 Accepted Manuscript
Title: Hair cortisol concentrations in war-affected adolescents:
A prospective intervention trial
Authors: Rana Dajani, Kristin Hadfield, Stan van Uum,
Michael Greff, Catherine Panter-Brick
PII:
S0306-4530(17)31207-6
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psyneuen.2017.12.012
Reference:
PNEC 3790
To appear in:
Received date:
31-7-2017
Revised date:
6-11-2017
Accepted date:
19-12-2017
Please cite this article as: Dajani, Rana, Hadfield, Kristin, van Uum, Stan,
Greff, Michael, Panter-Brick, Catherine, Hair cortisol concentrations in war-
affected adolescents: A prospective intervention trial.Psychoneuroendocrinology
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psyneuen.2017.12.012
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication.
As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript.
The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof
before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process
errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that
apply to the journal pertain.
  
1 
Hair cortisol concentrations in war-affected adolescents: A prospective intervention trial 
 
Author_Affiliations: 
 
Rana Dajani,  Kristin Hadfield, Stan van Uum, Michael Greff, Catherine Panter-Brick 
 
Rana Dajani, Ph.D. 
1Department of Biology and Biotechnology, Hashemite University, Zarqa 13115 Jordan  
  
2Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study, Harvard University 10 Garden Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, 
USA 
 
Kristin Hadfield, Ph.D. 
 
Department of Biological and Experimental Psychology, Queen Mary University of London, UK 
Email: hadfield@qmul.ac.uk 
 
 
Stan H. M. Van Uum, MD, PhD 
 
1Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Medicine, Schulich School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, Western University, 1151 Richmond Street, London, Ontario, Canada, N6A 3K7 
 
2Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Schulich School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, Western University, 268 Grosvenor St, London, Ontario, Canada N6G 4L1 
 
Email: Stan.VanUum@sjhc.london.on.ca 
 
 
Michael J. E. Greff, MD 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
2 
1Robarts Research Institute, Western University, 1151 Richmond St. N., London, Ontario, Canada, N6A 
5B7 
 
2Department of Paediatrics, Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry, Western University, 800 
Commissioners Rd. E., London, Ontario, Canada, N6C 2R6 
 
Email: mgreff2@uwo.ca 
 
Catherine Panter-Brick, D.Phil. 
 
1Department of Anthropology, Yale University, 10 Sachem Street, New Haven, CT 06511, USA  
2Jackson Institute for Global Affairs, Yale University. 
 
Email: Catherine.Panter-Brick@yale.edu  
Tel 1 203 645 0164 
 
Highlights 
 
Three trajectories describe cortisol production of refugee and non-refugee youth 
 
Insecurity and female gender predicted a pattern of cortisol hypersecretion. 
 
Trauma exposure predicted within-individual cortisol dysregulation. 
 
The stress-attunement intervention decreased hair cortisol concentrations by a third.  
 
Effective interventions may normalize cortisol production in war-affected adolescents 
 
Abstract 
Temporal examinations of endocrine changes as a biological signature of stress or trauma in war-
affected civilian populations are seldom undertaken, and few studies have examined whether 
stress biomarkers track biological sensitivity to brief interventions targeting the improvement of 
psychosocial wellbeing.  Our study is the first to prospectively examine, in war-affected 
adolescents, the associations between hair cortisol concentrations (HCC) and self-reports of 
stress, insecurity, posttraumatic reactions, and lifetime trauma. We also tested the impact of an 8-
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
3 
week intervention based on profound stress attunement, evaluated with a randomized controlled 
trial allowing robust comparison of the intervention and control groups. We collected data for a 
gender-balanced sample of 733 Syrian refugee (n=411) and Jordanian non-refugee (n=322) 
adolescents (11-18 years), at three time-points. We used growth mixture models to classify 
cortisol trajectories, and growth models to evaluate intervention impact on stress physiology. We 
observed three trajectories of HCC: hypersecretion, medium secretion, and hyposecretion 
(capturing 9.6%, 87.5% and 2.9% of the cohort). For every one percent increase in levels of 
insecurity, adolescents were .02 times more likely to have a trajectory of hypersecretion (95% 
CI: 1.00, 1.03, p = .01).  For each additional symptom of posttraumatic stress reported, they were 
.07 times less likely to show hyposecretion (95% CI: .89, .98, p = .01). Indeed, stronger 
posttraumatic stress reactions were associated with a pattern of within-individual cortisol 
dysregulation and medium secretion.  Importantly, HCC decreased in response to the 
intervention (95% CI: -.19, -.03, p = .01), corroborating self-reports of improved psychosocial 
wellbeing. However, while the intervention decreased HCC for youth with hypersecretion and 
medium secretion, it increased HCC for youth with hyposecretion (95% CI: .22, 1.16, p = .004), 
relative to controls.  This suggests a beneficial regularization of cortisol levels. We did not find 
evidence to suggest that gender, resilience, or posttraumatic stress disorder influenced the 
strength or direction of responses to the intervention, as a result of some adolescents being more 
sensitive or vigilant to their environments.  This robust impact evaluation has value for tracking 
the physiological consequences of interventions over time and for understanding how improving 
environments may help regulate physiology and protect adolescent health and development. 
 
 
1. Introduction  
The use of biomarkers such as hair cortisol is at the forefront of chronic stress research (Russell 
et al., 2012; Steudte-Schmiedgen et al., 2016; Stalder et al., 2017). Stress biomarkers have the 
potential to provide a biological signature of adverse experiences, offering a window into the 
developmental and neuroendocrinological impacts of past and current adversity.  To-date, few 
studies have robustly examined trajectories of cortisol production in populations affected by war 
and forced displacement.  Psychoendocrinological research with active combatants and/or 
victims of war has measured salivary cortisol levels as a means to evaluate wartime stress and 
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).  This pioneering body of work includes a cross-sectional 
study of 20 Gulf War veterans with and without PTSD (Yehuda et al., 2010), a study of cortisol 
and immune responses of 20 male patients from the Iran-Iraq war (Masoudzadeh et al., 2012), an 
experimental study with 240 Chinese soldiers before and after high-intensity military operations 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
4 
(Li et al., 2012), and a prospective study of 30 refugees to Germany examining how victims of 
rape responded to trauma reminders (Gola et al., 2012).  Other studies have examined hair 
cortisol concentration (HCC) as an index of chronic stress in war-affected civilian populations.  
One compared 10 adults with PTSD and 17 war-affected controls in a camp for internally-
displaced people in northern Uganda (Steudte et al., 2011). A second examined 39 female 
university students after the 2011 Libyan war (Etwel et al., 2014).  Much of this work has 
remained cross-sectional and included relatively small samples of adult men and women, 
limiting the ability to examine differential cortisol trajectories over time in response to past 
trauma and/or current stressors.  
The literature reports inconsistent associations between trauma exposure and changes in 
cortisol secretion (Steudte-Schmiedgen et al., 2016). While some studies show that trauma-
exposed individuals have attenuated cortisol levels, other research – with participants 
experiencing ongoing stressors – suggests that continued exposure to adverse experiences can 
lead to cortisol hypersecretion (Miller et al., 2007; Mewes et al., 2017; Stalder et al., 2017).  In a 
recent review of the hair cortisol literature, Steudte-Schmiedgen et al. (2016) suggested that 
trauma experiences may induce an initial up-regulation of cortisol secretion, followed by 
attenuation of cortisol production with additional trauma, with or without posttraumatic disorder. 
There is also good evidence that recent stressors increase hypothalamic-pituitary-
adrenal (HPA) activity, but that chronic, ongoing stress may ultimately lead to cortisol 
hyposecretion (Miller et al., 2007).  A cross-sectional study of adults observed elevated HCC in 
56 male and female, recent asylum seekers to Germany, relative to 24 permanently-settled male 
Turkish immigrants and 28 male German hosts (Mewes et al., 2017).  However, the Turkish 
immigrants showed relative hypocortisolism by comparison to the host community. The 
observation that recent asylum seekers had higher HCC and settled Turkish immigrants had 
lower HCC relative to German hosts, was interpreted to reflect the impacts of insecure living 
conditions and continued stresses over an extended period, with cortisol down-regulation over 
time. PTSD status had no impact on cortisol concentrations. By contrast, a case-control study 
with 64 female adolescents (12-15 years old) found that, while HCC were elevated 7 months 
after experiencing the 2008 Wenchuan earthquake, the group of students with PTSD showed a 
pattern of blunted cortisol reactivity, suggesting attenuated HCC production (Luo et al., 2012). 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
5 
The patterns of associations between PTSD symptoms and cortisol production in children and 
adolescents are certainly complex (Russell et al. 2017).  
While trauma and stress exposures are associated with altered cortisol production, clear 
interpretation of findings is confounded by differences in the number of lifetime trauma and in 
the severity of concurrent stressors.  Thus, how the combination of significant lifetime trauma 
exposure (such as that experienced during war and forced displacement) and exposure to 
everyday stressors (such as that experienced during the process of resettlement) might affect the 
developmental HPA responses remains unclear. In the wake of war, civilian populations assume 
the heavy burden of violence, loss, and trauma, as well as ongoing stress, fear, and insecurity 
(Miller & Rasmussen, 2010).  Yet sizeable proportions of war-affected and refugee people, 
whether children or adults, show remarkable functioning, indicating the presence of multiple risk 
and resilience pathways in the wake of war (Tol et al., 2011, 2012; Hadfield et al., 2017).  In 
terms of impacts on the body, important endocrine changes may result from these exposures to 
past trauma, ongoing stress, and resilience factors.  
Extant studies of the biological stress response in war and disaster settings, however, rest 
largely upon observational or case-control studies, rather than discrete interventions. It is still an 
open question whether stress biomarkers might be used to track the impacts of interventions 
targeting improvements in mental health and psychosocial wellbeing in humanitarian crises.  A 
small number of studies have used salivary cortisol as a measure of physiological stress to 
evaluate intervention impacts, such as poverty-alleviation programs in very low-income children 
in Mexico (Fernald & Gunnar, 2009), cash transfers among the poor (Haushofer & Shapiro, 
2016), or increased access to health care (Haushofer et al, 2017).  Cortisol levels in blood, saliva, 
or urine are useful for measuring stress reactivity, but highly sensitive to the circadian rhythm of 
cortisol production and other confounders (Russell et al., 2012).  By contrast, HCC acts as a 
‘chronic stress diary,’ providing a long-term marker of the endocrine stress response and a useful 
measure of integrated HPA activity, pre- and post-intervention.  To our knowledge, ours is the 
first study to use HCC to evaluate the benefits and/or differential impacts of an intervention in 
communities affected by war and forced displacement.  It is also one of the first to prospectively 
examine trajectories of adolescent cortisol production.   
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
6 
Some studies have focused attention on the impacts of early childhood adversity by 
framing this issue in terms of ‘toxic stress’ (e.g. Shonkoff et al., 2012).  Other studies have 
advanced an adaptive calibration model to highlight the sensitivity of allostatic load responses to 
variable environments (e.g. Del Giudice et al., 2011).  The stress response system works as a 
mechanism of conditional adaptation, to coordinate physical and psychosocial challenges, to 
filter information from the environment, and to regulate a broad range of life history and 
developmental behaviors (Boyce & Ellis, 2005; Del Giudice et al., 2011, 2012; McEwen, 2012).  
Among children and adolescents specifically, the adaptive calibration model provides a 
framework for understanding the developmental trade-offs humans make for resource allocation 
under adversity, leading us to expect different biological responses to low, moderate, 
unpredictable, or severe ecological stress. Del Giudice et al. (2011) advanced four patterns of 
responsivity, characterised by sensitive, buffered, vigilant, and unemotional patterns of 
physiological stress profiles. Understanding both individual differences in stress physiology and 
individual differences in responsivity to interventions is important (Pluess & Belsky, 2013; 
Bakermans-Kranenburg & van IJzendoorn, 2015), in order to provide a better appreciation of 
who might benefit most from psychosocial interventions.   
 
 
1.1 Context for this study  
We aimed to understand patterns of cortisol production in youth who were differentially exposed 
to war-related trauma and forced displacement, and differentially engaged in a short, structured 
humanitarian intervention. In Jordan, Syrian refugee and host-community youth represent two 
cohorts with strikingly different exposures to trauma, stress, and insecurity (Panter-Brick, 2017a, 
2017b). Syrian refugees face the demands of adjustment to living in host communities following 
prolonged exposure to the toxic stress of insecurity, fear, and loss (Save The Children, 2017). As 
of October 2017, over 5.3 million people have been forced to leave Syria – this is the largest 
refugee crisis since the end of World War II; over 654,000 Syrians have taken refuge in Jordan, 
half of whom are children and adolescents under 18 years of age (United Nations High 
Commissioner for Refugees [UNHCR], 2017).  The large majority (79%) of Syrian refugees 
living in Jordan live side-by-side their Jordanian hosts, outside designated refugee camps 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
7 
(UNHCR, 2017). Jordanians are also deeply affected by the Syrian crisis, given increased 
pressures on neighboring countries to accommodate the very large influx of refugees (Mercy 
Corps, 2014); one in 15 people in Jordan is a Syrian refugee (UNHCR, 2017). 
We partnered with Mercy Corps, a global humanitarian and development organization 
implementing an Advancing Adolescents programme informed by a profound stress attunement 
framework, in Jordan, Lebanon, Iraq, Syria, and Turkey (Mercy Corps, 2014).  The intervention 
explicitly teaches youth about the impacts of stress on the brain and seeks to enhance safety and 
psychosocial support while imparting life skills for groups of vulnerable 11-18 year-olds: the 
eight-week programme of group-based activities focuses on promoting a person’s capacities for 
the mediation of extreme and prolonged stress (Mercy Corps, 2016; Macphail et al., 2017). 
Sessions are structured to teach stress attunement and skill acquisition, and involve a close 
mentorship with adult coaches, who are trained from the local community (Mercy Corps, 2014). 
Syrian refugees and Jordanian youth are brought together in small groups, for two sessions a 
week; boys and girls have separate sessions and coaches.  Participants choose from a range of 
activities that include vocational skills (e.g. hairdressing), technical skills (e.g. computer repairs), 
fitness, or arts and crafts. In assessing programme impacts in Jordan using a randomized 
controlled trial study design, we found differential impacts across several mental health and 
psychosocial stress outcomes and for youth with low and high trauma exposures (Panter-Brick et 
al., 2017a).  In the present paper, we specifically analyse hair cortisol as a marker of within- and 
between-person variation in adolescent responses to past trauma and current threats to wellbeing, 
in response to a brief intervention.  
1.2 Research questions 
Our study was guided by two main research questions. First, is there heterogeneity in patterns of 
cortisol production among war-affected adolescents, and if so, what predicts this heterogeneity? 
In line with previous research (Stalder et al., 2017), we expected to find several cortisol 
trajectories – for example, hypersecretion, normal secretion, and hyposecretion – that could be 
predicted by current stressors and/or past trauma exposures. On the basis of past studies, we 
hypothesized that current levels of human insecurity and/or perceived psychosocial stress would 
predict cortisol hyperproduction, while lifetime trauma exposure and/or posttraumatic stress 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
8 
reactions would predict some form of cortisol dysregulation, most likely reflected in 
hypoproduction.   
Second, does engaging in a structured, psychosocial intervention change cortisol levels 
for adolescents over time, and if so, are there differential responses to the intervention? We 
hypothesized that stress biomarkers would track self-reports of psychosocial burden, as measured 
by insecurity, perceived stress, and posttraumatic stress, in terms of the biological signature of a 
profound stress attunement intervention.  We also tested the model of adaptive stress calibration, 
examining whether some adolescents might be more responsive to the intervention because they 
are more sensitive or vigilant to their environments. This model suggests that patterns of 
unemotional, vigilant, buffered, and/or sensitive responses arise when individuals attune their 
physiology to the severity of contextual stressors, a calibration potentially influenced by trauma 
exposure, gender and other relevant life history variables (Del Giudice et al., 2010). We 
hypothezised that adolescents who had developed PTSD after significant trauma exposure were 
likely to be hypervigilant to their surroundings. Based on this, we expected that young people 
with PTSD would have a stronger HCC response to the psychosocial intervention, relative to 
those who did not develop PTSD in response to significant trauma exposure.  
 
 
2. Methods 
The study was conducted in four urban centers in northern Jordan, where Mercy Corps 
implemented programming for youth heavily affected by the Syrian crisis.  Data were collected 
over three time-points: at baseline before the start of the psychosocial intervention (T1), at 2.8 
months to capture the end of the 8-week intervention (T2), and at 11.3 months to capture a 
longer-term follow-up (T3). In this paper, we focus on the 733 adolescents for whom cortisol 
data were available for at least one time-point; we exclude 86 adolescents with missing 
physiological data (due to insufficient amount of hair). The full cohort (n = 817) is a 
representative sample of adolescents enrolled in Mercy Corps programming at the time of study 
(spring-winter 2015), including those engaged in the intervention and those wait-listed for future 
programme cycle implementation. Mercy Corps enrolled young people from the general 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
9 
population, on the basis of poor mental health and/or poor access to basic services. Our sample 
included Syrian refugees – living in Jordan for an average of nearly 3 years at baseline – and 
Jordanians living in the same communities, both eligible for the Mercy Corps programme.  
The study received formal approval from the Prime Minister’s Office of Jordan and 
ethics approval from Yale University. We conducted a randomized control trial 
(ClinicalTrials.gov ID: NCT03012451) to evaluate the Advancing Adolescents program for 
impacts in the treatment group, relative to wait-listed controls. Written informed consent was 
obtained from community leaders, parents, and adolescents. Engagement with the community 
was very high: fewer than 30 families declined survey participation. Neither the sponsor (Elrha’s 
Research for Health in Humanitarian Crises programme) nor Mercy Corps had a role in the 
design or conduct of data collection or analysis.  
We recruited and trained a core team of Syrian/Jordanian fieldworkers to complete 
survey and biomarker data collection; 8 fieldworkers conducted face-to-face interviews and 4 
supervisors checked data and stored samples on a daily basis. To respect local customs requiring 
that males do not talk to girls in private, all but two interviewers were female.  Hair sample 
collection was done by professional (male and female) hairdressers in gender-separated spaces. 
 
 
2.1 Measures 
2.1.1 Socio-demographic data, lifetime trauma exposure, and resources for resilience 
Standard socio-demographic data included displacement history, household wealth, and 
education.  Lifetime trauma events were assessed with a Trauma Event Checklist, adapted from 
the Harvard Trauma Questionnaire and the Gaza Traumatic Event Checklist (Panter-Brick et al., 
2009). The Checklist asks: For each event described, please answer whether or not the event has 
happened to you personally, during your lifetime and features yes/no responses to 21 trauma 
items, including items such as: Directly witnessed bombardment or rocket explosions as a result 
of war, Seen someone else severely beaten, shot or killed, Had your life in danger, and Been 
expelled from your home.  Resilience was measured through a 12-item, Arabic version of the 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
10 
Child and Youth Resilience Measure (CYRM), which measures individual, relational, and 
contextual resilience resources (Ungar & Liebenberg, 2011; Panter-Brick et al., 2017b).   
2.1.2 Insecurity, stress, and posttraumatic stress symptoms 
We used three main screening instruments previously used with war-affected adolescents and 
validated in the region, and confirmed instrument reliability in test-retest data (n = 41) and 
internal consistency with Cronbach’s α (Panter-Brick et al., 2017a, 2017b).  We implemented the 
Human Insecurity (HI) scale, developed and validated in the West Bank with Palestinian 
populations to capture feelings akin to fear, rather than mere strain, in conflict-affected areas 
(Ziadni et al., 2011; Hamayel et al., 2014).  It covers issues such as worries regarding inability to 
obtain daily life necessities, losing a source of income, fears about the future, and family safety 
over the past two weeks (10 items, 5-point Likert scale, with scores expressed on a scale of 0-
100).  We also used the Perceived Stress Scale (PSS, 14 items, 5-point Likert scale) to assess 
past-month feelings of being upset, nervous, angered, lacking control, or being unable to cope.  
While developed in Western contexts (Cohen et al., 1993), the Arabic-language PSS was 
validated in Jordan (Almadi et al., 2012). Finally, we implemented the Children's Revised Impact 
of Event Scale (CRIES, 8 items, 5-point Likert scale) to assess posttraumatic stress reactions. 
CRIES has good psychometric properties in war-affected Arab populations (Veronese & Pepe, 
2013; Punamäki et al., 2015).  The War Child Foundation recommends CRIES-8 as a screening 
tool that is predictive of posttraumatic stress reactions (using a threshold of intrusion and 
avoidance symptoms >17 points for meeting diagnostic criteria of PTSD.  Many studies 
nonetheless rely on dimensional CRIES scores in analytical models, given that this threshold is 
predictive rather than diagnostic of PTSD (Tol et al., 2011, 2012; Panter-Brick et al., 2015).   
 
2.1.3. Stress biomarkers 
In order to appraise which measures would be most appropriate for impact evaluation in 
humanitarian settings, we began the study with a range of relatively non-invasive stress 
biomarkers: these included blood pressure, cell-mediated immune function from dried blood 
spots, DNA samples from cheek swabs, and cortisol production from saliva and hair samples 
(Sancilio et al., 2016).  It soon became clear that saliva sampling was the most burdensome 
measure for participants – for whom ‘spitting’ proved socially embarrassing, as well as for 
researchers, given that collecting multiple samples to account for diurnal variation was relatively 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
11 
time-consuming and shipping samples expensive. By contrast, study participants appreciated our 
offer of a free professional haircut and did not find hair sampling invasive, and the fieldworkers 
found collecting and processing hair to be simpler as well.  We employed local hairdressers to 
cut ~100 strands of hair, as close as possible to the scalp from the vertex posterior, and give 
participants a professional haircut: this rewarded them for their time and ensured that sampling 
would be minimally visible.  Hair samples were cut at each of the three time-points.  
2.1.4 Laboratory analysis  
Hair samples were sent to the Drug Safety Laboratory (DSLab) of the Robarts Research Institute 
at the University of Western Ontario, which has been conducting hair cortisol analyses for over 
10 years (e.g. Van Uum et al., 2008; Thomson et al., 2010; Pereg et al., 2013), including HCC 
analyses in conflict-affected populations (Etwel et al., 2014). We measured cortisol 
concentrations of hair (0-2 cm at baseline, 0-1 cm at T2, 0-1 cm at T3).  Hair was black or 
brown, and undyed.  Hair samples were cut into segments, weighed, and washed twice for 3 
minutes with 3 mL of isopropanol before being dried for a minimum of 5 hours. Dried samples 
were then minced and extracted in 2 mL of methanol at 56 degrees Celsius in an incubator 
shaker for 16 hours. Methanol (containing cortisol extract) was removed to a clean tube and 
evaporated under heat and nitrogen gas until dry. Dried samples were reconstituted with 0.25 mL 
of phosphate buffered saline (pH = 8) before undergoing ELISA testing to quantify cortisol 
levels using a modified commercially available salivary cortisol test kit. The intra- and inter-day 
coefficients of variation for the cortisol immune assay were 3.6% and 8.6%, respectively.  
ELISA testing uses high and low cortisol controls on each plate for the generation of a plate-
specific standard curve.  Subsequently, each sample was individually compared with its plate-
specific standard curve. Samples from different time-points were analyzed on separate plates. 
2.1.5 Statistical analysis 
Cortisol data were log transformed to normalize the distribution.  In line with other studies (e.g. 
Skoluda et al., 2012), we excluded data points more than +2SD from the mean: namely, 5 
outliers at T1, 15 at T2, and 26 at T3 (pre-log HCC exceeding 90 pg/mg).  This resulted in the 
removal of only six participants, as most had at least one additional measurement at another 
time-point which fell within the normal range. Our sample included 150 participants with 
cortisol data at all time-points, 413 with cortisol data for at least two time-points, and 727 with 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
12 
cortisol data for at least one time-point.  We used both growth mixture and growth curve models 
to test our hypotheses; unlike traditional statistical models that involve listwise deletion for 
missing data, these models are robust to partially missing and unequally spaced data (Curran et 
al., 2010; Ram & Grimm, 2009).  
First, we examined sociodemographics and trends in the variables over time. To better 
understand how trauma exposure predicts cortisol regulation over time, we then split the sample 
into those who had experienced less than (<4) and more than average trauma (≥4 events), and ran 
Pearson correlations between cortisol at each timepoint. We then studied longitudinal cortisol 
trajectories with latent growth mixture modelling in MPlus v7.3. This technique captured 
heterogeneity in cortisol over time in k number of groups (or classes), each with a distinct 
trajectory, enabling us to test whether there were multiple trajectories of cortisol production. To 
determine the optimal number of classes, we added classes one at a time to examine whether 
model fit improved with each additional class; the four-class model was not significant, so we 
did not continue further (Jung & Wickrama, 2008). The slopes and intercepts were allowed to 
vary freely across classes, but held constant within groups.  
To establish the underlying pattern of cortisol trajectories in our data, we used Ram and 
Grimm’s (2009) well-established technique for selection of the optimal number of latent classes 
within a sample over time. First, we examined the Akaike Information Criteria (AIC) and 
sample-size adjusted Bayesian Information Criteria (SSA-BIC). A lower value indicates better 
model fit. We then examined the Vuong-Lo-Mendell-Rubin likelihood ratio test and Adjusted 
Lo-Mendell-Rubin tests, to determine whether each model performed better than the model with 
k-1 classes. The three-class model was significant for both, indicating that a three-trajectory 
solution fits the data better than a two-trajectory solution. Participants were assigned to the latent 
class that best fitted their trajectory. To assess predictors of class membership, we conducted a 
multinomial logistic regression in SPSS v.24, with the middle category (Medium Secretion) as 
the reference group. We included insecurity, perceived stress, posttraumatic stress symptoms, 
and gender at T1 as predictors.  We also conducted sensitivity analyses with resilience scores and 
other potentially important variables, such as age, site, wealth, and trauma exposure; adding 
these variables did not impact or change regression results (data available upon request).  
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
13 
Next, we used growth curve modeling to examine whether participating in the 
intervention predicted changes in cortisol production over time. Growth curve modeling is a 
powerful predictive statistical technique to assess both within- and between-person variation 
(Hruschka et al., 2005; Van Ryzin et al., 2009); in this dataset, we have repeated measurements 
(level one) nested within participants (level two).  First, we ran models for the overall cohort in 
order to test intervention impacts. Then we added interaction terms to test whether the 
intervention impact differed by HCC trajectory, as well as by participant characteristics such as 
levels of insecurity, stress, posttraumatic stress, gender, and trauma exposure.   
We then tested patterns of stress responsivity for adolescents who experienced more than 
average trauma (≥4 events), with the expectation that those who had developed PTSD reactions 
were more vigilant to their environments than those who did not, despite similar levels of 
exposure to trauma. We ran the growth curve model in this restricted sample, and tested the 
interaction between participating in the intervention and PTSD group. We repeated these models 
with a three-way interaction with resilience added (as an interaction term, intervention* 
PTSD*resilience), as we hypothesized that individual, relational, and contextual protective 
factors may influence whether and how the PTSD groups responded to the intervention. 
In all growth models, we included four time-invariant covariates (baseline: gender, age, 
site, and household wealth), coded trial participation as time-varying, and used maximum 
likelihood estimation to handle missing data. At T1 (baseline), no participants had taken part in 
the intervention (all were given a score of 0). At T2 and T3, those in the treatment group were 
given a score of 1, and those in the control group a score of 0. We used a first-order 
autoregressive covariance matrix.  
3. Results   
We achieved a gender-balanced sample, half of whom were Syrian refugees, totalling 727 
participants (in four urban centers: Irbid (n = 183), Mafraq (n = 165), Jarash (n = 265), and Zarqa 
(n = 114).  These participants had cortisol data, at a minimum, at one timepoint.  At baseline, 
physiological and psychological data were available for 611 participants (57.6% Syrian, 46.5% 
male, mean age = 14.52 years, SD = 1.70), 439 participants at T2, and 236 participants at T3 
(Table 1). Reasons for attrition were that youth were unreachable or unavailable, due to illness or 
school/work (Panter-Brick et al., 2017a).  
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
14 
[Tables 1 & 2] 
3.1 Descriptive data on trauma exposures and cortisol  
Syrian refugees were exposed to significant trauma: they averaged 6.25 lifetime trauma 
exposures (SD = 3.25) as compared to 1.06 trauma (SD = 1.68) for Jordanians (p < .001). The 
most common traumatic experiences to which the Syrian refugees were exposed were: 
witnessing bombardment or explosions (80.6%), having their home forcibly searched by police 
or a militia (71.0%), witnessing the demolition of their home by police or a militia (55.0%), 
living in a refugee camp (53.1%), and seeing a wounded or dead body (52.6%).  By contrast, 
non-refugees mostly reported a lack of medical care when severely ill (16.6%), seeing someone 
beaten, shot, or killed (15.3%), having a bad accident or fall (12.8%), painful or frightening 
medical treatment (9.7%), and being severely beaten (8.1%).  Two-thirds of adolescent refugees 
(65.2%) had symptoms of intrusion and avoidance consistent with PTSD reactions (> 17 CRIES 
points), as compared to 18.8% of Jordanians.  
At baseline, there was no significant relationship between HCC and trauma exposure (as 
measured by number of lifetime trauma events, p > .05).  However, participants who met criteria 
for PTSD (M = .86, SD = .34) had higher baseline HCC than those who did not have PTSD (M = 
.79, SD = .39), as measured by CRIES > 17; t(608) = 2.31 p = .02).  While Syrian refugees had 
higher levels of post-traumatic stress symptoms, perceived stress, and insecurity (p < .001) 
relative to Jordanian non-refugees, their HCC were similar to those of Jordanians (p > .05) at all 
three time-points.  Girls had higher HCC than boys (p < .001) at all time-points. We found no 
gender differences in likely PTSD (baseline CRIES > 17 points: 45.5% for girls, 43.8% for boys, 
p = .67), except at T3, where more girls than boys met predictive criteria [χ2 (1, N = 186) = 
4.90, p = .03]. 
We tabulated Pearson correlations of cortisol levels at all three time-points for the cohort 
stratified by average sample trauma exposure (<4 trauma events, ≥4 trauma events; Table 2). 
Adolescents with lower trauma exposures (n = 364, 20.3% Syrian) had cortisol levels that were, 
as could be expected, correlated over time (rs = .25 to .42, p < .05). By contrast, adolescents 
exposed to 4 or more lifetime traumas (n = 363, 91.7% Syrian) exhibited a pattern of cortisol 
dysregulation, where hair cortisol production was unrelated to itself over time (rs = .13 to .19, p 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
15 
> .05).  In terms of the sample with or without PTSD, we observed the following pattern: For 
adolescents without PTSD, hair cortisol levels are correlated at all three time-points (rs range 
from .21 to .34, p < .05), while for adolescents with PTSD, cortisol levels are correlated from T1 
to T2 (r = .23, p < .05) but unrelated from T2 to T3 (r = .17, p > .05) or from T1 to T3 (r = .16, p 
> .05). 
3.2 Cortisol trajectories: Impacts of insecurity, stress, and posttraumatic stress 
We observed three HCC trajectories, as indicated by fit indices for growth mixture modeling 
(Table 3, Supplemental Table A). As seen in Figure 1, the first class (Hypersecretion, n = 70) 
had a baseline log cortisol of 1.34 pg/mg and decreased by .04 each month during the study 
period. The second class (Medium Secretion, n = 636) had a baseline log cortisol of .77 pg/mg 
and increased by .01 each month.  The third class (Hyposecretion, n = 21) had a baseline log 
cortisol of -1.47 pg/mg and increased by .07 per month.  Essentially, adolescents in the 
Hypersecretion class (comprising 9.6% of the sample) started high and experienced shallow 
decreases in cortisol, those in the Medium Secretion class (87.5% of the sample) started at a mid-
range and increased slightly, and those in the Hyposecretion class (2.9% of the sample) started 
very low and increased rapidly in cortisol. Analysis of the distribution of trajectories across the 
ELISA plates excluded distribution across plates as a potential confounder (p > .05). Overall, log 
cortisol went up over the course of the study (from M = .82 at T1 to .92 at T3, Table 1): thus, 
while there were individual trajectories of cortisol production, the trend for the sample as a 
whole was an increase in cortisol over time. 
[Table 3 and Figure 1; Supplemental Table A] 
Insecurity and post-traumatic stress, but not psychosocial stress, predicted HCC 
trajectories (Table 4). Adolescents who reported higher insecurity were more likely to be part of 
the Hypersecretion trajectory (B = .02, SE = .01, 95% CI: 1.00, 1.03, p = .01). With each 
percentage point increase in their feelings of fear and insecurity (on a scale of 0 to 100%), youth 
were .02 times more likely to show hyper cortisol secretion.  Moreover, holding other variables 
constant, girls were likely to be in the Hypersecretion category than boys (B = -1.57, SE = .31, 
95% CI: .11, .39, p < .001).  Adolescents reporting more post-traumatic stress reactions were less 
likely to be part of the Hyposecretion trajectory (B = -.07, SE = .03, 95% CI: .89, .98, p = .01). 
For every additional point on the CRIES, adolescents were .07 times less likely to be categorised 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
16 
in the Hyposecretion class relative to the Medium Secretion class. This suggests that insecurity 
and post-traumatic stress symptoms predict different patterns of cortisol production over time.  
[Table 4] 
3.3 Impacts of the intervention 
We found that HCC of adolescents engaged in the intervention went up at a slower rate (B = -.11, 
SE = .04, 95% CI: -.19, -.03, p = .01), relative to the control group, in growth curve models 
adjusting for gender, age, site, and wealth (Supplemental Table B). Girls had higher HCC at 
intercept than boys, but their change in HCC over time (slope) was the same. Similarly, older 
participants had higher HCC, but their HCC slope was the same as younger participants. The 
intervention attenuated cortisol production by a third (Figure 2; Supplemental Table B).  
 [Figures 2 and 3; Supplemental Table B]  
The benefits of the intervention (in terms of lowering HCC) were similar for all 
participants, whether boys or girls, Syrian or Jordanians with high or low trauma exposures, or 
adolescents with different levels of insecurity, stress, or posttraumatic reactions (p > .05, model 
tables available by request). However, there were notable differences by HCC trajectory: the 
intervention raised rather than lowered HCC for the Hyposecretion class (Figure 3). When 
Hyposecretion adolescents engaged in the intervention, their cortisol levels increased by 59.7% 
(B = .69, SE = .24, 95% CI: .22, 1.16, p = .004) relative to the control group wait-listed for the 
intervention. We found no difference in intervention impacts on cortisol production between the 
Hypersecretion and Medium Secretion classes (B = .04, SE = .13, 95% CI: -.21, .29, p > .05), 
where participating in the intervention decreased cortisol by 15.2% for the Hypersecretion group, 
and 43.2% for the Medium Secretion group. 
We then examined whether HCC trajectories differed for participants with and without 
posttraumatic stress reactions akin to PTSD, who might be more or less vigilant to their 
environments, restricting the sample to those with high-trauma exposure (≥4 events, n = 363). 
The interaction between PTSD and participation in the intervention was non-significant (p > 
.05).  Individual resilience scores did not moderate this relationship (p > .05).  
Discussion 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
17 
In this study, we obtained unique psychological and hair cortisol data for adolescents directly 
and indirectly affected by the violence of war and forced displacement.  We assessed a large, 
gender-balanced, representative sample of vulnerable youth through engaging with refugee and 
host communities living side-by-side in urban centers in northern Jordan close to the border with 
Syria. To our knowledge, ours is the first study both to establish trajectories of cortisol 
production in war-affected adolescents, and to prospectively assess the impacts of a brief and 
scalable humanitarian intervention targeting psychosocial wellbeing.  By integrating measures of 
HCC over time, we identified three trajectories of cortisol production: Hypersecretion, Medium 
Secretion, and Hyposecretion.  We found that the stress-attunement intervention (Mercy Corps, 
2014, 2016) was effective in regularizing cortisol production over time, decreasing chronic 
stress, as indexed by hair cortisol concentrations, by a third.   
We highlight three main findings in this study.  First, experiencing fear or insecurity was 
predictive of a trajectory of increased cortisol production (Hypersecretion in Figure 1 and Table 
3).  This is consonant with previous research on the salience of current stressors (Stalder et al., 
2017).  Over the long-term, heightened cortisol production can have negative effects on health, 
which include depression, memory and learning deficits, overweight, high blood glucose, and 
high blood pressure (Tirabassi et al., 2013; Wosu et al., 2013). Considering that half our sample 
(54.9%) reported high insecurity levels at baseline, the finding that experiences of fear and 
insecurity were associated with chronic cortisol hypersecretion is an important finding, worthy of 
further investigation in situations of war and forced displacement.   
Second, we observed that the beneficial impacts of the Advancing Adolescents 
intervention – previously established for mental health and psychosocial outcomes (Panter-Brick 
et al, 2017a) – were mirrored in physiological response.  This intervention altered HPA activity, 
as shown by models that controlled for gender, age, site, and household wealth. For the overall 
cohort, we found that the intervention led to a 37.8% decrease in cortisol production over time 
(Figure 2). In the hypersecretion and medium secretion classes, the intervention led to reductions 
in cortisol (of 15.2% and 43.2%, respectively), but in the Hyposecretion class – which had very 
low baseline levels of HCC – it led to a 59.7% increase in cortisol (Figure 3).  This suggests that 
effective psychosocial interventions may lead to a normalization of cortisol levels in either 
direction (up- or down-regulation).  This is likely beneficial, since chronic hyposecretion has 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
18 
also negative effects on mental and physical health, being associated with impaired stress 
responses (Johansson et al., 2015), bodily disorders (Heim et al., 2000), and aggressive behavior 
(White et al., 2017).  
Third, we found that, at the individual level, high-trauma youth exhibited hair cortisol 
concentrations that were likely dysregulated, being unrelated at each time-point (as shown by 
weak individual-level correlation coefficients, Table 2). These findings may be specific to 
population groups experiencing many frightening and distressing experiences: in our sample, 
91.7% in the high-trauma exposure group were forcibly displaced Syrian refugees (n = 333).  As 
global studies have shown, experiencing this number of adverse childhood experiences predicts 
both the occurrence and the onset of psychopathology in later adulthood (Kessler et al., 2010).  
We then looked for non-linear patterns of stress responsivity, predicted by the adaptive 
calibration model (Del Giudice et al., 2012), but did not find strong evidence that either gender 
or PTSD status impacted physiological responses to the intervention. We are currently 
incorporating genetic data, assayed from DNA extracted from cheek swabs collected from study 
participants, to investigate the genetic component of stress responsivity (Clukay et al., 2018).  
Our analyses to-date show that the 8-week stress-attunement intervention had likely 
beneficial physiological impacts for the cohort as a whole: with respect to cortisol, the 
intervention was similarly effective for all participants, whether male or female, refugee or non-
refugee, irrespective of insecurity, stress, or posttraumatic stress reactions.  This has important 
implications.  For example, experimental trials of unconditional cash transfers in Kenya have 
interpreted a reduction in psychosocial stress and cortisol levels as gaining ‘peace of mind’ 
(Haushofer et al, 2017).  They also show that different types of intervention have likely 
differential impacts.  However, this body of work is based on the collection of just two saliva 
samples (one pre- and one post-intervention) to assess wellbeing.  Further research will need to 
clarify the extent to which beneficial physiological impacts are sustained, and the extent to which 
they improve social, developmental, or cognitive function.  
We noted that participation in the programme could lead to either increased or attenuated 
cortisol production, which may explain patterns of cortisol dysregulation in youth experiencing 4 
or more traumatic events. To-date, there are conflicting findings as to whether posttraumatic 
stress symptoms and traumatization are linked to hyper- or hypocortisolism (Steudte et al., 2011, 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
19 
2013; Fischer et al., 2017). This may account for the non-uniform results observed in our study 
at high-trauma exposures: where trauma caused hypocortisolism, we may have detected an 
upward normalization, and where trauma increased cortisol responses, the intervention may have 
stabilized, decreased, and/or normalized cortisol production. In settings of conflict and extensive 
trauma, where memories of trauma are malleable and present heterogeneous associations with 
posttraumatic distress (Panter-Brick et al., 2015), more research is needed to study both the 
impacts of psychosocial interventions and the etiology of hyper- and hypocortisolism.  
Unfortunately, there is limited research establishing what HCC levels and/or trajectories 
might be expected in this age-group. A study by Dettenborn et al. (2012) suggested that children 
tend to have higher cortisol levels than young adults, while Noppe et al. (2014) showed a gradual 
increase in hair cortisol with age, including higher reference intervals for the age 10-14 group 
than for younger age groups. White et al (2017) also demonstrated a gradual increase of HCC 
with age in their control population, while reporting a relative reduction in maltreated children 
and adolescents (3-16 year old) in Germany. A slight increase of hair cortisol over time (.10 log 
pg/mg over the 11 month-period) is therefore consistent with the literature. In this study, we 
cannot infer age-related HPA responses from observed cohort-level HCC changes, given the 
short time-frame and the multiple roles this hormone plays in regulating stress, metabolism, and 
immune responses.  
This study has two main limitations. First, we relied on hair cortisol levels, which provide 
a measure of cortisol hormone production averaged over time. HCC incorporate circadian 
fluctuations in a monthly average, but unlike serum or saliva, does not permit analysis of 
dynamic responses. At the start of our study, we implemented both saliva and hair cortisol 
sample collection, but found that collecting multiple saliva samples was not logistically feasible 
in this humanitarian aid context. By contrast, hair cortisol sampling proved a workable choice, 
particularly as we offered participants a complimentary haircut at the time of measurement. 
While we did not capture other factors that may affect hair cortisol, including strenuous exercise 
and frequency of hair washing, we did not find a difference in HCC between those participants 
who were and who were not engaged in physical activity, and we avoided all sampling during 
the fasting month of Ramadan, which considerably alters social and physical activity. Second, 
we collected cohort data at only three points, thus capturing a limited period of time change, and 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
20 
saw substantial cohort attrition. In conflict and refugee settings, extensive loss-to-follow-up 
arises from difficulties in tracing participants, yet in robustly-designed surveys, losses of even 
two-thirds of a refugee cohort has been shown to entail little retention bias with respect to mental 
health (Panter-Brick et al., 2013). Methodologically, we were able to use growth models to 
capture between- and within-individual differences in cortisol production, with models that are 
robust to missing values and uneven data points, in line with best practices for our study goals 
(Hruschka et al., 2005; Van Ryzin et al., 2009).  
Conclusion 
Temporal examinations of endocrine changes as a biological signature of stress or trauma 
in war-affected civilian populations are seldom undertaken, given the demands of a longitudinal 
research design to follow large enough cohorts over time.  A major strength of our study lies in 
its robust prospective design (a randomized control trial, with surveys at three time-points). This 
allowed us to observe the physiological impacts of a brief psychosocial intervention, to assess 
whether differential impacts were observed for distinct classes of cortisol production over time, 
and to examine whether some adolescents were more sensitive to improved environments.  We 
conducted the impact evaluation with a gender-balanced, community-based sample of Syrian 
refugees and Jordanian hosts who were differentially impacted by the trauma of war and the 
insecurity of forced displacement (Panter-Brick et al., 2017).   
Our work exemplifies the utility of biomarkers for tracking changes in physiological 
stress in response to past trauma, current insecurity, and structured psychosocial interventions. In 
contexts of war and forced displacement, this has value for understanding whether improving 
day-to-day environments, through the alleviation of current psychosocial stressors, can have 
beneficial physiological consequences and protect adolescent health and development. Indeed, 
we see that effective interventions can improve not just self-reports of insecurity, stress, and 
mental health difficulties (Panter-Brick et al., 2017), but can also change and regulate young 
people’s physiology. This work thus contributes to a body of work seeking to better understand 
the trajectories of neuroendocrine response in adverse environments, as well as patterns of stress 
responsivity to short-term ecological improvement. 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
21 
Funding Statement 
This research was funded by Elrha’s Research for Health in Humanitarian Crises (R2HC) 
Programme (elrha.org/r2hc), which aims to improve health outcomes by strengthening the 
evidence base for public health interventions in humanitarian crises. The R2HC programme is 
funded equally by the Wellcome Trust and the UK Government.  
Acknowledgments  
We thank Jon Kurtz, Noura Shahed, and Natasha Shawarib at Mercy Corps; Jane MacPhail, 
Director of the Advancing Adolescents programme implemented in Jordan; and the fieldworkers 
affiliated to the Taghyeer Organization, especially Dima Hamadmad, Ghufran Abudayyeh, 
Sana’a Bakeer, and Rahmeh Alhyari. 
 
References 
Almadi, T., Cathers, I., Mansour, A.M.H., Chow, C.M., 2012. An Arabic version of the 
Perceived Stress Scale: Translation and validation study. Int Journal Nurs Stud. 49, 84-
89.  
Bakermans-Kranenburg, M.J. and van IJzendoorn, M.H., 2015. The hidden efficacy of 
interventions: Gene× environment experiments from a differential susceptibility 
perspective. Annu Rev Psychol. 66. 381-409. 
Barber, B.K., McNeely, C., Allen, C., Giacaman, R., Arafat, C., Daher, M., Sarraj, E.E, Abu 
Mallouh, M., Belli, R.F., 2016. Whither the “Children of the Stone”? An entire life under 
occupation. J Palest Stud. 45, 77-108.  
Boyce, W.T. and Ellis, B.J., 2005. Biological sensitivity to context: I. An evolutionary–
developmental theory of the origins and functions of stress reactivity. Dev Psychopathol. 
17. 271-301.  
Clukay, C., Dajani, R., Hamadmad, D, Abudayyeh, G, Panter-Brick, C and Mulligan, C (2018). 
Genetics of risk and trauma exposure in Syrian refugee youth.  Meeting of the American 
Association of Physical Anthropologists, April. 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
22 
Cohen, S., Kamarck, T., & Mermelstein, R., 1983. A global measure of perceived stress. J Health 
Soc Behav. 24, 385-396. 
Curran, P.J., Obeidat, K. and Losardo, D., 2010. Twelve frequently asked questions about 
growth curve modeling. J Cogn Dev. 11, 121-136. 
Del Giudice, M., Ellis, B.J. and Shirtcliff, E.A., 2011. The adaptive calibration model of stress 
responsivity. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 35. 1562-1592. 
Del Giudice, M., Hinnant, J.B., Ellis, B.J. and El-Sheikh, M., 2012. Adaptive patterns of stress 
responsivity: A preliminary investigation. Dev Psychol. 48. 775-790.  
Dettenborn, L., Tietze, A., Kirschbaum, C., Stalder, T., 2012. The assessment of cortisol in 
human hair: Associations with sociodemographic variables and potential confounders. 
Stress. 15, 578-588.  
Etwel, F., Russell, E., Rieder, M. J., Van Uum, S. H., Koren, G., 2014. Hair cortisol as a 
biomarker of stress in the 2011 Libyan war. Clin Invest Med. 37, 403-408.  
Fernald, L. C. and M. Gunnar, 2009. Poverty-alleviation program participation and salivary 
cortisol in vey low-income children. Social Science & Medicine 68: 2180-2189. 
Fischer, S., Duncko, R., Hatch, S. L., Papadopoulos, A., Goodwin, L., Frissa, S., Hotopf, M., 
Cleare, A. J., 2017. Sociodemographic, lifestyle, and psychosocial determinants of hair 
cortisol in a South London community sample. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 76, 144-153. 
Gola, H., Engler, H., Maggie, S., Adenauer, H., Riether, C., Kolassa, S., Elbert, T., Kolassa, I.T., 
2012. Victims of rape show increased cortisol responses to trauma reminders: A study in 
individuals with war- and torture-related PTSD. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 37, 213-220. 
Hadfield, K., Ostrowski, A. and Ungar, M., 2017. What can we expect of the mental health and 
well-being of Syrian refugee children and adolescents in Canada?. Can Psychol, 58, 194-
201. 
Hamayel, L., Ghandour, R., Abu Rmeileh, N., Giacaman, R., 2014. Assessment of the 
psychosocial health status of adolescents 12-18 years old in the Occupied Palestinian 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
23 
Territory: A cross sectional baseline survey. Birzeit University, Institute of Community 
and Public Health, Palestine. 
Haushofer, J. and J. Shapiro (2016). The short-term impact of unconditional cash transfers to the 
poor: experimental evidence from Kenya. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(4): 
1973-2042. 
Haushofer, J., Chemin, M, C. Jang and J. Abraham (2017). Peace of mind: health insurance 
reduces stress and cortisol levels – evidence from a randomized experiment in Kenya. 
JEL. February. 
https://www.princeton.edu/haushofer/publications/Haushofer_Chemin_Jang_Abraham_I
nsurance_2017.02.10_jh.pdf 
Heim, C., Ehlert, U., Hellhammer, D.H., 2000. The potential role of hypocortisolism in the 
pathophysiology of stress-related bodily disorders. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 25. 1-35. 
Hruschka, D. J., Kohrt, B. A., Worthman, C. M., 2005. Estimating between- and within-
individual variation in cortisol levels using multilevel models. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology. 30, 698-714.  
Johannsson, G., Falorni, A., Skrtic, S., Lennernäs, H., Quinkler, M., Monson, J.P. and Stewart, 
P.M., 2015. Adrenal insufficiency: review of clinical outcomes with current 
glucocorticoid replacement therapy. Clin Endocrinol. 82. 2-11. 
Jung, T., Wickrama, K. A. S., 2008, An introduction to latent class growth analysis and growth 
mixture modeling. Soc Personal Psychol Compass. 2, 302-317.  
Kessler, R. C., McLaughlin, K. A., Green, J. G., Gruber, M. J., Sampson, N. A., Zaslavsky, A. 
M, Aguilar-Gaxiola, S., Alhamzawi, A. O., Alonso, J., Angermeyer, M., Benjet, C., 
Bromet, E., Chatterji, S., de Girolamo, G., Demyttenaere, K., Fayyad, J., Florescu, S., 
Gal, G., Gureje, O., Haro, J. M., Hu, C. Y., Karam, E. G., Kawakami, N., Lee, S., Lépine, 
J. P., Ormel, J., Posada-Villa, J., Sagar, R., Tsang, A., Ustün, T. B., Vassilev, S., Viana, 
M. C., Williams, D. R. (2010). Childhood adversities and adult psychopathology in the 
WHO World Mental Health Surveys. Br Journal Psych. 197, 378-385.  
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
24 
Li, X., Huang, W. X., Lu, J. M., Yang, G., Ma, F. L., Lan, Y.T., Meng, J. H., Dou, J. T., 2012. 
Experimental study on neuroendocrinological and immunological characteristics of the 
military-trained artillerymen. Chin Med J. 125, 1292-1296.    
Luo H., X. Liu, X. Ma, W. Guo, C. Qiu, Y. Wang, Q. Wang, X. Zhang, W. Zhang, G. Hannum, 
K. Zhang, X. Liu and T. Li (2012). Hair cortisol level as a biomarker for altered 
hypothalamic-pituary-adrenal activity in female adolescents with postraumatic stress 
disorder after the 2008 Wenchuan earthquake. Biol Psychiatry 72: 65-69. 
Masoudzadeh, A., Modanloo, K. M., Ajami, A., Azizi, A., 2012. Evaluation of cortisol level and 
cell-mediated immunity response changes in individuals with post-traumatic stress 
disorder as a consequence of war. Med Glas. 9, 218-222. 
Macphail, J., Niconchuk, M., & El-wer, N., 2017. Conflict, the brain, and community: A 
neurobiology-informed approach to resilience and community development, in: Phillips, 
R., Kenny, S., McGrath, B. (Eds). The Routledge Handbook of Community Development, 
Human Rights and Resilience. London, United Kingdom 
McEwen, B.S., 2012. Brain on stress: how the social environment gets under the skin. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 109, 17180-17185. 
Mercy Corps, 2014. Advancing Adolescents: Getting Syrian refugee and host-community 
adolescents back on track. Portland, Oregon. 
Mercy Corps, 2016. NUBADER Advancing the Next Generation: Final Evaluation Report. 
https://www.mercycorps.org/ (accessed 01.07.17) 
Mewes, R., Reich, H., Skoluda, N., Seele, F., Nater, U. M., 2017. Elevated hair cortisol 
concentrations in recently fled asylum seekers in comparison to permanently settled 
immigrants and non-immigrants. Transl Psych. 7, e1051. 
Miller, G. E., Chen, E., Zhou, E. S., 2007. If it goes up, must it come down? Chronic stress and 
the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis in humans. Psychol. Bull. 133, 25-45.  
Miller, K. E., Rasmussen, A., 2010. War exposure, daily stressors, and mental health in conflict 
and post-conflict settings: Bridging the divide between trauma-focused and psychosocial 
frameworks. Soc Sci Med. 70, 7-16.  
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
25 
Noppe, G., Van Rossum, E. F., Koper, J. W., Manenschijn, L., Bruining, G. J., De Rijke, Y. B., 
van den Akker, E.L., 2014. Validation and reference ranges of hair cortisol measurement 
in healthy children. Horm Res Paediatr. 82, 97-102.  
Out, D., D. Granger, S. Shepton and S. Segerstrom, 2013. Disentangling sources of individual 
differences in diurnal salivary a-amylase: Reliability, stability and sensitivity to context. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology 38: 367-375. 
Panter‐ Brick, C., Dajani, R., Eggerman, M., Hermosilla, S., Sancilio, A. Ager, A. (2017a). 
Insecurity, distress and mental health: Experimental and randomized controlled trials of a 
psychosocial intervention for youth affected by the Syrian crisis. J Child Psychol 
Psychiatry. 
Panter‐ Brick, C., Hadfield, K., Dajani, R., Eggerman, M., Ager, A., Ungar, M., 2017b. 
Resilience in context: A brief and culturally grounded measure for Syrian refugee and 
Jordanian host‐ community adolescents. Child Dev. 
Panter-Brick, C., Eggerman, M., Gonzalez, V., Safdar, S., 2009. Violence, suffering, and mental 
health in Afghanistan: a school-based survey. The Lancet. 374, 807-816.  
Panter-Brick C., Grimon M., & Eggerman, M., 2013. Caregiver-child mental health: a 
prospective study in conflict and refugee settings. J Child Psychol Psych. 55. 313-327.  
Panter-Brick C., Grimon, M-P., Kalin, M., Eggerman, M., 2015.  Trauma memories, mental 
health, and resilience: A prospective study of Afghan youth. J Child Psychol Psych. 56, 
814-825.   
Pereg, D., Chan, J., Russell, E., Berlin, T., Mosseri, M., Seabrook, J.A., Koren, G. Van Uum, S., 
2013. Cortisol and testosterone in hair as biological markers of systolic heart failure. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology. 38. 2875-2882. 
Punamäki, R.L., Palosaari, E., Diab, M., Peltonen, K., Qouta, S.R., 2015. Trajectories of 
posttraumatic stress symptoms (PTSS) after major war among Palestinian children: 
Trauma, family-and child-related predictors. J Affect Disord, 172, 133-140. 
Ram, N., Grimm, K. J., 2009. Methods and measures: Growth mixture modeling: A method for 
identifying differences in longitudinal change among unobserved groups. Int J Behav 
Dev. 33. 565-576.  
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
26 
Russell, E., Koren, G., Rieder, M., & van Uum, S., 2012. Hair cortisol as a biological marker of 
chronic stress: Current status, future directions and unanswered questions. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology. 37. 589-601. 
Russell, J. D., Neill, E.L., Carrion, V. G. and Weems, C. F., 2017. The Network Structure of 
Posttraumatic Stress Symptoms in Children and Adolescents Exposed to Disasters. J Am 
Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 56, 669-677 e665. 
Save The Children, 2017. Invisible Wounds. http://www.savethechildren.org/ (accessed 
10.07.17) 
Sancilio A, Dajani R, Eggerman M, van Uum S, Wiley K, Panter-Brick C (2016).  Can stress 
biomarkers demonstrate the effectiveness of a humanitarian intervention? An evaluation 
with Syrian refugee youth.  41st Annual Meeting of the Human Biology Association, 
Atlanta, Georgia. 
Shonkoff, J. P., Garner, A. S., Siegel, B. S., Dobbins, M. I., Earls, M. F., McGuinn, L, Pascoe, J. 
and Wood, D. 2012. The lifelong effects of early childhood adversity and toxic stress. 
Pediatrics 129: e232– e246. 
Skoluda, N., Dettenborn, L., Stalder, T. and Kirschbaum, C., 2012. Elevated hair cortisol 
concentrations in endurance athletes. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 37. 611-617. 
Stalder, T., Steudte-Schmiedgen, S., Alexander, N., Klucken, T., Vater, A., Wichmann, S., 
Kirschbaum, C, Miller, R., 2017. Stress-related and basic determinants of hair cortisol in 
humans: A meta-analysis. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 77. 261-274. 
Steudte, S., Kolassa, I. T., Stalder, T., Pfeiffer, A., Kirschbaum, C., Elbert, T., 2011. Increased 
cortisol concentrations in hair of severely traumatized Ugandan individuals with PTSD. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology. 36. 1193-1200. 
Steudte, S., Kirschbaum, C., Gao, W., Alexander, N., Schönfeld, S., Joyer, J., Stalder, T., 2013. 
Hair cortisol as a biomarker of traumatization in healthy individuals and posttraumatic 
stress disorder patients. Biol Psychol. 74. 639-646.  
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
27 
Steudte-Schmiedgen, S., Kirschbaum, C., Alexander, N., Stalder, T., 2016. An integrative model 
linking traumatization, cortisol dysregulation and posttraumatic stress disorder: insight 
from recent hair cortisol findings. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 69. 124-135. 
Thomson, S., Koren, G., Fraser, L.A., Rieder, M., Friedman, T.C. Van Uum, S.H.M., 2010. Hair 
analysis provides a historical record of cortisol levels in Cushing's syndrome. Exp. Clin. 
Endocrinol. Diabetes. 118. 133-138. 
Tirabassi, G., Boscaro, M. and Arnaldi, G., 2014. Harmful effects of functional hypercortisolism: 
a working hypothesis. Endocrine. 46. 370-386. 
Tol, W. A., Barbui, C., Galappatti, A., Silove, D., Betancourt, T. S., Souza, R., Golaz, A., van 
Ommeren, M. (2011). Mental health and psychosocial support in humanitarian settings: 
Linking practice and research. The Lancet. 378. 1581-1591.  
Tol, W., V. Patel, M. Tomlinson, F. Baingana, A. Galappatti, C. Panter-Brick, D. Silove, E. 
Sondorp, M. Wessells and M. van Ommeren, 2011. Research Priorities for Mental Health 
and Psychosocial Support in Humanitarian Settings. PLoS Med 8(9): e1001096. 
Ungar, M. and Liebenberg, L., 2011. Assessing resilience across cultures using mixed methods: 
Construction of the child and youth resilience measure. J Mix Methods Res. 5.126-149. 
UNHCR. (2017). Syrian regional refugee response in Jordan. 
https://data.unhcr.org/syrianrefugees/country.php?id=107 (accessed 20.07.17) 
Van Ryzin, M. J., Chatham, M., Kryzer, E., Kertes, D. A., Gunnar, M. R., 2009. Identifying 
atypical cortisol patterns in young children: The benefits of group-based trajectory 
modeling. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 34. 50-61.  
Van Uum, S.H.M., Sauve, B., Fraser, L.A., Morley-Forster, P., Paul, T.L. Koren, G., 2008. 
Elevated content of cortisol in hair of patients with severe chronic pain: a novel biomarker 
for stress. Stress, 11. 483-488. 
Veronese, G., Pepe, A., 2013. Psychometric properties of IES-R, short Arabic version in contexts 
of military violence. Res Soc Work Pract, 23, 710-718. 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
28 
White, L.O., Ising, M., Klitzing, K., Sierau, S., Michel, A., Klein, A.M., Andreas, A., Keil, J., 
Quintero, L., Müller-Myhsok, B., Uhr, M., 2017. Reduced hair cortisol after maltreatment 
mediates externalizing symptoms in middle childhood and adolescence. J. Child Psychol. 
Psychiatry. 58:9 (2017), pp 998–1007. 
Wosu, A. C., Valdimarsdóttir, U., Shields, A. E., Williams, D. R., Williams, M. A., 2013. 
Correlates of cortisol in human hair: implications for epidemiologic studies on health 
effects of chronic stress. Ann Epidemiol. 23. 797-811. 
Yehuda, R., Goller, J.A., Bierer, L.M., Mikhno, A, Prathett, L.C., Burton, C.L., Makotkine, I., 
Devanand, D.P., Pradhaban, G., Harvey, P.D., Mann, J.J., 2010. Hydrocortisone 
responsiveness in Gulf War veterans with PTSD: Effects on ACTH, declarative memory 
hippocampal [(18)F] FDG uptake on PET. Psychiatry Res. 184, 117-127. 
Ziadni, M., Hammoudeh, W., Rmeileh, N. M. A., Hogan, D., Shannon, H., Giacaman, R., 2011. 
Sources of human insecurity in post-war situations: The case of Gaza. J Hum Security. 7, 
23-36.  
 
 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
29 
 
 
Figure 1. Trajectories of hair cortisol concentration over time.   
The three groups differ at T1 and T2 (independent samples t-tests, p < .05). Neither the hyposecretion nor 
the hypersecretion groups differ from the medium secretion group at T3 (p < .05). Insecurity and 
gender predict a pattern of hypersecretion and post-traumatic stress symptoms predict a pattern of 
medium secretion rather than hyposecretion. T1 is baseline, T2 is after 2.8 months, and T3 is after 
11.1 months.  These data include study participants 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
30 
 
Figure 2. Impacts of the psychosocial intervention on hair cortisol concentration. Across time, the 
intervention significantly reduced hair cortisol concentration for those who were in the treatment group, 
relative to wait-listed controls (a 37.8% decrease). The figure shows within-subjects change over time 
when taking part in the intervention. Growth curve model controls for gender, age, site, and household 
wealth.  
* p < .05, error bars are ±1SE. 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
31 
 
Figure 3. Impacts of the psychosocial intervention on hair cortisol concentration (HCC).  The interaction 
(intervention*cortisol trajectory) was significant (p < .05). Across time, growth curve models showed that 
the intervention reduced HCC for adolescents with a hypersecretion and medium secretion trajectory (by 
15.2% and 43.2%, respectively), but increased HCC for those with a hyposecretion trajectory (by 59.7%). 
Model controls for gender, age, site, and household wealth.  
 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
32 
Table 1.  Characteristics of study participants, at three time-points 
 
Baseline, T1 
11 weeks, T2 
11 months, T3 
 
(n = 611) 
(n = 439) 
(n = 236) 
Age (years) 
14.52 (1.70) 
14.38 (1.71) 
14.17 (1.75) 
Male (%) 
46.5 
51.1 
56.2 
Syrian refugee (%) 
57.6 
56.9 
61.0 
Study site (%), Irbid 
28.2 
26.9 
17.8 
                         Mafraq 
23.4 
19.6 
28.4 
                         Jarash 
34.4 
35.5 
36.4 
                         Zarqa 
14.1 
18.0 
17.4 
Trial group (% intervention)  
58.9 
56.3 
54.7 
Household wealth (N items) 
7.76 (2.92) 
7.82 (2.89) 
7.49 (2.99) 
Trauma exposure (N events) 
4.03 (3.73) 
3.99 (3.72) 
4.29 (3.63) 
PTSD (%) 
44.7 
44.1 
47.1 
CRIES 
13.56 (12.62) 
13.08 (12.79) 
14.00 (12.52) 
Perceived stress  
27.87 (6.43) 
25.26 (6.55) 
23.04 (9.48) 
Human insecurity  
63.81 (21.29) 
59.33 (22.50) 
57.95 (20.43) 
Hair cortisol (pg/mg, non-transformed)  
9.52 (9.98) 
10.01 (14.46) 
16.28 (18.74) 
Hair cortisol (log pg/mg) 
0.82 (0.37) 
0.65 (0.59) 
0.92 (0.55) 
Unless otherwise stated, values are mean (SD).  Values for age, gender, nationality, study site, trial group, 
household wealth, trauma exposure, PTSD, and CRIES scores are from T1; values presented at T2 and T3 
reflect change from attrition. Values for perceived stress, insecurity, and hair cortisol (collected at T1, T2, 
and T3) are shown for each time-point, reflecting change over time.  For group differences, please see text 
and Table 4. 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
33 
Table 2. Correlations for cortisol over time, for the sample stratified by lifetime trauma exposure 
 
 
T1 Cortisol 
T2 Cortisol 
Low trauma exposure 
 
T2 Cortisol 
.42** 
n = 173 
 
T3 Cortisol 
.29* 
n = 74 
.25* 
n = 88 
High trauma exposure  
 
T2 Cortisol  
.13 
n = 180 
 
T3 Cortisol 
.19 
n = 97 
.13 
n = 105 
Pearson correlations for hair cortisol content (log values). Low trauma exposure is <4 trauma events, high 
trauma exposure is ≥4 trauma events.  * p < .05, ** p < .001 
 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
34 
Table 3. Model fit for latent basis mixture models of hair cortisol content  
 
AIC 
SSA-BIC 
Entropy 
LMR 
VLMR 
2 class 
1691.90 
1704.70 
.92 
29.98** 
0.28** 
3 class 
1669.25 
1686.32 
.78 
27.27** 
3.32** 
4 class 
1661.90 
1683.23 
.52 
12.71 
11.69 
Note: Significant LMR and VLMR scores suggest better model fit than a k-1 class model. Based on fit 
indices and theory, the 3-class model was chosen. LMR = Lo-Mendell-Rubin likelihood ratio test, VLMR 
= Vuong-Lo-Mendell-Rubin likelihood ratio test. * p < .05, ** p < .001 
  
 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
  
35 
Table 4. Multinomial logistic regression, predicting cortisol trajectory membership from gender, baseline 
trauma, perceived stress, and insecurity 
 
B 
SE 
eB 
Wald Z 
p 
95% CI 
Hyposecretion 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gender 
-.08 
.46 
.92 
.03 
.86 
.38, 2.27 
CRIES 
-.07 
.03 
.93 
7.68 
.01 
.89, .98 
Perceived stress  
.03 
.04 
1.03 
.47 
.49 
.95, 1.11 
Human insecurity  
.00 
.01 
1.00 
.09 
.76 
.98, 1.02 
 
Hypersecretion 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gender 
-1.57 
.31 
.21 
24.96 
<.001 
.11, .39 
CRIES 
.00 
.01 
1.00 
.00 
.98 
.98, 1.02 
Perceived stress  
-.01 
.02 
.99 
.36 
.55 
.95, 1.03 
Human insecurity  
.02 
.01 
1.02 
6.61 
.01 
1.00, 1.03 
Note: Reference class is the ‘Medium Secretion’ class. Reference group for gender is female.  
 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
