 Dectin-1 Activation on Macrophages by Galectin-9 Promotes 
Pancreatic Carcinoma and Peritumoral Immune-Tolerance
Donnele Daley1,±, Vishnu R. Mani1,±, Navyatha Mohan1, Neha Akkad1, Atsuo Ochi1, Daniel 
W. Heindel2, Ki Buom Lee1, Constantinos P. Zambirinis1, Gautam S.D. Balasubramania 
Pandian1, Shivraj Savadkar1, Alejandro Torres-Hernandez1, Shruti Nayak3, Ding Wang4, 
Mautin Hundeyin1, Brian Diskin1, Berk Aykut1, Gregor Werba1, Rocky M. Barilla1, Robert 
Rodriguez1, Steven Chang1, Lawrence Gardner4, Lara K. Mahal2, Beatrix Ueberheide3, and 
George Miller1,5,*
1S.A. Localio Laboratory, Department of Surgery, New York University School of Medicine, 430 
East 29th Street, New York, NY 10016
2Department of Chemistry, 100 Washington Square East, New York University, New York, NY 
10003
3S.A. Localio Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, New York 
University School of Medicine, 430 East 29th Street, New York, NY 10016
4S.A. Localio Laboratory, Department of Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, 430 
East 29th Street, New York, NY 10016
5S.A. Localio Laboratory, Department of Cell Biology, New York University School of Medicine, 
430 East 29th Street, New York, NY 10016
Abstract
The progression of pancreatic oncogenesis requires immune-suppressive inflammation in 
cooperation with oncogenic mutations. However, the drivers of intra-tumoral immune tolerance are 
uncertain. Dectin-1 is an innate immune receptor critical in anti-fungal immunity, but its role in 
sterile inflammation and oncogenesis is not well-defined. Further, non-pathogen-derived ligands 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Address correspondence to: George Miller, MD, Departments of Surgery and Cell Biology, New York University School of Medicine, 
430 East 29th Street, East River Science Park, Room 660, New York, NY 10016, Tel: (646) 501-2208, Fax: (212) 263-6840, 
george.miller@nyumc.org.
±DD and VRM contributed equally to this work
Author Contributions
DD and VRM (project leadership, data collection and analysis, manuscript preparation), NM (flow cytometry, western blotting, invivo 
experiments, manuscript preparation), NA (IHC, IF, flow cytometry, invivo experiments), AO (immunoprecipitation, binding assays, 
ELISA, western blotting), KBL, GSDBP, SS and RR (flow cytometry, invivo experiments), DWH (immunoprecipitation and 
biochemical analysis), SN (mass spectroscopy), DW (cell line transfection), GW (invivo experiments), CPZ (data collection and 
mouse breeding), RMB, ATH, MH, BD and BA (technical assistance in diverse in vivo and in vitro experiments), SC (data analysis), 
LG (Cell line transfection), LKM (immunoprecipitation and biochemical analysis), BU (mass spectroscopy), GM (project design and 
leadership, data analysis, manuscript preparation).
Competing Financial Interests
The authors have competing interests.
GM - Co-Founder and Scientific Advisory Board Member of Nybo Therapeutics
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 10.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Med. 2017 May ; 23(5): 556–567. doi:10.1038/nm.4314.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 for Dectin-1 have not been characterized. We found that Dectin-1 is highly expressed on 
macrophages in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA). Dectin-1 ligation accelerated PDA, 
whereas Dectin-1 deletion or blockade of its downstream signaling was protective. We found that 
Dectin-1 ligates the lectin Galectin-9 in the PDA tumor microenvironment resulting in tolerogenic 
macrophage programming and adaptive immune suppression. Upon interruption of the Dectin-1–
Galectin-9 axis, CD4+ and CD8+ T cells – which are dispensable to PDA progression in hosts with 
an intact signaling axis – become reprogrammed into indispensable mediators of anti-tumor 
immunity. These data suggest that targeting Dectin-1 signaling is an attractive strategy for the 
immunotherapy of PDA.
Keywords
Pancreatic cancer; Kras; T cells; Myeloid-derived suppressor cells
Introduction
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is a devastating disease with few long-term 
survivors1. Inflammation is paramount in PDA progression as oncogenic mutations alone, in 
the absence of concomitant inflammation, are insufficient for tumorigenesis2. Innate and 
adaptive immunity cooperate to promote tumor progression in PDA. In particular, specific 
innate immune subsets within the tumor microenvironment (TME) are apt at educating 
adaptive immune effector cells towards a tumor-permissive phenotype. Antigen presenting 
cell (APC) populations, including M2-polarized tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) and 
myeloid dendritic cells (DC), induce the generation of immune suppressive Th2 cells in 
favor of tumor-protective Th1 cells3,4. Similarly, we and others have shown that myeloid 
derived suppressor cells (MDSC) negate anti-tumor CD8+ cytotoxic T-Lymphocyte (CTL) 
responses in PDA and promote metastatic progression5–7. However, the drivers of monocytic 
cellular differentiation toward an immune-suppressive phenotype remain uncertain.
Dectin-1 is a member of the C-type lectin family of pattern recognition receptors and is 
expressed on the surface of macrophages and other cells of the myeloid-monocytic lineage8. 
Dectin-1 is a crucial component of the innate immune system’s ability to recognize beta-
glucan polysaccharides derived from fungal cell walls9. Ligation of Dectin-1 by β-glucans 
recruits the CARD9 adaptor protein, which phosphorylates Syk, thereby initiating an anti-
fungal immune response10,11. Our recent work suggested that chronic inflammatory injury 
upregulates Dectin-1 expression in the liver12. Further, we found that the PDA TME is rife 
with damage associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) generated as byproducts of 
inflammation and necrotic cell death3,13. However, unlike Toll-like receptors, which 
influence oncogenic progression when ligated by DAMPs3,14,15, the role of Dectin-1 in non-
pathogen mediated inflammation or oncogenesis is not well-defined and sterile Dectin-1 
ligands have not been characterized. We discovered high Dectin-1 expression and the 
presence of novel Dectin-1 agonists within the PDA TME. We postulated that Dectin-1 
ligation in macrophages drives their immune suppressive cellular differentiation in PDA and 
thereby governs the tolerogenic T cell program in the TME which facilitates oncogenic 
progression.
Daley et al.
Page 2
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Results
High Dectin-1 expression in murine and human PDA
To test the relevance of Dectin-1 signaling to pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA), we 
examined Dectin-1 expression in two PDA mouse models: the slowly progressive PDA 
model p48Cre;LSL-KrasG12D (KC) in which mice express oncogenic Kras in their pancreatic 
progenitor cells, and a more aggressive orthotopic PDA model utilizing tumor cells from 
Pdx1Cre;LSL-KrasG12D;Tp53R172H (KPC) mice, which expresses mutant Kras and p53; as 
well as in human PDA42,43. Immunohistochemical analysis suggested high Dectin-1 
expression in leukocytes in KC pancreata and in transformed epithelial cells (Figures 1a and 
S1a, b). Pancreata from KC mice crossed with Dectin-1−/− animals (KC;Dectin-1−/−) served 
as controls. Flow cytometry revealed ~2-fold higher Dectin-1 expression in macrophages 
(46%), neutrophils and inflammatory monocytes (80%), and DC (65%) within the KC TME 
compared with their cellular counterparts in spleen (18%, 47% and 40% respectively) 
(Figure 1b). Similarly, in orthotopically implanted KPC tumors, Dectin-1 was highly 
expressed on leukocytes and in malignant epithelial cells (Figures 1c and S1c–e). Dectin-1 
was also expressed higher in leukocytes in PDA (44%) compared with normal pancreas 
(9%) (Figure 1d). Immune-fluorescent microscopy in human PDA similarly suggested high 
Dectin-1 expression in transformed epithelial cells and in tumor-infiltrating myeloid cells 
(Figure S1f, g). Parallel to mice, human PDA-infiltrating CD14+ and CD15+ monocytes and 
macrophages and CD11c+ DC expressed higher Dectin-1 compared with their cellular 
counterparts in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) (Figure 1e).
To investigate the stimulus for upregulation of Dectin-1 expression in leukocytes in PDA we 
co-cultured bone-marrow derived macrophages (BMDM) with pancreatic tumor cells 
derived from KPC mice. PDA cells and PDA cellular supernatant upregulated Dectin-1 
expression in BMDM; however, select cytokines associated with PDA did not influence 
Dectin-1 expression (Figure S1h). Collectively, these results suggest upregulated Dectin-1 
expression in the tumor and peritumoral inflammatory compartment in PDA.
Evidence of Dectin-1 signaling and the presence of Dectin-1 ligands in PDA
To investigate the relevance of Dectin-1 signaling in pancreatic oncogenesis, we assayed 3 
and 6 month-old WT and KC pancreata for the presence of activated signaling intermediates 
downstream of Dectin-1 ligation. We found that compared with age-matched WT pancreata, 
KC pancreata expressed elevated p-Syk and p-PLCγ as well as high CARD9 and evidence 
of robust JNK pathway activation (Figure S2a). IHC confirmed high p-Syk expression in KC 
pancreata, whereas Syk signaling was reduced in PDA in the context of Dectin-1 deletion 
(Figure S2b). Similarly, flow cytometry showed elevated p-Syk expression in diverse 
myeloid cellular subsets in PDA compared with their counterparts in the spleen (Figure 
S2c).
To investigate for the presence of Dectin-1 ligands within the pancreatic TME, we employed 
a human IgG Fc-conjugated Dectin-1 fusion protein. Whereas Dectin-1 ligands were absent 
in WT pancreata, we identified high levels of Dectin-1 ligands in pancreata of KC mice by 
Western blotting (Figure S2a) and immune fluorescence microscopy (Figure S2d). Flow 
Daley et al.
Page 3
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cytometric analysis confirmed expression of Dectin-1 ligands on tumor-infiltrating 
macrophages and DC in KC pancreata compared with no expression in leukocytes in spleen 
(Figure S2e). Expression of Dectin-1 ligands were similarly elevated in APCs infiltrating 
orthotopic KPC tumors (Figure S2f). Further, CD133+ transformed epithelial cells in KC 
(Figure S2g) and KPC tumors (Figure S2h) expressed Dectin-1 ligands in vivo as did KPC-
derived tumor cells grown in culture (Figure S2i). Collectively, our data suggest high 
expression of the Dectin-1 receptor and Dectin-1 ligands in the epithelial and inflammatory 
compartments of PDA along with upregulation of associated signaling intermediates.
Dectin-1 ligation accelerates pancreatic oncogenesis
Since Dectin-1 and its cognate ligands are highly expressed in PDA, we postulated that 
Dectin-1 signaling may promote immune-suppressive inflammation leading to accelerated 
tumorigenesis. To test this, we serially treated six week-old KC mice with the Dectin-1 
specific agonists depleted Zymosan (d-Zymosan) or Heat-killed Candida albicans (HKCA) 
and assessed tumor progression eight weeks later compared to vehicle-treated animals. 
Ligation of Dectin-1 vigorously accelerated tumorigenesis (Figure 1f–i). Whereas pancreata 
in vehicle-treated KC mice harbored large areas of residually normal acinar architecture, 
mice treated with Dectin-1 agonists exhibited near-complete effacement of their pancreatic 
acini with more advanced PanIN lesions and numerous foci of invasive carcinoma embedded 
in dense fibro-inflammatory stroma (Figure 1f–i). Kras-transformed ductal epithelial cells in 
Dectin-1 agonist-treated KC mice also exhibited elevated Ki67 proliferative rates (Figure 
S3a). Similarly, in vivo administration of Dectin-1 agonists accelerated tumor growth in 
orthotopically implanted KPC-derived tumors (Figure 1j). These data suggest that Dectin-1 
signaling promotes PDA progression.
Dectin-1 deletion is protective against PDA
To determine whether Dectin-1 signaling is required for the normal progression of 
pancreatic oncogenesis, we examined the tumor-phenotype in KC;Dectin-1−/− mice over 
time. Dectin-1 deletion delayed malignant progression and stromal expansion. Compared 
with KC controls, age-matched KC;Dectin-1−/− pancreata exhibited delayed development of 
pancreatic dysplasia and fibrosis (Figures 2a, S3b) and extended survival (Figure 2b). To 
determine whether Dectin-1 deletion influences molecular oncogenesis, we probed 
pancreata from KC and KC;Dectin-1−/− mice for select cell cycle regulatory, oncogenic, and 
tumor suppressor genes. KC;Dectin-1−/− pancreata exhibited higher expression of Bcl-xL, 
Rb, Smad4, and p16 but reduced p53 and c-Myc expression suggesting a distinct oncogenic 
phenotype (Figure 2c). Collectively, these data imply that Dectin-1 contributes to the normal 
progression of pancreatic neoplasia in the context of a driving Kras mutation.
Syk inhibition is protective against PDA
Since Dectin-1 signals via Syk phosphorylation, and we showed that Syk activation is 
reduced in KC;Dectin-1−/− pancreata, we postulated that Syk blockade would be protective 
against pancreatic oncogenesis. KC mice were treated from 6–14 weeks of life with 
Piceatannol, a p-Syk inhibitor, and tested for tumor progression compared with vehicle-
treated controls. We confirmed that Piceatannol prevented Syk activation in vivo in PDA. 
Syk inhibition reduced pancreatic tumor weights and mitigated dysplastic changes but was 
Daley et al.
Page 4
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 not protective in KC;Dectin-1−/− mice (Figure 2d–e), suggesting that blockade of signaling 
pathways downstream of Dectin-1 may be an attractive therapeutic strategy in pancreatic 
oncogenesis.
Dectin-1 does not have direct pro-tumorigenic effects on transformed pancreatic ductal 
epithelial cells
To determine whether Dectin-1 ligation has direct mitogenic or activating effects on 
transformed pancreatic epithelial cells, we treated KPC-derived tumor cells in vitro with the 
Dectin-1 agonist d-Zymosan. Dectin-1 ligation failed to induce proliferation or cytokine 
production in PDA tumor cells (Figure S4a–c). HKCA similarly failed to induce 
proliferation or cytokine production in KPC cells (not shown). To further test whether 
Dectin-1 has direct oncogenic or pro-inflammatory effects in PDA cells, we silenced 
Dectin-1expression in KPC-derived tumor cells using shRNA (Figure S4d). However, 
Dectin-1 knockdown did not alter the growth rate of tumor cells in vivo (Figure S4e) 
suggesting that Dectin-1 signaling in the transformed epithelial compartment is not critical 
in modulating PDA. Similarly, transformed pancreatic ductal epithelial cells (PDEC) 
harvested from KC and KC;Dectin-1−/− pancreata proliferated at equal rates in vitro (Figure 
S4f) and in vivo (Figure S4g).
Dectin-1 deletion in the extra-epithelial compartment alone is protective against 
oncogenesis
Since Dectin-1 ligation or knockdown does not influence the proliferative capacity of 
transformed pancreatic epithelial cells, we postulated that Dectin-1 deletion in the extra-
epithelial compartment alone would be protective against PDA. To investigate this, WT and 
Dectin-1−/− mice were challenged with orthotopic injections of KPC-derived tumor cells 
with intact Dectin-1 expression. Pancreatic tumors harvested at 3 weeks were markedly 
smaller in Dectin-1−/− hosts suggesting that Dectin-1 deletion in the extra-tumoral 
compartment alone is protective against PDA (Figure S4h). Dectin-1−/− mice also exhibited 
extended survival after orthotopic PDA tumor implantation compared with WT mice (Figure 
S4i). Similarly, KC mice made chimeric using Dectin-1−/− bone marrow were protected 
against oncogenesis compared with KC mice made chimeric using WT bone marrow, 
confirming that deletion of Dectin-1 in leukocytes alone is protective (Figure S4j). Dectin-1 
expression was not associated with adverse survival in human PDA (Figure S4k); however, 
Dectin-1 was a surrogate for total myeloid cell infiltration (Figure S4l).
Dectin-1 deletion induces immunogenic reprogramming of tumor-infiltrating macrophages
We speculated that blockade of Dectin-1 signaling in the stroma leads to protection against 
PDA by bolstering anti-tumor immunity. Specifically, we postulated that Dectin-1 deletion 
leads to immunogenic reprogramming of macrophages resulting in the reversal of the 
immune-suppressive phenotype of PDA-infiltrating T cells. To test this in vitro, we 
stimulated naïve CD4+ and CD8+ T cells using CD3/CD28 co-ligation and measured 
expression of ICOS, CD44, IFN-γ, and TNF-α which are upregulated on activated T cells 
and expression of CD62L and IL-10 which is downregulated upon T cell activation. 
Dectin-1+/+ or Dectin-1−/− CD11b+ cells harvested from KPC-derived tumors were added to 
select wells. Whereas tumor-infiltrating WT myeloid cells abrogated ICOS upregulation in 
Daley et al.
Page 5
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 αCD3/CD28-activated CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, PDA-infiltrating Dectin-1−/− myeloid cells 
exhibited minimal inhibitory effects (Figure 3a, b). Similarly, whereas WT CD11b+ cells 
prevented CD4+ and CD8+ T cell adoption of a CD44+CD62L− effector memory phenotype 
in response to CD3/CD28 ligation, Dectin-1−/− cells were non-inhibitory (Figure 3c, d). 
Moreover, in contrast to tumor-infiltrating WT CD11b+ cells which promoted IL-10 
production from CD4+ T cells (Figure 3e) and negated IFN-γ and TNF-α expression in 
CD8+ T cells (Figure 3f), Dectin-1−/− cells only minimally induced IL-10 production in 
CD4+ T cells and were permissive of CD8+ cytotoxic T cell activation (Figure 3e, f). Similar 
differential effects on CD4+ and CD8+ T cell inhibition were observed when using purified 
Gr1−CD11c−CD11b+F4/80+ PDA-associated macrophages (TAMs) harvested from WT 
versus Dectin-1−/− hosts (Figure S5a, b). Conversely, the T cell inhibitory capacity of 
Gr1+CD11b+ neutrophils and inflammatory monocytes was not diminished in the context of 
Dectin-1 deletion suggesting that only Dectin-1 signaling in TAMs influences T cell 
function (Figure S5c).
To investigate whether Dectin-1 signaling promotes macrophage-mediated immune-
suppression in situ in PDA, we assessed macrophage recruitment and phenotype in both our 
slowly progressive (KC) and invasive (KPC) models of PDA in the contexts of either 
Dectin-1 deletion or activation. KC;Dectin-1−/− mice exhibited significantly reduced 
pancreatic infiltration with F4/80+ and Arg1+ TAMs on IHC analysis (Figure 4a, b). Flow 
cytometry confirmed a ~50% reduction in the fraction of TAMs in KC;Dectin-1−/− pancreata 
(Figure 4c). We found a similar decrease in the fraction of TAMs in orthotopic KPC tumors 
in Dectin-1−/− hosts compared with WT (Figure 4d). Accordingly, analysis of orthotopic 
KPC tumors using a PCR array suggested reduced expression of diverse inflammatory 
mediators in tumors in Dectin-1−/− hosts compared with WT (Figure S5d). Moreover, 
cellular phenotyping experiments indicated that Dectin-1 deletion induced immunogenic 
reprogramming of TAMs toward M1-like differentiation. Specifically, TAMs infiltrating 
Dectin-1−/− pancreata expressed elevated MHC II, reduced CD206, and higher TNF-α and 
iNOS compared with Dectin-1+/+ hosts suggesting M1-like programming (Figure 4e–g). By 
contrast, the prevalence and immune-phenotype of CD11c+MHCII+ DC was similar in both 
WT and Dectin-1−/− PDA tumors (Figure S5e, f).
We confirmed that exogenous Dectin-1 ligand administration using d-Zymosan activates Syk 
signaling in the PDA TME (Figure 4h). Accordingly, in vivo Dectin-1 ligation increased the 
fraction of TAMs in orthotopic KPC tumors (Figure 4i), and upregulated CD206 expression 
(Figure 4j); however, MHC II expression was not significantly altered (Figure 4k). Similar 
effects on macrophage programming were seen after in vivo treatment with HKCA (not 
shown). Moreover, adoptive transfer of WT macrophages coincident with PDA tumor 
challenge in Dectin-1−/− hosts resulted in an accelerated tumor growth rate compared with 
adoptive transfer of Dectin-1−/− macrophages (Figure 4l).
Dectin-1 signaling suppresses T cell immunogenicity in PDA
Based on the macrophage phenotyping and adoptive transfer experiments and our in vitro 
co-culture data, we postulated that the reprogramming of TAMs resulting from Dectin-1 
deletion in PDA leads to enhanced immunogenicity in tumor-entrained T cells. To test this, 
Daley et al.
Page 6
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 we interrogated the T cell phenotype in pancreas-draining lymph nodes in KC vs 
KC;Dectin-1−/− mice, as well as in orthotopic KPC tumors in WT vs Dectin-1−/− hosts. 
Consistent with our hypothesis, Dectin-1 deletion in KC mice led to immunogenic 
reprogramming of tumor-draining CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, which exhibited upregulated 
expression of CD44, OX40, and PD-1 indicative of cellular activation (Figure 5a–c). 
Dectin-1 deletion also increased the CD8:CD4 ratio in tumor draining lymph nodes (Figure 
5d). Similarly, Dectin-1 deletion increased the CD8:CD4 ratio in tumor-infiltrating T cells in 
orthotopic KPC tumors (Figure 5e). Further, CD8+ T cells in KPC tumors in Dectin-1−/− 
hosts exhibited an activated phenotype with high expression of PD-1, T-bet, TNF-α, 
CD107a, and Granzyme B suggesting enhanced cytotoxic potential compared with 
orthotopic KPC tumors in WT hosts (Figure 5f). Accordingly, orthotopic administration of 
KPC cells engineered to express OVA resulted in a markedly higher fraction of tumor-
infiltrating OVA Pentamer+ cytotoxic T cells in Dectin-1−/− hosts compared with WT 
(Figure S5g, h). Similarly, PDA-infiltrating CD4+ T cells in Dectin-1−/− hosts expressed 
higher CD44, CD107a, and ICOS and exhibited enhanced Th1 polarization as evidenced by 
upregulated expression of T-bet and TNF-α (Figure 5g). Collectively, these data indicate 
enhanced T cell immunogenicity. Notably, consistent with higher T cell activation and PD-1 
expression in PDA tumors in Dectin-1−/− mice, combined Dectin-1 deletion + PD-1 
blockade trended to offer synergistic protection and further enhanced intra-tumoral Th1 
polarization whereas PD-1 blockade had no efficacy in absence of Dectin-1 deletion (Figure 
5h, i).
We postulated that exogenous Dectin-1 ligation would induce an immune-suppressive Th2 
phenotype and reduce CD8+ T cell activation. Accordingly, CD4+ T cells harvested from d-
Zymosan treated KPC-tumor bearing mice exhibited reduced T-bet and TNF-α expression 
but higher IL-5, IL-10, and IL-13 expression (Figure S6a). Similarly, CD8+ T cells exhibited 
diminished T-bet and TNF-α expression after Dectin-1 ligation (Figure S6b). Further, in 
vivo macrophage depletion activated PDA-infiltrating CD4+ and CD8+ T cells exclusively in 
WT hosts but not in Dectin-1−/− hosts, suggesting that Dectin-1-expressing macrophages 
drive T cell suppression in PDA (Figure S6c, d).
To definitively test whether tumor-protection in the absence of Dectin-1 signaling is 
contingent on immunogenic T cell reprogramming, we depleted T cells coincident with 
orthotopic KPC tumor administration in cohorts of WT and Dectin-1−/− animals. Pan-T cell 
depletion did not affect PDA growth in WT mice; however, tumor protection was abrogated 
in Dectin-1−/− cohorts (Figure S6e). Similarly, CD4+ and CD8+ T cell depletion alone each 
reversed tumor-protection in Dectin-1−/− mice (Figure S6f, g) but not in WT (not shown). 
These data suggest that in PDA-bearing WT hosts, T cells are dispensable to outcome; 
conversely, in the absence of Dectin-1 signaling, T cells are reprogrammed into 
indispensable mediators of tumor-protection.
Galectin-9 ligates Dectin-1 in PDA
Non-pathogen derived Dectin-1 ligands have not been well-characterized. Therefore, we 
performed affinity purification-mass spectrometry using the IgG Fc-conjugated Dectin-1 
fusion protein coupled to protein G beads to purify putative ligand(s) in KPC tumor extracts. 
Daley et al.
Page 7
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The proteins co-purified with the Dectin-1 fusion protein were contrasted with proteins 
purified with protein G beads alone. Affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry 
experiments were repeated twice and only proteins that uniquely co-purified with the IgG 
Fc-conjugated Dectin-1 fusion protein were considered possible candidate Dectin-1 ligands. 
A total of 19 proteins were identified. Among the co-purified proteins was Galectin-9 (Table 
S1). Since Galectin-9 is a member of the β-galactoside-binding family of lectins, we 
hypothesized that Galectin-9 is a sterile ligand for Dectin-1. We assayed for the presence of 
Galectin-9 in the murine PDA TME and found robust expression of Galectin-9 in diverse 
PDA-infiltrating myeloid cells and in cancer cells by flow cytometry (Figure 6a, b). We also 
found modest expression of Galectin-9 in both leukocytes and tumor cells in human PDA 
whereas Galectin-9 was minimally expressed in leukocytes in PBMC (Figure 6c). We further 
demonstrated expression of Galectin-9 in PDA-infiltrating leukocytes (13%) and cancer cells 
(7%) by confocal microscopy (Figure 6d, e). To investigate whether Dectin-1 ligates 
Galectin-9, protein G-magnetic beads were loaded with the Dectin-1 IgG Fc fusion protein 
or control IgG Fc. Bead–IgG Fc complexes were incubated with recombinant Galectin-9 and 
then labeled with a fluorescently-conjugated αGalectin-9 mAb and tested for fluorescence 
by flow cytometry. We found that the IgG Fc-conjugated Dectin-1 fusion protein avidly 
ligated Galectin-9 whereas controls failed to elicit a positive signal (Figure 6f). Furthermore, 
our data suggest that Galectin-9 ligation of Dectin-1 may be competitively inhibited by the 
well-characterized Dectin-1 ligand d-Zymosan (Figure 6f). Galectin-9 also bound murine 
(Figure 6g) and human (Figure 6h) Dectin-1 in a dose-dependent manner on ELISA. By 
contrast, murine Dectin-1 did not avidly bind Galectin-3 or Galectin-4 (Figure 6i). We 
further confirmed that Galectin-9 binds Dectin-1 in situ by precipitating Dectin-1 ligands in 
pancreatic tissue extract from KC mice and then probing for Galectin-9. Our results 
indicated Dectin-1–Galectin-9 complex formation (Figure 6j). Given that Galectin-9 binds to 
polylactosamine epitopes on glycoproteins, we assessed whether Galectin-9 ligates Dectin-1 
through a glycan/galectin-9 interaction. To test this, we pretreated the Dectin-1 with 
PNGaseF, an enzyme that cleaves N-linked glycans, and tested whether this modulated the 
interaction. We observed no change in the binding between the proteins suggesting glycan-
independent binding (Figure 6k). In addition, we pretreated Galectin-9 with high 
concentrations of lactose, a known inhibitor of galectins, prior to incubation with Dectin-1. 
Again, no alteration of the Dectin-1/Galectin-9 interaction was observed confirming glycan-
independent binding (Figure 6k). To determine whether Galectin-9 is a functional Dectin-1 
ligand, we treated WT and Dectin-1−/− macrophages with recombinant Galectin-9 and 
measured Syk phosphorylation. Galectin-9 activated Syk in a Dectin-1-dependent manner 
(Figure 6l). Similarly, Galectin-9 induced NF-κB signaling in a HEK293 Dectin-1 reporter 
cell line16 in a dose dependent manner (Figure 6m). An irrelevant ligand specific for the C-
type lectin receptor Mincle did not activate the Dectin-1 reporter cells (not shown).
Galectin-9 blockade is protective against PDA
Since we found that Galectin-9 activates Dectin-1 in PDA, we postulated that Galectin-9 
blockade would protect against tumor progression. We found that serial treatment with a 
neutralizing Galectin-9 mAb extended survival in mice harboring orthotopic KPC tumors 
(Figure S7a). Galectin-9 blockade also extended survival after mAb treatment was initiated 
in mice harboring established orthotopic KPC tumors (Figure S7b). Similarly, elevated 
Daley et al.
Page 8
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Galectin-9 expression was associated with a trend toward reduced survival in human PDA 
(Figure S7c). To determine whether Galectin-9 blockade induces tumor regression, mice 
were implanted subcutaneously with PDA cells and treatment with α-Galectin-9 or isotype 
was commenced after tumor development. Galectin-9 blockade resulted in substantial tumor 
regression (Figure S7d). Further, akin to Dectin-1 deletion, combined blockade of Galectin-9 
and PD-1 trended to offer synergistic protection against orthotopic PDA (Figure S7e) and 
resulted in enhanced T cell activation (not shown). Moreover, T cell deletion abrogated the 
protective effects of Galectin-9 blockade (Figure S7f). By contrast, macrophage depletion 
was protective against PDA in WT hosts as we have previously reported13; however, 
depleting macrophages accelerated tumor growth in the context of Galectin-9 neutralization 
(Figure S7f). Further, similar to Dectin-1 deletion, Galectin-9 neutralization was associated 
with immunogenic reprogramming of TAMs in PDA (Figure S7g). These data suggest that 
Galectin-9 neutralization leads to macrophage-dependent adaptive anti-tumor immunity. 
Since Galectin-9-based immunotherapy of orthotopic PDA tumors eventually fails – despite 
more than doubling median survival – we compared the cellular differentiation and 
inflammatory infiltrate in early (day 21) versus late (day 42) tumors in mice treated with 
αGalectin-9. Tumor differentiation, macrophage infiltration, and polarization were similar in 
early and late tumors (Figure S7h–j). However, CD8+ T cell infiltration was markedly 
diminished in advanced tumors and CD8+ T cells expressed lower IFN-γ and T-bet (Figure 
S7k–m).
To determine whether the immune-suppressive T cell program associated with Dectin-1 
signaling in the PDA TME was contingent on Galectin-9, we serially blocked Galectin-9 in 
KPC tumor bearing WT and Dectin-1−/− mice. Galectin-9 neutralization enhanced intra-
tumoral T cell activation in PDA in WT hosts. However, Galectin-9 neutralization failed to 
further enhance CD4+ or CD8+ T cell phenotype in the context of Dectin-1 deletion (Figure 
S8a, b). Collectively, our data suggests that the Dectin-1 – Galectin-9 axis plays a pivotal 
role in the education of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells toward immunogenic or tolerogenic 
phenotypes in PDA, which regulates oncogenic progression (Figure S8c).
Discussion
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is a devastating disease in which the mortality rate 
approaches the incidence rate1. Specifically, PDA is almost invariably associated with a 
robust inflammatory infiltrate which can have divergent influences on disease progression by 
either combating cancer growth via antigen-restricted tumoricidal immune responses or by 
promoting tumor progression via induction of immune suppression17–19. For example, CD8+ 
T cells and Th1-polarized CD4+ T cells mediate tumor protection in murine models of PDA 
and are associated with prolonged survival in human disease20. Conversely, we and others 
reported that Th2-polarized CD4+ T cells promote PDA progression in mice and intra-
tumoral CD4+ Th2 cell infiltrates correlate with reduced survival in human disease3,20,21. 
Similarly, Foxp3+ Tregs facilitate tumor immune escape and shorten survival in PDA22,23. 
Hence, T cell programing influences disease outcome in PDA. However, regulation of the 
balance between immunogenic and immune-suppressive T cell populations is uncertain. Our 
data suggest that Dectin-1 signaling plays a critical role in the capacity of macrophages to 
educate CD4+ and CD8+ T cells toward immunogenic or tolerogenic phenotypes.
Daley et al.
Page 9
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Dectin-1 is vital in the innate immune defense against fungal pathogens24. Patients with 
genetic deficiencies in Dectin-1 are at risk for recurrent mucocutaneous fungal infections, 
such as vulvovaginal candidiasis or onychomycosis25. However, unlike their TLR cousins, a 
definitive role for Dectin-1 in promoting non-pathogen mediated inflammation or 
oncogenesis is lacking26. We previously reported that in the context of chronic liver disease 
Dectin-1 signaling secondarily protects against liver cancer development by suppressing 
TLR4 which drives liver fibrosis and increases the associated risk for development of 
hepatocarcinogenesis12. Additional evidence also suggests that in select contexts Dectin-1 
activation may bolster anti-tumor immunity. Chiba et al. showed that Dectin-1 expression on 
antigen presenting cells is critical to NK-mediated killing of tumor cells that overexpress N-
glycan structures27. Dectin-1 recognition of these tumor cells causes the activation of the 
IRF5 transcription factor and gene induction necessary for the tumoricidal activity of NK 
cells. Orally administered β-glucans may be protective in lung and mammary tumor models 
by ligating Dectin-1 and inducing tumoricidal responses28. By contrast, we demonstrate that 
Dectin-1 critically regulates macrophage phenotype in PDA, which dictates the 
immunogenic or tolerogenic properties of peritumoral T cells. Moreover, we show that 
whereas T cells are dispensable in PDA, as T cell deletion does not influence tumor growth, 
Dectin-1 deletion renders T cells indispensable to tumor protection. These data suggest that 
targeting Dectin-1 may be an attractive strategy for PDA immunotherapy in experimental 
therapeutics. We recently reported that activation of Mincle, another C-type lectin receptor, 
also has pro-tumorigenic properties13. However, unlike Dectin-1, Mincle is a well-described 
death receptor as Mincle ligates byproducts of necroptotic cell death within the PDA TME, 
including SAP130, leading to expansion of Tregs13,29. Of note, we did not find differential 
Treg expansion as a consequence of Dectin-1 signaling in PDA (not shown).
Interestingly, we found that in addition to Dectin-1 expression on peri-tumoral macrophages 
and myeloid cells, PDA cells also express Dectin-1. However, the functional implications of 
Dectin-1 in transformed epithelial cells appear to be inconsequential to tumorigenesis as 
Dectin-1 ligation or knockdown in PDA cells did not influence their proliferative or 
inflammatory properties nor did it affect tumor growth in vivo. Similarly, Dectin-1 deletion 
in the inflammatory compartment alone is protective against PDA growth and extends 
survival. These data were confirmed by our macrophage adoptive transfer experiments. Our 
finding parallel our previous work investigating TLR4 or TLR9 signaling in PDA, which 
found that whereas these pattern recognition receptors are highly expressed on tumor cells, 
receptor ligation does not directly influence tumor progression3,14.
Beyond elucidating a critical role for Dectin-1 signaling in macrophages in modulating T 
cell plasticity in the transformed pancreas, one of the most important observations in this 
study is the discovery that Galectin-9, a lectin with affinity for β-galactosides, is a functional 
ligand for Dectin-1. Non-pathogen derived ligands for Dectin-1 have not been well-
described. Thus, these data may have far-reaching implications to a broader role for Dectin-1 
in sterile inflammation and oncogenesis. Galectin-9 has been reputed as an exhaustion 
ligand for the TIM3 checkpoint receptor on T cells30. TIM3 is also expressed on 
macrophages and dendritic cells31. However, the Galectin-9-TIM3 relationship has recently 
been called into question32. Galectin-9 has also recently been shown to bind CD137 where it 
facilitates receptor complex aggregation, signaling, and functional activity in lymphocytes 
Daley et al.
Page 10
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and myeloid cells33. Hence, Galectin-9 may have a broader role in immune regulation. 
However, we found that Galectin-9 neutralization only enhanced T cell activation in 
Dectin-1+/+ hosts suggesting that Galectin-9 exerts primary immune-suppressive effects 
specific to Dectin-1 signaling. Of note, Martinez-Bosch et al. recently reported that 
Galectin-1 promotes PDA growth via stromal remodeling and hedgehog signaling activation 
suggesting a role for other Galectins in PDA progression34. Additional reports have shown 
that Galectin-1 contributes to tumor aggressiveness by promoting angiogenesis and T cell 
apoptosis whereas blockade of Galectin-1 in vivo results in tumor rejection via the 
generation of tumor-specific T cell-mediated responses35,36. Conversely, Galectin-3 ligation 
has been shown to activate tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes and promote anti-tumor 
immunity37. We found that other Galectins did not avidly bind Dectin-1 thus implicating 
alternate mechanisms.
Our data suggest that, akin to Dectin-1, Galectin-9 would be an attractive target for 
immunotherapy in PDA. In contrast to our findings, Galectin-9 has been reported to prevent 
metastases in colon and melanoma models by inhibiting the binding of tumor cells to 
extracellular matrix components, leading to the prevention of tumor cell migration38. There 
are also important limitations to targeting Dectin-1 or Galectin-9 in PDA as animals do 
eventually progress based on our survival experiments. These data suggest that Dectin-1 or 
Galectin-9 targeted immunotherapy would require additional treatments to achieve cure. 
Indeed, the complex network of immunosuppressive pathways present in tumors are unlikely 
to be overcome by intervention with a single immune-modulatory agent39. Acquired 
resistance to checkpoint-based immunotherapy in patients with melanoma was associated 
with defects in the pathways involved in interferon-receptor signaling and in antigen 
presentation40. Relapse after immunotherapy has also been linked to upregulated expression 
of exhaustion ligands by tumors41. Our comparison of day 21 versus day 42 PDA tumors in 
cohorts of mice treated with α-Galectin-9 suggests that eventually CD8+ T cell expansion 
and activation fails. It is conceivable that the CD8+ T cells activated by interrupting the 
Dectin-1 – Galectin-9 axis eventually become exhausted based on reduced IFN-γ and T-bet 
expression. In fact, our data suggest that combination immunotherapy regimens targeting 
Dectin-1 or Galectin-9 + PD-1 are likely to have synergistic efficacy, with Dectin-1/
Galectin-9 blockade enhancing T cell activation and PD-1 blockade preventing exhaustion 
via checkpoint receptor ligation. Consistent with our findings, a recent report suggested that 
durable regression of established tumors in melanoma requires concurrent immunotherapy 
with four distinct agents which target complementary aspects of innate and adaptive 
immunity39. Thus, the development of therapeutics targeting Dectin-1 signaling will 
potentially enable immunotherapeutic options in human PDA.
Methods
Animals and In Vivo Models
C57BL/6 (H-2Kb) mice were purchased from Jackson Labs (Bar Harbor, ME) and bred in-
house. Dectin-1−/− mice were a gift of Gordon Brown (University of Aberdeen, UK). KC 
(gift of Dafna Bar-Sagi) and KPC (gift of Mark Philips, both New York University) mice 
develop pancreatic neoplasia endogenously by expressing mutant Kras alone or mutant Kras 
Daley et al.
Page 11
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and p53, respectively, in the progenitor cells of the pancreas42,43. We previously detailed 
tumor progression and survival in control KC mice44. Dectin-1−/− mice were crossed with 
KC mice to generate KC;Dectin-1−/− animals. For orthotopic pancreatic tumor challenge, 
mice were administered intra-pancreatic injections of either KrasG12D PDEC or FC1242 
tumor cells derived from KPC mice. KrasG12D PDEC and FC1242 cells were generated as 
previously described6,14. In select experiments we utilized KPC-derived tumor cells (1×106) 
which we engineered to express OVA using pCI-neo-cOVA (gift of Maria Castro; Addgene 
plasmid # 25097) as we described44. Both male and female mice were used but animals 
were sex- and age-matched in each experiment. For orthotopic tumor experiments, 8–10 
week old mice were used. No formal power analyses, randomization, exclusions, or blinding 
were done. In preparation for intra-pancreatic injection, cells were suspended in PBS with 
50% Matrigel (BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ) and 1×105 tumor cells were injected 
into the body of the pancreas via laparotomy. Mice were sacrificed 3 weeks later and tumor 
weight recorded. In select experiments, KPC-derived tumor cells (5–10×105) were 
administered subcutaneously alone or mixed with macrophages (2×105). To study the effects 
of Dectin-1 ligation, mice were administered d-Zymosan (500ug) or HKCA (5×107cells; 
both Invivogen, San Diego, CA) by i.p. injection five times weekly for 8 weeks in 
endogenous tumor models and for 3 weeks in the orthotopic tumor models. PDEC were 
harvested from pancreata of KC mice and passaged in vitro as previously described6. PDEC 
proliferation was measured using the XTT assay according to the manufacturer’s protocol 
(Roche, Nutley, NJ). In select experiments, cohorts of mice were treated five times weekly 
with the p-Syk inhibitor Piceatannol (20mg/kg, i.p.; Selleck Chemicals, Houston, TX). Pan-
T cells (CD90, T24/31), CD4 T cells (GK1.5), CD8 T cells (53–6.72), and macrophages 
(F4/80, CI:A3-1, all BioXcell, West Lebanon, NH) were depleted with neutralizing mAbs 
using regimens we have previously described13,45. In other experiments, animals were 
treated twice weekly with i.p. injection of neutralizing mAbs directed against PD-1 (29F.
1A12, 6mg/kg), or Galectin-9 (RG9-1, 6mg/kg; both BioXCell) or respective isotype 
controls. Bone marrow chimeric animals were created by irradiating mice (9 Gy) followed 
by i.v. bone marrow transfer (1×107 cells) from non-irradiated donors as we previously 
described15. Chimeric mice were used in experiments 7 weeks later. All animal procedures 
were approved by the New York University School of Medicine IACUC.
Cellular Harvest and Flow Cytometry
Human or murine single cell suspensions for flow cytometry were prepared as described 
previously with slight modifications13. Briefly, pancreata were placed in cold RPMI 1640 
with Collagenase IV (1 mg/mL; Worthington Biochemical, Lakewood, NJ) and DNAse I (2 
U/mL; Promega, Madison, WI) and minced with scissors to sub-millimeter pieces. Tissues 
were then incubated at 37°C for 30 minutes with gentle shaking every 5 minutes. Specimens 
were passed through a 70μm mesh, and centrifuged at 350g for 5 minutes. The cell pellet 
was resuspended in cold PBS with 1% FBS. Single cell splenocyte suspensions were 
prepared as previously described13. Cell labeling was performed after blocking FcγRIII/II 
with an anti-CD16/CD32 mAb (eBioscience, San Diego, CA) by incubating 1×106 cells 
with 1 μg of fluorescently conjugated mAbs directed against murine CD44 (IM7), CD206 
(C068C2), PD-1 (29F.1A12), CD3 (17A2), CD4 (RM4-5), CD8 (53-6.7), CD45 (30-F11), 
CD11b (M1/70), Gr1 (RB6-8C5), CD11c (N418), MHC II (M5/114.15.2), IL-6 
Daley et al.
Page 12
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (MP5-20F3), IL-5 (TRFK5), IL-10 (JES5-16E3), IFN-γ (XMG1.2), TNFα (MP6-XT22), 
F4/80 (BM8), ICOS (15F9), OX40 (OX86), CD133 (315-2c11), CD62L(MEL-14), CD107a 
(1D4B), Galectin-9 (RG9-35; all Biolegend, San Diego, CA), Tbet (eBio4B10), iNOS 
(CXNFT), IL-13 (eBio13A), Granzyme B (NGZB), FoxP3 (FJK-16s), p-Syk (moch1ct; all 
eBioscience), Dectin-1 (2A11, Abcam), and Dectin-1 Fc (fc-mdec1a; InvivoGen). Human 
PDA-infiltrating cells and PBMC were stained with mAbs directed against CD45 (HI30), 
CD14 (HCD14), CD15 (W6D3), Galectin-9 (9M1-3), and CD11c (3.9; all Biolegend). OVA-
restricted CD8+ T cells were identified using an OVA-Pentamer (Proimmune, Oxford, UK). 
Dead cells were excluded from analysis using zombie yellow (Biolegend). Intracellular 
cytokine staining was performed using the Fixation/Permeabilization Solution Kit (BD 
Biosciences) for cytokines, transcription factors, and Granzyme B. Flow cytometry was 
carried out on the LSR-II flow cytometer (BD Biosciences). Data were analyzed using 
FlowJo v.10.1 (Treestar, Ashland, OR). BMDM were prepared as previously described46. In 
select experiments IL-12 (0.1 ng/ml; both R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN), TNF-α (8 
pg/ml; Cell Signaling, Beverly, MA), or TGF-β (0.2 ng/ml; Biolegend) were added to day 8 
BMDM cultures for 24h. Alternatively, BMDM were cocultured with KPC-derived tumor 
cells (50:1 ratio).
Histology, Immunohistochemistry, and Microscopy
For histological analysis, pancreatic specimens were fixed with 10% buffered formalin, 
dehydrated in ethanol, embedded with paraffin, and stained with H&E or Gomori’s 
Trichrome. The fraction of preserved acinar area was calculated as previously described13. 
Pancreatic ductal dysplasia was graded according to established criteria47. 
Immunohistochemistry on frozen or paraffin embedded mouse tissues was performed using 
antibodies directed against F4/80 (CI:A3-1, Conc: 10μg/ml), Arginase1 (Polyclonal, Conc: 
2μg/ml), p-Syk (Polyclonal, Conc: 10μg/ml), Ki67 (Polyclonal, Conc: 3μg/ml), and Dectin-1 
(2A11, Conc: 5μg/ml, all Abcam). For paraffin-embedded samples (F4/80, p-Syk, Ki67, 
Arginase1), samples were dewaxed in ethanol followed by antigen retrieval with 0.01M 
Sodium Citrate with 0.05% Tween. For frozen specimen (Dectin-1), samples did not 
undergo antigen retrieval prior to incubation with the primary antibody. Immunofluorescent 
staining on frozen mouse tissues was performed using antibodies against Dectin-1 (2A11; 
Conc: 20μg/ml, Abcam), CD45 (30-F11; Conc: 6.25μg/ml, BD Biosciences), CK19 (Troma-
III; University of Iowa), CD68 (FA-11, Conc: 5μg/ml, Abcam), Dectin-1 Fc (fc-mdec1a; 
InvivoGen), Galectin-9 (Polyclonal; Conc: 20μg/ml, Bioss) and DAPI (Vector Labs, 
Burlingame, CA). Immunofluorescent staining in human tissue was performed using 
antibodies against Dectin-1 (Polyclonal; Conc: 20μg/ml, Abcam), CD11b (M1/70, Conc: 
5μg/ml), Ep-CAM (G8.8; Conc: 5μg/ml, both Biolegend) and DAPI (Vector Labs, 
Burlingame, CA). Immunofluorescent images were acquired using the Zeiss LSM700 
confocal microscope with ZEN 2010 software (Carl Zeiss, Thornwood, New York). All 
human tissues were collected using an IRB approved protocol and donors of de-identified 
specimens gave informed consent. Sample sizes for human experiments were not determined 
based on formal power calculations. Quantifications were performed by assessing 10 high-
power fields (HPF; 40X) per slide in a blinded manner.
Daley et al.
Page 13
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Western Blotting and RNA Analysis
For protein extraction, tissues were homogenized in ice-cold RIPA buffer. Total protein was 
quantified using the DC Protein Assay according to the manufacturer’s instructions (BioRad, 
Hercules, CA). Western blotting was performed as previously described with minor 
modifications13. Briefly, 10 % Bis-Tris polyacrylamide gels (NuPage, Invitrogen) were 
equiloaded with 10–30μg of protein, electrophoresed at 200V, and electrotransferred to 
PVDF membranes. After blocking with 5% BSA, membranes were probed with primary 
antibodies to β-actin (8H10D10), p53 (7F5), PLC-γ (polyclonal), p-PLC-γ (polyclonal), 
Bcl-XL (54H6; all Cell Signaling), JNK (2C6), p-JNK (G9), Smad4 (polyclonal), p16 
(polyclonal), c-Myc (9E10), CARD9 (polyclonal), Syk (polyclonal), p-Syk (polyclonal), Rb 
(C-15; all Cell Signalling), Dectin-1 (polyclonal; Abcam), Galectin-9 (polyclonal), and 
Dectin-1 Fc (fc-mdec1a; InvivoGen). Blots were developed by ECL (Thermo Scientific, 
Asheville, NC). RNA extraction was performed using the RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen, 
Germantown, MD) as per manufacturer’s instructions. For Nanostring analysis, the nCounter 
mouse inflammation panel was employed using the nCounter Analysis System (both 
Nanostring, Seattle, Washington).
Enrichment of endogenous Dectin-1 ligands and mass spectroscopy
Cell lysate of KPC-derived tumor cells were prepared and protein was quantified as above. 
Lysate (2mg) was mixed overnight at 4°C with a human IgG Fc-conjugated Dectin-1 fusion 
protein (3mg) and protein-G magnet beads (10ml; 10003D, Dynabeads, FisherThermo, 
Grand Island, NY). Magnet beads were then washed once with 1%NP40 lysis buffer, three 
times with 0.5M NaCl, and once with H2O. The affinity purified sample was eluted off the 
beads by boiling with SDS loading buffer. Samples were reduced with DTT at 57°C for 1 
hour and then alkylated with iodoacetamide at 37°C in the dark for 45 minutes (2μl of 0.5M 
in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate). After alkylation, samples were loaded onto a NuPAGE 
4–12% Bis-Tris Gel 1.0 mm (Life Technologies Corporation, Grand Island, NY) and run for 
15 minutes at 200 V. The gel was stained using GelCode Blue Stain Reagent (Thermo 
Scientific, Rockford, IL). The short gel lane was cut into approximately 1mm3 pieces. The 
gel pieces were destained in 1:1 v/v solution of methanol and 100mM ammonium 
bicarbonate at 4°C with agitation. The destain solution was changed every 15 minutes at 
least 5 times and until pieces had no visibly blue stain left. Gel pieces were partially 
dehydrated with an acetonitrile rinse and further dried in a SpeedVac concentrator for 20 
minutes. Sequencing grade-modified trypsin (300ng; Promega, Madison, WI) was added to 
the dried gel pieces. After the trypsin was absorbed, 200μl of 100mM ammonium 
bicarbonate was added to cover the gel pieces and digestion proceeded overnight on a shaker 
at 37°C. Peptide extraction was performed by adding a slurry of R2 20μm Poros beads (Life 
Technologies Corporation) in 5% formic acid; 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to each 
sample at an volume equal to that of the ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were incubated 
with agitation at 4°C for 4 hours. The beads were loaded onto equilibrated C18 ziptips 
(Millipore) using a microcentrifuge for 30 sec at 6000 RPM. Gel pieces were rinsed three 
times with 0.1% TFA and each rinse was added to the corresponding ziptip followed by 
microcentrifugation. Extracted poros beads were further washed with 0.5% acetic acid. 
Peptides were eluted off the beads by addition of 40% acetonitrile in 0.5% acetic acid 
followed by the addition of 80% acetonitrile in 0.5% acetic acid. The organic solvent was 
Daley et al.
Page 14
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 removed using a SpeedVac concentrator and the samples were reconstituted in 0.5% acetic 
acid. An aliquot of each sample was loaded onto the EASY spray 50 cm C18 analytical 
HPLC column with <2μm bead size using the auto sampler of an EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC 
(ThermoFisher) in solvent A (2% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid). The peptides were gradient 
eluted directly into a Q Exactive (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer using a one hour 
gradient from 2% to 31% solvent B (95% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid), followed by 10 
minutes from 31% to 40% solvent B, and 10 minutes from 40% to 100% solvent B. The Q 
Exactive mass spectrometer acquired high resolution full MS spectra with a resolution of 
70,000, an AGC target of 1×106, with a maximum ion time of 120 ms, and scan range of 400 
to 1500 m/z. HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired using the following instrument 
parameters: resolution of 17,500, AGC target of 5×104, maximum ion time of 120 ms, one 
microscan, 2 m/z isolation window, fixed first mass of 150 m/z, and Normalized Collision 
Energy of 27, dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds. The MS/MS spectra were searched against 
the Uniprot Mouse database combined with mammalian IgG database using Sequest within 
Proteome Discoverer (ThermoFisher). The results were filtered using a <1% False Discovery 
Rate searched against a decoy database and all the proteins with less than two unique 
peptides were excluded. Proteins identified in the control were subtracted from the proteins 
identified in the Dectin-1 affinity purification and a shortened list interrogated for potential 
Dectin-1 ligands.
Analysis of Dectin-1 – Galectin-9 interaction
To investigate if Galectin-9 can bind with Dectin-1, Protein G-magnet beads (2 ml; 
Dynabeads) were loaded with Dectin-1 IgG Fc (1mg) or control IgG Fc before washing and 
blocking. Subsequently, beads were incubated with recombinant Galectin-9 (2mg; R&D 
Systems) for 30 min, washed, and stained with PE-conjugated anti-Galectin-9 (Biolegend, 
San Diego CA). Galectin-9 specific staining was determined by flow cytometry. To 
investigate the interaction between Galectin-9 and Dectin-1 by ELISA, plates (Maxisorp, 
Nunc, St. Louis, MO) were coated with recombinant mouse Galectin-9 (2mg; R&D 
Systems, Minneapolis, MN), Galectin-3, or Galectin-4 (both 2mg; Biolegend) for 16 hours 
at 4°C, blocked with 1% BSA/PBS for 1 hour, and incubated with increasing doses of 
Dectin-1 IgG Fc or control IgG Fc for 2 hours. The Galectin-bound Dectin-1 IgG Fc was 
detected with anti-IgG-HRP. For affinity precipitation experiments, protein G-beads were 
loaded with Dectin-1 IgG Fc and were then incubated with the extract of 6 month old KC 
pancreata. Bead-bound precipitates were resuspended with loading buffer, resolved by SDS-
PAGE under reduced conditions for western blotting using mAbs specific for Galectin-9. To 
determine whether Galectin-9 induces Dectin-1 signaling, the Dectin-1 reporter HEK293 
cell line16 (Invivogen) was treated with recombinant Galectin-9 (1–10μg/ml; R&D Systems), 
d-Zymosan (1–10μg/ml), or Curdlan (10–100 μg/ml; both Invivogen). Dectin-1 signaling 
was measured by detection of secreted embryonic alkaline phosphatase. In other 
experiments, WT and Dectin-1−/− splenic macrophages were treated in vitro with 
recombinant Galectin-9 (10ug/ml). Syk phosphorylation was measured by flow cytometry at 
3 hours.
Daley et al.
Page 15
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Galectin-9 immunoprecipitation experiments with PNGase F or lactulose treatment
Dectin-1 IgG Fc (8 μg; InvivoGen) was treated with PNGase F (20 μl, ~10,000 units; New 
England Biolabs) following the company’s non-denaturing protocol (37°C, 24 hr). PNGase 
F treated and untreated Dectin-1 IgG Fc samples (4 μg; InvivoGen) were added to protein G 
beads (25 μl, Dynabeads Protein G; novex) and the mixtures were incubated at room 
temperature for 10 min. The beads were washed 2 × with PBS-T (pH 7.4 with 0.02% 
tween). Recombinant mouse Galectin-9 (4 μg; R&D Systems) was resuspended in PBS-T or 
a solution of 100 mM lactose in PBS-T. Galectin-9 samples were then incubated with the 
Dynabead/Dectin-1 IgG Fc complex for 20 min at room temperature. The Dynabeads were 
then washed 3 × with PBS-T and transferred to a clean tube. Galectin-9 and Dectin-1 IgG Fc 
were eluted in SDS-PAGE buffer (PBS with 10% BME) by heating at 98°C for 10 min. The 
samples were then analyzed by SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie Blue.
Dectin-1 knockdown
Lentivirus was prepared by infecting 293T cells with the either a Scrambled or shDectin 
(NM_020008.1-298s1c1) plasmid, Δ8.9CR2 plasmid, and vesicular stomatitis virus 
glycoprotein plasmid (3:1:4 ratio). Supernatant were collected for 3 days post infection. 
KPC cells were then infected with supernatant in the presence of polybrene (8 μg/ml) for 12 
hours X 2 and selected with puromycin (2 μg/ml). The efficacy of gene knockdown was 
confirmed by PCR, flow cytometry, and western blotting.
Statistical Analysis
Data is presented as mean +/− standard error. Human RNAseq data and clinical correlations 
were performed using the UCSC Cancer Genomics Browser (https://genome-
cancer.ucsc.edu/)27. Survival was measured according to the Kaplan-Meier method. 
Statistical significance was determined by the Student’s t test (two-tailed) and the log-rank 
test using GraphPad Prism 7 (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA). P-values <0.05 were 
considered significant.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
Grant Support: This work was supported by NCI CA168611 (GM), CA155649 (GM), Department of Defense Peer 
Reviewed Medical Research Program (GM), Lustgarten Foundation (GM), AACR-PanCan (GM), National 
Pancreas Foundation (CZ), Panpaphian Association of America (CZ), the Irene and Bernard Schwartz Fellowship in 
GI Oncology (DD).
This work was supported by grants from the National Pancreas Foundation (CPZ), the Pancreatic Cancer Action 
Network (GM), the Lustgarten Foundation (GM), and National Institute of Health Awards CA155649 (GM), 
CA168611 (GM), CA193111 (GM, ATH) and the NYU School of Medicine Office of Therapeutics Alliances. We 
thank the New York University Langone Medical Center (NYU LMC) Histopathology Core Facility, the NYU 
LMC Flow Cytometry Core Facility, the NYU LMC Microscopy Core Facility, and the NYU LMC BioRepository 
Center, each supported in part by the Cancer Center Support Grant P30CA016087 and by grant UL1 TR000038 
from the National Center for the Advancement of Translational Science (NCATS).
Daley et al.
Page 16
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 References
1. Yadav D, Lowenfels AB. The epidemiology of pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer. Gastroenterology. 
2013; 144:1252–1261. [PubMed: 23622135] 
2. Guerra C, et al. Chronic pancreatitis is essential for induction of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma 
by K-Ras oncogenes in adult mice. Cancer cell. 2007; 11:291–302. [PubMed: 17349585] 
3. Ochi A, et al. MyD88 inhibition amplifies dendritic cell capacity to promote pancreatic 
carcinogenesis via Th2 cells. The Journal of experimental medicine. 2012; 209:1671–1687. 
[PubMed: 22908323] 
4. Zhu Y, et al. CSF1/CSF1R blockade reprograms tumor-infiltrating macrophages and improves 
response to T-cell checkpoint immunotherapy in pancreatic cancer models. Cancer Res. 2014; 
74:5057–5069. [PubMed: 25082815] 
5. Connolly MK, et al. Distinct populations of metastases-enabling myeloid cells expand in the liver of 
mice harboring invasive and preinvasive intra-abdominal tumor. Journal of leukocyte biology. 2010; 
87:713–725. [PubMed: 20042467] 
6. Pylayeva-Gupta Y, Lee KE, Hajdu CH, Miller G, Bar-Sagi D. Oncogenic Kras-induced GM-CSF 
production promotes the development of pancreatic neoplasia. Cancer cell. 2012; 21:836–847. 
[PubMed: 22698407] 
7. Bayne LJ, et al. Tumor-derived granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor regulates 
myeloid inflammation and T cell immunity in pancreatic cancer. Cancer cell. 2012; 21:822–835. 
[PubMed: 22698406] 
8. Goodridge HS, et al. Activation of the innate immune receptor Dectin-1 upon formation of a 
‘phagocytic synapse’. Nature. 2011; 472:471–475. [PubMed: 21525931] 
9. Taylor PR, et al. Dectin-1 is required for beta-glucan recognition and control of fungal infection. 
Nature immunology. 2007; 8:31–38. [PubMed: 17159984] 
10. Strasser D, et al. Syk kinase-coupled C-type lectin receptors engage protein kinase C-sigma to 
elicit Card9 adaptor-mediated innate immunity. Immunity. 2012; 36:32–42. [PubMed: 22265677] 
11. Gross O, et al. Card9 controls a non-TLR signalling pathway for innate anti-fungal immunity. 
Nature. 2006; 442:651–656. [PubMed: 16862125] 
12. Seifert L, et al. Dectin-1 Regulates Hepatic Fibrosis and Hepatocarcinogenesis by Suppressing 
TLR4 Signaling Pathways. Cell reports. 2015; 13:1909–1921. [PubMed: 26655905] 
13. Seifert L, et al. The necrosome promotes pancreatic oncogenesis via CXCL1 and Mincle-induced 
immune suppression. Nature. 2016; 532:245–249. [PubMed: 27049944] 
14. Zambirinis CP, et al. TLR9 ligation in pancreatic stellate cells promotes tumorigenesis. The Journal 
of experimental medicine. 2015; 212:2077–2094. [PubMed: 26481685] 
15. Ochi A, et al. Toll-like receptor 7 regulates pancreatic carcinogenesis in mice and humans. The 
Journal of clinical investigation. 2012; 122:4118–4129. [PubMed: 23023703] 
16. Walachowski S, Tabouret G, Foucras G. Triggering Dectin-1-Pathway Alone Is Not Sufficient to 
Induce Cytokine Production by Murine Macrophages. PLoS One. 2016; 11:e0148464. [PubMed: 
26840954] 
17. Zheng L, Xue J, Jaffee EM, Habtezion A. Role of immune cells and immune-based therapies in 
pancreatitis and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Gastroenterology. 2013; 144:1230–1240. 
[PubMed: 23622132] 
18. Clark CE, et al. Dynamics of the immune reaction to pancreatic cancer from inception to invasion. 
Cancer research. 2007; 67:9518–9527. [PubMed: 17909062] 
19. Andren-Sandberg A, Dervenis C, Lowenfels B. Etiologic links between chronic pancreatitis and 
pancreatic cancer. Scand J Gastroenterol. 1997; 32:97–103. [PubMed: 9051867] 
20. Fukunaga A, et al. CD8+ tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes together with CD4+ tumor-infiltrating 
lymphocytes and dendritic cells improve the prognosis of patients with pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma. Pancreas. 2004; 28:e26–31. [PubMed: 14707745] 
21. De Monte L, et al. Intratumor T helper type 2 cell infiltrate correlates with cancer-associated 
fibroblast thymic stromal lymphopoietin production and reduced survival in pancreatic cancer. The 
Journal of experimental medicine. 2011; 208:469–478. [PubMed: 21339327] 
Daley et al.
Page 17
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 22. Hiraoka N, Onozato K, Kosuge T, Hirohashi S. Prevalence of FOXP3+ regulatory T cells increases 
during the progression of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and its premalignant lesions. Clin 
Cancer Res. 2006; 12:5423–5434. [PubMed: 17000676] 
23. Jiang Y, et al. FOXP3+ lymphocyte density in pancreatic cancer correlates with lymph node 
metastasis. PloS one. 2014; 9:e106741. [PubMed: 25191901] 
24. Vautier S, MacCallum DM, Brown GD. C-type lectin receptors and cytokines in fungal immunity. 
Cytokine. 2012; 58:89–99. [PubMed: 21924922] 
25. Ferwerda B, et al. Human dectin-1 deficiency and mucocutaneous fungal infections. N Engl J Med. 
2009; 361:1760–1767. [PubMed: 19864674] 
26. Bianchi ME. DAMPs, PAMPs and alarmins: all we need to know about danger. J Leukoc Biol. 
2007; 81:1–5.
27. Chiba S, et al. Recognition of tumor cells by Dectin-1 orchestrates innate immune cells for anti-
tumor responses. eLife. 2014; 3:e04177. [PubMed: 25149452] 
28. Hong F, et al. Mechanism by which orally administered beta-1,3-glucans enhance the tumoricidal 
activity of antitumor monoclonal antibodies in murine tumor models. Journal of immunology. 
2004; 173:797–806.
29. Yamasaki S, et al. Mincle is an ITAM-coupled activating receptor that senses damaged cells. 
Nature immunology. 2008; 9:1179–1188. [PubMed: 18776906] 
30. Zhu C, et al. The Tim-3 ligand galectin-9 negatively regulates T helper type 1 immunity. Nature 
immunology. 2005; 6:1245–1252. [PubMed: 16286920] 
31. Anderson AC, et al. Promotion of tissue inflammation by the immune receptor Tim-3 expressed on 
innate immune cells. Science. 2007; 318:1141–1143. [PubMed: 18006747] 
32. Leitner J, et al. TIM-3 does not act as a receptor for galectin-9. PLoS pathogens. 2013; 
9:e1003253. [PubMed: 23555261] 
33. Madireddi S, et al. Galectin-9 controls the therapeutic activity of 4-1BB-targeting antibodies. The 
Journal of experimental medicine. 2014; 211:1433–1448. [PubMed: 24958847] 
34. Martinez-Bosch N, et al. Galectin-1 drives pancreatic carcinogenesis through stroma remodeling 
and Hedgehog signaling activation. Cancer research. 2014; 74:3512–3524. [PubMed: 24812270] 
35. Banh A, et al. Tumor galectin-1 mediates tumor growth and metastasis through regulation of T-cell 
apoptosis. Cancer research. 2011; 71:4423–4431. [PubMed: 21546572] 
36. Rubinstein N, et al. Targeted inhibition of galectin-1 gene expression in tumor cells results in 
heightened T cell-mediated rejection; A potential mechanism of tumor-immune privilege. Cancer 
cell. 2004; 5:241–251. [PubMed: 15050916] 
37. Demotte N, et al. A galectin-3 ligand corrects the impaired function of human CD4 and CD8 
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes and favors tumor rejection in mice. Cancer research. 2010; 
70:7476–7488. [PubMed: 20719885] 
38. Nobumoto A, et al. Galectin-9 suppresses tumor metastasis by blocking adhesion to endothelium 
and extracellular matrices. Glycobiology. 2008; 18:735–744. [PubMed: 18579572] 
39. Moynihan KD, et al. Eradication of large established tumors in mice by combination 
immunotherapy that engages innate and adaptive immune responses. Nature medicine. 2016; 
22:1402–1410.
40. Zaretsky JM, et al. Mutations Associated with Acquired Resistance to PD-1 Blockade in 
Melanoma. The New England journal of medicine. 2016; 375:819–829. [PubMed: 27433843] 
41. Ansell SM, et al. PD-1 blockade with nivolumab in relapsed or refractory Hodgkin’s lymphoma. 
The New England journal of medicine. 2015; 372:311–319. [PubMed: 25482239] 
42. Hingorani SR, et al. Preinvasive and invasive ductal pancreatic cancer and its early detection in the 
mouse. Cancer Cell. 2003; 4:437–450. [PubMed: 14706336] 
43. Hingorani SR, et al. Trp53R172H and KrasG12D cooperate to promote chromosomal instability 
and widely metastatic pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma in mice. Cancer Cell. 2005; 7:469–483. 
[PubMed: 15894267] 
44. Daley D, et al. gammadelta T Cells Support Pancreatic Oncogenesis by Restraining alphabeta T 
Cell Activation. Cell. 2016; 166:1485–1499. [PubMed: 27569912] 
Daley et al.
Page 18
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 45. Bedrosian AS, et al. Dendritic cells promote pancreatic viability in mice with acute pancreatitis. 
Gastroenterology. 2011; 141:1915–1926. e1911–1914. [PubMed: 21801698] 
46. Greco SH, et al. Mincle suppresses Toll-like receptor 4 activation. Journal of leukocyte biology. 
2016; 100:185–194. [PubMed: 26747838] 
47. Hruban RH, et al. Pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia: a new nomenclature and classification 
system for pancreatic duct lesions. The American journal of surgical pathology. 2001; 25:579–586. 
[PubMed: 11342768] 
Daley et al.
Page 19
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. High Dectin-1 expression in mouse and human PDA and Dectin-1 ligation accelerates 
PDA progression
(a) Frozen sections of 6 month-old KC;Dectin-1+/+ and KC; Dectin-1−/− pancreata were 
tested for expression of Dectin-1 by IHC (scale bar = 100μm). (b) PDA-infiltrating and 
splenic leukocytes from KC and aged-matched WT mice were tested for expression of 
Dectin-1 in CD11c−Gr1−CD11b+F4/80+ macrophages, Gr1+CD11b+ neutrophils and 
inflammatory monocytes, and CD11c+MHCII+ dendritic cells. Representative contour plots 
and quantitative data from 5 mice are shown. (c) PDA-infiltrating and splenic leukocytes 
from mice bearing KPC-derived tumors were tested for expression of Dectin-1 compared 
with isotype control in CD11c−Gr1−CD11b+F4/80+ macrophages, Gr1+CD11b+ neutrophils 
and inflammatory monocytes, and CD11c+MHCII+ dendritic cells. Representative contour 
plots and quantitative data from 5 mice are shown. Murine flow cytometry experiments were 
repeated more than 3 times. (d) Dectin-1 expression was tested by flow cytometry in 
macrophages from normal pancreas compared with macrophages infiltrating orthotopic PDA 
tumors (n=5/group). (e) Human PDA-infiltrating and PBMC-derived CD14+, CD15+, and 
CD11c+ cells were tested for expression of Dectin-1. Representative contour plots (CD15, 
CD11c) and quantitative data from 5 PDA patients are shown. (f–i) Six week-old KC mice 
were treated with the Dectin-1 ligands d-Zymosan, HKCA, or vehicle for 8 weeks before 
sacrifice (n=5/group). (f) Representative H&E (scale bar = 100μm) and Trichrome (scale bar 
= 200μm) stained sections are shown. (g) The percentage of ducts exhibiting normal 
morphology, ADM, graded PanIN lesions, or foci of invasive cancer are shown. (h) The 
percentage of pancreatic area occupied by fibrotic tissues was calculated based on trichrome 
Daley et al.
Page 20
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 staining. (i) The percentage of pancreatic area occupied by normal acinar structures was 
calculated. (j) WT mice were administered orthotopic KPC-derived tumor cells and serially 
treated with the Dectin-1 ligands d-Zymosan or HKCA or vehicle control. Animals were 
sacrificed at 3 weeks and pancreas weights measured. Representative gross images of 
pancreatic tumors and quantitative data are shown (n=5/group; scale bar = 1cm; *p<0.05; 
**p<0.01; ***p<0.001; ****p<0.0001).
Daley et al.
Page 21
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Dectin-1 deletion or blockade is protective against PDA
(a) KC;Dectin-1+/+ (n=10) and KC;Dectin-1−/− (n=6) mice were sacrificed at 3, 6, or 9 
months of life. Representative H&E-stained sections are shown, the percentage of pancreatic 
area occupied by intact acinar structures, and the fractions of ductal structures exhibiting 
normal morphology, acino-ductal metaplasia (ADM), or graded PanIN I-III lesions were 
calculated (scale bar = 200μm). (b) Kaplan-Meier survival analysis was performed 
comparing KC;Dectin-1+/+ (n=29) and KC;Dectin-1−/− (n=41) mice (p=0.01). (c) Whole 
pancreas lysate from 3 month-old KC;Dectin-1+/+ and KC;Dectin-1−/− mice were assayed 
for expression of select oncogenic and tumor suppressor genes. (d) Six week-old 
KC;Dectin-1+/+ and KC;Dectin-1−/− mice were serially treated with the p-Syk inhibitor 
Piceatannol or vehicle for 8 weeks before sacrifice (n=5–10/group). Pancreas weights were 
measured and representative H&E-stained sections are shown (scale bar = 200μm). Each 
point represents data from a single mouse. (e) WT mice bearing orthotopic PDA were 
serially treated with the p-Syk inhibitor Piceatannol or vehicle for 3 weeks. Tumor-
infiltrating APC were harvested and tested for p-Syk expression by flow cytometry. Median 
fluorescence index (MFI) is shown (n=5/group; *p<0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001).
Daley et al.
Page 22
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Dectin-1−/− PDA-infiltrating monocytic cells exhibit diminished T cell suppressive 
properties
Naïve CD4+ or CD8+ splenic T cells were either unstimulated, stimulated with αCD3/
αCD28 alone or in co-culture with PDA-infiltrating CD11b+ cells harvested from orthotopic 
KPC tumors in WT or Dectin-1−/− hosts. CD4+ and CD8+ T cell activation, respectively, 
were determined at 72h by (a, b) ICOS expression, (c, d) the fraction of cells exhibiting the 
CD62L−CD44+ phenotype, (e) CD4+ T cell expression of IL-10, and (f) CD8+ T cell co-
expression of IFN-γ and TNF-α. Experiments were performed in quadruplicate and 
repeated 3 times (*p<0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001; ****p<0.0001).
Daley et al.
Page 23
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Dectin-1 signaling regulates macrophage infiltration and phenotype in PDA
(a–c) Six month-old KC;Dectin-1+/+ and KC;Dectin-1−/− mice were tested for (a) F4/80+ 
and (b) Arg1+ macrophage infiltration by IHC (n=5/group) (scale bar = 100μm). (c) The 
fraction of CD11c−Gr1−CD11b+F4/80+ macrophages in the pancreata of three-month old 
KC;Dectin-1+/+ and KC;Dectin-1−/− mice was determined by flow cytometry (n=5/group). 
(d–g) WT and Dectin-1−/− mice were challenged with orthotopic KPC-derived PDA tumors. 
(d) CD11c−Gr1−CD11b+F4/80+ macrophage infiltration was determined on day 21 by flow 
cytometry. (e) PDA-infiltrating macrophages were gated and tested for expression of MHC 
II, (f) CD206, (g) TNF-α, and iNOS (n=5/group). (h–k) WT mice were implanted with 
orthotopic KPC tumors and serially treated with the Dectin-1 specific ligand d-Zymosan or 
vehicle. (h) Dectin-1 activation was confirmed by upregulation of p-Syk expression in PDA-
infiltrating macrophages in d-Zymosan-treated compared with vehicle-treated mice. (i) The 
fraction of tumor-infiltrating macrophages was determined by flow cytometry on day 21. (j) 
PDA-infiltrating macrophages were gated and tested for expression of CD206 and (k) MHC 
II. Representative contour plots and quantitative data are shown (n=5/group). Experiments 
were repeated more than 3 times with similar results. (l) Dectin-1−/− mice were 
subcutaneously implanted with KPC-derived PDA tumor cells admixed with WT or 
Dectin-1−/− macrophages. Tumor volume was recorded at serial intervals. This experiment 
was repeated twice with similar results (n=4/group; *p<0.05; **p<0.01; ****p<0.0001).
Daley et al.
Page 24
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Dectin-1 signaling prevents immunogenic T cell differentiation in PDA
(a–d) The inferior pancreas-draining lymph node in 6 month-old KC;Dectin-1+/+ and 
KC;Dectin-1−/− mice was assayed for (a) CD44, (b) Ox40, and (c) PD-1 expression in CD4+ 
and CD8+ T cells, and (d) the CD8+:CD4+ T cell ratio. Representative contour plots and 
quantitative data are shown (n=5/group). (e–g) WT and Dectin-1−/− mice were challenged 
with orthotopic KPC tumors. (e) The CD8+:CD4+ ratio was determined on day 21 by flow 
cytometry. (f) PDA-infiltrating CD8+ T cell expression of PD-1, T-bet, TNF-α, CD107a, and 
Granzyme B were determined by flow cytometry. (g) PDA-infiltrating CD4+ T cell 
expression of CD44, CD107a, ICOS, T-bet, and TNF-α were determined by flow cytometry 
(n=5/group). (h, i) WT and Dectin-1−/− mice were challenged with orthotopic KPC tumors. 
Cohorts were additionally treated with αPD-1 or isotype control. (h) Tumor weights were 
measured on Day 21 and (i) the fraction of CD4+ T cells expressing IFN-γ was determined 
by flow cytometry n=5/group. All experiments were repeated at least twice (*p<0.05, 
**p<0.01, ***p<0.001).
Daley et al.
Page 25
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Galectin-9 is a novel Dectin-1 ligand in PDA
(a) PDA-infiltrating and splenic Gr1+CD11b+ neutrophils and inflammatory monocytes, 
CD11c−Gr1−CD11b+F4/80+ macrophages, and CD11c+MHCII+ DC from mice harboring 
orthotopic KPC tumors were gated by flow cytometry and tested for expression of 
Galectin-9. Gates are based on respective isotype control (not shown). Representative 
contour plots and quantitative data from 5 mice are shown. (b) CD45−CD133+ pancreatic 
cancer cells from orthotopic KPC tumors were gated by flow cytometry and tested for 
expression of Galectin-9 compared with isotype control. Representative data from >3 
experiments is shown. (c) CD45+ and CD45− cells from human PDA tumor tissue were 
tested for expression of Galectin-9 compared with PBMC. Representative data from one of 
three patients are shown. (d) Frozen sections of orthotopic KPC-derived pancreatic tumors 
were co-stained for CD45 and Galectin-9 or isotype control and imaged by confocal 
microscopy. Representative images are shown (scale bar = 50μm). (e) Frozen sections of 
orthotopic KPC-derived pancreatic tumors were co-stained for CK19 and Galectin-9 or 
isotype control and imaged by confocal microscopy. Representative images are shown (scale 
bar = 50μm). (f) Protein G-magnetic beads were loaded with the Dectin-1 IgG Fc fusion 
protein. After blocking, the bead–IgG Fc complexes were incubated with recombinant 
Galectin-9 and then stained with fluorescently-conjugated anti-Galectin-9 and tested for 
fluorescence by flow cytometry. Controls included: unstained beads, bead–IgG Fc 
complexes + recombinant Galectin-9 + fluorescently-conjugated isotype antibody, bead–IgG 
Fc complexes + fluorescently-conjugated anti-Galectin-9, beads without Dectin-1 IgG Fc 
incubated with recombinant Galectin-9 + fluorescently-conjugated anti-Galectin-9. To test 
Daley et al.
Page 26
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 for competitive inhibition of Galectin-9 binding with a well-characterized Dectin-1 ligand, 
the bead–IgG Fc complexes were incubated with recombinant Galectin-9 together with d-
Zymosan and then stained with fluorescently-conjugated anti-Galectin-9. This assay was 
repeated twice with similar results. (g, h) Galectin-9 coated ELISA plates were incubated 
with increasing doses of (g) murine or (h) human Dectin-1 IgG Fc or control IgG Fc. The 
Galectin-9-bound Dectin-1 IgG Fc was detected with anti-IgG-HRP. Averages of triplicates 
are shown. ELISA assays was repeated twice with similar results. (i) Galectin-3, Galectin-4, 
and Galectin-9 coated ELISA plates were incubated with Dectin-1 IgG Fc or control IgG Fc 
(2.5μg/ml) in parallel. The Galectin-bound Dectin-1 IgG Fc was detected with anti-IgG-
HRP. Averages of triplicates are shown. (j) We precipitated Dectin-1 ligands in pancreatic 
tissue extract from 6 month-old KC mice using the Dectin-1 IgG Fc or control IgG Fc and 
then probed for Galectin-9 by western blotting. Recombinant Galectin-9 was used as a 
positive control. This assay was repeated twice with similar results. (k) Dectin-1 IgG Fc was 
treated with either buffer or PNGase F, loaded onto Protein G beads and incubated with 
recombinant mouse Galectin-9 pre-incubated with 100 mM lactose or buffer. Treated and 
control samples were analyzed by SDS-PAGE and gels were stained with Coomassie Blue. 
This experiment was repeated twice with similar results. (l) WT and Dectin-1−/− 
macrophages were treated with Galectin-9 (10ug/ml) for 3 hours. Syk phosphorylation was 
determined by flow cytometry compared with isotype control. Representative histogram 
overlays and quantitative data from 5 separate experiments are shown. (m) Dectin-1 reporter 
HEK293 cells were untreated or treated low and high doses of Galectin-9 or well-
characterized Dectin-1 ligands Curdlan and d-Zymosan. Dectin-1 activation was measured 
by detection of secreted embryonic alkaline phosphatase. This assay was performed in 
triplicate (*p<0.05; **p<0.01; ****p<0.0001).
Daley et al.
Page 27
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
