 ORIGINAL RESEARCH 
ARTICLE
Circulation. 2017;135:2373–2388. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.026560 
June 13, 2017
2373
ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
BACKGROUND: The implications of different adiposity measures on 
cardiovascular disease etiology remain unclear. In this article, we quantify 
and contrast causal associations of central adiposity (waist-to-hip ratio 
adjusted for body mass index [WHRadjBMI]) and general adiposity (body 
mass index [BMI]) with cardiometabolic disease.
METHODS: Ninety-seven independent single-nucleotide polymorphisms 
for BMI and 49 single-nucleotide polymorphisms for WHRadjBMI were 
used to conduct Mendelian randomization analyses in 14 prospective 
studies supplemented with coronary heart disease (CHD) data from 
CARDIoGRAMplusC4D (Coronary Artery Disease Genome-wide Replication 
and Meta-analysis [CARDIoGRAM] plus The Coronary Artery Disease [C4D] 
Genetics; combined total 66 
842 cases), stroke from METASTROKE 
(12 
389 ischemic stroke cases), type 2 diabetes mellitus from DIAGRAM 
(Diabetes Genetics Replication and Meta-analysis; 34 
840 cases), 
and lipids from GLGC (Global Lipids Genetic Consortium; 213 
500 
participants) consortia. Primary outcomes were CHD, type 2 diabetes 
mellitus, and major stroke subtypes; secondary analyses included 18 
cardiometabolic traits.
RESULTS: Each one standard deviation (SD) higher WHRadjBMI (1 
SD≈0.08 U) associated with a 48% excess risk of CHD (odds ratio [OR] 
for CHD, 1.48; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.28–1.71), similar to 
findings for BMI (1 SD≈4.6 kg/m2; OR for CHD, 1.36; 95% CI, 1.22–
1.52). Only WHRadjBMI increased risk of ischemic stroke (OR, 1.32; 95% 
CI, 1.03–1.70). For type 2 diabetes mellitus, both measures had large 
effects: OR, 1.82 (95% CI, 1.38–2.42) and OR, 1.98 (95% CI, 1.41–2.78) 
per 1 SD higher WHRadjBMI and BMI, respectively. Both WHRadjBMI 
and BMI were associated with higher left ventricular hypertrophy, 
glycemic traits, interleukin 6, and circulating lipids. WHRadjBMI was also 
associated with higher carotid intima-media thickness (39%; 95% CI, 
9%–77% per 1 SD).
CONCLUSIONS: Both general and central adiposity have causal effects on 
CHD and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Central adiposity may have a stronger 
effect on stroke risk. Future estimates of the burden of adiposity on health 
should include measures of central and general adiposity.
Causal Associations of Adiposity and Body Fat 
Distribution With Coronary Heart Disease, Stroke 
Subtypes, and Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus
A Mendelian Randomization Analysis
© 2017 American Heart 
Association, Inc.
*Drs Dale and Fatemifar 
contributed equally as first 
authors.
†Drs Holmes and Casas 
contributed equally as senior 
authors (see p 2382).
Correspondence to: Juan P
. 
Casas, MD, PhD, Farr Institute of 
Health Informatics Research, UCL 
Institute of Health Informatics, 
University College London, 222 
Euston Rd, London, NW1 2DA, 
United Kingdom, or Caroline 
E. Dale, PhD, Farr Institute of 
Health Informatics Research, UCL 
Institute of Health Informatics, 
University College London, 222 
Euston Rd, London, NW1 2DA, 
United Kingdom. E-mail jp.casas@
ucl.ac.uk or c.dale@ucl.ac.uk
Sources of Funding, see page 2382
Key Words: adiposity ◼ body fat 
distribution ◼ body mass index  
◼ coronary artery disease  
◼ Mendelian randomization 
analysis ◼ stroke ◼ waist-hip ratio
Caroline E. Dale, PhD*
Ghazaleh Fatemifar, PhD*
et al
The full author list is available on 
page 2382.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Dale et al
June 13, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:2373–2388. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.026560
2374
O
bservational studies have identified associations 
between adiposity and the risk of developing in-
cident coronary heart disease (CHD), stroke, and 
type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D).1,2 Many observational 
studies report consistent results with different measures 
of adiposity; for example, the Emerging Risk Factors Col-
laboration found similar associations with both general 
adiposity measured via body mass index (BMI) and cen-
tral adiposity measured via waist-to-hip ratio (WHR) for 
CHD and ischemic stroke.1 The association of different 
adiposity measures with T2D has also been found to be 
similar.2
However, other studies have suggested that central 
adiposity, measured as either WHR or waist circum-
ference, may have stronger associations with cardio-
vascular disease. For example, INTERHEART found a 
stronger association for WHR with myocardial infarction 
than BMI, and the association of WHR with myocardial 
infarction persisted after adjustment for BMI.3 The Mil-
lion Women Study found that waist circumference as-
sociated with an increase in CHD risk within BMI cat-
egories (and vice versa), again suggesting that each 
is independently associated with CHD.4 Furthermore, 
INTERSTROKE found WHR to be more strongly associ-
ated with stroke risk than BMI.5 Although these studies 
have attempted to separate the independent effects of 
general and central adiposity, this remains challenging 
in observational studies because of the high degree 
of correlation between adiposity measures. Another 
problem is that adiposity measures may differ in their 
reproducibility; for example, BMI is less affected by re-
gression dilution bias, a bias to the null resulting from 
measurement error, than WHR.6 In addition, all mea-
sures of adiposity suffer from confounding attributable 
to underlying ill health at low or subclinical levels, be-
cause many chronic conditions lead to weight loss.7–9 
Consequently, it is very difficult, if not impossible, to 
quantify the true independent effects of different mea-
sures of adiposity in observational studies alone.
Although Mendelian randomization (MR) studies mini-
mize bias from traditional sources such as confounding, 
regression dilution bias, and reverse causation, they 
may be susceptible to bias from pleiotropy (association 
of genetic variants with >1 variable). Pleiotropy can be 
vertical because of the multiple downstream effects 
that follow the single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) 
effect on the exposure of interest, but this does not 
compromise MR assumptions. Alternatively, pleiotropy 
can be horizontal, whereby the SNP or instrument af-
fects pathways other than those of the exposure of 
interest and could therefore invalidate the MR assump-
tion that the SNP only affects the outcome through 
the exposure of interest, potentially leading to biased 
causal estimates. With multi-SNP instruments, there is a 
chance that pleiotropic effects might become balanced 
such that causal inference regarding the exposure is 
possible. In this study, we perform MR analyses of BMI 
and WHR together with recently developed methods 
that are robust to horizontal pleiotropy under additional 
assumptions (online-only Data Supplement Figure I). We 
therefore use MR-Egger regression to provide a test for 
unbalanced horizontal pleiotropy and a causal estimate 
of exposure on outcome in its presence.10,11 In addition, 
we use the weighted median estimator that can give 
valid estimates even in the presence of horizontal plei-
otropy provided at least 50% of the information in the 
analysis comes from variants that are valid instruments, 
and has the advantage of retaining greater precision in 
the estimates than MR-Egger.12
This article represents the most comprehensive as-
sessment of the causal role of adiposity on CHD, stroke, 
and T2D to date. It contrasts the causal effects of cen-
tral adiposity (WHR adjusted for BMI [WHRadjBMI]) from 
general adiposity (BMI) on multiple cardiovascular out-
comes: new CHD events from 14 prospective studies/
randomized controlled trials in addition to data publicly 
Clinical Perspective
What Is New?
• This large-scale genetic analysis presents the most 
comprehensive causal assessment of adiposity 
with cardiometabolic diseases to date, including 
new data for stroke subtypes from METASTROKE 
and novel cardiometabolic traits including ECG mea-
sures and carotid intima media thickness.
• We find that waist-to-hip ratio adjusted for body 
mass index, a measure of central body fat distribu-
tion that aims to be independent of general adipos-
ity, is causally related to higher risks of coronary 
heart disease, ischemic stroke, and a multitude of 
cardiometabolic traits.
• Our findings also reinforce existing evidence on the 
causal relevance of general adiposity (body mass 
index) to these diseases and provide more precise 
estimates.
What Are the Clinical Implications?
• Both the amount of adiposity and its distribution play 
important roles in influencing multiple cardiometa-
bolic traits and the development of cardiometabolic 
diseases.
• Furthermore, our findings indicate that body fat dis-
tribution has multiple causal roles in disease that are 
independent of general adiposity.
• This suggests that physicians should pay attention 
to measures of adiposity beyond body mass index, 
because measurement of such traits may identify 
patients at risk of cardiometabolic disease and pro-
vide opportunities to the scientific community to 
identify novel approaches to disease prevention.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Causal Associations of Adiposity: CHD, Stroke, T2D 
ORIGINAL RESEARCH 
ARTICLE
Circulation. 2017;135:2373–2388. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.026560 
June 13, 2017
2375
available from the CARDIOGRAMplusC4D (Coronary Ar-
tery Disease Genome-wide Replication and Meta-analysis 
[CARDIoGRAM] plus The Coronary Artery Disease [C4D] 
Genetics)13 increasing CHD cases to 66 
842, multiple 
stroke subtypes using data from METASTROKE,14 and 
T2D from DIAGRAM (Diabetes Genetics Replication and 
Meta-analysis).15 We present the largest number of car-
diometabolic traits ever examined in a MR analysis of 
adiposity including lipids from the Global Lipids Genetic 
Consortium (GLGC; 213 
500 participants)16 and many 
novel intermediate disease end points, including ECG 
measures of left ventricular hypertrophy, carotid intima 
media thickness as a measure of subclinical atheroscle-
rosis, and markers of renal and lung disease, as well. 
We build distinct multi-SNP genetic instruments for each 
adiposity measure using the most comprehensive rep-
ertoire available from recent genome-wide association 
studies (GWAS),17,18 with 97 SNPs for BMI and 49 SNPs 
for WHRadjBMI, thereby more than doubling the pheno-
typic variance explained in some earlier MR studies.19–23
METHODS
Study Selection and Inclusion of Participants
We include individual participant data from 10 studies in the 
University College London–London School of Hygiene and 
Tropical Medicine–Edinburgh–Bristol (UCLEB) consortium 
(see online-only Data Supplement Table I for study details). 
We include summary data from a further 4 studies (ASCOT 
[Anglo-Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes Trial], HRS [Health 
and Retirement Study], NEO [Netherlands Epidemiology of 
Obesity], and PROSPER [Prospective Study of Pravastatin 
in the Elderly at Risk]), and summary data from 4 consortia 
(CARDIoGRAMplusC4D, METASTROKE, DIAGRAM, and GLGC) 
(see Appendix in the online-only Data Supplement). All partici-
pating studies received approval from local institutional review 
boards or ethics committees. All participants gave informed 
consent.
Clinical Outcomes
Online-only Data Supplement Table II provides details of CHD 
ascertainment and number of events by study. In UCLEB stud-
ies, the primary outcome was combined prevalent or incident 
CHD defined as fatal or nonfatal myocardial infarction, or a 
coronary revascularisation procedure, but excluding angina. 
In the majority of studies, events were validated (eg, hospital 
episode statistics, clinical/laboratory measurements, review 
of primary care medical records). CARDIoGRAMplusC4D used 
standard criteria for defining cases of coronary artery disease 
and myocardial infarction with some studies including angi-
ography-confirmed stenosis and stable or unstable angina.13 
METASTROKE defined stroke as a typical clinical syndrome 
with radiological confirmation; subtyping was done with the 
TOAST (Trial of Org 10172 in Acute Stroke Treatment) clas-
sification system.14 We include all ischemic stroke, 3 subtypes 
of ischemic stroke (large-vessel disease, small-vessel disease, 
and cardioembolic stroke) and hemorrhagic stroke. T2D defini-
tions follow DIAGRAM.24
Cardiometabolic Traits
For analysis of individual participant data studies, data on sex, 
age, measured standing height, weight, waist circumference, 
and hip circumference were used to derive BMI and WHRadjBMI 
traits. WHRadjBMI was calculated by generating the predicted 
residuals from the linear regression of WHR on BMI. Biomarkers 
included in analyses were grouped into the following categories: 
lipids (triglycerides, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol [HDL-C], 
and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol [LDL-C), inflammation 
(interleukin 6), lung function (ratio of forced expiratory volume in 
1 second to forced vital capacity), metabolic (glucose, insulin, 
and albumin), renal (creatinine, estimated glomerular filtration 
rate, modification of diet in renal disease equation), and systolic 
blood pressure. The following ECG measures of left ventricular 
hypertrophy were recorded: QRS voltage sum, QRS voltage 
sum product, Cornell product, and Sokolow-Lyon index, and PR 
interval, as well (see online-only Data Supplement Method I for 
definitions). Cardiometabolic traits that were not normally dis-
tributed were transformed to the natural logarithmic scale. For 
comparability across biomarkers, measurements were z-score 
standardized. Self-reports of current smoking status (ever/
never) and alcohol consumption (drinker/nondrinker) were con-
sidered to be potential confounders of adiposity-cardiovascular 
disease (CVD) associations.
Genotyping
Online-only Data Supplement Table I details genotyping by 
study. Genotyping in all UCLEB studies was conducted with 
the Metabochip array (except a subset of ELSA study [English 
Longitudinal Study of Ageing] that used a GWAS array).25 
The remaining studies used GWAS arrays (HRS, PROSPER) 
or Exome Chip (NEO). Individuals were excluded from the 
analyses on the basis of sex mismatch, excessive or minimal 
heterozygosity, relatedness or individual missingness (>3%). 
Individuals of non-European ancestry were removed to mini-
mize confounding by population structure. SNPs with a low call 
rate or evidence of departure from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium 
were excluded from analyses (see online-only Data Supplement 
Table I for thresholds used in different studies).
Statistical Analyses
Observational Analyses
In individual participant data studies, adiposity (BMI or 
WHRadjBMI) was z-score standardized, and linear or logistic 
regression models were fitted for each cardiometabolic trait 
or disease outcome. Observational models were adjusted for 
age and sex. Fixed-effect meta-analyses were used to derive 
combined observational estimates across studies. We calcu-
lated I2 statistics to quantify heterogeneity between studies 
and derived P values from the Cochran Q test.26
GENETIC ANALYSES
SNP Selection and Construction of the Genetic 
Instruments
Selection of SNPs for the genetic instruments was 
based on analyses from the GIANT consortium (Genetic 
Investigation of Anthropometric Traits), which included 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Dale et al
June 13, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:2373–2388. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.026560
2376
339 
224 individuals from 125 separate studies for BMI17 
and 224 
459 individuals from 101 studies for WHRad-
jBMI.18 These studies identified 97 independent SNPs 
for BMI and 49 independent SNPs for WHRadjBMI at 
GWAS significance. We found no overlap between the 
BMI SNPs and WHRadjBMI SNPs. In studies where the 
SNP identified by GIANT was not available in the Metabo-
chip array, we used proxy SNPs in linkage disequilibrium 
(R2>0.8) with the specified SNP. Details of proxy SNPs 
used by platform (Metabochip/GWAS) are given in online-
only Data Supplement Tables III and IV.
Genetic Association Analyses in Individual 
Participant Data
We performed a within-study genetic association analy-
sis with adiposity (standardized BMI and WHRadjBMI) 
as a continuous trait using an additive model. We used 
linear or logistic regression models to estimate the ad-
ditive effect of each SNP on cardiometabolic traits and 
outcomes. We used logistic regression to test the as-
sociation of each SNP with smoking and alcohol con-
sumption as potential confounders of the adiposity-CVD 
association.
Instrumental Variable Analyses in Summary Data
We conducted 3 tests for the causal estimation of each 
adiposity measure on cardiometabolic outcomes: (1) 
inverse variance–weighted (IVW) method, (2) MR-Egger, 
and (3) weighted median. In the absence of unbalanced 
horizontal pleiotropy, we would expect all three tests to 
give consistent results. All inverse variance (IV) estimates 
in summary data were calculated using the mrrobust 
package27 in Stata version 14.28 The proportion of vari-
ance in adiposity explained by the genetic instruments 
in summary data was calculated using the grs.summary 
function from the gtx package in R.29,30 A threshold of 
statistical significance of P<0.025 (0.05/2=0.025) was 
used to reflect testing for 2 different adiposity traits (BMI 
and WHRadjBMI).
IVW Instrumental Variable Analyses
To combine data across studies with summary level data, 
we pooled the association of each SNP on risk of each 
CVD outcome/cardiometabolic trait using fixed-effects 
meta-analysis. To provide external weights for the SNP-
adiposity associations, the effect of each SNP on adi-
posity (BMI; WHRadjBMI) in GIANT was pooled with that 
in all other contributing studies, excluding studies that 
had already contributed to GIANT (1958BC, EAS, HRS, 
NSHD, PROSPER, Whitehall II). To quantify heterogeneity 
in the SNP effects across studies, we calculated I2 and 
derived P values from the Cochrane Q tests. All P values 
were 2-sided. IVW meta-analysis was used to provide a 
combined estimate of the causal estimates (SNP-out-
come/SNP-adiposity) from each SNP. IVW is equivalent 
to a 2-stage least-squares or allele score analysis using 
individual-level data, and is hence referred to here as con-
ventional MR.31 However, it can lead to overrejection of 
the null, particularly when there is heterogeneity between 
the causal estimates from different genetic variants.
MR-Egger Instrumental Variable Analyses
To account for potential unbalanced horizontal pleiot-
ropy in the multi-SNP adiposity instruments, we reesti-
mated the instrumental variable associations using MR-
Egger regression.10,11 MR-Egger tests for the presence 
of, and accounts for, unbalanced horizontal pleiotropy 
by introducing a parameter for this bias.10 Specifically, 
linear regression of the instrument-outcome effects is 
performed on the instrument-exposure effects, with the 
slope representing the causal effect estimate and the 
intercept representing the net bias attributable to hori-
zontal pleiotropy. An assumption is required that the in-
dividual SNP effects on the exposure are independent 
of their pleiotropic effects on the outcome (termed the 
InSIDE assumption).12
Weighted Median Estimate Instrumental Variable 
Analyses
Finally, we applied a complementary approach termed 
the weighted median estimator that can give valid es-
timates even in the presence of unbalanced horizontal 
pleiotropy, provided at least half of the weighted vari-
ance is valid.12
Power Calculations
Power to detect causal estimates was calculated based 
on the proportion of variance of the exposure explained 
by the instruments (R2), the total number of individuals in 
the analysis, and the number of cases and controls us-
ing the online tool.32,33 Power estimates are provided in 
online-only Data Supplement Table V).
RESULTS
Studies and Participants
Full descriptive details of the included studies are given 
in online-only Data Supplement Table I. Data from 14 
prospective studies and randomized trials and 4 consor-
tia were included with 66 
842 CHD cases (3716 from 
UCLEB/other nonconsortia studies), 12 
389 ischemic 
stroke cases, and 34 
840 T2D cases. The number of 
individuals included in the analyses of cardiometabolic 
traits ranged from 6625 to 213 
556. The mean age in 
individual participant data studies was 63.5 years, the 
mean BMI was 27.4 kg/m2 (SD 4.6), and the mean WHR 
was 0.89 (SD 0.13) (online-only Data Supplement Tables 
I and VI). Distribution of binary traits by study are given in 
online-only Data Supplement Table VII.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Causal Associations of Adiposity: CHD, Stroke, T2D 
ORIGINAL RESEARCH 
ARTICLE
Circulation. 2017;135:2373–2388. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.026560 
June 13, 2017
2377
Instrument Validation
We identified Metabochip proxies for 13 BMI SNPs 
and 7 WHRadjBMI SNPs; the median R2 was 0.965 
and 0.913, respectively (online-only Data Supplement 
Tables III and IV). The proportion of variance of BMI 
explained by the BMI genetic instrument was 1.7%, 
whereas the WHRadjBMI instrument explained 0.7% 
WHRadjBMI variance. The associations of individual 
SNPs with adiposity are shown in online-only Data Sup-
plement Tables VIII and IX.
MR Analysis of Adiposity With Cardiometabolic 
Traits
Figure 1A and 1B presents estimates of associations 
between BMI and WHRadjBMI with cardiometabolic traits 
from IV analyses. Both genetically instrumented adipos-
ity measures were found to be causally associated with 
increased insulin and triglycerides. In addition, BMI was 
causally associated with higher interleukin 6, with a di-
rectionally consistent result identified for WHRadjBMI. 
Both adiposity measures were also causally associated 
Figure 1. Association of BMI (A) and 
WHRadjBMI (B) with continuous 
biomarkers derived from Mendelian 
randomization analyses.  
A, Association of BMI with continuous bio-
markers derived from Mendelian randomiza-
tion analysis. Values represent standardized 
mean differences of each trait per SD 
increase in BMI derived from conventional 
(IVW) Mendelian randomization analysis. 
Nonnormally distributed variables were 
natural ln transformed; therefore, mean 
differences displayed on the log scale may 
be antilogged and interpreted as percent-
age differences in SD of trait per SD in BMI. 
Log triglycerides from individual participant 
data studies only; GLGC triglycerides in 
online-only Data Supplement Table X. B, 
Association of WHRadjBMI with continu-
ous biomarkers derived from Mendelian 
randomization analysis. Values represent 
standardized mean differences of each trait 
per SD increase in WHRadjBMI derived from 
conventional (IVW) Mendelian randomization 
analysis. Nonnormally distributed variables 
were natural log transformed; therefore, 
mean differences displayed on the log 
scale may be antilogged and interpreted as 
percentage difference in SD of trait per SD 
in WHRadjBMI. Log triglycerides from indi-
vidual participant data studies only; GLGC 
triglycerides in online-only Data Supple-
ment Table XI. BMI indicates body mass 
index; EGFR, estimated glomerular filtration 
rate; FEV1, forced expiratory volume in 1 
second; FVC, forced vital capacity; GLCG, 
Global Lipids Genetic Consortium; HDL-C, 
high-density lipoprotein cholesterol; IL6, 
interleukin 6; IMT, intima-media thickness; 
IVW, inverse-variance weighted; LDL-C, 
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol; MDRD, 
modification of diet in renal disease; SBP, 
systolic blood pressure; SD, standard 
deviation; and WHRadjBMI, waist-to-hip ratio 
adjusted for body mass index.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Dale et al
June 13, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:2373–2388. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.026560
2378
with decreased levels of HDL-C. However, only WHRad-
jBMI was associated with increased LDL-C, and the as-
sociation with systolic blood pressure was also stronger. 
BMI was inversely associated with albumin, whereas 
WHRadjBMI was not; but heterogeneity across studies 
was moderately high (I2=57%).
There was evidence for a causal association with 
some of the ECG measures that index left ventricular 
hypertrophy with both adiposity measures associated 
with higher log Cornell Product; in addition BMI, but not 
WHRadjBMI, associated with a lower Sokolow-Lyon in-
dex. There was no suggestion for a causal association 
of either measure of adiposity and PR interval.
Both WHRadjBMI and, to a weaker extent, BMI were 
causally associated with higher carotid intima media thick-
ness (39%; 95% confidence interval [CI], 9%–77% and 
18%; 95% CI, 1%–38% higher per SD in WHRadjBMI and 
BMI, respectively). WHRadjBMI had a weak association with 
lung function (forced expiratory volume in 1 second:forced 
vital capacity) at 0.12 U per SD (95% CI, 0.00–0.23), but 
the P value does not meet the threshold that takes into 
account testing for multiple measures of adiposity. There 
was no suggestion of a causal association of either adipos-
ity measure with any of the measures of renal function.
With MR-Egger regression, there was no convincing 
evidence for unbalanced horizontal pleiotropy in any of 
the associations of adiposity traits with continuous car-
diometabolic traits (online-only Data Supplement Tables 
X and XI).
Online-only Data Supplement Figure IIA and IIB illus-
trate the consistency of observational and IV estimates 
for associations between adiposity and cardiometabolic 
traits (online-only Data Supplement Tables XII and XIII).
MR Analysis of Adiposity With Cardiometabolic 
Diseases
Figure 2A through 2C shows the association of each adi-
posity measure with CHD, ischemic stroke, and T2D from 
conventional IVW and weighted median MR analyses. MR-
Egger estimates tended to be much more imprecise and 
are therefore presented separately in online-only Data 
Supplement Table XIV to facilitate interpretation.
MR Analysis of Adiposity With CHD
The summary causal estimate per 1 SD increment in BMI 
from conventional IVW MR was an OR for CHD of 1.36 
(95% CI, 1.22–1.52) (Figure 2A). MR-Egger regression 
suggested little evidence for unbalanced horizontal plei-
otropy in the genetic instrument (intercept P value=0.65), 
and both MR-Egger and weighted median estimates were 
consistent with the IVW estimate (online-only Data Sup-
plement Figure IIIA). Furthermore, MR estimates were 
consistent with observational estimates reported by the 
Emerging Risk Factors Collaboration (Figure 2A)
Similarly, we found an association between WHRad-
jBMI and CHD using conventional MR (OR, 1.48; 95% 
CI, 1.28–1.71 per SD WHRadjBMI, Figure 2A and on-
line-only Data Supplement Figure IIIB). The intercept for 
the MR-Egger test was 0.0134 (95% CI, –0.0004 to 
0.0278; P=0.06). The causal estimate from MR-Egger 
was imprecise (OR, 0.89; 95% CI, 0.52–1.53), but the 
weighted median estimator (which retains more power 
than MR-Egger) provided a causal effect of 1.61 (95% 
CI, 1.36–1.90) which was consistent with the IVW result.
MR Analysis of Adiposity With Ischemic Stroke
The causal OR for the association between BMI and 
ischemic stroke was 1.09 (95% CI, 0.93–1.28 per SD) 
(Figure 2B). Results from the MR-Egger analysis were 
compatible with no unbalanced horizontal pleiotropy 
(intercept P value=0.73), and the weighted median es-
timator suggested no causal association (online-only 
Data Supplement Figure IIIC). Estimates for association 
between BMI and stroke subtypes were imprecise and 
95% CIs all included the null (Table). Thus, whereas all IV 
estimates for BMI and stroke include the Emerging Risk 
Factors Collaboration estimate (Figure 2B), lack of preci-
sion hinders any clear causal evidence for an association 
between BMI and ischemic stroke.
Results do, however, provide some evidence for a 
causal association of WHRadjBMI with ischemic stroke 
(OR, 1.32; 95% CI, 1.03–1.70 per SD in WHRadjBMI) 
(Figure 2B). MR-Egger regression was consistent with 
no unbalanced horizontal pleiotropy (intercept P val-
ue=0.94), and the weighted median estimator was 
very close to the IVW estimate (causal OR, 1.34; 95% 
CI, 0.97–1.86 per SD increase in WHRadjBMI) (online-
only Data Supplement Figure IIID). Limited evidence was 
found for a causal association with stroke subtypes; all 
point estimates were consistently >1, but precision was 
poor and 95% CIs included the null (Table).
MR Analysis of Adiposity With T2D
We found a causal OR for T2D of 1.98 (95% CI, 1.41–2.78) 
per SD increase in BMI (Figure 2C). Similar but stronger 
estimates were identified using MR-Egger (OR, 3.70; 95% 
CI, 1.63–8.41; P value for pleiotropy=0.10) and weighted 
median estimator (OR, 2.70; 95% CI, 2.26–3.23). One BMI 
SNP (rs7903146) was an outlier (online-only Data Supple-
ment Figure IIIe) and is a marker for the TCF7L2 gene, a 
GWAS-identified locus for T2D.34 We therefore repeated 
the T2D analysis excluding rs7903146 (online-only Data 
Supplement Table XV yielding an IVW OR of 2.25 (95% CI, 
1.87–2.71) per SD increase in BMI, with similar estimates 
from MR-Egger and weighted median estimators.
Likewise, we found a causal relationship between 
WHRadjBMI and T2D (OR, 1.82; 95% CI, 1.38–2.42 
per SD increase in WHRadjBMI, Figure 2C). MR-Egger 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Causal Associations of Adiposity: CHD, Stroke, T2D 
ORIGINAL RESEARCH 
ARTICLE
Circulation. 2017;135:2373–2388. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.026560 
June 13, 2017
2379
did not provide evidence of unbalanced horizontal plei-
otropy (P value for pleiotropy=0.21), and the weight-
ed median estimator result was consistent with the 
IVW (OR, 1.64; 95% CI, 1.25–2.15) (online-only Data 
Supplement Figure IIIG).
Multivariate MR
We found some evidence for association of both adipos-
ity instruments with smoking, but not with other major 
confounders (online-only Data Supplement Table XVI). To 
account for this, sensitivity analyses were undertaken 
Figure 2. Associations of BMI and WHRadjBMI with risks of CHD (A), stroke (B) and type 2 diabetes (C) from obser-
vational and Mendelian randomization analyses. 
A, Associations of adiposity with risk of CHD from observational and Mendelian randomization analyses. Association between 
adiposity (BMI and WHRadjBMI) and coronary heart disease, comparing causal odds ratios (OR) per SD of adiposity trait derived from 
instrumental variable analysis and observational analysis from the Emerging Risk Factors Consortium hazard ratio (HR per SD of BMI 
or waist:hip adjusted for age, sex, and smoking status).1 Causal estimates are derived from Mendelian randomization and include 
conventional (ratio) approach and weighted median (see Methods for further details). P(genetic pleiotropy) relates to the P value 
derived from the intercept of MR-Egger; a small P value denotes the presence of unbalanced horizontal pleiotropy. B, Associations 
of adiposity with risk of ischemic stroke from observational and Mendelian randomization analyses. Association between ischemic 
stroke and adiposity (BMI and WHRadjBMI) comparing causal odds ratios (OR) per SD of adiposity trait derived from instrumental 
variable analysis and observational analysis from the Emerging Risk Factors Consortium (HR of ischemic stroke per SD of BMI or 
waist:hip adjusted for age, sex, and smoking status).1 Causal estimates are derived from Mendelian randomization and include con-
ventional (ratio) approach and weighted median (see Methods for further details). P(genetic pleiotropy) relates to the P value derived 
from the intercept of MR-Egger; a small P value denotes presence of unbalanced horizontal pleiotropy. C, Associations of adiposity 
with risk of T2D from observational and Mendelian randomization analyses. Association between T2D and adiposity (BMI and WHRad-
jBMI) comparing causal odds ratios (OR) per SD of adiposity trait derived from instrumental variable analysis and observational analy-
sis from Vazquez et al.2 Causal estimates are derived from Mendelian randomization and include conventional (ratio) approach and 
weighted median (see Methods for further details). P(genetic pleiotropy) relates to the P value derived from the intercept of MR-Egger; 
a small P value denotes presence of unbalanced horizontal pleiotropy. BMI indicates body mass index; CHD, coronary heart disease; 
CI, confidence interval; ERFC, Emerging Risk Factors Consortium; HR, hazard ratio; IVW, inverse-variance weighted; SD, standard 
deviation; T2D, type 2 diabetes mellitus; WHR, waist-to-hip ratio; and WHRadjBMI, waist-to-hip ratio adjusted for body mass index.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Dale et al
June 13, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:2373–2388. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.026560
2380
for each cardiometabolic disease using multivariate MR, 
including the effect of each SNP used as an instrument 
for BMI and WHRadjBMI on smoking. MR estimates were 
found to be robust to this adjustment (online-only Data 
Supplement Table XVII), with generally consistent point 
estimates measured with greater imprecision, reflecting 
the reduced power in these analyses. The multivariate 
MR (adjusted for smoking) for the causal association 
of WHRadjBMI with ischemic stroke was 1.27 (95% CI, 
0.84–1.93) broadly similar to 1.32 (95% CI, 1.03–1.70) 
in the main IVW analysis, but with a wider CI. We also 
included the forced expiratory volume in 1 second to 
forced vital capacity ratio in these sensitivity analyses 
because of the likely association of this trait with smok-
ing; again, adjusted results were very similar to the main 
IVW results (online-only Data Supplement Table XVII).
DISCUSSION
We conducted the most comprehensive MR analysis to 
date comparing the causal role of central and general 
adiposity in the development of multiple CVD outcomes 
(CHD, multiple stroke subtypes, and T2D). Owing to ben-
efits of MR to minimize residual confounding by common 
lifestyle factors and underlying ill health, we are able to 
quantify that 1 SD increase in genetically instrumented 
WHRadjBMI (≈0.08 U) results in a ≈50% increase in 
risk of CHD independent of BMI. This compares with 
the ≈40% increase in risk of CHD we find per 1 SD in-
crease in genetically instrumented BMI (≈4.6 kg/m2), 
which is consistent with the observational effect derived 
from large prospective population cohorts including the 
Emerging Risk Factors Collaboration1 (CHD hazard ratio, 
1.29 [1.22–1.37] per 1 SD) and the Prospective Stud-
ies Collaboration.34 Thus, although observational studies 
such as the Emerging Risk Factors Collaboration have 
found risk to be consistent across different measures 
of adiposity, our results suggest WHRadjBMI may have a 
stronger effect, although the greater imprecision in the 
MR estimates should also be considered.
Similarly, although observational studies have found that 
different measures of adiposity have similar associations 
with risk of ischemic stroke,1 our results again suggest that 
WHRadjBMI may be more strongly associated (increased 
risk ≈30% per 1 SD). Recent findings from INTERSTROKE 
also suggest that WHR is a much stronger deleterious risk 
factor for ischemic stroke.5 Our systolic blood pressure 
results follow a similar pattern, with a much stronger as-
sociation between central adiposity and systolic blood pres-
sure than general adiposity. This is also the first MR study 
to suggest potential causal association between central 
adiposity and carotid intima media thickness, a widely used 
surrogate measure of subclinical atherosclerosis.
Previous adiposity MR studies used limited num-
bers of SNPs (with weaker genetic instruments), fewer 
events, and generally failed to find evidence for a causal 
association between BMI and CHD.19,21 However, 1 MR 
study using a 3-SNP allele score (FTO, MC4R, TMEM18) 
reported an OR of 1.52 (95% CI, 1.12–2.05 for a 4 kg/
m2 increase in BMI,20 and, most recently, a MR study 
using a 32-SNP instrument for BMI found results for 
CHD similar to ours.22 We do not, however, replicate the 
Table. Mendelian Randomization Estimates for the Association of Adiposity and Stroke 
Subtypes
IVW*
P(Genetic 
Pleiotropy)†
Weighted Median
OR
95% CI
I 
2
OR
95% CI
Body mass index
  
 
All ischemic stroke
1.09
0.93–1.28
20%
0.734
0.98
0.77–1.25
   
Cardioembolic
1.18
0.89–1.55
0%
0.507
1.40
0.87–2.24
   
Large-vessel disease
1.14
0.82–1.59
19%
0.625
1.12
0.65–1.91
   
Small-vessel disease
0.93
0.64–1.35
30%
0.270
1.15
0.67–1.97
  
Hemorrhagic stroke
1.51
0.73–3.13
0%
0.435
1.28
0.37–4.40
Waist-to-hip ratio adjusted for body mass index
  
 
All ischemic stroke
1.32
1.03–1.70
38%
0.936
1.34
0.96–1.87
   
Cardioembolic
1.24
0.84–1.83
0%
0.588
1.32
0.73–2.38
   
Large-vessel disease
1.37
0.90–2.09
0%
0.470
0.87
0.48–1.58
   
Small-vessel disease
1.57
0.98–2.51
13%
0.861
1.71
0.89–3.29
  
Hemorrhagic stroke
1.89
0.69–5.18
0%
0.430
1.73
0.42–7.06
CI indicates confidence interval; and OR, odds ratio.
*IVW refers to the inverse variance weighted (also termed conventional Mendelian randomization) and weighted median. 
†P(genetic pleiotropy) relates to the P value derived from the intercept of Mendelian randomization-Egger; a small P value 
denotes the presence of unbalanced horizontal pleiotropy.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Causal Associations of Adiposity: CHD, Stroke, T2D 
ORIGINAL RESEARCH 
ARTICLE
Circulation. 2017;135:2373–2388. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.026560 
June 13, 2017
2381
causal association between BMI and ischemic stroke re-
ported by the same study (hazard ratio per SD increase 
of BMI, 1.83; 95% CI, 1.05–3.20),22 despite increasing 
the number of stroke cases 10-fold. Furthermore, our 
results are in line with those for ischemic stroke from the 
Emerging Risk Factors Collaboration and INTERSTROKE, 
including the apparently stronger association we find be-
tween central adiposity and stroke relative to general 
adiposity. Results for the causal association of WHRad-
jBMI with CHD and T2D are consistent with those from a 
recent MR analysis.35
We present the largest number of cardiometabolic 
traits ever examined in a MR analysis of adiposity. The 
current findings are broadly consistent with earlier MR 
studies for glucose, triglycerides, HDL-C, systolic blood 
pressure, and interleukin 6, providing further support 
for a detrimental impact of adiposity on the cardiovas-
cular system.19,21,23 However, we find no evidence for a 
causal association between BMI and LDL-C, consistent 
with some but not all earlier studies.21,23 A recent MR 
study found a causal effect of BMI and a wide range 
of lipid metabolites, including all LDL metabolites,36 but 
was conducted in a younger, healthier population (aver-
age BMI ≈24 kg/m2) than is commonly included in MR 
studies (including the current one), and this could explain 
the discrepancy with our findings (because observa-
tional studies suggest the association of BMI and LDL-
C plateaus beyond 27 kg/m2).34 We also report novel 
positive causal associations of adiposity with the ECG 
measure log Cornell product (a measure of left ventricu-
lar hypertrophy). The negative association of BMI with 
Sokolow-Lyon (an alternative measure of left ventricular 
hypertrophy) was unexpected and may represent a false 
positive. Although both log Cornell product and Sokolow-
Lyon measure left ventricular hypertrophy, log Cornell 
product is considered to be the better test for identify-
ing left ventricular hypertrophy when measured against 
a gold standard.37
This study demonstrates that central obesity (as 
quantified by WHRadjBMI) has a causal effect on CHD 
that is independent of BMI. This finding demonstrates 
the potential of MR approaches for investigating highly 
correlated adiposity measures that have proved chal-
lenging to disentangle in observational studies.38 In these 
analyses, we find that WHRadjBMI has a more deleteri-
ous lipid profile than BMI, with detrimental associations 
of greater magnitude with triglycerides and HDL-C and 
association with LDL-C not found for BMI. The associa-
tion of WHRadjBMI with carotid intima media thickness 
is also of greater magnitude. Conversely, BMI appears 
to have a greater inflammatory effect than WHRadjBMI, 
and potentially a stronger effect on the ECG measures 
that index left ventricular hypertrophy and with glucose 
and T2D, as well. The apparent lack of association of 
WHRadjBMI with glucose is surprising, but is potentially 
explained by a negative association of WHRadjBMI SNPs 
with BMI. Interestingly, a recent article showed WHRadjB-
MI to associate with 2-hour fasting glucose, suggesting 
that WHRadjBMI may have differential effects according 
to how glucose is measured; different mechanisms are 
likely to regulate fasting and 2-hour glucose.35 In keep-
ing with our findings was the discovery that GWAS that 
identified 49 SNPs associated with WHRadjBMI18 found 
associations of the SNPs with concentrations of HDL-
C, triglycerides, LDL-C, adiponectin, and fasting insulin. 
Furthermore, the study identified enrichment of WHRad-
jBMI SNPs for T2D and CHD.
This study suggests that it is not only the volume of 
adiposity, but also its location, that is relevant for dis-
ease, lending weight to the emerging theory that the 
deposition of body fat plays important roles that are in-
dependent of total fat. For example, at a given BMI, there 
is considerable interindividual variation in the amount of 
visceral fat, which shows associations with disease.39 
Our results also suggest that efforts to quantify the ef-
fect of adiposity on burden of disease should include 
multiple measures of adiposity to avoid underestimat-
ing the true burden of adiposity on health.40 Regarding 
specific interventions that focus on WHR more than BMI, 
there is observational evidence that physical activity can 
modify WHR independent of BMI.41 Thus, it may be pos-
sible to mitigate the effects of WHR through increased 
population-wide physical activity. In addition, our findings 
open potentially new avenues of investigation. For ex-
ample, identifying these causal effects of WHRadjBMI 
can enable research to focus on the downstream conse-
quences of this trait, and potentially identify traits (such 
as metabolites)35 that could mediate the relationship be-
tween WHRadjBMI and disease which may themselves 
be amenable to pharmacological modification. Such 
traits downstream of WHRadjBMI could be unique (and 
not shared with BMI), raising the possibility of novel op-
portunities for drug discovery and disease prevention.
Strengths
This study has many strengths. First, independent 
multi-SNP instruments comparing the effect of central 
and general adiposity on multiple CVD outcomes; sec-
ond, the use of powerful genetic instruments for BMI 
and WHRadjBMI that explained up to twice the pheno-
typic variation in comparison with previous MR studies; 
third, large number of clinical events that provided ample 
power to detect the associations of adiposity with car-
diometabolic diseases; fourth, the use of methods to 
minimize the impact of unbalanced horizontal pleiotropy 
in the genetic instruments that may invalidate findings 
from conventional MR.
In addition to this being the most comprehensive evalu-
ation of adiposity-related traits with cardiovascular and 
metabolic risk factors and diseases, our analysis also facil-
itates their direct comparison, and therefore contrasts the 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Dale et al
June 13, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:2373–2388. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.026560
2382
effects of general adiposity with body fat distribution in the 
same data sets. This provides novel insights, demonstrat-
ing that WHRadjBMI is more relevant to the development of 
subclinical atherosclerosis and stroke than BMI, whereas 
both BMI and WHRadjBMI are important for CHD and T2D.
Limitations
Limitations include the potential pleiotropic effects of 
the multi-SNP instruments. However, results suggest 
little evidence for unbalanced horizontal pleiotropy. Re-
estimates of the causal associations using MR-Egger re-
gression were broadly consistent with our conventional 
MR analysis, albeit with a loss of precision and, conse-
quently, a loss of power, whereas weighted median es-
timates (that retain more power than MR-Egger) proved 
remarkably similar to IVW.
The InSIDE (Instrument Strength Independent of Direct 
Effect), which is untestable, assumes that the pleiotropic 
effects of the genetic variants are uncorrelated with the 
association of the genetic variants with the exposure. 
Violation of InSIDE would give rise to biased causal esti-
mates from MR-Egger; however, each MR approach has 
different strengths and assumptions, for example, viola-
tion of InSIDE does not affect the weighted median MR 
approach.12 This highlights the importance of using the 
3 MR approaches (IVW, median, and MR-Egger) in our 
study. General concordance of MR estimates derived 
from these approaches helps reinforce the conclusions 
that can be drawn. We used a multi-SNP instrument for 
WHR that had already been adjusted for BMI as part of 
the GIANT GWAS.18 Genetic instruments for phenotypes 
adjusted for heritable components may show associa-
tion with the adjusted phenotype through collider bias,42 
which could violate the InSIDE assumption. Indeed, we 
found WHRadjBMI SNPs to be associated with BMI be-
yond what would be expected by chance (online-only 
Data Supplement Table XVIII). This could lead to biased 
results; however, in the current scenario, the bias will 
tend to be toward the null (and underestimate the true ef-
fect) as the WHRadjBMI SNPs are associated negatively 
with BMI.
We selected cardiometabolic traits a priori on the ba-
sis that previous studies have shown them to be observa-
tionally and genetically associated with BMI. Therefore, 
although we test multiple outcomes, use of a conven-
tional Bonferroni would overpenalize the interpretation.
Future studies should look to include emerging CVD 
outcomes such as heart failure and atrial fibrillation, and 
consider additional potential confounders. In addition, 
more stroke cases should be added to improve preci-
sion in these analyses, in particular, for multivariate MR 
analyses.
Given that our MR analysis on CHD was largely based 
on summary data, we were unable undertake more de-
tailed investigations of the linear relationship between 
BMI or WHRadjBMI and risk of CHD or to explore the 
causal effects of very low levels of BMI or WHR on CHD.43 
These are important next steps to investigate, given the 
uncertainty regarding whether the U-shape association of 
BMI with disease reflects a true causal relationship, or 
whether it is an artifact from residual confounding and un-
derlying ill health. The recent finding of a J-shaped (rather 
than U-shaped) association between BMI and mortality in 
healthy nonsmokers reinforces the likely role of artifact 
in this association.44 Therefore, application of methods 
for nonlinear MR could help to determine the true optimal 
level of BMI for health.45 However, such analyses would 
require access to individual participant data in all studies.
Finally, although we identify several downstream bio-
logical mechanisms by which general and central adipos-
ity may mediate the effects on risk of CHD, these results 
should be considered as exploratory and further stud-
ies using adequate methodology for mediation analysis 
should be conducted,46,47 including the analysis of finer 
resolution for cardiometabolic traits, for example, using 
NMR metabolomics.
CONCLUSIONS
Our study supports evidence for a causal role of both 
central and general adiposity in risk of CHD and T2D, 
and central adiposity in risk of ischemic stroke. Further-
more, our results suggest that central adiposity may 
pose higher risk for stroke and CHD. Efforts to estimate 
the role of adiposity on CVD should consider the potential 
independent effects of different measures of adiposity.
AUTHORS
Caroline E. Dale, PhD*; Ghazaleh Fatemifar, PhD*; Tom M. 
Palmer, PhD; Jon White, PhD; David Prieto-Merino, PhD; Delilah 
Zabaneh, PhD; Jorgen E.L. Engmann, MSc; Tina Shah, PhD; 
Andrew Wong, PhD; Helen R. Warren, PhD; Stela McLachlan, 
PhD; Stella Trompet, PhD; Max Moldovan, PhD; Richard W. Mor-
ris, PhD; Reecha Sofat, MRCP; Meena Kumari, PhD; Elina Hyp-
pönen, PhD; Barbara J. Jefferis, PhD; Tom R. Gaunt, PhD; Yoav 
Ben-Shlomo, PhD; Ang Zhou, PhD; Aleksandra Gentry-Maharaj, 
PhD; Andy Ryan, PhD; UCLEB Consortium; METASTROKE Con-
sortium; Renée de Mutsert, PhD; Raymond Noordam, PhD; 
Mark J. Caulfield, MBBS, MD; J. Wouter Jukema, MD, PhD; 
Bradford B. Worrall, MD, MSc; Patricia B. Munroe, PhD; Usha 
Menon, FRCOG, MD (Res); Chris Power, PhD; Diana Kuh, PhD; 
Debbie A. Lawlor, PhD; Steve E. Humphries, PhD; Dennis O. 
Mook-Kanamori, MD, PhD; Naveed Sattar, MD, PhD; Mika Kivi-
maki, PhD; Jacqueline F. Price, MD; George Davey Smith, DSc; 
Frank Dudbridge, PhD; Aroon D. Hingorani, MD, PhD; Michael 
V. Holmes, MD, PhD†; Juan P. Casas, MD, PhD†.
SOURCES OF FUNDING
Dr Dale is supported by a University College London Spring-
board Population Science Fellowship. Prof Casas is supported 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Causal Associations of Adiposity: CHD, Stroke, T2D 
ORIGINAL RESEARCH 
ARTICLE
Circulation. 2017;135:2373–2388. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.026560 
June 13, 2017
2383
by the National Institute for Health Research University College 
London Hospitals Biomedical Research Center. Prof Hingorani 
is supported by a National Institute for Health Research Se-
nior Investigator Award. Work in his laboratory is supported 
by a British Heart Foundation Grant (RG/10/12/28456). The 
UCLEB Consortium is supported by funding from the Na-
tional Institute for Health Research, British Heart Foundation 
(RG/10/12/28456), and Medical Research Council. Dr Holmes 
works in a unit that receives funds from the UK Medical Re-
search Council.
DISCLOSURES
None.
AFFILIATIONS
From Farr Institute of Health Informatics Research, UCL Insti-
tute of Health Informatics, University College London, United 
Kingdom (C.E.D., G.F., D.P.-M., A.D.H., J.P.C.); Department 
of Mathematics and Statistics, Lancaster University,  United 
Kingdom (T.M.P.); UCLGenetics Institute, University College 
London, United Kingdom (J.W.); Applied Statistical Methods 
in Medical Research Group, Universidad Catolica de San An-
tonio de Murcia, Spain (D.P.-M.); Social Genetic & Develop-
mental Psychiatry, King’s College London, United Kingdom 
(D.Z.); Institute of Cardiovascular Science, University College 
London, United Kingdom (J.E.L.E., T.S., A.D.H., S.E.H.); MRC 
Unit for Lifelong Health & Ageing at UCL, London, United 
Kingdom (A.W., D.K.); Clinical Pharmacology, William Harvey 
Research Institute, Barts and The London School of Medi-
cine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, United 
Kingdom (H.R.W., M.J.C., P.B.M.); NIHR Barts Cardiovascular 
Biomedical Research Unit, Barts and The London School of 
Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, 
United Kingdom (H.R.W., M.J.C., P.B.M.); Usher Institute of 
Population Health Sciences and Informatics, University of 
Edinburgh, United Kingdom (S.M., J.F.P.); Department of Car-
diology, Leiden University Medical Center, The Netherlands 
(S.T., W.J.); South Australian Health and Medical Research 
Institute, Adelaide (M.M., E.H.); EMBL Australia, Adelaide 
(M.M.); School of Social and Community Medicine, University 
of Bristol, United Kingdom (R.W.M., T.R.G., Y.B.-S., D.A.L., 
G.D.S.); Centre for Clinical Pharmacology, University Col-
lege London, United Kingdom (R.S.); Institute for Social and 
Economic Research, University of Essex, Colchester, United 
Kingdom (M.K.); Centre for Population Health Research, 
School of Health Sciences and Sansom Institute, University 
of South Australia, Adelaide (E.H., A.Z.); Population, Policy & 
Practice, UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, 
London, United Kingdom (E.H., C.P.); Department of Primary 
Care & Population Health, University College London, Royal 
Free Campus, United Kingdom (B.J.J.); MRC Integrative Epi-
demiology Unit, University of Bristol, United Kingdom (T.R.G., 
D.A.L., G.D.S.); Department of Women’s Cancer, Institute 
for Women’s Health, UCL, London, United Kingdom (A.G.-M., 
A.R., U.M.); Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Leiden Uni-
versity Medical Center, The Netherlands (R.d.M., D.O.M.-K.); 
Department of Internal Medicine, Section Gerontology and 
Geriatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, The Netherlands 
(R.N., S.T.); Interuniversity Cardiology Institute Netherlands, 
Utrecht (W.J.); Departments of Neurology and Public Health 
Sciences, University of Virginia, Charlottesville (B.B.W.); De-
partment of Public Health and Primary Care, Leiden University 
Medical Center, The Netherlands (D.O.M.-K.); BHF Glasgow 
Cardiovascular Research Centre, Faculty of Medicine, Unit-
ed Kingdom (N.S.); Department of Epidemiology and Public 
Health, University College London, United Kingdom (M.K.); 
Department of Non-communicable Disease Epidemiology, 
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, United 
Kingdom (F.D.); Department of Health Sciences, University of 
Leicester, United Kingdom (F.D.); Clinical Trial Service Unit & 
Epidemiological Studies Unit, Nuffield Department of Popula-
tion Health, Big Data Institute Building, University of Oxford, 
United Kingdom (M.V.H.); Medical Research Council Popula-
tion Health Research Unit at the University of Oxford, United 
Kingdom (M.V.H.); and National Institute for Health Research 
Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford University Hospi-
tals, United Kingdom (M.V.H.).
FOOTNOTES
Received November 25, 2016; accepted April 3, 2017.
The online-only Data Supplement is available with this arti-
cle at http://circ.ahajournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1161/ 
CIRCULATIONAHA.116.026560/-/DC1.
Guest editor for this article was Ching-Ti Liu, PhD.
Circulation is available at http://circ.ahajournals.org.
REFERENCES
 1. Wormser D, Kaptoge S, Di Angelantonio E, Wood AM, Pennells L, 
Thompson A, Sarwar N, Kizer JR, Lawlor DA, Nordestgaard BG, 
Ridker P, Salomaa V, Stevens J, Woodward M, Sattar N, Collins R, 
Thompson SG, Whitlock G and Danesh J. Separate and combined 
associations of body-mass index and abdominal adiposity with 
cardiovascular disease: collaborative analysis of 58 prospective 
studies. Lancet. 2011;377:1085–1095. doi: 10.1016/S0140-
6736(11)60105-0.
 2. Vazquez G, Duval S, Jacobs DR Jr, Silventoinen K. Comparison 
of body mass index, waist circumference, and waist/hip ratio 
in predicting incident diabetes: a meta-analysis. Epidemiol Rev. 
2007;29:115–128. doi: 10.1093/epirev/mxm008.
 3. Yusuf S, Hawken S, Ounpuu S, Bautista L, Franzosi MG, Com-
merford P, Lang CC, Rumboldt Z, Onen CL, Lisheng L, Tanomsup 
S, Wangai P Jr, Razak F, Sharma AM, Anand SS; INTERHEART 
Study Investigators. Obesity and the risk of myocardial infarc-
tion in 27,000 participants from 52 countries: a case-control 
study. Lancet. 2005;366:1640–1649. doi: 10.1016/S0140-
6736(05)67663-5.
 4. Canoy D, Cairns BJ, Balkwill A, Wright FL, Green J, Reeves G, 
Beral V; Million Women Study Collaborators. Coronary heart dis-
ease incidence in women by waist circumference within catego-
ries of body mass index. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2013;20:759–762. 
doi: 10.1177/2047487313492631.
 5. O’Donnell MJ, Chin SL, Rangarajan S, Xavier D, Liu L, Zhang H, Rao-
Melacini P, Zhang X, Pais P, Agapay S, Lopez-Jaramillo P, Dama-
sceno A, Langhorne P, McQueen MJ, Rosengren A, Dehghan M, 
Hankey GJ, Dans AL, Elsayed A, Avezum A, Mondo C, Diener HC, 
Ryglewicz D, Czlonkowska A, Pogosova N, Weimar C, Iqbal R, Diaz 
R, Yusoff K, Yusufali A, Oguz A, Wang X, Penaherrera E, Lanas F, 
Ogah OS, Ogunniyi A, Iversen HK, Malaga G, Rumboldt Z, Oveis-
gharan S, Al Hussain F, Magazi D, Nilanont Y, Ferguson J, Pare G, 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Dale et al
June 13, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:2373–2388. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.026560
2384
Yusuf S; INTERSTROKE investigators. Global and regional effects 
of potentially modifiable risk factors associated with acute stroke 
in 32 countries (INTERSTROKE): a case-control study. Lancet. 
2016;388:761–775. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30506-2.
 6. Yusuf S and Anand S. Body-mass index, abdominal adiposity, and 
cardiovascular risk. Lancet. 2011;378:226–227; author reply 
228.
 7. Lawlor DA, Harbord RM, Timpson NJ, Lowe GD, Rumley A, Gaunt 
TR, Baker I, Yarnell JW, Kivimaki M, Kumari M, Norman PE, Jam-
rozik K, Hankey GJ, Almeida OP, Flicker L, Warrington N, Marmot 
MG, Ben-Shlomo Y, Palmer LJ, Day IN, Ebrahim S, Smith GD. The 
association of C-reactive protein and CRP genotype with coro-
nary heart disease: findings from five studies with 4,610 cases 
amongst 18,637 participants. PLoS One. 2008;3:e3011. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0003011.
 8. Lawlor DA, Hart CL, Hole DJ, Davey Smith G. Reverse causality 
and confounding and the associations of overweight and obesity 
with mortality. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2006;14:2294–2304. doi: 
10.1038/oby.2006.269.
 9. Dale C, Nüesch E, Prieto-Merino D, Choi M, Amuzu A, Ebrahim S, 
Casas JP, Davey-Smith G. Why do thin people have elevated all-
cause mortality? Evidence on confounding and reverse causality 
in the association of adiposity and COPD from the British Women’s 
Heart and Health Study. PLoS One. 2015;10:e0115446. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0115446.
 
10. Bowden J, Davey Smith G, Burgess S. Mendelian randomization 
with invalid instruments: effect estimation and bias detection 
through Egger regression. Int J Epidemiol. 2015;44:512–525. 
doi: 10.1093/ije/dyv080.
 
11. White J, Sofat R, Hemani G, Shah T, Engmann J, Dale C, Shah S, 
Kruger FA, Giambartolomei C, Swerdlow DI, Palmer T, McLachlan 
S, Langenberg C, Zabaneh D, Lovering R, Cavadino A, Jefferis B, 
Finan C, Wong A, Amuzu A, Ong K, Gaunt TR, Warren H, Davies TL, 
Drenos F, Cooper J, Ebrahim S, Lawlor DA, Talmud PJ, Humphries 
SE, Power C, Hypponen E, Richards M, Hardy R, Kuh D, Ware-
ham N, Ben-Shlomo Y, Day IN, Whincup P, Morris R, Strachan MW, 
Price J, Kumari M, Kivimaki M, Plagnol V, Whittaker JC, Smith GD, 
Dudbridge F, Casas JP, Holmes MV, Hingorani AD; International 
Consortium for Blood Pressure (ICBP); UCLEB (University College 
London-London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine-Edinburgh-
Bristol Consortium. Plasma urate concentration and risk of coro-
nary heart disease: a Mendelian randomisation analysis. Lancet 
Diabetes Endocrinol. 2016;4:327–336. doi: 10.1016/S2213-
8587(15)00386-1.
 
12. Bowden J, Davey Smith G, Haycock PC, Burgess S. Consistent 
estimation in Mendelian randomization with some invalid instru-
ments using a weighted median estimator. Genet Epidemiol. 
2016;40:304–314. doi: 10.1002/gepi.21965.
 
13. Deloukas P, Kanoni S, Willenborg C, Farrall M, Assimes TL, 
Thompson JR, Ingelsson E, Saleheen D, Erdmann J, Goldstein BA, 
Stirrups K, König IR, Cazier JB, Johansson A, Hall AS, Lee JY, 
Willer CJ, Chambers JC, Esko T, Folkersen L, Goel A, Grundberg 
E, Havulinna AS, Ho WK, Hopewell JC, Eriksson N, Kleber ME, 
Kristiansson K, Lundmark P, Lyytikäinen LP, Rafelt S, Shungin D, 
Strawbridge RJ, Thorleifsson G, Tikkanen E, Van Zuydam N, Voight 
BF, Waite LL, Zhang W, Ziegler A, Absher D, Altshuler D, Balmforth 
AJ, Barroso I, Braund PS, Burgdorf C, Claudi-Boehm S, Cox D, 
Dimitriou M, Do R, Doney AS, El Mokhtari N, Eriksson P, Fischer K, 
Fontanillas P, Franco-Cereceda A, Gigante B, Groop L, Gustafsson 
S, Hager J, Hallmans G, Han BG, Hunt SE, Kang HM, Illig T, Kes-
sler T, Knowles JW, Kolovou G, Kuusisto J, Langenberg C, Lang-
ford C, Leander K, Lokki ML, Lundmark A, McCarthy MI, Meisinger 
C, Melander O, Mihailov E, Maouche S, Morris AD, Müller-Nurasyid 
M, Nikus K, Peden JF, Rayner NW, Rasheed A, Rosinger S, Rubin 
D, Rumpf MP, Schäfer A, Sivananthan M, Song C, Stewart AF, Tan 
ST, Thorgeirsson G, van der Schoot CE, Wagner PJ, Wells GA, 
Wild PS, Yang TP, Amouyel P, Arveiler D, Basart H, Boehnke M, 
Boerwinkle E, Brambilla P, Cambien F, Cupples AL, de Faire U, De-
hghan A, Diemert P, Epstein SE, Evans A, Ferrario MM, Ferrières 
J, Gauguier D, Go AS, Goodall AH, Gudnason V, Hazen SL, Holm 
H, Iribarren C, Jang Y, Kähönen M, Kee F, Kim HS, Klopp N, Koe-
nig W, Kratzer W, Kuulasmaa K, Laakso M, Laaksonen R, Lee JY, 
Lind L, Ouwehand WH, Parish S, Park JE, Pedersen NL, Peters A, 
Quertermous T, Rader DJ, Salomaa V, Schadt E, Shah SH, Sinisalo 
J, Stark K, Stefansson K, Trégouët DA, Virtamo J, Wallentin L, 
Wareham N, Zimmermann ME, Nieminen MS, Hengstenberg C, 
Sandhu MS, Pastinen T, Syvänen AC, Hovingh GK, Dedoussis G, 
Franks PW, Lehtimäki T, Metspalu A, Zalloua PA, Siegbahn A, Sch-
reiber S, Ripatti S, Blankenberg SS, Perola M, Clarke R, Boehm 
BO, O’Donnell C, Reilly MP, März W, Collins R, Kathiresan S, Ham-
sten A, Kooner JS, Thorsteinsdottir U, Danesh J, Palmer CN, Rob-
erts R, Watkins H, Schunkert H, Samani NJ; CARDIoGRAMplusC4D 
Consortium; DIAGRAM Consortium; CARDIOGENICS Consortium; 
MuTHER Consortium; Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium. 
Large-scale association analysis identifies new risk loci for coro-
nary artery disease. Nat Genet. 2013;45:25–33. doi: 10.1038/
ng.2480.
 
14. Traylor M, Farrall M, Holliday EG, Sudlow C, Hopewell JC, Cheng 
YC, Fornage M, Ikram MA, Malik R, Bevan S, Thorsteinsdottir U, 
Nalls MA, Longstreth W, Wiggins KL, Yadav S, Parati EA, Deste-
fano AL, Worrall BB, Kittner SJ, Khan MS, Reiner AP, Helgadot-
tir A, Achterberg S, Fernandez-Cadenas I, Abboud S, Schmidt 
R, Walters M, Chen WM, Ringelstein EB, O’Donnell M, Ho WK, 
Pera J, Lemmens R, Norrving B, Higgins P, Benn M, Sale M, 
Kuhlenbäumer G, Doney AS, Vicente AM, Delavaran H, Algra A, 
Davies G, Oliveira SA, Palmer CN, Deary I, Schmidt H, Pandolfo 
M, Montaner J, Carty C, de Bakker PI, Kostulas K, Ferro JM, 
van Zuydam NR, Valdimarsson E, Nordestgaard BG, Lindgren A, 
Thijs V, Slowik A, Saleheen D, Paré G, Berger K, Thorleifsson 
G, Hofman A, Mosley TH, Mitchell BD, Furie K, Clarke R, Levi 
C, Seshadri S, Gschwendtner A, Boncoraglio GB, Sharma P, Bis 
JC, Gretarsdottir S, Psaty BM, Rothwell PM, Rosand J, Meschia 
JF, Stefansson K, Dichgans M, Markus HS; Australian Stroke Ge-
netics Collaborative, Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium 
2 (WTCCC2); International Stroke Genetics Consortium. Genetic 
risk factors for ischaemic stroke and its subtypes (the META-
STROKE collaboration): a meta-analysis of genome-wide associa-
tion studies. Lancet Neurol. 2012;11:951–962. doi: 10.1016/
S1474-4422(12)70234-X.
 
15. DIAGRAM. http://diagram-consortium.org/index.html. 2016.
 
16. Global Lipids Genetics Consortium, Willer CJ, Schmidt EM, Sen-
gupta S, Peloso GM, Gustafsson S, Kanoni S, Ganna A, Chen J, 
Buchkovich ML, Mora S, Beckmann JS, Bragg-Gresham JL, Chang 
HY, Demirkan A, Den Hertog HM, Do R, Donnelly LA, Ehret GB, 
Esko T, Feitosa MF, Ferreira T, Fischer K, Fontanillas P, Fraser RM, 
Freitag DF, Gurdasani D, Heikkila K, Hypponen E, Isaacs A, Jack-
son AU, Johansson A, Johnson T, Kaakinen M, Kettunen J, Kleber 
ME, Li X, Luan J, Lyytikainen LP, Magnusson PK, Mangino M, Mi-
hailov E, Montasser ME, Muller-Nurasyid M, Nolte IM, O’Connell JR, 
Palmer CD, Perola M, Petersen AK, Sanna S, Saxena R, Service 
SK, Shah S, Shungin D, Sidore C, Song C, Strawbridge RJ, Surak-
ka I, Tanaka T, Teslovich TM, Thorleifsson G, Van den Herik EG, 
Voight BF, Volcik KA, Waite LL, Wong A, Wu Y, Zhang W, Absher D, 
Asiki G, Barroso I, Been LF, Bolton JL, Bonnycastle LL, Brambilla 
P, Burnett MS, Cesana G, Dimitriou M, Doney AS, Doring A, Elliott 
P, Epstein SE, Eyjolfsson GI, Gigante B, Goodarzi MO, Grallert 
H, Gravito ML, Groves CJ, Hallmans G, Hartikainen AL, Hayward 
C, Hernandez D, Hicks AA, Holm H, Hung YJ, Illig T, Jones MR, 
Kaleebu P, Kastelein JJ, Khaw KT, Kim E, Klopp N, Komulainen P, 
Kumari M, Langenberg C, Lehtimaki T, Lin SY, Lindstrom J, Loos 
RJ, Mach F, McArdle WL, Meisinger C, Mitchell BD, Muller G, Naga-
raja R, Narisu N, Nieminen TV, Nsubuga RN, Olafsson I, Ong KK, 
Palotie A, Papamarkou T, Pomilla C, Pouta A, Rader DJ, Reilly MP, 
Ridker PM, Rivadeneira F, Rudan I, Ruokonen A, Samani N, Schar-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Causal Associations of Adiposity: CHD, Stroke, T2D 
ORIGINAL RESEARCH 
ARTICLE
Circulation. 2017;135:2373–2388. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.026560 
June 13, 2017
2385
nagl H, Seeley J, Silander K, Stancakova A, Stirrups K, Swift AJ, 
Tiret L, Uitterlinden AG, van Pelt LJ, Vedantam S, Wainwright N, 
Wijmenga C, Wild SH, Willemsen G, Wilsgaard T, Wilson JF, Young 
EH, Zhao JH, Adair LS, Arveiler D, Assimes TL, Bandinelli S, Ben-
nett F, Bochud M, Boehm BO, Boomsma DI, Borecki IB, Bornstein 
SR, Bovet P, Burnier M, Campbell H, Chakravarti A, Chambers JC, 
Chen YD, Collins FS, Cooper RS, Danesh J, Dedoussis G, de Faire 
U, Feranil AB, Ferrieres J, Ferrucci L, Freimer NB, Gieger C, Groop 
LC, Gudnason V, Gyllensten U, Hamsten A, Harris TB, Hingorani 
A, Hirschhorn JN, Hofman A, Hovingh GK, Hsiung CA, Humphries 
SE, Hunt SC, Hveem K, Iribarren C, Jarvelin MR, Jula A, Kahonen 
M, Kaprio J, Kesaniemi A, Kivimaki M, Kooner JS, Koudstaal PJ, 
Krauss RM, Kuh D, Kuusisto J, Kyvik KO, Laakso M, Lakka TA, Lind 
L, Lindgren CM, Martin NG, Marz W, McCarthy MI, McKenzie CA, 
Meneton P, Metspalu A, Moilanen L, Morris AD, Munroe PB, Njols-
tad I, Pedersen NL, Power C, Pramstaller PP, Price JF, Psaty BM, 
Quertermous T, Rauramaa R, Saleheen D, Salomaa V, Sanghera 
DK, Saramies J, Schwarz PE, Sheu WH, Shuldiner AR, Siegbahn 
A, Spector TD, Stefansson K, Strachan DP, Tayo BO, Tremoli E, 
Tuomilehto J, Uusitupa M, van Duijn CM, Vollenweider P, Wallentin 
L, Wareham NJ, Whitfield JB, Wolffenbuttel BH, Ordovas JM, Boer-
winkle E, Palmer CN, Thorsteinsdottir U, Chasman DI, Rotter JI, 
Franks PW, Ripatti S, Cupples LA, Sandhu MS, Rich SS, Boehnke 
M, Deloukas P, Kathiresan S, Mohlke KL, Ingelsson E, Abecasis 
GR. Discovery and refinement of loci associated with lipid levels. 
Nat Genet. 2013;45:1274–1283.
 
17. Locke AE, Kahali B, Berndt SI, Justice AE, Pers TH, Day FR, Powell 
C, Vedantam S, Buchkovich ML, Yang J, Croteau-Chonka DC, Esko 
T, Fall T, Ferreira T, Gustafsson S, Kutalik Z, Luan J, Mägi R, Ran-
dall JC, Winkler TW, Wood AR, Workalemahu T, Faul JD, Smith JA, 
Hua Zhao J, Zhao W, Chen J, Fehrmann R, Hedman ÅK, Karjalainen 
J, Schmidt EM, Absher D, Amin N, Anderson D, Beekman M, 
Bolton JL, Bragg-Gresham JL, Buyske S, Demirkan A, Deng G, 
Ehret GB, Feenstra B, Feitosa MF, Fischer K, Goel A, Gong J, 
Jackson AU, Kanoni S, Kleber ME, Kristiansson K, Lim U, Lotay V, 
Mangino M, Mateo Leach I, Medina-Gomez C, Medland SE, Nalls 
MA, Palmer CD, Pasko D, Pechlivanis S, Peters MJ, Prokopenko I, 
Shungin D, Stančáková A, Strawbridge RJ, Ju Sung Y, Tanaka T, 
Teumer A, Trompet S, van der Laan SW, van Setten J, Van Vliet-
Ostaptchouk JV, Wang Z, Yengo L, Zhang W, Isaacs A, Albrecht E, 
Ärnlöv J, Arscott GM, Attwood AP, Bandinelli S, Barrett A, Bas IN, 
Bellis C, Bennett AJ, Berne C, Blagieva R, Blüher M, Böhringer S, 
Bonnycastle LL, Böttcher Y, Boyd HA, Bruinenberg M, Caspersen 
IH, Ida Chen YD, Clarke R, Daw EW, de Craen AJ, Delgado G, 
Dimitriou M, Doney AS, Eklund N, Estrada K, Eury E, Folkersen L, 
Fraser RM, Garcia ME, Geller F, Giedraitis V, Gigante B, Go AS, 
Golay A, Goodall AH, Gordon SD, Gorski M, Grabe HJ, Grallert H, 
Grammer TB, Gräßler J, Grönberg H, Groves CJ, Gusto G, 
Haessler J, Hall P, Haller T, Hallmans G, Hartman CA, Hassinen M, 
Hayward C, Heard-Costa NL, Helmer Q, Hengstenberg C, Holmen 
O, Hottenga JJ, James AL, Jeff JM, Johansson Å, Jolley J, Julius-
dottir T, Kinnunen L, Koenig W, Koskenvuo M, Kratzer W, Laitinen 
J, Lamina C, Leander K, Lee NR, Lichtner P, Lind L, Lindström J, 
Sin Lo K, Lobbens S, Lorbeer R, Lu Y, Mach F, Magnusson PK, 
Mahajan A, McArdle WL, McLachlan S, Menni C, Merger S, Mi-
hailov E, Milani L, Moayyeri A, Monda KL, Morken MA, Mulas A, 
Müller G, Müller-Nurasyid M, Musk AW, Nagaraja R, Nöthen MM, 
Nolte IM, Pilz S, Rayner NW, Renstrom F, Rettig R, Ried JS, Ripke 
S, Robertson NR, Rose LM, Sanna S, Scharnagl H, Scholtens S, 
Schumacher FR, Scott WR, Seufferlein T, Shi J, Vernon Smith A, 
Smolonska J, Stanton AV, Steinthorsdottir V, Stirrups K, String-
ham HM, Sundström J, Swertz MA, Swift AJ, Syvänen AC, Tan ST, 
Tayo BO, Thorand B, Thorleifsson G, Tyrer JP, Uh HW, Vandenput 
L, Verhulst FC, Vermeulen SH, Verweij N, Vonk JM, Waite LL, War-
ren HR, Waterworth D, Weedon MN, Wilkens LR, Willenborg C, 
Wilsgaard T, Wojczynski MK, Wong A, Wright AF, Zhang Q, Bren-
nan EP, Choi M, Dastani Z, Drong AW, Eriksson P, Franco-Cerece-
da A, Gådin JR, Gharavi AG, Goddard ME, Handsaker RE, Huang J, 
Karpe F, Kathiresan S, Keildson S, Kiryluk K, Kubo M, Lee JY, Li-
ang L, Lifton RP, Ma B, McCarroll SA, McKnight AJ, Min JL, Moffatt 
MF, Montgomery GW, Murabito JM, Nicholson G, Nyholt DR, Oka-
da Y, Perry JR, Dorajoo R, Reinmaa E, Salem RM, Sandholm N, 
Scott RA, Stolk L, Takahashi A, Tanaka T, Van’t Hooft FM, 
Vinkhuyzen AA, Westra HJ, Zheng W, Zondervan KT, Heath AC, 
Arveiler D, Bakker SJ, Beilby J, Bergman RN, Blangero J, Bovet P, 
Campbell H, Caulfield MJ, Cesana G, Chakravarti A, Chasman DI, 
Chines PS, Collins FS, Crawford DC, Cupples LA, Cusi D, Danesh 
J, de Faire U, den Ruijter HM, Dominiczak AF, Erbel R, Erdmann J, 
Eriksson JG, Farrall M, Felix SB, Ferrannini E, Ferrières J, Ford I, 
Forouhi NG, Forrester T, Franco OH, Gansevoort RT, Gejman PV, 
Gieger C, Gottesman O, Gudnason V, Gyllensten U, Hall AS, Harris 
TB, Hattersley AT, Hicks AA, Hindorff LA, Hingorani AD, Hofman A, 
Homuth G, Hovingh GK, Humphries SE, Hunt SC, Hyppönen E, Illig 
T, Jacobs KB, Jarvelin MR, Jöckel KH, Johansen B, Jousilahti P, 
Jukema JW, Jula AM, Kaprio J, Kastelein JJ, Keinanen-Kiukaannie-
mi SM, Kiemeney LA, Knekt P, Kooner JS, Kooperberg C, Kovacs 
P, Kraja AT, Kumari M, Kuusisto J, Lakka TA, Langenberg C, Le 
Marchand L, Lehtimäki T, Lyssenko V, Männistö S, Marette A, Ma-
tise TC, McKenzie CA, McKnight B, Moll FL, Morris AD, Morris AP, 
Murray JC, Nelis M, Ohlsson C, Oldehinkel AJ, Ong KK, Madden 
PA, Pasterkamp G, Peden JF, Peters A, Postma DS, Pramstaller 
PP, Price JF, Qi L, Raitakari OT, Rankinen T, Rao DC, Rice TK, Rid-
ker PM, Rioux JD, Ritchie MD, Rudan I, Salomaa V, Samani NJ, 
Saramies J, Sarzynski MA, Schunkert H, Schwarz PE, Sever P, 
Shuldiner AR, Sinisalo J, Stolk RP, Strauch K, Tönjes A, Trégouët 
DA, Tremblay A, Tremoli E, Virtamo J, Vohl MC, Völker U, Waeber 
G, Willemsen G, Witteman JC, Zillikens MC, Adair LS, Amouyel P, 
Asselbergs FW, Assimes TL, Bochud M, Boehm BO, Boerwinkle E, 
Bornstein SR, Bottinger EP, Bouchard C, Cauchi S, Chambers JC, 
Chanock SJ, Cooper RS, de Bakker PI, Dedoussis G, Ferrucci L, 
Franks PW, Froguel P, Groop LC, Haiman CA, Hamsten A, Hui J, 
Hunter DJ, Hveem K, Kaplan RC, Kivimaki M, Kuh D, Laakso M, Liu 
Y, Martin NG, März W, Melbye M, Metspalu A, Moebus S, Munroe 
PB, Njølstad I, Oostra BA, Palmer CN, Pedersen NL, Perola M, 
Pérusse L, Peters U, Power C, Quertermous T, Rauramaa R, 
Rivadeneira F, Saaristo TE, Saleheen D, Sattar N, Schadt EE, Sch-
lessinger D, Slagboom PE, Snieder H, Spector TD, Thorsteinsdot-
tir U, Stumvoll M, Tuomilehto J, Uitterlinden AG, Uusitupa M, van 
der Harst P, Walker M, Wallaschofski H, Wareham NJ, Watkins H, 
Weir DR, Wichmann HE, Wilson JF, Zanen P, Borecki IB, Deloukas 
P, Fox CS, Heid IM, O’Connell JR, Strachan DP, Stefansson K, van 
Duijn CM, Abecasis GR, Franke L, Frayling TM, McCarthy MI, Viss-
cher PM, Scherag A, Willer CJ, Boehnke M, Mohlke KL, Lindgren 
CM, Beckmann JS, Barroso I, North KE, Ingelsson E, Hirschhorn 
JN, Loos RJ, Speliotes EK; LifeLines Cohort Study; ADIPOGen 
Consortium; AGEN-BMI Working Group; CARDIOGRAMplusC4D 
Consortium; CKDGen Consortium; GLGC; ICBP; MAGIC Investiga-
tors; MuTHER Consortium; MIGen Consortium; PAGE Consortium; 
ReproGen Consortium; GENIE Consortium; International Endo-
gene Consortium. Genetic studies of body mass index yield new 
insights for obesity biology. Nature. 2015;518:197–206. doi: 
10.1038/nature14177.
 
18. Shungin D, Winkler TW, Croteau-Chonka DC, Ferreira T, Locke AE, 
Mägi R, Strawbridge RJ, Pers TH, Fischer K, Justice AE, Workale-
mahu T, Wu JM, Buchkovich ML, Heard-Costa NL, Roman TS, 
Drong AW, Song C, Gustafsson S, Day FR, Esko T, Fall T, Kutalik 
Z, Luan J, Randall JC, Scherag A, Vedantam S, Wood AR, Chen J, 
Fehrmann R, Karjalainen J, Kahali B, Liu CT, Schmidt EM, Absher 
D, Amin N, Anderson D, Beekman M, Bragg-Gresham JL, Buyske 
S, Demirkan A, Ehret GB, Feitosa MF, Goel A, Jackson AU, John-
son T, Kleber ME, Kristiansson K, Mangino M, Mateo Leach I, Me-
dina-Gomez C, Palmer CD, Pasko D, Pechlivanis S, Peters MJ, 
Prokopenko I, Stančáková A, Ju Sung Y, Tanaka T, Teumer A, Van 
Vliet-Ostaptchouk JV, Yengo L, Zhang W, Albrecht E, Ärnlöv J, Ar-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Dale et al
June 13, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:2373–2388. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.026560
2386
scott GM, Bandinelli S, Barrett A, Bellis C, Bennett AJ, Berne C, 
Blüher M, Böhringer S, Bonnet F, Böttcher Y, Bruinenberg M, Car-
ba DB, Caspersen IH, Clarke R, Daw EW, Deelen J, Deelman E, 
Delgado G, Doney AS, Eklund N, Erdos MR, Estrada K, Eury E, 
Friedrich N, Garcia ME, Giedraitis V, Gigante B, Go AS, Golay A, 
Grallert H, Grammer TB, Gräßler J, Grewal J, Groves CJ, Haller T, 
Hallmans G, Hartman CA, Hassinen M, Hayward C, Heikkilä K, 
Herzig KH, Helmer Q, Hillege HL, Holmen O, Hunt SC, Isaacs A, 
Ittermann T, James AL, Johansson I, Juliusdottir T, Kalafati IP, Kin-
nunen L, Koenig W, Kooner IK, Kratzer W, Lamina C, Leander K, 
Lee NR, Lichtner P, Lind L, Lindström J, Lobbens S, Lorentzon M, 
Mach F, Magnusson PK, Mahajan A, McArdle WL, Menni C, Merger 
S, Mihailov E, Milani L, Mills R, Moayyeri A, Monda KL, Mooijaart 
SP, Mühleisen TW, Mulas A, Müller G, Müller-Nurasyid M, Nagaraja 
R, Nalls MA, Narisu N, Glorioso N, Nolte IM, Olden M, Rayner NW, 
Renstrom F, Ried JS, Robertson NR, Rose LM, Sanna S, Scharnagl 
H, Scholtens S, Sennblad B, Seufferlein T, Sitlani CM, Vernon 
Smith A, Stirrups K, Stringham HM, Sundström J, Swertz MA, 
Swift AJ, Syvänen AC, Tayo BO, Thorand B, Thorleifsson G, To-
maschitz A, Troffa C, van Oort FV, Verweij N, Vonk JM, Waite LL, 
Wennauer R, Wilsgaard T, Wojczynski MK, Wong A, Zhang Q, Hua 
Zhao J, Brennan EP, Choi M, Eriksson P, Folkersen L, Franco-Ce-
receda A, Gharavi AG, Hedman ÅK, Hivert MF, Huang J, Kanoni S, 
Karpe F, Keildson S, Kiryluk K, Liang L, Lifton RP, Ma B, McKnight 
AJ, McPherson R, Metspalu A, Min JL, Moffatt MF, Montgomery 
GW, Murabito JM, Nicholson G, Nyholt DR, Olsson C, Perry JR, 
Reinmaa E, Salem RM, Sandholm N, Schadt EE, Scott RA, Stolk L, 
Vallejo EE, Westra HJ, Zondervan KT, Amouyel P, Arveiler D, Bak-
ker SJ, Beilby J, Bergman RN, Blangero J, Brown MJ, Burnier M, 
Campbell H, Chakravarti A, Chines PS, Claudi-Boehm S, Collins 
FS, Crawford DC, Danesh J, de Faire U, de Geus EJ, Dörr M, Erbel 
R, Eriksson JG, Farrall M, Ferrannini E, Ferrières J, Forouhi NG, 
Forrester T, Franco OH, Gansevoort RT, Gieger C, Gudnason V, 
Haiman CA, Harris TB, Hattersley AT, Heliövaara M, Hicks AA, Hin-
gorani AD, Hoffmann W, Hofman A, Homuth G, Humphries SE, 
Hyppönen E, Illig T, Jarvelin MR, Johansen B, Jousilahti P, Jula AM, 
Kaprio J, Kee F, Keinanen-Kiukaanniemi SM, Kooner JS, Kooper-
berg C, Kovacs P, Kraja AT, Kumari M, Kuulasmaa K, Kuusisto J, 
Lakka TA, Langenberg C, Le Marchand L, Lehtimäki T, Lyssenko 
V, Männistö S, Marette A, Matise TC, McKenzie CA, McKnight B, 
Musk AW, Möhlenkamp S, Morris AD, Nelis M, Ohlsson C, Oldehin-
kel AJ, Ong KK, Palmer LJ, Penninx BW, Peters A, Pramstaller PP, 
Raitakari OT, Rankinen T, Rao DC, Rice TK, Ridker PM, Ritchie MD, 
Rudan I, Salomaa V, Samani NJ, Saramies J, Sarzynski MA, 
Schwarz PE, Shuldiner AR, Staessen JA, Steinthorsdottir V, Stolk 
RP, Strauch K, Tönjes A, Tremblay A, Tremoli E, Vohl MC, Völker 
U, Vollenweider P, Wilson JF, Witteman JC, Adair LS, Bochud M, 
Boehm BO, Bornstein SR, Bouchard C, Cauchi S, Caulfield MJ, 
Chambers JC, Chasman DI, Cooper RS, Dedoussis G, Ferrucci L, 
Froguel P, Grabe HJ, Hamsten A, Hui J, Hveem K, Jöckel KH, Kivi-
maki M, Kuh D, Laakso M, Liu Y, März W, Munroe PB, Njølstad I, 
Oostra BA, Palmer CN, Pedersen NL, Perola M, Pérusse L, Peters 
U, Power C, Quertermous T, Rauramaa R, Rivadeneira F, Saaristo 
TE, Saleheen D, Sinisalo J, Slagboom PE, Snieder H, Spector TD, 
Thorsteinsdottir U, Stumvoll M, Tuomilehto J, Uitterlinden AG, 
Uusitupa M, van der Harst P, Veronesi G, Walker M, Wareham NJ, 
Watkins H, Wichmann HE, Abecasis GR, Assimes TL, Berndt SI, 
Boehnke M, Borecki IB, Deloukas P, Franke L, Frayling TM, Groop 
LC, Hunter DJ, Kaplan RC, O’Connell JR, Qi L, Schlessinger D, 
Strachan DP, Stefansson K, van Duijn CM, Willer CJ, Visscher PM, 
Yang J, Hirschhorn JN, Zillikens MC, McCarthy MI, Speliotes EK, 
North KE, Fox CS, Barroso I, Franks PW, Ingelsson E, Heid IM, 
Loos RJ, Cupples LA, Morris AP, Lindgren CM, Mohlke KL; ADIPO-
Gen Consortium; CARDIOGRAMplusC4D Consortium; CKDGen 
Consortium; GEFOS Consortium; GENIE Consortium; GLGC; ICBP; 
International Endogene Consortium; LifeLines Cohort Study; MAG-
IC Investigators; MuTHER Consortium; PAGE Consortium; Repro-
Gen Consortium. New genetic loci link adipose and insulin biology 
to body fat distribution. Nature. 2015;518:187–196. doi: 
10.1038/nature14132.
 
19. Fall T, Hägg S, Mägi R, Ploner A, Fischer K, Horikoshi M, Sarin 
AP, Thorleifsson G, Ladenvall C, Kals M, Kuningas M, Draisma 
HH, Ried JS, van Zuydam NR, Huikari V, Mangino M, Sonestedt E, 
Benyamin B, Nelson CP, Rivera NV, Kristiansson K, Shen HY, Ha-
vulinna AS, Dehghan A, Donnelly LA, Kaakinen M, Nuotio ML, Rob-
ertson N, de Bruijn RF, Ikram MA, Amin N, Balmforth AJ, Braund 
PS, Doney AS, Döring A, Elliott P, Esko T, Franco OH, Gretarsdottir 
S, Hartikainen AL, Heikkilä K, Herzig KH, Holm H, Hottenga JJ, 
Hyppönen E, Illig T, Isaacs A, Isomaa B, Karssen LC, Kettunen 
J, Koenig W, Kuulasmaa K, Laatikainen T, Laitinen J, Lindgren C, 
Lyssenko V, Läärä E, Rayner NW, Männistö S, Pouta A, Rathmann 
W, Rivadeneira F, Ruokonen A, Savolainen MJ, Sijbrands EJ, Small 
KS, Smit JH, Steinthorsdottir V, Syvänen AC, Taanila A, Tobin MD, 
Uitterlinden AG, Willems SM, Willemsen G, Witteman J, Perola M, 
Evans A, Ferrières J, Virtamo J, Kee F, Tregouet DA, Arveiler D, 
Amouyel P, Ferrario MM, Brambilla P, Hall AS, Heath AC, Madden 
PA, Martin NG, Montgomery GW, Whitfield JB, Jula A, Knekt P, 
Oostra B, van Duijn CM, Penninx BW, Smith GD, Kaprio J, Samani 
NJ, Gieger C, Peters A, Wichmann HE, Boomsma DI, de Geus 
EJ, Tuomi T, Power C, Hammond CJ, Spector TD, Lind L, Orho-
Melander M, Palmer CN, Morris AD, Groop L, Järvelin MR, Salo-
maa V, Vartiainen E, Hofman A, Ripatti S, Metspalu A, Thorsteins-
dottir U, Stefansson K, Pedersen NL, McCarthy MI, Ingelsson E, 
Prokopenko I; European Network for Genetic and Genomic Epi-
demiology (ENGAGE) consortium. The role of adiposity in cardio-
metabolic traits: a Mendelian randomization analysis. PLoS Med. 
2013;10:e1001474. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1001474.
 
20. Nordestgaard BG, Palmer TM, Benn M, Zacho J, Tybjaerg-Hansen 
A, Davey Smith G, Timpson NJ. The effect of elevated body mass 
index on ischemic heart disease risk: causal estimates from a Men-
delian randomisation approach. PLoS Med. 2012;9:e1001212. 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1001212.
 
21. Holmes MV, Lange LA, Palmer T, Lanktree MB, North KE, Almo-
guera B, Buxbaum S, Chandrupatla HR, Elbers CC, Guo Y, Hoo-
geveen RC, Li J, Li YR, Swerdlow DI, Cushman M, Price TS, Curtis 
SP, Fornage M, Hakonarson H, Patel SR, Redline S, Siscovick DS, 
Tsai MY, Wilson JG, van der Schouw YT, FitzGerald GA, Hingo-
rani AD, Casas JP, de Bakker PI, Rich SS, Schadt EE, Asselbergs 
FW, Reiner AP, Keating BJ. Causal effects of body mass index 
on cardiometabolic traits and events: a Mendelian randomization 
analysis. Am J Hum Genet. 2014;94:198–208. doi: 10.1016/j.
ajhg.2013.12.014.
 
22. Hägg S, Fall T, Ploner A, Mägi R, Fischer K, Draisma HH, Kals M, 
de Vries PS, Dehghan A, Willems SM, Sarin AP, Kristiansson K, 
Nuotio ML, Havulinna AS, de Bruijn RF, Ikram MA, Kuningas M, 
Stricker BH, Franco OH, Benyamin B, Gieger C, Hall AS, Huikari 
V, Jula A, Järvelin MR, Kaakinen M, Kaprio J, Kobl M, Mangino 
M, Nelson CP, Palotie A, Samani NJ, Spector TD, Strachan DP, 
Tobin MD, Whitfield JB, Uitterlinden AG, Salomaa V, Syvänen AC, 
Kuulasmaa K, Magnusson PK, Esko T, Hofman A, de Geus EJ, 
Lind L, Giedraitis V, Perola M, Evans A, Ferrières J, Virtamo J, 
Kee F, Tregouet DA, Arveiler D, Amouyel P, Gianfagna F, Brambilla 
P, Ripatti S, van Duijn CM, Metspalu A, Prokopenko I, McCarthy 
MI, Pedersen NL, Ingelsson E; European Network for Genetic 
and Genomic Epidemiology Consortium. Adiposity as a cause of 
cardiovascular disease: a Mendelian randomization study. Int J 
Epidemiol. 2015;44:578–586. doi: 10.1093/ije/dyv094.
 
23. Fall T, Hägg S, Ploner A, Mägi R, Fischer K, Draisma HH, Sarin AP, 
Benyamin B, Ladenvall C, Åkerlund M, Kals M, Esko T, Nelson CP, 
Kaakinen M, Huikari V, Mangino M, Meirhaeghe A, Kristiansson K, 
Nuotio ML, Kobl M, Grallert H, Dehghan A, Kuningas M, de Vries 
PS, de Bruijn RF, Willems SM, Heikkilä K, Silventoinen K, Pietiläin-
en KH, Legry V, Giedraitis V, Goumidi L, Syvänen AC, Strauch K, 
Koenig W, Lichtner P, Herder C, Palotie A, Menni C, Uitterlinden 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Causal Associations of Adiposity: CHD, Stroke, T2D 
ORIGINAL RESEARCH 
ARTICLE
Circulation. 2017;135:2373–2388. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.026560 
June 13, 2017
2387
AG, Kuulasmaa K, Havulinna AS, Moreno LA, Gonzalez-Gross M, 
Evans A, Tregouet DA, Yarnell JW, Virtamo J, Ferrières J, Veronesi 
G, Perola M, Arveiler D, Brambilla P, Lind L, Kaprio J, Hofman 
A, Stricker BH, van Duijn CM, Ikram MA, Franco OH, Cottel D, 
Dallongeville J, Hall AS, Jula A, Tobin MD, Penninx BW, Peters A, 
Gieger C, Samani NJ, Montgomery GW, Whitfield JB, Martin NG, 
Groop L, Spector TD, Magnusson PK, Amouyel P, Boomsma DI, 
Nilsson PM, Järvelin MR, Lyssenko V, Metspalu A, Strachan DP, 
Salomaa V, Ripatti S, Pedersen NL, Prokopenko I, McCarthy MI, 
Ingelsson E; ENGAGE Consortium. Age- and sex-specific causal 
effects of adiposity on cardiovascular risk factors. Diabetes. 
2015;64:1841–1852. doi: 10.2337/db14-0988.
 
24. Morris AP, Voight BF, Teslovich TM, Ferreira T, Segrè AV, Stein-
thorsdottir V, Strawbridge RJ, Khan H, Grallert H, Mahajan A, Pro-
kopenko I, Kang HM, Dina C, Esko T, Fraser RM, Kanoni S, Kumar 
A, Lagou V, Langenberg C, Luan J, Lindgren CM, Müller-Nurasyid 
M, Pechlivanis S, Rayner NW, Scott LJ, Wiltshire S, Yengo L, Kin-
nunen L, Rossin EJ, Raychaudhuri S, Johnson AD, Dimas AS, 
Loos RJ, Vedantam S, Chen H, Florez JC, Fox C, Liu CT, Rybin D, 
Couper DJ, Kao WH, Li M, Cornelis MC, Kraft P, Sun Q, van Dam 
RM, Stringham HM, Chines PS, Fischer K, Fontanillas P, Holmen 
OL, Hunt SE, Jackson AU, Kong A, Lawrence R, Meyer J, Perry JR, 
Platou CG, Potter S, Rehnberg E, Robertson N, Sivapalaratnam 
S, Stančáková A, Stirrups K, Thorleifsson G, Tikkanen E, Wood 
AR, Almgren P, Atalay M, Benediktsson R, Bonnycastle LL, Burtt 
N, Carey J, Charpentier G, Crenshaw AT, Doney AS, Dorkhan M, 
Edkins S, Emilsson V, Eury E, Forsen T, Gertow K, Gigante B, 
Grant GB, Groves CJ, Guiducci C, Herder C, Hreidarsson AB, Hui 
J, James A, Jonsson A, Rathmann W, Klopp N, Kravic J, Krjutškov 
K, Langford C, Leander K, Lindholm E, Lobbens S, Männistö S, 
Mirza G, Mühleisen TW, Musk B, Parkin M, Rallidis L, Saramies J, 
Sennblad B, Shah S, Sigurðsson G, Silveira A, Steinbach G, Tho-
rand B, Trakalo J, Veglia F, Wennauer R, Winckler W, Zabaneh D, 
Campbell H, van Duijn C, Uitterlinden AG, Hofman A, Sijbrands E, 
Abecasis GR, Owen KR, Zeggini E, Trip MD, Forouhi NG, Syvänen 
AC, Eriksson JG, Peltonen L, Nöthen MM, Balkau B, Palmer CN, 
Lyssenko V, Tuomi T, Isomaa B, Hunter DJ, Qi L, Shuldiner AR, 
Roden M, Barroso I, Wilsgaard T, Beilby J, Hovingh K, Price JF, 
Wilson JF, Rauramaa R, Lakka TA, Lind L, Dedoussis G, Njølstad 
I, Pedersen NL, Khaw KT, Wareham NJ, Keinanen-Kiukaanniemi 
SM, Saaristo TE, Korpi-Hyövälti E, Saltevo J, Laakso M, Kuusisto 
J, Metspalu A, Collins FS, Mohlke KL, Bergman RN, Tuomilehto J, 
Boehm BO, Gieger C, Hveem K, Cauchi S, Froguel P, Baldassarre 
D, Tremoli E, Humphries SE, Saleheen D, Danesh J, Ingelsson E, 
Ripatti S, Salomaa V, Erbel R, Jöckel KH, Moebus S, Peters A, Illig 
T, de Faire U, Hamsten A, Morris AD, Donnelly PJ, Frayling TM, 
Hattersley AT, Boerwinkle E, Melander O, Kathiresan S, Nilsson 
PM, Deloukas P, Thorsteinsdottir U, Groop LC, Stefansson K, Hu 
F, Pankow JS, Dupuis J, Meigs JB, Altshuler D, Boehnke M, McCar-
thy MI; Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium; Meta-Analyses 
of Glucose and Insulin-related traits Consortium (MAGIC) Investiga-
tors; Genetic Investigation of ANthropometric Traits (GIANT) Con-
sortium; Asian Genetic Epidemiology Network–Type 2 Diabetes 
(AGEN-T2D) Consortium; South Asian Type 2 Diabetes (SAT2D) 
Consortium; DIAbetes Genetics Replication And Meta-analysis (DI-
AGRAM) Consortium. Large-scale association analysis provides in-
sights into the genetic architecture and pathophysiology of type 2 
diabetes. Nat Genet. 2012;44:981–990. doi: 10.1038/ng.2383.
 
25. Voight BF, Kang HM, Ding J, Palmer CD, Sidore C, Chines PS, 
Burtt NP, Fuchsberger C, Li Y, Erdmann J, Frayling TM, Heid IM, 
Jackson AU, Johnson T, Kilpeläinen TO, Lindgren CM, Morris AP, 
Prokopenko I, Randall JC, Saxena R, Soranzo N, Speliotes EK, 
Teslovich TM, Wheeler E, Maguire J, Parkin M, Potter S, Rayner 
NW, Robertson N, Stirrups K, Winckler W, Sanna S, Mulas A, Nag-
araja R, Cucca F, Barroso I, Deloukas P, Loos RJ, Kathiresan S, 
Munroe PB, Newton-Cheh C, Pfeufer A, Samani NJ, Schunkert H, 
Hirschhorn JN, Altshuler D, McCarthy MI, Abecasis GR, Boehnke 
M. The metabochip, a custom genotyping array for genetic stud-
ies of metabolic, cardiovascular, and anthropometric traits. PLoS 
Genet. 2012;8:e1002793. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002793.
 
26. Higgins JP, Thompson SG, Deeks JJ, Altman DG. Measuring in-
consistency in meta-analyses. BMJ. 2003;327:557–560. doi: 
10.1136/bmj.327.7414.557.
 
27. mrrobust [computer program]. https://github.com/remlapmot/
mrrobust/blob/master/mrrobust.pkg. 2016. Accessed Novem-
ber 20, 2016.
 
28. StataCorp [computer program]. College Station, TX.
 
29. gtx [computer program]. The Comprehensive R Archive Network; 
2013.
 
30. R: A language and environment for statistical computing [com-
puter program]. Vienna, Austria; 2013.
 
31. Burgess S, Dudbridge F, Thompson SG. Combining information on 
multiple instrumental variables in Mendelian randomization: com-
parison of allele score and summarized data methods. Stat Med. 
2016;35:1880–1906. doi: 10.1002/sim.6835.
 
32. mRnd: Power calculations for Mendelian Randomization. http://
cnsgenomics.com/shiny/mRnd/. Accessed November 20, 2016.
 
33. Brion MJ, Shakhbazov K, Visscher PM. Calculating statisti-
cal power in Mendelian randomization studies. Int J Epidemiol. 
2013;42:1497–1501. doi: 10.1093/ije/dyt179.
 
34. Whitlock G, Lewington S, Sherliker P, Clarke R, Emberson J, Halsey 
J, Qizilbash N, Collins R, Peto R; Prospective Studies Collabora-
tion. Body-mass index and cause-specific mortality in 900 000 
adults: collaborative analyses of 57 prospective studies. Lancet. 
2009;373:1083–1096. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(09)60318-4.
 
35. Emdin CA, Khera AV, Natarajan P, Klarin D, Zekavat SM, Hsiao AJ, 
Kathiresan S. Genetic association of waist-to-hip ratio with cardio-
metabolic traits, type 2 diabetes, and coronary heart disease. 
JAMA. 2017;317:626–634. doi: 10.1001/jama.2016.21042.
 
36. Würtz P, Wang Q, Kangas AJ, Richmond RC, Skarp J, Tiainen M, 
Tynkkynen T, Soininen P, Havulinna AS, Kaakinen M, Viikari JS, 
Savolainen MJ, Kähönen M, Lehtimäki T, Männistö S, Blankenberg 
S, Zeller T, Laitinen J, Pouta A, Mäntyselkä P, Vanhala M, Elliott 
P, Pietiläinen KH, Ripatti S, Salomaa V, Raitakari OT, Järvelin MR, 
Smith GD, Ala-Korpela M. Metabolic signatures of adiposity in 
young adults: Mendelian randomization analysis and effects of 
weight change. PLoS Med. 2014;11:e1001765. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pmed.1001765.
 
37. Truong QA, Ptaszek LM, Charipar EM, Taylor C, Fontes JD, Kriegel 
M, Irlbeck T, Toepker M, Schlett CL, Bamberg F, Blankstein R, 
Brady TJ, Nagurney JT, Hoffmann U. Performance of electrocar-
diographic criteria for left ventricular hypertrophy as compared 
with cardiac computed tomography: from the Rule Out Myocardial 
Infarction Using Computer Assisted Tomography trial. J Hypertens. 
2010;28:1959–1967. doi: 10.1097/HJH.0b013e32833b49cb.
 
38. Pischon T, Boeing H, Hoffmann K, Bergmann M, Schulze MB, 
Overvad K, van der Schouw YT, Spencer E, Moons KG, Tjønneland 
A, Halkjaer J, Jensen MK, Stegger J, Clavel-Chapelon F, Boutron-
Ruault MC, Chajes V, Linseisen J, Kaaks R, Trichopoulou A, Tricho-
poulos D, Bamia C, Sieri S, Palli D, Tumino R, Vineis P, Panico S, 
Peeters PH, May AM, Bueno-de-Mesquita HB, van Duijnhoven FJ, 
Hallmans G, Weinehall L, Manjer J, Hedblad B, Lund E, Agudo A, 
Arriola L, Barricarte A, Navarro C, Martinez C, Quirós JR, Key T, 
Bingham S, Khaw KT, Boffetta P, Jenab M, Ferrari P, Riboli E. Gen-
eral and abdominal adiposity and risk of death in Europe. N Engl 
J Med. 2008;359:2105–2120. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0801891.
 
39. Després JP. Body fat distribution and risk of cardiovascular 
disease: an update. Circulation. 2012;126:1301–1313. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.067264.
 
40. Ng M, Fleming T, Robinson M, Thomson B, Graetz N, Margono C, 
Mullany EC, Biryukov S, Abbafati C, Abera SF, Abraham JP, Abu-
Rmeileh NM, Achoki T, AlBuhairan FS, Alemu ZA, Alfonso R, Ali MK, 
Ali R, Guzman NA, Ammar W, Anwari P, Banerjee A, Barquera S, 
Basu S, Bennett DA, Bhutta Z, Blore J, Cabral N, Nonato IC, Chang 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Dale et al
June 13, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:2373–2388. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.026560
2388
JC, Chowdhury R, Courville KJ, Criqui MH, Cundiff DK, Dabhadkar 
KC, Dandona L, Davis A, Dayama A, Dharmaratne SD, Ding EL, 
Durrani AM, Esteghamati A, Farzadfar F, Fay DF, Feigin VL, Flax-
man A, Forouzanfar MH, Goto A, Green MA, Gupta R, Hafezi-Nejad 
N, Hankey GJ, Harewood HC, Havmoeller R, Hay S, Hernandez L, 
Husseini A, Idrisov BT, Ikeda N, Islami F, Jahangir E, Jassal SK, 
Jee SH, Jeffreys M, Jonas JB, Kabagambe EK, Khalifa SE, Kengne 
AP, Khader YS, Khang YH, Kim D, Kimokoti RW, Kinge JM, Kokubo 
Y, Kosen S, Kwan G, Lai T, Leinsalu M, Li Y, Liang X, Liu S, Logro-
scino G, Lotufo PA, Lu Y, Ma J, Mainoo NK, Mensah GA, Merriman 
TR, Mokdad AH, Moschandreas J, Naghavi M, Naheed A, Nand 
D, Narayan KM, Nelson EL, Neuhouser ML, Nisar MI, Ohkubo T, 
Oti SO, Pedroza A, Prabhakaran D, Roy N, Sampson U, Seo H, 
Sepanlou SG, Shibuya K, Shiri R, Shiue I, Singh GM, Singh JA, 
Skirbekk V, Stapelberg NJ, Sturua L, Sykes BL, Tobias M, Tran BX, 
Trasande L, Toyoshima H, van de Vijver S, Vasankari TJ, Veerman 
JL, Velasquez-Melendez G, Vlassov VV, Vollset SE, Vos T, Wang C, 
Wang X, Weiderpass E, Werdecker A, Wright JL, Yang YC, Yatsuya 
H, Yoon J, Yoon SJ, Zhao Y, Zhou M, Zhu S, Lopez AD, Murray CJ, 
Gakidou E. Global, regional, and national prevalence of overweight 
and obesity in children and adults during 1980-2013: a systemat-
ic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013. Lancet. 
2014;384:766–781. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)60460-8.
 
41. Trichopoulou A, Gnardellis C, Lagiou A, Benetou V, Naska A, 
Trichopoulos D. Physical activity and energy intake selectively pre-
dict the waist-to-hip ratio in men but not in women. Am J Clin Nutr. 
2001;74:574–578.
 
42. Aschard H, Vilhjálmsson BJ, Joshi AD, Price AL, Kraft P. Adjusting 
for heritable covariates can bias effect estimates in genome-wide 
association studies. Am J Hum Genet. 2015;96:329–339. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.12.021.
 
43. Silverwood RJ, Holmes MV, Dale CE, Lawlor DA, Whittaker JC, 
Smith GD, Leon DA, Palmer T, Keating BJ, Zuccolo L, Casas JP, 
Dudbridge F; Alcohol-ADH1B Consortium. Testing for non-linear 
causal effects using a binary genotype in a Mendelian randomiza-
tion study: application to alcohol and cardiovascular traits. Int J 
Epidemiol. 2014;43:1781–1790. doi: 10.1093/ije/dyu187.
 
44. Aune D, Sen A, Prasad M, Norat T, Janszky I, Tonstad S, Romund-
stad P, Vatten LJ. BMI and all cause mortality: systematic review 
and non-linear dose-response meta-analysis of 230 cohort studies 
with 3.74 million deaths among 30.3 million participants. BMJ. 
2016;353:i2156.
 
45. Afzal S, Tybjærg-Hansen A, Jensen GB, Nordestgaard BG. Change 
in body mass index associated with lowest mortality in Denmark, 
1976-2013. JAMA. 2016;315:1989–1996. doi: 10.1001/
jama.2016.4666.
 
46. Daniel RM, De Stavola BL, Cousens SN, Vansteelandt S. Caus-
al mediation analysis with multiple mediators. Biometrics. 
2015;71:1–14. doi: 10.1111/biom.12248.
 
47. Burgess S, Daniel RM, Butterworth AS, Thompson SG; EPIC-Inter-
Act Consortium. Network Mendelian randomization: using genetic 
variants as instrumental variables to investigate mediation in caus-
al pathways. Int J Epidemiol. 2015;44:484–495. doi: 10.1093/ije/
dyu176.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
