 3-7-07 
Page 1 of 3 
 
 
 
 
American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP) 
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) 
American College of Physicians (ACP) 
American Osteopathic Association (AOA) 
 
Joint Principles of the Patient-Centered Medical Home 
March 2007 
 
Introduction 
 
The Patient-Centered Medical Home (PC-MH) is an approach to providing 
comprehensive primary care for children, youth and adults. The PC-MH is a health 
care setting that facilitates partnerships between individual patients, and their 
personal physicians, and when appropriate, the patient’s family. 
 
The AAP, AAFP, ACP, and AOA, representing approximately 333,000 physicians, 
have developed the following joint principles to describe the characteristics of the 
PC-MH. 
 
Principles 
 
Personal physician - each patient has an ongoing relationship with a personal 
physician trained to provide first contact, continuous and comprehensive care. 
 
Physician directed medical practice – the personal physician leads a team of 
individuals at the practice level who collectively take responsibility for the 
ongoing care of patients. 
 
Whole person orientation – the personal physician is responsible for providing 
for all the patient’s health care needs or taking responsibility for appropriately 
arranging care with other qualified professionals. This includes care for all stages 
of life; acute care; chronic care; preventive services; and end of life care. 
 
Care is coordinated and/or integrated across all elements of the complex health 
care system (e.g., subspecialty care, hospitals, home health agencies, nursing 
homes) and the patient’s community (e.g., family, public and private community- 
based services). Care is facilitated by registries, information technology, health 
information exchange and other means to assure that patients get the indicated 
care when and where they need and want it in a culturally and linguistically 
appropriate manner. 
 
Quality and safety are hallmarks of the medical home: 
 
 Practices advocate for their patients to support the attainment of 
optimal, patient-centered outcomes that are defined by a care 
 3-7-07 
Page 2 of 3 
 
 
 
 
planning process driven by a compassionate, robust partnership 
between physicians, patients, and the patient’s family. 
 Evidence-based medicine and clinical decision-support tools guide 
decision making. 
 Physicians in the practice accept accountability for continuous 
quality improvement through voluntary engagement in 
performance measurement and improvement. 
 Patients actively participate in decision-making and feedback is 
sought to ensure patients’ expectations are being met. 
 Information technology is utilized appropriately to support optimal 
patient care, performance measurement, patient education, and 
enhanced communication. 
 Practices go through a voluntary recognition process by an 
appropriate non-governmental entity to demonstrate that they have 
the capabilities to provide patient centered services consistent with 
the medical home model. 
 Patients and families participate in quality improvement activities 
at the practice level. 
 
Enhanced access to care is available through systems such as open scheduling, 
expanded hours and new options for communication between patients, their 
personal physician, and practice staff. 
 
Payment appropriately recognizes the added value provided to patients who have 
a patient-centered medical home. The payment structure should be based on the 
following framework: 
 
 It should reflect the value of physician and non-physician staff 
patient-centered care management work that falls outside of the 
face-to-face visit. 
 It should pay for services associated with coordination of care both 
within a given practice and between consultants, ancillary 
providers, and community resources. 
 It should support adoption and use of health information 
technology for quality improvement. 
 It should support provision of enhanced communication access 
such as secure e-mail and telephone consultation. 
 It should recognize the value of physician work associated with 
remote monitoring of clinical data using technology. 
 It should allow for separate fee-for-service payments for face-to- 
face visits. (Payments for care management services that fall 
outside of the face-to-face visit, as described above, should not 
result in a reduction in the payments for face-to-face visits). 
 It should recognize case mix differences in the patient population 
being treated within the practice. 
 3-7-07 
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
 
 
 It should allow physicians to share in savings from reduced 
hospitalizations associated with physician-guided care 
management in the office setting. 
 It should allow for additional payments for achieving measurable 
and continuous quality improvements. 
 
Background of the Medical Home Concept 
The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) introduced the medical home concept in 
1967, initially referring to a central location for archiving a child’s medical record. In its 
2002 policy statement, the AAP expanded the medical home concept to include these 
operational characteristics: accessible, continuous, comprehensive, family-centered, 
coordinated, compassionate, and culturally effective care. 
 
The American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP) and the American College of 
Physicians (ACP) have since developed their own models for improving patient care 
called the  “medical home” (AAFP, 2004) or “advanced medical home” (ACP, 2006). 
 
