 Frequency of CNKSR2 mutation in the X-linked
epilepsy-aphasia spectrum
*John A. Damiano, *Rosemary Burgess
, †‡Sara Kivity, ‡Tally Lerman-Sagie, §Zaid Afawi,
*¶Ingrid E. Scheffer, *Samuel F. Berkovic, and *Michael S. Hildebrand
Epilepsia, **(*):1–4, 2017
doi: 10.1111/epi.13666
John Damiano is a
senior research
assistant with more
than 8 years
experience studying
the molecular genetics
of epilepsy.
SUMMARY
Synaptic proteins are critical to neuronal function in the brain, and their deficiency can
lead to seizures and cognitive impairments. CNKSR2 (connector enhancer of KSR2) is a
synaptic protein involved in Ras signaling-mediated neuronal proliferation, migration
and differentiation. Mutations in the X-linked gene CNKSR2 have been described in
patients with seizures and neurodevelopmental deficits, especially those affecting lan-
guage. In this study, we sequenced 112 patients with phenotypes within the epilepsy-
aphasia spectrum (EAS) to determine the frequency of CNKSR2 mutation within this
complex set of disorders. We detected a novel nonsense mutation (c.2314 C>T;
p.Arg712*) in one Ashkenazi Jewish family, the male proband of which had a severe
epileptic encephalopathy with continuous spike-waves in sleep (ECSWS). His affected
brother also had ECSWS with better outcome, whereas the sister had childhood epi-
lepsy with centrotemporal spikes. This mutation segregated in the three affected siblings
in an X-linked manner, inherited from their mother who had febrile seizures. Although
the frequency of point mutation is low, CNKSR2 sequencing should be considered in fami-
lies with suspected X-linked EAS because of the specific genetic counseling implications.
KEY WORDS: CNKSR2, Epilepsy-aphasia spectrum, Developmental delay, Speech
delay, Sanger sequencing.
The Epilepsy-aphasia spectrum (EAS) is a spectrum of
disorders
from
severe
epileptic
encephalopathy
with
continuous spike-waves in sleep (ECSWS) and Landau-
Kleffner syndrome (LKS) to the mild condition of child-
hood epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes. Some of the dis-
orders show a male bias, and there is evidence to suggest a
genetic cause.1 The N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) subunit
encoded by GRIN2A was the first gene associated with
EAS.2–5 Recently, the Ras-signaling protein encoded by
CNKSR2 (connector enhancer of KSR2),6–10 was shown to
cause phenotypes within the EAS spectrum; four of five
unrelated probands had CNKSR2 deletions discovered using
chromosomal microarrays, suggesting loss of the protein at
brain synapses to be pathogenic.6,7,10 However, no study
has systematically determined the contribution of CNKSR2
point mutations to the EAS.
Materials and Methods
Subjects
We searched for DNA variation in CNKSR2 among our
cohort of 112 EAS probands (62 male, 50 female) where
there was no evidence of male-to-male transmission. There
were 50 familial cases and 62 sporadics. The breakdown of
phenotypes of this cohort is shown in Table 1. Genomic
DNA was extracted from venous blood with standard meth-
ods.11 A subset of the cohort has received testing for other
genes associated with aphasia such as GRIN2A, for which
Accepted December 19, 2016.
*Department of Medicine, Epilepsy Research Centre, Austin Health,
University of Melbourne, Heidelberg, Victoria, Australia; †Department of
Pediatric Neurology and Epilepsy Center, Schneider Children’s Medical
Center of Israel, Petah Tiqva, Israel; ‡Pediatric Neurology Unit, Epilepsy
Clinic, Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel; §Sackler School of
Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, Israel; and ¶Department of
Paediatrics, Royal Children’s Hospital, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Victoria, Australia
Address correspondence to Michael S. Hildebrand, Epilepsy Research
Centre, Level 1, Melbourne Brain Centre, 245 Burgundy St., Heidelberg,
Vic. 3084, Australia. E-mail: michael.hildebrand@unimelb.edu.au
Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
© 2017 International League Against Epilepsy
1
BRIEF COMMUNICATION
 they were negative. No individuals in the reported pedigree
have had other genes sequenced using either a gene panel or
by whole exome analysis. The Human Research Ethics
Committee (project No. H2007/02961) of Austin Health,
Melbourne, Australia, and the Wolfson Medical Centre
Institutional Review Board approved this study. Written
informed consent was obtained from all subjects or their
parents or legal guardians.
PCR and sequencing
Coding exons and splice sites of the CNKSR2 gene were
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplified using specific
primers designed to all isoforms using reference human
gene transcripts (NCBI Gene; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/). Primer sequences are available upon request. Ampli-
fication reactions were cycled using a standard protocol on
a Veriti Thermal Cycler (Applied Biosystems, Carlsbad,
CA, U.S.A.). Bidirectional sequencing of all exons and
flanking intronic regions including splice sites was com-
pleted with a BigDye v3.1 Terminator Cycle Sequencing
Kit (Applied Biosystems), according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Sequencing products were resolved using a
3730xl DNA Analyzer (Applied Biosystems). All sequenc-
ing chromatograms were compared to published comple-
mentary DNA (cDNA) sequence; nucleotide changes were
detected using Codon Code Aligner (CodonCode Corpora-
tion, Dedham, MA, U.S.A.).
Results
Genetic analysis
We detected a novel nonsense mutation (c.2314 C>T;
p.Arg712*) in the proband from one Ashkenazi Jewish fam-
ily (Fig. 1) that is not present in available public databases
including the Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC),
Exome Variant Server or 1000 Genomes. Although a vari-
ant (p.Arg712Gln) is reported on ExAC to affect the same
residue, this variant is not relevant because it is a missense
change present in control individuals, whereas we have
found a novel nonsense mutation at the same residue. Segre-
gation analysis revealed that the mutation was present in all
three affected siblings and was inherited in an X-linked
manner from their mother who had febrile seizures. Samples
from the mother’s siblings, including the affected uncle,
were unavailable for genetic analysis.
The p.Arg712* mutation is located toward the C-terminal
of the protein and is predicted to result in a truncated protein
lacking the last 322 of 1,034 residues. This portion of the
protein includes a coiled-coil functional domain (residues
875–904; http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/Q8WXI2). The
p.Arg712 residue is also located only six residues away
from a known short proline-rich motif (PPPP P2; residues
Table 1. Phenotypic breakdown of probands
Epilepsy-aphasia spectrum (EAS) diagnosis
Probands
Childhood epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes
82
Intermediate epilepsy-aphasia disorder (IEAD)
12
Landau-Kleffner syndrome (LKS)
5
Epileptic encephalopathy with continuous
spike-waves in sleep (ECSWS)
13
Total
112
Figure 1.
Ashkenazi Jewish family segregating the X-linked CNKSR2 mutation. (A) Two of the three affected siblings are males who are hemizygous
for the mutation; the female sibling is heterozygous. The mutation was maternally transmitted; DNA from the affected uncle was not avail-
able. C, wild-type allele; T, c.2314 C>T (p.Arg712*) mutation. (B) Wild-type sequence in unaffected father (top). Heterozygous mutation
in mother with febrile seizures (middle). Hemizygous mutation in male sibling with EAS (bottom).
Epilepsia
ILAE
Epilepsia, **(*):1–4, 2017
doi: 10.1111/epi.13666
2
J. A. Damiano et al.
 703–706) that has been shown to be essential for binding of
CNKSR2 to WW domains of Vilse,12 a protein previously
reported to interact with the axon guidance receptor
Robo1.13 Disruption of this interaction may adversely affect
synaptic activity. The other possibility is complete loss of
the protein due to nonsense-mediated decay (NMD). We
were unable to test for NMD because we could not obtain
fresh blood samples from affected family members. All
reported deletion or frameshift CNKSR2 mutations in EAS
patients either include or are predicted to lead to loss of the
C-terminal portion of the protein where our nonsense muta-
tion is located.6–10
Phenotypic analysis
In the proband, seizures began at 3.5 years with develop-
mental and language delay occurring prior to seizure onset.
Sleep–electroencephalography (EEG) demonstrated contin-
uous bilateral centrotemporal or frontal spike and wave
activity. Comorbidities included attention deficits and
hyperactivity. At 4 years, the probands behavior, cognition,
and language deteriorated, and he became aphasic. At
12 years he was institutionalized with neuropsychiatric
deterioration and remains institutionalized at age 18 years.
The proband’s brother also had seizures onset at 3.5 years
with developmental and language delay prior to seizure
onset, continuous bilateral centrotemporal or frontal spike
and wave activity on sleep-EEG (Fig. 2), and attention defi-
cit and hyperactivity. At age 12 years he was less severely
affected than the proband, as indicated by useful language
and attendance at regular school. However, he requires
ongoing antiepileptic medication.
Their sister had mild motor and language delay and seizure
onset at 6 years; left centrotemporal spikes were recorded on
EEG, consistent with a diagnosis of childhood epilepsy with
centrotemporal spikes. At age 16 years, she was seizure free
without medication and had mild learning difficulties.
The sibling’s mother had febrile seizures without lan-
guage or intellectual impairment. Their maternal uncle
(DNA unavailable) had refractory seizures from 3.5 years
of age; he had ECSWS recorded on sleep-EEG and had a
Figure 2.
Centrotemporal or frontal spike and wave activity on sleep-EEG. EEG from the proband’s brother at 10.5 years showing continuous
right-sided focal epileptiform activity, maximum in the temporal region with some involvement on the left.
Epilepsia
ILAE
Epilepsia, **(*):1–4, 2017
doi: 10.1111/epi.13666
3
Frequency of CNKSR2 Mutation
 language and motor delay. His seizures responded to the
ketogenic diet, and by 5 years of age his EEG had normal-
ized and the diet was discontinued. He had rare seizures over
a few years, and by 10 years he had ceased all medication.
He has autism and mild-to-moderate intellectual disability.
Discussion
We confirm recent studies6–10 reporting CNKSR2 muta-
tions in patients with the EAS spectrum and show that the
frequency is low (1/112). Although large deletions have
been reported,6,7,11 they are not likely to be present in our
screening cohort, since we amplified CNKSR2 exonic DNA
from all probands by PCR.
In our family, all affected males had onset of seizures at
3.5 years comparable to 2 or 2.5 years for four reported
male cases but older than 8 days or neonatal onset in an
additional two male cases.6,10 Frequent or continuous spike
and wave patterns on EEG has been documented in six
reported cases, consistent with the three affected males from
our family.6,9,10 Most of reported patients, including our
family, have severe speech delay, often commencing prior
to the time of seizure onset, which may continue and result
in lifelong language loss.10 Developmental and psychomo-
tor delay are common features (again prior to seizures
onset), as is intellectual disability.6,8 Finally, behavioral dis-
turbances including severe attention deficit and hyperactiv-
ity have been frequently observed here and elsewhere.10
The previously reported cases of CNKSR2 deficiency
causing seizures have all been male, with their genotype
being inherited from unaffected carrier mothers. Herein we
report the first female with EAS and a CNKSR2 mutation.
The sister, in our family, has a less severe phenotype than
her two brothers have; this could be because the females are
heterozygous and likely subject to X-inactivation, although
the latter was not measured. Of interest, the mother, who
also carries the point mutation, had only febrile seizures.
Both febrile seizures and benign childhood epilepsy with
centrotemporal spikes (BECTS) are common seizure disor-
ders, with the former affecting ~ 3% of children in the
Western European population, whereas the latter accounts
for ~ 10% of focal epilepsies in children. ECSWS is much
rarer, although it has been associated with CNKSR2 muta-
tion in several unrelated cases.6–10 This is the first report of
BECTS and febrile seizures in female patients carrying a
CNKSR2 mutation.
Our data suggest in cases with suspected X-linked EAS—
specifically in males with ECSWS, developmental delay,
affected speech, and early onset seizures—that CNKSR2
gene sequencing should be performed in addition to stan-
dard clinical microarrays for detection of large deletions at
the CNKSR2 locus. Examinations of regulatory regions out-
side the coding and splice-site regions interrogated here are
an area for future research. Finding a pathogenic mutation
in CNKSR2 will help clinicians with diagnosis and genetic
counseling, with implications for expressivity of both sev-
ere (e.g., ECSWS), and milder (e.g. BECTS and FS), pheno-
types, depending on whether the mutation is inherited by
male or female offspring.
Acknowledgments
This study was supported by National Health and Medical Research
Council Program Grant (628952) to S.F.B. and I.E.S., a Practitioner Fel-
lowship (1006110) to I.E.S., and an R.D. Wright Career Development Fel-
lowship (1063799) to M.S.H. We confirm that we have read the Journal’s
position on issues involved in ethical publication and affirm that this report
is consistent with those guidelines.
Conflict of Interest
Authors report grant funds that contributed to this project as outlined in
the Acknowledgements section. S.F.B. discloses payments from UCB
Pharma, Novartis Pharmaceuticals, Sanofi-Aventis, and Jansen Cilag for
lectures and educational presentations, and a patent for SCN1A testing held
by Bionomics Inc and licensed to various diagnostic companies. I.E.S. dis-
closes payments from UCB Pharma, GlaxoSmithKline, Eisai, Athena Diag-
nostics, and Transgenomics for lectures and educational presentations, and
a patent for SCN1A testing held by Bionomics Inc and licensed to various
diagnostic companies.
References
1. Tsai MH, Vears DF, Turner SJ, et al. Clinical genetic study of the epi-
lepsy-aphasia spectrum. Epilepsia 2013;54:280–287.
2. Carvill GL, Regan BM, Yendle SC, et al. GRIN2A mutations cause
epilepsy-aphasia spectrum disorders. Nat Genet 2013;45:1073–1076.
3. Endele S, Rosenberger G, Geider K, et al. Mutations in GRIN2A and
GRIN2B encoding regulatory subunits of NMDA receptors cause vari-
able neurodevelopmental phenotypes. Nat Genet 2010;42:1021–1026.
4. Lemke JR, Lal D, Reinthaler EM, et al. Mutations in GRIN2A cause
idiopathic
focal
epilepsy
with
rolandic
spikes.
Nat
Genet
2013;45:1067–1072.
5. Lesca G, Rudolf G, Bruneau N, et al. GRIN2A mutations in acquired
epileptic aphasia and related childhood focal epilepsies and encephalo-
pathies
with
speech
and
language
dysfunction.
Nat
Genet
2013;45:1061–1066.
6. Aypar U, Wirrell EC, Hoppman NL. CNKSR2 deletions: a novel cause
of X-linked intellectual disability and seizures. Am J Med Genet A
2015;167:1668–1670.
7. Houge G, Rasmussen IH, Hovland R. Loss-of-function CNKSR2 muta-
tion is a likely cause of non-syndromic X-linked intellectual disability.
Mol Syndromol 2012;2:60–63.
8. Hu H, Haas SA, Chelly J, et al. X-exome sequencing of 405 unresolved
families identifies seven novel intellectual disability genes. Mol Psy-
chiatry 2016;21:133–148.
9. Piton A, Redin C, Mandel JL. XLID-causing mutations and associated
genes challenged in light of data from large-scale human exome
sequencing. Am J Hum Genet 2013;93:368–383.
10. Vaags AK, Bowdin S, Smith ML, et al. Absent CNKSR2 causes sei-
zures and intellectual, attention, and language deficits. Ann Neurol
2014;76:758–764.
11. Grimberg J, Nawoschik S, Belluscio L, et al. A simple and efficient
non-organic procedure for the isolation of genomic DNA from blood.
Nucleic Acids Res 1989;17:8390.
12. Lim J, Ritt DA, Zhou M, et al. The CNK2 scaffold interacts with vilse
and modulates Rac cycling during spine morphogenesis in hippocam-
pal neurons. Curr Biol 2014;24:786–792.
13. Lundstrom A, Gallio M, Englund C, et al. Vilse, a conserved Rac/
Cdc42 GAP mediating Robo repulsion in tracheal cells and axons.
Genes Dev 2004;18:2161–2171.
Epilepsia, **(*):1–4, 2017
doi: 10.1111/epi.13666
4
J. A. Damiano et al.
