 MDMA-assisted therapy: A new treatment model for social anxiety in
autistic adults☆
Alicia L. Danforth a,⁎, Christopher M. Struble b, Berra Yazar-Klosinski c, Charles S. Grob d
a Los Angeles Biomedical Research Institute, Torrance, CA, United States
b Department of Psychiatry, Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, CA, United States
c Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies, Santa Cruz, CA, United States
d Department of Psychiatry, Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Los Angeles Biomedical Research Institute, Torrance, CA, United States
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Available online 25 March 2015
Keywords:
Autism
Ecstasy
MDMA
Psychedelics
Psychotherapy
Social anxiety
The first study of 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA)-assisted therapy for the treatment of social
anxiety in autistic adults commenced in the spring of 2014. The search for psychotherapeutic options for autistic
individuals is imperative considering the lack of effective conventional treatments for mental health diagnoses
that are common in this population. Serious Adverse Events (SAEs) involving the administration of MDMA in
clinical trials have been rare and non-life threatening. To date, MDMA has been administered to over 1133 indi-
viduals for research purposes without the occurrence of unexpected drug-related SAEs that require expedited
reporting per FDA regulations. Now that safety parameters for limited use of MDMA in clinical settings have
been established, a case can be made to further develop MDMA-assisted therapeutic interventions that could
support autistic adults in increasing social adaptability among the typically developing population. As in the
case with classic hallucinogens and other psychedelic drugs, MDMA catalyzes shifts toward openness and intro-
spection that do not require ongoing administration to achieve lasting benefits. This infrequent dosing mitigates
adverse event frequency and improves the risk/benefit ratio of MDMA, which may provide a significant advan-
tage over medications that require daily dosing. Consequently, clinicians could employ new treatment models
for social anxiety or similar types of distress administering MDMA on one to several occasions within the context
of a supportive and integrative psychotherapy protocol.
© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
1. Introduction
The purpose of this paper is to provide an overview of the ratio-
nale and to summarize the method for a pilot study of 3,4-
methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA)-assisted therapy for the
treatment of social anxiety in autistic adults. Multiple areas of investiga-
tion in autism research have paralleled MDMA research. Some
examples include neurobiological studies, particularly on the effects of
the neuropeptides oxytocin (OT) and vasopressin, which are believed
to play a role in interpersonal connection and bonding (Domes et al.,
2007a,2007b; Dumont et al., 2009; Hollander et al., 2003, 2007; Jacob
et al., 2007; Kirsch et al., 2005; Lerer et al., 2008; Sumnall, 2006), and
the neurotransmitter serotonin (Volkmar et al., 2009; Vollenweider
et al., 1998; Whitaker-Azmitia, 2005). Cognitive studies, such as inves-
tigations of the mechanisms of face recognition, also appear in the liter-
ature of both autism (Adolphs et al., 2001; Ashwin et al., 2007, 2009;
Clark et al., 2008) and MDMA research (Hoshi et al., 2004).
Functional brain imaging studies with anxiogenic stimuli in autis-
tic individuals suggest that the amygdala may be differentially acti-
vated, with greater activation in the anterior cingulate gryus and
Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry 64 (2016) 237–249
Abbreviations: 5HT1A, 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin) receptor 1A; 8-OH-DPAT, 7-
(Dipropylamino)-5,6,7,8-tetrahydronaphthalen-1-ol;
ADOS-2,
Autism
Diagnostic
Observation Schedule, Second Edition (Module 4); BDI, Beck Depression Inventory; CAPS,
Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale; C-SSRS, Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale; DEA,
Drug Enforcement Administration; DSM-5, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, 5th edition; EKG, Electrocardiogram; ERQ, Emotion Regulation Questionnaire;
FDA, Food and Drug Administration; IRB, Institutional Review Board; IRI, Interpersonal
Reactivity Index; LSAS, Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale; LSD, Lysergic Acid Diethylamide;
MAOI, Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitor; MDMA, 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine;
OT, Oxytocin; PSS, Perceived Stress Scale; PTSD, Posttraumatic Stress Disorder; RSES,
Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale; SAE, Serious Adverse Event; SCID-I-RV, Structured Clinical
Interview for Diagnoses Axis I Research Version; SSRI, Selective Serotonin Reuptake
Inhibitor; STAI, State-Trait Anxiety Index; SUDS, Subjective Units of Distress; TAS-20,
Toronto Alexithymia Scale; TASIT, The Awareness of Social Inference Test; TD, Typically
Developing; UML, 1-Methyl-D-Lysergic Acid Butanolamide; U.S., United States; VHD,
Valvular Heart Disease.
☆ Trial Registration ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02008396
⁎ Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 310 222 1664 (office).
E-mail addresses: adanforth@labiomed.org (A.L. Danforth), cstruble.md@gmail.com
(C.M. Struble), Berra@MAPS.org (B. Yazar-Klosinski), cgrob@labiomed.org (C.S. Grob).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2015.03.011
0278-5846/© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological
Psychiatry
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pnp
 superior temporal cortex, and less activation in the left amygdala and
left orbito-frontal cortex (Ashwin et al., 2007), or it may signal in an
atypical manner to the fusiform gyrus, a key brain region involved in
facial recognition, resulting in differences in social perception be-
tween autistic and typically developing (TD) individuals (Hall et al.,
2010). In TD healthy volunteers, MDMA administration acutely de-
creases activity in the left amygdala (Gamma et al., 2000), a brain re-
gion involved in the interpretation of negative cues, and attenuates
amygdalar response and emotional reactivity to angry faces (Bedi
et al., 2009). This action of MDMA is compatible with its reported reduc-
tion in fear of emotional injury or defensiveness (Greer and Tolbert,
1986). The multi-level effects of MDMA on brain circuits, monoaminer-
gic neurotransmitters, and neurohormones that have been studied ex-
tensively in autistic individuals suggest that further study of the
effects of MDMA in autistic populations is warranted. In addition,
MDMA has been proposed as a treatment for anxiety disorders
(Johansen and Krebs, 2009), which are prevalent in autistic individuals
(Gillott and Standen, 2007). The current review takes into account
these areas of overlap and explores a parallel indication by studying
MDMA-assisted therapy as an intervention for social anxiety in autistic
adults.
1.1. Relevant history
MDMA, also known as the street drug Ecstasy or Molly, is a psycho-
active compound with structural similarities to both amphetamine and
the hallucinogenic phenethylamines (Grob and Poland, 1995). MDMA is
a laboratory-synthesized compound that does not exist on its own in
nature. Even though MDMA has been illegal in the United States since
the mid-1980s, there were 0.8 million past-year initiates who reported
first-time Ecstasy use in 2013 (Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration, 2014).
MDMA was developed as a byproduct of a styptic compound at
Merck in Germany in 1912. University and industry based medicinal
chemists started conducting initial scientific investigations during the
1970s after chemist Alexander Shulgin began exploring MDMA's poten-
tial to create controllable altered states of consciousness. Despite report-
ed therapeutic potential (Greer and Tolbert, 1986; Grinspoon and
Bakalar, 1986), concerns about potential neurotoxicity resulted in sup-
pression of FDA-approved research with human subjects in clinical in-
vestigations. Gross errors in reporting on MDMA's effects, side effects,
and risk factors in non-human primate studies (e.g., Ricaurte et al.,
2003), in addition to problems with interspecies scaling algorithms
leading to overdosing by an order of magnitude in animal studies
(Baumann et al., 2007), have contributed to confusion about which
policies and approaches are optimal regarding regulation and research.
Early investigators noted MDMA's capacity to help people talk open-
ly and honestly about themselves and their relationships, without de-
fensive conditioning intervening (Greer and Tolbert, 1986; Stolaroff,
2004). For several hours, anxiety and fear appeared to decrease, even
in subjects who were chronically constricted and apprehensive. Of par-
ticular interest to psychiatric researchers were clients with disorders
such as chronic post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and depression
who were nonresponsive to conventional treatment models. Beginning
Table 1
Major studies implicating the effects of MDMA.
Year
Citation
Sample
Category
Significance
1986
Greer & Tolbert
29
Psychotherapy
First published report
1998
Grob
18
Phase 1 — Preliminary
Controlled study
2008
Bouso et al.
6
Psychotherapy
Controlled study (incomplete)
2011
Mithoefer et al.
20
Psychotherapy
Blinded, placebo controlled RCT
2013
Mithoefer et al.
16 (CAPS);
19 (Questionnaire)
Psychotherapy (see above)
Long term follow up of above
2013
Oehen et al.
12
Psychotherapy
2nd RCT, active placebo
2000
Gamma et al.
16
Mechanism of action
PET study — b L amygdala
2009
Dumont et al.
15
Mechanism of action
Elevated OT in an RCT
2009
Bedi et al.
9
Mechanism of action
fMRI of brain — lower amygdala to angry faces
2014
Carhart-Harris et al.
19
Mechanism of action
Worst memories less distressing & vivid
2014
Bedi et al.
13
Mechanism of action
Increased social language RCT
2014
Hysek et al.
32
Mechanism of action
Increased emotional empathy, prosocial in men
2014
Kuypers et al.
20
Mechanism of action
Plasma OT after MDMA unrelated to empathy
2012
Hysek et al.
48
Mechanism of action
Changes in emotion reading, self-reported increased closeness, elevated OT
1996
Grob et al.
6
Pharmacodynamics/PK
Reported cardiovascular, increased cortisol, prolactin
1998
Vollenweider et al.
13
Pharmacodynamics/PK
Subjective, cardiovascular, neuroendocrine & spont. reactions
2000
de la Torre et al.
14 (6 in study 1; 8 in study 2)
Pharmacodynamics/PK
Detected nonlinear pharmacokinetics
2001
Liechti and Vollenweider
16
Pharmacodynamics/PK
Using pretreatment studies, shows impact of 5HT release on MDMA effects
2001
Liechti et al.
74 (incl. earlier FXV samples)
Pharmacodynamics/PK
Pooled data — women report greater subjective effects & reactions, men
higher cardiovascular
2014
Kirkpatrick et al.
220a (contains de Wit,
ME Liechti data)
Pharmacodynamics/PK
Demonstrates similarity of MDMA effects across 3 independent laboratories
2006
Mechan et al.
4 squirrel monkeys
PK/risks and toxicity
Detected nonlinear PK in monkeys, and demonstrates doses deemed
“human equivalent” weren't.
2009
Rogers
Review/meta analysis
PK/risks
Systematic review and meta-analyses of literature concluding Ecstasy use may
produce significant but small impairments and can but mostly won't be fatal
2007
Schilt
58 Ecstasy users, 60 controls
PK/risks
First prospective study of effects of Ecstasy use. Reported impaired
(actually less improvement) in verbal memory but no other areas.
2011
Halpern
52 Ecstasy users; 59 controls
matched for drug use
PK/Risks
Study strongly controlling for drug use histories and using low drug use sample.
Found few differences in cognitive performance save poorer strategic
self-regulation in Ecstasy users
2010
Nutt et al.
20 substances
Risks/benefits
Modeling determined alcohol, heroin most harmful; [magic] mushrooms,
buprenorphine last (i.e. least harmful); MDMA 17/20 on list.
2010
Van Amsterdam et al.
19 substances
Risks/benefits
Used similar team and produced similar but not identical rankings. In this model,
Ecstasy 14th of 19, rated slightly more harmful than Nutt et al.
2007
Sessa
Review
Therapy assessment
Argues for use of MDMA in psychotherapy
2009
Johanson and Krebs
Review
Review
Provides hypotheses and model for how MDMA might help treat anxiety
disorders
a The Basel sample is not the same as the Zurich sample so the two sets represent independent data samples. However, Kirkpatrick et al. may cover data addressed in reports by the Basel
(Hysek–Liechti) team and at least of the Bedi/De Wit data (when collected at the University of Chicago).
238
A.L. Danforth et al. / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry 64 (2016) 237–249
 in the mid-1970s, therapists and psychiatrists provided the still-legal
MDMA to thousands of clients as an adjunct to therapy, but unfortu-
nately no methodical research was published from this period.
Formal hearings commenced in 1985 to determine MDMA's legal
status. Weighing the interests of the therapeutic community against
the growing perception of MDMA's abuse liability and the threat it
posed to public health and safety, the U.S. Drug Enforcement Adminis-
tration (DEA) eventually ordered that it be placed in the most restrictive
category, Schedule I, in 1986 (Lawn, 1986).
In the decades following the DEA scheduling, discord and divisive-
ness escalated in the research world. At the center of the debate was
the question of whether or not MDMA use caused neurotoxicity
resulting in brain damage. Histopathological findings in animal studies
with repeated “binge administration” injections demonstrated that dis-
tal serotonergic axonal degeneration could result with doses much
higher than recreational users consume (Sumnall, 2006). Implications
of such pre-clinical findings are further confounded by observations of
proximal axonal regeneration, cell body sparing, and absence of stan-
dard laboratory markers of neurotoxicity. Some studies suggested that
even modest use could lead to irreparable organic and psychiatric
damage, which included emotional and memory deficits, although
these reports were often marred by flawed research methodologies,
questionable data analyses, and biased conclusions (Danforth and
Grob, 2009; Grob, 2000, 2005; LeVay, 2008).
The Ecstasy user literature base also contains multiple factors that
limit the generalizability of naturalistic studies of street Ecstasy to clin-
ical settings in which pure MDMA is administered from one to several
times within a psychotherapy paradigm. The most substantial of these
limitations are the high quantities of doses taken in nearly all publica-
tions on recreational Ecstasy users, often on the order of several hun-
dreds of doses. Critics of MDMA-assisted psychotherapy use this data
to suggest a higher level of risk than logically can be inferred from no
more than six exposures reported in MDMA-assisted psychotherapy
clinical trials (e.g., Parrott, 2014). Additionally, “Ecstasy” refers to
MDMA obtained from street sources which currently is almost always
cut with other drugs as seized shipments from 2007 show only 3% of
tablets destined for North American markets containing pure MDMA
(Hudson et al., 2014) (https://www.ecstasydata.org/stats.php). Authors
commonly cite Ecstasy user data and use it to draw conclusions about
MDMA without citing the above purity limitation (Grob, 2000). Further-
more, Ecstasy users are also almost always polysubstance abusers as in-
dicated in the 2007 National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related
Conditions (n = 43,093) (Wu et al., 2009), and high polysubstance
abuse rates confound nearly all of the Ecstasy correlations found in the
medical literature to date. Other common notable hazards include ad-
verse environmental conditions, polydrug use in dangerous combina-
tions, and ingestion of high doses or stacking multiple doses to
prolong drug effects. Therefore, research on recreational Ecstasy use
has limited applicability to determining the safety of clinical investiga-
tions of MDMA-assisted therapy.
1.2. Pharmacology and behavioral effects in animals
Research into the pharmacological, physiological, or psychological
effects of MDMA began in the 1950s, when the U.S. Army administered
MDMA to guinea pigs, monkeys, mice, rats, and dogs as part of a military
research program, possibly intended to develop chemical incapacitants
or means of enhancing interrogation (Hardman et al., 1973). Investiga-
tions of the pharmacology, functional effects, and toxicity of MDMA in
animals have generally included injections of large and often repeated
doses of MDMA in an attempt to produce human-equivalent doses
(Baggott et al, 2001). Recent reports re-examining these effects have
questioned the applicability of interspecies scaling models for MDMA,
and have supported nonlinear pharmacology (Baumann et al., 2009;
Mechan et al., 2006; Wang et al., 2005).
A study directly comparing MDMA pharmacokinetics in humans and
monkeys found that the two species metabolized MDMA in a similar but
not identical manner and that MDMA had a shorter half-life in monkeys
than in humans. Both species exhibited nonlinear pharmacokinetics,
and it appears that monkeys and humans exhibit similar plasma
MDMA levels after receiving the same dose of MDMA (Mueller et al.,
2009a,2009b). An investigation in rats also demonstrated nonlinear
pharmacokinetics in that species as well, finding that human-
equivalent doses of MDMA in rats are close to or identical to those in
humans and drug half-life is rapid (Baumann et al., 2009). Doses of
10 mg/kg, but not 2 mg/kg, produced signs of serotonin syndrome in
rats, but neither dose reduced total serotonin levels in the brain two
weeks after drug administration. These discoveries suggest that toxico-
logical and behavioral studies of MDMA used doses exceeding human
equivalent doses. As a consequence, it is difficult to interpret the rele-
vance of findings in nonclinical studies employing these dosing regimes.
Early studies in rodents suggest that 5HT1A receptors reduce anxiety
and aggression (Brunner and Hen, 1997; Graeff et al., 1996), and some
drug discrimination studies suggest that the 5HT1A agonist 8-OH-
DPAT partially or fully substitutes for MDMA (Glennon and Young,
2000; Glennon et al., 2007; Schechter, 1986). Administering a 5HT1A an-
tagonist attenuates the prosocial behavior of rats, measured by prefer-
ence to lie adjacent to each other, possibly because it prevents
elevation in OT (Morley et al., 2005; Thompson et al., 2007). At least
some direct or indirect effects of MDMA on serotonin receptors may
cause changes in GABA uptake in the ventral tegmental area of rats
(Bankson and Yamamoto, 2004). In rodents, doses of MDMA equivalent
to human doses produce either few or no behavioral effects. However,
doses of 5 mg/kg or greater have several specific behavioral effects, in-
cluding increased locomotor activity, increased anxiety at moderately
high doses, and decreased anxiety at higher doses (Cole and Sumnall,
2003; Green et al., 2003). In contrast, rhesus monkeys do not exhibit in-
creased locomotor activity after receiving up to 2.4 mg/kg MDMA
(Crean et al., 2006).
To date, no empirical investigations have been conducted on the ef-
fects of MDMA on primate social interactions. Morley and colleagues
observed rat behavior after receiving 5 mg/kg MDMA, noting that this
dose correlated with prosocial behavior, such as lying next to each
other (Morley et al., 2005). Recent studies conducted by the same
team of researchers suggest that MDMA increases prosocial behavior
in rats by elevating OT in the paraventricular nucleus through 5HT1A re-
ceptor agonism, with the OT increase arising from the indirect effects of
MDMA on 5HT1A receptors (Thompson et al., 2007, 2009). At present,
there have been no human pharmacological challenge studies combin-
ing MDMA with 5HT1A agonists, while 5HT1A antagonists have negligi-
ble effects on subjective or physiological effects of MDMA in humans
(Hasler et al., 2009; Hysek et al., 2010; van Wel et al., 2012). As a result,
it is unclear whether the rat behavior is analogous to human reports of
increased feelings of empathy or interpersonal closeness while under
the influence of MDMA (Liester et al., 1992; Peroutka et al., 1988;
Solowij et al., 1992; Vollenweider et al., 1998).
1.3. Summary of effects of MDMA in humans
MDMA is primarily a potent releaser of serotonin as well as an inhib-
itor of presynaptic serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine (de la
Torre et al., 2004). Pharmacologically it exhibits effects similar to am-
phetamine type drugs, with a chemical structure that also resembles
the classic hallucinogen mescaline. The primary mode of action of
MDMA is as an indirect serotonergic agonist, increasing the amount of
serotonin released into the synaptic space. MDMA interacts with the se-
rotonin transporter, and is transported into the nerve terminal, facilitat-
ing the release of serotonin. After oral ingestion, MDMA is readily
absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract.
At doses of at least 1 mg/kg (or approximately 70 mg) and higher,
active doses of MDMA alter mood and cognition and produce slight
239
A.L. Danforth et al. / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry 64 (2016) 237–249
 alterations in perception (Dumont and Verkes, 2006; Liechti et al.,
2001). Its onset of action is within 30–45 min of intake, and effects
peak 90 to 120 min after oral administration, and they are near to or
at pre-drug levels 3 to 6 h later (Lamers et al., 2003; Tancer and
Johanson, 2001; Vollenweider, 1998). Sub-acute effects may occur one
to three days after drug administration, but are no longer apparent
seven to 14 days later (Harris et al., 2002; Huxster et al., 2006; Pirona
and Morgan, 2010). The elimination half-life is approximately 7 h.
MDMA's primary
metabolite,
3-4
methylenedioxyamphetamine
(MDA), has a longer half-life of approximately 16–38 h. Primary enzy-
matic activity responsible for the metabolism of MDMA occurs at the
hepatic cytochrome P45 CYP2D6 enzyme. MDMA is metabolized in a
non-linear manner with relatively small increases in dose causing dis-
proportionate elevation in MDMA plasma concentration, consequently
necessitating vigilance for the development of signs of acute adverse re-
actions (Harris et al., 2002; Mas et al., 1999).
1.3.1. Physiological effects
MDMA acutely increases cortisol, prolactin, and adrenocorticotropic
hormone concentrations in a dose-dependent manner (Farré et al.,
2004; Grob et al., 1996; Harris et al., 2002; Mas et al., 1999; Parrott
et al., 2008). MDMA also produces a robust increase in the neurohor-
mone OT (Dumont et al., 2009). OT is a neuropeptide associated with
pair bonding and social affiliation in mammals that also attenuates
amygdalar response to anxiogenic stimuli (Adolphs et al., 2005; Bartz
and Hollander, 2006). Exogenous OT administration is associated with
increased interpersonal trust and changes in social perception, includ-
ing attenuated reactivity to threatening faces (Domes et al., 2007a,
2007b; Kosfeld et al., 2005). OT administration also improves empathic
accuracy in some individuals who are shy or lack adequate social skills
(Guastella et al., 2010). Alterations in OT signaling have also been pro-
posed as a potential mechanism for the underlying neurological basis
for the core social differences in autism and have been implicated as a
possible novel therapy for enhancing social adaptability (Bartz and
Hollander, 2006).
MDMA elevates OT in peripheral blood (Dumont et al., 2009; Hysek
et al., 2012; Wolff et al., 2006), which is an imperfect but somewhat re-
liable indicator of elevated OT in the brain (Bartz and Hollander, 2006).
Findings of an association between elevated OT and detectable MDMA
in peripheral blood were first reported in a naturalistic study of
London nightclub attendees with and without detectable plasma
MDMA levels (Wolff et al., 2006). Dumont and colleagues reproduced
these results in humans and found that MDMA significantly elevated
peripheral plasma OT levels in a placebo-controlled study in healthy
volunteers (Dumont et al., 2009), in addition to a positive association
between elevated levels of OT and prosocial feelings. Hysek and col-
leagues replicated these results and further reported that administering
a serotonin reuptake inhibitor, but not a norepinephrine uptake inhibi-
tor nor several adrenergic antagonists, attenuated the effects of MDMA
on OT levels, suggesting a serotonergic mechanism in producing elevat-
ed (Hysek et al., 2012). The effects of MDMA on OT could be partially re-
sponsible for changes in empathy (Bedi et al, 2010). However, the
multi-level effects of MDMA on monoaminergic signaling and OT,
combined with a therapeutic setting focused on enhancing functional
skills, are more likely to provide the opportunity for a corrective
emotional experience greater than OT alone, and could be useful in
the treatment of social anxiety in autistic adults.
Hyperthermia has occurred in people using Ecstasy in unsupervised
and
non-medical
conditions
(e.g.,
vigorous
dancing
in
hot,
underventilated spaces without adequate access to water), and though
rare, it is one of the most frequently reported SAEs occurring in Ecstasy
users (Henry and Rella, 2001; Liechti et al., 2005). In rare but sometimes
lethal cases, naïve users have consumed too much water without
ingesting required amounts of electrolytes, leading to water intoxica-
tion (hyponatremia) (Milroy, 2011). Taking MDMA with monoamine
oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) or with certain antiretroviral medications
can induce a life-threatening hypertensive crisis (Harrington et al.,
1999; Smilkstein et al., 1987).
MDMA produces sympathomimetic effects that include elevation in
blood pressure and heart rate. Elevation in blood pressure above 140/
110 or higher occurred in approximately 5% of research participants re-
ceiving at least 100 mg MDMA in research studies. However, blood pres-
sure returned to normal as drug effects waned (Downing, 1986; Grob,
1998; Grob et al., 1996; Lester et al., 2000; Liechti et al., 2001; Mas
et al., 1999; Vollenweider et al., 1998). The elevation of blood pressure
and increased heart rate produced by MDMA, like that produced by
other sympathomimetic drugs, can lead to additional risks and compli-
cations (Hughes et al., 1993; Kaku and Lowenstein, 1990; Perez et al.,
1999), such as stroke, cardiac events or other cerebrovascular events,
including cerebral venous sinus thrombosis (Rothwell and Grant,
1993) and cerebral hemorrhage (Gledhill et al., 1993; Henry et al.,
1992; Manchanda and Connolly, 1993; Selmi et al., 1995). First-time
users with congenital heart defects are especially vulnerable to cardiac
events (Hall and Henry, 2006). Due to properly conducted medical
screening, there have been no such events to date in any clinical trial
of MDMA.
Some researchers expressed concern that MDMA activity at 5HT2B
receptors might be indicative of increasing risk of valvular heart disease
(VHD) with repeated use (Setola et al., 2003). Studies in Ecstasy users
indicated that only people reporting average lifetime exposure of 900
tablets had cardiac abnormalities indicative of potential VHD
(Droogmans et al., 2007), and a case of VHD has occurred in a man
reporting approximately 16 years of Ecstasy use (Montastruc et al.,
2012). No abnormalities were found in people reporting lifetime expo-
sure of approximately 200 tablets in the same study. Since VHD-
associated changes and VHD only occurred after extremely heavy Ecsta-
sy use, they are unlikely to be a risk within the research or therapeutic
context.
Hepatotoxicity (liver disease or damage) was reported in approxi-
mately 16% of 199 case reports from non-medical, uncontrolled Ecstasy
users, making it the third most SAE reported in the literature (Baggott
et al., 2001). No cases of liver disease or hepatotoxicity have occurred
in a controlled clinical trial with MDMA.
MDMA is not considered physically addictive, but there have been
reports of both acute and chronic psychological reactions in vulnerable
individuals (Parrott, 2007). Nevertheless, these cases generally have
been in the context of frequent polydrug use, Ecstasy or Molly use of
dubious quality, adverse environmental settings, and significant under-
lying psychological vulnerability (Grob, 2005). Even though Ecstasy is
considered a drug of abuse, pure MDMA is not considered a drug of de-
pendence on the order of opioids, amphetamines, methamphetamines,
and cocaine. This lack of dependence is evidenced by rodents and non-
human primates self-administering MDMA at much lower rates than
the aforementioned drugs (De La Garza et al., 2007; Schenk, 2009),
and even heavy Ecstasy users fail to report the intensive patterns of
use seen with other stimulants. Hence, MDMA possesses moderate
abuse liability that is greater than that for serotonergic hallucinogens
but less than that for stimulants. Nutt et al. (2010) have studied the rel-
ative harm of a variety of drugs and have identified MDMA as being
among the least dangerous recreational compounds.
1.3.2. Neuropsychological effects
Most of the therapeutic effects of MDMA result from changes in af-
fect, cognition and social interaction. Vollenweider et al., (1998) report-
ed that MDMA produced acute “increased responsiveness to emotions, a
heightened openness, and a sense of closeness to other people” (p. 247).
When combined with psychotherapy that supports one or more of
these effects, MDMA permits individuals to confront and consider emo-
tionally intense memories, thoughts or feelings and perhaps through
changes in mood and perception increases empathy and compassion
for others and one's self (Bouso et al., 2008; Greer and Tolbert, 1986;
Mithoefer et al., 2011).
240
A.L. Danforth et al. / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry 64 (2016) 237–249
 MDMA facilitates states of positive mood as well as transient anxiety
(Camí et al., 2000; Harris et al., 2002; Liechti et al., 2001; Tancer &
Johanson, 2001). MDMA users report feeling more talkative and friendly
after receiving MDMA, and at least one research team informally report-
ed increased feelings of closeness to others (Vollenweider et al., 1998).
However, subjects have also reported feeling anxious and undergoing
negatively experienced derealization, including increased anxiety relat-
ed to loss of control and experiences of racing or blocked thoughts
(Camí et al., 2000; Liechti et al., 2001; Vollenweider et al., 1998). Sub-
jects receiving active doses of MDMA experienced euphoria, positive
mood, vigor and positively experienced derealization, and they also ex-
perienced anxiety, tension and dysphoria, as concern over losing control
over the self (Camí et al., 2000; Harris et al., 2002; Tancer & Johanson,
2001; Liechti et al., 2001). Available data is unclear regarding whether
the increases in positive and negative mood occur simultaneously or
occur at different times throughout the duration of MDMA effects;
data in reports from two different teams suggest that peaks in negative
mood may precede peaks for positive mood (Tancer & Johanson 2001;
Liechti and Vollenweider, 2000). Table 1 lists major studies implicating
the effects of MDMA.
1.4. Clinical advantages of MDMA
As a clinical intervention to increase social adaptability, MDMA pro-
vides specific advantages. In supportive settings, a typical oral dose of
75–125 mg produces psychological effects that are distinct from those
of classic hallucinogens (Nichols, 1986; Vollenweider et al., 1998).
Beginning in the late 1970s, proponents saw the benefits of MDMA,
compared to classic hallucinogens, making it uniquely suited as an ad-
junct to therapy. It was comparatively mild, shorter acting, and induced
an enhanced ability to facilitate heightened states of introspection, all
without distracting cognitive distortions and alterations in perception,
body image, and sense of self commonly seen with classic hallucino-
gens, such as LSD, psilocybin, and mescaline. Users were reported as los-
ing defensive anxiety and feeling more emotionally open thus giving
them access to feelings and thoughts not ordinarily available to them.
In informal settings, MDMA was reported to be useful in treating a
wide range of conditions, including post-traumatic stress, phobias, psy-
chosomatic disorders, depression, suicidality, drug addiction, relation-
ship difficulties and the psychological distress of terminal illness
(Adamson and Metzner, 1988; Downing, 1986; Greer and Tolbert,
1986; Grinspoon and Bakalar, 1986; Riedlinger and Riedlinger, 1994).
Lasting improvement was often reported in patients' self-esteem, ability
to communicate with significant others, capacity for achieving empathic
rapport, interest in and capacity for insight, strengthened capacity for
trust and intimacy, and enhanced therapeutic alliance (Grinspoon and
Bakalar, 1986).
2. Phase 1 and Phase 2 clinical studies with MDMA
2.1. Establishing safety and feasibility
Recent research with human subjects has focused on establishing
safety parameters for limited use of MDMA-assisted therapy in U.S.
and European clinical settings (e.g., Mithoefer et al., 2011, 2013;
Oehen et al., 2013). The first double-blind, placebo controlled U.S.
Phase 1, FDA-compliant study was conducted in 1994, with findings
that suggested MDMA may cause a statistically significant increase in
body temperature, heart rate, and blood pressure in some healthy vol-
unteers (Grob, 1998; Grob et al., 1996; Lieb et al., 2002). However,
these increases were found to be transient and generally tolerable in a
controlled clinical setting. Subsequent trials confirmed that MDMA pro-
duced significant increases in heart rate and blood pressure that were
likely to be well tolerated by healthy individuals (Check, 2004; Doblin,
2002; Hysek et al., 2012; Lieb et al., 2002; von Sydow et al., 2002). As
of November 2014, MDMA had been administered to more than 1133
research subjects, in both Phase 1 and Phase 2 studies. Only one expect-
ed SAE that was probably drug-related has been reported, which was an
increase in frequency of premature ventricular contractions experi-
enced during treatment, which resolved with full recovery to baseline
after the effects of MDMA ceased. No acute cardiac damage occurred,
and hospitalization during this SAE was a cautionary measure. No unex-
pected, life-threatening SAEs have occurred in published or ongoing re-
search studies (Jerome and Baggott, 2003; Multidisciplinary Association
for Psychedelic Studies, 2015)
2.2. MDMA-assisted therapy for PTSD
The first placebo-controlled Phase 2 pilot study of MDMA-assisted
psychotherapy for the treatment of chronic, treatment resistant PTSD
demonstrated promising results in a sample of 20 subjects (Mithoefer
et al., 2011). Scores on the Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS),
an established gold-standard measure of PTSD symptoms, declined to
a statistically and clinically significant degree after undergoing
MDMA-assisted psychotherapy. The group of subjects randomized to
receive MDMA showed a mean CAPS score reduction of 53.7, with a
mean starting score of 79.2, whereas, participants in the placebo arm
who also received psychotherapy had a mean starting score of 79.6
and showed a mean CAPS score reduction of 20.5. As a point of compar-
ison, a reduction of mean CAPS scores of 10.2 in a clinical trial of 187 pa-
tients resulted in FDA-approval of sertraline (Zoloft) for PTSD (Brady
et al., 2000). Improvements in PTSD symptoms observed in the proof
of principle study were maintained an average of 3.8 years later (N =
16) (Mithoefer et al., 2013). Mithoefer et al., (2011) reported that,
“MDMA-assisted psychotherapy with close follow-up monitoring and
support can be used with acceptable and short-lived side effects in a
carefully screened group of subjects with chronic, treatment-resistant
PTSD” (p. 449). A double blind pilot study of MDMA-assisted psycho-
therapy conducted by a Swiss therapist team in an equivalent Swiss
clinical population (N = 12) comparing 125 mg MDMA to 25 mg
MDMA as an active placebo found a clinically but not statistically signif-
icant effect, although trends toward symptomatic improvement were
noted using a German translation of the CAPS (Oehen et al., 2013).
The improvement continued to increase during the twelve-month
follow-up.
Currently, four Phase 2 pilot studies of MDMA-assisted psychother-
apy are underway for treatment of chronic PTSD (NCT01689740,
NCT01793610, NCT01211405, NCT01958593), including one in trauma-
tized war veterans and as well as first responders, such as police officers
and fire fighters. These studies have shown promise for MDMA-assisted
psychotherapy to help people overcome PTSD, an anxiety-related disor-
der, and suggest that this treatment could also be useful in treating so-
cial anxiety in autistic adults.
3. The need for innovative mental healthcare options for autistic
adults
A major revision of autism diagnostic criteria in the in the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th edition (American
Psychiatric Association, 2013) eliminated the distinctions between au-
tism categories and combined them under one diagnosis. The revised
DSM-5 definition includes the former diagnoses of Asperger's Disorder
and Pervasive Developmental Disorder. The term autism refers to a
spectrum of congenital and pervasive neurocognitive variants, charac-
terized, in part, by atypical development of social and communication
skills.
At present, there are no published research data in support of any
compound that can influence the course of autism or be a causative
agent. Autistic adults often present for treatment of conditions such as
anxiety, trauma, depression, and social adaptability challenges. Howev-
er, responses to conventional prescription medications evaluated in TD
individuals are often ineffective in autistic individuals (e.g., King et al.,
241
A.L. Danforth et al. / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry 64 (2016) 237–249
 2009), and mutual difficulties establishing therapeutic rapport between
clinicians and clients can interfere with conventional, psychodynamic
psychotherapy (Koenig and Levine, 2011; Ramsay et al., 2005). The
search for new supportive treatments is relevant given the lack of
established or effective treatment options for anxiety, depression, trau-
ma, and other psychological distress in autistic adults.
3.1. Pharmacotherapy: few effective options
Clinical diagnoses such as anxiety disorders, depression, obsessive–
compulsive disorder, Tourette's syndrome, tics, and epilepsy are com-
mon in autistic populations (Barnhill and Myles, 2001; Canitano and
Vivanti, 2007; Cath et al., 2008; Duggal et al., 2001; Frazier et al.,
2002; Newman and Ghaziuddin, 2008; Saulnier and Volkmar, 2007;
Tsai, 2006; Wymbs et al., 2005). Conventional anti-anxiety medications,
including selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), MAOIs, and
benzodiazepines, lack substantial clinical effectiveness in autistic adults,
potentially due to physiological differences between autistic and TD
individuals. There may be underlying biological reasons for this differ-
ence, including some reported evidence for a lower number of benzodi-
azepine binding sites in the brains of autistic adults (King et al., 2009;
Oblak et al., 2012).
Medications approved for the treatment of other indications are
often prescribed “off-label” without the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) approval for the use in autistic children, adolescents, and adults.
For example, off-label prescription of SSRIs is on the rise in this popula-
tion (Hollander et al., 2012). The data on SSRIs in the treatment of autis-
tic individuals are of varied nature. Given the paucity of confirmed
efficacy in clinical trials and clinical practice, the search for effective,
complementary and alternative interventions for mental health issues
in autistic populations remains urgent.
3.2. Social anxiety and autism
Social anxiety, also known as social phobia, is characterized by fear
of scrutiny and avoidance of social interactions (American Psychiatric
Association, 2013). Social anxiety is prevalent (Kessler et al., 1994), be-
gins early (Hazen and Stein, 1995; Öst, 1987), and follows a chronic
course (Reich et al., 1994). Impairment is substantial in TD individuals
(Schneier et al., 1994), and fear and avoidance behaviors interfere
with ability to work, attend school, and develop relationships, leading
to low quality of life (Liebowitz et al., 1985; Turner et al., 1986).
Comparative studies suggest that autistic adults, especially those
who can speak and whose autism might not be immediately recogniz-
able to others and who are faced with strong pressure to conform to
non-autistic social norms, are at greater risk for lifetime and current
psychological disorders, especially social anxiety (Joshi et al., 2012;
Tantam, 1991, 2000). Social anxiety frequently compounds the consid-
erable social challenges experienced by autistic adults (White et al.,
2010).
4. Factors in support of MDMA-assisted therapy for social anxiety in
autistic adults
The primary purpose of this paper is to provide an overview of
three main factors that supported the rationale for commencing
the first pilot study of an MDMA-assisted therapy treatment model
for an adult autistic population. The first factor is clinical findings
in reports from early research with psychedelics in studies with
autistic minors. The second factor is improved methodology
for conducting safe and ethical research with psychedelics and
MDMA, especially in vulnerable populations. The third, and most
recently available, factor in support of commencing a pilot study is
copious anecdotal support culled from public sources and scholarly
exploratory inquiry.
4.1. Early psychedelics research with autistic minors
Psychedelics are a large class of natural and synthetic substances
with limited abuse liability and psychoactive properties that alter
thought, mood, and perception in characteristic ways that can resemble
dreaming, psychoses, and ecstatic religious experiences. The term is
often used synonymously with hallucinogens in the medical literature.
However, with psychedelics, the perceiver retains awareness of the illu-
sory and personal nature of the altered perceptions (Aleman and de
Haan, 1998). MDMA is difficult to classify because it causes fewer and
attenuated hallucinogenic effects (Nichols, 1986) with less cognitive
distortion (Grinspoon and Bakalar, 1986) than other classes of psyche-
delics. MDMA also has mild to moderate amphetamine-like effects
and produces subjective prosocial effects which are distinct from the
mysticospiritual effects of the classic hallucinogens. Whereas MDMA
and classic hallucinogens have different neurobiological mechanisms
of action, they share similar psychological effects of catalyzing states
of openness and introspection. Therefore, a review of prior research
with classic hallucinogens with autistic minors is relevant to a discus-
sion of MDMA-assisted therapy for autistic adults with social anxiety.
From the late 1950s to the early 1970s, researchers in the United
States, Europe and Argentina (e.g., Abramson, 1960; Bender et al.,
1962, 1963; Fisher and Castile, 1963; Freedman et al., 1961; Simmons
et al., 1972, 1966) experimented with therapeutic applications of syn-
thetic psychedelic compounds, mainly LSD, UML (a methylated deriva-
tive of LSD), and psilocybin, in attempts to “treat” autistic children
during an era when autism was mistakenly considered a form of
juvenile schizophrenia until clinical interest declined when funding
for research and access to psychedelics decreased due to illicit use and
political pressure (Sigafoos et al., 2007). Whereas giving powerful psy-
chedelics to distressed, non-speaking children seems inappropriate ac-
cording to current ethics and safety standards, in the 1950s and 1960s,
synthetic psychedelics were considered new and novel medications
with a favorable safety profile that held promise for treating, what
were considered at the time, autistic-type developmental disorders in
youth.
Researchers shared the common goal of breaking through what they
interpreted as the “autistic barrier” toward increased empathic affect
and attachment in the absence of effective interventions for behaviors
such as self-harm (Mogar and Aldrich, 1969). However, the rationales
for conducting the research varied. Some studies emphasized a medical
approach. For example, the prospect of restoring speech as a means to
reduce isolation inspired some investigators after case reports were
published on catatonic schizophrenic adults who were electively mute
at baseline but who spoke while under the effects of LSD (Cholden
et al., 1955; Freedman et al., 1961). Employing a neurobiological ap-
proach, Bender et al., (1963) made early attempts to understand the
role of the neurotransmitter serotonin by including biochemical tests
in LSD study protocols.
Other researchers emphasized subjective considerations. Fisher
(1970), for example, took a psychodynamic approach when providing
LSD and psilocybin to autistic children. Fisher emphasized the potential
of psychedelics to augment the psychotherapeutic alliance: “Little of
what may be called health or growth can occur without legitimate
and honest relationships between people. The drugs were, however,
in our judgment, of extreme importance in making the psychotherapeu-
tic experience” (p. 112).
From 1959 to 1970, more than 100 minors with the obsolete diagno-
sis of juvenile schizophrenia, autistic type or similar descriptions were
given psychedelics in approximately a dozen trials of varying sizes and
durations. In at least six studies, children as young as five years old
were given repeated moderate to high doses (100–300 μg) of LSD
(e.g., Abramson, 1960; Fisher, 1970; Simmons et al., 1972). In retrospect,
the methods employed were flawed to varying degrees according to cur-
rent standards, including: small sample size (e.g., Rojas-Bermúdez, 1960;
Rolo et al., 1965; Simmons et al., 1966), vague and subjective assessment
242
A.L. Danforth et al. / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry 64 (2016) 237–249
 of positive and negative drug effects (e.g., Bender et al., 1962, 1963;
Freedman et al., 1961; Rolo et al., 1965), absent or incomplete baseline
data (e.g., Bender et al., 1963; Rojas-Bermúdez, 1960), and inadequate
follow-up data collection (Mogar and Aldrich, 1969). A majority of the
early researchers were primarily concerned with observing drug effects
and proceeded without a clearly stated treatment hypothesis or random
assignment to control groups, and reports on the persistence of post-
session effects were vague and inconsistent.
Mogar and Aldrich (1969) published a comprehensive review of
seven independent studies of LSD for treatment of emotional distress
and social isolation in 91 autistic children (Abramson, 1960; Bender
et al., 1962, 1963; Fisher and Castile, 1963; Freedman et al., 1961; Rolo
et al., 1965; Simmons et al., 1966). Despite “gross shortcomings”
(Mogar and Aldrich, 1969, p. 5) and inconsistencies across the seven
studies, the reviewers concluded that there was general consensus
among the research teams that the LSD treatment sessions were “effec-
tive in characteristic ways,” (p. 1) including increased vocabulary,
increased emotional responsiveness to others, an elevation in positive
mood, and decreases in compulsive behavior (p. 13). Social behaviors,
such as eye-to-face contact and engaging with the researchers, were ob-
served more frequently during LSD sessions than in placebo or control
sessions. No researchers reported serious side effects, toxicity, or per-
manent regression following treatment with psychedelics.
The general consensus resulting from the early research was that
psychedelics were unlikely to restore speech in non-speaking autistic
children. However, most researchers concluded that psychedelics
allowed subjects a greater degree of contact with others, regardless of
demographics, dose, schedule, or setting (Mogar and Aldrich, 1969).
Nevertheless, the Controlled Substances Act of 1970 resulted in an
abrupt cessation of virtually all clinical research with psychedelic
compounds.
The diagnostic distinctions for less readily apparent manifestations
of autism have emerged over the past several decades (Volkmar et al.,
1994; Wing, 1981) but were not recognized in the research literature
until well after clinical research with psychedelics had ended. Now
that research with psychedelic-assisted therapy to promote social
adaptability is resuming, investigators can recruit autistic adults who
speak or who use text-to-speech technology instead of working with
non-speaking children. In the early studies, investigators could not
collect self-reported baseline or follow-up data, conduct interviews,
confirm informed assent, or communicate verbally with subjects during
most experimental psychedelic treatment sessions.
4.2. Improved methods and standards for psychedelic research
Few, if any, of the clinical studies conducted with psychedelics be-
tween the 1950s and early 1970s would satisfy current design, safety,
and ethics requirements for research with human subjects. Among nu-
merous serious shortcomings, most early psychedelic trials lacked rigor-
ous oversight by institutional review boards, adequate data and safety
monitoring, or adherence to current best practices for scientific research
(e.g., adequate informed consent, random assignment to placebo con-
trol groups, double-blinded dosing regimens). Due to restrictions on re-
search using psychedelics with human subjects and the flawed
methodology of earlier trials, researchers have had few resources to
consult regarding the best methods for optimizing safety during chal-
lenging psychedelic experiences. However, guidelines and suggestions
for improvements in clinical studies and psychotherapy with psyche-
delics have been published by reputable investigators and are available
to inform new research (e.g., Greer and Tolbert, 1998; Johnson et al.,
2008; Richards et al., 1972; Strassman, 1995; Winkelman & Roberts,
2007).
A significant innovation in support of resuming clinical research
with psychedelics is the evolved understanding of the importance of
set and setting. In psychedelic therapy, set refers to the traits, mind
state,
and
expectations
of
the
subject
regarding
the
session
(Strassman, 1995). Grof (1980) also considered the psychotherapist's
perception of the nature of the experience, the preparation and pre-
session psychotherapy, and the specific technique of guidance
employed during the drug experience as contributing to set. Setting
refers primarily to the external factors that influence the ambiance of
the experience for the client. For an ideal setting, Grof (1980) recom-
mended a safe and pleasant environment plus reassuring and nurturing
interpersonal support.
4.3. First-person reports of MDMA/Ecstasy use by autistic adults
The introduction of the Internet has provided new and effective
means for autistic individuals to communicate with others who are
both autistic and non-autistic, often with greater ease than in face-to-
face situations (Davidson, 2008). Ample anecdotal data regarding the
MDMA/Ecstasy experiences of autistic individuals available through
spontaneous, first-person accounts posted in online discussion forums
provided foundational support for clinical research on MDMA-assisted
therapy for social anxiety with autistic adults.
Unsolicited accounts of personal MDMA/Ecstasy use have provided
consistent statements about its effects on social behavior. Some com-
ments have included descriptions of overall improvement in function-
ing, whereas other examples have described psychosocial healing and
relief from symptoms such as anxiety and trauma. Another common
theme reported is improved connectedness to others. Over 250 ac-
counts that were posted in online discussion forums between 2006
and 2011 (e.g., http://wrongplanet.net, http://www.Erowid.org, http://
www.psychforums.com, http://www.bluelight.ru) were reviewed
prior to commencing original data collection for exploratory doctoral
research on the qualitative MDMA/Ecstasy experiences of autistic adults
(Danforth, 2013).
The majority of the testimonials included descriptions of positive
outcomes. However, robust dialog about potential drawbacks of im-
proper use also has occurred in online forums. The overall impression
presented was that MDMA/Ecstasy can be helpful for some autistic indi-
viduals, attention to appropriate set and setting is crucial for positive
outcomes, and, as with other interventions, MDMA-assisted therapy
might be contraindicated for individuals at risk for potential abuse or
adverse outcomes (e.g., individuals with history of addiction or who
do not have access to sufficient post-session support). As a caveat, the
authors would advise any individual against taking Ecstasy or Molly,
which are manufactured and marketed on the illicit market and are sub-
ject to rampant drug substitution and often low-quality MDMA.
The dissertation was published as a mixed-methods study to explore
how autistic adults experience the subjective effects of MDMA/Ecstasy
(Danforth, 2013). The purpose of the qualitative component was to doc-
ument a comprehensive analysis of emergent themes from interviews
and to identify themes of clinical relevance. In addition, subjects from
13 countries submitted quantitative survey data, including 100
MDMA/Ecstasy-experienced individuals (76% males; 24% females) and
a 50-subject MDMA/Ecstasy-naïve comparison group (54% males; 46%
females). Respondents' ages ranged from 21 to 74 years. The majority
of respondents reported accounts of sustained benefits after MDMA/Ec-
stasy experiences, including improvement of conditions such as trauma
and social anxiety that are common in autistic populations.
Two notable findings from survey questions about drug effects were
that 91% of respondents reported that they experienced “Increased Feel-
ings of Empathy/Connectedness,” and 86% indicated “Ease of Communi-
cation” as an effect of their MDMA/Ecstasy use. Positive effects (e.g., joy,
openness, enjoying being touched) were reported as more strongly
experienced than negative effects, and no subjects rated anxiety
symptoms in the “strongly experienced” category. A finding particularly
relevant to treating social anxiety was that 72% of MDMA/Ecstasy-
experienced participants reported “more comfort in social settings,”
and 12% indicated that the effect lasted for two or more years. Another
positive outcome reported was that 78% of the MDMA/Ecstasy-
243
A.L. Danforth et al. / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry 64 (2016) 237–249
 experienced group reported “feeling at ease in my own body” as an
effect, and 15% indicated that the effect lasted two years or longer.
A finding that might have particular relevance to establishing rap-
port with therapists in clinical settings was that 77% of the MDMA/
Ecstasy-experienced group reported that they found it “easier than
usual to talk to others” as an effect of taking MDMA/Ecstasy, and 18% in-
dicated that the effect lasted up to one year or longer. A final finding
about the duration of effects that could have implications for psycho-
therapy for autistic adults was that 22% of the MDMA/Ecstasy-
experienced group reported “increased insight into own thought pro-
cesses” that persisted for two or more years. Despite the researcher's
multifold efforts to encourage subjects to disclose negative outcomes
and to provide balanced accounts of their experiences, there were no re-
ported moderate or serious, long-term adverse outcomes in the final
data set.
5. Method
For the present FDA-compliant, IRB-approved pilot investigation of
the effects of MDMA-assisted therapy on social anxiety in autistic adults,
a placebo-controlled, double-blind methodology is being employed, uti-
lizing an MDMA dosage in the range of 75 mg–125 mg. Twelve subjects
will be screened and enrolled into the study and randomized into two
groups, with one group of eight subjects receiving the experimental
drug (MDMA) and the control group of four subjects receiving an inac-
tive placebo. Both the subject, the clinical treatment team, and Indepen-
dent Rater assessing treatment outcomes are blind to the condition of
treatment. All subjects will receive two separate treatment sessions,
spaced approximately one month apart. Participants who receive place-
bo in the first treatment phase can return for one or two optional open-
label treatment sessions with MDMA after the blind is broken after six
months of follow-up data collection (Fig. 1).
Subjects receiving MDMA will be divided into two sub-groups, the
first group of four subjects receiving 75 mg MDMA at the first session
and 100 mg MDMA at the second session. The second sub-group of
four subjects will receive 100 mg MDMA at the first session and
125 mg at the second session. The researchers opted for a dose-
finding regimen due to anecdotal data that suggested that types of sen-
sory hypersensitivity and emotion regulation challenges common with
autism might indicate a lower optimal dosing range for this population.
Subjects randomized into the placebo condition will receive inactive
placebo at each of the two treatment sessions, but otherwise will partic-
ipate in the identically structured treatment model and assessment bat-
tery as those receiving the active drug.
5.1. Screening, eligibility, and preparation
After signing an informed consent, prospective subjects will be
screened into the study based on eligibility established on a number of
diagnostic instruments, including the Structured Clinical Interview for
Diagnoses Axis I Research Version (SCID-I-RV) (First et al., 2012), the
Leibowitz Social Anxiety Scale (LSAS) (Liebowitz et al., 1985) and the
Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS-2) (Bastiaansen et al.,
2011). All subjects must be 21 years or older, have at least two years
of college education or the equivalent, have an autism diagnosis con-
firmed by an Independent Rater who is certified based on research reli-
ability, have moderate to severe symptoms of social anxiety, and be able
to safely discontinue any psychotropic medications they are currently
being prescribed. They must also have healthy cardiovascular function,
as per electrocardiogram and medical history, and not suffer from dia-
betes, glaucoma, seizures, hypertension, liver disease, glaucoma or any
other condition that the investigator or medical monitor believes
might interfere with subject participation and safety in the study. Sub-
jects must also be MDMA-naïve and without active substance use disor-
ders. Psychiatric exclusion criteria include family history in first-degree
relatives of schizophrenia or bipolar I disorder, or subject diagnoses of
active or past psychotic disorder, borderline personality disorder, disso-
ciative identity disorder, eating disorder or active suicidal ideation.
Prior to entry into the study, all subjects will have a physical exami-
nation, EKG and baseline labs drawn for measurement of plasma OT, va-
sopressin and cortisol. Baseline performance using The Awareness of
Social Inference Test (TASIT) (McDonald et al., 2006), Emotion Regula-
tion Questionnaire (ERQ) (Gross and John, 2003), Beck Depression In-
ventory (BDI) (Beck et al., 1996), Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) (Cohen
et al., 1983), Interpersonal Reactivity Index (IRI) (Davis, 1980, 1983),
Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale (RSES) (Rosenberg, 1965), and State-
Trait Anxiety Index (STAI) (Spielberger et al., 1970) will be examined.
The LSAS will be the primary outcome measure.
Prior to the first treatment session, all subjects will receive several
preparatory psychotherapy sessions, where the structure of treatment
and range of possible effects will be discussed, as will any past or current
salient issues in the subject's life. These preparatory sessions will also
focus on establishing effective rapport between the subject and the
treatment team. Conventional psychodynamic psychotherapy will be
employed only on a limited basis, as this type of approach is not indicat-
ed in general in autistic populations due to mutual interpersonal bar-
riers to the psychotherapeutic alliance with non-autistic therapists
(e.g., Koenig & Levine, 2011; Ramsay et al., 2005). As an alternative, re-
search findings support mindfulness training in autistic populations. In
Bögels et al., (2008), autistic children and their parents reported
Fig. 1. Study structure overview.
244
A.L. Danforth et al. / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry 64 (2016) 237–249
 improvement in attunement to others, happiness, attention problems,
personal goals, self-control, and other measures that contribute to qual-
ity of life after receiving mindfulness training. Consequently, all subjects
will receive core mindfulness skills training as part of their therapy
(Linehan, 1993). An anticipated advantage of this intervention is that
it will provide vocabulary, concepts, and skills that support research
subjects with transitioning into MDMA-influenced cognitive and affec-
tive states as well as communicating with others during a novel, often
ineffable, altered state of consciousness.
5.2. Treatment sessions
On the days of the two treatment sessions, subjects will arrive at the
clinical research center early in the morning, accompanied by a study
partner, who has previously committed to driving the subject to and
from research sessions, as well as to and from day-after integrative ses-
sions. Office visits as well as treatment sessions will take place in a spe-
cially prepared room, which has been designed to minimize sensory
distress (e.g., soft lighting, comfortable seating, minimal noise) and to
resemble a comfortable den-like space more than a clinical setting.
Water intake will be monitored to avoid dehydration or water intoxica-
tion, and optional snacks and a light meal will be made available two
hours after the study drug is administered. The treatment sessions will
be videotaped, though contingent upon subject consent. Prior to exper-
imental drug administration on treatment session days, subjects will
have baseline blood pressure, heart rate and temperature measured,
with hourly repeat measurements following administration of active
drug or placebo for the next seven hours until the conclusion of the
treatment session. Suicidal ideation with the Columbia Suicide Severity
Rating Scale (Posner et al., 2011) and subjective units of distress (SUDs)
will also be assessed during hourly intervals. During the second experi-
mental treatment session, in the late morning, blood will be drawn for
later analyses of OT, vasopressin and cortisol. During the actual drug-
assisted treatment sessions, both structured and unstructured tasks
will be employed, including but not limited to listening to preselected
music, working with art supplies, writing in journals, silent introspec-
tion, and engaging in rapport building interactions with therapists. In
addition, subjects will complete the TASIT, which is an interactive,
video-based assessment of social inference skills. The co-therapists, al-
ways one male and one female to manage potential transference during
therapy, will emphasize creating and communicating a setting of safety
and support for the subject during periods of inner focus. More struc-
tured interaction during experimental sessions will focus on challenges
subjects have had with social perception and function.
5.3. Post-session follow-up
The day following each of the two experimental treatment sessions,
subjects will return to the study location for an integrative session,
where safety data will be collected, the content of the previous day's ex-
perience will be examined and methods for adjusting back to daily life
after treatment will be reviewed. Additional in-person integrative psy-
chotherapy sessions will be scheduled at two week intervals for one
month and then again at the six-month follow-up point. Telephone
safety checks will occur daily for the week following treatment sessions,
overlapping with the 3–4 days for the drug to be excreted from the
body. One day, two weeks and four weeks post experimental drug treat-
ment subjects will complete the BDI, STAI, and PSS. At monthly
intervals,
between
the
one-month
post-treatment
integrative
psychotherapy session and the six-month in-person final integrative
psychotherapy session, subjects will complete the BDI, STAI, and PSS
via remote, secure internet connection. In addition to baseline mea-
sures, the LSAS will be conducted the day after experimental treatment
sessions, at two-week intervals for one month and then at the six-
month follow-up. TASITs will be conducted at baseline, the day of the
two experimental treatment sessions, two weeks following each of the
treatments and at the six-month follow-up. A subsequent data analysis
will evaluate outcomes of active drug versus placebo. Additionally, two
post-treatment late-morning blood draws for plasma OT, vasopressin
and cortisol will be conducted one month and six months after experi-
mental treatment.
6. Concluding remarks
Promising findings from early psychedelics studies with autistic
minors, development of safer clinical research models and methods,
clarification around optimal set and setting, and an abundance of self-
reported accounts of potential benefits all support the case for initiating
a pilot trial with MDMA-assisted therapy for autistic adults who have
moderate to severe social anxiety.
Researchers gradually and cautiously are exploring a broader range
of potential risks and benefits of MDMA-assisted therapies. In the opin-
ion of the authors, this is the optimal and responsible option for
addressing the public health concerns that have been raised, as well as
to investigate the potential of developing new and novel models for
some psychiatric conditions that are refractory to conventional treat-
ment. Informed understanding of the facts about MDMA, a psychother-
apeutic compound known to enhance prosocial behaviors, is as relevant
to clinicians, researchers, the public, and policymakers now as in any
earlier point in its history.
Acknowledgments
Sponsor funding support provided by the Multidisciplinary Associa-
tion for Psychedelic Studies (MAPS), a 501(c)(3) non-profit research
and educational organization. Berra Yazar-Klosinski, Ph.D. is employed
by the sponsor as the Clinical Research Scientist and monitors the
study. Additional private funding provided through a donation from
the Betsy Gordon Foundation. Nick Walker, M.A. provided consultant
services in support of using appropriate and unharmful language to dis-
cuss autism in a psychiatric context.
References
Abramson HA. The use of LSD in psychotherapy: transactions of a conference on D-
lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD-25). Oxford, England: Josiah Macy Jr. Foundation;
1960.
Adamson S, Metzner R. The nature of the MDMA experience and its role in healing,
psychotherapy and spiritual practice. Revision 1988;10:59–72.
Adolphs R, Sears L, Piven J. Abnormal processing of social information from faces in
autism.
J
Cogn
Neurosci
2001;13(2):232–40.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/
089892901564289.
Adolphs R, Gosselin F, Buchanan TW, Tranel D, Schyns P, Damasio AR. A mechanism for
impaired fear recognition after amygdala damage. Nature 2005;433(7021):68–72.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature03086.
Aleman A, de Haan EHF. On redefining hallucination. Am J Orthopsychiatry 1998;68(4):
656–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0080376.
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders.
5th ed. Washington, DC: Author; 2013.
Ashwin C, Baron-Cohen S, Wheelwright S, O'Riordan M, Bullmore ET. Differential activa-
tion of the amygdala and the “social brain” during fearful face-processing in Asperger
syndrome.
Neuropsychologia
2007;45(1):2–14.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
neuropsychologia.2006.04.014.
Ashwin C, Ricciardelli P, Baron-Cohen S. Positive and negative gaze perception in autism
spectrum conditions. Soc Neurosci 2009;4(2):153–64. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
17470910802337902.
Baggott M, Jerome L, Stuart R. 3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA). A review
of the English-language scientific and medical literature. Published on-line: http://
www. maps. org/research/mdma/protocol/litreview. html, 2001.
Bankson MG, Yamamoto BK. Serotonin–GABA interactions modulate MDMA‐induced
mesolimbic dopamine release. J Neurochem 2004;91(4):852–9. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1111/j.1471-4159.2004.02763.x.
Barnhill GP, Myles BS. Attributional style and depression in adolescents with Asperger
syndrome. J Posit Behav Interv 2001;3(3):175–82. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/
109830070100300305.
Bartz JA, Hollander E. The neuroscience of affiliation: forging links between basic and clin-
ical research on neuropeptides and social behavior. Horm Behav 2006;50(4):518–28.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.yhbeh.2006.06.018.
Bastiaansen JA, Meffert H, Hein S, Huizinga P, Ketelaars C, Pijnenborg M, et al. Diagnosing
autism spectrum disorders in adults: the use of Autism Diagnostic Observation
245
A.L. Danforth et al. / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry 64 (2016) 237–249
 Schedule (ADOS) module 4. J Autism Dev Disord 2011;41(9):1256–66. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s10803-010-1157-x.
Baumann MH, Wang X, Rothman RB. 3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA)
neurotoxicity in rats: a reappraisal of past and present findings. Psychopharmacology
(Berl) 2007;189(4):407–24. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00213-006-0322-6.
Baumann MH, Zolkowska D, Kim I, Scheidweiler KB, Rothman RB, Huestis MA. Effects
of
dose
and
route
of
administration
on
pharmacokinetics
of
(±)-3,4-
methylenedioxymethamphetamine in the rat. Drug Metab Dispos 2009;37(11):
2163–70. http://dx.doi.org/10.1124/dmd.109.028506.
Beck AT, Steer RA, Ball R, Ranieri WF. Comparison of Beck Depression Inventories-IA and-
II in psychiatric outpatients. J Pers Assess 1996;67(3):588–97. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1207/s15327752jpa6703_13.
Bedi G, Phan KL, Angstadt M, de Wit H. Effects of MDMA on sociability and neural re-
sponse to social threat and social reward. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2009;207(1):
73–83. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00213-009-1635-z.
Bedi G, Hyman D, de Wit H. Is Ecstasy an “empathogen”? Effects of ±3,4-
methylenedioxymethamphetamine on prosocial feelings and identification of emo-
tional states in others. Biol Psychiatry 2010;68(12):1134–40. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.biopsych.2010.08.003.
Bender L, Godschmidt L, Siva Dankar DV. Treatment of autistic schizophrenic children
with LSD-25 and UML-491. Recent Adv Biol Psychiatry 1962;4:170–7.
Bender L, Faretra G, Cobrinik L. LSD and UML treatment of hospitalized disturbed children.
Recent Adv Biol Psychiatry 1963;5:84–92.
Bögels S, Hoogstad B, van Dun L, de Schutter S, Restifo K. Mindfulness training for adoles-
cents with externalizing disorders and their parents. Behav Cogn Psychother 2008;
36(2):193–209. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/s1352465808004190.
Bouso JC, Doblin R, Farré M, Alcázar MÁ, Gómez-Jarabo G. MDMA-assisted psychotherapy
using low doses in a small sample of women with chronic posttraumatic stress disor-
der. J Psychoactive Drugs 2008;40(3):225–36.
Brady K, Pearlstein T, Asnis GM, Baker D, Rothbaum B, Sikes CR, et al. Efficacy and safety of
sertraline treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder: a randomized controlled trial.
JAMA 2000;283(14):1837–44. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.283.14.1837.
Brunner D, Hen R. Insights into the neurobiology of impulsive behavior from serotonin re-
ceptor knockout mice. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1997;836(1):81–105. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1111/j.1749-6632.1997.tb52356.x.
Camí J, Farré M, Mas M, Roset PN, Poudevida S, Mas A, et al. Human pharmacology of 3, 4-
methylenedioxymeth-amphetamine (“Ecstasy”): psychomotor performance and
subjective effects. J Clin Psychopharmacol 2000;20(4):455–66. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1007/s00213-006-0410-7.
Canitano R, Vivanti G. Tics and Tourette syndrome in autism spectrum disorders. Autism
2007;11(1):19–28. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1362361307070992.
Cath DC, Ran N, Smit JH, van Balkom AJLM, Comijs HC. Symptom overlap between autism
spectrum disorder, generalized social anxiety disorder and obsessive–compulsive
disorder in adults: a preliminary case-controlled study. Psychopathology 2008;
41(2):101–10. http://dx.doi.org/10.1159/000111555.
Check E. Psychedelic drugs: the ups and downs of Ecstasy. Nature 2004;429(6988):
126–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/429126a.
Cholden LS, Kurland AA, Savage C. Clinical reactions and tolerance to LSD in chronic
schizophrenia. J Nerv Ment Dis 1955;122:211–21.
Clark TF, Winkielman P, McIntosh DN. Autism and the extraction of emotion from briefly
presented facial expressions: stumbling at the first step of empathy. Emotion 2008;
8(6):803–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0014124.
Cohen S, Kamarck T, Mermelstein R. A global measure of perceived stress. J Health Soc
Behav 1983;24(4):385–96. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2136404.
Cole
JC,
Sumnall
HR.
The
pre-clinical
behavioural
pharmacology
of
3,
4-
methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA). Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2003;27(3):
199–217. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0149-7634(03)00031-9.
Crean RD, Davis SA, Von Huben SN, Lay CC, Katner SN, Taffe MA. Effects of (±) 3, 4-
methylenedioxymethamphetamine,(±) 3, 4-methylenedioxy- amphetamine and
methamphetamine on temperature and activity in rhesus macaques. Neuroscience
2006;142(2):515–25. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2006.06.033.
Danforth AL. Courage, connection, and clarity: a mixed-methods collective-case study of
MDMA (Ecstasy) experiences of autistic adults (Doctoral dissertation); 2013 [Re-
trieved from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses. (UMI No. 3401141)].
Danforth A, Grob CS. Ecstasy. In: Fisher GL, Roget NA, editors. Encyclopedia of substance
abuse prevention, treatment, and recovery, vol. 1. Sage; 2009. p. 352–4.
Davidson J. Autistic culture online: virtual communication and cultural expression on the
spectrum.
Soc
Cult
Geogr
2008;9(7):791–806.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
14649360802382586.
Davis MH. A multidimensional approach to individual differences in empathy. Cat Sel Doc
Psychol 1980;10:85.
Davis MH. Measuring individual differences in empathy: evidence for a multidimensional
approach. J Pers Soc Psychol 1983;44(1):113–26.
De La Garza II R, Fabrizio KR, Gupta A. Relevance of rodent models of intravenous
MDMA self-administration to human MDMA consumption patterns. Psycho-
pharmacology (Berl) 2007;189(4):425–34. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00213-
005-0255-5.
de la Torre R, Farré M, Roset PN, Pizarro N, Abanades S, Segura M, Camí J. Human pharma-
cology of MDMA: pharmacokinetics, metabolism, and disposition. Therapeutic drug
monitoring 2004;26(2):137–44.
Doblin R. A clinical plan for MDMA (Ecstasy) in the treatment of posttraumatic stress dis-
order (PTSD): partnering with the FDA. J Psychoactive Drugs 2002;34(2):185–94.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02791072.2002.10399952.
Domes G, Heinrichs M, Gläscher J, Büchel C, Braus DF, Herpertz SC. Ot attenuates amygda-
la responses to emotional faces regardless of valence. Biol Psychiatry 2007a;62(10):
1187–90. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2007.03.025.
Domes G, Heinrichs M, Michel A, Berger C, Herpertz SC. Oxytocin improves “mind-read-
ing” in humans. Biol Psychiatry 2007b;61(6):731–3. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
biopsych.2006.07.01.
Downing J. The psychological and physiological effects of MDMA on normal volunteers. J
Psychoactive Drugs 1986;18(4):335–40. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02791072.1986.
10472366.
Droogmans S, Cosyns B, D'haenen H, Creeten E, Weytjens C, Franken PR, et al. Possible as-
sociation between 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine abuse and valvular heart
disease. Am J Cardiol 2007;100(9):1442–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amjcard.
2007.06.045.
Duggal HS, Dutta S, Sinha VK. Mood stabilizers in Asperger's syndrome. Aust N Z J Psychi-
atry 2001;35(3):390–1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1046/j.1440-1614.2001.0905h.x.
Dumont
GJH,
Verkes
RJ.
A
review
of
acute
effects
of
3,
4-
methylenedioxymethamphetamine in healthy volunteers. J Psychopharmacol 2006;
20(2):176–87. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0269881106063271.
Dumont GJH, Sweep FCGJ, van der Steen R, Hermsen R, Donders ART, Touw DJ, et al. In-
creased oxytocin concentrations and prosocial feelings in humans after ecstasy
(3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine) administration. Soc Neurosci 2009;4(4):
359–66. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17470910802649470.
Farré M, De La Torre R, Mathúna BÓ, Roset PN, Peiro AM, Torrens M, et al. Repeated doses
administration of MDMA in humans: pharmacological effects and pharmacokinetics.
Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2004;173(3-4):364–75. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s00213-004-1789-7.
First MB, Spitzer RL, Gibbon M, Williams JB. Structured clinical interview for DSM-IV®
axis I disorders (SCID-I), clinician version, administration booklet. American Psychiat-
ric Pub.; 2012
Fisher G. The psycholytic treatment of a childhood schizophrenic girl. Int J Soc Psychiatry
1970;16(2):112–30. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/002076407001600204.
Fisher, G., & Castile, D. (1963). Interim report on research project: An investigation to deter-
mine therapeutic effectiveness of LSD-25 and psilocybin on hospitalized severely emo-
tionally disturbed children. Unpublished manuscript.
Frazier JA, Doyle R, Chiu S, Coyle JT. Treating a child with Asperger's disorder and comor-
bid bipolar disorder. Am J Psychiatry 2002;159(1):13–21. http://dx.doi.org/10.1176/
appi.ajp.159.1.13.
Freedman AM, Ebin EH, Wilson EA. Autistic schizophrenic children: an experiment in the
use of D-lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD-25). Arch Gen Psychiatry 1961;6(3):35–45.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.1962.01710210019003.
Gamma
A,
Buck
A,
Berthold
T,
Hell
D,
Vollenweider
FX.
3,
4-
Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) modulates cortical and limbic brain ac-
tivity as measured by [H215O]-PET in healthy humans. Neuropsychopharmacology
2000;23(4):388–95. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0893-133X(00)00130-5.
Gillott A, Standen PJ. Levels of anxiety and sources of stress in adults with autism. J
Intellect Disabil 2007;11(4):359–70. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1744629507083585.
Gledhill JA, Moore DF, Bell D, Henry JA. Subarachnoid haemorrhage associated with
MDMA abuse. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1993;56(9):1036. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1136/jnnp.56.9.1036.
Glennon RA, Young R. MDMA stimulus generalization to the 5-HT 1A serotonin agonist 8-
hydroxy-2-(di-n-propylamino) tetralin. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 2000;66(3):
483–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0091-3057(00)00174-X.
Glennon RA, Young R, Dukat M, Chang-Fong J, El-Zahabi M. N-Methyl-1-(4-
methoxyphenyl)-2-aminopropane
(PMMA)
and
N-Methyl-1-(3,
4-
methylenedioxyphenyl)-2-aminopropane (MDMA) produce non-identical discrimi-
native stimuli in rats. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 2007;86(3):477–84. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.pbb.2007.01.007.
Graeff FG, Guimarães FS, De Andrade TG, Deakin JF. Role of 5-HT in stress, anxiety, and de-
pression. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 1996;54(1):129–41. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
0091-3057(95)02135-3.
Green AR, Mechan AO, Elliott JM, O'Shea E, Colado MI. The pharmacology and
clinical pharmacology of 3, 4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA,
“Ecstasy”). Pharmacol Rev 2003;55(3):463–508. http://dx.doi.org/10.1124/
pr.55.3.3.
Greer GR, Tolbert RR. Subjective reports of the effects of MDMA in a clinical setting. J Psy-
choactive Drugs 1986;18(4):319–27. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02791072.1986.
10472364.
Greer GR, Tolbert R. A method of conducting therapeutic sessions with MDMA. J Psycho-
active
Drugs
1998;30(4):371–9.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02791072.1998.
10399713.
Grinspoon L, Bakalar JB. Can drugs be used to enhance the psychotherapeutic process?
Am J Psychother 1986;40(3):393–404.
Grob CS. MDMA research: preliminary investigations with human subjects. Int J Drug Pol-
icy 1998;9(2):119–24. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0955- 3959(98)00008-5.
Grob CS. Deconstructing Ecstasy: the politics of MDMA research. Addict Res 2000;8(6):
549–88. http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/16066350008998989.
Grob CS. The enigma of Ecstasy: implications for youth and society. Adolesc Psychiatry
2005;29:97–117.
Grob CS, Poland RE. MDMA. In: Lowinson JH, Ruiz P, Millman RB, Langrod JE, editors. Sub-
stance abuse: a comprehensive textbook. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Williams and Wilkins;
1995. p. 374–86.
Grob
CS,
Poland
RE,
Chang
L,
Ernst
T.
Psychobiologic
effects
of
3,4-
methylenedioxymethamphetamine in humans: methodological considerations and
preliminary observations. Behav Brain Res 1996;73(1):103–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/0166-4328(96)00078-2.
Grof S. LSD psychotherapy. Pomona, CA: Hunter House; 1980.
Gross JJ, John OP. Individual differences in two emotion regulation processes: implications
for affect, relationships, and well-being. J Pers Soc Psychol 2003;85(2):348. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1037/0022- 3514.85.2.348.
246
A.L. Danforth et al. / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry 64 (2016) 237–249
 Guastella AJ, Einfeld SL, Gray KM, Rinehart NJ, Tonge BJ, Lambert TJ, et al. Intranasal oxy-
tocin improves emotion recognition for youth with autism spectrum disorders. Biol
Psychiatry 2010;67(7):692–4. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.09.020.
Hall AP, Henry JA. Acute toxic effects of ‘Ecstasy’(MDMA) and related compounds: over-
view of pathophysiology and clinical management. Br J Anaesth 2006;96(6):
678–85. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/bja/ael078.
Hall GB, Doyle KA, Goldberg J, West D, Szatmari P. Amygdala engagement in response to
subthreshold presentations of anxious face stimuli in adults with autism spectrum
disorders: preliminary insights. PLoS One 2010;5(5):e10804. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1371/journal.pone.0010804.
Hardman HF, Haavik CO, Seevers MH. Relationship of the structure of mescaline and
seven analogs to toxicity and behavior in five species of laboratory animals. Toxicol
Appl Pharmacol 1973;25(2):299–309. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0041-008X(73)
80016-X.
Harrington RD, Woodward JA, Hooton TM, Horn JR. Life-threatening interactions between
HIV-1 protease inhibitors and the illicit drugs MDMA and γ-hydroxybutyrate. Arch
Intern Med 1999;159(18):2221–4. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/archinte.159.18.2221.
Harris DS, Baggott M, Mendelson JH, Mendelson JE, Jones RT. Subjective and hormonal ef-
fects of 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) in humans. Psychopharma-
cology (Berl) 2002;162(4):396–405. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00213-002-1131-1.
Hasler F, Studerus E, Lindner K, Ludewig S, Vollenweider FX. Investigation of serotonin-1A
receptor function in the human psychopharmacology of MDMA. J Psychopharmacol
2009;23(8):923–35. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0269881108094650.
Hazen A, Stein M. Clinical phenomenology and co-morbidity. In: Stein M, editor. Social
phobia clinical and research perspectives. American Washington, DC: Psychiatric
Press; 1995. p. 3–41.
Henry JA, Rella JG. Medical risks associated with MDMA use. In: Holland J, editor. Ecstasy,
a complete guide. Rochester VT: Inner Traditions; 2001. p. 71–86.
Henry
JA,
Jeffreys
KJ,
Dawling
S.
Toxicity
and
deaths
from
3,4-
methylenedioxymethamphetamine (“ ecstasy”). Lancet 1992;340(8816):384–7.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0140-6736(92)91469-O.
Hollander E, Novotny S, Hanratty M, Yaffe R, DeCaria CM, Aronowitz BR, et al. Oxytocin
infusion reduces repetitive behaviors in adults with autistic and Asperger's disorders.
Neuropsychopharmacology 2003;28(1):193–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/sj.npp.
1300021.
Hollander E, Bartz J, Chaplin W, Phillips A, Sumner J, Soorya L, et al. Oxytocin increases re-
tention of social cognition in autism. Biol Psychiatry 2007;61(4):498–503. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2006.05.030.
Hollander E, Soorya L, Chaplin W, Anagnostou E, Taylor BP, Ferretti CJ, et al. A double-
blind placebo-controlled trial of fluoxetine for repetitive behaviors and global sever-
ity in adult autism spectrum disorders. Am J Psychiatry 2012;169(3):292–9. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2011.10050764.
Hoshi R, Bisla J, Curran HV. The acute and sub-acute effects of “Ecstasy” (MDMA) on pro-
cessing of facial expressions: preliminary findings. Drug Alcohol Depend 2004;76(3):
297–304. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2004.06.006.
Hudson AL, Lalies MD, Baker GB, Wells K, Aitchison KJ. Ecstasy, legal highs and designer
drug use: a Canadian perspective. Drug Sci Policy Law 2014;1. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1177/2050324513509190.
Hughes JC, McCabe M, Evans RJ. Intracranial haemorrhage associated with ingestion of ‘Ec-
stasy’. Arch Emerg Med 1993;10(4):372–4. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/emj.10.4.372.
Huxster JK, Pirona A, Morgan MJ. The sub-acute effects of recreational Ecstasy (MDMA)
use: a controlled study in humans. J Psychopharmacol 2006;20(2):281–90. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1177/0269881106060513.
Hysek CM, Vollenweider FX, Liechti ME. Effects of a β-blocker on the cardiovascular re-
sponse to MDMA (Ecstasy). Emerg Med J 2010;27(8):586–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1136/emj.2009.079905.
Hysek CM, Domes G, Liechti ME. MDMA enhances “mind reading” of positive emotions
and impairs “mind reading” of negative emotions. Psychopharmacology (Berl)
2012;222(2):293–302. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00213-012-2645-9.
Jacob S, Brune CW, Carter CS, Leventhal BL, Lord C, Cook EH. Association of the oxytocin
receptor gene (OXTR) in Caucasian children and adolescents with autism. Neurosci
Lett 2007;417(1):6–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2007.02.001.
Jerome L, Baggott M. MAPS' MDMA investigator's brochure update # 2; a review of re-
search in humans and nonhuman animals. Published on-line at http://www. maps.
org/research/mdma/protocol/litupdate1. pdf, 2003.
Johansen P, Krebs T. How could MDMA (Ecstasy) help anxiety disorders? A neurobiolog-
ical rationale. J Psychopharmacol 2009;23(4):389–91. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/
0269881109102787.
Johnson MW, Richards WA, Griffiths RR. Human hallucinogen research: guidelines for
safety.
J
Psychopharmacol
2008;22(6):603–20.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/
0269881108093587.
Joshi G, Wozniak J, Petty C, Martelon MK, Fried R, Bolfek A, et al. Psychiatric co-morbidity
and functioning in a clinically referred population of adults with autism spectrum
disorders: a comparative study. J Autism Dev Disord 2012;43(6):1314–25. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10803-012-1679-5.
Kaku DA, Lowenstein DH. Emergence of recreational drug abuse as a major risk factor for
stroke in young adults. Ann Intern Med 1990;113(11):821–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.
7326/0003-4819-113-11-821.
Kessler RC, McGonagle KA, Zhao S, Nelson CB, Hughes M, Eshleman S, et al. Lifetime and
12-month prevalence of DSM-III-R psychiatric disorders in the United States: results
from the National Comorbidity Survey. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1994;51(1):8–9. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1001/1994.03950010008002.
King BH, Hollander E, Sikich L, McCracken JT, Scahill L, Bregman JD, et al. Lack of efficacy of
citalopram in children with autism spectrum disorders and high levels of repetitive
behavior: citalopram ineffective in children with autism. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2009;
66(6):583–90. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2009.30.
Kirsch P, Esslinger C, Chen Q, Mier D, Lis S, Siddhanti S, et al. Oxytocin modulates neural
circuitry for social cognition and fear in humans. J Neurosci 2005;25(49):11489–93.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3984-05.2005.
Koenig K, Levine M. Psychotherapy for individuals with autism spectrum disorders. J
Contemp Psychother 2011;41(1):29–36. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10879-010-
9158-9.
Kosfeld M, Heinrichs M, Zak PJ, Fischbacher U, Fehr E. Oxytocin increases trust in humans.
Nature 2005;435(7042):673–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature03701.
Lamers CT, Ramaekers JG, Muntjewerff ND, Sikkema KL, Riedel WJ, Samyn N, et al. Disso-
ciable effects of a single dose of Ecstasy (MDMA) on psychomotor skills and atten-
tional performance. J Psychopharmacol 2003;17(4):379–87. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1177/0269881103174015.
Lawn
JC.
Schedules
of
controlled
substances;
scheduling
of
3,4-
methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) into schedule I of the controlled sub-
stances act. Fed Regist 1986;51(198):36552–60.
Lerer E, Levi S, Salomon S, Darvasi A, Yirmiya N, Ebstein RP. Association between the oxy-
tocin receptor (OXTR) gene and autism: relationship to Vineland Adaptive Behavior
Scales and cognition. Mol Psychiatry 2008;13(10):980–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
sj.mp.4002087.
Lester SJ, Baggott M, Welm S, Schiller NB, Jones RT, Foster E, et al. Cardiovascular effects of
3, 4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine: a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.
Ann Intern Med 2000;133(12):969–73. http://dx.doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-133-
12-200012190-00012.
LeVay S. When science goes wrong: twelve tales from the dark side of discovery. New
York, NY: Penguin Group; 2008. p. 78–98.
Lieb R, Schuetz CG, Pfister H, von Sydow K, Wittchen HU. Mental disorders in Ecstasy
users: a prospective-longitudinal investigation. Drug Alcohol Depend 2002;68(2):
195–207. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0376-8716(02)00190-4.
Liebowitz MR, Gorman JM, Fyer AJ, Klein DF. Social phobia: review of a neglected anxiety
disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1985;42(7):729–36. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
archpsyc.1985.01790300097013.
Liechti ME, Vollenweider FX. The serotonin uptake inhibitor citalopram reduces acute car-
diovascular and vegetative effects of 3, 4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (‘Ecsta-
sy’) in healthy volunteers. J Psychopharmacol 2000;14(3):269–74. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1177/026988110001400313.
Liechti ME, Gamma A, Vollenweider FX. Gender differences in the subjective effects of
MDMA. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2001;154(2):161–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s002130000648.
Liechti ME, Kunz I, Kupferschmidt H. Acute medical problems due to Ecstasy use. Swiss
Med Wkly 2005;135(43–44):652–7.
Liester MB, Grob CS, Bravo GL, Walsh RN. Phenomenology and sequelae of 3,4-
methylenedioxymethamphetamine use. J Nerv Ment Dis 1992;180(6):345–52.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/00005053-199206000-00001.
Linehan M. Cognitive-behavioral treatment of borderline personality disorder. Guilford
Press; 1993.
Manchanda S, Connolly MJ. Cerebral infarction in association with Ecstasy abuse. Postgrad
Med J 1993;69(817):874–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/pgmj.69.817.874.
Mas M, Farré M, de la Torre R, Roset PN, Ortuño J, Segura J, et al. Cardiovascular and neu-
roendocrine effects and pharmacokinetics of 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine
in humans. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1999;290(1):136–45.
McDonald S, Bornhofen C, Shum D, Long E, Saunders C, Neulinger K. Reliability and valid-
ity of The Awareness of Social Inference Test (TASIT): a clinical test of social percep-
tion.
Disabil
Rehabil
2006;28(24):1529–42.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
09638280600646185.
Mechan A, Yuan J, Hatzidimitriou G, Irvine RJ, McCann UD, Ricaurte GA. Pharmacokinetic
profile of single and repeated oral doses of MDMA in squirrel monkeys: relationship
to lasting effects on brain serotonin neurons. Neuropsychopharmacology 2006;
31(2):339–50. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/sj.npp.1300808.
Milroy CM. “Ecstasy” associated deaths: what is a fatal concentration? Analysis of a case
series. Forensic Sci Med Pathol 2011;7(3):248–52. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s12024-010-9220-7.
Mithoefer MC, Wagner MT, Mithoefer AT, Jerome L, Doblin R. The safety and efficacy of
±3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine-assisted psychotherapy in subjects with
chronic, treatment-resistant posttraumatic stress disorder: the first randomized con-
trolled pilot study. J Psychopharmacol 2011;25(4):439–52. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1177/0269881110378371.
Mithoefer MC, Wagner MT, Mithoefer AT, Jerome L, Martin SF, Yazar-Klosinski B,
et
al.
Durability
of
improvement
in
post-traumatic
stress
disorder
symptoms and absence of harmful effects or drug dependency after 3,4-
methylenedioxymethamphetamine-assisted psychotherapy: a prospective
long-term follow-up study. J Psychopharmacol 2013;27(1):28–39. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1177/0269881112456611.
Mogar RE, Aldrich RW. The use of psychedelic agents with autistic schizophrenic children.
Psychedelic Rev 1969;10:5–13.
Montastruc F, Montastruc G, Vigreux P, Bruneval P, Guilbeau‐Frugier C, Cron C, et al. Val-
vular heart disease in a patient taking 3,4‐methylenedioxymethamphetamine
(MDMA, ‘Ecstasy’). Br J Clin Pharmacol 2012;74(3):547–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1111/j.1365-2125.2012.04252.x.
Morley KC, Arnold JC, McGregor IS. Serotonin (1A) receptor involvement in acute 3, 4-
methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) facilitation of social interaction in the
rat. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 2005;29(5):648–57. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2005.04.009.
Mueller M, Kolbrich EA, Peters FT, Maurer HH, McCann UD, Huestis MA, et al. Direct com-
parison of (±)3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (“Ecstasy”) disposition and
metabolism in squirrel monkeys and humans. Ther Drug Monit 2009a;31(3):367.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/FTD.0b013e3181a4f6c2.
247
A.L. Danforth et al. / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry 64 (2016) 237–249
 Mueller M, Peters FT, Huestis MA, Ricaurte GA, Maurer HH. Simultaneous liquid
chromatographic-electrospray ionization mass spectrometric quantification of 3, 4-
methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA, Ecstasy) and its metabolites 3, 4-
dihydroxymethamphetamine, 4-hydroxy-3-methoxymethamphetamine and 3, 4-
methylenedioxyamphetamine in squirrel monkey and human plasma after acidic
conjugate cleavage. Forensic Sci Int 2009b;184(1):64–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
forsciint.2008.12.002.
Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies. Annual report for FDA on 3,4
methylenedioxy-methamphetamine (MDMA). (IND# 63,384, Form 1571, Serial
Number: 0050). Retrieved from http://www.maps.org/research archive/mdma/
FDA_ 2014_ MDMA_AR_13Feb15.pdf, 2015.
Newman SS, Ghaziuddin M. Violent crime in Asperger syndrome: the role of psychiatric
comorbidity. J Autism Dev Disord 2008;38(10):1848–52. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s10803-008-0580-8.
Nichols DE. Differences between the mechanism of action of MDMA, MBDB, and the
classic hallucinogens: identification of a new therapeutic class: entactogens. J
Psychoactive Drugs 1986;18(4):305–13. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02791072.
1986.10472362.
Nutt DJ, King LA, Phillips LD. Drug harms in the UK: a multicriteria decision analysis.
Lancet 2010;376(9752):1558–65. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(10)61462-
6.
Oblak A, Gibbs T, Blatt G. Reduced GABA-A receptors and benzodiazepine binding sites in
the posterior cingulate cortex and fusiform gyrus in autism. Brain Res 2012;1380:
218–28. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2010.09.021.
Oehen P, Traber R, Widmer V, Schnyder U. A randomized, controlled pilot study of MDMA
(±3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine)-assisted psychotherapy for treatment of
resistant, chronic Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). J Psychopharmacol 2013;
27(1):40–52. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0269881112464827.
Öst LG. Age of onset in different phobias. J Abnorm Psychol 1987;96(3):223. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1037/0021-843X.96.3.223.
Parrott
AC.
The
psychotherapeutic
potential
of
MDMA
(3,4-methylene
dioxymethamphetamine): an evidence-based review. Psychopharmacology (Berl)
2007;191(2):181–93. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00213-007-0703-5.
Parrott AC. The potential dangers of using MDMA for psychotherapy. J Psychoactive Drugs
2014;46(1):37–43. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02791072.2014.873690.
Parrott AC, Lock J, Conner AC, Kissling C, Thome J. Dance clubbing on MDMA and during
abstinence from Ecstasy/MDMA: prospective neuroendocrine and psychobiological
changes. Neuropsychobiology 2008;57(4):165–80. http://dx.doi.org/10.1159/
000147470.
Perez Jr JA, Arsura EL, Strategos S. Methamphetamine-related stroke: four cases. J Emerg
Med 1999;17(3):469–71. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0736-4679(99)00009-8.
Peroutka
SJ,
Newman
H,
Harris
H.
Subjective
effects
of
3,4-methylene
dioxymethamphetamine in recreational users. Neuropsychopharmacology 1988;
1(4):273–7.
Pirona A, Morgan MJ. An investigation of the subacute effects of Ecstasy on neuropsycho-
logical performance, sleep and mood in regular Ecstasy users. J Psychopharmacol
2010. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0269881109102780.
Posner K, Brown GK, Stanley B, Brent DA, Yershova KV, Oquendo MA, et al. The Columbia
—Suicide Severity Rating Scale: initial validity and internal consistency findings from
three multisite studies with adolescents and adults. Am J Psychiatry 2011;168(12):
1266–77. http://dx.doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2011.10111704.
Ramsay JR, Brodkin ES, Cohen MR, Listerud J, Rostain AL, Ekman E. Better strangers: using
the relationship in psychotherapy for adult patients with Asperger syndrome.
Psychother Theory Res Pract Train 2005;42(4):483. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-
3204.42.4.483.
Reich J, Goldenberg I, Vasile R, Goisman R, Keller M. A prospective follow—along study of
the course of social phobia. Psychiatry Res 1994;54(3):249–58. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/0165-1781(94)90019-1.
Ricaurte GA, Yuan J, Hatzidimitriou G, Cord BJ, McCann UD. Severe dopaminergic neuro-
toxicity in primates after a common recreational dose regimen of MDMA (“Ecstasy”):
retraction. Science 2003;301(5639):1479. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.301.
5639.1479b.
Richards W, Grof S, Goodman L, Kurland A. LSD-assisted psychotherapy and the human
encounter with death. Journal of Transpersonal Psychology 1972;4(2):121–50.
Riedlinger TJ, Riedlinger JE. Psychedelic and entactogenic drugs in the treatment of de-
pression. J Psychoactive Drugs 1994;26(1):41–55. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
02791072.1994.10472600.
Rojas-Bermúdez JG. Tratamiento combinado deo psicoanalisis y LSD 25 en ninos
psicoticos [Combined treatment with psychoanalysis and LSD 25 in psychotic chil-
dren]. Acta Neuropsiquait (Argentina) 1960;6:497–500.
Rolo A, Krinsky LW, Abramson HA, Goldfarb L. Preliminary method for study of LSD with
children. Int J Neuropsychiatry 1965;1(6):552–5.
Rosenberg M. Society and the adolescent self-image. Princeton: Princeton University
Press; 1965.
Rothwell PM, Grant R. Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis induced by ‘Ecstasy’. J
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1993;56(9):1035. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/jnnp.
56.9.1035.
Saulnier C, Volkmar F. Mental health problems in people with autism and related disor-
ders. In: Bouras N, Holt G, editors. Psychiatric and behavioural disorders in intellectu-
al and developmental disabilities. 2nd ed. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press;
2007. p. 215–24.
Schechter MD. Discriminative profile of MDMA. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 1986;24(6):
1533–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0091-3057(86)90480-6.
Schenk S. MDMA self-administration in laboratory animals: a summary of the literature
and proposal for future research. Neuropsychobiology 2009;60(3-4):130–6. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1159/000253549.
Schneier FR, Heckelman LR, Garfinkel R, Campeas R, Fallon BA, Gitow A, et al. Functional
impairment in social phobia. J Clin Psychiatry 1994;55(8):322–31.
Selmi KG Davies, Sharma RR, JW Neal F. Intracerebral haemorrhage due to amphetamine
abuse: report of two cases with underlying arteriovenous malformations. Br J
Neurosurg 1995;9(1):93–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02688699550041836.
Setola V, Hufeisen SJ, Grande-Allen KJ, Vesely I, Glennon RA, Blough B, et al. 3, 4-
Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA, “Ecstasy”) induces fenfluramine-like
proliferative actions on human cardiac valvular interstitial cells in vitro. Mol
Pharmacol 2003;63(6):1223–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1124/mol.63.6.1223.
Sigafoos J, Green VA, Edrisinha C, Lancioni GE. Flashback to the 1960s: LSD in the treat-
ment of autism. Dev Neurorehabil 2007;10(1):75–81. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
13638490601106277.
Simmons III JQ, Leiken SJ, Lovaas OI, Schaeffer B, Perloff B. Modification of autistic behav-
ior with LSD-25. Am J Psychiatry 1966;122(11):1201–11.
Simmons JQ, Benor D, Daniel D. The variable effects of LSD-25 on the behavior of a hetero-
geneous group of childhood schizophrenics. Behav Neuropsychiatry 1972;4(1–2):
10–6.
Smilkstein MJ, Smolinske SC, Rumack BH. A case of MAO inhibitor/MDMA interaction:
agony after Ecstasy. Clin Toxicol 1987;25(1–2):149–59. http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/
15563658708992620.
Solowij N, Hall W, Lee N. Recreational MDMA use in Sydney: a profile of ‘Ecstasy’ users
and their experiences with the drug. Br J Addict 1992;87(8):1161–72. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1360-0443.1992.tb02003.x.
Spielberger CD, Gorsuch RL, Lushene RE. Manual for the state-trait anxiety inventory;
1970.
Stolaroff M. The secret chief revealed: conversations with a pioneer of the underground
therapy movement. Sarasota FL: Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Stud-
ies; 2004.
Strassman RJ. Hallucinogenic drugs in psychiatric research and treatment: perspectives
and prospects. J Nerv Ment Dis 1995;183(3):127–38. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
00005053-199503000-00002.
Substance Abuse Mental Health Services Administration. Results from the 2013 National
Survey on Drug Use and Health: Summary of National Findings, NSDUH Series H-48,
HHS Publication No. (SMA) 14–4863. Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration; 2014.
Sumnall HR. The varieties of ecstatic experience: an exploration of the subjective experi-
ences of Ecstasy. J Psychopharmacol 2006;20(5):670–82. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/
0269881106060764.
Tancer ME, Johanson CE. The subjective effects of MDMA and mCPP in moderate MDMA
users. Drug Alcohol Depend 2001;65(1):97–101. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0376-
8716(01)00146-6.
Tantam D. Asperger syndrome in adulthood. In: Frith U, editor. Autism and Asperger's
syndrome. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press; 1991. p. 147–83.
Tantam D. Psychological disorder in adolescents and adults with Asperger syndrome.
Autism 2000;4(1):47–62. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1362361300004001004.
Thompson MR, Callaghan PD, Hunt GE, Cornish JL, McGregor IS. A role for oxytocin and 5-
HT 1A receptors in the prosocial effects of 3,4 methylenedioxymethamphetamine
(“Ecstasy”). Neuroscience 2007;146(2):509–14. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neurosci-
ence.2007.02.032.
Thompson MR, Hunt GE, McGregor IS. Neural correlates of MDMA (“Ecstasy”)-induced
social interaction in rats. Soc Neurosci 2009;4(1):60–72. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
17470910802045042.
Tsai L. Diagnosis and treatment of anxiety disorders in individuals with autism spectrum
disorder. In: Baron MG, Groden J, Groden G, Lipsitt L, editors. Stress and coping in au-
tism. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2006. p. 2388–440.
Turner SM, Beidel DC, Dancu CV, Keys DJ. Psychopathology of social phobia and compar-
ison to avoidant personality disorder. J Abnorm Psychol 1986;95(4):389. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1037//0021-843X.95.4.389.
van Wel JH, Kuypers KP, Theunissen EL, Bosker WM, Bakker K, Ramaekers JG. Effects of
acute MDMA intoxication on mood and impulsivity: role of the 5-HT2 and 5-HT1 re-
ceptors. PLoS One 2012;7(7):e40187. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0040187.
Volkmar FR, Klin A, Siegel B, Szatmari P, Lord C, Campbell M, et al. Field trial for autistic
disorder in DSM-IV. Am J Psychiatry 1994;151(9):1361–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1023/A:1005415823867.
Volkmar FR, State M, Klin A. Autism and autism spectrum disorders: diagnostic issues for
the coming decade. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2009;50(1–2):108–15. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1469-7610.2008.02010.x.
Vollenweider FX, Gamma A, Liechti M, Huber T. Psychological and cardiovascular effects
and short-term sequelae of MDMA (“Ecstasy”) in MDMA-naïve healthy volunteers.
Neuropsychopharmacology 1998;19(4):241–51. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0893-
133x(98)00013-x.
von Sydow K, Lieb R, Pfister H, Höfler M, Wittchen HU. Use, abuse and dependence of Ec-
stasy and related drugs in adolescents and young adults—a transient phenomenon?
Results from a longitudinal community study. Drug Alcohol Depend 2002;66(2):
147–59. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0376-8716(01)00195-8.
Wang X, Baumann MH, Xu H, Morales M, Rothman RB. (±)-3,4-Methylene
dioxymethamphetamine administration to rats does not decrease levels of the sero-
tonin transporter protein or alter its distribution between endosomes and the plasma
membrane. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2005;314(3):1002–12. http://dx.doi.org/10.1124/
jpet.105.088476.
Whitaker-Azmitia PM. Behavioral and cellular consequences of increasing serotonergic
activity during brain development: a role in autism? Int J Dev Neurosci 2005;23(1):
75–83. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2004.07.022.
White SW, Albano AM, Johnson CR, Kasari C, Ollendick T, Klin A, et al. Development of a
cognitive-behavioral intervention program to treat anxiety and social deficits in
248
A.L. Danforth et al. / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry 64 (2016) 237–249
 teens with high-functioning autism. Clin Child Fam Psychol Rev 2010;13(1):77–90.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10567-009-0062-3.
Wing L. Asperger's syndrome: a clinical account. Psychol Med 1981;11(1):115–29. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0033291700053332.
Winkelman MJ, Roberts TB. Conclusions: Guidelines for implementing the use of psyche-
delic medicines. In: Winkelman MJ, Roberts TB, editors. Psychedelic medicine: New
evidence for hallucinogenic substances as treatments, Vol. 2. CT: Praeger: Westport;
2007. p. 2271–98.
Wolff K, Tsapakis EM, Winstock AR, Hartley D, Holt D, Forsling ML, et al. Vasopressin and
oxytocin secretion in response to the consumption of Ecstasy in a clubbing
population. J Psychopharmacol 2006;20(3):400–10. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/
0269881106061514.
Wu LT, Parrott AC, Ringwalt CL, Yang C, Blazer DG. The variety of Ecstasy/MDMA users:
results from the National Epidemiologic Survey on alcohol and related conditions.
Am J Addict 2009;18(6):452–61. http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/10550490903206049.
Wymbs BT, Robb JA, Chronis AM, Massetti GM, Fabiano GA, Arnold FW, et al. Long-term,
multimodal treatment of a child with Asperger's syndrome and comorbid disruptive
behavior problems: a case illustration. Cogn Behav Pract 2005;12(3):338–50. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/s1077-7229(05)80056-2.
249
A.L. Danforth et al. / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry 64 (2016) 237–249
