 Women's Health Policy in the United States: An American College of
Physicians Position Paper
Hilary Daniel, BS; Shari M. Erickson, MPH; and Sue S. Bornstein, MD; for the Health and Public Policy Committee of the American
College of Physicians*
In this position paper, the American College of Physicians (ACP)
examines the challenges women face in the U.S. health care sys-
tem across their lifespans, including access to care; sex- and
gender-specific health issues; variation in health outcomes com-
pared with men; underrepresentation in research studies; and
public policies that affect women, their families, and society. ACP
puts forward several recommendations focused on policies that
will improve the health outcomes of women and ensure a health
care system that supports the needs of women and their families
over the course of their lifespans.
Ann Intern Med. 2018;168:874-875. doi:10.7326/M17-3344
Annals.org
For author affiliations, see end of text.
This article was published at Annals.org on 29 May 2018.
W
omen face unique challenges over the course of
their lifespans regarding their physical health, in-
teractions with the health care system, and roles in so-
ciety. They make up more than half of the U.S. popula-
tion and are likely to live longer than men—women
aged 85 years or older outnumber their male counter-
parts nearly 2 to 1 (1). Women use the health care sys-
tem as patients, caregivers, and family representatives
and can be particularly affected by costs, access issues,
discriminatory policies, and lack of representation in
biomedical and health outcomes research.
Both sex- and gender-specific issues affect women's
health. Women may differ from men in disease expres-
sion, reaction to medications, or care management
plans. They are more likely to be diagnosed or afflicted
with certain diseases and conditions (including chronic
or autoimmune diseases), and 38% of women have 1 or
more chronic diseases, compared with 30% of men (2).
Research suggests that risk factors related to chronic
disease (such as diabetes, high cholesterol, and cardio-
vascular disease) are becoming more prevalent in
women of reproductive age (3). Women also have
unique mental health issues and depression, such as
postpartum or perimenopausal depression. Women of
diverse race/ethnicity, as well as women in the lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender, questioning, intersex, or
asexual (LGBTQIA) community, face greater health dis-
parities than the general population, compounding
specific issues in women's health.
Access to reproductive health care and health in-
surance has been and continues to be a barrier for
women. Women in the United States are more likely to
be covered by health insurance as a dependent (24%
of women aged 19 to 64 years) than men, putting a
woman at greater risk for losing coverage if she be-
comes widowed or divorced or if her spouse or partner
loses his or her job (4). Uninsured women use fewer
preventive services and are more likely to delay care
because of cost (5). A woman's risk for being uninsured
also varies by demographic, increasing to more than
20% for low-income women, those who lack a high
school education, Hispanic/Latina women, and nonciti-
zens (4). In addition, funding for family planning ser-
vices and access to comprehensive reproductive health
care are regularly disputed by state and federal legis-
latures, creating uncertainties and potential disparities
around access to reproductive care.
As the health care system evolves, stakeholders
must consider how to integrate women's health needs
into policy discussion and capitalize on opportunities to
improve the health of women, their families, and soci-
ety. The American College of Physicians (ACP) makes 7
recommendations that aim to improve overall well-
being throughout all stages of a woman's life and to
address public policy issues that may result in barriers
to health care access. The full position paper, including
the expanded background and policy rationale, is in
the Appendix (available at Annals.org).
METHODS
This policy paper was drafted by ACP's Health and
Public Policy Committee, which is charged with ad-
dressing issues that affect the health care of the U.S.
public and the practice of internal medicine and its sub-
specialties. The authors reviewed available studies, re-
ports, and surveys related to women's health from
PubMed and Google Scholar between 1990 and 2017
and relevant news articles, policy documents, Web
sites,
and
other
sources.
Recommendations
were
based on reviewed literature and input from ACP's
See also:
Editorial comment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 885
* This paper, written by Hilary Daniel, BS; Shari M. Erickson, MPH; and Sue S. Bornstein, MD, was developed for the Health and Public Policy Committee of the
American College of Physicians. Individuals who served on the Health and Public Policy Committee at the time of its approval and authored this work were Sue
S. Bornstein, MD (Chair); Gregory C. Kane, MD (Vice Chair); Heather E. Gantzer, MD; Tracey L. Henry, MD; Joshua D. Lenchus, DO; Joseph M. Li, MD; Bridget
M. McCandless, MD; Beth R. Nalitt, MD; Lavanya Viswanathan, MD; Caleb J. Murphy, BS; Ayeetin M. Azah, MD; and Lianne Marks, MD. Approved by the ACP
Board of Regents on 16 April 2018.
POSITION PAPER
Annals of Internal Medicine
874 © 2018 American College of Physicians
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 Board of Governors, Board of Regents, Council of Early
Career Physicians, Council of Resident/Fellow Mem-
bers, Council of Student Members, and Council of Sub-
specialty Societies and nonmember experts in the field.
The policy paper and related recommendations were
reviewed and approved by the ACP Board of Regents
on 16 April 2018. Financial support for the develop-
ment of this position paper came exclusively from the
ACP operating budget.
POSITIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
1. ACP believes that internists are well-suited to
provide high-quality women's health care and that clini-
cians in all specialties and fields, including internal
medicine, who care for women should receive appropri-
ate training in health issues of particular relevance to
the population of women seen in their practice setting.
Training should emphasize both primary and compre-
hensive care of women, such as office gynecology, as
well as the internist's role in team-based care for com-
plex issues.
2. ACP believes that it is essential for women to
have access to affordable, comprehensive, nondiscrim-
inatory public or private health care coverage that in-
cludes evidence-based care over the course of their
lifespans. Health insurers should not be allowed to
charge women higher premiums or impose higher cost
sharing on women because of their sex or gender.
3. ACP believes in respect for the principle of pa-
tient autonomy on matters affecting patients' individual
health and reproductive decision-making rights, includ-
ing about types of contraceptive methods they use and
whether or not to continue a pregnancy as defined by
existing constitutional law. Accordingly, ACP opposes
government restrictions that would erode or abrogate a
woman's right to continue or discontinue a pregnancy.
Women should have sufficient access to evidence-
based family planning and sexual health information
and the full range of medically accepted forms of
contraception.
4. ACP opposes legislation or regulations that limit
access to comprehensive reproductive health care by
putting medically unnecessary restrictions on health
care professionals or facilities.
5. ACP supports the goal of universal access to fam-
ily and medical leave policies that provide a minimum
period of 6 weeks' paid leave and calls for legislative or
regulatory action at the federal, state, or local level to
advance this goal.
6. ACP supports increased availability of effective
screening tools for physicians or health care profession-
als treating survivors of intimate partner or sexual vio-
lence. ACP supports increased patient education about
intimate partner and sexual violence and the availability
of resources for those affected by these abuses.
7. ACP supports efforts to improve the representa-
tion of women's health in clinical research and close
knowledge gaps related to specific women's health
issues.
SUMMARY
Although the greater medical community recog-
nizes that biological and social factors lead to differ-
ences in disease expression and treatment between
men and women, further consideration of sex and gen-
der is needed in the health care system's broader ap-
proach to women's health. Women face unique health
challenges across their lifespans in addition to their
roles in maintaining healthy families and meeting the
health care needs of children and seriously ill family
members. Ensuring access to nondiscriminatory health
care coverage, ensuring access to a broad range of
evidence-based services for reproductive health care,
supporting public policies that positively affect women
and their families, and closing knowledge gaps are es-
sential to improving the overall health and well-being
of women in the United States.
From American College of Physicians, Washington, DC (H.D.,
S.M.E.); and Texas Medical Home Initiative, Dallas, Texas
(S.S.B.).
Disclosures: Authors have disclosed no conflicts of interest.
Forms can be viewed at www.acponline.org/authors/icmje
/ConflictOfInterestForms.do?msNum=M17-3344.
Corresponding Author: Hilary Daniel, BS, American College of
Physicians, 25 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Suite 700, Wash-
ington, DC 20001; e-mail, hdaniel@acponline.org.
Current author addresses and author contributions are avail-
able at Annals.org.
References
1. He W, Goodkind D, Kowal P. U.S. Census Bureau, International
Population Reports, P95/16-1, An Aging World: 2015. Washington,
DC: US Gov Pr Off; 2016.
2. National Conference of State Legislatures. Improving women's
health: state policy options. December 2015. Accessed at www.ncsl
.org/Portals/1/Documents/Health/WHchecklist12-15.pdf on 11 De-
cember 2017.
3. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Health, United States,
2008. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics; 2008.
4. Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. Women's health insurance
coverage. 21 October 2016. Accessed at http://kff.org/womens
-health-policy/fact-sheet/womens-health-insurance-coverage-fact
-sheet on 2 October 2017.
5. Salganicoff A, Ranji U, Beamesderfer A, Kurani N. Women and
health care in the early years of the ACA: key findings from the 2013
Kaiser Women's Health Survey. Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation.
May 2014. Accessed at www.kff.org/womens-health-policy/report
/women-and-health-care-in-the-early-years-of-the-aca-key-findings
-from-the-2013-kaiser-womens-health-survey on 2 October 2017.
Women's Health Policy in the United States: An ACP Position Paper
POSITION PAPER
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 12 • 19 June 2018 875
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 Current Author Addresses: Ms. Daniel and Ms. Erickson:
American College of Physicians, 25 Massachusetts Avenue
NW, Suite 700, Washington, DC 20001.
Dr. Bornstein: 3111 Beverly Drive, Dallas, TX 75205.
Author Contributions: Conception and design: H. Daniel, S.M.
Erickson.
Analysis and interpretation of the data: H. Daniel.
Drafting of the article: H. Daniel.
Critical revision of the article for important intellectual con-
tent: H. Daniel, S.S. Bornstein.
Final approval of the article: H. Daniel, S.M. Erickson, S.S.
Bornstein.
Administrative, technical, or logistic support: H. Daniel, S.M.
Erickson.
Collection and assembly of data: H. Daniel.
APPENDIX: BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR
WOMEN'S HEALTH POLICY IN THE UNITED
STATES: AN AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
PHYSICIANS POSITION PAPER
For the purpose of this paper, “women” and “fe-
male” refer to women of any cultural, racial, or ethnic
background whose country of residence is the United
States and who are primarily affected by U.S. regula-
tions and laws. Many women's health issues are global,
such as prevalence of certain types of cancer, repro-
ductive and maternal health, behavioral and mental
health, and violence against women. ACP acknowl-
edges that certain cultural, political, and historical tra-
ditions affect the lives and health of women around the
world. Female genital cutting, child marriage, and rates
of sexually transmitted infections (STIs) and HIV/AIDS
(6) continue to be significant concerns for women glob-
ally and require further dedicated analysis and policy
considerations outside the scope of this paper.
Sex- and Gender-Specific Disease Issues
for Women
Women and men differ in susceptibility, presenta-
tion, and expression of disease as a result of biological,
social, and behavioral influences. Sex, the biological
difference between men and women, and gender, the
social constructs and behaviors associated with the
sexes, can affect a woman's health (7). Women report a
higher prevalence of disability than men (24.4% vs.
19.8%), and women account for 54 million of the 100
million Americans living with 1 or more chronic dis-
eases (8, 9). Major issue areas for women include car-
diovascular disease, diabetes, obesity, cancer, and
mental or behavioral health. Compared with men,
women are more likely to die within a year of a heart
attack (10), more likely to delay going to the emer-
gency department with cardiac symptoms, and less
likely to receive aggressive prescription regimens (11).
Women with diabetes are at higher risk for cardiovas-
cular disease than men with diabetes (12) and are less
likely to receive preventive care (13). Although women
are less likely to be diagnosed with cancer, they are
more likely to survive (14). Research shows that over
the past 4 decades, the incidence rate of new cases of
lung cancer has decreased 32% for men but increased
94% for women (15).
Women are 70% more likely than men to have de-
pression (16). Psychological distress associated with
balancing work and family can cause women to delay
accessing health care compared with women who do
not report this type of distress (17). Gender-based ex-
pectations also influence psychiatric care. More than
half of women believe that depression is “a normal part
of aging” (18). Social determinants can affect whether a
woman has maternal depression, and mothers who live
in poverty are 3 times more likely to have depression
than those who do not (19). Women also face different
challenges with substance use disorders from men:
They respond differently to substances and can have
more cravings and relapse after treatment or use drugs
for less time before becoming addicted (20).
Health Issues for Special Populations
Racial/ethnic minorities and LGBTQIA women are
more likely to encounter health care disparities than
non-Hispanic, heterosexual white women. Women in
racial/ethnic minorities face more challenges in access-
ing and receiving appropriate care than the general
population. For example, American Indians and Alaska
Natives have the lowest rates of mammography screen-
ings, and rates among African American women, Asian
women, and women with disabilities are also lower
than in the general population (21, 22). Lesbians have
higher rates of polycystic ovary syndrome than hetero-
sexual women and may be at slightly higher risk for
breast, ovarian, and endometrial cancer. However, they
are less likely to get routine mammograms or cervical
cancer screening. Women in the LGBTQIA population
are also less likely to perceive themselves as at risk for
STIs (23) and may be less likely to report instances of
intimate partner violence (IPV) to authorities (24).
Health disparities faced by LGBTQIA women can be
compounded by race/ethnicity. Transgender women
also face challenges in the health care system, includ-
ing discriminatory coverage practices by insurers, diffi-
culties regarding clinical competency on transgender
health issues, and traditional gender norms that affect
how society views and treats these women (25).
Reproductive Health Care
Reproductive Health and Family Planning
Women's reproductive health care includes several
components related to the reproductive processes and
systems of women across their lifespans. These may in-
clude but are not limited to miscarriage, ectopic preg-
nancy, pregnancy termination, sterilization, and contra-
ceptive methods (26). However, significant attention is
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 12 • 19 June 2018
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 paid to reproductive health during the years in which
women may become pregnant. Family planning is the
entry point to the health care system and allows indi-
viduals and families to plan and space pregnancies. It
also includes other services, such as breast and pelvic
examinations, screening for breast and cervical cancer,
efforts to test for and prevent STIs and HIV, and preg-
nancy diagnosis and counseling (27). Between 2006
and 2010, a total of 43 million women aged 15 to 44
years reported having received family planning or a re-
lated medical service in the past 12 months. Approxi-
mately half of the 18% of women who received such
care at a clinic did so at a Title X–funded clinic. Use of
Title X clinics is more common among women who live
in a nonmetropolitan area or are black, Hispanic/Latina,
below the poverty level, or uninsured (28).
Contraception
Contraceptive methods are used to prevent preg-
nancy and include short-acting hormonal birth control,
barrier methods, long-acting reversible contraception
(LARC), and emergency contraception. In addition to
preventing pregnancy, some methods help relieve
physical symptoms associated with the menstrual cycle.
Approximately 14% of women who use short-acting
hormonal birth control do so exclusively for noncontra-
ceptive purposes (29). Adolescent girls and young
women can be prescribed birth control pills for irregu-
lar menstrual periods, cramps, acne, endometriosis,
polycystic ovary syndrome, or primary ovarian insuffi-
ciency (30). Although the safety, efficacy, and contra-
indications of various types of contraception have been
established, access challenges remain. Some emer-
gency contraception is available over the counter, but
price, confusion about regulations for selling the drug,
and inconsistency about which pharmacies stock it can
make access difficult (31).
Pregnancy and Childbirth
For many women, pregnancy and childbirth can be
a positive experience. Women's health outcomes after
the birth of a child are affected by preconception health,
health through pregnancy, and postpartum care. Social
determinants, such as income, education, and employ-
ment, also correlate with reproductive health and can re-
sult in inequalities (32). In both 2015 and 2016, nearly 4
million births were registered in the United States (33).
However, the United States has the highest maternal mor-
tality rate among developed countries and is the only de-
veloped nation where that rate continues to increase.
Since the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention be-
gan tracking pregnancy-related deaths (those caused by
complications of pregnancy), the maternal mortality rate
has steadily increased from 7.2 deaths per 100 000 live
births in 1987 to a high of 17.8 deaths per 100 000 live
births in 2009 and 2011. Large racial disparities also exist:
Between 2011 and 2013, a total of 12.7 white women
died per 100 000 live births, compared with 43.5 black
women (34). One review of maternal deaths found that
nearly 60% of pregnancy-related deaths were prevent-
able (35). The 2 primary causes of death are cardiovascu-
lar disease and other medical noncardiovascular disease,
indicating potential issues related to prenatal health or
preventable disease.
Some women may determine that they wish not to
continue their pregnancy, and in 2014 (the most recent
year with available data), approximately 652 000 legal
induced abortions were recorded in the United States,
most (91.5%) of which occurred at fewer than 13 weeks'
gestation (36). Carrying a child to delivery or choosing
not to continue a pregnancy may have short- and long-
term positive or negative effects on a woman. Legal
abortion is shown to be safe for the woman (37), and a
recent 5-year study of women's mental health and well-
being after seeking abortion services showed that
those who are denied wanted abortion services are at
greater risk for negative mental health outcomes ini-
tially than those who want and receive an abortion and
that those feelings generally improve over time (38).
Each woman's experience in choosing not to continue
a pregnancy is unique and influenced by various factors
in her life, which may manifest in different ways across
her lifespan.
IPV and Sexual Violence
IPV
Intimate partner violence is “a pattern of assaultive
and coercive behaviors that may include inflicted phys-
ical injury, psychological abuse, sexual assault, progres-
sive isolation, stalking, deprivation, intimidation, and
threats” (39). Perpetrators of IPV can be current or for-
mer spouses or partners or those who wish to be in an
intimate relationship with a person. Approximately 20
persons per minute are abused by an intimate partner
in the United States (40). Intimate partner violence can
affect survivors' physical and mental health in the short
and long term and is associated with no fewer than 40
negative physical, reproductive, psychological, social,
or health behavior outcomes (41). Although both men
and women can experience IPV, women are more likely
to be abused. Between 1994 and 2010, 4 in 5 survivors
of IPV were female (42).
Women are more likely to be killed by an intimate
partner or someone they know than by a stranger, and
between 67% and 80% of intimate partner homicides
involve physical abuse of a woman before the murder
regardless of which partner is killed (43). Of all female
homicide victims, 64% are killed by someone they know,
most frequently (45%) by a spouse, former spouse, boy-
friend, or girlfriend (44). Conversely, 16% of male homi-
cide victims in 2007 were killed by a family member or
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 12 • 19 June 2018
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 intimate partner (44). Firearms may also increase the
probability of death in IPV incidents: Women are 5 times
more likely to be killed by their abuser if he or she owns a
firearm (45).
Gender-based violence also predicts suicidality in
women and can be connected with substance use. In a
survey of more than 3000 persons by the National Cen-
ter on Domestic Violence, Trauma & Mental Health,
26% of participants reported using alcohol or drugs to
self-medicate. These participants also reported that
their partners or former partners used the participant's
substance use to discourage them from seeking help or
threatened to use the information to undermine their
credibility with authorities (46).
Sexual Violence
Sexual violence refers to crimes that include sexual
assault and rape. Women are much more likely to be
survivors of sexual assault than men. The National Vio-
lence Against Women Survey found that 1 in 6 women
(17%) and 1 in 33 men (3%) reported being survivors of
attempted or completed rape during their lifetime (47).
Sexual violence can have physical and psychological
consequences. Victims of sexual violence are also more
likely to engage in high-risk behaviors that increase the
potential for future attacks (48).
Parental and Medical Leave Policies
The United States is the only developed nation and
1 of 2 countries out of 185 surveyed by the Interna-
tional Labour Organization that does not offer some
degree of paid maternity leave; it is 1 of only 4 high-
wealth countries without paid paternity or parental
leave (49). As of March 2016, only 13% of workers in
the private sector had access to paid family leave,
which includes parental leave or leave taken to care for
a seriously ill family member (50). In addition, the rate
at which new mothers with access to maternity leave use
that leave has remained stagnant. A recent analysis
showed no significant trend upward or downward in
women who took maternity leave between 1994 and
2015 (51). The analysis showed that 47.5% of women who
took maternity leave in 2015 were compensated, an aver-
age increase of only 0.65% over nearly 2 decades.
As many as 75% of all caregivers are women, and
female caregivers spend as much as 50% more time
providing care than men (52). Women reported making
27% of decisions affecting their children, 20% affecting
their spouse or partner, and 6% affecting adult relatives
(53). Those who care for a close relative are at higher
risk for poor health due to physical and emotional
stress associated with the caregiver role. Stress associ-
ated with long-term caregiving can include depression
and anxiety, a weakened immune system, obesity,
higher risk for chronic diseases, and problems with
memory (54). Seventeen percent of caregivers re-
ported their health as “fair” or “poor,” compared with
10% of the general adult population (55). Caregiving
caused a change in the work situation of 6 in 10 care-
givers, including reducing work hours, taking unpaid
leave, or receiving warnings about performance or
attendance (55).
No federal laws require a standard level of paid
parental or medical leave. The Family and Medical
Leave Act (FMLA), signed into law in 1993, offers em-
ployees who meet certain requirements up to 12 weeks
of unpaid, job-protected leave each year and requires
employers to maintain the employee's health benefits
during that time (56). Employees of all public agencies,
public and private schools (elementary and secondary),
and companies with 50 or more employees can use
FMLA for the birth and care of a newborn child, adop-
tion of a child, or foster care; to care for an immediate
family member with a serious health condition; or if the
employee cannot work because of a serious health con-
dition. The FMLA defines “immediate family member”
as a spouse, child, or parent but excludes grandparents
and family members through marriage or domestic
partnership (56).
California, New Jersey, Rhode Island, New York,
Washington, and the District of Columbia have passed
laws requiring employers to make paid leave available
for the birth or adoption of a child, for a disability (which
often includes pregnancy), or to care for an ailing family
member with a serious medical condition. California, New
Jersey, and New York are the only states that currently
offer paid family leave to residents, and Washington and
the District of Columbia have passed laws that will take
effect at a later date (57). Programs in California, New Jer-
sey, Rhode Island, and New York are structured to coor-
dinate with existing temporary disability benefits to sup-
port a longer duration.
Recommendations and Positions
1. ACP believes that internists are well-suited to
provide high-quality women's health care and that clini-
cians in all specialties and fields, including internal
medicine, who care for women should receive appropri-
ate training in health issues of particular relevance to
the population of women seen in their practice setting.
Training should emphasize both primary and compre-
hensive care of women, such as office gynecology, as
well as the internist's role in team-based care for com-
plex issues.
Internists are trained to diagnose and treat basic to
complex chronic illnesses and are well-suited to pro-
vide care for adolescent and adult women. However,
not all internal medicine physicians feel prepared to
address some important issues in women's health. En-
hanced or specialized training in such issues can im-
prove the overall care of women across their lifespans,
as well as improve access to routine services. More ro-
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 12 • 19 June 2018
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 bust consideration in medical school, residency, and
fellowship of the unique health needs of women will
help physicians provide care to the largest number of
women (including adolescent and aging women) and
increase awareness of the most common causes of fe-
male mortality in their patient populations.
Primary care has been identified as an avenue to
increase access to certain reproductive health services,
such as LARC, in areas where access is restricted by
government intervention or lack of women's health clin-
ics or providers. However, barriers prevent these pro-
posals from translating into policy changes. A survey of
New York City physicians' views about providing LARC
to adolescents identified both knowledge gaps and
limited access to the device as reasons why the physi-
cians rarely counseled their patients about LARC (58).
These barriers should be addressed to encourage
LARC uptake. Insurance reimbursement can be inade-
quate, and although the device should be covered un-
der the contraception coverage mandate in the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), not all insur-
ers comply (59). Promoting the safety of these methods
and training in LARC insertion among primary care phy-
sicians and patients and addressing issues about same-
day availability of LARC in primary care settings can
enhance access and potentially increase use of this
highly effective contraception.
The health needs of women throughout their life-
spans require the specialized training of various health
care professionals. In addition to preventive care and
the treatment and management of disease, primary
care physicians traditionally play a role in preconcep-
tion and postpartum care. They can help women ad-
dress obesity, blood sugar, diabetes, and cardiovascu-
lar issues that may lead to preeclampsia, all which may
increase the risk for adverse health effects during preg-
nancy. Additional opportunities for training on acute
care management of pregnant women and in the im-
mediate postpartum period in the hospital setting
should also be explored, particularly in light of high
maternal mortality rates.
Women must have access to and a longitudinal re-
lationship with a primary care physician who under-
stands a woman's individual health needs at each stage
of her life, as well as subspecialists who are able to care
for the specific health-related issues women may face.
Internists can treat various illnesses and conditions,
conduct examinations, administer vaccines, and pro-
vide preventive care, but they may not be properly
trained to care for women having high-risk pregnancies
or provide the distinct perspective of pediatricians
treating young women or geriatricians treating older
women. Health care professionals, working with other
members in a medical practice, support women's in-
creased access to care and help create a partnership
between a patient and members of her care team. A
2013 position paper (60) detailed the need to enable
greater collaboration, communication, and coopera-
tion to better serve patient needs and provide the best
possible care for all patients.
2. ACP believes that it is essential for women to
have access to affordable, comprehensive, nondiscrim-
inatory public or private health care coverage that in-
cludes evidence-based care over the course of their
lifespans. Health insurers should not be allowed to
charge women higher premiums or impose higher cost
sharing on women because of their sex or gender.
Before the ACA was passed, one third of women who
applied for a health plan independently were turned
down, charged a higher premium, or excluded because
of previous health problems (61). A report analyzing state-
by-state coverage in the individual market before full im-
plementation of all ACA provisions also showed that cov-
erage for female-specific health care services, such as
maternity care, was severely lacking (62).
The ACA contains many provisions that specifically
support women's health and access to health care cov-
erage. It requires plans to contain certain essential
health benefits (including maternity care and preven-
tive services) and to cover preventive care with no cost
sharing (including well-woman visits, preconception
care, and human papillomavirus testing). The ACA also
ensures access to all contraceptive methods approved
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration with no cost
sharing. Efforts to undercut the ACA's provisions,
weaken or eliminate its essential health benefits, and
allow employers and individuals to purchase plans that
do not cover essential health benefits will negatively
affect women and women's health care.
Additional policies are required to ensure that ev-
ery American, including women, has health insurance
coverage for the full range of evidence-based care he
or she requires to remain healthy and obtain treatment
when unhealthy. Such coverage should include preven-
tion and wellness services, screening for conditions typi-
cally or exclusively found among women, family planning
and reproductive care, contraception, preconception
care, maternity care, postpartum care, care throughout
menopause, mental and behavioral health care, sub-
stance use disorder treatment, and prevention and man-
agement of chronic diseases.
Access to health insurance coverage is important in
supporting not only a woman's physical health but also
her financial stability (63). Women pay more out of
pocket than men overall because they use more health
care. Therefore, access to affordable coverage that ap-
propriately covers all aspects of women's health will
spare women the choice between getting preventive or
immediate health care services and paying for basic
necessities like housing and food. Low-income, diverse,
and younger women are more likely to be uninsured
and be negatively affected by high out-of-pocket costs
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 12 • 19 June 2018
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 for health care. ACP also strongly opposes efforts to
cap or cut Medicaid or convert it into a block grant
program. Two thirds of adult Medicaid beneficiaries are
women (64), and the program paid for nearly half of all
U.S. births before the ACA was implemented (64). In-
adequate or reduced funding forces programs to limit
the number of eligible patients or the benefits they
receive.
3. ACP believes in respect for the principle of pa-
tient autonomy on matters affecting patients' individual
health and reproductive decision-making rights, includ-
ing about types of contraceptive methods they use and
whether or not to continue a pregnancy as defined by
existing constitutional law. Accordingly, ACP opposes
government restrictions that would erode or abrogate a
woman's right to continue or discontinue a pregnancy.
Women should have sufficient access to evidence-
based family planning and sexual health information
and the full range of medically accepted forms of
contraception.
ACP believes that a woman has the right to make
her own decisions, in consultation with her physician or
health care professional, on matters affecting her indi-
vidual health. Reproductive decision-making rights
should be based on the ethical principle of respect for
patient autonomy. Women should have access to the
health care services they may need in their lifetimes,
including reproductive health care and contraception.
They
should
feel
empowered
to
make
decisions
around pregnancy that are grounded in evidence-
based information and reflect their own circumstances,
which may result in a woman delivering and raising a
child, choosing adoption, or choosing abortion. Limit-
ing access to evidence-based medicine greatly affects
a woman's ability to make her own health care choices.
Reproductive care is a key component of women's
health, and limiting access can have lasting repercus-
sions on a woman's physical and mental health, eco-
nomic well-being, and social mobility.
One of the most complex, controversial, and polit-
icized issues in women's health care is access to com-
prehensive reproductive health services, specifically
abortion. Such services may include but are not limited
to management of miscarriage, ectopic pregnancy,
pregnancy termination, sterilization, and contraception
(26). The landmark decisions by the Supreme Court in
Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood of Southeastern
Pennsylvania v. Casey established the current legal
frameworks that regulate a woman's right to abortion.
Since 1973, Roe v. Wade has asserted a woman's right
to privacy regarding medical decisions without interfer-
ence
by
the
government,
including
the
decision
whether or not to continue a pregnancy before fetal
viability, but it did not determine abortion as an abso-
lute right. Roe v. Wade established a framework in
which decisions about abortion in the first trimester
should be left to the medical judgment of a woman and
her physician but in which states may have a greater
interest in the health of the mother during the second
and third trimesters and could impose stronger regula-
tions (second trimester) or regulations and bans (third
trimester) (65). The decision in Planned Parenthood of
Eastern Pennsylvania v. Casey in 1992 established the
undue burden standard, which allows states to regulate
abortion procedures in the first trimester as long as
they do not put a “substantial obstacle in the path of a
woman seeking an abortion before the fetus attains vi-
ability,” superseding the language in the Roe v. Wade
decision (66). Current law also states that exceptions
must be made to preserve the life of the mother.
Notwithstanding
the
Supreme
Court's
rulings,
abortion remains a subject of intense debate among
the American public, federal and state lawmakers, and
jurists. ACP asserts that a woman's right over health
care decisions for matters affecting her individual
health must include the right to decide whether to con-
tinue a pregnancy. However, it recognizes and respects
that individuals, including physicians and patients, may
have deeply held personal beliefs that inform their
views on abortion or contraception rooted in how they
perceive the ontological or moral status of a fetus. Eth-
ical, public policy, and religious or spiritual arguments
raise questions about the nature of what it means to be
a person. For example, those who support constitu-
tional personhood (the concept that from the moment
of fertilization a zygote is considered a fetus and should
possess the same legal status as any other human being,
with some or all constitutional rights) would oppose any
type of abortion and some types of contraception (67),
whereas others may oppose the procedure after fetal vi-
ability. Although the debate is often viewed through the
lens of ardent support or opposition, attitudes and opin-
ions about if and when abortion is acceptable vary (68,
69). ACP supports the current legal framework that allows
women to obtain abortions before fetal viability or in later
stages of pregnancy to protect the health of the mother
and opposes efforts that would further restrict a woman's
constitutional right to privacy in medical decision making,
as upheld by the Supreme Court.
Supporting access to family planning services and
all forms of contraception is essential to reducing the
rate of unintended pregnancy and demand for abor-
tion services. ACP reaffirms its support for federal,
state, and local family planning grants for educational
and clinical services. It continues to support evidence-
based family planning and sex education programs,
which can help to disseminate information about con-
traceptive methods, the social and economic impact of
unintended pregnancy, and prevention of STIs. Access
to family planning clinics that provide essential health
care services (such as STI and HIV testing) continues to
be a major issue for women, particularly those who are
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 12 • 19 June 2018
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 disadvantaged and at higher risk for unintended preg-
nancy. Evidence shows that rather than seeking care else-
where when access to family planning services is limited,
some women forgo preventive care or their usual contra-
ceptive methods. An analysis of the effect of women's
health clinic closures in Wisconsin and Texas showed that
an increase of 100 miles to the nearest clinic decreased
the rate of breast examinations by 11%, mammograms by
18%, and Papanicolaou tests by 18% (70). Exclusion of
Planned Parenthood affiliates from the Texas Women's
Health Program coincided with an increased rate of child-
birth by women on Medicaid, suggesting that the exclu-
sion may have prevented women from accessing family
planning services (71).
4. ACP opposes legislation or regulations that limit
access to comprehensive reproductive health care by
putting medically unnecessary restrictions on health
care professionals or facilities.
As of February 2018, laws in 23 states can be con-
sidered to go beyond what is necessary to ensure pa-
tient safety and may subject physicians to criminal or
civil penalties if they violate the laws, some of which
include regulation of the offices or sites where abortion
procedures are performed. The safety of abortion pro-
cedures is well-established (37). Sixteen states have li-
censing standards that require clinics or offices provid-
ing abortions to meet state licensing standards for
ambulatory surgical centers. In an amicus brief filed in
opposition to a Texas law with such a requirement, the
American Medical Association and American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists called the require-
ment “devoid of any medical or scientific purpose” (72).
These state-level attempts to restrict access to
comprehensive reproductive health services, including
abortion, impose medically unnecessary regulations
that can interfere with the patient–physician relation-
ship and make it difficult for patients to access health
care professionals or assistance at facilities that counsel
on or offer abortion services. ACP opposes regulation
of reproductive health care services that is not focused
on patient safety or based in accepted science. Public
health policy about women's reproductive health and
health care services should first and foremost be based
in clinical research, with an emphasis on health promo-
tion, prevention of unintended pregnancy, and access
to reproductive health services.
ACP strongly reaffirms the position that “laws and
regulations should not mandate the content of what
physicians may or may not say to patients or mandate
the provision or withholding of information or care that,
in the physician's clinical judgment and based on clini-
cal evidence and the norms of the profession, are not
necessary or appropriate for a particular patient at the
time of a patient encounter” (73). These laws may inter-
fere with the relationship between physicians and pa-
tients or make access to reproductive health care
services or abortion extremely difficult or impossible.
Physicians may personally choose not to provide cer-
tain reproductive services or information about these
services if it conflicts with their moral or personal stan-
dards. However, they still have a duty to inform patients
about care options and alternatives or refer them for
information (so that patient rights are not constrained)
and provide information that is evidence-based and
free of personal bias (74).
5. ACP supports the goal of universal access to fam-
ily and medical leave policies that provide a minimum
period of 6 weeks' paid leave and calls for legislative or
regulatory action at the federal, state, or local level to
advance this goal.
Paid leave policies can improve health outcomes
for women and their families, on whom a new child can
have significant physical and emotional effects. The
birthing process is physically taxing, and women con-
tinue to have physical and hormonal changes for weeks
or months afterward. An analysis of mothers at various
periods after childbirth showed a relationship between
leave duration and decreases in depressive symptoms
until 6 months postpartum (75). Paid maternity leave is
associated with increased likelihood of breastfeeding ini-
tiation and continuation at 6 months compared with no
paid leave (76). Breastfeeding can have positive health
outcomes for both child and mother, including providing
some protection from common childhood infections in a
baby's first year of life, helping a woman recover after the
birth, and reducing risk for breast or ovarian cancer (77,
78). In addition, paid parental leave for men can reduce
stress on families and encourage father–child bonding
(79).
Guaranteeing at least 6 weeks' paid leave for both
men and women allows employees already experienc-
ing major life changes to focus on their physical health
and the health of their families without added stress.
Such policies should include minimum standards for
paid leave and dedicated funding to help employers
provide such leave. Analyses of states with paid leave
policies show an overall positive effect. A study of Cal-
ifornia's policy showed that access to the benefits in-
creased new mothers' leave by 3 weeks, positively
affected children and mothers, and did not cause prob-
lems for most employers (around 90% reported posi-
tive effects) (80). Paid leave makes economic sense for
employers as well as employees. Employers who offer
paid leave are more likely to retain employees and
more attractive to job seekers. In New Jersey, approxi-
mately 76% of workers view the law favorably, and busi-
nesses claim they have adjusted well (81).
Despite the availability of FMLA to about 60% of
the American workforce, some caregivers still cannot
afford to take unpaid time off, and existing public pol-
icies do not sufficiently support women or their families
in a way that does not risk economic stability or posi-
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 12 • 19 June 2018
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 tion in the workforce. Paid leave policies should ensure
increased flexibility for caregivers to care for family
members, including children (biological or adopted),
spouses, partners, parents, parents-in-law, or grandpar-
ents. Policymakers should also consider revising FMLA
to reflect the current workforce and more flexible family
structures that may include grandparents or in-laws. Re-
forms should be structured to minimize disruption for
employers while providing the same standard of job
protection for employees and consideration of the fi-
nancial hardships and stress experienced by caregivers
and their families.
ACP recognizes that universal access to at least 6
weeks of paid family leave may bring unique chal-
lenges for smaller employers, including private physi-
cian practices and nonprofit organizations. Therefore,
legislation to expand paid leave should consider po-
tential burdens on employers while upholding the in-
tent of the programs through dedicated funding, nec-
essary accommodation, and assistance to help small
businesses transition to a minimum of 6 weeks of paid
leave.
Additional studies are needed to determine the
optimal amount of paid time off to maximize the asso-
ciated health benefits for employees; discourage the
“motherhood penalty,” in which women face bias and
wage gaps resulting from their potential or actual tak-
ing of leave; examine whether paid leave policies
should be integrated into or administered by unem-
ployment insurance programs; balance the economic
benefit for employers against costs; determine an ap-
propriate level of imbursement during leave; and re-
search additional mechanisms that may help finance
paid leave, such as payroll taxes or reforms of existing
programs (for example, Social Security) (82).
6. ACP supports increased availability of effective
screening tools for physicians or health care profession-
als treating survivors of intimate partner or sexual vio-
lence. ACP supports increased patient education about
intimate partner and sexual violence and the availability
of resources for those affected by these abuses.
The physical, mental, and behavioral health effects
of IPV are well-documented, including increased mor-
bidity and mortality. Unfortunately, many victims of IPV
or sexual violence go unrecognized. Primary care prac-
tices provide a confidential environment and private
space that is particularly important in light of the low
reporting rate of IPV against women. The U.S. Preven-
tive Services Task Force rates screening for IPV in preg-
nant women but is currently reviewing that recommen-
dation as well as screening recommendations for elder
abuse and abuse of vulnerable adults (83). The rate of
screening for IPV in primary care offices ranges from
1.5% to 12% (84).
Many physician barriers may make identifying or
screening for IPV challenging. These include feelings
that discussing the topic is “too close to home,” per-
sonal discomfort with the topic, a belief that asking
about IPV is too personal, lack of education and train-
ing, lack of time to screen and respond, a belief that
physicians should not address IPV, and fear of reper-
cussions from mandatory reporting laws in their state.
Institutional barriers also prevent IPV from being recog-
nized and addressed, including lack of training, legal
issues involving insurance discrimination, mandatory
reporting requirements, and lack of diagnostic or pro-
cedural codes for violence. Finally, research on IPV is
limited by concerns about ethics, safety, and privacy;
lack of uniform or standard definitions for IPV; and an
overall lack of funding for research on violence (85).
An emerging area of interest is how to develop ef-
fective screening measures for potential perpetrators
of violence, including IPV and sexual violence. There is
little empirical evidence on methodology, best prac-
tices, or effectiveness of this type of intervention. De-
spite this, several measurement tools exist, including
the Abuse Within Intimate Relationships Scale, Abusive
Behavior Inventory–Partner Form, Physical Abuse of
Partner Scale, Revised Conflict Tactics Scale, and Non-
Physical Abuse of Partner Scale. In an effort to address
prevention of IPV and sexual violence, additional re-
search should investigate whether these methods are
effective in preventing or reducing incidents of IPV or
sexual violence.
Sexual violence and IPV are very sensitive subjects,
and not all victims will feel comfortable raising these
issues, even with trusted health care professionals in
a private setting. Creating an environment in which
awareness of the topic is increased can help the patient
feel more comfortable discussing any issue they may
have had. For patients who are not ready to disclose
IPV to a clinician, primary care practices can improve
awareness of and access to IPV resources by hanging
posters and providing pamphlets, palm cards, and con-
tact lists for national and local resources in the office or
on their Web site. These resources should also include
information for victims of human trafficking or sexual
exploitation.
7. ACP supports efforts to improve the representa-
tion of women's health in clinical research and close
knowledge gaps related to specific women's health
issues.
Women's health research and its applications serve
a broader societal purpose. Women make up more
than half of the U.S. population, but these research
gaps continue to contribute to disparities in health care
treatment of women. Several troubling trends are af-
fecting the overall survival of U.S. women, such as the
decreasing
life
expectancy
of
lower-income
white
women (86), increasing rate of maternal mortality, prev-
alence of binge drinking among older women (87), in-
creasing rate of STIs in older women, and increasing
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 12 • 19 June 2018
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 suicide rate among women (88). All women in the
United States must have access to the best available
health care—starting with a comprehensive understand-
ing of the science behind women's health and health
needs—as well as the resources necessary to effectively
address women's health issues and take steps to re-
duce negative outcomes.
In 1985, a workgroup of the U.S. Public Health Ser-
vice reported that the exclusion of women in research
negatively affected the quality of knowledge related to
women's health issues (89). Considerable efforts have
been made since then through policy changes, regula-
tions, and the establishment of offices of women's
health in federal agencies to better support scientific
research on women's health. However, clinical trial in-
vestigators do not necessarily distinguish sex or gender
differences in their data. Large research gaps therefore
remain in understanding how women react to or are
affected by certain medications. Despite advances in
certain areas since 1985, progress is lacking in unin-
tended pregnancy, maternal morbidity and mortality,
autoimmune diseases, alcohol and drug addiction,
lung cancer, gynecologic cancer other than cervical
cancer, nonmalignant gynecologic disorders, and Alz-
heimer disease (90). In addition, certain groups (partic-
ularly disadvantaged women) have not seen improved
health outcomes in the areas where major progress has
been made, namely breast cancer, cardiovascular dis-
ease, and cervical cancer.
Although efforts to increase female participation
in clinical studies have improved representation of
women in research generally, more attention should be
focused on how sex and gender affect disease, disease
treatment, and social factors (91) as well as disease ex-
pression, health outcomes, and treatment protocols.
Gaps in women's health research not only are detri-
mental to the health of women but also prevent policy-
makers from properly addressing sex or gender in out-
comes measures or understanding the return on
federal investments into biomedical research. In a re-
view of 2 decades of medical literature on the compar-
ative effectiveness of treatments for coronary artery dis-
ease in women, 65% of articles were excluded because
they did not report sex-specific data and only 17% of
articles reported sex-specific outcomes (92).
Research must also reflect the broader demographic
makeup of the United States, and efforts should include
increased participation of women of different races or eth-
nicities and LGBTQIA women in research studies. Demo-
graphic changes in the overall population show that
those who identify as racial/ethnic minorities make up a
larger part of the population than previously, and re-
search must adequately represent them. Despite prog-
ress in female representation in studies, some racial
minorities—especially African American or black women—
remain underrepresented in most drug development
programs (93). This may prevent generalizability of clinical
trial results in this population.
Representation of LGBTQIA persons should also
be addressed. Lesbians and gay men are sometimes
excluded from clinical trials on the basis of their sexual
orientation, particularly in studies of sexual health or
function, without scientific reasoning (94). Lesbian, bi-
sexual, or transgender women may also be hesitant to
participate in research studies because of reluctance to
share their sexual orientation or gender identity status
with researchers due to concerns about privacy; being
judged; potential lack of cultural competence by re-
searchers; or avoiding stigma, harassment, or discrimi-
nation (95). Although excluding certain persons from
clinical research who are not in the target population of
the study is not uncommon, researchers should ensure
that this is not done in a discriminatory manner.
Conclusion
Health care is important to women's personal, so-
cial, and economic well-being. Policymakers must take
into account the health needs of women over their life-
spans and take action to strengthen the health care sys-
tem and societal structures to support women and their
families. Ensuring access to care that accounts for the
unique health needs of women, ensuring affordable
and nondiscriminatory health care coverage, improving
awareness of issues particularly affecting women, and
ensuring that women's health care decisions are re-
spected are all steps on the path to improving women's
health in the United States. Addressing these issues will
advance the goal of achieving health equity among all
citizens and will improve health care outcomes for
women of future generations.
Web-Only References
6. Nour NM. An introduction to global women's health. Rev Obstet
Gynecol. 2008;1:33-7.
7. National Institutes of Health. Sex & gender. Accessed at https:
//orwh.od.nih.gov/sex-gender on 1 May 2018.
8. Courtney-Long EA, Carroll DD, Zhang QC, Stevens AC, Griffin-
Blake S, Armour BS, et al. Prevalence of disability and disability type
among adults—United States, 2013. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep.
2015;64:777-83. [PMID: 26225475]
9. Buttorff C, Ruder T, Bauman M. Multiple chronic conditions in the
United States. RAND Corporation. 2017. Accessed at www.rand.org
/content/dam/rand/pubs/tools/TL200/TL221/RAND_TL221.pdf on 1
March 2018.
10. Mehta LA, Beckie TM, DeVon HA, Grines CL, Krumholz HM,
Johnson MN, Lindley KJ, Vaccarino V, Wang TY, Watson KE,
Wenger NK. Acute Myocardial Infarction in Women: A Scientific
Statement From the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2016
Mar 1;133(9):916-47. doi:10.1161/CIR.0000000000000351.
11. Garcia M, Mulvagh SL, Merz CN, Buring JE, Manson JE. Cardio-
vascular disease in women: clinical perspectives. Circ Res. 2016;118:
1273-93. [PMID: 27081110] doi:10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.116.307547
12. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Diabetes. 2017.
Accessed at www.womenshealth.gov/a-z-topics/diabetes on 2 Octo-
ber 2017.
13. Owens MD, Beckles GL, Ho KK, Gorrell P, Brady J, Kaftarian JS.
Women with diagnosed diabetes across the life stages: underuse
of recommended preventive care services. J Womens Health
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 12 • 19 June 2018
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 (Larchmt). 2008;17:1415-23. [PMID: 18954234] doi:10.1089/jwh
.2008.1125
14. Cook MB, McGlynn KA, Devesa SS, Freedman ND, Anderson
WF. Sex disparities in cancer mortality and survival. Cancer Epide-
miol Biomarkers Prev. 2011;20:1629-37. [PMID: 21750167] doi:10
.1158/1055-9965.EPI-11-0246
15. American Lung Association. Lung cancer facts. 3 November
2016. Accessed at www.lung.org/lung-health-and-diseases/lung
-disease-lookup/lung-cancer/resource-library/lung-cancer-fact-sheet
.html?referrer=http://sanfrancisco.cbslocal.com/2017/05/15/growing
-lung-cancer-toll-on-non-smoking-women-a-mystery on 2 October
2017.
16. National Alliance on Mental Illness. Depression. August 2017.
Accessed at www.nami.org/Learn-More/Mental-Health-Conditions
/Depression on 2 October 2017.
17. Bonomi AE, Anderson ML, Reid RJ, Rivara FP, Carrell D, Thomp-
son RS. Medical and psychosocial diagnoses in women with a history
of intimate partner violence. Arch Intern Med. 2009;169:1692-7.
[PMID: 19822826] doi:10.1001/archinternmed.2009.292
18. Mental Health America. Depression in women. Accessed at www
.mentalhealthamerica.net/conditions/depression-women on 1 May
2018.
19. Kahn RS, Wise PH, Kennedy BP, Kawachi I. State income inequal-
ity, household income, and maternal mental and physical health:
cross sectional national survey. BMJ. 2000;321:1311-5. [PMID:
11090512]
20. National Institute on Drug Abuse. Sex and gender differences in
substance use. 2017. Accessed at www.drugabuse.gov/publications
/drugfacts/substance-use-in-women on 1 March 2018.
21. Armour BS, Thierry JM, Wolf LA. State-level differences in breast
and cervical cancer screening by disability status: United States,
2008. Womens Health Issues. 2009;19:406-14. [PMID: 19879454]
doi:10.1016/j.whi.2009.08.006
22. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Health Care for
Minority Women: Recent Findings. Program Brief. AHRQ publication
no. 11-P005. Rockville: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality;
December 2010.
23. Gorgos LM, Marrazzo JM. Sexually transmitted infections among
women who have sex with women. Clin Infect Dis. 2011;53 Suppl
3:S84-91. [PMID: 22080273] doi:10.1093/cid/cir697
24. Stiles-Shields C, Carroll RA. Same-sex domestic violence: preva-
lence, unique aspects, and clinical implications. J Sex Marital Ther.
2015;41:636-48. [PMID: 25189218] doi:10.1080/0092623X.2014
.958792
25. Daniel H, Butkus R; Health and Public Policy Committee of
American College of Physicians. Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and trans-
gender health disparities: executive summary of a policy position
paper from the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med.
2015;163:135-7. [PMID: 25961598] doi:10.7326/M14-2482
26. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Re-
strictions to comprehensive reproductive health care: position state-
ment. Updated April 2016. Accessed at www.acog.org/Resources-
And-Publications/Position-Statements/Restrictions-to-Comprehensive
-Reproductive-Health-Care on 11 December 2017.
27. Stith Butler A, Wright Clayton E, eds; Institute of Medicine Com-
mittee on a Comprehensive Review of the HHS Office of Family
Planning Title X Program. Overview of family planning in the United
States. In: A Review of the HHS Family Planning Program: Mission,
Management, and Measurement of Results. Washington, DC: Na-
tional Academies Pr; 2009:29-70. Accessed at www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
/books/NBK215219 on 11 December 2017.
28. Martinez G, Chandra A, Febo-Vazquez I, Mosher W. Use of family
planning and related medical services among women aged 15-44 in
the United States: National Survey of Family Growth, 2006-2010. Natl
Health Stat Report. 2013:1-16. [PMID: 24974624]
29. Jones, RK. Beyond birth control: the overlooked benefits of
oral contraceptive pills. Guttmacher Institute. November 2011. Ac-
cessed
at
www.guttmacher.org/report/beyond-birth-control
-overlooked-benefits-oral-contraceptive-pills on 11 December 2017.
30. Center for Young Women's Health. Medical uses of birth control.
Updated 2 June 2016. Accessed at http://youngwomenshealth.org
/2011/10/18/medical-uses-of-the-birth-control-pill on 1 March 2018.
31. Cleland K, Bass J, Doci F, Foster AM. Access to emergency con-
traception in the over-the-counter era. Womens Health Issues. 2016;
26:622-7. [PMID: 27682018] doi:10.1016/j.whi.2016.08.003
32. Hall KS, Dalton V, Johnson TR. Social disparities in women's
health service use in the United States: a population-based analysis.
Ann Epidemiol. 2014;24:135-43. [PMID: 24332620] doi:10.1016/j
.annepidem.2013.10.018
33. Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Osterman MJK, Driscoll AK, Drake P.
Births: final data for 2016. Natl Vital Stat Rep. 2018;67:1-54.
34. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Pregnancy mortality
surveillance system. Updated 9 November 2017. Accessed at www
.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/maternalinfanthealth/pmss.html on 11
December 2017.
35. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Foundation. Build-
ing U.S. capacity to review and prevent maternal deaths. Report from
maternal mortality review committees: a view into their critical role.
2017. Accessed at www.cdcfoundation.org/sites/default/files/upload
/pdf/MMRIAReport.pdf on 11 December 2017.
36. Jatlaoui TC, Shah J, Mandel MG, Krashin JW, Suchdev DB,
Jamieson DJ, et al. Abortion surveillance—United States, 2014.
MMWR Surveill Summ. 2017;66:1-48. [PMID: 29166366] doi:10
.15585/mmwr.ss6624a1
37. The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medi-
cine. The Safety and Quality of Abortion Care in the United States.
Washington, DC: National Academies Pr; 2018.
38. Biggs MA, Upadhyay UD, McCulloch CE, Foster DG. Women's
mental health and well-being 5 years after receiving or being denied
an abortion: a prospective, longitudinal cohort study. JAMA Psychi-
atry. 2017;74:169-78. [PMID: 27973641] doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry
.2016.3478
39. Family Violence Prevention Fund. Reproductive Health and Part-
ner Violence Guidelines: An Integrated Response to Intimate Partner
Violence and Reproductive Coercion. San Francisco: Family Violence
Prevention Fund; 2010.
40. Black MC, Basile KC, Breiding MJ, Smith SG, Walters ML,
Merrick MT, et al. The National Intimate Partner and Sexual
Violence Survey: 2010 summary report. 2011. Accessed at www
.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/nisvs_report2010-a.pdf
on
11
December 2017.
41. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Intimate partner
violence: consequences. Updated 22 August 2017. Accessed at
www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/intimatepartnerviolence
/consequences.html on 1 March 2018.
42. Catalano SM. Intimate partner violence, 1993-2010. Bureau of
Justice Statistics. Accessed at www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid
=4536 on 19 September 2017.
43. Campbell JC, Webster D, Koziol-McLain J, Block C, Campbell D,
Curry MA, et al. Risk factors for femicide in abusive relationships:
results from a multisite case control study. Am J Public Health. 2003;
93:1089-97. [PMID: 12835191]
44. Catalano S, Smith E, Snyder H, Rand M. Female victims of vio-
lence. Bureau of Justice Statistics. September 2009. Accessed at
www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/fvv.pdf on 11 December 2017.
45. Siegel MB, Rothman EF. Firearm ownership and the murder of
women in the United States: evidence that the state-level firearm
ownership rate is associated with the nonstranger femicide rate.
Violence Gend. 2016;3:20-6.
46. Smith SG, Chen J, Basile KC, Gilbert LK, Merrick MT, Patel N,
et al. The National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence Survey
(NISVS): 2010-2012 State Report. Atlanta: National Center for Injury
Prevention and Control, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention;
2017.
47. Rape, Abuse and Incest National Network. Sexual assault.
2017. Accessed at www.rainn.org/articles/sexual-assault on 2 Octo-
ber 2017.
48. Tjaden P, Thoennes N. Prevalence, Incidence and Consequences
of Violence Against Women: Findings From the National Violence
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 12 • 19 June 2018
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 Against Women Survey. NCJ 172837. Washington, DC: U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice; November 1998.
49. International Labour Organization. Maternity and paternity at
work: law and practice across the world. 2014. Accessed at www
.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/—dgreports/— dcomm/—publ
/documents/publication/wcms_242615.pdf on 1 March 2018.
50. U.S. Department of Labor. General facts on women and job
based health. Employee Benefits Security Administration. December
2013. Accessed at www.dol.gov/sites/default/files/ebsa/about-ebsa
/our-activities/resource-center/fact-sheets/women-and-job-based
-health.pdf on 2 October 2017.
51. Zagorsky JL. Divergent trends in US maternity and paternity
leave, 1994-2015. Am J Public Health. 2017;107:460-5. [PMID:
28103064] doi:10.2105/AJPH.2016.303607
52. Institute on Aging. Women as caregivers. 2017. Accessed at
www.ioaging.org/aging-in-america on 2 October 2017.
53. Matoff-Stepp S, Applebaum B, Pooler J, Kavanagh E. Women as
health care decision-makers: implications for health care coverage in
the United States. J Health Care Poor Underserved. 2014;25:1507-
13. [PMID: 25418222] doi:10.1353/hpu.2014.0154
54. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Caregiver
stress. 2017. Accessed at www.womenshealth.gov/a-z-topics
/caregiver-stress on 2 October 2017.
55. National Alliance for Caregiving; AARP Public Policy Institute.
Caregiving in the U.S. 2015. Accessed at www.caregiving.org/wp
-content/uploads/2015/05/2015_CaregivingintheUS_Final-Report
-June-4_WEB.pdf on 11 December 2017.
56. U.S. Department of Labor. FMLA (Family & Medical Leave Act).
2017. Accessed at www.dol.gov/general/topic/benefits-leave/fmla
on 2 October 2017.
57. National Partnership for Women & Families. State paid family
and medical leave insurance laws. July 2017. Accessed at www
.nationalpartnership.org/research-library/work-family/paid-leave
/state-paid-family-leave-laws.pdf on 1 May 2018.
58. Rubin SE, Davis K, McKee MD. New York City physicians' views of
providing long-acting reversible contraception to adolescents. Ann
Fam Med. 2013;11:130-6. [PMID: 23508599] doi:10.1370/afm.1450
59. The Commonwealth Fund. How the Affordable Care Act has
helped women gain insurance and improved their ability to get
health care: findings from The Commonwealth Fund Biennial Health
Insurance Survey 2016. 2017. Accessed at www.commonwealthfund
.org/publications/issue-briefs/2017/aug/aca-helped-women-gain
-insurance-and-access on 2 October 2017.
60. Doherty RB, Crowley RA; Health and Public Policy Committee of
the American College of Physicians. Principles supporting dynamic
clinical care teams: an American College of Physicians position pa-
per. Ann Intern Med. 2013;159:620-6. [PMID: 24042251] doi:10
.7326/0003-4819-159-9-201311050-00710
61.
National
Women's
Law
Center.
Health
coverage
is
a
critical component of women's economic security: fact sheet. June
2014. Accessed at https://nwlc.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/08
/women_economic_secuirty_health_coverage_6-18-14.pdf on 2 Oc-
tober 2017.
62. Dicken JE. Letter to Orrin G. Hatch. Private health insurance: the
range of base premiums in the individual market by state in January
2013. 23 July 2013. Accessed at www.gao.gov/assets/660/656121
.pdf on 2 October 2017.
63. National Women's Law Center. The stealth attack on women's
health: the harmful effects block granting safety net programs would
have on women: fact sheet. April 2017. Accessed at https://nwlc
.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/Medicaid-Block-Grants.pdf on 11
December 2017.
64. Markus AR, Andres E, West KD, Garro N, Pellegrini C. Medicaid
covered births, 2008 through 2010, in the context of the implemen-
tation of health reform. Women's Health Issues. 2013;23:e273-80.
[PMID: 23993475] doi:10.1016/j.whi.2013.06.006
65. Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113 (1973).
66. Planned Parenthood of Southeastern PA v. Casey, 505 U.S. 833
(1992).
67. Americans United for Life. What exactly is “constitutional person-
hood”? The definition of personhood and its role in the life debate.
23 April 2010. Accessed at www.aul.org/2010/04/what-exactly-is
-constitutional-personhood-the-definition-of-personhood-and-its
-role-in-the-life-debate on 11 December 2017.
68. Cox D, Jones RP. How race and religion shape millennial atti-
tudes on sexuality and reproductive health. Public Religion Research
Institute. 27 March 2015. Accessed at www.prri.org/research/survey
-how-race-and-religion-shape-millennial-attitudes-on-sexuality-and
-reproductive-health/#.VSUqA5PF_YF on 11 December 2017.
69. Lu Y, Slusky DJG. The impact of women's health clinic closures
on preventive care. Am Econ J Appl Econ. 2016;8:100-24.
70. Stevenson AJ, Flores-Vazquez IM, Allgeyer RL, Schenkkan P, Pot-
ter JE. Effect of removal of Planned Parenthood from the Texas
Women's Health Program. N Engl J Med. 2016;374:853-60. [PMID:
26836435] doi:10.1056/NEJMsa1511902
71. Guttmacher Institute. Targeted regulation of abortion
providers. 2017. Accessed at www.guttmacher.org/state-policy
/explore/targeted-regulation-abortion-providers on 2 October
2017.
72. Brief of Amici Curiae American College of Obstetricians and Gy-
necologists and the American Medical Association in support of
plaintiffs-appellees-cross-appellants and in support of affirmance.
No. 14-50928. 2014. Accessed at www.reproductiverights.org/sites
/crr.civicactions.net/files/documents/2014-12-01%20-XX-%20
Amicus%20Brief–ACOG%20and%20AMA.PDF on 1 March 2018.
73. Ginsburg J, Snyder L; Health and Public Policy Committee of the
American College of Physicians. Statement of principles on the role
of governments in regulating the patient–physician relationship.
American College of Physicians. July 2012. Accessed at www
.acponline.org/acp_policy/policies/patient_physician_relationship
_2012.pdf on 7 May 2018.
74. Snyder L; American College of Physicians Ethics, Professional-
ism, and Human Rights Committee. American College of Physicians
ethics manual: sixth edition. Ann Intern Med. 2012;156:73-104.
[PMID: 22213573] doi:10.7326/0003-4819-156-1-201201031-00001
75. Dagher RK, McGovern PM, Dowd BE. Maternity leave duration
and postpartum mental and physical health: implications for leave
policies.
J
Health
Polit
Policy
Law.
2014;39:369-416.
[PMID:
24305845] doi:10.1215/03616878-2416247
76. Mirkovic KR, Perrine CG, Scanlon KS. Paid maternity leave and
breastfeeding outcomes. Birth. 2016;43:233-9. [PMID: 26991788]
doi:10.1111/birt.12230
77. Section on Breastfeeding. Breastfeeding and the use of human
milk. Pediatrics. 2012;129:e827-41. [PMID: 22371471] doi:10.1542
/peds.2011-3552
78. Office on Women's Health. Making the decision to breastfeed.
2018. Accessed at www.womenshealth.gov/breastfeeding/making
-decision-breastfeed/#3 on 1 March 2018.
79. Gault B, Hartmann H, Hegewisch A, Milli J, Reichlin L. Paid
parental leave in the United States. Institute for Women's Policy
Research. March 2014. Accessed at https://iwpr.org/wp-content
/uploads/wpallimport/files/iwpr-export/publications/B334-Paid%20
Parental%20Leave%20in%20the%20United%20States.pdf
on
11
December 2017.
80. Bartel A, Baum C, Rossin-Slate M, Ruhm C, Waldfogel J.
California's paid family leave law: lessons from the first decade.
2014. Accessed at www.dol.gov/wb/resources/california_paid
_family_leave_law.pdf on 2 October 2017.
81. National Partnership for Women & Families. Paid leave works in
California, New Jersey, and Rhode Island. June 2016. Accessed at
www.nationalpartnership.org/research-library/work-family/paid
-leave/paid-leave-works-in-california-new-jersey-and-rhode-island
.pdf on 2 October 2017.
82. AEI-Brookings Workgroup on Paid Family Leave. Paid family and
medical leave: an issue whose time has come. May 2017. Accessed
at www.aei.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/Paid-Family-and
-Medical-Leave-An-Issue-Whose-Time-Has-Come.pdf on 11 Decem-
ber 2017.
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 12 • 19 June 2018
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 83. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Intimate partner vio-
lence, elder abuse, and abuse of vulnerable adults: screening.
May 2016. Accessed at www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org
/Page/Document/UpdateSummaryDraft/intimate-partner-violence
-and-abuse-of-elderly-and-vulnerable-adults-screening1 on 1 March
2018.
84. Waalen J, Goodwin MM, Spitz AM, Petersen R, Saltzman LE.
Screening for intimate partner violence by health care providers.
Barriers and interventions. Am J Prev Med. 2000;19:230-7. [PMID:
11064226]
85. Kimberg L. Addressing intimate partner violence in primary care
practice. MedGenMed. 2001;3.
86. Arias E. Changes in Life Expectancy by Race and Hispanic Origin
in the United States, 2013-2014. NCHS Data Brief no. 244. Hyatts-
ville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics; 2016.
87. Breslow RA, Castle IP, Chen CM, Graubard BI. Trends in alcohol
consumption among older Americans: national health interview sur-
veys, 1997 to 2014. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2017;41:976-86. [PMID:
28340502] doi:10.1111/acer.13365
88. Belluz J. Women's health in the US is declining in 4 key ways,
and researchers can't explain why. Vox. 7 June 2016. Accessed at
www.vox.com/2016/6/7/11871604/womens-health-obesity-suicide
-maternal-mortality on 11 December 2017.
89. Parekh A, Fadiran EO, Uhl K, Throckmorton DC. Adverse effects
in women: implications for drug development and regulatory poli-
cies. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2011;4:453-66. [PMID: 22114855]
doi:10.1586/ecp.11.29
90. Institute of Medicine; Board on Population Health and Public
Health Practice; Committee on Women's Health Research. Women's
Health Research: Progress, Pitfalls, and Promise. Washington, DC:
National Academies Pr; 2010.
91. Office of Research on Women's Health. How sex and gender
influence
disease.
2017.
Accessed
at
https://orwh.od.nih.gov
/resources/pdf/SexGenderInfographic_11x17_508.pdf on 2 October
2017.
92. Johnson PA, Fitzgerald T, Salganicoff A, Wood SF, Goldstein JM.
Sex-Specific Medical Research: Why Women's Health Can't Wait.
2014. Accessed at www.brighamandwomens.org/assets/BWH
/womens-health/pdfs/ConnorsReportFINAL.pdf on 1 May 2018.
93. Chen A, Wright H, Itana H, Elahi M, Igun A, Soon G, et al. Rep-
resentation of women and minorities in clinical trials for new molec-
ular entities and original therapeutic biologics approved by FDA
CDER from 2013 to 2015. J Womens Health (Larchmt). 2017. [PMID:
29048983] doi:10.1089/jwh.2016.6272
94. Egleston BL, Dunbrack RL Jr, Hall MJ. Clinical trials that explicitly
exclude gay and lesbian patients [Letter]. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:
1054-5. [PMID: 20237357] doi:10.1056/NEJMc0912600
95. Institute of Medicine Committee on Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and
Transgender Health Issues and Research Gaps and Opportunities.
Conducting research on the health status of LGBT populations. In:
The Health of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender People:
Building a Foundation for Better Understanding. Washington, DC:
National Academies Pr; 2011:89-96.
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 12 • 19 June 2018
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
