 Addressing Social Determinants to Improve Patient Care and Promote
Health Equity: An American College of Physicians Position Paper
Hilary Daniel, BS; Sue S. Bornstein, MD; and Gregory C. Kane, MD; for the Health and Public Policy Committee of the American
College of Physicians*
Social determinants of health are nonmedical factors that can
affect a person'
s overall health and health outcomes. Where a
person is born and the social conditions they are born into can
affect their risk factors for premature death and their life expec-
tancy. In this position paper, the American College of Physicians
acknowledges the role of social determinants in health, exam-
ines the complexities associated with them, and offers recom-
mendations on better integration of social determinants into the
health care system while highlighting the need to address sys-
temic issues hindering health equity.
Ann Intern Med. 2018;168:577-578. doi:10.7326/M17-2441
Annals.org
For author affiliations, see end of text.
S
ocial determinants of health, which are defined as
“the conditions in which people are born, grow,
work, live, age, and the wider set of forces and systems
shaping the conditions of daily life” (1), are responsible
for most health inequalities. Social determinants are
primarily rooted in resource allocation and affect fac-
tors at the local, national, and global levels (2). Evi-
dence gathered over the past 30 years supports the
substantial effect of nonmedical factors on overall phys-
ical and mental health. An analysis of studies measuring
adult deaths attributable to social factors found that, in
2000, approximately 245 000 deaths were attributable
to low education, 176 000 were due to racial segrega-
tion, 162 000 were due to low social support, 133 000
were due to individual-level poverty, and 119 000 were
due to income inequality (3). The number of annual
deaths attributable to low social support was similar to
the number from lung cancer (n = 155 521).
The United States, despite ranking among the 10
richest countries in the world per capita, experiences
sizable health disparities among its citizens that are
rooted in social, economic, and environmental factors.
In the United States, place of birth is more strongly as-
sociated with life expectancy than race or genetics (4).
On average, there is a 15-year difference in life expec-
tancy between the most advantaged and disadvan-
taged citizens (5). This difference is correlated with
geographic characteristics and health behaviors (2) that
are influenced by historical and social factors. Population-
level inequalities in health care result in $309 billion in
losses to the economy annually and disproportionately af-
fect disadvantaged populations (6). The lack of economic
or social mobility can also affect future generations who
are born into environments that contribute to negative
health outcomes. Research also suggests that investments
in interventions to address social determinants of health,
such as housing, income support, and care coordination,
yield positive outcomes (7).
To address health outcomes associated with social
determinants of health, physicians, policymakers, com-
munities, and individuals should understand the role
these factors play in individual and community health
and strive to implement public policies that reach the
largest number of people while targeting the day-to-
day needs of individuals in their communities. Tackling
these issues will reduce health disparities and promote
health equity across the population. Awareness of so-
cial determinants of health may not always translate
into better health outcomes, but it is an important com-
ponent of the physician'
s role as an advocate for pa-
tients and a steward of medical care.
METHODS
This policy paper was drafted by the Health and Pub-
lic Policy Committee of the American College of Physi-
cians (ACP), which is charged with addressing issues that
affect the health care of the U.S. public and the practice of
internal medicine and its subspecialties. The authors re-
viewed studies, reports, and surveys on social determi-
nants of health from PubMed, Google Scholar, relevant
news articles, policy documents, Web sites, and other
sources. Recommendations were based on reviewed lit-
erature and input from the ACP'
s Board of Governors,
Board of Regents, Council of Early Career Physicians,
Council of Resident/Fellow Members, Council of Student
Members, and Council of Subspecialty Societies and a
nonmember expert in the field. The policy paper and rec-
ommendations were reviewed and approved by the ACP
Board of Regents on 19 November 2017. Financial sup-
port for the development of this position paper came ex-
clusively from the ACP operating budget.
See also:
Editorial comment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 596
* This paper, written by Hilary Daniel, BS; Sue S. Bornstein, MD; and Gregory C. Kane, MD, was developed for the Health and Public Policy Committee of the
American College of Physicians. Individuals who served on the Health and Public Policy Committee at the time of its approval and authored this work were Sue
S. Bornstein, MD (Chair); Gregory C. Kane, MD (Vice Chair); Jan K. Carney, MD; Heather E. Gantzer, MD; Tracey L. Henry, MD; Joshua D. Lenchus, DO; Joseph
M. Li, MD; Bridget M. McCandless, MD; Beth R. Nalitt, MD; Lavanya Viswanathan, MD; Caleb J. Murphy; Ayeetin M. Azah, MD; and Lianne Marks, MD.
Approved by the ACP Board of Regents on 19 November 2017.
Annals of Internal Medicine
POSITION PAPER
© 2018 American College of Physicians 577
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS
1. The American College of Physicians supports in-
creased efforts to evaluate and implement public policy
interventions with the goal of reducing socioeconomic in-
equalities that have a negative impact on health. Support-
ive public policies that address downstream environmen-
tal, geographical, occupational, educational, and nutritional
social determinants of health should be implemented to
reduce health disparities and encourage health equity.
2. The American College of Physicians recom-
mends that social determinants of health and the under-
lying individual, community, and systemic issues related
to health inequities be integrated into medical educa-
tion at all levels. Health care professionals should be
knowledgeable about screening and identifying social
determinants of health and approaches to treating pa-
tients whose health is affected by social determinants
throughout their training and medical career.
3. The American College of Physicians supports in-
creased interprofessional communication and collabor-
ative models that encourage a team-based approach to
treating patients at risk to be negatively affected by so-
cial determinants of health.
4. The American College of Physicians supports the
adequate and efficient funding of federal, state, tribal, and
local agencies in their efforts to address social determi-
nants of health, including investments in programs and so-
cial services shown to reduce health disparities or costs to
the health care system and agency collaboration to reduce
or eliminate redundancies and maximize potential impact.
5. The American College of Physicians supports in-
creased research into the causes, effects, prevention, and
dissemination of information about social determinants of
health. A research agenda should include short- and long-
term analysis of how social determinants affect health out-
comes and increased effort to recruit disadvantaged and
underserved populations into large-scale research studies
and community-based participatory studies.
6. The American College of Physicians recom-
mends policymakers adopt a “health in all policies”
approach and supports the integration of health consid-
erations into community planning decisions through the
use of health impact assessments.
7. The American College of Physicians recom-
mends development of best practices for utilizing elec-
tronic health record (EHR) systems as a tool to improve
individual and population health without adding to the
administrative burden on physicians.
8. The American College of Physicians recommends
adjusting quality payment models and performance mea-
surement assessments to reflect the increased risk associ-
ated with caring for disadvantaged patient populations.
9. The American College of Physicians recom-
mends increased screening and collection of social de-
terminants of health data to aid in health impact assess-
ments and support evidence-driven decision making.
SUMMARY
The ACP believes that understanding and address-
ing social factors that affect health outcomes is a press-
ing issue for physicians and medical professionals in
the communities they serve. In order to reduce nega-
tive health outcomes associated with social determi-
nants of health, a comprehensive approach is needed
that includes support for public policies aimed at im-
mediate needs and systemic issues, a better under-
standing of the issue by physicians, improved interper-
sonal communication, a robust research agenda that
incorporates institutional and community involvement,
adequate funding for federal and local initiatives, con-
siderations of health in community planning and devel-
opment, and collection of real-world evidence that can
help target interventions toward those who need them
most. The ACP puts forth these recommendations to
empower stakeholders to advocate for policies aimed
at eliminating disparities and establishing health equity
among all persons. The Appendix (available at Annals
.org) contains the full position paper, including the ex-
panded background and policy rationale.
From American College of Physicians, Washington, DC (H.D.);
Texas Medical Home Initiative, Austin, Texas (S.S.B.); and
Sidney Kimmel Medical College, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (G.C.K.).
Financial Support: Financial support for the development of this
position paper comes exclusively from the ACP operating budget.
Disclosures: Disclosures can be viewed at www.acponline.org
/authors/icmje/ConflictOfInterestForms.do?msNum=M17-2441.
Requests for Single Reprints: Hilary Daniel, BS, American
College of Physicians, 25 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Suite
700, Washington, DC 20001; e-mail, hdaniel@acponline.org.
Current author addresses and author contributions are avail-
able at Annals.org.
References
1. World Health Organization. Social determinants of health. 2018.
Accessed at www.who.int/social_determinants on 2 November 2017.
2. Commission on Social Determinants of Health. Closing the Gap in
a Generation: Health Equity through Action on the Social Determi-
nants of Health. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2008.
3. Galea S, Tracy M, Hoggatt KJ, Dimaggio C, Karpati A. Estimated
deaths attributable to social factors in the United States. Am J Public
Health. 2011;101:1456-65. [PMID: 21680937] doi:10.2105/AJPH
.2010.300086
4. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Vital Signs tele-
briefing on heart disease and stroke deaths. 3 September 2013.
Accessed at www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2013/t0903-vs-heart
-disease.html on 1 November 2017.
5. Chetty R, Stepner M, Abraham S, et al. The association between
income and life expectancy in the United States, 2001–2014. JAMA.
2016;315:1750-66. [PMID: 27063997] doi:10.1001/jama.2016.4226
6. Ubri P, Artiga A. Disparities in health and health care: five key
questions. The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. 12 August 2016. Ac-
cessed at http://kff.org/disparities-policy/issue-brief/disparities-in-health
-and-health-care-five-key-questions-and-answers on 8 October 2016.
7. Taylor LA, Tan AX, Coyle CE, et al. Leveraging the social determi-
nants of health: what works? PLoS One. 2016;11:e0160217. [PMID:
27532336] doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0160217
POSITION PAPER
Addressing Social Determinants to Improve Care and Promote Health Equity
578 Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 Current Author Addresses: Ms. Daniel: American College of
Physicians,
25
Massachusetts
Avenue
NW,
Suite
700,
Washington, DC 20001.
Dr. Bornstein: 3111 Beverly Drive, Dallas, TX 75205.
Dr. Kane: Department of Medicine, Sidney Kimmel Medical
College, Thomas Jefferson University, 1025 Walnut Street,
Philadelphia, PA 19107.
Author Contributions: Conception and design: H. Daniel, H.E.
Gantzer, T.L. Henry, J.D. Lenchus, L. Viswanathan, A.M. Azah.
Analysis and interpretation of the data: H. Daniel, J.K. Carney,
H.E. Gantzer, B.R. Nalitt, L. Viswanathan.
Drafting of the article: H. Daniel, G.C. Kane, J.D. Lenchus, B.M.
McCandless.
Critical
revision
of
the
article
for
important
intellectual
content: H. Daniel, G.C. Kane, J.K. Carney, H.E. Gantzer, T.L.
Henry, J.D. Lenchus, B.M. McCandless, L. Viswanathan, C.J.
Murphy, A.M. Azah.
Final approval of the article: H. Daniel, S.S. Bornstein, G.C.
Kane, J.K. Carney, H.E. Gantzer, T.L. Henry, J.D. Lenchus, J.M.
Li, B.M. McCandless, B.R. Nalitt, L. Viswanathan, C.J. Murphy,
A.M. Azah, L. Marks.
Administrative, technical, or logistic support: H. Daniel, S.S.
Bornstein, G.C. Kane.
Collection and assembly of data: H. Daniel, T.L. Henry.
APPENDIX: EXPANDED BACKGROUND AND
RATIONALE
Social determinants of health have been described as
nonmedical factors that influence health (8), including in-
come and social status; education; physical environment,
including safe drinking water and clean air; healthy work-
places; safe housing; communities and roads; employ-
ment and working conditions; social support networks;
and access to health services. These factors may have
short- or long-term effects on health outcomes and are
associated with negative health outcomes. For example,
living in dilapidated housing with ongoing exposure to
harmful pollutants is likely to result in poorer health (9),
whereas access to stable housing with minimal environ-
mental risks in a low-crime area is likely to reduce the
chance of negative health outcomes. Categories and ex-
amples of social determinants of health are shown in the
Appendix Table (10).
Socioeconomic Status
The primary nonmedical factor affecting health is
socioeconomic status. Socioeconomic status may be
assessed by wealth (either individual wealth or family
income), education (higher education is associated
with better economic outcomes), or occupation (which
provides financial benefits as well as benefits from ex-
panded social networks) (11), although Americans pri-
marily associate income or wealth with socioeconomic
status. Income inequality in the United States continues
to grow: The top 1% of earners make 3 times what they
did in the 1980s, whereas the bottom 50% earn the
same average income they did in 1980 (12). Not only is
the income gap widening, the percentage of persons
earning more than their parents has been decreasing.
Members of the millennial generation, generally classi-
fied as persons born between 1981 and 1997, have
only a 50% chance of earning more than their parents
(12). Socioeconomic status is also linked to racial and
ethnic disparities, and certain racial or ethnic groups
are disproportionately represented in lower socioeco-
nomic groups. An estimated 38% of the excess mortal-
ity among African American adults versus white non-
Latino adults is related to income (13).
In 2016, 14% of the U.S. population had a house-
hold income below the federal poverty threshold.
Whether someone meets this threshold is calculated on
the basis of total income before taxes, including earn-
ings, Social Security benefits, and public assistance
(14). However, the percentage of Americans living in
poverty is not evenly distributed, nor does it take into
consideration those who have incomes above the pov-
erty threshold but live in poverty areas (census tracts
with a poverty rate >20%) (15). The most recent data
show that the number of persons living in poverty areas
increased from 49.5 million in 2000 to 77.4 million dur-
ing 2008 to 2012. African Americans in both metropol-
itan and nonmetropolitan areas have the highest pov-
erty rates (23% and 33%, respectively). In addition, U.S.
Census Bureau statistics from 2015 show that 19.4 mil-
lion persons reported living in deep poverty, defined
as a household income less than 50% of the 2015 pov-
erty threshold (16). The poverty rate has fluctuated over
the years; it reached a low of 11.1% in 1973 and has
typically been between 11% and 15% since then.
Neighborhoods with concentrated poverty often
lack grocery stores with fresh food, adequate public
transportation, access to public spaces, adequate em-
ployment prospects, and access to health care services;
often have underfunded schools; and often are situated
near environmental hazards. Low-income persons are
disproportionately affected by major weather events;
an analysis of those still in need of housing assistance
after being displaced by Hurricane Sandy in 2012 showed
that marginalized persons still faced obstacles, such as
long-term housing solutions, meeting the basic needs of
their families, and financial burdens (17). Low-income per-
sons may be particularly vulnerable to extreme weather
events due to poor housing conditions and economic in-
stability that makes it difficult to prepare or plan for natu-
ral disasters (18).
Education and employment status affect socioeco-
nomic status and economic mobility and health. Re-
search indicates that children from households and
communities with low socioeconomic status may be
negatively affected by underresourced schools, hinder-
ing academic progress and resulting in higher risk for
dropping out of school (19). Lower educational attain-
ment is associated with lower wages and higher levels
of unemployment. The unemployment rate among per-
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 sons who have not completed high school is more than
50% (20).
Housing
Shelter and protection from the elements are con-
sidered basic physiologic needs of humans. Housing
protects persons from environmental harm but may
also contribute to poorer health outcomes if the dwell-
ing is unsafe, substandard, or dilapidated. Unsafe or
dilapidated housing is associated with exposure to lead
and asthma triggers (dust, mold, moisture, and rodents);
injuries; and mental health stressors, such as violence and
social isolation (21). In addition, overcrowded living con-
ditions can contribute to the spread of airborne disease,
such as respiratory infections or pneumonia, and proxim-
ity to environmental hazards can increase risk.
As part of the Healthy People 2020 initiative, data
are collected on primary objectives, including eco-
nomic stability, education, social and community con-
text, and housing and built environment. Data show
that the proportion of households earning less than
200% of the federal poverty level and spending more
than 30% of income on housing increased steadily from
65.1% in 2007 to 69.5% in 2011 (22). Approximately 12
million renters or homeowners spend more than 50%
of their annual income on housing. Families or individ-
uals who spend more than 30% of their income on
housing are considered to be “cost-burdened” and
may have difficulties affording necessities, such as
food, transportation, and medical care. They also are at
higher risk for eviction and possible homelessness (23).
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
(24) defines a homeless person as:
. . . an individual who lacks housing (without
regard to whether the individual is a member
of a family), including an individual whose pri-
mary residence during the night is a super-
vised public or private facility (e.g., shelters)
that provides temporary living accommoda-
tions, and an individual who is a resident in
transitional housing. A homeless person is an
individual without permanent housing who may
live on the streets; stay in a shelter, mission, sin-
gle room occupancy facility, abandoned building
or vehicle; or in any other unstable or non-
permanent situation.
The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Develop-
ment uses a narrower definition of homelessness for its
programs (25).
The homeless population is at increased risk for
mental health problems and certain diseases and poses
challenges for policymakers. Approximately 60% of home-
less persons have had mental health problems, as
many as 80% have marked decline in cognitive func-
tion, the prevalence of tuberculosis is at least 46 times
higher in the homeless population than the general
population, and the prevalence of hepatitis C is 4-fold
higher than in the general population (26). Models such
as supportive housing or Housing First have shown that
providing basic housing integrated with optional social
and/or health services may improve health outcomes.
For example, the Bud Clark Commons is a housing ini-
tiative in Portland, Oregon, that uses harm reduction
and Housing First models for the most vulnerable ap-
plicants. Since 2011, the Bud Clark Commons has
housed more than 200 residents, and more than 80%
have remained in permanent housing (27).
Transportation
Transportation in the United States is primarily mo-
torized, and the reliance on motorized vehicles and
motorized transportation increases potential for fatal in-
jury, as well as air pollution, accidents, and physical in-
activity, which lead to other health problems (28). The
reliance on motorized transportation may also dispro-
portionately affect the aging population because they
may have limited driving ability. A 2010 study found
that the costs of medical care and lost productivity
associated with motor vehicle crashes were approxi-
mately $99 billion in 2005 (29). Lack of transportation
options also creates barriers to health care access,
leading to missed appointments, missed or delayed
medication use, delayed care, or poorer management
of chronic conditions. A review of 61 studies found lack
of transportation to be a major obstacle to health care
access, particularly for low-income, uninsured, or un-
derinsured persons (30). Neighborhoods with lower so-
cioeconomic status may have longer wait times for
emergency response vehicles than neighborhoods with
higher socioeconomic status (31). Living and attending
school in proximity to high-traffic areas can affect a per-
son'
s health. In cities, poverty corridors often match
highway geography, contributing to excess exposure
among the poorest and most vulnerable residents (32,
33). In particular, exposure to automobile exhaust can
play a critical role in poor asthma control, asthma exac-
erbations, and acute care visits among children (34).
These effects are not limited to children; data on symp-
toms among U.S. veterans have shown that proximity to
roadways is associated with increased wheezing in pa-
tients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (35).
Low-income persons and persons of color are
more likely to rely on “active transportation” (walking,
bicycling, or public transit) to get to work or other ac-
tivities than those in other income brackets. Persons
who earn less than $10 000 per year have the highest
rates of walking or biking to work, and walking is the
primary means of getting to work in large cities in all
U.S. regions (36). Although these persons are more
likely to walk or bike, they do so in dangerous condi-
tions. Pedestrian fatality rates are twice as high in low-
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 income neighborhoods compared with higher-income
neighborhoods, and bicycling fatality rates among His-
panic/Latino persons and African Americans are 23%
and 30% higher, respectively, than among white non-
Latino persons (37). Low-income communities also
have poorer infrastructure for walking or biking, such as
sidewalks; street lighting; marked crosswalks; or traffic
calming features, such as traffic islands or traffic circles.
Food and Agriculture
Access to a healthy and adequate supply of food is
necessary to living a healthy and productive life. Ap-
proximately 11% of households in the United States
(25.8 million adults and 12.4 million children) are con-
sidered food-insecure. Food insecurity is a broad con-
cept that includes the physical feeling of hunger and
anxiety about access to food. It may result in unhealthy
food-related behaviors, such as skipping meals or con-
suming low-cost but calorie-dense foods that are highly
processed and have little nutritional value. Food inse-
curity is also strongly related to poverty; approximately
33% of households with incomes less than 130% of the
poverty level are food-insecure (38).
Current efforts suggest that promotion of healthy
eating can be successful, but these efforts are affected
by social class, social networks, race and ethnicity, and
neighborhood (39). One hurdle to improving diet is ac-
cess to fresh produce and nutritious food. Approxi-
mately 23.5 million persons live in “food deserts,” and
about half of these are low-income persons (40). Food
deserts are areas in which at least 500 people and/or
33% of the census tract'
s population reside more than 1
mile from a supermarket or large grocery store (≥10 miles
in rural populations) (41). A total of 2.3 million persons live
in rural food deserts. Better access to supermarkets is as-
sociated with reduced risk for obesity, and other studies
have found that neighborhood environment, including
proximity to grocery stores, may be a determinant of
body mass index (37). Data from the U.S. Department of
Agriculture also show that adults in counties with a larger
number of food deserts have rates of diabetes that are 5
percentage points higher than those in counties with a
low number of food deserts (38).
The “Digital Divide”
The digital divide is the gap between those who
have access to technology or the Internet and those
who do not, typically on the basis of higher versus
lower socioeconomic status (42). Thirteen percent of
U.S. adults do not use the Internet; of these, 19% do
not use it because of cost barriers related to Internet
service or computer ownership (43). In addition, demo-
graphic variables, such as age, education, community
(rural, urban, or suburban), or income, may contribute
to nonadoption of technology (41). The American Med-
ical Informatics Association has stated that it “believe[s]
that access to broadband is, or will soon become, a
social determinant of health” (44). Lacking access to re-
liable and affordable Internet or mobile service limits
not only a person'
s ability to utilize technology for
health-related purposes but also their ability to access
other important services, such as emergency assistance
or employment opportunities. Lack of Internet or com-
puter access at home also puts students at an educa-
tional disadvantage, referred to as the “homework
gap.” Approximately 5 million households with school-
aged children do not have high-speed Internet access
at home, with a disproportionate share being low-
income African American or Hispanic/Latino house-
holds, and low-income households are 4 times more
likely than middle- or high-income households to lack
broadband access (45).
There is an increased emphasis on integrating
technology into medical care, and lack of reliable Inter-
net access can hinder a person'
s ability to access med-
ical portals or electronic health records (EHRs). Thirty-
nine percent of rural areas lack reliable access to
broadband technologies (46), hampering the ability of
physicians to utilize technology to improve access to
care and limiting the use of EHRs. Lack of Internet ser-
vice can also stifle health literacy and prevent patients
from utilizing mobile health technologies, such as ap-
plications that support healthy behaviors. A 2012 sur-
vey showed that 21% of uninsured persons do not use
the Internet, those who are likely to lack health insur-
ance are also likely to not be online, and 59% of unin-
sured persons did not report seeking health informa-
tion online (42). In addition, there is an association
between health literacy (the ability to understand basic
health care information and use it to make health care
decisions) and Internet access and use (47).
Racial and Ethnic Health Disparities
The ACP'
s policy on racial and ethnic health dispar-
ities acknowledges that addressing social determinants
of health is a key component to increasing health eq-
uity among racial and ethnic populations (48). Social
determinants can exacerbate health care disparities
among racial or ethnic groups. Socioeconomic status,
race, and ethnicity are connected in a complex, multi-
dimensional way and may affect a person'
s health inde-
pendently or in combination (49). For example, Latina
women have a higher incidence rate of cervical cancer
and have higher mortality rates than non–Latina/His-
panic women (3.0 vs. 2.1 deaths per 100 000 women)
(50). Latina women are also more likely to lack health
insurance than white non-Latina women, which affects
access to care (51). American Indian and Alaska Native
adults are more likely to have stroke than white non-
Latino or African American adults in the same age range
(52). However, those who do have stroke may not receive
the necessary care in a timely manner. The Indian Health
Service'
s operating budget is not large enough to cover
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 all eligible services, and a Government Accountability Of-
fice report found that “these gaps in services sometimes
delay diagnoses and treatments, which can exacerbate
the severity of a patient'
s condition and necessitate more
intensive treatment” (53).
Another example is the difference in incidence and
death rates between African American women and
white non-Latina women. African Americans have the
highest cancer burden of any racial or ethnic group for
all types of cancer, and African American women are
more likely to die of breast cancer despite having a
lower incidence rate than white non-Latina women (54).
African American women are also more likely to be di-
agnosed at later disease stages and have lower survival
rates for breast cancer than any other racial or ethnic
group (55). A review of the social determinants associ-
ated with this mortality disparity found that it was tied
to social, economic, and cultural disparities, as well as ge-
netic and biological factors (56). Research has also shown
that aggressive breast cancer tumors are more common
in younger African American and Latina women living in
areas with low socioeconomic status (57).
Racism or ethnic discrimination—systems in society,
including internalized, interpersonal, or systemic prac-
tices, that cause unavoidable and unfair inequalities
in power, resources, or capacities and opportunities
across racial or ethnic groups and manifest through
beliefs, stereotypes, prejudices, or discrimination—can
also result in poorer health outcomes, including poorer
mental health (such as depression [58]) and physical
health. A meta-analysis of studies that focused on the
relationship between racism and health also found that
ethnicity is a factor in how discrimination is associated
with certain negative health outcomes. For example,
there are stronger negative mental health associations
for Asian Americans and Hispanic/Latino persons than
African Americans (59).
Federal and Local Initiatives Related to Social
Determinants
The federal government has implemented or es-
tablished several initiatives that incorporate social de-
terminants of health into the action plan or may have
a broader effect on social determinants. The Healthy
People 2020 initiative includes measuring and monitor-
ing of social determinants of health and disparities.
Four indicators (15.4%) have met or exceeded targets,
and 10 (38.5%) are improving. Moreover, fewer adults
are smoking cigarettes, fewer children are exposed to
secondhand smoke, more adults are meeting physical
activity targets, and fewer adolescents are using alco-
hol or illicit drugs (60). Executive Order 12898 estab-
lished the Federal Interagency Working Group on En-
vironmental Justice, which directed all federal agencies
to identify and address cases where their programs,
policies, and activities had disproportionately adverse
health effects on low-income and disadvantaged com-
munities. In addition, the Centers for Medicare & Med-
icaid Services will award grants to local jurisdictions
that implement accountable health community models
in their communities in an effort to improve health out-
comes and reduce health costs by addressing social
determinants of health, such as food insecurity, inade-
quate transportation, and unstable housing. The 3-track
model seeks to bring awareness of community services,
assistance in navigating available services, and align-
ment of community need with available services (61).
Programs like the Older Americans Act provide social
services that encourage independence for aging Amer-
icans. The Older Americans Act contains critical sup-
port, including the Meals on Wheels program, legal
services, and transportation services. Approximately
10% of older persons have incomes below the poverty
threshold (62), and although this is an improvement
over previous decades, these social services remain vi-
tal for members of this population.
States and local communities also attempt to identify
and mitigate potentially negative effects of social determi-
nants by implementing programs that foster community
partnerships with public and private entities. These initia-
tives show the importance of community-level participa-
tion. Examples include efforts in New Jersey to address
high-utilizing or high-cost patients through coordinated
efforts to identify such patients, provide appropriate re-
sources, and reduce barriers to care (63, 64); a state pro-
gram in Vermont (65); medical–legal partnerships (66);
and partnerships between the medical community and
businesses, such as the Fruit and Vegetable Prescription
Program, which works with hospitals, community health
centers, food hubs, farms, and retail outlets to “prescribe”
fruits and vegetables for low-income individuals and fam-
ilies (67). It is important to note that programs that are
successful or show positive benefit in some communities
may not be as successful in others.
The Complexities of Social Determinants of
Health
Determinants of health involve varying levels of so-
cial, biological, and behavioral interplay and pose
unique obstacles for policymakers. A recent example is
the water crisis in Flint, Michigan. Flint is a predomi-
nantly African American city, and 41% of residents live
below the federal poverty level (68). In 2014, the state
of Michigan authorized switching the source of tap wa-
ter for the approximately 99 000 residents of Flint from
the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department to the
Flint River. The Flint Water Treatment Plant did not use
corrosion control, resulting in increased lead contami-
nation in the water supply. After several parents and
community health care workers heard about elevated
levels of lead and noticed health problems affecting
citizens after the switch, testing concluded that blood
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 lead levels had increased among children in the city
(69). Lead ingestion can be serious, and the effects of
lead poisoning are sometimes irreversible (70).
Flint had experienced eroding infrastructure and
reduced infrastructure investments after many manu-
facturing jobs left the area, increasing potential expo-
sure to hazardous conditions (71). Flint is also a food
desert, with only 1 major grocery store in the city. Res-
idents reported being unable to afford bottled water,
and those who did attempt to purchase it found that it
was often sold out. Nutrition and access to healthy food
also affect health issues associated with lead exposure.
When children are deficient in certain vitamins and
minerals, such as iron, calcium, and vitamin C, lead ab-
sorption increases (72). These factors resulted in the
residents of Flint being particularly vulnerable to in-
creased exposure to and ingestion of lead.
Positions and Recommendations
1. The American College of Physicians supports in-
creased efforts to evaluate and implement public policy
interventions with the goal of reducing socioeconomic
inequalities that have a negative impact on health. Sup-
portive public policies that address downstream envi-
ronmental, geographical, occupational, educational,
and nutritional social determinants of health should be
implemented to reduce health disparities and encour-
age health equity.
Socioeconomic status has far-reaching influence on
nearly all areas of physical and mental health. All races
and ethnicities with low socioeconomic status are at a
disadvantage, and persons who are born into lower so-
cioeconomic status are more likely than those in higher
brackets to have cardiovascular disease, mental illness,
poor quality of life, and premature death (73). A study
also showed that lower socioeconomic position in
childhood is associated with higher risk for death from
certain causes in adulthood (74). In a separate study
spanning 4 decades, researchers found that lead expo-
sure in childhood affected cognitive function and socio-
economic status at age 38 years, greatly influencing so-
cial mobility (75).
People are more likely to have better health out-
comes if they have the resources to obtain a good ed-
ucation, stable housing, safe environments, and health
care coverage (76). However, years of racial and ethnic
discrimination, segregation, and inequality have re-
sulted in a legacy of disadvantaged groups more likely
to reside in neighborhoods that lack access to nutri-
tious food, quality housing, good jobs, or properly
funded schools (77). Poverty is still one of the strongest
predictors of premature death; an analysis of data that
spanned 7 countries and included 1.7 million persons
found that adults with low socioeconomic status were
nearly 1.5 times more likely to die before age 85 years
than those with higher socioeconomic status. In addi-
tion, the reduced life expectancy in those with low so-
cioeconomic status was approximately the same as the
reduction associated with inactivity (78). Strengthening
economic development for disadvantaged persons
and communities and supporting economic mobility
are likely to meaningfully improve the physical health
and overall wellness of people throughout generations.
An observational study showed that a reduction in
neighborhood-level segregation was associated with a
decrease in systolic blood pressure (79).
The effects of socioeconomic status on nearly all
aspects of society indicate that no single policy or set of
policies can eliminate health disparities (80). Because
the health effects of socioeconomic status are felt the
most by persons living in poverty, income modifica-
tions for low-income persons are likely to have direct
positive health effects. In one test program, persons
were guaranteed a minimum income with tax reduc-
tions associated with additional earned income. An as-
sessment of the effect of this program on low-income
families found that providing additional income to expect-
ant mothers was associated with higher-birthweight in-
fants, which researchers suggested was related to im-
proved nutrition (81). Another successful intervention
provided housing vouchers to low-income families, giving
them more options in where to live (82) and potentially
improving access to grocery stores, reliable transporta-
tion options, and schools. Finally, a simulation showed
that increasing the minimum wage to $15 per hour could
have averted 2800 to 5500 premature deaths, primarily
among low-income persons (83).
Addressing inequalities related to socioeconomic
status will have the most meaningful effect on individ-
ual, community, and intergenerational health and social
mobility. The effect of socioeconomic status on health
is far-reaching and variable, and exploring nonmedical
interventions to address the effect of social determi-
nants of health will vary in efficacy (84). However, there
is also a pressing need for public policy interventions
that address the day-to-day needs of persons with neg-
ative health outcomes related to social determinants.
In an analysis of the relationship between public
policy and social determinants of health, the authors
stated that public policy is influenced by political, so-
cial, and economic environments to determine a dom-
inant health model. If the model prioritizes biology of
disease and individual risk factors, public policy is more
likely to focus on treating illness and managing risk to
the detriment of broader population health (85). Al-
though reducing individual risk for disease is impor-
tant, public policies that aim to eliminate or reduce un-
healthy conditions or promote initiatives that support
individual or community health are vital to overcoming
the health inequities that can be associated with social
determinants of health.
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 It is also important to remember that simply in-
creasing access to certain services, such as grocery
stores, may not have meaningful effects without addi-
tional supportive policies that can influence individual
behavior and choice. For example, in 2003, Pennsylva-
nia adopted the Fresh Food Financing Initiative, a state-
wide program aimed at opening new grocery stores in
underserved areas. Six months after implementation of
the program, few residents had adopted the newly
built stores as their main store, and there was no dis-
cernible change in daily fruit and vegetable intake or
body mass index, suggesting that merely opening the
stores was not enough to change long-term habits (86).
The authors noted that in the future, partnerships with
local health departments and initiatives that support af-
fordability and availability could increase the chance
that residents would adapt their behaviors. Other sup-
portive public policies that may affect health include
taxes on sugar-sweetened beverages (87); authorizing
and encouraging farmers'markets, community-assisted
agriculture, and direct-marketing farmers to facilitate
the use of Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
benefits at those locations (88); and Housing First and
permanent supportive housing programs (89).
2. The American College of Physicians recom-
mends that social determinants of health and the under-
lying individual, community, and systemic issues related
to health inequities be integrated into medical educa-
tion at all levels. Health care professionals should be
knowledgeable about screening and identifying social
determinants of health and approaches to treating pa-
tients whose health is affected by social determinants
throughout their training and medical career.
The health care system is shifting toward putting a
premium on the quality of care provided as opposed to
the number of services provided. With a system that
pays for quality and outcomes, physicians must con-
sider the underlying factors that affect a patient'
s phys-
ical health and continued wellness. An increased focus
on wellness and prevention presents an opportunity to
improve overall population health. One challenge for
physicians is the need to develop a broader under-
standing of how social or environmental determinants
may affect a patient'
s ability to adhere to a care plan. A
patient with diabetes who lives in substandard housing,
recently lost their job, or lives in a food desert will face
greater challenges in managing their illness than a pa-
tient who is not facing these obstacles. However, it
might not be readily apparent to a physician that a pa-
tient living in substandard housing may have trouble
keeping their insulin refrigerated due to poor wiring
and spotty electricity or that a patient living in a food
desert might also lack reliable transportation options to
get to a grocery store with nutritious food.
Physicians can be important advocates in the effort
to reduce potential negative health outcomes associ-
ated with social determinants of health. In one survey,
85% of primary care physicians or pediatricians be-
lieved that unmet social needs led to poor health out-
comes; however, 4 of 5 were not confident in their abil-
ity to meet the social needs of their patients (90). As
trusted members of society, physicians have the poten-
tial to effect meaningful policy changes. Dr. Mona
Hanna-Attisha, a pediatrician in Flint, Michigan, heard
about elevated lead levels in the water and residents'
concerns about water quality after the switch to the new
water source. She knew that the hospital where she
worked routinely tested young children for lead expo-
sure, and she conducted comparisons of blood lead
levels using test results from before and after the
switch. She found that the percentage of children in
Flint with lead poisoning doubled—or, in some neigh-
borhoods, tripled—and that this correlated with where
lead levels were highest. She presented her findings
during a press conference, forcing the issue into the
spotlight and forcing public officials to acknowledge
the ongoing lead exposure (91).
Early and ongoing education about health dispari-
ties and negative health outcomes associated with so-
cial determinants of health can help physicians to bet-
ter identify these factors and effectively treat patients
with them. The Health Scholars Program, a 9-month
program based at the community health center Puen-
tes de Salud in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, piloted a
course in which medical students were taught by
volunteer medical and public health faculty and com-
pleted a project that required them to develop, imple-
ment, and evaluate an intervention to address a
community-defined need. Participants reported high
levels of overall satisfaction with the program and indi-
cated that it increased their desire to serve vulnerable
communities, although the degree to which they fol-
lowed through with tangible outcomes is unknown (92).
Other researchers have developed frameworks for ed-
ucating health professionals on social determinants of
health. The National Academies of Sciences, Engineer-
ing, and Medicine (NASEM) Committee on Educating
Health Professionals to Address the Social Determi-
nants of Health proposed a framework consisting of 9
components centered around 3 concepts (transfor-
mative learning, dynamic partnerships, and lifelong
learning) (93).
Efforts to improve health equity have been made
that emphasize screening, education, and actionable
initiatives in graduate medical education programs.
The Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Educa-
tion incorporated reducing health disparities into its
Clinical Learning Environment Review program. The
program performs site visits to accredited institutions
that sponsor residency programs and assesses and
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 provides feedback in 6 focus areas (94). Under the fo-
cus area of health care quality, the pathway “Resident/
fellow and faculty member education on reducing
health care disparities” prioritizes education on identi-
fying and reducing health care disparities for the pa-
tient population seen at their institution as well as train-
ing in cultural competency (94). Although there is some
consideration of health equity and social determinants
in the academic setting, more robust integration should
be considered as stakeholders develop a better under-
standing of how these issues factor into direct clinical
care of patients, including incorporating social determi-
nants of health into undergraduate medical education
and continuing medical education in addition to medi-
cal school, residency, and fellowship programs.
3. The American College of Physicians supports in-
creased interprofessional communication and collabor-
ative models that encourage a team-based approach to
treating patients at risk to be negatively affected by so-
cial determinants of health.
Health professionals across disciplines, including
medicine, social work, and public health, play key roles
in helping to reduce negative health outcomes related
to social determinants. Good primary care experiences,
including accessibility and continuity of care, are asso-
ciated with better self-reported health and can reduce
the adverse association between income inequality and
general health (95).
Clinical care is critical to overall health; however,
medical care comes into play primarily at the onset of
illness, whereas outside influences affecting health are
constant. In 2012, NASEM released the report “Primary
Care and Public Health: Exploring Integration to Im-
prove Population Health,” which acknowledged that in-
vestments in the health care system had done little to
reduce the cost of care and that more needed to be
done to reduce costs and improve care (96). The
patient-centered medical home (PCMH) model aims to
deliver coordinated and cost-effective care and pro-
vides an opportunity for collaboration and communica-
tion between members of the care team about social
determinants of health. For example, collocation of
community-based resources within the PCMH can also
address issues of transportation and communication
(97). The ACP supports the joint principles of PCMHs
and is encouraged by their potential to support broader
public health goals. Strengthening the components of the
PCMH that address social determinants of health for indi-
vidual patients, such as social service assistance or direct-
ing patients to appropriate community resources, helps
to address individual needs of patients. Further collabora-
tion is also needed to improve access to specialty services
for disadvantaged patients in a way that promotes contin-
uation of care and reduces confusion for the patient. Pro-
viding specialty care services to underserved populations
can also result in savings, as shown by reduced costs after
the expansion of allergy services to Medicaid beneficia-
ries in Florida (98).
Effective collaboration requires ongoing communi-
cation and education. Communication is arguably the
most
important
consideration
in
interventions
to
change individual behaviors that may be influenced by
social determinants. One must consider how the mes-
sage is communicated, who is delivering it, and how
the individual or community might respond (99). Col-
laborative health care teams that utilize the unique skills
of each team member and follow the principles in the
ACP position paper “Principles Supporting Dynamic
Clinical Care Teams” (100) are positioned to effectively
communicate and disseminate information to patients.
Strengthening communication among team members
also ensures that everyone involved in the patient'
s
care is engaged about roles and responsibilities and is
acting in the patient'
s best interests.
4. The American College of Physicians supports the
adequate and efficient funding of federal, state, tribal,
and local agencies in their efforts to address social de-
terminants of health, including investments in programs
and social services shown to reduce health disparities or
costs to the health care system and agency collabora-
tion to reduce or eliminate redundancies and maximize
potential impact.
Although the U.S. health system is the most expen-
sive in the world, it does not perform better than those
of other industrialized countries. This is partially a result
of a small share of health expenditures (9%) being di-
rected toward prevention and low levels of investment
in social services (101). Compared with other countries
in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and De-
velopment (OECD), the United States invests relatively
small amounts in social services that may address social
determinants of health. On average, OECD nations
spend $2 on social services for every dollar spent on
health care, whereas the United States spends 55 cents
per dollar (102). Evidence suggests that increased so-
cial services can help to mitigate health disparities
(103). In addition, research funding has been primarily
targeted toward specific diseases or risk factors for cer-
tain diseases, focusing many available research dollars
on a “clinical, individual approach to disease” (104).
Investments in social services are associated with
cost savings, and funding for social services that have
been shown to reduce costs and improve health should
be included in health care funding packages at the
state and federal levels. An analysis of peer-reviewed
literature on investments in social services or integrated
models of health care and social services found that 32
studies reported significant positive effects, and many
reported decreased health care costs and improved
outcomes in housing, nutrition, income support, and
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 care coordination (7). An analysis of states between
2000 and 2009 found that those with higher ratios of
social services spending to medical spending had bet-
ter health outcomes (93), and residents of states with
the lowest ratios had higher rates of myocardial infarc-
tion, lung cancer, and mental illness. Investments in so-
cial services suggest a reduction in overall health care
costs insofar as they relate to chronic illness or the need
for medical intervention, such as hospitalization. A study
of state-level social services spending determined that a
20% change in the median ratio of social services spend-
ing to health spending could reduce the percentage of
adults with obesity by 0.33%, or 85 000 adults. Obese
adults are estimated to incur $2700 more in annual health
care costs than nonobese adults (93).
Because prioritizing funding for programs can be
challenging in an uncertain budget environment, cross-
agency collaboration is needed to ensure that resources
are being used effectively and efficiently. The Federal In-
teragency Health Equity Team facilitates activities among
agencies, including the Departments of Health, Agricul-
ture, Commerce, Justice, Education, Defense, Veterans
Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, Labor, and
Transportation; the Consumer Product Safety Commis-
sion; and the Environmental Protection Agency, to in-
crease the efficiency and effectiveness of policies and
programs at all levels. Office of Lead Hazard Control and
Healthy Homes grants provide local governments with
funds to research and implement effective ways to reduce
hazards associated with exposure to lead-based paint and
other poor housing conditions, such as mold, pesticides,
vermin, and air quality, that are often found in low-income
housing (105). A housing-based approach to reducing
lead exposure in children was associated with reductions
in blood lead levels during 1970 to 1990, in addition to
improved screening efforts (106).
Despite attempts to encourage collaboration and
reduce overlap, large cuts to federal funding for pro-
grams intended to address environmental or safety risk
have been proposed. For example, proposed cuts to
the Environmental Protection Agency in the fiscal year
2018 budget could result in the elimination of 2 pro-
grams aimed at reducing risk for lead exposure (107),
and a $300 million reduction in funds to the Indian
Health Service has been proposed. Funding for block
grant programs, such as Temporary Assistance for
Needy Families, the Substance Abuse Prevention and
Treatment Block Grant program, and job training block
grants, has decreased by an average of 27% over the
past 17 years (108). It is increasingly important that pro-
grams not only are working efficiently but are funded
appropriately to reach the people they are intended to
serve.
5. The American College of Physicians supports
increased research into the causes, effects, prevention,
and dissemination of information about social determi-
nants of health. A research agenda should include
short- and long-term analysis of how social determi-
nants affect health outcomes and increased effort to re-
cruit disadvantaged and underserved populations into
large-scale research studies and community-based par-
ticipatory studies.
Underlying the challenge of reducing negative health
outcomes associated with social determinants of health is
determining how to translate research into actionable
public policies or interventions and the effectiveness of
interventions or efforts. Low socioeconomic status is
known to be associated with an increased likelihood of
poor health, but understanding influences that keep peo-
ple in that position or effective strategies for social and
economic mobility given a person'
s unique circumstances
are lacking. Improving population health necessitates
identifying the social and behavioral processes that will
help in the development of interventions (109).
Given that there are often areas of overlap in the
study of social determinants of health, research is being
focused on multistakeholder collaboration and partner-
ships. In 2010, the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
announced the transition of the National Center on Mi-
nority Health and Health Disparities to the National
Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities
(NIMHD) and signaled a commitment to reducing
health disparities. The NIMHD then released a frame-
work for how NIH institutes and centers can work to-
gether to achieve their primary goals (110). The plan
involves research, including comparative effectiveness
research and research on social determinants of health,
behavioral and social sciences, and genetics and bio-
logical factors; research capacity building through re-
search infrastructure enhancements, workforce diver-
sity, and informatics capacity; community outreach,
information dissemination, and public health educa-
tion; and the integration of all of these objectives.
Including disadvantaged populations and communi-
ties in clinical research can ensure that the results reflect
the diversity of the U.S. population. Community-based
participatory models engage community members as
well as researchers and health care professionals in the
area to identify and address social determinants of health
and encourage healthy behaviors in the community.
These studies help conceptualize social determinants of
health and how they affect individual behavior (such as
poor diet or limited exercise) as well as the broader com-
munity. The Office of Behavioral and Social Sciences Re-
search, in partnership with the NIH, developed funding
opportunities to stimulate community-based participatory
research, particularly in underserved communities (100).
Such research can help identify factors that need to be
considered beyond individual behavior and challenges to
achieving sustained improvements.
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 6. The American College of Physicians recom-
mends policymakers adopt a “health in all policies” ap-
proach and supports the integration of health consider-
ations into community planning decisions through the
use of health impact assessments:
“Health in all policies” (HiAP) works to integrate
health considerations into government-implemented
policies, such as transportation, infrastructure, or urban
planning (111). The concept behind the HiAP model is
to anticipate and prevent triggers of negative social de-
terminants. For example, when building low-income
housing in a community, the local planning commission
may consider the location relative to public transporta-
tion, primary care or health care facilities, schools, and
safety. In 2011, NASEM recommended that the HiAP
approach be adopted at the federal, state, and local
levels (112). In 2010, the United States moved to incor-
porate the HiAP concept into federal agencies through
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. The Af-
fordable Care Act established the National Prevention
Council, which is chaired by the Surgeon General and
whose mission is to develop and implement cross-
sector strategies to promote health and disease pre-
vention. The council includes 20 federal departments,
agencies, and offices (113). In 2012, the National Pre-
vention Council targeted 3 areas to accelerate prog-
ress: increasing tobacco-free environments; increasing
access to affordable, healthy food; and identifying op-
portunities for prevention. The council'
s 2014 status re-
port noted that progress had been made on all fronts.
In July 2014, more than 22 000 schools in the United
States became eligible to serve healthy breakfasts and
lunches to low-income students, on the basis of data col-
lected from such programs as the Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program and Temporary Assistance for Needy
Families instead of paper applications. This was estimated
to help as many as 9 million children (114).
The HiAP model is also effective at the state level.
California established the Health in All Policies Task
Force in 2010, comprising 22 agency members and
guided by 6 goals (115). Since its creation, the task
force has developed an action plan on active transpor-
tation; established a partnership among the Depart-
ments of Education, Food and Agriculture, and Public
Health called the “California Office of Farm to Fork”;
successfully piloted a community-supported agriculture
program; and integrated health criteria into state food
purchasing contracts (116). The Seattle/King County
Health Department in Washington also worked to inte-
grate health considerations into area planning. Through
this approach, it has altered the budget of the Depart-
ment of Natural Resources and Parks to enable walking
trails to be built in low-income communities, reduced the
number of students expelled from school through a col-
laboration between the criminal justice and education de-
partments, and included health-based metrics in city and
county land use and transportation plans (117). Other cit-
ies that have implemented HiAP include Boston, Massa-
chusetts; Washington, DC; and Nashville, Tennessee.
Health impact assessments have aided in the im-
plementation of HiAP. They bring together scientific
data, health experts, and public input to identify the
potential effect of new laws, regulations, or programs
on health (118). Health impact assessments:
. . . [look] at health from a broad perspective
that considers social, economic, and environ-
mental influences; [bring] community mem-
bers, business interests and other stakeholders
together, which can help build consensus; [ac-
knowledge] the trade-offs of choices under
consideration and [offer] decision makers com-
prehensive information and practical recom-
mendations to maximize health gains and min-
imize adverse effects; [put] health concerns in
the context of other important factors when
making a decision; and [consider] whether cer-
tain impacts may affect vulnerable groups of
people in different ways.
Health impact assessments are important to inform
policymakers of the potential positive and negative ef-
fects of policies or programs. The American Public
Health Association has extensive resources to assist lo-
cal and state governments in incorporating health im-
pact assessments into their decision making (119).
7. The American College of Physicians recom-
mends development of best practices for utilizing elec-
tronic health record (EHR) systems as a tool to improve
individual and population health without adding to the
administrative burden on physicians.
Electronic health records have the potential to be a
beneficial tool in facilitating data aggregation and thus
integration of social determinants and population
health into the broader health care system. Potential
uses of incorporation of social determinants into EHRs
include identifying individual risk factors, identifying
the need for referrals to appropriate public health or
social services agencies, increasing shared decision
making between patients and physicians, expanding
the capacity of health systems to tailor services to their
population'
s needs, and supporting research (120).
Several logistical reasons have been identified for why
collection and use of data on social determinants of
health have not been more prominent, including lack of
knowledge and consensus, resource differences be-
tween social services and health care organizations,
lack of multisector collaboration, and difficulties with
current technology systems (121).
The International Classification of Diseases, 10th
Revision, includes Z Codes (Z00 to Z99) (122) that could
better chart health conditions in EHRs. Codes Z55 to
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 Z65 relate to social or economic issues, including prob-
lems related to education and literacy (Z55), problems
related to employment and unemployment (Z56), and
problems related to housing and economic circum-
stances (Z59) (112). This type of data can be used to
improve panel management and expand the definition
of quality improvement to include such things as food
access intervention, staffing for team-based care, and
adjustment of clinician panel sizes (123). Translation of
the information will differ between individual and pop-
ulation health because each has different goals.
In 2014, the NASEM Committee on the Recom-
mended Social and Behavioral Domains and Measures
for Electronic Health Records identified 12 social deter-
minants to be included in EHRs as part of meaningful
use stage 3 and issued recommendations on standard-
izing collection of measures of these social determi-
nants. Several behavioral and social domains are cur-
rently
collected:
tobacco
use;
alcohol
use;
race/
ethnicity; and residential address, which is geocoded.
The NASEM recommended new domains to be col-
lected on the basis of evidence of their usefulness if
they are included in the EHR: education level; financial
strain; stress; depression; physical activity; social isola-
tion; intimate partner violence; and neighborhood me-
dian household income, which would be obtained us-
ing the residential address (120).
The Protocol for Responding to and Assessing Pa-
tients'Assets, Risks, and Experiences (PRAPARE) tool is a
national-level effort to collect data on social determinants.
PRAPARE incorporates core measures not included in the
NASEM recommendations, including housing status and
stability, employment, language, and migrant or seasonal
farm work, as well as optional measures of incarceration
history, refugee status, and general safety (124). The
NASEM committee also indicated the need for regular
evaluation of metrics to ensure that the goal of using
these systems to reduce health disparities and improve
health outcomes is still being met (125).
When developing best practices for use of EHRs as
a tool to improve health, stakeholders must consider
how to optimize benefits without adding to a physi-
cian'
s administrative burden, such as by limiting the
number of domains and adding new ones only after
evidence supports their inclusion.
8. The American College of Physicians recom-
mends adjusting quality payment models and perfor-
mance measurement assessments to reflect the in-
creased risk associated with caring for disadvantaged
patient populations.
There is interest in how to incorporate social determi-
nants of health into risk adjustment models and how they
may affect performance outcomes (126). A 2013 review of
literature on social factors potentially affecting risk for hos-
pital readmission for community-acquired pneumonia or
heart failure found a wide range of factors that could af-
fect outcomes (127). Research also indicates that safety
net hospitals are more vulnerable to higher penalties un-
der hospital readmission pay-for-performance measures,
and inclusion of patient- and community-level character-
istics reduced variance in risk-standardized readmission
rates (128). Despite the association between readmission
rates and areas that primarily serve disadvantaged popu-
lations, questions remain about the most appropriate
ways to incorporate social determinants into performance
measurement.
Initiatives have been instituted to assess the scope
of impact that social determinants of health have on
hospital readmissions, given data showing an associa-
tion between the two. These models and demonstra-
tions offer guidance on appropriate ways to capture
and adjust for social determinants of health. The Na-
tional Quality Forum recommended and has under-
taken a project focused on assessing how and to what
degree socioeconomic factors affect outcome mea-
sures (129). Focus on Hospitals became the first Web
site to report hospital readmission data adjusted for
sociodemographic status (130). The Centers for Medi-
care & Medicaid Services has also undertaken efforts to
consider social determinants of health in hospital read-
missions, including identifying ways to connect patients
with appropriate community resources (131) and add-
ing a risk adjustment to the Medicare Advantage Star
Rating program for differences in dual-eligibility status
and disability among beneficiaries.
9. The American College of Physicians recom-
mends increased screening and collection of social de-
terminants of health data to aid in health impact assess-
ments and support evidence-driven decision making.
Among policy discussions is the role that can be
played in identifying and screening for social determi-
nants of health in the clinical setting by physicians and
other medical professionals whose roles are to diag-
nose and treat disease. Research shows that screening
rates for health-related social problems are low despite
the effectiveness of such screening in identifying health-
related needs associated with social determinants of
health. In a survey of 205 families visiting a pediatric clinic
for a well-child visit, 82% reported 1 or more health-
related social problems, but 33% reported no screening
for them. In addition, 70% identified at least 1 need for a
referral, but 49% reported an unmet referral need (132).
Screening for even 1 health-related social problem may
result in identification of other problems. The use of a
Web-based screening tool focused on identifying food
insecurity found that food insecurity was also associated
with problems with health care access, education, hous-
ing, and income insecurity (133).
Screening supports collection of population- and
individual-level information needed to identify social
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 determinants of health broadly within communities and
among individuals. However, improving patient care
through screening and data collection should not add
undue burden on the physician or practice, and other
avenues for collecting this type of data at the state and
local levels should be explored. The Patient Centered
Assessment Method tested a way to incorporate screen-
ing for social factors into the primary care setting by
screening for health and well-being, social factors, and
health literacy. A study of the tool in Scotland found
that although it did not have immediate positive or
negative effects on patient satisfaction, it did increase
the number of onward referrals and referrals to non-
medical services (134).
Screening need not occur at every clinical encoun-
ter, and physician practices should be allowed to tailor
their screening methods in a way that is appropriate to
their practice and the patient population they treat.
This is another area where collaboration among physi-
cians, social workers, care coordinators, nurse practitio-
ners, and others could support screening and data col-
lection without adding burden. Potential collaborators
will need to address who will screen and collect data
and how the data will be used and disseminated (120).
Outside the clinical setting, those at the local and
state levels should also play a key role in supporting
screening and data collection through surveys, polls, or
questionnaires. The Nashville Area Metropolitan Plan-
ning Organization (MPO) used data from 6 health-
related questions included in the Middle Tennessee
Household Travel Survey; additional households com-
pleted an expanded questionnaire. All who completed
a questionnaire kept a travel diary and wore a GPS de-
vice for 4 days. The MPO used the data to determine 4
demographic characteristics correlated with poor health,
including being impoverished, being unemployed, being
older than 65 years, and not owning a car. As a result, the
MPO was able to prioritize transportation projects in
areas that it deemed “health priority areas” using a
points system (135).
A key component of screening is understanding
the complex social and economic dynamics that are in-
volved in assessing these issues and not painting with
broad strokes. Screening for social determinants in the
clinical setting can be difficult because of a fundamen-
tal difference between social determinants and clinical
care. A recent commentary noted, “Screening for any
condition in isolation without the capacity to ensure re-
ferral and linkage to appropriate treatment is ineffec-
tive and, arguably, unethical” (136). The article also
offered recommendations for screening protocol, includ-
ing integrating screening with referral and linkage to
community-based resources, taking a comprehensive sys-
tems approach to screening, building and utilizing the
strength of families and communities, and not limiting
screening practices on the basis of apparent social status
(125). These are important factors in efficiently and effec-
tively reaching patients and directing funds that target in-
dividual and broad-scale behaviors.
Web-Only References
8. Braveman P, Egerter S, Williams DR. The social determinants of
health: coming of age. Annu Rev Public Health. 2011;32:381-98.
[PMID: 21091195] doi:10.1146/annurev-publhealth-031210-101218
9. Crowley RA; Health and Public Policy Committee of the American
College of Physicians. Climate change and health: a position paper
of the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2016;164:
608-10. [PMID: 27089232] doi:10.7326/M15-2766
10. Heiman HJ, Artiga S. Beyond health care: the role of social de-
terminants in promoting health and health equity. The Henry J. Kai-
ser Family Foundation. 4 November 2015. Accessed at www.kff.org
/disparities-policy/issue-brief/beyond-health-care-the-role-of-social
-determinants-in-promoting-health-and-health-equity on 11 Septem-
ber 2017.
11. American Psychological Association. Measuring socioeconomic
status and subjective social status. 2018. Accessed at www.apa.org
/pi/ses/resources/class/measuring-status.aspx on 11 May 2017.
12. Chetty R, Grusky D, Hell M, Hendren N, Manduca R, Narang J.
The Fading American Dream: Trends in Absolute Income Mobility
Since 1940. Working Paper no. 22910. Cambridge, MA: National
Bureau of Economic Research; December 2016. doi:10.3386
/w22910
13. Braveman PA, Cubbin C, Egerter S, Chideya S, Marchi KS,
Metzler M, et al. Socioeconomic status in health research: one size
does not fit all. JAMA. 2005;294:2879-88. [PMID: 16352796]
14. U.S. Census Bureau. How the Census Bureau measures poverty.
Updated 11 August 2017. Accessed at www.census.gov/topics
/income-poverty/poverty/guidance/poverty-measures.html
on 3 November 2017.
15. Bishaw A. Changes in areas with concentrated poverty: 2000–
2010. American Community Survey reports. United States Census
Bureau. June 2014. Accessed at www.census.gov/content/dam
/Census/library/publications/2014/acs/acs-27.pdf on 10 May 2017.
16. UC Davis Center for Poverty Research. What is the current
poverty rate in the United States? Updated 18 December 2017. Ac-
cessed at https://poverty.ucdavis.edu/faq/what-current-poverty-rate
-united-states on 3 November 2017.
17. Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre. Global estimates
2015: people displaced by disasters. 2015. Accessed at www.internal
-displacement.org/assets/library/Media/201507-globalEstimates
-2015/20150713-global-estimates-2015-en-v1.pdf on 12 Septem-
ber 2017.
18. Ross T. A Disaster in the Making: Addressing the Vulnerability of
Low-Income Communities to Extreme Weather. Washington, DC:
Center for American Progress; August 2013.
19. American Psychological Association. Education and socioeco-
nomic status. 2018. Accessed at www.apa.org/pi/ses/resources
/publications/education.aspx on 1 November 2017.
20. National Center for Education Statistics. Employment and unem-
ployment rates by educational attainment. Updated April 2017. Ac-
cessed at https://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/indicator_cbc.asp on 1
November 2017.
21. Hood E. Dwelling disparities: how poor housing leads to poor
health. Environ Health Perspect. 2005;113:A310-7. [PMID: 15866753]
22. Healthy People 2020. SDOH-4.1.2. Proportion of households
earning less than 200% of the poverty threshold that spend more
than 30% of income on housing. Accessed at www.healthypeople
.gov/2020/data-search/Search-the-Data#objid=5254 on 9 May 2017.
23. U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. Afford-
able housing. 2017. Accessed at https://portal.hud.gov/hudportal
/HUD?src=/program_offices/comm_planning/affordablehousing on
8 May 2017.
24. National Health Care for the Homeless Council. What is the offi-
cial definition of homelessness? 2017. Accessed at www.nhchc.org
/faq/official-definition-homelessness on 10 May 2017.
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 25. National Alliance to End Homelessness. Changes in the HUD
definition of “homeless.” 18 January 2012. Accessed at www
.endhomelessness.org/library/entry/changes-in-the-hud-definition
-of-homeless on 10 May 2017.
26. The Commonwealth Fund. In Focus: Using Housing to Improve
Health and Reduce the Costs of Caring for the Homeless. Nove-
mber 2014. Accessed at www.commonwealthfund.org/publications
/newsletters/quality-matters/2014/october-november/in-focus on 8
October 2016.
27. Center for Outcomes Research & Education. Integrating Housing
and Health: A Health-Focused Evaluation of the Apartments at Bud
Clark Commons. Portland, OR: Center for Outcomes Research & Ed-
ucation. Accessed at http://media.oregonlive.com/portland_impact
/other/Verified%20BCC%20report%20with%20appendix.pdf on 13
February 2018.
28. Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. How does transportation im-
pact health? Issue Brief. October 2012. Accessed at www.rwjf.org
/content/dam/farm/reports/issue_briefs/2012/rwjf402311 on 5 May
2017.
29. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Physical activity for
everyone: the benefits of physical activity. Updated 4 June 2015.
Accessed
at
www.cdc.gov/physicalactivity/everyone/health/index
.html on 27 November 2017.
30. Syed ST, Gerber BS, Sharp LK. Traveling towards disease: trans-
portation barriers to health care access. J Community Health. 2013;
38:976-93. [PMID: 23543372] doi:10.1007/s10900-013-9681-1
31. Govindarajan A, Schull M. Effect of socioeconomic status on out-
of-hospital transport delays of patients with chest pain. Ann Emerg
Med. 2003;41:481-90. [PMID: 12658247]
32. Houston D, Wu P, Ong P, Winer A. Structural disparities of urban
traffic in Southern California: implications for vehicle related air pol-
lution exposure in minority and high-poverty neighborhoods.
J Urban Aff. 2004;26:565-92. doi:10.1111/j.0735-2166.2004.00215
33. Brunekreef B, Janssen NA, de Hartog J, Harssema H, Knape M,
van Vliet P. Air pollution from truck traffic and lung function in chil-
dren living near motorways. Epidemiology. 1997;8:298-303. [PMID:
9115026]
34. O’
Connor GT, Neas L, Vaughn B, Kattan M, Mitchell H, Crain EF,
et al. Acute respiratory health effects of air pollution on children with
asthma in US inner cities. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2008;121:1133-9.
[PMID: 18405952] doi:10.1016/j.jaci.2008.02.020
35. Garshick E, Laden F, Hart JE, Caron A. Residence near a major
road and respiratory symptoms in U.S. veterans. Epidemiology.
2003;14:728-36. [PMID: 14569190]
36. McKenzie B. Modes less traveled—bicycling and walking to work
in the United States: 2008–2012. American Community Survey Re-
ports. Washington, DC: United States Census Bureau; May 2014.
37. Safe Routes to School National Partnership. Fighting for equita-
ble transportation: why it matters. American Public Health Associa-
tion. 2015. Accessed at www.apha.org/~/media/files/pdf/topics
/environment/built_environment/srtsnp_equitytransp_factsheet2015
.ashx on 4 May 2017.
38. Seligman HK. Food Insecurity and Diabetes Prevention and Con-
trol in California. Accessed at https://cvp.ucsf.edu/images/seligman
_food.pdf on 8 October 2016.
39. Viswanath K, Bond K. Social determinants and nutrition: reflec-
tions on the role of communication. J Nutr Educ Behav. 2007;39:
S20-4. [PMID: 17336801]
40. Food access and its relationship to diet and health outcomes. In:
U.S. Department of Agriculture. Access to Affordable and Nutritious
Food: Measuring and Understanding Food Deserts and Their Con-
sequences. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture; June
2009:51-60. Accessed at www.ers.usda.gov/webdocs/publications
/42711/12716_ap036_1_.pdf?v=41055 on 13 February 2018.
41. U.S. Department of Agriculture. Definition of a food desert. Ac-
cessed
at
www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/food-access-research
-atlas/documentation#definitions on 13 February 2018.
42. Stanford University. Digital Divide. 2017. Accessed at https://cs
.stanford.edu/people/eroberts/cs181/projects/digital-divide/start
.html on 1 August 2017.
43. Anderson M, Perrin A. 13% of Americans don'
t use the internet.
Who are they? Pew Research Center. 7 September 2016. Accessed
at www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/09/07/some-americans
-dont-use-the-internet-who-are-they on 25 July 2017.
44. Pai A. Letter regarding request for comment—actions to acceler-
ate adoption and accessibility of broadband-enabled health care
solutions and advanced technologies (GN docket no. 16-46, FCC
17-46). 24 May 2017. Accessed at www.amia.org/sites/default/files
/AMIA-Response-to-FCC-Notice-on-Accelerating-Broadband-Health
-Tech-Availability.pdf on 25 July 2017.
45. Horrigan JB. The numbers behind the broadband “homework
gap.” Pew Research Center. 20 April 2015. Accessed at www
.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/04/20/the-numbers-behind-the
-broadband-homework-gap on 25 July 2017.
46. Federal Communications Commission. 2016 broadband prog-
ress report. 28 January 2016. Accessed at https://apps.fcc.gov/edocs
_public/attachmatch/FCC-16-6A1.pdf on 2 November 2017.
47. Estacio EV, Whittle R, Protheroe J. The digital divide: exam-
ining socio-demographic factors associated with health liter-
acy, access and use of internet to seek health information.
J Health Psychol. 2017:1359105317695429. [PMID: 28810415]
doi:10.1177/1359105317695429
48. American College of Physicians. Racial and Ethnic Disparities in
Health Care, Updated 2010. Philadelphia: American College of Phy-
sicians; 2010.
49. Williams DR, Priest N, Anderson NB. Understanding associations
among race, socioeconomic status, and health: patterns and pros-
pects. Health Psychol. 2016;35:407-11. [PMID: 27018733] doi:10
.1037/hea0000242
50. Mann L, Foley KL, Tanner AE, Sun CJ, Rhodes SD. Increasing
cervical cancer screening among US Hispanics/Latinas: a qualitative
systematic review. J Cancer Educ. 2015;30:374-87. [PMID: 25154515]
doi:10.1007/s13187-014-0716-9
51. American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network. Cervical can-
cer incidence rates remain higher in Hispanic/Latina women. 2017.
Accessed at www.acscan.org/sites/default/files/FINAL%20-%20
Hispanic%20Latinas%20and%20Cervical%20Cancer%2005.09.17
.pdf on 5 November 2017.
52. Zhang Y, Galloway JM, Welty TK, Wiebers DO, Whisnant JP,
Devereux RB, et al. Incidence and risk factors for stroke in American
Indians: the Strong Heart Study. Circulation. 2008;118:1577-84.
[PMID: 18809797] doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.772285
53. United States Government Accountability Office. Progress on
many high-risk areas, while substantial efforts needed on others.
GAO-17-317. February 2017. Accessed at www.gao.gov/assets/690
/682765.pdf on 30 October 2017.
54. National Cancer Institute. Cancer health disparities. Updated 11
March 2008. Accessed at www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization
/crchd/cancer-health-disparities-fact-sheet#r3 on 12 September 2017.
55. DeSantis CE, Fedewa SA, Goding Sauer A, Kramer JL, Smith RA,
Jemal A. Breast cancer statistics, 2015: convergence of incidence
rates between black and white women. CA Cancer J Clin. 2016;66:
31-42. [PMID: 26513636] doi:10.3322/caac.21320
56. Gerend MA, Pai M. Social determinants of black-white disparities
in breast cancer mortality: a review. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers
Prev. 2008;17:2913-23. [PMID: 18990731] doi:10.1158/1055-9965
.EPI-07-0633
57. Carey LA, Perou CM, Livasy CA, Dressler LG, Cowan D, Conway
K, et al. Race, breast cancer subtypes, and survival in the Carolina
Breast Cancer Study. JAMA. 2006;295:2492-502. [PMID: 16757721]
58. Noh S, Kaspar V. Perceived discrimination and depression: mod-
erating effects of coping, acculturation, and ethnic support. Am J
Public Health. 2003;93:232-8. [PMID: 12554575]
59. Paradies Y, Ben J, Denson N, Elias A, Priest N, Pieterse A, et al.
Racism as a determinant of health: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. PLoS One. 2015;10:e0138511. [PMID: 26398658] doi:10
.1371/journal.pone.0138511
60. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Healthy People
2020 leading health indicators: progress update. March 2014. Ac-
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 cessed at www.healthypeople.gov/sites/default/files/LHI-Progress-
Report-ExecSum_0.pdf on 12 October 2016.
61. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Accountable
health communities model. Accessed at https://innovation.cms.gov
/initiatives/AHCM on 12 October 2016.
62. Federal Interagency Forum on Aging-Related Statistics. Older
Americans 2016: Key Indicators of Well-Being. Washington, DC: US
Gov Pr Office; August 2016. Accessed at https://agingstats.gov/docs
/LatestReport/Older-Americans-2016-Key-Indicators-of-WellBeing
.pdf on 10 September 2017.
63. Westfall JM. Cold-spotting: linking primary care and public
health to create communities of solution. J Am Board Fam Med.
2013;26:239-40.
[PMID:
23657689]
doi:10.3122/jabfm.2013.03
.130094
64. Gawande A. The hot spotters. The New Yorker. 24 January
2011. Accessed at www.newyorker.com/magazine/2011/01/24/the
-hot-spotters on 5 October 2016.
65. Department of Vermont Health Access. Vermont Chronic
Care Initiative. Accessed at http://dvha.vermont.gov/for-providers
/vermont-chronic-care-initiative-vcci on 12 September 2017.
66. National Center for Medical-Legal Partnership. Helping families
keep their heat and lights on. 1 October 2017. Accessed at http:
//medical-legalpartnership.org/utility-story on 7 February 2018.
67. Wholesome Wave. Fruit and Vegetable Prescription Program.
FVRx fact sheet. Accessed at www.wholesomewavegeorgia.org/food
-rx on 13 February 2018.
68. U.S. Census Bureau. Quick facts: Flint City, Michigan. Accessed at
www.census.gov/quickfacts/table/PST045215/2629000,00 on 8 Oc-
tober 2016.
69. Kennedy C, Yard E, Dignam T, Buchanan S, Condon S, Brown
MJ, et al. Blood lead levels among children aged <6 years—Flint,
Michigan, 2013–2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016;65:
650-4. [PMID: 27359350] doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm6525e1
70. Mayo Clinic. Lead poisoning. 2016. Accessed at www.mayoclinic
.org/diseases-conditions/lead-poisoning/basics/definition/con
-20035487 on 8 October 2016.
71. Ross T, Solomon D. Lessons from Flint: the case for investing in
the building blocks of communities of color. Center for American
Progress. 3 March 2016. Accessed at https://cdn.americanprogress
.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/02102155/CommunitiesofColor
Flint.pdf on 4 May 2017.
72. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Learn about lead: lower
your chances of exposure to lead. Updated 26 May 2017. Accessed
at www.epa.gov/lead/learn-about-lead#lower on 4 May 2017.
73. Cheng JK. Confronting the social determinants of health—
obesity, neglect, and inequity. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:1976-7.
[PMID: 23171094] doi:10.1056/NEJMp1209420
74. Galobardes B, Davey Smith G, Jeffreys M, McCarron P. Child-
hood socioeconomic circumstances predict specific causes of death
in adulthood: the Glasgow student cohort study. J Epidemiol Com-
munity Health. 2006;60:527-9. [PMID: 16698985]
75. Reuben A, Caspi A, Belsky DW, Broadbent J, Harrington H, Sugden
K, et al. Association of childhood blood lead levels with cognitive
function and socioeconomic status at age 38 years and with IQ
change and socioeconomic mobility between childhood and
adulthood. JAMA. 2017;317:1244-51. [PMID: 28350927] doi:10
.1001/jama.2017.1712
76. Woolhandler S, Himmelstein DU. The relationship of health in-
surance and mortality: is lack of insurance deadly? Ann Intern Med.
2017;167:424-31. [PMID: 28655034] doi:10.7326/M17-1403
77. Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. Overcoming Obstacles to
Health: Report from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation to the
Commission to Build a Healthier America. Princeton: Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation; February 2008. Accessed at www.rwjf.org
/content/dam/farm/reports/reports/2008/rwjf22441
on
11
May
2017.
78. Stringhini S, Carmeli C, Jokela M, Avendan
˜o M, Muennig P,
Guida F, et al; LIFEPATH consortium. Socioeconomic status and the
25 × 25 risk factors as determinants of premature mortality: a multi-
cohort study and meta-analysis of 1.7 million men and women.
Lancet. 2017;389:1229-37. [PMID: 28159391] doi:10.1016/S0140
-6736(16)32380-7
79. Kershaw KN, Robinson WR, Gordon-Larsen P, Hicken MT,
Goff DC Jr, Carnethon MR, et al. Association of changes in
neighborhood-level racial residential segregation with changes in
blood pressure among black adults: the CARDIA study. JAMA
Intern Med. 2017;177:996-1002. [PMID: 28505341] doi:10.1001
/jamainternmed.2017.1226
80. Adler NE, Newman K. Socioeconomic disparities in health: path-
ways and policies. Health Aff (Millwood). 2002;21:60-76. [PMID:
11900187]
81. Williams DR, Costa MV, Odunlami AO, Mohammed SA. Moving
upstream: how interventions that address the social determinants of
health can improve health and reduce disparities. J Public Health
Manag Pract. 2008;14 Suppl:S8-17. [PMID: 18843244] doi:10.1097/
01.PHH.0000338382.36695.42
82. Task Force on Community Preventive Services. Recommenda-
tions to promote healthy social environments. Am J Prev Med. 2003;
24:21-4. [PMID: 12668195]
83. Tsao TY, Konty KJ, Van Wye G, Barbot O, Hadler JL, Linos N,
et al. Estimating potential reductions in premature mortality in
New York City from raising the minimum wage to $15. Am J Public
Health. 2016;106:1036-41. [PMID: 27077350] doi:10.2105/AJPH
.2016.303188
84. Williams DR, Costa MV, Odunlami AO, Mohammed SA. Moving
upstream: how interventions that address the social determinants of
health can improve health and reduce disparities. J Public Health
Manag Pract. 2008;14 Suppl:S8-17. [PMID: 18843244] doi:10.1097/
01.PHH.0000338382.36695.42
85. Shi L, Tsai J, Kao S. Public health, social determinants of health,
and public policy. Journal of Medical Sciences. 2009;29:43-59.
86. Cummins S, Flint E, Matthews SA. New neighborhood grocery
store increased awareness of food access but did not alter dietary
habits or obesity. Health Aff (Millwood). 2014;33:283-91. [PMID:
24493772] doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2013.0512
87. Gortmaker SL, Long MW, Ward ZJ, Giles CM, Barrett JL, Resch
SC, et al. Brief: cost effectiveness of a sugar-sweetened beverage
excise tax in Philadelphia, PA. (Prepared by the CHOICES Project at
the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health.) Accessed at http:
//choicesproject.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/BRIEF_Cost
-Effectiveness-of-a-Sugar-Sweetened-and-Diet-Beverage-Excise-Tax
-in-Philadelphia-PA.pdf on 13 February 2018.
88. Cotter EW, Teixeira C, Bontrager A, Horton K, Soriano D. Low-
income adults' perceptions of farmers' markets and community-
supported agriculture programmes. Public Health Nutr. 2017;20:
1452-1460. [PMID: 28202100] doi:10.1017/S1368980017000088
89. Community of Hope. Permanent supportive housing. 2016.
Accessed
at
www.communityofhopedc.org/housing/permanent
-supportive-housing on 11 May 2017.
90. Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. Health care'
s blind side. 1
December
2011.
Accessed
at
www.rwjf.org/en/library/research
/2011/12/health-care-s-blind-side.html on 12 September 2017.
91. Gupta S, Tinker B, Hume T. ‘
Our mouths were ajar’: Doctor'
s fight
to expose Flint'
s water crisis. Updated 22 January 2016. Accessed at
www.cnn.com/2016/01/21/health/flint-water-mona-hanna-attish
/index.html on 6 February 2018.
92. O’
Brien MJ, Garland JM, Murphy KM, Shuman SJ, Whitaker RC,
Larson SC. Training medical students in the social determinants of
health: the Health Scholars Program at Puentes de Salud. Adv Med
Educ Pract. 2014;5:307-14. [PMID: 25278787] doi:10.2147/AMEP
.S67480
93. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine; In-
stitute of Medicine; Board on Global Health; Committee on Educat-
ing Health Professionals to Address the Social Determinants of
Health. A Framework for Educating Health Professionals to Address
the Social Determinants of Health. Washington, DC: National Acad-
emies Pr; 2016. doi:10.17226/21923
94. Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education. CLER
Pathways to Excellence: Expectations for an Optimal Clinical Learn-
ing Environment to Achieve Safe and High Quality Patient Care. Chi-
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 cago: Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education; 2014.
Accessed at www.acgme.org/Portals/0/PDFs/CLER/CLER_Brochure
.pdf on 10 May 2017.
95. Shi L, Starfield B, Politzer R, Regan J. Primary care, self-rated
health, and reductions in social disparities in health. Health Serv Res.
2002;37:529-50. [PMID: 12132594]
96. Institute of Medicine. Primary Care and Public Health: Exploring
Integration to Improve Population Health. Washington, DC: National
Academy of Sciences; March 2012. Accessed at www.national
academies.org/hmd/~/media/Files/Report%20Files/2012/Primary
-Care-and-Public-Health/Primary%20Care%20and%20Public
%20Health_Revised%20RB_FINAL.pdf on 5 May 2017.
97. Garg A, Jack B, Zuckerman B. Addressing the social determi-
nants of health within the patient-centered medical home: lessons
from pediatrics. JAMA. 2013;309:2001-2. [PMID: 23619825] doi:10
.1001/jama.2013.1471
98. Hankin CS, Cox L, Bronstone A, Wang Z. Allergy immuno-
therapy: reduced health care costs in adults and children with
allergic rhinitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013;131:1084-91.
[PMID: 23375206] doi:10.1016/j.jaci.2012.12.662
99. Rimal RN, Lapinski MK. Why health communication is important
in public health [Editorial]. Bull World Health Organ. 2009;87:247.
[PMID: 19551226]
100. Doherty RB, Crowley RA; Health and Public Policy Committee
of the American College of Physicians. Principles supporting dy-
namic clinical care teams: an American College of Physicians posi-
tion paper. Ann Intern Med. 2013;159:620-6. [PMID: 24042251] doi:
10.7326/0003-4819-159-9-201311050-00710
101. Miller G, Roehrig C, Hughes-Cromwick P, Turner A. What is
currently spent on prevention as compared to treatment? In: Faust H,
Menzel P, eds. Prevention vs. Treatment: What'
s the Right Balance?
New York: Oxford Univ Pr; 2011:37-55.
102. Bradley EH, Canavan M, Rogan E, Talbert-Slagle K, Ndumele C,
Taylor L, et al. Variation in health outcomes: the role of spending on
social services, public health, and health care, 2000–09. Health Aff
(Millwood). 2016;35:760-8. [PMID: 27140980] doi:10.1377/hlthaff
.2015.0814
103. Avendano M, Kawachi I. Why do Americans have shorter life
expectancy and worse health than do people in other high-
income countries? Annu Rev Public Health. 2014;35:307-25. [PMID:
24422560] doi:10.1146/annurev-publhealth-032013-182411
104. Syme SL. Social determinants of health: the community as
an empowered partner. Prev Chronic Dis. 2004;1:A02. [PMID:
15634364]
105. U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. Healthy
homes and lead hazard control. Accessed at http://portal.hud.gov
/hudportal/HUD?src=/hudprograms/hhlhc on 12 October 2016.
106. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Preventing Lead
Exposure in Young Children: A Housing-Based Approach to Primary
Prevention of Lead Poisoning. Atlanta: Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention; October 2004. Accessed at www.cdc.gov/nceh
/lead/publications/primarypreventiondocument.pdf on 1 November
2017.
107. Bloom DA. FY 2018 President'
s Budget: Major Policy and Final
Resource Decisions [Memorandum]. 21 March 2017. Accessed at
www.washingtonpost.com/apps/g/page/politics/epas-spending-cut
-plan/2188/?tid=a_inl on 11 May 2017.
108. Reich D, Shapiro I, Cho C, Kogan R. Block-granting low-income
programs leads to large funding declines over time, history shows.
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. 22 February 2017. Accessed
at www.cbpp.org/research/federal-budget/block-granting-low
-income-programs-leads-to-large-funding-declines-over-time on 6
November 2017.
109. Boyce CA, Olster DH. Strengthening the public research
agenda for social determinants of health. Am J Prev Med. 2011;40:
S86-8. [PMID: 21146786] doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2010.10.006
110. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; National Insti-
tutes of Health. NIH health disparities strategic plan and budget fis-
cal years 2009–2013. Accessed at www.nimhd.nih.gov/docs/2009
-2013nih_health_disparities_strategic_plan_and_budget.pdf on 11
May 2017.
111. Bauman AE, King L, Nutbeam D. Rethinking the evaluation and
measurement of health in all policies. Health Promot Int. 2014;29
Suppl 1:i143-51. [PMID: 25217351] doi:10.1093/heapro/dau049
112. Institute of Medicine. For the Public'
s Health: Revitalizing Law
and Policy to Meet New Challenges. Washington, DC: National
Academy of Sciences; June 2011. Accessed at www.national
academies.org/hmd/~/media/Files/Report%20Files/2011/For-the
-Publics-Health-Revitalizing-Law-and-Policy-to-Meet-New-Challenges
/For%20the%20Publics%20Health%202011%20Report%20Brief
.pdf on 8 October 2016.
113. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. National
Prevention Council. Accessed at www.surgeongeneral.gov/priorities
/prevention/about on 8 October 2016.
114. National Prevention Council. National Prevention, Health Pro-
motion, and Public Health Council Annual Status Report 2014. Wash-
ington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; July
2014. Accessed at www.surgeongeneral.gov/priorities/prevention
/2014-npc-status-report.pdf on 11 May 2017.
115. California Department of Public Health. Health in All Policies
(HIAP). Accessed at www.cdph.ca.gov/Programs/OHE/Pages/HIAP
.aspx# on 11 May 2017.
116. California Health in All Policies Task Force. California'
s Health in
All Policies Task Force fact sheet. Accessed at www.co.merced.ca.us
/DocumentCenter/View/11972 on 13 February 2018.
117. Wernham A, Teutsch SM. Health in all policies for big cities.
J Public Health Manag Pract. 2015;21 Suppl 1:S56-65. [PMID:
25423058] doi:10.1097/PHH.0000000000000130
118. The Pew Charitable Trusts. Health Impact Project: about health
impact assessment. Accessed at www.pewtrusts.org/en/projects
/health-impact-project/health-impact-assessment on 9 October 2016.
119. Rudolph L, Caplan J, Ben-Moshe K, Dillon L. Health in All
Policies: A Guide for State and Local Governments. Oakland: Public
Health Institute; 2013.
120. Adler NE, Stead WW. Patients in context—EHR capture of social
and behavioral determinants of health. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:698-
701. [PMID: 25693009] doi:10.1056/NEJMp1413945
121. Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. Using social determinants
of health data to improve health care and health: a learning report.
2 May 2016. Accessed at https://healthleadsusa.org/wp-content
/uploads/2016/06/RWJF-SDOH-Learning-Report.pdf on 27 Novem-
ber 2017.
122. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. ICD-10-CM official
guidelines for coding and reporting FY2016. 2016. Accessed at
www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/icd/10cmguidelines_2016_final.pdf on 11
May 2017.
123. Gottlieb L, Tobey R, Cantor J, Hessler D, Adler NE. Integrating
social and medical data to improve population health: opportunities
and
barriers.
Health
Aff
(Millwood).
2016;35:2116-23.
[PMID:
27834254]
124. National Association of Community Health Centers. PRAPARE.
Accessed at www.nachc.org/research-and-data/prapare on 11 May
2017.
125. Institute of Medicine. Capturing Social and Behavioral Domains
and Measures in Electronic Health Records: Phase 2. Washington,
DC: National Academies Pr; 2014.
126. Nuckols TK. With the Merit-Based Incentive Payment System,
pay for performance is now national policy. Ann Intern Med. 2017;
166:368-9. [PMID: 28114662] doi:10.7326/M16-2947
127. Calvillo-King L, Arnold D, Eubank KJ, Lo M, Yunyongying P,
Stieglitz H, et al. Impact of social factors on risk of readmission
or mortality in pneumonia and heart failure: systematic review.
J Gen Intern Med. 2013;28:269-82. [PMID: 23054925] doi:10.1007/
s11606-012-2235-x
128. Nagasako EM, Reidhead M, Waterman B, Dunagan WC. Add-
ing socioeconomic data to hospital readmissions calculations may
produce more useful results. Health Aff (Millwood). 2014;33:786-91.
[PMID: 24799575] doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2013.1148
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 129. National Quality Forum. Risk Adjustment for Socioeconomic or
Other Sociodemographic Factors. Technical Report. Washington,
DC: National Quality Forum; 2014.
130. Focus on Hospitals. Risk-adjustment methodology for readmis-
sions. Accessed at http://focusonhospitals.com/risk-adjustment
-methodology-for-readmissions on 1 August 2017.
131. Betancourt JR, Tan-McGrory A, Kenst KS. Guide to Preventing
Readmissions among Racially and Ethnically Diverse Medicare Ben-
eficiaries. (Prepared by Disparities Solutions Center, Mongan Insti-
tute for Health Policy at Massachusetts General Hospital.) Baltimore:
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services Office of Minority Health;
September 2015.
132. Fleegler EW, Lieu TA, Wise PH, Muret-Wagstaff S. Families'
health-related social problems and missed referral opportunities.
Pediatrics. 2007;119:e1332-41. [PMID: 17545363]
133. Baer TE, Scherer EA, Fleegler EW, Hassan A. Food insecurity
and the burden of health-related social problems in an urban youth
population. J Adolesc Health. 2015;57:601-7. [PMID: 26592328] doi:
10.1016/j.jadohealth.2015.08.013
134. Pratt R, Hibberd C, Cameron IM, Maxwell M. The Patient Cen-
tered Assessment Method (PCAM): integrating the social dimen-
sions of health into primary care. J Comorb. 2015;5:110-9. [PMID:
29090159] doi:10.15256/joc.2015.5.35
135.
Transportation
for
America.
Case
study:
Nashville,
TN.
Prioritizing public health benefits through better project evaluation.
2016. Accessed at http://t4america.org/wp-content/uploads/2016
/09/Nashville-Case-Study.pdf on 11 May 2017.
136. Garg A, Boynton-Jarrett R, Dworkin PH. Avoiding the unin-
tended consequences of screening for social determinants of health.
JAMA. 2016;316:813-4. [PMID: 27367226] doi:10.1001/jama.2016
.9282
Appendix Table. Social Determinants of Health and
Health Outcomes*
Social determinants of health
Economic stability
Employment
Income
Expenses
Debt
Medical bills
Support
Neighborhood and physical environment
Housing
Transportation
Safety
Parks
Playgrounds
Walkability
Education
Literacy
Language
Early childhood education
Vocational training
Higher education
Food
Hunger
Access to healthy options
Community and social context
Social integration
Support systems
Community engagement
Discrimination
Health care system
Health coverage
Provider availability
Provider linguistic and cultural competency
Quality of care
Health outcomes
Mortality
Morbidity
Life expectancy
Health care expenditures
Health status
Functional limitations
* Adapted from Heiman and Artiga (10).
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
