 Lesion network localization of criminal behavior
R. Ryan Darbya,b,c,d,e,1, Andreas Hornb,c,f, Fiery Cushmang, and Michael D. Foxb,c,d,h,1
aDepartment of Neurology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232; bBerenson-Allen Center for Non-Invasive Brain Stimulation,
Department of Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215; cDivision of Cognitive Neurology, Department
of Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115; dDepartment of Neurology, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114; eDepartment of Neurology, McLean Psychiatric Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Belmont, MA 02478;
fDepartment of Neurology, Movement Disorder and Neuromodulation Unit, Charité–University Medicine, 10117 Berlin, Germany; gDepartment of
Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138; and hAthinoula A. Martinos Centre for Biomedical Imaging, Charlestown, MA 02129
Edited by Kent A. Kiehl, The Mind Research Network, Albuquerque, NM, and accepted by Editorial Board Member Michael S. Gazzaniga November 20, 2017
(received for review April 25, 2017)
Following brain lesions, previously normal patients sometimes exhibit
criminal behavior. Although rare, these cases can lend unique insight
into the neurobiological substrate of criminality. Here we present a
systematic mapping of lesions with known temporal association to
criminal behavior, identifying 17 lesion cases. The lesion sites were
spatially heterogeneous, including the medial prefrontal cortex, orbi-
tofrontal cortex, and different locations within the bilateral temporal
lobes. No single brain region was damaged in all cases. Because
lesion-induced symptoms can come from sites connected to the lesion
location and not just the lesion location itself, we also identified brain
regions functionally connected to each lesion location. This technique,
termed lesion network mapping, has recently identified regions in-
volved in symptom generation across a variety of lesion-induced dis-
orders. All lesions were functionally connected to the same network
of brain regions. This criminality-associated connectivity pattern was
unique compared with lesions causing four other neuropsychiatric
syndromes. This network includes regions involved in morality,
value-based decision making, and theory of mind, but not regions
involved in cognitive control or empathy. Finally, we replicated our
results in a separate cohort of 23 cases in which a temporal relation-
ship between brain lesions and criminal behavior was implied but not
definitive. Our results suggest that lesions in criminals occur in differ-
ent brain locations but localize to a unique resting state network,
providing insight into the neurobiology of criminal behavior.
morality | functional connectivity | criminality | sociopathy | lesion
C
riminal behavior comes at an enormous cost to society, up-
wards of $1 trillion dollars by some estimates (1). Despite
this burden, the neurobiological substrate underlying criminal
behavior remains unclear (2). To address this, some previous
studies have used brain imaging, which have identified a variety
of abnormalities in criminals (3–5). In most cases, however, it is
unclear whether these abnormalities are a cause, compensation,
or incidental correlate of criminality (6). This distinction is im-
portant, both for neuroscience and the legal field, given the in-
creasing use of neuroimaging in criminal court cases (7).
Another approach is to study patients who develop criminal
behavior following focal brain lesions, referred to as “pseudo-
psychopathy” or “acquired sociopathy” (8, 9). Although many
factors besides brain lesions contribute to criminality (2, 10–14),
the lesion is often interpreted as causal in the sense that it con-
tributes or predisposes to the behavior (2, 6). This causal inference
is strengthened when there is a clear temporal relationship be-
tween the lesion and the criminal behavior (6), although often this
temporal association is unclear.
Famous examples of acquired sociopathy include Phineas
Gage, who developed antisocial personality changes after an iron
rod blast damaged his medial frontal lobes, and Charles Whit-
man, who murdered 16 people following growth of a brain tumor
in his right temporal lobe (15). This pair of cases also illustrates a
problem with lesion-based localization: different cases often
implicate different brain regions. Patients such as Gage have
damage to the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) and
orbital prefrontal cortex (16), while other patients like Whitman
have damage outside this area (15). Despite several reviews (5,
17–19), there is currently no widely accepted and parsimonious
explanation for this heterogeneity.
Our approach is motivated by the observation that neurologic
symptoms can come from dysfunction in remote brain regions
connected to the lesion location rather than from the lesion lo-
cation itself, a phenomenon referred to as diaschisis (20). A new
technique termed lesion network mapping can potentially account
for these remote effects (21–25). This technique uses a database of
resting state functional connectivity from normal subjects to
identify regions functionally connected to each lesion location
(Materials and Methods). Because lesions causing the same symp-
tom tend to share functional connectivity to the same brain re-
gions, this approach has provided insight into complex neurologic
symptoms, including hallucinations (21), involuntary movements
(25), delusions (23), and loss of consciousness (24).
Here we report a systematic mapping of lesion locations
temporally associated with criminal behavior. We used lesion
network mapping to test (i) whether lesions temporally asso-
ciated with criminal behavior are part of a common brain net-
work, and (ii) whether this network overlaps regions activated
by neuropsychological processes hypothesized to be abnormal in
criminals (19, 26, 27). Finally, we tested whether our results can be
replicated in a second cohort in which the temporal relationship
between lesion onset and criminal behavior is uncertain.
Significance
Cases like that of Charles Whitman, who murdered 16 people
after growth of a brain tumor, have sparked debate about
why some brain lesions, but not others, might lead to criminal
behavior. Here we systematically characterize such lesions
and compare them with lesions that cause other symptoms.
We find that lesions in multiple different brain areas are as-
sociated with criminal behavior. However, these lesions all
fall within a unique functionally connected brain network
involved in moral decision making. Furthermore, connectivity
to competing brain networks predicts the abnormal moral
decisions observed in these patients. These results provide
insight into why some brain lesions, but not others, might
predispose to criminal behavior, with potential neuroscience,
medical, and legal implications.
Author contributions: R.R.D., F.C., and M.D.F. designed research; R.R.D. performed re-
search; A.H. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; R.R.D. analyzed data; and R.R.D.
wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission. K.A.K. is a guest editor invited by the Editorial
Board.
This open access article is distributed under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
NoDerivatives License 4.0 (CC BY-NC-ND).
See Commentary on page 451.
1To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: darby.ryan@gmail.com or
foxmdphd@gmail.com.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1706587115/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1706587115
PNAS
|
January 16, 2018
|
vol. 115
|
no. 3
|
601–606
NEUROSCIENCE
SEE COMMENTARY
 Results
Lesions Temporally Associated with Criminal Behavior Are Spatially
Heterogeneous. Seventeen patients with a documented temporal
relationship between a brain lesion and criminal behavior were
identified through a systematic literature search (SI Appendix, Fig.
S1 and Table S1). Criminal behaviors included “white collar”
crimes, such as fraud or theft; however, most of the patients (12 of
17) had committed violent crimes, such as assault, rape, and
murder. Cases included documentation of no criminal behavior
before the lesion (15 cases) or resolution of criminal behavior
following treatment of the lesion (two cases). The 17 lesions were
spatially diverse, including nine in the medial frontal or orbito-
frontal structures, three in the medial temporal lobe/amygdala,
three in the anterior lateral temporal lobe, one in the dorsomedial
prefrontal cortex, and one involving the ventral striatum and parts
of the orbitofrontal cortex (Fig. 1). Although the most common
lesion location was the vmPFC/orbitofrontal cortex, at least seven
lesions were documented to not extend into this area.
Network Localization of Lesions Temporally Associated with Criminal
Behavior. The set of regions functionally connected to each lesion
location was determined using a database of resting state functional
connectivity from normal subjects (21, 28, 29). Regions with activity
positively or negatively correlated with activity at each lesion site
were identified (Fig. 2B). Finally, lesion network maps from each
patient were overlapped to determine brain regions significantly
connected to all or most lesions causing criminal behavior (Fig. 2C).
All 17 lesions temporally associated with criminal behavior were
functionally connected (i.e., positively correlated) to the inferior
orbitofrontal cortex and anterior temporal lobes, and most (16 of
17) were connected to the vmPFC and nucleus accumbens (Fig.
3A and SI Appendix, Table S2). In addition, all 17 lesions were
functionally connected (i.e., negatively correlated) with the intra-
parietal sulcus, and 15 of 17 were functionally connected with the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (Fig. 3A and SI Appendix, Table S2).
Statistical analysis showed that this pattern of connectivity was
specific to lesions temporally associated with criminal behavior
compared with lesions causing four other neurologic syndromes
(21) (Fig. 3B and SI Appendix, Table S3). There was no difference
in connectivity between early-onset (age <18 years; n = 7) and
later-onset (age >18 years; n = 10) lesions. These results suggest
that lesions in different locations temporally associated with
criminal behavior are characterized by a unique pattern of brain
connectivity. Thus, while these lesions are spatially diverse, they
are part of a common functional network.
Network Localization to Moral Decision-Making Regions. Criminality
is presumed to arise in part from abnormalities in moral decision
making (17, 19). We therefore hypothesized that lesions tem-
porally associated with criminal behavior would be functionally
connected to regions involved in moral decision making in nor-
mal subjects. We identified moral decision-making regions in two
ways: (i) activation likelihood estimation (ALE) of regions ac-
tivated by moral vs. nonmoral stimuli (Fig. 4, light green) (30, 31)
and (ii) activations associated with the keyword “moral” on the
website Neurosynth (www.neurosynth.org), an automated engine
for performing neuroimaging meta-analyses that avoids potential
bias associated with study selection (Fig. 4, dark green) (32).
We then quantitatively tested whether lesion locations causing
criminal behavior were functionally connected to regions involved
in moral decision making. Specifically, we used our resting-state func-
tional connectivity dataset to compute the temporal correlation be-
tween spontaneous brain activity recorded from each lesion location
with activity recorded from binarized maps of our morality meta-
analyses. As a group, lesion locations temporally associated with
criminal behavior were functionally connected to regions activated by
moral tasks (P < 0.0001). This connectivity was significantly greater
than for lesion locations causing other neurologic syndromes (P <
0.0001; Fig. 4 B and C). Results were independent of the meta-
analysis method used to identify moral decision-making regions.
Network Localization to Regions Associated with Subcomponents of
Moral Decision Making. Our results indicate that lesions tempo-
rally associated with criminal behavior are uniquely functionally
connected to regions involved in moral decision making. How-
ever, moral decision making incorporates several different neu-
ropsychological processes including cognitive control (33), value
or reward-based decision making (34), theory of mind (35), and
empathy (27). The potential contributions of each process to
criminal behavior are contested (36).
We approach this problem at a network level of analysis: how
does the functional network that we identify in lesion-induced
criminal behavior align with brain regions implicated in these
subcomponents of moral decision making? We used Neurosynth
to perform unbiased meta-analyses of “value,” “theory of mind,”
“empathy,” and “cognitive control.” As expected, brain regions
identified in each of these meta-analyses partially overlapped
portions of our original morality meta-analysis (SI Appendix, Fig.
S2). Lesions temporally associated with criminal behavior were
functionally connected to regions involved in value-based decision
making (Pc < 0.0001; Fig. 5A) and theory of mind (Pc < 0.0001;
Fig. 5B) but not with empathy (Fig. 5C) or cognitive control (Fig.
5D). Lesions were significantly more connected to value-based
Fig. 1.
Lesions temporally associated with criminal behavior. Lesions from
17 patients with acquired criminal behavior, manually traced onto a com-
mon brain atlas (MNI).
Fig. 2.
Lesion network mapping technique. (A) Lesions traced onto a stan-
dardized MNI brain template. (B) Brain regions functionally connected to each
lesion location based on a large resting-state functional connectivity database.
(C) Overlap in the functional connectivity maps from each lesion identifies brain
regions functionally connected to the greatest number of lesion locations.
602
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1706587115
Darby et al.
 decision making and theory of mind regions than empathy or cog-
nitive control regions (all comparisons P < 0.01). Finally, this
connectivity was specific to lesions temporally associated with
criminal behavior compared with lesions causing other neurologic
syndromes (P < 0.0001; Fig. 5).
Network Localization to Competing Brain Networks Matches Abnormal
Moral Choices. The foregoing analyses focus on brain regions with
positive correlations to lesion locations; however, a crucial theme
in both functional network analysis (37) and moral decision making
(33, 38) is the role of opponent networks—those exhibiting sys-
tematic negative correlations. We next explored whether known
behavioral abnormalities in individuals with criminal behavior are
consistent with lesion connectivity to opponent networks.
We focused on the widely studied conflict between competing
networks involved in resolving ambiguous moral dilemmas, such as
the “trolley problem” (33, 38). One network is associated with a
strong aversion to directly harming others, while the second network
is involved in overcoming this aversion to make more utilitarian
decisions (e.g., harm one person to save the lives of five persons).
Patient populations with increased risk of criminal behavior [e.g.,
those with vmPFC lesions, frontotemporal dementia, psychopathy]
are more likely than normal subjects to endorse harming others to
make more utilitarian decisions (39–41). We hypothesized that le-
sions temporally associated with criminal behavior would show
differential connectivity to these competing brain regions.
Indeed, activity from our lesion locations was positively correlated
with brain regions activated when deciding to avoid personal harm
(P < 0.0001; Fig. 6A) and negatively correlated with brain regions
activated by utilitarian decisions (P < 0.0001; Fig. 6B). In both cases,
results were specific to lesion locations temporally associated with
criminal behavior vs. lesions causing other syndromes (P < 0.0001).
Crucially, the combination of connectivity to these two competing
sets of brain regions was a better predictor of lesion-induced criminal
behavior than was connectivity to either set alone (P < 0.01).
Patient populations with increased criminality also tend to
reject unfair offers more than normal subjects during the ulti-
matum game (42–44). As above, competing brain regions are
associated with the decision to reject an unfair offer made by
another player vs. a decision to accept a fair offer (45). Lesion
locations temporally associated with criminal behavior were
negatively correlated with the brain region most activated when
rejecting unfair offers (P < 0.05) and positively correlated with
the brain region most activated by accepting fair offers (P <
0.05). This pattern of connectivity was again specific for lesion-
induced criminal behavior compared with lesions causing other
neurologic syndromes (P < 0.0001; SI Appendix, Fig. S3).
Replication in Criminals with Lesions of Uncertain Temporal Association.
In many cases, the temporal association between a brain lesion and
criminal behavior is uncertain. We identified 23 cases of uncertain
temporal association from our initial search (SI Appendix, Fig.
S1 and Table S1). These cases included brain lesions found in-
cidentally in incarcerated criminals (20 cases), brain lesions present
since birth (two cases), or lesions being treated when the criminal
behavior occurred (one case). As in our initial cohort, these lesions
were spatially heterogeneous (SI Appendix, Fig. S4).
Lesion network mapping showed nearly identical results to those
for our initial cohort (Fig. 7). All 23 lesions were functionally con-
nected to the orbitofrontal cortex, and most were connected to the
anterior temporal lobe, vmPFC, mesial temporal lobe/amygdala, and
nucleus accumbens (Fig. 7B). Connectivity to these regions was
specific compared with lesions causing other syndromes (Fig. 7B).
This second cohort showed the same pattern of connectivity to re-
gions involved in morality (P < 0.0001; Fig. 7B), subcomponents of
morality (P < 0.0001 for value and theory of mind), harm aversion
vs. utilitarian decisions in moral dilemmas (P < 0.0001), and fair vs.
unfair offers in the ultimatum game (P < 0.0001). There was no
significant difference in connectivity between lesions with and those
without a documented temporal association with criminal behavior.
Discussion
There are four important findings in the present study. First, le-
sions temporally associated with criminal behavior occur in dif-
ferent brain regions but lie within a single connected brain network
that is distinct from lesions not associated with criminal behavior.
Second, lesions temporally associated with criminal behavior are
functionally connected to regions activated by moral decision
making, value-based decision making, and theory of mind tasks, but
not with regions activated by empathy or cognitive control. Third,
lesions temporally associated with criminal behavior show opposite
connectivity to brain regions activated by competing moral choices,
predicting the biases seen in these patients. Finally, all results are
Fig. 4.
Lesions temporally associated with criminality are functionally con-
nected to morality regions. (A) Regions functionally connected to lesion loca-
tions temporally associated with criminal behavior (red) are similar to regions
activated by moral decision-making tasks (green; overlap in yellow). (B and C)
Lesion locations temporally associated with criminal behavior (gray) are func-
tionally connected to regions activated by moral decision-making tasks iden-
tified in meta-analyses using Neurosynth (B) or ALE (C), unlike lesions causing
other neurologic syndromes (control syndromes; black). **P < 0.0001.
Fig. 3.
Lesions temporally associated with criminality are part of a unique
connected brain network. (A) Regions functionally connected to 17 lesion
locations temporally associated with criminal behavior. (B) Nonparametric
voxel-wise lesion-symptom mapping results showing regions in which 17 le-
sions temporally associated with criminal behavior were significantly more
connected (positive in red, negative in blue) compared with the connectivity
of 63 lesions causing other syndromes.
Darby et al.
PNAS
|
January 16, 2018
|
vol. 115
|
no. 3
|
603
NEUROSCIENCE
SEE COMMENTARY
 reproducible in a second cohort of patients with uncertain tem-
poral associations between lesions and criminal behavior.
Lesions Associated with Criminal Behavior Are Part of a Single
Connected Brain Network. The heterogeneity of brain lesions as-
sociated with criminal behavior has been noted in previous re-
views (5, 15, 19), raising the question of what features these
lesions share that could result in a similar behavioral phenotype.
Our results show that these heterogeneous lesion locations are
part of a single connected brain network that includes the orbi-
tofrontal cortex, vmPFC, and anterior temporal lobes. Moreover,
this network is specific to lesions associated with criminal be-
havior compared with lesions causing other syndromes.
Abnormalities in these same brain regions have been identified
in other patient populations prone to criminal behavior (2–5). For
example, up to 57% of patients with frontotemporal dementia have
committed a crime and exhibit pathological changes in regions
overlapping those identified in the present study (46–48). Similarly,
psychopaths display atrophy distributed across the vmPFC, orbito-
frontal cortex, and anterior temporal lobes (49, 50), as well as white
matter and functional connectivity changes in these regions (51).
Lesion Connectivity to Regions Involved in Moral Decision Making.
Lesions temporally associated with criminal behavior showed not
only a similar pattern of brain connectivity, but also connectivity
specifically to regions implicated in moral decision making. These
results link lesions resulting in criminal behavior to regions whose
activity is correlated with moral decision making, value-based de-
cision making, and theory of mind in normal subjects. Exactly which
psychological processes are abnormal or disrupted in criminals re-
mains a matter of ongoing research and debate (36). It is also un-
known whether deficits in moral decision making contribute to
lesion-associated criminal behavior. Nonetheless, our present re-
sults provide testable hypotheses for future work—namely, that
patients whose lesions are connected to brain regions involved in
specific aspects of moral decision making will demonstrate behav-
ioral deficits in those tasks.
Connectivity to Brain Networks Involved in Competing Moral Decisions
and Behavioral Bias. Previous work has demonstrated that the relative
balance in activation between two different networks of brain re-
gions is associated with different choices in moral dilemmas (33,
38). This has led to the hypothesis that there is “competition” be-
tween opponent networks during moral decision making (33), which
is supported by evidence that these networks are normally anti-
correlated at rest (37). We found that lesions temporally associated
with criminal behavior were connected to both sets of brain regions,
but in opposite directions. Thus, lesions may bias patients toward
utilitarian moral decisions (i.e., push someone off the bridge to save
others) (39) and rejection of unfair offers in the ultimatum game
(42) (SI Appendix, Fig. S5).
Replication and Causal Inferences. Our main analysis included
17 cases with a strong temporal relationship between the le-
sion and criminal behavior. Our results were nearly identical
using lesions of uncertain temporal association with criminal
behavior. This replication increases our confidence that lesions
within a well-defined network increase the relative probability
of criminality. In a judicial setting, it is often desirable to know
whether a lesion contributed to criminality or was an incidental
finding. In this respect, the implications of our findings are
unclear. The published cases included in our second cohort
were often believed to be contributing to criminality (and not
incidental), even if a clear temporal association between the
lesion and criminality was not documented. Whether lesion
network mapping can help differentiate incidental lesions from
Fig. 5.
Lesions temporally associated with criminality are functionally connected
to some, but not all, subcomponents of moral decision making. Connectivity with
lesion locations temporally associated with criminal behavior (red) is similar to that
in regions activated by some but not other components of moral decision making
(green; overlap in yellow). Quantitatively, lesion locations temporally associated
with criminal behavior are functionally connected to regions activated by value-
based decision making (A) and theory of mind tasks (B), but not with empathy (C)
or cognitive control tasks (D). These results were specific to lesions temporally
associated with criminal behavior (gray) compared with lesions causing other
neurologic syndromes (control syndromes; black). **P < 0.0001.
Fig. 6.
Lesions temporally associated with criminality are connected in opposite
directions to opponent networks involved in moral decision making. (A) Lesion
locations are positively connected (red) with regions activated by decisions to
avoid harm in personal moral dilemmas (green; overlap in yellow). (B) Lesion
locations are negatively connected (blue) with regions activated by utilitarian
decisions in impersonal moral dilemmas (green; overlap in yellow). Results are
specific to lesions temporally associated with criminal behavior (gray) compared
with lesions causing other neurologic syndromes (black). **P < 0.0001.
604
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1706587115
Darby et al.
 lesions contributing to a given behavior remains unknown, but
is beginning to be tested in this context (29).
It is important not to overinterpret our results with respect to the
prediction of criminal behavior. Factors including genetics (13), age
at lesion onset (10, 12, 14), lesion etiology (11), environment, social
support, and premorbid personality traits (2) may contribute to
criminal behavior, either independently or through interaction with
the lesion location. Violence or crime occurs in only ∼9% of pa-
tients with traumatic brain injury (52, 53), 14% of patients with
frontal lobe injury (54), and up to 57% of patients with frontal
temporal dementia (46–48). Specifically, criminal behavior has been
reported in 37–57% of patients with behavioral variant fronto-
temporal dementia and in 27–56% of those with semantic variant
primary progressive aphasia, although these percentages include
nonviolent crimes, such as shoplifting and traffic violations (46–48).
These findings suggest that many patients with lesions lying within
our network will not develop criminal behavior. Thus, lesions within
our identified network may increase the risk of criminal behavior,
but should not be interpreted as an inevitable or sole cause of
criminal behavior. Prospective studies addressing the likelihood
that a lesion with connectivity to our identified regions will result in
criminal behavior, as well as other contributing factors, are needed.
Limitations. Several potential confounders associated with lesion
network mapping have been identified and addressed in previous
studies (21, 23–25, 28, 29). First, the accuracy of lesion tracing is
limited by the quality of the published images, as well as the use of
a 2D lesion to approximate a 3D lesion. While we did not have any
3D lesions available for the present study, previous studies have
shown that lesion network mapping of 2D approximations of 3D
lesions are highly similar (21, 23). Second, results might vary based
on the specific connectome dataset or resting-state functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) processing strategy used. We
have previously demonstrated that results do not change when
using an age-matched or disease-specific connectome, or using
alternative processing strategies (21). Of note, the present study
used a larger (n = 1,000) publicly available connectome (55),
rather than the smaller (n = 98) dataset used in our previous
lesion network mapping studies (21, 23–25). The results were
nearly identical across these two datasets (SI Appendix, Fig. S6).
A limitation of the present study is that no functional imaging or
behavioral testing was actually performed in patients with lesion-
induced criminal behavior. Rather, we used previous behavioral
testing, previously published lesion locations, neuroimaging meta-
analyses, and large connectome datasets to generate our findings.
This approach avoids confounders often associated with fMRI in
patients, including movement, task compliance, low subject num-
bers (especially in rare syndromes such as acquired criminal be-
havior), and ambiguity regarding whether imaging abnormalities
are caused by the lesion, compensating for the lesion, or secondary
to altered task performance (56). However, without functional
imaging in patients, it is unknown whether remote brain regions
functionally connected to a lesion location (and thus predicted to
be dysfunctional in the present study) are actually dysfunctional in
these patients. Similarly, while we show that brain lesions associ-
ated with criminal behavior are functionally connected to regions
involved in moral decision making, it remains unknown whether
moral decision making is actually abnormal in these patients.
A second limitation is that the study focused on retrospective
cases of lesion-induced criminal behavior. Thus, our sample is
susceptible to bias due to our search and inclusion criteria, and
might not represent the true distribution of patients with lesion-
induced criminality. In addition, our determination of criminal
behavior, and the temporal relationship between the lesion and
change in behavior, are limited by the accuracy and variable
assessments in each case. As discussed previously, prospective
studies are needed to determine the likelihood that a lesion with
connectivity to the regions that we identified will develop crim-
inal behavior, as well as whether patients with lesion-induced
criminal behavior have abnormalities in moral decision making.
Conclusion. Brain lesions temporally associated with criminal be-
havior are characterized by a unique pattern of brain connectivity.
These results may prove useful for ongoing efforts to understand,
predict, and assign responsibility to criminal acts.
Materials and Methods
This study was approved by the Massachusetts General Hospital Institutional
Review Board. Informed consent was not required.
Patient Cases from the Literature. We identified patients via a PubMed search.
Inclusion criteria included case description of criminal behavior in a patient, an
intrinsic focal brain lesion, and a published image of the brain lesion of suf-
ficiently high quality to trace the lesion’s location onto a standardized brain
atlas. Among the 40 cases meeting these criteria, 17 had a clear temporal
relationship between the lesion and criminal behavior and were included in
the primary analyses, while the remaining 23 cases had an uncertain temporal
association between lesion onset and criminal behavior and were used in a
replication cohort (SI Appendix, Fig. S1 and Table S1). Lesions were traced by
hand onto a standardized brain atlas (2 × 2 × 2 MNI space) using FSL as in
previous work (21, 23–25) (Fig. 1 and SI Appendix, Fig. S4).
Lesion Network Mapping. Traced lesions were used as individual seeds in a
resting-state connectivity analysis using data obtained from 1,000 healthy
subjects (55). Functional connectivity to each lesion was determined by calcu-
lating the correlated time course between each lesion location and every other
brain voxel using the resting-state data from each individual normal control (28,
29). These correlations for all 1,000 subjects were then combined to calculate a
T-score value for each individual voxel. Positive and negative correlations were
thresholded at T > ±12 to create a binarized map of functionally connected
regions to each patient’s lesion site (P < 10−17 uncorrected). Finally, maps from
all patients were combined to form a group map showing the number of pa-
tients with lesions functionally connected with each individual voxel (Fig. 2C).
Comparison with Lesions Causing Other Neurologic Syndromes. Lesion network
mapping results from lesions associated with criminal behavior were compared
with lesion network mapping results from 63 lesions causing other syndromes
(21). Voxel-wise nonparametric testing was used to identify voxels significantly
more likely to be connected with lesions causing acquired criminal behavior
Fig. 7.
Replication in lesions of uncertain temporal association with criminal
behavior. Lesions with a clear temporal association (original cohort) (A) and
uncertain temporal association (replication cohort) (B) are connected to the
same regions (lesion network overlap, Right; voxel-wise nonparametric
comparison with control syndromes, Middle). Lesions in both cohorts were
significantly connected to regions involved in morality compared with con-
trol lesions (Right). **P < 0.0001.
Darby et al.
PNAS
|
January 16, 2018
|
vol. 115
|
no. 3
|
605
NEUROSCIENCE
SEE COMMENTARY
 compared with control lesions using a standard Bonferroni-corrected family-
wise error rate of P < 0.05 (Fig. 3).
Neuroimaging Meta-Analyses of Morality. To define regions involved in morality,
we performed meta-analyses of task-fMRI activation studies using the terms
“morality,” “value,” “theory of mind,” “empathy,” and “cognitive control” in
Neurosynth (www.neurosynth.org), a data-driven, automated engine for per-
forming neuroimaging meta-analyses (32). To ensure that results were not de-
pendent on our choice of meta-analysis technique, we used the results of a recent,
manually performed meta-analysis of fMRI studies of morality (31) using ALE (30).
Connectivity to Regions Involved in Morality. fMRI time courses were extracted
from each lesion location and the binarized map of significant regions from
each meta-analysis. The Pearson correlation coefficient between time courses
was computed for each subject in our normative 1,000-subject dataset.
Resulting r values were converted to a normal distribution using the Fisher
r-to-z transform and compared statistically using a two-tailed t test. Lesion
locations causing acquired criminal behavior were compared with lesion
locations causing other neurologic syndromes identified in our previous
work (21). All statistics were computed using Stata version 14.0 (StataCorp,
College Station, TX).
Connectivity to Regions Involved in Moral Dilemmas. We obtained activation maps
for personal moral dilemmas and impersonal moral dilemmas from Greene et al.
(33). For the ultimatum game, we created 8-mm-radius regions of interest at the
peak reported coordinates from a recent meta-analysis for accepting fair offers
and rejecting unfair offers (45). Time course correlations and statistical
comparisons were performed as above. We tested whether the combina-
tion of connectivity to regions activated by personal and impersonal di-
lemmas was superior to connectivity to either set of regions alone using a
likelihood ratio test.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Joshua Greene and Danilo Bzdok for sharing
data. This work was supported by funding from the Sidney R. Baer, Jr. Foundation
(R.R.D. and M.D.F.), the National Institutes of Health Grant K23NS083741 (to
M.D.F.), the Dystonia Foundation (M.D.F.), the Nancy Lurie Marks Foundation
(M.D.F.), the Alzheimer’s Association (R.R.D.), and the BrightFocus Foundation
(R.R.D.).
1. Anderson DA (1999) The aggregate burden of crime. J Law Econ 42:611–642.
2. Glenn AL, Raine A (2014) Neurocriminology: Implications for the punishment, pre-
diction and prevention of criminal behaviour. Nat Rev Neurosci 15:54–63.
3. Blake PY, Pincus JH, Buckner C (1995) Neurologic abnormalities in murderers.
Neurology 45:1641–1647.
4. Anderson NE, Kiehl KA (2012) The psychopath magnetized: Insights from brain im-
aging. Trends Cogn Sci 16:52–60.
5. Bufkin JL, Luttrell VR (2005) Neuroimaging studies of aggressive and violent behavior:
Current findings and implications for criminology and criminal justice. Trauma
Violence Abuse 6:176–191.
6. Adolphs R (2016) Human lesion studies in the 21st century. Neuron 90:1151–1153.
7. Denno DW (2015) The myth of the double-edged sword : An empirical study of
neuroscience evidence in criminal cases. Boston Coll Law Rev 56:493–552.
8. Saver JL, Damasio AR (1991) Preserved access and processing of social knowledge in a
patient with acquired sociopathy due to ventromedial frontal damage. Neuropsychologia
29:1241–1249.
9. Blumer D, Benson DF (1975) Personality changes with frontal lobe lesions. Psychiatric
Aspects of Neurological Disease, eds Benson DF, Blumer D (Grune & Stratton, New
York), pp 151–170.
10. Anderson SW, Bechara A, Damasio H, Tranel D, Damasio AR (1999) Impairment of
social and moral behavior related to early damage in human prefrontal cortex. Nat
Neurosci 2:1032–1037.
11. Anderson SW, Damasio H, Tranel D (1990) Neuropsychological impairments associ-
ated with lesions caused by tumor or stroke. Arch Neurol 47:397–405.
12. Taber-Thomas BC, et al. (2014) Arrested development: Early prefrontal lesions impair
the maturation of moral judgement. Brain 137:1254–1261.
13. Pardini M, et al. (2011) Prefrontal cortex lesions and MAO-A modulate aggression in
penetrating traumatic brain injury. Neurology 76:1038–1045.
14. Anderson SW, Barrash J, Bechara A, Tranel D (2006) Impairments of emotion and real-
world complex behavior following childhood- or adult-onset damage to ventrome-
dial prefrontal cortex. J Int Neuropsychol Soc 12:224–235.
15. Batts S (2009) Brain lesions and their implications in criminal responsibility. Behav Sci
Law 27:261–272.
16. Damasio H, Grabowski T, Frank R, Galaburda AM, Damasio AR (1994) The return of
Phineas Gage: Clues about the brain from the skull of a famous patient. Science 264:
1102–1105.
17. Mendez MF (2009) The neurobiology of moral behavior: Review and neuropsychiatric
implications. CNS Spectr 14:608–620.
18. Braun CMJ, Léveillé C, Guimond A (2008) An orbitofrontostriatopallidal pathway for
morality: Evidence from postlesion antisocial and obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Cogn Neuropsychiatry 13:296–337.
19. Fumagalli M, Priori A (2012) Functional and clinical neuroanatomy of morality. Brain
135:2006–2021.
20. Monakow C (1914) Die Lokalisation im Grosshirn: und der Abbau der Funktion durch
kortikale Herde (von J.F. Bergmann, Wiesbaden, Germany).
21. Boes AD, et al. (2015) Network localization of neurological symptoms from focal brain
lesions. Brain 138:3061–3075.
22. Sutterer MJ, et al. (2016) Canceled connections: Lesion-derived network mapping helps
explain differences in performance on a complex decision-making task. Cortex 78:31–43.
23. Darby RR, Laganiere S, Pascual-Leone A, Prasad S, Fox MD (2017) Finding the imposter:
Brain connectivity of lesions causing delusional misidentifications. Brain 140:497–507.
24. Fischer DB, et al. (2016) A human brain network derived from coma-causing brain-
stem lesions. Neurology 87:2427–2434.
25. Laganiere S, Boes AD, Fox MD (2016) Network localization of hemichorea-hemi-
ballismus. Neurology 86:2187–2195.
26. Buckholtz JW (2015) Social norms, self-control, and the value of antisocial behavior.
Curr Opin Behav Sci 3:122–129.
27. Baron-Cohen S (2013) The Science of Evil: On Empathy and the Origins of Cruelty
(Basic Books, New York).
28. Horn A, et al. (2017) Connectivity predicts deep brain stimulation outcome in Par-
kinson disease. Ann Neurol 82:67–78.
29. Darby RR, Fox MD (2017) Reply. Capgras syndrome: Neuroanatomical assessment of
brain MRI findings in an adolescent patient. Brain 140:e44.
30. Eickhoff SB, et al. (2009) Coordinate-based activation likelihood estimation meta-
analysis of neuroimaging data: A random-effects approach based on empirical esti-
mates of spatial uncertainty. Hum Brain Mapp 30:2907–2926.
31. Bzdok D, et al. (2012) Parsing the neural correlates of moral cognition: ALE meta-
analysis on morality, theory of mind, and empathy. Brain Struct Funct 217:783–796.
32. Yarkoni T, Poldrack RA, Nichols TE, Van Essen DC, Wager TD (2011) Large-scale au-
tomated synthesis of human functional neuroimaging data. Nat Methods 8:665–670.
33. Greene JD, Nystrom LE, Engell AD, Darley JM, Cohen JD (2004) The neural bases of
cognitive conflict and control in moral judgment. Neuron 44:389–400.
34. Cushman F (2013) Action, outcome, and value: A dual-system framework for morality.
Pers Soc Psychol Rev 17:273–292.
35. Young L, Cushman F, Hauser M, Saxe R (2007) The neural basis of the interaction
between theory of mind and moral judgment. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104:8235–8240.
36. Darby RR, Edersheim J, Price BH (2016) What patients with behavioral-variant fronto-
temporal dementia can teach us about moral responsibility. AJOB Neurosci 7:193–201.
37. Fox MD, et al. (2005) The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic, anti-
correlated functional networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:9673–9678.
38. Greene JD, Sommerville RB, Nystrom LE, Darley JM, Cohen JD (2001) An fMRI in-
vestigation of emotional engagement in moral judgment. Science 293:2105–2108.
39. Koenigs M, et al. (2007) Damage to the prefrontal cortex increases utilitarian moral
judgements. Nature 446:908–911.
40. Koenigs M, Kruepke M, Zeier J, Newman JP (2012) Utilitarian moral judgment in
psychopathy. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 7:708–714.
41. Mendez MF, Anderson E, Shapira JS (2005) An investigation of moral judgement in
frontotemporal dementia. Cogn Behav Neurol 18:193–197.
42. Koenigs M, Tranel D (2007) Irrational economic decision-making after ventromedial
prefrontal damage: Evidence from the ultimatum game. J Neurosci 27:951–956.
43. Koenigs M, Kruepke M, Newman JP (2010) Economic decision-making in psychopathy: A
comparison with ventromedial prefrontal lesion patients. Neuropsychologia 48:2198–2204.
44. O’Callaghan C, et al. (2016) Fair play: Social norm compliance failures in behavioural
variant frontotemporal dementia. Brain 139:204–216.
45. Feng C, Luo Y-J, Krueger F (2015) Neural signatures of fairness-related normative
decision making in the ultimatum game: A coordinate-based meta-analysis. Hum
Brain Mapp 36:591–602.
46. Mendez MF, Chen AK, Shapira JS, Miller BL (2005) Acquired sociopathy and fronto-
temporal dementia. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 20:99–104.
47. Liljegren M, et al. (2015) Criminal behavior in frontotemporal dementia and Alz-
heimer disease. JAMA Neurol 72:295–300.
48. Diehl-Schmid J, Perneczky R, Koch J, Nedopil N, Kurz A (2013) Guilty by suspicion?
Criminal behavior in frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Cogn Behav Neurol 26:73–77.
49. Ermer E, Cope LM, Nyalakanti PK, Calhoun VD, Kiehl KA (2012) Aberrant paralimbic
gray matter in criminal psychopathy. J Abnorm Psychol 121:649–658.
50. de Oliveira-Souza R, et al. (2008) Psychopathy as a disorder of the moral brain: Fronto-
temporo-limbic grey matter reductions demonstrated by voxel-based morphometry.
Neuroimage 40:1202–1213.
51. Motzkin JC, Newman JP, Kiehl KA, Koenigs M (2011) Reduced prefrontal connectivity
in psychopathy. J Neurosci 31:17348–17357.
52. Fazel S, Lichtenstein P, Grann M, Långström N (2011) Risk of violent crime in indi-
viduals with epilepsy and traumatic brain injury: A 35-year Swedish population study.
PLoS Med 8:e1001150.
53. Timonen M, et al. (2002) The association of preceding traumatic brain injury with
mental disorders, alcoholism and criminality: The northern Finland 1966 birth cohort
study. Psychiatry Res 113:217–226.
54. Grafman J, et al. (1996) Frontal lobe injuries, violence, and aggression: A report of the
Vietnam head injury study. Neurology 46:1231–1238.
55. Yeo BT, et al. (2011) The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by
intrinsic functional connectivity. J Neurophysiol 106:1125–1165.
56. Grefkes C, Fink GR (2014) Connectivity-based approaches in stroke and recovery of
function. Lancet Neurol 13:206–216.
606
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1706587115
Darby et al.
