 biomedicines
Review
Viroimmunotherapy of Thoracic Cancers
Alexander S. Dash 1 and Manish R. Patel 2,*
1
Department of Biology, Macalester College, St. Paul, MN 55105, USA; adash@macalester.edu
2
Division of Hematology, Oncology, and Transplantation, University of Minnesota Medical School,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA
*
Correspondence: patel069@umn.edu; Tel.: +1-612-624-6940
Academic Editor: Zong Sheng Guo
Received: 13 September 2016; Accepted: 24 November 2016; Published: 4 January 2017
Abstract: Thoracic cancers, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), small cell lung cancer
(SCLC), and malignant pleural mesothelioma (MM), cause the highest rate of cancer mortality
worldwide. Most of these deaths are as a result of NSCLC; however, prognoses for the other two
diseases remain as some of the poorest of any cancers. Recent advances in immunotherapy, specifically
immune checkpoint inhibitors, have begun to help a small population of patients with advanced lung
cancer. People who respond to these immune therapies generally have a durable response and many
see dramatic decreases in their disease. However, response to immune therapies remains relatively
low. Therefore, intense research is now underway to rationally develop combination therapies to
expand the range of patients who will respond to and benefit from immune therapy. One promising
approach is with oncolytic viruses. These oncolytic viruses (OVs) have been found to be selective
for or have been engineered to preferentially infect and kill cancer cells. In pre-clinical models of
different thoracic cancers, it has been found that these viruses can induce immunogenic cell death,
increase the number of immune mediators brought into the tumor microenvironment and broaden
the neoantigen-specific T cell response. We will review here the literature regarding the application
of virotherapy toward augmenting immune responses in thoracic cancers.
Keywords:
oncolytic virus; thoracic cancers; lung cancer; mesothelioma; immunotherapy;
viroimmunotherapy; immunogenic cell death; immune infiltration
1. Introduction
Cancers of the thorax, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), small cell lung cancer
(SCLC), and mesothelioma (MM), cause the highest rate of cancer-related mortality worldwide [1].
The bulk of these fatalities are attributed to non-small cell lung cancer, but this fact belies the devastating
toll the latter two diseases impart on afflicted patients. The vast majority of patients are not diagnosed
until their disease is incurable. Though advances have been made in NSCLC, median survival
remains poor, and there has been little to no improvement in outcomes for MM or SCLC over the past
two decades.
Immunotherapy, using anti-programmed death 1 (anti-PD1) antibodies, has recently been
approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for NSCLC based on a statistically significant
improvement in survival compared to standard chemotherapy [2]. For SCLC and MM, data has been
presented to suggest that anti-PD1 antibodies may be as effective as chemotherapy for these diseases as
well [3,4]. While there are significant differences among these disease types, within each disease, there is
a subset of patients who can have both dramatic and durable antitumor responses. Unfortunately,
the response rates remain low, in the range of 15%–30%. Thus, there are now ongoing efforts to
improve upon these results using novel combination therapies. Importantly, after nearly 40 years of
promising to develop immune therapy for cancer, research has finally developed a breakthrough that
is applicable to a variety of common and devastating malignancies, providing hope for a cure.
Biomedicines 2017, 5, 2; doi:10.3390/biomedicines5010002
www.mdpi.com/journal/biomedicines
 Biomedicines 2017, 5, 2
2 of 11
A new and emerging field in the realm of immunotherapy is the use of oncolytic viruses [5].
These viruses cause both direct lysis of tumor cells as well as induce an enhanced immune response
to the cancerous tissue. Genetic engineering has allowed the development of recombinant viruses
that can express immunotherapeutic cytokines, amplifying their antitumor activity and increasing
their specificity for heavily mutated tumor cells.
Numerous studies have now demonstrated
that several oncolytic viruses have immunomodulatory effects favoring antitumor immunity [6–9].
Since immunotherapy is now a part of standard therapy for NSCLC, we will review here the application
of virotherapy as a potential immunotherapy when applied to lung cancer and mesothelioma.
Furthermore, we will examine what is known about the mechanisms involved and potential strategies
for rational viral combination therapies.
Application of Virotherapy for Thoracic Cancers
As a pathogen, viruses are naturally immunogenic and the host has evolved several innate
and adaptive immune mechanisms to limit viral spread and prevent reinfection with the same virus.
Since many of the oncolytic viruses are common pathogens, most people have been previously exposed
to these viruses and have circulating neutralizing antibodies. Even for the few animal viruses that are
used, neutralizing antibodies will develop. This creates a major limitation to oncolytic virotherapy
systemically as circulating virus can be rapidly cleared by neutralizing antibodies, preventing the
virus from ever reaching the tumor to exert its effects. As a result, pleural mesothelioma seems
to be an ideal candidate for virotherapy as the vast majority of patients have disease confined to
one hemithorax and the pleural space is accessible via a catheter. Furthermore, work by several
investigators has demonstrated that the immune repertoire in the pleural space may be important
for disease control and can be modulated by viral gene therapy delivered to the pleural space [10,11].
On the other hand, lung cancer (either NSCLC or SCLC) is a systemic disease hallmarked by
early hematogenous metastasis, and thus pre-existing neutralizing antibodies are problematic for
systemic delivery and local delivery could be difficult and may not address the systemic tumor
burden. The finding that talimogene laherparepvec (Tvec), a recombinant herpes simplex virus
expressing granulocyte-monocyte colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), was able to evoke a systemic
immunotherapeutic response after local injection of dermal melanoma lesions challenged the notion
that local tumor injection could not be efficacious for widespread disease [6]. This study has led to
the first FDA-approved oncolytic virus in the United States. These developments have led to the
possibility of similar approaches for the treatment of NSCLC. Though not as simple as intradermal
injections, NSCLC tumors are often accessible using endobronchial approaches with ultrasound (EBUS)
guidance directly into diseased mediastinal lymph nodes or endobronchial tumors for potential
viroimmunotherapy [12]. This article will review the pertinent literature to date using oncolytic
viruses to achieve enhanced antitumor immune responses in thoracic malignancies. These studies
demonstrate that the stage is now set to advance oncolytic viroimmunotherapy to the clinical setting
for thoracic malignancies.
2. Oncolytic Viruses for Thoracic Cancers
Currently, there are numerous agents receiving attention as a potential viral immunotherapy
for thoracic cancers. A few of these include the vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV), measles virus (MV),
vaccinia virus (VV), and adenovirus (Ad) (Table 1). A small number of these viruses have made it into
the clinic (Table 2) where they are being tested in conjunction with various other drugs to see how they
can improve outcomes for patients with incurable thoracic cancers. Reovirus is one of the few trials
that has been published in patients with NSCLC. This phase II trial combined reovirus with standard
chemotherapy in patients with activation of the epidermal growth factor pathway. This patient
population was chosen as the oncolytic activity of reovirus depends upon signaling through the Kras
pathway and inhibition of protein kinase to double-stranded RNA (PKR) [5]. The objective response
rate was 31%, which is higher than what is expected with chemotherapy alone; however, the lack of
 Biomedicines 2017, 5, 2
3 of 11
a comparator arm limits any conclusions that could be drawn from this trial [13]. These results do
align with preclinical data suggesting that reovirus is synergistic in combination with chemotherapy
for NSCLC [14].
Seneca valley virus (SVV) was initially found to be tropic for neuroendocrine tumors. While the
mechanism of the tumor tropism of SVV is not clear, in the initial phase I trial, one patient with
SCLC had prolonged stable disease for longer than 10 months. Thus, patients with SCLC who had
completed induction chemotherapy were randomized to receive SVV-001 or a placebo in a randomized
phase II trial. Though the results were not published, the data were presented and found no benefit
of SVV-001 in this setting. There was no signal of activity whatsoever. Thus, further development of
SVV for small cell lung cancer has been abandoned. Several other trials are under way or completed;
however, published results are not yet available. The primary endpoint for most of the trials involves
the safety and feasibility of the use of oncolytic viruses in humans. Many of these pathogens are being
investigated as combination therapies to see how they can augment the efficacy of already established
treatment regimens as well as complement other novel biologic and immunologic agents currently
being studied. While the primary endpoint for most of these trials is simply the safety profile, there are
also plans to test for immunological markers in the tumor microenvironment which could indicate if
viroimmunotherapy increases tumor infiltration by T cells, shows decreases in the presence of immune
suppression cells, and increases the humoral immune response.
Many of these viruses have been further attenuated through genetic modification in order to
enhance viral replication in tumor cells and improve the safety profile in healthy cells. One common
modification is the addition of interferon-β (IFNβ) [15,16]. IFNβ is the key innate mechanism to
inhibiting viral replication in healthy human cells. There are often defects in the type I IFN response of
many tumor tissues allowing for increased viral replication, leaving normal cells unaffected. While this
modification has been pursued to generate increased tumor specificity and safety, it is also clear
that IFNβ can play a role in stimulating immune responses. For lung cancer with malignant pleural
effusion and mesothelioma, gene therapy using a replication-deficient adenovirus engineered to
express IFNβ has been tested in a phase I clinical trial by direct instillation into the pleural space
carried by a non-replicating adenoviral vector. Though clinical responses were rare, some responses
did occur. Moreover, there was evidence of stimulation of antitumor immune responses in seven of
10 patients [10]. The lack of clinical response was felt to be limited by the low infection efficiency
and, thus, the low levels of produced IFNβ. Thus, viral spread of a replication competent virus could
increase the exposure of the tumor microenvironment to this immune stimulus.
Thus, several viruses have been engineered to produce IFNβ that have been applied to thoracic
cancers. Measles, vaccinia, and vesicular stomatitis virus have all been engineered to produce IFNβ
and have been tested in laboratory models of NSCLC or mesothelioma with profound antitumor effects
in mouse models [8,15,17]. As yet, none of these viruses have been tested in clinical trials. Interestingly,
though conditionally replicative adenovirus has been engineered to produce IFN, it has not yet been
tested in NSCLC or mesothelioma models to date [18]. Though a variety of recombinant viral vectors
have been engineered to stimulate the immune system, relatively few have been applied to thoracic
cancers as of yet. With the FDA approval of immune checkpoint inhibitors for NSCLC, it is likely that
further development of these novel viral vectors will be applied towards thoracic malignancies in the
near future.
There are also currently numerous clinical trials being investigated at institutions across the world.
 Biomedicines 2017, 5, 2
4 of 11
Table 1. Oncolytic viruses that have been studied in thoracic cancers.
Oncolytic Virus
Disease
Immune Mechanism Studied
Phase of Development
Author/Year/Journal
Adenovirus
NSCLC
N/A
Pre-Clinical Data: Nude Mice
Zhang, J.-F., et al., 2010. [19].
NSCLC
Neoantigen Specific Response;
Checkpoint-Inhibitors; CD8+ Tumor Infiltration
Pre-Clinical Data: Immune Competent Mice,
CD8+ Depleted Mice
Woller, N., et al., 2015. [20].
MPM
N/A
Pre-Clinical Data: Athymic Mice
Kubo, S., et al., 2010. [21].
Cocksackie B3 Virus
NSCLC
Immunogenic Cell Death
Pre-Clinical Data: Immune Competent Mice
Miyamoto, S. et al., 2012. [22].
Herpes Simplex Virus
NSCLC
N/A
Pre-Clinical Data: Murine Lung Cancer Model
Goodwin et al., 2012. [23].
NSCLC
N/A
Pre-Clinical Data: In Vitro Work
Li, J.-M., et al., 2013. [24].
MPM
N/A
Pre-Clinical Data: Athymic Mice
Adusumilli, P.S., et al. 2006 [25].
Measles Virus
MPM
DC Maturation; CD8+ Priming
Pre-Clinical Data: In Vitro Work
Gauvrit, A., et al., 2008. [26].
MPM
Innate Immune Infiltration by
Macrophages/Monocytes
Pre-Clinical Data: Athymic Mice
Li, H., et al., 2010. [17].
NSCLC
N/A
Pre-Clinical Data: Nude Mice
Patel, M.R., et al., 2014. [27].
Newcastle Disease Virus
NSCLC
N/A
Pre-Clinical Data: In Vitro Work
Meng, G., et al., 2014. [28].
NSCLC
N/A
Pre-Clinical Data: In Vitro Work
Fu, F., et al., 2011. [29].
Reovirus
NSCLC
N/A
Phase I Clinical Trial w/Paclitaxel and Carboplatin
Villalona-Calero, M.A., et al., 2016. [13].
NSCLC
N/A
Pre-Clinical Data: In Vitro Work
Sei, S., et al., 2009. [14].
NSCLC
Cytokine Induction
Pre-Clinical Data: Mice Models
Campion, C.A., et al., 2016. [30].
NSCLC
Increased Antigen Presentation
Pre-Clinical Mouse Model
Gujar, S.A., et al., 2010 [31].
Vaccinia Virus
NSCLC
Cytokine Expression and CD8+ Tumor Infiltration
Pre-Clinical Data: Immune Competent Mice
Wang, L.-C.S., et al., 2011. [15].
MPM
N/A
Pre-Clinical Data: Immune Competent Mice
Acuna, S.A., et al., 2014. [32].
MPM
N/A
Pre-Clinical Data: Athymic Mice
Belin, L.J., et al., 2013. [33].
MPM
N/A
Pre-Clinical Data: Athymic Mice
Kelly, K.J., et al., 2008. [34].
Vesicular Stomatitis Virus
NSCLC
CD8+ Infiltration, TILs, PDL-1 Expression
Pre-Clinical Data: Immune Competent Mice
Patel et al., 2015. [8].
MPM
Interferon Response
Pre-Clinical Data: SCID Mice
Saloura, V., et al., 2010. [9].
MPM
CD8+ T Cell and NK Cell Infiltration
Pre-Clinical Data: Immune Competent Mice
Willmon, C.L., et al., 2009. [16].
DC = Dendritic Cell, TIL= tumor infiltrating lymphocytes, NK = Natural Killer, SCID = Severe combined immunodeficient, N/A = Not applicable.
 Biomedicines 2017, 5, 2
5 of 11
Table 2. Ongoing clinical trials of oncolytic viruses for thoracic cancers.
Oncolytic Virus
Disease
Other Therapeutic
Agents Involved
Status of Trial
Phase
ClinicalTrials.gov
Number
Adenovirus Vaccine Expressing MAGE-A3 with
Genetically-Modified MAGE-A3-Expressing
MG1 Maraba Virus Vaccine
Metastatic/Advanced Non-Small
Cell Lung Cancer
Pembrolizumab
Not Yet Recruiting
I/II
NCT02879760
Group B Oncolytic Adenovirus (ColoAd1)
Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer
N/A (patients must be
candidates for surgery)
Completed
I
NCT02053220
Wild-Type Reovirus
Non-Small Cell Lung
Cancer (must have KRAS
or EGFR activation)
Carboplatin and Paclitaxel
Completed—Preliminary data indicates
greatly increased median survival for
patients with EGFR activation
II
NCT00861627 [13]
Thymidine Kinase-Deleted Vaccinia Virus
Metastatic/Advanced Non-Small
Cell Lung Cancer
GM-CSF
Completed
I
NCT00625456
Measles Virus Vaccine Encoding Thyroidal
Sodium Iodide Symporter
Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma
N/A
Recruiting
I
NCT01503177
Cocksackie A21 Virus
Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer
Pembrolizumab
Not Yet Recruiting
Ib
NCT02824965
Seneca Valley Virus (SVV-001)
Small Cell Lung Cancer
N/A
Completed—Negative trial
II
NCT01017601
Herpes Simplex Virus Type 1 (HSV-1716)
Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma
N/A
Active, Not Recruiting
I/II
NCT01721018
GL-ONC1 (Vaccinia Virus Strain)
Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma
-
Recruiting
Ib
NCT01766739
 Biomedicines 2017, 5, 2
6 of 11
3. Mechanisms of Viroimmunotherapy in Thoracic Malignancies
3.1. Immunogenic Cell Death
As an oncolytic agent, viruses directly lyse cancer cells. It is likely that this action of oncolytic
viruses can directly stimulate antitumor immune responses. Viral infection involves the creation
of viral RNA and or DNA within the cytosol, which sends a danger signal from the infected cell.
Though there are several pathways that are involved in this danger signal, the end result involves
the release into the tumor microenvironment of damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPS) and
pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPS) by the dying cell which can trigger an immune
response [7,35]. Though not all cytotoxic agents induce these signals, oncolytic viruses do. In the case
of NSCLC, coxackie b virus, a single-stranded RNA virus, has been shown to have profound oncolytic
effects [22]. Perhaps one of the major mechanisms involves the inducement of immunogenic cell death
with robust production of extracellular ATP, high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1), and cell-surface
expression of calreticulin, markers of immunogenic cell death [35]. Moreover, intratumoral injections
led to marked tumor infiltration with granulocytes, activated dendritic cells and NK cells. Depleting
experiments demonstrated that the antitumor activity was dependent upon NK cells and granulocytes,
highlighting the importance of innate immune stimulation in mediating antitumor activity.
Measles virus has been found to be oncolytic for both NSCLC and mesothelioma. Unfortunately,
the MV host range does not include mice, and therefore there is no immune-competent model to
effectively study MV viroimmunotherapy. However, there are some data to suggest that MV can
induce immunity in mesothelioma. MV-infected mesothelioma cells resulted in activation of human
dendritic cells and cross-presentation to mesothelioma-specific T cells in co-culture experiments [26].
Dendritic cell maturation and induction of tumor-specific T cells were dependent on the viral infection
of mesothelioma cells as UV irradiation did not induce the same response. It is likely that the activation
of the pattern recognition receptors, toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3), RIG-1, and MDA-5, after viral infection
mediates this response, though this has not been carefully elucidated in this model. Both of the
above instances highlight the effects of viral oncolysis on stimulating innate immune responses in the
tumor microenvironment.
3.2. Broadening of the Spectrum of Neoantigen-Specific T Cell Responses
Beyond simply oncolysis, the cell death associated with oncolytic virotherapy may involve
additional mechanisms that serve to evoke an adaptive immune response. One reason that NSCLC is
immunogenic is the fact that there are typically numerous nonsynonymous mutations present within
any individual tumor [36]. These resulting proteins are potentially immunogenic and can be presented
on Class I MHC molecules. The presence of numerous mutations increases the likelihood of recognition
by tumor-specific T cells. Viral oncolysis can activate signals that lead to enhanced presentation of
these neoepitopes on MHC molecules and can thusly expose tumor antigens to the immune system
that had previously gone unnoticed [31]. It has been shown using a murine NSCLC cell line that
replicative adenovirus infection can broaden the antitumor immune response by increasing the number
of tumor mutations recognized by tumor-specific T cells [20]. Neither untreated tumor-bearing mice
nor mice treated with immune checkpoint blockade were able evoke this response. Moreover, synthetic
ligands of toll-like receptors (TLRs), CpG and poly(I:C) were unable to evoke this epitope-spreading
phenomenon, suggesting that the viral replication is in some way important in mediating this effect,
though the mechanism has not been fully elucidated. This data reveals a potential mechanism by
which viral oncolysis can increase the chance of immune recognition by a tumor-specific T cell and
lead to antitumor immune responses. In addition, combination therapy with immune checkpoint
blockade seems to be a rational strategy based on these results as the response to therapy correlates
with the tumor mutational burden and immune recognition of the resulting neoepitopes. Several
groups are now considering such trials combining oncolytic virotherapy with immune checkpoint
blockade specifically for NSCLC. It will be important to study these potential mechanisms in parallel
 Biomedicines 2017, 5, 2
7 of 11
with the clinical trial to better understand the critical mechanisms of response in combination with
oncolytic virotherapy.
3.3. Recruitment of Immune Mediators to the Tumor Microenvironment
As a pathogen, oncolytic viruses in the tumor microenvironment provide a potent stimulus
to attract infiltrating immune cells to the tumor microenvironment.
In models of NSCLC and
mesothelioma as well as many other tumor types, this outcome is consistent and reproducible.
While undoubtedly much of the infiltrate is directed at the virus, this inflammation can be beneficial.
Inflammation created by viral infection at the tumor microenvironment can create a bystander effect in
which activated NK cells and dendritic cells can be alerted to the presence of tumor cells. Moreover,
the inflammation can result in the secretion of chemokines (IL-10, e.g.), which can attract further
T cells, some of which undoubtedly are tumor-specific. Intratumoral VSV expressing IFNβ (VSV-IFNβ)
results in a profound change in the tumor microenvironment of murine lung cancer [8]. There is
a complete reversal of the immune suppression seen with a marked reduction in immune-suppressive
T regulatory cells (Tregs) and myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC) and an increase in both CD8
T cells and effector CD4 T cells in conjunction with tumor-infiltration leukocytes (TILs). Importantly,
this change is not limited to the injected tumor, but rather is systemic. Uninjected tumors show almost
identical effects with regards to immune infiltration after virotherapy. VSV-IFNβ has been tested in
murine mesothelioma models as well [16]. In this case, the immune infiltrate was important as CD8
depletion resulted in abrogation of antitumor activity. Similarly, vaccinia virus expressing IFNβ is
oncolytic for murine lung cancer [15]. Interestingly, the mechanism of antitumor activity was distinct
depending on which murine model was used. In one model, TC-1, the therapeutic efficacy was
dependent upon robust viral replication, whereas in the other LKRM2 model, viral replication was
minimal and the response was entirely dependent upon immune activation as the antitumor activity
was greatly inhibited when tumors were grown in immune-deficient mice and in CD8 T cell-depleted
mice. Notably, a vaccination strategy in the TC-1 model (HPV E7-driven cancer) was much more
effective in combination with VV-IFNβ, which was dependent on the IFNβ transgene, highlighting
the potential for viroimmunotherapy combinations.
The immune infiltration may, in part, be dependent upon the expression of the IFNβ transgene.
VV-IFNβ induced CXCL10 production compared to VV-Luc in the above NSCLC mouse models.
In contrast, MV did not induce CXCL10 production when co-cultured with human dendritic cells
in the mesothelioma model [26]. MV engineered to express IFNβ did induce two- to four-fold
higher infiltration of CD68 monocytes in athymic mice bearing mesothelioma tumors compared to
parent virus, demonstrating that the IFNβ transgene may play a therapeutic role in stimulating innate
immune responses in the tumor microenvironment; however, CXCL10 production was not assayed [17].
Still since CXCL10 is known to play a critical role in attracting T cells into the tumor microenvironment
and is under the control of type I IFN, it seems reasonable to speculate that the IFNβ transgene
modulates the chemokine milieu to recruit immune effectors into the tumor microenvironment.
Undoubtedly, the production of such chemokines will be tumor- and context-specific and may be an
important biomarker for determining outcomes after virotherapy.
4. Discussion and Future Directions
For decades, there has been interest in the natural tropism of viruses for cancer cells and direct
oncolytic activity. There has been a recent paradigm shift in the therapeutic use of viruses as a cancer
immunotherapy with emerging data demonstrating the dependency of immune stimulation on the
improved outcomes in various cancer models (Figure 1). Furthermore, initial fears about the safety of
live viral vectors have given way to the exciting promise that these treatments hold. The emergence of
immune checkpoint blockade for thoracic malignancies has now paved the way for novel combination
therapies. While anti-PD1 antibodies have demonstrated improvement in outcomes for patients with
thoracic malignancies, the response rate remains low. Data in melanoma and NSCLC indicate that
 Biomedicines 2017, 5, 2
8 of 11
pre-existing T cells in the tumor microenvironment and programmed death ligand (PDL)-1 expression
on the tumor are associated with response to therapy. Furthermore, in spite of high PDL-1 expression,
tumors without infiltrating T cells are unlikely to respond. We and others have shown that oncolytic
virotherapy has the potential to recreate the tumor microenvironment needed for response to anti-PD1
antibodies. The promise of this approach has already been published with adenovirus in the NSCLC
model and several groups are actively pursuing this approach for clinical translation.
Biomedicines 2016, 5, 2  
8 of 11 
high PDL-1 expression, tumors without infiltrating T cells are unlikely to respond. We and others 
have shown that oncolytic virotherapy has the potential to recreate the tumor microenvironment 
needed for response to anti-PD1 antibodies. The promise of this approach has already been published 
with adenovirus in the NSCLC model and several groups are actively pursuing this approach for 
clinical translation. 
 
Figure 1. Schematic representation of possible mechanisms by which oncolytic virotherapy can exert 
immunologic effects in the tumor microenvironment. Initial viral infection of the tumor cell leads to 
viral replication and lysis. Progeny virions then can infect and lyse surrounding cells amplifying 
tumor lysis. This infection can then directly lead to release of damage associated and pathogen 
associated molecular patterns (DAMP and PAMP, respectively) as well as interferons into the tumor 
microenvironment.  These can further attract T cells, decrease suppressive cells, and lead to 
upregulation of programmed death ligand (PDL-1) on tumor cells promoting antitumor immunity. 
Going forward there will be several issues that remain to be addressed with regards to clinical 
application of viroimmunotherapy. First, viral delivery remains a thorny issue for some viruses. 
Vaccinia and reovirus are good viruses for systemic delivery; however, the doses required to achieve 
systemic tumor replication are quite high and near the limits of production capacity. While we have 
argued the case for intratumoral delivery, it is both expensive and inconvenient. Therefore, strategies 
for effective targeting or evasion from systemic immunity remain relevant for maximizing the ability 
to apply virotherapy for patient care, particularly for patients with advanced lung cancer. The use of 
cellular carriers of MV is already entering clinical testing for ovarian cancer [37]. The results of these 
studies and several other ongoing efforts to develop strategies for systemic administration of 
oncolytic viruses are eagerly awaited. 
Another major issue is the complex interaction between the host, tumor, and pathogen which 
can have a drastic impact on outcomes. It is clear that some tumors are exquisitely sensitive to viral 
replication and others are not. Similarly, it is likely that some tumors are very sensitive to immune 
therapy while others are not, and there is likely to be significant overlap between the viral-sensitive 
and the immune therapy-sensitive tumors. For combination studies, the effects of immune 
stimulation on viral replication may be deleterious for the viral-sensitive type of tumors. Therefore, 
careful experiments to understand the optimal timing of immune therapy in the context of oncolytic 
virotherapy will be important. Moreover, given the substantial differences in immunity and tumors 
between mouse and human, it will be paramount to study the changes in the tumor 
microenvironment before and after virotherapy during clinical testing. Careful design of clinical trials 
with the goal of understanding treatment response and resistance will guide the development of the 
next generation of viral vectors and better deployment of the ones we already have. 
There is no question that we have entered a new and exciting phase of development of oncolytic 
viruses as an immunotherapy for cancer. The ability of viruses to be directly cytotoxic to cancer cells 
offers a distinct advantage over other immune therapy strategies that rely on indirect immune 
stimulation. Unlike other therapies for thoracic cancers, immune therapy with checkpoint blockade has 
not only been generally well-tolerated, but also tantalizing in the offer of durability of response. 
Currently, there is an intense effort at finding effective combinations of checkpoint blockade with other 
immune therapy with the hopes of increasing the response rate such that the majority of patients can 
Figure 1. Schematic representation of possible mechanisms by which oncolytic virotherapy can exert
immunologic effects in the tumor microenvironment. Initial viral infection of the tumor cell leads
to viral replication and lysis. Progeny virions then can infect and lyse surrounding cells amplifying
tumor lysis. This infection can then directly lead to release of damage associated and pathogen
associated molecular patterns (DAMP and PAMP, respectively) as well as interferons into the tumor
microenvironment. These can further attract T cells, decrease suppressive cells, and lead to upregulation
of programmed death ligand (PDL-1) on tumor cells promoting antitumor immunity.
Going forward there will be several issues that remain to be addressed with regards to clinical
application of viroimmunotherapy. First, viral delivery remains a thorny issue for some viruses.
Vaccinia and reovirus are good viruses for systemic delivery; however, the doses required to achieve
systemic tumor replication are quite high and near the limits of production capacity. While we have
argued the case for intratumoral delivery, it is both expensive and inconvenient. Therefore, strategies
for effective targeting or evasion from systemic immunity remain relevant for maximizing the ability
to apply virotherapy for patient care, particularly for patients with advanced lung cancer. The use of
cellular carriers of MV is already entering clinical testing for ovarian cancer [37]. The results of these
studies and several other ongoing efforts to develop strategies for systemic administration of oncolytic
viruses are eagerly awaited.
Another major issue is the complex interaction between the host, tumor, and pathogen which
can have a drastic impact on outcomes. It is clear that some tumors are exquisitely sensitive to
viral replication and others are not. Similarly, it is likely that some tumors are very sensitive to
immune therapy while others are not, and there is likely to be significant overlap between the
viral-sensitive and the immune therapy-sensitive tumors. For combination studies, the effects of
immune stimulation on viral replication may be deleterious for the viral-sensitive type of tumors.
Therefore, careful experiments to understand the optimal timing of immune therapy in the context
of oncolytic virotherapy will be important. Moreover, given the substantial differences in immunity
and tumors between mouse and human, it will be paramount to study the changes in the tumor
microenvironment before and after virotherapy during clinical testing. Careful design of clinical trials
with the goal of understanding treatment response and resistance will guide the development of the
next generation of viral vectors and better deployment of the ones we already have.
There is no question that we have entered a new and exciting phase of development of oncolytic
viruses as an immunotherapy for cancer. The ability of viruses to be directly cytotoxic to cancer
cells offers a distinct advantage over other immune therapy strategies that rely on indirect immune
stimulation. Unlike other therapies for thoracic cancers, immune therapy with checkpoint blockade
 Biomedicines 2017, 5, 2
9 of 11
has not only been generally well-tolerated, but also tantalizing in the offer of durability of response.
Currently, there is an intense effort at finding effective combinations of checkpoint blockade with other
immune therapy with the hopes of increasing the response rate such that the majority of patients can
receive the durable benefit that so far only applies to 15%–30% of the patient population. Preclinical
data with oncolytic virotherapy suggest that viruses can play an important role as an immunotherapy
in their own right, but also in combination with checkpoint blockade. The time has come for clinical
testing for thoracic cancers and results of upcoming early-phase trials are eagerly awaited.
Acknowledgments: Manish R. Patel is supported by A Breath of Hope Lung Foundation.
Author Contributions: Alexander S. Dash and Manish R. Patel reviewed all the pertinent literature, prepared
and edited the manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1.
Siegel, R.L.; Miller, K.D.; Jemal, A. Cancer statistics, 2015. CA Cancer J. Clin. 2015, 65, 5–29. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
2.
Ribas, A. Tumor immunotherapy directed at PD-1. N. Engl. J. Med. 2012, 366, 2517–2519. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
3.
Evan, W.; Alley, L.R.M.; Santoro, A.; Becky, K.; Yuan, S.; Cheng, J.D.; Piperdi, B.; Schellens, J.H.M. Abstract
CT103: Clinical safety and efficacy of pembrolizumab (MK-3475) in patients with malignant pleural
mesothelioma: Preliminary results from KEYNOTE-028. In Proceedings of the 106th Annual Meeting of the
American Association for Cancer Research, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 18–22 April 2015; AACR: Philadelphia,
PA, USA, 2015.
4.
Antonia, S.J.; Lopez-Martin, J.A.; Bendell, J.C.; Ott, P.A.; Taylor, M.H.; Eder, J.P.; Jager, D.; Le, D.T.;
De Braud, F.G.; Morse, M. Checkmate 032: Nivolumab (N) alone or in combination with ipilimumab (I) for
the treatment of recurrent small cell lung cancer (SCLC). In Proceedings of the American Society of Clinical
Oncology Annual Meeting, Chicago, IL, USA, 3–7 June 2016.
5.
Patel, M.R.; Kratzke, R.A. Oncolytic virus therapy for cancer: the first wave of translational clinical trials.
Transl. Res. 2013, 161, 355–364. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.
Andtbacka, R.H.; Kaufman, H.L.; Collichio, F.; Amatruda, T.; Senzer, N.; Chesney, J.; Delman, K.A.;
Spitler, L.E.; Puzanov, I.; Agarwala, S.S.; et al. Talimogene laherparepvec improves durable response
rate in patients with advanced melanoma. J. Clin. Oncol. 2015, 33, 2780–2788. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7.
Guo, Z.S.; Liu, Z.; Bartlett, D.L. Oncolytic immunotherapy: Dying the right way is a key to eliciting potent
antitumor immunity. Front. Oncol. 2014, 4, 74. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8.
Patel, M.R.; Jacobson, B.A.; Ji, Y.; Drees, J.; Tang, S.; Xiong, K.; Wang, H.; Prigge, J.E.; Dash, A.S.;
Kratzke, A.K.; et al.
Vesicular stomatitis virus expressing interferon-beta is oncolytic and promotes
antitumor immune responses in a syngeneic murine model of non-small cell lung cancer. Oncotarget
2015, 6, 33165–33177. [PubMed]
9.
Saloura, V.; Wang, L.C.; Fridlender, Z.G.; Sun, J.; Cheng, G.; Kapoor, V.; Sterman, D.H.; Harty, R.N.;
Okumura, A.; Barber, G.N.; et al. Evaluation of an attenuated vesicular stomatitis virus vector expressing
interferon-beta for use in malignant pleural mesothelioma: heterogeneity in interferon responsiveness
defines potential efficacy. Hum. Gene Ther. 2010, 21, 51–64. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10.
Sterman, D.H.; Recio, A.; Carroll, R.G.; Gillespie, C.T.; Haas, A.; Vachani, A.; Kapoor, V.; Sun, J.;
Hodinka, R.; Brown, J.L.; et al. A phase I clinical trial of single-dose intrapleural IFN-beta gene transfer for
malignant pleural mesothelioma and metastatic pleural effusions: high rate of antitumor immune responses.
Clin. Cancer Res. 2007, 13, 4456–4466. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11.
Odaka, M.; Sterman, D.H.; Wiewrodt, R.; Zhang, Y.; Kiefer, M.; Amin, K.M.; Gao, G.P.; Wilson, J.M.;
Barsoum, J.; Kaiser, L.R.; et al. Eradication of intraperitoneal and distant tumor by adenovirus-mediated
interferon-beta gene therapy is attributable to induction of systemic immunity. Cancer Res. 2001, 61,
6201–6212. [PubMed]
 Biomedicines 2017, 5, 2
10 of 11
12.
Jiang, J.H.; Turner, J.F., Jr.; Huang, J.A. Endobronchial ultrasound elastography: A new method in
endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration. J. Thorac. Dis. 2015, 7 (Suppl. 4),
S272–S278. [PubMed]
13.
Villalona-Calero, M.A.; Lam, E.; Otterson, G.A.; Zhao, W.; Timmons, M.; Subramaniam, D.; Hade, E.M.;
Gill, G.M.; Coffey, M.; Selvaggi, G.; et al. Oncolytic reovirus in combination with chemotherapy in metastatic
or recurrent non-small cell lung cancer patients with KRAS-activated tumors. Cancer 2016, 122, 875–883.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.
Sei, S.; Mussio, J.K.; Yang, Q.E.; Nagashima, K.; Parchment, R.E.; Coffey, M.C.; Shoemaker, R.H.;
Tomaszewski, J.E. Synergistic antitumor activity of oncolytic reovirus and chemotherapeutic agents in
non-small cell lung cancer cells. Mol. Cancer 2009, 8, 47. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.
Wang, L.C.; Lynn, R.C.; Cheng, G.; Alexander, E.; Kapoor, V.; Moon, E.K.; Sun, J.; Fridlender, Z.G.; Isaacs, S.N.;
Thorne, S.H.; et al. Treating tumors with a vaccinia virus expressing IFNbeta illustrates the complex
relationships between oncolytic ability and immunogenicity. Mol. Ther. 2012, 20, 736–748. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
16.
Willmon, C.L.; Saloura, V.; Fridlender, Z.G.; Wongthida, P.; Diaz, R.M.; Thompson, J.; Kottke, T.;
Federspiel, M.; Barber, G.; Albelda, S.M.; et al. Expression of IFN-beta enhances both efficacy and safety of
oncolytic vesicular stomatitis virus for therapy of mesothelioma. Cancer Res. 2009, 69, 7713–7720. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
17.
Li, H.; Peng, K.W.; Dingli, D.; Kratzke, R.A.; Russell, S.J. Oncolytic measles viruses encoding interferon beta
and the thyroidal sodium iodide symporter gene for mesothelioma virotherapy. Cancer Gene Ther. 2010, 17,
550–558. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.
LaRocca, C.J.; Han, J.; Gavrikova, T.; Armstrong, L.; Oliveira, A.R.; Shanley, R.; Vickers, S.M.; Yamamoto, M.;
Davydova, J. Oncolytic adenovirus expressing interferon alpha in a syngeneic Syrian hamster model for the
treatment of pancreatic cancer. Surgery 2015, 157, 888–898. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19.
Zhang, J.F.; Wei, F.; Wang, H.P.; Li, H.M.; Qiu, W.; Ren, P.K.; Chen, X.F.; Huang, Q. Potent anti-tumor activity
of telomerase-dependent and HSV-TK armed oncolytic adenovirus for non-small cell lung cancer in vitro
and in vivo. J. Exp. Clin. Cancer Res. 2010, 29, 52. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20.
Woller, N.; Gurlevik, E.; Fleischmann-Mundt, B.; Schumacher, A.; Knocke, S.; Kloos, A.M.; Saborowski, M.;
Geffers, R.; Manns, M.P.; Wirth, T.C.; et al.
Viral infection of tumors overcomes resistance to
PD-1-immunotherapy by Broadening Neoantigenome-directed T-cell Responses. Mol. Ther. 2015, 23,
1630–1640. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21.
Kubo, S.; Kawasaki, Y.; Yamaoka, N.; Tagawa, M.; Kasahara, N.; Terada, N.; Okamura, H. Complete regression
of human malignant mesothelioma xenografts following local injection of midkine promoter-driven oncolytic
adenovirus. J. Gene Med. 2010, 12, 681–692. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22.
Miyamoto, S.; Inoue, H.; Nakamura, T.; Yamada, M.; Sakamoto, C.; Urata, Y.; Okazaki, T.; Marumoto, T.;
Takahashi, A.; Takayama, K.; et al. Coxsackievirus B3 is an oncolytic virus with immunostimulatory
properties that is active against lung adenocarcinoma. Cancer Res. 2012, 72, 2609–2621. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.
Goodwin, J.M.; Schmitt, A.D.; McGinn, C.M.; Fuchs, B.C.; Kuruppu, D.; Tanabe, K.K.; Lanuti, M.
Angiogenesis inhibition using an oncolytic herpes simplex virus expressing endostatin in a murine lung
cancer model. Cancer Investig. 2012, 30, 243–250. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.
Li, J.M.; Kao, K.C.; Li, L.F.; Yang, T.M.; Wu, C.P.; Horng, Y.M.; Jia, W.W.; Yang, C.T. MicroRNA-145 regulates
oncolytic herpes simplex virus-1 for selective killing of human non-small cell lung cancer cells. Virol. J. 2013,
10, 241. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.
Adusumilli, P.S.; Stiles, B.M.; Chan, M.K.; Mullerad, M.; Eisenberg, D.P.; Ben-Porat, L.; Huq, R.; Rusch, V.W.;
Fong, Y. Imaging and therapy of malignant pleural mesothelioma using replication-competent herpes
simplex viruses. J. Gene Med. 2006, 8, 603–615. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26.
Gauvrit, A.; Brandler, S.; Sapede-Peroz, C.; Boisgerault, N.; Tangy, F.; Gregoire, M. Measles virus induces
oncolysis of mesothelioma cells and allows dendritic cells to cross-prime tumor-specific CD8 response.
Cancer Res. 2008, 68, 4882–4892. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.
Patel, M.R.; Jacobson, B.A.; Belgum, H.; Raza, A.; Sadiq, A.; Drees, J.; Wang, H.; Jay-Dixon, J.;
Etchison, R.; Federspiel, M.J.; et al. Measles vaccine strains for virotherapy of non-small-cell lung carcinoma.
J. Thorac. Oncol. 2014, 9, 1101–1110. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Biomedicines 2017, 5, 2
11 of 11
28.
Meng, G.; Xia, M.; Wang, D.; Chen, A.; Wang, Y.; Wang, H.; Yu, D.; Wei, J. Mitophagy promotes replication of
oncolytic Newcastle disease virus by blocking intrinsic apoptosis in lung cancer cells. Oncotarget 2014, 5,
6365–6374. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29.
Fu, F.; Zhao, M.; Yang, Y.J.; Tong, G.Z.; Yang, B.F.; Song, C.; Li, X. Antiproliferative effect of newcastle disease
virus strain D90 on human lung cancer cell line A549. Oncol. Res. 2011, 19, 323–333. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30.
Campion, C.A.; Soden, D.; Forde, P.F. Antitumour responses induced by a cell-based Reovirus vaccine in
murine lung and melanoma models. BMC Cancer 2016, 16, 462. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31.
Gujar, S.A.; Marcato, P.; Pan, D.; Lee, P.W. Reovirus virotherapy overrides tumor antigen presentation
evasion and promotes protective antitumor immunity. Mol. Cancer Ther. 2010, 9, 2924–2933. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
32.
Angarita, F.A.; Acuna, S.A.; Fonseca, A.; Crystal, P.; Escallon, J. Impact of preoperative breast MRIs on timing
of surgery and type of intervention in newly diagnosed breast cancer patients. Ann. Surg. Oncol. 2010, 17
(Suppl. 3), 273–279. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.
Belin, L.J.; Ady, J.W.; Lewis, C.; Marano, D.; Gholami, S.; Mojica, K.; Eveno, C.; Longo, V.; Zanzonico, P.B.;
Chen, N.G.; et al. An oncolytic vaccinia virus expressing the human sodium iodine symporter prolongs
survival and facilitates SPECT/CT imaging in an orthotopic model of malignant pleural mesothelioma.
Surgery 2013, 154, 486–495. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34.
Kelly, K.J.; Woo, Y.; Brader, P.; Yu, Z.; Riedl, C.; Lin, S.F.; Chen, N.; Yu, Y.A.; Rusch, V.W.; Szalay, A.A.; et al.
Novel oncolytic agent GLV-1h68 is effective against malignant pleural mesothelioma. Hum. Gene Ther. 2008,
19, 774–782. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.
Kepp, O.; Senovilla, L.; Vitale, I.; Vacchelli, E.; Adjemian, S.; Agostinis, P.; Apetoh, L.; Aranda, F.; Barnaba, V.;
Bloy, N.; et al. Consensus guidelines for the detection of immunogenic cell death. Oncoimmunology 2014, 3,
e955691. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36.
Rizvi, N.A.; Hellmann, M.D.; Snyder, A.; Kvistborg, P.; Makarov, V.; Havel, J.J.; Lee, W.; Yuan, J.; Wong, P.;
Ho, T.S.; et al. Cancer immunology. Mutational landscape determines sensitivity to PD-1 blockade in
non-small cell lung cancer. Science 2015, 348, 124–128. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37.
Mader, E.K.; Butler, G.; Dowdy, S.C.; Mariani, A.; Knutson, K.L.; Federspiel, M.J.; Russell, S.J.; Galanis, E.;
Dietz, A.B.; Peng, K.W. Optimizing patient derived mesenchymal stem cells as virus carriers for a phase I
clinical trial in ovarian cancer. J. Transl. Med. 2013, 11, 20. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
© 2017 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC-BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
