 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
3 4 4 7
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 9   September 2016
Introduction
Tumors use multiple mechanisms to suppress adaptive immune 
responses directed at antigens expressed in the tumor micro-
environment. In this context, chronic and persistent antigen 
stimulation results in increased expression of programmed cell 
death 1 (PD-1) on CD8+ T cells infiltrating neoplastic tissue (1). 
The net result of signaling through this receptor is an attenuation 
of the cytotoxic and cytokine-producing capacity of these cells, 
leading to ineffective antitumor immune responses (1). Target-
ed inhibition of the PD-1 pathway has shown excellent efficacy 
in several human tumors (2–4); however, many patients do not 
respond, and the cellular and molecular mechanisms underly-
ing this clinical heterogeneity are only beginning to be eluci-
dated. A biomarker that accurately predicts clinical response 
to anti–PD-1 therapy is critical in order to appropriately select 
patients for this therapy in the face of multiple emerging treat-
ment options for metastatic cancer.
It is becoming increasingly clear that the immune composi-
tion in tumors is markedly different from that observed in periph-
eral blood (5, 6). Thus, robust biomarkers that predict response 
to immunotherapy will most likely be derived from tumor tissue. 
Quantification of programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1) and 
PD-1 expression in tumors by routine IHC has been used in an 
attempt to predict response to anti–PD-1 therapy (7–11). These 
studies have yielded provocative results; however, constraints in 
the number of markers able to be simultaneously assessed and the 
inherent difficulties in quantifying staining intensity have limited 
the potential of this approach. In addition, although standard IHC 
reveals information regarding which immune cells are present 
and where they localize within tumors, it rarely elucidates how 
these cells are functioning. In the current study, we used multi-
parameter flow cytometry to comprehensively analyze the tumor 
immune microenvironment prior to anti–PD-1 therapy. Using this 
approach, we quantified the accumulation of a unique immune 
cell population that robustly predicts response to this treatment. 
In functional experiments, we show that this cell subset represents 
a partially exhausted tumor-infiltrating T cell and that treatment 
with anti–PD-1 effectively activates these cells in tumors.
BACKGROUND. Immune checkpoint blockade is revolutionizing therapy for advanced cancer, but many patients do not 
respond to treatment. The identification of robust biomarkers that predict clinical response to specific checkpoint inhibitors 
is critical in order to stratify patients and to rationally select combinations in the context of an expanding array of therapeutic 
options.
METHODS. We performed multiparameter flow cytometry on freshly isolated metastatic melanoma samples from 2 cohorts 
of 20 patients each prior to treatment and correlated the subsequent clinical response with the tumor immune phenotype.
RESULTS. Increasing fractions of programmed cell death 1 high/cytotoxic T lymphocyte–associated protein 4 high  
(PD-1hiCTLA-4hi) cells within the tumor-infiltrating CD8+ T cell subset strongly correlated with response to therapy (RR) and 
progression-free survival (PFS). Functional analysis of these cells revealed a partially exhausted T cell phenotype. Assessment 
of metastatic lesions during anti–PD-1 therapy demonstrated a release of T cell exhaustion, as measured by an accumulation 
of highly activated CD8+ T cells within tumors, with no effect on Tregs.
CONCLUSIONS. Our data suggest that the relative abundance of partially exhausted tumor-infiltrating CD8+ T cells predicts 
response to anti–PD-1 therapy. This information can be used to appropriately select patients with a high likelihood of 
achieving a clinical response to PD-1 pathway inhibition. 
FUNDING. This work was funded by a generous gift provided by Inga-Lill and David Amoroso as well as a generous gift 
provided by Stephen Juelsgaard and Lori Cook.
Tumor immune profiling predicts response to anti–PD-1 
therapy in human melanoma
Adil I. Daud,1 Kimberly Loo,1 Mariela L. Pauli,2 Robert Sanchez-Rodriguez,2 Priscila Munoz Sandoval,2 Keyon Taravati,2  
Katy Tsai,1 Adi Nosrati,1 Lorenzo Nardo,3 Michael D. Alvarado,1 Alain P. Algazi,1 Miguel H. Pampaloni,4 Iryna V. Lobach,1  
Jimmy Hwang,1 Robert H. Pierce,5 Iris K. Gratz,6 Matthew F. Krummel,4 and Michael D. Rosenblum2
1Helen Diller Comprehensive Cancer Center, 2Department of Dermatology, 3Department of Radiology, and 4Department of Pathology, UCSF, San Francisco, California, USA. 5Oncosec Inc.,  
San Diego, California, USA. 6Department of Molecular Biology, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria.
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Submitted: February 29, 2016; Accepted: June 23, 2016.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2016;126(9):3447–3452. doi:10.1172/JCI87324.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
3 4 4 8
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 9   September 2016
significant association with a clinical response (Supplemental 
Figure 2). Further analysis of CTLA-4–expressing CTLs revealed 
that this subset of CD8+ T cells expressed the highest levels of 
PD-1 (Supplemental Figure 2). Representative flow cytometric 
plots and clinical images of a nonresponder and a responder to 
anti–PD-1 therapy are shown in Figure 1A. The immunopheno-
type of a nonresponder clearly showed the presence of tumor-in-
filtrating CD8+ CTLs; however, these cells expressed low levels 
of CTLA-4 and PD-1. In contrast, patients who responded to this 
treatment had relatively increased percentages of CTLA-4hiPD-1hi 
cells within the CTL gate.
In a discovery cohort of 20 patients, RR and PFS were sig-
nificantly correlated with the relative abundance of CTLA-4hiPD-
1hi CD8+ tumor-infiltrating CTLs (Figure 1B). For patients with 
more than 20% CTLA-4hiPD-1hi CTLs, the PFS was 31.6 months 
versus 9.6 months for tumors that contained 20% or fewer 
CTLA-4hiPD-1hi cells within the CTL gate (*P = 0.017, log-rank 
test). The objective response rate (CR + PR) was 0% (0 of 6) in 
the low CTLA-4hiPD-1hi CTL group versus 85.7% (12 of 14) in the 
greater than 20% CTLA-4hiPD-1hi CTL group. Having identified 
a potential biomarker for response to anti–PD-1 therapy, we set 
out to prospectively validate our results in an independent cohort 
of patients (n = 20). In this validation cohort, patients with 20% 
or fewer tumor-infiltrating CTLA-4hiPD-1hi CTLs had a PFS of 
Results
Because anti–PD-1 therapy is thought to directly target PD-1–
expressing T cells, we hypothesized that the relative abundance of 
these cells within tumors would predict response to treatment. To 
test this hypothesis, we performed multiparameter flow cytome-
try on freshly isolated metastatic melanoma tumor samples prior 
to anti–PD-1 therapy. We assessed CD45, CD3, CD4, CD8, and 
FOXP3 expression to quantify the relative percentages of CD4+ 
effector T cells (Teff) (CD45+CD3+CD4+FOXP3–), CD4+ Tregs 
(CD45+CD3+CD4+FOXP3+), and CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes 
(CTLs) (CD45+CD3+CD4–CD8+) infiltrating tumors (Supplemen-
tal Figure 1; supplemental material available online with this arti-
cle; doi:10.1172/JCI87324DS1). In addition, we quantified PD-1, 
PD-L1, cytotoxic T lymphocyte–associated protein 4 (CTLA-4), 
and MHC class II (HLA-antigen DR; HLA-DR) expression on each 
of these subsets. Patients were then treated with anti–PD-1 mono-
therapy, and clinical outcome data were collected. The therapeu-
tic response was evaluated using response evaluation criteria in 
solid tumor malignancies (Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid 
Tumors [RECIST], version 1.1). Patients with a complete response 
(CR) or a partial response (PR) were considered responders, and 
those with stable or progressive disease were considered non-
responders. Multivariate analysis revealed that CTL expression 
of CTLA-4 was the single parameter that showed a statistically 
 
Figure 1. Relative abundance of CTLA-4hiPD-1hi CTLs predicts response to anti–PD-1 therapy. (A) Flow cytometric data from metastatic tumors taken prior 
to anti–PD-1 therapy and representative pre- and post-treatment computed tomographic images from a patient who achieved a response (Responder) and 
one who did not (Nonresponder). Flow cytometric plots were pregated on live CD45+CD3+CD8+ cells. (B) Discovery cohort ( 
n = 20 patients) and (C) validation 
cohort (n = 20 patients) of PFS for patients who had 20% or more (dotted line) or 20% or fewer (solid line) tumor-infiltrating CTLA-4hiPD-1hi CTLs. Statisti-
cal significance was determined by log-rank test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
3 4 4 9
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 9   September 2016
apy for human melanoma (11). This assay used an immunohisto-
chemical approach to both quantify lymphocytes and discern the 
invasive tumor margin. We have recently performed this assay on 
21 patients with metastatic melanoma (Supplemental Figure 5). 
Using 1,500 CD8+ cells/mm2 as a cutoff, in our hands, this assay 
had a positive predictive value (PPV) of 57% and a negative predic-
tive value (NPV) of 100%. This is comparable to our flow cytom-
etry–based assay, which had a PPV of 82% and an NPV of 100%. 
However, using the immunohistochemical approach, 8 of the 21 
samples (38%) were not able to be evaluated, because the inva-
sive tumor margin could not be reliably discerned. The majority of 
these samples were smaller biopsy specimens (core biopsies and 
skin punch biopsies). Because small tumor specimens are the only 
samples that can be obtained from many patients with skin, liver, 
lung, or bone metastasis, the inability to evaluate these samples is 
a major limitation of the immunohistochemical assay.
Tumor-infiltrating CTLA-4hiPD-1hi CTLs have been shown to 
contain the majority of tumor-antigen–specific T cells (5, 6). These 
cells are only detectable in tumors (i.e., not peripheral blood) and 
have been suggested to have an “exhausted” phenotype (5). In order 
to determine the functional capacity of tumor-infiltrating CTLA-
4hiPD-1hi CTLs in our patient population, we prepared single-cell 
suspensions from metastatic melanoma tumors and stimulated 
these cells with PMA and ionomycin. Intracellular cytokine produc-
tion was then assessed by flow cytometry. When compared with 
9.9 months versus 15.9 months for the high CTLA-4hiPD-1hi CTL 
group (Figure 1C). The RR was 78.6% for the high CTLA-4hiPD-1hi 
CTL group versus 0% (0 of 6) for the low CTLA-4hiPD-1hi group. 
No objective clinical responses were observed in patients with 
infiltration of 20% or fewer CTLA-4hiPD-1hi CTLs into their 
tumors (Figure 2). The percentages of CTLA-4hiPD-1hi CTLs were 
independent of biopsy site or prior therapy (Figure 2). In addition, 
response rates were independent of other tumor-infiltrating T 
cell populations, including Tregs (Figure 2). The increased pro-
portions of CTLA-4hiPD-1hi CTLs also correlated with overall sur-
vival (OS); however, this did not achieve statistical significance 
during the relatively short study period (Supplemental Figure 
3). Clinical response strongly correlated with the abundance of 
CTLA-4hiPD-1hi double-positive cells within the CD8+ gate (with a 
concomitant reduction in CTLA-4loPD-1lo double-negative cells) 
and only minimally with CTLA-4loPD-1hi single-positive cells 
(Supplemental Figure 4). Taken together, our data suggest that 
the relative abundance of CTLA-4hiPD-1hi CTLs infiltrating meta-
static melanoma tumors strongly correlates with clinical response 
to anti–PD-1 therapy. It is important to acknowledge, however, 
that given the small sample size of our study, the CI (especially of 
the low CTLA-4hiPD-1hi group) is wide and may be similar to the 
response rate reported for PDL-1–negative tumors (8–10).
In a previous report, the abundance of CD8+ T cells located at 
the invasive tumor margin predicted response to anti–PD-1 ther-
Figure 2. Clinical characteristics and CTL profiles of patients with metastatic melanoma who responded or did not respond to anti–PD-1 therapy. 
Histogram showing flow cytometric quantification of the percentages of CTLA4hiPD-1hi tumor-infiltrating T cells in the CD8+ CTL gate versus characteristics 
of individual patients. Responders included patients with tumor target lesions that met RECIST 1.1 criteria for a CR (>99% reduction in the target lesions) 
or a PR (≥30% reduction in target lesions). Nonresponders included patients with tumor target lesions that met RECIST 1.1 criteria for progressive (≥20% 
increase in the target lesions) or stable disease (<30% reduction or <20% increase in tumor target lesions). n = 40 patients. Tregs were defined as FOX-
P3hiCTLA-4hi cells within the live CD45+CD3+CD4+ gate. V, validation; D, discovery; I, ipilimumab; T, targeted therapy with BRAF/MEK inhibitors; Liv, liver; 
LN, lymph node; Mets, metastasis; S, skin; Ova, ovary.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
3 4 5 0
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 9   September 2016
is highly predictive of the response to therapy. In addition to 
measuring the abundance of CD8+ T cells at the invasive tumor 
margin (as described above), previous studies have attempted to 
predict clinical responses by assaying for PD-L1 expression on 
tumor cells using traditional immunohistochemical approaches 
(7–10, 17). These attempts have yielded variable results. PD-L1 
is expressed on many hematopoietic and nonhematopoietic cells 
within the tumor microenvironment, and in many cases, there is 
a wide range of staining intensity. Both of these variables make 
distinctions between relative degrees of tumor PD-L1 expression 
difficult to discern. In addition, traditional staining is performed 
on relatively thin sections of tumor and therefore assesses only a 
small portion of the specimen. In contrast, flow cytometry allows 
for evaluation of the entire tumor, enabling a more comprehensive 
assessment of lesions. Flow cytometry is readily performed on 
small tumor specimens (core and skin punch biopsies), a setting in 
which the reliable detection of tumor margins can be challenging. 
However, it should be noted that flow cytometry of nonhemato-
poietic tissue is difficult to standardize for clinical use, given the 
inherent variability in enzymatic tissue digestion and the require-
ment for fresh (nonpreserved) samples. Future studies focused 
on developing strategies for the robust quantification of partially 
exhausted CTLs at either the RNA or DNA (i.e., epigenetic) levels 
using preserved tumor tissue may help to circumvent these issues.
Interestingly, a recent study involved the use of flow cytometry 
to show that T cell numbers increase in tumors following PD-1 block-
ade (18). These results are consistent with our findings; however, this 
study was not focused on defining biomarkers that predict response 
to therapy and thus did not identify the partially exhausted CTL 
population elucidated in our work. High expression of both CTLA-4 
and PD-1 on tumor-infiltrating CTLs was instrumental in identify-
ing our biomarker subset (Supplemental Figure 2 and Supplemental 
4), providing mechanistic insight into how anti–PD-1 therapy results 
in tumor regression in select groups of patients. Our results are sup-
ported by those of a previous study that found high tumor CTLA-4 
expression to be predictive of response to PD-L1 blockade (19).
In our assay, patients who had more than 20% of total tumor- 
infiltrating CD8+ T cells that coexpressed high levels of PD-1 and 
CTLA-4 had an increased likelihood of responding to anti–PD-1 
therapy. However, response rates were more variable the closer 
the percentages were to 20% (Figure 2). This suggests that there is 
CTLA-4negPD-1lo cells, CTLA-4hiPD-1hi CTLs contained equivalent 
 
percentages of IFN-γ–producing cells; however, CTLA-4hiPD-1hi 
CTLs had a significant reduction of TNF-α–producing cells (Figure 3). 
Both cell populations produced very little IL-2 (Figure 3). In the con-
text of viral infections, a hierarchy of CD8+ T cell exhaustion has been 
described (12, 13). In this model, specific functional properties such as 
IL-2 and TNF-α production are lost first, whereas IFN-γ production is 
more resistant to attenuation. Thus, partially exhausted CD8+ T cells 
have been characterized as cells that are capable of producing IFN-γ 
but lack the ability to produce TNF-α and IL-2, a phenotype consis-
tent with tumor-infiltrating CTLA-4hiPD-1hi CTLs found in high per-
centages in patients who responded to anti–PD-1 therapy.
Given that the abundance of CTLA-4hiPD-1hi CTLs in meta-
static tumors predicts the response to anti–PD-1 therapy and that 
the functional properties of this cell population is consistent with 
a partially exhausted T cell phenotype, we set out to determine 
whether treatment with anti–PD-1 reverses CD8+ T cell exhaustion 
in tumors. To test this, we immunophenotyped metastatic lesions 
during anti–PD-1 therapy and compared these with pretreatment 
samples. Treatment with anti–PD-1 resulted in a marked increase 
in the percentage of tumor-infiltrating CD8+ T cells, with a con-
comitant decline in the percentage of CD4+ T cells, resulting in a 
significant reduction in the CD4/CD8 ratio (Figure 4). Expression 
of HLA-DR is a robust activation marker for human CTLs (14–16). 
Thus, we assessed HLA-DR expression on tumor-infiltrating T 
cells before beginning therapy and after the initiation of therapy. 
When compared with pretreatment samples, tumor-infiltrating 
CTLs isolated during therapy had increased percentages of HLA-
DRhi cells and increased HLA-DR mean fluorescence intensity 
(Figure 4). Interestingly, there was no difference in Treg percent-
ages or activation (as indicated by either CTLA-4 or HLA-DR 
expression) between pretreatment and treatment samples (Figure 
4). These results suggest that treatment with anti–PD-1 preferen-
tially activates CD8+ CTLs within the tumor microenvironment.
Discussion
Taken together, our data support the notion that the relative abun-
dance of partially exhausted tumor-infiltrating CTLs correlates 
with response to anti–PD-1 therapy. In addition, treatment with 
anti–PD-1 results in increased activation of this cell population. 
Thus, the presence of the “target” cell population within tumors 
Figure 3. Tumor-infiltrating CTLA-4hiPD-1hi CTLs have a partially exhausted phenotype. (A) Representative flow cytometric plots (pregated on live 
CD45+CD3+CD8+ cells) of intracellular cytokine staining of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes from metastatic tumors taken prior to anti–PD-1 therapy. (B) 
Quantification of cytokine-expressing cells (as measured by intracellular cytokine staining) obtained from multiple metastatic tumors taken prior to anti–
PD-1 therapy. White squares and red dots represent individual patients. Bars indicate the mean values. Data were combined from 3 replicate experiments. 
P value in B was determined by an unpaired, 2-tailed Student’s t test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
3 4 5 1
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 9   September 2016
of January 2016 were included in all the analyses. The efficacy analy-
sis included 2 endpoints: (1) best overall response was defined as the 
best tumor response from the start of treatment to the time of disease 
progression or death; and (2) PFS was defined as the interval between 
the date of enrollment and the date of progression or death (or the 
last clinic visit date for which the patient was known not to have had 
radiological or clinical progression). OS was calculated as the time 
from the date of enrollment to the time of death or to the last known 
date that the patient was known to be alive. The best overall response 
was determined from investigator-reported data according to RECIST 
1.1 criteria. The Rosenblum laboratory team was blinded to all clinical 
data (including treatment response) throughout all studies.
Tumor sample procurement. Patients’ biopsies of metastat-
ic lesions were obtained within 30 days of starting the treatment. 
Tumor biopsies were performed with either a 16- or 18-gauge needle 
or a 4-mm punch tool.
Flow cytometric analyses. Multiparameter flow cytometry was per-
formed on pretreatment and treatment samples obtained from met-
astatic tumors as previously described (20). Freshly isolated samples 
were minced and digested overnight with buffer consisting of collage-
nase type 4 (4188; Worthington Biochemical Corp.), DNAse (SDN25-
1G; Sigma-Aldrich), 10% FBS, 1% HEPES, and 1% penicillin-strepta-
vidin in RPMI medium. Single-cell suspensions were double filtered, 
centrifuged, and counted. For intracellular cytokine analysis, digest-
ed tumor cell suspensions were stimulated with PMA and ionomycin 
for 4 hours as previously described (20). Approximately 2 × 106 cells 
were stained with multiple fluorochrome-conjugated mAbs. The fol-
lowing Abs were used (all from eBioscience, unless otherwise stat-
ed): anti-human CD3 (anti-hCD3) (UCHT1); anti-hCD8 (RPA-T8); 
anti-hCD45 (HI30); anti-CD4 (SK3); anti-FOXP3 (PCH101); anti–
hCTLA-4 (14D3); anti–PD-1 (EH12.2H7; BioLegend); anti–HLA-DR 
(LN3); anti–PD-L1 (MIH1); and LIVE/DEAD Fixable Aqua Dead 
Cell Stain (Life Technologies, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data were 
acquired by an LSRFortessa (BD Biosciences) and analyzed using 
FlowJo software (Tree Star Inc.).
Flow cytometric standardization and gating strategy. All the sam-
ples were fresh and acquired by the LSRFortessa at different time 
points. To standardize voltages over time, Sphero Ultra Rainbow 
a subset of patients who have partially exhausted CTLs that hover 
around the threshold required to achieve a response. It is interest-
ing to speculate that clinical strategies aimed to induce or augment 
these cells prior to therapy may result in better response rates in 
these patients. Furthermore, because patients with low percentag-
es of CTLA-4hiPD-1hi CTLs are less likely to respond to anti–PD-1 
monotherapy, the risk-benefit profile in this patient subset may 
favor combination therapy with multiple checkpoint inhibitors. 
Further clinical investigation is required to discern whether the 
relative abundance of tumor-infiltrating partially exhausted CTLs 
can be used to make meaningful clinical therapeutic decisions. In 
addition, the utility of this biomarker in cancers other than mela-
noma remains to be determined.
Methods
Study design and cohorts. Between January 2014 and January 2016, 120 
patients with advanced melanoma were treated with the anti–PD-1 Ab 
pembrolizumab or nivolumab. Of these patients, 42 had accessible 
tumors and were amenable to having a research biopsy performed for 
flow cytometric analysis. Of these, 2 patients were excluded because of 
inadequate numbers of cells for analysis. An inadequate number of cells 
was defined as fewer than 200 CD8+ T cells within the live CD45+CD3+ 
gate. Flow cytometric analysis of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes was 
performed prior to therapy on the first discovery cohort of 20 patients 
(Figure 1B) and the second validation cohort of 20 patients (Figure 
1C). Pembrolizumab was administered i.v. at 2 or 10 mg/kg every 2 or 
3 weeks, and nivolumab was administered at 3 mg/kg every 2 weeks. 
Patients underwent a core biopsy with an 18-gauge core or punch biop-
sy with a 4-mm punch, and sterile precautions were taken.
Treatment outcome groups and efficacy analysis. Two treatment 
outcome groups, responders and nonresponders, were defined using 
radiologic imaging following anti–PD-1 treatment. Responders includ-
ed patients with tumor target lesions that met RECIST 1.1 criteria for 
a CR (>99% reduction in the target lesions) or a PR (≥30% reduction 
in target lesions). Nonresponders included patients with tumor target 
lesions that met RECIST 1.1 criteria for progressive (≥20% increase in 
the target lesions) or stable disease (<30% reduction or <20% increase 
in tumor target lesions). Available efficacy and immunological data as 
Figure 4. Anti–PD-1 treatment results in preferential activation of tumor-infiltrating 
CD8+ CTLs. (A) Flow cytometric quantification of tumor-infiltrating CD4+ and CD8+ T cells 
obtained before and after starting anti–PD-1 therapy. (B) Representative flow cytometric 
plots and flow cytometric quantification of HLA-DR expression on tumor-infiltrating 
CD8+ T cells before and after starting anti–PD-1 therapy. (C) Flow cytometric quantifica-
tion of tumor-infiltrating Tregs as well as Treg expression of CTLA-4 and HLA-DR before 
and after starting anti–PD-1 therapy. White squares and red dots represent individual 
patients. Bars indicate the mean values. MFI, mean fluorescence intensity. P values in all 
panels were determined by an unpaired, 2-tailed Student’s t test. 
 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
3 4 5 2
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 9   September 2016
on Human Research Protocol 138510. Informed consent was obtained 
from all patients for biopsies of metastatic lesions within 30 days of 
starting the treatment. 
Author contributions
AID and MDR designed the research studies. AID, KL, IKG, MLP, 
RSR, PMS, and K Taravati conducted experiments. AID, KL, MLP, 
RSR, and K Tsai acquired data. AID, MDR, KL, MLP, JH, RSR, K 
Taravani, K Tsai, AN, LN, MDA, APA, MHP, RHP, IVL, and MFK 
analyzed data. AID, MDR, KL, and MLP wrote the manuscript.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants awarded to AID from the Helen 
Diller Comprehensive Cancer Center and the Amoroso and Juels-
gaard/Cook Funds.
Address correspondence to: Michael D. Rosenblum, 513 Par-
nassus Avenue, San Francisco, California 94143, USA. Phone: 
415.476.1685; E-mail: Michael.Rosenblum@ucsf.edu.
Beads (Spherotech) were used to calibrate and normalize to baseline 
intensity. Gates were determined using both isotype control Ab stain-
ing and an internal negative control cell population (i.e., PD-1 and 
CTLA-4 expression on CD3– cells).
Statistics. PFS and OS curves were constructed with the 
Kaplan-Meier method and compared with the Maentel-Henzel log-
rank test using SPSS, version 23 (IBM Corp.). Progression was record-
ed on the date of scans showing progression or on the date clinical 
progression or death was noted.  All tests were 2-sided, with P values 
of less than 0.05 considered statistically significant. Patients with 
tumors that had fewer than 20% CTLA-4hiPD-1hi cells were noted to 
have infrequent responses in initial testing, and this threshold was 
used in the discovery and validation cohorts. For flow cytometric data, 
significance was assessed using an unpaired, 2-tailed Student’s t test. 
In all figures showing quantification of flow cytometric data, the mean 
value is visually depicted. Statistical analysis was performed using 
GraphPad Prism, version 6 (GraphPad Software).
Study approval. Biopsies of melanoma tumors were performed 
after patients provided informed consent under the UCSF Committee 
 1. Pauken KE, Wherry EJ. Overcoming T cell exhaus-
tion in infection and cancer. Trends Immunol. 
2015;36(4):265–276.
 2. Brahmer JR, et al. Phase I study of single-agent 
anti-programmed death-1 (MDX-1106) in refrac-
tory solid tumors: safety, clinical activity, phar-
macodynamics, and immunologic correlates.  
J Clin Oncol. 2010;28(19):3167–3175.
 3. Hamid O, et al. Safety and tumor responses with 
lambrolizumab (anti-PD-1) in melanoma. N Engl 
J Med. 2013;369(2):134–144.
 4. Rizvi NA, et al. Activity and safety of nivolumab, 
an anti-PD-1 immune checkpoint inhibitor, for 
patients with advanced, refractory squamous non-
small-cell lung cancer (CheckMate 063): a phase 2, 
single-arm trial. Lancet Oncol. 2015;16(3):257–265.
 5. Ahmadzadeh M, et al. Tumor antigen-specific 
CD8 T cells infiltrating the tumor express high 
levels of PD-1 and are functionally impaired. 
Blood. 2009;114(8):1537–1544.
 6. Gros A, et al. PD-1 identifies the patient-specific 
CD8+ tumor-reactive repertoire infiltrating human 
tumors. J Clin Invest. 2014;124(5):2246–2259.
 7. Madore J, et al. PD-L1 expression in melano-
ma shows marked heterogeneity within and 
between patients: implications for anti-PD-1/
PD-L1 clinical trials. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 
2015;28(3):245–253.
 8. Mahoney KM, Atkins MB. Prognostic and predic-
tive markers for the new immunotherapies. Oncol-
ogy (Williston Park, NY). 2014;28 Suppl 3:39–48.
 9. Pan ZK, Ye F, Wu X, An HX, Wu JX. Clinico-
pathological and prognostic significance of pro-
grammed cell death ligand1 (PD-L1) expression 
in patients with non-small cell lung cancer: a 
meta-analysis. J Thorac Dis. 2015;7(3):462–470.
 10. Patel SP, Kurzrock R. PD-L1 Expression as a Pre-
dictive Biomarker in Cancer Immunotherapy. 
Mol Cancer Ther. 2015;14(4):847–856.
 11. Tumeh PC, et al. PD-1 blockade induces respons-
es by inhibiting adaptive immune resistance. 
Nature. 2014;515(7528):568–571.
 12. Freeman GJ, Wherry EJ, Ahmed R, Sharpe AH. 
Reinvigorating exhausted HIV-specific T cells 
via PD-1-PD-1 ligand blockade. J Exp Med. 
2006;203(10):2223–2227.
 13. Wherry EJ. T cell exhaustion. Nat Immunol. 
2011;12(6):492–499.
 14. Ferenczi K, Burack L, Pope M, Krueger JG, Aus-
tin LM. CD69, HLA-DR and the IL-2R identify 
persistently activated T cells in psoriasis vulgaris 
lesional skin: blood and skin comparisons by flow 
cytometry. J Autoimmun. 2000;14(1):63–78.
 15. Kestens L, et al. Expression of activation anti-
gens, HLA-DR and CD38, on CD8 lymphocytes 
during HIV-1 infection. AIDS. 1992;6(8):793–797.
 16. Miller JD, et al. Human effector and memory 
CD8+ T cell responses to smallpox and yellow 
fever vaccines. Immunity. 2008;28(5):710–722.
 17. Callea M, et al. Differential Expression of PD-L1 
between Primary and Metastatic Sites in Clear-
Cell Renal Cell Carcinoma. Cancer Immunol Res. 
2015;3(10):1158–1164.
 18. Ribas A, et al. PD-1 Blockade Expands Intratu-
moral Memory T Cells. Cancer Immunol Res. 
2016;4(3):194–203.
 19. Herbst RS, et al. Predictive correlates of response 
to the anti-PD-L1 antibody MPDL3280A in can-
cer patients. Nature. 2014;515(7528):563–567.
 20. Sanchez Rodriguez R, et al. Memory regula-
tory T cells reside in human skin. J Clin Invest. 
2014;124(3):1027–1036.
