 Downloaded from https://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3JhfpBaN+Hky52TUwjXTKDhaOwhHAqPktD2uiaH1JeOg= on 06/06/2019
Downloaded from https://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3JhfpBaN+Hky52TUwjXTKDhaOwhHAqPktD2uiaH1JeOg= on 06/06/2019
Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
1061
9Division of Pediatric Critical Care Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, 
Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI.
10Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX.
11 
Department of Pediatrics, Saint Barnabas Medical Center, Livingston, 
NJ.
12 
Division of Emergency Medicine and Center for Pediatric Clinical 
 
Effectiveness, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, 
 
Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA.
13 
Intensive Care & Bioethics, Great Ormond St Hospital for Sick Children, 
London, United Kingdom.
14 
Pediatric Critical Care Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Stollery 
 
Children’s Hospital/University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
15 
Division of Pediatric Critical Care Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, 
Duke Children’s, Durham, NC.
16 
Departments of Pediatrics and Critical Care, Clinical Epidemiology 
and Biostatistics, McMaster University, Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, 
McMaster Children’s Hospital, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
17Beth Israel Medical Center, Hartsdale, NY.
Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters 
Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
DOI: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000002425
1No institution affiliation.
2Department of Critical Care Medicine and Pediatrics, University of 
 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA.
3Department of Pediatric Critical Care, Riley Hospital for Children, Indiana 
University, IN.
4Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO.
5Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine/Texas Children’s 
Hospital, Houston, TX.
6Pediatric Critical Care Medicine, Covenant Women and Children’s Hos-
pital, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX.
7Division of Pediatric Critical Care Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, 
Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL.
8Division of Pediatric Critical Care, University of British Columbia, 
 
Vancouver, BC, Canada.
American College of Critical Care Medicine Clinical 
Practice Parameters for Hemodynamic Support of 
Pediatric and Neonatal Septic Shock
Alan L. Davis, MD, MPH, FAAP, FCCM1; Joseph A. Carcillo, MD2; Rajesh K. Aneja, MD2;  
Andreas J. Deymann, MD3; John C. Lin, MD4; Trung C. Nguyen, MD5;  
Regina S. Okhuysen-Cawley, MD, FAAP5; Monica S. Relvas, MD, FAAP, MSHA, FCCM6;  
Ranna A. Rozenfeld, MD, FCCM7; Peter W. Skippen, MD, MBBS, FRCPC8;  
Bonnie J. Stojadinovic, DNP, CPNP9; Eric A. Williams, MD, MS, MMM10; Tim S. Yeh, MD, MCCM11; 
Fran Balamuth, MD12; Joe Brierley, MD, MA13; Allan R. de Caen, MD14; Ira M. Cheifetz, MD, FCCM15; 
Karen Choong, MSc, MB, Bch16; Edward Conway Jr, MD, MS, FCCM17; Timothy Cornell, MD18;  
Allan Doctor, MD19; Marc-Andre Dugas, MD, MSc20; Jonathan D. Feldman, MD21;  
Julie C. Fitzgerald, MD, PhD22; Heidi R. Flori, MD23; James D. Fortenberry, MD, MCCM24;  
Ana Lia Graciano, MD, FAAP, FCCM25; Bruce M. Greenwald, MD, FAAP, FCCM26;  
Mark W. Hall, MD, FCCM27; Yong Yun Han, MD28; Lynn J. Hernan, MD29; Jose E. Irazuzta, MD, FCCM30; 
Elizabeth Iselin, MD31; Elise W. van der Jagt, MD, MPH, FAAP, SFHM32; Howard E. Jeffries, MD, MBA33;  
Saraswati Kache, MD34; Chhavi Katyal, MD35; Niranjan (Tex) Kissoon, MD, MCCM, FCCM36; 
Alexander A. Kon, MD, FCCM37; Martha C. Kutko, MD, FCCM38; Graeme MacLaren, MD, FCCM39–41; 
Timothy Maul, PhD42; Renuka Mehta, MD, MBBS, FAAP43; Fola Odetola, MD, MPH44;  
Kristine Parbuoni, BCPS, PharmD45; Raina Paul, MD46; Mark J. Peters, MD, PhD47;  
Suchitra Ranjit, MD, FCCM48; Karin E. Reuter-Rice, PhD, CPNP-AC, FCCM49;  
Eduardo J. Schnitzler, MD50; Halden F. Scott, MD51; Adalberto Torres Jr, MD, MS, FCCM52;  
Jacki Weingarten-Abrams, MD53; Scott L. Weiss, MD24; Jerry J. Zimmerman, MD, PhD, FCCM54; 
Aaron L. Zuckerberg, MD55,56
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Davis et al
1062 
www.ccmjournal.org 
June 2017 • Volume 45 • Number 6
18 
Department of Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
19 
Departments of Pediatrics and Biochemistry, Washington University in 
Saint Louis School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO.
20 
Department of Pediatrics, Centre mère-enfant Soleil du CHU de Qué-
bec-Université Laval, Québec City, QC, Canada.
21 
Department of Inpatient Pediatrics, Kaiser Santa Clara Medical Center, 
Santa Clara, CA.
22 
Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Children’s Hospital of Phila-
delphia, Philadelphia, PA.
23 
Division of Pediatric Critical Care Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Mott C.S. Children’s Hospital, Ann Arbor, MI.
24 
Division of Critical Care, Department of Pediatrics, Emory University 
School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA.
25 
Department of Pediatrics-Critical Care Medicine, University of Maryland 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD.
26 
Division of Pediatric Critical Care Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical Col-
lege, New York, NY.
27 
Division of Critical Care Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Nationwide 
Children’s Hospital, Columbus, OH.
28 
Department of Critical Care Medicine, Children’s Mercy Hospital, 
 
Kansas City, MO.
29 
Department of Pediatrics, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, 
El Paso, TX.
30Division of Pediatric Critical Care, University of Florida, Jacksonville, FL.
31Bon Secours St. Mary’s Hospital, Glen Allen, VA.
32 
Division of Pediatric Critical Care, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY.
33 
Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, WA.
34 
Division of Critical Care, Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University 
School of Medicine, Palo Alto, CA.
35 
Pediatric Critical Care Medicine, The Children’s Hospital at Montefiore, 
The Pediatric Hospital for Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY.
36 
Department of Pediatrics, University of British Columbia, UBC & BC 
Children’s Hospital Professor in Critical Care—Global Child Health, Van-
couver, BC, Canada.
37 
Department of Pediatrics, Naval Medical Center San Diego and Univer-
sity of California San Diego School of Medicine, San Diego, CA.
38 
Department of Pediatrics and Pediatric Critical Care Medicine, The Val-
ley Hospital, Ridgewood, NJ.
39Cardiothoracic ICU, National University Hospital, Singapore.
40Paediatric ICU, The Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia.
41 
Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
42Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
43 
Department of Pediatrics, Medical College of Georgia at Augusta Uni-
versity, Augusta, GA.
44 
Division of Critical Care Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University 
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
45 
Department of Pharmacy Practice, Loma Linda University School of 
Pharmacy, Loma Linda, CA.
46 
Division of Emergency Medicine, Ann and Robert Lurie Children’s Hos-
pital of Chicago, Feinberg School of Medicine at Northwestern Univer-
sity, Chicago, IL.
47 
UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health and Paediatric Inten-
sive Care Unit, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, NHS Trust, 
London, United Kingdom.
48 
Pediatric Intensive Care and Emergency Services, Apollo Children’s 
Hospital, Chennai, India.
49 
Division of Pediatric Critical Care, Department of Pediatrics, Duke Uni-
versity School of Nursing and School of Medicine, Durham, NC.
50 
Pediatrics School of Medicine, Austral University, Pcia de Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
51 
Departments of Pediatrics and Emergency Medicine, University of Colo-
rado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO.
52Critical Care and Transport, Nemours Children’s Hospital, Orlando, FL.
53 
Department of Pediatrics, Critical Care Medicine, Albert Einstein  
College 
of Medicine, Bronx, NY.
54 
Division of Pediatric Critical Care Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA.
55 
Departments of Pediatrics & Anesthesiology, Sinai Hospital/NAPA, 
 
Baltimore, MD.
56 
Department of Pediatrics, University of Maryland Medical School, 
 
Baltimore, MD.
Group leaders and subgroups are identified in Appendix 1.
Supplemental digital content is available for this article. Direct URL  
citations 
appear in the printed text and are provided in the HTML and PDF versions 
of this article on the journal’s website (http://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal).
The American College of Critical Care Medicine (ACCM), which honors 
individuals for their achievements and contributions to multidisciplinary crit-
ical care medicine, is the consultative body of the Society of Critical Care 
Medicine (SCCM) that possesses recognized expertise in the practice of 
critical care. The College has developed administrative guidelines and clini-
cal practice parameters for the critical care practitioner. New guidelines 
and practice parameters are continually developed, and current ones are 
systematically reviewed and revised. 
Dr. Davis served as an expert witness regarding a patient who herniated post 
operatively. Dr. Aneja received funding from UpToDate royalties. Dr. Relvas 
participates in AAP PrepICU (editorial board member). Dr. Williams partici-
pates in American Academy of Pediatrics (guidelines committee work). Dr. Yeh 
participates in American Academy of Pediatrics (guidelines committee work). 
Dr. Brierley received funding from Astellas Pharmaceuticals Speakers Bureau 
(regarding anti-fungals in the ICU). He participates as a member in the Ameri-
can Academy of Pediatrics, Academic Pediatric Association, and Society for 
Academic Emergency Medicine. Dr. de Caen participates in the Royal College 
of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada and the American Heart Association. 
Dr. Cheifetz received funding from Philips (medical advisor) and Ikaria (medi-
cal advisor). He participates in various volunteer activities for AARC and ATS, 
and he has served as an expert witness for testimony for medical malprac-
tice cases. Dr. Choong participates as an Executive Member of the Canadian 
Critical Care Trials Group, and is an employee of the Hamilton Health Sci-
ences. Dr. Conway participates as Chair of Section on Pediatric CCM for 
the AAP. He has served as an expert witness for pediatric CCM/ED defense 
cases. Dr. Cornwell received grant funding from the Coulter Foundation. He 
participates in the Society of Pediatric Research. Dr. Doctor received fund-
ing from consulting for Novartis, Galera Pharmaceuticals, and Terumo BCT. 
Dr. Fortenberry participates in American Academy of Pediatrics, Extracorpo-
real Life Support Organization. He served as an expert witness for review of 
PICU cases and testimony in support of physicians providing PICU care. Dr. 
Greenwald served as an expert witness for testimony regarding course of ill-
ness and risk of mortality. Dr. Hall serves as the Editor for the ATS Online 
Journal Club. Dr. Irazuzta participates in the National Institutes of Health. Dr. 
van der Jagt received grant funding from University of Rochester (employee/
faculty). She participates in NYS Emergency Medical Services for Children 
Advisory Committee (Vice-Chair); University of Rochester School of Medicine 
(faculty); AHA Pediatric Advanced Life Support Advanced Life Support Writ-
ing Group (member); IPSO National Expert Advisory Committee (member); 
FAAP, Sr. Fellow Society of Hospital Medicine; and Fellow College of Pediatri-
cians. Dr. Jeffries participates in AAP, Ped Cardiac Intensive Care Society, and 
ACC. Dr. Kache participates on the Global health Educators Committee in 
Association of Pediatric Program Directors, and on the Global Health Educa-
tion Sub-Comittee in Consortium of Universities for Global Health. Dr. Kon 
participates as the President-elect for the American Society for Bioethics and 
Humanities. He disclosed he is a government employee. He has served as 
an expert witness for peds critical care and bioethics. Dr. MacLaren received 
funding from UpToDate (royalties). He participates in the Asia-pacific Chapter 
of ELSO (Chair) and the Pediatric Cardiac Intensive Care Society (Vice Presi-
dent). Dr. Maul received funding from consulting for Mallinkrodt, Thoratec, and 
Alung. He received grant funding. He participates in ASAIO (editor) and ELSO 
(committee member). Dr. Odetola participates as a member of the Sub-Board 
of Critical Care Medicine, American Board of Pediatrics. Dr. Parbuoni partici-
pates in the American Society of Health-System Pharmacists and California 
Society of Health-System Pharmacists. Dr. Reuter-Rice received funding from 
J & B Learning (textbook royalties). She received grant funding from RWJK. 
She participates in PNCB-IPN, AAN, and ISONG. Dr. Schnitzler participates 
in Sociedad Argentina de Terapia Intensiva, Sociedad Argentina de Calidad en 
Asistencia Sanitaria, and Instituto Técnico de Acreditación de Establecimien-
tos Sanitarios. Dr. Torres received funding from Abbott Point of Care (speaker). 
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
1063
He served as an expert witness for the defense paid for his time. Dr. Weiss 
received funding from honoraria to grand rounds lectures from ThermoFisher 
Scientific (but content of lecture was solely his own responsibility). He partici-
pates in AAP and Shock Society. The remaining authors have disclosed that 
they do not have any potential conflicts of interest.
For information regarding this article, E-mail: carcilloja@ccm.upmc.edu
Objectives: The American College of Critical Care Medicine provided 
2002 and 2007 guidelines for hemodynamic support of newborn and 
pediatric septic shock. Provide the 2014 update of the 2007 Ameri-
can College of Critical Care Medicine “Clinical Guidelines for Hemo-
dynamic Support of Neonates and Children with Septic Shock.
”
Design: Society of Critical Care Medicine members were identi-
fied from general solicitation at Society of Critical Care Medicine 
Educational and Scientific Symposia (2006–2014). The PubMed/
Medline/Embase literature (2006–14) was searched by the Soci-
ety of Critical Care Medicine librarian using the keywords: sep-
sis, septicemia, septic shock, endotoxemia, persistent pulmonary 
hypertension, nitric oxide, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, 
and American College of Critical Care Medicine guidelines in the 
newborn and pediatric age groups.
Measurements and Main Results: The 2002 and 2007 guidelines 
were widely disseminated, translated into Spanish and Portuguese, 
and incorporated into Society of Critical Care Medicine and Ameri-
can Heart Association/Pediatric Advanced Life Support sanc-
tioned recommendations. The review of new literature highlights 
two tertiary pediatric centers that implemented quality improvement 
initiatives to improve early septic shock recognition and first-hour 
compliance to these guidelines. Improved compliance reduced 
hospital mortality from 4% to 2%. Analysis of Global Sepsis Initia-
tive data in resource rich developed and developing nations further 
showed improved hospital mortality with compliance to first-hour 
and stabilization guideline recommendations.
Conclusions: The major new recommendation in the 2014 update 
is consideration of institution—specific use of 1) a “recognition 
bundle” containing a trigger tool for rapid identification of patients 
with septic shock, 2) a “resuscitation and stabilization bundle” to 
help adherence to best practice principles, and 3) a “performance 
bundle” to identify and overcome perceived barriers to the pursuit 
of best practice principles. (Crit Care Med 2017; 45:1061–1093)
Key Words: hemodynamics; newborn; pediatric; septic shock
I
n 1998, the Institute of Medicine called for establishment of 
best practice guidelines across medicine. In 2002 and 2007, 
the American College of Critical Care Medicine (ACCM) 
Clinical Practice Parameters for Hemodynamic Support of 
Pediatric and Neonatal Shock (1, 2) were published in part to 
replicate the reported outcomes associated with implementa-
tion of “best clinical practices” (mortality rates of 0–5% in pre-
viously healthy [3–5] and 10% in chronically ill children with 
septic shock [5]). Of note, neonatal and pediatric severe sepsis 
outcomes were already improving prior to 2002 with the advent 
of neonatal and pediatric intensive care (reduction in mortality 
from 97% to 9%) (6–9) and were markedly better than in adults 
(9% compared with 28% mortality) (8). There are two purposes 
served by this 2014 update of these 2002/2007 Clinical Practice 
Parameters. First, this 2014 update examines and grades new 
studies performed to test the utility and efficacy of the 2007 rec-
ommendations. Second, this 2014 update examines and grades 
relevant new treatment and outcome studies to determine to 
what degree, if any, the 2007 guidelines should be modified.
METHODS
Clinical investigators and clinicians affiliated with the Society 
of Critical Care Medicine (SCCM) who had special interest in 
hemodynamic support of pediatric patients with sepsis volun-
teered to be members of the update task force. Subcommittees 
were formed to review the literature and make recommenda-
tions using Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Develop-
ment and Evaluation methodology. A strong recommendation 
received the “number” grade 1 and a weak recommendation 
received the number grade 2. The strength of the literature used 
to support these number recommendations was given “letter” 
grades with A equals to multiple randomized controlled tri-
als and at least one meta-analysis, B equals to one randomized 
controlled trial, C equals to cohort, case control studies, and D 
equals to expert opinion and case reports. There is common 
discordance between strength of recommendation and strength 
of literature providing impetus to study most all recommenda-
tions made. The recommendations are largely based on opinion 
regarding the systematic review by a number of subcommit-
tees, with editorial decision regarding content done initially by 
group leaders, and ultimately by the chairperson.
The PubMed/Medline/Embase literature (2006–2014) was 
searched by the SCCM librarian using the keywords: sepsis, sep-
ticemia, septic shock, endotoxemia, persistent pulmonary hyper-
tension, nitric oxide, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation 
(ECMO), and ACCM guidelines in the newborn and pediatric 
age groups who identified 3,382 potential references. The search 
was refined by each of the subgroup leaders to identify studies 
specifically relevant to children and newborns (n = 143; see sup-
plement for CONSORT, Supplemental Digital Content 1, http://
links.lww.com/CCM/C598). The group members were asked to 
change the recommendations from 2007 in the new 2014 update 
only if there was new pediatric evidence since 2007 that warranted 
such change. The committee members graded all old and new 
recommendations (see above) because different systems had been 
used in the prior 2002 or 2007 documents. Due to the diverse, 
multidisciplinary, international composition of the SCCM mem-
bership, and the document’s task force committee members, this 
update continues to follow the lead of the previous guidelines 
making recommendations on hemodynamic support medica-
tions which may or may not be approved by the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration, but which are approved and used in other 
nations, such as levosimendan, terlipressin, and enoximone.
RESULTS
Evolution of the 2002, 2007, and 2014 Guidelines
Many studies have tested the observations and recommendations 
of the 2002 and 2007 guidelines (1, 2). Studies in the resource rich 
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Davis et al
1064 
www.ccmjournal.org 
June 2017 • Volume 45 • Number 6
setting, where mechanical ventilators, IV infusion pumps, ino-
trope medications, and intensive care monitoring are available, 
have uniformly favored use of the ACCM/Pediatric Advanced Life 
Support (PALS) guidelines. Han et al (10) showed an association 
between early use of practice consistent with the 2002 guidelines 
in the community hospital and improved outcomes in new-
borns and children (mortality rate 8% vs 38%; number needed 
to treat = 3.3). Every hour that went by without restoration of 
normal blood pressure for age and capillary refill less than 3 sec-
onds was associated with a two-fold increase in adjusted mortality 
odds ratio (10). Ninis et al (11) similarly reported an association 
between delay in inotrope resuscitation and a 22.6-fold increased 
adjusted mortality odds ratio in meningococcal septic shock 
which led to the new guideline recommendation in 2007 that 
inotropes be started through peripheral infusion in children with 
fluid-refractory septic shock until central access is attained. Ven-
tura et al (12) tested this 2007 recommendation in a randomized 
trial and found that use of peripheral adrenaline infusion reduced 
mortality to 7% compared with 20% with use of peripheral dopa-
mine infusion until central access was attained. de Oliveira et al 
(13) reported in a randomized trial that use of the 2002 guidelines 
with continuous central venous oxygen saturation (Scvo2) moni-
toring and therapy directed to maintenance of Scvo2 greater than 
70%, reduced mortality from 39% to 12% (NNT = 3.6) compared 
with therapy directed only to blood pressure and capillary refill. 
Sankar et al (14) corroborated this finding in a cohort study in 
a population of Indian children showing that directing therapy 
to Scvo2 was associated with improved outcome with a number 
needed to treat equals to five. In a before and after study, Karapi-
nar et al (15) reported that implementation of the 2002 guidelines 
in a U.S. tertiary center achieved best practice outcome with a 
fluid-refractory shock 28-day mortality of 3% and hospital mor-
tality of 6% (3% in previously healthy children; 9% in chronically 
ill children). This outcome matched the “best practice outcomes” 
targeted by the 2002 guidelines (3–5). Similar to the experience 
of St. Mary’s Hospital before 2002 (4), Sophia Children’s Hospi-
tal in Rotterdam also reported a reduction in mortality rate from 
purpura and severe sepsis from 20% to 1% after implementation 
of 2002 guideline-based therapy in the referral center, transport 
system, and tertiary care settings (16). Both of these centers also 
used high flux continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) and 
fresh frozen plasma infusion directed to the goal of normal inter-
national normalized ratio (prothrombin time [PT]).
In contrast, the findings have been mixed in the “resource 
poor setting” where there is not access to mechanical ventila-
tors, IV infusion pumps, inotrope medications, and intensive 
care monitoring. Wills et al (17) demonstrated near 100% sur-
vival when fluid resuscitation was provided to children with 
dengue shock in the first hour. In contrast, Maitland et al (18) 
(NEJM, 2011) found fluid boluses were harmful compared 
with maintenance IV fluid infusion and blood transfusion in 
severe malaria endemic sub-Saharan Africa. The Maitland study 
included a large population of children with severe malaria and 
anemia, and excluded cases with gastroenteritis or hypovolemia, 
whereas the Wills study only included a population of children 
with dengue shock, with capillary leak, hemoconcentration, and 
dehydration with gastroenteritis and hypovolemia. Importantly, 
neither of these studies formally tested fluid bolus use as recom-
mended in the 2002 and 2007 ACCM guidelines because boluses 
were given without attention to the presence of rales and hepa-
tomegaly in the patients, and without attention to electrolyte 
balance, or subsequent fluid removal as needed.
The 2002 and 2007 ACCM guidelines specifically recom-
mend against fluid boluses when rales or hepatomegaly are 
present, instead recommend inotropic support for these 
patients (1, 2). The basic tenet of fluid resuscitation proposed 
in the ACCM guidelines is that “some do” and “some do 
not” require fluid resuscitation. Hypovolemic shock patients 
require fluid boluses, whereas euvolemic and hypervolemic 
patients do not. Severely anemic patients require blood trans-
fusion, severely malnourished children require slow feeding, 
and patients with congestive heart failure or fluid overload 
require inotropes and diuretics, not fluid boluses.
There is general consensus among the committee members 
that these studies indirectly and directly support the utility and 
efficacy of implementation of the time-sensitive, goal-directed 
recommendations of the 2002 and 2007 ACCM/PALS guidelines 
in the “resource rich” setting. In this regard, since 2007 there has 
been a major effort in the United States to test the first-hour rec-
ommendations in pediatric academic centers in the American 
Academy of Pediatrics collaborative Septic Shock consortium 
which is dedicated to quality improvement in septic shock rec-
ognition and treatment. There have been four studies conducted 
in tertiary pediatric emergency departments that have examined 
adherence to ACCM/PALS guidelines for sepsis resuscitation 
in the first hour (19–22). Together, these studies demonstrated 
incomplete adherence to recommended goals for administration 
of IV fluids, antibiotics, and vasoactive agents. Subsequent qual-
ity-directed efforts from these studies showed improvement in 
both process metrics (e.g., decreased time to administration of IV 
fluids, antibiotics, and peripheral vasoactive agents) (19–22) and 
outcome metrics, including hospital and PICU length of stay and 
mortality (20–22). Importantly, all quality improvement studies 
were predicated on rapid identification of patients with suspected 
septic shock to trigger rapid clinician evaluation and implemen-
tation of appropriate resuscitation efforts. Multiple elements 
have been incorporated into trigger tools with success by several 
institutions (23, 24); however, there has been notable variation in 
the algorithms used at each institution, and none have sufficient 
evidence to fully endorse as a specific tool. Given the complex-
ity of resource allocation and implementation, it seems reason-
able that each institution could locally develop their trigger tool, 
whereas further studies refine the derivation and validation of an 
optimally sensitive and specific sepsis trigger tool (24).
From the best practice model standpoint, Paul et al (22) 
implemented a hospital-wide quality improvement initiative to 
improve compliance with all five elements of the ACCM/PALS 
guidelines first-hour recommendations: 1) recognition, 2) 
establishing IV access, 3) starting IV fluids and resuscitation as 
needed, 4) administering antibiotics, and 5) starting vasoactive 
agents if needed. Achievement of 100% compliance required a 
number of human interaction interventions including use of 
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
1065
time clocks set to have time going from 0 to 60 minutes rather 
than from 60 to 0 minutes that resulted in an increase in num-
ber of cases between death occurrences (p < 0.05) with an over-
all reduction in hospital mortality from 4.0% to 1.7%.
Han et al (25) analyzed the international Global Sepsis 
Initiative database which included children from resource 
rich settings in Europe, North America, and South America 
in order to derive “three-element” bundles associated with 
improved outcomes. The first-hour/emergency department 
three-element bundle included 1) reversal of shock defined 
by normal blood pressure and capillary refill less than 3 sec-
onds, 2) provision of antibiotics, and 3) provision of D10 and 
sodium containing IV fluid infusion. The stabilization/PICU 
three-element bundle included 1) reversal of shock defined 
by maintaining normal mean arterial pressure (MAP)-central 
venous pressure (CVP) for age and Scvo2 greater than 70%, 
2) timely provision of the appropriate sensitive antibiotic and 
source control, and 3) maintenance of effective tidal volumes 
between 6 and 8 mL/kg in children mechanically ventilated 
with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Reversal of 
shock was associated with use of the 2007 ACCM/PALS guide-
lines in both the resuscitation and stabilization bundles (2).
Major New Recommendations in the 2014 Update
Due to the success of the 2002 and 2007 guidelines (1, 2), the 
2014 update compilation and discussion of the new literature 
were directed to the question of what changes, if any, should 
be implemented in the update. The members of the commit-
tee were asked whether there are clinical practices which the 
“best outcome practices” are using in 2014 that are not recom-
mended in the 2002 and 2007 guidelines and should be recom-
mended in the 2014 guidelines? “The changes recommended 
were few. Most importantly, there was no change in emphasis 
between the 2002 guidelines and the 2014 update. The con-
tinued emphasis is directed to 1) first-hour fluid resuscitation 
and inotrope therapy directed to goals of threshold heart rates, 
normal blood pressure, and capillary refill less than or equal 
to 2 seconds with specific evaluation after each bolus for signs 
of fluid overload, as well as first-hour antibiotic administration 
and 2) subsequent ICU hemodynamic support directed to goals 
of Scvo2 greater than 70% and cardiac index (CI) 3.3–6.0 L/min/
m2 with appropriate antibiotic coverage and source control.”
The major new recommendation in the 2014 update is that 
hemodynamic support of septic shock now be addressed at the 
institutional level rather than only at the practitioner level with 
well-planned coordination between the family, community, pre-
hospital, emergency department, hospital, and ICU settings. The 
new guidelines recommend that each institution implements their 
own adopted or home-grown bundles that include the following:
1) Recognition bundle containing a trigger tool for rapid 
identification of patients with suspected septic shock at that 
institution,
2) Resuscitation and stabilization bundle to drive adherence to 
consensus best practice at that institution, and
3) Performance bundle to monitor, improve, and sustain 
adherence to that best practice.
The new 2014 guidelines provide examples of each bundle 
(Fig. 1) for consideration and review by each hospital’s expert 
committee.
LITERATURE AND BEST PRACTICE REVIEW
Developmental Differences in the Hemodynamic 
Response to Sepsis in Newborns, Children, and 
Adults
The predominant cause of mortality in adult septic shock is 
vasomotor paralysis (26). Adults have myocardial dysfunction 
manifested as a decreased ejection fraction; however, cardiac 
output (CO) is usually maintained or increased by two mecha-
nisms: tachycardia and ventricular dilation. Adults who do 
not develop this adaptive process to maintain CO have a poor 
prognosis (27, 28). “Pediatric septic shock” is typically associ-
ated with severe hypovolemia, and children frequently respond 
well to aggressive volume resuscitation; however, the hemody-
namic response of fluid resuscitated children seems diverse 
compared with adults. Contrary to the adult experience, low 
CO, not low systemic vascular resistance (SVR), is associated 
with mortality in pediatric septic shock (29–40). Attainment 
of the therapeutic goal of CI 3.3–6.0 L/min/m2 may result in 
improved survival (30, 38). Also contrary to adults, a reduction 
in oxygen delivery rather than a defect in oxygen extraction is 
the major determinant of oxygen consumption (V
o2) in chil-
dren (31). Attainment of the therapeutic goal of V
o2 greater 
Figure 1. Examples of recognition, resuscitation, stabilization, and 
performance bundles.
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Davis et al
1066 
www.ccmjournal.org 
June 2017 • Volume 45 • Number 6
than 200 mL/min/m2 may also be associated with improved 
outcome (30).
It was not until 1998 that investigators reported patient out-
come when aggressive volume resuscitation (60 mL/kg fluid 
in the first hour) and goal-directed therapies (goal = CI, 3.3–
6.0 L/min/m2 and normal pulmonary artery occlusion pres-
sure [PAOP]) were applied to children with septic shock (38). 
Ceneviva et al (38) reported 50 children with fluid-refractory 
(≥ 60 mL/kg in the first hour), dopamine-resistant shock. The 
majority (58%) showed a low CO/high SVR state, and 22% 
had low CO and low vascular resistance. Hemodynamic states 
frequently progressed and changed over the first 48 hours. 
Persistent shock occurred in 33% of the patients. There was 
a significant decrease in cardiac function over time, requiring 
addition of inotropes and vasodilators. Although decreasing 
cardiac function accounted for the majority of patients with 
persistent shock, some showed a complete change from a low 
output state to a high output/low SVR state (41–44). Inotropes, 
vasopressors, and vasodilators were directed to maintain nor-
mal CI and SVR in the patients. Mortality from fluid-refrac-
tory, dopamine-resistant septic shock in this study (18%) was 
markedly reduced compared with mortality in the 1985 study 
(58%) (30), in which aggressive fluid resuscitation could not be 
accomplished in part because intraosseous vascular access was 
not yet commonly used and attainment of intravascular access 
in the resuscitation bay was difficult. More recently investi-
gators in the United Kingdom confirmed these observations 
using Doppler ultrasound to measure CO (39, 40). They found 
that previously healthy children with community-acquired 
sepsis often had a low CO with a higher mortality rate, whereas 
CO was high and mortality rate was low in septic shock related 
to catheter-associated blood stream infections (39).
“Neonatal septic shock” can be complicated by the physi-
ologic transition from fetal to neonatal circulation. In utero, 
85% of fetal circulation bypasses the lungs through the patent 
ductus arteriosus (PDA) and foramen ovale. This flow pattern 
is maintained by supra systemic pulmonary vascular resistance 
in the prenatal period. At birth, inhalation of oxygen triggers a 
cascade of biochemical events that ultimately result in reduc-
tion in pulmonary vascular resistance and artery pressure 
and transition from fetal to neonatal circulation with blood 
flow now being directed through the pulmonary circulation. 
Closure of the PDA and foramen ovale (that can occur much 
later) complete this transition. Pulmonary vascular resistance 
and artery pressures can remain elevated and the ductus arte-
riosus can remain open for the first 6 weeks of life, whereas 
the foramen ovale may remain probe patent for years. Sepsis-
induced acidosis and hypoxia can increase pulmonary vascu-
lar resistance and artery pressure and maintain patency of the 
ductus arteriosus, resulting in persistent pulmonary hyperten-
sion of the newborn (PPHN) and persistent fetal circulation. 
Neonatal septic shock with PPHN is associated with increased 
right ventricle work. Despite in utero conditioning, the thick-
ened right ventricle may fail in the presence of systemic pul-
monary artery pressures. Decompensated right ventricular 
failure can be clinically manifested by tricuspid regurgitation 
and hepatomegaly. Newborn animal models of Group B strep-
tococcal and endotoxin shock have also documented reduced 
CO, and increased pulmonary, mesenteric, and SVR (45–48). 
Therapies directed at reversal of right ventricle failure, through 
reduction of pulmonary artery pressures, are commonly 
needed in neonates with fluid-refractory shock and PPHN.
The hemodynamic response in premature, very low birth 
weight (VLBW) infants with septic shock (< 32-wk gestation, < 
1,000 gm) is least understood. Most hemodynamic information 
is derived only from echocardiographic evaluation, and there 
are few septic shock studies in this population. Neonatology 
investigators often fold septic shock patients into “respiratory 
distress syndrome” and “shock” studies rather than conduct 
septic shock studies alone. Hence, the available clinical evi-
dence on the hemodynamic response in premature infants for 
the most part is in babies with respiratory distress syndrome or 
shock of undescribed etiology. In the first 24 hours after birth 
during the “transitional phase,” the neonatal heart must rap-
idly adjust to a high vascular resistance state compared with the 
low resistance placenta. CO and blood pressure may decrease 
when vascular resistance is increased (49). However, the litera-
ture indicates that premature infants with shock can respond to 
volume and inotropic therapies with improvements in stroke 
volume (SV), contractility, and blood pressure (50–63).
Several other developmental considerations influence shock 
therapy in the premature infant. Relative initial deficiencies in 
the thyroid and parathyroid hormone axes have been reported 
and can result in the need for thyroid hormone and/or calcium 
replacement (64, 65). Hydrocortisone has been examined in 
this population as well. Since 2002, randomized controlled tri-
als showed that prophylactic use of hydrocortisone on day 1 of 
life reduced the proportion of patients with hypotension in this 
population (66), and a 7-day course of hydrocortisone reduced 
the need for inotropes in VLBW infants with septic shock (67–
69). Immature mechanisms of thermogenesis require atten-
tion to external warming. Reduced glycogen stores and muscle 
mass for gluconeogenesis require attention to maintenance of 
serum glucose concentration. Standard practices in resuscita-
tion of preterm infants in septic shock employ a more graded 
approach to volume resuscitation and vasopressor therapy 
compared with resuscitation of term neonates and children. 
This more cautious approach is a response to anecdotal reports 
that preterm infants at risk for intraventricular hemorrhage (< 
30-wk gestation) can develop hemorrhage after rapid shifts in 
blood pressure; however, some now question whether long-
term neurologic outcomes are related to periventricular leu-
komalacia (a result of prolonged under perfusion) more than 
to intraventricular hemorrhage. Another complicating factor 
in VLBW infants is the persistence of the PDA. This can occur 
because immature muscle is less able to constrict. The major-
ity of infants with this condition are treated medically with 
indomethacin, or in some circumstances with surgical ligation. 
Rapid administration of fluid may further increase left to right 
shunting through the ductus with resultant pulmonary edema.
One single-center, randomized control trial reported 
improved outcome with use of daily 6-hour pentoxyfilline 
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
1067
infusions in very premature infants with sepsis (70, 71). This 
compound is both a vasodilator and an anti-inflammatory 
agent. A Cochrane analysis agrees that this promising therapy 
deserves evaluation in the multicenter trial setting (72).
What Clinical Signs and Hemodynamic Variables 
Can Be Used to Direct Treatment of Newborn and 
Pediatric Shock?
Shock can be defined by clinical variables, hemodynamic vari-
ables, oxygen utilization variables, and/or cellular variables. 
However, after review of the literature, the committee contin-
ues to choose to define septic shock by clinical, hemodynamic, 
and oxygen utilization variables only.
Ideally, septic shock should be diagnosed by clinical signs, 
which include hypothermia or hyperthermia, altered mental 
status, and peripheral vasodilation (warm shock) or vaso-
constriction with capillary refill greater than 2 seconds (cold 
shock) before hypotension occurs. Threshold heart rates 
(HRs) associated with increased mortality in critically ill (not 
necessarily septic) infants are a HR less than 90 or greater than 
160 beats/min, and in children are a HR less than 70 or greater 
than 150 beats/min (73). Emergency department therapies 
should be directed toward restoring normal mental status, 
threshold HRs, peripheral perfusion (capillary refill < 3 s), pal-
pable distal pulses, and blood pressure for age (10). Carcillo 
et al (74) reported that specific hemodynamic abnormalities 
in the emergency department were associated with progressive 
increase in mortality (%): eucardia (1%) less than tachycardia/
bradycardia (3%) less than hypotension with capillary refill 
less than 3 seconds (5%) less than normotension with capil-
lary refill longer than 3 seconds (7%) less than hypotension 
with capillary refill longer than 3 seconds (33%). Reversal of 
these hemodynamic abnormalities using ACCM/PALS rec-
ommended therapy was associated with a 40% reduction in 
mortality odds ratio regardless of the stage of hemodynamic 
abnormality at the time of presentation (74).
In both neonates and children, shock should be further 
evaluated and resuscitation treatment guided by hemody-
namic variables including perfusion pressure (MAP – CVP) 
and CO. Invasive blood pressure monitoring provides more 
accurate reflection of vasomotor state. Shock has historically 
been divided into warm and cold based on clinical examina-
tion, inferring vasodilation or vasoconstriction based on warm 
and cold phenotypes, respectively. This categorization has been 
demonstrated to be fraught with errors. Indeed, as many as 
66% of children judged by experienced clinicians to be in “cold 
shock” were noted to be vasodilated on invasive monitoring 
(75). Blood flow (Q) varies directly with perfusion pressure 
(ΔP) and inversely with resistance (R). This is mathematically 
represented by Q = ΔP/R. For the systemic circulation, this 
is represented by CO = MAP – CVP/SVR. This relationship 
is important for organ perfusion. In the kidney, for example, 
renal blood flow = mean renal arterial pressure (mRAP) – 
mean renal venous pressure/renal vascular resistance. Some 
organs (including the kidney and brain) have vasomotor auto-
regulation, which maintains blood flow in low blood pressure 
(MAP or RAP) states; however, at some critical point, perfu-
sion pressure is reduced below the ability of the organ to main-
tain blood flow.
Therefore, the goal of shock treatment is to maintain perfu-
sion pressure above the critical point below which blood flow 
cannot be effectively maintained in individual organs. Kumar 
et al (76) demonstrated in children with severe CNS infections 
and sepsis that therapies targeted to preservation of a minimum 
cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) rather than to intracranial 
pressure (ICP) reduced mortality from 38.2% in the ICP con-
trol group to 18.2% in the CPP preservation group. The mean 
blood pressure in the CPP targeted group was the 90th percen-
tile for age supporting targeting a mean blood pressure greater 
than 50th percentile for age (76). The kidney receives the sec-
ond highest blood flow relative to its mass of any organ in the 
body, and measurement of urine output (with the exception of 
patients with hyperosmolar states such as hyperglycemia which 
leads to osmotic diuresis) and creatinine clearance can be used 
as an indicator of adequate perfusion pressure. Maintenance of 
MAP with norepinephrine has been shown to improve urine 
output and creatinine clearance in hyperdynamic sepsis (77, 
78). Producing a supranormal MAP above this point is likely 
not of benefit (78) and may actually decrease CO by increasing 
afterload above the capacity of the myocardium to compensate.
In addition, reduction in perfusion pressure below the criti-
cal point necessary for adequate splanchnic organ perfusion 
can also occur in disease states with increased intra-abdominal 
pressure (IAP) such as bowel wall edema, ascites, or abdomi-
nal compartment syndrome. If this increased IAP is not com-
pensated for by an increase in MAP, then splanchnic perfusion 
pressure is decreased. Therapeutic reduction of IAP (measured 
by intrabladder pressure) using diuretics and/or peritoneal 
drainage for IAP greater than 12 mm Hg, and surgical decom-
pression for greater than 30 mm Hg, results in restoration of 
perfusion pressure and has been shown to improve renal func-
tion in children with burn shock (79).
Normative blood pressure values in the VLBW newborn 
have been reassessed. A MAP less than 30 mm Hg is associ-
ated with poor neurologic outcome and survival and is con-
sidered the absolute minimum tolerable blood pressure in the 
extremely premature infant (51). Since blood pressure does 
not necessarily reflect CO, it is recommended that normal CO 
and/or superior vena cava (SVC) flow, measured by Doppler 
echocardiography, be a primary goal as well (80–90).
Although perfusion pressure is used as a surrogate marker 
of adequate flow, the previous equation shows that organ 
blood flow (Q) correlates directly with perfusion pressure but 
indirectly with vascular resistance. If the ventricle is healthy, 
an elevation of SVR results in hypertension with mainte-
nance of CO. Conversely, if ventricular function is reduced, 
the presence of normal blood pressure with high vascular 
resistance means that CO is reduced. If the elevation in vas-
cular resistance is marked, the reduction in blood flow results 
in shock. A CI between 3.3 and 6.0 L/min/m2 is associated 
with best outcomes in septic shock patients (29, 39, 40) com-
pared to patients without septic shock for whom a CI above 
 
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Davis et al
1068 
www.ccmjournal.org 
June 2017 • Volume 45 • Number 6
2.0 L/min/m2 is sufficient (91). Attainment of this CO goal is 
often dependent on attaining threshold HRs. However, if the 
HR is too high, then there is not enough time to fill the cor-
onary arteries during diastole, and contractility and CO will 
decrease. Coronary perfusion may be further reduced when 
an unfavorable transmural coronary artery filling pressure is 
caused by low diastolic blood pressure (DBP) and/or high end-
diastolic ventricular pressure. In this scenario, efforts should 
be made to improve coronary perfusion pressure and reverse 
the tachycardia by giving volume if the end-diastolic volume 
is low, or an inotrope if contractility is low. Because CO = HR 
× SV, therapies directed to increasing SV will often reflexively 
reduce HR and improve CO. This will be evident in improve-
ment of the shock index (HR/systolic blood pressure [SBP]) 
(92), as well as CO. Children have limited HR reserve com-
pared with adults because they are already starting with high 
basal HRs. For example, if SV is reduced due to endotoxin-
induced cardiac dysfunction, an adult can compensate for the 
fall in SV by increasing HR two-fold from 70 to 140 beats/min, 
 
but a baby cannot increase from 140 to 280 beats/min. 
Although tachycardia is an important method for maintain-
ing CO in infants and children, the younger the patient, the 
more likely this response will be inadequate and the CO will 
fall. In this setting, the compensatory response to falling SV 
and contractility is to vasoconstrict to maintain blood pres-
sure. Increased vascular resistance is clinically identified by 
absent or weak distal pulses, cool extremities, prolonged capil-
lary refill, and narrow pulse pressure with relatively increased 
DBP. The effective approach for these children is vasodilator 
therapy with additional volume loading as vascular capacity is 
expanded. Vasodilator therapy reduces afterload and increases 
vascular capacitance. This shifts the venous compliance curve 
so that more volume can exist in the right and left ventricle at 
a lower pressure. In this setting, giving volume to restore fill-
ing pressure results in a net increase in end-diastolic volume 
 
(i.e., preload) and a higher CO at the same or lower filling pres-
sures. Effective use of this approach results in a decreased HR 
and improved perfusion.
At the other end of the spectrum, a threshold minimum 
HR is also needed because if the HR is too low, then CO will 
be too low (CO = HR × SV). This can be attained by using an 
inotrope that is also a chronotrope. In addition to threshold 
HRs, attention must also be paid to DBP. If the DBP-CVP is 
too low, then addition of an inotrope/vasopressor agent such 
as norepinephrine will be required to improve diastolic coro-
nary blood flow. Conversely, if wall stress is too high due to 
an increased end-diastolic ventricular pressure secondary to 
fluid overload, then a diuretic may be required to improve 
SV by moving leftward on the overfilled Starling function 
curve. The effectiveness of these maneuvers will similarly be 
evidenced by improvement in the HR/SBP shock index, CO, 
and SVR along with improved distal pulses, skin temperature, 
and capillary refill.
In addition, shock should be treated according to oxygen 
utilization measures. Measurement of CO and oxygen con-
sumption was proposed as being of benefit in patients with 
persistent shock because a CI between 3.3 and 6.0 L/min/m2  
and oxygen consumption greater than 200 mL/min/m2 is 
associated with improved survival (29). Low CO is associated 
with mortality in pediatric septic shock (29–38). In one study, 
children with fluid-refractory, dopamine-resistant shock were 
treated with goal-directed therapy (CI, > 3.3 and < 6 L/min/m2) 
and found to have improved outcomes compared with histori-
cal reports (38). Because low CO is associated with increased 
oxygen extraction (30), Scvo2 saturation can be used as an 
indirect indicator of whether CO is adequate to meet tis-
sue metabolic demand. If tissue oxygen delivery is adequate, 
then assuming a normal Sao2 of 100%, mixed venous satu-
ration is greater than 70%. Assuming a hemoglobin con-
centration of 10 g/dL and 100% arterial oxygen saturation, 
then a CI greater than 3.3 L/min/m2 with a normal V
o2 of 
150 mL/min/m2 (oxygen consumption = CI × [arterial oxygen 
content – venous oxygen content]) results in a mixed venous sat-
uration of greater than 70%: 150 mL/min/m2 = 3.3 L/min/m2 × 
 
(1.36 × 10 g/dL + Pao2 × 0.003) × 10 × (1–0.7). Since 2002, de 
Oliveira et al (13) performed a randomized controlled trial in 
children with septic shock showing a reduction in mortality 
from 39% to 12% when directing therapy to the goal of Scvo2 
saturation greater than 70% (NNT, 3.6) (93). Sankar et al (14) 
observed an association with reduced mortality from 54% to 
33.3% (NNT, 5) and lower organ dysfunction with a similar 
Scvo2 saturation goal of greater than 70%. In contrast, supra-
normal Scvo2 saturations greater than 80–85% that reflect a 
narrowed arteriovenous difference in oxygen (AVDo2) content 
may reflect either mitochondrial dysfunction, a high CO state, 
or overly aggressive resuscitation (94). In this narrow AVDo2 
shock state, practitioners should incorporate in their serial 
patient assessments other markers of adequate tissue oxygen 
delivery and utilization and organ perfusion such as serum lac-
tate and urine output.
In isolation, any one of the above clinical or hemodynamic 
parameters may underestimate or overestimate the true sever-
ity of illness, leading to either false reassurance and under-
resuscitation or overresuscitation. Multimodal monitoring 
refers to the use of multiple variables and their changes over 
time to better determine the underlying hemodynamic state. 
Shock index (HR/SBP) (92) and HR variability analysis (95) 
both leverage the added value of evaluating combinations of 
variables and their trends over time and have been suggested 
as being superior to any individual parameter alone for diag-
nosing septic shock and assessing response to therapy. By 
combining information from clinical signs, invasive arterial 
monitoring, and serial bedside echocardiograms, Ranjit et al 
(75) were able to titrate hemodynamic therapies more pre-
cisely and achieve equivalent mortality outcomes to PICUs 
using more invasive continuous CO monitoring.
Laboratory markers of cardiac function and oxygen 
delivery:utilization balance include troponin and lactate. Blood 
troponin concentrations correlate well with poor cardiac func-
tion and response to inotropic support in children with septic 
shock (96–98). Lactate is recommended in adult septic shock 
laboratory testing bundles for both diagnosis and subsequent 
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
1069
monitoring of therapeutic responses. However, most adult 
literature continues to define shock by hypotension and rec-
ommends using lactate concentration to identify shock in nor-
motensive adults. In pediatric studies, initial elevated lactate 
levels have correlated with increased mortality, and decreas-
ing lactate trends over time seem to correlate with recovery 
(99–103). However, each of these studies has been limited by 
small numbers. Lactate elevation for reasons other than cellu-
lar hypoxia further clouds the utility of using lactate to either 
predict outcome or track response to therapy (104). For now, 
the committee recommends early recognition of pediatric 
septic shock using clinical examination, not biochemical tests. 
Nevertheless, given the broad adoption of lactate in the adult 
guidelines and the suggestive data in small pediatric studies, 
lactate measurements if high on initial measurement may 
be useful to judge resolution of shock. Early elevated lactate 
(from a free flowing sample) may grab a clinician’s attention, 
when clinical signs are difficult to decipher—it is inexpensive, 
readily available, and over time performed well as an indicator 
of shock and its resolution. Because clinical signs of compen-
sated and decompensated shock are always present in children 
whereas high lactate is commonly not (12, 13), we stress early 
recognition with clinical signs, not lactate.
In VLBW infants, ultrasound-derived SVC blood flow mea-
surement was reportedly useful in assessing the effectiveness of 
shock therapies. The SVC flow approximates blood flow from 
the brain. A value greater than 40 mL/kg/min is associated with 
improved neurologic outcomes and survival (86–90). Scvo2 
saturation can be used in low birth weight infants but may be 
misleading in the presence of left to right shunting through 
the PDA.
Intravascular Access
Vascular access for fluid resuscitation and inotrope/vasopres-
sor infusion is more difficult to attain in newborns and chil-
dren compared with adults. Portable near-infrared imaging 
devices may assist with placement of peripheral vascular access 
 
(105, 106). To facilitate a rapid approach to vascular access in 
critically ill infants and children, the American Heart Associa-
tion and the American Academy of Pediatrics developed Neo-
natal Resuscitation Program (NRP) and PALS guidelines for 
emergency establishment of intravascular support (107–110). 
Essential age-specific differences include use of umbilical artery 
catheter (UAC) and umbilical venous catheter access in new-
borns and rapid use of intraosseous access in children (108–114). 
Ultrasound guidance facilitates placement of central catheters 
in children but is technologist dependent (113–119).
Fluid Therapy
Fluid resuscitation trials have been performed since 2002. Sev-
eral randomized trials showed that when children with mostly 
stage III (narrow pulse pressure/tachycardia) and some stage IV 
(hypotension) World Health Organization classification dengue 
shock received fluid resuscitation in the emergency department, 
there was near 100% survival regardless of the fluid composition 
used (3, 17, 120, 121). In a randomized controlled trial, Maitland 
et al (122) demonstrated a reduction in malaria septic shock 
mortality from 18% to 4% when albumin was used compared 
with crystalloid. In contrast, Maitland et al (18) subsequently 
demonstrated harm in the Fluid Expansion as Supportive Ther-
apy (FEAST) trial when fluid boluses were given rather than IV 
fluid at a maintenance rate and blood transfusion contradict-
ing this earlier study. The adult Saline versus Albumin Fluid 
Evaluation (SAFE) trial that compared crystalloid versus albu-
min fluid resuscitation reported a hypothesis generating trend 
toward improved outcome (p < 0.1) in septic shock patients who 
received albumin (123). Preference was given for exclusive use of 
colloid resuscitation in a clinical practice position article from 
a group who reported outstanding clinical results in resuscita-
tion of meningococcal septic shock (5% mortality) both using 
4% albumin exclusively (20 mL/kg boluses over 5–10 min) and 
intubating patients who required greater than 40 mL/kg (4). In 
an Indian trial of fluid resuscitation of pediatric septic shock, 
there was no difference in outcome with gelatin compared with 
crystalloid (124). In the initial clinical case series that popular-
ized the use of aggressive volume resuscitation for reversal of 
pediatric septic shock, a combination of crystalloid and colloid 
therapies was used (125). Several new investigations examined 
both the feasibility of the 2002 guideline recommendation 
of rapid fluid resuscitation and the need for fluid removal in 
patients with subsequent oliguria following fluid resuscitation. 
The 2002 guideline recommended rapid 20 mL/kg fluid boluses 
over 5 minutes followed by assessment for improved perfusion 
or fluid overload as evidenced by new onset rales, increased 
work of breathing and hypoxemia from pulmonary edema, hep-
atomegaly, or a diminishing MAP-CVP. Emergency medicine 
investigators reported that 20 mL/kg of crystalloid or colloid can 
be pushed over 5 minutes, or administered via a pressure bag 
over 5 minutes through a peripheral and/or central IV catheter 
(126). Ranjit et al (127) reported improved outcome from den-
gue and bacterial septic shock when they implemented a pro-
tocol of aggressive fluid resuscitation followed by fluid removal 
using diuretics and/or peritoneal dialysis if oliguria ensued. In 
this regard, Foland et al (128) similarly reported that patients 
with multiple organ failure who received CRRT when they were 
less than 10% fluid overloaded had better outcomes than those 
who were greater than 10% fluid overloaded. Similarly, two best 
outcome practices reported routine use of CRRT to prevent fluid 
overload while correcting prolonged INR with plasma infusion 
in patients with purpura and septic shock (4, 16).
The use of blood as a volume expander was examined in two 
small pediatric studies, but no recommendations were given by 
the investigators (129, 130). In the previously mentioned study 
by de Oliveira et al (13) reporting improved outcome with use 
of the 2002 ACCM guidelines and continuous Scvo2 satura-
tion monitoring, the treatment group received more blood 
transfusions directed to improvement of Scvo2 saturation to 
greater than 70% (40% vs 7%). Although the members of the 
task force use conservative goals for blood transfusion in stable 
critical illness (Hgb > 7 g/dL without cardiopulmonary com-
promise) (131), the observation that patients who have septic 
shock with a Scvo2 less than 70% and Hgb less than 10 g/dL had 
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Davis et al
1070 
www.ccmjournal.org 
June 2017 • Volume 45 • Number 6
better outcomes when transfused to a goal Hgb greater than 
10 g/dL supports a higher hemoglobin goal in this population.
Fluid infusion is best initiated with boluses of 20 mL/kg, 
titrated to assuring an adequate blood pressure and clinical 
monitors of CO including HR, quality of peripheral pulses, 
capillary refill, level of consciousness, and urine output. Initial 
volume resuscitation requirements may be 0 mL/kg if rales or 
hepatomegaly are present but commonly are 40–60 mL/kg 
(41, 125, 132–138). Patients who do not respond rapidly to ini-
tial fluid boluses, or those with insufficient physiologic reserve, 
should be considered for invasive hemodynamic monitoring. 
Monitoring filling pressures can be helpful to optimize preload 
and thus CO. Observation of little change in the CVP in response 
to a fluid bolus suggests that the venous capacitance system is 
not overfilled and that more fluid is indicated. Observation that 
an increasing CVP is met with reduced MAP-CVP suggests that 
too much fluid has been given. Large volumes of fluid for acute 
stabilization in children have not been shown to increase the 
incidence of the ARDS or cerebral edema (13, 138). Increased 
fluid requirements may be evident for several days secondary to 
loss of fluid from the intravascular compartment when there is 
profound capillary leak (17). Fluid choices include crystalloids 
(normal saline or lactated Ringers solution) and colloids (dex-
tran, gelatin, or 5% albumin) (139–144). Fresh frozen plasma 
may be infused to correct abnormal PT and partial thromboplas-
tin time values. Since oxygen delivery depends on hemoglobin 
concentration, hemoglobin can be maintained at a minimum of 
10 g/dL during the initial resuscitation phase with good results 
(13). Diuretics/peritoneal dialysis/CRRT is indicated for patients 
who develop signs and symptoms of fluid overload.
Sedation for Invasive Procedures or Intubation
Supplemental oxygen and optimal airway positioning should 
be provided at presentation for all patients with shock, consis-
tent with PALS guidelines. Although patients presenting with 
hypopnea or frank apnea may need immediate intubation, 
in most instances, there is time for fluid resuscitation, at least 
20 mL/kg of either isotonic crystalloid or 5% albumin, and 
starting a peripheral epinephrine infusion within the first hour 
of presentation. Children with persistent or worsening shock, 
as manifested by failure to approximate normal vital signs for 
age and inadequate perfusion, should be considered to be at 
high risk for deterioration and should receive ventilatory sup-
port. High-flow nasal cannula and other modes of noninvasive 
respiratory support can be evaluated in selected patients (145). 
Patients with shock of any etiology are particularly vulnerable 
to the hemodynamic effects of sedatives and analgesics, empha-
sizing the importance of prompt appropriate fluid resuscitation 
and inotrope infusion (peripheral or central) prior to airway 
instrumentation in spontaneously breathing patients.
Intubation for controlled ventilation plays an important role 
in the management of neonates and children with septic shock, 
and timing and should be thoughtfully considered. Sedation, 
analgesia and positive-pressure ventilation prior to adequate 
volume resuscitation (146-148), may cause profound drops in 
preload and precipitate severe hemodynamic instability during 
intubation. Also, severe diastolic and systolic ventricular dys-
function may predispose the child to pulmonary edema and 
rapid desaturation during intubation, providing rationale for 
considering peripheral epinephrine infusion before intuba-
tion. Mechanical ventilation can eliminate work of breathing 
and improve oxygenation and organ perfusion, all of which are 
typically compromised in the septic child (149–152).
Atropine increases the HR and protects against the deleteri-
ous effects of bradycardia, particularly in babies (153). Atropine 
does not cause cardiac dysrhythmias and is not contraindi-
cated in children exhibiting tachycardia. Ketamine remains 
an important agent for intubation of pediatric patients with 
shock (154, 155), given its pharmacologic effects of dissocia-
tion while maintaining or augmenting SVR. Side effects may 
be minimized by administering IV boluses over 30–60 seconds.
The use of ketamine with atropine pretreatment is con-
sidered to be the sedative/induction regimen which best pro-
motes cardiovascular integrity (155). The use of etomidate is 
generally discouraged at this time, given its known effects on 
adrenal function (156, 157), despite some reports suggesting 
no direct effect on patient mortality (158–160). Etomidate can 
be considered in the presence of profound shock if ketamine 
is unavailable. The role of hydrocortisone supplementation 
in this setting is unclear. It is possible that etomidate analogs 
currently in development may have a role in urgent pediatric 
airway management.
Other options to consider for intubation of neonates 
and children include the opioids fentanyl and remifentanil 
 
(161, 162). These agents should be used instead of morphine, 
when available, because they have fewer hemodynamic effects. 
Opioids such as fentanyl should be given in titrated aliquots of 
1–2 µg/kg, administered over 60 seconds. Although chest wall 
rigidity is usually associated with larger doses given as a bolus, 
this complication and altered hemodynamics can also occur 
with smaller doses. Benzodiazepines, if used, should be like-
wise carefully titrated to effect, using small doses.
Pentobarbital and other barbiturates are direct myocardial 
depressants and decrease SVR, commonly causing hemody-
namic instability. These drugs are also devoid of intrinsic anal-
gesic effects, making them unsuitable for tracheal intubation 
of patients with shock. Inhalational agents are not appropriate 
for isolated airway instrumentation in shock. Propofol com-
monly causes hypotension and should be avoided during intu-
bation or sedation in the presence of shock, particularly during 
transport and before admission to the ICU.
Neuromuscular blocking agents such as rocuronium, or 
succinylcholine (absent a contraindication), may facilitate 
intubation by qualified providers. Hypotension may occur 
even in children who have received appropriate volume resus-
citation and pharmacotherapy for intubation. It is advisable, 
therefore, to have additional isotonic crystalloid and vasoac-
tive infusions available for immediate use during or following 
the procedure. Additional vascular access should be obtained 
as soon as practical. Sedation and analgesia may be maintained 
in ventilated patients requiring transport using agents such 
as fentanyl and midazolam, supplemented by neuromuscular 
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
1071
blockade. Ketamine infusions may be used as well, but there is 
concern regarding neuroapoptosis following exposure to ket-
amine in infants (161, 162). Unplanned extubation may occur 
as the child recovers from shock. The endotracheal tube should 
be carefully secured once adequate placement is achieved. 
Appropriately titrated analgesia and sedation are essential for 
safe transport. Neuromuscular blockade and physical restraints 
may be appropriate under some circumstances, always in the 
presence of adequate analgesia and sedation.
Intravascular Catheters and Noninvasive or Minimally 
Invasive Monitoring
Minimal invasive monitoring is necessary in children with 
fluid-responsive shock; however, in children with fluid-refrac-
tory shock, physical signs of cold versus warm shock may be 
unreliable, and central venous access and arterial pressure 
monitoring is recommended. Intensivists have long used the 
ultrasound for central venous catheter placement in children, 
but its role is now expanding to direct resuscitation goals and 
therapeutic endpoints in shock resuscitation. Echocardiog-
raphy is considered an appropriate noninvasive tool to rule 
out the presence of pericardial effusion, evaluate myocardial 
contractility and intravascular volume. Ranjit et al (75) incor-
porated the use of echocardiography in their usual practice 
to categorize the hemodynamics in 48 patients with fluid-
refractory septic shock. Based on their findings on the echo-
cardiogram and invasive blood pressure monitoring, fluid and 
inotrope/vasopressor therapy was changed in almost 88% of 
the patients (75). Early placement of invasive arterial catheters 
helped in the identification and subsequent management of a 
cohort of patients who presented with cold shock but had wide 
pulse pressure with low diastolic pressure (75). Similarly, Bri-
erly et al (39) categorized the hemodynamic patterns of pedi-
atric septic shock with the use of Doppler ultrasonography 
and observed that the manifestation of hemodynamics was 
cause dependent, that is, CVC-associated sepsis presented with 
high CO and low SVR, whereas community-acquired infec-
tions sepsis presented with low CO. A CO greater than 3.3 less 
than 6.0 L/min/m2 is associated with improved survival and 
neurologic function. Other noninvasive monitors undergoing 
evaluation in newborns and children include percutaneous 
venous oxygen saturation, aortic ultrasound, perfusion index 
(pulse oximetry), near-infrared spectroscopy, sublingual Pco2, 
and sublingual microvascular orthogonal polarization spec-
troscopy scanning. All show promise; however, none has been 
tested in goal-directed therapy trials (163–166).
Maintenance of perfusion pressure (MAP – CVP), or 
(MAP – IAP) if the abdomen is tense secondary to bowel 
edema or ascitic fluid, is considered necessary for organ per-
fusion (79). Goal-directed therapy to achieve an Scvo2 satura-
tion greater than 70% is associated with improved outcome 
(13, 14). To gain accurate measures of Scvo2, the tip of the 
catheter must be at the superior vena cava-right atrium or 
inferior vena cava-right atrium junction (164). A pulmo-
nary artery catheter (PAC), pulse index contour CO (PiCCO) 
 
(165, 166), or femoral artery thermodilution catheter can be 
used to measure CO in those who remain in shock despite ther-
apies directed to clinical signs of perfusion, MAP-CVP, Scvo2, 
and echocardiographic analyses (165–172). The PAC measures 
the PAOP to help identify selective left ventricular dysfunction 
and can be used to determine the relative contribution of right 
and left ventricle work. A less invasive PiCCO catheter estimates 
global end-diastolic volume in the heart (both chambers) and 
extra vascular lung water and can be used to assess whether pre-
load is adequate. This measure of intravascular volume by global 
end-diastolic volume has been demonstrated in both children 
and adults to be more predictive than either CVP or PAOP for 
changes in CO associated with volume challenge.
Cardiovascular Drug Therapy
When considering the use of cardiovascular agents in the man-
agement of infants and children with septic shock, several impor-
tant points need to be emphasized. The first is that septic shock 
represents a dynamic process so that the agents selected and 
their infusion dose may need to be changed over time based on 
the need to maintain adequate organ perfusion. It is also impor-
tant to recognize that the vasoactive agents are characterized by 
varying effects on SVR and pulmonary vascular resistance (i.e., 
vasodilators or vasopressors), contractility (i.e., inotropy), HR 
(chronotropy), and lusotropy (ventricle relaxation). These phar-
macologic effects are determined by the pharmacokinetics of the 
agent and the pharmacodynamics of the patient’s response to 
the agent. In critically ill septic children, perfusion of the liver 
and kidney is often altered leading to changes in the pharma-
cokinetics of these drugs with higher concentrations observed 
than anticipated. Thus, the infusion doses quoted in many 
textbooks are approximations of starting rates and should be 
adjusted based on the patient’s response. “We recommend fre-
quent reevaluation of hemodynamic parameters when a patient 
requires the use of vasopressors, especially in relation to CO, 
SVR, and peripheral perfusion so as to choose the appropriate 
combination with inotropic or vasodilator drugs ± fluids.”
The latter is also determined by the pharmacodynamic 
response to the agent, which is commonly altered in septic 
patients. For example, patients with sepsis have a well-recog-
nized reduced response to α-adrenergic agonists that is medi-
ated by excess nitric oxide production and alterations in the 
α-adrenergic receptor system. Similarly, cardiac β-adrenergic 
responsiveness may be reduced by the effect of nitric oxide and 
other inflammatory cytokines.
Inotropes
Dopamine (5–9 µg/kg/min), dobutamine, or epinephrine 
(0.05–0.3 µg/kg/min) can be used as first-line inotropic sup-
port. Dobutamine may be used when there is a low CO state 
with adequate or increased SVR (38, 173–201). Dobutamine or 
mid-dosage dopamine can be used as the first line of inotropic 
support if supported by clinical and objective data (e.g., assess-
ment of contractility by echocardiogram) when one of the 
initial goals is to increase cardiac contractility in patients with 
normal blood pressure. However, children less than 12 months 
may be less responsive (195).
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Davis et al
1072 
www.ccmjournal.org 
June 2017 • Volume 45 • Number 6
Dobutamine- or dopamine-refractory low CO shock may 
be reversed with epinephrine infusion (12, 38, 173, 174, 176). 
Epinephrine is more commonly used in children than in 
adults. Some members of the committee recommended use 
of low-dose epinephrine as a first-line choice for cold hypo-
dynamic shock (12). It is clear that epinephrine has potent 
inotropic and chronotropic effects, but its effects on periph-
eral vascular resistance and the endocrine stress response may 
result in additional problems. At lower infusion doses (≤ 0.3 
µg/kg/min), epinephrine has greater β2-adrenergic effects in 
the peripheral vasculature with little α-adrenergic effect so 
that SVR falls, particularly in the skeletal musculature and 
skin. This may redirect blood flow away from the splanchnic 
circulation even though blood pressure and CO increases. 
This effect of epinephrine likely explains the observation that 
epinephrine transiently reduces gastric intramucosal pH in 
adults and animals with hyperdynamic sepsis (177), but there 
are no data available to evaluate whether gut injury does or 
does not occur with epinephrine use in children. Epinephrine 
stimulates gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis, and inhibits 
the action of insulin, leading to increased blood glucose con-
centrations. In addition, as part of the stimulation of gluco-
neogenesis, epinephrine increases the shuttle of lactate to liver 
as a substrate for glucose production (the Cori cycle). Thus, 
patients on epinephrine infusion have increased plasma lactate 
concentrations independent of changes in organ perfusion, 
making this parameter somewhat more difficult to interpret in 
children with septic shock.
Ideally, epinephrine should be administered by a secure 
central venous route, but in an emergency, it may be infused 
through a peripheral IV route or through an intraosseous nee-
dle while attaining central access (12). The AHA/PALS guide-
lines for children recommend the initial use of epinephrine by 
peripheral IV or intraosseous for CPR or post CPR shock, and 
by the subcutaneous or intramuscular route for anaphylaxis. 
Even though a common perception, there are no data clarify-
ing if the peripheral infiltration of epinephrine produces more 
local damage than observed with dopamine. The severity of 
local symptoms likely depends on the concentration of the 
vasoactive drug infusion and the duration of the peripheral 
infiltration before being discovered. If peripheral infiltration 
occurs with any catecholamine, its adverse effects may be 
antagonized by local infiltration with phentolamine, 1–5 mg 
diluted in 5 mL of normal saline.
Vasodilators
When pediatric patients are normotensive with a low CO and 
high SVR, initial treatment of fluid-refractory patients consists 
of the use of an inotropic agent such as epinephrine or dobu-
tamine that tends to lower SVR. In addition, a short-acting 
vasodilator may be added, such as sodium nitroprusside or 
nitroglycerin to recruit microcirculation (202–208). Orthog-
onal polarizing spectroscopy showed that addition of sys-
temic IV nitroglycerin to dopamine/norepinephrine infusion 
restored tongue microvascular blood flow during adult septic 
shock (208). Nitrovasodilators can be titrated to the desired 
effect, but use of nitroprusside is limited if there is reduced 
renal function secondary to the accumulation of sodium thio-
cyanate. Use of nitroglycerin may also have limited utility over 
time through the depletion of tissue thiols that are important 
for its vasodilating effect. Other vasodilators that have been 
used in children include prostacyclin, pentoxyfilline, dopex-
amine, and fenoldapam (209–214).
An alternative approach to improve cardiac contractility 
and lower SVR is based on the use of type III phosphodiester-
ase inhibitors (PDEIs) (206, 207, 215, 216). This class of agents, 
which includes milrinone and inamrinone (formerly amrinone, 
but the name was changed to avoid confusion with amioda-
rone), has a synergistic effect with β-adrenergic agonists because 
the latter agents stimulate intracellular cyclic adenylate mono 
phosphate (cAMP) production while the PDEIs increase intra-
cellular cAMP by blocking its hydrolysis. Since the PDEIs do not 
depend on a receptor mechanism, they maintain their action 
even when the β-adrenergic receptors are down-regulated or 
have reduced functional responsiveness. The main limitation of 
these agents is their need for normal renal function (for milri-
none clearance) and liver function (for inamrinone clearance). 
Inamrinone and milrinone are rarely used in adults with septic 
shock because catecholamine refractory low CO and high vascu-
lar resistance are uncommon; however, this hemodynamic state 
represents a major proportion of children with fluid-refractory, 
dopamine-resistant shock. Fluid boluses are likely to be required 
if inamrinone or milrinone is administered with full loading 
doses. Because milrinone and inamrinone have long half-lifes 
(1–10 hr depending on organ function), it can take 3–30 hours 
to reach 90% of steady state. Although recommended in the lit-
erature, some individuals in the committee choose not to use 
boluses of inamrinone or milrinone. This group administers 
the drugs as a continuous infusion only. Other members divide 
the bolus into five equal aliquots administering each aliquot 
over 10 minutes if blood pressure remains within an acceptable 
range. If blood pressure falls, it is typically because of the desired 
vasodilation and can be reversed by titrated (e.g., 5 mL/kg) 
boluses of isotonic crystalloid or colloid. Because of the long 
elimination half-life, these drugs should be discontinued at the 
first sign of arrhythmia, or hypotension caused by excessively 
diminished SVR. Hypotension-related toxicity can also be poten-
tially overcome by beginning norepinephrine. Norepinephrine 
counteracts the effects of increased cyclic adenosine monophos-
phate in vascular tissue by stimulating the alpha receptor result-
ing in vasoconstriction. Norepinephrine has little effect at the 
vascular β2 receptor.
Rescue from refractory shock has been described in case 
reports and series using two medications with type III phos-
phodiesterase activity. Levosimendan is a promising medica-
tion that increases Ca++/actin/tropomyosin complex binding 
sensitivity and also has some type III PDEI and adenosine 
triphosphate–sensitive K+ channel activity. Because one of the 
pathogenic mechanisms of endotoxin-induced heart dysfunc-
tion is desensitization of Ca++/actin/tropomyosin complex 
binding, this drug allows treatment at this fundamental level 
of signal transduction overcoming the loss of contractility that 
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
1073
characterizes septic shock (217–222). Enoximone is a type III 
PDEI with 10 times more β1 cAMP hydrolysis inhibition than 
β2 cAMP hydrolysis inhibition (223–225). Hence, it can be 
used to increase cardiac performance with less risk of unde-
sired hypotension.
Vasopressors
Vasopressors may also be beneficial in the treatment of pediat-
ric septic shock when applied according to the guideline algo-
rithm. Vasopressors can be titrated to endpoints of perfusion 
pressure (MAP-CVP) or SVR that promote optimum urine 
output and creatinine clearance, but excessive vasoconstric-
tion compromising microcirculatory flow should be avoided. 
Vasopressor effect can be obtained with different sympathico-
mimetic drugs. There is no clear evidence that supports the 
use of one specific vasoactive drug over another (dopamine 
 
> 15 µg/kg/min, epinephrine > 0.3 µg/kg/min, or norepineph-
rine) (77, 179, 226–231). When epinephrine is administrated in 
doses greater than 0.3 µg/kg/min or dopamine in doses greater 
than 10 µg/kg/min, there is a vasopressor effect additional 
to their inotropic action. However, if the patient has ongo-
ing shock and/or shows findings consistent with warm shock 
(flash capillary refill, warm extremities, low diastolic pressure, 
and bounding pulses), the additional use of norepinephrine is 
suggested (231). Some committee members advocate the use of 
low-dose norepinephrine as a first-line agent for fluid-refrac-
tory hypotensive hyperdynamic shock. Based on experimental 
and clinical data, norepinephrine is recommended as the first-
line agent in adults with fluid-refractory shock. If the patient’s 
clinical state is characterized by low SVR (e.g., wide pulse pres-
sure with DBP that is < half the systolic pressure), norepineph-
rine is recommended alone. Other experts have recommended 
combining norepinephrine with dobutamine, recognizing that 
dobutamine is a potent inotrope that has intrinsic vasodilat-
ing action that may be helpful to counteract excessive vaso-
constriction from norepinephrine. Higher norepinephrine 
doses than those usually suggested in the literature have been 
described to reverse hypotension and hypoperfusion without 
inducing significant adverse effects (230, 231).
The infusion of norepinephrine is suggested as the initial 
vasoactive drug in patients with warm shock, vasodilatation, 
and low SVR. A study using a noninvasive ultrasound CO 
monitor device to measure serial hemodynamics showed that 
patients could present with cold or warm shock and that both 
types evolved in a heterogeneous manner needing frequent 
revision of cardiovascular support therapy (40). Children 
with initial warm shock were commenced on norepinephrine. 
Despite an initial good response, four patients developed low 
CI and needed epinephrine (40).
When the use of vasopressor drugs is needed, it must be 
started as soon as possible but within 60 minutes of resusci-
tation, using intraosseus access, while central venous access is 
obtained. Lampin et al (230) describe in a retrospective study 
the use of norepinephrine in 144 children over a 10-year period; 
it was used as the first-choice drug in 22% of the patients, 
and in 19% of the cases, it was used either by peripheral or 
intraosseus route. Paul et al (21, 22) describe delay in the initia-
tion of vasoactive drugs in 65% of the cases and associate this 
with an increase in length of stay in intensive care.
Vasopressin and terlipressin have been shown to increase 
MAP, SVR, and urine output in patients with vasodilatory 
septic shock and hyporesponsiveness to catecholamines (232–
258). Vasopressin’s action is independent of catecholamine 
receptor stimulation, and therefore, its efficacy is not affected 
by α-adrenergic receptor down-regulation often seen in septic 
shock. Low-dose infusion of vasopressin should not be used 
as routine adjunctive therapy but may be considered as rescue 
therapy in patients with catecholamine and steroid resistant 
hypotension. The adult Vasopressin and Septic Shock Trial, a 
randomized, controlled clinical trial that compared low-dose 
arginine vasopressin with norepinephrine in adults with septic 
shock, showed no difference between regimens in the 28-day 
mortality primary endpoint (247). The results of another ran-
domized control trial evaluating the use of low doses of vaso-
pressin as an adjunctive therapy in vasodilated pediatric septic 
shock also failed to show benefits (248).
Both vasopressin and terlipressin can be considered as 
rescue therapy in patients in vasodilatory shock who do not 
respond to high doses of norepinephrine or other sympathi-
comimetics. Terlipressin, a long acting form of vasopres-
sin, has been reported to reverse vasodilated shock as well. 
Administered as a continuous infusion or in bolus, it increases 
blood pressure and urine output in pediatric patients with 
refractory septic shock. Decreased CO or distal necrosis has 
been reported as possible adverse events. Yildizdas et al (258) 
evaluated the effect of continuous infusion of terlipressin in 
a randomized control trial in pediatric patients with septic 
shock and high catecholamine requirement. Terlipressin infu-
sion had no effect on mortality.
Angiotensin can also be used to increase blood pressure 
in patients who are refractory to norepinephrine; however, 
its clinical role is not as well defined (259). Phenylephrine is 
another pure vasopressor with no β-adrenergic activity (260). 
Its clinical role is also limited. Nitric oxide (NO) inhibitors and 
methylene blue are considered investigational therapies (261–
264). Studies have shown an increased mortality with nonse-
lective NO synthase inhibitors suggesting that increasing blood 
pressure through excessive vasoconstriction can have adverse 
effects (261).
Glucose, Calcium, Thyroid, and Hydrocortisone 
Replacement
Hypoglycemia, hyperglycemia, and glycemic variability have 
been associated with worse short-term outcomes in critically 
ill children (265–268). Hypoglycemia must be rapidly diag-
nosed and promptly treated. Hyperglycemia in nondiabetic 
children with sepsis has been associated with worse outcomes 
(266–268). Branco et al (267) reported a greater risk of death 
with hyperglycemia (≥ 178 mg/dL) in 57 children with septic 
shock. Day et al (268) reported hyperglycemia (> 180 mg/dL) 
negatively correlated with ventilator-free days at 30 days in a 
retrospective review of 97 children with meningococcal sepsis. 
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Davis et al
1074 
www.ccmjournal.org 
June 2017 • Volume 45 • Number 6
Hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia during critical illness may 
simply represent epiphenomena. In contrast, Mesotten et al 
(269) reported that brief hypoglycemia (≤ 40 mg/dL) caused 
by tight glycemic control in a pediatric randomized controlled 
trial was not associated with worse neurocognitive outcome 
approximately 4 years later.
Randomized controlled trials of tight glycemic control have 
been conducted primarily in postcardiac surgery children 
(270–273). Results are conflicting, with one study showing a 
reduction in PICU length of stay and inflammatory markers 
(272) and the other three not showing an improvement in 
mortality or morbidity (270, 271, 273). Hyperglycemia in chil-
dren with meningococcal sepsis has been partially attributed 
to the suppression of insulin production by proinflammatory 
mediators rather than insulin resistance as seen in other critical 
illnesses (274, 275).
Calcium replacement should be directed to normalize ion-
ized calcium concentration; however, its safety and efficacy 
have not been established in septic shock. Replacement with 
thyroid and/or hydrocortisone can also be lifesaving in children 
with thyroid and/or adrenal insufficiency and catecholamine-
resistant shock (64, 276–291). Hypothyroidism is relatively 
common in children with trisomy 21 and children with CNS 
pathology, (e.g., pituitary abnormality). Hypothyroidism may 
manifest clinically after the administration of corticosteroids 
for adrenal insufficiency and needs to be recognized and 
treated promptly. Infusion therapy with triiodothyronine may 
be beneficial in postoperative congenital heart disease patients 
but has yet to be studied in children with septic shock.
Multiple studies suggest changes in the hypopituitary adre-
nal axis (292–294), glucocorticoid receptor changes (295), 
and changes in cortisol metabolism during sepsis (296, 297). 
Possible rationales for the use of corticosteroids in sepsis are 
beneficial pharmacologic effect on the cardiovascular system 
and anti-inflammatory properties (276, 298, 299). A recent 
prospective study of critically ill children reported a preva-
lence of relative adrenal insufficiency in critically ill children 
of 30.2% on the first day of admission and 19.8% on the sec-
ond day of admission as defined by an increase in cortisol 
of less than 9 µg/dL after administration of low dose (1 µg) 
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) (300). The prevalence 
of relative adrenal insufficiency reported in other studies is 
widely variable depending on the diagnostic criteria used 
and remains somewhat arbitrary. Low or high serum corti-
sol concentrations have been associated with increased sepsis 
mortality (301). A cutoff of less than 25 µg/dL in adults with 
septic shock has been described as useful to predict hemo-
dynamic response to cortisol administration. In children, a 
serum cortisol concentration of greater than 36 µg/dL and a 
lack in response to ACTH stimulation may predict a failure 
to respond to exogenous corticosteroid administration (302). 
Several factors contribute to the diagnostic controversy. In one 
study, patients with relative adrenal insufficiency had higher 
basal cortisol concentrations than those without relative adre-
nal insufficiency (28.6 vs 16.7 µg/dL; p < 0.001) (302). A study 
of total and free cortisol concentrations among critically ill 
children found a high incidence of biochemical adrenal insuf-
ficiency using various definitions but no evidence of corre-
sponding clinical adrenal insufficiency (303).
Hypoproteinemia decreases total cortisol concentrations, 
but free cortisol concentrations have been observed to be 
high in patients with serum albumin concentrations less than 
2.5 mg/dL despite a low total serum cortisol concentration in 
nearly 40% of adults tested (304). Reduced cortisol metabo-
lism in critically ill adults suggests a 50% decrease in clearance 
of corticosteroids due to suppression of activity or expression 
of metabolizing enzymes. Furthermore, the authors observed 
a dissociation of cortisol concentrations after ACTH stimula-
tion. In patients with elevated serum cortisol concentrations 
due to reduced clearance, ACTH concentrations were found 
to be lower suggesting negative feedback on the HPA axis. 
Mortality is correlated with a higher degree of suppression 
of corticosteroid metabolism in adults (296). The role of free 
cortisol in the diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency determination 
has not been sufficiently elucidated (303, 304). Administration 
of etomidate (305), megestrol (306), and ketoconazole (307) 
have been identified as iatrogenic causes of adrenal insuffi-
ciency due to their interference with cortisol production.
Nonsurvivors have exceedingly high ACTH/cortisol ratios 
within the first 8 hours of meningococcal shock (277–279, 290, 
292, 308). The lack of increase in serum cortisol concentra-
tion (< 9 µg/dL) in patients undergoing an ACTH stimulation 
test with baseline cortisol concentrations greater than 18 µg/
dL was associated with catecholamine refractory shock but not 
mortality (309, 310). The value of ACTH stimulation test in the 
diagnosis and treatment of relative adrenal insufficiency and 
critical illness-related corticosteroid insufficiency in children 
and adults remains unclear. No gold standard has been estab-
lished for the diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency in critical ill-
ness. Absolute adrenal insufficiency has been defined as a basal 
serum cortisol concentration of less than 7 µg/dL and peak 
serum cortisol of less than 18 µg/dL after stimulation. Others 
suggested a basal serum cortisol of less than 5 or less than 9 µg/
dL and use the same peak cutoff after ACTH stimulation of 
less than 18 µg/dL for the definition of absolute adrenal insuf-
ficiency. Relative adrenal insufficiency has been proposed as a 
basal serum cortisol concentration of less than 20 µg/dL and Δ 
less than 9 after ACTH stimulation, or a basal total cortisol less 
than 10, Δ total cortisol less than 9 or free cortisol less than 2.
Patients at risk of inadequate cortisol/aldosterone pro-
duction due to absolute adrenal insufficiency in the set-
ting of shock include children with purpura fulminans and 
Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome, children who previously 
received steroid therapies for chronic illness, and children with 
pituitary or adrenal abnormalities. These patients may benefit 
from stress doses of hydrocortisone early in the course of their 
illness, in the presence of sepsis without shock. The need for 
separate mineralocorticoid replacement during critical illness 
is unclear. Serum aldosterone concentrations are markedly 
depressed in meningococcemia (311). The administration of 
fludrocortisone in addition to hydrocortisone has been sug-
gested in septic shock (312) with the benefit of shortening 
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
1075
the duration of norepinephrine administration in the septic 
subgroup, over hydrocortisone administration alone. The 
mineralocorticoid activity of hydrocortisone alone, however, 
may be sufficient and should not exceed 200 mg/d (equiva-
lent to about 100 mg/m2/d) when given to adults (313–316). 
Hydrocortisone’s mineralocorticoid activity is deemed to be 
equivalent to 150 µg/m2/d of 9α-fludrocortisone when a total 
daily dose of 20–50 mg of hydrocortisone is reached.
Treatment with low-dose hydrocortisone for relative adrenal 
insufficiency has gained interest since the first randomized con-
trolled trial (RCT) in adults with septic shock was published in 
2002, proving a mortality benefit (276). A subsequent RCT in 
adults did not confirm a mortality advantage for the treatment 
with stress doses of hydrocortisone, leaving us with conflicting 
results (316). The pediatric literature lacks large RCTs evaluat-
ing the benefit of corticosteroids specifically in septic shock and 
refractory septic shock, and a pediatric meta-analysis evaluating 
the role of corticosteroids in shock did not demonstrate benefit 
(302). Trials in premature newborns, and other studies in chil-
dren and adults have repeatedly shown a positive effect on the 
cardiovascular system by decreasing the duration and/or amount 
of catecholamines administered (2, 67, 284, 287, 317, 318).
Very high-dose corticosteroid administration in septic shock 
has previously been associated with higher infection rates. 
Several studies published since 2006 point to the possibility of 
infectious complications as a result of corticosteroid adminis-
tration in adults and children. Steroid use was linked to dissem-
inated candidiasis in a case report (319); however, infectious 
complications were not found to be increased by the admin-
istration of corticosteroids in children and adults with shock 
in other studies. Other side effects in patients receiving corti-
costeroids have been described, including hyperglycemia and 
bleeding. Concerns regarding the development of myopathy 
in association with corticosteroid therapy have been raised but 
not confirmed in either the adult or pediatric population with 
shock. A rise in sodium during corticosteroid administration 
was observed in several studies and self-resolves after discon-
tinuation. Pediatric septic shock is associated with suppression 
of all aspects of adaptive immunity, and steroid use was associ-
ated with further depression of peripheral blood mononuclear 
cell adaptive immunity messenger RNA expression (320, 321).
Analysis of data obtained during the RESOLVE trial did not 
reveal treatment benefit associated with the administration of 
corticosteroids, but the concerns for higher mortality associ-
ated with corticosteroid administration raised by the analysis 
of the Pediatric Health Information System database were not 
corroborated (321). Studies in patients with serious infectious 
illnesses, that is, meningococcal meningitis, have shown cortisol 
production rates between 4 and 15 times the normal daily pro-
duction rate of 5.7–12.5 mg/m2 (277–279, 290, 322–325) of cor-
tisol. Effects on the cardiovascular system in shock have been 
shown at the lower end of the stress dose range. Administration 
of stress doses as low as 0.18 mg/kg/hr of hydrocortisone (about 
4 mg/kg/d) shorten the time to cessation of vasopressor support 
(median time 2 vs 7 d in the placebo group) without improv-
ing mortality in adults (326). In a single-center study of term 
neonates, the administration of 45 mg/m2/d of hydrocortisone 
resulted in similar complication rates compared with histori-
cal controls and resulted in a statistically significant increase in 
blood pressure at 2, 6, 12, and 24 hours after initiation (67). 
Cortisol levels in adults after IV boluses of 50 mg of hydrocor-
tisone given 6 hourly showed peak plasma cortisol levels over 
100 μg/dL, and nadir levels remained elevated at 40–50 μg/dL 
(326). Among children, only those with fluid-refractory shock 
were found to have adrenal insufficiency (327).
Persistent Pulmonary Artery Hypertension (PPHN) of 
the Newborn Therapy
Inhaled nitric oxide therapy is the treatment of choice for 
uncomplicated PPHN (328, 329). However, metabolic alka-
linization remains an important initial resuscitative strategy 
during shock because PPHN can reverse when acidosis is cor-
rected (330). For centers with access to inhaled nitric oxide, 
this is the only selective pulmonary vasodilator reported to 
be effective in reversal of PPHN (331–336). Milrinone may be 
added to improve heart function as tolerated (337, 338). Inves-
tigations support use of inhaled iloprost (synthetic analog of 
prostacyclin) or adenosine infusion as modes of therapy for 
PPHN (339–345). ECMO remains the therapy of choice for 
patients with refractory PPHN and sepsis (346–349).
Extracorporeal Therapies
Various extracorporeal therapies such as ECMO, CRRT, and 
blood purification (hemofiltration, hemoperfusion, and thera-
peutic plasma exchange [TPE]) have been reported with various 
successes in the management of pediatric sepsis and septic shock. 
ECMO is a viable therapy for refractory septic shock in neonates 
and children (346–359). Neonates have comparably good out-
comes (80% + survival) whether the indication for ECMO is 
refractory respiratory failure or refractory shock from sepsis. 
Pediatric and adult patients with sepsis have lower survival (his-
torically ≤ 50%) than neonates, but experienced ECMO centers 
are now reporting survival rates approaching 75% (356–358) 
for refractory shock and 90% for refractory pneumonia (359). 
Although ECMO survival is similar in pediatric patients with 
and without sepsis, thrombotic complications are common in 
sepsis. Efforts are warranted to reduce ECMO-induced hemo-
lysis because free heme scavenges nitric oxide, adenosine, and a 
disintegrin and metalloproteinase with a thrombospondin type 
1 motif, member 13 (a.k.a. von Willebrand factor-cleaving pro-
tease) leading to microvascular thrombosis, reversal of portal 
blood flow, and multiple organ failure (360–364). Severe hemo-
lysis (plasma Hgb > 1 g/L) is associated with longer ECMO runs, 
more blood product administration, and increased mortality 
(362). Independent risk factors for hemolysis on ECMO include 
very negative inlet pressures, higher pump speeds, kinked or 
narrowed cannulae, and nonpediatric oxygenators (362). The 
risk of hemolysis can be mitigated by using the proper sized can-
nulas for age, avoiding excessive pump speeds, and maintaining 
the negative inlet pressure close to the specified pressure drop 
given by the manufacturer for the flow rate and never greater 
than –100 mm Hg (363, 364).
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Davis et al
1076 
www.ccmjournal.org 
June 2017 • Volume 45 • Number 6
Outcome benefits of CRRT, either alone or in tandem with 
ECMO, are uncertain in pediatric sepsis. Theoretical benefits 
of CRRT in sepsis could include prevention or management of 
fluid overload, management of acute kidney injury, clearance of 
lactate and organic acids, binding of inflammatory mediators, 
reversal of coagulopathy, or some combination of these actions 
(365, 366). Mortality in children receiving CRRT in sepsis ranges 
from 39% to 59%, likely reflecting severity of illness of patient 
selection for CRRT use. The best documented association of 
CRRT and outcome is related to fluid overload. In general, use 
of CRRT earlier in the course of multiple organ dysfunction syn-
drome (MODS), including septic patients, has been associated 
with decreased mortality in children, even when adjusted for 
severity of illness (128, 367, 368). No specific randomized trials 
of CRRT use in pediatric sepsis have been performed. In adults, 
use of higher CRRT flux rates (> 35 mL/kg/hr filtration-dialysis 
flux), while initially encouraging, has not shown overall mortal-
ity benefit in subsequent randomized trials and meta-analysis 
(369, 370). Investigators in pediatric settings have reported that 
the use of high flux flow rate CRRT, with concomitant fresh fro-
zen plasma, antithrombotic protein C infusion, or in combina-
tion with plasma exchange on ECMO has been associated with 
reduced inotrope/vasopressor requirements in children with 
refractory septic shock and purpura (4, 371–376).
Investigators have reported more experiences with blood 
purification for pediatric sepsis since the last update. In 2010, 
guided by the evidence-based adult and pediatric literature, 
the American Society of Apheresis gives a category III recom-
mendation, which is “Optimum 
role of apheresis therapy is not 
established. 
Decision-making 
should be individualized,” for 
the use of TPE for sepsis with 
multiple organ failure (377). 
Meta-analysis of adult ran-
domized trials reports survival 
benefit with the use of blood 
purification for sepsis by hemo-
perfusion or TPE but not by 
hemofiltration (378). In this 
regard, pediatric case series and 
small trials have reported sur-
vival benefits with the use of 
TPE for sepsis-induced MODS, 
and in particular, patients with 
significant coagulopathy (379–
387). These studies use TPE as 
a strategy to reverse MODS and 
not for shock resuscitation. As 
for other blood purification 
techniques for pediatric sepsis, 
a large RCT testing plasma fil-
tration was stopped due to poor 
recruitment and showed no 
benefit of plasmafiltration for 
severe sepsis (388), and hemo-
perfusion experience had been 
very limited (389–391).
OVERALL 
RECOMMENDATIONS
Pediatric Septic Shock
Diagnosis. The inflammatory 
triad of fever, tachycardia, and 
vasodilation is common in 
children with benign infections 
(Fig. 2). Septic shock is sus-
pected when children with this 
triad have a change in mental 
Figure 2. American College of Critical Care Medicine algorithm for time-sensitive, goal-directed stepwise 
management of hemodynamic support in infants and children. Proceed to next step if shock persists. 1) First-
hour goals—restore and maintain heart rate thresholds, capillary refill ≤ 2 s, and normal blood pressure in the first 
hour/emergency department. 2) Subsequent ICU goals—if shock not reversed proceed to restore and maintain 
normal perfusion pressure (MAP – CVP) for age, Scvo2 > 70% (* except congenital heart patients with mixing 
lesions), and cardiac index > 3.3 < 6.0 L/min/m2 in PICU.
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
1077
status manifested as irritability, inappropriate crying, drowsi-
ness, confusion, poor interaction with parents, lethargy, or 
becoming unarousable. The clinical diagnosis of septic shock 
is made in children who 1) have a suspected infection mani-
fested by hypothermia or hyperthermia and 2) have clinical 
signs of inadequate tissue perfusion including any of the fol-
lowing: decreased or altered mental status, prolonged capil-
lary refill greater than 2 seconds, diminished pulses, mottled 
cool extremities, or flash capillary refill, bounding peripheral 
pulses and wide pulse pressure or decreased urine output less 
than 1 mL/kg/hr. Hypotension is not necessary for the clinical 
diagnosis of septic shock; however, its presence in a child with 
clinical suspicion of infection is confirmatory.
We recommend that each institution develop a recognition 
bundle (Fig. 1) to optimize identification of patients at risk for 
septic shock that is based on vital sign abnormalities and high-
risk criteria (1C).
The recognition bundle should contain:
1) A trigger tool. Elements that are recommended for use in a 
trigger tool include vital signs, physical examination, and 
at-risk populations (an example trigger tool is located in 
Fig. 3).
2) Rapid clinician assessment within 15 minutes for any patient 
that is identified by the trigger tool.
3) Activation of a sepsis resuscitation bundle within 15 minutes 
for patients with suspected septic shock. We recommend 
that each institution also develop or adopt a first-hour resus-
citation and stabilization bundle (Fig. 1) to optimize time 
to completion of first hour and stabilization tasks when a 
patient with suspected septic shock is identified (1C).
The resuscitation bundle may contain:
1) Intraosseous or IV access within 5 minutes
2) Appropriate fluid resuscitation initiated within 30 minutes
3) Initiation of broad spectrum antibiotics within 60 minutes
4) Blood culture if it does not delay antibiotic administration
5) Appropriate use of peripheral or central inotrope within 60 
minutes
The stabilization bundle may contain:
1) Multimodal monitoring to guide fluid, hormonal, and car-
diovascular therapies to attain a normal MAP-CVP for age 
(55 + 1.5 × age in yr), and Scvo2 greater than 70% and/or CI 
3.3–6.0 L/min/m2
2) Administration of appropriate antibiotic therapy and source 
control. We recommend that each institution develop or 
adopt a performance bundle (Fig. 1) to identify barriers to 
attaining the recognition, resuscitation, and stabilization 
bundle goals (1C).
The performance bundle should contain:
1) Measurement of adherence as well as achievement of goals 
and individual components.
2) Assessment of barriers as well as unintended conse-
quences such as inappropriate antibiotic duration or fluid 
overresuscitation.
ABCs: The First Hour of Resuscitation (Emergency 
Department Resuscitation)
Goals: (Level 1C)
 
●
Maintain or restore airway, oxygenation, and ventilation
 
●
Maintain or restore circulation, defined as normal perfu-
sion and blood pressure
 
●
Maintain or restore threshold HR.
Therapeutic Endpoints (Level 1C). Capillary refill less than or 
equal to 2 seconds, normal pulses with no differential between 
the quality of peripheral and central pulses, warm extremities, 
urine output greater than 1 mL/kg/hr, normal mental status, 
normal blood pressure for age (only reliable when pulses pal-
pable), normal glucose concentration, normal ionized calcium 
concentration.
Monitoring (Level 1C)
 
●
Pulse oximeter
 
●
Continuous electrocardiogram (ECG)
 
●
Blood pressure and pulse pressure
 
●
Temperature
 
●
Urine output
 
●
Glucose, ionized calcium
Airway and Breathing (Level 1C). Airway and breathing 
should be rigorously monitored and maintained. Supplemen-
tal oxygen or high-flow nasal cannula oxygen is titrated as ini-
tial therapy to avoid hypoxia and hyperoxia (Spo2 100%). Lung 
compliance and work of breathing may change precipitously. 
In early sepsis, patients often have a respiratory alkalosis from 
centrally mediated hyperventilation. As sepsis progresses, 
patients may have hypoxemia as well as metabolic acidosis and 
are at high risk to develop respiratory acidosis secondary to a 
combination of parenchymal lung disease and/or inadequate 
respiratory effort due to altered mental status. The decision 
to intubate and ventilate is based on clinical assessment of 
increased work of breathing, hypoventilation, or impaired 
mental status. Waiting for confirmatory laboratory tests is 
discouraged. If possible, volume loading and peripheral or 
central inotropic/vasoactive drug support is recommended 
before and during intubation because of relative or absolute 
hypovolemia, cardiac dysfunction, and the risk of suppressing 
endogenous stress hormone response with agents that facili-
tate intubation. Etomidate is not recommended. Ketamine 
with atropine pretreatment should be considered the induc-
tion combination of choice during intubation, to promote 
cardiovascular integrity during the procedure. A short-acting 
neuromuscular blocking agent can facilitate intubation if the 
provider is confident and skilled.
Circulation (Level 1C). Vascular access should be rapidly 
attained. In addition to direct visualization and/or palpation, 
portable near-infrared imaging devices may assist in periph-
eral vascular access. Establish intraosseous access if reliable 
peripheral intravenous line (PIV) access cannot be attained in 
minutes. Powered intraosseous devices (i.e., intraosseous drill) 
can facilitate successful intraosseous placement but should 
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Davis et al
1078 
www.ccmjournal.org 
June 2017 • Volume 45 • Number 6
be reserved for use in children greater than 3 kg (device not 
approved below this size). Fluid resuscitation should commence 
immediately unless hepatomegaly, rales, or a cardiac gallop are 
present. In the fluid-refractory patient, begin a peripheral ino-
trope if a second PIV/intraosseous is in place, while establish-
ing a central venous catheter. When administered through a 
PIV/intraosseous, the inotrope should be infused either as a 
dilute solution (peripheral epinephrine dilution may be 10 × 
central) or with a second carrier solution running at a flow rate 
to assure that it reaches the heart in a timely fashion. Care must 
be taken to reduce dosage if evidence of peripheral infiltra-
tion/ischemia occurs as α-adrenergic receptor mediated effects 
occur at higher concentrations for epinephrine and dopamine. 
Central dopamine, epinephrine, or norepinephrine can be 
administered as a first-line drug as indicated by hemodynamic 
state when a central line is in place. It is generally appropriate 
to begin central venous infusion and wait until a pharmaco-
logic effect is observed before stopping the peripheral infusion. 
Establishing a central venous catheter during the initial resus-
citation may be dependent upon the availability of skilled per-
sonnel and appropriate equipment and should not delay or 
compromise ongoing resuscitation efforts. Utilization of bed-
side vascular imaging modalities such as ultrasound guidance 
can facilitate successful central venous access for skilled per-
sonnel familiar with such technologies. High frequency (7.5–
13 MHz) probes should be used for infants and children, with 
higher frequencies yielding better resolution for the smallest 
 
patients (< 15 kg).
Fluid Resuscitation (Level 1C). Rapid fluid boluses of 
20 mL/kg (isotonic crystalloid or 5% albumin) can be admin-
istered by push or rapid infusion device (pressure bag) while 
observing for signs of fluid overload (i.e., the development of 
increased work of breathing, rales, cardiac gallop rhythm, or 
hepatomegaly). In the absence of these clinical findings, chil-
dren can require 40–60 mL/kg in the first hour. Fluid can be 
pushed with the goal of attaining normal perfusion and blood 
Figure 3. American Academy of Pediatrics trigger tool for early septic shock recognition.
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
1079
pressure. Hypoglycemia and hypocalcemia should be cor-
rected. A 10% dextrose containing isotonic IV solution can be 
run at maintenance IV fluid rates to provide age appropriate 
glucose delivery and to prevent hypoglycemia.
Hemodynamic Support (Level 1C). Central dopamine 
can be titrated to a maximum of 10 μg/kg/min through cen-
tral access; however, epinephrine or norepinephrine is more 
likely to be beneficial. Central epinephrine can be started for 
“cold shock” (0.05–0.3 μg/kg/min) or norepinephrine can be 
titrated for “warm shock” to restore normal perfusion and 
blood pressure.
Hydrocortisone Therapy (Level 1C). If a child is “at risk of 
absolute adrenal insufficiency or adrenal pituitary axis failure” 
(e.g., purpura fulminans, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, prior 
steroid exposure, hypothalamic/pituitary abnormality, intuba-
tion with etomidate induction) and remains in shock despite 
epinephrine or norepinephrine infusion, then hydrocortisone 
can be administered ideally after attaining a blood sample for 
subsequent determination of baseline cortisol concentration.
Stabilization: Beyond the First Hour (PICU 
Hemodynamic Support)
Goals: (Level 1C)
 
●
Normal perfusion, capillary refill less than or equal to 2 
seconds, threshold HRs
 
●
Perfusion pressure (MAP-CVP or MAP-IAP) appropriate 
for age. Scvo2 greater than 70%
 
●
CI greater than 3.3 and less than 6.0 L/min/m2
Therapeutic Endpoints: (Level 1C). Capillary refill less than 
or equal to 2 seconds, threshold HRs, normal pulses with no 
differential between the quality of the peripheral and central 
pulses, warm extremities, urine output greater than 1 mL/kg/hr, 
 
normal mental status, CI greater than 3.3 and less than 
 
6.0 L/min/m2 with normal perfusion pressure (MAP-CVP, or 
MAP-IAP) for age (Table 1), Scvo2 greater than 70%. Maximize 
preload in order to maximize CI, MAP-CVP. Normal INR, 
anion gap, and lactate.
Monitoring (Level 1C)
 
●
Pulse oximetry
 
●
Continuous ECG
 
●
Continuous intra-arterial blood pressure
 
●
Temperature (core) urine output
 
●
CVP/oxygen saturation and/or pulmonary artery pressure/
oxygen saturation CO
 
●
Serial limited echocardiogram
 
●
Glucose and calcium
 
●
INR
 
●
Lactate, anion gap
Fluid Resuscitation (Level 1C). Fluid losses and persistent 
hypovolemia secondary to diffuse capillary leak can continue 
for days. Ongoing fluid replacement should be directed at clin-
ical endpoints including perfusion, PAOP/global end-diastolic 
volume (when available), and CO. Crystalloid is the fluid of 
choice in patients with Hgb greater than 10 g/dL. RBC transfu-
sion can be given to children with Hgb less than 10 g/dL. FFP is 
recommended for patients with prolonged INR but as an infu-
sion, not a bolus. Following shock resuscitation, diuretics/peri-
toneal dialysis/high flux CRRT can be used to remove fluid in 
patients who are 10% fluid overloaded and unable to maintain 
fluid balance with native urine output/extra-renal losses.
Elevated lactate concentration and anion gap measurements 
can be treated by assuring both adequate oxygen delivery and 
glucose utilization. Adequate oxygen delivery (indicated by a 
Scvo2 > 70%) can be achieved by attaining Hgb greater than 
10 g/dL and CO greater than 3.3 L/min/m2 using adequate vol-
ume loading and inotrope/vasodilator support when needed 
(as described below). Appropriate glucose delivery can be 
attained by giving a D10% containing isotonic IV solution 
at fluid maintenance rate. Appropriate glucose uptake can 
be attained in subsequently hyperglycemic patients by titrat-
ing a glucose/insulin infusion to prevent hyperglycemia (keep 
glucose concentration ≤ 150 mg/dL) and hypoglycemia (keep 
glucose concentration > 80 mg/dL). The use of lesser glucose 
infusion rates (e.g., D5% or lower volumes of D10%) will not 
provide glucose delivery requirements.
Hemodynamic Support (Level 1C). Hemodynamic support 
can be required for days. Children with “catecholamine-resis-
tant shock” can present with low CO/high SVR, high CO/low 
SVR, or low CO/low SVR shock. Although children with per-
sistent shock commonly have worsening cardiac failure, hemo-
dynamic states may completely change with time. Titration of 
vasoactive infusion(s) may be guided by clinical examination 
(blood pressure, HR, and capillary refill/skin perfusion analy-
sis) and laboratory data (arterial blood gas and Scvo2 analysis). 
For patients with persistent shock (reduced urine output, poor 
perfusion, metabolic/lactic acidosis, or hypotension), a more 
accurate assessment of CO may be warranted. Many modali-
ties for CO assessment currently exist and include pulmonary 
artery, PiCCO, femoral artery or thermodilution catheters, 
TABLE 1. Threshold Heart Rates and 
Perfusion Pressure (Mean Arterial Pressure-
Central Venous Pressure or Mean Arterial 
Pressure-Intra-Abdominal Pressure for Age)
 
Heart Rate  
(beats/min)a
Perfusion Pressure
Mean Arterial  
Pressure – Central Venous  
Pressure (mm Hg)b
Newborn
110–160
(55 + age ×1.5) = 55
Infant (2 yr)
90–160
(55 + age × 1.5) = 58
Child (7 yr)
70–150
(55 + age × 1.5) = 65
aThe “good risk” heart rates are as defined in the Pediatric Risk of Mortality 
Scoring System (73).
bThe mean arterial pressure (MAP) goal is based on the estimated formula 
for 50th percentile MAP for a child with 50th percentile height in the healthy 
population with an expected central venous pressure (CVP) = 0 mm Hg (76, 
392). When the CVP > 0, then the goal MAP should be adjusted accordingly 
to achieve adequate perfusion pressure.
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Davis et al
1080 
www.ccmjournal.org 
June 2017 • Volume 45 • Number 6
and/or CO estimated by Doppler ultrasound. These additional 
data may justify further changes in the vasoactive regimen with 
resolution of shock. Therapies should be directed to maintain 
mixed venous/Scvo2 greater than 70%, CI greater than 3.3 less 
than 6.0 L/min/m2, and a normal perfusion pressure for age 
(MAP-CVP).
Shock With Low CI, Normal Blood Pressure, and High 
SVR (Level 1D). Milrinone is considered by the authors to be 
the first-line inodilator in patients with epinephrine-resistant 
shock and normal blood pressure. As noted above, the long 
elimination half-life of these drugs can lead to slowly reversible 
toxicities (hypotension, tachyarrhythmias, or both) particularly 
if abnormal renal or liver function exists. Such toxicities can be 
reversed in part with norepinephrine infusion. Additional vol-
ume loading may be necessary to prevent hypotension when 
loading doses are used. Nitroprusside or nitroglycerin may be 
considered as second-line vasodilators. Monitoring is needed 
to avoid cyanide or isothiocyanate toxicity. Levosimendan and 
enoximone may have a role in recalcitrant low CO syndrome. 
Thyroid replacement with triiodothyronine is warranted for 
thyroid insufficiency, and hydrocortisone replacement can be 
warranted for adrenal or HPA axis insufficiency.
Shock With Low CI, Low Blood Pressure, and Low SVR 
(Level 1D). Norepinephrine can be added to/or substituted 
for epinephrine to increase DBP and SVR. Once an adequate 
blood pressure is achieved, dobutamine, type III PDEIs such as 
milrinone or enoximone (which is more cardioselective than 
milrinone) or levosimendan can be added to norepinephrine 
to improve CI and Scvo2. Thyroid replacement with triiodo-
thyronine is warranted for thyroid insufficiency, and hydro-
cortisone replacement is warranted for adrenal or HPA axis 
insufficiency.
Shock With High CI and Low SVR (Level 1D). When titra-
tion of norepinephrine and fluid does not resolve hypotension, 
then low-dose vasopressin, angiotensin, or terlipressin can be 
helpful in restoring blood pressure; however, these potent vaso-
constrictors can reduce CO, therefore it is recommended that 
“these drugs are used with CO/Scvo2 monitoring.” In this situ-
ation, additional inotropic therapies will be required such as 
low-dose epinephrine or dobutamine. Terlipressin is a longer 
acting drug than angiotensin or vasopressin, so toxicities are 
more long-acting. As with other forms of severe shock, thyroid 
hormone or adrenocortical replacement therapy may be added 
for appropriate indications. We recommend frequent reevalu-
ation of hemodynamic parameters when a patient requires 
the use of vasopressors, especially in relation to CO, SVR, and 
peripheral perfusion so as to choose the appropriate combina-
tion with inotropic or vasodilator drugs ± fluids.
Refractory Shock (Level 2C). Children with refractory shock 
must be suspected to have unrecognized morbidities (treat-
ment in parenthesis), including inappropriate source control 
of infection (remove nidus and use antibiotics with the lowest 
minimum inhibitory concentration possible, preferably < 1, 
use IV immunoglobulin for toxic shock), pericardial effusion 
(pericardiocentesis), pneumothorax (thoracentesis), hypo-
adrenalism (adrenal hormone replacement), hypothyroidism 
(thyroid hormone replacement), ongoing blood loss (blood 
replacement/hemostasis), increased IAP (peritoneal catheter 
or abdominal release), necrotic tissue (nidus removal), exces-
sive immunosuppression (wean immunosuppressants), or 
immunocompromise (restore immune function; e.g., white cell 
growth factors/transfusion for neutropenic sepsis). When these 
potentially reversible causes are addressed, ECMO becomes an 
important alternative to consider. The expected survival with 
ECMO for septic shock is no greater than 50% in children, 
although some centers have recently reported survival rates as 
high as 75% by using high flow, goal-directed central ECMO 
where the right atrium and ascending aorta are cannulated 
directly. This approach mitigates any differential cyanosis and 
allows the highest possible flow rates, which may facilitate faster 
resolution of shock. If high flow rates are necessary to resolve 
shock, it is important to monitor for, and prevent, hemolysis. 
Maintaining plasma free hemoglobin concentration less than 
0.05 g/L by using adequate catheter, circuit, and oxygenator 
sizes for age. Monitor the inlet pressure as close to the patient 
as possible (at the connection between the venous cannula and 
the tubing) and maintain this pressure between zero and the 
expected pressure drop for the cannula size and the pump flow 
that is employed. At pressures below these points, there is an 
increased risk for creating negative pressure in the vessel lead-
ing to vessel damage. Thus, the cannula size should be cho-
sen to stay below this limit at the peak expected flow. If these 
limits are approached, the pump speed should be temporarily 
reduced while the cause is urgently sought out and corrected. 
Aside from unnecessarily high circuit flow targets, causes of 
extremely negative inlet pressures include hypovolemia, inad-
equate cannula size, partial cannula obstruction or kinking, or 
high intrathoracic pressure (e.g., cardiac tamponade, excessive 
positive end-expiratory pressure, pneumothorax, abdominal 
compartment syndrome). Adequate cannula placement can 
be confirmed using both chest x-ray and ultrasound guid-
ance. Use of CRRT should be considered for management of 
potential or actual fluid overload and in patients with purpura. 
CRRT dosing of 20–25 mL/kg/hr is adequate. High flux CRRT 
dosing (> 35 mL/kg/hr) can be used, but benefits are theoreti-
cal. Consideration should be given to use of CRRT on ECMO 
primarily for improvement of fluid balance. TPE should not be 
used during the initial septic shock resuscitation. Once shock 
resuscitation is addressed, TPE could be considered as a strat-
egy to reverse MODS, especially in patients with significant 
coagulopathy. Titration of medications will be needed during 
the procedure to prevent hemodynamic changes because TPE 
will also remove inotropes, vasopressors, and sedatives. Citrate, 
a calcium chelator, is used as an anticoagulant for the TPE cir-
cuit; therefore, calcium levels will need to be monitored and 
replenished during the procedure.
TERM NEWBORN SEPTIC SHOCK
Diagnosis
Septic shock should be suspected in any newborn with 
tachycardia, respiratory distress, poor feeding, poor tone, 
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
1081
poor color, tachypnea, diarrhea, or reduced perfusion, par-
ticularly in the presence of a maternal history of chorioam-
nionitis or prolonged rupture of membranes (Fig. 4). It is 
important to distinguish newborn septic shock from cardio-
genic shock caused by closure of the PDA in newborns with 
ductal-dependent complex congenital heart disease. Any 
newborn with shock and hepatomegaly, cyanosis, a cardiac 
murmur, or differential upper and lower extremity blood 
pressures or pulses should be started on prostaglandin infu-
sion until complex congenital heart disease is ruled out by 
echocardiographic analysis. Inborn errors of metabolism 
resulting in hyperammonemia or hypoglycemia may simu-
late septic shock, and appropriate laboratory tests should be 
obtained to rule out these conditions. Newborn septic shock 
is typically accompanied by increased pulmonary vascular 
resistance and artery pressures. PPHN can cause right ven-
tricle failure with right-to-left shunting at the atrial/ductal 
levels causing cyanosis.
ABCs: The First Hour of Resuscitation (Delivery 
Room Resuscitation)
Goals: (Level 1C)
 
●
Maintain airway, oxygenation, and ventilation
 
●
Restore and maintain circulation, defined as normal 
 
perfusion and blood pressure
 
●
Maintain neonatal circulation
 
●
Maintain threshold HRs.
Therapeutic Endpoints:  
(Level 1C)
●  
Capillary refill less than or 
equal to 2 seconds, normal 
pulses with no differential 
in quality between periph-
eral and central pulses, warm 
extremities, 
urine 
output 
greater 
than 
1 mL/kg/hr, 
normal mental status, nor-
mal blood pressure for age, 
normal glucose, and calcium 
concentrations.
 
●  
Difference in preductal and 
postductal oxygen saturation 
less than 5%
● 95% Sao2
Monitoring: (Level 1C)
● Temperature
●  
Preductal 
and 
postductal 
pulse oximetry
 
●  Intra-arterial (umbilical or 
peripheral) blood pressure
● Continuous ECG
● Blood pressure
● Arterial pH
● Urine output
 
●  Glucose, 
ionized 
calcium 
concentration
Airway and Breathing (Level 
1D). Airway patency and ade-
quate oxygenation and ven-
tilation should be rigorously 
monitored 
and 
maintained. 
Supplemental 
or 
high-flow 
nasal cannula oxygen is the first 
choice for respiratory support. 
The decision to intubate and 
ventilate is based on clinical 
diagnosis of increased work of 
Figure 4. American College of Critical Care Medicine algorithm for time-sensitive, goal-directed stepwise 
management of hemodynamic support in newborns. Proceed to next step if shock persists. 1) First-hour goals—
restore and maintain heart rate thresholds, capillary refill ≤ 2 
s, and normal blood pressure in the (first hour). 2) 
Subsequent ICU goals—restore normal perfusion pressure (mean arterial pressure – central venous pressure), 
preductal and postductal oxygen saturation difference < 5%, and either Scvo2 > 70% (* except congenital heart 
patinets with mixing lesions), superior vena cava flow > 40 
mL/kg/min, or cardiac index > 3.3 
L/min/m2 in NICU.
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Davis et al
1082 
www.ccmjournal.org 
June 2017 • Volume 45 • Number 6
breathing or inadequate respiratory effort or marked hypox-
emia. Volume loading and inotrope infusion are often nec-
essary prior to intubation and ventilation because analgesia, 
sedation, and positive-pressure ventilation can reduce preload, 
precipitating severe hemodynamic instability or arrest. Criti-
cally ill neonates may have rapid decline in systolic and dia-
stolic ventricular function, which implies the need for close 
reassessment as resuscitation progresses. Expertly timed and 
performed intubation and mechanical ventilation will enhance 
physiologic performance at all levels by obviating work of 
breathing and ensuring the best possible oxygenation and per-
fusion. Pharmacologic management of intubation includes, in 
addition to adequate fluid resuscitation, the use of atropine to 
prevent hemodynamically significant bradycardia, and judi-
cious analgesia, which can be accomplished in many cases with 
small doses of fentanyl, given slowly as 1–2 μg/kg aliquots. 
The use of NMDA-receptor antagonists such as ketamine is 
discouraged by many experts, given concerns regarding neuro-
toxicity despite it being the only hemodynamically stable drug. 
Etomidate is associated with adrenal suppression and is gener-
ally discouraged, although the agent has been used successfully 
by some experts in this setting with adjunctive hydrocortisone. 
Morphine, propofol, barbiturates, high-dose benzodiazepines, 
and dexmedetomidine are likely to cause hemodynamic insta-
bility in the septic neonate and should not be used as first-line 
agents to secure the airway in this setting.
Circulation (Level 1D). Vascular access can be rapidly 
attained according to NRP/PALS guidelines. Placement of an 
umbilical arterial and venous catheter is preferred. Intraosseous 
access, particularly in preterm newborns, is not the preferred 
route of drug administration.
Fluid Resuscitation (Level 1C). Fluid boluses of 10 mL/kg 
can be administered, observing for the development of hepato-
megaly and increased work of breathing. Up to 60 mL/kg may 
be required in the first hour. Fluid should be infused with a goal 
of attaining normal perfusion and blood pressure. A D10 con-
taining isotonic IV solution run at maintenance rate will pro-
vide age appropriate glucose delivery to prevent hypoglycemia.
Hemodynamic Support (Level 1C). Patients with severe 
shock uniformly require cardiovascular support during fluid 
resuscitation. Although dopamine can be used as the first-line 
agent, its effect on pulmonary vascular resistance should be 
considered. A combination of dopamine at low dosage (< 8 
μg/kg/min) and dobutamine (up to 10 μg/kg/min) is initially 
recommended. If the patient does not adequately respond to 
these interventions, then epinephrine (0.05–0.3 μg/kg/min) 
can be infused to restore normal blood pressure and perfusion.
PPHN Therapy (Level 1B). Hyperoxygenate initially with 
100% oxygen and institute metabolic alkalinization (up to pH 
7.50) with NaHCO3 or tromethamine unless and until inhaled 
NO is available. Mild hyperventilation to produce a respiratory 
alkalosis can also be instituted until 100% oxygen saturation 
and less than 5% difference in preductal and postductal satu-
rations are obtained. Inhaled nitric oxide should be adminis-
tered as the first treatment when available. Back-up therapies 
include milrinone and inhaled iloprost.
Stabilization: Beyond the First Hour (NICU 
Hemodynamic Support)
Goals: (Level 1C)
 
●
Restore and maintain threshold HR.
 
●
Maintain normal perfusion and blood pressure.
 
●
Maintain neonatal circulation.
 
●
Scvo2 greater than 70%
 
●
CI greater than 3.3 L/min/m2
 
●
SVC flow greater than 40 mL/kg/min
Therapeutic Endpoints (Level 1C)
 
●
Capillary refill less than or equal to 2 seconds, normal pulses 
with no differential between peripheral and central pulses, 
warm extremities, urine output greater than 1 mL/kg/hr, 
normal mental status, and normal blood pressure for age
 
●
greater than 95% Sao2
 
●
less than 5% difference in preductal and postductal Sao2
 
●
Scvo2 greater than 70%
 
●
Absence of right-to-left shunting, tricuspid regurgitation, 
or right ventricular failure on echocardiographic analysis.
 
●
Normal glucose and ionized calcium concentrations
 
●
SVC flow greater than 40 mL/kg/min
 
●
CI greater than 3.3 L/min/m2
 
●
Normal INR
 
●
Normal anion gap, and lactate Fluid overload less than 10%
Monitoring (Level 1C)
 
●
Pulse oximetry
 
●
Arterial pH Continuous ECG
 
●
Continuous intra-arterial blood pressure
 
●
Temperature
 
●
Glucose and calcium concentration
 
●
Ins and outs, urine output
 
●
CVP/oxygen saturation
 
●
CO
 
●
SVC flow
 
●
INR
 
●
Anion gap and lactate
Fluid Resuscitation (Level 1C). Fluid losses and persistent 
hypovolemia secondary to diffuse capillary leak can continue 
for days. Ongoing fluid replacement should be directed at 
clinical endpoints, including perfusion and CVP. Crystalloid 
is the fluid of choice in patients with Hgb greater than 12 g/dL. 
Packed RBCs can be transfused in newborns with Hgb less than 
12 g/dL. Diuretics are recommended in newborns who are 10% 
fluid overloaded and unable to attain fluid balance with native 
urine output/extra-renal losses. A D10% containing isotonic 
IV solution run at maintenance rate can provide age appropri-
ate glucose delivery to prevent hypoglycemia. Insulin infusion 
can be used to correct hyperglycemia. Diuretics are indicated 
in hypervolemic patients to prevent fluid overload.
Hemodynamic Support (Level 1C). A 5-day, 6 hour/d 
course of IV pentoxifylline can be used to reverse septic shock 
in VLBW babies. In term newborns with PPHN, inhaled nitric 
oxide is often effective. Its greatest effect is usually observed at 
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
1083
20 ppm. In newborns with poor left ventricle function and nor-
mal blood pressure, the addition of nitrosovasodilators or type 
III PDEIs to epinephrine (0.05–0.3 µg/kg/min) can be effective 
but must be monitored for toxicities. It is important to volume 
load based on clinical examination and blood pressure changes 
when using these systemic vasodilators. Triiodothyronine is 
an effective inotrope in newborns with thyroid insufficiency. 
Norepinephrine can be effective for refractory hypoten-
sion, but Scvo2 should be maintained greater than 70%. An 
additional inotrope therapy should be added if warranted. 
Hydrocortisone therapy can be added if the newborn has adre-
nal insufficiency (defined by a peak cortisol after ACTH < 18 
µg/dL, or basal cortisol < 4 mg/dL, or basal cortisol < 18 with 
the need for inotropic support). An additional inotrope ther-
apy should be added if warranted.
The total duration of umbilical catheterization should not 
exceed 5 days for an UAC or 14 days for an umbilical vein cath-
eter. Low doses of heparin (0.25–1.0 U/mL) should be added 
to the fluid infused through UACs. Prophylactic use of heparin 
for peripherally inserted silastic percutaneous central venous 
catheters increases the likelihood that they will complete 
their intended use (complete therapy) and reduces catheter 
occlusion.
Refractory Shock (Level 1C). Newborns with refractory 
shock must be suspected to have unrecognized morbidities 
(requiring specific treatment) including cyanotic or obstruc-
tive heart disease (responsive to prostaglandin E1), a criti-
cally large PDA (PDA closure), inborn errors of metabolism 
(responsive to glucose and insulin infusion or ammonia scav-
engers), pericardial effusion (pericardiocentesis), pneumotho-
rax (thoracentesis), ongoing blood loss (blood replacement/
hemostasis), hypoadrenalism (hydrocortisone), and/or hypo-
thyroidism (triiodothyronine). When these causes have been 
excluded, ECMO becomes an important therapy to consider 
in term newborns. The current ECMO survival rate for new-
born sepsis is 80%. Most centers accept refractory shock or 
a Pao2 less than 40 mm Hg after maximal therapy to be suf-
ficient indication for ECMO support. When on venovenous 
ECMO, persistent hypotension and/or shock should be treated 
with inotropic and/or vasopressor therapy, or conversion to 
venoarterial support. For newborns with refractory shock 
related to PPHN-induced right ventricular failure, venovenous 
ECMO can unload the right ventricle, reduce septal bowing, 
and improve left ventricle output. However, for newborns with 
primary left ventricle or biventricular failure refractory to ino-
tropic and vasodilator support, venoarterial ECMO is required 
to reverse shock. Inotrope requirements can diminish when 
venoarterial ECMO is used but may persist. Calcium concen-
tration should be normalized in the RBC pump prime (usually 
requires 300 mg CaCl2 per unit of pRBCs). In newborns with 
inadequate urine output and 10% fluid overload despite diuret-
ics, CRRT is best performed while on the ECMO circuit. No 
specific recommendations for CRRT can be made in neonatal 
sepsis. Venous access for CRRT in neonates can be problematic, 
but in patients on ECMO, CRRT can be provided in tandem. It 
is a technical challenge to perform TPE in a neonate weighing 
less than 5 kg. TPE should not be used during the initial septic 
shock resuscitation. Once the shock resuscitation is addressed, 
TPE could be considered as a strategy to reverse MODS, espe-
cially in patients with significant coagulopathy. Titration of 
medications and calcium replenishment will be needed during 
the procedure to prevent hemodynamic changes.
REFERENCES
 1. Carcillo JA, Fields AI; American College of Critical Care Medicine 
Task Force Committee Members: Clinical practice parameters for 
hemodynamic support of pediatric and neonatal patients in septic 
shock. Crit Care Med 2002; 30:1365–1378
 2. Brierley J, Carcillo JA, Choong K, et al: Clinical practice parameters 
for hemodynamic support of pediatric and neonatal septic shock: 
2007 update from the American College of Critical Care Medicine. 
Crit Care Med 2009; 37:666–688
 3. Nhan NT, Phuong CXT, Kneen R, et al: Acute management of dengue 
shock syndrome: A randomized double-blind comparison of 4 intrave-
nous fluid regimens in the first hour Clin Infect Dis 2001; 32:204–
212
 4. Booy R, Habibi P, Nadel S, et al; Meningococcal Research Group: 
Reduction in case fatality rate from meningococcal disease asso-
ciated with improved healthcare delivery. Arch Dis Child 2001; 
85:386–390
 5. Kutko MC, Calarco MP, Flaherty MB, et al: Mortality rates in pediatric 
septic shock with and without multiple organ system failure. Pediatr 
Crit Care Med 2003; 4:333–337
 6. DuPont HL, Spink WW: Infections due to gram-negative organisms: 
An analysis of 860 patients with bacteremia at the University of Min-
nesota Medical Center, 1958-1966. Medicine (Baltimore) 1969; 
48:307–332
 7. Stoll BJ, Holman RC, Shuchat A: Decline in sepsis-associated neona-
tal and infant deaths 1974–1994. Pediatrics 1998; 102:E18
 8. Angus DC, Linde-Zwirble WT, Lidicker J, et al: Epidemiology of severe 
sepsis in the United States: Analysis of incidence, outcome, and 
associated costs of care. Crit Care Med 2001; 29:1303–1310
 9. Watson RS, Carcillo JA, Linde-Zwirble WT, et al: The epidemiology of 
severe sepsis in children in the United States. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 2003; 167:695–701
 
10. Han YY, Carcillo JA, Dragotta MA, et al: Early reversal of pediatric-
neonatal septic shock by community physicians is associated with 
improved outcome. Pediatrics 2003; 112:793–799
 
11. Ninis N, Phillips C, Bailey L, et al: The role of healthcare delivery in the 
outcome of meningococcal disease in children: Case-control study of 
fatal and non-fatal cases. BMJ 2005; 330:1475
 
12. Ventura AM, Shieh HH, Bousso A, et al: Double-blind prospective 
randomized controlled trial of dopamine versus epinephrine as first-
line vasoactive drugs in pediatric septic shock. Crit Care Med 2015; 
43:2292–2302
 
13. de Oliveira CF, de Oliveira DS, Gottschald AF, et al: ACCM/PALS 
haemodynamic support guidelines for paediatric septic shock: An 
outcomes comparison with and without monitoring central venous 
oxygen saturation. Intensive Care Med 2008; 34:1065–1075
 
14. Sankar J, Sankar MJ, Suresh CP, et al: Early goal-directed therapy 
in pediatric septic shock: Comparison of outcomes “with” and 
“without” intermittent superior venacaval oxygen saturation moni-
toring: A prospective cohort study. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2014; 
15:e157–e167
 
15. Karapinar B, Lin JC, Carcillo JA: ACCM guidelines use, correct antibi-
otic therapy, and immune suppressant withdrawal are associated with 
improved survival in pediatric sepsis, severe sepsis, and septic shock. 
Crit Care Med 2004; 32(12 Suppl 3):A161
 
16. Maat M, Buysse CM, Emonts M, et al: Improved survival of children 
with sepsis and purpura: Effects of age, gender, and era. Crit Care 
2007; 11:R112
 17. Wills BA, Nguyen MD, Ha TL, et al: Comparison of three fluid solu-
tions for resuscitation in dengue shock syndrome. N Engl J Med 
2005; 353:877–889
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Davis et al
1084 
www.ccmjournal.org 
June 2017 • Volume 45 • Number 6
 
18. Maitland K, Kiguli S, Opoka RO, et al; FEAST Trial Group: Mortality 
after fluid bolus in African children with severe infection. N Engl J Med 
2011; 364:2483–2495
 
19. Cruz AT, Perry AM, Williams EA, et al: Implementation of goal-directed 
therapy for children with suspected sepsis in the emergency depart-
ment. Pediatrics 2011; 127:e758–e766
 
20. Larsen GY, Mecham N, Greenberg R: An emergency department sep-
tic shock protocol and care guideline for children initiated at triage. 
Pediatrics 2011; 127:e1585–e1592
 
21. Paul R, Neuman MI, Monuteaux MC, et al: Adherence to PALS Sepsis 
Guidelines and Hospital Length of Stay. Pediatrics 2012; 130:e273–
e280
 
22. Paul R, Melendez E, Stack A, et al: Improving adherence to PALS 
septic shock guidelines. Pediatrics 2014; 133:e1358–e1366
 
23. Cruz AT, Williams EA, Graf JM, et al: Test characteristics of an auto-
mated age- and temperature-adjusted tachycardia alert in pediatric 
septic shock. Pediatr Emerg Care 2012; 28:889–894
 
24. Sepanski RJ, Godambe SA, Mangum CD, et al: Designing a pediatric 
severe sepsis screening tool. Front Pediatr 2014; 2:56
 
25. Han YY, Kissoon N, Carcillo JA, et al: The Global Pediatric Sepsis 
Initiative. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2014; 15(suppl):15–16
 
26. Hollenberg SM, Ahrens TS, Annane D, et al: Practice parameters 
for hemodynamic support of sepsis in adults patients: 2004 update. 
Crit Care Med 2004; 32:1928–1948
 27. Parker MM, Shelhamer JH, Natanson C, et al: Serial cardiovascu-
lar variables in survivors and nonsurvivors of human septic shock: 
Heart rate as an early predictor of prognosis. Crit Care Med 1987; 
15:923–929
 
28. Parker MM, Shelhamer JH, Bacharach SL, et al: Profound but revers-
ible myocardial depression in patients with septic shock. Ann Intern 
Med 1984; 100:483–490
 
29. Pollack MM, Fields AI, Ruttimann UE: Sequential cardiopulmonary 
variables of infants and children in septic shock. Crit Care Med 1984; 
12:554–559
 
30. Pollack MM, Fields AI, Ruttimann UE: Distributions of cardiopulmo-
nary variables in pediatric survivors and nonsurvivors of septic shock. 
Crit Care Med 1985; 13:454–459
 
31. Carcillo JA, Pollack MM, Ruttimann UE, et al: Sequential physiologic 
interactions in pediatric cardiogenic and septic shock. Crit Care Med 
1989; 17:12–16
 
32. Monsalve F, Rucabado L, Salvador A, et al: Myocardial depression 
in septic shock caused by meningococcal infection. Crit Care Med 
1984; 12:1021–1023
 
33. Mercier JC, Beaufils F, Hartmann JF, et al: Hemodynamic patterns of 
meningococcal shock in children. Crit Care Med 1988; 16:27–33
 
34. Simma B, Fritz MG, Trawöger R, et al: Changes in left ventricular func-
tion in shocked newborns. Intensive Care Med 1997; 23:982–986
 
35. Walther FJ, Siassi B, Ramadan NA, et al: Cardiac output in new-
born infants with transient myocardial dysfunction. J Pediatr 1985; 
107:781–785
 
36. Ferdman B, Jureidini SB, Gale G, et al: Severe left ventricular dys-
function and arrhythmias as complications of gram-positive sepsis: 
Rapid recovery in children. Pediatr Cardiol 1998; 19:482–486
 37. Feltes TF, Pignatelli R, Kleinert S, et al: Quantitated left ventricular 
systolic mechanics in children with septic shock utilizing noninvasive 
wall-stress analysis. Crit Care Med 1994; 22:1647–1658
 
38. Ceneviva G, Paschall JA, Maffei F, et al: Hemodynamic support in 
fluid-refractory pediatric septic shock. Pediatrics 1998; 102:e19
 
39. Brierly J, Thiruchelvan T, Peters MJ: Hemodynamics of early pedi-
atric fluid resistant septic shock using non-invasive cardiac output 
(USCOM) distinct profiles of CVC infection and community acquired 
sepsis. Crit Care Med 2006; 33:171-I
 
40. Deep A, Goonasekera CD, Wang Y, et al: Evolution of haemodynam-
ics and outcome of fluid-refractory septic shock in children. Intensive 
Care Med 2013; 39:1602–1609
 
41. Hoban LD, Paschall JA, Eckstein J, et al: Awake porcine model of 
intraperitoneal sepsis and altered oxygen utilization. Circ Shock 
1991; 34:252–262
 
42. Green EM, Adams HR: New perspectives in circulatory shock: Patho-
physiologic mediators of the mammalian response to endotoxemia 
and sepsis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992; 200:1834–1841
 
43. McDonough KH, Brumfield BA, Lang CH: In vitro myocardial perfor-
mance after lethal and nonlethal doses of endotoxin. Am J Physiol 
1986; 250:H240–H246
 
44. Natanson C, Fink MP, Ballantyne HK, et al: Gram-negative bactere-
mia produces both severe systolic and diastolic cardiac dysfunction 
in a canine model that simulates human septic shock. J Clin Invest 
1986; 78:259–270
 
45. Dobkin ED, Lobe TE, Bhatia J, et al: The study of fecal E. coli perito-
nitis-induced septic shock in a neonatal pig model. Circ Shock 1985; 
16:325–36
 
46. Peevy KJ, Chartrand SA, Wiseman HJ, et al: Myocardial dysfunction in 
group B streptococcal shock. Pediatr Res 1985; 19:511–513
 47. Meadow WL, Meus PJ: Unsuspected mesenteric hypoperfusion 
despite apparent hemodynamic recovery in the early phase of septic 
shock in piglets. Circ Shock 1985; 15:123–129
 
48. Meadow WL, Meus PJ: Early and late hemodynamic consequences 
of group B beta streptococcal sepsis in piglets: Effects on sys-
temic, pulmonary, and mesenteric circulations. Circ Shock 1986; 
19:347–356
 
49. Gill AB, Weindling AM: Echocardiographic assessment of cardiac 
function in shocked very low birthweight infants. Arch Dis Child 
1993; 68(1 Spec No):17–21
 
50. Kluckow M: Low systemic blood flow and pathophysiology of the pre-
term transitional circulation. Early Hum Dev 2005; 81:429–437
 
51. Munro MJ, Walker AM, Barfield CP: Hypotensive extremely low birth 
weight infants have reduced cerebral blood flow. Pediatrics 2004; 
114:1591–1596
 
52. Jayasinghe D, Gill AB, Levene MI: CBF reactivity in hypotensive and 
normotensive preterm infants. Pediatr Res 2003; 54:848–853
 
53. Vavilala MS, Lam AM: CBF reactivity to changes in MAP (cerebral 
autoregulation) or CO2 (CO2 reactivity) is lost in hypotensive, venti-
lated, preterm infants. Pediatr Res 2004; 55:898
 
54. Al-Aweel I, Pursley DM, Rubin LP, et al: Variations in prevalence of 
hypotension, hypertension, and vasopressor use in NICUs. J Perina-
tol 2001; 21:272–278
 
55. Martens SE, Rijken M, Stoelhorst GM, et al; Leiden Follow-Up Project 
on Prematurity, The Netherlands: Is hypotension a major risk factor for 
neurological morbidity at term age in very preterm infants? Early Hum 
Dev 2003; 75:79–89
 
56. Subhedar NV: Treatment of hypotension in newborns. Semin Neona-
tol 2003; 8:413–423
 57. Seri I, Noori S: Diagnosis and treatment of neonatal hypotension out-
side the transitional period. Early Hum Dev 2005; 81:405–411
 
58. Noori S, Seri I: Pathophysiology of newborn hypotension outside the 
transitional period. Early Hum Dev 2005; 81:399–404
 
59. Evans JR, Lou Short B, Van Meurs K, et al: Cardiovascular support in 
preterm infants. Clin Ther 2006; 28:1366–1384
 
60. Evans N: Which inotrope for which baby? Arch Dis Child Fetal Neo-
natal Ed 2006; 91:F213–220
 
61. Osborn DA: Diagnosis and treatment of preterm transitional circula-
tory compromise. Early Hum Dev 2005; 81:413–422
 
62. Evans N: Management of hypotension and circulatory assessment on 
NICU. Early Hum Dev 2005; 81:397–398
 
63. Seri I: Inotrope, lusitrope, and pressor use in neonates. J Perinatol 
2005; 25(Suppl 2):S28–S30
 
64. Schönberger W, Grimm W, Gempp W, et al: Transient hypothyroidism 
associated with prematurity, sepsis, and respiratory distress. Eur J 
Pediatr 1979; 132:85–92
 
65. Roberton NR, Smith MA: Early neonatal hypocalcaemia. Arch Dis 
Child 1975; 50:604–609
 
66. Efird MM, Heerens AT, Gordon PV, et al: A randomized-controlled trial 
of prophylactic hydrocortisone supplementation for the prevention of 
hypotension in extremely low birth weight infants. J Perinatol 2005; 
25:119–124
 67. Ng PC, Lee CH, Bnur FL, et al: A double-blind, randomized, con-
trolled study of a “stress dose” of hydrocortisone for rescue treat-
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
1085
ment of refractory hypotension in preterm infants. Pediatrics 2006; 
117:367–375
 
68. Fernandez E, Schrader R, Watterberg K: Prevalence of low cortisol 
values in term and near-term infants with vasopressor-resistant hypo-
tension. J Perinatol 2005; 25:114–118
 
69. Noori S, Siassi B, Durand M, et al: Cardiovascular effects of low-
dose dexamethasone in very low birth weight neonates with refractory 
hypotension. Biol Neonate 2006; 89:82–87
 70. Lauterbach R, Pawlik D, Kowalczyk D, et al: Effect of the immunomod-
ulating agent, pentoxifylline, in the treatment of sepsis in prematurely 
delivered infants: A placebo-controlled, double-blind trial. Crit Care 
Med 1999; 27:807–814
 
71. Zimmerman JJ: Appraising the potential of pentoxifylline in septic pre-
mies. Crit Care Med 1999; 27:695–697
 72. Haque K, Mohan P: Pentoxifylline for neonatal sepsis. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2003; CD004205
 73. Pollack MM, Ruttimann UE, Getson PR: Pediatric risk of mortality 
(PRISM) score. Crit Care Med 1988; 16:1110–1116
 74. Carcillo JA, Kuch BA, Han YY, et al: Mortality and functional morbidity 
after use of PALS/APLS by community physicians. Pediatrics 2009; 
124:500–508
 
75. Ranjit S, Aram G, Kissoon N, et al: Multimodal monitoring for hemo-
dynamic categorization and management of pediatric septic shock: A 
pilot observational study. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2014; 15:e17–e26
 76. Kumar R, Singhi S, Singhi P, et al: Randomized controlled trial com-
paring cerebral perfusion pressure-targeted therapy versus intracranial 
pressure-targeted therapy for raised intracranial pressure due to acute 
CNS infections in children. Crit Care Med 2014; 42:1775–1787
 77. Redl-Wenzl EM, Armbruster C, Edelmann G, et al: The effects of 
norepinephrine on hemodynamics and renal function in severe septic 
shock states. Intensive Care Med 1993; 19:151–154
 78. LeDoux D, Astiz ME, Carpati CM, et al: Effects of perfusion pressure 
on tissue perfusion in septic shock. Crit Care Med 2000; 28:2729–
2732
 79. Greenhalgh DG, Warden GD: The importance of intra-abdominal pres-
sure measurements in burned children. J Trauma 1994; 36:685–690
 
80. Evans N, Osborn D, Kluckow M: Preterm circulatory support is more 
complex than just blood pressure. Pediatrics 2005; 115:1114–1115
 
81. Osborn DA, Evan N, Kluckow M: Clinical detection of low upper body 
blood flow in very premature infants using blood pressure, capillary 
refill time, and central – peripheral temperature difference Arch Dis 
Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 2004; 69:F168–F173
 
82. Hunt RW, Evans N, Rieger I, et al: Low superior vena cava flow and 
neurodevelopment at 3 years in very preterm infants. J Pediatr 2004; 
145:588–592
 
83. Evans N, Kluckow M, Simmons M, et al: Which to measure, systemic 
or organ blood flow? Middle cerebral artery and superior vena cava 
blood flow in very preterm infants Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 
2002; 87:F181–F184
 
84. Osborn DA, Evans N, Kluckow M: Hemodynamic and antecedent risk 
factors of early and late periventricular/intraventricular hemorrhage in 
premature infants. Pediatrics 2003; 112:33–39
 
85. Osborn DA, Evans N, Kluckow M: Effect of targeted indometha-
cin on the ductus arteriosus and blood flow to the upper body and 
brain in the preterm infant. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 2003; 
88:F477–F482
 
86. Osborn D, Evans N, Kluckow M: Randomized trial of dobutamine 
versus dopamine in preterm infants with low systemic blood flow. J 
Pediatr 2002; 140:183–191
 87. Evans N, Osborn D, Kluckow M: Mechanism of blood pressure 
increase induced by dopamine in hypotensive preterm neonates. Arch 
Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 2000; 83:F75–F76
 
88. Kluckow M, Evans N: Low systemic blood flow in the preterm infant. 
Semin Neonatol 2001; 6:75–84
 
89. Kluckow M, Evans N: Ductal shunting, high pulmonary blood flow, and 
pulmonary hemorrhage. J Pediatr 2000; 137:68–72
 
90. Kluckow M, Evans N: Low superior vena cava flow and intraventricular 
haemorrhage in preterm infants. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 
2000; 82:F188–F194
 91. Parr GV, Blackstone EH, Kirklin JW: Cardiac performance and mor-
tality early after intracardiac surgery in infants and young children. 
Circulation 1975; 51:867–874
 92. Yasaka Y, Khemani RG, Markovitz BP: Is shock index associated 
with outcome in children with sepsis/septic shock?. Pediatr Crit 
Care Med 2013; 14:e372–e379
 93. Rivers E, Nguyen B, Havstad S, et al; Early Goal-Directed Therapy 
Collaborative Group: Early goal-directed therapy in the treat-
ment of severe sepsis and septic shock. N Engl J Med 2001; 
345:1368–1377
 94. Textoris J, Fouché L, Wiramus S, et al: High central venous oxygen 
saturation in the latter stages of septic shock is associated with 
increased mortality. Crit Care 2011; 15:R176
 95. Ahmad S, Tejuja A, Newman KD, et al: Clinical review: A review and 
analysis of heart rate variability and the diagnosis and prognosis of 
infection. Crit Care 2009; 13:232
 96. Fenton KE, Sable CA, Bell MJ, et al: Increases in serum levels of tro-
ponin I are associated with cardiac dysfunction and disease severity 
in pediatric patients with septic shock. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2004; 
5:533–538
 97. Briassoulis G, Narlioglou M, Zavras N, et al: Myocardial injury in 
meningococcus-induced purpura fulminans in children. Intensive 
Care Med 2001; 27:1073–1082
 98. Thiru Y, Pathan N, Bignall S, et al: A myocardial cytotoxic process is 
involved in the cardiac dysfunction of meningococcal septic shock. 
Crit Care Med 2000; 28:2979–2983
 99. Hatherill M, Waggie Z, Purves L, et al: Mortality and the nature 
of metabolic acidosis in children with shock. Intensive Care Med 
2003; 29:286–291
 
100. Dugas MA, Proulx F, de Jaeger A, et al: Markers of tissue hypo-
perfusion in pediatric septic shock. Intensive Care Med 2000; 
26:75–83
 
101. Scott HF, Donoghue AJ, Gaieski DF, et al: The utility of early lactate 
testing in undifferentiated pediatric systemic inflammatory response 
syndrome. Acad Emerg Med 2012; 19:1276–1280
 
102. Kim YA, Ha EJ, Jhang WK, et al: Early blood lactate area as a prog-
nostic marker in pediatric septic shock. Intensive Care Med 2013; 
39:1818–1823
 
103. Jat KR, Jhamb U, Gupta VK: Serum lactate levels as the predictor 
of outcome in pediatric septic shock. Indian J Crit Care Med 2011; 
15:102–107
 
104. James JH, Luchette FA, McCarter FD, et al: Lactate is an unreli-
able indicator of tissue hypoxia in injury or sepsis. Lancet 1999; 
354:505–508
 
105. Chapman LL, Sullivan B, Pacheco AL, et al: VeinViewer-assisted 
intravenous catheter placement in a pediatric emergency depart-
ment. Acad Emerg Med 2011; 18:966–971
 
106. Kim MJ, Park JM, Rhee N, et al: Efficacy of VeinViewer in pediatric 
peripheral intravenous access: A randomized controlled trial. Eur J 
Pediatr 2012; 171:1121–1125
 107. Aria DJ, Vatsky S, Kaye R, et al: Greater saphenous venous access 
as an alternative in children. Pediatr Radiol 2014; 44:187–192
 
108. Guilfoyle FJ, Milner R, Kissoon N: Resuscitation interventions in a 
tertiary level pediatric emergency department: Implications for main-
tenance of skills. CJEM 2011; 13:90–95
 
109. Kanter RK, Zimmerman JJ, Strauss RH, et al: Pediatric emergency 
intravenous access. Evaluation of a protocol. Am J Dis Child 1986; 
140:132–134
 
110. Voigt J, Waltzman M, Lottenberg L: Intraosseous vascular access 
for in-hospital emergency use: A systematic clinical review of the 
literature and analysis. Pediatr Emerg Care 2012; 28:185–199
 
111. American Heart Association/American Academy of Pediatrics 
Pediatric Resuscitation Subcommittee: Pediatric Advanced Life 
Support Provider Manual. Oak Park, IL, AHA/AAP, 2010, p 110
 
112. Fiorito BA, Mirza F, Doran TM, et al: Intraosseous access in the set-
ting of pediatric critical care transport. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2005; 
6:50–53
 
113. National Institute for Clinical Excellence: Guidance on the Use of 
Ultrasound Locating Devices for Placing Central Venous Catheters. 
Technology Appraisal Guidance No. 49, 2002
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Davis et al
1086 
www.ccmjournal.org 
June 2017 • Volume 45 • Number 6
 
114. Verghese ST, McGill WA, Patel RI, et al: Ultrasound-guided internal 
jugular venous cannulation in infants: A prospective comparison with 
the traditional palpation method. Anesthesiology 1999; 91:71–77
 
115. Ultrasound guidance of central vein catheterization. In: Rothschild 
JM (Eds). Evidence Report/Technology Assessment, No. 43. Making 
Health Care Safer: A Critical Analysis of Patient Safety Practices. 
Rockville, MD, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 2001, 
Publication No. 01-E058, 245–53
 
116. Di Nardo M, Tomasello C, Pittiruti M, et al: Ultrasound-guided central 
venous cannulation in infants weighing less than 5 kilograms. J Vasc 
Access 2011; 12:321–324
 117. Hind D, Calvert N, McWilliams R, et al: Ultrasonic locating devices 
for central venous cannulation: Meta-analysis. BMJ 2003; 327:361
 
118. Lamperti M, Caldiroli D, Cortellazzi P, et al: Safety and efficacy of 
ultrasound assistance during internal jugular vein cannulation in neu-
rosurgical infants. Intensive Care Med 2008; 34:2100–2105
 
119. Sigaut S, Skhiri A, Stany I, et al: Ultrasound guided internal jugular 
vein access in children and infant: A meta-analysis of published stud-
ies. Paediatr Anaesth 2009; 19:1199–1206
 
120. Ngo NT, Cao XT, Kneen R, et al: Acute management of dengue shock 
syndrome: A randomized double-blind comparison of 4 intravenous 
fluid regimens in the first hour. Clin Infect Dis 2001; 32:204–213
 
121. Dung NM, Day NP, Tam DT, et al: Fluid replacement in dengue shock 
syndrome: A randomized, double-blind comparison of four intrave-
nous-fluid regimens. Clin Infect Dis 1999; 29:787–794
 
122. Maitland K, Pamba A, English M, et al: Randomized trial of volume 
expansion with albumin or saline in children with severe malaria: 
Preliminary evidence of albumin benefit. Clin Infect Dis 2005; 
40:538–545
 
123. Finfer S, Bellomo R, Boyce N, et al; SAFE Study Investigators: A 
comparison of albumin and saline for fluid resuscitation in the inten-
sive care unit. N Engl J Med 2004; 350:2247–2256
 
124. Upadhyay M, Singhi S, Murlidharan J, et al: Randomized evaluation 
of fluid resuscitation with crystalloid (saline) and colloid (polymer 
from degraded gelatin in saline) in pediatric septic shock. Indian 
Pediatr 2005; 42:223–231
 
125. Carcillo JA, Davis AL, Zaritsky A: Role of early fluid resuscitation in 
pediatric septic shock. JAMA 1991; 266:1242–1245
 
126. Stoner MJ, Goodman DG, Cohen DM, et al: Rapid fluid resuscitation 
in pediatrics; testing the ACCM guidelines Crit Care Med 2005; 
33:A68
 127. Ranjit S, Kissoon N, Jayakumar I: Aggressive management of den-
gue shock syndrome may decrease mortality rate: A suggested pro-
tocol. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2005; 6:412–419
 
128. Foland JA, Fortenberry JD, Warshaw BL, et al: Fluid overload before 
continuous hemofiltration and survival in critically ill children: A retro-
spective analysis. Crit Care Med 2004; 32:1771–1776
 
129. Lucking SE, Williams TM, Chaten FC, et al: Dependence of oxy-
gen consumption on oxygen delivery in children with hyperdynamic 
septic shock and low oxygen extraction. Crit Care Med 1990; 
18:1316–1319
 
130. Mink RB, Pollack MM: Effect of blood transfusion on oxygen consump-
tion in pediatric septic shock. Crit Care Med 1990; 18:1087–1091
 
131. Karam O, Tucci M, Ducruet T, et al; Canadian Critical Care Trials 
Group; PALISI Network: Red blood cell transfusion thresholds 
in pediatric patients with sepsis. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2011; 
12:512–518
 
132. Carroll GC, Snyder JV: Hyperdynamic severe intravascular sep-
sis depends on fluid administration in cynomolgus monkey. Am J 
Physiol 1982; 243:R131–R141
 
133. Lee PK, Deringer JR, Kreiswirth BN, et al: Fluid replacement protec-
tion of rabbits challenged subcutaneous with toxic shock syndrome 
toxins. Infect Immun 1991; 59:879–884
 
134. Ottoson J, Dawidson I, Brandberg A, et al: Cardiac output and organ 
blood flow in experimental septic shock: Effect of treatment with 
antibiotics, corticosteroids, and fluid infusion. Circ Shock 1991; 
35:14–24
 
135. Wilson MA, Chou MC, Spain DA, et al: Fluid resuscitation attenu-
ates early cytokine mRNA expression after peritonitis. J Trauma 
1996; 41:622–627
 
136. Boldt J, Muller M, Heesen M: Influence of different volume therapies 
and pentoxifylline infusion on circulating adhesion molecules in criti-
cally ill patients. Crit Care Med 1998; 24:385–391
 137. Zadrobilek E, Hackl W, Sporn P, et al: Effect of large volume replace-
ment with balanced electrolyte solutions on extravascular lung water 
in surgical patients with sepsis syndrome. Intensive Care Med 
1989; 15:505–510
 
138. Powell KR, Sugarman LI, Eskenazi AE, et al: Normalization of plasma 
arginine vasopressin concentrations when children with meningitis 
are given maintenance plus replacement fluid therapy. J Pediatr 
1990; 117:515–522
 
139. Pladys P, Wodey E, Bétrémieux P, et al: Effects of volume expan-
sion on cardiac output in the preterm infant. Acta Paediatr 1997; 
86:1241–1245
 
140. Lambert HJ, Baylis PH, Coulthard MG: Central-peripheral temper-
ature difference, blood pressure, and arginine vasopressin in pre-
term neonates undergoing volume expansion. Arch Dis Child Fetal 
Neonatal Ed 1998; 78:F43–F45
 
141. Bressack MA, Morton NS, Hortop J: Group B streptococcal sepsis 
in the piglet: Effects of fluid therapy on venous return, organ edema, 
and organ blood flow. Circ Res 1987; 61:659–669
 
142. Pollard AJ, Britto J, Nadel S, et al: Emergency management of menin-
gococcal disease. Arch Dis Child 1999; 80:290–296
 
143. Boldt J, Heesen M, Welters I, et al: Does the type of volume therapy 
influence endothelial-related coagulation in the critically ill? Br J 
Anaesth 1995; 75:740–746
 
144. Oca MJ, Nelson M, Donn SM: Randomized trial of normal saline 
versus 5% albumin for the treatment of neonatal hypotension. J 
Perinatol 2003; 23:473–476
 
145. Cam BV, Tuan DT, Fonsmark L, et al: Randomized comparison of oxy-
gen mask treatment vs nasal continuous positive airway pressure in 
dengue shock syndrome with acute respiratory failure. J Trop Pediatr 
2002; 48:335–339
 
146. Maitland K, Pamba A, English M, et al: Pre-transfusion management of 
children with severe malarial anaemia: A randomised controlled trial of 
intravascular volume expansion. Br J Haematol 2005; 128:393–400
 147. Liet JM, Kuster A, Denizot S, et al: Effects of hydroxyethyl starch on 
cardiac output in hypotensive neonates: A comparison with isotonic 
saline and 5% albumin. Acta Paediatr 2006; 95:555–560
 
148. Pamba A, Maitland K: Capillary refill: Prognostic value in Kenyan chil-
dren. Arch Dis Child 2004; 89:950–955
 
149. Yamamoto LG: Rapid sequence intubation. In: Textbook of Pediatric 
Emergency Care. Ludwig S and Fleisher GR (Eds). Philadelphia, PA, 
Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 2000
 
150. Jabre P, Avenel A, Combes X, et al: Morbidity related to emergency 
endotracheal intubation–a substudy of the KETAmine SEDation trial. 
Resuscitation 2011; 82:517–522
 
151. Haubner LY, Barry JS, Johnston LC, et al: Neonatal intubation per-
formance: Room for improvement in tertiary neonatal intensive care 
units. Resuscitation 2013; 84:1359–1364
 
152. Li S, Rehder K, Giuliano JS, et al: Development of a quality improve-
ment bundle to reduce tracheal intubation-associated events in 
PICUs. Am J Med Qual 2016; 31:47–55
 
153. Jones P, Dauger S, Denjoy I, et al: The effect of atropine on rhythm 
and conduction disturbances during 322 critical care intubations. 
Pediatr Crit Care Med 2013; 14:e289–e297
 
154. Jabre P, Combes X, Lapostolle F, et al; KETASED Collaborative 
Study Group: Etomidate versus ketamine for rapid sequence intuba-
tion in acutely ill patients: A multicentre randomised controlled trial. 
Lancet 2009; 374:293–300
 
155. Barois J, Tourneux P: Ketamine and atropine decrease pain for pre-
term newborn tracheal intubation in the delivery room: An observa-
tional pilot study. Acta Paediatr 2013; 102:e534–e538
 
156. Cuthbertson BH, Sprung CL, Annane D, et al: The effects of etomi-
date on adrenal responsiveness and mortality in patients with septic 
shock. Intensive Care Med 2009; 35:1868–1876
 157. den Brinker M, Hokken-Koelega AC, Hazelzet JA, et al: One single 
dose of etomidate negatively influences adrenocortical performance 
for at least 24h in children with meningococcal sepsis. Intensive 
Care Med 2008; 34:163–168
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
1087
 
158. Albert SG, Ariyan S, Rather A: The effect of etomidate on adrenal 
function in critical illness: A systematic review. Intensive Care Med 
2011; 37:901–910
 
159. Dmello D, Taylor S, O’Brien J, et al: Outcomes of etomidate in severe 
sepsis and septic shock. Chest 2010; 138:1327–1332
 
160. McPhee LC, Badawi O, Fraser GL, et al: Single-dose etomidate is 
not associated with increased mortality in ICU patients with sepsis: 
Analysis of a large electronic ICU database. Crit Care Med 2013; 
41:774–783
 
161. Nemergut ME, Yaster M, Colby CE: Sedation and analgesia to facili-
tate mechanical ventilation. Clin Perinatol 2013; 40:539–558
 
162. Hall RW: Anesthesia and analgesia in the NICU. Clin Perinatol 
2012; 39:239–254
 
163. Sloth E, Pedersen J, Olsen KH, et al: Transoesophageal echocar-
diographic monitoring during paediatric cardiac surgery: Obtainable 
information and feasibility in 532 children. Paediatr Anaesth 2001; 
11:657–662
 
164. Fernandez EG, Green TP, Sweeney M: Low inferior vena caval cath-
eters for hemodynamic and pulmonary function monitoring in pediat-
ric critical care patients. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2004; 5:14–18
 
165. Mahajan A, Shabanie A, Turner J, et al: Pulse contour analysis for 
cardiac output monitoring in cardiac surgery for congenital heart dis-
ease. Anesth Analg 2003; 97:1283–1288
 
166. Torgay A, Pirat A, Akpek E, et al: Pulse contour cardiac output sys-
tem use in pediatric orthotopic liver transplantation: Preliminary 
report of nine patients. Transplant Proc 2005; 37:3168–3170
 167. Reynolds EM, Ryan DP, Sheridan RL, et al: Left ventricular failure 
complicating severe pediatric burn injuries. J Pediatr Surg 1995; 
30:264–269
 
168. Zaritsky A: Curr Concepts Ped Emergency and Crit Care 1998
 
169. Duke TD, Butt W, South M: Predictors of mortality and multiple 
organ failure in children with sepsis. Intensive Care Med 1997; 
23:684–692
 
170. Tibby SM, Hatherill M, Marsh MJ, et al: Clinical validation of cardiac 
output measurements using femoral artery thermodilution with direct 
Fick in ventilated children and infants. Intensive Care Med 1997; 
23:987–991
 
171. McLuckie A, Murdoch IA, Marsh MJ, et al: A comparison of pulmo-
nary and femoral artery thermodilution cardiac indices in paediatric 
intensive care patients. Acta Paediatr 1996; 85:336–338
 
172. Pauli C, Fakler U, Genz T, et al: Cardiac output determination in chil-
dren: Equivalence of the transpulmonary thermodilution method to 
the direct Fick principle. Intensive Care Med 2002; 28:947–952
 
173. Bollaert PE, Bauer P, Audibert G, et al: Effects of epinephrine on 
hemodynamics and oxygen metabolism in dopamine-resistant septic 
shock. Chest 1990; 98:949–953
 174. Heckmann M, Trotter A, Pohlandt F, et al: Epinephrine treatment of 
hypotension in very low birthweight infants. Acta Paediatr 2002; 
91:566–570
 
175. Pellicer A, Valverde E, Elorza MD, et al: Cardiovascular support for 
low birth weight infants and cerebral hemodynamics: A randomized, 
blinded, clinical trial. Pediatrics 2005; 115:1501–1512
 
176. Valverde E, Pellicer A, Madero R, et al: Dopamine versus epinephrine 
for cardiovascular support in low birth weight infants: Analysis of 
systemic effects and neonatal clinical outcomes. Pediatrics 2006; 
117:e1213–e1222
 177. Meier-Hellmann A, Reinhart K, Bredle DL, et al: Epinephrine 
impairs splanchnic perfusion in septic shock. Crit Care Med 1997; 
25:399–404
 
178. Subhedar NV, Shaw NJ: Dopamine versus dobutamine for hypo-
tensive preterm infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2003; 
CD001242
 
179. Sakr Y, Reinhart K, Vincent JL, et al: Does dopamine administration 
in shock influence outcome? Results of the Sepsis Occurrence in 
Acutely Ill Patients (SOAP) Study. Crit Care Med 2006; 34:589–597
 
180. Padbury JF, Agata Y, Baylen BG, et al: Pharmacokinetics of dopa-
mine in critically ill newborn infants. J Pediatr 1990; 117:472–476
 
181. Bhatt-Mehta V, Nahata MC, McClead RE, et al: Dopamine phar-
macokinetics in critically ill newborn infants. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 
1991; 40:593–597
 
182. Allen E, Pettigrew A, Frank D, et al: Alterations in dopamine clear-
ance and catechol-O-methyltransferase activity by dopamine infu-
sions in children. Crit Care Med 1997; 25:181–189
 
183. Outwater KM, Treves ST, Lang P, et al: Renal and hemodynamic 
effects of dopamine in infants following cardiac surgery. J Clin 
Anesth 1990; 2:253–257
 
184. Lobe TE, Paone R, Dent SR, et al: Benefits of high-dose dopamine in 
experimental neonatal septic shock. J Surg Res 1987; 42:665–674
 
185. Seri I, Tulassay T, Kiszel J, et al: Cardiovascular response to dopa-
mine in hypotensive preterm neonates with severe hyaline mem-
brane disease. Eur J Pediatr 1984; 142:3–9
 
186. Padbury JF, Agata Y, Baylen BG, et al: Dopamine pharmacokinetics 
in critically ill newborn infants. J Pediatr 1987; 110:293–298
 187. Hentschel R, Hensel D, Brune T, et al: Impact on blood pressure 
and intestinal perfusion of dobutamine or dopamine in hypotensive 
preterm infants. Biol Neonate 1995; 68:318–324
 
188. Klarr JM, Faix RG, Pryce CJ, et al: Randomized, blind trial of dopamine 
versus dobutamine for treatment of hypotension in preterm infants 
with respiratory distress syndrome. J Pediatr 1994; 125:117–122
 
189. Liet JM, Boscher C, Gras-Leguen C, et al: Dopamine effects on pul-
monary artery pressure in hypotensive preterm infants with patent 
ductus arteriosus. J Pediatr 2002; 140:373–375
 
190. Kim KK, Frankel LR: The need for inotropic support in a subgroup 
of infants with severe life-threatening respiratory syncytial viral infec-
tion. J Investig Med 1997; 45:469–473
 
191. Jardin F, Eveleigh MC, Gurdjian F, et al: Venous admixture in human 
septic shock: Comparative effects of blood volume expansion, 
dopamine infusion and isoproterenol infusion on mismatching of 
ventilation and pulmonary blood flow in peritonitis. Circulation 1979; 
60:155–159
 
192. Harada K, Tamura M, Ito T, et al: Effects of low-dose dobutamine 
on left ventricular diastolic filling in children. Pediatr Cardiol 1996; 
17:220–225
 
193. Stopfkuchen H, Schranz D, Huth R, et al: Effects of dobutamine on 
left ventricular performance in newborns as determined by systolic 
time intervals. Eur J Pediatr 1987; 146:135–139
 
194. Stopfkuchen H, Queisser-Luft A, Vogel K: Cardiovascular responses 
to dobutamine determined by systolic time intervals in preterm 
infants. Crit Care Med 1990; 18:722–724
 
195. Habib DM, Padbury JF, Anas NG, et al: Dobutamine pharmacokinet-
ics and pharmacodynamics in pediatric intensive care patients. Crit 
Care Med 1992; 20:601–608
 
196. Berg RA, Donnerstein RL, Padbury JF: Dobutamine infusions in 
stable, critically ill children: Pharmacokinetics and hemodynamic 
actions. Crit Care Med 1993; 21:678–686
 197. Martinez AM, Padbury JF, Thio S: Dobutamine pharmacokinetics and 
cardiovascular responses in critically ill neonates. Pediatrics 1992; 
89:47–51
 
198. Perkin RM, Levin DL, Webb R, et al: Dobutamine: A hemodynamic 
evaluation in children with shock. J Pediatr 1982; 100:977–983
 
199. Goto M, Griffin A: Adjuvant effects of beta-adrenergic drugs on indo-
methacin treatment of newborn canine endotoxic shock. J Pediatr 
Surg 1991; 26:1156–1160
 
200. Clark SJ, Yoxall CW, Subhedar NV: Right ventricular performance 
in hypotensive preterm neonates treated with dopamine. Pediatr 
Cardiol 2002; 23:167–170
 
201. Lopez SL, Leighton JO, Walther FJ: Supranormal cardiac output in 
the dopamine- and dobutamine-dependent preterm infant. Pediatr 
Cardiol 1997; 18:292–296
 
202. Keeley SR, Bohn DJ: The use of inotropic and afterload-reducing 
agents in neonates. Clin Perinatol 1988; 15:467–489
 
203. Butt W, Bohn D, Whyte H: Clinical experience with systemic 
vasodilator therapy in the newborn infant. Aust Paediatr J 1986; 
22:117–120
 
204. Benitz WE, Rhine WD, Van Meurs KP, et al: Nitrovasodilator ther-
apy for severe respiratory distress syndrome. J Perinatol 1996; 
16:443–448
 
205. Wong AF, McCulloch LM, Sola A: Treatment of peripheral tissue 
ischemia with topical nitroglycerin ointment in neonates. J Pediatr 
1992; 121:980–983
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Davis et al
1088 
www.ccmjournal.org 
June 2017 • Volume 45 • Number 6
 
206. Bailey JM, Miller BE, Kanter KR, et al: A comparison of the hemody-
namic effects of amrinone and sodium nitroprusside in infants after 
cardiac surgery. Anesth Analg 1997; 84:294–298
 207. Laitinen P, Happonen JM, Sairanen H, et al: Amrinone versus 
dopamine-nitroglycerin after reconstructive surgery for complete 
atrioventricular septal defect. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 1997; 
11:870–874
 
208. Spronk PE, Ince C, Gardien MJ, et al: Nitroglycerin in septic 
shock after intravascular volume resuscitation. Lancet 2002; 
360:1395–1396
 
209. Heyderman RS, Klein NJ, Shennan GI, et al: Deficiency of prosta-
cyclin production in meningococcal shock. Arch Dis Child 1991; 
66:1296–1299
 
210. Lauterbach R, Zembala M: Pentoxifylline reduces plasma tumour 
necrosis factor-alpha concentration in premature infants with sepsis. 
Eur J Pediatr 1996; 155:404–409
 
211. Kawczynski P, Piotrowski A: Circulatory and diuretic effects of 
dopexamine infusion in low-birth-weight infants with respiratory fail-
ure. Intensive Care Med 1996; 22:65–70
 
212. Habre W, Beghetti M, Roduit C, et al: Haemodynamic and renal 
effects of dopexamine after cardiac surgery in children. Anaesth 
Intensive Care 1996; 24:435–439
 
213. Moffett BS, Orellana R: Use of fenoldopam to increase urine output 
in a patient with renal insufficiency secondary to septic shock: A 
case report. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2006; 7:600–602
 
214. Morelli A, Rocco M, Conti G, et al: Effects of short-term fenoldo-
pam infusion on gastric mucosal blood flow in septic shock. 
Anesthesiology 2004; 101:576–582
 
215. Barton P, Garcia J, Kouatli A, et al: Hemodynamic effects of i.v. mil-
rinone lactate in pediatric patients with septic shock. A prospec-
tive, double-blinded, randomized, placebo-controlled, interventional 
study. Chest 1996; 109:1302–1312
 
216. Chang AC, Atz AM, Wernovsky G, et al: Milrinone: Systemic and 
pulmonary hemodynamic effects in neonates after cardiac surgery. 
Crit Care Med 1995; 23:1907–1914
 217. Matejovic M, Krouzecky A, Radej J, et al: Successful reversal of 
resistent hypodynamic septic shock with levosimendan. Acta 
Anaesthesiol Scand 2005; 49:127–128
 
218. Noto A, Giacomini M, Palandi A, et al: Levosimendan in septic car-
diac failure. Intensive Care Med 2005; 31:164–165
 
219. Oldner A, Konrad D, Weitzberg E, et al: Effects of levosimendan, 
a novel inotropic calcium-sensitizing drug, in experimental septic 
shock. Crit Care Med 2001; 29:2185–2193
 
220. Morelli A, Teboul JL, Maggiore SM, et al: Effects of levosimendan on 
right ventricular afterload in patients with acute respiratory distress 
syndrome: A pilot study. Crit Care Med 2006; 34:2287–2293
 
221. Müller K, Peters A, Zeus T, et al: [Therapy of acute decompen-
sated heart failure with levosimendan]. Med Klin (Munich) 2006; 
101(Suppl 1):119–122
 
222. Namachivayam P, Crossland DS, Butt WW, et al: Early experience 
with Levosimendan in children with ventricular dysfunction. Pediatr 
Crit Care Med 2006; 7:445–448
 
223. Ringe HI, Varnholt V, Gaedicke G: Cardiac rescue with enoximone in 
volume and catecholamine refractory septic shock. Pediatr Crit Care 
Med 2003; 4:471–475
 
224. Kern H, Schröder T, Kaulfuss M, et al: Enoximone in contrast to 
dobutamine improves hepatosplanchnic function in fluid-optimized 
septic shock patients. Crit Care Med 2001; 29:1519–1525
 
225. Hoang P, Fosse JP, Fournier JL, et al: [Enoximone-noradrenaline 
combination in septic shock]. Presse Med 1991; 20:1785
 
226. Meadows D, Edwards JD, Wilkins RG, et al: Reversal of intractable 
septic shock with norepinephrine therapy. Crit Care Med 1988; 
16:663–666
 227. Desjars P, Pinaud M, Potel G, et al: A reappraisal of norepinephrine 
therapy in human septic shock. Crit Care Med 1987; 15:134–137
 
228. Morimatsu H, Singh K, Uchino S, et al: Early and exclusive use of 
norepinephrine in septic shock. Resuscitation 2004; 62:249–254
 
229. Hall LG, Oyen LJ, Taner CB, et al: Fixed-dose vasopressin compared 
with titrated dopamine and norepinephrine as initial vasopressor 
therapy for septic shock. Pharmacotherapy 2004; 24:1002–1012
 
230. Lampin ME, Rousseaux J, Botte A, et al: Noradrenaline use for sep-
tic shock in children: Doses, routes of administration and complica-
tions. Acta Paediatr 2012; 101:e426–e430
 
231. Tourneux P, Rakza T, Abazine A, et al: Noradrenaline for manage-
ment of septic shock refractory to fluid loading and dopamine 
or dobutamine in full-term newborn infants. Acta Paediatr 2008; 
97:177–180
 
232. Klinzing S, Simon M, Reinhart K, et al: High-dose vasopressin is not 
superior to norepinephrine in septic shock. Crit Care Med 2003; 
31:2646–2650
 
233. Delmas A, Leone M, Rousseau S, et al: Clinical review: Vasopressin 
and terlipressin in septic shock patients. Crit Care 2005; 9:212–222
 
234. Leibovitch L, Efrati O, Vardi A, et al: Intractable hypotension in septic 
shock: Successful treatment with vasopressin in an infant. Isr Med 
Assoc J 2003; 5:596–598
 
235. Matok I, Vard A, Efrati O, et al: Terlipressin as rescue therapy for 
intractable hypotension due to septic shock in children. Shock 
2005; 23:305–310
 
236. Tsuneyoshi I, Yamada H, Kakihana Y, et al: Hemodynamic and meta-
bolic effects of low-dose vasopressin infusions in vasodilatory septic 
shock. Crit Care Med 2001; 29:487–493
 237. Peters MJ, Booth RA, Petros AJ: Terlipressin bolus induces systemic 
vasoconstriction in septic shock. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2004; 
5:112–115
 
238. Liedel JL, Meadow W, Nachman J, et al: Use of vasopressin in refrac-
tory hypotension in children with vasodilatory shock: Five cases and 
a review of the literature. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2002; 3:15–18
 
239. Vasudevan A, Lodha R, Kabra SK: Vasopressin infusion in children 
with catecholamine-resistant septic shock. Acta Paediatr 2005; 
94:380–383
 
240. Rodríguez-Núñez A, Fernández-Sanmartín M, Martinón-Torres F, et 
al: Terlipressin for catecholamine-resistant septic shock in children. 
Intensive Care Med 2004; 30:477–480
 
241. Matok I, Leibovitch L, Vardi A, et al: Terlipressin as rescue therapy for 
intractable hypotension during neonatal septic shock. Pediatr Crit 
Care Med 2004; 5:116–118
 
242. Rosenzweig EB, Starc TJ, Chen JM, et al: Intravenous arginine-
vasopressin in children with vasodilatory shock after cardiac surgery. 
Circulation 1999; 100(Suppl 19):II182–II186
 
243. Agrawal A, Singh VK, Varma A, et al: Intravenous arginine vasopres-
sin infusion in refractory vasodilatory shock: A clinical study. Indian J 
Pediatr 2012; 79:488–493
 
244. Bidegain M, Greenberg R, Simmons C, et al: Vasopressin for refrac-
tory hypotension in extremely low birth weight infants. J Pediatr 
2010; 157:502–504
 
245. Meyer S, Gottschling S, Baghai A, et al: Arginine-vasopressin in cat-
echolamine-refractory septic versus non-septic shock in extremely 
low birth weight infants with acute renal injury. Crit Care 2006; 
10:R71
 
246. Meyer S, Löffler G, Polcher T, et al: Vasopressin in catecholamine-
resistant septic and cardiogenic shock in very-low-birthweight 
infants. Acta Paediatr 2006; 95:1309–1312
 247. Russell JA, Walley KR, Singer J, et al; VASST Investigators: 
Vasopressin versus norepinephrine infusion in patients with septic 
shock. N Engl J Med 2008; 358:877–887
 
248. Choong K, Bohn D, Fraser DD, et al; Canadian Critical Care Trials 
Group: Vasopressin in pediatric vasodilatory shock: A multicenter 
randomized controlled trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2009; 
180:632–639
 
249. Zeballos G, López-Herce J, Fernández C, et al: Rescue therapy with 
terlipressin by continuous infusion in a child with catecholamine-
resistant septic shock. Resuscitation 2006; 68:151–153
 
250. Radicioni M, Troiani S, Camerini PG: Effects of terlipressin on pul-
monary artery pressure in a septic cooled infant: An echocardio-
graphic assessment. J Perinatol 2012; 32:893–895
 
251. Filippi L, Gozzini E, Daniotti M, et al: Rescue treatment with terlipres-
sin in different scenarios of refractory hypotension in newborns and 
infants. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2011; 12:e237–e241
 
252. Filippi L, Poggi C, Serafini L, et al: Terlipressin as rescue treatment 
of refractory shock in a neonate. Acta Paediatr 2008; 97:500–502
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
1089
 
253. Leone M, Martin C: Role of terlipressin in the treatment of infants and 
neonates with catecholamine-resistant septic shock. Best Pract Res 
Clin Anaesthesiol 2008; 22:323–333
 
254. Michel F, Thomachot L, David M, et al: Continuous low-dose infusion 
of terlipressin as a rescue therapy in meningococcal septic shock. 
Am J Emerg Med 2007; 25:863.e1–863.e2
 
255. Papoff P, Mancuso M, Barbara CS, et al: The role of terlipressin in 
pediatric septic shock: A review of the literature and personal experi-
ence. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol 2007; 20:213–221
 
256. Rodríguez-Núñez A, Oulego-Erroz I, Gil-Antón J, et al; RETSPED-II 
Working Group of the Spanish Society of Pediatric Intensive Care: 
Continuous terlipressin infusion as rescue treatment in a case series 
of children with refractory septic shock. Ann Pharmacother 2010; 
44:1545–1553
 257. Rodríguez-Núñez A, López-Herce J, Gil-Antón J, et al; RETSPED 
Working Group of the Spanish Society of Pediatric Intensive Care: 
Rescue treatment with terlipressin in children with refractory septic 
shock: A clinical study. Crit Care 2006; 10:R20
 
258. Yildizdas D, Yapicioglu H, Celik U, et al: Terlipressin as a rescue ther-
apy for catecholamine-resistant septic shock in children. Intensive 
Care Med 2008; 34:511–517
 
259. Yunge M, Petros A: Angiotensin for septic shock unresponsive to 
noradrenaline. Arch Dis Child 2000; 82:388–389
 
260. Gregory JS, Bonfiglio MF, Dasta JF, et al: Experience with phen-
ylephrine as a component of the pharmacologic support of septic 
shock. Crit Care Med 1991; 19:1395–1400
 
261. López A, Lorente JA, Steingrub J, et al: Multiple-center, randomized, 
placebo-controlled, double-blind study of the nitric oxide synthase 
inhibitor 546C88: Effect on survival in patients with septic shock. 
Crit Care Med 2004; 32:21–30
 
262. Grover R, Lopez A, Lorente J et al Multi-center, randomized, double 
blind, placebo-controlled, double bind study of nitric oxide inhibitor 
546C88: Effect on survival in patients with septic shock. Crit Care 
Med 1999; 27:A33
 
263. Driscoll W, Thurin S, Carrion V, et al: Effect of methylene blue on 
refractory neonatal hypotension. J Pediatr 1996; 129:904–908
 
264. Taylor K, Holtby H: Methylene blue revisited: Management of hypo-
tension in a pediatric patient with bacterial endocarditis. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg 2005; 130:566
 
265. Faustino EV, Bogue CW: Relationship between hypoglycemia 
and mortality in critically ill children. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2010; 
11:690–698
 
266. Wintergerst KA, Buckingham B, Gandrud L, et al: Association of 
hypoglycemia, hyperglycemia, and glucose variability with morbid-
ity and death in the pediatric intensive care unit. Pediatrics 2006; 
118:173–179
 267. Branco RG, Garcia PC, Piva JP, et al: Glucose level and risk of 
mortality in pediatric septic shock. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2005; 
6:470–472
 
268. Day KM, Haub N, Betts H, et al: Hyperglycemia is associated with 
morbidity in critically ill children with meningococcal sepsis. Pediatr 
Crit Care Med 2008; 9:636–640
 
269. Mesotten D, Gielen M, Sterken C, et al: Neurocognitive develop-
ment of children 4 years after critical illness and treatment with 
tight glucose control: A randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2012; 
308:1641–1650
 
270. Macrae D, Grieve R, Allen E, et al; CHiP Investigators: A randomized 
trial of hyperglycemic control in pediatric intensive care. N Engl J 
Med 2014; 370:107–118
 
271. Agus MSD, Stiel GM, Wypij D, et al: Tight glycemic control versus 
standard care after pediatric cardiac surgery. N Engl J Med 2012; 
367; 1208–1219
 
272. Vlasselaers D, Milants I, Desmet L, et al: Intensive insulin therapy 
for patients in paediatric intensive care: A prospective, randomised 
controlled study. Lancet 2009; 373:547–556
 
273. Rigby M, Maher K, Preissig C, et al: The Pedietrol trial: A 2-center 
trial of glycemic control in pediatric critical illness. Crit Care Med 
2013; 41:A993
 274. Verhoeven JJ, den Brinker M, Hokken-Koelega AC, et al: 
Pathophysiological aspects of hyperglycemia in children with 
meningococcal sepsis and septic shock: A prospective, observa-
tional cohort study. Crit Care 2011; 15:R44
 
275. van Waardenburg DA, Jansen TC, Vos GD, et al: Hyperglycemia in 
children with meningococcal sepsis and septic shock: The relation 
between plasma levels of insulin and inflammatory mediators. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2006; 91:3916–3921
 
276. Annane D, Sébille V, Charpentier C, et al: Effect of treatment with 
low doses of hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone on mortality in 
patients with septic shock. JAMA 2002; 288:862–871
 277. Hodes HL: Care of the critically ill child: Endotoxin shock. Pediatrics 
1969; 44:248–260
 
278. Sonnenschein H, Joos HA: Use and dosage of hydrocortisone in 
endotoxic shock. Pediatrics 1970; 45:720
 
279. Migeon CJ, Kenny FM, Hung W, et al: Study of adrenal function in 
children with meningitis. Pediatrics 1967; 40:163–183
 
280. Soni A, Pepper GM, Wyrwinski PM, et al: Adrenal insufficiency 
occurring during septic shock: Incidence, outcome, and relationship 
to peripheral cytokine levels. Am J Med 1995; 98:266–271
 
281. Riordan FA, Thomson AP, Ratcliffe JM, et al: Admission cortisol and 
adrenocorticotrophic hormone levels in children with meningococcal 
disease: Evidence of adrenal insufficiency? Crit Care Med 1999; 
27:2257–2261
 
282. Sumarmo: The role of steroids in dengue shock syndrome. Southeast 
Asian J Trop Med Public Health 1987; 18:383–389
 
283. Min M, U T, Aye M, et al: Hydrocortisone in the management of den-
gue shock syndrome. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health 
1975; 6:573–579
 
284. Hatherill M, Tibby SM, Hilliard T, et al: Adrenal insufficiency in septic 
shock. Arch Dis Child 1999; 80:51–55
 
285. Ryan CA, Wenman W, Henningsen C, et al: Fatal childhood pneu-
mococcal Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome. Pediatr Infect Dis J 
1993; 12:250–251
 
286. Matot I, Sprung CL. Corticosteroids in septic shock: Resurrection of 
the last rites? Crit Care Med 1998; 26:627–630
 287. Briegel J, Forst H, Kellermann W, et al: Haemodynamic improve-
ment in refractory septic shock with cortisol replacement therapy. 
Intensive Care Med 1992; 18:318
 
288. Moran JL, Chapman MJ, O’Fathartaigh MS, et al: Hypocortisolaemia 
and adrenocortical responsiveness at onset of septic shock. 
Intensive Care Med 1994; 20:489–495
 
289. Todd JK, Ressman M, Caston SA, et al: Corticosteroid therapy for 
patients with toxic shock syndrome. JAMA 1984; 252:3399–3402
 
290. Sonnenschein H, Joos HA: Hydrocortisone treatment of endotoxin 
shock. Another paradox in pediatrics. Clin Pediatr (Phila) 1970; 
9:251–252
 
291. Bettendorf M, Schmidt KG, Grulich-Henn J, et al: Tri-iodothyronine 
treatment in children after cardiac surgery: A double-blind, ran-
domised, placebo-controlled study. Lancet 2000; 356:529–534
 
292. Joosten KF, de Kleijn ED, Westerterp M, et al: Endocrine and meta-
bolic responses in children with meningoccocal sepsis: Striking 
differences between survivors and nonsurvivors. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2000; 85:3746–3753
 
293. Menon K, Ward RE, Lawson ML, et al; Canadian Critical Care Trials 
Group: A prospective multicenter study of adrenal function in criti-
cally ill children. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2010; 182:246–251
 
294. Marquardt DJ, Knatz NL, Wetterau LA, et al: Failure to recover 
somatotropic axis function is associated with mortality from pediatric 
sepsis-induced multiple organ dysfunction syndrome. Pediatr Crit 
Care Med 2010; 11:18–25
 
295. Indyk JA, Candido-Vitto C, Wolf IM, et al: Reduced glucocorticoid 
receptor protein expression in children with critical illness. Horm Res 
Paediatr 2013; 79:169–178
 
296. Boonen E, Vervenne H, Meersseman P, et al: Reduced cortisol metab-
olism during critical illness. N Engl J Med 2013; 368:1477–1488
 297. Annane D, Bellissant E, Bollaert PE, et al: Corticosteroids in the 
treatment of severe sepsis and septic shock in adults: A systematic 
review. JAMA 2009; 301:2362–2375
 
298. Wheeler DS, Zingarelli B, Wheeler WJ, et al: Novel pharmaco-
logic approaches to the management of sepsis: Targeting the host 
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Davis et al
1090 
www.ccmjournal.org 
June 2017 • Volume 45 • Number 6
inflammatory response. Recent Pat Inflamm Allergy Drug Discov 
2009; 3:96–112
 
299. Oppert M, Schindler R, Husung C, et al: Low-dose hydrocortisone 
improves shock reversal and reduces cytokine levels in early hyper-
dynamic septic shock. Crit Care Med 2005; 33:2457–2464
 
300. Sarthi M, Lodha R, Vivekanandhan S, et al: Adrenal status in children 
with septic shock using low-dose stimulation test. Pediatr Crit Care 
Med 2007; 8:23–28
 
301. Sam S, Corbridge TC, Mokhlesi B, et al: Cortisol levels and mortality 
in severe sepsis. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 2004; 60:29–35
 
302. Menon K, McNally D, Choong K, et al: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis on the effect of steroids in pediatric shock. Pediatr 
Crit Care Med 2013; 14:474–480
 
303. Zimmerman JJ, Donaldson A, Barker RM, et al; Eunice Kennedy 
Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development 
Collaborative Pediatric Critical Care Research Network: Real-time 
free cortisol quantification among critically ill children. Pediatr Crit 
Care Med 2011; 12:525–531
 
304. Hamrahian AH, Oseni TS, Arafah BM: Measurements of serum free 
cortisol in critically ill patients. N Engl J Med 2004; 350:1629–1638
 
305. Cotton BA, Guillamondegui OD, Fleming SB, et al: Increased risk 
of adrenal insufficiency following etomidate exposure in critically 
injured patients. Arch Surg 2008; 143:62–67
 
306. Li J, Winkler M: Decompensated septic shock in the setting of 
megace-induced severe adrenal suppression in an otherwise 
healthy pediatric patient: A case report. Pediatr Emerg Care 2012; 
28:802–804
 307. Jeschke MG, Williams FN, Finnerty CC, et al: The effect of keto-
conazole on post-burn inflammation, hypermetabolism and clinical 
outcomes. PLoS One 2012; 7:e35465
 
308. Aneja R, Carcillo JA: What is the rationale for hydrocortisone treat-
ment in children with infection-related adrenal insufficiency and sep-
tic shock? Arch Dis Child 2007; 92:165–169
 
309. Marik PE, Pastores SM, Annane D, et al; American College of 
Critical Care Medicine: Recommendations for the diagnosis and 
management of corticosteroid insufficiency in critically ill adult 
patients: Consensus statements from an international task force 
by the American College of Critical Care Medicine. Crit Care Med 
2008; 36:1937–1949
 
310. Annane D, Maxime V, Ibrahim F, et al: Diagnosis of adrenal insuf-
ficiency in severe sepsis and septic shock. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 2006; 174:1319–1326
 
311. Lichtarowicz-Krynska EJ, Cole TJ, Camacho-Hubner C, et al: 
Circulating aldosterone levels are unexpectedly low in children 
with acute meningococcal disease. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2004; 
89:1410–1414
 
312. Hebbar KB, Stockwell JA, Fortenberry JD: Clinical effects of adding 
fludrocortisone to a hydrocortisone-based shock protocol in hypo-
tensive critically ill children. Intensive Care Med 2011; 37:518–524
 
313. Arafah BM: Hypothalamic pituitary adrenal function during critical ill-
ness: Limitations of current assessment methods. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2006; 91:3725–3745
 
314. Jung C, Inder WJ: Management of adrenal insufficiency dur-
ing the stress of medical illness and surgery. Med J Aust 2008; 
188:409–413
 
315. Padidela R, Hindmarsh PC: Mineralocorticoid deficiency and treat-
ment in congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Int J Pediatr Endocrinol 
2010; 2010:656925
 
316. Sprung CL, Annane D, Keh D, et al; CORTICUS Study Group: 
Hydrocortisone therapy for patients with septic shock. N Engl J Med 
2008; 358:111–124
 317. Lodygensky GA, Rademaker K, Zimine S, et al: Structural and func-
tional brain development after hydrocortisone treatment for neonatal 
chronic lung disease. Pediatrics 2005; 116:1–7
 
318. Baker CF, Barks JD, Engmann C, et al: Hydrocortisone administra-
tion for the treatment of refractory hypotension in critically ill new-
borns. J Perinatol 2008; 28:412–419
 
319. Burmester M, Pierce C, Petros A: Disseminated candidiasis after 
steroid treatment for early neonatal hypotension. Arch Dis Child 
Fetal Neonatal Ed 2001; 85:F226
 
320. Wong HR, Cvijanovich NZ, Allen GL, et al: Corticosteroids are asso-
ciated with repression of adaptive immunity gene programs in pedi-
atric septic shock. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2014; 189:940–946
 
321. Zimmerman JJ, Williams MD: Adjunctive corticosteroid therapy in 
pediatric severe sepsis: Observations from the RESOLVE study. 
Pediatr Crit Care Med 2011; 12:2–8
 
322. Esteban NV, Loughlin T, Yergey AL, et al: Daily cortisol production 
rate in man determined by stable isotope dilution/mass spectrom-
etry. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1991; 72:39–45
 
323. Kerrigan JR, Veldhuis JD, Leyo SA, et al: Estimation of daily cortisol 
production and clearance rates in normal pubertal males by decon-
volution analysis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1993; 76:1505–1510
 
324. Kenny FM, Preeyasombat C, Migeon CJ: Cortisol production rate. II. 
Normal infants, children, and adults. Pediatrics 1966; 37:34–42
 
325. Kenny FM, Malvaux P, Migeon CJ: Cortisol production rate in newborn 
babies, older infants, and children. Pediatrics 1963; 31:360–373
 
326. Briegel J, Forst H, Haller M, et al: Stress doses of hydrocorti-
sone reverse hyperdynamic septic shock: A prospective, ran-
domized, double-blind, single-center study. Crit Care Med 1999; 
27:723–732
 327. Pizarro CF, Troster EJ: Adrenal function in sepsis and septic shock. J 
Pediatr (Rio J) 2007; 83(5 Suppl):S155–S162
 
328. Roberts JD Jr, Fineman JR, Morin FC 3rd, et al: Inhaled nitric oxide 
and persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn. The Inhaled 
Nitric Oxide Study Group. N Engl J Med 1997; 336:605–610
 
329. Inhaled Nitric Oxide Study Group: Inhaled nitric oxide in full term and 
nearly full-term infants with hypoxic respiratory failure. N Engl J Med 
1997; 336:597–604
 
330. Wung JT, James LS, Kilchevsky E, et al: Management of infants with 
severe respiratory failure and persistence of the fetal circulation, 
without hyperventilation. Pediatrics 1985; 76:488–494
 
331. Drummond WH, Gregory GA, Heymann MA, et al: The independent 
effects of hyperventilation, tolazoline, and dopamine on infants with 
persistent pulmonary hypertension. J Pediatr 1981; 98:603–611
 
332. Drummond WH: Use of cardiotonic therapy in the management of 
infants with PPHN. Clin Perinatol 1984; 11:715–728
 
333. Gouyon JB, Françoise M: Vasodilators in persistent pulmonary 
hypertension of the newborn: A need for optimal appraisal of effi-
cacy. Dev Pharmacol Ther 1992; 19:62–68
 
334. Meadow WL, Meus PJ: Hemodynamic consequences of tolazoline 
in neonatal group B streptococcal bacteremia: An animal model. 
Pediatr Res 1984; 18:960–965
 
335. Sandor GG, Macnab AJ, Akesode FA, et al: Clinical and echocar-
diographic evidence suggesting afterload reduction as a mechanism 
of action of tolazoline in neonatal hypoxemia. Pediatr Cardiol 1984; 
5:93–99
 
336. Benitz WE, Malachowski N, Cohen RS, et al: Use of sodium 
nitroprusside in neonates: Efficacy and safety. J Pediatr 1985; 
106:102–110
 337. McNamara PJ, Laique F, Muang-In S, et al: Milrinone improves oxy-
genation in neonates with severe persistent pulmonary hypertension 
of the newborn. J Crit Care 2006; 21:217–222
 
338. Bassler D, Choong K, McNamara P, et al: Neonatal persistent pul-
monary hypertension treated with milrinone: Four case reports. Biol 
Neonate 2006; 89:1–5
 
339. Rashid N, Morin FC 3rd, Swartz DD, et al: Effects of prostacy-
clin and milrinone on pulmonary hemodynamics in newborn lambs 
with persistent pulmonary hypertension induced by ductal ligation. 
Pediatr Res 2006; 60:624–629
 
340. Concheiro Guisán A, Sousa Rouco C, Suárez Traba B, et al: [Inhaled 
iloprost: A therapeutic alternative for persistent pulmonary hyperten-
sion of the newborn]. An Pediatr (Barc) 2005; 63:175–176
 
341. Ehlen M, Wiebe B: Iloprost in persistent pulmonary hypertension of 
the newborn. Cardiol Young 2003; 13:361–363
 
342. Patole S, Lee J, Buettner P, et al: Improved oxygenation following 
adenosine infusion in persistent pulmonary hypertension of the new-
born. Biol Neonate 1998; 74:345–350
 
343. Konduri GG, Garcia DC, Kazzi NJ, et al: Adenosine infusion improves 
oxygenation in term infants with respiratory failure. Pediatrics 1996; 
97:295–300
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
1091
 
344. Motti A, Tissot C, Rimensberger PC, et al: Intravenous adenosine for 
refractory pulmonary hypertension in a low-weight premature new-
born: A potential new drug for rescue therapy. Pediatr Crit Care 
Med 2006; 7:380–382
 
345. Ng C, Franklin O, Vaidya M, et al: Adenosine infusion for the man-
agement of persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn. 
Pediatr Crit Care Med 2004; 5:10–13
 
346. Bartlett RH, Roloff DW, Custer JR, et al: Extracorporeal life 
support: The University of Michigan experience. JAMA 2000; 
283:904–908
 347. Meyer DM, Jessen ME: Results of extracorporeal membrane oxy-
genation in neonates with sepsis. The Extracorporeal Life Support 
Organization experience. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1995; 
109:419–425
 
348. Bernbaum J, Schwartz IP, Gerdes M, et al: Survivors of extracor-
poreal membrane oxygenation at 1 year of age: The relationship of 
primary diagnosis with health and neurodevelopmental sequelae. 
Pediatrics 1995; 96(5 Pt 1):907–913
 
349. The 
collaborative 
UK 
ECMO 
(Extracorporeal 
Membrane 
Oxygenation) trial: Follow-up to 1 year of age. Pediatrics 1998; 
101:E1
 
350. Meyer DM, Jessen ME: Results of extracorporeal membrane oxy-
genation in children with sepsis. The Extracorporeal Life Support 
Organization. Ann Thorac Surg 1997; 63:756–761
 
351. Goldman AP, Kerr SJ, Butt W, et al: Extracorporeal support for intrac-
table cardiorespiratory failure due to meningococcal disease. Lancet 
1997; 349:466–469
 
352. Beca J, Butt W: Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for refractory 
septic shock in children. Pediatrics 1994; 93:726–729
 
353. Dalton HJ, Siewers RD, Fuhrman BP, et al: Extracorporeal mem-
brane oxygenation for cardiac rescue in children with severe myo-
cardial dysfunction. Crit Care Med 1993; 21:1020–1028
 
354. Hallin GW, Simpson SQ, Crowell RE, et al: Cardiopulmonary mani-
festations of hantavirus pulmonary syndrome. Crit Care Med 1996; 
24:252–258
 
355. Crowley MR, Katz RW, Kessler R, et al: Successful treatment of 
adults with severe Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome with extracorpo-
real membrane oxygenation. Crit Care Med 1998; 26:409–414
 
356. MacLaren G, Butt W, Best D, et al: Central extracorporeal mem-
brane oxygenation for refractory pediatric septic shock. Pediatr Crit 
Care Med 2011; 12:133–136
 357. Maclaren G, Butt W, Best D, et al: Extracorporeal membrane oxy-
genation for refractory septic shock in children: One institution’s 
experience. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2007; 8:447–451
 
358. Bréchot N, Luyt CE, Schmidt M, et al: Venoarterial extracorporeal 
membrane oxygenation support for refractory cardiovascular dys-
function during severe bacterial septic shock. Crit Care Med 2013; 
41:1616–1626
 
359. Smalley N, MacLaren G, Best D, et al: Outcomes in children with 
refractory pneumonia supported with extracorporeal membrane oxy-
genation. Intensive Care Med 2012; 38:1001–1007
 
360. Jeffers A, Gladwin MT, Kim-Shapiro DB: Computation of plasma 
hemoglobin nitric oxide scavenging in hemolytic anemias. Free 
Radic Biol Med 2006; 41:1557–1565
 
361. Jackson EK, Koehler M, Mi Z, et al: Possible role of adenosine deami-
nase in vaso-occlusive diseases. J Hypertens 1996; 14:19–29
 
362. Lou S, MacLaren G, Best D, et al: Hemolysis in pediatric patients 
receiving centrifugal-pump extracorporeal membrane oxygenation: 
Prevalence, risk factors, and outcomes. Crit Care Med 2014; 
42:1213–1220
 
363. Pfaender M: Hemodynamics in the extracorporeal aortic can-
nula: Review of factors affecting choice of the appropriate size. J 
Extracorp Tech 1981; 13:224–232
 
364. Mulholland JW, Massey W, Shelton JC: Investigation and quantifica-
tion of the blood trauma caused by the combined dynamic forces 
experienced during cardiopulmonary bypass. Perfusion 2000; 
15:485–494
 
365. Dellinger RP, Levy MM, Rhodes A, et al: Surviving sepsis campaign: 
International guidelines for management of severe sepsis and septic 
shock: 2012. Crit Care Med 2013; 41:580–637
 
366. Fortenberry JD, Paden ML, Goldstein SL: Acute kidney injury in chil-
dren: An update on diagnosis and treatment. Pediatr Clin North Am 
2013; 60:669–688
 367. Sutherland SM, Zappitelli M, Alexander SR, et al: Fluid overload and 
mortality in children receiving continuous renal replacement therapy: 
The prospective pediatric continuous renal replacement therapy reg-
istry. Am J Kidney Dis 2010; 55:316–325
 
368. Goldstein SL, Somers MJ, Baum MA, et al: Pediatric patients 
with multi-organ dysfunction syndrome receiving continuous renal 
replacement therapy. Kidney Int 2005; 67:653–658
 
369. Bellomo R, Cass A, Cole L, et al; RENAL Replacement Therapy 
Study Investigators: Intensity of continuous renal-replacement ther-
apy in critically ill patients. N Engl J Med 2009; 361:1627–1638
 
370. Van Wert R, Friedrich JO, Scales DC, et al; University of Toronto 
Acute Kidney Injury Research Group: High-dose renal replacement 
therapy for acute kidney injury: Systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Crit Care Med 2010; 38:1360–1369
 
371. Fortenberry JD, Paden ML: Extracorporeal therapies in the treatment 
of sepsis: Experience and promise. Semin Pediatr Infect Dis 2006; 
17:72–79
 
372. Smith OP, White B, Vaughan D, et al: Use of protein-C concentrate, 
heparin, and haemodiafiltration in meningococcus-induced purpura 
fulminans. Lancet 1997; 350:1590–1593
 
373. Ratanarat R, Brendolan A, Ricci Z, et al: Pulse high-volume hemo-
filtration in critically ill patients: A new approach for patients with 
septic shock. Semin Dial 2006; 19:69–74
 374. Piccinni P, Dan M, Barbacini S, et al: Early isovolaemic haemofiltra-
tion in oliguric patients with septic shock. Intensive Care Med 2006; 
32:80–86
 
375. Bock KR: Renal replacement therapy in pediatric critical care medi-
cine. Curr Opin Pediatr 2005; 17:368–371
 
376. Bridges BC, Hardison D, Pietsch J: A case series of the successful 
use of ECMO, continuous renal replacement therapy, and plasma 
exchange for thrombocytopenia-associated multiple organ failure. J 
Pediatr Surg 2013; 48:1114–1117
 377
. Szczepiorkowski ZM, Winters JL, Bandarenko N, et al; Apheresis 
Applications Committee of the American Society for Apheresis: 
Guidelines on the use of therapeutic apheresis in clinical practice–evi-
dence-based approach from the Apheresis Applications Committee of 
the American Society for Apheresis. J Clin Apher 2010; 25:83–177
 
378. Zhou F, Peng Z, Murugan R, et al: Blood purification and mortality in 
sepsis: A meta-analysis of randomized trials. Crit Care Med 2013; 
41:2209–2220
 
379. De Simone N, Racsa L, Bevan S, et al: Therapeutic plasma exchange 
in the management of sepsis and multiple organ dysfunction syn-
drome: A report of three cases. J Clin Apher 2014; 29:127–131
 
380. Demirkol D, Yildizdas D, Bayrakci B, et al; Turkish Secondary HLH/
MAS Critical Care Study Group: Hyperferritinemia in the critically 
ill child with secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis/sepsis/
multiple organ dysfunction syndrome/macrophage activation syn-
drome: What is the treatment? Crit Care 2012; 16:R52
 
381. Qu L, Kiss JE, Dargo G, et al: Outcomes of previously healthy 
pediatric patients with fulminant sepsis-induced multisystem organ 
failure receiving therapeutic plasma exchange. J Clin Apher 2011; 
26:208–213
 
382. Sevketoglu E, Yildizdas D, Horoz OO, et al: Use of therapeutic 
plasma exchange in children with thrombocytopenia-associated 
multiple organ failure in the Turkish thrombocytopenia-associ-
ated multiple organ failure network. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2014; 
15:e354–e359
 
383. Churchwell KB, McManus ML, Kent P, et al: Intensive blood and 
plasma exchange for treatment of coagulopathy in meningococce-
mia. J Clin Apher 1995; 10:171–177
 
384. van Deuren M, Frieling JT, van der Ven-Jongekrijg J, et al: Plasma pat-
terns of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF) and TNF soluble recep-
tors during acute meningococcal infections and the effect of plasma 
exchange. Clin Infect Dis 1998; 26:918–923
 
385. van Deuren M, Santman FW, van Dalen R, et al: Plasma and whole 
blood exchange in meningococcal sepsis. Clin Infect Dis 1992; 
15:424–430
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Davis et al
1092 
www.ccmjournal.org 
June 2017 • Volume 45 • Number 6
 
386. Yildirim I, Ceyhan M, Bayrakci B, et al: A case report of thrombo-
cytopenia-associated multiple organ failure secondary to Salmonella 
enterica serotype Typhi infection in a pediatric patient: Successful 
treatment with plasma exchange. Ther Apher Dial 2010; 14:226–229
 387. Nguyen TC, Han YY, Kiss JE, et al: Intensive plasma exchange 
increases a disintegrin and metalloprotease with thrombospondin 
motifs-13 activity and reverses organ dysfunction in children with 
thrombocytopenia-associated multiple organ failure. Crit Care Med 
2008; 36:2878–2887
 
388. Long EJ, Taylor A, Delzoppo, et al: A randomised controlled trial of 
plasma filtration in severe paediatric sepsis. Crit Care Resusc 2013; 
15:198–204
 
389. Hirabayashi K, Shiohara M, Saito S, et al: Polymyxin-direct hemo-
perfusion for sepsis-induced multiple organ failure. Pediatr Blood 
Cancer 2010; 55:202–205
 
390. Hirakawa E, Ibara S, Tokuhisa T, et al: Septic neonate res-
cued by polymyxin B hemoperfusion. Pediatr Int 2013; 55: 
e70–e72
 
391. Nakamura T, Sato E, Fujiwara N, et al: Polymyxin B-immobilized fiber 
hemoperfusion in a high school football player with septic shock 
caused by osteitis pubis. ASAIO J 2011; 57:470–472
 
392. Haque IU, Zaritsky AL: Analysis of the evidence for the lower limit 
of systolic and mean arterial pressure in children. Pediatr Crit Care 
Med 2007; 8:138–144
 Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
1093
APPENDIX 1
Clinical Signs and Hemodynamic Variables to Direct Treat-
ment of Shock/Goals/Therapeutic Endpoints
John C. Lin Lin_Jo@kids.wustl.edu (subgroup chair)
Alan L Davis aland3@gmail.com
Niranjan Kissoon nkissoon@cw.bc.ca
Martha C. Kutko martha_kutko@hotmail.com
Suchitra Ranjit suchitraranjit@yahoo.co.in
Mark Hall, Mark.Hall@nationwidechildrens.org
Allan Doctor doctor_a@kids.wustl.edu
Timothy Cornell ttcornel@med.umich.edu
Jacki Weingarten jweingar@montefiore.org
Intravascular Access
Tim Yeh tyeh@barnabashealth.org (subgroup chair) Yong Yun 
Han yhan@cmh.edu
Heidi Flori hflori@me.com
Fluid therapy/Fluid Resuscitation
Alan L. Davis aland3@gmail.com (subgroup chair)
Allan Doctor doctor_a@kids.wustl.edu
Suchitra Ranjit suchitraranjit@yahoo.co.in
Mark Peters mark.peters@ucl.ac.uk
Airway and Breathing
Bonnie Stojadinovic bstojadi@mcw.edu (subgroup chair)
Mark Hall, Mark.Hall@nationwidechildrens.org
Jacki Weingarten jweingar@montefiore.org
Ira Cheifetz ira.cheifetz@duke.edu
Sedation for Invasive Procedures or Intubation
Regina 
Okhuysen-Cawley 
rxokhuys@texaschildrens.org 
( 
subgroup chair)
Mark Peters mark.peters@ucl.ac.uk
Fola Odetola fodetola@med.umich.edu
Intravascular Catheters and Invasive and Noninvasive 
Hemodynamic Monitoring
Rajesh K. Aneja anejar@upmc.edu (subgroup chair)
Renuka Mehta remehta@gru.edu
Eduardo Schnizler eduardoschnitzler@gmail.com
Howard Jeffries howard.jeffries@seattlechildrens.org
Lynn Hernan lynnhernan@gmail.com
Aaron Zuckerberg bbfan33@comcast.net
Suchitra Ranjit suchitraranjit@yahoo.co.in
Inotropes/Hemodynamic Support
Monica Relvas mrelvas@aol.com (subgroup chair)
Ana Lia Graciano alg2341@gmail.com
Saraswati Kache skache@stanford.edu
Jose Irazuzta irazuzta@aol.com
Rajesh K. Aneja anejar@upmc.edu
Alexander A. Kon kon.sandiego@gmail.com
Elizabeth Iselin elizabeth.iselin.md@gmail.com
Karen Choong choongk@mcmaster.ca
Vasodilators/Hemodynamic Support and PPHN Therapies
Peter Skippen pskippen@cw.bc.ca (subgroup chair)
Marc-Andre Dugas marc-andre.dugas@mail.chuq.qc.ca
Howard Jeffries howard.jeffries@seattlechildrens.org
Andreas Deymann adeymann@gmail.com
Karin Reuter-Rice karin.reuter-rice@duke.edu
Saraswati Kache skache@stanford.edu
Joe Brierley brierj@gosh.nhs.uk
Vasopressors/Hemodynamic Support
Ranna Rozenfeld rrozenfeld@northwestern.edu (subgroup 
chair) Jon Feldman jon.feldman@kp.org
Allan de Caen allan.decaen@albertahealthservices.ca
Eduardo Schnitzler eschnitzle@cas.austral.edu.ar
Glucose, Calcium, Thyroid, and Hydrocortisone Replacement
Andreas Deymann adeymann@gmail.com (subgroup chair)
Adalberto Torres Jr. atorres@nemours.org
Eric Williams eawillia@texaschildrens.org
Kristine Parbuoni kristine.rapan@gmail.com
Jerry Zimmerman jerry.zimmerman@seattle childrens.org 
(editor, not original group member)
Extracorporeal Therapies
Trung Nguyen tcnguyen@texaschildrens.org (subgroup chair) 
Peter Skippen pskippen@cw.bc.ca
Timothy Cornell ttcornel@med.umich.edu
Timothy Maul maultm@upmc.edu
Graeme Maclaren gmaclaren@iinet.net.au
James Fortenberry james.fortenberry@choa.org
Bundle Development Taskforce
Eric Williams eawillia@texaschildrens.org (subgroup chair)
Scott L. Weiss WeissS@email.chop.edu
Julie C. Fitzgerald FITZGERALDJ@email.chop.edu
Bruce Greenwald bmgreen@med.cornell.edu
Monica Relvas mrelvas@aol.com
Chhavi Katyal ckatyal@montefiore.org
Edward Conway econway@chpnet.org
Halden Scott halden.scott@childrenscolorado.org
Fran Balamuth balamuthf@email.chop.edu
Raina Paul rpaul@wakehealth.edu
Elise van der Jagt Elise_Van_der_Jagt@URMC.Rochester.edu
