 HRDetect is a predictor of BRCA1 and BRCA2 deficiency based 
on mutational-signatures
Helen Davies1,*, Dominik Glodzik1,*, Sandro Morganella1, Lucy R. Yates1,2, Johan Staaf3, 
Xueqing Zou1, Manasa Ramakrishna1,4, Sancha Martin1, Sandrine Boyault5, Anieta M. 
Sieuwerts6, Peter T. Simpson7, Tari A. King8, Keiran Raine1, Jorunn E. Eyfjord9, Gu Kong10, 
Åke Borg3, Ewan Birney11, Hendrik G. Stunnenberg12, Marc J. van de Vijver13, Anne-Lise 
Børresen-Dale14,15, John W.M. Martens6, Paul N. Span16, Sunil R Lakhani7,17, Anne 
Vincent-Salomon18, Christos Sotiriou19, Andrew Tutt20,21, Alastair M. Thompson22, Steven 
Van Laere23,24, Andrea L. Richardson25,26, Alain Viari27,28, Peter J Campbell1, Michael R. 
Stratton1, and Serena Nik-Zainal1,29
1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK 2Guys and St Thomas’ 
NHS Trust, London, UK 3Division of Oncology and Pathology, Department of Clinical Sciences 
Lund, Lund University, Lund, SE-223 81, Sweden 4Oncology, Innovative Medicines and Early 
Development Biotech Unit, AstraZeneca, Hodgkin Building, Chesterford Research Park, Little 
Chesterford, Cambridge CB10 1XL, UK 5Centre Léon Bérard, Translational Research Lab 
Department, 28, rue Laënnec, 69373 Lyon Cedex 08, France 6Department of Medical Oncology, 
Erasmus MC Cancer Institute and Cancer Genomics Netherlands, Erasmus University Medical 
Center, Rotterdam 3015CN, The Netherlands 7The University of Queensland: UQ Centre for 
Clinical Research and School of Medicine, Brisbane, Queensland 4029, Australia 8Memorial 
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Ave, New York, NY 10065, United States 9Cancer 
Research Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, 101 Reykjavik, Iceland 
10Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul, 133-791, South 
Corresponding author : Serena Nik-Zainal (snz@sanger.ac.uk).
*shared first authorship
Equal contributions: HD and DG contributed equally towards the development of the principles and the analyses in this manuscript.
Competing Financial Interests
H. Davies, D. Glodzik and S. Nik-Zainal are inventors on a patent application encompassing the code and intellectual principle on this 
algorithm. A. Tutt has been in receipt of payments from the Institute of Cancer Research Rewards to inventors scheme associated with 
the invention of PARP inhibitors as therapy for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation associated cancers.
Author Contributions
H.D., D.G., S.N.-Z. drove the development of the intellectual concepts, performed analyses and wrote the manuscript.
S.M., J.S., X.Z. and M.R. contributed towards data curation and performed analyses.
L.R.Y., S.B., A.M.S., P.T.S., T.A.K., J.E.E., P.N.S., S.R.L., A.V.-S., C.S., A.T., A.M.T., S.V.L., A.L. contributed new samples and/or to 
experimental design of the study.
S.M. was the scientific project coordinator.
K.R. provided bioinformatics support.
P.J.C. provided infrastructure at Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute.
G.K., A.B., E.B., H.G.S., M.JvdV., A.-L.B.-D., J.W.M.M., A.M.T., A.L.R., A.V. and M.R.S. originally conceived the concept of the 
Breast Cancer Consortium that generated the data resource which has been utilised for these analyses, contributed samples old and 
new and contributed comments towards the manuscript.
Data access
Breast cancer whole genome sequence BAM files and CEL files from Affymetrix SNP6 arrays are available from European Genome-
phenome Archive (EGA), see Accession codes sections for details of accession codes.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Med. 2017 April ; 23(4): 517–525. doi:10.1038/nm.4292.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Korea 11European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome 
Trust Genome Campus,Hinxton, Cambridgeshire, CB10 1SD 12Department of Molecular Biology, 
Faculties of Science and Medicine, Radboud University, 6525GA, Nijmegen, Netherlands 
13Department of Pathology, Academic Medical Center, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands 14Department of Cancer Genetics, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University 
Hospital The Norwegian Radium Hospital Oslo 0310, Norway 15K.G. Jebsen Centre for Breast 
Cancer Research, Institute for Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo 0310, Norway 
16Department of Radiation Oncology, and department of Laboratory Medicine, Radboud 
university medical center, Nijmegen 6525GA, The Netherlands 17Pathology Queensland, The 
Royal Brisbane and Women’s Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland 4029, Australia 18Institut Curie, 
Department of Pathology and INSERM U934, 26 rue d'Ulm, 75248 Paris Cedex 05, France 
19Breast Cancer Translational Research Laboratory, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Institut Jules 
Bordet, Bd de Waterloo 121, B-1000 Brussels, Belgium 20Breast Cancer Now Research Unit, 
King’s College, London, UK 21Breast Cancer Now Toby Robin’s Research Centre, Institute of 
Cancer Research, London, UK 22Department of Breast Surgical Oncology, University of Texas 
MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1400 Pressler Street, Houston, Texas 77030, USA 23Translational 
Cancer Research Unit, Center for Oncological Research, Faculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium 24HistoGeneX NV, Wilrijk, Belgium 
25Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115 USA 26Dana-
Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215 USA 27Equipe Erable, INRIA Grenoble-Rhône-Alpes, 
655, Avenue de l'Europe, 38330 Montbonnot-Saint Martin, France 28Synergie Lyon Cancer, 
Centre Léon Bérard, 28 rue Laënnec, Lyon Cedex 08, France 29East Anglian Medical Genetics 
Service, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge CB2 9NB, UK
Abstract
Approximately 1-5% of breast cancers are attributed to inherited mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2 
and are selectively sensitive to poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors. Germline and/or 
somatic mutations in BRCA1/BRCA2 in other cancer types also confer selective sensitivity to 
PARP inhibitors. Thus, assays to detect BRCA1/BRCA2 deficient tumours have been sought. 
Recently, somatic substitution, insertion/deletion and rearrangement patterns or mutational 
signatures were associated with BRCA1/BRCA2 dysfunction. We used a supervised lasso logistic 
regression model to identify six critically distinguishing mutational signatures predictive of 
BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency. A weighted model called HRDetect was developed to accurately 
detect BRCA1/BRCA2 deficient samples. HRDetect identifies BRCA1/BRCA2 deficient tumours 
with 98.7% sensitivity (AUC 0.98). Application of this model in a cohort of 560 breast cancer 
patients with 22 known germline BRCA1/BRCA2 mutation carriers, allowed us to identify an 
additional 22 somatic BRCA1/BRCA2 null tumours and 47 tumours with functional BRCA1/
BRCA2-deficiency where no mutation was detected. We validated HRDetect on independent 
cohorts of breast, ovarian and pancreatic cancers, and demonstrate efficacy on alternative 
sequencing strategies. Integrating all classes of mutational signatures thus reveals a larger 
proportion of breast cancer patients (of up to 22%) than hitherto appreciated (~1-5%) that could 
have selective therapeutic sensitivity to PARP-inhibition.
Davies et al.
Page 2
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Introduction
A small fraction of breast cancers (~1-5%)1–3 are attributed to familial mutations in the 
BRCA1 and BRCA2 cancer susceptibility genes. Heterozygous germline mutations in 
BRCA1 and BRCA2 confer elevated lifetime risks of breast, ovarian and other cancers4,5. 
BRCA1 and BRCA2 proteins have multiple distinct roles in maintaining genome integrity, 
particularly, through Homologous Recombination (HR)-mediated double strand break 
(DSB) repair6. These classical tumour suppressor genes usually lose the wild-type allele 
during tumorigenesis to become fully inactivated7. BRCA1/BRCA2 null tumours are thus 
deficient in HR and selectively sensitive to compounds that increase the demand on HR8. 
Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors are an example of therapeutic compounds 
that cause replication fork stalling and collapse leading to increased DSBs9. The inability to 
perform HR-dependent DSB repair ultimately leads to selective tumour cell death10,11.
Preclinical studies and Phase I/II breast and ovarian clinical trials12,13 have shown PARP-
inhibitor efficacy in familial BRCA1 and BRCA2 patients. However, PARP-inhibition has 
applications beyond that of germline mutated tumours14. Effective PARP-inhibition 
maintenance therapy has been demonstrated in high grade serous ovarian cancer with 
germline or somatic BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations15. Thus, extensive efforts have been put 
into identification of molecular features of tumours that are BRCA1/BRCA2 deficient, 
referred to historically as “BRCAness”, whether inactivated through germline, somatic or 
secondary means, including promoter hypermethylation or inactivation of a related gene in 
the HR pathway.
Gene-specific sequencing strategies including sequencing all known HR genes, Multiplex 
Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA)16, promoter hypermethylation assays17, 
transcriptional metagene signatures18–20, copy number-based methods (e.g. HRD 
(Homologous Recombination Deficiency) index and genomic “scars”)21–23 and functional 
assays of HR competence24 have been developed to detect BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency. 
However, these indices have had limited predictive success. A recent review suggests that a 
good predictor of the biological status of a HR-deficient tumour is essential, as the cohort of 
tumours that demonstrate BRCAness and that could be selectively sensitive to PARP-
inhibitors is likely not limited to the small proportion of familial breast and ovarian cancers, 
but extends to a larger fraction of sporadic breast and ovarian cancers as well as other cancer 
types25.
Recent advances in sequencing technology26 have significantly reduced sequencing costs, 
permitting whole genome sequencing (WGS) for the detection of all somatic mutations 
including base substitutions, insertions/deletions (indels), rearrangements and copy number 
aberrations in human cancers. Deep analysis reveals patterns of mutations, or somatic 
mutational signatures, which are the physiological readout of the DNA damage and DNA 
repair processes that have occurred through tumorigenesis27–31. These patterns are 
indicators of past and on-going exposures, whether of environmental insults such as 
ultraviolet radiation, or of endogenous biochemical degradation and deficiencies of DNA 
repair pathways like HR.
Davies et al.
Page 3
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 We reason that mutational signatures which report BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency in germline 
mutated tumours could be used as a predictor of other tumours that also have this deficiency. 
Previously, base substitution Signature 3 was shown to distinguish germline BRCA1/
BRCA2 null from sporadic cancers in a small subset of breast cancers29,30 and 
subsequently extended to pancreatic32,33, ovarian34 and stomach cancer35. However, 
selecting a cut-off to discriminate BRCA1/BRCA2-deficient from -proficient cancers is not 
straightforward when using this signature alone. Recent characterisation of a large cohort of 
WGS breast cancers27,28 has provided new insights. A defect in a single gene such as 
BRCA1/BRCA2 does not result in a single signature – it gives rise to at least five mutational 
signatures of all classes, including base substitutions, indels and rearrangements27,28. 
Unlike most biomarkers, these multiple mutational signatures are the direct consequence of 
abrogation of DSB repair pathways. Thus, in the current analysis, we exploit this 
observation to quantitatively define genomic features of BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency and 
present a WGS-based predictor with remarkable preformance for detection of HR-deficient 
tumours.
Results
Quantitatively defining features of “BRCA”ness
24 women carrying inherited predisposition mutations in BRCA1 (5) and BRCA2 (19) were 
recruited into a breast cancer genome sequencing study involving 560 patients27. Loss of 
the wild-type allele predicted to result in complete inactivation of the relevant protein was 
observed in 22 of the 24 breast cancers.
These 22 tumours had a distinguishing genomic profile: overrepresentation of base-
substitution Signatures 3 or 8, an excess of large deletions (>3bp) with microhomology at 
the junction of the deletion, Rearrangement Signature 5, and copy number profiles 
associated with widespread loss of heterozygosity (Figure 1). Additionally, BRCA1 null 
tumours also had an excess of Rearrangement Signature 3 (characterized by short <10kb) 
tandem duplications) mainly, and a lesser contribution of Rearrangement Signature 1 
(typified by long >100kb tandem duplications)27.
The 22 BRCA1/BRCA2 null tumours were used in a first training set to quantitatively define 
features of BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency. They were contrasted to a cohort of 235 sporadic 
breast cancers with quiescent genomic profiles, distinct from BRCA1/BRCA2 null cancers.
Somatic variants of all classes of mutation had been previously called. Twelve base 
substitution, two indel and six rearrangement mutational signatures were previously 
extracted and HRD copy number indices were obtained (Supplementary Table 1). A 
supervised learning lasso logistic regression model was applied to counts of mutational 
signatures and to HRD indices that were log-transformed and normalized to permit 
comparability between genomic parameters (Supplementary Table 2).
An iterative ten-fold nested cross-validation strategy was adopted where 90% of samples 
were used for model parameter selection and the weights for each parameter were tested on 
Davies et al.
Page 4
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 the remaining 10% of samples. This was performed to ensure that parameters identified as 
putative predictors of BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency were robust and generalizable.
Five distinguishing parameters with different individual weights were found to convey the 
greatest difference between BRCA1/BRCA2-deficient cancers and sporadic breast cancers: 
microhomology-mediated indels, the HRD index, base substitution Signature 3, 
Rearrangement Signature 3 and Rearrangement Signature 5(Supplementary Table 2).
Identification of additional BRCA1 and BRCA2 null tumors
The selected parameters were applied across the cohort of 560 breast cancers to test the 
performance of our model in predicting BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency, and to detect other 
cancers with similar characteristics to germline BRCA1/BRCA2 null tumours Figure 2 for 
workflow, Supplementary Table 2). The resulting distribution of probabilities of BRCA1/
BRCA2 deficiency was a strikingly steep sigmoidal curve with clear distinction between 
patients predicted to have high or low probabilities of BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency. Apart 
from the 22 positive controls from the training set, 90/538 additional tumor samples were 
identified as having a probability of BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency exceeding 70%, bringing 
the total proportion of patients predicted to have a high level of BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency 
to 20%.
This result prompted us to look for additional BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations (germline and 
somatic) in the cohort of 560 patients. 33 were found to carry pathogenic germline variants 
in BRCA1/BRCA2 with corresponding somatic inactivation of the alternative allele. This 
more than doubles the number of women harbouring familial cancer predisposition alleles 
than originally recruited into the study, carrying significant clinical genetic counselling 
implications and potential for active surveillance and/or treatment choices, for affected 
patients and their families.
22 patients had early, clonal, somatic BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations (eight) or promoter DNA 
hypermethylation of BRCA1 (fourteen) with inactivation of the alternative allele. The 
remaining tumours with probability of BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency exceeding 70% did not 
demonstrate biallelic inactivation of BRCA1/BRCA2, although DNA methylation data were 
not available for a subset of patients.
6 BRCA1-null samples had probabilities of 0.006-0.64 and were missed because the 
algorithm had been trained on a small cohort of five BRCA1 tumours out of the total 22 in 
the training set, suggesting that algorithm retraining on a larger and more balanced cohort 
was prudent.
HRDetect: Predictor of BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency in cancer
Given that additional patients were identified as null for BRCA1/BRCA2, we performed 
another iteration of the lasso logistic regression model on a larger, better-powered training 
set comprising 77 samples (22 known germline, 33 new germline diagnoses, 22 somatic)
(Figure 2).
Davies et al.
Page 5
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Reassuringly, the same genomic features were identified as predictive parameters as was 
observed for the 22 germline null samples, with the addition of base substitution Signature 
8, ranked by decreasing weight – microhomology-mediated deletions(2.398), base 
substitution signature 3(1.611), rearrangement signature 3(1.153), rearrangement signature 
5(0.847), HRD index(0.667) and base substitution signature 8 (0.091)(Figure 3, 
Supplementary Table 3). Acknowledging the imbalance in numbers of BRCA1/BRCA2 null 
cancers versus controls, supervised learning was repeated in a 1:1 ratio. Differences to the 
original assessment (77 null : 234 control) were insignificant, verifying the stability of the 
six critically distinguishing parameters. With a larger dataset available, we permitted 
identification of interactions between genomic covariates in order to discover potentially 
augmented effects of cooperating signatures. Although correlations were observed, the 
performance including interactions did not improve on predictions when compared to the 
model without interactions. We therefore opted for the simpler model, keeping each genomic 
parameter independent. Thus, we finalised our predictor of BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency, 
termed HRDetect, on this set.
HRDetect was re-applied on the cohort of 560 breast cancers and showed excellent 
performance as revealed by a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve with an area 
under the ROC curve (AUC) of 0.98 (Figure 4). This result is unlikely to be bettered, 
emphasising the value of utilising multiple mutational signatures as a read-out of BRCA1/
BRCA2 deficiency. Reinforcing this point, no individual genomic parameter performed as 
well as all six genomic signatures incorporated together in HRDetect (Figure 4). In 
particular, it is superior to current methods of assessing BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency, 
specifically, the genomic “scar” based index21–23 like the HRD score (sensitivity of HRD 
score = 60%, Figure 4 ROC curve compares HRDetect against HRD score alone and other 
mutational signatures individually).
Using a probabilistic cut-off of 70%, HRDetect predicts BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency with a 
sensitivity of 98.7% in the cohort of 560 patients. HRDetect reveals a total of 124 samples 
with a score exceeding 70%, including an additional 47 samples with a high probability of 
BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency. These remaining tumours (5/340 ER positive and 42/143 ER 
negative) with high scores and neither germline nor somatic BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations and 
for which promoter hypermethylation of BRCA1 was either not observed (10) or not 
available for assessment (37), were investigated for inactivation of other genes involved in 
HR repair and for other germline susceptibility alleles.
Other genetic factors and “BRCA”ness
Of these 47 samples, three had mutations in HR genes. One patient, PD4875a, exhibited a 
high HRDetect score (0.94) and showed a profile typically associated with BRCA2 nullness. 
Although she carried a germline BRCA2 mutation, the other parental allele was retained36. 
This patient was thus the exception where genetic BRCA2 nullness could not be proven in 
the tumour. Inactivation of the wild-type allele by alternative means cannot be excluded. 
This patient also carried a germline truncating mutation in BRIP1 (a gene associated with 
moderate penetrance breast cancer risk) with loss of the alternative allele; however with only 
a single example of a truncating BRIP1, its significance is unclear. Otherwise, all other 
Davies et al.
Page 6
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 tumours with monoallelic germline/somatic inactivation of BRCA1/BRCA2 were associated 
with low HRdetect scores (thirteen patients total: four germline, seven somatic, two BRCA1 
promoter hypermethylation) (Supplementary Table 4).
Two patients (PD24205a and PD24212a) had somatic monoallelic PALB2 (a gene associated 
with moderate penetrance breast cancer risk) truncating mutations. A third patient which had 
low HRDetect score, PD11340a, also had a deleterious somatic monoalleleic essential splice 
PALB2 mutation. Given the small numbers, we would interpret the contribution of PALB2 
mutations with caution as other modes of BRCA1/BRCA2 inactivation or other genes 
related to the HR pathway could underlie the observations in these patients.
Interestingly, monoallelic somatic inactivating mutations of other HR repair genes including 
ATR (PD14457a, PD23564a, PD5956a) and ATM (PD5937a) were not associated with high 
scores of BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency. Furthermore, none from the list of HR genes 
(RAD51C, RAD50, CHEK2 and FANCA-FANCN) was identified as a contributor amongst 
tumours with high scores. Notably, high- and moderate-penetrance germline breast cancer 
susceptibility alleles including TP53, PTEN, ATM, CHEK2, ATR, RAD50, CDH1, STK11, 
PALB2, whether remaining monoallelic or demonstrating biallelic inactivation, were neither 
associated with a genomic profile nor a high probability of BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency.
These results firstly, emphasise the importance of knowing the status of the alternative 
parental allele in the interpretation of mutation data (Supplementary Table 4). Secondly, they 
also highlight that nearly a third of tumours with high scores for BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency 
scores cannot be authenticated as BRCA1/BRCA2 null through genetic/epigenetic means. 
Yet, given the striking resemblance to BRCA1/BRCA2 null tumours, it is intriguing to 
consider that these cancers are therefore biologically comparable and likely to respond 
similarly to BRCA1/BRCA2 null cancers, in particular to PARP-inhibition.
Validation of HRDetect in a new cohort of 80 WGS breast cancer
HRDetect was applied to a new cohort of WGS breast cancers from 80 women (Figure 4, 
Supplementary Table 5) with mainly ER positive, HER2 negative breast cancer as a 
validation exercise. HRDetect successfully identified 1 germline BRCA1 and 5 BRCA2 
mutation carriers (4 germline and 1 somatic) with associated loss of the wild type allele. One 
sample, PD14434a, carried a germline essential splice site mutation with loss of the 
alternative parental allele but fell short of the HRDetect cut off of 70%. Two samples, one 
germline BRCA2 and one somatic BRCA2 mutation, retained the alternative allele and were 
correctly assigned low HRDetect scores. Thus, the sensitivity of HRDetect on this validation 
cohort was high at 86%.
Performance of HRDetect on alternative sequencing strategies
To explore the performance of HRDetect on alternative sequencing strategies, we performed 
an in silico experiment, randomly down-sampling the sequences of the 560 high coverage 
(30- to 40-fold) WGS breast cancers, to generate low coverage (10-fold, range 9.9 to 10.5) 
WGS sequence files for analysis (Supplementary Table 6). Somatic mutations were re-called 
across down-sampled sequences, signatures and HRD indices were extracted and the 
performance of HRDetect was tested. In theory, the absolute detection of every somatic 
Davies et al.
Page 7
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 change is not obligatory, as long as some mutations representative of over-arching mutation 
patterns are present.
As expected, the numbers of base substitutions, indels and rearrangements were consistently 
lower in the down-sampled in silico experiment of all samples when compared to the 
original high-coverage experiment. Nevertheless, all twelve base substitution, two indel and 
six rearrangement signatures were detectable, at approximately the same proportions per 
sample, albeit at reduced absolute numbers. Additionally, copy number analysis showed 
good concordance for overall HRD scores (r=0.63) between high and low coverage 
genomes. Thus, despite the reduction in sensitivity of individual somatic mutations, the 
detection of over-arching mutation signatures remained relatively secure.
At an absolute probability cut-off of 0.7, the sensitivity for detection of BRCA1/BRCA2 
defective cancers in a low-coverage genome sequencing experiment remained high at 86% 
(Figure 4). The concordance in HRDetect predictions between high-coverage and low-
coverage sequencing experiments was excellent (r=0.96). Low-coverage genomes may thus 
be adequate for HRDetect to report deficiency of BRCA1/BRCA2.
By contrast, when HRDetect is used to assess BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency on data that are 
representative of only coding sequences (whole exome sequencing, WES), the sensitivity of 
detection is affected considerably falling to 46.8%. This is because essential predictor 
components such as rearrangement signatures 3 and 5 are not available by WES, and 
substitutions/indels are restricted to only 1-1.5% of the footprint of the genome 
(Supplementary Information). When the HRDetect algorithm is retrained taking WES-based 
data as input alone, the performance of the classifier is improved (sensitivity 73% (56/77)) 
although at the cost of calling 12 additional samples that were not previously identified as 
BRCA1/BRCA2 deficient (Supplementary Table 7).
Application of HRDetect to predict BRCAness in other types of cancers
HRDetect was applied to other WGS cancers including pancreatic and ovarian cancers to 
assess generalizability across tumour types32–34. Available BAM files were recalled 
through our somatic-mutation calling pipeline, mutational signatures extracted and copy 
number profiles obtained.
The ovarian cancer cohort comprised 73 samples. Using a threshold of 70%, 46 (63%) were 
identified as having a high probability of BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency. Of these, 30 were 
confirmed as having germline or somatic BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations with loss of the wild-
type parental allele (germline (14), somatic (6) and DNA methylation (10))(Supplementary 
Table 8). None were missed. Thus, again HRDetect has a sensitivity of detecting BRCA1/
BRCA2 null cancers approaching 100% and has uncovered 16 additional patients as HR 
deficient.
The pancreatic cancer cohort comprised 96 samples. Eleven (11.5%) were found to have a 
high HRDetect score. Five were mutated for BRCA1/BRCA2 (three germline and two 
somatic) and had lost the wild-type allele, one had retained the other allele. Epigenetic data 
were not available to interrogate the status of the remaining five samples. Three samples had 
Davies et al.
Page 8
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 BRCA2 mutations but did not demonstrate convincing evidence of loss of the alternative 
allele and had low HRDetect scores (Supplementary Table 8). Thus, HRDetect had a 
sensitivity approaching 100% in this pancreatic cancer cohort and identified 5 additional 
patients with potential HR deficiency.
Overall, HRDetect had excellent sensitivity for these other tumor types. However, the 
distributions of HRDetect scores were slightly different (Figure 4C). When more samples 
become available increasing power for analysis, a reappraisal of HRDetect parameters per 
tissue-type may be necessary to fine-tune performance in different tissue-types.
Strengths of HRDetect and their relevance to accelerating clinical application
Routine clinical pathology practice involves storage of tumour material using formalin-
fixation paraffin-embedded (FFPE) methods. To explore the performance of HRDetect on 
FFPE tissue samples (Figure 5), we obtained nucleic acids derived from an FFPE sample 
from a patient with a germline BRCA1 mutation. WGS was performed, somatic mutations 
called and mutational signatures extracted. HRDetect correctly reported a high probability of 
BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency of 0.94 despite an overwhelming FFPE-related sequencing 
artefact (Figure 5, Supplementary Table 9) that compromised substitution signature 
extraction resulting in the absence of base substitution signature 3. Indeed, small amounts of 
the correct combination of other critically distinguishing signatures still generates a strong 
probabilistic prediction.
Biological hypermutation phenomena occur in human cancers and mutational processes 
such as those due to the APOBEC family of cytidine deaminases are not uncommon. We 
find that BRCA1/BRCA2 deficient cancers remain consistently identified by HRDetect 
despite excessive APOBEC-related mutagenesis in some samples (Supp Fig 7 for example). 
Furthermore, HRDetect is able to discern BRCA1/BRCA2 deficient cancers with 
remarkable precision over a wide range of tumour cellularities, including relatively low 
cellularity samples (but not less than 15%) where mutation-calling sensitivity may be 
compromised. Thus, irrespective of biological or non-biological noise, HRDetect faithfully 
detects the signal of BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency, reinforcing the exceptional utility of this 
classifier.
Finally, to advance potential clinical utility of HRDetect, we considered whether HRDetect 
could be applied earlier in the clinical process on small needle biopsy samples, rather than 
post-operatively on large specimens. To this end, we obtained 18 DNA samples (14 needle 
biopsies and four post-operative tumour block specimens) from nine patients with triple 
negative tumours that were treated with neoadjuvant anthracyclines +/- taxanes37 
(Supplementary Table 9, Supplementary Information). Although a different compound from 
PARP inhibitors, sensitivity to anthracyclines has been reported for tumours that show 
BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency38,39. Interestingly, four patients demonstrated complete 
responses to treatment and all had high HRDetect scores – two were confirmed to be 
germline BRCA1 mutation carriers and two were sporadic tumours (Figure 5C). By contrast, 
five patients that exhibited residual disease had low HRDetect probability scores. 
Furthermore, HRDetect performed consistently in independent biopsies per patient, and 
between biopsy and post-operative specimen per patient, without exception. Though the 
Davies et al.
Page 9
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 numbers are small, in all, these analyses suggest that HRDetect has potential for 
distinguishing therapeutic sensitivity as early in the patient’s clinical journey as the first 
biopsy, and is robust between biopsies/specimens. Larger clinical trials are clearly necessary 
to fully understand how this predictor will perform when applied to breast cancer 
diagnostics in general.
Variants of uncertain significance
Germline BRCA1 and BRCA2 SNPs and variants of uncertain significance (VUS) including 
20 common alleles and 107 rare or private variants were identified in the 560 breast cancer 
dataset (Supplementary Table 4). 56 had concurrent loss of the other allele. However, these 
did not consistently demonstrate high scores for BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency emphasising 
that these variants VUSs are unlikely to be pathogenic and hence of low clinical 
significance.
There was one exception – PD23563a had a missense p.L1780P mutation in BRCA1 with 
LOH of the other allele and a high score for BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency. This variant 
remains “of uncertain significance” in clinical databases of BRCA1/BRCA2 SNP alleles 
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/clinvar/), although functional support for defective BRCA1 
function has been reported40. With only a single example, this result must be interpreted 
with caution, as other causes of BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency in this sample cannot be 
excluded.
Additionally, 8 missense somatic BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations were identified and did not 
appear to be associated with features of deficiency. Over time, HR mutational signatures 
could be used to effectively validate the pathogenicity of VUSs.
HRDetect can distinguish BRCA1 from BRCA2 tumours
Thus far, we have focused on detecting tumours with either BRCA1 or BRCA2 deficiency 
and not distinguishing between them. Currently there is no clinical indication to separately 
identify these tumours because BRCA1 and BRCA2 deficient tumours are both similarly 
sensitive to PARP inhibition. In the future, however, reasons for separating these tumours 
may arise. The discriminating genomic parameters that distinguish BRCA1 from BRCA2 
tumours are rearrangement Signature 3 and deletions without distinctive junctional 
characteristics (Supplementary Information). Both are detected best using WGS approaches.
Discussion and conclusions
Abrogation of BRCA1/BRCA2 leads to not one, but a characteristic set of mutational 
signatures. As a predictive tool, utilising these multiple pathognomonic mutational 
signatures is extraordinarily effective with performance metrics which suggest that this 
method cannot be easily bettered. It dependably detects BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency in the 
presence of biological noise (e.g. APOBEC-related mutagenesis), when there is relatively 
low tumour cellularity (Supplementary Information) and when there is non-biological noise 
from formalin fixation. Indeed, demonstrating HRDetect efficacy in FFPE-banked samples 
opens doors in terms of exploration of historic and/or existing clinical trials, assuming 
matched normal DNAs are also available. Our analyses also emphasise that a WGS approach 
Davies et al.
Page 10
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 (even if at low-coverage (10 fold)) is far more effective than a WES approach at detecting 
BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency. Additionally, distinguishing BRCA1 from BRCA2 tumours is 
dependent on WGS-based methods. These methodological points have implications in 
designing genomic aspects of clinical trials. At least for detecting BRCA1/BRCA2 
deficiency, WGS approaches are optimal. Indeed, our analyses provide support and context 
for large-scale national WGS endeavours such as the UK 100,000 genomes project (https://
www.genomicsengland.co.uk/the-100000-genomes-project/) and the Precision Medicine 
Initiative (http://www.cancer.gov/research/key-initiatives/precision-medicine) in the USA.
While the performance of HRDetect is extremely promising, algorithmic developments are 
envisaged including identification of tumours that have developed resistance alleles41,42. 
Because historic scars of HR deficiency will be present in a resistant tumour, this may lead 
to high HRDetect scores. However, distinguishing on-going from historic mutational 
signatures of BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency is already a possibility, given the advances in 
exploiting the digital nature of modern sequencing technologies to construct phylogenetic 
trees of each person’s tumour30,37.
Although only 22 patients were originally recruited with known germline BRCA1/BRCA2 
null cancers, HRDetect reveals an additional 33 germline, 22 somatic and 47 tumours where 
no mutation was detected – bringing the total to 124 (22%) BRCA1/BRCA2 deficient 
tumours. Large-scale population based studies are required to gather proper population 
estimates but nevertheless, the numbers are startling.
Most notably, knowledge of the precise causative mutation may not be necessary because 
mutational signatures are such a reliable reporter of a tumour’s biological status and hence 
possible sensitivity to PARP inhibition (or other treatments (e.g. platinum-based salts, 
anthracyclines and mitomycin C) that cancers with BRCAness are selectively sensitive to). 
Nearly a third of samples that have characteristic genome profiles and high scores for 
BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency do not have canonical mutations detected. Thus, limiting testing 
to simply sequencing BRCA1/BRCA2 genes and performing methylation assays would miss 
this cohort of patients that could be functionally deficient incurred through currently 
unknown means.
If the tumours with predicted BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency also demonstrate sensitivity to 
PARP-inhibitors, this would unearth a substantial cohort of patients who could be responsive 
to selective therapeutic agents, currently reserved for just ~1-5% of breast cancer patients 
who are germline mutation carriers. This is potentially transformative and thus application 
of this predictor in PARP-inhibitor clinical trials is warranted to assess predictive capacity in 
clinical settings.
The primary investment of a bank of WGS cancer data has been vital to the development of 
this predictor. Being able to find definitive ways of classifying the biological status of a 
patient’s tumour, potentially for therapeutic stratification, is an example of the added value 
derived from these data – instrumental early steps that ultimately could lead to population 
health economic benefits.
Davies et al.
Page 11
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Online methods
1 Dataset
Internal Review Boards of each participating institution approved collection and use of 
samples of all patients in this study.
DNA was extracted from 560 breast cancer cases along with corresponding normal tissue 
and subjected to whole genome sequencing as described previously. Resulting BAM files 
were aligned to the reference human genome (GRCh37) using Burrows-Wheeler Aligner, 
BWA (v0.5.9)43.
Mutation calling was performed as described previously27. Briefly, CaVEMan (Cancer 
Variants Through Expectation Maximization: http://cancerit.github.io/CaVEMan/) was used 
for calling somatic substitutions. Indels in the tumour and normal genomes were called 
using a modified Pindel version 2.0 (http://cancerit.github.io/cgpPindel/) on the NCBI37 
genome build11. Structural variants were discovered using a bespoke algorithm, BRASS 
(BReakpoint AnalySiS) (https://github.com/cancerit/BRASS) through discordantly mapping 
paired-end reads followed by de novo local assembly using Velvet44 to determine exact 
coordinates and features of breakpoint junction sequence.
In total, 3,479,652 somatic base substitutions, 371,993 small indels and 77,695 
rearrangements were detected in the 560 samples.
1.1 Mutational signatures background—Mutation signature analysis based on 
nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) was performed as described previously27,45. 
Twelve base consensus substitution signatures were identified previously in the 560 breast 
whole genomes: signatures 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 13, 17, 18, 20, 26, and 30.
Base substitution signatures 1 (characterised by C>T transitions at NCG, where the 
underlined base is mutated) and 5 (primarily characterised by C>T and T>C mutations) have 
previously been associated with age46. Signature 2 is predominantly composed of C>T 
substitutions at TCN, and signature 13 predominantly comprise C>G mutations at TCN, 
may be generated by members of the AID/APOBEC family of cytidine deaminases that 
deaminate cytosine to uracil. Signatures 3 (enriched in C>G substitutions) and 8 (enriched in 
C>A substitutions) both lack highly distinctive substitution features and are enriched in 
BRCA1 and BRCA2 null tumours. Signature 3 in particular has been associated with the 
presence of inactivating BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations. Signatures 6, 20 and 26 are 
associated with defective DNA mismatch repair and were restricted to 10 samples, which 
exhibited mutation profiles consistent with mismatch repair deficiency. The aetiology of 
signatures 17 (characterised by T>G mutations at NTT) and 18 (exhibiting a high proportion 
of C>A mutations) is unknown. Signature 30 (characterised by C>T transitions) was found 
in a single patient and may be due to previous exposure to cancer therapies.
Six rearrangement mutational signatures, (RS1-RS6) based on rearrangement type, 
clustering and size were identified. RS1 and RS3 were characterised by non-clustered 
tandem duplications. RS1 mostly with tandem duplications of >100 kb, while, RS3 was 
Davies et al.
Page 12
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 predominantly associated with small tandem duplications <10 kb. RS2 was characterized by 
non-clustered deletions (>100 kb), inversions and interchromosomal translocations. RS4 was 
characterized by clustered interchromosomal translocations. RS5 was associated with non-
clustered deletions <100 kb, while RS6 contained clustered inversions and deletions. RS5 is 
enriched in BRCA1/BRCA2 null tumours and an excess of RS3 with BRCA1 null 
tumours27.
Two indel signatures based on the presence of either short tandem repeats or short stretches 
of identical sequence at the breakpoints (termed overlapping microhomology), were also 
extracted. Deletions with microhomology were typically >3bp in length and are 
characteristic of defective non-homologous end-joining based DNA double strand break 
repair. While indels at short tandem repeats, are typical of the microsatellite instability 
associated with defective DNA mismatch repair. See Supplementary table 1 for the 
breakdown of contribution of each mutation signature per sample.
1.2 Identifying whether a sample had particular mutational signatures—An 
iterative algorithm was used to identify the set of COSMIC signatures [cancer.sanger.ac.uk/
cosmic/signatures] active in each sample (the so called exposure). Each sample was 
completely described by a vector containing the number of substitutions observed for each 
mutation and flanking sequence context (defined by the neighbouring bases immediately 5’ 
and 3' to the mutated base and by the mutated base itself). Each mutation was orientated 
with respect to the pyrimidine strand and consequently each vector contained 96 elements. 
The algorithm started from a random exposure and iteratively moved a number of mutations 
from one signature to another, where both number of mutations and signatures were 
randomly picked. This choice was aimed to maximize the cosine similarity between 
observed and reconstructed vectors, and the algorithm stopped when no improvement to the 
cosine similarity was found in 1,000 consecutive random movements. This procedure was 
independently applied 100 times on each sample, and the median of these 100 exposures 
was considered to be the final sample exposure.
1.3 HRD indices—Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array hybridization using the 
Affymetrix SNP6.0 platform was performed according to Affymetrix protocols. Allele-
specific copy number analysis of tumours was performed using ASCAT (v2.1.1), to generate 
integral allele-specific copy number profiles for the tumour cells47. ASCAT was also 
applied to next-generation sequencing data directly with highly comparable results. 
Resulting allele-specific data generated by ASCAT were used in the calculation of 
homologous recombination deficiency (HRD) index score using implementations made in 
R48,49. See Supplementary table 1 for HRD index scores.
1.4 Variants in BRCA1 and BRCA2 and other HR genes—For details of the 
process used to discover germline and somatic mutations in BRCA1/BRCA2 and other 
genes known to be involved in DNA repair via homologous recombination, see 
Supplementary information.
Davies et al.
Page 13
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 2 Lasso logistic regression modelling
2.1 Learning phase—We set out to create a method for detecting genomic features 
associated with deficiency in BRCA1/BRCA2 that would report the probability of a tumour 
sample being HR-deficient during its evolution.
The method is trained on whole-genome sequencing data. We utilised the information on 
signatures of single base substitutions, indels, rearrangements, and a copy number 
classification based on HRD indices.
This supervised learning method was first applied to a cohort of 22 germline mutation 
carriers of BRCA1 and BRCA2 with clear loss of the alternative parental allele. There were 
also 235 control samples that did not have BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations or promoter 
hypermethylation of BRCA1, and any evidence of signatures of BRCA1/BRCA2 and were 
believed to be sporadic breast cancers. BRCA1/BRCA2 proficient tumours are usually 
reported as relatively stable genomically and quiescent in mutational profile. Thus, using 
this prior knowledge, we manually interrogated genome plots of the overall mutation 
patterns to identify the 235 samples that we could confidently call BRCA proficient 
tumours.
Inputs into the algorithm were as follows:
•
counts of mutations associated with each signature of single-base substitutions: 
signatures 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 13, 17, 18, 20, 26 – (Signature 30 was excluded as it 
involved only 1 sample)
•
indels with micro-homology at indel breakpoint junction, indels at 
polynucleotide repeat tracts and other complex indels as proportions
•
counts of rearrangements associated with each signature of rearrangements RS1-
RS6
•
HRD index
Some samples had vastly higher counts of substitutions than others and such outliers posed a 
challenge in the analysis. Thus, the genomic features were first log-transformed, according 
to the formula:
Equation 1
The ranges of values of each class of mutation were vastly different. Therefore, the 
transformed data were normalised so that each feature had a mean of 0 and standard 
deviation of 1, in order to be able to make the features comparable to one another:
Equation 2
Davies et al.
Page 14
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 A lasso logistic regression50 model was used to separate the two categories of patient 
samples: those affected or not affected by BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency. An efficient computer 
implementation for learning model parameters was available through the R package glmnet. 
The lasso approach permits learning and weighting genomic features most relevant to 
predicting BRCA1/BRCA2 status through variable selection.
Coefficients β are learnt from the genomic parameters of BRCA1/BRCA2-proficient and 
BRCA1/BRCA2-deficient samples presented to the algorithm. Optimal coefficients are 
obtained by minimising the objective function50:
Equation 3
where:
yi is BRCA status of a sample, yi = 1for BRCA1/BRCA2 null samples, yi = 0 otherwise
β0 is the intercept, equivalent to the background log-odds of BRCAness
β is a vector of weights with one real value corresponding to each feature
p is the number of features characterising each sample
N is the number of samples
 is the vector of features characterising ith sample
λ is the penalty (real value) promoting the sparseness of the weights, as learnt through 
nested cross-validation in R package glmnet
‖β‖1 is the L1 norm of the vector of weights, ie. the sum of absolute values of all entries of 
the coefficient vector
We constrained all β weights to be positive because they reflect the biological presence of 
mutational processes that are due to (in this case) BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency. By setting the 
constraint of non-negative weights, we ensured that all samples would be scored on the basis 
of the presence of relevant mutational signatures associated with BRCA1/BRCA2 
deficiency, irrespective of whether it is the dominant mutational process in the cancer or not.
Multiple mutational processes can exist in a tumour, and in some cases, certain hypermutator 
mutational phenotypes can come to dominate a specific cancer and eclipse the appreciation 
of other mutational processes. However, using non-negative coefficients in our model 
ensures that mutational signatures associated with BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency are detected 
reliably no matter how weakly present.
Davies et al.
Page 15
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Ultimately, the lasso logistic regression model is used to assign a probabilistic score to any 
new sample that is being analysed, using the normalised exposures of mutational processes 
in the sample (
) applying the parameters of the model (β) as follows:
Equation 4
where
Ci is the variable encoding the status of ith sample
β0 is the intercept weight
 is the vector encoding features of ith sample; and
β is the vector of weights.
2.2 Robustness, stability and generalizability (on 22)—We trained the logistic 
regression model using a cohort of 22 germline BRCA1/BRCA2 carriers with loss of the 
alternate allele, and a cohort of 235 sporadic tumours in this supervised analysis.
We used a ten-fold nested cross-validation strategy to assess the robustness and 
generalizability of the learned weights. Ten outer folds were used in the cross-validation 
process where 10% of data were set aside for each outer fold and were used for assessing 
accuracy of the prediction and generalizability.
The remaining 90% of the data were used for model parameter selection. The parameters 
associated with BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency were investigated on the inner folds for a range 
of λ values that define the sparsity of the results.
We obtained the model coefficients across the ten folds (presented as boxplots in the 
Supplementary Figure 1) demonstrating that the results across the ten folds are consistently 
non-zero for each of the genomic parameters identified as distinguishing. The model was 
finally applied across all the data used in training, where the coefficients from this final run 
(Supplementary table 10) are also presented in red crosses in Supplementary Figure 1.
The genomic parameters and associated coefficients were identified for a λ of 0.000480 
(mean 0.000891 and standard deviation 0.000803), to distinguish samples with HR 
deficiency in the final step:
Finally, we assessed the stability of each coefficient through sub-sampling of the training set. 
We chose half of samples in the training set randomly, and counted how many times each 
genomic feature was selected as a distinguishing feature (i.e. non-zero coefficient). This was 
performed iteratively and out of 100 sub-sampling and training iterations, each coefficient 
was non-zero, see supplementary table 11.
Davies et al.
Page 16
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 While most features are relatively stable, rearrangement signature RS3, which is a feature of 
BRCA1 null tumours, appears less stable. This is likely to be due to the cohort of 22 
informative tumours that were chosen to represent BRCA1/BRCA2 nullness. Only five of 
the 22 patients are BRCA1 patients, thus there is a skew in the cohort to BRCA2 and the 
balance in this cohort thus could be improved in order to improve the learned weights and 
their relative stability.
2.3 Identifying further samples with BRCA1/BRCA1 deficiency—The logistic 
regression model was applied to all 560 samples in the cohort. In particular, we could 
calculate the BRCAness scores on samples that were not in the training set, for example 
because their genomes were not quiescent or had uncertain genomic profiles. Supplementary 
Figure 2 shows the scores for each sample, demonstrating a steeply sigmoidal curve.
Apart from the 22 patients recruited into the study, many samples with high BRCAness 
scores had germline mutations that we had not known of at the time of enrolment into the 
study, and many had somatic BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations. All had loss of the other parental 
allele. We thus reasoned that features of BRCAness are present is samples with bi-allelic 
inactivation of BRCA1/BRCA2 genes, whether germline or somatic, and included all such 
samples in a further round of training.
2.4 Retraining on 77 and defining HRDetect, a classifier of BRCA1/BRCA2 
deficiency—In the final round of training, we included 77 samples with bi-allelic 
inactivation of BRCA1/BRCA2, and 234 quiescent tumours as negative examples. The 
number of BRCA1/BRCA2 proficient tumours differs by one sample between this and the 
previous training round because one of the samples with a quiescent genome, PD6042a, was 
subsequently found to have a biallelic mutation of BRCA2. We assessed robustness and 
generalizability of HRDetect using nested cross-validation as before (Section 2.2).
The genomic parameters and associated coefficients learnt across the 10 folds of cross-
validation are shown in Supplementary Figure 3. The boxplots show variability of each 
coefficient, and the red crosses show values of the coefficients when training on the whole 
dataset.
In comparison to training with 22 known germline BRCA carriers only, the variability of the 
coefficient values across folds decreased. A larger number of informative samples in the 
training set improved the robustness of the coefficients.
With the higher number of training samples, the stability of individual coefficients also 
improved, as shown in Supplementary table 12.
The logistic regression model was settled on the coefficients in Supplementary table 13, with 
(λ) of 0.00369 (mean 0.00478 and standard deviation 0.00104): These parameters were 
finalised in our algorithm that we have called HRDetect.
The accuracy of the BRCA predictions was excellent, with an area under the curve in cross-
validation of 1, for the 77 BRCA1/BRCA2 null samples and 234 quiescent tumours (311 
samples of 560 breast cancer genomes).
Davies et al.
Page 17
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 We also explored the possibility of permitting interactions between all genomic covariates in 
order to discover potentially augmented effects of cooperating signatures in our model (See 
Supplementary Information for details).
2.5 Assessment of accuracy of the classifiers through ROC curves—For a 
more comprehensive assessment of accuracy of HRDetect, we extended the set of samples 
by 60 samples that had been excluded from training. We applied HRDetect to all samples 
that had been successfully characterised with respect to methylation and HRD indices. We 
ultimately assessed the performance of HRDetect on 371 out of 560 breast cancer genomes, 
ignoring 2 samples with no HRD index and 187 with missing methylation data, as their 
BRCA status could not be verified.
In calculating the ROC curves, we compared the predictions from HRDetect for each of the 
371 samples, against evidence of bi-allelic loss of BRCA1/2. The area under the ROC curve 
for the breast cancer genomes was 0.98, which we quote in the main part of the manuscript.
Finally, HRDetect was applied to the full set of 560 breast cancer samples to give the final 
HRDetect score for each sample.
The flow diagram in Supplementary Figure 4 describes the steps involved in training, 
evaluation and applying HRDetect to the full data set.
2.6 Applying HRDetect to new tumour samples—Applying the predictor to a new 
sample requires that it has been characterised with respect to signatures of single-base 
substitutions, signatures of rearrangements, copy number profile and HRD score, small 
insertions and deletions, together with the characteristics of adjacent sequence.
Furthermore, the features of a new sample need to be normalised as in Equations 1 and 2. 
See Supplementary table 14 for the means and standard deviations of each feature that were 
taken into account based on current settings of HRDetect.
After the features of a new sample were normalised, HRDetect score is obtained by applying 
Equation 4, coefficients from Supplementary t13able 4 and intercept β0 = −3.364.
For details of how HRDetect was applied to new breast cancer samples, down sampled 
genomes, breast cancer WES and WGSs from other cancer types, see Supplementary 
information.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
This work has been performed on data that was previously published. It was generated and funded through the 
ICGC Breast Cancer Working group by the Breast Cancer Somatic Genetics Study (BASIS), a European research 
project funded by the European Community's Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2010-2014) under the grant 
agreement number 242006; the Triple Negative project funded by the Wellcome Trust (grant reference 
077012/Z/05/Z) and the HER2+ project funded by Institut National du Cancer (INCa) in France (Grants N° 
226-2009, 02-2011, 41-2012, 144-2008, 06-2012). The ICGC Asian Breast Cancer Project was funded through a 
Davies et al.
Page 18
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 grant of the Korean Health Technology R&D Project, Ministry of Health & Welfare, Republic of Korea (A111218-
SC01). The Oslo Breast Cancer Research Consortium (OSBREAC), Norway (www.osbreac.no), contributed 
samples to this study.
Personal funding: DG was supported by the EU-FP7-SUPPRESSTEM project. ALR is partially supported by the 
Dana-Farber/Harvard Cancer Center SPORE in Breast Cancer (NIH/NCI 5 P50 CA168504-02). AS was supported 
by Cancer Genomics Netherlands (CGC.nl) through a grant from the Netherlands Organisation of Scientific 
research (NWO). CS is supported by a grant from the Breast Cancer Research Foundation. EB was funded by 
EMBL. A.T. acknowledges infrastructure support funding from the NIHR Biomedical Research Centres at Guys 
and St Thomas's and Royal Marsden Hospital NHS Foundation Trusts. GK is supported by National Research 
Foundation of Korea (NRF) grants funded by the Korean government (NRF 2015R1A2A1A10052578). SN-Z is a 
Wellcome Beit Fellow and personally funded by a Wellcome Trust Intermediate Fellowship (WT100183MA).
Finally, we would like to acknowledge all members of the ICGC Breast Cancer Working Group and ICGC Asian 
Breast Cancer Project, for without the foresight of engaging in this scale of collaboration, we will not have gained 
these insights.
References
1. Prevalence and penetrance of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in a population-based series of breast 
cancer cases. Anglian Breast Cancer Study Group. Br J Cancer. 2000; 83:1301–8. [PubMed: 
11044354] 
2. John EM, et al. Prevalence of pathogenic BRCA1 mutation carriers in 5 US racial/ethnic groups. 
JAMA. 2007; 298:2869–76. [PubMed: 18159056] 
3. Malone KE, et al. Prevalence and predictors of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in a population-
based study of breast cancer in white and black American women ages 35 to 64 years. Cancer Res. 
2006; 66:8297–308. [PubMed: 16912212] 
4. Couch FJ, Nathanson KL, Offit K. Two decades after BRCA: setting paradigms in personalized 
cancer care and prevention. Science. 2014; 343:1466–70. [PubMed: 24675953] 
5. King MC. "The race" to clone BRCA1. Science. 2014; 343:1462–5. [PubMed: 24675952] 
6. Lord CJ, Ashworth A. The DNA damage response and cancer therapy. Nature. 2012; 481:287–94. 
[PubMed: 22258607] 
7. Venkitaraman AR. Cancer suppression by the chromosome custodians, BRCA1 and BRCA2. 
Science. 2014; 343:1470–5. [PubMed: 24675954] 
8. Farmer H, et al. Targeting the DNA repair defect in BRCA mutant cells as a therapeutic strategy. 
Nature. 2005; 434:917–21. [PubMed: 15829967] 
9. Prakash R, Zhang Y, Feng W, Jasin M. Homologous recombination and human health: the roles of 
BRCA1, BRCA2, and associated proteins. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2015; 7:a016600. 
[PubMed: 25833843] 
10. Bryant HE, et al. Specific killing of BRCA2-deficient tumours with inhibitors of poly(ADP-ribose) 
polymerase. Nature. 2005; 434:913–7. [PubMed: 15829966] 
11. Fong PC, et al. Inhibition of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase in tumors from BRCA mutation 
carriers. N Engl J Med. 2009; 361:123–34. [PubMed: 19553641] 
12. Audeh MW, et al. Oral poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitor olaparib in patients with BRCA1 or 
BRCA2 mutations and recurrent ovarian cancer: a proof-of-concept trial. Lancet. 2010; 376:245–
51. [PubMed: 20609468] 
13. Tutt A, et al. Oral poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitor olaparib in patients with BRCA1 or 
BRCA2 mutations and advanced breast cancer: a proof-of-concept trial. Lancet. 2010; 376:235–
44. [PubMed: 20609467] 
14. Mateo J, et al. DNA-Repair Defects and Olaparib in Metastatic Prostate Cancer. N Engl J Med. 
2015; 373:1697–708. [PubMed: 26510020] 
15. Ledermann J, et al. Olaparib maintenance therapy in platinum-sensitive relapsed ovarian cancer. N 
Engl J Med. 2012; 366:1382–92. [PubMed: 22452356] 
16. Lips EH, et al. Quantitative copy number analysis by Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe 
Amplification (MLPA) of BRCA1-associated breast cancer regions identifies BRCAness. Breast 
Cancer Res. 2011; 13:R107. [PubMed: 22032731] 
Davies et al.
Page 19
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 17. Ruscito I, et al. BRCA1 gene promoter methylation status in high-grade serous ovarian cancer 
patients--a study of the tumour Bank ovarian cancer (TOC) and ovarian cancer diagnosis 
consortium (OVCAD). Eur J Cancer. 2014; 50:2090–8. [PubMed: 24889916] 
18. Jazaeri AA, et al. Gene expression profiles of BRCA1-linked, BRCA2-linked, and sporadic ovarian 
cancers. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2002; 94:990–1000. [PubMed: 12096084] 
19. Larsen MJ, et al. Classifications within molecular subtypes enables identification of BRCA1/
BRCA2 mutation carriers by RNA tumor profiling. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e64268. [PubMed: 
23704984] 
20. Peng G, et al. Genome-wide transcriptome profiling of homologous recombination DNA repair. 
Nat Commun. 2014; 5:3361. [PubMed: 24553445] 
21. Joosse SA, et al. Prediction of BRCA1-association in hereditary non-BRCA1/2 breast carcinomas 
with array-CGH. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2009; 116:479–89. [PubMed: 18704682] 
22. Vollebergh MA, et al. An aCGH classifier derived from BRCA1-mutated breast cancer and benefit 
of high-dose platinum-based chemotherapy in HER2-negative breast cancer patients. Ann Oncol. 
2011; 22:1561–70. [PubMed: 21135055] 
23. Watkins JA, Irshad S, Grigoriadis A, Tutt AN. Genomic scars as biomarkers of homologous 
recombination deficiency and drug response in breast and ovarian cancers. Breast Cancer Res. 
2014; 16:211. [PubMed: 25093514] 
24. Graeser M, et al. A marker of homologous recombination predicts pathologic complete response to 
neoadjuvant chemotherapy in primary breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2010; 16:6159–68. 
[PubMed: 20802015] 
25. Lord CJ, Ashworth A. BRCAness revisited. Nat Rev Cancer. 2016; 16:110–20. [PubMed: 
26775620] 
26. Bentley DR, et al. Accurate whole human genome sequencing using reversible terminator 
chemistry. Nature. 2008; 456:53–9. [PubMed: 18987734] 
27. Nik-Zainal S, et al. Landscape of somatic mutations in 560 breast cancer whole-genome sequences. 
Nature. 2016
28. Morganella S, et al. The topography of mutational processes in breast cancer genomes. Nat 
Commun. 2016; 7 11383. 
29. Nik-Zainal S, et al. Mutational processes molding the genomes of 21 breast cancers. Cell. 2012; 
149:979–93. [PubMed: 22608084] 
30. Nik-Zainal S, et al. The life history of 21 breast cancers. Cell. 2012; 149:994–1007. [PubMed: 
22608083] 
31. Alexandrov LB, et al. Signatures of mutational processes in human cancer. Nature. 2013; 500:415–
21. [PubMed: 23945592] 
32. Waddell N, et al. Whole genomes redefine the mutational landscape of pancreatic cancer. Nature. 
2015; 518:495–501. [PubMed: 25719666] 
33. Bailey P, et al. Genomic analyses identify molecular subtypes of pancreatic cancer. Nature. 2016; 
531:47–52. [PubMed: 26909576] 
34. Patch AM, et al. Whole-genome characterization of chemoresistant ovarian cancer. Nature. 2015; 
521:489–94. [PubMed: 26017449] 
35. Alexandrov LB, Nik-Zainal S, Siu HC, Leung SY, Stratton MR. A mutational signature in gastric 
cancer suggests therapeutic strategies. Nat Commun. 2015; 6 8683. 
36. Stefansson OA, et al. Genomic and phenotypic analysis of BRCA2 mutated breast cancers reveals 
co-occurring changes linked to progression. Breast Cancer Res. 2011; 13:R95. [PubMed: 
21958427] 
37. Yates LR, et al. Subclonal diversification of primary breast cancer revealed by multiregion 
sequencing. Nat Med. 2015; 21:751–9. [PubMed: 26099045] 
38. Rodriguez AA, et al. DNA repair signature is associated with anthracycline response in triple 
negative breast cancer patients. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010; 123:189–96. [PubMed: 20582464] 
39. Chappuis PO, et al. A significant response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in BRCA1/2 related 
breast cancer. J Med Genet. 2002; 39:608–10. [PubMed: 12161606] 
Davies et al.
Page 20
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 40. Lee MS, et al. Comprehensive analysis of missense variations in the BRCT domain of BRCA1 by 
structural and functional assays. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:4880–90. [PubMed: 20516115] 
41. Edwards SL, et al. Resistance to therapy caused by intragenic deletion in BRCA2. Nature. 2008; 
451:1111–5. [PubMed: 18264088] 
42. Sakai W, et al. Secondary mutations as a mechanism of cisplatin resistance in BRCA2-mutated 
cancers. Nature. 2008; 451:1116–20. [PubMed: 18264087] 
43. Li H, Durbin R. Fast and accurate short read alignment with Burrows-Wheeler transform. 
Bioinformatics. 2009; 25:1754–60. [PubMed: 19451168] 
44. Zerbino DR, Birney E. Velvet: algorithms for de novo short read assembly using de Bruijn graphs. 
Genome Res. 2008; 18:821–9. [PubMed: 18349386] 
45. Alexandrov LB, Nik-Zainal S, Wedge DC, Campbell PJ, Stratton MR. Deciphering signatures of 
mutational processes operative in human cancer. Cell Rep. 2013; 3:246–59. [PubMed: 23318258] 
46. Alexandrov LB, et al. Clock-like mutational processes in human somatic cells. Nat Genet. 2015; 
47:1402–7. [PubMed: 26551669] 
47. Van Loo P, et al. Allele-specific copy number analysis of tumors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010; 
107:16910–5. [PubMed: 20837533] 
48. Abkevich V, et al. Patterns of genomic loss of heterozygosity predict homologous recombination 
repair defects in epithelial ovarian cancer. Br J Cancer. 2012; 107:1776–82. [PubMed: 23047548] 
49. Natrajan R, et al. Characterization of the genomic features and expressed fusion genes in 
micropapillary carcinomas of the breast. J Pathol. 2014; 232:553–65. [PubMed: 24395524] 
50. Tibshirani R. Regression shrinkage and selection via the Lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical 
Society Series B-Methodological. 1996; 58:267–288.
Davies et al.
Page 21
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 1. Whole genome profiling depicts differences between patients with BRCA1/BRCA2 
mutated tumours and sporadic tumours.
Examples of genome plots for a typical sporadic breast cancer (left), a BRCA1 germline null 
(middle) and a BRCA2 germline null tumour (right). Features depicted in circos plots from 
outermost rings heading inwards: Karyotypic ideogram outermost. Base substitutions next, 
plotted as rainfall plots (log10 intermutation distance on radial axis, dot colours: blue, C>A; 
black, C>G; red, C>T; grey, T>A; green, T>C; pink, T>G). Ring with short green lines, 
insertions; ring with short red lines, deletions. Major copy number allele (green, gain) ring, 
minor copy number allele ring (red, loss), Central lines represent rearrangements (green, 
tandem duplications; red, deletions; blue, inversions; purple, interchromosomal events). 
Mutations in breast cancer driver genes are indicated around the circus plots. Below each 
circos plot are the histograms showing mutation counts for each mutation class; topmost 
histogram shows the number of mutations contributing to each substitution signature; middle 
histogram represents indel patterns; lowermost histogram shows the number of 
rearrangements contributing to each rearrangement signature.
Davies et al.
Page 22
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 2. Workflow for developing HRDetect
A. Workflow of the steps involved in the development of the HRDetect predictor
I.
Initial training using 22 known germline BRCA1 and BRCA2 null samples.
II.
Retraining using 77 BRCA1 and BRCA2 null samples to produce the final 
HRDetect predictor.
III.
Validation on a further set of breast cancers and application to other data sets.
B. Box plots of the weights for the genomic features contributing to the HRDetect predictor. 
Range of values from 10 replicates of training in cross-validation, using 311 breast cancer 
samples; 77 BRCA1/BRCA2 null samples and 234 quiescent tumours. Red crosses indicate 
the final coefficients used in HRDetect.
Davies et al.
Page 23
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 3. HRDetect as a probabilistic classifier
A. Piechart depicting the BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation status of samples in the 560 breast 
cancer set which produced, on the lefthand side HRDetect scores below the cut-off of 0.7 
and on the right handside above 0.7. Purple = previously known germline BRCA1 and 
BRCA2 with loss of the alternative allele; blue = newly discovered gemline BRCA1 and 
BRCA2 with loss of the alternative allele; orange = somatic gemline BRCA1 and BRCA2 
and DNA hypermethylation of BRCA1 promoter with loss of the alternative allele; black = 
monoallelic germline and somatic BRCA1 and BRCA2 retaining the alternative allele; grey 
= samples in which no BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation has been detected.
B. HRDetect scores for 560 breast cancer samples ordered lowest to highest scores from left 
to right. Coloured bars included both monoalleleic mutations and those with loss of 
alternative allele, purple; previously known germline BRCA1 and BRCA2 (24 in total of 
which 22 are biallelic and 2 mono-alleleic), blue; newly discovered germline BRCA1 and 
BRCA2 (36 in total of which 33 are bialleic and 3 monoalleleic), orange; somatic gemline 
BRCA1 and BRCA2 and hypermethylation of BRCA1 promoter (31 in total of which 22 are 
biallelic and 9 monoalleleic), black diamonds above the bars indicate monoallelic germline 
and somatic BRCA1 and BRCA2 retaining the alternative allele (14).
Davies et al.
Page 24
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 4. Performance of HRDetect and validation
A. ROC curves demonstrating the performance of HRDetect on 371 breast cancer samples 
as well as performance when simply using individual mutational signatures as a predictor of 
BRCA1/BRCA2 deficiency.
B. Comparing the sensitivity of detection of BRCA1/BRCA2 deficient tumours across 
different types of sequencing experiments - high-coverage 30-40X genomes, low-coverage 
10X genomes and whole exome sequencing (using HRDetect weights learned from WGS 
and retrained on WES data). 371 breast cancer samples are used in each case.
Davies et al.
Page 25
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 C. Performance of HRDetect on other data sets. From left to right - a cohort of 80 new breast 
cancers, 73 ovarian cancers and 96 pancreatic cancers. Top panel shows ROC curves for 
each cancer type respectively. Bottom panel shows histogram of HRDetect scores. Blue = 
germline BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations; orange = somatic BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations; 
grey = no BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation detected; black diamonds above the bars indicate 
mono-allelic germline and somatic BRCA1 and BRCA2 retaining the alternative allele.
Davies et al.
Page 26
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 5. Clinically relevant strengths of HRDetect
A. Genome plot from an FFPE sample from a patient with a germline BRCA1 mutation
B. Contribution of mutation signatures, top, substitutions; middle, indels; bottom, 
rearrangements; and below representation of the HRDetect score.
C. HRDetect scores for nine patients treated with neoadjuvant anthracyclines +/- taxanes. 
Duplicate pretreatment needle biopsy samples were available for five of the samples (Pre-
treatment Biospy 1 and 2). One patient (PD9770) had multifocal tumours. One patient with 
extremely low tumour cellularity in both biopsies and with hardly any mutations, was 
Davies et al.
Page 27
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 excluded (PD9773). HRDetect scores are provided under each sample. Blue shading 
indicates patients with residual disease while patients shaded green had complete response 
to treatment.
Davies et al.
Page 28
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
