 Ipilimumab for Patients with Relapse after Allogeneic 
Transplantation
Matthew S. Davids, M.D., Haesook T. Kim, Ph.D., Pavan Bachireddy, M.D., Caitlin Costello, 
M.D., Rebecca Liguori, M.S., Alexandra Savell, B.S., Alexander P. Lukez, B.A., David 
Avigan, M.D., Yi-Bin Chen, M.D., Peter McSweeney, M.B., Ch.B., Nicole R. LeBoeuf, M.D., 
M.P.H., Michael S. Rooney, Ph.D., Michaela Bowden, Ph.D., Chensheng W. Zhou, M.S., Scott 
R. Granter, M.D., Jason L. Hornick, M.D., Ph.D., Scott J. Rodig, M.D., Ph.D., Masahiro 
Hirakawa, M.D., Ph.D., Mariano Severgnini, Ph.D., F. Stephen Hodi, M.D., Catherine J. Wu, 
M.D., Vincent T. Ho, M.D., Corey Cutler, M.D., M.P.H., John Koreth, M.B., B.S., D.Phil., Edwin 
P. Alyea, M.D., Joseph H. Antin, M.D., Philippe Armand, M.D., Ph.D., Howard Streicher, M.D., 
Edward D. Ball, M.D., Jerome Ritz, M.D., Asad Bashey, M.D., Ph.D., Robert J. Soiffer, M.D., 
and for the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society Blood Cancer Research Partnership
Abstract
BACKGROUND—Loss of donor-mediated immune antitumor activity after allogeneic 
hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation (HSCT) permits relapse of hematologic cancers. We 
hypothesized that immune checkpoint blockade established by targeting cytotoxic T-lymphocyte–
associated protein 4 with ipilimumab could restore antitumor reactivity through a graft-versus-
tumor effect.
METHODS—We conducted a phase 1/1b multicenter, investigator-initiated study to determine 
the safety and efficacy of ipilimumab in patients with relapsed hematologic cancer after allogeneic 
HSCT. Patients received induction therapy with ipilimumab at a dose of 3 or 10 mg per kilogram 
of body weight every 3 weeks for a total of 4 doses, with additional doses every 12 weeks for up to 
60 weeks in patients who had a clinical benefit.
RESULTS—A total of 28 patients were enrolled. Immune-related adverse events, including one 
death, were observed in 6 patients (21%), and graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) that precluded 
further administration of ipilimumab was observed in 4 patients (14%). No responses that met 
formal response criteria occurred in patients who received a dose of 3 mg per kilogram. Among 22 
patients who received a dose of 10 mg per kilogram, 5 (23%) had a complete response, 2 (9%) had 
a partial response, and 6 (27%) had decreased tumor burden. Complete responses occurred in 4 
patients with extramedullary acute myeloid leukemia and 1 patient with the myelodysplastic 
syndrome developing into acute myeloid leukemia. Four patients had a durable response for more 
than 1 year. Responses were associated with in situ infiltration of cytotoxic CD8+ T cells, 
Address reprint requests to Dr. Davids at the Department of Medical Oncology, Dana–Farber Cancer Institute, 450 Brookline Ave., 
Boston, MA, 02215-5450, or at matthew_davids@dfci.harvard.edu.
The authors’ affiliations are listed in the Appendix.
Disclosure forms provided by the authors are available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 14.
Published in final edited form as:
N Engl J Med. 2016 July 14; 375(2): 143–153. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1601202.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 decreased activation of regulatory T cells, and expansion of subpopulations of effector T cells in 
the blood.
CONCLUSIONS—Our early-phase data showed that administration of ipilimumab was feasible 
in patients with recurrent hematologic cancers after allogeneic HSCT, although immune-mediated 
toxic effects and GVHD occurred. Durable responses were observed in association with several 
histologic subtypes of these cancers, including extramedullary acute myeloid leukemia. (Funded 
by the National Institutes of Health and others; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01822509.)
Allogeneic hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation (HSCT) is the only cure for many 
patients who have advanced hematologic cancers, principally through the induction of a 
graft-versus-tumor effect.1 Unfortunately, more than one third of patients who have 
undergone transplantation have a relapse of disease.2 The prognosis for these patients is 
poor; the majority die within 1 year after relapse despite salvage chemotherapy, donor-
lymphocyte infusion, or retransplantation.3–5
Immune escape (i.e., tumor evasion of the donor immune system) contributes to relapse after 
allogeneic HSCT, and immune checkpoint inhibitory pathways probably play an important 
role.6 The engagement of cytotoxic T-lymphocyte–associated protein 4 (CTLA-4) and 
programmed death 1 (PD-1) receptors by their respective ligands B7-1 and B7-2 and PD-L1 
and PD-L2 inhibits effector T-cell function. Tumor cells often express these ligands, thereby 
selectively blocking antitumor immunity. In murine models, PD-1 blockade has led to an 
increase in graft-versus-host-disease (GVHD),7 whereas selective blockade of CTLA-4 to 
treat late relapse after transplantation has augmented graft-versus-tumor effects without 
accelerating GVHD.8
We hypothesized that CTLA-4 blockade with ipilimumab may induce a graft-versus-tumor 
effect in patients with relapse after allogeneic HSCT and lead to a clinical response without 
excessive immune-related toxic effects. CTLA-4 blockade could provide a novel tool for 
immune modulation to treat or prevent relapse after allogeneic HSCT.
Studies9,10 have shown that ipilimumab (Yervoy, Bristol-Myers Squibb), a human IgG1 
kappa monoclonal antibody, specifically blocks CTLA-4. We previously found that a single 
low dose of ipilimumab (0.1 to 3.0 mg per kilogram of body weight) had acceptable side-
effect and adverse-effect profiles and did not result in clinically significant GVHD. 
Responses were seen in three patients with lymphoma. In that study, T-cell activation was 
observed,11,12 but patients received only one planned infusion of ipilimumab and doses 
higher than 3.0 mg per kilogram were not tested. These observations prompted the initiation 
of the current study of ipilimumab to evaluate the safety and efficacy of sustained CTLA-4 
blockade in patients with relapse after allogeneic HSCT.
METHODS
PATIENTS
Patients were eligible if they had received a diagnosis of progressive or persistent leukemia, 
lymphoma, multiple myeloma, or a neoplasm with myelodysplastic or myeloproliferative 
features 3 months or more after allogeneic HSCT, had had no immune suppression for at 
Davids et al.
Page 2
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 least 4 weeks, and had no history of grade III or IV acute GVHD. Other eligibility criteria 
were 20% or more donor-derived CD3+ T-cell chimerism, no history of autoimmune 
disease, and an absence of active infection.
STUDY DESIGN AND OVERSIGHT
This phase 1/1b, open-label, investigator-initiated, single-group, multicenter study was 
designed to determine the maximum tolerated dose, characterize toxic effects, and assess the 
efficacy and pharmacodynamic features of ipilimumab in patients with recurrent 
hematologic cancer after allogeneic HSCT. Patients were enrolled from April 2013 through 
March 2015. In the phase 1 portion of the study, the original design included five patients 
who would receive ipilimumab at a dose of 3.0 mg per kilogram, and this dose would be 
escalated in a second cohort of five patients who would receive 10.0 mg per kilogram if no 
more than one manifestation of dose-limiting toxicity was observed. Additional patients 
could take the place of patients who discontinued the study because of early disease 
progression if the patients who discontinued the study did not complete the period of 
observation for toxic effects.
Next, in a phase 1b dose-expansion phase that was designed to better define toxicity and 
assess preliminary efficacy, an additional 15 patients were enrolled and received the 
maximum tolerated dose. Ipilimumab was administered intravenously over the course of 90 
minutes every 21 days for four courses unless unacceptable toxic effects or clear disease 
progression occurred. Patients who did not have disease progression or unacceptable toxic 
effects could continue to receive maintenance therapy every 12 weeks for up to 60 weeks.
The study was designed solely by the authors, and the regulatory sponsor was the Cancer 
Therapy Evaluation Program (CTEP) of the National Cancer Institute. The study drug was 
provided by the manufacturer, Bristol-Myers Squibb, to CTEP, which distributed it to the 
participating sites. The manufacturer had no other role in the study. The institutional review 
board at each site approved the protocol (available with the full text of this article at 
NEJM.org), and the study was conducted in accordance with the principles of the 
Declaration of Helsinki and the International Conference on Harmonisation Good Clinical 
Practice guidelines. All the participants provided written informed consent. The data 
analysis and writing of the manuscript were performed solely by the authors with no third-
party assistance. All the authors were in agreement regarding submission of the manuscript 
and vouch for the completeness and accuracy of the data and analysis and the fidelity of the 
study to the protocol.
CLINICAL ASSESSMENTS
Patients underwent evaluations every week for the first 3 weeks, then every 3 weeks through 
week 12, and then monthly. Assessments of acute and chronic GVHD were made with the 
use of standard criteria.13,14
Dose-limiting toxic effects were defined as grade III or IV acute GVHD, grade 4 
hematologic toxic effects unrelated to the underlying disease, or grade 3 nonhematologic 
toxic effects that did not improve to grade 1 with a 3-week dose delay. Immune-related 
adverse events that resolved to grade 1 or lower with the use of glucocorticoids were not 
Davids et al.
Page 3
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 considered to be dose-limiting toxic effects. We designated the observation period for toxic 
effects to be 12 weeks to capture delayed immunologic toxic effects. Responses were 
assessed with the use of standard disease-specific criteria (listed in the protocol) after 6 and 
12 weeks of induction therapy and every 12 weeks thereafter during maintenance therapy.
IMMUNOLOGIC ANALYSIS
Correlative studies were performed at baseline and at response assessments. These studies 
included the following: immunophenotypic analysis of peripheral-blood mononuclear cells 
by means of flow cytometry and mass cytometry; immunohistochemical staining and RNA 
sequencing of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded skinbiopsy specimens; and cytokine and 
chemokine assays of plasma samples. Additional methods are described in the 
Supplementary Appendix, available at NEJM.org.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
All patients who received the study drug were included in the safety and efficacy analyses. 
Exploratory pharmacodynamic correlative studies were analyzed descriptively and 
graphically, and group comparisons were made with the use of the exact Wilcoxon rank-sum 
test. All P values were two-sided, and P values of less than 0.05 were considered to indicate 
statistical significance. All analyses were performed with the use of SAS software, version 
9.3 (SAS Institute) and the statistical program R, version 2.13.2 (the CRAN project [http://
cran.r-project.org]). A detailed statistical analysis plan is provided in the Supplementary 
Appendix.
RESULTS
PATIENTS AND TREATMENT
A total of 28 patients were enrolled at six sites. Baseline characteristics of the patients are 
summarized in Table 1. Diagnoses included acute myeloid leukemia (in 12 patients, 
including 3 with leukemia cutis and 1 with a myeloid sarcoma), Hodgkin’s lymphoma (in 7), 
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (in 4), and the myelodysplastic syndrome (in 2). In addition, 1 
patient each had multiple myeloma, myeloproliferative neoplasm, and acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia. Eight patients (29%) had previously had grade I or II acute GVHD, and 16 
patients (57%) had previously had chronic GVHD.
The median time from transplantation to initial treatment with ipilimumab during the study 
was 675 days (range, 198 to 1830), and the median time from relapse to initial 
administration of ipilimumab was 97 days (range, 0 to 1415). Patients had received a median 
of three prior treatment regimens, excluding transplantation (range, 1 to 14), and 20 patients 
(71%) had previously received treatment for relapse after transplantation, including 
chemotherapy in 17 patients (61%), radiation therapy in 6 patients (21%), and donor-
lymphocyte infusions in 6 patients (21%). The median pretreatment peripheral-blood donor 
T-cell chimerism was 99% (range, 58 to 100).
Davids et al.
Page 4
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 SAFETY
Adverse events that occurred in all patients are listed in Table 2. Six patients received 3 mg 
of ipilimumab per kilogram (five patients were initially enrolled, but one patient could not 
be assessed for toxic effects because of early progression, and another patient took that 
patient’s place, according to the protocol). Chronic GVHD of the liver developed in one 
patient; this was the only dose-limiting toxic effect in that cohort. Immune-related adverse 
events were observed in two patients (grade 2 pneumonitis in one patient and grade 2 
diarrhea in one patient). These events were rapidly reversed with glucocorticoids and did not 
preclude further administration of ipilimumab.
On the basis of the safety profile at a dose of 3 mg of ipilimumab per kilogram and evidence 
that 10 mg per kilogram may have greater efficacy than 3 mg in melanoma,15 a dose-
escalation cohort of 7 patients was enrolled to receive a dose of 10 mg per kilogram (2 
patients could not be evaluated for toxic effects because of early progression events and 
discontinued the study; 2 other patients took their place, according to the protocol). A 
subsequent dose-expansion cohort of an additional 15 patients was then enrolled; these 
patients received ipilimumab at a dose of 10 mg per kilogram.
Among the 22 patients who received 10 mg of ipilimumab per kilogram, dose-limiting toxic 
effects included two cases of chronic GVHD of the liver and one case of grade II acute 
GVHD of the gut, all of which resolved with glucocorticoids but precluded further 
administration of ipilimumab. Immune-related adverse events, which occurred in 3 patients, 
included grade 2 immune thrombocytopenia (in 1 patient), grade 3 colitis (in 1), and 
pneumonitis (1 patient with grade 2 pneumonitis and 1 patient with grade 4 pneumonitis). 
These toxic effects were treated with glucocorticoids, and in 2 patients, glucocorticoids were 
tapered and ipilimumab was resumed within 3 weeks. The third patient died 42 days after 
receiving the initial dose of ipilimumab after grade 3 colitis and grade 4 pneumonitis 
developed. No infectious complications of grade 3 or higher were observed.
The clinical presentation of GVHD and immune-related adverse events can be similar, so 
biopsy specimens of the affected site were obtained whenever feasible to distinguish 
pathologically between these potential causes. Two patients with colitis underwent colon 
biopsies. One of these patients had pathological features consistent with typical ipilimumab-
related colitis, including a mixture of chronic inflammation in the lamina propria, acute 
neutrophilic inflammation in the crypts, and minimal apoptosis. The other patient had 
typical GVHD features, including crypt epithelial-cell apoptosis in the absence of 
inflammation (Fig. S1 in the Supplementary Appendix).
In total, ipilimumab was discontinued because of dose-limiting toxic effects in 5 patients: 4 
patients with GVHD and 1 patient with severe immune-related adverse events. Overall, the 
median number of doses received was 4 (range, 1 to 8). A total of 15 patients (54%) 
completed the full course of induction therapy, and 6 patients (21%) received maintenance 
therapy.
Davids et al.
Page 5
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 CLINICAL RESPONSE
In the cohort of patients who received 3 mg of ipilimumab per kilogram, no responses were 
noted. One patient with extramedullary acute myeloid leukemia of the breast had a presumed 
tumor flare after two doses of ipilimumab and then had a 27% decrease in the size of the 
mass at the end of induction; the reduced size was maintained for 12 additional weeks (Fig. 
S2 in the Supplementary Appendix).
The best responses among the 22 patients who received 10 mg of ipilimumab per kilogram 
are listed in Table 2. Seven of 22 patients (32%) met disease-specific criteria for a response. 
All patients who had a response had baseline donor T-cell chimerism in the blood of 99% or 
higher. Five patients had an objective complete response (23%), including all 3 patients with 
leukemia cutis (Fig. 1A through 1D, and Fig. S3 in the Supplementary Appendix), 1 with 
myeloid sarcoma involving lymph nodes, and 1 with smoldering myelodysplastic syndrome 
developing into acute myeloid leukemia with marrow involvement.
Two patients had a partial response, 1 with widespread Hodgkin’s lymphoma involving the 
bones and bone marrow (Fig. 1E through 1H) and 1 with lung plasmacytomas. Six 
additional patients who did not meet formal response criteria had a reduction in the tumor 
burden, including the patient with extramedullary acute myeloid leukemia of the breast, 3 
patients with Hodgkin’s lymphoma who had had a relapse very soon after receiving multiple 
courses of post-transplantation therapy and remained in the study with stable disease for up 
to 1 year, a patient with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, and a patient with acute myeloid 
leukemia who had a 28% reduction in marrow blasts. In total, 13 of 22 patients (59%) had a 
reduction in the tumor burden after receiving ipilimumab.
With a median follow-up time of 15 months (range, 8 to 27) among survivors, the 1-year 
overall survival rate was 49% (Fig S4 in the Supplementary Appendix). The median duration 
of response had not been reached. Two of the three patients with leukemia cutis remained in 
complete remission at 12 and 15 months, and the patient with the myelodysplastic syndrome 
developing into acute myeloid leukemia remained in complete remission at 16 months. The 
patient with lung plasmacytomas had a partial response without progression for more than 
21 months. Clinical response was not associated with the patient’s age, the intensity of the 
conditioning regimen, the stem-cell source, the time since transplantation, or prior donor-
lymphocyte infusion. All seven patients with a complete or partial response, as compared 
with 62% of patients who did not have a response, had some prior GVHD (P = 0.08).
IMMUNOLOGIC EFFECTS
In exploratory studies, we assessed the association between clinical outcomes and the 
immunologic responses to ipilimumab both at the site of disease and in the blood. In three 
patients with leukemia cutis who had a complete response, pretreatment skin-biopsy 
specimens showed dense infiltration with leukemia cells, and post-treatment biopsy 
specimens confirmed elimination of leukemia cells and replacement with mild fibrosis and 
chronic inflammation (Fig. 1A through 1D, and Fig. S3 in the Supplementary Appendix). 
Serial skin-biopsy specimens in one of these patients showed increased infiltration of CD8+ 
T cells 12 days after the patient received a single dose of ipilimumab (Fig. 2A). Increased 
Davids et al.
Page 6
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cytotoxicity, as evidenced by staining for perforin granules, paralleled the increased CD8+ 
T-cell infiltration (Fig. 2A and 2B).
To further explore this finding, we performed RNA sequencing from biopsy specimens 
obtained at sites of leukemic involvement in two patients who had a response and one 
patient who did not have a response (Fig. 2C). Consistent with the immunohistochemical 
analysis, gene-expression data showed up-regulation of both CD8A (by a factor of 8.5 to 
22.0) and PRF1 (perforin) (by a factor of 1.5 to 9.0) in association with the clinical response 
to ipilimumab. In one patient who had a response, increased expression of CD8A and PRF1 
after the administration of ipilimumab was detected at two different sites of relapse. In 
contrast, the patient who did not have a response had up-regulation of CD8A (by a factor of 
10.0) without increased PRF1 expression (PRF1 expression changed by a factor of −1.5).
To probe the systemic effects of ipilimumab on T-cell immunity, we evaluated changes in 
CD4+ regulatory T-cell (Treg) and CD4+ conventional T-cell (Tcon) populations in 
peripheral blood 8 weeks after the patients began to receive ipilimumab. Flow cytometry 
(Fig. 3A) showed that patients who had a complete response or stable disease had fewer 
CD4+ Treg cells and more CD4+ Tcon cells than patients with progressive disease. Using 
mass cytometry (Fig. 3B), we found that activated CD4+ Treg cells were present at a 50% 
lower frequency in two patients who had a response than in two patients who had disease 
progression (additional details are provided in the Supplementary Appendix).
In plasma samples obtained from patients who had a response to ipilimumab, we observed 
significant increases in chemokines that are critical for leukocyte trafficking, including the 
interleukin-8 receptor ligands and chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligands 2 (CXCL2) (Fig. 3C) 
and 5 (CXCL5) (Fig. 3D), but not in other chemokines such as CXCL6, interleukin-1 
receptor type I, angiopoietin-1 and angiopoietin-2, and vascular endothelial growth factor 
(data not shown). Finally, we observed that low pretreatment levels of soluble major 
histocompatibility complex class I polypeptide–related sequence A positively predicted a 
clinical response (P = 0.006) (Fig. S5 in the Supplementary Appendix). Taken together, 
these data began to elucidate immunologic responses both in situ and systemically during 
CTLA-4 blockade in patients with relapse after allogeneic HSCT.
DISCUSSION
Treatment options for patients with relapse of disease after allogeneic HSCT are limited. In 
our early-phase study, we found that CTLA-4 blockade with ipilimumab induced clinically 
significant remissions in patients with recurrent cancer after transplantation. Although no 
objective responses were seen at a dose of 3 mg per kilogram, 7 of 22 patients (32%) who 
received 10 mg per kilogram had a response; this suggests that the antibody dose may be 
important after transplantation. Five patients had complete remission and 4 patients who had 
a response continued to have a durable remission for more than 1 year. These observations 
suggest that CTLA-4 blockade may be effective after allogeneic HSCT by inducing a 
dormant graft-versus-tumor response.
Davids et al.
Page 7
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Stimulation of a graft-versus-tumor effect arouses concern regarding the potential 
exacerbation of GVHD; however, GVHD that precluded additional administration of 
ipilimumab developed in 4 of 28 patients; each of these patients had a response to 
glucocorticoids. Immune-related adverse events that are typical of ipilimumab were also 
observed in 6 patients. After dose delay and the administration of glucocorticoids, 5 of these 
patients were able to receive additional ipilimumab without recurrence of the adverse 
effects. However, in 1 patient, immune-related adverse effects led to treatment-related death. 
Since our study included only patients who had undergone transplantation 3 months or more 
previously, no conclusions can be drawn regarding the safety of ipilimumab in the early 
post-transplantation period.
Patients with relapse after allogeneic HSCT are in a unique position to benefit from 
checkpoint blockade. One study has suggested that immune escape after transplantation can 
be mediated by reduced expression of costimulatory molecules and loss of the recipient’s 
mismatched HLA haplotype.16 Donor-derived T cells also express high levels of checkpoint 
receptors.17 Dysfunction of donor antitumor CD8+ T cells may play a crucial role in the 
biology of relapse after transplantation.18 Although donor-lymphocyte infusions may 
partially reverse this dysfunction, agents such as anti–CTLA-4 antibodies can be adjusted 
more easily than cellular products to selectively augment graft-versus-tumor effects without 
inducing severe GVHD. Extramedullary myeloid leukemias, which are typically refractory 
to standard therapies, may provide a particularly rich environment for antigen presentation 
that makes them sensitive to checkpoint blockade.19,20 Indeed, all three patients with 
leukemia cutis had a complete response, as did a patient with myeloid sarcoma. GVHD 
developed in the three patients with leukemia cutis; this suggests that the occurrence of 
GVHD may be associated with a clinical response.
Our immunohistochemical and gene-expression data indicated that in patients with leukemia 
cutis, ipilimumab drove infiltration of cytotoxic CD8+ T cells to the site of disease. These 
data were notable for CD8+ T-cell up-regulation both in patients who had a response and in 
those who did not, but a lack of in situ cytotoxic function in patients who did not have a 
response suggests that local factors may suppress antileukemic immunity by preventing the 
acquisition of a cytotoxic phenotype, rather than by blocking T-cell infiltration.
In contrast, analysis of peripheral blood showed decreased CD4+ Tregs and increased CD4+ 
effector T cells in patients who had a response. Moreover, CD4+ Tregs in patients who had a 
response were less activated than those in patients who did not have a response. In patients 
who had a response, peripheral T cells were also enriched for more differentiated CD62L− 
effector memory T-cell subsets. CD62L is a lymphnode “homing receptor” that is down-
regulated during T-cell activation to allow for lymph-node egress and subsequent encounter 
with cognate antigen in the peripheral tissues. Increased CD62L− effector memory T cells 
may be an indirect effect of ipilimumab, reflecting activation, homing, and differentiation of 
CD4+ effector T cells as CTLA-4+ Tregs are depleted. The apparent differential effects of 
ipilimumab that we observed on CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in the peripheral blood and tissue 
suggest that immunologic correlative studies should not be restricted to one tissue 
compartment. Indeed, recent data have revealed localization-dependent heterogeneity in T-
cell homeostasis.21
Davids et al.
Page 8
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Our chemokine analysis suggests that greater activation of the interleukin-8 pathway is 
associated with improved antitumor immunity, which may facilitate a clinical response. 
Moreover, we found that pretreatment soluble MHC class I polypeptide–related sequence A 
was negatively correlated with the clinical outcome in patients after transplantation, as it is 
in patients with melanoma22; this suggests that it could be further evaluated as a predictive 
biomarker for response to checkpoint blockade, with potential usefulness in human cancers 
more broadly. These exploratory observations of immunologic correlates with clinical 
outcome will need to be validated in larger cohorts of patients who receive CTLA-4 
blockade.
In summary, CTLA-4 blockade was a feasible approach for the treatment of patients with 
relapsed hematologic cancer after transplantation. Complete remissions with some durability 
were observed, even in patients with refractory myeloid cancers.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank the patients who participated in this study; the study research nurses, research coordinators, mid-level 
practitioners, and site staff for their support of the study; Carol Reynolds, Ph.D., for running the flow cytometric 
assays; Irene Ghobrial, M.D., Lee Greenberger, Ph.D., Keting Chu, Ph.D., and Jun Xu, Ph.D., for support of the 
study through the Blood Cancer Research Partnership; and Megan Hiserodt, B.A., for editorial assistance with an 
earlier version of the manuscript.
Supported by grants (5R01CA183559-03, 5R01CA183560-03, and 5UM1CA186709-02) from the National 
Institutes of Health, the Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program of the National Cancer Institute, the Leukemia and 
Lymphoma Society Therapy Accelerator Program, Pasquarello Tissue Bank, and Dana–Farber Cancer Institute 
Department of Medical Oncology and Center for Immuno-Oncology.
Appendix
The authors’ affiliations are as follows: the Department of Medical Oncology, Dana–Farber 
Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School (M.S.D., H.T.K., P.B., R.L., A.S., A.P.L., 
M.H., M.S., F.S.H., C.J.W., V.T.H., C. Cutler, J.K., E.P.A., J.H.A., P.A., J.R., R.J.S.), the 
Bone Marrow Transplant Program, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard 
Medical School (D.A.), the Bone Marrow Transplant Program, Massachusetts General 
Hospital Cancer Center and Harvard Medical School (Y.-B.C.), the Departments of 
Dermatology (N.R.L.) and Pathology (S.R.G., J.L.H., S.J.R.), Dana–Farber and Brigham 
and Women’s Cancer Center, and the Dana–Farber Cancer Institute, Center for Molecular 
Oncologic Pathology (M.B., C.W.Z.) — all in Boston; Broad Institute of Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology and Harvard (P.B., C.J.W.) and Neon Therapeutics (M.S.R.) — both 
in Cambridge; the Blood and Marrow Transplant Program, University of California, San 
Diego, Moores Cancer Center, La Jolla (C. Costello, E.D.B.); Colorado Blood Cancer 
Institute, Denver (P.M.); Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program, National Cancer Institute, 
Bethesda, MD (H.S.); and the Blood and Marrow Transplant Group of Georgia at Northside 
Hospital, Atlanta (A.B.).
Davids et al.
Page 9
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 REFERENCES
1. Antin JH. Graft-versus-leukemia: no longer an epiphenomenon. Blood. 1993; 82:2273–2277. 
[PubMed: 8400279] 
2. Alyea EP, Kim HT, Ho V, et al. Comparative outcome of nonmyeloablative and myeloablative 
allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation for patients older than 50 years of age. Blood. 2005; 
105:1810–1814. [PubMed: 15459007] 
3. Mielcarek M, Storer BE, Flowers ME, Storb R, Sandmaier BM, Martin PJ. Outcomes among 
patients with recurrent high-risk hematologic malignancies after allogeneic hematopoietic cell 
transplantation. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2007; 13:1160–1168. [PubMed: 17889352] 
4. Thanarajasingam G, Kim HT, Cutler C, et al. Outcome and prognostic factors for patients who 
relapse after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 
2013; 19:1713–1718. [PubMed: 24076323] 
5. Soiffer RJ. Donor lymphocyte infusions for acute myeloid leukaemia. Best Pract Res Clin 
Haematol. 2008; 21:455–466. [PubMed: 18790449] 
6. Armand P. Immune checkpoint blockade in hematologic malignancies. Blood. 2015; 125:3393–
3400. [PubMed: 25833961] 
7. Blazar BR, Carreno BM, Panoskaltsis-Mortari A, et al. Blockade of programmed death-1 
engagement accelerates graft-versus-host disease lethality by an IFN-gamma-dependent mechanism. 
Journal Immunol. 2003; 171:1272–1277. [PubMed: 12874215] 
8. Blazar BR, Taylor PA, Panoskaltsis-Mortari A, Sharpe AH, Vallera DA. Opposing roles of CD28:B7 
and CTLA-4:B7 pathways in regulating in vivo alloresponses in murine recipients of MHC 
disparate T cells. J Immunol. 1999; 162:6368–6377. [PubMed: 10352249] 
9. Thompson CB, Allison JP. The emerging role of CTLA-4 as an immune attenuator. Immunity. 1997; 
7:445–450. [PubMed: 9354465] 
10. Kuhns MS, Epshteyn V, Sobel RA, Allison JP. Cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen-4 (CTLA-4) 
regulates the size, reactivity, and function of a primed pool of CD4+ T cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U 
S A. 2000; 97:12711–12716. [PubMed: 11050166] 
11. Bashey A, Medina B, Corringham S, et al. CTLA4 blockade with ipilimumab to treat relapse of 
malignancy after allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation. Blood. 2009; 113:1581–1588. 
[PubMed: 18974373] 
12. Zhou J, Bashey A, Zhong R, et al. CTLA-4 blockade following relapse of malignancy after 
allogeneic stem cell transplantation is associated with T cell activation but not with increased 
levels of T regulatory cells. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2011; 17:682–692. [PubMed: 
20713164] 
13. Przepiorka D, Weisdorf D, Martin P, et al. 1994 Consensus Conference on Acute GVHD Grading. 
Bone Marrow Transplant. 1995; 15:825–828. [PubMed: 7581076] 
14. Filipovich AH, Weisdorf D, Pavletic S, et al. National Institutes of Health consensus development 
project on criteria for clinical trials in chronic graft-versus-host disease. I. Diagnosis and staging 
working group report. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2005; 11:945–956. [PubMed: 16338616] 
15. Wolchok JD, Neyns B, Linette G, et al. Ipilimumab monotherapy in patients with pretreated 
advanced melanoma: a randomised, double-blind, multicentre, phase 2, dose-ranging study. Lancet 
Oncol. 2010; 11:155–164. [PubMed: 20004617] 
16. Vago L, Kimi Perna S, Zanussi M, et al. Loss of mismatched HLA in leukemia after stem-cell 
transplantation. N Engl J Med. 2009; 361:478–488. [PubMed: 19641204] 
17. Toffalori C, Cavattoni I, Deola S, et al. Genomic loss of patient-specific HLA in acute myeloid 
leukemia relapse after well-matched unrelated donor HSCT. Blood. 2012; 119:4813–4815. 
[PubMed: 22596173] 
18. Bachireddy P, Hainz U, Rooney M, et al. Reversal of in situ T-cell exhaustion during effective 
human antileukemia responses to donor lymphocyte infusion. Blood. 2014; 123:1412–1421. 
[PubMed: 24357730] 
19. Koc Y, Miller KB, Schenkein DP, Daoust P, Sprague K, Berkman E. Extramedullary tumors of 
myeloid blasts in adults as a pattern of relapse following allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. 
Cancer. 1999; 85:608–615. [PubMed: 10091734] 
Davids et al.
Page 10
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 20. Yoshihara S, Ando T, Ogawa H. Extramedullary relapse of acute myeloid leukemia after allogeneic 
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation: an easily overlooked but significant pattern of relapse. 
Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2012; 18:1800–1807. [PubMed: 22634018] 
21. Thome JJ, Yudanin N, Ohmura Y, et al. Spatial map of human T cell compartmentalization and 
maintenance over decades of life. Cell. 2014; 159:814–828. [PubMed: 25417158] 
22. Koguchi Y, Hoen HM, Bambina SA, et al. Serum immunoregulatory proteins as predictors of 
overall survival of metastatic melanoma patients treated with ipilimumab. Cancer Res. 2015; 
75:5084–5092. [PubMed: 26627641] 
Davids et al.
Page 11
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Clinical and Histopathological Responses to Ipilimumab in Patients with Leukemia 
Cutis and Hodgkin’s Lymphoma
Panel A shows a lesion in the skin of a patient with leukemia cutis before treatment, and 
Panel B shows the clinical response after treatment. Panel C shows sheets of neoplastic cells 
before treatment in the same patient, and Panel D shows the histopathological response after 
treatment, with fibrosis and sparse chronic inflammation without evidence of cancer 
(hematoxylin and eosin, low magnification in both panels). Panel E shows a positron-
emission tomographic and computed tomographic (PET-CT) image before treatment and 
Panel F shows the response on PET-CT after treatment in a patient with Hodgkin’s 
Davids et al.
Page 12
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 lymphoma. Panel G shows a bone marrow biopsy specimen in the same patient before 
treatment, with staining for CD30 showing extensive malignant lymphocyte infiltration (high 
magnification), and Panel H shows a bone marrow biopsy specimen after treatment, with no 
evidence of cancer (high magnification).
Davids et al.
Page 13
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Immunohistochemical and Transcriptional Analysis of In Situ Leukemic Responses to 
Ipilimumab
Panel A shows immunohistochemical images (at high magnification) of costaining for CD8+ 
T cells (red) and perforin (brown) before and after the initial dose of ipilimumab in a patient 
with leukemia cutis (Patient 1) who had a complete remission. The arrow on the left side of 
the panel indicates a leukemic blast; the arrows on the right side of the panel indicate cells 
undergoing apoptosis. The scale bars represent 50 µm. The inset (right) shows CD8+ T cells 
(red) contacting multiple leukemic cells with perforin staining (brown). Panel B shows 
quantitation by means of visual estimation for the stains in Panel A. Panel C shows gene-
Davids et al.
Page 14
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 expression analyses of CD8A and PRF1 from biopsy specimens obtained before and after 
treatment with ipilimumab in two patients with leukemia who had a response and one patient 
who did not have a response. Biopsy specimens from two different sites of leukemia cutis 
(the back and hip) were obtained from Patient 1 before and after treatment.
Davids et al.
Page 15
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Systemic Immunologic Correlative Studies in Patients Who Received Ipilimumab, 
According to Response Status
Panel A is a heat map showing the results of unsupervised clustering. These results are 
expressed as the percentage of T-cell subsets, as assessed by means of flow cytometry of 
peripheral-blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) 8 weeks after administration of ipilimumab, in 
patients with progressive disease (PD), stable disease (SD), or a complete response (CR). 
The top two rows represent the percentage of total regulatory T-cells (Tregs) and 
conventional T-cells (Tconvs), and the bottom six rows represent T-cell subsets of these two 
populations, including Treg effector memory (EM) cells, Tconv EM cells, Treg central 
Davids et al.
Page 16
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 memory (CM) cells, Tconv CM cells, Treg naive cells, and Tconv naive cells. Minimum 
values (dark blue) and maximum values (dark red) in each row are shown. Plus signs 
indicate positive expression, and minus signs negative expression. Panel B shows a mass 
cytometric analysis of PBMCs at 8 weeks after administration of ipilimumab. Shown are 
activated Tregs (the population of cells below the black dividing line) in two patients who 
had a complete response as compared with two patients whose best response was PD. Cells 
expressing the Helios, HLA-DR, and CD25HIFoxP3RI markers are considered to be 
activated Tregs. Panel C shows levels of chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 2 (CXCL2), and 
Panel D shows levels of chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 5 (CXCL5) in the plasma of 
patients at baseline as compared with 8 weeks after treatment with ipilimumab, according to 
response status. Patients with a response included four patients with a CR and one with SD 
and some antitumor activity.
Davids et al.
Page 17
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Davids et al.
Page 18
Table 1
Baseline Characteristics of the Patients.*
Characteristic
Total (N = 28)
Male sex — no. (%)
16 (57)
Age at enrollment — yr
  Median
58
  Range
22–75
Diagnosis — no. (%)
  Acute myeloid leukemia
12 (43)
  Relapse with extramedullary disease
4 (14)
  Hodgkin’s lymphoma
7 (25)
  Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma
4 (14)
  Myelodysplastic syndrome
2 (7)
  Multiple myeloma
1 (4)
  Myeloproliferative neoplasm
1 (4)
  Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
1 (4)
Time since HSCT — days
  Median
675
  Range
198–1830
Donor type — no. (%)
  Unrelated
15 (54)
  Related
13 (46)
Graft source — no. (%)
  Peripheral blood
22 (79)
  Bone marrow
5 (18)
  Umbilical cord
1 (4)
Conditioning intensity — no. (%)
  Myeloablative
11 (39)
  Reduced intensity
17 (61)
Prior treatment of relapse after allogeneic HSCT
    — no. (%)
20 (71)
  Chemotherapy
17 (61)
  Radiation therapy
6 (21)
  Donor-lymphocyte infusion
6 (21)
Prior GVHD — no. (%)
  Grade I or II acute
8 (29)
  Chronic
16 (57)
    Limited
8 (29)
    Extensive
8 (29)
*GVHD denotes graft-versus-host disease, and HSCT hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation.
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 14.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Davids et al.
Page 19
Table 2
Adverse Events and Outcomes of Treatment.*
Variable
No. of Patients
Adverse event
Patients who could be evaluated for adverse events
28
GVHD — dose-limiting toxicity
  Chronic GVHD of liver
3
  Acute GVHD of gut
1
Immune-related adverse events
  Death
1
  Pneumonitis
    Grade 4
1
    Grade 2
2
  Colitis, grade 3
1
  Immune thrombocytopenic purpura, grade 2
1
  Diarrhea, grade 2
1
Other adverse events of grade 3 or higher regardless of attribution, or grade 1 or 2 events
      at least possibly related to ipilimumab
  Acute kidney injury, grade 3
1
  Corneal ulcer, grade 3
1
  Thrombocytopenia, grade 3 or 4
9
  Neutropenia, grade 3 or 4
3
  Anemia, grade 3 or 4
2
  Pleural effusion, grade 3
1
  Limb edema, grade 1 or 2
6
Outcome of treatment
Patients who received maximum administered dose (10 mg/kg)
22
Complete response
5
Partial response
2
Stable disease
6
Progression of disease
9
*Adverse events were graded according to the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events, version 4.0.
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 14.
