 Neurodevelopmental outcome at two years of age after general 
and awake-regional anaesthesia in infancy: a randomised 
controlled trial
Andrew J. Davidson, MD1,2,3, Nicola Disma, MD4, Jurgen C. de Graaff, PhD5, Davinia E. 
Withington, BM6,7, Liam Dorris, DClinPsy8,9, Graham Bell, MBChB10, Robyn Stargatt, 
PhD11,12, David C. Bellinger, PhD13,14,15, Tibor Schuster, PhD16, Sarah J. Arnup, 
MBiostat16, Pollyanna Hardy, MSc17, Rodney W. Hunt, PhD3,18,19, Michael J. Takagi, 
PhD1,12, Gaia Giribaldi, MD4, Penelope L. Hartmann, BPsych(Hons)1, Ida Salvo, MD20, Neil 
S. Morton, MD10,21, Britta S von Ungern Sternberg, PhD22,23, Bruno Guido Locatelli, MD24, 
Niall Wilton, MBBS25, Anne Lynn, MD26, Joss J. Thomas, MD27, David Polaner, MD28, Oliver 
Bagshaw, FRCA29, Peter Szmuk, MD30, Anthony R. Absalom, MBChB31, Geoff Frawley, 
MBBS1,2, Charles Berde, MD32, Gillian D Ormond, MSc1, Jacki Marmor, MEd13, Mary Ellen, 
McCann32, and The GAS Consortium
This manuscript version is made available under the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license.
Corresponding Author: Andrew J. Davidson, Anaesthesia and Pain Management Research Group, Murdoch Childrens Research 
Institute, The Royal Children’s Hospital, Flemington Road, Parkville, Victoria, 3052. Australia. andrew.davidson@rch.org.au Phone 
Number: +61 (0)3 9345 4008. 
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
Authors’ contributions:
AJD was involved in study design and concept, conduct, data coordination, contribution to the statistical analysis plan, data 
interpretation, writing and coordinating drafts of the manuscript and revising it critically and approving the version to be published. 
ND was involved in study design and conduct, data acquisition and coordination, data interpretation and revising the manuscript 
critically. JCdeG was involved in the coordination and supervision of data collection, data analyses and interpretation, contribution to 
the statistical analysis plan, revised the manuscript and approved the final manuscript as submitted. DEW was involved in study design 
and conduct, data acquisition and coordination, data interpretation and revising the manuscript critically. LD contributed to protocol 
development, data collection, statistical plan, statistical analysis, data interpretation and writing of the manuscript. GB was involved in 
study conduct, data coordination and writing and reviewing the manuscript. RS was the lead neuropsychologist and along with DCB 
and RWH was involved in study design, concept, conduct, data interpretation and critically revising the manuscript. TS and SJA were 
involved in interim analyses, contribution to the statistical analysis plan, data interpretation, and revising the manuscript critically. PH 
was involved in study design, study conduct, interim analyses, contribution to the statistical analysis plan, data interpretation and 
editing of the manuscript. MJT contributed to the statistical analysis, data interpretation, and manuscript preparation. GG and PLH 
were involved in study conduct, data acquisition, data interpretation and revising the manuscript critically. IS, BSvonUS, BGL, NW, 
AL, JTT, DP, OB, PS, ARA and JM were involved in study conduct, data acquisition and coordination and revising the manuscript 
critically. NSM and MEMcC was involved in study design, concept and conduct, data coordination, data interpretation, writing the 
manuscript and revising it critically. GF and CB was involved in study design and concept, study conduct, data acquisition, 
contribution to data interpretation and revising the manuscript critically. GDO was involved in study conduct, data acquisition and 
coordination, contribution to the statistical analysis plan and revising the manuscript.
Declaration of Interests:
We declare no competing interests.
Disclaimer:
The views expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the MRC, NHS, NIHR or the 
Department of Health UK.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 16.
Published in final edited form as:
Lancet. 2016 January 16; 387(10015): 239–250. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00608-X.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 1Anaesthesia and Pain Management Research Group, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, 
Melbourne, Australia 2Department of Anaesthesia and Pain Management, The Royal Children’s 
Hospital, Melbourne, Australia 3Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, 
Australia 4Department of Anesthesia, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy 5Department of 
Anaesthesia, Wilhelmina Children’s Hospital, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands 6Department of Anesthesia, Montreal Children’s Hospital, Montreal, Canada 
7Department of Anesthesia, McGill University, Montreal, Canada 8Paediatric Neurosciences 
Research Group, Fraser of Allander Unit, Royal Hospital for Children, Glasgow, Scotland, UK 
9Mental Health and Wellbeing, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland, UK 10Department of 
Anaesthesia, Royal Hospital for Children, Glasgow, Scotland, UK 11School of Psychological 
Science, La Trobe University, Victoria, Australia 12Child Neuropsychology, Murdoch Childrens 
Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia 13Department of Neurology, Boston Children’s Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA 14Department of Psychiatry, Boston 
Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA 15Department of 
Environmental Health, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA 
16Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics Unit, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, 
Australia 17National Perinatal Epidemiology Unit, Clinical Trials Unit, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK 18Department of Neonatal Medicine, The Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia 
19Neonatal Research Group, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia 
20Department of Anesthesiology & Paediatric Intensive Care, Ospedale Pediatrico ‘Vittore Buzzi’, 
Milan, Italy 21University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland, UK 22School of Medicine and 
Pharmacology, The University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia 23Department of Anaesthesia 
and Pain Management, Princess Margaret Hospital for Children, Perth, Australia 24Department of 
Anaesthesia, Ospedale Papa Giovanni XXIII, Bergamo, Italy 25Department of Paediatric 
Anaesthesia and Operating Rooms, Starship Children’s Hospital, Auckland District Health Board, 
Auckland, New Zealand 26Department of Anesthesiology, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington, USA 27Department of Anesthesia, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 
USA 28Children’s Hospital Colorado and University of Colorado School of Medicine, Department 
of Anesthesiology, Aurora, Colorado, USA 29Department of Anaesthesia, Birmingham Children’s 
Hospital, Birmingham, UK 30Children’s Medical Centre Dallas, Department of Anesthesiology, 
Dallas, Texas, USA 31Department of Anesthesiology, University Medical Center Groningen, 
Groningen University, Groningen, The Netherlands 32Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative 
and Pain Medicine, Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA
Summary
Background—There is pre-clinical evidence that general anaesthetics affect brain development. 
There is mixed evidence from cohort studies that young children exposed to anaesthesia may have 
an increased risk of poorer neurodevelopmental outcome. This trial aims to determine if GA in 
infancy has any impact on neurodevelopmental outcome. The primary outcome for the trial is 
neurodevelopmental outcome at 5 years of age. The secondary outcome is neurodevelopmental 
outcome at two years of age and is reported here.
Davidson et al.
Page 2
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Methods—We performed an international assessor-masked randomised controlled equivalence 
trial in infants less than 60 weeks post-menstrual age, born at greater than 26 weeks gestational 
age having inguinal herniorrhaphy. Infants were excluded if they had existing risk factors for 
neurologic injury. Infants were randomly assigned to awake-regional (RA) or sevoflurane-based 
general anaesthesia (GA). Web-based randomisation was performed in blocks of two or four and 
stratified by site and gestational age at birth. The outcome for analysis was the composite 
cognitive score of the Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development, Third Edition. The 
analysis was as-per-protocol adjusted for gestational age at birth. A difference in means of five 
points (1/3 SD) was predefined as the clinical equivalence margin. The trial was registered at 
ANZCTR, ACTRN12606000441516 and ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT00756600.
Findings—Between February 2007, and January 2013, 363 infants were randomised to RA and 
359 to GA. Outcome data were available for 238 in the RA and 294 in the GA arms. The median 
duration of anaesthesia in the GA arm was 54 minutes. For the cognitive composite score there 
was equivalence in means between arms (RA-GA: +0·169, 95% CI −2·30 to +2·64).
Interpretation—For this secondary outcome we found no evidence that just under an hour of 
sevoflurane anaesthesia in infancy increases the risk of adverse neurodevelopmental outcome at 
two years of age compared to RA.
Introduction
There is considerable preclinical evidence describing how GA agents alter brain 
development in young animals.1 This includes accelerated apoptosis and a variety of other 
changes including changes to dendritic morphology.2–5 There is also evidence that exposure 
to GA in young animals is associated with long term cognitive and behavioural 
changes.3, 6, 7 These effects have been described in a variety of species including non-human 
primates.7–10 The changes are seen with several different GA agents, are greater with longer 
exposure and less severe in older animals.2, 8 The clinical significance of these findings is 
unknown and hotly debated.11–14
In humans there is conflicting evidence for an association between exposure to anaesthesia 
in early childhood and adverse long term neurodevelopmental outcome; however 
confounding limits any assumption of causality.15–30 Young children that receive anaesthesia 
are inevitably having surgery or an investigative procedure. Added risk of poor 
neurodevelopmental outcome may be due to the underlying pathology, co-morbidity or other 
peri-operative risk factors.
These results have prompted recommendations to consider delaying surgery in infancy and 
there have been several calls for more research to address this important issue.12, 13, 31 Given 
the large number of potential confounding factors, a randomised trial is the best study design 
to determine if anaesthesia exposure in early childhood causes long term 
neurodevelopmental changes. Fortuitously there are two established anaesthetic techniques 
for inguinal herniorrhaphy in infancy; RA and sevoflurane based GA. We therefore 
undertook a randomised controlled trial comparing neurodevelopmental outcome in children 
who were randomly assigned to receive RA or sevoflurane based GA for inguinal 
herniorrhaphy in early infancy: the General Anaesthesia compared to Spinal anaesthesia 
Davidson et al.
Page 3
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (GAS) trial. The aim of the trial is to determine if GA does not increase the risk of adverse 
neurodevelopmental outcome. The primary outcome for the overall trial will be the Wechsler 
Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence Third Edition (WPPSI-III) Full Scale 
Intelligence Quotient score at five years of age. As a secondary outcome we also planned a 
priori to assess neurodevelopmental outcome at 2 years of age. In this paper we report all 
secondary outcomes at two years of age. Data from the trial relating to post- anaesthesia 
apnoea and success of regional block have been published elsewhere.32, 33
Methods
Study design
The GAS trial is a prospective, observer blind, international multi-site, randomised, 
controlled, equivalence trial examining RA versus GA in infants undergoing inguinal 
herniorrhaphy. The trial was performed at 28 hospitals in Australia, Italy, The USA, The 
UK, Canada, The Netherlands and New Zealand. Institutional Review Board or Human 
Research Ethics Committee approval was obtained at each site and written consent obtained 
from the child’s parents or guardians. The protocol has been previously published at http://
www.thelancet.com/protocol-reviews/09PRT-9078
Participants
Eligibility criteria included infants up to 60 weeks’ postmenstrual age scheduled for 
unilateral or bilateral inguinal herniorraphy born at greater than 26 weeks gestation. 
Exclusion criteria included any contraindication for either anaesthetic technique, a history of 
congenital heart disease requiring surgery or pharmacotherapy, mechanical ventilation 
immediately prior to surgery, known chromosomal abnormalities or other known acquired or 
congenital abnormalities which might affect neurodevelopment, previous exposure to 
volatile GA or benzodiazepines as a neonate or in the third trimester in utero, any known 
neurologic injury such as cystic peri-ventricular leukomalacia or grade three or four intra-
ventricular haemorrhage (IVH), any social or geographic factor that may make follow up 
difficult (such as planned house move, homelessness, no telephone communication 
available), or having a primary language at home in a region where neurodevelopmental 
tests are not available in that language. Eligible infants were identified from operating room 
schedules or at pre-admission clinics and recruited in the clinic or in the preadmission areas 
of the operating floor.
Randomisation and Masking
A 24-hour web-based randomisation service was managed by The Data Management & 
Analysis Centre, Department of Public Health, University of Adelaide, South Australia. 
Participants were randomised with a 1:1 allocation ratio to either GA or RA. Randomisation 
was performed in blocks of two or four and stratified by site and gestational age at birth: 26 
to 29 weeks and six days, 30 to 36 weeks and six days and 37 weeks or more. The 
anaesthetist was aware of group allocation. Parents were not informed of the group 
allocation but were told if they asked. The psychologists and paediatricians performing the 
assessment were masked to group allocation. Once their assessment was completed they 
were asked to indicate if they were aware of group allocation.
Davidson et al.
Page 4
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Procedures
The RA group received either an awake-spinal anaesthetic, an awake-caudal anaesthetic, or a 
combined spinal-caudal anaesthetic according to institutional protocols. Spinal anaesthesia 
was performed with 0·2 ml/kg 0·5% isobaric bupivacaine with a minimum volume of 0·5ml. 
Due to unavailability of isobaric bupivacaine at some sites other agents were used (in the 
US, 0·13ml/kg of hyperbaric 0·75% bupivacaine and in the UK 0·2 ml/kg 0·5% 
levobupivacaine). Caudal anaesthesia was performed with up to a total dose of 2·5 mg.kg−1 
of 0·25% bupivacaine. In the UK 0·25% levobupivacaine was used. In the US if surgery was 
likely to take greater than one hour, some patients were given a loading dose of 3% 
chloroprocaine (1ml/kg in divided doses of no more than 0·25ml/kg per 15 seconds) via a 
caudal cannula and then an infusion of 1–2 ml/kg/hr. Ilioinguinal and field blocks could also 
be done. The total dose of bupivacaine did not exceed 2·5 mg/kg. In the RA group oral 
sucrose was used to settle the child if required and all other forms of sedation avoided. If the 
RA was ineffective then a GA was performed with sevoflurane, and if the child became 
unsettled intra-operatively sevoflurane was administered to supplement the RA. Both were 
regarded as protocol violations.
The GA group received sevoflurane for induction and maintenance in an air/oxygen mix. 
The concentration of sevoflurane was left to the discretion of the anaesthetist, as was choice 
of airway device, ventilation technique and use of any neuromuscular blocking agents. No 
opioid or nitrous oxide was allowed. A caudal, ilioinguinal-iliohypogastric and/or field block 
with bupivacaine could be performed in both groups to provide post-operative analgesia. 
Oral or intra venous acetaminophen could also be given. Heart rate, blood pressure, oxygen 
saturation and (where applicable) expired sevoflurane concentrations were recorded every 
five minutes.
Serum glucose was measured after anesthetic induction. There were rescue protocols for 
hypoglycaemia, hypotension and hypoxemia. If the blood pressure fell >20% below baseline 
an intravenous bolus fluid was administered and vasoactive drugs given if deemed necessary. 
Hypoglycaemia (blood sugar <3·0mmol/L) was treated with a bolus of 5ml/kg of 10% 
dextrose. Oxygen by face mask in the RA arm and an increased FiO2 in the GA arm was 
used at the discretion of the anaesthetist to maintain arterial oxygen saturation > 95%.
Two Year Assessments
Assessments were performed within two months either side of two years of age (corrected 
for prematurity). The assessment took approximately two hours to complete. A trained 
psychologist administered the Bayley-III. 34 The Bayley-III has cognitive, language and 
motor scales. The cognitive scale includes tasks assessing attention, memory, sensorimotor 
development, exploration, concept formation, and simple problem solving. The language 
scale assesses expressive and receptive skills, and the motor scale assesses fine and gross 
motor skills. Parents completed the Bayley-III Social-Emotional and Adaptive Behavior 
Questionnaires and the MacArthur-Bates Communicative Development Inventory: Words 
and Sentences (MacArthur-Bates).35 The MacArthur-Bates is a parent informant measure 
that assesses expressive language in children aged 16–30 months of age. Demographic data, 
family history, and medical history were also noted, and a brief physical and neurological 
Davidson et al.
Page 5
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 examination was performed. The physical examination included anthropometric 
measurements such as length, weight, arm and head circumference. The neurologic 
examination included cranial nerve examination, posture assessment and the muscle 
strength, tone and reflexes of the upper and lower extremities.
All study data were sent to the Murdoch Childrens Research Institute in Melbourne, 
Australia. All forms were checked for data quality by trained research assistants and double 
checked by a research assistant who was not involved in the primary data collection or entry. 
An independent data safety monitoring committee met at six monthly intervals during 
recruitment. Summary data by allocation were presented to the committee. There were no 
formal interim analyses of neurodevelopmental outcome.
Statistical Analysis
The main outcome for the analysis at 2 years of age was pre-specified to be the composite 
cognitive score of the Bayley-III. The hypothesis (as stated in the protocol) was that the 
composite cognitive score of the Bayley-III measured at two years of age in infants who are 
anaesthetised for inguinal herniorraphy is equivalent when using GA compared with RA. 
The components of the Bayley-III are reported as scaled scores and as composite scores. The 
five composite scores (Cognitive, Language, Motor, Adaptive Behaviour, and Social-
Emotional Scales) are standardised to have a mean of 100 and a SD of 15 in the reference 
population. The sub-scales (e.g., fine motor scale) are reported as scaled scores, with a mean 
of 10 and a SD of 3. The other secondary outcomes for this analysis are the language, motor, 
social-emotional, and adaptive behaviour scores from the Bayley-III and the age-adjusted 
Vocabulary Production Score from the MacArthur-Bates. Published normative scores were 
used at all sites with forms and instructions translated locally. Diagnosis of cerebral palsy 
was another pre-specified secondary outcome
Since this is an equivalence study, the outcome was analysed on an APP basis to ensure a 
conservative estimate in the direction of non-equivalence. Equivalence was defined a-priori 
if the 95% confidence interval of the difference in means lies within -five and +five points. 
ITT analyses were also planned. Analyses were adjusted for categories of gestational age at 
birth (182–209 days; 210–258 days; ≥259 days)
The sample size was based on the primary outcome for the GAS trial; the five year follow up 
WPPSI-III Full Scale IQ score. Assuming an expected difference of one standardised score 
point, and a 90% chance that a 95% confidence interval will exclude a difference of more 
than five points (the largest difference acceptable to demonstrate equivalence), the trial 
would need 598 infants in total. Enrolling approximately 720 participants would allow for 
10% loss to follow-up and 10% with a major protocol violation.
Multiple imputation using chained equations was used to impute missing outcome data in 
the analysis of all outcomes.36 The following pre-specified variables were used as predictor 
variables within the imputation approach: anaesthesia group, country, gender, gestational age 
at birth, standardized z-score for birth weight, mother received antenatal steroids, mother 
diagnosed with chorioamnionitis, IVH, maternal age, maternal education, rescue glucose 
given intra-venously, need for fluid bolus for hypotension, vasoactive drugs given for 
Davidson et al.
Page 6
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 hypotension, duration of surgery, dose of sevoflurane (concentration x hours), significant 
post-operative apnoea, corrected age at assessment, any more anaesthetic exposures since 
the inguinal herniorraphy, any malformations, any chronic illness, any prescribed medication 
for two months or longer, total length of any readmission to hospital, any interventions for 
neurodevelopmental problems, diagnosis of cerebral palsy, any other neurological 
abnormality.
For the purpose of sensitivity analysis, effect estimates were computed using best and worst 
case imputation scenarios. Furthermore, effect estimates and confidence intervals based on 
inverse probability of censoring weighting were reported.37
Risk ratios with 95% confidence intervals were reported for the proportion of individuals 
that fall below one and two SDs of the composite cognitive score. Risk ratios were generated 
using generalized linear models for a binomial distributed response variable employing a log 
link (binomial log-linear regression). These analyses were not pre-specified in the study 
protocol (post hoc analyses). All analyses were carried out in Stata 13 (StataCorp. 2013. 
Stata Statistical Software: Release 13. College Station, TX: StataCorp LP).
The GAS trial is registered in Australia and New Zealand at ANZCTR: ID# 
ACTRN12606000441516 first registered on 16th October 2006; in the United States (US) at 
ClinicalTrials.gov: ID#: NCT00756600 first registered on 18th September 2008; and in the 
United Kingdom (UK) at UK Clinical Research Network (UKCRN) ID#: 6635 (ISRCTN 
ID#: 12437565; MREC No: 07/S0709/20).
Role of the Funding Source
The sponsors of the study had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data 
interpretation, or writing of the report. All authors had access to the data, and AJD, GO and 
Suzette Sheppard were responsible for submitting the manuscript. AJD made the final 
decision to submit the paper for publication.
Results
Seven hundred twenty-two infants were recruited into the trial between February 9, 2007, 
and January 31, 2013 from 28 centres in Australia, the US, the UK, Italy, the Netherlands, 
Canada and New Zealand (appendix). There were two mis-randomisations and one 
withdrawal of consent leaving 361 in the ITT analysis in the RA arm and 358 in the GA arm. 
Table 1 summarises demographic data for each arm at baseline and table 2 summarises 
demographic data at two years. There were 74 protocol violations in the RA arm (five due to 
surgery being cancelled and 69 receiving some sevoflurane or other GA) and two violations 
in the GA arm (surgery cancelled).
Follow up was from March 5, 2009 to March 6, 2015. Forty-seven families were lost to 
follow up in the GA arm and 52 in the RA arm. Of those lost to follow up some reason for 
non-attendance was gained in 19 and in only one case was non-attendance due to 
developmental delay (this child was in the RA arm). Of those that attended for assessment, 
the cognitive scale of the Bayley-III was completed by 292 in the RA arm and 295 in the GA 
Davidson et al.
Page 7
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 arm (Figure 1). Very few children were unable to complete the Bayley-III due to 
developmental delay or other recognised reasons for cognitive impairment. In 97% of cases 
the psychologist and paediatrician were unaware of group allocation at the time of 
assessment. (appendix)
The Bayley-III Cognitive, Language, Motor, Social-Emotional and Adaptive Behaviour 
scores, and the MacArthur-Bates data are summarised for each group in table 3.
For the Cognitive Composite score there was evidence for equivalence in means between 
RA and GA arms in both the APP and the ITT analyses using multiple imputation to account 
for missing outcome data (RA-GA: +0·169, 95% CI −2·30 to +2·64; and RA-GA: +0·256, 
95% CI −2·06 to +2·57 for APP and ITT respectively). These results were consistent with 
the findings of the complete case analyses (RA-GA: +0·458, 95% CI −2·02 to +2·94; and 
RA-GA: +0·430, 95% CI −1·90 to +2·76, for APP and ITT respectively). There was also 
evidence for equivalence between arms in the Composite Motor scores, Composite 
Language scores and the Composite Adaptive Behavior scores (Table 4). The results were 
consistent in both APP and ITT analyses, and when using complete case and multiple 
imputation. With mean differences of one and two score points (multiple imputation and 
complete case analysis for APP/ITT) and upper 95% confidence interval limits exceeding 
the pre-specified five point equivalence margin, evidence for equivalence with regard to the 
Social-Emotional Composite scale of the Bayley-III was not compelling. There was no 
evidence for a difference between groups in MacArthur-Bates scores (Table 4).
The results of the inverse probability weighting and worst case imputation scenarios for 
missing data are presented in the appendix. The worst case scenario results represent 
theoretical boundaries to what extent the actual effect estimates could have been affected by 
selective dropout. However, both multiple imputation analysis as well as inverse probability 
weighting demonstrated consistent robustness of the study findings with regard to data 
missingness.
Overall a low number of children had a diagnosis of cerebral palsy, hearing or visual 
impairment or specific behavioural diagnoses such as autistic spectrum disorder (ASD) 
(table 5). The event rate was too low for any meaningful comparative analysis. There was no 
evidence for a difference between arms in the proportion of children one or two SDs below 
the age mean on the cognitive composite score (appendix).
Details of adverse events during and immediately after anaesthesia have been reported in the 
earlier publication.32
Research in context
Evidence before this study
Medline and Cochrane controlled trial register were searched (search last done 18th 
September 2015) for original research and meta-analyses describing the association between 
anaesthesia exposure in early life and neurodevelopmental outcome. Combinations of search 
terms “anesthesia”, and “child development”, or “learning disorders” were used. The search 
Davidson et al.
Page 8
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 revealed no randomised trials but several cohort studies. There have been numerous reviews 
that have concluded that there is an association between anaesthesia in childhood and 
neurodevelopmental outcome.19, 31 There have been two meta-analyses that have found 
evidence for an association between anaesthesia in children and a range of 
neurodevelopmental outcomes.16, 30 All reviews and meta-analyses acknowledge the 
weaknesses of the cohort studies; including strong likelihood of confounding, bias, 
heterogeneous populations at times of exposure, and heterogeneous outcome measures, 
some of which are poorly defined or insensitive. All conclude that causation cannot be 
established or excluded.
Added value of this study
We report a secondary outcome from the first randomised controlled trial assessing the 
impact of general anaesthesia in infancy on neurodevelopmental outcome. Using the best 
measure of neurodevelopment available for assessing a two year old child, strong evidence 
for equivalence between awake-regional and just under an hour of general anaesthesia was 
found. However it should be noted that this was an analysis of a secondary outcome with the 
primary outcome planned at five years of age, and given the limited sensitivity of 
developmental assessment at two years of age, this trial does not provide the definitive 
answer.
Implications of all the available evidence
Although there are some limitations that should be noted when interpreting the trial, the 
randomised prospective design adds significantly to the weight that should be given to the 
results compared to the mixed results found in previous cohort studies. It should however be 
emphasised that reassessment at an older age is necessary before definitive conclusions can 
be drawn. The trial does not rule out the possibility that longer, or multiple exposures to 
anaesthesia in early childhood may cause neurodevelopmental changes. Further research is 
needed to address these questions.
Discussion
In this trial we found strong evidence for equivalence between RA and GA in infancy in 
terms of neurodevelopmental outcome at two years of age. Equivalence was demonstrated in 
multiple domains of neurodevelopmental assessment and the 95% confidence intervals fell 
within a third of a SD; well inside our pre-defined boundaries of clinical equivalence.
There are no previous randomised trials examining the effect of anaesthesia in infancy on 
long term neurodevelopmental outcomes (see research in context panel). Previous cohort 
studies have found mixed results.19 Some studies have found an association between 
exposure to anaesthesia in early childhood and increased risk of poor neurodevelopmental 
outcome.16–18, 20–24, 28 Although this association fits with preclinical animal data, it may 
also be explained by the confounding effects of surgery, pathology or co-morbidity. 
Conversely some cohort studies have found no evidence for an association.25–27 These 
studies have limited ability to rule out a link between anaesthesia and neurodevelopmental 
outcome due to a reliance on outcome measures, such as school grade, which may not detect 
Davidson et al.
Page 9
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 subtle effects, or their broad inclusion criteria include children exposed to anaesthesia at an 
older age where the risk may be less. The heterogeneity of the cohort studies also make it 
difficult to analyse the effects of duration of exposure, type of anaesthetic drugs used, doses 
or combination of drugs used. The above limitations inherently limit the capacity for cohort 
studies to determine the link between exposure to anaesthesia and neurodevelopmental 
outcome. These limitations highlight the importance of methodologically robust and 
adequately powered trials such as this trial.31
In this analysis we chose the cognitive scale of the Bayley-III as the main outcome of 
interest. Changes seen in preclinical studies tend to be diffusely distributed over several 
brain regions. Such diffuse changes are most likely to have an impact on general cognition. 
Of note, there was also no evidence for a difference in any of the other Bayley-III domains.
Two recent studies have found that while children exposed to anaesthesia had similar school 
grades, those exposed had an increased risk of not sitting the tests.26, 28 This raises the 
possibility that a sub-population of exposed children may have significant 
neurodevelopmental delay. To investigate this possibility we compared the proportion of 
children in each arm that scored two standard deviations below the age mean on the 
composite cognitive score. There was no evidence for a difference; however given the 
limited power of this analysis, equivalence cannot be assumed. We have also reported the 
number of children with the diagnosis of ASD, cerebral palsy and visual or hearing defects. 
This trial was not powered to detect differences in these diagnoses or events, and as expected 
we found a low event rate in both arms. It should also be noted that at two years of age it is 
difficult to accurately diagnose the presence of disorders such as ASD, or to accurate assess 
vision and hearing, and it is possible some children may still have undiagnosed neurologic 
or neurobehavioural disorders.
Most pre-clinical studies suggest that prolonged exposure to GA is required before injury is 
seen, usually at least two to three hours.8 However changes have been seen with one hour of 
exposure.38 In this trial the median sevoflurane exposure was 54 minutes in the GA arm and 
hence the results are consistent with the majority of pre-clinical data. The trial is an 
important adjunct to these data as translating doses and exposures from animal to humans is 
uncertain, and it is possible that shorter duration of exposure may still have clinically 
relevant effects that cannot be detected in animal models.
In human cohorts some studies have found an association with a single short exposure. 17, 39 
Others studies have only found an association after longer or multiple exposures.22 This 
study that found there was no increase in learning disabilities in infants and toddlers exposed 
to two or less hours of GA.22 This study revealed that anaesthetic exposure was less than 90 
minutes in 61% of the exposed patients and less than two hours in 85% of the exposed 
patients highlighting that the vast majority of anaesthetics in young children are of fairly 
brief duration. An internal audit of anaesthetic duration in infants at Boston Children’s 
Hospital revealed that 53% of anaesthetics done in babies less than12 months of age were 
less than two hours duration. Thus, as far as duration of exposure, it is likely our results are 
pertinent to approximately half the anaesthetics delivered to infants.
Davidson et al.
Page 10
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The finding of equivalence after short exposure does not rule out the possibility that longer 
exposure to anaesthetics may have an effect on neurodevelopment. Further trials are required 
before any assumptions can be made about the impact of prolonged anaesthesia exposure in 
infancy.
Some studies have also found a stronger association between multiple anaesthesia exposures 
and adverse outcome than with single exposure.20, 30 It is possible this reflects a greater 
effect of confounding; inevitably children having multiple procedures are more likely to 
have significant conditions or chronic disease. Our trial cannot address the possible 
increased toxicity with multiple exposures.
There are a number of limitations to our trial. RA inevitably has a failure rate. As this was an 
equivalence trial we took the APP analysis to be the most conservative analysis – assuming 
that treatment failure would bias toward no difference. Given the possibly contentious nature 
of this assumption, we planned a priori to perform a secondary ITT analysis. There were no 
measureable differences between APP and ITT analyses, implying no bias was introduced 
by treatment failure. In this study there was a loss to follow up of almost 14%. This, along 
with RA failure lead to an appreciable amount of missing data, however both the multiple 
imputation analysis and the inverse probability weighting demonstrated consistent 
robustness of the findings.
Another limitation is that while the Bayley-IIII is a well validated assessment tool of current 
development, early neurobehavioural assessment of children is not a perfect predictor of 
long term outcome due to the considerable variability in developmental timing in young 
children. Whilst the Bayley-III has been shown to have a stronger correlation with IQ at age 
five years than earlier versions of the test, it was not designed to assess a broad range of 
cognitive functions. Cognitive skills emerge and differentiate over childhood and a more 
detailed neuropsychological assessment is required at a later date to identify mild or 
circumscribed deficits in cognitive functions as executive skills and memory.4041 It is thus 
important that the children be reassessed later in their development to confirm the results 
and to more thoroughly examine multiple domains of cognition. Children in this trial are 
undergoing assessment at five years of age and the results should be known after 2018.
It is important to note that this manuscript reports the results of a secondary outcome. The 
primary outcome is planned at 5 years, for the reason mentioned above. This analysis of the 
secondary outcome was pre-specified in the study protocol, however the study was not 
specifically powered for the secondary outcome and thus it should be interpreted with 
caution and not regarded as definitive. The analysis of the secondary outcome was planned 
due to the recognition that there was growing concern over the issue of neurotoxicity and 
existing evidence to guide practice was inherently limited, and while the two year 
assessment was not definitive, it would still provide higher quality evidence than that which 
existed to date. The two year assessment was also planned due to concerns over the 
feasibility of maintaining the cohort for the longer term follow-up.
In this study over 80% of participants were male. It is well recognised that gender can have 
an impact on recovery from brain injury. The effect is variable and depends on the nature of 
Davidson et al.
Page 11
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the injury and outcome measured, though generally greater effects are seen in males and 
indeed the neurotoxic effect of anaesthesia on rodents has been shown to be greater in 
males.42 Thus the finding of equivalence in our trial with a preponderance of males makes it 
unlikely that equivalence would not also be demonstrated in females.
In this trial sevoflurane was used without other general anaesthetics. We chose a sevoflurane 
only anaesthetic as this reflects common practice for anaesthesia for inguinal herniorrhaphy, 
and the preclinical effects of sevoflurane have been clearly described. There are some 
preclinical studies that suggest combinations of general anaesthetics may be more injurious 
and thus our trial cannot shed light on the possibility that an effect may be seen if other 
agents are added. 3
Lastly it should also be noted that the MacArthur-Bates is dependent on parental report and 
hence may be open to bias. In addition the standardisation data is of varying degrees of 
validation across different languages.
In conclusion, this trial found strong evidence that exposure of just under an hour to a 
sevoflurane GA in infancy does not increase the risk of adverse neurodevelopmental 
outcome at two years of age. While not definitive, this is the strongest clinical evidence to 
date that just under an hour of sevoflurane GA in infancy does not result in significant 
neurotoxicity.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
Mark Fagjman (Department of Anaesthesia, Monash Medical Centre, Melbourne, Australia); Daniela Tronconi 
(Department of Anesthesia, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy); David C. van der Zee (Department of Pediatric 
Surgery, Wilhelmina Children’s Hospital, University Medical Centre Utrecht, The Netherlands); Jan Hulscher 
(Department of Surgery, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen University, Groningen, The 
Netherlands); Michael Rivkin (Department of Neurology, Children’s Hospital Boston, Boston, USA); Michelle 
Sadler-Greever (University of Washington, Seattle Children’s Hospital, Department of Anesthesia and Pain 
Medicine, Seattle, USA); Debra Faulk (Children’s Hospital Colorado and University of Colorado School of 
Medicine, Department of Anesthesiology, Colorado, USA); Greta Wilkening (Neurosciences Institute, Children’s 
Hospital Colorado, Colorado, USA); Edward Goldson (Department of Pediatrics, Division of Developmental-
Behavioral Pediatrics, Children’s Hospital Colorado, Colorado, USA). Danai Udomtecha andSarah Titler (The 
University of Iowa Hospital, Department of Anesthesia, Iowa, USA); Roxana Ploski and Alan Farrow-Gilespie 
(Children’s Medical Centre Dallas, Department of Anesthesiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas and Children’s Medical Center at Dallas and Outcome Research Consortium, Texas, USA); Timothy 
Cooper (Division of Developmental Medicine & the Center for Child Development, Monroe Carell Jr. Children’s 
Hospital at Vanderbilt, Tennessee, USA); Elizabeth Card (Perioperative Clinical Research Institute, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Tennessee, USA); Wendy Boardman (Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, 
Department of Anesthesiology, New Hampshire, USA);Theodora K. Goebel (Department of Anesthesiology and 
Critical Care Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, USA)
Funding
All hospitals and centres were generously supported by departmental funding. In addition to this funding, specific 
grants received for this study are as follows:
Australia: The Australian National Health & Medical Research Council (Project Grants #1002906 and 491226); 
Australian and New Zealand College of Anaesthetists (Project Grant #11/021 and 07/012); The Murdoch Childrens 
Research Institute. This study was supported by the Victorian Government’s Operational Infrastructure Support 
Davidson et al.
Page 12
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Program. US: National Institute of Health (Project Grant # NIH 1-R01 HD06 1136-01A1); Food and Drug 
Administration (Project Grant #FDA-SOL-08-SAFEKIDS-Clin 002-Project 2) Italy: Italian Ministry of Heath, 
Young Researchers Grant (Project Grant #167/GR-2009-1476067)
Netherlands: Fonds NutsOhra grant #1305-144 and Vrienden WKZ 16.13.038 Canada: Canadian Institute of Health 
Research (Project Grant #MCT-98031), Canadian Anesthesiologists’ Society, Pfizer Canada Inc.
UK: Health Technologies Assessment- National Institute for Health Research UK (Project Grant # 07/01/05)
Australia National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC), Health Technologies Assessment- National 
Institute for Health Research UK, The National Institute of Health, The Food and Drug Administration, The 
Australian and New Zealand College of Anaesthetists, The Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, The Canadian 
Institute of Health Research, Canadian Anesthesiologists’ Society, Pfizer Canada Inc, Italian Ministry of Heath, 
Fonds NutsOhra grant
Appendix
GAS Trial Group
Trial Steering Committee
Prof Paul Myles (chair); Members – AJD, MEMcC, NSM, ND, DEW, JCdeG, GF, RWH, 
DCB, CB, Prof Andy Wolf, Prof Neil McIntosh, Prof John Carlin, Prof Kate Leslie,
Data Monitoring Committee
Dr Jonathan de Lima (chair), Prof Greg Hammer, Prof David Field, Prof Val Gebski, Prof 
Dick Tibboel
GAS Consortium
Australia:
Andrew J. Davidson and Geoff Frawley (Department of Anaesthesia and Pain Management, 
Murdoch Childrens Research Institute and The Royal Children’s Hospital and University of 
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia); Pollyanna Hardy (National Perinatal Epidemiology Unit, 
Clinical Trials Unit, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK); Sarah J. Arnup, Tibor Schuster and 
Katherine Lee (Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics Unit, Murdoch Childrens Research 
Institute, Melbourne, Australia); Rodney W. Hunt (Department of Neonatal Medicine, The 
Royal Children’s Hospital and Murdoch Childrens Research Institute and University of 
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia); Robyn Stargatt (School of Psychological Science, La 
Trobe University and Child Neuropsychology, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, 
Melbourne, Australia); Suzette Sheppard, Gillian D. Ormond, Penelope L. Hartmann, 
Michael J. Takagi, Stephanie Malarbi and Melissa Doyle (Department of Anaesthesia and 
Pain Management, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia); Philip 
Ragg (Department of Anaesthesia and Pain Management, The Royal Children’s Hospital, 
Melbourne, Australia); Marie Backstrom (Department of Anaesthesia, Monash Medical 
Centre, Melbourne, Australia); David Costi (Paediatric Anaesthesia, Women’s and 
Children’s Hospital, Adelaide, Australia); Britta S. von Ungern-Sternberg (Department of 
Anaesthesia and Pain Management, Princess Margaret Hospital for Children and The 
University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia)
New Zealand:
Davidson et al.
Page 13
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Niall C. Wilton, and Graham Knottenbelt (Department of Paediatric Anaesthesia and 
Operating Rooms, Starship Children’s Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand)
Italy:
Nicola Disma, Giovanni Montobbio, Leila Mameli, Pietro Tuo, and Gaia Girbaldi 
(Department of Anesthesia, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy); Alessio Pini Prato 
(Department of Pediatric Surgery, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy); Girolamo 
Mattioli (DINOGMI University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy); Andrea Wolfler, Francesca Izzo, 
and Ida Salvo (Department of Anesthesiology & Paediatric Intensive Care, Ospedale 
Pediatrico ‘Vittore Buzzi’, Milan, Italy); Valter Sonzogni, Bruno Guido Locatelli, and 
Magda Khotcholava (Department of Anaesthesia, Ospedale Papa Giovanni XXIII, Bergamo, 
Italy)
The Netherlands:
Jurgen C. de Graaff, Jose T.D.G van Gool, Sandra C. Numan, D. Judy S. van Veldhuijzen 
and Cor J. Kalkman (Department of Anesthesiology, Wilhelmina Children’s Hospital, 
University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands); Anneloes L. van Baar and 
Leonie J.P. Steenis (Utrecht Centre for Child and Adolescent Studies. Utrecht University, 
Utrecht, The Netherlands); J.H.M. Hagenaars, Anthony R. Absalom, Frouckje M. Hoekstra, 
and Martin Volkers (Department of Anesthesiology, University Medical Center Groningen, 
Groningen University, Groningen, The Netherlands)
Canada:
Davinia Withington (Department of Anesthesia, Montreal Children’s Hospital and McGill 
University, Montreal, Canada); Koto Furue (Département d’Anesthésie, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire Sainte-Justine, Montreal, Canada); Josee Gaudreault (Montreal Children’s 
Hospital, Montreal, Canada)
USA:
Mary Ellen McCann, Charles Berde, Sulpicio Soriano, Vanessa Young, Navil Sethna, Pete 
Kovatsis, and Joseph Cravero (Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and Pain 
Medicine, Children’s Hospital Boston, Boston, USA); David Bellinger and Jacki Marmor 
(Department of Neurology, Children’s Hospital Boston, Boston, USA); Anne Lynn, Iskra 
Ivanova, Agnes Hunyady, and Shilpa Verma (University of Washington, Seattle Children’s 
Hospital, Department of Anesthesia and Pain Medicine, Seattle, USA); David Polaner 
(Children’s Hospital Colorado and University of Colorado, Department of Anesthesiology, 
Colorado, USA); Joss Thomas, Martin Mueller, and Denisa Haret (The University of Iowa 
Hospital, Department of Anesthesia, Iowa, USA); Peter Szmuk, Jeffery Steiner, and Brian 
Kravitz (Children’s Medical Centre Dallas, Department of Anesthesiology, University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas and Children’s Medical Center at Dallas and 
Outcome Research Consortium, Texas, USA); Suresh Surantham (Department of Pediatric 
Anesthesiology, Ann & Robert H Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago, Northwestern 
University, Illinois, USA); Stephen Hays (Pediatric Anesthesia, Monroe Carell Jr. Children’s 
Davidson et al.
Page 14
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Hospital at Vanderbilt, Tennessee, USA); Andreas Taenzer (Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical 
Center, Department of Anesthesiology, New Hampshire, USA); Lynne Maxwell 
(Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, USA); Robert K. Williams (Anesthesia and Pediatrics, College of Medicine, 
University of Vermont, Vermont Children’s Hospital, Vermont, USA)
UK:
Neil S. Morton (University of Glasgow and Department of Anaesthesia, Royal Hospital for 
Sick Children, Glasgow, Scotland, UK); Graham Bell (Department of Anaesthesia, Royal 
Hospital for Sick Children, Glasgow, Scotland, UK); Liam Dorris and Claire Adey 
(Paediatric Neurosciences Research Group, Fraser of Allander Unit, Royal Hospital for 
Children, Glasgow, Scotland, UK); Jaycee Pownall (Institute of Health and Wellbeing, 
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland, UK); Oliver Bagshaw (Anaesthetic Department, 
Birmingham Children’s Hospital, Birmingham, UK); Anthony Chisakuta (Department of 
Anaesthetics, Royal Belfast Hospital for Sick Children, Belfast, Northern Ireland, UK); 
Ayman Eissa (Anaesthetic Department, Sheffield Children’s Hospital, Sheffield, UK); Peter 
Stoddart (Bristol Royal Hospital for Children, Bristol, UK);Annette Davis (Alder hey 
Childrens’ NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool, UK)
References
1. Jevtovic-Todorovic V, Absalom AR, Blomgren K, Brambrink A, Crosby G, Culley DJ, et al. 
Anaesthetic neurotoxicity and neuroplasticity: an expert group report and statement based on the 
BJA Salzburg Seminar. British journal of anaesthesia. 2013; 111(2):143–151. [PubMed: 23722106] 
2. Briner A, Nikonenko I, De Roo M, Dayer A, Muller D, Vutskits L. Developmental Stage-dependent 
persistent impact of propofol anesthesia on dendritic spines in the rat medial prefrontal cortex. 
Anesthesiology. 2011; 115(2):282–293. [PubMed: 21701379] 
3. Jevtovic-Todorovic V, Hartman RE, Izumi Y, Benshoff ND, Dikranian K, Zorumski CF, et al. Early 
exposure to common anesthetic agents causes widespread neurodegeneration in the developing rat 
brain and persistent learning deficits. J Neurosci. 2003; 23(3):876–882. [PubMed: 12574416] 
4. Sanchez V, Feinstein SD, Lunardi N, Joksovic PM, Boscolo A, Todorovic SM, et al. General 
Anesthesia Causes Long-term Impairment of Mitochondrial Morphogenesis and Synaptic 
Transmission in Developing Rat Brain. Anesthesiology. 2011; 115(5):992–1002. [PubMed: 
21909020] 
5. Istaphanous GK, Ward CG, Nan X, Hughes EA, McCann JC, McAuliffe JJ, et al. Characterization 
and quantification of isoflurane-induced developmental apoptotic cell death in mouse cerebral 
cortex. Anesthesia and analgesia. 2013; 116(4):845–854. [PubMed: 23460572] 
6. Paule MG, Li M, Allen RR, Liu F, Zou X, Hotchkiss C, et al. Ketamine anesthesia during the first 
week of life can cause long-lasting cognitive deficits in rhesus monkeys. Neurotoxicol Teratol. 
2011; 33(2):220–230. [PubMed: 21241795] 
7. Raper J, Alvarado MC, Murphy KL, Baxter MG. Multiple Anesthetic Exposure in Infant Monkeys 
Alters Emotional Reactivity to an Acute Stressor. Anesthesiology. 2015
8. Slikker W Jr, Zou X, Hotchkiss CE, Divine RL, Sadovova N, Twaddle NC, et al. Ketamine-induced 
neuronal cell death in the perinatal rhesus monkey. Toxicol Sci. 2007; 98(1):145–158. [PubMed: 
17426105] 
9. Brambrink AM, Back SA, Riddle A, Gong X, Moravec MD, Dissen GA, et al. Isoflurane-induced 
apoptosis of oligodendrocytes in the neonatal primate brain. Annals of neurology. 2012; 72(4):525–
535. [PubMed: 23109147] 
Davidson et al.
Page 15
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 10. Brambrink AM, Evers AS, Avidan MS, Farber NB, Smith DJ, Zhang X, et al. Isoflurane-induced 
neuroapoptosis in the neonatal rhesus macaque brain. Anesthesiology. 2010; 112(4):834–841. 
[PubMed: 20234312] 
11. Hansen TG. Anesthesia-related neurotoxicity and the developing animal brain is not a significant 
problem in children. Paediatric anaesthesia. 2015; 25(1):65–72. [PubMed: 25266176] 
12. Psaty BM, Platt R, Altman RB. Neurotoxicity of generic anesthesia agents in infants and children: 
an orphan research question in search of a sponsor. Jama. 2015; 313(15):1515–1516. [PubMed: 
25898045] 
13. Rappaport BA, Suresh S, Hertz S, Evers AS, Orser BA. Anesthetic neurotoxicity--clinical 
implications of animal models. The New England journal of medicine. 2015; 372(9):796–767. 
[PubMed: 25714157] 
14. Crosby G, Davis PJ. General anesthesia in infancy is associated with learning disabilities-or not. 
Anesthesia and analgesia. 2013; 117(6):1270–1272. [PubMed: 24132014] 
15. Davidson AJ. Anesthesia and neurotoxicity to the developing brain: the clinical relevance. 
Paediatric anaesthesia. 2011; 21(7):716–721. [PubMed: 21466608] 
16. DiMaggio C, Sun LS, Ing C, Li G. Pediatric anesthesia and neurodevelopmental impairments: a 
Bayesian meta-analysis. Journal of neurosurgical anesthesiology. 2012; 24(4):376–381. [PubMed: 
23076225] 
17. Ing C, DiMaggio C, Whitehouse A, Hegarty MK, Brady J, von Ungern-Sternberg BS, et al. Long-
term differences in language and cognitive function after childhood exposure to anesthesia. 
Pediatrics. 2012; 130(3):e476–e485. [PubMed: 22908104] 
18. Ing CH, DiMaggio CJ, Malacova E, Whitehouse AJ, Hegarty MK, Feng T, et al. Comparative 
analysis of outcome measures used in examining neurodevelopmental effects of early childhood 
anesthesia exposure. Anesthesiology. 2014; 120(6):1319–1332. [PubMed: 24694922] 
19. Lei SY, Hache M, Loepke AW. Clinical research into anesthetic neurotoxicity: does anesthesia 
cause neurological abnormalities in humans? Journal of neurosurgical anesthesiology. 2014; 26(4):
349–357. [PubMed: 25144503] 
20. Flick RP, Katusic SK, Colligan RC, Wilder RT, Voigt RG, Olson MD, et al. Cognitive and 
behavioral outcomes after early exposure to anesthesia and surgery. Pediatrics. 2011; 
128(5):e1053–e1061. [PubMed: 21969289] 
21. Sprung J, Flick RP, Katusic SK, Colligan RC, Barbaresi WJ, Bojanic K, et al. Attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder after early exposure to procedures requiring general anesthesia. Mayo Clinic 
proceedings. 2012; 87(2):120–129. [PubMed: 22305025] 
22. Wilder RT, Flick RP, Sprung J, Katusic SK, Barbaresi WJ, Mickelson C, et al. Early exposure to 
anesthesia and learning disabilities in a population-based birth cohort. Anesthesiology. 2009; 
110(4):796–804. [PubMed: 19293700] 
23. DiMaggio C, Sun LS, Li G. Early childhood exposure to anesthesia and risk of developmental and 
behavioral disorders in a sibling birth cohort. Anesthesia and analgesia. 2011; 113(5):1143–1151. 
[PubMed: 21415431] 
24. DiMaggio C, Sun LS, Kakavouli A, Byrne MW, Li G. A retrospective cohort study of the 
association of anesthesia and hernia repair surgery with behavioral and developmental disorders in 
young children. Journal of neurosurgical anesthesiology. 2009; 21(4):286–291. [PubMed: 
19955889] 
25. Bartels M, Althoff RR, Boomsma DI. Anesthesia and cognitive performance in children: no 
evidence for a causal relationship. Twin Res Hum Genet. 2009; 12(3):246–253. [PubMed: 
19456216] 
26. Hansen TG, Pedersen JK, Henneberg SW, Pedersen DA, Murray JC, Morton NS, et al. Academic 
performance in adolescence after inguinal hernia repair in infancy: a nationwide cohort study. 
Anesthesiology. 2011; 114(5):1076–1085. [PubMed: 21368654] 
27. Hansen TG, Pedersen JK, Henneberg SW, Morton NS, Christensen K. Educational outcome in 
adolescence following pyloric stenosis repair before 3 months of age: a nationwide cohort study. 
Paediatric anaesthesia. 2013; 23(10):883–890. [PubMed: 23863116] 
Davidson et al.
Page 16
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 28. Block RI, Thomas JJ, Bayman EO, Choi JY, Kimble KK, Todd MM. Are anesthesia and surgery 
during infancy associated with altered academic performance during childhood? Anesthesiology. 
2012; 117(3):494–503. [PubMed: 22801049] 
29. Bong CL, Allen JC, Kim JT. The effects of exposure to general anesthesia in infancy on academic 
performance at age 12. Anesthesia and analgesia. 2013; 117(6):1419–1428. [PubMed: 24132012] 
30. Wang X, Xu Z, Miao CH. Current clinical evidence on the effect of general anesthesia on 
neurodevelopment in children: an updated systematic review with meta-regression. PloS one. 
2014; 9(1):e85760. [PubMed: 24465688] 
31. Davidson AJ, Becke K, de Graaff J, Giribaldi G, Habre W, Hansen T, et al. Anesthesia and the 
developing brain: a way forward for clinical research. Paediatric anaesthesia. 2015; 25(5):447–
452. [PubMed: 25818094] 
32. Davidson AJ, Morton NS, Arnup SJ, de Graaff JC, Disma N, Withington DE, et al. Apnea after 
Awake Regional and General Anesthesia in Infants: The General Anesthesia Compared to Spinal 
Anesthesia Study-Comparing Apnea and Neurodevelopmental Outcomes, A Randomized 
Controlled Trial. Anesthesiology. 2015; 123(1):38–54. [PubMed: 26001033] 
33. Frawley G, Bell G, Disma N, Withington DE, de Graaff JC, Morton NS, et al. Predictors of Failure 
of Awake Regional Anesthesia for Neonatal Hernia Repair: Data from the General Anesthesia 
Compared to Spinal Anesthesia Study-Comparing Apnea and Neurodevelopmental Outcomes. 
Anesthesiology. 2015; 123(1):55–65. [PubMed: 26001028] 
34. Bayley, N. Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development. 3rd. San Antonio: Harcourt 
Assessment Inc; 2006. 
35. Fenson, L.; Marchman, VA.; Thal, DJ.; Dale, PS.; Reznic, JS.; Bates, E. MacArthur-Bates 
Communicative Development Inventories: User’s Guide and Technical Manual. 2nd. Baltimore 
Brookes Publishing; 2007. 
36. van Buuren S. Multiple imputation of discrete and continuous data by fully conditional 
specification. Statistical methods in medical research. 2007; 16(3):219–242. [PubMed: 17621469] 
37. Seaman SR, White IR. Review of inverse probability weighting for dealing with missing data. 
Statistical methods in medical research. 2013; 22(3):278–295. [PubMed: 21220355] 
38. Johnson SA, Young C, Olney JW. Isoflurane-induced neuroapoptosis in the developing brain of 
nonhypoglycemic mice. Journal of neurosurgical anesthesiology. 2008; 20(1):21–28. [PubMed: 
18157021] 
39. Di Maggio C, Sun L, Kakavuoli A, Byrne M, Li G. A retrspective cohort study of the association 
of anesthesia and hernia repair surgery with behavioral and developmental disorders in young 
children. Journal of neurosurgical anesthesiology. 2009; 21:286–291. [PubMed: 19955889] 
40. Harris SR, Langkamp DL. Predictive value of the Bayley mental scale in the early detection of 
cognitive delays in high-risk infants. Journal of perinatology : official journal of the California 
Perinatal Association. 1994; 14(4):275–279. [PubMed: 7525902] 
41. Bode MM, D’Eugenio DB, Mettelman BB, Gross SJ. Predictive validity of the Bayley, Third 
Edition at 2 years for intelligence quotient at 4 years in preterm infants. Journal of developmental 
and behavioral pediatrics : JDBP. 2014; 35(9):570–575. [PubMed: 25370298] 
42. Lee BH, Chan JT, Kraeva E, Peterson K, Sall JW. Isoflurane exposure in newborn rats induces 
long-term cognitive dysfunction in males but not females. Neuropharmacology. 2014; 83:9–17. 
[PubMed: 24704083] 
Davidson et al.
Page 17
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Trial profile
Davidson et al.
Page 18
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Davidson et al.
Page 19
Table 1
Descriptive statistics of birth, pregnancy and peri-anaesthesia data
RA Arm
APP (N=287)
GA Arm
APP
(N=356)
RA Arm
ITT (N=361)
GA Arm ITT
(N=358)
Baseline demographics
Gender, Male
232 (81%)
304 (85%)
294 (82%)
306 (86%)
Chronological age at surgery (days)
68·9 (31)
71·1 (32)
70·1 (32)
71·0 (32)
Post menstrual age at surgery (days)
317·2 (32)
319·7 (32)
318·3 (33)
319·5 (32)
Weight of child at surgery (kg)
4·2 (1·1)
4·3 (1·1)
4·2 (1·1)
4·3 (1·1)
Pregnancy and birth details
Mean (SD) Post menstrual age at birth (days)
248·2 (29)
248·6 (27)
248.3 (29)
248.6 (27)
Prematurity (Born < 37 weeks gestation)
160 (56%)
195 (55%)
198 (55%)
196 (55%)
Birth Weight (kg)
2·3 (0·9)
2·3 (0·9)
2·4 (0·9)
2·3 (0·9)
Z score for birth weight
−0.68 (1·3)
0.69 (1·3)
−0.66 (1·2)
−0.69 (1·3)
Median (IQR) Apgar score at 1 minute
9 (7–9)
8·5 (7–9)
9 (7–9)
9 (7–9)
Median (IQR) Apgar score at 5 minutes
9 (9–10)
9 (9–10)
9 (9–10)
9 (9–10)
One of a multiple pregnancy
52 (18%)
61 (17%)
62 (17%)
62 (17%)
Mother received partial course antenatal
steroids
16 (6%)
19 (5%)
20 (6%)
19 (5%)
Mother received complete course antenatal
steroids
95 (33%)
98 (28%)
114 (32%)
98 (28%)
Mother diagnosed with chorioamnionitis
10 (4%)
12 (3%)
11 (3%)
12 (3%)
Prolonged rupture of the membranes (>24
hours)
28 (10%)
34 (10%)
32 (9%)
34 (10%)
Mother diagnosed with pre-eclampsia
50 (17%)
68 (19%)
60 (17%)
68 (19%)
Sepsis during pregnancy
36 (13%)
50 (14%)
43 (12%)
50 (14%)
Mode of delivery of birth
Cephalic vaginal
135 (47%)
157 (44%)
169 (47%)
157 (44%)
Breech vaginal
1 (<1%)
6 (2%)
3 (1%)
6 (2%)
Compound vaginal
2 (1%)
4 (1%)
3 (1%)
4 (1%)
Caesarean section
149 (52%)
189 (53%)
185 (51%)
191 (53%)
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 16.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Davidson et al.
Page 20
RA Arm
APP (N=287)
GA Arm
APP
(N=356)
RA Arm
ITT (N=361)
GA Arm ITT
(N=358)
Caesarean section and mother went into labour
42 (15%)
58 (16%)
52 (14%)
59 (16%)
Mother exposed to nitrous oxide during
delivery
48 (18%)
62 (18%)
61 (18%)
62 (18%)
IVH
7 (2%)
6 (2%)
8 (2%)
6 (2%)
IVH Grade 1
5 (2%)
6 (2%)
5 (2%)
6 (2%)
IVH Grade 2
2 (1%)
0
2 (1%)
0
Retinopathy of prematurity
17 (9%)
16 (6%)
30 (8%)
16 (6%)
Hearing defects detected by perinatal screening
7 (3%)
10 (3%)
8 (3%)
10 (3%)
PDA diagnosed
23 (8%)
21 (6%)
27 (8%)
21 (6%)
PDA never treated
9 (3%)
9 (3%)
11 (3%)
9 (3%)
PDA treated with non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs
14 (5%)
10 (3%)
16 (4%)
10 (3%)
Familial Demographics:
Primary language(s) only spoken*
252 (88%)
305 (86%)
311 (86%)
307 (86%)
Maternal Age at Birth >21
273 (96%)
339 (95%)
339 (95%)
341 (95%)
Family structure two caregivers together, at
Birth
261 (91%)
324 (91%)
328 (91%)
326 (91%)
Maternal education
Completed tertiary studies
150 (52%)
171 (48%)
181 (51%)
171 (48%)
Continuing tertiary studies
50 (17%)
67 (19%)
68 (19%)
67 (19%)
Completed year 11 or 12
62 (22%)
83 (23%)
77 (22%)
84 (24%)
Did not complete year 11
25 (9%)
33 (9%)
32 (9%)
34 (10%)
Anaesthesia Details:
Median (IQR)Blood glucose level (mmol/L)
5·4 (4·7–6·1)
5·5 (4·8–
6·4)
5·4 (4·7–6·2)
5·5 (4·8–6·4)
Rescue glucose given IV
2 (1%)
4 (1%)
2 (1%)
4 (1%)
Haemoglobin (g/100 ml)
10·3 (2·1)
10·2 (2·0)
10·3 (2·1)
10·2 (2·0)
Need for fluid bolus for hypotension
15 (5%)
59 (17%)
21 (6%)
59 (17%)
Vasoactive drugs given (including atropine)
4 (1%)
17 (5%)
6 (2%)
17 (5%)
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 16.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Davidson et al.
Page 21
RA Arm
APP (N=287)
GA Arm
APP
(N=356)
RA Arm
ITT (N=361)
GA Arm ITT
(N=358)
Median (IQR)Duration of surgery (mins)
26·0 (19·0–
35·0)
28·0 (20·0–
40·0)
28·0 (20·0–
38·0)
28·0 (20·0–
40·0)
Median (IQR) Duration of sevoflurane
exposure (mins)
NA
54.0 (41.0–
70.0)
42.0 (31.0–
62.5)**
54.0 (41.0–
70.0)
End tidal sevoflurane concentration (%)
NA
2·6 (0·7)
2·3 (0·8)**
2·6 (0·7)
Total concentration x hours per
NA
2·6 (1·1)
1·9 (1·0)**
2·6 (1·1)
Any significant apnoea to 12hrs postop***
6 (2%)
15 (4%)
10 (3%)
15 (4%)
Data are n(% of non-missing data) or Mean (SD), unless otherwise stated. APP= As Per Protocol; GA= General Anaesthesia; ITT= Intention to treat; IV= Intra-venously; IVH= Intra ventricular 
haemorrhage; IQR= Interquartile Range; PDA = Patent ductus arteriosus; RA= Awake Regional Anaesthesia.
*The primary language spoken at home, is the primary language in each country that the Bayley was conducted e.g in Italy it was conducted in Italian
**For those cases that received sevoflurane
***significant apnoea defined as a pause in breathing for more than 15 seconds or more than 10 seconds if associated with oxygen saturation less than 80% or bradycardia (20% decrease in heart rate)
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 16.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Davidson et al.
Page 22
Table 2
2 year descriptive statistics demographic data
RA Arm APP
(N=287)
GA Arm APP
(N=356)
RA Arm ITT
(N=361)
GA Arm ITT
(N=358)
Assessment details
Location of two year
assessment at hospital
204 (96%)
240 (94%)
250 (95%)
241 (94%)
Family demographics at two
years
Paid employment is main
family income
222 (90%)
267 (88%)
274 (90%)
268 (88%)
Family structure, two
caregivers living together
226 (91%)
274 (90%)
277 (90%)
275 (90%)
Number of children at home
1
88 (36%)
118 (39%)
115 (37%)
118 (39%)
2
109 (44%)
120 (40%)
131 (43%)
121 (40%)
3
37 (15%)
43 (14%)
45 (14%)
43 (14%)
>3
14 (6%)
22 (7%)
17 (6%)
22 (7%)
Birth order
1
123 (50%)
161 (53%)
154 (50%)
161 (53%)
2
87 (35%)
90 (30%)
107 (35%)
91 (30%)
>2
37 (15%)
52 (17%)
46 (15%)
52 (17%)
Corrected age at assessment
(weeks)
108·9 (13·0)
108 (9·8)
108·7 (12·5)
108 (9·8)
Events since original
anaesthesia
Number of hospitalisations
since inguinal herniorrhaphy
operation
0
172 (69%)
206 (68%)
210 (68%)
207 (68%)
1
51 (20%)
64 (21%)
69 (22%)
64 (21%)
2
14 (6%)
18 (6%)
16 (5%)
18 (6%)
>2
6 (2%)
8 (3%)
8 (3%)
8 (3%)
Number of anaesthetics since
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 16.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Davidson et al.
Page 23
RA Arm APP
(N=287)
GA Arm APP
(N=356)
RA Arm ITT
(N=361)
GA Arm ITT
(N=358)
inguinal herniorrhaphy
operation
1
34 (14%)
36 (12%)
42 (14%)
36 (12%)
2
5 (2%)
6 (2%)
6 (2%)
6 (2%)
>2
4 (2%)
4 (1%)
4 (1%)
4 (1%)
Child had a head injury that
involved the loss of
consciousness
7 (3%)
4 (1%)
7 (2%)
4 (1%)
Child has an acquired brain
Injury
1 (0%)
1 (0%)
1 (0%)
1 (0%)
Child has any malformations
Cardiac
0
4 (1%)
0
4 (1%)
Central Nervous System
3 (1%)
1 (<1%)
3 (1%)
1 (<1%)
Genitourinary
6 (2%)
4 (1%)
8 (3%)
4 (1%)
Genetic condition
1 (<1%)
0
1 (<1%)
0
Respiratory
0
1 (<1%)
0
1 (<1%)
Skeletal
4 (2%)
11 (4%)
4 (1%)
11 (4%)
Cleft lip/palate
1 (<1%)
0
1 (<1%)
0
Craniofacial
2 (1%)
0
2 (1%)
0
Child has any chronic illness
42 (17%)
43 (14%)
50 (16%)
43 (14%)
Child had any prescribed
medication for two months or
longer
43 (17%)
50 (16%)
93 (17%)
59 (19%)
Child had febrile seizures
following the hernia repair
8 (3%)
9 (3%)
10 (3%)
9 (3%)
Child had other seizures
following the hernia repair
1 (<1%)
4 (1%)
1 (<1%)
4 (1%)
The child has had an
intervention for
neurodevelopmental issues
since the inguinal
herniorrhaphy operation
46 (19%)
55 (18%)
54 (18%)
55 (18%)
Speech Therapy
22 (9%)
27 (9%)
28 (9%)
27 (9%)
Physiotherapy
22 (9%)
27 (9%)
26 (8%)
27 (9%)
Occupational Therapy
9 (4%)
12 (4%)
12 (4%)
12 (4%)
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 16.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Davidson et al.
Page 24
RA Arm APP
(N=287)
GA Arm APP
(N=356)
RA Arm ITT
(N=361)
GA Arm ITT
(N=358)
Psychology
1(<1%)
6 (2%)
1 (<1%)
6 (2%)
Developmental medicine/early
intervention
8 (3%)
7 (2%)
9 (3%)
7 (2%)
Child attends play group/child
Care on a regular basis
147 (60%)
177 (58%)
186 (61%)
178 (58%)
Physical examination
Height (cm)
86·6 (5·5)
86·9 (4·9)
86·4 (5·2)
86·9 (4·9)
Weight (kg)
12·6 (2·0)
12·6 (1·9)
12·6 (2·0)
12·6 (1·9)
Head circumference (cm)
49·1 (2·1)
48·8 (2·2)
49·0 (2·0)
48·8 (2·2)
Arm circumference (cm)
16·4 (2·0)
16·1 (1·8)
16·4 (2·0)
16·1 (1·8)
Data are n(% of non-missing data) or Mean (SD), unless otherwise stated. APP= As Per Protocol; GA=General Anaesthesia; ITT= Intention to treat; RA= Awake Regional Anaesthesia.
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 16.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Davidson et al.
Page 25
Table 3
Descriptive statistics Bayley-III and Macarthur-Bates Scores by group
RA Arm APP
GA Arm APP
RA Arm ITT
GA Arm ITT
Cognitive
Cognitive, Scaled Score
238, 9·7 (2·8)
294, 9·6 (2·9)
292, 9·7 (2·8)
295, 9·6 (2·9)
Cognitive, Composite
Score
238, 98·6 (14·2)
294, 98·2 (14·7)
292, 98·6 (14·2)
295, 98·2 (14·6)
Language
Receptive Language,
Scaled Score
236, 8·7 (2·9)
285, 8·6 (2·9)
287, 8·8 (2·9)
286, 8·6 (2·9)
Expressive Language
Scaled Score
235, 9·3 (2·9)
290, 9·3 (3·0)
287, 9·4 (2·9)
291, 9·3 (3·0)
Language, Composite
Score
235, 94·6 (15·4)
285, 94·0 (15·6)
286, 94·9 (15·5)
286, 94·0 (15·6)
Motor
Fine Motor, Scaled
Score
234, 10·5 (2·7)
287, 10·4 (2·7)
287, 10·6 (2·8)
288, 10·4 (2·7)
Gross Motor, Scaled
Score
234, 8·8 (2·4)
279, 8·7 (2·6)
285, 8·9 (2·5)
280, 8·7 (2·6)
Motor, Composite Score
232, 98·3 (13·2)
274, 97·9 (13·4)
283, 98·9 (13·5)
275, 97·8 (13·4)
Social Emotional
Social Emotional, Scaled
Score
218, 9·5 (3·8)
267, 9·1 (3·7)
267, 9·5 (3·8)
268, 9·1 (3·7)
Social Emotional,
Composite Score
218, 97·4 (19·0)
267, 95·4 (18·3)
267, 97·4 (19·2)
268, 95·4 (18·3)
Adaptive Behaviour
Communication Scaled
Score
233, 9·7 (2·9)
291, 9·6 (2·9)
288, 9·8 (2·9)
292, 9·6 (2·9)
Community Use Scaled
Score
233, 9·8 (2·8)
291, 9·9 (2·7)
288, 9·9 (2·8)
292, 9·8 (2·7)
Functional Pre-
Academics Scaled Score
233, 9·0 (3·0)
291, 9·2 (2·9)
288, 9·1 (3·0)
292, 9·2 (2·9)
Home Living Scaled
Score
233, 9·9 (2·8)
291, 10·1 (2·7)
288, 9·9 (2·9)
292, 10·1 (2·7)
Health and Safety Scaled
Score
233, 9·0 (2·8)
291, 9·3 (2·7)
288, 9·0 (2·9)
292, 9·3 (2·7)
Leisure Scaled Score
233, 9·4 (3·0)
291, 9·9 (2·8)
288, 9·5 (3·1)
292, 9·9 (2·8)
Self-Care Scaled Score
233, 6·8 (2·6)
291, 6·6 (2·5)
288, 6·8 (2·6)
292, 6·6 (2·5)
Self-Direction Scaled
Score
233, 9·7 (3·2)
291, 10·0 (3·2)
288, 9·8 (3·2)
292, 10·0 (3·2)
Social Scaled Score
233, 9·3 (2·9)
291, 9·5 (2·8)
288, 9·4 (2·9)
292, 9·5 (2·8)
Motor Scaled Score
233, 9·8 (3·2)
291, 10·0 (2·9)
288, 9·9 (3·3)
292, 10·0 (2·9)
Adaptive Behaviour
Composite Score
233, 93·1 (15·6)
291, 94·3 (14·7)
288, 93·4 (16·1)
292, 94·3 (14·7)
MacArthur Bates
Percentile Score
195, 32·4 (27·9)
247, 34·7 (28·7)
240, 33·6 (28·0)
247, 34·7 (28·7)
Data as n, mean (SD). APP= As Per Protocol; GA= General Anaesthesia; ITT= Intention to treat; RA= Awake-Regional Anaesthesia.
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 16.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Davidson et al.
Page 26
Table 4
Between group comparisons in Bayley-III and MacArthur-Bates scores
Scale
*A: RA - GA
SEA
95% CI forA: RA - GA
Cognitive
Composite score
APP multiple imputation
0·169
1·26
−2·30
2·64
APP complete case
0·458
1·26
−2·02
2·94
ITT multiple imputation
0·256
1·18
−2·06
2·58
ITT complete case
0·430
1·19
−1·90
2·76
Language
composite score
APP multiple imputation
1·146
1·39
−1·59
3·88
APP complete case
0·628
1·37
−2·07
3·32
ITT multiple imputation
1·454
1·32
−1·14
4·05
ITT complete case
0·942
1·30
−1·61
3·49
Motor
composite score
APP multiple imputation
0·598
1·20
−1·77
2·97
APP complete case
0·410
1·19
−1·92
2·74
ITT multiple imputation
0·143
1·13
−1·08
3·37
ITT complete case
1·031
1·14
−1·20
3·26
Social
emotional
composite score
APP multiple imputation
1·005
2·09
−3·12
5·13
APP complete case
2·012
1·70
−1·32
5·35
ITT multiple imputation
1·183
2·03
−2·82
5·19
ITT complete case
2·015
1·62
−1·17
5·20
Adaptive
behaviour
composite score
APP multiple imputation
−0·893
1·34
−3·52
1·73
APP complete case
−1·223
1·33
−3·83
1.38
ITT multiple imputation
−0·502
1·28
−3·03
2·02
ITT complete case
−0·830
1·28
−3·34
1·68
MacArthur
Bates Percentile
Score
APP multiple imputation
−1·811
3·06
−7·85
4·23
APP complete case
−2·359
2·71
−7·69
2·98
ITT multiple imputation
−0·544
2·87
−6·20
5·11
ITT complete case
−1·113
2·57
−6·17
3·94
*Adjusted for gestational age at birth. APP= As Per Protocol; GA= General Anaesthesia; ITT= Intention to treat; RA= Awake Regional Anaesthesia.
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 16.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Davidson et al.
Page 27
Table 5
2 year non-psychometric outcome data
RA Arm APP
(N=287)
GA Arm APP
(N=356)
RA Arm ITT
(N=361)
GA Arm ITT
(N=358)
Child has a hearing
Defect
Conductive
9 (3%)
6 (2%)
9 (2%)
6 (2%)
Sensorineural
0
3 (1%)
1 (<1%)
3 (1%)
Child has a hearing
aid
1 (8%)
3 (25%)
2 (15%)
3 (23%)
Child is legally
blind (<6/60 in both
eyes)
1 (2%)
0
1 (2%)
0
Child has Cerebral
Palsy
1 (<1%)
4 (1%)
1 (0%)
4 (1%)
The child has
Autism Spectrum
Disorder
2 (1%)
0
2 (1%)
0
Data are n (% of non-missing data), unless otherwise stated. APP= As Per Protocol; GA= General Anaesthesia; ITT= Intention to treat; RA= Regional Anaesthesia.
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 16.
