 UC San Diego
UC San Diego Previously Published Works
Title
Guidelines for Family-Centered Care in the Neonatal, Pediatric, and Adult ICU
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8p96j3gd
Journal
Critical Care Medicine, 45(1)
ISSN
0090-3493
Authors
Davidson, Judy E
Aslakson, Rebecca A
Long, Ann C
et al.
Publication Date
2017-12-01
Data Availability
The data associated with this publication are within the manuscript.
 
Peer reviewed
eScholarship.org
Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California
 1 
 
Title: Guidelines for Family-Centered Care in the Neonatal, Pediatric and Adult Intensive Care 
Unit 
Corresponding Author:  
Judy E. Davidson DNP RN FCCM FAAN, jdavidson@ucsd.edu 
Authors: (No authors have conflicts to report) 
Judy E. Davidson DNP RN FCCM FAAN, University of California San Diego Health, San Diego, 
California.  
Rebecca A. Aslakson MD PhD FAAHPM, Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care 
Medicine; Department of Oncology and the Palliative Care Program in the Sidney Kimmel 
Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins; Department of Health, Behavior, and 
Society in the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health; The Johns Hopkins 
Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland.  
Ann C. Long MD MS, Cambia Palliative Care Center of Excellence, Division of Pulmonary and 
Critical Care Medicine, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington.  
Kathleen A. Puntillo PhD RN FAAN FCCM, Department of Physiological Nursing, University of 
California, San Francisco.  
Erin K. Kross MD Cambia Palliative Care Center of Excellence, Division of Pulmonary and 
Critical Care Medicine, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington.  
Joanna Hart MD MS Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Fostering 
Improvement in End-of-Life Decision Science Program, Center for Clinical Epidemiology and 
Biostatistics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania.  
Christopher E. Cox MD MPH, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Program to 
Support People and Enhance Recovery, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina.  
Hannah Wunsch MD MSc, Department of Critical Care Medicine Sunnybrook Health Sciences 
Centre; Department of Anesthesia and Interdepartmental Division of Critical Care Medicine, 
University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
Mary A. Wickline MLIS, M.Ed. University of California, San Diego, California.  
Mark E. Nunnally MD FCCM University of Chicago; Chicago, Illinois; Director Adult Critical Care 
Services, New York University NY.  
Giora Netzer MD MSCE Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of 
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD.  
Nancy Kentish-Barnes PhD Saint-Louis University Hospital, Paris, France.  
Charles L. Sprung MD MCCM JD Hadassah Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, 
Israel.  
 2 
 
Christiane Hartog MD Jena University Hospital, Department of Anaesthesiology and Intensive 
Care Medicine, Jena, Germany.  
Professor Maureen Coombs PhD RN, Graduate School of Nursing Midwifery and Health, 
Victoria University of Wellington; Capital and Coast District Health Board, Wellington, New 
Zealand.  
Rik T. Gerritsen MD FCCM Center of Intensive Care, Medisch Centrum, Leeuwarden, The 
Netherlands.  
Ramona O. Hopkins PhD, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah; Pulmonary and Critical Care 
Medicine, Intermountain Medical Center, Murray Utah.  
Linda S. Franck PhD RN FRCPCH FAAN Department of Family Health Care Nursing, University 
of California, San Francisco.  
Yoanna Skrobik MD FRCP(c), MSc McGill University, Montreal, Canada.  
Alexander A. Kon MD FCCM, Naval Medical Center San Diego and University of California San 
Diego, San Diego, CA 
Elizabeth A. Scruth PhD RN CCRN CNS FCCM Quality and Regulatory Services, Kaiser 
Permanente, Oakland CA.  
Maurene A. Harvey MPH MCCM Critical Care Educator and Consultant, Lake Tahoe, Nevada.  
Mithya Lewis-Newby MD MPH Seattle Childrens Hospital, Seattle, Washington.  
Douglas B. White MD MAS, Program on Ethics and Decision Making in Critical Illness; 
Department of Critical Care Medicine, University of Pittsburgh medical Center, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania.  
Sandra M. Swoboda MS RN FCCM Johns Hopkins University Schools of Medicine and Nursing, 
Baltimore, Maryland.  
Colin R. Cooke MD MS, University of Michigan Hospitals, North Campus Research Complex, 
Ann Arbor, Michigan.  
Mitchell M. Levy MD MCCM FCCM, The Warren Alpert School at Brown University, Providence, 
Rhode Island.  
Elie Azoulay MD PhD, Saint-Louis University Hospital, Paris, France.  
J. Randall Curtis MD MPH Cambia Palliative Care Center of Excellence, Harborview Medical 
Center, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.  
Acknowledgements: 
Sarah A. Kraus MPH Society of Critical Care Medicine, Mt. Prospect, Illinois 
Patricia G. Graham MS RN CCRN University of California, San Diego, San Diego, California 
Scot Halpern MD, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and 
Critical Care Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
 3 
 
Miachael Quasney MD, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan  
Kathleen M. Kelly MD FACS FCCM, Janssen Research and Development, Morristown, New 
Jersey 
Dan R. Thompson MD MCCM MA FACP, Alden March Bioethics Institute, Albany, New Jersey 
David Y. Hwang MD, Assistant Professor of Neurology; Division of Neurocritical Care and 
Emergency Neurology; Yale School of Medicine; New Haven, Connecticut 
Heather M. Bullard PharmD, BCCCP, Clinical Pharmacy Specialist, Cardiothoracic Surgery; 
Department of Pharmacy; The University of Chicago medicine; Chicago, Illinois 
LeeAnn Christie MSN RN Dell Children’s Medical Center of Central Trexas; Austin, Texas 
Meg Frizzola DO, Division of Critical Care Medicine; Medical Director, Pediatric Intensive Care 
Unit; Assistant Professor of Pediatrics; Sidney Kimmel Medical College; Thomas Jefferson 
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
Serena A. Harris PharmD, BCPS, BCCCP; Department of Pharmacy; Eskenazi health; 
Indianapolis, Indiana 
Mathhew E. Lissauer MD, Surgical Critical Care; Rutgers-Robert Wood Johnson Medical 
School; New Brunswick, New Jersey 
Appreciation is sent to the patients and family members who volunteered their time to validate 
the PICO questions and outcomes of interest.  
Keywords: 
"Family"[Mesh] 
"Patient-Centered Care"[Mesh]  
"Intensive Care"[Mesh] 
"Intensive Care, Neonatal"[Mesh]  
"Critical Care"[Mesh] 
"Critical Care Nursing"[Mesh]  
Family-centered care 
Family Nursing 
 
 
 
 4 
 
Abstract 
Objective: To provide clinicians with evidence-based strategies to optimize support of the family 
of critically ill patients in the ICU. 
Methods: We used the Council of Medical Specialty Societies principles for the development of 
clinical guidelines as the framework for guideline development. We assembled an international 
multidisciplinary team of 29 members with expertise in guideline development, evidence 
analysis and family-centered care to revise the 2007 Clinical Practice Guidelines for Support of 
the Family in the Patient-Centered Intensive Care Unit. We conducted a scoping review of 
qualitative research that explored family-centered care in the ICU. Thematic analyses were 
conducted to support Population, Intervention, Comparison, Outcome (PICO) question 
development. Patients and families validated the importance of interventions and outcomes. We 
then conducted a systematic review using the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, 
Development and Evaluations (GRADE) methodology to make recommendations for practice. 
Recommendations were subjected to electronic voting with pre-established voting thresholds. 
No industry funding was associated with guideline development.  
Results: The scoping review yielded 683 qualitative studies; 228 were used for thematic 
analysis and PICO question development. The systematic review search yielded 4158 reports 
after de-duplication and 76 additional studies were added from alerts and hand searches; 238 
studies met inclusion criteria. We made 23 recommendations from moderate, low and very low 
level of evidence on the topics of: communication with family members, family presence, family 
support, consultations and ICU team members, and operational and environmental issues. We 
provide recommendations for future research and work-tools to support translation of the 
recommendations into practice.  
Conclusions: These guidelines identify the evidence base for best practices for family-centered 
care in the ICU. All recommendations were weak, highlighting the relative nascency of this field 
of research and the importance of future research to identify the most effective interventions to 
improve this important aspect of ICU care.  
 
 
 
 
 5 
 
Introduction 
       
There is increasing evidence of the significant impact that critical illness has on family 
members of the critically ill. Stressful decision making often falls to family members because 
most patients in the intensive care unit (ICU) are too ill to participate in decision-making (1). 
Furthermore, family members bear a significant burden of caregiving to the more than 50% of 
critical illness survivors who have post-discharge disability (2, 3). Approximately one-quarter to 
half of family members of critically ill children or adults experience psychological symptoms, 
including acute stress, post-traumatic stress, generalized anxiety, and depression both during 
and after the critical illness of a loved one (4-6). The sum total of family exposure to critical 
illness may result in what has been termed “Post-Intensive Care Syndrome-Family” (PICS-F) (3, 
5). There is increasing awareness of the importance of improving outcomes for family 
caregivers and that support for family caregivers can also improve patient outcomes (6, 7).  
 
Structured interventions and approaches to support family members of critically ill 
patients are needed both to mitigate the impact of the crisis of critical illness and to prepare 
family members for decision-making and caregiving demands. Family-centered care recognizes 
the central importance of the family to a patient’s recovery and describes the responsibilities of 
the healthcare team to provide support for families of seriously ill patients. The objective of 
these guidelines is to provide clinicians with evidence-based strategies to optimize support of 
the family of critically ill patients in the ICU. 
 
The original clinical practice guidelines for support of the family in the patient-centered 
ICU from the American College of Critical Care Medicine were published in 2007 (8). These 
prior guidelines have been one of the most widely cited documents on family-centered care and 
stimulated research on the role of families in ICU care. However, the prior guidelines were 
developed using what is now an outdated evidence analysis. The new guidelines described in 
this work are not an update of the prior guidelines, but instead are the result of a completely 
new and more rigorous analysis. These new guidelines represent the current state of 
international science in family-centered care and family support for family members of critically 
ill patients across the lifespan. We report here the process for the systematic review of the 
literature, grading of the evidence, consultation with patients and families, and development of 
consensus among international experts on the final recommendations herein.  
 
 
Methods 
 
 
These guidelines were developed using the Council of Medical Specialty Societies 
(CMSS) Principles for the Development of Specialty Society Clinical Guidelines framework (9). 
The guideline writing group was composed of international experts in the fields of neonatal, 
pediatric and adult critical and intensive care medicine and family-centered care. The goal was 
to create a document to optimize family-centered care for the global community of ICU clinicians 
who care for patients and family members of all age groups. 
A strict conflict of interest process was followed according to SCCM procedures. A 
conflict of interest form was completed at the start of the process and yearly. Members were 
asked to report new conflicts at each meeting.  Of the writing members, 19 out of 21 were 
chosen for their expertise on the topic of family-centered care. This was considered essential to 
product development and not considered a conflict. Authors did not review their own papers 
during evidence analysis and Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and 
Evaluations (GRADE) scoring or write summaries of their own work.  Authors with conflicts were 
asked to abstain from voting. By group consensus, authors were permitted to vote on the 
recommendations made partially as a result of their scientific contributions. In no circumstance 
 6 
 
did these votes make a difference in whether or not the recommendation was accepted 
(Electronic Supplement Table 3: Voting Results). No authors had influence over the acceptance 
of the document. None reported the potential for financial gain that could cause bias. There was 
no industry involvement in the development of these Guidelines.” 
A scoping review was undertaken of all qualitative research that explored family-
centered care in the ICU from the perspective of patients, families and clinicians. Thematic 
analyses of results were then used to develop clinical questions regarding best methods of 
providing family-centered care. In evidence-based practice the Population, Intervention, 
Comparator, Outcome (PICO) format of constructing a clinical question was used to focus the 
search. These questions were then used to locate results from quantitative studies testing 
interventions in specific areas of family-centered care in the ICU to improve outcomes of 
interest. These studies were reviewed and analyzed using the GRADE methodology to make 
recommendations for clinical practice. 
 
 Search Methodology  
The perspectives of patients and family members were incorporated in guideline 
development in two ways: through literature review and direct consultation. We conducted a 
scoping review of the qualitative literature relevant to neonatal, pediatric and adult patient and 
family perspectives using PubMed, CINAHL, Web of Science, and PsycINFO. The purpose of 
this review was to identify issues of importance to patients and families to generate PICO 
questions. We conducted a broad general search of Web of Science on the topic “family-
centered” OR “family-centred” to determine when family-centered care began to be commonly 
addressed in ICU studies. A citation report showed that the number of publications exceeded 
100 per year beginning in 1994 [Electronic supplement Figure 1]. We used this as a basis to 
determine the year to begin our literature search (1994- ). Qualitative filtering of English 
language texts was adapted from McMaster’s University Health Information Research Unit filters 
to identify non-experimental research (10, 11). We performed a PubMed MEDLINE search 
using this logic statement [see appendix 1: Complete search strategies]: 
("Intensive Care Units"[Mesh] OR "Critical Care"[Mesh] OR "Critical Care  
Nursing"[Mesh] OR “intensive care” OR “critical care”) 
AND 
("family centered" OR "family centred") 
AND 
(interview*[Title/Abstract] OR interviews[MeSH:noexp] OR experience*[Text  
Word] OR qualitative[Title/Abstract]) 
 
Separate searches focused on family versus clinician perspectives and retrieved a total 
of 683 studies. Duplicates, single case studies, narrative reviews of the literature, and off-topic 
abstracts were eliminated, resulting in 228 final studies for the scoping review. These abstracts 
were then sorted into RefWorks® groups based on primary perspectives: studies describing 
patient/family perspectives (n=133), or studies describing clinician perspectives (n=118). Some 
studies overlapped both categories and evaluated family-centered care from multiple 
perspectives of clinicians, patients and family members (n=23). Systematic, Cochrane, and 
narrative reviews were included (n=12). 
The guidelines writing group reviewed the abstracts for relevant findings. A master 
spreadsheet of study results was constructed to perform a thematic analysis from the results of 
each abstract. The themes were then clustered further into patient/family and clinician domains, 
which were then used to develop PICO questions (Electronic Supplement Table 1). 
Former ICU patients and family members were recruited from the University of Maryland 
(UOM) School of Medicine and the University of California San Diego Health System (UCSD), 
 7 
 
as well as through patient advocacy organizations, including the ARDS Foundation, Survivors of 
Sepsis, and Project Help. Participants were also recruited by word of mouth by writing group 
members. This recruitment was done in parallel with an ongoing research study at the UOM 
(Institutional Review Board (IRB) HP-0058018), and UCSD (IRB 140458).  
Patient and family participants (n=27) were consulted at 3 time points during the 
guidelines preparation: 1) development of the definition of family and family-centered care; 2) 
creation of the domains to be considered for development of PICO questions; and 3) ranking of 
the importance of outcomes within the PICO questions. At each time point, interviews were 
scheduled by telephone or email at the preference of the participant. The scripts were 
developed by one committee member (JD) and validated for clarity by at least two guidelines 
writing group members. A committee member (GN or PG) sent the script over email and read 
the script and associated questions during phone interviews.  
 
Definitions of “family” and “family-centered care” 
 
To ensure consensus and consistency in use of key concepts used in guidelines 
development, we identified previous published definitions of “family” and “family-centered care” 
from guidelines and key documents on family-centered care, and then conducted an online 
survey of the entire guidelines writing group to select definitions of family and family-centered. 
Full details of this process are described in Online Appendix A. We intentionally did not search 
patient or person-centered care because the focus of these Guidelines is on support of the 
family. However, we support the concept of person and patient-centered care. The proposed 
definitions were then reviewed and approved by a group of seven former ICU patients and 
family members. These final definitions for “family” and “family-centered care” were 
unanimously deemed appropriate and acceptable by the participating former ICU patients and 
family members. Our definitions are as follows:  
 
Family is defined by the patient or, in the case of minors or those without decision 
making capacity, by their surrogates. In this context, the family may be related or 
unrelated to the patient. They are individuals who provide support and with whom the 
patient has a significant relationship. 
 
Family-centered care is an approach to health care that is respectful of and responsive 
to individual families' needs and values. 
 
 
Defining the Relevant Outcomes and Prioritizing the Outcomes  
The guidelines writing group developed a list of domains for family-centered care 
outcomes through a review of the qualitative literature identifying domains important to patients 
and family members (12-23). We then had group members rate the relative importance of each 
outcome on a scale of extremely important (10) to not at all important (0). In addition, a sample 
of survivors and family members also rated the importance of these outcomes on the same 
scale producing similar results and supporting the rating results. These outcomes and their 
importance scores are shown in Electronic Supplement Table 2. 
Following the rating of potential outcomes to be used in the PICO questions, patients 
and family members were again surveyed. The 24 outcomes were rated using a 0-10 numeric 
rating scale  and then ranked according to their mean rating. Nine patients and family members 
participated. In general, patients and family members scored all outcomes higher than the 
writing group, with less discrimination between most and least important. No new outcomes 
were identified in the open comments section. Of interest, patients and family members scored 
clinician outcomes (e.g. clinician retention and clinical teaching time) higher than the guidelines 
 8 
 
writing group. The exercise provides some validation that the outcomes of interest to clinicians 
were also important to patients and families.  
 
Search Strategy for Systematic Review 
This review was in support of clinical practice guidelines for the SCCM which had no role in the 
review of evidence selected. In accordance with Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic 
Reviews and Meta- Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines, our systematic review protocol was 
registered with the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO) 
on June 14, 2015 and was last updated December 8, 2015 (registration number 
CRD42015023445). 
PubMed, CINAHL, and EMBASE databases were searched for quantitative studies in 
the area of family-centered care in critical care. We narrowed literature to English language 
studies with a publication date during or after 1994. The PubMed search strategy was: 
 
((family-centered[Text Word] OR family-centred[Text Word] OR  
"Family/psychology"[Mesh:noexp] OR Professional-Family[TW] OR ("Patient- 
Centered Care"[Mesh] AND ("Family"[Mesh] OR Family [TW] OR spouse[TW] OR  
significant-other [TW] OR parent[TW] OR child[TW] OR children [TW] OR  
sibling [TW] OR friend[TW]))) AND ("Intensive Care"[Mesh] OR "Intensive Care,  
Neonatal"[Mesh] OR "Intensive Care Units"[Mesh] OR "Critical Care  
Nursing"[Mesh] OR "Critical Care"[Mesh] OR critical care [TW] OR intensive  
Care [TW] OR Burn Unit[TW] OR Coronary Care[TW] OR Respiratory Care[TW] OR  
"ICU"[TW] OR "PICU"[TW] OR "NICU"[TW] NOT "Recovery Room"[Mesh]))  
 
See Appendix C for search strategies in all databases. The searches were performed in 
December 2014. After searches in all databases, records were de-duplicated using “near 
match” in RefWorks®. Investigators examined reference lists from previous systematic reviews 
for studies on family-centered care interventions (12, 14, 15, 17, 18, 21-24). Investigators 
searched the RefWorks® account for intervention terms using “All References” and the 
“Anywhere” field and sorted records into folders for each PICO question. Alerts were created 
and monitored by the librarian, and records uploaded when applicable until June 8, 2015. The 
Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) was searched for relevant 
registered trials; 154 records of trials were retrieved, of which 11 were in an ICU setting. An 
analysis of the predominant source titles was performed by the librarian using Web of Science 
for a date range of January 1994 through June 2015. We contacted known experts to inquire 
about unpublished studies that should be noted. We also searched Open Grey 
<http://www.opengrey.eu/> and the New York Academy of Medicine’s GreyLit.org for grey 
literature. 
Eligible studies for this systematic review included randomized trials, and observational 
studies of family-centered care in an ICU setting that addressed the domains of interest. For 
interventions lacking experimental or observational studies, qualitative literature that helped to 
answer the PICO question was accepted but considered to be very low quality of evidence. We 
excluded studies where outcomes were not focused on the family or that were not conducted in 
an ICU environment (exception made a-priori: family presence at resuscitation in the emergency 
and pre-hospital setting). Proceedings that were not on topic or not original research or 
systematic reviews of original research were excluded. 
Our December 2014 searches identified 4158 reports after de-duplication. Seventy-six 
additional studies were subsequently included from alerts and hand searches, and 236 studies 
were included in the final analyses. We used the GRADE tool to assess the level of evidence 
 9 
 
from included studies. Electronic Supplement Figure 2 describes the PRISMA Flow Diagram of 
study identification and inclusion. 
 
GRADE Process for Grading the Evidence 
GRADE assigns the strength of a recommendation based on the priority of a problem; 
balance of benefits and harms; certainty of the evidence of effect; values and preferences; 
equity; acceptability; and feasibility (25). The strength of the recommendation should summarize 
the evidence in a way that can be interpreted by individual clinicians dealing with specific 
problems under local conditions. Embedded in this summary is the understanding that the 
variables leading to the decision may vary under these same local conditions. For these 
reasons, a weak recommendation implies that clinicians consider the recommended action, but 
allows them leeway to make a decision based on the specific conditions they face. Strong 
recommendations imply greater applicability of the action across a spectrum of clinical 
situations. 
Two or three investigators examined and summarized the literature relevant to each 
PICO question. To avoid intellectual conflict, guidelines writing group members who had 
authored a study of interest did not perform the GRADE analysis of their own scientific work. 
Standard GRADE methodology was used (see Appendix C). As with previous guidelines,(26, 
27) a GRADE grid was used to help reach decisions on recommendations when consensus was 
not achieved or conflict arose (28). 
The proposed recommendations were then put to a vote of the entire guidelines writing 
group. At least 50% of members had to vote in favor of, and no more than 20% against, each 
recommendation. In addition, a strong recommendation required at least 70% of those voting to 
vote in favor of the recommendation. Otherwise the recommendation qualified as weak. Strong 
recommendations use the language “we recommend,” whereas weak recommendations use the 
language “we suggest” according to GRADE standards.  All recommendations were based upon 
the published evidence and not from consensus statements. Voting results are posted in 
electronic supplement Table 3. A GRADE methodologist served as co-author on this project, 
attended all meetings, and provided oversight to the GRADE process to assure that 
recommendations were based upon appropriate evidence.   
 
 
Results:  PICO Questions and Recommendations 
 
      In the section to follow, the evidence summary and recommendations for each PICO 
question are presented. GRADE worksheets and voting summaries are archived with the 
SCCM. For all of the PICO questions, evidence varied significantly in study design and outcome 
measures, such that it was difficult to combine results statistically. For this reason, the nature of 
the individual studies is described in the narrative after each question. 
 
 
Executive Summary of Recommendations: 
All recommendations in these guidelines are made from moderate, low, or very low 
quality evidence and constitute weak recommendations per GRADE methodology (29). When 
outcomes are listed at the conclusion of a recommendation, it is because these outcomes have 
been tested (whereas others may not have been). We note the lack of research addressing the 
use of multiple simultaneous interventions. Although it seems likely that some combination of 
the interventions may improve outcomes, there are currently no data on the additive or 
synergistic effects of combined interventions. Clinicians and institutions will need to make a 
judgment about which intervention or combination of interventions are likely to be most 
 10 
 
successful in specific circumstances. We also note that adverse effects have not been 
described for most of the interventions and seem unlikely, but are possible. Statements as to 
adverse effects or risks for each PICO question are not repeated below, unless the 
intervention’s specific adverse effects or risks were described. Recommendations apply to 
neonatal, pediatric and adult ICUs unless otherwise specified. When specified, it is because the 
evidence was available in only one age category.  
 
 
ICU Family-Centered Care Recommendations 
 
We suggest the following: 
 
1. Family Presence in the ICU 
1.1. Family members of critically ill patients be offered open flexible family presence at the 
bedside that meets their needs while providing support for staff and positive 
reinforcement to work in partnership with families to improve family satisfaction. (2D) 
1.2. Family members of critically ill patients be offered the option of participating in 
interdisciplinary team rounds to improve satisfaction with communication and increase 
family engagement. (2C) 
1.3. Family members of critically ill patients be offered the option of being present during 
resuscitation efforts, with a staff member assigned to support the family. (2C) 
 
2. Family Support 
2.1. Family members of critically ill neonates be offered the option to be taught how to assist 
with the care of their critically ill neonate to improve parental confidence and 
competence in their caregiving role and improve parental psychological health during 
and after the ICU stay. (2B) 
2.2. Family education programs be included as part of clinical care as these programs have 
demonstrated beneficial effects for family members in the ICU by reducing anxiety, 
depression, post-traumatic stress, and generalized stress while improving family 
satisfaction with care. (2C) 
2.3. Peer-to-peer support be implemented in neonatal ICUs to improve family satisfaction, 
reduce parental stress, and reduce depression. (2D) 
2.4. ICUs provide family with leaflets that give information about the ICU setting to reduce 
family member anxiety and stress. (2B) 
2.5. ICU diaries be implemented in ICUs to reduce family member anxiety, depression, and 
post-traumatic stress. (2C) 
2.6. Validated decision support tools for family members be implemented in the ICU setting 
when relevant validated tools exist to optimize quality of communication, medical 
comprehension, and reduce family decisional conflict. (2D) 
2.7. Among surrogates of ICU patients who are deemed by a clinician to have a poor 
prognosis, clinicians use a communication approach, such as the “VALUE” mnemonic, 
during family conferences to facilitate clinician-family communication. 2C) 
 
3. Communication with Family Members 
3.1. Routine interdisciplinary family conferences be used in the ICU to improve family 
satisfaction with communication and trust in clinicians, reduce conflict between 
clinicians and family members. (2C) 
 11 
 
3.2. Healthcare clinicians in the ICU should use structured approaches to communication, 
such as that included in the “VALUE” mnemonic, when engaging in communication with 
family members, specifically including active listening, expressions of empathy, and 
making supportive statements around non-abandonment and decision-making. In 
addition, we suggest that family members of critically ill patients who are dying be 
offered a written bereavement brochure to reduce family anxiety, depression and post-
traumatic stress and improve family satisfaction with communication.(2C) 
3.3. ICU clinicians receive family-centered communication training as one element of critical 
care training to improve clinician self-efficacy and family satisfaction. (2D) 
 
4. Use of Specific Consultations and ICU Team Members  
4.1. Proactive palliative care consultation be provided to decrease ICU and hospital length 
of stay among selected critically ill patients (e.g. advanced dementia, global cerebral 
ischemia after cardiac arrest, patients with prolonged ICU stay, and patients with 
subarachnoid hemorrhage requiring mechanical ventilation). (2C) 
4.2. Ethics consultation be provided to decrease ICU and hospital length of stay among 
critically ill patients for whom there is a value-related conflict between clinicians and 
family. (2C) 
4.3. A psychologist’s intervention be provided to specifically incorporate a multimodal 
cognitive behavioral technique (CBT)-based approach to improve outcomes in mothers 
of pre-term babies admitted to the NICU; furthermore, targeted video and reading 
materials be provided in the context of psychological support to mothers of pre-term 
babies admitted to the ICU. (2D) 
4.4. Social workers be included within an interdisciplinary team to participate in family 
meetings in order to improve family satisfaction. (2D) 
4.5. Family navigators (care coordinator or communication facilitator) be assigned to families 
throughout the ICU stay to improve family satisfaction with physician communication, 
decrease psychological symptoms, and reduce costs of care and length of ICU and 
hospital stay. (2C) 
4.6. Spiritual support from a spiritual advisor or chaplain be offered to families of ICU 
patients to meet their expressed desire for spiritual care and the accreditation standard 
requirements. (2D) 
 
5. Operational and Environmental Issues 
5.1. Protocols be implemented to ensure adequate and standardized use of sedation and 
analgesia during withdrawal of life support. (2C) 
5.2. Nurses be involved in decision-making about goals of care and be trained to provide 
support for family members as part of an overall program to decrease ICU and hospital 
length of stay and to improve quality of communication in the ICU. (2D) 
5.3. Hospitals implement policies to promote family-centered care in the ICU to improve 
family experience. (2C) 
5.4. Given the evidence of harm related to noise, although in the absence of evidence for 
specific strategies, ICUs implement noise reduction and environmental hygiene 
practices and use private rooms to improve patient and family satisfaction. (2D) 
5.7. Family sleep be considered and families are provided a sleep surface to reduce the 
effects of sleep deprivation. (2D) 
 
 12 
 
A table of the summary of recommendations for future research can be found on Appendix D. 
Note that this list is not exhaustive in nature. 
 
 
I. Family Presence with Patients in the ICU 
 
PICO Question 1.1 
 
In the critical care environment, does open family presence at the bedside (also called open 
visiting) affect family satisfaction? 
 
Evidence Summary:  
The majority of literature examining the effect of open family presence at the bedside is 
observational or descriptive in nature. Many families value the opportunity to be at the bedside 
(30-34) and sometimes report the need to safeguard the patient or be vigilantly present (35-37). 
However, open family presence policies can be challenging to staff and may be perceived to 
increase workload (15, 38) and staff stress (39). Family presence is necessary for family 
engagement at the bedside, which has been demonstrated, when coupled with an educational 
program, to improve outcomes (40-42).  
There are no randomized trials addressing the effect of open or flexible family presence 
on family-centered outcomes. Data from existing observational studies addressed family 
satisfaction with variable ICU accessibility. One study examined open versus restricted family 
presence and demonstrated no differences in information or comfort for the families (43). 
Another study exposed families to open family presence with one group also receiving an 
information booklet (44). When comparing unrestricted vs. open family presence, there was a 
statistically significant increase in 9 out of 11 measures of knowledge with open family 
presence. The sample of families (n=50) who received the informational booklet were more 
knowledgeable about specific facts. A third study conducted a pre and post survey after 
implementation of flexible family presence. When minimal restrictions were lifted from family 
presence (during report times) family satisfaction improved without changing staff satisfaction 
(45). 
The quality of the evidence is very low for family presence with patients because there 
are no randomized trials and the observational studies are of poor quality. Studies are limited by 
small sample sizes, inadequate reporting of study results, and methodological issues. It is 
therefore difficult to understand how open family presence affect families. The literature would at 
least suggest that open family presence are more beneficial for families and may affect staff 
workload or perception of workload. In the future shifting away from the term visiting, to family 
presence and/or engagement would better reflect alignment with the family-centered paradigm.  
 
Recommendation: 
Given the value family members place on family presence, their dissatisfaction associated with 
restricted presence, and the benefit of engagement associated with presence, we suggest that 
family members of critically ill patients be offered open flexible family presence at the bedside 
that meets their needs while providing support for staff and positive reinforcement to work in 
partnership with families. (2D) 
 
Further research is needed to understand the best ways to implement open flexible visitation 
and fully understand the impact on family member outcomes and conflict in the ICU. 
 
 
PICO Question 1.2  
 13 
 
Does family presence during interdisciplinary team rounds improve family psychological 
symptoms, family trust in clinicians, family satisfaction with and preferences for care or 
communication, family or clinician conflict, degree of shared decision-making (as a direct result 
of family participation), and family knowledge? 
 
Evidence Summary:  
The majority of literature examining family presence on rounds is descriptive or 
observational in nature and focuses on the needs, perceptions and preferences of family 
members and healthcare providers. Studies have been conducted in the adult (46-48), pediatric 
(49, 50) or neonatal (51, 52) ICUs. In general, family members are as satisfied or slightly more 
satisfied when they participate in rounds and tend to be more in favor of family participation than 
support the traditional rounds format that excludes family members. Family members who 
participate in family-centered rounds report slightly or somewhat greater understanding and 
involvement in decision making and satisfaction with provider communication than those who do 
not. There was inconsistency in reports of greater anxiety or stress or privacy concerns related 
to participation in rounds, with some studies reporting an increase and others reporting no 
difference. No studies examined family or clinician conflict or alterations in the quality of bedside 
teaching. There is limited description to distinguish between presence and active participation 
by family members. All studies had significant limitations in the use of non-validated measures 
and single item questions of different dimensions of family experience. 
Randomized trials and observational studies assessing validated family-centered 
outcomes related to this important topic are lacking. One small single-center randomized 
crossover trial in the PICU setting compared parent (n=27) and resident (n=21) perspectives 
after rounds were randomly assigned to occur at the bedside or in the conference room for two 
consecutive mornings. Parents reported increased satisfaction with bedside rounds: increased 
understanding of what the doctor said, increased confidentiality and intimacy respected, more 
questions were answered, enough time was spent with them, their child was more respected, 
their problem was taken seriously, and increased understanding of tests and treatment plans. 
Parents preferred bedside case presentation, and 81% wished that the next case presentation 
would take place at their child’s bedside.  
Data from several small observational studies (53-56) suggest that preferences (53), 
satisfaction(54),(55)(56), involvement in asking questions and in decision making(53), support 
with decision making(56) are improved. Anxiety could theoretically increase or decrease with 
family presence on rounds compared with rounds without family presence (56). One study (57) 
found that family perceptions change over time: compared to later in the ICU stay, on the day of 
admission families understood the plan less, felt less comfortable asking questions, did not want 
bad news during rounds were more likely to be concerned about privacy and wanted more 
information after rounds.  However, since all studies reported generally high levels of 
satisfaction with traditional rounds, most of the described differences were small.  
The evidence is of low quality because the single randomized trial is of low quality as are 
the limited number of observational studies. Studies are limited by small sample sizes, 
inadequate reporting of study results, and methodological issues (crossover, lack of validated 
measures). These limited data suggest no immediate harm and there are no data on long-term 
psychological outcomes. Family members generally express a preference to have the option to 
be present. In one study (56), residents had slightly less satisfaction with bedside rounds with 
parents participating compared with parents present but not participating. There is no evidence 
to determine the relative risks, feasibility, burden or cost of family presence and participation 
during rounds compared to traditional rounds without family presence or participation. 
 
Recommendation: 
 14 
 
We suggest that family members of critically ill patients be offered the option of participating in 
interdisciplinary team rounds to improve satisfaction with communication and increase family 
engagement. (2C) 
 
Further research is needed to fully understand the best method of including family members in 
medical rounds and the impact of this on family outcomes. Further research is also needed to 
understand potential benefits and burdens and long-term effects on family outcomes 
 
 
PICO Question 1.3:  
Does family presence during resuscitation affect: family psychological symptoms, caregiver 
burden, family trust in clinicians, family satisfaction with care, family satisfaction with 
communication, family or clinician conflict? 
 
Evidence Summary:  
 
Both family members and clinicians have strong opinions about family presence during 
resuscitation efforts and several national organizations, including the Emergency Nurses 
Association (58), the American Heart Association (59), the American Association of Critical-
Care Nurses (60),  the American Academy of Pediatrics (61), the European Federation of 
Critical Care Nursing Associations,(62) the European Society of Pediatric and Neonatal 
Intensive Care (62), and the European Society of Cardiology Council on Cardiovascular Nursing 
(62, 63), have made formal statements in support of family presence during resuscitation. There 
is a large body of descriptive and qualitative literature that explores the attitudes of family 
members and clinicians about this practice. However, there are few randomized trials or 
observational studies that assess family-centered outcomes related to family presence during 
resuscitation.  
 
Numerous studies examining family member attitudes about family presence during 
resuscitation suggest a supportive attitude for this practice, and many family members express 
a desire to be present during the resuscitation of a loved one (64-74). In one study of deaths in 
the emergency department, family members of decedents reported the belief that their presence 
would have helped the patient as well as the belief that their presence during the resuscitation 
would have attenuated their grief (64). An evaluation of resuscitation in a pediatric intensive 
care unit identified similar findings, with family members who were present for resuscitation 
reporting the belief that their presence brought comfort to their child and that their presence 
helped them adjust to the loss of their child (68). Themes from the qualitative literature include 
the idea of being there for the patient, seeing firsthand what was happening during the 
resuscitation, and protecting and supporting the patient (75, 76).  
 
Support for family presence among clinicians is not consistently positive, and studies 
suggest few institutions have adopted policies regarding the presence of family members during 
resuscitation in the intensive care unit or emergency department (62, 77-79). Survey data 
suggest that nurses have a more positive outlook about family member presence during 
resuscitation compared to physicians (66, 73, 80-84). In addition, providers with limited 
experience with family presence are less supportive of this practice than those who have 
participated in resuscitation efforts that included family members (73, 85, 86). Concerns about 
family presence include the possibility of family interference with procedures, impaired staff 
performance, psychological trauma for family members, and litigation that may arise following a 
resuscitation attempt (66, 67, 80, 81, 83, 87-103). In a study assessing family-witnessed 
resuscitation in 162 UK emergency departments, 57 departments reported adverse events 
associated with family member presence (104). Adverse events included family member 
 15 
 
distress, interference with resuscitation, distracting the team, and making inappropriate 
demands on the team. Only one emergency department reported any medico-legal issues 
related to family presence during resuscitation, and none of the emergency departments that 
permitted family-witnessed resuscitation had plans to stop this practice based on adverse 
events (104). Other studies evaluating implementation of family presence programs have not 
reported interruptions in care related to family member presence (80, 105). 
 
To date, two randomized trials have addressed family presence during resuscitation in 
the emergency department (106, 107), but none have addressed this issue in the hospital-
based ICU. Both of these studies have significant limitations. The first trial only included 25 
patients undergoing resuscitation at a single center (106). The authors assessed 8 different 
family member psychological measures and did not identify any significant differences between 
witnesses of resuscitation and the control group. The other randomized trial evaluating family 
presence during resuscitation only provided descriptive data, and no quantitative comparisons 
were made between family members who witnessed resuscitation and those who did not (107).  
 
Although randomized trials in the emergency department and intensive care unit are 
lacking, research done in the out-of-hospital setting has offered some insights into family 
presence. In a cluster-randomized trial, family presence was evaluated during resuscitation of 
cardiac arrests occurring at home. Emergency medical service units (“mobile ICUs”) assigned to 
the intervention asked family members if they wished to be present at the resuscitation (108). 
Ninety days after resuscitation, enrolled relatives completed the Impact of Event Scale (IES) 
and the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) by telephone. Frequency of PTSD-
related symptoms was significantly higher in the control group than in the intervention group and 
also higher among family members who did not witness CPR compared to those who did. 
Family-witnessed resuscitation did not affect resuscitation characteristics, patient survival, or the 
level of emotional stress in the medical team (108). A study following long-term psychological 
outcomes in these family members found that at 1 year after the event, psychological distress 
was higher for those family members not offered the option to witness resuscitation: PTSD-
related symptoms, major depressive episode, and complicated grief (109).  
 
Data from existing observational studies (110, 111) do not clarify or answer remaining 
questions about family presence during resuscitation. One study enrolled 50 family members of 
patients undergoing trauma resuscitation in a single center. They found no significant 
differences in family member anxiety, satisfaction, or well-being when comparing family 
members who were present for the resuscitation to those who were not. Another study collected 
ratings of satisfaction from parents of children in a pediatric ICU and compared ratings of 
satisfaction between parents present during resuscitation compared to parents not present. 
Sixty-four parents completed the self-developed survey of parental satisfaction, and no 
significant differences in satisfaction were found when comparing parents who were present 
during resuscitation to those who were not. 
 
The role of staff in supporting family members is one important aspect of family 
presence during resuscitation that has also been left largely unaddressed in randomized trials or 
observational studies. Many institutions with policies or programs regarding family presence 
have mandated that when possible a nurse, chaplain, or other trained staff member be available 
to support family members who choose to witness resuscitation (80, 105, 112-114). The 
presence of support personnel was also included in the existing aforementioned randomized 
trials (106, 107, 109); however, the relationship between family-centered outcomes and the 
presence of a dedicated support person has not been well-described. Since most studies 
included an individual designated to provide family support, this fact should be considered in 
implementation of this intervention.  
The quality of evidence is low as existing randomized trials are of low quality or 
completed outside of the ICU setting. Studies are limited by small sample sizes, inadequate 
 16 
 
reporting of study results, and methodological issues (crossover, early termination due to lack of 
experimental concealment).  
 
Recommendation: 
We suggest family members of critically ill patients be offered the option of being present 
during resuscitation efforts, with a staff member assigned to support the family. (2C) 
 
Future research is needed to better understand the influence of family presence for 
resuscitation on patient and family outcomes and the best approach for supporting family 
presence. 
 
II. Family Support 
 
 
PICO Question 2.1: 
Among families of ICU patients, does teaching family members to participate in patient care 
affect: family satisfaction with care, family self-efficacy, or time to do not resuscitate (DNR) 
order? 
 
Evidence Summary:  
 
 
We identified two randomized trials that addressed teaching families to participate in 
care in the NICU (115, 116). Both studies evaluated satisfaction with participation and being 
provided information. One study, including 55 mothers in both the control and treatment group 
demonstrated that participation and presence in the NICU increased maternal satisfaction (116). 
The other study, (n=133), demonstrated increased satisfaction with information, written pain 
control information  , pain control information satisfaction, a sense that nurses showed the 
parent how to look for signs of pain and perform comfort techniques, but did not reduce 
maternal stress  (115). In addition, there is one randomized trial comparing standard care 
versus basic developmental care and another comparing basic developmental care versus care 
based on the Newborn Individualized Developmental Care and Assessment Program (NIDCAP) 
including behavioral observations (117). Both had sample sizes over 100. Parents of the infants 
born < 32 weeks gestational age received questionnaires after the first week of admission in the 
neonatal unit and approximately 2 weeks after the birth of their infant. Results showed no 
significant difference in parental stress with these interventions. 
 
Data from existing observational studies (118, 119) does not clarify or answer questions 
about family self-efficacy or time to DNR order. One study evaluated opinions of family 
members and desire to help with care in the ICU and 84% of families expressed a wish to be 
engaged in care (118). Another study involving 216 parents aimed to evaluate the impact of a 
national program designed to promote family-centered care in NICUs and to provide information 
and comfort to families during the NICU hospitalization of their newborn (119). Results of the 
study revealed better communication with the national program in place. 
The majority of literature examining teaching family members in the ICU to participate in 
patient care is limited to two randomized trials and several observational studies focusing mainly 
on the neonatal setting. Maternal and other family participation in providing patient care in the 
NICU is strongly correlated with increased maternal satisfaction but does not decrease stress 
for the mother. 
The quality of evidence is moderate for satisfaction. Existing randomized trials only show 
benefit for this outcome. Observational studies are limited in number and in the provided 
evidence. Family members of NICU patients express the desire to assist with care and studies 
show increased satisfaction among mothers of those patients with this intervention.  
 
 17 
 
Recommendation: 
We suggest that family members of critically ill neonates be offered the option to be taught how 
to assist with the care of their critically ill neonate to improve parental confidence and 
competence in their caregiving role and improve parental psychological health during and after 
the ICU stay. (2B) 
 
Further research concerning the benefits and limitations of family participation for care for 
children and for adult patients is needed.  
 
 
PICO Question 2.2 
 
Amongst family members of ICU patients, do training/education programs for family members 
affect family psychological symptoms; family stress; family satisfaction; family self-efficacy; and 
hospital length of stay and costs? 
Evidence Summary:  
The majority of literature examining the effect of family training/education programs is 
observational or descriptive in nature. There are three randomized trials addressing family-
centered outcomes (40-42). The types of family training/education programs vary widely in type, 
duration, and purpose and as such are difficult to compare.  
There are 7 studies addressing family psychological symptoms (primarily depression 
and anxiety) with family training/education programs. There are 3 randomized trials, one is of 
very low quality and found no effect of the training/educational intervention on family 
psychological outcome (40), while two randomized trials, one of high and one of moderate 
quality, found the COPE (Creating Opportunities for Parent Empowerment) educational program 
reduced family stress and depression (41, 42). There are also 3 observational studies (120, 
121), (122), and a secondary analysis of a randomized trial (123) all of which found reduced 
anxiety. The observational studies are of very low quality.  
Data from 4 studies address family stress with family training/education programs. There 
are two randomized trials (40, 41), a secondary analysis of a randomized trial (123), and one 
observational study (124). The three studies (40, 41, 123) used the COPE program. In 
secondary analysis of the randomized trial (123), maternal perceived stress was reduced by 
COPE training and maternal anxiety was directly associated with stress. In one randomized trial, 
the COPE training resulted in a decrease in several measures of stress (40); another study 
found the COPE training decreased stress at 2 months in but not in fathers (42). The 
observational study using an NICU education program found it reduced stress in fathers but not 
in mothers (124). The observational study and secondary analysis are very low quality, whereas 
the 2 randomized trials have high and moderate quality evidence. The results of the studies are 
conflicting with the 2 high quality studies showing reduced stress but one only in mothers and 
the other study having a small effect size. 
Data from existing observational studies address family satisfaction with family training 
or education programs. There are four observational studies with very low quality evidence. One 
study assessed a family education program, finding the intervention group had a significant 
increase in family satisfaction with small effects (125). Another study used a family education 
program and found higher satisfaction in the experimental group with small effects (121).  
Data from one randomized trial and 3 observational studies address family self-efficacy 
with family training/education programs. The observational studies (126-128) are of low quality. 
One study used a program to teach parents how to do exercises with their pre-term children and 
found the parents performed the exercises on most days (93%) and made few errors (126). A 
positive parent education program found the family was able to gain perspective on the situation 
 18 
 
and learn key concepts and find resources (127). A training program with families of children 
with tracheostomy found high satisfaction with the training (128).  
Data from existing observational studies address cost and length of stay with family 
training or education programs. One observational study reported reduced median hospital 
length of stay by 24 days after the education program (129). A cost analysis of the COPE 
training found estimated cost savings of $4864 per preterm born child with reduced hospital 
length of stay by 3.8 days (130). Both studies have very low quality of evidence. 
The overall quality of evidence is low as there are predominately observational studies 
which are of low quality and 3 randomized trials, of which one trial is of low quality and two are 
of high quality. Studies are limited by small sample sizes, inadequate reporting of study results, 
and other methodological issues. The literature suggests that family education programs may 
reduce family psychological symptoms (depression and anxiety) and family stress. These may 
increase family satisfaction and family self-efficacy and may reduce hospital length of stay and 
costs. 
 
Recommendation: 
We suggest that family education programs be included as part of clinical care as these 
programs have demonstrated beneficial effects for family members in the ICU by reducing 
anxiety, depression, post-traumatic stress and generalized stress, while improving family 
satisfaction with care. (2C) 
 
Further research is needed to understand the educational/training programs and their impact on 
family member outcomes and ICU length of stay and costs. In addition, much of the work to 
date has been done in pediatric populations; this research should be extended to adolescents 
and adults. 
 
 
PICO Question 2.3 
 
Amongst family members of ICU patients, does provision of family support such as family peer-
to-peer support, “date night”, or family respite affect family psychological symptoms like PTSD, 
and family satisfaction with care? 
Evidence Summary 
We found no studies of single interventions of date-night or respite support. There are 
four studies of a single intervention of peer-to-peer support in the neonatal ICU. Three (131-
133) are descriptive, qualitative studies of small convenience samples in a single site that 
describe perceptions of health professionals (132) or mothers (131, 133) receiving a peer-to-
peer counseling about breast feeding infants in the neonatal ICU. The mothers felt supported 
and satisfied to work with the peer counselors who had experienced themselves the difficulties 
of providing milk and breastfeeding in the neonatal ICU setting (131) and most ranked the peer 
support as most important for development of their maternal role in the neonatal ICU (133). The 
fourth descriptive study documented the utilization of peer-to-peer support provided in three 
formats: in groups, 1-to-1 at the bedside, and by telephone. Of the 477 parents (301 families) 
followed over a 2-year period, 78% consistently used only one type of peer-support (bedside). A 
minority of families using the multiple types of support used them frequently. Of the 48 parents 
who completed the survey, 92% felt that the program met their needs and would recommend 
the program to another neonatal ICU family (134)  
One small study (135) compared peer support for mothers of neonatal ICU infants at one 
site with a control group of mothers at another similar neonatal ICU site. The mothers at the site 
with peer support reported less stress at 4, less state anxiety, less depression, and more social 
 19 
 
support at 16 weeks than the mothers in the control group. 
One small retrospective comparison study of peer support as part of a package of 
interventions to integrate parents into the care of neonatal ICU infants found that 92% would 
recommend the program to others (134). The evidence available for this topic is of very low 
quality. 
These interventions, particularly peer-to-peer support, have low cost and low risk, with 
the suggestion of possible benefit. Qualitative research suggests that families value peer 
support in neonatal ICU (131-133). 
 
Recommendation: 
We suggest that peer-to-peer support be implemented in neonatal ICUs to improve family 
satisfaction, reduce parental stress, and reduce depression. (2D) 
 
There is no evidence to evaluate date-night or respite and therefore no recommendation can 
be made about those topics at this time.  
 
Further research is needed to evaluate the value of peer-to-peer support in all age groups to 
improve family-centered outcomes. Further research is also needed to evaluate family support 
options such as date-night or respite. 
 
 
 
PICO Question 2.4: 
Do written materials such as pamphlets, education materials, and bereavement materials 
targeting ICU family members improve psychological distress or communication compared to 
usual care? 
 
Evidence Summary:  
Ample evidence exists describing the many psychological, financial, and social 
challenges faced by the family members of ICU patients both during and after the period of ICU 
care (136-138). Two studies show that written materials can improve family member 
psychological distress. One randomized trial of 126 patients and their family members 
compared a bereavement brochure plus a proactive family conference to usual care finding that 
the intervention reduced PTSD, depression, and anxiety symptoms at 90 days after the patient’s 
death (4). In another randomized trial including 175 family members, a family information leaflet 
compared to usual care improved family members’ comprehension of medical information (139). 
The quality of evidence is moderate because the results of these two studies 
demonstrated large treatment effects. Since studies were relatively small, no dose-response 
relationship could be tested. In addition, the strongest study (4) included two interventions – a 
proactive family conference and a bereavement pamphlet – making it impossible to determine 
the relative effectiveness of each intervention. The benefits seem quite strong and compelling 
with no associated risk or burden for relatives and can be implemented at relatively low cost. 
 
Recommendation: 
We suggest that ICUs provide family with leaflets that give information about the ICU setting to 
reduce family member anxiety and stress. (2B) 
 
Further research is needed to examine the relative benefits of different approaches to providing 
written materials to family members. 
 
PICO Question 2.5: 
 20 
 
Among family members of ICU patients does an ICU diary program improve/affect psychological 
symptoms (PTSD, anxiety, or depression)? 
 
Evidence Summary:  
 
Ample evidence exists describing that post-ICU burden for relatives, especially in the 
form of anxiety, depression and PTSD, in the months that follow the patient’s discharge or death 
(136-138). During the patient’s stay, families have difficulty in understanding and assimilating 
information, in maintaining a connection with the critically ill patient, and they may also question 
the quality of care (140, 141). All this contributes to the development of post-ICU burden after 
patient’s discharge or death. The ICU diary is a diary that is written for the ICU patients during 
their time of critical illness. It can be written by relatives, nurses, physicians and others. Two 
randomized trials show that, in family members, receiving an ICU diary can reduce the risk of 
post-traumatic stress 3 months (142) and 12 months (143) after the patient’s discharge or 
death. The quality of evidence is low with sample sizes of 36 and 143 respectively. These trials 
are conducted in single center or included only 2 sites. Across studies, the procedure involved 
in providing the patient or family with a diary is very different. In one trial (142), the diary was 
given to the patient by a research nurse or doctor who discussed its content with the patient. In 
the other trial (144), the diary was handed to the patient as the patient left the hospital with no 
discussion. Although both trials assess the impact of the diary on post-traumatic stress 
symptoms, they do not use the same outcome scales. The limits of both trials suggest the need 
for more research such as a multicenter randomized trial to further assess the effect of a diary 
on patients’ relatives’ wellbeing. Qualitative studies show that relatives describe the benefits of 
ICU diaries (144-146). No harm has been described and relatives mostly describe improved 
communicative, emotional, and humanizing experiences including improved comprehension of 
information, connection to the patient, and trust in caregivers. No risks or burdens for relatives 
have been described (see qualitative literature: (144-146)). There is a potential time investment 
to hospitals and ICUs for development of diary programs. The overall quality of evidence for ICU 
diaries is low. 
 
Recommendation: 
We suggest that ICU diaries be implemented in the ICU to reduce family member anxiety, 
depression, and post-traumatic stress. (2C) 
 
Further research should be developed to assess the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of a 
diary on family outcomes. 
 
 
PICO Question 2.6: 
In the ICU environment, do decision support tools for families or shared decision making itself 
improve/affect communication, cost or length of stay? 
 
Evidence Summary:  
Surrogate decision makers of ICU patients face significant challenges during 
hospitalization of their loved ones. Stress, emotion, the complexity of the clinical situation, 
uncertainty, poor communication quality, and lack of social support all present barriers to good 
quality decision-making. One published paper describes a small before-after study of a written 
shared decision support aid designed for surrogate decision makers of patients with chronic 
critical illness (147). The study took place in three academic medical centers. The decision 
support tool was associated with lower clinician-family discordance about prognosis, better 
quality of communication, better medical comprehension. Hospital costs were approximately 
 21 
 
$68,000 lower in the intervention group. Quality of evidence is very low due to the small size of 
the study and the before-after design.  
 
Recommendation: 
We suggest that validated decision support tools for family members be implemented in the 
ICU setting when relevant validated tools exist to optimize quality of communication, medical 
comprehension, and reduce family decisional conflict. (2D) 
 
Further research is needed to assess the effect of a decision aid on surrogate decision makers’ 
wellbeing and the quality of decisions, as well as the important components of decision aids for 
improving outcomes.   
 
 
PICO Question 2.7: 
 
In the ICU environment, do clinician support tools targeting family support or primary palliative 
care such as checklists, worksheets and mnemonics improve family satisfaction, communication 
or psychological distress compared to usual care? 
 
Evidence Summary:  
Several studies have examined the impact of clinician support tools targeting families on 
patient-centered outcomes (75, 148, 149). One observational study examined the impact of 
implementing a bundle of interventions (ICU Quality Bundle) on family satisfaction. The ICU 
Quality Bundle was a multi-faceted educational intervention targeting improving communication 
with family members during their loved one’s admission to the ICU, and included a family 
conference at 72 hours, documentation of surrogate decision maker, and documentation of 
advanced directives, among other aspects. Eighty-six individuals in the intervention period were 
compared to 26 in the pre-intervention period. The intervention was associated with non-
statistically significant differences in family satisfaction within 72 hours from admission. Authors 
propose that non-significance was due in part to poor protocol compliance initiating conferences 
when indicated (148). Another multicenter randomized trial allocated families of ICU patients to 
a combined intervention of a bereavement packet and family conference, described above, 
focused on end-of-life care where clinicians employed the VALUE mnemonic. The intervention 
significantly reduced symptoms of PTSD, depression, and anxiety among family members at 90 
days after the patients’ death (4).  
 
The evidence is of low quality. The observationtal study was rated very low due to study 
design, although it could be very low do the imprecision of effect (148). The single randomized 
trial provided the most compelling evidence of benefit of the mnemonic VALUE. In addition to 
use of VALUE during the family conference, the intervention also included a bereavement 
packet. It is impossible to determine if the effect is attributable to the use of the mnemonic or the 
bereavement packet or both. The study was upgraded because it identified several large, and 
clinically meaningful improvements in family outcomes. Benefits seem quite strong and 
persuasive without known risk or burden for relatives and likely can be administered at very low 
costs. 
 
Recommendation: 
We suggest that, among surrogates of ICU patients who are deemed by a clinician to have a 
poor prognosis, clinicians use a communication approach, such as the mnemonic “VALUE”, 
during family conferences to facilitate clinician-family communication. (2C) 
 
 22 
 
Further research is needed to identify the most effective methods to improve communication 
with family members of critically ill patients. 
 
 
III. Evaluation of Interventions Focused on Improving Communication 
 
PICO Question 3.1: In the ICU setting, do routine interdisciplinary family conferences improve 
patient or family outcomes, including increasing family satisfaction with communication and trust 
in clinicians, and reducing conflict between clinicians and family members? 
 
Evidence Summary:  
 
 
The effect of routine interdisciplinary family conferences on family satisfaction with care 
was addressed in one observational study (150). In comparing family members of 106 patients 
from Neurological and Medical ICUs who did not participate in any formal family meetings to 
those who did participate, those who did not participate were less likely to feel completely 
satisfied with the concern and caring shown to them as family members by ICU staff. Four 
different papers conducted analyses from an observational study of 51 ICU family conferences 
showing that family satisfaction with communication during family meetings was associated with 
improved communication techniques (2 with mixed qualitative-quantitative designs (151, 152) 
and 2 with quantitative, observational designs (153, 154)). One study (153) found that an 
increased proportion of family speech during meetings was significantly associated with 
increased family satisfaction with physician communication. In another (151), there was a 
significant association between the number of empathic statements made during family 
conferences and higher degree of family satisfaction with communication. In the latter study, 
there was a dose-response gradient such that more empathic statements were associated with 
greater satisfaction.  Furthermore, specific statements were associated with increased family 
satisfaction, including assurances of non-abandonment; assurances of comfort and not 
suffering; and support for family’s decision to withdraw or not to withdraw life support (152). A 
third analysis (154) found that higher levels of shared decision making were associated with 
greater family satisfaction with communication. Findings from these studies provide indirect 
evidence that interdisciplinary family conferences, when conducted well, are associated with 
increased family satisfaction with communication.  
Quality of communication was also associated with family conferences using medical 
interpreters in three different observational studies (155-157) during which interpreters were 
used for non-English-speaking families. Alterations in interpretation (i.e., additions, omissions, 
substitutions, and editorializations) were present in 55% of communication exchanges between 
clinicians and family members (155); three-quarters were judged to have potentially significant 
consequences on conference goals, and 93% were considered negative. In addition, non-
English-speaking family members received significantly less information and support than 
English-speaking family members (157).  Another study (156) quantified examples of good 
quality of communication from qualitative content audiotaped in family conferences with 
Spanish- and English-speaking families. Overall quality of communication was found to be poor 
in both interpreted and non-interpreted ICU family meetings, but worse with Spanish-speaking 
patients.  
 
Regarding conflict, in a before-after study (158), use of a proactive interdisciplinary 
(represented by the various disciplines involved in the patient’s care) family conferences 
decreased the rate of family “non-consensus” from 1.7 to 0.09 days per patient. In an 
observational study, an increased proportion of family speech was also associated with 
decreased family ratings of conflict with clinicians (153).  
 23 
 
ICU length of stay was addressed as an outcome associated with having family 
conferences in 4 studies, 3 of which were before-after studies (158-160) and 1 of which was a 
retrospective chart review (161). In the largest and only multi-center study, there was no 
significant difference in LOS between usual care (with or without a family meeting) and a 
system-level intervention that included formal family conferences (159). However, a single-
center study of a similar intervention (158) found a significant decrease in LOS for those who 
received physician–led conferences during the “intensive communication period.” In a 4-year 
follow-up of this same study (160), the difference in LOS between the intervention groups at 
each time period was not significant. In a retrospective chart review of PICU patients, (161) 
families who had a family conference were more likely to be discharged to a “new environment” 
(e.g., if the patient had been living at home and was discharged to a long-term care facility) 
versus families who didn’t have a family conference though there were likely multiple 
confounders to this association beyond presence of a family conference. The overall quality of 
evidence for family conferences is low. There are no data to identify the most effective clinician 
participants or the most effective timing or frequency of family conferences. 
 
Recommendation: 
We suggest routine interdisciplinary family conferences be used in the ICU to improve family 
satisfaction with communication and trust in clinicians, reduce conflict between clinicians and 
family members. (2C) 
 
Further research is needed to identify the most effective and cost-effective ways to implement 
routine family conferences in the ICU setting. 
 
PICO Question 3.2: Amongst healthcare clinicians in the ICU, do specific communication 
techniques such as active listening, empathy and empathic statements, provision of supportive 
comments, language translation or cultural mediation affect family psychological symptoms, 
family satisfaction with care, communication or decision-making, physician-family conflict, or 
ICU utilization (length of stay)? 
 
Evidence Summary:  
Numerous observational studies have suggested the need for improved communication 
with family members (137, 162-167). One multicenter observational study analyzed recordings 
of 51 family conferences and published results in a series of articles (151-153). As stated in 
section 2.1, these studies showed that higher family satisfaction was associated with several 
features of high quality communication including higher proportion of family speech, increased 
empathic statements, and with specific statements of support regarding non-abandonment, 
symptom control, and support in decision-making. In addition, higher proportion of family speech 
was associated with fewer family reports of conflict with physicians. 
A before-after study of an intervention to train multidisciplinary teams of ICU clinicians in 
a standardized approach to communicating serious news using the “SPIKES” approach (Set-up, 
Perception, Invitation, Knowledge, Emotions, Summarize)(168) showed higher family 
satisfaction with decision-making in the post-intervention period(169). The study did not show 
significant improvement in overall family satisfaction in the post-intervention period. 
Review of the literature identified only one multicenter prospective randomized trial, 
which explored the impact of specific communication strategies on family-centered outcomes. 
This study (4) showed that providing relatives of patients who are dying in the ICU with a 
brochure on bereavement and using a proactive communication strategy for family conferences 
(“VALUE” --Value, Acknowledge, Listen, Understand and Elicit) resulted in longer conferences 
and more time for family members to talk. The authors found that family members in the 
 24 
 
intervention group reported fewer symptoms of PTSD, depression and anxiety 3 months after 
death in the ICU: they demonstrated a 22-27% absolute reduction in family reported symptoms 
of PTSD, depression and anxiety) (4). However, in this single study family members 
experienced very high levels of PTSD, depression, and anxiety in the control group. 
The quality of evidence is collectively low. Only one randomized trial assessed the 
outcome of a specific communication strategy on family outcomes. Its quality of evidence was 
downgraded to “low quality” due to the high level of symptoms in the control group and the 
relatively small sample size limiting statistical stability.  
 
Recommendation: 
We suggest healthcare clinicians in the ICU use structured approaches to communication such 
as that included in the “VALUE” mnemonic when engaging in communication with family 
members, specifically including active listening, expressions of empathy, and making supportive 
statements around non-abandonment and decision-making. In addition, we suggest that family 
members of critically ill patients undergoing withdrawal of life support are offered a written 
bereavement brochure to reduce family anxiety, depression and post-traumatic stress and 
improve family satisfaction with communication. (2C) 
 
Further research is needed to identify the most effective ways to improve communication with 
family members and which components of a communication strategy are most effective. 
 
 
PICO QUESTION 3.3: 
In the ICU environment, do communication-training programs for clinicians, such as education 
or simulation improve family psychological symptoms, family-rating of quality of dying, patient or 
family rated quality of communication, family satisfaction with communication, clinician self-
efficacy, or clinician psychological symptoms? 
 
EVIDENCE SUMMARY:  
Ample evidence exists describing the importance that patients and families place on 
high-quality communication in the ICU (26, 27, 170, 171). Furthermore, additional evidence 
demonstrates that poor communication can cause patient and family dissatisfaction (162-165) 
and even harm in the form of anxiety, depression, symptoms of PTSD and complicated grief  
(137, 166, 167, 172). Given the importance of high-quality staff-family communication to family-
centered outcomes, many investigators have examined communication training programs as an 
intervention to improve the quality of communication in the ICU setting. The training programs 
examined in the literature vary widely, with training interventions ranging from purely didactic to 
simulation-based. Additionally, the training programs intensity differed from a 1-hour workshop 
to a 12-month didactic series. All studies that examine the effect of training programs on 
clinician self-efficacy showed a significant improvement in clinician-reported communication 
skills and comfort with family communication training (169, 173-182). Despite this consistent 
self-reporting of improved skills and comfort with communication, only one of two studies 
examining the effect of communication training on staff anxiety demonstrated improvement in 
staff-reported anxiety with family communication (180), while the other study found no 
improvement (183). Importantly, while clinicians consistently self-report improvement in 
communication skills and comfort with communication, studies that employed more objective 
third party measurements of the quality of communication showed mixed results, with at best 
 25 
 
only modest improvements in a limited number of communication elements. Of note, the studies 
that demonstrated at least some improvement were of a longer training duration (1 to 12-
months) (173, 178, 182, 183), in contrast with a 1-hour (176) and 1-day (184) training that 
showed no improvement. Additionally, one study found that the improvement in quality of 
communication seen immediately after the training was lost at a 6-month follow-up (184).  
Only two studies examined family-reported outcomes. One of these studies found 
potential improvements in some aspects of family satisfaction with communication (frequency of 
nursing communication, frequency of physician communication, and honesty of communication 
after a training program intervention. Due to the very low quality of the evidence, it is difficult to 
draw conclusions based on this single study (169). The other study showed no significant 
improvement in patient) or family satisfaction with communication or with patient- or family-rated 
quality of end-of-life care with high quality data (185). In fact, surprisingly, this same study 
showed an increase in patient-reported depressive symptoms for those patients assigned to the 
clinician group who had received the communication training intervention. Therefore, 
educational interventions have been shown to improve clinician-reported self-efficacy in 
communication skills and comfort with family communication as well as objectively documented 
communication skills, but these interventions have not been shown to improve patient- or family-
reported outcomes. 
The quality of evidence is very low for this PICO question for several reasons. First, 
although “clinician self-efficacy” was consistently shown to improve with the intervention (often 
with a large magnitude of effect), the quality of evidence from these studies was generally 
limited due to pre-post designs with lack of non-intervention controls, relatively small study 
numbers, and use of non-validated surveys. Second, studies examining other outcomes of 
interest showed inconsistent family reported results with no clear direction of evidence.  
Intuitively, patients and families would benefit from clinicians who are well-trained in 
family-centered communication. It has been established that the risks and burdens of poor 
communication include patient and family dissatisfaction, anxiety, depression, PTSD and 
complicated grief (137, 162-167, 172). Communication training for ICU clinicians is seemingly a 
low risk intervention. Costs are unknown and may range from minimal to considerable 
depending on the nature of the training. At this time, best practices for specific communication 
training programs are not well established in the literature. 
 
Recommendation: 
Based on existing evidence of patient and family burdens associated with poor communication, 
as well as improved clinician-reported skills and comfort following communication training, we 
suggest that ICU clinicians receive family-centered communication training as one element of 
critical care training. However, no recommendation can be made to suggest the use of any of 
the specific communication training programs that have been evaluated based on existing 
evidence. (2D) 
 
Further research is needed to determine if and how communication-training programs can be 
implemented to improve patient- and family-centered outcomes. Important components of future 
research include validation of a quality of communication measurement tool for consistency of 
reported outcomes, increase in the use of family-reported outcomes as the standard for quality 
of family communication; inclusion of data on cost of implementing communication training 
programs; more long-term follow up studies since skills may dissipate over time; comparison of 
 26 
 
different communication teaching modalities such as didactic training, role-plays and simulation, 
and further investigation of possible risks to patients such as increased depression (185). 
 
, ,  , . ,   
 
IV. Evaluations of the Use of Specific Consultations and Team Members 
 
 
PICO Question 4.1: 
Among family members of ICU patients does a palliative care consultation impact ICU and 
hospital utilization? 
 
Evidence Summary:  
 
There are limited data including five very low to low quality studies that suggest that 
proactive consultation of palliative care decreases ICU and hospital length-of-stay among 
certain patients, such as patients with advanced dementia, global cerebral ischemia after 
cardiac arrest, patients with prolonged ICU stay, and patients with subarachnoid hemorrhage 
(SAH) requiring mechanical ventilation (186-190). However, one study showed no significant 
changes in ICU and hospital length of stay (189) and another showed a significant decrease in 
ICU length-of-stay but no change in hospital length-of-stay (188). Quality of the evidence is low 
as all studies used a non-randomized, before-after study design, sample sizes were relatively 
small (under 100 patients in each study arm), and there were some inconsistent results. 
Although data from different studies varied, studies showed a decrease in ICU and in hospital 
length of stay. The risks involved in this intervention, and the other interventions in these 
guidelines, are mostly in terms of costs and specifically the opportunity costs for the resources 
involved in implementation of the intervention. Increasing palliative care consults may incur a 
cost saving in ICU and hospital length of stay (191). 
 
Recommendation: 
We suggest proactive palliative care consultation be provided to decrease ICU and hospital 
length of stay among selected critically ill patients (e.g. advanced dementia, global cerebral 
ischemia after cardiac arrest, patients with prolonged ICU stay, and patients with subarachnoid 
hemorrhage requiring mechanical ventilation). (2C) 
 
Further research is needed to better understand the effective and cost-effective components of 
a palliative care consultation and to identify the patients for whom palliative care consultation is 
most beneficial.  
 
 
PICO Question 4.2: 
Among family members of ICU patients does ethics consultation impact family satisfaction or 
ICU or hospital length of stay? 
 
Evidence Summary:  
 
There are limited data reporting the effect of ethics consultation on family satisfaction, 
with only one single-center randomized trial that assessed the impact of ethics consultation on 
family satisfaction showing no significant change (192).  There are two trials in which family 
satisfaction was examined in the intervention arm but not the control arm; family satisfaction 
appeared high in both these studies (193, 194).  
 27 
 
There are 4 studies of diverse methodological quality, each testing slightly different types 
of ethics consultation in different populations for effect on length of stay (192-195). Three of the 
four studies reported shorter ICU and/or hospital length of stay among patients receiving ethics 
consultations. The effect appeared strongest in studies in which the trial involved ethics 
consultation in response to clinician-family conflict, rather than using ethics consultation 
preventatively to improve communication. An important limitation is the heterogeneity in the 
nature of the deployed intervention. The highest quality study, which randomized 551 patients, 
showed only a relatively small effect of ethics consultation on ICU length of stay (194). The 
studies that showed the greatest effect had the smallest sample size and had the greatest 
methodological weaknesses. There are financial and opportunity costs of increasing the size 
and scale of ethics consultation services in hospitals to meet the demand of the large group of 
ICU patients that would be eligible and no evidence of harm. Increasing ethics consults may 
incur a cost saving in ICU and hospital length of stay. The overall quality of evidence for ethics 
consultation is low. 
 
Recommendation: 
We suggest that ethics consultation be provided to decrease ICU and hospital length of stay 
among critically ill patients for whom there is a value-related conflict between clinicians and 
family. (2C) 
 
Further research is needed to better understand the effective and cost-effective components of 
ethics consultations and to identify the patients for whom ethics consultation is most beneficial. 
 
 
PICO Question 4.3: 
Among family members of ICU patients does a psychologist consult improve/affect family 
outcomes? 
 
Evidence Summary:  
Access to psychologists for ICU family members appears limited; psychology 
consultation service provision range from 4% in the United Kingdom (196) and United States 
(197) to 29% in Australia (198) for pediatric ICU patients. In one study of adult ICUs in Europe, 
37% of relatives had access to psychologists (172). Only three publications describing two 
interventions were considered evidence to assess the effect of psychological consultation. All 
three studies assess the effect on mothers’ symptoms in the context of pre-term neonates 
admitted to neonatal ICUs. One randomized trial compared 36 mothers supported by a 
psychologist during the infant’s hospitalization to 23 mothers receiving psychologist support and 
reading and video material dealing with specific subjects related to prematurity, affective 
mother-child connection, and care of a premature baby. The group receiving additional 
materials in this study had more favorable anxiety levels at follow up (State-Trait Anxiety 
Inventory) (199).  
Another randomized trial compared 43 mothers undergoing 6 support sessions to 62 
mothers whose 6 sessions included targeted specific psychological interventions, namely 
trauma-focused cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT). Targeted therapeutic sessions included: 
psychoeducation about PTSD, cognitive restructuring, narrative and muscle relaxation. The first 
publication (200) describes outcomes at 4-5 weeks after the birth of the pre-term infant 
compared to the time of the intervention, and the second (201) describes the maintenance of 
improved outcomes at 6 months. The targeted session improved all spheres of evaluated 
outcomes including Davidson Trauma Scale, Beck Anxiety, and Beck Depression Inventory. 
 28 
 
One small observational study has been conducted in trauma patients in the adult ICU. 
Early psychological support was associated with a nonsignificant reduction in, and depression, 
significantly reduced PTSD and increased use of psychiatric medications at one year (202).  
Quality of the evidence is very low for the study of supplementary informational material; 
it is a single study (little evidence), the timing of the intervention is not described and effect of 
intervention is not reported (study design limitation). The study of trauma-focused CBT (201) is 
low quality evidence (observational study, single center, small numbers). The greatest 
improvement was found in the mothers that were the most distressed (and thus the most likely 
to not be functional in their parental role).  
Uncertain benefit, low cost and low risk were noted in the study describing the provision 
of additional informational materials. 
 
Recommendation: 
We suggest a psychologist’s intervention be provided to specifically incorporate a multimodal 
cognitive behavioral technique (CBT)-based approach to improve outcomes in mothers of pre-
term babies admitted to the NICU. Furthermore, we suggest that targeted video and reading 
materials be provided in the context of psychological support to mothers of pre-term babies 
admitted to the ICU. (2D) 
 
Further research testing the impact of psychological support in adult and pediatric populations, 
and larger studies in the pre-term neonatal population are needed.  
 
 
PICO Question 4.4: 
Among family members of ICU patients does a social work consultation impact family 
satisfaction? 
 
Evidence Summary:  
One large randomized trial involving 873 (203) assessed the value of a social worker to 
provide support for family members; one small observational trial addressed the effect social 
workers have on family satisfaction (204). The trial showed a non-significant improvement in 
satisfaction with, satisfaction with the amount of information provided, or satisfaction with 
involvement in decision making. In the observational study the presence of social workers 
independently predicted increased family satisfaction. Quality of the evidence is very low as 
there is only the single randomized trial and a small, very low quality observational study. The 
cost of utilizing social workers in this way is not known and would depend in part upon whether 
they are already available in the ICU. 
 
Recommendation: 
We suggest social workers be included within an interdisciplinary team to participate in family 
meetings in order to improve family satisfaction. (2D) 
 
Further research is necessary to evaluate outcomes associated with social worker interventions. 
 
PICO Question 4.5: 
Among family members of ICU patients does a navigator (care coordinator or communication 
facilitator) improve family anxiety, depression, post-traumatic stress, family satisfaction, family 
or clinician conflict or resource utilization? 
 
Evidence Summary:  
 29 
 
One moderate quality study suggests a navigator may decrease psychological 
symptoms in family members (205). This randomized trial assessed the effect of communication 
facilitators, trained to identify and support family members’ communication styles and to identify 
and mediate conflict, who met with family members regularly in the ICU (and 24 hours post 
discharge) to support communication between the family and the ICU team. This intervention 
was associated with a reduction in depression severity, among family members at 6 months, 
albeit with limited follow-up(205). There was no significant reduction in anxiety or PTSD at 3 or 6 
months (205). Another study assessed limited (1-2 visit) nurse liaison involvement aimed 
specifically family anxiety related to ICU-ward transfer; the intervention did not alter state-trait 
anxiety inventory scores at 3 months (206).  
Two publications derived from the same study address physician and nursing 
communication and satisfaction with that communication by families (207, 208). Families and 
staff were surveyed before and after integrating a family support coordinator (a nurse with ICU 
experience and psychological/social work training) assigned to families of patients who were 
expected to require ICU care for 5 days or were at high risk of death; the coordinator’s role 
included identifying information needs, clarifying medical information, assisting in decision-
making, organizing meetings with relevant team members, and relaying family needs to the 
team. Family members rated physician communication, social work communication, and 
respiratory care communication but not nursing communication more favorably after the 
involvement of a family support coordinator. Perception of family/physician conflict did not 
change from 'before' to 'after' the intervention of a family support coordinator.  
The single randomized trial of communication facilitators in the ICU found a reduction in 
ICU costs among all patients and decedents. The intervention reduced ICU and hospital length of 
stay among. (205). In another before and after study, changes of ICU length of stay and ICU 
costs after the introduction of a family support coordinator did not achieve statistical 
significance. The analysis was not stratified by patient mortality (207). 
The quality of the evidence is low for navigator impact on family psychological 
symptoms; the single randomized trial appears to improve family outcomes in terms of 
depression at 6 months, but had substantial loss to follow-up. The two studies addressing 
satisfaction were before/after design, and suffer from the imprecision of small numbers. The 
quality of evidence for evaluating resource utilization is moderate, as the data from a single 
randomized trial showed substantial reductions in ICU and hospital length of stay (among 
decedents only), and costs of care. The second study showed a similar trend but with no 
statistical difference in costs. Observational data suggest that timely (i.e. earlier) discussion of 
prognosis is essential to allow family members to prepare emotionally and logistically for the 
possibility of a patient's death (5). Potential benefits include satisfaction with physician 
communication, decreased family depression, and decreased length of stay, at potentially 
moderate personnel cost if hiring a family support coordinator is required. 
 
Recommendation: 
We suggest that family navigators (care coordinator or communication facilitator) be assigned 
to families throughout the ICU stay to improve family satisfaction with physician communication, 
decrease psychological symptoms, and reduce costs of care and length of ICU and hospital 
stay. (2C) 
 
Further research is needed to examine the most effective and cost effective approach to training 
and implementing navigators, identify patients and family members most likely to benefit, and 
describe any potential adverse outcomes associated with navigators interacting with families.  
 
 
PICO Question 4.6: 
 30 
 
Among families of ICU patients, does routine consultation of a spiritual care provider improve 
outcomes? 
 
Evidence Summary:  
Many families express that they value spiritual care (26, 209, 210) and the availability of 
a spiritual advisor or clergy (211-213). Spiritual care has been identified as a core element of 
palliative care (18). The Joint Commission requires that patients receive a spiritual assessment 
(PC.01.02.01.04), that hospitals provide care that accommodates spiritual end-of-life needs 
(PC.02.02.13.01) and that patients have a right to spiritual and religious services (RI.01.01.09) 
(214). 
Many families interact with spiritual care providers during a patient’s ICU stay (215). In 
one study, patients on telemetry units were visited by chaplains, and perceived their 
interventions as helpful (216). No evidence exists comparing the intervention of a spiritual care 
provider versus standard care for patient and family outcomes. One observational study 
describes the types of activities spiritual care providers engage in, and found that, for families 
that interacted with spiritual care providers, increased overall family satisfaction with ICU care 
was associated with discussions about the patient’s wishes for end-of-life care and a greater 
number of spiritual care activities performed (215). In another observational study in which 
family members (n=356) were surveyed about spiritual care, family members had greater 
satisfaction with spiritual care if a spiritual advisor or pastor was involved within 24 hours of the 
patient’s death (217). Provision of spiritual care and satisfaction with the ICU experience were 
strongly correlated (217). A before-after study described the involvement of a comprehensive 
support care team, which included a chaplain, and resulted in a decrease in intensity of care, as 
assessed by the average Therapeutic Intervention Scoring System (TISS) for patients (218).  
Collectively the evidence is very low quality as no studies provided a control group and 
interventions did not consist solely of involvement of a spiritual care provider. There is probable 
benefit with low risk of harm. Additional costs may be incurred in settings where spiritual care 
providers are not already available. 
 
Recommendation: 
Given the consistency of expression of family values for availability of spiritual care, the 
accreditation standard requirements, and the association with increased satisfaction, we 
suggest that families be offered spiritual support from a spiritual advisor or chaplain. (2D) 
 
Further research testing the impact of a spiritual care provider on patient and family outcomes is 
needed. The best method for provision of spiritual support has not been studied and warrants 
further investigation. 
 
 
V. Operational and Environmental Issues 
 
 
PICO Question 5.1: 
In the ICU environment, do protocols for withdrawing life support improve outcomes? 
 
Evidence Summary:  
Only four articles were found that specifically addressed the use of protocols for 
withdrawal of life support (149, 219-221) Of these, three directly addressed withdrawal of life 
support (149, 219, 220) while one (221) addressed the impact of a protocol on sedation and 
 31 
 
analgesia use.  The first three studies addressed only the documentation of protocol use. No 
measures of family satisfaction were directly obtained, although one study showed high levels of 
clinician satisfaction(221) This study evaluated the use of a protocol for sedation and analgesia 
in a before-after study design showing increased use of sedation and analgesia without 
hastening. High levels of clinician satisfaction were reported with the protocol, supporting the 
use of a protocol for managing patient symptoms.   
 
The evidence on protocols for withdrawal of life support is of low quality. Only one study, 
a before-after design (221), examined outcomes demonstrating that protocols led to increased 
use of sedation and analgesia without affecting time to death or ICU LOS. Quality of dying and 
death was not significantly improved. The benefits of a protocol potentially optimizing sedation 
and analgesia are persuasive. Although family outcomes have not been explicitly examined in 
existing studies, family burden of poor withdrawal of life support caused us to include this 
recommendation.  
 
Recommendation: 
We suggest that protocols be implemented to ensure adequate and standardized use of 
sedation and analgesia during withdrawal of life support. (2C) 
 
Further research is needed to assess the effect of protocols for withdrawing life support on 
patient- and family-centered outcomes.  
 
 
PICO Question 5.2:  
Does the inclusion of nurses in ICU communication about decision making about the goals of 
care improves family-centered outcomes?  
 
Evidence Summary:  
While nurses are ubiquitous and integrally involved in all aspects of ICU care, this 
question searches whether or not specifically including nurses in communication about decision-
making about the goals of care improves communication will improve family outcomes. In the 
ICU, inclusion of nurses in decision making may improve family-centered outcomes such as 
quality of communication, quality of care, family satisfaction with care, and conflict. The majority 
of literature examining the inclusion of nurses in ICU decision-making is descriptive or 
qualitative in nature (174, 222-225). These studies were conducted in adult, pediatric, and 
neonatal ICUs and focused on the quality of communication, quality of care, and family 
satisfaction with care.  
In general, studies of initiatives to include nurses in decision making situations were pre- 
and post-intervention survey designs or descriptions of existing practice. There are no 
randomized trials on this topic. No standard intervention was used and therefore no specific 
training or involvement of nurses can be recommended. Nevertheless, the need for efforts to 
improve quality of communication is evident.  
Two studies provide informative evaluations of interventions to increase nursing 
involvement in decision-making about the goals of ICU care. One single-unit study compared 
patients exposed to a multi-professional care communication team including clinical nurse 
specialists (along with unit-wide palliative care training) with patients who received standard 
practice. A statistically significant decrease in ICU length of stay and hospital length of stay and 
total costs of care (225) were described with the intervention. A small, single-unit study of 15 
patients used a single nurse trained as a family support specialist finding that families and 
physicians reported improvements in the quality of communication and patient-centeredness 
(226). 
 32 
 
Quality of evidence is very low due to the limitations of the two relevant studies. While 
both report empiric evidence, the studies used before-after rather than randomized designs. 
Both had a relatively small sample of clinicians (e.g. physicians, nurses, therapists) and patients 
and did not attempt to adjust for confounding or other influences. The first study used unit-wide 
palliative care education and therefore the impact of each intervention alone (nursing 
involvement versus education) is unknown (225). The second (226) was conducted in a single 
unit, included only 15 patients, and relied on a single nurse interventionist. Therefore, it is 
unknown whether this result would be generalizable. No studies currently exist that examine the 
impact of such an intervention on family-reported outcomes other than family satisfaction with 
communication. One study suggested decreased ICU and hospital length of stay. There are 
limited data to estimate the relative risks, feasibility, burden or costs. 
 
Recommendation: 
We suggest that nurses be involved in decision-making about goals of care and trained to 
provide support for family members of critically ill patients as part of an overall program to 
decrease ICU and hospital length of stay and to improve quality of communication in the ICU. 
(2D) No recommendation can be made regarding decision-making due to lack of supporting 
evidence.  
 
Further research is needed to examine the potential benefits of nursing involvement in ICU 
decision-making for family as well as clinician outcomes. 
 
 
PICO Question 5.3: 
Does a comprehensive “family-centered care” approach to ICU care improve family-centered 
outcomes during critical illness? 
 
Evidence Summary:  
Some ICUs have instituted procedures and policies meant to improve the unit’s entire 
approach to family-centered critical care. These policies are intended to shift the paradigm of 
critical care away from paternalistic or hierarchical care and toward an approach that integrates 
families as care partners in the ICU (227). Limited empiric evidence exists evaluating the effect 
of the comprehensive programs on outcomes important to families. One study developed and 
implemented a Family Support System in a single neonatal ICU that consisted of three 
components: (1) new policies regarding flexible family presence at the beside, unit 
communication, and team rounding promoting family involvement, (2) identification and referral 
of parents at high risk of psychosocial distress to social workers, and (3) a post-ICU stay home 
care visitation program (228). The authors sought to measure the effects on parental 
hypervigilance and anxiety, using hospital resource utilization as the primary outcome. There 
were 80 patients included in the control (pre-intervention) arm and 90 patients who received the 
intervention. Following introduction of the programmatic and policy changes, there was a 
reduction in hospital readmission days. A second study created and implemented a hospital-
wide program intended to emphasize the importance of family members and to change policies 
to allow families to participate more fully in care (229). This included education of family 
members on their role, 24-hour family presence, and encouraging families to participate in 
bedside care. Family members could elect to participate in the program. The authors measured 
satisfaction with the program, with over 84% of participants reporting that it made the hospital 
stay more or much more positive. There was no reported comparison of overall satisfaction with 
care among those family members who did or did not participate. 
 33 
 
The quality of evidence is very low due to study design limitations and the data is limited 
to quality improvement project assessments. Both studies have limited generalizability as they 
were conducted within a single center and among a limited population of patients. One study 
used a pre- and post-implementation design (228) and the other did not compare the 
participating family members with a control group (229).  
There is potential for burden on staff and family members, and the intervention is 
potentially costly depending on extent of program components, but there are unlikely to be 
important risks other than the opportunity costs. 
 
Recommendation:  
We suggest hospitals implement policies to promote family-centered care in the ICU to improve 
family experience. (2C) 
 
Further research is needed to examine the effect of hospital and ICU policies designed to 
promote family-centered care. Additionally, future research should identify specific program 
components that drive improvements in family-centered outcomes. 
 
 
PICO Question 5.4:  
In the ICU do noise reduction strategies, private rooms or space for family members (beyond 
single rooms for patients) affect patient/family satisfaction, staff stress or noise? 
 
Evidence Summary:  
Ample evidence exists that noise levels are high in the ICU and negatively affect patient 
outcomes (32, 230-235). However, a paucity of data exists evaluating the effect of noise 
reduction on family-centered outcomes. Of the literature reviewed, only one study addressed 
family satisfaction with care associated with noise reduction (236). This randomized trial of co-
bedding multiple-gestation infants in the neonatal ICU versus bedding single infants alone 
(infants n=37, parents n=19) resulted in a statistically significant increase in parent affirmations 
of the questionnaire item “attempts were made to create a quiet environment for my baby” that 
was one component of a Family Satisfaction Score.  
          Single family rooms are associated with noise reduction, as well as greater family and 
patient privacy. In a study comparing family attitudes towards single family rooms compared to 
an open bay ward neonatal ICU design, families had increased satisfaction in several areas. 
These were in response to the questions “parent comfortable visiting”, “privacy for bonding”, and 
“could control light”. Noise levels were 20 decibels higher in the open ward ICU (237). 
The majority of literature examining space for family members is descriptive or 
qualitative in nature and limited to single-center studies. The focus of this work is the needs and 
impact on the family members and clinical staff satisfaction. Two descriptive survey studies 
included evaluation of the psychological symptoms of families using previously validated tools 
(sleep disturbance, Beck anxiety index and fatigue scales). While these described fatigue, lack 
of sleep, and anxiety among family members, they did not measure the impact of improvements 
in ICU design or space for family (238, 239).  
Five additional studies attempt to provide information on ICU design using pre- and post-
design. One study evaluated three physical design layouts of a neonatal ICU using focus groups 
(240) of parents with surviving infants (n=5) and staff (n=11) of the unit. Designs studied 
included open space (multiple infants in a single, large room without parent beds), modified 
room (a curtained space for each infant that included a parent bed) and smaller room designs (a 
private room with a parent bed for each infant). The focus groups suggested that the smaller 
 34 
 
room design promoted bonding between parent and infant, led to better comprehension of 
illness among parents, and allowed healthcare providers to meet healthcare needs. 
These findings were supported by other studies comparing an open bay and single family 
room in a neonatal ICU. A pre-post study measured baseline, 6 and 12-month family member and 
staff reaction to change to a single family room from open bay. Families of long-term stay infants 
in single family rooms were more likely to report privacy for bonding with the infant and control of 
lighting; surrogate markers for satisfaction. However, over 30 other surrogate outcomes were 
evaluated with non-significant results. There was also inconsistency in staff results at one year. 
For instance, there was a significant improvement in staff willingness to help each other but the 
work was reported as more physically demanding. Another study used similar methods, surveying 
staff members (n=67) and family members (n=85) longitudinally prior to and following a move 
from an open bay neonatal ICU to one with private rooms. Following the move to the single family 
room, family satisfaction related to design significantly improved, including perception of privacy 
at 6 months and 1 year and the opportunity to interact with other families (241). Of the clinician 
outcomes of interest to these guidelines, there was no long-term effect on staff stress. 
Another pre-post relocation design study interviewed 103 hospitalized patients and 
families prior to and after a move to assess satisfaction with the new environment, namely 
privacy, space, noise, light and atmosphere. Additionally, the investigators used Hospital 
Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems (HCAHPS) and Press Ganey 
survey questions specific to environment to explore similar issues. The interviews revealed that 
the privacy of room, room size, and bathroom were key features that led to improved patient 
satisfaction. Areas of dissatisfaction included noise, lighting systems, television controls and 
chairs. The survey data revealed that there were improvements in satisfaction with every aspect 
of the environment of care following the relocation (231).  
Study design and scope substantially limit the application of findings to other settings. 
There are no randomized trials of the effect of design changes or space for family members on 
family-centered outcomes. All studies are limited to a single center with small sample sizes and 
a narrow patient population. Most of this work has been described as quality improvement 
assessment rather than research.  
Given the benefits of ICU noise reduction for patient clinical outcomes (e.g. delirium), 
noise should be addressed in all ICUs. There is a significant cost associated with building 
private rooms. However, building new ICUs private rooms are advocated by ACCM/SCCM for a 
variety of reasons (including infection control), only one of which is family-centered care 
outcomes (242), so the cost may be justified given the multiple benefits. The data available 
suggest harm in the form of staff stress that needs to be managed with a change from open bay 
neonatal ICUs to private rooms. There is no evidence to determine the relative risks, feasibility, 
burden or justification of cost of additional bedside space for family members. The overall 
quality of evidence for noise reduction strategies is very low.  
Recommendation: 
Given evidence of harm related to noise, although in the absence of evidence for specific 
strategies, we suggest ICUs implement noise reduction and environmental hygiene practices 
and use private rooms to improve patient and family satisfaction. (2D) No recommendation 
can be made for family space. However, it is noted that the SCCM/ACCM Guidelines for ICU 
design recommend designing new ICUs with family space based upon consensus statement 
(242).  
 
 35 
 
Further research is needed evaluating the effect on family-centered outcomes of interventions to 
reduce noise or improve the ICU environment in the ICU. Further research is also needed 
regarding the impact on outcomes of private rooms and family space and the effect of private 
rooms on family-centered outcomes. 
 
 
PICO Question 5.5: 
Do executive (hospital leadership) walk rounds improve family-centered outcomes in the ICU? 
 
Evidence Summary:  
Increased presence of hospital leadership in the form of executive walk rounds in the 
physical space of the ICU has been considered as a method of improving outcomes important 
to family members (243-246). Two primary investigations specifically measure the effect of such 
executive walk rounds on clinician burnout. Both of these articles demonstrated no clear 
evidence that executive walk rounds increases or decreases clinician burnout in small samples 
with design limitations preventing clear conclusions (245, 246). 
Quality of evidence is very low due to limitations in the design of the two studies. One 
study used a pre/post design that included a small sample of clinicians and did not attempt to 
adjust for confounding. The executive walk rounds were merely one component of what the 
authors describe as a “comprehensive unit-based safety plan.” Similarly, the second study 
examines surveys of clinicians in a convenience sample of 44 neonatal ICUs. Participants 
reported their exposure to executive walk rounds. Executive walk rounds were not prospectively 
tested nor could the authors account fully for other cultural or policy variations among ICUs. No 
studies currently exist that examine the impact of such an intervention on family-reported 
outcomes.  
These limits suggest that there is a need for more research that tests executive walk 
rounds in a randomized trial, ideally on a multi-center scale and testing family-reported 
outcomes. Treatment effects are not reported in the literature. There is a potential for high 
burden to hospital leadership. 
 
No recommendation can be made due to lack of supporting evidence.  
 
Further research testing executive walk rounds on family-reported outcomes is needed. 
 
 
PICO Question 5.6: 
Does consistency in staffing improve family-centered outcomes during critical illness? 
 
Evidence Summary:  
Continuity of care in the ICU is defined as the establishment of a continuous caring 
relationship between the medical care team and the patient and family members, typically 
measured by the number of professionals who primarily care for the patient over a given period 
of time (247, 248). Two studies tested the effect of aspects of this continuity of care on family 
satisfaction with communication or ICU length of stay (247, 249, 250). One study introduced a 
care model emphasizing consistency of care for long-term pediatric patients in a single ICU in a 
pre- and post-intervention design (249). The authors found that the chronic care nursing model 
resulted in improvements in the opportunity for parents to participate in the plan of care (28% v. 
100%, p=0.019) and in the parents’ view of the relationship with the ICU staff (57% v. 100%, 
p=0.008), based on surveys among 33 parents. An observational study of 292 pediatric ICU 
patients of a single unit, calculated an index of continuity of nursing care based on the ratio of 
 36 
 
the total number of nurses assigned to the patient over each week. The authors examined the 
association between this index and ICU length of stay, adjusting for patient characteristics such 
as severity of illness, and finding that patients with the highest quartile of discontinuity had 
shorter ICU stays as compared to those with the highest quartile of continuity (Hazard 
Ratio=0.12, 95% CI=0.05-0.31). This finding was unexpected and may be due to confounding 
by unmeasured patient characteristics (247). 
Quality of evidence is low due to study design limitations and inconsistency of results. 
These two studies all have limited generalizability as they were each conducted within a single 
ICU. The studies also did not show a consistent trend towards or away from improvements in 
the selected outcomes with increased continuity. There is likely low risk associated with 
interventions increasing staffing, but it is difficult to assess the overall cost or burden associated 
with these interventions. 
 
No recommendation can be made due to lack of supporting evidence.  
 
Further research is needed to examine the effect of nurse and physician staffing consistency on 
family-centered outcomes. 
 
PICO Question 5.7: 
Among family members of ICU patients, does providing a surface for sleep improve family 
psychological symptoms, quality of life, satisfaction with care, caregiver burden, family or 
clinician conflict, satisfaction with communication, self-efficacy, trust in clinicians, conferences, 
quality of communication, or time to DNR? 
Evidence Summary:  
Multiple studies find striking levels of sleep-deprivation and sleep-associated morbidity 
among family members in the ICU. These observational studies utilized both qualitative (251-
254) and validated, objective measurements (238, 239, 255-257). The need for access to a 
location for sleep is a theme expressed by families of the critically ill (252). Indirect evidence 
informs us that provision of facilities for napping and allowing on-demand naps increases sleep 
and reduces fatigue among medical staff on call in the hospital (258). Napping in a bed reduces 
driving errors (259) and also relieves pain hypersensitivity resulting from sleep deprivation 
(260).  
 
Families in the ICU suffer significant sleep deprivation and related morbidity. Napping 
increases daily sleep duration, reduces fatigue, reduces errors, and reduces pain (in non-family, 
non-ICU populations). Provision of a surface for napping may reduce morbidity among family 
members, though no studies have been conducted to evaluate the effect of providing a sleep 
surface on family health. There is a cost to purchasing or building sleep surfaces/space. Given 
that families desire presence, and there is clear evidence of harm (sleep deprivation) the risk 
benefit analysis suggests that a sleep surface for families should be provided. The quality of 
evidence is collectively very low. 
Recommendation:  
We suggest that family sleep be considered and families are provided a sleep surface to 
reduce the effects of sleep deprivation. (2D) 
Further research is indicated to determine outcomes related to provision of a family sleep 
surface, sleep space, napping, and/or light therapy and sleep in the ICU environment.  
 
 37 
 
 
Work tools 
Clinicians and healthcare organizations may use these strategies to develop 
individualized interventions and programs to improve family-centered care in their own ICUs. 
Tools to enhance translation of the research highlighted in these guidelines into clinical practice 
are also provided on the Society of Critical Care Medicine (SCCM) website (www.sccm.org) and 
as an electronic supplement. Work tools supporting these guidelines are also available as 
electronic supplement Appendix E. Additional work tools are under construction and as 
available will be posted to the sccm.org website. Finally, a gap analysis tool is being developed 
by SCCM to support translation of recommendations into practice. Electronic supplement table 
6 is also offered as a starting point. Recommendations in Electronic supplement table 6 are 
summarized in order of ranked importance of outcomes. Organizations and clinicians may 
prioritize staged implementation based upon the importance of outcomes, perceived barriers 
and resources at hand. 
 
Limitations  
These guidelines have important limitations that should be acknowledged.  First, all 23 
recommendations in these guidelines were weak recommendations, reflecting the relatively low 
quality of evidence regarding interventions to improve family-centered care. The fact that all 
recommendations were weak highlights the newness of this field of research and the 
importance of future research to identify the most effective interventions to improve this 
important aspect of ICU care. Future research is needed that examines the benefits and risks of 
family presence and participation in ICU settings for patients, families, staff, and clinicians. 
Quantifying the benefits of partnership with families and the impact on patient outcomes is also 
needed. Furthermore, research in this area will require additional work to develop, validate, and 
disseminate rigorous family-centered outcome measures incorporating diverse domains such as 
satisfaction with care, quality of communication, and quality of decision-making. Second, 
although we used the qualitative literature to support the generation of topics important to 
patients and families, and validated topics and importance of outcomes through survivors and 
families, our pool of patient and family informants was small. Future guidelines writing teams 
should consider recruiting key patient or family members as co-authors.  Furthermore, 
guidelines writing teams should consider implementing focus groups or key informant interviews 
serially to validate the progress of the writing team over time. Fourth, although we identify 23 
recommendations that we suggest ICUs consider implementing, we found no comparative 
effectiveness studies that can help identify the most effective interventions and it would be 
impractical to try to implement all 23 recommendations in a single ICU. Therefore, it will be 
important that the clinicians and administrators in individual ICUs identify a strategy for staging 
implementation according to priorities and available resources. Finally, because of the low level 
of evidence, it is premature to create accreditation or reimbursement standards from the 
recommendations. However, we offer the suggested recommendations as best known practice 
given the evidence available today.  
 
Summary 
The primary goal of these guidelines is to identify best practices for family-centered care 
in the ICU based on existing evidence. These guidelines were developed using a rigorous, 
objective, and transparent assessment of the relevant published evidence with use of the 
GRADE methodology. After a systematic review of the literature, the recommendations were 
developed by taking into consideration not only the quality of the evidence, but also important 
clinical outcomes and the values and preferences of diverse ICU stakeholders, including 
patients and family members. The recommendations provide a summary of best practices as 
identified by existing evidence to form internal policy related to supporting families in the ICU. 
 38 
 
Communication, clinician and family training, family presence, involvement and engagement, 
provision of consultative resources and environmental and organizational processes are all 
elements to consider when building an optimal program of family-centered care in the ICU. 
 
 
 
 39 
 
 
Electronic Table 1: Themes from Qualitative Literature 
Patient Family Themes 
Clinician Themes 
Communication 
Communication 
Presence 
Presence 
Relationship based care 
Relationship based care 
Adaptation/Sensemaking 
Adaptation/Sensemaking 
Operational/Organizational 
Operational/Organizational 
End of life care 
End of life care 
Environment 
Environment 
Individualized care 
Individualized care 
Maintaining Family Integrity 
Staff Consequences 
 
 
 
 40 
 
Electronic Supplement Table 2: Outcomes of interest and importance. 7-10 high, 4-6 moderate, 
0-3 low.  
OUTCOME
OUTCOME 
AVERAGE 
AVERAGE CLINICIAN 
CLINICIAN RATING 
RATING 
(0
(0-10)
10) 
(Highest rating most important)
(Highest rating most important) 
AVERAGE 
AVERAGE FAMILY 
FAMILY RATING 
RATING 
(0
(0-10)
10) (n=7)
(n=7) 
(Highest rating most important)
(Highest rating most important) 
Family Psychological Symptoms (Depression, 
Anxiety, PTSD, Prolonged/complicated grief, 
Fatigue, PICS) 
9.62 
9.29 
 
 
 
Family Quality of Life 
8.22 
9.14 
 
 
 
Family Quality of Dying/Ratings of Dying 
8.15 
8.43 
 
 
 
Caregiver (family) Burden 
8.04 
8.71 
 
 
 
Family Decisional Regret 
7.85 
8.43 
 
 
 
Quality of Communication or Family Conference 
7.67 
9.29 
 
 
 
Family Trust in Clinicians 
7.66 
9.29 
 
 
 
Family Conferences (#/% receiving conferences, 
Time to family conferences 
7.59 
9.00 
 
 
 
Family Impact - integrity (Divorce rates, Bonding) 
7.37 
7.14 
 
 
 
Family Satisfaction with Care 
7.33 
9.43 
 
 
 
Family Satisfaction with Communication 
7.33 
9.14 
 
 
 
Family Self-Efficacy 
6.93 
8.71 
 
 
 
Family or Clinician Conflict 
6.70 
8.00 
 
 
 
Clinician Quality of Dying/Rating of Dying 
6.30 
7.85 
 
 
 
ICU and Hospital Utilization (ICU LOS, ICU costs, 
Hospital LOS, Hospital costs, Intensity of care, 
TISS) 
6.22 
7.71 
 
 
 
Clinician Self-Efficacy  
5.59 
9.00 
 
 
 
Clinician Psychological Symptoms  (Depression, 
Anxiety, PTSD, Burnout, Compassion Fatigue, 
Moral Distress) 
5.52 
9.00 
 
 
 
Time to DNR Order 
5.15 
6.57 
 
 
 
Clinician Job Satisfaction 
5.00 
8.71 
 
 
 
Quality of Teaching 
5.00 
9.14 
 
 
 
Clinician Retention or Intent to Leave Job 
4.63 
7.57 
 
 
 
 41 
 
Clinician Time 
4.30 
7.71 
 
 
 
Adherence to Policy/Protocols 
4.07 
8.71 
 
 
 
Clinician fear of litigation 
2.81 
7.14 
 
 
 42 
 
Electronic Supplement Table 3: Voting Results 
Family Centered-Care Guideline Voting Summary 
Family Presence 
Question 1.1 In the critical care environment, does open flexible visiting hours affect family satisfaction?    
Quality of 
Evidence  
Very Low  
  
  
Recommendation 
We suggest that, given the value family members place on presence, dissatisfaction 
associated with restricted presence and benefit of engagement associated with presence, 
We suggest that family members of critically ill patients be offered open flexible visiting that 
meets their needs while supporting staff through the stress imposed by family presence 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
Weak Recommendation  
Task Force Voting  
Agree  
Disagree  
Abstain  
Votes 
24 
1 
2 
Percentages  
88% 
  
  
Question 1.2 In the critical care or emergency department environment, does family presence during interdisciplinary team 
rounds affect: Family psychological symptoms, Family trust in clinician, Family satisfaction with and preferences for care, 
Family satisfaction with and preferences for communication, Family or clinician conflict, Quality of teaching, Family 
participation in rounds, Degree of shared decision-making (as a direct result of family participation), Family knowledge?  
Quality of 
Evidence  
Low 
Quality  
  
  
Recommendation 
We suggest that family members of critically ill patients be offered the option of participating 
in interdisciplinary team rounds, but that further research is needed to understand potential 
benefits and burdens and long-term effects on family outcomes. 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
Weak Recommendation  
Task Force Voting  
Agree  
Disagree  
Abstain  
Votes 
26 
  
1 
Percentages  
96% 
  
  
Question 1.3 In the critical care or emergency department environment, does family presence during resuscitation affect: 
Family psychological symptoms, caregiver burden, family trust in clinician, family satisfaction with care, family satisfaction 
with communication, family or clinician conflict?  
Quality of 
Evidence  
Low 
Quality  
  
  
Recommendation 
We suggest that family members of critically ill patients be offered the option of being 
present during resuscitation efforts. 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
Weak Recommendation  
 43 
 
Task Force Voting  
Agree  
Disagree  
Abstain  
Votes 
26 
1 
  
Percentages  
96% 
  
  
Family Support  
Question 2.1 Amongst families of ICU patients, does teaching family members to participate in patient care affect: Family 
satisfaction with care, Family self-efficacy, Time to DNR order?  
Quality of 
Evidence  
Moderate    
  
Recommendation 
We suggest that family members of critically ill patients be offered the option to be taught 
how to assist with the care of their loved ones. 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
Weak Recommendation  
Task Force Voting  
Agree  
Disagree  
Abstain  
Votes 
27 
  
  
Percentages  
100% 
  
  
Question 2.2 Amongst family members of ICU patients do training/education programs for family members affect: Family 
psychological symptoms; Family stress; Family satisfaction; reduce health care costs; Family self-efficacy; and reduce hospital 
length of stay and costs?  
Quality of 
Evidence  
Low  
  
  
Recommendation  
We suggest that family education programs be included as part of clinical care as these 
programs have demonstrated beneficial effects for family members in the ICU. 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
Weak Recommendation  
Task Force Voting  
Agree  
Disagree  
Abstain  
Votes 
24 
2 
2 
Percentages  
88% 
  
  
Question 2.3 Amongst family members of ICU patients, does provision of family support such as “Date night” or family respite 
or family peer-to-peer support affect: family psychological symptoms like PTSD, family satisfaction with care?   
Quality of 
Evidence  
Very Low  
  
  
Recommendation 
We suggest peer-to-peer support be implemented to improve family satisfaction, parental 
stress and depression. It is not known whether peer-to-peer support would be effective in 
the adult population 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
Weak Recommendation  
Task Force Voting  
Agree  
Disagree  
Abstain  
 44 
 
Votes 
27 
  
1 
Percentages  
100% 
  
  
Question 2.4 Do written materials such as pamphlets, education materials, and bereavement materials targeting ICU family 
members improve outcomes compared to usual care?  
Quality of 
Evidence  
Low 
Quality  
  
  
Recommendation 
We suggest that ICUs provide family with information leaflets that give information about 
the ICU setting 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
Weak Recommendation  
Task Force Voting  
Agree  
Disagree  
Abstain  
Votes 
25 
  
2 
Percentages  
92% 
  
  
Question 2.5 Among family members of ICU patients does an ICU diary program improve/affect psychological symptoms 
(PTSD, Anxiety, Depression)?   
Quality of Evidence  
Low 
Quality  
  
  
Recommendation 
We suggest that ICU diaries be implemented in ICUs 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
Weak Recommendation  
Task Force Voting  
Agree  
Disagree  
Abstain  
Votes 
25 
2 
  
Percentages  
92% 
  
  
Question 2.6 In the ICU environment, do decision support tools for families or shared decision making itself improve/affect 
communication, cost or length of stay ? 
Quality of 
Evidence  
Very Low  
  
  
Recommendation 
We suggest that validated decision support tools for family members be implemented in the 
ICU setting when relevant validated tools exist. 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
Weak Recommendation  
Task Force Voting  
Agree  
Disagree  
Abstain  
Votes 
23 
3 
1 
Percentages  
85% 
  
  
Question 2.6 In the ICU environment, do clinician support tools targeting family support or primary palliative care such as 
checklists, worksheets, mnemonics improve psychological distress or communication  compared to usual care?   
Quality of 
Evidence  
Low 
Quality  
  
  
Recommendation 
We suggest that, among surrogates of ICU patients who are deemed by a clinician to have a 
poor prognosis, clinicians use clinician support tools, such as the use of the mnemonic VALUE 
during family conferences, to facilitate clinician-family communication 
 45 
 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
Weak Recommendation  
Task Force Voting  
Agree  
Disagree  
Abstain  
Votes 
25 
1 
1 
Percentages  
92% 
  
  
Task Force Voting  
Agree  
Disagree  
Abstain  
Votes 
23 
3 
1 
Percentages  
85% 
  
  
Communication 
Question 2.1.a In the ICU setting, do routine family conferences improve/affect patient ICU length of stay (LOS)?  
Quality of 
Evidence  
Low 
Quality  
  
  
Recommendation  
We suggest that routine interdisciplinary family conferences should be used in ICU to reduce length of 
stay for patients who die in the ICU.  
Strength of 
Recommendation  
Weak Recommendation  
Task Force Voting  
Agree 
Disagree 
Abstain  
Comments  
Votes 
20 
2 
  
5  
Percentages  
74% 
  
  
Question 2.1.b. In the ICU setting, do routine family conferences improve/affect family satisfaction with communication or 
care or quality of communication?   
Quality of 
Evidence  
Low 
quality 
  
  
Recommendation 
We suggest that certain, specific communication patterns (e.g. more family and less clinician 
speech, use of empathic statements and assurance/support statements with families) can be 
used in communication with family members to improve family satisfaction 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
Weak Recommendation  
Task Force Voting  
Agree 
 Disagree 
 Abstain  
Votes 
25 
2 
  
Percentages  
92% 
  
  
Question 2.1c  In the ICU setting, do routine family conferences improve family trust in clinicians, decrease 
family/clinician conflict; or affect intensity of , or time devoted to, care?   
Quality of 
Evidence  
Low 
Quality  
  
  
Recommendation 
We suggest that routine interdisciplinary family conferences should be used in ICU to 
improve family trust and reduce conflict between clinicians and family members. 
 46 
 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
Weak Recommendation 
Task Force Voting  
Agree  
Disagree  
Abstain  
Votes 
26 
  
1 
Percentages  
96% 
  
  
Question 2.2. Amongst healthcare clinicians in the ICU, do specific communication techniques such as active listening, 
empathy and empathic statements, provision of hope, bedside caring behaviors including touch, provision of supportive 
comments, language translation or cultural mediation affect family psychological symptoms, family satisfaction with care, 
communication or decision-making, physician-family conflict, or ICU utilization (length of stay)?   
Quality of 
Evidence  
Low 
Quality 
  
  
Recommendation  
We suggest that health care clinicians in the ICU utilize strategies included in the VALUE 
mnemonic when engaging in communication with family members, specifically active 
listening, expressions of empathy, making supportive statements around non-abandonment 
and decision-making. In addition, we suggest that family members of critically ill patients be 
offered a written brochure. 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
Weak Recommendation  
Task Force Voting  
Agree  
Disagree  
Abstain  
Votes 
25 
1 
1 
Percentages  
92% 
  
  
Question 2.3a In the ICU environment, do communication training programs for clinicians such as education or simulation 
improve/affect: Family Psychological Symptoms (1 study) Family Quality of Dying (1 study) Quality of Communication (5 
studies)  Family Satisfaction with Communication (2 studies) Clinician Self-Efficacy (10 studies)• Clinician Psychological 
Symptoms (2 studies)?    
Quality of 
Evidence  
Very Low  
  
  
Recommendation  
Based on existing evidence of patient and family burden associated with poor 
communication, as well as improved clinician-reported skills and comfort following 
communication training, we suggest that ICU clinicians receive family-centered 
communication training as one element of an overall well-rounded critical care training 
curriculum and ongoing education. 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
Weak Recommendation  
Task Force Voting  
Agree  
Disagree  
Abstain  
Votes 
27 
  
1 
Percentages  
100% 
  
  
Question 2.3b  In the ICU environment, do communication training programs for clinicians such as education or simulation 
improve/affect: Family Psychological Symptoms (1 study) Family Quality of Dying (1 study) Quality of Communication (5 
studies) Family Satisfaction with Communication (2 studies) Clinician Self-Efficacy (10 studies) Clinician Psychological 
Symptoms (2 studies)?   
 47 
 
Quality of 
Evidence  
Very Low  
  
  
Recommendation 
No Recommendation can be made to suggest the use of any of the specific communication 
training programs that have been evaluated based on existing evidence. 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
No Recommendation  
Task Force Voting  
Agree  
Disagree  
Abstain  
Votes 
25 
2 
1 
Percentages  
92% 
  
  
Consultations 
Question 1.1 Among family members of ICU patients does a palliative care consultation impact ICU and hospital 
utilization? 
Quality of 
Evidence 
Low 
Quality 
  
  
Recommendation  
We suggest that proactive palliative care consultation be considered to decrease ICU and 
hospital length among selected critically ill patients 
Strength of 
Recommendation 
Weak Recommendation 
Task Force Voting 
Agree 
Disagree 
Abstain 
Votes 
26 
1 
  
Percentages  
96% 
  
  
Question 1.2a Among family members of ICU patients does ethics consultation impact family satisfaction, ICU 
or hospital length of stay? 
Quality of 
Evidence 
Low 
Quality 
  
  
Recommendation 
We suggest that ethics consultation, particularly in reaction to a conflict about goals of care 
for an ICU patient, may decrease ICU and hospital length of stay among selected critically ill 
patients 
Strength of 
Recommendation 
Weak Recommendation 
Task Force Voting 
Agree 
Disagree 
Abstain 
Votes 
24 
2 
2 
Percentages  
88% 
  
  
Question 1.2b Among family members of ICU patients does ethics consultation impact family satisfaction, ICU 
or hospital length of stay?  
Quality of 
Evidence 
Low 
Quality  
  
  
Recommendation 
No recommendation can be made about using ethics consultation with the goal of increasing 
family satisfaction 
Strength of 
Recommendation 
No Recommendation  
Task Force Voting 
Agree 
Disagree 
Abstain 
 48 
 
Votes 
26 
1 
1 
Percentages  
96% 
  
  
Question 1.3 Among family members of ICU patients does a psychologist improve/affect family outcomes?  
Quality of 
Evidence 
Low 
Quality  
  
  
Recommendation 
We suggest a psychologist’s intervention to specifically incorporate a multimodal CBT-based 
approach to improve outcomes in mothers of pre-term babies admitted to the NICU based 
on a single center study 
Strength of 
Recommendation 
Weak Recommendation  
Task Force Voting 
Agree 
Disagree 
Abstain 
Votes 
26 
  
1 
Percentages  
96% 
  
  
Quality of 
Evidence 
Low 
Quality  
  
  
Question 1.3b Among family members of ICU patients does a psychologist improve/ affect family outcomes? 
Quality of 
Evidence 
Low 
Quality  
  
  
Recommendation 
We suggest that targeted video and reading materials be considered in the context of 
psychological support provided to mothers of pre-term babies admitted to the ICU, based on 
a single study 
Strength of 
Recommendation 
Weak Recommendation  
Task Force Voting 
Agree  
Disagree 
Abstain  
Votes 
25 
1 
2 
Percentages  
92% 
  
  
Question 1.4 Among family members of ICU patients does a social work consultation impact family satisfaction? 
Quality of 
Evidence 
Very Low  
  
  
Recommendation  
We suggest social workers be included within an interdisciplinary team to participate in 
family meetings and improve family satisfaction 
Strength of 
Recommendation 
Weak Recommendation  
Task Force Voting 
Agree  
Disagree 
Abstain  
Votes 
26 
1 
  
Percentages  
96% 
  
  
Question 1.5a Among family members of ICU patients does a patient navigator improve/affect family psychological 
symptoms, family satisfaction, family or clinician conflict or resource utilization? 
 49 
 
Quality of 
Evidence  
Very Low 
  
  
Recommendation  
We suggest that patient/family navigators be assigned to families throughout the ICU stay to 
improve family satisfaction with communication, family psychological symptoms, and reduce 
length of ICU stay and costs of care. 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
Weak Recommendation  
Task Force Voting  
Agree  
Disagree 
Abstain  
Votes  
25 
1 
1 
Percentages  
92% 
  
  
Question 1.5.b Among family members of ICU patients does a patient navigator improve/affect family satisfaction?  
Quality of 
Evidence  
Low 
Quality  
  
  
Recommendation  
We suggest that patient/family navigators be considered in the ICU to improve family 
satisfaction with physician communication 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
Weak Recommendation  
Task Force Voting  
Agree  
Disagree 
Abstain  
Comments  
Votes  
22 
2 
  
3  
Percentages 
81% 
  
  
Question 1.5.c Among family members of ICU patients does a patient/family navigator improve/affect Family or Clinician 
Conflict?  
Quality of 
Evidence  
Very Low  
  
  
Recommendation  
No recommendation can be made due to lack of sufficient evidence 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
No Recommendation  
Task Force Voting  
Agree 
Disagree 
Abstain  
Comments 
Votes  
26 
  
  
1  
Percentages 
96% 
  
  
  
Question 1.5.d Among family members of ICU patients does a patient/family navigator improve/affect resource utilization? 
Quality of 
Evidence  
Very Low  
  
  
Recommendation 
No recommendation can be made due to lack of sufficient evidence 
 50 
 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
No Recommendation 
Task Force Voting  
Agree 
Disagree 
Abstain  
Votes  
25 
1 
1 
Percentages 
92% 
  
  
Question 1.6 Among families of ICU patients, does routine consultation of a spiritual care provider, as compared to usual 
care, improve outcomes?  
Quality of 
Evidence  
Very Low 
  
  
Recommendation 
Given the consistency of expression of family values for availability of spiritual care, the 
accreditation standards, and the results of the observation study we propose that families be 
offered spiritual support with a spiritual advisor or pastor. The best method for provision of 
spiritual support has not been studied and warrants further investigation 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
Weak Recommendation  
Task Force Voting  
Agree 
Disagree 
Abstain  
Votes  
24 
3 
  
Percentages 
88% 
  
  
Organization/Environment 
Question 5.1+74:80 In the ICU environment, do protocols for withdrawing life support improve outcomes?  
Quality of 
Evidence  
Low 
Quality  
  
  
Recommendation 
We suggest that protocols be implemented to ensure adequate and standardized use of 
sedation and analgesia during withdrawal of life support 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
Weak Recommendation  
Deleted Question  Do executive (hospital leadership) walk rounds improve family-centered outcomes in the 
ICU?  
Quality of 
Evidence  
Very Low  
  
  
Recommendation 
No recommendation can be made due to lack of supporting evidence 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
No Recommendation  
Task Force Voting  
Agree  
Disagree  
Abstain  
Votes 
27 
  
1 
Percentages  
100% 
  
  
 51 
 
Question 5.2a Does the inclusion of nurses in ICU communication improve family-centered outcomes?    
Quality of 
Evidence  
Very Low 
  
  
Recommendation 
We suggest that specialized nurses be used as part of an overall program to potentially 
decrease ICU and hospital length of stay and to improve patient/family perception of the 
quality of communication in the ICU 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
Weak Recommendation  
Task Force Voting  
Agree  
Disagree  
Abstain  
Votes 
25 
1 
2 
Percentages  
92% 
  
  
Question 5.2.b Does the inclusion of nurses in ICU decision making improve family-centered outcomes?    
Quality of 
Evidence  
Very Low  
  
  
Recommendation 
No recommendation can be made regarding decision-making due to lack of supporting 
evidence 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
No Recommendation  
Task Force Voting  
Agree  
Disagree  
Abstain  
Votes 
26 
  
2 
Percentages  
96% 
  
  
Deleted Question: Does consistency in staffing improve family-centered outcomes during critical illness?  
Quality of 
Evidence  
Low  
  
  
Recommendation  
No recommendation can be made due to lack of supporting evidence 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
No Recommendation  
Task Force Voting  
Agree  
Disagree  
Abstain  
Votes 
26 
1 
1 
Percentages  
96% 
  
  
Question 5.3  Does a comprehensive “family-centered care” approach to ICU care improve family-centered outcomes during 
critical illness? 
Quality of 
Evidence  
Very Low 
  
  
Recommendation 
We suggest that hospitals consider implementing policies to promote family-centered care in 
the ICU to improve family experience 
 52 
 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
Weak Recommendation  
Task Force Voting  
Agree  
Disagree  
Abstain  
Votes 
27 
  
1 
Percentages  
100% 
  
  
Question 5.4  In the critical care environment do noise reduction strategies for family members (beyond single rooms for 
patients) affect patient/family satisfaction, staff stress or noise?  
Quality of 
Evidence  
Very Low 
  
  
Recommendation 
In the absence of evidence to support specific strategies other than private rooms for noise 
reduction, yet given the evidence of harm from noise, we suggest that ICUs implement noise 
reduction and environmental hygiene practices. 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
Weak Recommendation  
Task Force Voting  
Agree  
Disagree  
Abstain  
Votes 
27 
  
1 
Percentages  
100%   
  
Question 5.4 In the critical care environment do private rooms or space for family members (beyond single rooms for 
patients) affect patient/family satisfaction, staff stress or noise?  
Quality of 
Evidence  
Very Low 
  
  
Recommendation  
We suggest the use of private rooms to improve patient/family satisfaction and noise 
reduction while managing staff stress imposed with the change from open-bay to private 
rooms in the NICU. 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
Weak Recommendation  
Task Force Voting  
Agree  
Disagree  
Abstain  
Votes 
25 
2 
1 
Percentages  
92% 
  
  
 Question 5.4 In the critical care environment do noise reduction strategies, private rooms or space for family members 
(beyond single rooms for patients) affect patient/family satisfaction, staff stress or noise?  
Quality of 
Evidence  
Very Low  
  
  
Recommendation 
No Recommendation can be made for family space. However, it is noted that the 
SCCM/ACCM Guidelines for ICU design recommend designing new ICUs with family space 
based upon consensus statement (Thompson-4843) 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
No Recommendation  
 53 
 
Task Force Voting  
Agree  
Disagree  
Abstain  
Votes 
25 
1 
2 
Percentages  
92% 
  
  
Question 5.5 Among family members of ICU patients, does providing a surface or space for sleep improve family 
psychological symptoms, quality of life, satisfaction with care, caregiver burden, family or clinician conflict, satisfaction with 
communication, self-efficacy, trust in clinicians, conferences, quality of communication, or time to DNR?   
Recommendation  
We suggest that family members of critically ill patients be provided a sleep surface or space 
in close proximity to the patient in order to improve family outcomes 
Quality of 
Evidence  
Very Low 
Strength of 
Recommendation  
Weak Recommendation 
Task Force Voting  
Agree  
Disagree  
Abstain  
Votes 
25 
2 
  
Percentages  
92% 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 54 
 
Appendix A:  Developing Definitions of “family” and “family-centered care” 
 
We identified previous published definitions of “family” and “family-centered care” from 
published guidelines and key documents on family-centered care. A search strategy and hand-
search yielded 24 articles, books, and pamphlets offering definitions of “family”, “patient-
centered care”, and/or “family-centered care”; (8, 13, 21, 61, 261-278) these definitions were 
abstracted by a sub-group composed of five panel members. Definitions were summarized in a 
single document (Electronic supplement tables 4 and 5), circulated to the five sub-group 
members along with a panel leader (JRC), and discussed. Through an iterative process, 
proposed definitions were summarized, discussed, eliminated, and modified. The group decided 
to exclude “patient-centered care” as beyond the scope of the intended review and guidelines. 
Two potential definitions of “family” and three potential definitions of “family-centered care” were 
developed and, along with summaries of the discussion surrounding each proposed definition, 
presented to the entire advisory panel for further development and discussion (Electronic 
supplement table 6). 
Through an online survey, the entire guidelines writing group panel indicated their 
preferences for the proposed definitions and were given the opportunity to provide alternative 
definitions. The proposed definitions were also provided to a group of 7 former ICU patients and 
family members, including three adult survivors of critical illness and four family members of 
critically ill adults. 
Incorporating alternative definitions and refining wording of the proposed definitions, the 
final definitions were selected and determined to be acceptable by greater than 70% of the 
expert panel. These final selected definitions for “family” and “family-centered care” were 
unanimously deemed appropriate and acceptable by the participating former ICU patients and 
family members. We define family as:  
Family is defined by the patient or, in the case of minors or those without decision 
making capacity, by their surrogates. In this context, the family may be related or 
 55 
 
unrelated to the patient. They are individuals who provide support and with whom the 
patient has a significant relationship. 
We define family-centered care as:  
Family-centered care is an approach to health care that is respectful of and responsive 
to individual family's needs and values. 
 
 
 56 
 
Electronic Supplement Table 4: Abstracted definitions of terms “family” organized by domain 
 
“Family” 
Domain 
Definitions (examples) 
Family is defined 
by the patient 
and family.  
“Two or more persons who are related in any way—biologically, legally, or 
emotionally. Patients and families define their families.” 24 
“For the purposes of this document, the definition of family published by the 
National Consensus Project for Quality Palliative Care is adopted: “Family is 
defined by the patient or in the case of minors or those without decision making 
capacity by their surrogates. In this context the family may be related or 
unrelated to the patient. They are individuals who provide support and with 
whom the patient has a significant relationship” 6  
Family is a social 
unit. 
“The family is a basic social unit having as its nucleus two or more persons, 
irrespective of age, in which each of the following conditions are present: 1. the 
members are related by blood, or marriage, or adoption, or by a contract which 
is either explicit or implied; 2. the members communicate with each other in 
terms of defined social roles such as mother, father, wife, husband, daughter, 
son, brother, sister, grandfather, grandmother, uncle, aunt; and 3. they adopt or 
create and maintain common customs and traditions.” 19 
Family defies 
definition 
“We all come from families. Families are big, small, extended, nuclear, 
multigenerational, with one parent, two parents and grandparents. We live 
under one roof or many. A family can be as temporary as a few weeks, as 
permanent as forever. We become part of a family by birth, adoption, marriage, 
or from a desire for mutual support. As family members, we nurture, protect, 
and influence one another. Families are dynamic and are cultures unto 
themselves, with different values and unique ways of realizing dreams. Together, 
our families become the source of our rich cultural heritage and spiritual 
diversity. Each family has strengths and qualities that flow from individual 
members and from the family as a unit. Our families create neighborhoods, 
communities, states, and nations.” 2 
 
 
 
 57 
 
Electronic Supplement Table 5: Abstracted definitions of terms “family-centered care” organized by 
domain 
 
“Family-centered care” 
Domain 
Definitions 
Definition by 
tenets  
“There are a number of key principles to family-centered care:  (1) including 
parents and families being treated with dignity and respect; (2) parents having a 
right to know about their infant’s care and condition and updated information 
should be available to them, health care providers prioritizing open 
communication and sharing information with parents and families in ways that 
are affirming and useful; (3) information-giving being tailored according to 
parents’ individual preferences for detail and their changing needs; (4) parents 
and families being encouraged to participate in their infant’s care with the aim of 
them developing a sense of confidence, control and growing independence; and 
(5) practical and emotional support being provided continuously, through the 
care pathway ”2 
“In the Institute of Medicine’s patient-centered model, a) patients and families 
are kept informed and actively involved in medical decisionmaking and self-
management; b) patient care is coordinated and integrated across groups of 
healthcare providers; c) healthcare delivery systems provide for the physical 
comfort and emotional support of patients and family members; d) healthcare 
providers have a clear understanding of patients’ concepts of illness and their 
cultural beliefs; and e) healthcare providers understand and apply principles of 
disease prevention and behavioral change appropriate for diverse populations.”6  
Care involving 
patient 
preferences and 
goals 
“Family centered-care, which sees patients as embedded within a social 
structure and web of relationships, is emerging as a comprehensive ideal for 
end-of-life care in the ICU.” “Family centered care is based on the values, goals, 
and needs of the patient and family, including their understanding of the illness, 
prognosis, and treatment options and their expectations and preferences for 
treatment and decision making.”23 
Care involving 
compassion, 
empathy, and the 
whole patient 
 “Patient-centered encompasses qualities of compassion, empathy, and 
responsiveness to the needs, values, and expressed preferences of the individual 
patient.” 25 
Care respectful of 
cultural 
competence 
“Patient-centered care responds precisely to each patient’s wants, needs, and 
preferences. It gives patients abundant opportunities to be informed and 
involved in medical decision making, and guides and supports those providing 
care in attending to their patients’ physical and emotional needs, and 
maintaining or improving their quality of life to the extent possible. Patient-
centered care is highly customized and incorporates cultural competence.” 25 
Care that treats 
the patient and 
family 
“A way of caring for children and their families within health services which 
ensures that care is planned around the whole family, not just the individual 
child/person, and in which all the family members are recognised as care 
recipients” 19 
“[Family centered care] is an approach to health care in which:  providers 
recognize the importance that families paly in ensuring the health and well-being 
 58 
 
of their children; providers support families in their care-giving and decision 
making roles; providers have an awareness of the importance of meeting the 
psychosocial and developmental needs of children and the role of families in 
promoting  the health and well –being of their children;  ‘the philosophies, 
principles and practices that put the family at the heart or center of services;’” 1 
Care that is a 
partnership 
between 
providers and 
patients and 
families 
Collaboration between providers and families and patients in the planning, 
delivery and evaluation of care-  family-centered care and patient andfamily-
centered care  “more explicitly capture the importance of engaging the family 
and the patient in a developmentally supportive manner as essential members of 
the health care team.” 
 
 
 
 
 59 
 
Electronic Supplement Table 6: Definitions of terms “family” and “family-centered care” presented to 
entire group 
 
Term 
Definitions  
Family 
“Two or more persons who are related in any way—biologically, legally, or 
emotionally. Patients and families define their families.” 24 
“Family is defined by the patient or in the case of minors or those without 
decision making capacity by their surrogates. In this context the family may be 
related or unrelated to the patient. They are individuals who provide support 
and with whom the patient has a significant relationship” 6  
Family-centered 
care 
Family-centered care is an approach to health care that is respectful of and 
responsive to individual family's needs and values. 
    Derived from 25 
Family-centered care recognizes that patients are embedded within a social 
structure and web of relationships. It is an approach to health care that is 
respectful of and responsive to individual family's needs and values. 
   Derived from 23 
Family-centered care recognizes that patients are embedded within a social 
structure and web of relationships. It is an approach to health care that is 
planned around the individual patient as the primary focus, but also views the 
patient as part of a family whose members are recognized as care recipients. 
   Derived from 23  
 
 
 
 
 
 60 
 
Appendix B:  Standard GRADE methodology used 
 
The Refworks® account of the master literature review was searched and citations relevant to 
each PICO question were loaded into a folder from which to conduct the evidence analysis. The 
evidence analysis worksheet was completed by each member of the dyad independently as a 
quality control measure. Using a structured PICO summary template, dyads compared their 
findings and produced a consensus assessment for each question and its relevant outcomes, 
an aggregate scoring of the strength of the evidence for that question and recommendations 
based upon the available evidence. Multiple outcomes could inform a recommendation, but their 
relative contribution to the GRADE assigned was weighed by their ranking in importance. 
Members were encouraged to be as explicit about judgments as possible.  
 
 
 61 
 
Appendix C. Search Strategies for systematic review 
All searches were narrowed to English language and from 1994 – 
 
In PubMed on December 8, 2014: 
((family-centered[Text Word] OR family-centred[Text Word] OR  
"Family/psychology"[Mesh:noexp] OR Professional-Family[TW] OR ("Patient- 
Centered Care"[Mesh] AND ("Family"[Mesh] OR Family[TW] OR spouse[TW] OR  
significant-other[TW] OR parent[TW] OR child[TW] OR children[TW] OR  
sibling[TW] OR friend[TW]))) AND ("Intensive Care"[Mesh] OR "Intensive Care,  
Neonatal"[Mesh] OR "Intensive Care Units"[Mesh] OR "Critical Care  
Nursing"[Mesh] OR "Critical Care"[Mesh] OR critical care[TW] OR intensive  
care[TW] OR Burn Unit[TW] OR Coronary Care[TW] OR Respiratory Care[TW] OR  
"ICU"[TW] OR "PICU"[TW] OR "NICU"[TW] NOT "Recovery Room"[Mesh])) AND  
English[lang] 
 
In CINAHL on December 16, 2014   
( MH "Critical Care Family Needs Inventory" OR IN "Critical Care Family Needs Inventory" ) OR ( 
(family-centered OR family-centred OR developmental care OR "family presence" OR (Family 
AND Communication) OR MH "Visitors to Patients" OR MH "Family/PF" OR MH "Professional-
Family Relations" OR MH "Family Attitudes" ) AND ("intensive care" OR "critical care") ) NOT PT 
Editorial 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 62 
 
In EMBASE on December 18, 2014 
See next 2 pages with history printout 
 EMBASE search  
 
1  
family centered care/  
954  
2  
family attitude/  
1903  
3  
exp family attitude/  
7888  
4  
family coping  
600  
5  
Health visitor.mp. or health 
visitor/  
2010  
6  
social worker.mp. or social 
worker/  
7102  
7  
Decision Support system.mp. 
or decision support system/  
14614  
8  
exp family/  
339299  
9  
satisfaction/  
29918  
10  
Presence.mp.  
1394139  
11  
Decision making.mp. or 
decision making/  
269888  
12  
interpersonal 
communication.mp. or 
interpersonal 
communication/  
119807  
13  
Medical decision making.mp. 
or medical decision making/  
70263  
14  
Patient care.mp. or patient 
care/  
252668  
15  
Nurse attitude.mp. or nurse 
attitude/  
33623  
16  
Physician attitude.mp. or 
physician attitude/  
42352  
17  
Consultation.mp. or 
consultation/  
93158  
18  
Noise.mp.  
109246  
19  
resuscitation/ or 
resuscitation.mp.  
91232  
20  
Developmental care.mp.  
347  
21  
Family-cent?red.mp.  
3489  
22  
critical care family needs 
inventory.mp. or Critical Care 
Family Needs Inventory/  
78  
23  
1 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 or 7 or 
22  
32888  
24  
9 or 10 or 11 or 12 or 13 or 
14 or 15 or 16 or 17 or 18  
2231469  
 63 
 
25  
8 AND 24  
54583  
26  
23 or 25  
85714  
27  
intensive care.mp.  
218161  
28  
Pediatric advanced life 
support.mp. or pediatric 
advanced life support/  
580  
29  
critical care.mp.  
32442  
30  
Resuscitation/ or 
resuscitation.mp.  
91232  
31  
(NICU or PICU or ICU).mp. 
[mp=title, abstract, subject 
headings, heading word, 
drug trade name, original 
title, device manufacturer, 
drug manufacturer, device 
trade name, keyword]  
71081  
32  
27 or 28 or 29 or 30 or 31  
318081  
33  
26 and 32  
34  
1 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 or 7 or 
20 or 21 or 22  
35621  
35  
25 or 34  
87804  
36  
32 and 35  
5282  
37  
(32 and 35) not Editorial.pt.  
5053  
38  
(32 and 35) not Editorial.pt.  
5053  
39  
limit 38 to (english language 
and yr=*1994 – 2015*)  
4313  
 
 
 
 
 64 
 
Appendix D:  Recommendations for future research [Print in Text Box] 
 
Team 
• 
Measure the impact of ethics consultation on family satisfaction and other family-
reported outcomes. 
• 
Measure the effectiveness and cost-effective components of ethics consultations and 
identify the patients for whom ethics consultation is most beneficial. 
• 
Measure the impact of psychological support in adult and pediatric populations, with 
larger studies in the pre-term neonatal population needed.  
• 
Measure the effective and cost-effective components of a palliative care consultation 
and identify the patients for whom palliative care consultation is most beneficial.  
• 
Measure the impact of ethics consultation on family satisfaction and other family-
reported outcomes. Further research is needed to better understand the effectiveness 
and cost-effective components of ethics consultations and to identify the patients for 
whom ethics consultation is most beneficial. 
• 
Measure outcomes and return on investment from family support coordinators. 
• 
Measure outcomes and return on investment of a patient/family navigator on family 
psychological symptoms, conflict and resource utilization. Determine the best navigator 
model, which families to target, and evaluation of any negative outcomes associated 
with navigators interacting with families.  
• 
Measure the impact of a spiritual care provider on patient and family outcomes. 
• 
Test the best method for provision of spiritual support.  
• 
Measure outcomes from social worker intervention. 
 
Family Communication 
• 
Determine if and how communication training programs can be implemented to improve 
family-centered outcomes. Specifically, we recommend the following for future research:  
1) validation of a quality of communication measurement tool for consistency of reported 
outcomes; 2) cautious use of self-assessment tools as these appear to be imprecise 
measures of true quality of communication; 3) increase the use of family-reported 
outcomes as the standard for quality of family communication; 4) collect data on cost of 
implementing communication training programs; 5) more long-term follow up studies 
since skills may dissipate over time; 6) comparison of different communication teaching 
modalities such as didactic training vs role-plays vs simulation; and 7) further 
investigation of possible risks to patients such as increased depression. 
• 
Determine the best ways to implement open flexible visitation and fully understand the 
impact on family member outcomes and conflict in the ICU. 
• 
Determine the best method of including family members in medical rounds and the 
impact of this on family outcomes. 
• 
Measure the benefits and limitations of family participation in care for the adult patient 
population. 
• 
Measure the impact of educational/training programs on family member outcomes and 
ICU LOS and costs. In addition much of the work to date has been done in pediatric 
populations and research should be extended to adolescents and adults of all ages. 
 
Family Presence (see also Family Communication) 
• 
Measure long-term effects of witnessed resuscitation.  
• 
Measure outcomes in support personnel caring for family members who choose to 
witness resuscitation. 
 65 
 
• 
Measure outcomes related to date-night or respite.  
Family Support 
• 
Measure the value of peer-to-peer support in all age groups to improve family-centered 
outcomes.  
• 
Measure the relative benefits of different approaches to providing written materials to 
family members. 
• 
Further assess and measure the effect of a diary on family outcomes.  
• 
Measure the best method of implementing a patient/family diary program. 
• 
Assess outcomes of a decision aid on patients’ surrogate decision makers’ wellbeing. 
 
Operational and Environmental Issues 
• 
Identify the important components of decision aids for improving outcomes.  
• 
Measure the effect of protocols for withdrawing life support on patient- and family-
centered outcomes.  
• 
Measure the impact of executive walk rounds on family-reported outcomes.  
• 
Measure family outcomes associated with consistency of staffing. 
• 
Measure family outcomes associated with family inclusion in decision-making. 
• 
Measure outcomes associated with nursing involvement in ICU decision making and the 
impact on family outcomes.  
• 
Measure the effect of interventions to reduce noise or improve environmental hygiene in 
the ICU on outcomes important to families.  
• 
Measure the impact of private rooms on patient and family outcomes. 
• 
Test outcomes associated with architectural design including dedicated family space. 
• 
Test outcomes associated with family sleep, sleep space, and napping in the ICU. 
 
 
 66 
 
 
Appendix E: Work tools 
ACCM Family-Centered Care Guidelines Supplement: Work Tools for Guideline Implementation 
All links last accessed on 05.10.2016 
 
 67 
 
The following collaborators participated in this guidelines update, specifically 
with regards to creating this electronic supplement containing tools for 
guideline implementation. 
 
David Y. Hwang, MD (Task Force Leader) 
Assistant Professor of Neurology 
Division of Neurocritical Care and Emergency Neurology 
Yale School of Medicine 
New Haven, CT 
david.hwang@yale.edu 
 
Judy E. Davidson, DNP RN FCCM FAAN (Guidelines Writing Group Liaison) 
EBP/Research Nurse Liaison 
UC San Diego Health 
La Jolla, CA 
 
Sarah Kraus, MPH (SCCM Staff) 
SCCM Quality and Guidelines Specialist 
Mount Prospect, IL 
 
Heather M. Bullard, PharmD BCCCP 
Clinical Pharmacy Specialist, Cardiothoracic Surgery 
Department of Pharmacy 
The University of Chicago Medicine 
Chicago, IL 
 
LeeAnn Christie, MSN RN 
Critical Care Research Scientist 
Dell Children’s Medical Center of Central Texas 
Austin, TX 
 
Linda S. Franck, RN PhD FRCPCH FAAN 
Jack and Elaine Koehn Endowed Chair in Pediatric Nursing 
Professor, Department of Family Health Care Nursing 
Co-PI, UCSF Preterm Birth Initiative 
University of California 
San Francisco, CA 
 
 
Meg Frizzola, DO 
Interim Chief, Division of Critical Care Medicine 
Medical Director, Pediatric Intensive Care Unit 
Assistant Professor of Pediatrics 
Sidney Kimmel Medical College, Thomas Jefferson University 
Philadelphia, PA 
 
Serena A. Harris, PharmD BCPS BCCCP 
Clinical Pharmacy Specialist, Trauma and Surgical Critical Care 
Department of Pharmacy 
Eskenazi Health 
Indianapolis, IN 
 
Ramona O. Hopkins, PhD 
Director, Neuroscience Center 
Professor, Psychology and Neuroscience 
Brigham Young University, 
Provo, Utah 
 
Matthew E. Lissauer, MD 
Associate Professor of Surgery 
Medical Director, Surgical Critical Care 
Program Director, Surgical Critical Care Fellowship 
Rutgers-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School 
New Brunswick, NJ 
 
Elizabeth Scruth PhD MPH RN CCNS CCRN FCCM 
Clinical Practice Consultant, Quality and Regulatory Services 
Kaiser Permanente 
Oakland, CA 
 
 68 
 
 
68 
 
 
Work Tool Name 
Description 
Cost 
Internet Link / Reference 
 
Category 1: Family Presence 
 
 
 
 
• 
Given the value family members place on presence, dissatisfaction associated with restricted presence and benefit of engagement associated with presence, that 
family members of critically ill patients be offered open flexible visiting hours that meets their needs while providing staff support and positive reinforcement to work 
in partnership with families. 
 
 
 
 
American Association of Critical 
Care Nurses (AACN) Practice Alert 
Delineates expected practice of appropriate policies to facilitate family 
visitation, supporting evidence for open visitation in the ICU, and literature 
available outside of AACN supporting open visitation and family presence.  
Free 
http://www.aacn.org/wd/practice/content/p
racticealerts/family-visitation-icu-practice-
alert.pcms?menu=practice 
Better Together: Partnering with 
Families 
This North American campaign, launched by the Institute for Patient-and-
Family-Centered Care and supported by a coalition of Canadian 
organizations, encourages hospitals to adopt family presence policies. 
Website includes “change package” of free resources to facilitate 24/7 
family presence. 
Free 
http://www.cfhi-fcass.ca/WhatWeDo/better-
together/resources 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
Family members of critically ill patients be offered the option of participating in interdisciplinary team rounds to improve satisfaction with communication and family 
engagement. 
 
• 
Family members of critically ill patients be offered the option of being present during resuscitation efforts, with a staff member assigned to support the family. 
 
 
 
 
American Association of Critical 
Care Nurses Practice Alert and 
Tools 
Provides review of current evidence supporting family presence during 
resuscitation. Provides basic framework for nursing staff to initiate action 
plan aimed at including families in resuscitative efforts. 
Free 
http://www.aacn.org/wd/practice/content/fa
mily-presence-practice-
alert.pcms?menu=practice 
 
 
 
 
Category 2: Family Support 
 
 
 
 
• 
Family members of critically ill patients be offered the option to be taught how to assist with the care of their loved ones. 
 
 
 
 
Apps for Communication with Mechanically Ventilated Patients 
SCCM Patient Communicator App 
for iPad 
Contains a scale that allows patients to identify where on the body they 
feel sensations of pain and itching to express the intensity of these 
sensations. More than 30 phrases in 19 languages that allow patients to 
express various needs related to their care and wellbeing. 
$12.99 
http://www.sccm.org/Education-
Center/Clinical-Resources/Pages/Patient-and-
Family.aspx 
 69 
 
 
69 
 
SmallTalk Intensive Care for 
iPhone and iPad; Lingraphicare, 
Inc 
Provides a picture-based vocabulary of phrases that patients can use to 
communicate their needs and feelings, such as “I have chest pain” and “I 
want a doctor.”  Designed for anyone who has difficulty speaking or is 
unable to speak, due to having a language impairment, not being a native 
speaker, being intubated, or having a tracheotomy tube. 
Free 
Available on iTunes 
YoDoc for iPhone and iPad; 
Docapps LLC 
English and Spanish language app for people on ventilators and/or people 
with speech impairment due to critical medical condition. Patients can 
write phrases to be spoken out, draw with their finger to show pain areas 
and speak out pain level and intensity. 
Free 
Available on iTunes 
Instructional Booklet on Infant Comfort 
Comforting Your Baby in Intensive 
Care 
Booklet written for parents to help them learn about infant pain and the 
role parents can play to keep their child comfortable in the NICU, in 
partnership with the health care team. 
Free 
http://familynursing.ucsf.edu/resources-
parents 
 
 
 
 
• 
Family education programs be included as part of clinical care as these programs have demonstrated beneficial effects for family members in the ICU.  
 
 
 
 
COPE for Hope 
Organization that provides on-site training for neonatal ICU staff on how to 
provide support for NICU parents. Teaches parents how to interact with 
their preterm infant both in the NICU and after discharge in ways that 
enhances infant growth and development. Helps parents understand the 
workings of the NICU unit and encourages their active engagement with 
the NICU staff. 
Cost 
available 
upon 
request 
http://www.copeforhope.com/index.php 
 
 
 
 
• 
Peer-to-peer support be implemented to improve family satisfaction, parental stress, and depression in neonatal ICUs. It is not known whether peer-to-peer support 
would be effective in the adult population, but work tools are provided below. 
 
 
 
 
Share Your Story, March of Dimes 
An online community for parents to share their experiences with 
prematurity, birth defects, or perinatal loss 
Free 
http://share.marchofdimes.org/ 
SCCM THRIVE 
Contains resources to improve patient and family support after critical 
illness, including connecting with other ICU survivors and/or family 
members of ICU patients, finding in-person support groups, and providing 
information on what to expect after discharge. 
Free 
http://www.myicucare.org/thrive/Pages/defa
ult.aspx 
Intensive Care Unit Support 
Teams for Ex-Patients (ICUsteps) 
UK resource to improve the care and support available to patients 
recovering from critical illness and their families, including support groups.  
Free 
http://icusteps.org 
 
 
 
 
• 
ICUs provide family with information leaflets that give information about the ICU setting. 
 
 
 
 
 70 
 
 
70 
 
 
 
 
 
SCCM Patient and Family Support 
Page 
SCCM support page for ICU patients and families. Provides education on a 
variety of ICU topics along with additional outside resource 
recommendations. Brochures available for .pdf download. 
Free 
http://www.myicucare.org 
 
Neurocritical Care Society Family 
and Patient Resources 
Resource guide that provides overview of neurocritical care unit to families, 
including members of the team, description of common diseases, and links 
to patient and family resources. 
Free for 
printing; 
$40 for 25 
brochures 
https://www.pathlms.com/ncs-
ondemand/categories/413/courses 
AHRQ Guide to Patient and 
Family Engagement in Hospital 
Quality and Safety 
Provides written material to improve communication between patients, 
families, and clinicians. Downloadable brochures and handouts for patients 
and families, as well as informational poster to put in ICU. 
Free 
http://www.ahrq.gov 
 
UCSF Critical Care Innovations 
Group 
Extensive website designed specifically to provide information for families 
of ICU patients, including details about ICU arrival, the ICU care team, and 
what to expect after ICU discharge. 
Free 
http://ccig.ucsf.edu 
 
 
 
 
• 
ICU diaries be implemented in ICUs. 
 
 
 
 
ICU Diary Network 
Network for healthcare providers interested in ICU diaries. Resources 
include diary overview, literature, implementation assistance, and methods 
for connecting with institutions who utilize an ICU diary. 
Free 
www.icu-diary.org 
Josie King Foundation Care 
Journal and App 
Journal and downloadable iPhone app to help patients and families 
manage healthcare information. Prompts user on information to remember 
and questions to ask healthcare team. 
App is 
free; fee 
for journal 
bulk order 
http://www.josieking.org  
Graham’s Foundation MyPreemie 
App 
Downloadable iPhone, iPad, iPod, and Android application for families of 
premature babies. Includes definitions, education, suggested questions, 
growth charts, diary, and task list. 
Free 
http://grahamsfoundation.org/resources/the
-mypreemie-app/ 
 
 
 
 
• 
Among surrogates of ICU patients who are deemed by a clinician to have a poor prognosis, clinicians use a communication approach, such as the mnemonic “VALUE,” 
during family conferences to facilitate clinician-family communication and that validated decision support tools for family members be implemented in the ICU 
setting when relevant validated tools exist. 
 
 
 
 
“VALUE” Mnemonic 
“VALUE” Pocket Card 
Pocket card available for download that lists “VALUE” mnemonic for ICU 
communication with families: value family statements, acknowledge family 
emotions, listen to family, understand the patient as a person, elicit family 
questions.  
Free 
http://depts.washington.edu/eolcare/produc
ts/communication-tools/ 
 71 
 
 
71 
 
Decision Support Tools 
Prolonged Mechanical Ventilation  Appendix for this article contains a pilot-tested decision aid for families of 
patients who have been mechanically ventilated for longer than 10 days 
and who are re-evaluating patient goals-of-care. Associated with improved 
communication, decreased cost, and positive physician reviews. Currently 
being developed in web format. 
Free with 
journal 
access 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22635
048  
Ottawa Patient Decision Aid 
Research Group Life Support 
Decision Aid 
Field-tested paper-based decision aid for families of ICU patients who are 
making decisions regarding life support versus comfort care. 
Free 
https://decisionaid.ohri.ca/docs/das/Critically
_Ill_Decision_Support.pdf 
CARENET Code Status Decision 
Aid 
Paper-based decision aid for deciding on code status, developed by the 
Canadian Researchers at the End of Life Network. 
Free 
http://thecarenet.ca/docs/CPR%20Decision%
20Aid%20revised%20to%20PDF%20brochure
%20Nov%203%202009.pdf 
 
 
 
 
Category 3: Family Communication 
 
 
 
 
• 
Healthcare clinicians in the ICU use structured approaches to communication such as that included in the “VALUE” mnemonic when engaging in communication with 
family members, specifically active listening, expressions of empathy, and making supportive statements around non-abandonment and decision-making. In addition, 
we suggest that family members of critically ill patients be offered a written brochure. 
 
 
 
 
Healthcare Clinicians’ Specific Communication Techniques 
“VALUE” 
ICU communication with families: value family statements, acknowledge 
family emotions, listen to family, understand the patient as a person, elicit 
family questions. Pocket card available at listed website. 
Free 
http://depts.washington.edu/eolcare/produc
ts/communication-tools/ 
“SPIKES” 
Breaking bad news: setup, patient’s perception, invitation to share 
information, knowledge transmission, explore emotions, summarize & 
strategize 
$26 for 
book 
Buckman, R. How to Break Bad News: A Guide 
for Health Care Professionals. John Hopkins, 
1992. 
“NURSE” 
Verbal empathy: naming, understanding, respecting, supporting, exploring 
$40 for 
book 
Fortin, AH; Dwamena, FC; Frankel, RM; Smith, 
RC. Smith’s Patient-Centered Interviewing: An 
Evidence-Based Method. McGraw-Hill, 2012. 
“AIDET” 
Five fundamentals of service: acknowledge, introduce, duration, 
explanation, thank you 
Free 
www.studergroup.com 
Structured Approaches to Family Communication Improvement 
Rhode Island ICU Collaborative 
Communication Process 
Measures 
Description of “day 1” and “day 3” goals for family communication that a 
statewide coalition of ICUs targeted for a coordinated ICU communication 
quality improvement project.  
Free with 
journal 
access 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24060
769  
 72 
 
 
72 
 
Robert Wood Johnson 
Foundation Palliative Care Quality 
Measures 
Describes a proposed set of quality measures for ICUs to target with 
respect to palliative care, divided by domains; the majority of the domains 
relate to communication with and support of the family, with structured 
goals that should be achieved during an ICU admission. 
Free with 
journal 
access 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17057
606  
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14501
954  
VHA Care and Communication 
“Bundle” 
Describes “bundle of care” that includes identification of surrogate decision 
makers and patient preferences, communication timelines, social work, 
and spiritual support; with performance measurement and feedback.  
Free with 
journal 
access 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16885
251  
University of Maryland Family 
Meeting Algorithm 
Description of algorithm (e.g., introduction of clinical team, identification of 
surrogate decision makers and advance directives, palliative care 
involvement) designed to improve ICU communication, including time-
based checklist (i.e., benchmarks at 24, 72, and 96 hours), as well as 
triggers to escalate the family communication algorithm.  
Free with 
journal 
access 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24085
828  
Bereavement Brochure 
Bereavement Support Leaflet, 
Saint-Louis Teaching Hospital 
(France) 
This appendix to a randomized trial examining the positive effects of a 
proactive end-of-life conference strategy on long-term adverse 
psychological outcomes among families contains an extensive brochure 
that was used in the study to counsel families on bereavement. 
Free with 
journal 
access 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17267
907  
 
 
 
 
• 
Based on existing evidence of patient and family burdens associated with poor communication, as well as improved clinician-reported skills and comfort following 
communication training, we suggest that ICU clinicians receive family-centered communication training as one element of an overall well-rounded critical care 
training curriculum and ongoing education.  
 
Communication Training Programs for Clinicians 
AHRQ Communication Training 
Slides 
Provides definitions of patient and family engagement and overview of 
communication skills; includes practice exercises in the form of 
patient/provider scenarios. 
Free 
http://www.ahrq.gov 
 
Breaking Bad News Foundation 
Communication skills training program developed by a neonatologist where 
physicians and healthcare workers participate in improvisational role-
playing sessions with professional actors. Sessions are video-taped and 
watched remotely by certified instructors. Foundation will work with 
institutions to fit their local needs. 
Costs 
available 
upon 
request 
http://www.bbnfoundation.org/ 
 
Center to Advance Palliative Care 
(CAPC) 
Formal membership to CAPC includes access to numerous CME/CEU 
courses. 
Range 
from $600 
for critical 
access to 
$7500 for 
institution 
https://www.capc.org/capc-central/courses/ 
 73 
 
 
73 
 
DocCom 
Comprehensive online program with > 400 video modules demonstrating 
communication skills. Includes evidence-based recommendations, skills 
checklists, and assessment questions. 
$95/yr for 
individual; 
$40+ per 
person 
group 
pricing; 
$25+ per 
person + 
library 
pricing 
http://www.aachonline.org/dnn/DocCom.asp
x 
IMPACT-ICU  
Quality improvement program at the University of California system 
designed to integrate palliative care into the ICU by training and supporting 
bedside nurses. Internet link is to training manual outlining the 
implementation of communication skills training workshops for nurses. 
Free 
https://ucsf.box.com/ImpactICUProjectGuide 
Institute for Healthcare 
Communication 
Offers variety of workshops on communication, including disclosing 
unanticipated medical outcomes, end-of-life conversations, and challenging 
clinician-patient relationships. 
Costs 
available 
upon 
request 
http://healthcarecomm.org/training/ 
Vital Talk 
Online communication skills courses available for clinicians who work with 
patients with serious illness and end-of-life care, focused on balancing 
honesty with empathy.  
Costs 
available 
upon 
request 
www.vitaltalk.org 
 
 
 
 
Category 4: Consultations 
 
 
 
 
• 
Proactive palliative care consultation be provided to decrease ICU and hospital length of stay among selected critically ill patients. 
 
 
 
 
Center to Advance Palliative Care 
– Improving Palliative Care in the 
ICU Project (CAPC / IPAL) 
Free resource available on website regarding the implementation of 
screening criteria for palliative care in ICUs.  
Free 
https://media.capc.org/filer_public/80/be/80
be3587-6ca1-4eb8-93f0-
7fa0e30cd153/76_66_ipal-icu-implementing-
icu-screening-criteria-for-unmet-palliative-
care-needs.pdf 
National Consensus Project for 
Quality Palliative Care Clinical 
Practice Guidelines 
Guidelines providing a “blueprint” upon which to build optimal palliative 
care.  The document comments on the issue of primary vs. consultative 
palliative care. 
Free 
http://www.nationalconsensusproject.org/gu
ideline.pdf  
 
 
 
 
 74 
 
 
74 
 
• 
Ethics consultation, particularly in reaction to a conflict about goals of care for an ICU patient, be provided to decrease ICU and hospital length of stay among 
selected critically ill patients. 
 
 
 
 
Joint Professional Societies 
Statement on Responding to 
Requests for Potentially 
Inappropriate Treatments in ICUs 
Provides a protocol for early consultation with experts in communication 
and conflict negotiation, namely ethics or palliative care. It is 
recommended that these practitioners become involved early when 
conflict is arising, and that they facilitate frequent, effective 
communication between healthcare providers and the patients and/or 
their surrogates. 
Free with 
journal 
access 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25978
438  
 
 
 
 
• 
A psychologist’s intervention be provided to specifically incorporate a multimodal CBT-based approach to improve outcomes in mothers of pre-term babies admitted 
to the NICU. 
 
 
 
 
Behavioral Interventions for 
Mothers of Pre-Term Babies 
A manualized 6-session treatment based on traum-focused cognitive-
behavioral therapy that includes: (1) psychoeducation to educate mothers 
about PTSD and common feelings and thoughts of NICU parents; (2) 
cognitive restructuring to help mothers recognize and challenge erroneous 
and maladaptive cognitions; (3) progressive muscle relaxation to reduce 
anxiety; and (4) development and processing of the mother’s trauma 
narrative. The intervention has been shown in a single center study to be 
effective in reducing symptoms of parental trauma, anxiety, and depression 
in the NICU and at 6-month follow-up. 
Free with 
journal 
access 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23909
669  
 
 
 
 
• 
Targeted video and reading materials be provided in the context of psychological support provided to mothers of pre-term babies admitted to the ICU. 
 
 
 
 
• 
Social workers be included within an interdisciplinary team to participate in family meetings and improve family satisfaction. 
 
 
 
 
• 
Family navigators assigned to families throughout ICU stay be considered in the ICU to improve family satisfaction with physician communication, psychological 
symptoms, and reduce length of ICU or hospital stay and costs of care. 
 
 
 
 
Published Training Protocol for 
ICU “Facilitators” 
Describes a protocol for a trained nurse or social worker “communication 
facilitator” designed to improve psychological distress among family 
members of critically ill patients, patient length of stay in the intensive care 
unit and hospital, and costs associated with care and the intervention. 
Free with 
journal 
access 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22772
089  
 
 
 
 
• 
Given the consistency of expression of family values for availability of spiritual care, the accreditation standard requirements, and the results of the observation 
study families should be offered spiritual support with a spiritual advisor or chaplain. 
 75 
 
 
75 
 
Category 5: Operational and Environmental Issues 
 
 
 
 
• 
Protocols be implemented to ensure adequate and standardized use of sedation and analgesia during withdrawal of life support. 
 
 
 
 
University of Washington 
Withdrawal of Life Support 
Orders for Adults 
Provides guidance for use of analgesics and sedatives in addition to 
discontinuation of other therapies not required when adult patients are 
transitioned to a goal of comfort care. Also describes a set of principles to 
assist transitioning goals-of-care to promote comfort instead of focusing on 
disease processes. 
Free 
http://depts.washington.edu/eolcare/pubs/w
p-content/uploads/2011/08/wls-orders2.pdf 
 
 
 
 
• 
Specialized nurse be used as part of an overall program to potentially decrease ICU and hospital length of stay and to possibly improve quality of communication in 
the ICU. Hospitals implement policies to promote family-centered care in the ICU to improve family experience. 
 
 
 
 
Institute for Patient- and Family-
Centered Care (work tools for 
hospital-wide leaders) 
Contains links to multiple well-established tools for executives; including 
“How to Get Started,” which details a step-wise plan for hospitals to build 
partnerships with patients and families; and ‘Strategies for Leadership,” 
which includes a video, resource guides, and a hospital self-assessment 
inventory. 
Free 
http://www.ipfcc.org/tools/downloads-
tools.html  
Institute for Patient- and Family-
Centered Care (work tools for ICU 
leaders) 
Assessment tools that provide teams with a structure for assessing their 
unit and hospital for the four principles of patient andfamily-centered care 
in ten areas. 
$10 each 
http://www.ipfcc.org/resources/other/index.
html 
 
 
 
 
• 
In the absence of evidence for specific strategies but evidence of harm related to noise, we suggest that ICUs implement noise reduction and environmental hygiene 
practices and the use of private rooms to improve patient/family satisfaction and noise reduction while managing staff stress imposed with the change from open-
bay to private rooms in the neonatal ICU. 
 
 
 
 
ACCM Guidelines for Intensive 
Care Unit Design 
Expert opinion on optimal ICU design, including extensive 
recommendations for designing a “family support zone.”   
Free 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22511
137 
Recommended Standards for 
Newborn ICU Design 
Expert opinion on optimal neonatal ICU design, including extensive 
recommendations for family support space. 
Free 
https://www3.nd.edu/~nicudes/Recommend
edNICUStandardsFinal8Aug15.pdf  
 76 
 
 
76 
 
 77 
 
 
77 
 
Electronic Supplement Table 6: Recommendations rank ordered by importance of outcome 
 
OUTCOME AND  
AVERAGE CLINICIAN RATING 
(10 = highest rating) 
ICU FAMILY-CENTERED CARE RECOMMENDATIONS 
Family Psychological Symptoms  
9.62 
• 
A psychologist-delivered trauma-focused multimodal cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT  
 
 
 
 
reading materials providing psychological support be provided to mothers of pre-term b
 
 
 
 
Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU). (Rec 1.3) 
• 
Family navigators be assigned to families throughout the ICU stay. (Rec 1.5) 
• 
Healthcare clinicians in the ICU use structured approaches to communication with fam
 
 
members of critically ill patients undergoing withdrawal of life support be offered a writte  
 
 
(Rec 2.2) 
• 
Family members of critically ill patients be offered the option of being present during re
 
 
  
staff member assigned to support the family.  (Rec 3.3) 
• 
Family members of critically ill children be offered the option to be taught how to assist 
 
 
 
 
 
critically ill child. (Rec 4.1) 
• 
Family education programs be included as part of clinical care. (Rec 4.2) 
• 
Peer-to-peer support be implemented in pediatric ICUs. (Rec 4.3) 
• 
ICUs provide family with leaflets that give information about the ICU setting. (Rec 4.4) 
• 
ICU diaries be implemented in ICUs. (Rec 4.5) 
 
Quality of Communication 
7.67 
• 
ICU clinicians receive family-centered communication training as one element of a critic  
 
 
(Rec 2.3) 
• 
Validated decision support tools for family members be implemented in the ICU setting 
tools exist. (Rec 4.6) 
• 
Among surrogates of ICU patients who are deemed by a clinician to have a poor progn
 
 
 
communication approach during family conferences and validated decision support too  
 
 
 
 
implemented in the ICU setting. (Rec 4.7) 
• 
Nurses be trained to provide support for family members. (Rec 5.2) 
 
Family Trust in Clinicians 
7.66 
• 
Routine interdisciplinary family conferences be used in the ICU. (Rec 2.1) 
Family Satisfaction with Care 
7.33 
• 
Medical social workers be included within an interdisciplinary team to participate in fam
 
 
 
• 
Family members of critically ill patients be offered open flexible visiting that meets their 
 
 
 
support for staff and positive reinforcement to work in partnership with families. (Rec 3.
• 
Family education programs be included as part of clinical care. (Rec 4.2) 
• 
Peer-to-peer support be implemented in pediatric ICUs. (Rec 4.3) 
• 
Hospitals implement policies to promote family-centered care in the ICU. (Rec 5.3) 
• 
ICUs implement noise reduction and environmental hygiene practices and use private 
• 
Family sleep be considered and families are provided a sleep surface to reduce the eff
 
 
 
(Rec 5.7) 
 
 78 
 
 
78 
 
Family Satisfaction with 
Communication 
7.33 
• 
Spiritual support from a spiritual advisor or chaplain be offered to families of ICU patien  
 
desire for spiritual care.  (Rec 1.1) 
• 
Family navigators be assigned to families throughout the ICU stay. (Rec 1.5) 
• 
Routine interdisciplinary family conferences be used in the ICU. (Rec 2.1) 
• 
Healthcare clinicians in the ICU use structured approaches to communication with fam
 
 
members of critically ill patients undergoing withdrawal of life support be offered a writte  
 
 
(Rec 2.2) 
• 
ICU clinicians receive family-centered communication training as one element of a critic  
 
 
 
(Rec 2.3) 
• 
Family members of critically ill patients be offered the option of participating in interdisc
 
 
 
 
3.2) 
• 
Validated decision support tools for family members be implemented in the ICU setting 
 
 
 
tools exist. (Rec 4.6) 
 
Family Self-Efficacy 
6.93 
 
• 
Family members of critically ill children be offered the option to be taught how to assist 
 
 
 
 
 
critically ill child. (Rec 4.1) 
 
Family or Clinician Conflict 
6.70 
• 
Routine interdisciplinary family conferences be used in the ICU. (Rec 2.1) 
• 
Validated decision support tools for family members be implemented in the ICU setting 
 
 
 
tools exist. (Rec 4.6) 
Clinician Rated Quality of Dying 
6.30 
 
• 
Protocols be implemented to ensure adequate and standardized use of sedation and a
 
 
 
of life support. (Rec 5.1) 
 
ICU and Hospital Utilization  
6.22 
• 
Proactive palliative care consultation be provided among selected critically ill patients. 
 
• 
Ethics consultation be provided among critically ill patients for whom there is a conflict 
 
 
 
 
 
1.2) 
• 
Family navigators be assigned to families throughout the ICU stay. (Rec 1.5) 
• 
Routine interdisciplinary family conferences be used in the ICU. (Rec 2.1) 
• 
Nurses be trained to provide support for family members. (Rec 5.2) 
Clinician Self-Efficacy  
5.59 
 
• 
ICU clinicians receive family-centered communication training as one element of a critic  
 
 
 
(Rec 2.3) 
 
 
 
 
 79 
 
 
79 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Citation analysis of family-centered care publication from Thomson Web of Science 
 80 
 
 
80 
 
Figure 2: Prisma Flow Diagram for Systematic Review 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Adapted from: Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG, The PRISMA Group (2009). 
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta- Analyses: The PRISMA 
Statement. PLoS Med 6(6): e1000097. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed1000097 
 
 
Records identified through 
database searching 
PubMed              2437 
CINAHL               3051 
EMBASE              4313 
( n = 9801 ) 
Records after duplicates removed 
( n = 4158  ) 
Additional records identified 
through alerts & hand search 
( n = 76 ) 
Records screened 
( n =  4234  ) 
Records excluded 
( n =  3910 ) 
Full-text articles assessed 
as eligible 
( n = 324 ) 
Full-text articles excluded, 
with reason 
( n = 88 ) 
Studies included 
(n = 236 ) 
Screening 
Included 
Eligibility 
Identification 
 81 
 
 
81 
 
References  
1. Prendergast TJ: Resolving conflicts surrounding end-of-life care. New Horiz 1997;5:62-71  
2. Desai SV, Law TJ, Needham DM: Long-term complications of critical care. Crit Care Med 
2011;39:371-379  
3. Needham DM, Davidson J, Cohen H, et al: Improving long-term outcomes after discharge 
from intensive care unit: Report from a stakeholders' conference. Crit Care Med 2012;40:502-
509  
4. Lautrette A, Darmon M, Megarbane B, et al: A communication strategy and brochure for 
relatives of patients dying in the ICU. N Engl J Med 2007;356:469-478  
5. Davidson JE, Jones C, Bienvenu OJ: Family response to critical illness: Postintensive care 
syndrome-family. Crit Care Med 2012;40:618-624  
6. Adelman RD, Tmanova LL, Delgado D, et al: Caregiver burden: A clinical review. JAMA 
2014;311:1052-1060  
7. Lynn J: Strategies to ease the burden of family caregivers. JAMA 2014;311:1021-1022  
8. Davidson JE, Powers K, Hedayat KM, et al: Clinical practice guidelines for support of the 
family in the patient-centered intensive care unit: American college of critical care medicine task 
force 2004-2005. Crit Care Med 2007;35:605-622  
9. Council of Medical Specialty Societies: Principles for the development of specialty society 
clinical guidelines. Chicago, CMSS, 2012  
 82 
 
 
82 
 
10. McMaster University: Health information research unit (HIRU) search filters for MEDLINE. 
http://hiru.mcmaster.ca/hiru/HIRU_Hedges_MEDLINE_Strategies.aspx#Qualitative Edition. 
2003  
11. Wilczynski NL, Marks S, Haynes RB: Search strategies for identifying qualitative studies in 
CINAHL. Qual Health Res 2007;17:705-710  
12. McAlvin SS, Carew-Lyons A: Family presence during resuscitation and invasive procedures 
in pediatric critical care: A systematic review. Am J Crit Care 2014;23:477-485  
13. Staniszewska S, Brett J, Redshaw M, et al: The POPPY study: Developing a model of 
family‐centred care for neonatal units. Worldviews on Evidence-Based Nursing 2012;9:243-255  
14. Visser M, Deliens L, Houttekier D: Physician-related barriers to communication and patient 
and family-centred decision making towards the end of life in intensive care: A systematic 
review. Crit Care 2014;18:604  
15. Ciufo D, Hader R, Holly C: A comprehensive systematic review of visitation models in adult 
critical care units within the context of patient- and family-centred care. Int J Evid Based Healthc 
2011;9:362-387  
16. Boudreaux ED, Francis JL, Loyacano T: Family presence during invasive procedures and 
resuscitations in the emergency department: A critical review and suggestions for future 
research. Ann Emerg Med 2002;40:193-205  
17. Power N, Franck L: Parent participation in the care of hospitalized children: A systematic 
review. J Adv Nurs 2008;62:622-641  
 83 
 
 
83 
 
18. Clarke E, Curtis J, Luce J, et al: Quality indicators for end-of-life care in the intensive care 
unit. Crit Care Med 2003;31:2255-2262  
19. Cleveland LM: Parenting in the neonatal intensive care unit. J Obstet Gynecol Neonatal 
Nurs 2008;37:666-691  
20. Halm MA: Family presence during resuscitation: A critical review of the literature. Am J Crit 
Care 2005;14:494-511  
21. Shields L, Zhou H, Pratt J, et al: Family-centred care for hospitalised children aged 0-12 
years. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2012;DOI: 
10.1002/14651858.CD004811.pub3.  
22. Cypress BS: Family presence on rounds: A systematic review of literature. Dimens Crit Care 
Nurs 2012;31:53-64  
23. Fawole OA, Dy SM, Wilson RF, et al: A systematic review of communication quality 
improvement interventions for patients with advanced and serious illness. J Gen Intern Med 
2013;28:570-577  
24. Aslakson R, Cheng J, Vollenweider D, et al: Evidence-based palliative care in the intensive 
care unit: A systematic review of interventions. Journal of Palliative Medicine 2014;17:219-235  
25. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, et al: Going from evidence to recommendations. BMJ 
2008;336:1049-1051  
26. Al-Mutair A, Plummer V, Clerehan R, et al: Needs and experiences of intensive care 
patients' families: A saudi qualitative study. Nurs Crit Care 2014;19:135-144  
 84 
 
 
84 
 
27. Boyles C, Langley R: The transfer of parents from picu to the ward. Pediatric Critical Care 
Medicine 2011;1):A64-A65  
28. Jaeschke R, Guyatt GH, Dellinger P, et al: Use of GRADE grid to reach decisions on clinical 
practice guidelines when consensus is elusive. BMJ 2008;337:a744  
29. Schunemann HJ, Jaeschke R, Cook DJ, et al: An official ATS statement: Grading the quality 
of evidence and strength of recommendations in ATS guidelines and recommendations. Am J 
Respir Crit Care Med 2006;174:605-614  
30. Campbell ML, Guzman JA: Impact of a proactive approach to improve end-of-life care in a 
medical ICU. Chest 2003;123:266-271  
31. Campbell ML, Guzman JA: A proactive approach to improve end-of-life care in a medical 
intensive care unit for patients with terminal dementia. Crit Care Med 2004;32:1839-1843  
32. Norton SA, Hogan LA, Holloway RG, et al: Proactive palliative care in the medical intensive 
care unit: Effects on length of stay for selected high-risk patients. Crit Care Med 2007;35:1530-
1535  
33. Lamba S, Murphy P, McVicker S, et al: Changing end-of-life care practice for liver transplant 
service patients: Structured palliative care intervention in the surgical intensive care unit. J Pain 
Symptom Manage 2012;44:508-519  
34. Mosenthal AC, Murphy PA, Barker LK, et al: Changing the culture around end-of-life care in 
the trauma intensive care unit. J Trauma 2008;64:1587-1593  
 85 
 
 
85 
 
35. Khandelwal N, Kross EK, Engelberg RA, et al: Estimating the effect of palliative care 
interventions and advance care planning on ICU utilization: A systematic review. Crit Care Med 
2015;43:1102-1111  
36. Andereck WS, McGaughey JW, Schneiderman LJ, et al: Seeking to reduce nonbeneficial 
treatment in the ICU: An exploratory trial of proactive ethics intervention. Critical Care Medicine 
2014;42:824-830  
37. Schneiderman LJ, Gilmer T, Teetzel HD: Impact of ethics consultations in the intensive care 
setting: A randomized, controlled trial. Crit Care Med 2000;28:3920-3924  
38. Schneiderman LJ, Gilmer T, Teetzel HD, et al: Effect of ethics consultations on 
nonbeneficial life-sustaining treatments in the intensive care setting: A randomized controlled 
trial. JAMA 2003;290:1166-1172  
39. Dowdy MD, Robertson C, Bander JA: A study of proactive ethics consultation for critically 
and terminally ill patients with extended lengths of stay. Crit Care Med 1998;26:252-259  
40. Alam J, Ahlund S, Thalange N, et al: Psychological support for parents in UK tertiary-level 
neonatal units - A postcode lottery. Archives of Disease in Childhood 2010;95:A104  
41. Tunick RA, Gavin JA, DeMaso DR, et al: Pediatric psychology critical care consultation: An 
emerging subspecialty. Clinical Practice in Pediatric Psychology 2013;1:42-54  
42. Conniff H, Pierce C, Brierley J, et al: Communication on picu: Reflections on consultant 
conversations with families. Pediatric Critical Care Medicine 2011;1):A71  
43. Kentish-Barnes N, Chaize M, Seegers V, et al: Complicated grief after death of a relative in 
the intensive care unit. Eur Respir J 2015;45:1341-1352  
 86 
 
 
86 
 
44. Carvalho AE, Linhares MB, Padovani FH, et al: Anxiety and depression in mothers of 
preterm infants and psychological intervention during hospitalization in neonatal ICU. Span J 
Psychol 2009;12:161-170  
45. Shaw RJ, St John N, Lilo EA, et al: Prevention of traumatic stress in mothers with preterm 
infants: A randomized controlled trial. Pediatrics 2013;132:e886-94  
46. Shaw RJ, St John N, Lilo E, et al: Prevention of traumatic stress in mothers of preterms: 6-
month outcomes. Pediatrics 2014;134:e481-8  
47. Peris A, Bonizzoli M, Iozzelli D, et al: Early intra-intensive care unit psychological 
intervention promotes recovery from post traumatic stress disorders, anxiety and depression 
symptoms in critically ill patients. Crit Care 2011;15:R41  
48. Burns JP, Mello MM, Studdert DM, et al: Results of a clinical trial on care improvement for 
the critically ill. Crit Care Med 2003;31:2107-2117  
49. Sundararajan K, Sullivan TR, Chapman M: Determinants of family satisfaction in the 
intensive care unit. Anaesth Intensive Care 2012;40:159-165  
50. Curtis JR, Treece PD, Nielsen EL, et al: Randomized trial of communication facilitators to 
reduce family distress and intensity of end-of-life care. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
2015;193:154-162  
51. Chaboyer W, Thalib L, Alcorn K, et al: The effect of an ICU liaison nurse on patients and 
family's anxiety prior to transfer to the ward: An intervention study. Intensive Crit Care Nurs 
2007;23:362-369  
 87 
 
 
87 
 
52. Shelton W, Moore CD, Socaris S, et al: The effect of a family support intervention on family 
satisfaction, length-of-stay, and cost of care in the intensive care unit. Crit Care Med 
2010;38:1315-1320  
53. Moore CD, Bernardini GL, Hinerman R, et al: The effect of a family support intervention on 
physician, nurse, and family perceptions of care in the surgical, neurological, and medical 
intensive care units. Crit Care Nurs Q 2012;35:378-387  
54. Al-Mutair A, Plummer V, Clerehan R, et al: Families' needs of critical care muslim patients in 
saudi arabia: A quantitative study. Nurs Crit Care 2014;19:185-195  
55. Puggina A, da Silva M, de Araújo M: Messages from relatives of patients in coma: Hope as 
common element. Acta Paul Enfermagem 2008;21:249-255  
56. Anderson W, Cimino J, Ungar A, et al: Keys to communicating about prognosis in the ICU: A 
multicenter study of family, provider, and expert perspectives (FR424-C). Journal of Pain and 
Symptom Management 2013;45 (2):382  
57. Gries CJ, Engelberg RA, Kross EK, et al: Predictors of symptoms of posttraumatic stress 
and depression in family members after patient death in the ICU. Chest 2010;137:280-287  
58. Robinson MR, Thiel MM, Backus MM, et al: Matters of spirituality at the end of life in the 
pediatric intensive care unit. Pediatrics 2006;118:e719-e729  
59. The Joint Commission: Specifications manual for joint commission national quality core 
measures. 2015A1 Edition. Oak Brook, IL, Joint Commission Resources, 2015  
 88 
 
 
88 
 
60. Johnson JR, Engelberg RA, Nielsen EL, et al: The association of spiritual care providers' 
activities with family members' satisfaction with care after a death in the ICU*. Crit Care Med 
2014;42:1991-2000  
61. Halm MA, Myers RN, Bennetts P: Providing spiritual care to cardiac patients: Assessment 
and implications for practice. Crit Care Nurse 2000;20:54  
62. Wall RJ, Engelberg RA, Gries CJ, et al: Spiritual care of families in the intensive care unit. 
Crit Care Med 2007;35:1084-1090  
63. Campbell ML, Field BE: Management of the patient with do not resuscitate status: 
Compassion and cost containment. Heart Lung 1991;20:345-348  
64. Kynoch K, Chang A, Coyer F, et al: The effectiveness of interventions to meet family needs 
of critically ill patients in an adult intensive care unit: A systematic review protocol update. JBI 
Database of Systematic Reviews and Implementation Reports 2014;12:14-26  
65. Karlsson C, Tisell A, Engstrom A, et al: Family members' satisfaction with critical care: A 
pilot study. Nurs Crit Care 2011;16:11-18  
66. Macdonald ME, Liben S, Carnevale FA, et al: An office or a bedroom? challenges for family-
centered care in the pediatric intensive care unit. J Child Health Care 2012;16:237-249  
67. Soury-Lavergne A, Hauchard I, Dray S, et al: Survey of caregiver opinions on the 
practicalities of family-centred care in intensive care units. J Clin Nurs 2012;21:1060-1067  
68. Raz S, Goren Y, Artzman P, et al: Initial experience with a family support group in the ICU. 
Intensive Care Medicine 2010;36:S156  
 89 
 
 
89 
 
69. Plakas S, Taket A, Cant B, et al: The meaning and importance of vigilant attendance for the 
relatives of intensive care unit patients. Nurs Crit Care 2014;19:243-254  
70. Burr G: Contextualizing critical care family needs through triangulation: An australian study. 
Intensive Crit Care Nurs 1998;14:161-169  
71. Davidson JE, Daly BJ, Agan D, et al: Facilitated sensemaking: Testing of a mid-range theory 
of family support. Commun Nurs Res 2009;42:353-353  
72. Olsen KD, Dysvik E, Hansen BS: The meaning of family members' presence during 
intensive care stay: A qualitative study. Intensive Crit Care Nurs 2009;25:190-198  
73. Giannini A, Miccinesi G, Prandi E, et al: Partial liberalization of visiting policies and ICU staff: 
A before-and-after study. Intensive Care Med 2013;39:2180-2187  
74. Melnyk BM, Alpert-Gillis L, Feinstein NF, et al: Creating opportunities for parent 
empowerment: Program effects on the mental health/coping outcomes of critically ill young 
children and their mothers. Pediatrics 2004;113:e597-607  
75. Melnyk BM, Crean HF, Feinstein NF, et al: Testing the theoretical framework of the COPE 
program for mothers of critically ill children: An integrative model of young children's post-
hospital adjustment behaviors. Journal of Pediatric Psychology 2007;32:463-474  
76. Melnyk BM, Feinstein NF, Alpert-Gillis L, et al: Reducing premature infants' length of stay 
and improving parents' mental health outcomes with the creating opportunities for parent 
empowerment (COPE) neonatal intensive care unit program: A randomized, controlled trial. 
Pediatrics 2006;118:e1414-27  
 90 
 
 
90 
 
77. Baharoon S, Al Yafi W, Al Qurashi A, et al: Family satisfaction in critical care units: Does an 
open visiting hours policy have an impact? J Patient Saf 2014;  
78. Henneman EA, McKenzie JB, Dewa CS: An evaluation of interventions for meeting the 
information needs of families of critically ill patients. Am J Crit Care 1992;1:85-93  
79. Chapman DK, Collingridge DS, Mitchell LA, et al: Satisfaction with elimination of all visitation 
restrictions in a mixed-profile intensive care unit. Am J Crit Care 2016;25:46-50  
80. Mangram AJ, Mccauley T, Villarreal D, et al: Families' perception of the value of timed daily 
"family rounds" in a trauma ICU. Am Surg 2005;71:886-891  
81. Schiller WR, Anderson BF: Family as a member of the trauma rounds: A strategy for 
maximized communication. J Trauma Nurs 2003;10:93-101  
82. Tripathi S, Arteaga G, Rohlik G, et al: Implementation of patient-centered bedside rounds in 
the pediatric intensive care unit. J Nurs Care Qual 2015;30:160-166  
83. Stickney CA, Ziniel SI, Brett MS, et al: Family participation during intensive care unit rounds: 
Attitudes and experiences of parents and healthcare providers in a tertiary pediatric intensive 
care unit. J Pediatr 2014;164:402-6.e1-4  
84. Drago MJ, Aronson PL, Madrigal V, et al: Are family characteristics associated with 
attendance at family centered rounds in the PICU? Pediatr Crit Care Med 2013;14:e93-7  
85. Bramwell R, Weindling M: Families' views on ward rounds in neonatal units. Archives of 
Disease in Childhood: Fetal and Neonatal Edition 2005;90:F429-F431  
 91 
 
 
91 
 
86. Grzyb MJ, Coo H, Ruhland L, et al: Views of parents and health-care providers regarding 
parental presence at bedside rounds in a neonatal intensive care unit. J Perinatol 2014;34:143-
148  
87. Ladak LA, Premji SS, Amanullah MM, et al: Family-centered rounds in pakistani pediatric 
intensive care settings: Non-randomized pre- and post-study design. Int J Nurs Stud 
2013;50:717-726  
88. Voos KC, Ross G, Ward MJ, et al: Effects of implementing family-centered rounds (FCRs) in 
a neonatal intensive care unit (NICU). J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 2011;24:1403-1406  
89. Jacobowski NL, Girard TD, Mulder JA, et al: Families in critical care. communication in 
critical care: Family rounds in the intensive care unit. Am J Crit Care 2010;19:421-430  
90. Cameron MA, Schleien CL, Morris MC: Parental presence on pediatric intensive care unit 
rounds. J Pediatr 2009;155:522-528  
91. Aronson PL, Yau J, Helfaer MA, et al: Impact of family presence during pediatric intensive 
care unit rounds on the family and medical team. Pediatrics 2009;124:1119-1125  
92. Egging D, Crowley M, Arruda T, et al: Emergency nursing resource: Family presence during 
invasive procedures and resuscitation in the emergency department. J Emerg Nurs 
2011;37:469-473  
93. ECC Committee, Subcommittees and Task Forces of the American Heart Association: 2005 
american heart association guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency 
cardiovascular care. Circulation 2005;112:IV1-203  
94. Family presence during CPR and invasive procedures. AACN NEWS 2004;21:4-4  
 92 
 
 
92 
 
95. American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Pediatric Emergency Medicine, American 
College of Emergency Physicians Pediatric Emergency Medicine Committee, O'Malley P, et al: 
Patient- and family-centered care and the role of the emergency physician providing care to a 
child in the emergency department. Pediatrics 2006;118:2242-2244  
96. Fulbrook P, Latour J, Albarran J, et al: The presence of family members during 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation: European federation of critical care nursing associations, 
european society of paediatric and neonatal intensive care and european society of cardiology 
council on cardiovascular nursing and allied professions joint position statement. Eur J 
Cardiovasc Nurs 2007;6:255-258  
97. Moons P, Norekval TM: European nursing organizations stand up for family presence during 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation: A joint position statement. Progress in cardiovascular nursing 
2008;23:136-139  
98. Meyers TA, Eichhorn DJ, Guzzetta CE: Do families want to be present during CPR? A 
retrospective survey. Journal of emergency nursing: JEN : official publication of the Emergency 
Department Nurses Association 1998;24:400-405  
99. Mazer MA, Cox LA, Capon JA: The public's attitude and perception concerning witnessed 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Critical Care Medicine 2006;34:2925-2928  
100. Duran CR, Oman KS, Abel JJ, et al: Attitudes toward and beliefs about family presence: A 
survey of healthcare providers, patients' families, and patients. American Journal of Critical Care 
2007;16:270-280  
101. Ong MEH, Chung WL, Mei JSE: Comparing attitudes of the public and medical staff 
towards witnessed resuscitation in an asian population. Resuscitation 2007;73:103-108  
 93 
 
 
93 
 
102. Tinsley C, Hill JB, Shah J, et al: Experience of families during cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation in a pediatric intensive care unit. Pediatrics 2008;122:e799-804  
103. Zakaria M, Siddique M: Presence of family members during cardio-pulmonary resuscitation 
after necessary amendments. Journal of the Pakistan Medical Association 2008;58:632-635  
104. Ersoy G, Yanturali S, Suner S, et al: Turkish patient relatives' attitudes towards family-
witnessed resuscitation and affecting sociodemographic factors. European Journal of 
Emergency Medicine 2009;16:188-193  
105. Mortelmans LJM, Van Broeckhoven V, Van Boxstael S, et al: Patients'and relatives'view on 
witnessed resuscitation in the emergency department: A prospective study. European Journal of 
Emergency Medicine 2010;17:203-207  
106. Hung MSY, Pang SMC: Family presence preference when patients are receiving 
resuscitation in an accident and emergency department. J Adv Nurs 2011;67:56-67  
107. Leung NY, Chow SK: Attitudes of healthcare staff and patients' family members towards 
family presence during resuscitation in adult critical care units. J Clin Nurs 2012;21:2083-2093  
108. Chew KS, Ghani ZA: Attitudes and perceptions of the general malaysian public regarding 
family presence during resuscitation. Singapore Medical Journal 2014;55:439-442  
109. Maxton FJ: Parental presence during resuscitation in the PICU: The parents' experience. 
sharing and surviving the resuscitation: A phenomenological study. J Clin Nurs 2008;17:3168-
3176  
110. Leske JS, McAndrew NS, Brasel KJ: Experiences of families when present during 
resuscitation in the emergency department after trauma. J Trauma Nurs 2013;20:77-85  
 94 
 
 
94 
 
111. MacLean SL, Guzzetta CE, White C, et al: Family presence during cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation and invasive procedures: Practices of critical care and emergency nurses. Am J 
Crit Care 2003;12:246-257  
112. Fallis WM, McClement S, Pereira A: Family presence during resuscitation: A survey of 
canadian critical care nurses' practices and perceptions. Dynamics 2008;19:22-28  
113. Goldberger ZD, Nallamothu BK, Nichol G, et al: Policies allowing family presence during 
resuscitation and patterns of care during in-hospital cardiac arrest. Circ Cardiovasc Qual 
Outcomes 2015;8:226-234  
114. Meyers TA, Eichhorn DJ, Guzzetta CE, et al: Family presence during invasive procedures 
and resuscitation. The American journal of nursing 2000;100:32-42; quiz 43  
115. Redley B, Hood K: Staff attitudes towards family presence during resuscitation. Accident 
and emergency nursing 1996;4:145-151  
116. McClenathan BM, Torrington KG, Uyehara CF: Family member presence during 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation: A survey of US and international critical care professionals. 
Chest 2002;122:2204-2211  
117. Wacht O, Dopelt K, Snir Y, et al: Attitudes of emergency department staff toward family 
presence during resuscitation. Israel Medical Association Journal 2010;12:366-370  
118. Al Mutair A, Plummer V, Paul O'Brien A, et al: Attitudes of healthcare providers towards 
family involvement and presence in adult critical care units in saudi arabia: A quantitative study. 
J Clin Nurs 2014;23:744-755  
 95 
 
 
95 
 
119. Sacchetti A, Carraccio C, Leva E, et al: Acceptance of family member presence during 
pediatric resuscitations in the emergency department: Effects of personal experience. Pediatric 
Emergency Care 2000;16:85-87  
120. Feagan LM, Fisher NJ: The impact of education on provider attitudes toward family-
witnessed resuscitation. J Emerg Nurs 2011;37:231-239  
121. Jarvis AS: Parental presence during resuscitation: Attitudes of staff on a paediatric 
intensive care unit. Intensive Crit Care Nurs 1998;14:3-7  
122. Grice AS, Picton P, Deakin CD: Study examining attitudes of staff, patients and relatives to 
witnessed resuscitation in adult intensive care units. Br J Anaesth 2003;91:820-824  
123. Ong MEH, Chan YH, Srither DE, et al: Asian medical staff attitudes towards witnessed 
resuscitation. Resuscitation 2004;60:45-50  
124. Knott A, Kee CC: Nurses' beliefs about family presence during resuscitation. Applied 
Nursing Research 2005;18:192-198  
125. Yanturali S, Ersoy G, Yuruktumen A, et al: A national survey of turkish emergency 
physicians perspectives regarding family witnessed cardiopulmonary resuscitation. International 
Journal of Clinical Practice 2005;59:441-446  
126. Macy C, Lampe E, O'Neil B, et al: The relationship between the hospital setting and 
perceptions of family-witnessed resuscitation in the emergency department. Resuscitation 
2006;70:74-79  
127. Badir A, Sepit D: Family presence during CPR: A study of the experiences and opinions of 
turkish critical care nurses. Int J Nurs Stud 2007;44:83-92  
 96 
 
 
96 
 
128. Kirchhoff C, Stegmaier J, Buhmann S, et al: Trauma surgeons' attitude towards family 
presence during trauma resuscitation: A nationwide survey. Resuscitation 2007;75:267-275  
129. Lam DSY, Wong SN, Hui H, et al: Attitudes of doctors and nurses to family presence 
during paediatric cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Hong Kong Journal of Paediatrics 
2007;12:253-259  
130. Gunes UY, Zaybak A: A study of turkish critical care nurses' perspectives regarding family-
witnessed resuscitation. J Clin Nurs 2009;18:2907-2915  
131. Koberich S, Kaltwasser A, Rothaug O, et al: Family witnessed resuscitation - experience 
and attitudes of german intensive care nurses. Nurs Crit Care 2010;15:241-250  
132. Kianmehr N, Mofidi M, Rahmani H, et al: The attitudes of team members towards family 
presence during hospital-based CPR: A study based in the muslim setting of four iranian 
teaching hospitals. Journal of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh 2010;40:4-8  
133. Gordon ED, Kramer E, Couper I, et al: Family-witnessed resuscitation in emergency 
departments: Doctors' attitudes and practices. South African Medical Journal 2011;101:765-767  
134. Kosowan S, Jensen L: Family presence during cardiopulmonary resuscitation: Cardiac 
health care professionals' perspectives. Canadian journal of cardiovascular nursing = Journal 
canadien en soins infirmiers cardio-vasculaires 2011;21:23-29  
135. Al-Mutair AS, Plummer V, Copnell B: Family presence during resuscitation: A descriptive 
study of nurses' attitudes from two saudi hospitals. Nurs Crit Care 2012;17:90-98  
 97 
 
 
97 
 
136. Mahabir D, Sammy I: Attitudes of ED staff to the presence of family during 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation: A trinidad and tobago perspective. Emergency Medicine Journal 
2012;29:817-820  
137. Tripon C, Defossez G, Ragot S, et al: Parental presence during cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation of children: The experience, opinions and moral positions of emergency teams in 
france. Archives of Disease in Childhood 2014;99:310-315  
138. Salamonson Y, van Heere B, Everett B, et al: Voices from the floor: Nurses' perceptions of 
the medical emergency team. Intensive Crit Care Nurs 2006;22:138-143  
139. Kingsnorth J, O'Connell K, Guzzetta CE, et al: Family presence during trauma activations 
and medical resuscitations in a pediatric emergency department: An evidence-based practice 
project. Journal of Emergency Nursing 2010;36:115-121  
140. Robinson SM, Mackenzie-Ross S, Campbell Hewson GL, et al: Psychological effect of 
witnessed resuscitation on bereaved relatives. Lancet 1998;352:614-17  
141. Holzhauser K, Finucane J, De Vries SM: Family presence during resuscitation: A 
randomised controlled trial of the impact of family presence. Australasian Emergency Nursing 
Journal 2006;8:139-147  
142. Jabre P, Belpomme V, Azoulay E, et al: Family presence during cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation. New England Journal of Medicine 2013;368:1008-1018  
143. Jabre P, Tazarourte K, Azoulay E, et al: Offering the opportunity for family to be present 
during cardiopulmonary resuscitation: 1-year assessment. Intensive Care Medicine 
2014;40:981-987  
 98 
 
 
98 
 
144. Pasquale MA, Pasquale MD, Baga L, et al: Family presence during trauma resuscitation: 
Ready for primetime? J Trauma 2010;69:1092-9; discussion 1099-100  
145. Ebrahim S, Singh S, Parshuram CS: Parental satisfaction, involvement, and presence after 
pediatric intensive care unit admission. J Crit Care 2013;28:40-45  
146. Oman KS, Duran CR: Health care providers' evaluations of family presence during 
resuscitation. Journal of Emergency Nursing 2010;36:524-533  
147. Mian P, Warchal S, Whitney S, et al: Impact of a multifaceted intervention on nurses' and 
physicians' attitudes and behaviors toward family presence during resuscitation. Critical Care 
Nurse 2007;27:52-61  
148. Mangurten J, Scott SH, Guzzetta CE, et al: Effects of family presence during resuscitation 
and invasive procedures in a pediatric emergency department. Journal of Emergency Nursing 
2006;32:225-233  
149. Franck LS, Oulton K, Nderitu S, et al: Parent involvement in pain management for NICU 
infants: A randomized controlled trial. Pediatrics 2011;128:510-518  
150. Bastani F, Abadi TA, Haghani H: Effect of family-centered care on improving parental 
satisfaction and reducing readmission among premature infants: A randomized controlled trial. J 
Clin Diagn Res 2015;9:SC04-8  
151. van der Pal SM, Maguire CM, le Cessie S, et al: Parental experiences during the first 
period at the neonatal unit after two developmental care interventions. Acta Paediatr 
2007;96:1611-1616  
 99 
 
 
99 
 
152. Azoulay E, Pochard F: Communication with family members of patients dying in the 
intensive care unit. Curr Opin Crit Care 2003;9:545-550  
153. Cooper LG, Gooding JS, Gallagher J, et al: Impact of a family-centered care initiative on 
NICU care, staff and families. J Perinatol 2007;27 Suppl 2:S32-7  
154. Chien W, Chiu YL, Lam L, et al: Effects of a needs-based education programme for family 
carers with a relative in an intensive care unit: A quasi-experimental study. Int J Nurs Stud 
2006;43:39-50  
155. Chiu YL, Chien WT, Lam LW: Effectiveness of a needs-based education programme for 
families with a critically ill relative in an intensive care unit. J Clin Nurs 2004;13:655-656  
156. Oswalt KL, McClain DB, Melnyk B: Reducing anxiety among children born preterm and 
their young mothers. MCN Am J Matern Child Nurs 2013;38:144-149  
157. Melnyk BM, Crean HF, Feinstein NF, et al: Maternal anxiety and depression after a 
premature infant's discharge from the neonatal intensive care unit: Explanatory effects of the 
creating opportunities for parent empowerment program. Nurs Res 2008;57:383-394  
158. Ahn YM, Kim NH: Parental perception of neonates, parental stress and education for NICU 
parents. Asian Nurs Res (Korean Soc Nurs Sci) 2007;1:199-210  
159. Chien W, Ip W, Lee I: Psychometric properties of a chinese version of the critical care 
family needs inventory. Res Nurs Health 2005;28:474-487  
160. McQueen D, Lakes K, Rich J, et al: Feasibility of a caregiver-assisted exercise program for 
preterm infants. J PERINAT NEONAT NURS 2013;27:184-192  
 100 
 
 
100 
 
161. Pearson J, Andersen K: Evaluation of a program to promote positive parenting in the 
neonatal intensive care unit. NEONAT NETW 2001;20:43-48  
162. Tearl DK, Hertzog JH: Home discharge of technology-dependent children: Evaluation of a 
respiratory-therapist driven family education program. Respiratory Care 2007;52:171-176  
163. Huning BM, Reimann M, Beerenberg U, et al: Establishment of a family-centred care 
programme with follow-up home visits: Implications for clinical care and economic 
characteristics. Klin Padiatr 2012;224:431-436  
164. Melnyk BM, Feinstein NF: Reducing hospital expenditures with the COPE (creating 
opportunities for parent empowerment) program for parents and premature infants: An analysis 
of direct healthcare neonatal intensive care unit costs and savings. Nurs Adm Q 2009;33:32-37  
165. Rossman B, Engstrom JL, Meier PP, et al: "They've walked in my shoes": Mothers of very 
low birth weight infants and their experiences with breastfeeding peer counselors in the 
neonatal intensive care unit. J Hum Lact 2011;27:14-24  
166. Rossman B, Engstrom JL, Meier PP: Healthcare providers' perceptions of breastfeeding 
peer counselors in the neonatal intensive care unit. Res Nurs Health 2012;35:460-474  
167. Rossman B, Greene MM, Meier PP: The role of peer support in the development of 
maternal identity for "NICU moms". J Obstet Gynecol Neonatal Nurs 2015;44:3-16  
168. Hurst I: One size does not fit all: Parents' evaluations of a support program in a newborn 
intensive care nursery. J Perinat Neonatal Nurs 2006;20:252-261  
 101 
 
 
101 
 
169. Preyde M, Ardal F: Effectiveness of a parent "buddy" program for mothers of very preterm 
infants in a neonatal intensive care unit. CMAJ : Canadian Medical Association journal = journal 
de l'Association medicale canadienne 2003;168:969-973  
170. Pochard F, Darmon M, Fassier T, et al: Symptoms of anxiety and depression in family 
members of intensive care unit patients before discharge or death. A prospective multicenter 
study. J Crit Care 2005;20:90-96  
171. Azoulay E, Pochard F, Kentish-Barnes N, et al: Risk of post-traumatic stress symptoms in 
family members of intensive care unit patients. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2005;171:987-994  
172. Kentish-Barnes N, Lemiale V, Chaize M, et al: Assessing burden in families of critical care 
patients. Crit Care Med 2009;37:S448-56  
173. Azoulay E, Pochard F, Chevret S, et al: Impact of a family information leaflet on 
effectiveness of information provided to family members of intensive care unit patients: A 
multicenter, prospective, randomized, controlled trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002;165:438-
442  
174. Azoulay E, Chevret S, Leleu G, et al: Half the families of intensive care unit patients 
experience inadequate communication with physicians. Crit Care Med 2000;28:3044-3049  
175. Peigne V, Chaize M, Falissard B, et al: Important questions asked by family members of 
intensive care unit patients. Crit Care Med 2011;39:1365-1371  
176. Jones C, Backman C, Griffiths RD: Intensive care diaries and relatives' symptoms of 
posttraumatic stress disorder after critical illness: A pilot study. Am J Crit Care 2012;21:172-176  
 102 
 
 
102 
 
177. Garrouste-Orgeas M, Coquet I, Perier A, et al: Impact of an intensive care unit diary on 
psychological distress in patients and relatives*. Crit Care Med 2012;40:2033-2040  
178. Garrouste-Orgeas M, Perier A, Mouricou P, et al: Writing in and reading ICU diaries: 
Qualitative study of families' experience in the ICU. PLoS One 2014;9:e110146  
179. Bergbom I, Svensson C, Berggren E, et al: Patients' and relatives' opinions and feelings 
about diaries kept by nurses in an intensive care unit: Pilot study. Intensive Crit Care Nurs 
1999;15:185-191  
180. Backman CG, Walther SM: Use of a personal diary written on the ICU during critical 
illness. Intensive Care Med 2001;27:426-429  
181. Cox CE, Lewis CL, Hanson LC, et al: Development and pilot testing of a decision aid for 
surrogates of patients with prolonged mechanical ventilation. Critical Care Medicine 
2012;40:2327-2334  
182. Kodali S, Stametz R, Clarke D, et al: Implementing family communication pathway in 
neurosurgical patients in an intensive care unit. Palliat Support Care 2014;1-7  
183. Holzapfel L, Demingeon G, Piralla B, Biot L, Nallet B: A four-step protocol for limitation of 
treatment in terminal care.  an observatinal study in 475 intensive care unit pateints. Intensive 
Care Med 2002;28:1309-1315  
184. Hwang DY, Yagoda D, Perrey H, et al: Assessment of satisfaction with care among family 
members of survivors in a neuroscience intensive care unit. Neurocritical Care 2012;17:S261  
185. Selph RB, Shiang J, Engelberg R, et al: Empathy and life support decisions in intensive 
care units. J Gen Intern Med 2008;23:1311-1317  
 103 
 
 
103 
 
186. Stapleton RD, Engelberg RA, Wenrich MD, et al: Clinician statements and family 
satisfaction with family conferences in the intensive care unit. Crit Care Med 2006;34:1679-1685  
187. McDonagh JR, Elliott TB, Engelberg RA, et al: Family satisfaction with family conferences 
about end-of-life care in the intensive care unit: Increased proportion of family speech is 
associated with increased satisfaction. Crit Care Med 2004;32:1484-1488  
188. White DB, Braddock CH,3rd, Bereknyei S, et al: Toward shared decision making at the end 
of life in intensive care units: Opportunities for improvement. Arch Intern Med 2007;167:461-467  
189. Pham K, Thornton JD, Engelberg RA, et al: Alterations during medical interpretation of ICU 
family conferences that interfere with or enhance communication. Chest 2008;134:109-116  
190. Van Cleave A,C., Roosen-Runge M, Miller A, B., et al: Quality of communication in 
interpreted versus noninterpreted PICU family meetings*. Crit Care Med 2014;42:1507-1517  
191. Thornton JD, Pham K, Engelberg RA, et al: Families with limited english proficiency 
receive less information and support in interpreted intensive care unit family conferences. Crit 
Care Med 2009;37:89-95  
192. Lilly CM, De Meo DL, Sonna LA, et al: An intensive communication intervention for the 
critically ill. American Journal of Medicine 2000;109:469-475  
193. Daly BJ, Douglas SL, O'Toole E, et al: Effectiveness trial of an intensive communication 
structure for families of long-stay ICU patients. Chest 2010;138:1340-1348  
194. Lilly CM, Sonna LA, Haley KJ, et al: Intensive communication: Four-year follow-up from a 
clinical practice study. Crit Care Med 2003;31:S394-9  
 104 
 
 
104 
 
195. Michelson KN, Clayman ML, Haber-Barker N, et al: The use of family conferences in the 
pediatric intensive care unit. J Palliat Med 2013;16:1595-1601  
196. Wall RJ, Curtis JR, Cooke CR, et al: Family satisfaction in the ICU: Differences between 
families of survivors and nonsurvivors. Chest 2007;132:1425-1433  
197. Abbott KH, Sago JG, Breen CM, et al: Families looking back: One year after discussion of 
withdrawal or withholding of life-sustaining support. Crit Care Med 2001;29:197-201  
198. Hunziker S, McHugh W, Sarnoff-Lee B, et al: Predictors and correlates of dissatisfaction 
with intensive care. Crit Care Med 2012;40:1554-1561  
199. Quenot JP, Rigaud JP, Chahraoui K, et al: Is the level of satisfaction of families of patients 
in critical care improved by the quality of the information they receive? Intensive Care Medicine 
2010;36:S323  
200. Belayachi J, Himmich S, Madani N, et al: Psychological burden in inpatient relatives: The 
forgotten side of medical management. QJM 2014;107:115-122  
201. Hartog CS, Schwarzkopf D, Riedemann NC, et al: End-of-life care in the intensive care 
unit: A patient-based questionnaire of intensive care unit staff perception and relatives' 
psychological response. Palliat Med 2015;29:336-345  
202. Baile WF, Buckman R, Lenzi R, et al: SPIKES-A six-step protocol for delivering bad news: 
Application to the patient with cancer. Oncologist 2000;5:302-311  
203. Shaw D, J., Davidson J, E., Smilde R, I., et al: Multidisciplinary team training to enhance 
family communication in the ICU*. Crit Care Med 2014;42:265-271  
 105 
 
 
105 
 
204. Fenwick J, Barclay L, Schmied V: Interactions in neonatal nurseries: Women's perceptions 
of nurses and nursing. J NEONAT NURS 2000;6:197-203  
205. Shudy M, de Almeida ML, Ly S, et al: Impact of pediatric critical illness and injury on 
families: A systematic literature review. Pediatrics 2006;118 Suppl 3:S203-18  
206. McCallister JW, Gustin JL, Wells-Di Gregorio S, et al: Communication skills training 
curriculum for pulmonary and critical care fellows. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2015;12:520-525  
207. Krimshtein NS, Luhrs CA, Puntillo KA, et al: Training nurses for interdisciplinary 
communication with families in the intensive care unit: An intervention. J Palliat Med 
2011;14:1325-1332  
208. Boss RD, Urban A, Barnett MD, et al: Neonatal critical care communication (NC3): Training 
NICU physicians and nurse practitioners. J Perinatol 2013;33:642-646  
209. Downar J, Knickle K, Granton JT, et al: Using standardized family members to teach 
communication skills and ethical principles to critical care trainees. Crit Care Med 
2012;40:1814-1819  
210. Hales BM, Hawryluck L: An interactive educational workshop to improve end of life 
communication skills. J Contin Educ Health Prof 2008;28:241-8  
211. Hope AA, Hsieh SJ, Howes JM, et al: Let's talk critical: Development and evaluation of a 
communication skills training program for critical care fellows. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2015;12:505-
511  
 106 
 
 
106 
 
212. Meyer EC, Sellers DE, Browning DM, et al: Difficult conversations: Improving 
communication skills and relational abilities in health care. PEDIATR CRIT CARE MED 
2009;10:352-359  
213. Meyer EC, Brodsky D, Hansen AR, et al: An interdisciplinary, family-focused approach to 
relational learning in neonatal intensive care. Journal of Perinatology 2011;31:212-219  
214. Pye S, Kane J, Jones A: Parental presence during pediatric resuscitation: The use of 
simulation training for cardiac intensive care nurses. J SPEC PEDIATR NURS 2010;15:172-175  
215. Bays AM, Engelberg RA, Back AL, et al: Interprofessional communication skills training for 
serious illness: Evaluation of a small-group, simulated patient intervention. J Palliat Med 
2014;17:159-166  
216. Garcia de Lucio L, Garcia Lopez FJ, Marin Lopez MT, et al: Training programme in 
techniques of self-control and communication skills to improve nurses' relationships with 
relatives of seriously ill patients: A randomized controlled study. J Adv Nurs 2000;32:425-431  
217. Morton J, Blok GA, Reid C, et al: The european donor hospital education programme 
(EDHEP): Enhancing communication skills with bereaved relatives. Anaesth Intensive Care 
2000;28:184-190  
218. Curtis JR, Back AL, Ford DW, et al: Effect of communication skills training for residents 
and nurse practitioners on quality of communication with patients with serious illness: A 
randomized trial. JAMA 2013;310:2271-2281  
 107 
 
 
107 
 
219. Sedillot N, Holzapfel L, Jacquet-Francillon T, et al: A five-step protocol for withholding and 
withdrawing of life support in an emergency department: An observational study. European 
Journal of Emergency Medicine 2008;15:145-149  
220. Sjokvist P, Sundin P, Berggren L: Limiting life support 
experiences with a special protocol. Acta Anaesthesiologica Scandinavica 1998;42:232-237  
221. Treece PD, Engelberg RA, Crowley L, et al: Evaluation of a standardized order form for the 
withdrawal of life support in the intensive care unit. Crit Care Med 2004;32:1141-1148  
222. Licata J, Aneja R, K., Kyper C, et al: In our unit. A foundation for patient safety: Phase I 
implementation of interdisciplinary bedside rounds in the pediatric intensive care unit. Crit Care 
Nurse 2013;33:89-91  
223. Penticuff JH, Arheart KL: Effectiveness of an intervention to improve parent-professional 
collaboration in neonatal intensive care. J Perinat Neonatal Nurs 2005;19:187-202  
224. Paganini MC, Bousso RS: Nurses' autonomy in end-of-life situations in intensive care 
units. Nurs Ethics 2015;22:803-814  
225. Ahrens T, Yancey V, Kollef M: Improving family communications at the end of life: 
Implications for length of stay in the intensive care unit and resource use. Am J Crit Care 
2003;12:317-23; discussion 324  
226. White DB, Cua SM, Walk R, et al: Nurse-led intervention to improve surrogate decision 
making for patients with advanced critical illness. Am J Crit Care 2012;21:396-409  
227. Nelson DP, Polst G: An interdisciplinary team approach to evidence-based improvement in 
family-centered care. Crit Care Nurs Q 2008;31:110-118  
 108 
 
 
108 
 
228. Perrault C, Coates A, Collinge J, et al: Family support system in newborn medicine: Does it 
work? follow-up study of infants at risk. J Pediatr 1986;108:1025-1030  
229. Kinsala E: Focus on. the VERY IMPORTANT PARTNER program: Integrating family and 
friends into the health care experience. Prog Cardiovasc Nurs 1999;14:103-110  
230. Zeschke J: Diminishingtheexperienceof anxietyforparents of children admitted into the 
pediatric intensive care unit. Pediatric Critical Care Medicine 2011;1):A166-A167  
231. Trochelman K, Albert N, Spence J, et al: Patients and their families weigh in on evidence-
based hospital design. Crit Care Nurse 2012;32:e1-e10  
232. Shahheidari M, Homer C: Impact of the design of neonatal intensive care units on 
neonates, staff, and families: A systematic literature review. J Perinat Neonatal Nurs 
2012;26:260-6; quiz 267-8  
233. Meaburn A, Boylan A, Ford D, et al: Improving patient care during transitions from the ICU 
to the general care floor via staff and family collaboration and a novel patient/familycentered 
transfer brochure. Critical Care Medicine. Conference: 42nd Critical Care Congress of the 
Society of Critical Care Medicine, SCCM 2013;40:  
234. Heinemann A, Hellstrom-Westas L, Nyqvist KH: Factors affecting parents' presence with 
their extremely preterm infants in a neonatal intensive care room. Acta Paediatrica 
2013;102:695-702  
235. Riera MA, Gallart E, Afonso E, et al: Stressful perceptions of tracheostomized patients in 
the intensive care unit. Intensive Care Medicine. Conference: 27th Annual Congress of the 
European Society of Intensive Care Medicine, ESICM 2014;40:S275-S275  
 109 
 
 
109 
 
236. Byers JF, Yovaish W, Lowman LB, et al: Co-bedding versus single-bedding premature 
multiple-gestation infants in incubators. JOGNN 2003;32:340-347  
237. Domanico R, Davis DK, Coleman F, et al: Documenting the NICU design dilemma: Parent 
and staff perceptions of open ward versus single family room units. Journal of Perinatology 
2010;30:343-351  
238. Day A, Haj-Bakri S, Lubchansky S, et al: Sleep, anxiety and fatigue in family members of 
patients admitted to the intensive care unit: A questionnaire study. Critical Care 2013;17:1-7  
239. Verceles A, Corwin D, Afshar M, et al: Half of the family members of critically ill patients 
experience excessive daytime sleepiness.. Intensive Care Med 2014;40:1124  
240. Beck SA, Weis J, Greisen G, et al: Room for family-centered care — a qualitative 
evaluation of a neonatal intensive care unit remodeling project. Journal of Neonatal Nursing 
2009;15:88-99  
241. Watson J, DeLand M, Gibbins S, et al: Improvements in staff quality of work life and family 
satisfaction following the move to single-family room NICU design. Adv Neonatal Care 
2014;14:129-136  
242. Thompson DR, Hamilton DK, Cadenhead CD, et al: Guidelines for intensive care unit 
design. Crit Care Med 2012;40:1586-1600  
243. Singer S, Tucker A: The evolving literature on safety WalkRounds: Emerging themes and 
practical messages. BMJ QUAL SAF 2014;789  
244. Thomas E, Sexton J, Neilands T, et al: The effect of executive walk rounds on nurse safety 
climate attitudes: A randomized trial of clinical units. BMC Health Services Research 2005;5:28-  
 110 
 
 
110 
 
245. Saladino L, Pickett L, Frush K, et al: Evaluation of a nurse-led safety program in a critical 
care unit. J Nurs Care Qual 2013;28:139  
246. Sexton J, Sharek P, Thomas E: Exposure to leadership WalkRounds in neonatal intensive 
care units is associated with a better patient safety culture and less caregiver burnout. BMJ 
Qual Saf 2014;814  
247. Siow E, Wypij D, Berry P, et al: The effect of continuity in nursing care on patient outcomes 
in the pediatric intensive care unit. J Nurs Adm 2013;43:394-402  
248. Bowman K: Trepidation: A family member's response to shift change in the intensive care 
unit. Dimens Crit Care Nurs 2010;29:288-292  
249. Garcia X, Sachdeva R, Swearingen CJ, et al: A novel paradigm for providing improved 
care to chronic patients in cardiac intensive care unit. Congenit Heart Dis 2012;7:403-409  
250. Kerlin MP, Small DS, Cooney E, et al: A randomized trial of nighttime physician staffing in 
an intensive care unit. N Engl J Med 2013;368:2201-2209  
251. McAdam JL, Dracup KA, White DB, et al: Symptom experiences of family members of 
intensive care unit patients at high risk for dying. Crit Care Med 2010;38:1078-1085  
252. Stremler R, Dhukai Z, Wong L, et al: Factors influencing sleep for parents of critically ill 
hospitalised children: A qualitative analysis. Intensive Crit Care Nurs 2011;27:37-45  
253. Halm MA, Titler MG, Kleiber C, et al: Behavioral responses of family members during 
critical illness. Clin Nurs Res 1993;2:414-437  
 111 
 
 
111 
 
254. Van Horn E, Tesh A: The effect of critical care hospitalization on family members: Stress 
and responses. Dimens Crit Care Nurs 2000;19:40-49  
255. Lee SY, Kimble LP: Impaired sleep and well-being in mothers with low-birth-weight infants. 
JOGNN - Journal of Obstetric, Gynecologic, and Neonatal Nursing 2009;38:676-685  
256. Busse M, Stromgren K, Thorngate L, et al: Parents' responses to stress in the neonatal 
intensive care unit. Crit Care Nurse 2013;33:52-60  
257. Stremler R, Dhukai Z, Pullenayegum E, et al: Sleep, sleepiness, and fatigue outcomes for 
parents of critically ill children. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2014;15:e56-65  
258. Arora V, Dunphy C, Chang VY, et al: The effects of on-duty napping on intern sleep time 
and fatigue. Ann Intern Med 2006;144:792-798  
259. Philip P, Taillard J, Moore N, et al: The effects of coffee and napping on nighttime highway 
driving: A randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 2006;144:785-791  
260. Faraut B, Leger D, Medkour T, et al: Napping reverses increased pain sensitivity due to 
sleep restriction. PLoS One 2015;10:e0117425  
261. COMMITTEE ON HOSPITAL CARE and INSTITUTE FOR PATIENT- AND FAMILY-
CENTERED CARE: Patient- and family-centered care and the pediatrician's role. Pediatrics 
2012;129:394-404  
262. Committee on Hospital Care. American Academy of Pediatrics: Family-centered care and 
the pediatrician's role. Pediatrics 2003;112:691-697  
 112 
 
 
112 
 
263. Beryl Institute.: The state of patient experience in american hospitals 2013: Positive trends 
and opportunities for the future. Washington DC, The Beryl Institute, 2013  
264. Bliss: The bliss baby charter standards, 2009. http://www.bliss.org.uk/order-
publications/#hp Edition. London, Bliss Publications, 2009  
265. Bliss: Bliss baby charter audit tool, 2012. http://www.bliss.org.uk/order-publications/#hp 
Edition. London, Bliss Publications, 2012  
266. Dunn MS, Reilly MC, Johnston AM, et al: Development and dissemination of potentially 
better practices for the provision of family-centered care in neonatology: The family-centered 
care map. Pediatrics 2006;118:95-107-95-107  
267. Kuo DZ, Houtrow AJ, Arango P, et al: Family-centered care: Current applications and 
future directions in pediatric health care. Maternal and Child Health Journal, Matern Child Health 
J 2011;16:297-305  
268. Ludwig S, Day S: New standards for resident professionalism: Discussion and justification. 
Philibert I and Amis S, editors. Chicago, Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education, 
2011  
269. Mann KJ, Hoffman A, Miller DJ, et al: The effect of a patient- and family-centered care 
curriculum on pediatrics residents’ patient-centeredness. J Grad Med Educ 2013;5:36-40  
270. Ortenstrand A, Westrup B, Brostrom EB, et al: The stockholm neonatal family centered 
care study: Effects on length of stay and infant morbidity. Pediatrics 2010;125:e278-85  
 113 
 
 
113 
 
271. Johnson B, Abraham M, Conway J, et al: Partnering with patients and families to design a 
patient-and family-centered health care system. Bethesda MD: Institute for Family-Centered 
Care 2008;  
272. Earp JAL, French EA, Gilkey MB: Patient advocacy for health care quality: Strategies for 
achieving patient-centered care. Sudbury, Mass., Jones and Bartlett Pub., 2008  
273. Philibert I, Patow C, Cichon J: Incorporating patient- and family-centered care into resident 
education: Approaches, benefits, and challenges. J Grad Med Educ 2011;3:272-278  
274. Schappin R, Wijnroks L, Uniken Venema MM, et al: Rethinking stress in parents of preterm 
infants: A meta-analysis. PLoS One 2013;8:e54992  
275. Stewart M: Towards a global definition of patient centred care. BMJ 2001;322:444-445  
276. Truog RD, Campbell ML, Curtis JR, et al: Recommendations for end-of-life care in the 
intensive care unit: A consensus statement by the american college [corrected] of critical care 
medicine. Crit Care Med 2008;36:953-963  
277. Institute of Medicine (U.S.). Committee on Quality of Health Care in America: Crossing the 
quality chasm. Washington, D.C., National Academy Press, 2001  
278. Institute for Patient- and Family-Centered Care: What is meant by the word "family"? 
http://www.ipfcc.org/faq.html Edition. 2014  
 
 
