 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
716 
MMWR / July 22, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 28
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
On July 15, 2016, this report was posted as an MMWR Early 
Release on the MMWR website (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr). 
A routine investigation by the New York City (NYC) 
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DOHMH) iden-
tified a nonpregnant woman in her twenties who reported she 
had engaged in a single event of condomless vaginal intercourse 
with a male partner the day she returned to NYC (day 0) from 
travel to an area with ongoing Zika virus transmission. She had 
headache and abdominal cramping while in the airport await-
ing return to NYC. The following day (day 1) she developed 
fever, fatigue, a maculopapular rash, myalgia, arthralgia, back 
pain, swelling of the extremities, and numbness and tingling 
in her hands and feet. In addition, on day 1, the woman began 
menses that she described as heavier than usual. On day 3 
she visited her primary care provider who obtained blood 
and urine specimens. Zika virus RNA was detected in both 
serum and urine by real-time reverse transcription–polymerase 
chain reaction (rRT-PCR) performed at the DOHMH Public 
Health Laboratory using a test based on an assay developed 
at CDC (1). The results of serum testing for anti-Zika virus 
immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibody performed by the New 
York State Department of Health Wadsworth Center labora-
tory was negative using the CDC Zika IgM antibody capture 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (Zika MAC-ELISA) (2).
Seven days after sexual intercourse (day 6), the woman’s 
male partner, also in his twenties, developed fever, a maculo-
papular rash, joint pain, and conjunctivitis. On day 9, three 
days after the onset of his symptoms, the man sought care 
from the same primary care provider who had diagnosed Zika 
virus infection in his female partner. The provider suspected 
sexual transmission of Zika virus and contacted DOHMH to 
seek testing for the male partner. That same day, day 9, urine 
and serum specimens were collected from the man. Zika virus 
RNA was detected in urine but not serum by rRT-PCR testing 
at the DOHMH Public Health Laboratory. Zika virus IgM 
antibodies were not detectable by the CDC Zika MAC-ELISA 
assay performed at the New York State Department of Health 
Wadsworth Center. The CDC Arbovirus Disease Branch 
confirmed all rRT-PCR results for urine and serum specimens 
from both partners.
During an interview with DOHMH on day 17, the man 
confirmed that he had not traveled outside the United States 
during the year before his illness. He also confirmed a single 
encounter of condomless vaginal intercourse with his female 
partner (the patient) after her return to NYC and reported that 
he did not engage in oral or anal intercourse with her. The man 
reported that he noticed no blood on his uncircumcised penis 
immediately after intercourse that could have been associated 
either with vaginal bleeding or with any open lesions on his 
genitals. He also reported that he did not have any other recent 
sexual partners or receive a mosquito bite within the week 
preceding his illness.
Independent follow-up interviews with the woman and man 
corroborated the exposure and illness history. The patients were 
consistent in describing illness onset, symptoms, sexual history, 
and the woman’s travel. This information also was consistent 
with the initial report from the primary care provider.
The timing and sequence of events support female-to-male 
Zika virus transmission through condomless vaginal inter-
course. The woman likely was viremic at the time of sexual 
intercourse because her serum, collected 3 days later, had evi-
dence of Zika virus RNA by rRT-PCR. Virus present in either 
vaginal fluids or menstrual blood might have been transmit-
ted during exposure to her male partner’s urethral mucosa or 
undetected abrasions on his penis. Recent reports document 
detection of Zika virus in the female genital tract, including 
vaginal fluid. A study on nonhuman primates found Zika 
virus RNA detected in the vaginal fluid of three nonpregnant 
females up to 7 days after subcutaneous inoculation (3), and 
Zika virus RNA was detected in specimens from a woman’s 
cervical mucous, genital swab, and endocervical swab collected 
3 days after illness onset, using an unspecified RT-PCR test 
(4). Further studies are needed to determine the characteristics 
of Zika virus shedding in the genital tract and vaginal fluid 
of humans.
This case represents the first reported occurrence of female-
to-male sexual transmission of Zika virus. Current guidance 
to prevent sexual transmission of Zika virus is based on the 
assumption that transmission occurs from a male partner to 
a receptive partner (5,6). Ongoing surveillance is needed to 
determine the risk for transmission of Zika virus infection from 
a female to her sexual partners. Providers should report to their 
local or state health department any patients with illnesses 
compatible with Zika virus disease who do not have a history 
Suspected Female-to-Male Sexual Transmission of Zika Virus — 
New York City, 2016
Alexander Davidson, MPH1; Sally Slavinski, DVM1; Kendra Komoto1; Jennifer Rakeman, PhD1; Don Weiss, MD1
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / July 22, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 28 
717
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
of travel to an area with ongoing Zika virus transmission, but 
who had a sexual exposure to a partner who did travel.
Persons who want to reduce the risk for sexual transmis-
sion of Zika virus should abstain from sex or correctly and 
consistently use condoms for vaginal, anal, and oral sex, as 
recommended in the current CDC guidance (5). Guidance on 
prevention of sexual transmission of Zika virus, including other 
methods of barrier protection, will be updated as additional 
information becomes available (http://www.cdc.gov/zika).
 1New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, New York.
Corresponding author: Sally Slavinski, sslavins@health.nyc.gov, 347-396-2672.
References
1. Lanciotti RS, Kosoy OL, Laven JJ, et al. Genetic and serologic properties 
of Zika virus associated with an epidemic, Yap State, Micronesia, 2007. 
Emerg Infect Dis 2008;14:1232–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/
eid1408.080287
2. CDC. Zika MAC-ELISA: instructions for use. Atlanta, GA: US 
Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2016. http://www.
fda.gov/downloads/MedicalDevices/Safety/EmergencySituations/
UCM488044.pdf
3. Dudley DM, Aliota MT, Mohr EL, et al. A rhesus macaque model of 
Asian-lineage Zika virus infection. Nat Commun 2016;7:12204. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1038/ncomms12204
4. Prisant N, Bujan L, Benichou H, et al.  Zika virus in the female genital 
tract [Letter].  Lancet Infect Dis 2016. E-pub July 11, 2016. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/S1473-3099(16)30193-1
5. Oster AM, Russell K, Stryker JE, et al. Update: interim guidance for 
prevention of sexual transmission of Zika virus—United States, 2016. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:323–5. http://dx.doi.
org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6512e3
6. Hills SL, Russell K, Hennessey M, et al. Transmission of Zika virus through 
sexual contact with travelers to areas of ongoing transmission—continental 
United States, 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:215–6. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6508e2
