 OR G A N I S M A L B I O L O G Y
Copyright © 2017
The Authors, some
rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim to
original U.S. Government
Works. Distributed
under a Creative
Commons Attribution
NonCommercial
License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
Pushing the limits of photoreception in twilight
conditions: The rod-like cone retina of the
deep-sea pearlsides
Fanny de Busserolles,1,2* Fabio Cortesi,1 Jon Vidar Helvik,3 Wayne I. L. Davies,4,5,6
Rachel M. Templin,1 Robert K. P. Sullivan,1 Craig T. Michell,2,7 Jessica K. Mountford,4,5,6
Shaun P. Collin,4,5,6 Xabier Irigoien,2,8,9 Stein Kaartvedt,2,10 Justin Marshall1
Most vertebrates have a duplex retina comprising two photoreceptor types, rods for dim-light (scotopic) vision
and cones for bright-light (photopic) and color vision. However, deep-sea fishes are only active in dim-light
conditions; hence, most species have lost their cones in favor of a simplex retina composed exclusively of rods.
Although the pearlsides, Maurolicus spp., have such a pure rod retina, their behavior is at odds with this simplex
visual system. Contrary to other deep-sea fishes, pearlsides are mostly active during dusk and dawn close to the
surface, where light levels are intermediate (twilight or mesopic) and require the use of both rod and cone photo-
receptors. This study elucidates this paradox by demonstrating that the pearlside retina does not have rod photo-
receptors only; instead, it is composed almost exclusively of transmuted cone photoreceptors. These transmuted cells
combine the morphological characteristics of a rod photoreceptor with a cone opsin and a cone phototransduction
cascade to form a unique photoreceptor type, a rod-like cone, specifically tuned to the light conditions of the
pearlsides’ habitat (blue-shifted light at mesopic intensities). Combining properties of both rods and cones into a
single cell type, instead of using two photoreceptor types that do not function at their full potential under mesopic
conditions, is likely to be the most efficient and economical solution to optimize visual performance. These results
challenge the standing paradigm of the function and evolution of the vertebrate duplex retina and emphasize the
need for a more comprehensive evaluation of visual systems in general.
INTRODUCTION
The retina of most vertebrates is categorized as being duplex, compris-
ing both rod and cone photoreceptors. Each photoreceptor type differs
in morphology and function, allowing animals to switch between the two
systems and thus maintain vision during most of the daily (24-hour)
period. Rods express the highly sensitive rod opsin gene (rh1), which
mediates vision in dim-light (scotopic) conditions, whereas cones
express up to four classes of visual pigment genes [short-wavelength
sensitive (sws1 and sws2), medium-wavelength sensitive (rh2), and
long-wavelength sensitive (lws)], which mediates vision and color
discrimination in bright-light (photopic) environments (1). In mesopic
conditions, such as during twilight, both rods and cones are active and
contribute to vision, but neither work at optimal levels (2, 3). Depending
on whether a species is diurnal, nocturnal, or crepuscular, the propor-
tion of each photoreceptor type may vary to maximize visual per-
formance (2). In a few extreme cases, an entire photoreceptor type
and function is lost, resulting in a simplex retina, such as the pure cone
or pure rod retinas of diurnal lizards and deep-sea fishes, respectively (4).
The classification of photoreceptors into rods and cones is, however,
not always straightforward, and some intermediate forms of photo-
receptors exist and exhibit morphological, electrophysiological, and/or
molecular characteristics of both cell types. This is most notable in squa-
mate reptiles (5–7), amphibians (8), lampreys (9), and skates (10)
(Table 1). These intermediate forms were first observed in snakes
and geckos by Walls (4), which led to the “transmutation” theory that
suggested that rods and cones could evolve or “transmute” from one
type to another, via a series of intermediate states, as a result of a major
ecological shift in activity pattern. For instance, the gecko ancestor was
diurnal and accordingly had a pure cone retina, but cones in modern
nocturnal geckos have transmuted into rod-like receptors to regain vi-
sion under scotopic light conditions (6). To our knowledge, the study
presented here is the first case of photoreceptor transmutation in teleost
fishes, specifically the pearlsides, Maurolicus spp. The results suggest
thatphotoreceptortransmutationisnotalwaysanevolutionarytransition
to regain a lost function but also an adaptation to optimize vision in a
specific ecological niche, in this case, the twilight environment.
Pearlsides are deep-sea teleost fishes that live in the upper part of the
mesopelagic zone (~200 m) and vertically migrate to feed on zoo-
plankton present in the upper layers of the ocean (0 to 100 m). Contrary
to other vertically migrating fishes that ascend to feed throughout the
night, pearlsides mostly migrate to the surface at dusk and dawn (twi-
light) and spend the night at greater depths without foraging (11). This
behavior is best explained by the “antipredation window” theory, which
suggests that it is advantageous to spend short periods of time foraging
at twilight when light levels are sufficient for prey detection but low
enough to hide from predators (12). Whereas animals that are active
during this time period usually use a combination of rods and cones
for vision (2), pearlsides, like most deep-sea teleost fishes, have a mor-
phologically pure rod retina implying an rh1-based scotopic visual sys-
tem (13), which is at odds with their daily behavior. To explore this
paradox, the visual system of two species of pearlsides, Maurolicus
1Queensland Brain Institute, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland
4072, Australia. 2Red Sea Research Center, Biological and Environmental Sciences
and Engineering Division, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology,
Thuwal 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia. 3Department of Biology, University of Bergen,
Bergen 5020, Norway. 4The Oceans Institute, The University of Western Australia,
Crawley, Western Australia 6009, Australia. 5School of Biological Science, The University
of Western Australia, Crawley, Western Australia 6009, Australia. 6Lions Eye Institute, The
University of Western Australia, Crawley, Western Australia 6009, Australia. 7Department
of Environmental and Biological Sciences, University of Eastern Finland, Yliopistokatu 7,
FI-80101 Joensuu, Finland. 8Marine Research, AZTI - Tecnalia, Herrera Kaia, Portualdea
z/g, 20110 Pasaia (Gipuzkoa), Spain. 9IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science,
Bilbao, Spain 10Department of Biosciences, University of Oslo, Oslo 0316, Norway.
*Corresponding author. Email: f.debusserolles@uq.edu.au
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
de Busserolles et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:eaao4709
8 November 2017
1 of 12
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 muelleri from the Norwegian fjords and Maurolicus mucronatus from
the Red Sea, was investigated.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Pearlside retinal transcriptomes
Retinal transcriptome sequencing of both species revealed the expres-
sion of three distinct opsin genes: rh1 (usually restricted to rods) and,
surprisingly, two cone opsins (rh2-1 and rh2-2; Fig. 1A and fig. S1). The
rh2 genes were expressed at similar levels and comprised ~99% of the
totalopsin expression in the retina (Fig. 1B and table S1), suggesting that
pearlsides rely almost exclusively on their cone photopigments for vi-
sion, a strategy expected in animals devoid of rods. This is further
supported at the amino acid level. In general, amino acid sites 122 and
189 confer photoreceptor specificity in vertebrates, with Gln122 and
Pro189 sites being cone-specific and Glu122 (except Gln122 in deep-sea fish
rods) and Ile189 sites being rod-specific (1). Whereas the pearlside rh1
showed typical deep-sea rod specificity (that is, Gln122 and Ile189), pearl-
siderh2s showedtheconetypicalGln122andPro189combination (fig.S2).
Atthe levelofthephototransduction cascade,theGa subunitoftrans-
ducin (critical for signal transduction; Fig. 2A and fig. S3) and arrestin
(involved in pigment recovery; Fig. 2B and fig. S4) were also found to
be mainly cone-like (1) and were expressed at a ratio of around 99% cone
to 1% rod (tables S2 and S3), strongly supporting the use of a
predominantly cone-based visual system, a first in adult teleost fishes.
A detailed analysis of the transcriptomes revealed that pearlsides express
three Ga transducins: one rod transducin (gnat1) and two cone trans-
ducins (gnat2-1 and gnat2-2; Fig. 2A). Although with low support values,
the pearlsidecone transducinsformtheirown clade,indicating alineage-
specific duplication that might have facilitated photoreceptor trans-
mutation (fig. S3). Alternatively, the gnat-2 duplication might have a
much deeper phylogenetic origin that has so far been missed (1, 14)
and, as for the opsins (15), would imply that the evolutionary history of
these genes is more complex than previously thought. The transcriptomes
also contained four arrestin genes: two rod arrestins (saga and sagb) and
two cone arrestins (arr3a and arr3b; Fig. 2B). In the medaka (Oryzias
latipes), rod arrestin orthologs, saga and sagb (fig. S4), are expressed in
different parts of the photoreceptor. Saga is expressed in the outer
segments and mediates phototransduction, whereas sagb is expressed
in the synapses (function unknown) (16). It is therefore possible that
only saga is involved in phototransduction in pearlsides, explaining
the presence of two rod arrestin genes but only one rod opsin.
Table 1. Characteristics summary (morphology, opsin, phototransduction cascade, and electrophysiology) of the transmuted photoreceptors of dif-
ferent species compared to true rods and true cones. Lizard data are for the genus Anolis. Lamprey is the sea lamprey Petromyzon marinus. Salamander is the
tiger salamander Ambystoma tigrinum. Pearlside is the Mueller’s pearlside M. muelleri. The snake with the cone-like rods is the diurnal garter snake Thamnophis
proximus. The snake with the rod-like cones data are for the nocturnal genus Hypsiglena. The gecko is the nocturnal Tokay gecko Gekko gekko. The skate is the
genus Raja. R, true rod; C, true cone; n.a., not available; poly, polysynaptic.
Photoreceptor
characteristics
True
rod (1, 19)
True
cone (1, 19)
Cone-like rod
Rod-like cone
Snake
(7, 78)
Skate
(10, 45, 79)
Lizard
(5, 80, 81)
Lamprey
(9, 82, 83)
Gecko
(6, 84–86)
Snake
(4, 35)
Salamander
(8, 87)
Pearlside
(this study)
Outer segment
shape
Long, rod-
shaped
(cylindrical)
Short, cone-
shaped (distally
tapering)
C
R
C
R
R
R
R
R
Outer segment
discs
Individual sealed
disc, separated
from the plasma
membrane
Discs continuous
with the plasma
membrane (open)
R
R
n.a.
R C
R C
n.a.
n.a.
R
Incisure
Present
Absent
n.a.
n.a.
C
C
R
n.a.
R
R
Paraboloid
Absent
Present
C
R
R
R
Oil droplet
Absent
Sometimes present
R
n.a.
C
n.a.
R
R
R
R
Synaptic ending
Small, spherical,
oligosynaptic
Large, conical,
flat-end base,
polysynaptic
n.a.
C
n.a.
R C
Small poly
C
n.a.
R C
Small poly
R C
Small poly
Opsin
rh1
sws1, sws2,
lws, rh2
R
R
R
R
C
rh2
C
sws1
lws
C
sws2
C
rh2-1
rh2-2
Spectral
sensitivity
(nm)
480–510
rh2, 450–530
sws1, 360–440
sws2, 400–450
m/lws, 510–560
R
482
R
500
R
491
n.a.
C
521
C
358,
536
C
432
C
441 (both
pigments)
Phototransduction
cascade
Rod-like
Cone-like
R
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
C(R)
n.a.
R
C
Cell physiology
Rod properties
(high sensitivity)
Cone properties
(fast, never
saturate)
n.a.
R C
n.a.
R
R
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
de Busserolles et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:eaao4709
8 November 2017
2 of 12
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Pearlside spectral sensitivities
Vertebrates distinguish colors by comparing the visual input between
two photoreceptors that are sensitive to different parts of the light
spectrum and are active at the same time (17). Accordingly, the expres-
sion of two rh2 opsins, presumably with different peak spectral sensitiv-
ities (lmax) and expressed in different photoreceptors, could confer
color vision to pearlsides. However, the rh2 genes in both species
showed very few amino acid differences, with none occurring at key
spectral tuning sites (fig. S2) (18–20). Therefore, the two rh2 opsins
are likely to have similar lmax values, making color vision an unlikely
feature of the pearlside visual system. Instead, as was suggested for rh1-
duplicated genes (rh1-1 and rh1-2) in the zebrafish (Danio rerio) (21),
the ancestral rh2 function may be partitioned between the two rh2
copies in pearlsides. After comparing the synonymous substitution rate
in the coding region [coding DNA sequence (CDS)] of the rh2 para-
logs to that in the 3′ untranslated regions (3′UTRs), it seemed plausible
that gene conversion might have acted to conserve the rh2 spectral
sensitivities (15, 22). The occurrence of gene conversion was con-
firmed by reconstructing a phylogeny using only the information con-
tained in the 3′UTR and the last 50 base pairs (bp) of exon 5, which
revealed that the rh2 duplication occurred in the common ancestor of
pearlsides (fig. S5).
In vitro expression was subsequently attempted to determine the
spectral sensitivities of the M. muelleri opsins using a vitamin A1 chro-
mophore (that is, 11-cis-retinal chromophore). Although some deep-
sea fishes have been found to use both A1- and A2-based chromophores
for vision (23), this seems not to be the case for pearlsides based on a
lack of cytochrome P450 family 27 subfamily c member 1 (cyp27c1) ex-
pression in their transcriptomes. The Cyp27c1 enzyme has been shown
to convert vitamin A1 to vitamin A2 in zebrafish, leading to the replace-
ment of 11-cis-retinal with 11-cis-3,4-didehydroretinal: This change
results in a long-wavelength shift of the spectral peak for visual photo-
pigments (24). In vitro ultraviolet (UV)–visible spectrophotometry
was successfully performed for the rod opsin pigments expressed in
M.muelleri(rh1)andhuman(RH1;control),withpeakspectralsensitivity
(lmax) values of 494 and 495 nm, respectively (Fig. 3A), closely
matching the predicted lmax values of 496 nm for M. muelleri and a
previous spectral study of the human RH1 photopigment (25). The pre-
dicted value of M. muelleri rh1 (lmax = 496 nm) was calculated on the
basis of two other deep-sea teleost fishes from the same family, namely,
Argyropelecus aculeatus and Argyropelecus gigas, where their spectral
peaks were determined to be 477 nm using microspectrophotometry
(26).Incomparisontothesetwofishes,thespectralpeakoftheM.muelleri
rh1 opsin is long-wavelength–shifted by 19 nm, which corresponds
to Phe261Tyr (+10 nm) and Ser292Ala (+9 nm) substitutions (20, 26).
Unfortunately, both M. muelleri rh2-1 and rh2-2 pigments did not re-
generate or reconstitute with 11-cis-retinal in vitro, despite numerous
attempts. This is not uncommon with photopigments studied in vitro,
where technical artefacts, such as misfolding of overexpressed proteins,
may cause experiments to be unsuccessful (27–29). Nonetheless, logical
predictions may be made on the basis of published data, as well as those
present in this study (Fig. 3B). Although most rh2 pigments yield spec-
tral peaks between 470 and 510 nm (20), those found in deep-sea species
are typically short-wavelength–shifted. For example, the deep-sea tele-
ost Scopelarchus analis has an rh2 photopigment with a lmax value of
444 nm (30, 31), and the elephant shark (Callorhinchus milii) has an rh2
photopigment with a lmax value of 442 nm (32); the former was
measured by in vivo microspectrophotometry, and the latter was
measured by in vitro UV-visible spectrophotometry. When comparing
the known tuning sites for rh2 photopigments (18, 20) identified in
M. muelleri (thisstudy) and S. analis (30), the only difference found was
at site 300 with Ile and Leu in M. muelleri (for both rh2-1 and rh2-2) and
S. analis, respectively (fig. S2). From an extensive comparative study of
spectral tuning in deep-sea fish visual pigments (26), a Leu300Ile substi-
tution results in a short-wavelength shift of 3 nm. Thus, for M. muelleri,
the rh2 pigments are predicted to have spectral peaks at 441 nm (Fig.
3B). When comparing known rh1 tuning sites between pearlsides spe-
cies, no differences were observed; hence, rh1 in M. mucronatus is pre-
dicted to have a lmax value of 494 to 496 nm (that is, measured and
predicted). When rh2 pigments were compared between Maurolicus
species, only a single difference between known tuning sites was found
at site 299, with Ala in M. mucronatus and Ser in M. muelleri. Analyses
rh2-1 vs. rh2-2
42.7
57.3
M. mucronatus
M. muelleri rh1
M. mucronatus rh1
M. muelleri rh2-1
M. muelleri rh2-2
M. mucronatus rh2-1
M. mucronatus rh2-2
0.2
lws*
va opsin*
sws2* 
sws1* 
rh1
rh2
Stomiiformes
Stomiiformes
A
% Proportional opsin expression
M. muelleri
M. mucronatus
rh1 vs. rh2’s
1.0
99.0
0.3
99.7
30.0
70.0
M. muelleri
B
Fig. 1. Vertebrate opsin gene phylogeny and pearlside opsin gene expres-
sion. (A) The pearlside retinal transcriptomes (n = 5 per species) contained three
opsin genes: one rod opsin (rh1) and two rhodopsin-like 2 (rh2) cone opsins. Black
spheres indicate Bayesian posterior probabilities >0.8. Asterisk indicates that this
opsin gene class was not present in the pearlside transcriptome. lws, long-
wavelength sensitive; sws1 and sws2, short-wavelength sensitive 1 and 2; va, ver-
tebrate ancient opsin (outgroup). A detailed phylogeny and GenBank accession
numbers are shown in fig. S1. Pearlside-specific accession numbers are given in
table S4. (B) The per-species mean of the proportional opsin gene expression
shows the almost exclusive use of cone opsins in pearlside vision.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
de Busserolles et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:eaao4709
8 November 2017
3 of 12
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 of spectral tuning in deep-sea fish visual pigments indicate that a
Ser299Ala substitution results in a short-wavelength shift of 6 nm (26);
therefore, both rh2 pigments of M. mucronatus are predicted to exhibit a
spectral peak at 435 nm (Fig. 3B).
Distribution and morphology of M. muelleri photoreceptors
Given the high levels of cone-specific pigment expression, it was
expected that at least a few cone photoreceptors (based on morpholog-
ical criteria) would occur in the pearlside retina. However, similar to
previous findings (13), no cone-like cells were found, and RNA in situ
hybridization (R-ISH) using opsin-specific probes confirmed that both
rh1 and rh2s were expressed only in rod-like photoreceptors in M. muelleri
(Fig. 4). Moreover, R-ISH and anti-rhodopsin (rod pigment) immuno-
histochemistry (IHC) corroborated the transcriptomic data, with both
rh2 genes being expressed collectively in about 99% of photoreceptor
cells and rh1 in the remaining 1% of photoreceptors (Fig. 4).
The density of the rh2-expressing photoreceptors varied across the
retina with an increase in cell density in the ventral region (that is,
elongated area ventralis; Fig. 4D and fig. S6). This pattern matched
the retinal ganglion cell topography (fig. S7), and assuming a horizontal
position of the fish in the water column, this high photoreceptor density
zone is likely to facilitate the detection of silhouettes situated above the
fish against the lighter background of the upper mesopelagic zone (33).
The small population of rh1-expressing photoreceptors was confined to
the peripheral margins of the retina (Fig. 4B and figs. S8 and S9) and
might, therefore, be used to detect motion, although their extremely low
level of expression questions their ecological significance.
Subsequentimmunofluorescence,transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) and 3View-based three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction re-
vealed two types of rod photoreceptors at the morphological level: a
rod-like cone (the main cell type expressing rh2) and a “true” rod
(labeled with anti-rhodopsin antibodies and expressing rh1) (Fig. 5
and movie S1). Both cell types showed the classic anatomical character-
isticsofarod(Table1):alongcylindricaloutersegment,individualsealed
discs surrounded by a plasma membrane, incisures (Fig. 5F), and the
absence of both a paraboloid and an oil droplet. Structurally, the main
Cone
Rod
“Taste”
arrb2
arr3a
arr3b
 arrb1
Cone
Rod
saga
sagb
% Proportional arrestin expression
M. muelleri
M. mucronatus
saga vs. arr3’s
arr3b vs. arr3a
M. muelleri
M. mucronatus
98.5
1.5
75.3
24.7
99.5
0.5
91.1
8.9
M. mucronatus gnat2-1
M. muelleri gnat2-1
M. mucronatus gnat2-2
M. muelleri gnat2-2
M. mucronatus gnat1
M. muelleri gnat1
0.09
A
B
C
D
M. mucronatus arr3a
M. muelleri arr3a
M. mucronatus arr3b
M. muelleri arr3b
M. mucronatus saga
M. muelleri saga
M. mucronatus sagb
M. muelleri sagb transcript-v2
M. muelleri sagb transcript-v3
M. muelleri sagb transcript-v1
% Proportional transducin expression
M. muelleri M. mucronatus
gnat1 vs. gnat2’s
gnat2-1 vs. gnat2-2
M. muelleri
M. mucronatus
99.4
0.6
84.3
15.7
99.6
0.4
88.7
11.3
0.2
M. mucronatus gnat1
M. muelleri gnat1
gnat2
gnat1
Transducin
Arrestin
Fig. 2. Vertebrate phylogenies of phototransduction cascade genes and phototransduction cascade gene expression. (A and B) Vertebrate Ga transducin (A) and vertebrate
arrestin (B) gene phylogenies. Black spheres indicate Bayesian posterior probabilities >0.8. Detailed phylogenies and GenBank accession numbers are shown in figs. S3 and S4.
Pearlside-specific accession numbers are given in table S4. gnat2, G protein subunit a transducin 2; gnat1, G protein subunit a transducin 1; “taste,” G protein subunit a transducin
3; arrb2, arrestin b2; arr3, arrestin 3; sag, s-antigen arrestin [saga is present in the outer segment, and sagb is present in the synapses (16)]; arrb1, arrestin b1. (C and D) The per-species
mean of the proportional transducin (C) and arrestin (D) gene expression shows the almost exclusive use of cone transducin (gnat2) and cone arrestin (arr3) in pearlside vision.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
de Busserolles et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:eaao4709
8 November 2017
4 of 12
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 differences between the two photoreceptor types were restricted to the
vitreated region of the receptors (the nucleus and synaptic terminal). In
thetruerod,thenucleuswasdisplacedtowardtheinnerretina,whereasits
synaptic process was located slightly above the processes of rod-like cones
(Fig. 5, B and C). Furthermore, although both cell types had a relatively
smallsynapticterminal(~3mm)andasingleinvagination(acharacteristic
of rod cells), the rod-like cones had a polysynaptic ending with three syn-
aptic ribbons and multiple processes constituting the only cone feature
observed in the pearlside retina (Fig. 5, D and E, Table 1, and movie S2).
Likely evolutionary scenario leading to photoreceptor
transmutation in pearlsides
Two possible evolutionary scenarios could lead to cone opsins being
expressed in rod-like photoreceptor cells: (i) Pearlside cone photo-
receptors transmuted to morphologically resemble rod cells or (ii) cone
opsin(s) and visual phototransduction genes co-adapted and replaced
the conventional rod-based machinery in 99% of all rod cells. The
occurrence of about 1% of the true rod photoreceptors expressing a
rod opsin, the cone-like synaptic ending of the rod-like cones, and
cone-specific amino acid residues of rh2 opsins strongly support the
first scenario. However, to demonstrate either scenario, a complete
ontogenetic analysis of the pearlside retina, at both molecular and
morphological levels, is required (34).
Although photoreceptor transmutation normally occurs following
the loss of a photoreceptor type or a specific opsin gene (4, 35, 36), this
is unlikely to be the case for pearlside fishes. First, they express both rod
and cone opsins and associated phototransduction genes. Second, tele-
osts, including deep-sea species with pure rod retinas as adults, have
both cones and rods at some stage during their development (37). Fi-
nally, adult individuals from species within the same family (Sternop-
tychidae) have both photoreceptor types (38). Hence, the transmuted
rod-like cones of the pearlside are likely to be an ecological adaptation
rather than an evolutionary regain of function.
Ecological significance
The likely explanation for the peculiar visual system of the pearlside is
an adaptation to the surrounding light environment. Pearlsides inhabit
Absorbance
H. sapiens 
M. muelleri
Wavelength
(nm)
350
450
550
650
0.10
0.00
0.05
0.15
Dark
Bleached
Bleached
0.20
Absorbance difference
350
450
550
650
–0.01
–0.05
0.07
0.03
Wavelength
(nm)
Absorbance difference
350
450
550
650
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.010
0.005
0.000
–0.005
Dark
λ
 = 494 nm 
max
λ
 = 495 nm 
max
350
450
550
650
0.06
0.08
λmax = 441 nm
λmax = 435 nm
rh2-1/rh2-2
λmax = 494 nm
λmax = 494–496 nm
rh1
Wavelength (nm)
400
500
300
600
0.0
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalized absorbance
M. muelleri
M. mucronatus
0.2
Wavelength (nm)
A
B
Fig. 3. Absorbance spectra of photopigments expressed in two representative
Maurolicus spp. (A) Experimentally determined absorbance spectra of M. muelleri and
human (Homo sapiens; control) rod opsin photopigments, reconstituted with 11-cis-
retinal. For all pigments, representative dark (filled circles) and light-bleached (open
circles) spectra are shown, with difference spectra (open diamonds) that have been
fitted with a Govardovskii rhodopsin/vitamin A1 template (63) (black line) in the inset
to determine the lmax. (B) Predicted spectral sensitivities of rh1 and the two rh2 opsins
found in the two pearlside species, M. muelleri (black) and M. mucronatus (gray).
A
B
N
V
C
D
0.6%
99.4%
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Fig. 4. Opsin R-ISH and the distribution of the two photoreceptor types in the
retina of M. muelleri. (A and C) Retinal cryosections showing the expression of rh1 (A)
and rh2 (C) opsin genes in cryosections. Arrowheads highlight labeled cells. Note that
both genes are expressed in rod-like photoreceptor cells. (B) Distribution of rh1 photo-
receptors labeled with anti-rhodopsin antibodies. Each dot represents one labeled
photoreceptor. Black arrows indicate the orientation of the retina. N, nasal; V, ventral.
(D) Topographic map of rh2 photoreceptor densities (cells × 104 mm−2). Percentages
indicate the proportion of each celltype. Scale bars, 50mm (A and C) and 1 mm (B and D).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
de Busserolles et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:eaao4709
8 November 2017
5 of 12
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 the upper mesopelagic zone of the ocean where two main sources of
light are found: the downwelling light produced by the sun and stars,
and bioluminescence produced and emitted by the organisms them-
selves. However, adaptation to bioluminescent light seems unlikely
for the following reasons: (i) Pearlsides are only active in light intensities
between 0.2 cd m−2 (full moon) and 127 cd m−2 (sunset/sunrise) (39),
that is, in mesopic conditions and/or the lowest intensities of photopic
illumination (Fig. 6A), which would severely limit visualization of bio-
luminescent signals (40). (ii) The predicted peak spectral sensitivity for
both rh2 opsins is between lmax = 435 and 441 nm in both species (Fig.
3B), which is offset from most bioluminescent emissions at 475 nm (41)
but instead matches the blue-shifted twilight spectrum of downwelling
light at 450 nm (Fig. 6B) (42). (iii) Although pearlsides are bio-
luminescent, the unique ventral placement of their photophores (43)
suggests that they are used for camouflage via countershading rather
than for communication, implying a dire need to visualize downwelling
light (44). (iv) Increased photoreceptor and ganglion cell densities in the
ventral part of the retina (figs. S6 and S7) indicate that their visual system
is optimized to detect shadows of objects situated above the eye rather
than perceive bioluminescent signals directly (33). Therefore, the visual
system of pearlsides appears to be specifically adapted to the ambient
blue-shifted mesopic light conditions in which they live (Fig. 6).
Instead of having two photoreceptor types that do not function at
their full potential under mesopic conditions, pearlsides have evolved
a more efficient and economical solution by combining properties of
both rods and cones in a single cell type to optimize visual performance.
Under this premise, transmuting cones to morphologically resemble
rods, while retaining the cone pigment and the cone phototransduction
cascade rather than the reverse situation, would result in the greatest
gain of sensitivity. Specifically, whereas cone photopigments have a
higher tolerance to light intensities before reaching saturation and
can be very stable, a rod morphology with a larger outer segment, which
allows a greater packing of photopigment molecules, would result in a
higher photon catch and hence greater sensitivity (1). Furthermore,
whereas rh1 peak spectral sensitivities across vertebrates seem to have a
lower limit of around 470 nm (26), rh2 peak spectral sensitivities appear
more variable, where a comparable short-wavelength–shifted pigment
with a lmax value of 442 nm has previously been described in the
deep-sea elephant shark (32). Further studies on the pearlside rod-like
cones are, however, needed to verify their predicted spectral sensitivities
IS
SE
Mt
Nc
Di
ILM
OS
Rod-like 
cone
Rod
A
C
D
E
F
r
c
c
r
c
c
*
c
r
c
r
c
r
B
cse
rse
rse
cse
PRL
INL
ONL
IPL
OPL
Fig. 5. Morphology of the two photoreceptor types in M. muelleri. (A) Schematic of the rod-like cone (yellow; left) and rod (blue; right) drawn from the 3D reconstruction
using 3View. OS, outer segment; IS, inner segment; SE, synaptic ending; Di, discs; Mt, mitochondria; ILM, inner limiting membrane; Nc, nucleus. Note the displaced nucleus and
synaptic ending in the rod. (B) Immunofluorescence labeling of transverse retinal cryosections. Rod outer segments were labeled with anti-rhodopsin antibodies (red), inner
segments with NeuN (white), cell nuclei with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (blue), and synaptic connections with synapsin (green). Note that NeuN does not usually stain
photoreceptor inner segments, but in M. muelleri, the inner segments of the rods were strongly labeled compared to the rod-like cones. PRL, photoreceptor layer; ONL, outer
nuclear layer; OPL, outer plexiform layer; INL, inner nuclear layer; IPL, inner plexiform layer; c, rod-like cone; r, rod; cse, rod-like cone synaptic ending; rce, rod synaptic ending.
Scale bar, 5 mm. (C to F) TEM of transverse retinal sections showing the two photoreceptor types (C), the polysynaptic ending of the rod-like cone (D), the oligosynaptic ending
of the rod (E), and the sealed discs and incisures of the outer segments (F). The white arrowheads in (D) and (E) show the synaptic ribbons, and the black arrowheads in (F) show
the incisures present in the rod-like cone. Scale bars, 2 mm (C) and 1 mm (D to F).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
de Busserolles et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:eaao4709
8 November 2017
6 of 12
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 (that is, using microspectrophotometry) and to assess their physiological
properties to determine whether they function as a rod, a cone, or a com-
bination of both, as has been reported for the cone-like rods of the skate
Raja spp. (10, 45). Unfortunately, deep-sea fishes are difficult to source
and catch alive and are not yet viable in normal aquarium settings, ren-
dering most experimental and behavioral approaches extremely difficult.
Conclusions
Teleost fishes are remarkably adaptive, as revealed by their diverse
forms and varied visual specializations. This study represents the first
description of a teleost fish visual system that combines the character-
istics of both rods and cones into a single photoreceptor type to presum-
ably optimize vision in twilight conditions. This exceptional visual
solution challenges the current paradigm of the evolution of the verte-
brate duplex retina and the limits of visual adaptation. It also highlights
the need for more comprehensive evaluations of visual systems in gen-
eral and a more cautious approach in classifying photoreceptors into
rods and cones.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Sample collection and ocular tissue preservation
Adult individuals of similar sizes of the Mueller’s pearlside (M. muelleri)
were collected in Masfjorden, Norway, aboard the research vessel G.O.
Sars in October 2014. For each individual, the standard length and
rostro-caudal eye diameter were measured with digital calipers to an
accuracy of 0.1 mm before dissection. Eyes were enucleated, the cornea
and lens were dissected free of the posterior chamber, and the lens di-
ameter was measured as above. The eyecups were fixed either in 4%
paraformaldehyde (PFA) in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (PB; pH 7.4) or in
RNAlater (Thermo Fisher). RNAlater samples were stored at −80°C until
further processing. The whole heads of three specimens of M. muelleri
were also fixed in 4% PFA at 4°C for 48 hours.
Adult individuals of the pearlside, M. mucronatus, were collected in
theRedSea,SaudiArabia,aboardtheresearchvesselThuwalinNovember
2014. Each individual was measured, and the eyes were enucleated in a
similar fashion as for M. muelleri and preserved in RNAlater only.
The research undertaken in Saudi Arabia was in accordance with the
policies and procedures of the King Abdullah University of Science and
Technology. Permissions relevant for the research have been obtained
from the applicable governmental agencies in the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia. The research undertaken in Norway followed the local animal
care guidelines approval by the Norwegian Veterinary Authorities.
Transcriptome sequencing, quality filtering, and de
novo assembly
Total RNA of five individuals of M. muelleri and five individuals of
M. mucronatus were processed from RNAlater-fixed eyes and se-
quenced separately. Briefly, each eyecup was homogenized in TRIzol
reagent, and total RNA was extracted using the PureLink RNA Mini
Kit (Thermo Fisher) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Total
RNA quality was checked using a Eukaryotic Total RNA chip on the
Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent Technologies). mRNA was subsequently
extracted from 2 mg of total RNA using a Dynabeads mRNA Purifica-
tion kit (Thermo Fisher), and complementary DNA (cDNA) libraries
were prepared from 50 ng of mRNA following a NEBNext Ultra Direc-
tional RNA Library Prep Kit protocol (item: E7420, New England Bio-
labs). The quality of libraries was checked using a Bioanalyzer DNA
1000 chip. Library concentrations were measured using a Qubit dsDNA
BRAssay kit(Thermo Fisher). Sampleswere pooledin equimolarratios,
and 100-bp paired-end sequence reads were obtained using Illumina
HiSeq 2000.
Transcriptomes were uploaded to the Genomics Virtual Laboratory
(GVL 4.0.0) (46) on the Queensland Galaxy Server (http://galaxy-qld.
genome.edu.au/galaxy/), and data were converted using FASTQ
Groomer (Galaxy v.1.0.4) (47). Sequences were quality-checked with
FastQC (Galaxy v.0.53) and trimmed with Trimmomatic (Galaxy
v.0.32.2) (48) using customized settings [ILLUMINACLIP (TrueSeq3);
HEADCROP (10 bp); LEADING (Q20), TRAILING (Q20); SLIDING-
WINDOW (average of 4 bp with Q20); and MINLEN (80 bp)]. Trim-
ming and quality filtering removed overrepresented sequences, retaining
only those sequences with a minimum length of 80 bp and a quality
score of ≥20. Two transcriptomes per species were subsequently
assembled de novo using Trinity (Galaxy v.0.0.2) (49) with default
0
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
Wavelength (nm)
Normalized spectra
0.2
A
B
a
b
c
d
e
f
0
2
4
6
8
–2
–4
–6
Luminance (log cd m–2)
Scotopic
Photopic
Mesopic
R
R + C
C
Fig. 6. Ambient light environment and pearlside visual capabilities. (A) Light
levels associated with different photoreceptor functionalities. M. muelleri is only active
during mesopic and low-level photopic light intensities (39). R, rod; C, cone. Scotopic
vision is defined by the use of rods. Mesopic vision is defined by the use of both rods
and cones limited by cone threshold and rod saturation. Photopic vision is defined by
the use of cones and ends when light intensities start to be damaging (75). Environ-
mental light sources (from left to right) are as follows: starlight, full moon, civil twilight,
sunset/sunrise, and sunlight (76). Figure partially redrawn from Hood and Finkelstein
(75). (B) Spectral sensitivity curves of the pearlside M. muelleri rh2 (a, black line; pre-
dicted lmax = 441 nm; fig. S7), the deep-sea myctophid Symbolophorus evermanni
rh1 [b, dark gray line; lmax = 476 (23)], and the nocturnal squirrelfish Neoniphon
sammara rh1 [c, light gray line; lmax = 502 nm (77)] along with the relative down-
welling vector irradiance spectra (courtesy of S. Johnsen) of their respective light environ-
ments: twilight (−6.5° solar elevation) at the surface (d, black dashed line), downwelling
light at 500 m (e, dark gray dashed line), and moonlight (full moon at 70° elevation above
horizon) at the surface (f, light gray dashed line). Note how the spectral sensitivity of each
species is tuned to the light spectra of their respective habitat.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
de Busserolles et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:eaao4709
8 November 2017
7 of 12
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 settings, a k-mer coverage of at least four for initial contig construction,
and a minimum contig length of 200 bp. Transcriptomes are available
on the short-read archive database (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/) (tables
S1 to S3) and assemblies on Dryad (http://datadryad.org/).
Gene extraction, phylogenetic reconstruction, and
expression analyses
Putative opsin sequences of the two Maurolicus spp. were identified by
initially mapping assembled contigs to publicly available opsin coding
sequences (CDS) of the dusky dottyback, Pseudochromis fuscus (50), in
Geneious v.9.1.5 (www.geneious.com) using customized sensitivity set-
tings (fine tuning, none; maximum gap per read, 30%; word length, 14;
maximum mismatches per read, 40%; maximum gap size, 1000 bp; and
index word length, 12). Similarly, publicly available zebrafish (D. rerio)
CDS was used to identify rod- and cone-specific signal transduction
genes (gnat1 and gnat2) and pigment recovery genes (sag and arr3)
(1). Mapped contigs were extracted and scored for similarity to publicly
available gene sequences using BLASTN (https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/Blast.cgi). However, de novo assembly of highly similar genes, in this
case, opsin gene paralogs, using short-read libraries is prone to errors,
often causing misassemblies (chimeric genes) or missing lowly expressed
“rare” paralogs/isoforms/alleles (51, 52). Therefore, a second approach was
usedtocorroboratetheinitialresultsbymanuallyextractingpearlsideopsin
genes from back-mapped reads [similar to the study of Cortesi et al. (15)].
In this manual approach, unassembled reads were first mapped
against the dusky dottyback opsin CDS using medium-sensitivity set-
tings (70% identity threshold for mapping) in Geneious v.9.1.5.
Matching reads were manually split and extracted by copy-moving
from single polynucleotide polymorphism (SNP) to SNP and taking
advantage of paired-end matching to cover gaps between SNPs (fig.
S10). Extracted reads were assembled de novo, and their consensus
was used as a species-specific reference for low-sensitivity (highly ac-
curate) mapping using customized identity parameters (100% identity
threshold for mapping). During this cyclic mapping, unassembled
reads were mapped and assembled repeatedly against an extending
reference until the assembled gene included >300 bp of the 3′UTR.
Alignments were continuously inspected visually to ensure unambiguous
mapping of genes. Both approaches were also used to search for the ex-
pression of cyp27c1.
Pearlside opsin and phototransduction gene sequences were con-
firmed and assigned to a particular class based on phylogenetic relation-
ships with gene sequences from a number of species obtained from
GenBank (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/) or Ensembl (www.ensembl.
org/) (Figs. 1A and 2, A and B, and figs. S1 and S3 to S5). The CDS
of gene-specific data sets (that is, opsin, transducin, and arrestin) was
aligned using the L-INS-I algorithm in MAFFT v.7.222 (53), and the
most appropriate model of sequence evolution was estimated in
jModeltest v.2.1.6 (54), using the Akaike information criterion for
model selection. Bayesian inference phylogenetic hypothesis was
calculated on the CIPRES platform (55), using GTR+I+g models and
Markov chain Monte Carlo searches with two independent runs and
four chains each in MrBayes v.3.2.6 (56). Each run was set to 10 million
generations, with trees sampled every 1000 generations (that is, 10,000
trees per run) and a burn-in of 25%. A similar approach was used to test
for gene conversion between rh2 paralogs, only in this case the phylog-
eny was reconstructed using the information contained in the 3′UTR
and the last 50 bp of exon 5 alone (fig. S5). To corroborate the phylo-
genetic hypotheses, we reran our data sets using Bayesian inference with
a GTR+g model (using parameters as above) as wells as maximum like-
lihood using RAxML v.8.2.9 (57) and 1000 iterations for bootstrapping.
However, no substantial differences in tree structure or node support
could be found, and the resulting trees and data alignments have been
deposited in Dryad. GenBank accession numbers for genes used in differ-
ent phylogeniesare depictedafterthe species namesin figs. S1andS3to S5.
To analyze differences in gene expression of pearlside opsins and
phototransduction genes, unassembled reads were mapped against
pearlside genes (CDS and 3′UTRs for duplicated rh2 genes and only
CDS for all other genes) using customized low-sensitivity settings in
Geneious v.9.1.5 (a minimum overlap between reads of 80 bp and
98% and 95% identity thresholds for opsin and phototransduction gene
mapping, respectively). A higher identity threshold was used for opsin
genes to assure the unambiguous mapping of reads against highly simi-
lar rh2 copies, but allowing for 2% differences to enable the mapping of
reads containing heterozygous positions. Proportional gene expression
(opsin, tranducin, or arrestin) was then calculated according to Ti
Tall ¼
Ni
∑Ni þ n, where Ti/Tall is the gene expression ratio for a given gene Ti
normalized by the total genes expressed Tall, and Ni is the number of
mapped reads for a given gene divided by its length. First, the propor-
tional expression of rod-specific genes was compared to the combined
proportional expression of cone-specific genes (that is, rh1 versus rh2,
gnat1 versus gnat2, and saga versus arr3), and second, the proportional
expression of cone-specific genes was compared among themselves
(Figs. 1B and 2, C and D). However, visual inspection of reads showed
that, despite using high identity thresholds, read mapping against the
CDS of rh2 paralogs remained inaccurate. Therefore, to resolve am-
biguous mapping between cone opsin paralogs, all rh2-specific reads
were extracted and submapped only against the 3′UTR of the genes.
Proportionalgeneexpression of rh2 paralogswasthen recalculatedusing
normalized read counts from this submapping approach (Fig. 1B and
table S1).
Molecular cloning of visual opsins and R-ISH
Using one eyecup of M. muelleri fixed in RNAlater, total RNA was
extracted using TRI reagent (Sigma), and DNase treatment (TURBO
DNA-free, Ambion) was performed. Subsequently, cDNA was synthe-
sized using SuperScript III (Invitrogen) reverse transcriptase with oligo
(dT) primers following the manufacturer’s instructions. Gene-specific pri-
mers for M. muelleri visual opsin genes [rh1: forward primer MMRH1F1,
GAGCCCGTATGAGTACCCTCAG;reverseprimerMMRH1R1,CCA-
CAGATGACGTGGAGGAG (gives a 1004-bp product); rh2: forward
primer MMRH2x1F3, AACGCATCTGGGCTTGTGAG; reverse primer
MMRH2x1R3, CTGGGGACACGGAAGAGAC (gives a 1000-bp
product)] were used to amplify opsin sequences from cDNA derived
from retinal tissue using polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Bands of the
correct size were excised from the agarose gel, purified (MinElute Gel Ex-
traction Kit, Qiagen), and cloned into StrataClone vector (Stratagene).
To extract plasmids, a Miniprep (QIAprep Spin Kit, Qiagen) was used
with cultures grown overnight from positive colonies (PCR-screened
with M13 TOPO primers) following the manufacturer’s instructions.
All positive plasmids were sequenced using a 3730XL analyzer (Applied
Biosystems) at the University of Bergen Sequencing Facility (Norway).
Sequenced opsins were confirmed by comparing the sequences to an-
notatedM.muelleri opsin genes(table S4) and orthologsin otherspecies
using BLASTN and TBLASTX algorithms.
Antisense digoxigenin-labeled riboprobes for rh1 and rh2 opsins were
prepared following the manufacturer’s instructions (Roche Diagnostics).
For the synthesis of the riboprobes, opsin-specific PCR products using
forward and reverse primers with T3 and T7 RNA polymerase sites (un-
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
de Busserolles et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:eaao4709
8 November 2017
8 of 12
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 derlined) (rh1: MMRH1F1T3, CATTAACCCTCACTAAAGGGAA-
GAGCCCGTATGAGTACCCTCAG and MMRH1R1T7, TAATAC-
GACTCACTATAGGGCCACAGATGACGTGGAGGAG; rh2:
MMRH2x1F3T3, CATTAACCCTCACTAAAGGGAAAACG-
CATCTGGGCTTGTGAG and MMRH2x1R3T7, TAATACGACT-
CACTATAGGGCTGGGGACACGGAAGAGAC) were used as
template, as described by Thisse and Thisse (58), and the synthesized
probes were precipitated by 0.1× volume of 4 M LiCl and 3× volume
of 100% ethanol together with transfer RNA (Roche Diagnostics).
The head of three M. muelleri fixed in 4% PFA was briefly washed in
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and the eyes were dissected and incu-
bated in a solution of 25% sucrose and 25% Tissue-Tek (Sakura Finetek)
overnight at 4°C. Each eye was then mounted in a mold of Tissue-Tek
and rapidly frozen on an iron block precooled in liquid nitrogen.
Parallel sectioning (10 mm) series of the eyes was performed with a Leica
CM3050 S cryostat. Before storage at −22°C, the tissue was air-dried for
1 hour at room temperature and for 10 min at 65°C. One parallel series
of the sectioned eye was stained for the presence of rh1 expression, and
the other parallel series was stained for rh2 transcripts by R-ISH, as de-
scribed by Sandbakken et al. (59). Photographs were taken with a Leica
6000B microscope mounted with a Leica DFC digital camera.
In vitro expression and spectral sensitivity
Total RNA was extracted from a single M. muelleri eye previously fixed
in RNAlater (Thermo Fisher), using the PureLink RNA Mini Kit (Thermo
Fisher) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Oligo(dT)-primed retinal
mRNA (2 mg) was converted to cDNA using the Transcriptor First Strand
cDNA Synthesis Kit (Roche), according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Both rh1 and rh2 coding sequences were amplified using the following
primer sets (where rh2 forward and reverse oligonucleotides were designed
to detect both rh2-1 and rh2-2 gene paralogs): rh1, 5′-GCGCGAATTC-
CACCATGAACGGCACGGAGGGAC-3′ (PE_MMuelleri_RH1_F)
and 5′-CGGCGTCGACGCTGCAGGGCCCACAGATGAC-3′
(PE_MMuelleri_RH1_R); rh2, 5′-GCGCGAATTCCACCATGAACG-
GAACGGAGGGAG-3′ (PE_MMuelleri_RH2_F) and 5′-CGGCGTC-
GACGCTGCTGGGGACACGGAAGAG-3′ (PE_MMuelleri_RH2_R).
PCR reagents and conditions were used as previously described
(27, 60, 61). Opsin amplicons comprising the full-length coding se-
quences were excised from a 1.2% agarose gel and purified using a
QIAquick Gel Extraction kit (Qiagen) before digestion with 1 U each
of Eco RI and Sal I restriction enzymes and repurification with a
QIAquick PCR Purification kit (Qiagen). These digested fragments
were cloned into a pMT4 mammalian expression vector via the same
restriction enzyme sites mentioned above, as previously described (60),
and sequenced by the Australian Genome Research Facility to confirm
the presence and fidelity of all three M. muelleri visual opsin sequences.
Each pearlside opsin plasmid (210 mg of DNA in total) was separate-
ly mixed with GeneJuice Transfection Reagent at a DNA/GeneJuice
ratio of 3:1, according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Novagen),
and used to transfect 12 large tissue culture plates (140 mm) that were
preseeded with a nearly confluent monolayer of human embryonic kid-
ney (HEK) 293T cells. The transfected cells were harvested after 48 hours,
pelleted, and washed four times in PBS to remove all dead cells and any
remaining traces of cell culture medium. Visual photopigments were
repeatedly regenerated with excess 11-cis-retinal (>20 mM) under dark
conditions. Cells were lysed with dodecyl maltoside detergent (1%), in
the presence of the protease inhibitor phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride
(20 mg/ml), to release membrane fractions containing the opsin pro-
teins. Lysate was then subjected to affinity chromatography over a
CNBr-activated Sepharose-binding column coupled to an anti-1D4
monoclonal antibody (62), as previously described (60). Triplicate ab-
sorbance spectra were recorded in complete darkness using a Shimadzu
UV-visible spectrophotometer (UV-2700) before bleaching with white
light for 1 hour. A difference spectrum was calculated by subtracting the
bleached spectrum from that measured in the dark, which was then
fitted to a modified Govardovskii rhodopsin A1 template (63) using Mi-
crosoft Excel to determine the lmax, as previously shown (18, 32, 60).
Spectral sensitivities were predicted by analyzing amino acid substi-
tution at 13 known key spectral tuning sites [83, 122, 124, 132, 207, 208,
211, 261, 265, 292, 295, 299, and 300 (18, 20, 26)] (fig. S2). Because sev-
eral studies thus far suggest that similar tuning sites are used for both
rh1 and rh2 pigments (18–20), all 13 sites were analyzed to predict spec-
tral sensitivities for each gene.
Preparation of retinal whole mounts
Retinal whole mounts were prepared according to standard protocols
(64–66). Radial cuts were performed to flatten the eye and subsequently
the retina in toto onto a glass slide, where the orientation was confirmed
by making a small additional cut in the nasal or dorsal part of the eye.
The sclera was gently removed, and the retina was bleached overnight in
a solution of 3% hydrogen peroxide in 0.1 M PB.
Immunohistochemistry
Anti-rhodopsin (rod opsin) antibody was used to selectively label the
true rod photoreceptor population from whole mounts of three individ-
uals of M. muelleri. Eyes fixed in 4% PFA were dissected and bleached
as described previously. To optimize immunolabeling, two pretreat-
ments were performed after bleaching: antigen retrieval [incubation
in sodium citrate buffer (pH 6) at 60°C for 30 min] followed by endog-
enous peroxidase inactivation (15 min in a solution of 10% methanol
and 3% hydrogen peroxide in 0.1 M PB) (67). Retinas were then rinsed
three times (15 min each) in 0.1 M PBS and incubated for 30 min at
room temperature in a blocking solution (5% goat serum and 0.3%
Triton X-100 in 0.1 M PBS) with 50 mM glycine. Retinal whole mounts
were incubated under gentle rocking at room temperature for 48 hours
in a blocking solution containing anti-rhodopsin (mouse monoclonal,
1:500; MAB5316, Millipore). Thereafter, the retinas were washed three
times in 0.1 M PB (15 min each) and further incubated for 24 hours in a
mixture of horseradish peroxidase–conjugated anti-mouse secondary
antibody (1:500, Jackson ImmunoResearch), 5% goat serum, and
0.05% thiomersal in 0.1 M PB. Finally, after being washed three times
(15 min) in 0.1 M PB azide and twice (5 min) in 0.1 M sodium acetate
buffer, retinal whole mounts were incubated in a solution containing
5% of 3,3′-diaminobenzidine solution, 2% nickel sulfate, and NH2Cl
(100 mg/ml) in 0.1 M sodium acetate sodium for 5 min before adding
30% hydrogen peroxide and incubating for another 6 min. Finally,
retinas were rinsed three times in 0.1 M sodium acetate buffer (15 min
each) and mounted in 100% glycerol on a glass slide for analysis.
Immunofluorescence was performed on three retinas cut transverse-
ly using a vibratome (Leica 1000S). Thick sections (50 mm) were
collected into a multiwall chamber and incubated in a blocking solution
(0.5% bovine serum albumin, 0.05% saponin, 0.1% Triton X-100, and
0.05% sodium azide in 0.1 M PBS) for 30 min at room temperature.
Sections were incubated with the following primary antibodies for
48 hours at room temperature: the synaptic vesicle marker anti-SV2
(mouse monoclonal at 1:300, Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank)
and the neuronal marker NeuN (rabbit polyclonal used at 1:1000,
Merck Millipore). Subsequently, sections were washed three times in
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
de Busserolles et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:eaao4709
8 November 2017
9 of 12
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 0.1 M PBS (15 min) and incubated for 5 hours at room temperature
with species-specific immunoglobulin G (IgG) secondary antibodies:
specifically, these comprised either anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 488 or anti-
rabbit Alexa Fluor 555 (1:1000, Thermo Fisher) diluted in a blocking
solution. Sections were incubated in donkey anti-mouse IgG (1:500,
Jackson ImmunoResearch) overnight to absorb any unbound mouse
IgG and cross-linked with 4% PFA for 15 min. Sections were washed
three times in PBS (15 min each) and incubated with the mouse mono-
clonal anti-rhodopsin antibody as described above at 1:500 for 48 hours
at room temperature. Sections were washed three times in PBS (15 min
each) and incubated with an anti-mouse IgG Alexa Fluor 647 secondary
antibody (1:1000, Thermo Fisher) made in a blocking solution. Sections
were washed in PBS and incubated with DAPI to stain the nuclei.
Sections were mounted in vector shield and imaged using a Yokogawa
CSU-W1 spinning disc confocal microscope.
Photoreceptor morphology
TEM and serial block-face scanning electron microscopy (3View) were
used to assess the photoreceptor morphology of M. muelleri. Each anal-
ysis was performed on retinas fixed in 4% PFA and subsequently cross-
linked with 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M PB (pH 7.4). Because both
rods and cones are only present in the periphery of the retina, pieces
of tissue from the retinal margins were processed and analyzed. For
TEM analyses, pieces of retina were postfixed in 1% osmium tetroxide
in 0.15 M PB, dehydrated through an alcohol and acetone series, and
infiltrated with Epon resin (ProSciTech) using a BioWave tissue processor.
Resin samples were then polymerized at 60°C for 48 hours. Ultrathin
sections (90 nm) were cut using a diamond knife, mountedon a 100-mesh
square copper grid, and stained with uranyl acetate and Reynold’s lead cit-
rate. Examination of the sections was conducted using a JEOL 1010 trans-
mission electron microscope operating at 80 kV, and images were taken
using an Olympus Soft Imaging Solutions Veleta 2K × 2K wide-angle
digital camera. To be able to identify morphological differences between
distinct photoreceptor types, one of the retinas previously labeled with
anti-rhodopsin was first analyzed. This allowed the true rods (expressing
rh1) to be confidently distinguished from rod-like cones (expressing
either rh2-1 or rh2-2) and to identify morphological characteristics spe-
cific to each photoreceptor type. Further TEM analyses on unlabeled
retinas were performed to acquire high-resolution and magnification
imagesofthedifferentpartsandcomponentsofeachphotoreceptortype.
3Viewanalysiswasperformedtoreconstructandviewthetwophoto-
receptor types in 3D. Briefly, retinal tissue was postfixed in 2% osmi-
um tetroxide/1.5% potassium ferricyanide solution, followed by 1%
thiocarbohydrazide and 2% osmium tetroxide, then stained overnight
with 1% uranyl acetate, and incubated in lead aspartate for 1 hour at
60°C. Each step was followed by 3 × 5-min rinse in ultrapure water. The
tissue was dehydrated with increasing concentrations of ethanol before in-
filtration and embedding in Durcupan resin [protocol adapted from
Nguyen et al. (68)]. The resin-embedded tissue was trimmed, mounted
on aluminum pins, and coated with conductive silver. Retinal tissue was
imaged on a Zeiss Sigma SEM fitted with a 3View (Gatan). Imaging was
conductedat2kVwithsectionthicknessof50or100nm.Fromtheimages,
the surfaces of eachphotoreceptortype were manually segmented andren-
dered for 3D visualization using the image analysis software IMOD (69).
Distribution of the different neural cell types across
the retina
For topographic analysis of photoreceptors, retinas were whole-
mounted (photoreceptor layer up) in 100% glycerol on a microscopic
slide. For similar analysis of ganglion cells, retinas were flat-mounted on
a gelatinized slide (ganglion cell layer facing up) and stained for 5 min in
0.1% cresyl violet, following the protocol of Coimbra et al. (65). Shrink-
age using this technique was deemed negligible because the retinal
whole mounts were attached to the slides during all steps (65). Different
types of analyses were performed for high-density cell types (that is,
rod-like cone photoreceptors and ganglion cells) and low-density cell
types (rod photoreceptors).
Following the protocols described by de Busserolles et al. (33, 70),
topographic distribution of rod-like cone photoreceptor and ganglion
cell populations was assessed using the optical fractionator technique
(71) modified by Coimbra et al. (67, 72) for its use in whole-mounted
retinas. Briefly, the outline of the retinal whole mounts was digitized
using a 4× objective (numerical aperture, 0.13) mounted on a com-
pound microscope (Olympus BX50) equipped with a motorized stage
(MAC5000, Ludl Electronic Products), a digital video camera (Micro-
Fire, Optronics), and a computer running Stereo Investigator software
(MicroBrightField). Using a 60× oil immersion objective (numerical ap-
erture, 1.35) for ganglion cell counts and 100× oil objective (numerical
aperture, 1.40) for photoreceptor counts, cells were randomly and sys-
tematically counted using the parameters listed in table S5. The
counting frame and grid size were chosen carefully to maintain the
highest level of sampling (~200 sampling sites) and achieve an
acceptable Schaeffer coefficient of error (CE). The CE is a measure of
the accuracy of the total number of cell estimates and is considered
acceptable below 0.1. Topographic mapswere constructed using the sta-
tistical program R v.2.15.0 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing,
2012) with the results exported from the Stereo Investigator Software
according to Garza-Gisholt et al. (73). The Gaussian kernel smoother
from the Spatstat package (74) was used and adjusted the sigma value to
the distance between points (that is, grid size).
The distribution of the rod photoreceptors labeled with anti-rhodopsin
wasmappedfromoneretinausingtheNeurolucidasoftware(MicroBright-
Field). Although IHC was performed on three retinas and gave similar
results visually (that is, labeling at the peripheral margins), only one
whole mount preparation was deemed good enough for quantitative
analysis due to the challenge of flattening the retinal margins in this type
of preparation. The outline of the retinal whole mounts was digitized
using a 5× objective (numerical aperture, 0.13). The entire retina was
then scanned in contiguous steps using a 20× objective (numerical ap-
erture, 0.8), and each labeled cell was marked. Results were exported
from the Neurolucida software, and a dot map representing the location
of each labeled cell was constructed using the statistical program R
v.2.15.0 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing) and a customized
version of the Garza-Gisholt et al. (73) script.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Supplementary material for this article is available at http://advances.sciencemag.org/cgi/
content/full/3/11/eaao4709/DC1
fig. S1. Gene coding region (CDS) inferred vertebrate opsin gene phylogeny.
fig. S2. Reconstruction of amino acid changes at known key spectral tuning sites of pearlside
opsins.
fig. S3. Vertebrate Ga transducin gene phylogeny.
fig. S4. Vertebrate arrestin gene phylogeny.
fig. S5. rh2 opsin gene conversion phylogeny.
fig. S6. Topographic distribution of rod-like cone photoreceptors in three individuals of M. muelleri.
fig. S7. Topographic distribution of ganglion cells (excluding amacrine cells and glial cells) in
three individuals of M. muelleri.
fig. S8. Expression of rh2 and rh1 opsin genes from sectional RNA in situ hybridization analyses
of the eye of M. muelleri.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
de Busserolles et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:eaao4709
8 November 2017
10 of 12
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 fig. S9. Location of the ”true“ rod photoreceptors and their distribution across the retina in
M. muelleri.
fig. S10. Manual approach to extract genes from back-mapped reads.
table S1. Summary of transcriptomes, GenBank accession numbers, opsin mapping (including
base pair coverage), and proportional opsin gene expression.
table S2. Summary of transcriptomes, GenBank accession numbers, transducin mapping
(including base pair coverage), and proportional transducin gene expression.
table S3. Summary of transcriptomes, GenBank accession numbers, arrestin mapping
(including base pair coverage), and proportional arrestin gene expression.
table S4. Single-gene GenBank accession numbers of gene sequences produced during this study.
table S5. Summary of the stereology parameters used for the analysis of the rod-like cone
photoreceptors and ganglion cell distribution along with the quantitative results obtained
using the optical fractionator methods in six retinas of M. muelleri.
movie S1. 3D reconstruction of the two photoreceptor types in M. muelleri.
movie S2. Close-up 3D reconstruction of the nucleus and synaptic terminal of the two
photoreceptor types in M. muelleri.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. T. D. Lamb, Evolution of phototransduction, vertebrate photoreceptors and retina. Prog.
Retin. Eye Res. 36, 52–119 (2013).
2. F. W. Munz, W. N. McFarland, The significance of spectral position in the rhodopsins of
tropical marine fishes. Vision Res. 13, 1829–1874 (1973).
3. A. Stockman, L. T. Sharpe, Into the twilight zone: The complexities of mesopic vision and
luminous efficiency. Ophthalmic Physiol. Opt. 26, 225–239 (2006).
4. G. L. Walls, The Vertebrate Eye and Its Adaptive Radiation (The Cranbrook Institute of
Science, 1942), p. 785.
5. D. S. McDevitt, S. K. Brahma, J.-C. Jeanny, D. Hicks, Presence and foveal enrichment of rod opsin
in the “all cone” retina of the American chameleon. Anat. Rec. 237, 299–307 (1993).
6. B. Röll, Gecko vision—Visual cells, evolution, and ecological constraints. J. Neurocytol. 29,
471–484 (2000).
7. R. K. Schott, J. Müller, C. G. Y. Yang, N. Bhattacharyya, N. Chan, M. Xu, J. M. Morrow,
A.-H. Ghenu, E. R. Loew, V. Tropepe, B. S. W. Chang, Evolutionary transformation
of rod photoreceptors in the all-cone retina of a diurnal garter snake. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 113, 356–361 (2016).
8. J.-x. Ma, S. Znoiko, K. L. Othersen, J. C. Ryan, J. Das, T. Isayama, M. Kono, D. D. Oprian,
D. W. Corson, M. C. Cornwall, D. A. Cameron, F. I. Harosi, C. L. Makino, R. K. Crouch,
A visual pigment expressed in both rod and cone photoreceptors. Neuron 32, 451–461 (2001).
9. D. H. Dickson, D. A. Graves, Fine structure of the lamprey photoreceptors and retinal
pigment epithelium (Petromyzon marinus L.). Exp. Eye Res. 29, 45–60 (1979).
10. J. E. Dowling, H. Ripps, On the duplex nature of the skate retina. J. Exp. Zool. 256,
55–65 (1990).
11. J. Giske, D. L. Aksnes, B. M. Baliño, S. Kaartvedt, U. Lie, J. T. Nordeide, A. G. V. Salvanes,
S. M. Wakili, A. Aadnesen, Vertical distribution and trophic interactions of zooplankton
and fish in Masfjorden, Norway. Sarsia 75, 65–81 (1990).
12. C. W. Clark, D. A. Levy, Diel vertical migrations by juvenile sockeye salmon and the
antipredation window. Am. Nat. 131, 271–290 (1988).
13. M. A. Ali, M. Anctil, Retinas of Fishes: An Atlas (Springer Science & Business Media, 1976).
14. T. D. Lamb, H. Patel, A. Chuah, R. C. Natoli, W. I. L. Davies, N. S. Hart, S. P. Collin, D. M. Hunt,
Evolution of vertebrate phototransduction: Cascade activation. Mol. Biol. Evol. 33,
2064–2087 (2016).
15. F. Cortesi, Z. Musilová, S. M. Stieb, N. S. Hart, U. E. Siebeck, M. Malmstrøm, O. K. Tørresen,
S. Jentoft, K. L. Cheney, N. J. Marshall, K. L. Carleton, W. Salzburger, Ancestral duplications
and highly dynamic opsin gene evolution in percomorph fishes. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 112, 1493–1498 (2015).
16. Y. Imanishi, O. Hisatomi, F. Tokunaga, Two types of arrestins expressed in medaka rod
photoreceptors. FEBS Lett. 462, 31–36 (1999).
17. A. Kelber, M. Vorobyev, D. Osorio, Animal colour vision—Behavioural tests and
physiological concepts. Biol. Rev. 78, 81–118 (2003).
18. W. L. Davies, J. A. Cowing, L. S. Carvalho, I. C. Potter, A. E. O. Trezise, D. M. Hunt, S. P. Collin,
Functional characterization, tuning, and regulation of visual pigment gene expression
in an anadromous lamprey. FASEB J. 21, 2713–2724 (2007).
19. S. Yokoyama, Evolution of dim-light and color vision pigments. Annu. Rev. Genomics Hum.
Genet. 9, 259–282 (2008).
20. S. Yokoyama, Molecular evolution of vertebrate visual pigments. Prog. Retin. Eye Res.
19, 385–419 (2000).
21. J. M. Morrow, S. Lazic, M. Dixon Fox, C. Kuo, R. K. Schott, E. de A. Gutierrez, F. Santini,
V. Tropepe, B. S. W. Chang, A second visual rhodopsin gene, rh1-2, is expressed in zebrafish
photoreceptors and found in other ray-finned fishes. J. Exp. Biol. 220, 294–303 (2017).
22. D. Escobar-Camacho, E. Ramos, C. Martins, K. L. Carleton, The opsin genes of Amazonian
cichlids. Mol. Ecol. 26, 1343–1356 (2017).
23. F. de Busserolles, N. S. Hart, D. M. Hunt, W. I. Davies, N. J. Marshall, M. W. Clarke, D. Hahne,
S. P. Collin, Spectral tuning in the eyes of deep-sea lanternfishes (Myctophidae): A novel
sexually dimorphic intra-ocular filter. Brain Behav. Evol. 85, 77–93 (2015).
24. J. M. Enright, M. B. Toomey, S.-y. Sato, S. E. Temple, J. R. Allen, R. Fujiwara, V. M. Kramlinger,
L. D. Nagy, K. M. Johnson, Y. Xiao, M. J. How, S. L. Johnson, N. W. Roberts, V. J. Kefalov,
F. P. Guengerich, J. C. Corbo, Cyp27c1 red-shifts the spectral sensitivity of photoreceptors by
converting vitamin A1 into A2. Curr. Biol. 25, 3048–3057 (2015).
25. W. I. L. Davies, S. M. Downes, J. K. Fu, M. E. Shanks, R. R. Copley, S. Lise, S. C. Ramsden,
G. C. M. Black, K. Gibson, R. G. Foster, M. W. Hankins, A. H. Németh, Next-generation
sequencing in health-care delivery: Lessons from the functional analysis of rhodopsin.
Genet. Med. 14, 891–899 (2012).
26. D. M. Hunt, K. S. Dulai, J. C. Partridge, P. Cottrill, J. K. Bowmaker, The molecular basis for
spectral tuning of rod visual pigments in deep-sea fish. J. Exp. Biol. 204, 3333–3344
(2001).
27. W. I. L. Davies, T. K. Tamai, L. Zheng, J. K. Fu, J. Rihel, R. G. Foster, D. Whitmore,
M. W. Hankins, An extended family of novel vertebrate photopigments is widely
expressed and displays a diversity of function. Genome Res. 25, 1666–1679 (2015).
28. W. I. L. Davies, M. Turton, S. N. Peirson, B. K. Follett, S. Halford, J. M. Garcia-Fernandez,
P. J. Sharp, M. W. Hankins, R. G. Foster, Vertebrate ancient opsin photopigment spectra
and the avian photoperiodic response. Biol. Lett. 8, 291–294 (2012).
29. W. L. Davies, M. W. Hankins, R. G. Foster, Vertebrate ancient opsin and melanopsin:
Divergent irradiance detectors. Photochem. Photobiol. Sci. 9, 1444–1457 (2010).
30. M. A. Pointer, L. S. Carvalho, J. A. Cowing, J. K. Bowmaker, D. M. Hunt, The visual pigments
of a deep-sea teleost, the pearl eye Scopelarchus analis. J. Exp. Biol. 210, 2829–2835
(2007).
31. J. C. Partridge, S. N. Archer, J. Vanoostrum, Single and multiple visual pigments in
deep-sea fishes. J. Mar. Biol. Assoc. U.K. 72, 113–130 (1992).
32. W. L. Davies, L. S. Carvalho, B.-H. Tay, S. Brenner, D. M. Hunt, B. Venkatesh, Into the
blue: Gene duplication and loss underlie color vision adaptations in a deep-sea
chimaera, the elephant shark Callorhinchus milii. Genome Res. 19, 415–426 (2009).
33. F. de Busserolles, N. J. Marshall, S. P. Collin, Retinal ganglion cell distribution and
spatial resolving power in deep-sea lanternfishes (Myctophidae). Brain Behav.
Evol. 84, 262–276 (2014).
34. J.-W. Kim, H.-J. Yang, A. P. Oel, M. J. Brooks, L. Jia, D. C. Plachetzki, W. Li, W. T. Allison,
A. Swaroop, Recruitment of rod photoreceptors from short-wavelength-sensitive
cones during the evolution of nocturnal vision in mammals. Dev. Cell 37, 520–532
(2016).
35. B. F. Simões, F. L. Sampaio, E. R. Loew, K. L. Sanders, R. N. Fisher, N. S. Hart, D. M. Hunt,
J. C. Partridge, D. J. Gower, Multiple rod–cone and cone–rod photoreceptor
transmutations in snakes: Evidence from visual opsin gene expression. Proc. Biol.
Sci. 283, 20152624 (2016).
36. N. Bhattacharyya, B. Darren, R. K. Schott, V. Tropepe, B. S. W. Chang, Cone-like rhodopsin
expressed in the all-cone retina of the colubrid pine snake as a potential adaptation to
diurnality. J. Exp. Biol. 220, 2418–2425 (2017).
37. A. Bozzano, P. M. Pankhurst, A. Sabatés, Early development of eye and retina in
lanternfish larvae. Vis. Neurosci. 24, 423–436 (2007).
38. L. M. Biagioni, D. M. Hunt, S. P. Collin, Morphological characterization and topographic
analysis of multiple photoreceptor types in the retinae of mesopelagic hatchetfishes with
tubular eyes. Front. Ecol. Evol. 4, 25 (2016).
39. A. Staby, D. L. Aksnes, Follow the light—Diurnal and seasonal variations in vertical
distribution of the mesopelagic fish Maurolicus muelleri. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 422, 265–273
(2011).
40. E. J. Warrant, N. A. Locket, Vision in the deep sea. Biol. Rev. 79, 671–712 (2004).
41. E. A. Widder, Bioluminescence in the ocean: Origins of biological, chemical, and
ecological diversity. Science 328, 704–708 (2010).
42. A. M. Sweeney, C. A. Boch, S. Johnsen, D. E. Morse, Twilight spectral dynamics and the
coral reef invertebrate spawning response. J. Exp. Biol. 214, 770–777 (2011).
43. N. V. Parin, S. G. Kobyliansky, Diagnoses and distribution of fifteen species recognized in
genus Maurolicus Cocco (Sternoptychidae, Stomiiformes) with a key to their
identification. Cybium 20, 185–195 (1996).
44. P. J. Herring, How to survive in the dark: Bioluminescence in the deep sea, in Physiological
Adaptations in Marine Animals, M. S. Laverack, Ed. (Society for Experimental Biology,
1985), vol. 39, pp. 323–350.
45. H. Ripps, J. E. Dowling, Structural features and adaptive properties of photoreceptors in
the skate retina. J. Exp. Zool. 256, 46–54 (1990).
46. E. Afgan, C. Sloggett, N. Goonasekera, I. Makunin, D. Benson, M. Crowe, S. Gladman,
Y. Kowsar, M. Pheasant, R. Horst, A. Lonie, Genomics virtual laboratory: A practical
bioinformatics workbench for the cloud. PLOS ONE 10, e0140829 (2015).
47. D. Blankenberg, A. Gordon, G. Von Kuster, N. Coraor, J. Taylor, A. Nekrutenko; Galaxy
Team, Manipulation of FASTQ data with Galaxy. Bioinformatics 26, 1783–1785 (2010).
48. A. M. Bolger, M. Lohse, B. Usadel, Trimmomatic: A flexible trimmer for Illumina sequence
data. Bioinformatics 30, 2114–2120 (2014).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
de Busserolles et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:eaao4709
8 November 2017
11 of 12
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 49. B. J. Haas, A. Papanicolaou, M. Yassour, M. Grabherr, P. D. Blood, J. Bowden, M. B. Couger,
D. Eccles, B. Li, M. Lieber, M. D. MacManes, M. Ott, J. Orvis, N. Pochet, F. Strozzi, N. Weeks,
R. Westerman, T. William, C. N. Dewey, R. Henschel, R. D. LeDuc, N. Friedman, A. Regev, De novo
transcript sequence reconstruction from RNA-seq using the Trinity platform for reference
generation and analysis. Nat. Protoc. 8, 1494–1512 (2013).
50. F. Cortesi, Z. Musilová, S. M. Stieb, N. S. Hart, U. E. Siebeck, K. L. Cheney, W. Salzburger,
N. J. Marshall, From crypsis to mimicry: Changes in colour and the configuration of
the visual system during ontogenetic habitat transitions in a coral reef fish. J. Exp.
Biol. 219, 2545–2558 (2016).
51. A. Conesa, P. Madrigal, S. Tarazona, D. Gomez-Cabrero, A. Cervera, A. McPherson,
M. W. Szcześniak, D. J. Gaffney, L. L. Elo, X. Zhang, A. Mortazavi, A survey of best practices
for RNA-seq data analysis. Genome Biol. 17, 13 (2016).
52. N. Vijay, J. W. Poelstra, A. Künstner, J. B. W. Wolf, Challenges and strategies in
transcriptome assembly and differential gene expression quantification. A
comprehensive in silico assessment of RNA-seq experiments. Mol. Ecol. 22, 620–634
(2013).
53. K. Katoh, K. Misawa, K.-i. Kuma, T. Miyata, MAFFT: A novel method for rapid multiple
sequence alignment based on fast Fourier transform. Nucleic Acids Res. 30, 3059–3066
(2002).
54. D. Darriba, G. L. Taboada, R. Doallo, D. Posada, jModelTest 2: More models, new heuristics
and parallel computing. Nat. Methods 9, 772 (2012).
55. M. A. Miller, W. Pfeiffer, T. Schwartz, Creating the CIPRES Science Gateway for inference of
large phylogenetic trees, in 2010 Gateway Computing Environments Workshop (GCE), New
Orleans, LA, 14 November 2010 (IEEE, 2010), pp. 1–8.
56. F. Ronquist, M. Teslenko, P. van der Mark, D. L. Ayres, A. Darling, S. Höhna, B. Larget,
L. Liu, M. A. Suchard, J. P. Huelsenbeck, MrBayes 3.2: Efficient Bayesian phylogenetic
inference and model choice across a large model space. Syst. Biol. 61, 539–542
(2012).
57. A. Stamatakis, RAxML version 8: A tool for phylogenetic analysis and post-analysis of
large phylogenies. Bioinformatics 30, 1312–1313 (2014).
58. C. Thisse, B. Thisse, High-resolution in situ hybridization to whole-mount zebrafish
embryos. Nat. Protoc. 3, 59–69 (2008).
59. M. Sandbakken, L. Ebbesson, S. Stefansson, J. V. Helvik, Isolation and characterization of
melanopsin photoreceptors of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar). J. Comp. Neurol. 520,
3727–3744 (2012).
60. W. I. L. Davies, L. Zheng, S. Hughes, T. K. Tamai, M. Turton, S. Halford, R. G. Foster,
D. Whitmore, M. W. Hankins, Functional diversity of melanopsins and their global
expression in the teleost retina. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 68, 4115–4132 (2011).
61. W. L. Davies, J. A. Cowing, J. K. Bowmaker, L. S. Carvalho, D. J. Gower, D. M. Hunt,
Shedding light on serpent sight: The visual pigments of henophidian snakes.
J. Neurosci. 29, 7519–7525 (2009).
62. R. S. Molday, D. MacKenzie, Monoclonal antibodies to rhodopsin: Characterization,
cross-reactivity, and application as structural probes. Biochemistry 22, 653–660 (1983).
63. V. I. Govardovskii, N. Fyhrquist, T. Reuter, D. G. Kuzmin, K. Donner, In search of the visual
pigment template. Vis. Neurosci. 17, 509–528 (2000).
64. J. Stone, The Whole Mount Handbook: A Guide to the Preparation and Analysis of Retinal
Whole Mounts (Maitland Publications, 1981), p. 128.
65. J. P. Coimbra, M. L. V. Marceliano, B. L. S. Andrade-da-Costa, E. S. Yamada, The retina of
tyrant flycatchers: Topographic organization of neuronal density and size in the
ganglion cell layer of the great kiskadee Pitangus sulphuratus and the rusty margined
flycatcher Myiozetetes cayanensis (Aves: Tyrannidae). Brain Behav. Evol. 68, 15–25
(2006).
66. J. F. P. Ullmann, B. A. Moore, S. E. Temple, E. Fernández-Juricic, S. P. Collin, The retinal
wholemount technique: A window to understanding the brain and behaviour.
Brain Behav. Evol. 79, 26–44 (2012).
67. J. P. Coimbra, P. M. Nolan, S. P. Collin, N. S. Hart, Retinal ganglion cell topography and
spatial resolving power in penguins. Brain Behav. Evol. 80, 254–268 (2012).
68. J. V. Nguyen, I. Soto, K.-Y. Kim, E. A. Bushong, E. Oglesby, F. J. Valiente-Soriano,
Z. Yang, C.-h. O. Davis, J. L. Bedont, J. L. Son, J. O. Wei, V. L. Buchman, D. J. Zack,
M. Vidal-Sanz, M. H. Ellisman, N. Marsh-Armstrong, Myelination transition zone astrocytes
are constitutively phagocytic and have synuclein dependent reactivity in glaucoma.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 108, 1176–1181 (2011).
69. J. R. Kremer, D. N. Mastronarde, J. R. McIntosh, Computer visualization of
three-dimensional image data using IMOD. J. Struct. Biol. 116, 71–76 (1996).
70. F. de Busserolles, J. L. Fitzpatrick, N. J. Marshall, S. P. Collin, The influence of
photoreceptor size and distribution on optical sensitivity in the eyes of lanternfishes
(Myctophidae). PLOS ONE 9, e99957 (2014).
71. M. J. West, L. Slomianka, H. J. G. Gundersen, Unbiased stereological estimation of the total
number of neurons in the subdivisions of the rat hippocampus using the optical
fractionator. Anat. Rec. 231, 482–497 (1991).
72. J. P. Coimbra, N. Trévia, M. L. V. Marceliano, B. L. da Silveira Andrade-Da-Costa,
C. W. Picanço-Diniz, E. S. Yamada, Number and distribution of neurons in the retinal
ganglion cell layer in relation to foraging behaviors of tyrant flycatchers. J. Comp.
Neurol. 514, 66–73 (2009).
73. E. Garza-Gisholt, J. M. Hemmi, N. S. Hart, S. P. Collin, A comparison of spatial analysis
methods for the construction of topographic maps of retinal cell density.
PLOS ONE 9, e93485 (2014).
74. A. Baddeley, R. Turner, Spatstat: An R package for analyzing spatial point patterns.
J. Stat. Softw. 12, 1–42 (2005).
75. D. C. Hood, M. A. Finkelstein, Sensitivity to light, in Handbook of Perception and Human
Performance, K. Boff, L. Kaufman, J. Thomas, Eds. (Wiley, 1986), vol. 1.
76. H. W. Leibowitz, Ambient illuminance during twilight and from the moon, in Night Vision:
Current Research and Future Directions. Symposium Proceedings (National Academies
Press, 1987), pp. 19–22.
77. N. J. Marshall, M. Vorobyev, U. Siebeck, What does a reef fish see when it sees a reef fish?
Eating “Nemo,” in Communication in Fishes, F. Ladich, S. P. Collin, P. Moller, B. G. Kapoor,
Eds. (Science Publisher, 2006).
78. C. G. Y. Yang, thesis, University of Toronto (2010).
79. K. P. Brin, H. Ripps, Rhodopsin photoproducts and rod sensitivity in the skate retina.
J. Gen. Physiol. 69, 97–120 (1977).
80. S. Kawamura, S. Yokoyama, Functional characterization of visual and nonvisual pigments
of American chameleon (Anolis carolinensis). Vision Res. 38, 37–44 (1998).
81. F. Crescitelli, The visual cells and visual pigments of the vertebrate eye, in Photochemistry
of Vision, H. J. A. Dartnall, Ed. (Springer, 1972), pp. 245–363.
82. A. Morshedian, G. L. Fain, Single-photon sensitivity of lamprey rods with cone-like outer
segments. Curr. Biol. 25, 484–487 (2015).
83. H. Zhang, S. Yokoyama, Molecular evolution of the rhodopsin gene of marine lamprey,
Petromyzon marinus. Gene 191, 1–6 (1997).
84. D. Kojima, T. Okano, Y. Fukada, Y. Shichida, T. Yoshizawa, T. G. Ebrey, Cone visual pigments
are present in gecko rod cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 89, 6841–6845 (1992).
85. X. Zhang, T. G. Wensel, C. Yuan, Tokay gecko photoreceptors achieve rod-like physiology
with cone-like proteins. Photochem. Photobiol. 82, 1452–1460 (2006).
86. J. Kleinschmidt, J. E. Dowling, Intracellular recordings from gecko photoreceptors during
light and dark adaptation. J. Gen. Physiol. 66, 617–648 (1975).
87. A. P. Mariani, Photoreceptors of the larval tiger salamander retina. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B
Biol. Sci. 227, 483–492 (1986).
Acknowledgments: We thank S. Johnsen for providing downwelling vector irradiance
spectra. We gratefully acknowledge A. G. Salvanes, the captain and crew of the G.O. SARS and
R. V. Thuwal for sea time opportunities, and G. Ben-Ari for providing access to a Stereo
Investigator system at the University of Western Australia. We also thank R. Karlsen for technical
support with cloning and ISH, R. Chapman for technical assistance with the 3View analysis,
and R. Crouch and the National Eye Institute, NIH, for the provision of 11-cis-retinal. We
also acknowledge the facilities and the scientific and technical assistance of the Australian
Microscopy and Microanalysis Research Facility at the Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis,
and the Queensland Brain Institute’s Advanced Microscopy Facility at the University of
Queensland. Funding: This work was supported by King Abdullah University of Science and
Technology, the Air Force Office of Scientific Research, and the Australian Research Council via
grants awarded to J.M.; a Discovery Project grant (DP140102117) and Future Fellowship
(FT110100176) awarded to W.I.L.D.; and a Linkage Infrastructure, Equipment and Facilities (LIEF)
grant (LE100100074) awarded to the Queensland Brain Institute (Neurolucida software). F.C.
was supported by a Swiss National Science Foundation Early Postdoctoral Mobility Fellowship
(165364) and a University of Queensland Development Fellowship. J.V.H. was supported by
a start-up grant from the University of Bergen. Author contributions: F.d.B., F.C., and S.K.
designed the study. F.d.B., F.C., J.V.H., W.I.L.D., R.M.T., R.K.P.S., C.T.M., and J.K.M. performed the
experiments. F.d.B., F.C., J.V.H., and W.I.L.D. analyzed the data. S.P.C., X.I., S.K., and J.M. supervised
the project. All authors wrote the manuscript. Competing interests: The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. Data and materials availability: All data needed to
evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper, Supplementary Materials,
Dryad repository at https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.c7p60, and GenBank (single gene accession no.
MF805819-MF805840 and transcriptome accession no. for the project PRJNA401503 and for
the samples SRX3161870, SRX3161890, SRX3161913-SRX3161915, and SRX3162896-SRX3162900).
Additional data related to this paper may be requested from the authors.
Submitted 27 July 2017
Accepted 17 October 2017
Published 8 November 2017
10.1126/sciadv.aao4709
Citation: F. de Busserolles, F. Cortesi, J. V. Helvik, W. I. L. Davies, R. M. Templin, R. K. P. Sullivan,
C. T. Michell, J. K. Mountford, S. P. Collin, X. Irigoien, S. Kaartvedt, J. Marshall, Pushing the limits
of photoreception in twilight conditions: The rod-like cone retina of the deep-sea pearlsides.
Sci. Adv. 3, eaao4709 (2017).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
de Busserolles et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:eaao4709
8 November 2017
12 of 12
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 deep-sea pearlsides
Pushing the limits of photoreception in twilight conditions: The rod-like cone retina of the
Michell, Jessica K. Mountford, Shaun P. Collin, Xabier Irigoien, Stein Kaartvedt and Justin Marshall
Fanny de Busserolles, Fabio Cortesi, Jon Vidar Helvik, Wayne I. L. Davies, Rachel M. Templin, Robert K. P. Sullivan, Craig T.
DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aao4709
 (11), eaao4709.
3
Sci Adv 
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/3/11/eaao4709
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2017/11/06/3.11.eaao4709.DC1
REFERENCES
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/3/11/eaao4709#BIBL
This article cites 77 articles, 16 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
registered trademark of AAAS.
is a
Science Advances 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
(ISSN 2375-2548) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New
Science Advances 
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
