 BRIEF REVIEW
www.jasn.org
Pragmatic Clinical Trials in CKD: Opportunities and
Challenges
Ian H. de Boer,*† Csaba P. Kovesdy,‡§ Sankar D. Navaneethan,|¶ Carmen A. Peralta,**††
Delphine S. Tuot,†† Miguel A. Vazquez,‡‡ and Deidra C. Crews,§§|| for the American Society of
Nephrology Chronic Kidney Disease Advisory Group
*Division of Nephrology and †Department of Medicine, Kidney Research Institute, University of Washington, Seattle, WA;
‡Division of Nephrology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN; §Nephrology Section, Memphis
VA Medical center, Memphis, TN; |Section of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Selzman Institute for Kidney Health,
Baylor College of Medicine; ¶Section of Nephrology, Michael E. DeBakey Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Houston, TX;
**Kidney Health Research Collaborative and ††Division of Nephrology, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA; ‡‡Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX;
§§Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine; and ||Welch Center for
Prevention, Epidemiology and Clinical Research, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD
ABSTRACT
Randomized controlled trials in CKD lag in number behind those of other chronic
diseases, despite the high morbidity and mortality experienced by patients with kidney
disease and the exorbitant costs of their health care. Observational studies of CKD
frequently yield seemingly paradoxic associations of traditional risk factors with
outcomes, making it difficult to extrapolate the results of trials conducted in people
with normal kidney function to patients with CKD. However, many completed trials in
CKD have been limited by intermediate outcomes of unclear clinical significance or
narrow eligibility criteria that limit external validity, and implementation of proven
therapies remains a challenge. It is therefore imperative that the nephrology com-
munity capitalize on recent interest in novel approaches to trial design, such as prag-
matic clinical trials. These trials are meant to promote research within real world
settings to yield clinically relevant results with greater applicability than those of
traditional trials, while maintaining many advantages, such as controlling for potential
sources of bias. We provide a description of pragmatic clinical trials and a discussion
of advantages, disadvantages, and practical challenges inherent to this study design,
in the context of specific scientific questions relevant to patients with CKD.
J Am Soc Nephrol 27: 2948–2954, 2016. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2015111264
THE NEED FOR CLINICAL TRIALS
IN CKD
In the second half of the past century, sig-
nificant progress has been made in under-
standing principles of causal inference and
in statistical techniques underlying the
proper planning and analysis of interven-
tional trials.1 As a result, the randomized
controlled trial (RCT) has become the
gold standard tool for proving the efficacy
and safety of therapeutic interventions.2,3
After their ubiquitous acceptance as the
sine qua non of causal assessment, RCTs
evolved from small single-center studies
to large, multicenter trials. With this shift,
the cost of conducting RCTs increased dra-
matically, common disease states amena-
ble to drug intervention (such as hyper-
cholesterolemia and hypertension)
became a dominant focus of inquiry,4
and commercial entities took on enlarg-
ing roles in trial design and conduct.5,6
At the same time, gaps emerged between
demonstration of treatment efficacy
and implementation of proven thera-
pies in clinical care, and high-quality
RCT evidence has remained scarce for
many important and practical clinical
questions.
Upon this general background, con-
ducting investigations in CKD has faced
additional challenges. The number of RCTs
conducted in patients with CKD or ESRD
is one of the smallest compared with other
medical subspecialties,7 in spite of the ris-
ing prevalence of CKD, the enormously
high morbidity and mortality experienced
by patients with kidney disease, and the
high costs of CKD and ESRD care.8,9 Pub-
lished nephrology RCTs have often exam-
ined intermediate outcomes that are of
unclear significance to patients, providers,
and families, with important exceptions.
The complex and heterogeneous nature
of CKD has often led to restrictive enroll-
ment criteria that limit external validity.7
Published online ahead of print. Publication date
available at www.jasn.org.
Correspondence: Dr. Ian de Boer, Division of Ne-
phrology and Kidney Research Institute, University
of Washington, Box 359606, 325 9th Ave, Seattle,
WA 98104. Email: deboer@u.washington.edu
Copyright © 2016 by the American Society of
Nephrology
2948
ISSN : 1046-6673/2710-2948
J Am Soc Nephrol 27: 2948–2954, 2016
 Insufficient implementation of the few
proven therapies has contributed to in-
creased risk of CKD and its complications
in economically and socially disadvan-
tagedpopulations.10,11Moreover,observa-
tional studies of people with CKD and
ESRD have frequently observed seemingly
paradoxic associations of traditional risk
factors with clinical outcomes,12 making
it difficult to extrapolate the results of
RCTs conducted in patients with normal
kidney function to patients with CKD.
It is therefore imperative that the
nephrology community capitalize on the
recent wave of interest in novel approaches
to clinical trial design, such as pragmatic
clinical trials (PCTs). This review article
willprovideadescriptionoftheconceptof
PCTs, a discussion of the advantages, dis-
advantages, and practical challenges of
PCTs, and examples of PCTs conducted
among patients with CKD.
WHAT ARE PCTS?
PCTs have been recognized as important
tools for evaluating medical interventions
since at least 1967.13 Over time, the term
“pragmatic” has been used to refer to a va-
riety of interrelated elements of trial de-
sign.14–16 Central to all definitions is an
emphasis on external validity. PCTs are de-
signed so that their results can be quickly
and directly applied to relevant clinical
populations. Toward this goal, common
features of PCTs include broad eligibility
criteria, comparisons of clinically relevant
alternatives, integration of research into
clinical practice, and evaluation of a broad
range of relevant health outcomes.17,18 The
Gruppo Italiano per lo Studio della Strep-
tochinasi nell’Infarto Miocardico trial of
thrombolysis for acute myocardial infarc-
tion is often cited as an example of an early
and successful PCT.19 PCTs have been con-
trasted with explanatory trials, which strive
to determine whether an intervention has
beneficial effects in humans, often using
conditions that maximize the likelihood
of demonstrating a treatment effect while
narrowing generalizability.13–16 Some au-
thors have compared PCTs to effectiveness
evaluationandexplanatorytrialstoefficacy
evaluation.14,15
In reality, any single trial is neither fully
pragmatic nor fully explanatory.15 The
PRagmatic Explanatory Continuum Indi-
cator Summary-2 tool identifies nine do-
mains to quantitate the extent to which a
clinicaltrialispragmatic.20Themostprag-
matic trials apply broad eligibility criteria,
recruit from clinical settings, conduct pro-
cedures in the context of usual care using
available clinical infrastructure, apply in-
terventions with flexible protocols using
usualencouragement,assessoutcomesrel-
evant to patients using readily obtainable
metrics, and apply intention-to-treat anal-
ysis (Figure 1). Rarely is a clinical trial
pragmatic in all aspects of its design. Of-
ten, some design elements are made less
pragmatic in order to maintain internal
validityortoaccommodatepracticalneeds
for implementation. Ultimately, the choice
of design for any clinical trial depends on
the underlying scientific question and the
context in which it is addressed.
PCTs are suited for the evaluation of a
wide variety of medical interventions in-
cluding individual medical treatments and
strategies to deliver those treatments to
patient populations. Depending on the
intervention and setting, PCTs may em-
ploy cluster randomization, active com-
parator groups, and quasi-experimental
designs. The electronic health record
(EHR) plays a central role in most PCTs.
EHR data can efficiently facilitate every
step of a clinical trial, from screening to
enrollment, collection of baseline data,
intervention implementation, safety mon-
itoring, and outcome ascertainment.18,21
Interest in PCTs has grown quickly
over the last decade,15 and the nephrol-
ogy community has been an early leader
in this surge, as demonstrated by the ex-
amples below. PCTs that involve popu-
lations with kidney disease have been
facilitated and encouraged through spe-
cific funding mechanisms from sponsors
critical to nephrology research, including
the National Institutes of Health, Depart-
ment of Veterans Affairs, and the Patient
Centered Outcomes Research Institute. Of
note, interest in PCTs has grown along
with interest in another movement that
may appear conflicting – the Precision
Medicine Initiative.22 Indeed, whereas
PCTs focus on applicability to popula-
tions, precision medicine focuses on ap-
plicability to individuals. However, there
is no reason that trials advancing preci-
sion medicine cannot incorporate prag-
matic design elements, and PCTs can in-
form precision medicine by building in
personalized components (e.g., inter-
vention flexibility) or the evaluation of
between-participant heterogeneity in
response.
POTENTIAL BENEFITS OF PCT
DESIGNS IN CKD
There are several potential benefits to
PCTs in CKD (Table 1). First, PCTs may
Figure 1. Domains of the explanatory-pragmatic clinical trial design spectrum.
J Am Soc Nephrol 27: 2948–2954, 2016
Pragmatic Clinical Trials in CKD
2949
www.jasn.org
BRIEF REVIEW
 include a broad range of patients with
CKD, enhancing external validity. Pa-
tients with CKD have diverse underlying
and comorbid conditions and often have
complicated medical regimens that may
be more acceptable for PCTs than tradi-
tional RCTs with strict eligibility criteria.
In addition, PCTs may include partici-
pants from socially disadvantaged pop-
ulations that bear a disproportionate
burden of disease and experience large
translational gaps between research and
practice,10,11,23 who may be excluded
from efficacy trials owing to a lack of re-
liable transportation or limited English
language proficiency or may choose not
to enroll in efficacy studies because of
mistrust in the research process.24,25 So-
cially disadvantaged patients may be
more willing to participate in the context
of their usual site of health care26; re-
cruiting and enrollment data from early
PCTs will help address this possibility.
Second,findingsfromPCTscanoftenbe
directly applied to the practice environment
(s) in which the study was conducted. This
helps translate research results to clinical
care, lowering well known barriers to the
implementation of existing practice guide-
linesforcareofpatientswithCKD.27,28The
majority of CKD patients are cared for by
primary care providers with or without
collaboration with nephrologists,8,29 and
PCTs may be well positioned to affect
CKD care in the primary care setting. Ex-
amples of studies bridging nephrology and
primary care include trials of CKD care co-
ordination with patient navigators30
and strategies to implement guideline-
concordant CKD care with electronic
checklists,31 primary care practice facilita-
tion,32 and pharmacist-led interventions.33
Third, pragmatic trials offer an op-
portunity to examine clinical questions
that have been identified by diverse
stakeholders, including patients, care-
givers, and providers, as high-priority
CKD research areas (Box 1).34,35 Out-
comes of interest to these stakeholders
include traditional clinical events such
as hospitalizations, emergency room
visits, and mortality as well as patient-
centered outcomes of growing interest,
such as symptoms, treatment prefer-
ences, quality of life, and satisfaction
with care. Use of the EHR can effectively
ascertain clinical events, although fur-
ther planning is required to collect pa-
tient-reported outcome data, which are
not currently available in most EHRs.21
Fourth, pragmatic trials for CKD may
be less costly than efficacy trials. This is
particularly important when consider-
ing the length of follow-up necessary to
observe some clinicaloutcomesof CKD,
such as progression to ESRD.
BARRIERS AND OBSTACLES FOR
PCTS IN CKD
Informed Consent
Informed consent is a cornerstone of
ethical clinical research, but PCTs pose
unique challenges that have led to debate
regarding optimal approaches and alter-
natives to the traditional written in-
formed consent process.36,37 Written,
in person, informed consent may alter
the nature of the intervention, introduce
prohibitive logistic barriers, and lead to
selection bias. These risks are particu-
larly apparent for PCTs that employ clus-
ter randomization, i.e., assigning groups
of participants rather than individuals to
treatment arms. With the increasing use
of EHRs, an electronic consenting pro-
cess can be considered to reduce costs.38
However, such a process may introduce
selection bias, as target populations
would necessarily be literate and have
access to information technology, and
recent national surveys have suggested
a general preference for an interactive
written consent process rather than al-
ternatives, such as informing pa-
tients that a clinical site is participating
in a PCT.39,40
Regulatory Issues
Institutional review boards (IRBs) serve
toprotectthesafetyofstudysubjects,and
each has different rules and regulations
to account for local conditions of risk.
Multicenter PCTs require harmonization
of these local regulations to ensure par-
ticipant safety and data integrity. This
process may be facilitated through use
of central IRBs with shared review,41
but confusion regarding divisions of re-
sponsibility for collaborating central
and local IRBs remains a barrier for
Table 1.
Selected advantages and challenges for PCTs in nephrology
Advantages
Challenges
Enhanced external validity
Informed consent and regulatory oversight
Ability to enroll socially
disadvantaged populations
Achieving large separation between
comparison groups
Directly applicable to patient care
Selection and ascertainment of outcomes
Relevant patient-centered outcomes
Funding
Reduced cost
Lack of experience and training
EXAMPLES OF RESEARCH QUESTIONS IDENTIFIED BY DIVERSE
STAKEHOLDERS AS HIGH-PRIORITY CKD RESEARCH AREAS
What is the optimal screening frequency in populations at high-risk of de-
veloping CKD?
How effective are lifestyle programs for preventing deteriorating kidney
function in early CKD?
What is the effectiveness of strategies to improve provider awareness and
adherence to guidelines on improving outcomes for patients with CKD?
What is the effectiveness of patient-safety interventions in reducing compli-
cations among CKD patients?
What is the effectiveness of computer decision support for CKD management in
reducing complications?
What strategies will improve family consent for deceased donor kidney
donation, taking different cultural groups into account?
2950
Journal of the American Society of Nephrology
J Am Soc Nephrol 27: 2948–2954, 2016
BRIEF REVIEW
www.jasn.org
 widespread adoption.18 Moreover, the
concepts and design elements of PCTs
are new to many IRBs and data and safety
monitoring boards, who may expect, re-
quest, or even demand traditional clini-
cal trial design elements that reduce
pragmatic elements of PCTs. Contribut-
ing to this tension, it may be difficult to
define appropriate standards of care for
patients with CKD because many guide-
lines may not offer clear consensus or be
based on limited evidence.42 PCTs seek-
ing to challenge traditional care practices
may have difficulty defining an appropri-
ate control group or gaining IRB or data
and safety monitoring board approval
for a design that involves more flexible
protocols or less extensive research-spe-
cific monitoring than traditional explan-
atory trials.
Outcome Ascertainment
Ideally, PCTs identify outcomes using
available clinical data sources, e.g., EHRs,
to enhance relevance and promote effi-
ciency. Challenges for use of such data
include lack of specificity for coded clin-
ical events, potentially leading to mis-
classification of study outcomes, and
missing or biased outcomes data. For ex-
ample, laboratory outcomes, such as
changes in slope of eGFR, serum phos-
phorus, or hemoglobin can be strongly
influenced by loss to follow-up, and clin-
ical events can be difficult to ascertain if
participants change health care systems.
Outcomes that are ascertained from na-
tional databases, such as initiation of
dialysis or transplantation, may not
be affected to the same degree. Patient-
reported outcomes, such as health-
related quality of life measures, medication
adherence, and medication side effects,
are difficult to track pragmatically, as
they are not often ascertained as part
of routine clinical care.21
Implementation Barriers
As with traditional RCTs, sufficient sep-
aration in treatment between compari-
son groups is needed to detect differences
in clinical outcomes.43 For PCTs, large
separations between groups may be dif-
ficult to achieve in a clinical setting
with large commonalities in practice,
particularly if study participants have lit-
tle contact with dedicated research staff.
PCTs may also increase burden to prac-
ticing providers, requiring effective strat-
egies to increase provider engagement
and participation without compromising
the integrity and “pragmatism” of the
study. In addition, PCTs in nephrology
are likely to require partnerships with
large, integrated health systems, and it
may be difficult to harmonize protocols
while maintaining local care priorities
when there are substantial differences in
workflow, EHR, personnel, and clinic
culture. Nephrology experience with
PCTs is nascent, so many implementa-
tion barriers will be new to investigative
teams.
Novel Therapeutics
Novel therapeutic approaches are sorely
needed to reduce the incidence and pro-
gression of CKD and its complications.
The initial evaluation of new drugs is
often best accomplished using more
traditional RCTs that feature explanatory
design elements. For example, extensive
eligibility criteria may be used to limit
participation to a subset of patients more
likely to benefit and less likely to experi-
ence adverse events than the broader
target population, and extra efforts may
be used to enhance adherence and main-
tainseparationoftreatmentgroups.PCTs
may be more suitable for subsequent
studies in broader populations, for drugs
thathaveknownefficacyandarerelatively
safe, and for studies that evaluate imple-
mentation of existing therapies or health
care delivery.
EXAMPLES OF ONGOING
PRAGMATIC TRIALS IN CKD
Screening for CKD
The effectiveness of screening for CKD
is currently being evaluated in a high
risk primary care population of United
States veterans (Table 2). Using cluster-
randomization by primary care team,
this pilot PCT aims to evaluate two
strategies to improve BP control among
nondiabetic hypertensive veterans with
unrecognized CKD in primary care
(NCT02059408). In the usual care arm,
no systematic screening for CKD is
recommended. The first intervention eval-
uates the efficacy of a screen-and-educate
strategy that utilizes a “triple-marker”
CKD screening approach (creatinine,
cystatin C, and albuminuria44) coupled
with provider education, compared
with usual care. This strategy takes
advantage of the VA EHR to identify eli-
gible persons, order screening tests, and
deliver recommendations to primary
care providers. The second intervention
evaluates whether a screen, educate, and
intensify treatment program coled by a
primary care provider and a clinical
pharmacist can improveBP management
among persons with CKD, compared
with the screen-and-educate provider
strategy and with usual care. The primary
outcome of the study is change in BP and
secondary outcomes include processes of
care and clinician burden. This prag-
matic study design can be easily trans-
lated to any primary care practice with
an EHR that utilizes the chronic care
model.
The Kidney Awareness Registry and
Education Study
The Kidney Awareness Registry and Ed-
ucation (KARE) study (NCT01530958)
is a two by two factorial trial that assesses
the effectiveness of a multilevel interven-
tion to improve BP control among low-
incomepatients withCKD (Table2).The
study design relies on two levels of ran-
domization: primary care practice teams
are randomized to one of two arms (ac-
cess to an electronic CKD registry or
usual care); patients of each practice
team are subsequently randomized to
participate in a CKD self-management
program or usual care. With four study
arms, KARE allows assessment of the
individual and additive effect of both in-
terventions. Although the KARE study
design is complex, its pragmatic elements
include: setting and participants, inter-
vention components (electronic CKD
registry embedded in the EHR and a pa-
tient self-management support program
that relies on language-concordant
health coaches), outcome ascertainment
(change in systolic BP and proportion of
J Am Soc Nephrol 27: 2948–2954, 2016
Pragmatic Clinical Trials in CKD
2951
www.jasn.org
BRIEF REVIEW
 patients with BP control), and relevance
to practice. By relying on existing infra-
structure and recruiting actively empan-
eled patient participants, KARE results
will be directly applicable to populations
that receive CKD care in similar health
systems.
Improving Chronic Disease
Management with Pieces
Improving Chronic Disease Manage-
ment with Pieces (ICD-Pieces) is a large
PCT spanning several large health care
systems that will compare EHR-based
clinical-decision support to primarycare
providers and practice facilitators with
usual care among patients with coexis-
tent CKD, diabetes, and hypertension
(Table 2).45 The study uses a novel tech-
nology platform, Pieces, which has been
successfully used in other chronic condi-
tions, such as heart failure, to reduce
hospital readmissions and improve
clinical outcomes,46,47 in a cluster-
randomized design. Study outcomes in-
clude hospitalizations, readmissions,
cardiovascular events, ER visits, and
death. Other pragmatic characteristics
of ICD-Pieces are broad inclusion cri-
teria, flexibility of protocols, imple-
mentation of the interventions within
the context of available clinical infra-
structures, robust clinical support
tools, electronic ascertainment of out-
comes, and intention-to-treat analysis
based on assigned cluster. The goal of
this PCT is to evaluate a promising new
model for the care of CKD patients with
multimorbidity.
Evaluating Calcitriol Heart
Outcomes in CKD
Evaluating Calcitriol Heart Outcomes in
CKD (ECHO-CKD) is a PCT, currently
in a pilot stage, designed to test the
cardiovascular effects of calcitriol, a drug
commonly used in CKD for which long-
term clinical risks and benefits remain
uncertain (Table 2).48,49 The overall goal
of the ECHO-CKD trial is to determine
whether calcitriol plus usual care, com-
pared with usual care alone, reduces the
risk of clinical cardiovascular events
among patients with stage 3–4 CKD. Al-
though this question could be addressed
using a more traditional explanatory
trial, a pragmatic approach facilitates
application of results and reduces cost.
Pragmatic features of the planned study
include integration into a large compre-
hensive health care system, utilization of
electronic resources to identify partici-
pants, the application of minimal eligi-
bility criteria, delivery and monitoring
of the study intervention using clinical
pharmacy and laboratory services, and
Table 2.
Selected examples of ongoing PCTs in CKD
Study
Intervention
Outcomes(s)
Pragmatic Aspects
Barriers and Obstacles
Screening
for CKD
Usual care versus
screen-educate
versus screen-
educate-intensify BP
management by
clinical pharmacist
BP levels, change in
BP: proportion
with BP controlled
VA clinical practice
Informed consent
Processes of care,
appropriate use of
ACE/ARB
Wide inclusion criteria
Ensuring screening after lab orders
placed
Utilization of EHR for patient identification,
delivery of interventions and outcome
ascertainment
Database design for study
management
Use of ancillary health personnel
embedded in primary care
KARE
Provider intervention:
CKD registry versus
usual care
Change in systolic
BP; proportion of
patients with BP
control
Set in “real world” primary care practices
Accurate outcome ascertainment
Patient intervention:
language concordant
self-management
program versus usual
care
Utilization of EHR for outcome
ascertainment
Recruitment of study participants that are
not well represented in RCTs.
ICD-Pieces
CKD care enhanced by
information
technology, clinical
support and practice
facilitator versus usual
care
Hospitalizations
Cardiovascular
events,
readmissions, ER
visits, deaths
Broad eligibility criteria
Data transmission from multiple
sites
Delivery of the intervention in clinical
setting by primary care providers
Implementation of various
interventions
Electronic ascertainment of outcomes
Changes in standard clinical
practices
Intention-to treat analysis based on
assigned cluster
ECHO-CKD
Calcitriol plus usual care
versus usual care
alone
Composite of
clinical
cardiovascular
events
Integration into clinical health care system
Efficient informed consent
Minimal eligibility criteria
Recruiting
Utilization of EHR for recruiting and
outcome ascertainment
Retention and adherence
Clinical events outcome
Accurate outcome ascertainment
ACE/ARB, angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor/angiotensin 2 receptor blocker; VA, Veterans Affairs; ER, emergency room.
2952
Journal of the American Society of Nephrology
J Am Soc Nephrol 27: 2948–2954, 2016
BRIEF REVIEW
www.jasn.org
 the ascertainment of clinical outcomes
of importance to patients and providers.
OTHER PCTS IN NEPHROLOGY
PCTsmayalso beusefultoimprovecarein
dialysis, glomerular disease, kidney trans-
plantation, hypertension, and other fields
within nephrology. As an example, the
TiME trial (NCT02019225) evaluates the
effects of a minimum hemodialysis ses-
sion duration of 4.25 hours compared
with usual care on mortality, hospitaliza-
tions, and health-related quality of life
among patients with ESRD initiating
treatment with thrice weekly maintenance
hemodialysis. This PCTuses a cluster ran-
domization design, with the allocation of
outpatient dialysis units to the two inter-
vention arms. Another novel aspect of the
TiME trial isthat itisconducted through a
partnership between academic investiga-
tors and two large dialysis provider orga-
nizations in approximately 320 dialysis
facilities, thereby combining traditional
funding mechanisms with existing indus-
try resources and expertise. The TiME tri-
al is planning to enroll approximately
6432 patients, and it is estimated to be
completed in September 2017. In glomer-
ular disease, NephCure has brought to-
gether patients, families, and researchers
to support patient-oriented research well
suited to PCTs. In kidney transplantation,
many interventions are made using pro-
tocols starting from a clear time zero, and
alternative protocols may be effectively
compared using pragmatic trial designs.
Hypertension is a highly prevalent condi-
tion with many available treatments
for which BPtargets,specificantihyperten-
sive agents, and antihypertensive combi-
nations or approaches could be compared
using pragmatic designs. The Living
Textbook of PCTs, sponsored by the
National Institutes of Health Collabo-
ratory, further describes ongoing PCTs
within and beyond nephrology.18
NEXT STEPS FOR PCTS IN CKD
PCTs offer a valuable approach to increase
the evidence base for the treatment of
patients with CKD with high external
validity and applicability and low costs.
However, informed consent, regulatory
issues, outcome ascertainment, and other
implementation barriers provide chal-
lenges to designing and implementing
PCTs.Ifbarriers to PCTs can besurmoun-
ted and benefits realized, then further
training, infrastructure, and funding will
be needed to facilitate additional studies.
Few investigators in nephrology have sub-
stantial experience in PCTs, and training
will be necessary to advance and imple-
ment high-quality PCTmethods. Because
PCTsarecriticallydependentonthehealth
care setting in which they are based,
investment in EHRs and partnerships of
researchers with health care systems will be
required to expand bandwidth. For exam-
ple, within the Veterans Health Adminis-
tration, a national coordinating center has
been developed to help design and launch
PCTs. Currently, the Patient-Centered
Outcomes Research Institute and several
institutes within the National Institutes of
Health have offered funding mechanisms
specifictoPCTs;additionalfundingmech-
anisms appropriate for this study design
will be required. Ongoing studies, includ-
ing those described above, will provide
valuable information on the feasibility,
strengths,limitations,andhurdlesofPCTs
in CKD, as well as additional next steps
required to move forward this promising
approach to clinical trials.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The San Francisco VA Medical Center and
University of California San Francisco
CKD screening study is supported by grant
R34DK102152 from the National Institute
for Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases (NIDDK). KARE is supported by
grants R34DK093992 and R01DK104130
from the NIDDK. ICD-Pieces is supported
by grant UH3DK104655 from the NIDDK.
The ECHO-CKD study is supported by
UH2HL125122 from the National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute.
DISCLOSURES
I.D.B. has received consultancy fees from Amgen,
Bayer (Whippany, NJ), Boehringer-Ingelheim
(Ridgefield, CT), and Janssen (Titusville, NJ). S.N.
has served on the event adjudication committee of
clinical trials sponsored by AbbVie (North Chicago,
IL), Bayer, and Boehringer-Ingelheim.
REFERENCES
1. Hill AB: The Environment and Disease: As-
sociation or Causation? Proc R Soc Med 58:
295–300, 1965
2. Organization, review, and administration of
cooperative studies (Greenberg Report): a
report from the Heart Special Project Com-
mittee
to
the
National
Advisory
Heart
Council, May 1967. Control Clin Trials 9:
137–148, 1988
3. Concato J, Shah N, Horwitz RI: Randomized,
controlled trials, observational studies, and
the hierarchy of research designs. N Engl J
Med 342: 1887–1892, 2000
4. DiMasi JA, Hansen RW, Grabowski HG: The
price of innovation: new estimates of drug
development costs. J Health Econ 22: 151–
185, 2003
5. Clancy C, Collins FS: Patient-Centered Out-
comes Research Institute: the intersection of
science and health care. Sci Transl Med 2:
37cm18, 2010
6. DeMets DL, Califf RM: A historical perspec-
tive on clinical trials innovation and leader-
ship: where have the academics gone? JAMA
305: 713–714, 2011
7. Inrig JK, Califf RM, Tasneem A, Vegunta RK,
Molina C, Stanifer JW, Chiswell K, Patel UD:
The landscape of clinical trials in nephrology:
a systematic review of Clinicaltrials.gov. Am J
Kidney Dis 63: 771–780, 2014
8. Saran R, Li Y, Robinson B, Ayanian J,
Balkrishnan R, Bragg-Gresham J, Chen JT,
Cope E, Gipson D, He K, Herman W, Heung
M, Hirth RA, Jacobsen SS, Kalantar-Zadeh K,
Kovesdy CP, Leichtman AB, Lu Y, Molnar MZ,
Morgenstern H, Nallamothu B, O’Hare AM,
Pisoni R, Plattner B, Port FK, Rao P, Rhee CM,
Schaubel DE, Selewski DT, Shahinian V, Sim
JJ, Song P, Streja E, Kurella Tamura M,
Tentori F, Eggers PW, Agodoa LY, Abbott
KC. US Renal Data System 2014 Annual Data
Report: Epidemiology of Kidney Disease in
the United States. Am J Kidney Dis 66: S1-
305, 2015
9. Després JP, Nadeau A, Tremblay A, Ferland
M, Moorjani S, Lupien PJ, Thériault G, Pinault
S, Bouchard C: Role of deep abdominal fat
in the association between regional adipose
tissue distribution and glucose tolerance in
obese women. Diabetes 38: 304–309, 1989
10. Tarver-Carr ME, Powe NR, Eberhardt MS,
LaVeist TA, Kington RS, Coresh J, Brancati
FL: Excess risk of chronic kidney disease
among African-American versus white sub-
jects in the United States: a population-
based study of potential explanatory factors.
J Am Soc Nephrol 13: 2363–2370, 2002
J Am Soc Nephrol 27: 2948–2954, 2016
Pragmatic Clinical Trials in CKD
2953
www.jasn.org
BRIEF REVIEW
 11. Volkova N, McClellan W, Klein M, Flanders
D, Kleinbaum D, Soucie JM, Presley R:
Neighborhood poverty and racial differ-
ences in ESRD incidence. J Am Soc Nephrol
19: 356–364, 2008
12. Kovesdy CP, Anderson JE: Reverse epide-
miology in patients with chronic kidney dis-
ease who are not yet on dialysis. Semin Dial
20: 566–569, 2007
13. Schwartz D, Lellouch J: Explanatory and
pragmatic attitudes in therapeutical trials. J
Chronic Dis 20: 637–648, 1967
14. Macpherson H:
Pragmatic
clinical
trials.
Complement Ther Med 12: 136–140, 2004
15. Patsopoulos NA: A pragmatic view on prag-
matic trials. Dialogues Clin Neurosci 13:
217–224, 2011
16. Godwin M, Ruhland L, Casson I, MacDonald S,
Delva D, Birtwhistle R, Lam M, Seguin R: Prag-
matic controlled clinical trials in primary care:
the struggle between external and internal
validity. BMC Med Res Methodol 3: 28, 2003
17. Tunis SR, Stryer DB, Clancy CM: Practical
clinical trials: increasing the value of clinical
research for decision making in clinical and
health policy. JAMA 290: 1624–1632, 2003
18. 2016. Available at: http://sites.duke.edu/
rethinkingclinicaltrials/. Accessed March 17,
2016
19. Effectiveness of intravenous thrombolytic
treatment in acute myocardial infarction.
Gruppo Italiano per lo Studio della Strepto-
chinasi nell’Infarto Miocardico (GISSI). Lan-
cet 1: 397–402, 1986
20. Loudon K, Treweek S, Sullivan F, Donnan P,
Thorpe KE, Zwarenstein M: The PRECIS-2
tool: designing trials that are fit for purpose.
BMJ 350: h2147, 2015
21. Drawz PE, Archdeacon P, McDonald CJ,
Powe NR, Smith KA, Norton J, Williams DE,
Patel UD, Narva A: CKD as a Model for Im-
proving Chronic Disease Care through Elec-
tronic
Health
Records.
Clin J
Am
Soc
Nephrol 10: 1488–1499, 2015
22. Collins FS, Varmus H: A new initiative on
precision medicine. N Engl J Med 372: 793–
795, 2015
23. Schillinger D. Literacy and health communi-
cation: reversing the ’inverse care law’. Am J
Bioeth 7:15–18, 2007
24. Farmer DF, Jackson SA, Camacho F, Hall MA:
Attitudes of African American and low so-
cioeconomic status white women toward
medical research. J Health Care Poor Un-
derserved 18: 85–99, 2007
25. Scharff
DP,
Mathews
KJ,
Jackson
P,
Hoffsuemmer J, Martin E, Edwards D: More
than Tuskegee: understanding mistrust about
research participation. J Health Care Poor
Underserved 21: 879–897, 2010
26. UyBico SJ, Pavel S, Gross CP: Recruiting
vulnerable populations into research: a sys-
tematic review of recruitment interventions.
J Gen Intern Med 22: 852–863, 2007
27. Estrella MM, Jaar BG, Cavanaugh KL, Fox
CH, Perazella MA, Soman SS, Howell E,
Rocco MV, Choi MJ; National Kidney Foun-
dation: Perceptions and use of the national
kidney foundation KDOQI guidelines: a sur-
vey of U.S. renal healthcare providers. BMC
Nephrol 14: 230, 2013
28. Abdel-Kader K, Greer RC, Boulware LE,
Unruh ML: Primary care physicians’ familiar-
ity, beliefs, and perceived barriers to practice
guidelines in non-diabetic CKD: a survey
study. BMC Nephrol 15: 64, 2014
29. Diamantidis CJ, Powe NR, Jaar BG, Greer
RC, Troll MU, Boulware LE: Primary care-
specialist collaboration in the care of patients
with chronic kidney disease. Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol 6: 334–343, 2011
30. Jolly SE, Navaneethan SD, Schold JD, Arrigain
S, Konig V, Burrucker YK, Hyland J, Dann P,
Tucky BH, Sharp JW, Nally JV: Development
of a chronic kidney disease patient navigator
program. BMC Nephrol 16: 69, 2015
31. Mendu ML, Schneider LI, Aizer AA, Singh K,
Leaf DE, Lee TH, Waikar SS: Implementation
of a CKD checklist for primary care providers.
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 9: 1526–1535, 2014
32. Fox CH, Vest BM, Kahn LS, Dickinson LM,
Fang H, Pace W, Kimminau K, Vassalotti J,
Loskutova N, Peterson K: Improving evi-
dence-based primary care for chronic kidney
disease: study protocol for a cluster ran-
domized control trial for translating evidence
into practice (TRANSLATE CKD). Implement
Sci 8: 88, 2013
33. Cooney D, Moon H, Liu Y, Miller RT,
Perzynski A, Watts B, Drawz PE: A pharmacist
based intervention to improve the care of
patients with CKD: a pragmatic, randomized,
controlled trial. BMC Nephrol 16: 56, 2015
34. Crews DC, Greer RC, Fadrowski JJ, Choi MJ,
Doggett D, Segal JB, FawoleKA, Crawford PR,
Boulware LE: Setting an agenda for compara-
tive effectiveness systematic reviews in CKD
care. BMC Nephrol 13: 74, 2012
35. Tong A, Crowe S, Chando S, Cass A,
Chadban SJ, Chapman JR, Gallagher M,
Hawley CM, Hill S, Howard K, Johnson DW,
Kerr PG, McKenzie A, Parker D, Perkovic V,
Polkinghorne KR, Pollock C, Strippoli GF,
Tugwell P, Walker RG, Webster AC, Wong G,
Craig JC: Research Priorities in CKD: Report
of a National Workshop Conducted in Aus-
tralia. Am J Kidney Dis 66: 212–222, 2015
36. Platt R, Kass NE, McGraw D: Ethics, regula-
tion, and comparative effectiveness research:
time for a change. JAMA 311: 1497–1498,
2014
37. Pletcher MJ, Lo B, Grady D: Informed consent
in randomized quality improvement trials: a
critical barrier for learning health systems.
JAMA Intern Med 174: 668–670, 2014
38. Chalil Madathil K, Koikkara R, Obeid J,
Greenstein JS, Sanderson IC, Fryar K,
Moskowitz J, Gramopadhye AK: An in-
vestigation of the efficacy of electronic con-
senting interfaces of research permissions
management system in a hospital setting. Int
J Med Inform 82: 854–863, 2013
39. Nayak RK, Wendler D, Miller FG, Kim SY:
Pragmatic Randomized Trials Without Stan-
dard Informed Consent?: A National Survey.
Ann Intern Med 163: 356–364, 2015
40. Cho MK, Magnus D, Constantine M, Lee SS,
Kelley M, Alessi S, Korngiebel D, James C,
Kuwana E, Gallagher TH, Diekema D, Capron
AM, Joffe S, Wilfond BS: Attitudes Toward
Risk and Informed Consent for Research on
Medical Practices: A Cross-sectional Survey.
Ann Intern Med 162: 690–696, 2015
41. Sugarman J, Califf RM: Ethics and regulatory
complexities for pragmatic clinical trials.
JAMA 311: 2381–2382, 2014
42. Reisin E, Harris RC, Rahman M: Commentary
on the 2014 BP guidelines from the panel
appointed to the Eighth Joint National
Committee (JNC 8). J Am Soc Nephrol 25:
2419–2424, 2014
43. Parfrey PS, Block
GA, Correa-Rotter
R,
Drüeke TB, Floege J, Herzog CA, London
GM, Mahaffey KW, Moe SM, Wheeler DC,
Chertow GM: Lessons Learned from EVOLVE
for Planning of Future Randomized Trials in
Patients on Dialysis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
11: 539–546, 2016
44. Peralta CA, Shlipak MG, Judd S, Cushman
M, McClellan W, Zakai NA, Safford MM,
Zhang X, Muntner P, Warnock D: Detection
of chronic kidney disease with creatinine,
cystatin C, and urine albumin-to-creatinine
ratio and association with progression to end-
stage renal disease and mortality. JAMA 305:
1545–1552, 2011
45. Fujioka S, Matsuzawa Y, Tokunaga K, Tarui S:
Contribution of intra-abdominal fat accumu-
lation to the impairment of glucose and lipid
metabolism in human obesity. Metabolism
36: 54–59, 1987
46. Amarasingham R, Moore BJ, Tabak YP,
Drazner MH, Clark CA, Zhang S, Reed WG,
Swanson TS, Ma Y, Halm EA: An automated
model to identify heart failure patients at risk
for 30-day readmission or death using elec-
tronic medical record data. Med Care 48:
981–988, 2010
47. Amarasingham R, Velasco F, Xie B, Clark C,
Ma Y, Zhang S, Bhat D, Lucena B, Huesch M,
Halm EA: Electronic medical record-based
multicondition models to predict the risk of
30 day readmission or death among adult
medicine patients: validation and compari-
son to existing models. BMC Med Inform
Decis Mak 15: 39, 2015
48. Bosworth C, de Boer IH: Impaired vitamin D
metabolism in CKD. Semin Nephrol 33: 158–
168, 2013
49. Ketteler M, Elder GJ, Evenepoel P, Ix JH,
Jamal SA, Lafage-Proust MH, Shroff R,
Thadhani RI, Tonelli MA, Kasiske BL, Wheeler
DC, Leonard MB: Revisiting KDIGO clinical
practice guideline on chronic kidney disease-
mineral and bone disorder: a commentary
from a Kidney Disease: Improving Global
Outcomes controversies conference. Kidney
Int 87: 502–528, 2015
2954
Journal of the American Society of Nephrology
J Am Soc Nephrol 27: 2948–2954, 2016
BRIEF REVIEW
www.jasn.org
