 www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 5   November 2018 
885
Articles
The benefit of minocycline on negative symptoms of 
schizophrenia in patients with recent-onset psychosis 
(BeneMin): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
trial
Bill Deakin, John Suckling, Thomas R E Barnes, Kelly Byrne, Imran B Chaudhry, Paola Dazzan, Richard J Drake, Annalisa Giordano, Nusrat Husain, 
Peter B Jones, Eileen Joyce, Emma Knox, Carl Krynicki, Stephen M Lawrie, Shôn Lewis, Danuta M Lisiecka-Ford, Naghmeh Nikkheslat, 
Carmine M Pariante, Richard Smallman, Andrew Watson, Steven C R Williams, Rachel Upthegrove, Graham Dunn, and the BeneMin Study team*
Summary
Background The antibiotic minocycline has neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory properties that could prevent or 
reverse progressive neuropathic changes implicated in recent-onset schizophrenia. In the BeneMin study, we aimed 
to replicate the benefit of minocycline on negative symptoms reported in previous pilot studies, and to understand the 
mechanisms involved.
Methods In this randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, we recruited people with a schizophrenia-
spectrum disorder that had begun within the past 5 years with continuing positive symptoms from 12 National Health 
Service (NHS) trusts. Participants were randomly assigned according to an automated permuted blocks algorithm, 
stratified by pharmacy, to receive minocycline (200 mg per day for 2 weeks, then 300 mg per day for the remainder of 
the 12-month study period) or matching placebo, which were added to their continuing treatment. The primary 
clinical outcome was the negative symptom subscale score of the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scales (PANSS) 
across follow-ups at months 2, 6, 9, and 12. The primary biomarker outcomes were medial prefrontal grey-matter 
volume, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex activation during a working memory task, and plasma concentration of 
interleukin 6. This study is registered as an International Standard Randomised Controlled Trial, number 
ISRCTN49141214, and the EU Clinical Trials register (EudraCT) number is 2010-022463-35I.
Findings Between April 16, 2013, and April 30, 2015, we recruited 207 people and randomly assigned them to receive 
minocycline (n=104) or placebo (n=103). Compared with placebo, the addition of minocycline had no effect on ratings of 
negative symptoms (treatment effect difference –0·19, 95% CI –1·23 to 0·85; p=0·73). The primary biomarker outcomes 
did not change over time and were not affected by minocycline. The groups did not differ in the rate of serious adverse 
events (n=11 in placebo group and n=18 in the minocycline group), which were mostly due to admissions for worsening 
psychiatric state (n=10 in the placebo group and n=15 in the minocycline group). The most common adverse events were 
gastrointestinal (n=12 in the placebo group, n=19 in the minocycline group), psychiatric (n=16 in placebo group, n=8 in 
minocycline group), nervous system (n=8 in the placebo group, n=12 in the minocycline group), and dermatological (n=10 
in the placebo group, n=8 in the minocycline group).
Interpretation Minocycline does not benefit negative or other symptoms of schizophrenia over and above adherence 
to routine clinical care in first-episode psychosis. There was no evidence of a persistent progressive neuropathic or 
inflammatory process underpinning negative symptoms. Further trials of minocycline in early psychosis are not 
warranted until there is clear evidence of an inflammatory process, such as microgliosis, against which minocycline 
has known efficacy.
Funding National Institute for Health Research Efficacy and Mechanism Evaluation (EME) programme, an MRC and 
NIHR partnership.
Copyright © 2018 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open Access article under the CC BY 4.0 
license. 
Introduction
Antipsychotic drugs in schizophrenia can effectively 
promote remission of so-called positive psychotic 
symptoms, such as delusions, hallucinations, and 
disorganised speech. Nevertheless, a poor quality of life 
with impaired social and occupational functioning is 
common despite continuing medical, rehabilitative, and 
psychological treatment. A major underlying problem 
is the persistence of so-called negative symptoms: 
social withdrawal, self-neglect, and loss of emotional 
responsiveness and motivation, together with mild 
cognitive impairment.1 The pathogenesis of the negative 
Lancet Psychiatry 2018; 
5: 885–94
Published Online 
October 12, 2018 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ 
S2215-0366(18)30345-6
This online publication has 
been corrected. The corrected 
version first appeared at 
thelancet.com/psychiatry on 
November 1, 2018
See Comment page 856
*Additional team members 
listed in the appendix
Neuroscience and Psychiatry 
Unit (Prof B Deakin FMedSci, 
K Byrne BA, E Knox PhD, 
R Smallman PhD), MAHSC 
(Prof B Deakin, S Lewis MD), 
Division of Neuroscience and 
Experimental Psychology 
(I B Chaudhry MD), Division of 
Psychology and Mental Health 
(R J Drake PhD, N Husain 
MRCPsych), and Division of 
Population Health, Health 
Services Research and Primary 
Care (G Dunn PhD), 
The University of Manchester, 
Manchester, UK; Greater 
Manchester Mental Health 
NHS Foundation Trust, 
Prestwich, Manchester, UK 
(Prof B Deakin, R J Drake, 
S Lewis); Brain Mapping Unit, 
Department of Psychiatry, 
Herchel Smith Building for 
Brain and Mind Sciences 
(J Suckling PhD, P B Jones MD) 
and Neurology Unit, 
Department of Clinical 
Neurosciences 
(D M Lisiecka-Ford PhD), 
University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, UK; 
Cambridgeshire & 
Peterborough NHS Foundation 
Trust, Cambridge, UK 
(J Suckling, P B Jones); Centre for 
Psychiatry, Imperial College 
London, London, UK 
(T R E Barnes DSc);  Tropical 
Clinical Trials Unit, Liverpool
 Articles
886 
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 5   November 2018
syndrome is unknown and the scarcity of validated CNS 
targets probably accounts for the failure of many attempts 
to find effective medical treatments. Early studies plausibly 
attributed negative symptoms to the static neurodevelop-
mental cerebral atrophy associated with the disorder.2 
However, later MRI studies reported evidence of a 
progressive loss of grey matter occurring before onset of 
psychosis and continuing in early years of psychosis.3–5 
That early treatment with a neuroprotective drug might 
prevent such a process and its symptomatic consequences 
was the prime motivation for this study and its precursor.6
We initially selected minocycline because of preclinical 
evidence of neuroprotective effects in experimental 
models of stroke and Huntington’s disease, related to its 
ability to inhibit caspases and the apoptotic pathway.7 
Preliminary clinical trials had also reported possible 
benefit of minocycline in patients with stroke and 
Parkinson’s disease,8,9 but with no benefit on neurological 
symptoms in Huntington’s disease10 and worsening in 
patients with motor neurone disease.11 Early open-label 
clinical studies had reported benefit in patients with 
schizophrenia.12 Interest in the possible therapeutic 
benefit of the anti-inflammatory actions of minocycline 
grew with increasing evidence for raised circulating 
cytokine concentrations in schizophrenia.13 Furthermore, 
increased PET radioligand binding to the translocator 
protein, expressed in activated microglia, had been 
reported in patients with recent-onset schizophrenia.14 
Whether microglia are activated in an inflammatory state 
in schizophrenia has become a key research question. 
Minocycline is widely used as a pharmacological inhibitor 
of microglial activation in experimental animal studies,15 
and its possible efficacy in schizophrenia is a key test of 
microglial involvement in the disorder.
The precursor to this present study was a two-centre 
trial in Brazil and Pakistan.6 94 people with schizophrenia 
taking stable medication completed 12 months of add-on 
treatment with placebo or minocycline.6 Negative symp-
toms improved significantly more in the minocycline 
group than in the placebo group. In a study in Tel Aviv,16 
relapsed patients were randomly assigned to placebo 
(n=18) or minocycline (n=36) within 2 weeks of treatment 
School of Tropical Medicine, 
Liverpool, UK (K Byrne); 
Lancashire Care Early 
Intervention Service, 
Accrington, UK (I B Chaudhry); 
Department of Psychosis 
Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, 
Psychology and Neuroscience 
(P Dazzan PhD, A Giordano MD), 
Stress, Psychiatry and 
Immunology Lab & Perinatal 
Psychiatry, The Maurice Wohl 
Clinical Neuroscience Institute 
(N Nikkheslat PhD, 
C M Pariante PhD), and 
Department for Neuroimaging 
(S C R Williams PhD), King’s 
College London, London, UK; 
Sobell Department of Motor 
Neurosciences and Movement 
Disorders, UCL Institute of 
Neurology, London, UK 
(E Joyce MRCPsych, 
A Watson MSc); Institute for 
Applied Clinical Sciences, Keele 
University, Guy Hilton Research 
Centre, Stoke-on-Trent, UK 
(E Knox); Institute for Mental 
Health, University of 
Birmingham, Birmingham, UK 
(C Krynicki MSc, 
R Upthegrove MRCPsych); and 
Division of Psychiatry, Centre 
for Clinical Brain Sciences, 
University of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh, UK (S M Lawrie MD)
Correspondence to: 
Prof Bill Deakin, Neuroscience 
and Psychiatry Unit, 
The University of Manchester, 
Manchester, M13 9PT, UK 
bill.deakin@manchester.ac.uk
See Online for appendix
Research in context
Evidence before this study 
The antibiotic minocycline has neuroprotective and 
anti-inflammatory actions that have attracted attention as 
potential treatments for several neurodegenerative disorders, 
including a possible neuropathic process in schizophrenia. 
Several case reports, open-label studies, and small controlled 
trials have claimed benefit, particularly for negative symptoms 
such as apathy and social withdrawal. The negative syndrome is 
little improved by current treatments and predicts poor social 
and occupational functioning. Emerging evidence of an 
inflammatory process in schizophrenia and depression has 
reinforced interest in minocycline and other anti-inflammatory 
drugs as a new direction in psychiatric treatment. We searched 
PubMed with the terms “minocycline” and “schizophrenia” or 
“psychosis”, filtering for “clinical trial”, on Aug 20, 2018. 
We found six studies in English, all involving minocycline as 
an adjunctive treatment compared with placebo, five of which 
targeted negative symptoms. Two early studies provided proof 
of concept for the BeneMin trial, funded in parallel by the same 
funder. A 12-month trial in Pakistan and Brazil had a larger 
sample size of more than 45 patients who completed the study 
per group. Minocycline showed efficacy on negative symptoms 
in both centres but the benefit was significantly less in the 
Pakistan subsample. Efficacy in a study from Tel Aviv, Israel, was 
assessed at 22 weeks and based on 23 patients who completed 
the study receiving minocycline and eight receiving placebo, 
which were initiated during acute psychosis. Two studies have 
subsequently reported substantially greater improvement with 
minocycline than placebo over 8 weeks (in Iran) and 16 weeks 
(in China), in stable patients taking risperidone. The Iranian 
study was one of 24 mostly positive trials of various adjunctive 
drugs on negative symptoms published by the same study 
group in less than 10 years. A study from a second Iranian group 
found no significant benefit over 8 weeks in patients on 
risperidone. A US study in patients who were clozapine resistant 
found no benefit of minocycline over placebo on positive 
symptoms (the primary outcome) or negative symptoms. 
Added value of this study 
To our knowledge, the BeneMin study is the largest 
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of minocycline to date. 
It addresses the therapeutic potential of minocycline in 
recent-onset schizophrenia and also probed its potential 
neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory mechanism of action. 
Strengths of the study include the large sample size, effective 
blinding, adequate retention, and the 12-month exposure to 
minocycline. The results are decisively negative, with no 
evidence of deterioration in negative symptoms or indices of 
inflammation or grey-matter loss, and no evidence that 
minocycline prevents or ameliorates negative symptoms or 
inflammatory or neuropathic processes. Our results are 
generalisable to patients with schizophrenia treated with 
antipsychotic medication within 5 years of illness onset. 
Implications of all the available evidence 
Minocycline should not be used in the early adjunctive 
treatment of schizophrenia. Further trials are not indicated in 
this population, unless a potentially responsive inflammatory 
or progressive subtype can be identified. Convergent PET 
imaging studies show little evidence that microglial 
inflammation occurs in drug-free patients with schizophrenia; 
together with the absence of effect of minocycline, the results 
suggest that active neuroinflammation involving microglial 
activation and neuropathology is not a pervasive feature of the 
first years of schizophrenia.
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 5   November 2018 
887
initiation. Negative symptoms increased after 3 months 
in the placebo group but not in the minocycline group, 
and there was no difference at 6 months. In the BeneMin 
study, we aimed to replicate the therapeutic effects of 
minocycline in a large sample, to characterise the time 
course over 12 months, and to test the hypothesis that any 
benefit of minocycline on negative symptoms is due to 
neuro- 
protection, possibly involving anti-inflammatory 
actions. The 12-month design aimed to allow sufficient 
time for the emergence of negative symptoms and for a 
detectable loss of grey-matter volume, on the basis of 
findings from the 1-year structural imaging study of 
Lieberman and colleagues.4
Methods
Study design and participants
BeneMin was a multicentre, double-blind, randomised, 
placebo-controlled study involving participants recruited 
from 12 UK National Health Service trusts. The 
hypotheses and full study protocol have been published.17 
The North West Manchester Research Ethics Committee 
(reference number 11/NW
/0218) approved the study. Full 
details of the study will be published elsewhere.18
Eligible patients were in a first episode of schizophrenia, 
schizophreniform, or schizoaffective psychosis (DSM-IV) 
as assessed by the research team, with continuing positive 
symptoms defined by a score greater than 2 for one or 
more items (P1 delusions, P2 conceptual disorganisation, 
P3 hallucinatory behaviour, or P6 suspiciousness) of the 
Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS), were 
within 5 years of onset of symptoms judged sufficient to 
meet diagnostic criteria, had an intelligence quotient (IQ) 
greater than 70 as assessed by the Wechsler Test of Adult 
Reading (WTAR), and were able to understand and give 
written informed consent. Participants were required to be 
taking stable antipsychotic treatment from a mental 
health-care team. 
Participants were excluded if they had a current 
diagnosis of substance misuse, had a current serious risk 
of suicide or violence, had used tetracycline antibiotics 
within 2 months of baseline visit or had a history of 
sensitivity or intolerance to an antibiotic, had a relevant 
current or past medical disorder or were pregnant or 
breastfeeding, or met MRI exclusion criteria.
Recruitment 
followed 
the 
previously 
validated 
procedures of PsyGrid.19 The clinical team made the first 
approach. The participant’s responsible medical officer or 
care coordinator completed a diagnostic and eligibility 
criteria checklist and elicited permission for contact from 
the research team. Written informed consent was 
recorded.
Randomisation and masking
Patients were randomly assigned with an automated 
permuted blocks algorithm, and were stratified by 
pharmacy. openCDMS (a now discontinued open-source 
clinical data management system) allocated the patient to 
a treatment group at randomisation, emailed the local 
pharmacy to identify the numbered treatment kit of 
3 months’ supply to be dispensed, and recorded when a kit 
was dispensed. Emergency unblinding using openCDMS 
was governed by a standard operating procedure. The data 
management and ethics committee statistician could, but 
did not, request access to unblinded data on openCDMS 
operated by the informatics department at the University 
of Manchester. Coded supplies of placebo and active 
minocycline were manufactured and distributed to local 
pharmacies by Catalent and tracked by openCDMS.
Procedures
Patients took two 100 mg capsules of modified-release 
minocycline or matching placebo every day for 2 weeks, 
then three 100 mg tablets per day for the remainder of 
the 12-month study period, in addition to standard 
therapy and routine care.
For the schedule of assessments, see the appendix. 
Research assistants obtained informed consent to the 
procedures described in a patient information leaflet 
about the trial. At screening, the research assistant 
applied a diagnostic checklist to the case notes and, on 
the basis of a Mini-International Neuropsychiatric 
Interview, reached a consensus diagnosis with the 
responsible medical officer and confirmed the presence 
of psychotic symptoms. Blood was taken for renal and 
liver function tests (if not available from routine care) and 
urine for drugs and pregnancy tests. At the randomisation 
visit, all baseline efficacy, MRI scans, and mechanistic 
outcomes were recorded, together with assessments of 
side-effects and medication adherence (appendix).
Efficacy, side-effects, and adherence assessments were 
repeated at follow-up visits at 2, 6, 9, and 12 months. MRI 
and cognitive function tests were repeated at 12 months. 
Blood samples to test for high-sensitivity C-reactive 
protein (hs-CRP) and cytokines were repeated at months 
6, 9, and 12. Trial medication ceased at 12 months. 
Clinical ratings were repeated at 15 months to check 
for rebound symptoms after withdrawal from trial 
medication. Project research assistants had regular 
training and harmonisation discussions at telecon-
ferences every 2 weeks and at away days every 6 months. 
We used reference PANSS interview videos to maintain 
and monitor inter-rater reliability.
Bloods for plasma inflammatory markers were 
aliquoted and frozen within 4 h. hs-CRP was measured 
with the Cormay anti-CRP antibody (PZ Cormay SA, 
Lomianki, 
Poland) 
sensitised 
to 
latex 
particles. 
Interleukin 6 (IL-6) was assayed with Meso Scale 
Discovery V-PLEX sandwich immunoassays (Rockville, 
MD, USA). Assays were done at King’s College London, 
supervised by PD.
JS coordinated the MRI sequences, which were based 
on the previous NeuroPsygGrid multi-centre validation 
and reliability study20 comprising three-dimensional 
T1-weighted magnetisation-prepared rapid gradient-echo 
For more on Catalent see www.
catalent.com
 Articles
888 
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 5   November 2018
(MPRAGE/SPGR), proton density and T2-weighted dual 
echo (PD/T2), and T2*-weighted gradient echo planar 
imaging during N-back working memory task and 
resting state. Scans were transferred to and analysed 
by JS. Cognitive function testing across centres was 
coordinated and monitored by EJ.
We assessed adherence to trial medication using a 
seven-point semi-structured interview rating about 
attitude to and frequency of taking medication (appendix). 
As a minor amendment to the protocol, we also assayed 
the 6-month and 12-month plasma samples for 
minocycline after the study, using high-performance 
liquid chromatography.18
The trial was overseen by an independent Trial Steering 
Committee that included a service user. The committee 
received reports from the data monitoring committee 
to determine whether there was evidence of harm to 
participants from active medication, harm from with-
holding an overwhelmingly beneficial treatment from 
those on placebo, or feasibility or ethical barriers to 
continuing the trial in its current or modified form 
to achieve its stated objectives.
Outcomes
The primary clinical outcome was overall severity of 
negative symptoms of psychosis or their change over 
time, as measured by the negative symptom subscale 
score in PANSS, at months 2, 6, 9, and 12.
The secondary clinical outcomes were positive symptom 
subscale and total score of PANSS; Calgary Depression 
Scale for Schizophrenia (CDSS); Global Assessment of 
Functioning; Social Functioning Scale, a self-rating scale 
assessing social functioning in domains such as social 
engagement, interpersonal behaviour, pro-social activities, 
independence or employment; cognitive function as 
measured by short Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale III for 
patients with schizophrenia (current IQ), which included 
the subtests Information, Arithmetic, Block Design and the 
Digit Symbol test of processing speed; WTAR for pre-
morbid IQ; Verbal Fluency, and Auditory-Verbal Learning 
Task Test trials 1–5; bodyweight and body-mass index 
(BMI); and current and previous drug treatment.
The primary biomarker outcomes were medial 
prefrontal grey-matter volume (measured with structural 
MRI), circulating IL-6 concentration, and N-back 
perform 
ance and blood-oxygen-level-dependent imaging 
(BOLD) response in dorsolateral-prefrontal cortex 
(measured with functional MRI).
The secondary biomarker outcomes were regional 
grey-matter volume, hs-CRP and major cytokines (which 
will be reported elsewhere), and resting state connectivity.
The general medical care of participants was the 
responsibility of the mental health-care team and general 
practitioner. Haematology, renal, and liver blood screens 
were arranged if none was available within the past 
3  months. Any new physical or subjective symptoms 
were recorded as adverse events or reactions, or serious 
Figure 1: Trial profile
104 assigned placebo
 
 104 with PANSS score
5 withdrew
9 lost to follow-up
1 moved 
1 abdominal pain
88 in placebo group at month 2
 
85 with PANSS score
3 withdrew
7 lost to follow-up
2 malaise
1 mole
1 vomit
74 in placebo group at month 6
 
67 with PANSS score
4 lost to follow-up
70 in placebo group at month 9
 
62 with PANSS score
1 withdrew
4 lost to follow-up
65 in placebo group at month 12
 
65 with PANSS score
   2 withdrew
15 lost to follow-up 
48 in placebo group at 15 months’ follow-up
 
48 with PANSS score
103 assigned minocycline 
 
 103 with PANSS score
4 withdrew
6 lost to follow-up
1 moved 
1 rash
2 dysphagia
1 malaise
88 in minocycline group at month 2
 
83 with PANSS score
3 withdrew
7 lost to follow-up
1 abdominal pain
77 in minocycline group at month 6
 
69 with PANSS score
2 withdrew
3 lost to follow-up
1 relapse
71 in minocycline group at month 9
 
68 with PANSS score
2 withdrew
3 lost to follow-up
1 vision distrurbed
1 epilepsy
64 in minocycline group at month 12
 
62 with PANSS score
   5 withdrew
18 lost to follow-up 
41 in minocycline group at 15 months’ follow-up
 
41 with PANSS score
229 screened
22 excluded
 
10 clinical exclusions
 
5 withdrew
 
5 no consent
 
2 unknown
207 randomly assigned
267 gave consent and received identification number
572 received patient information leaflet
2227 potentially eligible candidates
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 5   November 2018 
889
adverse events with standard reporting procedures. 
 
Assessments of neurological and non-neurological side-
effects of anti 
psychotic drugs are detailed in the appendix.
Statistical analysis
The study was designed to produce clinical and biomarker 
data for 170 patients completing 1 year of placebo or 
minocycline add-on treatment (n=85 per group). This 
sample would have 90% power to detect a standardised 
effect size of 0·5 in the primary clinical outcome (eg, a 
group difference in negative symptom scores of 3 units, 
assuming the within-group SD is equal to 6) using a two-
tailed t test (at p<0·05). On the basis of the NeuroPsyGrid 
five-site imaging data,20 the minimal detectable difference 
in grey matter is 2% at 80% power at this sample size.
The statistical analysis was overseen by study 
statistician (GD) to a plan agreed by the Trial Steering 
Committee. There were no interim analyses and all 
analyses were carried out after the collection of the final 
outcome measures. We did all statistical analyses of the 
clinical, cognitive, and biomarker outcomes using Stata 
(version 14). When the primary analyses were complete, 
the treatment code was revealed.
We used baseline variables to check balance of the 
randomised groups. We reported treatment effects using 
95% CI, supplemented by their associated p values. 
Treatment effects are the difference between group 
means (minocycline minus placebo) attributable to 
treatment after controlling for baseline and academic 
centre. The treatment effect is reported as an average 
outcome across follow-up timepoints for the minocycline 
group minus the average outcome for the placebo group. 
Thus, for severity scores, negative treatment effects 
indicate a beneficial effect of minocycline (less severity 
than placebo). For function scores in which a high score 
is a good outcome, a beneficial effect of minocycline 
would be indicated by a positive treatment effect.
We estimated treatment effects by using a random 
effects regression model (using Stata’s xtreg command) 
after allowing for time of follow-up (2, 6, 9, or 12 months, 
treated as a categorical variable), academic centre, and 
baseline severity of negative symptoms. We assessed the 
effect of time of follow-up on treatment efficacy by the 
interactions of treatment by time and treatment effects at 
the four follow-up times, estimated separately. If there was 
no significant interaction between the treatment effect 
and time, we removed the interaction from the model and 
estimated treatment efficacy common to all four follow-up 
times. All models contained interactions of centre by time 
and baseline severity by time. An exploratory analysis 
examined treatment effects in each academic centre 
separately. We assessed the sensitivity of efficacy estimates 
to the effects of poor adherence with medication and other 
covariates on loss to follow-up using descriptive summary 
statistics and the use of inverse probability weighting.18
We visually inspected all MRI scans for quality and 
possible acquisition artefacts. Subsequently, we used 
standardised method-specific temporal and spatial 
processing with the FSL software library on each scan 
(appendix). We analysed MPRAGE/SPGR and PD/T2 
images using sequence-specific voxel-based morph-
ometry. We extracted mean grey-matter volumes from 
bilateral medial prefrontal cortex defined independently 
by an atlas.21 We extracted mean BOLD responses 
corresponding to orthogonal contrasts of working 
memory (1-back and 2-back vs 0-back; 2-back vs 1-back) 
from atlas regions corresponding to the dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex. We used a random effects model to 
estimate the main effects of treatment group and time 
and their interaction on the grey-matter volume and 
BOLD responses, as with other outcome variables. 
Participant sex and age, and MRI acquisition centre were 
included as covariates. The threshold of significance was 
set at a p value of 0·05 or less. This study is registered as 
an International Standard Randomised Controlled Trial, 
number ISRCTN49141214, and the EU Clinical Trials 
register (EudraCT) number is 2010-022463-35I.
Role of the funding source
The funder of the study had no role in study design, data 
collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of 
the report. The corresponding author had full access to 
Placebo
Minocycline
n
Mean (SD)
n
Mean (SD)
Sex
Male
73
··
77
··
Female
30
··
27
··
Age, years 
101
25·7 (5·1)
103
25·5 (5·2)
PANSS score
Negative symptom subscale score
104
16·8 (5·5)
103
17·7 5·9)
Positive symptom subscale score
104
17·3 (5·3)
103
16·3 (4·1)
Total PANSS score
103
69·3 (15·4)
103
67·1 (13·2)
CDSS score
103
5·5 (5·0)
103
5·2 (4·3)
GAF score
103
56·2 (11·6)
102
55·5 (9·1)
Weight, kg
101
86·8 (25·3)
97
82·6 (19·6)
Body-mass index
101
28·7 (7·6)
96
27·1 (6·2)
Processing speed
91
52·8 (16·8)
95
58·0 (16·7)
Current IQ
100
89·2 (15·9)
101
91·2 (14·0)
Premorbid IQ
98
95·4 (19·8)
100
97·7 (1·7)
Medial prefrontal cortex grey-matter volume (cc)
Left grey-matter volume 
88
5·7 (0·8)
94
5·6 (0·7)
Right grey-matter volume 
88
4·6 (0·7)
94
4·6 (5·8)
N-back BOLD activation (% change)
1-back plus 2-back vs 0-back
88
0·12% (1·25)
94
–0·02% (1·48)
2-back vs 1-back
88
0·10% (1·23)
94
–0·04% (1·54)
Cytokine IL-6, pg/mL
100
0·84 (0·64)
101
0·69 (0·46)
hs-CRP, mg/L
100
3·83 (5·45)
101
3·08 (3·82)
PANSS=Positive and Negative Syndrome Scales. CDSS=Calgary Depression Scale for Schizophrenia. GAF=Global 
Assessment of Functioning. IQ=intelligence quotient. BOLD=blood-oxygen-level-dependent imaging. 
IL-6=interleukin 6. hs-CRP=high-sensitivity C-reactive protein.  
Table 1: Baseline demographics and outcome variables
 Articles
890 
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 5   November 2018
all the data in the study and had final responsibility for 
the decision to submit for publication.
Results
Between April 16, 2013, and April 30, 2015, 207 participants 
were recruited. The last 12-month visit occurred on 
June 9, 2016. Figure 1 shows the numbers of participants 
recruited and remaining in the study, including those 
who missed an assessment but attended a subsequent 
one, up to and including the 12-month visit (the end of 
the treatment phase). The number of participants seen at 
each appointment for whom PANSS scores were 
recorded is also shown (figure 1). Overall, 78 (38%) of 
207 randomly assigned participants dropped out during 
the 12-month treatment phase. In 63 (81%) of these 
participants, the reasons were either a participant’s 
request or loss to follow-up. Scores for the primary 
outcome measure at 6 months were available for 
136 (66%) participants and, at 12 months, 127 (61%) 
participants. The numbers of participants dropping out 
were evenly split throughout: at 15 months, 11 participants 
in the placebo group versus 16 in the minocycline grup 
had withdrawn, and 39 versus 37 were lost to follow-up. 
There were 12 allocation centres, each of which had a 
collaborating pharmacy linked to OpenCDMS and one of 
the six universities of the principal investigators and 
research assistants. Each centre allocated a similar 
number of participants to placebo and minocycline. 
About a quarter of each group were prescribed long-
acting depots. Oral medication was almost entirely 
confined to second-generation antipsychotics (n=86 in 
the placebo group, n=90 in the minocycline group), most 
frequently olanzapine, followed in equal measure by 
risperidone, aripiprazole, and amisulpride.18
The two treatment groups did not differ in terms of 
age, sex, or any baseline measures of the primary and 
other major outcome variables (table 1). Mean total 
PANSS scores of 67 (minocycline group) and 69 (placebo 
group) indicated a mild-to-moderate level of symptom 
severity.22 Global Assessment of Functioning scores in 
the mid-50s at baseline indicate a moderate level of 
severity of impairment of social and occupational 
function (table 1). This finding was corroborated by low 
subscale scores for the Social Functioning Scale, 
particularly in spontaneous recreational activity and pro-
social activity (appendix). The mean CDSS was greater 
than 5 in both groups, with 37 (36%) participants in the 
placebo and 39 (38%) in the minocycline group having 
scores greater than 6, indicating a possible major 
depressive episode (data not shown).23 In both groups, 
premorbid IQ, as assessed by the WTAR, was just less 
than 100, whereas current IQ was about 5 points less 
(table 1). 13 participants had increased hs-CRP 
concentrations (>10 mg/L) at baseline, indicating a 
probable recent viral or possibly bacterial infection, 
otherwise baseline IL-6 and hs-CRP concentrations were 
unremarkable (table 1).
Minocycline had no discernible influence on any 
clinical outcome variable in terms of direction, 
magnitude, or statistical significance. The observed case 
means were closely similar in both groups (figure 2). 
There were no significant treatment effects on measures 
assessed at all follow-up timepoints (table 2). Negative 
symptom subscale scores were similar in each group 
throughout the study, with no tendency to worsen in the 
placebo group as we had expected. In an exploratory 
Figure 2: Main outcome measures for minocycline and placebo groups
The minimum scores on Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) subscales is 7.  
0 
0·2 
0·4 
0·6 
0·8 
1·0 
0 
6 
12 
Interleukin 6
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
0 
12 
0 
12 
Medial prefrontal cortex grey-matter volume 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Calgary Depression Scale 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
Global Assessment of Function 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
16 
18 
PANSS positive 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
16 
18 
20 
PANSS negative 
Left
Right
0 
0 
0 
3 
6 
9 
12 
15 
Follow-up (months)
0 
3 
6 
9 
12 
15 
Follow-up (months)
Mean score
Mean score
Mean score
Mean score
Volume (cc)
Concentration (pg/mL)
Follow-up (months)
Follow-up (months)
Minocycline
Placebo
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 5   November 2018 
891
analysis by the trial statistician, treatment effects did not 
differ in participants with above and below median 
hs-CRP or IL-6 concentrations at baseline. There was no 
indication of a rebound worsening of negative symptoms 
recorded at 15 months, after cessation of treatment at 
12 months, in either group. Mean scores for negative 
symptoms, positive symptoms, and depression symptoms 
improved in both groups across the trial (appendix). 
There was moderately good agreement (intra-class 
correlation 0·7) between the seven principal research 
assistants of their negative PANSS scores in up to 
11 reference videos of SCI-PANSS interviews.
There were no significant effects of treatment on 
primary or secondary biomarker outcomes. Medial 
prefrontal grey-matter volume did not show the expected 
decrease over 12-months in either group (figure 2). 
N-back performance (% correct) improved by 10% in both 
groups over 12 months (appendix). The task engaged the 
predicted fronto-parietal executive network with greater 
BOLD activation in the more difficult 2-back versus 1-back 
condition (appendix). There were no effects of treatment 
on BOLD responses or performance. Circulating hs-CRP 
and IL-6 concentrations were stable and unaffected by 
treatment (figure 2; appendix). hs-CRP and IL-6 
intercorrelated, and both correlated with BMI (p<0·005) 
at baseline and at 6 and 12 months. There were no 
systematic hs-CRP or IL-6 correlations with clinical 
PANSS subscale scores or Calgary depression self-ratings 
(data not shown).
Ratings on the seven-point adherence scale decreased 
throughout the study; from approximately 90% fully or 
partially engaged and compliant at 2 months, to 80% at 
6 months, 75% at 9 months, and 70% at 12 months 
(appendix). The planned sensitivity analysis showed that 
failure to find a beneficial effect of minocycline is unlikely 
to have arisen from poor compliance and subsequent loss 
to follow-up.18 Minocycline was assayed in 56 plasma 
samples from the minocycline group at 6 months and 
was detectable in 32 (57%). Analysis of the effect of 
treatment on PANSS subscales in the 32 participants 
with detectable minocycline concentrations did not reveal 
any benefit of minocycline versus placebo at 6 months.
The prevalence of extrapyramidal side-effects was low 
and there were no group differences (appendix). There 
were 67 adverse events in the placebo group and 60 events 
in the minocycline group (appendix). The most common 
were gastrointestinal (n=12 in the placebo group, n=19 in 
the minocycline group), psychiatric (n=16 in placebo 
group, n=8 in minocycline group), nervous system (n=8 in 
the placebo group, n=12 in the minocycline group), and 
dermatological (n=10 in the placebo group, n=8 in the 
minocycline group).
Admission to hospital was classified as a serious 
adverse event. All admissions were for intensification of 
psychosis, in nearly all cases associated with stopping 
antipsychotic medication. Some were repeat admissions 
such that 15 admissions occurred in the minocycline 
group (n=10 patients) and ten admissions occurred in the 
placebo group (n=6 patients). One patient in the placebo 
group was admitted with deep-venous thrombosis. No 
deaths occurred during the study.
Discussion
There is no evidence from the BeneMin study that 
minocycline treatment for up to 1 year has an effect on 
the progression or severity of negative symptoms of 
schizophrenia within the first 5 years of treatment onset. 
This study followed the design used in a previous two-
centre, placebo-controlled, randomised controlled trial in 
Pakistan and Brazil, done by Chaudhry and colleagues,6 
in which minocycline improved negative symptoms 
when added to treatment as usual for 1 year. Participants 
in the trial by Chaudhry and colleagues had greater 
PANSS negative symptom subscale scores (n=22) at 
baseline than in the present study (n=17). However, there 
was no evidence of an interaction between treatment and 
baseline in the BeneMin study. The difference between 
studies might simply reflect chance variation. The benefit 
of minocycline in the Tel Aviv study16 was also small and 
offset by the fact that it was not detected in the PANSS 
Estimate (95% CI); p value
Standard error
Primary outcome
Negative symptoms (PANSS)*
–0·19 (–1·23 to 0·85); p=0·73
0·53
Clinical outcomes
Positive symptoms (PANSS)*
–0·19 (–1·12 to 0·73); p=0·68
0·47
Total symptoms (PANSS)*
–0·58 (–3·75 to 2·59); p=0·72
1·62
CDSS score
–0·06 (–0·84 to 0·72); p=0·88
0·40
GAF score*
2·71 (–1·57 to 6·98); p=0·21
2·15
SFS Withdrawal†
–0·24 (–1·03 to 0·55); p=0·55
0·40
SFS Relations†
–0·02 (–0·55 to 0·51); p=0·94
0·27
SFS Independence-Performance†
–0·78 (–2·53 to 0·97); p=0·38
0·89
SFS Recreation†
–0·91 (–2·65 to 0·82); p=0·30
0·89
SFS Prosocial Activities†
0·19 (–2·25 to 2·62); p=0·88
1·24
SFS Independence-Competence†
–0·49 (–1·79 to 0·81); p=0·46
0·67
SFS Employment†
–0·12 (–0·95 to 0·71); p=0·78
0·43
Processing speed‡
–2·14 (–6·63 to 2·35); p=0·35
2·26
Current IQ‡
–0·56 (–3·59 to 2·47); p=0·72
1·53
Weight‡
2·71 (–1·57 to 6·98); p=0·21
2·15
Biomarker outcomes
Left grey-matter volume‡
–0·09 (–0·30 to 0·12); p=0·40
0·11
Right grey-matter volume‡
–0·07 (–0·21 to 0·08); p=0·34
0·07
N-back BOLD activation (% change): 1-back plus 
2-back vs 0-back
–0·66 (–1·53 to 0·20); p=0·13
0·43
N-back BOLD activation (% change): 2-back vs 
1-back 
–0·57 (–1·40 to 0·26); p=0·18
0·41
Interleukin 6†
0·07 (–0·12 to 0·26); p=0·46
0·10
High-sensitivity C-reactive protein†
1·72 (–1·42 to 4·85); p=0·28
1·60
PANSS=Positive and Negative Syndrome Scales. CDSS=Calgary Depression Scale for Schizophrenia. GAF=Global 
Assessment of Functioning. SFS=Social Functioning Scale. IQ=intelligence quotient. BOLD=blood-oxygen-level-
dependent imaging. *Follow-up at months 2, 6, 9, and 12. †Follow-up at months 6 and 12. ‡12-month follow-up.
Table 2: Summary of best estimates of treatment effects across all follow-up timepoints
 Articles
892 
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 5   November 2018
ratings but only in the Scale for the Assessment of 
Negative Symptoms, and there were small numbers 
(16 patients vs 9 controls) remaining in the study at 
primary outcome assessment. A third study24 that 
reported a large effect in patients with recent-onset 
schizophrenia was an outlier in a meta-analysis by Xiang 
and colleagues.25 Their meta-analysis included five trials 
in patients with more chronic illness and overall there 
was a significant benefit of minocycline on negative 
symptoms. However, the variability in outcome and 
divergence between countries make for appreciable 
uncertainty. To our knowledge, BeneMin is the largest 
study to date and is unequivocally negative. We discuss 
three possible explanations for the negative result: 
absence of CNS inflammation after the acute episode, 
ineffectiveness of minocycline in CNS inflammation, 
and limitations of the study.
The lack of effect of minocycline in the present study 
could indicate that the canonical feature of neuropathic 
inflammation—activation of microglia—was not present 
or had ceased by the time participants were recruited, 
within 5 years of presentation with schizophrenia. We 
found no evidence of progressive loss of grey matter over 
1 year, there was no deterioration in cognitive function, 
and there was no evidence of systemic inflammation from 
hs-CRP and IL-6 concentrations. In keeping with these 
results, a meta-analysis of recent PET imaging studies26 
found no evidence of increases in translocator protein 
(TSPO) radioligand binding to activated microglia in early 
or established schizophrenia. This finding contrasts 
with two reports of increased microglial activation in 
depression27,28 and in neurodegenerative diseases.29 
Indeed, reduced TSPO binding was a consistent finding 
in drug-free or minimally treated patients with 
schizophrenia.26 This important and replicated psychosis-
specific abnormality of microglial function is, at face 
value, a logical explanation for the lack of effect of 
minocycline. It could indicate impaired microglial 
surveillance and clearance of dysfunctional, redundant, or 
pathological synapses in schizophrenia, rather than 
neuroinflammation. However, the precise implications of 
low TSPO binding for microglial function and for the 
neuroinflammatory hypothesis of schizophrenia are not 
yet clear, and this is an active research area.
Increased circulating hs-CRP and IL-6 concentrations 
compared with controls have been consistently reported 
in schizophrenia, depression, and other psychiatric 
disorders. BeneMin has no control group, but no mean 
concentrations were less than reported norms30 and were 
lower than in previous investigations in schizophrenia.31 
Samples were processed and frozen within 4 h of 
venepuncture. The collection was sufficiently consistent 
to show the well known influence of BMI on circulating 
concentrations. There was no effect of minocycline on 
peripheral circulating hs-CRP or IL-6 concentrations, and 
these concentrations did not correlate with the severity of 
negative or other symptoms. Remarkably, there appears 
to be only one report of minocycline effects on circulating 
cytokines in PubMed searches. In a study in patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis,32 IL-6 concentrations decreased 
during 6 months in the minocycline treatment group but 
not in the placebo group. Whether the between-group 
difference was significant was not reported. No such 
changes were observed in the BeneMin study. In future 
studies targeting inflammation, it will be important to 
preselect patients who have increased circulating hs-CRP 
or cytokine concentrations, or other evidence of 
inflammation.
The failure to observe loss of grey matter casts doubt 
on the duration or generality of losses reported in 
previous studies. Evidence suggests that loss of grey-
matter volume in the prodromal phase peaks within the 
first years of psychosis.4,33 It seems increasingly likely 
that some of the loss of grey-matter volume is due to 
initiation of antipsychotic drug treatment in recent-onset 
psychosis, and this is more marked with first-generation 
antipsychotic drugs than with second-generation drugs.33 
Indeed, there is evidence that second-generation 
antipsychotic drugs have neuroprotective and anti-
inflammatory actions. Less than 5% of the BeneMin 
patients were taking first-generation antipsychotic drugs 
It seems plausible, therefore, that any late developmental 
or antipsychotic-related changes in grey-matter volume 
had plateaued by the time of recruitment. The improving 
course of symptoms and stability of biomarkers in the 
study could reflect the benefit of continuing contact with 
early intervention services and adherence to treatment.
It is possible that minocycline is an ineffective 
antimicroglial drug in humans, hence its lack of effect in 
BeneMin. Indeed, no new evidence has emerged of the 
benefit of minocycline in preventing or slowing neuro-
degenerative disease in randomised controlled trials 
since those noted at the beginning of BeneMin research, 
except for the improvements reported over placebo in 
142 patients with multiple sclerosis.34 However, the 
precise role of microglia in the initiation and continuation 
of these neurodegenerative disorders is not entirely clear. 
Furthermore, two randomised controlled trials report 
beneficial effects of minocycline in depression,35,36 in 
which there is evidence for microglial activation from 
PET TSPO binding.27,28
The aim of the study was to determine whether 
minocycline protects against the development of negative 
symptoms during 1 year. The design involved a 
compromise between early neuroprotective treatment in 
a first episode, with continuing positive symptoms when 
a putative neuropathic process might be most active, and 
allowing sufficient time for the process to produce 
negative symptoms. We chose 1 year on the basis of 
reports that observable changes in brain structure occur 
over 1 year in first-episode psychosis.4 However, evidence 
from longitudinal studies in first-episode psychosis37 
challenge the premise that a 1-year follow up would be 
sufficient; they indicate that negative symptoms lessen as 
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 5   November 2018 
893
positive symptoms stabilise, and remain low and stable 
for up to 2 years in patients remaining in services and 
treatment. Indeed, the greatest predictor of follow-up in 
BeneMin was the baseline score, suggesting that early 
influences on negative symptoms had already operated 
before the minocycline trial.
Fewer participants were retained in the study for 
12 months (64 in minocycline group, 65 in placebo 
group) than the planned group size of 85. This outcome 
mainly reflected participant choice and was not clearly 
different between the two groups. However, retention 
was more than 80% at month 2, the standard duration 
for trials of antipsychotic efficacy, and more than 70% at 
6 months, by which time major benefits against an 
inflammatory disorder might be observable.
Poor treatment adherence in one group or another is a 
further potential source of bias, but there was no 
between-group difference in self-rated attitude and 
adherence to trial medication that could account for a 
failure to observe a benefit of minocycline.18 Furthermore, 
exploratory analyses found no evidence of trends to 
efficacy compared with placebo in those with maximum 
adherence scores or in those with detectable minocycline 
in plasma at 6 or 12-months.
Poor training or reliability between raters is a potential 
mechanism for a false negative study. In BeneMin, 
extensive training and discussions of ratings continued 
throughout the trial. A single research assistant recruited 
and tested most of the participants in each centre because 
staff turnover was low. This approach would increase 
consistency and sensitivity to change within each centre. 
Agreement between the seven principal research 
assistants of negative scores in up to 11 reference videos of 
SCI-PANSS interviews produced an intra-class correlation 
of 0·7
. Centre was included as a factor in estimating all 
treatment effects, but none were statistically significant. 
Furthermore, there were no effects of treatment in any 
centre when considered separately. Since treatment effects 
do not vary between centres, it seems unlikely that 
beneficial effects of minocycline were obscured by marked 
deviation in rating or other unknown systematic deviations 
in some centres. The lack of effect of minocycline is 
backed up by the lack of effect on secondary measures that 
are known to relate to negative symptoms, some of which 
do not involve external raters—eg, the Social Function 
Scale, which is self-rated, or objective measures such as 
being in employment. Performance on cognitive function 
tasks is a known correlate of negative symptoms, but they 
too were unaffected by minocycline.
The BeneMin study, taken together with the existing 
literature, suggests that up to 12 months’ treatment with 
minocycline does not improve the symptomatic or 
functional status of people within 5 years of a diagnosis of 
schizophrenia. Furthermore, there was little evidence of 
persisting neurodegeneration or systemic inflammation 
that the known preclinical actions of minocycline could 
target. It is possible that such processes occur at an earlier 
stage, in acute-phase schizophrenia, or in inflammatory 
or treatment resistant subgroups. However, much firmer 
biomarker evidence of these pathological processes would 
seem necessary before further trials of promising anti-
inflammatory drugs are done in patients with psychosis. 
Future studies should also carefully consider the 
stratification of recruitment and analysis plans, with 
sufficient numbers of patients included with evidence of 
an active inflammatory process.
Contributors
All authors reviewed, revised, and approved the final version of the 
manuscript. BD was the chief investigator, obtained funding, designed 
the study, interpreted the data and wrote the report. RU was 
co-investigator, organised recruitment, interpreted the high-sensitivity 
C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) and interleukin 6 (IL-6) data, and 
contributed to drafting the report. JS was co-investigator and designed 
and supervised the imaging component of the study. DML-F managed 
MRI in the five scanners and published the protocol. SCRW was 
co-investigator and contributed to the design of the imaging component 
of the study. PD was co-investigator, and designed and supervised the 
hs-CRP and IL-6 investigations of the study with NN and CMP. EJ was 
co-investigator and designed and supervised the neuropsychological 
component of the study. GD was co-investigator and supervised the 
statistical design of the study and the analysis. TREB was co-investigator 
and designed and supervised the assessment of neurological and other 
side-effects of medication. NH, IBC, SML, SL, and PBJ were 
co-investigators and were involved in the design and interpretation of 
the study and overall recruitment strategy. RJD was involved in the 
design of the study and supervised PANSS training and other clinical 
assessments EK and KB were involved in the design of the study, and in 
all aspects of the study’s set-up, management, governance, and 
monitoring. RS organised data management. AG and CK analysed and 
interpreted aspects of the hs-CRP and IL-6 data, and AW supervised the 
cognitive function tests and their analysis.
Declaration of interests
BD reports grants from P1vital and grants and personal fees from 
Autifony outside the submitted work. TREB reports personal fees from 
Sunovion, Lundbeck, Newron Pharmaceuticals, and Janssen, outside the 
submitted work. RJD reports honoraria paid to the University of 
Manchester from Otsuka, Janssen, and Lundbeck, outside the submitted 
work. SML reports personal fees from Otsuka and Sunovion and 
personal fees and research support from Janssen. SL is Director of 
Affigo.io, a not-for-profit University of Manchester start-up for digital 
mental health, and is the Medical Director of Xenzone, an online 
counselling company. DML-F reports grants from the National Institute 
for Health Research (NIHR) during the conduct of the study. 
CMP reports that, in the past 5 years, he has received research funding 
from Johnson & Johnson, a pharmaceutical company interested in the 
development of anti-inflammatory medications for use in psychiatry, and 
from MRC-funded and Wellcome-funded research consortia that also 
include GlaxoSmithKline, Johnson & Johnson, and Lundbeck; however, 
the work in this publication is completely independent from this 
funding. RU reports personal fees from Sunovion, outside the submitted 
work. All other authors declare no competing interests.
Data sharing
Requests for sharing the anonymised trial database should be addressed 
to the lead author.
Acknowledgments
This project was supported by the Efficacy and Mechanism Evaluation 
(EME) programme (reference number 10/90/04) funded by the Medical 
Research Council (MRC) and managed by the NIHR on behalf of the 
MRC–NIHR partnership. The study was sponsored by Manchester 
Mental Health and Social Care Trust (now part of the Greater 
Manchester Mental Health National Health Service [NHS] Foundation 
Trust) and supported by the UK Clinical Research Network. Additional 
support for hs-CRP and IL-6 work was provided by the NIHR Biomedical 
Research Centre at South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust 
 Articles
894 
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 5   November 2018
and King’s College London. See the appendix for details of other support 
given to the study. The views expressed in this publication are those of 
the authors and not necessarily those of the MRC, NHS, NIHR, or the 
Department of Health.
References
1 
Andreasen NC. Negative symptoms in schizophrenia. Definition 
and reliability. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1982; 39: 784–88.
2 
Crow TJ. The two-syndrome concept: origins and current status. 
Schizophr Bull 1985; 11: 471–86.
3 
Cahn W, Rais M, Stigter FP, et al. Psychosis and brain volume 
changes during the first five years of schizophrenia. 
Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 2009; 19: 147–51.
4 
Lieberman JA, Tollefson GD, Charles C, et al. Antipsychotic drug 
effects on brain morphology in first-episode psychosis. 
Arch Gen Psychiatry 2005; 62: 361–70.
5 
Pantelis C, Velakoulis D, McGorry PD, et al. Neuroanatomical 
abnormalities before and after onset of psychosis: a cross-sectional 
and longitudinal MRI comparison. Lancet 2003; 361: 281–88.
6 
Chaudhry IB, Hallak J, Husain N, et al. Minocycline benefits negative 
symptoms in early schizophrenia: a randomised double-blind 
placebo-controlled clinical trial in patients on standard treatment. 
J Psychopharmacol 2012; 26: 1185–93.
7 
Domercq M, Matute C. Neuroprotection by tetracyclines. 
Trends Pharmacol Sci 2004; 25: 609–12.
8 
Lampl Y, Boaz M, Gilad R, et al. Minocycline treatment in acute 
stroke: an open-label, evaluator-blinded study. Neurology 2007; 
69: 1404–10.
9 
NINDS NET-PD Investigators. A pilot clinical trial of creatine and 
minocycline in early Parkinson disease. Clin Neuropharmacol 2008; 
31: 141–50.
10 
Huntington Study Group DOMINO Investigators M. A futility 
study of minocycline in Huntington’s disease. Mov Disord 2010; 
25: 2219–24.
11 
Gordon P, Moore D, Miller R, et al. Efficacy of minocycline in 
patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a phase III randomised 
trial. Lancet Neurol 2007; 6: 1045–53.
12 
Miyaoka T, Yasukawa R, Yasuda H, Hayashida M, Inagaki T, 
Horiguchi J. Minocycline as adjunctive therapy for schizophrenia: 
an open-label study. Clin Neuropharmacol 2008; 31: 287–92.
13 
Upthegrove R, Manzanares-Teson N, Barnes NM. Cytokine function 
in medication-naive first episode psychosis: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Schizophr Res 2014; 155: 101–08.
14 
van Berckel BN, Bossong MG, Boellaard R, et al. Microglia 
activation in recent-onset schizophrenia: a quantitative (R)-[¹¹C]
PK11195 positron emission tomography study. Biol Psychiatry 2008; 
64: 820–22.
15 
Möller T, Bard F, Bhattacharya A, et al. Critical data-based re-evaluation 
of minocycline as a putative specific microglia inhibitor. Glia 2016; 
64: 1788–94.
16 
Levkovitz Y, Mendlovich S, Riwkes S, et al. A double-blind, 
randomized study of minocycline for the treatment of negative and 
cognitive symptoms in early-phase schizophrenia. 
J Clin Psychiatry 2010; 71: 138–49.
17 
Lisiecka DM, Suckling J, Barnes TRE, et al. The benefit of 
minocycline on negative symptoms in early-phase psychosis in 
addition to standard care—extent and mechanism (BeneMin): study 
protocol for a randomised controlled trial. Trials 2015; 16: 71.
18 
Deakin B, Suckling J, Dazzan P, et al. The benefit of minocycline on 
negative symptoms of schizophrenia (BeneMin); a randomised 
placebo-controlled trial. Effic Mech Eval (in press).
19 
Ainsworth J, Harper R. The PsyGrid experience. 
Int J Healthc Inf Syst Informatics 2007; 2: 1–20.
20 Suckling J, Barnes A, Job D, et al. The Neuro/PsyGRID calibration 
experiment: identifying sources of variance and bias in multicenter 
MRI studies. Hum Brain Mapp 2012; 33: 373–86.
21 
Tzourio-Mazoyer N, Landeau B, Papathanassiou D, et al. Automated 
anatomical labeling of activations in SPM using a macroscopic 
anatomical parcellation of the MNI MRI single-subject brain. 
Neuroimage 2002; 15: 273–89.
22 Leucht S, Kane JM, Kissling W, Hamann J, Etschel E, Engel RR. 
What does the PANSS mean? Schizophr Res 2005; 79: 231–38.
23 Addington J, Shah H, Liu L, Addington D. Reliability and validity of 
the Calgary Depression Scale for Schizophrenia (CDSS) in youth at 
clinical high risk for psychosis. Schizophr Res 2014; 153: 64–67
.
24 
Liu F, Guo X, Wu R, et al. Minocycline supplementation for 
treatment of negative symptoms in early-phase schizophrenia: 
a double blind, randomized, controlled trial. Schizophr Res 2014; 
153: 169–76.
25 Xiang Y-Q, Zheng W, Wang S-B, et al. Adjunctive minocycline for 
schizophrenia: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. 
Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 2017; 27: 8–18.
26 Plavén-Sigray P, Matheson GJ, Collste K, et al. Positron emission 
tomography studies of the glial cell marker translocator protein in 
patients with psychosis: a meta-analysis using individual participant 
data. Biol Psychiatry 2018; 84: 433–42.
27 
Holmes SE, Hinz R, Conen S, et al. Elevated translocator protein in 
anterior cingulate in major depression and a role for inflammation 
in suicidal thinking: a positron emission tomography study. 
Biol Psychiatry 2018; 83: 61–69.
28 Setiawan E, Attwells S, Wilson AA, et al. Association of translocator 
protein total distribution volume with duration of untreated major 
depressive disorder: a cross-sectional study. Lancet Psychiatry 2018; 
5: 339–47
.
29 Dodel R, Spottke A, Gerhard A, et al. Minocycline 1-year therapy in 
multiple-system-atrophy: Effect on clinical symptoms and [¹¹C] 
(R)-PK11195 PET (MEMSA-trial). Mov Disord 2010; 25: 97–107
.
30 Biancotto A, Wank A, Perl S, et al. Baseline levels and temporal 
stability of 27 multiplexed serum cytokine concentrations in healthy 
subjects. PLoS One 2013; 8: e76091.
31 
Mondelli V, Ciufolini S, Belvederi Murri M, et al. Cortisol and 
inflammatory biomarkers predict poor treatment response in first 
episode psychosis. Schizophr Bull 2015; 41: 1162–70.
32 Kloppenburg M, Dijkmans BA, Verweij CL, Breedveld FC. 
Inflammatory and immunological parameters of disease activity in 
rheumatoid arthritis patients treated with minocycline. 
Immunopharmacology 1996; 31: 163–69.
33 Dazzan P, Morgan KD, Orr K, et al. Different effects of typical and 
atypical antipsychotics on grey matter in first episode psychosis: 
the AESOP study. Neuropsychopharmacology 2005; 30: 765–74.
34 
Metz LM, Li DKB, Traboulsee AL, et al. Trial of minocycline in a 
clinically isolated syndrome of multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med 2017; 
376: 2122–33.
35 Savitz JB, Teague TK, Misaki M, et al. Treatment of bipolar 
depression with minocycline and/or aspirin: an adaptive, 
2 × 2 double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, phase IIA 
clinical trial. Transl Psychiatry 2018; 8: 27
.
36 Husain MI, Chaudhry IB, Husain N, et al. Minocycline as an 
adjunct for treatment-resistant depressive symptoms: a pilot 
randomised placebo-controlled trial. J Psychopharmacol 2017; 
31: 1166–75.
37 
Mezquida G, Cabrera B, Bioque M, et al. The course of negative 
symptoms in first-episode schizophrenia and its predictors: 
a prospective two-year follow-up study. Schizophr Res 2017; 
189: 84–90.
