 C O G N I T I V E N E U R O S C I E N C E
Copyright © 2019
The Authors, some
rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim to
originalU.S.Government
Works. Distributed
under a Creative
Commons Attribution
NonCommercial
License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
Human consciousness is supported by dynamic
complex patterns of brain signal coordination
A. Demertzi1,2,3*†, E. Tagliazucchi3,4*†, S. Dehaene5,6, G. Deco7,8, P. Barttfeld9‡,
F. Raimondo1,2,3,10,11,12, C. Martial1, D. Fernández-Espejo13,14,15, B. Rohaut2,3,16,
H. U. Voss17, N. D. Schiff18, A. M. Owen15, S. Laureys1, L. Naccache2,3, J. D. Sitt2,3*
Adopting the framework of brain dynamics as a cornerstone of human consciousness, we determined whether
dynamic signal coordination provides specific and generalizable patterns pertaining to conscious and un-
conscious states after brain damage. A dynamic pattern of coordinated and anticoordinated functional
magnetic resonance imaging signals characterized healthy individuals and minimally conscious patients. The
brains of unresponsive patients showed primarily a pattern of low interareal phase coherence mainly mediated
by structural connectivity, and had smaller chances to transition between patterns. The complex pattern was
further corroborated in patients with covert cognition, who could perform neuroimaging mental imagery tasks,
validating this pattern’s implication in consciousness. Anesthesia increased the probability of the less complex
pattern to equal levels, validating its implication in unconsciousness. Our results establish that consciousness
rests on the brain’s ability to sustain rich brain dynamics and pave the way for determining specific and gen-
eralizable fingerprints of conscious and unconscious states.
INTRODUCTION
Consciousness is seemingly lost and recovered every day, from the
moment we fall asleep until we wake up. Consciousness can also be
transiently abolished by pharmacological agents or, more permanently,
by brain injury. Each of these departures from conscious wakefulness
brings about different changes in brain function, behavior, and neuro-
chemistry. Yet, they all share a common feature: lack of reported sub-
jective experience (1).
Finding reliable markers indicating the presence or absence of con-
sciousness represents an outstanding open problem for science (2).
We postulate that consciousness has specific characteristics that are
based on the temporal dynamics of ongoing brain activity and its co-
ordination over distant cortical regions. Our hypothesis stems from
the common stance of various contemporary theories which propose
that consciousness relates to a dynamic process of self-sustained,
coordinated brain-scale activity assisting the tuning to a constantly
evolving environment, rather than in static descriptions of brain
function (3–5). In that respect, neural signals combine, dissolve, re-
configure, and recombine over time, allowing perception, emotion,
and cognition to happen (6).
The first biological evidence for a constantly active brain came
from electroencephalographic recordings showing electrical oscilla-
tions even when the participant was not performing any particular
task. More recently, brain dynamics have been characterized by the
presence of complex activity patterns, which cannot be completely
attributed to background noise (7). Experiments with functional mag-
netic resonance imaging (fMRI) during normal wakefulness have
shown that the brain spontaneously generates a dynamic series of con-
stantly changing activity and connectivity between brain regions (8–10).
This activity presents long-range temporal correlations in the sense
that signal changes exert long-term influence on future dynamics (11).
This translates to a complex temporal organization of the long-range
coupling between brain regions, with temporally correlated series of
transitions between discrete functional connectivity patterns (6). The
spatiotemporal complexity of brain dynamics contributes toward ef-
ficient exchanges between neuronal populations (8), suggesting that
the neural correlates of consciousness could be found in temporally
evolving dynamic processes, as postulated by influential theoretical
accounts (3–5).
In terms of states of consciousness, spontaneous fMRI dynamic
connectivity has been investigated in different sleep stages (11, 12)
and pharmacologically induced anesthesia in humans (13, 14) and
animals (15, 16). These studies indicate that, during physiologically
reversible unconscious states, cortical long-range correlations are
1GIGA-Consciousness, GIGA Institute B34, University of Liège, Avenue de l’Hôpital, 11, 4000 Sart Tilman, Belgium. 2INSERM, U 1127, F-75013 Paris, France. 3Institut du
Cerveau et de la Moelle Epinière, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, 47 bd de l’Hôpital, 75013 Paris, France. 4Instituto de Física de Buenos Aires and Physics Deparment (University of
Buenos Aires), Buenos Aires, Argentina. 5Cognitive Neuroimaging Unit, CEA, INSERM, Université Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, F-91191 Gif/Yvette, France. 6Collège de
France, 11, Place Marcelin Berthelot, 75005 Paris, France. 7Center for Brain and Cognition, Computational Neuroscience Group, Department of Information and Com-
munication Technologies, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Calle Ramon Trias Fargas 25-27, Barcelona 08005, Spain. 8Institucio Catalana de la Recerca I Estudis Avancats
(ICREA), University of Pompeu Fabra, Passeig Lluis Companys 23, Barcelona 08010, Spain. 9Laboratory of Integrative Neuroscience, Physics Department, FCEyN UBA
and IFIBA, CONICET, Pabellón 1, Ciudad Universitaria, 1428 Buenos Aires, Argentina. 10Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Exact and Natural Sciences, Intendente
Güiraldes 2160–Ciudad Universitaria–C1428EGA, University of Buenos Aires, Argentina. 11Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Université Paris 06, Faculté de Médecine Pitié-
Salpêtrière, 91-105 bd de l’Hôpital, 75013 Paris, France. 12CONICET–Universidad de Buenos Aires, Instituto de Investigación en Ciencias de la Computación, Godoy Cruz
2290, C1425FQB Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina. 13Centre for Human Brain Health, University of Birmingham, B15 2TT Birmingham, UK. 14School of Psychology,
University of Birmingham, B15 2TT, Birmingham, UK. 15The Brain and Mind Institute, Western Interdisciplinary Research Building, N6A 5B7 University of Western Ontario, London,
Ontario, Canada. 16Department of Neurology, Columbia University, 710 West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032-3784, USA. 17Radiology Department, Citigroup Biomedical Imaging
Center, Weill Cornell Medical College, 516 E. 72nd Street, New York, NY 10021, USA. 18Feil Family Brain and Mind Research Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College, 1300 York
Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA.
*Corresponding author. Email: a.demertzi@uliege.be (A.D.); tagliazucchi.enzo@googlemail.com (E.T.); jacobo.sitt@inserm.fr (J.D.S.)
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
‡Present address: Instituto de Investigaciones Psicológicas (IIPSI) CONICET, Enfermera Gordillo s/n, Córdoba, Argentina.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Demertzi et al., Sci. Adv. 2019;5:eaat7603
6 February 2019
1 of 11
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 disrupted in both space and time, anticorrelated cortical states
disappear, and the dynamic explorations are limited to specific patterns
that are dominated by rigid functional configurations tied to the anatom-
ical connectivity. Conversely, conscious wakefulness is characterized
not only by global integration, evidenced by strong long-distance inter-
actions between brain regions, but also by a dynamic exploration of a
rich and flexible repertoire of functional brain configurations departing
from the anatomical constraints (15). Another important characteristic
observed predominantly during conscious wakefulness is the appear-
ance of anticorrelations between the activity of different brain regions.
This observation is in line with the prediction of the Global Neuronal
Workspace theory stating that different streams of information in the
brain compete for the global percolation (“ignition”) of a widespread
network of regions, a phenomenon associated with conscious access.
In terms of the fMRI blood oxygen level–dependent (BOLD) signal,
this could manifest in the mutual inhibition of activity at different cor-
tical regions, leading to anticorrelated dynamics (5).
Although dynamic connectivity has been investigated in physio-
logical and pharmacological unresponsiveness, currently, the altera-
tions in brain connectivity dynamics associated with pathological
unconsciousness after severe brain injury remain unknown. The study
of unresponsive brain-lesioned patients with preserved levels of vig-
ilance offers unique insights into the necessary and potentially suf-
ficient conditions for the capacity of sustaining conscious content. So
far, the inference of consciousness in patients has rested on the use of
active mental imagery neuroimaging paradigms (17) and by assess-
ing the complexity of evoked (18) and spontaneous brain activity
(19). Patients who successfully perform these active paradigms can
no longer be considered unconscious and are thought to suffer from
cognitive-motor dissociation (20). Given that nonresponsiveness can
be associated with a variety of brain lesions, varying levels of vigilance,
and covert cognition, we highlight the need to determine a common
set of features capable of accounting for the capacity to sustain con-
scious experience. Given the above theoretical considerations, which
agree in the characterization of consciousness as a global, temporally
evolving process, we aimed at determining whether the dynamics of
brain-wide coordination could provide such a set of common features
in the form of transient patterns of connectivity that successfully gen-
eralize between different forms of nonresponsiveness in patients with
brain injury.
RESULTS
We recorded fMRI data in a cohort of 159 participants scanned at
four independent research sites (Liège: 21 healthy individuals and
63 patients; Paris: 15 healthy individuals and 22 patients; New York:
11 healthy individuals and 16 patients; London, Ontario: 11 patients).
Patients were diagnosed in a vegetative state/unresponsive wakeful-
ness syndrome (UWS) or in a minimally conscious state (MCS) with
repetitive standardized behavioral assessments and were scanned
under a resting condition, sedation free, or under anesthesia with
propofol. The cohort was divided into three datasets: dataset 1 (Liège,
Paris, and New York; n = 125) was used for the main analysis, data-
set 2 (London, Ontario; n = 11) included patients with cognitive-
motor dissociation, and dataset 3 (Liège, n = 23) included patients
scanned under propofol anesthesia (clinical details are summarized
in table S1).
Dynamic fMRI BOLD signal coordination was estimated between
42 nonoverlapping regions of interest (ROIs) representing six brain
networks implicated in functional/cognitive processes (table S2)
(21). The coordination between the continuous fMRI time series
was estimated on dataset 1 by means of phase synchronization, which
determines the relative timing of the phases of two signals during each
waveform cycle. We partitioned the phase-based coherence observa-
tions in a data-driven way (k-means clustering), leading to a discrete
set of brain-wide coordination patterns and their corresponding rates
of occurrence in each group. The analysis consistently revealed four
distinguishable patterns (Fig. 1A), recurrently emerging even when
varying the number of clusters in the algorithm (fig. S1). A pattern
of high complexity (pattern 1), including positive and negative values
of long-distance coordination, was more prevalent in healthy partici-
pants and in patients in MCS as compared to patients in UWS (Fig. 1B).
The rate of this pattern also increased when moving from patients in
UWS, to patients in MCS, and to healthy control individuals (UWS <
MCS < HC, Spearman rank correlation between rate and group, rho =
0.7, P < 10−16). In sharp contrast, a pattern of low interareal coordi-
nation (pattern 4) was more likely to occur in unresponsive patients
compared to patients in MCS (Fig. 1B). This pattern also presented a
decreasing probability rate from patients in UWS, to patients in MCS,
and to healthy control individuals (UWS > MCS > HC, Spearman
rank correlation between rate and group, rho = −0.6, P < 10−11).
In comparison to pattern 4, pattern 1 was characterized by higher
spatial complexity, long-distance edges, community structure, and
high efficiency (fig. S2), suggestive of a more complex organization
of brain-wide coordination. In addition, participant-level modularity,
efficiency, integration, and distance showed systematic increases with
respect to the participants’ state of consciousness (fig. S3). The robust-
ness of the extracted patterns was tested by repeating the analysis sep-
arately for each scanning site and by demonstrating the emergence of
similar patterns and dynamic configurations in each individual site
(fig. S4). None of the patterns’ occurrence probabilities were mediated
by scanning site (Supplementary Methods 1). Similarly, none of the
patterns’ occurrence probabilities were mediated by etiology, chronic-
ity, age, or gender (fig. S5). Patterns 2 and 3 were equally probable
across all groups and conditions (Spearman rank correlation between
rate and group, pattern 2: rho = 0.2, P < 0.01; pattern 3: rho = 0.02, P =
0.8). In addition, conscious participants showed a more uniform
probabilistic distribution of the coordination patterns (Fig. 1D);
in other words, the entropy of the temporal sequence of patterns
increased with the level of consciousness.
To investigate the relationship between brain coordination dy-
namics and a representative network of the anatomical connections,
we measured the observed dynamic patterns of brain coordination
and an estimate of human anatomical connectivity independently
acquired using diffusion spectrum imaging (DSI) data (fig. S6).
The complex pattern 1 presented a low similarity to the anatomical
connectivity, whereas pattern 4 was the most similar to the anatomy
(Fig. 1C). We then quantified the relationship between the probabil-
ity of each pattern’s occurrence (y axis) and the similarity to the
anatomical connectivity (x axis) by means of the slope of the best
least-squares linear fit. We found a weak relationship for healthy
participants, suggesting the presence of diverse transient coordina-
tion patterns during conscious wakefulness (slope HC = 0.34 ± 0.31,
median ± median absolute deviation). The increased slope seen in
patients suggests that, despite persistent spontaneous neuronal
activity, such activity is most likely to trace the fixed connectivity
network (slope MCS = 0.94 ± 0.44, UWS = 1.5 ± 0.31, median ±
median absolute deviation).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Demertzi et al., Sci. Adv. 2019;5:eaat7603
6 February 2019
2 of 11
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Further characterization of coordination dynamics was obtained
by computing the probabilities of transitioning between different
brain coordination patterns (transition probabilities) and the dura-
tion of contiguous segments of pattern prevalence. Individuals with
higher levels of consciousness were more likely to not only reside in
pattern 1 but also to depart to and from this pattern toward patterns 2
and 3. The brains of patients in UWS were more likely to avoid this
exploration of the complex coordination pattern and to preferentially
reside in the less complex pattern 4. Last, patients in MCS were more
likely not onlyto remainin pattern 1butalso to switchtowardpatterns2
and 3 (Fig. 2) than patients in UWS. Controlling the transition prob-
ability for the patterns’ absolute (static) frequency of occurrence also
revealed an increase of autotransitioning in pattern 1 as a function of
the level of consciousness (fig. S7). In addition, we also observed that the
overall sequence predictability decreased alongside the state of con-
sciousness, as shown by the systematic increases in entropy rates (esti-
mated from the transitional probability matrices) from patients in UWS
to patients in MCS and healthy controls (fig. S8).
To validate the implication of the identified brain patterns in
consciousness, we quantified the generalization of the clustering
model trained in dataset 1 into two independent datasets (fig. S9).
First, we tested the rates of occurrence of the dataset 1 patterns
in an independent group of patients, all of whom were behaviorally
in UWS but some of whom presented a cognitive-motor dissocia-
tion (dataset 2), to determine their relevance in the capacity for
conscious experience, regardless of behavioral output. The latter
clinical group presented higher rates of residence in the complex co-
ordination pattern 1, with slopes similar to those observed in healthy
controls (fig. S10). On the other hand, patients in UWS lacking evidence
of command-following during neuroimaging tasks were more likely to
reside in the low-complexity configuration (Fig. 3, left), with slopes
comparable to those measured in anesthetized patients (fig. S10). Sec-
ond, we tested again the rates of occurrence of the dataset 1 patterns in
a third datasetoffMRI acquired in anesthetized patients with disorders
of consciousness (dataset 3). Our hypothesis was that complex con-
figurations would uniformly disappear across all patients, regardless
of clinical diagnosis, as a result of the pharmacologically depressed
arousal, cognitive function, and autonomic control typically induced
by propofol (22). The pattern identification in anaesthetized patients
with disorders of consciousness confirmed this hypothesis, revealing
an equalization of occurrence probabilities regardless of clinical di-
agnosis, congruent with a uniform loss of awareness in this condition
(Fig. 3, right).
DISCUSSION
We studied the brain’s dynamic organization during conscious
wakefulness and after severe brain injury leading to disorders of con-
sciousness, with the aim of determining patterns of signal coordination
specifically associated with conscious and unconscious states. We
identified a pattern of positive and negative long-distance coordination,
high modularity, with low similarity to the anatomical connectivity,
A
C
B
D
8 × 10−13
Fig. 1. The interareal coordination of ongoing brain dynamics is differentially orchestrated as a function of the state of consciousness. (A) Four patterns
recurrently emerged from the data-driven analysis of phase-based coherence matrices. The patterns revealed diverse interareal coordination, from positive/negative
long-range coherence (pattern 1), to predominantly occipital coherence (pattern 2), to overall high coherence (pattern 3), and overall low coherence (pattern 4).
(B) Patient groups differed with respect to the likelihood of each coordination pattern occurrence. The complex interareal coordination pattern 1 presented a higher
probability rate in healthy control participants (HC) and patients in MCS compared to patients in UWS, who predominantly resided in the overall low coordination
pattern 4. Patterns 2 and 3 were equally probable across groups, potentially serving a transitional role. For the sake of visualization clarity, the scale in the last panel
is different than in the other three. (C) Probability of each pattern’s occurrence as a function of their similarity to the anatomical connectivity matrix. Complex
pattern 1 showed low similarity to the anatomical connectivity, while pattern 4 was the most similar to the anatomical connectivity, suggesting that spontaneous
neuronal activity during pattern 4 traces fixed structural connections. The slope of occurrence probability versus similarity relationship decreases with the state of
consciousness. (D) Patients in UWS presented lower entropy values associated with the patterns’ occurrence probability distribution, suggestive of a less uniform
distribution compared to patients in MCS and healthy controls. Notes: (A) The patterns are ordered on the basis of their similarity to the anatomical connectivity,
from the least (left) to the most (right) similar. The networks are rendered on the anatomical space (transverse view) and show the top 10% links between ROIs,
within the absolute value of phase coherence > 0.2; red/blue edges indicate positive/negative coherence. Aud, auditory; DMN, default mode network; FP, fronto-
parietal; Mot, motor; Sal, salience; Vis, visual; KW, Kruskal-Wallis test P value; UWS/MCS, Wilcoxon test P value for the comparisons between patients in UWS and
patients in MCS. (B) Boxplots represent the medians of the occurrence probabilities with interquartile range and maximum-minimum values (whiskers). (C) Lines are
based on the best linear fit for each group; R, Spearman correlation.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Demertzi et al., Sci. Adv. 2019;5:eaat7603
6 February 2019
3 of 11
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 potentially relevant for the support of conscious cognition (pattern 1).
We also identified a pattern of low interregional dynamic coordina-
tion, low efficiency, with high similarity to anatomical connectivity,
potentially specific to reduced or absent conscious processing (pattern
4). With respect to pattern 1, momentary neural coalitions have been
previously shown to constitute a basis for complex cognitive function,
with signals fluctuating between states of high and low connectivity
and with more integrated states enabling faster and more accurate
A
B
P = 0.03
Fig. 2. The exploration of the identified coordination patterns differs with respect to the state of consciousness. (A) Left: The transition probabilities show an
ordinal relationship with the level of consciousness. Black arrows indicate a higher probability to transit between the coordination patterns in healthy controls (HC) as
opposed to patients in MCS and patients in UWS (HC > MCS > UWS). Gray arrows indicate the opposite trend (HC < MCS < UWS). Right: Patients in MCS were more likely
to stay in the complex pattern 1 and to transition from this pattern to patterns 2 and 3. On the other hand, unresponsive patients were more likely to stay in the pattern most
similar to anatomical constraints (pattern 4). Red arrows indicate higher transitional probabilities for patients in MCS, and blue arrows indicate higher transitional prob-
abilities for unresponsive patients. (B) The clinical groups differ with respect to the contiguous amount of time spent in each pattern (after normalizing using randomly
shuffled surrogate time series). The complex pattern 1 was explored during longer consecutive periods by healthy controls and patients in MCS, while patients in UWS spent
higher periods of time in the overall low positive coordination pattern 4. Patterns 2 and 3 were explored similarly by all groups, further suggesting a transitional role. Notes: (A)
Left:Groups are ranked ordinally fromUWS, MCS,and HC (Rho: Spearman rank correlation). Right:P, Wilcoxon rank-sum test, false discovery rate corrected. (B) Boxplots represent
the medians of mean pattern duration (in seconds) with interquartile range and maximum-minimum values (whiskers); Rho, Spearman rank correlation; UWS/MCS, Wilcoxon
test P value for the comparisons between patients in UWS and patients in MCS.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Demertzi et al., Sci. Adv. 2019;5:eaat7603
6 February 2019
4 of 11
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 performance during cognitive tasks (23). With respect to pattern 4,
studies in physiological and pharmacological unconsciousness
showed a breakdown of long-range interareal positive and negative
connections. For example, during sleep, the presence of negative dy-
namic connections disappear (11). Our results are in line with previ-
ous findings in animals. As in the present study, the brain activity of
anesthetized nonhuman primates resided most frequently in a pattern
of low connectivity resembling the anatomy, which was sustained for
longer periods of time in comparison to more complex patterns (15).
In addition, we demonstrated that network properties, such as mod-
ularity, integration, distance relationship, and efficiency, increased
with the participants’ conscious state. The latter result is in line with
the hypothesis that high-efficiency patterns carry higher metabolic
costs (24), which are restricted under pathological unconscious
conditions (25).
Our findings also align with theoretical considerations on dynamic
connectivity, suggesting that alternating patterns of correlations and
anticorrelations may constitute a fundamental property of information
processing in the brain (26). Differentmodelsof consciousness propose
that intermittent epochs of global synchronization grant segregated
A
B
C
A
B
C
Fig. 3. The coordination patterns generalize to other states of preserved and diminished consciousness. (A) Left: Typical unresponsive patients who did not
show command following in mental imagery tasks (Ut−) presented a higher probability of residing in the overall low coordination pattern 4. Conversely, behaviorally
unresponsive patients who nevertheless successfully followed commands in mental imagery tasks (Ut+) showed significantly lower probabilities for the same pattern.
(B) The sequence of pattern occurrences was more uniformly distributed in the Ut+ group as determined by higher entropy values. (C) The probability of each pattern’s
occurrence in Ut+ patients was less dependent on the similarity with the anatomical connectivity, supporting the idea that the dynamic coordination could not be
entirely accounted for in terms of structural connections, but rather represented emergent functional processes. (A) Right: Under anesthesia, the complex coordination
pattern 1 uniformly became less prevalent across unresponsive patients (UWS), patients in MCS, and conscious patients who have emerged from the MCS (EMCS); in
other words, it was reduced independently of the clinical diagnosis. Conversely, the overall low-coordination pattern 4 became uniformly the most prevalent in all
anesthetized patients, irrespective of clinical diagnosis, supporting the specificity of this dynamic configuration to unconsciousness. (B) Similar entropy values across all
patients validated the hypothesis that propofol homogeneously abolished conscious awareness. (C) Under anesthesia, all clinical groups presented a stronger relation-
ship (i.e., higher slope) between the patterns’ probabilities and the structure-function correlation in comparison to conscious individuals (fig. S10), indicating that brain
dynamics largely reflected activity constrained by fixed anatomical pathways. Notes: (C) The patterns are ordered on the basis of their similarity to anatomical
connectivity, from the least (left) to the most (right) similar. Boxplots represent medians with interquartile range and maximum-minimum values (whiskers); Rho:
Spearman rank correlation between rate and group; UWS/MCS, Wilcoxon test P value for the comparisons between patients in UWS and patients in MCS. Ut+, non-
behavioral MCS/cognitive-motor dissociation; Ut−, unresponsive patients who do not show command following on mental imagery tasks.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Demertzi et al., Sci. Adv. 2019;5:eaat7603
6 February 2019
5 of 11
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 and parallel network elements access to a global workspace, integrating
them serially and allowing effortful conscious cognition (27). There-
fore, the transient exploration of this global workspace could permit
the brain to efficiently balance both segregated and integrated neural
dynamics and to encode globally broadcasted and therefore reportable
conscious contents (3). In the absenceoftransient epochs of global syn-
chronization, the transmission of information is expected to be rela-
tively ineffective (6).
With respect to patterns 2 and 3, these were not predominantly
preferred by any group in terms of occurrence probabilities and dura-
tion and hence could represent transitional states (28). Pattern 3 showed
the overall positive interareal coherence. For pattern 2, the significance
of the overall negative coherence with regions of the visual network
can only be speculated. For the moment, we suggest that it indicates
the presence of a local coordination pattern reflecting the anatomical
organization of the visual cortex (29).
Whether the identified dynamic coordination patterns entail the
presence/absence of mental contents or cognitive function is difficult
to assume without probing moment-to-moment changes in the
contents of conscious experience. Although a link has been shown
between intrinsic connectivity networks and various behavioral tasks
(30), it has been suggested that BOLD correlations need not necessar-
ily reflect moment-to-moment changes in cognitive content. Instead,
they may predominantly reflect processes necessary for maintaining
the stability of the brain’s functional organization (31). Also, the BOLD
signal is nonstationary (32), and some of its spontaneous fluctuations
may not be a faithful reflection of functionally relevant brain dynamics
or the underlying nonstationarities of neural activity and coordination
(10). We also acknowledge that the identification of these dynamic
configurations required time-resolved analyses of fMRI time series
in the scale of few seconds. It can be argued that conscious cognition
and the relevant features of our environment develop on a faster time
scale of hundreds of milliseconds (3). However, the BOLD signal has
been shown to correlate with infraslow neurophysiological oscilla-
tions, i.e., the slow cortical potential (33). The slow cortical potential
is important for large-scale information integration, hence suggest-
ing that the flow of the conscious experience could be supported by
processes at slower time scales (34). Future experiments should ad-
dress a potential relationship between conscious experience, the slow
cortical potential, and functional network reconfigurations measured
as with fMRI.
Regardless of the implicated time scales, our analyses did not aim at
tracking the moment-to-moment contents of conscious experience,
but at identifying brain-wide dynamic networks supporting different
global states of consciousness. We consider that the four-pattern model
can account for modes of conscious and unconscious information
processing. Our interpretation is sustained by the additional tests
for the validity and replicability of the main results. We found that
the complex dynamic pattern 1 presented low probabilities of appear-
ing in patients under propofol anesthesia (whether they were commu-
nicating or not at baseline) and that it was most likely to appear in
patients with covert cognition (i.e., patients in UWS who successfully
performed mental imagery neuroimaging tasks). Both findings sug-
gest its implication in conscious states. We also found that the pat-
tern of low interareal coordination (pattern 4) uniformly presented
higher probabilities of appearing in all anesthetized patients, regardless
of clinical diagnosis, and it was most likely to manifest in unresponsive
patients who did not perform the mental imagery neuroimaging task,
supporting its relationship to absent or reduced conscious cognition.
Pattern 4 remained visited by healthy controls even under typical
wakeful conditions. In the absence of experience sampling during
data acquisition, the interpretation of this finding can only be specu-
lative. On the one hand, it could be that healthy controls entered tran-
sient microsleep states as a result of fluctuating levels of vigilance, a
frequently observed phenomenon during resting-state experiments
(35). Our experimental setup did not include simultaneous poly-
somnography recordings to directly test this hypothesis. However,
we derived different fMRI-based proxies to assess the presence of
microsleeps. First, we examined head movements time locked to the
occurrence of all coordination patterns and found no substantial as-
sociations between the two variables, as could be expected if pattern 4
was related to lapses in vigilance. Second, we performed a whole-brain
general linear model (GLM) analysis, with the coordination pattern
time series as regressors. We did not observe significant positive/
negative BOLD signal changes associated with the onset of the different
coordination patterns; in particular, the presence of coordination pat-
tern 4 did not result in BOLD signal changes typical of microsleeps.
Last, the likelihood of pattern 4 occurring over time did not positively
correlate with the elapsed scan time, as has been shown to occur for
patterns associated with lapses in vigilance (35, 36). Once we rule out
transient loss of vigilance as the cause of the intrusion of pattern 4 in
conscious wakefulness, we can speculate that the flow of conscious
cognition may be separated by periods of absent or reduced effortful
information processing, as recently it was hypothesized that between
two successive self-reports, a subject may present states of reduced
awareness (37). Behaviorally, this could take the form of “mind
blanks” during which participants are not engaged in cognitive
demanding processes, although they remain vigilant (38). This inter-
pretation is parsimonious with the observation that participants
were instructed to rest inside the scanner, without engaging in any
effortful cognitive task. The potential role of transient lapses of aware-
ness in the stream of conscious contents during healthy wakefulness
should be addressed by future experiments.
Together, our results suggest that, following loss of consciousness,
coordinated brain activity is largely restricted to a positive pattern of
interareal coherence dominated by the anatomical connections be-
tween brain regions. In contrast, conscious states are characterized
by a higher prevalence of a complex configuration of interareal coor-
dination that, while still constrained by brain anatomy, also deviates
from it and presents both positive and negative long-distance inter-
actions. It did not escape us that such a complex interareal coor-
dination pattern sporadically appeared in the group of unresponsive
patients. The real-time detection of this pattern and its reinforcement
though externally induced manipulations could represent a promis-
ing avenue for the noninvasive restoration of consciousness. We con-
clude that these patterns of transient brain signal coordination are
characteristic of conscious and unconscious brain states, warranting
future research concerning their relationship to ongoing conscious
content, and the possibility of modifying their prevalence by external
perturbations, both in healthy and pathological individuals, as well as
across species.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Experimental design
Cross-sectional observational study. Measurement technique: fMRI,
standardized behavioral assessments. Type of observations: BOLD
time series, behavioral observations.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Demertzi et al., Sci. Adv. 2019;5:eaat7603
6 February 2019
6 of 11
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Participants
Data were collected from a cohort of 169 individuals scanned in
four clinical expert centers in Belgium [Department of Radiology,
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU), Liège; n = 87], France (Depart-
ment of Neuroradiology, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris; n = 43),
United States (Citigroup Biomedical Imaging Center, Weill Cornell
Medical College, New York; n = 28), and Canada (Centre for Functional
and Metabolic Mapping, Western’s Robarts Research Institute, London,
Ontario; n = 11). The cohort included 47 healthy controls and 122
patients suffering from disorders of consciousness leading to a veg-
etative state/UWS or in a MCS. Patients in UWS open their eyes but
never exhibit nonreflex voluntary movements, indicating preserved
awareness (39). Patients in MCS show more complex behaviors po-
tentially declarative of awareness, such as visual pursuit, orientation to
pain, or nonsystematic command following but who, nevertheless, re-
main unable to communicate their thoughts and feelings (40).
Inclusion criteria for patients were brain damage at least 7 days af-
ter the acute brain insult and behavioral diagnosis of the MCS or UWS
performed with the Coma Recovery Scale–Revised (CRS-R) (41). The
CRS-R evaluates 23 arranged items organized on subscales for audi-
tory, visual, motor, oromotor, communication, and arousal function.
Each item assesses the presence or absence of specific physical signs,
which represent the integrity of brain function as generalized, loca-
lized, or cognitively mediated responsiveness. Patients were excluded
when there was contraindication for MRI (e.g., the presence of ferro-
magnetic aneurysm clips and pacemakers). In addition, 10 patients
(6 from Paris, 3 from Liège, and 1 from New York; 8 in MCS and 2 in
UWS) were discarded because the signal extracted from the selected
ROIs was partially missing during the recordings, resulting in the final
cohort of 112 patients (table S1). Inclusion criteria for healthy controls
were >18 years old and free of psychiatric and neurological history. The
study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Medical School of
the University of Liège, the Ethics Committee of the Pitié-Salpêtrière
Hospital, the Institutional Review Board at Weill Cornell Medical
College, and the Western University Research Ethics Board. Informed
consent to participate in the study was obtained directly from healthy
control participants and the legal surrogates of the patients.
The cohort was divided into three datasets. Dataset 1 (n = 125)
was used for the main analysis, with the aim of identifying the dynamic
coordination patterns. It included 47 healthy controls and 78 patients,
all scanned under an anesthesia-free resting-state condition [Liège:
21 healthy controls (8 females; mean age, 45 ± 17 years), 40 patients
(23 in MCS, 17 in UWS, 11 females; mean age, 47 ± 18 years; 12 trau-
matic, 28 nontraumatic of which 17 anoxic, 10 patients assessed under
acute condition, i.e., <30 days after insult); Paris: 15 healthy controls
(9 females; mean age, 41 ± 13 years), 22 patients (9 in MCS, 13 in
UWS, 9 females; mean age, 45 ± 17 years; 5 traumatic, 19 nontraumatic
of which 12 anoxic, 3 patients assessed in acute setting, i.e., <30 days
after insult); New York: 11 healthy controls (3 females; mean age, 32 ±
11 years), 16 patients (10 in MCS, 6 in UWS, 8 females; mean age,
44 ± 14 years; 8 traumatic, 8 nontraumatic of which 4 anoxic, all pa-
tients assessed chronic setting, i.e., >30 days after insult)]. Dataset 2
(n = 11) included patients with cognitive-motor dissociation (20), i.e.,
lacking overt conscious behavior yet evidenced using functional neuro-
imaging (Ut+), and patients who did not perform the imagery task and
hence were considered in UWS (Ut−). This dataset was used to test the
hypothesis that the complex coordination pattern would be more fre-
quent in the Ut+ patients, whereas the low coordination pattern would
be more frequent in patients in UWS who could not perform the task
(Ut−) [London, Ontario: 5 Ut+, 6 Ut−; seven females; mean age, 36 ±
15 years; two traumatic, nine nontraumatic of which eight anoxic,
all patients assessed in chronic setting, i.e., >30 days after insult)].
Dataset 3 (n = 23) included patients scanned under propofol anes-
thesia and was used to test the hypothesis that complex coordination
would disappear as an effect of overall cerebral depression due to the
administered anesthetic [Liège: 3 emergence from MCS, 14 in MCS,
6 in UWS; 6 females; mean age, 37 ± 14 years; 16 traumatic, 7 non-
traumatic of which 3 anoxic, 21 patients assessed in chronic setting,
i.e., >30 days after insult)]. Details on patients’ demographics and
clinical characteristics are summarized in table S1.
Anesthesia protocol
Patients were scanned in anesthesia after medical decision, with the
aim of minimizing motion in the scanner, and it was performed by a
certified anesthesiologist. Before scanning, all patients fasted for at
least 6 hours for solids and 2 hours for liquids. Propofol was
administered through intravenous infusion using a target-controlled
infusion system, and the concentration was kept to the minimum (1 to
2 mg/ml). To ensure adequate airing, some patients received assisted
mechanical ventilation through a tracheostomy, a laryngeal mask,
or an endotracheal tube when already in place. Additional oxygen
was delivered in some cases, either through a face mask or through
the airway instrumentation device. Patients’ physiologic parameters
(arterial blood pressure, electrocardiogram, breathing frequency,
and pulse oximetry) were closely and continuously monitored. Propo-
fol was titrated to achieve immobility in the scanner. Once obtained,
the necessary plasma concentration of propofol was kept constant
throughout the procedure. A complete resuscitation equipment was
present during the procedure.
Imaging acquisition parameters
In Liège, data were acquired on a 3T Siemens TIM Trio MRI scanner
(Siemens Medical Solutions, Erlangen, Germany): 300 T2*-weighted
images were acquired with a gradient-echo echo-planar imaging (EPI)
sequence using axial slice orientation and covering the whole brain
(32 slices; slice thickness, 3 mm; repetition time, 2000 ms; echo time,
30 ms; voxel size, 3 × 3 × 3 mm; flip angle, 78°; field of view, 192 mm by
192 mm). A structural T1 magnetization-prepared rapid gradient-
echo (MPRAGE) sequence (120 slices; repetition time, 2300 ms; echo
time, 2.47 ms; voxel size, 1.0 × 1.0 × 1.2 mm; flip angle, 9°).
In Paris, data were acquired on a 3T General Electric Signa Sys-
tem (Milwaukee, WI): 200 T2*-weighted images were acquired with a
gradient-echo EPI sequence using axial slice orientation and cover-
ing the whole brain (48 slices; slice thickness, 3 mm; repetition time,
2400 ms; echo time, 30 ms; voxel size, 3.4375 × 3.4375 × 3.4375 mm;
flip angle, 90°; field of view, 192 mm by 192 mm). A T1 MPRAGE
sequence was further acquired in the same session (236 slices; repeti-
tion time, 7156 ms; echo time, 3.672 ms; voxel size, 0.4883 × 0.4883 ×
0.4883 mm; flip angle, 15°).
In New York, data were acquired on a 3T General Electric Signa
System (Milwaukee, WI): 180 T2*-weighted images were acquired with
a gradient-echo EPI sequence using axial slice orientation and cover-
ing the whole brain (28 slices; repetition time, 2000 ms; echo time,
40 ms; voxel size, 3.75 × 3.75 × 5 mm; flip angle, 70°). A T1-weighted
three-dimensional (3D) inversion recovery-prepared spoiled gradient
echo sequence was further acquired in the same session (120 slices;
repetition time, 8.864 ms; echo time, 3.524 ms; inversion time, 400 ms;
voxel size, 0.9375 × 0.9375 × 1.2 mm; flip angle, 13°).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Demertzi et al., Sci. Adv. 2019;5:eaat7603
6 February 2019
7 of 11
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 In London, Ontario, data were acquired on 3T Siemens TIM Trio
and 3T Siemens Prisma MRI scanners: 256 T2*-weighted images
were acquired with a gradient-echo EPI sequence using axial slice
orientation and covering the whole brain (33 slices; slice thickness,
3 mm; repetition time, 2000 ms; echo time, 30 ms; voxel size, 3 × 3 ×
3 mm; flip angle, 75°); a T1-weighted 3D inversion recovery-prepared
spoiled gradient echo sequence was further acquired in the same ses-
sion (176 slices; slice thickness, 1 mm; repetition time, 2530 ms; echo
time, 3.34 ms; voxel size, 1 × 1 × 1 mm; flip angle, 7°).
Data preprocessing and time series extraction
Preprocessing was performed as previously reported (21) using Sta-
tistical Parametric Mapping 12 (SPM12; www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm).
Preprocessing steps included slice-time correction, realignment, seg-
mentation of structural data, normalization of functional and structural
data into the standard stereotactic Montreal Neurological Institute
space, and spatial smoothing using a Gaussian kernel of 6-mm full
width at half-maximum. For functional data, the three initial volumes
were discarded to avoid T1 saturation effects. Motion artifact detection
and rejection were performed with the artifact detection toolbox (ART
toolbox): An image was defined asan outlierorartifact image if the head
displacement in the x, y, or z direction was greater than 2 mm from the
previous frame, if the rotational displacement was greater than 0.02 rad
from the previous frame, or if the global mean intensity in the image was
greater than 3 SDs from the mean image intensity for the entire resting
scan. Outliers in the global mean signal intensity and motion were sub-
sequently included as nuisance regressors within the first-level GLM so
that the temporal structure of the data would not be disrupted. As a data
quality measure, we calculated the number of motion outliers that were
detected during preprocessing. The number of motion outlier images
was similar across the groups of healthy controls (mean rank, 61), pa-
tients in MCS (mean rank, 72), and patients in UWS [mean rank, 74;
Kruskal-Wallis test, H(2) = 2.5, P = 0.3], suggesting comparable datasets.
For noise reduction, we modeled the influence of noise as a voxel-
specific linear combination of multiple empirically estimated noise
sources by deriving principal components from noise ROIs and by
including them as nuisance parameters within the GLMs (as imple-
mented in the CONN functional connectivity toolbox, v.16.b). Spe-
cifically, the anatomical image for each participant was segmented
into white matter (WM), gray matter (GM), and cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) masks (old normalize function, SPM12). To minimize partial
volumingwith GM, the WM and CSF masks were eroded by one voxel,
which resulted in smaller masks than the original segmentations. The
eroded WM and CSF masks were then used as noise ROIs. Used time
series were from the unsmoothed functional volumes to avoid addi-
tional risk of contaminating WM and CSF signals with GM signals.
Five principal components of the signals from WM and CSF noise
ROIs were removed with regression. A temporal band-pass filter of
0.008 to 0.09 Hz was applied on the time series to restrict the analysis
to low-frequency fluctuations. Residual head motion parameters
(three rotation and three translation parameters and six parameters
representing their first-order temporal derivatives) were further re-
gressed out. For each sphere ROI, time series were extracted by
averaging all voxels’ signal within the ROI at a given brain volume.
A total of 42 network-based ROIs were selected (table S2). Concern-
ing the positive coupling between ROIs belonging to the default
mode network (DMN) and the frontoparietal (FP) network observed
in some of our dynamic coordination patterns, we noted that previous
articles (42, 43) using the same set of ROIs (as well as similar data
preprocessing) also reported positive connectivity between them.
Therefore, it is possible that the precise choice of FP ROIs introduced
in these articles does not robustly represent the FP/DMN anticorrela-
tions present in the data. Most likely, this is due to the fact that some
FP ROIs are located in the proximity of the FP/DMN boundary, and
the spatial extent of RSN is known to present important interperson
variability, especially in higher-order heteromodal association cortices
(44). However, we noted that the DMN ROIs were anticorrelated to
other task-positive ROIs, as expected.
Statistical analysis: Dynamic functional
coordination analysis
Phase-based dynamic functional coordination was preferred to a
sliding-window approach because it avoids the inclusion of over-
lapping signals in the estimation of temporal oscillations (6). To ob-
tain a phase signal corresponding to the BOLD time series of each
ROI, the analytic representation of the signals was used. The analytic
signal was expressed in the imaginary space and was composed by
the original signal (real part) and the corresponding Hilbert transform
of this signal (imaginary part). This representation allows for the
computation of the instantaneous phase. Using Euler’s formula, the
analytic signal can be represented as the combination of two instan-
taneous real signals: amplitude and phase. The phase was calculated
as the inverse tangent of the ratio of the imaginary and real compo-
nents. Afterward, the phase was “wrapped” to values between −p and
p, and the instantaneous phase q(t) was related to zero crossings and
BOLD peaks. Inter-ROI phase difference was computed using the
difference of each pair of ROI instantaneous phase signals.
To assess the presence of recurrent coordination patterns across
individuals and patients of dataset 1 (n = 125), we adopted the following
steps. First, we restructured each scanning session as a matrix with
phase-difference values in one dimension ([42 × (42 − 1)]/2 = 861
features) and time in the other dimension (279 images). Second, we
concatenated all the matrices by the time dimension, yielding a matrix
of 861 × 34875 elements. Last, the k-means clustering algorithm was
applied to the concatenated matrix using the L1 distance (a.k.a.
“Manhattan distance”) as implemented in MATLAB (MathWorks
Inc.). The clustering algorithm was applied 500 times to avoid local
minima using a random initialization of centroid positions in each
iteration. As a result of this procedure, we obtained (i) k cluster cen-
troids (42 × 42 matrices), which are representative of the recurrent co-
ordination patterns, and(ii) a labelindicating the pattern corresponding
to each image of the scanning session. The number of clusters k was
determined as previously reported (k = 4) (36), although additional
exploratory analyses varying k from 3 to 7 demonstrated consistent
and robust results (fig. S1A). In addition, our results showed stable
first and last coordination patterns (ordered in terms of their similarity
to the anatomical connectivity) for all the choices of the clustering k
(fig. S1B) and a maximal interpattern variance when setting this o ob-
tain four clusters (fig. S1C).
For dataset 2 and dataset 3, we characterized the sequence of phase
coherence matrices based on the coordination patterns obtained from
dataset 1. More precisely, we computed the L1 distance between each
phase coherence matrix and the cluster centroids determined in data-
set 1. Each scanning volume was then assigned the label of the centroid
that minimized its distance with the phase coherence matrix asso-
ciated with that volume.
In all cases, we computed the occurrence rate of each pattern for
each individual as the total number of volumes for which that given
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Demertzi et al., Sci. Adv. 2019;5:eaat7603
6 February 2019
8 of 11
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 pattern was present divided by the total number of volumes of the ac-
quisition. To rule out potential effects related to the scanning site on
the identified brain patterns, we computed four independent analyses
of variance (ANOVAs) (one for each pattern) with the pattern rate of
occurrences as the dependent variable and the patient’s clinical con-
dition and scanning site as independent factors (see Supplementary
Methods 1). Last, entropy was computed using the classical definition,
which considers the sum of the probabilities of the patterns weighted
by their corresponding logarithms (H ¼ �∑N
i pilog2pi, where N is the
total number of patterns and pi is the probability of observing the ith
pattern). In this definition, we used a base-2 logarithm, which results
in the equivalent definition of the amount of information contained in
the symbolic sequence of patterns (measured in bits).
To further describe the dynamic nature of the pattern exploration,
we obtained, for each participant, a matrix containing information
about the probabilities that any given pattern to transition into anoth-
er. This matrix contains, in its ith row, the normalized (i.e., sum equal
to one) frequency distribution of observing a volume labeled as the ith
pattern transitioning into the pattern corresponding tothe jth column.
The average contiguous amount of time spent in each pattern for each
clinical group was corrected for random durations by subtracting the
average duration of surrogate shuffled pattern series.
The sequence predictability for each individual was quantified
using the entropy rate (Markov entropy) for the corresponding pat-
tern probabilities and the transition probability matrices. The entro-
py rate for the sequence of brain patterns of each participant was
computed as follows
H ¼ �∑
ij miPijlog2Pij
where mi corresponds to the probability of observing pattern i and Pij
corresponds to the transition probability from pattern i to pattern j.
To investigate the dependence of brain dynamics on the state of
consciousness, we defined a measure of similarity between function-
al and structural connectivity. We resorted to a widely used group
estimate of human anatomical connectivity, measured with the non-
invasive technique of DSI (fig. S6). The procedure followed to acquire
DSI data and construct the anatomical connectivity network was ex-
tensively explained elsewhere (45). Briefly, high-resolution T1 and dif-
fusion spectrum images were acquired for five healthy participants
(mean age, 29.4 years; all male) and 998 ROIs (1.5-cm2 area) placed
throughout the cortex (excluding subcortical regions) of individual
participants, being later mapped into a common space. WM tracto-
graphy wasappliedtocomputefibertrajectoriesandconstruct anetwork
by linking every two nodes for which a fiber existed that started in
one and ended in the other. A group consensus network was created
by linking nodes connected in at least one of the participants, result-
ing in a binary network of density 0.0359. Since the choice of regions
of the 998 ROIs used in (45) did not match our 42 ROIs (selected
from literature performing independent component analysis), we re-
sampled the network by considering 30-mm spheres centered at each
of the 42 ROIs and computed the mean structural connectivity be-
tween all the original 998 regions within each pair of spheres. This
resulted in a symmetric 42 × 42 matrix containing in each entry the
mean anatomical connectivity value observed between the cor-
responding pair of ROIs. We obtained similar results when reduc-
ing the original DSI matrix using different sphere diameters (10 and
20 mm; fig. S11). Last, to compare the phase-based coherence and an-
atomical connectivity matrices, we computed the linear correlation co-
efficient between the entries of both matrices (coherence/anatomical
correlation). This was performed for each phase-based coordination
pattern obtained using the k-means algorithm. Last, for each partici-
pant, we computed the linear slope coefficient of the relationship be-
tween the occurrence rate of each brain pattern and the corresponding
coherence/anatomical correlation.To better understand the identified
patterns, a quantitative description by means of graph theory metrics
was performed to reveal the level of underlying complexity that may
not be evident upon direct observation (Supplementary Methods 2).
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Supplementary material for this article is available at http://advances.sciencemag.org/cgi/
content/full/5/2/eaat7603/DC1
Supplementary Methods 1
Supplementary Methods 2
Fig. S1. The four recurrent dynamic coordination patterns emerge at different dimensionalities.
Fig. S2. Network analysis of the identified patterns shows that consciousness-related patterns
are characterized by higher spatial complexity, long-distance negative edges, community
structure, and high efficiency.
Fig. S3. Network properties reflect the state of consciousness.
Fig. S4. Robustness of the extracted coordination patterns.
Fig. S5. Etiology, chronicity age, and gender do not mediate patients’ temporal dynamics.
Fig. S6. The structural connectivity network is defined from DSI and contains systems-based
ROIs.
Fig. S7. Transition probabilities normalized by the patterns’ probabilities of occurrence.
Fig. S8. Entropy rate increases with respect to the state of consciousness.
Fig. S9. Pattern validation in dataset 2 (“Canada”) and dataset 3 (“Anesthesia”).
Fig. S10. Dataset slope comparisons.
Fig. S11. Replication of the structural-functional analysis with different granularity of the
structural matrix reduction.
Table S1. Patients’ demographic and clinical characteristics per scanning site (n = 112).
Table S2. Network-level ROIs used as seed areas.
References (46–48)
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. J. F. Storm, M. Boly, A. G. Casali, M. Massimini, U. Olcese, C. M. A. Pennartz, M. Wilke,
Consciousness regained: Disentangling mechanisms, brain systems, and behavioral
responses. J. Neurosci. 37, 10882–10893 (2017).
2. P. Stern, Neuroscience: In search of new concepts. Science 358, 464–465 (2017).
3. G. Tononi, Consciousness as integrated information: A provisional manifesto.
Biol. Bull. 215, 216–242 (2008).
4. G. Northoff, Z. Huang, How do the brain’s time and space mediate consciousness
and its different dimensions? Temporo-spatial theory of consciousness (TTC).
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 80, 630–645 (2017).
5. S. Dehaene, J.-P. Changeux, Experimental and theoretical approaches to conscious
processing. Neuron 70, 200–227 (2011).
6. G. Deco, M. L. Kringelbach, Metastability and coherence: Extending the communication
through coherence hypothesis using a whole-brain computational perspective.
Trends Neurosci. 39, 125–135 (2016).
7. M. Breakspear, Dynamic models of large-scale brain activity. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 340–352
(2017).
8. A. Zalesky, A. Fornito, L. Cocchi, L. L. Gollo, M. Breakspear, Time-resolved resting-state
brain networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111, 10341–10346 (2014).
9. R. F. Betzel, M. Fukushima, Y. He, X.-N. Zuo, O. Sporns, Dynamic fluctuations coincide with
periods of high and low modularity in resting-state functional brain networks.
Neuroimage 127, 287–297 (2016).
10. R. M. Hutchison, T. Womelsdorf, E. A. Allen, P. A. Bandettini, V. D. Calhoun, M. Corbetta,
S. Della Penna, J. H. Duyn, G. H. Glover, J. Gonzalez-Castillo, D. A. Handwerker,
S. Keilholz, V. Kiviniemi, D. A. Leopold, F. de Pasquale, O. Sporns, M. Walter, C. Chang,
Dynamic functional connectivity: Promise, issues, and interpretations. Neuroimage
80, 360–378 (2013).
11. E. Tagliazucchi, F. von Wegner, A. Morzelewski, V. Brodbeck, K. Jahnke, H. Laufs,
Breakdown of long-range temporal dependence in default mode and attention networks
during deep sleep. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, 15419–15424 (2013).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Demertzi et al., Sci. Adv. 2019;5:eaat7603
6 February 2019
9 of 11
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 12. H. M. Chow, S. G. Horovitz, W. S. Carr, D. Picchioni, N. Coddington, M. Fukunaga, Y. Xu,
T. J. Balkin, J. H. Duyn, A. R. Braun, Rhythmic alternating patterns of brain activity
distinguish rapid eye movement sleep from other states of consciousness. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, 10300–10305 (2013).
13. E. Tagliazucchi, D. R. Chialvo, M. Siniatchkin, E. Amico, J.-F. Brichant, V. Bonhomme,
Q. Noirhomme, H. Laufs, S. Laureys, Large-scale signatures of unconsciousness are consistent
with a departure from critical dynamics. J. R. Soc. Interface 13, 20151027 (2016).
14. E. Amico, F. Gomez, C. Di Perri, A. Vanhaudenhuyse, D. Lesenfants, P. Boveroux,
V. Bonhomme, J.-F. Brichant, D. Marinazzo, S. Laureys, Posterior cingulate cortex-related
co-activation patterns: A resting state fMRI study in propofol-induced loss of
consciousness. PLOS ONE 9, e100012 (2014).
15. P. Barttfeld, L. Uhrig, J. D. Sitt, M. Sigman, B. Jarraya, S. Dehaene, Signature of consciousness
in the dynamics of resting-state brain activity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112, 887–892
(2015).
16. A. G. Hudetz, X. Liu, S. Pillay, Dynamic repertoire of intrinsic brain states is reduced in
propofol-induced unconsciousness. Brain Connect. 5, 10–22 (2015).
17. M. M. Monti, A. Vanhaudenhuyse, M. R. Coleman, M. Boly, J. D. Pickard, L. Tshibanda,
A. M. Owen, S. Laureys, Willful modulation of brain activity in disorders of consciousness.
N. Engl. J. Med. 362, 579–589 (2010).
18. S. Casarotto, A. Comanducci, M. Rosanova, S. Sarasso, M. Fecchio, M. Napolitani,
A. Pigorini, A. G. Casali, P. D. Trimarchi, M. Boly, O. Gosseries, O. Bodart, F. Curto, C. Landi,
M. Mariotti, G. Devalle, S. Laureys, G. Tononi, M. Massimini, Stratification of unresponsive
patients by an independently validated index of brain complexity. Ann. Neurol. 80,
718–729 (2016).
19. D. A. Engemann, F. Raimondo, J.-R. King, B. Rohaut, G. Louppe, F. Faugeras, J. Annen,
H. Cassol, O. Gosseries, D. Fernandez-Slezak, S. Laureys, L. Naccache, S. Dehaene, J. D. Sitt,
Robust EEG-based cross-site and cross-protocol classification of states of consciousness.
Brain 141, 3179–3192 (2018).
20. N. D. Schiff, Cognitive motor dissociation following severe brain injuries. JAMA Neurol. 72,
1413–1415 (2015).
21. A. Demertzi, G. Antonopoulos, L. Heine, H. U. Voss, J. S. Crone, C. de Los Angeles,
M. A. Bahri, C. Di Perri, A. Vanhaudenhuyse, V. Charland-Verville, M. Kronbichler, E. Trinka,
C. Phillips, F. Gomez, L. Tshibanda, A. Soddu, N. D. Schiff, S. Whitfield-Gabrieli, S. Laureys,
Intrinsic functional connectivity differentiates minimally conscious from unresponsive
patients. Brain 138, 2619–2631 (2015).
22. P. Fiset, T. Paus, T. Daloze, G. Plourde, P. Meuret, V. Bonhomme, N. Hajj-Ali, S. B. Backman,
A. C. Evans, Brain mechanisms of propofol-induced loss of consciousness in humans:
A positron emission tomographic study. J. Neurosci. 19, 5506–5513 (1999).
23. J. M. Shine, P. G. Bissett, P. T. Bell, O. Koyejo, J. H. Balsters, K. J. Gorgolewski, C. A. Moodie,
R. A. Poldrack, The dynamics of functional brain networks: Integrated network states
during cognitive task performance. Neuron 92, 544–554 (2016).
24. E. Bullmore, O. Sporns, The economy of brain network organization. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
13, 336–349 (2012).
25. J. Stender, K. N. Mortensen, A. Thibaut, S. Darkner, S. Laureys, A. Gjedde, R. Kupers,
The minimal energetic requirement of sustained awareness after brain injury.
Curr. Biol. 26, 1494–1499 (2016).
26. A. Demertzi, A. Soddu, S. Laureys, Consciousness supporting networks.
Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 23, 239–244 (2013).
27. S. Dehaene, M. Kerszberg, J.-P. Changeux, A neuronal model of a global workspace in
effortful cognitive tasks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 95, 14529–14534 (1998).
28. A. Fornito, B. J. Harrison, A. Zalesky, J. S. Simons, Competitive and cooperative dynamics
of large-scale brain functional networks supporting recollection. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 109, 12788–12793 (2012).
29. E. Genç, M. L. Schölvinck, J. Bergmann, W. Singer, A. Kohler, Functional connectivity
patterns of visual cortex reflect its anatomical organization. Cereb. Cortex 26, 3719–3731
(2016).
30. A. R. Laird, P. M. Fox, S. B. Eickhoff, J. A. Turner, K. L. Ray, D. R. McKay, D. C. Glahn,
C. F. Beckmann, S. M. Smith, P. T. Fox, Behavioral interpretations of intrinsic connectivity
networks. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 23, 4022–4037 (2011).
31. T. O. Laumann, A. Z. Snyder, A. Mitra, E. M. Gordon, C. Gratton, B. Adeyemo, A. W. Gilmore,
S. M. Nelson, J. J. Berg, D. J. Greene, J. E. McCarthy, E. Tagliazucchi, H. Laufs,
B. L. Schlaggar, N. U. F. Dosenbach, S. E. Petersen, On the stability of BOLD fMRI
correlations. Cereb. Cortex 27, 4719–4732 (2017).
32. M. Fukunaga, S. G. Horovitz, P. van Gelderen, J. A. de Zwart, J. M. Jansma,
V. N. Ikonomidou, R. Chu, R. H. R. Deckers, D. A. Leopold, J. H. Duyn, Large-amplitude,
spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early
sleep stages. Magn. Reson. Imaging 24, 979–992 (2006).
33. B. J. He, A. Z. Snyder, J. M. Zempel, M. D. Smyth, M. E. Raichle, Electrophysiological
correlates of the brain’s intrinsic large-scale functional architecture. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105, 16039–16044 (2008).
34. B. J. He, M. E. Raichle, The fMRI signal, slow cortical potential and consciousness.
Trends Cogn. Sci. 13, 302–309 (2009).
35. E. Tagliazucchi, H. Laufs, Decoding wakefulness levels from typical fMRI resting-state
data reveals reliable drifts between wakefulness and sleep. Neuron 82, 695–708
(2014).
36. E. A. Allen, E. Damaraju, S. M. Plis, E. B. Erhardt, T. Eichele, V. D. Calhoun, Tracking
whole-brain connectivity dynamics in the resting state. Cereb. Cortex 24, 663–676
(2014).
37. L. Naccache, Why and how access consciousness can account for phenomenal
consciousness. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 373, 20170357 (2018).
38. A. F. Ward, D. M. Wegner, Mind-blanking: When the mind goes away. Front. Psychol. 4,
650 (2013).
39. S. Laureys, G. G. Celesia, F. Cohadon, J. Lavrijsen, J. León-Carrión, W. G. Sannita, L. Sazbon,
E. Schmutzhard, K. R. von Wild, A. Zeman, G. Dolce; European Task Force on Disorders
of Consciousness, Unresponsive wakefulness syndrome: A new name for the vegetative state
or apallic syndrome. BMC Med. 8, 68 (2010).
40. J. T. Giacino, The minimally conscious state: Defining the borders of consciousness.
Prog. Brain Res. 150, 381–395 (2005).
41. J. T. Giacino, K. Kalmar, J. Whyte, The JFK Coma Recovery Scale-Revised: Measurement
characteristics and diagnostic utility. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 85, 2020–2029
(2004).
42. D. A. Fair, N. U. F. Dosenbach, J. A. Church, A. L. Cohen, S. Brahmbhatt, F. M. Miezin,
D. M. Barch, M. E. Raichle, S. E. Petersen, B. L. Schlaggar, Development of distinct control
networks through segregation and integration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 104,
13507–13512 (2007).
43. N. U. F. Dosenbach, D. A. Fair, F. M. Miezin, A. L. Cohen, K. K. Wenger, R. A. T. Dosenbach,
M. D. Fox, A. Z. Snyder, J. L. Vincent, M. E. Raichle, B. L. Schlaggar, S. E. Petersen,
Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 104, 11073–11078 (2007).
44. S. Mueller, D. Wang, M. D. Fox, B. T. T. Yeo, J. Sepulcre, M. R. Sabuncu, R. Shafee, J. Lu,
H. Liu, Individual variability in functional connectivity architecture of the human brain.
Neuron 77, 586–595 (2013).
45. P. Hagmann, L. Cammoun, X. Gigandet, R. Meuli, C. J. Honey, V. J. Wedeen,
O. Sporns, Mapping the structural core of human cerebral cortex. PLOS Biol. 6, e159
(2008).
46. M. Rubinov, O. Sporns, Complex network measures of brain connectivity: Uses and
interpretations. Neuroimage 52, 1059–1069 (2010).
47. G. Deco, G. Tononi, M. Boly, M. L. Kringelbach, Rethinking segregation and
integration: Contributions of whole-brain modelling. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 16, 430–439
(2015).
48. J. Annen, G. Frasso, J. S. Crone, L. Heine, C. Di Perri, C. Martial, H. Cassol, A. Demertzi,
L. Naccache, S. Laureys; Coma Science Group Collaborators, Regional brain
volumetry and brain function in severely brain-injured patients. Ann. Neurol. 83, 842–853
(2018).
Acknowledgments: We would like to express our gratitude to V. Bonhomme and
M. Kirsch (GIGA-Consciousness, Anesthesia and Intensive Care laboratories, CHU Liège)
for assistance in performing anesthesia in patients. We thank L. Tshibanda (Liège CHU
Neuroradiology Department) and D. Gallanaud (Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière Neuroradiology
Department) for assistance in participant scanning. We thank L. E. Gonzalez-Lara (Brain
and Mind Institute, University of Western Ontario) for assistance in data acquisition. We
acknowledge the assistance of M. M. Conte (Brain and Mind Research Institute, Weill
Cornell Medical College) for sharing neuroimaging data. We thank C. Aubinet and
M. Carriere, PhD candidates (Coma Science Group, GIGA Consciousness, University of
Liège), for assistance in neuroimaging data acquisition. We are grateful to V. Perlbarg
(Bioinformatics and Biostatistics Platform, IHU-A-ICM, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle
épinière, Paris) for assistance during data preprocessing. We are highly grateful to the
members of the Liège Coma Science Group and the Paris PICNIC Lab DOC Team for
assistance in clinical evaluations. Last, we would like to express our gratitude to
A. Schurger (Neurospin, Unicog, CEA-Saclay) for manuscript proofreading. Funding:
The reported data have been collected and shared among partners participating in the
James S. McDonnell Foundation Collaborative Activity Award “Recovery of Consciousness
After Severe Brain Injury” (phases I and II; 2008–2017). This work has been further
financially supported by the INSERM, the Belgian National Funds for Scientific Research
(FNRS), the Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière (ICM), the Canada Excellence
Research Chairs (CERC) program, the CIFAR Canadian Institute for Advanced Research,
the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), the European Commission, the
Human Brain Project (EU-H2020-FETFLAGSHIP-HBP-SGA1-GA720270), the Luminous project
(EU-H2020-fetopen-ga686764), the Center-TBI project (FP7-HEALTH- 602150), the
Belgian American Education Foundation, the Wallonie-Bruxelles International, the Fonds
Léon Fredericq, “Fondazione Europea di Ricerca Biomedica,” European Space Agency,
Belspo, BIAL Foundation, the Mind Science Foundation, the French Speaking
Community Concerted Research Action (ARC-06/11-340), and the University and University
Hospital of Liège. Author contributions: A.D., E.T., and J.D.S. designed the research.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Demertzi et al., Sci. Adv. 2019;5:eaat7603
6 February 2019
10 of 11
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 A.D., E.T., G.D., P.B., F.R., D.F.-E., and J.D.S. analyzed the data. A.D., E.T., S.D., N.D.S., A.M.O.,
S.L., L.N., and J.D.S. interpreted the data. N.D.S., A.M.O., S.L., L.N., B.R., C.M., and H.U.V.
curated and provided the data. A.D., E.T., and J.D.S. wrote the manuscript. All authors
contributed to the editing of the manuscript. Competing interests: The authors declare
that they have no competing interests. Data and materials availability: Data have
been stored locally, following national and EU laws on the protection of individuals
with regard to the processing of personal data. The clinical data used in this paper may
be available upon reasonable request. All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in
the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials.
Submitted 5 April 2018
Accepted 19 December 2018
Published 6 February 2019
10.1126/sciadv.aat7603
Citation: A. Demertzi, E. Tagliazucchi, S. Dehaene, G. Deco, P. Barttfeld, F. Raimondo, C. Martial,
D. Fernández-Espejo, B. Rohaut, H. U. Voss, N. D. Schiff, A. M. Owen, S. Laureys, L. Naccache,
J. D. Sitt, Human consciousness is supported by dynamic complex patterns of brain signal
coordination. Sci. Adv. 5, eaat7603 (2019).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Demertzi et al., Sci. Adv. 2019;5:eaat7603
6 February 2019
11 of 11
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 coordination
Human consciousness is supported by dynamic complex patterns of brain signal
U. Voss, N. D. Schiff, A. M. Owen, S. Laureys, L. Naccache and J. D. Sitt
A. Demertzi, E. Tagliazucchi, S. Dehaene, G. Deco, P. Barttfeld, F. Raimondo, C. Martial, D. Fernández-Espejo, B. Rohaut, H.
DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aat7603
 (2), eaat7603.
5
Sci Adv 
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/5/2/eaat7603
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2019/02/04/5.2.eaat7603.DC1
REFERENCES
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/5/2/eaat7603#BIBL
This article cites 48 articles, 12 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
registered trademark of AAAS.
is a
Science Advances 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
(ISSN 2375-2548) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New
Science Advances 
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
