 Probiotics (Lactobacillus gasseri KS-13, Bifidobacterium
bifidum G9-1, and Bifidobacterium longum MM-2) improve
rhinoconjunctivitis-specific quality of life in individuals with
seasonal allergies: a double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized trial1,2
Jennifer C Dennis-Wall,3 Tyler Culpepper,3 Carmelo Nieves Jr.,3 Cassie C Rowe,3 Alyssa M Burns,3 Carley T Rusch,3
Ashton Federico,3 Maria Ukhanova,4 Sheldon Waugh,4 Volker Mai,4 Mary C Christman,5 and Bobbi Langkamp-Henken3*
3Food Science and Human Nutrition Department and 4Emerging Pathogens Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL; and 5MCC Statistical Consulting
LLC, Gainesville, FL
ABSTRACT
Background: Rhinoconjunctivitis-specific quality of life is often
reduced during seasonal allergies. The Mini Rhinoconjunctivitis
Quality of Life Questionnaire (MRQLQ) is a validated tool used
to measure quality of life in people experiencing allergies (0 = not
troubled to 6 = extremely troubled). Probiotics may improve quality
of life during allergy season by increasing the percentage of regu-
latory T cells (Tregs) and inducing tolerance.
Objective: The objective of this study was to determine whether
consuming Lactobacillus gasseri KS-13, Bifidobacterium bifidum
G9-1, and B. longum MM-2 compared with placebo would result
in beneficial effects on MRQLQ scores throughout allergy season in
individuals who typically experience seasonal allergies. Secondary
outcomes included changes in immune markers as part of a poten-
tial mechanism for changes in MRQLQ scores.
Design: In this double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel, random-
ized clinical trial, 173 participants (mean 6 SEM: age 27 6 1 y)
who self-identified as having seasonal allergies received either a
probiotic (2 capsules/d, 1.5 billion colony-forming units/capsule)
or placebo during spring allergy season for 8 wk. MRQLQ scores
were collected weekly throughout the study. Fasting blood samples
were taken from a subgroup (placebo, n = 37; probiotic, n = 35) at
baseline and week 6 (predicted peak of pollen) to determine serum
immunoglobulin (Ig) E concentrations and Treg percentages.
Results: The probiotic group reported an improvement in the MRQLQ
global score from baseline to pollen peak (20.68 6 0.13) when com-
pared with the placebo group (20.19 6 0.14; P = 0.0092). Both serum
total IgE and the percentage of Tregs increased from baseline to week
6, but changes were not different between groups.
Conclusions: This combination probiotic improved rhinoconjunctivitis-
specific quality of life during allergy season for healthy individ-
uals with self-reported seasonal allergies; however, the associated
mechanism is still unclear. This trial was registered at clinicaltrials.gov as
NCT02349711.
Am J Clin Nutr 2017;105:758–67.
Keywords:
healthy adults, probiotics, seasonal allergies, allergic
rhinitis, quality of life, Lactobacillus gasseri, Bifidobacterium
bifidum, Bifidobacterium longum
INTRODUCTION
Medical practice often focuses on treating diseases and alleviating
symptoms of disease, but quality of life is also an important aspect
that is sometimes overlooked. Secondary effects of a disease or its
consequent treatment can negatively impact well-being and the
ability of an individual to continue a daily routine, diminishing
quality of life. Allergic rhinitis, commonly known as seasonal
allergies or hay fever, has been associated with a lack of sleep, reduced
productivity at work or school, emotional distress, and embarrassment
(1). A steady increase in the prevalence of allergic diseases has been
observed over the past 50 y (2). Current medications for allergies may
have undesirable side effects depending on the individual (e.g., dry
mouth, drowsiness, sleeplessness) (3), some of which may affect
quality of life. It is of interest to continue to search for alternatives.
A recent meta-analysis reports that probiotics have potential to
improve quality of life in people experiencing allergies, but more
high-quality studies are required to confirm this (4). Evidence for the
effects of probiotics on allergies varies widely based on the bacterial
strain(s) used for the intervention, delivery vehicle (yogurt, capsule,
milk, etc.), duration of intervention, subject characteristics, and
method of quantifying efficacy. A highly cited, validated tool to
measure improvements in rhinoconjunctivitis-specific quality of life
is the Rhinoconjunctivitis Quality of Life Questionnaire (RQLQ)6 (1).
1 Supported by Wakunaga of America Co., Ltd. and USDA National In-
stitute of Food and Agriculture Hatch Project number FLA-FOS-005129.
This is a free access article, distributed under terms (http://www.nutrition.
org/publications/guidelines-and-policies/license/) that permit unrestricted
noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided
the original work is properly cited.
2 Supplemental Figure 1 is available from the “Online Supporting Mate-
rial” link in the online posting of the article and from the same link in the
online table of contents at http://ajcn.nutrition.org.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: henken@ufl.edu.
Received June 15, 2016. Accepted for publication December 20, 2016.
First published online February 22, 2017; doi: 10.3945/ajcn.116.140012.
6 Abbreviations used: GSRS, Gastrointestinal Symptom Rating Scale;
MRQLQ, Mini Rhinoconjunctivitis Quality of Life Questionnaire; OTU,
operational taxonomic unit; PE, phycoerythrin; RQLQ, Rhinoconjunctivitis
Quality of Life Questionnaire; Treg, regulatory T cell.
758
Am J Clin Nutr 2017;105:758–67. Printed in USA. � 2017 American Society for Nutrition
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/105/3/758/4569700 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Costa et al. (5) demonstrated an improvement in ocular symptoms
and quality of life (RQLQ scores) in allergic rhinitis patients sup-
plemented with capsules of Lactobacillus paracasei LP33 for 5 wk.
Peng and Hsu (6) and Wang et al. (7) showed improvement in
quality of life in 2 different studies both using a pediatric-adapted
version of the RQLQ in children supplemented for 30 d with either
capsules of heat-killed LP33 or fermented milk containing live LP33.
The probiotic used in this study (L. gasseri KS-13, Bifidobacterium
bifidum G9-1, and B. longum MM-2), when previously con-
sumed by older adults, resulted in increased in vitro–stimulated
peripheral blood mononuclear cell production of IL-10, a cy-
tokine important in induction of tolerance to allergens (8). An
animal study using only one of these strains (B. bifidum G9-1)
demonstrated potential clinical benefit (lower nose-rubbing and
intranasal pressure compared with the control) (9). Although
B. bifidum G9-1 has improved allergy-related outcomes in animals,
only the combination of the 3 strains has shown immune-related
benefit in humans (8). These data suggest that this combination
of strains has the potential to improve rhinoconjunctivitis-specific
quality of life for individuals experiencing allergies. Based on
these findings, the objective of this study was to determine whether
individuals who self-identify with seasonal allergies and
consume a daily dose of L. gasseri KS-13, B. bifidum G9-1, and
B. longum MM-2 have improved quality of life scores by using the
validated (10) miniature version of the RQLQ (MRQLQ) when
compared with those consuming the placebo.
METHODS
Participants
The study population was recruited (Figure 1) from a com-
munity in Florida. Trained study coordinators received consent
from healthy male and female adults between the ages of 18 and
60 y. Participants were included if they 1) self-identified as
having seasonal allergies and would typically receive a global
score of $2 on the MRQLQ during peak allergy season, 2) were
willing and able to provide informed consent in English, 3) were
willing and able to maintain their regular level of physical ac-
tivity and diet for the 8-wk study, and 4) were willing to
discontinue consumption of fermented foods, probiotics
(e.g., yogurts with live, active cultures or supplements) or
immune-enhancing supplements (e.g., Echinacea or fish oil).
Participants were excluded if they 1) typically used allergy
medications, including nasal sprays, $5 d/wk during allergy
season, 2) received allergy shots, 3) were pregnant at the time of
enrollment or were attempting to get pregnant, 4) were taking
any systemic corticosteroids, androgens (such as testosterone),
or large doses of anti-inflammatory drugs (i.e., aspirin in doses
.600 mg/d) on a regular basis at the time of enrollment, 5) were
being treated for or had any of the following physician-
diagnosed diseases or conditions: HIV; immune modulating
diseases (autoimmune disease, hepatitis, cancer, etc.); kidney
disease; pancreatitis; pulmonary disease; hepatic or biliary dis-
ease; or gastrointestinal diseases or conditions, such as diver-
ticulitis, ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease, Celiac disease, short
bowel disease, ileostomy, or colostomy, but not including gas-
troesophageal reflux disease, 6) had a central venous catheter, or
7) if they had received chemotherapy or other immune-
suppressing therapy within the previous year.
This study was conducted in accordance with the guidelines laid
down in the Declaration of Helsinki of 1975 as revised in 1983, and
all study-related procedures were approved and monitored by the
University of Florida Institutional Review Board.
Study capsules
The study capsules contained either the probiotic or a placebo
in a gelatin casing and were identical in appearance and mass
(350 mg). For the probiotic, each capsule contained 1.2 billion
CFU of L. gasseri KS-13, 0.15 billion CFU of B. bifidum G9-1,
and 0.15 billion CFU of B. longum MM-2 for a total of 1.5 billion
CFU/capsule before expiration. For the placebo, each capsule
contained 348 mg potato starch. One capsule was to be taken
at the end of the morning meal and one at the end of the
evening meal. The capsules were manufactured and supplied
by Wakunaga of America Co., Ltd.
Study design and questionnaires
For this prospective, double-blind, parallel study, participants
were randomly assigned to their study group over a 5-d period
by using sealed envelopes administered by study coordina-
tors. A member of the department not involved in the study
generated the randomization scheme using a random-number
generator available in Excel (Microsoft) and prepared the
randomization envelopes. Participants were randomly assigned
to receive either the probiotic or placebo capsules for 8 wk
during spring allergy season (March 2015 to May 2015; the
predicted peak of pollen counts was estimated to be early-to-
mid April, or week 6 of the study). All participants and re-
searchers or study coordinators were blinded throughout the
entire study. The study was unblinded after statistical analyses
were completed.
Participants were instructed to complete daily and weekly
questionnaires for the entire 8 wk of the study. The primary
outcome, rhinoconjunctivitis-specific quality of life, was mea-
sured by using the global score from the previously validated (10)
MRQLQ. This tool produces a global score (calculated by av-
eraging 14 items that are valued on a 7-point scale: 0 = not
troubled to 6 = extremely troubled) and domain scores (calculated
by averaging the 2 or 3 items in each domain category). Dif-
ferences in domain scores between groups were included as
secondary outcomes. Domains address how affected an in-
dividual was because of nose and eye symptoms with regard to
activities (at home and at work, recreational activities, and/or
sleep), practical problems (the need to rub nose and eyes and/or
the need for repeated nose blowing), nose symptoms (sneezing,
having a stuffy or blocked nose, and/or having a runny nose), eye
symptoms (itchy eyes, sore eyes, and/or watery eyes), and other
symptoms (tiredness or fatigue, thirst, and/or feeling irritable).
Weekly questionnaires, which inquired about the previous week,
began on the first day of the study and continued weekly
thereafter. Weekly questionnaires included the MRQLQ and the
Gastrointestinal Symptom Rating Scale (GSRS) (11), which
records gastrointestinal symptoms (diarrhea, constipation, ab-
dominal pain, indigestion, and reflux) on a rating scale (1 = no
discomfort at all to 7 = very severe discomfort). Differences in
GSRS symptom scores between groups were included as sec-
ondary outcomes, because probiotics have been established to
PROBIOTICS AND QUALITY OF LIFE DURING ALLERGIES
759
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/105/3/758/4569700 by guest on 02 June 2019
 modulate gastrointestinal function. Daily questionnaires began
on the first day of the study (day of random assignment and
receipt of capsules) and recorded intake of the study capsules,
time spent outdoors converted from time to a categorical variable
(2 categories: ,30 or $30 min/d), symptoms they were expe-
riencing (other than allergy or gastrointestinal symptoms), visits
to a physician, and medication use including allergy medica-
tions. Questionnaires were administered online (Qualtrics,
LLC); paper copies of questionnaires were available for par-
ticipants (n = 2) who did not have Internet access. Study co-
ordinators tracked daily questionnaire completion and supplement
consumption. If questionnaires had not been completed or
supplements not consumed for 3 d in a row, study coordinators
contacted participants to inquire why and provide strategies for
improving compliance when appropriate. Study coordinators
evaluated adverse events daily.
A subgroup of participants (placebo, n = 37; probiotic, n = 35)
who had already consented to participate in the main study
consented to an additional portion of the study in which they
provided blood and stool samples at baseline (before random
assignment) and at week 6 (65 d) of the study to assess immune
parameters and microbiota composition.
Sample collection and laboratory analyses
Characterization of bacterial DNA in stool samples by 16S
rRNA sequencing
Participants collected stool samples in commode specimen
collectors (Fisher Scientific) and delivered the samples on ice to
the study laboratory within 4 h of defecation. Within 6 h of
defecation, samples were homogenized in a sterile plastic bag,
aliquotted into bead-beater tubes and stored at 2708C. A standard
FIGURE 1
Participant flow diagram. The number of participants analyzed refers to those included in the primary outcome analysis. Participants were
analyzed on an intent-to-treat basis.
760
DENNIS-WALL ET AL.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/105/3/758/4569700 by guest on 02 June 2019
 protocol was used to extract DNA from samples (QIAamp DNA
Mini Kits; Qiagen) with the addition of a bead-beating step (12).
Methods for 16S rRNA sequencing have been previously de-
scribed in detail (13). Briefly, samples were amplified by PCR by
using uniquely barcoded primers. Successful amplification was
verified by gel electrophoresis. On amplification, samples were
pooled and sequenced (MiSeq; Illumina). Sequence reads were
processed into operational taxonomic units (OTUs) at similarity
levels of 95% and 98% and analyzed for differences in various
microbiota diversity measures between baseline and week 6 in
probiotic and placebo groups by using an in-house pipeline.
Flow cytometry to quantify regulatory T cells
Fasting whole-blood samples were collected at the study site
between the hours of 0700 and 1030 in tubes containing sodium
heparin. Samples were kept at room temperature in the dark on a
mixer (Clay Adams Nutator) and used for assays within 24 h.
Samples were incubated for 45 min at 48C in the dark
with antibodies [human anti-CD3-phycoerythrin (PE), anti-CD4-
fluorescein isothiocyanate, and anti-CD25-allophycocyanin or
mouse IgG1 k-PE, IgG2b k-fluorescein isothiocyanate,
IgG1 k-allophycocyanin, and IgG1 k-(PE-Cyanine7) for isotype
controls; eBioscience]. A set of fluorescence-minus-one controls
was created for the purpose of analyzing flow cytometry data. A
set of controls was also created by using compensation beads
(eBioscience). Red blood cells were lysed (eBioscience), and
samples were washed 3 times with flow stain buffer [PBS (0.09%
sodium azide) and 2% FBS albumin]. Remaining cells were per-
meated and incubated for 1 h at 48C in the dark. Cells were
washed with permeabilization buffer (3% FBS; eBioscience) 3
times. Anti-Foxp3-PE (eBioscience) was then added to the appro-
priate samples and incubated for 1 h at 48C in the dark. Cells were
washed 2 more times with permeabilization buffer and resuspended
in flow stain buffer. Counting beads (eBioscience) were added to the
samples containing all antibodies to identify regulatory T cells
(Tregs). Samples were analyzed on a flow cytometer (BD Accuri
C6; BD Biosciences), and gates were set for total lymphocytes,
CD3+ cells (T cells), CD4+ T cells, and CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ cells
(Tregs) by using the accompanying software (BD Accuri C6 Soft-
ware, version 1.0.264.21; BD Biosciences).
Quantification of serum total IgE and IL-10 concentrations
Fasting whole-blood samples collected in silicone-coated tubes
were allowed 30 min to clot over ice and were centrifuged at 1300 3 g
for 10 min at room temperature. Serum was aliquotted into tubes
and frozen at 2708C until used for assays. Concentrations of serum
total IgE and IL-10 were quantified via ELISA (eBioscience) by
using the recommended protocols. Ninety-six–well plates were
analyzed with a spectrophotometer (SpectraMax 340PC384; Mo-
lecular Devices) and accompanying software (SoftMax Pro, version
5.4; Molecular Devices). Readings at 570 nm were subtracted from
readings at 450 nm.
Statistical methods
Sample size calculation
When controlling for as-needed allergy medication use, a total
of 84 participants/group was calculated as needed to see a 0.40
difference in the global MRQLQ score with a SD of 0.82 (1) at
peak allergy season between participants who received the
probiotic and those who received the placebo with 95% confi-
dence, 80% power, and a 20% attrition rate. A previous study of
the effect of a probiotic on immune parameters during allergy
season reported a significant difference of 14 pg/mL in serum
concentrations of IL-10 between probiotic and placebo
groups (14). To obtain this difference, it was calculated that 23
participants/subgroup would be required to see a 14-pg/mL
difference between probiotic and placebo groups with 95%
confidence and 80% power. It was determined that a total of 30
participants/subgroup would be appropriate for exploratory ad-
vanced bioinformatics analyses of fecal samples to determine
microbial populations and diversity. To account for attrition, 72
total participants were enrolled in the substudy.
Questionnaire analyses
To verify that the peak of allergy season occurred during the
study period, pollen indexes from the local newspaper (15) were
recorded beginning 2 wk before the start of the study and ending
on the final day of the study (Supplemental Figure 1). It was
expected that the peak of allergy symptoms in the participants
would correspond with the peak of pollen counts as observed in
some cases (16). The peak of pollen counts was determined to
be the 8 d of highest pollen indexes (around weeks 4 and 5 of the
study). Because the peak period occurred over parts of 2 wk and
weekly questionnaires for the prior week were completed by
participants, each participant’s MRQLQ scores for weeks 4 and
5 were combined into a single weighted average with weights
equal to the proportion of peak time for which the weekly
MRQLQ score was recorded.
Analysis of all MRQLQ outcomes used a general linear model.
The change in MRQLQ scores from baseline to peak was ana-
lyzed as the primary outcome instead of comparing peak values
because of sex differences between groups at baseline. The model
for MRQLQ global and domain scores (placebo, n = 80;
probiotic, n = 81) included intervention, several covariates, and
all interactions. Covariates in the full model included sex and a
2-category time-spent-outdoors indicator during the peak and
the week before peak. Because the categorical time spent out-
doors was recorded daily, the modal score was calculated for
each week and used in the modeling as a covariate. Nonsignif-
icant covariates were removed hierarchically beginning with
interactions with the largest P values.
Analysis of GSRS scores used a general linear mixed model
with a random effect of subject to account for the repeated
weekly observations. The full model for GSRS outcomes
(placebo, n = 87; probiotic, n = 86) included week and sex
and all interactions between these 2 covariates and the in-
tervention. Nonsignificant covariates were removed hierar-
chically beginning with interactions with the largest P values.
Week was retained in all final models of GSRS outcomes,
regardless of significant contribution. Residuals for all models
were checked for normality and homoscedasticity. Weekly
GSRS syndrome scores were log-transformed for analysis to
meet the assumptions of normality and homogeneity of vari-
ance. Post hoc tests with the use of the Holm-Tukey method
for multiple comparisons were conducted on GSRS outcomes
that had significant intervention effects.
PROBIOTICS AND QUALITY OF LIFE DURING ALLERGIES
761
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/105/3/758/4569700 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Allergy medications were not included as a covariate in any
model because only 10 participants (placebo, n = 6; probiotic,
n = 4) reported taking allergy medications on any given day
during the peak.
Immune variable analyses
A general linear model was used to analyze the change in mean
serum total IgE (placebo, n = 37; probiotic, n = 35) between
baseline and week 6. IgE values were log-transformed for
analysis to meet the assumptions of normality and homogeneity
of variance. Variance was found to be heterogeneous even after
transformation (chi-square test, P = 0.0013) with larger residual
variance for those reporting more time outdoors than those re-
porting less time (0.071 compared with 0.007, respectively).
Hence, a heterogeneous variance model was used. Intervention,
categorical time spent outdoors during the peak and the week
before peak, and their interactions were included in the full
model for IgE. Nonsignificant covariates were removed hierar-
chically beginning with interactions with the largest P values.
A general linear mixed model was used to analyze percentages
of CD3+ cells (T cells), CD4+ T cells, and Tregs out of total
lymphocytes (placebo, n = 35; probiotic, n = 35). Percentages
were analyzed with intervention, time point (baseline, week 6),
and the interaction between intervention and time point as co-
variates in the model. A random effect of subject was included
to account for the repeated observations on each subject.
Serum IL-10 concentrations were below the limit of detection
for many of the samples, so statistical analysis was not performed
for this outcome.
Data were analyzed on an intent-to-treat basis. Unless stated
otherwise, data are reported by using the model least squares
means 6 SEMs by using a type I error rate of 0.05. All statis-
tical models were analyzed by using SAS version 9.4.
Microbiota analyses
Two participants were excluded from the microbiota analysis
because they did not provide the second stool sample. Seven
samples (from 6 different participants) were excluded because
there were not enough OTUs in the samples to be analyzed. The
Quantitative Insights into Microbial Ecology (QIIME) package
was used for microbiota analyses. Data were sorted into 4 cat-
egories for analyses: placebo and probiotic groups at baseline and
placebo and probiotic groups at week 6 (predicted peak). Rar-
efaction curves displaying the number of unique OTUs by in-
creasing number of sequences per sample were created for each
of the 4 categories. Chao1 rarefaction diversity, a measure of a
diversity, was calculated between baseline and week 6 for each
intervention group. Principal component analysis was conducted
to visualize differences within each intervention group between
the 2 time points. UniFrac distance, a measure of b diversity,
was calculated between baseline and week 6 for both groups.
Shannon diversity indexes were calculated for each sample by
using the total number of OTUs per sample and the relative
volume of each OTU. Proportions of phyla were analyzed by
using t tests between the percentages of each phylum at baseline
and week 6. To determine whether specific OTUs changed in
prevalence throughout the study, a z score was calculated for the
differences in proportions of participants who had an OTU
present between 2 time points. A z score of .1.96 or ,21.96
indicated significance (P , 0.05). The aim of the microbiota
analyses was to generate, rather than test, hypotheses regarding
relation between microbial OTUs and the primary endpoint of
this study. P values were thus not corrected for the multiple
comparisons.
RESULTS
Participant characteristics and compliance
Baseline demographic characteristics were not different be-
tween the 2 intervention groups in either the main study (Table 1)
or the substudy (data not shown). Compliance measures for
capsule intake and completion of daily questionnaires were
relatively high and did not differ between the 2 groups for both
the main study (Table 1) and the substudy (data not shown). Two
participants withdrew from the placebo group, and 1 participant
withdrew from the probiotic group after random assignment
(Figure 1). Two participants, 1 from each intervention group,
developed skin rashes within week 1 of supplementation and
elected to stop taking the capsules; they both remained in the
study and continued questionnaires, reporting no capsule con-
sumption. No adverse events could be attributed to the probiotic
supplement.
All participants in the substudy provided initial blood and stool
samples. One participant was unable to come to the study site
during the week of the second blood draw and did not provide a
second blood sample. Two participants (1 from each group) were
unable to provide second stool samples.
Blinding efficacy
Blinding was assessed at the week 6 visit. Of the participants
who had the placebo, 46% guessed placebo and 54% guessed
probiotic; of the participants who had the probiotic, 59% guessed
placebo and 41% guessed probiotic. Blinding was determined to
be effective based on a contingency table analysis (P = 0.125).
TABLE 1
Demographic characteristics and compliance by study group1
Placebo
(n = 87)
Probiotic
(n = 86)
Sex, n (%)
M
22 (25)
32 (37)
F
65 (75)
54 (63)
Age, y
27.6 6 1.42
26.0 6 1.2
Race, n (%)
Asian
11 (13)
13 (15)
Black/African American
4 (5)
6 (7)
Other
4 (5)
6 (7)
White
68 (78)
61 (71)
BMI, kg/m2
25.0 6 0.6
25.6 6 0.6
Days of correct capsule intake,3 %
86.9 6 1.8
87.9 6 1.8
Daily questionnaires completed, %
95.4 6 1.2
95.5 6 1.2
1 Data were analyzed for incidental differences between groups by
using contingency tables or 2-sample t tests as appropriate. None of the
outcomes were significantly different.
2 Mean 6 SEM (all such values).
3 Blank responses on questionnaires were considered “0” for consump-
tion for that day.
762
DENNIS-WALL ET AL.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/105/3/758/4569700 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Questionnaire data
Rhinoconjunctivitis-specific quality of life
Between-group comparisons revealed that the difference in the
global scores between baseline and peak for the probiotic group was
greater than that of the placebo group (P = 0.0092; Figure 2A).
Additionally, within this same statistical model, the difference in
global score reported in the probiotic group was different from
0 (P , 0.0001) whereas the difference reported in the placebo group
was not (P = 0.1624). This indicates that the observed difference
between intervention groups was due to an improvement in
rhinoconjunctivitis-specific quality of life only in the probiotic group
that was not observed with the placebo. MRQLQ scores were highest
at baseline (probiotic, 1.71 6 0.12; placebo, 1.93 6 0.13) rather than
being highest at the peak of pollen indexes as originally expected.
Differences from baseline to peak between groups were dif-
ferent for activity (P = 0.0203), nose symptom (P = 0.0144),
other symptom (P = 0.0090), and practical problem (P = 0.0409)
domain scores (Figure 2B–E). The changes in eye symptom do-
main scores were not significantly different between the probiotic
and placebo groups (P = 0.1774; Figure 2F). Furthermore, the
probiotic group reported a decrease in symptom scores whereas the
placebo group did not for activity (probiotic, P = 0.0002; placebo,
P = 0.6283), nose symptom (probiotic, P , 0.0001; placebo,
P = 0.5594), and other symptom (probiotic, P , 0.0001;
placebo, P = 0.2212) scores. The practical problem domain
scores decreased in both groups (P , 0.05), but not to the
same degree in the placebo group as in the probiotic group
(Figure 2E).
Although there was no difference in baseline MRQLQ score
between intervention groups (P = 0.1834), there was an effect of sex
on the global MRQLQ score. Women, regardless of intervention
group, reported a decrease in global score from baseline to peak
(20.71 6 0.11, P , 0.0001), whereas men did not (20.16 6 0.17,
P = 0.3354). There were no statistically significant interactions
between sex and intervention. Results for all domain scores were
FIGURE 2
Changes in global (A), activity domain (B), nose symptom domain (C), other symptom domain (D), practical problem domain (E), and
eye symptom domain (F) Mini Rhinoconjunctivitis Quality of Life Questionnaire scores (0 = not troubled, 6 = extremely troubled) represented as
baseline subtracted from peak (the 8 d of highest pollen indexes) for participants consuming the placebo (n = 80) or the probiotic (n = 81). Values are
least square means 6 SEMs. A general linear model was used to analyze scores. Intervention, sex, time spent outdoors during the peak and the week
before peak, and their interactions with the intervention were included as covariates in the full model. Nonsignificant covariates were removed
hierarchically beginning with interactions with the largest P values. The final model included intervention and sex. *P , 0.05 compared with placebo.
PROBIOTICS AND QUALITY OF LIFE DURING ALLERGIES
763
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/105/3/758/4569700 by guest on 02 June 2019
 similar for women across both intervention groups reporting de-
creases from baseline (P , 0.0001) and men reporting no change
from baseline (P . 0.05) with no interaction between sex and the
interventions.
Gastrointestinal function
Based on the weekly GSRS scores, there was a significant in-
teraction between the intervention and study week for constipation
(P = 0.0041). Overall, constipation symptom scores were low
(i.e., ,2, which equates to “slight discomfort”) but were signifi-
cantly lower in the probiotic group at weeks 3, 4, 6, and 7 than in
the placebo group at those weeks (Figure 3). There was no effect
of the intervention or interaction between the intervention and the
week of the study for the other GSRS symptom scores. Sex was
retained only in the model for abdominal pain symptom scores
(P = 0.0293); however, there was no interaction between sex and
intervention.
Immune markers
The difference in mean serum total IgE from baseline to week
6 was not significantly different between the probiotic and
placebo groups. However, across intervention groups, mean IgE
increased from baseline to week 6 (log-transformed means:
5.79 6 0.12 ng/mL at baseline compared with 5.85 6 0.12 ng/mL
at week 6, P = 0.0327). Tregs as a percentage of total lymphocytes
increased from baseline (4.3% 6 0.2%) to week 6 (4.8% 6 0.1%,
P = 0.0089) but were not different between intervention groups.
There were no differences in any other T cell phenotypes between
groups or between time points (data not shown).
Microbiota profile
The a and b diversity indexes used to measure representative
intestinal bacterial phyla did not differ between groups. Pro-
portions of phyla at each time point did not differ within in-
tervention groups, indicating no significant changes during the
intervention. Two phyla, Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes, typically
dominated in all samples.
An OTU corresponding to L. gasseri increased in prevalence
from baseline to week 6 in the probiotic group (1 of 33 com-
pared with 22 of 34; z score = 27.083) although it had a low
prevalence throughout the study in the placebo group (5 of 34
compared with 3 of 32; z score = 0.663; Figure 4). This con-
firmed compliance of the participants and that the probiotics
were present in the intestine of the appropriate group. An OTU
corresponding to Streptococcus sanguinis, a strain that is part of
normal oral flora but known to be associated with endocarditis,
increased in prevalence in the placebo group (2 of 34 compared
with 9 of 32; z score = 22.488) but not in the probiotic group
(7 of 33 compared with 3 of 34; z score = 1.457; Figure 4). An
OTU corresponding to Escherichia coli decreased in preva-
lence in the probiotic group (22 of 33 compared with 13 of 34;
z score = 2.449) but did not change in the placebo group (19 of 34
compared with 22 of 32; z score = 21.080; Figure 4). This same
pattern was seen with an OTU corresponding to Haemophilus
parainfluenzae (probiotic: 13 of 33 compared with 4 of 34;
z score = 2.753; placebo: 6 of 34 compared with 10 of 32;
z score = 21.290l; Figure 4). Both E. coli and H. parainfluenzae
belong to the class Gammaproteobacteria, a class that is generally
thought to be more pathogenic when present in the intestinal tract.
An OTU corresponding to a species of Faecalibacterium increased
in prevalence in the probiotic group (1 of 33 compared with 6 of
34; z score = 22.039) but not in the placebo group (3 of 34
compared with 5 of 32; z score = 20.840; Figure 4). Interestingly,
more changes in prevalence of OTUs occurred in the probiotic
than in the placebo group, suggesting that the probiotic mediated
changes in intestinal microbial profiles.
DISCUSSION
Self-reported rhinoconjunctivitis-specific quality of life as
indicated by the MRQLQ global score improved in healthy in-
dividuals consuming a daily probiotic combination compared
with a placebo during allergy season. Additional improvements
were seen in symptom-related aspects of allergies, indicated by
MRQLQ domain scores. Because this study was placebo-
controlled and well blinded and the probiotic was confirmed
to be present in the stool of the probiotic group, the differ-
ences can likely be attributed to 1 or the combination of the 3
probiotic strains used in the intervention. To our knowledge, this
is the first randomized, placebo-controlled trial addressing the
clinical relevance of this particular combination of 3 probiotic
strains on quality of life related to self-identified seasonal
allergies.
An important consideration is whether the improvement in
quality of life seen in the probiotic group is clinically relevant.
MRQLQ scores were relatively low throughout the study and did
not actually reach the inclusion criteria cutoff of $2. However,
these reported values are consistent with a previous study during
spring allergy season that enrolled participants with a 2-y
FIGURE 3
Constipation symptom scores from the Gastrointestinal
Symptom Rating Scale (1 = no discomfort at all, 7 = very severe discomfort)
for participants consuming the placebo (n = 87) and probiotic (n = 86). The
constipation syndrome score includes constipation, hard stools, and the feel-
ing of incomplete evacuation. Values were log-transformed for analysis in
a general linear mixed model and presented as untransformed means 6
SEMs. Intervention, week, sex, and their interactions with the intervention
were included in the full model. Nonsignificant covariates were removed
hierarchically beginning with interactions with the largest P values. The final
model included intervention, week, and the interaction between intervention
and week. The interaction between intervention and week was significant
(P = 0.0041). *P , 0.05 compared with placebo, calculated by using the
post hoc Holm-Tukey method for multiple comparisons.
764
DENNIS-WALL ET AL.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/105/3/758/4569700 by guest on 02 June 2019
 clinical history of allergic rhinitis, a positive grass-pollen skin
prick test, and detectable serum grass pollen–specific IgE (16),
indicating that MRQLQ values in this range are not atypical of
people diagnosed with clinical allergic rhinitis. Additionally, a
validation study of the MRQLQ established a minimally im-
portant difference of 0.70 (10). According to a global rating
scale, this difference corresponded to between “a little better”
and “somewhat better” (17). The global score decreased both
statistically and by 0.70 from baseline to peak in the probiotic
group, whereas in the placebo group it did not even decrease
statistically, suggesting that the decrease in the probiotic group
was clinically relevant.
Although immune effects of probiotics are thought to be strain-
specific, Tregs, IL-10, and IgE were measured because of their
implication in previous studies related to probiotics and immune
modulation. An in vitro experiment showed that L. gasseri
SBT2055 interacts with intestinal dendritic cells, resulting in
production of TGF-b and IL-10 (18). These 2 cytokines main-
tain Treg function (19, 20) and are in turn produced by Tregs,
creating a suppressive environment that purportedly induces
peripheral tolerance (21). In the context of allergies, in vitro
studies with human bronchial mucosal cells have indicated a
heightened T-helper 2 cytokine response in allergic individuals
that contributes to antibody class-switching to IgE and therefore
higher IgE concentrations (22), and IL-10 is thought to inhibit
T- helper 2 cytokine production (23). IL-10 has also been shown
to directly inhibit IgE-mediated activation of mast cells in vitro
(24). Although IL-10 is central to this mechanism and was
proposed to explain the anticipated difference in allergy symp-
toms between intervention groups, serum concentrations of
IL-10 were too low to accurately measure in participants from
this study. A better indicator of IL-10 concentration as related to
this mechanism may have been to measure intracellular con-
centrations of IL-10. Of note, the participants in this study who
spent $30 min outdoors each day had a larger variation in serum
total IgE than those participants who spent ,30 min outdoors
each day. This suggests a relation between IgE and exposure to
allergens, although this may or may not be directly related to
FIGURE 4
Changes in prevalence (determined by z scores) of specific fecal OTUs were detected more often in the probiotic group than in the placebo
group. Bold text indicates the group that had changes in OTU prevalence from week 0 to week 6; the other group is included for comparison of the same
OTUs. (A) OTUs that increased in the placebo group. (B) OTUs that increased in the probiotic group. (C) OTUs that decreased in the placebo group. (D) OTUs
that decreased in the probiotic group. Placebo at week 0, n = 34; at week 6, n = 32. Probiotic at week 0, n = 33; at week 6, n = 34. OTU, operational taxonomic
unit.
PROBIOTICS AND QUALITY OF LIFE DURING ALLERGIES
765
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/105/3/758/4569700 by guest on 02 June 2019
 allergy symptoms. Serum IgE has traditionally been used as a
diagnostic tool for allergy, but the true clinical relevance of IgE
alone without additional clinical indicators has been called into
question, as some individuals produce IgE in response to aller-
gens but are asymptomatic (25). Also, IgE concentrations may
be altered in tissues rather than in circulation. Although studies
in mice have demonstrated increased Tregs in mesenteric lymph
nodes that are thought to migrate to tissues and alter systemic
immune balance (26), only circulating Tregs are available for
sampling from healthy humans, and percentages of circulating
Tregs also may not accurately reflect changes in tissues. IgE and
Tregs were not different between intervention groups; however,
the observed increases from baseline to week 6 indicate immune
stimulation, likely confirming exposure of the participants to
allergens.
The most pronounced differences between the intervention
groups that may explain differences in MRQLQ scores were seen
in the fecal microbiota profiles. Observational studies have
reported low prevalence of F. prausnitzii in atopic children (27)
as well as higher prevalence of E. coli in infants that later de-
veloped eczema (28). In the current analysis, the OTUs corre-
sponding to E. coli that decreased and to a species of
Faecalibacterium that increased in prevalence in the probiotic
group indicate a beneficial shift in the overall profile of intestinal
microorganisms. Although we did not measure metabolites in
this study, the probiotic strains present in this supplement have
previously been shown in vitro to produce anti-inflammatory
metabolites such as short-chain fatty acids (29), which are
thought to be beneficial (30). Other mechanistic targets known
to affect immune balance might include intestinal secretory IgA
(18, 31) and/or reduced gut microbial translocation (32). Also,
the fact that the constipation syndrome score (syndrome score
includes constipation, hard stools, and the feeling of incomplete
evacuation) was lower in the probiotic group supports the idea
that the probiotic group indeed experienced changes in intestinal
microbiota.
There are some limitations of this study that should be con-
sidered. This study was originally designed to begin before the
start of spring allergy season to allow time for changes in in-
testinal microbiota and systemic immunity before exposure to
allergens, and it was thus hypothesized that MRQLQ scores of the
probiotic group would be maintained whereas those from the
placebo group would increase to follow pollen counts. However,
the highest reported levels of allergy troubles (indicated by
MRQLQ score) occurred at the beginning of the study (baseline
global MRQLQ: 1.81 6 0.09). Other studies have shown that
clinical symptoms do not necessarily correlate with the peak of
pollen (16, 33) as was originally expected in this study. It is
unknown whether a larger difference would have been seen
between intervention groups if the study began before allergy
season. The peak used for analyses was designated based on
pollen indexes (15) rather than actual pollen counts of the sur-
rounding area, because that was the only data available.
Screening of participants by serum total IgE would have
provided a quantitative, nonsubjective criterion for inclusion
into the study; however, as stated above, IgE alone can mis-
takenly identify someone who is allergic but asymptomatic.
Also, enrollment in this study occurred in the winter before
spring allergy season, and it was unknown if serum IgE taken at
that time would accurately identify individuals allergic to
springtime pollen because IgE specific to an allergen has a half-
life of 2 d (34). Skin prick tests, although commonly used to
identify allergic individuals, involve selection of a specific al-
lergen. Because the probiotic was expected to provide benefit by
broadly modulating immune mechanisms rather than targeting a
specific allergen (as immunotherapy does), selection of partici-
pants based on a single or only a few allergens was also not
appropriate for this study. For these reasons, screening for al-
lergic participants was done by using a subjective, self-
identifying questionnaire. Self-reported outcomes capture the
individual’s own perspective on his or her health, which drives
the decision to continue to use a treatment or not. In this way, a
self-identifying screening process was deemed appropriate to
assess clinical benefit of this intervention. Finally, people who
regularly used allergy medications ($5 d/wk) or received im-
munotherapy to treat allergies were excluded from this study,
because those medications may mask the more subtle effects
of a probiotic. These criteria likely excluded individuals who
have more severe seasonal allergies, thus limiting the general-
izability of the results.
It is plausible that probiotics, as commensal organisms, may
serve a greater role in preventing allergies earlier in life when the
immune system is still developing (35). Our study demonstrates a
potential benefit for healthy adults with self-identified seasonal
allergies when the probiotic is administered starting at the
greatest level of allergy symptoms. Prophylactic administration
of the probiotic might potentiate the beneficial effects observed in
this study. Future research should focus on the molecular
mechanism by which probiotics modulate immune function. If
elucidated, this information may lead to a more complete un-
derstanding of the role of commensal microorganisms in de-
veloping and maintaining immune balance.
The authors’ responsibilities were as follows–—JCD-W, TC, VM, and
BL-H: designed the research; JCD-W, CN, CCR, AMB, CTR, AF, and
BL-H: conducted the research; JCD-W, MU, SW, and MCC: performed
the statistical analysis; JCD-W, VM, MCC, and BL-H: wrote the manuscript;
BL-H: had primary responsibility for the final content; and all authors: read
and approved the final manuscript. None of the authors reported a conflict of
interest related to the study.
REFERENCES
1. Juniper EF, Guyatt GH. Development and testing of a new measure of
health status for clinical trials in rhinoconjunctivitis. Clin Exp Allergy
1991;21:77–83.
2. World Allergy Organization. White book on allergy 2011-2012 exec-
utive summary. Milwaukee (WI): World Allergy Organization; 2011.
3. Juniper EF, Stahl E, Doty RL, Simons FE, Allen DB, Howarth PH.
Clinical outcomes and adverse effect monitoring in allergic rhinitis. J
Allergy Clin Immunol 2005;115(3 Suppl 1):S390–413.
4. Zajac AE, Adams AS, Turner JH. A systematic review and meta-
analysis of probiotics for the treatment of allergic rhinitis. Int Forum
Allergy Rhinol 2015;5:524–32.
5. Costa DJ, Marteau P, Amouyal M, Poulsen LK, Hamelmann E,
Cazaubiel M, Housez B, Leuillet S, Stavnsbjerg M, Molimard P, et al.
Efficacy and safety of the probiotic Lactobacillus paracasei LP-33 in
allergic rhinitis: a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial
(GA2LEN Study). Eur J Clin Nutr 2014;68:602–7.
6. Peng GC, Hsu CH. The efficacy and safety of heat-killed Lactobacillus
paracasei for treatment of perennial allergic rhinitis induced by house-
dust mite. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2005;16:433–8.
7. Wang MF, Lin HC, Wang YY, Hsu CH. Treatment of perennial allergic
rhinitis with lactic acid bacteria. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2004;15:
152–8.
766
DENNIS-WALL ET AL.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/105/3/758/4569700 by guest on 02 June 2019
 8. Spaiser SJ, Culpepper T, Nieves C Jr., Ukhanova M, Mai V,
Percival SS, Christman MC, Langkamp-Henken B. Lactobacillus
gasseri KS-13, Bifidobacterium bifidum G9-1, and Bifidobacterium
longum MM-2 ingestion induces a less inflammatory cytokine profile
and a potentially beneficial shift in gut microbiota in older adults:
a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study. J Am
Coll Nutr 2015;34:459–69.
9. Tsunemine S, Isa Y, Shimakawa M, Ohno H, Yamamura H. Effects of
Bifidobacterium bifidum G9-1 on nasal symptoms in a Guinea pig
model of experimental allergic rhinitis. Biosci Microflora 2011;30:1–7.
10. Juniper EF, Thompson AK, Ferrie PJ, Roberts JN. Development and
validation of the mini Rhinoconjunctivitis Quality of Life Question-
naire. Clin Exp Allergy 2000;30:132–40.
11. Revicki DA, Wood M, Wiklund I, Crawley J. Reliability and validity of
the Gastrointestinal Symptom Rating Scale in patients with gastro-
esophageal reflux disease. Qual Life Res 1998;7:75–83.
12. Miller DN, Bryant JE, Madsen EL, Ghiorse WC. Evaluation and op-
timization of DNA extraction and purification procedures for soil and
sediment samples. Appl Environ Microbiol 1999;65:4715–24.
13. Burns AM, Zitt MA, Rowe CC, Langkamp-Henken B, Mai V, Nieves C
Jr., Ukhanova M, Christman MC, Dahl WJ. Diet quality improves for
parents and children when almonds are incorporated into their daily
diet: a randomized, crossover study. Nutr Res 2016;36:80–9.
14. Koyama T, Kirjavainen PV
, Fisher C, Anukam K, Summers K, Hekmat S,
Reid G. Development and pilot evaluation of a novel probiotic mixture for the
management of seasonal allergic rhinitis. Can J Microbiol 2010;56:730–8.
15. AccuWeather, Inc. Gainesville pollen levels [Internet]. [cited 2015
May 8]. Available from: http://www.accuweather.com/en/us/gainesville-
fl/32601/allergies-weather/328162.
16. Nembrini C, Singh A, De Castro CA, Mercenier A, Nutten S. Oral
administration of Lactobacillus paracasei NCC 2461 for the modula-
tion of grass pollen allergic rhinitis: a randomized, placebo-controlled
study during the pollen season. Clin Transl Allergy 2015;5:41.
17. Juniper EF, Guyatt GH, Willan A, Griffith LE. Determining a minimal
important change in a disease-specific quality of life questionnaire. J
Clin Epidemiol 1994;47:81–7.
18. Sakai F, Hosoya T, Ono-Ohmachi A, Ukibe K, Ogawa A, Moriya T,
Kadooka Y, Shiozaki T, Nakagawa H, Nakayama Y, et al. Lactobacillus
gasseri SBT2055 induces TGF-beta expression in dendritic cells and
activates TLR2 signal to produce IgA in the small intestine. PLoS One
2014;9:e105370.
19. Murai M, Turovskaya O, Kim G, Madan R, Karp CL, Cheroutre H,
Kronenberg M. Interleukin 10 acts on regulatory T cells to maintain
expression of the transcription factor Foxp3 and suppressive function in
mice with colitis. Nat Immunol 2009;10:1178–84.
20. Horwitz DA, Zheng SG, Gray JD, Wang JH, Ohtsuka K, Yamagiwa S.
Regulatory T cells generated ex vivo as an approach for the therapy of
autoimmune disease. Semin Immunol 2004;16:135–43.
21. Faria AM, Weiner HL. Oral tolerance. Immunol Rev 2005;206:232–59.
22. Walker C, Bode E, Boer L, Hansel TT, Blaser K, Virchow JC Jr. Al-
lergic and nonallergic asthmatics have distinct patterns of T-cell acti-
vation and cytokine production in peripheral blood and bronchoalveolar
lavage. Am Rev Respir Dis 1992;146:109–15.
23. Kosaka S, Tamauchi H, Terashima M, Maruyama H, Habu S,
Kitasato H. IL-10 controls Th2-type cytokine production and eosino-
phil infiltration in a mouse model of allergic airway inflammation.
Immunobiology 2011;216:811–20.
24. Royer B, Varadaradjalou S, Saas P, Guillosson JJ, Kantelip JP,
Arock M. Inhibition of IgE-induced activation of human mast cells by
IL-10. Clin Exp Allergy 2001;31:694–704.
25. Pastorello EA, Incorvaia C, Ortolani C, Bonini S, Canonica GW,
Romagnani S, Tursi A, Zanussi C. Studies on the relationship between
the level of specific IgE antibodies and the clinical expression of al-
lergy: I. Definition of levels distinguishing patients with symptomatic
from patients with asymptomatic allergy to common aeroallergens. J
Allergy Clin Immunol 1995;96:580–7.
26. Kim HJ, Kim YJ, Lee SH, Yu J, Jeong SK, Hong SJ. Effects of Lac-
tobacillus rhamnosus on allergic march model by suppressing Th2,
Th17, and TSLP responses via CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) Tregs. Clin
Immunol 2014;153:178–86.
27. Candela M, Rampelli S, Turroni S, Severgnini M, Consolandi C, De
Bellis G, Masetti R, Ricci G, Pession A, Brigidi P. Unbalance of in-
testinal microbiota in atopic children. BMC Microbiol 2012;12:95.
28. Penders J, Thijs C, van den Brandt PA, Kummeling I, Snijders B,
Stelma F, Adams H, van Ree R, Stobberingh EE. Gut microbiota
composition and development of atopic manifestations in infancy: the
KOALA Birth Cohort Study. Gut 2007;56:661–7.
29. Pokusaeva K, Fitzgerald GF, van Sinderen D. Carbohydrate metabo-
lism in Bifidobacteria. Genes Nutr 2011;6:285–306.
30. D’Argenio G, Mazzacca G. Short-chain fatty acid in the human colon.
Relation to inflammatory bowel diseases and colon cancer. Adv Exp
Med Biol 1999;472:149–58.
31. Ten Bruggencate SJ, Girard SA, Floris-Vollenbroek EG, Bhardwaj R,
Tompkins TA. The effect of a multi-strain probiotic on the resistance
toward Escherichia coli challenge in a randomized, placebo-controlled,
double-blind intervention study. Eur J Clin Nutr 2015;69:385–91.
32. Iemoli E, Trabattoni D, Parisotto S, Borgonovo L, Toscano M,
Rizzardini G, Clerici M, Ricci E, Fusi A, De Vecchi E, et al. Probiotics
reduce gut microbial translocation and improve adult atopic dermatitis.
J Clin Gastroenterol 2012;46(Suppl):S33–40.
33. de Weger LA, Beerthuizen T, Gast-Strookman JM, van der Plas DT,
Terreehorst I, Hiemstra PS, Sont JK. Difference in symptom severity
between early and late grass pollen season in patients with seasonal
allergic rhinitis. Clin Transl Allergy 2011;1:18.
34. Murphy K. Janeway’s immunobiology, 8th ed. New York: Garland
Science, Taylor & Francis Group; 2012.
35. Ouwehand AC. Antiallergic effects of probiotics. J Nutr 2007;137(3
Suppl 2):794s–7s.
PROBIOTICS AND QUALITY OF LIFE DURING ALLERGIES
767
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/105/3/758/4569700 by guest on 02 June 2019
