 Antimicrobial 
Resistance:
Tackling a crisis 
for the health and 
wealth of nations
 
 
 
The Review on Antimicrobial Resistance  
Chaired by Jim O’Neill 
December 2014  
  Contents 
The Review  
 
2
What is antimicrobial resistance?  
 
3
The economic cost of drug-resistant infections  
 
6
Our research findings in detail  
 
7
The secondary health effects of antimicrobial  
resistance: a return to the dark age of medicine? 
 
11
Future work: already we see cause for optimism 
14
 The Review on Antimicrobial Resistance, Chaired by Jim O’Neill
2
The Review 
The UK Prime Minister announced a Review on Antimicrobial Resistance in July, 
calling for ideas to bring this growing threat under control. This is the Review 
team’s first paper, where we demonstrate that there could be profound health 
and macroeconomic consequences for the world, especially in emerging economies, 
if antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is not tackled. 
We believe that this crisis can be avoided. The cost of taking action can be small 
if we take the right steps soon. And the benefits will be large and long-lasting 
especially for emerging economies, including the so-called BRIC nations, who 
will need to make improved investments in their health infrastructure and build 
industries that leapfrog to the next generation of innovation. 
Defining the specific steps needed is what our sponsors the UK Prime Minister and 
the Wellcome Trust set us off to do: by the summer of 2016, we will recommend 
a package of actions that we think should be agreed internationally. To do this, 
over the course of our Review we want to explore the following five themes, 
starting with this paper. 
1. The impact of antimicrobial resistance on the world’s economy if the 
problem is not tackled. 
2. How we can change our use of antimicrobial drugs to reduce the rise 
of resistance, including the game-changing potential of advances 
in genetics, genomics and computer science. 
3. How we can boost the development of new antimicrobial drugs. 
4. The potential for alternative therapies to disrupt the rise in resistance 
and how these new ideas can be boosted. 
5. The need for coherent international action that spans drugs regulation, 
and drugs use across humans, animals and the environment. 
We approach our goals with a blank sheet of paper and open minds. We want to hear 
from bright and innovative minds across all countries and disciplines, starting with 
the hard-earned experience of physicians, healthcare workers and their patients. 
 3
The Review on Antimicrobial Resistance, Chaired by Jim O’Neill
What is antimicrobial resistance? 
In 1928 a piece of mould fortuitously contaminated a petri dish in Alexander 
Fleming’s Laboratory at St Mary’s Hospital London, and he discovered that 
it produced a substance (penicillin) that killed the bacteria he was examining. 
Within 12 years Fleming and others had turned this finding into a wonder drug 
of its time, which could cure patients with bacterial infections. Further antibiotics 
were discovered and went on to revolutionise healthcare, becoming the bedrock of 
many of the greatest medical advances of the 20th century. Common yet frequently 
deadly illnesses such as pneumonia and tuberculosis (TB) could be treated effectively. 
A small cut no longer had the potential to be fatal if it became infected, and the 
dangers of routine surgery and childbirth were vastly reduced. More recently, 
advances in antiviral developments over the past 20 years have transformed 
HIV from a probable death sentence into a largely manageable lifelong condition.
But bacteria and other pathogens have always evolved so that they can resist the 
new drugs that medicine has used to combat them. Resistance has increasingly 
become a problem in recent years because the pace at which we are discovering 
novel antibiotics has slowed drastically, while antibiotic use is rising. And it is not 
just a problem confined to bacteria, but all microbes that have the potential to 
mutate and render our drugs ineffective. The great strides forward made over the 
past few decades to manage malaria and HIV could be reversed, with these diseases 
once again spiralling out of control. 
AMR threatens many of the most important medical advances we have made, and 
this report will go on to quantify the costs that society will face if action is not taken.
The problem today
The damaging effects of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) are already 
manifesting themselves across the world. Antimicrobial-resistant infections 
currently claim at least 50,000 lives each year across Europe and the US alone, 
with many hundreds of thousands more dying in other areas of the world. 
But reliable estimates of the true burden are scarce. 
There is considerable variation globally in the patterns of AMR, with different 
countries often experiencing different major problems. Despite this and in 
contrast to some health issues, AMR is a problem that should concern every 
country irrespective of its level of income. 
For instance, in 15 European countries more than 10% of bloodstream 
Staphylococcus aureus infections are caused by methicillin-resistant strains 
(MRSA), with several of these countries seeing resistance rates closer to 50%.1 
1.  
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control Antimicrobial Resistance Interactive Database 
(EARS-NET) data for 2013. 
 The Review on Antimicrobial Resistance, Chaired by Jim O’Neill
4
Although in modern, well-funded healthcare systems, obtaining access to 
second and third-line treatments may often not be an issue, mortality rates 
for patients with infections caused by resistant bacteria are significantly 
higher, as are their costs of treatment. And we are seeing in parts of Europe 
an increasing number of patients in intensive care units, haematology units 
and transplant units who have pan-resistant infections, meaning there 
is no effective treatment available.
The threat of increasingly drug-resistant infections is no less severe in 
poorer countries. Emerging resistance to treatments for other diseases, such 
as TB, malaria and HIV, have enormous impacts in lower-income settings. 
The growing prevalence of drug-resistant strains of TB is well-documented: 
there were an estimated 480,000 new cases in 2013 – of which the majority 
went untreated.2 The spread of resistant strains of malaria is similarly well-
documented, and the development of resistance to antiretroviral therapy for 
HIV is closely monitored. 
The variation in the AMR problems of individual countries is linked to huge 
differences in how heavily they use antimicrobial drugs. Global consumption 
of antibiotics in human medicine rose by nearly 40% between 2000 and 
2010, but this figure masks patterns of declining usage in some countries 
and rapid growth in others. The BRIC countries plus South Africa accounted 
for three quarters of this growth, while annual per-person consumption 
of antibiotics varies by more than a factor of 10 across all middle and high-
income countries.3 
Any use of antimicrobials, however appropriate and conservative, contributes 
to the development of resistance, but widespread unnecessary and excessive 
use makes it worse. Overuse and misuse of antimicrobials is facilitated in 
many places by their availability over the counter and without prescription, 
but even where this is not the case prescribing practices vary hugely 
between (and often within) countries. Such issues are only made worse by 
large quantities of counterfeit and sub-standard antimicrobials permeating 
the pharmaceuticals markets in some regions. 
As with all infectious diseases, the speed and volume of intercontinental travel 
today creates new opportunities for antimicrobial-resistant pathogens to 
be spread globally. Such mixing of different microbes, particularly bacteria, 
provides them with opportunities to share their genetic material with each 
other, creating new resistant strains at an unprecedented pace. No country 
can therefore successfully tackle AMR by acting in isolation.
2. World Health Organization Global Tuberculosis Report 2014.
3.  
Van Boeckel, T P et al. Global antibiotic consumption 2000 to 2010: an analysis of national 
pharmaceutical sales data. The Lancet Infectious Diseases 2014; 14(8): 742–750. 
 5
The Review on Antimicrobial Resistance, Chaired by Jim O’Neill
Deaths attributable
to AMR every year
compared to other
major causes of death
AMR in 2050
10 million
Cancer
8.2 million
Road traffic
accidents
1.2 million
Cholera
100,000–
120,000
Measles
130,000
Diabetes
1.5 million
Diarrhoeal
disease
1.4 million
Tetanus
60,000
AMR 
now
700,000
(low estimate)
Sources
Diabetes 
www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs312/en/
Cancer 
www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs297/en/
Cholera 
www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs107/en/
Diarrhoeal disease 
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140673612617280
Measles 
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140673612617280
Road traffic accidents 
www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs358/en/
Tetanus 
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140673612617280
 The Review on Antimicrobial Resistance, Chaired by Jim O’Neill
6
The economic cost of drug-resistant infections 
For doctors and for those who have experienced first-hand the anxiety of an 
infection that is drug-resistant, as a patient or when caring for a loved one, 
there is little need to prove the importance of tackling AMR. 
However for the majority of people, including in leading policy and business circles 
around the globe, the threat of drug resistance might seem a distant and abstract 
risk, if it is known at all. 
To bridge that gap between global perceptions of how bad the problem is today 
and how bad it is likely to become if the current trend is not altered, we have 
estimated the global economic cost of antimicrobial drug resistance by 2050. 
Given the severe lack of data, the studies we commissioned are necessarily 
based on high-level scenarios of what is likely to happen. They are a broad brush 
estimate, not certain forecasts. 
The results show a considerable human and economic cost. Initial research, looking 
only at part of the impact of AMR, shows that a continued rise in resistance by 2050 
would lead to 10 million people dying every year and a reduction of 2% to 3.5% 
in Gross Domestic Product (GDP). It would cost the world up to 100 trillion USD.
We commissioned two multidisciplinary research teams from RAND Europe and 
KPMG each to provide their own high-level assessments of the future impact 
of AMR, based on scenarios for rising drug resistance and economic growth 
to 2050. Both research teams estimated how an increase in resistance would 
affect the labour force through mortality and morbidity, and what this would 
mean for overall economic production. Their results project that if resistance 
is left unchecked, the loss of world output will get bigger through time, so 
by 2050, the world will be producing between 2% and 3.5% less than it otherwise 
would. Furthermore, 10 million more people would be expected to die every year 
than would be the case if resistance was kept to today’s level.
However, these studies only estimate part of the impact of AMR, for two main reasons. 
First, the studies looked only at a subset of drug-resistant bacteria and public 
health issues, because of the lack of readily available data for this initial research.
Bacteria that already show 
concerning resistance levels
Broader public health issues for 
which resistance is a concern
Klebsiella pneumonia
HIV
Escherichia coli (E. coli)
Tuberculosis (TB)
Staphylococcus aureus
Malaria
 7
The Review on Antimicrobial Resistance, Chaired by Jim O’Neill
It is worth noting that the three bacteria were selected from a larger group of seven 
that the World Health Organization (WHO) has highlighted as being key AMR 
concerns. 
Second, the research was commissioned to understand the economic cost of AMR, 
interpreted strictly as its impact on global GDP. Other issues, such as social and 
healthcare costs, were not considered. If AMR continues to grow as a major problem 
in the world it will have enormous consequences for how we deliver healthcare. 
The human impact of AMR is more than large enough on its own to justify a major 
intervention, to avert what threatens to be a devastating burden on the world’s 
healthcare systems. However our economic results aim to show that this is an 
issue which transcends health policy. Even on a strictly macroeconomic basis it 
makes sense for governments to act now, working in coalition with the scientific 
community in industry and academia, as well as with philanthropic organisations, 
to tackle the rise in antimicrobial drug resistance.
Our research findings in more detail 
The findings in this paper are based on two of the scenarios modelled by RAND 
Europe and KPMG. Further details of the two studies are set out in the box on the 
following page and the full papers are available on our website. 
The two teams modelled an increase in AMR rates from where they are today, 
each using their own methodology, to understand the impact this would have 
on the world population and its economic output. Both studies were hampered 
by a lack of reliable data, in particular regarding bacterial infections, and as 
a consequence they most likely underestimate the true cost of AMR. 
The studies estimate that, under the scenarios described below, 300 million people 
are expected to die prematurely because of drug resistance over the next 35 years 
and the world’s GDP will be 2 to 3.5% lower than it otherwise would be in 2050. 
This means that between now and 2050 the world can expect to lose between 
60 and 100 trillion USD worth of economic output if antimicrobial drug resistance 
is not tackled. This is equivalent to the loss of around one year’s total global 
output over the period, and will create significant and widespread human suffering. 
Furthermore, in the nearer term we expect the world’s GDP to be 0.5% smaller 
by 2020 and 1.4% smaller by 2030 with more than 100 million people having 
died prematurely.
The two studies also show a different economic impact for each of the drug-
resistant infections they considered. E. coli, malaria and TB are the biggest drivers 
of the studies’ results. Malaria resistance leads to the greatest numbers of fatalities, 
while E. coli is the largest detractor from GDP accounting for almost half the total 
economic impact in RAND’s results. Because malaria and TB vary far more by 
region than E. coli in the studies, they are the largest drivers of differences between 
countries and regions.
 The Review on Antimicrobial Resistance, Chaired by Jim O’Neill
8
The Review 
8
RAND Europe and KPMG methodology
Scenarios
The RAND Europe scenario modelled what would happen if antimicrobial drug 
resistance rates rose to 100% after 15 years, with the number of cases of infection 
held constant. This was done across five of the bacteria and public health 
issues mentioned above, with the exception being malaria, for which mortality 
was modelled to increase in line with estimates of 1950 levels, this being just 
prior to the introduction of the first generation of modern malaria drugs. 
For calculating mortality and morbidity RAND Europe assumed that all drugs 
would fail, i.e. there would be 100% resistance to all antimicrobials across the 
relevant pathogens.
The KPMG scenario, again for all bacteria and public health issues except 
malaria, looked at what would happen if resistance rose by 40% from today’s 
levels and the number of infections doubled as a result of people being infected 
for longer, leading to more transmission. For malaria, KPMG grouped countries 
into seven geographical areas and assumed that in malaria susceptible regions, 
every country with a low current incidence of malaria would see their infection 
rates rise to that region’s (higher) average. For calculating mortality and 
morbidity, KPMG assumed that the established first-line treatment would 
fail, i.e. some antimicrobials would still be effective. 
The effects of resistance in malaria were more difficult to forecast than for 
other pathogens, due to the more complex interactions at play between drug 
resistance and rates of incidence and transmission. For other pathogens, 
as resistance becomes worse, those regions or countries that are already 
badly affected continue to get worse. In contrast, regions that currently have 
malaria eradicated or under control are more vulnerable to increasing resistance, 
compared to those that already have high infection rates and have most likely 
reached a plateau point.
RAND Europe used historical data and KPMG used current regional data 
to try and estimate how anti-malarial resistance is likely to rise. These were 
considered as proxies in the absence of better data or forecasting tools; much 
more detailed and robust work will no doubt be done by academic researchers 
and clinicians in the future. 
Mortality, morbidity and infection rates
For the mortality and morbidity of different pathogens KPMG used data 
based on current outcomes for patients with resistant infections. They looked 
at Staphylococcus aureus that was resistant to methicillin (MRSA), and at 
E. coli and K. pneumoniae strains that were resistant to third-generation 
cephalosporins. For TB they used the multi-drug resistance rates published 
in the WHO Tuberculosis database. HIV figures were taken from the WHO HIV 
 9
The Review on Antimicrobial Resistance, Chaired by Jim O’Neill
9
The Review 
drug resistance report. RAND Europe used figures based on consultation with 
experts to assess how severe mortality and morbidity would be without any 
adequate antimicrobial drugs.
To model incidence rates for infections today, RAND used data on the 
likelihood of contracting a hospital-acquired infection. They then used WHO 
data to calculate the average number of hospital stays in various countries 
and multiplied the two figures together to obtain an estimate for the number 
of hospital-acquired infections in each region. KPMG applied European in-
hospital and community infection rates to the whole world in the absence 
of better available data. As RAND did not include infections acquired outside 
of hospital and KPMG used European figures that are lower than the world 
average, both of these analyses are likely to systematically underestimate 
true infection rates.
These approaches provided estimates of the mortality and morbidity 
(expressed in terms of time lost from the workplace due to illness), 
which were then applied to existing models of macroeconomic growth. 
Both teams experienced significant problems with data collection because of 
the lack of consistent sources monitoring the number of bacterial infections 
globally. These problems were severe in OECD as well as non-OECD countries. 
This demonstrates the urgent need to improve the surveillance of infections, 
and the rising tide of drug-resistant infections. The Review will consider this 
issue in its future work.
Antimicrobial resistance will have a different 
impact in different parts of the world
Our results suggest that countries that already have high malaria, HIV or 
TB rates are likely to particularly suffer as resistance to current treatments 
increases. This is exacerbated by the fact that the regional variation is much 
greater for these three public health issues than for the three named bacteria 
studied. Particular countries at risk include India, Nigeria and Indonesia (malaria), 
and Russia (TB). In addition, if malaria and HIV drug resistance is not tackled, 
Africa as a continent will suffer greatly, and the debilitating impacts of HIV and 
TB co-
 morbidity already seen in many of the poorest parts of the world will likely 
get worse. Furthermore, drug-resistant malaria could constrain the economic 
progress achieved by some countries in Asia. It is also possible that the hard 
work China and Brazil have undertaken to almost eradicate malaria in the second 
half of the 20th century could be undermined if resistance is unchecked, and this 
could have a negative impact on their large export sectors. For countries in the 
OECD, the cumulative loss of economic output by 2050 will amount to between 
USD 20 and 35 trillion. 
 The Review on Antimicrobial Resistance, Chaired by Jim O’Neill
10
AMR’s impact on World GDP
in trillions of USD
2014
2020
2030
2040
2050
-10$T
-8$T
-6$T
0
-2$T
-4$T
Total GDP loss
$100.2 trillion
 11
The Review on Antimicrobial Resistance, Chaired by Jim O’Neill
The secondary health effects of AMR:  
a return to the dark age of medicine? 
Despite the staggering size of the figures set out above, they do not capture the full 
picture of what a world without antimicrobials would look like. One of the greatest 
worries about AMR is that modern health systems and treatments that rely heavily 
on antibiotics could be severely undermined. When most surgery is undertaken, 
patients are given prophylactic antibiotics to reduce the risk of bacterial infections. 
In a world where antibiotics do not work, this measure would become largely useless 
and surgery would become far more dangerous. Many procedures, such as hip 
operations, which currently allow people to live active lives for longer and may 
enable them to stay in the workforce, might become too risky to undertake. 
Modern cancer treatments often suppress patients’ immune systems, making them 
more susceptible to infections. Therefore without effective antibiotics to prevent 
or treat infection, chemotherapy would become a much riskier proposition. 
Despite many medical professionals considering the secondary effects of AMR 
to be the greatest risk, there remain many unknowns, which have meant that few 
major studies have looked comprehensively at this impact. It is not clear how many 
more people will get infections when prophylactic antibiotics do not work, nor do 
we know how many people will opt to take on the risk and still have procedures. 
Therefore, instead of trying to work out exactly how much the economy would 
suffer because of these secondary health effects, we have sought to estimate the 
economic value that these procedures create for society. This gives a sense of what 
we might stand to lose if AMR rises, with the caveat that we cannot predict how 
much might actually be lost within this total. We hope that others looking at the 
impact of AMR will focus more on this area and can build on the initial broad-brush 
research that we have undertaken.
By way of illustration, we have considered four areas of high-volume medical 
intervention which have become entirely routine in many parts of the world 
but are dependent upon the availability of effective antibiotics to make them 
comparatively low-risk. 
We estimate that caesarean sections contribute about 2% to world GDP. Joint 
replacements add about 0.65%, the vastly improved cancer drugs that have been 
created since the early 1970s add more than 0.75% and organ transplants add 
about 0.1%. These are just a small number of the areas in modern medicine that 
risk being undermined if we do not have effective antibiotics in the future. In 
aggregate they contribute almost 4% to the world’s GDP, worth at least 120 trillion 
USD between now and 2050. While this total would not be completely lost, when 
this is combined with the other effects of AMR it shows that the world’s economy 
could lose more than 7% of its GDP by 2050, or a total of 210 trillion USD over the 
next 35 years. These problems will not just affect high income countries where such 
surgery is already commonplace, but will also have serious and negative impacts 
on middle income countries that are expected to build universal health systems 
over the coming decades. While some of these procedures may continue in a world 
 The Review on Antimicrobial Resistance, Chaired by Jim O’Neill
12
with higher rates of resistance, there are many other procedures not captured here, 
including bowel surgery and bone marrow transplants, which would be undertaken 
less often, and whose economic impact we were unable to quantify.
Rising drug resistance would also have alarming secondary effects in terms of the 
safety of childbirth, including caesarean sections, with consequential increases 
in maternal and infant mortality. The 20th century saw childbirth in high income 
countries move from being something that carried significant risk to something 
that we take for granted as being safe: the world witnessed a 50-fold decrease 
in maternal deaths over the course of that century. Much of this progress could 
risk being undermined if AMR is allowed to continue rising significantly. 
Finally, previous health scares such as SARS have shown that travel and trade 
can have a much bigger impact on the economy than the health costs assessed 
by this paper. The reaction is likely to be a growing aversion to travel in a world 
with dramatic and widespread AMR problems. If there is no effective treatment 
for malaria, for example, people from malaria-free countries may be unwilling 
to travel to malarial zones. This should be a major worry for all economies, 
particularly those reliant on tourism, foreign direct investment or global trade.
Left unchecked, the current trend in rising 
drug resistance is a crisis of global scale 
The potential impacts outlined above demonstrate that it is vital that the world’s 
healthcare systems are not undermined by resistance to antimicrobial drugs. What 
this paper has sought to show is that resistance is not just a major health worry, 
which will lead to millions more people dying every year, but that it is also an 
economic issue. Financially the cost of dealing with resistance is far smaller than 
not taking action. This is why we will seek to find the most effective ways for the 
world to combat resistance, and allow us to preserve some of the most precious 
medical resources the world has ever had.
Our research also underlines that acting quickly is crucial. The development 
of resistance is an evolutionary inevitability, even where antimicrobials are used 
properly and sparingly. However, the high level estimates we commissioned show 
just how important it is that we do everything we can both to slow the spread 
of resistance, and to ensure that we are able to mitigate its impact with effective 
new treatments to replace those that it renders obsolete. The value of a delay 
is potentially enormous: RAND Europe’s study demonstrated that delaying the 
development of widespread resistance by just 10 years could save 65 trillion USD 
of the world’s output between now and 2050. It is for this reason that the Review 
is looking so carefully at how to conserve the world’s existing antibiotics and those 
developed in the future.
Infection rates are another important driver of the results. KPMG looked at what 
would happen if infection rates doubled and then stayed constant. This analysis 
 13
The Review on Antimicrobial Resistance, Chaired by Jim O’Neill
Deaths attributable
to AMR every year 
by 2050
Africa
4,150,000
number of deaths
6
5
7
8
9
10
>
Mortality per 10,000 population
Latin
America
392,000
North
America
317,000
Europe
390,000
Asia
4,730,000
Oceania
22,000
 The Review on Antimicrobial Resistance, Chaired by Jim O’Neill
14
showed that an increase in infection rates alone could mean 150 million people 
dying prematurely and reduce world GDP by 55 trillion USD between now and 2050, 
just over half the total impact they estimate for AMR. This shows the importance 
of not just treating infections but also reducing and controlling them. This is why 
the Review will need to look at ways to improve hygiene and sanitation both in and 
outside hospitals, to break chains of transmission and stop people getting sick in 
the first place. Although enormously beneficial to society, the advent of antibiotics 
may to an extent have reduced the world’s focus on fighting infections at their 
source, as treating them became much easier. This is a trend that needs to be 
considered carefully. 
Already we see cause for optimism 
While we are yet to estimate how much it would cost the world to solve the problem 
of AMR, there is no doubt that the returns will be many orders of magnitude greater 
for society than the investment. 
Based on our initial conversations with policy makers, companies, researchers and 
clinicians, we already see some cause for optimism. While the problem is enormous, 
it can be solved if we collectively take the rights steps soon: 
• 
We have met a vibrant field of university researchers and biotech 
entrepreneurs teeming with ideas to solve this problem – from early 
stage development of new drugs, to vaccines and alternative therapies, 
such as antibodies. For each stage of the innovation cycle we will 
consider whether and what action can be taken to accelerate these 
bright ideas. 
• 
There is an international governance framework with the WHO taking 
the lead to agree a global action plan to tackle AMR between 194 
countries this spring. Ambitious philanthropic initiatives could emerge 
for antibiotics in the wake of the achievements and lessons from the 
work of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and others on malaria 
and HIV/AIDS. Already there is cooperation at the highest level in the 
European Union, and between the EU and the United States for pushing 
more collaborative and innovative research for new antibiotics involving 
academics, clinicians and companies, large and small. We will work 
within these frameworks, as well as outside them, to identify the actions 
that can be implemented with the highest chance of success. 
• 
Advances in genetics, genomics and computer science will likely change 
the way that infections and new types of resistance are diagnosed, 
detected and reported worldwide, so that we can fight back faster when 
bacteria evolve to resist drugs. These same technological advances 
will in the future deliver rapid diagnostic tools which will in time 
improve the way we use antibiotics, antimalarials, and HIV and TB 
drugs. Therefore, we will examine the market for new, quicker, point 
 15
The Review on Antimicrobial Resistance, Chaired by Jim O’Neill
of care diagnostics and whether there are market failures or bottlenecks 
in development, just as we are for the antimicrobial drug pipeline.
• 
Finally, tackling drug resistance is aligned with the growth objectives 
of low and middle-income economies. Sustained growth will be helped 
by investing in sanitation and basic health infrastructure that protect 
citizens from excessively high rates of infection. The industrial 
opportunities presented by drug and diagnostic innovations may help 
many of these same countries leapfrog to more effective technologies 
that support their long term economic success. In developing our 
recommendations, we will consider the economic priorities of all parts 
of the world inclusively and look for examples of novel, effective funding 
both within and outside healthcare. 
This crisis can be averted if the world takes 
action soon 
This might be one of the world’s biggest problems, but it does not need to 
be its hardest.
At the core of this Review is the conviction that we need to preserve and further 
support the huge progress in medicine and poverty alleviation that has taken 
place over the last 25 years. It would be unforgiveable if the great progress made 
in combatting infectious diseases could be threatened by the lack of new drugs 
that are within reach, or for lack of common sense investment in infrastructure 
that keeps us safe from avoidable infections. 
Many issues relating to AMR are complex and inter-related. Coordinated action 
among many different countries is by nature more difficult to agree than individual 
initiatives, yet it is necessary: drug-resistant bacteria know no borders. We need 
coherent international action that spans drug regulation and antimicrobial drugs 
use across humans, animals and the environment – all matters that this Review will 
consider carefully. This is a looming global crisis, yet one which the world can avert 
if we take action soon. 
 The Review on Antimicrobial Resistance, Chaired by Jim O’Neill
16
Acknowledgements
We would like to express our gratitude to the wide range of clinical and technical 
experts who have offered extensive input and advice during the preparation of this 
paper and the commissioning of the two studies which underpin it. In particular, 
we would like to acknowledge the invaluable help and support received from:
– Prof Dame Sally Davies, Chief Medical Officer
– Prof Jeremy Farrar, Director, Wellcome Trust
–  
Prof John Rex, Senior Vice-President and Head of Infection,  
Global Medicines Development, AstraZeneca
–  
Lisa J White, Professor of Mathematical and Economic Modelling,  
Mahodil-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, Thailand
– Richard Murray, Director of Policy, The King’s Fund
– The Health Protection Analytical Team, Department of Health 
– Staff of Public Health England 
– Staff of the Wellcome Trust 
We would also like to thank the teams from RAND Europe and KPMG for their hard 
work and perseverance in producing the reports to such challenging timeframes; 
and Soapbox for their support with data visualisation and the design of the report. 
However, please note that the views and opinions expressed in this report represent 
those of the Review on Antimicrobial Resistance, and do not necessarily reflect 
those of the individuals and organisations named above. 
  The Review on Antimicrobial Resistance, Chaired by Jim O’Neill
18
The UK Prime Minister commissioned the Review on 
Antimicrobial Resistance to address the growing global 
problem of drug-resistant infections. It is Chaired by 
Jim O’Neill and supported by the Wellcome Trust and 
the UK Government, but operates and speaks with full 
independence from both. 
This report is licenced under the Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International Public Licence. Please use 
the following attribution notice: ‘Review on Antimicrobial 
Resistance. Antimicrobial Resistance: Tackling a Crisis for the 
Health and Wealth of Nations. 2014.’
