 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Mucocutaneous Findings and Course in an Adult
With Zika Virus Infection
Sarah M. Derrington, MD; A. Paul Cellura, MD; Laura E. McDermott, BA; Taylor Gubitosi, BS;
Anna Marie Sonstegard, BA; Sheng Chen, MD, PhD; Amit Garg, MD
Z
ika virus (ZIKV) is an enveloped, single-stranded RNA
flavivirus transmitted by the mosquito vector Aedes
aegypti. ZIKV was incidentally discovered in a febrile
Rhesus monkey at a Ugandan yellow fever surveillance cen-
ter in 1947.1 In 2007, human ZIKV infection was reported in
other parts of Africa, Asia, and the Pacific Islands.2 In early
2015, the virus was observed in Brazil and later in the 25
countries of the Americas.2 Based on the interim case defi-
nition by the World Health Organization, a person suspected
of being infected with ZIKV has an erythematous eruption
and/or fever with at least 1 of the following: arthralgia,
arthritis, and/or conjunctivitis. Herein, we describe the
mucocutaneous morphologic findings and histologic corre-
lation in ZIKV infection.
Report of a Case
In February 2016, a 44-year-old man returned from a 6-day
vacation in Puerto Rico. Within 3 days of his return, the
patient experienced headache and lethargy. This was fol-
lowed 1 day later by the appearance of an erythematous
eruption on the arms, dorsal side of the hands, and the
palms. Over the course of the next 24 hours, the eruption
became more apparent and had also spread to the trunk.
Itching was not a major feature. The patient also noted that
his eyes appeared “bloodshot.” As the eruption faded on the
upper body, it became more apparent on the lower body. On
day 3, the patient noted the eruption to be most pro-
nounced on the knees and feet, and he described burning
pain of the feet. He developed joint pains involving the
wrists, knees, and ankles on day 4. The erythematous erup-
tion, arthralgias, and constitutional symptoms improved by
day 5 and were resolved by day 8. The patient remained afe-
brile throughout the course of illness. He did not experience
cough, coryza, sore throat, diarrhea, nausea, or vomiting
and stated that he had not taken new prescriptions or over-
the-counter medications in the 6 weeks prior to onset of the
eruption.
On physical examination, there were numerous tiny
pink and red erythematous papules scattered diffusely
over the head, neck, trunk, and extremities, including the
palms and soles (Figure 1A). Many papules were partially
nonblanching, particularly in acral regions (Figure 1B).
There were petechiae on the hard palate, and sclerae were
injected and nonpurulent (Figure 2). Lymph nodes were not
palpable.
Biopsy specimens of lesional skin showed mild and
focally moderate perivascular lymphocytic infiltrate in the
upper dermis (Figure 3A). The deep dermis and subcutis
(not shown) were unremarkable. A high-power view
showed the focal moderate perivascular lymphocytic infil-
trate in the upper dermis (Figure 3B). There were no cyto-
logic abnormalities of the lymphocytes. The infiltrate was
not composed of eosinophils or neutrophils. No viral cyto-
pathic changes were noted in the tissue.
Real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for ZIKV
RNA was detected in the urine but not in the serum from
samples taken 3 days after the eruption was noted. Enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay on serum was reactive for IgM.
IMPORTANCE The Zika virus epidemic has been declared a public health emergency of
international concern by the World Health Organization. We describe the mucocutaneous
features and histologic correlation in a patient with the acute Zika virus infection.
OBSERVATIONS We observed the presence of a diffuse papular descending eruption,
petechiae on the palate, and hyperemic sclerae in a 44-year-old man returning from Puerto
Rico with confirmatory testing for the Zika virus.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE A detailed awareness of mucocutaneous findings associated
with Zika virus infection will support its early recognition and will facilitate elimination of Zika
infection from consideration for concerned patients who present with other, more common
erythematous eruptions.
JAMA Dermatol. doi:10.1001/jamadermatol.2016.1433
Published online May 11, 2016.
Viewpoint
Author Affiliations: Department of
Dermatology, Hofstra Northwell
School of Medicine, Hempstead,
New York.
Corresponding Author: Amit Garg,
MD, Department of Dermatology,
Hofstra Northwell School of
Medicine, 1991 Marcus Ave, Ste 300,
New Hyde Park, NY 11042
(amgarg@northwell.edu).
Research
Brief Report
jamadermatology.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Dermatology
Published online May 11, 2016
E1
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://archderm.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of Pittsburgh User  on 05/11/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Discussion
The incubation period of ZIKV ranges from 3 to 12 days.3 Signs
and symptoms include an exanthem (in 90% of patients), ar-
thralgias (in 65%), nonpurulent conjunctivitis (in 55%), and
headache.4 The exanthem has been described in the nonder-
matology literature as “maculopapular” or morbilliform. How-
ever, we have noted it to be distinctly comprised of small pap-
ules. The exanthema has also been described to descend—to
start on the trunk and eventually involve the lower body.5 This
was indeed the case for the patient described herein. We have
Figure 2. Mucositis
Injected sclera
B
Hard palate
A
A, Scattered red petechiae on the
hard palate. B, Presence of
hyperemic sclera.
Figure 3. Histopathologic Correlation
Hematoxylin-eosin, original magnification ×40
B
Hematoxylin-eosin, original magnification ×10
A
A, Perivascular lymphocytic infiltrate
in the upper dermis. B, Focal
perivascular lymphocytic infiltrate in
the upper dermis.
Figure 1. Exanthem
Exanthem on foot
B
Exanthem on trunk
A
A, Scattered tiny pink to red
erythematous macules and papules
on the trunk and extremities. B, Red,
erythematous, partially nonblanching
papules on the foot.
Research Brief Report
Mucocutaneous Findings and Course in Adult With Zika Virus Infection
E2
JAMA Dermatology
Published online May 11, 2016
(Reprinted)
jamadermatology.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://archderm.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of Pittsburgh User  on 05/11/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
also observed the presence of petechiae on the palate. Fever
is not a prominent feature and is low grade when present. ZIKV
is detectable by RT-PCR in the urine at a higher load and for a
longer duration than in serum.5 Serum levels of ZIKV may not
be detectable via RT-PCR for up 20 days after onset of
symptoms.6 Treatment of ZIKV infection is supportive.
We have detailed the morphologic mucocutaneous find-
ingsandhistologiccharacteristicsoflesionalskinthatmaysup-
port the health care community in recognizing exanthems
suspected to be related to ZIKV infection and perhaps in elimi-
natingitfromconsiderationforconcernedpatientswhopresent
with other, more common eruptions.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: April 11, 2016.
Published Online: May 11, 2016.
doi:10.1001/jamadermatol.2016.1433.
Author Contributions: Dr Garg had full access to all
the data in the study and takes responsibility for the
integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data
analysis.
Study concept and design: Cellura, Garg.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data:
Derrington, Cellura, McDermott, Gubitosi,
Sonstegard, Chen, Garg.
Drafting of the manuscript: Derrington, Cellura,
Gubitosi, Sonstegard, Chen, Garg.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: Cellura, McDermott, Garg.
Administrative, technical, or material support:
Derrington, Cellura, McDermott, Gubitosi.
Study supervision: Cellura, Garg.
Pathologic analysis: Chen.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.
Additional Contributions: We thank the patient for
granting permission to publish this information.
REFERENCES
1. Dick GWA, Kitchen SF, Haddow AJ. Zika virus, I:
isolations and serological specificity. Trans R Soc
Trop Med Hyg. 1952;46(5):509-520.
2. Garcia E, Yactayo S, Nishino K, Millot V, Perea W,
Briand S. Zika virus infection: global update on
epidemiology and potential associated clinical
manifestations. WHO Weekly Epidemiological
Record. 2016;91(7):73-88.
3. Rudolph KE, Lessler J, Moloney RM, Kmush B,
Cummings DA. Incubation periods of
mosquito-borne viral infections: a systematic
review. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2014;90(5):882-891.
4. Duffy MR, Chen TH, Hancock WT, et al. Zika virus
outbreak on Yap Island, Federated States of
Micronesia. N Engl J Med. 2009;360(24):2536-2543.
5. Brasil P, Pereira JP Jr, Raja Gabaglia C, et al.
Zika virus infection in pregnant women in Rio de
Janeiro: preliminary report. [published online
March 2016]. N Engl J Med. 2016. doi:10.1056
/NEJMoa1602412.
6. Gourinat A-C, O’Connor O, Calvez E, Goarant C,
Dupont-Rouzeyrol M. Detection of Zika virus in
urine. Emerg Infect Dis. 2015;21(1):84-86.
Mucocutaneous Findings and Course in Adult With Zika Virus Infection
Brief Report Research
jamadermatology.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Dermatology
Published online May 11, 2016
E3
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://archderm.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of Pittsburgh User  on 05/11/2016
