 A dietary fiber-deprived gut microbiota degrades the colonic 
mucus barrier and enhances pathogen susceptibility
Mahesh S. Desai1,2,3,*,§, Anna M. Seekatz2, Nicole M. Koropatkin2, Nobuhiko Kamada2, 
Christina A. Hickey4, Mathis Wolter3, Nicholas A. Pudlo2, Sho Kitamoto2, Nicolas 
Terrapon5, Arnaud Muller6, Vincent B. Young2, Bernard Henrissat5, Paul Wilmes1, 
Thaddeus S. Stappenbeck4, Gabriel Núñez2, and Eric C. Martens2,*,7
1Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine, Esch-sur-Alzette 4362, Luxembourg
2University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA
3Department of Infection and Immunity, Luxembourg Institute of Health, Esch-sur-Alzette 4354, 
Luxembourg
4Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA
5Aix-Marseille Université, UMR 7257, 13288 Marseille, France
6Department of Oncology, Luxembourg Institute of Health, Strassen 1526, Luxembourg
SUMMARY
Despite the accepted health benefits of consuming dietary fiber, little is known about the 
mechanisms by which fiber deprivation impacts the gut microbiota and alters disease risk. Using a 
gnotobiotic mouse model, in which animals were colonized with a synthetic human gut microbiota 
composed of fully sequenced commensal bacteria, we elucidated the functional interactions 
between dietary fiber, the gut microbiota and the colonic mucus barrier, which serves as a primary 
defense against enteric pathogens. We show that during chronic or intermittent dietary fiber 
deficiency, the gut microbiota resorts to host-secreted mucus glycoproteins as a nutrient source, 
leading to erosion of the colonic mucus barrier. Dietary fiber deprivation, together with a fiber-
deprived, mucus-eroding microbiota, promotes greater epithelial access and lethal colitis by the 
mucosal pathogen, Citrobacter rodentium. Our work reveals intricate pathways linking diet, the 
*Correspondence: emartens@umich.edu, mahesh.desai@lih.lu.
7Lead Contact
§Current affiliation: Department of Infection and Immunity, Luxembourg Institute of Health, Esch-sur-Alzette 4354, Luxembourg
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
M.S.D., E.C.M., P.W., T.S., and G.N. conceived the study; M.S.D. and E.C.M. designed the study, and M.S.D. performed the 
experiments; M.S.D, A.M.S., and E.C.M. analyzed data; M.S.D., A.M.S., C.H. and E.C.M. prepared figures; M.S.D. and E.C.M 
primarily wrote and edited the manuscript; M.S.D., N.M.K. and N.A.P. carried out bacterial in vitro growth assays; G.N., N.K. and 
S.K. assisted with C. rodentium infection and luminescence experiments; M. W. assisted with mucus measurements; C.H. and T.S.S. 
conducted blinded histology scoring; A.M. analyzed microarray data; N.T. and B.H. provided CAZy annotations; all authors discussed 
the results and provided comments on the manuscript.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2016 November 17; 167(5): 1339–1353.e21. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.10.043.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 gut microbiome and intestinal barrier dysfunction, which could be exploited to improve health 
using dietary therapeutics.
Graphical abstract
Regular consumption of dietary fiber helps prevent erosion of the intestinal mucus barrier by the 
gut microbiome, blunting pathogen infection and reducing the incidence of colitis.
INTRODUCTION
The diet of industrialized nations has experienced a decrease in fiber intake, which for many 
is now well below the recommended daily range of 28–35 g for adults and this deficit has 
been linked to several diseases (Burkitt et al., 1972; Sonnenburg and Sonnenburg, 2014). 
Fiber provides direct physical benefits, including increased fecal bulking and laxation 
(Burkitt et al., 1972). However, another feature of dietary fiber—a nutrient category that 
includes a broad array of polysaccharides that are not digestible by human enzymes—has 
also drawn it into the spotlight: it provides an important substrate to the community of 
microbes (microbiota) that inhabits the distal gut (Sonnenburg and Sonnenburg, 2014). 
Unlike humans, who produce ~17 gastrointestinal enzymes to digest mostly starch, our gut 
microbiota produce thousands of complementary enzymes with diverse specificities, 
enabling them to depolymerize and ferment dietary polysaccharides into host-absorbable 
short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) (El Kaoutari et al., 2013). Thus, the physiology of the gut 
microbiota is geared towards dietary polysaccharide metabolism. At present, relatively little 
is known about how a fiber-deprived gut microbiota fulfils its energy demands and how low 
fiber-induced microbiota changes impact our health.
Apart from dietary fiber, an alternative energy source for the microbiota is the glycoprotein-
rich mucus layer that overlies the gut epithelium as a first line of defense against both 
commensal microbes and invading pathogens (Johansson et al., 2013; McGuckin et al., 
2011). The colonic mucus layer is a dynamic and chemically complex barrier composed 
largely of secreted mucin-2 glycoprotein (MUC2) (Johansson et al., 2008). Goblet cells 
secrete MUC2 as a disulfide cross-linked network that expands to form an inner layer, which 
Desai et al.
Page 2
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 is tightly adherent to the epithelium and is poorly colonized by commensal bacteria. As 
bacterial and host enzymes continuously hydrolyze the luminal edge of this layer, a looser 
outer layer is formed that supports a more dense and metabolically distinct (Li et al., 2015) 
community. A key nutritional aspect of the mucus layer for gut bacteria is its high 
polysaccharide content, with up to 80% of the mucin biomass being composed of mostly O-
linked glycans (Johansson et al., 2013). However, only a distinct subset of gut microbiota 
species has evolved the capacity to utilize this nutrient source (Hoskins and Boulding, 1981; 
Png et al., 2010).
The direct impact of fiber polysaccharides on the microbiota, combined with the ability of at 
least one nutritional generalist (Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron) to shift from dietary 
polysaccharides to mucus glycan metabolism in the absence of fiber (Sonnenburg et al., 
2005), suggests a connection between diet and the status of the colonic mucus barrier. 
Indeed, three previous reports have correlated reduced dietary fiber with thinner colonic 
mucus (Brownlee et al., 2003; Earle et al., 2015; Hedemann et al., 2009). Nevertheless, the 
underlying mechanisms with respect to involvement of the microbiota and, perhaps more 
importantly, consequences for the host remain largely unknown. Such knowledge is 
important as it could provide explanations for why deviations or imbalances in gut microbial 
community membership and physiology (“dysbiosis”) correlate with several negative health 
outcomes, including pathogen susceptibility, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and colon 
cancer (Cameron and Sperandio, 2015; McKenney and Pamer, 2015). Finally, such 
knowledge could inform therapeutic and preventative strategies to correct these conditions.
The integrity of the mucus layer is critical for health. Genetic ablation of Muc2 in mice 
brings bacteria into close contact with the epithelium, leading to inflammation and colon 
cancer (Van der Sluis et al., 2006). Additional studies have implicated reduced or abnormal 
mucus production or O-glycosylation in the development of intestinal inflammation (Fu et 
al., 2011; Larsson et al., 2011) and penetration of commensal bacteria in the inner mucus 
layer in murine models of colitis and ulcerative colitis patients (Johansson et al., 2014). 
Moreover, the mucus barrier—a reservoir of antimicrobial peptides and immunoglobulins—
is the first structure that a mucosal pathogen must overcome to establish an infection 
(McGuckin et al., 2011). Given that the status of the mucus layer is precariously balanced 
between replenishment by goblet cells and degradation by gut bacteria, we hypothesized that 
a fiber-deprived microbiota would progressively forage on this barrier, leading to 
inflammation and/or increased pathogen susceptibility.
We aimed to investigate the mechanistic connections between chronic or intermittent dietary 
fiber deprivation on microbiota composition and physiology as well as the resulting effects 
on the mucus barrier. To create a model that facilitates functional interpretation, we 
assembled a synthetic gut microbiota from fully sequenced human gut bacteria in 
gnotobiotic mice. In the face of reduced dietary fiber, we examined changes in community 
physiology and susceptibility to Citrobacter rodentium, a murine pathogen that models 
human enteric E. coli infection (Collins et al., 2014). We demonstrate that a microbiota 
deprived of dietary fiber damages the colonic mucus barrier and promotes pathogen 
susceptibility. Our findings suggest a mechanism through which diet alters the activity of the 
Desai et al.
Page 3
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 gut microbiota and impacts health, which is important prerequisite knowledge for rationally 
designing future dietary interventions and therapeutics.
RESULTS
A synthetic human gut microbiota with versatile fiber polysaccharide degrading capacity
Diet changes are known to rapidly affect the composition of the microbiota in humans and 
rodents (David et al., 2014; Faith et al., 2011; McNulty et al., 2013; Rey et al., 2013). 
However, the full complexity of the gut microbiota is a barrier to deriving detailed 
conclusions because sequence-based approaches (16S rRNA gene and meta-genomics/-
transcriptomics) suffer from substantial functional uncertainty. Thus, to test our hypothesis 
that specific members within a fiber-deprived gut microbiota cause damage by increasingly 
foraging for nutrients in the protective mucus layer, we designed a synthetic microbiota 
(SM) containing 14 species of fully sequenced commensal human gut bacteria (Fig. 1A). 
The selected species were chosen to represent the five dominant phyla and collectively 
possess important core metabolic capabilities (Fig. S1A).
To provide an additional layer of functional knowledge about complex carbohydrate 
metabolism, we pre-evaluated our 14 species for growth in vitro on a panel of 42 plant- and 
animal-derived mono- and polysaccharides, including purified mucin O-glycans (MOGs) as 
sole carbon sources (Martens et al, 2011). These growth assays allowed us to determine that 
all major groups of dietary fiber and host mucosal polysaccharides could be used by one or 
more strains in our community as well as which bacteria target each glycan (Fig. 1A, Figs. 
S1A,B, Table S1). It is evident that the four mucin-degrading species fall into two 
categories: mucin specialists (A. muciniphila and B. intestinihominis), which only grow on 
MOGs as a sole polysaccharide source, and mucin generalists (B. thetaiotaomicron and B. 
caccae), which each grow on several other polysaccharides. Overall, our choice of species is 
physiologically and ecologically representative of the more complex native gut microbiota. 
Because our community is composed of bacteria with determined carbohydrate metabolic 
abilities, it allows us to address our central hypothesis in more precise, mechanistic detail.
To develop a gnotobiotic model, we assembled the SM in germfree mice, which were fed a 
standard fiber-rich (FR) laboratory diet that contains ~15% dietary fiber from minimally 
processed grains and plants (Figs. 1B,C). Colonized animals were maintained on the FR diet 
for 14 days to monitor reproducibility and stability of community assembly (Fig. 1B). All of 
the introduced species persisted in each mouse between 6 and 54 or 66 days of colonization 
depending on the length of the experiment (n = 37 total, 2 independent experiments; 
analyzed by both 16S rRNA sequencing (Table S2) and quantitative PCR approaches (Table 
S3)). Individual mice exhibited reproducible SM assembly irrespective of caging, mouse 
gender, experimental replicate or method of analysis (Fig. S2, Tables S2, S3). In addition to 
29 germfree control animals, a total of 4 different gnotobiotic colonization experiments (51 
SM-colonized mice in total; Experiments 1–4) were performed according to the timeline 
shown in Fig. 1B.
Desai et al.
Page 4
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Both chronic and intermittent fiber deficiency promotes enrichment of mucus-degrading 
bacteria
Although dietary changes are known to perturb microbiota composition, the impact of diet 
variation, especially chronic or intermittent fiber deficiency, on the activities and abundance 
of mucin-degrading bacterial communities has not been studied in functional detail. After 
validating stable SM colonization, three groups of mice were maintained by constant feeding 
of one of three different diets: Fiber-rich (FR), Fiber-free (FF) or Prebiotic (Pre). In contrast 
to the FR diet that contained naturally milled food ingredients with intact fiber particles, the 
Pre diet was designed to study the effect of adding a mixture of purified, soluble glycans, 
similar to those used in prebiotic formulations (Fig. 2C). To imitate the fact that the human 
diet experiences fluctuating amounts of fiber from meal-to-meal, four other groups were 
alternated between the FR and FF or Pre and FF diets on a daily- or four-day basis (Fig. 1B).
Fecal microbial community dynamics showed that in mice switched to the FF diet, several 
species rapidly and reproducibly changed in abundance (Figs. 2A,B; Fig. S3). Four species
—A. muciniphila, B. caccae, B. ovatus and E. rectale—were highly responsive to diet 
change. A. muciniphila and B. caccae are able to degrade MOGs in vitro. B. ovatus and E. 
rectale cannot metabolize MOGs, but together can use a broad range of polysaccharides 
found in dietary fiber (Fig. 1A). In the absence of fiber, the abundance of A. muciniphila and 
B. caccae increased rapidly with a corresponding decrease of the fiber-degrading species 
(Fig. 2A). The Pre diet, which contains purified polysaccharides and is otherwise isocaloric 
with the FF diet, had a similar effect on community composition as the FF diet but separated 
slightly by PCoA ordination from FF, likely due to increased Bacteroides abundance (Figs. 
2A,B). Intriguingly, the abundances of the same four bacteria noted above fluctuated rapidly 
on a daily basis when the FR and FF diets were oscillated (Fig. 2C; Figs. S3), corroborating 
their ability to respond dynamically to variations in dietary fiber. The increase in mucin-
degrading species observed in fecal samples matched with cecal abundances at the end of 
the experiment (Fig. 2D and panels to the right of plots in Fig. 2A). Moreover, similar levels 
of mucin-degrading bacteria were quantified in the colonic lumen and mucus layer using 
laser capture microdissection (Fig. 2E), indicating that proliferation of mucin-degrading 
bacteria in this model is a community-wide effect and not limited just to the mucus layer.
Many of the other bacteria (except R. intestinalis and B. intestinihominis) were sensitive to 
changes between the FR and FF diets on daily and four-day bases, albeit to lower degrees 
(Fig. S3B, Table S2). Two additional species especially sensitive to diet change were 
Desulfovibrio piger (increased on FF diet) and Marvinbryantia formatexigens (decreased on 
FF diet) (Fig. S3A). Population changes in the groups oscillated between Pre and FF diets 
were similar to the abundances observed in FF only diet regimen (Table S2). Thus, despite 
the pure polysaccharides contained in the Pre diet exerting a clear physiological impact on 
the microbiota (discussed below), the amount and composition of the purified 
polysaccharides in this diet exert little effect on species composition.
Desai et al.
Page 5
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Community transcriptional and enzymatic readouts demonstrate enhanced degradation of 
mucus when fiber is absent
Since mucin-degrading bacteria were higher on both the FF and Pre diets that lack naturally 
complex plant fiber, we reasoned that this increased abundance is due to their ability to 
degrade mucus as an alternative nutrient. To test this, we measured changes in transcripts 
encoding carbohydrate active enzymes (CAZymes) that enable gut bacteria to utilize dietary 
fiber and mucosal polysaccharides (cecal samples from all but the 4-day oscillation groups 
were analyzed).
Based on new or existing genome annotations of the 14 species in our synthetic community, 
a total of 1,661 different degradative CAZymes belonging to 96 different families were 
detected (glycoside hydrolase, GH; polysaccharide lyase, PL; and carbohydrate esterase, 
CE, families were counted). This number is close to the total number of families (122) that 
was identified in a larger survey of 177 human gut bacterial reference genomes (El Kaoutari 
et al., 2013), indicating that our synthetic community retains much of the metabolic potential 
towards carbohydrates that is present in a more diverse microbiota. Of the 96 enzyme 
families in our community, members of 38 families, plus M60-like proteases (pfam13402), a 
group of enzymes previously shown to degrade mucin glycoproteins (Nakjang et al., 2012), 
showed variable expression in either FR/FF or Pre/FF community transcriptome 
comparisons (Fig. 3A). These differentially abundant degradative enzymes mapped to 770 
different genes contributed from all species except D. piger (Table S4).
Our transcriptomic data show that in the mice fed the FR diet, transcripts belonging to 
enzyme families that target dietary fiber polysaccharides were more abundant. In contrast, in 
mice fed the FF diet, transcripts encoding enzyme families known to release sugars from 
host substrates, including mucin O-glycans, were elevated (Fig. 3A). In line with our in vitro 
growth assays (Fig. 1A) and the microbial community abundance data (Fig. 2), we found 
that B. ovatus and E. rectale contributed a majority of CAZymes specific for plant 
polysaccharides (Fig. 3A). The four in vitro mucin degraders were the major contributors to 
the degradation of host glycans and mucus in vivo. Additionally, transcripts encoding M60-
like proteases (pfam13402) were also more highly expressed in FF conditions (Fig. 3A). 
Expression of these putative mucin-targeting enzymes was primarily contributed by B. 
caccae, an organism that possesses 16 of these genes compared to just 4 in A. muciniphila 
and 5 in all other species combined. This observation suggests the tantalizing possibility that 
B. caccae is particularly equipped via its M60-like proteases to perform a key degradative 
step (cleavage of glycoprotein backbones) during mucin foraging and this ability may 
facilitate access to mucus carbohydrate structures by other bacteria.
In the group fed the Pre diet, similar transcripts as in the FR-fed group were elevated relative 
to FF, albeit to lower levels (Fig. 3A bottom histogram). Furthermore, transcripts for the 
same bacterial enzymes presumed to target mucus in the FR/FF diet comparison were 
observed in the Pre/FF comparison. Additional RNA-Seq analyses of cecal transcriptomes 
from mice oscillated between FR/FF and Pre/FF on a daily basis (collected after 1 day on FF 
diet) provided similar results to those obtained for the FF only diet mice (Table S4). Our 
transcriptomic readouts corroborate the increased abundance of mucin-degrading bacteria 
Desai et al.
Page 6
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 observed in these mice (Fig. 2D) and demonstrate that even intermittent fiber deficiency has 
the potential to alter the microbiota and favor mucin-degrading species.
To further connect the in vivo responses of B. caccae and A. muciniphila with degradation of 
mucin O-glycans, we performed additional transcriptional profiling of these two species on 
purified MOGs from porcine gastric mucus. We have previously shown that this mixture 
contains ~130 different structures (Hickey et al., 2015) that when metabolized by B. 
thetaiotaomicron stimulate a transcriptional response that overlaps substantially with genes 
expressed in vivo under fiber-restricted conditions (Martens et al., 2008). During growth on 
MOGs as the sole carbon source, B. caccae and A. muciniphila activated expression of 82 
and 61 genes, respectively (Table S5). In previous microarray data from growth in the same 
substrate, B. thetaiotaomicron activated expression of 166 genes (Martens et al., 2008). 
Next, we examined expression of these validated O-glycan-responsive genes (for B. caccae, 
A. muciniphila and B. thetaiotaomicron) in the SM community from FF-fed mice compared 
to FR. In support of our hypothesis, validated B. caccae and A. muciniphila O-glycan-
responsive genes were increased in the FF condition (Fig. 3B). B. caccae expression was 
increased irrespective of normalization by reads mapped to the whole community (i.e., 
including increased B. caccae abundance) or to just the B. caccae genome (discounts 
abundance change and examines changes in expression).
Consistent with its specialization for O-glycans, A. muciniphila mostly showed increased 
expression of O-glycan-responsive genes proportional to its increased population size (from 
~20% to ~40%), indicating that it does not shift its substrate utilization in comparison to the 
FR diet (Fig. 3B, see also Table S6e). The idea that B. caccae is capable of broader 
transcriptional shifts, compared to A. muciniphila, is further supported by global analysis of 
its gene expression changes between the FF and FR diets and one-day alternations (Fig. S4). 
In response to the FF diet, B. caccae showed increased in vivo expression of 237 genes, 
including 29 degradative enzymes; whereas, A. muciniphila only showed increased 
expression of 43 genes, including 2 enzymes (Fig. S4). In contrast to previous 
monoassociation data (Sonnenburg et al., 2005), B. thetaiotaomicron mostly showed 
unchanged or slightly decreased expression of its known O-glycan utilization genes after a 
shift to FF (Fig. 3B, Table S6b).
Colonic mucin O-glycans contain glycosidic linkages distinct from plant fibers and also 
covalently linked sulfate. In further support of increased bacterial degradation of the host 
mucus on the FF diet, we detected significantly increased bacterial enzymes (sulfatase and 
α-fucosidase) in the mice subjected to the FF diet on either a chronic or intermittent basis 
(Fig. 3C). In contrast, enzymes targeting linkages in fiber polysaccharides (β-glucosidase) 
were significantly reduced in the mice fed the fiber-deficient diets, while others involved in 
xylan and α-galactan degradation trended similarly without significance (Fig. 3C).Despite 
the dramatic change in microbiota species abundance and transcriptional response, there was 
only one significant change (succinate) in SCFA and organic acids in the FF diet fed mice 
(Fig. 3D). Overall, the transcriptomic and enzyme analyses support the conclusion that a 
fiber-deprived gut microbiota synergistically and progressively expresses CAZymes, 
sulfatases and proteases to attack mucus polysaccharides when the diet lacks complex plant 
fiber.
Desai et al.
Page 7
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fiber deprivation leads the gut microbiota to degrade the colonic mucus barrier
The mucus layer is a dynamic barrier that is constantly replenished through the secretory 
activity of goblet cells (Johansson et al., 2013). We rationalized that if bacterial consumption 
of mucin-derived nutrients exceeds new production, the integrity of this critical barrier could 
be compromised. To explore this possibility, we performed blinded thickness measurements 
of the colonic mucus layer from proximal colon to rectum in each mouse using Alcian blue 
stained sections (Fig. 4A). We further validated thickness of the mucus layer by 
immunofluorescence staining of the Muc2 mucins using α-Muc2 antibody (Fig. 4B). To 
address the possibility that variations in thickness are directly influenced by the diets used, 
we measured mucus layer thickness in germfree mice fed the FR or FF diets.
Colonic mucus measurements revealed that mucus thickness was highest in the colonized 
group fed the FR diet (Fig. 4C). In most other groups, including germfree (GF) controls, 
mucus thickness was significantly thinner than colonized FR mice. The observation that GF 
mice have thinner colonic mucus is consistent with previous studies in gnotobiotic mice and 
rats (Petersson et al., 2011; Wrzosek et al., 2013), which found that microbial colonization 
or exposure to cues such as peptidoglycan or lipopolysaccharides is required for mucus 
production. Notably, mucus in SM-colonized FF diet mice was 5–6X thinner than colonized 
mice fed the FR diet. From these data, we conclude that the mucus layer: i) is initially 
thinner in GF mice regardless of diet, ii) begins expanding upon microbial colonization, but 
iii) is disproportionately eroded back to a thinner layer due to the increased mucus foraging 
activity by the microbiota in the context of the FF diet. A similar reduction in mucus 
thickness was observed in the Pre diet and both 4-day oscillation groups, while an 
intermediate thickness was observed in the 1-day FR/FF oscillation group (Fig. 4C).
Next, we determined whether mucus production was altered in colonized mice fed the FF 
diet. We examined the abundance of transcripts encoding several key proteins involved in 
building and regulating the mucus barrier (Fig. 4D): Muc2 and Muc5ac, two building blocks 
of colonic mucus; Tff1 and Tff3, goblet cell proteins that promote mucosal repair and 
protection; and Klf3 a transcription factor involved in barrier function. Our results show that 
the transcription of the major colonic mucin gene (Muc2) was slightly elevated in the 
colonized FF diet group, suggesting a compensatory response of the host to offset the 
increased bacterial mucus degradation in this group; whereas other genes (Muc5ac, Tff1, 
Tff3 and Klf3) remained statistically unchanged (Fig. 4D). Qualitative visualization by 
Alcian blue (Fig. 4A) staining supports the conclusion that the colonic tissue of FF-fed 
colonized mice contained similar numbers of goblet cells that have yet to secrete their 
glycoproteins.
As expected, degradation of the mucus layer by the fiber-deprived gut microbiota brought 
luminal bacteria closer to the intestinal epithelium (Fig. 4B, inset), which could potentially 
trigger deleterious effects or other host compensatory responses. Histopathology (Fig. S5A) 
and body weight measurements over time (Fig. S5B) of mice from the groups with reduced 
mucus thickness did not reveal changes compared to the mice consuming the FR diet. 
However, measurements of three additional host parameters provided support for altered 
host responses in the face of mucus erosion: The first was fecal lipocalin – a neutrophil 
protein that binds bacterial siderophores and is associated with low-grade inflammation 
Desai et al.
Page 8
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Chassaing et al., 2015) – which was increased in the group of colonized mice fed the FF 
diet compared to those fed FR (Fig. 4E). A second readout, colon length, revealed shorter 
colons in colonized FF fed mice and other SM colonized groups when compared to 
colonized FR fed mice or GF mice on either diet (Fig. 4F). Additional analysis of host cecal 
tissue global transcriptional responses failed to reveal large-scale changes in the host; 
although, some compensatory responses were suggested by pathway analysis, which 
illuminated several immune responses as altered in the colonized FF fed mice (Fig. 4G, Fig. 
S5C, Table S7). Collectively, the data described above indicate that fiber-restricted, 
colonized mice experience erosion of the mucus barrier and some altered intestinal 
responses, albeit without overt signs of disease.
A fiber-deprived gut microbiota promotes heightened pathogen susceptibility
Since the mucus layer is a critical barrier against both commensal microbes and invading 
pathogens, we next hypothesized that the reduction in thickness associated with microbiota 
activity during low-fiber conditions would increase pathogen susceptibility. To test this idea, 
we chose the attaching/effacing pathogen Citrobacter rodentium (Cr) because it must 
traverse the mucus layer to access the epithelium and cause colitis (Collins et al., 2014). 
Towards this point, a previous study demonstrated that mice genetically lacking the 
dominant colonic mucin glycoprotein (Muc2−/−), but not wild-type mice, develop lethal 
colitis following infection with Cr, highlighting that the mucus layer is an important initial 
barrier to this pathogen (Bergstrom et al., 2010).
Therefore, we recreated the previously observed diet-modulated thick and thin mucus layer 
phenotypes in gnotobiotic mice, and infected both groups with Cr (Fig. S6A). To control for 
diet-specific effects on Cr pathogenesis in the absence of our SM, we infected two additional 
groups consisting of germfree (GF) mice fed a priori (~4 weeks before infection) the same 
FR or FF diets. We collected fecal samples each day post Cr infection to measure changes in 
pathogen colonization by both selective plating for Cr and 16S rRNA gene analysis (Figs. 
5A,B, Fig. S6A). In the two groups colonized by the synthetic microbiota, Cr levels 
gradually increased but were significantly higher beginning at day 2 in mice fed the FF diet, 
and remained ~10-fold higher thereafter.
The dramatic diet-specific increase of Cr levels in SM-colonized mice fed the FF diet was 
accompanied by weight loss that was specific to this group (Fig. 5C). Importantly, both GF
+Cr groups that had high pathogen levels (Fig. 5A) failed to exhibit similar weight loss, 
illuminating that the pathogen alone is insufficient for this effect on either diet. The higher 
pathogen burdens in colonized mice fed the FF diet were associated with multiple signs of 
morbidity such as hunched posture and inactivity. Notably, by 10 days post infection, 60% 
of the mice from the SM colonized FF group had to be euthanized due to ≥20% loss of body 
weight (Fig. 5D). Mice in the other 3 groups did not show similar morbidity.
Histological scoring of the cecal and colonic tissue revealed that the SM-colonized FF diet 
group experienced inflammation that covered a significantly more expansive surface area 
(Figs. 5E–G). An exception was the descending colon/rectum, which showed larger areas of 
inflamed tissue in both FR and FF groups; although, the FF group was still significantly 
higher and 100% affected. When the tissue was inflamed, the level of hyperplasia was 
Desai et al.
Page 9
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 similar across all four groups (Fig. S6B). Importantly, there were overall lower levels of 
inflamed tissue in both of our GF+Cr control groups. To determine if increased mucus 
production post infection could explain the lower disease observed in the GF+Cr groups, we 
measured thickness of the colonic mucus and found that Cr triggered only a slight increase 
in GF mucus thickness; whereas the thick mucus layer associated with the FR diet in the 
context of microbiota colonization persisted (Fig. S7A,B).
Based on the above results, we further hypothesized that the increased area of inflamed 
tissue in FF mice was due to earlier and increased pathogen access due to the microbiota-
degraded mucus layer. To test this idea, we infected the same four treatment groups (SM-
colonized or GF mice, fed either FR or FF diets) with a luciferase-expressing Cr strain (Fig. 
6A). At 4 days post infection, we sacrificed all mice and conducted bioluminescent imaging 
of the colons after flushing out the luminal contents. In support of our hypothesis, and 
despite having similar levels of fecal Cr in FR- and FF-fed SM mice (Fig. 6B), we saw 
significantly higher pathogen signal adherent to the colonic tissue of SM colonized mice fed 
the FF diet as compared to those fed FR (Figs. 6C,D). The higher levels of attached Cr in FF 
fed SM mice were further validated by transmission electron microscopy, revealing 
increased appearance of the attaching and effacing lesions, pedestals and loss of microvilli 
that is typically associated with Cr infection (Fig. 6E). Notably, GF+Cr mice on either diet 
displayed similarly high adherent bacterial signal as the FF-fed SM mice (Fig. 6D, Fig. 
S7C). Taken together, these results suggest that the pathogen can more quickly traverse the 
thin colonic mucus layers in GF mice (irrespective of diet) and SM-colonized mice fed the 
FF diet. However, the commensal microbiota is also required in the context of increased 
pathogen access to elicit more severe disease, possibly by provoking co-inflammatory 
responses.
DISCUSSION
The health benefits of fiber consumption have been purported for decades, yet the influence 
of many different chemical and physical forms of fiber polysaccharides on the gut 
microbiota, and ways through which gut bacteria digest, sequester and share these 
chemically complex nutrients, are just now being unraveled in detail (Cuskin et al., 2015; 
Rakoff-Nahoum et al., 2016). Aside from loss of beneficial SCFA production, microbiota-
mediated mechanisms that connect low fiber intake to poor gastrointestinal health have not 
been described. Using a gnotobiotic mouse model, our study provides a mechanism by 
which a diet deficient in complex plant fiber triggers a synthetic gut microbiota to feed on 
the colonic mucus layer that acts as a primary barrier against invading pathogens (Fig. 7).
Our findings reveal important implications regarding how our immediate diet history may 
modify susceptibility to some enteric diseases. Our approach highlights the power of using a 
tractable synthetic human gut microbiota, in which the individual members can be 
characterized or manipulated to support functional interpretations. We demonstrate that fiber 
deficiency allows the subset of mucin-degrading bacteria to increase their population and 
express mucin-degrading CAZymes to access mucin as a nutrient. While the ability to 
annotate CAZyme functions is well developed vis-a-vis many other metabolic functions that 
are important in the microbiome (El Kaoutari et al., 2013), there are still substantial 
Desai et al.
Page 10
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ambiguities in connecting such predictions with precise catalytic roles. Here, we not only 
leverage knowledge of the substrate and enzyme specificities associated with some of the 
well-studied species in our SM (Table S4 and references therein), but we also employ new in 
vitro growth and transcriptional profiling experiments for key mucus-degrading bacteria (B. 
caccae and A. muciniphila). Our results point out a poignant example of how this evolving 
“bottom up” approach can increasingly resolve functional resolution in complex microbial 
systems: only very recently, the single B. ovatus GH98 enzyme that is increased in the FR 
diet (leftmost bar, Fig. 3A, top) was shown unequivocally to be an endo-β-xylosidase 
(Rogowski et al., 2015). Prior to this finding, the GH98 family was only known to contain 
blood group antigen-cleaving endo-α-galactosidases – a function that could have 
confusingly been associated with mucus O-glycan metabolism instead of its proper target, 
the plant fiber xylan.
Our results shed important light on the nature and amount of fiber that is required for the 
health of the colonic mucus layer. The prebiotic diet, which contains purified soluble fibers 
that are similar to common prebiotics (e.g., inulin, arabinoxylan, β-glucan), could not 
mitigate microbial erosion of the mucus barrier despite having a clear impact on the cecal 
community transcriptome. Since the FR diet contains complex plant fiber in its natural form 
(intact plant cell walls) and at higher concentration (~15% vs. 10% in the Pre diet), we 
cannot determine which variable (form or amount) is most important. However, the defined 
FF diet provides an ideal platform to which purified polysaccharides and even individual 
food items can be added to separately test both of these parameters for their ability to 
alleviate mucus degradation. Such an approach could help to design dietary therapeutics and 
next-generation prebiotics and will be particularly powerful given our existing knowledge of 
which polysaccharides the non-mucin-degrading species target (Fig. 1A) and our ability to 
implant new species with other defined functionalities in the SM.
The present work highlights that the gut microbiota plays significant positive and negative 
roles in the pathogenesis of C. rodentium. Whereas we previously showed that the presence 
of a microbiota blocks colonization by C. rodentium unless it possesses virulence traits 
(Kamada et al., 2012), here we demonstrate that diet-specific modulation of the gut 
microbiota can facilitate pathogen colonization and a fiber-deprived microbiota enhances 
disease susceptibility. Since the colonic mucus layer is an early barrier that a pathogen must 
transit (Collins et al., 2014), our data illustrate that a fiber-deprived microbiota has profound 
effects on the susceptibility to a gastrointestinal pathogen via reduction of this barrier. The 
contribution of mucus degradation to heightened pathogen susceptibility in our study is 
surprisingly parallel to a previous report that found a similar level of lethal colitis in mice 
with a genetically ablated (Muc2−/−) mucus layer (Bergstrom et al., 2010). From this 
perspective, it is striking that a dietary alteration in wild-type mice can imitate the phenotype 
of a mutation as severe as Muc2 loss. Given that Muc2 knockout mice experience 
inflammation and eventual colorectal cancer, it is reasonable to conclude that prolonged 
diet-driven mucus layer loss could result in similar outcomes. In this context, it is worth 
noting that higher levels of mucolytic bacteria have been found in IBD patients (Png et al., 
2010). In light of our observations that mice subjected to intermittent (daily or 4-day) dietary 
fiber deprivation exhibit thinner mucus, it will be critical in future studies to investigate the 
impact of periodic fiber deprivation, which is more like real human dietary habits, on the 
Desai et al.
Page 11
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 status of the mucus layer and the many downstream health effects that may be connected to 
mucus barrier dysfunction.
Taken together, our findings support a model in which dynamic interactions between dietary 
fiber and metabolism of a synthetic microbiota composed of commensal bacteria influence 
the status of the colonic mucus layer and susceptibility to pathogens that traverse this barrier 
(Fig. 7). The current findings are likely applicable to gut microbial communities with higher 
numbers of species: three previous studies (see also Introduction) involving rats with native 
microbiota and mice with transplanted human gut microbiota found a correlation between 
fiber-deficient diets and thinner colonic mucus layer. However, it remains to be investigated 
whether a thin colonic mucus layer together with a complex microbiota would contribute to 
enhanced pathogen susceptibility or how this effect might vary between individual microbial 
communities. Moreover, to understand whether microbial degradation of the colonic mucus 
is required for its secretion by the host in order to achieve a thicker mucus layer, future 
experiments need to address the effects on the mucus thickness after exclusion of the 4 
validated mucus degraders from our synthetic microbiota. Finally, since the strains used here 
are of human origin, and given the significant structural overlap between human and murine 
mucin (including glycosylation) (Johansson et al., 2013) and that C. rodentium uses similar 
pathogenesis mechanisms as human pathogenic E. coli strains, it is likely that such diet-
induced disease susceptibility would extend to humans. Since E. coli infections are 
associated with high morbidity (Kaper et al., 2004) and health-care cost, our study 
emphasizes the need to consider a dietary perspective in fully understanding their 
transmission. With this in mind, efforts to find the optimal combinations of natural or 
prebiotic fiber polysaccharides and the minimum intake required to restore the integrity and 
resilience of the colonic mucus layer should be paramount.
METHODS AND RESOURCES
CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
Further information may be obtained from the Lead Contact Eric C. Martens (Email: 
emartens@umich.edu; address: University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan 48109, USA).
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Gnotobiotic mouse model and diet treatments—All animal experiments followed 
protocols approved by the University of Michigan, University Committee for the Use and 
Care of Animals. Germfree male and female wild type Swiss Webster mice were colonized 
at 8–9 weeks of age and none of these mice were involved in any previous experiments/
treatments. Mice were housed alone or in groups as appropriate for gender, litter and diet 
requirements and provided ad libitum with autoclaved distilled water and the diets described 
below.
Identities and culture purity of the bacterial species in the synthetic gut microbiota were 
confirmed by sequencing their 16S rRNA genes, followed by comparison to sequences in 
public databases. Bacteria were grown in their respective media (Table S1) for community 
Desai et al.
Page 12
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 assembly or in vitro growth evaluation on carbohydrates. Each individual bacterial member 
of the SM was grown anaerobically (atmosphere 85% N2, 10% H2, 5% CO2) in its 
respective medium (Table S1) at 37°C with final absorbance (600nm) readings ranging from 
about 0.5 to 1.0. Bacterial cultures were mixed in equal volumes and each individual 
inoculum sealed in its own tube with anaerobic headspace. Each mouse was gavaged with 
0.2 ml of this mixture (freshly prepared each day) for three consecutive days at nearly the 
same time of the day.
Fiber-free (FF) and Prebiotic (Pre) diets were sterilized by gamma irradiation and the Fiber-
rich (FR) diet (LabDiet 5010; autoclavable rodent diet) was sterilized by autoclaving. The 
FF diet was manufactured by Teklad/Envigo (WI, USA) and, as previously described (TD.
140343) (Kamada et al., 2012), consisted of a modified version of Harlan TD.08810 in 
which starch and maldodextrin were replaced with glucose. The Pre diet was a new 
formulation based on the FF diet with 2.1% of a purified polysaccharide mixture (Table S1) 
added along with 10% cornstarch (each replacing an equivalent amount of glucose).
On day 14 after colonization (Figure 1B), mice were randomly assigned to groups by a 
technician, who was not aware of the details of the treatment groups. The mice were 
sometimes caged separately even within individual groups. For dietary oscillations, mice 
from their respective cage were transferred to a different cage with another diet. Bedding 
was replaced in each cage before the mice were transferred. To minimize the potential for 
circadian effects, the oscillation was carried out at nearly the same time of the day (±1.0 h 
between different days) and fecal samples were collected just prior to their transfer to 
another cage containing a different diet. The fecal samples were immediately stored at 
−20 °C until further use.
Citrobacter rodentium infection—A kanamycin (Km)-resistant wild-type C. rodentium 
strain (DBS120) and a luciferase-expressing strain of C. rodentium (DBS100; resistant to 
ampicillin (Amp)) were used (Kamada et al., 2012). Each mouse was gavaged with 0.2 ml of 
culture grown aerobically overnight at 37 °C (~109 CFU grown in Luria-Bertani broth 
without antibiotics). The exact same culture was used to gavage all mice in a single 
experiment to rule out effects of growth variation on pathogenesis. For experiments with 
luciferase expressing C. rodentium, mice were fed the FF diet for nearly the same duration 
(39 days instead of 42) as for the other experiment (Experiment 2B, Figure 5), prior to 
infecting them with C. rodentium. For the experiment with germfree (GF) mice, two groups 
of mice were separately pre-fed the FR and FF diets for ~4 weeks prior to infection with 
luciferase-expressing C. rodentium or the wild-type C. rodentium.
Formulation of the synthetic microbiota: We selected 12/14 bacterial species (Figure 1A) 
from the list of the most common/frequent 75–89 species in the human gut (Qin et al., 
2010). Moreover, the selection of 14 species was based in part on carbohydrate utilization 
abilities of a larger pool of ~350 strains that were screened on the same platform as shown in 
Figure 1A (Urs, Pudlo and Martens, unpublished). Based on the in vitro assays, our 
synthetic microbiota (SM) is not biased towards mucin-degrading bacteria, as only 4/14 
species possess this ability (Figure 1A).
Desai et al.
Page 13
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 METHOD DETAILS
Experimental design: A total of four gnotobiotic animal experiments (Experiments 1–4; 
also mentioned in figure legends) were performed – details of the experimental replication 
are provided in the corresponding figure legends. Both male and female mice were randomly 
used depending on the availability of animals. Gnotobiotic Experiment 1 contained 2 male 
mice in Fiber-rich (FR) group, 2 male mice in Fiber-free (FF) group and 1 male mouse in 
Prebiotic (Pre) group; all other animals in Gnotobiotic Experiment 1 were females. 
Gnotobiotic Experiment 2A and 2B had all male mice. All animals in Gnotobiotic 
Experiment 3 were females. Gender details of the animals in gnotobiotic Experiment 4 are 
shown in Figure 6 (both males and females were used). For infection with wild-type C. 
rodentium in germfree (GF) mice, all male mice were used. Gender details of GF mice used 
for infection with luciferase-expressing C. rodentium are included in Figure S7 (both males 
and females were used). Finally, all GF mice used for measurement of the colonic mucus 
layer (Figure 4C) were females. The researchers were not blinded to the identities of the 
treatment groups; however, the technician who assigned individual gnotobiotic animals to 
different treatment groups was not aware of the experimental details. Measurements of the 
colonic mucus layer were single blinded (see details below in the relevant section). The 
pathologist who devised the inflammation-scoring rubric was not blinded, and the 
pathologist who performed the histology scoring and the technician who performed electron 
microscopy were blinded for the identities of the treatment groups (see below for details of 
the methods). No data were excluded from the final analysis.
Sample size estimations were performed as follows in consultation with a statistician. Based 
on previous studies it was assumed an effect size (ratio of mean difference to within group 
standard deviation) of 3 would be reasonable for readouts such as mucus layer 
measurements, enzyme assays and measurement of transcript changes. With 3 animals in 
each group and a 5% significance level, two-sided, this would yield a power of 78% for the 
t-test. Therefore, for some of the feeding groups (those alternated between different diets), 3 
animals were used. However, for other feeding groups that were more important for the 
central research question of the study (e.g., constant feeding on Fiber-rich (FR) and Fiber-
free (FF) diets), at least 4 animals were used to obtain higher power. For Citrobacter 
rodentium infection experiments, in most cases 5 animals per group were used based on 
results of our previous study (Kamada et al., 2012).
Sample processing for animal experiments: All animals were killed using CO2 
asphyxiation followed by cervical dislocation. The gastrointestinal tracts were quickly 
removed. The colons were gently separated, by cutting at the cecum-colon junction and the 
rectum, and immediately preserved in Carnoy’s fixative (dry methanol:chloroform:glacial 
acetic acid in the ratio 60:30:10) with slight modifications to a previous protocol (Johansson 
and Hansson, 2012). Note that the Carnoy’s fixative was made fresh with anhydrous 
methanol, chloroform and glacial acetic acid. The colons were fixed in Carnoy’s solution for 
3 h followed by transfer to fresh Carnoy’s solution for 2–3 h. The colons were then washed 
in dry methanol for 2 h, placed in cassettes and stored in fresh dry methanol at 4 °C until 
further use. Cecal contents from each animal were divided into replicates; instantly flash-
frozen in liquid nitrogen and were stored at −80 °C until further use. Immediately after 
Desai et al.
Page 14
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 squeezing out the cecal contents, the cecal tissues were transferred in separate screw-cap 
tubes and were rapidly flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, followed by their storage at −80 °C 
until further use. Lengths of colons were measured immediately after fixation in Carnoy’s 
solution by photographing the colons in a reference cassette of identical size, followed by 
length measurement in Image J.
Purification of mucin O-glycans: Mucin O-glycans were purified from porcine gastric 
mucus as previously described in Martens et al., 2008, albeit with several modifications. 
Porcine gastric mucin (Type III, Sigma, USA) was suspended at 2.5% w/v in 100 mM Tris 
(pH 7.4): the mixture was immediately autoclaved for 5 min to increase solubility and 
reduce potential contaminating glycoside hydrolase and polysaccharide lyase activity, then 
cooled to 55°C. Proteinase K (Invitrogen, USA) was added to a final concentration of 0.1 
mg/ml and the suspension was incubated at 55°C for 16–20 h with slow shaking. The 
proteolyzed solution was subsequently centrifuged at 21,000 × g for 30 min at 4°C to 
remove insoluble material, and NaOH and NaBH4 were added to final concentrations of 0.1 
M and 1 M, respectively. This solution was incubated at 65°C for 18 h to promote selective 
release of O-linked glycans (mucin O-glycans and GAGs) from mucin glycopeptides by 
alkaline β-elimination. The pH was subsequently decreased to 7.0 with HCl and the 
neutralized mixture centrifuged at 21,000 × g for 30 min at 4°C, and then filtered through a 
0.22 μm filter (Millipore) to remove remaining insoluble material. The filtrate was 
exhaustively dialyzed (1 kDa cutoff) against deionized distilled H2O to remove salts and 
contaminating small molecules. The collected mucosal glycans were further fractionated 
using anion exchange chromatography by passing them twice over a DEAE-Sepharose 
(Sigma) column (325 ml bed volume; equilibrated in 50 mM Tris 7.4; gravity flow). The 
flow through (neutral fraction) was collected and the column washed with 1L of 50 mM 
Tris, pH 7.4. This fraction was used in all growth experiments and was further prepared by 
dialyzing against ddH2O (1 kDa cutoff), lyophilized and resuspended in ddH2O at 20 mg/ml.
Bacterial growth assays in a custom carbohydrate array: All species except 
Desulfovibrio piger were evaluated in a custom carbohydrate array (n = 2 replicate cultures 
per glycan); D. piger failed to grow in any of the tested minimal media, but is not predicted 
to have extensive carbohydrate-degrading capacity based on its small genomic complement 
of only 30 carbohydrate active enzymes. The custom carbohydrate array was formulated 
according to Martens et al., 2011, but with a few modifications included in the following 
protocol: flat bottom 96-well plates (Costar) were used, to which 100 μl of a 2x concentrated 
solution (prepared in Milli-Q water) of each of the sterilized carbohydrate stocks (Table S1) 
were added. The plates were then transferred to the anaerobic chamber (10% H2, 5% CO2 
and 85% N2) and were allowed to equilibrate with the anaerobic atmosphere for ~3–4 h. 
Growth assays for all carbohydrates were carried out in non-adjacent duplicates and all 
growth arrays contained two non-adjacent water only negative controls that were checked to 
ascertain that other medium components without added carbohydrates did not yield 
detectable growth. The cultures for the inoculation were grown overnight in their respective 
minimal media (MM)/regular growth media at 37°C under an anaerobic atmosphere (10% 
H2, 5% CO2 and 85% N2). MM for some bacterial species were used from previous studies, 
and for other members of the synthetic microbiota, MM with novel formulations were 
Desai et al.
Page 15
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 devised (see Table S1 for compositions of all growth media used in this study). MM were 
pre-reduced in the anaerobic chamber overnight by loosening the lids of the glass bottles 
containing the MM. 1 ml of the culture was centrifuged and the pellet was recovered – note 
that the centrifugation was performed inside the anaerobic chamber. The pellet was washed 
2 times in the respective MM in order to remove carried over carbohydrates from the culture 
media and was then resuspended in 1 ml, 2x concentrated MM without any carbohydrates. 
This 1 ml culture was used to inoculate 50 ml of 2x concentrated MM without carbohydrates 
at a 1:50 ratio. 100 μl of the resulting cultures were then added to the individual wells of the 
carbohydrate solutions in the 96-well plates, resulting in 200 μl of final volumes. A gas 
permeable, optically clear polyurethane membrane (Diversified Biotech, USA) was then 
used to seal the well plates under the same anaerobic atmosphere. Next, the well plates were 
loaded in a Biostack automated plate-handling device (Biotek Instruments, USA) place 
inside the anaerobic chamber, which was coupled with a Powerwave HT absorbance reader 
(Biotek Instruments, USA).
Absorbance values were measured at 600nm (A600) at an interval of 10 min over 96 h for all 
species, except for Akkermansia muciniphila, for which the absorbance was measured over 
144 h, owing to its relatively slow growth on mucin O-glycans (Figure S1B). To construct 
the heat map containing relative growth values (Figure 1A), absorbance data of all bacterial 
species were normalized as follows: only carbohydrate growth assays for which both 
replicate cultures produced an increase in absorbance of more than 0.1 were scored as 
positive (all other values were set to 0). Next, the maximum change in absorbance was 
normalized within each individual species by setting its best growth to 1.0 and normalizing 
all other positive growths to this maximum value (normalized values were thus between 0 
and 1.0). Finally, growth on each substrate was normalized across species by setting the 
maximum (previously normalized) growth value on that substrate to 1.0 and then adjusting 
the growth values for other strains on that same substrate relative to the maximum value, 
yielding final normalized values between 0 and 1.0. Both raw and normalized values are 
provided in Table S1.
To perform RNA-Seq analysis on pure cultures, A. muciniphila and Bacteroides caccae were 
grown anaerobically in their respective minimal media (Table S1). A. muciniphila was 
grown separately on two different substrates N-acetylglucosamine (5 mg/ml final 
concentration) and purified mucin O-glycans (10 mg/ml final concentration). Cultures of A. 
muciniphila were grown to mid-log phase (A600 values between 0.45–0.6). Cultures of B. 
caccae were grown separately on glucose and mucin O-glycan as the carbon sources (10 
mg/ml final concentration for both sugars) to mid-log phase (OD values between 0.7–0.8). 
Cultures of both species were treated with RNAprotect (Qiagen, USA) according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions. The RNAprotect treated bacterial pellets were stored at −80°C 
until extraction of RNA. Two replicate cultures per glycan (with closely matching ODs) 
were performed for each of the two bacterial species.
Citrobacter rodentium quantification—To determine the CFUs of C. rodentium, 
freshly collected fecal samples were weighed and homogenized in cold phosphate-buffered 
saline and were plated on LB agar plates with 50 μg/ml Km (for strain DBS120) or 200 
μg/ml Amp (for strain DBS100) at serial dilutions up to 10−9. The plates were incubated 
Desai et al.
Page 16
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 aerobically overnight at 37 °C. Killing of E. coli HS, the only facultative anaerobe in our 
SM, to Km and Amp was confirmed by plating it on LB agar with Km or Amp.
Extraction of nucleic acids: DNA from fecal samples was isolated using the MoBio 
PowerSoil Isolation Kit (MoBio Laboratories, USA) adapted for use in the epMotion 5075 
TMX or the DNA extraction protocol used for Collinsella aerofaciens (mentioned below). 
DNA was extracted from the bacterial pure cultures using DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit 
(Qiagen, USA), except that the following bead beating and phenol–chloroform extraction 
protocol, was employed to better extract DNA from C. aerofaciens: 1–2 ml of the overnight 
grown culture was centrifuged and the resulting pellet was combined with acid-washed glass 
beads (212–300 μm; Sigma-Aldrich, USA), 500 μl Buffer A (200 mM NaCl, 200 mM Tris, 
20 mM EDTA), 210 μl SDS (20% w/v, filter-sterilized) and 500 μl 
phenol:chloroform:isoamyl alcohol (25:24:1, pH 8.05; Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). A 
Mini-BeadBeater-16 (Biospec Products, USA) was used to disrupt the bacterial cells for 5 
min at room temperature, which was followed by cooling the samples for 1–2 min on wet 
ice. The samples were then centrifuged and the aqueous phase was recovered. An equal 
volume of phenol:chloroform:isoamyl alcohol (25:24:1) was added to the aqueous phase and 
was mixed with the aqueous phase by gentle inversion. After centrifugation (12,000 rpm, 
4°C, 3 min), the aqueous phase was removed. Next, 500 μl of pure chloroform was added to 
the aqueous phase, mixed by inversion and the tubes were centrifuged (12,000 rpm, 4°C, 3 
min). The aqueous phase was removed in fresh tubes and 1 volume of −20°C chilled 100% 
isopropanol and 1/10 volume 3 M sodium acetate (pH 5.2) were added to the aqueous phase. 
The samples were mixed by gentle inversion and incubated at −20°C for 1 h, centrifuged for 
20 minutes (12,000 rpm, 4°C) and the supernatants were discarded. The pellets were washed 
in 70% ethanol (v/v, prepared in nuclease-free water), air dried and then resuspended in 
nuclease-free water. The resulting DNA extracts were purified by using DNeasy Blood & 
Tissue Kit (Qiagen, USA).
RNA was extracted from cecal contents using a standard phenol–chloroform method with 
bead beating as mentioned earlier (Sonnenburg et al., 2006), but with a few modifications: 1 
ml of RNAprotect (Qiagen, USA) stored at room temperature was added to 200–300 mg of 
cecal contents stored at −80 °C, followed by thawing the cecal samples on wet ice. After the 
cecal contents were thawed, 250 μl acid-washed glass beads (212–300 μm; Sigma-Aldrich, 
USA) were added to the samples. Next, 500 μl of a solution of Buffer A (200 mM NaCl, 200 
mM Tris, 20 mM EDTA), 210 μl of 20% SDS (filter sterilized) and 500 μl of 
phenol:chloroform:isoamyl alcohol (125:24:1, pH 4.3; Fischer Scientific, USA) were added 
to the samples. The mixture was then bead beaten (instrument same as above) for 5 min and 
centrifuged at 4 °C (3 min at 13000 rpm). The aqueous phase was recovered and mixed with 
500 μl of the aforementioned phenol:chloroform:isoamyl alcohol solution. Afterwards, the 
mixture was centrifuged again at 4°C (3 min at 13,000 rpm) and the aqueous phase was 
recovered. 1/10 volume of a 3M sodium acetate (pH: 5.2) and 1 volume of −20°C chilled 
ethanol were added to the aqueous phase. The resulting solution was then mixed by gentle 
inversion and incubated for 20 min on ice. Afterwards, the mixture was centrifuged at 4°C 
(20 min at 13,000 rpm). The pellet was recovered and washed twice in 500 μl of cold 70% 
ethanol. The mixture was centrifuged at 4°C (5 min at 13,000 rpm) and the RNA pellet was 
Desai et al.
Page 17
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 recovered, air dried and then resuspended in nuclease-free water. The RNA extracts were 
then purified using an RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen, USA) according to the manufacturer’s 
protocol. During extraction of RNA from the cecal contents, a portion (~100–200 μl) of 
homogenized material immediately after bead beating was removed and stored at −80°C for 
extraction of DNA. To extract DNA from these cecal-content derived samples, DNA 
extraction protocol described above (used for C. aerofaciens) was used, except that bead 
beating and inclusion of glass beads were skipped. RNA was extracted from the 
RNAprotect-treated cell pellets of bacterial pure cultures of B. caccae using RNeasy Protect 
Bacteria Mini Kit. For extraction of RNA from RNAprotect-treated cell pellets of A. 
muciniphila, the RNA extraction protocol used for cecal contents (see above) was used, 
except that the samples were not treated with RNAprotect after thawing. RNA was extracted 
from cecal tissue by thawing the samples in the presence of RNAprotect (as described above 
for cecal contents), followed by homogenization (OMNI International) involving metal 
beads. RNA was then extracted with Trizol (Invitrogen, USA) according to manufacturer’s 
instructions. All RNA extracts were subjected to digestion of DNA using TURBO DNase 
(Ambion, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions..
Bioluminescence imaging and transmission electron microscopy: For bioluminescence 
imaging of the luciferase-expressing Citrobacter rodentium, GI tracts were removed and 
luminal contents were gently flushed with a syringe by passing phosphate-buffered saline 
(PBS) through the colon. The GI tracts were then cut open flat and rinsed in PBS to remove 
loosely attached luminal contents. Bioluminescence was visualized (identical exposure 
across all samples) and photographed using the IVIS200, Xenogen system. The colonic 
tissue sections showing highest luciferase intensity (from both Fiber-rich (FR) and Fiber-free 
(FF) diet fed colonized mice) were then immediately fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde prepared 
in 0.1 M Sorensen’s buffer (pH 7.4). Thereafter, the samples were treated with 1% osmium 
tetroxide in 0.1 M Sorensen’s buffer and were sequentially dehydrated in graded alcohols 
and propylene oxide, followed by infiltration in Spurrs or Epon. Ultrathin sections of the 
tissue samples were made using a diamond knife, stained and were visualized with a 
transmission electron microscope (Philips CM-100).
Laser capture microdissection: To perform laser capture microdissection (LCM) on 
colonic thin sections, 4 and 3 fecal masses were analyzed for the Fiber-rich (FR) and Fiber-
free (FF) groups, respectively. Colonic thin sections that were deposited on microscope 
slides were deparaffinized in xylene followed by dehydration by isopropanol (see details in 
the immunofluorescence staining protocol below). The sections were stored overnight in a 
container with Drierite dessicant (Drierite, USA). LCM was carried out using a Veritas 
Microdissection instrument (Arcturus, USA). DNA was extracted from the microdissected 
samples using the Arcturus Pico Pure DNA extraction kit and the accompanying protocol. In 
order to perform Ilumina sequencing, 16S rRNA genes were amplified from the LCM-
derived samples using a low biomass-optimized touch down PCR protocol as follows: 
denaturation at 95°C for 2 min; a total of 20 cycles with a touch-down program: 
denaturation at 95°C for 20 s, extension at 72°C for 5 min, annealing starting at 60°C for 15 
s which decreased 0.3°C per cycle; a total of 20 cycles: extension at 72°C for 5 min, 
annealing at 55°C 15 s and extension at 72°C for 5 min; final extension at 72°C for 5 min. 
Desai et al.
Page 18
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Note that a 5 min extension was used in order to reduce chimera development. Library 
preparation and sequencing were carried out using similar protocols described for fecal and 
cecal samples (see below).
Illumina sequencing and data analysis: PCR and library preparation were performed by 
the University of Michigan Microbial Systems Molecular Biology Lab as described by 
Kozich et al., 2013. The V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene was amplified using the dual-
index primers described by Kozich et al. with a few modifications to the PCR assay, which 
are included in the following protocol. Each of these dual-index primers contains an 
Illumina adapter, an 8-nt index sequence, a 10-nt pad sequence, a 2-nt linker, and the V4 
primers F515 and R806. These primer sequences are listed in Table S2. For the PCR assays, 
5 μl of each of the 4 μM primers, 0.15 μl AccuPrime High Fidelity Taq polymerase (Thermo 
Fisher Scientific, USA), 2 μl of 10x AccuPrime PCR II buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 
USA), 11.85 μl of sterile PCR-grade water and 1 μl of the DNA template were mixed. The 
PCR cycles started with a 2 min of denaturation at 95°C, followed by 30 cycles each 
consisting of 95°C for 20 s, 55°C for 15 s and 72°C for 5 min, followed by a final step of 
72°C for 10 min. The amplicons were normalized to the lowest concentration of the pooled 
plates using a SequalPrep normalization plate kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). A KAPA 
Library Quantification kit for Illumina platforms (Kapa Biosystems, USA) was used to 
determine the library’s concentration and an Agilent Bioanalyzer high-sensitivity DNA 
analysis kit (Agilent, USA) was employed to determine the amplicon size. The amplicons 
were sequenced using an Illumina MiSeq with a MiSeq Reagent 222 kit V2 (Illumina, 
USA). The libraries were prepared following the Illumina protocol for 2nM libraries: 
‘Preparing Libraries for Sequencing on the MiSeq’ (part 15039740, Rev. D).
Raw sequences were analyzed using mothur (v1.33.3) (Schloss et al., 2009). The following 
control samples were included: 1) DNA extracted from the fecal samples collected from 
germfree mice, 2) a mixture of extracted DNA from pure cultures of the members of the 
synthetic microbiota (DNA samples from each strain were mixed in equal amounts) and 3) 
PBS negative controls during DNA extraction and PCR amplification. Following sequence 
barcode-trimming, sequences were aligned to a custom reference database, consisting of the 
V4 16S rRNA region from each of the 14 bacterial members and C. rodentium. UCHIME 
(Edgar et al. 2011) was used to remove sequence chimeras. The R package ‘vegan’ was used 
to calculate the principal coordinates analysis (PCoA) from the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity 
index based on phylotype classification of the 14 bacterial members. Standard R commands 
and the R package ‘plyr’ (Wickham, 2011) were used to generate median values of relative 
abundance or change in relative abundance over time, and the Wilcoxon signed-rank test 
(two-sample comparisons) or the Kruskal-Wallis test (multiple groups) was used to 
determine significance as indicated due to the nonparametric distribution of relative 
abundance data. R was used to visualize relative abundance of bacterial members in different 
groups, over time as streamplots, or in heatmaps. Change in relative abundance over time 
was determined by subtracting the relative abundance of the specified microbial member 
from the day prior within each animal, over time. Change in relative abundance followed a 
parametric distribution, and student t-tests were used to calculate significant differences in 
the change of relative abundance between diet groups. The R package ‘ggplots’ was used to 
Desai et al.
Page 19
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 generate heatmaps visualizing the Percent of Maximum Abundance (POMA) as previously 
described (McNulty et al., 2013). For this, the relative abundance of the different species 
was normalized by their maximum abundance observed for a given species across all time-
points from the given animal. A detailed list of commands used to analyze the data, 
including the commands used in mothur, are included in https://github.com/aseekatz/
mouse.fiber. Raw sequences have been deposited in the Sequence Read Archive under the 
study accession SRP065682 (BioProjectID PRJNA300261).
Microbial RNA-Seq and CAZyme annotation: Microbial RNA-Seq was performed on 
pure cultures of A. muciniphila and B. caccae that were grown separately on mucin O-
glycans and on the respective simple sugars (see above). For Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, 
gene expression data from previous studies was utilized (Martens et al., 2008; Sonnenburg et 
al., 2005). To perform RNA-Seq on cecal samples, 3 samples each (out of 4) were randomly 
selected from Fiber-rich (FR) and Fiber-free (FF) diet groups and all three samples each 
from the Prebiotic diet (Pre), FR–FF daily oscillation and Pre–FF daily oscillation groups 
were utilized. To remove ribosomal RNA, samples were subjected to Ribo-Zero rRNA 
Removal Kits (Bacteria) (Epicentre, Illumina, USA) according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions. The resulting residual mRNA concentrations were quantified using Qubit RNA 
Assay Kit (Life Technologies, USA).
Libray preparation and sequencing of RNA-Seq libraries was carried out using the Illumina 
HiSeq platform and TruSeq adaptors. Samples were multiplexed in groups of 24 per lane 
(see Tables S4, S5, S6 for quantification of reads mapped to each sample). The resulting data 
in fastq file format were demultiplexed and mapped to the respective species genomes or 
community metagenomes using RPKM normalization and default parameters, and were 
further analyzed for fold-change and statistics (moderated t-test with Benjamini-Hochberg 
correction) within the Arraystar software package (DNAStar, USA). Mapping reads to all 
genes in the 14 species community was intended to retain the contributions of community 
member abundance shifts while mapping only to individual genomes was intended to 
normalize abundance shifts of the same species between conditions and isolate gene 
expression changes between conditions. The diet-specific behaviour of known B. 
thetaiotaomicron and B. ovatus genes involved in fiber polysaccharide degradation (Table 
S6) was used as internal validation that biologically relevant changes in gene expression 
were indeed being detected. As stated above, three biological replicates were analyzed for 
each of the in vivo dietary conditions used.
p-Nitrophenyl glycoside-based enzyme assays: p-Nitrophenyl glycoside-based enzyme 
assays were carried out on cecal samples stored at −80°C. The cecal samples were thawed 
on wet ice and 500 μl buffer (50 mM Tris, 100 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2; pH 7.25) was 
added to 22–67 mg of cecal contents. The buffer additionally contained the following 
additives: lysozyme (tiny amount of powder/100 ml buffer), TritonX (100 μl, 12%/100 ml 
buffer), DNases (tiny amount of powder/100 ml buffer) and protease inhibitor (one tablet of 
EDTA-free, Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Roche, USA/100 ml buffer). After adding the buffer 
to cecal samples, the samples were sonicated with an ultrasonic processor for 45 s (9 cycles 
of 5 s sonication followed by a break of 10 s; 35% amplitude; using a tapered microtip of 3 
Desai et al.
Page 20
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mm) on ice. Sonicated samples were subjected to centrifugation (10,000 g, 10 min, 4°C). 
Supernatants (~400 μl) were carefully pipetted and were stored at −20°C until further use. 
The following nitrophenyl-linked substrates (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) were employed: 
Potassium 4-nitrophenyl sulfate, 4-nitrophenyl α-D-galactopyranoside, 4-nitrophenyl N-
acetyl-β-D-glucosaminide, 4-nitrophenyl β-D-glucopyranoside, p-nitrophenyl α-L-
fucopyranoside and p-nitrophenyl β-D-xylopyranoside. Protein concentrations in the 
supernatants were determined using Pierce Microplate BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo 
Scientific, USA). Some samples were diluted with the buffer (same buffer as above) to 
obtain a homogenous range of protein concentrations across all samples. 5 μg of total protein 
was used in the 150 μl reactions inside flat-bottom, 96-well plates (Costar) with 10 mM 
nitrophenyl-based substrate in the buffer (same buffer as above). Absorbance measurements 
(405 nm) were started immediately in a plate reader (Biotek, USA) at 37°C and absorbance 
values were recorded every minute for 6–12 h duration depending on linearity of the kinetic 
curve. The enzyme activities were determined by plotting a standard curve of known 
concentrations of 4-nitrophenol and measuring the OD values at 37°C.
Thickness measurements of the colonic mucus layer: Post Carnoy’s fixation, the 
methanol-stored colon samples (see above) were embedded in paraffin and thin sections (~5 
μm) were cut and deposited on glass slides. Alcian blue staining was performed by the 
following protocol: 1) deparaffinization and hydration to distilled water, 2) Alcian blue 
solution for 30 minutes, 3) washing in running tap water for 2 minutes, 4) rinsing in distilled 
water, 5) dehydration (2X changes) and treatment with absolute alcohol (2X changes), 3 
minutes each, 6) clearance in xylene (3X changes), 3 minutes each 7) cover with coverslip. 
To measure the thickness of the colonic inner mucus layer, thousands of partially 
overlapping photographs were taken from nearly the entire length of each colon based from 
the Alcian blue stained slides after cross-validation using anti-Muc2 staining (Fig. 4A,B 
main text). The images captured all of the available fecal masses of all mice, although this 
number was variable and there were generally fewer colonic fecal masses in mice fed the FF 
diet alone or in any combination. Image sample names were blinded by M.S.D. and M.W., 
and the thickness of the colonic sections were then measured by E.C.M. using ImageJ. Only 
regions in which the mucus layer was sandwiched between epithelium on one side and 
luminal contents on the other were used; care was taken to measure regions that represented 
the average thickness in each blinded image; 2–3 measurements per image were taken and 
averaged over the entire usable colon surface. See Fig. 4A,B for representative images in 
which the region measured as the inner mucus layer is delineated in both Alcian blue and 
anti-Muc2 staining.
Measurements in Cr infected mice were conducted exactly as described for non-infected 
mice above, with the exception that only distal colon–rectal tissue was considered as this 
was uniformly a site at which inflammation was high and C. rodentium would be present. 
Since only sections in which luminal contents that could be visualized adjacent to the mucus 
layer were considered, only a few measurements were obtained for a single SM-colonized 
infected mouse fed the FF diet due to the fact that all mice in this group were extremely 
morbid and not eating.
Desai et al.
Page 21
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Quantitative PCR: In addition to Illumina sequencing of the 16S rRNA genes (V4 region), 
as a second approach to quantifying relative bacterial abundance in fecal samples, 
phylotype-specific bacterial primers were designed. The primers were designed against 
randomly selected genes that were checked for homology against the other 13 species in 
each case. These primer sequences are listed in Table S3A. The primers were tested for 
specificities against the target strain by comparing the primer and target gene sequences 
against sequences in public databases. Moreover, specificity of each primer was validated by 
the following three approaches: 1) by quantitative PCR (qPCR) against target species 
genome and melting curve analysis (for a single peak), 2) by qPCR for each primer set 
against a non-target template comprising of genomic DNA from the 13 bacterial species in 
our synthetic microbiota, 3) by performing qPCR against DNA extracted from the fecal 
samples of germfree mice feeding on the Fiber-rich diet. qPCR was carried out in 384 wells 
(with each plate including known concentrations of template DNA included to plot a 
standard curve). The qPCR analyses were performed using KAPA SYBR FAST qPCR Kits 
(KAPA Biosystems, USA) on Applied Biosystems (ABI) Real Time PCR instrument (ABI, 
USA). The amount of DNA was quantified by plotting a standard curve of varying DNA 
concentrations of the target template.
Quantification of short chain fatty acids: Cecal samples stored at −80°C were used to 
quantify short chain fatty acids (SCFAs). Samples were first thawed on wet ice. Then, an 
equivalent amount of MilliQ water was added (100 ul per 100 mg of material) to cecal 
contents (≥ 0.05 g) and the samples were thoroughly homogenized by vortexing for 1 
minute. The samples were then centrifuged at 13,000 g for at least 3 minutes (or for a longer 
time depending on time required to obtain a tight pellet). The supernatant was pipetted and 
filtered through a 0.22 μm filter (Millex-gv 4mm SLGV004SL). Samples were kept on ice or 
frozen until quantification of SCFAs by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). 
Some samples were diluted to obtain enough liquid to inject onto the HPLC, or in certain 
cases they were diluted so that they could be filtered. A Shimadzu HPLC with an Agilent 
HP-87X column was utilized for separating compounds, with a mobile phase of 0.01 N 
H2SO4, a flow rate of 0.6 ml/min, and a column temperature of 50°C. A UV detector set to a 
wavelength of 214 nm was used to measure concentrations.
Immunofluorescence staining: The immunofluorescence staining for Muc2 mucin was 
performed on the colonic thin sections after several modifications to the protocols from 
Johansson and Hansson, 2012 and an immunohistochemistry/tissue section staining protocol 
from BD Biosciences, USA (http://www.bdbiosciences.com). The sections were 
deparaffinized by dipping in 50-ml Falcon conical tubes filled with xylene (Sigma-Aldrich, 
USA) for 5 min, followed by transfer to another tube with fresh xylene for 5 min – care was 
taken to completely immerse the tissue material in the liquid (also in the subsequent steps). 
This was followed by two dehydration steps of 5 min each using 100% isopropanol 
contained in conical tubes. The slides were then washed by dipping in conical tubes 
containing MilliQ-water. The antigens were retrieved by placing the slides in a glass beaker 
with enough BD Retrievagen A (pH 6.0; BD Biosciences, USA) to cover the slides. The 
sections were then heated by microwaving and holding at about 89°C for 10 min 
(microwaving was repeated during this time, as required). The slides were then cooled for 20 
Desai et al.
Page 22
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 min at room temperature. Afterwards, the slides were washed 3 times with MilliQ-water. 
Excess liquid was gently blotted away and a PAP pen was used to draw a circle around the 
tissue area, in order to better hold liquid on the tissue area during subsequent steps. Blocking 
was performed by immersing the slides into blocking buffer (1:10 dilution of goat serum 
(Sigma, USA) in 1x Tris-buffered Saline (TBS; 500 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4)) and 
incubating them at room temperature for 1 h. For the primary antibody staining, the tissue 
sections were covered in a 1:200 dilution Mucin 2 antibody (H-300) (original concentration: 
200 μg/ml; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, USA) in the aforementioned blocking buffer and 
incubated for 2 h at room temperature. After the incubation step, the excess liquid was 
blotted away and the slides were rinsed 3 times in 1x TBS (in conical tubes) for 5 min each. 
The secondary antibody staining was performed by covering the tissue sections with a 1:200 
dilution of Alexa Fluor 488 conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG antibody (original 
concentration: 2 mg/ml; Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) in blocking buffer and the sections 
were incubated for 1 h at room temperature in dark. The excess liquid was blotted away and 
the sections were rinsed twice for 5 min each using TBS. Next, the sections were stained for 
5 min at room temperature in dark using a 10 μg/ml of DAPI solution diluted in 1x TBS 
(Sigma-Aldrich, USA). The sections were then rinsed with Milli-Q water and blotted dry. 
Finally, the sections were covered with ProLong Gold Antifade Mountant (Invitrogen, 
USA), covered with coverslips and the edges of the coverslips sealed with nail polish. The 
slides were kept at room temperature in dark for at least 24 h and then visualized by 
Olympus BX60 upright fluorescence microscope (Olympus, USA).
ELISA for fecal Lipocalin: Frozen fecal samples (−20°C) were used to determine the levels 
of fecal Lipocalin (LCN-2). The assays were performed within 30 days of sample collection. 
The samples were prepared as mentioned previously (Chassaing et al., 2015), with a few 
modifications in the sample prepration protocol: fecal samples stored at −20°C were thawed 
on wet ice and 6.9–67.7 mg of samples were separated in fresh tubes, to which 0.5 ml of 1% 
(v/v) Tween 20 (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) prepared in PBS was added. To get a homogenous 
suspension, the samples were vortexed for 20 min. The suspension was then centrifuged at 
4°C for 10 min at 12000 rpm. Next, the supernatant was carefully recovered and stored at 
−20°C until the analysis. To measure the LCN-2 levels, a mouse Lipocalin-2/NGAL DuoSet 
ELISA kit (R & D Biosystems, USA) was employed and the manufacturer’s protocol was 
followed.
Tissue histology: To perform histology analyses on GI tracts of C. rodentium infected mice: 
first the intestinal segments (cecum and colon together) were fixed in Carnoy’s fixative for 3 
h, followed by transfer to fresh Carnoy’s fixative overnight. Next, the samples were washed 
in 100% methanol (2x) for 30 min each, which was followed by washing in 100% ethanol 
(2x) for 20 min each. The samples were then stored in 100% ethanol at 4°C until further use. 
After 100% ethanol washes, the intestinal tissue samples were divided into 3 sections for 
histology: cecum, ascending colon, and the descending colon/rectum. These sections were 
embedded, processed and cut by an experienced histology core (Washington University, 
USA), and then stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H and E) prior to analysis. An 
unblinded experienced pathologist (T.S.S.) examined the slides from each of the groups to 
determine a viable readout. The best readout was determined to be the extent of epithelial 
Desai et al.
Page 23
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 area showing crypt hyperplasia. After a scoring rubric was devised, an independent blinded 
evaluator (C.A.H.) then measured the total length of each intestinal segment with a ruler in 
millimeters. Areas of increased crypt hyperplasia were then determined by microscopy and 
the lengths of these areas were measured as a percentage of the total epithelial length on a 
single slide.
Mouse microarray analyses: Mouse microarrays were carried out with Affymetrix Mouse 
Gene ST 2.1 strips. Expression values for each gene were calculated using a robust multi-
array average (RMA) approach (Irizarry et al., 2003). Linear models were fitted to the data 
by employing the limma bioconductor package in R version 3.1.1. Note that selected 
probesets had a fold change greater than 1.5 and an FDR adjusted p-value of 0.05 or less. 
Data were analyzed through the use of QIAGEN’s Ingenuity® Pathway Analysis (IPA®, 
QIAGEN Redwood City, www.qiagen.com/ingenuity) using the default parameters. Input 
data correspond to significantly detected genes with FDR < 0.05 and absolute log Fold-
Change > 0.5. ILK signalling was the number 1 canonical pathway detected (p-value = 
8.33E-07). TNF targets corresponded to the number 1 (overlap p-value = 2.64E-06) 
upstream regulator detected by IPA. The category ‘Immune response of cells’ was predicted 
as the most significantly activated (p-value = 6.83E-06 and Z-score = 2.316) in the 
inflammatory response category.
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Statistical analyses—All experimental analyses were conducted in consultation with a 
statistician. Unless otherwise stated in individual method sections above, all statistical 
analyses were performed using Prism 5.04 (GraphPad Software, Inc.), except statistics for 
colony forming units (CFU) for C. rodentium were performed in Excel. Statistically 
significant differences are shown with asterisks as follows: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 
0.001 and ****p < 0.0001; whereas, ns indicates comparisons that are not significant. 
Numbers of animals (n) used for individual experiments, details of the statistical tests used 
and pooled values for several biological replicates are indicated in the respective figure 
legends. A two-tailed t-test was employed in all cases. Since generally the microbiome data 
did not follow a normal distribution, for these data a nonparametric test such as the 
Wilcoxon test was used. An exception was the data in Figure 2C, which generally followed a 
normal distribution and hence a t-test was used (see details in the section: Illumina 
sequencing and data analysis). For the other data that appeared normally distributed, a t-test 
was used; otherwise, a non-parametric (Mann-Whitney) test was used (for example for 
Figure 4E). Finally, ANOVA (parametric) and Kruskal-Wallis (nonparametric) methods were 
used to describe differences between more than two groups. For data in Figure 6D, a non-
parametric approach with Dunn’s test and involving pairwise comparisons were employed.
DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
Accession numbers—16S rRNA gene sequences and metadata have been deposited 
under the BioProjectID PRJNA300261 and in SRA under SRP065682. The commands used 
to analyze the 16S rRNA gene data can be found online at the following link: https://
github.com/aseekatz/mouse.fiber. RNA-Seq data have been deposited at NCBI under 
Desai et al.
Page 24
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 BioProjectIDs PRJNA310052, PRJNA310058, PRJNA310062. Mouse microarray data are 
deposited to NCBI Geo under accession numbers GSM2084849–55.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank Lansing C. Hoskins for critical comments on this manuscript and the germfree animal facility of the 
University of Michigan for expert support. We also thank Markus Ollert and Rudi Balling for their encouragement 
and advice. This work was supported by: Luxembourg National Research Fund (FNR) INTER Mobility 
(13/5624108) and CORE (C15/BM/10318186) grants to M.S.D.; Luxembourg Ministry of Higher Education and 
Research support to M.S.D; FNR ATTRACT (A09/03), CORE (11/1186762) and European Union Joint 
Programming in Neurodegenerative Diseases (INTER/JPND/12/01) grants to P.W.; NIH R01 (GM099513) grant to 
E.C.M.; and financial support from the University of Michigan Host Microbiome Initiative and Center for 
Gastrointestinal Research (DK034933).
References
Bergstrom KSB, Kissoon-Singh V, Gibson DL, Ma C, Montero M, Sham HP, Ryz N, Huang T, Velcich 
A, Finlay BB, et al. Muc2 protects against lethal infectious colitis by disassociating pathogenic and 
commensal bacteria from the colonic mucosa. PLoS Pathog. 2010; 6:e1000902. [PubMed: 
20485566] 
Brownlee IA, Havler ME, Dettmar PW, Allen A, Pearson JP. Colonic mucus: secretion and turnover in 
relation to dietary fibre intake. Proc Nutr Soc. 2003; 62:245–249. [PubMed: 12756974] 
Burkitt DP, Walker ARP, Painter NS. Effect of dietary fibre on stools and transit-times, and its role in 
the causation of disease. Lancet. 1972; 300:1408–1411.
Cameron EA, Sperandio V. Frenemies: signaling and nutritional integration in pathogen-microbiota-
host interactions. Cell Host Microbe. 2015; 18:275–284. [PubMed: 26355214] 
Chassaing B, Koren O, Goodrich JK, Poole AC, Srinivasan S, Ley RE, Gewirtz AT. Dietary emulsifiers 
impact the mouse gut microbiota promoting colitis and metabolic syndrome. Nature. 2015; 519:92–
96. [PubMed: 25731162] 
Collins JW, Keeney KM, Crepin VF, Rathinam VAK, Fitzgerald KA, Finlay BB, Frankel G. 
Citrobacter rodentium: infection, inflammation and the microbiota. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2014; 
12:612–623. [PubMed: 25088150] 
Cuskin F, Lowe EC, Temple MJ, Zhu Y, Cameron Ea, Pudlo Na, Porter NT, Urs K, Thompson AJ, 
Cartmell A, et al. Human gut Bacteroidetes can utilize yeast mannan through a selfish mechanism. 
Nature. 2015; 517:165–169. [PubMed: 25567280] 
David LA, Maurice CF, Carmody RN, Gootenberg DB, Button JE, Wolfe BE, Ling AV, Devlin AS, 
Varma Y, Fischbach MA, et al. Diet rapidly and reproducibly alters the human gut microbiome. 
Nature. 2014; 505:559–563. [PubMed: 24336217] 
Earle KA, Billings G, Sigal M, Earle KA, Lichtman JS, Hansson GC, Elias JE, Amieva MR, Huang 
KC, Sonnenburg JL. Quantitative imaging of gut microbiota spatial resource quantitative imaging of 
gut microbiota spatial organization. Cell Host Microbe. 2015:1–11.
Edgar RC, Haas BJ, Clemente JC, Quince C, Knight R. UCHIME improves sensitivity and speed of 
chimera detection. Bioinformatics. 2011; 27:2194–2200. [PubMed: 21700674] 
Faith JJ, McNulty NP, Rey FE, Gordon JI. Predicting a human gut microbiota’s response to diet in 
gnotobiotic mice. Science. 2011; 333:101–104. [PubMed: 21596954] 
Fu J, Wei B, Wen T, Johansson MEV, Liu X, Bradford E, Thomsson KA, McGee S, Mansour L, Tong 
M, et al. Loss of intestinal core 1-derived O-glycans causes spontaneous colitis in mice. J Clin 
Invest. 2011; 121:1657–1666. [PubMed: 21383503] 
Desai et al.
Page 25
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Gibson GR, Cummings JH, Macfarlane GT. Growth and activities of sulphate-reducing bacteria in gut 
contents of healthy subjects and patients with ulcerative colitis. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 1991; 
86:103–111.
Hedemann MS, Theil PK, Bach Knudsen KE. The thickness of the intestinal mucous layer in the colon 
of rats fed various sources of non-digestible carbohydrates is positively correlated with the pool of 
SCFA but negatively correlated with the proportion of butyric acid in digesta. Br J Nutr. 2009; 
102:117–125. [PubMed: 19138435] 
Hickey CA, Kuhn KA, Donermeyer DL, Porter NT, Jin C, Cameron EA, Jung H, Kaiko GE, 
Wegorzewska M, Malvin NP, et al. Colitogenic Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron antigens access host 
immune cells in a sulfatase-dependent manner via outer membrane vesicles. Cell Host Microbe. 
2015; 17:672–680. [PubMed: 25974305] 
Hoskins LC, Boulding ET. Mucin degradation in human colon ecosystems. J Clin Invest. 1981; 
67:163–172. [PubMed: 6161136] 
Irizarry RA, Hobbs B, Collin F, Beazer-Barclay YD, Antonellis KJ, Scherf U, Speed TP. Exploration, 
normalization, and summaries of high density oligonucleotide array probe level data. Biostatistics. 
2003; 4:249–264. [PubMed: 12925520] 
Johansson MEV, Phillipson M, Petersson J, Velcich A, Holm L, Hansson GC. The inner of the two 
Muc2 mucin-dependent mucus layers in colon is devoid of bacteria. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2008; 105:15064–15069. [PubMed: 18806221] 
Johansson MEV, Hansson GC. Preservation of mucus in histological sections, immunostaining of 
mucins in fixed tissue, and localization of bacteria with FISH. Methods Mol Biol. 2012; 842:229–
235. [PubMed: 22259139] 
Johansson MEV, Sjövall H, Hansson GC. The gastrointestinal mucus system in health and disease. Nat 
Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2013; 10:352–361. [PubMed: 23478383] 
Johansson MEV, Gustafsson JK, Holmén-Larsson J, Jabbar KS, Xia L, Xu H, Ghishan FK, Carvalho 
FA, Gewirtz AT, Sjövall H, et al. Bacteria penetrate the normally impenetrable inner colon mucus 
layer in both murine colitis models and patients with ulcerative colitis. Gut. 2014; 63:281–291. 
[PubMed: 23426893] 
Kamada N, Kim YG, Sham HP, Vallance BA, Puente JL, Martens EC, Núñez G. Regulated virulence 
controls the ability of a pathogen to compete with the gut microbiota. Science. 2012; 336:1325–
1329. [PubMed: 22582016] 
El Kaoutari A, Armougom F, Gordon JI, Raoult D, Henrissat B. The abundance and variety of 
carbohydrate-active enzymes in the human gut microbiota. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2013; 11:497–504. 
[PubMed: 23748339] 
Kaper JB, Nataro JP, Mobley HLT. Pathogenic Escherichia coli. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2004; 2:123–140. 
[PubMed: 15040260] 
Kozich JJ, Westcott SL, Baxter NT, Highlander SK, Schloss PD. Development of a dual-index 
sequencing strategy and curation pipeline for analyzing amplicon sequence data on the MiSeq 
Illumina sequencing platform. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2013; 79:5112–5120. [PubMed: 
23793624] 
Larsson JMH, Karlsson H, Crespo JG, Johansson MEV, Eklund L, Sjövall H, Hansson GC. Altered O-
glycosylation profile of MUC2 mucin occurs in active ulcerative colitis and is associated with 
increased inflammation. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2011; 17:2299–2307. [PubMed: 21290483] 
Li H, Limenitakis JP, Fuhrer T, Geuking MB, Lawson MA, Wyss M, Brugiroux S, Keller I, 
Macpherson JA, Rupp S, et al. The outer mucus layer hosts a distinct intestinal microbial niche. 
Nat Commun. 2015; 6:8292. [PubMed: 26392213] 
Loubinoux J, Bronowicki J-P, Pereira IAC, Mougenel J-L, Faou AE. Sulfate-reducing bacteria in 
human feces and their association with inflammatory bowel diseases. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2002; 
40:107–112. [PubMed: 19709217] 
Martens EC, Chiang HC, Gordon JI. Mucosal glycan foraging enhances fitness and transmission of a 
saccharolytic human gut bacterial symbiont. Cell Host Microbe. 2008; 4:447–457. [PubMed: 
18996345] 
Desai et al.
Page 26
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Martens EC, Lowe EC, Chiang H, Pudlo NA, Wu M, McNulty NP, Abbott DW, Henrissat B, Gilbert 
HJ, Bolam DN, et al. Recognition and degradation of plant cell wall polysaccharides by two 
human gut symbionts. PLoS Biol. 2011; 9:e1001221. [PubMed: 22205877] 
McGuckin MA, Lindén SK, Sutton P, Florin TH. Mucin dynamics and enteric pathogens. Nat Rev 
Microbiol. 2011; 9:265–278. [PubMed: 21407243] 
McKenney PT, Pamer EG. From hype to hope: the gut microbiota in enteric infectious disease. Cell. 
2015; 163:1326–1332. [PubMed: 26638069] 
McNulty NP, Wu M, Erickson AR, Pan C, Erickson BK, Martens EC, Pudlo NA, Muegge BD, 
Henrissat B, Hettich RL, et al. Effects of diet on resource utilization by a model human gut 
microbiota containing Bacteroides cellulosilyticus WH2, a symbiont with an extensive 
glycobiome. PLoS Biol. 2013; 11:e1001637. [PubMed: 23976882] 
Nakjang S, Ndeh DA, Wipat A, Bolam DN, Hirt RP. A novel extracellular metallopeptidase domain 
shared by animal host-associated mutualistic and pathogenic microbes. PLoS One. 2012; 
7:e30287. [PubMed: 22299034] 
Petersson J, Schreiber O, Hansson GC, Gendler SJ, Velcich A, Lundberg JO, Roos S, Holm L, 
Phillipson M. Importance and regulation of the colonic mucus barrier in a mouse model of colitis. 
Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2011; 300:G327–G333. [PubMed: 21109593] 
Png CW, Lindén SK, Gilshenan KS, Zoetendal EG, McSweeney CS, Sly LI, McGuckin MA, Florin 
THJ. Mucolytic bacteria with increased prevalence in IBD mucosa augment in vitro utilization of 
mucin by other bacteria. Am J Gastroenterol. 2010; 105:2420–2428. [PubMed: 20648002] 
Qin J, Li R, Raes J, Arumugam M, Burgdorf KS, Manichanh C, Nielsen T, Pons N, Levenez F, 
Yamada T, et al. A human gut microbial gene catalogue established by metagenomic sequencing. 
Nature. 2010; 464:59–65. [PubMed: 20203603] 
Rakoff-Nahoum S, Foster KR, Comstock LE. The evolution of cooperation within the gut microbiota. 
Nature. 2016; 533:255–259. [PubMed: 27111508] 
Rey FE, Gonzalez MD, Cheng J, Wu M, Ahern PP, Gordon JI. Metabolic niche of a prominent sulfate-
reducing human gut bacterium. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013; 110:13582–13587. [PubMed: 
23898195] 
Ritchie ME, Phipson B, Wu D, Hu Y, Law CW, Shi W, Smyth GK. limma powers differential 
expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015; 
43:e47. [PubMed: 25605792] 
Rogowski A, Briggs JA, Mortimer JC, Tryfona T, Terrapon N, Lowe EC, Baslé A, Morland C, Day 
AM, Zheng H, et al. Glycan complexity dictates microbial resource allocation in the large 
intestine. Nat Commun. 2015; 6:7481. [PubMed: 26112186] 
Schloss PD, Westcott SL, Ryabin T, Hall JR, Hartmann M, Hollister EB, Lesniewski RA, Oakley BB, 
Parks DH, Robinson CJ, et al. Introducing mothur: open-source, platform-independent, 
community-supported software for describing and comparing microbial communities. Appl 
Environ Microbiol. 2009; 75:7537–7541. [PubMed: 19801464] 
Schneider CA, Rasband WS, Eliceiri KW. NIH Image to ImageJ: 25 years of image analysis. Nat 
Methods. 2012; 9:671–675. [PubMed: 22930834] 
Sonnenburg ED, Sonnenburg JL. Starving our microbial self: the deleterious consequences of a diet 
deficient in microbiota-accessible carbohydrates. Cell Metab. 2014:1–8.
Sonnenburg JL, Xu J, Leip DD, Chen CH, Westover BP, Weatherford J, Buhler JD, Gordon JI. 
Genomic and Metabolic Studies of the Impact of Probiotics on a Model Gut Symbiont and 
HostGlycan foraging in vivo by an intestine-adapted bacterial symbiont. PLoS Biol. 12, e413. 
Science. 2006; 307:1955–1959.
Sonnenburg JL, Xu J, Leip DD, Chen CH, Westover BP, Weatherford J, Buhler JD, Gordon JI. Glycan 
foraging in vivo by an intestine-adapted bacterial symbiont. Science. 2005; 307:1955–1959. 
[PubMed: 15790854] 
Van der Sluis M, De Koning BAE, De Bruijn ACJM, Velcich A, Meijerink JPP, Van Goudoever JB, 
Büller Ha, Dekker J, Van Seuningen I, Renes IB, et al. Muc2-deficient mice spontaneously 
develop colitis, indicating that MUC2 is critical for colonic protection. Gastroenterology. 2006; 
131:117–129. [PubMed: 16831596] 
Wickham H. The Split-Apply-Combine Strategy for Data. J Stat Softw. 2011; 40:1–29.
Desai et al.
Page 27
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Wrzosek L, Miquel S, Noordine M-L, Bouet S, Joncquel Chevalier-Curt M, Robert V, Philippe C, 
Bridonneau C, Cherbuy C, Robbe-Masselot C, et al. Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron and 
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii influence the production of mucus glycans and the development of 
goblet cells in the colonic epithelium of a gnotobiotic model rodent. BMC Biol. 2013; 11:61. 
[PubMed: 23692866] 
Desai et al.
Page 28
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 HIGHLIGHTS
•
Characterized synthetic bacterial communities enable functional 
insights in vivo
•
Low-fiber diet promotes expansion and activity of colonic mucus-
degrading bacteria
•
Purified prebiotic fibers do not alleviate degradation of the mucus layer
•
Fiber-deprived gut microbiota promotes aggressive colitis by an enteric 
pathogen
Desai et al.
Page 29
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Carbohydrate utilization by the synthetic human gut microbiota (SM) members and 
gnotobiotic mouse treatments
(A) Heat map showing normalized growth values of 13/14 SM members.
(B) Schematic of the gnotobiotic mouse model illustrating the timeline of colonization, 
feeding strategies and fecal sampling.
(C) Compositions of the three distinct diets employed in this study (common additives such 
as vitamins and minerals are not shown). The prebiotic mix contained equal proportions of 
14 host indigestible polysaccharides (see Table S1). See also Fig. S1.
Desai et al.
Page 30
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Complex dietary fiber deficiency leads to proliferation of mucus-degrading bacteria
(A) Stream plots exhibiting fecal (over time, Fig. 1B) and cecal (end point) microbial 
community dynamics and average abundance of total species-specific transcripts from cecal 
RNA-Seq transcriptome mapping at the endpoint; for transcript abundance n = 3 mice/group.
(B) Principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) based on bacterial community similarity.
(C) Changes in relative bacterial abundance over time in mice oscillated for 1-day 
increments between FR and FF feeding. Changes in FR and FF control groups are shown for 
comparison. Asterisks (colored according to the dietary group) indicate a statistically 
significant difference in the change of relative abundance from the previous day within each 
group. Student’s t-test.
(D) Additive relative abundances of four mucus-degrading bacteria (Fig. 1A).
(E) Relative bacterial abundances in laser capture microdissected colonic lumen and mucus 
samples (images displayed on left). n = 3 mice/group.
Microbial community abundance data are based on Illumina sequencing of 16S rRNA genes 
(V4 region) and median values at each time point are shown. Unless specified, significance 
was determined using Kruskal–Wallis test and n = 4 for FR and FF groups, n = 3 for all 
other groups. All data in Fig. 2A–E is from Experiment 1.
See also Figs. S2, S3 and Tables S2, S3.
Desai et al.
Page 31
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Diet-specific changes in carbohydrate active enzyme expression reveal a community 
shift from fiber to mucus degradation
(A) Positive and negative fold-changes in transcripts encoding carbohydrate active enzymes 
(CAZymes) between either FR/FF (top) or Pre/FF (bottom) comparisons. Only CAZyme 
families (x-axis) in which >2-fold changes and p < 0.05 (Student’s t-test) were observed for 
all of the genes in that family in RPKM-normalized cecal community transcriptomes are 
shown as averages; open circles denote statistically insignificant differences. n = 3 mice/
group, Experiment 1.
(B) Fold-change values of empirically validated (Table S5), MOG-specific transcripts of 
three mucus-degrading bacteria. n = 3 mice/group, Experiment 1. Data are shown as average 
± SEM. Student’s t-test
(C) Activities of cecal enzymes determined by employing p-nitrophenyl-linked substrates. n 
= 4 for FR and FF groups and n = 3 for other groups, Experiment 1. Data are shown as 
average ± SD. One-way ANOVA, FR diet group vs. other groups.
(D) Concentrations of organic acid (OA, succinate) and short-chain fatty acids (SCFA) 
determined from cecal contents. n = 4 mice/group; 2 mice/dietary group in two independent 
experiments (#2A and 3). Student’s t-test.
See also Fig. S4, Tables S4, S5, S6.
Desai et al.
Page 32
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Microbiota-mediated erosion of the colonic mucus barrier and host responses
(A) Alcian blue-stained colonic sections showing the mucus layer (arrows). Scale bars, 100 
μm. Opposing black arrows with shafts delineate the mucus layer that was measured and 
triangular arrowheads point to pre-secretory goblet cells.
(B) Immunofluorescence images of colonic thin sections stained with α-Muc2 antibody and 
DAPI. Opposing white arrows with shafts delineate the mucus layer. Inset (FF diet group) 
shows a higher magnification of bacteria-sized, DAPI-stained particles in closer proximity to 
host epithelium and even crossing this barrier. Scale bars: 100 μm; inset, 10 μm.
(C) Blinded colonic mucus layer measurements from Alcian blue stained sections. Mice in 
the FR and FF fed colonized groups (Experiments 1 and 2A), and in the FR-diet fed 
germfree groups are from two independent experiments; all other colonized mice are from 
Experiment 1. Asterisk and dagger indicate that colons of only 2 and 1 mice contained fecal 
masses, respectively. Data are presented as average ± SEM. Statistically significant 
differences are annotated with different letters p < 0.01; One-way ANOVA with Tukey’s 
test.
(D) Microarray-derived transcript levels of genes involved in the production of colonic 
mucus (n = 4 for the FR diet group and n = 3 for the FF diet group). Data are from two 
independent experiments (#2A and 3). Values are shown as average ± SEM. Student’s t-test.
(E) Levels of fecal lipocalin (LCN2) measured by ELISA in the FR and FF diet fed groups 
(day 50, Figure S6A; Experiment 2A). n = 7 mice/group. Mann-Whitney test.
(F) Colon lengths of mice subjected to different dietary treatments. Data for the FR (with 
SM) and FF (with SM) are representative of 3 independent experiments (Experiments 1, 2A 
and 3). One-way ANOVA, FR diet group (with SM) vs. other groups.
(G) Changes in the host cecal transcriptome between FR and FF diet conditions. Heatmap 
shows statistically significant fold changes of genes identified from Ingenuity Pathway 
Desai et al.
Page 33
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Analysis (FDR < 0.05 and absolute Log2 Fold-Change > 0.5). n = 4 for the FR diet group 
and n = 3 for the FF diet group; data are from two independent experiments (#2A and 3).
See also Fig. S5 and Table S7.
Desai et al.
Page 34
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Fiber-deprived gut microbiota contributes to lethal colitis by Citrobacter rodentium
(A) Fecal C. rodentium levels over time. Data are shown as average ± SEM. Student’s t-test; 
FR (SM+Cr) group vs. FF (SM+Cr) group (bottom statistics labels) and FR (Cr) vs. FF (Cr) 
(top statistics labels). Data in Figure 5A–5G are from Experiment 2B.
(B) Relative abundance of C. rodentium in fecal samples over time. Data are shown as 
median ± IQR. Wilcoxon test.
(C) Weight changes in the four groups of mice. Values are shown as average ± SEM. One-
way ANOVA, FF diet group (with SM) vs. other groups.
(D) Survival curves for the four groups of mice. One-way ANOVA with Tukey’s test.
(E) Representative images of unflushed ceca after Hematoxylin and Eosin (H/E) staining 
highlighting major differences in hyperplasia (indicated with arrows in the FR group, where 
hyperplasia is patchy and infrequent). Scale bars, 5 mm.
Desai et al.
Page 35
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (F) Images of representative H/E stained colonic thin sections depicting differences in 
hyperplasia between two groups. Scale bars: low power, 500 μm; high power, 50 μm.
(G) Measurements of inflamed tissue area in different intestinal segments. n = 5 mice/group 
except that n = 4 mice were used for FF (SM+Cr) group. Values are shown as average ± 
SEM. Statistically significant differences are shown with letters within each intestinal 
segment; p < 0.0002; One-way ANOVA with Tukey’s test.
See also Fig. S6, S7 and Table S2.
Desai et al.
Page 36
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Fiber-deprived gut microbiota promotes faster C. rodentium access to the colonic 
epithelium
(A) Experimental setup for luminescent C. rodentium experiment (Experiment 4).
(B) Fecal burdens of C. rodentium at 4 dpi. Data are shown as averages ± SEM; statistically 
significant differences are shown with different letters (p < 0.001). One-way ANOVA with 
Tukey’s test.
(C) Bioluminescence images of flushed colons showing the location and intensity of 
adherent C. rodentium colonization.
(D) Quantified bioluminescence intensities of C. rodentium from panel C and Fig. S7C. 
Kruskal-Wallis One-way ANOVA with Dunn’s test.
(E) Transmission electron microscopy images of the representative colonic regions from 
flushed colons; arrowheads denote individual C. rodentium cells and “P” denotes epithelial 
pedestals in high power/FF image. Scale bars, low power views 10 μm and high power views 
2 μm.
See also Fig. S7.
Desai et al.
Page 37
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. Model of how a fiber-deprived gut microbiota mediates degradation of the colonic 
mucus barrier and heighted pathogen susceptibility
Schemes derived from results shown in Figs. 1–6 illustrating the balance between fiber 
degradation and mucus degradation in FR diet-fed mice; whereas an FF diet leads to 
proliferation of mucus-degrading bacteria and microbiota-mediated degradation of the 
colonic mucus layer. The latter results in more severe colitis by C. rodentium.
Desai et al.
Page 38
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Desai et al.
Page 39
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Antibodies
Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-rabbit IgG
Life Technologies
Cat#A11008
Mucin 2 antibody (H-300)
Santa Cruz Biotechnology
Cat#sc-15334
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins
4-nitrophenyl N-acetyl-β-D-glucosaminide
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#N9376
4-nitrophenyl α-D-galactopyranoside
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#N0877
4-nitrophenyl β-D-glucopyranoside
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#N7006
4-nitrophenol
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#73560
Acetic acid
Acros Organics
Cat#222140010
Adenine
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#A2786
Alanine
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#A7469
Alcian blue
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#A5268
Alginate
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#180947
Ammonium chloride
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#A0171
Ammonium sulfate
Thermo Fisher Scientific
Cat#A702
Arginine
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#A8094
Asparagine
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#A4159
Aspartic Acid
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#A93100
Barley β-glucan (Barliv Betafiber)
Cargill
Cat#BBF-100
Beef extract
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#B4888
Biotin
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#B4501
Boric acid
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#B6768
Calcium chloride
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#C1016
Calcium pantothenate
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#P2250
Cellulose
International Fiber Corporation
Solka-Floc
Chloroform
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#496189
Chondroitin sulfate
Federal Laboratories
Cat#CSP1K
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Desai et al.
Page 40
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
cOmplete™, Mini, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#000000004693159001
Copper(II) sulfate pentahydrate
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#C7631
Corn starch/amylopectin
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#10120
Cyanocobalamin
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#V2876
Cysteine
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#C7352
Cytosine
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#C3506
DAPI
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#D9542
Dextran
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#31389
Dipotassium phosphate
Thermo Fisher Scientific
Cat#BP363-500
EDTA
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#ED4SS
Ethanol
Decon Labs
Cat#2701
Fiber-Free diet
Teklad/Envigo
Cat#TD.130343
Folic acid
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#F7876
Fructose
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#F0127
Galactose
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#G0625
Glucomannan
Konjac Foods
Konjac Glucomannan Powder
Glucose
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#158968
Glutamine
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#G8540
Glutaraldehyde
Electron Microscopy Sciences
Cat#16537
Guanine
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#G11950
Guar gum galactomannan
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#G4129
Glutamic Acid
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#G1501
Hematin
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#H3281
Histidine
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#H8000
Hydrochloric Acid
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#320331
Inulin
Cargill
Oliggo-Fiber Instant Inulin
Iron(II) sulfate heptahydrate
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#215422
Isobutyric acid
Alfa Aesar
Cat#79-31-2
Isoleucine
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#I2752
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Desai et al.
Page 41
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Isopropanol
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#278475
Isovaleric acid
Alfa Aesar
Cat#503-74-2
Laboratory Autoclavable Rodent Diet - 5010
LabDiet
Cat#0001326
Larch arabinogalactan
Megazyme
Cat#P-ARGAL
Leucine
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#L8000
Lysine
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#L5501
Lysozyme
Thermo Fisher Scientific
Cat#BP535-1
Magnesium chloride anhydrous
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#M8266
Magnesium sulfate anhydrous
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#M7506
Magnesium sulfate heptahydrate
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#M5921
Manganese(II) sulfate monohydrate
Mallinkrodt
Cat#6192
Mannose
Acros Organics
Cat#150600
Menadione
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#M5625
Methanol anhydrous
Thermo Fisher Scientific
Cat#A412-1
Methionine
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#M9625
Mucin from porcine stomach
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#M1778
N-acetyl glucosamine
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#A3286
Nicotinic acid
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#N4126
Osmium tetroxide
Electron Microscopy Sciences
Cat#19100
p-Aminobenzoic acid
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#A9878
Pancreatic digest of casein
BioWorld
Cat#30620060-1
Phenol
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#P4557
Phenol:Chloroform:Isoamyl Alcohol (pH 8.05)
Thermo Fisher Scientific
Cat# 15593031
Phenol:Chloroform:Isoamyl Alcohol (pH 4.3)
Fisher Scientific
Cat#BP1754I-400
Phenylalanine
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#P2126
p-nitrophenyl α-L-fucopyranoside
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#N3628
p-nitrophenyl β-D-xylopyranoside
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#N2132
Polygalacturonic acid
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#P3850
Potassium 4-nitrophenyl sulfate
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#N3877
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Desai et al.
Page 42
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Potassium chloride
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#P9333
Potassium dihydrogen phosphate
Thermo Fisher Scientific
Cat#P284
Potato pectic galactan
Megazyme
Cat#P-PGAPT
Proline
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#P5607
Propionic acid
Acros Organics
Cat#149300010
Propylene oxide
Electron Microscopy Sciences
Cat#20412
Pyridoxine HCl
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#P9755
Resazurin
Acros Organics
Cat#418900010
Retrievagen A
BD Biosciences
Cat#550524
Rhamnogalacturonic acid
Megazyme
Cat#P-RHAM1
Riboflavin
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#R7649
RNAprotect
Qiagen
Cat#76506
SDS
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#L3771
Serine
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#84959
Sodium acetate
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#S2889
Sodium bicarbonate
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#S5761
Sodium chloride
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#S7653
Sodium citrate
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#S1804
Sodium hydroxide
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#S8045
Sodium lactate
Thermo Fisher Scientific
Cat#S326-500
Sodium molybdate dihydrate
JT Baker Chemical Company
Cat#3764
Sugar beet arabinan
Megazyme
Cat#p-ARAB
Tamarind xyloglucan
Carbomer
Cat#4-00634
Thiamine HCl
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#T4625
Thioctic acid
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#T5625
Threonine
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#T8625
Thymine
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#T0895
Tris
Thermo Fisher Scientific
Cat#BP152
TritonX-100
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#T9284
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Desai et al.
Page 43
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
TRIzol
Invitrogen
Cat#15596026
Tryptone
Thermo Fisher Scientific
Cat#BP1421
Tyrosine
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#T3754
Uracil
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#U1128
Valeric acid
Alfa Aesar
Cat#109-52-4
Valine
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#V0500
Wheat arabinoxylan
Megazyme
Cat#P-WAXYL
Xylene
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#296333
Xylene Substitute
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#A5597
Xylose
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#X3877
Yeast extract
Fluka Analytical
Cat#70161
Zinc sulfate heptahydrate
JT Baker Chemical Company
Cat#4382
Critical Commercial Assays
AccuPrimeTaq DNA Polymerase, high fidelity kit
Thermo Fisher Scientific
Cat#12346086
Affymetrix Mouse Gene ST 2.1 strips
Affymetrix
Cat#902120
Arcturus PicoPure DNA Extraction Kit
Arcturus
Cat#KIT0103
DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit
Qiagen
Cat#69506
epMotion 5075 TMX
Eppendorf
Cat#960020033
High-sensitivity DNA analysis kit
Agilent
Cat#5067-4626
KAPA SYBRFAST qPCR kit
KAPA Biosystems
Cat#KK4600
KAPA Library Quantification Kit for Illumina platforms
KAPA Biosystems
Cat# KK4824
Mouse Lipocalin-2/NGAL DuoSet ELISA kit
R & D Biosystems
Cat#DY1857
Pierce Microplate BCA Protein Assay Kit
Thermo Fisher Scientific
Cat#PI23252
PowerSoil Isolation Kit
MoBio Laboratories
Cat#12888
Qubit RNA Assay Kit
Thermo Fisher Scientific
Cat#Q32852
Ribo-Zero rRNA Removal Kits (Bacteria)
Illumina
Cat#MRZB12424
RNeasy Protect Bacteria Mini Kit
Qiagen
Cat #74524
SequalPrep Normalization Plate Kit, 96-well
Thermo Fisher Scientific
Cat#A1051001
TURBO DNase kit
Ambion
Cat#AM1907
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Desai et al.
Page 44
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Deposited Data
16S rRNA gene sequences and metadata
NCBI BioProjectID NCBI 
SRA;
PRJNA300261;SRP065682
Mouse microarray data
NCBI Geo
GSM2084849–55
RNA-Seq data
NCBI BioProjectID
PRJNA310052, PRJNA310058, PRJNA310062
Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains
Akkermansia muciniphila: DMS 22959, type strain
DSMZ
Cat#DMS 22959
Bacteroides caccae: DSM 19024, type strain
DSMZ
Cat#DSM 19024
Bacteroides ovatus: DSM 1896, type strain
DSMZ
Cat#DSM 1896
Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron: DSM 2079, type strain
DSMZ
Cat#DSM 2079
Bacteroides uniformis: ATCC 8492, type strain
ATCC
Cat#ATCC 8492
Barnesiella intestinihominis: YIT11860
DSMZ
Cat#DSM 21032
Citrobacter rodentium: DBS100
David Schauer, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology
N/A
Citrobacter rodentium: DBS120
David Schauer, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology
N/A
Clostridium symbiosum: DSM 934, type strain, 2
DSMZ
Cat#DSM 934
Collinsella aerofaciens: DSM 3979, type strain
DSMZ
Cat#DSM 3979
Desulfovibrio piger: ATC 29098, type strain
ATCC
Cat#ATC 29098
Escherichia coli HS
ATCC
N/A
Eubacterium rectale: DSM 17629, A1-86
DSMZ
Cat#DSM 17629
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii: DSM 17677, A2-165
DSMZ
Cat#DSM 17677
Marvinbryantia formatexigens: DSM 14469, type strain, 
I-52
DSMZ
Cat#DSM 14469
Roseburia intestinalis: DSM 14610 type strain, L1-82
DSMZ
Cat#DSM 14610
Sequence-Based Reagents
16S rRNA gene Illumina sequencing primers
Kozich et al. 2013
Table S2B
qPCR primers
This paper
Table S3A
Software and Algorithms
Arraystar
DNAStar
http://www.dnastar.com/t-sub-products-genomics-arraystar.aspx
Gen5
Biotek
http://www.biotek.com/products/microplate_software/gen5_data_analysis_software.html
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Desai et al.
Page 45
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
ImageJ
Schneider et al., 2012
http://imagej.net/
Microsoft Excel
Microsoft
https://products.office.com/en-us/excel
Mothur v1.33.3
Schloss et al., 2009
http://www.mothur.org/
Multi-array average (RMA) method
Irizarry et al, 2003
http://www.bioconductor.org/
Prism v5.04
GraphPad Software
http://www.graphpad.com/scientific-software/prism/
QIAGEN’s Ingenuity Pathway Analysis
Qiagen
http://www.ingenuity.com/products/ipa
R
The R Foundation
https://www.r-project.org/
R - Limma package
Ritchie et al., 2015
https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/limma.html
R - Plyr package
Wickham, 2011
https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=plyr
UCHIME
Edgar et al., 2011
http://drive5.com/usearch/manual/uchime_algo.html
Other
Acid-washed glass beads (212–300 μm)
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#G1277
Anaerobic chamber
Coy manufacturing
Vinyl Type A + Type B
Biostack automated plate handling device
Biotek Instruments
BIOSTACK2WR
Bioluminescence reader
Xenogen
IVIS200
Breathe-Easy polyurethane membrane
Biversified Biotech
Cat#BEM-1
Flat bottom 96-well plates
Costar
General Laboratory Homogenizer
Omni International
Microdissection instrument
Arcturus
Veritas Microdissection Instrument
Millex-GV Syringe Filter Unit, 0.22 μm, PVDF, 4 mm, 
ethylene oxide sterilized
EMD Millipore
Cat#SLGV004SL
Mini-BeadBeater-816
Biospec Products
Cat#607
Powerwave HT absorbance reader
Biotek Instruments
PowerWaveHT
Synergy HT absorbance reader
Biotek Instruments
Synergy HT
Upright fluorescence microscope
Olympus
BX60
Transmission electron microscope
Philips
Philips CM-100
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
