 UCSF
UC San Francisco Previously Published Works
Title
Clinical Practice Guidelines for the Prevention and Management of Pain, 
Agitation/Sedation, Delirium, Immobility, and Sleep Disruption in Adult Patients in the 
ICU.
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7rx6v813
Journal
Critical care medicine, 46(9)
ISSN
0090-3493
Authors
Devlin, JW
Skrobik, Y
Gélinas, C
et al.
Publication Date
2018-09-01
DOI
10.1097/ccm.0000000000003299
 
Peer reviewed
eScholarship.org
Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California
 Downloaded from https://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal by DSlwEIA4K43FPciSsbv4Wxxi+GltYBwIS6SNg1xpMGMgNGFmtdg2b7V9+upt7EKNFQ+O/swIVVaRRnOJg78i/crNRdOttEFe9TfgShMEtO/VUDbfGkrtKlB+lZSfNfAw on 08/15/2018
Downloaded from https://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal by DSlwEIA4K43FPciSsbv4Wxxi+GltYBwIS6SNg1xpMGMgNGFmtdg2b7V9+upt7EKNFQ+O/swIVVaRRnOJg78i/crNRdOttEFe9TfgShMEtO/VUDbfGkrtKlB+lZSfNfAw on 08/15/2018
Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Online Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
e825
1School of Pharmacy, Northeastern University, Boston, MA.
2Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Tufts Medical 
Center, Boston, MA.
3Faculty of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
4Regroupement de Soins Critiques Respiratoires, Réseau de Santé Res-
piratoire, Montreal, QC, Canada.
5Ingram School of Nursing, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
6Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Physi-
cal Medicine and Rehabilitation, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity, Baltimore, MD.
7Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Brain Center Rudolf Magnus, 
University Medical Center, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
8Department of Anesthesiology, Division of Anesthesiology Critical Care 
Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN.
9Division of Sleep Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nash-
ville, TN.
10 
Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Brigham and Women’s Hospital 
and School of Medicine, Harvard University, Boston, MA.
11 
Division of Anesthesiology, Perioperative Care and Pain Medicine, New 
York University Langone Health, New York, NY.
12 
Division of Medicine, New York University Langone Health, New York, 
NY.
13 
Division of Neurology, New York University Langone Health, New York, 
NY.
14Division of Surgery, New York University Langone Health, New York, NY.
15 
Department of Medicine (Critical Care), McMaster University, Hamilton, 
ON, Canada.
16 
Department of Health Research Methods, Impact and Evidence, McMas-
ter University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
17 
The Ohio State University, College of Nursing, Center of Excellence in 
Critical and Complex Care, Columbus, OH.
18The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH.
19 
Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Radboud University Medical 
Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
20 
Division of Critical Care, London Health Sciences Centre, London, ON, 
Canada.
21 
Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry, University of Western Ontario, 
London, ON, Canada.
22 
Center for Quality Aging, Division of Allergy, Pulmonary and Critical Care 
Medicine, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, TN.
23 
Center for Health Services Research, Vanderbilt University Medical Cen-
ter, Nashville, TN.
DOI: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000003299
Clinical Practice Guidelines for the Prevention and 
Management of Pain, Agitation/Sedation, Delirium, 
Immobility, and Sleep Disruption in Adult Patients 
in the ICU
John W. Devlin, PharmD, FCCM (Chair)1,2; Yoanna Skrobik, MD, FRCP(c), MSc, FCCM (Vice-Chair)3,4; 
Céline Gélinas, RN, PhD5; Dale M. Needham, MD, PhD6; Arjen J. C. Slooter, MD, PhD7;  
Pratik P
. Pandharipande, MD, MSCI, FCCM8; Paula L. Watson, MD9; Gerald L. Weinhouse, MD10;  
Mark E. Nunnally, MD, FCCM11,12,13,14; Bram Rochwerg, MD, MSc15,16;  
Michele C. Balas, RN, PhD, FCCM, FAAN17,18; Mark van den Boogaard, RN, PhD19; Karen J. Bosma, MD20,21; 
Nathaniel E. Brummel, MD, MSCI22,23; Gerald Chanques, MD, PhD24,25; Linda Denehy, PT, PhD26;  
Xavier Drouot, MD, PhD27,28; Gilles L. Fraser, PharmD, MCCM29; Jocelyn E. Harris, OT, PhD30;  
Aaron M. Joffe, DO, FCCM31; Michelle E. Kho, PT, PhD30; John P
. Kress, MD32; Julie A. Lanphere, DO33; 
Sharon McKinley, RN, PhD34; Karin J. Neufeld, MD, MPH35; Margaret A. Pisani, MD, MPH36;  
Jean-Francois Payen, MD, PhD37; Brenda T. Pun, RN, DNP23; Kathleen A. Puntillo, RN, PhD, FCCM38; 
Richard R. Riker, MD, FCCM29; Bryce R. H. Robinson, MD, MS, FACS, FCCM39;  
Yahya Shehabi, MD, PhD, FCICM40; Paul M. Szumita, PharmD, FCCM41;  
Chris Winkelman, RN, PhD, FCCM42; John E. Centofanti, MD, MSc43; Carrie Price, MLS44;  
Sina Nikayin, MD45; Cheryl J. Misak, PhD46; Pamela D. Flood, MD47; Ken Kiedrowski, MA48;  
Waleed Alhazzani, MD, MSc (Methodology Chair)16,49
Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters 
Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Devlin et al
e826 
www.ccmjournal.org 
September 2018 • Volume 46 • Number 9
24 
Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care, Montpellier University 
Saint Eloi Hospital, Montpellier, France.
25 
PhyMedExp, INSERM, CNRS, University of Montpellier, Montpellier, 
France.
26 
Melbourne School of Health Sciences, University of Melbourne, Mel-
bourne, VIC, Australia.
27Faculte de Medecine Pharmacie, University of Poitiers, Poitiers, France.
28Service de Neurophysiologie, CHU de Poitiers, Poitiers, France.
29 
Department of Critical Care, Maine Medical Center and School of Medi-
cine, Tufts University, Portland, ME.
30 
School of Rehabilitation Science, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, 
Canada.
31 
Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, Harborview Medical 
Center, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.
32 
Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Chicago, 
Chicago, IL.
33 
Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Intermountain 
Healthcare, Salt Lake City, UT.
34 
School of Nursing and Midwifery, Deakin University, Geelong, VIC, Aus-
tralia.
35 
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD.
36 
Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, School of Med-
icine, Yale University, New Haven, CT.
37 
Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care, Grenoble Alpes Univer-
sity Hospital, Grenoble, France.
38 
School of Nursing, University of California San Francisco, San Fran-
cisco, CA.
39Department of Surgery, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.
40 
Department of Critical Care and Perioperative Medicine, School of Clini-
cal Sciences, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
41Department of Pharmacy, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA.
42 
Frances Payne Bolton School of Nursing, Case Western Reserve Uni-
versity, Cleveland, OH.
43 
Department of Anesthesia and Critical Care, McMaster University, Ham-
ilton, ON, Canada.
44 
Welch Medical Library, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD.
45 
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, New York Medical 
College, Valhalla, NY.
46Department of Philosophy, University of Toronto, Toronto, CA.
47Division of Anesthesiology, Stanford University Hospital, Palo Alto, CA.
48 
Patient and Family Advisory Committee, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Balti-
more, MD.
49 
Department of Medicine (Critical Care and Gastroenterology), McMas-
ter University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
These guidelines are endorsed by the American Association of Critical-
Care Nurses, American College of Chest Physicians, American College of 
Clinical Pharmacy, American Delirium Society, Australian College of Criti-
cal Care Nurses, Canadian Critical Care Society, Eastern Association for 
the Surgery of Trauma, European Delirium Association, European Federa-
tion of Critical Care Nursing Associations, Neurocritical Care Society, and 
Society of Critical Care Anesthesiologists.
Supplemental digital content is available for this article. Direct URL citations 
appear in the printed text and are provided in the HTML and PDF versions 
of this article on the journal’s website (http://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal).
Dr. Devlin has received research funding from the National Institute of Aging, 
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, and AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, 
he is on the editorial board of Critical Care Medicine, and he is the president 
of the American Delirium Society. Dr. Skrobik participates in the ATS and the 
American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP), and she is on the editorial board 
for Intensive Care Medicine and Chest. Dr. Needham is a principal investiga-
tor on a National Institutes of Health (NIH)-funded, multicentered randomized 
trial (R01HL132887) evaluating nutrition and exercise in acute respiratory failure 
and, related to this trial, is currently in receipt of an unrestricted research grant 
and donated amino acid product from Baxter Healthcare and an equipment loan 
from Reck Medical Devices to two of the participating study sites, external to his 
institution. Dr. Slooter has disclosed that he is involved in the development of an 
electroencephalogram-based delirium monitor, where any (future) profits from 
electroencephalogram-based delirium monitoring will be used for future scien-
tific research only. Dr. Pandharipande’s institution received funding from Hospira 
(research grant to purchase study drug [dexmedetomidine] in collaboration with 
a NIH-funded RO1 study) and disclosed that he is the past president of the 
American Delirium Society. Dr. Nunnally participates in the Society of Critical 
Care Anesthesiologists, International Anesthesia Research Society, and Ameri-
can Society of Anesthesiology (ASA). Dr. Rochwerg participates as a guideline 
methodologist for other organizations (i.e., American Thoracic Society [ATS] and 
Canadian Blood Service) in addition to the Society of Critical Care Medicine. Dr. 
Balas received funding from Select Medical (primary investigator on research 
study exploring Assess, Prevent, and Manage Pain, Both Spontaneous Awaken-
ing Trials and Spontaneous Breathing Trials, Choice of analgesia and sedation, 
Delirium: Assess, Prevent, and Manage, Early mobility and Exercise, and Family 
engagement and empowerment bundle adoption). Dr. Bosma received fund-
ing from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) where she is the 
primary investigator of an industry partnered research grant with Covidien as the 
industry partner of the CIHR for a study investigating proportional assist ventila-
tion versus pressure support ventilation for weaning from mechanical ventilation. 
Dr. Brummel participates in the ATS (Aging and Geriatrics Working Group Co-
Chair) and ArjoHuntleigh (advisory board activities). Dr. Chanques participates 
in other healthcare professional organization activities. Dr. Denehy participates in 
the Australian Physiotherapy Association. Dr. Drouot participates in the French 
Sleep Society and the French Institute for Sleep and Vigilance. Mr. Joffe par-
ticipates on committees for ASA. Dr. Kho received funding from Restorative 
Therapies (Baltimore, MD) (loaned two supine cycle ergometers for ongoing 
research). Dr. Kress received funding from a dexmedetomidine speaker program, 
he participates in the ATS and ACCP, and he has served as an expert witness 
in medical malpractice. Dr. McKinley participates in the American Association 
of Critical-Care Nurses (AACN) (editorial board of American Journal of Critical 
Care) and the American Heart Association (editorial board of Journal of Car-
diovascular Nursing). Dr. Neufeld participates in the American Delirium Society 
(board member). Dr. Pisani participates in the ACCP (Chair Scientific Program-
ming Committee and Steering Committee Women’s Health Network). Dr. Payen 
received funding from Baxter SA (distributor of dexmedetomidine in France), 
and he has received honorariums from Baxter SA (oral presentations of dex-
medetomidine). Ms. Pun participates as an AACN speaker at the National Con-
ference. Dr. Puntillo participates in other healthcare professional organizations 
(e.g., AACN). Dr. Robinson participates in the Easter Association for the Surgery 
of Trauma, American College of Surgeons, and American Association for the 
Surgery of Trauma. Dr. Shehabi received funding from an unrestricted research 
grant (drug supply) from Pfizer (Hospira) and Orion Pharma to an ongoing multi-
national multicenter study. Mr. Szumita participates in several committees for the 
American Society of Health-System Pharmacists. Ms. Price has disclosed that 
she is a medical librarian working at Johns Hopkins University, and she consults 
as an information specialist to the Cochrane Urology Review Group. Dr. Flood 
participates on the Society of Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatology research 
committee and the ASA Chronic Pain Committee. The remaining authors have 
disclosed that they do not have any potential conflicts of interest.
The American College of Critical Care Medicine (ACCM), which honors indi-
viduals for their achievements and contributions to multidisciplinary critical 
care medicine, is the consultative body of the Society of Critical Care Medi-
cine (SCCM) that possesses recognized expertise in the practice of critical 
care. The College has developed administrative guidelines and clinical prac-
tice parameters for the critical care practitioner. New guidelines and practice 
parameters are continually developed, and current ones are systematically 
reviewed and revised.
For information regarding this article, E-mail: j.devlin@neu.edu
Objective: To update and expand the 2013 Clinical Practice 
Guidelines for the Management of Pain, Agitation, and Delirium in 
Adult Patients in the ICU.
Design: Thirty-two international experts, four methodologists, and 
four critical illness survivors met virtually at least monthly. All sec-
tion groups gathered face-to-face at annual Society of Critical 
Care Medicine congresses; virtual connections included those 
unable to attend. A formal conflict of interest policy was developed 
a priori and enforced throughout the process. Teleconferences and 
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Online Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
e827
electronic discussions among subgroups and whole panel were 
part of the guidelines’ development. A general content review was 
completed face-to-face by all panel members in January 2017
.
Methods: Content experts, methodologists, and ICU survivors were 
represented in each of the five sections of the guidelines: Pain, Agita-
tion/sedation, Delirium, Immobility (mobilization/rehabilitation), and 
Sleep (disruption). Each section created Population, Intervention, 
Comparison, and Outcome, and nonactionable, descriptive ques-
tions based on perceived clinical relevance. The guideline group 
then voted their ranking, and patients prioritized their importance. 
For each Population, Intervention, Comparison, and Outcome ques-
tion, sections searched the best available evidence, determined its 
quality, and formulated recommendations as “strong,
” “conditional,
” 
or “good” practice statements based on Grading of Recommenda-
tions Assessment, Development and Evaluation principles. In addi-
tion, evidence gaps and clinical caveats were explicitly identified.
Results: The Pain, Agitation/Sedation, Delirium, Immobility (mobi-
lization/rehabilitation), and Sleep (disruption) panel issued 37 
recommendations (three strong and 34 conditional), two good 
practice statements, and 32 ungraded, nonactionable statements. 
Three questions from the patient-centered prioritized question list 
remained without recommendation.
Conclusions: We found substantial agreement among a large, inter-
disciplinary cohort of international experts regarding evidence sup-
porting recommendations, and the remaining literature gaps in the 
assessment, prevention, and treatment of Pain, Agitation/sedation, 
Delirium, Immobility (mobilization/rehabilitation), and Sleep (disrup-
tion) in critically ill adults. Highlighting this evidence and the research 
needs will improve Pain, Agitation/sedation, Delirium, Immobility 
(mobilization/rehabilitation), and Sleep (disruption) management 
and provide the foundation for improved outcomes and science in 
this vulnerable population. (Crit Care Med 2018; 46:e825–e873)
Key Words: delirium; guidelines; immobility; intensive care; 
mobilization; pain; sedation; sleep
C
linical practice guidelines are published, often by pro-
fessional societies, because they provide a current and 
transparently analyzed review of relevant research with 
the aim to guide clinical practice. The 2018 Pain, Agitation/
sedation, Delirium, Immobility (rehabilitation/mobilization), 
and Sleep (disruption) (PADIS) guideline builds on this mis-
sion by updating the 2013 Pain, Agitation, and Delirium (PAD) 
guidelines (1); by adding two inextricably related clinical care 
topics—rehabilitation/mobilization and sleep; by including 
patients as collaborators and coauthors; and by inviting an 
international panel of experts from high-income countries as 
an early step toward incorporating more diverse practices and 
expertise from the global critical care community.
Readers will find rationales for 37 recommendations (derived 
from actionable Patient, Intervention, Comparison, and Outcome 
[PICO] questions); two ungraded good practice statements 
(derived from actionable PICO questions where it is unequivo-
cal, the benefits of the intervention outweigh the risks but direct 
evidence to support the intervention does not exist); and 32 
ungraded statements (derived from nonactionable, descriptive 
questions) across the five guideline sections. The supplemental 
digital content figures and tables linked to this guideline provide 
background on how the questions were established, profiles of the 
evidence, the evidence-to-decision tables used to develop recom-
mendations, and voting results. Evidence gaps and future research 
directions are highlighted in each section. The five sections of this 
guideline are interrelated, and thus, the guideline should be con-
sidered in its entirety rather than as discrete recommendations.
Knowledge translation and implementation effectiveness are 
an important segue to our guideline document and work to foster 
advances in clinical practice related to PADIS assessment, preven-
tion, and treatment. A PADIS guideline implementation and inte-
gration article separately created to facilitate this is available (2). 
Many challenges characterize developing effective PADIS-related 
educational and quality improvement programs. Although 
some have not achieved expected outcomes (3, 4), many quality 
improvement efforts in this field have been successful (5–10).
METHODS
The panel followed the Grading of Recommendations Assess-
ment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) working group’s 
methodology for clinical practice guideline development. 
Guideline chairs, with input from the methodology team, cre-
ated a protocol before beginning formal work on the guideline. 
Chairs, group heads, and panel members, with input from ICU 
survivors (11), selected topics that are important to patients and 
practicing clinicians. A list of questions was developed for each 
topic, and questions and outcomes were prioritized through an 
electronic survey following the GRADE principles (12).
Once the list of questions was finalized, a university-based 
librarian conducted a literature review of five electronic databases 
from 1990 to October 2015 based on priority topics voted on by 
the members and revised by critical illness survivors. The librarian 
finalized the relevant search terms with the groups and extracted 
literature based on these prioritized topics. These publications 
were then evaluated for their methodologic rigor that determined 
the highest quality of evidence available per outcome and per 
question in keeping with GRADE guidance. Evidence evaluation 
was performed by determining its relevance for each question; 
members with a financial or intellectual conflict of interest did not 
review questions related to their conflict. Full-text screening was 
performed in duplicate. Each group used the GRADE evidence-
to-decision framework to formulate the preliminary recommen-
dations (12). Further, all five groups’ comments on the overall 
recommendations and the literature provided to support it were 
reviewed by the chair and vice-chair after recommendation voting 
and screened for potential or perceived conflict.
Subsequently, recommendations were discussed in person 
among the full panel. Then, only members who were free of overt 
or potential conflict of interest voted electronically for each recom-
mendation. We defined consensus as greater than 80% agreement 
with greater than 70% response rate. ICU survivors participated 
in every step of the guideline development, which provided a 
unique perspective for this guideline. We used the GRADE cri-
teria to formulate good practice statements where appropri-
ate (11). For nonactionable, descriptive questions, evidence was 
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Devlin et al
e828 
www.ccmjournal.org 
September 2018 • Volume 46 • Number 9
summarized and ungraded statements were provided. A complete 
description of the methods is found in Supplemental Appendix 
1 (Supplemental Digital Content 1, http://links.lww.com/CCM/
D759). A detailed description of the methodologic innovations 
that characterize these guidelines is published separately (13).
PAIN
Pain management is complex because pain patterns are highly 
individual (e.g., acute, chronic, and acute-on-chronic), it arises 
from different sources (e.g., somatic, visceral, and neuropathic), 
and patients have subjective perceptions and have exceedingly 
variable tolerability. A consistent approach to pain assessment and 
management is paramount given the unique features of critically 
ill adults that include impaired communication, altered mental 
status, mechanical ventilation, procedures and use of invasive 
devices, sleep disruption, and immobility/mobility status (14).
Critically ill adults experience moderate-to-severe pain at 
rest (15) and during standard care procedures (16). Pain is 
defined as “an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience 
associated with actual or potential tissue damage, or described 
in terms of such damage” (17). Pain should be considered to be 
“whatever” the experiencing person says it is, existing “when-
ever” the experiencing person says it does (18). Although the 
reference standard measure of pain is a patient’s self-report, 
the inability to communicate clearly does not negate a patient’s 
pain experience or the need for appropriate pain management 
(19). Fortunately, validated behavioral pain scales provide alter-
native measures for pain assessment in those patients unable 
to self-report their pain. Severe pain negatively affects patient 
status (e.g., cardiac instability, respiratory compromise, immu-
nosuppression) in critically ill adults; implementation of assess-
ment-driven and standardized pain management protocols 
improves ICU outcomes and clinical practice (5, 20). Carefully 
titrated analgesic dosing is important when balancing the ben-
efits versus potential risks of opioid exposure (21–25). In this 
guideline section, we address three actionable questions and 
two descriptive questions related to the pain experience of criti-
cally ill adults (see prioritized topic list in Supplemental Table 
1 [Supplemental Digital 2, http://links.lww.com/CCM/D760] 
and voting results in Supplemental Table 2 [Supplemental 
Digital Content 3, http://links.lww.com/CCM/D761]). The 
evidence summaries and evidence-to-decision tables used to 
develop recommendations for the pain group are available in 
Supplemental Table 3 (Supplemental Digital Content 4, http://
links.lww.com/CCM/D762), and the forest plots for all meta-
analyses are available in Supplemental Figure 1 (Supplemental 
Digital Content 5, http://links.lww.com/CCM/D763).
Risk Factors
Question: What factors influence pain in critically ill adults 
during both rest and during procedures?
Ungraded Statements: Pain at rest is influenced by both psycho-
logic (e.g., anxiety and depression) and demographic (e.g., young 
age, one or more comorbidities, and history of surgery) factors.
Pain during a procedure is influenced by preprocedural pain 
intensity, the type of procedure, underlying surgical or trauma 
diagnoses, and demographic factors (younger age, female sex, 
and non-white ethnicity).
Rationale: Pain is common in critically ill adults at rest and 
during procedures including regular activities (e.g., turning) 
and discrete procedures (e.g., arterial catheter insertion). The 
prior guidelines document the incidence, frequency, severity, 
and impact of pain (1): 1) adult medical, surgical, and trauma 
ICU patients routinely experience pain, both at rest and dur-
ing standard ICU care; 2) procedural pain is common in adult 
ICU patients; and 3) pain in adult cardiac surgery patients is 
common and poorly treated; women experience more pain 
than men. This guideline’s new descriptive question focuses 
on observational studies that have identified factors associated 
with pain in ICU patients at rest and during procedures.
During Rest. Five studies (evaluating from 74 to 5,176 
patients each) describe factors associated with pain in medical, 
surgical, and trauma ICU populations (26–30). The time from 
pain recognition to analgesic initiation, the pain being worse 
than what the patient expected, and ICU length of stay (LOS) 
are significant predictors of higher self-reported pain intensity 
(26). The amount of analgesic administered after cardiac and 
abdominal surgery in the ICU is a significant predictor of later 
pain intensity, pain affect (i.e., emotional experience), and pain 
sensation (i.e., quality of pain related to the sensory dimension 
of the pain experience) (27). Among 301 mechanically ven-
tilated patients, younger age and prior surgery both predicted 
greater pain at rest (28). After cardiac surgery, patients with 
preoperative anxiety or depression have a higher level of self-
reported pain intensity (29). One large cohort of 5,176 medical 
ICU adults reported the following baseline predictors of higher 
self-reported pain intensity during the ICU admission: younger 
age; need for support to conduct daily living activities; num-
ber of comorbidities such as cardiac and pulmonary diseases; 
depression; anxiety; and an expectation of a future poor quality 
of life (30). Clinicians should make an effort to obtain informa-
tion from all relevant sources, including family and other care-
givers, about their patient’s pre-ICU illness background to better 
consider these factors in plans to improve patient comfort.
During Procedures. A total of 12 studies (evaluating from 
30 to 5,957 patients each) have evaluated pain level, mostly 
through patient self-reports, during 12 different procedures in 
various ICU populations (i.e., medical, surgical, cardiovascular, 
trauma, and neurologic) (27, 28, 31–37). The following proce-
dures are associated with the greatest increased pain intensity: 
arterial catheter insertion, chest tube removal (CTR), wound 
drain removal (16), turning (32) and repositioning, and tra-
cheal suctioning (37). (A complete list of painful procedures 
can be found in Supplemental Table 4 [Supplemental Digital 
Content 6, http://links.lww.com/CCM/D764].) Patients with a 
surgical history/diagnosis or trauma had worse procedural pain 
(32), as did younger (37), female (33), and non-white patients 
(34, 37); however, in one report evaluating six procedures (35), 
no association was found between procedural pain intensity 
and age except during wound care and tracheal suctioning.
Opioid use before or during a procedure was found to be a risk 
factor for higher procedural pain in one recent, large multinational 
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Online Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
e829
study (16), but not in a smaller, older study limited to surgical ICU 
patients (27). This divergence may be due to a focus on the dose 
rather than efficacy of opioid therapy, mistimed opioid adminis-
trations (relative to the procedure), and the inclusion of patients 
with prior opioid exposure. Such findings emphasize the impor-
tance of preprocedural pain assessment and preemptive analgesia, 
when appropriate, for procedures known to cause pain. Indeed, 
severe procedural pain is associated with severe adverse events (e.g., 
tachycardia, bradycardia, hypertension, hypotension, desaturation, 
bradypnea, and ventilator distress) (21) that may be prevented 
with appropriate pain assessment and preemptive analgesia.
Evidence Gaps: Future research should include the following: 
1) an exploration of the affect of sociodemographic variables such 
as age, gender, and ethnicity that may affect pain and response 
to pharmacologic intervention; 2) identification of pharmaco-
kinetic, pharmacogenomic, and gender-associated factors that 
influence analgesic responses; 3) a determination of what pain-
related behaviors predict self-reported pain; 4) the development 
and study of objective measures (e.g., pupillary reflex dilatation 
response) to determine pain before and during a planned pro-
cedure in patients unable to self-report pain; 5) identification of 
biomarkers associated with pain; 6) conduct of clinical trials of 
pain management interventions during procedures; and 7) inves-
tigation of the relationship among opioid effectiveness, opioid 
tolerance, opioid-related hyperalgesia, and procedural pain (38).
Assessment
Question: What are the most reliable and valid pain assessment 
methods to use in critically ill adults?
Self-Report Scales. 
Ungraded Statements: A patient’s self-report of pain is the 
reference standard for pain assessment in patients who can 
communicate reliably.
Among critically ill adults who are able to self-report pain, 
the 0–10 Numeric Rating Scale (NRS) administered either ver-
bally or visually is a valid and feasible pain scale.
Rationale: Four studies served to answer the above ques-
tion (39–42). One study evaluated 111 medical/surgical ICU 
patients for pain in a randomized order using five different 
self-report scales: 1) 0–10 cm Visual Analog Scale Horizontal 
(VAS-H); 2) 0–10 cm Visual Analog Scale (VAS) Vertical; 3) 
Verbal Descriptor Scale (VDS): no pain, mild pain, moder-
ate pain, severe pain, and extreme pain); 4) 0–10 NRS Oral 
(NRS-O); and 5) 0–10 NRS Visual (NRS-V) in a horizontal 
format (39). The NRS-V had the highest rate of success (i.e., 
response obtained) (91%); the VAS-H the lowest (66%). The 
NRS-V success rate was significantly greater than the VDS and 
VAS (both p < 0.001) and NRS-O (p < 0.05). It also had the 
best sensitivity, negative predictive value, and accuracy; given 
its ease of use, it was most highly favored by ICU patients.
The 0–10 Faces Pain Thermometer (FPT) (4.25 × 14 verti-
cal format) scale, validated in 105 postoperative cardiac surgery 
ICU patients, revealed higher FPT scores during turning and 
good correlation with the VDS for pain supporting its construct 
validity (43). Patients evaluated the faces and numbers in the FPT 
favorably and nearly all rated it as easy to use and useful in iden-
tifying pain intensity. When compared with the 0–10 NRS, the 
Wong-Baker FACES scale resulted in higher pain scores suggesting 
that pain scales developed for children should be evaluated cau-
tiously before being used in adults (41). Finally, in another study 
(42), cardiovascular surgery ICU patients stated that the 0–10 
NRS or Verbal Rating Scale (VRS) of six descriptors scale is better 
for evaluating their pain than the 0–100 VAS; they prefer to have 
their pain evaluated with the VRS (vs the 0–10 NRS). In summary, 
the 0–10 NRS in a visual format is the best self-reported pain scale 
to use in critically ill adults. A descriptive pain scale like the VDS 
should be considered for ICU patients unable to use a numerically 
formatted scale such as the 0–10 NRS.
Behavioral Assessment Tools. 
Ungraded Statement: Among critically ill adults unable to 
self-report pain and in whom behaviors are observable, the 
Behavioral Pain Scale in intubated (BPS) and nonintubated 
(BPS-NI) patients and the Critical-Care Pain Observation 
Tool (CPOT) demonstrate the greatest validity and reliability 
for monitoring pain.
Rationale: We updated this psychometric analysis of behav-
ioral pain assessment tools, which was initiated in the 2013 
guidelines (1) and in a systematic review (44). Fifty-three articles 
pertained to the development, validation, and implementation of 
12 pain scales for use in critically ill adults unable to self-report 
pain. Four additional pain scales were included: the FACES Scale 
(45), the Facial Action Coding System (46), the Pain In Advanced 
Dementia (PAINAD) (47), and the Behavior Pain Assessment 
Tool (BPAT) (48). In this analysis, we considered a pain scale with 
a psychometric quality score of 15–20 to have very good psycho-
metric properties; a score of 12–14.9 good psychometric prop-
erties; 10–11.9 some acceptable psychometric properties; and 
0–9.9 very few psychometric properties reported and/or unac-
ceptable results (1, 49). A list of studies (by pain scale) published 
since 2013 are included in Supplemental Table 5 (Supplemental 
Digital Content 7, http://links.lww.com/CCM/D765), and the 
psychometric scores and the quality of evidence supporting each 
pain scale are described in Supplemental Table 6 (Supplemental 
Digital Content 8, http://links.lww.com/CCM/D766).
The CPOT and the BPS remain the most robust scales for 
assessing pain in critically ill adults unable to self-report. Each 
has very good psychometric properties with scores of 16.7 
and 15.1, respectively. The BPS-NI obtained a psychometric 
weighted score of 14.8. Although both the BPS and the CPOT 
have been validated across large samples of medical, surgical, 
and trauma ICUs (50–54), studies involving brain-injured 
patients using the BPS (50, 51) and CPOT (52–54) are small. In 
the brain-injured population, although the construct validity 
of both scales is supported with higher scores during painful 
procedures (vs rest and nonpainful procedures), patients pre-
dominantly expressed pain-related behaviors that were related 
to level of consciousness; grimacing and muscle rigidity were 
less frequently observed (50, 52–54). An additional study (51), 
although not evaluating validity, found that BPS and BPS-NI 
were feasible and reliable to use in the brain-injured population. 
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Devlin et al
e830 
www.ccmjournal.org 
September 2018 • Volume 46 • Number 9
Of note, Behavioral Pain Scales have been validated in the fol-
lowing languages (other than French or English): CPOT—
Mandarin (55), Korean (56), Spanish (57), and Swedish (58); 
BPS and BPS-NI—Mandarin (59).
The BPAT, the first behavioral pain assessment tool to 
undergo international validation, obtained a psychometric 
weighted score of 10.6 when tested in its original English ver-
sion and 12 other languages among 3,851 critically ill adults 
from 28 countries (48). This is less than reported for either 
the BPS or the CPOT because the feasibility and impact of its 
use once implemented in clinical practice remain to be inves-
tigated. By the time this implementation research is complete, 
it may be of use in countries/languages where neither the BPS 
nor CPOT has been validated (48). Each of the other scales 
considered (i.e., the Face, Legs, Activity, Cry, Consolability; 
the Non-verbal Pain Assessment Tool; the PAIN; the BOT; 
the FACES; the Fear-Avoidance Components Scale; and the 
PAINAD) had low psychometric weighted scores (< 10).
Proxy Reporters. 
Ungraded Statement: When appropriate, and when the 
patient is unable to self-report, family can be involved in their 
loved one’s pain assessment process.
Rationale: The intensity and distress of 10 different patient 
symptoms, including pain, were independently assessed by ICU 
patients, nurses, physicians, and family members (60). For both 
pain intensity and pain distress, the reports of family proxy 
reporters were found to be closer to ICU patients’ self-reports 
than that of the patients’ nurses and physicians. However, the 
agreement between family and patients was only moderate. A 
second study compared ICU nurse and patient pain percep-
tion across nine procedures using a 10-point scale. Although 
patient and nurse pain scores for nasogastric tube insertion and 
tracheal aspiration were similar, they were significantly higher 
among nurses (vs patients) for position change, subcutaneous 
injection, blood sugar testing, and blood pressure (BP) measure-
ment (61). No statistical measure of agreement between nurse 
and ICU patient scores was reported. Finally, compared with 
seriously ill patients’ self-reports, surrogates correctly identified 
pain presence 74% of the time and pain severity 53% of the 
time, with a tendency to overestimate pain intensity (62). There 
are families who may not want to be involved in pain assess-
ment or situations where family involvement in pain assess-
ment is not appropriate. Family involvement in pain assessment 
should not substitute for an ICU team’s role and commitment 
to systematic pain assessment and optimal analgesia.
Physiologic Measures. 
Ungraded Statement: Vital signs (VS) (i.e., heart rate [HR], 
BP, respiratory rate [RR], oxygen saturation [Spo2], and end-
tidal CO2) are not valid indicators for pain in critically ill adults 
and should only be used as cues to initiate further assessment 
using appropriate and validated methods such as the patient’s 
self-report of pain (whenever possible) or a behavioral scale 
(i.e., BPS, BPS-NI, CPOT).
Rationale: The 2013 guidelines state that VS should not be 
used alone to assess pain in critically ill adults (1). Fourteen 
studies (four new since the 2013 guidelines) (n = 30–755 
patients) evaluated the validity of using VS for pain assess-
ment across various ICU populations and reported inconsis-
tent results (31, 34, 37, 63–73). In 11 of 14 studies, HR and/
or BP was found to increase when ICU patients were exposed 
to a nociceptive procedure (e.g., endotracheal/tracheal suction-
ing) compared with either rest or a nonnociceptive procedure 
(e.g., cuff inflation, eye care) (34, 37, 63–71). However, these 
HR and BP increases (< 20% in all studies) were not considered 
to be clinically significant by the authors. In addition, VS were 
found to increase during both nociceptive and nonnociceptive 
procedures suggesting the lack of validity of these indicators 
(68, 70, 72–74). In some studies, RR increased and/or end-tidal 
CO2 decreased during a painful procedure (64, 65, 68), whereas 
Spo2 decreased (65, 69). Except for associations found among 
these VSs (i.e., HR, RR, and Spo2) and the pain described by 
cardiac surgery ICU patients themselves (64) and by critically ill 
adults with a traumatic brain injury (TBI) (74), an association 
between VS changes and patients’ self-reported pain was not 
observed (65, 67, 68, 70). In one quality improvement project 
(19), changes in VS (e.g., tachycardia, bradycardia, hyperten-
sion, hypotension, desaturation, and bradypnea) during nurs-
ing care (bathing, massage, sheet-change, repositioning) were 
considered as severe pain-related adverse events. Although VS 
changes can be considered to be pain-related adverse events, 
they should not be used for pain assessment in critically ill 
adults.
Evidence Gaps: When evaluating self-reported pain inten-
sity scales, further research comparing FACES pain scales with 
other rating scales (e.g., NRS, VDS, and VAS) in heterogeneous 
ICU populations is required. Family members’ acting as proxy 
reporters using behavioral pain assessment tools (e.g., BPS/
BPS-NI and CPOT) for ICU patients unable to self-report 
should be explored. Behavioral scales are the alternative mea-
sures to use when the patient is unable to self-report (75). 
Scale revisions could enhance the validity of their use in ICU 
patients with brain injury and other neurologically critically ill 
patients (such as those with neuromuscular diseases); research 
on the application of the BPAT in ICU practice is encour-
aged. However, situations exist for which behavioral scales are 
impossible to use (e.g., unresponsive patients with a Richmond 
Agitation-Sedation Scale [RASS] ≤ −4). In such situations, no 
alternative methods are currently available to ICU clinicians. 
Other technology that may be useful in the ICU pain assess-
ment process should be explored. Technology measuring HR 
variability (e.g., the Analgesia Nociception Index) (76, 77) or 
incorporating simultaneously different physiologic parameters 
(e.g., Nociception Level Index) (78) may be relevant. Pupillary 
reflex dilation using video pupillometry has shown promising 
results in pain assessment of critically ill adults (79–81), but 
future research is necessary to investigate the benefits, harms, 
and feasibility of implementation in the ICU.
Pharmacologic Adjuvants to Opioid Therapy
Opioids remain a mainstay for pain management in most ICU set-
tings. However, their side effects preoccupy clinicians because of 
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Online Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
e831
important safety concerns, such as sedation, delirium, respiratory 
depression, ileus, and immunosuppression, may lengthen ICU 
LOS and worsen post-ICU patient outcome. A “multi-modal anal-
gesia” approach has been used in the perioperative setting to reduce 
opioid use and to optimize postoperative analgesia and rehabili-
tation (82). Nonopioid analgesics such as acetaminophen, nefo-
pam, ketamine, lidocaine, neuropathic agents, and nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have each been evaluated in 
critically ill adults with the aim of sparing opioid use and improv-
ing analgesic effectiveness. In addition to opioids, these nonopioid 
analgesic alternatives may be combined with regional anesthetics 
and nonpharmacologic interventions known to reduce pain (see 
below). Dose, duration, and pharmacologic effectiveness need to 
be evaluated when combination strategies are being evaluated.
Acetaminophen. 
Question: Should acetaminophen be used as an adjunct to 
an opioid (vs an opioid alone) for pain management in criti-
cally ill adults?
Recommendation: We suggest using acetaminophen as an 
adjunct to an opioid to decrease pain intensity and opioid con-
sumption for pain management in critically ill adults (condi-
tional recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
Rationale: Two single-centered, parallel-group randomized 
controlled trials (RCTs) evaluated IV acetaminophen 1 g every 
6 hours (q6h) versus placebo in a double-blind fashion in 113 
postcardiac surgery patients (83) and in an open design in 40 
postabdominal surgical ICU patients (84). After 24 hours, pooled 
analysis of these two trials revealed a decrease in pain intensity at 
rest measured by the VAS-H (mean difference [MD], –0.5 points; 
95% CI, –0.7 to –0.2; moderate quality) and in opioid consump-
tion (MD, –4.5 mg [morphine equivalents]; 95% CI, –6.6 to –2.5; 
moderate quality) in the acetaminophen groups. In the study 
demonstrating the greatest reduction in opioid consumption 
(84), time to extubation, sedation, and nausea rate were all sig-
nificantly improved in the acetaminophen group. The risk for IV 
acetaminophen-associated hypotension (a decrease in the mean 
arterial pressure > 15 mm Hg may occur in up to 50% of patients) 
may preclude its use in some patients (85). Given these findings, 
panel members suggest using acetaminophen (IV, oral, or rectal) 
to decrease pain intensity and opioid consumption when treat-
ing pain in critically ill patients, particularly in patients at higher 
risk for opioid-associated safety concerns (e.g., critically ill patient 
recovering from abdominal surgery and at risk for ileus or nausea 
and vomiting). Although IV acetaminophen was the intervention 
evaluated in the two relevant studies, the panel felt that this con-
ditional recommendation was generalizable to all acetaminophen 
administration routes. Although not studied in the critically ill, 
the absorption (i.e., bioavailability) of acetaminophen adminis-
tered by the oral or rectal route may be reduced in some criti-
cally ill subgroups (e.g., those requiring vasopressor support). The 
IV route of administration may be preferable in these situations, 
balanced with the hypotension risk described with IV (but not 
enteral) acetaminophen administration. The acquisition cost and 
availability of IV acetaminophen vary widely among countries 
and will likely influence the decision to use this specific formula-
tion of acetaminophen in critically ill adults.
Nefopam. 
Question: Should nefopam be used either as an adjunct or a 
replacement for an opioid (vs an opioid alone) for pain man-
agement in critically ill adults?
Recommendation: We suggest using nefopam (if feasible) 
either as an adjunct or replacement for an opioid to reduce 
opioid use and their safety concerns for pain management 
in critically ill adults (conditional recommendation, very low 
quality of evidence).
Rationale: Nefopam is a nonopioid analgesic that exerts its 
effect by inhibiting dopamine, noradrenaline, and serotonin 
recapture in both the spinal and supraspinal spaces. A 20-mg 
dose has an analgesic effect comparable to 6 mg of IV morphine 
(86). Unlike non–cyclooxygenase (COX)-1 selective NSAIDs 
(e.g., ketorolac), nefopam has no detrimental effects on hemo-
stasis, the gastric mucosa, or renal function; unlike acetamin-
ophen, it has no detrimental effects on hepatic function, and 
unlike opioids, it has no detrimental effects on vigilance, venti-
latory drive, and intestinal motility. However, nefopam use can 
be associated with tachycardia, glaucoma, seizure, and delirium. 
Nevertheless, nefopam may be a safe and effective alternative or 
adjunctive analgesic for ICU patients. Although not available in 
United States and Canada, nefopam is a low-cost drug that is 
used in nearly 30 countries. For example, after acetaminophen, 
it is the second most frequently used nonopioid medication in 
mechanically ventilated ICU patients in France (87).
A three-armed, double-blind, noninferiority RCT tested 
the effect of nefopam, fentanyl, and combination nefopam + 
half-dose fentanyl, administered by a patient-controlled anal-
gesia (PCA) device, in 276 elective cardiac surgery patients in 
one ICU (88). Patients’ self-reported pain intensity was not 
significantly different among the three groups despite similar 
PCA volumes. Nausea was significantly more frequent in the 
fentanyl group compared with nefopam groups. If available, 
nefopam could be used to reduce the opioid consumption and 
opioid-associated side effects, such as nausea, after an evalua-
tion of the risk-to-benefit ratio of all available analgesic options 
and patient reassessment for potential side effects (tachycardia, 
glaucoma, seizure, and delirium) (89–92).
Ketamine. 
Question: Should ketamine be used as an adjunct to an opi-
oid (vs an opioid alone) for pain management in critically ill 
adults?
Recommendation: We suggest using low-dose ketamine 
(0.5 mg/kg IVP x 1 followed by 1-2 μg/kg/min infusion) as an 
adjunct to opioid therapy when seeking to reduce opioid con-
sumption in postsurgical adults admitted to the ICU (condi-
tional recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
Rationale: Ketamine, because of its N-methyl-d-aspartate 
(NMDA) receptor-blocking properties and potential to reduce 
the risk for opioid hyperalgesia, has been evaluated in postop-
erative adults as a strategy to improve pain relief while reducing 
opioid requirements in two non-ICU systematic reviews (93, 94). 
In a single-center, double-blind RCT of 93 postabdominal sur-
gery ICU patients, adjunctive ketamine (0.5 mg/kg IV push, 2 μg/
kg/min infusion × 24 hr followed by 1 μg/kg/min × 24 hr) was 
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Devlin et al
e832 
www.ccmjournal.org 
September 2018 • Volume 46 • Number 9
associated with reduced morphine consumption (MD, –22 mg; 
95% CI, –30 to –14; low quality) but no difference in patients’ 
self-reported pain intensity (95). The panel noted that reduced 
opioid consumption is only a surrogate for better patient-cen-
tered outcomes. The incidence of side effects (i.e., nausea delir-
ium, hallucinations, hypoventilation, pruritus, and sedation) was 
not different between the ketamine and opioid-alone groups. 
Based on this generally positive ICU RCT, the panel made a con-
ditional recommendation for the use of low-dose ketamine as an 
adjunct to opioids to optimize acute postoperative pain manage-
ment in critically ill adults once the benefits and harms of its use 
have been considered by clinicians. Because this single available 
ICU RCT had a high risk of bias and was also limited to post-
operative abdominal surgery patients, the panel also considered 
indirect evidence from RCTs involving non-ICU patients that, 
overall, suggested benefit with ketamine use (93, 94).
Neuropathic Pain Medications. 
Question: Should a neuropathic pain medication (e.g., gab-
apentin, carbamazepine, and pregabalin) be used as an adjunct 
to an opioid (vs an opioid alone) for pain management in criti-
cally ill adults?
Recommendations: We recommend using a neuropathic pain 
medication (e.g., gabapentin, carbamazepine, and pregabalin) 
with opioids for neuropathic pain management in critically ill 
adults (strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
We suggest using a neuropathic pain medication (e.g., gaba-
pentin, carbamazepine, and pregabalin) with opioids for pain 
management in ICU adults after cardiovascular surgery (con-
ditional recommendation, low quality of evidence).
Rationale: Two RCTs in ICU patients with Guillain-Barré 
syndrome (96, 97) and two RCTs in postcardiac surgery ICU 
patients (98, 99) were included. Each of these trials, although 
double-blinded, was small and single centered. The first 
Guillain-Barré syndrome trial compared gabapentin (15 mg/
kg/d) with placebo in 18 patients using a crossover design 
(96). In the second Guillain-Barré syndrome trial, gabapen-
tin (300 mg/d), carbamazepine (100 mg/d), and placebo were 
compared in 36 patients using a parallel design (97). Pooled 
analysis showed that neuropathic agents reduced pain inten-
sity measured by the 0–10 NRS (MD, –3.44 cm; 95% CI, –3.90 
to –2.98; high quality). Patients receiving gabapentin had also 
significantly lower pain intensity than patients receiving car-
bamazepine (97). Two postcardiac surgery trials compared 
pregabalin (150 mg before surgery then 150 mg daily) with 
placebo in 40 and 60 patients, respectively (98, 99).
Pooled analysis of these four trials demonstrated a sig-
nificant decrease in opioid consumption in the first 24 hours 
after neuropathic agent initiation (MD, –13.54 mg [morphine 
equivalent]; 95% CI, –14.57 to –12.5; moderate quality). 
However, the four RCTs included diverse opioids as baseline 
treatment: fentanyl (96, 97), oxycodone (98), and tramadol 
(99), which may limit the applicability of results. Across the 
two postsurgical trials, both time to extubation (MD, +0.36 hr; 
95% CI, –0.7 to +1.43; low quality) and ICU LOS (MD, –0.04 
d; 95% CI, –0.46 to +0.38; low quality) were similar between 
the neuropathic and nonneuropathic medication groups (99).
The Guillain-Barré syndrome population is considered by 
neurologists to be one of the best populations to evaluate neu-
ropathic pain medication efficacy (among the larger popula-
tion of ICU patients who might have neuropathic pain). The 
existence of limited data and potential drawbacks to neuro-
pathic pain medication use are distinct in the much larger 
population of cardiovascular surgical patients; our recommen-
dation focuses on opiate exposure reduction in patients who, 
in most cases, do not have neuropathic pain. The quality of 
evidence for the postcardiac surgery recommendation was low 
due to issues related to risk of bias and imprecision (98). Panel 
members estimated that neuropathic agents had negligible 
costs and were widely available although the possible sedative 
and cognitive effects of these agents could preclude their use in 
some patients. These drugs require the ability for patients to 
swallow or have enteral access.
Lidocaine. 
Question: Should IV lidocaine be used as an adjunct to an 
opioid (vs an opioid alone) for pain management in critically 
ill adults?
Recommendation: We suggest not routinely using IV lido-
caine as an adjunct to opioid therapy for pain management in 
critically ill adults (conditional recommendation, low quality 
of evidence).
Rationale: One single-center, double-blind RCT of 100 car-
diac surgery patients requiring a postoperative ICU stay found 
that lidocaine (1.5 mg/kg IV bolus × 1 over 10 min at the time 
of surgery followed by an IV infusion of 30 µg/kg/min for 
48 hr) versus placebo did not affect patient’s self-reported pain 
intensity; postoperative fentanyl or sedative consumption, 
time to extubation; nor ICU and hospital LOS when compared 
with placebo (100). This study had a high risk of bias related to 
selection bias and a lack of intention-to-treat analysis.
Evidence from non-ICU studies helped support this recom-
mendation. A meta-analysis assessing the improvement of anal-
gesia and opioid-related side effects in non-ICU postoperative 
patients reported only low-to-moderate quality evidence that 
adjunctive lidocaine, when compared with placebo, decreased 
postoperative pain intensity scores after abdominal surgery. It 
did not find an improvement with lidocaine use for objective 
outcomes like time to first spontaneous bowel movement after 
surgery. It did not evaluate the important safety concerns asso-
ciated with lidocaine use (101). Although the use of IV lido-
caine infusions as adjunctive medication is discouraged for the 
general ICU population, individual patients and certain surgi-
cal ICU cohorts may benefit from this intervention. Of note, the 
influence of IV lidocaine infusion dose and duration and inter-
patient pharmacokinetic variability on the risk that neurologic 
and cardiac toxicity will occur in the ICU population remains 
unclear. At this time, concerns about safety outweigh the theo-
retical benefits of its use in the general adult ICU population.
NSAIDs. 
Question: Should a COX-1–selective NSAID be used as an 
adjunct to an opioid (vs an opioid alone) for pain management 
in critically ill adults?
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Online Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
e833
Recommendation: We suggest not routinely using a COX-
1–selective NSAID as an adjunct to opioid therapy for pain 
management in critically ill adults (conditional recommenda-
tion, low quality of evidence).
Rationale: Two single-center RCTs, one including 120 post-
cardiac surgery ICU patients in four parallel groups (adjunctive 
75 mg diclofenac, 100 mg ketoprofen, 100 mg indomethacin, or 
placebo) (102) and one including 43 postabdominal surgery ICU 
patients in two parallel groups (adjunctive 100 mg ketoprofen or 
placebo) (103), evaluated the role of COX-1–selective NSAIDs for 
postoperative ICU pain control. Pooled analysis demonstrated 
that NSAIDs nonsignificantly reduced pain intensity at rest at 24 
hours as measured by the 0–10 VAS or NRS (MD, –0.35 cm; 95% 
CI, –0.91 to +0.21; low quality). In one trial (103), pain intensity 
during deep inspiration—although significantly lower at 6 hours 
(MD, –1.3 cm; 95% CI, –2.36 to –0.24; moderate quality)—was 
not different at 24 hours (MD, –0.6 cm; 95% CI, –1.44 to +0.24; 
low quality). Pooled analysis showed a significant reduction of 
morphine consumption at 24 hours (MD, –1.61 mg [morphine 
equivalents]; 95% CI, –2.42 to –0.8; very low quality). Neither 
study reported a difference in nausea/vomiting between groups. 
No respiratory depression events were reported (103).
NSAID-related side effects including acute kidney injury 
and excessive bleeding were not significantly different between 
the three NSAIDs and the placebo group. Both studies had a 
high risk of bias (102, 103). Given the perceived small ben-
eficial effect balanced with serious potential safety concerns 
(e.g., bleeding and kidney injury), particularly when NSAIDs 
are administered for multiple doses, the panel members rec-
ommend against routine use of NSAIDs along with opioids 
for nonprocedural pain management in critically ill adults. 
As with most conditional recommendations, the panel felt 
that there are likely patients—and perhaps even cohorts of 
patients—who may benefit from NSAIDs. No RCT evaluating 
a COX-2–specific NSAID (e.g., celecoxib) in critically ill adults 
was identified; thus, the role of these agents remains unclear.
Evidence Gaps: All adjunctive nonopioid analgesics (when 
used in the context of multimodal analgesia) require larger 
sized studies in critically ill adults that are designed to clearly 
evaluate their opioid-sparing properties and their ability to 
reduce opioid-related side effects (104). The outcomes asso-
ciated with opioid safety concerns such as ileus, duration of 
mechanical ventilation, immunosuppression, healthcare-
associated infections, delirium, and both ICU and hospital 
LOS must be evaluated carefully. The risks of using nonopi-
oid-adjunctive medications for analgesia in a population at 
increased risk for adverse drug effects need to be better defined. 
This includes analysis of liver and renal toxicities secondary to 
acetaminophen (all routes), hemodynamic instability second-
ary to IV acetaminophen (85), risk of bleeding secondary to 
non-COX-1–selective NSAIDs, delirium, and neurotoxicity 
associated with ketamine (105), and hemodynamic alterations 
with IV lidocaine (100). The optimal dose and route of admin-
istration for these nonopioids in critically ill patients need to 
be investigated, and studies should be conducted in the criti-
cally ill medical patients unable to self-report pain. Finally, the 
role for the use of different opioid-adjunctive medications in 
combination needs to be evaluated.
Summary of Pharmacologic Adjuvants to Opioid Ther-
apy. The panel generally supports the utilization of multi-
modal pharmacotherapy as a component of an analgesia-first 
approach to spare and/or minimize both opioids and seda-
tives. A multimodal analgesia strategy is likely to improve pain 
control, reduce opioid consumption, and improve patient-
centered outcomes. In patients for whom the risk of these 
nonopioid-adjunctive medications favors their exclusion, the 
several nonpharmacologic strategies (described below) pro-
vide an opportunity to minimize opioid consumption.
Protocols mandating systematic assessments with validated 
pain and sedation scales consistently reduced the consumption 
of opioids and sedatives (3, 106–111). Studies aiming to evaluate 
an improvement in systematic pain assessment with validated 
scales evaluated cohorts in whom the use of nonopioid multi-
modal pharmacotherapy was significantly higher (106, 110). 
Daily sedation interruption can also be a useful intervention at 
reducing opioid consumption, provided proper assessment of 
pain precedes it (112). Music and massage, as recommended in 
these guidelines, have also been shown to reduce opioids (113–
117). Selected adjunctive agents should be both patient specific 
(e.g., minimizing acetaminophen use with liver dysfunction or 
high doses of gabapentin with renal dysfunction) and symptom 
specific (e.g., use of ketamine in surgical ICU patients at high risk 
of opioid side effects) to improve pain scores, decrease opioid 
consumption, minimize new adverse effects, and reduce poly-
pharmacy (Supplemental Fig. 2 [Supplemental Digital Content 
9, http://links.lww.com/CCM/D767] summarizes a pharmaco-
logic strategy to decrease opioid consumption in the ICU).
Pharmacologic Interventions to Reduce Procedural Pain
Bedside procedures in the ICU can include regular activities (e.g., 
turning) and discrete procedures (e.g., arterial catheter inser-
tion). Pain should be assessed and appropriately treated before 
a procedure to prevent more intense pain during the procedure. 
The 2013 guidelines recommended that preemptive analgesia 
and/or nonpharmacologic interventions (e.g., relaxation) be 
administered to alleviate pain in adult ICU patients before CTR 
and suggest these interventions before other procedures (1).
Opioid Use and Dose. 
Questions: Should an opioid (vs no opioid) be used for criti-
cally ill adults undergoing a procedure?
Should a high-dose opioid (vs a low-dose opioid) be used 
for critically ill adults undergoing a procedure?
Recommendation: We suggest using an opioid, at the low-
est effective dose, for procedural pain management in criti-
cally ill adults (conditional recommendation, moderate level 
of evidence).
Remarks: The same opioids (i.e., fentanyl, hydromorphone, 
morphine, and remifentanil) that are recommended in the 
2013 guidelines to manage pain should also be considered 
when an opioid is deemed to be the most appropriate pharma-
cologic intervention to reduce procedural pain (1).
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Devlin et al
e834 
www.ccmjournal.org 
September 2018 • Volume 46 • Number 9
Rationale: Three small RCTs tested the relative effectiveness 
of different doses of opioids administered before turning and 
CTR. Cardiac surgery patients in a high-dose remifentanil group 
versus a low-dose remifentanil group had significantly lower 
CTR pain (118). However, in a second study, when high-dose 
versus low-dose morphine was administered before turning or 
CTR (when steady-state morphine serum concentrations had 
not been reached), no significant differences in procedural pain 
scores were seen (119); however, procedural pain scores were low 
in both groups. Pooled analysis comparing high-dose versus low-
dose opioids for periprocedural pain management demonstrated 
a small reduction in the 0–10 NRS pain score with high-dose 
opioid use (standard mean difference [SMD], –0.26 cm; 95% CI, 
–0.94 to +0.42; low quality); however, conclusions are limited 
given the differing results between individual studies. In a third 
study, medical-surgical ICU patients who received IV fentanyl 
versus placebo before turning had a significantly lower score on 
the BPS (120). The potential for harm with opioids, in a dose-
dependent proportion, was demonstrated. Two of 20 patients 
in the high-dose remifentanil group had 1–3 minutes of apnea, 
requiring bag and mask ventilation for 3 minutes (118), whereas 
10% of patients in another study who were administered high-
dose fentanyl (at a dose of 1–1.5 µg/kg) experienced respiratory 
depression (120). Given this short-term consequence of higher 
dose opioids in critically ill patients, as well as the effectiveness 
of small doses of opioids in the three studies in maintaining low 
pain levels, opioids at the lowest effective doses for procedural 
pain are favored. Timing opioid administration so that the opi-
oid’s peak effect coincides with the procedure is important.
Local Analgesia/Nitrous Oxide. 
Questions: Should local analgesia (vs an opioid) be used for 
critically ill adults undergoing a procedure?
Should nitrous oxide (vs an opioid) be used for critically ill 
adults undergoing a procedure?
Recommendation: We suggest not using either local anal-
gesia or nitrous oxide for pain management during CTR in 
critically ill adults (conditional recommendation, low quality 
of evidence).
Rationale: Only one RCT tested the effects of subcutaneous 
infiltration of 20 mL of 0.5% bupivacaine around a mediastinal 
CTR site versus inhaled 50% nitrous oxide and oxygen after car-
diac surgery (121). Patients in the bupivacaine (vs 50% nitrous 
oxide and oxygen) group had significantly lower CTR pain 
scores; however, the quality of evidence was low. Despite a signal 
of benefit, the feasibility of subcutaneous bupivacaine use in the 
ICU is challenging, given that it can only be administered by a 
qualified clinician. A lack of data to support the use of lower risk 
local anesthetics like lidocaine, able to be administered by a wider 
range of clinicians, also influenced the panel’s recommendation.
Volatile Anesthetics. 
Question: Should an inhaled volatile anesthetic (vs no use of 
this agent) be used for critically ill adults undergoing a procedure?
Recommendation: We recommend not using inhaled vola-
tile anesthetics for procedural pain management in critically ill 
adults (strong recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
Rationale: Isoflurane, a volatile anesthetic, is traditionally 
used for general anesthesia. It has a relatively rapid onset and 
recovery and has demonstrated cardioprotective effects such 
as preserved mitochondrial oxygen consumption, troponin 
release, and myocardial infarction (122). Little is known of the 
analgesic effects of isoflurane for periprocedural pain in ICU 
patients.
No RCTs comparing isoflurane to a control intervention 
(e.g., opioid alone) were found. One small double-blinded 
RCT tested the relative effectiveness of nitrous oxide 50% and 
oxygen combined with isoflurane versus inhaled nitrous oxide 
50% and oxygen alone for CTR in patients after uncomplicated 
cardiac surgery (123). Nitrous oxide 50% and oxygen along 
with isoflurane inhalation were more effective for pain related 
to the first of two chest tubes removed. However, removal of 
the second chest tube was more painful, regardless of the gas 
inhaled. Although the study showed a potential for benefit, we 
do not recommend this intervention because the study failed to 
consider the CTR time relative to the gas administration time; 
the very low quality of evidence available (imprecision [a small 
sample size and only one study] and indirectness [only cardiac 
surgery patients]); the increased resources needed for use of 
gases in the ICU; and in some centers, safety issues related to 
the use of volatile anesthetics outside the operating room.
NSAIDs. 
Question: Should an NSAID administered IV, orally, and/or 
rectally (vs an opioid) be used for critically ill adults undergo-
ing a procedure?
Recommendation: We suggest using an NSAID administered 
IV, orally, or rectally as an alternative to opioids for pain man-
agement during discrete and infrequent procedures in criti-
cally ill adults (conditional recommendation, low quality of 
evidence).
Rationale: In a randomized double-blind study (124), the 
effects of two types of analgesics with different mechanisms 
of action were tested on CTR pain: a single 4-mg dose of IV 
morphine (an opioid) or a single 30-mg dose of IV ketorolac (a 
non-COX-1–specific NSAID). Procedural pain intensity scores 
did not differ significantly among the groups, although pain 
intensity was mild in both groups and the quality of evidence 
was limited by imprecision (small number of patients).
Question: Should an NSAID topical gel (vs no use of NSAID 
gel) be used for critically ill adults undergoing a procedure?
Recommendation: We suggest not using an NSAID topi-
cal gel for procedural pain management in critically ill adults 
(conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence).
Rationale: Topical valdecoxib is an NSAID gel. Use of a 
topical analgesic rather than an IV NSAID or opioid or local 
anesthetic injection could be less demanding on available 
nursing resources (125). One randomized double-blind study 
in postcardiac surgery patients tested the efficacy of topical 
valdecoxib 50-mg placebo gel (vs a paraffin gel) applied to 
the skin surrounding a chest tube before CTR (125). Patients 
who received the NSAID gel had less CTR pain than those who 
received the paraffin control gel. However, the panel made a 
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Online Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
e835
conditional recommendation against the use of NSAID gel for 
procedural pain management given concerns about the qual-
ity of this study and the high acquisition cost of NSAID gel 
product in some countries that may make their use prohibitive.
Evidence Gaps: Future studies are warranted to test the effec-
tiveness of various types and doses of opioids in larger sample 
of patients during different procedures while attending to the 
patients’ preprocedural pain, particularly in a context where 
opioid exposure may be undesirable. Studies of procedural pain 
interventions should avoid risk of bias through use of control 
groups, allocation concealment, and blinding. Generalizability 
of study findings can be improved by including heterogeneous 
samples of ICU patients undergoing the same procedure and 
also patients admitted to the ICU with a known opioid use 
disorder. Much procedural pain research has used CTR as the 
paradigm procedure, most likely because the research protocol 
can be standardized more easily than with other procedures 
and because CTR represents a painful ICU procedure that fre-
quently occurs after cardiac surgery. The degree to which data 
from CTR studies can be extrapolated to other ICU procedures 
likely to be associated with pain remains unclear.
Nonpharmacologic Interventions to Reduce Pain
Cybertherapy/Hypnosis. 
Questions: Should cybertherapy (virtual reality [VR]) (vs no 
use of cybertherapy) be used for pain management in critically 
ill adults?
Should hypnosis (vs no use of hypnosis) be used for pain 
management in critically ill adults?
Recommendation: We suggest not offering cybertherapy 
(VR) or hypnosis for pain management in critically ill adults 
(conditional recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
Rationale: Cybertherapy is a VR distraction postulated to 
reduce postoperative pain and distress in the ICU. A set of five 
simulated environments was displayed to the patient for 30 
minutes before and after surgery (126). Hypnosis was admin-
istered by a trained ICU nurse in alert ICU patients and was 
induced using the cenesthesic approach (i.e., patient attention 
focused on any body sensation) or carried out on the actual 
symptom (pain or anxiety) (127). One study evaluated 67 
postcardiac surgery ICU patients before and after the cyber-
therapy intervention (126). Most (88%) reported a decreased 
level of postoperative pain (MD, –3.75 cm on the 0–10 VAS) 
that corresponded to a change from “severe to moderate” to 
“moderate to light” pain. Although risk of bias was minimal, 
imprecision (small sample size), failure to use a validated pain 
intensity scale, and the methodologic limitations inherent 
to observational studies led to an overall very low quality of 
evidence. Also, many factors related to resources (equipment, 
time, ICU environment, and training) make this intervention 
possibly infeasible to implement. Therefore, the panel suggests 
that clinicians not use cybertherapy for pain management in 
critically ill adults.
Hypnosis was evaluated with 23 burn ICU patients com-
pared with 23 matched historical controls (127). The first ICU 
hypnosis session occurred at a median of 9 days (0–20 d) after 
injury, and an adequate level of hypnosis was obtained, on 
average, after 15 minutes. On the day after hypnosis, repeated 
pain assessments (up to 12) found that hypnosis was associated 
with a reduction in the 0–10 VAS (MD, –0.5 cm; 95% CI, –1.37 
to +0.37; very low quality). Opioid consumption was reduced 
compared with historical controls. Within the intervention 
group, opioid consumption was lower in patients who received 
hypnosis at admission to the ICU compared with those who 
did not. The risk of bias was judged to be very serious due to 
poorly evaluated outcomes, variability on assessment time 
points, cointerventions between groups, and unclear ascertain-
ment of exposure. Due to high risk of bias and the imprecision 
associated with the observational data, the overall quality of 
evidence was very low. Many factors (resources, ICU environ-
ment, extensive training, and patient acceptability) make this 
option possibly unfeasible to implement. Therefore, the panel 
issued a conditional recommendation against the use of hyp-
nosis for pain management in critically ill adults.
Massage. 
Question: Should massage (vs no massage) be used for pain 
management in critically ill adults?
Recommendation: We suggest offering massage for pain 
management in critically ill adults (conditional recommenda-
tion, low quality of evidence).
Remarks: Massage interventions varied in session time (10–
30 min), frequency (once or bid), duration (for 1–7 d), and 
body area (back, feet and hands, or only hands).
Rationale: Massage for postoperative ICU pain management 
in cardiac and abdominal surgery patients (n = 751 and 265, 
respectively) was investigated in five RCTs (65, 117, 128–130) 
(Supplemental Table 7, Supplemental Digital Content 10, 
http://links.lww.com/CCM/D768). The comparator arms were 
different across studies and included standard care (117, 129, 
130), attention (129, 130), or sham massage (i.e., hand hold-
ing) (65). Pooled analysis showed a reduction in pain intensity 
scores (0–10 VAS or NRS scale) with massage use on the first 
day after it was provided (MD, –0.8 cm; 95% CI, –1.18 to –0.42; 
low quality). Repetitive administration of massage seemed to 
reduce pain intensity scores with MDs varying from –0.3 to 
–1.83 cm from day 1 to day 5 (after patients were discharged 
from the ICU). The overall quality of evidence was low due to 
risk of bias and imprecision. No adverse events were reported in 
relation to the administration of massage in the included stud-
ies. Resources varied across studies in which nurses or massage 
therapists provided the intervention. Minimal training (3–6 hr) 
was provided to nurses. The panel felt that feasibility of using 
massage for ICU pain management would depend on the inter-
vention duration and resources needed, which could affect cost.
Music. 
Question: Should music therapy (vs no music therapy) be 
used for pain management in critically ill adults to relieve both 
procedural and nonprocedural pain?
Recommendation: We suggest offering music therapy to 
relieve both nonprocedural and procedural pain in critically ill 
adults (conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence).
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Devlin et al
e836 
www.ccmjournal.org 
September 2018 • Volume 46 • Number 9
Rationale: Among the studies evaluated, music interven-
tions varied in music type (participant’s choice from a prese-
lection of music or harp live music), duration (10–45 min), and 
pain management purposes (procedural or nonprocedural) in 
the evaluated studies. Participants were provided with headsets 
to listen to music except in one study where live harp music 
was played in the ICU room (116). Music interventions were 
administered once in most studies except in two studies in 
which participants received the music intervention during two 
turning procedures (115), and once daily up to a maximum 
of 3 days (117) (Supplemental Table 8, Supplemental Digital 
Content 11, http://links.lww.com/CCM/D769).
Effectiveness of music was tested for procedural pain man-
agement in three RCTs during different procedures including 
CTR in 156 cardiac surgery ICU adults (113), C-clamp proce-
dure after percutaneous coronary interventions in 66 patients 
(114), and during two turning procedures in postoperative 
ICU patients (115). The comparator arms were different across 
studies and included standard care and white noise (113), 
headsets attached to a CD player without music (115), or a 
rest period (114). Pooled analysis showed that music therapy 
reduced pain intensity (0–10 NRS) (MD, –0.52 cm; 95% CI, 
–1.49 to +0.45; low quality).
For nonprocedural pain management, effectiveness of music 
was tested in four studies including three RCTs with a total of 
434 medical or surgical ICU patients (12, 116, 117, 131) and a 
pre/posttest observational study with 87 cardiac surgery ICU 
patients (132). The comparator arms included standard care 
(117) or a rest period (116, 131). Pooled analysis showed that 
music reduced pain intensity (0–10 NRS) (MD, –0.66 cm; 95% 
CI, –0.89 to –0.43; low quality). These reductions in pain inten-
sity for both procedural and nonprocedural pain management 
were not considered to be clinically significant. However, the 
potential for benefit outweighed any signal for harm or resource 
requirements. One large RCT that found that personal-directed 
music therapy reduces anxiety and sedative use in critically ill 
adults was not included in the evidence profile for this question 
because it did not report pain assessments (133).
The quality of evidence of included studies was deemed to 
be low (nonprocedural pain management) to very low (pro-
cedural pain management) due to risk of bias and the incon-
sistency in the reported results between studies. There were 
no reported adverse events related to music therapy. However, 
nine participants did not complete the music intervention 
in two studies because they disliked music or removed their 
headsets (114, 131). The panel felt that music is a safe interven-
tion for pain management, but the patient’s preference should 
be considered. Feasibility was raised as an issue by the panel 
depending on the resources needed for its implementation 
including professionals (e.g., musician and music therapist) 
and equipment (e.g., purchase of music and headsets). Storage 
room and hygiene measures must also be considered.
Cold Therapy. 
Question: Should cold therapy (vs no use of cold therapy) 
be used for critically ill adults undergoing a procedure?
Recommendation: We suggest offering cold therapy for pro-
cedural pain management in critically ill adults (conditional 
recommendation, low quality of evidence).
Remarks: Cold ice packs were applied for 10 minutes, and 
wrapped in dressing gauze, on the area around the chest tube 
before its removal.
Rationale: Cold therapy for periprocedural pain manage-
ment during CTR was investigated in two RCTs (n = 130 total) 
in postcardiac surgery ICU patients (134, 135). In one study, the 
effects of cold therapy were compared with usual care (i.e., oral 
acetaminophen every 6 hr) (n = 40 per group) (134), whereas in 
the other, a placebo tap water pack (n = 25 per group) was used 
as the comparator (135). Although a pooled analysis of stud-
ies demonstrated a nonsignificant reduction in pain intensity 
(0–10 NRS) with cold therapy (MD, –1.91 cm; 95% CI, –5.34 
to +1.52; low quality), the panel considered that a reduction of 
this magnitude on the NRS scale was clinically important and 
consistent with meaningful acute pain reductions (1.3–2.4 cm) 
as defined in one study of 700 postsurgical patients (136).
Although only CTR was investigated in a homogeneous 
group of postcardiac surgery patients, the panel felt that this 
recommendation was generalizable to other procedures and 
for use in other critically ill populations. No mention of pos-
sible undesirable effects related to the use of cold therapy 
appeared in the included literature; however, the panel agreed 
that these are likely to be trivial (unless the clinician forgets to 
remove the cold pack after CTR). Adequate room in the ICU 
freezer and a written protocol for use of this intervention will 
be required. Simple, inexpensive, and widely available inter-
ventions like cold therapy can be used frequently in resource-
poor areas where medications may not be available.
Relaxation Techniques. 
Question: Should relaxation techniques (vs no use of relax-
ation techniques) be used for critically ill adults undergoing a 
procedure?
Recommendation: We suggest offering relaxation techniques 
for procedural pain management in critically ill adults (condi-
tional recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
Remarks: The relaxation technique used in each study 
differed.
Rationale: Relaxation techniques related to breathing were 
tested for procedural pain management and timed with opioid 
administration during CTR in two different matched control 
studies evaluating a total of 88 postcardiac surgery ICU patients 
(137, 138). In one study (137) (in which the rapidly adminis-
tered relaxation technique consisted of instructing the patient to 
inhale and hold their breath for a moment; to breathe out and go 
limp as a rag doll; and then to start yawning), the chest tube(s) 
were removed at the end of the yawn. In the second study (138), 
patients were taught breathing exercises that included inhaling 
slowly through the nose and exhaling slowly through pursed lips. 
Patients were encouraged to complete these exercises either with 
their eyes closed or to focus on an object in the room. Breathing 
exercises were initiated 5 minutes before CTR and continued 
during chest tube dressing, sutures, and tube removal.
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Online Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
e837
Pooled analysis showed a mean reduction in pain intensity 
(0–10 VAS) 15–30 minutes after CTR (MD, –2.5 cm; 95% CI, 
–4.18 to –0.82; very low quality). A reduction of this magni-
tude is clinically important (136). However, the quality of evi-
dence was deemed to be very low due to the imprecision (small 
sample sizes) and the risk of bias. Although a breathing-focused 
relaxation technique was evaluated in a relatively homogeneous 
group of patients during only one type of painful procedure, 
the panel felt that this recommendation was generalizable to 
other painful procedures and other critically ill populations. 
Possible undesirable effects related to relaxation were not men-
tioned in the included studies, and the panel felt that these were 
unlikely to occur. The panel agreed that minimal resources and 
training were needed to provide this intervention safely and 
efficiently. Therefore, relaxation using breathing techniques 
appears feasible to implement and acceptable to stakeholders. 
Written information could also be provided to patients to help 
familiarize them with relaxation techniques.
Evidence Gaps: The effects of nonpharmacologic interven-
tions in critically ill adults unable to self-report remain unknown. 
The role of a family member in the delivery of some interven-
tions (e.g., relaxation, massage, and music) could be explored. 
Whether music’s coanalgesic effect depends on patient’s musi-
cal preferences should be considered. Interventions to reduce 
procedural pain should be evaluated during procedures other 
than CTR. Implementation studies documenting the feasibil-
ity and associated costs related to the use of these interventions 
are also needed. Studies to determine the effect of relaxation 
techniques on other outcomes such as sleep are also required.
Protocol-Based Pain Assessment and Management
Question: Should a protocol-based (analgesia/analgosedation) 
pain assessment and management program be used in the care 
of critically ill adults when compared with usual care?
Good Practice Statement: Management of pain for adult 
ICU patients should be guided by routine pain assessment and 
pain should be treated before a sedative agent is considered.
Recommendation: We suggest using an assessment-driven, 
protocol-based, stepwise approach for pain and sedation man-
agement in critically ill adults (conditional recommendation, 
moderate quality of evidence).
Remarks: For this recommendation, analgosedation is 
defined as either analgesia-first sedation (i.e., an analgesic 
[usually an opioid] is used before a sedative to reach the seda-
tive goal) or analgesia-based sedation (i.e., an analgesic [usu-
ally an opioid] is used instead of a sedative to reach the sedative 
goal). The implementation of this recommendation infers that 
institutions should have an assessment-driven protocol that 
mandates regular pain and sedation assessment using validated 
tools, provides clear guidance on medication choice and dos-
ing, and makes treating pain a priority over providing sedatives.
Rationale: The five outcomes deemed critical to the rec-
ommendation include pain intensity, medication exposure 
(analgesics/sedatives), adverse events, duration of mechani-
cal ventilation, and ICU LOS (5, 106–110, 127, 139–156) 
(Supplemental Table 9, Supplemental Digital Content 12, 
http://links.lww.com/CCM/D770). Pooled analysis suggests 
that a protocol-based (analgesia/analgosedation) pain and 
sedation assessment management program compared with 
usual care does not affect the incidence of nosocomial infec-
tion, constipation, hypotension, bradycardia, or opioid expo-
sure, but does reduce sedative requirements (SMD, –0.57; 
95% CI, –0.84 to –0.31; low quality), duration of mechani-
cal ventilation (MD, –1.26 d; 95% CI, –1.8 to –0.73; moder-
ate quality), ICU LOS (MD, –2.27 d; 95% CI, –2.96 to –1.58; 
moderate quality), and pain intensity (0–10 VAS or NRS) (MD, 
–0.35 cm; 95% CI, –0.22 to –0.49; low quality). Panel members 
issued a conditional recommendation because the benefits of 
a protocol-based approach were not observed across all critical 
outcomes.
Evidence Gaps: To be able to generate strong recommen-
dations for the use of a protocol-based analgesia/analgoseda-
tion program, future randomized studies must be completed 
that address the following questions: 1) what is the optimal 
opioid, or other analgesic, to use in the protocol? 2) what 
ICU setting or patient population is most appropriate for 
the use of such a protocol? 3) what are the potential ben-
efits of such protocols based on their ability to reduce pain 
or avoid the use of potentially harmful effects of sedatives? 
and 4) what are the potential safety concerns associated with 
such protocols (e.g., opioid withdrawal, posthospital opioid 
use disorder)?
AGITATION/SEDATION
Sedatives are frequently administered to critically ill patients 
to relieve anxiety, reduce the stress of being mechanically ven-
tilated, and prevent agitation-related harm (1). These medi-
cations may predispose patients to increased morbidity (157, 
158). The healthcare provider must determine the specific 
indication for the use of sedatives. If a sedative is needed, the 
patient’s current sedation status should be assessed and then 
frequently reassessed using valid and reliable scales (158–161). 
In critically ill patients, unpredictable pharmacokinetics and 
pharmacodynamics secondary to drug interactions, organ dys-
function, inconsistent absorption and protein binding, hemo-
dynamic instability, and drug accumulation can lead to adverse 
events (1, 162, 163).
The 2013 guidelines (1) suggested targeting light levels of 
sedation or using daily awakening trials (112, 164–166), and 
minimizing benzodiazepines (167) to improve short-term out-
comes (e.g., duration of mechanical ventilation and ICU LOS). 
In addition, sedation delivery paradigms and the specific seda-
tive medication used can have an important impact on post-
ICU outcomes including 90-day mortality physical functioning, 
neurocognitive, and psychologic outcomes. These issues have 
been evaluated in the present guidelines through three action-
able and three descriptive questions. (A prioritized topic list is 
in Supplemental Table 10 [Supplemental Digital Content 13, 
http://links.lww.com/CCM/D771], and voting results appear in 
Supplemental Table 11 [Supplemental Digital Content 14, http://
links.lww.com/CCM/D772].) The evidence summaries and 
evidence-to-decision tables used to develop recommendations 
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Devlin et al
e838 
www.ccmjournal.org 
September 2018 • Volume 46 • Number 9
for the agitation (sedation) group are available in Supplemental 
Table 12 (Supplemental Digital Content 15, http://links.lww.
com/CCM/D773), and the forest plots for all completed meta-
analyses are available in Supplemental Figure 3 (Supplemental 
Digital Content 16, http://links.lww.com/CCM/D774).
Light Sedation
Question: Does light sedation (vs deep sedation), regardless 
of the sedative agent(s) used, significantly affect outcomes in 
critically ill, mechanically ventilated adults?
Recommendation: We suggest using light sedation (vs deep 
sedation) in critically ill, mechanically ventilated adults (con-
ditional recommendation, low quality of evidence).
Rationale: The 2013 PAD guidelines made an ungraded 
statement that maintaining a light level of sedation will shorten 
time to extubation and reduce ICU LOS (1). Although the prior 
guideline defined light sedation as a RASS scale score of greater 
than or equal to –2 and eye opening of at least 10 minutes 
(112), this level of sedation is probably deeper than required 
for management of mechanically ventilated adults in an ICU. 
No universally accepted definition of light sedation exists. To 
address this question, we evaluated studies in which light versus 
deep sedation were defined a priori, measured, and explicitly 
reported with objective scales describing whether patients met 
these clear light, versus deep, sedation targets systematically over 
the time spent in the ICU and at least q6h. Surrogate measures 
(e.g., sedative plasma levels) or subjective clinical assessments 
of wakefulness were not considered as part of the definition of 
level of sedation. Studies describing a daily spontaneous awak-
ening trial (SAT) were not deemed indicative of a light seda-
tion approach because they reported lightening of sedation at a 
single point in time, rather than over the entire day. For studies 
that used scales, such as the RASS (159), a RASS score of –2 to 
+1 range (or its equivalent using other scales) was considered as 
light sedation in the evaluated studies.
Eight RCTs satisfied our research criteria (156, 168–174). We 
evaluated the effect of light versus deep sedation on outcomes 
that were considered critical by the sedation group and patient 
representatives: 90-day mortality, time to extubation, delir-
ium, tracheostomy, cognitive and physical functional decline, 
depression, and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). The 
outcomes evaluated were mostly measured after ICU discharge 
and are different from the short-term outcomes assessed in the 
2013 guideline ungraded descriptive question. Light sedation 
was not associated with 90-day mortality (RR, 1.01; 95% CI, 
0.80–1.27; moderate quality) (168, 169), but it was associated 
with a shorter time to extubation (MD, –0.77 d; 95% CI, –2.04 
to –0.50; low quality) (168–170) and a reduced tracheostomy 
rate (RR, 0.57; 95% CI, 0.41–0.80; low quality) (170, 171). Light 
sedation was not associated with a reduction in the incidence 
of delirium (RR, 0.96; 95% CI, 0.80–1.16; low quality) (168, 
172), PTSD (RR, 0.67; 95% CI, 0.12–3.79; low quality) (156, 
174), depression (RR, 0.76; 95% CI, 0.10–5.58; very low qual-
ity) (156, 170), or self-extubation (RR, 1.29; 95% CI, 0.58–2.88; 
low quality) (168–170, 173). No RCTs evaluated the impact of 
light versus deep sedation on cognitive or physical functioning.
The overall quality of the body of evidence was low. Both 
the magnitude of reduction in time to extubation and tracheos-
tomy rate were considered small; the magnitude of harm asso-
ciated with self-extubation was uncertain. We initially evaluated 
the data from RCTs and then reviewed observational studies 
related to outcomes where the RCT data were of low quality. 
Observational trials suggested benefits in reduced risk of death 
at 90 days and time to extubation, but not in delirium outcomes 
(166, 175, 176). One recent cohort study not considered in the 
guideline evidence demonstrates that sedation intensity (sum 
of negative RASS measurements by number of assessments) 
independently, in an escalating dose-dependent relationship, 
predicts increased risk of death, delirium, and delayed time to 
extubation (177). The amount of sedation preferred by patients 
is likely variable; some patients or families may prefer deeper 
sedation, but this preference may not be considered appropri-
ate by clinicians given the adverse outcomes associated with 
deep sedation. Uncertainty about the cost-effectiveness of light 
sedation was considered. Light sedation was considered likely 
acceptable to clinicians and patients and feasible to implement.
Evidence Gaps: Despite the wide use of validated sedation 
scales, no consensus on the definition of light, moderate, and 
deep sedation is available. Further exploration of the concept 
of wakefulness and light sedation is required. The relationship 
between changing levels of sedation and their duration over the 
course of the ICU stay and clinical outcomes is also unknown. 
The effect of depth of sedation on post-ICU, patient-centered 
outcomes such as 90-day all-cause mortality and cognitive 
function, physical recovery, PTSD, anxiety, and depressive 
symptoms has not been well evaluated in RCTs. There is also a 
dearth of information regarding the interaction among seda-
tive choice, sedation depth, and the patient-specific factors that 
affect this relationship. Finally, as outlined elsewhere in these 
guidelines, the relationship between level of sedation and the 
ability to evaluate, pain, delirium, and sleep has not been fully 
elucidated.
Daily Sedative Interruption/Nurse-Protocolized 
Sedation
Question: In critically ill, intubated adults, is there a differ-
ence between daily sedative interruption (DSI) protocols and 
nursing-protocolized (NP)-targeted sedation in the ability to 
achieve and maintain a light level of sedation?
Ungraded Statement: In critically ill, intubated adults, DSI 
protocols and NP-targeted sedation can achieve and maintain 
a light level of sedation.
Remarks: A DSI or a SAT is defined as a period of time, each 
day, during which a patient’s sedative medication is discon-
tinued and patients can wake up and achieve arousal and/or 
alertness, defined by objective actions such as opening eyes in 
response to a voice, following simple commands, and/or hav-
ing a Sedation-Agitation Scale (SAS) score of 4–7 or a RASS 
score of –1 to +1. NP-targeted sedation is defined as an estab-
lished sedation protocol implemented by nurses at the bedside 
to determine sedative choices and to titrate these medications 
to achieve prescription-targeted sedation scores.
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Online Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
e839
Rationale: Five randomized, prospective, unblinded trials 
compared DSI protocols and NP-targeted sedation to usual 
care (178–182) (Supplemental Table 13, Supplemental Digital 
Content 17, http://links.lww.com/CCM/D775). Some studies 
compared DSI to “usual care,” defined as an NP protocol. Most 
studies did not specifically target or assess how effectively either 
technique achieved light level of sedation; rather, they evaluated 
the differences in the overall sedation scores among patients 
being managed with DSI or NP-targeted sedation. Across the 
five studies, a total of 739 patients were randomized (DSI, n = 
373; NP, n = 366). Benzodiazepines were commonly prescribed 
for sedation in both groups, often paired with opioids for anal-
gesia. Two studies reported no difference in level of sedation 
achieved between DSI and NP-targeted sedation (178, 179). 
The remaining studies appear contradictory; one noted higher 
RASS with DSI versus NP-targeted sedation (180), another 
noted lower median SAS scores with DSI versus NP-targeted 
sedation, but no difference in the percentage of time spent in 
the targeted light sedation range (181). A third study reported 
lighter sedation with DSI than with NP-targeted sedation (182).
As outlined in these guidelines, clinicians should target a 
light rather than deep level of sedation in their intubated, criti-
cally ill adult patients unless deeper sedation is clinically indi-
cated. Our literature review suggests that both DSI protocols and 
NP-targeted sedation are safe and no differences exist between 
them in achieving and maintaining a light level of sedation. There 
are, however, some important caveats: first, most studies evaluat-
ing DSIs and NP have done so in the context of sedation with 
benzodiazepines, which are no longer recommended for sedation 
in critically ill patients; second, DSI protocols may be associated 
with increasing nursing workload (179); and third, a brief DSI 
should not be used to justify the use of deep sedation for the rest 
of the day when it is not indicated. Because light levels of sedation 
are associated with improved outcomes and are needed to facili-
tate other interventions such as spontaneous breathing trials and 
early mobilization, healthcare providers should strive to achieve 
light levels of sedation in the majority of patients the majority 
of the time. Light sedation, assessed using a validated sedation 
scale, can be achieved either using a NP or through DSI protocols 
(where light sedation is targeted, whereas sedatives are infusing).
Evidence Gaps: Variability in nursing sedation assessment 
frequency and its reporting, and modality of sedative admin-
istration (infusion vs bolus) differ among institutions. The 
most frequent sedative choice (benzodiazepines) described in 
the studies may not reflect current practice. Patient and fam-
ily preferences and education as to depth of sedation within a 
“light sedation” range should also be considered. Nonetheless, 
future research should focus on the effect of sedation level on 
patient-centered outcomes.
Choice of Sedative
Critically ill adults may require sedation to reduce anxiety and 
stress and to facilitate invasive procedures and mechanical ven-
tilation. Sedation indication, goal, clinical pharmacology, and 
acquisition cost are important determinants in choosing a sed-
ative agent. The 2013 PAD guidelines suggest (in a conditional 
recommendation) that nonbenzodiazepine sedatives (either 
propofol or dexmedetomidine) are preferable to benzodiaz-
epine sedatives (either midazolam or lorazepam) in critically 
ill, mechanically ventilated adults because of improved short-
term outcomes such as ICU LOS, duration of mechanical 
ventilation, and delirium (1). For the current guidelines, we 
considered both short-term and long-term outcomes as criti-
cal for evaluation. These included time to extubation, time to 
light sedation, and delirium, and long-term outcomes such as 
90-day mortality, cognitive and physical functioning, institu-
tionalization, and psychologic dysfunction.
Elective cardiac surgical patients are different from critically 
ill medical and surgical patients whose admission profile is sel-
dom elective and whose ICU stay and mechanical ventilation 
duration are longer. We therefore separated studies describ-
ing mechanically ventilated, routine cardiac surgical patients 
and critically ill, mechanically ventilated medical and surgi-
cal patients. Pharmacogenomic factors that may influence the 
response of sedatives and other medications in the critically ill 
were reviewed (163).
Cardiac Surgery
Question: Should propofol, when compared with a benzodiaz-
epine, be used for sedation in mechanically ventilated adults 
after cardiac surgery?
Recommendation: We suggest using propofol over a benzo-
diazepine for sedation in mechanically ventilated adults after 
cardiac surgery (conditional recommendation, low quality of 
evidence).
Rationale: We identified eight RCTs: seven of which com-
pared infusions of both sedative agents (183–189) and one RCT 
compared propofol infusions to midazolam boluses (190). In 
cardiac surgical patients, we considered a shortened time to 
light sedation of at least 30 minutes and time to extubation of 
at least 1 hour to be clinically significant. Two small RCTs (n = 
70) reported shorter time to light sedation with propofol when 
compared with benzodiazepines (MD, –52 min; 95% CI, –77 to 
–26; low quality) (185, 186). Seven RCTs (n = 409), including 
one study using only benzodiazepine boluses reported shorter 
time to extubation with propofol versus a benzodiazepine 
(MD, –1.4 hr; 95% CI, –2.2 to –0.6; low quality) (183–189). We 
were unable to find RCTs comparing propofol and benzodiaz-
epine effects on other critical outcomes in the cardiac surgical 
population. Overall, the panel judged that the desirable conse-
quences of using propofol probably outweigh the undesirable 
consequences, and thus issued a conditional recommendation 
favoring propofol over a benzodiazepine.
Medical and Surgical Patients Not Undergoing 
Cardiac Surgery
Questions: Should propofol, when compared with a benzodi-
azepine, be used for sedation in critically ill, mechanically ven-
tilated adults?
Should dexmedetomidine, when compared with a benzo-
diazepine, be used for sedation in critically ill, mechanically 
ventilated adults?
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Devlin et al
e840 
www.ccmjournal.org 
September 2018 • Volume 46 • Number 9
Should dexmedetomidine, when compared with propofol, 
be used for sedation in critically ill, mechanically ventilated 
adults?
Recommendation: We suggest using either propofol or dex-
medetomidine over benzodiazepines for sedation in critically 
ill, mechanically ventilated adults (conditional recommenda-
tion, low quality of evidence).
Rationale: We evaluated the effect of propofol versus ben-
zodiazepine, dexmedetomidine versus benzodiazepine, and 
propofol versus dexmedetomidine in three separate analyses 
for the outcomes deemed critical. In most studies, benzodiaze-
pines were administered as continuous infusions and not inter-
mittent boluses. We combined studies using midazolam and 
lorazepam. In critically ill, mechanically ventilated patients, a 
shortened time to light sedation of at least 4 hours and time 
to extubation of at least 8–12 hours (one nursing shift) were 
deemed clinically significant.
Propofol Versus Benzodiazepines. Seven trials (n = 357) (191–
197) reported shorter time to light sedation with propofol when 
compared with a benzodiazepine (MD, –7.2 hr; 95% CI, –8.9 to 
–5.5; low quality). Nine trials (n = 423) (191, 196–202) reported 
shorter time to extubation with propofol compared with a ben-
zodiazepine (MD, –11.6 hr; 95% CI, –15.6 to –7.6; low quality). 
Only one RCT assessed delirium and found no difference (196). 
No data were available for other critical outcomes. Although pro-
pofol was associated with a higher risk of self-extubation (RR, 
2.2; 95% CI, 0.30–26.45; low quality), reliable conclusions for this 
outcome cannot be made given the wide CI. Additionally, it was 
not clear if the self-extubations caused any harm (e.g., need for 
reintubation). Although this was an important consideration for 
the physicians on the sedation group panel, ICU patients might 
feel otherwise. Overall, the panel judged that the desirable con-
sequences of using propofol probably outweighs the undesirable 
consequences, and thus issued a conditional recommendation 
favoring propofol over a benzodiazepine infusion.
Dexmedetomidine Versus Benzodiazepines. Five RCTs 
(n = 1,052) assessed duration of mechanical ventilation (167, 172, 
202–204); three studies (n = 969) evaluated ICU LOS (167, 172, 
203); and four RCTs (n = 1,007) evaluated delirium prevalence 
(167, 172, 203, 205). The study with the lowest risk of bias (n = 
366), Safety and Efficacy of Dexmedetomidine Compared With 
Midazolam (SEDCOM), had the greatest benefit for the time to 
extubation (MD, –1.90 d; 95% CI, –2.32 to –1.48) and delirium 
(RR, 0.71; 95% CI, 0.61–0.83) with dexmedetomidine compared 
with a benzodiazepine infusion, and influenced how the evidence 
was graded when developing this recommendation (167).
Although the study by Xu et al (205) also showed 
reduced delirium with dexmedetomidine use, and the 
Dexmedetomidine Versus Midazolam for Continuous Sedation 
in the ICU (MIDEX) study (203) demonstrated a shorter 
duration of mechanical ventilation with dexmedetomidine 
over a benzodiazepine infusion, pooled analysis of all evalu-
ated studies did not show a significant benefit of dexmedeto-
midine compared with a benzodiazepine infusion for duration 
of mechanical ventilation extubation (MD, –0.71 d; 95% CI, 
–1.87 to 0.45; low quality), ICU LOS (MD, –0.23 d; 95% CI, 
–0.57 to 0.11; low quality), and the risk for delirium (RR, 0.81; 
95% CI, 0.60–1.08; low quality). Of note, the MIDEX study 
(203), in which delirium was assessed only once 48 hours after 
sedation discontinuation, showed no improvements in delir-
ium prevalence with dexmedetomidine.
The SEDCOM (167) and Maximizing the Efficacy of 
Sedation and Reducing Neurological Dysfunction (MENDS) 
(172) studies both demonstrated a greater incidence of bra-
dycardia in the dexmedetomidine group; neither study found 
intervention was required for the bradycardia. Overall, the 
panel judged that the desirable consequences of using dexme-
detomidine probably outweigh any undesirable consequences 
and thus issued a conditional recommendation favoring dex-
medetomidine over a benzodiazepine.
Propofol Versus Dexmedetomidine. Three RCTs (n = 850) 
assessed time to extubation and showed no difference in this out-
come (202, 203, 206). No data were available for other critical 
outcomes. A single RCT, the Propofol Versus Dexmedetomidine 
for Continuous Sedation in the ICU (PRODEX) study, showed 
a decreased incidence of delirium with dexmedetomidine at 
the single time point of 48 hours after sedation cessation (203). 
Patients were able to communicate more effectively if sedated 
with dexmedetomidine when compared with propofol (203). No 
differences were reported in bradycardia or hypotension between 
patients sedated with propofol and dexmedetomidine (203).
Overall, there was low quality evidence for the outcomes 
assessed, with a moderate benefit noted (reduced time to light 
sedation and extubation) when both propofol and dexmedeto-
midine were compared with benzodiazepines. No important 
differences in outcomes were noted between propofol and dex-
medetomidine. As reported in these studies, associated harm 
with either propofol or dexmedetomidine was deemed to be 
minimal and not clinically significant. The cost-effectiveness 
of these sedative regimens was uncertain as both propofol and 
dexmedetomidine acquisition costs are now lower than when 
they were initially studied. Additionally, the cost of acquisition 
of these agents varies widely in the world, making it difficult to 
generalize cost-effectiveness. Nevertheless, incorporating both 
propofol and dexmedetomidine into practice was likely accept-
able and feasible. Recognizing that dexmedetomidine should not 
be used when deep sedation (with or without neuromuscular 
blockade) is required, panel members judged that the desirable 
and undesirable consequences of using propofol (vs dexmedeto-
midine) were balanced; therefore, they issued a conditional rec-
ommendation to use either agents for sedation of critically ill 
adults. Implementation will likely depend on the availability of 
the drug and its associated cost at individual institutions.
Evidence Gaps: Larger, well-conducted studies assessing the 
critical outcomes we defined need to be undertaken. Faster 
extubation and increased hospital survival, though the build-
ing blocks of long-term outcomes, no longer suffice as the sole 
descriptors of patient-centered outcomes. Improvements in 
many aspects of survivorship, including return to former qual-
ity of life, independent function, and employment, are mean-
ingful (207). Further studies evaluating the value of patient 
communication with family members during and after ICU 
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Online Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
e841
care and the perceptions of patients while on each of these 
sedatives are also needed; of note, our patient panel members 
described very different subjective experiences when receiving 
sedatives that could not be translated into guideline recom-
mendation content. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic 
considerations should be incorporated in both sedative choice 
and delivery methods (162, 163). For example, the risks and 
benefits of an intermittent benzodiazepine administration 
strategy after establishing analgesia need to be studied against 
use of continuous sedative infusions. Benzodiazepine medi-
cations still form the mainstay of therapy in resource-poor 
areas; risks and benefits need to be studied in the context of 
their cost. Additionally, the role of sedative medications in the 
context of an analgesia-first approach or to supplement anal-
gosedation needs to be better studied. The role of benzodiaz-
epines versus propofol or dexmedetomidine in patients who 
are hemodynamically unstable, need deep sedation, are at 
risk for delirium, or have signs of alcohol withdrawal needs 
to be studied. With increased propofol use, strategies to detect 
propofol-related infusion syndrome earlier are required and 
large-scale registry studies to characterize its prevalence and 
risks should be undertaken. The role of nonpharmacologic 
strategies to reduce agitation, anxiety, and distress in terms of 
sedative choice and requirements is uncertain, and thus, no 
recommendations could be made in this regard.
Objective Sedation Monitoring
Question: Are objective sedation monitoring tools (electroen-
cephalogram-based tools or tools such as HR variability, actig-
raphy, and evoked potentials) useful in managing sedation in 
critically ill, intubated adults?
Ungraded Statements: Bispectral index (BIS) monitoring 
appears best suited for sedative titration during deep sedation 
or neuromuscular blockade, though observational data suggest 
potential benefit with lighter sedation as well.
Sedation that is monitored with BIS compared with subjec-
tive scales may improve sedative titration when a sedative scale 
cannot be used.
Rationale: The literature for ICU-based studies of objec-
tive monitoring tools for sedation consists primarily of reports 
for electroencephalogram-based tools (particularly the BIS). 
Few ICU-based studies evaluated outcome benefits (208–210). 
The methods used to evaluate the accuracy of BIS in the 
ICU are outlined in Supplemental Table 14 (Supplemental 
Digital Content 18, http://links.lww.com/CCM/D776), and 
the characteristics of the 32 studies included are summarized 
in Supplemental Table 15 (Supplemental Digital Content 19, 
http://links.lww.com/CCM/D777) (161, 208–239).
Several common challenges in research design for these 
studies have been identified. The relationship between elec-
troencephalogram data and subjective sedation data was often 
assumed to be constant and linear, but this is an inaccurate 
perception. Because sedation gets deeper and patients become 
unresponsive, subjective sedation scales reach a minimum 
value (SAS 1 or RASS –5), whereas objective electroencepha-
logram-based tools can continue to decline until an isoelectric 
electroencephalogram is obtained (Supplemental Fig. 4, 
Supplemental Digital Content 20, http://links.lww.com/CCM/
D778) (211). At the other extreme, with increasing agitation, 
objective tools reach a maximum (i.e., a BIS 100), whereas 
subjective scales continue to describe increasing levels of agita-
tion (Supplemental Fig. 5, Supplemental Digital Content 21, 
http://links.lww.com/CCM/D779) (211). In addition, objective 
monitors such as BIS allow measurement without stimulating 
the patient, whereas subjective sedation scales require assess-
ing the patient response to voice, physical, and even noxious 
stimuli. This stimulation changes the preexisting state of the 
patient and increases the BIS value; depending on the timing 
of the BIS measurements (i.e., before, during, or after stimula-
tion), agreement between the two assessment techniques will 
be affected.
The 32 ICU-based studies that compared BIS and subjective 
sedation scale assessment were scored based on their approach 
to timing of BIS measurement relative to the stimulation 
from subjective assessment (0–4 points), type of stimulation 
(0–2 points), adjustment for deep sedation (0–2 points), and 
whether electroencephalogram signal quality and software 
version were defined (0–2 points) (161, 208–239). Studies 
with less potential confounding (4 points on the timing issue) 
trended to better agreement between BIS and subjective scales 
(p = 0.09), whereas the studies that did not account for the 
effect of subjective stimulation (scoring 0 on timing) had the 
worst agreement between BIS and subjective scales (see the red 
ellipse in Supplemental Fig. 6, Supplemental Digital Content 
22, http://links.lww.com/CCM/D780).
Three studies evaluated the effect of using the BIS to assess 
sedation compared with using a subjective tool (209–211). 
These showed reductions in total sedative use and faster wak-
ening times despite similar clinical sedation (Ramsay 4) (208), 
a reduction in procedure-related adverse events (Ramsey 2–3) 
(209), and reduced midazolam and fentanyl doses, less agita-
tion, less need for tracheostomy, and shorter ICU LOS (210).
Evidence Gaps: Research methodology to evaluate ICU 
sedation monitors has not been standardized, resulting in 
wide variability in study design as noted above. Defining best 
components and approaches will improve study quality. With 
improved research rigor, valid comparisons between the vari-
ous objective sedation monitoring tools and between objec-
tive and subjective sedation scales may be possible. Additional 
research is needed to define the best approach to dealing with 
issues such as depth of sedation (particularly in an era when 
more patients are lightly sedated), stimulation during sedation 
assessment, and how different patient pathology (neurologic vs 
nonneurologic diagnoses) may affect objective tool reliability. 
Finally, more outcome studies are needed to confirm whether 
these tools improve patient outcomes or reduce healthcare 
resource consumption compared with subjective scales.
Physical Restraints
Question: What are the prevalence rates, rationale, and out-
comes (harm and benefit) associated with physical restraint 
use in intubated or nonintubated critically ill adults?
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Devlin et al
e842 
www.ccmjournal.org 
September 2018 • Volume 46 • Number 9
Ungraded Statements: Physical restraints are frequently used 
for critically ill adults although prevalence rates vary greatly by 
country.
Critical care providers report using restraints to prevent 
self-extubation and medical device removal, avoid falls, and to 
protect staff from combative patients despite a lack of studies 
demonstrating efficacy and the safety concerns associated with 
physical restraints (e.g., unplanned extubations and greater 
agitation).
Rationale: In an era focused on improving patient-centered 
care, the effect physical restraints have on the care and out-
comes of critically ill adults remains controversial. Physical 
restraints are defined as “any manual method, physical, or 
mechanical device, material, or equipment that immobilizes or 
reduces the ability of a patient to move his or her arms, legs, 
body, or head freely” (240). This question specifically focuses on 
physical restraints attached to the ankle, wrist, or upper torso. 
Physical restraint use varies widely from 0% in some European 
countries to more than 75% in North America (Supplemental 
Table 16, Supplemental Digital Content 23, http://links.lww.
com/CCM/D781) (168, 241–261). The type and location (e.g., 
wrist, ankle, upper torso) of physical restraints similarly vary, 
with resource-rich countries reporting using commercially 
available restraints (242, 245–247, 249, 252, 255, 260, 262–268).
Healthcare providers have historically justified the use of 
physical restraints in the ICU for many reasons including to 
enhance patient safety (242, 249, 252, 262, 263); prevent self-
extubation, tube dislodgement, and/or medical device removal 
(242, 246, 249, 255, 262, 263, 265, 266, 269); control patient 
behavior (249, 262, 265, 266, 269); protect staff from combat-
ive patients (263); and prevent falls (242, 263, 266). Less com-
monly cited reasons include the following: preserving posture/
positioning of the patient (249, 266); staffing shortages or lack 
of supervision during break coverage (249, 263, 265); and 
compliance with patient, family member, or other medical 
staff suggestions (265).
To date, no RCT has explored the safety and efficacy of 
physical restraint use in critically ill adults. The few descrip-
tive studies exploring physical restraint use and outcomes of 
the critically ill paradoxically report higher rates of the events 
that their use is intended to prevent. These events include more 
unplanned extubations and frequent reintubations (245, 247, 
267, 268); greater unintentional device removal (268); longer 
ICU LOS (245); increased agitation; higher benzodiazepine, 
opioid, and antipsychotic medication use (244, 268); and 
increased risk for delirium or disorientation (257, 259, 268, 
270, 271).
Certain modifiable and nonmodifiable factors appear 
to increase critically ill adults’ risk for physical restraint use. 
These factors include the following: older age (250, 264); 
non-coma level of arousal; neurologic or psychiatric condi-
tions including delirium (257, 258, 261, 268); sedative type/
strategy (169, 242, 261, 272); mechanical ventilation use (242, 
261, 263); use of invasive devices (246, 250); nurse-to-patient 
ratio and perceived workload (242, 268, 271); and time of day 
(249). Interestingly, patients participating in an early mobility 
program (273) who received early pharmacologic treatment of 
delirium (272) and patients who had a history of alcohol use 
were less restrained (268).
Patients’ perceptions of being physically restrained during 
an ICU stay vary but often provoke strong emotional responses 
that persist after the ICU stay (169, 269). Given the prevalence, 
unintended consequences, and patients’ perceptions of physi-
cal restraint use, critical care providers should closely weigh 
the risks and benefits of this practice in the adult ICU set-
ting before initiating or maintaining physical restraint use. 
Although certain countries report a “restraint-free” ICU envi-
ronment, it may be possible that their use of bedside sitters 
and/or pharmacologic restraints is increased.
Evidence Gaps: Whether efforts to reduce physical restraint 
use will have the unintended consequence of increasing patients’ 
exposure to potentially harmful sedative and antipsychotic med-
ications remain unclear. The effect nurse staffing patterns, staff 
education, and patient/family advocacy have on the incidence of 
physical restraint use in the ICU has also yet to be determined. 
Particularly relevant to the ICU setting, the necessity and eth-
ics of physical restraints during end-of-life care need further 
exploration. Finally, the true effect physical restraints play on 
outcomes relevant to patients should be explored in RCTs.
DELIRIUM
Delirium is common in critically ill adults. The delirium 
encountered in the ICU and other settings are assumed to be 
equivalent pathophysiologic states. Delirium is a clinical diag-
nosis; most studies detect delirium using screening tools such 
as the Confusion Assessment Method for the ICU (CAM-ICU) 
or the Intensive Care Delirium Screening Checklist (ICDSC) 
(274, 275). Delirium can be disturbing for affected patients 
and relatives and is associated with worse outcome, and much 
higher ICU and hospital LOS and costs (276). Many research 
gaps exist in this area (277). In this guideline, we address six 
actionable questions and five descriptive questions (see pri-
oritized topic list in Supplemental Table 17 [Supplemental 
Digital Content 24, http://links.lww.com/CCM/D782] and 
voting results in Supplemental Table 18 [Supplemental Digital 
Content 25, http://links.lww.com/CCM/D783]). The evidence 
summaries and evidence-to-decision tables used to develop 
recommendations for the delirium group are available in Sup-
plemental Table 19 (Supplemental Digital Content 26, http://
links.lww.com/CCM/D784), and the forest plots for all meta-
analyses are available in Supplemental Figure 7 (Supplemental 
Digital Content 27, http://links.lww.com/CCM/D785).
Risk Factors
Question: Which predisposing and precipitating risk factors 
are associated with delirium occurrence (i.e., incidence, prev-
alence, or daily transition), delirium duration, or severity in 
critically ill adults?
Ungraded Statement: For the following risk factors, strong 
evidence indicates that these are associated with delirium 
in critically ill adults: “modifiable”—benzodiazepine use 
and blood transfusions, and “nonmodifiable”—greater 
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Online Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
e843
age, dementia, prior coma, pre-ICU emergency surgery or 
trauma, and increasing Acute Physiology and Chronic Health 
Evaluation (APACHE) and ASA scores.
Rationale: Sixty-eight studies published from 2000 to 
November 2015 that evaluated critically ill adults not under-
going cardiac surgery for delirium that used either multivari-
able analysis or randomization were used to evaluate variables 
as potential risk factors (Supplemental Table 20, Supplemental 
Digital Content 28, http://links.lww.com/CCM/D786). Risk of 
bias of the retrieved articles was scored (cohort studies using the 
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network quality checklist[s] 
and controlled trials using Cochrane methods), and studies 
were classified as high, acceptable, or low quality (Supplemental 
Table 21, Supplemental Digital Content 29, http://links.lww.
com/CCM/D787). Each variable was evaluated using three cri-
teria: 1) the number of studies investigating it; 2) the quality 
of these investigations, and 3) where consistency existed across 
the studies (i.e., the direction of association was consistent for 
≥ 50% of studies). Strengths of association were not summa-
rized because of the heterogeneity between studies. The follow-
ing, nonvalidated, criteria were used to define whether there 
was strong, moderate, or inconclusive evidence that a risk fac-
tor was associated with increased delirium: strong—more than 
or equal to two high-quality articles and association consistency; 
moderate—one high-quality article and more than or equal to 
one acceptable quality article with association consistency; and 
inconclusive—inconsistent findings and no fulfilment of criteria 
for strong evidence and for moderate evidence (278). The evalua-
tion of predisposing and precipitating risk factors was combined 
because these were studied in most investigations simultaneously.
Benzodiazepine use and blood transfusion administration are 
the only two modifiable factors with strong evidence for an asso-
ciation with delirium detected by screening tools (Supplemental 
Table 22, Supplemental Digital Content 30, http://links.lww.
com/CCM/D788). The nonmodifiable risk factors with strong 
evidence for an association with delirium include increasing age, 
dementia, prior coma, pre-ICU emergency surgery or trauma, 
and increasing APACHE and ASA scores. Sex, opioid use, and 
mechanical ventilation each have been strongly shown not to 
alter the risk of delirium occurrence. Moderate evidence exists 
showing the following increase the risk for delirium: history of 
hypertension; admission because of a neurologic disease; trauma; 
and the use of psychoactive medication (e.g., antipsychotics, anti-
convulsants). A history of respiratory disease, medical admission, 
nicotine use, dialysis or continuous venovenous hemofiltration, 
and a lower Glasgow Coma Scale score have each been moder-
ately shown not to increase the risk for delirium. See the “Sedation 
section” for a review on how sedative choice may affect delirium 
and the “Sleep section” regarding the relationship between sleep 
and delirium. For all other potential delirium-associated risk fac-
tors, evidence currently remains inconclusive.
Prediction
Question: Can delirium be predicted in critically ill adults?
Ungraded Statement: Predictive models that include delir-
ium risk factors at both the time of ICU admission and in the 
first 24 hours of ICU admission have been validated and shown 
to be capable of predicting delirium in critically ill adults.
Rationale: We identified four studies that used modeling 
to predict ICU delirium (279–282), three of which were con-
sidered to be psychometrically strong (Supplemental Table 
23, Supplemental Digital Content 31, http://links.lww.com/
CCM/D789) (280–282). Of these, two studies aimed to pre-
dict ICU delirium within 24 hours after ICU admission using 
the PREdiction of DELIRium in ICu patients (PRE-DELIRIC) 
model (280, 281). In a multinational study, 10 predictors (age, 
APACHE-II score, admission group, urgent admission, infec-
tion, coma, sedation, morphine use, urea level, and metabolic 
acidosis) permitted a model with an area under the receiver 
operating characteristic (AUROC) curve of 0.77 (95% CI, 0.74–
0.79) (281). In another high-quality, multinational study (282), 
a model was built to predict delirium with patient characteris-
tics available at ICU admission. This Early (E)-PRE-DELIRIC 
model includes nine predictors (age, history of cognitive 
impairment, history of alcohol abuse, blood urea nitrogen, 
admission category, urgent admission, mean arterial BP, use 
of corticosteroids, and respiratory failure) and was found to 
have an AUROC of 0.76 (95% CI, 0.73–0.77). Because both the 
PRE-DELIRIC and the E-PRE-DELIRIC models had similar 
predictive value, the model of choice can be based on availabil-
ity of predictors (Supplemental Table 24, Supplemental Digital 
Content 32, http://links.lww.com/CCM/D790). Both models 
were based on screening with the CAM-ICU only.
Evidence Gaps: Future etiologic studies on delirium should 
focus on presumed risk factors for which there is currently 
inconclusive evidence and where modifiability is likely. The 
effect of a reduction in known delirium risk factors including 
comorbid diseases, sepsis, nicotine and alcohol abuse, and the 
use of opioids and systemic steroids on delirium burden and 
patient outcome is unknown. Confounding is a key issue in 
these studies. Future studies on delirium risk factors should 
therefore make adequate adjustments based on previously 
considered risk factors (278).
Assessment
Question: Should we assess for delirium using a valid tool 
(compared with not performing this assessment with a valid 
tool) in critically ill adults?
Good Practice Statement: Critically ill adults should be regu-
larly assessed for delirium using a valid tool.
Remarks: The previous guidelines provided psychomet-
ric appraisals of pain, sedation, and delirium screening tools 
(1). A reevaluation of the psychometrics for available delirium 
screening tools was not conducted as part of these guidelines. 
This question’s focus is the effect of using any delirium assess-
ment tool (vs no assessment tool) in clinical practice.
Rationale: Most studies evaluating delirium assessment 
combine the assessment intervention with one or more 
management strategies (8, 110, 283), precluding the ability 
to evaluate outcomes related to the monitoring itself. Three 
studies specifically evaluated delirium assessment effects 
(284–286) and varied significantly in design and choice of 
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Devlin et al
e844 
www.ccmjournal.org 
September 2018 • Volume 46 • Number 9
evaluated outcomes. Two (284, 285) found no relationship 
between delirium assessment and ICU LOS or duration of 
mechanical ventilation. Three studies evaluated time to delir-
ium diagnosis and treatment. One study compared screen-
ing using the CAM-ICU versus clinical assessment (285) 
and reported no difference in time to diagnosis or treatment 
with antipsychotics. The CAM-ICU arm had more antipsy-
chotic medication days, but the total dose of antipsychotic 
medication administered was similar in the two arms. The 
largest of the four studies (286) compared assessment tool 
implementation and haloperidol use, a proxy in that study 
for delirium incidence and duration. More patients in the 
postimplementation period were treated with haloperi-
dol, but at lower doses and for less time than patients in 
the preimplementation group. In a crossover study, Reade 
et al (287) compared a period of CAM-ICU assessment to 
a period of unstructured nursing assessments using a form 
with a delirium definition. The CAM-ICU arm had a signifi-
cantly lower proportion of nursing shifts with delirium and a 
shorter duration of delirium when compared with the period 
of unstructured assessments. Systemic delirium detection 
can spuriously raise reported delirium prevalence, making 
it challenging to capture the true impact of delirium reduc-
tion intervention efforts on this outcome. Implementation 
strategies differed, and each study’s significant design limi-
tations led to low and very low quality of evidence evalua-
tions. These studies are summarized in Supplemental Table 
25 (Supplemental Digital Content 33, http://links.lww.com/
CCM/D791). Although none of the studies reported patient 
harm, this quality level and the heterogeneity in study design 
and results preclude a recommendation. This evidence can-
not establish whether delirium screening alone is beneficial.
Instead of a graded recommendation, we issue an ungraded 
Good Practice Statement given that the potential benefits of 
delirium monitoring far outweigh any potential downsides. 
Summarizing the literature and evaluating the quality of 
evidence was not feasible due to complexity of studies. The 
primary potential benefit of delirium monitoring is early rec-
ognition that may hasten clinical assessment and intervention. 
Early detection may lead to prompt identification and correc-
tion (when possible) of etiology, assurance of patients expe-
riencing distressing symptoms, treatment (pharmacologic or 
nonpharmacologic), and treatment effectiveness assessments. 
Multiple studies in both ICU and non-ICU settings have found 
that without validated screening tools, bedside nurses and phy-
sicians fail to recognize delirium (285, 287–294).
What are the consequences of missing delirium in addition 
to possible earlier detection of underlying delirium causes? 
Delirium is a distressing experience for ICU patients, their 
families, and for ICU staff (295–298). Although not proven, 
such distress might be mitigated by discussions between staff 
and patients/families about delirium. Regular delirium moni-
toring may provide a foundation for those discussions (299). 
Qualitative studies of ICU experiences consistently highlight 
that delirious patients feel greater trust toward, and encourage-
ment from, family members versus staff (295, 300). The early 
detection and identification of delirium might benefit patients 
by fostering reassurance when frightening symptoms occur.
Delirium screening using the CAM-ICU or the ICDSC is 
quick (2–5 min) (284, 286). A recent systematic review has 
updated the psychometric properties of delirium screening 
tools for critically ill adults (301). The sensitivity and speci-
ficity of delirium screening tools when compared with clini-
cal assessment, and their reproducibility and reliability when 
screening tools are substituted for a clinical diagnosis vary 
between ICU populations (e.g., cardiac surgery ICU or neuro-
logically injured patients) (51, 302, 303). A recent publication 
(304) describes a new validated tool (the ICU-7) to document 
delirium severity and suggests that severity is associated with 
worse outcome. Almost all the clinical trials investigating strat-
egies to prevent and/or treat delirium are based on delirium 
assessment tools. The generalizability of any delirium-focused 
study relies on these instruments in clinical practice. Because 
the characteristics of the tools (and their confounders) are bet-
ter described, the results of these investigations will help guide 
future clinical trials.
The disadvantages of delirium screening should be consid-
ered. A false-positive screening, although rare with either the 
CAM-ICU or the ICDSC, may result in unnecessary pharma-
cologic or nonpharmacologic treatment. ICU antipsychotic 
use is often associated with its continuation and prolonged 
administration after ICU and hospital discharge (305–307). 
Delirium screening may be burdensome for nursing staff (287). 
In the context of the criteria needed to generate a best prac-
tice statement, we felt that the benefits of widespread delirium 
assessment with the CAM-ICU or the ICDSC far outweigh any 
potential disadvantages.
Evidence Gaps: The current body of evidence in support of 
pain and agitation assessments, which has been studied longer 
than delirium, may provide some guidance for future research 
in delirium monitoring (19, 106, 110, 308–310). Some stud-
ies (18, 310) suggest that the ability of assessment tools to 
improve patient outcomes may be associated with the inten-
sity of the training strategy used and the quality improvement 
initiatives deployed. A recent observational study (311) found 
an association between high delirium monitoring adherence 
(i.e., assessments on ≥ 50% of the ICU days) and improved 
patient outcomes (i.e., lower in-hospital mortality, shorter 
ICU LOS, and shorter time on mechanical ventilation). Future 
studies should include various critical care populations such 
as patients with primary neurologic diagnoses. The lack of 
high-quality trials investigating the effect of delirium assess-
ment underscores the gaps in understanding the relationship 
among delirium assessment and patient-centered outcomes, 
treatment decisions, patient and family satisfaction, and staff 
satisfaction.
Level of Arousal and Assessment
Question: Does the level of arousal influence delirium assess-
ments with a validated screening tool?
Ungraded Statement: Level of arousal may influence delir-
ium assessments with a validated screening tool.
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Online Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
e845
Rationale: Four observational cohort studies have examined 
delirium assessments at different levels of wakefulness and 
sedation as assessed by the CAM-ICU, ICDSC, and RASS (312–
315). Because many patients with RASS of –3 were deemed in 
these studies to be “unable to assess,” data are limited to an 
evaluation of the influence of a RASS range from 0 to –2 on 
delirium positivity. These data do not allow for discrimination 
between delirium that is potentially sedation induced com-
pared with that related to other pathologic alterations (with or 
without sedation).
A total of 12,699 delirium assessments (97% involving the 
CAM-ICU) were evaluated in patients with a RASS between 0 
and –2. The likelihood of a positive delirium assessment was sig-
nificantly greater (77% vs 23%; p < 0.0001) when patients had a 
RASS –2 (vs a RASS of –1 to 0), which could suggest that level of 
arousal influences delirium assessments. However, because delir-
ium can present with a decreased arousal level, no inferences can 
be made from these data (Supplemental Table 26, Supplemental 
Digital Content 34, http://links.lww.com/CCM/D792). Apart 
from the study by Patel et al (312) in which 12% of patients in 
whom delirium was present during sedative infusion resolved 
within 2 hours of stopping infusion, no other study informs the 
question of whether a positive delirium assessment as a result of 
concomitant sedation affects patient outcome or whether seda-
tion merely represents a confounding issue for patient assess-
ment. Given that studies to date have shown that delirium is 
associated with worse outcomes, even when a depressed level of 
arousal is present, clinicians should not currently discount the 
clinical significance of delirium in this setting (316–318).
Evidence Gaps: The effects of level of arousal on delirium 
are in need of further study. This includes the impact of delir-
ium at different levels of arousal on delirium assessments (with 
or without concomitant sedative exposure) on important out-
comes such as hospital disposition and long-term cognitive 
impairment.
Outcomes
Delirium. 
Questions: What are the short- and long-term outcomes of 
delirium in critically ill adults and are these causally related?
Ungraded Statements: Positive delirium screening in criti-
cally ill adults is strongly associated with cognitive impairment 
at 3 and 12 months after ICU discharge (316–319) and may be 
associated with a longer hospital stay (257, 279, 316, 320–327).
Delirium in critically ill adults has consistently been shown 
NOT to be associated with PTSD (328–333) or post-ICU dis-
tress (316, 333–336).
Delirium in critically ill adults has NOT been consistently 
shown to be associated with ICU LOS (257, 258, 272, 279, 318, 
320–326, 334, 337–352), discharge disposition to a place other 
than home (257, 342, 344, 353, 354), depression (330, 356), 
functionality/dependence (330, 334, 350, 353, 354, 357–360), 
or mortality (316, 357).
Rationale: Despite the fact that 48 studies enrolling 19,658 
patients describe potential outcomes associated with ICU 
delirium, the complex relationship linking delirium to these 
outcomes has yet to be fully defined (257, 258, 279, 316–326, 
330–332, 334–354, 356–358, 360–365) (Supplemental Table 27, 
Supplemental Digital Content 35, http://links.lww.com/CCM/
D793). We emphasize that these associations do not imply 
causality and that they highlight areas for future studies par-
ticularly those involving cognition. Another significant gap in 
ICU delirium outcomes data includes the psychologic toll that 
delirium exerts in real time on patients, families, and caregivers.
Rapidly Reversible Delirium. 
Question: What are the short- and long-term outcomes of 
rapidly reversible delirium?
Ungraded Statement: Rapidly reversible delirium is asso-
ciated with outcomes that are similar to patients who never 
experience delirium.
Rationale: One prospective observational study with blinded 
evaluations enrolled 102 patients (312) and found that out-
comes (ICU and hospital LOS, discharge disposition, and 1-yr 
mortality) were similar between the 12 patients who developed 
rapidly reversible, sedation-related delirium and the 10 patients 
who never experienced delirium. Most patients (n = 80) who 
had either delirium or not always rapidly reversible delirium 
had worse outcomes than the patients with rapidly reversible, 
sedation-related delirium, or who never developed delirium. 
These preliminary data suggest that for a small group of patients 
with rapidly reversible delirium, delirium is not associated with 
the specifically measured adverse clinical outcomes. Delirium 
assessments should be performed both before and after a DSI 
(SAT) to identify these subtypes of delirium.
Pharmacologic Prevention and Treatment
Prevention. 
Question: Should a pharmacologic agent (vs no use of this 
agent) be used to “prevent” delirium in all critically ill adults?
Recommendation: We suggest not using haloperidol, an 
atypical antipsychotic, dexmedetomidine, a β-Hydroxy 
β-methylglutaryl-Coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibi-
tor (i.e., statin), or ketamine to prevent delirium in all critically 
ill adults (conditional recommendation, very low to low qual-
ity of evidence).
Rationale: The outcomes deemed critical to this recommen-
dation included delirium incidence and duration, duration 
of mechanical ventilation, length of ICU stay, and mortality. 
Single, randomized studies of adults who were admitted to 
the ICU for postoperative care were reviewed for haloperidol 
(366); the atypical antipsychotic, risperidone (367); and dex-
medetomidine (368). Each study reported a significant reduc-
tion in delirium incidence favoring the pharmacologic agent: 
scheduled IV haloperidol (n = 457) after noncardiac surgery 
(RR, 0.66; 95% CI, 0.45–0.97; low quality) (366); a single dose 
of risperidone (n = 126) following elective cardiac surgery (RR, 
0.35; 95% CI, 0.16–0.77; low quality) (366); and scheduled, 
low-dose dexmedetomidine (n = 700) after noncardiac surgery 
(odds ratio [OR], 0.35; 95% CI, 0.22–0.54; low quality) (368). 
One recently published, double-blind, placebo-controlled RCT 
of 1,789 delirium-free critically ill adults, not included in the 
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Devlin et al
e846 
www.ccmjournal.org 
September 2018 • Volume 46 • Number 9
evidence profile, found that administration of low-dose IV 
haloperidol in the ICU until delirium developed did not help 
prevent delirium or affect 90-day survival (369). Another sug-
gested that nocturnal administration of low-dose dexmedeto-
midine in critically ill adults with APACHE-II scores of 22 (sd, 
± 7.8) was associated with a significantly greater proportion of 
patients who remained delirium free (80% vs 54%; p = 0.008) 
during their ICU stay (370).
Despite the consistent reduction in delirium incidence in 
each study, none reported a statistically significant and/or 
clinically meaningful difference for any of the other outcomes 
that the group deemed critical. The randomized trials inform-
ing this question included surgical adults having a severity of 
illness less than half, on average, of the (predominantly medi-
cal) ICU patients represented in these trials (366–368). Given 
the strong association between severity of illness and delirium 
occurrence (365), data derived from surgical patients with a 
low severity of illness must be interpreted with caution.
Many acute critically ill patients have delirium at ICU 
admission and thus delirium prevention strategies may not 
apply to this proportion of the ICU population. Given this 
evidence gap and the lack of generalizability from each study 
population to the broader critically ill adult population, the 
current recommendation reflects the panel’s concern that the 
potential risks and costs of exposing a large proportion of 
the critically ill adult population to one or more medications 
aimed at preventing delirium will outweigh any benefit.
Three cohort studies suggest that when statin use is stopped 
during critical illness, delirium occurrence increases (371–373). 
However, one recent randomized study of delirium-free cardiac 
surgery patients admitted to the ICU (not included in the evi-
dence profile for this question) found that the use of preopera-
tive atorvastatin did not affect incident delirium (374). The role 
of an NMDA receptor antagonist for the primary prevention of 
delirium prevention in critically ill adults was being prospec-
tively evaluated in a randomized trial at the time of guideline 
development. One recent large RCT found that a single sub-
anesthetic dose of ketamine, administered perioperatively, did 
not decrease delirium in older adults after major surgery, some 
of who required admission to the ICU (375).
Subsyndromal Delirium Treatment. 
Question: Should a pharmacologic agent (vs no use of this 
agent) be used to “treat subsyndromal delirium” in all critically 
ill adults with subsyndromal delirium?
Recommendation: We suggest not using haloperidol or an 
atypical antipsychotic to treat subsyndromal delirium in criti-
cally ill adults (conditional recommendations, very low to low 
quality of evidence).
Rationale: Subsyndromal delirium is part of an outcome-
predicting spectrum of delirium symptoms, is present when 
the ICDSC score is 1–3 out of 8 and occurs in about 30% of 
critically ill adults (342). A critically ill patient who develops 
subsyndromal delirium, compared with one who develops 
neither delirium (ICDSC, ≥ 4) nor subsyndromal delirium, is 
more likely to die in the ICU, spend more time hospitalized, and 
to be discharged to a long-term care facility rather than home 
(342). Duration of subsyndromal delirium when evaluated 
using the CAM-ICU is an independent predictor of increased 
odds of institutionalization (376). The outcomes deemed 
critical to this recommendation included delirium incidence, 
duration, and severity; duration of mechanical ventilation; 
ICU LOS; and mortality. Both RCTs used the ICDSC to iden-
tify patients with subsyndromal and full-syndrome delirium 
(ICDSC, ≥ 4). Scheduled IV haloperidol 1 mg q6h, when com-
pared with placebo in 60 mechanically ventilated adults, was 
not associated with a change in delirium incidence, duration, 
or time to first episode of delirium; days of mechanical ventila-
tion; or ICU LOS in critically ill medical and surgical patients 
(377). Risperidone (0.5 mg every 8 hr), when compared with 
placebo in 101 cardiac surgery patients, was associated with a 
reduced likelihood for a transition from subsyndromal to full-
syndrome delirium (RR, 0.41; 95% CI, 0.02–0.86) (378).
Despite this reduction in delirium incidence, neither statis-
tically significant and/or clinically meaningful differences were 
noted for any of the other outcomes deemed critical by the group. 
Given these evidence gaps, questionable clinical benefit, and the 
potential lack of applicability of data from the study by Hakim 
et al (378) to the entire medical and surgical critically ill popula-
tion having a greater severity of illness and different risk factors 
for delirium, the current recommendation reflects the panel’s 
concern about the risks of exposing up to 35% of all critically 
ill adults to antipsychotic therapy (379). The role of dexmedeto-
midine, a HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor (i.e., a statin), or an 
NMDA antagonist (e.g., ketamine) as a treatment for subsyndro-
mal delirium has not been evaluated in a randomized trial.
Delirium Treatment. 
Question: Should a pharmacologic agent (vs no use of this 
agent) be used to treat delirium in all critically ill adults with 
delirium?
Antipsychotic/statin.
Recommendation: We suggest not routinely using halo-
peridol, an atypical antipsychotic, or a HMG-CoA reductase 
inhibitor (i.e., a statin) to treat delirium (conditional recom-
mendation, low quality of evidence).
Rationale: The outcomes deemed most critical to this ques-
tion included delirium duration, duration of mechanical 
ventilation, ICU LOS, and mortality. A total of six RCTs were 
identified: haloperidol (n = 2) (380, 381), atypical antipsy-
chotics (quetiapine) (n = 1) (382), ziprasidone (n = 1) (380), 
olanzapine (n = 1) (383), and a statin (i.e., rosuvastatin) (n = 
1) (384). A recent randomized trial of critically ill adults, not 
included in the evidence profile, found that high-dose simv-
astatin does not reduce days spent with delirium and coma 
(385). No evidence was found to inform a recommendation 
regarding the use of an NMDA antagonist (e.g., ketamine) for 
delirium treatment.
This evidence suggests that the use of the typical antipsy-
chotic, haloperidol; an atypical antipsychotic (e.g., quetiapine, 
ziprasidone); or a statin was not associated with a shorter dura-
tion of delirium, a reduced duration of mechanical ventilation 
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Online Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
e847
or ICU LOS, or decreased mortality. Although the randomized 
trials informing this question were conducted in both medical 
and surgical patients who were critically ill, each used open-label 
antipsychotic rescue medication for agitation or hallucinations 
(368, 380–384, 386). Administration of such open-label medica-
tion to the placebo group in these studies may bias the results of 
these investigations toward the null hypothesis. The undesirable 
effects of haloperidol and atypical antipsychotics remain uncer-
tain, given the small sample sizes of the available studies.
Although this recommendation discourages the “routine” 
use of antipsychotic agents in the treatment of delirium, patients 
who experience significant distress secondary to symptoms of a 
delirium such as anxiety, fearfulness, hallucinations, or delusions, 
or who are agitated and may be physically harmful to them-
selves or others, may benefit from short-term use of haloperidol 
or an atypical antipsychotic until these distressing symptoms 
resolve based on the panel’s clinical experience. Patients who 
start with an antipsychotic for delirium in the ICU often remain 
on these medications unnecessarily after discharge (305–307). 
Continued exposure to antipsychotic medication can result in 
significant morbidity and financial cost. Panel members judged 
that the undesirable consequences of using either haloperidol or 
an atypical antipsychotic far outweighed the potential benefits 
for most critically adults with delirium and thus issued a condi-
tional recommendation against their routine use.
Dexmedetomidine.
Recommendation: We suggest using dexmedetomidine for 
delirium in mechanically ventilated adults where agitation is 
precluding weaning/extubation (conditional recommenda-
tion, low quality of evidence).
Rationale: The single RCT used to evaluate the role of dex-
medetomidine as a treatment for agitation precluding ventilator 
liberation in patients with delirium screened 21,500 intubated 
patients from 15 ICUs to enroll the 71 study patients and was ter-
minated early because the funding amount (from the manufac-
turer of dexmedetomidine) had been used up (386). Although 
dexmedetomidine (vs placebo) was associated with a small, but 
statistically significant increase in ventilator-free hours in the 
first 7 days after study randomization (MD, 17.3 hr; 95% CI, 4.0–
33.2; very low quality), its use did not affect either ICU or hos-
pital LOS, or patient’s disposition location at hospital discharge. 
Patients did not commonly receive opioids; some of the agita-
tion may have been pain related; and the number of patients 
enrolled with acute alcohol withdrawal was not reported.
Panel members judged that the desirable consequences 
of using dexmedetomidine for mechanically ventilated ICU 
patients with agitation precluding weaning/extubation out-
weighed the potential undesirable consequences associated 
with its use; therefore, they issued a conditional recommenda-
tion supporting its use in the narrow population of critically ill 
adults. The role of dexmedetomidine in patients with delirium 
without agitation or who have agitation that is not preclud-
ing ventilator liberation remains unclear. Recommendations 
regarding choice of sedation in mechanically ventilated criti-
cally ill adults in the context of delirium can be found in rec-
ommendations about sedative choice.
Evidence Gaps: Studies evaluating pharmacologic preven-
tion strategies need to evaluate patients without delirium, enroll 
severely ill medical patients, identify patient subgroups where 
the delirium prevention benefits are greatest, and evaluate clini-
cally meaningful outcomes. To improve the methodology of 
such subsyndromal treatment trials, our understanding of the 
significance, characteristics, and measurement of subsyndromal 
delirium needs to expand. In addition, future studies should tar-
get specific symptoms (e.g., anxiety) instead of subsyndromal 
delirium as a whole. Delirium treatment studies should focus on 
more homogeneous high-risk ICU populations given that the 
cause of delirium (and thus response to therapy) may be differ-
ent. Symptomatic distress (e.g., agitation) and long-term cogni-
tive and functional outcome should be evaluated. Medications 
shown in small studies to reduce delirium symptoms (e.g., 
valproic acid) should be rigorously evaluated. Finally, system 
innovations are needed to ensure that patients do not remain 
indefinitely on medications such as antipsychotics after symp-
tomatic initiation during an ICU episode of delirium.
Nonpharmacologic Prevention and Treatment
Single Component. 
Question: Should a single-component, nonpharmacologic 
strategy not solely focused on sleep improvement or early 
mobilization (vs no such strategy) be used to reduce delirium 
in critically ill adults?
Recommendation: We suggest not using bright light therapy 
to reduce delirium in critically ill adults (conditional recom-
mendation, moderate quality of evidence).
Rationale: ICU delirium studies of nonpharmacologic 
interventions focused on either one modifiable risk factor 
with a single intervention or several modifiable risk factors 
with multicomponent interventions (Supplemental Table 
28, Supplemental Digital Content 36, http://links.lww.com/
CCM/D794). For the purposes of these guidelines, one ques-
tion addressed single intervention studies and one question 
addressed multicomponent intervention studies. Delirium 
incidence, prevalence, and duration were considered the most 
important outcomes across both questions. ICU LOS, hospital 
LOS, and hospital mortality were also considered to be critical 
outcomes for these questions. Bright light therapy, family par-
ticipation in care, and a psychoeducational program were the 
only single-component interventions that have been studied 
in the ICU.
Three studies examined the effects of light therapy, which did 
not demonstrate beneficial effect on either delirium incidence or 
ICU LOS (387–389). One before-after study evaluated the effect 
of family participation in care (390). Panel members judged 
that the undesirable consequences of using bright light therapy 
outweighed the potential desirable effects associated with its use 
and thus issued a conditional recommendation against its use.
Multicomponent. 
Question: Should a multicomponent, nonpharmacologic 
strategy (vs no such strategy) be used to reduce delirium in 
critically ill adults?
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Devlin et al
e848 
www.ccmjournal.org 
September 2018 • Volume 46 • Number 9
Recommendation: We suggest using a multicomponent, 
nonpharmacologic intervention that is focused on (but not 
limited to) reducing modifiable risk factors for delirium, 
improving cognition, and optimizing sleep, mobility, hearing, 
and vision in critically ill adults (conditional recommendation, 
low quality of evidence).
Remarks: These multicomponent interventions include 
(but are not limited to) strategies to reduce or shorten delir-
ium (e.g., reorientation, cognitive stimulation, use of clocks); 
improve sleep (e.g., minimizing light and noise); improve 
wakefulness (i.e., reduced sedation); reduce immobility (e.g., 
early rehabilitation/mobilization); and reduce hearing and/or 
visual impairment (e.g., enable use of devices such as hearing 
aids or eye glasses).
Rationale: The multicomponent intervention studies eval-
uated a bundle of interventions. Many examples of multi-
component bundles (8, 283, 391–396) have shown improved 
outcomes in critically ill adults (Supplemental Table 29, 
Supplemental Digital Content 37, http://links.lww.com/CCM/
D795). Pilot studies suggested that combining cognitive and 
physical therapy early during critical illness is feasible and safe 
(391) and using nonpharmacologic multicomponent interven-
tions in ICU patients is feasible (392). Studies of multicompo-
nent interventions, many of which were not randomized, focus 
on cognitive impairment (e.g., reorientation, cognitive stimu-
lation, music, use of clocks); sedation/sleep disruption (e.g., 
reducing sedation, minimizing light and noise); immobility 
(early rehabilitation/mobilization); and hearing and visual 
impairment (e.g., use of hearing aids and glasses). Overall, 
the use of such strategies reduced delirium significantly (five 
studies, n = 1,318; OR, 0.59; 95% CI, 0.39–0.88) (392–396). 
Further, ICU duration of delirium (16 vs 20 hr) (395), ICU 
LOS (387), and hospital mortality all decreased (393).
Another multi-intervention approach, the awakening and 
breathing coordination, delirium monitoring/management, 
and early exercise/mobility (ABCDE) bundle, was significantly 
associated with less delirium (n = 296; 49% vs 62%; OR, 0.55; 
95% CI, 0.33–0.93) (7) when evaluated in a before-after study 
at one hospital. When a revised and expanded ABCDEF bun-
dle (which includes a focus on “F,” Family engagement) was 
evaluated in a larger, multicenter, before-after, cohort study, 
and where delirium was also assessed using the CAM-ICU, an 
adjusted analysis showed that improvements in bundle com-
pliance were significantly associated with reduced mortality 
and more ICU days without coma or delirium (9). Adverse 
effects were not reported in these nonpharmacologic interven-
tion studies. Six of the eight studies’ small interventions were 
heterogeneous, and the studies with positive findings were 
observational. Panel members judged that desirable conse-
quences of using any of these multicomponent interventions 
to reduce delirium outweighed any potential undesirable con-
sequences and thus issued a conditional recommendation sup-
porting their use.
Evidence Gaps: Overall, the certainty of evidence supporting 
single-component and multicomponent interventions is low. 
Because delirium almost always has a multifactorial etiology, 
multicomponent interventions are plausibly more promising 
than single interventions. However, a major gap in understand-
ing the available data is uncertainty as to which interventions 
result in the effect. The role of families in reducing patient 
stress and facilitating nonpharmacologic delirium prevention 
and management interventions requires further research. The 
experience of patients with delirium has not been qualitatively 
evaluated. Some articles describe the same interventions differ-
ently (2); consistent definitions should be established.
IMMOBILITY (REHABILITATION/
MOBILIZATION)
Survivors of critical illness frequently experience many long-
term sequelae, including ICU-acquired muscle weakness 
(ICUAW). ICUAW can be present in 25–50% of critically ill 
patients (397) and is associated with impairments in patients’ 
long-term survival, physical functioning, and quality of life 
(398–400). One important risk factor for ICUAW is bed rest 
(398, 401). The safety, feasibility, and benefits of rehabilita-
tion and mobilization delivered in the ICU setting have been 
evaluated as potential means to mitigate ICUAW and impaired 
physical functioning.
As highlighted in the 2013 guidelines (1), rehabilitation/
mobilization may be beneficial as part of delirium management 
strategies. Furthermore, important associations exist between 
analgesic and sedation practices and pain and sedation status with 
patients’ participation in rehabilitation/mobilization in the ICU 
(402). Given the growing literature in this field and the interplay 
of rehabilitation/mobilization with pain, agitation, and delirium, 
this topic was introduced as a new part of the present guideline. 
One actionable question and three descriptive questions were 
addressed (see prioritized topic list in Supplemental Table 30 
[Supplemental Digital Content 38, http://links.lww.com/CCM/
D796] and voting results in Supplemental Table 31 [Supplemental 
Digital Content 39, http://links.lww.com/CCM/D797]) (403). A 
glossary of rehabilitation /mobilization interventions and out-
comes relevant to this topic can be found in Supplemental Table 
32 (Supplemental Digital Content 40, http://links.lww.com/CCM/
D798). The evidence summaries and evidence-to-decision tables 
used to develop recommendations for the immobility (rehabilita-
tion/mobilization) group are available in Supplemental Table 33 
(Supplemental Digital Content 41, http://links.lww.com/CCM/
D799), and the forest plots for all meta-analyses are available in 
Supplemental Figure 8 (Supplemental Digital Content 42, http://
links.lww.com/CCM/D800).
Efficacy and Benefit
Question: For critically ill adults, is receiving rehabilitation or 
mobilization (performed either in-bed or out-of-bed) benefi-
cial in improving patient, family, or health system outcomes 
compared with usual care, a different rehabilitation/mobiliza-
tion intervention, placebo, or sham intervention?
Recommendation: We suggest performing rehabilitation or 
mobilization in critically ill adults (conditional recommenda-
tion, low quality evidence).
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Online Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
e849
Remarks: Rehabilitation is a “set of interventions designed 
to optimize functioning and reduce disability in individuals 
with a health condition” (404). Mobilization is a type of inter-
vention within rehabilitation that facilitates the movement of 
patients and expends energy with a goal of improving patient 
outcomes (405). This recommendation supports performing 
rehabilitation/mobilization interventions over usual care or 
over similar interventions with a reduced duration, reduced 
frequency, or later onset. The implementation of this recom-
mendation will be influenced by feasibility-related issues, par-
ticularly related to variability in the availability of appropriate 
staffing and resources to perform rehabilitation/mobilization 
interventions across ICUs.
Rationale: A wide variety of critically ill patient populations 
were studied (see study eligibility criteria in Supplemental 
Table 34 [Supplemental Digital Content 43, http://links.lww.
com/CCM/D801]). Studies evaluated different types of inter-
ventions and different timings for initiating the intervention, 
which prevent us from making more specific recommen-
dations in these areas. Comparators for the interventions 
included usual care rehabilitation or mobilization; rehabilita-
tion or mobilization interventions with reduced duration or 
frequency; or a longer time to initiation compared with the 
intervention group. As described below, five outcomes were 
evaluated for this question. Three additional outcomes (cog-
nitive function, mental health, and timing of return to work 
and related economic outcomes) could not be evaluated due 
to inadequate data.
We identified a total of 16 RCTs (391, 406–420) 
(Supplemental Table 25, Supplemental Digital Content 33, 
http://links.lww.com/CCM/D791) that met our eligibility crite-
ria and reported on five critical outcomes. The pooled estimates 
from six RCTs (304 patients) showed that rehabilitation/mobi-
lization improved muscle strength at ICU discharge (MD in 
Medical Research Council sum score [range, 0–60]: 6.24 points 
[95% CI, 1.67–10.82; low quality evidence]) (408–410, 414, 
415, 420). Duration of mechanical ventilation (11 RCTs, 1,128 
patients) was reduced by 1.31 days (95% CI, –2.44 to –0.19; low 
quality evidence) (406–409, 411, 413–416). For health-related 
quality of life measured using the 36-Item Short Form Health 
Survey instrument within 2 months of discharge in four RCTs 
(303 patients), a moderate-sized improvement (SMD, 0.64 
[95% CI, –0.05 to 1.34]) not reaching statistical significance was 
observed, with an overall rating of low quality of evidence (412, 
416–418). For the remaining two critical outcomes, across 13 
RCTs (1,421 patients), there was no effect on hospital mortality 
(moderate quality of evidence) (391, 407, 408, 410–418, 420). 
Physical function was evaluated via the “Timed Up and Go” 
test in three RCTs (209 patients) and the Physical Function in 
ICU Test in three RCTs (209 patients), with no significant effect 
of rehabilitation/mobilization (moderate quality of evidence) 
(391, 411, 414, 416, 420). The incidence of adverse events for 
patients was very low based on five trials and eight observa-
tional studies (moderate quality of evidence).
Rehabilitation/mobilization was assessed as feasible, accept-
able to key stakeholders, and likely to be cost-effective based 
on preliminary data. In addition, indirect evidence (421), 
along with a discussion with panel members (including an 
ICU patient representative), suggests that patients will prob-
ably value the benefits of rehabilitation/mobilization. Given 
a small benefit of rehabilitation/mobilization interventions 
(performed either in-bed or out-of-bed) and the low overall 
quality of evidence, panel members agreed that the desirable 
consequences for patients probably outweigh the undesir-
able consequences, and issued a conditional recommendation 
favoring rehabilitation/mobilization interventions.
Safety and Risk
Question: For critically ill adults, is receiving rehabilitation/
mobilization (performed either in-bed or out-of-bed) com-
monly associated with patient-related safety events or harm?
Ungraded Statement: Serious safety events or harms 
do not occur commonly during physical rehabilitation or 
mobilization.
Rationale: Data from 10 observational and nine RCTs 
(Supplemental Table 35, Supplemental Digital Content 44, 
http://links.lww.com/CCM/D802) were reviewed to answer 
this question. Serious safety events or harms were defined as 
a change in physiologic status or an injury that required an 
intervention. These events were rare, with only 15 reported 
during greater than 12,200 sessions across 13 studies (283, 391, 
416–418, 422–429). An incidence rate for these events could 
not be calculated because information about the number of 
patients at risk and/or the number of rehabilitation/mobi-
lization sessions per patient was not consistently or clearly 
reported in many studies.
The majority of safety events or harms was respiratory 
related, with four desaturations that required an increase in Fio2 
(423, 429) and three unplanned extubations (285). Three mus-
culoskeletal-related events occurred: one fall (427), one Achilles 
tendon rupture (418), and one polyarthralgia exacerbation 
(416). Two cardiovascular-related events occurred: one hyper-
tensive urgency (391) and one syncopal episode (416). Overall, 
patient harm related to rehabilitation/mobilization is rare; this 
conclusion is supported by a recent meta-analysis (430).
Indicators for Initiation
Question: For critically ill adults, what aspects of patient clini-
cal status are indicators for the safe initiation of rehabilitation/
mobilization (performed either in-bed or out-of-bed)?
Ungraded Statements: Major indicators for safely initiating 
rehabilitation/mobilization include stability in cardiovascular, 
respiratory, and neurologic status.
Vasoactive infusions or mechanical ventilation are not 
barriers to initiating rehabilitation/mobilization, assuming 
patients are otherwise stable with the use of these therapies.
Rationale: Safe initiation of physical rehabilitation or mobi-
lization was evaluated in 17 (283, 391, 407, 408, 413, 416–418, 
424–426, 429, 431–435) studies that enrolled 2,774 patients 
and reported cardiovascular, respiratory, or neurologic cri-
teria (Supplemental Table 36, Supplemental Digital Content 
45, http://links.lww.com/CCM/D803). Data from these studies 
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Devlin et al
e850 
www.ccmjournal.org 
September 2018 • Volume 46 • Number 9
were summarized, and expert opinion was used to determine 
suggested ranges for cardiovascular, respiratory, neurologic, 
and other relevant criteria within which rehabilitation/mobili-
zation can be safely initiated (Table 1). Although these param-
eters were based on clinical research with clinical application 
interpreted via expert opinion, they should not be a substitute 
for clinical judgment. All thresholds should be interpreted 
or modified, as needed, in the context of individual patients’ 
clinical symptoms, expected values, recent trends, and any cli-
nician-prescribed goals or targets.
Indicators for Stopping
Question: For adult critically ill patients, what aspects of patient 
clinical status are indicators that rehabilitation/mobilization 
(performed either in-bed or out-of-bed) should be stopped?
Ungraded Statements: Major indicators for stopping reha-
bilitation/mobilization include development of new cardiovas-
cular, respiratory, or neurologic instability.
Other events, such as a fall or medical device removal/mal-
function, and patient distress are also indications for stopping.
Rationale: Indicators for stopping rehabilitation/mobi-
lization were reported in 14 studies (283, 391, 407, 408, 413, 
416, 418, 424, 425, 429, 431–434) that enrolled 2,617 patients 
(Supplemental Table 37, Supplemental Digital Content 46, 
http://links.lww.com/CCM/D804). Specific stopping crite-
ria for cardiovascular, respiratory, or neurologic instability 
were identified. Data from these studies were summarized, 
and expert opinion was used to determine suggested cardio-
vascular, respiratory, neurologic, and other relevant criteria 
for stopping rehabilitation/mobilization (Table 1). Although 
these parameters were based on clinical research with clinical 
application interpreted via expert opinion, they should not be 
a substitute for clinical judgment.
Evidence Gaps: The field of ICU-based rehabilitation/
mobilization is at an early stage with a rapidly evolving body 
of evidence. Many research questions remain outstanding. 
Important directions for future research include understand-
ing differences in patient outcomes according to the type of 
intervention and the timing, frequency, duration, and intensity 
of interventions. The mode of intervention delivery, including 
the expertise/training of personnel delivering interventions, 
needs additional investigation. The influence of patient condi-
tions (e.g., pre-ICU functional status, delirium and sedation 
status, muscle wasting, and nerve and muscle dysfunction) on 
patient outcomes after rehabilitation/mobilization interven-
tions should be examined. These factors may help to identify 
potential subgroups of critically ill patients who may gain the 
greatest benefit from rehabilitation/mobilization interven-
tions. As well, methods to assess the patient experience during 
rehabilitation/mobilization, particularly in nonverbal critically 
ill patients, are warranted. Standardized reporting of interven-
tion details (e.g., timing, frequency, duration, and intensity), 
potential safety events, and both short-term and long-term 
outcomes will facilitate comparisons between studies and 
settings. Finally, future research should continue to evalu-
ate the measurement properties of short-term and long-term 
outcome measures to determine the most effective and effi-
cient approaches to evaluating the effects of rehabilitation/
mobilization.
SLEEP DISRUPTION
Poor sleep is a common complaint and a source of distress for 
many critically ill patients (436, 437). Sleep disruption in the 
critically ill can be severe and is characterized by sleep fragmen-
tation, abnormal circadian rhythms, increased light sleep (stage 
N1 + N2), and decreased slow-wave (stage N3) and rapid eye 
movement (REM) sleep (438–440). The interplay of medica-
tions, critical illness, delirium, cerebral perfusion, and sleep is 
complex, but is important, and is an increasing focus of research. 
A glossary of the sleep-related terms used in this section can be 
found in Supplemental Table 38 (Supplemental Digital Content 
47, http://links.lww.com/CCM/D805), and an overview of nor-
mal sleep and its architecture as characterized by polysomnog-
raphy can be found in Supplemental Table 39 (Supplemental 
Digital Content 48, http://links.lww.com/CCM/D806).
In addition to emotional distress, sleep disruption has also 
been hypothesized to contribute to ICU delirium (441–443), 
prolonged duration of mechanical ventilation (444), deranged 
immune function (445, 446), and neurocognitive dysfunc-
tion. Given that sleep is a potentially modifiable risk factor 
influencing recovery in critically ill adults, this topic has been 
introduced in the present guideline and is addressed in four 
actionable and six descriptive questions (see prioritized topic 
list in Supplemental Table 40 [Supplemental Digital Content 
49, http://links.lww.com/CCM/D807] and voting results in 
Supplemental Table 41 [Supplemental Digital Content 50, 
http://links.lww.com/CCM/D808]). The evidence summa-
ries and evidence-to-decision tables used to develop recom-
mendations for the disrupted sleep group are available in 
Supplemental Table 42 (Supplemental Digital Content 51, 
http://links.lww.com/CCM/D809), and the forest plots for 
all meta-analyses completed are available in Supplemental 
Figure 9 (Supplemental Digital Content 52, http://links.lww.
com/CCM/D810).
Characterization
Critically Ill Versus Healthy. 
Question: How does sleep in critically ill adults differ from 
normal sleep in healthy adults?
Ungraded Statements: Total sleep time (TST) and sleep effi-
ciency are often normal.
Sleep fragmentation, the proportion of time spent in light 
sleep (stages N1 + N2), and time spent sleeping during the day 
(vs night) are higher.
The proportion of time spent in deep sleep (stage N3 sleep 
and REM) is lower.
Subjective sleep quality is reduced.
Rationale: Small studies suggest that TST and sleep effi-
ciency are normal during critical illness although considerable 
interpatient variability exists (443, 447). During critical illness, 
the proportion of time spent in light sleep (stages N1 + N2) is 
increased and the time spent in deep sleep (stages N3 + REM 
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Online Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
e851
sleep) is decreased (438, 440, 448–450). Sleep fragmentation 
(i.e., number of arousals and awakenings per hour) is higher in 
critically ill adults than healthy subjects (449, 451, 452). Among 
healthy adults exposed to the ICU environment, daytime sleep 
was found to increase each day spent in the ICU setting and 
represent one third of total sleep (453). In critically ill adults, 
the proportion of total sleep during the daytime sleep has been 
shown to be as high as 57% (444, 454). Subjective sleep quality 
is severely altered during critical illness; patients assess their 
sleep quality in the ICU as being considerably worse than their 
sleep at home (449, 455, 456).
Delirium Versus No Delirium. 
Question: Is sleep different in critically ill adults if delirium 
(vs no delirium) is present?
Ungraded Statements: The presence of delirium may not 
affect TST, sleep efficiency, or sleep fragmentation.
The influence of delirium on the proportion of time spent 
in light (N1 + N2) versus deeper (N3) sleep is unknown.
REM sleep is lower if delirium is present.
Delirium is associated with greater circadian sleep-cycle 
disruption and increased daytime sleep.
Whether delirium affects reported subjective sleep quality 
remains unclear.
Rationale: Delirium has not been evaluated in most ICU 
polysomnography sleep studies. Four studies have evalu-
ated sleep with polysomnography in critically ill adults with 
delirium that was evaluated with a validated screening tool 
(443, 447, 457). Two of the studies excluded patients receiv-
ing sedation (443, 447). TST and sleep efficiency are similar 
between delirious and nondelirious patients (443, 447). One 
small study of noninvasive ventilation (NIV) patients found 
that sleep fragmentation is similar regardless of delirium 
status (443). The influence of delirium on the proportion 
TABLE 1. Summary of Safety Criteria for Starting and Stopping Physical Rehabilitation or 
Mobilization Performed Either In-Bed or Out-of-Bed
System
Starting a Rehabilitation/Mobility Sessiona
Stopping a Rehabilitation/Mobility Sessiona
System
Rehabilitation or mobility could be “started” when 
ALL of the following parameters are present:
Rehabilitation or mobility should be 
“stopped” when ANY of the following 
parameters are present:
Cardiovascular
•  
Heart rate is between 60 and 130 beats/min,
•  
Systolic blood pressure is between 90 and  
180 mm Hg, or
•  
Mean arterial pressure is between 60 and 100 mm Hg
•  
Heart rate decreases below 60 or increases 
above 130 beats/min,
•  
Systolic blood pressure decreases below 90 or 
increases above 180 mm Hg, or
•  
Mean arterial pressure decreases below 60 or 
increases above 100 mm Hg
Respiratory
•  
Respiratory rate is between 5 and 40 breaths/min
•  
Spo2 ≥ 88%
•  
Fio2 < 0.6 and positive end-expiratory pressure < 10
•  
Airway (endotracheal tube or tracheostomy) is adequately 
secured
•  
Respiratory rate decreases below 5 or increases 
above 40 breaths per minute
•  
Spo2 decreases below 88%
•  
Concerns regarding adequate securement of 
airway (endotracheal tube or tracheostomy)
Neurologic
•  
Able to open eyes to voice
•  
Changes in consciousness, such as not follow-
ing directions, lightheadedness, combative, or 
agitated
 
Further, the following clinical signs and symptoms should  
be “absent”:
Further, if the following clinical signs, symptoms or 
events develop and appear clinically relevant:
•  
New or symptomatic arrhythmia
•  
Chest pain with concern for myocardial ischemia
•  
Unstable spinal injury or lesion
•  
Unstable fracture
•  
Active or uncontrolled gastrointestinal bleed
 
 
•  
New/symptomatic arrhythmia
•  
Chest pain with concern for myocardial ischemia
•  
Ventilator asynchrony
•  
Fall
•  
Bleeding
•  
Medical device removal or malfunction
•  
Distress reported by patient or observed by clini-
cian
Other
Mobility sessions may be performed with the following:
•  
Femoral vascular access devices, with exception of femoral 
sheaths in which hip mobilization is generally avoided
•  
During continuous renal replacement therapy
•  
Infusion of vasoactive medications
 
 
 
 
Spo2 = oxygen saturation.
aBased on published clinical studies and expert opinion, but should not be a substitute for clinical judgment. All thresholds should be interpreted or modified, 
as needed, in the context of individual patients’ clinical symptoms, “normal” values, and recent trends while in the hospital, and any clinician-prescribed goals or 
targets.
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Devlin et al
e852 
www.ccmjournal.org 
September 2018 • Volume 46 • Number 9
of time spent in light sleep (N1 + N2) (vs deeper N3 sleep) 
was not reported in any of the studies. The amount of REM 
sleep was significantly lower in patients with delirium (443). 
Days with delirium were greater in those patients having a 
very low amount of REM sleep suggesting that an association 
between REM sleep quantity and delirium exists (442). One 
study found that delirium is associated with a greater circadian 
sleep-cycle disruption as evidenced by daytime sleep becoming 
a greater proportion of TST (443). Higher reported subjective 
sleep quality was associated with lower delirium incidence in 
one observational study (312), and in one RCT, earplug use 
reduced delirium and improved subjective sleep quality (458). 
In a pre-post sleep quality improvement study, patients rated 
their sleep before and during the multicomponent sleep pro-
tocol similarly although significantly fewer patients had coma/
delirium during the intervention (459). Subjective sleep qual-
ity reporting by delirious patients might be unreliable.
Mechanical Ventilation Versus No Mechanical Ventilation. 
Question: Is sleep different in critically ill adults who are 
mechanically ventilated (vs not mechanically ventilated)?
Ungraded Statements: The use of mechanical ventilation 
in critically ill adults may worsen sleep fragmentation, archi-
tecture, and circadian rhythm (daytime sleep) compared with 
normal sleep, but these effects are often variable and have not 
yet been fully investigated.
The use of mechanical ventilation (vs periods without 
mechanical ventilation) in patients with respiratory failure 
may improve sleep efficiency and reduce fragmentation, but 
data are limited.
Rationale: Ventilation and sleep share complex and recip-
rocal relationships. During sleep, oxygen consumption and 
CO2 production decrease, leading to a physiologic reduction 
of ventilation compared with wakefulness. Excessive pressure 
support, ventilator asynchronies, or ventilator alarms might 
trigger arousals and sleep interruptions. For the purpose of 
this question, “ventilated” referred to patients mechanically 
ventilated (both invasively and noninvasively) and “nonventi-
lated” as patients who were breathing without any respiratory 
assistance (i.e., no pressure support, patients may be receiving 
continuous positive airway pressure). Only studies that incor-
porated polysomnography assessment were evaluated.
Although three polysomnography studies compared dis-
tinct ventilated and nonventilated groups (451, 454, 461), two 
studies evaluated the same patients before and after ventila-
tory assistance (451, 454). During ventilation, sleep duration 
has been reported to be lower than normal (241, 443, 448, 453, 
454, 462–464), normal (438, 465), or higher than normal (466, 
467). Arousal indices are lower during ventilation (460), and 
sleep fragmentation is lower with NIV than without ventila-
tion (243, 443, 448, 453, 454, 462–464).
Sleep fragmentation is higher during mechanical ven-
tilation (vs no ventilation) (449) and NIV (vs no ventila-
tion) (454). The proportion of time spent in stage N3 sleep 
is decreased in ventilated critically ill adults (0–27%) (438, 
439, 448, 449, 453, 462, 464, 467–473), as is the proportion 
of time spent in REM stage sleep reduced (0–14%) (241, 
438, 440, 443, 448, 450, 451, 453, 454, 462, 464–473). Sleep 
fragmentation index during mechanical ventilation ranges 
from 18 to 35 arousals and awakenings per hour of sleep 
(241, 438, 440, 443, 448, 450, 451, 453, 454, 462, 464–474). 
Respiratory-related arousals have been suspected to be a 
major factor involved in sleep fragmentation in critically 
ill adults, reported in one study as causing 19% (11–30) of 
arousal and awakenings from sleep (241, 438, 440, 448, 450, 
451, 453, 454, 460, 462, 464–474). Among ventilated criti-
cally ill adults, studies consistently show that among venti-
lated patients, the proportion of time spent in daytime sleep 
ranges from 36% to 57% and is greater than it is for nonven-
tilated patients (438, 440, 443, 450, 453, 454, 470).
Comparing mechanical ventilation (vs no mechanical ven-
tilation) in critically ill adults, three studies have shown greater 
TST during mechanical ventilation (241, 436, 438), whereas one 
study showed no difference (461). In patients with a tracheos-
tomy, median (interquartile range) sleep efficiency is higher 
during ventilation (61% [38–74]) than without ventilatory sup-
port (44% [9–63]) (451). Two studies have shown that sleep 
fragmentation is significantly lower during mechanical ventila-
tion (vs no ventilation) (472, 473), whereas one study showed no 
difference (451). Two studies showed no significant difference in 
sleep stages, whereas one study showed improved sleep architec-
ture with less light, sleep (stage N1), and more deep sleep (stages 
3 and REM sleep) during periods with NIV than without (454).
Evidence Gaps: Large, additional studies are required to 
define the influence of critical illness, delirium, and mechani-
cal ventilation on sleep quality. A systematic assessment of 
delirium should be done in parallel with polysomnography 
recording (472). Among studies, considerable variability has 
been reported regarding all sleep parameters. These discor-
dances might be due to several factors such as total record-
ing time, quality of the recordings, experience of the scorer 
(awareness of atypical sleep), the criteria used to analyze sleep 
(i.e., Rechtschaffen et Kales vs Drouot-Watson rules) (457, 
475, 476), disease severity, LOS on the day of polysomnogra-
phy evaluation, both sedative type and depth of sedation, and 
whether delirium is present. Harmonization in scoring rules 
and recording practices (e.g., systematic recording of noise 
levels and mental status) and studying homogeneous groups 
of patients might help to assess the prevalence of sleep altera-
tions in critically ill patients. Detailed data on potential sleep 
disrupters are important when evaluating sleep fragmentation. 
The effect of sleep disruption on clinically relevant short- and 
long-term outcomes in large homogeneous patient groups 
remains uncertain. Finally, reliable tools to assess circadian 
rhythm disruption have yet to be identified.
Prevalence of Unusual/Dissociated Sleep
Question: What is the prevalence of unusual or dissociative 
sleep patterns in critically ill adults?
Ungraded Statement: The prevalence of unusual or dissoci-
ated sleep patterns is highly variable and depends on patient 
characteristics.
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Online Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
e853
Rationale: Atypical sleep, characterized by δ waves without 
any cyclic organization and by the absence of K complexes and 
sleep spindles that are considered the defining electroencepha-
logram features of stage N2 sleep, was first reported in sedated 
patients (438). Pathologic wakefulness is often associated with 
atypical sleep and is characterized by a nonreactive slowed 
electroencephalogram and by dissociation between electro-
encephalogram rhythms and behavioral wakefulness. During 
atypical sleep, not included in conventional Rechtschaffen and 
Kales electroencephalogram scoring rules, the electroencepha-
logram can display δ or θ waves (evocative of sleep) in behav-
iorally awake patients or α-β waves (evocative of wakefulness) 
in a comatose patient (457, 476).
Eleven studies have reported the prevalence of the abnor-
mal sleep electroencephalogram patterns that meet the crite-
ria for atypical sleep (438, 440, 443, 450, 457, 464, 476–481). 
In conscious nonsedated or lightly sedated ICU patients, the 
abnormal sleep electroencephalogram pattern prevalence 
ranges from 23% to 31% (440, 443, 450, 457, 480). When 
criteria are used to exclude patients with known factors for 
these abnormal electroencephalogram patterns (e.g., receiv-
ing sedative/opioids, having delirium coma or sepsis, or with 
a history of epilepsy), the prevalence of atypical sleep becomes 
nonexistent (0%) (464). In sedated patients, the prevalence of 
at least one dissociated electroencephalogram pattern (dis-
sociated wake or sleep) ranges from 60% to 97% (438, 476, 
481), and the prevalence of isolated unusual sleep electroen-
cephalogram patterns ranges from 50% to 70% (475, 481). 
Variability in the presence to those factors (i.e., sedation, sep-
sis, and delirium) known to influence abnormal sleep electro-
encephalogram patterns likely accounts for the variability in 
prevalence among studies (438, 440, 457, 476).
Evidence Gaps: Sleep recordings in critically ill adults should be 
carefully examined to identify new unusual or dissociative sleep 
patterns using published approaches and specific criteria (457, 
476). The clinical characteristics of patients with these unusual 
patterns, and their associated mechanisms and outcomes both 
during and long after the ICU stay, should be investigated.
Risk Factors
Before ICU Admission. 
Question: What risk factors that exist before the onset of 
critical illness affect sleep quality in critically ill adults in the 
ICU?
Ungraded Statement: Patients who report poor-quality sleep 
and/or use of a pharmacologic sleep aid at home are more 
likely to report poor-quality sleep in the ICU.
Rationale: The following factors existing before the onset of 
critical illness have been examined to determine if they affect 
sleep quality in ICU: female gender, older age, reported poor 
quality of sleep at home, regular use of sleep aid medication at 
home, and specific premorbid medical conditions (e.g., hyper-
tension, diabetes, cancer, and thyroid disease) (Supplemental 
Table 43, Supplemental Digital Content 53, http://links.lww.
com/CCM/D811). Of these, only “reported poor quality sleep 
at home” (459, 482, 483) and “regular use of a pharmacologic 
sleep aid at home” (450, 482) have been consistently reported 
in more than one study as being associated with perceived 
lower quality of sleep in the ICU.
During ICU Admission. 
Question: Which ICU-acquired risk factors affect sleep 
quality in critically ill adults?
Ungraded Statement: Pain, environmental stimuli, health-
care-related interruptions, psychologic factors, respiratory fac-
tors, and medications each affect sleep quality in the ICU.
Rationale: Patient-perceived factors that contribute to 
patient-perceived poor sleep among critically ill adults have been 
reported according to either their severity (degree to which they 
disrupted sleep) or incidence (frequency with which they were 
reported) in 12 observational studies (455, 456, 460, 482, 484–
492) (Supplemental Table 44, Supplemental Digital Content 54, 
http://links.lww.com/CCM/D812). The factors most frequently 
cited by patients as disruptive to sleep were noise, pain and dis-
comfort, immobility/restricted movement, nursing care inter-
ventions, and worry/anxiety/fear (449, 455, 456, 482, 484–490, 
492, 493). Four studies (449, 456, 482, 492) used the “Sleep in 
the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) Questionnaire” (455) to assess the 
severity of disruption caused by seven extrinsic (environmental) 
factors (ranked on a scale of 1–10 with 1 being no disruption 
and 10 significant disruption). The top three reported extrinsic 
factors disrupting sleep were noise, lighting, and nursing inter-
ventions (e.g., baths). All seven factors, including the top three, 
ranked 5 or less on the 10-point sleep disruptiveness scale (455, 
482, 484). When ICU patients were asked to rank 35 intrinsic 
and extrinsic factors on a 0–4 scale (based on how disruptive 
each factor was to sleep), the top intrinsic factors were pain, 
inability to get comfortable, the bed, and procedures being per-
formed on the patient (456, 485–490, 492, 493). A complete list 
of patient-identified factors is summarized in Table 2.
In addition to asking patients to identify factors they perceive 
as disruptive, other studies have measured sleep objectively using 
polysomnography or actigraphy and attempted to correlate risk 
factors with various measures of sleep. Factors that have been 
shown to correlate with sleep disruption in univariate analyses 
include illness severity (494), delirium (442, 443), hypoxemia 
and alkalosis (494), receiving a benzodiazepine (442) or propo-
fol (464), patient-ventilator asynchrony (454), spontaneous (vs 
mechanically supported) breathing (452), and a spontaneous 
mode of ventilation (vs a controlled mode) (472, 495). Noise has 
been found to correlate temporally with arousals but appears to 
be responsible for only 10–17% of all arousals (449, 455, 482, 
484). Only one study included multivariable analysis and found 
that presence of an endotracheal tube (i.e., receiving mechani-
cal ventilation) seemed to confer improved sleep quality (460). 
The sleep of individual patients may be affected differently by 
various risk factors (e.g., some patients may be more bothered 
by noise than other patients) and the meaning or relevance to 
patients (e.g., some patients are comforted by hearing the nurse 
nearby, whereas others are bothered by it), and the patient’s 
intrinsic disposition (e.g., susceptibility to feel worried, afraid, 
or uncomfortable under similar circumstances).
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Devlin et al
e854 
www.ccmjournal.org 
September 2018 • Volume 46 • Number 9
Evidence Gaps: Studies using questionnaires and interviews, 
while patient-centered, are subject to recall bias and exclude 
patients who are not able to self-report due to sedation, delir-
ium, dementia, or acute brain injury. Furthermore, patients 
may have sleep that is severely fragmented with microarous-
als, but the patients may not be able to identify the disrup-
tive factors because they were not fully awakened from sleep. 
Studies using polysomnography are limited to those that can 
be analyzed by standard criteria and exclude highly abnormal 
electroencephalograms or those with poor-quality electroen-
cephalogram signals. Studies correlating various factors with 
impaired sleep on polysomnography do not prove causation, 
only association, and were largely weak associations in univari-
ate analysis.
Outcomes
Question: Do sleep and circadian rhythm alterations “during” 
an ICU admission affect outcomes during and/or after the ICU 
stay in critically ill adults?
Ungraded Statements: Although an association between 
sleep quality and delirium occurrence exists in critically ill 
adults, a cause-effect relationship has not been established.
An association between sleep quality and duration of 
mechanical ventilation, length of ICU stay, and ICU mortality 
in critically ill adults remains unclear.
The effects of sleep quality and circadian rhythm alterations 
on outcomes in critically ill patients after ICU discharge are 
unknown.
Rationale: A handful of studies help answer these ques-
tions (Supplemental Table 45, Supplemental Digital Content 
55, http://links.lww.com/CCM/D813). Poor sleep quality is 
often assumed to be a potentially modifiable risk factor for 
ICU delirium; several studies have evaluated this relationship. 
Critically ill adults who are severely sleep deprived are 30% 
more likely to have mental status changes (441). Subsequent 
polysomnography studies further supported this association 
(442, 451). Critically ill adults with severe REM deprivation 
(442, 451) and circadian sleep-cycle disruption (as evidenced 
by a greater proportion of daytime sleep) are more likely to 
experience delirium (451). Poor sleep quality has also been 
found to be an independent risk factor (496) for postcardiac 
surgery ICU delirium. Additionally, before-and-after observa-
tional studies of multidisciplinary bundles that include sleep 
enhancement protocols have been shown to decrease delirium 
prevalence (312, 454), although in only one study did sleep 
efficiency improve with the intervention (312). Although an 
association between sleep quality and delirium occurrence 
exists, it remains unknown if poor sleep is a cause for delirium.
Use of a multicomponent delirium prevention protocol that 
incorporated a nonpharmacologic sleep enhancement protocol 
TABLE 2. List of Factors That Patients Report as Disruptive to Sleep
Environmental
Physiologic and Pathophysiologic
Noise (447, 453, 454, 480, 483–488, 490, 491)
Pain (454, 483–486, 488, 490, 491)
Light (241, 453, 454, 480, 482–484, 486–488)
Discomfort (454, 483, 486, 488, 490)
Comfort of bed (483, 486–488)
Feeling too hot or too cold (484, 486, 488)
Activities at other bedsides (483, 486, 487)
Breathing difficulty (484, 491)
Visitors (clinician or family) (483)
Coughing (484, 491)
Room ventilation system (483)
Thirst (484, 486) and hunger (486, 488)
Hand washing by clinicians (483)
Nausea (484, 488)
Bad odor (486, 488)
Needing to use bedpan/urinal (486, 488)
Care Related
Psychologic
Nursing care (447, 453, 480, 482–484, 486, 488, 491)
Anxiety/worry/stress (483, 484, 486, 489–491)
Patient procedures (447, 453, 480, 482, 483, 487, 488)
Fear (485, 486, 489)
Vital sign measurement (442, 448, 475, 477, 481, 483)
Unfamiliar environment (485, 488, 491)
Diagnostic tests (447, 453, 480, 483)
Disorientation to time (454, 486)
Medication administration (447, 453, 480, 482)
Loneliness (488, 491)
Restricted mobility from lines/catheters (454, 486, 488)
Lack of privacy (485, 488)
Monitoring equipment (454, 486, 488)
Hospital attire (486, 488)
Oxygen mask (486, 488)
Missing bedtime routine (483)
Endotracheal tube (491)
Not knowing nurses’ names (486)
Urinary catheters (486)
Not understanding medical terms (486)
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Online Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
e855
was associated with shorter delirium duration and greater venti-
lator-free days (497). The relationship of sleep to these outcomes 
remains unclear as sleep was not measured in the study. Patients 
with abnormal sleep (increased daytime sleep; reduced REM) 
were more likely to fail NIV and require intubation and mechani-
cal ventilation (443). In a small study of patients with moderate/
severe TBI, better or improving rest-activity cycle consolidation 
(≥ 80% daytime activity) was associated with shorter ICU and 
hospital stays (498). Among patients where abnormal sleep was 
felt to be a cause of late NIV failure, ICU stays were longer and 
both ICU and hospital mortality rates were greater (443). One 
quality improvement study showed no difference in mortality 
with its use despite delirium’s being reduced (459). The presence 
of organized sleep patterns in patients with a recent TBI is pre-
dictive of improved survival (479). Although a number of stud-
ies have found that sleep remains disturbed after ICU discharge, 
no studies were found in the literature evaluating the effect of 
sleep in the ICU on outcomes after ICU discharge.
Evidence Gaps: Available studies cannot fully elucidate the 
relationship between sleep alterations in the critically ill and 
important outcomes such as delirium occurrence, duration of 
mechanical ventilation, ICU LOS, and mortality are inadequate 
to confirm whether an association exists between the sleep altera-
tions seen in the critically ill adults and important outcomes such 
as delirium occurrence, duration of mechanical ventilation, ICU 
LOS, and mortality. Poor sleep may adversely affect the immune 
system, glycemic control, and the psychologic well-being of oth-
erwise healthy individuals, so understanding if there are clinical 
effects on these and other outcomes in critically ill adults is of 
great importance. Studies that pair these outcomes with reliable 
measurement of sleep at the ICU bedside, while controlling for 
the multiple other factors that are associated with these out-
comes, are needed. Additionally, studies are needed to determine 
the effects of ICU sleep quality on post-ICU outcomes.
Monitoring
Question: Should physiologic monitoring be routinely used 
clinically to evaluate sleep in critically ill adults?
Recommendation: We suggest not routinely using physi-
ologic sleep monitoring clinically in critically ill adults (condi-
tional recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
Remarks: Physiologic monitoring refers to the use of actig-
raphy, bispectral analysis (BIS), electroencephalography, and 
polysomnography to determine if a patient is asleep or awake. It 
specifically does “not” include monitoring of patients’ perceived 
sleep by either validated assessment (e.g., the Richards Campbell 
Sleep Questionnaire) or informal subjective bedside assessment.
Rationale: None of the five critical outcomes chosen for 
this question (i.e., delirium occurrence, duration of mechani-
cal ventilation, ICU LOS, ICU mortality, and patient satisfac-
tion) have been studied. Observational studies have evaluated 
the role of physiologic sleep monitoring on other outcomes 
(Supplemental Table 46, Supplemental Digital Content 56, 
http://links.lww.com/CCM/D814). 
Physiologic 
monitor-
ing identified sleep-disordered breathing in patients with 
acute coronary syndromes (499, 500), but the impact of this 
evaluation was not determined. When motor activity (as mea-
sured by actigraphy) was compared with nurses’ sleep and seda-
tion assessments in a small series of mechanically ventilated 
adults (501), limb movements were found to correlate with 
the measured neurologic indices. The use of polysomnogra-
phy-derived electroencephalogram recordings of patients with 
nontraumatic (479) and traumatic (480) encephalopathy con-
cluded that the presence of recognized elements of sleep was 
associated with a favorable prognosis. Finally, three small stud-
ies found that polysomnography can be used to optimize the 
method of mechanical ventilatory support in ICU patients in 
acute respiratory failure (443, 502, 503). Despite these potential 
roles for polysomnography, its routine use in the ICU is not 
feasible.
The panel arrived at this recommendation based on the 
lack of high-quality evidence combined with the high cost 
of the resources necessary to implement most of the relevant 
technologies. Physiologic monitoring and interpretation have 
significant limitations as described above. Further, no studies 
investigated sleep monitoring in an unselected ICU popula-
tion, thus calling into question the generalizability of the avail-
able data.
Although routine physiologic sleep monitoring is not rec-
ommended, we emphasize that clinicians “should” routinely 
inquire about patients’ sleep or try to monitor it either by using 
one of the validated assessment tools such as the Richards 
Campbell Sleep Questionnaire or by informal bedside assess-
ment. The Richard-Campbell Sleep Questionnaire has been 
shown to be a valid and reliable tool in critically ill adults to 
evaluate a patient’s perception of their own sleep if they are 
both alert and oriented (504).
Poor sleep is considered to be one of the most common 
stresses experienced by critically ill patients (435, 437). Asking 
about patients’ sleep may serve to validate patients’ and their 
families’ concerns and is a necessary first step to approaching 
an intervention. Nurse-observed sleep (439, 448, 505, 506) 
overestimated TST when compared with polysomnography 
evaluation. When nurse and patient perceptions of sleep are 
compared, the nurse may sometimes overestimate patients’ 
perception of sleep quality (485, 492, 505, 507).
Evidence Gaps: How best to measure sleep in critically ill 
patients continues to be debated (476, 508). Routine moni-
toring of any brain activity in the ICU remains challenging. 
The problem of monitoring sleep is further complicated by the 
fact that the electrical activity of the brain alone (i.e., electro-
encephalogram) is insufficient to determine sleep stages, cir-
cadian activity, and sleep-disordered breathing. A simplified, 
generalizable system for monitoring sleep in the ICU that is 
resistant to the changing physiology of the critically ill patient 
and will stand up to regular use in the ICU setting would 
enhance our understanding of the relationship between sleep 
and ICU outcomes. In contrast to healthy individuals, critically 
ill patients have variation in vigilance states and electroenceph-
alogram patterns not only due to natural sleep/wake states but 
also from sedating medications and delirium. Whether sed-
ative-induced sleep provides the same restorative benefits as 
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Devlin et al
e856 
www.ccmjournal.org 
September 2018 • Volume 46 • Number 9
natural sleep is unknown. Large studies are needed to deter-
mine the best method of sleep measurement and classification 
and to measure how the individual factors (sleep, sedation, ill-
ness-induced encephalopathy) or a combination thereof affect 
patient outcomes, including patient satisfaction. The expense 
and time-consuming nature of polysomnography have made 
research of sleep measurement and sleep outcomes difficult. 
Other measurement techniques such as limited electroenceph-
alogram and processed electroencephalogram devices may 
provide valuable data, but studies comparing them to poly-
somnography are needed to validate these methods.
Nonpharmacologic Interventions to Improve Sleep
A description of the ventilation modes evaluated in this section 
question and the methods used to identify studies and sum-
marize data can be found in Supplemental Table 47 (Supple-
mental Digital Content 57, http://links.lww.com/CCM/D815).
Ventilator Mode. 
Question: Should assist-control ventilation be used at night 
(vs pressure support ventilation) to improve sleep in critically 
ill adults?
Recommendation: We suggest using assist-control ventila-
tion at night (vs pressure support ventilation) for improving 
sleep in critically ill adults (conditional recommendation, low 
quality of evidence).
Rationale: Many of the outcomes deemed critical or impor-
tant by the panel for this question were not evaluated or 
reported. Pooled estimates of three studies (n = 61) (469, 472, 
473) found that assist-control ventilation (vs pressure support 
ventilation) was associated with an increase in sleep efficiency 
(MD, 18.33%; 95% CI, 7.89–28.76; moderate quality). Although 
pooled estimates of two studies (472, 473) (n = 41) found that 
assist-control ventilation (vs pressure support ventilation) 
was not associated with a difference in the percentage of TST 
spent in stage 1 (MD, 0.31%; 95% CI, –5.17 to 5.79; low qual-
ity) or stage 2 (MD, 5.29%; 95% CI, –4.38 to 14.97; very low 
quality) sleep, it was associated with more time spent in REM 
sleep (MD, 2.79%; 95% CI, 0.53–5.05; low quality). Although 
the quality was deemed to be low, given the potential benefits of 
this intervention, its low risk and the fact that all ventilators have 
assist-control mode capability, a conditional recommendation 
for using assist-control mode ventilation at night to improve 
sleep was made. For those patients who remain dyssynchronous 
despite all efforts to optimize ventilator settings on assist-control 
mode, however, clinicians will have to make a case-by-case deci-
sion whether to return the patient to pressure support ventila-
tion or consider sedation, considering the deleterious effects of 
propofol and benzodiazepines on sleep quality and synchrony.
Question: Should an adaptive mode of ventilation be used 
at night (vs pressure support ventilation) to improve sleep in 
critically ill adults?
Recommendation: We make no recommendation regarding 
the use of an adaptive mode of ventilation at night (vs pressure 
support ventilation) for improving sleep in critically ill adults 
(no recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
Rationale: Five small randomized controlled crossover trials 
compared an adaptive mode of ventilation versus a pressure 
support mode in primarily medical critically ill adults, evalu-
ating outcomes the panel deemed important but none were 
deemed critical. The adaptive modes studied were as follows: 
automatically adjusted pressure support (473), proportional 
assist ventilation (462), proportional assist ventilation with 
load-adjustable gain factors (468, 471), and neutrally adjusted 
ventilator assist (465). Feasibility may also be a concern because 
some ICUs might not have ventilators or staff trained to deliver 
an adaptive ventilation mode. Based on these issues, and the 
reluctance to issue a recommendation based on this small, sin-
gle-center study due to feasibility/availability concerns in other 
centers, we were not able to make a recommendation regarding 
the use of adaptive ventilation at night.
NIV-Dedicated Ventilator. 
Question: Among critically ill adults requiring NIV, should 
an NIV-dedicated ventilator (vs a standard ICU ventilator with 
NIV capacity) be used to improve sleep?
Recommendation: We suggest using either an NIV-dedicated 
ventilator or a standard ICU ventilator for critically ill adults 
requiring NIV to improve sleep (conditional recommendation, 
very low quality of evidence).
Rationale: Only one small randomized trial was available 
to answer this question, and it did not evaluate most of the 
defined outcomes (454). No significant differences appeared 
between use of an NIV-dedicated ventilator and a standard ICU 
ventilator with respect to sleep efficiency; percent of time spent 
in stage 1, stage 2, stage 3/4, or REM sleep; or sleep fragmenta-
tion index. Compared with periods off NIV, sleep during NIV 
resulted in increased REM and stage 3/4 sleep with a reduc-
tion in sleep fragmentation index. Based on the above, patients 
with acute hypercapnic respiratory failure have improved sleep 
quality during NIV compared with without NIV, but we rec-
ommend that either type of ventilator, dependent on feasibility 
and convenience, is acceptable to use for ICU patients requir-
ing NIV.
Evidence Gaps: Studies comparing sleep between assisted 
breathing and controlled breathing in the assist-control and 
adaptive modes and the adaptive mode and assist-control 
ventilation modes have not been published. Studies used poly-
somnography to measure sleep on various modes, but none of 
these studies evaluated patients’ perception of their sleep.
Aromatherapy/Acupressure/Music
Question: Should aromatherapy, acupressure, or music be used 
at night (vs not using it) to improve sleep in critically ill adults?
Recommendation: We suggest not using aromatherapy, acu-
pressure, or music at night to improve sleep in critically ill adults 
(conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence [aroma-
therapy and acupressure]; very low quality of evidence [music]).
Rationale: Two small, unblinded RCTs (509, 510) evaluated 
the use of aromatherapy for improving sleep in conscious and 
communicative ICU patients. No adverse effects were reported, 
but a pooled analysis demonstrated no effect with its use (vs no 
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Online Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
e857
use) in patient-reported sleep quality (MD, 0.02 points; 95% 
CI, –0.36 to 0.41; low quality) and the overall quality of evi-
dence was low. Although a low-cost intervention that is gen-
erally considered safe, the lack of proven benefit for sleep in 
addition to some concern about using potential respiratory 
irritants in an ICU population led the panel to make a condi-
tional recommendation against aromatherapy in the ICU.
One small RCT (n = 85) (511) evaluated the use of acupres-
sure in ICU patients having a low severity of illness. Researchers 
who attended an acupressure training course applied pressure 
for 3 minutes to each of six acupoints between 7:00 pm and 
10:00 pm and found that acupressure (vs no use of acupressure) 
was associated with an increased duration of sleep when evalu-
ated by actigraphy (MD, 0.5 hr; 95% CI, 0.09–0.91; low quality) 
or the nurse (MD, 1.1 hr; 95% CI, 0.39–1.81; low quality) and 
less daytime sleepiness on the Stanford Sleepiness Scale (MD, 
0.4 points; 95% CI, 0.66–0.14; low quality). Given the high 
risk of bias for the single included study, the small number of 
patients enrolled, the cost of having a trained clinician pro-
vide acupressure, and the lack of availability of this modality at 
many centers, we decided to suggest against the use of acupres-
sure to improve sleep in critically ill adults. For those institu-
tions with trained personnel and expertise, however, it may be 
a reasonable intervention, especially if requested by patients.
One small RCT (n = 28) (512) evaluated the effect of play-
ing music on the piano (four sedating pieces lasting 45 min) on 
sleep outcomes (during first 2 hr of night) in critically ill adults. 
The music had a small effect on improving sleep quality (as 
evaluated by the Verran and Snyder-Halpern Sleep Scale) (MD, 
48 points; 95% CI, 34.5–130.5; very low quality) and sleep 
efficiency (as evaluated by polysomnography) (MD, 2.3%; 
95% CI, 27.3–32.0; very low quality). Given the low quality 
of evidence (no blinding, ambient noise not controlled) and 
the resources needed to institute this intervention, the panel 
made a conditional recommendation against the use of music 
to improve sleep in critically ill adults. Music may play a role in 
reducing pain (see pain section) and anxiety in the ICU (133). 
If patients (or their families) request it, it should be considered.
Noise and Light Reduction
Question: Should noise and light reduction strategies (vs not 
using these strategies) be used at night to improve sleep in 
critically ill adults?
Recommendation: We suggest using noise and light reduc-
tion strategies to improve sleep in critically ill adults (condi-
tional recommendation, low quality of evidence).
Rationale: Two RCTs (458, 513) and two observational 
studies (514, 515) evaluated strategies to reduce ICU noise and 
light at night through the use of earplugs with or without the 
use of eyeshades. Use of earplugs and eyeshades (vs control) on 
the first postoperative ICU night after cardiac surgery main-
tained sleep quality at the preoperative level (513). Application 
of earplugs (vs no earplugs) to nonsedated, critically ill adults 
improved patient-reported sleep quality and reduced delirium 
(458). Pooled analysis from the two ICU observational studies 
(n = 164) found that application of ear plugs (vs no ear plugs) 
was associated with a greater proportion of achieving greater 
than 4 hours of sleep (RR, 1.2; 95% CI, 0.64–2.24; low qual-
ity) (513, 515). The overall quality of evidence was low due 
to a lack of blinding, a population of patients not severely ill, 
and the refusal of some patients to keep the earplugs inserted. 
Earplugs, with or without eyeshades, represent a low-cost 
intervention that can be applied in all ICUs to improve sleep 
quality and reduce delirium. In general patients, particularly 
those who cannot initiate sleep, should be asked if they want 
this intervention and earplugs should always be removed in the 
morning.
Evidence Gaps: Nonpharmacologic strategies focused on 
improving sleep in the ICU need to be evaluated in large ran-
domized trials, include ICU patients with higher severity of ill-
ness, and rigorously evaluate the effect of these interventions 
on sleep quality. The group of patients in the ICU who may 
gain the most benefit from these interventions needs to be 
elucidated.
Pharmacologic Interventions to Improve Sleep
Given the challenges of promoting naturally occurring sleep in 
the ICU, patients and their family members may ask for sleep-
enhancing medication. Although their request should always 
be considered, this pressure and our efforts to provide com-
passionate care sometimes lead to the administration of med-
ications that are poorly tested for safety and efficacy in ICU 
patients and that may increase the risk for polypharmacy and 
delirium rather than actually promote sleep. Pharmacologic 
interventions were considered by drug type/class and were 
reviewed by the panel solely for their effect on sleep promotion.
Question: Should a sleep-promoting medication (i.e., mela-
tonin, dexmedetomidine, or propofol) (vs no use of a medica-
tion) be used to improve sleep in critically ill adults?
Melatonin. 
Recommendation: We make no recommendation regarding 
the use of melatonin to improve sleep in critically ill adults (no 
recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
Rationale: Three small, placebo-controlled, randomized 
trials (n = 60) evaluating the night-time administration of 
melatonin were reviewed. The first found that the administra-
tion of 10 mg of melatonin at night (vs placebo) to 12 patients 
in the ICU having chronic respiratory failure was associated 
with nonsignificant improvements in both sleep quality and 
quantity (as evaluated by BIS) (516). A second RCT that eval-
uated night-time melatonin 3 mg (or placebo) in 16 patients 
in a similar population and evaluated sleep using actigra-
phy arrived at a similar conclusion (517). A third RCT that 
compared melatonin 3 mg (or placebo) to 32 patients who 
also were admitted to the ICU with chronic respiratory fail-
ure as the first two studies found no discernible difference in 
the duration of “observed nocturnal sleep” by bedside nurse 
assessment (518). The limitations of evaluating sleep in the 
ICU using BIS, actigraphy, or subjective nursing scales rather 
than polysomnography are highlighted previously in the 
guidelines.
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Devlin et al
e858 
www.ccmjournal.org 
September 2018 • Volume 46 • Number 9
The manufacture of melatonin in the United States is not 
Food and Drug Administration regulated; concerns as to the 
quality and consistency of the product (519) have prevented 
many hospitals from adding it to their formulary. Melatonin 
is, however, associated with relatively few adverse effects (e.g., 
mild sedation and headache) and inexpensive. The panel 
decided on no recommendation due to the perceived balance 
between desirable and undesirable outcomes and the lack of 
high-quality evidence.
Ramelteon, an FDA-approved melatonin receptor agonist, 
was evaluated in a single study (not included in this analysis) 
to prevent delirium in the elderly (520). A small number of 
patients in that study were critically ill; however, there was no 
demonstrable improvement in subjective sleep quality. Similar 
to melatonin, few adverse events are reported with the medica-
tion, but sleep promotion was not proven and the cost is higher 
than that of melatonin. One recent single-center, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled RCT, also not included in this analysis, 
found that the administration of 8 mg of ramelteon at 20:00 
hours each day to critically ill adults without delirium was asso-
ciated with significant reduction in delirium occurrence (521).
Dexmedetomidine. 
Recommendation: We make no recommendation regarding 
the use of dexmedetomidine at night to improve sleep (no rec-
ommendation, low quality of evidence).
Rationale: Two randomized trials (n = 74) evaluated the 
effects of dexmedetomidine in critically ill, mechanically ven-
tilated adults requiring sedation (470) and in critically ill, non-
mechanically ventilated patients not requiring a continuous 
infusion of a sedative medication (521). Both studies demon-
strated that dexmedetomidine increased stage 2 sleep (MD, 
47.85% min; 95% CI, 24.05–71.64; moderate quality) and 
decreased in stage 1 sleep (MD, –30.37%; 95% CI, –50.01 to 
–10.73; moderate quality), each of which the panel considered 
favorable outcomes (470, 521). Neither study, however, demon-
strated a decrease in sleep fragmentation or an increase in deep 
sleep or REM sleep that are thought to be the most restorative 
sleep stages and thus potentially most important to recovery. 
A third, observational trial, not included in this analysis, cor-
roborated these findings with regard to sleep architecture and 
noted preserved day-night cycling when dexmedetomidine 
was administered overnight in mechanically ventilated ICU 
patients (522). One recently published double-blind, placebo-
controlled RCT of 100 delirium-free critically ill adults receiv-
ing sedatives, and not included in the evidence profile, found 
that the administration of low-dose dexmedetomidine did not 
change Leeds Sleep Evaluation Questionnaire scores between 
the dexmedetomidine and placebo groups (370).
Consideration was given to a conditional recommendation 
in favor of using dexmedetomidine at night for the sole pur-
pose of sleep promotion; however, clinical concerns include its 
high cost, hemodynamic side effects, and generalizability of the 
existing studies. If a sedative infusion is indicated for a hemody-
namically stable, critically ill adult overnight, dexmedetomidine 
may be a reasonable option because of its potential to improve 
sleep architecture (523). See the sedation section for a more in-
depth evaluation of sedative choice in critically ill adults.
Propofol. 
Recommendation: We suggest not using propofol to improve 
sleep in critically ill adults (conditional recommendation, low 
quality of evidence).
Rationale: Two RCTs compared propofol with benzodiaz-
epines (454, 524), and one compared propofol with placebo 
(525). No demonstrable improvement in sleep occurred with 
propofol compared with placebo. Further, propofol was asso-
ciated with REM suppression, hemodynamic side effects, and 
respiratory depression sometimes necessitating mechanical 
ventilation. Although we recommend against using propofol 
for the sole purpose of improving sleep in the critically ill, this 
recommendation does not intend to address its use in patients 
requiring procedural or continuous sedation.
Other medications administered with the intent to improve 
sleep in the critically ill include tricyclic antidepressants, atypi-
cal antipsychotics, and hypnotics such as benzodiazepines and 
benzodiazepine-receptor agonists. Currently, there is insuf-
ficient information to consider a recommendation for any of 
medications to help promote sleep in the critically ill. Although 
their adverse effects are well described, their benefits in terms 
of sleep promotion are unknown.
Evidence Gaps: Large, well-controlled trials of medications 
administered at night for the sole purpose of sleep promo-
tion in critically ill patients are lacking. This is especially 
true for medications such as tricyclic antidepressants and 
atypical antipsychotics that are frequently used for this pur-
pose because they are less likely to precipitate an episode of 
delirium, have fewer hemodynamic and respiratory depres-
sant effects, and because their sedating side effects suggest the 
possibility of sleep promotion. These medications, however, 
should be rigorously studied to assess their efficacy in this 
population to determine if the benefits justify their potential 
harms.
Sleep-Promoting Protocol
Question: Should a sleep-promoting protocol be used to 
improve sleep in critically ill adults?
Recommendation: We suggest using a sleep-promoting, 
multicomponent protocol in critically ill adults (conditional 
recommendation, very low quality of evidence.)
Rationale: Protocols are a common way to incorporate 
multiple interventions at once into a clinical practice guide-
line (526), including those described below for sleep quality 
improvement in critically ill patients. The sleep-promoting 
protocols eligible for inclusion varied in their components, as 
described below (459, 527–529). All included offering earplugs 
and eyeshades to patients who could choose to use them or to 
discontinue their use if they wished and two also included use 
of relaxing music (459, 526). Among the two composed of a 
more complex combination of interventions, one specified a 
pharmacologic guideline that discouraged the use of sedating 
medications known to alter sleep and/or precipitate delirium 
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Online Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
e859
and introduced interventions in stages over a 5-month period 
(459). In all studies, protocols were applied to all ICU patients 
and did not target a subset of patients known to have poor 
sleep quality.
The critical outcomes examined were sleep stages, sleep 
duration, sleep fragmentation, circadian rhythm, delirium, 
duration of mechanical ventilation, mortality, LOS (ICU 
and hospital), and patient experience. Current published 
data contain four studies reporting outcomes relevant to 
this question, one RCT (527), and three observational stud-
ies (459, 528, 529) (Supplemental Table 48 Supplemental 
Digital Content 58, http://links.lww.com/CCM/D816). One 
small RCT in open-heart surgery patients demonstrated 
that earplugs, eyeshades, and relaxing music improved self-
reported sleep quality (528). Among the three observational 
before-and-after studies, one found an improvement in sleep 
in a mixed ICU population (529), whereas the other two did 
not (459, 528). Pooled analysis of the three studies demon-
strated an overall reduction in the prevalence of delirium 
with a sleep-promoting protocol (RR, 0.62; 95% CI, 0.42–
0.91; very low quality). One of the observational studies 
used a similar intervention to Hu et al (527), earplugs, eye 
shades, and music, whereas the other two tested more com-
plex interventions including these interventions plus envi-
ronmental changes, namely clustering of care to minimize 
interruptions overnight and early mobilization (459, 529). 
One study also specifically included pharmacologic guide-
lines, administering zolpidem to patients without delirium 
and haloperidol or an atypical antipsychotic for patients 
with delirium (459). In an effort to minimize the influ-
ence of medications on outcomes, Patel et al (529) excluded 
patients who had received sedatives in the 24 hours before 
enrollment. Which of the interventions, or which combina-
tions of the interventions, are effective in improving sleep 
and reducing delirium cannot be discerned from the above 
studies. Overall evidence was low or very low quality due to 
risk of confounding, imprecision, and the potential for risk 
of bias in the included studies. The panel made a conditional 
recommendation based on the potential for benefit (e.g., 
delirium reduction) and minimal anticipated harm. The 
panel recognized, however, that implementing and sustain-
ing multifaceted clinical practice protocols can be resource 
intensive (530).
Evidence Gaps: Future research should investigate which of 
the interventions, or which combinations of the interventions, 
are effective in improving sleep and reducing delirium. The 
effect on reduction in delirium in the reviewed studies but less 
demonstrable on sleep quality is notable, reinforcing that more 
work on the assessment of sleep in critically ill adults is needed, 
as recommended above. Although many thousands of publica-
tions on the science of implementing evidenced-based clinical 
practice guidelines exist, relatively few address improving sleep 
in critically ill adult patients; this specific topic would benefit 
from further investigation. Mortality, ICU LOS, and dura-
tion of mechanical ventilation were reported in the reviewed 
studies, but numbers were too small to draw any conclusions. 
These, as well as patient experience and patient-centered 
mid- to long-term outcomes such as sleep quality, psychologic 
health, and quality of life determinants such as autonomous 
living remain unexplored.
Concluding Comments on Sleep: Studies to date are consis-
tent in demonstrating that critically ill patients sleep poorly as 
a result of both patient and ICU factors. The importance of 
improving sleep in this population may be unproven by RCT 
but is intuitive and, at least, could be considered an important 
comfort measure that would improve patients’ ICU quality of 
life if not other outcomes. Although only a select few interven-
tion studies have been published, available data suggest that 
a multicomponent protocolized approach to improving sleep 
that favors nonpharmacologic measures may offer our patients 
their best chance for a better night’s sleep. Future research 
needs to focus on improved methods for measuring sleep and 
on implementing interventions targeting patient-centered 
outcomes. Sleep habits are highly variable among healthy indi-
viduals; therefore, a more individualized approach should be 
considered.
SUMMARY
Thousands of hours were invested by these guidelines’ authors, 
who were in turn supported by formal and informal collab-
orators, over the 3.5 years it took to produce this effort. As 
experts mandated by the Society of Critical Care Medicine, 
we aimed to provide the recent information clinicians need 
to better care for critically ill adults (531, 532) using the most 
rigorous and transparent processes at our disposition. Because 
such process does not necessarily ensure acceptability among 
knowledge providers and users (533), we established ways in 
which to address relevant and patient-centered pain, sedation, 
delirium, immobility, and sleep practice-related questions. The 
diversity of our experts (534), representing many professions 
on three continents, generated vigorous discussions as to clini-
cal approaches and care aspects that differed by geographical 
availability (of medication interventions, for instance) and by 
institutional culture. Because we did not limit our reviews to 
English language publications, the evidence gathered to sup-
port our recommendations represents literature from around 
the world.
The recommendation rationales, fueled by debate and dis-
cussion, circled back to the bedside experience—and the per-
spective of what was best for patients—held by all panelists 
and methodology experts. In sections added to these guidelines 
since their last 2013 version (1) (rehabilitation/mobility and 
sleep), we sought to clarify conceptual definitions within these 
relatively new critical care research domains. We wanted to 
make them accessible to facilitate incorporating them into the 
complex patient management reasoning any critical care clini-
cian might consider. We challenged common practices such as 
administering antipsychotics to delirious patients. We invited 
clinicians to expand the proposed interventions in comparison 
to the 2013 guidelines (1); one example is the consideration 
of multiple pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic coanalgesic 
approaches to the ICU patient. When the published evidence 
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Devlin et al
e860 
www.ccmjournal.org 
September 2018 • Volume 46 • Number 9
was insufficient, limited to a narrow population or specific 
intervention (e.g., for procedural analgesia), or outright absent 
to answer the questions we posed, we structured evidence gap 
descriptors to inform clinicians where the uncertainty lay, 
and intended to provide sufficient information to apprise and 
invite researchers to address these gaps.
We are mindful of the limitations inherent to our work. 
“Good evidence” requirements for randomized trials involv-
ing many patients have its caveats; practice misalignment 
(535) and diagnostic confounders (312) were, to the extent 
it was possible, considered, but “unknown” factors with the 
potential to influence evidence likely exist. One example is 
the recent introduction of stratification by frailty (536) in 
trials involving the critically ill, which could not be con-
sidered because this comorbidity had not been taken into 
account in much of the literature justifying our recom-
mendations. Another is the fact that although all patients 
were admitted to an ICU, both the reasons leading to their 
ICU admission and severity of illness varied considerably, 
warranting individual tailoring of our recommendations to 
individual patient considerations. A degree of uncertainty is 
as inherent to clinical practice as it is to the research process 
and its resulting conclusions (537). The quest to make our 
decision making and iterative innovations transparent and 
accessible motivated the methods article that was prepared 
separately from this guideline initiative (13).
Finally, the development of guidelines like these does not 
ensure their use (538). Some educational programs and the 
provision of feedback in relationship to attaining analgesia 
and sedation-targeted performance goals have been disap-
pointingly ineffective when studied prospectively (3, 4). We 
consider the effectiveness and limitations of different dissem-
ination methods and approaches germane to this guideline’s 
topics in a separate publication as a tool to inform educa-
tional programming and quality improvement initiatives that 
will evolve from this guideline (2). In addition to bridging 
the gap between the knowledge we gathered and its applica-
tion, we believe that this will provide tangible support to cli-
nicians, stakeholders, and decision makers in implementing 
quality in pain, agitation, delirium, early mobility, and sleep 
and further foster the application of what we understand to 
be useful in the provision and delivery of excellent care.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge the many direct and indirect contributors to 
this effort: Margaret McIvor, an ICU survivor whose contri-
bution was limited by subsequent illness; students, trainees, 
and colleagues (Julie C. Reid, PT, MSc; Anastasia Newman, PT, 
MSc; David J. Gagnon, PharmD; Lauren E. Payne, PharmD; 
Nicole Kovacic, PharmD; Kimia Honarmand, MD, MSc; 
Jamie Le, MD; Sindu Mohan, MD; Peter J. Hurh, MD; Justin 
D. Dumont, DO, MS; M. Farhan Nasser, MD; Venkat R. Venna, 
MD; Aparna Nallagangula, MBBS; Kimberly J. Terry, PharmD; 
and Jeremy R. DeGrado, PharmD) helped with abstract and 
full-text screening, supervised by several of the authors; 
Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and 
Evaluation group members (Fayez Alshamsi, MD) who pro-
vided help with data analyses; Charlie Kishman, MSL, who 
initiated the literature searches as a continuation of his con-
tribution to the 2013 PAD guidelines; Matt Duprey, PharmD, 
for his valuable support at the 2017 Hawaii meeting; Lori 
Harmon and Sylvia Quintanilla who provided direction and 
organizational infrastructure; and Deb McBride copywrote 
and edited the final article. The panel coauthors’ effort would 
not have been possible without the explicit and implicit sup-
port of colleagues, families, and friends. The time committed 
to the Pain, Agitation/sedation, Delirium, Immobility (reha-
bilitation/ mobilization), and Sleep (disruption) initiative 
had to be weighed against availability to attend personal and 
professional challenges. We wish to acknowledge all those 
who shouldered other responsibilities, indirectly facilitating 
the creation and writing of these guidelines. Finally, we wish 
to thank the patients, teachers, and colleagues who inspired 
this effort and who challenged us to honor, and rise to the 
challenge of, this academic effort.
The Society of Critical Care Medicine’s ICU Liberation ini-
tiative is dedicated to providing resources and implementation 
tools related to the prevention and management of pain, agi-
tation, delirium, and immobility. Please visit the ICU Libera-
tion Campaign website (http://www.iculiberation.org/About/
Pages/default.aspx) for additional information.
REFERENCES
 1. Barr J, Fraser GL, Puntillo K, et al; American College of Critical Care 
Medicine: Clinical practice guidelines for the management of pain, 
agitation, and delirium in adult patients in the intensive care unit. Crit 
Care Med 2013; 41:263–306
 2. Balas MC, Weinhouse GL, Denehy L, et al: Interpreting and imple-
menting the 2018 Pain, Agitation/Sedation, Delirium, Immobility, and 
Sleep Disruption Clinical Practice Guideline. Crit Care Med 2018; 
46:1464–1470
 3. Walsh TS, Kydonaki K, Antonelli J, et al; Development and Evaluation 
of Strategies to Improve Sedation Practice in Intensive Care (DESIST) 
Study Investigators: Staff education, regular sedation and analgesia qual-
ity feedback, and a sedation monitoring technology for improving seda-
tion and analgesia quality for critically ill, mechanically ventilated patients: 
A cluster randomised trial. Lancet Respir Med 2016; 4:807–817
 4. Khan BA, Fadel WF, Tricker JL, et al: Effectiveness of implementing 
a wake up and breathe program on sedation and delirium in the ICU. 
Crit Care Med 2014; 42:e791–e795
 5. Skrobik Y, Ahern S, Leblanc M, et al: Protocolized intensive care 
unit management of analgesia, sedation, and delirium improves 
analgesia and subsyndromal delirium rates. Anesth Analg 2010; 
111:451–463
 6. Kamdar BB, Yang J, King LM, et al: Developing, implementing, and 
evaluating a multifaceted quality improvement intervention to promote 
sleep in an ICU. Am J Med Qual 2014; 29:546–554
 7. Balas MC, Burke WJ, Gannon D, et al: Implementing the awakening 
and breathing coordination, delirium monitoring/management, and 
early exercise/mobility bundle into everyday care: Opportunities, chal-
lenges, and lessons learned for implementing the ICU Pain, Agitation, 
and Delirium Guidelines. Crit Care Med 2013; 41:S116–S127
 8. Hoyer EH, Friedman M, Lavezza A, et al: Promoting mobility and 
reducing length of stay in hospitalized general medicine patients: A 
quality-improvement project. J Hosp Med 2016; 11:341–347
 9. Barnes-Daly MA, Phillips G, Ely EW: Improving hospital survival and 
reducing brain dysfunction at seven California community hospitals: 
Implementing PAD guidelines via the ABCDEF bundle in 6,064 
patients. Crit Care Med 2017; 45:171–178
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Online Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
e861
 
10. Selva A, Sanabria AJ, Pequeño S, et al: Incorporating patients’ views 
in guideline development: A systematic review of guidance docu-
ments. J Clin Epidemiol 2017; 88:102–112
 
11. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, et al; GRADE Working Group: 
GRADE: An emerging consensus on rating quality of evidence and 
strength of recommendations. BMJ 2008; 336:924–926
 
12. Alonso-Coello P, Oxman AD, Moberg J, et al; GRADE Working Group: 
GRADE Evidence to Decision (EtD) frameworks: A systematic and 
transparent approach to making well informed healthcare choices. 2: 
Clinical practice guidelines. BMJ 2016; 353:i2089
 
13. Devlin JW. Skrobik Y, Rochwerg B, et al: Methodological Innovation 
in Creating Clinical Practice Guidelines: Insights From the 2018 
Society of Critical Care Medicine Pain, Agitation/Sedation, Delirium, 
Immobility, and Sleep Disruption Guideline Effort. Crit Care Med 
2018; 46:1457–1463
 
14. The Joint Commission: New and revised standards related to pain 
assessment and management. 2017. Available at: https://www.
jointcommission.org/assets/1/18/Joint_Commission_Enhances_
Pain_Assessment_and_Management_Requirements_for_Accred-
ited_Hospitals1.PDF. Assessed January 5, 2018
 
15. Chanques G, Sebbane M, Barbotte E, et al: A prospective study of 
pain at rest: Incidence and characteristics of an unrecognized symp-
tom in surgical and trauma versus medical intensive care unit patients. 
Anesthesiology 2007; 107:858–860
 
16. Puntillo KA, Max A, Timsit JF, et al: Determinants of procedural pain 
intensity in the intensive care unit. The Europain® study. Am J Respir 
Crit Care Med 2014; 189:39–47
 17. Loeser JD, Treede RD: The Kyoto protocol of IASP basic pain termi-
nology. Pain 2008; 137:473–477
 
18. McCaffery M, Alexander Beebe A: Pain: Clinical Manual for Nursing 
Practice. St. Louis, Mosby, 1994
 
19. Merskey H, Bogduk N; Task Force on Taxonomy of the International 
Association for the Study of Pain: Classification of Chronic Pain: 
Descriptions of Chronic Pain Syndromes and Definitions of Pain 
Terms. Seattle, WA, IASP Press, 1994
 
20. Vervest AC, Schimmel GH: Taxonomy of pain of the IASP. Pain 1988; 
34:318–321
 
21. de Jong A, Molinari N, de Lattre S, et al: Decreasing severe pain and 
serious adverse events while moving intensive care unit patients: A 
prospective interventional study (the NURSE-DO project). Crit Care 
2013; 17:R74
 
22. Georgiou E, Hadjibalassi M, Lambrinou E, et al: The impact of pain 
assessment on critically ill patients’ outcomes: A systematic review. 
Biomed Res Int 2015; 2015:503830
 
23. Puntillo KA, Naidu R: Chronic pain disorders after critical illness and 
ICU-acquired opioid dependence: Two clinical conundra. Curr Opin 
Crit Care 2016; 22:506–512
 
24. Macintyre PE, Huxtable CA, Flint SL, et al: Costs and consequences: 
A review of discharge opioid prescribing for ongoing management of 
acute pain. Anaesth Intensive Care 2014; 42:558–574
 
25. Yi P, Pryzbylkowski P: Opioid induced hyperalgesia. Pain Med 2015; 
16(Suppl 1):S32–S36
 
26. Carroll KC, Atkins PJ, Herold GR, et al: Pain assessment and man-
agement in critically ill postoperative and trauma patients: A multisite 
study. Am J Crit Care 1999; 8:105–117
 27
. Puntillo K, Weiss SJ: Pain: Its mediators and associated morbidity in 
critically ill cardiovascular surgical patients. Nurs Res 1994; 43:31–
36
 
28. Al Sutari MM, Abdalrahim MS, Hamdan-Mansour AM, et al: Pain 
among mechanically ventilated patients in critical care units. J Res 
Med Sci 2014; 19:726–732
 
29. Navarro-García MA, Marín-Fernández B, de Carlos-Alegre V, et al: 
Preoperative mood disorders in patients undergoing cardiac surgery: 
Risk factors and postoperative morbidity in the intensive care unit. 
Rev Esp Cardiol (English Edition) 2011; 64:1005–1010
 
30. Desbiens NA, Wu AW, Broste SK, et al: Pain and satisfaction with 
pain control in seriously ill hospitalized adults: Findings from the 
SUPPORT research investigations. For the SUPPORT investigators. 
Study to understand prognoses and preferences for outcomes and 
risks of treatment. Crit Care Med 1996; 24:1953–1961
 
31. Arbour C, Choinière M, Topolovec-Vranic J, et al: Detecting pain in 
traumatic brain injured patients exposed to common procedures in 
the ICU: Typical or atypical behaviors. Clin J Pain 2014; 30:960–
969
 
32. Puntillo KA, Morris AB, Thompson CL, et al: Pain behaviors observed 
during six common procedures: Results from Thunder Project II. Crit 
Care Med 2004; 32:421–427
 
33. Faigeles B, Howie-Esquivel J, Miaskowski C, et al: Predictors and 
use of nonpharmacologic interventions for procedural pain associ-
ated with turning among hospitalized adults. Pain Manag Nurs 2013; 
14:85–93
 
34. Stotts NA, Puntillo K, Bonham Morris A, et al: Wound care pain in 
hospitalized adult patients. Heart Lung 2004; 33:321–332
 
35. Stotts NA, Puntillo K, Stanik-Hutt J, et al: Does age make a difference 
in procedural pain perceptions and responses in hospitalized adults? 
Acute Pain 2007; 9:125–134
 
36. Stanik-Hutt JA, Soeken KL, Belcher AE, et al: Pain experiences of 
traumatically injured patients in a critical care setting. Am J Crit Care 
2001; 10:252–259
 37. Arroyo-Novoa CM, Figueroa-Ramos MI, Puntillo KA, et al: Pain 
related to tracheal suctioning in awake acutely and critically 
ill adults: A descriptive study. Intensive Crit Care Nurs 2008; 
24:20–27
 
38. Puntillo K, Gélinas C, Chanques G: Next steps in ICU pain research. 
Intensive Care Med 2017; 43:1386–1388
 
39. Chanques G, Viel E, Constantin JM, et al: The measurement of pain in 
intensive care unit: Comparison of 5 self-report intensity scales. Pain 
2010; 151:711–721
 
40. Gélinas C: Management of pain in cardiac surgery ICU patients: 
Have we improved over time? Intensive Crit Care Nurs 2007; 
23:298–303
 
41. Rahu MA, Grap MJ, Ferguson P, et al: Validity and sensitivity of 6 
pain scales in critically ill, intubated adults. Am J Crit Care 2015; 
24:514–523
 
42. Karahan A, Ersayın A, Yıldırım F, et al: Comparison of three rating 
scales for assessing pain intensity in an intensive care unit. Turk J 
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2012; 20:50–55
 
43. Gélinas C: The Faces Pain Thermometer: A new tool for critically ill 
adults. Perspect Infirm 2007; 4:12–20
 
44. Gélinas C, Klein K, Naidech AM, et al: Pain, sedation, and delirium 
management in the neurocritically ill: Lessons learned from recent 
research. Semin Respir Crit Care Med 2013; 34:236–243
 
45. Terai T, Yukioka H, Asada A: Pain evaluation in the intensive care unit: 
Observer-reported faces scale compared with self-reported Visual 
Analog Scale. Reg Anesth Pain Med 1998; 23:147–151
 
46. Rahu MA, Grap MJ, Cohn JF, et al: Facial expression as an indicator 
of pain in critically ill intubated adults during endotracheal suctioning. 
Am J Crit Care 2013; 22:412–422
 47. Paulson-Conger M, Leske J, Maidl C, et al: Comparison of two pain 
assessment tools in nonverbal critical care patients. Pain Manag Nurs 
2011; 12:218–224
 
48. Gélinas C, Puntillo KA, Levin P, et al: The Behavior Pain Assessment 
Tool for critically ill adults: A validation study in 28 countries. Pain 
2017; 158:811–821
 
49. Gélinas C, Arbour C, Michaud C, et al: Patients and ICU nurses’ per-
spectives of non-pharmacological interventions for pain management. 
Nurs Crit Care 2013; 18:307–318
 
50. Dehghani H, Tavangar H, Ghandehari A: Validity and reliability of 
Behavioral Pain Scale in patients with low level of consciousness due 
to head trauma hospitalized in intensive care unit. Arch Trauma Res 
2014; 3:e18608
 
51. Yu A, Teitelbaum J, Scott J, et al: Evaluating pain, sedation, and 
delirium in the neurologically critically ill-feasibility and reliability of 
standardized tools: A multi-institutional study. Crit Care Med 2013; 
41:2002–2007
 
52. Echegaray-Benites C, Kapoustina O, Gélinas C: Validation of the use 
of the Critical-Care Pain Observation Tool (CPOT) with brain surgery 
patients in the neurosurgical intensive care unit. Intensive Crit Care 
Nurs 2014; 30:257–265
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Devlin et al
e862 
www.ccmjournal.org 
September 2018 • Volume 46 • Number 9
 
53. Joffe AM, McNulty B, Boitor M, et al: Validation of the Critical-Care 
Pain Observation Tool in brain-injured critically ill adults. J Crit Care 
2016; 36:76–80
 
54. Lee J, Jung J, Noh JS, et al: Perioperative psycho-educational inter-
vention can reduce postoperative delirium in patients after cardiac 
surgery: A pilot study. Int J Psychiatry Med 2013; 45:143–158
 
55. Li Q, Wan X, Gu C, et al: Pain assessment using the Critical-Care 
Pain Observation Tool in Chinese critically ill ventilated adults. J Pain 
Symptom Manage 2014; 48:975–982
 
56. Kwak EM, Oh H: Validation of a Korean translated version of the Criti-
cal Care Pain Observation Tool (CPOT) for ICU patients. J Korean 
Acad Nurs 2012; 42:76–84
 57. Vázquez M, Pardavila MI, Lucia M, et al: Pain assessment in turning 
procedures for patients with invasive mechanical ventilation. Nurs Crit 
Care 2011; 16:178–185
 
58. Nürnberg Damström D, Saboonchi F, Sackey PV, et al: A preliminary 
validation of the Swedish version of the Critical-Care Pain Observa-
tion Tool in adults. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2011; 55:379–386
 
59. Liu Y, Li L, Herr K: Evaluation of two observational pain assessment 
tools in Chinese critically ill patients. Pain Med 2015; 16:1622–1628
 
60. Puntillo KA, Neuhaus J, Arai S, et al: Challenge of assessing symp-
toms in seriously ill intensive care unit patients: Can proxy reporters 
help? Crit Care Med 2012; 40:2760–2767
 
61. Bae KH, Jeong IS: Pain perception of nurses and pain expression of 
patients in critical care units. J Korean Acad Nurs 2014; 44:437–445
 
62. Desbiens NA, Mueller-Rizner N: How well do surrogates assess the 
pain of seriously ill patients? Crit Care Med 2000; 28:1347–1352
 
63. Aïssaoui Y, Zeggwagh AA, Zekraoui A, et al: Validation of a Behav-
ioral Pain Scale in critically ill, sedated, and mechanically ventilated 
patients. Anesth Analg 2005; 101:1470–1476
 
64. Arbour C, Gélinas C: Are vital signs valid indicators for the assess-
ment of pain in postoperative cardiac surgery ICU adults? Intensive 
Crit Care Nurs 2010; 26:83–90
 
65. Boitor M, Martorella G, Arbour C, et al: Evaluation of the preliminary 
effectiveness of hand massage therapy on postoperative pain of 
adults in the intensive care unit after cardiac surgery: A pilot random-
ized controlled trial. Pain Manag Nurs 2015; 16:354–366
 
66. Chanques G, Payen JF, Mercier G, et al: Assessing pain in non-intu-
bated critically ill patients unable to self report: An adaptation of the 
Behavioral Pain Scale. Intensive Care Med 2009; 35:2060–2067
 67. Chen HJ, Chen YM: Pain assessment: Validation of the physiologic 
indicators in the ventilated adult patient. Pain Manag Nurs 2015; 
16:105–111
 68. Gélinas C, Arbour C: Behavioral and physiologic indicators during a noci-
ceptive procedure in conscious and unconscious mechanically ventilated 
adults: Similar or different? J Crit Care 2009; 24:628.e7–628.e17
 
69. Gélinas C, Johnston C: Pain assessment in the critically ill ventilated 
adult: Validation of the Critical-Care Pain Observation Tool and physi-
ologic indicators. Clin J Pain 2007; 23:497–505
 70. Kapoustina O, Echegaray-Benites C, Gélinas C: Fluctuations in vital 
signs and behavioural responses of brain surgery patients in the inten-
sive care unit: Are they valid indicators of pain? J Adv Nurs 2014; 
70:2562–2576
 
71. Payen JF, Bru O, Bosson JL, et al: Assessing pain in critically ill 
sedated patients by using a Behavioral Pain Scale. Crit Care Med 
2001; 29:2258–2263
 72. Siffleet J, Young J, Nikoletti S, et al: Patients’ self-report of procedural 
pain in the intensive care unit. J Clin Nurs 2007; 16:2142–2148
 73. Young J, Siffleet J, Nikoletti S, et al: Use of a Behavioural Pain Scale 
to assess pain in ventilated, unconscious and/or sedated patients. 
Intensive Crit Care Nurs 2006; 22:32–39
 74. Arbour C, Choinière M, Topolovec-Vranic J, et al: Can fluctuations in 
vital signs be used for pain assessment in critically ill patients with a 
traumatic brain injury? Pain Res Treat 2014; 2014:175794
 
75. Hadjistavropoulos T, Craig KD: A theoretical framework for under-
standing self-report and observational measures of pain: A communi-
cations model. Behav Res Ther 2002; 40:551–570
 76. Broucqsault-Dédrie C, De Jonckheere J, Jeanne M, et al: Measurement 
of heart rate variability to assess pain in sedated critically ill patients: A 
prospective observational study. PLoS One 2016; 11:e0147720
 77. Chanques G, Tarri T, Ride A, et al: Analgesia nociception index for 
the assessment of pain in critically ill patients: A diagnostic accuracy 
study. Br J Anaesth 2017; 119:812–820
 78. Ben-Israel N, Kliger M, Zuckerman G, et al: Monitoring the nocicep-
tion level: A multi-parameter approach. J Clin Monit Comput 2013; 
27:659–668
 79. Li D, Miaskowski C, Burkhardt D, et al: Evaluations of physiologic 
reactivity and reflexive behaviors during noxious procedures in 
sedated critically ill patients. J Crit Care 2009; 24:472.e9–472.e13
 
80. Lukaszewicz AC, Dereu D, Gayat E, et al: The relevance of pupil-
lometry for evaluation of analgesia before noxious procedures in the 
intensive care unit. Anesth Analg 2015; 120:1297–1300
 
81. Paulus J, Roquilly A, Beloeil H, et al: Pupillary reflex measurement pre-
dicts insufficient analgesia before endotracheal suctioning in critically 
ill patients. Crit Care 2013; 17:R161
 
82. White PF, Kehlet H, Neal JM, et al; Fast-Track Surgery Study Group: 
The role of the anesthesiologist in fast-track surgery: From multi-
modal analgesia to perioperative medical care. Anesth Analg 2007; 
104:1380–1396
 
83. Cattabriga I, Pacini D, Lamazza G, et al: Intravenous paracetamol as 
adjunctive treatment for postoperative pain after cardiac surgery: A 
double blind randomized controlled trial. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 
2007; 32:527–531
 
84. Memis D, Inal MT, Kavalci G, et al: Intravenous paracetamol reduced 
the use of opioids, extubation time, and opioid-related adverse effects 
after major surgery in intensive care unit. J Crit Care 2010; 25:458–
462
 
85. Cantais A, Schnell D, Vincent F, et al: Acetaminophen-induced 
changes in systemic blood pressure in critically ill patients: Results of 
a multicenter cohort study. Crit Care Med 2016; 44:2192–2198
 
86. Beloeil H, Delage N, Nègre I, et al: The median effective dose of 
nefopam and morphine administered intravenously for postoperative 
pain after minor surgery: A prospective randomized double-blinded 
isobolographic study of their analgesic action. Anesth Analg 2004; 
98:395–400
 87. Payen JF, Genty C, Mimoz O, et al: Prescribing nonopioids in mechan-
ically ventilated critically ill patients. J Crit Care 2013; 28:534.e7–
534.12
 
88. Kim K, Kim WJ, Choi DK, et al: The analgesic efficacy and safety 
of nefopam in patient-controlled analgesia after cardiac surgery: A 
randomized, double-blind, prospective study. J Int Med Res 2014; 
42:684–692
 
89. Chanques G, Sebbane M, Constantin JM, et al: Analgesic efficacy 
and haemodynamic effects of nefopam in critically ill patients. Br J 
Anaesth 2011; 106:336–343
 
90. Corbonnois G, Iohom G, Lazarescu C, et al: Unilateral permanent loss 
of vision after nefopam administration. Ann Fr Anesth Reanim 2013; 
32:e113–e115
 
91. Durrieu G, Olivier P, Bagheri H, et al; French Network of Pharma-
covigilance Centers: Overview of adverse reactions to nefopam: An 
analysis of the French Pharmacovigilance database. Fundam Clin 
Pharmacol 2007; 21:555–558
 
92. Godier A, Babinet A, el Metaoua S, et al: A new cause of postop-
erative confusion syndrome: Nefopam. Ann Fr Anesth Reanim 2002; 
21:538–539
 
93. Assouline B, Tramèr MR, Kreienbühl L, et al: Benefit and harm of add-
ing ketamine to an opioid in a patient-controlled analgesia device for 
the control of postoperative pain: Systematic review and meta-analy-
ses of randomized controlled trials with trial sequential analyses. Pain 
2016; 157:2854–2864
 
94. Wang L, Johnston B, Kaushal A, et al: Ketamine added to morphine or 
hydromorphone patient-controlled analgesia for acute postoperative 
pain in adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized 
trials. Can J Anaesth 2016; 63:311–325
 
95. Guillou N, Tanguy M, Seguin P, et al: The effects of small-dose ket-
amine on morphine consumption in surgical intensive care unit patients 
after major abdominal surgery. Anesth Analg 2003; 97:843–847
 
96. Pandey CK, Bose N, Garg G, et al: Gabapentin for the treatment 
of pain in Guillain-Barré syndrome: A double-blinded, placebo-con-
trolled, crossover study. Anesth Analg 2002; 95:1719–1723
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Online Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
e863
 97. Pandey CK, Raza M, Tripathi M, et al: The comparative evaluation 
of gabapentin and carbamazepine for pain management in Guillain-
Barré syndrome patients in the intensive care unit. Anesth Analg 
2005; 101:220–225
 98. Pesonen A, Suojaranta-Ylinen R, Hammarén E, et al: Pregabalin 
has an opioid-sparing effect in elderly patients after cardiac sur-
gery: A randomized placebo-controlled trial. Br J Anaesth 2011; 
106:873–881
 99. Joshi SS, Jagadeesh AM: Efficacy of perioperative pregabalin in 
acute and chronic post-operative pain after off-pump coronary artery 
bypass surgery: A randomized, double-blind placebo controlled trial. 
Ann Card Anaesth 2013; 16:180–185
 
100. Insler SR, O’Connor M, Samonte AF, et al: Lidocaine and the inhi-
bition of postoperative pain in coronary artery bypass patients. J 
Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 1995; 9:541–546
 
101. Kranke P, Jokinen J, Pace NL, et al: Continuous intravenous peri-
operative lidocaine infusion for postoperative pain and recovery. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015:CD009642
 
102. Hynninen MS, Cheng DC, Hossain I, et al: Non-steroidal anti-inflam-
matory drugs in treatment of postoperative pain after cardiac sur-
gery. Can J Anaesth 2000; 47:1182–1187
 
103. Oberhofer D, Skok J, Nesek-Adam V: Intravenous ketoprofen in 
postoperative pain treatment after major abdominal surgery. World J 
Surg 2005; 29:446–449
 
104. Wick EC, Grant MC, Wu CL: Postoperative multimodal analgesia 
pain management with nonopioid analgesics and techniques: A 
review. JAMA Surg 2017; 152:691–697
 
105. Soriano SG: Neurotoxicity of ketamine: Known unknowns. Crit Care 
Med 2012; 40:2518–2519
 
106. Payen JF, Bosson JL, Chanques G, et al; DOLOREA Investigators: 
Pain assessment is associated with decreased duration of mechani-
cal ventilation in the intensive care unit: A post hoc analysis of the 
DOLOREA study. Anesthesiology 2009; 111:1308–1316
 107. Brook AD, Ahrens TS, Schaiff R, et al: Effect of a nursing-imple-
mented sedation protocol on the duration of mechanical ventilation. 
Crit Care Med 1999; 27:2609–2615
 
108. Quenot JP, Ladoire S, Devoucoux F, et al: Effect of a nurse-imple-
mented sedation protocol on the incidence of ventilator-associated 
pneumonia. Crit Care Med 2007; 35:2031–2036
 
109. Robinson BR, Mueller EW, Henson K, et al: An analgesia-delirium-
sedation protocol for critically ill trauma patients reduces ventilator 
days and hospital length of stay. J Trauma 2008; 65:517–526
 
110. Chanques G, Jaber S, Barbotte E, et al: Impact of systematic evalu-
ation of pain and agitation in an intensive care unit. Crit Care Med 
2006; 34:1691–1699
 
111. Marshall J, Finn CA, Theodore AC: Impact of a clinical pharma-
cist-enforced intensive care unit sedation protocol on duration 
of mechanical ventilation and hospital stay. Crit Care Med 2008; 
36:427–433
 
112. Kress JP, Pohlman AS, O’Connor MF, et al: Daily interruption of sed-
ative infusions in critically ill patients undergoing mechanical ventila-
tion. N Engl J Med 2000; 342:1471–1477
 
113. Broscious SK: Music: An intervention for pain during chest tube 
removal after open heart surgery. Am J Crit Care 1999; 8:410–415
 
114. Chan MF: Effects of music on patients undergoing a C-clamp pro-
cedure after percutaneous coronary interventions: A randomized 
controlled trial. Heart Lung 2007; 36:431–439
 
115. Cooke M, Chaboyer W, Schluter P, et al: The effect of music on dis-
comfort experienced by intensive care unit patients during turning: A 
randomized cross-over study. Int J Nurs Pract 2010; 16:125–131
 
116. Chiasson AM, Linda Baldwin A, McLaughlin C, et al: The effect of 
live spontaneous harp music on patients in the intensive care unit. 
Evid Based Complement Alternat Med 2013; 2013:428731
 117. Kshettry VR, Carole LF, Henly SJ, et al: Complementary alternative 
medical therapies for heart surgery patients: Feasibility, safety, and 
impact. Ann Thorac Surg 2006; 81:201–205
 
118. Casey E, Lane A, Kuriakose D, et al: Bolus remifentanil for chest 
drain removal in ICU: A randomized double-blind comparison of 
three modes of analgesia in post-cardiac surgical patients. Intensive 
Care Med 2010; 36:1380–1385
 
119. Ahlers SJ, van Gulik L, van Dongen EP, et al: Efficacy of an intrave-
nous bolus of morphine 2.5 versus morphine 7.5 mg for procedural 
pain relief in postoperative cardiothoracic patients in the intensive 
care unit: A randomised double-blind controlled trial. Anaesth 
Intensive Care 2012; 40:417–426
 
120. Robleda G, Roche-Campo F, Sendra MÀ, et al: Fentanyl as pre-emp-
tive treatment of pain associated with turning mechanically ventilated 
patients: A randomized controlled feasibility study. Intensive Care 
Med 2016; 42:183–191
 
121. Akrofi M, Miller S, Colfar S, et al: A randomized comparison of three 
methods of analgesia for chest drain removal in postcardiac surgical 
patients. Anesth Analg 2005; 100:205–209
 
122. Van Allen NR, Krafft PR, Leitzke AS, et al: The role of volatile anes-
thetics in cardioprotection: A systematic review. Med Gas Res 
2012; 2:22
 
123. Bryden FM, McFarlane H, Tunstall ME, et al: Isoflurane for removal of 
chest drains after cardiac surgery. Anaesthesia 1997; 52:173–175
 
124. Puntillo K, Ley SJ: Appropriately timed analgesics control pain due to 
chest tube removal. Am J Crit Care 2004; 13:292–301; discussion 
302; quiz 303
 
125. Singh M, Gopinath R: Topical analgesia for chest tube removal in 
cardiac patients. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2005; 19:719–722
 
126. Mosso-Vázquez JL, Gao K, Wiederhold BK, et al: Virtual reality for 
pain management in cardiac surgery. Cyberpsychol Behav Soc 
Netw 2014; 17:371–378
 127. Berger MM, Davadant M, Marin C, et al: Impact of a pain protocol 
including hypnosis in major burns. Burns 2010; 36:639–646
 
128. Asadizaker M, Fathizadeh A, Haidari A, et al: The effect of foot and 
hand massage on postoperative cardiac surgery pain. Indian J Nucl 
Med 2011; 3:165–169
 
129. Piotrowski MM, Paterson C, Mitchinson A, et al: Massage as adju-
vant therapy in the management of acute postoperative pain: A pre-
liminary study in men. J Am Coll Surg 2003; 197:1037–1046
 
130. Mitchinson AR, Kim HM, Rosenberg JM, et al: Acute postoperative 
pain management using massage as an adjuvant therapy: A random-
ized trial. Arch Surg 2007; 142:1158–1167
 
131. Jaber S, Bahloul H, Guétin S, et al: Effects of music therapy in inten-
sive care unit without sedation in weaning patients versus non-venti-
lated patients. Ann Fr Anesth Reanim 2007; 26:30–38
 
132. Özer N, Karaman Özlü Z, Arslan S, et al: Effect of music on postop-
erative pain and physiologic parameters of patients after open heart 
surgery. Pain Manag Nurs 2013; 14:20–28
 
133. Chlan LL, Weinert CR, Heiderscheit A, et al: Effects of patient-
directed music intervention on anxiety and sedative exposure in 
critically ill patients receiving mechanical ventilatory support: A ran-
domized clinical trial. JAMA 2013; 309:2335–2344
 
134. Gorji HM, Nesami BM, Ayyasi M, et al: Comparison of ice packs 
application and relaxation therapy in pain reduction during chest 
tube removal following cardiac surgery. N Am J Med Sci 2014; 
6:19–24
 
135. Sauls J: The use of ice for pain associated with chest tube removal. 
Pain Manag Nurs 2002; 3:44–52
 
136. Cepeda MS, Africano JM, Polo R, et al: What decline in pain intensity 
is meaningful to patients with acute pain? Pain 2003; 105:151–157
 137. Houston S, Jesurum J: The quick relaxation technique: Effect on 
pain associated with chest tube removal. Appl Nurs Res 1999; 
12:196–205
 
138. Friesner SA, Curry DM, Moddeman GR: Comparison of two pain-
management strategies during chest tube removal: Relaxation exer-
cise with opioids and opioids alone. Heart Lung 2006; 35:269–276
 
139. Aday AW, Dell’orfano H, Hirning BA, et al: Evaluation of a clini-
cal pathway for sedation and analgesia of mechanically ventilated 
patients in a cardiac intensive care unit (CICU): The Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital Levine CICU sedation pathways. Eur Heart J 
Acute Cardiovasc Care 2013; 2:299–305
 
140. Awissi DK, Bégin C, Moisan J, et al: I-SAVE study: Impact of seda-
tion, analgesia, and delirium protocols evaluated in the intensive care 
unit: An economic evaluation. Ann Pharmacother 2012; 46:21–28
 
141. Dale CR, Bryson CL, Fan VS, et al: A greater analgesia, sedation, 
delirium order set quality score is associated with a decreased 
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Devlin et al
e864 
www.ccmjournal.org 
September 2018 • Volume 46 • Number 9
duration of mechanical ventilation in cardiovascular surgery patients. 
Crit Care Med 2013; 41:2610–2617
 
142. Degrado JR, Anger KE, Szumita PM, et al: Evaluation of a local ICU 
sedation guideline on goal-directed administration of sedatives and 
analgesics. J Pain Res 2011; 4:127–134
 
143. Diby M, Romand JA, Frick S, et al: Reducing pain in patients under-
going cardiac surgery after implementation of a quality improvement 
postoperative pain treatment program. J Crit Care 2008; 23:359–371
 
144. Egerod I, Jensen MB, Herling SF, et al: Effect of an analgo-sedation 
protocol for neurointensive patients: A two-phase interventional non-
randomized pilot study. Crit Care 2010; 14:R71
 
145. Erdek MA, Pronovost PJ: Improving assessment and treatment of 
pain in the critically ill. Int J Qual Health Care 2004; 16:59–64
 
146. Faust AC, Rajan P, Sheperd LA, et al: Impact of an analgesia-based 
sedation protocol on mechanically ventilated patients in a medical 
intensive care unit. Anesth Analg 2016; 123:903–909
 147. MacLaren R, Plamondon JM, Ramsay KB, et al: A prospective evalu-
ation of empiric versus protocol-based sedation and analgesia. 
Pharmacotherapy 2000; 20:662–672
 
148. Park G, Lane M, Rogers S, et al: A comparison of hypnotic and anal-
gesic based sedation in a general intensive care unit. Br J Anaesth 
2007; 98:76–82
 
149. Sneyers B, Laterre PF, Perreault MM, et al: Current practices and 
barriers impairing physicians’ and nurses’ adherence to analgo-
sedation recommendations in the intensive care unit–a national sur-
vey. Crit Care 2014; 18:655
 
150. Tedders KM, McNorton KN, Edwin SB: Efficacy and safety of anal-
gosedation with fentanyl compared with traditional sedation with 
propofol. Pharmacotherapy 2014; 34:643–647
 
151. van Gulik L, Ahlers SJ, Brkić Z, et al: Improved analgesia after the 
realisation of a pain management programme in ICU patients after 
cardiac surgery. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2010; 27:900–905
 
152. van Valen R, van Vuuren H, van Domburg RT, et al: Pain management 
after cardiac surgery: Experience with a nurse-driven pain protocol. 
Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs 2012; 11:62–69
 
153. Breen D, Karabinis A, Malbrain M, et al: Decreased duration of 
mechanical ventilation when comparing analgesia-based seda-
tion using remifentanil with standard hypnotic-based sedation for 
up to 10 days in intensive care unit patients: A randomised trial 
[ISRCTN47583497]. Crit Care 2005; 9:R200–R210
 
154. Karabinis A, Mandragos K, Stergiopoulos S, et al: Safety and effi-
cacy of analgesia-based sedation with remifentanil versus standard 
hypnotic-based regimens in intensive care unit patients with brain 
injuries: A randomised, controlled trial [ISRCTN50308308]. Crit 
Care 2004; 8:R268–R280
 
155. Rozendaal FW, Spronk PE, Snellen FF, et al; UltiSAFE Investigators: 
Remifentanil-propofol analgo-sedation shortens duration of ventila-
tion and length of ICU stay compared to a conventional regimen: A 
centre randomised, cross-over, open-label study in the Netherlands. 
Intensive Care Med 2009; 35:291–298
 
156. Strøm T, Martinussen T, Toft P: A protocol of no sedation for criti-
cally ill patients receiving mechanical ventilation: A randomised trial. 
Lancet 2010; 375:475–480
 157. Kollef MH, Levy NT, Ahrens TS, et al: The use of continuous i.v. seda-
tion is associated with prolongation of mechanical ventilation. Chest 
1998; 114:541–548
 
158. Pandharipande P, Shintani A, Peterson J, et al: Lorazepam is an inde-
pendent risk factor for transitioning to delirium in intensive care unit 
patients. Anesthesiology 2006; 104:21–26
 
159. Brattebø G, Hofoss D, Flaatten H, et al: Effect of a scoring sys-
tem and protocol for sedation on duration of patients’ need for 
ventilator support in a surgical intensive care unit. BMJ 2002; 
324:1386–1389
 
160. Sessler CN, Gosnell MS, Grap MJ, et al: The Richmond Agitation-
Sedation Scale: Validity and reliability in adult intensive care unit 
patients. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002; 166:1338–1344
 
161. Riker RR, Fraser GL, Simmons LE, et al: Validating the Sedation-
Agitation Scale with the Bispectral Index and Visual Analog Scale in 
adult ICU patients after cardiac surgery. Intensive Care Med 2001; 
27:853–858
 
162. Roberts DJ, Haroon B, Hall RI: Sedation for critically ill or injured 
adults in the intensive care unit: A shifting paradigm. Drugs 2012; 
72:1881–1916
 
163. MacKenzie M, Hall R: Pharmacogenomics and pharmacogenetics 
for the intensive care unit: A narrative review. Can J Anaesth 2017; 
64:45–64
 
164. Treggiari MM, Romand JA, Yanez ND, et al: Randomized trial of light 
versus deep sedation on mental health after critical illness. Crit Care 
Med 2009; 37:2527–2534
 
165. Girard TD, Kress JP, Fuchs BD, et al: Efficacy and safety of a paired 
sedation and ventilator weaning protocol for mechanically ventilated 
patients in intensive care (Awakening and Breathing Controlled 
trial): A randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2008; 371:126–134
 
166. Shehabi Y, Bellomo R, Reade MC, et al; Sedation Practice in 
Intensive Care Evaluation (SPICE) Study Investigators; ANZICS 
Clinical Trials Group: Early intensive care sedation predicts long-
term mortality in ventilated critically ill patients. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 2012; 186:724–731
 167. Riker RR, Shehabi Y, Bokesch PM, et al; SEDCOM (Safety and 
Efficacy of Dexmedetomidine Compared With Midazolam) Study 
Group: Dexmedetomidine vs midazolam for sedation of critically ill 
patients: A randomized trial. JAMA 2009; 301:489–499
 
168. Shehabi Y, Bellomo R, Reade MC, et al; Sedation Practice in 
Intensive Care Evaluation Study Investigators; Australian and 
New Zealand Intensive Care Society Clinical Trials Group: Early 
goal-directed sedation versus standard sedation in mechanically 
ventilated critically ill patients: A pilot study. Crit Care Med 2013; 
41:1983–1991
 
169. Bugedo G, Tobar E, Aguirre M, et al: The implementation of an anal-
gesia-based sedation protocol reduced deep sedation and proved 
to be safe and feasible in patients on mechanical ventilation. Rev 
Bras Ter Intensiva 2013; 25:188–196
 
170. Treggiari M: Randomized trial of light versus deep sedation on men-
tal health after critical illness. Crit Care Med 2010; 38:349–350
 
171. Tanaka LM, Azevedo LC, Park M, et al; ERICC Study Investigators: 
Early sedation and clinical outcomes of mechanically ventilated 
patients: A prospective multicenter cohort study. Crit Care 2014; 
18:R156
 
172. Pandharipande PP, Pun BT, Herr DL, et al: Effect of sedation with 
dexmedetomidine vs lorazepam on acute brain dysfunction in 
mechanically ventilated patients: The MENDS randomized con-
trolled trial. JAMA 2007; 298:2644–2653
 173. Muller L, Chanques G, Bourgaux C, et al: Impact of the use of propo-
fol remifentanil goal-directed sedation adapted by nurses on the time 
to extubation in mechanically ventilated ICU patients: The experience 
of a French ICU. Ann Fr Anesth Reanim 2008; 27:481.e1–481.e8
 174. Samuelson KA, Lundberg D, Fridlund B: Light vs. heavy sedation 
during mechanical ventilation after oesophagectomy–a pilot experi-
mental study focusing on memory. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2008; 
52:1116–1123
 
175. Shehabi Y, Chan L, Kadiman S, et al; Sedation Practice in Intensive 
Care Evaluation (SPICE) Study Group Investigators: Sedation 
depth and long-term mortality in mechanically ventilated critically ill 
adults: A prospective longitudinal multicentre cohort study. Intensive 
Care Med 2013; 39:910–918
 
176. Balzer F, Weiß B, Kumpf O, et al: Early deep sedation is associated 
with decreased in-hospital and two-year follow-up survival. Crit Care 
2015; 19:197
 177. Shehabi Y, Bellomo R, Kadiman S, et al; Sedation Practice in 
Intensive Care Evaluation (SPICE) Study Investigators and the 
Australian and New Zealand Intensive Care Society Clinical Trials 
Group: Sedation intensity in the first 48 hours of mechanical ventila-
tion and 180-day mortality: A multinational prospective longitudinal 
cohort study. Crit Care Med 2018; 46:850–859
 
178. Carson SS, Kress JP, Rodgers JE, et al: A randomized trial of inter-
mittent lorazepam versus propofol with daily interruption in mechani-
cally ventilated patients. Crit Care Med 2006; 34:1326–1332
 
179. Mehta S, Burry L, Cook D, et al; SLEAP Investigators; Canadian 
Critical Care Trials Group: Daily sedation interruption in mechani-
cally ventilated critically ill patients cared for with a sedation proto-
col: A randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2012; 308:1985–1992
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Online Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
e865
 
180. de Wit M, Gennings C, Jenvey WI, et al: Randomized trial comparing 
daily interruption of sedation and nursing-implemented sedation algo-
rithm in medical intensive care unit patients. Crit Care 2008; 12:R70
 
181. Nassar Junior AP, Park M: Daily sedative interruption versus intermit-
tent sedation in mechanically ventilated critically ill patients: A ran-
domized trial. Ann Intensive Care 2014; 4:14
 
182. Yiliaz C, Kelebek Girgin N, Ozdemir N, et al: The effect of nursing-
implemented sedation on the duration of mechanical ventilation in 
the ICU. Ulus Travma Acil Cerrahi Derg 2010; 16:521–526
 
183. Grounds RM, Lalor JM, Lumley J, et al: Propofol infusion for sedation 
in the intensive care unit: Preliminary report. Br Med J (Clin Res Ed) 
1987; 294:397–400
 
184. McMurray TJ, Collier PS, Carson IW, et al: Propofol sedation 
after open heart surgery. A clinical and pharmacokinetic study. 
Anaesthesia 1990; 45:322–326
 
185. Snellen F, Lauwers P, Demeyere R, et al: The use of midazolam 
versus propofol for short-term sedation following coronary artery 
bypass grafting. Intensive Care Med 1990; 16:312–316
 
186. Roekaerts PM, Huygen FJ, de Lange S: Infusion of propofol versus 
midazolam for sedation in the intensive care unit following coronary 
artery surgery. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 1993; 7:142–147
 187. Searle NR, Côté S, Taillefer J, et al: Propofol or midazolam for seda-
tion and early extubation following cardiac surgery. Can J Anaesth 
1997; 44:629–635
 
188. Dowd NP, Karski JM, Cheng DC, et al: Fast-track cardiac anaesthe-
sia in the elderly: Effect of two different anaesthetic techniques on 
mental recovery. Br J Anaesth 2001; 86:68–76
 
189. Huey-Ling L, Chun-Che S, Jen-Jen T, et al: Comparison of the effect 
of protocol-directed sedation with propofol vs. midazolam by nurses 
in intensive care: Efficacy, haemodynamic stability and patient satis-
faction. J Clin Nurs 2008; 17:1510–1517
 
190. Oliver WC Jr, Nuttall GA, Murari T, et al: A prospective, randomized, 
double-blind trial of 3 regimens for sedation and analgesia after car-
diac surgery. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2011; 25:110–119
 
191. Carrasco G, Molina R, Costa J, et al: Propofol vs midazolam in short-, 
medium-, and long-term sedation of critically ill patients. A cost-ben-
efit analysis. Chest 1993; 103:557–564
 
192. Chamorro C, de Latorre FJ, Montero A, et al: Comparative study of 
propofol versus midazolam in the sedation of critically ill patients: 
Results of a prospective, randomized, multicenter trial. Crit Care 
Med 1996; 24:932–939
 
193. Weinbroum AA, Halpern P, Rudick V, et al: Midazolam versus pro-
pofol for long-term sedation in the ICU: A randomized prospective 
comparison. Intensive Care Med 1997; 23:1258–1263
 
194. Sanchez-Izquierdo-Riera JA, Caballero-Cubedo RE, Perez-Vela JL, 
et al: Propofol versus midazolam: Safety and efficacy for sedating 
the severe trauma patient. Anesth Analg 1998; 86:1219–1224
 
195. Sandiumenge Camps A, Sanchez-Izquierdo Riera JA, Toral Vazquez 
D, et al: Midazolam and 2% propofol in long-term sedation of trauma-
tized critically ill patients: Efficacy and safety comparison. Crit Care 
Med 2000; 28:3612–3619
 
196. Mesnil M, Capdevila X, Bringuier S, et al: Long-term sedation in 
intensive care unit: A randomized comparison between inhaled sevo-
flurane and intravenous propofol or midazolam. Intensive Care Med 
2011; 37:933–941
 197
. Zhou Y, Jin X, Kang Y, et al: Midazolam and propofol used alone or 
sequentially for long-term sedation in critically ill, mechanically ventilated 
patients: A prospective, randomized study. Crit Care 2014; 18:R122
 
198. Boeke A, Lauwers J, Schurink G: A pilot study to compare the use of 
propofol and midazolam for long-term sedation. J Drug Dev 1989; 
2:71–72
 
199. Barrientos-Vega R, Mar Sánchez-Soria M, Morales-García C, et al: 
Prolonged sedation of critically ill patients with midazolam or propo-
fol: Impact on weaning and costs. Crit Care Med 1997; 25:33–40
 
200. Costa J, Cabré L, Molina R, et al: Cost of ICU sedation: Comparison 
of empirical and controlled sedation methods. Clin Intensive Care 
1994; 5:17–21
 
201. Hall RI, Sandham D, Cardinal P, et al; Study Investigators: Propofol 
vs midazolam for ICU sedation: A Canadian multicenter randomized 
trial. Chest 2001; 119:1151–1159
 
202. Srivastava VK, Agrawal S, Kumar S, et al: Comparison of dexme-
detomidine, propofol and midazolam for short-term sedation in post-
operatively mechanically ventilated neurosurgical patients. J Clin 
Diagn Res 2014; 8:GC04–GC07
 
203. Jakob SM, Ruokonen E, Grounds RM, et al; Dexmedetomidine for 
Long-Term Sedation Investigators: Dexmedetomidine vs midazolam 
or propofol for sedation during prolonged mechanical ventilation: 
Two randomized controlled trials. JAMA 2012; 307:1151–1160
 
204. MacLaren R, Preslaski CR, Mueller SW, et al: A randomized, double-
blind pilot study of dexmedetomidine versus midazolam for intensive 
care unit sedation: Patient recall of their experiences and short-term 
psychological outcomes. J Intensive Care Med 2015; 30:167–175
 
205. Xu JB, Wang YZ, Shi QS: A combined protocol for dexmedetomi-
dine used in prolonged sedation in intensive care unit. Mod Med J 
Chin 2012; 14:20–22
 
206. Herr DL, Sum-Ping ST, England M: ICU sedation after coronary 
artery bypass graft surgery: Dexmedetomidine-based versus pro-
pofol-based sedation regimens. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2003; 
17:576–584
 207. Turnbull AE, Sepulveda KA, Dinglas VD, et al: Core domains for 
clinical research in acute respiratory failure survivors: An inter-
national modified Delphi consensus study. Crit Care Med 2017; 
45:1001–1010
 
208. Olson DM, Thoyre SM, Peterson ED, et al: A randomized evaluation 
of bispectral index-augmented sedation assessment in neurological 
patients. Neurocrit Care 2009; 11:20–27
 
209. Yang KS, Habib AS, Lu M, et al: A prospective evaluation of the inci-
dence of adverse events in nurse-administered moderate sedation 
guided by sedation scores or bispectral index. Anesth Analg 2014; 
119:43–48
 
210. Mahmood S, Parchani A, El-Menyar A, et al: Utility of bispectral 
index in the management of multiple trauma patients. Surg Neurol 
Int 2014; 5:141
 
211. Fraser GL, Riker RR: Bispectral index monitoring in the intensive 
care unit provides more signal than noise. Pharmacotherapy 2005; 
25:19S–27S
 
212. De Deyne C, Struys M, Decruyenaere J, et al: Use of continuous 
bispectral EEG monitoring to assess depth of sedation in ICU 
patients. Intensive Care Med 1998; 24:1294–1298
 
213. Simmons LE, Riker RR, Prato BS, et al: Assessing sedation dur-
ing intensive care unit mechanical ventilation with the Bispectral 
Index and the Sedation-Agitation Scale. Crit Care Med 1999; 
27:1499–1504
 
214. Walder B, Suter PM, Romand JA: Evaluation of two processed EEG 
analyzers for assessment of sedation after coronary artery bypass 
grafting. Intensive Care Med 2001; 27:107–114
 
215. Frenzel D, Greim CA, Sommer C, et al: Is the bispectral index appro-
priate for monitoring the sedation level of mechanically ventilated 
surgical ICU patients? Intensive Care Med 2002; 28:178–183
 
216. Mondello E, Siliotti R, Noto G, et al: Bispectral index in ICU: 
Correlation with Ramsay Score on assessment of sedation level. J 
Clin Monit Comput 2002; 17:271–277
 217. Nasraway SA SA Jr, Wu EC, Kelleher RM, et al: How reliable is the 
bispectral index in critically ill patients? A prospective, comparative, 
single-blinded observer study. Crit Care Med 2002; 30:1483–1487
 
218. Riess ML, Graefe UA, Goeters C, et al: Sedation assessment in 
critically ill patients with bispectral index. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2002; 
19:18–22
 
219. de Wit M, Epstein SK: Administration of sedatives and level of seda-
tion: Comparative evaluation via the Sedation-Agitation Scale and 
the Bispectral Index. Am J Crit Care 2003; 12:343–348
 
220. Ely EW, Truman B, Shintani A, et al: Monitoring sedation status 
over time in ICU patients: Reliability and validity of the Richmond 
Agitation-Sedation Scale (RASS). JAMA 2003; 289:2983–2991
 
221. Doi M, Morita K, Mantzaridis H, et al: Prediction of responses to vari-
ous stimuli during sedation: A comparison of three EEG variables. 
Intensive Care Med 2005; 31:41–47
 
222. Tonner PH, Wei C, Bein B, et al: Comparison of two bispectral index 
algorithms in monitoring sedation in postoperative intensive care 
patients. Crit Care Med 2005; 33:580–584
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Devlin et al
e866 
www.ccmjournal.org 
September 2018 • Volume 46 • Number 9
 
223. Chisholm CJ, Zurica J, Mironov D, et al: Comparison of electrophysi-
ologic monitors with clinical assessment of level of sedation. Mayo 
Clin Proc 2006; 81:46–52
 
224. Consales G, Chelazzi C, Rinaldi S, et al: Bispectral Index compared 
to Ramsay score for sedation monitoring in intensive care units. 
Minerva Anestesiol 2006; 72:329–336
 
225. Turkmen A, Altan A, Turgut N, et al: The correlation between the 
Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale and bispectral index during dex-
medetomidine sedation. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2006; 23:300–304
 
226. Hernández-Gancedo C, Pestaña D, Pérez-Chrzanowska H, et al: 
Comparing entropy and the bispectral index with the Ramsay score 
in sedated ICU patients. J Clin Monit Comput 2007; 21:295–302
 227. Sackey PV, Radell PJ, Granath F, et al: Bispectral index as a predic-
tor of sedation depth during isoflurane or midazolam sedation in ICU 
patients. Anaesth Intensive Care 2007; 35:348–356
 
228. Haenggi M, Ypparila-Wolters H, Bieri C, et al: Entropy and bispec-
tral index for assessment of sedation, analgesia and the effects of 
unpleasant stimuli in critically ill patients: An observational study. Crit 
Care 2008; 12:R119
 
229. Lu CH, Ou-Yang HY, Man KM, et al: Relative reliability of the auditory 
evoked potential and bispectral index for monitoring sedation level 
in surgical intensive care patients. Anaesth Intensive Care 2008; 
36:553–559
 
230. Arbour R, Waterhouse J, Seckel MA, et al: Correlation between 
the Sedation-Agitation Scale and the Bispectral Index in ventilated 
patients in the intensive care unit. Heart Lung 2009; 38:336–345
 
231. Trouiller P, Fangio P, Paugam-Burtz C, et al: Frequency and clinical 
impact of preserved bispectral index activity during deep sedation 
in mechanically ventilated ICU patients. Intensive Care Med 2009; 
35:2096–2104
 
232. Karamchandani K, Rewari V, Trikha A, et al: Bispectral index corre-
lates well with Richmond Agitation Sedation Scale in mechanically 
ventilated critically ill patients. J Anesth 2010; 24:394–398
 
233. Plaschke K, Fichtenkamm P, Schramm C, et al: Early postopera-
tive delirium after open-heart cardiac surgery is associated with 
decreased bispectral EEG and increased cortisol and interleukin-6. 
Intensive Care Med 2010; 36:2081–2089
 
234. Ogilvie MP, Pereira BM, Ryan ML, et al: Bispectral index to monitor 
propofol sedation in trauma patients. J Trauma 2011; 71:1415–1421
 
235. LeBlanc JM, Dasta JF, Pruchnicki MC, et al: Bispectral index values, 
sedation-agitation scores, and plasma lorazepam concentrations in 
critically ill surgical patients. Am J Crit Care 2012; 21:99–105
 
236. Yaman F, Ozcan N, Ozcan A, et al: Assesment of correlation between 
bispectral index and four common sedation scales used in mechani-
cally ventilated patients in ICU. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci 2012; 
16:660–666
 237. Paliwal B, Rai P, Kamal M, et al: Comparison between dexmedeto-
midine and propofol with validation of bispectral index for sedation 
in mechanically ventilated intensive care patients. J Clin Diagn Res 
2015; 9:UC01–UC05
 
238. Prottengeier J, Moritz A, Heinrich S, et al: Sedation assessment in a 
mobile intensive care unit: A prospective pilot-study on the relation of 
clinical sedation scales and the bispectral index. Crit Care 2014; 18:615
 
239. Wang ZH, Chen H, Yang YL, et al: Bispectral index can reliably 
detect deep sedation in mechanically ventilated patients: A prospec-
tive multicenter validation study. Anesth Analg 2017; 125:176–183
 
240. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Medicare 
& Medicaid Services: 42 CFR Part 482 Medicare and Medicaid 
Programs; Hospital Conditions of Participation: Patients’ Rights; 
Final Rule. Available at: https://www.cms.gov/Regulationsand-
Guidance/Legislation/CFCsAndCoPs/Hospitals.html. 
Accessed 
August 17, 2017
 
241. Elliott D, Aitken LM, Bucknall TK, et al; Australian and New Zealand 
Intensive Care Society Clinical Trials Group; George Institute for 
Global Health: Patient comfort in the intensive care unit: A multi-
centre, binational point prevalence study of analgesia, sedation and 
delirium management. Crit Care Resusc 2013; 15:213–219
 
242. Benbenbishty J, Adam S, Endacott R: Physical restraint use in inten-
sive care units across Europe: The PRICE study. Intensive Crit Care 
Nurs 2010; 26:241–245
 
243. Burk RS, Grap MJ, Munro CL, et al: Predictors of agitation in criti-
cally ill adults. Am J Crit Care 2014; 23:414–423
 
244. Burry LD, Williamson DR, Perreault MM, et al: Analgesic, sedative, 
antipsychotic, and neuromuscular blocker use in Canadian intensive 
care units: A prospective, multicentre, observational study. Can J 
Anaesth 2014; 61:619–630
 
245. Chang LY, Wang KW, Chao YF: Influence of physical restraint on 
unplanned extubation of adult intensive care patients: A case-control 
study. Am J Crit Care 2008; 17:408–415; quiz 416
 
246. Choi E, Song M: Physical restraint use in a Korean ICU. J Clin Nurs 
2003; 12:651–659
 247. Curry K, Cobb S, Kutash M, et al: Characteristics associated with 
unplanned extubations in a surgical intensive care unit. Am J Crit 
Care 2008; 17:45–51; quiz 52
 
248. Happ MB, Roesch T, Kagan SH: Communication needs, methods, 
and perceived voice quality following head and neck surgery: A lit-
erature review. Cancer Nurs 2004; 27:1–9
 
249. Kandeel NA, Attia AK: Physical restraints practice in adult intensive 
care units in Egypt. Nurs Health Sci 2013; 15:79–85
 
250. Krüger C, Mayer H, Haastert B, et al: Use of physical restraints in 
acute hospitals in Germany: A multi-centre cross-sectional study. Int 
J Nurs Stud 2013; 50:1599–1606
 
251. Kwizera A, Nakibuuka J, Ssemogerere L, et al: Incidence and risk fac-
tors for delirium among mechanically ventilated patients in an African 
intensive care setting: An observational multicenter study. Crit Care 
Res Pract 2015; 2015:491780
 
252. Langley G, Schmollgruber S, Egan A: Restraints in intensive care 
units–a mixed method study. Intensive Crit Care Nurs 2011; 
27:67–75
 
253. Liu JJ, Chou FH, Yeh SH: Basic needs and their predictors for intu-
bated patients in surgical intensive care units. Heart Lung 2009; 
38:208–216
 
254. Lucidarme O, Seguin A, Daubin C, et al: Nicotine withdrawal and 
agitation in ventilated critically ill patients. Crit Care 2010; 14:R58
 
255. Martin B, Mathisen L: Use of physical restraints in adult critical care: 
A bicultural study. Am J Crit Care 2005; 14:133–142
 
256. Martín Iglesias V, Pontón Soriano C, Quintián Guerra MT, et al: 
Mechanical restraint: Its use in intensive cares. Enferm Intensiva 
2012; 23:164–170
 257. Mehta S, Cook D, Devlin JW, et al; SLEAP Investigators; Canadian 
Critical Care Trials Group: Prevalence, risk factors, and outcomes 
of delirium in mechanically ventilated adults. Crit Care Med 2015; 
43:557–566
 
258. Micek ST, Anand NJ, Laible BR, et al: Delirium as detected by the 
CAM-ICU predicts restraint use among mechanically ventilated 
medical patients. Crit Care Med 2005; 33:1260–1265
 
259. Van Rompaey B, Elseviers MM, Schuurmans MJ, et al: Risk factors 
for delirium in intensive care patients: A prospective cohort study. 
Crit Care 2009; 13:R77
 
260. Vance DL: Effect of a treatment interference protocol on clinical 
decision making for restraint use in the intensive care unit: A pilot 
study. AACN Clin Issues 2003; 14:82–91
 
261. van der Kooi AW, Peelen LM, Raijmakers RJ, et al: Use of physical 
restraints in Dutch intensive care units: A prospective multicenter 
study. Am J Crit Care 2015; 24:488–495
 
262. Akansel N: Physical restraint practices among ICU nurses in one 
university hospital in weastern [sic] turkey. Health Science Journal 
2017; 1:7
 
263. Leith BA: Canadian critical care nurses and physical restraints. Off J 
Can Assoc Crit Care Nurs 1999; 10:10–14
 
264. Minnick AF, Fogg L, Mion LC, et al: Resource clusters and variation 
in physical restraint use. J Nurs Scholarsh 2007; 39:363–370
 
265. Turgay AS, Sari D, Genc RE: Physical restraint use in Turkish inten-
sive care units. Clin Nurse Spec 2009; 23:68–72
 
266. Yönt GH, Korhan EA, Dizer B, et al: Examination of ethical dilemmas 
experienced by adult intensive care unit nurses in physical restraint 
practices. Holist Nurs Pract 2014; 28:85–90
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Online Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
e867
 267. Ismaeil MF, El-Shahat HM, El-Gammal MS, et al: Unplanned versus 
planned extubation in respiratory intensive care unit, predictors of 
outcome. Egypt J Chest Dis Tuberc 2014; 63:219–231
 
268. Rose L, Burry L, Mallick R, et al: Prevalence, risk factors, and out-
comes associated with physical restraint use in mechanically venti-
lated adults. J Crit Care 2016; 31:31–35
 
269. Minnick A, Leipzig RM, Johnson ME: Elderly patients’ reports of 
physical restraint experiences in intensive care units. Am J Crit Care 
2001; 10:168–171
 
270. McPherson JA, Wagner CE, Boehm LM, et al: Delirium in the cardio-
vascular ICU: Exploring modifiable risk factors. Crit Care Med 2013; 
41:405–413
 
271. Yeh SH, Hsiao CY, Ho TH, et al: The effects of continuing education 
in restraint reduction on novice nurses in intensive care units. J Nurs 
Res 2004; 12:246–256
 
272. Michaud CJ, Thomas WL, McAllen KJ: Early pharmacological treat-
ment of delirium may reduce physical restraint use: A retrospective 
study. Ann Pharmacother 2014; 48:328–334
 
273. Titsworth WL, Hester J, Correia T, et al: The effect of increased 
mobility on morbidity in the neurointensive care unit. J Neurosurg 
2012; 116:1379–1388
 274. Ely EW, Margolin R, Francis J, et al: Evaluation of delirium in criti-
cally ill patients: Validation of the Confusion Assessment Method 
for the Intensive Care Unit (CAM-ICU). Crit Care Med 2001; 
29:1370–1379
 
275. Bergeron N, Dubois MJ, Dumont M, et al: Intensive Care Delirium 
Screening Checklist: Evaluation of a new screening tool. Intensive 
Care Med 2001; 27:859–864
 
276. Slooter AJ, Van De Leur RR, Zaal IJ: Delirium in critically ill patients. 
Handb Clin Neurol 2017; 141:449–466
 277. Pandharipande PP, Ely EW, Arora RC, et al: The intensive care delir-
ium research agenda: A multinational, interprofessional perspective. 
Intensive Care Med 2017; 43:1329–1339
 
278. Zaal IJ, Devlin JW, Peelen LM, et al: A systematic review of risk fac-
tors for delirium in the ICU. Crit Care Med 2015; 43:40–47
 
279. Guenther U, Theuerkauf N, Frommann I, et al: Predisposing and 
precipitating factors of delirium after cardiac surgery: A prospective 
observational cohort study. Ann Surg 2013; 257:1160–1167
 
280. van den Boogaard M, Pickkers P, Slooter AJ, et al: Development 
and validation of PRE-DELIRIC (PREdiction of DELIRium in ICu 
patients) delirium prediction model for intensive care patients: 
Observational multicentre study. BMJ 2012; 344:e420
 
281. van den Boogaard M, Schoonhoven L, Maseda E, et al: Recalibration 
of the delirium prediction model for ICU patients (PRE-DELIRIC): 
A multinational observational study. Intensive Care Med 2014; 
40:361–369
 
282. Wassenaar A, van den Boogaard M, van Achterberg T, et al: 
Multinational development and validation of an early prediction model 
for delirium in ICU patients. Intensive Care Med 2015; 41:1048–1056
 
283. Balas MC, Vasilevskis EE, Olsen KM, et al: Effectiveness and safety 
of the awakening and breathing coordination, delirium monitoring/
management, and early exercise/mobility bundle. Crit Care Med 
2014; 42:1024–1036
 
284. Andrews L, Silva SG, Kaplan S, et al: Delirium monitoring and 
patient outcomes in a general intensive care unit. Am J Crit Care 
2015; 24:48–56
 
285. Bigatello LM, Amirfarzan H, Haghighi AK, et al: Effects of routine 
monitoring of delirium in a surgical/trauma intensive care unit. J 
Trauma Acute Care Surg 2013; 74:876–883
 
286. van den Boogaard M, Pickkers P, van der Hoeven H, et al: 
Implementation of a delirium assessment tool in the ICU can influ-
ence haloperidol use. Crit Care 2009; 13:R131
 287. Reade MC, Eastwood GM, Peck L, et al: Routine use of the 
Confusion Assessment Method for the Intensive Care Unit (CAM-
ICU) by bedside nurses may underdiagnose delirium. Crit Care 
Resusc 2011; 13:217–224
 
288. Devlin JW, Fong JJ, Schumaker G, et al: Use of a validated delirium 
assessment tool improves the ability of physicians to identify delir-
ium in medical intensive care unit patients. Crit Care Med 2007; 
35:2721–2724; quiz 2725
 
289. Han JH, Eden S, Shintani A, et al: Delirium in older emergency 
department patients is an independent predictor of hospital length 
of stay. Acad Emerg Med 2011; 18:451–457
 
290. van Eijk MM, van Marum RJ, Klijn IA, et al: Comparison of delirium 
assessment tools in a mixed intensive care unit. Crit Care Med 
2009; 37:1881–1885
 
291. Pun BT, Gordon SM, Peterson JF, et al: Large-scale implementation 
of sedation and delirium monitoring in the intensive care unit: A report 
from two medical centers. Crit Care Med 2005; 33:1199–1205
 
292. Spronk PE, Riekerk B, Hofhuis J, et al: Occurrence of delirium is 
severely underestimated in the ICU during daily care. Intensive Care 
Med 2009; 35:1276–1280
 
293. Inouye SK, Foreman MD, Mion LC, et al: Nurses’ recognition of delir-
ium and its symptoms: Comparison of nurse and researcher ratings. 
Arch Intern Med 2001; 161:2467–2473
 
294. Grossmann FF, Hasemann W, Graber A, et al: Screening, detection 
and management of delirium in the emergency department - a pilot 
study on the feasibility of a new algorithm for use in older emergency 
department patients: The modified Confusion Assessment Method 
for the Emergency Department (mCAM-ED). Scand J Trauma 
Resusc Emerg Med 2014; 22:19
 
295. Svenningsen H, Egerod I, Dreyer P: Strange and scary memories of 
the intensive care unit: A qualitative, longitudinal study inspired by 
Ricoeur’s interpretation theory. J Clin Nurs 2016; 25:2807–2815
 
296. Bélanger L, Ducharme F: Patients’ and nurses’ experiences of delirium: 
A review of qualitative studies. Nurs Crit Care 2011; 16:303–315
 297. Granberg A, Engberg IB, Lundberg D: Acute confusion and unreal 
experiences in intensive care patients in relation to the ICU syn-
drome. Part II. Intensive Crit Care Nurs 1999; 15:19–33
 
298. Granberg A, Bergbom Engberg I, Lundberg D: Patients’ experience 
of being critically ill or severely injured and cared for in an intensive 
care unit in relation to the ICU syndrome. Part I. Intensive Crit Care 
Nurs 1998; 14:294–307
 
299. Breitbart W, Gibson C, Tremblay A: The delirium experience: Delirium 
recall and delirium-related distress in hospitalized patients with can-
cer, their spouses/caregivers, and their nurses. Psychosomatics 
2002; 43:183–194
 
300. Storli SL, Lindseth A, Asplund K: A journey in quest of meaning: A 
hermeneutic-phenomenological study on living with memories from 
intensive care. Nurs Crit Care 2008; 13:86–96
 
301. Gélinas C, Bérubé M, Chevrier A, et al: Delirium assessment tools in 
adult critically ill: A psychometric analysis and systematic review. Crit 
Care Nurse 2018; 38:38–49
 
302. Riker RR, Fugate JE; Participants in the International Multi-disciplinary 
Consensus Conference on Multimodality Monitoring: Clinical moni-
toring scales in acute brain injury: Assessment of coma, pain, agita-
tion, and delirium. Neurocrit Care 2014; 21(Suppl 2):S27–S37
 
303. Nishimura K, Yokoyama K, Yamauchi N, et al; TMAD Investigators: 
Sensitivity and specificity of the Confusion Assessment Method for 
the Intensive Care Unit (CAM-ICU) and the Intensive Care Delirium 
Screening Checklist (ICDSC) for detecting post-cardiac surgery 
delirium: A single-center study in Japan. Heart Lung 2016; 45:15–20
 
304. Khan BA, Perkins AJ, Gao S, et al: The Confusion Assessment 
Method for the ICU-7 Delirium Severity Scale: A novel delirium sever-
ity instrument for use in the ICU. Crit Care Med 2017; 45:851–857
 
305. Tomichek JE, Stollings JL, Pandharipande PP, et al: Antipsychotic 
prescribing patterns during and after critical illness: A prospective 
cohort study. Crit Care 2016; 20:378
 
306. Marshall J, Herzig SJ, Howell MD, et al: Antipsychotic utilization in 
the intensive care unit and in transitions of care. J Crit Care 2016; 
33:119–124
 307
. Herzig SJ, Rothberg MB, Guess JR, et al: Antipsychotic medication utili-
zation in nonpsychiatric hospitalizations. J Hosp Med 2016; 11:543–549
 
308. Botha JA, Mudholkar P: The effect of a sedation scale on ventilation 
hours, sedative, analgesic and inotropic use in an intensive care unit. 
Crit Care Resusc 2004; 6:253–257
 
309. Gélinas C, Arbour C, Michaud C, et al: Implementation of the Critical-
Care Pain Observation Tool on pain assessment/management nurs-
ing practices in an intensive care unit with nonverbal critically ill adults: 
A before and after study. Int J Nurs Stud 2011; 48:1495–1504
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Devlin et al
e868 
www.ccmjournal.org 
September 2018 • Volume 46 • Number 9
 
310. Radtke FM, Heymann A, Franck M, et al: How to implement moni-
toring tools for sedation, pain and delirium in the intensive care 
unit: An experimental cohort study. Intensive Care Med 2012; 
38:1974–1981
 
311. Luetz A, Weiss B, Boettcher S, et al: Routine delirium monitoring 
is independently associated with a reduction of hospital mortality 
in critically ill surgical patients: A prospective, observational cohort 
study. J Crit Care 2016; 35:168–173
 
312. Patel SB, Poston JT, Pohlman A, et al: Rapidly reversible, sedation-
related delirium versus persistent delirium in the intensive care unit. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2014; 189:658–665
 
313. Haenggi M, Blum S, Brechbuehl R, et al: Effect of sedation level 
on the prevalence of delirium when assessed with CAM-ICU and 
ICDSC. Intensive Care Med 2013; 39:2171–2179
 
314. Gusmao-Flores D, Martins JC, Amorin D, et al: Tools for diagnosing 
delirium in the critically ill: Is calibration needed for the less sedated 
patient? Intensive Care Med 2014; 40:137–138
 
315. Svenningsen H, Egerod I, Videbech P, et al: Fluctuations in sedation 
levels may contribute to delirium in ICU patients. Acta Anaesthesiol 
Scand 2013; 57:288–293
 
316. Ely EW, Shintani A, Truman B, et al: Delirium as a predictor of mor-
tality in mechanically ventilated patients in the intensive care unit. 
JAMA 2004; 291:1753–1762
 317. Pandharipande PP, Girard TD, Jackson JC, et al; BRAIN-ICU Study 
Investigators: Long-term cognitive impairment after critical illness. N 
Engl J Med 2013; 369:1306–1316
 
318. Wolters AE, van Dijk D, Pasma W, et al: Long-term outcome of delir-
ium during intensive care unit stay in survivors of critical illness: A 
prospective cohort study. Crit Care 2014; 18:R125
 
319. Girard TD, Jackson JC, Pandharipande PP, et al: Delirium as a pre-
dictor of long-term cognitive impairment in survivors of critical illness. 
Crit Care Med 2010; 38:1513–1520
 
320. Ely EW, Gautam S, Margolin R, et al: The impact of delirium in the 
intensive care unit on hospital length of stay. Intensive Care Med 
2001; 27:1892–1900
 
321. Lat I, McMillian W, Taylor S, et al: The impact of delirium on clinical 
outcomes in mechanically ventilated surgical and trauma patients. 
Crit Care Med 2009; 37:1898–1905
 
322. Naidech AM, Beaumont JL, Rosenberg NF, et al: Intracerebral hem-
orrhage and delirium symptoms. Length of stay, function, and quality 
of life in a 114-patient cohort. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2013; 
188:1331–1337
 
323. Thomason JW, Shintani A, Peterson JF, et al: Intensive care unit 
delirium is an independent predictor of longer hospital stay: A pro-
spective analysis of 261 non-ventilated patients. Crit Care 2005; 
9:R375–R381
 
324. Alexander SA, Ren D, Gunn SR, et al: Interleukin 6 and apolipopro-
tein E as predictors of acute brain dysfunction and survival in critical 
care patients. Am J Crit Care 2014; 23:49–57
 
325. Milbrandt EB, Deppen S, Harrison PL, et al: Costs associated with 
delirium in mechanically ventilated patients. Crit Care Med 2004; 
32:955–962
 
326. Mu DL, Wang DX, Li LH, et al: High serum cortisol level is associ-
ated with increased risk of delirium after coronary artery bypass graft 
surgery: A prospective cohort study. Crit Care 2010; 14:R238
 327. Ouimet S, Kavanagh BP, Gottfried SB, et al: Incidence, risk fac-
tors and consequences of ICU delirium. Intensive Care Med 2007; 
33:66–73
 
328. Bienvenu OJ, Gellar J, Althouse BM, et al: Post-traumatic stress dis-
order symptoms after acute lung injury: A 2-year prospective longitu-
dinal study. Psychol Med 2013; 43:2657–2671
 
329. Wolters AE, Peelen LM, Welling MC, et al: Long-term mental 
health problems after delirium in the ICU. Crit Care Med 2016; 
44:1808–1813
 
330. Jackson JC, Pandharipande PP, Girard TD, et al; Bringing to Light 
the Risk Factors and Incidence of Neuropsychological Dysfunction 
in ICU Survivors (BRAIN-ICU) Study Investigators: Depression, 
post-traumatic stress disorder, and functional disability in survivors 
of critical illness in the BRAIN-ICU study: A longitudinal cohort 
study. Lancet Respir Med 2014; 2:369–379
 
331. Girard TD, Shintani AK, Jackson JC, et al: Risk factors for post-trau-
matic stress disorder symptoms following critical illness requiring 
mechanical ventilation: A prospective cohort study. Crit Care 2007; 
11:R28
 
332. Patel MB, Jackson JC, Morandi A, et al: Incidence and risk factors for 
intensive care unit-related post-traumatic stress disorder in Veterans 
and civilians. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2016; 193:1373–1381
 
333. Roberts BL, Rickard CM, Rajbhandari D, et al: Factual memories of 
ICU: Recall at two years post-discharge and comparison with delir-
ium status during ICU admission–a multicentre cohort study. J Clin 
Nurs 2007; 16:1669–1677
 
334. van den Boogaard M, Schoonhoven L, Evers AW, et al: Delirium in 
critically ill patients: Impact on long-term health-related quality of life 
and cognitive functioning. Crit Care Med 2012; 40:112–118
 
335. Roberts BL, Rickard CM, Rajbhandari D, et al: Patients’ dreams in 
ICU: Recall at two years post discharge and comparison to delirium 
status during ICU admission. A multicentre cohort study. Intensive 
Crit Care Nurs 2006; 22:264–273
 
336. Van Rompaey B, Schuurmans MJ, Shortridge-Baggett LM, et al: 
Long term outcome after delirium in the intensive care unit. J Clin 
Nurs 2009; 18:3349–3357
 337
. Shehabi Y, Riker RR, Bokesch PM, et al; SEDCOM (Safety and 
Efficacy of Dexmedetomidine Compared With Midazolam) Study 
Group: Delirium duration and mortality in lightly sedated, mechanically 
ventilated intensive care patients. Crit Care Med 2010; 38:2311–2318
 
338. Tsuruta R, Oda Y, Shintani A, et al; Japanese Epidemiology of 
Delirium in ICUs (JEDI) Study Investigators: Delirium and coma eval-
uated in mechanically ventilated patients in the intensive care unit 
in Japan: A multi-institutional prospective observational study. J Crit 
Care 2014; 29:472.e1–472.e5
 
339. Caruso P, Guardian L, Tiengo T, et al: ICU architectural design 
affects the delirium prevalence: A comparison between single-bed 
and multibed rooms. Crit Care Med 2014; 42:2204–2210
 
340. Guillamondegui OD, Richards JE, Ely EW, et al: Does hypoxia affect inten-
sive care unit delirium or long-term cognitive impairment after multiple 
trauma without intracranial hemorrhage? J Trauma 2011; 70:910–915
 
341. Mardani D, Bigdelian H: Predictors and clinical outcomes of postopera-
tive delirium after administration of dexamethasone in patients undergo-
ing coronary artery bypass surgery. Int J Prev Med 2012; 3:420–427
 
342. Ouimet S, Riker R, Bergeron N, et al: Subsyndromal delirium in the 
ICU: Evidence for a disease spectrum. Intensive Care Med 2007; 
33:1007–1013
 
343. Roberts B, Rickard CM, Rajbhandari D, et al: Multicentre study of 
delirium in ICU patients using a simple screening tool. Aust Crit 
Care 2005; 18:6, 8–9, 11
 
344. Robinson TN, Raeburn CD, Tran ZV, et al: Motor subtypes of post-
operative delirium in older adults. Arch Surg 2011; 146:295–300
 
345. Salluh JI, Soares M, Teles JM, et al; Delirium Epidemiology in Critical 
Care Study Group: Delirium Epidemiology in Critical Care (DECCA): 
An international study. Crit Care 2010; 14:R210
 
346. Serafim RB, Dutra MF, Saddy F, et al: Delirium in postoperative non-
ventilated intensive care patients: Risk factors and outcomes. Ann 
Intensive Care 2012; 2:51
 347. Sharma A, Malhotra S, Grover S, et al: Incidence, prevalence, risk 
factor and outcome of delirium in intensive care unit: A study from 
India. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 2012; 34:639–646
 
348. Simons KS, Workum JD, Slooter AJ, et al: Effect of preadmission 
sunlight exposure on intensive care unit-acquired delirium: A multi-
center study. J Crit Care 2014; 29:283–286
 
349. van den Boogaard M, Peters SA, van der Hoeven JG, et al: The 
impact of delirium on the prediction of in-hospital mortality in inten-
sive care patients. Crit Care 2010; 14:R146
 
350. Yamaguchi T, Tsukioka E, Kishi Y: Outcomes after delirium in a Japanese 
intensive care unit. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 2014; 36:634–636
 
351. Dubois MJ, Bergeron N, Dumont M, et al: Delirium in an inten-
sive care unit: A study of risk factors. Intensive Care Med 2001; 
27:1297–1304
 
352. Lin SM, Huang CD, Liu CY, et al: Risk factors for the development of 
early-onset delirium and the subsequent clinical outcome in mechan-
ically ventilated patients. J Crit Care 2008; 23:372–379
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Online Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
e869
 
353. Balas MC, Happ MB, Yang W, et al: Outcomes associated with 
delirium in older patients in surgical ICUs. Chest 2009; 135:18–25
 
354. Balas MC, Chaperon C, Sisson JH, et al: Transitions experienced 
by older survivors of critical care. J Gerontol Nurs 2011; 37:14–25; 
quiz 26
 
355. Marquis F, Ouimet S, Riker R, et al: Individual delirium symptoms: Do 
they matter? Crit Care Med 2007; 35:2533–2537
 
356. Abraham CM, Obremskey WT, Song Y, et al: Hospital delirium and 
psychological distress at 1 year and health-related quality of life after 
moderate-to-severe traumatic injury without intracranial hemorrhage. 
Arch Phys Med Rehabil 2014; 95:2382–2389
 357. Abelha FJ, Luís C, Veiga D, et al: Outcome and quality of life in 
patients with postoperative delirium during an ICU stay following 
major surgery. Crit Care 2013; 17:R257
 
358. Brummel NE, Jackson JC, Pandharipande PP, et al: Delirium in 
the ICU and subsequent long-term disability among survivors of 
mechanical ventilation. Crit Care Med 2014; 42:369–377
 
359. Norman BC, Jackson JC, Graves JA, et al: Employment outcomes 
after critical illness: An analysis of the bringing to light the risk factors 
and incidence of neuropsychological dysfunction in ICU survivors 
cohort. Crit Care Med 2016; 44:2003–2009
 
360. Svenningsen H, Tønnesen EK, Videbech P, et al: Intensive care delir-
ium - effect on memories and health-related quality of life - a follow-
up study. J Clin Nurs 2014; 23:634–644
 
361. Tomasi CD, Grandi C, Salluh J, et al: Comparison of CAM-ICU and 
ICDSC for the detection of delirium in critically ill patients focusing 
on relevant clinical outcomes. J Crit Care 2012; 27:212–217
 
362. Veiga D, Luis C, Parente D, et al: Postoperative delirium in intensive 
care patients: Risk factors and outcome. Rev Bras Anestesiol 2012; 
62:469–483
 
363. Lin SM, Liu CY, Wang CH, et al: The impact of delirium on the 
survival of mechanically ventilated patients. Crit Care Med 2004; 
32:2254–2259
 
364. Pisani MA, Kong SY, Kasl SV, et al: Days of delirium are associated 
with 1-year mortality in an older intensive care unit population. Am J 
Respir Crit Care Med 2009; 180:1092–1097
 
365. Klein Klouwenberg PM, Zaal IJ, Spitoni C, et al: The attributable mor-
tality of delirium in critically ill patients: Prospective cohort study. 
BMJ 2014; 349:g6652
 
366. Wang W, Li HL, Wang DX, et al: Haloperidol prophylaxis decreases 
delirium incidence in elderly patients after noncardiac surgery: A ran-
domized controlled trial. Crit Care Med 2012; 40:731–739
 367. Prakanrattana U, Prapaitrakool S: Efficacy of risperidone for preven-
tion of postoperative delirium in cardiac surgery. Anaesth Intensive 
Care 2007; 35:714–719
 
368. Su X, Meng ZT, Wu XH, et al: Dexmedetomidine for prevention 
of delirium in elderly patients after non-cardiac surgery: A ran-
domised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 2016; 
388:1893–1902
 
369. van den Boorgard M, Slooter AJC, Bruggemann RJM, et al: Effect of 
prophylactic haloperidol on survival among critically ill adults at high 
risk for delirium: The REDUCE randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2018; 
319:680–690
 
370. Skrobik Y, Duprey MS, Hill NS, et al: Low-dose nocturnal dexme-
detomidine prevents ICU delirium. A randomized, placebo-controlled 
trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2018; 197:1147–1156
 
371. Page VJ, Davis D, Zhao XB, et al: Statin use and risk of delirium in 
the critically ill. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2014; 189:666–673
 
372. Morandi A, Hughes CG, Girard TD, et al: Statins and brain dysfunc-
tion: A hypothesis to reduce the burden of cognitive impairment in 
patients who are critically ill. Chest 2011; 140:580–585
 
373. Mather JF, Corradi JP, Waszynski C, et al: Statin and its asso-
ciation with delirium in the medical ICU. Crit Care Med 2017; 
45:1515–1522
 374. Billings FT 4th, Hendricks PA, Schildcrout JS, et al: High-dose peri-
operative atorvastatin and acute kidney injury following cardiac sur-
gery: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2016; 315:877–888
 
375. Avidan MS, Maybrier HR, Abdallah AB, et al; PODCAST Research 
Group: Intraoperative ketamine for prevention of postoperative 
delirium or pain after major surgery in older adults: An international, 
multicentre, double-blind, randomised clinical trial. Lancet 2017; 
390:267–275
 
376. Brummel NE, Boehm LM, Girard TD, et al: Subsyndromal delirium 
and institutionalization among patients with critical illness. Am J Crit 
Care 2017; 26:447–455
 377. Al-Qadheeb NS, Skrobik Y, Schumaker G, et al: Preventing ICU sub-
syndromal delirium conversion to delirium with low-dose IV haloperi-
dol: A double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot study. Crit Care Med 
2016; 44:583–591
 
378. Hakim SM, Othman AI, Naoum DO: Early treatment with risperi-
done for subsyndromal delirium after on-pump cardiac surgery in the 
elderly: A randomized trial. Anesthesiology 2012; 116:987–997
 
379. Devlin JW, Smithburger P, Kane JM, et al: Intended and unintended 
consequences of constraining clinician prescribing: The case of 
antipsychotics. Crit Care Med 2016; 44:1805–1807
 
380. Girard TD, Pandharipande PP, Carson SS, et al; MIND Trial 
Investigators: Feasibility, efficacy, and safety of antipsychotics for 
intensive care unit delirium: The MIND randomized, placebo-con-
trolled trial. Crit Care Med 2010; 38:428–437
 
381. Page VJ, Ely EW, Gates S, et al: Effect of intravenous haloperidol on 
the duration of delirium and coma in critically ill patients (Hope-ICU): 
A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Respir 
Med 2013; 1:515–523
 
382. Devlin JW, Roberts RJ, Fong JJ, et al: Efficacy and safety of quetiap-
ine in critically ill patients with delirium: A prospective, multicenter, 
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot study. Crit Care 
Med 2010; 38:419–427
 
383. Skrobik YK, Bergeron N, Dumont M, et al: Olanzapine vs haloperidol: 
Treating delirium in a critical care setting. Intensive Care Med 2004; 
30:444–449
 
384. Needham DM, Colantuoni E, Dinglas VD, et al: Rosuvastatin ver-
sus placebo for delirium in intensive care and subsequent cognitive 
impairment in patients with sepsis-associated acute respiratory dis-
tress syndrome: An ancillary study to a randomised controlled trial. 
Lancet Respir Med 2016; 4:203–212
 
385. Page VJ, Casarin A, Ely EW, et al: Evaluation of early administration of sim-
vastatin in the prevention and treatment of delirium in critically ill patients 
undergoing mechanical ventilation (MoDUS): A randomised, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Respir Med 2017; 1:515–523
 
386. Reade MC, Eastwood GM, Bellomo R, et al; DahLIA Investigators; 
Australian and New Zealand Intensive Care Society Clinical Trials 
Group: Effect of dexmedetomidine added to standard care on venti-
lator-free time in patients with agitated delirium: A randomized clini-
cal trial. JAMA 2016; 315:1460–1468
 387. Ono H, Taguchi T, Kido Y, et al: The usefulness of bright light therapy 
for patients after oesophagectomy. Intensive Crit Care Nurs 2011; 
27:158–166
 
388. Taguchi T, Yano M, Kido Y: Influence of bright light therapy on post-
operative patients: A pilot study. Intensive Crit Care Nurs 2007; 
23:289–297
 
389. Simons KS, Laheij RJ, van den Boogaard M, et al: Dynamic light 
application therapy to reduce the incidence and duration of delir-
ium in intensive-care patients: A randomised controlled trial. Lancet 
Respir Med 2016; 4:194–202
 
390. Black P, Boore JR, Parahoo K: The effect of nurse-facilitated family 
participation in the psychological care of the critically ill patient. J 
Adv Nurs 2011; 67:1091–1101
 
391. Brummel NE, Girard TD, Ely EW, et al: Feasibility and safety of early 
combined cognitive and physical therapy for critically ill medical and 
surgical patients: The Activity and Cognitive Therapy in ICU (ACT-
ICU) trial. Intensive Care Med 2014; 40:370–379
 
392. Foster J, Kelly M: A pilot study to test the feasibility of a nonphar-
macologic intervention for the prevention of delirium in the medical 
intensive care unit. Clin Nurse Spec 2013; 27:231–238
 
393. Moon KJ, Lee SM: The effects of a tailored intensive care unit delir-
ium prevention protocol: A randomized controlled trial. Int J Nurs 
Stud 2015; 52:1423–1432
 
394. Colombo R, Corona A, Praga F, et al: A reorientation strategy for 
reducing delirium in the critically ill. Results of an interventional 
study. Minerva Anestesiol 2012; 78:1026–1033
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Devlin et al
e870 
www.ccmjournal.org 
September 2018 • Volume 46 • Number 9
 
395. Hanison J, Conway D: A multifaceted approach to prevention of 
delirium on intensive care. BMJ Qual Improv Rep 2015; 12:4–12 
 
396. Rivosecchi RM, Kane-Gill SL, Svec S, et al: The implementation of a 
nonpharmacologic protocol to prevent intensive care delirium. J Crit 
Care 2016; 31:206–211
 397. Denehy L, Lanphere J, Needham DM: Ten reasons why ICU patients 
should be mobilized early. Intensive Care Med 2017; 43:86–90
 
398. Fan E, Dowdy DW, Colantuoni E, et al: Physical complications in 
acute lung injury survivors: A two-year longitudinal prospective 
study. Crit Care Med 2014; 42:849–859
 
399. Hermans G, Van Mechelen H, Clerckx B, et al: Acute outcomes and 
1-year mortality of intensive care unit-acquired weakness. A cohort 
study and propensity-matched analysis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
2014; 190:410–420
 
400. Dinglas VD, Aronson Friedman L, Colantuoni E, et al: Muscle weak-
ness and 5-year survival in acute respiratory distress syndrome sur-
vivors. Crit Care Med 2017; 45:446–453
 
401. Needham DM, Wozniak AW, Hough CL, et al; National Institutes of 
Health NHLBI ARDS Network: Risk factors for physical impairment 
after acute lung injury in a national, multicenter study. Am J Respir 
Crit Care Med 2014; 189:1214–1224
 
402. Kamdar BB, Combs MP, Colantuoni E, et al: The association of 
sleep quality, delirium, and sedation status with daily participation in 
physical therapy in the ICU. Crit Care 2016; 19:261
 
403. Latronico N, Herridge M, Hopkins RO, et al: The ICM research 
agenda on intensive care unit-acquired weakness. Intensive Care 
Med 2017; 43:1270–1281
 
404. World Health Organization: Rehabilitation: Key for health in the 21st 
century. Geneva, Switzerland, World Health Organization, 2017
 
405. Amidei C: Mobilisation in critical care: A concept analysis. Intensive 
Crit Care Nurs 2012; 28:73–81
 
406. Patman S, Sanderson D, Blackmore M: Physiotherapy following car-
diac surgery: Is it necessary during the intubation period? Aust J 
Physiother 2001; 47:7–16
 407. Morris PE, Goad A, Thompson C, et al: Early intensive care unit 
mobility therapy in the treatment of acute respiratory failure. Crit 
Care Med 2008; 36:2238–2243
 
408. Schweickert WD, Pohlman MC, Pohlman AS, et al: Early physical and 
occupational therapy in mechanically ventilated, critically ill patients: 
A randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2009; 373:1874–1882
 
409. Routsi C, Gerovasili V, Vasileiadis I, et al: Electrical muscle stimula-
tion prevents critical illness polyneuromyopathy: A randomized paral-
lel intervention trial. Crit Care 2010; 14:R74
 
410. Dantas CM, Silva PF, Siqueira FH, et al: Influence of early mobili-
zation on respiratory and peripheral muscle strength in critically ill 
patients. Rev Bras Ter Intensiva 2012; 24:173–178
 
411. Denehy L, Skinner EH, Edbrooke L, et al: Exercise rehabilitation for 
patients with critical illness: A randomized controlled trial with 12 
months of follow-up. Crit Care 2013; 17:R156
 
412. Ali MS, Talwar D, Jain SK: The effect of a short-term pulmonary 
rehabilitation on exercise capacity and quality of life in patients hos-
pitalised with acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease. Indian J Chest Dis Allied Sci 2014; 56:13–19
 
413. Dong ZH, Yu BX, Sun YB, et al: Effects of early rehabilitation therapy 
on patients with mechanical ventilation. World J Emerg Med 2014; 
5:48–52
 
414. Kayambu G, Boots R, Paratz J: Early physical rehabilitation in inten-
sive care patients with sepsis syndromes: A pilot randomised con-
trolled trial. Intensive Care Med 2015; 41:865–874
 
415. Kho ME, Truong AD, Zanni JM, et al: Neuromuscular electrical 
stimulation in mechanically ventilated patients: A randomized, sham-
controlled pilot trial with blinded outcome assessment. J Crit Care 
2015; 30:32–39
 
416. Moss M, Nordon-Craft A, Malone D, et al: A randomized trial 
of an intensive physical therapy program for patients with 
acute respiratory failure. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2016; 
193:1101–1110
 417. Morris PE, Berry MJ, Files DC, et al: Standardized rehabilitation and 
hospital length of stay among patients with acute respiratory failure: 
A randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2016; 315:2694–2702
 
418. Burtin C, Clerckx B, Robbeets C, et al: Early exercise in critically 
ill patients enhances short-term functional recovery. Crit Care Med 
2009; 37:2499–2505
 
419. Yosef-Brauner O, Adi N, Ben Shahar T, et al: Effect of physical ther-
apy on muscle strength, respiratory muscles and functional param-
eters in patients with intensive care unit-acquired weakness. Clin 
Respir J 2015; 9:1–6
 
420. Hodgson CL, Bailey M, Bellomo R, et al; Trial of Early Activity and 
Mobilization Study Investigators: A binational multicenter pilot feasi-
bility randomized controlled trial of early goal-directed mobilization in 
the ICU. Crit Care Med 2016; 44:1145–1152
 
421. Burns KE, Jacob SK, Aguirre V, et al: Stakeholder engagement in 
trial design: Survey of visitors to critically ill patients regarding pref-
erences for outcomes and treatment options during weaning from 
mechanical ventilation. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2016; 13:1962–1968
 
422. Stiller K, Phillips A, Lambert P: The safety of mobilisation and its 
effect on haemodynamic and respiratory status of intensive care 
patients. Physiother Theory Pract 2004; 20:175–185
 
423. Zanni JM, Korupolu R, Fan E, et al: Rehabilitation therapy and out-
comes in acute respiratory failure: An observational pilot project. J 
Crit Care 2010; 25:254–262
 
424. Kho ME, Damluji A, Zanni JM, et al: Feasibility and observed safety 
of interactive video games for physical rehabilitation in the intensive 
care unit: A case series. J Crit Care 2012; 27:219.e1–219.e6
 
425. Berney S, Haines K, Skinner EH, et al: Safety and feasibility of an 
exercise prescription approach to rehabilitation across the con-
tinuum of care for survivors of critical illness. Phys Ther 2012; 
92:1524–1535
 
426. Damluji A, Zanni JM, Mantheiy E, et al: Safety and feasibility of femo-
ral catheters during physical rehabilitation in the intensive care unit. 
J Crit Care 2013; 28:535.e9–535.15
 427. Sricharoenchai T, Parker AM, Zanni JM, et al: Safety of physical ther-
apy interventions in critically ill patients: A single-center prospective 
evaluation of 1110 intensive care unit admissions. J Crit Care 2014; 
29:395–400
 
428. Berney S, Skinner EH, Denehy L, et al: Development of a physical 
function outcome measure (PFIT) and a pilot exercise training proto-
col for use in intensive care. Crit Care Resusc 2009; 11:110
 
429. Pohlman MC, Schweickert WD, Pohlman AS, et al: Feasibility 
of physical and occupational therapy beginning from initiation of 
mechanical ventilation. Crit Care Med 2010; 38:2089–2094
 
430. Nydahl P, Sricharoenchai T, Chandra S, et al: Safety of patient 
mobilization and rehabilitation in the intensive care unit. Systematic 
review with meta-analysis. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2017; 14:766–777
 
431. Fowlow B, Price P, Fung T: Ambulation after sheath removal: A com-
parison of 6 and 8 hours of bedrest after sheath removal in patients 
following a PTCA procedure. Heart Lung 1995; 24:28–37
 
432. Hildreth AN, Enniss T, Martin RS, et al: Surgical intensive care unit 
mobility is increased after institution of a computerized mobility order 
set and intensive care unit mobility protocol: A prospective cohort 
analysis. Am Surg 2010; 76:818–822
 
433. Hanekom S, Louw QA, Coetzee AR: Implementation of a protocol 
facilitates evidence-based physiotherapy practice in intensive care 
units. Physiotherapy 2013; 99:139–145
 
434. Pires-Neto RC, Pereira AL, Parente C, et al: Characterization of the 
use of a cycle ergometer to assist in the physical therapy treatment 
of critically ill patients. Rev Bras Ter Intensiva 2013; 25:39–43
 
435. Dickinson S, Tschannen D, Shever LL: Can the use of an early mobil-
ity program reduce the incidence of pressure ulcers in a surgical 
critical care unit? Crit Care Nurs Q 2013; 36:127–140
 
436. Simini B: Patients’ perceptions of intensive care. Lancet 1999; 
354:571–572
 437. Rotondi AJ, Chelluri L, Sirio C, et al: Patients’ recollections of stress-
ful experiences while receiving prolonged mechanical ventilation in 
an intensive care unit. Crit Care Med 2002; 30:746–752
 
438. Cooper AB, Thornley KS, Young GB, et al: Sleep in critically ill patients 
requiring mechanical ventilation. Chest 2000; 117:809–818
 
439. Aurell J, Elmqvist D: Sleep in the surgical intensive care unit: 
Continuous polygraphic recording of sleep in nine patients receiving 
postoperative care. Br Med J (Clin Res Ed) 1985; 290:1029–1032
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Online Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
e871
 
440. Freedman NS, Gazendam J, Levan L, et al: Abnormal sleep/wake 
cycles and the effect of environmental noise on sleep disruption in the 
intensive care unit. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001; 163:451–457
 
441. Helton MC, Gordon SH, Nunnery SL: The correlation between sleep 
deprivation and the intensive care unit syndrome. Heart Lung 1980; 
9:464–468
 
442. Trompeo AC, Vidi Y, Locane MD, et al: Sleep disturbances in the 
critically ill patients: Role of delirium and sedative agents. Minerva 
Anestesiol 2011; 77:604–612
 
443. Roche Campo F, Drouot X, Thille AW, et al: Poor sleep quality is asso-
ciated with late noninvasive ventilation failure in patients with acute 
hypercapnic respiratory failure. Crit Care Med 2010; 38:477–485
 
444. White DP, Douglas NJ, Pickett CK, et al: Sleep deprivation and the 
control of ventilation. Am Rev Respir Dis 1983; 128:984–986
 
445. Benca RM, Quintas J: Sleep and host defenses: A review. Sleep 
1997; 20:1027–1037
 
446. Bryant PA, Trinder J, Curtis N: Sick and tired: Does sleep have a vital 
role in the immune system? Nat Rev Immunol 2004; 4:457–467
 447. Boesen HC, Andersen JH, Bendtsen AO, et al: Sleep and delirium 
in unsedated patients in the intensive care unit. Acta Anaesthesiol 
Scand 2016; 60:59–68
 
448. Beecroft JM, Ward M, Younes M, et al: Sleep monitoring in the inten-
sive care unit: Comparison of nurse assessment, actigraphy and 
polysomnography. Intensive Care Med 2008; 34:2076–2083
 
449. Elliott R, McKinley S, Cistulli P, et al: Characterisation of sleep in 
intensive care using 24-hour polysomnography: An observational 
study. Crit Care 2013; 17:R46
 
450. Knauert MP, Yaggi HK, Redeker NS, et al: Feasibility study of unat-
tended polysomnography in medical intensive care unit patients. 
Heart Lung 2014; 43:445–452
 
451. Roche-Campo F, Thille AW, Drouot X, et al: Comparison of sleep 
quality with mechanical versus spontaneous ventilation during wean-
ing of critically III tracheostomized patients. Crit Care Med 2013; 
41:1637–1644
 
452. Drouot X, Bridoux A, Thille AW, et al: Sleep continuity: A new metric 
to quantify disrupted hypnograms in non-sedated intensive care unit 
patients. Crit Care 2014; 18:628
 
453. Gabor JY, Cooper AB, Crombach SA, et al: Contribution of the 
intensive care unit environment to sleep disruption in mechanically 
ventilated patients and healthy subjects. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
2003; 167:708–715
 
454. Córdoba-Izquierdo A, Drouot X, Thille AW, et al: Sleep in hypercap-
nic critical care patients under noninvasive ventilation: Conventional 
versus dedicated ventilators. Crit Care Med 2013; 41:60–68
 
455. Freedman NS, Kotzer N, Schwab RJ: Patient perception of sleep 
quality and etiology of sleep disruption in the intensive care unit. Am 
J Respir Crit Care Med 1999; 159:1155–1162
 
456. Little A, Ethier C, Ayas N, et al: A patient survey of sleep quality in the 
intensive care unit. Minerva Anestesiol 2012; 78:406–414
 457. Drouot X, Roche-Campo F, Thille AW, et al: A new classification for 
sleep analysis in critically ill patients. Sleep Med 2012; 13:7–14
 
458. Van Rompaey B, Elseviers MM, Van Drom W, et al: The effect of ear-
plugs during the night on the onset of delirium and sleep perception: 
A randomized controlled trial in intensive care patients. Crit Care 
2012; 16:R73
 
459. Kamdar BB, King LM, Collop NA, et al: The effect of a quality 
improvement intervention on perceived sleep quality and cognition 
in a medical ICU. Crit Care Med 2013; 41:800–809
 
460. Elliott R, Rai T, McKinley S: Factors affecting sleep in the critically ill: 
An observational study. J Crit Care 2014; 29:859–863
 
461. Friese RS, Diaz-Arrastia R, McBride D, et al: Quantity and quality of 
sleep in the surgical intensive care unit: Are our patients sleeping? J 
Trauma 2007; 63:1210–1214
 
462. Bosma K, Ferreyra G, Ambrogio C, et al: Patient-ventilator interac-
tion and sleep in mechanically ventilated patients: Pressure sup-
port versus proportional assist ventilation. Crit Care Med 2007; 
35:1048–1054
 
463. Knauert MP, Malik V, Kamdar BB: Sleep and sleep disordered 
breathing in hospitalized patients. Semin Respir Crit Care Med 
2014; 35:582–592
 
464. Kondili E, Alexopoulou C, Xirouchaki N, et al: Effects of propofol on 
sleep quality in mechanically ventilated critically ill patients: A physi-
ological study. Intensive Care Med 2012; 38:1640–1646
 
465. Delisle S, Ouellet P, Bellemare P, et al: Sleep quality in mechanically 
ventilated patients: Comparison between NAVA and PSV modes. 
Ann Intensive Care 2011; 1:42
 
466. Hardin KA, Seyal M, Stewart T, et al: Sleep in critically ill chemically 
paralyzed patients requiring mechanical ventilation. Chest 2006; 
129:1468–1477
 467. Oto J, Yamamoto K, Koike S, et al: Effect of daily sedative interrup-
tion on sleep stages of mechanically ventilated patients receiving 
midazolam by infusion. Anaesth Intensive Care 2011; 39:392–400
 
468. Alexopoulou C, Kondili E, Vakouti E, et al: Sleep during proportional-
assist ventilation with load-adjustable gain factors in critically ill 
patients. Intensive Care Med 2007; 33:1139–1147
 
469. Toublanc B, Rose D, Glérant JC, et al: Assist-control ventilation vs. 
low levels of pressure support ventilation on sleep quality in intu-
bated ICU patients. Intensive Care Med 2007; 33:1148–1154
 
470. Alexopoulou C, Kondili E, Diamantaki E, et al: Effects of dexme-
detomidine on sleep quality in critically ill patients: A pilot study. 
Anesthesiology 2014; 121:801–807
 
471. Alexopoulou C, Kondili E, Plataki M, et al: Patient-ventilator syn-
chrony and sleep quality with proportional assist and pressure sup-
port ventilation. Intensive Care Med 2013; 39:1040–1047
 
472. Andréjak C, Monconduit J, Rose D, et al: Does using pressure-con-
trolled ventilation to rest respiratory muscles improve sleep in ICU 
patients? Respir Med 2013; 107:534–541
 
473. Cabello B, Thille AW, Drouot X, et al: Sleep quality in mechanically 
ventilated patients: Comparison of three ventilatory modes. Crit 
Care Med 2008; 36:1749–1755
 474. Parthasarathy S, Friese RS, Ayas NT: Biological validity to sleep mea-
surements during critical illness. Crit Care Med 2010; 38:705–706
 
475. Rechtschaffen A, Kales A: A Manual of Standardized Terminology, 
Techniques and Scoring System for Sleep Stages of Human Subjects. 
Washington, DC, Public Health Service, 1968. Cited August 30, 
2017. Available at: http://ci.nii.ac.jp/naid/10023901533/. Accessed 
June 14, 2017
 
476. Watson PL, Pandharipande P, Gehlbach BK, et al: Atypical sleep in 
ventilated patients: Empirical electroencephalography findings and 
the path toward revised ICU sleep scoring criteria. Crit Care Med 
2013; 41:1958–1967
 477. Cochen V, Arnulf I, Demeret S, et al: Vivid dreams, hallucinations, 
psychosis and REM sleep in Guillain-Barré syndrome. Brain 2005; 
128:2535–2545
 
478. Freedman RR, Kruger ML, Wasson SL: Heart rate variability in meno-
pausal hot flashes during sleep. Menopause 2011; 18:897–900
 
479. Sutter R, Barnes B, Leyva A, et al: Electroencephalographic sleep 
elements and outcome in acute encephalopathic patients: A 4-year 
cohort study. Eur J Neurol 2014; 21:1268–1275
 
480. Valente M, Placidi F, Oliveira AJ, et al: Sleep organization pattern as 
a prognostic marker at the subacute stage of post-traumatic coma. 
Clin Neurophysiol 2002; 113:1798–1805
 
481. Foreman B, Westwood AJ, Claassen J, et al: Sleep in the neurologi-
cal intensive care unit: Feasibility of quantifying sleep after melatonin 
supplementation with environmental light and noise reduction. J Clin 
Neurophysiol 2015; 32:66–74
 
482. Bihari S, Doug McEvoy R, Matheson E, et al: Factors affecting sleep qual-
ity of patients in intensive care unit. J Clin Sleep Med 2012; 8:301–307
 
483. McKinley S, Fien M, Elliott R, et al: Sleep and psychological health 
during early recovery from critical illness: An observational study. J 
Psychosom Res 2013; 75:539–545
 
484. Armutcu B, Celik T: Sleep quality of patients hospitalized in the coro-
nary intensive care unit and the affecting factors. Int J Caring Sci 
2014; 7:324
 
485. Simpson T, Lee ER, Cameron C: Patients’ perceptions of environ-
mental factors that disturb sleep after cardiac surgery. Am J Crit 
Care 1996; 5:173–181
 
486. Nicolás A, Aizpitarte E, Iruarrizaga A, et al: Perception of night-time 
sleep by surgical patients in an intensive care unit. Nurs Crit Care 
2008; 13:25–33
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Devlin et al
e872 
www.ccmjournal.org 
September 2018 • Volume 46 • Number 9
 
487. Hofhuis JG, Spronk PE, van Stel HF, et al: Experiences of criti-
cally ill patients in the ICU. Intensive Crit Care Nurs 2008; 
24:300–313
 
488. Ehlers VJ, Watson H, Moleki MM: Factors contributing to sleep 
deprivation in a multidisciplinary intensive care unit in South Africa. 
Curationis 2013; 36:E1–E8
 
489. Yinnon AM, Ilan Y, Tadmor B, et al: Quality of sleep in the medical 
department. Br J Clin Pract 1992; 46:88–91
 
490. Uğraş GA, Oztekin SD: Patient perception of environmental and 
nursing factors contributing to sleep disturbances in a neurosurgical 
intensive care unit. Tohoku J Exp Med 2007; 212:299–308
 
491. Richards KC, Anderson WM, Chesson AL Jr, et al: Sleep-related 
breathing disorders in patients who are critically ill. J Cardiovasc 
Nurs 2002; 17:42–55
 
492. Frisk U, Nordström G: Patients’ sleep in an intensive care unit–
patients’ and nurses’ perception. Intensive Crit Care Nurs 2003; 
19:342–349
 
493. Zhang L, Sha YS, Kong QQ, et al: Factors that affect sleep quality: 
Perceptions made by patients in the intensive care unit after thoracic 
surgery. Support Care Cancer 2013; 21:2091–2096
 
494. Fanfulla F, Ceriana P, D’Artavilla Lupo N, et al: Sleep disturbances in 
patients admitted to a step-down unit after ICU discharge: The role 
of mechanical ventilation. Sleep 2011; 34:355–362
 
495. Parthasarathy S, Tobin MJ: Effect of ventilator mode on sleep 
quality in critically ill patients. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002; 
166:1423–1429
 
496. Zhang WY, Wu WL, Gu JJ, et al: Risk factors for postoperative delir-
ium in patients after coronary artery bypass grafting: A prospective 
cohort study. J Crit Care 2015; 30:606–612
 497. Bryczkowski SB, Lopreiato MC, Yonclas PP, et al: Delirium preven-
tion program in the surgical intensive care unit improved the out-
comes of older adults. J Surg Res 2014; 190:280–288
 
498. Duclos C, Dumont M, Blais H, et al: Rest-activity cycle disturbances 
in the acute phase of moderate to severe traumatic brain injury. 
Neurorehabil Neural Repair 2014; 28:472–482
 
499. Van den Broecke S, Jobard O, Montalescot G, et al: Very early 
screening for sleep-disordered breathing in acute coronary syn-
drome in patients without acute heart failure. Sleep Med 2014; 
15:1539–1546
 
500. Saito T, Yoshikawa T, Sakamoto Y, et al: Sleep apnea in patients with 
acute myocardial infarction. Crit Care Med 1991; 19:938–941
 
501. Mistraletti G, Taverna M, Sabbatini G, et al: Actigraphic monitoring 
in critically ill patients: Preliminary results toward an “observation-
guided sedation.
” J Crit Care 2009; 24:563–567
 
502. BaHammam A, Syed S, Al-Mughairy A: Sleep-related breathing dis-
orders in obese patients presenting with acute respiratory failure. 
Respir Med 2005; 99:718–725
 
503. Buckle P, Pouliot Z, Millar T, et al: Polysomnography in acutely ill 
intensive care unit patients. Chest 1992; 102:288–291
 
504. Richards KC, O’Sullivan PS, Phillips RL: Measurement of sleep in 
critically ill patients. J Nurs Meas 2000; 8:131–144
 
505. Fontaine DK: Measurement of nocturnal sleep patterns in trauma 
patients. Heart Lung 1989; 18:402–410
 
506. Edwards GB, Schuring LM: Pilot study: Validating staff nurses’ 
observations of sleep and wake states among critically ill patients, 
using polysomnography. Am J Crit Care 1993; 2:125–131
 507. Kamdar BB, Shah PA, King LM, et al: Patient-nurse interrater reli-
ability and agreement of the Richards-Campbell sleep questionnaire. 
Am J Crit Care 2012; 21:261–269
 
508. Bridoux A, Thille AW, Quentin S, et al: Sleep in ICU: Atypical 
sleep or atypical electroencephalography? Crit Care Med 2014; 
42:e312–e313
 
509. Cho MY, Min ES, Hur MH, et al: Effects of aromatherapy on the 
anxiety, vital signs, and sleep quality of percutaneous coronary inter-
vention patients in intensive care units. Evid Based Complement 
Alternat Med 2013; 2013:381381
 
510. Lytle J, Mwatha C, Davis KK: Effect of lavender aromatherapy on vital 
signs and perceived quality of sleep in the intermediate care unit: A 
pilot study. Am J Crit Care 2014; 23:24–29
 
511. Chen JH, Chao YH, Lu SF, et al: The effectiveness of valerian acu-
pressure on the sleep of ICU patients: A randomized clinical trial. Int 
J Nurs Stud 2012; 49:913–920
 
512. Su CP, Lai HL, Chang ET, et al: A randomized controlled trial of the 
effects of listening to non-commercial music on quality of nocturnal 
sleep and relaxation indices in patients in medical intensive care unit. 
J Adv Nurs 2013; 69:1377–1389
 
513. Le Guen M, Nicolas-Robin A, Lebard C, et al: Earplugs and 
eye masks vs routine care prevent sleep impairment in post-
anaesthesia care unit: A randomized study. Br J Anaesth 2014; 
112:89–95
 
514. Jones C, Dawson D: Eye masks and earplugs improve patient’s per-
ception of sleep. Nurs Crit Care 2012; 17:247–254
 
515. Richardson A, Allsop M, Coghill E, et al: Earplugs and eye masks: 
Do they improve critical care patients’ sleep? Nurs Crit Care 2007; 
12:278–286
 
516. Bourne RS, Mills GH, Minelli C: Melatonin therapy to improve noc-
turnal sleep in critically ill patients: Encouraging results from a small 
randomised controlled trial. Crit Care 2008; 12:R52
 517. Shilo L, Dagan Y, Smorjik Y, et al: Effect of melatonin on sleep quality 
of COPD intensive care patients: A pilot study. Chronobiol Int 2000; 
17:71–76
 
518. Ibrahim MG, Bellomo R, Hart GK, et al: A double-blind placebo-
controlled randomised pilot study of nocturnal melatonin in trache-
ostomised patients. Crit Care Resusc 2006; 8:187–191
 
519. Erland LA, Saxena PK: Melatonin natural health products and sup-
plements: Presence of serotonin and significant variability of melato-
nin content. J Clin Sleep Med 2017; 13:275–281
 
520. Hatta K, Kishi Y, Wada K, et al; DELIRIA-J Group: Preventive effects 
of ramelteon on delirium: A randomized placebo-controlled trial. 
JAMA Psychiatry 2014; 71:397–403
 
521. Nishikimi M, Numaguchi A, Takahashi K, et al: Effect of administra-
tion of ramelteon, a melatonin receptor agonist, on duration of stay 
in the ICU: A single-center, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Crit 
Care Med 2018; 46:1099–1105
 
522. Wu XH, Cui F, Zhang C, et al: Low-dose dexmedetomidine improves 
sleep quality pattern in elderly patients after noncardiac sur-
gery in the intensive care unit: A pilot randomized controlled trial. 
Anesthesiology 2016; 125:979–991
 
523. Oto J, Yamamoto K, Koike S, et al: Sleep quality of mechanically 
ventilated patients sedated with dexmedetomidine. Intensive Care 
Med 2012; 38:1982–1989
 
524. Treggiari-Venzi M, Borgeat A, Fuchs-Buder T, et al: Overnight 
sedation with midazolam or propofol in the ICU: Effects on 
sleep quality, anxiety and depression. Intensive Care Med 1996; 
22:1186–1190
 
525. Engelmann C, Wallenborn J, Olthoff D, et al: Propofol versus fluni-
trazepam for inducing and maintaining sleep in postoperative ICU 
patients. Indian J Crit Care Med 2014; 18:212–219
 
526. Burgers JS, Grol R, Klazinga NS, et al; AGREE Collaboration: 
Towards evidence-based clinical practice: An international survey 
of 18 clinical guideline programs. Int J Qual Health Care 2003; 
15:31–45
 527. Hu RF, Jiang XY, Zeng YM, et al: Effects of earplugs and eye masks 
on nocturnal sleep, melatonin and cortisol in a simulated intensive 
care unit environment. Crit Care 2010; 14:R66
 
528. Li SY, Wang TJ, Vivienne Wu SF, et al: Efficacy of controlling night-
time noise and activities to improve patients’ sleep quality in a surgi-
cal intensive care unit. J Clin Nurs 2011; 20:396–407
 
529. Patel J, Baldwin J, Bunting P, et al: The effect of a multicomponent 
multidisciplinary bundle of interventions on sleep and delirium in 
medical and surgical intensive care patients. Anaesthesia 2014; 
69:540–549
 
530. Ahn HS, Kim HJ: Development and implementation of clinical prac-
tice guidelines: Current status in Korea. J Korean Med Sci 2012; 
27(Suppl):S55–S60
 
531. Grol R: Successes and failures in the implementation of evi-
dence-based guidelines for clinical practice. Med Care 2001; 
39:II46–II54
 Copyright © 2018 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Online Special Article
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
e873
 
532. Woolf SH, Grol R, Hutchinson A, et al: Clinical guidelines: Potential 
benefits, limitations, and harms of clinical guidelines. BMJ 1999; 
318:527–530
 
533. Nuckols TK, Lim YW, Wynn BO, et al: Rigorous development does 
not ensure that guidelines are acceptable to a panel of knowledge-
able providers. J Gen Intern Med 2008; 23:37–44
 
534. Mehta S, Burns KEA, Machado FR, et al: Gender parity in Critical 
Care Medicine. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2017; 196:425–429
 
535. Deans KJ, Minneci PC, Danner RL, et al: Practice misalignments 
in randomized controlled trials: Identification, impact, and potential 
solutions. Anesth Analg 2010; 111:444–450
 
536. Muscedere J, Waters B, Varambally A, et al: The impact of frailty on 
intensive care unit outcomes: A systematic review and meta-analy-
sis. Intensive Care Med 2017; 43:1105–1122
 537. Scotts A: Minimizing mistakes and embracing uncertainty. PLoS 
Med 2015; 2:e272
 
538. Shekelle P, Woolf S, Grimshaw JM, et al: Developing clini-
cal practice guidelines: Reviewing, reporting, and publish-
ing guidelines; updating guidelines; and the emerging issues 
of enhancing guideline implementability and accounting for 
comorbid conditions in guideline development. Implement Sci 
2012; 7:62
