 1
Scientific RepoRts | 6:35474 | DOI: 10.1038/srep35474
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Label-free enumeration, collection 
and downstream cytological and 
cytogenetic analysis of circulating 
tumor cells
Manjima Dhar1,*, Edward Pao1,*, Corinne Renier2,3,*, Derek E. Go1, James Che1,2, 
Rosita Montoya4, Rachel Conrad4, Melissa Matsumoto1, Kyra Heirich3, Melanie Triboulet3, 
Jianyu Rao4,5, Stefanie S. Jeffrey3, Edward B. Garon5,6, Jonathan Goldman5,6, Nagesh P. Rao4, 
Rajan Kulkarni5,7,8, Elodie Sollier-Christen1,2,3 & Dino Di Carlo1,2,5,7
Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) have a great potential as indicators of metastatic disease that may 
help physicians improve cancer prognostication, treatment and patient outcomes. Heterogeneous 
marker expression as well as the complexity of current antibody-based isolation and analysis systems 
highlights the need for alternative methods. In this work, we use a microfluidic Vortex device that can 
selectively isolate potential tumor cells from blood independent of cell surface expression. This system 
was adapted to interface with three protein-marker-free analysis techniques: (i) an in-flow automated 
image processing system to enumerate cells released, (ii) cytological analysis using Papanicolaou  
(Pap) staining and (iii) fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) targeting the ALK rearrangement.  
In-flow counting enables a rapid assessment of the cancer-associated large circulating cells in a sample 
within minutes to determine whether standard downstream assays such as cytological and cytogenetic 
analyses that are more time consuming and costly are warranted. Using our platform integrated with 
these workflows, we analyzed 32 non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and 22 breast cancer patient 
samples, yielding 60 to 100% of the cancer patients with a cell count over the healthy threshold, 
depending on the detection method used: respectively 77.8% for automated, 60–100% for cytology, 
and 80% for immunostaining based enumeration.
Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are believed to be responsible for cancer metastasis and represent potential bio-
markers of disease progression1. Numerous studies have found a correlation between CTC presence/frequency 
and poor outcomes, indicating that the number of these cells are potential biomarkers of malignancy and can be 
used for diagnosis or prognosis2–4. Beyond enumeration alone, CTCs can provide a good source of malignant 
tissue for genetic analysis, protein expression analysis and drug testing, potentially leading to the development 
of non-invasive treatment monitoring and personalized therapies5,6. However, despite the interest in obtaining 
these cells, collection of CTCs is challenging because of their limited numbers (~1–500 CTCs per ml of blood), 
and presence among a very high number of contaminating white blood cells (WBCs) and red blood cells (RBCs).
To selectively separate these rare cells from blood, many “label-based” methods have been developed to isolate 
 
cells based on surface antigen-based capture (e.g. epithelial cell adhesion molecule, EpCAM)7–9, but these 
1Department of Bioengineering, University of California, 420 Westwood Plaza, 5121 Engineering V, P.O. Box 951600, 
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. 2Vortex Biosciences Inc., 1490 O’Brien Drive, Suite E, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA. 
3Department of Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, MSLS Bldg, 1201 Welch Road, Stanford, CA 94305, 
USA. 4Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
CA 90095, USA. 5Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. 6UCLA Santa Monica 
Hematology Oncology, 2020 Santa Monica Blvd, Suite 600, Santa Monica, CA 90404, USA. 7California NanoSystems 
Institute, 570 Westwood Plaza, Building 114, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. 8Division of Dermatology, UCLA Medical 
Center, 52-121 CHS, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. *These authors contributed equally to this work. Correspondence 
and requests for materials should be addressed to E.S.-C. (email: elodie@vortexbiosciences.com) or D.D.C. (email: 
dicarlo@seas.ucla.edu)
Received: 27 October 2015
accepted: 28 September 2016
Published: 14 October 2016
OPEN
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
Scientific RepoRts | 6:35474 | DOI: 10.1038/srep35474
approaches are limited by heterogeneous inter/intra-tumor protein expression10,11. Addition of cocktails of anti-
bodies that target a range of antigens partly addresses this issue12, but can lead to more off-target capture and 
reduced purity. Such techniques also remain expensive and labor-intensive. To circumvent some of these issues, 
negative selection (depletion) of the contaminating blood cells instead has been proposed6,13,14. This negative 
selection approach has the advantage of un-biased capture but achieves limited capture purity. Biophysical meth-
ods that leverage differences between CTC and blood cell sizes have been developed to circumvent this reliance 
on protein expression and provide a more cost-effective alternative15. These approaches include microfiltration 
either with paper membranes16–20 or with microfluidic structures21,22, or inertial focusing23. However, these tech-
niques require additional sample preparation upstream and/or also have low specificity (0.1% to 1% purity).
Regardless of the CTC collection approach, the current standard for enumerating CTCs involves immuno-
fluorescence staining to visualize specific markers for CTCs and WBCs – a method with significant limitations. 
While this standard is evolving, in general, cytokeratin (CK) and/or EpCAM markers are used to identify CTCs 
while CD45 is used for WBCs11. White blood cells staining positive for both CD45 and CK may be isolated24, 
and have been identified as granulocytes with additional CD66b staining25,26 (Supp. Fig. 4). On the other hand, 
some large cells negative for both CD45 and CK have also been reported. Such double staining or lack of any CK/
EpCAM stain makes classification of these cells difficult10,27,28. In addition, several experimental factors can affect 
immunofluorescence analysis. These include variation in the antibodies used (sensitivity, clones, fluorophores), 
staining protocol, and lastly the image analysis methodology. In addition to these experimental issues, immunos-
taining based enumeration is time-consuming and costly. Simple analysis methods would enable a rapid and low 
cost count for more efficient use of downstream resources (e.g. for genetic analyses) on samples with large cell 
burdens.
Stains that aid in identifying malignant cells independent of immunostaining already exist. Cytopathologists 
are trained to interpret the cytomorphological features of cells using these stains. For example, the Papanicolaou 
(Pap) stain is a routinely used staining method for cancer diagnosis in human cytology29. The advantage of 
the Pap stain relies on its ability to yield detailed information regarding nucleoli and chromatin pattern in the 
tumor cell. This information is often sufficient to determine whether cells are benign or malignant. Clinical 
decision-making is often based on these features of a biopsy or cells present in body fluids as determined at the 
initial cytological assessment. Re-evaluation of the tumors during disease progression is not typically performed, 
because of the invasive nature of excisional biopsy, and also because the tumor may not be readily accessible. 
Cytological analysis of CTCs that are continuously shed by tumors into the bloodstream could provide real-time 
and more representative information on tumor evolution, treatment effectiveness, and cancer metastasis risk. 
Unfortunately, many CTC technologies cannot provide intact, free-floating CTCs suitable for cytological staining. 
This prevents compatibility with existing automated laboratory equipment and requires cyto-technicians to be 
trained on new protocols30. Even for separation approaches that isolate cells freely in solution, concentrating the 
cells into a smaller liquid volume suitable for cytology requires extra processing steps to collect the cells onto glass 
slides, leading to potential cell loss31. Furthermore, the low purity of many cell isolation techniques can confound 
downstream analysis. Therefore, a high purity platform that can prepare CTCs in a small volume would be ideally 
suited to enable such cytological studies directly on blood biopsies.
Such a platform could also be beneficial for fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assays to make use of 
CTCs to aid in treatment selection. For example, oncogenic fusion genes consisting of EML4 and ALK have been 
identified in a small subgroup consisting of ~3–7% of all NSCLC tumors32. Recent studies have demonstrated that 
detecting ALK rearrangements can be of clinical value for physicians to select more effective therapies. Indeed 
ALK rearrangements have been shown to be associated with positive response to targeted therapies such as the 
FDA approved drug crizotinib, a small-molecule inhibitor of the ALK tyrosine kinase33. Conversely ALK-positive 
patients have shown no benefit from the use of erlotinib. Detecting such rearrangements directly from the blood 
and in real-time would provide the clinician with a more accurate picture of the cancer, to better personalize the 
treatment. Other CTC technologies have demonstrated compatibility with FISH assays, for the detection of the 
ALK rearrangement in lung CTCs17,18 or to analyze the androgen receptor (AR) and MYC genomic copy number 
in patients with castration resistant prostate cancer34. However, these technologies generally require a custom 
filter-adapted FISH (FA-FISH) protocol18 or modified imaging equipment, which limits adoption by cytogenetics 
laboratories.
Our group previously introduced the Vortex Chip, which uses microfluidic vortices to achieve size-based and 
surface-label-free separation of CTCs from whole blood at high purities (> 
75% purity)35. Here, we combine the 
Vortex CTC enrichment system with an inline optical measurement and automated image analysis system to per-
form the label-free counting and morphological classification of all isolated cells (Fig. 1). We leverage the ability 
of this method to concentrate and easily release cells in a small volume (300 μ 
L) to achieve facile integration with 
standard cytological and cytogenetic analysis workflows, both of which further improve the accuracy of analysis.
Materials and Methods
All experiments were performed in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations.
Microfluidic Vortex HT device design and fabrication. 
Microfluidic devices were fabricated using 
common polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) replica molding processes35. Briefly, standard lithographic techniques 
were used to produce a mold from a silicon master wafer spin-coated with KMPR 1050 (MicroChem). PDMS 
chips were produced from this mold using Sylgard 184 Elastomer Kit (Dow Corning Corporation) with a 
cross-linker to polymer ratio of 1:10. To fabricate the channels, PDMS and glass were both activated by O2 plasma 
(Technics Micro-RIE series 800, 500 mTorr, 80 Watts, 30 sec) before being bonded together. The Vortex HT Chip 
used for cell trapping is composed of 192 reservoirs, with 16 channels in parallel and 12 reservoirs per path 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
Scientific RepoRts | 6:35474 | DOI: 10.1038/srep35474
(Fig. 1A). Each path includes a single straight high-aspect ratio channel (WC = 
 40 μ 
m, H = 
 70 μ 
m) composed of 
12 reservoirs (WR = 
 480 μ 
m, LR = 
 720 μ 
m) located every 1 mm downstream. Filters located at the inlet prevent 
channel clogging by cell aggregates or debris present in blood samples.
Microfluidic Vortex HT device operation. 
Two syringes on two separate syringe pumps (Harvard 
Apparatus PHD 2000) were connected to the device inlets to achieve rapid solution exchange35,36. One syringe 
contained the 10X diluted blood sample, while the second syringe was filled with Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS, 
pH 7.2, Gibco) as a washing buffer (Fig. 1B). Before sample infusion, the channels are primed and the vortices 
are stabilized by flowing PBS at 8 mL/min. The cell sample was then injected in the device at 7 mL/min while the 
PBS flow is lowered to 1 mL/min. After sample injection, PBS was flowed into the device at 8 mL/min to wash out 
unstable blood cells. Finally, by lowering the buffer flow rate, vortices were dissipated and the cells trapped in the 
vortices were released from the reservoirs and collected in a volume of 300 μ 
L for downstream analysis.
Cell culture and cell spiking. 
All cell lines used for characterization were grown to 30–40% confluence at 
37 °C in a humid atmosphere of 5% CO2. MCF7 (breast carcinoma, ATCC) cells were cultured in EMEM medium 
supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Invitrogen) and containing 0.01 mg/ml human 
recombinant insulin. A549 (Squamous non-small cell lung carcinoma) cells were cultured in RPMI medium 
supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Invitrogen). Adherent cells were dissociated with 
0.25% (w/v) Trypsin-EDTA (Gibco), resuspended in full medium and spiked (200–500 cells) in 5 mL Dulbecco’s 
PBS (DPBS, without calcium, magnesium) or in 5 mL healthy blood which was diluted 10x in DPBS prior to 
injection through the device. The cell sample was processed as indicated above in the Microfluidic Vortex HT 
Device Operation section and the captured cells were released into a 96-well plate as described below. To increase 
capture efficiency, sample flow-through was collected in a separate tube and reprocessed through the device for 
one or more additional cycles.
Patient recruitment, blood collection and processing. 
Patients with metastatic cancer were recruited 
according to protocols with informed consent approved by Institutional Review Boards (UCLA-IRB#11-001798 
and Stanford-IRB Protocol#5630) from the Department of Radiation Oncology and the Department of 
Hematology and Oncology at the Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, and from the Stanford University School 
of Medicine, respectively. Blood samples were drawn from 54 patients, diagnosed with metastatic non-small cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC, N = 
 32) and metastatic breast cancer (N = 
 22), as well as 12 healthy age-matched volunteers 
(Supp. Table 1). Peripheral blood was collected into 10 mL EDTA-coated tubes (BD Vacutainer), transported 
and processed at room temperature within 4 hours of the blood collection, as described in the Device Operation 
section above.
High-speed, label-free cell imaging and automated cell analysis script. 
A high-speed camera was 
used to collect videos of cells during their release from the vortices and as they flowed past the imaging region 
 
Figure 1. Label-free isolation and enumeration of CTCs followed by downstream analysis. (A) The Vortex 
HT chip is used to capture CTCs in vortices formed in microfluidic reservoirs. (B) After a priming step, CTCs 
are selectively trapped by size in the microscale vortices, RBCs and WBCs are washed away with a clean buffer, 
then remaining larger trapped cells are released into well plates or slides. (C) A region of the outlet channel 
is recorded to image the released cells in-flow for enumeration. An algorithm is used to process the video, 
determine morphological features of cells collected, and enumerate based on morphological thresholds. (D) 
The output from the video analysis allows the user to determine whether to perform downstream analysis. This 
could include immunofluorescence, cytology and cytogenetic analyses.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
Scientific RepoRts | 6:35474 | DOI: 10.1038/srep35474
(a portion of the outlet channel). The resulting video images were then analyzed using a custom image process-
ing algorithm (Supp. Fig. 1). Videos were collected using a 10X brightfield Nikon objective lens mounted on a 
Phantom v2010 high-speed camera and controlled through a Phantom Camera Control and Software (Vision 
Research Inc). For each incident cell, a collection of images (256 × 
 376 pixels) was captured (6006 frames per sec-
ond) for a total of 15 seconds. The cells appeared 6 times in the viewing window to ensure that none were missed. 
The focal plane was manually adjusted prior to sample injection, using the walls of the exit channel area as a 
reference. To initiate the release of the trapped cells, the flow rate was stopped and 15 s of video was recorded con-
comitantly. Cells remained in focus when recording a region downstream near the outlet because here we avoid a 
large hydrodynamic pressure buildup during operation. The depth of focus of the 10x Nikon objective used was 
8.5 μ 
m and, given the large depth of focus, small shifts out of the focal plane were not found to significantly affect 
the size calculations when imaging of these cells.
The image processing algorithm identifies cells by their morphology. Objects are detected using a background 
subtraction method. Briefly, the intensity values of an empty frame are subtracted from each ensuing image of the 
video, which eliminates the background image and yields traces of incident particles in the frames in which they 
appear (Supp. Fig. 1). In our algorithm that detects object boundaries first, each image is scaled by a factor of 3 
with interpolation. The images are converted to binary, and the particle traces are then filled with morphological 
closing (dilation followed by erosion) to be measured for their diameter, solidity (area/convex hull, where convex 
hull is the smallest enclosed convex region around the object), axial ratio (major axis/minor axis), and cell inte-
rior pixel intensity distribution. Data were thresholded for diameter greater than 12 μ 
m and less than 55 μm. A 
detailed description of these parameters is provided in Fig. 2C. These parameters were determined during control 
experiments with lung cancer cell lines. The detected objects are displayed in a matrix. These results give us infor-
mation concerning the number of cells collected and their morphologies.
Immunofluorescence cell staining and enumeration. 
After collection in a 96-well-plate (CELLSTAR, 
Greiner Bio-one), cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (Boston BioProducts) and permeabilized with 0.4% 
Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich) and stained with 4′ 
,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI, Invitrogen), CD45-PE 
(Clone HI-30, Becton Dickinson (BD), Pan-CK-FITC (Clone CK3-6H5, Miltenyi Biotec), CK CAM5.2-FITC 
(Clone CAM 5.2, BD), and Pan-CK-FITC (Clone AE1-AE3, eBioscience) to target CK 1–8, 10, 14–16, 18–19. After 
staining, each well of collected cells was imaged using a Photometrics CoolSNAP HQ2 CCD camera mounted 
on an Axio Observer Z1 microscope (Zeiss), with an ASI motorized stage operated with Zen software. Cells 
were manually classified by two independent trained readers and enumerated using a criterion (Supp. Fig. 4)25  
that is based on three categories: debris, WBCs, or CTCs. In general, debris was characterized by irregular, jagged 
shapes or dark outlines under bright-field microscopy. Among the WBCs, there were (i) CK− 
/CD45+ 
/DAPI+ 
 cells, 
 
(ii) doubly-stained CK+ 
/CD45+ 
/DAPI+ 
 cells generally corresponding to CD66b+ 
 activated granulocytes25, and 
finally (iii) DAPI+ 
 only cells distinguished by lobular or segmented granulocytic nuclei, small nuclei (< 
9 μ 
m), 
and/or small N:C ratios. CTCs were primarily characterized as (i) CK+ 
/CD45− 
/DAPI + 
 cells or (ii) DAPI+ 
 only 
cells with a large nucleus (> 
9 μ 
m) and large N:C ratio.
Cell collection for cytological analysis. 
A first benchtop collection system for preparing cytology 
slides was developed for testing, based on a removable PDMS well. PDMS was poured into a 6-well plate at a 
cross-linker to polymer ratio of 1:10. After curing, the PDMS was removed and punched with a 17-mm biopsy 
punch (Supp. Fig. 5). The resulting ring was bonded to a microscope slide (Fisherfinest Premium Plain) using 
the same plasma bonding techniques as for the microfluidic devices. The CTCs were collected directly onto the 
ring containing 95% ethanol. The slide was then agitated on a shaker plate overnight at room temperature. After 
evaporation, 1 mL of Clearprep cytology solution was added to the slide, and let to dry. The PDMS insert was then 
removed and the slide processed for cytological staining.
A second collection method, using commercially available materials, was evaluated and consisted of a remov-
able media chamber attached to a standard glass microscope slide (Lab-Tek II chamber slide system, Nunc). 
CTCs were collected in PBS directly in one of the chambers, the slide was centrifuged at 800 g for 10 minutes 
and the cells were let to attach for 1 hour at room temperature. The cells were then fixed for 20 minutes with 
Clearprep fixative (Resolution Biomedical), the fixative was removed carefully and replaced with an equal volume 
of a Clearprep cytology solution, and the slide was left to dry overnight before staining. Variations around this 
protocol were tested, including the use of different fixatives, of coated chamber slides (fibronectin, Poly-D-Lysine) 
and different incubation times.
Slides were stained on a Sakura Tissue-Tek DRS 2000 (Sakura) following the UCLA Cytopathology 
Papanicolaou staining protocol used for clinical samples. Briefly the protocol consisted of incubations in 
Hematoxylin, Orange G, and Eosin Azure, with corresponding washes (Thermo Scientific) (Supp. Text 1). Slides 
were then mounted with mounting medium (Richard Allan Scientific), coverslipped and examined by a cytopa-
thologist blinded to the immunofluorescence CTC counts. For cell line characterization experiments, all condi-
tions were tested in duplicate. Following PAP staining and mounting, the slides were imaged with a microscope, 
the cells were counted and a recovery rate (in %) was calculated as the number of cells counted after PAP stain 
divided by the number of cells seeded at t = 0 on the slide.
Preparation of cytology slide with Cytospin was evaluated in parallel using a protocol from the UCLA 
Cytopathology Department. Briefly, single cytofunnels were assembled with white filter cards (Shandon), loaded 
with 200 μ 
l of a cell suspension containing 300 MCF7 cells, and ran in the cytocentrifuge (Shandon, Cytospin III) 
for 10 minutes of 500 rpm. After disassembling the fixtures, cell spots were fixed for 10 minutes with 95% ethanol, 
the slides left to dry overnight at RT, then stained and cells counted.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
Scientific RepoRts | 6:35474 | DOI: 10.1038/srep35474
Cell collection for cytogenetic analysis. 
Positively charged slides (Fisherbrand Superfrost Plus) were 
used for FISH analysis in combination with the first collection system described previously for cytological anal-
ysis (Supp. Fig. 5). Cells were released into the PDMS ring with 95% ethanol and then placed in a fume hood 
to allow for complete evaporation. The PDMS ring was removed once the slide was dry. Slides were processed 
using the standard FISH protocol provided by the vendor Abbott Molecular (Des Plaines, Illinois) using their 
FDA-approved Vysis LSI ALK Break Apart Rearrangement FISH Probe Kit. After hybridization, the slides were 
analyzed under a fluorescence microscope (Zeiss Axiophot) equipped with multicolor filters and 63X and 100X 
oil immersion objective lenses. All images were taken at 100X with 1.6X magnification.
Figure 2. In-flow label-free counting of large cells. (A) The in-flow counting algorithm was validated with 
A549 cell lines. 10–600 cells were initially spiked into 5 mL of PBS and processed. A correlation of R2 = 0.97 was 
found between the number of cells identified per the algorithm and the number of cells manually counted in 
the well plate. Inset axes show cells per mL. (B) This method was used to enumerate 9 NSCLC patient samples 
(L1–9), and 5 samples from healthy donors (H1–5). Only cells larger than 12 μ 
m were counted for the well plate. 
The counting criteria for the cells imaged in-flow included ranges for cell diameter, circularity, axial ratio, and 
specific pixel intensity distribution defined with A549 cells. As indicated with a green dotted line, a healthy 
threshold can be calculated from healthy donors at 3.15 cells/mL (mean + 2SD) (C) The counting criteria for the 
cells imaged in-flow included threshold ranges for cell diameter, solidity, axial ratio, and specific pixel intensity 
distribution. The thresholding order is given in the four histograms. All parameters for all objects that were 
detected is shown before thresholding was performed. Clinical blood samples had a larger proportion of debris 
compared to A549 spiked in blood.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
Scientific RepoRts | 6:35474 | DOI: 10.1038/srep35474
The analyzed cells were classified as: (a) negative for ALK rearrangement with two copies of chromosome 2p, 
(b) negative for ALK rearrangement with 3 or more copies of chromosome 2p (polysomy), (c) positive for ALK 
rearrangement and positive for ALK rearrangement along with three of more copies of 2p (polysomy), and (d) 
ambiguous signals pattern and uninterpretable. As defined by the ALK FISH probe Signal Enumeration Guide: 
(1) ALK-negative nuclei show two yellow (Red-Green) signals, (2) ALK-negative and polysomy of 2p nuclei show 
three or more yellow (Red-Green) signals, (3) ALK-positive nuclei show many variations of the signal pattern but 
all show one or more copies of split red-green signals consistent with ALK-rearrangement. (4) Uninterpretable 
nuclei had unclear or unresolvable probe signals probably caused by pyknotic nuclei or the presence of back-
ground noise.
Results
In-flow and label-free counting of large circulating cells. 
Because of the high purity isolation 
achieved with the Vortex HT Chip, we investigated counting of all isolated large cells as a measure of abnormal 
malignant processes25,35. A high large cell count, whatever the origin of these cells, could then indicate that down-
stream label-based enumeration assays would be warranted. For this purpose, we developed an in-flow counting 
system to enumerate the number of cells trapped and released by the Vortex HT chip before their collection at 
the chip outlet (Fig. 1). The system achieved high-speed brightfield imaging of released cells followed by image 
analysis to identify and extract morphological features for each cell. We trained the image analysis algorithm to 
identify cancer cells by first capturing A549 lung cancer cells spiked in PBS in the vortex traps and enumerat-
ing the released cells, before progressing to clinical patient samples. Accepted ranges for cell diameter, solidity, 
axial ratio and pixel intensity distribution were determined based on the in-flow morphology of A549 cells. Cell 
diameter ranged from 12 to 55 μ 
m, solidity ranged from 0.7 to 1, axial ratio ranged from 1 to 1.8, and the pixel 
intensity range within the cell was 0–20,000. Following this training and to evaluate the performance of our label-
free approach, A549 cells (10 to 600) were spiked into 5 mL of PBS and processed through the Vortex HT Chip. 
The captured cells were simultaneously enumerated in-flow and after collection in a well-plate followed by DAPI 
staining. The DAPI staining was used to determine location of the cell, and the brightfield image was used to 
measure the size of the cell. Figure 2A indicates a high correlation (R2 = 
 0.97) and unity relationship (y = 
 1.02x) 
between the number of cells counted with in-flow counting using an automated script and the number of cells 
enumerated after staining in the well-plate, and supported the accuracy of our counting method.
We next applied this approach to counting the cells in NSCLC patients and age-matched healthy blood sam-
ples. Samples from nine NSCLC patients and five healthy controls show a strong linear correlation between 
automated cell counts and well plate counts (Fig. 2B), with a slight overcounting bias for the automated count 
(y = 
 1.04x). A gallery of cells imaged in-flow is shown in Supp. Fig. 3. Cell counts from healthy samples can 
be used as a threshold to define patients with abnormal numbers of large cells above this healthy background. 
Using automated counting, a healthy threshold can be defined at 3.15 cells/mL (mean + 
 2SD), leading to 7/9 
(77.8%) of NSCLC patients with automated cell counts above the healthy threshold. Using well-plate cell counts, 
the healthy threshold can be defined at 7.7 cells/mL, with 3/9 (33%) of the patients above the threshold. For 
both counting approaches, patients L5, L8, and L9 were above threshold while patients L3 and L6 were below. 
Patient L7 is just below the threshold using well-plate-counts (7.25 cells/mL) but above the threshold accord-
ing to automated-counting (7.63 cells/mL). These data validate the ability of automated-counting to yield rapid 
label-free enumeration of large cells following Vortex trapping, which are present at higher levels in NSCLC 
patients.
Cytological analysis of circulating tumor cells. 
We tested two methods to integrate Vortex-based CTC 
isolation with the downstream workflow for cytological studies. In the first CTC collection system, CTCs released 
from the Vortex chip were collected in a PDMS well reversibly bonded to a microscope glass slide (Supp. Fig. 5). 
 
Using this device, CTCs isolated from ten NSCLC and six breast cancer patient samples were collected and 
stained with conventional Papanicolaou stain (Pap stain) (Fig. 3, Supp. Text 1). Malignant cells were detected 
in 9 of the 10 lung and 6 of the 6 breast cancer cases, while no malignant cells were detected in 5 healthy donors 
(Fig. 4A). Comparison of Pap-stained CTCs isolated from four NSCLC patients to their corresponding primary 
tumor biopsies stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) or May-Grunwald Giemsa (MGG), revealed con-
served morphological features (Fig. 3I–V): The circulating cell detected from patient L12 (I) reveals a large size 
and binucleation, which is recapitulated in cells found from a conventional Pap stain (J) and MGG stain (K) of 
pleural fluid from this patient, as well as the H&E stain (L) from the cell block. Cells isolated from the blood of 
patient L13 (M, N, O) have a very high N/C ratio and a distinct chromatin margination pattern that is recapitu-
lated in cells from a Pap (P) and H&E stain (Q) of the fine needle aspirate. For patient L20, both the circulating 
cells from the liquid biopsy (R, S) and the cells from the core needle biopsy (T) have irregular nuclear contours 
and hyperchromasia. Finally, very large cells with multinucleation are seen in patient L21, both in circulation (U) 
and in a Diff-Quik stain of tumor biopsy (V).
Although atypical cells were detected in 15/16 patient samples successfully processed and stained, some sam-
ples (1 NSCLC, 5 breast) peeled off during the PDMS ring removal due to lack of adhesion of the cell embedded 
layer on the slide and were not usable for quantitative counting following Pap staining (Supp. Table 1).
To limit this cell loss during processing and staining and to improve the adherence of the cell layer, as well as to 
accelerate the overall processing, we evaluated the effects of different parameters on cell recovery after Pap stain-
ing using a breast cancer cell line (MCF7) as a model. We replaced the PDMS ring collection system by a commer-
cially available chamber glass slide. Parameters tested included fixatives (95% ethanol, Clearprep fixative), growth 
surface of chamber slides (RS wash, fibronectin, Poly-D-Lysine), incubation time (1-hour vs no incubation), and 
cytology solution (Fig. 4C). Improved cell recovery (ranging from a 1.23 to a 1.97-fold increase) was achieved 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
Scientific RepoRts | 6:35474 | DOI: 10.1038/srep35474
when the cells were incubated for 1 hour on the glass slide. The addition of cytology solution further increased 
the recovery rates and this effect was more pronounced when the Clearprep fixative was used as opposed to 95% 
ethanol. The optimal recovery rate and staining quality were achieved with RS treated glass slides, for a recovery 
Figure 3. Cytological analysis of CTCs from NSCLC (L) and breast (B) cancer patient blood. Cell 
Morphology. (A–H) Gallery of cells isolated with the Vortex Chip, stained with a conventional Papanicolaou 
procedure and classified as highly atypical by a cytopathologist due to nuclear morphologies (e.g. hyperchromasia 
and chromatin margination, irregular nuclear membrane, and sometimes multinucleation) and high nuclear to 
cytoplasm ratios. (I–V) Cells from patients L12, L13, L20, L21 were compared to their primary tumor biopsies or 
other body fluids to identify morphological similarities. (I–L) Patient L12: The cell detected from patient L12  
(I) revealed binucleation, which was recapitulated in cells found from a Pap stain (J), MGG stain (K) of the 
pleural fluid, and H&E (L) of the primary tumor. (M–Q) Patient L13: Cells isolated from patient L13 (M–O) had 
a very high N/C ratio and a distinct chromatin margination pattern that was recapitulated in cells from a Pap  
(P) and H&E stain (Q) of a fine needle aspirate. (R–T) Patient L20: Both the circulating cells from the liquid 
biopsy (R,S) and the cells from the core needle biopsy (T) had irregular nuclear contours and hyperchromasia. 
(U,V) Patient L21: Very large cells with multinucleation were seen in sample L21, both in circulation (U) and in 
Diff-Quick stain of tumor biopsy (V).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
8
Scientific RepoRts | 6:35474 | DOI: 10.1038/srep35474
Figure 4. Cytological analysis of CTCs from NSCLC (L) and breast (B) cancer patient blood. Cell 
Enumeration. (A) Collection System #1: Over 16 samples were Pap stained, and malignant cells were detected in 
9/10 NSCLC patients and 6/6 breast cancer patients, while none were detected in 5 healthy donors. Processing 
failed (peeling of the cell layer) for 7 samples. (B) To solve the cell layer peeling, a new Collection System #2 
was tested with 20 new samples: Over 20 samples, malignant cells were detected among 6/10 NSCLC patients 
and 6/10 breast cancer patients, while none were detected in 5 healthy donors. (C) Evaluation of the effect of 
different parameters (fixatives, surface of chamber slides, incubation time, use of cytology solution) on cell 
recovery after Pap staining using an MCF7 breast cancer cell line as a model. An optimal recovery rate and 
staining quality was achieved with RS treated glass slides, for a recovery rate of 97% and a processing time 
of about 12 hours, compared to 34% recovery and 36 hours processing using the initial protocol. (D) Using 
those optimal conditions, CTCs were isolated from patient whole-blood samples, Pap stained, and classified 
as malignant by a cytopathologist due to: abundant granular cytoplasm with large pleomorphic, lobulated 
nuclei (B1), foamy cytoplasm and large pleomorphic hyperchromatic nuclei (B2), and enlarged nuclei with 
hyperchromasia and coarse chromatin (L1).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
9
Scientific RepoRts | 6:35474 | DOI: 10.1038/srep35474
rate of 97%, compared to 69% and 75% for Poly-D-Lysine and fibronectin coated slides respectively, and 34% cell 
recovery using the initial protocol. Processing time for this new collection procedure was about 12 hours com-
pared to more than 36 hours for the original protocol.
As a final validation, the chamber slide protocol was tested in parallel with Cytospin. Cytospin is a conven-
tional cytology technique that uses a high speed centrifuge to concentrate cells from biopsies on a glass slide in 
a uniform monolayer. The monolayer distribution enhances the morphological appearance of the cells present 
and facilitates cytological staining and identification of atypical cells. In this comparison, 300 MCF7 cells were 
either seeded on a chamber glass slide, or loaded into the cytology sample funnel (Supp. Fig. 5). A significant cell 
loss was observed with the Cytospin concentration method, with only 25% cell recovery onto the glass slide, as 
opposed to 71% for the chamber glass-slide method. This low cell recovery with Cytospin can be explained by the 
low number of cells (300) loaded on the cytofunnel. This number of cells was chosen to reflect the low cellularity 
of the samples after processing through our CTC platform. The recommended number of cells for Cytospin is 
typically in the 1–2 × 105 range. This side-by-side comparison highlights the challenge of using Cytospin for rare 
CTC concentration and the need for a specific CTC concentration method for cytology purposes, which is one of 
the important points of our manuscript which we believe will assist the community.
Using those optimal conditions (RS wash glass slide, incubation of the cells for 1 hour, Clearprep fixative, 
cytology solutions), we then collected and Pap-stained an additional set of CTCs isolated from patients with 
NSCLC (N = 10) and breast cancer (N = 10), all in Stage IV (Fig. 4B). After Pap staining, malignant and atypical 
cells were identified, enumerated by a cytopathologist and cell counts normalized per mL of blood processed. 
Using Pap staining, malignant cells were identified in 6/10 (60%) of lung and in 6/10 (60%) of breast cancer 
patients while none were detected in 5 healthy volunteers. No cell layer was peeled off during the staining pro-
cedure as observed in the first approach. Samples were considered positive when cell count was greater than the 
threshold as determined from the healthy volunteer cohort (as mean + 
 2SD). Using this threshold (0 atypical 
+ 
 malignant cells/mL), 60% (6/10) of lung and 60% (6/10) of breast cancer samples were considered positive for 
CTCs (Fig. 4B). As a comparison, another blood tube from each patient was processed the same way, but with the 
cells being collected in a well-plate for conventional marker-based enumeration (CK, CD45, DAPI) as previously 
described by Che et al.25. Detailed explanations of these cell classifications with accompanying image galleries are 
shown in Supp. Fig. 3. Using such immunostaining and classification criteria, more CTCs were found in lung (mean: 
2.58 CTCs/mL, range: 1.00–5.50 CTCs/mL) and breast (mean: 3.95 CTCs/mL, range: 1.17–11.17 CTCs/mL) 
 
cancer samples than in healthy controls (mean: 0.72 CTCs/mL, range: 0.25–1.17 CTCs/mL) (Supp. Fig. 3C). 
Using the healthy threshold of 1.46 CTCs/mL (mean + 
 2SD), approximately 80% (8/10) of lung and 80% (8/10) of 
breast cancer samples, were considered positive for CTCs by immunofluorescence staining.
Cytogenetic analysis of circulating tumor cells. 
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is a gold 
standard diagnostic test used in the clinic for the detection of genetic aberrations including rearrangements 
(translocations, inversions) and changes in gene copy number associated with cancer32,33. As a proof of principle, 
we assessed the feasibility of characterizing the anaplastic lymphoma receptor tyrosine kinase (ALK) gene rear-
rangement by FISH in CTCs isolated from patients with non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) (Fig. 5A–B).
Blood samples were collected from one ALK-positive patient and ALK-negative patient, processed through 
the Vortex chip and CTCs were collected on a glass slide using the standard FISH procedures. The fluorescence 
signal patterns obtained from the cells collected from the liquid biopsy were compared to FISH results performed 
previously on the primary tumor biopsy. Notably, the isolated CTCs displayed similar ALK probe patterns when 
compared to the corresponding primary tumors (Fig. 5C). CTCs and tumor sections both showed ALK rear-
rangement as well as complex signal patterns, as evidenced by the multiple probe rearrangements and polysomy 
in the nuclei. However, no-rearrangements-positive signal patterns were observed for the cells collected from the 
ALK negative patient and its primary tumor counterpart (Fig. 5D).
Discussion
We have demonstrated the utility of Vortex trapping technology as a platform to enable extraction of CTCs and 
interfacing with downstream assays of clinical importance. Our cell capture approach enables the coupling of 
label-free cell enumeration in-flow based on bright field images with various standard assays downstream, such as 
cytology and cytogenetics. In-flow microfluidic cytological staining could also enhance such assays in the future, 
enabling rapid counts37. A simple count of tumor-associated large circulating cells obtainable within minutes 
after processing could avoid costly immunofluorescence-based enumeration as used currently, as well as indicate 
downstream assays for the subset of samples with sufficient numbers of cells, also avoiding wasted time and costs.
All cells collected can be counted in-flow, without the need for any cell-specific labels and remain unaltered, 
allowing cells to be collected off-chip for further characterization assays, such as cytology, cytogenetics, genomic 
profiling, transcriptomic and drug assays, and even conventional immunofluorescence. More importantly, these 
results introduce label-free analysis as a potential method to rapidly identify patient samples with high cell counts 
directly compatible with downstream assays (e.g. cytology, FISH, genetic analysis, or further immunostaining), or 
conversely, limit the use of valuable resources on samples without significant diagnostic cells. Although these ini-
tial data are promising, additional patient samples from a variety of cancer types and cancer stages are needed to 
validate the approach further. Further, direct single-cell comparisons between morphological and immunofluo-
rescence staining for CTCs would be interesting to investigate in the future, and should be enabled by high-speed 
imaging cytometry technology38.
The large cytological dataset of over 35 patients revealed that circulating tumor cells share striking cytomor-
phological features with malignant cells from other body fluids. The most common types of features include 
abundant granular cytoplasm, foamy cytoplasm, large pleomorphic and lobulated nuclei, large pleomorphic 
hyperchromatic nuclei, as well as nuclei with hyperchromasia and coarse chromatin. Similar observations have 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
10
Scientific RepoRts | 6:35474 | DOI: 10.1038/srep35474
been made with filter-based approaches or high-throughput imaging on a glass slide30,31, but without cell enu-
meration and with the need for red blood cell lysis and a staining protocol which differ from the standard cyto-
pathology workflow. Further clinical studies are needed in collaboration with cytopathologists at multiple sites 
to make any conclusion on the clinical use of liquid biopsies followed by standard cytological analysis for cancer 
diagnosis and prognosis30.
Further clinical testing using our label-free approach from numerous patient samples of different tumor types 
and different cancer stages would allow the development of an improved database of both CTC brightfield and 
Pap images30. This database could then be analyzed with machine learning algorithms to define new biomarkers 
for cancer diagnosis and prognosis, such as the number of cells above a certain size or number of cells with a 
distinct morphology, leading to improved differentiation from large cells present in healthy patients. A simple 
label-free count of abnormal cancer-associated cells could be more widely adopted for cancer prognosis, and 
also serve to direct downstream assays when most likely to provide clinically-actionable information – making 
headway towards personalized medicine that can be largely deployed.
Similarly, we have demonstrated the compatibility of Vortex CTC enrichment with FISH assays. More clin-
ical assays are warranted to validate the use of FISH for CTCs and liquid biopsies to define the corresponding 
threshold for identification of a patient that would respond to targeted therapies based on chromosomal aberra-
tions. Detecting ALK translocations in cells directly isolated from the blood of an ALK-positive patient not only 
Figure 5. Cytogenetic analysis of Vortex isolated circulating tumor cells. (A) Schematic of Abbot Molecular 
LSI ALK Break Apart Rearrangement Probe Kit (www.abbottmolecular.com). (B) Images of (left) ALK+ CTC 
isolated from a NSCLC patient sample and (right) ALK- WBC from a healthy donor. Non-rearranged ALK gene 
is identified by red and green probes next to each other or overlapping for a yellow signal (yellow arrows). ALK 
rearrangements are identified by split green and red signals (white arrows). (C) ALK+ 
 patient. (Left) Isolated 
CTCs have ALK probe patterns that are similar to those from the primary tumor (right): CTC1 and Tumor1 
both show ALK rearrangement as well as polysomy, which is indicated by the multiple probe signals of each 
color in each nuclei. (D) ALK- patient. CTC2 and Tumor2 both exhibit normal ALK signals.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
11
Scientific RepoRts | 6:35474 | DOI: 10.1038/srep35474
confirms the malignant nature of the isolated cells, but also supports the compatibility of CTCs isolated with our 
label-free approach with commercially available, FDA-approved FISH assays. FISH analysis of CTCs can be a 
valuable, noninvasive surrogate for routine tumor cytogenetic profiling and may provide additional information 
to help predict a patient’s outcome, identify patients eligible for targeted drug therapy and/or monitor response to 
treatment. Detection of CTCs harboring a unique ALK rearrangement in ALK-positive NSCLC patient samples 
was emphasized by Pailler et al.18, where the CTCs were isolated with the ISET FISH kit (FA_FISH) and enumer-
ated with CellSearch. Data suggest that ALK rearrangements can be reliably detected in CTCs from ALK-positive 
NSCLC patients and that serial evaluation of the CTCs could be used to monitor response to targeted therapy 
such as crizotinib and/or to enable detection of resistance markers. In addition, given the specific signal pattern 
of ALK-rearrangement that was detected only in CTCs and not observed within the tumor samples by Pailler 
 
et al., a single tumor biopsy may not be representative of the entire tumor and CTCs that may originate from var-
ious metastatic sites may be more informative17,18. In tumor samples analyzed by FISH, a threshold of 15% ALK- 
rearranged cells is typically used to define ALK-positive patients. Further clinical studies would now be necessary 
to define the cutoff value for positive blood biopsies that correlate with response to treatment for example.
Besides cytology and cytogenetics, this label-free collection and enumeration platform is enabling for almost 
any downstream analysis approach, and allows for rapid and cost-effective decisions concerning the next step of a 
sample processing. The sample is prepared in a small volume compatible with the standard workflows in the clin-
ical laboratory. This enables for example immunofluorescence staining, targeting Her2, ER, EGFR, PSA, cMET 
or PDL1 among others, to better profile CTC protein expression and identify new biomarkers, and should be also 
compatible with single-cell DNA and RNA sequencing. Beyond traditional body fluids analyzed in clinical labs, 
using a vortex-based approach now opens up the use of blood as a new source of diagnostic cells for the cytopa-
thologist for breast and lung cancer diagnosis.
References
1. Plaks, V., Koopman, C. D. & Werb, Z. Circulating Tumor Cells. Science 341(6151), 1186–1188 (2013).
2. Cristofanilli, M. et al. Circulating Tumor Cells, Disease Progression, and Survival in Metastatic Breast Cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 
351(8), 781–791 (2004).
3. Pantel, K. & Alix-Panabières, C. Circulating tumour cells in cancer patients: challenges and perspectives. Trends Mol. Med. 16(9), 
398–406 (2010).
4. Alix-Panabières, C. & Pantel, K. Circulating tumor cells: liquid biopsy of cancer. Clin. Chem. 59(1), 110–118 (2013).
5. Riethdorf, S. et al. Detection and HER2 expression of circulating tumor cells: prospective monitoring in breast cancer patients 
treated in the neoadjuvant GeparQuattro trial. Clin. Cancer Res. 16(9), 2634–2645 (2010).
6. Yu, M. et al. Cancer therapy. Ex vivo culture of circulating breast tumor cells for individualized testing of drug susceptibility. Science 
345(6193), 216–220 (2014).
7. Nagrath, S. et al. Isolation of rare circulating tumour cells in cancer patients by microchip technology. Nature 450(7173), 1235–1239 
(2007).
8. Stott, S. L. et al. Isolation of circulating tumor cells using a microvortex-generating herringbone-chip. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 
107(43), 18392–18397 (2010).
9. Riethdorf, S. et al. Detection of circulating tumor cells in peripheral blood of patients with metastatic breast cancer: a validation 
study of the CellSearch system. Clin. Cancer Res. 13(3), 920–928 (2007).
10. Went, P. T. et al. Frequent EpCam protein expression in human carcinomas. Hum. Pathol. 35(1), 122–128 (2004).
11. Patriarca, C., Macchi, R. M., Marschner, A. K. & Mellstedt, H. Epithelial cell adhesion molecule expression (CD326) in cancer: A 
short review. Cancer Treatment Reviews 38, 68–75 (2012).
12. Alva, A. et al. Circulating Tumor Cells as Potential Biomarkers in Bladder Cancer. Journal of Urology 194(3), 790–798 (2015).
13. Lustberg, M., Jatana, K. R., Zborowski, M. & Chalmers, J. J. Emerging technologies for CTC detection based on depletion of normal 
cells. Recent Results Cancer Res. 195, 97–110 (2012).
14. Ozkumur, E. Inertial Focusing for Tumor Antigen–Dependent and –Independent Sorting of Rare Circulating Tumor Cells. Sci. 
Transl. Med. 5(179), 179ra47 (2013).
15. Williams, A., Balic, M., Datar, R. & Cote, R. Size-Based Enrichment Technologies for CTC Detection and Characterization. Recent 
Results Cancer Res. 195, 87–95 (2012).
16. Cauley, C. E. et al. Circulating Epithelial Cells in Patients with Pancreatic Lesions: Clinical and Pathologic Findings. J. Am. Coll. Surg. 
221(3), 699–707 (2015).
17. Pailler, E. et al. High level of chromosomal instability in circulating tumor cells of ROS1-rearranged non-small-cell lung cancer. 
Annals of Oncology 26(7), 1408–1415 (2015).
18. Pailler, E. et al. Detection of Circulating Tumor Cells Harboring a Unique ALK Rearrangement in ALK-Positive Non–Small-Cell 
Lung Cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 31(18), 2273–2281 (2013).
19. Buim, M. E. C. et al. Detection of KRAS mutations in circulating tumor cells from patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. Cancer 
Biology & Therapy 16(9), 1–7 (2015).
20. Krebs, M. G. et al. Analysis of circulating tumor cells in patients with non-small cell lung cancer using epithelial marker-dependent 
and -independent approaches. J. Thorac. Oncol. 7, 306–315 (2012).
21. Tan, S. J. et al. Microdevice for the isolation and enumeration of cancer cells from blood. Biomed. Microdevices 11(4), 883–892 
(2009).
22. Sarioglu, A. F. et al. A microfluidic device for label-free, physical capture of circulating tumor cell clusters. Nat Methods 12(7), 
685–691 (2015).
23. Hou, H. W. et al. Isolation and retrieval of circulating tumor cells using centrifugal forces. Scientific Reports 3, 1259 (2013).
24. Streicher, J., Fabian, B., Herkner, K., Pointner, H. & Bayer, P. M. Anticytokeratins are a potential source of false-positive indirect 
immunofluorescence assays for C-ANCA. J. Clin. Lab. Anal. 12(1), 54–59 (1998).
25. Che, J. et al. Classification of large circulating tumor cells isolated with ultra-high throughput microfluidic Vortex technology. 
Oncotarget doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7220 (2016).
26. Karabacak, N. M. et al. Microfluidic, marker-free isolation of circulating tumor cells from blood samples. Nat. Protoc. 9, 694–710 
(2014).
27. Mikolajczyk, S. D. et al. Detection of EpCAM-negative and cytokeratin-negative circulating tumor cells in peripheral blood. J. Oncol. 
2011, 252361 (2011).
28. Serrano, M. J. et al. EMT and EGFR in CTCs cytokeratin negative non-metastatic breast cancer. Oncotarget 5(17), 7486–7497 
(2014).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
12
Scientific RepoRts | 6:35474 | DOI: 10.1038/srep35474
29. Mach, A. J., Adeyiga, O. & Di Carlo, D. Review: Microfluidic sample preparation for diagnostic cytopathology. Lab on a Chip 13(6), 
1011–1026 (2013).
30. Fiorelli, A. et al. Circulating Tumor Cells in Diagnosing Lung Cancer: Clinical and Morphologic Analysis. Ann. Thorac. Surg. 99, 
1899–1905 (2015).
31. Marrinucci, D. et al. Circulating Tumor Cells From Well-Differentiated Lung Adenocarcinoma Retain Cytomorphologic Features of 
Primary Tumor Type. Arch. Pathol. Lab. Med. 133(9), 1468–1471 (2009).
32. Kwak, E. L. et al. Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase Inhibition in Non–Small-Cell Lung Cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 363(18), 1693–1703 
(2010).
33. Shaw, A. T. et al. Effect of crizotinib on overall survival in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer harbouring ALK gene 
rearrangement: a retrospective analysis. Lancet Oncol. 12(11), 1004–1012 (2011).
34. Leversha, M. A. et al. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis of circulating tumor cells in metastatic prostate cancer. Clin. Cancer 
Res. 15(6), 2091–2097 (2009).
35. Sollier, E. et al. Size-selective collection of circulating tumor cells using Vortex technology. Lab Chip 14(1), 63–77 (2013).
36. Mach, A. J., Kim, J. H., Arshi, A., Hur, S. C. & Di Carlo, D. Automated cellular sample preparation using a Centrifuge-on-a-Chip. Lab 
Chip 11, 2827–2834 (2011).
37. Tan, A. P. et al. Continuous-flow cytomorphological staining and analysis. Lab Chip 14(3), 522–531 (2014).
38. Diebold, E. D., Buckley, B. W., Gossett, D. R. & Jalali, B. Digitally synthesized beat frequency multiplexing for sub-millisecond 
fluorescence microscopy. Nature Photonics 7, 806–810 (2013).
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge funding from a sponsored research grant from Vortex Biosciences, and NIH IMAT Program 
(Grant #5R33CA177456). The authors thank Dr. Oladunni Adeyiga, Juan Avalos, Hsiu Chin Hsu, Felicia Hall and 
all the nurses for their help with the blood collection. Last but not least, we would like to thank all patients and 
healthy blood donors for their blood donation.
Author Contributions
M.D., E.P. and C.R. contributed equally to this work. M.D., E.P., C.R., D.E.G., E.S.-C. and D.D.C. designed the 
experiments. M.D., E.P., C.R., D.E.G., J.C., M.T. and E.S.-C. performed the experiments. M.D., E.P., C.R., D.E.G., 
J.C., R.M., R.C., J.R., N.P.R., E.S.-C. and D.D.C. analyzed the data. M.M., K.H. and M.T. consent the patients. J.R., 
S.S.J., E.B.G., J.G., N.P.R. and R.K. contributed reagents and clinical samples. M.D., E.P, C.R., J.R., N.P.R., E.S.-C. 
and D.D.C. wrote the manuscript. All authors reviewed the manuscript.
Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at http://www.nature.com/srep
Competing financial interests: Some of the authors (C.R., J.C., E.S.-C. and D.D.C) and the Regents of the 
University of California have financial interests in Vortex Biosciences and intellectual property described 
herein. J. G. serves on the scientific advisory board of Vortex Biosciences.
How to cite this article: Dhar, M. et al. Label-free enumeration, collection and downstream cytological and 
cytogenetic analysis of circulating tumor cells. Sci. Rep. 6, 35474; doi: 10.1038/srep35474 (2016).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images 
or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, 
unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, 
users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this 
license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 
© The Author(s) 2016
