 P A R K I N S O N ’ S D I S E A SE
a-Synuclein binds to TOM20 and inhibits mitochondrial
protein import in Parkinson’s disease
Roberto Di Maio,1,2,3* Paul J. Barrett,1,2* Eric K. Hoffman,1,2 Caitlyn W. Barrett,1,2
Alevtina Zharikov,1,2,4 Anupom Borah,1,5 Xiaoping Hu,1,2 Jennifer McCoy,1,2 Charleen T. Chu,1,6
Edward A. Burton,1,2,4 Teresa G. Hastings,1,2 J. Timothy Greenamyre1,2,4†
a-Synuclein accumulation and mitochondrial dysfunction have both been strongly implicated in the patho-
genesis of Parkinson’s disease (PD), and the two appear to be related. Mitochondrial dysfunction leads to accumu-
lation and oligomerization of a-synuclein, and increased levels of a-synuclein cause mitochondrial impairment,
but the basis for this bidirectional interaction remains obscure. We now report that certain posttranslationally
modified species of a-synuclein bind with high affinity to the TOM20 (translocase of the outer membrane 20)
presequence receptor of the mitochondrial protein import machinery. This binding prevented the interaction of
TOM20 with its co-receptor, TOM22, and impaired mitochondrial protein import. Consequently, there were deficient
mitochondrial respiration, enhanced production of reactive oxygen species, and loss of mitochondrial membrane
potential. Examination of postmortem brain tissue from PD patients revealed an aberrant a-synuclein–TOM20 in-
teraction in nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons that was associated with loss of imported mitochondrial proteins,
thereby confirming this pathogenic process in the human disease. Modest knockdown of endogenous a-synuclein
was sufficient to maintain mitochondrial protein import in an in vivo model of PD. Furthermore, in in vitro systems,
overexpression of TOM20 or a mitochondrial targeting signal peptide had beneficial effects and preserved mito-
chondrial protein import. This study characterizes a pathogenic mechanism in PD, identifies toxic species of wild-
type a-synuclein, and reveals potential new therapeutic strategies for neuroprotection.
INTRODUCTION
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a common neurodegenerative disorder
that results in motor impairment, cognitive and psychiatric symp-
toms, and autonomic dysfunction (1). Both genetic and environ-
mental factors have been implicated in PD pathogenesis, and it
appears that mitochondrial defects and accumulation of the synap-
tic protein a-synuclein are common to most forms of the disease
(2). Moreover, there is evidence of a bidirectional interaction be-
tween mitochondrial dysfunction and a-synuclein accretion and
aggregation. Inhibition of mitochondrial complex I leads to accu-
mulation and oligomerization of a-synuclein (3–5), and increased
levels of a-synuclein cause mitochondrial impairment and produc-
tion of reactive oxygen species (ROS) (6). The nature of the inter-
action between a-synuclein and mitochondria remains obscure, as
does the basis for the vulnerability of dopamine neurons of the ni-
grostriatal tract. Furthermore, it is unclear whether unmodified
monomeric a-synuclein is responsible for these effects or whether
posttranslational modifications that have been implicated in patho-
genesis, such as oligomerization, dopamine modification, phospho-
rylation, or nitration, are important.
Although mitochondria contain their own genome, it encodes only
13 proteins (7). Because mitochondria may contain up to 1500 distinct
proteins (8), they must import roughly 99% of these. The mitochondrial
protein import and sorting machinery is complex and highly regulated
(9, 10), and its components and mechanisms vary by the compartment
to which a protein is to be sorted. The best-characterized system is one
by which nuclear-encoded, matrix-targeted proteins that contain a
mitochondrial targeting signal (MTS; presequence) are recognized
by the translocase of the outer membrane (TOM) receptors and trans-
located through the outer membrane to the translocase of the inner
membrane (TIM) and into the matrix, where the MTS is cleaved to
yield the mature protein (10). In this system, import of a presequence-
containing preprotein starts with recognition of the MTS via interaction
of its hydrophobic face with the TOM20 receptor (10). Subsequently,
the hydrophilic side of the presequence is recognized by TOM22. Given
the normally close proximity of TOM20 and TOM22, it is also possible
that both receptors recognize the MTS simultaneously. However, recent
cryo-EM (electron microscopy) studies suggest that, in addition to the
central TOM complex core, there are “peripheral” TOM20 components,
which are in a dynamic equilibrium with the preassembled TOM
complex (11).
Although monomeric a-synuclein is an intrinsically disordered pro-
tein in solution, in association with anionic lipids in membranes, it
forms an amphipathic helix (12) similar to known MTS motifs. In this
context, we hypothesized that, under some conditions, a-synuclein
might interact with TOM20 and interfere with import of mitochond-
rially targeted proteins. As such, this may represent a new pathogenic
mechanism and a potential target for therapeutic intervention in PD.
RESULTS
a-Synuclein interacts with TOM20 in vivo
Systemic defects in mitochondrial complex I have been described
repeatedly in PD, and systemic inhibition of complex I with rotenone
1Pittsburgh Institute for Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
PA 15213, USA. 2Department of Neurology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213,
USA. 3Ri.MED Foundation, Palermo, Italy. 4Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center,
VA Pittsburgh Healthcare System, Pittsburgh, PA 15240, USA. 5Department of Life Science
and Bioinformatics, Assam University, Silchar 788011, India. 6Department of Pathology,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Corresponding author. Email: jgreena@pitt.edu
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ra78
1
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 in rodents reproduces many features of PD, including Lewy pathology
and accumulation and oligomerization of a-synuclein in the substan-
tia nigra (4, 5, 13). We have also found that in vivo rotenone treatment
increases S129 phosphorylation of a-synuclein in nigrostriatal neu-
rons (213% of control; P < 0.0001, two-tailed unpaired t test; fig. S1).
Moreover, occupational exposure to rotenone is a risk factor for de-
veloping the disease (14). Therefore, we used the rotenone model to
assess potential interactions between a-synuclein and mitochondrial
protein import machinery. Using proximity ligation assays (PLAs)
(15), we demonstrated a marked increase in the interaction between
a-synuclein and TOM20 in nigrostriatal dopamine neurons of rats
treated with rotenone relative to rats treated with vehicle (n = 6 per
group; P < 0.001, two-tailed unpaired t test, or P < 0.005 with Welch’s
correction for unequal variances; Fig. 1A). There was no such inter-
action between a-synuclein and TOM22 or TOM40 or a component
of the translocase of the inner membrane, TIM23 (fig. S2). As an initial
assessment of whether this apparent interaction between a-synuclein
and TOM20 resulted in loss of mitochondrially targeted protein, we
examined levels of the nuclear-encoded, mitochondrially targeted
subunit of complex I, NADH (reduced form of nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide)–ubiquinone oxidoreductase core subunit S3 (Ndufs3),
and found a decrease in this imported protein after rotenone treatment.
Furthermore, the remaining Ndufs3 immunoreactivity was more dif-
fuse than punctate, as verified by a drop in the TOM20-Ndufs3 Pearson
index from 0.77 ± 0.02 in control animals to 0.23 ± 0.02 in rotenone-
treated rats (P < 0.0001, two-tailed unpaired t test; fig. S3).
a-Synuclein in nigrostriatal dopamine neurons increases with
normal aging, in PD, and in rats treated with rotenone (4, 16). Because
the amount of oligomer formation and other posttranslational modifi-
cations are dependent on the concentration of a-synuclein, we exam-
ined the in vivo effects of reducing a-synuclein on its interaction with
TOM20 in rotenone-treated rats. Three weeks before rotenone treat-
ment, rats received a unilateral injection into substantia nigra of adeno-
associated virus type 2 (AAV2) virus containing a short hairpin RNA
specificallytargetingrata-synuclein(17).Quantitativeconfocalimmuno-
fluorescence showed a 30 to 40% knockdown of endogenous a-synuclein
protein in transduced dopamine neurons 3 weeks after injection (17).
Using tissue from this previous study, we found that after rotenone treat-
ment, in the untransduced hemisphere, there was a strong PL signal be-
tween a-synuclein and TOM20, which was almost completely prevented
by the modest reduction in a-synuclein in the AAV2-injected hemi-
sphere (n = 4; P < 0.0001, two-tailed paired t test, or P < 0.0005 with
Welch’s correction; Fig. 1B). Consistent with the decreased interaction
of a-synuclein with TOM20, knockdown was associated with a pre-
servation of punctate (mitochondrial) Ndufs3 staining, suggesting nor-
mal protein import. Knockdown of endogenous a-synuclein provided
behavioral protection and preservation of nigrostriatal neurons, termi-
nals, and dendrites (17), possibly indicating the importance of reduced
mitochondrial protein import.
To validate our finding of an in vivo interaction between a-synuclein
and TOM20, we used another model of PD that does not rely on a
neurotoxin, namely, AAV2 viral-mediated overexpression of human
a-synuclein (hSNCA) in nigrostriatal neurons. Quantitative immu-
nofluorescence indicated a threefold overexpression of a-synuclein in
the transduced nigral neurons (P < 0.01) along with a marked increase
in S129 phosphorylation (394% of control; P < 0.005, paired t test; fig.
S1). In this model, which induces a-synuclein oligomerization (18)
and causes delayed and progressive neurodegeneration (19), we also
found a strong PL signal between a-synuclein and TOM20 with a
parallel loss of mitochondrial Ndufs3 in dopamine neurons in the
vector-injected hemisphere, but not in the control hemisphere (n = 4;
P < 0.005, two-tailed paired t test, or P < 0.05 with Welch’s correction;
Fig. 1C).
a-Synuclein interacts with TOM20 in dopaminergic neurons
in the PD brain
Our results from rotenone-treated and hSNCA-overexpressing rats
demonstrated an interaction between a-synuclein and TOM20, which
was associated with reduced import and a decrease in mitochondrially
localized Ndufs3. To determine whether this process was relevant to
idiopathichumanPD,weperformedPLAsassays(a-synuclein–TOM20)
and immunocytochemistry for the Ndufs3 subunit in blinded post-
mortem substantia nigra sections from individuals with PD (n = 5) and
from controls (n = 4). Compared to controls, nigrostriatal dopamine
neurons from all PD cases had a strong PL signal (P < 0.0001), indicating
an interaction between a-synuclein and TOM20 (Fig. 2). Furthermore,
relative to the controls, there was a prominent loss of mitochondrial
Ndufs3 staining (P < 0.02 or P < 0.05 with Welch’s correction), and the
staining that remained tended to be diffuse rather than punctate. This
suggested that a-synuclein–induced impairment of mitochondrial pro-
tein import may occur in the human disease.
a-Synuclein inhibits import of mitochondrial proteins
To explore in more detail the functional significance of the a-synuclein–
TOM20 interaction, we turned to cellular and in vitro assays of mito-
chondrial protein import in the presence or absence of various forms of
monomeric, oligomeric, or otherwise posttranslationally modified re-
combinant a-synuclein. For this purpose, we used (i) confocal imaging
of dopaminergic SH-SY5Y cells expressing mitochondrially targeted
GFP (MTS-GFP), (ii) direct assays of mitochondrial protein import in
isolated mitochondria, and (iii) confocal measurements of mitochondrial
localization of endogenous, presequence-containing, nuclear-encoded,
and imported proteins. a-Synuclein binds to lipid membranes and can
easily cross the plasma membrane, a property we took advantage of in
in vitro studies (20). Control experiments using fluorescently labeled
a-synuclein confirmed that each species of a-synuclein used in subse-
quent experiments entered cells to an equivalent extent (fig. S4). Fur-
thermore, when cells were treated with exogenous a-synuclein species
(200 nM monomer equivalent), there was no detectable change in the
total cellular content of a-synuclein, consistent with the data suggesting
that endogenous intraneuronal concentrations are in the range of 2 to
5 mM (21), or even higher (22).
Treatment of SH-SY5Y cells with 200 nM monomeric a-synuclein
for 24 or 48 hours had no effect on import (mitochondrially localized
GFP),butthesameamountofa-synuclein,intheformofsmalloligomers,
potently inhibited import by about 50% [P < 0.0001, two-way analysis of
variance (ANOVA); n = 3; Fig. 3, A and B]. Dopamine stably modifies
a-synuclein, and although the molecular nature of this modification is
controversial, this form of a-synuclein has been implicated in pathogenesis
(23, 24). When applied to SH-SY5Y cells, dopamine-modified a-synuclein
also potently inhibited import (P < 0.0001). Similarly, S129E a-synuclein,
a phosphomimetic mutant, strongly inhibited MTS-GFP import (P <
0.0001). In contrast, unlike the other posttranslational modifications, ni-
trated a-synuclein behaved like the monomeric, unmodified protein and
did not inhibit import. Additionally, thioflavin T–positive fibrils of
a-synuclein had no effect on import (fig. S5, A to D).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ra78
2
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. 1. Ex vivo PL between a-synuclein and TOM20 is associated with
decreased mitochondrial import of the complex I subunit Ndufs3 in ni-
grostriatal neurons in vivo in the rotenone and a-synuclein overex-
pression rat models of PD. (A) In a vehicle-treated rat (top row), there is
little a-synuclein (a-syn)–TOM20 PL signal, and there is intense punctate
staining of Ndufs3 in mitochondria of nigrostriatal neurons. In contrast, in
a rotenone-treated rat (bottom row), there is a strong a-synuclein–TOM20
PL signal, which is associated with loss of mitochondrial Ndufs3 staining. In
the box plot, mean nigrostriatalcellular PL fluorescence valuesfor individual
animals (vehicle- or rotenone-treated) are indicated by black circles. In each
animal, PL signal was measured in 35 to 50 nigrostriatal neurons per hem-
isphere. P < 0.005 by two-tailed unpaired t test with Welch’s correction. TH,
tyrosine hydroxylase. (B) In a rat that received a unilateral injection of AAV-
shSNCA, the rotenone-induced a-synuclein–TOM20 PL signal was largely
prevented, and mitochondrial Ndufs3 staining was preserved. In the box
plot, mean nigrostriatal cellular PL fluorescence values for each hemisphere
(control or AAV-shSNCA–injected) of individual animals are indicated by
black circles. For each animal, PL signal was measured in 50 to 70 nigro-
striatal neurons per hemisphere. P < 0.0005 by two-tailed paired t test with
Welch’s correction. (C) In a rat that received unilateral injection of an
a-synuclein overexpression vector (AAV-hSNCA), the a-synuclein–injected
hemisphere showed a strong a-synuclein–TOM20 PL signal with an asso-
ciated loss of Ndufs3 staining. In the box plot, mean nigrostriatal cellular
PL fluorescence values for each hemisphere (control AAV-GFP or AAV-
hSNCA–injected) of individual animals are indicated by black circles. For each
animal, PL signal was measured in 50 to 70 nigrostriatal neurons per hemi-
sphere. P < 0.05 by two-tailed unpaired t test with Welch’s correction. Scale
bar, 30 mm. GFP, green fluorescent protein.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ra78
3
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Given the critical role of TOM20 in the import of mitochondrially
targeted proteins containing an N-terminal targeting signal, we exam-
ined whether overexpression of TOM20 might ameliorate the deleterious
effects of a-synuclein on protein import. In cells transiently or stably
overexpressing TOM20 (about fourfold over endogenous), the inhibi-
tory effects of oligomeric, dopamine-modified, and S129E a-synuclein
on import of MTS-GFP were completely
prevented (P < 0.0001; Fig. 3, A and B).
Overexpression of another component
of the TOMcomplex, TOM5, did notpre-
serve import (fig. S6C).
Although a-synuclein inhibited mito-
chondrial protein import in cells, this ef-
fect might be indirect. Therefore, we used
isolated rat brain mitochondria to ex-
amine direct effects of various forms of
a-synucleinon import. Aftera 30-minpre-
incubation of 200 nM a-synuclein with
mitochondria at 4°C, we found that oligo-
meric, dopamine-modified, and S129E
a-synuclein each inhibited import of radio-
labeled pre-ornithine transcarbamylase
(pre-OTC) by more than 50% (P < 0.0001,
one-way ANOVA; n = 3 to 4), but mono-
meric and nitrated a-synuclein did not
(Fig. 3, C and D). Fibrillar a-synuclein was
without effect (fig. S5). A time course ex-
periment revealed that the reduction in
import was not simply a slowing of import
rate but instead reflected a true decrease in
import capacity (fig. S7). a-Synuclein had
identical effects in mitochondria isolated
from human dopaminergic SH-SY5Y cells
(Fig. 3, C and E). To rule out a nonspecific
effect of a-synuclein on mitochondrial
membrane potential (DYm), and hence,
on import, we monitored DYm with tetra-
methylrhodamine methyl ester (TMRM)
under the same conditions and found that
it was unchanged for the duration of the
experiment (fig. S8). Thus, the effect of
a-synuclein on mitochondrial import
seemed to be direct and not because of
nonspecific disruption of DYm. Further-
more, unlike in control mitochondria, pro-
tein import in mitochondria isolated from
TOM20-overexpressing SH-SY5Y cells
was not inhibited in vitro by posttransla-
tionally modified a-synuclein (Fig. 3, C
and E).
To examine the effects of a-synuclein
on import of an endogenous, nuclear-
encoded mitochondrial protein, we treated
human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293
cells with various forms of a-synuclein
for 24 hours and then used confocal mi-
croscopy to localize the complex I sub-
unit Ndufs3. Treatment with oligomeric,
dopamine-modified, and S129E a-synuclein decreased the import of
the Ndufs3 subunit. As a result, the mitochondrial localization (Pearson
index with TOM20) of Ndufs3 decreased from about 0.9 to 0.3 (P <
0.0001, two-way ANOVA with Sidak correction for multiple compari-
sons; n = 4 experiments), with an obvious increase in the diffuse cyto-
solic localization of this mitochondrial protein (Fig. 3, F and G). The
Fig. 2. Evidence of impaired mitochondrial protein import in human dopaminergic substantia nigra
neurons in PD. (A) In TH-positive dopamine neurons from postmortem braintissue of PD patients, there was
an intense a-synuclein–TOM20 PL signal and a marked loss of Ndufs3 immunoreactivity. In PD cases, remain-
ing Ndufs3 staining was rather diffuse instead of punctate. (B) Quantification of the a-synuclein–TOM20 PL
signal in control versus PD dopamine neurons. (C) Quantification of Ndufs3 immunoreactivity in control
versus PD dopamine neurons. The Ndufs3 signal was normalized to the TH signal, which tended to minimize
the apparent differences. ***P < 0.0001; *P < 0.05, two-tailed unpaired t test with Welch’s correction for un-
equal variances.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ra78
4
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. 3. Posttranslationally modified a-synuclein binds to TOM20 and
inhibits mitochondrial protein import. (A) Mitochondrial GFP (mtGFP) im-
port in intact wild-type (WT) and TOM20-overexpressing (OE) SH-SY5Y cells
exposed to various forms of a-synuclein. In WT cells treated with oligomeric,
dopamine (DA)–modified, or S129E a-synuclein, note the diffuse pattern of
staining compared to vehicle. In TOM20-overexpressing cells, mtGFP main-
tained its mitochondrial localization despite a-synuclein treatment. (B) Quan-
tification of mtGFP import in WT and TOM20-overexpressing cells. For each
condition in each experiment, mtGFP localization was determined in 5 to 10
regions of interest in zoomed confocal images from 5 to 10 cells, and three
or four independent experiments were performed. (C) Autoradiographs of
in vitro import of pre-OTC (pOTC) into mitochondria isolated from rat brain
(top), WT SH-SY5Y cells (middle), and TOM20-overexpressing SH-SY5Y cells
(bottom) after exposure to various forms of a-synuclein (30 min at 4°C).
The upper band represents 35S-labeled pre-OTC, and the lower band repre-
sents imported, cleaved (mature) OTC. Mitos, mitochondria. (D) Quantifi-
cation of OTC import into rat brain mitochondria. Results were normalized
to the vehicle-treated control, and trifluoromethoxy carbonylcyanide
phenylhydrazone (FCCP) + oligomycin was used to collapse membrane
potential and define zero import. n = 3 independent experiments. (E) Quan-
tification of OTC import into mitochondria from WT and TOM20-overexpressing
SH-SY5Y cells. n = 3 to 4 independent experiments. (F) Immunolocalization of
TOM20 and Ndufs3 in WT and TOM20-overexpressing HEK293 cells exposed
to various forms of a-synuclein. In WT cells exposed to oligomeric, dopamine-
modified, or S129E a-synuclein, Ndufs3 localization was diffuse rather than
mitochondrial (that is, Ndufs3 redistributed outside of mitochondria as
defined by TOM20). This effect was prevented in TOM20-overexpressing
cells. (G) Correlation (Pearson index) of the localizations of TOM20 and
Ndufs3 in WT versus TOM20-overexpressing cells. TOM20 overexpression
rescues the normal localization of Ndufs3. For each experimental condi-
tion, at least 100 cells were analyzed in each of three or four independent
experiments. Statistical analyses were by one- or two-way ANOVA
followed by pairwise testing and correction for multiple comparisons.
aP < 0.0001 versus monomer; bP < 0.0001 versus WT cells; cP < 0.005 versus
monomer; dP < 0.05 versus WT cells; eP < 0.002 versus WT cells. Scale
bars, 5 mm.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ra78
5
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 impaired import of endogenous Ndufs3, with redistribution to the
cytosol, was prevented by overexpression of TOM20 (P < 0.0001;
Fig. 3, F and G).
To determine whether the import of other presequence-containing
proteins was also disrupted by a-synuclein, we assessed the distribu-
tions of endogenous succinate dehydrogenase complex flavoprotein
Fig. 4. PL of posttranslationally modified a-synuclein and TOM20 and
Ndufs3localization in HEK293cells. (A) In untransfected cells, there was PL
between TOM20 and oligomeric, dopamine-modified, and S129E a-synuclein,
but not monomeric or nitrated species. This was associated with a cytosolic
redistribution of Ndufs3. Fibrillar a-synuclein did not interact with TOM20
(fig. S5). When cells were transfected with an MTS expression vector before
treatment with a-synuclein, the TOM20–a-synuclein interaction was blocked,
indicating that the a-synuclein binding site overlaps with the MTS binding
site onTOM20. MTS transfectionalso preserved the punctate(mitochondrial)
distribution of Ndufs3. (B) When cells were transfected with the MTS expres-
sion vector 24 hours after a-synuclein treatment, the TOM20–a-synuclein
interaction was reversed. Bar graphs show quantification of the a-synuclein–
TOM20 PL signal in mock-transfected (black bars) and MTS-overexpressing
cells (white bars). At least 100 cells were analyzed for each condition in every
independent experiment (n = 3). aP < 0.0001 versus vehicle; bP < 0.0001 versus
mock-transfected, two-way ANOVA. Scale bar, 5 mm.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ra78
6
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 subunit A (SDHA; a subunit of complex II), cytochrome c oxidase
subunit 4 (COX4; a subunit of complex IV), and mitochondrial heat
shock protein 70 (mtHSP70; a matrix chaperone). As with Ndufs3,
there was a cytosolic redistribution of each of these endogenous pro-
teins after treatment of cells with oligomeric, dopamine-modified, and
S129E a-synuclein, but not after monomeric or nitrated species (fig. S9).
Additionally, we monitored the expression and distribution of two pro-
teins encoded by the mitochondrial genome (which do not require im-
port). Mitochondrially encoded NADH–ubiquinone oxidoreductase
core subunit 1 (ND1; a subunit of complex I) and mitochondrially en-
coded COX1 (mtCO1; a subunit of complex IV) were unaffected by
a-synuclein during the time course of this experiment (fig. S9).
a-Synuclein binds to TOM20
To determine whether the inhibitory effects of posttranslationally
modified forms of a-synuclein on mitochondrial protein import
correlated with their interactions with TOM20, we performed PLAs
in cells exposed to various forms of a-synuclein. There was a strong
PL signal between TOM20 and oligomeric, dopamine-modified, and
S129E a-synuclein, but not monomeric or nitrated a-synuclein (P <
0.0001, ANOVA; n = 3; Fig. 4A). Control experiments showed that
the a-synuclein–TOM20 PL signal localized to mitochondria (fig.
S10). Fibrillar a-synuclein did not produce a PL signal with TOM20
(fig. S5E). Expression of a “naked” MTS peptide, the presequence of
COX8, prevented PL between posttranslationallymodified a-synuclein
and TOM20, suggesting that a-synuclein binds to a site on TOM20 that
overlaps with the MTS receptor site (Fig. 4A). Moreover, the MTS was
able to reverse the a-synuclein–TOM20 PL interaction when transfec-
tion occurred 24 hours after a-synuclein treatment (Fig. 4B).
To confirm that the a-synuclein–TOM20 PL signals represent true
protein-protein interactions, we measured binding between recombi-
nantly purified a-synuclein and TOM20 (C-terminal cytosolic domain)
(25) using fluorescence spectroscopy and a “pseudo–wild-type” trypto-
phan mutant of a-synuclein to impart fluorescence (26). We found sat-
urable, specific binding of oligomeric, dopamine-modified, and S129E
a-synuclein, with a dissociation constant (Kd) of about 5 mM (Fig. 5A).
Because binding of monomeric and nitrated a-synuclein was not sat-
urable, we concluded that there was not a specific interaction in this
assay, which is consistent with our PL and import results. Inclusion
of an MTS peptide (COX8 presequence) at a concentration of 250 mM
(~10 × Kd of a native MTS) (25) in this in vitro assay abolished specific,
saturable binding of a-synuclein to TOM20 and thereby confirmed that
the MTS and a-synuclein bind to the same site on TOM20 (Fig. 5B).
a-Synuclein disrupts the normal interaction of TOM20
with TOM22
It is believed that the presequence of mitochondrially targeted proteins
is first recognized by TOM20 in a hydrophobic interaction and subse-
quently by TOM22 in a hydrophilic interaction before the preprotein is
imported (10). The existence of peripheral TOM20 receptors at some
distance from the core TOM complex (11) raised the possibility that
TOM20-bound preproteins may be trafficked from the periphery to
TOM22 in the core translocase complex. In vehicle-treated cells in cul-
ture, we found a strong PL signal between TOM20 and TOM22, indicat-
ing that at least a portion of these two proteins is normally in close
approximation (Fig. 6A). After treatment with forms of a-synuclein that
bind to TOM20 (and thereby produce a TOM20–a-synuclein PL signal),
the TOM20-TOM22 PL signal was lost (P < 0.0001, ANOVA; n = 3)
(Fig. 6A). This result suggested that binding of a-synuclein to TOM20
prevented its association with TOM22, and this, together with specific
blockade of presequence binding sites on TOM20 by a-synuclein, likely
accounted for loss of import activity. The reasons for loss of association
of TOM20 and TOM22 are unclear, but steric interference with the PLA
is unlikely because control experiments showed that antibody binding
to TOM20 and TOM22 was not occluded by a-synuclein binding. It is
possible that the normal mobility of TOM20 in the outer membrane
might be impeded by the affinity of a-synuclein for membrane lipids
(27). In cells overexpressing a naked MTS, the TOM20-TOM22 PL signal
was maintained even in the presence of oligomeric, dopamine-modified,
and S129E a-synuclein (Fig. 6A). Moreover, expression of the MTS
24 hours after treatment with oligomeric a-synuclein was able to restore
theTOM20-TOM22PLsignal(Fig.6B),furtherindicatingthattheeffects
of a-synuclein on protein import machinery were reversible.
a-Synuclein–induced impairment of protein import has
downstream effects on mitochondrial function
Certain complex I subunits, such as Ndufs3, can normally turn over com-
pletely in less than 24 hours (28), and reduced levels of Ndufs3 may lead
Fig. 5. Binding curves of TOM20 C-terminal cytosolic domain to various forms of a-synuclein. (A) There
was saturable binding of oligomeric, dopamine-modified, and S129E a-synuclein, but not the monomeric or
nitrated species. n = 3. CTD, C-terminal cytosolic domain. (B) The COX8 MTS peptide inhibited binding of oligo-
meric a-synuclein to TOM20. When binding was performed in the presence of excess MTS (250 mM), specific
binding was markedly reduced or abolished; nonlinear curve fitting yielded an affinity of >7 × 1014 mM when the
MTS was present. Similar results were obtained with dopamine-modified and S129E a-synuclein. The overall
effect of the MTS was significant (P < 0.02) by two-way ANOVA. n = 3.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ra78
7
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 tometabolicdeficitsandexcessiveproductionofROS(29).Todetermine
the functional consequences of a-synuclein–induced impairment of
mitochondrial protein import, we measured mitochondrial respiration.
Results indicated that monomeric a-synuclein had no effect on respira-
tion, but oligomeric and dopamine-modified species depressed both
basal and FCCP-stimulated respiration by 30 to 40% (P < 0.01, one-way
ANOVA; n = 3; Fig. 7A). These deleterious effects were prevented by
overexpression of TOM20 (Fig. 7B) or a naked MTS (fig. S11E).
We next examined protein thiol oxidation (oxidative damage) after
exposure to various forms of a-synuclein. Treatment with oligomeric,
Fig. 6. a-Synuclein interaction with TOM20 prevents the normal inter-
action between TOM20 and TOM22 in HEK293 cells. (A) Under basal con-
ditions (vehicle), PL detects an interaction between TOM20 and TOM22. This
was blocked by oligomeric, dopamine-modified, and S129E a-synuclein, but
not monomeric or nitrated species. Loss of the TOM20-TOM22 PL signal was
associated with relocalization of Ndufs3 to the cytosol. In cells overexpressing
a naked MTS (COX8 presequence), the TOM20-TOM22 PL signal was main-
tained even after treatment with oligomeric, dopamine-modified, and S129E
a-synuclein. (B) When cells were treated with a-synuclein and then transfected
with the MTS 24 hours later, the TOM20-TOM22 PL signal was restored. Graphs
show quantification of TOM20-TOM22 signal in mock-transfected (black bars)
and MTS-overexpressing cells (white bars). aP < 0.0001 versus vehicle; bP <
0.0001 versus mock-transfected, two-way ANOVA. At least 100 cells were ana-
lyzed per condition in each independent experiment. n = 3. Scale bar, 5 mm.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ra78
8
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 dopamine-modified, and S129E a-synuclein induced protein thiol
oxidation (P < 0.001, two-way ANOVA; n = 3), but monomeric and
nitrated a-synuclein did not (Fig. 7, C and E). a-Synuclein–induced
oxidative damage was prevented by overexpression of TOM20 (Fig. 7,
D and E) or a naked MTS (fig. S11, A and B). Similarly, after 24-hour
exposure to oligomeric a-synuclein, there was a significant drop in
DYm (P < 0.001, two-way ANOVA; n = 4) that was not seen with
monomeric a-synuclein (Fig. 7, F and H), and which was prevented
by overexpression of TOM20 (Fig. 7, F and H) or a naked MTS (fig.
S11, C and D).
It is notable that in cells overexpressing TOM20, its distribution
was mitochondrial, not ectopic, and mitochondrial morphology was
Fig. 7. Downstream effects of a-synuclein on mitochondria. (A) In WT
SH-SY5Y cells, a 24-hour exposure to oligomeric or dopamine-modified
a-synuclein reduced basal and FCCP-stimulated mitochondrial respira-
tion. Monomeric a-synuclein was without effect. *P < 0.01 versus vehicle,
one-way ANOVA; n = 3. OCR, oxygen consumption rate. (B) In SH-SY5Y cells
overexpressing TOM20, the deleterious effects of oligomeric and dopamine-
modified a-synuclein were prevented. n = 3. (C) In WT HEK293 cells, a 24-
hour exposure to oligomeric, dopamine-modified, or S129E a-synuclein
induced oxidation of protein thiols, whereas exposure to monomeric or
nitrated a-synuclein did not. (D and E) In HEK293 cells overexpressing
TOM20, a-synuclein did not induce oxidative stress. At least 100 cells
were quantified per condition in each experiment. aP < 0.001 versus ve-
hicle; bP < 0.001 versus mock-transfected cells, two-way ANOVA; n = 3.
(F) TMRM fluorescence in SH-SY5Y cells (as an index of DYm) was reduced
by oligomeric but not monomeric a-synuclein. (G and H) In SH-SY5Y cells
overexpressing TOM20, oligomeric a-synuclein did not significantly af-
fect DYm. Thirty to 50 cells were analyzed for each treatment in each of
three independent experiments. aP < 0.001 versus vehicle; bP < 0.001
versus WT cells, two-way ANOVA. Scale bars, 10 mm. Oligo, oligomycin;
Rot, rotenone.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ra78
9
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 unchanged (Fig. 3F). Moreover, although such cells were protected against
a-synuclein–induced import defects and resultant respiratory defects,
oxidative stress, and depolarization, the mitochondrial a-synuclein–
TOM20 PL signal remained intact (Fig. 3F). The mechanism by which
overexpression of TOM20 was protective remains unclear, but it ap-
pears to enhance the efficiency of import by increasing the initial rate
of mitochondrial protein import. Additionally, the protective effect
was saturable because higher concentrations of toxic a-synuclein species
(1.7 or 3.4 mM versus 200 nM) could overcome the beneficial effects of
enhanced TOM20 expression (fig. S12).
Toxic species of a-synuclein may be trimers and tetramers
Evidence presented here suggests that oligomeric, dopamine-modified,
and S129E a-synuclein species impair protein import, whereas mono-
meric, nitrated, and fibrillarformsdo not. Tolookforpossible structural
explanations for these differences, we used circular dichroism spectros-
copy to examine the a-synuclein species used in biological experiments
(fig. S13, A and B). However, this did not reveal clear differences be-
tween the toxic and nontoxic species; all were predominantly in a
random coil conformation with a similar small component of a-helix
conformation. As expected, only the fibril preparation had a significant
amount of b-sheet structure. In contrast, there were some apparent dif-
ferences when the species were separated by SDS–polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) (fig. S13C). As intended, the nontoxic
monomer preparation was predominantly monomeric, with a small
component of dimer. The nitrated species was composed mostly of
monomer and dimer and high–molecular weight material, with little
trimer or tetramer. On the other hand, each of the toxic species—
oligomeric, dopamine-modified, and S129E a-synuclein—had relative-
ly large amounts of trimer and tetramer, which are about 25 to 35% of
the total (P < 0.05 to 0.001 versus monomer or nitrated species, ANOVA;
fig. S13D). Under conditions of our preparation, the fibril sample was a
continuous “smear,” and individual bands could not be resolved. From
these experiments, we tentatively concluded that a trimeric and/or
tetrameric structure may be important for mitochondrial toxicity of
a-synuclein. It is also important to note that each species of a-synuclein
was used in our experiments at a concentration of 200 nM (monomer
equivalent),sotheactualconcentrationofoligomerwassubstantiallylower.
The effects of endogenous a-synuclein on protein import
machinery may explain the selective vulnerability of
dopamine neurons
In cultured cells, there was a strong PL signal between TOM20-TOM22,
which could be disrupted by posttranslationally modified a-synuclein.
Similar TOM20-TOM22 interactions were seen in neurons in rat brain
sections (Fig. 8A). However, there was a conspicuous absence of the
TOM20-TOM22 PL signal in nigrostriatal dopamine neurons in con-
trol animals. In the midbrain, these neurons have, by far, the highest
expression ofSNCAmRNA (17), raising the possibility that endogenous
a-synuclein (perhaps combined with dopamine modification) may be
sufficient to impair import in these neurons at baseline. Consistent with
this hypothesis, knockdown of endogenous a-synuclein in control rats
“restored” a TOM20-TOM22 PL signal in nigrostriatal neurons relative
to the untransduced hemisphere (Fig. 8A). Furthermore, we have re-
ported previously that, under basal conditions, nigrostriatal neurons
exist in a more oxidized state than cortical or other dopaminergic
neurons (30). The results in Fig. 7 suggest that a-synuclein may con-
tribute to this process. In a separate cohort of animals, we found that
AAV-shRNA–mediated knockdown of endogenous a-synuclein de-
creased basal levels of protein thiol oxidation in nigrostriatal neurons
relative to the contralateral hemisphere, which received AAV-shControl
vector (P < 0.05; Fig. 8B). Thus, neuron-specific differences in the
amount of endogenous a-synuclein (or its posttranslational state)
may confer differences in mitochondrial protein import efficiency
and, possibly, selective vulnerability.
DISCUSSION
Our results tie together two central pathogenic mechanisms in PD:
a-synuclein accumulation and mitochondrial impairment. We have
found that certain species of a-synuclein bind specifically to TOM20,
prevent its interaction with the co-receptor TOM22, and inhibit mito-
chondrial protein import. This leads to impairment of mitochondrial
function, with reduced respiration and excessive ROS production.
Our data suggest that this process is operative in human PD and may
contribute to pathogenesis. These findings help to explain the deleteri-
ous effects of a-synuclein on mitochondria, and they suggest new
therapeutic strategies.
There is a single published report showing that a-synuclein is a sub-
strate for the import machinery and is imported into the mitochondrial
matrix, where it binds to and inhibits complex I (31). To the best of our
knowledge, this has not been replicated, and our results suggest that
there is no specific interaction between monomeric a-synuclein and
the TOM machinery. Another report suggests that TOM40 levels are
reduced when a-synuclein is overexpressed, but import was not
measured, and no mechanism was elucidated (32). Finally, it has been
reported that efficient import prevents PTEN-induced putative kinase
1 (PINK1) from accumulating on the mitochondrial surface, where it
can recruit parkin and promote autophagic mitochondrial clearance
(33). We hypothesize that by inhibiting protein import, a-synuclein
may also alter PINK1-parkin signaling, and this is under investigation.
Here, we used complementary techniques (PL, multiple assays of
mitochondrial protein import, and fluorescence spectroscopy) to pro-
vide convergent evidence that certain posttranslationally modified forms
of a-synuclein (soluble oligomers, dopamine-modified, and S129E) bind
to TOM20 and impair mitochondrial import of endogenous or exoge-
nous presequence-containing nuclear-encoded proteins. Our binding
assays indicate that these species of a-synuclein bind to TOM20 with
affinities of about 5 mM. By contrast, the affinity of a normal TOM20
substrate, the aldehyde dehydrogenase presequence, is lower—about
20 mM (25). The intraneuronal concentration of a-synuclein has been es-
timated to be 2 to 5 mM (21), and in our experiments, a-synuclein spe-
cies were applied to cells or isolated mitochondria at a concentration
equivalent to 200 nM monomeric protein. Control experiments confirmed
that all forms of a-synuclein used here entered cells to an equivalent ex-
tent and did not alter total a-synuclein in treated cells. Thus, we conclude
that local conditions that predispose to relatively minor oligomer forma-
tion, dopamine modification, or S129 phosphorylation (or some com-
bination thereof) are likely to have pronounced effects on protein
import into mitochondria.
Whereas binding assays provided strong evidence that a-synuclein
interacts specifically with TOM20, the fact that overexpression of a
naked MTS (COX8 presequence) blocked the a-synuclein–TOM20 PL
signal indicates that the a-synuclein binding site overlaps with the MTS
recognition site on TOM20. Direct inhibition of a-synuclein binding
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ra78
10
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 to TOM20 by the MTS peptide confirms this conclusion. Thus, one
mechanism by which a-synuclein inhibits protein import appears to
involve direct competition for TOM20 presequence receptor sites.
Moreover, when the MTS was overexpressed after a-synuclein was
already bound to TOM20, it was able to normalize the a-synuclein–
TOM20 PL signal, indicating that the interaction of a-synuclein with
TOM20 is reversible.
The presequence of mitochondrially targeted proteins must be
recognized by both TOM20 and TOM22 (either sequentially or simul-
taneously) before translocation through the TOM40 pore. a-Synuclein
binds to TOM20, but we found no evidence for binding to TOM22.
Cryo-EM studies suggest that, in addition to the central TOM complex
core, there are peripheral TOM20 components, which are in a dynamic
equilibrium with the preassembled TOM complex (11). Whether these
peripheral TOM20 receptors bind to the presequences of preproteins
and traffic them to the central TOM complex (containing TOM22)
for import is unclear. Under basal conditions, our PL studies indicate
that at least some portion of TOM20 interacts with TOM22, but this
interaction is prevented by toxic species of a-synuclein. Interference
with the normal TOM20-TOM22 interaction may represent a second
mechanism by which a-synuclein impairs import.
The mechanism by which a-synuclein prevents the TOM20-TOM22
interaction is unclear. However, if peripheral TOM20 components must
normally traffic to the central TOM complex, it is possible that the af-
finity of TOM20-bound a-synuclein for lipid membranes may impede
lateral movement of TOM20 in the outer mitochondrial membrane and
reduce formation of a functional import complex. We found that over-
expression of a naked MTS in the setting of exogenous a-synuclein, or
knockdown of endogenous a-synuclein in nigrostriatal neurons in vivo,
was able to restore this normal TOM20-TOM22 interaction.
Overall, these studies provide compelling evidence for a specific in-
teraction between certain species of wild-type a-synuclein and the
TOM20 presequence receptor. Furthermore, we have delineated two
plausible and related mechanisms by which this interaction impairs
mitochondrial protein import. The relative loss of mitochondrial pro-
tein import caused by a-synuclein has several deleterious downstream
effects. Basal and FCCP-inducedmitochondrial respiration are reduced,
and protein thiol oxidation is increased. Additionally, because of im-
paired electron transport complex activity, DYm declines. The fact that
each of these effects can be prevented by overexpression of TOM20 (or
an MTS peptide) confirms that they result from defective import.
Together, these findings indicate that a-synuclein–induced impairment
of mitochondrial protein import has the potential to produce senescent,
inefficient mitochondria that produce less energy and more ROS.
Our studies have used a wide variety of assays, including PL, direct
import assays, fluorescence spectroscopic binding assays, and respira-
tory measurements, and these have provided consistent results about
which species of a-synuclein are toxic to mitochondria. Monomeric,
wild-type a-synuclein appears to have no effect, but oligomeric,
dopamine-modified, and S129E phosphomimetic species potently
impair import function. Although the phosphomimetic mutant be-
haved like oligomeric and dopamine-modified species, it is impor-
tant to recognize that the S129E mutation does not always behave
identically to bona fide phosphorylated a-synuclein (34). Nitrated
a-synuclein and amyloid fibrils of a-synuclein were essentially inert
in our assays. Our limited structural studies suggest that a trimeric or
tetrameric conformation may be important for toxicity. If so, we
would anticipate that these conformations are distinct from the en-
dogenous tetramers posited by Dettmer and colleagues (35). Al-
though the current study focused on posttranslationally modified
wild-type a-synuclein in the context of idiopathic (sporadic) PD, it
will be of interest to examine in future studies the impact of mutant
a-synuclein, and posttranslational modifications thereof, on mito-
chondrial protein import.
Fig. 8. The normal TOM20-TOM22 PL signal seen in most neurons is
absent in rat nigrostriatal dopamine neurons in vivo but is restored
byknockdownofendogenousa-synuclein.(A) Inthe untreated hemisphere
(top row), MAP2+ (microtubule-associated protein 2)/TH− nondopaminergic
neurons (arrows) showed a strong TOM20-TOM22 PL signal, which was ab-
sent in TH+ dopaminergic cells (asterisks). In the hemisphere that received
AAV2-shSNCA (bottom row), there was emergence of a strong TOM20-TOM22
PL signal in the TH+ dopaminergic neurons. Scale bar, 30 mm. (B) Consistent
with the in vitro data (Fig. 7, C to E), a-synuclein knockdown was associated
with decreased basal protein thiol oxidation in otherwise untreated rats.
Filled circles, −S-S−/−SH ratio of nigral neurons in the control hemisphere;
half-filled circles, −S-S−/−SH ratio of nigral neurons in the SNCA knockdown
hemisphere. Lines connect the means from each hemisphere in each animal.
*P < 0.05, Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank test.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ra78
11
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 To determine the relevance of our findings to the human disease, we
examined postmortem brain specimens from controls and individuals
who died with PD. Just as in rats treated with rotenone or injected with
an AAV overexpression vector, we found that nigrostriatal dopamine
neurons from PD cases showed a marked increase in the a-synuclein–
TOM20 PL signal compared to controls. Similarly, this a-synuclein–
TOM20 PL signal was associated with a relative loss and cytosolic
redistribution of the endogenous, imported complex I subunit, Ndufs3.
Notably, another recent study reported a large loss of a presequence-
containing imported protein (Ndufb8) relative to a mitochondrially en-
coded protein (COX1) in nigral neurons in PD (36). This discovery of
anapparentproteinimportdefectinhumanPDaddstothe listoffindings
that have been predicted by the rotenone rat model of PD (13, 37, 38).
The results of this study may also shed light on the basis of the
selective vulnerability of nigrostriatal neurons to degeneration in PD. At
baseline, these cells express more SNCA mRNA than surrounding mid-
brain neurons, and they exist in a higher state of oxidation (17, 30). We
found that these neurons do not show the normal TOM20-TOM22 in-
teraction seen in other neurons (and presumably needed for efficient
protein import); however, when endogenous a-synuclein was knocked
down in vivo, the TOM20-TOM22 PL signal emerged. Furthermore,
the knockdown of endogenous a-synuclein decreased the oxidation
state of these neurons. Thus, under basal conditions, it appears that en-
dogenous a-synuclein levels may be sufficient to affect protein import
function; this situation is likely to be exacerbated in aging as a-synuclein
accumulates in these cells (16). Moreover, elevated a-synuclein increased
the redistribution of dopamine from vesicles to the cytosol (39) where it
may modify a-synuclein. Dopamine-modified a-synuclein is particu-
larly potent at inhibiting mitochondrial protein import.
Although the results of our studies are unanticipated and provide
new insights into pathogenesis, there are limitations and unknowns
as well. For example, thus far, we have not identified the structural char-
acteristics that define the toxic species of a-synuclein, although a tri-
meric or tetrameric structure may be important. We also found that
nitrated and fibrillar species of a-synuclein were essentially inert in
our system; however, this does not exclude the possibility that they
might exert toxicity by other mechanisms. Moreover, our study fo-
cused on wild-type a-synuclein, so we do not know yet how pathogenic
a-synuclein mutations affect mitochondrial protein import. Addition-
ally, many of our experiments used cell lines rather than primary neu-
rons for technical reasons; however, key aspects of our findings were
verified ex vivo using rat or human brain tissue. Finally, although we
showed that mitochondrial protein import impairment caused cellular
toxicity in forms of reduced respiration, oxidative damage, and mito-
chondrial depolarization, the relative extent to which this specific mech-
anism contributes to the overall neurotoxicity of a-synuclein remains to
be determined.
Despite these caveats, the results presented here have several im-
portant therapeutic implications. First, together with the recent report
by Zharikov et al. (17), they suggest that even the modest reduction of
endogenous a-synuclein may have beneficial effects on mitochondrial
function and nigral redox state—and may be neuroprotective in PD.
Given that multiple posttranslational modifications render a-synuclein
toxic to mitochondria, it appears that strategies aimed at a general re-
duction of a-synuclein, rather than targeting specific modifications or
aggregation states, may be most efficacious.
Additionally, we found that overexpression of TOM20 prevented
a-synuclein–induced impairment of mitochondrial protein import, as
well as its downstream consequences, such as respiratory defects, ROS
production, and loss of DYm. The mechanism by which a moderate
(two- to threefold) increase in TOM20 protein levels is protective is not
yet clear, but preliminary studies indicate that TOM20-overexpressing
mitochondria have a faster initial rate of protein import. This result is
consistent with previous work showing that TOM20 overexpression
can increase import (40). Additionally, however, we found that mito-
chondria isolated from TOM20-overexpressing cells and assayed in vitro
were resistant to the inhibitory effects of the otherwise toxic species of
a-synuclein. In this context, it will be of interest to determine whether
overexpression of TOM20 in vivo is protective in models of PD.
Finally, contrary to our expectations, overexpression of a naked MTS
had beneficial effects. We had anticipated that expression of the MTS
would be similar to a-synuclein, competing for TOM20 presequence
binding sitesandinhibiting import.However,whereasthe MTS blocked
the a-synuclein–TOM20 PL signal as expected, it also preserved the
mitochondrial import of the endogenous Ndufs3 subunit. In addition,
MTS overexpression was able to prevent or even reverse the loss of the
TOM20-TOM22 interaction induced by a-synuclein. As a consequence,
overexpression of the naked MTS prevented downstream toxic effects
of a-synuclein, such as reduced respiration, increased ROS production,
and mitochondrial depolarization. On this basis, examination of an
MTS peptide as a neuroprotective strategy is warranted.
In conclusion, we have defined a mechanism by which a-synuclein
impairs a critical mitochondrial function, protein import, and have shown
that this likely occurs in human PD. Our findings suggest new therapeutic
strategies that should be tested in future studies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
This study was designed to determine the potential role of various
species of wild-type a-synuclein on mitochondrial protein import
and downstream mitochondrial function. For this purpose, we used
several in vivo manipulations, including rotenone-treated rats and rats
with AAV2-mediated knockdown or overexpression of a-synuclein in
the substantia nigra. To confirm relevance to the human disease, we
examined measures of mitochondrial protein import and binding of
a-synuclein to TOM20 in postmortem human brain tissue. Additional
mechanistic experiments were conducted in intact cells (HEK293 and
SH-SY5Y) and isolated mitochondria from brains and cultured cells.
Most experiments used recombinant a-synuclein in the following
forms: monomeric, oligomeric, dopamine-modified, S129E phospho-
mimetic mutant, nitrated, and fibrillar. Mitochondrial protein import
was assessed by (i) direct import assays in isolated mitochondria, (ii)
assessment of “mtGFP” uptake in transfected cells, and (iii) localization
of endogenous presequence (MTS)–containing proteins in cells or brain
sections. The binding of a-synuclein species to TOM20 was assessed by
PL in intact cells or in brain sections and in vitro by fluorescence spec-
troscopy using recombinant proteins. In response to different species of
a-synuclein, mitochondrial functions were assessed in intact cells by
measurement of respiration (Seahorse), DYm (TMRM fluorescence),
and ROS production (thiol staining). Finally, to test potential protective
therapeutic strategies, cells were transfected to overexpress TOM20 or
the COX8 presequence (MTS).
a-Synuclein expression and purification. hSNCA complementary
DNA (cDNA) (wild type or S129E) was transfected into BL21-DE3
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ra78
12
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Escherichia coli, and a-synuclein was purified as described by Volles
and Lansbury (41).
a-Synuclein modification
For oligomers, monomeric a-synuclein was diluted to a concentration
of 5 mg/ml and shaken at ~300 to 500 rpm at 37°C for 3 days. Treatment
for dopamine modification was carried out as described by Martinez-
Vicente et al. (23). For nitration, monomeric a-synuclein was diluted to
a concentration of 5 mg/ml, and 50 ml of 1% tetranitromethane was
added per 500 ml of a-synuclein solution. The solution was vortexed
twice for10 min. ForS129 phosphomimetic, S129Emutant SNCAcDNA
was transfected into E. coli as described above. All samples (monomers,
oligomers, dopamine-modified, nitrated, and S129E) received the fol-
lowing treatment after modification: dialysis in the dark in 4 liters of
phosphate-buffered saline with gentle stirring overnight (10-kD molec-
ular weight cutoff). After dialysis, all samples were spun at 14,000g for
5 min to pellet any fibrils that formed. The supernatant contained sol-
uble oligomers and monomers as confirmed by SDS-PAGE, and the
pellet contained fibrils. Samples were prepared fresh weekly.
Proximityligationassay. PLAwasperformedin4%paraformaldehyde–
fixed tissue or cells. Samples were incubated with specific primary anti-
bodies to the proteins to be detected. Secondary antibodies conjugated
with oligonucleotides were added to the reaction and incubated. Liga-
tion solution, consisting of two oligonucleotides and ligase, was added.
In this assay, the oligonucleotides hybridize to the two PLA probes and
join to a closed loop if they are in close proximity. Amplification solu-
tion, consisting of nucleotides and fluorescently labeled oligonucleo-
tides, was added together with polymerase. The oligonucleotide arm
of one of the PLAprobesactsas aprimerfor“rolling-circle amplification”
(RCA) using the ligated circle as a template, and this generates a conca-
temeric product. Fluorescently labeled oligonucleotides hybridize to the
RCA product. The PL signal was visible as a distinct fluorescent spot and
was analyzed by confocal microscopy (Duolink, Sigma-Aldrich). Control
experiments included routine immunofluorescence staining of proteins
of interest under identical experimental conditions.
Fluorescencemeasurements. Quantitativefluorescencemeasurements
were made withan Olympus uprightthree-laserscanning confocalmicro-
scope, taking care to ensure that images contained no saturated pixels. For
quantitative comparisons, all imaging parameters (for example, laser
power, exposure, and pinhole) were held constant across specimens.
Statistical analyses
Each result presented here was derived from three to six independent ex-
periments. For simple comparisons of two experimental conditions, two-
tailed unpaired t tests were used. Where variances were not equal, Welch’s
correction was used. When virus was injected into one hemisphere of
thebrainandtheotherhemispherewasusedasacontrol,two-tailedpaired
t tests or Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank tests were used. For com-
parisons of multiple experimental conditions, one- or two-way ANOVA
was used, and if significant overall, post hoc corrections (Bonferroni or
Sidak) for multiple pairwise comparisons were made. P values less than
0.05 were considered significant. All bar graphs show means ± SEM.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/8/342/342ra78/DC1
Materials and Methods
Fig. S1. Amounts of a-synuclein and S129-phosphorylated a-synuclein in vivo.
Fig. S2. Positive and negative PL interactions with a-synuclein in substantia nigra pars compacta.
Fig. S3. Rotenone induces a loss of mitochondrial localization of the nuclear-encoded,
imported protein Ndufs3.
Fig. S4. All species of a-synuclein used in this study enter cells to an equivalent extent, and
when added at 200 nM, they do not change intracellular concentrations of a-synuclein or its
localization.
Fig. S5. Fibrillar a-synuclein does not affect mitochondrial protein import.
Fig. S6. Overexpression of TOM20 and TOM5.
Fig. S7. Time course of isolated brain mitochondrial protein import in the absence or presence
of monomeric and oligomeric a-synuclein.
Fig. S8. Lack of mitochondrial depolarization by a-synuclein during import assays.
Fig. S9. Effects of a-synuclein on import and localization of other mitochondrial proteins.
Fig. S10. The a-synuclein–TOM20 PL signal colocalizes with mitochondria.
Fig. S11. Downstream effects of a-synuclein on mitochondria are blocked by MTS overexpression.
Fig. S12. The protective effects of TOM20 overexpression on mitochondrial protein import can
be overcome by increased concentrations of a-synuclein.
Fig. S13. Structural analysis of the a-synuclein species used in this study.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. L. V. Kalia, A. E. Lang, Parkinson disease in 2015: Evolving basic, pathological and clinical
concepts in PD. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 12, 65–66 (2016).
2. M. Zaltieri, F. Longhena, M. Pizzi, C. Missale, P. Spano, A. Bellucci, Mitochondrial dysfunc-
tion and a-synuclein Synaptic pathology in Parkinson’s disease: Who’s on first? Parkinsons
Dis. 2015, 108029 (2015).
3. R. Betarbet, T. B. Sherer, G. MacKenzie, M. Garcia-Osuna, A. V. Panov, J. T. Greenamyre,
Chronic systemic pesticide exposure reproduces features of Parkinson’s disease. Nat. Neurosci.
3, 1301–1306 (2000).
4. R. Betarbet, R. M. Canet-Aviles, T. B. Sherer, P. G. Mastroberardino, C. McLendon, J.-H. Kim,
S. Lund, H.-M. Na, G. Taylor, N. F. Bence, R. Kopito, B. B. Seo, T. Yagi, A. Yagi, G. Klinefelter,
M. R. Cookson, J. T. Greenamyre, Intersecting pathways to neurodegeneration in Parkinson’s
disease: Effects of the pesticide rotenone on DJ-1, a-synuclein, and the ubiquitin–proteasome
system. Neurobiol. Dis. 22, 404–420 (2006).
5. J. R. Cannon, V. Tapias, H. M. Na, A. S. Honick, R. E. Drolet, J. T. Greenamyre, A highly
reproducible rotenone model of Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol. Dis. 34, 279–290 (2009).
6. L. J. Hsu, Y. Sagara, A. Arroyo, E. Rockenstein, A. Sisk, M. Mallory, J. Wong, T. Takenouchi,
M. Hashimoto, E. Masliah, a-synuclein promotes mitochondrial deficit and oxidative
stress. Am. J. Pathol. 157, 401–410 (2000).
7. E. A. Schon, S. DiMauro, M. Hirano, Human mitochondrial DNA: Roles of inherited and
somatic mutations. Nat. Rev. Genet. 13, 878–890 (2012).
8. M. Elstner, C. Andreoli, U. Ahting, I. Tetko, T. Klopstock, T. Meitinger, H. Prokisch, MitoP2: An
integrative tool for the analysis of the mitochondrial proteome. Mol. Biotechnol. 40, 306–315
(2008).
9. C. M. Koehler, Protein translocation pathways of the mitochondrion. FEBS Lett. 476, 27–31
(2000).
10. C. Schulz, A. Schendzielorz, P. Rehling, Unlocking the presequence import pathway. Trends
Cell Biol. 25, 265–275 (2015).
11. K. Model, C. Meisinger, W. Kühlbrandt, Cryo-electron microscopy structure of a yeast
mitochondrial preprotein translocase. J. Mol. Biol. 383, 1049–1057 (2008).
12. W. S. Davidson, A. Jonas, D. F. Clayton, J. M. George, Stabilization of a-synuclein secondary
structure upon binding to synthetic membranes. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 9443–9449 (1998).
13. J. T. Greenamyre, J. R. Cannon, R. Drolet, P.-G. Mastroberardino, Lessons from the rotenone
model of Parkinson’s disease. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 31, 141–142 (2010).
14. C. M. Tanner, F. Kamel, G. W. Ross, J. A. Hoppin, S. M. Goldman, M. Korell, C. Marras,
G. S. Bhudhikanok, M. Kasten, A. R. Chade, K. Comyns, M. B. Richards, C. Meng, B. Priestley,
H. H. Fernandez, F. Cambi, D. M. Umbach, A. Blair, D. P. Sandler, J. W. Langston, Rotenone,
paraquat and Parkinson’s disease. Environ. Health Perspect. 119, 866–872 (2011).
15. B. Koos, L. Andersson, C.-M. Clausson, K. Grannas, A. Klaesson, G. Cane, O. Söderberg, Analysis
of protein interactions in situ by proximity ligation assays. Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 377,
111–126 (2014).
16. Y. Chu, J. H. Kordower, Age-associated increases of a-synuclein in monkeys and humans
are associated with nigrostriatal dopamine depletion: Is this the target for Parkinson’s disease?
Neurobiol. Dis. 25, 134–149 (2007).
17. A. D. Zharikov, J. R. Cannon, V. Tapias, Q. Bai, M. P. Horowitz, V. Shah, A. El Ayadi, T. G. Hastings,
J. T. Greenamyre, E. A. Burton, shRNA targeting a-synuclein prevents neurodegeneration in a
Parkinson’s disease model. J. Clin. Invest. 125, 2721–2735 (2015).
18. H. Dimant, S. K. Kalia, L. V. Kalia, L. N. Zhu, L. Kibuuka, D. Ebrahimi-Fakhari, N. R. McFarland,
Z. Fan, B. T. Hyman, P. J. McLean, Direct detection of alpha synuclein oligomers in vivo.
Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 1, 6 (2013).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ra78
13
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 19. M. Decressac, B. Mattsson, M. Lundblad, P. Weikop, A. Björklund, Progressive neuro-
degenerative and behavioural changes induced by AAV-mediated overexpression of
a-synuclein in midbrain dopamine neurons. Neurobiol. Dis. 45, 939–953 (2012).
20. K. J. Ahn, S. R. Paik, K. C. Chung, J. Kim, Amino acid sequence motifs and mechanistic
features of the membrane translocation of a-synuclein. J. Neurochem. 97, 265–279 (2006).
21. C. H. Westphal, S. S. Chandra, Monomeric synucleins generate membrane curvature. J. Biol.
Chem. 288, 1829–1840 (2013).
22. F.-X. Theillet, A. Binolfi, B. Bekei, A. Martorana, H. M. Rose, M. Stuiver, S. Verzini, D. Lorenz,
M. van Rossum, D. Goldfarb, P. Selenko, Structural disorder of monomeric a-synuclein persists
in mammalian cells. Nature 530, 45–50 (2016).
23. M. Martinez-Vicente, Z. Talloczy, S. Kaushik, A. C. Massey, J. Mazzulli, E. V. Mosharov, R. Hodara,
R. Fredenburg, D.-C. Wu, A. Follenzi, W. Dauer, S. Przedborski, H. Ischiropoulos, P. T. Lansbury,
D. Sulzer, A. M. Cuervo, Dopamine-modified a-synuclein blocks chaperone-mediated autophagy.
J. Clin. Invest. 118, 777–788 (2008).
24. K. A. Conway, J.-C. Rochet, R. M. Bieganski, P. T. Lansbury Jr., Kinetic stabilization of the
a-synuclein protofibril by a dopamine-a-synuclein adduct. Science 294, 1346–1349 (2001).
25. Y. Abe, T. Shodai, T. Muto, K. Mihara, H. Torii, S.-i. Nishikawa, T. Endo, D. Kohda, Structural
basis of presequence recognition by the mitochondrial protein import receptor Tom20.
Cell 100, 551–560 (2000).
26. J. C. Lee, R. Langen, P. A. Hummel, H. B. Gray, J. R. Winkler, a-synuclein structures from
fluorescence energy-transfer kinetics: Implications for the role of the protein in Parkinson’s
disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101, 16466–16471 (2004).
27. M. Ramakrishnan, P. H. Jensen, D. Marsh, Association of a-synuclein and mutants with lipid
membranes: Spin-label ESR and polarized IR. Biochemistry 45, 3386–3395 (2006).
28. C. E. J. Dieteren, W. J. H. Koopman, H. G. Swarts, J. G. P. Peters, P. Maczuga, J. J. van Gemst,
R. Masereeuw, J. A. M. Smeitink, L. G. J. Nijtmans, P. H. G. M. Willems, Subunit-specific
incorporation efficiency and kinetics in mitochondrial complex I homeostasis. J. Biol. Chem.
287, 41851–41860 (2012).
29. S. Suhane, H. Kanzaki, V. Arumugaswami, R. Murali, V. K. Ramanujan, Mitochondrial NDUFS3
regulates the ROS-mediated onset of metabolic switch in transformed cells. Biol. Open 2,
295–305 (2013).
30. M. P. Horowitz, C. Milanese, R. Di Maio, X. Hu, L. M. Montero, L. H. Sanders, V. Tapias, S. Sepe,
W. A. van Cappellen, E. A. Burton, J. T. Greenamyre, P. G. Mastroberardino, Single-cell redox
imaging demonstrates a distinctive response of dopaminergic neurons to oxidative insults.
Antioxid. Redox Signal. 15, 855–871 (2011).
31. L. Devi, V. Raghavendran, B. M. Prabhu, N. G. Avadhani, H. K. Anandatheerthavarada,
Mitochondrial import and accumulation of a-synuclein impair complex I in human do-
paminergic neuronal cultures and Parkinson disease brain. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 9089–9100
(2008).
32. A. Bender, P. Desplats, B. Spencer, E. Rockenstein, A. Adame, M. Elstner, C. Laub, S. Mueller,
A. O. Koob, M. Mante, E. Pham, T. Klopstock, E. Masliah, TOM40 mediates mitochondrial
dysfunction induced by a-synuclein accumulation in Parkinson’s disease. PLOS One 8,
e62277 (2013).
33. G. Bertolin, R. Ferrando-Miguel, M. Jacoupy, S. Traver, K. Grenier, A. W. Greene, A. Dauphin,
F. Waharte, A. Bayot, J. Salamero, A. Lombès, A.-L. Bulteau, E. A. Fon, A. Brice, O. Corti, The
TOMM machinery is a molecular switch in PINK1 and PARK2/PARKIN-dependent mito-
chondrial clearance. Autophagy 9, 1801–1817 (2013).
34. K. E. Paleologou, A. W. Schmid, C. C. Rospigliosi, H.-Y. Kim, G. R. Lamberto, R. A. Fredenburg,
P. T. Lansbury Jr., C. O. Fernandez, D. Eliezer, M. Zweckstetter, H. A. Lashuel, Phosphorylation
at Ser-129 but not the phosphomimics S129E/D inhibits the fibrillation of a-synuclein.
J. Biol. Chem. 283, 16895–16905 (2008).
35. U. Dettmer, A. J. Newman, F. Soldner, E. S. Luth, N. C. Kim, V. E. von Saucken, J. B. Sanderson,
R. Jaenisch, T. Bartels, D. Selkoe, Corrigendum: Parkinson-causing a-synuclein missense
mutations shift native tetramers to monomers as a mechanism for disease initiation.
Nat. Commun. 6, 8008 (2015).
36. A. Grünewald, N. Z. Lax, M. C. Rocha, A. K. Reeve, P. D. Hepplewhite, K. A. Rygiel, R. W. Taylor,
D. M. Turnbull, Quantitative quadruple-label immunofluorescence of mitochondrial and cy-
toplasmic proteins in single neurons from human midbrain tissue. J. Neurosci. Methods 232,
143–149 (2014).
37. P. G. Mastroberardino, E. K. Hoffman, M. P. Horowitz, R. Betarbet, G. Taylor, D. Cheng,
H. M. Na, C.-A. Gutekunst, M. Gearing, J. Q. Trojanowski, M. Anderson, C. T. Chu, J. Peng,
J. T. Greenamyre, A novel transferrin/TfR2-mediated mitochondrial iron transport system is
disrupted in Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol. Dis. 34, 417–431 (2009).
38. L. H. Sanders, J. McCoy, X. Hu, P. G. Mastroberardino, B. C. Dickinson, C. J. Chang, C. T. Chu,
B. Van Houten, J. T. Greenamyre, Mitochondrial DNA damage: Molecular marker of vulner-
able nigral neurons in Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol. Dis. 70, 214–223 (2014).
39. E. V. Mosharov, R. G. W. Staal, J. Bové, D. Prou, A. Hananiya, D. Markov, N. Poulsen, K. E. Larsen,
C. M. H. Moore, M. D. Troyer, R. H. Edwards, S. Przedborski, D. Sulzer, a-synuclein over-
expression increases cytosolic catecholamine concentration. J. Neurosci. 26, 9304–9311
(2006).
40. M. Yano, M. Kanazawa, K. Terada, C. Namchai, M. Yamaizumi, B. Hanson, N. Hoogenraad,
M. Mori, Visualization of mitochondrial protein import in cultured mammalian cells with
green fluorescent protein and effects of overexpression of the human import receptor
Tom20. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 8459–8465 (1997).
41. M. J. Volles, P. T. Lansbury Jr., Relationships between the sequence of a-synuclein and its
membrane affinity, fibrillization propensity, and yeast toxicity. J. Mol. Biol. 366, 1510–1522
(2007).
Acknowledgments: We thank H. Yano for the pGEM-3Zf(+)-pOTC plasmid. Funding: This
work was supported by research grants from the DSF Charitable Foundation, the Ri.MED Foun-
dation, the Consolidated Anti-Aging Foundation, NIH (NS095387, NS059806, ES022644,
ES020718, ES020327, NS065789, AG026389, and P50AG005133), the U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs (1I01BX000548), the Blechman Foundation, the American Parkinson Disease Association, and
the Department of Biotechnology, Government of India. Author contributions: R.D.M. and P.J.B.
designed, performed, and analyzed the PL and protein import experiments and edited the manu-
script; E.K.H. was responsible for molecular biology and created and validated cell lines; C.W.B. also
did some of the protein import experiments; J.M.did some of the PLexperiments; A.Z. and A.B. did in
vivo gene transfer experiments; X.H. was responsible for cell culture experiments; C.T.C. supervised
human neuropathological studies; E.A.B. and T.G.H. designed and analyzed the experiments and
edited the manuscript; and J.T.G. supervised the project, designed and analyzed the experiments,
and wrote the paper. Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no competing in-
terests. J.T.G. is a paid consultant for Biogen and FORMA Therapeutics.
Submitted 23 February 2016
Accepted 17 May 2016
Published 8 June 2016
10.1126/scitranslmed.aaf3634
Citation: R. Di Maio, P. J. Barrett, E. K. Hoffman, C. W. Barrett, A. Zharikov, A. Borah, X. Hu,
J. McCoy, C. T. Chu, E. A. Burton, T. G. Hastings, J. T. Greenamyre, a-Synuclein binds to
TOM20 and inhibits mitochondrial protein import in Parkinson’s disease. Sci. Transl. Med. 8,
342ra78 (2016).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ra78
14
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 disease
-Synuclein binds to TOM20 and inhibits mitochondrial protein import in Parkinson's
α
Jennifer McCoy, Charleen T. Chu, Edward A. Burton, Teresa G. Hastings and J. Timothy Greenamyre
Roberto Di Maio, Paul J. Barrett, Eric K. Hoffman, Caitlyn W. Barrett, Alevtina Zharikov, Anupom Borah, Xiaoping Hu,
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaf3634
, 342ra78342ra78.
8
Sci Transl Med 
consequences.
species. This study also highlights potential ways to prevent this deleterious interaction and its downstream
senescence of mitochondria, which show reduced respiration and increased production of reactive oxygen 
receptor TOM20. This results in impaired import of proteins required for mitochondrial function and leads to
dopamine-modified forms, but not the monomeric or fibrillar forms, bind with high affinity to the mitochondrial 
-synuclein, such as oligomeric and
α
Di Maio and colleagues report that specific forms of wild-type 
Now,
Parkinson's disease and appear to intersect, but how the two are related to each other has remained elusive. 
-Synuclein accumulation and mitochondrial dysfunction are central to the pathogenesis of most forms of
α
-Synuclein disrupts the mitochondrial protein import business
α
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/8/342/342ra78
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2016/06/06/8.342.342ra78.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/362/6414/eaat8407.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/362/6414/521.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/360/6386/267.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/358/6369/1440.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/353/6307/1498.full
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/8/342/342ra78#BIBL
This article cites 41 articles, 10 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
