 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 2 6
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 3   March 2018
Introduction
Staphylococcus aureus is a Gram-positive bacterium that is the most 
common cause of skin infections in humans and is also an import-
ant cause of invasive and life-threatening infections, such as pneu-
monia, osteomyelitis, and bacteremia (1). The precise immune 
responses that protect against S. aureus skin infections are unclear, 
as nearly half of individuals with an S. aureus skin infection suffer 
a recurrence (2), despite the generation of high titers of specific 
antibodies and memory CD4+ T cells (3, 4). Moreover, all prior 
S. aureus vaccines in humans that targeted antibody-mediated 
phagocytosis have lacked efficacy or resulted in increased mortal-
ity (5). Therefore, a greater understanding of the adaptive immune 
responses that mediate long-lasting protection is needed to guide 
the future development of a successful S. aureus vaccine.
Neutrophils play an important role in host defense against 
 
S. aureus infections, as individuals with neutropenia (e.g., severe 
congenital neutropenia or as a result of chemotherapy) or impaired 
neutrophil function (e.g., chronic granulomatous disease) have a 
global susceptibility to S. aureus infections (6). However, certain 
primary immunodeficiency disorders have more selective impair-
ment against S. aureus infections in the skin, including those in 
humans with defective IL-1R/TLR signaling (e.g., IRAK4 or MyD88 
deficiency with impaired neutrophil recruitment; ref. 7–9) and in 
humans deficient in Th17 cells or IL-17 responses (i.e., autosomal 
dominant hyper-IgE syndrome and IL-17F or IL-17Ra deficiency; 
ref. 10–12). Similarly, MyD88-deficient mice have impaired neutro-
phil recruitment and host defense against S. aureus skin infections, 
predominantly due to loss of IL-1β/IL-1R1/MyD88 signaling (13, 
14) and subsequent T cell–mediated IL-17 responses (15–18).
Nevertheless, the responses that mediate durable immunity 
against recurrent S. aureus skin infections likely involve mecha-
nisms beyond MyD88/IRAK4 signaling and Th17/IL-17 responses 
because the childhood susceptibility to S. aureus skin infections in 
The mechanisms that mediate durable protection against Staphylococcus aureus skin reinfections are unclear, as 
recurrences are common despite high antibody titers and memory T cells. Here, we developed a mouse model of  
S. aureus skin reinfection to investigate protective memory responses. In contrast with WT mice, IL-1β–deficient 
mice exhibited poor neutrophil recruitment and bacterial clearance during primary infection that was rescued during 
secondary S. aureus challenge. The γδ T cells from skin-draining LNs utilized compensatory T cell–intrinsic TLR2/
MyD88 signaling to mediate rescue by trafficking and producing TNF and IFN-γ, which restored neutrophil recruitment 
and promoted bacterial clearance. RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) of the LNs revealed a clonotypic S. aureus–induced γδ 
T cell expansion with a complementarity-determining region 3 (CDR3) aa sequence identical to that of invariant Vγ5+ 
dendritic epidermal T cells. However, this T cell receptor γ (TRG) aa sequence of the dominant CDR3 sequence was 
generated from multiple gene rearrangements of TRGV5 and TRGV6, indicating clonotypic expansion. TNF- and IFN-γ–
producing γδ T cells were also expanded in peripheral blood of IRAK4-deficient humans no longer predisposed to  
S. aureus skin infections. Thus, clonally expanded γδ T cells represent a mechanism for long-lasting immunity against 
recurrent S. aureus skin infections.
Clonally expanded γδ T cells protect against 
Staphylococcus aureus skin reinfection
Carly A. Dillen,1 Bret L. Pinsker,1 Alina I. Marusina,2 Alexander A. Merleev,2 Orly N. Farber,3 Haiyun Liu,1 Nathan K. Archer,1  
Da B. Lee,1 Yu Wang,1 Roger V. Ortines,1 Steven K. Lee,1 Mark C. Marchitto,1 Shuting S. Cai,1 Alyssa G. Ashbaugh,1 Larissa S. May,4 
Steven M. Holland,5 Alexandra F. Freeman,5 Loren G. Miller,6 Michael R. Yeaman,6,7,8,9 Scott I. Simon,10 Joshua D. Milner,3  
Emanual Maverakis,2 and Lloyd S. Miller1,11,12,13
1Department of Dermatology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. 2Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine, UCD, Sacramento, California, USA. 3Laboratory 
of Allergic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. 4Department of Emergency Medicine, School of Medicine, UCD, Sacramento, California, USA. 
5Laboratory of Clinical Immunology and Microbiology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. 6Division of Infectious Diseases, 7Division of Molecular Medicine, 
and 8St. John’s Cardiovascular Research Center, Los Angeles Biomedical Research Institute, Harbor–UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, California, USA. 9Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine 
at UCLA, Los Angeles, California, USA. 10Department of Biomedical Engineering, UCD, Davis, California, USA. 11Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, and 12Department of Orthopaedic 
Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. 13Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
Conflict of interest: L.S. Miller reports grant support from MedImmune, Regeneron 
Pharmaceuticals, Moderna Therapeutics, and Pfizer, which are developing therapeutics 
and vaccines against Staphylococcus aureus and other pathogens. M.R. Yeaman is a 
shareholder of NovaDigm Therapeutics, which is developing new vaccines, including NDV-
3 targeting S. aureus and other pathogens.
Submitted: July 24, 2017; Accepted: December 19, 2017.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2018;128(3):1026–1042. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI96481.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 2 7
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 3   March 2018
Figure 1. IL-1β–/– mice are protected against an S. aureus skin reinfection. (A) Time line for S. aureus skin reinfection model. (B) Representative photo-
graphs of skin lesions. (C) Mean total lesion size (cm2) ± SEM (n = 10/group). (D) Representative S. aureus in vivo bioluminescent signals. (E) Mean total 
flux (photons/s) ± SEM (n = 10/group). (F) Ex vivo CFUs from d7 infected skin (n = 5/group). (G–J) Mean total lesion size (cm2) ± SEM and mean total 
flux (photons/s) ± SEM after 8-week (G and H) or 20-week (I and J) convalescent period (n = 5–10/group). †P < 0.01,; ‡P < 0.001, compared with 1° mice, 
as calculated by 2-way ANOVA (C, E, G–J) or 2-tailed Student’s t test (F). Results in B–E and G and H are a compilation of 2 independent experiments. 
Results in F are representative of 2 independent experiments.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 2 8
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 3   March 2018
sized that the normal activity of IL-1β in WT mice resulted in an effec-
tive response during both the 1° and 2° infections, making it difficult 
to observe an additional effect of any adaptive immune responses 
that developed. Therefore, we evaluated the 1° and 2° S. aureus skin 
infections in IL-1β–/– mice, which have impaired neutrophil recruit-
ment and host defense during a 1° S. aureus skin infection (13). The 1° 
IL-1β–/– mice developed markedly larger lesions and increased bac-
terial burden compared with WT mice (Figure 1, B–F). In contrast, 
2° IL-1β–/– mice were protected and their responses were similar to 
those of WT mice. The protection was long term and not limited to a 
specific skin location, since 2° IL-1β–/– mice were still protected when 
the convalescent interval was increased to 8 or 20 weeks (Figure 1, 
G–J) or when the locations for 1° and 2° inoculations were reversed 
(Supplemental Figure 1, A and B; supplemental material available 
online with this article; https:/
/doi.org/10.1172/JCI96481DS1).
Neutrophil recruitment in reinfected IL-1β–deficient mice. By his-
tology, 1° and 2° WT mice developed neutrophil abscesses at the 
peripheral edges and a dense band of Gram-positive S. aureus bacte-
ria in the center (Figure 2, A–F). 1° IL-1β–/– mice had defective neutro-
humans with MyD88 or IRAK4 deficiency wanes in adulthood (19) 
and humans with genetic defects in IL-17 responses suffer from 
mucocutaneous candidiasis more commonly than S. aureus skin 
infections (20). Therefore, we set out to identify these concomi-
tant protective immune responses that develop following a pri-
mary S. aureus skin infection that provide long-lasting protection 
against a secondary challenge.
Results
Protection of IL-1β–deficient mice against S. aureus skin reinfection. To 
assess whether immune protection developed following an S. aureus 
skin infection, WT C57BL/6 mice underwent a primary S. aureus skin 
infection (1°) in the lower back followed by a secondary S. aureus skin 
infection (2°) in a distant uninvolved site on the upper back on day 
28 (d28) (Figure 1A). Both 1° and 2° WT mice developed skin lesion 
sizes (Figure 1, B and C) and bacterial burdens (measured by in vivo 
bioluminescence imaging and ex vivo CFU counting) (Figure 1, D–F) 
that did not significantly differ from each other, similarly to what 
occurred in prior reports (17, 18, 21). Given these results, we hypothe-
Figure 2. Neutrophil recruitment is restored in IL-1β–/– mice during secondary infection. (A–D) Representative H&E- (A–C) and Gram-stained (D) histolog-
ic sections at 3 days after S. aureus inoculation. Scale bars: 240 μm. B and D show higher magnification of the black boxed area in A. C shows higher mag-
nification of the white boxed area in B (n = 5/group). (E) Mean abscess area (cm2) ± SEM and (F) mean bacterial band width (mm) ± SEM from histologic 
sections (n = 5/group). (G) Mean neutrophil (PMN) number per 10 μl of blood ± SEM from 0 to 6 hours after S. aureus inoculation (n = 5/group). *P < 0.05; 
†P < 0.01, compared with 1° mice, as calculated by 2-tailed Student’s t test (E–G). Results in G are representative of 2 independent experiments.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 2 9
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 3   March 2018
no effect on 2° WT mice. LN cells harvested from d28 IL-1β–/– mice 
and transferred to naive IL-1β–/– mice prior to 1° S. aureus skin infec-
tion also conferred protection (Figure 4, H and I). Furthermore, the 
protective response was unique to LN cells from previously infected 
IL-1β–/– mice, since the transfer of LN cells from naive IL-1β–/– mice 
to naive IL-1β–/– mice had no effect (Supplemental Figure 3).
Since Th17 cells and Th1 cells have been implicated in host 
defense against S. aureus skin infections in humans (4, 10–12, 25–
27) and mice (15–18), a role for CD4+ T cells was evaluated using 
anti-CD4 antibody depletion. Treatment successfully depleted 
CD4+ T cells from the blood and LNs (91% and 97%, respectively) 
while not significantly affecting the numbers of CD8+ T cells (Sup-
plemental Figure 4). However, anti-CD4 antibody treatment had 
no effect on 2° IL-1β–/– or WT mice (Figure 4, J and K), indicating 
that CD4+ T cells were not responsible for the protection observed.
γδ T cells from LNs mediate protection. During the innate 
immune response that occurs within hours of an S. aureus skin 
infection in naive WT mice, IL-1β induces γδ T cells to promote 
IL-17–mediated neutrophil recruitment (16). However, whether γδ 
T cells contribute to host defense against a 2° S. aureus skin infec-
tion is unknown. To evaluate this possibility, total LN cells from 
d28 IL-1β–/– mice were depleted of non–T cells; this was followed 
by isolating γδ T cells (TCRγδ+ cells) using magnetic bead separa-
tion. The enriched γδ T cells or the “flow-through” (CD3+ lympho-
cytes devoid of γδ T cells) (Supplemental Figure 5) was transferred 
to naive IL-1β–/– mice prior to 1° S. aureus skin infection (Figure 5A). 
Remarkably, transfer of only 50,000 γδ T cells mediated protec-
tion to a greater extent than 5 million other CD3+ T cells in the 
flow-through (Figure 5B). In addition, to evaluate for synergis-
tic protection between γδ and CD4+ T cells as reported for other 
bacterial infections (28), lesion sizes and in vivo bioluminescence 
were determined in naive IL-1β–/– mice that received no cell trans-
phil abscess formation with an increased band length of Gram-pos-
itive bacteria. In contrast, 2° IL-1β–/– mice had restored neutrophil 
abscess formation with an increase in circulating neutrophils (Fig-
ure 2G). Neutrophils differentiate into distinct effector subsets after 
an S. aureus infection (22), suggesting they might mediate trained 
immunity against a subsequent S. aureus challenge as previously 
described (23). To evaluate this possibility, neutrophils from d28 
IL-1β–/– mice were transferred to naive WT and IL-1β–/– mice 2 hours 
prior to 1° S. aureus skin infection. However, this did not result in any 
protection (Supplemental Figure 2, A and B).
Role of antibodies in conferring protection. Next, we evaluated 
whether more conventional adaptive immune responses contrib-
uted to the protection in 2° IL-1β–/– mice. d28 WT and IL-1β–/– mice 
had higher total IgG levels and S. aureus–specific IgG titers in the 
serum compared with naive mice (Figure 3A). There was also 
increased S. aureus–specific IgG in the infected skin of 2° WT and 
IL-1β–/– mice compared with naive mice (Figure 3B). To determine 
whether these antibodies conferred protection, serum from d28 
IL-1β–/– mice was transferred to naive WT and IL-1β–/– mice prior to 
1° S. aureus skin infection (Figure 3C). However, this passive trans-
fer of S. aureus–specific antibodies did not confer protection in 1° 
WT or IL-1β–/– mice (Figure 3D).
Role of T cells in mediating protection. To determine whether the 
observed protection was mediated by lymphocytes either residing 
in the skin or trafficking from LNs, mice were treated with FTY720, 
which inhibits lymphocyte efflux from LNs (24). FTY720 treatment 
of 2° IL-1β–/– mice resulted in increased lesion sizes and bacterial 
burden (Figure 4, A and B) and loss of neutrophil abscess formation 
(Figure 4, C–G), similarly to what occurred in 1° IL-1β–/– mice. Thus, 
trafficking lymphocytes from draining LNs promoted the protective 
neutrophil recruitment response. This role for trafficking lympho-
cytes was only observed in 2° IL-1β–/– mice, as FTY720 treatment had 
Figure 3. Specific antibodies are not involved in protective immunity. (A) Mean total and S. aureus–specific serum IgG (pg/ml) ± SEM at d28 (n = 5/
group). (B) Mean total and S. aureus–specific IgG levels IgG (pg/mg tissue weight) ± SEM in skin homogenates at 1 day after S. aureus inoculation (n = 5/
group). (C) Time line of i.v. serum transfer. (D) Mean total lesion size (cm2) ± SEM and mean total flux (photon/s) ± SEM (n = 10/group). †P < 0.01; ‡P < 
0.001, as measured by 2-tailed Student’s t test (A and B). Results in D are a compilation of 2 independent experiments.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 3 0
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 3   March 2018
Mechanisms that induce protective γδ T cells. Since protective γδ 
T cells developed in the absence of IL-1β activity, we hypothesized 
that an alternative MyD88 signal induced their generation and/or 
expansion. We first evaluated IL-1α because, like IL-1β, it signals 
via IL-1R1/MyD88. To inhibit both IL-1α and IL-1β activity, IL-1β–/– 
mice were treated with an anti–IL-1R1 blocking antibody through-
out the 42-day experiment (Figure 6, A and B). This treatment did 
not alter the 1° infection outcome nor did it diminish the protection 
fer or transfer of only γδ T cells (50,000 cells), only CD4+ T cells 
(5 million cells), or both γδ and CD4+ T cells combined (Figure 5, 
C and D). Transfer of only γδ T cells had the same protective effect 
as shown in Figure 5B. However, transfer of only CD4+ T cells or 
γδ and CD4+ T cells combined resulted in lesion sizes and in vivo 
bioluminescent signals that did not significantly differ from those 
of naive IL-1β–/– mice, indicating that CD4+ T cells did not have a 
protective effect either alone or when combined with γδ T cells.
Figure 4. T cells trafficking from draining LNs mediate the protection. (A) Time line of FTY720 administration with (B) mean total lesion size (cm2) ± SEM 
and mean total flux (photon/s) ± SEM (n = 10/group). (C) Representative H&E-stained histologic sections at 3 days after S. aureus inoculation. Scale bars: 240 
μm. D shows higher magnification of the black boxed area in C. E shows higher magnification of the white boxed area in D (n = 4/group). (F) Mean abscess 
area (cm2) ± SEM and (G) mean bacterial band width (mm) ± SEM from histologic sections (n = 4/group). (H) Draining LN cells harvested from d28 IL-1β–/– mice 
and transferred i.v. 1 day prior to 1° S. aureus inoculation of naive IL
-1β–/– mice and (I) mean total lesion size (cm2) ± SEM and mean total flux (photon/s) ± SEM 
(n = 5/group). (J) Time line of anti-CD4 treatment and (K) mean total lesion size (cm2) ± SEM and mean total flux (photon/s) ± SEM (n = 5/group). †P < 0.01, 
compared with control 1° or 2° mice (B and I) as measured by 2-way ANOVA. Results in B, I, and K are a compilation of 2 independent experiments.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 3 1
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 3   March 2018
observed in 2° IL-1β–/– mice, indicating that IL-1α was not involved 
in the protection. Next, a role for TLR2, which recognizes S. aureus 
lipopeptides, lipoteichoic acid (LTA), and peptidoglycan (PGN) (6), 
was evaluated by treating TLR2–/– mice with an anti–IL-1R1 block-
ing antibody (Figure 6, C and D). Under these conditions, both 
TLR2 and IL-1R1 activity were blocked and this resulted in loss 
of protection during the 2° infection, indicating that TLR2 com-
pensated for the lack of IL-1β to promote the protective response. 
Consistent for a role of TLR2 on γδ T cells, an appreciable percent-
age of γδ T cells in LNs of naive and d28 IL-1β–/– mice expressed 
TLR2, especially compared with the almost complete absence of 
TLR2 expression on CD4+ T cells (Figure 6, E and F). Furthermore, 
to evaluate for intrinsic TLR2/MyD88 signaling in T cells, 1° and 
2° S. aureus skin infections were induced in Lck-cre×MyD88fl/fl 
mice, which have MyD88 specifically deleted in all T cell subsets, 
including γδ T cells (Figure 6, G and H). Lck-cre×MyD88fl/fl mice 
had a marked host defense impairment during the 1° infection and 
completely failed to develop any protective response during a 2° S. 
aureus skin infection, suggesting that T cell–intrinsic MyD88 sig-
naling was required for mediating the protective response. Thus, 
TLR2 provided an alternative MyD88 signal in T cells that contrib-
uted to the protection observed in 2° IL-1β–/– mice.
TNF and IFN-γ, but not IL-17 or IL-22, mediate protection. To 
identify the effector cytokines produced by the protective γδ T 
cells, total LN cells from naive and d28 WT and IL-1β–/– mice were 
stimulated ex vivo with PMA/ionomycin and intracellular FACS 
was performed. IL-17A and IL-22 were first evaluated because 
they have been reported to be produced by trafficking γδ T cells 
(primarily in an IL-1β– and IL-23–dependent manner) during 
S. aureus skin infections (16), skin inflammation (24, 29–31), or 
after repeated intraperitoneal exposure to S. aureus (32). LN cells 
from d28 IL-1β–/– mice had either unchanged or decreased per-
centages of IL-17A+ and IL-22+ γδ T cells compared with naive 
IL-1β–/– mice (Figure 7, A and B). Certain circulating γδ T cell sub-
sets can produce TNF or IFN-γ (33–35); however, it is unknown 
whether TNF- and/or IFN-γ–producing γδ T cells developed after 
exposure to S. aureus and contributed to the protection observed. 
LN cells from d28 IL-1β–/– mice had significantly increased per-
centages of TNF+ and TNF+IFN-γ+ γδ T cells compared with naive 
IL-1β–/– mice (Figure 7, A and B). In contrast, LN cells from d28 
WT mice had an increased percentage of IL-17A+ γδ T cells and 
had either unchanged or decreased percentages of IL-22+, TNF+, 
and TNF+IFN-γ+ γδ T cells compared with naive WT mice.
To evaluate whether these responses were relevant in vivo, these 
cytokine protein levels were measured in the S. aureus–infected skin 
of IL-1β–/– and WT mice (Figure 7C). In 2° IL-1β–/– mice, TNF and 
IFN-γ levels increased 5- and 2-fold, respectively, whereas IL-17A 
and IL-22 levels were not significantly different than in 1° IL-1β–/– 
Figure 5. γδ T cells from draining LNs confer protection. (A) Draining LNs were harvested from d28 IL-1β–/– mice, and γδ T cells or other CD3+ T cells were 
transferred i.v. 1 day prior to S. aureus inoculation of naive IL-1β–/– mice. (B) Total lesion size (cm2) ± SEM and mean total flux (photon/s) ± SEM (n = 10/
group). (C) Draining LNs were harvested from d28 IL-1β–/– mice and γδ T cells, CD4+ T cells, or γδ T cells and CD4+ T cells combined were transferred i.v. 1 day 
prior to S. aureus inoculation of naive IL-1β–/– mice. (D) Total lesion size (cm2) ± SEM and mean total flux (photon/s) ± SEM (n = 5/group). *P < 0.05; †P < 
0.01, between the 2 groups (B) or compared with IL-1β–/– mice without cell transfer (1° IL-1β–/–) (D) as measured by 2-way ANOVA. Results in B are a compila-
tion of 2 independent experiments, and results in D are representative of 2 independent experiments.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 3 2
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 3   March 2018
mice. In contrast, IL-17A, IL-22, TNF, and IFN-γ levels were not sig-
nificantly different between 1° and 2° WT mice. Finally, treatment of 
2° IL-1β–/– mice with a combination of anti-TNF and anti–IFN-γ neu-
tralizing antibodies resulted in loss of protection (Figure 7D), indi-
cating that TNF and/or IFN-γ were crucial for mediating protection.
γδ T cells clonally expand in LNs following S. aureus skin infection. 
TCR complementarity-determining region 3–encoding (CDR3-en-
coding) sequences were mined from RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) 
data sets of naive and d28 WT and IL-1β–/– mice for T cell repertoire 
analysis (Figure 8, A and B). The LNs of naive WT and IL-1β–/–mice 
Figure 6. γδ T cells are induced by T cell–intrinsic TLR2/MyD88 signaling. 
IL-1β–/– mice (A and B) or TLR2–/– mice (C and D) were treated with an α–IL-1R 
antibody or isotype control every other day beginning at d–1 and continuing 
throughout the 1° and 2° infection with total lesion size (cm2) ± SEM and 
mean total flux (photon/s) ± SEM (n = 5/group) determined. (E and F) Rep-
resentative flow plots (E) and mean percentage ± SEM (F) of TLR2-express-
ing γδ and CD4+ T cells in inguinal LNs of naive and d28 IL-1β–/– mice (n = 5/
group). (G and H) Lck-MyD88–/– or WT mice (n = 5) during 1° and 2° infection 
with mean total lesion size (cm2) ± SEM and mean total flux (photon/s) ± 
SEM (n = 5/group) determined. *P < 0.05; †P < 0.01, compared with control 
1° or 2° mice as measured by 2-way ANOVA. Results (A–H) are representa-
tive of 2 independent experiments.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 3 3
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 3   March 2018
“top” (dominant) CDR3-encoding 
reads for TCR γ (TRG) (CACWDSS-
GFHKVF) and TRD (CGSDIGGSS-
WDTRQMFF), which represented 
approximately 20% of the total TRG 
and TRD CDR3-encoding sequences 
in the LNs following S. aureus skin 
infection (Figure 8B). The frequen-
cy of the TRG CACWDSSGFHKVF 
CDR3 aa sequence was increased in 
skin-draining LNs of 5 of 5 d28 WT 
mice and 6 of 7 d28 IL-1β–/– mice (Fig-
ure 8B) and was encoded by different 
TRG gene rearrangements, indicat-
ing that the expansion arose from 
multiple γδ T cells rather than a single 
clone. For example, while there were 
“canonical” TRG CACWDSSGFH-
KVF-encoding TCR gene rearrange-
ments lacking N additions, this CDR3 
aa sequence was also encoded for by 
gene rearrangements containing N 
additions (Table 1). Furthermore, this 
CDR3 aa sequence was encoded by 
2 different 3′ V regions, TRGV5 and 
TRGV6 (Table 2), again indicating 
clonotypic T cell expansion. Curi-
ously, a single d28 IL-1β–/– mouse 
did not expand the TRGV5/6-encod-
ed 
CACWDSSGFHKVF 
sequence 
in response to S. aureus, but instead 
utilized TRGV1 and TRGV3 gene segments to generate similar 
CDR3 aa sequences (i.e., CAVWTYSSGFHKVF and CAVWLYSS-
GFHKVF). The top TRD4 (CGSDIGGSSWDTRQMFF) CDR3 aa 
sequence also exhibited clonotypic expansion, as it was encoded 
by gene rearrangements with and without N additions in all d28 
WT and IL-1β–/– mice (Tables 3 and 4).
To verify these results, we mined the RNA-seq data set of 
Brady et al., which evaluated S. aureus–infected ear skin of WT 
mice on d0, d1, d4, and d7 (36). This revealed the same clono-
had diverse αβ and γδ T cell repertoires. In LNs of uninfected mice, 
there were “public” (present in multiple mice) CDR3 aa sequences 
encoded by TRA (CVVGDRGSALGRLHF) and TRB (CASSLGG-
NYAEQFF) at low frequencies (~0.5% and ~0.1%, respectively), 
but these did not expand following S. aureus skin infection. In LNs 
of d28 WT and IL-1β–/– mice, TRA and TRB repertoire analysis 
revealed no significant public S. aureus–induced expansions (Fig-
ure 8A). In contrast, LNs of d28 WT and IL-1β–/– mice exhibited 
strong γδ T cell expansions, as evidenced by the emergence of 
Figure 7. γδ T cells produced TNF and 
IFN-γ to mediate protection. (A and B) 
Representative flow plots (A) and mean 
percentage ± SEM (B) are shown for 
IL-17A–, IL-22–, TNF-, and IFN-γ–producing 
γδ T cells in inguinal LNs of naive and d28 
WT and IL-1β–/– mice (n = 5/group). (C)  
Protein levels of IL17A, IL-22, TNF, and 
IFN-γ in skin homogenates at d1 after  
S. aureus inoculation (n = 5/group). (D) 
Mean total lesion size (cm2) ± SEM and 
mean total flux (photon/s) ± SEM of 
IL-1β–/– mice ± anti-TNF/IFN-γ treatment 
(n = 5/group). *P < 0.05; †P < 0.01, as cal-
culated by 2-tailed Student’s t test (B and 
C) or 2-way ANOVA (D). Results are repre-
sentative of 2 independent experiments.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 3 4
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 3   March 2018
The Spearman’s rank-order correlation coefficient was used 
to determine correlations between reads mapping to the TRGV5/
V6-encoded CACWDSSGFHKVF sequence or the TRDV4-encod-
ed CGSDIGGSSWDTRQMFF sequence and reads mapping to the 
T cell–associated transcription factors TBX21, RORC, GATA3, and 
FOXP3 (Table 5). The only significant positive correlations were 
between the 2 CDR3-encoding transcripts and TBX21, which encodes 
for the IFN-γ–inducing transcription factor T-bet, consistent with the 
increased percentage of IFN-γ+ γδ T cells in LNs of d28 IL-1β–/– mice 
(Figure 6, A and B). There were also significant negative correlations 
between the TRV5/TRV6 CDR3 transcripts and GATA3 (P < 0.05), 
which encodes for a Th2 cytokine–inducing transcription factor.
Finally, TRGV4-encoded CDR3 sequences detected in the skin 
were compared with those detected in the LNs before and after the 
S. aureus skin infection. These cells were singled out for additional 
analysis because prior reports found that resident and recruited 
dermal γδ T cells in response to inflammation or infection com-
typic TRG5/6-encoded CACWDSSGFHKVF sequence (Table 1), 
demonstrating that the clones detected in our experiments were 
also found in naive and S. aureus–infected WT skin in a separate 
mouse colony. We also performed CDR3-dedicated T cell reper-
toire analysis of skin samples obtained from WT and IL-1β–/– naive 
mice and d31 IL-1β–/– mice (3 days after the 2° S. aureus inocula-
tion). In all cases, the TRGV5/6-encoded CACWDSSGFHKVF 
sequence and the TRDV4-encoded CGSDIGGSSWDTRQMFF 
sequence were detected (Tables 1 and 3), indicating that the same 
clonotypic γδ T cells were present in the skin both at baseline 
and during the 2° infection in WT and IL-1β–/– mice. Importantly, 
the TRGV5/V6-encoded CACWDSSGFHKVF and TRDV4-en-
coded CGSDIGGSSWDTRQMFF clonotypes were detected as 
unexpanded members of the skin-draining LNs of naive WT and 
IL-1β–/– mice (Figure 8B), indicating that these skin-resident γδ T 
cell clones were also low-frequency members of the peripheral T 
cell repertoire prior to infection.
Figure 8. Clonotypic T cell expansion in response to S. aureus. CDR3 sequences were mined from RNA-seq data set of LNs and skin samples of naive WT 
and IL-1β–/– mice (n = 5/group) and d28 LNs (WT mice, n = 5; IL-1β–/– mice, n = 7). (A and B) Pooled results from all LN samples presented as the CDR3 aa 
sequence rank (x axis) versus proportion of the total CDR3 aa reads occupied by that particular CDR aa sequence (y axis). Blue dots indicate each of the dif-
ferent CDR3 aa reads; orange dots indicate public (found in most samples) TRA- and TRB-encoded CDR3 aa sequences; red dots indicate top (dominantly 
expanded) TRG- and TRD-encoded CDR3 aa sequences in d28 LNs of WT and IL-1β-/- mice.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 3 5
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 3   March 2018
patient at the end of and several years after her recurrent infec-
tions was very stable. Interestingly, the percentage of γδ T cells 
that produced IL-17A among all human experimental groups was 
less than 0.68%, which was 50- to 100-fold lower than the per-
centage of TNF and/or IFN-γ–producing γδ T cells (Figure 9, I and 
J), indicating that IL-17A is not a major cytokine produced by cir-
culating γδ T cells in humans.
Discussion
The immune mechanisms that mediate long-lasting protection 
to S. aureus skin infections have remained elusive, especially 
since recurrences are common despite the generation of high 
titers of specific antibodies and memory αβ T cells (3, 4). In the 
present study, we utilized S. aureus–susceptible IL-1β–/– mice with 
impaired neutrophil recruitment and IL-17 responses to elucidate 
host defense mechanisms that provide durable protection against 
an S. aureus skin reinfection. We report that, following an initial 
 
S. aureus skin infection, clonotypic TNF
/IFN-γ–producing γδ T 
cells expanded in skin-draining LNs and protected against a sub-
sequent S. aureus skin challenge, which likely complements the 
previously characterized antibody and IL-17 responses in immu-
nity to S. aureus skin infections (15–18). This γδ T cell protective 
response was long lived, as it was still present at 20 weeks, similar 
to αβ T cell memory responses in other models (38, 39). The pro-
tection was specific to γδ T cells, since transfer of γδ T cells, but not 
serum containing S. aureus–specific antibodies, CD4+ T cells, or 
primed neutrophils from previously infected IL-1β–/– mice, rescued 
the immune impairment of naive IL-1β–/– mice.
In mice, γδ T cells have been increasingly recognized as con-
tributing to both innate and adaptive immune responses (33–35). 
During development, murine γδ T cells leave the thymus, possess 
invariant TCRs, and populate various epithelial sites in tissues and 
organs (33–35), such as the Vγ5+ γδ T cells in mouse epidermis (40). 
prised IL-17–producing Vγ4+ γδ T cells (24, 29–31). Although the 
TRGV4 population was diverse, there were several public clones, 
the most common of which was a TRGV4/TRGJ1 clone whose 
CDR3 aa sequence was CSYGYSSGFHKVF. This clone was detect-
ed in 100% of the LN samples and 50% of the skin samples from 
naive IL-1β–/– and WT mice. However, it was not expanded in the 
d28 IL-1β–/– mice following S. aureus skin infection.
Humans with IRAK4 deficiency have a similar population of 
circulating γδ T cells. To ascertain whether similar TNF
/IFN-γ 
circulating γδ T cells exist in humans, peripheral blood was eval-
uated from healthy individuals and individuals with primary 
immunodeficiency disorders with an increased susceptibility to 
S. aureus skin infections and other pyogenic infections, includ-
ing IRAK4 deficiency with impaired neutrophil migration due to 
defective IL-1R/TLR signaling (including a lack of IL-1β activi-
ty, as in IL-1β–/– mice) (7, 8) and chronic granulomatous disease 
(CGD) with defective neutrophil killing due to loss-of-function 
mutations in NADPH oxidase (37). Healthy and IRAK4-deficient 
individuals had 1%–5% γδ T cells, whereas individuals with CGD 
had only approximately 1% γδ T cells of the total CD3+ T cell 
population (Figure 9, A and B). Healthy individuals had virtually 
equivalent percentages (~45%) of Vδ1+ and Vδ2+ γδ T cells (Figure 
9, C and D), which are the major γδ T cell populations in human 
blood (33–35). γδ T cells were mostly Vδ2+ (>80%) in IRAK4 defi-
ciency, and in contrast, the few γδ T cells in CGD were mostly 
Vδ1+ (~80%). After PMA/ionomycin stimulation and intracellular 
FACS analysis, the percentages of TNF- and/or IFN-γ–producing 
cells were evenly distributed (20%–35%) among Vδ2+ and Vδ1+ 
cells in healthy individuals. In contrast, almost all of TNF– and/
or IFN-γ–producing cells (88%–96%) were Vδ2+ cells in IRAK4 
individuals and a broad range of TNF– and/or IFN-γ–producing 
cells (38%–92%) were Vδ1+ cells in CGD individuals (Figure 9, 
E–H). The cellular phenotype of blood drawn from the IRAK4 
Table 2. Analysis of TRG CDR3 V-J junction
No.
V name
3′ V region
N
5′ J region
J name
1
TRGV5*01
TGTGCCTGCTGGGAT.
..AGCTCAGGTTTTCACAAGGTATTT
TRGJ1*01
2
TRGV6*01
TGTGCATGCTGGGATA
...GCTCAGGTTTTCACAAGGTATTT
TRGJ1*01
3
TRGV6*01
TGTGCATGCTGGGATA
GCTCT
........GGTTTTCACAAGGTATTT
TRGJ1*01
TRGV5 and TRGV6 nt sequences of the 3′ V region and 5′ J region from the top TRG-encoded CDR3 aa sequence in Figure 8B. Germline residues not depicted 
are shown as periods (each individual period indicates a single unincorporated germline nucleotide). Bold indicates nt differences.
Table 1. TRG nt sequence alignments
No.
Gene
V
J
CDR3 nt
CDR3 aa
WT LN
IL-1β–/– LN
WT skinA
IL-1β–/– skin
1
TRG
V5
J1
TGTGCCTGCTGGGATAGCTCA 
GGTTTTCACAAGGTATTT
CACWDS 
SGFHKVF
+
+
+
+
2
TRG
V6
J1
TGTGCATGCTGGGATAGCTCA 
GGTTTTCACAAGGTATTT
CACWDS 
SGFHKVF
+
+
+
+
3
TRG
V6
J1
TGTGCATGCTGGGATAGCTCT 
GGTTTTCACAAGGTATTT
CACWDS 
SGFHKVF
–
+
–
–
ABrady et al. (36). TRGV5 and TRGV6 nt sequences and gene-sequence alignments of the different clonotypes from the top TRG-encoded CDR3 aa 
sequence in Figure 8B and ref. 36. Bold indicates nt differences.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 3 6
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 3   March 2018
S. aureus–derived ligands for TLR2 (e.g., lipoproteins/lipopep-
tides, LTA, and PGN; ref. 6) in the infected skin and/or in the 
draining LNs to generate the protective γδ T cells that produced 
TNF
/IFN-γ rather than IL-17A. This is consistent with the lack 
of expansion of IL-17A–producing γδ T cells in IL-1β–/– mice after 
the 1° S. aureus skin infection in vivo despite active TLR2/MyD88 
signaling in these mice. Although a prior report found that TLR2 
activation of γδ T cells in vitro resulted in IL-17A production, IL-1β 
was likely also produced in the cultures, providing an alternative 
explanation for the increased IL-17A production (41).
Regarding the specific CDR3 gene rearrangements, our results 
greatly modify the currently accepted views on γδ T cells. Early 
seminal discoveries demonstrated that the first murine γδ T cells 
produced by the thymus during early development have canonical 
TCRs lacking N additions, including an invariant δ chain (43, 44). It 
is believed that these T cells then migrate to distinctive sites with-
in the body dictated by the TCR-γ chain they express (33, 45). The 
TRGV5 gene rearrangement detected in our study corresponds to 
that reported for the previously described invariant Vγ5+ dendritic 
epidermal T cells (DETCs) (43, 44). DETCs are the most common 
skin-resident γδ T cell population and have been reported to rec-
ognize a stress-induced self-antigen derived from keratinocytes 
(46, 47). In contrast, the TRGV6 gene rearrangement described 
herein corresponds to that reported for canonical γδ T cells resid-
ing in the liver, placenta, kidney, uterus, tongue and other mucosal 
sites (33, 45). Interestingly, the dominant TRDV4 gene rearrange-
ment that was found in both the skin and LNs encodes the same 
CDR3 aa sequence for the Vδ1 chain of DETCs and was previously 
reported to only be present in remodeling epithelial tissues such 
as the placenta and lactating mammary glands (48, 49). Although 
still the dominant view, some reports have been inconsistent with 
the distribution of γδ T cells just described. For example, a recent 
In general, circulating murine γδ T cells produce IL-17 or IFN-γ, 
with IL-1β/IL-1R1 activation promoting IL-17 production (16, 29, 
32, 41). Since data in humans indicate that protective immunity 
to recurrent S. aureus skin infections can develop in the absence 
of MyD88/IRAK4 signaling (including IL-1β/IL-1R1/MyD88 sig-
naling) (19) and Th17/IL-17 responses (20), we evaluated IL-1β–
deficient mice to uncover previously unknown components of the 
 
S. aureus–directed immune response.
We found an important role for TNF and IFN-γ in protecting 
against a secondary S. aureus skin challenge, which was unexpect-
ed because TNF-αRI–/– and IFN-γR–/– mice were found to have no 
immune impairment against a 1° S. aureus skin infection (14, 16). 
However, a recent report found that deficiency in both IFN-γ and 
IL-17 signaling, but not either alone, resulted in spontaneous and 
persistent mucocutaneous S. aureus infections in mice (42), sug-
gesting that both IFN-γ and IL-17 are required for durable pro-
tection against S. aureus skin infections. Furthermore, impaired 
Th1 responses (i.e., IFN-γ+ CD4+ T cells), but not IL-17/Th17 cell 
responses, were observed in the blood and S. aureus–infected skin 
of HIV+ individuals (known to be highly susceptible to S. aureus 
skin infections), implicating IFN-γ rather than IL-17 in mediating 
protective immunity to S. aureus skin infections in humans (26). 
These data in mice and humans support our finding that TNF and 
IFN-γ responses are essential for long-lasting immunity against 
 
S. aureus skin infections.
In this study, TLR2 compensated for the lack of IL-1β, since 
the protection observed in the 2° IL-1β–/– mice was lost when both 
IL-1R1 and TLR2 were inhibited in vivo. In addition, TLR2 was 
expressed by γδ T cells in the LNs of IL-1β–deficient mice, and 
the effect of TLR2 was intrinsic to MyD88 signaling on T cells, 
as Lck-cre×MyD88fl/fl mice did not develop protection against 
2° S. aureus skin infection. TLR2 was likely activated by known 
 
Table 3. TRD nt sequence alignments
No.
Gene
V
J
CDR3 nt
CDR3 aa
WT LN
IL-1β–/– LN
WT skinA
IL-1β–/– skin
1
TRD
V4
J2
TGTGGGTCAGATATC 
GGAGGGAGCTCCTG 
GGACACCCGACAGA 
TGTTTTTT
CGSDIGGSS 
WDTRQMFF
+
+
+
+
2
TRD
V4
J2
TGTGGCTCAGATATC 
GGAGGGAGCTCCTG 
GGACACCCGACAGA 
TGTTTTTT
CGSDIGGSS 
WDTRQMFF
–
–
+
–
ABrady et al. (36). TRD nt sequences and gene sequence alignments of the different clonotypes from the top TRD-encoded CDR3 aa sequence in Figure 8B 
and Brady et al. (36). Bold indicates nt differences.
Table 4. Analysis of TRD CDR3 V-D-J junction
No.
V name
3′ V region
N
P
D region
P
5′ J region
J name
D name
1
TRDV4*01
TGTGGGTCAGATATC
...GGAGGGA......
G CTCCTGGGACACCCGACAGATGTTTTTT
TRDJ2*01 TRDD2*01
2
TRDV4*01
TGTGG..........
CTCA GAT
ATCGGAGGGA......
G CTCCTGGGACACCCGACAGATGTTTTTT
TRDJ2*01 TRDD2*01
TRDV4 nt sequences of 3′ V region and 5′ J region from the top TRD-encoded CDR3 aa sequence in Figure 8B. Germline residues not depicted are shown as 
periods (each individual period indicates a single unincorporated germline nucleotide). Bold indicates nt differences.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 3 7
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 3   March 2018
explain the patients’ decreased susceptibility to S. aureus with 
age (8, 19). In contrast, Vδ2+ γδ T cells were virtually absent in 
individuals with CGD, a disease in which patients never over-
come their predisposition to S. aureus and other pyogenic infec-
tions (37). In addition, almost all of the circulating Vδ1+ and 
Vδ2+ γδ T cells from all healthy humans and IRAK4 and CGD 
patients lacked the ability to produce IL-17 (or IL-22). This is in 
contrast to the high numbers of circulating IL-17–producing T 
cells in mice (56), suggesting that IL-17 responses might not be 
as relevant for circulating γδ T cells in humans. Moreover, since 
human circulating γδ T cells primarily produce TNF
/IFN-γ rath-
er than IL-17 or IL-22, the protective TNF
/IFN-γ–producing γδ 
T cells that we identified in mice might better translate to pro-
tective γδ T cell responses in humans.
There are several limitations and future directions. 
First, a key question is whether the expanded γδ T cells from 
previously infected IL-1β–/– mice could confer protection to WT 
mice. To evaluate this, we performed an LN transfer from d28 
IL-1β–/– mice to naive WT mice as in Figure 4H. However, this did 
not result in further protection of the WT mice (see Supplemental 
Figure 6). The lack of protection could have been due to normal 
IL-1β activity in WT mice, which induced effective neutrophil 
recruitment that could not be further enhanced. Alternatively, 
the presence of IL-1β activity could have negatively affected TNF 
and IFN-γ production by the transferred γδ T cells from IL-1β–/– 
mice. A future direction will be to determine the mechanisms 
by which clonally expanded γδ T cells confer protection to WT 
mice. Second, transfer of CD4+ T cells to naive IL-1β–/– mice did 
not have a protective effect. Further, transferring γδ and CD4+ 
T cells in combination resulted in loss of the protective effect of 
the γδ T cells. Although the reason for this is unclear, this result 
is consistent with recent findings that naturally generated or vac-
cine-induced CD4+ T cell responses were either not protective 
or resulted in increased mortality in mouse models of S. aureus 
bacteremia (57, 58). Third, the FTY720 experiments indicate 
that trafficking of the protective γδ T cells from LNs during the 
infection was required for protection, but it is unclear whether 
these cells might also function as tissue-resident cells. Regarding 
expression of homing and adhesion molecules of tissue-resident 
memory T cells, the γδ T cells from LNs of d28 IL-1β–/– mice had 
substantially decreased expression of CCR4 and significant but 
subtle differences in expression of CD103 and CLA compared 
with that in naive IL-1β–/– mice (Supplemental Figure 7). Final-
ly, it is unclear whether the TCR signaling in the γδ T cells was 
required for protection; however, the butyrophilin family mem-
bers (e.g., Skint1, Skint3, or Skint9) have recently been implicat-
ed as TCR ligands or costimulatory molecules for DETCs, which 
express the same CDR3 aa sequence (59, 60). There was a sig-
nificant correlation between reads encoding for the top γδ CDR3 
sequences and BTLN2 (but not SKINT1, SKINT3, or SKINT9) in 
the LNs of d28 IL-1β mice (Supplemental Figure 8), suggesting 
that Btnl2 might activate the protective γδ T cells in our model. 
A role of TCR signaling and butyrophilin family members will be 
the subject of our future work.
Taken together, this study identified a clonotypic expansion 
of TNF/IFN-γ–producing γδ T cells that were induced by TLR2/
MyD88 signaling to promote protection against an S. aureus 
report failed to identify invariant Vγ5+ γδ T cells in the mouse skin, 
but rather described an IL-17–producing CD3hi invariant Vγ6+ γδ 
T cell population that was increased following imiquimod-induced 
skin inflammation (50). Vγ6+ γδ T cells have also been shown to 
strongly produce IL-17 in response to fungal and bacterial infec-
tions, including repeated intraperitoneal exposure to S. aureus, at 
different anatomical sites (32, 51–53).
Our study differs substantially from these prior reports in that 
we used deep sequencing to characterize the γδ T cell repertoire. 
This revealed that invariant Vγ5+ and Vγ6+ T cells reside in the skin 
and in the skin-draining LNs. Furthermore, we demonstrate that 
both the classical TRGV5 and TRGV6 gene rearrangements encode 
for the exact same CDR3 aa sequence, CACWDSSGFHKVF, 
which we found is also encoded by noncanonical TRG gene rear-
rangements containing N additions. Finally, we demonstrate that 
following S. aureus skin infection, there is a clonotypic expansion 
of these TRGV5/V6 γδ T cells in the skin-draining LNs. Multiple 
gene rearrangements encoding for the same CDR3 aa sequence, as 
reported here, favor antigen specificity as the driving force behind 
the observed pathogen-induced T cell expansion. Although it is 
unclear whether the γδ T cell TCR reactivity was against a yet-to-
be-described S. aureus–derived antigen or self-antigen as previ-
ously postulated (46, 47), it is clear that this distinctive TRGV5/
V6-encoded CDR3 aa sequence is critical for mediating robust 
immune protection against pathogens at the skin and potentially 
other barrier sites. Furthermore, the TRGV5 and TRGV6 CDR3- 
encoding sequences correlated with TBX21 expression, providing 
an explanation for increased γδ T cell production of TNF
/IFN-γ. 
The TRGV5/V6 response is in contrast to that observed for TRGV4 
γδ T cells, which did not expand in response to S. aureus infection. 
TRGV4 γδ T cells were also found at a much lower frequency than 
the clonotypic TRGV5/V6 γδ T cells.
In humans, Vδ2+ γδ T cells have a semi-invariant TCR repertoire 
and rapidly expand and contribute to host defense against microbial 
infections (54, 55). Vδ1+ γδ T cells have a more diverse TCR reper-
toire and have been associated with adaptive responses, especial-
ly against viruses such as CMV (54, 55). In the present study, an 
increased proportion of circulating TNF
/IFN-γ–producing Vδ2+ γδ 
T cells were found in IRAK4-deficient individuals; these most likely 
expanded as a result of the recurrent infections in these patients (8). 
In the setting of IRAK4 deficiency, the Vδ2+ γδ T cells might restore 
the impaired neutrophil recruitment response (7), which would 
Table 5. Correlation of CDR3 sequences and T cell transcription factors
Gene
Spearman TRDV4
P value
Spearman TRGV5/TRGV6
P value
TBX21
0.57
6.02 × 10–03
0.62
2.24 × 10–03
RORC
0.06
7.84 × 10–01
0.08
7.24 × 10–01
GATA3
–0.31
1.58 × 10–01
–0.45
3.69 × 10–02
FOXP3
–0.01
9.74 × 10–01
–0.06
7.97 × 10–01
Spearman correlations between reads mapping to T cell transcription factors and 
reads mapping to the CDR3-encoding nt sequences of the dominant TRG- and 
TRD-encoded CDR3 aa sequences identified in Figure 8B. Bold indicates a positive 
correlation between CDR3-encoding transcripts and TBX21 expression. The other 
factors listed here negatively correlate with CDR3-encoding sequences.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 3 8
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 3   March 2018
Methods
Staphylococcus aureus strain. The bioluminescent USA300 LAC::lux 
strain used in all experiments was previously generated from the 
community-acquired methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) USA300 
skin reinfection. These findings provide important mechanis-
tic insights for targeting specific γδ T cells in future vaccines 
and immunotherapies to promote durable immunity against 
 
S. aureus skin infections.
Figure 9. TNF/IFN-γ–producing γδ T cells from PBMCs in individuals with IRAK4 deficiency and CGD. PBMCs from healthy controls (ctrl, n = 6), patients 
with IRAK4 deficiency (n = 3 samples, including 2 samples from the same individual at age 17, toward the end of the predilection for recurrent infection, 
and at age 22), and patients with CGD (n = 4) were analyzed. Representative flow plots and mean percentage ± SEM are shown for total γδ T cells in PBMCs 
(A and B), Vδ1+ versus Vδ2+ γδ T cells (C and D), TNF production (E and F), IFN-γ production (G and H), and IL-17A production (I and J). *P < 0.05; †P < 0.01, as 
measured by 2-tailed Student’s t test with Bonferroni’s correction.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 3 9
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 3   March 2018
were obtained by coating ELISA plates overnight with heat-killed 
USA300 LAC::lux in the stationary phase and then proceeding with 
manufacturer’s instructions (eBioscience).
Serum isolation and transfer to mice. Mouse serum was obtained 
from newly collected blood (from terminal cardiac puncture on anes-
thetized mice), which was allowed to clot at room temperature for 30 
minutes. Serum supernatants were then collected after centrifuging 
the clotted blood at 1,500 g for 10 minutes at 4°C. Serum samples were 
stored at –20°C prior to use. Serum (200 μl, 37°C) was transferred to 
mice via i.v. injection (via retroorbital vein) on day –1 (d–1) and d0 prior 
to S. aureus skin inoculation; serum used was 4 times that transferred 
in a prior study (18).
In vivo antibody and FTY administration. For CD4+ T cell depletion, 
mice were treated i.p. with anti-CD4 antibody (clone GK1.5, BioXCell) 
300 μg in 500 μl PBS on d–1 and 100 μg in 500 μl sterile PBS on d0 and 
d7 of the 2° S. aureus skin infection, according to previously described 
dosing (18). Depletion of CD4+ T cells was confirmed from blood sam-
ples (collected via retroorbital venipuncture) immediately prior to the 
S. aureus skin infection by flow cytometry using antibodies against CD4 
(clone RM4-5), CD8α (clone 53-6.7), and CD3ε (clone 145-2C11). For 
combined TNF and IFN-γ neutralization, mice were treated i.p. with 
anti-mouse TNF (clone XT3.11) and anti-mouse IFN-γ (clone XMG 1.2), 
with 200 μg of each given together in 500 μl sterile PBS on d–1, d0, and 
d1 of the 2° S. aureus skin infection, according to the manufacturer’s rec-
ommended dosing (BioXCell). To block IL-1R1, mice were treated i.p. 
with anti–IL-1R1 antibody (clone JAMA-147)  100 μg in 500 μl sterile 
PBS beginning on d–1, d0, and d1 of the 1° S. aureus skin infection and 
then every other day throughout the entire 42-day experiment (including 
during the 2° S. aureus skin infection), according to the manufacturer’s 
recommended dosing (BioXCell). All control mice were treated i.p. with 
a corresponding isotype control antibody (BioXCell) at the equivalent 
dose and volume. To block lymphocyte efflux from LNs, mice were treat-
ed i.p. with FTY720 (Sigma-Aldrich), 1 mg/kg in 100 μl sterile water, 
beginning on d27, d28, and d29 of the 2° S. aureus skin infection and con-
tinuing every other day as previously described (24).
Lymphocyte isolation, magnetic bead separation, and transfer to mice. 
A single suspension of LN cells was obtained after manually pushing 
draining LNs through a cell-separation filter (40 μm). Cells were counted 
and resuspended in MACS Separation Buffer (degassed PBS containing 
BSA [0.5%] and EDTA [2 mM]) (Miltenyi Biotec). γδ T cells were isolated 
using a TCRγ/δ+ Isolation Kit for mice, according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions (Miltenyi Biotec). Briefly, non–T cells were depleted using 
direct magnetic labeling of CD45R and CD11b microbeads. Next, γδ T 
cells were indirectly labeled using anti-TCRγ/δ-biotin, and anti-biotin 
microbeads were then used to positively select γδ T cells. The remaining T 
cells were collected via flow-through on the column. 50,000 γδ T cells or 5 
million CD3+ T cells (devoid of γδ T cells) in the flow-through were trans-
ferred to mice i.v. (via retroorbital vein) at 1 day prior to S. aureus skin inoc-
ulation. The adoptively transferred cells were either 96.1% CD3+ T cells 
with 0.8% GL3+ γδ T cells collected from the flow-through or 95.7% GL3+ 
γδ T cells isolated from the column (Supplemental Figure 5). In a separate 
experiment, γδ T cells were isolated as described above, while the non–T 
cell–depleted fraction left over after this isolation was subsequently used 
to isolate CD4+ T cells using a CD4+ T cell isolation kit (Miltenyi Biotech) 
per the manufacturer’s instructions. One day prior to inoculation with 
S. aureus, 50,000 γδ T cells, 5 million CD4+ T cells, or 50,000 γδ T cells 
plus 5 million CD4+ T cells were injected via retroorbital vein. The purity 
LAC isolate obtained from a skin infection outbreak in the Los Ange-
les County Jail (Los Angeles, California, USA) and was provided by 
Tammy Kielian (University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska, USA). 
USA300 LAC::lux possesses a modified luxABCDE operon stably inte-
grated in the bacterial chromosome so that the emission of blue-green 
light from live and metabolically active bacteria is maintained in all 
progeny without selection.
Bacterial preparation. S. aureus bacteria was streaked onto a tryp-
tic soy agar (TSA) plate (tryptic soy broth [TSB] plus 1.5% bacto agar; 
BD Biosciences) and grown overnight at 37°C in a bacterial incubator. 
Single colonies were cultured in TSB at 37°C in a shaking incubator 
(240 rpm) overnight (18 hours), followed by a 1:50 subculture at 37°C 
for 2 hours to obtain midlogarithmic phase bacteria. The bacteria were 
pelleted, resuspended, and washed in PBS. The absorbance (A600) was 
measured to estimate the number of CFUs, which was verified after 
overnight culture on TSA plates.
Mice. C57BL/6 WT mice, TLR2–/– mice (B6.129-Tlr2tm1Kir/J), Lck-
cre mice (B6.Cg-Tg(Lck-cre)548Jxm/J), and MyD88fl/fl (B6.129P2(S-
JL)-MyD88tm1Defr/J) mice were obtained from Jackson Laboratories. 
Lck-cre mice were crossed with MyD88fl/fl mice to obtain the Lck-cre × 
MyD88fl/fl mouse strain. IL-1β–/– mice on a C57BL/6 background were 
provided by Yoichiro Iwakura (University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan).
Mouse model of S. aureus skin reinfection. For each experiment, 
sex- and age-matched mice were used beginning at 6 and 8 weeks of 
age. For the 1° S. aureus skin infection, the dorsal backs of anesthetized 
mice (2% isoflurane) were shaved and injected intradermally (i.d.) in 
the lower back with 3 × 107 CFU of USA300 LAC::lux in 100 μl of PBS 
using a 29-gauge insulin syringe. After a 2-week convalescent period, 
on d28, a 2° S. aureus skin infection was performed by i.d. injection at a 
distant skin site in the upper back with the same inoculum and proce-
dures as used for the 1° S. aureus skin infection. In some experiments, 
the convalescent period was increased to 8 or 20 weeks prior to the 2° 
S. aureus skin infection or the i.d. inoculation sites on the lower and 
upper backs of mice were reversed.
Measurement of total lesion area. Total lesion size (cm2) was measured 
from digital photographs of the skin of anesthetized mice (2% isoflurane) 
using ImageJ software (NIH) and a millimeter ruler as a reference.
In vivo bioluminescent imaging. In vivo bioluminescent imaging 
was performed on anesthetized mice (2% isoflurane) using a Lumina 
III IVIS (PerkinElmer) and total flux (photons/s) was measured within 
a 1 × 103 pixel circular region of interest using Living Image software 
(PerkinElmer) (limit of detection: 2 × 104 photons/s).
Skin tissue homogenates and bacterial quantification. Skin tissue 
homogenates were obtained by performing a 10-millimeter lesion-
al skin punch biopsy (Acuderm) and homogenizing each specimen 
(Pro200 Series homogenizer; Pro Scientific) in Reporter Lysis buffer 
(Promega) containing protease inhibitor cocktail tablets (Roche Life 
Sciences) at 4°C. Ex vivo CFUs were counted after plating serially 
diluted skin tissue homogenates overnight on TSA plates.
Histology. Skin punch biopsy specimens (10 mm) were collected, 
fixed in formalin (10%), and embedded in paraffin. Sections (4 μm) 
were mounted onto glass slides and stained with H&E and Gram stain 
by the Johns Hopkins Reference Histology Laboratory.
Measurement of total and S. aureus–specific IgG. Levels of total 
IgG in serum and skin tissue homogenates were determined 
using a mouse IgG ELISA according to the manufacturer’s proto-
col (eBioscience). S. aureus–specific IgG levels in the specimens 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 4 0
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 3   March 2018
RNA-seq data analysis. Raw sequencing data were received in FASTQ 
format. Sequencing reads were mapped to the UCSC mm10 mouse 
reference genome by STAR. Gene-expression level normalization and 
differential expression analysis were carried out by using the DESeq2 
Bioconductor R package. This package provides statistics for determina-
tion of differential expression using a model based on the negative bino-
mial distribution. Genes with an adjusted P value of less than 0.05 and 
fold change greater than 2 were assigned as differentially expressed. In 
order to examine the relationship of gene expressions across the samples, 
Spearman’s correlation of normalized gene counts was computed. Spear-
man’s rank correlation coefficients and P values were calculated in R (ver-
sion 3.1.2, http:/
/www.R-project.org/) using the cor.test function.
Extraction of TCR sequence information from RNA-seq data. MiX-
CR software was used to extract TCR CDR3 sequences from RNA-seq 
data. Analyses were performed with the “-p rna-seq” option recom-
mended for analysis of RNA-seq data.
CDR3 definition. The TCR CDR3 region was defined as the ami-
no acid residues starting with the C at position 104 and ending with 
the F at position 118 based on International ImMunoGeneTics (IMGT) 
nomenclature and a TCR numbering system. Likewise, gene names of 
V and J regions are designated according to the IMGT name nomen-
clature for T cell receptors of mice.
Amplification of TCR CDR3. For targeted CDR3 sequencing, we 
synthesized cDNA with anchor sequence incorporation. This method is 
based on the 5′ template-switching ability of certain reverse transcrip-
tases, which has been used for αβ T cell repertoire analysis (61). Reverse 
transcriptions were performed using the Ribo_TSO (5′-AAGCAGTG-
GTATCAACGCAGAGTACTCTT(rG)5-3′), TCR Cγ- and Cδ-specific 
primers mDC1R RT (5′-CACCAGACAAGCAACATTTG-3′), mGC1R 
RT (5′-CTTTTCTTTCCAATACACCCTTAT-3′), and SMARTScribe 
reverse transcriptases (Clontech) according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions. Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) was performed 
for each sample to identify the minimum number of PCR cycles need-
ed to ideally amplify TCR without overamplification. We carried out 
qRT-PCR iProof High-Fidelity Master Mix (Bio-Rad) and EvaGreen 
Dye (Biotium) with the following primer pairs: Smart20 (5′-CACTC-
TATCCGACAAGCAGTGGTATCAACGCAG-3′), mDC2R (5′-CAT-
GATGAAAACAGATGGTTTGG-3′) for TCRδ, Smart20 (5′-CACTC-
TATCCGACAAGCAGTGGTATCAACGCAG-3′), 
and 
mGC2R 
(5′-GGAGATTTGTTTCAGCA-3′) for TCR-γ. The PCR cycle was as fol-
lows: 98°C for 2 minutes, 95°C for 20 seconds, 68°C for 20 seconds, and 
72°C for 50 seconds for 40 cycles, followed by a final extension step of 
72°C for 5 minutes. Once the optimal number of PCR cycles was estab-
lished, final PCR was carried without EvaGreen. All amplification reac-
tions were assayed in at least 10 separate tubes to minimize PCR ampli-
fication bias. The reaction products were purified using the MinElute 
PCR Purification Kit using Qiacube (QIAGEN) and quantified using a 
Qubit Fluorometer and Quant-iT dsDNA BR Assay Kit (Invitrogen).
TCR library preparation. All libraries from purified TCR ampli-
cons were prepared using the Nextera XT Index Kit (Illumina Inc.) 
according to the manufacturer’s instructions for the 16S Metagenomic 
Sequencing Library Preparation protocol, with minor modifications. 
Briefly, first-stage PCR was performed with KAPA HiFi HotStart 
ReadyMix (KAPA Biosystems) and the primer pairs were designed 
according to protocol guidelines. Primer pairs were as follows: first-
stage PCR forward primer: Nextera-Step_1: 5′-TCGTCGGCAGCGT-
CAGATGTGTATAAGAGACAGCACTCTATCCGACAAGCAGT-3′; 
percentages of isolated cells that were adoptively transferred were 95.7% 
GL3+ γδ T cells and 98.1% CD4+ T cells (Supplemental Figure 5).
Mouse cell phenotypic analysis. LNs were harvested from mice, and 
single-cell suspensions were created. Cells were resuspended in PBS 
containing 1% BSA. 1 × 106 Cells were stained for surface markers 
using antibodies against CCR4 (clone 2G12), CD4 (clone GK1.5), CD8α 
(clone 53-6.7), CD3 (clone REA641), CLA (HECA-452), TCRγδ (clone 
GL3), CD103 (clone REA789), and TLR2 (clone 6C2) for 30 minutes at 
4°C. Cells were washed twice in PBS and resuspended in PBS with 1% 
BSA for acquisition. Propidium iodide was added at 1:100 immediately 
prior to acquisition for discrimination of dead cells. Intracellular stain-
ing was performed by first creating single-cell suspensions from LNs, 
which were resuspended in RPMI containing FBS (10%), penicillin 
(100 U/ml), and streptomycin (100 μg/ml). 1 × 106 Cells per well were 
plated in 96-well cell-culture plates in the presence of a cell-stimula-
tion cocktail plus protein transport inhibitors (eBioscience) containing 
PMA, ionomycin, brefeldin A, and monensin. Control wells contained 
only protein transport inhibitor cocktail (brefeldin A and monensin). 
Cells were incubated at 37°C for 6 hours. Cells were washed once 
before staining for viability (Viability Fixable Dye, Miltenyi Biotec) and 
surface markers using antibodies against CD4 (clone RM4-5), CD8α 
(clone 53-6.7), and TCRγδ (clone GL3) for 30 minutes at 4°C. Cells 
were washed before being fixed using FACSFix (BD Biosciences) for 
30 minutes. Cells were permeabilized by washing 3 times and then 
incubating for 10 minutes in Perm/Wash (BD Biosciences) and then 
incubated with antibodies against IL-17A (clone TC11-18H10), IL-22 
(clone IL22JOP), TNF (clone MP6-XT22), and IFN-γ (clone XMG1.2) 
or isotype control mAbs (Miltenyi Biotec) (Supplemental Figure 9) for 
30 minutes before being washed and resuspended. Cell acquisition 
was performed on a MACSQuant flow cytometer (Miltenyi Biotec), and 
data were analyzed using FlowJo software (Tree Star).
Cytokine protein levels. Protein levels of IL-22, IFN-γ, and TNF were 
measured from homogenized punch biopsy specimens collected at d1 
after the S. aureus skin inoculation by using Bio-Plex protein assays and 
normalized to total protein according to the manufacturer’s recommen-
dations (Bio-Rad). Protein levels of IL-17A were measured using an ELISA 
kit according to the manufacturer’s recommendations (R&D Systems). 
Data are presented as pg/ml (Bio-Plex) or pg/mg tissue weight (ELISA).
RNA isolation. Mouse LNs and skin biopsies were stabilized by 
addition of RNAlater (Ambion). Homogenization was performed using 
a TissueLyzer II (QIAGEN) at 20 Hz for 1 minute at –80 C. Total RNA 
was extracted using the RNeasy Plus Mini Kit (QIAGEN). RNA con-
centrations were then quantified using a Qubit Fluorometer, and RNA 
integrity was assessed using the Agilent TapeStation (Agilent). Samples 
with RNA integrity number (RIN) of 8 or more were used for this study.
RNA-seq. Indexed libraries were constructed from 1,000 ng of 
total RNA using the TruSeq Stranded mRNA Sample Prep Kit (Illumi-
na) following the manufacturer’s instruction. The quantity and quality 
of the libraries were also assessed by Qubit and Agilent 2100 Bioana-
lyzer, respectively. The average library size was 400 bp. Library molar 
concentration was validated by quantitative PCR (qPCR) for library 
pooling. Sequencing was performed on the Illumina HiSeq 4000 plat-
form using PE150 chemistry (Illumina). RNA-seq data were deposited 
in the NCBI’s Sequence Read Archive database (SRA SRP126124).
Analysis of public data sets. RNA-seq FASTQ files of mouse skin 
were downloaded from the NCBI SRA database (SRA SRP040121), and 
information about the samples is in the corresponding publication (36).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 4 1
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 3   March 2018
 1. Tong SY, Davis JS, Eichenberger E, Holland TL, 
Fowler VG. Staphylococcus aureus infections: 
epidemiology, pathophysiology, clinical mani-
festations, and management. Clin Microbiol Rev. 
2015;28(3):603–661.
 2. Montgomery CP, David MZ, Daum RS. Host 
factors that contribute to recurrent staphy-
lococcal skin infection. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 
2015;28(3):253–258.
 3. Holtfreter S, Kolata J, Bröker BM. Towards the 
immune proteome of Staphylococcus aureus - 
The anti-S. aureus antibody response. Int J Med 
Microbiol. 2010;300(2-3):176–192.
 4. Kolata JB, et al. The fall of a dogma? unexpected 
high t-cell memory response to Staphylococcus 
aureus in humans. J Infect Dis. 2015;212(5):830–838.
 5. Fowler VG, Proctor RA. Where does a Staphy-
lococcus aureus vaccine stand? Clin Microbiol 
Infect. 2014;20 Suppl 5:66–75.
 6. Miller LS, Cho JS. Immunity against Staphylococ-
cus aureus cutaneous infections. Nat Rev Immu-
nol. 2011;11(8):505–518.
 
7. Bouma G, et al. Impaired neutrophil migration 
and phagocytosis in IRAK-4 deficiency. Br J Hae-
matol. 2009;147(1):153–156.
 8. Picard C, et al. Pyogenic bacterial infections 
in humans with IRAK-4 deficiency. Science. 
analyses were calculated using Prism software (GraphPad). Data are 
presented as mean ± SEM, and values of P < 0.05 were considered to 
be statistically significant.
Study approval. All mice were bred and maintained under specific 
pathogen–free conditions at an animal facility accredited by the Ameri-
can Association for the Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care (AAA-
LAC) at Johns Hopkins and housed according to procedures described in 
the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (National Academies 
Press, 2011). All animal studies were approved by the Johns Hopkins 
University Animal Care and Use Committee. All human subject samples 
were gathered at the NIH Clinical Center via protocol NCT00001355, 
approved by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases 
Institutional Review Board. These included healthy human subjects 
 
(n = 6) and individuals with genetically confirmed IRAK4 deficiency 
 
(n = 2) or CGD (n = 4 individuals). Both individuals with IRAK4 defi-
ciency had a history of recurrent S. aureus skin infections, 3 of the 4 indi-
viduals with CGD had a history of recurrent S. aureus skin infections, 
and all 4 individuals with CGD had a history of an S. aureus liver abscess. 
All samples were collected from adults, with the exception of the first 
of 2 samples from an IRAK4-deficient patient, which were drawn when 
she was 17 (a sample that was collected toward the end of her predilec-
tion for recurrent infection). All patients gave informed consent.
Author contributions
CAD, BLP, AIM, AAM, ONF, HL, NKA, DBL, YW, RVO, SKL, MCM, 
SSC, AGA, LS May, LGM, MRY, SIS, JDM, EM, and LS Miller per-
formed experiments and analyzed data. AFF, SMH, and JDM eval-
uated patients and obtained samples. CAD, AIM, AAM, ONF, LS 
May, LGM, MRY, SIS, JDM, EM, and LS Miller conceived the study, 
designed experiments, interpreted data and wrote the manuscript.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants R01AR069502 (to L.S. Mill-
er), R21AI126896 (to L.S. Miller), 1DP2OD008752 (to EM), 
U01AI124319 (to MRY), and R01AI129302 (to SIS) and in part 
by the Division of Intramural Research of the National Institute 
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases of the US NIH (to SMH, AFF, 
and JDM) and an early career award from the Burroughs Well-
come Fund (to EM). The content is solely the responsibility of the 
authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the 
US NIH. We thank Tammy Kielian (University of Nebraska) for 
providing the USA300 LAC::lux strain and Yoichiro Iwakura (Uni-
versity of Tokyo) for generously providing the IL-1β–/– mice.
Address correspondence to: Lloyd S. Miller, Johns Hopkins 
Department of Dermatology, Cancer Research Building II, Suite 
205, 1550 Orleans Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA. 
Phone: 410.955.8662; Email: lloydmiller@jhmi.edu.
first-stage PCR reverse primer for TCRδ NextMusDCj: 5′-GTCTC-
GTGGGCTCGGAGATGTGTATAAGAGACAGTTTGGCCGGAG-
GCTGGCTTT-3′; and first-stage PCR reverse primer for TCR-γ 
NextMusDG2R: 5′-GTCTCGTGGGCTCGGAGATGTGTATAAGAG-
ACAGGAGATTTGTTTCAGCA-3′. First-stage PCRs were purified 
using AMPure XP beads (Beckman Coulter Inc).
Illumina sequencing adapters and dual index barcodes were add-
ed in subsequent second-stage PCR using the Nextera XT indices and 
HotStart ReadyMix (KAPA Biosystems).
Indexed libraries were purified using 2 rounds of 0.7 volumes 
of AMPure XP beads (Beckman Coulter Inc.) and quantified using a 
Qubit Fluorometer and Quant-iT HS DNA Assay Kit (Invitrogen). The 
quality of the libraries was also assessed by Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer, 
and the average library size was 600–700 bp.
TCR library sequencing and analysis. Libraries were pooled to a final 
pool concentration of 4 nM including a 10% PhiX Control v3 (Illumina) 
spike-in. Sequencing was performed on an Illumina MiSeq sequencer 
using the 600-cycle MiSeq Reagent Kit v3 (Illumina) with paired-end 
reads. Raw-sequencing reads were processed for FASTQ conversion 
and demultiplexing using the MiSeq Reporter. MiXCR software was 
used to extract TCR CDR3 sequences from sequencing data. All gene 
names used are according to IMGT nomenclature. Data visualization 
and TCR repertoire comparison were done in R (version 3.1.2). The 
IMGT/Junction Analysis tool was used to analyze in detail the CDR3 
V-D-J and V-J junctions.
Human cell phenotypic analysis. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells 
(PBMCs) were isolated by density centrifugation and resuspended in 
RPMI 1640 supplemented with penicillin, streptomycin, and l-gluta-
mine along with 10% fetal calf serum. PBMCs rested for 1 hour in the 
media at 37°C. Subsequently, cells were costimulated with PMA and ion-
omycin (Calbiochem) plus brefeldin A (Sigma-Aldrich). Cells were incu-
bated for 5 hours at 37°C. Following incubation, PBMCs were washed 
in PBS containing 0.5% BSA and stained for extracellular markers 
including Live/Dead Fixable Blue Viability Dye (Invitrogen); CD3 (clone 
UCHT1), CD27 (clone L128) (both BD Biosciences); CD4 (clone RPA-T4, 
BioLegend); CD45RO (clone UCHL1, Beckman Coulter); TCRγδ (clone 
REA591), Vδ1 (clone REA173), and Vδ2 (clone 123R3) (all Miltenyi Bio-
tec). PBMCs were then fixed and permeabilized using BD Biosciences 
Cytofix/Cytoperm Kit. Finally, PBMCs were stained for intracellular 
cytokine production of TNF (clone mAb 11 RUO) IFN-γ (clone B27) (both 
BD Biosciences), and IL-17A (clone eBio64CAP17, eBioscience) and ana-
lyzed by flow cytometry and using FlowJo software (Tree Star).
Statistics. Statistical analysis of the RNA-seq data is described 
above. For all other experiments, data for multiple comparisons 
were compared using 2-way ANOVA, and data from single com-
parisons were compared using 2-tailed Student’s t test. In certain 
instances, Bonferroni’s correction was applied to account for mul-
tiple comparisons, as indicated in the figure legends. All statistical 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 4 2
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 3   March 2018
2003;299(5615):2076–2079.
 9. von Bernuth H, et al. Pyogenic bacterial infec-
tions in humans with MyD88 deficiency. Science. 
2008;321(5889):691–696.
 10. Lévy R, et al. Genetic, immunological, and clinical 
features of patients with bacterial and fungal infec-
tions due to inherited IL-17RA deficiency. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A. 2016;113(51):E8277–E8285.
 11. Milner JD, et al. Impaired T(H)17 cell differentia-
tion in subjects with autosomal dominant hyper-
IgE syndrome. Nature. 2008;452(7188):773–776.
 12. Puel A, et al. Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis 
in humans with inborn errors of interleukin-17 
immunity. Science. 2011;332(6025):65–68.
 13. Cho JS, et al. Neutrophil-derived IL-1β is suffi-
cient for abscess formation in immunity against 
Staphylococcus aureus in mice. PLoS Pathog. 
2012;8(11):e1003047.
 14. Miller LS, et al. MyD88 mediates neutrophil 
recruitment initiated by IL-1R but not TLR2 
activation in immunity against Staphylococcus 
aureus. Immunity. 2006;24(1):79–91.
 15. Chan LC, et al. Nonredundant roles of interleu-
kin-17A (IL-17A) and IL-22 in murine host defense 
against cutaneous and hematogenous infection 
due to methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus. Infect Immun. 2015;83(11):4427–4437.
 16. Cho JS, et al. IL-17 is essential for host defense 
against cutaneous Staphylococcus aureus infec-
tion in mice. J Clin Invest. 2010;120(5):1762–1773.
 17. Gaidamakova EK, et al. Preserving immuno-
genicity of lethally irradiated viral and bacte-
rial vaccine epitopes using a radio- protective 
Mn2+-Peptide complex from Deinococcus. Cell 
Host Microbe. 2012;12(1):117–124.
 18. Montgomery CP, Daniels M, Zhao F, Alegre 
ML, Chong AS, Daum RS. Protective immunity 
against recurrent Staphylococcus aureus skin 
infection requires antibody and interleukin-17A. 
Infect Immun. 2014;82(5):2125–2134.
 19. Picard C, et al. Clinical features and outcome of 
patients with IRAK-4 and MyD88 deficiency. 
Medicine (Baltimore). 2010;89(6):403–425.
 20. Patel DD, Kuchroo VK. Th17 cell pathway in human 
immunity: lessons from genetics and therapeutic 
interventions. Immunity. 2015;43(6):1040–1051.
 21. Sampedro GR, et al. Targeting Staphylococcus 
aureus α-toxin as a novel approach to reduce 
severity of recurrent skin and soft-tissue infec-
tions. J Infect Dis. 2014;210(7):1012–1018.
 22. Tsuda Y, Takahashi H, Kobayashi M, Hanafusa T, 
Herndon DN, Suzuki F. Three different neutrophil 
subsets exhibited in mice with different susceptibil-
ities to infection by methicillin-resistant Staphylo-
coccus aureus. Immunity. 2004;21(2):215–226.
 23. Chan LC, et al. Innate immune memory con-
tributes to host defense against recurrent skin 
and skin structure infections caused by meth-
icillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Infect 
Immun. 2017;85(2):e00876-16.
 24. Ramírez-Valle F, Gray EE, Cyster JG. Inflamma-
tion induces dermal Vγ4+ γδT17 memory-like 
cells that travel to distant skin and accelerate 
secondary IL-17-driven responses. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci USA. 2015;112(26):8046–8051.
 25. Alegre ML, et al. Impact of Staphylococcus 
aureus USA300 colonization and skin infections 
on systemic immune responses in humans.  
J Immunol. 2016;197(4):1118–1126.
 26. Utay NS, et al. MRSA infections in HIV-infected peo-
ple are associated with decreased MRSA-specific 
Th1 immunity. PLoS Pathog. 2016;12(4):e1005580.
 27. Zielinski CE, et al. Pathogen-induced human 
TH17 cells produce IFN-γ or IL-10 and are regu-
lated by IL-1β. Nature. 2012;484(7395):514–518.
 28. Sheridan BS, et al. γδ T cells exhibit multifunc-
tional and protective memory in intestinal tis-
sues. Immunity. 2013;39(1):184–195.
 29. Cai Y, et al. Differential developmental require-
ment and peripheral regulation for dermal Vγ4 
and Vγ6T17 cells in health and inflammation.  
Nat Commun. 2014;5:3986.
 30. Pantelyushin S, et al. Rorγt+ innate lymphocytes 
and γδ T cells initiate psoriasiform plaque forma-
tion in mice. J Clin Invest. 2012;122(6):2252–2256.
 31. Sumaria N, et al. Cutaneous immunosurveillance 
by self-renewing dermal γδ T cells. J Exp Med. 
2011;208(3):505–518.
 32. Murphy AG, O’Keeffe KM, Lalor SJ, Maher BM, 
Mills KH, McLoughlin RM. Staphylococcus aureus 
infection of mice expands a population of memory 
γδ T cells that are protective against subsequent 
infection. J Immunol. 2014;192(8):3697–3708.
 33. Bonneville M, O’Brien RL, Born WK. γδ T cell 
effector functions: a blend of innate program-
ming and acquired plasticity. Nat Rev Immunol. 
2010;10(7):467–478.
 34. Lalor SJ, McLoughlin RM. Memory γδ T cells-newly 
appreciated protagonists in infection and immunity. 
Trends Immunol. 2016;37(10):690–702.
 35. Vantourout P, Hayday A. Six-of-the-best: unique 
contributions of γδ T cells to immunology. Nat 
Rev Immunol. 2013;13(2):88–100.
 36. Brady RA, Bruno VM, Burns DL. RNA-seq analy-
sis of the host response to Staphylococcus aureus 
skin and soft tissue infection in a mouse model. 
PLoS One. 2015;10(4):e0124877.
 37. Holland SM. Chronic granulomatous disease. 
Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2010;38(1):3–10.
 38. Chandran SS, Verhoeven D, Teijaro JR, Fenton MJ, 
Farber DL. TLR2 engagement on dendritic cells pro-
motes high frequency effector and memory CD4 T 
cell responses. J Immunol. 2009;183(12):7832–7841.
 39. Kaech SM, Tan JT, Wherry EJ, Konieczny BT, 
Surh CD, Ahmed R. Selective expression of the 
interleukin 7 receptor identifies effector CD8 T 
cells that give rise to long-lived memory cells. 
Nat Immunol. 2003;4(12):1191–1198.
 40. Nielsen MM, Witherden DA, Havran WL. γδ T cells 
in homeostasis and host defence of epithelial barri-
er tissues. Nat Rev Immunol. 2017;17(12):733–745.
 41. Martin B, Hirota K, Cua DJ, Stockinger B, Veld-
hoen M. Interleukin-17-producing γδ T cells 
selectively expand in response to pathogen 
products and environmental signals. Immunity. 
2009;31(2):321–330.
 42. Barin JG, et al. Collaborative interferon-γ and 
interleukin-17 signaling protects the oral muco-
sa from Staphylococcus aureus. Am J Pathol. 
2016;186(9):2337–2352.
 43. Asarnow DM, Kuziel WA, Bonyhadi M, Tigelaar RE, 
Tucker PW, Allison JP. Limited diversity of gamma 
delta antigen receptor genes of Thy-1+ dendritic 
epidermal cells. Cell. 1988;55(5):837–847.
 44. Itohara S, et al. Homing of a gamma delta thymocyte 
subset with homogeneous T-cell receptors to muco-
sal epithelia. Nature. 1990;343(6260):754–757.
 45. Muñoz-Ruiz M, Sumaria N, Pennington DJ, Silva- 
Santos B. Thymic determinants of γδ T cell differ-
entiation. Trends Immunol. 2017;38(5):336–344.
 46. Havran WL, Chien YH, Allison JP. Recogni-
tion of self antigens by skin-derived T cells 
with invariant γδ antigen receptors. Science. 
1991;252(5011):1430–1432.
 47. Komori HK, et al. Cutting edge: dendritic epi-
dermal γδ T cell ligands are rapidly and locally 
expressed by keratinocytes following cutaneous 
wounding. J Immunol. 2012;188(7):2972–2976.
 48. Heyborne KD, Cranfill RL, Carding SR, Born 
WK, O’Brien RL. Characterization of gamma 
delta T lymphocytes at the maternal-fetal inter-
face. J Immunol. 1992;149(9):2872–2878.
 49. Reardon C, Lefrancois L, Farr A, Kubo R, O’Brien R, 
Born W. Expression of gamma/delta T cell recep-
tors on lymphocytes from the lactating mammary 
gland. J Exp Med. 1990;172(4):1263–1266.
 50. Paget C, et al. CD3bright signals on γδ T cells 
identify IL-17A-producing Vγ6Vδ1+ T cells. 
Immunol Cell Biol. 2015;93(2):198–212.
 51. Conti HR, et al. Oral-resident natural Th17 cells and 
γδ T cells control opportunistic Candida albicans 
infections. J Exp Med. 2014;211(10):2075–2084.
 52. Misiak A, Wilk MM, Raverdeau M, Mills KH. 
IL-17-producing innate and pathogen-specific 
tissue resident memory γδ T cells expand in the 
lungs of Bordetella pertussis-infected mice.  
J Immunol. 2017;198(1):363–374.
 53. Okamoto Yoshida Y, et al. Essential role of 
IL-17A in the formation of a mycobacterial infec-
tion-induced granuloma in the lung. J Immunol. 
2010;184(8):4414–4422.
 54. Davey MS, et al. Clonal selection in the human Vδ1 T 
cell repertoire indicates γδ TCR-dependent adaptive 
immune surveillance. Nat Commun. 2017;8:14760.
 55. Dimova T, et al. Effector Vγ9Vδ2 T cells dominate 
the human fetal γδ T-cell repertoire. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA. 2015;112(6):E556–E565.
 56. Papotto PH, Ribot JC, Silva-Santos B. IL-17+ γδ T 
cells as kick-starters of inflammation. Nat Immu-
nol. 2017;18(6):604–611.
 57. Karauzum H, Haudenschild CC, Moore IN, Mah-
moudieh M, Barber DL, Datta SK. Lethal CD4 
T cell responses induced by vaccination against 
Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. J Infect Dis. 
2017;215(8):1231–1239.
 58. Sanchez M, et al. O-acetylation of peptidoglycan 
limits helper T cell priming and permits Staph-
ylococcus aureus reinfection. Cell Host Microbe. 
2017;22(4):543–551.e4.
 59. Boyden LM, et al. Skint1, the prototype of a newly 
identified immunoglobulin superfamily gene 
cluster, positively selects epidermal gammadelta 
T cells. Nat Genet. 2008;40(5):656–662.
 60. Keyes BE, et al. Impaired epidermal to dendritic 
T cell signaling slows wound repair in aged skin. 
Cell. 2016;167(5):1323–1338.e14.
 61. Marusina AI, et al. CD4+ virtual memory: Anti-
gen-inexperienced T cells reside in the naive, 
regulatory, and memory T cell compartments at 
similar frequencies, implications for autoimmu-
nity. J Autoimmun. 2017;77:76–88.
