 sors, and network connectivity, which enables these objects 
to collect and exchange data [1]. Its impact on medicine 
will be perhaps the most important, and personal, effect. By 
2020, 40% of IoT-related technology will be health-related, 
more than any other category, making up a $117 billion 
market [2]. The convergence of medicine and information 
technologies, such as medical informatics, will transform 
healthcare as we know it, curbing costs, reducing inefficien-
cies, and saving lives. 
 Figure 1 illustrates how this revolution in medicine will 
look in a typical IoT hospital, in practice. A patient with 
diabetes will have an ID card that, when scanned, links to a 
secure cloud which stores their electronic health record vi-
tals and lab results, medical and prescription histories. Phy-
sicians and nurses can easily access this record on a tablet or 
Medical Internet of Things and Big Data in 
Healthcare
Dimiter V. Dimitrov, MD, PhD
Diavita Ltd., Varna, Bulgaria
Objectives: A number of technologies can reduce overall costs for the prevention or management of chronic illnesses. These 
include devices that constantly monitor health indicators, devices that auto-administer therapies, or devices that track real-
time health data when a patient self-administers a therapy. Because they have increased access to high-speed Internet and 
smartphones, many patients have started to use mobile applications (apps) to manage various health needs. These devices 
and mobile apps are now increasingly used and integrated with telemedicine and telehealth via the medical Internet of 
Things (mIoT). This paper reviews mIoT and big data in healthcare fields. Methods: mIoT is a critical piece of the digital 
transformation of healthcare, as it allows new business models to emerge and enables changes in work processes, productiv-
ity improvements, cost containment and enhanced customer experiences. Results: Wearables and mobile apps today support 
fitness, health education, symptom tracking, and collaborative disease management and care coordination. All those platform 
analytics can raise the relevancy of data interpretations, reducing the amount of time that end users spend piecing together 
data outputs. Insights gained from big data analysis will drive the digital disruption of the healthcare world, business process-
es and real-time decision-making. Conclusions: A new category of “personalised preventative health coaches” (Digital Health 
Advisors) will emerge. These workers will possess the skills and the ability to interpret and understand health and well-being 
data. They will help their clients avoid chronic and diet-related illness, improve cognitive function, achieve improved mental 
health and achieve improved lifestyles overall. As the global population ages, such roles will become increasingly important.
Keywords: Telemedicine, Smartphone, Mobile Applications, Wireless Technology, Disease Management
Healthc Inform Res. 2016 July;22(3):156-163. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4258/hir.2016.22.3.156
pISSN 2093-3681  •  eISSN 2093-369X  
Review Article
Submitted: June 29, 2016
Accepted: July 18, 2016
Corresponding Author 
Dimiter V. Dimitrov, MD, PhD
Diavita Ltd., Varna, Bulgaria. E-mail: dimiter.v. dimitrov@gmail.com 
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Com-
mons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc/4.0/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduc-
tion in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
ⓒ 2016 The Korean Society of Medical Informatics
I. Introduction
The Internet of Things (IoT) is a network of physical devices 
and other items, embedded with electronics, software, sen-
 157
Vol. 22  •  No. 3  •  July 2016
www.e-hir.org
IoT and Big Data in Healthcare
desktop computer. 
 It sounds pretty basic, but the adoption of Electronic Health 
Records (EHRs) is a game changer. In less than a decade, an 
ink-and-paper system of managing records that goes back 
thousands of years will be digitized and replaced [3]. The ad-
vantages are obvious and many. Paper records, often written 
in questionable penmanship, can get stuffed away in filing 
cabinets, out of the reach of researchers or other healthcare 
providers. Instead, by keeping all the important information 
in one place, and easily sharable, EHRs will eliminate many 
inefficiencies, and save lives. 
 One of the major challenges to implementing the IoT has 
to do with communication; although many devices now 
have sensors to collect data, they often talk with the server in 
their own language. Manufacturers each have their own pro-
prietary protocols, which means sensors by different mak-
ers can’t necessarily speak with each other. This fragmented 
software environment, coupled with privacy concerns and 
the bureaucratic tendency to hoard all collected information, 
frequently maroons valuable info on data islands, undermin-
ing the whole idea of the IoT. 
 Precision medicine, as it’s called, is a term that will be fre-
quently heard in coming years [4]. It begins with genomics 
and goes through the rest of the omics platforms, provid-
ing multiscale data for analysis and interpretation [5]. In 
2015, Intel and the Oregon Health and Science University 
launched a joint project, the Collaborative Cancer Cloud: 
a high-performance analytics platform that collects and 
securely stores private medical data that can be used for can-
cer research. Though the platform began with cancer, Intel 
intends to open up the federated cloud network to other 
institutions, including ones working on cures to diseases like 
Parkinson’s. 
 Engineering simulation solutions are making medicine 
participatory, personalized, predictive and preventive (P4 
medicine) via the medical Internet of Things (mIoT) [6].
II. IoT - The Future of Pharma?
Pharma companies long ago realized that just selling tradi-
tional medicines will not produce growth nor even sustain 
competitiveness. This fundamental change, known as mov-
ing ‘beyond the pill’
, typically arises from one or two realiza-
tions: (1) medicines alone are often not enough to achieve 
optimal clinical outcomes for patients, and (2) as pharma-
ceutical pipelines dry up, ‘beyond-the-pill’ businesses can be 
valuable new sources of revenues. This has created growing 
interest in methods of utilizing the new technologies and 
business processes for development and patient care, leading 
to Pharma IoT.
 The Pharma IoT concept involves digitalization of medical 
products and related care processes using smart connected 
medical devices and IT services (web, mobile, apps, etc.) 
during drug development, clinical trials and patient care. 
The outcomes of Pharma IoT in development and clinical 
trials can employ combinations of advanced technologies 
Figure 1.  
An illustration of how this 
revolution in medicine will 
look in a typical Internet 
of Things (IoT) hospital, in 
practice.
Physician
Medical
tablet
Desktop
manager
Patient
RFID Reader
Network Hub
Database
Biobanks
clinical trials
Wearables
Gateway to
other services
Sensor/actuator
with low-power TRx
Blood pressure
sensor
Insulin
pump
Glucose
sensor
Body temp
sensor
Health
Cloud
EHR
 158
www.e-hir.org
Dimiter V. Dimitrov
http://dx.doi.org/10.4258/hir.2016.22.3.156
and services to create totally new kinds of disease treatment 
possibilities (e.g., Treatment 2.0).
 In patient care, Pharma IoT will enable patients and health-
care professionals to use medicines with advanced sensor 
hardware, and craft personalized care services and processes 
(Product 2.0). Good examples of the Pharma IoT solutions 
are the connected sensor wearables for Parkinson’s disease 
and multiple sclerosis patients, which provide medication 
management, improving the patient outcomes and the qual-
ity of life [7]. 
 In addition, existing medical device products such as inhal-
ers and insulin pens can be added to the sensor and connec-
tivity technologies to collect data for further care analytics, 
and even personalized therapy [8]. All this will substantially 
improve personal medication and care processes, because 
patient care data provides new sources of innovation and 
competitiveness.
 The transformation also involves some challenges: at the 
same time, pharma companies need to take into account the 
forthcoming European Union (EU) data protection and pri-
vacy legislation, which will give patients control of their care 
data [9]. For example, patients will be allowed to transfer 
their care and health data across multiple service providers, 
leading to the emergence of totally new kinds of service plat-
forms and business models, e.g., data brokers [10]. 
III.  
Devices and Mobile Apps for  
Healthcare 
We are heading into the age of information, where knowl-
edge and data will be key. We are also entering the age of the 
customer, in which more than ever the customer is going to 
determine what they want. myTomorrows is one example of 
the changing look of business models, in this case, directly 
connecting customers and pharma [11].
 In this new age, devices and apps will be used to create a 
“health selfie”
. For example: 
   •  
The Myo, originally a motion controller for games, is now 
being used in orthopedics for patients who need to ex-
ercise after a fracture. With the aid of the Myo, patients 
can monitor their progress and doctors can measure the 
angle of movement.
   •  
The Zio Patch measures heart rate and electrocardiogram 
(ECG) and is the US Food and Drug Administration ap-
proved [12].
 Where is pharma in all this turmoil? Interestingly, there 
are signs that pharma is reaching out from its traditional 
medicine-centric approach.
   •  
Glaxo recently announced that it is investing in electro-
ceuticals, bioelectrical drugs that work by micro-stimula-
tion of nerves [13].
   •  
J&J has teamed up with Google to develop robotic sur-
gery. In addition, they are collaborating with Philips on 
wearable devices such as blood pressure monitors [14].
   •  
Novartis is working with Google (again) on sensor tech-
nologies, such as the smart lens, and a wearable device to 
measure blood glucose levels [15].
 Sensors can provide a lot of information to support pharma 
development, but it is particularly important to recruit the 
right patients for the right clinical trials. Body sensors, once 
gadgets that were mainly used by athletes and runners, are 
now rapidly entering the general market, and consumers and 
pharma will soon have access to a wealth of information in-
cluding not only pulse, blood pressure, ECG and respiratory 
rate, but also more advanced data, such as inflammation, 
sleep patterns, etc. 
 A number of mobile apps which support device handling 
have emerged, including myDario and SleepBot among 
others [16,17]. The Hacking Medicine Institute recently an-
nounced RANKED Health, a program to critically evaluate 
and rank health-focused applications and connected devices 
[18].
 It has been predicted that in the near future we will look at 
our phone or smart watch to check health outcomes more 
often than we do now to check our mail or WhatsApp. A 
typical situation might involve an elderly person, recovering 
from a medical condition at home, linked to a combination 
of several connected services streaming data towards differ-
ent parties, such as family members, tele-carer and physi-
cians (Figure 2). 
 Recently it was announced that Medtronic will be partner-
ing with a digital health app company named Canary Health 
to be a re-seller of its digital chronic disease management 
programs, including its CDC-recognized Diabetes Preven-
tion Program, which is aimed at changing behaviors in pre-
diabetic people. But the partnership goes beyond just resell-
ing Canary Health’s digital tools. In fact, both Canary Health 
and Medtronic plan to develop solutions that “leverage 
Medtronic’s devices, services and infrastructure as well as 
Canary Health’s suite of behavior-change programs, design 
expertise, and deep user engagement experience,” according 
to a Canary Health news release [19].
 One reason that Medtronic must have been attracted to Ca-
nary Health is that the company’s digital tools are reimburs-
able. As digital health programs mature, payers are looking 
at innovative, yet proven, ways to reduce their cost burden 
 159
Vol. 22  •  No. 3  •  July 2016
www.e-hir.org
IoT and Big Data in Healthcare
for chronic diseases like diabetes. 
 According to the Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion (CDC), people with prediabetes who take part in a 
structured lifestyle change program—like the one Canary 
Health has developed, or programs championed by Omada 
Health and Noom Health, among others—“can cut their risk 
of developing type 2 diabetes by 58% (71% for people over 
60 years old)” [20]. The CDC adds that “this finding was the 
result of a program helping people lose 5% to 7% of their 
body weight through healthier eating and 150 minutes of 
physical activity a week” [21]. 
 Given that diabetes is an expensive, chronic disease, hos-
pitals, doctors, patients, and payers are equally keen to tame 
this epidemic. In other words, the move is helping to trans-
form companies from simply providing care to the sick to 
actually delivering healthcare.
IV. Data, Data, Data
The driver behind all these wearable sensors is the data that 
is generated, and various parties are trying to bundle the 
data streams and obtain control. Microsoft developed the 
Health Vault, an e-health safe, acting as an EMR. In Holland 
the Radboud University Medical Center collaborated with 
Philips and Salesforce on HereIsMyData, a database where 
patients can store their health data and determine who can 
access them [22]. The role of Salesforce is interesting. The 
Salesforce platform powers Veeva, the customer relationship 
management (CRM) now widely used in pharma. This posi-
tions Salesforce to be able to bridge the gap between patient’s 
medical data and pharma.
 “Big data” is a phrase that has been used pervasively by 
the media and the lay public in the last several years. While 
many definitions have been proposed, the common de-
nominator seems to include the “three V’s”—Volume (vast 
amounts of data), Variety (significant heterogeneity in the 
type of data available in the set), and Velocity (speed at 
which a data scientist or user can access and analyze the 
data) [23]. 
 Defined as such, healthcare has become one of the key 
emerging users of big data. For example, Fitbit and Apple’s 
ResearchKit can provide researchers access to vast stores of 
biometric data on users, which can then be used to test hy-
potheses on nutrition, fitness, disease progression, treatment 
success, and the like. 
 Most complex high dimensional data sets include imag-
ing (photos, X-rays, MRIs, and slides), wave analysis such as 
EEG and ECG, audio files with associated transcripts, free 
text notes with natural language processing (NLP) outputs, 
and mappings between structured concepts such as lab tests 
and the Logical Observation Identifiers Names and Codes 
(LOINC) codes or the International Classification of Dis-
eases-9 (ICD9) and ICD10 codes. Among the things that the 
data analysis should provide is the means to continuously 
update the annotations based on acquired knowledge, while 
keeping the location of the data in place. 
 The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) have 
vast stores of billing data that can be mined to promote high 
Figure 2.  
A typical situation involved 
an elderly person, recover-
ing from a medical condi-
tion at home, linked to 
a combination of several 
connected services stream-
ing data towards differ-
ent parties, such as family 
members, tele-carer and 
physicians.
Bio samples
Vital signs
Rehab
tracking
Medication
tracking
Telemedicine
Telehealth
Service
a
can
help you
with...
Health coach
Food
Stress
Exercise
Sleep
Relationships
Career
todiforfitness.com
 160
www.e-hir.org
Dimiter V. Dimitrov
http://dx.doi.org/10.4258/hir.2016.22.3.156
value care; the same is true of private health insurers. And 
hospitals have attempted to reduce re-admission rates by 
targeting patients where predictive artificial intelligence (AI) 
algorithms indicate people who may be at highest risk based 
on an analysis of available data collected from existing pa-
tient records (Figure 3).
 Underlying these and many other potential uses, however, 
are a series of technology, legal and ethical challenges relat-
ing to, among other things, privacy, discrimination, intellec-
tual property, tort, and informed consent, as well as research 
and clinical ethics [24].
V. Challenges for mIoT
Leading IoT platforms must provide simple, powerful ap-
plication access to IoT devices and data to help designers 
rapidly compose analytics applications, visualization dash-
boards and mIoT apps. The following are 5 key capabilities 
that leading platforms must enable: 
 (1) Simple connectivity: A good IoT platform makes it 
easy to connect devices and perform device management 
functions, scaled through cloud-based services, and to apply 
analytics to gain insight and achieve organizational transfor-
mation.
 (2) Easy device management: A thoughtful approach to 
device management enables improved asset availability, 
increased throughput, minimized unplanned outages and 
reduced maintenance costs.
 (3) Information ingestion: Intelligently transform and store 
IoT data. APIs bridge the divide between the data and the 
cloud, making it easy to pull in the data that’s needed. Data 
is ingested from diverse data sources and platforms, then the 
essential values are extracted using rich analytics.
 (4) Informative analytics: Gain insight from huge volumes 
of IoT data to make better decisions and optimize opera-
tions. Apply real-time analytics to monitor current condi-
tions and respond accordingly. Leverage cognitive analytics 
with both structured and unstructured data to understand 
situations, reason through options, and learn as conditions 
change. An intuitive dashboard makes it all easy to under-
Figure 3. The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) data system.
Data
visualization
Big data
toolbox
Medical apps
developers
Billions
Millions
Hundreds of thousands
Descriptive analysis
Prescriptive analysis
Generalize
Architecture
Variables
Region
Subject of matter
Product category
State
Principal components analysis
K nearest neighbors
Support vector machines
Factor analysis
ANOVA, T test, etc.
Recursive
Clinical data
HR data
data
Wearables data
E
Molecular omics
Study centric
Warehouse
Repository
Big
Data
Machine
learning
Correlations
Linear regression
Thousands
Compare
Markov chain monte carlo
Random forests
Recommender systems
Neural networks
Logistic regression
Neural networks
Gradient descent
Symbolic artificial intelligence
Agent-based models
Cellular automata
Discrete event simulation
Squared error
Accuracy
Likelihood
Probability
Cost/utility
Define fitness function f(x)
Real-time data
Simulation
Segmentation
Dimensionality reduction
Extraction of groups
Define training set
ID causes and effects
Big data
Missing values & outliers
Predictive analysis
Data warehouse
Pattern recognition
 161
Vol. 22  •  No. 3  •  July 2016
www.e-hir.org
IoT and Big Data in Healthcare
stand.
 (5) Reduced risk: Act on notifications and isolate incidents 
generated anywhere in the company environment from a 
single console. 
VI. Challenges for Big Data in Healthcare
The challenges fall into two main categories: fiscal/policy 
and technology. 
 Fiscal and policy issues: In a fee-for-service environment, 
the only way that healthcare practitioners get paid is to have 
face-to-face encounters with patients. This creates heavy bias 
against promoting technologies that streamline non-face-
to-face interactions. However, as we move away from that 
model and more towards value-based care, where global 
risk-based payments are made to delivery organizations 
(hospitals, patient centered medical homes, accountable care 
organizations, etc.), then there is more incentive to use new 
technologies that reduce unnecessary in-office encounters. 
In such an environment, face-to-face encounters are actually 
a cost center, not a profit center, and positive health out-
comes of populations are rewarded.
 Technology issues: The biggest technical barrier to achiev-
ing this vision is the state of health data. Created by legacy 
EHR systems, health data is largely fragmented into institu-
tion-centered silos. Sometimes those silos are large, but they 
are still silos. Exchanging individual records between silos, 
using increasingly standardized vocabularies (code sets) 
and message formats (ADT messages, C-CDAs, even FHIR 
objects), is where much current effort is being directed. But 
that does not solve the problem of data fragmentation. More 
and more people in the health information exchange arena 
are seeing that the next generation of health technology is 
around aggregating data, not simply exchanging copies of in-
dividual records (the traditional query-response approach). 
Only by collecting the data from many different sources, 
normalizing that data into a consistent structure, resolving 
the data around unique patient identifiers as well as unique 
provider identifiers—only then can the data become truly 
useful [25].
 Aggregated data has two additional advantages. (1) It solves 
the interoperability problem. Systems and institutions no 
longer need to build data bridges, and translate how the data 
is structured between two proprietary systems; everyone 
instead simply connects to a central standard API “plug.” If 
built right, the aggregated data can be the basis for very ef-
fective AI technology. Such technology is very fast (consider 
Google suggestions as-you-type in a search bar, retrieving 
suggestions from billions of record options). (2) It is also 
sufficiently flexible to allow machine learning, and AI will be 
able to function in a real-time fashion.
VII.  
New Generation of Digital Health Ad-
visors
Once a data store has been built from many different 
sources—EHR data, payer data, device and IoT data, patient 
survey responses, consumer health data—and has been inte-
grated into a unified data structure, then AI can yield mean-
ingful insights. AI, after all, is about pattern recognition, 
comparing a particular pattern of data around a given indi-
vidual with similar (not necessarily identical) patterns found 
elsewhere, and making predictive recommendations based 
on what happened in those other situations. This is very 
much what clinicians do when exercising “clinical judge-
ment”—identifying a pattern, taking into account medical 
problems, medications, labs values, personal and family his-
tory, and comparing it to similar patterns from the clinician’s 
experience.
 A new generation of “Health Coaches”
, Tele-Carers or Digi-
tal Health Advisors can be trained to make these AI-derived 
recommendations useful [26]. They need to be easy-to-use, 
consumer-orientated persons who can connect to the aggre-
gated data store and the AI analytics engines that sit on top 
of that. They can empower consumers/patients, and reduce 
the demand burden on clinicians. Will they replace clini-
cians? No, of course not. But they will help filter the demand 
to those who truly need to be seen, while empowering pa-
tients with real-time, believable and personalized guidance 
for the more common things in day-to-day life [27].
 So what stands in the way of Digital Health Advisors? Pol-
icy (how we pay for healthcare) needs to encourage self-care 
and facilitate healthy behaviors, rather than encourage in-
office doctor visits. And, simultaneously, health data needs 
to become reorganized in order to empower AI and drive the 
emergence of new apps and related technologies. It will be 
a while before we get there, but we can see the path to that 
new generation of healthcare technology. 
VIII. Conclusion 
The mIoT is revamping healthcare services, as people have 
started using IoT to manage their health requirements. For 
example, people can use IoT devices to remind them about 
appointments, changes in blood pressure, calories burnt and 
much more. One of the best parts of the IoTs in the health-
 162
www.e-hir.org
Dimiter V. Dimitrov
http://dx.doi.org/10.4258/hir.2016.22.3.156
care industry is the remote health monitoring system, where 
patients can be monitored and advised from anywhere. 
Real-time location services are another major approach IoT 
offers. By using the service, doctors can easily track device 
locations, which directly reduces excess time spent. Smart-
phone usage is increasing rapidly, and people have started 
using mobile apps for almost everything. When it comes to 
the healthcare industry, mobile apps can improve communi-
cations between patients and doctors over a secured connec-
tion. 
 The primary duty of Digital Health Advisors and the clini-
cians will be to work collaboratively when the organization is 
shifting towards IoT-enabled infrastructure. Proper training 
and feedback are mandatory for better deployment. The tra-
ditional method of recording a patient’s details, i.e., a pad of 
paper hanging on the patient’s bed, is not going to work any-
more, since such records are only accessible to a limited few, 
and can be lost or scrambled. This is an application where 
on-field mobile/tablet technology might work, since they of-
fer hassle-free record management on the applications in the 
device. Health data information will be available in just a tap 
when information is recorded electronically, once security 
and privacy issues are met.
Conflict of Interest
No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was 
reported.
References 
1. Zanella A, Bui N, Castellani A, Vangelista L, Zorzi M. 
Internet of things for smart cities. IEEE Internet Things 
J 2014;1(1):22-32.
2. Bauer H, Patel M, Veira J. The Internet of Things: sizing 
up the opportunity [Internet]. New York (NY): McK-
insey & Company; c2016 [cited at 2016 Jul 1]. Avail-
able from: http://www.mckinsey.com/industries/high-
tech/our-insights/the-internet-of-things-sizing-up-the-
opportunity.
3. Kruse CS, Kothman K, Anerobi K, Abanaka L. Adop-
tion factors of the electronic health record: a systematic 
review. JMIR Med Inform 2016;4(2):e19. 
4. Scheen AJ. Precision medicine: the future in diabetes 
care? Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2016;117:12-21.
5. van Leeuwen N, Swen JJ, Guchelaar HJ, 't Hart LM. The 
role of pharmacogenetics in drug disposition and re-
sponse of oral glucose-lowering drugs. Clin Pharmaco-
kinet 2013;52(10):833-54. 
6. Flores M, Glusman G, Brogaard K, Price ND, Hood L. 
P4 medicine: how systems medicine will transform the 
healthcare sector and society. Per Med 2013;10(6):565-76. 
7. van Uem JM, Maier KS, Hucker S, Scheck O, Hobert 
MA, Santos AT, et al. Twelve-week sensor assessment 
in Parkinson’s disease: impact on quality of life. Mov 
Disord 2016 May 31 [Epub]. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
mds.26676.
8. Dzubur E, Li M, Kawabata K, Sun Y, McConnell R, Intil-
le S, et al. Design of a smartphone application to monitor 
stress, asthma symptoms, and asthma inhaler use. Ann 
Allergy Asthma Immunol 2015;114(4):341-2.e2.
9. European Commission. Clinical trials - regulation EU 
No 536/2014 [Internet]. Brussels: European Commis-
sion; c2016 [cited at 2016 Jul 1]. Available from: http://
ec.europa.eu/health/human-use/clinical-trials/regula-
tion/index_en.htm.
10. INNT Foundation [Internet]. Amsterdam: INNT 
Foundation; c2016 [cited at 2016 Jul 1]. Available from: 
https://www.innit.foundation.
11. MyTomorrows [Internet]. Amsterdam: MyTomorrows; 
c2016 [cited at 2016 Jul 1]. Available from: https://myto-
morrows.com. 
12. Tung CE, Su D, Turakhia MP, Lansberg MG. Diagnostic 
yield of extended cardiac patch monitoring in patients 
with stroke or TIA. Front Neurol 2015;5:266.
13. Famm K, Litt B, Tracey KJ, Boyden ES, Slaoui M. Drug 
discovery: a jump-start for electroceuticals. Nature 
2013;496(7444):159-61. 
14. Cuba-Gyllensten I, Gastelurrutia P, Riistama J, Aarts R, 
Nunez J, Lupon J, et al. A novel wearable vest for track-
ing pulmonary congestion in acutely decompensated 
heart failure. Int J Cardiol 2014;177(1):199-201. 
15. Senior M. Novartis signs up for Google smart lens. Nat 
Biotechnol 2014;32(9):856. 
16. MyDario.com [Internet]. Burlington (MA): MyDario.
com; c2016 [cited at 2016 Jul 1]. Available from: http://
mydario.com/.
17. SleepBot [Internet]. New York (NY): SleepBot; c2013 
[cited at 2016 Jul 1]. Available from: https://mysleepbot.
com/.
18. RANKED Health [Internet]. [place unknown: publisher 
unknown]; [cited at 2016 Jul 1]. Available from: http://
www.rankedhealth.com/about/. 
19. Canary Health [Internet]. Los Angeles (CA): Canary 
Health Inc.; c2016 [cited at 2016 Jul 1]. Available from: 
http://www.canaryhealth.com/.
 163
Vol. 22  •  No. 3  •  July 2016
www.e-hir.org
IoT and Big Data in Healthcare
20. Sepah SC, Jiang L, Peters AL. Long-term outcomes of a 
Web-based diabetes prevention program: 2-year results 
of a single-arm longitudinal study. J Med Internet Res 
2015;17(4):e92. 
21. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Lifestyle 
change program details [Internet]. Atlanta (GA): Cen-
ters for Disease Control and Prevention; c2016 [cited 
at 2016 Jul 1]. Available from: http://www.cdc.gov/dia-
betes/prevention/lifestyle-program/experience/index.
html. 
22. HereIsMyData [Internet]. Nijmegen: Radboud Universi-
ty Medical Center; c2015 [cited at 2016 Jul 1]. Available 
from: http://www.hereismydata.com/.
23. Auffray C, Balling R, Barroso I, Bencze L, Benson M, 
Bergeron J, et al. Making sense of big data in health re-
search: towards an EU action plan. Genome Med 2016; 
8(1):71.
24. Filkins BL, Kim JY, Roberts B, Armstrong W, Miller MA, 
Hultner ML, et al. Privacy and security in the era of digi-
tal health: what should translational researchers know 
and do about it? Am J Transl Res 2016;8(3):1560-80. 
25. Hackl WO. Intelligent re-use of nursing routine data: 
opportunities and challenges. Stud Health Technol In-
form 2016;225:727-8. 
26. Foley P, Steinberg D, Levine E, Askew S, Batch BC, 
Puleo EM, et al. Track: a randomized controlled trial of 
a digital health obesity treatment intervention for medi-
cally vulnerable primary care patients. Contemp Clin 
Trials 2016;48:12-20. 
27. Giraldo-Rodriguez L, Torres-Castro S, Martinez-Ramirez 
D, Gutierrez-Robledo LM, Perez-Cuevas R. Tele-care and 
tele-alarms for the elderly: preliminary experiences in 
Mexico. Rev Saude Publica 2013;47(4):711-7.
