 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
830 
MMWR / August 11, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 31
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Recommendations for HIV Screening of Gay, Bisexual, and Other Men Who 
Have Sex with Men — United States, 2017
Elizabeth A. DiNenno, PhD1; Joseph Prejean, PhD1; Kathleen Irwin, MD1; Kevin P
. Delaney, PhD1; Kristina Bowles, MPH1; Tricia Martin, MPH1; 
Amrita Tailor, MPH1; Gema Dumitru, MD1; Mary M. Mullins, MSLS1; Angela B. Hutchinson, PhD1; Amy Lansky, PhD1
CDC’s 2006 recommendations for human immuno-
deficiency virus (HIV) testing state that all persons aged 
13–64 years should be screened for HIV at least once, and that 
persons at higher risk for HIV infection, including sexually 
active gay, bisexual, and other men who have sex with men 
(MSM), should be rescreened at least annually (1). Authors of 
reports published since 2006, including CDC (2), suggested 
that MSM, a group that is at highest risk for HIV infection, 
might benefit from being screened more frequently than 
once each year. In 2013, the U.S. Preventive Services Task 
Force (USPSTF) found insufficient evidence to specify an 
HIV rescreening interval but recommended annual screening 
for MSM as a reasonable approach (3). However, some HIV 
providers have begun to offer more frequent screening, such as 
once every 3 or 6 months, to some MSM. A CDC work group 
conducted a systematic literature review and held four expert 
consultations to review programmatic experience to determine 
whether there was sufficient evidence to change the 2006 
CDC recommendation (i.e., at least annual HIV screening of 
MSM in clinical settings). The CDC work group concluded 
that the evidence remains insufficient to recommend screening 
more frequently than at least once each year. CDC continues 
to recommend that clinicians screen asymptomatic sexually 
active MSM at least annually. Each clinician can consider 
the benefits of offering more frequent screening (e.g., once 
every 3 or 6 months) to individual MSM at increased risk for 
acquiring HIV infection, weighing their patients’ individual 
risk factors, local HIV epidemiology, and local testing policies.
HIV testing is the critical first step in making HIV-infected 
persons aware of their status, so that they can obtain treatment 
and prevent transmission of HIV. In 2014, CDC estimated 
that 15% of all persons living with HIV in the United States 
had undiagnosed infections (4). Early HIV care and adherence 
to antiretroviral therapy (ART) prolong life and decrease the 
chances of HIV transmission (5). The increasing availability 
of antigen-antibody HIV tests means that a greater number 
of infections can be detected in the highly infectious, acute 
stage of infection (6). The potential benefits of early detection 
and treatment of HIV were the driving force behind CDC’s 
initiative to assess the benefits and harms associated with more 
frequent screening of MSM. This policy note describes the 
results of that initiative.
Systematic Review
A CDC work group of federal employees comprising a diverse 
group of epidemiologists, clinicians, behavioral scientists, 
health policy experts, and health economists was convened. 
To identify studies comparing annual versus more frequent 
screening among MSM, the CDC work group conducted a 
systematic literature review, using methods adapted from the 
Guide for Community Preventive Services (7,8), and convened 
four consultations with 24 external experts to obtain their 
individual input on the programmatic and scientific evidence. 
During 2013–2014, and updated in January 2015, the CDC 
work group conducted a systematic review of published studies 
indexed in MEDLINE, EMBASE, PsycINFO, and CINAHL. 
The search was restricted to articles that 1) were published 
during 2005–2014 (last search conducted in January 2015); 
2) described analyses conducted in the United States, Canada, 
Australia, New Zealand, and Western Europe; and 3) contained 
the following search terms: HIV seropositivity, HIV infection, 
AIDS serodiagnosis, sexually transmitted diseases/infections, 
men who have sex with men (MSM), high risk, test, screen. 
Included articles provided information on one of four out-
comes of interest: 1) health benefits to individual MSM being 
screened or to the community (e.g., averted secondary HIV 
infections); 2) harms to individual MSM (stigma or out-of-
pocket costs); 3) acceptability (MSM attitudes toward more 
frequent screening); or 4) feasibility (barriers to or facilitators 
of state or local screening). Included studies were restricted to 
those conducted in clinical settings. A manual search of gray 
literature was also conducted.
The CDC work group reviewed 6,479 abstracts resulting 
from the automated search, 111 of which met the initial 
screening inclusion criteria and were reviewed in full. Three 
members of the CDC work group, working in overlapping 
pairs, applied inclusion criteria to these studies, rating each 
study for outcome (benefits, harms, acceptability, or feasibil-
ity). They used a quantitative study assessment tool to note 
key findings. Discrepancies were resolved by a third reviewer 
who was not a member of the original pair (7,8).
Thirteen studies met the inclusion criteria and were evalu-
ated on quality of evidence (9). For each of the four study 
outcomes, CDC HIV testing experts then evaluated the quality 
of evidence to determine design suitability (high, moderate, or 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / August 11, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 31 
831
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
low), execution (good, fair, or poor), and consistency of study 
results, with one exception: the eight mathematical modeling 
studies were not rated on quality of execution because of the 
lack of a grading system appropriate for the different math-
ematical model types included.
Overall, the quality of studies was low. Eleven studies 
addressed health or economic benefits of more frequent 
screening compared with annual screening. Eight of these 
were mathematical models that the CDC work group clas-
sified as having low suitability because of uncertainty about 
the validity of the parameter estimates and questions about 
the models’ generalizability. Two studies addressed intervals 
between HIV screening or diagnostic tests in clinical settings, 
but did not directly address the acceptability of more frequent 
than annual HIV screening among asymptomatic MSM. No 
studies addressed harms associated with, or the feasibility of, 
conducting more frequent HIV screening in clinical settings 
in the United States. Additional details about these studies can 
be found elsewhere (9).
After deliberations that involved discussion, consensus 
building, and voting, the CDC work group concluded that 
insufficient evidence exists in the published and unpublished 
literature to warrant changing CDC’s current recommenda-
tion to offer HIV screening at least annually to all sexually 
active MSM.
Expert Consultation Series Results
During August–December 2014, the CDC work group 
convened a series of consultations with external subject mat-
ter experts, including clinicians, epidemiologists, academic 
researchers, health department policy and program staff mem-
bers, and members of the MSM community, to 1) obtain their 
individual input on the results of the systematic review and pre-
liminary conclusions; 2) obtain the opinions and experiences 
of experts from three public-sector HIV screening programs 
that provided more frequent than annual HIV screening to 
MSM; and 3) identify studies missed in the literature review 
or data that could be analyzed in the future to inform recom-
mendations about HIV screening frequency.
Postconsultation analysis of the individual feedback from 
experts revealed that most believed the literature was insuf-
ficient to conclude that more frequent screening had demon-
strated benefits over annual screening but that the scientific 
and programmatic evidence suggested that some MSM would 
be willing to be screened more frequently. Experts from 
health departments already implementing more frequent 
than annual screening described benefits of their programs, 
including decreases in the proportion of MSM with undiag-
nosed HIV infection. Experts also individually agreed that the 
estimates from the mathematical models suggest a benefit to 
more frequent screening, particularly in jurisdictions provid-
ing prompt, high-quality access to HIV medical care, where 
early treatment with ART decreases infectiousness and would 
likely decrease the number of new HIV infections in sex or 
drug-using partners. In addition, individual experts stressed 
the importance of the cost-effectiveness modeling studies, 
which estimated that more frequent screening, compared with 
annual screening, would be more cost-effective by averting 
new HIV infections (incremental cost-effectiveness ratio, 
range = cost-saving – $138,200/quality-adjusted life year) 
(9). Finally, most experts stated that mathematical models 
do not provide sufficient evidence to warrant by themselves a 
change in the guideline, because of limitations in their study 
design, and that additional studies are needed to update the 
current recommendation.
Recommendations
CDC concludes that the evidence, programmatic experi-
ence, and expert opinions are insufficient to warrant changing 
the current recommendation (annual screening for MSM) to 
more frequent screening (every 3 or 6 months). Therefore, 
CDC’s 2006 recommendation for HIV screening of MSM 
is unchanged; providers in clinical settings should offer 
HIV screening at least annually to all sexually active MSM. 
Clinicians can also consider the potential benefits of more 
frequent HIV screening (e.g., every 3 or 6 months) for some 
asymptomatic sexually active MSM based on their individual 
risk factors, local HIV epidemiology, and local policies (9). 
Additional research is needed to establish the individual- or 
community-level factors that might increase the risk for HIV 
acquisition for MSM and merit more frequent HIV screen-
ing. For MSM who are prescribed preexposure prophylaxis, 
HIV testing every 3 months and immediate testing whenever 
signs and symptoms of acute HIV infection are reported (10) 
is indicated. MSM who experience a specific high-risk sexual 
exposure or have symptoms of recent HIV infection should 
seek immediate HIV testing, and clinicians should be alert for 
the symptoms of acute HIV infection and provide appropriate 
diagnostic testing.
CDC encourages researchers to conduct studies to evaluate 
the benefits and harms of more frequent screening for MSM. 
Findings from these studies will inform future assessment of 
recommendations. CDC will continue to monitor the evidence 
on the effectiveness of various HIV screening intervals and 
consider the need to revise current recommendations in light 
of new evidence.
Conflict of Interest
No conflicts of interest were reported.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
832 
MMWR / August 11, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 31
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 1Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral 
Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, CDC.
Corresponding author: Elizabeth A. DiNenno, edinenno@cdc.gov, 
404-639-8482.
References
 1. Branson BM, Handsfield HH, Lampe MA, et al. Revised recommendations 
for HIV testing of adults, adolescents, and pregnant women in health-
care settings. MMWR Recomm Rep 2006;55(No. RR14).
 2. Oster AM, Miles IW, Le BC, et al. HIV testing among men who have 
sex with men—21 cities, United States, 2008. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2011;60:694–9.
 3. Moyer VA; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for HIV: 
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. 
Ann Intern Med 2013;159:51–60. https://doi.org/10.7326/ 
0003-4819-159-1-201307020-00645
 4. CDC. HIV Monitoring selected national HIV prevention and care 
objectives by using HIV surveillance data—United States and 6 
dependent areas, 2015. HIV surveillance supplemental report vol. 22, 
no. 2. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, 
CDC, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB, 
Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention; 2017. https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/pdf/
library/reports/surveillance/cdc-hiv-surveillance-supplemental-report-
vol-22-2.pdf 
 5. INSIGHT START Study Group. Initiation of antiretroviral therapy in 
early asymptomatic HIV infection. N Engl J Med 2015;373:795–807. 
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1506816
 6. CDC; Association of Public Health Laboratories. Laboratory testing for 
the diagnosis of HIV infection: updated recommendations. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2014. https://
stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/23447
 7. Briss PA, Zaza S, Pappaioanou M, et al.; Task Force on Community 
Preventive Services. Developing an evidence-based Guide to Community 
Preventive Services—methods. Am J Prev Med 2000;18(Suppl):35–43. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0749-3797(99)00119-1
 8. Zaza S, Wright-De Agüero LK, Briss PA, et al.; Task Force on Community 
Preventive Services. Data collection instrument and procedure for 
systematic reviews in the Guide to Community Preventive Services. 
Am J Prev Med 2000;18(Suppl):44–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0749-3797(99)00122-1
 9. DiNenno EA, Prejean J, Delaney K, et al. Evaluating the evidence for 
more frequent than annual HIV screening of gay, bisexual, and other 
men who have sex with men in the United States: results from a 
systematic review and CDC expert consultation. Public Health Rep 
2017. In press.
 
10. US Public Health Service. Preexposure prophylaxis for the prevention 
of HIV infection in the United States—2014: a clinical practice 
guideline. Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human 
Services, US Public Health Service; 2014. https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/pdf/
PrEPguidelines2014.pdf
