 HISTORICAL REVIEW ARTICLE
From cradle to grave via the dissection room: the role
of foetal and infant bodies in anatomical education
from the late 1700s to early 1900s
Jenna M. Dittmar and Piers D. Mitchell
Department of Archaeology and Anthropology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
Abstract
The preponderance of men in the narrative of anatomical education during the 1800s has skewed the historical
perception of medical cadavers in favour of adult men, and stifled the conversation about the less portrayed
individuals, especially children. Although underrepresented in both the historical literature and skeletal remains
from archaeological contexts dated to the 1800s, these sources nevertheless illustrate that foetal and infant
cadavers were a prized source of knowledge. In the late 1700s and 1800s foetal and infant cadavers were
acquired by anatomists following body snatching from graveyards, from the child’s death in a charitable
hospital, death from infectious disease in large poor families, or following infanticide by desperate unwed
mothers. Study of foetal and infant remains from the 1800s in the anatomical collection at the University of
Cambridge shows that their bodies were treated differently to adults by anatomists. In contrast to adults it was
extremely rare for foetal and infant cadavers to undergo craniotomy, and thoracotomy seems to have been
performed through costal cartilages of the chest rather than the ribs themselves. However, many infants and
foetuses do show evidence for knife marks on the cranium indicating surgical removal of the scalp by
anatomists. These bodies were much more likely to be curated long term in anatomical collections and
museums than were adult males who had undergone dissection. They were prized both for demonstrating
normal anatomical development, but also congenital abnormalities that led to an early death. The current
findings show that the dissection of foetal and infant cadavers was more widespread than previous research on
anatomical education suggests. This research details the important role of the youngest members of society in
anatomical education during the long 19th century, and how the social identity of individuals in this subgroup
affected their acquisition, treatment and disposal by elite medical men of the time.
Key words: anatomical dissection; anatomy museum; cadaver acquisition; children; medical education.
Introduction
In 1877 Flora McLean gave birth in a Lying-in Hospital in
Glasgow. McLean complained about the neglectful treat-
ment of her baby and 2 days later the infant died. Some-
time later she got out of bed to go to see the body of her
deceased infant in another room before the burial. Upon
entering the room, to her dismay she found the body of
the infant had been dismembered and sewn back together
again. She had paid the 10 shilling burial fee required for a
proper burial and was distraught at the state in which she
discovered the mutilated body. Upon seeing her baby in
that state, McLean became irate and berated several hospi-
tal employees about the inhumane treatment of her baby.
The police were ultimately informed and the body of the
infant was found at the hospital in the condition that
McLean described. An investigation was launched into the
goings on at the hospital and a warrant was issued to exam-
ine the body of the infant. When the doctors in charge of
the investigation, Dr Moore and Dr Dunlop, arrived to
examine the body they found that the head of the infant
had been subsequently severed and they were unable to
immediately locate it. Through the investigation it was
uncovered that the head, and later the body, was taken to
the Royal Infirmary for dissection without the consent or
knowledge of Flora McLean (Southern Reporter and Cork
Commercial Courier, 1877:2).
Correspondence
Piers D. Mitchell, Department of Archaeology and Anthropology,
University of Cambridge, The Henry Wellcome Building, Fitzwilliam
Street, Cambridge CB2 1QH, UK. E: pdm39@cam.ac.uk
Accepted for publication 26 May 2016
Article published online 30 June 2016
© 2016 Anatomical Society
J. Anat. (2016) 229, pp713-
-722
doi: 10.1111/joa.12515
Journal of Anatomy
 The socio-political climate surrounding human dissection
in the 1700s and 1800s has been thoroughly examined by
historians (Richardson, 1987; Hurren, 2012). This body of
research reveals that in general the public reaction to
human dissection was almost exclusively negative outside
of the medical community. The story of the McLean baby
highlights one of the major themes commonly investigated
within the context of anatomical education during the 19th
century: the fear of human dissection. The horror and dis-
gust instilled in the populace by this sensational tale con-
cerning the unauthorised use or retention of a loved one
are not unique, nor are they limited to the distant past. The
relatively recent Alder Hey scandal caused by the retention
of organs in UK hospitals echoes these historic fears (Ellis,
2004:42–43). Throughout the 19th century stories of con-
cealed dissections and stolen bodies plagued the thoughts
of the populace. Yet, amid the public outcry that these tales
provoked, dissection practices only increased in frequency.
The direct examination of the body by students through
either human dissection or by examining anatomical prepa-
rations in medical museums was deemed necessary for stu-
dents to gain a spatial and tactile understanding of the
human body. By the late 1700s, well before the dissection
of the McLean baby, the undeniable educational value of
dissection had caused this practice to become entrenched in
anatomical education (Dittmar & Mitchell, 2015a).
Within the majority of the research on human dissection,
cadavers are generally portrayed as adult men from a low
socio-economic status, with adult women from a similar
background appearing occasionally (Hurren, 2012; Hutton,
2013). It is perhaps unsurprising that the majority of the
research on anatomical education features adults, specifi-
cally men. From its inception, the bodies of men have gen-
erally been at the centre of the discussion about dissection.
Within the context of medical education men played all of
the roles; educator, dissector and dissected. The male form
has predominately been featured in the dissection manuals
and was most commonly depicted in the media. The pre-
ponderance of men depicted in the medical literature and
within historical research has skewed the historical identity
of medical cadavers as adult men, and has stifled the con-
versation about the less portrayed individuals, specifically
children. The role of young children, particularly foetuses
(3 gestational months–birth) and infants (birth–1 year post-
partum) in anatomical education has received very little
attention.
The historical literature from the 1700s and 1800s showed
that foetal cadavers were valued for the study of growth
and development, and were often kept in anatomical
museums (Hunter, 1774; Duckworth, unpublished data;
Humphry, unpublished data). The valuable and unique
knowledge that could only be obtained from the examina-
tion of these developing bodies made them essential to the
study of anatomy. Due to their importance and presence in
medical museums it is highly unlikely that foetal and infant
bodies were dissected to destruction, but very little evi-
dence of this practice remains in the archaeological or his-
torical record. When the bodies of children are briefly
mentioned in historical research about anatomical educa-
tion, they are generally as part of a discussion of cadaver
acquisition (Hurren, 2012). The lack of widespread informa-
tion surrounding foetal and infant bodies has caused this
group to be largely overlooked in the ongoing research
about anatomical education in the 1800s. Subsequently,
minimal research has been undertaken on how their unique
socio-political identity affected their use and treatment by
medical professionals.
During the 18th and 19th centuries, children, especially
the illegitimate, had a particularly marginalised role in soci-
ety. Many factors affected this position and their subse-
quent treatment including the high infant mortality rate
during the early 19th century. Infant deaths were not the
uncommon, shocking event that they are today. The still-
birth and premature death of infants was an all too com-
mon occurrence, and it has been argued that the likelihood
of the death of a child affected the attachments formed by
the parents (Ari�
es, 1979). This effect was magnified in the
mothers of illegitimate children because of legislative
actions against them and their illegitimate children in the
form of ‘the New Poor Law’ (Anonymous, 1834). The law
ended financial support from both the parish and father of
the illegitimate child (Higginbotham, 1989). This loss of sup-
port in addition to the loss of job opportunities experienced
by the mother threatened both her and her infant’s life.
The desperate financial situations in which mothers found
themselves resulted in not only decreased attachment to a
pregnancy, but also in malicious actions against it. An
extreme example of this is illustrated by examples of miscar-
ried foetal remains or deceased infants, possibly the victims
of infanticide, being given or sold to anatomists (Hurren,
2012; Withycombe, 2015).
The lack of infant bodies presented in the historical litera-
ture is not surprising, but it is also not representative of the
important and unique role that foetuses and infants had in
anatomical education. This paper puts forward additional
information about the socio-political climate surrounding
foetuses and infants in a medical context by using a com-
bined osteological and historical approach. The combina-
tion of historic and archaeological evidence is needed to
provide a more complete picture of the role infants and
foetuses had in anatomical education during the late 18th
and 19th centuries. The most effective way to undertake an
examination of the treatment of the bodies in this sub-
group is to examine the bodies themselves. The skeletal
remains of foetal and infant cadavers excavated from
archaeological sites or preserved in medical museums are a
rich and unstudied resource, which allow us to recover the
experiences of the individuals in this age group. This will be
complemented by an examination of historical sources and
previously published literature in order to explore how the
© 2016 Anatomical Society
Foetal dissection by early anatomists, J. M. Dittmar and P. D. Mitchell
714
 social identity of infants and foetuses increased the likeli-
hood that they would be acquired, how they would be
treated, and how their bodies were disposed of by elite
medical men during the long 19th century.
Acquisition of cadavers
It is clear from the research into the procurement of cadav-
ers during the 18th and 19th centuries that this was consid-
ered the primary challenge for anatomical education. The
acquisition of bodies for anatomical education has been
extensively studied since the publication of Ruth Richard-
son’s seminal work on the socio-political climate surround-
ing the Anatomy Act in 1832 (Richardson, 1987). This large
body of work elaborates on the difficulty anatomists faced
in securing sufficient numbers of cadavers and the ways in
which they tried to overcome this. From the mid 1500s to
the end of the 1800s, restrictive legislation on cadaver pro-
curement resulted in a long history of the procurement of
cadavers through nefarious means.
The examination of both archaeological and historical
sources reveals that the bodies of men were much more
commonly acquired and dissected than those of women or
children. The imbalance in the demographics of dissected
individuals linked to the legal history of the practice and
the sources from which bodies were acquired. The legal his-
tory of human dissection in England can be traced to 1540
when Henry VIII granted four hanged felons to the United
Companies of Barbers and Surgeons for dissection (Anony-
mous, 1540). Following this, the Charter for Anatomies in
1565 granted a group of physicians and surgeons of the
College of Physicians the bodies of four criminals per
annum for dissection (Anonymous, 1565).
These eight hanged felons, almost entirely men, com-
prised the entire legally available supply of medical cadav-
ers until 1752 with the passing of An Act for Better
Preventing the Horrid Crime of Murder or ‘Murder Act’ (25
Geo. 2, c.37, 1752; Anonymous, 1752). This act gave anato-
mists the right to dissect the bodies of murderers publicly to
deter the ‘horrid crime of murder’.
The Murder Act, perhaps unintentionally, cemented the
connection between adult men and the dissection table.
Eternal punishment in the form of dissection was generally
reserved for the most heinous crime of murder for which
women and children were rarely convicted. This made the
legal availability of female cadavers very rare compared
with those of men. Women were occasionally hanged, of
course, and subsequently dissected. From 1800 to 1832, only
seven of the 45 dissections performed by William Clift at
the College of Surgeons were women (MacDonald, 2006).
Many of the women sentenced to death were found guilty
of the most horrifying type of murder, infanticide. In align-
ment with the societal norms, a convicted, pregnant
woman destined for the gallows would be granted a stay
of execution until after the birth. The unique stipulation of
pregnancy as a means to promote life and protect the inno-
cent provides a morally consistent reason as to why the
1752 legislative change did not facilitate the acquisition of
foetal or infant cadavers (Anonymous, 1752). Infant cadav-
ers for dissection would have likely not been available
through legal channels prior to the passing of An Act for
Regulating Schools of Anatomy (2&3 Will. IV c.75, 1832) or
the ‘Anatomy Act’ in 1832 (Anonymous, 1832), but it would
have always been possible to access them through illegal
channels in the same way as illicit adult cadavers.
Resurrection
Even with the passing of the Murder Act in 1752, the bodies
of these felons hardly made a dent in the ever-growing
demand for bodies to dissect during the late 1700s and
early 1800s (Anonymous, 1752). Between 1805 and 1820,
1150 people were executed in Britain, an average of 77 per
year (Ball, 1928:46). However, according to the Report of
the Committee appointed by the House of Commons to
enquire into the manner of obtaining subjects for dissection
in the Schools of Anatomy in 1828, there were over 800 stu-
dents attending the Schools of Anatomy in London dissect-
ing 450–500 bodies a year (Great Britian, 1828). The
disparity between the number of legally available cadavers
and the number required for anatomical education trig-
gered the rise of the resurrectionists, or grave robbers.
These men, often members of gangs, were infamous for
digging up freshly buried bodies from graveyards or break-
ing into houses and stealing the deceased from the coffin
while awaiting burial (Great Britain, 1828). Bodies obtained
through illicit means became the main source of dissection
subjects before the passing of the Anatomy Act.
The legal channels through which human dissection
material was obtained were insufficient to meet the needs
of the medical sciences, not only in numbers but also in the
age and sex of bodies needed to fully investigate the varia-
tion and the growth of the human body. The bodies of
women would have been rarely available from the gallows,
and the bodies of children would have been completely
unavailable. However, this was not the case with illegally
acquired cadavers.
There exists only one firsthand account detailing resurrec-
tionist activity, The Diary of a Resurrectionist (Bailey, 1896).
This recounts how bodies of adults, referred to as ‘large’ as
well as those of children, referred to as ‘small’ and foetuses
were resurrected. The presumed author of the diary, Joseph
Naples, stated in an interview to the Select Committee on
Anatomy that his gang acquired 360 adults1 and 44 ‘smalls’
in 1809–1810, and 332 adults and 47 ‘smalls’ in 1810–1811.
This trend was continued in 1811–1812, with 360 adults and
1This number includes 37 bodies that were sent to Edinburgh,
and 18 which the gang had in hand but were never used.
© 2016 Anatomical Society
Foetal dissection by early anatomists, J. M. Dittmar and P. D. Mitchell 715
 56 children resurrected, but only nine foetuses. One key
explanation for this was the price a larger body could fetch.
‘Small’ bodies (under 3 ft long) were paid for by the inch.
These prices ranged from £1 0 0 to £1 10 0, whereas the
average price of an adult body was stated to be £4 4s 0d,
but as high as £7 17 6 (Great Britain, 1828; Bailey, 1896).
The work by Hurren (2012) on the St Bartholomew’s Hospi-
tal registers revealed that 1% of the bodies sold for dissec-
tion were below the age of 10 years. Although it is clear
that infants were resurrected, this method was not the
main source of foetal material.
Unclaimed bodies allocated by the anatomy act
Medical men continued to rely on the gallows and resurrec-
tionists for bodies to dissect until the passing of the Anat-
omy Act in 1832. The introduction of this new legislation in
1832 provided a more plentiful supply of bodies, by permit-
ting masters of workhouses, hospital managers and Poor
Law guardians to donate unclaimed bodies of the poor.
The socio-political ramifications of this act on the poor have
been extensively researched (Richardson, 1987). This act was
not only exploitative to the poor, but also largely ineffec-
tive in ceasing the trade in bodies. Although the intentions
of this act were put in place to prevent grave robbing and
other deceitful methods of obtaining the bodies of those
who did not want to be dissected, the enforcers of this act
did not have the power to effectively do this and bodies
continued
to
be
obtained
through
nefarious
means
(MacDonald, 2009; Hurren, 2012).
Following the passing of the Anatomy Act, the primary
source for unclaimed bodies was the large voluntary hos-
pitals. These charitable institutions founded during the
18th century had varied criteria for admittance, but very
few permitted entry to pregnant women, children or
those deemed ‘incurable’. The findings of archaeological
investigation at institutions like the Royal London Hospital
and the Newcastle Infirmary reflect these strict entry poli-
cies, as the majority of the population of these hospital
burial grounds were adults, of which, less than one-third
were women (Chamberlain, 2012; Fowler & Powers, 2012).
The unclaimed bodies from these predominantly adult
male institutions did very little to increase the availability
of legally acquired infant bodies for dissection. A notable
exception was the Foundling Hospital, established in 1739
by Captain Thomas Coram, which exclusively cared for
abandoned infants. The mortality rates for infants surren-
dered to this institution during the second half of the
18th century were variable but far exceeded the equiva-
lent rates for London (Levene, 2007). The bodies of these
unfortunate children, if unclaimed by a parent, could be
legally acquired for dissection.
Research into the populations of workhouses reveals that
by the end of the 19th century the majority of the individu-
als present in workhouses were elderly adults, mostly men
(Ritch, 2015). However, these institutions were used by
entire families, and records support the presence of infants.
Workhouses were inhospitable, desperate places that were
nearly always lethal to infants. Jonas Hanway, a champion
for the lives of poor children, railed against the conditions
of the London workhouses after he collected statistics
between 1757 and 1763. The parish poorhouses and work-
houses authorised by parliament had near a 100% mortality
rate for infants, which led Hanway to lament that in these
institutions the ‘poor infants were mowed like grass’ (Han-
way, 1766). The ultimate demise met by so many infants
was exacerbated by the lack of nursing facilities and care to
support them. Upon arriving at a workhouse the infant
would be handed off to either a ‘carelef[s]s, worthlef[s]s
young female, or a decrepid old woman’ (Hanway, 1766:4).
Such circumstances led Hanway to confirm the claims made
by a parish workhouse ‘that of the 54 children born, and
taken into their workhouse[s]e, not one out-lived the year
in which it was born’ (Hanway, 1766:9). The deceased from
these locations including the infants would have been
given, or sold, to the anatomists if unclaimed by their fam-
ily.
Stillbirths and infanticide
In the event that an infant was stillborn, certain financial
circumstances would have promoted the sale of the body to
an anatomist. Those from the lowest socio-economic ranks
would have not been able to afford a proper burial for a
stillborn infant. However, up until 1838 the law did not
require a stillborn baby to be registered and a body could
be easily sold to an anatomist through an intermediary. This
loop-hole in the legislation that facilitated the sale of these
bodies generally produced no formal records. Even at insti-
tutions where young bodies are reported, as is the case for
St Bartholomew’s Hospital, the actual number of infants
purchased is probably underrepresented (Hurren, 2012).
This has made it impossible to determine the exact number
of stillborn infants or give any indication of the scale on
which this trade occurred. Although it remains impossible
to completely reconstruct the trade of stillborn infants,
some of the information can be found in historic hospital
records such as cause of death and origin of the body.
Recent research by Hurren illustrated that even with this
minimal amount of information, it is possible to gain
insight into the experiences of the individuals involved in
this trade (Hurren, 2012).
The opportunistic acquisition of deceased infants from
the desperate poor during the 19th century was not limited
to those infants who died of natural causes. During the
18th and 19th centuries, illegitimate children had a particu-
larly marginalised role in society, which often led to the
inhumane treatment of individuals within this group. The
proportion of illegitimate births began to rise in the 1720s
and
sharply
increased
in
1730s
(Laslett
et al.
1980).
© 2016 Anatomical Society
Foetal dissection by early anatomists, J. M. Dittmar and P. D. Mitchell
716
 Concurrently, there was an increase in infanticide resulting
from illegitimacy in the 1730s. This trend continued and
increased over the next 100 years. Infanticide became even
more of a problem during the Victorian era. Legislation
aimed at controlling the costs of the continually increasing
illegitimate birth rate was enacted in 1810, which was later
replaced in 1834 with The Poor Law Amendment Act or
‘the New Poor Law’ (Anonymous, 1834). The New Poor Law
ended parish outdoor relief for unmarried women and the
availability of assistance from the father of an illegitimate
child (Higginbotham, 1989). The mothers of these illegiti-
mate children were then solely responsible for them until
they reached 16 years old. The New Poor Law was com-
pletely ineffective in curtailing the illegitimate birth rate.
But this law did effectively contribute to the desperate
social and financial situations that faced the mother of ille-
gitimate children.
Many of the mothers directly affected by the New Poor
Law were poor unwed women in service positions. Upon
the discovery of their pregnancy, most of these women
would have been forced to give up their positions and
would have been subjected to societal shame resulting in
additional loss of opportunity. Without parish relief, as
restricted by the New Poor Law, these women were left in
desperate financial situations with no way to take care of
an infant. This left very few options for these women, all of
which were life threatening: the workhouse, prostitution,
abortion and infanticide. Although some braved the work-
houses or turned to prostitution, the social and financial
repercussions for having an illegitimate baby introduced by
the New Poor Law made the elimination of the foetus or
infant an unthinkable yet practical option for many desper-
ate women.
By the 1860s the infanticide in England reached epidemic
proportions. There were times when inquests into the
death of infants in Marylebone were held ‘nearly every day’
(Times, 24 October 1862:6). The coroner for Central Middle-
sex, Edwin Lankester, estimated that over a several-year
period in the mid-19th century, ‘12 000 women, or one in
30’ had murdered their infants without detection in London
(Medical Times and Gazette, 26 April 1866:446). These fig-
ures were slightly revised after he received intense criticism,
but he maintained that ‘. .. in England and Wales there
could not be fewer than 1000 cases of infanticide annually’
(Times, 6 October 1866:12). The victims of this heinous crime
were not uncommonly found in the streets or hidden away
in unseemly places (Times, 22 September 1862:11; Times, 29
April 1862:8; Examiner, 9 September 1865:576).
As reported by the special committee on infanticide by
the Harveian Society, ‘. .. the life of the bastard is infinitely
less protected than that of the legitimate .. .’ (Lancet, 12
January 1867:61). The particularly vulnerable social position
held by these illegitimate infants in combination with the
desperation felt by many poor mothers likely contributed
to their ultimate demise and their use in anatomical
education. In the light of the dismal options, many of the
unwed mothers would have had a lesser attachment to
unwanted infants. The corpses of unwanted infants that
were sold by a family member to anatomical institutions
through intermediaries were gladly accepted by anatomists
as a source of dissection material.
Miscarriages and acquiring foetal material
The bodies of foetuses could be acquired by an anatomist
through various interactions with the mothers, by examin-
ing the deceased, pregnant body post mortem or through
the examination of miscarried remains. Obstetric texts of
the period indicate that both of these methods were neces-
sary to construct a complete anatomical timeline from con-
ception to birth. The eminent obstetrician and anatomist,
William Hunter, examined many women at different stages
of pregnancy as well and ‘collected innumerable fresh mis-
carriages’ from as early as ‘the sixth week’ (Hunter & Rigby,
1843:63).
Foetal material was invaluable to medical research in the
19th century but potentially difficult to acquire, just as
today. The procurement of this material was dependent on
the emotional response to a miscarriage experienced by
women. For many childless women, a miscarriage was per-
ceived as a tragic event that deprived them of the idyllic
and revered position of motherhood. Although, historically
miscarriages are generally presented as a devastating event,
recent research reveals that a miscarriage elicited a number
of emotions in women during and after the event. Among
this variety of emotions was relief (Withycombe, 2015). The
difficulties facing pregnant unwed mothers, described
above, would disappear in the event that the mother mis-
carried. This regaining of control and opportunity could
result in relief or even elation. Perhaps surprisingly, relief
after a miscarriage was not only experienced by those in
desperate personal or financial situations, but also by well-
off, married women. These emotions of relief allowed for
the miscarried foetal material to be acquired, generally by
the doctor who attended the event (Withycombe, 2015). In
many cases women willingly gave over the miscarried foe-
tus to the doctor attending her. It has been hypothesised
that women may have been comforted by a medical inter-
est in seeking answers about reproduction (Withycombe,
2015).
The post mortem examination of pregnant women,
through dissection or autopsy, provided a unique opportu-
nity to examine a foetus in utero and an opportunity to
extract foetuses for further study. Dissection of pregnant
women was not the norm, and the opportunity to dissect a
woman and foetus under the unique circumstances, as
depicted in William Hunter’s famous text, Anatomia Uteri
Humani Gravidi Tabulis Illustrata (The Anatomy of the
Human Gravid Uterus Exhibited in Figures) published in
1774, was incredibly rare. After the careful dissection or the
© 2016 Anatomical Society
Foetal dissection by early anatomists, J. M. Dittmar and P. D. Mitchell 717
 examination of the abdomen in the case of an autopsy, the
foetus could be removed, dissected and possible retained
for a museum. Many of the specimens in medical museums
were acquired in this manner: secretly and without consent.
Extant collections, including the Hunterian Collection and
the Royal College of Surgeons, still house many organs har-
vested from post mortem examinations (Richardson, 2000).
These harvested foetal bodies were not only displayed in
museums, they were also immortalised in published texts.
William Hunter’s iconic early obstetric text featured the
organs of 15 women, seven infants, eight pre-term foetuses
and supplementary material from miscarriages, some of
which must have come from post mortem examinations
(Hunter, 1774; McDonald & Faithfull, 2015).
Treatment and uses of foetal and infant
bodies
Medical cadavers of all ages were used in multiple ways in
anatomical teaching, including human dissection. Evidence
of the treatment of bodies from a medical context can be
assessed by examining the skeletal remains that have been
retained in medical museums or excavated from archaeo-
logical sites. In recent years a number of excavations have
uncovered skeletal remains with evidence of surgical cut
marks consistent with human dissection (Fowler & Powers,
2012; Chamberlain, 2012; Kausmally, 2012; Mitchell, 2012;
Mitchell et al. 2011; Western, 2012; Boston and Webb,
2012). Evidence of human dissection in archaeological
assemblages is generally identified through the presence
of tool marks on the bones.
In dissected adult skeletons, the most commonly identi-
fied procedures that indicate a post mortem examination
has taken place are craniotomy and thoracotomy. A circum-
ferential craniotomy, the process of sawing open a skull in
order to examine the brain, is the most commonly associ-
ated procedure with human autopsy and dissection in
archaeological contexts. During the 19th century, a knife
was used to cut the scalp, generally in a coronal direction.
The scalp was then pulled down to reveal the cranial vault,
which was then sawn around so the top of the calvaria
could be removed and the brain examined. During this pro-
cedure sometimes a knife or saw was used to remove any
soft tissues adhering to the bones of the skull. Although
craniotomy was not always undertaken in dissection, either
craniotomy or cut marks indicating scalp removal are gener-
ally required to make a convincing argument for dissection
in skeletal remains without historical documentation. A tho-
racotomy is a procedure in which the thoracic cavity is
opened in order to examine the internal organs. There is
considerable evidence to support variation in this procedure
during the 18th and 19th centuries, but commonly found
evidence includes sawn clavicles, knife or saw marks on the
manubrium and sternal elements, as well as sawn ribs
(Fig. 1).
Dissection at Cambridge
In recent years the authors have undertaken research ana-
lysing the skeletal remains of infants from the late 18th and
19th centuries showing signs of dissection. The study of the
skeletal collection retained from the Cambridge dissecting
room (1768–c.1913) reveals that the age of the individual
seems to dictate the role that each individual had in
anatomical teaching and how the individual was treated
(Dittmar & Mitchell, 2015b). Foetal and infant cadavers
were used for student dissection, but these bodies were
treated differently to individuals of other ages. Foetuses
were not generally dissected before the sixth gestational
month. It was suspected that this was due to the very small
size of the individual before the sixth gestational month.
Evidence of the examination of a foetal head via a cran-
iotomy was rarely found. Only one transverse craniotomy
was identified on an infant skull in the Cambridge collec-
tion, out of a total of 54 foetal/infant specimens. Knife
marks were much more commonly found on foetal and
infant crania that had undergone dissection (44%). It is pre-
sumed the remainder were defleshed by non-surgical tech-
niques, such as boiling the cadaver. In those who had knife
marks present, the location of the knife marks typically
extended coronally over the cranial vault (Fig. 2). These
Fig. 1 Dissection of an infant c.1685. Engraving by Gerard de Lairess
published in Anatomia Humani Corporis by Govard Bidloo. Wellcome
Library, London.
© 2016 Anatomical Society
Foetal dissection by early anatomists, J. M. Dittmar and P. D. Mitchell
718
 incisions are consistent with cutting the scalp with a knife
and pulling the skin away to reveal the vault. Generally this
preceded a craniotomy in adults, but clearly this was not
the case for the vast majority of foetal remains.
Evidence of thoracotomies on foetal and infant remains is
even more difficult to identify than craniotomies. Historical
sources indicate the chest of infants was opened in a similar
way to contemporary adults (Fig. 1). The lack of tool marks
indicative of this procedure found on skeletal remains sug-
gests that the thorax was opened by transecting the carti-
laginous portions of the ribs.
Although variation is seen in the treatment of bodies
between age groups, the surgical instruments used in the
dissection of foetal and infant bodies at Cambridge were
similar to those used on adults. Evidence of both knives and
saws was identified and, in the case of the transverse cran-
iotomy performed on a foetus in the 38th gestational week,
clear evidence that a saw was used to open the cranium
was present (Fig. 3). The morphological characteristics of
the saw marks are consistent with a surgical saw with an
alternate tooth set (Fig. 4). This type of saw was used to
perform craniotomies on individuals of all ages. However,
the standard saws used to divide the ribs of adults would
have been much too large to use on infant bodies. Special
saws for the dissection of infants were not made because
the end result could be achieved using different surgical
tools already in existence, such as bone nippers or scissors.
Anatomical preparations
The procedural changes in the dissection of foetal and
infant remains may have resulted from the importance
placed on these bodies to medical museums. The skulls
appear to have been intentionally spared to preserve them
for teaching or display. Museums were particularly impor-
tant to anatomical teaching, as they allowed for prolonged
and careful study of preparations, both anatomical and
pathological. These young bodies were especially important
to illustrate developmental changes, and most museums
would have had a series of preparations that would illus-
trate the process from embryonic development to birth.
With the increased interest in obstetrics, birthing prepara-
tions were commonly created for museums. These small
bodies were also preferable to adults to display the anat-
omy of the nervous system and circulatory system. These
preparations generally required the entire body to be
injected. Pole in his book on anatomical preparations sug-
gests that the bodies of adults were not ideal for creating
such preparations. In place of an adult, the bodies selected
for exhibiting the arteries were ‘from the earliest infancy,
to about the age of 14 years’, preferably ‘a thin emaciated
subject’ (Pole, 1790:36–37).
The preparations created from foetal and infant bodies
were clearly valued by anatomists as is illustrated by the
measures taken to preserve the skeleton intact and undam-
aged. The value placed on foetal preparations likely con-
tributed to the differential treatment of these bodies
during dissection as well as after. Unlike adult bones, foetal
material was not generally kept for handling by students as
they were too fragile and porous to examine the muscle
attachments and other anatomical markers.
The museum journey of foetal osteological preparations
seems to have been different to that of an adult prepara-
tion. As seen in the former Cambridge anatomical collec-
tion, the osteological preparations of adult bones can go
through several phases of use within an institution. Initially
the body is dissected, then a single or multiple preparation
is made from the body and put on display. After an unspeci-
fied amount of time, this preparation may no longer be
needed in a museum collection and may become a teaching
Fig. 2 Pattern of knife marks (in green) on a
full-term foetal skull (5752) from the
University of Cambridge c.1911.
Fig. 3 Craniotomy and incomplete saw mark on the skull of (5741)
from Cambridge, Duckworth Collection c.1911.
© 2016 Anatomical Society
Foetal dissection by early anatomists, J. M. Dittmar and P. D. Mitchell 719
 preparation, or a handling preparation that is used by stu-
dents to learn anatomy. In the event that a preparation is
broken or no longer useful, it was discarded. This journey
varies in length and is affected by many factors, but may
last for hundreds of years. Many teaching institutions retain
the anatomical preparations created by founding members
of the institution, such as the Hunterian Collections in Lon-
don and Glasgow (Fordyce et al. 1840; Paget & Stanley,
1863). This journey is often much less varied and potentially
shorter for infant skeletal remains. Due to their fragility
they were more likely to be damaged if handled, so these
elements were more likely to be hidden in a storeroom or
discarded when no longer fit to display.
Prized museum preparations
During the 18th and 19th centuries, abnormal bodies were
featured in many exhibitionary contexts. The commercial
exhibition of ‘Siamese’ or conjoined twins could be found
among dwarves, giants and hermaphrodites at establish-
ments such as the Egyptian Hall, the Regent Gallery and the
Rummer in Three Kings Court, Fleet Street (Anonymous,
c.1880–1900). These living people were placed alongside
anatomical specimens and even occasionally great beasts to
produce a spectacle of anatomical variation to serve both as
a reminder of morality and for public amusement.
The fascination with ‘monsters’ was universal, and even
among medical men this type of preparation was collected
and curated in many anatomical museums. This interest is
clearly illustrated in the book, Human Monstrosities, pub-
lished in 1891, which features developmental defects in foe-
tuses (Hirst & Piersol, 1981). Within medical contexts, the
abnormal was not sensationalised for profit in the way that
was seen in the commercial establishments. As a point of
professional pride, anatomists remained detached and
viewed these non-normative bodies through a scientific lens
(Porter, 2001). In alignment with this calculated scientific
approach, the term ‘monster’ that was liberally applied to
the ‘abnormal’ by commercial outfits was refined within
medical circles to the examination of physical malforma-
tions during the early embryonic development.
The rarity of malformed foetuses led them to be highly
valued, even among other abnormal preparations. The
unique
niche
held
by
foetuses
that
illustrated
developmental defects led to the majority of the bodies
being preserved intact. In comparison with preparations of
malformed adult organs or organs illustrating a pathologi-
cal process, preparations made from foetal bodies were
much more likely to feature the body in its entirety. This is
primarily because the most severe and often fatal congeni-
tal defects such as anencephaly (a congenital malformation
where major parts of the brain and skull are missing) only
exist in foetal form. Even in the event that a malformed
foetal body was dissected prior to being put on display, the
body would be stitched back together before being pre-
served in spirit and displayed (Hirst & Piersol, 1981). This
was not the case for adult bodies. Both convenience and
necessity played a role in curatorial decisions when it came
to the retention of entire bodies to illustrate congenital
abnormalities. The lack of display space was a continual bat-
tle for many museum curators and, practically, it is much
easier to prepare, store and display a small jar containing a
foetus than it is to do the same with an adult body.
Disposal
Given that these bodies played an important role in
anatomical education, the lack of archaeological evidence
of individuals in this subgroup raises questions about the
disposal practices used. Based on the unique and yet mar-
ginalised role that foetuses and infants played, it is likely
that a combination of disposal methods was used for indi-
viduals in this group. However, even the conventional
methods for disposing of dissected individuals do not
always align with traditional burial practices. The disposal
of bodies following dissection included burial in private or
hospital burial grounds. The remains of dissected cadavers
were supposed to be buried in a church burial ground for a
‘proper burial’. However, evidence from archaeological sites
does not suggest that these regulations were always fol-
lowed. This was especially the case when the bodies were
obtained through illicit means. For example, dissected indi-
viduals have been uncovered in pits behind hospitals (Wes-
tern, 2012).
The majority of dissected skeletal remains uncovered in
archaeological contexts indicate that disposal of bodies fol-
lowing dissection was primarily burial in private and hospi-
tal burial grounds (Mitchell, 2012). Burial of dissected
Fig. 4 Scanning electron micrograph of an incomplete saw mark on the right parietal bone of a foetus in the 38th gestational week (5741) dis-
sected at the University of Cambridge, c.1911.
© 2016 Anatomical Society
Foetal dissection by early anatomists, J. M. Dittmar and P. D. Mitchell
720
 remains was not always formal even within formal burial
locations. Within allocated burial grounds, especially hospi-
tal burial grounds, the burial of dissected remains did not
adhere to normative societal burial practices. It was not
uncommon to place dissection portions into the coffin of
another person or to bury a coffin containing mismatched
human and animal body parts (Fowler & Powers, 2012). The
concealment methods generally used to dispose of dis-
sected bodies, especially before the passing of the Anatomy
Act in 1832, were more effective in hiding the infant bodies
than those of adults. Sections of bodies not belonging to
the occupant of a coffin have been identified in archaeo-
logical excavations (Fowler & Powers, 2012). This was a
money-saving measure as well as an attempt to conceal the
dissection of illicitly acquired bodies. The size of the body
and legislation regarding burial practices of foetuses and
infants until the 1840s facilitated the treatment of these
bodies as material waste.
Conclusion
This historical, osteological and archaeological assessment
demonstrates that foetal and infant bodies played a larger
role in the study of anatomy during the 18th and 19th cen-
turies than was previously realised. These bodies were made
uniquely available to anatomists by socio-cultural factors.
Infant cadavers were often acquired via body snatching
until the early 1800s, and after 1832 following a child’s
death in a charitable hospital. However, they also became
available
through
anatomists’
dissection
of
pregnant
women, from the high mortality rates in infants from poor
families at that time due to infectious disease, and follow-
ing infanticide by unwed, vulnerable women in desperate
circumstances.
Once acquired, the treatment of an infant body by anato-
mists was largely dependent upon whether the body was
to be used in research or education. Foetal cadavers were
valued for the study of growth and development, and were
often kept in anatomical museums. Little archaeological evi-
dence for dissection exists due to the manner in which foe-
tuses and infants were treated by anatomists during the
19th century. The rarity of craniotomy in order to keep the
skull intact, and ease of thoracotomy through cartilaginous
parts of the ribs, means that many individuals who under-
went dissection as a foetus or infant have probably not
been identified at archaeological excavation. However, the
current research into the foetal and infant remains from
200 years ago in the Cambridge anatomy collection is start-
ing to shed new light on how the youngest members of
that society were studied by the anatomists of the time.
References
An Unpleasant Story (1877) Southern Reporter and Cork Com-
mercial Courier. June 21: 2.
Anonymous
(1540)
Concerning
Barbers and Chirurgians (32
Hen. VIII c.42, 1540). London: Anonymous.
Anonymous (1565) “Charter for Anatomies”. Letters Patent
under the Great Seal. Royal College of Physicians, RCP-LEGAC/
DR/11 Charter 1564/5.
Anonymous (1752) A Bill, Entitled an Act for Better Preventing
the Horrid Crime of Murder (25 Geo. 2, c.37, 1752). London:
Anonymous.
Anonymous (1832) An Act for Regulating Schools of Anatomy
(2&3 Will. IV c.75, 1832). London: Anonymous.
Anonymous (1834) An Act for the Amendment and Better
Administration of the Laws Relating to the Poor in England
and Wales (4 & 5 Will. IV cap. 76). London: Anonymous.
Anonymous (c.1880–1900) This is to Acquaint the Curious. Hand-
bill. London: Anonymous.
Ari�
es P (1979) Centuries of Childhood: a Social History of Family
Life. Harmondsworth: Penguin Educational.
Asserted Increase of Infanticide (1866) Medical Times and Gaz-
ette. April 26: 446.
Bailey JB (1896) The Diary of a Resurrectionist, 1811–1812, to
which are Added an Account of the Resurrection Men in Lon-
don and a Short History of the Passing of the Anatomy Act.
London: Swan Sonnenschein.
Ball JM (1928) The Sack-’em-up Men: an Account of the Rise
and Fall of the Modern Resurrectionists, pp. 46. London: Oli-
ver and Boyd.
Boston C, Webb H (2012) Early medical training and treatment
in Oxford: a consideration of the archaeological and historical
evidence. In: Anatomical Dissection in Enlightenment England
and Beyond: Autopsy, Pathology and Display. (ed. Mitchell
PD), pp. 43–68. Farnham: Ashgate.
Chamberlain A (2012) Morbid osteology: evidence for autopsies,
dissection and surgical training from the Newcastle Infirmary
burial
ground
(1753–1845).
In:
Anatomical
Dissection
in
Enlightenment England and Beyond: Autopsy, Pathology and
Display. (ed. Mitchell PD), pp. 11–22. Farnham: Ashgate.
Dittmar JM, Mitchell PD (2015a) The afterlife of Laurence Stern
(1713–68): body snatching, dissection and the role of Cam-
bridge anatomist Charles Collignon. J Med Biogr. doi: 10.1177/
0967772015601584. [Epub 2015 Aug 25]
Dittmar JM, Mitchell PD (2015b) A new method for identify-
ing and differentiating human dissection and autopsy in
archaeological human skeletal remains. J Archaeol Sci Rep 3,
73–79.
Duckworth WLH (unpublished) Duckworth General Catalogue:
Crania and Cranial Bones, University of Cambridge, Volume 1–
2, 1–6114.
Ellis I (2004) Beyond organ retention: the new human tissue bill.
Lancet 364, 42–43.
Fordyce G, Pitcairn D, Combe W (1840) Catalogue of the
Anatomical Preparations in the Hunterian Museum, University
of Glasgow. Glasgow: George Richardson.
Fowler L, Powers N (2012) Doctors, Dissection and Resurrection
Men: Excavations in the 19th-century Burial Ground of the
London Hospital, 2006. MOLA Monograph Series 62. London:
Laverham Press.
Great Britain (1828) Report from the Select Committee on Anat-
omy. Shannon, Ireland: Irish University Press.
Hanway J (1766) An Earnest Appeal for Mercy to the Children
of the Poor. London: J Dodsley in Pall-Mall.
Higginbotham AR (1989) “Sin of infanticide”: infanticide and
illegitimacy in Victorian London. Vic Stud 32, 319–337.
© 2016 Anatomical Society
Foetal dissection by early anatomists, J. M. Dittmar and P. D. Mitchell 721
 Hirst BC, Piersol GA (1981) Human Monstrosities. Philadelphia,
PA: Lea Brothers.
Humphry GM (unpublished) Catalogue of Museum Specimens.
Manuscript, housed in the Duckworth Collection Archives,
University of Cambridge.
Hunter W (1774) Anatomia Uteri Humani Gravidi Tabulis Illus-
trata [The Anatomy of the Human Gravid Uterus Exhibited in
Figures]. Birmingham: John Baskerville.
Hunter W, Rigby E (eds) (1843) An Anatomical Description of
the Human Gravid Uterus and its Contents. London: Henry
Renshaw.
Hurren ET (2012) ‘Dying for Victorian Medicine: English Anat-
omy and its Trade in the Dead Poor, c.1834–1929. Basingstoke:
Palgrave.
Hutton F (2013) The Study of Anatomy in Britain, 1700–1900.
London: Pickering & Chatto.
Infanticide. The Times. 1862 September 22: 4.
Infanticide in London. The Times. 1862 April 29: 8.
Kausmally T (2012) William Hewson and the Craven Street Anat-
omy School. In: Anatomical Dissection in Enlightenment Eng-
land
and
Beyond:
Autopsy,
Pathology
and
Display.
(ed.
Mitchell PD), pp. 69–76. Farnham: Ashgate.
Laslett P, Oosterveen K, Smith RM (eds) (1980) Bastardy and its
Comparative History: Studies in the History of Illegitimacy and
Marital Nonconformism in Britain, France, Germany, Sweden,
North
America,
Jamaica,
and
Japan.
Cambridge:
Harvard
University Press.
Levene A (2007) The estimation of mortality at the London
Foundling Hospital, 1741–99. Popul Stud 59, 87–97.
MacDonald H (2006) Human Remains: Dissection and its Histo-
ries. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
MacDonald H (2009) Procuring Corpses: The English Anatomy
Inspectorate, 1842 to 1858. Med Hist 53, 379–396.
McDonald SW, Faithfull JW (2015) William Hunter’s sources of
pathological and anatomical specimens, with particular refer-
ence to obstetric subjects. In: William Hunter’s World: the Art
and Science of Eighteenth-Century Collecting. (eds Hancock
EG, Pearce N, Campbell M), pp. 45–58. Farnham: Ashgate.
Mitchell PD ((ed.) 2012) Anatomical Dissection in Enlightenment
England and Beyond: Autopsy, Pathology and Display. Farn-
ham: Ashgate.
Mitchell PD, Boston C, Chamberlain A, et al. (2011) The study of
anatomy in England from 1700 to the early 20th century. J
Anat 219, 91–99.
More Child Murders (1865) The Examiner. September 9: 6.
Paget J, Stanley E (1863) Descriptive Catalogue of the Pathologi-
cal Specimens Contained in the Museum of The Royal College
of Surgeons of England, Supplement One. London: William
Clowes.
Pole T (1790) The Anatomical Instructor; or, An Illustration of
the Modern and Most Approved Methods of Preparing and
Preserving the Different Parts of the Human Body, and of
Quadrupeds, by Injection, Corrosion, Maceration, Distention,
Articulation, Modeling, &c. London: Couchman and Fry.
Porter R (2001) Bodies Politic: Disease, Death and Doctors in Bri-
tain 1650–1900. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Report of the Committee of the Harveian Society on Infanticide
1867) Lancet 89, 61–63.
Richardson R (1987) Death, Dissection and the Destitute. Lon-
don: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Richardson R (2000) A potted history of specimen-taking. Lancet
335, 935–936.
Ritch A (2015) English Poor Law institutional care for older
people: identifying the ‘aged and infirm; and the ‘sick’ in
Birmingham Workhouse, 1852–1912. Soc Hist Med 27, 64–
85.
Social Science Congress (1866) The Times. October 6:12.
Western G (2012) A star of the first magnitude: osteological and
historical evidence for the challenge of provincial Medicine at
the Worcester Royal infirmary in the Nineteenth century. In:
Anatomical Dissection in Enlightenment England and Beyond:
Autopsy, Pathology and Display. (ed. Mitched PD), pp. 23–41.
Farnham: Ashgate.
Withycombe SK (2015) From women’s expectations to scientific
specimens: the fate of miscarriage materials in nineteenth-
century America. J Soc Hist Med 28, 245–262.
© 2016 Anatomical Society
Foetal dissection by early anatomists, J. M. Dittmar and P. D. Mitchell
722
