 Health-related shame: an affective determinant
of health?
Luna Dolezal,1 Barry Lyons2
ABSTRACT
Despite shame being recognised as a powerful force in
the clinical encounter, it is underacknowledged, under-
researched and undertheorised in the contexts of health
and medicine. In this paper we make two claims. The
first is that emotional or affective states, in particular
shame, can have a significant impact on health, illness
and health-related behaviours. We outline four possible
processes through which this might occur: (1) acute
shame avoidance behaviour; (2) chronic shame health-
related behaviours; (3) stigma and social status threat
and (4) biological mechanisms. Second, we postulate
that shame’s influence is so insidious, pervasive and
pernicious, and so critical to clinical and political
discourse around health, that it is imperative that its
vital role in health, health-related behaviours and illness
be recognised and assimilated into medical, social and
political consciousness and practice. In essence, we
argue that its impact is sufficiently powerful for it to be
considered an affective determinant of health, and
provide three justifications for this. We conclude with a
proposal for a research agenda that aims to extend the
state of knowledge of health-related shame.
INTRODUCTION
Although, shame has been identified as a powerful
force in the clinical encounter, and the experience
of illness,1
2 curiously it remains both under-
theorised and commonly unacknowledged in the
contexts of health and medicine.3 As Darby et al4
note, despite shame’s ‘frequent occurrence’ within
healthcare settings, there is ‘a surprising lack of
research’ examining the effect of shame and other
negative self-conscious emotions. Commenting on
this apparent mismatch of clinical importance and
medical disinterest, Davidoff3 dubbed shame the
‘elephant in the room’ in healthcare contexts.
However, other disciplines (notably psychology,
philosophy and the social sciences) have been less
reticent in engaging in a more rigorous analysis of
the causes and consequences of shame. Emerging
literatures in these disciplines highlight that shame
is often significant when considering an individual’s
health status.
Our aim in this paper is twofold. First, we
propose to use insights from the aforementioned
emerging literatures, and from the empirical work
of others, to further the claim that emotional or
affective states, in particular shame, can have an
impact on health, illness and health-related beha-
viours. In so doing, we will contend that body or
disease-related shame contributes to the burden of
illness, and that shame may itself be a direct cause
of ill-health. In order to underpin this claim, we
will outline a number of processes or mechanisms
through which shame may act on the health of
individuals. W
e schematise these as follows: (1)
acute
shame
avoidance
behaviour;
(2)
chronic
shame health-related behaviours; (3) stigma and
social status threat and (4) biological mechanisms.
These headings are simple descriptors and are not
intended to convey the impression that they refer
to stand-alone entities. Rather, all are substantially
interlinked but have been individuated here in
order to provide conceptual clarity.
Second, we postulate that there is a plausible
case to be made for shame to be considered as a
determinant of health. WHO defines health deter-
minants as ‘the range of behavioural, biological,
socioeconomic
and
environmental
factors
that
influence the health status of individuals or popula-
tions’.5 Among the array of determinants that are
identified are the social, physical and economic
environment, and a person’s individual character-
istics. Although emotional traits or behaviours are
not mentioned, there seems no good reason to dis-
allow affective states from being regarded as signifi-
cantly health impacting. In essence, we argue that
shame is so pervasive, so corrosive of the self and
so potentially detrimental to health, that there is
considerable utility in considering it an affective
determinant of health. W
e include an assessment of
the implications of our thesis, including those for
the individual doctor-patient encounter, and for
public health policy in general.
Finally, we outline a number of research path-
ways that may be pursued to further investigate
health-related shame. On a terminological note,
within this paper we use ‘affect’ and ‘emotion’ as
interchangeable terms. This may be inherently
problematic for some theorists who hold that they
represent different concepts. However, in agree-
ment with Greco and Stenner,6 we do not feel the
distinction is inherently helpful or particularly rev-
elatory, in this context.
SHAME
Shame is regarded as being a negative emotion that
arises when one is seen and judged by others
(whether they are present, possible or imagined) to
be flawed in some crucial way, or when some part
of one’s self is perceived to be inadequate, inappro-
priate or immoral. It is what is called a self-
conscious emotion in that the object of shame is
oneself and, furthermore, it involves an awareness
of how other people view the self.7 8 Shame experi-
ences are varied and multiple in their expression.
As a result, ‘shame’ is often used as an umbrella
term to indicate a whole ‘family of emotions’
ranging from ‘the mildest twinge of embarrassment
to the searing pain of mortification’.9 Hence,
   
 257
Dolezal L, Lyons B. Med Humanit 2017;43:257–263. doi:10.1136/medhum-2017-011186
Original article
To cite: Dolezal L, 
Lyons B. Med Humanit 
2017;43:257–263.
1University of Exeter, Exeter, UK
2Trinity College Dublin, School 
of Medicine, Dublin 2, Ireland
Correspondence to
Dr Luna Dolezal, University of 
Exeter, Amory Building, Rennes 
Drive, Exeter EX4 4RJ, UK;  
 
L. 
R. 
Dolezal@ 
exeter. 
ac. 
uk
Accepted 28 March 2017
Published Online First 
8 June 2017
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://mh.bmj.com/
Med Humanities: first published as 10.1136/medhum-2017-011186 on 8 June 2017. Downloaded from 
 shame variants include a wide array of negative self-conscious
experiences such as embarrassment, humiliation, chagrin, morti-
fication, feelings of defectiveness or low self-worth.10 11 The
intensity and expression of a shame experience depends on an
extensive constellation of factors including one’s culture, back-
ground, family experiences, personality and the immediate
context. In general, shame is distinguished from guilt by a focus
on the person rather than the act. Guilt arises where one feels
bad about an action or something that one has done, shame is
about the person that one is.9
It is argued that because shame is linked to one’s core identity,
it is among the most powerful and significant affective experi-
ences.9 In a moment of shame, one feels flawed or inferior, and
feels as though others can see this also. As a result, shame is not
just linked to threats to one’s identity, but, significantly, it is
linked to threats to social bonds.12 Shame can threaten one’s
feelings of belonging and acceptance within interpersonal con-
texts13 and socially and politically.14 Shame, as a result, is an
alienating and isolating experience that is far from trivial, often
deeply disturbing and a cause of significant distress. As Gehert
Piers notes, ‘behind the feeling of shame stands [the] fear of
abandonment,
the
death
by
emotional
starvation’.15
16
Northrop17 echoes this claim contending that in cases of shame
and stigma, ‘social death and actual death are imminently con-
vergent’. The threat of shame can feel worse than the threat of
physical pain or even the risk of death.9 18
While shame signals a significant social threat, it also creates a
bind for the person experiencing it, as revealing that one is
experiencing shame is itself shameful. As a result, shame symp-
toms provoke a shame spiral or ‘loop’, in which, when shame
arises it incites more shame.12 Shame, thus, is an iterated
emotion; its occurrence leads to an intensification or multiplica-
tion of itself.19 20 Consequently, shame is an emotion that is
usually fastidiously avoided (both individually and collectively)
and if that is not possible, it is scrupulously ignored. Individuals
go out of their way to avoid shame (or even mention past
instances of shame),21 even when this avoidance means harming
or hurting the self.
Beyond remaining silent or being scrupulously circumvented,
shame is often an ‘unidentified’ or ‘hidden’ emotion which does
not enter conscious awareness but is nonetheless frequently
present.19 Although the experience remains available to con-
sciousness, the person experiencing it is not able to, or perhaps
simply will not, identify it as shame, and there is an intrinsic
connection between shame and the mechanism of denial. In
these cases, shame is ‘by-passed’ and other affects, such as
anger, guilt, depression, doubt or excessive displays of pride
through narcissism, take over.14 22 It is well theorised that when
shame occurs, or even when it is merely anticipated, powerful
‘scripts’, or ‘basic patterns of behaviour that govern our reac-
tions’ to it, are activated.9 While some of these scripts allow the
shame experience to manifest, others use denial or bypassing as
coping mechanisms. Nathanson9 describes four basic shame
scripts: shameful withdrawal, masochistic submission, narcissis-
tic avoidance of shame and the rage of wounded pride.
Through this schema of reaction patterns, a wide range of
behavioural forms emerge that help one cope with the perceived
threats to one’s social bonds and one’s identity that shame
experiences, no matter how mild or intense, provoke.
What is common to this diverse collection of responses and
reactions is that shame creates a sense of heightened visibility
and, as a result, has a tendency to provoke concealment—to
hide one’s shame and to obscure that of which one is ashamed.
At the same time, shame also provokes ‘a cognitive shock’ to use
Nathanson’s23 formulation, that ‘manages to derail cognition
[and] higher cortical function’. In short, shame (or even just the
threat of shame) induces a panic state where the ‘necessity’ (to
hide or conceal) that shame produces overrides rational thought
and moral reasoning.24 25 In its painful state of exposure and
continuous self-reference, a shamed individual often does not
have the cognitive resources to act as a responsive and respon-
sible agent, authentically attuned to the needs of itself and its
community of others.26 Thus, shame is commonly avoided and
hidden, even when these measures potentially entail harming
the self or others.
HEALTH-RELATED SHAME
That affective states impact on health and illness was something
well
understood
by ancient
physicians.
Both Hippocrates’
theory of the four humours, and Galen’s concept of the ‘pas-
sions’, point to a significant historical appreciation of the inter-
relationship between emotions and morbidity and mortality.
Indeed, ‘severe emotional reactions’ were regarded as causative
of diseases such as ‘stroke, deformed births, madness, asthma,
ulcers and even death’.27 Although this idea commanded
medical thinking for much of early civilisation, it largely fell
into abeyance during the enlightenment. As Sternberg observes:
‘the notion that emotions could have something to do with
disease came to be viewed by modern science with disdain and
mild amusement—magical thinking, certainly not ideas to be
welcomed into the domain of the serious scientist’.27 On the
rare occasions when emotion was directly addressed, ‘it was
typically associated with the primitive, the embodied, the
female’.6
As a result of these tendencies, there is a paucity of modern
scientific writing on shame and its effects in the context of
healthcare
and
medicine.
However,
it
has
recently
been
acknowledged that patients often regard their illnesses as per-
sonal shortcomings, or as arising from personal inadequacies.1
This is not surprising, as many illnesses continue to carry signifi-
cant stigma28 and ‘flaws’ in the physical body can often be con-
strued as a mark of disgrace, disqualifying, as Goffman29 puts it,
‘an individual … from full social acceptance’. The experience of
health-related stigma is crucially bound up in experiences of
shame,30 where threats to one’s identity and one’s social bonds
through carrying a stigma mean that, as Goffman29 notes,
‘shame becomes a central possibility’. However, health-related
shame is not simply about feelings of inadequacy (no matter
how undeserved) with respect to the ailing body. Instead, find-
ings across a broad spectrum of social science and biological
research demonstrate that shame impacts on health through a
variety of inter-related pathways. As stated in the introduction,
we have schematised these as follows: (1) acute shame avoidance
behaviour; (2) chronic shame health-related behaviour; (3)
stigma and social status threat and (4) biological mechanisms.
Acute shame avoidance behaviour
Acute shame is the experience of an isolated episode of shame
(to be distinguished from chronic shame, which will be dis-
cussed below). Acute shame can arise unexpectedly, as in cases
of
embarrassment
where
in
social
interaction,
one’s
self-
presentation falters, fails or falls short of socially desired modes
of comportment, such as a temporary or unexpected loss of
control of one’s body and bodily functions.10 31 However, acute
shame can also be anticipated, for instance, when one expects a
moment of exposure or anticipates a mishap or transgression.
Acute shame episodes are uncomfortable and alter one’s interac-
tions with others while immediately diminishing one’s sense of
258 
Dolezal L, Lyons B. Med Humanit 2017;43:257–263. doi:10.1136/medhum-2017-011186
Original article
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://mh.bmj.com/
Med Humanities: first published as 10.1136/medhum-2017-011186 on 8 June 2017. Downloaded from 
 social worth (whether fleetingly or permanently). As a result,
individuals go to great lengths to avoid or circumvent acute
shame and potential instances of shameful exposure, even when
this avoidance might mean harming the self or others.
Acute shame is a distinct possibility in clinical contexts as the
exposure of one’s (perceived) flaws, inadequacies, faults or frail-
ties are at the heart of many clinical encounters.1 32 Lazare1
notes that patients often experience their bodily afflictions or
diseases as personal defects. Becoming ill, ageing, disfigurement,
infectious diseases, mental health issues, obesity, incontinence
and other ‘failings’, where one’s physical or mental self deviates
from an imagined ideal norm of health, youth, fitness and
(increasingly) attractiveness, can be potent sources of shame.33
Furthermore, salient identity markers which may carry shameful
stigma (such as one’s socioeconomic status, one’s sexuality or lit-
eracy levels), or certain stigmatised behavioural patterns (eg,
smoking, overeating or poor hygiene) may be revealed by the
personal exposure an encounter with a healthcare professional
usually entails.34 35
Empirical research demonstrates that threats of acute shame
regarding one’s health, physical body, identity, behaviour or
social status can have a significant effect on the process of the
clinical encounter.4 34–36 Harris and Darby report that of a
large cohort of patients, half of all respondents recalled one or
more interactions with a physician that left them feeling
ashamed. Not all of these felt that being shamed had been a bad
thing, but the corollary of this was that even those who deemed
the experience to have improved their health behaviour were
significantly more likely to lie to their physician subsequently.34
Commonly, it is reported that shame, or the anticipation of a
shame episode, invokes a tendency towards concealment and
avoidance in healthcare contexts and as a result shame can act
as an invisible barrier to the adequate delivery of healthcare.
When individuals feel the threat of shame this can lead to (i)
failure to seek treatment; (ii) failure to disclose the full details of
one’s mental or physical ill-health or one’s situation or identity
—for example, one’s sexuality or literacy status35 37—which
may result in inadequate or ineffective treatment being pre-
scribed; (iii) failure to complete the course of prescribed treat-
ment or (iv) diagnosis concealment from family and friends.30
The anticipation of painful exposure, along with the fear of the
judgement that it might incur, can lead individuals to avoid
seeking medical attention or from accurately narrating or dis-
closing symptoms or histories ‘even when they are concerned
about serious symptoms’.36 Hence, avoiding potential instances
of acute shame can feel like a life-saving measure, even when it
puts one’s health or life at risk.
Chronic shame health-related behaviours
Chronic shame differs substantially from the acute shame that
arises because of a discrete moment of exposure. Instead,
chronic shame involves recurring or persistent shame that forms
a background of social pain and self-consciousness; it is an
‘affective attunement’ that colours all aspects of one’s life.38 As
Pattison notes: ‘chronic shame [can shape] a whole personality
and may last a lifetime’.14 The persistent feeling of inferiority
and social exclusion that comes with chronic shame means that
it can become debilitating or even pathological, affecting one’s
life chances, one’s relationships and, as recent research has
demonstrated, one’s health outcomes.22
Chronic shame can arise through several mechanisms (that
may nonetheless co-occur). First, childhood relational trauma
which may encompass experiences such as childhood abuse or
highly dysfunctional shame-based family dynamics.22 Second,
minority stigma, where a salient aspect of one’s identity—such
as gender, health status, disability, race, sexuality, weight, ethni-
city—is stigmatised or is seen to deviate from a centrally valued
cultural or social norm.39–43 Third, chronic shame is a feature
of certain psychopathologies such as post-traumatic stress dis-
order,44 body dysmorphic disorder,45 social anxiety disorder22
and pathological narcissism.46 Whatever the root of one’s
chronic shame, its manifestation is far from trivial. Pattison
terms it a ‘toxic unwantedness’ that results from experiencing
(or even mistakenly perceiving) persistent rejection by others
because one believes one’s identity to be flawed or sullied in
some way.14 The pervasive perception that one is worth less
than
others,
along
with
the
recurring
heightened
self-
consciousness, negative affect and cognitive shock that shame
produces, is profoundly dysfunctional and disempowering, not
to mention psychologically damaging.47 While in the next
section we will discuss how chronic shame arising from minority
stigma impacts on health outcomes, here we will outline the evi-
dence that suggests that chronic shame, and most significantly
strategies or scripts for its avoidance, can directly impact on
health and health relevant behaviour.
In order for an individual to cope with chronic shame, it is
frequently bypassed for other experiences and powerful shame
‘scripts’ take effect as a protective measure in order to bypass or
avoid the direct experience of shame which may itself be too
painful or psychologically damaging.22 Through engaging in
avoidance strategies, it has been demonstrated that chronic
shame is directly implicated in a wide range of health relevant
behaviours. There is a growing body of work that implicates
chronic shame with risk behaviours such as alcoholism,48 addic-
tion22 47 and eating disorders,49 conditions all of which act to
‘numb’ an individual against the pain of shame. Furthermore,
avoidance scripts that bypass shame in favour of narcissism or
rage responses have been shown to lead to antisocial behaviour
such as violence, bullying and sexual assault.50–52 At the same
time, withdrawal and avoidance scripts mean that chronic
shame commonly leads to states such as stress and anxiety53 or
depression,54 where an individual may not even be aware that
they are experiencing shame and instead report other emotional
troubles or psychopathological symptoms.14 22 As such, chronic
shame is clearly linked to behaviours and psychological states
that have a direct negative impact on health.
Of course, those burdened with chronic shame can experi-
ence episodes of acute shame. It seems reasonable to suggest
that chronic shame may lead to an increased sensitivity to acute
episodes—for example, a woman suffering chronic shame as a
consequence of childhood sexual abuse might well experience a
routine gynaecological examination as more traumatic or expos-
ing than another woman who does not share a history of
abuse.55 It does seem possible that chronic shame might expand
the range of possible sources of acute shame, or even the depth
or magnitude of shame experienced. However, the hypothesis
that acute on chronic shame may be qualitatively or quantita-
tively different to acute shame arising de novo has not been par-
ticularly well examined to date, and thus remains a relatively
unsupported theoretical consideration.
Stigma and social status threat
As noted above, chronic shame is frequently associated with
minority stigma, where a salient aspect of one’s identity—such
as gender, health status, disability, race, sexuality, weight or eth-
nicity—is stigmatised, and as a result one belongs to a margina-
lised group or community. In this way, chronic shame often has
its roots in the cultural politics of inclusion and exclusion where
259
Dolezal L, Lyons B. Med Humanit 2017;43:257–263. doi:10.1136/medhum-2017-011186
Original article
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://mh.bmj.com/
Med Humanities: first published as 10.1136/medhum-2017-011186 on 8 June 2017. Downloaded from 
 for certain groups of individuals ‘stigmatising shaming’56 is
experienced as a frequent, if not constant, background to daily
life. In marginalising circumstances, shame becomes deeply
embedded and chronically reoccurring. The idea is that even
when shame is not felt directly, it is permanently anticipated as
one’s identity (according to the dominant social, cultural or pol-
itical norms) is spoiled in the first instance.
It has been well-documented through the minority stress lit-
erature that ‘individuals from stigmatised social categories’
experience ‘excess stress’ as a result of ‘their social, often a
minority, position’.57 These stressors are unique (in that they are
over and above those experienced by the non-stigmatised popu-
lation), they are chronic and, furthermore, arise from social and
structural forces and circumstances (rather than as a result of an
individual’s inherent identity, circumstances or behaviour). The
stigma processes identified in the minority stress literature, such
as internalised negative self-conception, rejection anxiety, hyper-
vigilance in social situations and concealment behaviours,37
clearly follow the patterns of shame and shame avoidance. In
fact, minority stress is directly correlated to the experience of
chronic shame. For example, researchers have found a substan-
tial racial difference in psychosocial stress, demonstrating that
African Americans, among other socially and economically mar-
ginalised communities, are more likely to suffer from chronic
shame and social-evaluative threats as a result of racism and
discrimination.56 58 Similar links between a stigmatised social
status
and
chronic
shame
are
found
when
considering
sexuality,41 socioeconomic status42 and body size.39
It is now well established in health research literature on
socioeconomic
inequalities
in
health
that,
by
almost
any
measure, those who are lower down the social hierarchy—in
other words, those who suffer from regular stigma, discrimin-
ation and marginalisation because of minority status—have
poorer health and shorter life expectancy.59 A host of different
causes have been postulated to explain the higher incidences
in poorer health behaviours and outcomes, including cultural
differences and differences in material environments, where
factors such as poor housing and living environments along
with limited economic and social resources cause psychological
strain and negative physical health consequences.42 While the
link between marginalisation and poorer health outcomes is cer-
tainly related to material factors, such as limited access to
healthy affordable food, lack of opportunities for exercise and
restricted access to health services, for example, recent research
has revealed that psychosocial processes associated with the
experience of low self-esteem and psychophysiological stress
resulting from chronic shame, marginalisation and stigma are
also significant factors in determining health outcomes and
well-being.59
The minority stress theory, along with Richard Wilkinson’s
‘status anxiety’ hypothesis,60–63 argue that social inequalities
damage individual health. What has been demonstrated empiric-
ally is that minority stress and forms of status anxiety lead to
health disparities across populations, where stigmatised popula-
tions have higher incidents of mental and physical health pro-
blems and are more likely to engage in health risk behaviours.
There is a clear empirical correlation between status anxiety—
where shame is chronically anticipated or experienced—and
deleterious behaviours, such as addiction, violence, criminal
inclinations and self-harm, which directly affect health and life
expectancy.50 63 Experiencing social inequality is also associated
with higher rates of infant mortality, very low birth weight in
infants,57 shorter height, AIDS, depression and poor self-
reported health.63 In short, social marginalisation, or even just
the fear or anticipation of social rejection, through chronic
shame and stigma is, it seems, itself a cause of poor health.
Biological mechanisms
In
their
review
of
‘emotions,
morbidity
and
mortality’,
Kiecolt-Glaser et al64 read the biological evidence as strongly
supporting the idea that ‘negative emotions can intensify a
variety of health threats’ through a number of immune and
endocrine responses. Experiences of chronic shame, minority
stress and status anxiety cause prolonged stress in the body
which has a clear effect on many physiological systems, such as
the immune and cardiovascular systems.63 An increase in what
has been termed ‘social-evaluative threat’, or threats to self-
esteem or social status, directly correlate with increased anxiety
and heightened biological stress responses.53 63 The biological
response to stress includes the release into the bloodstream of
the individual of various hormonal and chemical mediators
including the steroid hormone cortisol and immunologically
active substances called pro-inflammatory cytokines (PIC). This
response is similar to the ‘fight-or-flight’ mechanism, which is
an adaptive response that tells our bodies to flee when we are
faced with physical danger.65 However, chronic or maladaptive
elevations of these agents, resulting in immunological or endo-
crine dysregulation, can be harmful to health.
Empirical research has clearly demonstrated that shame, and
other ‘disengagement-related affective states’, where the subject
wants to withdraw, hide or avoid social interaction, causes the
body to release cortisol66 and PIC.67 Stressors which include a
social-evaluative threat ‘in which others could negatively judge
performance
…
provoked
larger…changes
than
stressors
without these particular threats’.68 The response of the body to
these endogenous chemicals is complex, being both protective
and
signalling
the
brain
to
modify
social
behaviour.69
Stimulating the release of these substances in ‘healthy’ volun-
teers produces self-reported feelings of depressed mood and iso-
lation (more commonly and in a more pronounced way in
women than men).70 It has been proposed that these physio-
logical responses, in acute episodes, serve to protect the individ-
ual
from
threats
to
social
bonds,
ensuring
that
group
membership—and hence, physical, emotional and social survival
—is maintained.71 As a result, it is suggested that these
responses can serve to (i) help the individual become more sen-
sitive to endangering social experiences, thus leading to better
identification and avoidance of such threats in the future,72
while (ii) stimulating others who are close to the affected indi-
vidual to provide support, care and assist in recuperation.73 74
However, with chronic shame, these levels can be persistently
altered leading to a variety of negative health effects as a result
of the physiological strain on the body and its systems because
of chronically elevated PIC and cortisol levels. A variety of con-
ditions, such as ‘weight gain, heart disease, hardening of the
arteries and decreased immune function’,56 63 have been asso-
ciated with the physiological responses associated with chronic
shame. Moreover, recent research has demonstrated a direct cor-
relation between ‘negative characterological self-appraisals asso-
ciated with shame’ and ‘immune decline’.67 For instance, in a
study of HIV-positive patients, shame and perceived threats to
one’s social bonds clearly correlated with disease progression
and mortality.65
The purpose of this section is not to argue that shame stimu-
lates some unique biological system that results in negative
health outcomes. Rather, shame appears to act, as many other
chronic stressors do, through a common pathway that is ultim-
ately injurious in many instances. The notion that affective
260 
Dolezal L, Lyons B. Med Humanit 2017;43:257–263. doi:10.1136/medhum-2017-011186
Original article
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://mh.bmj.com/
Med Humanities: first published as 10.1136/medhum-2017-011186 on 8 June 2017. Downloaded from 
 states can impact on health is further reinforced by research on
positive emotions. In general, positive emotions have been
shown to be associated with ‘greater longevity and reduced mor-
bidity’.75 As might be predicted, positive emotions have the
opposite effect on inflammatory activity to negative affective
states—positive affect appears to induce a reduced inflammatory
response (the available evidence indicating that positive affect is
associated with lower levels of PIC), thus promoting faster
recovery, and leading to overall better health outcomes.75
SHAME AS AN AFFECTIVE DETERMINANT OF HEALTH?
What we hope to have demonstrated at this point is that our
first
contention—that
shame,
both
directly and
indirectly,
impacts on health through a variety of plausible mechanisms—is
supported by a reasonable body of research. What about our
second, more tentative and preliminary, proposal—that shame
could be considered an affective determinant of health?
An ever-expanding literature indicates that population and
individual-level health outcomes are attributable to a wide
variety of factors such as social connectedness, social capital,
gender, urban living environment, race and many others.
Perhaps the most widely investigated of these over the past
50 years has been the relationship between social status and
health.76 77 In general, the studies concur—social disadvantage
is correlated with worse health.78 Because poorer people tend to
have poorer health (although this is not an inevitable associ-
ation), poverty is generally classed as a social determinant of
health.42 Despite the abundance of research, some complex
questions
remain
unelucidated,
including
the
mechanisms
through which factors such as poverty impact on health.78
Macleod et al78 suggest that the debate over the origin of health
inequalities has ‘polarised around two basic explanatory hypoth-
eses. These have been referred to as the “material” and the “psy-
chosocial” explanations of health inequalities, respectively’. The
psychosocial hypothesis posits it is the ‘psychological stress’ asso-
ciated with perceptions of disadvantage that is health dam-
aging.78 While this debate is far from settled, the question might
be asked—what is there to gain by presenting shame as an affect-
ive determinant of health, rather than simply subsuming it into
the broader psychosocial hypothesis that attempts to explain the
relationship between poverty, or race, or gender, or other minor-
ity stresses, and health outcomes? W
e suggest that there would
seem a number of advantages in advancing an affective hypoth-
esis that isolates shame as an affective determinant of health.
First, as Greco and Stenner state, ‘concern with emotion…has
come to be a shared focal point for an emerging community of
scholars’.6 This is not simply an intellectual ‘affective turn’
within the literature of disciplines, but rather is responsive to,
and revealing of, the increasing importance of ‘the emotional’ in
many facets of interaction and communication in postmodern
societies.6 The incorporation of emotion into theories about
health and illness is thus not simply the imposition of something
novel on to an existing theoretical framework, but instead has
the potential to reflect ‘affective life’ and transform the concep-
tual landscape.79 80 Engagement with affect opens up the possi-
bility of regarding shame as a scientific category, an object of
health research linked to the political dimensions of governance,
morality and the normative business of the regulation of bodies.
Shame, as we have seen, is common to many negative social
processes, mediating relations between power and persons and
contributing to affecting physical and psychological experiences.
Chronic shame is hidden within populations and minority stress
identities. Critical reflection on how it originates, persists and
pervades
the
dynamics
of
contemporary
social,
and
self,
governance and contributes to forms of affective consciousness
that are problematic and unhealthy, opens up the possibility of
enhancing visibility and sensitivity, and potentially alleviating
negative impacts.
Second, shame is a ubiquitous emotion in the clinical environ-
ment because of the potential for exposure of perceived defects,
inadequacies or illness. Shame may arise inadvertently in the
consultation, or indeed be brought about deliberately by the
clinician. In a world where a significant proportion of ill-health
(and
mortality)
is
directly
or
indirectly
attributable
to
health-related
behaviours
such
as
smoking,
diet,
exercise,
alcohol and substance abuse, there has been a drive to tackle
these issues through direct confrontation, or through more
subtle ‘nudging’. While there seems little consensus on which
approach might be most effective in bringing about the medic-
ally desired behavioural change, directly confronting, admonish-
ing, or perhaps even ‘nudging’, patients runs the risk of eliciting
the response of shame to observed criticism. This may have sig-
nificant consequences for both the patient’s health and the
doctor-patient relationship. It is undoubted that shame may have
a positive impact on the health of some individuals through pro-
moting healthy behaviour but, as Harris and Darby34 point out
‘although one can hardly fail to be impressed by the proportion
of people attributing benefits to shame-provoking interactions,
the proportions of individuals who ceased contact with or lied
to a physician might reasonably be judged unacceptably high’.
This leaves us in the difficult position of not knowing who
shame will affect, and how, and whether the overall outcome for
the individual or the population will be positive or negative on a
utilitarian calculus. Shaming an individual, or deploying a
shaming campaign across a population, offers no guarantee that
the targeted subject or subjects will respond in a particular way.
There is of course the question of whether this is the right moral
framework to apply in the first instance. Regardless of this,
bringing shame to the centre of the medical paradigm will
ensure that health professionals are attuned to the dynamics of
shame within clinical contexts, where shame on the part of
patients can lead to avoidance and concealment.
Third, the link between shame and health is not simply about
a human propensity for embarrassment regarding the physical
body and a related concern regarding judgement from health-
care professionals, but there is a significant political and socio-
economic dimension. When individuals are stigmatised or
marginalised for reasons that may well have nothing to do with
their health status, such as for poverty, race or gender, they may
well experience shame as a chronic state of their subjectivity as a
result of persistent experiences of social evaluative threats.
These chronic feelings of global personal inadequacy may well
have a substantially negative effect on health behaviours and
health outcomes. Thus, it is pertinent that doctors become
accustomed to considerations of affective responses but, as
pointed out by Viney et al,81 there are many ‘other kinds of
relations, networks, nodes and entities through which health
and medicine are made, and unmade’ that must be included in
any
conceptualisation
or
analysis
of
health
and
illness.
Designating shame as an affective determinant of health would
raise awareness of the links between the cultural politics of
shame—namely,
the
dynamics of
inclusion
and
exclusion,
social-evaluative threats and status anxiety—and negative health
outcomes. Beyond this, the contemporary tendency towards a
politics of personal responsibility in clinical care, where the idea
is that everyone is capable of modifying and controlling their
behaviour and lifestyle and, hence, responsible for their own
risk factors, through their capacity to make ‘wise choices’, could
261
Dolezal L, Lyons B. Med Humanit 2017;43:257–263. doi:10.1136/medhum-2017-011186
Original article
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://mh.bmj.com/
Med Humanities: first published as 10.1136/medhum-2017-011186 on 8 June 2017. Downloaded from 
 be re-evaluated. It is clear that socioeconomic inequalities mean
that our capacities for the sorts of choices we make about our
health behaviours can be drastically unequal, and that this
inequality in itself can have a concrete effect on health, despite
the positive or negative material conditions in which we find
ourselves. As a result, the use of stigma and shame in public
health campaigns and as a strategy to motivate for healthy beha-
viours, for example, when considering conditions such as
obesity, sexual health and addiction, where individuals are seen
to be making ‘choices’ that affect their health status, should be
carefully reconsidered. Exacerbating shame for populations that
are likely to be dealing with chronic shame and marginalisation
may lead to a worsening, rather than an attenuation, of overall
negative health outcomes.
CONCLUSION
Within this paper, we have outlined how shame may impact on
the health of individuals and populations. W
e believe that its
influence is sufficiently powerful for it to be considered an
important contributor, or even determinant, of health status.
This is in no way to propose that it acts independently of other
material or psychosocial factors, or that it is mediated differ-
ently within the body than other stress responses. Rather, our
claim is that shame is so insidious, pervasive and pernicious, and
so critical to clinical and political discourse around health, that
it is imperative that its vital role in health, health-related beha-
viours and illness be recognised and assimilated into medical,
social and political consciousness and practice.
However,
there
are
many
questions
that
yet
remain
unanswered, and so we will conclude with a proposal for a
research agenda that aims to extend the state of knowledge,
focusing on clarifying the nature of the burden, the populations
affected and on the development and assessment of potential
strategies aimed at mitigating problematic shame. The research
agenda would address the following six broad aims:
1. Identify the determinants and indicators of shame and their
practical implications for health policy.
2. Build on the limited research that outlines the responses of
individuals to acute shame, identifying perceptual, disease
specific, medical, cultural, institutional and sociopolitical
factors that mediate reactions and outcomes.
3. Quantitatively and qualitatively assess the burden from
stigma and acute shame associated with various health pro-
blems, both in terms of nature and magnitude.
4. Explore shame associated with different health problems
and in different settings. It is important to determine
whether and how shame-proneness for the same issue varies
across the multiple sites identified by Viney et al.81
5. Analyse the role of chronic shame in a variety of health and
social environments, and its relationship with suffering and
illness in response to acute episodes.
6. Improve knowledge about the functional impact of shaming,
and the risk of furthering health problems through health
policy and legislation that inadvertently or consciously pro-
motes stigma and shame. Social policy needs to be informed
by research, rather than being influenced by stereotype and
prejudice.
Shame is an important subject for public health, and the
health of the public. It merits serious assessment and discussion.
It contributes to suffering, impairs health, interferes with health
relationships and impacts on service provision. Emotion is
important in social life, and while the social sciences and other
disciplines have taken an ‘affective turn’, shame remains the ele-
phant in the clinical room.
Acknowledgements We are grateful for the insightful comments of the reviewers
and the editor.
Contributors Only the authors LD and BL contributed to the writing of this article.
All our sources are referenced appropriately.
Funding The funding was from the Wellcome Trust Seed Award 201518/Z/16/Z.
Competing interests None declared.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY 4.0) license, which permits
others to distribute, remix, adapt and build upon this work, for commercial use,
provided the original work is properly cited. See: http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/
REFERENCES
1
Lazare A. Shame and humiliation in the medical encounter. Arch Intern Med
1987;147:1653–8.
2
Tomlinson J. Shame. A Better NHS [Blog], 16 Nov 2012. https://abetternhs.net/
2012/11/16/shame/
3
Davidoff F. Shame: the elephant in the room. BMJ 2002;324:623–4.
4
Darby RS, Henniger NE, Harris CR. Reactions to physician-inspired shame and guilt.
Basic Appl Soc Psych 2014;36:9–26.
5
World Health Organisation. The determinants of health. http://www.who.int/hia/
evidence/doh/en/
6
Greco M, Stenner P, eds. Emotions: a social science reader. London: Routledge,
2014.
7
Lewis M. Shame: the exposed self. New York: The Free Press, 1992.
8
Zahavi D. Self and other: exploring subjectivity, empathy and shame. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2014.
9
Nathanson DL. Shame and pride: affect, sex and the birth of the self. New York:
W. W. Norton and Company, 1992.
10
Dolezal L. The body and shame: phenomenology, feminism and the socially shaped
body. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2015.
11
Gibson M. Social worker shame: a scoping review. Br J Soc Work 2016;46:549–65.
12
Scheff TJ. Shame and the social bond: a sociological theory. Soc Theory
2000;18:84–99.
13
Brown B. Shame resilience theory: a grounded theory study on women and shame.
Fam Soc 2006;87:43–52.
14
Pattison S. Shame: theory, therapy, theology. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2000.
15
Piers G. Shame and Guilt: A Psychoanalytic Study. In: Piers G, Singer MB, eds.
Shame and Guilt: A Psychoanalytic and Cultural Study. New York: WW Norton &
Company, 1953:15–55.
16
Probyn E. Blush: the faces of shame. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
2005.
17
Northrop JM. Reflecting on cosmetic surgery: body image, shame and narcissism.
London: Routledge, 2012.
18
Rousseau JJ. The confessions. London: Wordsworth Editions, 1996.
19
Lewis HB. Shame and guilt in neurosis. New York: International Universities Press,
1971.
20
Kaufman G. The psychology of shame: theory and treatment of shame based
syndromes. London: Routledge, 1993.
21
Miller RS. Embarrassment: poise and peril in everyday life. New York: The Guilford
Press, 1996.
22
DeYoung PA. Understanding and treating chronic shame: a relational/
neurobiological approach. London: Routledge, 2015.
23
Nathanson DL. A timetable for shame. In: Nathanson DL, ed. The many faces of
shame. New York: Guilford Press, 1987:1–63.
24
Mann B. Sovereign masculinity: gender lessons from the war on terror. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2014.
25
Williams B. Shame and necessity. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993.
26
Sanders K, Pattison S, Hurwitz B. Tracking shame and humiliation in accident and
emergency. Nurs Philos 2011;12:83–93.
27
Sternberg EM. Emotions and disease: from balance of humors to balance of
molecules. Nat Med 1997;3:264–7.
28
Weiss MG, Ramakrishna J, Somma D. Health-related stigma: rethinking concepts
and interventions. Psychol Health Med 2006;11:277–87.
29
Goffman E. Stigma: notes on the management of spoiled identity. London: Penguin
Books, 1990.
30
Rose S, Paul C, Boyes A, et al. Stigma-related experiences in non-communicable
respiratory diseases: a systematic review. Chron Respir Dis 2017;14:1–18.
31
Goffman E. The presentation of self in everyday life. Middlesex: Penguin Books,
1959.
32
Dolezal L. The phenomenology of shame in the clinical encounter. Med Health Care
Philos 2015;18:567–76.
262 
Dolezal L, Lyons B. Med Humanit 2017;43:257–263. doi:10.1136/medhum-2017-011186
Original article
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://mh.bmj.com/
Med Humanities: first published as 10.1136/medhum-2017-011186 on 8 June 2017. Downloaded from 
 33
Gilbert P, Miles J, eds. Body shame: conceptualisation, research and treatment.
London: Routledge, 2002.
34
Harris CR, Darby RS. Shame in physician-patient interactions: patient perspectives.
Basic Appl Soc Psych 2009;31:325–34.
35
Parikh NS, Parker RM, Nurss JR, et al. Shame and health literacy: the unspoken
connection. Patient Educ Couns 1996;27:33–9.
36
Consedine NS, Krivoshekova YS, Harris CR. Bodily embarrassment and Judgment
concern as separable factors in the measurement of medical embarrassment:
psychometric development and links to treatment-seeking outcomes. Br J Health
Psychol 2007;12:439–62.
37
Hatzenbuehler ML, Pachankis JE. Stigma and minority stress as social determinants of
health among lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender Youth. Pediatr Clin North Am
2016;63:985–97.
38
Bartky SL. Femininity and domination: studies in the phenomenology of oppression.
London: Routledge, 1990.
39
Farrell AE. Fat shame: stigma and the fat body in American culture. New York:
New York University Press, 2011.
40
Lebron CJ. The color of our shame: race and justice in our time. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2013.
41
Sedgwick EK. Touching feeling: affect, pedagogy, performativity. Durham:
Duke University Press, 2003.
42
Walker R. The shame of poverty. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014.
43
Bartky SL. Shame and gender. Femininity and domination: studies in the
phenomenology of oppression. London: Routledge, 1990:83–98.
44
Leskela J, Dieperink M, Thuras P. Shame and posttraumatic stress disorder.
J Trauma Stress 2002;15:223–6.
45
Veale D. Shame in body dysmorphic disorder. In: Gilbert P, Miles J, eds. Body
shame: conceptualization, research and treatment. New York: Brunner-Routledge,
2002:267–82.
46
Morrison AP. Shame: the underside of narcissism. London: Routledge, 1989.
47
Bradshaw J. Healing the shame that binds you. Deerfield Beach, FL: Health
Communications, Inc., 1988.
48
Potter-Efron R, Carruth B. Shame, guilt and alcoholism: treatment issues in clinical
practice. London: Routledge, 1989.
49
Swan S, Andrews B. The relationship between shame, eating disorders and
disclosure in treatment. Br J Clin Psychol 2003;42:367–78.
50
Gilligan J. Violence: our deadly epidemic and its causes. New York: G. P. Putnum’s
Sons, 1996.
51
Lawrence AE, Taft CT. Shame, posttraumatic stress disorder, and intimate partner
violence perpetration. Aggress Violent Behav 2013;18:191–4.
52
Thomaes S, Bushman BJ, Stegge H, et al. Trumping shame by blasts of noise:
narcissism, self-esteem, shame, and aggression in young adolescents. Child Dev
2008;79:1792–801.
53
Gilbert P. The relationship of shame, social anxiety and depression: the role of the
evaluation of social rank. Clin Psychol Psychother 2000;7:174–89.
54
Andrews B, Hunter E. Shame, early abuse, and course of depression in a clinical
sample: a preliminary study. Cogn Emotion 1997;11:373–81.
55
Robohm JS, Buttenheim M. The gynecological care experience of adult survivors of
childhood sexual abuse: a preliminary investigation. Women Health 1997;24:59–75.
56
Harris-Perry MV. Sister citizen: shame, stereotypes and Black Women in America.
New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 2011.
57
Meyer IH. Prejudice, social stress, and mental health in lesbian, gay and bisexual
populations: conceptual issues and research evidence. Psychol Bull
2003;129:674–97.
58
Collins JW, David RJ, Handler A, et al. Very low birthweight in African American
Infants: the role of maternal exposure to interpersonal racial discrimination.
Am J Public Health 2004;94:2132–8.
59
Layte R. The association between income inequality and mental health: testing
status anxiety, social capital, and neo-materialist explanations. Eur Soc Rev
2012;28:498–511.
60
Wilkinson R. Unhealthy societies: the afflictions of inequality. London: Routledge,
1996.
61
Wilkinson R. The impact of inequality: how to make sick societies healthier.
New York: New Press, 2005.
62
Layte R, Whelan CT. Who feels inferior? A test of the status anxiety hypothesis of
social inequalities in health. Eur Soc Rev 2014;30:525–35.
63
Wilkinson R, Pickett K. The spirit level: why equality is better for everyone. London:
Penguin Books, 2010.
64
Kiecolt-Glaser JK, McGuire L, Robles TF, et al. Emotions, morbidity, and mortality:
new perspectives from psychoneuroimmunology. Annu Rev Psychol
2002;53:83–107.
65
Dickerson SS, Gruenewald TL, Kemeny ME. When the social self is threatened:
shame, physiology and health. J Pers 2004;72:1191–216.
66
Lewis M, Ramsay D. Cortisol response to embarrassment and shame. Child Dev
2002;73:1034–45.
67
Dickerson SS, Kemeny ME, Aziz N, et al. Immunological effects of induced shame
and guilt. Psychosom Med 2004;66:124–31.
68
Dickerson SS, Kemeny ME. Acute stressors and cortisol responses: a theoretical
integration and synthesis of laboratory research. Psychol Bull 2004;130:355–91.
69
Eisenberger NI, Moieni M, Inagaki TK, et al. In sickness and in health: the
co-regulation of inflammation and social behavior. Neuropsychopharmacology
2017;42:242–53.
70
Moieni M, Irwin MR, Jevtic I, et al. Sex differences in depressive and socioemotional
responses to an inflammatory challenge: implications for sex differences in
depression. Neuropsychopharmacology 2015;40:1709–16.
71
Gilbert P. The Evolution Of shame as a marker for relationship security: a
biopsychosocial approach. In: Tracy J, Robins R, Tangney J, eds. The self-conscious
emotions: theory and research. New York: Guilford, 2007:283–310.
72
Inagaki TK, Muscatell KA, Irwin MR, et al. Inflammation selectively enhances
amygdala activity to socially threatening images. Neuroimage 2012;59:3222–6.
73
Inagaki TK, Muscatell KA, Irwin MR, et al. The role of the ventral striatum in
inflammatory-induced approach toward support figures. Brain Behav Immun
2015;44:247–52.
74
Muscatell KA, Eisenberger NI, Dutcher JM, et al. Links between inflammation,
amygdala reactivity, and social support in breast cancer survivors. Brain Behav
Immun 2016;53:34–8.
75
Stellar JE, John-Henderson N, Anderson CL, et al. Positive affect and markers of
inflammation: discrete positive emotions predict lower levels of inflammatory
cytokines. Emotion 2015;15:129.
76
Berkman LF, Kawachi I, Glymour MM, eds. Social epidemiology. 2nd edn. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2014.
77
Marmot M, Wilkinson RG, eds. Social determinants of health. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2006.
78
Macleod J, Davey Smith G, Metcalfe C, et al. Is subjective social status a
more important determinant of health than objective social status? Evidence
from a prospective observational study of Scottish men. Soc Sci Med
2005;61:1916–29.
79
Kubzansky LD, Winning A, Kawachi I. Affective states and health. In: Berkman LF,
Kawachi I, Glymour MM, eds. Social epidemiology. 2nd edn. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2014:320–64.
80
DeSteno D, Gross JJ, Kubzansky L. Affective science and health: the importance of
emotion and emotion regulation. Health Psychol 2013;32:474–86.
81
Viney W, Callard F, Woods A. Critical medical humanities: embracing entanglement,
taking risks. Med Humanit 2015;41:2–7.
263
Dolezal L, Lyons B. Med Humanit 2017;43:257–263. doi:10.1136/medhum-2017-011186
Original article
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://mh.bmj.com/
Med Humanities: first published as 10.1136/medhum-2017-011186 on 8 June 2017. Downloaded from 
