 Colony Stimulating Factor-1 Receptor is a central component of 
the foreign body response to biomaterial implants in rodents 
and non-human primates
Joshua C. Doloff1,2,3, Omid Veiseh1,2,3,4, Arturo J. Vegas1,2,5, Hok Hei Tam1,3, Shady 
Farah1,2,3, Minglin Ma1,2,6, Jie Li1,2, Andrew Bader1,2, Alan Chiu1,2, Atieh Sadraei1, 
Stephanie Aresta-Dasilva1,2, Marissa Griffin1, Siddharth Jhunjhunwala1,2, Matthew 
Webber1,3, Sean Siebert1,2, Katherine Tang1,2, Michael Chen1,2, Erin Langan1,2, Nimit 
Dholokia1,2, Raj Thakrar1,2, Meirigeng Qi7, Jose Oberholzer7, Dale L. Greiner8, Robert 
Langer1,2,3,9,10,11, and Daniel G. Anderson1,2,3,9,10,11,*
1David H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
500 Main Street, Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA
2Department of Anesthesiology, Boston Children’s Hospital, 300 Longwood Ave, Boston, MA 
02115, USA
3Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts 
Avenue, Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA
7Division of Transplantation, Department of Surgery, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL
8Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 
01605, USA
9Division of Health Science Technology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts 
Avenue, Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA
10Institute for Medical Engineering and Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 
Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
* dgander@mit.edu; Tel.: +1 617 258 6843; fax: +1 617 258 8827.
4Current address: Sigilon, Inc., 161 First St., Cambridge, MA 02142, USA
5Current address: Department of Chemistry, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
6Current address: Biological and Environmental Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA
DATA AVAILABILITY
All data generated during this study are included in this published article (and its Supplementary Information).
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
Supplementary Tables 1–3
Supplementary Figure S1–S20
COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
J.D. and D.A. designed experiments, analyzed data, and wrote the manuscript. J.D., O.V., A.V., H.H.T., S.F., M.M., J.L., A.B., A.C., 
S.A-D., M.G., A.S., S.J., M.W., S.S., K.T., M.C., E.L., N.D., R.T., M.Q. and J.O. performed experiments. J.D. and H.T. performed 
statistical analyses of data sets and aided in the preparation of displays communicating data sets. J.O. and D.G. provided conceptual 
advice and technical support. R.L. and D.A. supervised the study. All authors discussed the results and assisted in the preparation of 
the manuscript.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Mater. 2017 June ; 16(6): 671–680. doi:10.1038/nmat4866.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 11Harvard-MIT Division of Health Science and Technology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA
Abstract
Host recognition and immune-mediated foreign body response (FBR) to biomaterials can 
compromise the performance of implanted medical devices. To identify key cell and cytokine 
targets, here we perform in-depth systems analysis of innate and adaptive immune system 
responses to implanted biomaterials in rodents and non-human primates. While macrophages are 
indispensable to the fibrotic cascade, surprisingly neutrophils and complement are not. 
Macrophages, via CXCL13, lead to downstream B cell recruitment, which further potentiated 
fibrosis, as confirmed by B cell knock out and CXCL13 neutralization. Interestingly, Colony 
Stimulating Factor-1 Receptor (CSF1R) is significantly increased following implantation of 
multiple biomaterial classes: ceramic, polymer, and hydrogel. Its inhibition, like macrophage 
depletion, leads to complete loss of fibrosis, but spares other macrophage functions such as wound 
healing, ROS production, and phagocytosis. Our results indicate targeting CSF1R may allow for a 
more selective method of fibrosis inhibition, and improve biomaterial biocompatibility without the 
need for broad immunosuppression.
Implanted biomedical devices reside within tens of millions of patients in the United States 
alone, and are involved in millions of new and revisionary surgeries every year1, 2. As such, 
they comprise a major component of modern medicine and are essential for many clinical 
applications ranging from hip/knee replacement3, tissue repair/reconstruction4, prosthesis 
and neural interfacing5, controlled drug release6, electronic pacing7, vital sign monitoring8, 
intraocular lens replacement9, and cell encapsulation and transplantation10. Unlike 
particulates, which may be phagocytosed and cleared by the innate immune system3, larger 
non-biodegradable macroscale devices remain in the body. The host senses these implants as 
foreign and mounts an immune-mediated rejection response11, 12. This sequence, known as 
the fibrotic cascade, includes tissue injury, immune recruitment and adhesion, myofibroblast 
induction, and fibrous capsule formation12, preventing interaction with the surrounding 
microenvironment, including sensing of biochemical stimuli such as pH, oxygen, blood 
glucose levels, and/or obstructing nutrient flux where internal device components are of 
biologic origin11, 13.
Aspects of the biology involved in the ensuing immune response have been 
characterized11, 13. Macrophages have remarkable plasticity, responding to numerous 
signals14, and are a key component of material recognition, actively adhering to the surface 
of foreign objects11, 13, 15, 16. They are increased locally throughout the implant site within 
days and may persist at the material surface11, 13, 16. Device contact initiates macrophage 
fusion into foreign-body giant cells11, 17, which recruit fibroblasts responsible for final 
fibrous collagen and matrix protein deposition11, 13, 18. This fate is the same for materials of 
both natural and synthetic origin, including polysaccharides, polymers, ceramics, and 
metals13.
One natural polysaccharide, alginate, is a multipurpose biomaterial that has been utilized in 
numerous biomedical applications including biosensors, tissue regeneration, cell 
Doloff et al.
Page 2
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 encapsulation, and drug delivery10, 19. While non-biodegradable alginate capsules are used 
to immunoisolate transplanted islets for type 1 diabetes therapy, host immune and fibrosis 
responses directed to the encapsulating biomaterial results in device failure20, 21, 22, 23. Even 
empty alginate microspheres elicit rejection in some animal models24, 25, including non-
human primates26, 27. This response has been a barrier to translation of alginate-
encapsulated islets for several decades22, 23.
Overcoming the rejection of implanted biomaterial devices may allow for a range of medical 
advancements28, 29. Current approaches for immune suppression or management of long-
term biomedical device implantation often involve broad-spectrum anti-inflammatories30. 
The major immunosuppressive agents used as standard care for implantation procedures are 
rapamycin (sirolimus), tacrolimus, everolimus, cyclosporine, and corticosteroids31. 
However, many of these anti-inflammatory drugs are not specific to individual immune 
populations, having multiple targets and differential effects in vivo30, 32. As such, more 
specific drug targets and corresponding inhibitory compounds need to be identified.
To do so, here we examine the roles of innate and adaptive immunity on biomaterial 
biocompatibility in vivo. While multiple materials are included for generalizability, we focus 
on alginate given its long history of use in the field of cell encapsulation, and the fact that 
the immune response to alginate remains a barrier to its success in the clinic20, 21, 22, 23. 
Implantation of alginate into the intraperitoneal (IP) space of immune compliant BALB/c 
mice yields little to no fibrosis33, 34, whereas alginate retrieved from C57BL/6 mice, which 
have more aggressive innate immunity, is densely covered with fibrous overgrowth33, 
mimicking the FBR observed in humans21, 22, 23 and non-human primates (NHPs)26, 27. To 
dissect the immune pathways involved we examine a range of C57BL/6 rodents with 
different immune knockout or targeted perturbation/depletion states (see online Methods for 
full description). Immune cell and cytokine responses in these models are screened to 
identify more specific targets for inhibiting fibrosis. Several hits were additionally confirmed 
as relevant in cynomolgus monkeys.
Alginate microspheres elicit a multi-immune population FBR
Historically, FBRs to alginate were believed to be a function of contaminating endotoxins35. 
However, a number of studies indicate that clinical grade, commercially purified alginate 
does not contain detectable endotoxins26, 27, 36 (Supplementary Table S1). This indicates 
that the immune-mediated FBR is to biomaterial alginate itself, and is complex, engaging 
both innate and adaptive immune cell populations (Figure 1). Cellular adhesion and fibrotic 
overgrowth of 500 μm alginate microspheres implanted in the intraperitoneal space of 
C57BL/6 mice after 14 days is apparent as a white plaque by phase contrast imaging (Figure 
1a), with individual cells resolvable by nuclear DAPI staining (Figure 1b). A 14-day 
timepoint was selected in this study, as it has been established as suitable to resolve both 
immune and fibrotic responses to implanted materials, in both C57BL/6 mice and non-
human primates26, 27. Specific markers for innate immune cell macrophages (F4/80 and 
CD68) and neutrophils (Ly6g), adaptive immune B cells (CD19), as well as fibrosis of 
material implants (alpha smooth muscle actin (αSMactin) and collagen 1a1 (Col1a1)) were 
identified by qPCR, and increased over time on alginate spheres, as compared to non-
Doloff et al.
Page 3
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 implanted and mock (saline-injected) controls (Figure 1c and Supplemental Figure S1). 
Increases in αSMactin and Col1a1, as well as Col1a2, have previously been shown to 
increase proportionately to fibrotic encapsulation26, 27, and as such are used here as markers. 
Despite the absence of implanted material for non-implant and mock surgery animals, 
omental and epididymal fat pads were taken for expression analysis, as these are the tissues 
to which materials are subsequently stuck and embedded within fibrotic tissue27. 
Immunofluorescent staining and confocal imaging of spheres retrieved 14 days post-
intraperitoneal (IP) implantation reveals that all three responding immune populations 
(macrophages: CD68; neutrophils, Ly6g/Gr1; B cells, CD19) reside within the fibrotic 
plaque directly enveloping implanted alginate spheres (Figure 1d & e). Intravital imaging at 
14 days post-implant in Ccr6-EGFP transgenic C57BL/6 mice also verified trafficking of 
adaptive B cells onto implanted quantum-dot labeled (pink) alginate spheres (Figure 1f & g).
Characterization of local immune responses to alginate
To determine whether the host immune response is acute and short-lived or manifested over 
a longer period of time, we performed FACS on cells retrieved at days 1, 4, 7, 14, and 28 
following IP implantation into C57BL/6 mice (Figure 2a–c). In general, free-floating 
peritoneal cell numbers reflected an increase in neutrophils (as % total), decrease in B cells, 
with macrophage levels unchanged over time (Figure 2a). However, these responses, 
representative of the liquid environment surrounding IP implants, do not accurately depict 
cell population increases identified directly on the implanted material surface (Figure 1 and 
Supplemental Figure S1).
Luminex analysis of serum cytokine levels following implantation showed an acute but 
transient increase of 4 out of 32 cytokines (Supplemental Figure S2) that went away within 
~1–3 days post-implantation. This temporary response is in contrast to the longer-term 
evidence of immunogenicity of implanted alginate (Figure 2). Longer-term responses, 
unfortunately, do not show measurable global cytokine levels in circulating blood, as signals 
originating in inflamed tissues have likely become too dilute upon dissemination. As a more 
direct test, FACS was performed on dissociated, fibrosed IP tissue—immediately adjacent 
and stuck to fibrosed alginate (Supplemental Figure S3), as well as cells taken specifically 
from just the surface of implanted alginate spheres. FACS revealed that immune cells 
increased persistently over a 28-day period, with macrophages the major responding cell 
population (Figure 2b & c). Analysis of cells dissociated directly from the material surface 
at day 1 showed the presence of immature CD68−Gr1lo/−CD11b+ monocytes, known for 
being early responders patrolling out from the blood37. On days 4 and 7, this immature 
population disappeared as mature CD68+CD11b+ macrophages increased in number (Figure 
2c, purple vs red). Macrophage subtyping carried out on surface-dissociated cells at 1, 4, 
and 7 days also suggests this change is due to early-stage recruitment and differentiation, as 
macrophage phenotypes not only increased in magnitude but also changed in makeup over 
the first days following implantation27. Later stage (day 7 and beyond) recruitment of both 
adaptive immune CD19+IgM+ B cells and fibrosis-associated alpha smooth muscle actin 
(αSMactin)-positive myofibroblasts was observed (Figure 2c, white). Multiplexed 
NanoString gene expression analysis of lysates taken directly from alginate implants was 
Doloff et al.
Page 4
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 also able to show longer-term increases (up to 4 weeks) in macrophage and neutrophil 
associated physical and cytokine markers (Figure 2d & e).
Tissue immediately adjacent to fibrosed alginate (Supplemental Figure S3, epididymal and 
omental fat pads), as well as directly adhered to the material surface of free-floating, 
fibrosed spheres was analyzed over 28-days. Both showed increasing presence of 
macrophage marker CD68 and local inflammation marker TGFβ1 (Supplemental Figure S4a 
& b), but a delayed increase in the B cell marker CD19 (Figure 2f). Lastly, increased 
expression of αSMactin, a marker for activated myofibroblasts responsible for downstream 
collagen deposition and fibrosis of material implants, was not observable in adjacent 
fibrosed tissue, due to background in IP fat pads (also the case in subcutaneous tissue). 
However, a significant increase, also starting at and increasing beyond day 7, was observed 
when fibrotic material was instead taken directly from the surface of implanted spheres 
(Figure 2g). These concomitant, delayed responses suggest a relationship between B cell and 
myofibroblast recruitment in the fibrotic cascade. It should be noted that a day-14 retrieval 
time point was often chosen to allow elucidation of earlier immune cell and cytokine 
signaling events as well as later stage myofibroblast recruitment and fibrosis deposition, 
which become much more robust by this point in time.
Adaptive and innate immune cells in the fibrotic cascade
To better understand the cellular components driving the fibrotic response, we examined 500 
μm alginate spheres retrieved after 14 days, in a range of C57BL/6-derived strains with 
different immune mutations. A total of 7 strains were studied, ranging from fully immune 
competent wild type versus knockout (KO) strains with varying levels of immunodeficiency 
(Supplementary Table S1). Phase contrast imaging was used to examine relative levels of 
fibrotic overgrowth (Figure 3a and Supplemental Figures S5). Supporting the idea that B cell 
recruitment does not just correlate but may also contribute to simultaneous increases in 
αSMactin-expressing myofibroblasts (Figure 2c & 2g), B cell loss (IghMnull, B KO) resulted 
in a partial loss of fibrosis (Figure 3a and Supplemental Figures S5 and S6). Additional T 
cell loss (Rag2null, T & B KO) made fibrosis worse and more comparable to wild type (WT) 
levels (Figure 3a and Supplemental Figures S5e), perhaps due to the loss of the regulatory T 
cell subset important for suppressing overreaching immune reactions38. These findings 
suggest that some broad-spectrum anti-inflammatory agents may reduce anti-fibrotic 
activity, highlighting the need for more specific agents for drug-eluting systems. Ultimately, 
only with additional innate immune cell macrophage dysfunction in Rag2null/Il2rγnull 
(Rag2/γ KO) mice was a complete loss of implant-induced fibrosis observed (Figure 3a and 
Supplemental Figure S5d). Individual T cell (T KO, nude) and complement component C3 
knockouts did not result in the loss of fibrosis (Supplemental Figure S5e & S5f).
Western blot assays were performed on extracted proteins from retrieved spheres in all 
groups exhibiting significant decreases in fibrosis (B KO and Rag2/γ KO), as compared to 
wild type controls, to quantify changes in the fibrosis-associated myofibroblast marker 
αSMactin (Figure 3b & c). Expression results were further corroborated using qPCR 
analysis of RNA isolated from retrieved spheres, where αSMactin and Collagens 1a1 and 
Doloff et al.
Page 5
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 1a2 showed similar significant decreases across both knockout models, as compared to WT 
(Figure 3d).
In addition to the study of spheres retrieved from the peritoneal space, which is relevant for 
cell encapsulation and transplantation21, 23, 27, alginate spheres were also implanted into the 
same wild type and knockout strains in the subcutaneous space (Figures 3e & 3f), more 
relevant for general biocompatibility assessment. Immune cell activity at the site of 
implantation was analyzed using Prosense, a fluorescent indicator of immune-associated 
inflammation39. IVIS imaging 7 days post-implantation showed decreases in alginate-
induced inflammation in both B and Rag2/γ knock-out models (Figure 3e). After 1-month, 
subcutaneous spheres were excised and processed for histology (H&E and Masson’s 
Trichrome). In general, spheres were completely embedded and individually sequestered in 
WT mice, but only had an outer, thin fibrotic capsule in B KO mice. No fibrosis was 
observed in macrophage dysfunctional (Rag2/γ KO) mice (Figure 3f and Supplemental 
Figure S7). FACS analysis of retrieved capsules and surrounding tissue verified that 
wildtype subcutaneous immune responses are local to the implant (Supplemental Figure S8) 
and similar in composition to those in the IP space (Figure 3g). Lastly, FACS analysis 
showed a ~60% decrease in macrophage and neutrophil presence on spheres taken from B 
KO mice, and an essentially complete loss of adherent cells in macrophage dysfunctional 
(Rag2/γ KO) mice (Figure 3g).
Macrophages, not neutrophils, are necessary for fibrosis
Both macrophages and neutrophils were on the surface of alginate spheres even 1 day 
following implantation into wild type C57BL/6 mice (Figure 2c). One hypothesis as to why 
microspheres implanted into Rag2/γ KO mice are fibrosis-free is that macrophages are 
necessary for fibrosis (Figure 3). However, Rag2/γ KO rodents still have macrophages, 
though they are reported to be reduced in number and dysfunctional, not maturing 
appropriately in response to cytokine stimulation40 (Supplementary Table S1). Since the 
Rag2/γ model also lacks adaptive T and B cells, innate immune natural killer cells, as well 
as functional dendritic cells, other unknown consequences affecting immune signaling and 
homeostasis may be possible. It has also recently been suggested that neutrophils are 
recruited first in response to protein deposition, with later macrophage response, in an 
initiated fibrotic cascade to implanted material devices15. Therefore, to further clarify the 
role of macrophages and neutrophils in fibrosis we induced depletion of macrophages, 
neutrophils, or both together by clodronate liposome (clodrosome) and/or targeted Ly6g 
(clone 1A8) neutrophil-depleting antibody, in implanted wild type C57BL/6 mice (Figure 4a 
and Supplemental S9). Depletion was started 3 days prior to implantation in all cases to 
ensure innate immune population ablation prior to alginate exposure. The extent and 
specificity of depletions were analyzed by FACS (Figure 4b & 4c and Supplemental Figures 
S10 and S11). Interestingly, fibrosis was only eliminated with targeted macrophage 
depletion, both alone and in combination with neutrophil removal (Figure 4a and 
Supplemental Figure S9). Neutrophil depletion alone, verified to be complete by FACS 
analysis (Supplemental Figure S11b, middle), appeared to cause alginate spheres to instead 
clump more, an effect seen with exacerbated immunity in the case of smaller diameter 
implants27 (Figure 4a and Supplemental S9). This may be a consequence of the loss of the 
Doloff et al.
Page 6
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Ly6g-granulocyte myeloid derived suppressor cell (MDSC) subset, which, like Tregs, prevent 
excessive immune responses38. Prominent drug-elution systems to date have largely focused 
on the incorporated broad-spectrum anti-inflammatories24, 31. However, these results suggest 
that targeted inhibition of a few select populations (innate immune macrophages and 
adaptive immune B cells) while leaving all others intact (ie., immunosuppressive Tregs and 
MDSCs) may lead to improved inhibition of FBR to implanted material devices.
Lastly, RNA samples (fibrosed capsules and attached, fibrosed epididymal/omental fat 
tissue) derived from all treatment groups (mock vs. alginate-implanted wild type, knockouts 
or depletions) were analyzed with a multiplexed NanoString array for all currently known 
mouse cytokines and cytokine receptors (Figure 4d–f and Supplemental Figure S12). 
Numerous genes, induced by alginate implantation, (2nd versus 1st column, mock), were 
eliminated upon macrophage depletion, both alone and in combination with neutrophil 
depletion (3rd and 5th columns). Many hits showing increased gene expression following 
implantation were corroborated by expression enrichment upon sorting macrophage cells 
away from the bulk mixed cellular response. Macrophage-specific genes exhibited an 
augmented increase in red, whereas non-macrophage genes showed dilution (either 
decreasing back to mock control levels (black), or below, green; 2nd to last column). Using 
these metrics (lost upon depletion and increased upon sorting), macrophage-specific gene 
subsets were identified (Figures 4d & 4e, partial). Genes lost upon macrophage depletion, 
but instead reduced upon sorting, were also identified (Figures 4e, partial, & 4f). This subset 
is believed to be associated with cells (ie., B cells, Cd19) recruited downstream of 
macrophages in the fibrotic cascade. This hypothesis is driven by the observation that this 
gene subset is not macrophage-specific (due to lack of enrichment upon sorting), but still 
lost upon macrophage depletion. Thus, their expression is dependent on earlier macrophage 
activation and recruitment.
CSF1R inhibition prevents host responses to implants
While elimination of macrophages by clodrosome treatment can prevent fibrosis of hydrogel 
alginate (Figures 4a), it is unlikely this approach would be suitable for human use41. An 
ideal anti-fibrotic drug therapy would only modulate and not eliminate this innate immune 
population, thus avoiding unnecessary immune suppression and resulting side effects. One 
macrophage-specific factor identified by our NanoString analysis was the cytokine receptor 
colony stimulating factor-1 receptor (CSF1R) (Figure 4d). This receptor has been previously 
reported to play a role in selectively polarizing and modulating macrophage phenotypes in 
cancer42. To test whether inhibition of this receptor could prevent macrophage-dependent 
biomaterial fibrosis, we examined the potential of the inhibitory small molecule GW2580 to 
inhibit the kinase domain thus preventing cross-phosphorylation and activation of CSF1R43 
and the fibrotic response to implanted microspheres. Treatment of C57BL/6 mice with 
GW2580 prevented the fibrotic response to a range of implanted materials, including 500 
μm alginate as well as 500 μm ceramic glass and polymer polystyrene spheres, all implanted 
for 14 days intraperitoneally (Figures 5a–d and Supplemental Figures S13–S15). CSF1R 
inhibition by GW2580 was as effective as clodrosome-based macrophage depletion at 
inhibiting host immune attack to alginate, glass and polystyrene spheres (Figure 4c vs. 5b, 
and 5d), showing that a targeted and selective inhibition of macrophages, rather than 
Doloff et al.
Page 7
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 depletion, is sufficient for inhibiting the FBR to multiple classes of material implants. 
Uninhibited fibrotic responses against all three materials importantly share the same core 
immune markers, and cytokine and cytokine receptor signaling, including CSF1R (Figure 5e 
and Supplemental Figure S16). And, as mentioned earlier, this response is dependent upon 
the implanted material, and not endotoxin, as analysis did not detect the presence of general 
pyrogens, endotoxins or glucan (Supplementary Table S2).
After establishing efficacy of this treatment strategy, we decided to also analyze the gene 
expression patterns from alginate spheres retrieved from these mice. This was done to 
determine which of the earlier identified macrophage-specific genes would or would not be 
affected by CSF1R inhibition (Figures 4d vs. 4e). Specifically, we inspected all macrophage-
associating genes that were both significantly increased 2 weeks following implantation into 
the intraperitoneal space (WT vs Mock controls), as well as eliminated or significantly 
decreased following macrophage depletion. Interestingly, the presence of many macrophage-
specific factors not affected by CSF1R inhibition (Figure 4e) suggests possible spared 
macrophage function, not observed with more blunt macrophage depletion and removal. 
VEGF protein production, directly associated with macrophage repair function44, was 
significantly diminished in both macrophage depletion groups, but not significantly affected 
with GW2580 treatment (Supplemental Figure S17). Furthermore, while macrophage 
phenotype changed with daily GW2580 treatment, no effect was observed on intraperitoneal 
cell counts or other macrophage-associated functions, including skin incision wound 
healing, macrophage phagocytic activity, and reactive oxygen species production 
(Supplemental Figure S18). While no functional changes were observed in these metrics, the 
lack of macrophage attachment, activation, and fusion as well as later fibrosis demonstrates 
a change in phenotype and function. It is possible that phagocytosis and NO production are 
unrelated to these activities. We note that gene expression of NOS2 is not engaged in the 
implantation response to alginate (Supplemental Figure S12, right column, 3rd gene down 
from the top). Treatment with the CSF1R inhibitor GW2580 appears to divert the immune 
response to foster a pro-healing rather than fibrotic outcome. The differential effect of 
CSF1R inhibition on these subsets of genes (Figure 4d and f vs. 4e) indicates that certain 
pathways within these cells are in fact being affected. For instance, inhibited Cx3cr1 and 
IL21r expression suggests improved healing yet reduced fibrotic capacity45, 46. However, 
more experimentation will be needed to fully examine such cellular mechanisms.
Macrophages recruit fibrosis-potentiating B cells via CXCL13
The chemokine CXCL13 has been shown to be expressed by monocytes/macrophages and is 
reported to be responsible for B cell recruitment in a model of lymphoid neogenesis47. 
Interestingly, CXCL13 was also identified by gene expression profiling of tissue following 
implantation of alginate microspheres (Figure 2d and Supplemental Figure S4c), as well as 
lost upon macrophage depletion (Figure 4d). CXCL13 was one of numerous immune 
markers and cytokines that either disappeared or was decreased in expression (~5 to 10-fold) 
below background levels following macrophage depletion and reduced (back to background 
levels) following CSF1R inhibition with GW2580 (Figure 4d). CXCL13 was also enriched 
upon sorting the macrophage population away from the bulk heterogeneous host cell 
infiltrate. To determine whether it plays a role in B cell recruitment in the observed 
Doloff et al.
Page 8
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 biomaterial-induced fibrotic cascade, neutralizing antibody was administered to alginate-
implanted wild type C57BL/6 mice. CXCL13 neutralization resulted in loss of B cell 
recruitment and reduced fibrosis (Figures 5a, 5f, and Supplemental Figure S19), similar to 
levels observed with B cell knock out (Figures 5g and 3, B KO). These findings suggest a 
role for B cells in potentiating fibrosis, perhaps due to their ability to regulate macrophage 
phenotype and response48. While B cells have been designated as an adaptive immune cell 
throughout this study, it is possible that they affect fibrosis in a manner generally associated 
with the innate immune response by secreting cytokines rather than antibodies. Their exact 
role will need to be investigated further. Interestingly, B cell loss was also observed with 
clodrosome macrophage depletion and CSF1R inhibition (Figures 4b, 4c, 4f, and 5b), once 
again suggesting that macrophages may have a role in their downstream recruitment. 
NanoString and western blot analysis for CXCL13 over 1, 4, 7, 14, and 28-day alginate 
microsphere implantation showed detectable RNA and protein levels by day 4 onward 
(Figure 2d and Supplement Figure S4c), matching observed kinetics for maturation of 
macrophages from immature monocytes (Figure 2c), and just preceding apparent day 7 B 
cell recruitment (Figures 2b & 2g). Taken together, these results indicate that macrophages 
are required and responsible for downstream B cell recruitment via the B cell 
chemoattractant CXCL13, and that, upon arrival, these B cells enhance fibrotic deposition. 
Highlighting the translational significance of these findings, CXCL13 was recently shown in 
human patients to be a biomarker for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis49.
Immune responses to implanted biomaterials in non-human primates
To study whether these findings were also observed in higher order non-human primates 
(NHPs), we implanted 500 μm diameter SLG20 alginate spheres, either intraperitoneally (N 
= 2) or subcutaneously into the dorsal regions (N = 4) of cynomolgus monkeys for 28 days. 
At 28 days post-implantation the 500 μm SLG20 alginate spheres were heavily embedded in 
host omental or subcutaneous tissues (Figure 6a and27). Excised tissue obtained from the IP-
implanted 500 μm SLG20 alginate spheres or non-fibrosed (“mock”) control tissue were 
examined through histological analysis with H&E and Masson’s Trichrome staining (Figure 
6b and Supplemental Figure S20a–b). Extensive embedding and fibrosis buildup (up to 100 
μm thick), similar to that seen in C57BL/6 mice, is visible. Confocal imaging of sections 
taken from retrieved 28-day IP omentum tissue confirmed extensive macrophage cellular 
deposition and fibrosis-associated alpha Smooth Muscle actin-positive, activated 
myofibroblast coverage (Figure 6c and Supplemental Figure S20c–e). Since we do not have 
earlier day 14 staining in the primates as we do in the C57BL/6 mice, it remains unclear 
whether these observed myofibroblasts levels are already lower at day 28. With that said, 
there are areas of lower αSMactin stain around embedded capsules (Supplemental Figure 
S20c–e), which could indicate partial resolution. Furthermore, histology shows the 
emergence of fused foreign body giant cells (FBGCs) immediately surrounding embedded 
capsules (Figure 6b and Supplemental Figure S20a–b). Importantly, upon staining for 
CSF1R (Figure 6c, inset, and Supplemental Figure S20c–e), we observed that both 
infiltrating macrophages and FBGCs adjacent to the implanted material have very high 
CSF1R expression50, indicating that both of these populations may be affected by GW2580 
treatment. Innate immune responses (macrophage and myeloid/neutrophil) were determined 
Doloff et al.
Page 9
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 by FACS to be similar between C57BL/6 mice and NHP cynomolgus monkeys (Figure 6d). 
Lastly, to confirm that the immune factors identified in the C57BL/6 model are also relevant 
for both intraperitoneal as well as subcutaneous alginate implants isolated previously27 from 
NHPs, NanoString analysis was performed on RNA derived from excised fibrotic alginate 
implants. Results showed increased expression of numerous factors common to the C57BL/6 
model, including multiple cytokine receptors and cytokines, such as CSF1R and CXCL13, 
and innate immune markers, such as CD68 and CD66b (in place of Ly6g/Gr1, which does 
not exist in NHPs and humans) (Figure 6e). Together, these findings support the use of the 
C57BL/6 mouse model to recapitulate the FBR seen in higher species such as non-human 
primate cynomolgus monkeys and human patients. The fact that both models share similar 
immunologic responses, not just in content but also kinetics and magnitude, adds additional 
credence to their use for research validation before translation into the clinic.
In summary, we have identified, through targeted perturbation/depletion studies, essential 
innate (macrophage) and adaptive (B cell) immune populations in the fibrotic response to 
implanted materials. Serial perturbation samples in conjunction with a complete known 
cytokine and cytokine receptor array were utilized to identify additional essential 
components of the fibrotic cascade, and evaluated to determine potential drug therapies to 
inhibit material implant-induced fibrosis. The host rejection responses and immunobiology 
were similar in both C57BL/6 mice and cynomolgus monkeys. While the chemokine 
CXCL13 was implicated in downstream recruitment of B cells, its blockade only resulted in 
a partial loss of fibrosis. Surprisingly, inhibition of the macrophage-associated cytokine 
receptor CSF1R eliminated host immune-mediated recognition and propagation of foreign 
body rejection responses to a broad spectrum of materials encompassing hydrogels, 
ceramics, and plastics. Importantly, as opposed to more blunt macrophage depletion, specific 
CSF1R inhibition spared other essential macrophage function. We believe these findings 
provide insight into the immunological basis of FBR, and may allow for the development of 
macrophage-specific agents for integration into already existing and prominently used drug-
elution systems to reduce the fibrotic response to implanted medical devices.
METHODS
Materials and Reagents
All in vitro reagents were obtained from Life Technologies (Carlsbad, CA), unless otherwise 
noted. Antibodies: Alexa Fluor-conjugated anti-mouse CD68, Ly-6G/Ly-6C (Gr-1), CD11b, 
CD19, and IgM (described below) were purchased from BioLegend Inc. (San Diego, CA). 
For primate immunostaining, anti-human CD68 Alexa Fluor-conjugated antibody was 
purchased from Santa Cruz (Dallas, TX). The same CD11b (anti-mouse/human) antibody 
(BioLegend) was used for both primate and mouse staining. Cy3-conjugated anti-mouse 
alpha smooth muscle actin antibody and glass spheres (acid washed) of medium size 
(conformed to 425–600 μm, 30–40 U.S. sieve) (Cat#: G8772, Lot#: SLBL7288V) were 
purchased from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Polystyrene spheres of medium (mean 
526.6 μm +/− 53.3 μm) size (Cat#:136, Lot#: 30055) were purchased from Phosphorex 
(Hopkinton, MA). A sampling of materials used in this study were submitted for endotoxin 
testing by a commercial vendor (Charles River, Wilmington, MA) and the results showed 
Doloff et al.
Page 10
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 that spheres contained < 0.05 EU/ml of endotoxin levels (below detectable limits) 
(Supplemental Table S2).
Fabrication of alginate hydrogel spheres
Alginate hydrogel spheres were made with an in-house customized electro-jetting system: 
voltage generator, vertical syringe pump (Harvard Apparatus), and a gelation bath basin. 
Voltage was coupled to the syringe needle dispensing the alginate and grounded to the 
gelling bath vessel. Spheres were made with a 1.4% solution of commercially available 
sterile alginate (PRONOVA SLG20, NovaMatrix, Sandvika, Norway) dissolved in 0.9% 
saline (pH ≈ 7.4, Osmotic pressure ≈ 290 mOsm), and crosslinked with 250 mL of sterile 
BaCl2 gelling solution (20mM BaCl2, 250mM D-Mannitol, 25mM HEPES, pH ≈ 7.4, 
Osmotic pressure ≈ 290 mOsm). Alginate hydrogel 500 μm diameter microspheres were 
generated with a 25G blunt needle, a voltage of 5kV and a 200 μl/min flow rate. 
Immediately after gelation, alginate spheres were washed with HEPES buffer (25mM 
HEPES, 1.2mM MgCl2×6H2O, 4.7mM KCl, 132mM NaCl2, pH≈7.4, ≈290 mOsm) 4 times 
and stored overnight at 4°C. Immediately prior to implantation, spheres were washed an 
additional 2 times with 0.9% saline. A sampling of the fabricated hydrogels was submitted 
for endotoxin testing by a commercial vendor (Charles River, Wilmington, MA) and the 
results showed that SLG20 hydrogels contained < 0.05 EU/ml of endotoxin levels (below 
detectable limits).
Implantation surgeries
All protocols were approved by the MIT Committee on Animal Care, and all surgical 
procedures and post-operative care were supervised by MIT Division of Comparative 
Medicine veterinary staff. All mice, wild type male immune-competent (non-diabetic), STZ-
induced diabetic, as well as knockout C57BL/6 mice, were ordered pathogen-free from 
Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME) or Taconic (Hudson, NY). The status of all mice was 
subsequently verified by testing sentinel animals, shown to be negative for at least 12 known 
mouse pathogens. Implanted mice were anesthetized with 3% isoflurane in oxygen and had 
their abdomens shaved and sterilized using betadine and isopropanol. C57BL/6-Nude (T 
KO, B6NU), C57BL/6-Rag2null (T & B KO, RAGN12), C57BL/6-Rag2null /Il2rγnull (Rag2/
γ, 4111) were ordered from Taconic (Hudson, NY), and C57BL/6-IghMnull (BKO, 002288), 
(C57BL/6) B6.129S6-Ccr6tm1(EGFP)Irw/J. (Ccr6, 013061), and C57BL/6-C3 KO (C3 KO, 
003641) mice were ordered from Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME). Preoperatively, all 
mice received 0.05 mg/kg buprenorphine and 0.2 mL of 0.9% saline subcutaneously for pre-
surgery analgesia and dehydration prevention. A midline (abdomen) incision (0.5 mm) was 
made and the peritoneal lining was exposed using blunt dissection. The peritoneal wall was 
then grasped with forceps and a 0.5–1 mm incision was made along the linea alba. A desired 
volume of spheres (all materials) were then loaded into a sterile pipette and implanted into 
the peritoneal cavity. The incision was then closed using 5-0 taper-tipped polydioxanone 
(PDS II) absorbable sutures, and the skin was closed using a wound clip and VetBond tissue 
glue. For subcutaneous implantation, ~200–300 μL of 500 μm SLG20 spheres were injected 
SC following anesthesia with isofluorane. All primate implant samples were derived by 
excising fibrosed, material-containing omentum and subcutaneous tissues 28 days following 
implantation of SLG20 500 μm diameter spheres in cynomolgus macaques, as described27.
Doloff et al.
Page 11
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 For targeted macrophage depletions, clodrosome (200 μL/mouse) (Encapsula Nano 
Sciences, Nashville, TN) were injected intraperitoneally starting at −3 days (prior to 
implantation, day 0), and for every 7 days thereafter (so days −3, 4, and 11). To achieve 
neutrophil depletion, affinity purified anti-Ly6g (Clone 1A8) antibody (250 ug/mouse) 
(BioLegend, San Diego, CA) was administered also starting at day −3, and every 3 days 
thereafter (except the day of implantation). For the combination therapy, in order to avoid 
drug-antibody interactions, each agent was administered 4 hours apart from one another. To 
neutralize secreted CXCL13, anti-CXCL13 antibody (mAB470, R&D Systems) was injected 
IP in sterile 1X PBS at a dose of 100 μg/mouse, once every 3 days, starting 3 days prior to 
implantation as well. For selective macrophage inhibition and polarization, the CSF1R-
targeted inhibitor GW2580 (LC Labs, Woburn, MA), was dissolved in a 1:1 DMSO/PEG400 
solution, and injected daily (starting 1 day prior to implantation) at a dose of 160 mg/kg BW 
subcutaneously (SC), to eliminate concerns of vehicle directly perturbing responding 
immune cells as well as a recovering implant site.
IVIS imaging
C57BL/6 mice (6–8 weeks old) were utilized for this assay. 200–300 μl of alginate spheres 
were resuspended in saline, and injected subcutaneously into the mouse on both left and 
right sides of upper back. The mice were shaved to get rid of the hair on the entire back 
before injection, and fed on sterilized AIN-93G purified rodent diet (TD 94045, Harlan) to 
minimize the fluorescent background after injection. Six days later, 100 μl (4 nmol) of 
ProSence 750 FAST (NEV11171, PerkinElmer Inc.) per mouse was injected intravenously 
via tail vein. At day 7 (24 hours post intravenous administration of the ProSense 750 FAST 
substrate, cleaved into a fluorescent tracking product by immune secreted cathepsin 
enzymes), the mice were scanned by IVIS Spectrum system (Xenogen, Caliper 
LifeScience). The mice were anesthetized using 3% isofluorane in oxygen and maintained at 
the same rate throughout the procedure, the new grown hair were removed by Nair hair 
removal lotion, and then the mice were scanned by the IVIS Spectrum system at the settings 
of Exposure=7.50, Binning=Medium, FStop=2, Excitation=605~640nm and 
Emission=660~760nm. The images were analyzed with LivingImage Software, and the 
duplicated ROI of lower back on the same mouse was used as control during the signal 
quantification.
Retrieval of cells, tissues, and materials
At desired time points post-implantation, as specified in figures, mice were euthanized by 
CO2 administration, followed by cervical dislocation. In certain instances, 5 ml of ice cold 
PBS was first injected in order perform an intraperitoneal lavage to rinse out and collect 
free-floating intraperitoneal immune cells. An incision was then made using forceps and 
scissors along the abdomen, and intraperitoneal lavage volumes were pipetted out into fresh 
15 ml falcon tubes (each prepared with 5 ml of RPMI cell culture media). Next, a wash 
bottle tip was inserted into the abdominal cavity. KREBS buffer was then used to wash out 
all material spheres into petri dishes for collection. After ensuring all the spheres were 
washed out or manually retrieved (if fibrosed directly to intraperitoneal tissues, in particular 
epididymal and omental fat pads), they were transferred into 50 mL conical tubes for 
downstream processing and imaging. In certain instances, after intraperitoneal lavage, 
Doloff et al.
Page 12
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 portions of fibrosed intraperitoneal tissues and material spheres were also excised for 
downstream FACS and expression analyses.
Imaging of the retrieved material spheres
For phase contrast imaging retrieved materials were gently washed using Krebs buffer and 
transferred into 35 mm petri dishes for phase contrast microscopy using an Evos Xl 
microscope (Advanced Microscopy Group). For bright-field imaging of retrieved materials, 
samples were gently washed using Krebs buffer and transferred into 35 mm petri dishes for 
bright-field imaging using a Leica Stereoscopic microscope.
Confocal Immunofluorescence
Immunofluorescence imaging was used to determine immune populations attached to 
spheres. Materials were retrieved from mice and fixed overnight using 4% paraformaldehyde 
at 4°C. Samples were then washed twice with KREBS buffer, permeabilized for 30 min 
using a 0.1% Triton X100 solution, and subsequently blocked for 1 hour using a 1% bovine 
serum albumin (BSA) solution. Next, the spheres were incubated for 1 hour in an 
immunostaining cocktail solution consisting of DAPI (500 nM), specific marker probes 
(1:200 dilution) in BSA. After staining, spheres were washed three times with a 0.1% Tween 
20 solution and maintained in a 50% glycerol solution. Spheres were then transferred to 
glass bottom dishes and imaged using an LSM 700 point scanning confocal microscope 
(Carl Zeiss Microscopy, Jena Germany) equipped with 5 and 10X objectives. Obtained 
images were adjusted linearly for presentation using Photoshop (Adobe Inc. Seattle, WA). 
For antigen-specific immunostaining, non-human primate (cynomolgus macaque) 
intraperitoneal sphere-embedded omenta were sectioned and stained according to traditional 
antigen retrieval and immunofluorescent methods, specifically looking at cellular nuclei 
(DAPI), macrophage marker CD68-AF488 (Santa Cruz, CA) and Cy3-conjugated anti-
mouse alpha smooth muscle actin (fibrosis-associated myofibroblast marker) (Sigma 
Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Anti-human CSF1R-AF488 (BioLegend) was also used.
Histological processing for H&E and Masson’s Trichrome staining
Retrieved material-containing tissue (omentum and/or subcutaneous) was fixed overnight 
using 4% paraformaldehyde at 4°C. After fixation, alginate sphere or retrieved tissue 
samples were washed using 70% alcohol. The materials were then paraffin embedded, 
sectioned and stained according to either standard histological (H&E or Masson’s 
Trichrome) or antigen-specific methods (as described above).
Western Blotting
Protein was extracted directly from materials for western blot analysis. Retrieved materials 
were prepared by lysis of covering cellular overgrowth in Pierce RIPA buffer (Cat. #89901, 
Thermo Scientific) with protease inhibitors (Halt Protease inhibitor single-use cocktail, Cat. 
#78430, Thermo Scientific) on ice, and then lysed by sonication (for 30 seconds on, 30 
seconds off, twice at 70% amplitude). Samples were then agitated constantly for 2 hours at 
4°C. Lysates were centrifuged for 20 min at 12,000 rpm at 4°C, and protein-containing 
supernatants were collected in fresh tubes, on ice. In samples from fatty tissue, an excess of 
Doloff et al.
Page 13
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 fat (a top layer on the supernatant) was removed before supernatant transfer. 20 μg protein 
(quantified by BCA assay, Pierce BCA protein assay kit, Cat. #23225, Thermo Scientific) 
for each lane was boiled at 95°C for 5 min and electrophoresed on SDS-polyacrylamide gels 
(Any kD 15-well comb mini-gel, BioRad, Cat. #456-9036) and then blotted onto 
nitrocellulose membranes (BioRad, Cat. #162-0213). Blots were probed with anti-alpha 
Smooth Muscle actin antibody (1:400 dilution, Rabbit polyclonal to alpha smooth muscle 
actin; Cat. #ab5694, AbCam) and anti-β-actin antibody (1:4000 dilution, monoclonal anti-β-
actin antibody produced in mouse; Cat. #A1978, Sigma Aldrich) as a loading control 
followed by donkey anti-rabbit (1:15,000 dilution, Cat. #926-32213, Li-Cor) and goat anti-
mouse (1:15,000 dilution, Cat. #926-68070, Li-Cor) fluor-conjugated secondary antibodies. 
Bands were visualized using an Odyssey detector (Li-Cor, Serial No. ODY-2329) at 700 and 
800 nm wavelengths. For CXCL13 detection, a rabbit anti-CXCL13/BCA1 polyclonal 
antibody (Bioss, Woburn, MA) was used.
qPCR analysis
Total RNA was isolated from tissue (adjacent epididymal and omental fat pad tissue alone 
for non-implant and mock (saline injected) controls, or fibrosed spheres with adhered tissue 
and immune overgrowth, if present), liquid nitrogen snap-frozen immediately following 
excision, using TRIzol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions. In addition, to help ensure complete tissue disruption, we also employed strong 
mechanical disruption with a Polytron homogenizer. Thus, gene expression signatures 
shown throughout are proportional and representative of the entire cell population present on 
and/or around retrieved materials. Before reverse transcription using the High Capacity 
cDNA Reverse Transcription kit (Cat. #4368814; Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA), all 
samples were first normalized for comparison by loading the same input 1 μg total RNA in a 
volume of 20 μl for each sample. cDNA (4.8 μl; 1:20 dilution) in a total volume of 16 μl 
(including SYBR Green and PCR primers) was amplified by qPCR with the following 
primers. Primers (Supplemental Table S3) were designed using Primer Express software 
(Applied Biosystems, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and evaluated using LaserGene software 
(DNAStar, Madison, WI, USA) to ensure either mouse (host)-specificity. Samples were 
incubated at 95°C for 10 min followed by 40 cycles of 95°C for 15 sec and 60°C for 1 min 
in an ABI PRISM 7900HT Sequence Detection System (Applied Biosystems). Results were 
analyzed using the comparative CT (ΔΔCT) method and are presented as relative RNA 
levels, as compared to control cell samples as specified in figure legends after normalization 
to the β-actin RNA content of each sample. To further ensure proper normalization and 
sample handling across multiple retrieval time points, RNA for all samples for each harvest 
condition (ie., IP lavage, spheres with or without adhered cells and fibrosis, and adjacent 
omental and/or epididymal tissues with infiltration, as described), were quantified, reverse 
transcribed, and analyzed by qPCR in parallel.
Luminex multiplexed cytokine and ELISA analyses
Cytokine array analysis was performed using the Luminex Bio-Rad Bio-Plex Pro mouse 
cytokine panel based on Luminex beads (multiplexing both the 23 and 8-cytokine arrays) 
(Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA), according to manufacturer’s instructions. 1:4 diluted mouse sera 
samples were analyzed for the time course, and protein lysates taken from fibrosed tissue 
Doloff et al.
Page 14
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and alginate microspheres, loaded at a concentration of 500 μg/mL (200 uL per sample), 
were run to compare cytokine responses across mock (saline) treated versus wildtype, 
knockout or serially perturbed/depleted C57BL/6 mice implanted with 500 μm SLG20 
alginate spheres. Samples were added to the panel of beads bearing capture antibodies for 
the analytes of interest, and agitated for 30 minutes. Sample plates were subsequently 
washed using an automated magnetic plate washer (Bio-Rad), and a biotinylated detection 
antibody for each of the 32 cytokines was added followed by agitation for 30 minutes. After 
another wash, streptavidin-PE was added, the plate was agitated for 10 minutes, washed, and 
resuspended in assay buffer. The plate was then read on a BioPlex-200 plate reader, with 
absolute concentrations obtained through fitting a standard curve. For Luminex runs, protein 
lysates were prepared using an NP-40-based lysis buffer, as opposed to the SDS-based RIPA 
buffer used for western blotting (described above) to maintain native state protein folding. 
For mouse IgM analysis, an ELISA from eBioscience (San Diego, CA) was used, according 
to manufacturer’s specifications, with both sera and protein lysates for IgM.
FACS analysis
Single-cell suspensions of freshly excised tissues were prepared using a gentleMACS 
Dissociator (Miltenyi Biotec, Auburn, CA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Single-
cell suspensions were prepared in a passive PEB dissociation buffer (1X PBS, pH 7.2, 0.5% 
BSA, and 2 mM EDTA) and suspensions were passed through 70 μm filters (Cat. 
#22363548, Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA). This process removed the majority of cells 
adhered to the surface (>90%) (See Supplemental Figure 17 from27). All tissue and material 
sample-derived, single-cell populations were then subjected to red blood cell lysis with 5 ml 
of 1X RBC lysis buffer (Cat. #00-4333, eBioscience, San Diego, CA, USA) for 5 min at 
4°C. The reaction was terminated by the addition of 20 ml of sterile 1X PBS. The cells 
remaining were centrifuged at 300–400g at 4°C and resuspended in a minimal volume (~50 
μl) of eBioscience Staining Buffer (cat. #00-4222) for antibody incubation. All samples were 
then co-stained in the dark for 25 min at 4°C with two of the fluorescently tagged 
monoclonal antibodies specific for the cell markers CD68 (1 μl (0.5 μg) per sample; CD68-
Alexa647, Clone FA-11, Cat. #11-5931, BioLegend), Ly-6G (Gr-1) (1 μl (0.5 μg) per 
sample; Ly-6G-Alexa-647, Clone RB6-8C5, Cat. #108418, BioLegend), CD11b (1 μl (0.2 
μg) per sample; or CD11b-Alexa-488, Clone M1/70, Cat. #101217, BioLegend). For alpha 
smooth muscle actin (fibrosis) analysis, additional cell aliquots were also fixed in 1% 
paraformaldehyde and permeabilized with 0.1% triton X-100 before being stained with Cy3-
conjugated anti-mouse αSMactin antibody (1:100) (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Two ml 
of eBioscience Flow Cytometry Staining Buffer (Cat. #00-4222, eBioscience) was then 
added, and the samples were centrifuged at 400–500g for 5 min at 4°C. Supernatants were 
removed by aspiration, and this wash step was repeated two more times with staining buffer. 
Following the third wash, each sample was resuspended in 500 μl of Flow Cytometry 
Staining Buffer and run through a 40 μm filter (Cat. #22363547, Fisher Scientific) for 
eventual FACS analysis using a BD FACSCalibur (cat. #342975), BD Biosciences, San Jose, 
CA, USA). For proper background and laser intensity settings, unstained, single antibody, 
and IgG (labled with either Alexa-488 or Alexa-647, BioLegend) controls were also run. For 
primate cell staining, anti-human CD68 Alexa Fluor-647-conjugated antibody (Clone KP1, 
Doloff et al.
Page 15
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Cat. #sc-20060, Santa Cruz, Dallas, TX) was used in conjunction with the above BioLegend 
(anti-mouse/human) CD11b-AF488 antibody.
Intravital Imaging – Ccr6-EGFP mice
For intravital imaging, 500 μm SLG20 hydrogel spheres were loaded with Qdot 605 (Life 
technologies, Grand Island, NY) and surgically implanted into (C57BL/6) B6.129S6-
Ccr6tm1(EGFP)Irw/J (Ccr6, 013061, Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME) mice, as 
described above. After 14 days post implantation, the mice were placed under isoflurane 
anesthesia throughout and a small incision was made at the site of the original surgery to 
expose beads. The mice were placed on an inverted microscope and imaged using a 25x, 
N.A. 1.05 objective on an Olympus FVB-1000 MP multiphoton microscope at an excitation 
wavelength of 860 nm. While Ccr6 can show EGFP in adaptive T and B cells as well as 
innate immune dendritic cells (DCs), only B cells respond in our alginate material model. 
We previously showed macrophage responses via intravital imaging to implanted capsules27.
NanoString analysis
RNAs for mock-implanted (saline) treated controls, or for 500 μm alginate sphere-bearing 
C57BL/6 mouse strains (n = 5/group), including wild type, knockouts, and serially immune 
depleted wild type mice, were isolated from tissue samples taken at various time points after 
implantation, as described. For each of the knockout strains, they were normalized to their 
own (strain-specific) mock (saline) implanted controls, in order to eliminate any artifacts due 
to shifts in immune homeostasis, since gene knockouts were also present throughout 
development. Furthermore, to corroborate macrophage-specific changes, macrophages were 
also sorted from implanted wild type C57BL/6 mice, and also plotted relative to expression 
levels from the entire mock tissue cell population. Thus, macrophage-specific genes show 
enriched (red, increased) expression fold changes, and macrophage-independent gene show 
diluted (green, decreased) expression fold changes. In general, respective RNAs were 
quantified, normalized to the appropriate loading concentration (100 ng/μl), and then 500 ng 
of each sample was processed according to NanoString manufacturer protocols for 
expression analysis via our customized multiplexed total (known) mouse cytokine and 
cytokine receptor expression panel, used for both immune strain comparisons with alginate, 
and material class comparisons just the wild type C57BL/6 strain. Another non-human 
primate custom panel was also used to corroborate gene hits in our cynomolgus macaque 
intraperitoneal and subcutaneous models. RNA levels (absolute copy numbers) were 
obtained following nCounter (NanoString Technologies Inc., Seattle, WA) quantification, 
and group samples were analyzed using nSolver analysis software (NanoString Technologies 
Inc., Seattle, WA).
Macrophage functional testing
For in vivo wound healing: C57BL/6 mice were anesthetized (same as above) and shaved, 
and skin incisions 1.5 cm in length were made along the midline. Each incision was then 
wound clipped shut for both vehicle and daily GW2580-treated C57BL/6 mice. Wound clips 
were removed and then replaced each imaging day up until day 7 (required to maintain them 
up until at least this time), after which clips were left off completely. Photos were acquired 
on days 0, 1, 4, 7, 10, and 14 post-incision. After 14 days, mice were sacrificed, and skin 
Doloff et al.
Page 16
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 samples were prepared for histological assessment (H&E and Masson’s Trichrome) of both 
vehicle and GW2580 treatment groups. Cross-sections through the incision line were 
generated to assess the level of in vivo healing following a 14-day treatment regimen.
For IP innate immune cell counts, FACS, and phagocytosis assays: cells were isolated by 
peritoneal lavage with 8 mL DPBS, diluted into RPMI, and then subsequently counted, and 
aliquoted either for staining and FACS analysis (as described above), or for phagocytosis 
assays. Peritoneal exudate macrophages isolated by IP lavage from (n=5) mice in each 
treatment group were immediately plated (400,000 cells/well in a 24-well plate) and 
incubated with fluorospheres for 90 minutes to determine phagocytic activity. 1 μm orange 
fluorospheres (540/560) (Cat# F13082, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) were added to each well 
in a volume of 500 μL from an initial dilution of 20 μL into 10 mL. After addition, plates 
were spun down at 1,000 rpm for 1 min, and then placed in an incubator for 90 minutes to 
allow IP macrophages time to phagocytose the 1 μm diameter fluorospheres. Following the 
90-minute incubation, all wells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and stored at 4C prior 
to imaging using a fluorescent and brightfield-capable EVOS microscope (Advanced 
Microscopy Group).
For ROS activity assessment: protein lysates were prepared from alginate spheres retrieved 
14 days after IP implantation into untreated, vehicle-treated, and daily GW2580-treated 
C57BL/6 mice. 50 μg of each lysate were aliquoted twice and incubated for 30 min. at 37C 
with two different reactive oxygen specie (ROS) substrate solutions: 10 μM APF (Cat# 
A36003, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and 5 μM CellROX (Cat# C10422, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, 
CA) diluted in PBS. Following appropriate incubation times, samples were read in a black-
wall 96-well plate with a Tecan fluorescent-capable Infinite M1000 plate reader.
Statistical analysis
Data are expressed as mean ± SEM, and n = 5 mice per time point and per treatment group. 
These sample sizes were chosen based on previous literature. All animals were included in 
analyses except in instances of unforeseen sickness or morbidity. Animal cohorts were 
randomly selected. Investigators were not blind to performed experiments. For qPCR, 
western blot and wound healing quantification, IVIS imaging, or FACS, data were analyzed 
for statistical significance either by unpaired, two-tailed t-test, or one-way ANOVA with 
Bonferroni multiple comparison correction, unless indicated otherwise, as implemented in 
GraphPad Prism 5; *: p < 0.05, **: p < 0.001, and ***: p < 0.0001. For Nanostring, data was 
normalized using the geometric means of the NanoString positive controls and background 
levels were established using the means of the negative controls. Variance was similar 
between all compared groups. Housekeeping genes Tubb5, Hprt1, Bact, and Cltc were used 
to normalize between samples. Data was then log-transformed.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Doloff et al.
Page 17
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation (JDRF) (Grant 17-2007-1063), and Leona 
M. and Harry B. Helmsley Charitable Trust Foundation (Grants 09PG-T1D027 and 2015PG-T1D063), National 
Institutes of Health (Grants EB000244, EB000351, DE013023 and CA151884), and through a generous gift from 
the Tayebati Family Foundation. JCD was supported by JDRF postdoctoral fellowship (Grant 3-PDF-2015-91-A-
N). OV was supported by JDRF and DOD/CDMRP postdoctoral fellowships (Grants 3-2013-178 and 
W81XWH-13-1-0215, respectively). J.O. is supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH/NIDDK) 
R01DK091526 and the Chicago Diabetes Project. D.G. is supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH/
NIDDK) UC4 DK104218. The authors would like to acknowledge the use of resources at W.M. Keck Biological 
Imaging Facility (Whitehead Institute), and Microscopy, Histology, Whole Animal Imaging, and Flow Cytometry 
Core Facilities (Swanson Biotechnology Center, David H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research at MIT).
References
1. Kurtz S, Ong K, Lau E, Mowat F, Halpern M. Projections of primary and revision hip and knee 
arthroplasty in the United States from 2005 to 2030. The Journal of bone and joint surgery 
American volume. 2007; 89(4):780–785. [PubMed: 17403800] 
2. Med I. Medical Devices and the Public’s Health: The FDA 510(k) Clearance Process at 35 Years. 
Medical Devices and the Public’s Health: The Fda 510(K) Clearance Process at 35 Years. 2011:1–
298.
3. Cobelli N, Scharf B, Crisi GM, Hardin J, Santambrogio L. Mediators of the inflammatory response 
to joint replacement devices. Nature reviews Rheumatology. 2011; 7(10):600–608. [PubMed: 
21894210] 
4. Hubbell JA, Langer R. Translating materials design to the clinic. Nature materials. 2013; 12(11):
963–966. [PubMed: 24150414] 
5. Fattahi P, Yang G, Kim G, Abidian MR. A review of organic and inorganic biomaterials for neural 
interfaces. Advanced materials. 2014; 26(12):1846–1885. [PubMed: 24677434] 
6. Farra R, Sheppard NF Jr, McCabe L, Neer RM, Anderson JM, Santini JT Jr, et al. First-in-human 
testing of a wirelessly controlled drug delivery microchip. Sci Transl Med. 2012; 4(122):122ra121.
7. Rosen MR, Robinson RB, Brink PR, Cohen IS. The road to biological pacing. Nat Rev Cardiol. 
2011; 8(11):656–666. [PubMed: 21844918] 
8. Nichols SP, Koh A, Storm WL, Shin JH, Schoenfisch MH. Biocompatible materials for continuous 
glucose monitoring devices. Chemical reviews. 2013; 113(4):2528–2549. [PubMed: 23387395] 
9. Perez-Cambrodi RJ, Pinero DP, Ferrer-Blasco T, Cervino A, Brautaset R. The posterior chamber 
phakic refractive lens (PRL): a review. Eye. 2013; 27(1):14–21. [PubMed: 23222559] 
10. Kearney CJ, Mooney DJ. Macroscale delivery systems for molecular and cellular payloads. Nature 
materials. 2013; 12(11):1004–1017. [PubMed: 24150418] 
11. Anderson JM, Rodriguez A, Chang DT. Foreign body reaction to biomaterials. Semin Immunol. 
2008; 20(2):86–100. [PubMed: 18162407] 
12. Wynn TA, Ramalingam TR. Mechanisms of fibrosis: therapeutic translation for fibrotic disease. 
Nature medicine. 2012; 18(7):1028–1040.
13. Kenneth Ward W. A Review of the Foreign-body Response to Subcutaneously-implanted Devices: 
The Role of Macrophages and Cytokines in Biofouling and Fibrosis. J Diabetes Sci Technol 
Online. 2008; 2:768–777.
14. Gordon S. Alternative activation of macrophages. Nat Rev Immunol. 2003; 3(1):23–35. [PubMed: 
12511873] 
15. Grainger DW. All charged up about implanted biomaterials. Nat Biotechnol. 2013; 31(6):507–509. 
[PubMed: 23752436] 
16. Sussman EM, Halpin MC, Muster J, Moon RT, Ratner BD. Porous implants modulate healing and 
induce shifts in local macrophage polarization in the foreign body reaction. Annals of biomedical 
engineering. 2014; 42(7):1508–1516. [PubMed: 24248559] 
17. Kyriakides TR, Foster MJ, Keeney GE, Tsai A, Giachelli CM, Clark-Lewis I, et al. The CC 
chemokine ligand, CCL2/MCP1, participates in macrophage fusion and foreign body giant cell 
formation. Am J Pathol. 2004; 165(6):2157–2166. [PubMed: 15579457] 
Doloff et al.
Page 18
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 18. Rodriguez A, Meyerson H, Anderson JM. Quantitative in vivo cytokine analysis at synthetic 
biomaterial implant sites. Journal of biomedical materials research Part A. 2009; 89(1):152–159. 
[PubMed: 18431759] 
19. Lee KY, Mooney DJ. Alginate: properties and biomedical applications. Progress in polymer 
science. 2012; 37(1):106–126. [PubMed: 22125349] 
20. de Vos P, Faas MM, Strand B, Calafiore R. Alginate-based microcapsules for immunoisolation of 
pancreatic islets. Biomaterials. 2006; 27(32):5603–5617. [PubMed: 16879864] 
21. Jacobs-Tulleneers-Thevissen D, Chintinne M, Ling Z, Gillard P, Schoonjans L, Delvaux G, et al. 
Sustained function of alginate-encapsulated human islet cell implants in the peritoneal cavity of 
mice leading to a pilot study in a type 1 diabetic patient. Diabetologia. 2013; 56(7):1605–1614. 
[PubMed: 23620058] 
22. Tuch BE, Keogh GW, Williams LJ, Wu W, Foster JL, Vaithilingam V, et al. Safety and viability of 
microencapsulated human islets transplanted into diabetic humans. Diabetes care. 2009; 32(10):
1887–1889. [PubMed: 19549731] 
23. Weir GC. Islet encapsulation: advances and obstacles. Diabetologia. 2013; 56(7):1458–1461. 
[PubMed: 23636639] 
24. Dang TT, Thai AV, Cohen J, Slosberg JE, Siniakowicz K, Doloff JC, et al. Enhanced function of 
immuno-isolated islets in diabetes therapy by co-encapsulation with an anti-inflammatory drug. 
Biomaterials. 2013; 34(23):5792–5801. [PubMed: 23660251] 
25. Robitaille R, Dusseault J, Henley N, Desbiens K, Labrecque N, Halle JP. Inflammatory response to 
peritoneal implantation of alginate-poly-L-lysine microcapsules. Biomaterials. 2005; 26(19):4119–
4127. [PubMed: 15664639] 
26. Vegas AJ, Veiseh O, Doloff JC, Ma M, Tam HH, Bratlie K, et al. Combinatorial hydrogel library 
enables identification of materials that mitigate the foreign body response in primates. Nat 
Biotechnol. 2016; 34(3):345–352. [PubMed: 26807527] 
27. Veiseh O, Doloff JC, Ma M, Vegas AJ, Tam HH, Bader AR, et al. Size- and shape-dependent 
foreign body immune response to materials implanted in rodents and non-human primates. Nature 
materials. 2015; 14(6):643–651. [PubMed: 25985456] 
28. Harding JL, Reynolds MM. Combating medical device fouling. Trends in biotechnology. 2014; 
32(3):140–146. [PubMed: 24438709] 
29. Langer R. Perspectives and challenges in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine. Advanced 
materials. 2009; 21(32–33):3235–3236. [PubMed: 20882493] 
30. Rhen T, Cidlowski JA. Antiinflammatory action of glucocorticoids--new mechanisms for old 
drugs. New England Journal of Medicine. 2005; 353(16):1711. [PubMed: 16236742] 
31. Khan, W., Muntimadugu, E., Jaffe, M., Domb, AJ. Focal Controlled Drug Delivery. Springer; US: 
2014. Implantable Medical Devices; p. 33-59.
32. Attur MG, Patel R, Thakker G, Vyas P, Levartovsky D, Patel P, et al. Differential anti-
inflammatory effects of immunosuppressive drugs: cyclosporin, rapamycin and FK-506 on 
inducible nitric oxide synthase, nitric oxide, cyclooxygenase-2 and PGE 2 production. 
Inflammation Research. 2000; 49(1):20–26. [PubMed: 10778917] 
33. King A, Sandler S, Andersson A. The effect of host factors and capsule composition on the cellular 
overgrowth on implanted alginate capsules. Journal of biomedical materials research. 2001; 57(3):
374–383. [PubMed: 11523032] 
34. Manoury B, Caulet-Maugendre S, Guenon I, Lagente V, Boichot E. TIMP-1 is a key factor of 
fibrogenic response to bleomycin in mouse lung. International journal of immunopathology and 
pharmacology. 2006; 19(3):471–487. [PubMed: 17026855] 
35. Paredes-Juarez GA, de Haan BJ, Faas MM, de Vos P. The role of pathogen-associated molecular 
patterns in inflammatory responses against alginate based microcapsules. J Control Release. 2013; 
172(3):983–992. [PubMed: 24051034] 
36. Jhunjhunwala S, Aresta-DaSilva S, Tang K, Alvarez D, Webber MJ, Tang BC, et al. Neutrophil 
Responses to Sterile Implant Materials. PloS one. 2015; 10(9):e0137550. [PubMed: 26355958] 
37. Shi C, Pamer EG. Monocyte recruitment during infection and inflammation. Nat Rev Immunol. 
2011; 11(11):762–774. [PubMed: 21984070] 
Doloff et al.
Page 19
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 38. Wood KJ, Bushell A, Hester J. Regulatory immune cells in transplantation. Nat Rev Immunol. 
2012; 12(6):417–430. [PubMed: 22627860] 
39. Bratlie KM, Dang TT, Lyle S, Nahrendorf M, Weissleder R, Langer R, et al. Rapid 
biocompatibility analysis of materials via in vivo fluorescence imaging of mouse models. PloS 
one. 2010; 5(4):e10032. [PubMed: 20386609] 
40. Ito M, Hiramatsu H, Kobayashi K, Suzue K, Kawahata M, Hioki K, et al. NOD/SCID/gamma(c)
(null) mouse: an excellent recipient mouse model for engraftment of human cells. Blood. 2002; 
100(9):3175–3182. [PubMed: 12384415] 
41. Diel IJ, Bergner R, Grotz KA. Adverse effects of bisphosphonates: current issues. The journal of 
supportive oncology. 2007; 5(10):475–482. [PubMed: 18240669] 
42. Pyonteck SM, Akkari L, Schuhmacher AJ, Bowman RL, Sevenich L, Quail DF, et al. CSF-1R 
inhibition alters macrophage polarization and blocks glioma progression. Nat Med. 2013; 19(10):
1264–1272. [PubMed: 24056773] 
43. Conway JG, McDonald B, Parham J, Keith B, Rusnak DW, Shaw E, et al. Inhibition of colony-
stimulating-factor-1 signaling in vivo with the orally bioavailable cFMS kinase inhibitor GW2580. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2005; 102(44):
16078–16083. [PubMed: 16249345] 
44. Laskin DL, Sunil VR, Gardner CR, Laskin JD. Macrophages and tissue injury: agents of defense or 
destruction? Annual review of pharmacology and toxicology. 2011; 51:267–288.
45. Arnold L, Perrin H, de Chanville CB, Saclier M, Hermand P, Poupel L, et al. CX3CR1 deficiency 
promotes muscle repair and regeneration by enhancing macrophage ApoE production. Nature 
communications. 2015; 6:8972.
46. Pesce J, Kaviratne M, Ramalingam TR, Thompson RW, Urban JF Jr, Cheever AW, et al. The IL-21 
receptor augments Th2 effector function and alternative macrophage activation. The Journal of 
clinical investigation. 2006; 116(7):2044–2055. [PubMed: 16778988] 
47. Carlsen HS, Baekkevold ES, Morton HC, Haraldsen G, Brandtzaeg P. Monocyte-like and mature 
macrophages produce CXCL13 (B cell-attracting chemokine 1) in inflammatory lesions with 
lymphoid neogenesis. Blood. 2004; 104(10):3021–3027. [PubMed: 15284119] 
48. Affara NI, Ruffell B, Medler TR, Gunderson AJ, Johansson M, Bornstein S, et al. B cells regulate 
macrophage phenotype and response to chemotherapy in squamous carcinomas. Cancer cell. 2014; 
25(6):809–821. [PubMed: 24909985] 
49. Vuga LJ, Tedrow JR, Pandit KV, Tan J, Kass DJ, Xue J, et al. C-X-C motif chemokine 13 
(CXCL13) is a prognostic biomarker of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. American journal of 
respiratory and critical care medicine. 2014; 189(8):966–974. [PubMed: 24628285] 
50. Neale SD, Athanasou NA. Cytokine receptor profile of arthroplasty macrophages, foreign body 
giant cells and mature osteoclasts. Acta orthopaedica Scandinavica. 1999; 70(5):452–458. 
[PubMed: 10622477] 
Doloff et al.
Page 20
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Numerous immune populations respond to implanted alginate spheres
SLG20 alginate 500 μm diameter spheres (0.35 ml total implant volume) were implanted 
into the intraperitoneal space of C57BL/6 mice, where they were retained for 14 days and 
analyzed for degree of fibrosis upon retrieval. (a) Dark field phase contrast image and (b) 
DAPI immunofluorescence image obtained from retrieved spheres reveal a significant level 
of cellular overgrowth; scale bar = 2000 μm). (c) qPCR analysis of innate and adaptive 
immune population and fibrosis markers present on fibrosed alginate spheres, A, or non-
implant, N, or mock implant, M, omental and epididymal fat pad tissue after 14 days post-
implantation into the IP space of C57BL/6 mice. Mϕ = macrophages, DCs = Dendritic cells, 
NKs = Natural Killer cells. Data: mean ± SEM, n = 5. qPCR statistical analysis: one-way 
ANOVA with Bonferroni multiple comparison correction **: p < 0.001, and ***: p < 
0.0001; ns = not significantly different. (d) Confocal staining showing DAPI (cellular 
nuclei), innate immune macrophage marker CD68 (green), adaptive immune B cells 
(magenta), alpha smooth muscle actin (αSMactin, myofibroblasts, red), and overlay making 
up the fibrosis on 500 μm alginate spheres. Scale bar = 400 μm. (e) Confocal staining 
showing DAPI (cellular nuclei), innate immune neutrophil marker Ly6g/Gr1 (green), alpha 
Doloff et al.
Page 21
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 smooth muscle actin (αSMactin, myofibroblasts, red), fluorescent overlay, and brightfield 
image for the fibrosis on 500 μm alginate spheres. Scale bar = 400 μm. In vivo intravital 
imaging of adaptive B cell behavior and accumulation at day 14 post-implant for mock 
implant (f) or SLG20 sphere (pink) implanted (g) C57BL/6-Ccr6 (EGFP) mice. For 
intravital imaging: n = 3 mice per treatment. For all others, n = 5 mice per group. 
Experiments repeated at least 3 times.
Doloff et al.
Page 22
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. The immune response to implanted biomaterial alginate is long lived
Flow analysis, using specific markers for responding host innate immune macrophage (red), 
neutrophil (blue), and adaptive immune B cells (green) at 1, 4, 7, 14, and 28 days post-
implantation among peritoneal exudate (lavage) (a), adjacent fibrosed omental and 
epididymal fat pads (through which host cells infiltrate and to which material spheres 
become fibrosed, becoming part of the fibrosis themselves) (b), and directly on fibrosed 
alginate spheres (c). For sphere-specific FACS, fixation and permeabilization was also 
carried out to stain for fibrosis-depositing myofibroblasts (aSMactin, white). See 
supplemental methods section for all antibody combinations. NanoString-based analysis 
enrichment for expression of significantly increasing macrophage (d) and neutrophil (e) 
associated physical and cytokine markers analyzed from deposited cell RNA extracts at 14 
days post-implant: fold changes between samples, presented on a base 2 logarithmic scale. 
(f) qPCR analysis on either adjacent fibrosed tissue (yellow) or fibrotic spheres alone (blue), 
relative to day 1 tissue for all, showing that there is a slightly delayed mobilization of 
adaptive B cells out of adjacent fibrosed tissue and onto spheres after 1 week post-
implantation. (g) qPCR analysis on either adjacent fibrosed tissue (yellow) or spheres alone 
(blue), relative to day 1 for either tissue or spheres, respectively, showing that there is no 
apparent response (due to high tissue background) across time points for aSMactin, as 
Doloff et al.
Page 23
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 opposed to a high dynamic response if spheres alone are examined. Error bars, mean ± 
SEM. For all analyses n = 5 per treatment. FACS and qPCR experiments were performed 
twice and NanoString analysis was performed once. FACS time point comparisons were 
performed by unpaired, two-tailed t-test *: p < 0.05, **: p < 0.001, and ***: p < 0.0001, vs 
mock (M) or non-implanted (N) controls. For NanoString statistical analyses see 
supplemental methods.
Doloff et al.
Page 24
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Innate immune macrophage function is required for fibrosis of alginate
SLG20 alginate 500 μm spheres (0.35 ml) were implanted for 14 days into the 
intraperitoneal (IP) or subcutaneous (SC) space of wild type and various knockout (IghMnull, 
B cell deficient; Rag2null, T and B cell deficient; and Rag2null/IL2rγnull, T, B, NK cell 
deficient, and Mϕ and DC dysfunctional) C57BL/6 mice, and analyzed for degree of fibrosis 
upon retrieval. (a) Phase contrast images showing that fibrosis, as compared to wild type 
(WT) response, was partially decreased upon removal of adaptive B cells (B KO), restored 
when T cells were also removed (TB KO), and completely removed with additional Mϕ 
dysfunction (Rag2/γ KO). Scale bar = 2000 μm. (b) Western blot analysis for fibrosis-
associated myofibroblast α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMact) expression in microsphere 
overgrowth (5 individual mice/group), confirming relative decreases in fibrosis, as observed 
in (a). (c) Plot of western blot band intensities from (b). (d) Relative q-PCR expression 
analysis for markers of fibrotic capsule formation on material implants: α-SMactin, 
Collagen 1a1 (Col1a1), and Collagen 1a2 (Col1a2), on retrieved spheres from various 
C57BL/6 strains (as shown). (e) Quantified IVIS imaging fluorescent ProSense 750 
inflammation levels across Mock (saline), WT, B KO, and Rag2/γ KO mice 7 days post-SC 
implant. (f) H&E and Masson’s Trichrome stained histological sections of excised SC tissue 
14 days post-implant from various strains (Scale bar = 500 μm). (g) Flow analysis for 
responding macrophages, neutrophils, and B cells dissociated from spheres (100 μl material 
in all cases) 14 days post-IP implantation (note: a WT SC group is included for comparison). 
Doloff et al.
Page 25
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 qPCR, western blot, IVIS, and FACS statistical analysis: one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni 
multiple comparison correction *: p < 0.05, **: p < 0.001, and ***: p < 0.0001, vs WT. 
Error bars, mean ± SEM. n = 5 mice/group for all assays. Experiments repeated at least 2–3 
times.
Doloff et al.
Page 26
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Macrophages, and not neutrophils, are required for fibrosis of alginate
SLG20 alginate 500 μm diameter spheres (0.35 ml) were implanted into the intraperitoneal 
(IP) space of wild type C57BL/6 mice, either treated with vehicle (WT) or targeted depletion 
agents to eliminate macrophages and/or neutrophils over a 14-day implantation (see 
supplemental methods for dosing), and analyzed for degree of fibrosis upon retrieval. (a) 
Phase contrast images showing that fibrosis, as compared to WT, was completely eliminated 
following removal of innate immune macrophages (- Mϕs), either alone or in combination 
with neutrophil depletion (- Neutros & Mϕs). Neutrophil depletion alone (- Neutros) did not 
alleviate fibrosis, instead augmenting sphere clumping. Scale bar = 2000 μm. (b) Flow 
analysis for responding host immune macrophages, neutrophils, and B cells dissociated 
directly from spheres (as percent composition) 14 days post-IP implantation, illustrating 
specificity of depletions. Recruited downstream of macrophages, adaptive B cells also 
decreased following macrophage depletion. (c) Flow analysis in (b) normalized to cell 
counts from 100 μl material (in each case) showing absolute cell presence, and the lack 
thereof on spheres in macrophage-depleted mice. NanoString expression analysis of all 
known cytokine and cytokine receptors (see Supplemental Figure S12 for complete data set, 
Doloff et al.
Page 27
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 excerpted based on response here) for macrophage-specific factors (determined by depletion 
and cell sorting) also inhibited by GW2580 (d), for macrophage-specific factors not affected 
by CSF1R inhibition, suggesting altered macrophage polarization/phenotype and residual 
function (e), and for macrophage-associated factors (by depletion, but NOT cell sorting) also 
inhibited by the CSF1R inhibitor GW2580 (f), analyzed from RNA extracts at 14 days post-
implant, presented on a base 2 logarithmic scale. Since these factors were removed by 
macrophage depletion, but not expressed by sorted macrophages (decreased/diluted green 
expression profile as compared to mock, whole-tissue controls), they likely belong to cells 
that are recruited by macrophages in the downstream fibrotic cascade (ie, CD19, B cell 
marker and fibrosis protein collagen 1a1, Col1a1). FACS statistical analysis: one-way 
ANOVA with Bonferroni multiple comparison correction ***: p < 0.0001, vs WT. ns = not 
significantly different. n = 5 mice/group. Experiments repeated at least 3 times.
Doloff et al.
Page 28
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. CSF1R-dependent macrophages recruit fibrosis-potentiating B cells via CXCL13
CSF1R inhibition prevents the entire (innate and adaptive) immune response to implanted 
biomaterials. Phase contrast images showing that fibrosis, as compared to wild type (WT) 
vehicle-treated control, was partially eliminated by CXCL13 neutralization, and completely 
eliminated with continuous CSF1R inhibition (inh.; 160 mg/kg BW GW2580 SC, daily) 
over a 14-day implant period (a). Scale bar = 2000 μm. Fibrosis was reduced the same extent 
as that of the B cell knockout (B KO) shown in Figure 3a. (b) Flow analysis for responding 
macrophages, neutrophils, and B cells dissociated directly from spheres (100 μl material in 
all cases) 14 days post-intraperitoneal (IP) implant, showing partial loss of cell presence 
with CXCL13 neutralization, and complete loss following CSF1R inhibition. (c) Brightfield 
images showing that fibrosis, compared to vehicle control, was completely eliminated by 
both macrophage depletion (- Mϕs) and CSF1R inhibition. Scale bar = 1000 μm. (d) Flow 
analysis for responding host innate immune macrophages and neutrophils dissociated 
directly from spheres (100 μl of each material) 14 days post-IP implantation, showing the 
loss of immune adhesion with loss of fibrosis due to either macrophage depletion (- Mϕs) or 
CSF1R inhibition. (e) NanoString expression analysis for all known cytokine and cytokine 
receptors (see Supplemental Figure S18 for complete data set, excerpted here), showing 
similar unique factors increased across all material (hydrogel alginate, ceramic glass, and 
Doloff et al.
Page 29
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 polymer polystyrene (PS)) groups. (f) Confocal for DAPI (cellular nuclei), macrophage 
marker CD68 (green), B cell marker CD19 (magenta), fibrosis-associated myofibroblast 
marker alpha smooth muscle actin (αSMactin, myofibroblasts, red), overlay, and brightfield 
imaging, showing that CXCL13 neutralization resulted in loss of B cell recruitment. Scale 
bar = 200 μm. (g) qPCR expression analysis of α-SMactin directly on retrieved spheres from 
Vehicle-treated (WT), B KO, and CXCL13-neutralized WT mice, plotted relative to 
expression levels on spheres from WT mice. Statistical analysis: one-way ANOVA with 
Bonferroni multiple comparison correction ***: p < 0.0001, vs Vehicle. n = 5 mice/group. 
Experiments repeated at least 2–3 times.
Doloff et al.
Page 30
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Essential fibrotic cascade players are also increased in non-human primates
0.5 mm-sized SLG20 hydrogel spheres of were implanted into either the intraperitoneal (IP) 
or subcutaneous (SC) dorsal region of cynomolgus monkeys and retrieved by laparoscopy-
guided tissue excision or biopsy punch after 28 days27. (a) Laparoscopy images taken on 
days 0 and 28 (initial implantation and retrieval from the IP space). (b) H&E and Masson’s 
Trichrome stained histological sections of excised IP omentum tissue at 28 days for non-
fibrosed fat-laden (No material, Mock) or heavily collagen-deposited and sphere-embedded 
(Implanted) omental tissue. Scale bars = 400 μm. (c) Main figure: Confocal staining 
showing DAPI (cellular nuclei), innate immune macrophage marker CD68 (green), and 
fibrosis-associated activated myofibroblast alpha smooth muscle actin (αSMactin) staining 
(red), showing cellular infiltration around and fibrosis deposition on an embedded 500 μm 
alginate sphere; Inset: additional confocal for CSF1R (green), showing positive staining on 
not only more distant macrophages but also material-proximal and fused foreign body giant 
cells (FBGCs); both 20x magnification. White scale bars: both 200 μm for each respective 
image. (d) Flow analysis showing similar host innate immune macrophage (CD68+CD11b+, 
top right quadrants) and remaining neutrophil/myeloid (CD68−CD11b+, bottom right 
quadrants) cells across C57BL/6 mice and cynomolgus monkeys, dissociated directly from 
fibrosed spheres and adjacent fibrosed omentum tissue (as percent composition) 28 days 
post-IP implantation. While the prominence of CD11b seems to be inverted in C57BL/6 
mice vs cynomolgus monkeys, population response percentages are similar 28 days post-IP 
implantation. (e) NanoString analysis for immune markers and cytokines, originally 
identified in C57BL/6 mice (Note: CD66b is used here as a neutrophil marker, as Ly6g/Gr1 
does not exist in NHPs or humans). Significant increases are observed for macrophage 
markers, as well as CSF1R and CXCL13 in both peritoneal and subcutaneous implant sites, 
as compared to mock (saline-injected) controls (there was no difference between SC and IP 
mock controls). N = 2 for IP-implanted groups; N = 4 for subcutaneous (SC) treatment 
groups. These experiments were performed once for SC and twice for IP delivery.
Doloff et al.
Page 31
Nat Mater. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
