 Jiang et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2018) 8:265 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41398-018-0319-z
Translational 
Psychiatry
A R T I C L E
O p e n A c c e s s
Integrative system biology analyses of
CRISPR-edited iPSC-derived neurons and
human brains reveal deficiencies of
presynaptic signaling in FTLD and PSP
Shan Jiang1,2, Natalie Wen1,2, Zeran Li
1,2, Umber Dube1,2, Jorge Del Aguila1,2, John Budde
1,2, Rita Martinez1,2,
Simon Hsu1,2, Maria V. Fernandez1,2, Nigel J. Cairns3, Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network (DIAN), International
FTD-Genomics Consortium (IFGC), Oscar Harari1,2, Carlos Cruchaga1,2 and Celeste M. Karch
1,2
Abstract
Mutations in the microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) gene cause autosomal dominant frontotemporal lobar
degeneration with tau inclusions (FTLD-tau). MAPT p.R406W carriers present clinically with progressive memory loss
and neuropathologically with neuronal and glial tauopathy. However, the pathogenic events triggered by the
expression of the mutant tau protein remain poorly understood. To identify the genes and pathways that are
dysregulated in FTLD-tau, we performed transcriptomic analyses in induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)–derived
neurons carrying MAPT p.R406W and CRISPR/Cas9-corrected isogenic controls. We found that the expression of the
MAPT p.R406W mutation was sufficient to create a significantly different transcriptomic profile compared with that of
the isogeneic controls and to cause the differential expression of 328 genes. Sixty-one of these genes were also
differentially expressed in the same direction between MAPT p.R406W carriers and pathology-free human control
brains. We found that genes differentially expressed in the stem cell models and human brains were enriched for
pathways involving gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors and pre-synaptic function. The expression of GABA
receptor genes, including GABRB2 and GABRG2, were consistently reduced in iPSC-derived neurons and brains from
MAPT p.R406W carriers. Interestingly, we found that GABA receptor genes, including GABRB2 and GABRG2, are
significantly lower in symptomatic mouse models of tauopathy, as well as in brains with progressive supranuclear
palsy. Genome wide association analyses reveal that common variants within GABRB2 are associated with increased
risk for frontotemporal dementia (P < 1 × 10−3). Thus, our systems biology approach, which leverages molecular data
from stem cells, animal models, and human brain tissue can reveal novel disease mechanisms. Here, we demonstrate
that MAPT p.R406W is sufficient to induce changes in GABA-mediated signaling and synaptic function, which may
contribute to the pathogenesis of FTLD-tau and other primary tauopathies.
Introduction
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) encom-
passes several disease entities that are distinguished by the
molecular pathology of neuronal and glial inclusion
bodies. FTLD with tau-immunoreactive inclusion bodies
(FTLD-tau) make up about 50% of cases. These primary
tauopathies include progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP),
corticobasal degeneration (CBD), and Pick disease1,2.
© The Author(s) 2018
OpenAccessThisarticleislicensedunderaCreativeCommonsAttribution4.0InternationalLicense,whichpermitsuse,sharing,adaptation,distributionandreproduction
in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If
material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Correspondence: Oscar Harari (harario@wustl.edu) or Carlos Cruchaga
(cruchagac@wustl.edu) or Celeste M. Karch (karchc@wustl.edu)
1Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, 660S.
Euclid Ave. Campus Box 8134, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA
2Hope Center for Neurological Disorders, Washington University School of
Medicine, 660S. Euclid Ave. Campus Box 8111, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article.
These authors contributed equally: Oscar Harari, Carlos Cruchaga, Celeste M.
Karch.
The IFGC members are listed in Supplementary Acknowledgments.
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
 Macroscopically, FTLD-tau is characterized by frontal and
temporal lobar atrophy in contrast to Alzheimer disease
(AD) where atrophy is more generalized. The insular
cortex and basal ganglia are frequently affected. Micro-
scopically, FTLD-tau, as with all FTLD entities, displays
neuronal loss and gliosis in affected areas. FTLD-tau is
clinically heterogeneous and may present with a broad
spectrum of phenotypes including behavioral, language,
memory and motor disturbances3. In a subset of FTLD-
tau cases, rare mutations in the microtubule associated
protein tau (MAPT) gene are sufficient to cause disease4,5.
More than 50 mutations in MAPT have been reported to
cause FTLD-tau and are located primarily in exons 9–136.
Despite the clear association of MAPT mutations with
FTLD-tau, we have little understanding of the down-
stream
events
that
lead
to
neurodegeneration
and
dementia.
The mechanism(s) by which MAPT mutations disrupt
tau metabolism and contribute to disease are poorly
understood in part due to the complexities of the MAPT
gene. The MAPT gene in the central nervous system is
alternatively spliced to produce 6 isoforms that differ
based on the presence of the N-terminal insert (0N, 1N,
2N) and the number of microtubule binding repeats
(MTBR; 3R, 4R). Several mechanisms have been proposed
to explain how MAPT mutations cause disease: abnormal
MAPT splicing, altered microtubule binding kinetics,
impaired degradation, tau accumulation and aggregation,
among others7.
MAPT p.R406W heterozygous carriers are notable in
presenting more commonly with AD-like progressive
memory decline and a protracted clinical course that may
last decades8–10. Neurofibrillary tangles of MAPT p.
R406W contain 3R and 4R tau and are virtually indis-
tinguishable from those of AD; they are present largely in
the frontal and temporal neocortices and hippocampus11.
In a transgenic mouse model, expression of human MAPT
p.R406W leads to age-dependent accumulation of tau
aggregates, reduction of tau in axonal compartments and
neurodegeneration12,13. MAPT p.R406W does not alter
tau-mediated microtubule dynamics nor does it induce
filament formation in vitro14–16. MAPT p.R406W may
block the interaction of tau with neuronal membranes
and impede neurite outgrowth17,18. However, the patho-
genic events triggered by the expression of the mutant tau
protein remain poorly understood.
Human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived
neurons have emerged as a powerful cellular system to
model the complexities of pathological gene expression,
particularly in the early stage of disease, in the context of a
non-neoplastic human genome. When coupled with
genome editing by CRISPR/Cas9, this system allows for
molecular events to be pinpointed specifically and to
impute causality for different molecular phenotypes.
However, in the context of neurodegenerative diseases,
such as FTLD-tau, it remains unclear whether the stem
cell models capture events that are critical and proximal
to disease pathogenesis. Here, we propose a novel inte-
grative approach to identify molecular drivers of neuro-
degenerative disease using a bioinformatic pipeline that
reduces the risk of false-positives arising from small
sample sizes and improves our ability to identify disease-
relevant pathways.
To begin to understand the molecular events caused by
the MAPT p.R406W mutation, we sought to leverage
stem cell models and human brain tissue to identify
molecular changes that are triggered by MAPT p.R406W
and that lead to human disease. We found that genes
differentially expressed in the stem cell models and brains
were
enriched
for
pathways
involving
gamma-
aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors and pre-synaptic
function. The expression of GABA receptor genes,
including GABRB2 and GABRG2, were consistently
reduced in iPSC-derived neurons and brains from MAPT
p.R406W carriers, PSP brains, and mouse models of
tauopathy. Here, we demonstrate that MAPT p.R406W is
sufficient to induce changes in GABA-mediated signaling
and synaptic function, which contribute to the patho-
genesis of FTLD-tau.
Materials and methods
Patient consent
The Washington University School of Medicine Insti-
tutional Review Board reviewed the protocol of the Knight
Alzheimer Disease Research Center (ADRC) Neuro-
pathology Core, from which clinically and neuropatholo-
gically well-characterized brain tissues were obtained. As
tissue was obtained postmortem it was exempt from IRB
approval. Research participants provided autopsy consent
limited to removal of the brain. All data were analyzed
anonymously.
Skin
punches
were
performed
following
written
informed consent from the donor. The informed consent
was approved by the Washington University School of
Medicine Institutional Review Board and Ethics Com-
mittee (IRB 201104178 and 201306108). The consent
allowed for use of tissue by all parties, commercial and
academic, for the purposes of research but not for use in
human therapy.
iPSC generation and genome engineering
Dermal fibroblasts from a MAPT p.R406W carrier
(F11362) were transduced with non-integrating Sendai
virus carrying OCT3/4, SOX2, KLF4, and cMYC (Life
Technologies)19,20. Cells that showed morphological evi-
dence of reprogramming were selected manually. iPSC
lines were characterized using standard methods19. Each
resulting clone was analyzed for pluripotency markers by
Jiang et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2018) 8:265 
Page 2 of 16
 immunocytochemistry
(ICC)
and
quantitative
PCR
(qPCR); for spontaneous differentiation into the three
germ layers by ICC and qPCR; and for chromosomal
abnormalities by karyotyping (see below for details).
Mutation status was confirmed in newly generated iPSC
by Sanger sequencing (Supplemental Fig. 1). Cell lines
were confirmed to be free of mycoplasma.
iPSC that were heterozygous for MAPT p.R406W were
edited using CRISPR/Cas9 as previously reported21.
Briefly, allele-specific guideRNAs (gRNAs) were designed
for the mutant allele. gRNAs were designed to have at
least 3 bp of mismatch to any other gene in the human
genome and validated for activity using the T7E1 assay. In
this assay, the T7E1 enzyme recognizes and cleaves non-
perfectly matched DNA. To prepare cells for editing, iPSC
colonies were dissociated into single cells via incubation
in Accutase for 10 min. Single cell iPSC cultures were
maintained on Matrigel supplemented with fibronectin
and cultured in mTesR. To edit cells, human iPSCs were
nucleofected
with
1 μg
pMaxGFP
(used
to
assess
nucleofection efficiency), 1 μg gRNA, 3 μg Cas9, and
300 μM single stranded oligodeoxynucleotides (ssODN)
and the P3 Primary Cell 4D reaction mix (Lonza). At least
96 clones were screened for editing. We routinely selected
2–5 edited clones for expansion and characterization. In
addition to edited clones, we selected 1–2 unedited clones
that were exposed to the genome-editing pipeline but
remained unmodified. Characterization of edited and
unedited clones included qPCR and ICC for pluripotency
markers, karyotyping and Sanger sequencing of on and
predicted off-target sites (Supplemental Fig. 1).
Immunocytochemistry
Immunocytochemistry was performed to confirm plur-
ipotency of the cultures (Supplemental Fig. 1). Culture
media was aspirated, and cells were washed and fixed with
4% paraformaldehyde (Sigma). Cells were washed and
permeabilized with permeabilization buffer (0.1% Triton
X-100 in PBS). Cells were then blocked in 0.1% bovine
serum albumin (BSA; Sigma) and treated with primary
and secondary antibodies diluted in 0.1% BSA. Immu-
nostained cells were then imaged (Nikon Eclipse 80i
fluorescent microscope). The following antibodies were
used: SOX2, Tra1-60 (Abcam, San Francisco, CA, USA);
DAPI (Life Technologies); Alexa488 anti-rabbit (Life
Technologies);
and
Alexa594
anti-mouse
(Life
Technologies).
Quantitative PCR
To determine whether iPSC clones express endogenous
markers of pluripotency, we performed qPCR (Supple-
mental Fig. 1). RNA was extracted from cell pellets with
an RNeasy kit (Qiagen), following the manufacturer’s
protocol. Extracted RNA (10ug) was converted to cDNA
by PCR using the High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Tran-
scriptase kit (Life Technologies). Gene expression was
measured in iPSCs using qPCR as previously described
(SOX2, POU5F1, LIN28A, NANOG, B3GALT5, PODXL,
SEV)22. Primers specific to GAPDH were used as a loading
control.
Karyotyping
Chromosomal abnormalities were assessed by G-band
karyotyping after clonal isolation of iPSC and after gen-
ome editing (Supplemental Fig. 1).
Differentiation of iPSC into cortical neurons
One MAPT p.R406W iPSC donor and one isogenic
control iPSC line were selected for evaluation by RNA-
seq. To generate neurons, iPSCs were harvested for neural
aggregate formation upon reaching 75–85% confluency.
iPSCs were dissociated with Accutase (MP Biomedicals)
and pelleted by centrifugation. Cells were counted and
resuspended in mTesR1 supplemented with the ROCK
inhibitor,
Y-27632
(10 µM),
to
achieve
450,000–650,000 cells/mL. Then, 100 µL/well of iPSC
suspension was plated into a v-bottom 96-well plate. The
v-bottom plate was centrifuged at 750 rpm for 3 min to
pellet the iPSCs and promote formation of spheres. Cells
were then incubated at 37 °C, 5% CO2 for 24 h. Neuro-
spheres were cultured for 5 additional days with daily
media change in Neural Induction Medium (NIM;
Stemcell Technologies).
Per manufacturer’s guidelines, on Day 5 of neural
aggregate formation, spheres were washed with 100 µL of
DMEM/F12. Then, 100 µL of NIM was added to each
well. Spheres were transferred from the conical wells into
a 6 well plate, pre-coated with poly-Ornithin (PLO)/
Laminin (Millpore-Sigma), at a density of 32 spheres per
well. Daily media changes followed with NIM. Spheres
were monitored daily for formation of neural rosette
structures. Neural rosettes were harvested when spheres
had completely flattened and clusters were clearly visible
(3–7 days after plating; line dependent). Neural rosettes
were harvested by aspirating spent medium, washing with
DMEM/F12, and then adding 1 mL of Neural Rosette
Selection reagent (Stemcell Technologies) to each well for
1 h at 37 °C. Rosette clusters were then detached by
pipetting with DMEM/F12. Rosette clusters were trans-
ferred into a conical tube, centrifuged at 750 rpm for
3 min, and then either cryopreserved or plated for neural
progenitor cell expansion. NPCs were cultured on PLO
and Laminin-coated plates and terminal differentiation
was initiated with the addition of cortical maturation
media (Neurobasal Media (Life Technologies) supple-
mented with B27 (GIBCO), BDNF (Peprotech), GDNF
(Peprotech), cAMP (Sigma), and L-glutamate (Sigma)).
Neurons were maintained for 6 weeks.
Jiang et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2018) 8:265 
Page 3 of 16
 Human brain tissue
Clinically and neuropathologically well-characterized
brain tissue was obtained from the Knight ADRC and
the Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network (DIAN),
both at Washington University in St Louis. Genotyping
was performed to determine whether brain tissue carried
a pathogenic mutation as described previously23. Brain
tissue from the insular cortex was obtained from MAPT p.
R406W carriers (n = 2) and pathology-free control cases
(n = 2). We also used brain tissue from the parietal cortex
from sporadic FTLD-TDP (n = 11), sporadic late onset
AD (LOAD; n = 80), PSEN1 (p.A79V, p.N135S, p.I143T,
p.H163R, p.S170F, p.G206A, p.G217R, p.L226R, p.I229F,
p.S290C, p.T245P, p.C410Y, p.A431E) with AD (n = 18),
and pathology-free control cases (n = 11). In one case, we
evaluated parietal and insular cortices from the same case
(control no. 10 and 13, respectively; Supplementary Table
1). In general, control brains were matched based on age,
sex and DV200, defined as the percentage of RNA frag-
ments >200 nucleotides in size. Specifically, MAPT p.
R406W and control brains were matched based on sex
and DV200. ANNOVA was performed to demonstrate
that there was no statistically significant difference
between covariates (P-value = 0.988 for sex and P-value
= 0.659 for DV200).
To evaluate whether genes differentially expressed in
iPSC-derived neurons and brains from MAPT p.R406W
compared with controls were also differentially expressed
in primary tauopathies, we examined previously generated
gene expression profiles from the temporal cortex and
cerebellum of 80 control and 84 progressive supranuclear
palsy (PSP) brains (syn5550404)24. Brain samples used in
this study are summarized in Table 1 and Supplemental
Table 1.
RNA extraction, library construction, and sequencing
RNA was extracted from frozen brain tissues and iPSC-
derived neuronal cell pellets using Tissue Lyser LT and
RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) following the
manufacturer’s instructions. RNA yields of individual
samples were quantified by the Quant-iT RNA Assay (Life
Technologies) on the Qubit Fluorometer (Fisher Scien-
tific). Quality of yielded RNA of individual samples was
assessed by the DV200 metric. DV200 of individual
samples was measured with the RNA 6000 Pico Assay
using the Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent Technologies). cDNA
libraries of individual samples were constructed using the
TruSeq Stranded Total RNA Sample Prep with Ribo-Zero
Gold kit (Illumina) and then sequenced by the HiSeq 4000
(Illumina)
at
the
McDonnell
Genome
Institute
at
Washington University in St. Louis with a mean of
58.14 ± 8.62 million reads as previously described23.
Quality control, alignment and quantification
Quality control, alignment and quantification was per-
formed on all newly generated RNA-seq samples, as well
as publically available sequencing reads from PSP and
control brains (syn5550404)23,24. After converting the
sequencing reads to FASTQ format, FastQC was used to
check quality of the RNA-seq data. STAR (v. 2.5.2b) was
then used to align the FASTQ files to human GRCh37
primary assembly25. We used the primary assembly and
aligned reads to the assembled chromosomes, unlocalized
and unplaced scaffolds, and discarded alternative haploid
sequences. Sequencing metrics, including coverage, dis-
tribution of reads in the genome, ribosomal and mito-
chondrial contents, and alignment quality, were further
obtained by applying Picard CollectRna-SeqMetrics (ver
2.8.2) to detect sample deviation.
Table 1
Characteristics of brain samples analyzed in this study
Sample group
Neuropathologic diagnosis
Sample size
Brain region
Age (years)a
Female (%)
DV200a
Reference
MAPT p.R406W
FTLD-Tau
2
Insular cortex
69.46 ± 3.88
50%
85.33 ± 11.55
23
Controls
None
2
Insular cortex
71.81 ± 2.14
50%
88.5 ± 2.12
23
Sporadic FTLD
FTLD-TDP
11
Parietal cortex
74.09 ± 17.00
45.5%
89.45 ± 4.16
23
Late-onset AD
AD
80
Parietal cortex
85.83 ± 6.88
61.25%
89.39 ± 3.81
23
ADADb
AD
18
Parietal cortex
50.17 ± 12.03
37.5%
86.06 ± 4.22
23
Controls
None
11
Parietal cortex
85.01 ± 9.06
45.5%
90.09 ± 1.87
23
PSP
PSP
84
Temporal cortex
73.96 ± 6.54
39.29%
NA
24
PSP
PSP
84
Cerebellum
73.95 ± 6.54
39.29%
NA
24
Controls
None
80
Temporal cortex
82.55 ± 8.80
48.75%
NA
24
Controls
None
79
Cerebellum
82.67 ± 8.11
49.37%
NA
24
aMean ± standard deviation
bPSEN1 A79V, N135S, I143T, H163R, S170F, G206A, G217R, L226R, I229F, S290C, T245P, C410Y, A431E
NA not available
Jiang et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2018) 8:265 
Page 4 of 16
 Aligned and sorted bam files were loaded into IGV to
visually
identify
target
variants26.
Samples
carrying
unexpected or missing expected variants were labeled as
potentially swapped samples. In addition, variants were
called from RNA-seq following BWA/GATK pipeline27,28.
The identities of the samples were later verified by per-
forming identity-by-descent analysis against genomic
typing from genome-wide association study chipsets.
After alignment, Salmon (v. 0.7.2) was used to quantify
expression levels of individual genes included in the
GENCODE
reference
genome
(GRCh37.75)29.
We
applied quality control, alignment and quantification as
previously described23.
Differential expression analysis
We tested for differential expression using the R
(v.3.4.2) package DESeq2 (v.1.18.1)30, that uses the nega-
tive binomial distribution to calculate the statistical sig-
nificance. DESeq2 reports P values and False Discovery
Rate (FDR)—corrected P values for individual genes—
determined using a Wald test. It has previously been
demonstrated that there are many fewer spurious differ-
entially expressed genes (DEGs) for a given false discovery
rate (FDR) when isogenic controls are used with paired
mutant lines rather than populations controls, even with
smaller sample sizes31. A paired analysis (mutant vs. iso-
genic controls) is a highly sensitive and specific approach
provided a more stringent FDR threshold is adopted31.
Thus, we applied the more stringent Benjamini-Yekutieli
FDR (B-Y FDR) correction to guarantee the specificity of
the differentially expressed genes32. B-Y extends Benja-
mini -Hochberg (B-H) by modeling and penalizing for
positive dependency, such as the comparison of multiple
treatments with a single control, correlated tests or effects
of latent variables on endpoints of same brain. Genes with
B-Y FDR-corrected P values less than 0.05 were con-
sidered differentially expressed. Volcano plots were gen-
erated using built-in R function plot. Heat maps of
differentially expressed genes were generated using R
package pheatmap (v.1.0.8) (https://cran.r-project.org/
web/packages/pheatmap/index.html).
Digital deconvolution of bulk RNA-seq
To determine whether the cellular composition of iPSC-
derived neurons from MAPT p.R406W and isogenic
controls were similar, we applied a machine learning
approach to digitally deconvolve bulk RNA-seq data to
reveal information as to the percentage of neurons,
astrocytes, microglia and oligodendrocytes in the cul-
tures23,33. To infer cellular composition of the iPSC-
neurons, we assembled and validated a reference panel
composed of cell type specific samples and genes. Then
we applied a digital deconvolution algorithm termed
semi-supervised non-negative matrix factorization algo-
rithm (ssNMF34) to infer cellular composition structure.
Functional annotation of differentially expressed genes
Functional annotation was performed on genes that
were significantly differentially expressed in the same
direction in both iPSC-derived neurons and brains from
MAPT p.R406W carriers and controls. Gene relation-
ships,
including
physical
interaction,
co-localization,
pathway, shared protein domain, and genetic interaction,
with or without co-expression among these verified dif-
ferentially expressed genes were annotated using the
Cytoscape plugin GeneMANIA (v. 3.4.1)35. Gene co-
expression data were derived from brain tissues of donors
free of neuropathology36. Gene topological properties
were calculated using Cytoscape built-in tool Networ-
kAnalyzer. To identify enrichments in gene ontologic
features, biological pathways and drug targets, we used
Webgestalt (http://www.webgestalt.org/)36. In Webges-
talt, the 61 differentially expressed genes were input as a
target gene set and all sequenced genes were input as the
reference gene set. Enrichments with B-H FDR-corrected
P values less than 0.05 were considered significantly
enriched.
Mouseac
To determine whether genes differentially expressed in
iPSC-derived neurons and brains from MAPT p.R406W
carriers and controls were similarly altered in a mouse
model of tauopathy, we evaluated gene expression in the
MAPT p.P301L transgenic mouse model (www.mouseac.
org)37. We focused on the GABA receptor genes that were
differentially expressed in iPSC-derived neurons, FTLD-
tau brains and PSP brains compared with controls. Briefly,
microarray gene expression data was evaluated from two
brain regions (cortex and hippocampus) from non-
transgenic C57Bl/6 J (2, 4, 8, 18 months; n = 4 per time
point) and MAPT p.P301L transgenic mice under the
control of a CaMKII promoter (2 months, n = 11,
4 months, n = 12; 8 months, n = 10; 18 months, n = 7).
Gene expression levels were log2 transformed and
expressed as a function of age. The normality of dis-
tribution was assessed using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov
test. Between-group differences of normally distributed
data were assessed using an unpaired t-test. The presence
of neurofibrillary tangle (NFT) pathology was evaluated
and
scored
as
previously
reported
by
immunohistochemistry37.
Developmental expression of differentially expressed
genes
To determine whether genes differentially expressed in
iPSC-derived neurons from MAPT p.R406W carriers and
Jiang et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2018) 8:265 
Page 5 of 16
 isogenic controls (328 genes) change during development,
we evaluated human brain expression data from Brain-
Span (www.brainspan.org) across 11 developmental stages
to generate a heat map38. Samples were grouped into
developmental
stages:
embryonic
(age
4–7
post-
conception weeks (pcw)); early prenatal A (age 8–9
pcw); early prenatal B (age 10–12 pcw); early mid-prenatal
A (age 13–15 pcw); early mid-prenatal B (age 16–18 pcw);
late mid-prenatal (age 19–24 pcw); late prenatal (age
25–38 pcw); early infancy (age birth-5 months); late
infancy (age 6–18 months); early childhood (age 19
months-5 years); late childhood (age 6–11 years); ado-
lescence (age 12–19 years); and adulthood (20–40 years).
Samples from each developmental stage were compared
to samples from adulthood stage, which were used as the
reference group to assess the developmental expression
difference of differentially expressed genes. Sex and brain
region were included as covariates in the analysis.
Gene enrichment in FTD GWAS loci
To determine whether genes differentially expressed in
iPSC-derived neurons and brains from MAPT p.R406W
carriers and controls occur within loci that increase
frontotemporal dementia (FTD) risk, we used summary
statistics from a genome wide association study (GWAS)
of FTD39. The International FTD-Genomics Consortium
(IFGC) provided phase 1 FTD-GWAS summary statistic
data, which consisted of 2154 FTD cases and 4308 con-
trols with genotypes or imputed data at 6,026,384 SNPs.
The FTD dataset included multiple clinical subtypes
within the FTD spectrum: behavioral variant FTD,
semantic dementia, progressive non-fluent aphasia and
FTD with motor neuron disease39. The criteria for
annotating an FTD-GWAS SNP to a given differentially
expressed gene was that the GWAS SNP was located
within 5 kb of the gene boundaries.
To determine whether the differentially expressed genes
in MAPT p.R406W carriers were significantly enriched for
FTD risk, improved gene-set enrichment analysis for
GWAS (i-GSEA4GWAS) was employed40,41. The max-
imum −log(P-value) of the SNPs located within 5 kb of a
gene boundary was assigned to represent the gene.
Instead of the commonly used phenotype label permuta-
tion, SNP label permutations were implemented to gen-
erate the distribution of the enrichment score (ES). A gene
set significance proportion based enrichment score (SPES)
was calculated based on gene rank using the following
equation: SPES = k/K × ES, where k is the proportion of
significant genes of the gene set and K is the proportion of
significant genes of the total number of genes in the
GWAS. Gene-length bias was corrected by applying
adaptive permutation in PLINK before i-GSEA4GWAS.
Then, a comparative quantile-quantile (QQ) plot was
used to demonstrate the differential association with FTD
between all genes and the genes differentially expressed in
MAPT p.R406W carriers.
To demonstrate the specificity of the enrichment of
genes differentially expressed in iPSC-derived neurons
and brains from MAPT p.R406W carriers compared to
controls, i-GSEA4GWAS was also employed on genes
differentially expressed in AD, schizophrenia (SCZ),
bipolar disorder (BD) and autism spectrum disorder
(ASD) for FTD risk. Genes differentially expressed in
SCZ, BD, and ASD were from obtained from a recently
published study42.
Results
Systems biology approach to identify molecular drivers of
FTLD-tau
The goal of our study was to identify genes and net-
works that are critical drivers of disease pathogenesis in
FTLD-tau downstream of MAPT mutations. As human
brain tissue from FTLD with MAPT p.R406W mutation is
rare, identifying and replicating genetic and molecular
networks involved in the etiology of disease has been
challenging, resulting in little focus outside of the tau
protein. Thus, we sought to develop a novel integrative
approach in which we coupled iPSC-derived neurons
from MAPT p.R406W carriers and CRISPR/Cas9-gener-
ated isogenic controls as a discovery cohort with valida-
tion using human brain tissue to identify consistently
differential expressed genes (Fig. 1). We also compared
the differentially expressed genes in the iPSC-derived
neurons vs. isogenic cell lines with those genes differen-
tially expressed in autosomal dominant AD (PSEN1
mutation carriers), FTLD-TDP, and PSP in order to
determine if those genes were related to MAPT p.R406W,
tau pathology or neurodegeneration in general. Finally, we
performed pathway analysis and functional annotation to
identify the main networks that lead to disease in MAPT
p.R406W carriers and to identify novel potential ther-
apeutically targets. Together, this approach led us to
conclude that GABA-related molecular pathways are
involved in FTLD with MAPT p.R406W mutation and
PSP and may constitute novel targets in these diseases.
MAPT p.R406W is sufficient to induce transcriptome-wide
changes in iPSC-derived neurons
To determine whether MAPT p.R406W is sufficient to
induce molecular changes in human neurons that may
lead to neuronal dysfunction, we leveraged human
somatic cells isolated from MAPT p.R406W carriers8.
Fibroblasts were isolated from a skin punch biopsy and
reprogrammed
into
pluripotent
cells
using
non-
integrating Sendai virus expressing KLF4, OCT4, SOX2,
and cMYC (Fig. 2a; Supplemental Fig. 1). Clonal lines
were picked and expanded. Only those clones expressing
endogenous
pluripotency
markers
by
Jiang et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2018) 8:265 
Page 6 of 16
 immunohistochemistry and qPCR and that also displayed
a normal karyotype were used in this study (Supplemental
Fig. 1). Genetic background of individual donors is a large
contributor to phenotypic variability in iPSCs;43 thus, cell
lines from non-mutation carriers are not ideal controls.
To define phenotypes driven specifically by the mutant
allele, we used CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing to establish
isogenic controls for donor iPSC line (Fig. 2a). All cell
lines used in this study were fully characterized for plur-
ipotency and chromosomal stability (Supplemental Fig. 1).
One clone from the MAPT p.R406W and the isogenic,
corrected control (MAPT WT) were then differentiated
into
cortical
neurons
using
a
growth
factor-based
approach (see Methods). After 6 weeks in cortical
maturation medium, we collected RNA and evaluated the
whole transcriptome by RNA-seq. At 6 weeks in culture,
iPSC-derived
neurons
produce
spontaneous
action
potentials, form functional synapses, and display a profile
of tau isoform expression that is similar to tau found in
the central nervous system44.
To begin to evaluate the impact of MAPT p.R406W on
the overall transcriptome profile, we first sought to
determine whether the MAPT p.R406W and isogenic
controls exhibited a similar capacity to form neurons. We
applied a digital deconvolution approach to predict the
proportion of neurons, astrocytes, microglia and oligo-
dendrocytes in the cultures23. We found that MAPT p.
R406W and isogenic controls were similarly enriched for
neuronal-specific genes (Fig. 2b). Additionally, we exam-
ined the expression of individual genes specific to cortical
layer markers to determine whether the MAPT p.R406W
mutation influenced survival of neuronal subtypes in the
culture. Deep cortical layer markers (TBR1, PCP4, TLE4);
upper cortical layer markers (TLE1, SATB2, CUX1,
POU3F2); layer 4 marker (RORB); layer 5 marker
(BCL11B); and subplate markers (CTGF, NR4A2)45 were
not significantly differentially expressed between the
MAPT p.R406W neurons and isogenic controls (Supple-
mental Table 2). Thus, we would predict that any
transcriptome-wide
changes
between
the
MAPT
p.
R406W and isogenic controls are driven by molecular
dysregulation within neurons rather than being a reflec-
tion of differences in cellular composition between
cultures.
To determine whether the MAPT p.R406W mutation is
sufficient to induce changes in gene expression in human
neurons, we performed differential expression analyses.
We found that the expression of the MAPT p.R406W
mutation leads to a unique transcriptome profile that is
significantly different compared to that of the isogeneic
controls. Principal component analysis revealed that
MAPT mutation explains 48% of the transcriptome-wide
variance between MAPT p.R406W and isogenic controls
(Fig. 2c), and the MAPT p.R406W was sufficient to
Fig. 1 Integrative analysis to define genes and pathways
dysregulated in FTLD with MAPT p.R406W. Human iPSC-derived
cortical neurons from MAPT p.R406W carriers and isogenic controls
served as a discovery cohort to identify genes affected by the MAPT p.
R406W mutation (n = 328). To define the genes that are differentially
expressed in disease, we sought to replicate the differential expression
analysis in human brains from MAPT p.R406W carriers and non-carrier
controls. We identified 61 genes that were differentially expressed in
both paradigms (FDR B-Y < 0.05). These 61 genes were then
functionally annotated and interrogated animal models of FTLD-tau
Jiang et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2018) 8:265 
Page 7 of 16
 discriminate the two groups: the mutation carriers from
the isogeneic controls. These results indicate that the
MAPT p.R406W is sufficient to shift the normal tran-
scriptome state of human neurons and some of these
changes could be involved in disease pathogenesis.
Next, to define the differentially expressed genes that
lead to the major changes in the transcriptome analyses,
we applied the strict B-Y FDR on the 18,537 genes that
were measured across all the cells. We found that 328
genes
are
differentially
expressed
between
neurons
expressing MAPT p.R406W and isogenic controls (Fig. 2d
and Fig. 3a; Supplemental Table 3).
Gene expression patterns in brain tissue from MAPT p.
R406W carriers overlaps with those observed in human
stem cell models
Given that FTLD with MAPT p.R406W is a neurode-
generative disease and stem cell systems are thought to
represent relatively immature states, we were uncertain as
to whether iPSC-derived neurons could capture mole-
cular phenotypes relevant to a disease that develops
clinical symptoms several decades after birth or whether
the differentially expressed genes only capture different
states
of
development.
Combining
the
differential
expression analyses from iPSC-derived neurons and
brains should allow us to identify genes altered as a
function of the MAPT mutation and involved in pathol-
ogy rather than those genes implicated in neurodevelop-
ment
(iPSC-only
artifacts)
or
in
general
neurodegeneration
and
cell
death-related
processed
(autopsied brain-only artifacts). To determine whether
any of the 328 genes differentially expressed between
MAPT p.R406W and isogenic controls are related to
disease pathogenesis, we examined brain tissue from cases
of FTLD with MAPT p.R406W and non-mutation carriers
free of pathology (Fig. 3). We performed RNA-seq in the
insular cortex, a region affected early in disease46–48. Due
to the limited amount of tissue available from MAPT p.
R406W carriers, we expanded our dataset by including
additional control brain samples (parietal cortex) from
non-carriers free of pathology (Fig. 3).
Principal
component
analysis
of
the
whole
tran-
scriptome illustrates that brains from FTLD with MAPT
p.R406W also cluster separately from non-mutation car-
riers free of pathology (Supplemental Fig. 2). We also
demonstrate that control brains from the insular and
parietal cortices cluster similarly, suggesting there are few
overall differences in gene expression between these two
Fig. 2 MAPT p.R406W is sufficient to induce transcriptome-wide changes in iPSC-derived cortical neurons. a Fibroblasts from a symptomatic
MAPT p.R406W carrier were reprogrammed into iPSC. CRISPR/Cas9 was used to correct the mutant allele and to establish an isogenic control line.
iPSCs from MAPT p.R406W and isogenic controls were differentiated into cortical neurons and cultured for 6 weeks prior to analysis. b Digital
deconvolution was applied to bulk RNA-seq data to define the relative percentage of neurons, astrocytes, microglia and oligodendrocytes. We
demonstrate that MAPT p.R406W and isogenic control cultures are similarly enriched in neurons (>98%). Graph represents mean ± SEM. c Principal
Component Analysis demonstrates that MAPT p.R406W is sufficient to induce transcriptome-wide differences in gene expression (PC1: 48% variance).
d Differential expression analysis reveals that 328 genes differ between iPSC-derived cortical neurons carrying MAPT p.R406W vs. isogenic control
(FDR B-Y < 0.05). Gene expression represented as in a heat map. RNA-seq was analyzed in 3 biological replicates
Jiang et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2018) 8:265 
Page 8 of 16
 brain regions and analyses including both regions should
not bias our results (Supplemental Fig. 2). Of the 328
genes differentially expressed between MAPT p.R406W
and isogenic control neurons, we found that 61 of these
genes were also differentially expressed in the same
direction with a B-Y FDR < 0.05 between the insular
cortex of FTLD with MAPT p.R406W and controls and
between the insular cortex and partial lobe of mutation
carriers and controls (Fig. 3; Supplemental Table 4).
We found that these 61 differentially expressed genes
exhibited similar effect sizes in the neurons and brains
(Fig. 3f, g; Pearson correlation R = 0.969 and P = 1.645 ×
10−37 for neurons vs. parietal cortices and Pearson cor-
relation R = 0.968 and P = 6.302 × 10−37 for neurons vs.
insular cortices). Interestingly, only three genes were
differentially expressed but in the opposite direction in
the neurons and brains (Supplemental Tables 3 and 4).
Importantly, this suggests that our iPSC-derived neuronal
system is capable of capturing gene expression changes
similar to those present in human brains at autopsy. Thus,
these 61 differentially genes represent genes that are
altered by the MAPT p.R406W mutation and are likely to
be relevant to disease pathogenesis.
Genes dysregulated by MAPT p.R406W are enriched for
pathways involving GABA receptors and pre-synaptic
function
We next sought to determine whether the 61 genes
differentially expressed between MAPT p.R406W carriers
and controls in iPSC-derived neurons and human brains
were enriched in any specific pathways or whether they
interacted
with
one
another.
GeneMANIA
analysis
revealed that more than half of the 61 genes directly
interacted with MAPT (Fig. 3h). The GeneMANIA
interactions of the 61 genes span over multiple relation-
ships: co-expression (70.52%), co-localization (16.07%),
physical interaction (7.89%), co-pathway (2.9%), compu-
tationally predicted (2.26%), genetic interaction (0.33%)
and shared protein domain (0.03%). Importantly, the
GABA-associated genes SNAP25 and SYT1 are hubs in
Fig. 3 Replication and disease validation of genes differentially expressed in MAPT p.R406W brains. To determine whether the 328
differentially expressed genes in iPSC-derived neuronal models capture changes in gene expression that are relevant to human disease, we tested
whether these 328 genes were differentially expressed in human brains from MAPT p.R406W carriers compared with normal controls. a Volcano plot
showing log2 fold change between iPSC-derived cortical neurons carrying MAPT p.R406W vs. isogenic controls and the –log10 P-value for each gene.
Black nodes: the 328 genes with FDR B-Y < 0.05. b Volcano plot of the 328 genes showing log2 fold change between MAPT p.R406W (insular cortex)
and control (insular cortex) brains and the –log10 P-value for each gene. Black nodes: genes with FDR B-Y < 0.05. c. Volcano plot of the 328 genes
showing log2 fold change between MAPT p.R406W (insular cortex) and control (parietal cortex) brains and the –log10 P-value for each gene. Black
nodes: genes with FDR B-Y < 0.05. d Heat map of the 61 genes differentially expressed in brains from MAPT p.R406W carriers compared to controls. e
Venn diagram of differentially expressed genes between MAPT p.R406W and controls. f Correlation of the effect size (shown as log2 fold change) of
the genes differentially expressed between MAPT p.R406W vs. isogenic control neurons and MAPT p.R406W (insular cortex) vs. control (insular cortex)
brains. g Correlation of the effect size of the genes differentially expressed between MAPT p.R406W vs. isogenic control neurons and MAPT p.R406W
(insular cortex) vs. control (parietal cortex) brains. h Relatedness of the 61 differentially expressed genes replicated in iPSC-derived neurons and
human brains. The sizes of the gene nodes are proportional to GeneMANIA scores of the genes (the degrees to which the genes are related). Black
node: MAPT gene; blue nodes: genes directly interacted with MAPT; Yellow nodes: drug target genes; green nodes: genes encompassed by FTD risk
variants; red node: drug target gene encompassed by FTD risk variants. i GO term enrichment. j KEGG pathway enrichment
Jiang et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2018) 8:265 
Page 9 of 16
 the interaction network (Supplemental Table 5). Hub
genes are defined by the total number of nodes directly
connected to a given node; rankings of hub genes also
factor in betweenness and closeness centrality. Recon-
structing
the
GeneMANIA
network
without
co-
expression revealed that the top two types of gene rela-
tionships are co-localization (55.28%) and physical inter-
action
(26.22%).
Twenty-six
genes
were
directly
connected to MAPT, and GABA-associated genes SYT1
and SNAP25 remained the hub genes of the network
(Supplemental Fig. 3).
Next, we determined if these 61 genes were enriched
in specific biological pathways. We found that the 61
genes are enriched for functions related to calcium-
dependent presynaptic function (FDR-adjusted P =
2.2 × 10−2; STMN2, SNAP25, SYT1,
and CALM1),
kinesin
binding
(FDR-adjusted
P = 4.85 × 10−2;
KIFAP3, SNCA, CROCC; Fig. 3i) and pathways invol-
ving GABAergic signaling (FDR-adjusted P = 5.43 ×
10−3; GABRB2, GABRG2, NSF, NGN2, PRKACB; Fig.
3j). Importantly, these enriched pathways appear to be
functionally related, as SNAP25 is calcium-dependent
protein binding that is critical for evoked GABA release
and is expressed in the presynaptic terminals of mature
GABAergic neurons49.
In addition to evaluating gene ontologies and biological
pathways that are enriched by the 61 differentially
expressed genes, we tested whether these genes are enri-
ched for known drugs using Webgestalt. These analyses
identified 32 GABA agonists and antagonists that target
GABRB2 and GABRG2 (Supplemental Table 6). This
served as an important proof of concept that we can
leverage our molecular and biological findings with pub-
licly available data on drug interactions to identify and
prioritize
putative
FDA-approved
drug
targets
and
repurpose these molecules as potential treatments for
FTLD with MAPT p.R406W.
GABA receptors
Given the enrichment in GABAergic signaling among
the 61 genes differentially expressed between MAPT p.
R406W and controls in iPSC-derived neurons and human
brains, we examined expression of all genes encoding
GABA receptor subunits (Fig. 4; Supplemental Table 7).
In iPSC-derived neurons expressing MAPT p.R406W, we
observed broad downregulation of GABA receptor genes:
GABRB2,
GABRG2,
GABRA2,
GABRA4,
GABRA5,
GABRB1, GABRB3, GABRG1 (Fig. 4a). Similarly, most of
these GABA receptor genes were also downregulated in
human brains from MAPT p.R406W carriers, with the
exception of GABRA5, GABRB1, GABRG1 (Fig. 4b),
although some of these genes did not pass the stringent
multiple correction we applied in the initial analyses. It is
important to note that the GABAB receptors form func-
tional heterodimers composed of GABA B1 and GABA
B2 subunits. The GABA B2 subunit, which is encoded by
GABRB2, is essential for the functional expression of the
receptor dimer at the cell surface. Interestingly, the
observed change in receptor expression was specific, as
genes encoding subunits for AMPA and NMDA receptors
were not differentially expressed (Supplemental Table 8).
Mouse models of tauopathy display altered GABA receptor
expression profiles
Our stem cell models and human brain tissue samples
capture a single time point in the progression of the
disease; thus, we next sought to resolve whether GABA
receptor gene expression is impaired early in disease or as
a consequence of pathologic events. To begin to address
this question, we examined temporal expression of
Gabbr1, Gabrb2, Gabrb3, and Gabrg2 in a mouse model
of tauopathy that overexpresses human MAPT p.P301L37.
We observed robust and consistent down regulation of
Gabbr1, Gabrb2, Gabrb3, and Gabrg2 at 18 months of age
in MAPT p.P301L mice compared with non-transgenic
Fig. 4 GABA receptor gene expression is reduced in primary tauopathies. GABA receptor gene expression in: a iPSC-derived cortical neurons
carrying MAPT p.R406W (black bars) and isogenic controls (WT-iso; white bars). b Brains from MAPT p.R406W carriers (insular cortex, black bars) and
controls (insular cortex, gray bars; parietal cortex, white bars). c. Hippocampus of MAPT p.P301L mouse (red lines) and non-transgenic controls (black
lines). Graph represents mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001; ****P < 0.0001
Jiang et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2018) 8:265 
Page 10 of 16
 controls but not prior (Fig. 4c; Supplemental Fig. 4). This
time point coincides with the presence of overt tau
aggregation and neurodegeneration in this model37. Thus,
we hypothesize that MAPT mutations, including p.P301L
and p.R406W are sufficient to induce pathologic changes
that lead to altered GABAergic signaling.
Common variants in GABA receptor genes may influence
FTD risk
To determine whether the 61 differentially expressed
genes are involved more broadly in FTD, we asked whe-
ther variants present in the 61 differentially expressed
genes confer risk for FTD. We used summary statistics
from the largest GWAS to date of FTD (n = 6462)39. We
extracted all SNPs that occur within 5 kb of the 61 dif-
ferentially expressed genes. Five genes, including the
GABA receptor gene, GABRB2, were found to be mar-
ginally associated with FTD risk (Table 2; Supplemental
Table 9).
To determine whether the 61 differentially expressed
genes were significantly enriched for FTD risk variants, we
performed i-GSEA4GWAS. The 61 differentially expres-
sed genes were defined as a gene set and enrichment
analysis was performed to determine whether the FTD
risk variants were significantly enriched within the gene
set. The 61 genes were significantly enriched for FTD risk
variants (Fig. 5a; P-value < 0.0001). Furthermore, we
demonstrate that the SNPs within the 61 differentially
expressed genes are more significantly associated with
FTD risk than expected by chance (Fig. 5b). To demon-
strate specificity of this genetic enrichment, we sought to
determine whether genes differentially expressed in AD,
SCZ, BP, and ASD (Supplemental Table 10) were also
significantly enriched among FTD risk variants42. We
observed no significant enrichment (Supplemental Fig. 5).
These analyses provide further evidence to support an
important role for these 61 genes in FTD.
GABA receptor involvement in other neurodegenerative
diseases
There is pathologic overlap between FTLD with MAPT
p.R406W and other primary tauopathies, including PSP
and CBD50. Thus, we next sought to determine whether
the 328 genes differentially expressed in in iPSC-derived
neurons from MAPT p.R406W carriers and isogenic
controls capture aspects of disease pathogenesis that are
more broadly related to another primary tauopathy, PSP.
We performed differential expression analyses in two
brain regions affected in disease, temporal neocortex and
cerebellum, from PSP cases and pathology-free controls.
We found that 23 genes were differentially expressed in
the same direction in the stem cell model and in the
temporal cortex of PSP cases compared to controls (Fig. 6;
Supplemental Table 11). We also found that 94 genes
were differentially expressed in the same direction in the
stem cell model and in the cerebellum of PSP cases
compared to controls (Fig. 6b, c; Supplemental Table 11).
The effect size of the expression of these genes were
highly correlated in temporal cortex (Fig. 6d; Pearson
correlation R = 0.849 and P = 3.04 × 10−7) and cere-
bellum (Fig. 6e; Pearson correlation R = 0.843 and P =
1.454 × 10−26). In total, 12 of the 328 genes (NALCN,
CX3CR1, DSP, MGP, CELSR1, KIAA1107, EMB, GREB1L,
GAD2, LGI2, SLC6A1, and TONSL) were differentially
expressed in the same direction in the stem cell models
and both PSP brain regions (Fig. 6c). Only a single gene,
KIAA1107, was significantly reduced in stem cell models
and brains from MAPT p.R406W carriers and PSP brains
(Supplemental
Fig.
6C;
Supplemental
Table
11).
KIAA1107 is an uncharacterized protein that has been
implicated in white matter lesions in multiple sclerosis
and has been implicated in risk for FTD, PSP, and
CBD39,51–53.
To determine whether genes involved in GABAergic
signaling are similarly differentially expressed in PSP
brains, we performed pathway and differential expression
analysis. We found that the GABAergic synapse pathway
was
significantly
enriched
among
the
differentially
expressed genes in the temporal cortex and cerebellum of
PSP cases (Fig. 6g). We also found that GABRB1 and
GABRB2 were significantly lower in the temporal cortex
of PSP brains and that GABRA2, GABRA4, GABRA5, and
GABRB1 were significantly lower in the cerebellum of PSP
brains compared with pathology-free controls (Fig. 6f). Of
Table 2
Enrichment of genes differentially expressed by MAPT p.R406W among FTD risk SNPs
SNP
Chromosome
Allele 1
Allele 2
β
P value
Nearest gene
Location in Gene
rs9531160
13
T
C
−0.2723
3.54E-04
DCLK1
Intron
rs6743717
2
A
G
0.1804
3.63E-04
FAM49A
Intron
rs17521304
5
T
C
0.225
5.64E-04
GABRB2
Intron
rs199533
17
A
G
−0.1948
5.94E-05
NSF
Exon; K720K
rs3738684
1
A
T
0.2893
8.49E-05
OBSCN
Intron
Jiang et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2018) 8:265 
Page 11 of 16
 note, GAD2, which was among the 12 differentially
expressed genes in both PSP brain regions and in the stem
cell model, encodes an enzyme that catalyzes the dec-
arboxylation of glutamate to GABA and CO2.
To determine whether the 328 differentially expressed
genes in the stem cell model of MAPT p.R406W
represent genes that are broadly related to neurode-
generative disease, we examined RNA-seq data from the
brains of autosomal dominant AD carrying PSEN1
mutations and from brains with FTLD-TDP that are
sporadic in nature. We failed to observe any of the 328
differentially expressed genes in either dataset (Supple-
mental Fig. 6A-B; Supplemental Table 12). Additionally,
we found that the 328 genes are not significantly dif-
ferentially expressed in the human developing brain
(Supplemental Fig. 7). Thus, these 328 genes do not
capture disease processes related to AD, where tauo-
pathy is an event secondary to β-amyloidosis; disease
processes related to FTLD associated with TDP-43
inclusions; nor developmental processes. Furthermore,
these results indicate that the genes shared between the
stem cell model and human brains from MAPT p.
R406W carriers did not occur by chance.
Discussion
Here, we use a systems biology approach to identify
molecular drivers of FTLD with MAPT p.R406W. By
leveraging transcriptomics data from human stem cell
models
and
human
brain
tissue
and
bioinformatic
approaches, we demonstrate that genes enriched in pre-
synaptic function are altered in FTLD with MAPT p.
R406W.
Furthermore,
we
demonstrate
that
GABA
receptor expression is altered as a function of disease.
The goal of using patient-derived cell culture models is
to develop tractable, human platforms that recapitulate
disease-specific and patient-specific phenotypes. How-
ever, reagent costs and experimental variables preclude us
and the scientific community in general from studying
exceedingly large numbers of patient lines in parallel.
Here, we demonstrate that even in a relative small num-
ber of patient stem cell lines and paired human brain
tissues have sufficient power to detect molecular drivers
of disease.
In this study, we demonstrate that GABA receptor
genes are reduced in FTLD with MAPT p.R406W. GABA
receptors occur in the pre-synaptic and post-synaptic
regions where they function to bind GABA, the major
inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain. During devel-
opment, GABA is the major excitatory neurotransmitter
in the brain prior to the maturation of glutamatergic
synapses, where it plays critical roles in neural progenitor
cell proliferation, elongation of neurites and formation of
synapses. There are two major classes of GABA receptors:
GABAA and GABAB. GABAA receptors compose the
ligand-gated ion channel complex, while GABAB recep-
tors are G protein-coupled neuromodulatory receptors.
While we observed a marginal effect of MAPT p.R406W
on GABAA receptor subunit genes (Supplemental Table 2
and 3), in the iPSC-derived neurons, human brains and
mouse
model,
GABAB
receptors
were
significantly
reduced
in
MAPT
mutation
carriers.
Importantly,
GABRB2 was robustly reduced across the model systems.
GABRB2 encodes the GABA B2 subunit, which is the
major regulator of the functional expression of the
receptor dimer on the cell surface54. Thus, reduction of
this gene could have a significant effect on the number of
Fig. 5 Enrichment of MAPT p.R406W dysregulated genes in genetic risk for FTD. To determine whether the 61 verified differentially expressed
genes in MAPT p.R406W carriers were enriched for FTD risk, i-GSEA4GWAS was employed for enrichment analysis of FTD risk. a Gene-based
Manhattan plot of the enrichment analysis of the genetic association signals from FTD summary statistics for the 61 verified differentially expressed
genes. b Comparative QQ plot of the genetic association signals from FTD summary statistics between all genes and the 61 verified differentially
expressed genes
Jiang et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2018) 8:265 
Page 12 of 16
 functional GABA receptors at the synapse. Beyond the
eight GABA receptor genes that were identified in the
stem cell model, we also observed differential expression
of genes related to GABA signaling. SNAP25 is calcium-
dependent protein binding that is critical for evoked
GABA release and is expressed in the presynaptic term-
inals of mature GABAergic neurons49. GAD2 encodes an
enzyme that catalyzes the decarboxylation of glutamate to
GABA and CO2
55. Interestingly, SYT1, an integral mem-
brane protein involved in synaptic vesicles, co-localizes
with KIAA1107, the gene differentially expressed in stem
cell models and brains from MAPT p.R406W carriers and
PSP brains, in neurons56.
Defects in GABAergic signaling have been previously
implicated in tauopathies. A mouse model of tauopathy
expressing MAPT p.P301L exhibited a reduction in
Fig. 6 Genes differentially expressed by MAPT p.R406W are also altered in PSP brains. To determine whether the 328 differentially expressed
genes in iPSC-derived neuronal models capture changes in gene expression that are relevant to primary tauopathy, we tested whether these 328
genes were differentially expressed in human brains from PSP patients. a Volcano plot of the 328 genes showing log2 fold change between PSP and
control brains (temporal cortex) and the –log10 P-value for each gene. Black nodes: genes with FDR B-Y < 0.05. b Volcano plot of the 328 genes
showing log2 fold change between PSP and control brains (cerebellum) and the –log10 P-value for each gene. Black nodes: genes with FDR B-Y <
0.05. c Venn diagram of differentially expressed genes between PSP and control brains. d Correlation of the effect size of the genes differentially
expressed between MAPT p.R406W vs. isogenic control neurons and PSP vs. control brains (temporal cortex). e Correlation of the effect size of the
genes differentially expressed between MAPT p.R406W vs. isogenic control neurons and PSP vs. control brains (cerebellum). f Reduced GABA receptor
genes in PSP brains. Graph represents mean ± SEM. g KEGG pathway enrichment
Jiang et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2018) 8:265 
Page 13 of 16
 hippocampal GABAergic interneurons57. Enhanced late-
phase long-term potentiation was observed in these mice
that could be rescued with zolpidem, a GABAAR ago-
nist57. Several prior studies have reported qualitative
evidence for the role of GABAergic neurons in FTLD-tau.
Caenorhabditis elegans and stem cell models of an FTLD-
tau risk variant in MAPT (MAPT p.A152T) exhibit
abnormal
morphology
and
degeneration
of
GABA-
positive cells58,59. GABAA receptor activity may regulate
tau
phosphorylation60.
GABAergic
interneurons
are
reduced in some FTLD-tau brains, including PSP61,62. PSP
brains also exhibit GABAA receptor loss by flumazenil-
PET63,64. However, how these defects fit within molecular
cascade that leads to disease remains unresolved. Impor-
tantly, these studies did not reveal whether changes in
GABAergic neurons and GABA receptors were a con-
sequence of early molecular dysfunction or end-stage
neurodegeneration. Our findings suggest that MAPT p.
R406W is necessary and sufficient to induce changes in
GABA receptor genes and other genes that regulate
GABA function. Furthermore, we demonstrate that this is
maintained in human tissue, suggesting that the event
triggered by the MAPT mutation is maintained through-
out the disease course.
Drug enrichment analysis revealed a number of GABA
receptor agonists and antagonists that act on the genes
differentially expressed in our stem cell model and human
brains. The clinical syndrome underlying FTLD-tau
pathology in the brain presents with behavioral abnorm-
alities, language and executive dysfunction, memory loss,
and other changes65,66. GABA receptor agonists have
been considered as a possible treatment for these clinical
phenotypes67. However, our findings suggest that drugs
that increase GABA receptor expression or enhance their
function could be a therapeutic strategy that targets
central mechanism of disease.
iGSEA4GWAS analysis showed that the 61 verified
differentially expressed genes in MAPT p.R406W carriers
are generally enriched with more FTD risk variants than
average genes, indicating a genetic basis for the perturbed
expression profile. Interestingly, we found that GABA-
associated genes, GABRB2 and NSF, are within suscept-
ibility loci for FTLD. Two marginal risk variants (P-value
= 7.24 × 10−3 for rs13178594 and P-value = 9.14 × 10−3
for rs194072) were also mapped to GABRB2 in the GWAS
for PSP risk68. Of note, the haplotype block constituted by
genetic susceptibility loci of FTLD mapped to NSF, or
MAPT H1 haplotype69, is a significant GWAS hit shared
with FTD, PSP, CBD, and Parkinson disease53,68,70.
Our results also indicate that the iPSC model of MAPT
p.R406W has some correlation with PSP, implicating the
ability of the iPSC model of MAPT p.R406W to capture
disease mechanisms related to other primary tauopathies.
The reduced GABA receptor genes, GABAergic pathway,
and drugs targeting GABA receptors were also identified
in PSP, suggesting the loss-of-function of GABAergic
neurons is a common mechanism of tauopathy57,71,72.
However, the iPSC model of MAPT p.R406W is unin-
formative with regards to PSEN1 mutations in AD or
FTLD-TDP, further supporting its specificity for primary
tauopathy.
Performing transcriptome analyses (differential expres-
sion and network analyses) in human brain tissue has
been highly informative in identifying potential co-
expression networks. Constructing gene regulatory net-
works from 1647 post-mortem brain tissues of AD and
pathology-free controls revealed dysregulation of genes
involved in immune and microglia networks and identi-
fied TYROBP as a key regulator of these networks73. More
recently, multiscale networks in human AD brains suggest
that human herpesvirus subtypes may impact AD risk via
regulation of genes involved in APP processing74. How-
ever, it remains unclear whether these networks are
implicated in disease pathogenesis or an unrelated event
in the neurodegenerative process. At the same time,
performing similar analyses in iPSC-derived neural cells
presents huge potential, but it is not clear whether this
cellular system recapitulates the events that lead to dis-
ease late in life. The results of this study indicate that
iPSC-derived neurons are highly informative and recapi-
tulate the pathogenic events leading to disease. While, of
course, not all the transcriptome changes in these models
will be important to disease, when coupled with human
brain tissue, it is clear that the differentially expressed
genes shared between the two models are implicated in
disease and are unlikely to be a mere artifact. These
results also confirm that using human brain tissue from
deceased individuals can be informative, but when paired
with additional models, our data indicate that it may not
be necessary to study hundreds of samples to identify
reliable and replicable signals. In this study, we paired the
human brain tissue with iPSC-derived neurons because
the MAPT gene is mainly expressed in neurons, but we
recognize that we may be missing other relevant pathways
involved in non-neuronal cell types, including oligoden-
drocytes, astrocytes, and microglia cells. Thus, future
studies using iPSC-derived glia can lead to the identifi-
cation of additional pathways implicated in disease. This
study indicates that pairing iPSC-derived neurons with
human tissue is a highly powerful and informative
approach that helps to identify novel pathways involved in
disease. We predict that similar study designs may be
helpful in identifying pathogenic pathways leading to
neurodegeneration in other diseases and in other genes.
This is especially important for studies trying to char-
acterize different events that lead to disease in rare
Jiang et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2018) 8:265 
Page 14 of 16
 (Mendelian mutations causing AD, PD or FTD) or low
frequency variants (i.e., TREM2 p.R47H) with a large
effect size conditions, where it is difficult to identify a
large number of brain samples that carry these variants.
Availability of data and materials
The datasets analyzed during the current study are available from these
sources: Mayo Clinic Brain Bank: https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:
syn5550404; Mount Sinai Brain Bank: https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:
syn3157743; The Knight-ADRC: https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:
syn12181323. According to the data request terms, DIAN data are available
upon request: http://dian.wustl.edu.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health (K01
AG046374, R01 AG056923, R01 AG056293, R01 AG044546, P01 AG003991, RF1
AG053303, R01 AG058501, U01 AG05241102, and U01 AG058922), the Tau
Consortium, the Alzheimer Association (NIRG-11-200110, BAND-14-338165,
and BFG-15-362540). The recruitment and clinical characterization of research
participants at Washington University were supported by NIH P50 AG05681,
P01 AG03991, and P01 AG026276. This work was supported by access to
equipment made possible by the Hope Center for Neurological Disorders and
the Departments of Neurology and Psychiatry at Washington University School
of Medicine. Data collection and sharing for this project was supported by The
Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer’s Network (DIAN, UF1AG032438) funded by
the National Institute on Aging (NIA), the German Center for
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Raul Carrea Institute for Neurological
Research (FLENI), Partial support by the Research and Development Grants for
Dementia from Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development, AMED,
and the Korea Health Technology R&D Project through the Korea Health
Industry Development Institute (KHIDI).This manuscript has been reviewed by
DIAN Study investigators for scientific content and consistency of data
interpretation with previous DIAN Study publications. We acknowledge the
altruism of the participants and their families and contributions of the DIAN
research and support staff at each of the participating sites for their
contributions to this study. The authors thank the International FTD-Genomics
Consortium (IFGC) for providing summary statistics data for these analyses. The
list of IFGC members and further acknowledgments for the IFGC can be found
in the online supplementary material.
Author details
1Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, 660S.
Euclid Ave. Campus Box 8134, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. 2Hope Center for
Neurological Disorders, Washington University School of Medicine, 660S. Euclid
Ave. Campus Box 8111, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. 3Department of Pathology
and Immunology, Washington University in St. Louis, School of Medicine, 660S.
Euclid Ave, Campus Box 8118, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Supplementary Information accompanies this paper at (https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41398-018-0319-z).
Received: 5 October 2018 Accepted: 13 November 2018
References
1.
Cairns, N. J. et al. Neuropathologic diagnostic and nosologic criteria for
frontotemporal lobar degeneration: consensus of the Consortium for Fron-
totemporal Lobar Degeneration. Acta Neuropathol. 114, 5–22 (2007).
2.
Mackenzie, I. R. et al. Nomenclature and nosology for neuropathologic sub-
types of frontotemporal lobar degeneration: an update. Acta Neuropathol.
119, 1–4 (2010).
3.
Yasuda, M. et al. A mutation in the microtubule-associated protein tau in
pallido-nigro-luysian degeneration. Neurology 53, 864–868 (1999).
4.
Ghetti, B. et al. Invited review: Frontotemporal dementia caused by
microtubule-associated protein tau gene (MAPT) mutations: a chameleon for
neuropathology and neuroimaging. Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol. 41, 24–46
(2015).
5.
Forrest, S. L. et al. Retiring the term FTDP-17 as MAPT mutations are genetic
forms of sporadic frontotemporal tauopathies. Brain 141, 521–534 (2018).
6.
Cruts, M., Theuns, J. & Van Broeckhoven, C. Locus-specific mutation databases
for neurodegenerative brain diseases. Hum. Mutat. 33, 1340–1344 (2012).
7.
van Swieten, J. & Spillantini, M. G. Hereditary frontotemporal dementia caused
by Tau gene mutations. Brain. Pathol. 17, 63–73 (2007).
8.
Reed, L. A. et al. Autosomal dominant dementia with widespread neurofi-
brillary tangles. Ann. Neurol. 42, 564–572 (1997).
9.
van Swieten, J. C. et al. Phenotypic variation in hereditary frontotemporal
dementia with tau mutations. Ann. Neurol. 46, 617–626 (1999).
10.
Lindquist, S. G. et al. Alzheimer disease-like clinical phenotype in a family with
FTDP-17 caused by a MAPT R406W mutation. Eur. J. Neurol. 15, 377–385
(2008).
11.
Miyasaka, T. et al. Molecular analysis of mutant and wild-type tau deposited in
the brain affected by the FTDP-17 R406W mutation. Am. J. Pathol. 158,
373–379 (2001).
12.
Zhang, B. et al. Retarded axonal transport of R406W mutant tau in transgenic
mice with a neurodegenerative tauopathy. J. Neurosci. 24, 4657–4667 (2004).
13.
Tatebayashi, Y. et al. Tau filament formation and associative memory deficit in
aged mice expressing mutant (R406W) human tau. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
99, 13896–13901 (2002).
14.
Bunker, J. M., Kamath, K., Wilson, L., Jordan, M. A. & Feinstein, S. C. FTDP-17
mutations compromise the ability of tau to regulate microtubule dynamics in
cells. J. Biol. Chem. 281, 11856–11863 (2006).
15.
Aoyagi, H., Hasegawa, M. & Tamaoka, A. Fibrillogenic nuclei composed of
P301L mutant tau induce elongation of P301L tau but not wild-type tau. J.
Biol. Chem. 282, 20309–20318 (2007).
16.
Chang, E., Kim, S., Yin, H., Nagaraja, H. N. & Kuret, J. Pathogenic missense MAPT
mutations differentially modulate tau aggregation propensity at nucleation
and extension steps. J. Neurochem. 107, 1113–1123 (2008).
17.
Brandt, R., Leger, J. & Lee, G. Interaction of tau with the neural plasma
membrane mediated by tau’s amino-terminal projection domain. J. Cell Biol.
131, 1327–1340 (1995).
18.
Gauthier-Kemper, A. et al. The frontotemporal dementia mutation R406W
blocks tau’s interaction with the membrane in an annexin A2-dependent
manner. J. Cell Biol. 192, 647–661 (2011).
19.
Takahashi, K. & Yamanaka, S. Induction of pluripotent stem cells from mouse
embryonic and adult fibroblast cultures by defined factors. Cell 126, 663–676
(2006).
20.
Ban, H. et al. Efficient generation of transgene-free human induced pluripotent
stem cells (iPSCs) by temperature-sensitive Sendai virus vectors. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 108, 14234–14239 (2011).
21.
Budde, J. et al. Precision genome-editing with CRISPR/Cas9 in human induced
pluripotent stem cells. bioRxiv 187377 (2017).
22.
Karch, C. M. et al. Expression of novel Alzheimer’s disease risk genes in control
and Alzheimer’s disease brains. PLoS ONE 7, e50976 (2012).
23.
Li, Z. et al. Genetic variants associated with Alzheimer’s disease confer different
cerebral cortex cell-type population structure. Genome Med. 10, 43 (2018).
24.
Allen, M. et al. Human whole genome genotype and transcriptome data for
Alzheimer’s and other neurodegenerative diseases. Sci. Data 3, 160089 (2016).
25.
Dobin, A. et al. STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics 29,
15–21 (2013).
26.
Robinson, J. T. et al. Integrative genomics viewer. Nat. Biotechnol. 29, 24–26
(2011).
27.
Li, H. & Durbin, R. Fast and accurate short read alignment with Burrows-
Wheeler transform. Bioinformatics 25, 1754–1760 (2009).
28.
McKenna, A. et al. The genome analysis toolkit: a MapReduce framework for
analyzing next-generation DNA sequencing data. Genome Res. 20, 1297–1303
(2010).
29.
Patro, R., Duggal, G., Love, M. I., Irizarry, R. A. & Kingsford, C. Salmon provides
fast and bias-aware quantification of transcript expression. Nat. Methods 14,
417–419 (2017).
Jiang et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2018) 8:265 
Page 15 of 16
 30.
Love, M. I., Huber, W. & Anders, S. Moderated estimation of fold change and
dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 15, 550 (2014).
31.
Germain, P. L. & Testa, G. Taming human genetic variability: transcriptomic
meta-analysis guides the experimental design and interpretation of iPSC-
based disease modeling. Stem Cell Rep. 8, 1784–1796 (2017).
32.
Kim, K. I. & van de Wiel, M. A. Effects of dependence in high-dimensional
multiple testing problems. BMC Bioinforma. 9, 114 (2008).
33.
Gaujoux, R. & Seoighe, C. CellMix: a comprehensive toolbox for gene
expression deconvolution. Bioinformatics 29, 2211–2212 (2013).
34.
Gaujoux, R. & Seoighe, C. Semi-supervised Nonnegative Matrix Factorization
for gene expression deconvolution: a case study. Infect. Genet. Evol. 12,
913–921 (2012).
35.
Montojo, J. et al. GeneMANIA Cytoscape plugin: fast gene function predictions
on the desktop. Bioinformatics 26, 2927–2928 (2010).
36.
Wang, J., Vasaikar, S., Shi, Z., Greer, M. & Zhang, B. WebGestalt 2017: a more
comprehensive, powerful, flexible and interactive gene set enrichment ana-
lysis toolkit. Nucleic Acids Res. 45(W1), W130–W137 (2017).
37.
Matarin, M. et al. A genome-wide gene-expression analysis and database in
transgenic mice during development of amyloid or tau pathology. Cell Rep.
10, 633–644 (2015).
38.
Kang, H. J. et al. Spatio-temporal transcriptome of the human brain. Nature
478, 483–489 (2011).
39.
Ferrari, R. et al. Frontotemporal dementia and its subtypes: a genome-wide
association study. Lancet Neurol. 13, 686–699 (2014).
40.
Zhang, K., Cui, S., Chang, S., Zhang, L. & Wang, J. i-GSEA4GWAS: a web server
for identification of pathways/gene sets associated with traits by applying an
improved gene set enrichment analysis to genome-wide association study.
Nucleic Acids Res. 38(Web Server issue), W90–W95 (2010).
41.
Jiang, S. et al. A systems view of the differences between APOE epsilon4
carriers and non-carriers in Alzheimer’s disease. Front. Aging Neurosci. 8, 171
(2016).
42.
Gandal, M. J. et al. Shared molecular neuropathology across major psychiatric
disorders parallels polygenic overlap. Science 359, 693–697 (2018).
43.
Kilpinen, H. et al. Common genetic variation drives molecular heterogeneity in
human iPSCs. Nature 546, 370–375 (2017).
44.
Sato, C. et al. Tau kinetics in neurons and the human central nervous system.
Neuron 97, 1284–1298 e1287 (2018).
45.
Hevner, R. F. Layer-specific markers as probes for neuron type identity in
human neocortex and malformations of cortical development. J. Neuropathol.
Exp. Neurol. 66, 101–109 (2007).
46.
Rohrer, J. D. Structural brain imaging in frontotemporal dementia. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1822, 325–332 (2012).
47.
Seeley, W. W. Selective functional, regional, and neuronal vulnerability in
frontotemporal dementia. Curr. Opin. Neurol. 21, 701–707 (2008).
48.
Seeley, W. W. Anterior insula degeneration in frontotemporal dementia. Brain
Struct. Funct. 214, 465–475 (2010).
49.
Tafoya, L. C. et al. Expression and function of SNAP-25 as a universal SNARE
component in GABAergic neurons. J. Neurosci. 26, 7826–7838 (2006).
50.
Dickson, D. W. Neuropathologic differentiation of progressive supranuclear
palsy and corticobasal degeneration. J. Neurol. 246(Suppl 2), II6–II15 (1999).
51.
Höglinger, G. U. et al. Identification of common variants influencing risk of the
tauopathy progressive supranuclear palsy. Nat. Genet. 43, 699 (2011).
52.
Kouri, N. et al. Genome-wide association study of corticobasal degeneration
identifies risk variants shared with progressive supranuclear palsy. Nat. Com-
mun. 6, 7247 (2015).
53.
Yokoyama, J. S. et al. Shared genetic risk between corticobasal degeneration,
progressive supranuclear palsy, and frontotemporal dementia. Acta Neuro-
pathol. 133, 825–837 (2017).
54.
Lujan, R., Shigemoto, R. & Lopez-Bendito, G. Glutamate and GABA receptor
signalling in the developing brain. Neuroscience 130, 567–580 (2005).
55.
Schwab, C., Yu, S., Wong, W., McGeer, E. G. & McGeer, P. L. GAD65, GAD67, and
GABAT immunostaining in human brain and apparent GAD65 loss in Alz-
heimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis. 33, 1073–1088 (2013).
56.
Piccini, A. et al. APache Is an AP2-Interacting Protein Involved in
Synaptic Vesicle Trafficking and Neuronal Development. Cell Rep. 21,
3596–3611 (2017).
57.
Levenga, J. et al. Tau pathology induces loss of GABAergic interneurons
leading to altered synaptic plasticity and behavioral impairments. Acta Neu-
ropathol. Commun. 1, 34 (2013).
58.
Fong, H. et al. Genetic correction of tauopathy phenotypes in neurons
derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells. Stem Cell Rep. 1, 226–234
(2013).
59.
Pir, G. J., Choudhary, B., Mandelkow, E. & Mandelkow, E. M. Tau mutant A152T,
a risk factor for FTD/PSP, induces neuronal dysfunction and reduced lifespan
independently of aggregation in a C. elegans Tauopathy model. Mol. Neu-
rodegener. 11, 33 (2016).
60.
Nykanen, N. P., Kysenius, K., Sakha, P., Tammela, P. & Huttunen, H. J. gamma-
Aminobutyric acid type A (GABAA) receptor activation modulates tau phos-
phorylation. J. Biol. Chem. 287, 6743–6752 (2012).
61.
Ferrer, I. Neurons and their dendrites in frontotemporal dementia. Dement.
Geriatr. Cogn. Disord. 10(Suppl 1), 55–60 (1999).
62.
Levy, R. et al. Alterations of GABAergic neurons in the basal ganglia of patients
with progressive supranuclear palsy: an in situ hybridization study of GAD67
messenger RNA. Neurology 45, 127–134 (1995).
63.
Foster, N. L. et al. PET measures of benzodiazepine receptors in progressive
supranuclear palsy. Neurology 54, 1768–1773 (2000).
64.
Murley, A. G. & Rowe, J. B. Neurotransmitter deficits from frontotemporal lobar
degeneration. Brain 141, 1263–1285 (2018).
65.
Neary, D. et al. Frontotemporal lobar degeneration: a consensus on clinical
diagnostic criteria. Neurology 51, 1546–1554 (1998).
66.
Boxer, A. L. & Miller, B. L. Clinical features of frontotemporal dementia. Alz-
heimer Dis. Assoc. Disord. 19(Suppl 1), S3–S6 (2005).
67.
Solas, M., Puerta, E. & Ramirez, M. J. Treatment options in alzheimer s disease:
the GABA story. Curr. Pharm. Des. 21, 4960–4971 (2015).
68.
Hoglinger, G. U. et al. Identification of common variants influencing risk of the
tauopathy progressive supranuclear palsy. Nat. Genet. 43, 699–705 (2011).
69.
Stefansson, H. et al. A common inversion under selection in Europeans. Nat.
Genet. 37, 129–137 (2005).
70.
Simon-Sanchez, J. et al. Genome-wide association study reveals genetic risk
underlying Parkinson’s disease. Nat. Genet. 41, 1308–1312 (2009).
71.
Soler, H. et al. The GABAergic septohippocampal connection is impaired in a
mouse model of tauopathy. Neurobiol. Aging 49, 40–51 (2017).
72.
Loreth, D. et al. Selective degeneration of septal and hippocampal GABAergic
neurons in a mouse model of amyloidosis and tauopathy. Neurobiol. Dis. 47,
1–12 (2012).
73.
Zhang, B. et al. Integrated systems approach identifies genetic nodes and
networks in late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Cell 153, 707–720 (2013).
74.
Readhead, B. et al. Multiscale analysis of independent Alzheimer’s cohorts
finds disruption of molecular, genetic, and clinical networks by human her-
pesvirus. Neuron. 99, 64–82.e7 (2018).
Jiang et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2018) 8:265 
Page 16 of 16
