 Partial restoration of the microbiota of cesarean-born infants via 
vaginal microbial transfer
Maria G. Dominguez-Bello1,2,*, Kassandra M. De Jesus-Laboy2, Nan Shen8, Laura M. Cox1, 
Amnon Amir3,7, Antonio Gonzalez3,7, Nicholas A. Bokulich1, Se Jin Song3,4, Marina 
Hoashi5, Juana I. Rivera-Vina6, Keimari Mendez6, Rob Knight3,7, and Jose C. Clemente8,9,*
1School of Medicine, New York University, New York, NY, USA
2Department of Biology, University of Puerto Rico, Río Piedras Campus, San Juan, PR, USA
3Biofrontiers Institute, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, USA
4Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, USA
5Polytechnic Institute of New York University, NY, USA
6Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical Science Campus, University of Puerto Rico, 
San Juan, PR, USA
7Department of Pediatrics, University of California-San Diego, CA, USA
8Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY, USA
9Department of Medicine, Division of Clinical Immunology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Abstract
Exposure of newborns to the maternal vaginal microbiota is interrupted with cesarean birthing. 
Babies delivered by Cesarean section (C-section) acquire a microbiota that differs from that of 
vaginally delivered infants, and C-section delivery has been associated with increased risk for 
immune and metabolic disorders. Here we conducted a pilot study in which infants delivered by 
C-section are exposed to maternal vaginal fluids at birth. Similar to vaginally delivered babies, the 
gut, oral, and skin microbiome of these newborns during the first 30 days of life was enriched in 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
*Corresponding authors: Maria G Dominguez-Bello, Ph.D., maria.dominguez-bello@nyumc.org, Jose C. Clemente, Ph.D., 
jose.clemente@mssm.edu. 
Accession codes
Sequence data have been deposited to EBI under study accession number ERP012216 and submission accession number ERA486171.
Author contributions
M.G.D.B. designed the study. M.G.D.B., K.M.D.J.L., J.I.R.V., and K.M. collected and processed specimens. M.G.D.B. sequenced and 
generated data. N.S., L.M.C., A.A., A.G., N.A.B., S.J.S., M.H., and J.C.C. performed experiments. M.G.D.B., N.S., L.M.C., A.A., 
A.G., N.A.B., S.J.S., M.H., R.K., and J.C.C. analyzed data. M.G.D.B. and J.C.C. drafted the manuscript. All authors reviewed the final 
manuscript.
Competing financial interests
New York University has filed an U.S. patent application (number 62161549) on behalf of M.G.D.B., related to methods for restoring 
the microbiota of newborns.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 13.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Med. 2016 March ; 22(3): 250–253. doi:10.1038/nm.4039.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 vaginal bacteria underrepresented in unexposed C-section infants, albeit similarity to vaginally-
delivered infants was higher in oral and skin than in anal samples. Although the long-term health 
consequences of restoring the microbiota of C-section born infants remain unclear, our results 
demonstrate that vaginal microbes can be partially restored at birth in C-section delivered babies.
Mode of delivery is a major determinant of microbiota composition in newborns. Vaginally 
delivered infants harbor bacterial communities resembling those of the maternal vagina, 
while C-section infants are enriched in skin microbiota1. The microbiome that colonizes the 
body of newborns can play a determinant role in educating the immune system2. Early 
interaction with commensal microbes is essential for healthy immune development and 
metabolic programming, and aberrant microbial colonization in newborns has been 
associated with long-term effects on host metabolism3 or impaired immune development2. 
Epidemiological studies, although not showing causality, have reported associations between 
C-section delivery and increased risk of obesity, asthma, allergies, and immune 
deficiencies4–7. Rates of cesarean delivery are increasing worldwide and in some countries 
exceed 50% of total births8–10, substantially over the estimated 15% of births requiring C-
section delivery to protect the health of the mother or baby11.
In this study, C-section delivered infants were exposed to their maternal vaginal fluids at 
birth, and the composition of their microbiota was determined longitudinally to assess 
whether they developed more similarly to vaginally born babies than to unexposed C-section 
infants. We collected samples from 18 infants and their mothers, including 7 born vaginally 
and 11 delivered by scheduled C-section, of which 4 were exposed to the maternal vaginal 
fluids at birth (Supplementary Table 1). Briefly, the microbial restoration procedure consists 
of incubating a sterile gauze in the vagina of mothers that were negative for Group B 
streptococcus (GBS), had no signs of vaginosis, and had a vaginal pH below 4.5, during the 
hour preceding the C-section. Within the first two minutes of birth, babies were exposed to 
their maternal vaginal contents by being swabbed with the gauze, starting with the mouth, 
then the face, and finally the rest of the body (Fig. 1a). A total of 1,519 samples were 
obtained from anal, oral and skin sites of infants and mothers at six time points during the 
first month of life (1, 3, 7, 14, 21 and 30 days after birth; Supplementary Table 2), 
Microbiome composition was characterized by sequencing the V4 region of 16S rRNA gene 
as previously described12, and 1,016 samples were utilized for analysis after quality filtering 
(Supplementary Methods).
Bacterial sourcetracking13 of the infant microbiome revealed that the four C-section infants 
exposed to vaginal fluids resembled vaginally delivered infants, particularly so during the 
first week of life (Fig. 1b). The distance between samples from exposed and vaginal 
newborns was lower in anal and skin samples (Fig. 1c). At day 1, and regardless of body 
site, the microbiome of babies delivered vaginally or by C-section but exposed to vaginal 
fluids was more similar to the maternal vaginal microbiome than that of C-section infants 
(Supplementary Fig. 1). A progression towards a body-specific configuration was observed 
in all body sites, either gradually (anus) or quickly (oral, skin), but both vaginally delivered 
and exposed newborns exhibit a vaginal-like signature that is absent in C-section babies 
(Supplementary Fig. 2). Although variations in microbiome composition per subject exist 
Dominguez-Bello et al.
Page 2
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 within each of the groups (Supplementary Figs. 3 to 7), we confirmed the differences 
between unexposed and exposed C-section infants by building a Random Forest classifier 
for each body site14. Samples from unexposed C-section and vaginally delivered infants 
could be classified with high accuracy, confirming that delivery mode shapes microbial 
communities of the infants (Supplementary Table 1). In relation to C-section infants 
unexposed to vaginal fluids, anal, oral, and skin samples from exposed C-section infants 
were classified less frequently as samples from C-section and more often as samples from 
vaginally delivered infants (Supplementary Table 3), with oral and skin samples more 
accurately classified than anal samples. A Random Forest classifier built from predicted 
metagenome content was equally able to distinguish vaginal and C-section infants, with 
exposed infants being classified as vaginal in oral and skin samples, and as C-section in anal 
samples but again less frequently than unexposed C-section infants (Supplementary Table 4).
Microbial colonization of body sites in the newborn occurs quickly and changes proceed 
during the first month in all groups. In anal samples from exposed infants and vaginally 
delivered infants, there is an early enrichment of Lactobacillus followed by a bloom of 
Bacteroides from week 2 that is not observed in newborns not exposed to vaginal fluids (Fig. 
1d and Supplementary Fig. 2). The anal microbiota of newborns in our study, as previously 
reported, remained distinct from that of adults even at one month of life15,16. The infant skin 
and oral microbiota, however, acquired a more adult-like configuration after the first week of 
life in all three groups. Unexposed C-section infants, however, lacked vaginal bacteria that 
were restored with the gauze or present in vaginally delivered infants, particularly anal and 
skin Lactobacillus early in life, anal Bacteroides, and members of the Bacteroidales family 
S24–7 in the skin (Fig. 1d and Supplementary Fig. 2). It has been recently shown that 
maturation of the infant gut microbiome occurs with the cessation of breast-feeding, with no 
differences appreciated between exclusive or formula-supplemented breastfeeding until the 
fourth month of life15. Since all infants in our study received breast milk either exclusively 
or supplemented with formula during the first month of life (Supplementary Table 1), the 
microbiome composition profiles observed in each group do not appear to be due to feeding 
mode.
Neonatal bacterial diversity was highest at birth in anal and oral sites, and had declined by 
the third day (Supplementary Figs. 8a, 8b). Although this phenomenon is not yet well 
understood, we have previously observed it in the gut microbiome of mice17. While the post-
natal decrease in digestive diversity might reflect the selective effect of milk on the gut and 
oral microbiome, the initially higher diversity could be explained by in utero colonization of 
the neonate18,19. The skin of newborns, on the other hand, was lowest at birth and gradually 
increased during the first month of life (Supplementary Fig. 8c).
Since C-section delivered infants were exposed to vaginal fluids through the use of sterile 
gauzes, we determined how similar the microbiome of the gauzes was to that of samples 
obtained from maternal body sites at day 1. We confirmed that the microbiota of the gauzes 
incubated in the maternal vagina were closest to the vaginal samples (Fig. 2a), with both 
enriched in Lactobacillus iners (Supplementary Fig. 9 and Supplementary Methods). 
Distance of each gauze sample to their own maternal vaginal sample was smaller than to 
those of other mothers, although these differences were not significant (Supplementary Fig. 
Dominguez-Bello et al.
Page 3
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 10). Power analysis estimated that it would require 35 samples per group to detect the 
observed effect size (Cohen’s d = 0.68) with a power of 80% and a significance level of 
0.05. UniFrac distances from the gauzes to vaginal samples were significantly smaller than 
from the gauzes to other body sites (ANOVA, P < 0.01, Fig. 2b) and bacterial sourcetracking 
further confirmed that the microbiota of the gauzes is mostly of vaginal origin (Fig. 2c).
Although our sample size is limited and sampling extends only through the first month after 
birth, our results suggest that, by exposing the infant to the maternal vaginal microbiota, the 
bacterial communities of newborns delivered by C-section can be partially restored to 
resemble that of vaginally delivered babies. The partial microbiota restoration provided by 
the gauze might be due to the compounded effects of the antibiotic treatments accompanying 
C-section and suboptimal bacterial transfer from the vagina to the gauze and then to the 
baby. However, there was no apparent clustering of the vaginal microbiota based on 
exposure to antibiotics (Fig. 2a, arrows indicate mothers unexposed to antibiotics). Bacterial 
diversity was not lower in the vaginal microbiota of mothers who received antibiotics (Fig. 
2d), and no clear differences were observed in taxonomic composition either (Fig. 2e). The 
abundance of Lactobacillus was not depleted in the vaginal microbiota of antibiotic-exposed 
mothers compared to that of unexposed mothers (Student’s t-test, P = 0.618). Both exposed 
and unexposed C-section infants were comparable in terms of antibiotic exposure and 
feeding (Supplementary Table 1), suggesting the differences observed in microbiome 
composition between these two groups can be most parsimoniously explained by the 
exposure to the vaginal gauze. A study of larger sample size will be needed to clarify the 
effect of perinatal antibiotics on the vaginal microbiome and, subsequently, on the 
microbiome of the gauze incubated in the maternal vagina and the bacterial load received by 
the infant. Determining more effective approaches to transfer the maternal microbiota to 
newborns or, more importantly, establishing which keystone species newborn infants should 
acquire at birth, will be important to maximize the beneficial effects provided by vaginal 
delivery in C-section infants. The partial microbial restoration observed in our study could 
be due to the fact that infants are exposed a single time to topical application of vaginal 
fluids. Furthermore, particular body sites (mouth, skin) were more amenable to inoculation 
than others. A modified protocol that exposed newborns repeatedly to the gauze would more 
faithfully reproduce the extended exposure that vaginally delivered infants receive, and 
might potentially improve microbial restoration, although this hypothesis remains to be 
tested. Enteral administration of key bacterial species could further supplement the method 
here described, however extensive research would be required to ensure the safety and 
efficacy of such approach. We stress that our work represents a proof of principle on a small 
cohort and with limited follow up in time. Labor is a complex process that cannot be fully 
recaptured by our procedure, and that encompasses multiple factors beyond the mere 
transmission of microbes from mother to infant. Finally, extended longitudinal analysis of 
larger cohorts will be needed to determine if this procedure has any effects on diseases later 
in life.
Dominguez-Bello et al.
Page 4
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Online methods
Study design
The inclusion criteria for mothers participating in this study were: healthy mothers as 
assessed by their doctors who were delivering vaginally or by scheduled C-section. Mothers 
scheduled to have a C-section were offered to participate in the study, and were divided into 
the two groups based on their willingness to have their newborns swabbed with the gauze. 
For the group of C-section delivered infants exposed to maternal vaginal fluids, mothers had 
to have negative results for the standard of care tests of STDs, including HIV, Chlamydia 
and Group B Streptococcus (GBS, standard test at 36 weeks by culturing), no signs of 
vaginosis or viral infections as determined by their obstetrician, and a vaginal pH<4.5 at 1–2 
h preceding the procedure. Of the 14 mothers whose infants were not exposed to the gauze 
(7 vaginal and 7 C-section delivery), three were GBS positive, and out of which two were 
delivered by C-section and one was vaginal delivery (Supplementary Table 1). All mothers 
received standard of care treatment, including preventive perinatal antibiotics (Beta lactams: 
mostly Cephalosporins or Penicillin. See Supplementary Table 1 for details) for mothers 
who underwent Cesarean section or for vaginally delivering GBS positive mothers. The 
study was approved by the Institutional Review Boards from University of Puerto Rico 
Medical Science (A9710112) and from Rio Piedras (1011-107) campus. All C-sections in 
this study were due to previous C-sections, and the procedure was conducted at the 
University Hospital, University of Puerto Rico Medical Science campus. Written informed 
consent was obtained from all participants.
Microbial restoration procedure
Within the hour previous to the procedure, maternal vaginal pH was measured using a sterile 
swab and a paper pH strip (Fisher). Once the pH was confirmed to be <4.5, a 8×8 cm four 
layered gauze (Fisherbrand Cat # 22028558) was folded like a fan, and then in half, wet with 
sterile saline solution and inserted in the vagina for one hour. Right before the C-section 
surgery started the gauze was extracted and placed in a sterile collector and kept at room 
temperature. As soon as the baby was brought to the neonate lamp and within 1 minute after 
delivery, the infant was swabbed with the gauze, starting on the lips, followed by the face, 
thorax, arms, legs, genitals and anal region, and finally the back. The swabbing took 
approximately 15 seconds. The neonatologist then proceeded to perform the standard 
detailed examination of the newborn.
Sample collection and processing
Sampling with sterile swabs in different body sites took place within the first 5 minutes after 
birth in all babies (including the vaginal gauze exposed C-section group, who were sampled 
after the gauze swabbing procedure), then at day 3, and weekly for the first month. Sampled 
body sites included oral mucosa, forehead, right arm, right foot and anal region of the baby, 
and the same sites of the mother plus a vaginal swab (Supplementary Table 2). Gauze 
samples were obtained from one cm2 from the center of the gauze. All samples were 
transported to the laboratory with ice packs within two hours of collection, and stored at 
−80C until further processing. DNA was extracted from samples using the MoBio Powersoil 
Kit following manufacturers instructions modified as described in the Earth Microbiome 
Dominguez-Bello et al.
Page 5
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Project protocol (http://www.earthmicrobiome.org/emp-standard-protocols/dna-extraction-
protocol/).
Sequencing and data processing
Sequencing of the swabs and gauzes was performed at NYU Genome Technology Center 
using the Illumina MiSeq sequencing instrument, with v2 reagents and 2 × 250 cartridge. 
Raw reads were de-multiplexed and quality filtered using QIIME v1.8.0 with default 
parameters20. Quality-filtered reads were clustered into Operational Taxonomic Units 
(OTUs) using an open-reference algorithm algorithm21 and Greengenes v13_8 as a reference 
set22. Samples that had at least 1,000 sequences (n=1,016) were further analyzed, resulting 
in a total of 6,515,724 sequences (mean 6,413±4,593; median 5,360 sequences). Alpha 
diversity on rarefied tables was estimated using Faith’s phylogenetic diversity23, and beta 
diversity using unweighted UniFrac24.
Bacterial sourcetracking
To estimate the sources of the microbial communities observed in each of the three infant 
groups at different body sites and time points, we used SourceTracker (v1.0), a Bayesian 
approach for bacterial sourcetracking13. Samples from each body site in the infants were 
designated as sinks, and samples from all body sites of the corresponding mother were 
tagged as sources. Sourcetracking of bacterial communities in the gauzes were performed 
similarly, designating gauzes as sinks and paired maternal body sites as potential sources.
Supervised learning classification
A Random Forest classifier was built for each body site using 500 trees and a leave-one-out 
error model as previously described14. To account for sub-sampling variability, the input 
tables were rarefied 10 times and results averaged over the total. The confusion matrices 
represent the mean and standard deviation percentage of samples from the true class 
assigned to each of the possible classes (vaginal, exposed, C-section) for each body site.
Predicted metagenome
OTU tables were filtered to remove de novo OTUs (i.e. not found in Greengenes). 
Metagenomic content was estimated using PICRUSt25 first normalizing each OTU in the 
filtered tables by its corresponding copy number and then predicting abundance of 
functional traits from the normalized OTU counts.
Deblurring
In order to identify with higher resolution the Lactobacillus present in the samples we used 
deblurring, a novel denoising method for Illumina based amplicon sequencing (manuscript 
in preparation). Using the raw reads as input, deblurring processes each sample 
independently and tries to remove all sequences derived from sequencing read errors or PCR 
errors, based on an upper bound on error probabilities. Briefly, the deblurring algorithm 
steps and parameters used for the current study are:
1.
Trim the all reads to constant length (150bp) and de-replicate, retaining 
the total number of reads per unique sequence.
Dominguez-Bello et al.
Page 6
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2.
Subsample to 4,000 reads (per sample).
3.
Discard all singleton reads.
4.
Remove sequences containing known sequencing artifacts (PhiS or adapter 
sequences)
5.
Perform multiple sequence alignment using MAFFT v7.130b26.
6.
Perform the actual deblurring: Iterate on all sequences from highest 
frequence to lowest.
a.
For each sequence, reduce the frequency of neighboring 
sequences (based on hamming distance + indel) according 
to the distance dependent maximal error profile. The error 
profile used ranges from 6% maximal read error for 
hamming distance 1, 2% for distance 2, down to 0.1% for 
hamming distance 10.
b.
If the resulting frequency is lower than 0, remove the 
sequence from the list.
7.
Remove chimeras from the resulting sequences using de-novo chimera 
detection with usearch 5.2.236 and the parameter –uchime_denovo
The performance of deblurring has been validated in simulations and mock mixtures, and 
was shown to retain the exact actual sequences in the sample while removing most of the 
sequencing/PCR error derived sequences, with the ability to detect sequences differing by as 
little as 1 nucleotide over the entire sequenced region. Additional details on deblurring and 
the source code can be found at https://github.com/biocore/deblur
Statistical analyses
All technicians processing the samples were blinded to the group allocations. Computational 
analyses were not blinded due to the use of supervised learning methods, which require 
knowledge of the groups. Since our study was designed as a proof-of-concept, sample size 
was not estimated a priori. Statistical tests were performed using QIIME 1.8.0 with default 
parameters and R 3.2.2.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by the C&D Research Fund (M.G.D.B.), U.S. National Institutes of Health R01 
DK090989 (M.G.D.B), the Crohn’s and Colitis Foundation of America grant #362048 (J.C.C.), and the Sinai 
Ulcerative Colitis: Clinical, Experimental & Systems Studies philanthropic grant (J.C.C.). Sequencing at the New 
York University Genome Technology Center was partially supported by the Cancer Center Support Grant, 
P30CA016087, at the Laura and Isaac Perlmutter Cancer Center. Computing was partially supported by the 
Department of Scientific Computing at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. We acknowledge the 
contribution of students who participated in obtaining the samples and the metadata: S.M. Rodriguez, J.F. Ruiz, N. 
Garcia, and J.L. Rivera Correa. We also thank M.J. Blaser for inspiring discussions and critical comments, and three 
anonymous reviewers for their suggestions to improve this manuscript
Dominguez-Bello et al.
Page 7
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 References
1. Dominguez-Bello MG, et al. Delivery mode shapes the acquisition and structure of the initial 
microbiota across multiple body habitats in newborns. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010; 107:11971–
11975. [PubMed: 20566857] 
2. Olszak T, et al. Microbial exposure during early life has persistent effects on natural killer T cell 
function. Science. 2012; 336:489–493. [PubMed: 22442383] 
3. Cox LM, et al. Altering the intestinal microbiota during a critical developmental window has lasting 
metabolic consequences. Cell. 2014; 158:705–721. [PubMed: 25126780] 
4. Thavagnanam S, Fleming J, Bromley A, Shields MD, Cardwell CR. A meta-analysis of the 
association between Caesarean section and childhood asthma. Clinical and experimental allergy : 
journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology. 2008; 38:629–633. [PubMed: 
18352976] 
5. Pistiner M, Gold DR, Abdulkerim H, Hoffman E, Celedon JC. Birth by cesarean section, allergic 
rhinitis, and allergic sensitization among children with a parental history of atopy. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol. 2008; 122:274–279. [PubMed: 18571710] 
6. Huh SY, et al. Delivery by caesarean section and risk of obesity in preschool age children: a 
prospective cohort study. Archives of disease in childhood. 2012; 97:610–616. [PubMed: 22623615] 
7. Sevelsted A, Stokholm J, Bonnelykke K, Bisgaard H. Cesarean section and chronic immune 
disorders. Pediatrics. 2015; 135:e92–e98. [PubMed: 25452656] 
8. Gibbons L, et al. The Global Numbers and Costs of Additionally Needed and Unnecessary 
Caesarean Sections Performed per Year: Overuse as a Barrier to Universal Coverage. World Health 
Report. 2010; 30
9. Finger C. Caesarean section rates skyrocket in Brazil. Many women are opting for caesareans in the 
belief that it is a practical solution. Lancet. 2003; 362:628. [PubMed: 12947949] 
10. Barber EL, et al. Indications contributing to the increasing cesarean delivery rate. Obstetrics and 
gynecology. 2011; 118:29–38. [PubMed: 21646928] 
11. Appropriate technology for birth. Lancet. 1985; 2:436–437. [PubMed: 2863457] 
12. Clemente JC, et al. The microbiome of uncontacted Amerindians. Science Advances. 2015; 1
13. Knights D, et al. Bayesian community-wide culture-independent microbial source tracking. Nat 
Methods. 2011; 8:761–763. [PubMed: 21765408] 
14. Knights D, Parfrey LW, Zaneveld J, Lozupone C, Knight R. Human-associated microbial 
signatures: examining their predictive value. Cell Host Microbe. 2011; 10:292–296. [PubMed: 
22018228] 
15. Backhed F, et al. Dynamics and Stabilization of the Human Gut Microbiome during the First Year 
of Life. Cell Host Microbe. 2015; 17:690–703. [PubMed: 25974306] 
16. Yatsunenko T, et al. Human gut microbiome viewed across age and geography. Nature. 2012; 
486:222–227. [PubMed: 22699611] 
17. Pantoja-Feliciano IG, et al. Biphasic assembly of the murine intestinal microbiota during early 
development. Isme J. 2013; 7:1112–1115. [PubMed: 23535917] 
18. Fardini Y, Chung P, Dumm R, Joshi N, Han YW. Transmission of diverse oral bacteria to murine 
placenta: evidence for the oral microbiome as a potential source of intrauterine infection. Infection 
and immunity. 2010; 78:1789–1796. [PubMed: 20123706] 
19. Aagaard K, et al. The placenta harbors a unique microbiome. Science translational medicine. 2014; 
6:237ra265.
20. Caporaso JG, et al. QIIME allows analysis of high-throughput community sequencing data. Nat 
Methods. 2010; 7:335–336. [PubMed: 20383131] 
21. Rideout JR, et al. Subsampled open-reference clustering creates consistent, comprehensive OTU 
definitions and scales to billions of sequences. Peer J. 2014; 2:e545. [PubMed: 25177538] 
22. McDonald D, et al. An improved Greengenes taxonomy with explicit ranks for ecological and 
evolutionary analyses of bacteria and archaea. Isme J. 2012; 6:610–618. [PubMed: 22134646] 
23. Faith DP, Baker AM. Phylogenetic diversity (PD) and biodiversity conservation: some 
bioinformatics challenges. Evolutionary bioinformatics online. 2006; 2:121–128.
Dominguez-Bello et al.
Page 8
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 24. Lozupone C, Knight R. UniFrac: a new phylogenetic method for comparing microbial 
communities. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2005; 71:8228–8235. [PubMed: 16332807] 
25. Langille MG, et al. Predictive functional profiling of microbial communities using 16S rRNA 
marker gene sequences. Nat Biotechnol. 2013; 31:814–821. [PubMed: 23975157] 
26. Katoh K, Standley DM. MAFFT multiple sequence alignment software version 7: improvements in 
performance and usability. Molecular biology and evolution. 2013; 30:772–780. [PubMed: 
23329690] 
Dominguez-Bello et al.
Page 9
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Restoring the maternal microbiota in infants born by C-section
(a) Infants born by C-section were swabbed with a gauze that was incubated in the maternal 
vagina 30–60 min prior to the C-section. All mothers delivering by C-section received 
antibiotics (ABX) as part of standard of care. The gauze was extracted prior to the 
procedure, kept in a sterile container, and used to swab the newborn within the first one to 
three minutes after birth, starting with the mouth, face, and rest of the body. (b) Proportion 
of each sample estimated to originate from different maternal sources (using bacterial 
sourcetracking) of anal (top row), oral (middle), and skin (bottom) samples in infants 
Dominguez-Bello et al.
Page 10
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 delivered either vaginally (left column, n = 7 subjects sampled at six time points), by C-
section (unexposed) (right, n = 8 × 6), or by C-section and exposed to vaginal fluids (middle, 
n = 4 × 6). (c) Bacterial community distances in anal (left), oral (middle), and skin (right) 
samples between vaginally delivered and C-section-delivered exposed (I-V) or not exposed 
(C-V) to the vaginal gauze, during the first month of life (Unweighted UniFrac distances). 
Bars indicate standard deviation from the mean. Distances between vaginal and exposed C-
section infants were significantly smaller than from unexposed C-section infants (ANOVA 
and Tukey’s honest significant difference test. * P < 0.01) (d) Representative bacterial taxa 
enriched in infants with perinatal exposure to vaginal fluids during the first month of life. 
Bars indicate standard deviation from the mean.
Dominguez-Bello et al.
Page 11
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Transmission of maternal vaginal microbes to the gauze
(a) Principal coordinate analysis of unweighted UniFrac community distances for maternal 
anal, oral, skin, and vaginal microbiota (n = 95 samples) and gauze (n = 4) microbiota at day 
one. Vaginal gauze bacteria resemble vaginal communities. Arrows indicate vaginal samples 
from mothers exposed to antibiotics. (b) Bacterial community distances between gauzes and 
each maternal body site at day one. Bars indicate standard deviation from the mean. (c) 
Proportion of gauze samples estimated to originate from different maternal sources using 
bacterial sourcetracking. Each stacked bar represents a gauze sample from a different 
mother. Oral samples were not found to be a potential source for any gauze and are not 
indicated in the legend. (d) Bacterial diversity (Faith’s phylogenetic diversity) of maternal 
vaginal microbiota in mothers that received (n = 13) or did not receive (n = 5) antibiotics 
prior to vaginal sampling before delivery. (e) Relative abundance of bacterial genera in the 
vaginal microbiota in mothers that received (n = 13) or did not receive (n = 5) antibiotics 
prior to vaginal sampling before delivery.
Dominguez-Bello et al.
Page 12
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
