 1
Scientific RepoRts | 6:30383 | DOI: 10.1038/srep30383
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Long-Term Training with a 
Brain-Machine Interface-Based 
Gait Protocol Induces Partial 
Neurological Recovery in Paraplegic 
Patients
Ana R. C. Donati1,2, Solaiman Shokur1, Edgard Morya3,4, Debora S. F. Campos1,2, 
Renan C. Moioli3,4, Claudia M. Gitti1,2, Patricia B. Augusto1,2, Sandra Tripodi1,2, 
Cristhiane G. Pires1,2, Gislaine A. Pereira1,2, Fabricio L. Brasil3,4, Simone Gallo5, 
Anthony A. Lin1,6, Angelo K. Takigami1, Maria A. Aratanha3, Sanjay Joshi7, Hannes Bleuler5, 
Gordon Cheng8, Alan Rudolph6,9 & Miguel A. L. Nicolelis1,3,6,10,11,12
Brain-machine interfaces (BMIs) provide a new assistive strategy aimed at restoring mobility in 
severely paralyzed patients. Yet, no study in animals or in human subjects has indicated that long-
term BMI training could induce any type of clinical recovery. Eight chronic (3–13 years) spinal cord 
injury (SCI) paraplegics were subjected to long-term training (12 months) with a multi-stage BMI-
based gait neurorehabilitation paradigm aimed at restoring locomotion. This paradigm combined 
intense immersive virtual reality training, enriched visual-tactile feedback, and walking with two EEG-
controlled robotic actuators, including a custom-designed lower limb exoskeleton capable of delivering 
tactile feedback to subjects. Following 12 months of training with this paradigm, all eight patients 
experienced neurological improvements in somatic sensation (pain localization, fine/crude touch, and 
proprioceptive sensing) in multiple dermatomes. Patients also regained voluntary motor control in key 
muscles below the SCI level, as measured by EMGs, resulting in marked improvement in their walking 
index. As a result, 50% of these patients were upgraded to an incomplete paraplegia classification. 
Neurological recovery was paralleled by the reemergence of lower limb motor imagery at cortical level. 
We hypothesize that this unprecedented neurological recovery results from both cortical and spinal 
cord plasticity triggered by long-term BMI usage.
Spinal Cord Injury (SCI) rehabilitation remains a major clinical challenge, especially in cases involving chronic 
complete injury. Clinical studies using body weight support systems1,2, robotic assistance1–4, and functional elec-
trostimulation of the leg5,6 have proposed potential solutions for assisting SCI patients in walking7,8. Yet, none of 
these approaches have generated any consistent clinical improvement in neurological functions, namely soma-
tosensory (tactile, proprioceptive, pain, and temperature) perception and voluntary motor control, below the 
level of the spinal cord lesion.
1Neurorehabilitation Laboratory, Associação Alberto Santos Dumont para Apoio à Pesquisa (AASDAP), Sâo 
Paulo, Brazil. 2Associação de Assistência à Criança Deficiente (AACD), São Paulo, Brazil. 3Edmond and Lily Safra 
International Institute of Neuroscience, Santos Dumont Institute, Macaiba, Brazil. 4Alberto Santos Dumont 
Education and Research Institute, Sao Paulo, Brazil. 5STI IMT, Ecole Polytechnique Federal de Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland. 6Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA. 7Mechanical and 
Aerospace Engineering, University of California, Davis, CA, USA. 8Institute for Cognitive Systems, Technical 
University of Munich (TUM), Munich, Germany, Germany. 9Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA. 
10Department of Neurobiology, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA. 11Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, 
Duke University, Durham, NC, USA. 12Center for Neuroengineering, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA. 
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.A.L.N. (email: nicoleli@neuro.duke.edu)
Received: 21 April 2016
Accepted: 04 July 2016
Published: 11 August 2016
OPEN
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
Scientific RepoRts | 6:30383 | DOI: 10.1038/srep30383
Since the first experimental demonstrations in rats9, monkeys10,11, and the subsequent clinical reports in 
humans12–14, brain-machine interfaces (BMIs) have emerged as potential options to restore mobility in patients 
who are severely paralyzed as a result of spinal cord injuries (SCIs) or neurodegenerative disorders15. However, 
to our knowledge, no study has suggested that long-term training associating BMI-based paradigms and phys-
ical training could trigger neurological recovery, particularly in patients clinically diagnosed as having a com-
plete SCI. Yet, in 60–80% of these “complete” SCI patients, neurophysiological assessments16,17 and post-mortem 
 
anatomical18 studies have indicated the existence of a number of viable axons crossing the level of the SCI. This 
led some authors to refer to these patients as having a “discomplete” SCI17 and predict that these remaining axons 
could mediate some degree of neurological recovery.
For the past few years, our multidisciplinary team has been engaged in a project to implement a multi-stage 
neurorehabilitation protocol – the Walk Again Neurorehabilitation (WA-NR) – in chronic SCI patients. This 
protocol included the intensive employment of immersive virtual-reality environments, combining train-
ing on non-invasive brain-control of virtual avatar bodies with rich visual and tactile feedback, and the use of 
closed-loop BMI platforms in conjunction with lower limb robotic actuators, such as a commercially available 
robotic walker (Lokomat, Hocoma AG, Volketswil, Switzerland), and a brain-controlled robotic exoskeleton, 
custom-designed specifically for the execution of this project.
Originally, our central goal was to explore how much such a long-term BMI-based protocol could help SCI 
patients regain their ability to walk autonomously using our brain-controlled exoskeleton. Among other innova-
tions, this device provides tactile feedback to subjects through the combination of multiple force-sensors, applied 
to key locations of the exoskeleton, such as the plantar surface of the feet, and a multi-channel haptic display, 
applied to the patient’s forearm skin surface.
Unexpectedly, at the end of the first 12 months of training with the WA-NR protocol, a comprehensive neu-
rological examination revealed that all of our eight patients had experienced a significant clinical improvement 
in their ability to perceive somatic sensations and exert voluntary motor control in dermatomes located below 
the original SCI. EEG analysis revealed clear signs of cortical functional plasticity, at the level of the primary 
somatosensory and motor cortical areas, during the same period. These findings suggest, for the first time, that 
long-term exposure to BMI-based protocols enriched with tactile feedback and combined with robotic gait train-
ing may induce cortical and subcortical plasticity capable of triggering partial neurological recovery even in 
patients originally diagnosed with a chronic complete spinal cord injury.
Methods
Eight paraplegic patients, suffering from chronic (>1 year) spinal cord injury (SCI, seven complete and one 
incomplete, see Fig. 1A, Supplementary Methods Inclusion/exclusion Criteria), were followed by a multidisci-
plinary rehabilitation team, comprised of clinical staff, engineers, neuroscientists, and roboticists, during the 
12 months of 2014. Our clinical protocol, which we named the Walk Again Neurorehabilitation (WA-NR), was 
approved by both a local ethics committee (Associação de Assistência à Criança Deficiente, Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, 
Brazil #364.027) and the Brazilian federal government ethics committee (CONEP, CAAE: 13165913.1.0000.0085). 
All research activities were carried out in accordance with the guidelines and regulations of the Associação de 
Assistência à Criança Deficiente and CONEP. Each participant signed written informed consent before enrolling 
in the study. The central goal of this study was to investigate the clinical impact of the WA-NR, which consisted 
of the integration between traditional physical rehabilitation and the use of multiple brain-machine interface 
paradigms (BMI). This protocol included six components: (1) an immersive virtual reality environment in which 
a seated patient employed his/her brain activity, recorded via a 16-channel EEG, to control the movements of a 
human body avatar, while receiving visuo-tactile feedback; (2) identical interaction with the same virtual envi-
ronment and BMI protocol while patients were upright, supported by a stand-in-table device; (3) training on a 
robotic body weight support (BWS) gait system on a treadmill (Lokomat, Hocoma AG, Switzerland); (4) training 
with a BWS gait system fixed on an overground track (ZeroG, Aretech LLC., Ashburn, VA); (5) training with a 
brain-controlled robotic BWS gait system on a treadmill; and (6) gait training with a brain-controlled, sensorized 
12 degrees of freedom robotic exoskeleton (see Supplementary Material).
In all cases except components 3 and 4 above, patients received continuous streams of tactile feedback from 
either the virtual (body avatar) or robotic devices (Lokomat and exoskeleton) via a haptic display (consisting of 
arrays of coined shaped vibrators) applied to the skin surface of the patient’s forearms. Tactile stimulation on the 
forearm was given in accordance with the rolling of the ipsilateral virtual or robotic feet on the ground.
Two BMI strategies were employed throughout training. Initially, patients were required to imagine move-
ment of the arms to modulate EEG activity so that they could generate high level motor commands such as ‘walk’ 
or ‘stop’
. Once patients mastered this first method, they learned to use EEG signals to control individual avatar/
robotic leg stepping by imagining movements of their own legs (see Supplementary Material for details). For the 
first paradigm, after the selection of the correct state, patients confirmed their choice by performing an isometric 
contraction of the triceps muscle.
Three lower limb actuators were used for the BMI experiments: a simulated 3D virtual avatar, the Lokomat 
gait trainer (Hocoma AG, Switzerland); and a custom built exoskeleton. The virtual avatar was simulated in 
MotionBuilder (Autodesk MotionBuilder 2014) and visualized from first person perspective using an immersive 
head mounted displayer (Oculus Rift, Oculus VR). The Lokomat is a robotic gait device that uses a body weight 
support (BWS) system integrated with a treadmill. Finally, a custom built exoskeleton was used with our patients. 
The exoskeleton had autonomous power, self-stabilization, and full lower limb hydraulic actuation. It was built 
to accommodate a wide weight range of SCI patients (50–80 kg) while not necessitating the use of crutches (See 
Supplementary Movie S11). Our exoskeleton was used in conjunction with a ZeroG19 system containing an over-
ground BWS system that rides along an overhead fixed track. In this setup, there were no mechanical barri-
ers between the patient and physical therapist. For this reason, the walking setup offers more challenges to the 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
Scientific RepoRts | 6:30383 | DOI: 10.1038/srep30383
subjects, in comparison to off-the-shelf devices, by requiring patients to be in charge of postural and trunk con-
trol, upper limb strength and dynamic balance. Further gait training was performed by having subjects utilize a 
lower limb orthosis and walking assistive devices (hip-knee-ankle-foot orthosis or ankle-foot orthosis with knee 
extension splint and wheeled triangular walker).
Throughout the application of our protocol, the complexity of activities was increased over time to ensure 
cardiovascular system stability and better patient postural control; starting with orthostatic training at a 
stand-in-table and progressing all the way to the different gait training robotic systems20–22. In addition to rou-
tine general clinical evaluations (i.e. cardiovascular function, intestinal and urinary emptying, skin inspection, 
spasticity handling), before and after every activity, and a long-term treatment of osteoporosis, multiple clini-
cal evaluations were periodically performed in order to identify possible changes in the neurological status of 
the SCI and to assess psychological and physical conditions. Such clinical evaluation started on the first day 
patients began training (Day 0), and were repeated after 4, 7, 10, and 12 months. Clinical evaluations included: 
the American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) Impairment Scale (International Standards for the Neurological 
Classification of Spinal Cord Injury23), the Semmes-Weinstein Monofilament Test24 (Fig. 1B), the evaluation of 
temperature, vibration, proprioception and deep pressure sensitivity, a muscle strength test (Lokomat L-force 
Evaluation)25,26, the Thoracic-Lumbar Scale for trunk control assessment27, Walking Index Spinal Cord Injury 
II (WISCI)28, Spinal Cord Independence Measurement III (SCIM)29, McGill Pain Questionnaire30 and Visual 
Analogue Scale (VAS)31,32 for pain evaluation, the range of motion of lower limb joints of the Medical Research 
Council scale33, Modified Ashworth Scale34 and the Lokomat L-stiff Evaluation for spasticity35, the World Health 
Organization Quality of Life Assessment Instrument-Bref (WHOQoL-Bref)36, the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale37, 
and the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI)38.
Figure 1. Methodology. (A) Cumulated number of hours and sessions for all patients over 12 months. We report 
cumulated hours for the following activities: classic physiotherapy activities (e.g. strengthening/stretching), 
gait-BMI-based neurorehabilitation, one-to-one consultations with a psychologist, periodic measurements 
for research purposes and routine medical monitoring (vital signs, etc.). (B) Neurorehabilitation training 
paradigm and corresponding cumulated number of hours for all patients: 1) Brain controlled 3D avatar with 
tactile feedback when patient is seated on a wheelchair or 2) in an orthostatic position on a stand-in-table, 3) 
Gait training using a robotic body weight support (BWS) system on a treadmill (LokomatPro, Hocoma), 4) 
Gait training using an overground BWS system (ZeroG, Aretech). 5–6) Brain controlled robotic gait training 
integrated with the sensory support of the tactile feedback at gait devices (BWS system on a treadmill or the 
exoskeleton). (C) Material used for the clinical sensory assessment of dermatomes in the trunk and lower 
limbs: to evaluate pain sensitivity, examiner used a pin-prick in random positions of the body segments. Nylon 
monofilaments applying forces ranging between 300 to 0.2 grams on the skin, were used to evaluate patients’ 
sensitivity for crude to fine touch. Dry cotton and alcohol swabs were used to assess respectively warm and cold 
sensation. Vibration test was done using a diapason on patients’ legs bone surface. Deep pressure was assessed 
with an adapted plicometer in every dermatome.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
Scientific RepoRts | 6:30383 | DOI: 10.1038/srep30383
Throughout training, the potential occurrence of functional cortical plasticity was evaluated through lon-
gitudinal analyses of EEG recordings. For this, patients were instructed to imagine movements of their own 
legs while EEG signals from 11 scalp electrodes were recorded over the leg primary somatosensory and motor 
cortical areas. Independent Component Analysis (ICA,39) was employed to determine potential cortical sources, 
represented by individual independent components (ICs), of novel leg representations in the primary motor and 
somatosensory cortices and to detect functional changes of these representations over time. To evaluate brain 
dynamics modulation, before and after many months of training, we calculated for each IC the Event Related 
Spectral Perturbations (ERSPs) with respect to a baseline of 1 second prior to the event and normalized by the 
average power across trials at each frequency. Event Related Potentials (ERPs), sampled from two EEG electrodes 
located over the leg representation area, averaged over all patients, before and after training, were also calculated 
and used for statistical comparison.
Results
Altogether, the eight paraplegic patients enrolled in this protocol (Table 1 for patient’s demography) participated 
in a total of 2,052 sessions, for a collective total of 1,958 hours, divided into multiple phases of neurorehabilitation 
training (Fig. 1A). Figure 1B details the distribution of hours of the six stages employed in our WA-NR protocol.
As part of the neurological evaluation, we periodically tested all patients’ sensitivity to fine touch, pain, tem-
perature, vibration, pressure, and proprioception (Fig. 1C). Figure 2A describes the individual improvement of 
each patient, in number of dermatomes, for tactile (Semmes-Weinstein monofilament test) and pain sensitivity 
(ASIA sensory evaluation) for all eight patients at the end of 10th month of training. The left graph shows the 
improvement of normal sensation, while the right graph depicts the improvement in altered sensation (hyper or 
hypoesthesia). In each of the graphs, improvement is described in terms of number of dermatomes, i.e. the body 
area that receives sensory innervation from a given spinal nerve root. In this analysis, we measured the extent of 
the Zone of Partial Preservation (ZPP), i.e. the dermatomes and myotomes (the set of muscles innervated by one 
spinal nerve) caudal to the neurological level of injury that remain partially innervated23. The ZPP applies only 
for complete SCI patients.
Figure 2B displays the patients’ average improvement, in number of dermatomes below the SCI, for both 
tactile and pain sensation after 10 months of training. Inspection of these two figures reveals significant improve-
ment in every monofilament and pin tested for all patients. Although we observed significant improvements in 
both the zone of normal sensation and in the ZPP, the largest gains (5.1 +/− 0.9 dermatomes) were consistently 
observed in the latter in every patient. In terms of tactile sensitivity, the largest improvements in number of 
dermatomes (1 normal/2 altered both pink and orange) were observed for the pink (300 g) and orange monofil-
aments (10 g). For the orange monofilament, the improvement was 1 dermatome for normal sensory area and 2 
dermatomes for the ZPP area. Figure 2C depicts two of the patients who exhibited the best improvement in both 
fine tactile and nociceptive perception. Notice that the improvement was larger for the latter and includes many 
dermatomes below the SCI level.
Throughout the study, all patients reported some type of pain sensation below the SCI level, as measured by 
the McGill’s questionnaire. Yet, patients experienced some difficulty in reporting the exact location of such pain. 
This finding corroborates the results described by Demirel et al.40 who showed that 68% of their SCI patients 
reported pain in the lower limbs. As the training progressed, the patients’ self-reported pain intensity in daily life - 
 
as measured by the visual analogue scale (VAS,32) - decreased on average from 2.0 to 1.3 (maximum 10, n = 8) 
while perception of pain at the moment of the evaluation (Present Pain Intensity evaluation integrates McGill 
Questionnaire30) stayed very low (sum over all patients = 3, with a maximum possible score = 40) throughout 
the year. An improvement in patients’ ability to perceive and relate more effectively the occurrence of lower limb 
pain as well the pain location in the body was observed at the end of the study. Supplementary Movie S1 shows 
the mean improvement for pain sensation over the 1 year training period.
Figure 2D–I describes the mean evolution of every somatosensory parameter (pain, tactile, temperature, pres-
sure, vibration, and proprioception) measured over the time course of our study. These graphs revealed that we 
did not observe any significant improvement in temperature sensitivity (Fig. 2F). Conversely, pressure sensitivity 
improved by 1 (normal) and 2 (altered) dermatomes, between the 4th and 10th month (Fig. 2G). Figure 2H indi-
cates that the average sensitivity to vibration also improved, mainly for the hip joint (anterior superior iliac spine), 
Gen
Age
Lesion 
grade
Lesion level
Time since the 
lesion (years)
Etiology
Right
Left
Patient 1
F
32
ASIA A
T11
T10
13
Closed trauma
Patient 2
M
26
ASIA B
T4
T4
6
Closed trauma
Patient 3
M
32
ASIA A
T10
T11
5
Open injury
Patient 4
M
38
ASIA A
T8
T8
5
Closed trauma
Patient 5
M
36
ASIA A
T7
T7
3
Closed trauma
Patient 6
M
29
ASIA A
T4
T4
8
Closed trauma
Patient 7
M
27
ASIA A
T7
T5
6
Closed trauma
Patient 8
F
29
ASIA A
T11
T11
11
Closed trauma
Table 1.  Patients’ demography.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
Scientific RepoRts | 6:30383 | DOI: 10.1038/srep30383
but also for the knee and the ankle. In all patients, improvement went from almost total absence to mid-level 
vibration sensation (see Figure S1 for details per patient).
The average proprioception sensation across all patients also improved significantly during the period between 
the 4th–12th months (Fig. 2I). This improvement was mainly observed at the hip level, since patients became 
capable of distinguishing hip flexion and extension for both the right and left sides. Secondary improvement was 
detected at the knee and ankle, from the 7th month to the 12th month (see Figure S2 for details per patient).
Improvement in motor function was also extensively documented in our eight patients. Figure 3A depicts 
the evolution of the ASIA motor protocol assessment for all patients, considering five key lower limb muscles: 
hip flexors (rectus femoris proximal portion), knee extensors (rectus femoris distal portion), ankle dorsiflexors 
(tibialis anterior), ankle plantar flexors (gastrocnemius), and long toe extensors. This analysis revealed that every 
patient exhibited some degree of improvement in voluntary muscle contraction below the SCI level. Indeed, seven 
patients experienced an improvement, ranging from two to multiple key muscles below the SCI level. The bottom 
shelf of Figure 3A depicts the average improvement for all eight patients for 11 muscles (five key muscles and six 
secondary muscles: gluteus medius, gluteus maximus, hip adductor, medial and lateral hamstrings, and long toe 
flexor) ranged in a proximal to distal order. Overall, the strongest motor improvement was observed in the six 
most proximal muscles.
Motor recovery was also documented through multi-channel surface EMG recordings (Fig. 3B,C). For this 
evaluation, patients were instructed verbally by a physiotherapist to alternate movements of their left leg with 
Figure 2. Sensory improvement after neurorehabilitation training. (A) Left table reports the improvement 
for altered sensation (hyper or hypoesthesia) and the right table reports normal sensation. Number of 
dermatomes recovered after 10 months training compared to baseline (recorded at day 1 of training) for pain 
and tactile sensory modalities for all patients and body sides. Sensory modalities are reported by pain, crude 
touch (applied with a 300 gr. monofilament), and gradually more selective touch (applied with 10 gr. to 0.2 gr. 
monofilaments). The brightness of each colored square represents the magnitude of improvement, considering 
each monofilament and pin employed (lightest represents highest improvement). (B) Average sensory 
improvement (mean +/− SEM over all patients) after 10 months training. (C) Example of improvement in 
the Zone of Partial Preservation for sensory evaluation for two patients. (D–G) Mean +/− SEM of lowest 
dermatome with normal (red) or altered (blue) sensation for (D) Pain (E) Tactile – crude touch, pink 
monofilament (F) Temperature and (G) Pressure on the body calculated over all patients. From (D–G), y-axis 
exhibits dermatomes in a cranio-caudal order, following the anatomic sequence. Baseline was recorded during 
the year following the injury, time 0 represents the starting day of our training. For each modality we show the 
average over raw (top graph) and z-scored data (lower graph). P-values for Wilcoxon rank sum test are reported 
on z-scored data (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001). (H) Mean score for perception of vibration on eight leg 
bones presented (most proximal to most distal order). Score convention was the following: 0 for no sensation, 1 
for altered sensation and 2 for normal sensation. (I) Mean score for proprioception (0: absent, 1: present) over 
lower limb joints. Note that measurements for temperature, vibration and proprioception were introduced 4 
months after the beginning of the training.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
Scientific RepoRts | 6:30383 | DOI: 10.1038/srep30383
movements of their right leg, and periods in which neither leg should be moved (Fig. 3B). The first EMG ses-
sion was recorded after 7 months of training (all patients), then a second session was obtained at 12 months (all 
patients except P2 and P8). Since all patients were completely paralyzed below the level of injury, none of them 
exhibited any motor activity below the level of their SCI at the onset of the training. However, 7 months into train-
ing, EMG recordings revealed that all patients started to show signs of motor recovery, indicated by their ability 
to voluntarily control at least one muscle below the level of the SCI (Fig. 3C). By the 12th month of training, this 
motor recovery had stabilized and, in most cases, improved significantly. Figure 3B,C shows that patient P1 exhib-
ited the strongest and most consistent voluntary contractions (Fig. 3B,C, Supplementary Movies S3, S4, S8, S9) in 
both left and right gluteus maximus (GMx) and reto femoral proximal (RFP) muscles (contraction significance, 
t-test, p < 0.01, is indicated in light green under each graph). This patient’s motor control was clearly selective, 
i.e., a stronger contraction of the right GMx and RFP was observed when the patient was instructed to contract 
Figure 3. Clinical and neurophysiological assessments of lower limb motor recovery. (A) Detail of key 
muscle improvement per patient, according to clinical evaluation (ASIA) for all patients and the average over 
all 8 patients for key and secondary lower limb muscles listed in a proximal to distal order (secondary muscles 
are in italic). Patients that changed classification to ASIA C after 12 months of training have 2 lines rings around 
their names. (B) Details of the EMG recording procedure in SCI patients. (B1) Raw EMG for the right gluteus 
maximus muscle for patient P1 is shown at the top of the topmost graph. The lower part of this graph depicts 
the envelope of the raw EMG, after the signal was rectified and low pass filtered at 3 HZ. Gray shaded areas 
represent periods where the patient was instructed to move the right leg, while the blue shaded areas indicate 
periods of left leg movement. Red areas indicate periods where patients were instructed to relax both legs. (B2) 
All trials over one session were averaged (mean +/− standard deviation envelopes are shown) and plotted 
as a function of instruction type (gray envelope = contract right leg; blue = contract left leg; red = relax both 
legs). (B3) Below the averaged EMG record, light green bars indicate instances in which the voluntary muscle 
contraction (right leg) was significantly different (t-test, p < 0.01) than the baseline (periods where she/he 
was instructed to relax both legs). Dark green bars depict periods in which there was a significant difference 
(p < 0.01) between muscle contraction in the right versus the left leg. (C) EMG envelops and t-tests for all 
recording sessions, involving 4 muscles, for all 8 patients: left and right gluteus maximus (GMx) and reto 
femoral proximal (RFP) muscles. Color convention and figure organization follows the one of panel B. Data was 
collected after 7 months of training for all patients and for all but patients P2 and P8 after 12 months.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
Scientific RepoRts | 6:30383 | DOI: 10.1038/srep30383
the right leg, while left GMx and RFP contractions were produced following the command to contract the left 
leg (see selectivity significance reported in dark green under each figure, t-test, p < 0.01). Patient P3 exhibited 
strong significant contractions in both left and right GMx muscles (Fig. 3C, Supplementary Movie S4). However, 
reliable RFP contractions, absent at the 7th month, appeared and became consistent at the end of the 12th month of 
training. The same evolution trend in motor control was observed in three other patients, P4, P5, and P7: while at 
the 7th month these patients exhibited weak or no voluntary GMx muscle contractions, after 12 month of training 
such contractions became evident in the EMG recordings (bilateral for P4 and P5, left side in P7, Fig. 3C). Finally, 
patients P2 and P8 also displayed significant voluntary muscle contractions in their GMx muscles during the 7th 
month of training. P8 also exhibited selective contractions in both her RPF muscles. Altogether, these longitudi-
nal EMG recordings suggest that a sustained and long-term training protocol may be required to trigger motor 
improvement in ASIA A patients.
Motor contractions were also documented through the employment of the Lokomat torque sensors during the 
same type of task used for EMG measurements (Table 2). Patient P1 showed the best recovery at 21.14 N⋅m (12th 
month, right leg) for hip flexion (thus RFP contraction), followed by patient P8 at 9.36 N⋅m (7th month), and P3 
and P5 at 4.6 and 4.3 N⋅m. Patients P2, P4, P6, P7 produced torques in the 0.8–1.5 N⋅m range.
Figure 4A and Supplementary Movie S2 illustrate the temporal progression of the average motor recovery 
observed in our patients, from month 0 to month 12, considering both key ASIA muscles and secondary lower 
limb muscles. Notice that this motor recovery clearly progressed from proximal to distal muscles, being more 
pronounced at the level of the hip joint. Thus, the muscles that exhibited the best recovery were: the gluteus max-
imum (maximum score 3; average score over all patients 1.56 and 1.5 for right and left side respectively), and glu-
teus medius (maximum score 2; average score 1.25 and 1.06), the proximal portion of the rectus femoris (max 3; 
 
average 1.56 and 1.5), and the hip adductors (max 2; average 1.18 and 1.06). At the level of the knee joint, the 
greatest improvements were observed in the medial and lateral hamstring (max 1; average 0.38 and 0.31), and the 
distal portion of the rectus femoris (max 2; average 1.06 and 0.88). At the ankle level, the greatest motor improve-
ment was located in the sural triceps (max 1.5; average 0.31 and 0.25) and the anterior tibialis (max score 1; 
 
average 0.5 and 0.38).
Overall, the global patterns of both sensory and motor recovery indicated a proximal to distal progression, 
below the level of the patients’ SCI that evolved to include sacral roots. Supplementary Movies S3–S10 shows 
patients’ clear lower limb contractions while in a hanging or lying positions after 1 year of training with the 
WA-NR protocol. As a result of this sensory and motor recovery, Fig. 4B depicts the progression over time of the 
ASIA classification showing that 50% of our patients (n = 4) changed their ASIA classification in 12 months of 
training: three of these patients moved from ASIA A to ASIA C and one patient moved from ASIA B to ASIA C.
To further document this recovery, Fig. 4C displays the individual patient improvement in thoracic-lumbar 
strength and stability measured in different positions – seated and laying down – and static and dynamic balance. 
Between the 7th and 10th months, five of our patients improved significantly in this type of motor control. To illus-
trate how this motor recovery functionally impacted the patients, Fig. 4D depicts the progression of their Walking 
Index for SCI over the last 5 months of training. As one can see, all patients showed significant improvement in 
assisted walking skills; two patients increased their performance by six levels, four patients by five levels, and 
two more patients by three levels. For example, while Patient 1 was initially not even able to stand using braces 
when placed in an orthostatic posture (score 0), after 10 months of training the same patient became capable 
of walking using a walker, braces and the assistance of one therapist (score 6). At this stage, this patient became 
capable of producing voluntary leg movements mimicking walking, while suspended overground in the Lokomat 
(Supplementary Movie S8). The same patient produced close to 20N*m of hip flexion force while in the Lokomat 
(Table 2). In another example, Patient 7, started at score 6 and progressed all the way to score 12, which means 
that he/she was capable of walking with two crutches and lower limb orthoses (hip-knee-ankle-foot orthoses), 
while requiring no assistance by a therapist.
In addition to the partial recovery in neurological functions, our patients also exhibited improvements in 
gastrointestinal function and their overall skin condition. Figure 4E plots the monthly evolution of both the mean 
number of standing/walking hours and the z-scored mean frequency of bowel functioning. The top right graph 
in Fig. 4E shows that these latter two variables are highly correlated (r = 0.72, n = 10 measurements). Notice 
that peak bowel function was reached 3 months after the training starting. During the patient’s vacation period 
Patient
Right Leg 7 
months of 
training
Right Leg 
12 months 
of training
Left Leg 7 
months of 
training
Left Leg 12 
months of 
training
P1
17.7
21.14
16.85
16.12
P2
1.11
1.17
0.95
1.31
P3
2.76
4.42
4.34
4.6
P4
0.47
1.48
0.9
1.07
P5
0.93
4.3
1.22
2.13
P6
0.25
0.6
0.3
0.8
P7
0.45
0.89
0.58
1.2
P8
5.01
9.36
Table 2.  Torque (N·m) measurement 7 and 12 months after beginning of training. Recordings were 
performed while patient was standing in the Lokomat (L-Force measurement). Patient was instructed by the 
physiotherapist to contract left or right leg (hip flexion). Peak of torque over six repetitions is reported.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
8
Scientific RepoRts | 6:30383 | DOI: 10.1038/srep30383
Figure 4. Clinical and functional improvements. (A) Graphical representation of clinical assessment of 
motor strength, calculated with the ASIA protocol, for key muscles and other muscles in the lower limb (mean 
over all patients). The scale for a given muscle goes from complete transparency for no muscle activation 
(muscle strength score 0) to contraction against gravity (score 3). Time 0 of x-axis means day 1 of the neuro-
rehabilitation training. (B) Patients with ASIA classification improvements: four patients changed ASIA 
classification over the course of the neurorehabilitation training, three moved from ASIA A to C and one 
moved from ASIA B to C. ASIA A is characterized by absence of both motor and sensory functions in the 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
9
Scientific RepoRts | 6:30383 | DOI: 10.1038/srep30383
(months 4–5), lack of standing/walking was correlated with a significant reduction in bowel function. Upon 
restarting of the standing/walking training, bowel function increased again.
EEG measurements were employed to investigate potential cortical functional reorganization that could 
correlate with the type of sensorimotor improvement observed during training. An Independent Component 
Analysis (ICA39) was applied to 11 EEG channels both at the beginning, and after 8–10 months of training. 
Briefly, the ICA algorithm isolates maximally independent sources from multi-channel EEG signals to both dis-
card non-brain signals (such as muscle artifact or noise) and identify the spatial location of distinct brain-derived 
signals contained in the overall EEG recording.
At the onset of training, in three out of seven patients instructed to imagine moving their own legs, we could 
only identify a total of four significant independent components (sum for all patients) in the putative leg rep-
resentation area of the primary somatosensory (S1) and motor (M1) cortices. The top shelf of Fig. 5A depicts 
the projection of these four components in the S1/M1 region (in a top and coronal slice) and the corresponding 
event related spectrogram perturbation (ERSP) found for each component is shown in Fig. 5B. The bottom shelf 
of Fig. 5A (respectively 5B for the ERSP) displays the same information, obtained after 8–10 months of training. 
Notice that at this point, a total of 12 significant components (sum for all patients) could be isolated in the leg 
area of the primary sensorimotor cortex of all seven patients who were asked to imagine locomotion movements.
Further analysis of the ERSP revealed the electrophysiological origins of the four independent components 
identified early in training in three patients (Fig. 5B, top shelf). They corresponded to the presence of desynchro-
nization of beta waves (16–20 Hz) for Patients 4 and 5, a clear power reduction in mu rhythm (7–12 Hz, first panel 
left) in Patient 5, and a smaller desynchronization of mu in Patient 6.
In healthy subjects, mu rhythm desynchronization is observed during motor imagery41,42. Desynchronization 
of beta waves (16.5–20 Hz) is also observed during the preparation period, prior to the execution of voluntary 
limb movements43–45, as well as during motor imagery46.
The bottom shelf of Fig. 5B illustrates the changes that occurred in the ERSP after 8–10 months of training. 
At that point, a total of 12 Independent Components (IC) could be isolated in the leg representation area of the 
S1/M1 of all seven patients analyzed. In 4 out of 12 (P1 second IC, P2 first IC, P3 first IC and P7), we detected a 
reduction in mu power. Interestingly, the remaining eight ICs depicted a significant desynchronization in both 
mu and beta waves. Altogether, these findings indicate that, after prolonged BMI-based neurorehabilitation 
training, the leg representation area of S1/M1 cortices of all patients exhibited the type of desynchronization of 
beta wave which has been associated with motor imagery in healthy subjects46.
Further evidence for functional plasticity taking place over the training period was obtained through an 
event-related potential analysis, considering two central EEG electrodes, located on the leg representation area of 
the primary S1/M1 cortices, for all seven patients analyzed. Figure 5C shows that, at the onset of training, there 
was no significant desynchronization of the EEG (red line) when patients were asked to imagine walking. Eight to 
ten months later, however, a significant EEG desynchronization (green line) was observed when the average for 
all seven patients was considered.
According to our inclusion and exclusion criteria, all our patients exhibited a complete range of motion 
(ROM) of the joints and a maximal grade of lower limb spasticity of 2 on the Ashworth scale. As our training 
protocol progressed, we observed that all subjects maintained the original complete range of motion and did not 
develop any muscles contractures. Moreover, their level of lower limb spasticity did not increase their perfor-
mance during the orthostatic or gait training. By using a Lokomat L-stiff test to quantify the level of spasticity 
of hip and knee muscles for flexors and extensors, we observed that, on average, all patients exhibited a reduced 
spasticity level by the end of 12 months. In addition, half of our patients maintained a stable bone mineral density 
index while the other half demonstrated a slight improvement. There was no correlation between bone mineral 
density and neurological improvement.
The SCIM questionnaire was applied to assess our patients’ level of functional independence to perform daily 
activities and mobility at home and in a community environment. Although all included patients exhibited a 
good level of independence in daily activities at the onset of training (ranging from 64 to 74 where scores ranged 
between 0 (dependent) to 100 (independent), some patients managed to improve their level of functional inde-
pendence by the end of the training. For instance, two patients experienced an improvement in the frequency of 
bowel function with no need of using auxiliary devices (laxatives); two became more independent in the bath-
room environment (perineal hygiene, setting towels/napkins and diapers); and two improved their level of inde-
pendence in the process of transferring from the wheelchair to the toilet and one from the wheelchair to the car.
lowest sacral area, ASIA B by the presence of sensory functions below the neurological level of injury, including 
sacral segments S4-S5 and no motor function is preserved more than three levels below the motor level on 
either side of the body, ASIA C by the presence of voluntary anal sphincter contraction, or sacral sensory 
sparing with sparing of motor function more than three levels below the motor level, majority of key muscles 
have muscle grade less than 323. (C) Thoracic-lumbar control scale evaluates quantitatively motor skill of the 
thoracolumbar region. Score ranges between 0 and 65. It has 10 items that considers supine, prone, sitting and 
standing postures. In the present study, the last item (orthostatic position) was scored 0 due to the limitations 
of the pathology. (D) Functional assessment of autonomy in walking given by the Walking Index for Spinal 
Cord Injury scale. The scale ranges between 0, for a patient who is unable to stand and/or to participate in 
assisted walking, to 20 for a patient who ambulates 10 meters with no walking devices, no braces and no 
physical assistance. (E) Correlation between average time spent in a standing position in orthostatic or gait 
training (mean +/− SEM, values are average hours per month) and mean frequency for bowel function (values 
calculated per month and z-scored per patient).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
10
Scientific RepoRts | 6:30383 | DOI: 10.1038/srep30383
Overall, all patients ranked very high on emotional stability and obtained good scores on the quality of life, 
depression and self-esteem assessment, with minimal fluctuations throughout the study. According to individual 
demand, psychological support was increased, but no use of psychiatric medication was required.
Discussion
As far as we can tell, this is the first clinical study to report the occurrence of consistent, reproducible, and sig-
nificant partial neurological recovery in multiple chronic SCI patients. This partial recovery was manifested 
by improvements in both somatic sensations and voluntary motor control, below the level of the spinal cord 
lesions. This sensorimotor improvement was also paralleled by autonomic improvements, such as bowel function. 
Moreover, this is also the first report demonstrating partial clinical neurological improvements in SCI patients 
subjected to long-term training with a BMI-based gait protocol. Up to now, all previous clinical reports involving 
BMIs focused on decoding and control strategies of artificial prosthetic devices using the subject’s own electrical 
brain activity alone12–14,47,48. In these studies, patients were able to control the movements of artificial devices 
using their brain activity. Yet, none of these studies described any type of neurological recovery as a consequence 
of BMI training.
A total of eight chronic SCI patients were trained over the course of 12 months in a multi-stage, progres-
sive neurorehabilitation protocol – the Walk Again Neurorehabilitation (WA-NR) protocol - that employed a 
non-invasive, EEG-based, closed-loop BMI approach. This protocol required that patients brain-control both 
Figure 5. EEG recording. (A) Functional Cortical dynamics over the leg sensory motor area over time. 
Projection of the position of dipoles found by Independent Component Analysis during leg motor imagery. 
Analysis revealed that the number of dipoles observed in the S1/M1 cortex evolved from four at onset of the 
protocol to 12 at the end of training. Two sets of sessions are shown for patients 1 to 7: one recorded in the first 
2 months of training (Onset) and one recorded between the 7th and 9th month of training (End). (B) For the 
onset and end of training, the Event Related Spectral Perturbation (ERSP) is shown for each of the Independent 
Components (IC) depicted in panel A. At the onset of training, one IC was found for P4 and P5, and two for 
patient P6. At the end of training, two ICs were found for each of the following patients: P1, P2, P3, P4 and P5.  
A single IC was identified for patient P6, and one for patient P7; and none for P8. Decrease in power in Beta 
waves (16·5–20 Hz) is associated with muscle contraction; suppression mu wave (7·5–12·5 Hz) are related to 
motor actions46. (C) Mean event related potential over all patients for two central electrodes (Cz and CPz) for 
Onset and End of training period. Significant desynchronization or synchronization is marked with an ‘*’
.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
11
Scientific RepoRts | 6:30383 | DOI: 10.1038/srep30383
virtual and mechanical actuators while receiving rich visuo-tactile feedback, aimed at restoring autonomous 
locomotion. Common to all periods of the WA-NR was the employment of both: (1) an EEG-based BMI, which 
required patients to produce motor imagery related to walking, was responsible for controlling the initiation of a 
series of lower limb motor behaviors (standing, walking and kicking a soccer ball), and (2) a multi-channel sen-
sory substitution (remapping)49,50 strategy that utilized a haptic display applied to the skin surface of the patients’ 
forearms to deliver both tactile and proprioceptive-like feedback. Such real-time tactile/proprioceptive feedback 
of autonomous bipedal walking was combined with visual feedback (3) during physical training using a robotic 
Body Weight Support (BWS) system on a treadmill (LokomatPro), an overground BWS system (ZeroG), and a 
robotic exoskeleton.
For all our patients, clinical diagnosis of total (ASIA A) or partial (ASIA B) paralysis was confirmed, over 
multiple years, by routine clinical neurological examination, performed by different neurologists belonging to 
the clinical staff of the hospital in which these patients were followed. Previously, these patients were enrolled in a 
traditional physical rehabilitation program that mainly aimed at increasing independence in daily living activities, 
while seated in a wheelchair. Two patients (P2 and P6) had routine training in a standing orthostatic position 
(stand in table device). Six patients (P1, P3, P4, P5, P6, P7) had walking training using parallel bars or using a 
walker. None of these subjects exhibited any level of sensory or motor improvement or recovery in the many years 
they were followed prior to enrollment in our study.
At the onset of our protocol, the ASIA status of all eight patients was confirmed by our own initial neurological 
evaluation. That further supports our contention that the neurological improvement observed here resulted only 
from the new WA-NR introduced in the present study.
Overall, all eight patients involved in the study experienced a significant improvement in tactile, proprio-
ceptive, vibration, and nociceptive (but not temperature) perception. Such improvement was already noticeable 
after 7 months, but reached its peak at the 10th month of training. On average, such a sensory recovery spanned 
multiple dermatomes below the SCI level, being more vigorous and consistent for altered nociceptive perception 
(more than five dermatomes on average) than for tactile, vibration or proprioception (between one-two dermat-
omes). Thus, as a rule, the pattern of sensory recovery documented in all eight patients indicated a larger effect 
mediated by small myelinated or non-myelinated fibers, which normally convey nociceptive and high-threshold 
tactile information, than through the large myelinated fibers that normally mediate fine tactile discrimination and 
proprioception. This suggests that axons running through the spinothalamic tract were the main mediators of this 
somatosensory recovery. As such, this observation may imply that the spinothalamic tract may be more resistant 
to the initial SCI and/or remain more amenable than dorsal column-medial lemniscal fibers to underlie plastic 
recovery, even many years after a spinal cord lesion. Interestingly, this is consistent with previous studies in which 
somatosensory plasticity was documented in animals51,52.
It is important to mention that, although we have not documented any significant recovery in thermo sensa-
tion, this negative result may reflect primarily the lack of specificity of the clinical method employed to evaluate 
temperature sensing. In the future, we intend to repeat this analysis using a more sensitive technique.
In addition to significant sensory recovery, we also observed widespread improvement in voluntary muscle 
control below the level of SCI, even in patients clinically classified as having a complete SCI. Such a recovery in 
motor function, which progressed from proximal to distal muscles over time (Fig. 4A) and was more intense at 
the level of anti-gravitation (extensor) and flexor muscles involved in hip movements – despite the fact that some 
motor recovery was seen at the level of knee and even ankle joints - was corroborated by clinical examination, 
EMG recordings (Fig. 3B,C), and direct measurements of L-force generated by patients (Table 2). Such a pattern 
of motor recovery suggests mediation by intact fibers of the vestibulo-spinal tract (extensor muscles) that run in 
the ventrolateral portion of the spinal cord, next to the spino-thalamic tract. Motor recovery at flexor muscles 
suggests that some fibers of the rubro-spinal tract may have also remained intact in some of our patients.
Altogether, the partial neurological improvement observed meant that 50% of our patients could be reclassi-
fied (three from ASIA A to C and one from ASIA B to C) in less than a year of training with our neurorehabilita-
tion protocol.
Prior to the present study, the literature contains only a single case report indicating that a patient with tetra-
plegia was reclassified from ASIA A to ASIA C after 3 years of being subjected to functional electrical stimulation 
bicycle therapy53. As far as we can tell, no independent study has reproduced this result so far. Heretofore, partial 
neurological recovery after an SCI has been mainly reported in subacute incomplete SCI patients. For instance, 
repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS), applied over the arm and leg representations of the pri-
mary somatosensory cortex of incomplete SCI patients, led to limited and variable improvements in sensory 
and motor functions54–57 primarily when high rTMS intensities were employed. Recently, the use of epidural 
stimulation at the lumbosacral level, combined with standing and stepping training, has allowed chronic ASIA 
A and B SCI patients to voluntary control paralyzed leg muscles. However, such motor control could only occur 
in the presence of the epidural stimulation58. In other words, these patients did not recover the ability to control 
their muscles without the assistive device. As such, none of the four subjects described by Angeli et al.58 changed 
their original ASIA classification. Interestingly, the study methodology also included a pre-implantation phase 
with extensive locomotor training (80 sessions) using a body weight support system on a treadmill. Neurological 
evaluations, neurophysiological measurements and ASIA exams, were performed before and after assisted gait 
training and implantation phases and no significant neurological recovery was observed suggesting that an iso-
lated gait trainer with a BWS system on a treadmill does not produce meaningful neurological recovery in com-
plete SCI patients. Moreover, no neurological recovery was described in a recent case report of a single SCI patient 
who was able to walk again using a BMI gait protocol that employed functional electrical stimulation of the lower 
limbs6.
Since our patients suffered their spinal cord lesions many years before enrolling in our protocol, the likelihood 
that the sensorimotor improvements observed here were due to spontaneous recovery can be basically ruled out. 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
12
Scientific RepoRts | 6:30383 | DOI: 10.1038/srep30383
Indeed, a review by the International Campaign for Cures of Spinal Cord Injury Paralysis59 about spontaneous 
recovery after SCI, based on pharmaceutical clinical trials that focused on acute neuroprotection in SCI60–62, 
reported that the majority of spontaneous recovery occurs during the first 3 months after the SCI. Small residual 
clinical improvements can persist for up to 18 months, but only minor changes occur afterwards. Thus, 1 year 
after an SCI, 80% of the initial ASIA A cases remain A, about 10% convert to ASIA B and about 10% to ASIA C. 
 
A survey of 987 SCI patients showed that, between 1 and 5 years after the lesion, a conversion from ASIA A to a 
higher grade occurs in only 6.5% of patients (3.5% to B, 1.05% to C and 1.05% to D)63. Since some of the patients 
that moved from ASIA A to ASIA C in the present study had suffered their SCI more than a decade ago, it is highly 
unlikely that spontaneous recovery accounts for our findings.
In complete motor lesions (ASIA A and B), the majority of functional recovery occurs within the ZPP, follow-
ing a craniocaudal sequence. Recovery within the ZPP appears to be due to both CNS and peripheral plasticity, 
while recovery beyond the ZPP would probably demand some CNS repair, likely involving axon regeneration59. 
Concerning partial motor recovery, the same review indicates that it likely occurs in myotomes with sensory 
preservation. Overall, the chances of a recovery of more than two spinal levels below the initial ASIA level are 
very small. Our findings revealed that motor recovery was indeed more significant within the ZPP. However, we 
also observed patients’ partial recovery in voluntary motor activity located in more than two dermatomes below 
the ZPP.
A previous study with ASIA B patients64 suggested that preservation of pinprick sensation can be useful in 
predicting motor recovery: presence of sacral pinprick sensation 4 weeks after the SCI significantly predicted 
ambulation 1 year later. Although these findings are not directly comparable to ours, by the differences in patient 
samples, the fact that we were able to document a 50% improvement in ASIA classification after many years of SCI 
raises the hypothesis that further motor clinical improvement could be seen with longer training.
The clear functional significance of the sensorimotor recovery observed here was further demonstrated by 
both the major overall improvement in the patients’ Walking Index. In other words, the observed partial sensori-
motor recovery was translated into a meaningful improvement in the patients’ daily routine.
But what mechanism could account for this partial neurological recovery? Kakulas et al.18 showed that about 
60% of SCI patients diagnosed clinically as having a complete spinal cord injury (ASIA A) still have 2–27% of 
the total area of spinal cord white matter preserved18. This finding is further supported by the observation that 
some of these surviving axons can exhibit functionality17 in more than 80% of such ASIA A patients. Sherwood 
and colleagues defined these cases as having a “discomplete” SCI and suggested that the residual axons could be 
Figure 6. Hypothesis for mechanism of neurological improvement in SCI patients. (A) Example of spinal 
cord lesion in the thoracic area. Cross section is shown in the three parts of the spinal cord: at the lesion level, 
on top and under the lesion. Example of two efferent and one afferent pathways and their corresponding spinal 
tract are shown (rubrospinal and vestibulospinal tracts; spinothalamic tract respectively). At the lesion level 
we hypothesize preservation of 2–25% of white matter18 which might include the spinothalamic tract (sensory: 
pain, temperature, crude touch and pressure), vestibulospinal tract (motor: extensors muscles), rubrospinal 
tract (motor: flexors muscles) and dorsal columns (sensory: proprioception and fine touch). Under the lesion, 
Central Pattern Generators (CPGs) and its interaction with descending pathways (reticulospinal tract) and 
sensory afferents, modulating the gait pattern50. (B) Proposed components for the rehabilitation mechanism: 
direct brain control of virtual or robotic legs, continuous stream of tactile stimulation representing the missing 
haptic feedback from the legs and robotic actuators to train patients to walk. Cortical and spinal plasticity are 
hypothesized to change and to modulate neurological circuits in the preserved area around the lesion through 
motor (red) and sensory (blue) connections.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
13
Scientific RepoRts | 6:30383 | DOI: 10.1038/srep30383
functionally rescued to mediate some level of clinical recovery17. We propose that such a mechanism may have 
accounted for the partial neurological recovery observed in our study (Fig. 6A).
Assuming that residual spinal cord connectivity mediated the clinical recovery, what are the potential phys-
iological mechanisms involved? Concomitantly to the partial neurological recovery, we documented the occur-
rence of cortical functional plasticity through longitudinal analysis of EEG recordings. This plasticity manifested 
itself by the emergence of consistent activation in the leg representation area of S1/M1, as measured by ICA, 
event-related spectrogram perturbation, and event-related potential analysis. The most prevalent EEG feature 
identified over training was the desynchronization of mu rhythm (7.5–12.5 Hz)41,42,65. Secondarily, we have also 
observed an increase in beta wave desynchronization.
Altogether, these results are consistent with our prior hypothesis66,67 that long-term BMI use is capable of 
changing the cortical body representation by including either new artificial actuators (robotic limbs or avatar 
bodies) or even by inducing a reactivation of the representation for paralyzed limbs, in the present case, legs. 
Therefore, based on these EEG findings, we propose that our long-term BMI-based training triggered a signif-
icant process of functional plasticity in S1/M1. Such functional cortical plasticity may have accounted for the 
re-emergence of lower limb representations in these cortical areas, as documented by the EEG analysis described 
above, and in another study with the same patients50. Such a functional cortical plasticity likely led to the reacti-
vation of upper motor cortical neurons that normally project to the spinal cord, via the corticospinal tract. Given 
that a small fraction of spinothalamic, vestibulospinal and rubrospinal tract axons may have survived the initial 
SCI event and remained silent for many years, even in our ASIA A patients, the peculiar motor recovery observed 
in our study, involving primarily hip extensor and flexor muscles, could be explained by the functional reacti-
vation of these residual axons as a byproduct of plasticity induced by long-term, intensive BMI training (Fig. 5).
But what are the key components of BMI training that triggered such a massive cortical plasticity? In our 
view, the driving force behind this plasticity includes: the direct brain control of robotic actuators by attentive 
and motivated patients, the reliance on patient’s motor imagery of walking to operate a BMI, a continuous stream 
of rich tactile/proprioceptive feedback, and the use of robotic actuators that allowed patients to routinely walk 
upright for long periods of time. This last feature may also have accounted for the generation of complex interac-
tions between the supraspinal centers (cortical and subcortical structures) and the spinal cord.
Particularly, in the case of locomotion, the use of robotic gait training may have triggered the engagement of 
central pattern generators (CP), both at the supraspinal and spinal levels, and contributed to the generation of 
tactile and proprioceptive feedback from the patients’ own legs. These two components may have also induced 
functional plasticity at the spinal level and contributed to the type of sensory recovery observed below the level of 
the SCI, mediated mainly by the spinothalamic tract, and the somatosensory cortical plasticity described above.
In both animals68,69 and humans70, central pattern generators (CPGs) have been shown to generate bilateral 
rhythmic patterns, alternating motor activity between the flexor and extensor motoneurons in the absence of 
descending inputs71. Animal studies have shown that the gait pattern itself is generated in the spinal cord by 
CPGs, which are modulated by a peripheral sensory feedback. Conversely, once gait is re-established, proprio-
ceptive and cutaneous afferents signals derived from receptors located in muscles, joints, and skin, can once again 
drive intraspinal circuits that interact with motor neurons, interneurons and CPGs in order to assist movement 
adaptations, such as postural corrections69. The level of this CPG activity would be determined by the brainstem 
locomotor command systems through the reticulospinal pathways68 (Fig. 5). The existence of CPGs in humans 
has been suggested, but its exact location is still unclear71.
Another possible source for sensory improvement observed in our patients could be the long-term use of 
visuo-tactile stimulation in virtual reality. Sensory modalities are not independent from each other; experiments 
have shown mechanisms of cross modal interaction72,73, and cross modal integration to create a robust percep-
tion74. In particular, vision of a body part was found to influence tactile perception75–77. For example, one experi-
ment has shown that observation of a body part increases tactile acuity during passive touch in healthy subjects78. 
The effect was present when subjects were touched on their forearm while observing a different part of their 
own arm; and their accuracy was even increased when the body part was magnified79. No effect was observed 
if a neutral object was used in place of the arm. Patients with sensory deficiency (stroke patients) were found to 
improve their sensory resolution by observing their own body. In another experiment, magnifying the arm of a 
patient with chronic pain increased his/her pain, while minifying decreased it80. Similarly, we hypothesize that 
long-term training observing a human avatar mimicking the position and orientation of the patients’ body could 
have induced a positive effect on our patients’ sensory acuity.
Based on our clinical findings, we propose that long-term gait training with a BWS that employs BMI-based 
robotic actuators, combined with rich tactile feedback, could recruit the activation of CPGs in SCI patients81. 
Likely, BMI-based training and tactile feedback in a virtual reality environment could also enhance CPG activity 
by recruiting cortical afferents to influence locomotion control. If some corticospinal or vestibulospinal axons are 
still intact in a fraction of SCI patients, these locomotion-related signals could reach lower alpha-motor neurons 
below the level of the SCI. Moreover, by making patients walk routinely upright and against load, peripheral tac-
tile and proprioceptive feedback would be generated and transmitted back to the spinal cord, contributing to the 
process of spinal cord functional reorganization (Fig. 6B).
In addition to partial neurological recovery, we observed a clear linear correlation between the number of 
hours spent upright walking/standing with the amount of bowel function (Fig. 4E). These and other autonomic 
improvements will be further explored in future studies using the same methodology.
We observed that significant clinical recovery was closely related to long-term and frequent use of a BMI par-
adigm that attempts to recreate lower limb movements in a realistic way (either in a virtual reality environment 
or through the use of brain-controlled robotic walkers). Further support for this contention can be found in the 
observation that after the two 30-day periods of vacation afforded to patients during the 12 month duration of 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
14
Scientific RepoRts | 6:30383 | DOI: 10.1038/srep30383
the protocol, we noticed a reduction in sensory and motor capabilities below the SCI level (Figs 2 and 3). Such a 
temporary reduction was quickly reversed, however, by the restart of the BMI-based training protocol.
Introduction of rich tactile feedback signals, delivered via a haptic display, also seemed to have played a key 
role in the patient’s recovery. Experiments reported elsewhere have shown that patients are capable of incorpo-
rating an avatar body and extending their body schema toward the avatar legs employed in our training50. This 
suggests that the introduction of tactile feedback likely enhanced the ability of patients to exhibit cortical and/
or subcortical functional plasticity during training with our BMI protocol, as we had previously documented in 
monkeys67,82.
Overall, the results obtained in our study suggest that BMI applications should be upgraded from merely a 
new type of assistive technology to help patients regain mobility, through the use of brain-controlled prosthetic 
devices, to a potentially new neurorehabilitation therapy, capable of inducing partial recovery of key neurological 
functions. Such a clinical potential was not anticipated by original BMI studies. Therefore, the present findings 
raise the relevance of BMI-based paradigms, regarding their impact on SCI patient rehabilitation. In this context, 
it would be very interesting to repeat the present study using a population of patients who suffered a SCI just a 
few months prior to the initiation of BMI training. We intend to pursue this line of inquiry next. Based on our 
findings, we anticipate that this population may exhibit even better levels of partial neurological recovery through 
the employment of our BMI protocol.
References
1. Alexeeva, N. et al. Comparison of training methods to improve walking in persons with chronic spinal cord injury: a randomized 
clinical trial. J. Spinal Cord Med. 34, 362–379, doi: 10.1179/2045772311Y.0000000018 (2011).
2. Field-Fote, E. C. & Roach, K. E. Influence of a locomotor training approach on walking speed and distance in people with chronic 
spinal cord injury: a randomized clinical trial. Phys. Ther. 91, 48–60, doi: 10.2522/ptj.20090359 (2011).
3. Hartigan, C. et al. Mobility Outcomes Following Five Training Sessions with a Powered Exoskeleton. Top Spinal Cord Inj Rehabil 21, 
93–99, doi: 10.1310/sci2102-93 (2015).
4. Zeilig, G. et al. Safety and tolerance of the ReWalk exoskeleton suit for ambulation by people with complete spinal cord injury: a pilot 
study. J. Spinal Cord Med. 35, 96–101, doi: 10.1179/2045772312Y.0000000003 (2012).
5. King, C. E. et al. Brain-computer interface driven functional electrical stimulation system for overground walking in spinal cord 
injury participant. In Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc.2015/01/09 edn 1238–1242. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc, Chicago, IL, 
August 26–30, 2014.
6. King, C. E. et al. The feasibility of a brain-computer interface functional electrical stimulation system for the restoration of 
overground walking after paraplegia. J Neuroeng Rehabil 12, 80, doi: 10.1186/s12984-015-0068-7 (2015).
7. Louie, D. R., Eng, J. J. & Lam, T. Gait speed using powered robotic exoskeletons after spinal cord injury: a systematic review and 
correlational study. J Neuroeng Rehabil 12, 82, doi: 10.1186/s12984-015-0074-9 (2015).
8. Mehrholz, J., Kugler, J. & Pohl, M. Locomotor training for walking after spinal cord injury. Cochrane Database Syst Rev, CD006676, 
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006676.pub2 (2008).
9. Chapin, J. K., Moxon, K. A., Markowitz, R. S. & Nicolelis, M. A. Real-time control of a robot arm using simultaneously recorded 
neurons in the motor cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 2, 664–670, doi: 10.1038/10223 (1999).
10. Carmena, J. M. et al. Learning to control a brain-machine interface for reaching and grasping by primates. PLoS biology 1, E42, doi: 
10.1371/journal.pbio.0000042 (2003).
11. Wessberg, J. et al. Real-time prediction of hand trajectory by ensembles of cortical neurons in primates. Nature 408, 361–365, doi: 
10.1038/35042582 (2000).
12. Collinger, J. L. et al. High-performance neuroprosthetic control by an individual with tetraplegia. Lancet 381, 557–564, doi: 10.1016/
S0140-6736(12)61816-9 (2013).
13. Hochberg, L. R. et al. Neuronal ensemble control of prosthetic devices by a human with tetraplegia. Nature 442, 164–171, doi: 
10.1038/nature04970 (2006).
14. Patil, P. G., Carmena, J. M., Nicolelis, M. A. & Turner, D. A. Ensemble recordings of human subcortical neurons as a source of motor 
control signals for a brain-machine interface. Neurosurgery 55, 27–35 discussion 35–28 (2004).
15. Nicolelis, M. A. Brain-machine interfaces to restore motor function and probe neural circuits. Nat Rev Neurosci 4, 417–422, doi: 
10.1038/nrn1105 (2003).
16. McKay, W. B., Lim, H. K., Priebe, M. M., Stokic, D. S. & Sherwood, A. M. Clinical neurophysiological assessment of residual motor 
control in post-spinal cord injury paralysis. Neurorehabil Neural Repair 18, 144–153, doi: 10.1177/0888439004267674 (2004).
17. Sherwood, A. M., Dimitrijevic, M. R. & McKay, W. B. Evidence of subclinical brain influence in clinically complete spinal cord 
injury: discomplete SCI. J. Neurol. Sci. 110, 90–98 (1992).
18. Kakulas, B. A., Lorimer, R. L. & Gubbay, A. D. In Spinal Cord Monitoring. Basic Principles, Regeneration, Pathophysiology and Clinical 
Aspects (eds Stalberg, E., Sharma, H. R. & Olsson, Y.) Ch. 395–407, (Springer Vienna, 1998).
19. Hidler, J. et al. ZeroG: overground gait and balance training system. J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 48, 287–298 (2011).
20. Benito-Penalva, J. et al. Gait training in human spinal cord injury using electromechanical systems: effect of device type and patient 
characteristics. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 93, 404–412, doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2011.08.028 (2012).
21. Eng, J. J. et al. Use of prolonged standing for individuals with spinal cord injuries. Phys. Ther. 81, 1392–1399 (2001).
22. Hoekstra, F. et al. Effect of robotic gait training on cardiorespiratory system in incomplete spinal cord injury. J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 50, 
1411–1422, doi: 10.1682/JRRD.2012.10.0186 (2013).
23. Ditunno, J. F. Jr., Young, W., Donovan, W. H. & Creasey, G. The international standards booklet for neurological and functional 
classification of spinal cord injury. American Spinal Injury Association. Paraplegia 32, 70–80, doi: 10.1038/sc.1994.13 (1994).
24. Bell-Krotoski, J. “Pocket filaments” and specifications for the semmes-weinstein monofilaments. J. Hand Ther. 3, 26–31 (1990).
25. Bolliger, M., Banz, R., Dietz, V. & Lunenburger, L. Standardized voluntary force measurement in a lower extremity rehabilitation 
robot. J Neuroeng Rehabil 5, 23, doi: 10.1186/1743-0003-5-23 (2008).
26. Lünenburger, L., Colombo, G., Riener, R. & Volker, D. Clinical Assessments Performed during Robotic Rehabilitation by the Gait 
Training Robot Lokomat In IEEE 9th International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics. 345–348. Chicago, IL, June 28 -July 1, 
2005.
27. Pastre, C. B. et al. Validation of the Brazilian version in Portuguese of the Thoracic-Lumbar Control Scale for spinal cord injury. 
Spinal Cord 49, 1198–1202, doi: 10.1038/sc.2011.86 (2011).
28. Morganti, B., Scivoletto, G., Ditunno, P., Ditunno, J. F. & Molinari, M. Walking index for spinal cord injury (WISCI): criterion 
validation. Spinal Cord 43, 27–33, doi: 10.1038/sj.sc.3101658 (2005).
29. Catz, A. et al. A multicenter international study on the Spinal Cord Independence Measure, version III: Rasch psychometric 
validation. Spinal Cord 45, 275–291, doi: 10.1038/sj.sc.3101960 (2007).
30. Melzack, R. The McGill pain questionnaire: from description to measurement. Anesthesiology 103, 199–202 (2005).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
15
Scientific RepoRts | 6:30383 | DOI: 10.1038/srep30383
31. Carlsson, A. M. Assessment of chronic pain. I. Aspects of the reliability and validity of the visual analogue scale. Pain 16, 87–101 
(1983).
32. Wewers, M. E. & Lowe, N. K. A critical review of visual analogue scales in the measurement of clinical phenomena. Res. Nurs. Health 
13, 227–236 (1990).
33. Paternostro-Sluga, T. et al. Reliability and validity of the Medical Research Council (MRC) scale and a modified scale for testing 
muscle strength in patients with radial palsy. J Rehabil Med 40, 665–671, doi: 10.2340/16501977-0235 (2008).
34. Bohannon, R. W. & Smith, M. B. Interrater reliability of a modified Ashworth scale of muscle spasticity. Phys. Ther. 67, 206–207 
(1987).
35. Riener, R., Brunschweiler, A., Lünenburger, L. & Colombo, G. In 9th Annual Conference of the International FES Society. p. 287–289.
36. Jang, Y., Hsieh, C. L., Wang, Y. H. & Wu, Y. H. A validity study of the WHOQOL-BREF assessment in persons with traumatic spinal 
cord injury. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 85, 1890–1895 (2004).
37. Rosenberg, M. Society and the adolescent self-image. (Princeton University Press, 1965).
38. Beck, A. T., Ward, C. H., Mendelson, M., Mock, J. & Erbaugh, J. An inventory for measuring depression. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 4, 
561–571 (1961).
39. Cardoso, J. F. High-order contrasts for independent component analysis. Neural Comput. 11, 157–192 (1999).
40. Demirel, G., Yllmaz, H., Gencosmanoglu, B. & Kesiktas, N. Pain following spinal cord injury. Spinal Cord 36, 25–28 (1998).
41. Pfurtscheller, G., Brunner, C., Schlogl, A. & Lopes da Silva, F. H. Mu rhythm (de)synchronization and EEG single-trial classification 
of different motor imagery tasks. Neuroimage 31, 153–159, doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.12.003 (2006).
42. Pfurtscheller, G., Neuper, C., Andrew, C. & Edlinger, G. Foot and hand area mu rhythms. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 26, 121–135 (1997).
43. Jasper, H. & Penfield, W. Electrocorticograms in man: Effect of voluntary movement upon the electrical activity of the precentral 
gyrus. Arch. Psychiatr. Nervenkr. 183, 163–174 (1949).
44. Pfurtscheller, G. & Lopes da Silva, F. H. Event-related EEG/MEG synchronization and desynchronization: basic principles. Clin. 
Neurophysiol. 110, 1842–1857 (1999).
45. Pfurtscheller, G., Neuper, C., Flotzinger, D. & Pregenzer, M. EEG-based discrimination between imagination of right and left hand 
movement. Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 103, 642–651 (1997).
46. Neuper, C. & Pfurtscheller, G. Event-related dynamics of cortical rhythms: frequency-specific features and functional correlates. Int. 
J. Psychophysiol. 43, 41–58 (2001).
47. Aflalo, T. et al. Neurophysiology. Decoding motor imagery from the posterior parietal cortex of a tetraplegic human. Science 348, 
906–910, doi: 10.1126/science.aaa5417 (2015).
48. Hochberg, L. R. et al. Reach and grasp by people with tetraplegia using a neurally controlled robotic arm. Nature 485, 372–375, doi: 
10.1038/nature11076 (2012).
49. Bach-y-Rita, P., Collins, C. C., Saunders, F. A., White, B. & Scadden, L. Vision substitution by tactile image projection. Nature 221, 
963–964 (1969).
50. Shokur, S., Gallo, S., Moioli, R. C., Donati, A. R. C., Morya, E., Bleuler, H. & Nicolelis, M. A. Assimilation of virtual legs and 
perception of floor texture by complete paraplegic patients receiving artificial tactile feedback. Sci. Rep. In press. (2016).
51. Calford, M. B. & Tweedale, R. Acute changes in cutaneous receptive fields in primary somatosensory cortex after digit denervation 
in adult flying fox. J. Neurophysiol. 65, 178–187 (1991).
52. Nicolelis, M. A., Lin, R. C., Woodward, D. J. & Chapin, J. K. Induction of immediate spatiotemporal changes in thalamic networks 
by peripheral block of ascending cutaneous information. Nature 361, 533–536, doi: 10.1038/361533a0 (1993).
53. McDonald, J. W. et al. Late recovery following spinal cord injury. Case report and review of the literature. J. Neurosurg. 97, 252–265 
(2002).
54. Belci, M., Catley, M., Husain, M., Frankel, H. L. & Davey, N. J. Magnetic brain stimulation can improve clinical outcome in 
incomplete spinal cord injured patients. Spinal Cord 42, 417–419, doi: 10.1038/sj.sc.3101613 (2004).
55. Benito, J. et al. Motor and gait improvement in patients with incomplete spinal cord injury induced by high-frequency repetitive 
transcranial magnetic stimulation. Top Spinal Cord Inj Rehabil 18, 106–112, doi: 10.1310/sci1802-106 (2012).
56. Kuppuswamy, A. et al. Action of 5 Hz repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation on sensory, motor and autonomic function in 
human spinal cord injury. Clin. Neurophysiol. 122, 2452–2461, doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2011.04.022 (2011).
57. Tazoe, T. & Perez, M. A. Effects of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation on recovery of function after spinal cord injury. Arch. 
Phys. Med. Rehabil. 96, S145–155, doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2014.07.418 (2015).
58. Angeli, C. A., Edgerton, V. R., Gerasimenko, Y. P. & Harkema, S. J. Altering spinal cord excitability enables voluntary movements 
after chronic complete paralysis in humans. Brain 137, 1394–1409, doi: 10.1093/brain/awu038 (2014).
59. Fawcett, J. W. et al. Guidelines for the conduct of clinical trials for spinal cord injury as developed by the ICCP panel: spontaneous 
recovery after spinal cord injury and statistical power needed for therapeutic clinical trials. Spinal Cord 45, 190–205, doi: 10.1038/
sj.sc.3102007 (2007).
60. Bracken, M. B. et al. Methylprednisolone or tirilazad mesylate administration after acute spinal cord injury: 1-year follow up. Results 
of the third National Acute Spinal Cord Injury randomized controlled trial. J. Neurosurg. 89, 699–706, doi: 10.3171/
jns.1998.89.5.0699 (1998).
61. Geisler, F. H., Coleman, W. P., Grieco, G. & Poonian, D. The Sygen multicenter acute spinal cord injury study. Spine (Phila Pa 1976) 
26, S87–98 (2001).
62. Tadie, M. et al. Early care and treatment with a neuroprotective drug, gacyclidine, in patients with acute spinal cord injury. Rachis 
15, 363–376 (2003).
63. Kirshblum, S., Millis, S., McKinley, W. & Tulsky, D. Late neurologic recovery after traumatic spinal cord injury. Arch. Phys. Med. 
Rehabil. 85, 1811–1817 (2004).
64. Oleson, C. V., Burns, A. S., Ditunno, J. F., Geisler, F. H. & Coleman, W. P. Prognostic value of pinprick preservation in motor 
complete, sensory incomplete spinal cord injury. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 86, 988–992, doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2004.09.031 (2005).
65. Wolpaw, J. R., McFarland, D. J., Neat, G. W. & Forneris, C. A. An EEG-based brain-computer interface for cursor control. 
Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 78, 252–259 (1991).
66. Ifft, P. J., Shokur, S., Li, Z., Lebedev, M. A. & Nicolelis, M. A. A brain-machine interface enables bimanual arm movements in 
monkeys. Science translational medicine 5, 210ra154, doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3006159 (2013).
67. O’Doherty, J. E. et al. Active tactile exploration using a brain-machine-brain interface. Nature 479, 228–231, doi: 10.1038/
nature10489 (2011).
68. Grillner, S., Wallen, P., Saitoh, K., Kozlov, A. & Robertson, B. Neural bases of goal-directed locomotion in vertebrates–an overview. 
Brain Res Rev 57, 2–12, doi: 10.1016/j.brainresrev.2007.06.027 (2008).
69. Rossignol, S. & Frigon, A. Recovery of locomotion after spinal cord injury: some facts and mechanisms. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 34, 
413–440, doi: 10.1146/annurev-neuro-061010-113746 (2011).
70. Dietz, V. Spinal cord pattern generators for locomotion. Clin. Neurophysiol. 114, 1379–1389 (2003).
71. Scivoletto, G. et al. Plasticity of spinal centers in spinal cord injury patients: new concepts for gait evaluation and training. 
Neurorehabil Neural Repair 21, 358–365, doi: 10.1177/1545968306295561 (2007).
72. Maravita, A., Spence, C. & Driver, J. Multisensory integration and the body schema: close to hand and within reach. Curr. Biol. 13, 
R531–539 (2003).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
16
Scientific RepoRts | 6:30383 | DOI: 10.1038/srep30383
73. Shimojo, S. & Shams, L. Sensory modalities are not separate modalities: plasticity and interactions. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 11, 
505–509 (2001).
74. Ernst, M. O. & Bulthoff, H. H. Merging the senses into a robust percept. Trends Cog. Sci. 8, 162–169, doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2004.02.002 
(2004).
75. Fiorio, M. & Haggard, P. Viewing the body prepares the brain for touch: effects of TMS over somatosensory cortex. Eur. J. Neurosci. 
22, 773–777, doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2005.04267.x (2005).
76. Taylor-Clarke, M., Kennett, S. & Haggard, P. Vision modulates somatosensory cortical processing. Curr. Biol. 12, 233–236 (2002).
77. Tipper, S. P. et al. Vision influences tactile perception without proprioceptive orienting. Neuroreport 9, 1741–1744 (1998).
78. Kennett, S., Taylor-Clarke, M. & Haggard, P. Noninformative vision improves the spatial resolution of touch in humans. Curr. Biol. 
11, 1188–1191 (2001).
79. Taylor-Clarke, M., Kennett, S. & Haggard, P. Persistence of visual-tactile enhancement in humans. Neurosci. Lett. 354, 22–25 (2004).
80. Moseley, G. L., Parsons, T. J. & Spence, C. Visual distortion of a limb modulates the pain and swelling evoked by movement. Curr. 
Biol. 18, R1047–1048, doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2008.09.031 (2008).
81. Jackson, A. & Zimmermann, J. B. Neural interfaces for the brain and spinal cord–restoring motor function. Nat Rev Neurol 8, 
690–699, doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2012.219 (2012).
82. Shokur, S. et al. Expanding the primate body schema in sensorimotor cortex by virtual touches of an avatar. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
USA. 110, 15121–15126, doi: 10.1073/pnas.1308459110 (2013).
Acknowledgements
First we would like to thank the patients for their contribution to this research. We also want to thank Neiva 
Paraschiva, Andrea Arashiro, Maria Cristina Boscaratto (AASDAP, Associação Alberto Santos Dumont para 
Apoio à Pesquisa) Susan Halkiotis (Duke University), Lumy Sawaki Adams (Department Physical Medicine 
and Rehabilitation, University of Kentucky HealthCare, Cardinal Hill Rehabilitation Hospital), Dora Fischer, 
Guilhaume Bao, Nicole Peretti, Kyle Fast for their work, commitment and support during this study. We 
acknowledge the clinical support of Marcelo de Jesus Justino Ares, Alice Conceição Rosa Ramos, Adriana 
Rosa Lovisotto Cristante, Isolda Araújo, Juliana Campos, Denise Yoshihara, Márcia Bellas Santos and Luana 
Ferreira (AACD, Associação de Assistência à Criança Deficiente, São Paulo, Brazil). We thank Ramzi Sellaouti, 
Roberto Dinis, Elmira Amrollah, Nadhir Dhaouadi for the technical support (BIA). This study was funded by 
grants from the Brazilian Financing Agency for Studies and Projects (FINEP 01·12·0514·00), Brazilian Ministry 
of Science, Technology and Innovation (MCTI), and the Itaú Unibanco S.A. We also acknowledge the support 
from the National Institute of Science and Technology (INCT) Brain Machine-Interface (INCEMAQ) CNPq 
573966/2008-7 of Brazilian Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation (MCTI/CNPq/FNDCT/CAPES/
FAPERN).
Author Contributions
A.R.C.D. and S.S.H. equally contributed to study design, data interpretation, data collection, data analysis, 
literature search, figure, tables, writing and editing. E.M., D.S.F.C., R.C.M., C.G.P. and C.M.G. contributed to 
study design, data collection, data interpretation and data analysis. P.B.A., S.T. and G.A.P. contributed to literature 
search, data collection and data analysis. F.L.B. and S.G. contributed to study design and data collection. A.L.L., 
A.K.T. and M.A.A. contributed to data collection and data analysis. H.B., S.J., G.C. and A.R. contributed to study 
design, technical developments, and setup testing. M.A.L.N. proposed the key neurorehabilitation concept tested 
in this study, defined the clinical scope of the study, and contributed to study design, data interpretation, data 
collection, data analysis, writing the manuscript, designing figures, and manuscript editing.
Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at http://www.nature.com/srep
Competing financial interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.
How to cite this article: Donati, A. R. C. et al. Long-Term Training with a Brain-Machine Interface-Based 
Gait Protocol Induces Partial Neurological Recovery in Paraplegic Patients. Sci. Rep. 6, 30383; doi: 10.1038/
srep30383 (2016).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images 
or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, 
unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, 
users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this 
license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 
© The Author(s) 2016
