  
1
Donkin A, et al. BMJ Glob Health 2017;3:e000603. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2017-000603
AbstrAct
Action on the social determinants of health (SDH) is 
required to reduce inequities in health. This article 
summarises global progress, largely in terms of 
commitments and strategies. It is clear that there is 
widespread support for a SDH approach across the world, 
from global political commitment to within country action. 
Inequities in the conditions in which people are born, live, 
work and age, are however driven by inequities in power, 
money and resources. Political, economic and resource 
distribution decisions made outside the health sector 
need to consider health as an outcome across the social 
distribution as opposed to a focus solely on increasing 
productivity. A health in all policies approach can go 
some way to ensure this consideration, and we present 
evidence that some countries are taking this approach, 
however given entrenched inequalities, there is some 
way to go. Measuring progress on the SDH globally will 
be key to future development of successful policies and 
implementation plans, enabling the identification and 
sharing of best practice. WHO work to align measures with 
the sustainable development goals will help to forward 
progress measurement.
IntroductIon
The WHO Global Commission on the Social 
Determinants of Health (CSDH) concluded 
that social injustice is killing on a grand scale. 
Specifically, the Commission identified ineq-
uities in the conditions in which people are 
born, live, work and age, driven by inequi-
ties in power, money and resources driving 
inequities in health.1 As of 2015, average life 
expectancy in Japan was 83.7 years and in 
Sierra Leone, just 50.1 years.2 There clearly 
remains a rationale for action to improve the 
lives of those living in poorer countries such 
as Chad. However, as has been well docu-
mented, inequalities are also evident within 
countries, towns and cities, for example, 
there is a 20-year gap in male life expec-
tancy between the richest and poorest areas 
in Glasgow. The average life expectancy for 
men in India was 62 at the same time that 
it was 54 for men living in the poorest area 
of Glasgow—Calton.3 Similarly in Baltimore 
and Washington DC, those living in the poor 
part of the city have a life expectancy 20 years 
shorter than those in a rich part.3 
While there are competing views as to the 
scale of the influence of the social determi-
nants of health (SDH), figure 1, complied by 
the Kings Fund, demonstrates that social and 
environmental influences are highly signifi-
cant, contributing to between 45% and 60% 
of the variation in health status. Providing 
universal access to good healthcare is there-
fore necessary, but insufficient to optimise 
the health of populations and reduce ineq-
uities in health. In England, for example, 
there is free universal health coverage but 
widespread, large and persistent inequali-
ties in health between social groups. This is 
largely because, for many communicable and 
non-communicable diseases (NCDs), acting 
Global action on the social determinants 
of health
Angela Donkin, Peter Goldblatt, Jessica Allen, Vivienne Nathanson, 
Michael Marmot
Analysis
To cite: Donkin A, Goldblatt P, 
Allen J, et al. Global action 
on the social determinants 
of health. BMJ Glob Health 
2017;3:e000603. doi:10.1136/
bmjgh-2017-000603
Handling editor Seye Abimbola
 
► Additional material is 
published online only. To view, 
please visit the journal online 
(http:// 
dx. 
doi. 
org/ 
10. 
1136/ 
bmjgh- 
2017- 
000603).
Received 11 October 2017
Revised 3 November 2017
Accepted 8 November 2017
Department of Epidemiology 
and Public Health, UCL Institute 
of Health Equity, London, UK
correspondence to
Dr Angela Donkin;  
 
a. 
donkin@ 
ucl. 
ac. 
uk
Key questions
What is already known about this topic?
 
► Officials and academics will be aware of action on 
the social determinants of health in their territories 
or fields of interest. 
 
► However, there is no up-to-date summary of action 
across the world. This paper provides such an 
overview.
What are the new findings?
 
► The paper provides a useful, high-level insight into 
action across the world.
 
► It is clear that there has been sustained expansion 
of action on the social determinants of health and 
an increase in higher level restructuring to enable 
real action, with for instance an increase in health 
in all policies approaches within governments.
recommendations for policy
 
► The report will be helpful to those trying to make a 
case for change in their territories.
 
► It provides a useful summary of action that can then 
be further investigated if of interest.
 
► Further work is needed to determine the degree 
to which commitments in strategies are followed 
through, and measurement of change should be 
considered an important step in that process.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gh.bmj.com/
BMJ Glob Health: first published as 10.1136/bmjgh-2017-000603 on 1 December 2017. Downloaded from 
 2
Donkin A, et al. BMJ Glob Health 2017;3:e000603. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2017-000603
BMJ Global Health
Figure 1 Estimates of the contribution of the main drivers of health status.
at the point at which someone presents with a health 
problem can be too late. To improve health, reduce 
health inequalities and reduce costs on healthcare (and 
other service) budgets, we need to improve the condi-
tions in which people are born, live, work and age.
Given persistent inequalities within and between coun-
tries and recognising the human and economic cost of 
inaction, the Lancet-University of Oslo Commission of 
Global Governance for Health called for global polit-
ical solutions that go beyond the health sector alone, 
and beyond technical solutions and unilateral national 
action.4 In this paper, we develop and update our 
previous reporting of progress across the World, in 20105 
and 2014.6
GlobAl ActIon toWArds HeAltH In All polIcIes
Following the WHO Commission on Social Determi-
nants of Health, the Rio Political Declaration on Social 
Determinants of Health7 was adopted by 125 member 
states during the WHO World Conference on SDH on 21 
October 2011. The declaration expresses global political 
commitment for the implementation of a SDH approach 
to reduce health inequities and to achieve other global 
priorities. The rationale was that it would help to build 
momentum within countries for the development of 
dedicated national action plans and strategies.8
In 2011, the United Nations (UN) General Assembly 
also adopted the Political Declaration on the Prevention 
and Control of Non-communicable Diseases9 calling for 
the development of multisectoral approaches to health 
at all government levels and to address the underlying 
determinants of health.
In May 2012, the 65thWorld Health Association then 
endorsed the Rio declaration and its recommendations. 
It approved measures to support the five priority actions 
recommended in the declaration to address social deter-
minants of health.10 This was followed by a UN Resolu-
tion on Global Health and Foreign Policy in December 
2012 calling on member states and the UN to accelerate 
universal health coverage and implement broad public 
health measures addressing the SDH through cross-sec-
toral policies.11
The 2010 WHO Adelaide Statement on Health in All 
Policies (HiAP) paved the way for global recognition 
of the need for cross-sectoral action as well as consid-
ering health in wider policies in order to improve health 
outcomes and equity. HiAP is a policy strategy, which 
targets the key social determinants of health through 
integrated policy response across relevant policy areas 
with the ultimate goal of supporting health equity. 
HiAP is thus closely related to concepts such as ‘inter-
sectoral action for health’, ‘healthy public policy’ and 
‘whole-of-government approach’. The HiAP approach is 
being advocated in several countries and in June 2013 
the WHO eighth Global Conference on Health Promo-
tion was dedicated to HiAP,12 building momentum for its 
implementation and highlighting the need to strengthen 
skill and political capacity to address the SDH.
There have also been a number of recent and signif-
icant supporting global developments, with perhaps 
the most significant recent social policy development 
being the adoption of the sustainable development goals 
(SDGs) by the UN.13 There is a high level of commonality 
between the SDGs and the improvement of the SDH.14
Another important development is The Declaration of 
Oslo, 2015, passed by the General Medical Assembly in 
Moscow. It sets out the importance of social determinants 
of health and principles of action for World Medical 
Association, National Medical Associations and indi-
vidual doctors.28 This declaration explicitly sets out a role 
for the WMA in advising doctors and other health profes-
sions of good and innovative examples that will have a 
positive impact on the social determinants of health. In 
doing so, it importantly sets out an advocacy and leader-
ship role for doctors and health professionals to improve 
people’s lives through action initiated outside the health 
sector.
europe buys In but economIc polIcIes could be more 
supportIve
Health 2020 is the European health policy framework 
adopted by the 53 Member States of the WHO Euro-
pean region in September 2012. It aims to support action 
across government and society to: 'significantly improve 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gh.bmj.com/
BMJ Glob Health: first published as 10.1136/bmjgh-2017-000603 on 1 December 2017. Downloaded from 
 Donkin A, et al. BMJ Glob Health 2017;3:e000603. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2017-000603
3
BMJ Global Health
the health and well-being of populations, reduce health 
inequalities, strengthen public health and ensure 
people-centred health systems that are universal, equi-
table, sustainable and of high quality'. In October 2010, 
WHO European Office launched a review of social deter-
minants and the health divide in the region15 to support 
the Health 2020 strategy.
In 2015, the 53 member states of the region signed the 
Minsk agreement committing to the adoption of the life-
course approach across the whole of government that 
would improve health and well-being, promote social 
justice and contribute to sustainable development and 
inclusive growth and wealth in all countries.
The European commission also administers the EU 
Health Programme Fund, which is the main instrument 
the EC uses to implement the EU Health Strategy. This 
has provided an important strand in the EU contribution 
to reduce health inequalities in Europe by cofunding proj-
ects and actions through successive Health Programmes 
since 2003. To date, a total of 64 actions, involving nearly 
700 organisations and institutions from all EU, European 
Free Trade Association (EFTA) and European Economic 
Area (EEA) countries and some candidate countries, 
have been funded, with EC cofunding amounting to 
€40 million. The current, Third Health Programme 
2014–20, is geared towards contributing to the objectives 
of the Europe 2020 strategy, and continues to address 
health inequalities as a priority.16
The European Parliament has recently allocated funds 
to develop pilot projects designed to test the feasibility 
and usefulness of action in the area of health inequali-
ties.17 The European Pact for Mental Health and Well-
being is another related EU policy initiated in 2008. 
It recognises that considerable inequalities in mental 
health status exist and seeks to address these. The 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) has 
also been working with national partners to forward 
action on Social, Economic and Environmental Deter-
minants of Health in the context of sustainable human 
development.18
National activities in a number of countries have followed 
the publication of Health 2020, with Lithuania producing a 
new national health plan and Serbia running an appraisal 
of cross-sectoral governance systems and capacity to address 
social inequalities. In 2013, France launched a national 
health strategy. This included a social contract under 
which every government department would be account-
able for the impact of their policies on public health and 
health inequalities, with the aim of ensuring a strong focus 
on the social determinants of health inequalities.19 Eight 
member states requested support from WHO to integrate 
equity in the policy process and a further six-member states 
are working with WHO Regional Office for Europe to 
develop strategies to address the SDH and health equity 
with a particular focus on the Roma population. Sweden 
have recently appointed a commission on health inequali-
ties to further inform their strategy, and Norway, Hungary 
and Poland have produced analytical reports.6
However, while many health departments have 
embraced the SDH rationale, they do not hold key levers 
for change. Social policy is often aligned with the SDH, 
however economic policies to promote growth may have 
done so at the expense of quality of work and security, 
austerity programmes have resulted in reduced services 
and cuts to the real value of social protection. More 
needs to be done to incentivise, or require, other sectors 
to consider health outcomes.
The EU treaty obliges all EU policies to adhere to 
the HiAP approach, although not all countries have yet 
integrated this into legislation. Given the current policy 
environment, integrating the HiAP approach with the 
requirement to adhere to the SDGs makes much sense. 
For example, in April 2016, the Welsh, ‘The Wellbeing 
of Future Generations’ Act came into effect. The Act 
requires that there is a commissioner, guidance and 
training material for a wide range of public bodies who 
will have legal obligation in a number of areas that codify 
the SDGs, including prevention. The overarching goals 
are to ensure Wales is: prosperous, resilient, equal, cohe-
sive, healthy, culturally sensitive and globally responsive.
nortH AmerIcA-cAnAdA HAs led tHe WAy, tHe usA WAs 
sWItcHInG focus to preventIon under obAmA
Canada has been at the forefront of research into the 
SDH, and this continues to be the case, with academics 
and practitioners advocating an SDH approach to public 
health and influencing policies.
Social determinants of health are now firmly on the 
agenda in Canada. There is a great deal of activity both 
at national and provincial level. The Federal Minister 
of Health has declared publicly that SDH is a priority 
for the government. Supporting the Federal Ministry, 
the Public Health Agency of Canada has a SDH team. 
Several Provinces have social determinants of health as 
central to their plans. The Canadian Medical Association 
has declared their commitment to action on SDH. In 
pursuing this goal, they held Town Hall meetings across 
the nation to engage public opinion.20 21
Policy initiatives in the USA created by various provi-
sions of the 2010 Patient Protection and Affordable Care 
Act; Healthy People 2020 and the National Partnership 
for Action created an environment for the USA to address 
social determinants of health and health equity. The 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, established 
the nation’s first National Prevention Council with heads 
of 17 federal agencies representing multiple sectors that 
impact health (eg, education, transportation, justice, 
etc). The National Prevention Council developed the 
National Prevention Strategy, which seeks to improve health 
outcomes by moving the nation from a focus on sickness 
and disease to one based on prevention and wellness.
In addition, there are a number of delivery and payment 
reform initiatives within Medicaid to address the diverse 
needs of the population served through an increased 
focus on social determinants of health. For example, 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gh.bmj.com/
BMJ Glob Health: first published as 10.1136/bmjgh-2017-000603 on 1 December 2017. Downloaded from 
 4
Donkin A, et al. BMJ Glob Health 2017;3:e000603. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2017-000603
BMJ Global Health
through the State Innovation Models Initiative (SIM), 
a number of states are engaged in multipayer delivery 
and payment reforms that include a focus on population 
health and recognise the role of social determinants. For 
example, Connecticut’s SIM plan seeks to promote an 
Advanced Medical Home model that will address the wide 
array of individuals’ needs, including environmental and 
socioeconomic factors that contribute to their ongoing 
health. Its plan also includes community health improve-
ment efforts that will coordinate efforts across commu-
nity organisations, providers, employers, consumers and 
local public health entities.22
Also in 2010, the Healthy People initiative, coordi-
nated by the US Department of Health and Human 
Services, added social determinants of health topic area. 
This national initiative involves a network of govern-
mental, private, non-profit and academic partners who 
work together to set priorities for national public health 
improvements.23
In 2011, the National Partnership for Action—the nation’s 
first roadmap for reducing racial and ethnic health 
disparities—was released by the US Department of 
Health and Human Services. A dual approach of public 
health, policy and research actions directed by federal 
agencies to reduce health disparities coupled with broad 
local and regional engagement in the implementation of 
public health strategies to reduce disparities is underway 
across the USA.
This article is being submitted in July 2017. The repeal 
of the Affordable Healthcare Act is ongoing, with current 
estimates suggesting that the present format would result 
in 22 million losing health cover. There is understandably 
concern regarding the impacts that this could have on 
health inequalities.
soutH AmerIcA—strAteGIes to Address HeAltH 
InequIty becomInG more common, but WIdespreAd 
poverty stIll persIsts
The countries in this region are at different points along 
the epidemiological transition, with certain countries 
facing a disproportionate burden of infectious disease 
and maternal mortality, while others are progressively 
facing higher rates of NCDs.
Strategies to address health inequity and inequality are 
increasingly at the centre of global and regional action 
in the Americas. In South America, the Union of South 
American Nations’ Council of Ministers of Health iden-
tified SDH as one of the five priorities in its 2010–2015 
Plan of Action. Mercosur created an Intergovernmental 
Commission on Health Promotion and Social Deter-
minants of Health, and Pan American Health Organ-
isation (PAHOs) Strategic Plan (2014−2019), ensured 
that SDH is an integral part of the Organisation's 5-year 
plan.24 In 2016, PAHO commissioned a 2-year indepen-
dent review to describe and analyse major drivers of 
health inequalities across the whole region, with partic-
ular focus on 14 partner countries. The Commission will 
make recommendations for action to improve equity 
and inequalities in health for international, national and 
local organisations. The recommendations and analyses 
will focus on social determinants, ethnicity, gender and 
human rights and will align with the SDGs.
Many countries in the region do already have a long-
standing and strong focus on social medicine, health 
equity and human rights and HiAP. In 2006, Brazil 
undertook a National Commission on Social Determi-
nants of Health,25 and in Argentina and Chile, policies 
and governance arrangements were created to promote 
social determinants in the ministries of health and at 
high levels of national government.
The SDGs are an important mechanism through which 
to take action on social determinants
nortH AfrIcA And tHe mIddle eAst—member stAtes 
HAve AGreed to ActIon on tHe sdH
The WHO Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterra-
nean Region (EMRO) initiated a regional strategic direc-
tion to implement the Rio political declaration, which was 
agreed by representatives of member states at a regional 
workshop in Cairo in September 2012. The regional 
office also supported the creation of a national database 
for health equity in Iran and capacity building in Afghan-
istan, Iraq and Oman for collecting and analysing disag-
gregated equity data.
The report identified a number of key themes specif-
ically relevant to the region which interact with and 
impact on the SDH, in particular issues of gender equity, 
the status and employment conditions of migrants, fast 
urbanisation and conflict all tend to hinder develop-
ment, improvement of the SDH and equity.
Since the Commission on the SDH 2005–2008, a number 
of initiatives have taken place to improve the knowledge 
base in the region and to engage member countries in 
debate on the SDH. In particular, knowledge sharing 
between academic institutions and non-profit organisa-
tions, and the production of country-level studies is seen 
as the basis for advocacy and the engagement of govern-
ments in the issue. Provision of primary healthcare is also 
seen as an entry point to raise awareness of the SDH in 
political debate. EMRO therefore initiated a consultation 
with member states on focusing community and primary 
care on the SDH as well as running a pilot programme 
of intersectoral action aimed at tackling health inequal-
ities in a number of countries. It also runs programmes 
covering literacy, training and income in 12 of the 22 
member states in the region (Afghanistan, Djibouti, 
Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, Morocco, Oman, Pakistan, 
Somalia, Sudan and Yemen); consideration is being given 
to ways of implementing programmes evaluated in other 
countries—such as conditional cash transfers to women 
in Latin America—in the context of different gender 
relations in the region. Community-based initiatives run 
by EMRO cover a population of around 3.7 million across 
all countries in the region and cover basic development 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gh.bmj.com/
BMJ Glob Health: first published as 10.1136/bmjgh-2017-000603 on 1 December 2017. Downloaded from 
 Donkin A, et al. BMJ Glob Health 2017;3:e000603. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2017-000603
5
BMJ Global Health
needs, healthy cities and healthy villages and women’s 
development.
At the 61 st session of the Eastern Mediterranean 
Regional Committee, 2015, member states agreed a 
plan to hold a regional consultation on reducing health 
inequities in EMR through actions on the social deter-
minants. Twenty-two member states agreed to implement 
the components of a proposed framework on SDH and 
related actions with technical support from WHO.
sub-sAHArAn AfrIcA—ActIon on sdH A WHo strAteGIc 
prIorIty for tHIs reGIon but more to be done
To address widening health inequities within and between 
countries in the WHO African Region, accelerating 
response to the determinants of health was identified as 
one of the six WHO Strategic Directions for achieving 
sustainable health development in the African Region 
between 2010 and 2015. The strategy presents several 
priority interventions for reducing inequities through 
action on social determinants of health aligned to the key 
recommendations of the CSDH.
In May 2013, the WHO Regional Office for Africa 
(AFRO) gathered stakeholders from 12 Eastern and 
Southern African countries to discuss how HiAP can be 
implemented at the national level in order to achieve 
health equity; AFRO is also supporting the documenta-
tion of intersectoral case studies in Angola, Congo and 
Mozambique.
The WHO’s Equity, Health, Health Policy and Human 
Development programme works with AFRO to support 
member states implementing programmes addressing 
the SDH through the development of policies enhancing 
health equity, gender equity, human rights and poverty 
reduction. It also aims to support regions and member 
states to achieve greater synergy between trade and 
health policy to maximise benefits for poor and vulner-
able populations.
At the recent World Medical Association Council 
meeting in Livingstone (2017), there was a real commit-
ment to setting up collaborative groups—and to sharing 
experience between countries. The President of Zambia 
has set up a ministry responsible for SDH and countries, 
for example, Zimbabwe, Kenya, Nigeria and South Africa 
are also keen to forward work in this area.
AsIA—strAteGIc buy In tHrouGH ActIon on non 
communIcAble dIseAses, some Good exAmples of 
ActIon but pAtcHy proGress
The WHO Regional Office for South East Asia have 
conducted reviews to assess the experience of inter-sec-
toral policies and actions to inform the development 
of further initiatives. A number of countries within the 
region have demonstrated promising results to improving 
health and addressing health equity. A review of Action 
to Address the Social and Environmental Determinants 
of Health Inequity in Asia Pacific was undertaken by 
Asia Pacific HealthGAEN and published in 2011. This 
identified a number of examples of action across the Asia 
Pacific region.26
There are a number of more recent examples. Thai-
land has been one of the most successful countries in 
reducing child mortality. Alongside improvements in 
equitable access to healthcare, Thailand holds a partic-
ularly democratic national health assembly open to the 
public each year, with regional representatives partici-
pating in health policy development.
Bangladesh has also seen large improvements in health 
outcomes. Latest data for 2013 show that life expectancy 
at birth was 71, compared with India at 66. This success 
has been attributed to poverty reduction, an increase in 
health resources and effective community-based inter-
ventions. The contribution of the Bangladesh Rehabil-
itation Assistance Committee to this success has been 
recognised, specifically in terms of coordinating the 
activity of non-governmental organisations.
The WHO Regional Office for the Western Pacific 
Region (WPRO), AP-HealthGaen and the Social Inequity 
Reduction Network in Thailand advocated for addressing 
determinants of health beyond health sectors and 
strengthening capacities for health equity analysis and 
health impact assessment. WPRO is also in the process 
of identifying suitable cases studies for the assessment of 
experiences of intersectoral policies and has supported 
Cambodia, Laos, Papua New Guinea and the Philip-
pines to undertake work on addressing aspects of SDH, 
including equity analysis, gender, working with specific 
populations and intersectoral action.
Every year Pacific island ministerial meetings are run, 
including health ministries. Recently, they declared 
a non communicable diseases (NCD) crisis and are 
developing approaches to tackle the issue. In 2013, they 
adopted an SDH approach within the healthy islands 
framework, which has political leverage, as does the 
Urban Health Equity Assessment and Response Tool 
(Urban HEART) framework for the area, which was 
developed by the WHO Centre for Health Development 
in Kobe, Japan, adapted to an island setting and piloted 
in Fiji in 2012.
Most countries in both the Western Pacific as well as 
South East Asia country have NCDs strategies and recently 
WHO focused its attention on supporting countries with 
SDH strategies and universal health systems. UCL IHE 
have recently completed a review of health inequalities 
and the SDH for Taiwan, which was launched by Presi-
dent Ma in November 2015.
In China, Healthy China 2030, puts health at the 
centre of the country’s entire policy-making machinery, 
making the need to include health in all policies an offi-
cial government policy. Multisectoral collaboration and 
innovation play a key role in Healthy China. With over 20 
departments drafting the 2030 plan, a vision has been set 
for a significantly expanded health industry, which would 
become a mainstay of the national economy and will be 
tasked with improving the quality and level of health 
service delivered across the country. A key component 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gh.bmj.com/
BMJ Glob Health: first published as 10.1136/bmjgh-2017-000603 on 1 December 2017. Downloaded from 
 6
Donkin A, et al. BMJ Glob Health 2017;3:e000603. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2017-000603
BMJ Global Health
of Healthy China is the promotion of healthy lifestyles 
and physical fitness, including through the development 
of Healthy Cities, to ensure a greater focus on preven-
tion rather than treatment. Through greater technolog-
ical advances and improvements to the health insurance 
system, and prevention, China is aiming to achieve health 
equity by 2030.27
AustrAlIA—reGIonAl proGress In some AreAs despIte 
lAck of nAtIonAl polIcy
Australia has been prioritising health inequities for a 
number of years, with a particular focus on aboriginal 
populations. A Commonwealth Government Senate 
Committee (a bipartisan committee) conducted an 
inquiry into Australia's response to the CSDH. However, 
the change of government in 2013 has meant that health 
inequities, in particular the SDH approach has come off 
the political agenda, while major financial cuts to public 
sector spending have been implemented across the 
board.
However, despite the lack of engagement by the current 
national government, the federal system allows the states 
and territories to implement their own initiatives and a 
number of policies and programmes are ongoing, while 
cross-sectoral policies are being developed in various 
states.
For example, in South Australia, HiAP approach has 
been adopted in response to escalating healthcare costs 
driven by an ageing population and increasing incidence 
of chronic disease. Ilona Kickbusch proposed that South 
Australia adopt a HiAP approach and that this approach 
be applied to targets contained within South Australia’s 
Strategic Plan (SASP); the Government’s overarching 
vision for its State. The unique advantage of this proposal 
was the significant and strategic importance of SASP to 
all South Australian government agencies. SASP contains 
98 targets under six objectives and there is strong align-
ment between the SASP objectives and the social deter-
minants of health. Oversight for HiAP was placed under 
the auspices of the high-level committee (the Executive 
Committee of Cabinet) responsible for overseeing the 
implementation of SASP, reflecting the strategic impor-
tance of the work.29
conclusIon
This paper demonstrates, with examples from regions, 
that across the world, there is commitment and action 
at national and local level to improve the social deter-
minants of health. We have also probably just touched 
the surface, it is impossible to document all action and 
commitment in one paper, and so readers should be 
aware that if an area or country is not mentioned, this 
does not mean that there is no action.
The paper has not investigated progress on improving 
the social determinants of health or reducing health 
inequalities. Further work is needed to ensure that these 
commitments are carried through and that policies from 
a number of sectors align to ensure that power, money 
and resources are sufficiently distributed to support the 
health of all.
This paper has not tracked progress on measurement of 
the SDH across the continents. WHO are progressing 
a set of indicators that capture the SDH and align with 
the SDGs. Some countries have sophisticated monitoring 
systems, while others are yet to register births and there-
fore do not have meaningful denominators by which to 
calculate rates. Measuring progress on the SDH globally 
will be key to future development of successful policies 
and implementation plans, enabling the identification 
and sharing of best practice .
A health in all policies approach has been followed in 
some countries and more should be done to encourage 
remaining countries to take a holistic cross-government 
approach to improve health.
contributors The authors have all made a substantive contribution to this draft 
and have edited and viewed the final version.
disclaimer The author(s) is(are) staff member(s) of the World Health Organization. 
The author(s) alone is(are) responsible for the views expressed in this publication 
and they do not necessarily represent the views, decisions or policies of the World 
Health Organization. 
competing interests None declared.
provenance and peer review Commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
open Access This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the 
Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial IGO License (CC BY-NC 3.0 IGO), 
which permits use, distribution,and reproduction for non-commercial purposes 
in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. In any reproduction 
of this article there should not be any suggestion that WHO or this article endorse 
any specific organization or products. The use of the WHO logo is not permitted. 
This notice should be preserved along with the article's original URL. See: https:// 
creativecommons. 
org/ 
licenses/ 
by- 
nc/ 
3. 
0/ 
igo
© World Health Organization [2017]. Licensee BMJ.
RefeRences
 1. Commission on the Social Determinants of Health. Closing the Gap 
in a Generation, 2008.
 2. World Health Organization. World Health Statistics 2016: Monitoring 
health for the SDGs Annex B: tables of health statistics by country, 
WHO region and globally, 2016.
 3. Marmot M. The Health Gap: the challenge of an Unequal World. 
London: Bloomsbury, 2015.
 4. Ottersen OP
. The political origins of health inequity: prospects for 
change. The Lancet- University of Oslo Commission on Global 
Governance for Health. The Lancet 2014;383:630–67.
 5. Marmot M, Allen J, Bell R, et al. Building of the global movement 
for health equity: from Santiago to Rio and beyond. Lancet 
2012;379:181–8.
 6. UCL Institute of Health Equity, 2014. Action on the Social 
Determinants of Health Worldwide 2008-2013. Proceedings of 
the Commission on Social Determinants of Health 1-3 April 2014. 
Italy:Rockefeller Bellagio Centre
 7. World Health Organisation. Rio Political Declaration on the Social 
Determinants of Health. 2011. accessed 3 Jul 2017 http://www. 
who. 
int/ 
sdhconference/ 
declaration/ 
Rio_ 
political_ 
declaration. 
pdf? 
ua=1
 8. World Health Organisation. Rio Political Declaration on the Social 
Determinants of Health. 2011 http://www. 
who. 
int/ 
sdhconference/ 
declaration/ 
en/ (accessed 3 Jul 2017).
 9. UN General Assembly 66th Session Agenda Item 117 - Resolution 
62/2. Political Declaration of the High-level Meeting of the General 
Assembly on the Prevention and Control of Non-communicable 
Diseases, 2011.
 
10. World Health Organisation (2012). ‘65th World Health Assembly 
closes with new global health measures’. http://www. 
who. 
int/ 
mediacentre/ 
news/ 
releases/ 
2012/ 
wha65_ 
closes_ 
20120526/ 
en/ 
(accessed 3 Jul 2017).
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gh.bmj.com/
BMJ Glob Health: first published as 10.1136/bmjgh-2017-000603 on 1 December 2017. Downloaded from 
 Donkin A, et al. BMJ Glob Health 2017;3:e000603. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2017-000603
7
BMJ Global Health
 
11. United Nations General Assembly. 67th Session – Agenda item 123 
Global Health and Foreign Policy. 2012 http:// 
daccess- 
dds- 
y. 
un. 
org/ 
doc/ 
UNDOC/ 
LTD/ 
N12/ 
630/ 
51/ 
PDF/ 
N1263051. 
pdf? 
OpenElement
 
12. The 8th Global Conference on Health Promotion. Helsinki, 
Finland.  10–14 Jun 2013. http://www. 
who. 
int/ 
healthpromotion/ 
conferences/ 
8gchp/ 
background/ 
en/
 
13. UN Sustainable Development Goals. 17 goals to transform our 
world.  
http 
://w 
ww.u 
n.org/ 
sustainabledevelopment/ 
sustainable- 
dev 
elop 
ment- 
goals/
 
14. United Nations. Sustainable Development Platform. ht 
tps:// 
sustainabledevelopment. 
un. 
org/ 
? 
me 
nu= 
1300 (accessed 3 Jul 2017).
 
15. World Health Organisation. Review of social determinants of health 
and the health divide across the European Region. 2014.
 
16. Consumers Health and Food Executive Agency. Action on health 
inequalities in the European Union, final version: The EU Health 
Programme’s contribution to fostering solidarity in health and 
reducing health inequalities in the European Union 2003–13. 2014 
http:// 
ec. 
europa. 
eu/ 
chafea/ 
documents/ 
health/ 
health- 
inequality- 
brochure_ 
en. 
pdf (accessed 3 Jul 2017).
 
17. European Commission. Social Determinants and health inequalities: 
pilot projects funded by the European Parliament. http:// 
ec. 
europa. 
eu/ 
health/ 
social_ 
determinants/ 
projects/ 
ep_ 
funded_ 
projects_ 
en. 
htm 
(accessed 3 Jul 2017).
 
18. UNDP
. Addressing social, economic and environmental determinants 
of health and the health divide in the context of sustainable human 
development. 2017 http://www. 
eurasia. 
undp. 
org/ 
content/ 
rbec/ 
en/ 
home/ 
library/ 
hiv_ 
aids/ 
addressing- 
social- 
economic- 
environmental- 
determinants- 
of- 
health. 
html (accessed 3 Jul 2017).
 
19. Touraine M. Health inequalities and France's national health strategy. 
Lancet 2014;383:1101–2.
 
20. Canadian Medical Association. Health equity and the social 
determinants of health. https://www. 
cma. 
ca/ 
En/ 
Pages/ 
health- 
equity. 
aspx (accessed 3 Jul 2017).
 
21. Canadian Medical Association. Health equity and the social 
determinants of health: a role for the medical profession. 2017 
https://www. 
cma. 
ca/ 
Assets/ 
assets- 
library/ 
document/ 
en/ 
advocacy/ 
PD13- 
03- 
e. 
pdf (accessed 3 Jul 2017).
 
22. State of Connecticut. Connecticut Healthcare Innovation Plan, 
Executive Summary. http://www. 
healthreform. 
ct. 
gov/ 
ohri/ 
lib/ 
ohri/ 
sim/ 
plan_ 
documents/ 
innovation_ 
plan_ 
executive_ 
summary_ 
v82. 
pdf. 
(accessed 3 Jul 2017).
 
23. Koh HK, Piotrowski JJ, Kumanyika S, et al. Healthy people: a 2020 
vision for the social determinants approach. Health Educ Behav 
2011;38:551–7.
 
24. Marmot M, Filho A, Vega J, et al. Acción conrespecto a 
losdeterminantessociales de lasalud en lasAméricas. Rev Panam 
Salud Publica 2013;34.
 
25. World Health Association. Social Determinants of Health – Brazil. 
2017 http://www. 
who. 
int/ 
social_ 
determinants/ 
thecommission/ 
countrywork/ 
within/ 
brazil/ 
en/ (accessed 3 Jul 2017).
 
26. Asia Pacific – Global action for health equity network. An Asia Pacific 
spotlight on health inequity: Taking Action to Address the Social and 
Environmental Determinants of Health Inequity in Asia Pacific. htt 
p://
www 
.wpro.w 
ho.int/topics 
/social 
_det 
ermi 
nant 
s_he 
alth/ 
ehgAP 
Healt 
hgae 
nreport. 
pdf (accessed 3 Jul 2017).
 
27. World Health Organization and National Health and Family Planning 
Commission of the People's Republic of China. 9th Global 
Conference on Health Promotion, Shanghai 2016. 2016 http:// 
healthpromotion2016. 
org/ 
en/ 
contents/ 
83/ 
114. 
html (accessed 3 Jul 
2017).
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gh.bmj.com/
BMJ Glob Health: first published as 10.1136/bmjgh-2017-000603 on 1 December 2017. Downloaded from 
