 INTRODUCTION
It has been the policy of successive UK 
governments to address the challenge of 
the growing healthcare needs of the ageing 
population by transferring care into the 
community setting.1 In the 10 years prior 
to 2011, the GP workforce in the UK had an 
annual average increase of 2.3%.2 However, 
this was only half the rate of other medical 
specialties.3 Patient demand for GP services 
in England continues to grow, with an 
estimated 340 million patient consultations 
per year, an increase of 40 million since 
2008.3 The UK Department of Health (DH) 
has set a target that half of all medical 
graduates entering postgraduate specialty 
training should go into GP training.4 
However, despite the longstanding DH policy 
to increase GP training numbers in England 
to 3250 per annum, GP recruitment has 
remained below this target, at around 2700 
per annum.5 The cost of 5 years’ foundation 
and GP training programmes is £249 261 
per GP.6 It is therefore imperative that these 
highly trained professionals are retained 
within the UK primary care workforce. 
In the 5 years between 2009 and 2014, 
45.5% of England’s 12 690 GP leavers were 
aged <50 years, while 30.6% were aged 
50–59 years, and less than one-quarter 
were aged ≥60 years.7 This early loss of 
GPs is contributing to the GP workforce 
crisis.8 In 2013, Health Education England 
and NHS England commissioned this 
mixed methods study to investigate why 
so many GPs leave the NHS below the age 
of 50 years.9,10 This article summarises the 
main reasons for leaving.
METHOD 
Study design
A mixed methods study comprising an 
online survey, triangulated with qualitative 
interviews, was conducted. To design the 
survey, the views of 34 GPs were sought. 
From these, qualitative content analysis 
was used to identify major categories, 
which then formed the survey items.9
Survey recruitment
GPs who were aged <50 years and had 
left the English Medical Performers List 
between 2009 and 2014 were recruited 
through articles in BMA News as well as 
direct mailing. Twelve NHS area teams 
(ATs), between them covering 40% of the 
population of England, sent invitations to 
some or all of their early GP leavers. In 
total, ATs mailed 413 early leavers, and 143 
participated in the survey. 
Qualitative interviews recruitment 
At the end of the online survey, participants 
were invited to take part in an interview and 
38 survey participants volunteered. Of these, 
21 returned signed consent forms. Semi-
structured interviews were carried out by 
telephone, guided by an interview schedule 
that was developed to complement and 
extend the survey questions.10 Interviews 
N Doran, MA, PhD, honorary research fellow, 
Department for Health, University of Bath, Bath; 
senior research fellow, South West Academic 
Health Science Network (SWAHSN), Exeter. F Fox, 
PhD, research associate, NIHR Collaborations for 
Leadership in Applied Health Research and Care 
(CLAHRC) West, University of Bristol, Bristol.  
K Rodham, PhD, professor of health psychology, 
Staffordshire University, Stoke-on-Trent. G Taylor, 
MSc, PhD, reader in medical statistics; M Harris, 
FRCGP, visiting research fellow, Department for 
Health, University of Bath, Bath.
Address for correspondence
Natasha Doran, Department for Health, University of 
Bath, Claverton Down, Bath BA2 7AY, UK.
E-mail: n.doran@bath.ac.uk
Submitted: 9 July 2015; Editor’s response: 20 
August 2015; final acceptance: 24 September 2015.
©British Journal of General Practice
This is the full-length article (published online  
7 Jan 2016) of an abridged version published in 
print. Cite this article as: Br J Gen Pract 2016; DOI: 
10.3399/bjgp16X683425
Lost to the NHS:
a mixed methods study of why GPs leave practice early in England
Natasha Doran, Fiona Fox, Karen Rodham, Gordon Taylor and Michael Harris
Research
Abstract
Background 
The loss of GPs in the early stages of their 
careers is contributing to the GP workforce 
crisis. Recruitment in the UK remains below 
the numbers needed to support the demand 
for GP care.
Aim
To explore the reasons why GPs leave general 
practice early.
Design and setting
A mixed methods study using online survey 
data triangulated with qualitative interviews. 
Method
Participants were GPs aged <50 years who had 
left the English Medical Performers List in the 
last 5 years (2009–2014). A total of 143 early 
GP leavers participated in an online survey, 
of which 21 took part in recorded telephone 
interviews. Survey data were analysed using 
descriptive statistics, and qualitative data using 
thematic analysis techniques.
Results
Reasons for leaving were cumulative and 
multifactorial. Organisational changes to the 
NHS have led to an increase in administrative 
tasks and overall workload that is perceived by 
GP participants to have fundamentally changed 
the doctor–patient relationship. Lack of time 
with patients has compromised the ability to 
practise more patient-centred care, and, with 
it, GPs’ sense of professional autonomy and 
values, resulting in diminished job satisfaction. 
In this context, the additional pressures of 
increased patient demand and the negative 
media portrayal left many feeling unsupported 
and vulnerable to burnout and ill health, and, 
ultimately, to the decision to leave general 
practice. 
Conclusion
To improve retention of young GPs, the pace of 
administrative change needs to be minimised 
and the time spent by GPs on work that is not 
face-to-face patient care reduced.
Keywords
burnout; general practice; job satisfaction; 
professional autonomy; qualitative research; 
workload.
e128  British Journal of General Practice, February 2016
 lasting 40–60 minutes were audiorecorded, 
transcribed verbatim, and all identifying 
information was removed.
Analysis
Quantitative. Survey data were analysed 
using descriptive statistics. Common 
themes were identified and summarised 
from the free response survey items using 
thematic analysis techniques.11
Qualitative. Fieldwork notes contextualised 
the interview data and detailed summaries 
of each interview were produced. Thematic 
analysis was used to generate themes, both 
within and across the dataset.11 The phases 
of analysis included coding, followed by 
the identification and clustering of themes 
and sub-themes, and the production of 
a descriptive thematic summary. Team 
members each coded three transcripts, 
before comparing their analyses for 
inconsistencies and agreement. Finally the 
themes and sub-themes were grouped 
to construct a more interpretative 
narrative across the dataset and depicted 
diagrammatically (Figure 1).
RESULTS
Of the 143 survey responders, 72 (50.3%) 
were female and 70 (49.0%) male (one 
unknown). Their median age range was 
40–44 years. Forty-six (32.2%) stated that 
they still work as GPs but outside the EU, 
seven (4.9%) work as GPs in another part 
of the EU, and two (1.4%) in another part 
of the UK (not England). Nineteen (13.3%) 
do other clinical work, and 22 (15.4%) do 
non-clinical medical work. Thirteen (9.1%) 
said that they were full-time parents, and 
14 (9.8%) were carers. A further nine (6.3%) 
had retired voluntarily, and six (4.2%) had 
retired on medical grounds. The remainder 
were in non-medical careers.
Of the 21 interviewees, 14 participants 
were female and seven were male, with 
an age range of 32–54 years at the time of 
interview. They had been practising GPs 
in England for between 2.5 and 20 years; 
their ages when they left general practice 
in England ranged from 29–50 years. 
Interviewees represented a maximum 
variation sample in terms of age, number of 
years as practising GPs, and geographical 
location. 
At interview, five participants were 
working as GPs abroad; five had either 
retired early on medical grounds or taken 
jobs that accommodated their illness; eight 
worked in related fields, such as medical 
education, the tribunal service, managerial 
roles, and public health; two decided to 
focus on raising their families; one worked 
in a non-medical career.
Although many of the categories 
in the survey were also identified in the 
analysis of the qualitative interviews, the 
inductive and interpretative nature of the 
qualitative analysis generated a thematic 
summary that illustrates the complex and 
overlapping issues causing GPs to leave 
practice early (Figure 1). The qualitative 
findings are therefore given primacy here 
and are supported by relevant statistical 
evidence from the survey.9,10
All survey responders indicated that 
they had left English general practice for 
multiple reasons:
‘I think it’s so multifactorial, I don’t 
think there’s any one thing. I think it’s 
that combination of increased work with 
decreasing income with high patient 
expectation 
with 
continuous 
media 
negativity and no support from the 
government, just all of those things.’ (GP5)
Although the strength of other social 
factors such as family issues or attractions 
to alternative careers were explored during 
interview and through the online survey 
as possible determining factors in their 
decision to leave, participants’ responses 
were more focused on the impact of their 
profession on their personal lives, rather 
than the other way around.
The complex interplay of factors 
explaining why GPs leave practice early was 
characterised by the overarching theme 
‘The changing role of general practice and 
its impact’. This is discussed in relation to 
the sub-themes: organisational changes; 
clash of values; increased workload; 
negative media portrayal; workplace 
issues; and lack of support.
Organisational changes
Participants described a radically altered 
How this fits in
Almost half of GP leavers in England are 
aged <50 years. Key drivers for leaving early 
relate to changes in the NHS, resulting 
in loss of professional autonomy, and in 
overwork, stress, and burnout. General 
practice in the UK has undergone a series 
of organisational changes culminating in 
an increase in day-to-day administrative 
tasks, which have come to adversely impact 
the doctor–patient relationship. To improve 
retention of young GPs in practice, time 
spent on work that is not face-to-face patient 
care needs to be minimised.
British Journal of General Practice, February 2016  e129
 Figure 1. Boiling frogs: the changing role of general practice and its impact. © Natasha Doran 2016. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B
L
A
M
E
C
U
L
T
U
R
E
B
U
L
L
Y
I
N
G
C
U
L      
T
U
R
E
T
I
C
K
B
O
X
C
U
L
T
U
R
E
GP
6. IMPACT ON WELLBEING
• Ill health including stress, anxiety, 
and burnout
• Poor work–life balance
LOW JOB SATISFACTION
• Feeling undervalued and under-
appreciated
• Loss of intellectual challenge
• Fearing litigation or practising  
defensively
• Less time for reflection
• Feel no longer giving a good  service 
(impact on quality and continuity of 
patient care)
• Burdened by conflicting priorities
• Having to cut corners
• More stress, time pressures, and 
administrative tasks
• Current job unrecognisable from the 
professional role they took on
• Continuity of patient care not as 
expected
• Job not meeting expectations
“Boiling
Frogs” 
The changing role 
and its impact
of general practice 
‘If you take a frog and you stick it in 
some very hot water it will jump 
out, it won’t like it. If you take the 
same frog and you stick it in a pan 
full of water and you just very, very 
slowly warm it up, it will adapt to 
the change, to the point that […] 
you can actually boil the water and 
[…] because it’s so well used to 
adapting, it won’t realise that it’s 
actually dying!’  (GP6)
‘A lot of GP meetings that I used 
to go to they used to go on about 
“boiling frogs” and they said they 
keep on increasing the workload 
on GPs who are adapting to the 
point where they all crack and 
then say “That’s it, I’ve had 
enough!”.’ (GP6)
LEAVING UK
GENERAL PRACTICE
• Relocating abroad
• Changing jobs
• Early retirement on 
medical grounds
1.
ORGANISATIONAL
CHANGES
• Hospitals becoming
more specialised
• Changes to methods of 
referral. More complex 
communication channels
across services
• Funding cuts
• More  standardised,
depersonalised, fragmented 
patient care
2.
CLASH
OF VALUES
• Reduced  to
‘government clerks’
• Impossible targets
• Unrealistic
appointment times
• Less patient-centred
3.
INCREASED
WORKLOAD
• More bureaucracy — 
management targets, 
regulations, and guidelines
• More work shifting from 
hospital to primary care
• Change in patient 
population and demand
• Time pressures
4.
NEGATIVE MEDIA 
PORTRAYAL
• Fear of ‘political spin’
• Portrayed as ‘overpaid 
and under-delivering’
• Undermining and
demoralising
5.
WORKPLACE ISSUES
AND LACK OF SUPPORT
• Partnership conflicts over workload, 
flexible hours, funding, and
career  progression
• Colleagues — less time for informal 
support or ‘catch up’
• Feeling more isolated in practice
• Bullying culture
• Need for a more ‘robust’
occupational health service
• Government — more expected of GPs 
with fewer financial resources and 
less support in place
e130  British Journal of General Practice, February 2016
 working environment caused by an 
unprecedented increase in organisational 
changes, many of which were felt to 
be made without any ‘long-term vision’ 
(GP19), and for ‘little health gain’ (GP15). 
Unhappiness with day-to-day life as 
a GP was indicated by 78.9% of survey 
responders, in particular, changes to the 
role of the GP (43.7%):
‘Cases were getting more complicated, 
more 
was 
being 
transferred 
from 
the responsibility of the hospital to the 
responsibility of GPs […], I was spending 
more and more time doing administrative 
things and less and less time being able to 
devote my mental attention to the patients 
in front of me. I just felt more and more 
stretched.’ (GP3)
As referral systems became more 
complex and hospitals more specialised, 
interviewees 
experienced 
a 
more 
fragmented and depersonalised healthcare 
system that was increasingly challenging 
for them to navigate:
‘One of the problems with hospital 
medicine is it’s very fragmented […], so if 
you sent somebody in with one thing, they 
have that sorted, but they don’t look at 
the bigger picture, so they’d come back 
out and there’d be another thing that was 
developing so you’d have to refer them 
to somewhere else, so the fragmented 
nature of hospital medicine makes general 
practice quite difficult.’ (GP4)
Clash of values
According 
to 
participants, 
continual 
organisational changes fundamentally 
altered their professional role to a 
‘government clerk’ or a ‘data clerk for 
public health and for management’ (GP15). 
The increasing influx of administrative 
tasks left many feeling professionally 
compromised as they came to face 
conflicting priorities in the consulting room. 
Among survey responders, 55.6% stated 
that the goalposts were being moved too 
often and 52.1% disliked the ‘target-driven’ 
approach to patient care:
‘You spent more time ticking boxes than 
you did talking to the patients sometimes 
[…] that put more stress on me and I felt it 
affected my rapport with the patients.’ (GP2)
For most participants, the introduction of 
the Quality and Outcomes Framework (QOF) 
marked a defining point where ‘modern 
medicine’ became a ‘more target driven 
culture’ (GP12), or a ‘tick box exercise’ 
(GP1).
For the majority of participants, attempts 
to juggle what they saw as ‘impossible 
targets’ with ‘unrealistic appointment 
times’ (GP12) detracted from delivering 
good patient care:
‘The partner would come in before I started 
surgery and say, “Oh don’t forget to do all 
the QOFs […]” And that was more important 
than actually focusing on the patient […] 
With busier and busier surgeries with more 
and more extras, something has to go and I 
think what ends up going when you’re under 
pressure to get all the QOFs and the money 
in, is the actual patient relationship.’ (GP11) 
Increased workload
Participants perceived that management 
targets, 
regulations, 
and 
guidelines 
impinged on their day-to-day work in 
general practice, increasing their workload. 
Fifty per cent of survey responders thought 
that having too high a non-clinical workload 
was a factor in their decision to leave 
practice early, while 83.8% said that aspects 
relating to pressure of work featured in 
their decision:
‘The consultation’s length didn’t change, 
but what you were expected to do in a 
consultation changed.’ (GP11)
‘I felt I was cutting corners, I felt I wasn’t 
offering a good service unfortunately.’ (GP6)
The higher administrative workload 
reduced the time available to spend with 
their patients, leading to a fundamental 
change in the doctor–patient relationship:
‘You see it does change the doctor–patient 
relationship because it changes how you 
react to people and how you interact with 
people. I mean it’s obvious stuff, but when 
you’re really stressed and you’ve still got 15 
people to see, you don’t have the time for 
people, you don’t have the interest.’ (GP11)
The conditions within which doctors were 
expected to function affected their ability to 
practise holistic, patient-centred care:
‘Patients are dissatisfied […] because they’re 
not being given sufficient time to give their 
history properly and be investigated at 
the primary care level […] there isn’t that 
reflective quality that allows differential 
diagnosis, use of time, the use of your 
personal knowledge of the individual and 
British Journal of General Practice, February 2016  e131
 their social circumstances to be applied.’ 
(GP9)
With more work shifting from hospital 
to primary care, combined with changes in 
patient population and demand, participants 
felt increasingly time-stretched. Strategies 
to cope included staying late at work, taking 
work home, or changing their appointment 
times:
‘I changed my work patterns because I kept 
getting migraine headaches, because I was 
getting stressed because of time pressures 
[…] I found it very stressful, having patients 
just waiting, because I was running late on 
a regular basis.’ (GP2)
Negative media portrayal
Factors relating to patients and the media 
were cited by 63.4% of survey responders. 
Concerns about media attacks on the 
medical profession were indicated more 
frequently (57.0%) than fear of litigation 
(25.4%) or complaints (17.6%).
Rather than feeling supported in their 
efforts to meet patient demands, or to 
cope with the pressures inherent in a high-
risk working environment, participants 
instead felt worn down by negative media 
representations: 
‘I was very conscious of the negative image 
of general practice in the media and I found 
it quite stressful.’ (GP3)
For many participants, being portrayed 
as ‘overpaid and under delivering’ was 
tantamount to ‘media battering’:
‘One of the frustrations is that I think 
there was definitely a political spin against 
general practice […] It doesn’t help when 
you’ve had a bad day at work and you come 
home and watch the 10 o’clock news and 
you see somebody on the telly saying “Oh 
these GPs aren’t working very hard and 
patients can never get appointments’’ […] 
Just constant criticism in the press about 
the fact that GPs were getting paid an awful 
lot of money and they weren’t having to do 
the out-of-hours and they weren’t working 
nights and weekends.’ (GP6)
Not 
only 
did 
participants 
feel 
misrepresented by ‘political spin’, but 
they also felt frustrated that the more 
positive aspects of their hard work and 
professionalism went largely unreported:
‘There was never anything positive, 
never any positive health stories related 
to the improvement in cardiac mortality, 
reductions in cancer deaths, earlier 
diagnosis — any of the positives that we’d 
achieved were just ignored.’ (GP9)
Being the subject of an ongoing and 
negative media campaign left many feeling 
undermined and demoralised:
‘We were targeted in a completely 
unsympathetic light […] without any 
recognition of what as a profession we gave 
to the public really and it did, over time, 
become very wearing.’ (GP9)
Workplace issues and lack of support
Participants described conflicts within their 
practices over funding, career progression, 
flexible hours, and workload distribution. 
These issues within practices were 
exacerbated by the lack of time for more 
informal interactions and support among 
colleagues. Although all participants 
felt supported during their training and 
registrar years, once fully qualified they 
became increasingly isolated in practice:
‘I did sometimes feel quite isolated at the 
practice […] I think the thing that possibly 
my training hadn’t prepared me for was 
sort of feeling like a lone worker in many 
ways, particularly in comparison to working 
in a hospital where you were always part of 
a team.’ (GP3)
Participants expressed the view that 
more was being expected of them by 
government, without the necessary support 
in place:
‘I lost my confidence. I lost my faith in the 
system. I lost my faith in my profession […] I 
think once you’ve lost your confidence, then 
I don’t think there’s any structure within 
the profession that helps that come back.’ 
(GP4)
Participants described a ‘bullying culture’, 
which they felt had come to permeate the 
NHS from the top down:
‘There is a really aggressive, vicious, bullying 
culture that permeates management in the 
NHS. That then flows all the way down to 
whoever your locality middle managers 
are. It’s a dreadful, awful, bullying culture 
and to shift from that to a non-overseeing, 
facilitative, hands-off, trusting culture is ... 
I don’t know if people are capable of that 
cultural shift.’ (GP15)
In light of this reported culture of bullying, 
e132  British Journal of General Practice, February 2016
 several interviewees expressed the need 
for more support, particularly in the form of 
a more ‘robust’ occupational health service 
for doctors. Among survey responders, 
unhappiness with their professional 
culture was important for 61%, while 44% 
highlighted the feeling of a loss of autonomy 
and professional control.
Impact on job satisfaction and wellbeing
Time pressure and conflicting priorities 
meant that participants felt that the care 
they were giving was sub-standard. These 
pressures, intensified by a perceived ‘blame 
culture’, led to disillusionment and a raised 
anxiety about the risk of making a mistake: 
‘I found that I was increasingly anxious 
about the patients that I was seeing. I think 
because I was so often quite time-strapped 
with all the things that I was trying to fit in 
during the day. But I felt conscious that I 
was worried that I ran the risk of missing 
things and that made me really worried and 
anxious.’ (GP3) 
Participants described a series of 
conditions which they felt contributed 
to an increasingly pressurised working 
environment. These included organisational 
changes resulting in a clash of values 
and diminishing professional autonomy 
as health care became more centralised, 
standardised, and depersonalised; an 
unprecedented increase in administrative 
workload; and a lack of support not only 
from government, but also across services 
and the wider community due to an ongoing 
negative media campaign. 
This combination of factors led to reduced 
job satisfaction and ultimately affected 
wellbeing. In some cases, participants grew 
to hate their job:
‘I think I got to the point where I hated it and, 
that’s a really strong word. But I absolutely 
hated it and I used to wake up on a Friday 
morning feeling sick at the thought of going 
in.’ (GP11)
In other cases, it was not so much the 
job, but ‘everything around the job’ that 
they came to ‘hate’, as another participant 
described:
‘Passionately adoring my work and my 
patients, I mean, really I can’t tell you how 
much I miss them. Absolutely loved the 
actual job, but everything around the job I 
hated.’ (GP7)
One participant, who had worked in 
general practice for 18 years and was also 
an appraiser, described the impact this was 
having on a number of GPs: 
‘There was this kind of malaise growing 
within the profession that I could see as 
an appraiser. As GPs got more and more 
exhausted and burnt out, there was this 
“I don’t want to know”, there was this 
disassociation, there was this lack of will to 
fight to get what patients needed.’ (GP13)
One-third 
of 
the 
survey 
sample 
experienced ill health, including stress 
and anxiety disorder. Burnout was cited by 
38.0% of the survey responders, although 
some participants self-diagnosed the early 
symptoms of burnout:
‘I don’t think I was medically ill, but I was 
certainly quite grumpy and I was quite fed 
up and I just wasn’t enjoying work and I got 
to the stage when I was driving to work and 
I used to have this sort of sense of dread 
the nearer I got to the practice and I thought 
“Oh no, another day is coming”. I thought 
this isn’t right, I shouldn’t be feeling like 
this!’ (GP6)
Others decided to act upon these early-
warning signs and leave:
‘Before getting to the point where I 
really thought I was going to burn out 
and really hit a very low point mentally 
and psychologically, I thought actually, I 
think I recognised those warning signs 
and I thought it better to go do something 
different at this point while I still have the 
wherewithal to go and do it.’ (GP12)
Personal factors were cited by 90.8% of 
survey responders, in particular, feeling 
overworked (53.5%), a wish to improve their 
work–life balance (49.3%), the work being 
too stressful (43.0%), and lack of enjoyment 
of the work (41.5%). 
Overall, participants felt that their job 
was not meeting expectations, particularly 
among GPs who had been in practice for 
≥10 years, it was felt that their current job 
was unrecognisable from the professional 
role they had initially taken on.
DISCUSSION
Summary
Participants had been attracted to GP 
work in the expectation that it would offer 
continuity of patient care, professional 
autonomy, and flexibility in working hours, 
along with the intellectual challenges 
inherent in problem solving. However, 
British Journal of General Practice, February 2016  e133
 participants described factors that were 
both cumulative and multifactorial, leading 
to their decision to leave practice early in 
their careers (Figure 1).
The extent and rapidity of organisational 
changes to the NHS, which had led to an 
increase in day-to-day administrative tasks 
and overall workload, were perceived by 
participants to have fundamentally changed 
the doctor–patient relationship: the very 
hallmark of general practice. 
Lack of time with patients meant the 
ability to practise patient-centred continuity 
of care was perceived to be compromised 
and, with it, the GPs’ professional autonomy 
and values, resulting in diminished job 
satisfaction. Once their job satisfaction had 
become negatively impacted, the combined 
pressures of increased patient demand 
and the negative media portrayal left many 
feeling unsupported and vulnerable to 
burnout and ill health, and, ultimately, to 
the decision to leave general practice.
Strengths and limitations
GP training, recruitment, and retention in 
the UK is fast approaching crisis point 
as more GPs leave the profession at a 
younger age. This study triangulates 
interview findings with survey results to 
provide an in-depth exploration of the 
reasons why this is happening. Participants 
were self-selecting and therefore may have 
had particularly strong views. However, 
interviewees represented a maximum 
variation sample in terms of age, number of 
years as practising GPs, and geographical 
location.  
Comparison with existing literature
Although current evidence points to an 
impending crisis in the recruitment and 
retention of GPs in the UK,12–14 this is by 
no means a new phenomenon,15–17 nor one 
which is unique to the UK workforce.18–20 
In 2001, a survey carried out by the BMA 
 
revealed that one-quarter of GPs wanted to 
quit,21 while a number of surveys, carried out 
before and since, have continued to monitor 
GP training, retention, and recruitment, 
particularly in relation to contractual 
reforms, job satisfaction, and burnout.15,22–26 
Much research has been carried out on 
factors associated with stress, anxiety, 
depression, and burnout among doctors in 
the UK and abroad.27–30 There has also been 
a renewed focus in the research literature 
upon educational initiatives, preventive 
measures, and therapeutic interventions 
that could help combat what is perceived to 
be a growing malaise within the healthcare 
profession.31–35
In a recent BMA survey, 80% of 1000 
responders rated work pressure as ‘high 
or very high’, with their main workplace 
stresses being ‘meeting patients’ demands, 
lack of time, and excessive bureaucracy’.36 
In a study looking at motives for early 
retirement among GPs in the Netherlands, 
policies related to workload reduction were 
considered the most useful instruments 
to control retention and retirement.37 The 
current mixed methods study complements 
and extends this literature, by showing the 
cumulative, inter-related, and multifactorial 
reasons as to why GPs are leaving practice 
early in their careers.
Implications for research and practice
The early loss of GPs causes a considerable 
drain on NHS resources. To improve 
retention of GPs in practice, NHS leaders 
need both to minimise the pace of 
administrative change and to reduce the 
amount of time spent by GPs on work that 
is not face-to-face patient care.
For those leaving practice early, exit 
interviews would help identify specific local 
as well as more general reasons for their 
leaving the GP workforce. 
Many GPs reported that they had enjoyed 
direct patient care. Research is needed on 
how the skills and experience of GPs can 
most usefully be harnessed, rather than 
being lost to the NHS.
Funding
The study was jointly funded by Health 
Education England and NHS England.
Ethical approval
Ethical approval was granted by the 
Research Ethics Approval Committee for 
Health (REACH) at the University of Bath 
(REACH reference number: EP 13/1451).
Provenance
Freely submitted; externally peer reviewed.
Open access
This article is Open Access: CC BY-NC 
3.0 licence (http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc/3.0/).
Competing interests
The authors have declared no competing 
interests.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank all volunteer 
participants who kindly gave their time to 
share their experiences of working in UK 
general practice. We also wish to thank 
Justin Devine for his graphic design work. 
Discuss this article
Contribute and read comments about this 
article: bjgp.org/letters
e134  British Journal of General Practice, February 2016
 REFERENCES
1. 
Department of Health. The new NHS: modern, dependable. Cm3807. London: 
The Stationery Office, 1997.
2. 
Health & Social Care Information Centre Workforce Directorate. General and 
Personal Medical Services England 2001–2011. Leeds: Health and Social Care 
Information Centre, 2012.
3. 
NHS England Analytical Service. Improving general practice — a call to action. 
Evidence pack. 2014. http://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/
igp-cta-evid.pdf (accessed 16 Dec 2015).
4. 
NHS Health Education England. General practice (GP). http://www.nhscareers.
nhs.uk/explore-by-career/doctors/careers-in-medicine/general-practice/ 
(accessed 16 Dec 2015).
5. 
GP Taskforce. Securing the future GP workforce: delivering the mandate on GP 
expansion. GP Taskforce final report. Leeds: Health Education England, 2014.
6. 
Curtis L. Unit costs of health and social care 2014. Canterbury: Personal Social 
Services Research Unit, 2014.
7. 
Health & Social Care Information Centre. General and Personal Medical 
Services, England — 2004–2014, as at 30 September
. http://www.hscic.gov.uk/
catalogue/PUB16934 (accessed 16 Dec 2015). 
8. 
British Medical Association. Survey reveals extent of GP workforce crisis. http://
bma.org.uk/news-views-analysis/news/2014/may/survey-reveals-extent-of-gp-
workforce-crisis (accessed 16 Dec 2015).
9. 
Doran N, Fox F, Taylor G, Harris M. Early GP leavers interim report: report to 
HEE & NHS England dated 4th May 2014. Bath: University of Bath, 2014. http://
opus.bath.ac.uk/47271/ (accessed 16 Dec 2015).
10. 
Doran N, Fox F, Rodham K, et al. A qualitative study exploring the reasons why 
GP’s leave practice early in their careers and the barriers to their return. Bath: 
University of Bath, 2014. http://opus.bath.ac.uk/47274/ (accessed 16 Dec 2015).
11. 
Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual Res Psychol 
2006; 3(2): 77–101.
12. 
Adams S. NHS facing GP workforce crisis. Telegraph, 27 Feb 2013. http://
www.telegraph.co.uk/news/health/news/9897615/NHS-facing-GP-workforce-
crisis.html (accessed 16 Dec 2015).
13. 
British Medical Association. General practice faces ‘serious threat’ to 
recruitment. http://bma.org.uk/news-views-analysis/news/2014/june/general-
practice-faces-serious-threat-to-recruitment (accessed 16 Dec 2015).
14. 
British Medical Association. Survey reveals extent of GP workforce crisis. http://
bma.org.uk/news-views-analysis/news/2014/may/survey-reveals-extent-of-gp-
workforce-crisis (accessed 16 Dec 2015).
15. 
Young R, Leese B. Recruitment and retention of general practitioners in the UK: 
what are the problems and solutions? Br J Gen Pract 1999; 49(447): 829–833.
16. 
Lambert TW, Evans J, Goldacre MJ. Recruitment of UK-trained doctors into 
general practice: findings from national cohort studies. Br J Gen Pract 2002; 
52(478): 364–367, 369–372.
17. 
Evans J, Lambert T, Goldacre M. GP recruitment and retention: a qualitative 
analysis of doctors’ comments about training for and working in general 
practice. Occas Pap R Coll Gen Pract 2002 (83): iii–vi, 1–33.
18. 
Sumanen M, Aine T, Halila H, et al. Where have all the GPs gone — where will 
they go? Study of Finnish GPs. BMC Fam Pract 2012; 13: 121.
19. 
Heponiemi T, Manderbacka K, Vanska J, Elovainio M. Can organizational justice 
help the retention of general practitioners? Health Policy 2013; 110(1): 22–28.
20. 
Van Greuningen M, Heiligers P
J, Van der Velden LF
. Motives for early retirement 
of self-employed GPs in the Netherlands: a comparison of two time periods. 
BMC Health Serv Res 2012; 12: 467.
21. 
Kmietowicz Z. Quarter of GPs want to quit, BMA survey shows. BMJ 2001; 
323(7318): 887.
22. 
Sibbald B, Enzer I, Cooper C, et al. GP job satisfaction in 1987, 1990 and 1998: 
lessons for the future? Fam Pract 2000; 17(5): 364–371.
23. 
Van Ham I, Verhoeven AA, Groenier KH, et al. Job satisfaction among general 
practitioners: a systematic literature review. Eur J Gen Pract 2006; 12(4): 174–
180.
24. 
Watson J, Humphrey A, Peters-Klimm F, Hamilton W. Motivation and 
satisfaction in GP training: a UK cross-sectional survey. Br J Gen Pract 2011; 
DOI: 10.3399/bjgp11X601352.
25. 
Whalley D, Bojke C, Gravelle H, Sibbald B. GP job satisfaction in view of contract 
reform: a national survey. Br J Gen Pract 2006; 56(523): 87–92.
26. 
Sibbald B, Bojke C, Gravelle H. National survey of job satisfaction and retirement 
intentions among general practitioners in England. BMJ 2003; 326(7379): 22.
27. 
McManus IC, Winder BC, Gordon D. The causal links between stress and 
burnout in a longitudinal study of UK doctors. Lancet 2002; 359(9323): 2089–
2090.
28. 
Vedsted P, Sokolowski I, Olesen F
. Open access to general practice was 
associated with burnout among general practitioners. Int J Family Med 2013; 
2013: 383602.
29. 
Firth-Cozens J. Individual and organizational predictors of depression in general 
practitioners. Br J Gen Pract 1998; 48(435): 1647–1651.
30. 
Harvey SB, Laird B, Henderson M, Hotopf M. The mental health of health care 
professionals: a review for the Department of Health. London: National Clinical 
Assessment Service, 2009.
31. 
Kjeldmand D, Holmstrom I. Balint groups as a means to increase job 
satisfaction and prevent burnout among general practitioners. Ann Fam Med 
2008; 6(2): 138–145.
32. 
Lown BA, Manning CF
. The Schwartz Center Rounds: evaluation of an 
interdisciplinary approach to enhancing patient-centered communication, 
teamwork, and provider support. Acad Med 2010; 85(6): 1073–1081.
33. 
Krasner MS, Epstein RM, Beckman H, et al. Association of an educational 
program in mindful communication with burnout, empathy, and attitudes among 
primary care physicians. JAMA 2009; 302(12): 1284–1293.
34. 
Beckman HB, Wendland M, Mooney C, et al. The impact of a program in mindful 
communication on primary care physicians. Acad Med 2012; 87(6): 815–819.
35. 
Bullock A, Fox F, Barnes R, et al. Transitions in medicine: trainee doctor stress 
and support mechanisms. Journal of Workplace Learning 2013; 25(6): 368–382.
36. 
Jaques H. BMA must ‘act now’ on stress and burnout, say doctors. BMJ Careers 
2013. http://careers.bmj.com/careers/advice/view-article.html?id=20013164 
(accessed 16 Dec 2015).
37. 
Van Greuningen M, Heiligers P
J, Van der Velden LF
. Motives for early retirement 
of self-employed GPs in the Netherlands: a comparison of two time periods. 
BMC Health Serv Res 2012; 12: 467.
British Journal of General Practice, February 2016  e135
