 1160
P
lastic bronchitis (PB) is a relatively rare but devastating 
complication in patients after single-ventricle palliation. 
Noncardiac causes of PB include cystic fibrosis, sickle cell 
anemia, and asthma, and lymphangiomatosis, as well.1,2 The 
disease is caused by exudation of proteinaceous material and 
cells in the airways leading to branching cast formation. Once 
formed, the casts are either expectorated by coughing or can 
lead to asphyxiation.
Clinical Perspective on p 1170
The prevalence of PB in patients after total cavopul-
monary connection (TCPC) is estimated to be 4%.3,4 The 
diagnosis is often difficult, and physical examination and 
radiological findings are nonspecific and may consist of 
diminished breath sounds and patchy consolidations on chest 
x-rays. Spontaneous expectoration of the cast is often the first 
presentation of the disease, and bronchoscopy is performed to 
confirm the diagnosis by demonstrating casts in the airways. 
Lymphatic involvement has been considered to be part of the 
pathological process in PB because of the dilation of the lym-
phatic vessels found at lung biopsies and the abnormal lung 
tracer intake shown by lymphoscintigraphy.5–7
Poor understanding of the pathogenesis of the disease has 
resulted in variability in therapies across centers. Interventions 
aimed at lowering venous pressure have been reported to 
reduce cast formation.8 Medical treatment with sildenafil, 
steroids, and mucolytics have also been reported to improve 
symptoms.9–11 Finally, heart transplantation can result in long-
term resolution of the disease.12 Assuming central lymphatic 
involvement, thoracic duct (TD) ligation has been performed 
with reports of symptomatic improvement in some cases.7,13,14 
The wide range of therapies reported is a testament to the fact 
Background—Plastic bronchitis is a potentially fatal disorder occurring in children with single-ventricle physiology, 
and other diseases, as well, such as asthma. In this study, we report findings of abnormal pulmonary lymphatic flow, 
demonstrated by MRI lymphatic imaging, in patients with plastic bronchitis and percutaneous lymphatic intervention as 
a treatment for these patients.
Methods and Results—This is a retrospective case series of 18 patients with surgically corrected congenital heart disease 
and plastic bronchitis who presented for lymphatic imaging and intervention. Lymphatic imaging included heavy 
T2-weighted MRI and dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance lymphangiogram. All patients underwent bilateral 
intranodal lymphangiogram, and most patients underwent percutaneous lymphatic intervention. In 16 of 18 patients, MRI 
or lymphangiogram or both demonstrated retrograde lymphatic flow from the thoracic duct toward lung parenchyma. 
Intranodal lymphangiogram and thoracic duct catheterization was successful in all patients. Seventeen of 18 patients 
underwent either lymphatic embolization procedures or thoracic duct stenting with covered stents to exclude retrograde 
flow into the lungs. One of the 2 patients who did not have retrograde lymphatic flow did not undergo a lymphatic 
interventional procedure. A total of 15 of 17(88%) patients who underwent an intervention had significant symptomatic 
improvement at a median follow-up of 315 days (range, 45–770 days). The most common complication observed was 
nonspecific transient abdominal pain and transient hypotension.
Conclusions—In this study, we demonstrated abnormal pulmonary lymphatic perfusion in most patients with 
plastic bronchitis. Interruption of the lymphatic flow resulted in significant improvement of symptoms in these 
patients and, in some cases, at least temporary resolution of cast formation.  (Circulation. 2016;133:1160-1170. 
 
DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.115.019710.)
Key Words: bronchitis ◼ heart defects, congenital ◼ lymphatic vessels ◼ lymphography
© 2016 American Heart Association, Inc.
Circulation is available at http://circ.ahajournals.org 
DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.115.019710
Received September 29, 2015; accepted February 1, 2016.
From Division of Cardiology, Division of Pulmonary Medicine, and Department of Radiology, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, PA (Y.D., 
M.S.K., J.J.R., M.J.G., A.C.G., K.D., D.J.G., S.G., J.R.); and Division of Interventional Radiology, Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia (M.I.).
Correspondence to Yoav Dori, MD, PhD, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, 34th and Civic Center Blvd, Philadelphia, PA 19104. E-mail 
 
doriy@email.chop.edu
Percutaneous Lymphatic Embolization of Abnormal 
Pulmonary Lymphatic Flow as Treatment of Plastic 
Bronchitis in Patients With Congenital Heart Disease
Yoav Dori, MD, PhD; Marc S. Keller, MD; Jonathan J. Rome, MD;  
Matthew J. Gillespie, MD; Andrew C. Glatz, MD, MSCE; Kathryn Dodds, MSN, CRNP;  
David J. Goldberg, MD; Samuel Goldfarb, MD; Jack Rychik, MD; Maxim Itkin, MD
Congenital Heart Disease
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Dori et al  Etiology and New Therapy for Plastic Bronchitis  1161
that none are reliably efficacious; and, most importantly, mor-
bidity and mortality for the condition remain high.4
Dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance lym-
phangiogram (DCMRL) has recently been described as a 
method of imaging the central lymphatic system.15,16 Dori et 
al16,17 have recently reported on the use of this technique and 
T2-weighted MRI to characterize lymphatic abnormalities in 
patients with PB.
Percutaneous lymphatic procedures, such as TD emboli-
zation, are well-established, less invasive alternatives to sur-
gical interventions in cases of chylous leaks.18 Recently, we 
described the first reported case of the successful use of a 
modification of this technique and DCMRL in the successful 
treatment of a patient with PB.16
In this study, we expand on the previous case report and 
examine our broader experience and short-term outcome with 
the percutaneous treatment of PB in patients with congeni-
tal heart diseases. Preprocedure imaging using DCMRL and 
T2 lymphatic mapping provided insight into the etiology and 
pathogenesis of PB and were used to guide the procedures.
Methods
Permission from the Institutional Review Board was obtained before 
the initiation of this study. This study is a retrospective review of 
data of 18 patients with PB and congenital heart disease who have 
undergone lymphatic imaging and interventions at our institution. 
All procedures were performed under general anesthesia. Flexible 
bronchoscopy was initially performed to remove residual casts and to 
facilitate general anesthesia. Extracted casts were sent for pathology 
examination.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
MRI was performed in an XMR suite that couples an MR scanner 
with a catheterization laboratory (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany). With 
the use of ultrasound guidance, bilateral inguinal lymph nodes were 
directly accessed with 25-gauge spinal needles attached to a short con-
nector tubing (BD Medical, Franklin Lakes, NJ), similar to the method 
described by Nadolski et al.19 A small amount of Lipiodol (Guerbet 
LLC; Bloomington, IN) was injected under fluoroscopic guidance to 
confirm the correct position of the needles inside the lymph nodes. After 
stabilizing the needle, the patients were transferred to the MRI suite.
MR Protocol
MRI was performed on a 1.5 T Siemens Magnetom Avanto scanner 
(Siemens, Erlangen, Germany). T2-weighted MRI lymphatic imag-
ing was performed by using a respiratory navigated and cardiac-
gated 3-dimensional turbo spin echo sequence with the following 
parameters: matrix 256×256, field of view 300 to 450, repetition 
time 2500, time to echo 650, flip angle 140, voxel size 1.2×1.2×1.2 
mm, scan time 2 to 5 minutes. For dynamic imaging 2 to 8 mL of 
undiluted gadopentetate dimeglumine (Magnevist, Bayer Healthcare 
Pharmaceuticals Inc., Wayne, NJ) was injected by hand into each 
lymph node at a rate of 0.5 to 1 mL/min. One minute after the injec-
tion, scanning was initiated by using the Syngo TWIST sequence. 
Typical scanning parameters were: matrix 320×240, field of view 
300 to 450, repetition time 3, time to echo 1, flip angle 25, slice 
thickness 1.2, isotropic voxel size 1.2×1.2×1.2, scan time ≈15 min-
utes. This was followed by additional scans with a high-resolution 
navigator gated 3-dimensional flash inversion recovery sequence. 
Typical scanning parameters were as follows: matrix 320×240, 
field of view 300 to 450, repetition time 300, time to echo 1.5, flip 
angle 20, slice thickness 1.2, isotropic voxel size 1.2×1.2×1.2. In 
all patients, the scan area covered the neck, chest, and abdomen as 
caudally as feasible. Volume rendering and further processing of the 
3-dimensional volume, maximum intensity projection, and coronary 
projection were performed on a Syngo InSpace Dynamic worksta-
tion (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany).
Cardiac Catheterization
All patients in the study underwent cardiac catheterization before 
lymphatic intervention. Embolization of venovenous collateral ves-
sels near the main lymphovenous junction was performed to reduce 
the risks of systemic embolization from shunting of the Lipiodol into 
systemic circulation through the collateral vessels. In patients with 
a fenestration, temporary balloon occlusion of the fenestration dur-
ing the lymphatic intervention procedure was performed for the same 
reason.
Lymphatic Intervention
Initially, by using the method of Nadolski and Itkin,20 intranodal lym-
phangiogram was performed to opacify a target central lymphatic ves-
sel. After identification of the target vessel (larger lumbar lymphatics 
or cisterna chyli), access to this vessel was performed by using the 
transabdominal approach as previously described.20 In short, the tar-
get lymphatic vessel was accessed through an anterior transabdomi-
nal approach using a 21- to 22-gauge Chiba needle (Cook Medical 
Inc, Bloomington, IN). A V18 control guide wire (Boston Scientific, 
Natick, MA) was then advanced into the TD and manipulated cephalad. 
Over the wire, a 60-cm 2.3F Rapid Transit microcatheter (Cordis Corp, 
Warren, NJ) was advanced further into the TD. Imaging of the TD 
and its branches was then performed. Embolization of the lymphatic 
ducts were performed using Lipiodol, MReye coils (Cook Medical, 
Bloomington, IN), and glue (TRUFILL n-BCA Liquid Embolic 
System, DePuy Synthes, Warsaw, IN). Four embolization techniques 
were used in this study: (1) embolization of the TD with endovascular 
coils and glue; (2) selective embolization of the branches of the TD with 
Lipiodol and glue; (3) embolization of TD with Lipiodol while imped-
ing flow in the TD by external compression of cutaneous lymphatic 
collaterals and transvenous balloon occlusion of the lymphovenous 
junction at the subclavian vein (Tyshak II, B. Braun Medical Inc, 
Bethlehem, PA); and (4) isolation of the branches of the TD by stenting 
of the TD with covered stent (Viabahn, Gore Medical, Flagstaff, AZ).
In 3 patients, bronchoscopy was performed immediately after cath-
eterization of the TD while injecting Isosulfan Blue (Lymphazurin, 
Tyco Healthcare Group, Mansfield, MA) to help us identify the path-
ways of pulmonary lymphatic perfusion in cases where the origin of 
the pulmonary lymphatic flow was unclear.
Casting Frequency
In this study, we report on the casting frequency (number of casts per 
time) as reported by the patients, patients physician, or family. In 2 
patients, there was no report of a regular pattern of casting; thus, they 
were labeled as intermittent.
Statistical Methods
Demographic and procedural variables were summarized by using 
standard descriptive statistics and expressed as mean±standard devia-
tion for normally distributed continuous variables, median with range 
for skewed continuous variables, and count with percentage of total 
for categorical variables.
Casting Frequency and Number of Medications
Before conducting the prepost test analysis, we converted the descrip-
tive casting frequency to a numeric number (casts per month). For those 
with irregular casting frequency (intermittent), we counted approximate 
episodes in a certain time period (casts per year) and converted this 
number into casts per month. We then created a difference variable by 
subtracting the precasting frequency from the postcasting frequency and 
prenumber of medications. For the primary analysis, we used general-
ized estimating equations within the GENMOD procedure in SAS 9.4 
to compare outcomes (casting rate and number of medications) before 
and after the intervention. A Poisson distribution with a log link function 
was assumed, while adjusting for clustering of data at the patient level 
by specifying the exchangeable covariance structure.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 1162  Circulation  March 22, 2016
Table 1. Summary of Patients’ Baseline Demographic and Medical History Data
Patient 
No.
Age, y
Age at Last 
Surgery, y
Diagnosis
Surgical  
Repair
PB  
Duration, 
mo
CVP
Cast Frequency
Previous  
Interventions for PB
Preprocedure  
Medical Treatment
P1
5.98
3.91
HLHS
ECFF
6
10
Daily
Venovenous collateral 
embolization
itPA, inh steroids,  
sildenafil, albuterol
P2
6.99
2.62
Heterotaxy, 
UCAVC
LTFF
24
18
Daily
None
itPA, oral steroids,  
sildenafil, albuterol, 
Pulmozyme, Flovent
P3*
9.11
0.35
HLHS
Hemi Fontan
36
9
Daily
AP collateral embolization
itPA, sildenafil,  
albuterol, saline nebs
P4
4.51
2.77
HLHS
LTFF
7
11
Every 4–7 d
Transcatheter fenestration 
creation
itPA, sildenafil, albuterol, 
inh steroids, saline nebs, 
azithromycin
P5
5.25
3.01
DILV
ECNFF
3
11
Daily
LPA stent, RPA BDA, AP 
collateral embolization
itPA, sildenafil, inh steroids, 
saline, azithromycin
P6
3.84
3.06
HLHS
ECNFF
8
13
Daily
LPA stent, AP collateral 
embolization
itPA, Sildenafil, inh and  
oral steroids, saline, 
albuterol, azithromycin
P7
10.17
8.3
DORV
ECNFF
2
11
Weekly
LPA stent
iNO
P8†
2.66
2.64
HLHS
ECFF
0.25
18
Acute onset of 
PB post-TCPC 
surgery
AP collateral embolization
itPA, sildenafil, inh and  
oral steroids, saline, 
albuterol
P9
10.14
3.04
UCAVC
ECNFF
36
11
Every 2 wk
LPA stent dilation AP 
collateral embolization
itPA, sildenafil, inh  
and oral steroids,  
saline, albuterol
P10‡
2.32
1.73
TA
ECFF
7
19
Every 2–3 d
Fenestration dilation
itPA, Sildenafil, inh steroids, 
saline, Pulmozyme, 
albuterol, dornase alfa
P11
13.97
9.08
OHT
OHT
48
1
Daily
OHT
Azithromycin, Xopenex, oral 
steroids, Pulmozyme
P12
10.89
2.42
TA
ECFF
50
14
Intermittent
LPA stent dilation
itPA, sildenafil, inh heparin, 
inh steroids, albuterol
P13
14.87
1.11
PA/IVS
RVOT patch 
2 ventricle 
repair
14
20
Daily
None
itPA, steroids high dose,  
inh dornase alfa, iNS, 
albuterol, Qvar, azithromycin
P14
6.3
4
Heterotaxy, 
UCAVC
ECFF
7
11
Every 2–3 wk
None
itPA, sildenafil, albuterol, 
Qvar, azithromycin
P15
8.1
3.4
TGA, VSD
ECFF
28
15
Daily
None
itPA, sildenafil, albuterol, 
Flovent
P16
13.2
1.6
DILV
LTFF
96
13
Weekly
None
itPA, albuterol, Flovent, 
sildenafil, Singulair
P17
9.7
2.8
HLHS
ECNF
51
15
Weekly
Surgical fenestration 
creation
itPA, sildenafil, bosentan
P18
14.8
11.2
HLHA, TAPVR
ECNF
41
12
Intermittent
Collateral embolization, 
coarctation stent dilation, 
AVNRT ablation
itPA, sildenafil, steroids, 
albuterol, azithromycin
Median 
(range)
8.6  
(2.3–14.9)
2.8 
(0.4–9.5)
19 
(0.25–96)
12.5 
(1–20)
AP indicates aortopulmonary; BDA, balloon dilation angioplasty; BL, bilateral; CVP, central venous pressure; DILV, double-inlet left ventricle; DORV, double-outlet right 
ventricle; ECFF, extracardiac fenestrated Fontan; ECNFF, extracardiac nonfenestrated Fontan; HLHS, hypoplastic left heart syndrome; inh, inhaled; iNS, inhaled normal saline; 
itPA, inhaled tissue plasminogen activator; LPA, left pulmonary artery; LTFF, lateral tunnel fenestrated Fontan; OHT, orthotropic heart transplant; PA/IVS, pulmonary atresia 
intact ventricular septum; RPA, right pulmonary artery; RVOT, right ventricular outflow tract; TA, tricuspid atresia; and UCAVC, unbalanced complete atrioventricular canal.
*Patient died 1.5 months after the procedure of multiorgan system failure.
†Patient had another procedure 140 days after the first procedure and now has undergone OHT. 
‡Patient did not have MRI because of pacemaker; observation was based on contrast lymphangiogram. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Dori et al  Etiology and New Therapy for Plastic Bronchitis  1163
After conducting the primary analysis, we executed sensitivity 
analyses where we considered the negative binomial, normal distri-
bution, and a nonparametric Wilcoxon sign rank test, as well. The 
statistical significance was set at the 0.05 level.
Results
Patient demographics, diagnosis, and surgical history are 
shown in Table 1. Fifteen patients had undergone a previous 
TCPC, 1 had undergone a previous hemifontan, 1 was post–
heart transplant, and 1 was post–biventricular repair of pul-
monary atresia with intact ventricular septum. A history of 
prolonged postoperative chylous effusions (>2 weeks) had 
occurred in 14 of the 15 patients who presented after TCPC.
A detailed summary of the preprocedure PB course is 
presented in Table 1. Eight patients expectorated bronchial 
casts daily. Seventeen patients were treated with inhaled tis-
sue plasminogen activator and 16 were treated with silde-
nafil. Thirteen patients underwent cardiac interventions in 
an attempt to improve TCPC hemodynamics. These included 
fenestration creation or enlargement and pulmonary artery or 
pulmonary vein angioplasty with or without stent placement, 
and embolization of systemic to pulmonary collaterals. One 
patient (patient 8) presented with an acute onset of PB imme-
diately after TCPC surgery. In this patient, postsurgical extu-
bation was not possible and TCPC takedown was considered.
Bronchoscopy Results
All patients in this study underwent bronchoscopy. 
Bronchoscopy demonstrated bronchial casts in 7 patients. 
In 5 of these, the constitution of the casts was mucin and 
fibrin with inflammatory cells. In 1 patient (patient 10), the 
casts consisted of mixed cells, and 1 patient (patient 18) 
had mucin and fibrin casts with mixed inflammatory and 
eosinophil cells.
Cardiac Catheterization Results
Right-sided cardiac catheterization was performed in all 
patients. Two patients underwent balloon occlusion of the car-
diac fenestration and embolization of venovenous collaterals. 
In 3 patients, only embolization of the venovenous collaterals 
was performed, and, in 1 patient, only balloon occlusion of 
the fenestration was performed. Mean central venous pressure 
Figure 1. MIP of DCMRL (A) and 
lymphangiogram (B) images of the central 
lymphatic system of a patient with type 4 
PB. Both figures demonstrate dilated and 
tortuous TD (arrow) pulmonary lymphatic 
vessels with retrograde flow (arrowheads) 
and areas of pulmonary lymphatic 
perfusion (box). DCMRL indicates dynamic 
contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance 
lymphangiogram; MIP
, maximum intensity 
projection; and PB, plastic bronchitis.
Figure 2. Schematic drawing of the 5 PB types. PB 
indicates plastic bronchitis.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 1164  Circulation  March 22, 2016
(CVP) in the cohort was 12.5 mm Hg with range (1–20). Ten 
of the fifteen patients (67%) with TCPC had pulmonary arte-
rial pressure of ≤14 mm Hg.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
MRI was performed in 17 patients. One patient (patient 10) 
could not undergo MRI because of a pacemaker. In all but 1 
patient (patient 1), MRI and lymphatic intervention were done 
as part of 1 procedure. In 16 of 17 patients, T2 imaging dem-
onstrated dilated peribronchial lymphatic networks. In 15of 
17 patients, DCMRL demonstrated retrograde lymphatic flow 
from the TD toward lung parenchyma or lymphatic perfusion 
of the mediastinum or both. In 2 of 17 patients, there was no 
retrograde lymphatic flow. In 10 of 15 patients, the lymphatic 
networks and retrograde flow were unilateral and predomi-
nantly on the right side.
Lymphangiography Imaging
Intranodal lymphangiogram was successful in all 18 
patients. Following the intranodal lymphangiogram, cath-
eterization of the TD or its contributories was performed 
successfully in 17 patients during the same procedure and 
in 1 patient (patient 14) during a second procedure. Contrast 
lymphangiography in the TD, through a microcatheter, 
confirmed retrograde pulmonary lymphatic flow in all 15 
patients with the finding of retrograde lymphatic flow on 
DCMRL (Figure 1). Retrograde lymphatic flow was also 
demonstrated in the patient in whom DCMRL was not pos-
sible because of the presence of the pacemaker. Five of 18 
patients had an occluded TD outlet and 3 of 18 patients had 
a persistent left-sided TD.
Review of the images of contrast injection in the thoracic 
duct revealed 5 lymphangiography patterns of retrograde lym-
phatic flow toward lung parenchyma or bronchi (Figure 2):
Type 1.  
Patent TD with retrograde flow in 1 branch (1/16 
patients).
Type 2.  
Patent TD with retrograde flow in multiple branches 
(10/16 patients).
Type 3.  
Double TD with left duct supplying the lungs (2/16 
patients).
Type 4.  
Complete occlusion of the TD outlet with retrograde flow 
in multiple branches (1/16 patients).
Type 5.  
Absence of any identifiable anatomic TD and diffuse per-
fusion of the lungs (2/16 patients).
In 2 patients, methylene blue injection in TD with simulta-
neous bronchoscopy confirmed the lymphatic perfusion of the 
bronchi (Figure 3). In 1 patient (patient 18), retrograde pulmo-
nary lymphatic perfusion was not demonstrated on DCRML, 
conventional lymphangiogram, or injection of Lymphazurin 
in the TD during bronchoscopy.
The correlation between DCRML and TD lymphangio-
gram was excellent.
DCRML was much more sensitive in showing the degree 
of lymphatic perfusion of the lungs and mediastinum. TD 
lymphangiogram was subjectively able to demonstrate more 
reliably the patency of the TD and anatomy of the TD and its 
branches.
Lymphatic Interventions
Lymphatic embolization was performed in 17 of 18 patients. 
Patient 18 did not undergo a lymphatic embolization proce-
dure because of the lack of pulmonary lymphatic perfusion. 
A detailed summary of the specific embolization techniques 
for each patient is presented in Table 2. In 2 of 17 (12%) 
patients, exclusion of the retrograde pulmonary flow was per-
formed with a stent graft (Viabahn, Gore Medical; Figure 4). 
Selective embolization procedures were performed in 12 of 17 
(70%) the patients undergoing an embolization procedure. In 
4 of 17 (24%) patients, complete embolization of the TD was 
performed.
Clinical Response
There was a statistically significant difference between pre 
and post results for casting rate assuming a Poisson distribu-
tion (P<0.0001). The sensitivity analyses considering other 
distribution assumptions yielded consistent findings.
Overall, 15 of 17 (88%) patients that had embolization 
had significant improvement of the symptoms. One patient 
(patient 11) had no change in expectoration of casts. In this 
patient, no retrograde pulmonary lymphatic perfusion was 
Figure 3. Endoscopic images of the bronchial tree with simultaneous injection of the Lymphazurin in the TD in this patient are shown. A, 
Multiple dilated submucosal lymphatic ducts colored in blue are demonstrated within 1 minute of the injection (arrow). B, Several minutes 
later, new cast creation is observed (arrow). The color of this new cast is blue tinged, supporting the transmucosal seepage hypothesis. 
PB indicates plastic bronchitis; and TD, thoracic duct.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Dori et al  Etiology and New Therapy for Plastic Bronchitis  1165
demonstrated. Of 16 of 17 patients that had retrograde pul-
monary perfusion on DCMRL or lymphangiogram or both, 
15 of 16 (94%) had improvement in symptoms after emboli-
zation. One patient (patient 8) presented 3 days after TCPC 
surgery with PB and high ventilator support. The patient had 
type 5 PB with diffuse perfusion of the lungs on DCMRL 
(Figure 5). The patient underwent embolization with 
Lipiodol, and, 4 days after the embolization, the patient was 
weaned off ventilation and was discharged home. Because 
of persistent cast formation, the patient underwent an addi-
tional embolization 5 months later that resulted in improve-
ment but not complete resolution of the symptoms. This 
patient subsequently underwent a heart transplant for severe 
ventricular dysfunction. Ten of the 16 patients (59%) had 
immediate complete resolution of the symptoms, and 4 of 
17 (25%) patients had 1 to 2 casting episodes within several 
weeks of the procedure.
In 5 of 16 patients, there have been additional subjectively 
milder late casting episodes, usually in the setting of viral 
respiratory infection. These casting events were character-
ized by expectoration of small casts that responded to a short 
course (5–7 days) of oral steroids. In this group, 1 of 5 patients 
(patient 13), 3 months after the procedure, had a recurrence of 
casts after surgery for placement of a valved conduit. Repeat 
TD embolization procedure was performed at a lower level, 
which led to resolution of symptoms. Fifteen (15/17) patients 
that had an intervention were weaned off respiratory medi-
cation and other therapies, with the exception of sildenafil. 
There was a statistically significant difference between pre 
and post results for the number of medications, assuming a 
Poisson distribution (P<0.0001). The sensitivity analyses 
considering other distribution assumptions yielded consistent 
findings. Patient 18, in whom embolization was not performed 
because of the absence of evidence of retrograde pulmonary 
lymphatic perfusion, had resolution of cast formation with a 
high dose of steroids
One patient in this study (patient 18) did not have retro-
grade pulmonary flow on DCMRL and lymphangiogram and 
did not undergo an embolization procedure (Figure 6). This 
patient had eosinophils in her cast and had resolution of symp-
toms on steroid therapy.
Median follow-up for this cohort is 315 days (range, 45–
770 days). Median time to discharge after the procedure was 
7 days (3–45 days).
Complications
The most common complications from the procedure were 
transient abdominal pain in 10 of 18 cases and transient 
hypotension in 14 of 18 cases. One patient (patient 1) had 
acute onset of severe chest pain 48 hours after the procedure, 
which resolved spontaneously. One patient required a bron-
choscopy 3 days after the procedure for removal of residual 
casts in the setting of respiratory distress. One patient (patient 
13) had a unique finding on lymphangiography of lympho-
venous connections between lymphatic ducts and pulmonary 
veins. He presented with right-sided neurological deficits 1 
day after the second embolization procedure. Nonenhanced 
computed tomography of the head demonstrated diffuse 
deposition of the contrast material in brain tissue. There was 
a complete resolution of his neurological symptoms within 
a month of the procedure. One patient (patient 3) died 1.5 
months after the procedure because of unrelated multiorgan 
system failure.
Discussion
PB is a rare complication of single-ventricle palliation. The 
reported mean mortality in congenital heart disease associ-
ated PB is 33% (14%–50%).2 Lymphatic involvement has 
been shown and is believed to play a role in the disease pro-
cess, but the pathogenesis of PB associated with it is poorly 
understood.7,21–23
Treatments of PB in patients post-TCPC have focused 
primarily on facilitation of cast expectoration (inhaled tissue 
plasminogen activator, heparin inhalations, dornase, hyper-
tonic saline, and vibration vest), reduction of CVP (fenestra-
tion and sildenafil), and steroid anti-inflammatory therapy. 
It is possible that improvement of CVP is 1 mechanism by 
which heart transplantation results in cessation or cure of 
PB. However, other mechanisms such as return of pulsatile 
flow to the lungs and increased cardiac output could also be 
important.
In this study, we found abnormal lymphatic pulmonary 
flow in the majority of patients with PB. Using DCMRL and 
lymphangiogram, we demonstrated that 16 of 18 patients had 
flow from the TD toward the peribronchial lymphatic vessels 
and lung parenchyma. We have termed this phenomenon pul-
monary lymphatic perfusion syndrome. We believe that the 
lymphatic vessels that carry this flow represent a congenital 
anatomic lymphatic variant. This anatomic variant manifests 
clinically as PB because of the overloading of the lymphatic 
system in patients with elevated CVP. Several earlier lym-
phangiographic studies described the development of chylous 
effusion caused by lymphatic reflux similar to our observa-
tion.24,25 Gray et al26 reported complete occlusion of flow in 
the TD and retrograde flow of lymph toward lung parenchyma 
in congenital chylothorax similar to the type 4 pattern. In 5 of 
16 patients, the TD was occluded primarily at the distal end. 
Although this occlusion can be a sequela of previous surgi-
cal chest intervention, the cervical location of most of these 
occlusions, outside the surgical area, argues against this pos-
sibility and supports a congenital etiology.
The increase in lymphatic flow overload in patients with 
right-sided heart failure is attributable to a combination of 
increase in lymphatic production and increase in impedance 
to lymphatic drainage.27,28 However, there is a poor correlation 
between the severity of the cardiac failure and the presence or 
severity of PB. In fact in our study, 10 of 15 patients had what 
are conventionally considered acceptable pulmonary arterial 
pressures of ≤14 mm Hg, but these CVP values are still sig-
nificantly higher than those seen in normal circulation.
The mechanism of cast formation in PB is probably attrib-
utable to abnormal perfusion of the bronchial submucosa with 
lymph and slow seepage of lymph proteins into the bronchial 
lumen. We were able to demonstrate this perfusion visually 
by injection of Lymphazurin during bronchoscopy resulting 
in formation of a blue cast. Once in the airway the proteins 
dry and denature, thus causing cast formation. PB is known to 
be exacerbated during bouts of upper respiratory tract disease, 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 1166  Circulation  March 22, 2016
Table 2. Summary of Patients’ Imaging, Procedure Details, and Follow-Up Data
     Table 2. Continued
Patient No. 
Cardiac Interventions
Bronchoscopy Findings
T2 Findings
DCMRL Findings
P1
Balloon occlusion of 
fenestration, Embolization 
of venovenous collaterals
Mucin and fibrin casts with 
inflammatory cells
Right hilum, peribronchial increased signal
Retrograde flow in branch of the TD, supplying 
right hilum
P2
Balloon occlusion of 
fenestration
Mucin and fibrin casts with 
inflammatory cells
Left hilum peribronchial increased T2 signal
Diffuse left peribronchial and mediastinal 
lymphatic perfusion. Absence of the defined TD
P3
No intervention
No casts
Diffuse bilateral lung increased T2 signal
Double TD with lymphatic perfusion of the right 
lung
P4
Embolization of venovenous 
collaterals
No casts
Increased T2 signal at the mediastinum and hilum
Defined TD. Diffuse peribronchial and mediastinal 
lymphatic perfusion
P5
Balloon occlusion of 
fenestration, Embolization  
of venovenous collaterals
Mucin and fibrin casts with 
inflammatory cells
Increased T2 signal at the mediastinum and hilum
Double TD with bilateral peribronchial lymphatic 
perfusion
P6
No intervention
Mucin and fibrin casts with 
inflammatory cells
Increased T2 signal at the mediastinum and hilum
Defined TD with upper mediastinal perfusion
P7
Embolization of  
venovenous collaterals
No casts
Significant coil artifact
Diffuse left peribronchial and mediastinal 
lymphatic perfusion. Absence of the defined TD
P8
No intervention
Mucin and fibrin casts  
with inflammatory cells
Increased T2 signal at the mediastinum and hilum
Ill-defined TD, diffuse mediastinal and 
peribronchial perfusion
P9
No intervention
No casts
Increased T2 signal, right hilum
Well-defined TD with perfusion of the upper 
mediastinum
P10
No intervention
Mixed inflammatory  
cells casts
Cardiac pacemaker
Cardiac pacemaker
P11
No intervention
No casts
Increased T2 signal small area of upper mediastinum 
(lymph node)
Small area of the upper mediastinal perfusion
P12
No intervention
No casts
N/A
N/A
P13
No intervention
No casts
Increased T2 signal, right hilum and right mediastinum
Diffuse right peribronchial and mediastinal 
lymphatic perfusion. Absence of the defined TD
P14
No intervention
No casts
Increased T2 signal at the mediastinum and hilum
Diffuse peribronchial and mediastinal lymphatic 
perfusionDefined TD
P15
No intervention
No casts
Increased T2 signal upper mediastinum
Diffuse peribronchial and mediastinal lymphatic 
perfusionDefined TD
P16
Embolization of  
venovenous collaterals
No casts
Increased T2 signal upper mediastinum
Defined TD, peribronchial perfusion at the carina 
area
P17
No intervention
No casts
Increased T2 signal at the mediastinum  
and hilum
Defined TD, right hilar and mediastinal perfusion
P18
No intervention
Mucin and fibrin casts with 
mixed inflammatory cells 
and eosinophils
No pathological T2 signal
Normal TD
Median (range)
(Continued)
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Dori et al  Etiology and New Therapy for Plastic Bronchitis  1167
Table 2. Summary of Patients’ Imaging, Procedure Details, and Follow-Up Data
     Table 2. Continued
Patient No. 
Cardiac Interventions
Bronchoscopy Findings
T2 Findings
DCMRL Findings
Lymphangiogram Findings
Patent TD 
Outlet
Lymphangiogram 
Classification
Lymphatic Intervention
Postprocedure 
Meds
Length of  
Follo-up, d
Outcome Acute
Retrograde flow in branch of the TD, 
supplying right hilum
Y
Type 1
Lipiodol + glue selective embolization of 
the branch of TD
Sildenafil
770
Cast free
Patent TD and multiple collaterals
Y
Type 2
Lipiodol embolization of the branches of 
TD with retrograde balloon occlusion or 
the TD
Sildenafil
561
Cast free for 18 mo with 
late recurrent cast in setting 
of URI
Double TD with lymphatic perfusion 
of the bilateral lung from the right TD, 
left more than right
N
Type 3
Lipiodol + glue embolization of the right 
TD
Sildenafil
45
Cast free, deceased 1.5 mo 
after procedure because of 
unrelated complications
Defined dilated TD. Occlusion of 
the TD and significant mediastinal 
lymphatic perfusion
N
Type 4
Lipiodol embolization of the branches of 
the TD
Sildenafil
462
Significant improvement 
with 1 documented late 
recurrent episode in the 
setting of viral URI
Double TD with bilateral peribronchial 
lymphatic perfusion
Y
Type 3
Lipiodol embolization of the branches of 
the TD
Sildenafil
464
Significant improvement, 
with 1 cast episode in 
setting of URI in 14 mo
Patent TD with perfusion of the upper 
mediastinum
Y
Type 2
Lipiodol embolization of the branches of 
TD with transvenous balloon occlusion of 
the lymphovenous junction
Sildenafil
449
Cast free
Absent intrathoracic TD. Perfusion of 
the right hilum
N
Type 5
Lipiodol embolization of the branches of 
the TD with manual compression
Sildenafil, 
bosentan, itPA
428
Significant improvement, 1 
cast 1 mo postprocedure
Absent intrathoracic TD. Perfusion of 
the mediastinum right hilum
N
Type 5
First procedure: Lipiodol embolization 
of the branches of the TD with manual 
compression. Second procedure: 
embolization of the TD with Lipiodol and 
glue
Sildenafil, itPA
408
Significant improvement in 
respiratory status, extubated 
and discharged home after 
2 wk. Continue intermittent 
casts resolved after OHT 
for severe ventricular 
dysfunction
Patent TD with retrograde perfusion of 
the upper mediastinum
Y
Type 2
Lipiodol embolization of the branches of 
TD with transvenous balloon occlusion of 
the lymphovenous junction
Sildenafil
350
Significant improvement 
with few casts in setting 
of URI
Patent TD with perfusion of the upper 
mediastinum
Y
Type 2
Lipiodol embolization
Sildenafil, 
albuterol
322
Significant improvement 
with intermittent episodes
Double TD, small area of the 
mediastinal perfusion (lymph node)
N
N/A
Lipiodol + glue embolization of the TD
Unchanged
308
Unchanged
Patent TD with retrograde perfusion of 
the upper mediastinum
Y
Type 2
Lipiodol + glue embolization of the 
branches of the TD with manual occlusion 
of flow in TD
Sildenafil
287
Cast free
Patent TD with perfusion of the upper 
mediastinum
Y
Type 2
First procedure: Lipiodol + glue 
embolization of the TD. Second procedure: 
addition embolization of the TD with 
Lipiodol and glue
Weaning meds
267
Initially cast free but 
recurrent casting 
after surgery for valve 
replacement. Cast free after 
second procedure Stroke 
after second procedure
Patent TD with perfusion of the hilum 
and mediastinum
Y
Type 2
First attempt: failed access of TD. Second 
attempt: successful access of TD. Lipiodol 
+ glue embolization of the TD with manual 
and balloon occlusion lymphovenous 
connection
Sildenafil
224
Cast free
Y
Type 2
Lipiodol + glue embolization of the TD 
with manual compression
Sildenafil
156
Cast free
Patent TD with perfusion at the carina 
area
Y
Type 2
Lipiodol embolization of the branches of 
the T + 5 mm × 5 cm stent graft of the TD
Sildenafil
140
Cast free
Patent TD with right hilar and 
mediastinal perfusion
Y
Type 2
Lipiodol embolization of the branches of 
the TD + 5 mm × 10 cm stent graft
Sildenafil
133
Cast free
Normal patent TD with no perfusion
Y
N/A
None
Steroids
126
Cast free on steroid 
treatment
315 (45–770)
DCMRL indicates dynamic contrast magnetic resonance lymphangiogram; itPA, inhaled tissue plasminogen activator; meds, medications; N/A, not applicable; OHT, orthotropic heart  
transplant; TD, thoracic duct; and URI, upper respiratory tract infection.
 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 1168  Circulation  March 22, 2016
especially with influenza A virus, suggesting that bronchial 
mucosal inflammation may affect permeability and contribute 
to cast formation. This may explain the temporary improve-
ment of symptoms with steroid treatment reported in some 
cases.10 This is also the reason that care must be exercised 
when using medications such as inhaled tissue plasminogen 
activator that are known to produce bleeding and inflamma-
tion in the airway.
In our study, we observed significant anatomic variations 
of the central lymphatic system, which include double TD, 
central and left location of the lower TD, and even absence 
of the intrathoracic TD. For that reason, we believe that pre-
procedure and intraprocedure imaging are crucial to achieve 
a high rate of success of any central lymphatic intervention 
procedure.
The goal of the lymphatic intervention in this cohort was 
to eliminate or reduce the flow from the TD toward lung 
parenchyma, while maintaining the flow of lymph through the 
TD into the venous system. In the majority of the patients, we 
managed to maintain this patency by selective embolization of 
the peribronchial lymphatic ducts assisted by temporary ces-
sation of the flow in the TD. In 2 cases, stenting of the TD was 
performed to exclude flow into lymphatic vessels originating 
from the TD that were too small and numerous to catheterize. 
Embolization of the distal lymphatic networks by Lipiodol 
or particles injection can potentially improve the outcome 
of these procedures and reduce the risk of recurrence. In 4 
cases, maintenance of the patency of the TD was not possible 
because of an unfavorable anatomy. Type 2, 4, and 5 patients 
represent the anatomic variants, which are more difficult to 
selectively embolize because of the presence of multiple lym-
phatic collaterals.
In 1 patient (patient 8) severe respiratory deterioration and 
PB occurred immediately after TCPC surgery. This patient was 
a candidate for TCPC takedown or heart transplant. However, 
lymphatic embolization significantly improved respiratory 
function by selective embolization of the branches of the TD 
and alleviated the need for TCPC takedown or emergent trans-
plant. We believe that acute lymphatic overflow or failure, as a 
cause of TCPC failure, should be considered in a patient with 
persistent effusions and respiratory distress shortly after the 
TCPC procedure.
Most TCPC patients in this study had persistent chylous 
pleural effusions, which have been shown to be a major risk 
Figure 4. Contrast lymphangiogram of a patient with type 2 PB. A, Multiple ducts are seen connecting to a dilated TD (arrow 
and arrowheads). B, A Gore Viabahn stent graft is seen after it was deployed in the TD. Contrast injection after the procedure (C) 
demonstrates exclusion of flow into the lung (arrow) with preservation of the patency of the TD. PB indicates plastic bronchitis; and TD, 
thoracic duct.
Figure 5. MIP of DCMRL (A) and 
lymphangiogram (B) images of the central 
lymphatic system of a patient with type 
5 PB. A, MIP of the DCMRL shows 
diffuse perfusion of both lung fields (box). 
Also seen are filling of cervical and left-
sided axillary lymphatic networks (arrow 
heads). B, No identifiable TD is seen, but, 
instead, multiple dilated ducts are seen 
supplying both lungs (arrow). DCMRL 
indicates dynamic contrast-enhanced 
magnetic resonance lymphangiogram; MIP
, 
maximum intensity projection; PB, plastic 
bronchitis; and TD, thoracic duct.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Dori et al  Etiology and New Therapy for Plastic Bronchitis  1169
factor for the development of PB.4 Two PB patients in this 
study did not have retrograde lymphatic flow: 1 patient with 
TCPC and no history of persistent chylous pleural effusions 
and 1 patient after orthotropic heart transplant. Currently, we 
do not understand the etiology of PB in these patients. It is 
possible that these patients belong to a separate group of PB 
patients who do not have cardiac disease.2 Alternatively, it is 
possible that the imaging techniques we used are not sensi-
tive enough to detect subtle lymphatic perfusion abnormalities 
and, as such, were unable to demonstrate the mechanism of 
the disease in these patients. Further investigations will need 
to be done to determine the etiology and best treatment strat-
egy for this group of patients.
Lymphatic embolization does not address the elevated 
CVP in these patients, which leads to significant lymphatic 
congestion. For that reason, we believe that the optimiza-
tion of the TCPC pathway and cardiovascular circulation 
should be considered as an important part of the treatment 
of PB. Thus, despite weaning off the respiratory treatments 
such as inhaled tissue plasminogen activator and albuterol 
in all patients, we have continued treatment with pulmo-
nary vasodilators to encourage pulmonary vasodilation and 
thereby perhaps reduce the impetus for recurrence of PB. 
However, this approach is empirical and warrants further 
investigation.
In our first 18 cases, abdominal pain a day after the pro-
cedure and transient hypotension were the most common 
complications. Transient abdominal pain was presumably 
a consequence of transabdominal access. The cause of the 
transient hypotension is unknown. The cause of the transient 
chest pain in 2 patients is also unknown but could be a reac-
tion to embolization with Lipiodol. The use of an oil-based 
contrast agent in children with right-to-left shunting poses 
a risk for systemic embolization, which occurred in 1 case. 
To mitigate this risk, we performed systemic-to-pulmonary 
venous collateral embolization and temporary fenestra-
tion occlusion in these patients. Sheybani et al29 described 
cerebral embolization in patients without right-to-left shunt 
resulting in neurological deficit. The mechanism by which 
systemic embolization occurred in the 1 patient in this study 
is not completely understood because the patient already had 
complete occlusion of the TD and he did not have any known 
right-to-left shunts. However, numerous lymphovenous 
connections were seen in this patient between lymphatic col-
laterals and the pulmonary veins, which is possibly the source 
of the shunting and the etiology of the stroke. Consequently, 
minimizing the amount of oily contrast agent used is of 
utmost importance.
In this study, institutional review board permission was 
granted for a retrospective review. Before performing the first 
procedures there was a discussion about the need to apply 
for a prospective institutional review board permission. The 
institutional review board concluded that this was not needed 
because of several factors. First, the techniques we use are 
not experimental, because they are used extensively to treat 
patients with chylous leaks such as chylothorax. Second, 
given that PB is a potentially fatal illness without a known 
treatment, the benefits of performing the procedures would 
likely outweigh the risks. Last, these procedures were clini-
cally indicated and not part of a research study. Despite this 
conclusion, we believe that, when radical new treatments are 
offered, it is of utmost importance to provide patients with an 
accurate description of the potential benefits and risks without 
producing false hope. In addition, we believe that it is impor-
tant early on to incorporate radical new treatments into formal 
research protocols.
Limitations
The major limitation of this study is the short-term follow-up 
in the majority of the patients.
Longitudinal study is required to further define the long-
term effect of this treatment.
Conclusion
In this report, we demonstrate that retrograde pulmonary lym-
phatic flow from the central lymphatic system was present in 
the majority of cardiac patients with PB. Embolization or stent 
graft exclusion of these lymphatic networks proved effective 
in a large percentage of our patients and appears to be safe. 
This treatment has the potential to offer long-term improve-
ment of PB for these patients with a major impact on morbid-
ity and mortality and, potentially, alleviation of the need for 
heart transplant.
Disclosures
None.
Figure 6. MIP of DCMRL (A) and 
lymphangiogram (B) images of the central 
lymphatic system of a patient with no 
identifiable abnormal lung perfusion. Both 
images show a dilated and tortuous TD 
(arrow) draining to the innominate vein 
on the left (arrowhead). DCMRL indicates 
dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic 
resonance lymphangiogram; MIP
, 
maximum intensity projection; and TD, 
thoracic duct.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 1170  Circulation  March 22, 2016
References
 1. Seear M, Hui H, Magee F, Bohn D, Cutz E. Bronchial casts in children: 
a proposed classification based on nine cases and a review of the lit-
erature. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1997;155:364–370. doi: 10.1164/
ajrccm.155.1.9001337.
 2. Madsen P, Shah SA, Rubin BK. Plastic bronchitis: new insights and a clas-
sification scheme. Paediatr Respir Rev. 2005;6:292–300. doi: 10.1016/j.
prrv.2005.09.001.
 3. Caruthers RL, Kempa M, Loo A, Gulbransen E, Kelly E, Erickson SR, 
Hirsch JC, Schumacher KR, Stringer KA. Demographic characteristics 
and estimated prevalence of Fontan-associated plastic bronchitis. Pediatr 
Cardiol. 2013;34:256–261. doi: 10.1007/s00246-012-0430-5.
 4. Schumacher KR, Singh TP, Kuebler J, Aprile K, O’Brien M, Blume 
ED. Risk factors and outcome of Fontan-associated plastic bronchitis: 
a case-control study. J Am Heart Assoc. 2014;3:e000865. doi: 10.1161/
JAHA.114.000865.
 5. Wiggins J, Sheffield E, Jeffery PK, Geddes DM, Corrin B. Bronchial casts 
associated with hilar lymphatic and pulmonary lymphoid abnormalities. 
Thorax. 1989;44:226–227.
 6. Hug MI, Ersch J, Moenkhoff M, Burger R, Fanconi S, Bauersfeld U. Chylous 
bronchial casts after fontan operation. Circulation. 2001;103:1031–1033.
 7. Parikh K, Witte MH, Samson R, Teodori M, Carpenter JB, Lowe MC, Morgan 
W, Hardin C, Brown M, Naughton Y, Sinha S, Barber BJ. Successful treat-
ment of plastic bronchitis with low fat diet and subsequent thoracic duct liga-
tion in child with fontan physiology. Lymphology. 2012;45:47–52.
 8. Wilson J, Russell J, Williams W, Benson L. Fenestration of the Fontan cir-
cuit as treatment for plastic bronchitis. Pediatr Cardiol. 2005;26:717–719. 
doi: 10.1007/s00246-005-0913-8.
 9. Haseyama K, Satomi G, 
Yasukochi S, Matsui H, Harada 
Y
, Uchita S. Pulmonary 
vasodilation therapy with sildenafil citrate in a patient with plastic bronchi-
tis after the Fontan procedure for hypoplastic left heart syndrome. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 2006;132:1232–1233. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2006.05.067.
 
10. Onoue Y, Adachi Y, Ichida F, Miyawaki T. Effective use of corticosteroid 
in a child with life-threatening plastic bronchitis after Fontan operation. 
Pediatr Int. 2003;45:107–109.
 
11. Heath L, Ling S, Racz J, Mane G, Schmidt L, Myers JL, Tsai WC, 
Caruthers RL, Hirsch JC, Stringer KA. Prospective, longitudinal study 
of plastic bronchitis cast pathology and responsiveness to tissue plas-
minogen activator. Pediatr Cardiol. 2011;32:1182–1189. doi: 10.1007/
s00246-011-0058-x.
 
12. Laubisch JE, Green DM, Mogayzel PJ, Reid Thompson W. Treatment 
of plastic bronchitis by orthotopic heart transplantation. Pediatr Cardiol. 
2011;32:1193–1195. doi: 10.1007/s00246-011-9989-5.
 
13. Nayar S, Parmar R, Kulkarni S, Cherian KM. Treatment of plas-
tic bronchitis. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;83:1884–1886. doi: 10.1016/j.
athoracsur.2006.12.027.
 
14. Salman A Shah S, Drinkwater DC, Christian KG. Plastic bronchitis: is thoracic 
duct ligation a real surgical option? Ann Thorac Surg. 2006;81:2281–2283.
 
15. Dori Y, Zviman MM, Itkin M. Dynamic contrast-enhanced MR lymphan-
giography: feasibility study in swine. Radiology. 2014;273:410–416. doi: 
10.1148/radiol.14132616.
 
16. Dori Y, Keller MS, Rychik J, Itkin M. Successful treatment of plastic bron-
chitis by selective lymphatic embolization in a Fontan patient. Pediatrics. 
2014;134:e590–e595. doi: 10.1542/peds.2013-3723.
 
17. Dori Y, Keller MS, Fogel MA, Rome JJ, Whitehead KK, Harris MA, Itkin 
M. MRI of lymphatic abnormalities after functional single-ventricle pal-
liation surgery. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2014;203:426–431. doi: 10.2214/
AJR.13.11797.
 
18. Itkin M, Kucharczuk JC, Kwak A, Trerotola SO, Kaiser LR. Nonoperative 
thoracic duct embolization for traumatic thoracic duct leak: experience in 
109 patients. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2010;139:584–589; discussion 
589. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2009.11.025.
 
19. Nadolski GJ, Itkin M. Feasibility of ultrasound-guided intranodal lym-
phangiogram for thoracic duct embolization. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 
2012;23:613–616. doi: 10.1016/j.jvir.2012.01.078.
 
20. Nadolski G, Itkin M. Thoracic duct embolization for the management of 
chylothoraces. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2013;19:380–386. doi: 10.1097/
MCP.0b013e3283610df2.
 
21. Larue M, Gossett JG, Stewart RD, Backer CL, Mavroudis C, Jacobs ML. 
Plastic bronchitis in patients with fontan physiology: review of the litera-
ture and preliminary experience with fontan conversion and cardiac trans-
plantation. World J Pediatr Congenit Heart Surg. 2012;3:364–372. doi: 
10.1177/2150135112438107.
 
22. Ezmigna DR, Morgan WJ, Witte MH, Brown MA. Lymphoscintigraphy in 
plastic bronchitis, a pediatric case report. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2013;48:515–
518. doi: 10.1002/ppul.22673.
 
23. Languepin J, Scheinmann P, Mahut B, Le Bourgeois M, Jaubert F, 
Brunelle F, Sidi D, de Blic J. Bronchial casts in children with cardiopa-
thies: the role of pulmonary lymphatic abnormalities. Pediatr Pulmonol. 
1999;28:329–336.
 
24. Kinmonth J, Kinmonth JB, Taylor GW, Taylor G. Chylous reflux. Br Med 
J. 1964;1:529–532.
 
25. Maier HC. Chylous reflux in the lungs and pleurae. Thorax. 1968;23: 
281–296.
 
26. Gray M, Kovatis KZ, Stuart T, Enlow E, Itkin M, Keller MS, French HM. 
Treatment of congenital pulmonary lymphangiectasia using ethiodized 
oil lymphangiography. J Perinatol. 2014;34:720–722. doi: 10.1038/
jp.2014.71.
 
27. Witte MH, Dumont AE, Clauss RH, Rader B, Levine N, Breed ES. Lymph 
circulation in congestive heart failure: effect of external thoracic duct 
drainage. Circulation. 1969;39:723–733.
 
28. Dumont AE. The flow capacity of the thoracic duct-venous junction. Am J 
Med. Sci. 1975;269:292–301.
 
29. Sheybani A, Gaba RC, Minocha J. Cerebral embolization of ethiodized 
oil following intranodal lymphangiography. Semin Intervent Radiol. 
2015;32:10–13. doi: 10.1055/s-0034-1396957.
CLINICAL PERSPECTIVE
Plastic bronchitis is a rare and often devastating complication in patients after single-ventricle palliation but can also occur 
secondary to noncardiac causes such as cystic fibrosis and sickle cell anemia. The disease is caused by the exudation of 
proteinaceous material and cells in the airways leading to cast formation. Casts are often spontaneously expectorated or 
they can lead to asphyxiation. To date, there has been a poor understanding of the etiology of the disease, which has led to 
limited treatment options, variability in treatments between centers, and poor patient outcomes. In this report, we demon-
strate by dynamic contrast magnetic resonance lymphangiography, conventional lymphangiography, and blue dye injection 
into lymphatic ducts that abnormal pulmonary lymphatic perfusion originating from the central lymphatic system is present 
in the majority of cardiac patients with plastic bronchitis. We have termed this phenomenon pulmonary lymphatic perfu-
sion syndrome and have identified 5 patterns of this abnormal flow. Diverting the lymphatic fluid away from the lungs by 
embolization of these abnormal lymphatic ducts or stent graft exclusion of these lymphatic networks resulted in significant 
improvement and often cessation of casting in these patients without significant complications. We believe that this treat-
ment has the potential to offer long-term improvement of plastic bronchitis for these patients; it could have a major impact 
on morbidity and mortality and alleviate the need for heart transplant.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
