 https://doi.org/10.1177/2045125316689030 
https://doi.org/10.1177/2045125316689030
Ther Adv Psychopharmacol
2017, Vol. 7(4) 141 
–157
DOI: 10.1177/ 
2045125316689030
© The Author(s), 2017.  
Reprints and permissions:  
http://www.sagepub.co.uk/
journalsPermissions.nav
Therapeutic Advances in Psychopharmacology
journals.sagepub.com/home/tpp 
141
Introduction
Ayahuasca is a natural hallucinogen traditionally 
used by several indigenous groups from the 
Northwestern Amazon for ritual and therapeutic 
purposes [Schultes and Hofmann, 1992]. It is 
usually prepared by the prolonged decoction of 
the vine Banisteriopsis caapi together with the 
leaves of the shrub Psychotria viridis [Schultes and 
Hofmann, 1992]. B. caapi contains β-carbolines 
alkaloids such as harmine, tetrahydroharmine 
(THH) and harmaline, which are reversible mon-
oamine oxidase A (MAO-A) inhibitors, while 
 
P. viridis contains the serotonin2A/2C/1A receptor 
agonist 
hallucinogen 
N,N-dimethyltryptamine 
(DMT) [McKenna and Riba, 2015]. Although 
DMT by itself is orally inactive, in the case of aya-
huasca, its β-carbolines inhibit the metabolism of 
DMT by peripheral MAO-A, thus allowing the 
alkaloid to reach cortical 5-HT2A receptors [Riba 
et al. 2015].
In the last 25 years, ayahuasca use has expanded 
from the Amazon to the United States, Europe, 
Africa and Asia, raising concerns about its possi-
ble toxic effects and hopes on its therapeutic 
potentials [Labate et al. 2009; Labate and Feeney, 
2012]. Laboratory studies involving oral adminis-
tration of single ayahuasca doses to healthy volun-
teers show that this botanical hallucinogen induces 
perceptual alterations, introspection, increases in 
Ayahuasca, dimethyltryptamine, and 
psychosis: a systematic review of human 
studies
Rafael G. dos Santos, José Carlos Bouso and Jaime E. C. Hallak
Abstract: Ayahuasca is a hallucinogen brew traditionally used for ritual and therapeutic 
purposes in Northwestern Amazon. It is rich in the tryptamine hallucinogens 
dimethyltryptamine (DMT), which acts as a serotonin 5-HT2A agonist. This mechanism of 
action is similar to other compounds such as lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) and psilocybin. 
The controlled use of LSD and psilocybin in experimental settings is associated with a low 
incidence of psychotic episodes, and population studies corroborate these findings. Both the 
controlled use of DMT in experimental settings and the use of ayahuasca in experimental 
and ritual settings are not usually associated with psychotic episodes, but little is known 
regarding ayahuasca or DMT use outside these controlled contexts. Thus, we performed a 
systematic review of the published case reports describing psychotic episodes associated 
with ayahuasca and DMT intake. We found three case series and two case reports describing 
psychotic episodes associated with ayahuasca intake, and three case reports describing 
psychotic episodes associated with DMT. Several reports describe subjects with a personal 
and possibly a family history of psychosis (including schizophrenia, schizophreniform 
disorders, psychotic mania, psychotic depression), nonpsychotic mania, or concomitant use of 
other drugs. However, some cases also described psychotic episodes in subjects without these 
previous characteristics. Overall, the incidence of such episodes appears to be rare in both 
the ritual and the recreational/noncontrolled settings. Performance of a psychiatric screening 
before administration of these drugs, and other hallucinogens, in controlled settings seems 
to significantly reduce the possibility of adverse reactions with psychotic symptomatology. 
Individuals with a personal or family history of any psychotic illness or nonpsychotic mania 
should avoid hallucinogen intake.
Keywords: ayahuasca, dimethyltryptamine, hallucinogens, psychosis
Correspondence to: 
Rafael G. dos Santos, PhD  
Department of 
Neurosciences and 
Behavior, Ribeirão Preto 
Medical School, University 
of São Paulo, Ribeirão 
Preto, Brazil; National 
Institute for Translational 
Medicine (INCT-TM), 
CNPq, Ribeirão Preto, 
Brazil; International 
Center for Ethnobotanical 
Education, Research 
and Service, ICEERS, 
Barcelona, Spain
banisteria@gmail.com
Jaime E. C. Hallak, MD, 
PhD 
Department of 
Neurosciences and 
Behavior, Ribeirão Preto 
Medical School, University 
of São Paulo, Ribeirão 
Preto, Brazil; National 
Institute for Translational 
Medicine (INCT-TM), 
CNPq, Ribeirão Preto, 
Brazil
José Carlos Bouso, PhD  
International Center for 
Ethnobotanical Education, 
Research and Service, 
ICEERS, Barcelona, Spain
689030 TPP0010.1177/2045125316689030Therapeutic Advances in PsychopharmacologyR dos Santos, JC Bouso
research-article2017
Review
 Therapeutic Advances in Psychopharmacology 7(4)
142 
journals.sagepub.com/home/tpp
autobiographical memories, positive mood and 
wellbeing [dos Santos et al. 2016a]. These studies 
also suggest that ayahuasca has an acceptable tol-
erability, with nausea and vomiting as the most 
frequent adverse reactions. Likewise, long-term 
ingestion of ayahuasca in ritual settings is not 
associated with increases in cognitive deficits or 
psychopathology [dos Santos et al. 2016a].
The subjective and neurophysiological effects of 
acute ayahuasca intake are apparently mediated 
by the agonist action of DMT on 5-HT2A recep-
tors expressed in paralimbic and frontal brain 
areas including the default mode network 
(DMN) [Riba et al. 2006; de Araujo et al. 2012; 
Palhano-Fontes et al. 2015]. Therefore, aya-
huasca shares, at least in part, the same mecha-
nism of action of classic 5-HT2A agonist 
hallucinogens such as lysergic acid diethylamide 
(LSD), psilocybin, and mescaline [Vollenweider 
and Kometer, 2010; Nichols, 2016]. The ago-
nism of these compounds at cortical 5-HT2A 
receptors also seems to depend on metabotropic 
glutamate receptors (mGluR) [Gonzalez-Maeso 
et al. 2008; Moreno et al. 2011].
During the 1950s–1970s, when the use of classic/
serotonergic hallucinogens such as LSD and psil-
ocybin was allowed both in therapeutic/clinical 
and experimental settings, one of the most promi-
nent concerns regarding the use of these com-
pounds was their possible association with 
prolonged psychotic reactions [Cohen, 1960; 
Cohen and Ditman, 1962; Smart and Bateman, 
1967; Malleson, 1971; Strassman, 1984; Johnson 
et al. 2008]. However, studies from that time 
reported that the incidence of such cases in con-
trolled settings was rare both in healthy volun-
teers and in psychiatric patients [Cohen 1960; 
Cohen and Ditman, 1962; Smart and Bateman, 
1967; Malleson, 1971; Strassman, 1984; Johnson 
et al. 2008]. In one of the most cited studies, 
Cohen reported the following estimated rates of 
psychotic reactions lasting longer than 48 hours 
in both experimental subjects and patients under-
going therapy: 0.8/1000 and 1.8/1000, respec-
tively [Cohen, 1960]. However, the nature of 
these psychotic reactions was not characterized.
Regarding noncontrolled/recreational use of clas-
sic hallucinogens, although case reports of psy-
chotic experiences have been described since the 
1960s [Klock et al. 1974; Smith et al. 2014], these 
reports often involved individuals with preexist-
ing psychiatric disorders and possibly instances of 
poor preparation, guidance, and integration of 
drug effects, thus making it difficult to establish a 
causal relationship with hallucinogen use in many 
cases [Strassman, 1984; Johnson et al. 2008; 
Smith et al. 2014; Garcia-Romeu et al. 2016]. 
According to the fifth edition of the Diagnostic 
Statistical Manual of the American Psychiatric 
Association [DSM-V; American Psychiatric 
Association, 2013], hallucinogen-induced disor-
ders are among the rarest of all substance use dis-
orders, and this also seems to be valid regarding 
drug-induced psychosis [Vallersnes et al. 2016]. 
Moreover, hallucinogens are considered one of 
the least toxic classes of drugs [Nutt et al. 2010; 
van Amsterdam et al. 2011, 2013, 2015], and 
recent population studies did not find significant 
associations between lifetime use of classic hallu-
cinogens (LSD, psilocybin, mescaline) and 
increases in mental health problems [Krebs and 
Johansen, 2013; Johansen and Krebs, 2015], 
including nonaffective psychosis and mania 
[Krebs and Johansen, 2013].
Indeed, these and other population studies sug-
gested that hallucinogen consumption is associ-
ated with reductions in mental health problems 
and in problematic behavior [Krebs and Johansen, 
2013; Hendricks et al. 2014, 2015; Walsh et al. 
2016]. These potential benefic effects were previ-
ously reported in both controlled and uncon-
trolled studies from the 1950s–1970s [Johnson 
et al. 2008; Vollenweider and Kometer, 2010; 
Smith et al. 2014; dos Santos et al. 2016b; Garcia-
Romeu et al. 2016], and are being corroborated 
by recent open-label studies suggesting positive 
effects in drug dependence and mood and anxiety 
disorders [dos Santos et al. 2016b; Garcia-Romeu 
et al. 2016]. Importantly, there are no reports 
describing prolonged psychotic reactions in the 
volunteers participating in these recent studies 
[dos Santos et al. 2016b; Garcia-Romeu et al. 
2016]. The picture seems to be somewhat differ-
ent regarding new synthetic hallucinogens, such 
as phenylethylamine and tryptamine derivatives, 
which appear to be associated with more adverse 
reactions, 
including 
psychotic 
experiences 
[Araujo et al. 2015; Tittarelli et al. 2015; Vallersnes 
et al. 2016]. However, these drugs are not the 
topic of the present article and will not be further 
discussed.
The possible relationship between ayahuasca and 
psychotic experiences is poorly understood. In 
experimental and clinical studies involving single 
or few ayahuasca doses, transient (<6 hours) 
 R dos Santos, JC Bouso et al.
journals.sagepub.com/home/tpp 
143
dysphoric reactions with anxiety and possibly 
psychotic-like features such as modifications on 
perceptions and thought content may occur [dos 
Santos et al. 2016a], as with other hallucinogens 
[Strassman, 
1984; 
Johnson 
et 
al. 
2008; 
Vollenweider and Kometer, 2010; Studerus et al. 
2011; Garcia-Romeu et al. 2016]. However, these 
cases are usually rare and transient, with verbal 
support reducing distress in most instances 
[Strassman, 1984; Johnson et al. 2008; Studerus 
et al. 2011; Garcia-Romeu et al. 2016]. Indeed, 
Riba and colleagues [Riba et al. 2001; Riba and 
Barbanoj, 2006] reported the case of a volunteer 
that experienced an intense and transient (around 
20 minutes) dysphoric reaction with disorienta-
tion, anxiety, and feelings of suspiciousness and 
menace that was effectively handled only with 
verbal support, disappearing completely after the 
expected time of action of ayahuasca (<6 hours) 
without the need of any kind of medical interven-
tion. Likewise, long-term ingestion of ayahuasca 
in controlled/ritual settings is not usually associ-
ated with an increased incidence of psychotic dis-
orders [dos Santos et al. 2016a].
Therefore, the aim of the present work is to pre-
sent a systematic review of the cases in which psy-
chotic events occurred after the acute effects of 
ayahuasca and DMT.
Methods
The data for this systematic review were obtained 
according to the systematic reviews and meta-
analysis guidelines from the PRISMA group 
[Moher et al. 2009].
Data acquisition
We attempted to identify all studies available to 
review up to 16 August 2016 in which a possible 
association between ayahuasca/DMT intake and 
psychotic disorders was reported.
Search strategy
Electronic searches were performed using the 
PubMed (1 January 1966–16 August 2016), 
LILACS (1 January 1982–16 August 2016) and 
SciELO (1 January 1998–16 August 2016) data-
base. The following key words were used: aya-
huasca OR dimethyltryptamine AND psychosis 
OR psychotic OR schizophrenia OR mania OR 
psychotic depression OR psychotic mania OR 
psychotic bipolar. References were retrieved by 
searching the aforementioned electronic data-
bases and handsearching of reference lists of the 
identified literature. All studies published in 
English up to 16 August 2016 were included.
Eligibility criteria
The following inclusion and exclusion criteria 
were established prior to the literature search:
Article type. Original research reports, reviews, 
qualitative studies, case series and case reports, 
books and book chapters, abstracts, letters, con-
ference abstracts, comments and editorials were 
included. Animal studies were excluded.
Study design. The review only included studies 
where a possible association between ayahuasca/
DMT intake and psychotic disorders was reported.
Participants/sample. Healthy 
volunteers 
and 
clinical populations.
Interventions. Ayahuasca/DMT intake.
Comparisons. No comparators were considered.
Outcomes. Psychotic disorders.
Data extraction
All studies were screened by two independent 
reviewers with discrepancies resolved by a third 
reviewer. Names of authors, year of publication, 
study type, intervention, and outcome measures 
were recorded for all included articles.
Results
Study selection
A flow diagram illustrating the different phases of 
the systematic review is presented in Figure 1.
The electronic database search yielded 112 sepa-
rate references that were reviewed for abstract 
screening. Following this first pass, four poten-
tially relevant references were identified [Gable, 
2007; Warren et al. 2013; Paterson et al. 2015; 
Szmulewicz et al. 2015]. Four additional citations 
were added after reviewing both the specialized 
and grey literature [Lima et al. 2002; dos Santos 
and Strassman, 2008; Lima and Tófoli, 2011; 
Umut et al. 2011]. Full-text reports of these eight 
citations were obtained for a more detailed 
 Therapeutic Advances in Psychopharmacology 7(4)
144 
journals.sagepub.com/home/tpp
evaluation. Following detailed examination of the 
reports, all eight citations were included. Selected 
publications included three studies related to 
DMT use (all case reports): [Umut et al. 2011; 
Warren et al. 2013; Paterson et al. 2015] and five 
studies related to ayahuasca use (two case 
reports): [dos Santos and Strassman, 2008; 
Szmulewicz et al. 2015]; and three case series/
observational studies: [Lima et al. 2002; Gable, 
2007; Lima and Tófoli, 2011]. The main infor-
mation of the studies included in the review is 
presented in Table 1.
Brief background information on the different 
settings within which ayahuasca/N,N-
dimethyltryptamine were administered
It is important to consider the different types of 
settings where ayahuasca or DMT were adminis-
tered or ingested, since they can be an important 
variable when evaluating the occurrence of the 
psychotic episodes reported in the present review. 
These settings could be basically divided between 
controlled and uncontrolled contexts. The con-
trolled contexts include ritual or religious aya-
huasca use, both within the setting of any of the 
Brazilian ayahuasca religions (Santo Daime and 
União do Vegetal, for example) and in organized 
retreats and workshops; the controlled settings 
also include experimental and clinical contexts 
where ayahuasca or DMT are administered. In 
the controlled settings, some form of screening, 
preparation, guidance, and integration are usually 
present. The uncontrolled or recreational settings 
could be characterized in those contexts where 
ayahuasca or DMT are used outside a religious, 
ritual or experimental/clinical framework, and 
usually do not have any form of screening, prepa-
ration, guidance, and integration.
N,N-dimethyltryptamine
Umut and colleagues described the case of a 
19-year-old North American male who experi-
enced sudden and dramatic psychotic symptoms 
immediately after consuming a solution of DMT 
and cannabis (route of administration not speci-
fied, but probably smoked) [Umut et al. 2011]. 
He had no personal or family psychiatric history, 
but had been using cannabis for the last 3 years 
before the episode: in the first 1.5 years, he used 
cannabis ‘rarely and irregularly’, but in the last 
1.5 years he was using 1–2 joints/day. The subject 
lived in Turkey and had just returned from a 
3-month period living abroad with his father, 40 
days before the episode. In the evening when he 
Figure 1. Flow diagram illustrating the different phases of the systematic review.
 R dos Santos, JC Bouso et al.
journals.sagepub.com/home/tpp 
145
returned home, the subject experienced an epi-
sode of psychotic mania characterized by contin-
uous swearing, delusional ideas (such as believing 
that he was a king), increased speech, excessive 
money spending and joyfulness, inappropriate 
dressing and behavior (such as dancing in the 
streets and being rapidly familiar and getting 
friendly with people he did not know before). 
Because he had no psychiatric history, this psy-
chotic mania episode was later associated with his 
3-year period of continuous cannabis use. His 
mother thought that these symptoms were related 
to his happiness in returning home, and they did 
not seek any treatment. After this episode, the 
subject used cannabis a few more times and 15 
days later, a friend offered him a DMT/cannabis 
solution (probably smoked). After using this solu-
tion, the subject experienced intense psychotic 
symptoms such as feeling that he was being 
directed by another power, seeing musical sounds 
in the sky, contacting creatures from outer space, 
and believing that people could read his thoughts 
and were saying numbers to him while he was 
walking in the street, among other symptoms. His 
Table 1. Psychotic reactions associated with ayahuasca and DMT.
Reference
Study design
Sample/drug
Main findings
Lima et al. [2002]*
Case series/
observational
1996–2000
Brazilian UDV members
AYA (oral)
Seven cases of 
psychotic disorders$
Gable [2007]*
Case series/
observational
5 years (?)
Brazilian UDV members
AYA (oral)
13–24 cases of 
psychotic disorders
Dos Santos and 
Strassman [2008]
Case report
21-year-old Brazilian 
man
AYA (oral)
Two psychotic episodes 
separated by 1 year
Lima and Tófoli, [2011]*
Case series/
observational
1994–2007
Brazilian UDV members
AYA (oral)
29 cases of psychotic 
disorders¶
Umut et al. [2011]
Case report
19-year-old North 
American man
DMT (smoked?)
Psychotic episode
Warren et al. [2013]
Case report
24-year-old South 
Australian man
DMT (smoked)
Psychotic episode
Szmulewicz et al. [2015]
Case report
30-year-old Argentinian 
man
AYA (oral)
Psychotic episode
Paterson et al. [2015]
Case report
42-year-old North 
American (?) man
DMT (smoked)
Psychotic episode
Described in the present 
review
Case report
40-year-old Spanish 
woman
AYA (oral)
Psychotic episode
AYA, ayahuasca; DMT, dimethyltryptamine; UDV, União do Vegetal.
Interrogation: not specified.
*Included subjects from the same sample.
$ 
Two cases did not present relation with ayahuasca, three cases were relapses of previous psychotic episodes, in one 
case, ayahuasca was associated with other factors (no details were given), and only one case presented immediate 
temporal relation with ayahuasca and there were no psychotic antecedents.
¶ 
Schizophrenia (n = 9), acute and transient psychotic disorders (n = 4), unspecified nonorganic (n = 2), severe depres-
sive episode with psychotic symptoms (n = 4), substance-induced psychosis (n = 6), and bipolar affective disorder with 
psychotic manic episode (n = 4). In 10 cases there was no immediate temporal relation between ayahuasca intake and 
the psychotic episode, and 19 of the 29 cases (65.5%) presented some relation with ayahuasca: in four cases, there was 
an immediate temporal relation between ayahuasca intake and the psychotic episode, and subjects had no psychiatric 
history; in five cases, there was an immediate temporal relation between ayahuasca intake and the psychotic episode, 
but subjects had a psychiatric history with or without an active symptomatology; and in 10 cases there was no immedi-
ate temporal relation between ayahuasca intake and the psychotic episode, but ayahuasca may have contributed with 
others factors for the development of the case.
 Therapeutic Advances in Psychopharmacology 7(4)
146 
journals.sagepub.com/home/tpp
mother got worried with these sudden and dra-
matic symptoms and started looking for help, tak-
ing him to a private hospital where cannabis 
metabolites were detected in the subject’s urine 
20 days after DMT consumption. It is not clear in 
the report when exactly the subject went to this 
hospital or what happened in those 20 days, but it 
seems that the subject did not receive any treat-
ment in this period. The subject received a pre-
scription (not specified) in the private hospital, 
but did not use the medication. After being con-
vinced, he was brought to another hospital 3 days 
later, where he received a 12-day inpatient antip-
sychotic treatment (haloperidol, risperidone). 
After being discharged, the subject continued to 
take his medications (risperidone) regularly and 
was followed for approximately 2.5 months, and 
the psychotic symptoms gradually remitted. The 
authors concluded that DMT exacerbated the 
psychotic symptoms of a previous ongoing canna-
bis-induced psychotic mania.
Warren and colleagues reported a brief descrip-
tion (letter) of a case of a 24-year-old man from 
rural South Australia that was admitted to hospi-
tal after suffering a psychotic episode associated 
with continuous use of a smokable powder made 
of DMT-containing plants [Warren et al. 2013]. 
After being introduced to DMT by his friends and 
encouraged to investigate about the drug on the 
internet, the subject collected the leaves, bark, and 
seeds from two DMT-rich plants (Phalaris aquat-
ica and an unidentified Acacia species), dried and 
grounded the botanical material into a fine pow-
der, and then added the powder to a pipe where 
he regularly used tobacco and cannabis. According 
to the authors, in the year before his admission the 
subject was smoking this material with increasing 
frequency, and in the last 6 months before the 
admission, the subject developed ‘a complex delu-
sional spiritual belief system and was pursuing 
enlightenment.’ This pattern of increased use and 
delusional thinking led the subject to a hospital 
admission for presenting positive symptoms of 
schizophrenia. Importantly, the subject had a fam-
ily history of psychotic disorder (not specified), 
and also an extensive prior experience with 
tobacco, 
cannabis, 
methamphetamines, 
and 
DMT. These factors complicate the assessment of 
the possible role of DMT in this episode.
Paterson presented the case of a 42-year-old man 
(apparently North American, not specified) that 
suffered a psychotic episode associated with 
repeated use of smoked DMT [Paterson et al. 
2015]. The subject had no personal psychiatric 
history, but had an extensive history of multiple 
substance use disorders [alcohol, tobacco, can-
nabis, 3, 4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine 
(MDMA, ecstasy), hydrocodone] associated with 
legal problems (e.g. driving while intoxicated, 
fined for cannabis possession). Moreover, he had 
a family history of alcoholism, bipolar disorder, 
and obsessive–compulsive disorder. When the 
subject was 39-years old, he had successfully 
completed a drug-treatment program, but 
resumed cannabis use afterwards. Just 3 weeks 
before his hospitalization (at age 42 years), he 
began smoking DMT, later informing that he had 
smoked DMT no more than 10 times. At the time 
of his hospitalization, the subject had several 
stressors occurring in his life, such as eviction 
from his apartment, unemployment, and his 
mother’s death. He arrived at the emergency 
department, brought by the police, presenting 
agitated, bizarre, and disinhibited behavior, time 
disorientation, disorganized thought, and delu-
sions (e.g. being ‘navigated by the stars’). Due to 
his agitation, he need emergency medication 
(benzodiazepines) and was admitted to an inpa-
tient psychiatry unit. Over the next 12 days, the 
subject was hyperverbal and intrusive, and pre-
sented paranoid and grandiose delusions (e.g. 
being able to read minds, interact with ‘aliens’, 
and control distant events and persons by adopt-
ing specific body postures). These body postures 
were performed by the subject before and for sev-
eral days after his admission, and were possibly 
associated with the transient (5 days) elevated 
creatinine kinase level (2732 units/l) observed 
upon admission. During these 12 days, the sub-
ject was treated with antipsychotics (quetiapine, 
olanzapine, risperidone) and drugs for controlling 
impulsivity (divalproex sodium), anxiety (gabap-
entin), and to improve sleep (hydroxyzine). By 
day 14, he showed improved insight and judg-
ment, and was discharged on day 21 to a residen-
tial drug-treatment program, with no further 
psychotic symptoms. At 6 months after discharge, 
he remained treatment compliant and started to 
reduce his antipsychotic treatment (quetiapine), 
and was drug and symptom free. Importantly, 
although the subject stated the he was a long-
term cannabis user, and recent cannabis use 
could have contributed to the psychotic episode, 
urine toxicology performed 3 days after admis-
sion was negative for cannabinoids. According to 
the authors, since cannabinoids usually persist in 
the urine of chronic users for several days, this 
negative result could indicate that the subject had 
 R dos Santos, JC Bouso et al.
journals.sagepub.com/home/tpp 
147
a lower level of cannabis use or was not using can-
nabis in the weeks before the psychotic episode. 
Moreover, the negative result suggests that DMT 
was the main drug associated with the patient’s 
psychotic symptoms.
Ayahuasca
Lima and colleagues reported the incidence of 
psychiatric occurrences from data collected in an 
institutional study of the União do Vegetal (UDV) 
to monitor the psychological health of its mem-
bers [Lima et al. 2002; Lima and Tófoli, 2011]. 
The UDV is a Brazilian syncretic religion that 
regularly uses ayahuasca in a ritual setting twice 
monthly, but often as frequently as several times 
per week [Labate et al. 2009].
In a conference abstract, Lima and colleagues 
reported results from UDV members from the 
period of 1996–2000 [Lima et al. 2002]. Lima 
and Tófoli reviewed and updated the previous 
data, presenting results from 1994 to 2007 [Lima 
and Tófoli, 2011]. Lima and colleagues reported 
seven cases of psychotic disorders in the UDV 
context [Lima et al. 2002]. According to their 
report, two cases did not present any relation with 
ayahuasca; in three cases, ayahuasca apparently 
increased symptoms of previous psychotic epi-
sodes; in one case, ayahuasca was associated with 
other factors (not specified), and only one case 
presented immediate temporal relation with aya-
huasca and there were no psychotic antecedents. 
The authors affirmed that this incidence of psy-
chotic disorders is similar to that of the general 
population, although they did not inform the 
sample size of the study nor how they calculated 
this incidence.
Lima and Tófoli reported data from 1994 to 2007 
and stated that there were 51 cases of psychiatric 
occurrences among UDV members, 29 of which 
were psychotic disorders: schizophrenia (n = 9), 
acute and transient psychotic disorders (n = 4), 
unspecified nonorganic (n = 2), severe depressive 
episode with psychotic symptoms (n = 4), sub-
stance-induced psychosis (n = 6), and bipolar 
affective disorder with psychotic manic episode 
(n = 4) [Lima and Tófoli, 2011]. Until 2007, 18 
of these cases (62%) were subjects that were no 
longer participating in ayahuasca rituals, while 11 
were still participating. Moreover, detailed evalu-
ation of the cases showed that in only 19 of the 29 
(65.5%) ayahuasca seemed to be the main con-
tributing factor. In the other 10 cases, there was 
no immediate temporal relation between aya-
huasca intake and the psychotic episode, suggest-
ing that ayahuasca might not have significantly 
contributed for the development of the case. 
Among the cases related to ayahuasca intake, in 
four cases there was an immediate temporal rela-
tion between ayahuasca consumption and the 
psychotic episode, and subjects had no psychiat-
ric history; in five cases there was an immediate 
temporal relation between ayahuasca intake and 
the psychotic episode, but subjects had a psychi-
atric history with or without an active symptoma-
tology; in 10 cases there was no immediate 
temporal relation between ayahuasca consump-
tion and the psychotic episode, but ayahuasca 
may have contributed with others factors for the 
development of the case. It is important to note 
that, according to the authors, even in the cases 
were ayahuasca may have produced a psychotic 
episode in subjects without a psychiatric history, 
the detailed examination of the cases suggested 
the presence of traces of premorbid personality 
factors that could also influence the occurrence of 
a psychotic episode.
Gable made a comment on the data presented by 
the UDV in the legal battle that this group won 
regarding their right to use ayahuasca in the 
United States [Supreme Court of the United 
States, 2005; Gable, 2007]. Gable reported that 
over a period of 5 years, the UDV documented 
between 13 and 24 cases in which ayahuasca 
might have been a contributing factor in a psy-
chotic incident. Although the exact years were 
not specified, it seems that the data were obtained 
from 2000 to 2005, since the Supreme Court 
report was published in 2005. Thus, it seems 
highly probable that at least part of this sample 
was previously reported by Lima and Tófoli, since 
they reported data from within the UDV context 
in this same period (from 1994 until 2007) [Lima 
and Tófoli, 2011]. According to the document 
from the Supreme Court of the United States 
[Supreme Court of the United States, 2005], the 
United States ‘government claims that hoasca 
(note from the authors: hoasca is the name of aya-
huasca within the UDV context) has caused 24 
psychotic incidents in Brazil over a period of 5–6 
years’. Nevertheless, ‘a review of the entire record, 
however, reveals that only 8–13 arguably psy-
chotic incidents have been documented’. These 
incidents occurred from an estimated total of 25 
000 servings of ayahuasca according to Gable, 
but the document from the Supreme Court of the 
United States informed the total of 250 000 
 Therapeutic Advances in Psychopharmacology 7(4)
148 
journals.sagepub.com/home/tpp
servings [Gable, 2007]. Both references failed to 
inform how these numbers were estimated. Gable 
reported that the rate of psychotic episodes in the 
UDV context is under 1% (0.052–0.096%, con-
sidering 13–24 episodes in 25.000 servings) 
[Gable, 2007], which is similar to the estimated 
prevalence rate of psychosis/schizophrenia in the 
general population [Stilo and Murray, 2010]. If 
we consider the 8–13 ‘arguably psychotic inci-
dents’ occurring reported in 250 000 servings, as 
reported by the document from the Supreme 
Court of the United States, the rate is even lower: 
0.0032–0.0052%. Furthermore, the document 
from the Supreme Court of the United States 
stated that ‘many or most of these psychological 
problems were transient and resolved’, and that ‘a 
review of the case histories in the record reveals 
that in many of those, either no truly psychotic 
incident was identified or no causal link to hoasca 
was found’.
Dos Santos and Strassman reported the case of a 
21-year-old Brazilian male who experienced two 
consecutive psychotic episodes after participation 
in ayahuasca rituals [dos Santos and Strassman, 
2008]. The episodes were separated by 1 year 
from each other, and both occurred during the 
rituals but endured several days/weeks afterwards. 
Neither the subject nor his parents had a history 
of psychosis. The subject had used other halluci-
nogens (LSD and psilocybin) on several occa-
sions, but did not report any adverse effects 
associated with these experiences. He was also a 
nearly daily cannabis user for the preceding 6 
years before the first psychotic episode, with no 
significant adverse effects associated with this 
pattern of cannabis use. Before the first psychotic 
episode, the subject had already used ayahuasca 
‘more or less twice per month, for about 2 years’, 
without incident. Sometimes he used cannabis 
concurrently, also without incident. However, 
during one particular ayahuasca ritual, the sub-
ject ingested ayahuasca and combined its use with 
cannabis, and sometime later (not specified) he 
experienced very intense paranoid and suicidal 
ideas. Moreover, the subject also superficially cut 
himself with a sharp-edged ceremonial item dur-
ing the ritual. Psychotic/paranoid symptoms per-
sisted for 2–3 weeks, and only subsided and 
resolved after a 1-year antipsychotic treatment 
(risperidone). During this year, the subject did 
not use ayahuasca, cannabis, or other drugs, and 
remained symptom free. At 1 year later, after the 
treatment had finished, the subject wished to con-
tinue participation in ayahuasca rituals. He 
ingested ayahuasca again in three separated cere-
monies, and was not using cannabis any more. 
Although no adverse reactions occurred in the 
first two rituals, during the third one, he again 
experienced paranoid and suicidal ideation. As in 
the first episode, symptoms persisted for 2–3 
weeks and only resolved after another year of ris-
peridone treatment. The previous use of other 
hallucinogens and the concomitant use of canna-
bis by this subject with no personal or family his-
tory of psychotic disorders makes it difficult to 
establish the exact role of ayahuasca in this case, 
especially regarding the first episode. In the sec-
ond one, although it happened a year later and 
there was no concomitant use of cannabis, the 
subject might have developed a sensibility or pre-
disposition to psychotic experiences after his first 
episode.
We had the opportunity to follow-up this case 
until 2016. After the second episode and treat-
ment, the subject continued to use cannabis daily 
and occasionally used other hallucinogenic [LSD, 
psilocybin, ketamine, 2, 5-dimethoxy-4-iodo-
phenethylamine (2C-I)] and nonhallucinogenic 
drugs [MDMA, γ-hydroxybutyric acid (GHB), 
alcohol, tobacco, amphetamines, cocaine, heroin], 
but did not use ayahuasca anymore. Approximately 
1 year after the second treatment, the subject 
experimented with MDMA on four occasions sep-
arated by 3–4 months, and had another paranoid/
psychotic episode in the fourth occasion, followed 
by another year of successful risperidone treat-
ment. Some months after this third treatment, the 
subject experimented the hallucinogenic pheneth-
ylamine 2C-I and had another paranoid episode, 
again followed by a year of risperidone treatment. 
A last psychotic episode occurred some months 
after the last treatment, and this time it was appar-
ently associated with excessive alcohol intake. 
This episode was also successfully treated with ris-
peridone for another year. The subject did not use 
any hallucinogen after this last episode and did 
not have other psychotic symptoms afterwards. 
Interestingly, he continued to use cannabis daily 
until 2016, including during all antipsychotic 
treatments, apparently without increases in psy-
chotic symptoms.
Szmulewicz and colleagues reported the case of a 
30-year-old Argentinian man who developed a 
manic episode after participating in a 4-day aya-
huasca retreat [Szmulewicz et al. 2015]. The sub-
ject had traveled to Brazil for 3 months before to 
learn about South American tribes, and 2 weeks 
 R dos Santos, JC Bouso et al.
journals.sagepub.com/home/tpp 
149
before the travel he experienced a 10-day period 
compatible with a hypomanic episode: increased 
energy, self-esteem, and goal-directed activity, 
sleep disorder, pressured speech, and running 
thoughts. Although there was no previous diagno-
sis of manic or depressive episodes, there was a 
prior history, as the subject stated that he had 
experienced this kind of hypomanic episodes sev-
eral times before. Moreover, his father had been 
diagnosed with bipolar affective disorder type I. 
According to the subject and his mother, he did 
not present any manic symptoms before the aya-
huasca ritual. At 2 days after the last ayahuasca 
use (the number of ayahuasca doses was not speci-
fied), the subject began to experience mystical and 
paranoid delusional ideas, auditory hallucinations, 
racing thoughts, disorganized behavior, elevated 
energy, and euphoria. Afterwards (time not speci-
fied), the subject was admitted to a psychiatric 
hospital in Brazil, where he received antipsychotic/
benzodiazepine treatment (risperidone and clon-
azepam) for a month. After this period, he was 
symptom-free, was discharged with the same 
medications, and traveled back to Argentina to 
continue treatment. When he arrived in a hospital 
in Argentina, the subject had a depressive episode 
characterized by significant anhedonia, hopeless-
ness, apathy, ideas of ruin, and clinophilia (ten-
dency to spend extra time in bed, without 
necessarily sleeping). Surprisingly, the authors 
suggested that this was not a case of a psychotic/
mania episode induced by ayahuasca, but an ‘anti-
depressant-induced mania due to excessively pro-
longed use of a substance with antidepressant 
properties’ in a man with a personal history of 
hypomania and a family history of bipolar disor-
der. Interestingly, the authors stated that this 
‘substance with antidepressant properties’ was 
harmine, one of the main ayahuasca components 
[McKenna and Riba, 2015]. It is not clear why the 
authors suggested that ayahuasca and harmine 
were not part of the same ‘substance’.
One last unpublished case was reported by phone 
to one of us and involved a 40-year-old woman 
who suffered a psychotic crisis during an aya-
huasca weekend retreat She attended the retreat 
for self-improvement purposes following the 
advice of a friend that told her that ayahuasca was 
a potential tool for helping to solve daily difficul-
ties and that she could experience beneficial 
effects by participating in the retreat. The subject 
had no history of mental health problems nor had 
psychiatric family antecedents. She had a history 
of occasional cannabis use years before the 
episode, always in small quantities. Also, some 
months before the ayahuasca retirement, she 
experimented with a medium dose of MDMA in 
a house setting with her partner, having a good 
experience. The subject took ayahuasca on two 
occasions: on Friday night and in Saturday even-
ing. The subject did not experience side effects 
during the Friday session and she spent all 
Saturday in a normal state. But just before taking 
ayahuasca in the Saturday session, she started to 
manifest an incoherent discourse, according to 
the friend that was with her at the retreat. About 
10–15 minutes after taking ayahuasca, before the 
psychoactive effects have begun, she started to 
develop paranoid ideas, delusional thinking and 
aberrant behavior. The content of her speech was 
related with personal events involving aspects of 
her life and aspects of the life of some of her rela-
tives and near friends, including possible past 
traumatic experiences not remembered until that 
moment. She remained in that state for more 
than 24 hours. All Sunday night she stayed awake, 
talking endlessly in a constant and incoherent 
monologue with evident suffering and uncon-
trolled movements. On Monday, a psychologist 
attending the ceremony suggested to the guides 
to administer an antipsychotic (2 mg of risperi-
done). Less than 30 min after taking risperidone 
her psychotic symptomatology disappeared, and 
she asked to the people in the retreat what has 
happened to her. In the following hours, she 
slowly remembered the content of the session, 
and after being almost 48 hours awake and in a 
psychotic state she finally slept. After 7 hours of 
sleep, she woke up again in a psychotic state that 
lasted for 2 days, when she was finally taken to a 
hospital, where she received antipsychotic treat-
ment (haloperidol) and her psychotic state was 
again interrupted. The antipsychotic treatment 
was maintained for a few months, and she did not 
experience psychotic symptoms anymore. One of 
us had the opportunity to talk with her by phone 
at some moment while she was in the psychotic 
state and to interview by phone some other peo-
ple present in the retreat and her partner along all 
the psychotic process. After the haloperidol treat-
ment, we lost contact with the patient, but 1 year 
later, we could interview her again. The psychotic 
symptoms never came back and she had a normal 
life, although she preferred not to talk about what 
happened in the ceremony since she just wanted 
to forget it. Our institution does not require ethics 
approval for reporting individual cases, and the 
subject provided written informed consent for 
including the reported information in this article.
 Therapeutic Advances in Psychopharmacology 7(4)
150 
journals.sagepub.com/home/tpp
Discussion
The present systematic review reported evidence 
from case reports and case series associating aya-
huasca or DMT intake with psychotic episodes 
enduring more than the expected time of action 
of each drug.
To the best of our knowledge, there is no pub-
lished report of prolonged psychotic reactions 
associated with the use of ayahuasca in controlled 
settings [dos Santos et al. 2016a]. In these set-
tings, volunteers are screened for a possible psy-
chiatric history or a current psychiatric diagnosis, 
including psychotic disorders, bipolar disorder, 
or a history of mania or hypomania induced by 
antidepressant or substance use [Riba et al. 2006; 
de Araujo et al. 2012; Osório et al. 2015; Palhano-
Fontes et al. 2015; dos Santos et al. 2016b; 
Sanches et al. 2016]. The performance of a 
 
psychiatric screening before experimental or 
 
clinical use of hallucinogens is essential to reduce 
the possible occurrence of adverse reactions 
[Strassman, 1984; Johnson et al. 2008; Studerus 
et al. 2011; Garcia-Romeu et al. 2016]. Therefore, 
a possible explanation for the occurrence of psy-
chotic episodes could be the presence of previous 
psychiatric disorders.
Indeed, in the UDV case series [Lima et al.  
2002; Lima and Tófoli, 2011], several psychotic 
episodes associated with ritual ayahuasca intake 
were related to previous psychiatric diagnoses or 
current symptomatology, including psychotic 
symptoms/disorders. Moreover, in the manic 
episode associated with ayahuasca intake, the 
subject had a family history of bipolar disorder 
and a personal history of hypomanic episodes 
[Szmulewicz et al. 2015]. Interestingly, acute 
ayahuasca administration to depressed patients 
screened for bipolar disorder or a history of 
mania/hypomania was not associated with 
increases in manic symptomatology [Osório et al. 
2015; Sanches et al. 2016].
In both the UDV case series [Lima et al. 2002; 
Lima and Tófoli, 2011] and in the case reports 
[dos Santos and Strassman, 2008] ayahuasca 
intake was also associated with psychotic episodes 
in people without a personal or family psychiatric 
history. However, in the case report, the use of 
other drugs (e.g. cannabis and other hallucino-
gens) complicates the assessment of the possible 
role of ayahuasca in the psychotic episode, and in 
the UDV case series no details are given regarding 
isolated cases, limiting their evaluation. In any 
case, the overall incidence of psychotic episodes 
in the UDV context seems to be rare. Gable 
reported that such cases represented a rate of less 
than 0.1% (0.052–0.096%) [Gable, 2007], which 
is comparable with the data reported by Cohen 
regarding controlled LSD administration [Cohen, 
1960].
Regarding DMT, we are also not aware of any 
published reports describing prolonged psychotic 
reactions associated with experimental/controlled 
DMT administration [e.g. Strassman et al. 1994, 
1996; Daumann et al. 2008, 2010]. Volunteers in 
these studies are also psychiatrically screened for 
psychotic disorders before drug administration, 
thus limiting the possible occurrence of adverse 
reactions with psychotic features [Strassman, 
1984; Daumann et al. 2008; Johnson et al. 2008; 
Daumann et al. 2010; Studerus et al. 2011; Garcia-
Romeu et al. 2016]. Like ayahuasca, in two of the 
case reports associated with smoked DMT, the 
subjects had a previous hypomanic/psychotic 
mania episode [Umut et al. 2011; Paterson et al. 
2015], and in one case, the subject had a family 
history of psychotic disorder [Warren et al. 2013]. 
Furthermore, in all three cases the subjects used 
other drugs as well, especially cannabis. Like other 
hallucinogens, it seems that people with a personal 
or family psychiatric history of psychotic or manic 
episodes should avoid DMT intake [Strassman, 
1984; Johnson et al. 2008; Studerus et al. 2011; 
Garcia-Romeu et al. 2016].
It is not clear why some people suffer prorogued 
psychotic reactions to ayahuasca or DMT. Mental 
health assessments of long-term ritual ayahuasca 
use do not report increased psychopathology in 
these population, and ayahuasca intake could 
even be related to better mental health [dos 
Santos et al. 2016a]. However, studies with 
experimented ayahuasca users could be biased by 
the fact that these people are already adapted to 
ayahuasca, having used this substance for several 
years or even decades in some cases [dos Santos 
et al. 2016a]. Therefore, it is possible that people 
that have adverse reactions to ayahuasca during 
their first experiences do not continue to use this 
hallucinogen anymore, and will not be present in 
studies assessing the mental health of long-term 
users. Previous prospective studies assessing the 
effects of a first ayahuasca intake in naïve users 
after 2 weeks [Barbosa et al. 2005] and 6 months 
[Barbosa et al. 2009] did not report adverse reac-
tions with psychotic features, but observed reduc-
tions in psychiatric symptoms. More prospective 
 R dos Santos, JC Bouso et al.
journals.sagepub.com/home/tpp 
151
studies following novice ayahuasca users for 
longer periods are need to better understand the 
effects of ayahuasca, both the negative and the 
therapeutic.
Nevertheless, the case reports describing the 
occurrence of psychotic episodes among the UDV 
members show that a minority of individuals may 
be predisposed to such experiences even in ritual 
settings. People with previous psychiatric diagno-
ses of psychotic disorders (schizophrenia or schiz-
ophreniform disorders, psychotic depression or 
mania) or with current psychotic symptomatol-
ogy seem to be the individuals with more predis-
position to an adverse reaction with psychotic 
features, both for ayahuasca and DMT intake. 
Therefore, both in experimental/clinical and rit-
ual settings, a previous psychiatric screening 
should be performed and individuals with such 
characteristics should avoid ayahuasca intake. 
This is similar for other hallucinogens [Strassman, 
1984; Johnson et al. 2008; Studerus et al. 2011; 
Garcia-Romeu et al. 2016]. Indeed, in the case 
report described by dos Santos and Strassman, 
the second psychotic episode could be the result 
of both sensitization (increased susceptibility to 
the psychoactive effects of ayahuasca/DMT) and 
predisposition (increased tendency to suffer 
another psychotic reaction after a first-episode 
psychosis) induced by the first episode 1 year 
before [dos Santos and Strassman, 2008].
The cases of people that had a psychotic episode 
with ayahuasca or DMT but that the subjects had 
no personal or family psychiatric history are more 
difficult to interpret. In the case of DMT, all 
reports described subjects with past or ongoing 
psychiatric symptomatology and use of other 
drugs that could also induce psychotic symptoms/
disorders (e.g. cannabis and other hallucinogens). 
The case described by dos Santos and Strassman 
with ayahuasca also had an association with can-
nabis and other hallucinogens, even considering 
the absence of a personal or previous psychiatric 
history for the subject [dos Santos and Strassman, 
2008]. Future studies should record not only the 
psychiatric history of the participants, but also the 
drug use history with detailed information on the 
type of drug used and the frequency and duration 
of such use. For instance, in two of the cases 
related to DMT the psychotic episode was appar-
ently associated with an increase in the frequency/
duration of DMT use, among other factors 
[Warren et al. 2013; Paterson et al. 2015]. 
Radiolabeled DMT remained for 7 days after 
injection in the rabbit brain [Vitale et al. 2011], 
suggesting the possibility that continuous use of 
DMT could increase brain levels of this com-
pound over time, maybe reaching levels high 
enough to induce psychotic experiences, espe-
cially in predisposed individuals.
Unfortunately, although the UDV case series 
have described several psychotic episodes, they 
lack the detailed information present in the 
descriptions of the case reports. Thus, the UDV 
data is limited regarding the details of the psychi-
atric and drug use history of the subjects. It would 
be interesting to further explore the UDV data, 
and to assess if the religious setting of organized 
groups such as the UDV has any positive influ-
ence in how the person suffering a psychotic epi-
sode in that context copes with that experience.
Individuals predisposed to psychotic episodes 
after ayahuasca/DMT intake could share some 
genetic/metabolic characteristics that predispose 
them to such experiences. The so-called ‘trans-
methylation hypothesis’ suggests that an enzy-
matic/metabolic alteration could induce the 
organism to increase the synthesis of endogenous 
hallucinogenic compounds such as DMT, thus 
inducing psychosis/schizophrenia [Gillin et al. 
1978; Barker et al. 1981; Ciprian-Ollivier and 
Cetkovich-Bakmas, 1997; Pomilio et al. 1999; 
Vitale et al. 2010; Barker et al. 2012; Grammenos 
and Barker, 2015]. However, although DMT is 
indeed an endogenous compound that has been 
detected in the human cerebrospinal fluid, blood, 
and urine [Barker et al. 2012], and some studies 
did find increased concentrations of DMT and 
related compounds (5-hydroxy-DMT, 5-meth-
oxy-DMT) in the body fluids of psychotic/schizo-
phrenic patients and other psychiatric patients 
[Barker et al. 2012], results are inconclusive and 
the transmethylation hypothesis is still under 
debate [Barker et al. 2012; Grammenos and 
Barker, 2015]. Moreover, although several authors 
have speculated on other possible physiological 
roles of endogenous DMT and related com-
pounds in our organism, including regulation/pro-
duction of dreams, near-death experiences, and 
mystical states [Callaway, 1988; Strassman, 
2001], anxiolytic effects [Jacob and Presti, 2005], 
and tissue protection/regeneration and immune 
regulation [Frecska et al. 2013, 2016; Szabo et al. 
2014], we still do not know what DMT is doing in 
our body. Additional research in this area is 
needed to better understand the presence of these 
compounds in humans.
 Therapeutic Advances in Psychopharmacology 7(4)
152 
journals.sagepub.com/home/tpp
There may be at least two explanations to under-
stand the psychotic crisis reported in this paper, 
one psychological and another physiological. In 
the first case, maybe the subjects faced psycho-
logical content that unbalanced them. In the two 
cases in which we had personal contact with the 
subjects, they became paranoid, thinking that the 
people surrounding them wanted to harm them. 
At the same time, both subjects reacted quite well 
to treatment with atypical antipsychotics. In the 
case reported by dos Santos and Strassman, the 
subject apparently only became psychotic after 
taking drugs with hallucinogenic (ayahuasca, 
2C-I) or hallucinogenic-like (MDMA) effects 
[dos Santos and Strassman, 2008]. Although 
MDMA is not considered a classic or serotoner-
gic hallucinogen, it has hallucinogenic-like effects 
and may influence cortical 5-HT2A receptors 
[Mueller et al. 2016]. Moreover, the subject was 
successfully treated in all occasions with risperi-
done, an atypical antipsychotic that act as an 
antagonist of dopamine D1–2 receptors and of the 
serotonin 5-HT2A receptor. The unpublished 
case report involving ayahuasca also described the 
effective (although transitory) use of risperidone, 
as well as one of the case reports involving DMT 
[Umut et al. 2011]. Thus, although a possible 
involvement of the dopaminergic system in the 
psychotic effects of hallucinogens cannot be ruled 
out, it seems that the psychotic crisis induced by 
ayahuasca, DMT, and other serotonergic halluci-
nogens may have their cause in their action on 
cortical 5-HT2A receptors. Solid evidence sup-
porting this idea includes the fact that three of the 
reviewed cases reported successful use of an atyp-
ical antipsychotic with mixed dopamine and sero-
tonin antagonism, and that the subject described 
by dos Santos and Strassman did not become 
psychotic after taking neither D2 agonists 
(cocaine, amphetamines) nor cannabis, but only 
after using serotoninergic compounds that act as 
5-HT2A agonists [dos Santos and Strassman, 
2008]. This is also in accordance with studies in 
which 5-HT2A antagonists reduced the effects of 
classic/serotonergic hallucinogens, including aya-
huasca [Vollenweider et al. 1998; Kometer et al. 
2013; Valle et al. 2016].
However, the subject described by dos Santos and 
Strassman also described an extensive experience 
with other hallucinogens that act as 5-HT2A ago-
nists (such as LSD and psilocybin) without psy-
chotic incidents, and the last episode was 
apparently induced by excessive alcohol intake 
[dos Santos and Strassman, 2008]. It is not clear 
why these psychotic reactions occurred only with 
2C-I, MDMA, and alcohol, but it is possible that 
after several psychotic episodes the subject may 
have developed an increased sensibility to psy-
chotic symptoms that generalized to nonseroton-
ergic drugs, or that the dose, intensity, or frequency 
of use of the other drugs was not sufficient to 
induce full-blown psychotic symptoms. Indeed, 
several of the cases reviewed described that the 
subjects had used several doses of ayahuasca/
DMT before the psychotic episode, suggesting a 
possible dose-related or cumulative effect.
The hallucinogenic effects of ayahuasca do not 
seem to be mediated by harmine and related β-
carboline alkaloids (THH and harmaline), since 
human studies about their possible psychoactive 
properties are inconclusive, with reports describ-
ing hallucinogenic effects [Shulgin and Shulgin, 
1997; Naranjo, 1959; Pennes and Hoch, 1957], 
sedative-like effects [Ott, 1994, 1999], or lack of 
psychoactive effects [Slotkin et al. 1970]. 
However, a recent study suggested that the β-
carbolines in ayahuasca could have specific effects 
in the human electroencephalogram (EEG), sug-
gesting central/psychoactive effects [Schenberg 
et al. 2015]. Moreover, compounds such as 
harmine may have pro-dopaminergic effects 
[Nunes et al. 2016], and the possible role of these 
compounds in the psychotic effects of ayahuasca 
is not currently known. Thus, more studies are 
needed to better understand the effects of the β-
carboline alkaloids in humans.
It is unknown if there are people vulnerable to 
hallucinogenic drugs, but in the two cases that we 
had direct contact subjects had no personal or 
familiar history of psychological problems, and 
were subjects perfectly adapted and with high 
qualified works and high educational levels. One 
of these subjects had a long history of ayahuasca 
use without having suffered any psychological 
side effect. Since he used cannabis and ayahuasca 
at the same time, it is possible cannabis could 
have potentiated the psychotic effects of DMT. 
In our field observations over the last 10–15 years, 
we have observed precisely this phenomenon [dos 
Santos, 2011]. Also, those two subjects suffered 
the psychotic crisis under the course of a struc-
tured ritual, and the UDV case series reported 
cases that occurred in this structured religious 
context. Thus, although the ritual may have some 
protective effect, it is not a total guarantee of 
complete safety [Lima, 1996–97; Lima and 
Tófoli, 2011]. Considering the good and fast 
 R dos Santos, JC Bouso et al.
journals.sagepub.com/home/tpp 
153
response of those two subjects to antipsychotic 
medication, it could be possible that ayahuasca/
DMT do not trigger a latent psychotic response 
in healthy individuals, but just induce a transitory 
psychotic crisis. But in people with a history of 
mental disorders, as was the case of some of the 
reports described in the present review, these sub-
stances could aggravate the premorbid condition. 
Therefore, although the psychological content of 
an ayahuasca experience can be sometimes diffi-
cult to face, it does not explain by itself a psy-
chotic reaction. It is more probable that 
psychological side effects will appear in the form 
of transitory anxiety that disappears when the 
effects of ayahuasca fade away. But there may be 
conditions where the biochemical reactions 
induced by hallucinogens over 5-HT2A receptors 
induce a psychotic state that lasts more than the 
pharmacological effect of the drug, being neces-
sary to rebalance the system/brain with a pharma-
cological/antipsychotic intervention that it is 
 
not dependent on the psychological content. 
Ayahuasca guides should be cautious in selecting 
people before giving them ayahuasca. Since aya-
huasca use is being popularized internationally 
[Labate and Feeney, 2012], future studies should 
explore deeply the prevalence and incidence of 
psychiatric reactions in ayahuasca communities.
Limitations
Limitations of the present study include the small 
number of studies and the small sample sizes of 
most studies, which were case reports. Moreover, 
the case series reported data collected from a spe-
cific ritual/religious context (UDV), and the 
authors (Lima and Tófoli) were members of the 
UDV at the time of the publication of these 
reports. Thus, the extrapolation of the results to 
other settings might be limited due to potential 
conflict of interests. On the other hand, the pub-
lication of the UDV monitoring system has pro-
vided the researchers with information of 
ayahuasca-related adverse effects that otherwise 
would not be available. Moreover, UDV’s system 
reflects a concern about their followers’ wellbeing 
that is unique among ayahuasca religions.
Other important limitations regarding the assess-
ment of a possible causal role of ayahuasca/DMT 
in the reviewed cases include personal or family 
psychiatric histories of psychotic or bipolar disor-
ders (schizophrenia or schizophreniform disorders, 
psychotic depression or mania), ongoing psychotic 
or manic symptomatology, and concomitant use of 
other drugs with potential to induce psychotic 
symptoms/disorders such as cannabis and other 
hallucinogens.
Conclusion
It is estimated that nearly 20 000 people world-
wide are members of some of the Brazilian aya-
huasca religions (Santo Daime, UDV, Barquinha) 
[Labate et al. 2009]. The scientific literature sug-
gests that acute ayahuasca administration to 
healthy volunteers has a good safety profile, and 
that long-term ritual ayahuasca consumption is 
not associated with cognitive or psychiatric prob-
lems [dos Santos et al. 2016a]. The psychotic epi-
sodes described in the present systematic review 
are apparently associated with several contribut-
ing factors, and not only ayahuasca or DMT 
intake. Many cases involved individuals with a 
personal or family history of psychosis or nonpsy-
chotic bipolar disorder, or concomitant use of 
other drugs. Therefore, these individuals have a 
different profile from those that participate in 
controlled studies where a psychiatric screening is 
performed and use of other drugs is not allowed. 
Moreover, in controlled studies, only single or 
few ayahuasca/DMT doses are administered, and 
in some cases described, related to DMT use, the 
subjects have used several doses DMT before 
their psychotic episode.
Previous reviews of adverse effects of hallucino-
gens in noncontrolled/recreational settings dem-
onstrated that in reports ‘from the field’ it is very 
difficult to tease apart preexisting psychopathol-
ogy, drug/alcohol abuse, family history, and other 
important features such as proper preparation, 
guidance, and integration of drug effects. Thus, it 
is difficult to establish a causal relationship with 
hallucinogen use and most of these cases [Klock 
et al. 1974; Strassman, 1984; Johnson et al. 2008; 
Smith et al. 2014; Garcia-Romeu et al. 2016]. In 
the case reports described in the present review, it 
is similarly difficult to determine the significance 
of ayahuasca/DMT use in such complicated set-
tings, especially considering the safety record of 
ayahuasca/DMT administration in controlled 
clinical trials where rigorous screening, supervi-
sion, and follow up are provided.
Taken together, these results suggest that the inci-
dence of psychotic episodes associated with aya-
huasca/DMT intake is a rare phenomenon, and 
these rare instances appear be associated with pre-
vious premorbid characteristics of the individuals, 
 Therapeutic Advances in Psychopharmacology 7(4)
154 
journals.sagepub.com/home/tpp
previous and possibly concurrent drug abuse, and 
lack of a supervised setting. Therefore, consider-
ing the possible influence of these and other fac-
tors, the causal relation between ayahuasca/DMT 
and these cases is not always clear. These data 
suggest that performance of a psychiatric and 
drug use history before ayahuasca or DMT admin-
istration in controlled settings may reduce the 
occurrence of psychotic experiences. Regarding 
noncontrolled/recreational use, individuals with 
personal or family history of schizophrenia or 
schizophreniform disorders, psychotic depression 
or mania, or with ongoing manic or psychotic 
symptomatology, should avoid ayahuasca/DMT 
intake.
Funding
This research received no specific grant from any 
funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-
for-profit sectors.
Conflict of interest statement
RGS is Fellow of the Programa Nacional de Pós-
Doutorado, 
Brazil 
(PNPD/CAPES). 
JECH 
receives a CNPq (Brazil) Productivity Fellowship 
Award. Sponsors had no role in study design, 
data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the 
report. All authors had full access to all the data 
and had final responsibility for the decision to 
submit for publication.
References
American Psychiatric Association. (2013) Diagnostic 
and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). 
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
Araujo, A., Carvalho, F., Bastos Mde, L., Guedes 
de Pinho, P. and Carvalho, M. (2015) The 
hallucinogenic world of tryptamines: an updated 
review. Arch Toxicol 89: 1151–1173.
Barbosa, P., Cazorla, I., Giglio, J. and Strassman, 
R. (2009) A 6-month prospective evaluation of 
personality traits, psychiatric symptoms and quality of 
life in ayahuasca-naïve subjects. J Psychoactive Drugs 
41: 205–212.
Barbosa, P., Giglio, J. and Dalgalarrondo, P. (2005) 
Altered states of consciousness and short-term 
psychological after-effects induced by the first-time 
ritual use of ayahuasca in an urban context in Brazil. J 
Psychoactive Drugs 37: 193–201.
Barker, S., McIlhenny, E. and Strassman, R. (2012) 
A critical review of reports of endogenous psychedelic 
N,N-dimethyltryptamines in humans: 1955–2010. 
Drug Test Anal 4: 617–635.
Barker, S., Monti, J. and Christian, S. (1981) N,N-
dimethyltryptamine: an endogenous hallucinogen. Int 
Rev Neurobiol 22: 83–110.
Callaway, J. (1988) A proposed mechanism for the 
visions of dream sleep. Med Hypotheses 26: 119–124.
Ciprian-Ollivier, J. and Cetkovich-Bakmas, M. 
(1997) Altered consciousness states and endogenous 
psychoses: a common molecular pathway? Schizophr 
Res 28: 257–265.
Cohen, S. (1960) Lysergic acid diethylamide: side 
effects and complications. J Nerv Ment Dis 130: 
30–40.
Cohen, S. and Ditman, K. (1962) Complications 
associated with lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD-25). 
JAMA 181: 161–162.
Daumann, J., Heekeren, K., Neukirch, A., Thiel, 
C., Möller-Hartmann, W. and Gouzoulis-Mayfrank, 
E. (2008) Pharmacological modulation of the neural 
basis underlying inhibition of return (IOR) in the 
human 5-HT2A agonist and NMDA antagonist 
model of psychosis. Psychopharmacology 200: 
573–583.
Daumann, J., Wagner, D., Heekeren, K., Neukirch, 
A., Thiel, C. and Gouzoulis-Mayfrank, E. (2010) 
Neuronal correlates of visual and auditory alertness 
in the DMT and ketamine model of psychosis. J 
Psychopharmacol 24: 1515–1524.
De Araujo, D., Ribeiro, S., Cecchi, G., Carvalho,  
F., Sanchez, T., Pinto, J., et al. (2012) Seeing with 
the eyes shut: neural basis of enhanced imagery 
following ayahuasca ingestion. Hum Brain Mapp 33: 
2550–2560.
Dos Santos, R. (2011) Possible risks and 
interactions of the consumption of ayahuasca and 
cannabis in humans. In: dos Santos, R. (ed.) The 
ethnopharmacology of ayahuasca, Transworld Research 
Network: Kerala. Available at: https://issuu.com/
researchsignpost/docs/rafael (accessed 16 August 
2016).
Dos Santos, R., Balthazar, F., Bouso, J. and 
Hallak, J. (2016a) The current state of research on 
ayahuasca: a systematic review of human studies 
assessing psychiatric symptoms, neuropsychological 
functioning, and neuroimaging. J Psychopharmacol in 
press. doi:10.1177/0269881116652578
Dos Santos, R., Osório, F., Crippa, J., Riba, J., 
Zuardi, A. and Hallak, J. (2016b) Antidepressive, 
anxiolytic, and antiaddictive effects of ayahuasca, 
psilocybin and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD): a 
systematic review of clinical trials published in the last 
25 years. Ther Adv Psychopharmacol 6: 193–213.
Dos Santos, R. and Strassman, R. (2008) 
Ayahuasca and psychosis. Br J Psychiatry (eLetter), 
3 December. Available at: http://bjp.rcpsych.org/
 R dos Santos, JC Bouso et al.
journals.sagepub.com/home/tpp 
155
content/190/1/81.2.e-letters#ayahuasca-and-psychosis 
(accessed 16 August 2016).
Frecska, E., Bokor, P. and Winkelman, M. (2016) 
The therapeutic potentials of ayahuasca: possible 
effects against various diseases of civilization. Front 
Pharmacol 7: 35.
Frecska, E., Szabo, A., Winkelman, M., Luna, 
L. and McKenna, D. (2013) A possibly sigma-1 
receptor mediated role of dimethyltryptamine in tissue 
protection, regeneration, and immunity. J Neural 
Transm 120: 1295–1303.
Gable, R. (2007) Risk assessment of ritual use of oral 
dimethyltryptamine (DMT) and harmala alkaloids. 
Addiction 102: 24–34.
Garcia-Romeu, A., Kersgaard, B. and Addy, P. 
(2016) Clinical applications of hallucinogens: a 
review. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol 24: 229–268.
Gillin, J., Stoff, D. and Wyatt, R. (1978) 
Transmethylation hypothesis: a review of progress. 
In: Lipton, M., DiMascio, A. and Killam, K. (eds) 
Psychopharmacology: a generation of progress. New York, 
NY: Raven Press.
Gonzalez-Maeso, J., Ang, R., Yuen, T., Chan, P., 
Weisstaub, N., López-Giménez, J., et al. (2008) 
Identification of a serotonin/glutamate receptor 
complex implicated in psychosis. Nature 452: 
93–97.
Grammenos, D. and Barker, S. (2015) On 
the transmethylation hypothesis: stress, N,N-
dimethyltryptamine, and positive symptoms of 
psychosis. J Neural Transm 122: 733–739.
Hendricks, P., Clark, C., Johnson, M., Fontaine, K. 
and Cropsey, K. (2014) Hallucinogen use predicts 
reduced recidivism among substance-involved 
offenders under community corrections supervision. J 
Psychopharmacol 28: 62–66.
Hendricks, P., Thorne, C., Clark, C., Coombs, D. 
and Johnson, M. (2015) Classic psychedelic use is 
associated with reduced psychological distress and 
suicidality in the United States adult population. J 
Psychopharmacol 29: 280–288.
Jacob, M. and Presti, D. (2005) Endogenous 
psychoactive tryptamines reconsidered: an anxiolytic 
role for dimethyltryptamine. Med Hypotheses 64: 
930–937.
Johansen, P. and Krebs, T. (2015) Psychedelics not 
linked to mental health problems or suicidal behavior: 
a population study. J Psychopharmacol 29: 270–279.
Johnson, M., Richards, W. and Griffiths, R. (2008) 
Human hallucinogen research: guidelines for safety. J 
Psychopharmacol 22: 603–620.
Klock, J., Boerner, U. and Becker, C. (1974) Coma, 
hyperthermia and bleeding associated with massive 
LSD overdose: a report of eight cases. Western J Med 
120: 183–188.
Kometer, M., Schmidt, A., Jäncke, L. and 
Vollenweider, F. (2013) Activation of serotonin 2A 
receptors underlies the psilocybin-induced effects on α 
oscillations, N170 visual-evoked potentials, and visual 
hallucinations. J Neurosci 33: 10544–10551.
Krebs, T. and Johansen, P. (2013) Psychedelics 
and mental health: a population study. PLoS One 8: 
e63972.
Labate, B. and Feeney, K. (2012) Ayahuasca and the 
process of regulation in Brazil and internationally: 
implications and challenges. Int J Drug Policy 23: 
154–161.
Labate, B., Rose, I. and dos Santos, R. (2009) 
Ayahuasca religions: a comprehensive bibliography and 
critical essays. Santa Cruz, CA: Multidisciplinary 
Association for Psychedelic Studies.
Lima, F. (1996–97) The ritual use of hoasca: 
comments and advice. MAPS Newsletter 7: 25–26.
Lima, F., Naves, M., Motta, J., Migueli, J., Brito, G. 
et al. (2002) Sistema de monitoramento psiquiátrico 
em usuários do chá hoasca. Rev Bras Psiquiatr 24 
(Suppl. 2): 120–141.
Lima, F. and Tófoli, L. (2011) An epidemiological 
surveillance system by the UDV: mental health 
recommendations concerning the religious use of 
hoasca. In Labate, B. and Jungaberle, H. (eds) The 
internationalization of ayahuasca. Zurich/Berlin: Lit 
Verlag.
Malleson, N. (1971) Acute adverse reactions to 
LSD in clinical and experimental use in the United 
Kingdom. Br J Psychiatry 118: 229–230.
McKenna, D. and Riba, J. (2015) New World 
tryptamine hallucinogens and the neuroscience 
of ayahuasca. Curr Top Behav Neurosci in press. 
doi:10.1007/78542015368.
Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J. and Altman, D. 
and The PRISMA Group. (2009) Preferred reporting 
items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: The 
PRISMA statement. PLoS Medicine 6: e1000097.
Moreno, J., Holloway, T., Albizu, L., Sealfon, S. and 
González-Maeso, J. (2011) Metabotropic glutamate 
mGlu2 receptor is necessary for the pharmacological 
and behavioral effects induced by hallucinogenic 
5-HT2A receptor agonists. Neurosci Lett 493: 76–79.
Mueller, F., Lenz, C., Steiner, M., Dolder, P., 
Walter, M., Lang, U., et al. (2016) Neuroimaging in 
moderate MDMA use: a systematic review. Neurosci 
Biobehav Rev 62: 21–34.
Naranjo, P. (1959) Estudio comparativo de la 
harmina, la dietilamida del ácido lisérgico (LSD-25) y 
la mescalina [Comparative study of harmine, lysergic 
 Therapeutic Advances in Psychopharmacology 7(4)
156 
journals.sagepub.com/home/tpp
acid diethylamide (LSD-25) and mescaline]. Revista 
de la Confederación Médica Panamericana 6: 1–8.
Nichols, D. (2016) Psychedelics. Pharmacol Rev 68: 
264–355.
Nunes, A., dos Santos, R., Osório, F., Sanches, R., 
Crippa, J. and Hallak, J. (2016) Effects of ayahuasca 
and its alkaloids on drug dependence: a systematic 
literature review of quantitative studies in animals and 
humans. J Psychoactive Drugs 48: 195–205.
Nutt, D., King, L. and Phillips, L. and Independent 
Scientific Committee on Drugs. (2010) Drug harms 
in the UK: a multicriteria decision analysis. Lancet 
376: 1558–1565.
Osório, F., Sanches, R., Macedo, L., dos Santos, R., 
Maia-de-Oliveira, J., Wichert-Ana, L., et al. (2015) 
Antidepressant effects of a single dose of ayahuasca 
in patients with recurrent depression: a preliminary 
report. Rev Bras Psiquiatr 37: 13–20.
Ott, J. (1994) Ayahuasca analogues: pangaean 
entheogens. Kennewick, WA: Natural Books Co.
Ott, J. (1999) Pharmahuasca: human pharmacology 
of oral DMT plus harmine. J Psychoactive Drugs 31: 
171–177.
Palhano-Fontes, F., Andrade, K., Tofoli, L., Santos, 
A., Crippa, J., Hallak, J., et al. (2015) The psychedelic 
state induced by ayahuasca modulates the activity and 
connectivity of the default mode network. PLoS One 
10: e0118143.
Paterson, N., Darby, W. and Sandhu, P. (2015) 
N,N-Dimethyltryptamine-induced psychosis. Clin 
Neuropharmacol 38:141–143.
Pennes, H. and Hoch, P. (1957) Psychotomimetics, 
clinical and theoretical considerations: harmine, WIN-
299 and nalline. Am Journal Psychiatry 113: 887–892.
Pomilio, A., Vitale, A., Ciprian-Ollivier, J., Cetkovich-
Bakmas, M., Gómez, R. and Vázquez, G. (1999) 
Ayahoasca: an experimental psychosis that mirrors 
the transmethylation hypothesis of schizophrenia. J 
Ethnopharmacol 65: 29–51.
Riba, J. and Barbanoj, M. (2006) Ayahuasca. In: 
Peris, J., Zurián, J., Martínez, G. and Valladolid, 
G. (eds) Tratado SET de Transtornos Adictivos, Ed. 
Madrid, Spain: Médica Panamericana.
Riba, J., McIlhenny, E., Bouso, J. and Barker, 
S. (2015) Metabolism and urinary disposition of 
N,N-dimethyltryptamine after oral and smoked 
administration: a comparative study. Drug Test Anal 7: 
40140–40146.
Riba, J., Rodríguez-Fornells, A., Urbano, G., Morte, 
A., Antonijoan, R., Montero, M., et al. (2001) 
Subjective effects and tolerability of the South 
American psychoactive beverage ayahuasca in healthy 
volunteers. Psychopharmacology 154: 85–95.
Riba, J., Romero, S., Grasa, E., Mena, E., Carrió, 
I. and Barbanoj, M. (2006) Increased frontal and 
paralimbic activation following ayahuasca, the pan-
amazonian inebriant. Psychopharmacology 186: 93–98.
Sanches, R., de Lima Osório, F., dos Santos, R., 
Macedo, L., Maia-de-Oliveira, J., Wichert-Ana, L., 
et al. (2016) Antidepressant effects of a single dose 
of ayahuasca in patients with recurrent depression: a 
SPECT study. J Clin Psychopharmacol 36: 77–81.
Schenberg, E., Alexandre, J., Filev, R., Cravo, A., 
Sato, J., Muthukumaraswamy, S., et al. (2015) 
Acute biphasic effects of ayahuasca. PLoS One 10: 
e0137202.
Schultes, R. and Hofmann, A. (1992) Plants of the 
Gods: their sacred, healing, and hallucinogenic powers. 
Rochester, VT: Healing Arts Press.
Shulgin, A. and Shulgin, A. (1997) TIHKAL: the 
continuation. Berkeley: Transform Press.
Smart, R. and Bateman, K. (1967) Unfavourable 
reactions to LSD: a review and analysis of the 
available case reports. Can Med Assoc J 97: 1214–
1221.
Smith, D., Raswyck, G. and Davidson, L. (2014) 
From Hofmann to the Haight Ashbury, and into 
the future: the past and potential of lysergic acid 
diethylamide. J Psychoactive Drugs 46: 3–10.
Slotkin, T., Distefano, V. and Au, W. (1970) Blood 
levels and urinary excretion of harmine and its 
metabolites in man and rats. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 
173: 26–30.
Stilo, S. and Murray, R. (2010) The epidemiology 
of schizophrenia: replacing dogma with knowledge. 
Dialogues Clin Neurosci 12: 305–315.
Strassman, R. (1984) Adverse reactions to psychedelic 
drugs. A review of the literature. J Nerv Ment Dis 172: 
577–595.
Strassman, R. (2001). DMT: the spirit molecule: a 
doctor’s revolutionary research into the biology of near-
death and mystical experiences. Rochester, VT: Park 
Street Press.
Strassman, R., Qualls, C. and Berg, L. (1996) 
Differential tolerance to biological and subjective 
effects of four closely spaced doses of N,N-
dimethyltryptamine in humans. Biol Psychiatry 39: 
784–795.
Strassman, R., Qualls, C., Uhlenhuth, E. and 
Kellner, R. (1994) Dose-response study of N,N-
dimethyltryptamine in humans. II. Subjective effects 
and preliminary results of a new rating scale. Arch Gen 
Psychiatry 51: 98–108.
Studerus, E., Kometer, M., Hasler, F. and 
Vollenweider, F. (2011) Acute, subacute and long-
term subjective effects of psilocybin in healthy 
 R dos Santos, JC Bouso et al.
journals.sagepub.com/home/tpp 
157
humans: a pooled analysis of experimental studies. J 
Psychopharmacol 25: 1434–1452.
Supreme Court of the United States (2005) Alberto 
R. Gonzales, Attorney General, et al. (Petitioners), 
v. O Centro Espírita Beneficiente União do Vegetal, 
et al. (Respondents), no 04-1084. On Writ of 
Certiorari to the US Court of Appeals for the Tenth 
Circuit. Brief of Robert Gable, Ed.D., Ph.D., Harriet 
de Wit, Ph.D., Wayne Hall, Ph.D., Chris-Ellyn 
Johanson, Ph.D., William A. McKim, Ph.D., Daniel 
M. Perrine, Ph.D., and Manuel Tancer, M.D., as 
Amici Curiae in support of respondents. New Mexico, 
September 9.
Szabo, A., Kovacs, A., Frecska, E. and Rajnavolgyi, 
E. (2014) Psychedelic N,N-dimethyltryptamine 
and 5-methoxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine modulate 
innate and adaptive inflammatory responses through 
the sigma-1 receptor of human monocyte-derived 
dendritic cells. PLoS One 9: e106533.
Szmulewicz, A., Valerio, M. and Smith, J. (2015) 
Switch to mania after ayahuasca consumption in a 
man with bipolar disorder: a case report. Int J Bipolar 
Disord 3: 4.
Tittarelli, R., Mannocchi, G., Pantano, F. and Romolo, 
F. (2015) Recreational use, analysis and toxicity of 
tryptamines. Curr Neuropharmacol 13: 26–46.
Umut, G., Küçükparlak, I., Özgen, G. and 
Türkcan, A. (2011) A mood disorder episode with 
an onset under chronic cannabis consumption and 
accompanied with psychotic features immediately 
after N,N-dimethyltryptamine (DMT) use: a case 
report. Düşünen Adam 24: 246–250.
Valle, M., Maqueda, A., Rabella, M., Rodríguez-
Pujadas, A., Antonijoan, R., Romero, S., et al. (2016) 
Inhibition of alpha oscillations through serotonin-2A 
receptor activation underlies the visual effects of 
ayahuasca in humans. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 26: 
1161–1175.
Vallersnes, O., Dines, A., Wood, D., Yates, C., 
Heyerdahl, F., Hovda, K., et al. (2016) Psychosis 
associated with acute recreational drug toxicity: a 
European case series. BMC Psychiatry 16: 293.
Van Amsterdam, J., Opperhuizen, A. and van 
den Brink, W. (2011) Harm potential of magic 
mushroom use: a review. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 
59: 423–429.
Van Amsterdam, J., Pennings, E., Brunt, T. and van 
den Brink, W. (2013) Physical harm due to chronic 
substance use. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 66: 83–87.
Van Amsterdam, J., Nutt, D., Phillips, L. and van den 
Brink, W. (2015) European rating of drug harms. J 
Psychopharmacol 29: 655–660.
Vitale, A., Ollivier, J., Vitale, V., Romero, E. and 
Pomillo A. (2010) Estudio clínico de marcadores 
de hipermetilación indólica en las alteraciones de la 
percepción. Acta Bioquím Clín Latinoam 44: 627–642.
Vitale, A., Pomilio, A., Cañellas, C., Vitale, M., Putz, 
E. and Ciprian-Ollivier, J. (2011) In vivo long-term 
kinetics of radiolabeled N,N-dimethyltryptamine and 
tryptamine. J Nucl Med 52: 970–977.
Vollenweider, F. and Kometer, M. (2010) The 
neurobiology of psychedelic drugs: implications for 
the treatment of mood disorders. Nat Rev Neurosci 11: 
642–651.
Vollenweider, F., Vollenweider-Scherpenhuyzen, M., 
Bäbler, A., Vogel, H. and Hell, D. (1998) Psilocybin 
induces schizophrenia-like psychosis in humans via a 
serotonin-2 agonist action. Neuroreport 9: 
3897–3902.
Walsh, Z., Hendricks, P., Smith, S., Kosson, D., 
Thiessen, M., Lucas, P., et al. (2016) Hallucinogen 
use and intimate partner violence: prospective 
evidence consistent with protective effects among 
men with histories of problematic substance use. J 
Psychopharmacol 30: 601–607.
Warren, J., Dham-Nayyar, P. and Alexander, J. 
(2013) Recreational use of naturally occurring 
dimethyltryptamine - contributing to psychosis? Aust 
N Z J Psychiatry 47: 398–399.
Visit SAGE journals online 
journals.sagepub.com/
home/tpp
SAGE journals
