 Informed Consent to Study Purpose in Randomized
Clinical Trials of Antibiotics, 1991 Through 2011
Peter Doshi, PhD; Peter Hur, PharmD, MBA; Mark Jones, PhD; Husam Albarmawi, BSPharm, MS;
Tom Jefferson, MD; Daniel J. Morgan, MD; Patricia A. Spears, BS; John H. Powers III, MD
IMPORTANCE Potential research participants may assume that randomized trials comparing
new interventions with older interventions always hypothesize greater efficacy for the new
intervention, as in superiority trials. However, antibiotic trials frequently use “noninferiority”
hypotheses allowing a degree of inferior efficacy deemed “clinically acceptable” compared
with an older effective drug, in exchange for nonefficacy benefits (eg, decreased adverse
effects). Considering these different benefit-harm trade-offs, proper informed consent
necessitates supplying different information on the purposes of superiority and
noninferiority trials.
OBJECTIVE To determine the degree to which the study purpose is explained to potential
participants in randomized clinical trials of antibiotics and the degree to which study
protocols justify their selection of noninferiority hypotheses and amount of “clinically
acceptable” inferiority.
DESIGN AND SETTING Cross-sectional analysis of study protocols, statistical analysis plans
(SAPs), and informed consent forms (ICFs) from clinical study reports submitted to the
European Medicines Agency. The ICFs were read by both methodologists and patient
investigators.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES Protocols and SAPs were used as the reference standard to
determine prespecified primary hypothesis and record rationale for selection of
noninferiority hypotheses and noninferiority margins. This information was cross-referenced
against ICFs to determine whether ICFs explained the study purpose.
RESULTS We obtained trial documents from 78 randomized trials with prespecified efficacy
hypotheses (6 superiority, 72 noninferiority) for 17 antibiotics conducted between 1991 and
2011 that enrolled 39 407 patients. Fifty were included in the ICF analysis. All ICFs contained
sections describing study purpose; however, none consistently conveyed study hypothesis to
both methodologists and patient investigators. Methodologists found that 1 of 50 conveyed a
study purpose. Patient investigators found that 11 of 50 conveyed a study purpose,
7 accurately and 4 inaccurately compared with the reference standard. Seventy-one of 72
noninferiority trial protocols or SAPs provided no rationale for selection of noninferiority
hypothesis. None provided a clinical rationale for the chosen amount of decreased efficacy.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE Patients were not accurately informed of study purpose,
which raises questions regarding the ethics of informed consent in antibiotic trials.
Noninferiority and superiority trials entail different benefit-harm trade-offs that must be
conveyed for ethical informed consent.
JAMA Intern Med. 2017;177(10):1452-1459. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2017.3820
Published online August 21, 2017.
Invited Commentary
page 1459
Supplemental content
Author Affiliations: Author
affiliations are listed at the end of this
article.
Corresponding Author: Peter Doshi,
PhD, Pharmaceutical Health Services
Research Department, University of
Maryland, School of Pharmacy, 220
Arch St, 12th Floor, Room 01-228,
Baltimore, MD 21201 (pdoshi@rx
.umaryland.edu).
Research
JAMA Internal Medicine | Original Investigation
1452
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 E
thical clinical research is based on a respect for per-
sons. The importance of obtaining informed consent
from potential research participants is an unques-
tioned aspect of research involving humans. The Declaration
ofHelsinki,1BelmontReport,2andCommonRule3allagreethat
a key element necessary to convey to participants is the
“purposes”2,3 (or “aims”1) of the research.
Randomized clinical trials with active controls, some-
times called “head-to-head” studies, can evaluate “superior-
ity” or “noninferiority” hypotheses of an experimental inter-
vention compared with best standard of care. In superiority
trials, the primary hypothesis is to evaluate improved efficacy
of new interventions by ruling out any amount of inferior effi-
cacyofexperimentalinterventionscomparedwithexistingbest
standard of care. Noninferiority hypotheses allow an amount
of “clinically acceptable” inferior efficacy of new interven-
tions compared with older effective interventions,4-6(pp89-121)7
in exchange for potential nonefficacy benefits of new interven-
tions, such as being “less toxic, less invasive, less costly, re-
quire fewer doses, improve quality of life, or have some other
value to patients.
”8(p109) Noninferiority is determined by rul-
ing out an amount of inferior efficacy chosen prior to the trial,
called the “noninferiority margin.
” Between 2002 and 2009,
one-quarterofnewdrugapprovalsincludedevidencefromnon-
inferioritytrials,withthemajoritybeingantimicrobialstudies.9
To our knowledge, there has been no systematic evalua-
tion of information provided to potential research partici-
pants and whether it is sufficient to distinguish the differing
study purposes of superiority and noninferiority trials. If po-
tential research participants assume that they are enrolled in
superiority trials that are actually noninferiority trials or vice
versa, they may incorrectly assess the balance of benefits and
harms to which they may be exposed based on the study’
s in-
tended purpose.
Using informed consent forms (ICFs) obtained from
regulatory filings for antibiotics, we evaluated (1) how often
study purpose was conveyed to potential trial participants.
We also assessed study protocols and statistical analysis
plans (SAPs) of noninferiority trials to determine the ratio-
nale provided for choice of (2) noninferiority hypothesis
and (3) noninferiority margin.9
Methods
Institutional review board approval was not sought for this
study as this was non–human subjects research based on pub-
licly available data. There was no need for anonymization be-
cause we did not evaluate patient-level data.
Data Sources
In 2013 through 2014, we made a freedom of information
request to the European Medicines Agency (EMA) for ICFs,
study synopses, protocols, and SAPs (including any amend-
ments) for all antibiotic trials in the EMA’
s holdings. After an
initial denial, our appeal was successful. The EMA reported
that of 17 authorized antibiotics, it held study documents for
13 (retapamulin, inhaled aztreonam, inhaled colistin, dapto-
mycin, fidaxomicin, doripenem, ertapenem, telithromycin
[Ketek; Sanofi-Aventis], inhaled tobramycin, trovafloxacin
[Trovan; Pfizer], tigecycline, telavancin, ceftaroline). The
EMA did not possess data for the other 4 (telithromycin
[Levviax; Aventis Pharma S.p.A.], trovafloxacin [Turvel;
Laboratorios Almirall], alatrofloxacin [Turvel IV; Laboratorios
Almirall], and alatrofloxacin mesylate [Trovan IV; Pfizer]),
which are the same active molecule as drugs in the initial 13,
and regulators did not require additional studies. In 2015, we
requested 4 additional antibiotics approved subsequent to
our initial request (ceftazidime-avibactam, dalbavancin, ori-
tavancin, tedizolid). We did not initiate a similar request with
the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) because the FDA
currently does not release original sponsor-submitted clinical
trial documents, which it treats as exempt from disclosure
under the Freedom of Information Act.10,11 All of the underly-
ing data for this study, along with our extraction sheets, is
freely available in an online repository.12
Selection Criteria
We included all antibiotic randomized clinical trials that had
a prespecified efficacy hypothesis. We had no exclusion cri-
teria at the study level.
Study documents for some trials did not include ICFs. For
other studies, we received multiple ICF versions. For the lat-
ter, we selected the most recent ICF dated prior to the start of
patient enrollment. If identically dated ICFs existed for differ-
ently aged populations, we chose the form used with the old-
est population. When multiple ICFs met these criteria, for ex-
ample,multipleICFsfordifferentstudysites,wechosethefirst
form that appeared in the documents.
Study Outcomes
Our primary outcome measure was the proportion of ICFs that
accurately conveyed sufficient detail to explain the primary
hypothesis (superiority or noninferiority) using the protocols
or SAPs as the reference standard. For noninferiority studies,
we recorded any reasons given in trial documents for the se-
lection of noninferiority hypotheses and noninferiority mar-
gins. We also recorded the noninferiority margin.
Informed Consent Form Review
Five raters (2 methodologists with expertise in clinical trial de-
sign[T.J.,D.J.M.]and3patientinvestigators[P.A.S.,A.W.,K.A.])
judged whether ICFs explained the study purpose to poten-
tial participants, and if so, assigned the study purpose as
Key Points
Question How often is the study purpose explained to potential
participants in randomized clinical trials of antibiotics?
Findings In this cross-sectional analysis of trial documents
submitted to regulators, no informed consent forms consistently
conveyed the primary hypothesis of the study.
Meaning Patients enrolling in antibiotic clinical trials are not
accurately informed of study purpose, raising fundamental
questions of the ethics of consent in antibiotic drug trials.
Consent to Study Purpose in Randomized Clinical Trials of Antibiotics
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
October 2017
Volume 177, Number 10
1453
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 superiority or noninferiority. Raters were provided with ICFs
only and no other study documents. We aimed to increase rat-
ers’comprehension by highlighting the following words that
could be relevant to judging study purpose and statistical hy-
pothesis wherever they appeared in consent forms: purpose,
aim, goal, objective, hypothesis, evaluate, demonstrate, de-
termine, compare, intend, intention, plan, similar, superior,
inferior, better, worse, effective, less, more, safe, tolerate, tol-
erable, justification. We did this because relevant informa-
tion is not necessarily always located in the section of ICFs
wherestudypurposeisdescribed(eg,sometimeslabeled“Pur-
pose” or “Why is this research study being done?”). Highlight-
ing was automated with Adobe Acrobat Professional XI.
Patient investigators (P.A.S., A.W., K.A.) were selected by
convenience and given a $500 honorarium. As we expected
them to be unfamiliar with the terms “noninferiority” and “su-
periority,
”wedesignedaquestionnairethatenabledustogauge
their determination of study hypothesis without using ex-
plicit terms. No training was provided other than requesting
their participation in a pilot of 2 trials selected on the basis of
being the only 2 trials that named the study design in the study
title printed on the ICF.
Patient investigators were provided with ICFs and asked
to answer the following question: “Is the primary purpose of
this trial to see whether the NEW DRUG is more effective
than the CONTROL DRUG or is the primary purpose to see
whether the NEW DRUG is not substantially worse than the
CONTROL DRUG? Or can you not tell?” For the purpose of
comparing patient investigator responses to methodologist
responses, an answer of “more effective” was taken to indi-
cate a superiority study and “not substantially worse” a non-
inferiority study.
Disagreements among rater pairs were reported descrip-
tively and with κ statistics. Subsequently, to compare meth-
odologist and patient investigator judgments, we obtained a
consensus methodologist and consensus patient investigator
judgment for use in final data analysis by following Cochrane
methods13 for reaching consensus.
Methodologists were asked whether the ICF described
study purpose sufficiently to distinguish between superior-
ity and noninferiority design, and if so, to judge the design.
One author (P.D.) also searched ICFs for keywords
describing study purpose (keywords: purpose, aim, goal,
objective, justification) and whether this was phrased to
evaluate superiority (superior, better, more effective), simi-
larity (similar), or inferiority (inferior, worse, less effective).
Searching was automated with Adobe Acrobat Professional
XI and hand reviewed.
Data Analysis
We classified all included trials as superiority or noninferior-
ity hypotheses based on the primary efficacy hypothesis as
stated in the synopsis, protocol, or SAP. We classified trials
called“equivalence”inreportsas“noninferiority”trials,inline
with international guidance defining noninferiority trials.14
Many active clinical trials called “equivalence” are noninferi-
ority studies, as they specify only an amount of acceptable
inferiority.14 None described an upper bound on greater effi-
cacy as in equivalence trials. Studies were also categorized as
studyinga“serious”or“nonserious”diseasebasedonwhether
the FDA has granted Qualified Infectious Disease Product
(QIDP) status under the Generating Antibiotic Incentives Now
(GAIN)Actinrelationtotheindicationunderinvestigation.The
QIDP designation requires serious or life-threatening disease
and a qualified pathogen.
Final judgments by methodologist and patient raters were
compared with those based on the reference standard of study
reports (study synopsis, protocol, or SAP). We present our
analyses stratified by statistical hypothesis of the trial’
s pri-
mary objective (superiority or noninferiority).
We tested 2 hypotheses using the Fisher exact test: first,
that the proportion of ICFs that convey their study purpose
clearlywasequalforsuperiorityandnoninferioritytrials,strati-
fied by methodologists and patient investigators; second, that
ICFs convey their study purpose equally clearly to both meth-
odologists and patient investigators (as assessed by the pro-
portion of correct ratings). We used P < .05 to indicate statis-
tical significance and 2-sided testing.
Results
The EMA provided study documents for 107 trials of 17 anti-
biotics, of which 78 trials (for 17 drugs) met inclusion criteria
(6 superiority trials, 72 noninferiority trials). Of these, 26 trials
were excluded from the ICF analysis, primarily because the
EMAdidnotpossessICFs.WealsoexcludedfromtheICFanaly-
sis 2 trials used in our pilot to develop our methods, leaving a
total of 50 trials included in ICF analysis. Details of trials in-
cluded and excluded, with reasons, are provided in the eFig-
ure in the Supplement and our dataset.12
A total of 39 407 patients were enrolled in 78 trials. Pa-
tients enrolled in the 52 trials for which we had ICFs totaled
28 548. Approximately one-half of the included trials (38 of 78)
started between 1991 and 2000, and half (36 of 78) com-
menced between 2001 and 2011. Most superiority trials (5 of
Table 1. Characteristics of Included Studies
Characteristic
Superiority Trials
(n = 6)
Noninferiority Trials
(n = 72)
Trial enrollment start date,
No. (%)
1991-1995
0
22 (31)
1996-2000
0
16 (22)
2001-2005
2 (33)
23 (32)
2006-2010
1 (17)
8 (11)
2011
0
2 (3)
Study date unknown
3 (50)
1 (2)
Severity of disease under study,
No. (%)
Nonserious
1 (17)
19 (26)
Serious
5 (83)
53 (74)
Noninferiority margin,
median (IQR), %
NA
−10 (−15 to −10)
Abbreviations: IQR, interquartile range; NA, not applicable.
Research Original Investigation
Consent to Study Purpose in Randomized Clinical Trials of Antibiotics
1454
JAMA Internal Medicine
October 2017
Volume 177, Number 10
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 6) studied serious diseases. Three-quarters of noninferiority
trials (53 of 72) studied serious diseases (Table 1).
Automated keyword searching showed that all ICFs in-
cluded a study purpose section. Five ICFs included words such
as “better” or “superior,” 4 of which were noninferiority trials
(eTable in the Supplement). For example, 1 ICF informed pa-
tients that, “The study doctor will give PAR-101 to some people
in this study to see if it is safe and tolerable, and can help them
withtheirCDAD[Clostridiumdifficile–associateddiarrhea].An-
other purpose of this study is to find out if taking PAR-101 is
better than taking vancomycin.
” However, the SAP defined the
primary hypothesis as noninferiority. See the eBox in the
Supplement for other examples.
In the ICF analysis, prior to consensus the 2 methodolo-
gist raters’ independent judgments on study hypothesis
were concordant (mostly “cannot tell”) in 42 of 50 (84%
agreement; unweighted κ < 0) trials. After consensus, they
judged 49 of 50 ICFs as containing insufficient information
to judge study hypothesis. For the 3 patient investigator rat-
ers, agreement was 12 of 50 (24%; unweighted κ = 0.07), 16
of 50 (32%; unweighted κ = 0.23), and 31 of 50 (62%;
unweighted κ = 0.18). After consensus, patient investigator
raters judged 38 of 50 (76%) ICFs as containing insufficient
information to judge study hypothesis.
None of the ICFs consistently conveyed study purpose si-
multaneously to both methodologist and patient investiga-
tor raters. For the methodologist raters, 1 of 50 (2%) ICFs con-
veyed study purpose. This ICF was rated as a superiority trial
whereas the protocol or SAP defined the primary hypothesis
as noninferiority. This was the aforementioned trial in which
the ICF included wording stating, “the purpose of this study
is to find out if taking PAR-101 is better than taking vancomy-
cin.” For patient investigators, 7 of 50 (14%) ICFs conveyed
study purpose accurately (5 noninferiority and 2 superiority
trials) and 4 (8%) conveyed the incorrect hypothesis (all 4 were
noninferioritytrialsjudgedassuperioritytrials)comparedwith
the protocols or SAPs. The remaining 38 (76%) trials’ICFs did
not convey a study purpose (Table 2).
Because none of the ICFs rated by methodologists consis-
tently conveyed study purpose accurately, we could not re-
ject the hypothesis that ICFs from superiority and noninferi-
ority trials convey study purpose equally clearly. For patient
advocate raters, ICFs from superiority trials conveyed study
purpose accurately more commonly than noninferiority trials
(50% vs 11%; P = .09). Finally, we rejected the null hypoth-
esisthatICFsconveytheirstudypurposeequallyclearlytoboth
methodologists and patient investigators (0% vs 14%; P = .01)
(Table 3).
In protocols or SAPs, we could not locate a rationale for se-
lection of noninferiority hypotheses in 71 of 72 (99%) nonin-
feriority trials. The single trial that provided a justification ex-
plainedthataplacebo-controlledtrialwouldbeunethicalgiven
the type of disease (severe acute bacterial skin and skin struc-
ture infections with large lesions and systemic signs of infec-
tion) and an active-controlled superiority trial would be un-
ethical “because highly effective antibiotic treatment exists”
(Table 4).
We located a written explanation of the choice of nonin-
feriority margin in 51 of 72 (71%) trials, whereas 21 (29%)
trials did not include a justification for the noninferiority
margin choice. Thirty-seven (51%) trial documents indicated
that the noninferiority margin was chosen in accordance
with a guidance from the FDA, commonly citing 2 specific
FDA documents15,16 (Table 4). Six (8%) trials referenced the
effect of the control drug from previous placebo-controlled
trials, as delineated in FDA regulation and international
guidance.14,17 No trials provided a clinical rationale explain-
ing why the chosen amount of inferiority should be consid-
ered “clinically acceptable.
”
Among noninferiority studies, the median noninferiority
margin was −10% (interquartile range, −15% to −10%) (Table 1).
Discussion
Ouranalysisof50antibiotictrialssubmittedtoregulatoryagen-
cies for marketing approval over 2 decades found that poten-
tial participants were not accurately informed of study pur-
pose in ICFs. Neither patient investigators nor experienced
methodologists could determine the purpose for the major-
ity of trials. These results raise questions about the ethics of
antibiotic development. Clarity on study purpose is central to
the ethical principles of respect for persons, as well as mini-
mizing risk; it is also crucial to understanding alternative treat-
ments noted in foundational documents regarding experi-
mentation involving humans, and a requirement for proper
informed consent in the Common Rule.1-3,18
Table 2. Comparison of Study Purpose as Described in the Informed
Consent Form vs Protocol or Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP)
Study Purpose According to
ICF
Study Purpose According to
Protocol or SAP
Total
Superiority
(n = 4)
Noninferiority
(n = 46)
Methodologist raters
Superiority
0
1
1
Noninferiority
0
0
0
Cannot tell
4
45
49
Could not agree
0
0
0
Patient investigator raters
Superiority
2
4
6
Noninferiority
0
5
5
Cannot tell
2
36
38
Could not agree
0
1
1
Total
4
46
50
Table 3. Proportion of Informed Consent Forms That Accurately
Conveyed Study Purpose
Study Type
% (95% CI)
P Value
Methodologists
Patient Investigators
Overall
0 (0-7)
14 (6-27)
.01
Superiority
0 (0-60)
50 (7-93)
.43
Noninferiority
0 (0-8)
11 (4-24)
.06
P value
>.99
.09
Consent to Study Purpose in Randomized Clinical Trials of Antibiotics
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
October 2017
Volume 177, Number 10
1455
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Others have noted19,20 that informed consent should dif-
fer between superiority and noninferiority trials, given differ-
ences in trade-offs between efficacy and harm. In superiority
trials, investigators hypothesize increased efficacy com-
pared with best standard of care. In noninferiority trials, in-
vestigators hypothesize that some decreased effectiveness
compared with effective best standard of care would be ac-
ceptable to potential research participants in exchange for po-
tential nonefficacy benefits such as decreased adverse ef-
fects or improved convenience.
Whereas all ICFs included a study purpose section (usu-
ally labeled “Purpose”), none consistently conveyed the pri-
mary hypothesis of noninferiority or superiority. One reason
may be historical: when randomized trials became the stan-
dard,feweffectivetherapiesexistedandplacebocontrolswere
common. The important ethical documents1-3 were drafted
when superiority hypotheses were the norm. The term “non-
inferiority” did not exist until the 1980s.21
Today, nearly one-third of premarketing trials have
active controls.22 For antibiotics, the proportion is higher
and noninferiority trials are common.9,23 Living ethical guid-
ance documents need updating to reflect this changing land-
scape. Investigators need guidance on how to ensure that
ICFs convey study purpose. We are unaware of ICF model
language for noninferiority trials, although some have
offered sample language for “equivalence” trials.24 However,
investigators should avoid wording that implies that a non-
inferiority trial evaluates equality of interventions because
noninferiority trials cannot show that 2 interventions are not
different by any amount (as in superiority trials). To aid
efforts to develop model language, investigators, sponsors,
and institutional review boards could prospectively publish
ICFs and study protocols in trial registries. The recent US
Department of Health and Human Services Final Rule (effec-
tive January 2017) indicates that ClinicalTrials.gov will
accommodate optional posting of ICFs and requires posting
of protocols and SAPs.25 In the Box, we offer sample lan-
guage for ICFs for noninferiority trials.
We found that 99% of protocols or SAPs lacked a ratio-
nale for the selection of noninferiority hypotheses. One rea-
son may be that investigators believe that “noninferior” means
“equal to” or “as effective as,
” thus assuming that they are not
exposing participants to increased risk of harm. Ruling out no
loss of effectiveness at all necessitates superiority trials.1
In the single trial that offered a rationale, investigators
stated that a placebo-controlled superiority trial would be un-
ethical in severe skin infections and that an active-controlled
superiority trial would be unethical “because highly effec-
tive antibiotic treatment exists.
” However, the reason placebo-
controlled trials are considered unethical is that they may
Table4.RationaleforSelectionofNoninferiorityStudyDesignandMargin
Rationale
No. (%) of Studies
(N = 72)
For study design
Alternative treatment for antibiotic resistance
0
Decreased adverse events
0
Dosing convenience
0
Guidance from FDA
0
Placebo-controlled superiority study unethical
1 (1)
Highly effective therapy already exists
1 (1)
Other rationale
0
No rationale given
71 (99)
For margin
Reference to previous placebo-controlled trial(s)
6 (8)
Reference to previous active-controlled trial(s)
2 (3)
Reference to previous noninferiority trial(s)
2 (3)
Reference to previous surveillance study
2 (3)
Patient input was sought
0
Guidance from FDA
37 (51)
Prior drug approval
2 (3)
Other rationale
4 (6)
No rationale given
21 (29)
Abbreviation: FDA, Food and Drug Administration.
Box. Sample Language to Describe Study Purpose in Informed
Consent Form of Noninferiority Trials
Generic language:
You are being asked to enroll in a clinical trial comparing a new
experimental (drug, vaccine, diagnostic, etc) with a standard
treatment (drug, vaccine, diagnostic, etc). The standard treatment
is a (regulator) approved (drug, etc) that is already known to be
effective in (treating, preventing, diagnosing) your disease. This
trial does not seek to demonstrate that (new drug, etc) is more
effective than the (standard drug). Instead, investigators will test
to determine whether the new (drug) is no more than X% (eg,
10%) less effective than the standard treatment. A finding of X%
less effective would mean that 1 in Y (eg, 10) patients had a worse
outcome [explain what the outcome is] with the new experimental
(drug etc) compared with the standard treatment. The new (drug)
might be better for patients because it might have (demonstrated
or hypothesized nonefficacy benefit described here—fewer
adverse effects, more convenient, etc—ideally with the specific
hypothesis related to less adverse effects (eg, “might have 10%
less nausea” etc) [and whether that nonefficacy benefit is known
or will be tested in the trial]).
Example language in uncomplicated urinary tract infection for a
noninferiority hypothesis comparing a new antibiotic with an older
effective antibiotic with a −10% noninferiority margin in which the
new drug is hypothesized to have fewer adverse effects:
You are being asked to enroll in a clinical trial comparing a new
experimental antibiotic, Supermycin, with a standard drug
treatment called Standardcillin. The standard treatment is FDA
approved and already known to be effective in treating urinary
tract infections in young healthy women. This trial does not seek
to demonstrate that Supermycin is more effective than
Standardcillin. Instead, investigators will test to determine
whether Supermycin is no more than 10% less effective than
Standardcillin in treating urinary tract infections. A finding of 10%
less effective would mean that for 1 in 10 women, it will take longer
for the symptoms of their disease to go away compared with
Standardcillin. Supermycin might be better for patients because it
might have fewer adverse effects, such as an up to 10% decrease
in nausea, diarrhea, and rash, compared with Standardcillin. This
possibility of fewer adverse effects is not yet proven and will also
be tested in this trial.
Research Original Investigation
Consent to Study Purpose in Randomized Clinical Trials of Antibiotics
1456
JAMA Internal Medicine
October 2017
Volume 177, Number 10
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 expose patients who have effective options to increased harm
from a less effective intervention (placebo). The primary hy-
pothesis in noninferiority trials also allows for lesser effec-
tiveness with a new drug in patients who have effective
options(thecontroldrug).Therefore,noninferioritytrialsraise
the same ethical issues as placebo-controlled trials.1 Chal-
lenges in demonstrating added benefits with new antibiotics
do not make superiority trials “unethical” but highlight either
a lack of unmet medical need for improved efficacy in pa-
tients for whom effective therapy exists or the need to focus
onnonantibioticinterventionsthatmightimproveoutcomes.26
Clarity of study purpose is particularly important in seri-
ous and/or life-threatening diseases. More than 90% of ana-
lyzedtrialsusednoninferiorityhypotheses,withdeathsin64%
of them, and recent antibiotics approved via noninferiority
have increased morbidity and mortality.27-29 In life-
threatening disease, potential research participants may ac-
cept increased adverse effects for potentially prolonged and/or
improved life investigated in superiority trials. However, po-
tential participants may not find noninferiority trials accept-
able if they are not willing to give up any amount of efficacy,
even in exchange for fewer adverse effects or improved con-
venience,particularlyinacutelife-threateninginfectionswhere
decreased efficacy implies increased morbidity or mortality
compared with the active control. The EMA has noted, “Where
the treatment under consideration is used for the prevention
of death or irreversible morbidity...it can be very difficult to
justify a noninferiority margin of any size.”30 The FDA has
stated that “it is essential for public health protection that a
new therapy be as effective as alternatives that are already ap-
proved for marketing when...the disease to be treated is life-
threatening or... the disease to be treated is a contagious
illness.
”31,32 This indicates that noninferiority is not an appro-
priate study design for serious diseases because there is no
“clinically acceptable” inferior efficacy in such cases.5
Noninferioritytrialsmaybeacceptableinnon–life-threatening
diseases in which research participants might accept some
amountoflessereffectivenessnotresultingindeathorirrevers-
ible harm in exchange for superiority on fewer adverse effects,
with the amounts determined by valid patient surveys.33
We found that 71% of noninferiority studies provided a ra-
tionale for selection of noninferiority margins. Many pro-
vided this rationale in the discussion of sample size deriva-
tion. Half mentioned FDA guidance,15,16 but none provided
clinicalreasoningorinvolvementfrompatientsinselectingthe
amount of decreased effectiveness considered “acceptable.”
Noninferiority margins that allow for absolute decreases in ef-
fectiveness of −15% to −10% mean that as many as 1 in 6 to 10
patients may receive less effective new interventions com-
paredwitholdereffectivetherapy.Thissuggeststhatmajortrial
decisions are driven by convention, sample size consider-
ations, or following regulatory suggestions, leaving unclear
what, if any, consideration is given to patient perspectives. The
patient perspective is important because noninferiority mar-
gins are a central factor to determining whether a trial ulti-
mately meets its primary objective, but also because the mar-
gin reflects subjective judgments regarding the amount of
decreased efficacy that patients would find acceptable, as well
as the type and amount of nonefficacy benefits that consti-
tute an acceptable trade-off.
Limitations
Our study has limitations. Because we only assessed ICFs, we
do not know what other information was provided to partici-
pants, how well they understood the ICF, or whether they read
it. We also cannot generalize our findings beyond antibiotic
trials. Finally, we included study documents irrespective of
theirdatestamp.Thedegreethatstudyhypothesesmighthave
changed over time and were not reflected consistently across
documents may have caused misclassification.
Conclusions
Patients enrolling in clinical trials of antibiotics are not accu-
rately informed of study purpose. Because noninferiority trials
do not intend to demonstrate superior efficacy of new inter-
ventions and entail trade-offs of lesser efficacy for other ben-
efits, this study raises fundamental questions of the ethics of
consent in antibiotic trials.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: March 15, 2017.
Published Online: August 21, 2017.
doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2017.3820
Author Affiliations: University of Maryland School
of Pharmacy, Pharmaceutical Health Services
Research Department, Baltimore (Doshi, Hur,
Albarmawi); University of Queensland School of
Public Health, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia
(Jones); Centre for Evidence Based Medicine,
University of Oxford, Oxford, England (Jefferson);
University of Maryland School of Medicine, VA
Maryland Healthcare System, Baltimore (Morgan);
Center for Disease Dynamics, Economics and Policy,
Washington, DC (Morgan); North Carolina State
University, College of Veterinary Medicine, Raleigh
(Spears); now with Lineberger Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill (Spears); George
Washington University School of Medicine,
Washington, DC (Powers).
Author Contributions: Dr Doshi had full access to
all of the data in the study and takes responsibility
for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the
data analysis.
Study concept and design: Doshi, Powers.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: All
authors.
Drafting of the manuscript: Doshi, Powers.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: All authors.
Statistical analysis: Hur, Jones.
Administrative, technical, or material support:
Doshi.
Study supervision: Doshi.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Drs Doshi, Jones,
and Jefferson were co-recipients of a UK National
Institute for Health Research grant (HTA – 10/80/01
Update and amalgamation of 2 Cochrane Reviews:
neuraminidase inhibitors for preventing and
treating influenza in healthy adults and children—
https://www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk/programmes
/hta/108001#/. Drs Doshi, Jones, and Jefferson are
also in receipt of a Cochrane Methods Innovations
Fund grant to develop guidance on the use of
regulatory data in Cochrane reviews. Dr Doshi
received €1500 from the European Respiratory
Society in support of his travel to the society’
s
September 2012 annual congress in Vienna, where
he gave an invited talk on oseltamivir. Dr Doshi has
received funding support ($11 000) from the
American Association of Colleges of Pharmacy for a
study to analyze written medical information
regarding the possible harms of statins. Dr Doshi is
also an associate editor of the BMJ and an unpaid
member of the IMEDS steering committee at the
Reagan-Udall Foundation for the FDA, which
focuses on drug safety research. Dr Hur is a
postdoctoral fellow at the University of Maryland;
Consent to Study Purpose in Randomized Clinical Trials of Antibiotics
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
October 2017
Volume 177, Number 10
1457
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 this fellowship is funded by Novartis. Mr Albarmawi
reports working as a research assistant on projects
for Bayer Healthcare and Amgen, Inc (recipient:
University of Maryland, Baltimore) outside the
submitted work. Dr Jefferson receives royalties
from his books published by Blackwells and Il
Pensiero Scientifico Editore, Rome. Dr Jefferson is
occasionally interviewed by market research
companies for anonymous interviews about phase 1
or 2 pharmaceutical products. In 2011 through 2013,
Dr Jefferson acted as an expert witness in a
litigation case related to oseltamivir phosphate
(Tamiflu [Roche]) and in a labor case on influenza
vaccines in health care workers in Canada. In 1997
to 1999 Dr Jefferson acted as a consultant for
Roche, in 2001 to 2002 for GlaxoSmithKline, and in
2003 for Sanofi-Synthelabo for pleconaril (an
antirhinoviral, which did not get approval from the
US FDA). Dr Jefferson was a consultant for IMS
Health in 2013, and in 2014 was retained as a
scientific advisor to a legal team acting on the drug
oseltamivir (Tamiflu [Roche]). In 2014 to 2015,
Dr Jefferson was a member of 2 advisory boards for
Boerhinger. Dr Jefferson has a potential financial
conflict of interest in the investigation of the drug
oseltamivir. Dr Jefferson was a member of an
Independent Data Monitoring Committee for a
Sanofi Pasteur clinical trial. Dr Jefferson is a
co-signatory of the Nordic Cochrane Centre
Complaint to the European Medicines Agency
(EMA) over maladministration at the EMA in
relation to the investigation of alleged harms of
human papillomavirus vaccines and consequent
complaints to the European Ombudsman.
Dr Morgan reports grants from the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, the National
Institutes of Health, the Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality, and the Veterans Affairs
Health Services Research and Development
Service, other from the Infectious Diseases Society
of America, American Society for Microbiology,
Lown, and the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology
of America for expenses to organize or present at
national meetings, and received honoraria from
Springer Inc for journal and book editing, outside
the submitted work. Ms Spears reports personal
fees from Pfizer and other from Hoffmann
La Roche/Genentech, outside the submitted work.
Dr Powers reports personal fees from Abbvie,
Cardeas, Cempra, Contrafect, Gilead, Johnson
& Johnson, MedImmune, Novartis, Otsuka, Pfizer,
Roche, and Trius outside the submitted work.
No other disclosures are reported.
Funding/Support: This study was funded out of
nonspecific faculty research funds provided by the
University of Maryland, Baltimore, to Dr Doshi.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The funders had no
role in the design and conduct of the study;
collection, management, analysis, and
interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or
approval of the manuscript; and decision to submit
the manuscript for publication.
Additional Contributions: We thank our 2 patient
investigator raters, Alan Wu, BA, and Katura Alwyn,
BA (who received compensation from Dr Doshi’
s
faculty research funds). We also thank Deborah
Zarin, MD, for a helpful early discussion on our
study design. Dr Zarin received no compensation.
We are also grateful for data provided by the
European Medicines Agency.
REFERENCES
1. World Medical Association. Declaration of
Helsinki. Ethical Principles for Medical Research
Involving Human Subjects; 2013. https://www.wma
.net/policies-post/wma-declaration-of-helsinki
-ethical-principles-for-medical-research-involving
-human-subjects/. Accessed July 1, 2017.
2. National Commission for the Protection of
Human Subjects. Belmont Report: Ethical Principles
and Guidelines for the Protection of Human
Subjects of Research, Report of the National
Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects
of Biomedical and Behavioral Research.
US Government Printing Office; 1978.
https://videocast.nih.gov/pdf/ohrp_belmont_report
.pdf. Accessed July 1, 2017.
3. Department of Health and Human Services.
Protection of human subjects. 2009;45 CFR 46.
https://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/regulations-and-policy
/regulations/45-cfr-46/index.html. Accessed July 1,
2017.
4. Food and Drug Administration. Non-Inferiority
Clinical Trials to Establish Effectiveness: Guidance
for Industry; 2016. https://www.fda.gov/downloads
/Drugs/.../Guidances/UCM202140.pdf. Accessed
July 1, 2017.
5. Food and Drug Administration. Draft guidance
for industry on non-inferiority clinical trials;
availability. Fed Regist. 2010;75(39):9228-9229.
6. Kaul S, Diamond GA. Good enough: a primer on
the analysis and interpretation of noninferiority
trials. Ann Intern Med. 2006;145(1):62-69.
7. Fleming TR. Current issues in non-inferiority
trials. Stat Med. 2008;27(3):317-332.
8. Friedman LM, Furberg CD, DeMets DL,
Reboussin DM, Granger CB. Fundamentals of
Clinical Trials. New York, NY: Springer; 2015.
9. Government Accountability Office. New Drug
Approval: FDA’
s Consideration of Evidence from
Certain Clinical Trials (GAO-10-798); 2010.
http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d10798.pdf.
Accessed July 1, 2017.
10. Committee on Strategies for Responsible
Sharing of Clinical Trial Data, Board on Health
Sciences Policy, Institute of Medicine. Sharing
Clinical Trial Data: Maximizing Benefits, Minimizing
Risk. Washington, DC: National Academies Press;
2015.
11. Persaud N, Doshi P. North American regulatory
agencies can and should make clinical trial data
publicly available. CMAJ. 2016;188(2):96-97.
12. Doshi P, Hur P, Jones M, et al. Dataset for
"Informed Consent to Study Purpose in
Randomized Clinical Trials of Antibiotics, 1991
Through 2011". doi:10.5281/zenodo.825517
13. Higgins JPT, Green S, eds. Cochrane Handbook
for Systematic Reviews of Interventions Version 5.1.0.
The Cochrane Collaboration; 2011. http://handbook
.cochrane.org. Accessed July 1, 2017.
14. International Conference on Harmonisation of
Technical Requirements for Registration of
Pharmaceuticals for Human Use. Choice of Control
Group and Related Issues in Clinical Trials (ICH E10);
2000. http://www.ich.org/fileadmin/Public_Web
_Site/ICH_Products/Guidelines/Efficacy/E10/Step4
/E10_Guideline.pdf. Accessed July 1, 2017.
15. Food and Drug Administration. Points to
Consider: Clinical Development and Labeling of
Anti-Infective Drug Products; 1992.
https://www.fda.gov/downloads/drugs
/guidancecomplianceregulatoryinformation
/guidances/ucm070975.pdf. Accessed July 1, 2017.
16. Food and Drug Administration. Justification of
Non-Inferiority Margin for the Treatment of
Complicated Skin and Skin Structure Infections;
2002. https://www.fda.gov/ohrms/dockets/ac/08
/briefing/2008-4394b1-01-FDA.pdf. Accessed July
1, 2017.
17. Department of Health and Human Services.
Adequate and Well-Controlled Studies. 2010;21 CFR
314.126. https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/granule/CFR
-2010-title21-vol5/CFR-2010-title21-vol5-sec314
-126. Accessed July 1, 2017.
18. Nuremberg Code. Trials of War Criminals Before
the Nuremberg Military Tribunals Under Control
Council Law No. 10. vol 2; 1949:181-182.
https://www.loc.gov/rr/frd/Military_Law/pdf/NT
_war-criminals_Vol-II.pdf. Accessed July 1, 2017.
19. Djulbegovic B, Clarke M. Ethical issues in the
reporting of clinical trials. JAMA. 2001;286(13):
1577-1578.
20. Pinto VF. Non-inferiority clinical trials: concepts
and issues. J Vasc Bras. 2010;9(3):145-151.
21. Powers JH. Noninferiority and equivalence
trials: deciphering ‘
similarity’of medical
interventions. Stat Med. 2008;27(3):343-352.
22. Downing NS, Aminawung JA, Shah ND,
Krumholz HM, Ross JS. Clinical trial evidence
supporting FDA approval of novel therapeutic
agents, 2005-2012. JAMA. 2014;311(4):368-377.
23. Li Y, He Y, Sheng Y, et al. Systematic evaluation
of non-inferiority and equivalence randomized trials
of anti-infective drugs. Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther.
2013;11(12):1377-1389.
24. Djulbegovic B, Clarke M. Scientific and ethical
issues in equivalence trials. JAMA. 2001;285(9):
1206-1208.
25. Zarin DA, Tse T, Williams RJ, Carr S. Trial
reporting in ClinicalTrials.gov—the final rule. N Engl
J Med. 2016;375(20):1998-2004.
26. Casadevall A, Pirofski L-A. Microbiology: ditch
the term pathogen. Nature. 2014;516(7530):165-166.
27. Prasad P, Sun J, Danner RL, Natanson C. Excess
deaths associated with tigecycline after approval
based on noninferiority trials. Clin Infect Dis. 2012;
54(12):1699-1709.
28. Food and Drug Administration. FDA Drug
Safety Communication: FDA warns of increased risk
of death with IV antibacterial Tygacil (tigecycline)
and approves new Boxed Warning.
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety
/ucm369580.htm. Accessed December 1, 2016.
29. Food and Drug Administration. Safety Alerts
for Human Medical Products - Doribax
(doripenem): Drug Safety Communication - Risk
When Used to Treat Pneumonia on Ventilated
Patients. 2014. https://wayback.archive-it.org
/7993/20170112164151/http:/www.fda.gov/Safety
/MedWatch/SafetyInformation
/SafetyAlertsforHumanMedicalProducts
/ucm388328.htm. Accessed July 1, 2017.
30. Committee for Medicinal Products for Human
Use; Efficacy Working Party; Committee for Release
for Consultation. Committee for Medicinal Products
Research Original Investigation
Consent to Study Purpose in Randomized Clinical Trials of Antibiotics
1458
JAMA Internal Medicine
October 2017
Volume 177, Number 10
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 for Human Use (CHMP) guideline on the choice of
the non-inferiority margin. Stat Med. 2006;25(10):
1628-1638.
31. Clinton WJ, Gore A. Reinventing Regulation of
Drugs and Medical Devices. Washington, DC: National
Performance Review; 1995.
32. Schultz WB; Food and Drug Administration.
Statement regarding the demonstrations of
effectiveness of human drug products and devices.
Fed Regist. 1995;60(147):39181-39182.
33. Knottnerus BJ, Geerlings SE, Moll van Charante
EP, ter Riet G. Women with symptoms of
uncomplicated urinary tract infection are often
willing to delay antibiotic treatment: a prospective
cohort study. BMC Fam Pract. 2013;14:71.
doi:10.1186/1471-2296-14-71
Invited Commentary
What Should Patients Be Told About Noninferiority Studies?
Jerry Menikoff, MD, JD
A noninferiority trial is a study in which a new treatment is
compared with an existing, already available treatment, but
in which the statistical analysis does not evaluate the pos-
sible superiority of the new treatment. Rather, it tests
whether the new treatment
is not worse than the exist-
ing treatment, using a pre-
specified threshold for the
evaluation (the “noninferiority margin”). In this issue of
JAMA Internal Medicine, Doshi et al1 explore both what
patients are being told, and what they should be told, about
the purpose of the research when being asked to participate
in a noninferiority trial designed to test the comparative effi-
cacy and safety of antibiotics.
Doshi et al1 analyze patient informed consent forms used
in noninferiority trials and show that they are rarely clear
enough to let a patient know that the trial is a noninferiority
trial, in contrast to a superiority trial. They conclude that this
is a substantial ethical problem. But by exploring why cer-
tain types of disclosures are ethically required, we can per-
haps instead conclude that, consistent with the deeper con-
cerns raised by Doshi et al,1 the real issue here is not about
disclosing study purposes, but rather about being sure that
potential participants have received an appropriate explana-
tion of a study’
s risks.
Why is there a requirement to disclose information about
a study’
s purpose to potential participants? Certain types of
information about a study’
s purpose would be important to
many people in making a decision about whether to partici-
pate. People who have certain religious views might, for ex-
ample, not want to participate in a study about new forms of
contraceptives. Or someone might decline to participate in a
study of a “me too” drug, concluding that such a study was not
important enough to warrant participation.
On the other hand, it is not obvious that knowing that a
trial’
s purpose is to demonstrate noninferiority, as opposed to
superiority, should in a similar way be relevant to prospective
participants.Doshietal1proposespecificlanguagethatthecon-
sentformshouldcontain,whichwouldhighlightthatthestudy
istakingplaceto“determinewhetherthenew(drug)isnomore
than X% (eg, 10%) less effective than the standard treat-
ment.” They would also disclose that the new drug might be
better for certain patients (due to having, for example, fewer
adverse effects). Nonetheless, many patients reading such a
proposeddisclosurecouldcometotheconclusionthatthisnew
drug is, for the most part, not as good as the comparison drug.
Or that perhaps they should not be volunteering their time and
effort, let alone risking their health, to support this seem-
ingly marginally useful endeavor.
Would this be an accurate conclusion for why these trials
are allowed to take place with an explicit goal to test for non-
inferiority of a treatment? Probably not, and thus their pro-
poseddisclosuremightactuallymisinformpotentialstudypar-
ticipants. In fact, the leading justification for noninferiority
trials is that they serve an important purpose in correcting for
a type of study bias, and thus allowing the approval of certain
types of drugs—in particular, antibiotics that can be effective
against drug-resistant bacteria. Here, for example, is a discus-
sion of 1 aspect of these trials from a paper by the Antimicro-
bial Availability Task Force of the Infectious Diseases Society
of America that was included in a US Food and Drug Admin-
istration briefing document that Doshi et al1 themselves cite:
“Ironically, while resistance decreases the efficacy of avail-
able antimicrobial agents, it paradoxically increases the diffi-
culty of superiority testing of new antimicrobial agents be-
cause patients infected with bacteria resistant to the approved
comparator drug used in a clinical trial are excluded from en-
rollmentinthattrial.Sincetheseexcludedpatientsarethevery
patients for whom a new antimicrobial agent is likely to be su-
perior to the approved comparator drug, antimicrobial trials
are inherently biased against finding superiority of the new
agent. Therefore noninferiority (NI) trials have become the
standardmethodbywhichinvestigationalantimicrobialagents
are tested for efficacy.”2(p49)
Given the growing problem of antibiotic resistance, there
is an urgent need to be approving more antibiotics. And the
findings of Doshi et al1 themselves demonstrate that nonin-
feriority studies seem to be the accepted mechanism for ob-
taining such approvals: of the 78 trials for which they ob-
tained data, 72 (92%) were noninferiority trials.
The bottom line is that the usual justification for this type
of trial rests on fairly complicated and technical study design
issues relating to how our society chooses to allow particular
products to be approved for marketing. Regardless of whether
one fully agrees with the existing rules allowing the conduct
of such trials (such as whether using a noninferiority analysis
is the right way to correct for study bias), it does not seem rea-
sonable to ask a participant to try to understand the compli-
cated debate in the research community about whether these
trials should even be allowed.
Related article page 1452
Consent to Study Purpose in Randomized Clinical Trials of Antibiotics
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
October 2017
Volume 177, Number 10
1459
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
