 The Role of Intrinsic Brain Functional Connectivity in
Vulnerability and Resilience to Bipolar Disorder
Gaelle E. Doucet, Ph.D., Danielle S. Bassett, Ph.D., Nailin Yao, Ph.D., David C. Glahn, Ph.D., Sophia Frangou, M.D., Ph.D.
Objective: Bipolar disorder is a heritable disorder character-
ized by mood dysregulation associated with brain functional
dysconnectivity. Previous research has focused on the de-
tection of risk- and disease-associated dysconnectivity in
individuals with bipolar disorder and their first-degree rela-
tives. The present study seeks to identify adaptive brain con-
nectivity features associated with resilience, defined here as
avoidance of illness or delayed illness onset in unaffected
siblings of patients with bipolar disorder.
Method: Graph theoretical methods were used to examine
global and regional brain network topology in head-motion-
corrected resting-state functional MRI data acquired from
78 patients with bipolar disorder, 64 unaffected siblings, and
41 healthy volunteers.
Results: Global network properties were preserved in patients
and their siblings while both groups showed reductions in the
cohesiveness of the sensorimotor network. In the patient
group, these sensorimotor network abnormalities were cou-
pled with reduced integration of core default mode network
regions in the ventromedial cortex and hippocampus. Con-
versely,integrationofthedefaultmodenetworkwasincreased
in the sibling group compared with both the patient group and
the healthy volunteer group.
Conclusions: Theauthorsfoundthattrait-relatedvulnerability
to bipolar disorder was associated with reduced resting-state
cohesiveness of the sensorimotor network in patients with
bipolar disorder. However, integration of the default mode
network emerged as a key feature differentiating disease ex-
pression and resilience between the patients and their siblings.
This is indicative of the presence of neural mechanisms that
may promote resilience, or at least delay illness onset.
AmJPsychiatry2017;174:1214–1222;doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2017.17010095
Bipolar disorder is characterized by mood dysregulation
associated with alterations in brain connectivity. Resting-
state functional MRI (fMRI) studies in bipolar disorder have
shown that disease mechanisms influence intrinsic connectivity,
including that of the default mode, sensorimotor, and central
executive networks (1–3). Imbalance between the functional
connectivity of the sensorimotor and default mode networks
has been directly linked with the clinical expression of bipolar
disorder, as illustrated in a recent study (2) that found the
sensorimotor and default mode networks showing opposite
variability patterns during depressive and manic episodes.
Bipolar disorder is highly heritable (4), but the pathway
from genetic risk to clinical symptoms is not fully understood.
Siblings of patients have about a 10-fold higher risk than the
general population, with the mean weighted prevalence of
bipolar disorder (all subtypes included) in siblings estimated
at 11.9% (5). Disease expression and familial risk for bipolar
disorder influence the functional connectivity of brain regions
involved mainly in the default mode network, the mesolimbic
network, and the central executive network (1, 3, 6). These
neural systems–level alterations in individuals with a familial
risk of bipolar disorder are thought to occupy an intermedi-
ate location on the path from genetic risk to disorder (3, 7).
However, despite harboring risk-related features, a significant
proportion of relatives remain psychiatrically well. In addition,
there is emerging evidence that some measures of brain func-
tional (8–10) and structural connectivity (9, 11) appear to index
the avoidance or delayed onset of bipolar disorder in unaffected
siblings,suggestingthatthesemeasuresmayinvolvemechanisms
that actively counteract risk. Unaffected relatives may develop
psychiatric morbidity at some future point, but as long as they
remain well, they may manifest protective changes in brain
connectivity. We consider such measures as indicators of
“resilience” in relation to avoidance or delayed disease onset.
Here we describe a graph theoretical approach that seeks to
disambiguate brain features of risk, disease expression, and
resiliencetobipolardisorder.Graphtheorymodelsthebrainasa
graph with regions and their connections represented as nodes
and edges; its advantage over conventional approaches is that it
offers tools to evaluate brain connectivity at the global and
See related features: CME course (p. 1233) and AJP Audio (online)
1214
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
Am J Psychiatry 174:12, December 2017
ARTICLES
 regional levels in accordance with the multiscale nature of human
brain architecture (12). We obtained resting-state fMRI data
from patients with bipolar disorder, their unaffected siblings,
and demographically matched unrelated healthy individuals. This
design enabled us to characterize trait-related changes in brain
connectivityassociated with vulnerabilityand disease expression
in bipolar disorder. We focused on 1) global connectivity, assessed
by measures of global efficiency and characteristic path length
(two measures of network integration), clustering coefficient (a
measureofnetworksegregation),andsmall-worldness(ameasure
of the balance between segregation and integration); 2) mesoscale
connectivity, assessed by network modularity over a range of
spatial scales; and 3) regional connectivity, assessed by nodal de-
gree (a measure of a region’s putative influence on the network)
and participation coefficient (a measure of the extent to which a
given node connects to nodes in modules other than its own).
METHOD
Sample
Patients with bipolar I disorder (N=78), their unaffected
siblings (N=64), and unrelated healthy volunteers (N=41)
were recruited from psychiatric facilities and community
advertisements in Hartford, Conn. (Further details on re-
cruitment and assessment are provided in the data supple-
ment that accompanies the online edition of this article.)
Patients were included if they met DSM-IV criteria for
bipolar I disorder based on the Structured Clinical Interview
for DSM-IV disorders; had no current substance abuse or
dependence; had no history of major medical or neurological
conditions; had an IQ .80; and had a sibling willing to
participate in the study. Eligibility criteria for siblings and
unrelated healthy volunteers were identical to those for pa-
tients, with the exception of a personal diagnosis of bipolar
or psychosis spectrum disorders. In addition, unrelated
healthy volunteers could not have a family history of mood or
psychotic disorders. The three groups were matched on sex,
age, IQ, and head motion during scanning. Table 1 sum-
marizes the participants’ characteristics (for head motion,
see Table S1 in the online data supplement). All participants
provided informed consent as approved by the institutional
review board at Hartford Hospital and Yale University.
Given the pooled estimates of 11.9% (SD=4) for the prev-
alence of bipolar disorder in siblings of patients (5), three to
12 siblings might convert at some future point, within a 95%
confidence interval. Moreover, most of the siblings in this
sample have gone past the critical risk period because of their
age, since the risk of bipolar disorder after age 30 is very low
(13). In addition, siblings and patients have remained discor-
dant for a mean period of 15 years, which further reduces
the likelihood of disease transition in the healthy siblings (see
the onlinedatasupplementforadditionalanalyses assessingthe
resilience of the siblings).
Neuroimaging
All MRI scans were collected at the Olin Neuropsychiatry
ResearchCenter,InstituteofLiving,HartfordHospital,usinga
research-dedicated Siemens Allegra 3-T scanner. Details of
MRI acquisition and preprocessing, including motion cor-
rection and parcellation into regions of interest using a
validated template (14, 15), are provided in the online data
supplement. For each participant, the mean blood-oxygen-
level-dependent time course of each region of interest was
computed by averaging the time series of all voxels within
that region. A matrix (6203620) was created for each par-
ticipant by computing the Pearson correlation coefficients
between time courses for each pair of regions of interest.
Correlations were then Fisher r-to-z transformed.
Computation of global and regional connectivity measures.
These measures were estimated using MATLAB code in the
BrainConnectivityToolbox(www.brain-connectivity-toolbox.
net). To compute each measure, a series of binarized matrices
were produced using different thresholds, ranging from the top 1%
to 50% of all connections, in increments of 1%, because network
measuresarelesspronetononbiologicalartifactsandnoiseinthis
density range (16). Negative correlations were set to zero, ex-
cluding an average of 42% of the connections (range, 20%–49%).
Global network measures included global efficiency and
characteristic path length, two measures of network in-
tegration; clustering coefficient, a measure of network seg-
regation; small-worldness, a measure of the balance between
integration and segregation; and network robustness to
targeted and random attack. Regional measures included
nodal degree, equal to the number of links between a node
and other nodes; and participation coefficient, a measure
of intermodule connectivity. To correct for movement arti-
facts, the averaged head motion was regressed out from the
graph-metric values. Detaileddefinitions of each measureare
provided in the online data supplement.
Functionaldataanalysiswasusedtoassessgroupdifferences
(17). This analysis is a statistical method that treats a metric
curve as a function of the connection density. For each signif-
icant metric, we computed the average curve for each group
separately (with threshold density on the x-axis and graph
metrics on the y-axis). We then computed the area between the
two curves (associated with the two groups) by summing the
differences between the y values (graph-metric values) of the
two groups at each value of x (corresponding to the connection
densities).Thedifferencebetweenthetwogroupswastestedfor
significanceusing nonparametric permutation testing, whereby
the group identity of each individual was randomly reassigned
withoutreplacement.Averagecurvesforthetwopseudogroups
were determined, and the area between the two curves was
estimated.Thisprocess was repeated 5,000 times to create a
set of 5,000 curve differences values. The p value of the true
group difference was defined as the number of times the
random curve values were greater than the true curve value,
divided by the number of iterations.
Computation of mesoscale measures (brain modularity).
We used a validated Louvain-like locally greedy algorithm
implemented in MATLAB (18) to partition the resting-state
Am J Psychiatry 174:12, December 2017
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
1215
DOUCET ET AL.
 data of each participant into networks (i.e., groups of brain
regions with dense functional interconnectivity) and extract
the constituent modules. Details of the procedure and com-
putations involved are provided in the online data supple-
ment. For each individual, we extracted the number, size, and
structure of the modules, and wecomputed the Z-score of the
Rand coefficient, an index of topological similarity between
each individual partition and the average normative partition
(derived from the healthy volunteers) (19). Lastly, we cal-
culated the within-module and between-module functional
connectivity for each individual (20). Within-module con-
nectivity is the mean strength of the functional connectivity
within a module M, and between-module connectivity is the
mean strength of functional connectivity between a module
and all other modules. To correct for movement artifacts, the
averaged head motion was regressed out and the residuals
were entered into Kruskal-Wallis tests to assess group dif-
ferences for each measure.
For the global and mesoscale level analyses, we first tested
for an effect of group (patients, siblings, healthy volunteers),
setting the threshold for statistical significance at the 5% level
using false discovery rate correction (21). When indicated, we
conducted post hoc pairwise analyses to test for differences in
connectivity metrics between the three groups at p,0.05. For
the regional level, the significant values were set at p,0.05
followingpermutationtesting.Whenpairwisedifferenceswere
significant, we provided estimates of effect size (Cohen’s d).
All connectivity analyses were conducted twice, with and
without regressing the effect of age and sex; additional anal-
yses were undertaken to examine the effect of medication
and clinical features. These calculations are described in
detail in the online data supplement, as they did not have an
impact on the results.
RESULTS
Global Connectivity
No significant group differences were observed in any of the
global graph-theory metrics, even at an uncorrected p thresh-
old of 0.05 (Figure 1), including network robustness to random
and targeted attack (see Figure S2 in the data supplement).
Mesoscale Connectivity (Brain Modularity)
Consistent with previous research (20), we identified four
major networks: the default mode network, the central exec-
utive network, the sensorimotor network, and the visual net-
work (Figure 2D). There were no significant group differences
in the number (Figure 2A), size (Figure 2B), orstructure(based
on the Z-rand similarity index) (Figure 2C) of the modules at
any spatial scale tested (as titrated by the structural resolution
TABLE 1. Demographic and Clinical Characteristics of Patients With Bipolar Disorder, Unaffected Siblings, and Healthy Volunteers in a
Study of Brain Connectivity in Vulnerability and Resilience to Bipolar Disordera
Measure
Patients With Bipolar Disorder
(N=78)
Unaffected Siblings (N=64)
Healthy Volunteers (N=41)
N
%
N
%
N
%
Demographic characteristics
Female
52
67
37
58
28
68
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
Age (years)
34
13
32
13
33
12
Age at illness onset (years)
19
7
Illness duration (years)
15
12
Education (years)
14
2
15
2
15
2
Full-scale IQ
105
17
104
20
108
17
Clinical measures
Brief Psychiatric Rating Scaleb
32.7
8.7
25.7
2
24.6
1.2
Hamilton Depression Rating Scaleb
7.4
7.3
1.2
1.7
0.5
0.9
Young Mania Rating Scaleb
5.7
6.8
0.6
1.1
0.2
0.6
N
%
N
%
N
%
Non-bipolar diagnoses
Previous substance abuse
1
1
14
22
4
10
Posttraumatic stress disorder
0
0
2
3
1
2
Anxiety disorder
0
0
3
5
0
0
Major depressive disorder
0
0
1
2
0
0
Medicationsc
Antidepressant
22
28
6
9
1
2
Antipsychotic
24
31
3
5
0
0
Mood stabilizer (lithium)
34
44
0
0
0
0
Multiple agents ($3)
12
15
0
0
0
0
None
15
19
57
89
40
98
a No significant differences between groups except as otherwise noted.
b Significant difference between groups (,0.001), patients . siblings = healthy volunteers.
c Medication percentages do not add up to 100 because some participants were on multiple agents.
1216
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
Am J Psychiatry 174:12, December 2017
BRAIN CONNECTIVITY IN VULNERABILITY AND RESILIENCE TO BIPOLAR DISORDER
 parameter), even at an uncorrected p threshold of 0.05. In
contrast, there was a significant group effect for within-module
connectivityforthesensorimotornetwork(Kruskal-Wallispost
hoctest:H=13.1,p=0.01).Within-moduleconnectivityreduction
was associated with familial risk for bipolar disorder, as it was
reduced both in individuals with bipolar disorder (H=231.9,
p=0.005, Bonferroni corrected; Cohen’s d=0.58) and their
siblings (H=235.8, p=0.002, Bonferroni corrected; Cohen’s
d=0.57) compared with healthy volunteers (see Figure S3 in the
data supplement).
Regional Connectivity
Wefoundgroupdifferencesinnodaldegreeandparticipation
coefficient, primarily in regions that are part of the sensorimotor
anddefaultmodenetworks(Figure3),asdetailedinTablesS2
and S3 and Figure S4 in the data supplement. Specifically,
disease expression was associated with connectivity changes
that differentiated patients both from their siblings and
healthy volunteers; patients showed 1) increased nodal de-
gree in higher-order cortical regions (supplementary motor
area, middle frontal gyrus, supramarginal gyrus) and the
ventromedial prefrontal cortex (medial frontal gyrus) and
2) reduced participation coefficient of the ventromedial
prefrontal cortex and the hippocampus. The connectivity
changes that are common in patients and siblings were
considered as evidence of shared familial risk that define a
state of vulnerability to bipolar disorder but are not suffi-
cient for disease expression. Both patients and their siblings
showed 1) reduced nodal degree and increased participation
coefficient in regions of the sensorimotor network (pre- and
postcentral gyri, paracentral lobule) and 2) increased nodal
degree in higher-order visual processing regions (inferior
temporal cortex). Connectivity changes uniquely associated
withresiliencewereobservedwithinthedefaultmodenetwork
FIGURE 1. Global Topological Measures of the Brain in Patients With Bipolar Disorder, Unaffected Siblings, and Healthy Volunteersa
Density Thresholds (%)
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Clustering Coefficient
A. Average Clustering Coefficient
Density Thresholds (%)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Global Efficiency
B. Global Efficiency
Density Thresholds (%)
0
2
4
6
8
Characteristic Path Length
C. Characteristic Path Length
Density Thresholds (%)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Small-Worldness
D. Small-Worldness
20
0
40
60
20
0
40
60
20
0
40
60
20
0
40
60
Patients with bipolar disorder (N=78)
Unaffected siblings (N=64)
Healthy volunteers (N=41)
a Confidence intervals on the curves represent one standard deviation. The graphs show average clustering coefficient, global efficiency, characteristic
path length, and small-worldness as a function of connection density. There were no significant differences between groups after correction for false
discovery rate.
Am J Psychiatry 174:12, December 2017
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
1217
DOUCET ET AL.
 regions (the ventral anterior
cingulate cortex, the angular
gyrus, and the precuneus),
where siblings showed in-
creased participation coefficient
compared with both patients
and healthy volunteers.
Because of the association
between familial liability and
change in functional connec-
tivity in the sensorimotor net-
work in patients and siblings,
we tested whether this was
also reflected in terms of motor
control based on the Barratt
Impulsiveness Scale (22) score.
This scale is composed of 30
items clustered into three main
factors: attentional, motor, and
nonplanning. Each factor has
two subdomains: attentional
focus and cognitive instability;
motor impulsiveness and motor
perseverance; and self-control
and cognitive complexity. We
found that patients had signif-
icantly higher scores than both
their siblings and the healthy
volunteers across all factors.
The only difference between
siblings and healthy volunteers
was that siblings had higher
motor impulsiveness scores
(see Figure S5 in the data
supplement).
Additional analyses were
conducted to test resilience in
the siblings, correlation be-
tween the imaging metrics and
psychopathology, effects of
medications, and the reliability
oftheresults.Allaredescribedin
the data supplement.
DISCUSSION
We characterized the topo-
logical organization and net-
work modularity of the brain
during the resting-state con-
dition in patients with bipo-
lar disorder, their unaffected
siblings, and unrelated healthy
volunteers. We found that
disease expression, risk, and
resilience to bipolar disorder
FIGURE 2. Brain Modularity in Patients With Bipolar Disorder, Unaffected Siblings, and
Healthy Volunteersa
a Panels A–C are violin plots displaying the number of clusters, the size of the largest cluster, and the topological
similarity (Z-score of Rand coefficient) as a function of the resolution parameter ɣ. Panel D illustrates the brain
modularity at ɣ=1 for the healthy volunteer group (based on the averaged functional connectivity matrix within
thegroup).Theorangemodulecoversthesensorimotornetwork,thegreenmodulecoversthecentralexecutive
network, the blue module covers the default mode network, and the brown module covers the visual network.
No significant differences between groups were found after correction for false discovery rate.
1218
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
Am J Psychiatry 174:12, December 2017
BRAIN CONNECTIVITY IN VULNERABILITY AND RESILIENCE TO BIPOLAR DISORDER
 were associated with mesoscale and regional changes pri-
marily in the default mode and sensorimotor networks, while
global network properties appeared to be conserved both in
patients and their siblings (Figure 4).
We found that global network properties in bipolar disorder
were preserved in a manner consistent with previous studies
examining the structural connectome topology (23) and the
global resting-state fMRI signal power and variance in patients
with bipolar disorder (24). This contrasts with findings in
schizophrenia, where increased global signal variance and net-
work randomization have been reported in patients (24) and
their unaffected relatives (25). Although schizophrenia and bi-
polar disorder have overlapping clinical phenotypes and genetic
risk factors (4, 26), preserved global brain organization in bi-
polar disorder may represent a major difference between the
two disorders. This observation aligns with replicated reports of
preservedpremorbidandacademicperformanceinpatientswith
bipolardisorder(27)andsuperioracademicperformanceintheir
relatives (28), which is not the case for schizophrenia (27, 28).
Our results suggest that mechanisms related to vulnera-
bility to bipolar disorder affect brain organization at the
mesoscale and at the regional level and that they particularly
disrupt the connectivity of sensorimotor regions. Typically
the sensorimotor network shows high within-system con-
nectivity and relatively low integration with the rest of the
brain (20). This connectomic signature is characteristic of
“cohesive provincial” networks that are dedicated to the
specialized processing of sensory stimuli and motor re-
sponses. In the present study, patients and relatives showed
decreased within-module connectivity (indicative of re-
duced network cohesiveness) coupled with increased in-
teraction of sensorimotor regions with regions outside
their module (indicative of greater integration). In other
words, the sensorimotor network in bipolar disorder behaves
as an incohesive connector network which likely disrupts the
processing of sensorimotor information within the brain. It is
surprising that research to date has largely overlooked the
evidence for sensorimotor dysfunction in bipolar disorder
FIGURE 3. Altered Local Brain Topological Measures in Patients With Bipolar Disorder and Unaffected Siblings Relative to
Healthy Volunteersa
BD < HV
BD & SIB < HV
SIB < HV
BD < HV
BD > HV
BD & SIB > HV
SIB > HV
A. Decreased Nodal Degree
B. Increased Nodal Degree
C. Decreased Participation Coefficient
D. Increased Participation Coefficient
BD & SIB > HV
SIB > HV
a Panel A shows reduced nodal degree in patients with bipolar disorder (BD, N=78) and unaffected siblings (SIB, N=64) relative to healthy volunteers (HV,
N=41). Panel B shows increased nodal degree in patients with bipolar disorder and unaffected siblings relative to healthy volunteers. Panel C shows
reduced participation coefficient in patients with bipolar disorder relative to healthy volunteers. Panel D shows increased participation coefficient
in patients with bipolar disorder and unaffected siblings relative to healthy volunteers. Significant difference between groups (p,0.05, following
5,000 permutations).
Am J Psychiatry 174:12, December 2017
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
1219
DOUCET ET AL.
 given that abnormalities in motor and sensory processing are
included in the diagnostic criteria for manic and depressive
episodes. Complementing our findings, a large recent study
(29) has reported reduced intracortical myelination in pa-
tients with bipolar disorder predominantly in the sensori-
motorregions.Furtherstudieshavefoundabnormallyreduced
motor coordination, sensory integration, sensory gating, and
selective attention in patients with bipolar disorder and their
unaffected relatives (30, 31). In our data, increased motor
impulsiveness was also associatedwithdiseaseexpression and
risk for bipolar disorder, consistent with the connectivity
changes in the sensorimotor network observed in patients and
siblings.
The findings of this study underscore the role of regional
default mode network connectivity in disease expression
and resilience to bipolar disorder. Regional connectivity was
evaluated using nodal degree and participation coefficient.
Nodal degree is a measure of general connectedness, and
participation coefficient is a measure of intermodular in-
tegration of individual brain regions. Typically, the default
mode network regions show high within-network cohe-
siveness (high nodal degree) coupled with high between-
network integration (high participation coefficient) (20, 32).
These properties allow the default mode network to act as a
“cohesive connector” and thus support a wide range of brain
functions (20,32).Consistentwithpreviousreports ofdefault
mode network dysconnectivity in bipolar disorder (33, 34),
we found that patients had abnormally reduced inter-
modular integration of two core regions of the default mode
network—the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and hippo-
campus. In healthy individuals, hippocampal-midbrain
connectivity supports reward-based learning and mem-
ory, and hippocampal-amygdala connectivity underpins
contextually appropriate assignment of affective value and
behavioral response selection (35). A similar role is con-
ventionally attributed to the ventromedial prefrontal cortex
in the regulation of the evaluative, expressive, and experi-
ential aspects of emotion (36). Reduction in the integrative
role of the hippocampus and ventromedial prefrontal cortex
likely leads to impairment in stimulus appraisal and in con-
textually appropriate response selection. Moreover, the re-
duction of the integrative role of the default mode network,
when considered together with the findings of the sensori-
motor network dysconnectivity described above, supports
the study by Martino et al. (2), who found that the balance
between activity patterns of the default mode and sensori-
motor networks was altered during acute episodes, favoring
the default mode network in depression and the sensorimo-
tor network in mania. Our observations suggest that a dys-
function of the default mode and sensorimotor networks is
also present during interepisode intervals. The character-
ization of the cellular correlates of reduced default mode
network integration is beyond the resolution of fMRI.
Nevertheless, the present results are congruent with im-
paired neuronal plasticity and may be causally linked to the
reduction in GABAergic and glutamatergic receptors re-
ported in postmortem studies of bipolar patients (37, 38).
In contrast to patients, siblings had high participation
coefficients in multiple regions of the default mode network
that were even higher than those of the healthy volunteers.
We infer that enhanced integration of the default mode net-
work may represent an adaptive response to the dysconnec-
tivity of the sensorimotor network observed in siblings
and may thus be conducive to resilience (or at least delayed
illness onset). This interpretation is speculative pending
confirmation by longitudinal studies. Although one might
consider increased integration of the default mode network
as a prodromal marker for bipolar disorder, this is unlikely given
the low risk for conversion in siblings, as discussed earlier,
and in greater depth in the data supplement.
We took great care in minimizing potential head motion
artifacts based on strict inclusion criteria, in addition to re-
gressing out the average head motion from all of our metrics.
The construction of brain graphs from fMRI data requires
multiple methodological choices. We confirmed the robust-
nessofourkeyresultsusingalternativeapproaches,asdetailed
in the data supplement (including in Figure S6). Longitudinal
studies of high-risk individuals are needed to confirm the
association between default mode network connectivity
and resilience and to test whether the clinical symptoms of
bipolar disorder arise as a result of failure to either develop or
maintain enhanced default mode network integration.
FIGURE 4. Schematic Model of Network Organization in
Patients With Bipolar Disorder, Unaffected Siblings, and
Healthy Volunteersa
Sensorimotor network
Default mode network
Visual network
Reduced cohesiveness
Increased cohesiveness
Reduced integration of 
network
Increased integration of 
network
A. Healthy Volunteers
B. Patients With 
 
Bipolar Disorder
C. Unaffected Siblings
a The figure shows the three major networks, demonstrating differences
in topology between groups. Changes in integration are based on re-
sults from the participation coefficient and between-module func-
tional connectivity; changes in cohesiveness are based on results
from the nodal degree and within-module functional connectivity.
1220
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
Am J Psychiatry 174:12, December 2017
BRAIN CONNECTIVITY IN VULNERABILITY AND RESILIENCE TO BIPOLAR DISORDER
 In summary, we found that the pathophysiology of bipolar
disorder is characterized by abnormalities in regional—and not
global—network properties, mainly affecting the default mode
and sensorimotor networks. Enhanced default mode network
integration was observed in unaffected siblings, which may
have mitigated the effects of risk-related dysconnectivity in the
sensorimotor network. The latter observation has the potential
to open up avenues toward uncovering protective neural
mechanisms and thus inform novel interventions to prevent
or modify the course of bipolar disorder. Studies in neu-
rological patients (e.g., 39) and healthy individuals (e.g., 40)
suggest that both the default mode and sensorimotor net-
works may be amenable to plasticity-enhancing interven-
tions. Future empirical studies may help define the types
of plasticity-dependent interventions that might prove use-
ful in bipolar disorder based on the spontaneous adaptive
changes seen in resilient relatives.
AUTHOR AND ARTICLE INFORMATION
From the Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York; the Department of Bioengineering and the Depart-
ment of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia; the Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, Conn.; and the Olin Neuropsychiatric Institute,
Institute of Living, Hartford Hospital, Hartford, Conn.
Address correspondence to Dr. Frangou (sophia.frangou@mssm.edu).
Drs. Glahn and Frangou are joint senior authors.
Dr. Frangou received support from NIH grant R01 MH104284-01A1. Dr.
Glahn received support from NIH grant R01 MH080912. Dr. Bassett ac-
knowledges support from the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foun-
dation, the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the Army Research Laboratory and
the Army Research Office through contracts W911NF-10-2-0022 and
W911NF-14-1-0679, NIMH grant 2R01-DC-009209-11, National Institute
of Child Health and Human Development grant 1R01HD086888-01, the
Office of Naval Research, and grants BCS-1441502, BCS-1430087, and
PHY-1554488 from the National Science Foundation.
The authors report no financial relationships with commercial interests.
Received Jan. 24, 2017; revisions received March 21 and May 2, 2017;
accepted May 18, 2017; published online Aug. 18, 2017.
REFERENCES
1. Mamah D, Barch DM, Repov�
s G: Resting state functional connec-
tivityoffiveneuralnetworksinbipolardisorderandschizophrenia.J
Affect Disord 2013; 150:601–609
2. Martino M, Magioncalda P, Huang Z, et al: Contrasting variability
patterns in the default mode and sensorimotor networks balance in
bipolar depression and mania. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2016; 113:
4824–4829
3. MedaSA,RuañoG, Windemuth A,etal:Multivariateanalysisreveals
geneticassociationsoftherestingdefaultmodenetworkinpsychotic
bipolar disorder and schizophrenia. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2014;
111:E2066–E2075
4. LichtensteinP,YipBH,BjörkC,etal:Commongeneticdeterminants
of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder in Swedish families: a
population-based study. Lancet 2009; 373:234–239
5. Goodwin FK, Jamison KR: Manic-Depressive Illness: Bipolar Disor-
ders and Recurrent Depression, 2nd ed. New York, Oxford University
Press, 2007
6. Baker JT, Holmes AJ, Masters GA, et al: Disruption of cortical as-
sociation networks in schizophrenia and psychotic bipolar disorder.
JAMA Psychiatry 2014; 71:109–118
7. Fusar-Poli P, Howes O, Bechdolf A, et al: Mapping vulnerability to
bipolar disorder: a systematic review and meta-analysis of neuro-
imaging studies. J Psychiatry Neurosci 2012; 37:170–184
8. Dima D, Roberts RE, Frangou S: Connectomic markers of disease
expression, genetic risk, and resilience in bipolar disorder. Transl
Psychiatry 2016; 6:e706
9. Frangou S: Brain structural and functional correlates of resilience to
bipolar disorder. Front Hum Neurosci 2012; 5:184
10. PompeiF,Dima D, Rubia K, et al: Dissociable functional connectivity
changesduringtheStrooptaskrelatingtorisk,resilience,anddisease
expression in bipolar disorder. Neuroimage 2011; 57:576–582
11. Collin G, van den Heuvel MP, Abramovic L, et al: Brain network
analysis reveals affected connectome structure in bipolar I disorder.
Hum Brain Mapp 2016; 37:122–134
12. Rubinov M, Sporns O: Complex network measures of brain connec-
tivity: uses and interpretations. Neuroimage 2010; 52:1059–1069
13. Leboyer M, Bellivier F, McKeon P, et al: Age at onset and gender
resemblance in bipolar siblings. Psychiatry Res 1998; 81:125–131
14. Crossley NA, Mechelli A, Vértes PE, et al: Cognitive relevance of the
community structure of the human brain functional coactivation
network. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2013; 110:11583–11588
15. Zalesky A, Fornito A, Harding IH, et al: Whole-brain anatomical
networks: does the choice of nodes matter? Neuroimage 2010; 50:
970–983
16. KaiserM,HilgetagCC:Nonoptimalcomponentplacement,butshort
processing paths, due to long-distance projectionsin neural systems.
PLOS Comput Biol 2006; 2:e95
17. Ramsay JO, Silverman BW: Functional Data Analysis. New York,
Springer, 2005
18. Jutla IS, Jeub LGS, Mucha P: A generalized Louvain method for
communitydetectionimplementedinMATLAB(2011–2012).http://
netwiki.amath.unc.edu/GenLouvain/GenLouvain
19. Traud A, Kelsic ED, Mucha PJ, et al: Comparing community
structure to characteristics in online collegiate social networks.
SIAM Review 2011; 53:526–543
20. Gu S, Satterthwaite TD, Medaglia JD, et al: Emergence of system
roles in normative neurodevelopment. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2015;
112:13681–13686
21. Genovese CR, Lazar NA, Nichols T: Thresholding of statistical maps
in functional neuroimaging using the false discovery rate. Neuro-
image 2002; 15:870–878
22. Patton JH, Stanford MS, Barratt ES: Factor structure of the Barratt
impulsiveness scale. J Clin Psychol 1995; 51:768–774
23. CollinG,KahnRS,deReusMA,etal: Impairedrichclubconnectivity
inunaffectedsiblingsofschizophreniapatients.SchizophrBull2014;
40:438–448
24. Yang GJ, Murray JD, Repovs G, et al: Altered global brain signal in
schizophrenia. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2014; 111:7438–7443
25. Lo CY, Su TW, Huang CC, et al: Randomization and resilience of
brain functional networks as systems-level endophenotypes of
schizophrenia. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2015; 112:9123–9128
26. Pearlson GD: Etiologic, phenomenologic, and endophenotypic
overlap of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Annu Rev Clin
Psychol 2015; 11:251–281
27. MacCabe JH, Lambe MP, Cnattingius S, et al: Scholastic achieve-
ment at age 16 and risk of schizophrenia and other psychoses: a
national cohort study. Psychol Med 2008; 38:1133–1140
28. Vreeker A, Boks MP, Abramovic L, et al: High educational perfor-
manceisadistinctivefeatureofbipolardisorder:astudyoncognition
in bipolar disorder, schizophrenia patients, relatives, and controls.
Psychol Med 2016; 46:807–818
29. Jørgensen KN, Nerland S, Norbom LB, et al: Increased MRI-based
cortical grey/white-matter contrast in sensory and motor regions
in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Psychol Med 2016; 46:1971–1985
30. Giakoumaki SG, Roussos P, Rogdaki M, et al: Evidence of disrupted
prepulse inhibition in unaffected siblings of bipolar disorder pa-
tients. Biol Psychiatry 2007; 62:1418–1422
Am J Psychiatry 174:12, December 2017
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
1221
DOUCET ET AL.
 31. Mrad A, Wassim Krir M, Ajmi I, et al: Neurological soft signs in
euthymic bipolar I patients: a comparative study with healthy sib-
lings and controls. Psychiatry Res 2016; 236:173–178
32. Buckner RL, Andrews-Hanna JR, Schacter DL: The brain’s default
network: anatomy, function, and relevance to disease. Ann N Y Acad
Sci 2008; 1124:1–38
33. Meda SA, Gill A, Stevens MC, et al: Differences in resting-state
functional magnetic resonance imaging functional network connec-
tivity between schizophrenia and psychotic bipolar probands and their
unaffected first-degree relatives. Biol Psychiatry 2012; 71:881–889
34. Ongür D, Lundy M, Greenhouse I, et al: Default mode network
abnormalities in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia. Psychiatry Res
2010; 183:59–68
35. LeDoux JA: Cognitive-emotional interactions in the brain. Cogn
Emot 1989; 3:267–289
36. Phillips ML, Drevets WC, Rauch SL, et al: Neurobiology of emotion
perception, I: the neural basis of normal emotion perception. Biol
Psychiatry 2003; 54:504–514
37. Beneyto M, Kristiansen LV, Oni-Orisan A, et al: Abnormal glutamate
receptor expression in the medial temporal lobe in schizophrenia and
mood disorders. Neuropsychopharmacology 2007; 32:1888–1902
38. Heckers S, StoneD,Walsh J,et al: Differential hippocampal expression
of glutamic acid decarboxylase 65 and 67 messenger RNA in bipolar
disorder and schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2002; 59:521–529
39. Maniglia M, Pavan A, Sato G, et al: Perceptual learning leads to long
lasting visual improvement in patients with central vision loss.
Restor Neurol Neurosci 2016; 34:697–720
40. Ge R, Zhang H, YaoL, et al: Motorimagerylearninginducedchanges
in functional connectivity of the default mode network. IEEE Trans
Neural Syst Rehabil Eng 2015; 23:138–148
1222
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
Am J Psychiatry 174:12, December 2017
BRAIN CONNECTIVITY IN VULNERABILITY AND RESILIENCE TO BIPOLAR DISORDER
