 CDC Guideline for Prescribing Opioids for Chronic Pain—United 
States, 2016
Deborah Dowell, MD, MPH, Tamara M. Haegerich, PhD, and Roger Chou, MD
Corresponding Author: Deborah Dowell, MD, MPH, Division of Unintentional Injury Prevention, National Center for Injury 
Prevention and Control, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 4770 Buford Hwy NE, Atlanta, GA 30341, (ddowell@cdc.gov).
Author Contributions: Drs Dowell and Chou had full access to all of the data in the study and take responsibility for the integrity of 
the data and the accuracy of the data analysis.
Study concept and design: Dowell, Haegerich.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: Dowell, Haegerich, Chou.
Drafting of the manuscript: Dowell, Haegerich, Chou.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content: Dowell, Haegerich, Chou.
Statistical analysis: Chou.
Administrative, technical, or material support: Haegerich.
Study supervision: Dowell, Haegerich.
Additional Contributions: We acknowledge Jeanmarie Perrone, MD, Matthew Bair, MD, and David Tauben, MD, for conducting 
initial peer reviews of the guideline for the CDC prior to journal submission; peer reviewers were not compensated for their 
contributions. We acknowledge Don Teater, MD, for facilitating the Core Expert Group. We acknowledge the work that the medical 
writers, editors, and reviewers from Ariande Labs provided to produce the checklist for prescribing opioids for chronic pain.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors have completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of 
Interest. Drs Dowell and Haegerich are employees of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Dr Chou was supported under 
contract through a detail at CDC. No other disclosures were reported.
Core Expert Group: Pam Archer, MPH, Oklahoma State Department of Health; Jane Ballantyne, MD, University of Washington 
(retired); Amy Bohnert, MHS, PhD, University of Michigan; Bonnie Burman, ScD, Ohio Department on Aging; Roger Chou, MD, on 
detail to CDC under contract; Phillip Coffin, MD, MIA, University of California, San Francisco; Gary Franklin, MD, MPH, 
Washington State Department of Labor and Industries/University of Washington; Erin Krebs, MD, MPH, Minneapolis VA Health Care 
System/University of Minnesota; Mitchel Mutter, MD, Tennessee Department of Health; Lewis Nelson, MD, New York University 
School of Medicine; Trupti Patel, MD, Arizona Department of Health Services; Christina A. Porucznik, PhD, MSPH, University of 
Utah; Robert “Chuck” Rich, MD, American Academy of Family Physicians; Joanna Starrels, MD, MS, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine of Yeshiva University; Michael Steinman, MD, Society of General Internal Medicine; Thomas Tape, MD, American College 
of Physicians; Judith Turner, PhD, University of Washington. No compensation was received for serving as a member of the Core 
Expert Group. Disclosures may be found in the primary MMWR publication.
Stakeholder Review Group: American Academy of Neurology, John Markman, MD; American Academy of Pain Management, Bob 
Twillman, PhD; American Academy of Pain Medicine, Edward C. Covington, MD; American Academy of Pediatrics, Roger F. 
Suchyta, MD; American Academy of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Kavitha V. Neerukonda, JD, MHA; American Cancer 
Society Cancer Action Network, Mark Fleury, PhD; American Chronic Pain Association, Penney Cowan; American College of 
Medical Toxicology, David Juurlink, BPharm, MD, PhD; American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Gerald “Jerry” F. 
Joseph Jr, MD; American Geriatrics Society, Bruce Ferrell, MD, and M. Carrington Reid, MD, PhD; American Hospital Association, 
Ashley Thompson; American Medical Association, Barry D. Dickinson, PhD; American Pain Society, Gregory Terman, MD, PhD; 
American Society of Addiction Medicine, Beth Haynes, MPPA; American Society of Anesthesiologists, Asokumar Buvanendran, 
MD; American Society of Hematology, Robert M. Plovnick, MD, MS; American Society of Interventional Pain Physicians, Sanford 
M. Silverman, MD; Physicians for Responsible Opioid Prescribing, Andrew Kolodny, MD. No compensation was received for serving 
as a member of the Stakeholder Review Group.
Opioid Guideline Workgroup: Chair: Christina Porucznik, PhD, MSPH; Workgroup members: Anne Burns, RPh; Penney Cowan; 
Chinazo Cunningham, MD, MS; Katherine Galluzzi, DO; Traci Green, PhD, MSC; Mitchell Katz, MD; Erin Krebs, MD, MPH; 
Gregory Terman, MD, PhD; Mark Wallace, MD. Workgroup consultants: Roger Chou, MD; Edward Covington, MD; Diana Eppolito; 
Michael Greene, MD; Steven Stanos, DO. Disclosures may be found in the primary MMWR publication.
National Center for Injury Prevention and Control Board of Scientific Counselors: Chair: Stephen Hargarten, MD, MPH; 
Members: John Allegrante, PhD; Joan Marie Duwve, MD, Samuel Forjuoh, MD, MPH, DrPH, FGCP; Gerard Gioia, PhD; Deborah 
Gorman-Smith, PhD; Traci Green, PhD; Sherry Lynne Hamby, PhD; Robert Johnson, MD; Angela Mickalide, PhD, MCHES; Sherry 
Molock, PhD; Christina Porucznik, PhD, MSPH; Jay Silverman, PhD; Maria Testa, PhD; Shelly Timmons, MD, PhD; Ex officio 
members: Melissa Brodowski, PhD; Dawn Castillo, MPH; Wilson Compton, MD, MPE; Elizabeth Edgerton, MD, MPH; Thomas 
Feucht, PhD; Meredith Fox, PhD; Holly Hedegaard, MD, MSPH; John Howard, MD; Lyndon Joseph, PhD; Jinhee Lee, PharmD; Iris 
Mabry-Hernandez, MD, MPH; Valeri Maholmes, PhD; Angela Moore Parmley, PhD; Thomas Schroeder, MS. Disclosures may be 
found in the primary MMWR publication.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Published in final edited form as:
JAMA. 2016 April 19; 315(15): 1624–1645. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.1464.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Division of Unintentional Injury Prevention, National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia.
Abstract
IMPORTANCE—Primary care clinicians find managing chronic pain challenging. Evidence of 
long-term efficacy of opioids for chronic pain is limited. Opioid use is associated with serious 
risks, including opioid use disorder and overdose.
OBJECTIVE—To provide recommendations about opioid prescribing for primary care clinicians 
treating adult patients with chronic pain outside of active cancer treatment, palliative care, and 
end-of-life care.
PROCESS—The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) updated a 2014 systematic 
review on effectiveness and risks of opioids and conducted a supplemental review on benefits and 
harms, values and preferences, and costs. CDC used the Grading of Recommendations 
Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) framework to assess evidence type and 
determine the recommendation category.
EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS—Evidence consisted of observational studies or randomized clinical 
trials with notable limitations, characterized as low quality using GRADE methodology. Meta-
analysis was not attempted due to the limited number of studies, variability in study designs and 
clinical heterogeneity, and methodological shortcomings of studies. No study evaluated long-term 
(≥1 year) benefit of opioids for chronic pain. Opioids were associated with increased risks, 
including opioid use disorder, overdose, and death, with dose-dependent affects.
RECOMMENDATIONS—There are 12 recommendations. Of primary importance, nonopioid 
therapy is preferred for treatment of chronic pain. Opioids should be used only when benefits for 
pain and function are expected to outweigh risks. Before starting opioids, clinicians should 
establish treatment goals with patients and consider how opioids will be discontinued if benefits 
do not outweigh risks. When opioids are used, clinicians should prescribe the lowest effective 
dosage, carefully reassess benefits and risks when considering increasing dosage to 50 morphine 
milligram equivalents or more per day, and avoid concurrent opioids and benzodiazepines 
whenever possible. Clinicians should evaluate benefits and harms of continued opioid therapy with 
patients every 3 months or more frequently and review prescription drug monitoring program data, 
when available, for high-risk combinations or dosages. For patients with opioid use disorder, 
clinicians should offer or arrange evidence-based treatment, such as medication-assisted treatment 
with buprenorphine or methadone.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE—The guideline is intended to improve communication 
about benefits and risks of opioids for chronic pain, improve safety and effectiveness of pain 
treatment, and reduce risks associated with long-term opioid therapy.
The number of people experiencing chronic pain is substantial, with US prevalence 
estimated at 11.2% of the adult population.1 Patients should receive appropriate pain 
treatment based on a careful consideration of the benefits and risks of treatment options. 
Opioids are commonly prescribed for pain, with approximately 3% to 4% of the adult US 
population prescribed long-term opioid therapy.2 Evidence supports short-term efficacy of 
opioids in randomized clinical trials lasting primarily 12 weeks or less,3 and patients 
Dowell et al.
Page 2
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 receiving opioid therapy for chronic pain report some pain relief when surveyed.4–6 
However, few studies have been conducted to rigorously assess the long-term benefits of 
opioids for chronic pain (pain lasting >3 months) with outcomes examined at least 1 year 
later.7 Opioid pain medication use presents serious risks. From 1999 to 2014, more than 165 
000 persons died of overdose related to opioid pain medication in the United States.8 In 
2013 alone, an estimated 1.9 million persons abused or were dependent on prescription 
opioid pain medication.9 Primary care clinicians report concern about opioid pain 
medication misuse, find managing patients with chronic pain stressful, express concern 
about patient addiction, and report insufficient training in prescribing opioids.10
The “CDC Guideline for Prescribing Opioids for Chronic Pain—UnitedStates,2016,” is 
intended for primary care clinicians (eg, family physicians, internists, nurse practitioners, 
and physician assistants) who are treating patients with chronic pain(ie, pain conditions that 
typically last >3 months or past the time of normal tissue healing) in outpatient settings. The 
guideline is intended to apply to patients 18 years and older with chronic pain outside of 
active cancer treatment, palliative care, and end-of-life care. Some of the recommendations 
might be relevant for acute care settings or other specialists, such as emergency physicians 
or dentists, but use in these settings or by other specialists is not the focus of the guideline.
The guideline is intended to improve communication between clinicians and patients about 
the risks and benefits of opioid therapy for chronic pain, improve the safety and 
effectiveness of pain treatment, and reduce the risks associated with long-term opioid 
therapy, including opioid use disorder, overdose, and death. Clinical decision making should 
be based on a relationship between the clinician and patient and an understanding of the 
patient’s clinical situation, functioning, and life context. The recommendations in the 
guideline are voluntary, rather than prescriptive standards. They are based on emerging 
evidence, including observational studies or randomized clinical trials with notable 
limitations. Clinicians should consider the circumstances and unique needs of each patient 
when providing care. This Special Communication details evidence reviewed by and official 
recommendations issued by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and 
provides key highlights from a more extensive guideline; the full guideline with detailed 
information on disclosures and conflict of interest protocols, methods, scientific findings, 
and recommendation rationales can be found in the Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
(MMWR).11
Guideline Development Process
Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation Method
CDC used the CDC Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) translation12 of 
the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) 
method for guideline development.13 Within the ACIP GRADE framework, the quality of a 
body of evidence was graded, and the recommendations were developed and placed into 
categories (A or B) based on the quality of evidence, balance of benefits and harms, values 
and preferences, and resource allocation (Box 1).
Dowell et al.
Page 3
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 CDC obtained input from experts, stakeholders, the public, peer reviewers, and a federally 
chartered advisory committee in the development process. CDC drafted a set of 
recommendations and invited subject matter experts, primary care professional society 
representatives, and state agency representatives (Core Expert Group, listed at the end of the 
article) to provide individual perspectives on how CDC used the evidence to develop the 
recommendations. CDC asked experts to undergo a rigorous process to assess and manage 
possible conflicts of interest; full details on protocols and disclosures are reported in the 
MMWR.11 CDC also engaged partners from 10 federal agencies and a Stakeholder Review 
Group of 18 organizations (listed at the end of the article) to provide comment. CDC 
convened a constituent engagement webinar to obtain additional perspectives from 
constituents on the key recommendations. To obtain comments from the public on the full 
guideline, CDC published a notice in the Federal Register (80 FR 77351) announcing the 
avail-ability of the guideline and the supporting clinical and contextual evidence reviews for 
public comment. Per the final information quality bulletin for peer review (https://
www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/memoranda/fy2005/m05–03.pdf), the guideline 
was peer reviewed because it provides influential scientific information. In addition, the 
National Center for Injury Prevention and Control Board of Scientific Counselors (BSC), a 
federal advisory committee, established an Opioid Guideline Workgroup (OGW) to review 
the guideline (members of the BSC and OGW are listed at the end of the article). The OGW 
issued a report of observations to the BSC. At an in-person meeting, the BSC considered the 
OGW report, deliberated on the draft guideline itself, and offered an additional opportunity 
for public comment. The BSC voted unanimously to support the observations made by the 
OGW; that CDC adopt the guideline recommendations that, according to the workgroup’s 
report, had unanimous or majority support; and that CDC further consider the guideline 
recommendations for which the group had mixed opinions. At each stage, CDC reviewed 
and carefully considered comments and revised the guideline.
Clinical Evidence Review
To inform the guideline development process, CDC updated a systematic review sponsored 
by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) on the effectiveness and risks 
of long-term opioid treatment of chronic pain7 that addressed clinical questions about 
effectiveness of long-term opioid therapy for outcomes at least 1 year later related to pain, 
function, and quality of life. The effectiveness of short-term opioid therapy has been 
established previously. In randomized clinical trials 12 weeks or shorter in duration, opioids 
were moderately effective for pain relief, with small benefits for functional outcomes; 
although estimates varied, based on uncontrolled studies, a high percentage of patients 
discontinued long-term opioid use because of lack of efficacy and because of adverse events.
3 Opioids have unique effects such as tolerance and physical dependence that might 
influence assessments of benefit over time. These effects raise questions about whether 
findings on short-term effectiveness of opioid therapy can be extrapolated to estimate 
benefits of long-term therapy for chronic pain. Thus, it is important to consider studies that 
provide data on long-term benefit. For opioid-related harms (overdose, fractures, falls, motor 
vehicle crashes), studies were included with outcomes measured at shorter intervals because 
such outcomes can occur early during opioid therapy.
Dowell et al.
Page 4
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The review also considered evidence related to initiation and titration, harms and adverse 
events, and risk mitigation. CDC updated the review with more recent studies. Because long-
term opioid use may be affected by use of opioids for acute pain, CDC added a clinical 
question on the effects of prescribing opioids for acute pain on long-term use (Box 2).
CDC updated the systematic literature search using search terms for opioid therapy, specific 
opioids, chronic pain, and comparative study designs; assessed the overall strength of each 
body of evidence using methods developed by the GRADE Working Group; and 
qualitatively synthesized results. Complete methods and data for the clinical evidence 
review, including information about data sources and searches, study selection, data 
extraction and quality assessment, data synthesis, and update search yield and new evidence 
may be found in the MMWR and associated online appendixes.11
The updated review revealed that evidence on long-term opioid therapy for chronic pain 
outside of end-of-life care remains limited, with insufficient evidence to determine long-
term benefits, although evidence suggests risk of serious harms that is dose-dependent. Table 
1 provides a summary of the evidence and the quality ratings assigned. Full details on 
methodology and findings are available in the 2014 AHRQ report7 and the MMWR report.11 
The body of evidence for each clinical question was categorized as evidence type 3 or 4 
(observational studies or randomized clinical trials with notable limitations or clinical 
experience and observation).We highlight important findings from the review for each key 
question (KQ) below.
KQ1: Effectiveness and Comparative Effectiveness—No study of opioid therapy vs 
placebo, no opioid therapy, or non-opioid therapy for chronic pain evaluated long-term (≥1 
year) outcomes related to pain, function, or quality of life. Most placebo-controlled 
randomized clinical trials were 6 weeks or shorter in duration.7
KQ2: Harms and Adverse Events—Long-term opioid therapy was associated with 
problematic patterns of opioid use leading to clinically significant impairment or distress. 
Varying terminology has been used to reflect this pattern, including “addiction” (more 
informally), “opioid abuse and opioid dependence” (per Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders [Fourth Edition] [DSM-IV] or International Classification of Dis-eases, 
Ninth Revision, Clinical Modification [ICD-9-CM]), and “opioid use disorder” (per 
DSM-5). Such disorders are manifested by similar criteria, including unsuccessful efforts to 
reduce or control use and use resulting in social problems and a failure to fulfill major role 
obligations at work, school, or home. Disorders are different from tolerance (diminished 
response to a drug with repeated use) and physical dependence (adaptation to a drug that 
produces symptoms of withdrawal when the drug is stopped), both of which can exist 
without a diagnosed disorder.
Long-term opioid therapy was associated with an increased risk of an opioid abuse or 
dependence diagnosis (as defined by ICD-9-CM codes) vs no opioid prescription.14 In 
primary care settings, prevalence of opioid dependence (using DSM-IV criteria) ranged from 
3% to 26%.15–17 Factors associated with increased risk of misuse included history of 
substance use disorder, younger age, major depression, and use of psychotropic medications.
Dowell et al.
Page 5
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 16,18 Opioid use was associated with a dose-dependent increased risk of fatal and non-fatal 
overdose19,20 (Table 2). Other risks associated with opioid use included cardiovascular 
events,28,29 endocrinologic harms,30,31 and road trauma.32
KQ3: Dosing Strategies—Initiation of therapy with an extended-release/long-
acting(ER/LA) opioid was associated with greater risk of nonfatal overdose than initiation 
with an immediate-release opioid in 1 study, with risk greatest in the first 2 weeks after 
initiation of treatment.33 Three studies of various ER/LA opioids found no clear differences 
related to pain or function34–36; there were mixed findings regarding the differences between 
methadone and morphine in overall risk for nonfatal or fatal overdose,37–39 suggesting that 
risks of methadone might vary in different settings. One study found no differences between 
more liberal dose escalation and maintenance of current doses after 12 months40; evidence 
on other comparisons related to opioid dosing strategies was too limited to determine effects 
on outcomes.
KQ4: Risk Assessment and Risk Mitigation Strategies—Evidence on the accuracy 
of risk assessment instruments for predicting opioid abuse or misuse was inconsistent for the 
Opioid Risk Tool41–43 and limited for other risk assessment instruments.41,44,45 No study 
evaluated the effectiveness of risk mitigation strategies.
KQ5: Effect of Opioid Therapy for Acute Pain on Long-term Use—Studies 
examining patients who underwent low-risk surgery or experienced low back pain from 
injury revealed that opioid therapy prescribed for acute pain was associated with greater 
likelihood of long-term use.46,47 Compared with no early opioid use for acute low back pain, 
the adjusted odds ratio for receiving 5 or more opioid prescriptions from 30 to 730 days after 
onset was 2.08 (95% CI, 1.55–2.78) for 1 to 140 morphine milligram equivalents (MME) 
per day and increased to 6.14 (95% CI, 4.92–7.66) for 450 MME or more per day.47
Contextual Evidence Review
CDC conducted a contextual evidence review to assist in developing the recommendations 
by providing an assessment of the balance of benefits and harms, values and preferences, 
and cost, consistent with the GRADE approach (Box 3). Rapid review methods were used to 
streamline the process and obtain evidence quickly (eg, by limiting database searches and 
summarizing study quality based on author reports rather than applying objective quality 
rating protocols). Full details on methodology, including data sources and searches, 
inclusion criteria, study selection, and data extraction and synthesis, and findings are 
available in the MMWR report.11 In this article, we summarize benefits and harms of 
nonopioid therapies found in the clinical literature and harms of opioid therapy, including 
additional studies not included in the clinical evidence review (eg, studies not restricted to 
patients with chronic pain).
Several nonpharmacologic and nonopioid pharmacologic treatments were found to be 
effective for chronic pain in studies ranging in duration from 2 weeks to 6 months48–66 
(Table 3). For example, cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) had small positive effects on 
disability and catastrophic thinking.66 Exercise therapy reduced pain and improved function 
Dowell et al.
Page 6
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 in chronic low back pain54; improved function and reduced pain in osteoarthritis of the 
knee51 and hip52; and improved well-being, fibromyalgia symptoms, and physical function 
in fibromyalgia.48 Multimodal and multidisciplinary therapies helped reduce pain and 
improve function more effectively than single modalities.55,67 Multiple guidelines 
recommended acetaminophen as first-line pharmacotherapy for osteoarthritis68–73 or for low 
back pain74 and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) as first-line treatment for 
osteoarthritis or low back pain70,74; first- and second-line drugs for neuropathic pain include 
anticonvulsants (gabapentin or pregabalin), tricyclic antidepressants, and serotonin-
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs).75–78 Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs have 
been associated with hepatic, gastrointestinal, renal, and cardiovascular risks.63,73,79
Opioid-related overdose risk was dose-dependent, with higher opioid dosages associated 
with increased overdose risk (Table2).19–27 Compared with dosages of 1 to <20 MME per 
day, dosages of 50 to <100 MME per day were found to increase risks for opioid overdose 
by factors of 1.920 to 4.6,22 with absolute risk difference approximation of 0.15% for fatal 
overdose22 and 1.40% for any overdose;19 dosages of 100 MME or more per day were found 
to increase risks for opioid overdose by factors of 2.020 to 8.919 relative to dosages of 1 to 
<20 MME per day, with absolute risk difference approximation 0.25% for fatal overdose22 
and 4.04% for any overdose.19 Veterans Health Administration patients with chronic pain 
who died of overdoses related to opioids were prescribed higher mean opioid dosages (98 
MME/d) than controls (48 MME/d)27; above 200 MME per day, mortality rates continue to 
increase more gradually.23 (See Table 4 and Box 4 for a list of common opioid medications 
and their MME equivalents.)
Other findings included disproportionate numbers of overdose deaths associated with 
methadone80; fatal overdose risk associated with co-prescription of opioids and 
benzodiazepines20,23,81; and risks associated with sleep-disordered breathing,82,83 reduced 
renal or hepatic function,84 older age,85–88 pregnancy,89–92 mental health comorbidities, and 
history of substance use disorder.18,93,94 Indirect evidence was found for potential utility of 
risk stratification and mitigation strategies for identifying risky opioid-taking behaviors and 
prescribing practices, such as checking prescription drug monitoring program (PDMP) 
data95 and urine drug testing,96 as well as co-prescription of naloxone.97 In addition, 
methadone and buprenorphine for opioid use disorder were found to increase retention in 
treatment and to decrease illicit opioid use among patients with opioid use disorder, and 
some studies suggest that effectiveness is enhanced when psychosocial treatments are used 
in conjunction with medication-assisted therapy.98–102
Recommendations
The guideline includes 12 recommendations (Box 5). GRADE recommendation categories 
were based on the following assessment:
•
No evidence shows a long-term benefit of opioids in pain and function vs no 
opioids for chronic pain with outcomes examined at least 1 year later (with most 
placebo-controlled randomized clinical trials ≤6 weeks in duration).
Dowell et al.
Page 7
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 •
Extensive evidence shows the possible harms of opioids (including opioid use 
disorder, overdose, and motor vehicle injury).
•
Extensive evidence suggests some benefits of nonpharmacologic and nonopioid 
pharmacologic therapy, with less harm.
Determining When to Initiate or Continue Opioids for Chronic Pain
1. Nonpharmacologic therapy and nonopioid pharmacologic therapy are preferred for 
chronic pain. Clinicians should consider opioid therapy only if expected benefits for 
both pain and function are anticipated to outweigh risks to the patient. If opioids are 
used, they should be combined with nonpharmacologic therapy and nonopioid 
pharmacologic therapy, as appropriate. (Recommendation category: A; evidence type: 3)
Nonpharmacologic therapy (such as exercise therapy and CBT) should be used to reduce 
pain and improve function in patients with chronic pain. Aspects of these approaches can be 
used even when there is limited access to specialty care. For example, primary care 
clinicians can encourage patients to take an active role in the care plan and support patients 
in engaging in exercise. Nonopioid pharmacologic therapy (such as NSAIDs, 
acetaminophen, anticonvulsants, and SNRIs) should be used when benefits outweigh risks 
and should be combined with nonpharmacologic therapy. Opioids should not be considered 
first-line or routine therapy for chronic pain outside of active cancer, palliative, and end-of-
life care, given small to moderate short-term benefits, uncertain long-term benefits, and 
potential for serious harms; although evidence on long-term benefits of nonopioid therapies 
is also limited, these therapies are also associated with short-term benefits, and risks are 
much lower. This does not mean that patients should be required to sequentially “fail” 
nonpharmacologic and nonopioid pharmacologic therapy before proceeding to opioid 
therapy. Rather, expected benefits specific to the clinical context should be weighed against 
risks before initiating therapy. In some clinical contexts (eg, headache, fibromyalgia), 
expected benefits of initiating opioids are unlikely to outweigh risks regardless of previous 
nonpharmacologic and nonopioid pharmacologic therapies used. In other situations (eg, 
serious illness in a patient with poor prognosis for return to previous level of function, 
contraindications to other therapies, and clinician and patient agreement that the overriding 
goal is patient comfort), opioids might be appropriate regardless of previous therapies used. 
If opioids are used, they should be combined with nonpharmacologic therapy and nonopioid 
pharmacologic therapy, as appropriate, to provide greater benefits to patients.
2. Before starting opioid therapy for chronic pain, clinicians should establish treatment 
goals with all patients, including realistic goals for pain and function, and consider how 
opioid therapy will be discontinued if benefits do not outweigh risks. Clinicians should 
continue opioid therapy only if there is clinically meaningful improvement in pain and 
function that outweighs risks to patient safety. (Recommendation category: A; evidence 
type: 4)
Before opioid therapy is initiated for chronic pain, clinicians should determine how 
effectiveness will be evaluated and should establish treatment goals with patients. Clinicians 
seeing new patients already receiving opioids should establish treatment goals for continued 
Dowell et al.
Page 8
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 treatment. Goals should include improvement in both pain relief and function. However, 
there are some clinical circumstances under which reductions in pain without improvement 
in physical function might be a more realistic goal (eg, diseases typically associated with 
progressive functional impairment or catastrophic injuries such as spinal cord trauma). 
Experts noted that function can include emotional and social as well as physical dimensions. 
In addition, experts emphasized that mood has important interactions with pain and function. 
Clinicians may use validated instruments such as the 3-item “Pain average, interference with 
Enjoyment of life, and interference with General activity” (PEG) Assessment Scale103 to 
track patient outcomes. Clinically meaningful improvement has been defined as a 30% 
improvement in scores for both pain and function.104 Because depression, anxiety, and other 
psychological comorbidities often coexist with and can interfere with resolution of pain, 
clinicians should use validated instruments to assess for these conditions and ensure that 
treatment for these conditions is optimized.
3. Before starting and periodically during opioid therapy, clinicians should discuss with 
patients known risks and realistic benefits of opioid therapy and patient and clinician 
responsibilities for managing therapy. (Recommendation category: A; evidence type: 3)
Clinicians should ensure that patients are aware of potential benefits of, harms of, and 
alternatives to opioids before starting or continuing opioid therapy. Clinicians are 
encouraged to have open and honest discussions with patients to inform mutual decisions 
about whether to start or continue opioid therapy. Important considerations include the 
following:
•
Be explicit and realistic about expected benefits of opioids, explaining that while 
opioids can reduce pain during short-term use, there is no good evidence that 
opioids improve pain or function with long-term use and that complete relief of 
pain is unlikely.
•
Emphasize improvement in function as a primary goal and that function can 
improve even when pain is still present.
•
Advise patients about serious adverse effects of opioids, including potentially 
fatal respiratory depression and development of a potentially serious lifelong 
opioid use disorder.
•
Advise patients about common effects of opioids, such as constipation, dry 
mouth, nausea, vomiting, drowsiness, confusion, tolerance, physical dependence, 
and withdrawal symptoms when stopping opioids.
•
Discuss effects that opioids may have on ability to safely operate a vehicle, 
particularly when opioids are initiated, when dosages are increased, or when 
other central nervous system depressants, such as benzodiazepines or alcohol, are 
used concurrently.
•
Discuss increased risks for opioid use disorder, respiratory depression, and death 
at higher dosages, along with the importance of taking only the amount of 
opioids prescribed.
Dowell et al.
Page 9
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 •
Review increased risks for respiratory depression when opioids are taken with 
benzodiazepines, other sedatives, alcohol, illicit drugs such as heroin, or other 
opioids.
•
Discuss risks to household members and other individuals if opioids are 
intentionally or unintentionally shared with others for whom they are not 
prescribed, including the possibility that others might experience overdose at the 
same or at lower dosage than prescribed for the patient and that young children 
are susceptible to unintentional ingestion. Discuss storage of opioids in a secure, 
preferably locked location and options for safe disposal of unused opioids.105
•
Discuss the importance of periodic reassessment to ensure opioids are helping to 
meet patient goals and to allow opportunities for opioid discontinuation and 
consideration of additional nonpharmacologic and nonopioid pharmacologic 
treatment options if opioids are not effective or are harmful.
•
Discuss planned use of precautions to reduce risks, including use of PDMP 
information and urine drug testing. Consider including discussion of naloxone 
use for overdose reversal.
•
Consider whether cognitive limitations might interfere with management of 
opioid therapy (for older adults in particular), and if so, determine whether a 
caregiver can responsibly co-manage medication therapy. Discuss the importance 
of reassessing safer medication use with both the patient and caregiver.
Opioid Selection, Dosage, Duration, Follow-up, and Discontinuation
4. When starting opioid therapy for chronic pain, clinicians should prescribe 
immediate-release opioids instead of extended-release/long-acting (ER/LA) opioids. 
(Recommendation category: A; evidence type: 4)
Clinicians should not initiate opioid treatment with ER/LA opioids and should not prescribe 
ER/LA opioids for intermittent use. In general, avoiding the use of immediate-release 
opioids in combination with ER/LA opioids is preferable.
When an ER/LA opioid is prescribed, using a product with predictable pharmacokinetics 
and pharmacodynamics is preferred to minimize unintentional overdose risk.
•
Methadone should not be the first choice for an ER/LA opioid. Only clinicians 
who are familiar with methadone’s unique risk profile and who are prepared to 
educate and closely monitor their patients—including risk assessment for QT 
prolongation and consideration of electrocardiographic monitoring—should 
consider prescribing methadone for pain.
•
Because dosing effects of transdermal fentanyl are often misunderstood by both 
clinicians and patients, only clinicians who are familiar with the dosing and 
absorption properties of transdermal fentanyl and are prepared to educate their 
patients about its use should consider prescribing it.
Dowell et al.
Page 10
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 5. When opioids are started, clinicians should prescribe the lowest effective dosage. 
Clinicians should use caution when prescribing opioids at any dosage, should carefully 
reassess evidence of individual benefits and risks when considering increasing dosage 
to 50 morphine milligram equivalents (MME) or more per day, and should avoid 
increasing dosage to 90 MME or more per day or carefully justify a decision to titrate 
dosage to 90 MME or more per day. (Recommendation category: A; evidence type: 3)
Clinicians should start opioids at the lowest effective dosage, use caution when increasing 
opioid dosages, and increase dosage by the smallest practical amount. Before increasing 
total opioid dosage to 50 MME or more per day, clinicians should reassess whether opioids 
are meeting the patient’s treatment goals. If a patient’s opioid dosage for all sources of 
opioids combined reaches or exceeds 50 MME per day, clinicians should implement 
additional precautions, including increased frequency of follow-up and considering offering 
naloxone. Clinicians should avoid increasing opioid dosages to 90 MME or more per day or 
should carefully justify a decision to increase dosage to 90 MME or more per day based on 
individualized assessment of benefits and risks and weighing factors such as diagnosis, 
incremental benefits for pain and function relative to harms as dosages approach 90 MME 
per day, other treatments and effectiveness, and recommendations based on consultation 
with pain specialists. If patients do not experience improvement in pain and function at 90 
MME or more per day, or if there are escalating dosage requirements, clinicians should 
discuss other approaches to pain management with the patient, consider working with 
patients to taper opioids to a lower dosage or to taper and discontinue opioids, and consider 
consulting a pain specialist.
Established patients already prescribed high dosages of opioids (≥90MME/d), including 
patients transferring from other clinicians, should be offered the opportunity to reevaluate 
their continued use of opioids at high dosages in light of recent evidence regarding the 
association of opioid dosage and overdose risk. For patients who agree to taper opioids to 
lower dosages, clinicians should collaborate with the patient on a tapering plan.
6. Long-term opioid use often begins with treatment of acute pain. When opioids are 
used for acute pain, clinicians should prescribe the lowest effective dose of immediate-
release opioids and should prescribe no greater quantity than needed for the expected 
duration of pain severe enough to require opioids. Three days or less will often be 
sufficient; more than 7 days will rarely be needed. (Recommendation category: A; 
evidence type: 4)
Acute pain can often be managed without opioids. When diagnosis and severity of 
nontraumatic, nonsurgical pain are reasonably assumed to warrant the use of opioids, 
clinicians should prescribe no greater quantity than needed for the expected duration of pain 
severe enough to require opioids, often 3 days or less, unless circumstances clearly warrant 
additional opioid therapy. More than 7 days will rarely be needed. Postsurgical pain is 
outside the scope of this guideline but has been addressed elsewhere.106 Clinicians should 
not prescribe additional opioids to patients “just in case” pain continues longer than 
expected. Clinicians should reevaluate the subset of patients who experience severe acute 
pain that continues longer than the expected duration to confirm or revise the initial 
Dowell et al.
Page 11
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 diagnosis and to adjust management accordingly. Clinicians should not prescribe ER/LA 
opioids for the treatment of acute pain.
7. Clinicians should evaluate benefits and harms with patients within 1 to 4 weeks of 
starting opioid therapy for chronic pain or of dose escalation. Clinicians should 
evaluate benefits and harms of continued therapy with patients every 3 months or 
more frequently. If benefits do not outweigh harms of continued opioid therapy, 
clinicians should optimize other therapies and work with patients to taper opioids to 
lower dosages or to taper and discontinue opioids. (Recommendation category: A; 
evidence type: 4)
Clinicians should evaluate patients to assess benefits and harms of opioids within 1 to 4 
weeks of starting long-term opioid therapy or of dose escalation, consider follow-up 
intervals within the lower end of this range when ER/LA opioids are started or increased or 
when total daily opioid dosage is 50 MME per day or greater, and strongly consider shorter 
follow-up intervals (within 3 days) when starting or increasing the dosage of methadone. 
Clinicians should regularly reassess all patients receiving long-term opioid therapy, 
including patients who are new to the clinician but taking long-term therapy, at least every 3 
months and reevaluate patients exposed to greater risk of opioid use disorder or overdose 
(eg, patients with depression or other mental health conditions, history of substance use 
disorder or overdose, taking ≥50 MME/d, taking other central nervous system depressants) 
more frequently.
At follow-up, clinicians should determine whether opioids continue to meet treatment goals, 
including sustained improvement in pain and function, whether the patient has experienced 
common or serious adverse events or has early warning signs of serious adverse events such 
as overdose (eg, sedation, slurred speech) or opioid use disorder (eg, difficulty controlling 
use), whether benefits of opioids continue to outweigh risks, and whether opioid dosage can 
be reduced or opioids can be discontinued.
Clinicians should work with patients to reduce opioid dosage or to discontinue opioids when 
possible if clinically meaningful improvements in pain and function are not sustained, if 
patients are taking high-risk regimens (eg, dosages ≥50 MME/d or opioids combined with 
benzodiazepines) without evidence of benefit, if patients believe benefits no longer outweigh 
risks or request dosage reduction or discontinuation, or if patients experience overdose or 
other serious adverse events or warning signs of serious adverse events.
When opioids are reduced or discontinued, a taper slow enough to minimize symptoms and 
signs of opioid withdrawal should be used. A decrease of 10% of the original dose per week 
is a reasonable starting point; tapering plans may be individualized based on patient goals 
and concerns. Slower tapers (eg, 10% per month) might be appropriate and better tolerated, 
particularly when patients have been taking opioids for years. More rapid tapers might be 
needed for patients who have overdosed on their current dosage. Clinicians should access 
appropriate expertise if considering tapering opioids during pregnancy because of possible 
risk to the pregnant patient and to the fetus if the patient goes into withdrawal. Primary care 
clinicians should collaborate with mental health clinicians and with other specialists as 
Dowell et al.
Page 12
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 needed to optimize nonopioid pain management, as well as psychosocial support for anxiety 
related to the taper.
Assessing Risk and Addressing Harms of Opioid Use
8. Before starting and periodically during continuation of opioid therapy, clinicians 
should evaluate risk factors for opioid-related harms. Clinicians should incorporate 
into the management plan strategies to mitigate risk, including considering offering 
naloxone when factors that increase risk for opioid overdose, such as history of 
overdose, history of substance use disorder, higher opioid dosages (≥50 MME/d), or 
concurrent benzodiazepine use, are present. (Recommendation category: A; evidence 
type: 4)
Certain risk factors can increase susceptibility to opioid-associated harms. Clinicians should 
avoid prescribing opioids to patients with moderate or severe sleep-disordered breathing 
whenever possible. During pregnancy, clinicians and patients together should carefully 
weigh risks and benefits when making decisions about whether to initiate opioid therapy. 
Clinicians caring for pregnant women receiving opioids should arrange for delivery at a 
facility prepared to evaluate and treat neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome. Clinicians 
should use additional caution and increased monitoring to minimize risks of opioids 
prescribed for patients with renal or hepatic insufficiency, patients 65 years and older, and 
patients with anxiety or depression. Clinicians should ensure that treatment for depression 
and other mental health conditions is optimized, consulting with behavioral health specialists 
when needed. If clinicians consider opioid therapy for patients with drug or alcohol use 
disorders or for patients with prior nonfatal overdose, they should discuss increased risks for 
opioid use disorder and overdose with patients, carefully consider whether benefits of 
opioids outweigh increased risks, and increase frequency of monitoring opioid therapy.
Clinicians should consider offering naloxone when prescribing opioids to patients at 
increased risk of overdose, including patients with a history of overdose, patients with a 
history of substance use disorder, patients taking benzodiazepines with opioids, patients at 
risk of returning to a high dose to which they are no longer tolerant (eg, patients recently 
released from prison), and patients taking higher dosages of opioids (≥50 MME/d). Practices 
should provide education on overdose prevention and naloxone use to patients receiving 
naloxone prescriptions and to members of their households.
9. Clinicians should review the patient’s history of controlled substance prescriptions 
using state prescription drug monitoring program (PDMP) data to determine whether 
the patient is receiving opioid dosages or dangerous combinations that put him or her 
at high risk for overdose. Clinicians should review PDMP data when starting opioid 
therapy for chronic pain and periodically during opioid therapy for chronic pain, 
ranging from every prescription to every 3 months. (Recommendation category: A; 
evidence type: 4)
Clinicians should review PDMP data for opioids and other controlled medications patients 
might have received from additional prescribers to determine whether a patient is receiving 
high total opioid dosages or dangerous combinations (eg, opioids combined with 
Dowell et al.
Page 13
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 benzodiazepines) that put him or her at high risk for overdose. Ideally, PDMP data should be 
reviewed before every opioid prescription. This is recommended in all states with well-
functioning PDMPs and where PDMP access policies make this practicable (eg, clinician 
and delegate access permitted), but it is not currently possible in states without functional 
PDMPs or in those that do not permit certain prescribers to access them.
If patients are found to have high opioid dosages, dangerous combinations of medications, 
or multiple controlled substance prescriptions written by different clinicians, several actions 
can be taken to augment clinicians’ abilities to improve patient safety:
•
Clinicians should discuss information from the PDMP with their patient and 
confirm that the patient is aware of the additional prescriptions.
•
Clinicians should discuss safety concerns, including increased risk for 
respiratory depression and overdose, with patients found to be receiving opioids 
from more than 1 prescriber or receiving medications that increase risk when 
combined with opioids (eg, benzodiazepines).
•
Clinicians should avoid prescribing opioids and benzodiazepines concurrently 
whenever possible. Clinicians should communicate with others managing the 
patient to discuss the patient’s needs, prioritize patient goals, weigh risks of 
concurrent benzodiazepine and opioid exposure, and coordinate care.
•
Clinicians should calculate the total MME/d for concurrent opioid prescriptions. 
If patients are found to be receiving high total daily dosages of opioids, clinicians 
should discuss their safety concerns with the patient, consider tapering to a safer 
dosage, and consider offering naloxone.
•
Clinicians should discuss safety concerns with other clinicians who are 
prescribing controlled substances for their patient.
•
Clinicians should consider the possibility of a substance use disorder and discuss 
concerns with their patient.
•
If clinicians suspect their patient might be sharing or selling opioids and not 
taking them, clinicians should consider urine drug testing to assist in determining 
whether opioids can be discontinued without causing withdrawal. A negative 
drug test for prescribed opioids might indicate the patient is not taking prescribed 
opioids, although clinicians should consider other possible reasons for this test 
result.
Clinicians should not dismiss patients from their practice on the basis of PDMP information. 
Doing so could result in missed opportunities to provide potentially lifesaving information 
and interventions.
10. When prescribing opioids for chronic pain, clinicians should use urine drug testing 
before starting opioid therapy and consider urine drug testing at least annually to 
assess for prescribed medications as well as other controlled prescription drugs and 
illicit drugs. (Recommendation category: B; evidence type: 4)
Dowell et al.
Page 14
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Prior to starting opioids for chronic pain and periodically during opioid therapy, clinicians 
should use urine drug testing to assess for prescribed opioids as well as other controlled 
substances and illicit drugs that increase risk for overdose when combined with opioids, 
including nonprescribed opioids, benzodiazepines, and heroin.
In most situations, initial urine drug testing can be performed with a relatively inexpensive 
immunoassay panel for commonly prescribed opioids and illicit drugs. Patients prescribed 
less commonly used opioids might require specific testing for those agents. The use of 
confirmatory testing adds substantial costs and should be based on the need to detect specific 
opioids that cannot be identified on standard immunoassays or on the presence of 
unexpected urine drug test results. In addition, clinicians should not test for substances for 
which results would not affect patient management or for which implications for patient 
management are unclear. Clinicians should be familiar with the drugs included in urine drug 
testing panels used in their practice and should understand how to interpret results for these 
drugs. Before ordering urine drug testing, clinicians should explain to patients that testing is 
intended to improve their safety, should explain expected results (eg, presence of prescribed 
medication and absence of drugs, including illicit drugs, not reported by the patient), and 
should ask patients whether there might be unexpected results. Clinicians should discuss 
unexpected results with the local laboratory or toxicologist and with the patient. Discussion 
with patients prior to specific confirmatory testing can sometimes yield a candid explanation 
of why a particular substance is present or absent and obviate the need for expensive 
confirmatory testing on that visit. If unexpected results are not explained, a confirmatory test 
using a method selective enough to differentiate specific opioids and metabolites (eg, gas or 
liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry) might be warranted to clarify the situation.
Clinicians should not dismiss patients from care based on a urine drug test result. This could 
have adverse consequences for patient safety, including missed opportunities to facilitate 
treatment for substance use disorder.
11. Clinicians should avoid prescribing opioid pain medication and benzodiazepines 
concurrently whenever possible. (Recommendation category: A; evidence type: 3)
Although there are circumstances when it might be appropriate to prescribe opioids to a 
patient receiving benzodiazepines (eg, severe acute pain in a patient taking long-term, stable 
low-dose benzodiazepine therapy), clinicians should avoid prescribing opioids and 
benzodiazepines concurrently whenever possible. In addition, given that other central 
nervous system depressants (eg, muscle relaxants, hypnotics) can potentiate central nervous 
system depression associated with opioids, clinicians should consider whether benefits 
outweigh risks of concurrent use of these drugs. Clinicians should check the PDMP for 
concurrent controlled medications prescribed by other clinicians and should consider 
involving pharmacists and pain specialists as part of the management team when opioids are 
co-prescribed with other central nervous system depressants. When patients require tapering 
of benzodiazepines or opioids to reduce risk of fatal respiratory depression, it might be safer 
and more practical to taper opioids first. Clinicians should taper benzodiazepines gradually 
if discontinued because abrupt withdrawal can be associated with rebound anxiety, 
hallucinations, seizures, delirium tremens, and, in rare cases, death. If benzodiazepines 
Dowell et al.
Page 15
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 prescribed for anxiety are tapered or discontinued, evidence-based psychotherapies (eg, 
CBT) and specific antidepressants or other nonbenzodiazepine medications approved for 
anxiety should be offered. Clinicians should communicate with mental health professionals 
managing the patient to discuss the patient’s needs, prioritize patient goals, weigh risks of 
concurrent benzodiazepine and opioid exposure, and coordinate care.
12. Clinicians should offer or arrange evidence-based treatment (usually medication-
assisted treatment with buprenorphine or methadone in combination with behavioral 
therapies) for patients with opioid use disorder. (Recommendation category: A; evidence 
type: 2)
If clinicians suspect opioid use disorder107 based on patient concerns or behaviors or on 
findings in PDMP data or from urine drug testing, they should discuss their concerns with 
their patient and provide an opportunity for the patient to disclose related concerns or 
problems. Clinicians should assess for opioid use disorder using DSM-5 criteria.108 
Clinicians should offer or arrange for patients with opioid use disorder to receive evidence-
based treatment (usually medication-assisted treatment with buprenorphine or methadone 
maintenance therapy in combination with behavioral therapies).Oral or long-acting 
injectable naltrexone can also be used in nonpregnant adults. For pregnant women with 
opioid use disorder, medication-assisted therapy with buprenorphine (without naloxone) or 
methadone has been associated with improved maternal outcomes and should be offered.
Physicians prescribing opioids in communities without sufficient treatment capacity for 
opioid use disorder should strongly consider obtaining a waiver from the Substance Abuse 
and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) that allows them to prescribe 
buprenorphine to treat patients with opioid use disorder.109 Clinicians do not need a waiver 
to offer naltrexone for opioid use disorder as part of their practice. Clinicians unable to 
provide treatment themselves should arrange for patients with opioid use disorder to receive 
care from a substance use disorder treatment specialist, such as an office-based clinician 
who prescribes buprenorphine or naltrexone treatment, or from an opioid treatment program 
certified by SAMHSA to provide supervised medication-assisted treatment for patients with 
opioid use disorder.
Discussion
The evidence review focused on 5 key questions (Box 2) that have resulted in 12 
recommendations (Box 5) in 3 areas: determining when to initiate or continue opioids for 
chronic pain; opioid selection, dosage, duration, follow-up, and discontinuation; and 
assessing risk and addressing harms of opioid use. The objective of these recommendations 
is to provide information about opioid prescribing for primary care clinicians treating adult 
patients with chronic pain.
Of primary importance, nonopioid therapy is preferred for treatment of chronic pain. 
Opioids should be used only when benefits for pain and function are expected to outweigh 
risks. Before starting opioids, clinicians should establish treatment goals with patients and 
consider how opioids will be discontinued if benefits do not outweigh risks. When opioids 
Dowell et al.
Page 16
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 are used, clinicians should prescribe the lowest effective dosage, carefully reassess benefits 
and risks when considering increasing dosage to 50 MME or more per day, and avoid 
concurrent opioids and benzodiazepines whenever possible. Clinicians should evaluate 
benefits and harms of continued opioid therapy with patients every 3 months or more 
frequently and review prescription drug monitoring program data, when available, for high-
risk combinations or dosages. For patients with opioid use disorder, clinicians should offer 
or arrange evidence-based treatment, such as medication-assisted treatment with 
buprenorphine or methadone.
Clinical guidelines complement other strategies such as strengthening the evidence base for 
pain prevention and treatment, reducing disparities in pain treatment, improving service 
delivery and reimbursement, and supporting professional and public education.110 To aid the 
application of the guideline in clinical practice, CDC is translating the guideline into user-
friendly materials, such as a checklist decision aid (eFigure in the Supplement), fact sheets 
(available at http://www.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/prescribing/resources.html),and a mobile 
application. CDC will also work with partners to support clinician education on pain 
management options, opioid therapy, and risk mitigation strategies. Efforts that might 
enhance implementation of recommended practices include development of quality 
improvement measures, implementing clinical decision support, and integrating initiatives to 
promote safer prescribing within insurance plans. In addition, policy initiatives that address 
barriers to implementation of the guideline, such as increasing accessibility of PDMP data, 
e-prescribing, and availability of clinicians who can offer medication-assisted treatment for 
opioid use disorder are strategies to consider to enhance implementation of the 
recommended practices. CDC will work with federal partners and payers to evaluate 
strategies such as payment reform and health care delivery models that could improve 
patient health and safety. For example, strategies might include strengthened coverage for 
non-pharmacologic treatments, appropriate urine drug testing, and medication-assisted 
treatment; reimbursable time for patient counseling; and payment models that improve 
access to interdisciplinary, coordinated care.
The CDC guideline provides recommendations that are based on best available evidence, 
interpreted and informed by expert opinion. Evidence informing the recommendations is 
based on observational studies or randomized clinical trials with notable limitations, as well 
as clinical experience and observations, characterized as low in quality under GRADE 
methodology. As highlighted by a National Institutes of Health expert panel, “evidence is 
insufficient for every clinical decision that a provider needs to make about the use of opioids 
for chronic pain.”111 The expert panel recommended that research is needed to improve 
current understanding of which types of pain, specific diseases, and patients are most likely 
to be associated with benefit and harm from opioid pain medications; evaluate 
andestimatecost-benefitofmultidisciplinarypaininterventions;develop and validate tools for 
identification of patient risk and outcomes; assess the effectiveness and harms of opioid pain 
medications with alternative study designs; and investigate risk identification and mitigation 
strategies and their effects on patient and public health outcomes.
To inform future guideline development, more research is needed to fill critical evidence 
gaps. Yet given that chronic pain is a significant public health problem, the risks associated 
Dowell et al.
Page 17
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 with long-term opioid therapy, the availability of effective alternative treatment options for 
pain, and the potential for improvement in the quality of health care with the implementation 
of recommended practices, a guideline for prescribing is warranted with currently available 
evidence. The balance between benefits and harms of long-term opioid therapy for chronic 
pain based on both clinical and contextual evidence is sufficiently clear to support the 
issuance of category A recommendations in most cases.
Conclusions
The guideline is intended to improve communication between clinicians and patients about 
the risks and benefits of opioid therapy for chronic pain, improve the safety and 
effectiveness of pain treatment, and reduce the risks associated with long-term opioid 
therapy, including opioid use disorder, overdose, and death. CDC is committed to evaluating 
the guideline to identify effects on clinician and patient outcomes, both intended and 
unintended, and will revisit the guideline to determine if evidence gaps have been 
sufficiently addressed to warrant an update of the guideline and revise the recommendations 
in future updates when warranted.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
Funding/Support: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) supported the development of the 
guideline. Dr Chou’s activities were supported through a short-term detail under contract at CDC (15IPA-1505478). 
The clinical evidence review was updated based on a previously published 2014 report funded by the Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) under contract to the Pacific Northwest Evidence-based Practice Center 
(contract 290-2012-00014-I). Abt Associates collected, managed, analyzed, and interpreted data in the contextual 
evidence review, funded through a contract (contract 200–2013-M-53890, task order 200–2015-F-62036) supported 
by CDC.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: CDC conducted the full guideline development process, directing the design and 
conduct of the systematic reviews; collection, management, analysis, and interpretation of the data; and preparation, 
review, and approval for submission of the manuscript for publication. CDC staff members were responsible for the 
overall design and conduct of the guideline and preparation, review, and approval of the manuscript.
REFERENCES
1. Nahin RL. Estimates of pain prevalence and severity in adults: United States, 2012. J Pain. 2015; 
16(8):769–780. [PubMed: 26028573] 
2. Boudreau D, Von Korff M, Rutter CM, et al. Trends in long-term opioid therapy for chronic non-
cancer pain. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2009;18(12):1166–1175. [PubMed: 19718704] 
3. Guideline for the use of chronic opioid therapy in chronic noncancer pain: evidence review. 
American Pain Society and American Academy of Pain Medicine. http://americanpainsociety.org/
uploads/education/guidelines/chronic-opioid-therapy-cncp.pdf. Accessed February 6, 2016.
4. Anastassopoulos KP, Chow W, Tapia CI, Baik R, Moskowitz B, Kim MS. Reported side effects, 
bother, satisfaction, and adherence in patients taking hydrocodone for non-cancer pain. J Opioid 
Manag. 2013;9(2):97–109. [PubMed: 23709319] 
5. Gregorian RS, Jr, Gasik A, Kwong WJ, Voeller S, Kavanagh S. Importance of side effects in opioid 
treatment: a trade-off analysis with patients and physicians. J Pain. 2010;11(11):1095–1108. 
[PubMed: 20452835] 
Dowell et al.
Page 18
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 6. Thielke SM, Turner JA, Shortreed SM, et al. Do patient-perceived pros and cons of opioids predict 
sustained higher-dose use? Clin J Pain. 2014;30(2): 93–101. [PubMed: 23535150] 
7. Chou R, Deyo R, Devine B, et al. The effectiveness and risks of long-term opioid treatment of 
chronic pain [Evidence Report/Technology Assessment No. 218]. Agency for Healthcare Research 
and Quality. http://www.effectivehealthcare.ahrq.gov/ehc/products/557/1971/chronic-pain-opioid-
treatment-report-141007.pdf. Accessed February 2, 2016.
8. Multiple cause of death data. CDC WONDER. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. http://
wonder.cdc.gov/mcd.html. Accessed February 26, 2016.
9. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Results From the 2013 National 
Survey on Drug Use and Health: Summary of National Findings [NSDUH Series H-48, HHS 
Publication No. (SMA) 14–4863]. Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration; 2014.
10. Jamison RN, Sheehan KA, Scanlan E, Matthews M, Ross EL. Beliefs and attitudes about opioid 
prescribing and chronic pain management: survey of primary care providers. J Opioid Manag. 
2014;10(6):375–382. [PubMed: 25531955] 
11. Dowell D, Haegerich TM, Chou R. CDC guideline for prescribing opioids for chronic pain—
United States, 2016. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2016;65(RR-1): 1–49.
12. Ahmed F US Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices handbook for developing evidence-
based recommendations [version 1.2]. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. http://
www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/recs/grade/downloads/handbook.pdf. Accessed January 27, 2016.
13. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, et al.; GRADE Working Group. GRADE: an emerging 
consensus on rating quality of evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ. 2008;336(7650):
924–926. [PubMed: 18436948] 
14. Edlund MJ, Martin BC, Russo JE, DeVries A, Braden JB, Sullivan MD. The role of opioid 
prescription in incident opioid abuse and dependence among individuals with chronic noncancer 
pain: the role of opioid prescription. Clin J Pain. 2014;30(7):557–564. [PubMed: 24281273] 
15. Banta-Green CJ, Merrill JO, Doyle SR, Boudreau DM, Calsyn DA. Opioid use behaviors, mental 
health and pain: development of a typology of chronic pain patients. Drug Alcohol Depend. 
2009;104(1–2): 34–42. [PubMed: 19473786] 
16. Boscarino JA, Rukstalis M, Hoffman SN, et al. Risk factors for drug dependence among out-
patients on opioid therapy in a large US health-care system. Addiction. 2010;105(10):1776–1782. 
[PubMed: 20712819] 
17. Fleming MF, Balousek SL, Klessig CL, Mundt MP, Brown DD. Substance use disorders in a 
primary care sample receiving daily opioid therapy. J Pain. 2007;8(7):573–582. [PubMed: 
17499555] 
18. Reid MC, Engles-Horton LL, Weber MB, Kerns RD, Rogers EL, O’Connor PG. Use of opioid 
medications for chronic noncancer pain syndromes in primary care. J Gen Intern Med. 2002;17(3):
173–179. [PubMed: 11929502] 
19. Dunn KM, Saunders KW, Rutter CM, et al. Opioid prescriptions for chronic pain and overdose: a 
cohort study. Ann Intern Med. 2010;152(2):85–92. [PubMed: 20083827] 
20. Gomes T, Mamdani MM, Dhalla IA, Paterson JM, Juurlink DN. Opioid dose and drug-related 
mortality in patients with nonmalignant pain. Arch Intern Med. 2011;171(7):686–691. [PubMed: 
21482846] 
21. Paulozzi LJ, Kilbourne EM, Shah NG, et al. A history of being prescribed controlled substances 
and risk of drug overdose death. Pain Med. 2012;13(1):87–95. [PubMed: 22026451] 
22. Bohnert AS, Valenstein M, Bair MJ, et al. Association between opioid prescribing patterns and 
opioid overdose-related deaths. JAMA. 2011; 305(13):1315–1321. [PubMed: 21467284] 
23. Dasgupta N, Funk MJ, Proescholdbell S, Hirsch A, Ribisl KM, Marshall S. Cohort study of the 
impact of high-dose opioid analgesics on overdose mortality [published online September 1, 
2015]. Pain Med. doi:10.1111/pme.12907.
24. Gwira Baumblatt JA, Wiedeman C, Dunn JR, Schaffner W, Paulozzi LJ, Jones TF. High-risk use by 
patients prescribed opioids for pain and its role in overdose deaths. JAMA Intern Med. 
2014;174(5): 796–801. [PubMed: 24589873] 
Dowell et al.
Page 19
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 25. Liang Y, Turner BJ. Assessing risk for drug overdose in a national cohort: role for both daily and 
total opioid dose? J Pain. 2015;16(4):318–325. [PubMed: 25486625] 
26. Zedler B, Xie L, Wang L, et al. Risk factors for serious prescription opioid-related toxicity or 
overdose among Veterans Health Administration patients. Pain Med. 2014;15(11):1911–1929. 
[PubMed: 24931395] 
27. Bohnert AS, Logan JE, Ganoczy D, Dowell D. A detailed exploration into the association of 
prescribed opioid dosage and overdose deaths among patients with chronic pain [published online 
January 22, 2016]. Med Care. doi:10.1097/MLR.0000000000000505.
28. Carman WJ, Su S, Cook SF, Wurzelmann JI, McAfee A. Coronary heart disease outcomes among 
chronic opioid and cyclooxygenase-2 users compared with a general population cohort. 
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2011;20(7):754–762. [PubMed: 21567652] 
29. Li L, Setoguchi S, Cabral H, Jick S. Opioid use for noncancer pain and risk of myocardial 
infarction amongst adults. J Intern Med. 2013;273(5):511–526. [PubMed: 23331508] 
30. Deyo RA, Smith DH, Johnson ES, et al. Prescription opioids for back pain and use of medications 
for erectile dysfunction. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2013;38(11):909–915. [PubMed: 23459134] 
31. Rubinstein A, Carpenter DM. Elucidating risk factors for androgen deficiency associated with 
daily opioid use. Am J Med. 2014;127(12):1195–1201. [PubMed: 25063648] 
32. Gomes T, Redelmeier DA, Juurlink DN, Dhalla IA, Camacho X, Mamdani MM. Opioid dose and 
risk of road trauma in Canada: a population-based study. JAMA Intern Med. 2013;173(3):196–
201. [PubMed: 23318919] 
33. Miller M, Barber CW, Leatherman S, et al. Prescription opioid duration of action and the risk of 
unintentional overdose among patients receiving opioid therapy. JAMA Intern Med. 2015;175(4):
608–615. [PubMed: 25686208] 
34. Allan L, Richarz U, Simpson K, Slappendel R. Transdermal fentanyl versus sustained release oral 
morphine in strong-opioid naïve patients with chronic low back pain. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2005; 
30(22):2484–2490. [PubMed: 16284584] 
35. Wild JE, Grond S, Kuperwasser B, et al. Long-term safety and tolerability of tapentadol extended 
release for the management of chronic low back pain or osteoarthritis pain. Pain Pract. 2010;10(5):
416–427. [PubMed: 20602712] 
36. Mitra F, Chowdhury S, Shelley M, Williams G. A feasibility study of transdermal buprenorphine 
versus transdermal fentanyl in the long-term management of persistent non-cancer pain. Pain Med. 
2013;14(1):75–83. [PubMed: 23320402] 
37. Krebs EE, Becker WC, Zerzan J, Bair MJ, McCoy K, Hui S. Comparative mortality among 
Department of Veterans Affairs patients prescribed methadone or long-acting morphine for chronic 
pain. Pain. 2011;152(8):1789–1795. [PubMed: 21524850] 
38. Hartung DM, Middleton L, Haxby DG, Koder M, Ketchum KL, Chou R. Rates of adverse events 
of long-acting opioids in a state Medicaid program. Ann Pharmacother. 2007;41(6):921–928. 
[PubMed: 17504834] 
39. Ray WA, Chung CP, Murray KT, Cooper WO, Hall K, Stein CM. Out-of-hospital mortality among 
patients receiving methadone for noncancer pain. JAMA Intern Med. 2015;175(3):420–427. 
[PubMed: 25599329] 
40. Naliboff BD, Wu SM, Schieffer B, et al. A randomized trial of 2 prescription strategies for opioid 
treatment of chronic nonmalignant pain. J Pain. 2011;12(2):288–296. [PubMed: 21111684] 
41. Jones T, Moore T, Levy JL, et al. A comparison of various risk screening methods in predicting 
discharge from opioid treatment. Clin J Pain. 2012; 28(2):93–100. [PubMed: 21750461] 
42. Moore TM, Jones T, Browder JH, Daffron S, Passik SD. A comparison of common screening 
methods for predicting aberrant drug-related behavior among patients receiving opioids for chronic 
pain management. Pain Med. 2009;10(8): 1426–1433. [PubMed: 20021601] 
43. Webster LR, Webster RM. Predicting aberrant behaviors in opioid-treated patients: preliminary 
validation of the Opioid Risk Tool. Pain Med. 2005; 6(6):432–442. [PubMed: 16336480] 
44. Jones T, Lookatch S, Grant P, McIntyre J, Moore T. Further validation of an opioid risk assessment 
tool: the Brief Risk Interview. J Opioid Manag. 2014; 10(5):353–364. [PubMed: 25350477] 
45. Jones T, Moore T. Preliminary data on a new opioid risk assessment measure: the Brief Risk 
Interview. J Opioid Manag. 2013;9(1):19–27. [PubMed: 23709300] 
Dowell et al.
Page 20
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 46. Alam A, Gomes T, Zheng H, Mamdani MM, Juurlink DN, Bell CM. Long-term analgesic use after 
low-risk surgery: a retrospective cohort study. Arch Intern Med. 2012;172(5):425–430. [PubMed: 
22412106] 
47. Webster BS, Verma SK, Gatchel RJ. Relationship between early opioid prescribing for acute 
occupational low back pain and disability duration, medical costs, subsequent surgery and late 
opioid use. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2007;32(19): 2127–2132. [PubMed: 17762815] 
48. Busch AJ, Barber KAR, Overend TJ, Peloso PMJ, Schachter CL. Exercise for treating 
fibromyalgia syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007;(4):CD003786. [PubMed: 17943797] 
49. Chaparro LE, Furlan AD, Deshpande A, Mailis-Gagnon A, Atlas S, Turk DC. Opioids compared 
with placebo or other treatments for chronic low back pain: an update of the Cochrane Review. 
Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2014;39(7):556–563. [PubMed: 24480962] 
50. Collins SL, Moore RA, McQuay HJ, Wiffen P. Antidepressants and anticonvulsants for diabetic 
neuropathy and postherpetic neuralgia: a quantitative systematic review. J Pain Symptom Manage. 
2000;20(6):449–458. [PubMed: 11131263] 
51. Fransen M, McConnell S, Harmer AR, Van der Esch M, Simic M, Bennell KL. Exercise for 
osteoarthritis of the knee. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;1:CD004376. [PubMed: 25569281] 
52. Fransen M, McConnell S, Hernandez-Molina G, Reichenbach S. Exercise for osteoarthritis of the 
hip. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;4:CD007912.
53. Häuser W, Urrútia G, Tort S, Uçeyler N, Walitt B. Serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors 
(SNRIs) for fibromyalgia syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;1:CD010292.
54. Hayden JA, van Tulder MW, Malmivaara A, Koes BW. Exercise therapy for treatment of non-
specific low back pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005;(3):CD000335. [PubMed: 16034851] 
55. Lee C, Crawford C, Swann S; Active Self-Care Therapies for Pain (PACT) Working Group. 
Multimodal, integrative therapies for the self-management of chronic pain symptoms. Pain Med. 
2014;15(suppl 1):S76–S85. [PubMed: 24734863] 
56. Lunn MP, Hughes RA, Wiffen PJ. Duloxetine for treating painful neuropathy, chronic pain or 
fibromyalgia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;1: CD007115.
57. Moore RA, Straube S, Wiffen PJ, Derry S, McQuay HJ. Pregabalin for acute and chronic pain in 
adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;8(3): CD007076.
58. Moore RA, Wiffen PJ, Derry S, Toelle T, Rice AS. Gabapentin for chronic neuropathic pain and 
fibromyalgia in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;4:CD007938.
59. Roelofs PD, Deyo RA, Koes BW, Scholten RJ, van Tulder MW. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs for low back pain: an updated Cochrane review. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2008;33(16):1766–
1774. [PubMed: 18580547] 
60. Saarto T, Wiffen PJ. Antidepressants for neuropathic pain: a Cochrane review. J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry. 2010;81(12):1372–1373. [PubMed: 20543189] 
61. Salerno SM, Browning R, Jackson JL. The effect of antidepressant treatment on chronic back pain: 
a meta-analysis. Arch Intern Med. 2002;162(1):19–24. [PubMed: 11784215] 
62. Staiger TO, Gaster B, Sullivan MD, Deyo RA. Systematic review of antidepressants in the 
treatment of chronic low back pain. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2003;28(22):2540–2545. [PubMed: 
14624092] 
63. Trelle S, Reichenbach S, Wandel S, et al. Cardiovascular safety of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs: network meta-analysis. BMJ. 2011;342:c7086. [PubMed: 21224324] 
64. Welsch P, Sommer C, Schiltenwolf M, Häuser W. Opioids in chronic noncancer pain: are opioids 
superior to nonopioid analgesics? a systematic review and meta-analysis of efficacy, tolerability 
and safety in randomized head-to-head comparisons of opioids versus nonopioid analgesics of at 
least four week’s duration [in German]. Schmerz. 2015;29(1):85–95. [PubMed: 25376546] 
65. Wiffen PJ, Derry S, Moore RA, Kalso EA. Carbamazepine for chronic neuropathic pain and 
fibromyalgia in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;4:CD005451.
66. Williams AC, Eccleston C, Morley S. Psychological therapies for the management of chronic pain 
(excluding headache) in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;11:CD007407. [PubMed: 
23152245] 
Dowell et al.
Page 21
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 67. Kamper SJ, Apeldoorn AT, Chiarotto A, et al. Multidisciplinary biopsychosocial rehabilitation for 
chronic low back pain: Cochrane systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ. 2015;350:h444. 
[PubMed: 25694111] 
68. Zhang W, Doherty M, Arden N, et al.; EULAR Standing Committee for International Clinical 
Studies Including Therapeutics (ESCISIT). EULAR evidence based recommendations for the 
management of hip osteoarthritis: report of a task force of the EULAR Standing Committee for 
International Clinical Studies Including Therapeutics (ESCISIT). Ann Rheum Dis. 2005;64(5):
669–681. [PubMed: 15471891] 
69. Zhang W, Doherty M, Leeb BF, et al. EULAR evidence based recommendations for the 
management of hand osteoarthritis: report of a Task Force of the EULAR Standing Committee for 
International Clinical Studies Including Therapeutics (ESCISIT). Ann Rheum Dis. 2007;66(3):
377–388. [PubMed: 17046965] 
70. Zhang W, Moskowitz RW, Nuki G, et al. OARSI recommendations for the management of hip and 
knee osteoarthritis, part II: OARSI evidence-based, expert consensus guidelines. Osteoarthritis 
Cartilage. 2008;16(2):137–162. [PubMed: 18279766] 
71. Zhang W, Moskowitz RW, Nuki G, et al. OARSI recommendations for the management of hip and 
knee osteoarthritis, part I: critical appraisal of existing treatment guidelines and systematic review 
of current research evidence. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2007;15(9):981–1000. [PubMed: 17719803] 
72. Jordan KM, Arden NK, Doherty M, et al.; Standing Committee for International Clinical Studies 
Including Therapeutic Trials ESCISIT. EULAR Recommendations 2003: an evidence based 
approach to the management of knee osteoarthritis: report of a Task Force of the Standing 
Committee for International Clinical Studies Including Therapeutic Trials (ESCISIT). Ann Rheum 
Dis. 2003;62(12):1145–1155. [PubMed: 14644851] 
73. American Geriatrics Society Panel on Pharmacological Management of Persistent Pain in Older 
Persons. Pharmacological management of persistent pain in older persons. J Am Geriatr Soc. 
2009;57(8):1331–1346. [PubMed: 19573219] 
74. Chou R, Qaseem A, Snow V, et al.; Clinical Efficacy Assessment Subcommittee of the American 
College of Physicians; American College of Physicians; American Pain Society Low Back Pain 
Guidelines Panel. Diagnosis and treatment of low back pain: a joint clinical practice guideline 
from the American College of Physicians and the American Pain Society. Ann Intern Med. 
2007;147(7):478–491. [PubMed: 17909209] 
75. O’Connor AB, Dworkin RH. Treatment of neuropathic pain: an overview of recent guidelines. Am 
J Med. 2009;122(10)(suppl):S22–S32.
76. Attal N, Cruccu G, Baron R, et al.; European Federation of Neurological Societies. EFNS 
guidelines on the pharmacological treatment of neuropathic pain: 2010 revision. Eur J Neurol. 
2010; 17(9):1113–e88. [PubMed: 20402746] 
77. Moulin DE, Clark AJ, Gilron I, et al.; Canadian Pain Society. Pharmacological management of 
chronic neuropathic pain: consensus statement and guidelines from the Canadian Pain Society. 
Pain Res Manag. 2007;12(1):13–21. [PubMed: 17372630] 
78. Bril V, England J, Franklin GM, et al.; American Academy of Neurology; American Association of 
Neuromuscular and Electrodiagnostic Medicine; American Academy of Physical Medicine and 
Rehabilitation. Evidence-based guideline: treatment of painful diabetic neuropathy: report of the 
American Academy of Neurology, the American Association of Neuromuscular and 
Electrodiagnostic Medicine, and the American Academy of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 
[published correction in Neurology. 2011;77(6):603]. Neurology. 2011;76(20):1758–1765. 
[PubMed: 21482920] 
79. FDA Drug Safety Communication: FDA strengthens warning that non-aspirin nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can cause heart attacks or strokes. US Food and Drug 
Administration. http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm451800.htm. Accessed January 27, 
2016.
80. Paulozzi L, Mack KA, Jones CM; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Vital signs: 
risk for overdose from methadone used for pain relief: United States, 1999–2010. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep. 2012;61(26):493–497. [PubMed: 22763888] 
81. Jones CM, McAninch JK. Emergency department visits and overdose deaths from combined use of 
opioids and benzodiazepines. Am J Prev Med. 2015;49(4):493–501. [PubMed: 26143953] 
Dowell et al.
Page 22
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 82. Webster LR, Choi Y, Desai H, Webster L, Grant BJB. Sleep-disordered breathing and chronic 
opioid therapy. Pain Med. 2008;9(4):425–432. [PubMed: 18489633] 
83. VA/DoD clinical practice guidelines: management of opioid therapy (OT) for chronic pain (2010). 
US Department of Veterans Affairs, Department of Defense. http://www.healthquality.va.gov/
guidelines/Pain/cot/. Accessed January 27, 2016.
84. Brunton LL, ed. Goodman and Gilman’s the Pharmacologic Basis of Therapeutics. 9 ed New York, 
NY: McGraw-Hill; 1996.
85. Rowe JW, Andres R, Tobin JD, Norris AH, Shock NW. The effect of age on creatinine clearance in 
men: a cross-sectional and longitudinal study. J Gerontol. 1976;31(2):155–163. [PubMed: 
1249404] 
86. Rolita L, Spegman A, Tang X, Cronstein BN. Greater number of narcotic analgesic prescriptions 
for osteoarthritis is associated with falls and fractures in elderly adults. J Am Geriatr Soc. 
2013;61(3):335–340. [PubMed: 23452054] 
87. Vestergaard P, Rejnmark L, Mosekilde L. Fracture risk associated with the use of morphine and 
opiates. J Intern Med. 2006;260(1):76–87. [PubMed: 16789982] 
88. Spector W, Shaffer T, Potter DE, Correa-de-Araujo R, Rhona Limcangco M. Risk factors 
associated with the occurrence of fractures in US nursing homes: resident and facility 
characteristics and prescription medications. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2007;55(3):327–333. [PubMed: 
17341233] 
89. Yazdy MM, Mitchell AA, Tinker SC, Parker SE, Werler MM. Periconceptional use of opioids and 
the risk of neural tube defects. Obstet Gynecol. 2013; 122(4):838–844. [PubMed: 24084542] 
90. Broussard CS, Rasmussen SA, Reefhuis J, et al.; National Birth Defects Prevention Study. 
Maternal treatment with opioid analgesics and risk for birth defects. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 
2011;204(4):314.e1–314.e11. [PubMed: 21345403] 
91. Whiteman VE, Salemi JL, Mogos MF, Cain MA, Aliyu MH, Salihu HM. Maternal opioid drug use 
during pregnancy and its impact on perinatal morbidity, mortality, and the costs of medical care in 
the United States. J Pregnancy. 2014;2014: 906723. [PubMed: 25254116] 
92. Hadi I, da Silva O, Natale R, Boyd D, Morley-Forster PK. Opioids in the parturient with chronic 
nonmalignant pain: a retrospective review. J Opioid Manag. 2006;2(1):31–34. [PubMed: 
17319115] 
93. Edlund MJ, Steffick D, Hudson T, Harris KM, Sullivan M. Risk factors for clinically recognized 
opioid abuse and dependence among veterans using opioids for chronic non-cancer pain. Pain. 
2007;129(3):355–362. [PubMed: 17449178] 
94. Howe CQ, Sullivan MD. The missing “P” in pain management: how the current opioid epidemic 
highlights the need for psychiatric services in chronic pain care. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 2014;36(1): 
99–104. [PubMed: 24211157] 
95. Haegerich TM, Paulozzi LJ, Manns BJ, Jones CM. What we know, and don’t know, about the 
impact of state policy and systems-level interventions on prescription drug overdose. Drug Alcohol 
Depend. 2014;145:34–47. [PubMed: 25454406] 
96. Bair MJ, Krebs EE. Why is urine drug testing not used more often in practice? Pain Pract. 2010; 
10(6):493–496. [PubMed: 21040440] 
97. Walley AY, Xuan Z, Hackman HH, et al. Opioid overdose rates and implementation of overdose 
education and nasal naloxone distribution in Massachusetts: interrupted time series analysis. BMJ 
2013;346:f174. [PubMed: 23372174] 
98. Mattick RP, Breen C, Kimber J, Davoli M. Buprenorphine maintenance versus placebo or 
methadone maintenance for opioid dependence. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;2:CD002207.
99. Mattick RP, Breen C, Kimber J, Davoli M. Methadone maintenance therapy versus no opioid 
replacement therapy for opioid dependence. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;3(3):CD002209
100. Amato L, Minozzi S, Davoli M, Vecchi S. Psychosocial and pharmacological treatments versus 
pharmacological treatments for opioid detoxification. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011; 
(9):CD005031. [PubMed: 21901695] 
101. Fullerton CA, Kim M, Thomas CP, et al. Medication-assisted treatment with methadone: 
assessing the evidence. Psychiatr Serv. 2014;65(2): 146–157. [PubMed: 24248468] 
Dowell et al.
Page 23
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 102. Connock M, Juarez-Garcia A, Jowett S, et al. Methadone and buprenorphine for the management 
of opioid dependence: a systematic review and economic evaluation. Health Technol Assess. 
2007;11(9):1–171,iii-iv.
103. Krebs EE, Lorenz KA, Bair MJ, et al. Development and initial validation of the PEG, a three-item 
scale assessing pain intensity and interference. J Gen Intern Med. 2009;24(6):733–738 [PubMed: 
19418100] 
104. Ostelo RW, Deyo RA, Stratford P, et al. Interpreting change scores for pain and functional status 
in low back pain: towards international consensus regarding minimal important change. Spine 
(Phila Pa 1976). 2008;33(1):90–94. [PubMed: 18165753] 
105. Disposal of unused medicines: what you should know. Food and Drug Administration. http://
www.fda.gov/Drugs/ResourcesForYou/Consumers/BuyingUsingMedicineSafely/
EnsuringSafeUseofMedicine/SafeDisposalofMedicines/ucm186187.htm. Accessed January 27, 
2016.
106. AMDG 2015 interagency guideline on prescribing opioids for pain. Washington State Agency 
Medical Directors’ Group. http://agencymeddirectors.wa.gov/guidelines.asp. Accessed February 
9, 2016.
107. Opioid use disorder diagnostic criteria. American Psychiatric Association. http://pcssmat.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/02/5B-DSM-5-Opioid-Use-Disorder-Diagnostic-Criteria.pdf. Accessed 
January 27, 2016.
108. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 5th ed 
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association; 2013.
109. Buprenorphine waiver management. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration. http://www.samhsa.gov/medication-assisted-treatment/buprenorphine-waiver-
management. Accessed January 27, 2016.
110. National pain strategy; a comprehensive population health level strategy for pain. National 
Institutes of Health, Interagency Pain Research Coordinating Committee. http://iprcc.nih.gov/
National_Pain_Strategy/NPS_Main.htm. Accessed February 5, 2016.
111. Reuben DB, Alvanzo AAH, Ashikaga T, et al. National Institutes of Health Pathways to 
Prevention Workshop: the role of opioids in the treatment of chronic pain. Ann Intern Med. 
2015;162(4):295–300. [PubMed: 25581341] 
Dowell et al.
Page 24
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 1.
Interpretation of Recommendation Categories and Evidence Type
Recommendation Categories
Recommendation categories are based on evidence type, balance between desirable and 
undesirable effects, values and preferences, and resource allocation (cost).
Category A recommendation:
Applies to all persons; most patients should receive the recommended course of action.
Category B recommendation:
Individual decision making needed; different choices will be appropriate for different 
patients. Clinicians help patients arrive at a decision consistent with patient values and 
preferences and specific clinical situations.
Evidence Type
Evidence type is based on study design as well as a function of limitations in study 
design or implementation, imprecision of estimates, variability in findings, indirectness 
of evidence, publication bias, magnitude of treatment effects, dose-response gradient, and 
constellation of plausible biases that could change effects.
Type 1 evidence:
Randomized clinical trials or overwhelming evidence from observational studies.
Type 2 evidence:
Randomized clinical trials with important limitations or exceptionally strong evidence 
from observational studies.
Type 3 evidence:
Observational studies or randomized clinical trials with notable limitations.
Type 4 evidence:
Clinical experience and observations, observational studies with important limitations, or 
randomized clinical trials with several major limitations.
Dowell et al.
Page 25
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 2.
Key Questions for the Clinical Evidence Review
Key Question 1. Effectiveness and Comparative Effectiveness
a.
In patients with chronic pain, what is the effectiveness of long-term opioid 
therapy vs placebo or no opioid therapy for long-term (≥1 year) outcomes 
related to pain, function, and quality of life?
b.
How does effectiveness vary depending on: (1) the specific type or cause of 
pain (eg, neuropathic, musculoskeletal [including low back pain], 
fibromyalgia, sickle cell disease, inflammatory pain, and headache disorders); 
(2) patient demographics (eg, age, ethnicity, gender); and (3) patient 
comorbidities (including past or current alcohol or substance use disorders, 
mental health disorders, medical comorbidities, and high risk for addiction)?
c.
In patients with chronic pain, what is the comparative effectiveness of opioids 
vs nonopioid therapies (pharmacologic or nonpharmacologic) on outcomes 
related to pain, function, and quality of life?
d.
In patients with chronic pain, what is the comparative effectiveness of opioids 
plus nonopioid interventions (pharmacologic or nonpharmacologic) vs 
opioids or nonopioid interventions alone on outcomes related to pain, 
function, quality of life, and doses opioids used?
Key Question 2. Harms and Adverse Events
a.
In patients with chronic pain, what are the risks of opioids vs placebo or no 
opioid on (1) opioid abuse, addiction, and related outcomes; (2) overdose; and 
(3) other harms, including gastrointestinal-related harms, falls, fractures, 
motor vehicle crashes, endocrinologic harms, infections, cardiovascular 
events, cognitive harms, and psychological harms (eg, depression)?
b.
How do harms vary depending on (1) the specific type or cause of pain (eg, 
neuropathic, musculoskeletal [including back pain], fibromyalgia, sickle cell 
disease, inflammatory pain, headache disorders); (2) patient demographics; 
(3) patient comorbidities (including past or current substance use disorder or 
at high risk for addiction); and (4) the dose of opioids used?
Key Question 3. Dosing Strategies
a.
In patients with chronic pain, what is the comparative effectiveness of 
different methods for initiating and titrating opioids on outcomes related to 
pain, function, and quality of life; risk of overdose, addiction, abuse, or 
misuse; and doses of opioids used?
b.
In patients with chronic pain, what is the comparative effectiveness of 
immediate-release vs extended-release/long-acting (ER/LA) opioids on 
outcomes related to pain, function, and quality of life; risk of overdose, 
addiction, abuse, or misuse; and doses of opioids used?
Dowell et al.
Page 26
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 c.
In patients with chronic pain, what is the comparative effectiveness of 
different ER/LA opioids on outcomes related to pain, function, and quality of 
life and risk of overdose, addiction, abuse, or misuse?
d.
In patients with chronic pain, what is the comparative effectiveness of 
immediate-release plus ER/LA opioids vs ER/LA opioids alone on outcomes 
related to pain, function, and quality of life; risk of overdose, addiction, 
abuse, or misuse; and doses of opioids used?
e.
In patients with chronic pain, what is the comparative effectiveness of 
scheduled, continuous vs as-needed dosing of opioids on outcomes related to 
pain, function, and quality of life; risk of overdose, addiction, abuse, or 
misuse; and doses of opioids used?
f.
In patients with chronic pain on long-term opioid therapy, what is the 
comparative effectiveness of dose escalation vs dose maintenance or use of 
dose thresholds on outcomes related to pain, function, and quality of life?
g.
In patients on long-term opioid therapy, what is the comparative effectiveness 
of opioid rotation vs maintenance of current opioid therapy on outcomes 
related to pain, function, and quality of life; and doses of opioids used?
h.
In patients on long-term opioid therapy, what is the comparative effectiveness 
of different strategies for treating acute exacerbations of chronic pain on 
outcomes related to pain, function, and quality of life?
i.
In patients on long-term opioid therapy, what are the effects of decreasing 
opioid doses or of tapering off opioids vs continuation of opioids on outcomes 
related to pain, function, quality of life, and withdrawal?
j.
In patients on long-term opioid therapy, what is the comparative effectiveness 
of different tapering protocols and strategies on measures related to pain, 
function, quality of life, withdrawal symptoms, and likelihood of opioid 
cessation?
Key Question 4. Risk Assessment and Risk Mitigation Strategies
a.
In patients with chronic pain being considered for long-term opioid therapy, 
what is the accuracy of instruments for predicting risk of opioid overdose, 
addiction, abuse, or misuse?
b.
In patients with chronic pain, what is the effectiveness of use of risk 
prediction instruments on outcomes related to overdose, addiction, abuse, or 
misuse?
c.
In patients with chronic pain prescribed long-term opioid therapy, what is the 
effectiveness of risk mitigation strategies, including (1) opioid management 
plans, (2) patient education, (3) urine drug screening, (4) use of prescription 
drug monitoring program data, (5) use of monitoring instruments, (6) more 
frequent monitoring intervals, (7) pill counts, and (8) use of abuse-deterrent 
formulations on outcomes related to overdose, addiction, abuse, or misuse?
Dowell et al.
Page 27
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 d.
What is the comparative effectiveness of treatment strategies for managing 
patients with addiction to prescription opioids on outcomes related to 
overdose, abuse, misuse, pain, function, and quality of life?
Key Question 5. Effect of Opioid Therapy for Acute Pain on Long-term Use
a.
In patients with acute pain, what are the effects of prescribing opioid therapy 
vs not prescribing opioid therapy for acute pain on long-term opioid use?
Key questions 1–4 were developed for the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality 
review.7
Dowell et al.
Page 28
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 3.
Key Areas for the Contextual Evidence Review
•
Effectiveness of alternative treatments, including nonpharmacologic (eg, 
cognitive behavioral therapy, exercise therapy, interventional treatments, 
multimodal pain treatment) and nonopioid pharmacologic treatments (eg, 
acetaminophen, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, antidepressants, 
anticonvulsants), including studies of any duration.
•
Benefits and harms of opioid therapy (including additional studies not 
included in the clinical evidence review, such as studies that were not 
restricted to patients with chronic pain, evaluated outcomes at any duration, 
performed ecological analyses, or used observational study designs other than 
cohort and case-cohort control studies) related to specific opioids, high-dose 
therapy, co-prescription with other controlled substances, duration of use, 
special populations, and potential usefulness of risk stratification or 
mitigation approaches; in addition to effectiveness of treatments associated 
with addressing potential harms of opioid therapy (opioid use disorder).
•
Clinician and patient values and preferences related to opioids and 
medication risks, benefits, and use.
•
Resource allocation, including costs and economic efficiency of opioid 
therapy and risk mitigation strategies.
•
Clinical guidelines relevant to opioid prescribing to complement the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention recommendations (eg, guidelines on 
alternative treatments, guidelines with recommendations related to specific 
clinician actions such as urine drug testing or opioid tapering protocols).
Dowell et al.
Page 29
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 4.
Cautions About Calculating Morphine Milligram Equivalent Doses
•
Equianalgesic dose conversions are only estimates and cannot account for 
individual variability in genetics and pharmacokinetics.
•
Do not use the calculated dose in morphine milligram equivalents (MME) to 
determine the doses to use when converting one opioid to another; when 
converting opioids, the new opioid is typically dosed at substantially lower 
than the calculated MME dose to avoid accidental overdose due to incomplete 
cross-tolerance and individual variability in opioid pharmacokinetics.
•
Use particular caution with methadone dose conversions because the 
conversion factor increases at higher doses.
•
Use particular caution with fentanyl because it is dosed in μg/h instead of 
mg/d, and its absorption is affected by heat and other factors.
Dowell et al.
Page 30
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 5.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Recommendations for 
Prescribing Opioids for Chronic Pain Outside of Active Cancer, Palliative, 
and End-of-Life Care
Determining When to Initiate or Continue Opioids for Chronic Pain
1.
Nonpharmacologic therapy and nonopioid pharmacologic therapy are 
preferred for chronic pain. Clinicians should consider opioid therapy only if 
expected benefits for both pain and function are anticipated to outweigh risks 
to the patient. If opioids are used, they should be combined with 
nonpharmacologic therapy and nonopioid pharmacologic therapy, as 
appropriate.
2.
Before starting opioid therapy for chronic pain, clinicians should establish 
treatment goals with all patients, including realistic goals for pain and 
function, and should consider how therapy will be discontinued if benefits do 
not outweigh risks. Clinicians should continue opioid therapy only if there is 
clinically meaningful improvement in pain and function that outweighs risks 
to patient safety.
3.
Before starting and periodically during opioid therapy, clinicians should 
discuss with patients known risks and realistic benefits of opioid therapy and 
patient and clinician responsibilities for managing therapy.
Opioid Selection, Dosage, Duration, Follow-up, and Discontinuation
4.
When starting opioid therapy for chronic pain, clinicians should prescribe 
immediate-release opioids instead of extended-release/long-acting (ER/LA) 
opioids.
5.
When opioids are started, clinicians should prescribe the lowest effective 
dosage. Clinicians should use caution when prescribing opioids at any dosage, 
should carefully reassess evidence of individual benefits and risks when 
increasing dosage to 50 morphine milligram equivalents (MME) or more per 
day, and should avoid increasing dosage to 90 MME or more per day or 
carefully justify a decision to titrate dosage to 90 MME or more per day.
6.
Long-term opioid use often begins with treatment of acute pain. When 
opioids are used for acute pain, clinicians should prescribe the lowest 
effective dose of immediate-release opioids and should prescribe no greater 
quantity than needed for the expected duration of pain severe enough to 
require opioids. Three days or less will often be sufficient; more than 7 days 
will rarely be needed.
7.
Clinicians should evaluate benefits and harms with patients within 1 to 4 
weeks of starting opioid therapy for chronic pain or of dose escalation. 
Clinicians should evaluate benefits and harms of continued therapy with 
patients every 3 months or more frequently. If benefits do not outweigh harms 
Dowell et al.
Page 31
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of continued opioid therapy, clinicians should optimize therapies and work 
with patients to taper opioids to lower dosages or to taper and discontinue 
opioids.
Assessing Risk and Addressing Harms of Opioid Use
8.
Before starting and periodically during continuation of opioid therapy, 
clinicians should evaluate risk factors for opioid-related harms. Clinicians 
should incorporate into the management plan strategies to mitigate risk, 
including considering offering naloxone when factors that increase risk for 
opioid overdose, such as history of overdose, history of substance use 
disorder, higher opioid dosages (≥50 MME/d), or concurrent benzodiazepine 
use are present.
9.
Clinicians should review the patient’s history of controlled substance 
prescriptions using state prescription drug monitoring program (PDMP) data 
to determine whether the patient is receiving opioid dosages or dangerous 
combinations that put him or her at high risk for overdose. Clinicians should 
review PDMP data when starting opioid therapy for chronic pain and 
periodically during opioid therapy for chronic pain, ranging from every 
prescription to every 3 months.
10.
When prescribing opioids for chronic pain, clinicians should use urine drug 
testing before starting opioid therapy and consider urine drug testing at least 
annually to assess for prescribed medications as well as other controlled 
prescription drugs and illicit drugs.
11.
Clinicians should avoid prescribing opioid pain medication and 
benzodiazepines concurrently whenever possible.
12.
Clinicians should offer or arrange evidence-based treatment (usually 
medication-assisted treatment with buprenorphine or methadone in 
combination with behavioral therapies) for patients with opioid use disorder.
All recommendations are category A (apply to all patients outside of active cancer 
treatment, palliative care, and end-of-life care) except recommendation 10 (designated 
category B, with individual decision making required); detailed ratings of the evidence 
supporting the recommendations are provided in the full guideline publication.11
Dowell et al.
Page 32
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Dowell et al.
Page 33
Table 1.
GRADE Ratings of the Evidence for the Key Clinical Questions
a
Outcome
Studies
Limitations
Inconsistency
Imprecision
Type of Evidenceb
Other Factors
Estimates of Effect 
or Findings
Effectiveness and Comparative Effectiveness (Key Question 1)
Effectiveness of long-term opioid therapy vs placebo or no opioid therapy for long-term (≥1 y) outcomes
 Pain, function, and 
quality of life
None
NA
NA
NA
Insufficient
NA
No evidence.
Harms and Adverse Events (Key Question 2)
Risks of opioids vs placebo or no opioids on opioid abuse, addiction, and related outcomes; overdose; and other harms
 Abuse or addiction
1 cohort study (n 
= 568 640)
Serious limitations
Unknown (1 study)
No imprecision
3
None identified
One retrospective 
cohort study found 
long-term use of 
prescribed opioids was 
associated with an 
increased risk of abuse 
or dependence 
diagnosis vs no opioid 
use (adjusted OR 
range, 14.9–122.5, 
depending on dose).
 Abuse or addiction
10 uncontrolled 
studies (n = 
3780)
Very serious limitations
Very serious inconsistency
No imprecision
4
None identified
in primary care 
settings, prevalence of 
opioid abuse ranged 
from 0.6%−8%; 
prevalence of 
dependence, 3%–26%. 
In pain clinic settings, 
prevalence of misuse, 
8%−16%, and 
addiction, 2%–14%. 
Prevalence of aberrant 
drug-related 
behaviors, 6%−37%.
 Overdose
1 cohort study (n 
= 9940)
Serious limitations
Unknown (1 study)
Serious imprecision
3
None identified
Current opioid use 
associated with 
increased risk of any 
overdose events, 
adjusted HR,
5.2 (95% Cl, 2.1–12), 
and serious overdose 
events, adjusted HR, 
8.4 (95% Cl, 2.5–28) 
vs current nonuse.
 Fractures
1 cohort study (n 
= 2341) 1 case-
Serious limitations
No inconsistency
No imprecision
3
None identified
Opioid use associated 
with increased risk of 
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Dowell et al.
Page 34
Outcome
Studies
Limitations
Inconsistency
Imprecision
Type of Evidenceb
Other Factors
Estimates of Effect 
or Findings
controlstudy (n = 
21 739 case 
patients)
fracture in 1 cohort 
study, adjusted HR, 
1.28 (95% Cl, 0.99–
1.64), and 1 case-
control study, adjusted 
OR, 1.27 (95% Cl, 
1.21–1.33).
 Myocardial infarction
1 cohort study (n 
= 426 124) 1 
case-controlstudy 
(n = 11 693 case 
patients)
No limitations
No inconsistency
No imprecision
3
None identified
Current opioid use 
associated with 
increased risk of 
myocardial infarction 
vs nonuse, adjusted 
OR, 1.28 (95% Cl, 
1.19–1.37) and IRR, 
2.66 (95% Cl, 2.30–
3.08).
 Endocrinologic harms
1 cross-sectional 
study (n = 
11327)
Serious limitations
Unknown (1 study)
No imprecision
3
None identified
Long-term opioid use 
associated with 
increased risk for use 
of medications for 
erectile dysfunction or 
testosterone 
replacement vs 
nonuse, adjusted OR, 
1.5 (95% Cl, 1.1–1.9).
How do harms vary depending on the opioid dose used?
 Abuse or addiction
1 cohort study (n 
= 568 640)
Serious limitations
Unknown (1 study)
No imprecision
3
None identified
One retrospective 
cohort study found 
higher doses of long-
term opioid therapy 
associated with 
increased risk of 
opioid abuse or 
dependence than lower 
doses. Compared with 
no opioid prescription, 
the adjusted ORs were 
15 (95% Cl, 10–21) 
for 1–36 MM E/d, 29 
(95% Cl, 20–41) for 
36–120 MM E/d, and 
122 (95% Cl, 73–205) 
for ≥120 MME/d.
 Overdose
1 cohort study (n 
= 9940) and 1 
case-control 
study (n = 593 
case patients in 
primary analysis)
Serious limitations
No inconsistency
No imprecision
3
Magnitude of 
effect, dose-
response 
relationship
Compared with l-<20 
MME/d, 1 cohort 
study found an 
adjusted HR for an 
overdose event of 1,44 
(95% Cl, 0.57–3.62) 
for 20-<50 MME/d 
that increased to 8.87 
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Dowell et al.
Page 35
Outcome
Studies
Limitations
Inconsistency
Imprecision
Type of Evidenceb
Other Factors
Estimates of Effect 
or Findings
(95% Cl, 3.99–19.72) 
at >100 MME/d; 1 
case-control study 
found an adjusted OR 
for an opioid-related 
death of 1,32 (95% Cl, 
0.94–1.84) for 20–49 
MME/d that increased 
to 2.88 (95% Cl, 1.79–
4.63) at ≥200 MME/d.
 Fractures
1 cohort study (n 
= 2341)
Seriouslimitations
Unknown (1 study)
Serious imprecision
3
None identified
Risk of fracture 
increased from an 
adjusted HR of 1.20 
(95% Cl, 0.92–1.56) at 
l-<20 MME/d to 2.00 
(95% Cl, 1.24–3.24) at 
≥50 MME/d; the trend 
was of borderline 
statistical significance.
 Myocardial infarction
1 cohort study (n 
= 426 124)
Serious limitations
Unknown (1 study)
No imprecision
3
None identified
Relative to a 
cumulative dose of 0–
1350 MME during a 
90-d period, the IRR 
for myocardial 
infarction for 1350-
<2700 MME was 1,21 
(95% Cl, 1.02–1.45); 
for 2700-<8100 MME, 
1.42 (95% Cl, 1.21–
1.67); for 8100-<18 
000 MME, 1.89 (95% 
Cl, 1,54–2.33); and for 
>18 000 MME, 1.73 
(95% Cl, 1.32–2.26).
 Motor vehicle crash 
injuries
1 case-control 
study (n = 5300 
case patients)
No limitations
Unknown (1 study)
No imprecision
3
None identified
No association 
between opioid dose 
and risk of motor 
vehicle crash injuries 
even though opioid 
dosages ≥20 MME/d 
were associated with 
increased odds of road 
trauma among drivers.
 Endocrinologic harms
1 cross-sectional 
study (n = 
11327); new for 
update: 1 
additional cross-
sectional study (n 
= 1585)
Serious limitations
Consistent
No imprecision
3
None identified
Relative to 0-<20 
MME/d, the adjusted 
OR for ≥120 MME/d 
for use of medications 
for erectile 
dysfunction or 
testosterone 
replacement was 1.6 
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Dowell et al.
Page 36
Outcome
Studies
Limitations
Inconsistency
Imprecision
Type of Evidenceb
Other Factors
Estimates of Effect 
or Findings
(95% Cl, 1.0–2.4). 
One new cross-
sectional study found 
higher-dose long-term 
opioid therapy 
associated with 
increased risk of 
androgen deficiency 
among men receiving 
immediate-release 
opioids, adjusted OR 
per 10 MME/d, 1.16 
(95% Cl, 1,09–1.23), 
but the dose response 
was very weak among 
men receiving ER/LA 
opioids.
Dosing Strategies (Key 
Question 3)
Comparative effectiveness 
of different methods for 
initiating opioid therapy 
and titrating doses
 Pain
3 randomized 
trials (n = 93)
Serious limitations
Serious inconsistency
Very serious imprecision
4
None identified
Trials on effects of 
titration with 
immediate-release vs 
ER/LA opioids 
reported inconsistent 
results and had 
additional differences 
between treatment 
groups in dosing 
protocols (titrated vs 
fixed dosing) and 
doses of opioids used.
 Overdose
New for update: 
1 cohort study (n 
= 840 606)
Serious Limitations
Unknown (1 study)
No imprecision
4
None identified
One new cross-
sectional study found 
initiation of therapy 
with an ER/LA opioid 
associated with 
increased risk of 
overdose vs initiation 
with an immediate-
release opioid, 
adjusted HR, 2.33 
(95% Cl, 1.26–4.32).
Comparative effectiveness 
of different ER/LA opioids
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Dowell et al.
Page 37
Outcome
Studies
Limitations
Inconsistency
Imprecision
Type of Evidenceb
Other Factors
Estimates of Effect 
or Findings
 Pain and function
3 randomized 
trials (n = 1850)
Serious limitations
No inconsistency
No imprecision
3
None identified
No differences.
 All-cause mortality
1 cohort study (n 
= 108 492); new 
for update: 1 
cohort study (n = 
38 756)
Serious limitations
Serious inconsistency
No imprecision
4
None identified
One cohort study 
found methadone to be 
associated with lower 
all-cause mortality 
risk than sustained-
release morphine in a 
propensity-adjusted 
analysis, adjusted HR, 
0.56 (95% Cl, 0.51–
0.62).
One cohort study 
among Tennessee 
Medicaid patients 
found methadone to be 
associated with higher 
risk of all-cause 
mortality than 
sustained-release 
morphine, adjusted 
HR, 1.46 (95% Cl, 
1.17–1.73).
 Abuse and related 
outcomes
1 cohort study (n 
= 5684)
Serious limitations
Unknown (1 study)
Serious imprecision
4
None identified
One cohort study 
found some 
differences between 
ER/LA opioids in 
rates of adverse 
outcomes related to 
abuse, but outcomes 
were nonspecific for 
opioid-related adverse 
events, precluding 
reliable conclusions.
ER/LA vs immediate-
release opioids
 Endocrinologic harms
New for update: 
1 cross-sectional 
study (n = 1585)
Serious limitations
Unknown (1 study)
No imprecision
4
None identified
One cross-sectional 
study found ER/LA 
opioids associated 
with increased risk of 
androgen deficiency 
vs immediate-release 
opioids, adjusted OR, 
3.39 (95% Cl, 2.39–
4.77).
Dose escalation vs dose 
maintenance or use of dose 
thresholds
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Dowell et al.
Page 38
Outcome
Studies
Limitations
Inconsistency
Imprecision
Type of Evidenceb
Other Factors
Estimates of Effect 
or Findings
 Pain, function, or 
withdrawal due to opioid 
misuse
1 randomized 
trial (n = 140)
Serious limitations
Unknown (1 study)
Very serious imprecision
3
None identified
No difference between 
more liberal dose 
escalation vs 
maintenance of 
current doses in pain, 
function, or risk of 
withdrawal due to 
opioid misuse, but 
there was limited 
separation in opioid 
doses between groups 
(52 vs 40 MME/d at 
the end of the trial).
Immediate-release vs 
ER/LA opioids, 
immediate-release plus 
ER/LA opioids vs ER/LA 
opioids alone, scheduled 
and continuous vs as-
needed dosing of opioids, 
or opioid rotation vs 
maintenance of current 
therapy
 Pain, function, quality 
of life, and outcomes 
related to abuse
None
NA
NA
NA
Insufficient
NA
No evidence.
Effects of decreasing or 
tapering opioid doses vs 
continuation of opioid 
therapy
 Pain and function
1 randomized 
trial (n = 10)
Very serious [imitations
Unknown (1 study)
Very serious imprecision
4
None identified
Abrupt cessation of 
morphine was 
associated with 
increased pain and 
decreased function 
compared with 
continuation of 
morphine.
Comparative effectiveness 
of different tapering 
protocols and strategies
 Opioid abstinence
2 nonrandomized 
trials (n = 150)
Very serious [imitations
No inconsistency
Very serious imprecision
4
None identified
No clear differences 
between different 
methods for opioid 
discontinuation or 
tapering in likelihood 
of opioid abstinence 
after 3–6 mo.
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Dowell et al.
Page 39
Outcome
Studies
Limitations
Inconsistency
Imprecision
Type of Evidenceb
Other Factors
Estimates of Effect 
or Findings
Risk Assessment and 
Risk Mitigation 
Strategies (Key Question 
4)
Diagnostic accuracy of 
instruments for predicting 
risk for opioid overdose, 
addiction, abuse, or misuse 
among patients with 
chronic pain being 
considered for long-term 
opioid therapy
 Opioid Risk Tool
3 studies of 
diagnostic 
accuracy (n = 
496);
new for update: 2 
studies of 
diagnostic 
accuracy (n = 
320)
Serious limitations
Very serious inconsistency
Serious imprecision
4
None identified
Based on a cutoff 
score of >4 (or 
unspecified), 5 studies 
(2 fair-quality, 3 poor-
quality) reported 
sensitivity that ranged 
from 0.20–0.99 and 
specificity that ranged 
from 0.16–0.88.
 Screener and opioid 
assessment for patients 
with pain, version 1
2 studies of 
diagnostic 
accuracy (n = 
203)
Very serious limitations
No inconsistency
Serious imprecision
3
None identified
Based on a cutoff 
score of ≥8, sensitivity 
was 0.68 and 
specificity was 0.38 in 
1 study, for a positive 
likelihood ratio of 
1.11 and a negative 
likelihood ratio of 
0.83. Based on a 
cutoff score of >6, 
sensitivity was 0.73 in 
1 study.
 Screener and opioid 
assessment for patients 
with pain: revised
New for update: 
2 studies of 
diagnostic 
accuracy (n = 
320)
Very serious limitations
No inconsistency
Serious imprecision
3
None identified
Based on a cutoff 
score of >3 or 
unspecified, sensitivity 
was 0.25 and 0.53 and 
specificity was 0.62 
and 0.73 in 2 studies, 
for likelihood ratios 
close to 1.
 Brief risk interview
New for update:2 
studies of 
diagnostic 
accuracy (n = 
320)
Very serious limitations
No inconsistency
Serious imprecision
3
None identified
Based on a “high-risk” 
assessment, sensitivity 
was 0.73 and 0.83 and 
specificity was 0.43 
and 0.88 in 2 studies, 
for positive likelihood 
ratios of 1.28 and 7.18 
and negative 
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Dowell et al.
Page 40
Outcome
Studies
Limitations
Inconsistency
Imprecision
Type of Evidenceb
Other Factors
Estimates of Effect 
or Findings
likelihood ratios of 
0.63 and 0.19.
Effectiveness of risk 
prediction instruments on 
outcomes related to 
overdose, addiction, abuse, 
or misuse in patients with 
chronic pain
 Outcomes related to 
abuse
None
NA
NA
NA
Insufficient
NA
No evidence.
Effectiveness of risk 
mitigation strategies, 
including opioid 
management plans, patient 
education, urine drug 
screening, use of 
prescription drug 
monitoring program data, 
use of monitoring 
instruments, more frequent 
monitoring intervals, pill 
counts, and use of abuse-
deterrent formulations, on 
outcomes related to 
overdose, addiction, abuse, 
or misuse
 Outcomes related to 
abuse
None
NA
NA
NA
Insufficient
NA
No evidence.
Comparative effectiveness 
of treatment strategies for 
managing patients with 
addiction to prescription 
opioids
 Outcomes related to 
abuse
None
NA
NA
NA
Insufficient
NA
No evidence.
Effects of Opioid 
Therapy for Acute Pain 
on Long-term Use (Key 
Question 5)
Long-term opioid use
New for update: 
2 cohort studies 
(n = 399 852)
Serious limitations
No inconsistency
No imprecision
3
None identified
One study found use 
of opioids within 7 d 
of low-risk surgery 
associated with 
increased likelihood of 
opioid use at 1 y, 
adjusted OR, 1,44 
(95% Cl, 1.39–1.50).
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Dowell et al.
Page 41
Outcome
Studies
Limitations
Inconsistency
Imprecision
Type of Evidenceb
Other Factors
Estimates of Effect 
or Findings
One study found use 
of opioids within 15 d 
of onset of low back 
pain among workers 
with a compensation 
claim associated with 
increased risk of late 
opioid use, adjusted 
OR, 2.08 (95% Cl, 
1,55–2.78) for 1–140 
MM E/d and OR,
6.14 (95% Cl, 4.92–
7.66) for ≥450 MM 
E/d.
Abbreviations: AHRQ, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; GRADE, Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation; ER/LA, extended-release/long-acting; HR, hazard 
ratio; IRR, incidence rate ratio; KQ, key question; MME, morphine milligramequivalents; NA, not applicable (no evidence available for rating); OR, odds ratio.
aRatings were made per GRADE quality assessment criteria; “no limitations” indicates that limitations assessed through the GRADE method were not identified. This table is an update and modification of 
data presented previously in an online AHRQ-sponsored report on the effectiveness and risks of long-term opioid treatment of chronic pain.7
bTypes of evidence are described in Box 1.
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Dowell et al.
Page 42
Table 2.
Relationship Between Dose and Overdose
Source
Topic
Population
Primary Outcomes
Key Findings
Bohnert et al,27 
2016a
Matched case-controlstudy 
examining association between 
opioid dosage and fatal 
overdose
VeteransHealth Administration 
patients with chronic pain receiving 
opioid therapy, 2004–2009
Unintentional fatalopioid overdose
24% of controls had dosages >50 MME/d, but 59% of cases 
had dosages above this level.
Bohnert et al,22 
2011a
Case-cohort study examining 
the association between 
prescribed opioid dosage in 
MME/d and riskof opioid 
overdose death
VeteransHealth Administration 
patients receiving opioid therapy for 
pain, 2004–2005
Fatal opioid overdose
Among patients with chronic pain, receiving 20-<50 
MME/d, 50-<100 MME/d, and ≥100 MME/d was associated 
with adjusted HRs for overdose death of 1.88, 4.63, and 7.18 
comparedwith 1-<20 MME/d.
Dasgupta et al,23 
2015a
Prospective observational 
cohort study investigating fatal 
overdose among patients 
receiving opioid pain 
medication
Residents of North Carolina receiving 
a prescription for opioid pain 
medication
Overdose death involving opioid pain 
medication
Overdose risk increased steadily in a dose-dependent 
manner; rate of increase decreased after 200 MME/d. 
Evidence of concurrent benzodiazepine prescription in the 
past year was 80%, and benzodiazepines were determined to 
be involved in 61% of deaths involving opioid pain 
medications.
Dunn et al,19 
2010b
Cohort study examining rates 
ofopioid overdose and 
association with opioid dosage 
among patients receiving 
chronic opioid therapy
Health maintenance organization 
patients who received ≥3 opioid 
prescriptions within 90 d for chronic 
noncancer pain
Opioid-related overdose (fatalor 
nonfatal)
Compared with receiving 1-<20 MME/d, receiving 20-<50 
MME/d, 50-<100 MME d, and >100 MME/d was associated 
with adjusted HRs for overdose of 1.4, 3.7, and 8.9.
Gomes et al,20 
2011b
Case-control study examining 
association between opioid 
dose level and opioid-related 
mortality
Ontario residents aged 15–64y who 
received an opioid for nonmalignant 
pain through public prescription drug 
coverage, 1997–2006
Coroner’s determination of opioid-
related death
Compared with receiving 1-<20 MME/d, receiving 20–49 
MME/d, 50–99 MME d, and 100–199 MME/d was 
associated with odds ratios for fatal overdose of 1.3,1.9, and 
2.0.
Gwira Baumblatt 
et al,24 2014a
Matched case-control study 
examining association between 
opioid dosage or number 
ofprescribers or pharmacies 
with overdose death
Patients enrolled in Tennessee 
Controlled Substances Monitoring 
Program, 2007–2011
Fatal overdose
Opioid-related overdose death was associated with >100 
MME/d, ≥4 prescribers, and ≥4 pharmacies (adjusted odds 
ratios, 11.2, 6.5, and 6.0). At least one of these risk factors 
was present in 55% of overdose deaths.
Liang and Turner,
25 2015a
Longitudinal cohort study 
examining association between 
opioid dosage levels and 
overdose
Health maintenance program 
enrollees who filled at least 2 
schedule II or III opioid analgesic 
prescriptions from January 2009 
through July 2012
Fatal overdose
Overdose risk was associated with daily opioid dosage. In 
addition, among patients prescribed 50–100 MME/d, 
overdose risk was significantly greater for patients prescribed 
>1830 MME cumulatively over 6 mo.
Paulozzi et al,21 
2012a
Matched case-control study 
examining association between 
overdose death and patterns of 
use ofopioid analgesics
New Mexico residents who died of 
unintentionaldrug overdoses and 
patients with prescriptions in the 
Prescription Monitoring Program, 
April 2006–March 2008
Fatal overdose
Patients receiving a dailyaverage dose of >40 MME had a 
12.2 greater odds of overdose compared with those with 
lower opioid dosages or no opioid prescriptions.
Zedler et al,26 
2014a
Association between opioid 
dose and overdose
Patients dispensed an opioid by the 
Veterans Health Administration, 
2010–2012
Respiratory/central nervous system 
depression, overdose
Compared with patients with 1-<20 MME/d, the odds ratio 
of overdose was 1.5 for patients prescribed 20-<50 MME/d, 
2.2 for patients prescribed 50-<100 MME/d, and 4.1 for 
patients prescribed ≥100 MME/d.
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Dowell et al.
Page 43
Abbreviations: HR, hazard ratio; MME, morphine milligram equivalents.
aIncluded in the contextual evidence review.
bIncluded in the clinical evidence review.
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Dowell et al.
Page 44
Table 3.
Effectiveness and Harms of Nonpharmacologic and Nonopioid Pharmacologic Treatments
a
Source
Topic or Intervention
Participants or Population
Primary Outcomes
Key Findings
Study Quality
Busch et al,48 2007
Exercise training vs untreated 
control or nonexercise 
intervention
Systematic review of 33 RCTs 
with fibromyalgia patients
Global well-being, 
selected signs and 
symptoms, and 
physical function
Exercise training improves global well-
being and physicalfunction. Supervised 
aerobic exercise training has beneficial 
effects on physical capacity and 
fibromyalgia symptoms.
Four studies were classified as 
high quality, 15 as moderate 
quality, and 14 as low quality
Chaparro et al,49 2014
Noninjectable opioids vs 
placebo or other treatments
Systematic review of 15 RCTs 
with patients with chronic low 
back pain
Pain
One trialfound tramadolsimilar to celecoxib 
for pain relief. Two trials did not find a 
difference between opioids and 
antidepressants for pain or function.
Low- to moderate-quality 
evidence
Collins et al,50 2000
Antidepressants vs placebo; 
anticonvulsants vs placebo
Systematic review of 19 RCTs for 
diabetic neuropathy or 
postherpetic neuralgia
Pain
For diabetic neuropathy, the NNT for ≥50% 
pain relief was3.4 for antidepressants (12 
trials, 10 evaluated TCAs and 3 SSRIs) and 
2.7 for anticonvulsants (3 trials).
For postherpetic neuralgia, the NNT was 2.1 
for antidepressants (3 studies evaluating 
TCAs) and 3.2 for anticonvulsants (1 study 
evaluating gabapentin).
The mean and median quality 
score for included studies was 
4ona scale of 1–5
Fransen et al,51 2015
Exercise vs nonexercise group 
(active or no treatment)
Systematic review of 54 RCTs or 
quasi-randomized trials for knee 
osteoarthritis
Reduced joint pain or 
improved physical 
function and quality 
of life
Exercise reduced pain, improved function, 
and improved quality of life 
immediatelyaftertreatment; in studies 
providing posttreatment follow-up data, 
improved pain and function were sustained 
for 2–6 mo.
High-quality evidence for 
reduced pain and improved 
quality of life and moderate-
quality evidence for improved 
function
Fransen et al,522014
Exercise vs nonexercise group 
(active or no treatment)
Systematic review of 10 RCTs or 
quasi-randomized trials for hip 
osteoarthritis
Reduced joint pain 
and improved 
physical function and 
quality of life
Exercise reduced pain and improved 
function immediatelyafter treatment; in 
studies providing posttreatment follow-up 
data, improved pain and function were 
sustained for at least 3–6 mo.
High-quality evidence for 
reduced pain and improved 
function
Häuser et al,53 2013
Duloxetine vs placebo; 
milnacipran vs placebo
Systematic review of 10 RCTs for 
fibromyalgia patients
Benefits and harms
Duloxetine and milnacipran reduced pain 
bya smallamount compared with placebo.
Risk of bias in included 
studies was low
Hayden et al,54 2005
Exercise therapy vs no 
treatment, other conservative 
treatments
Systematic review consisting of 
61 RCTs for low back pain
Pain, function
Exercise therapy reduces pain and improves 
function with small magnitudes of effect. 
Effectiveness of exercise therapy appears to 
be greater in populations visiting a health 
care provider compared with the 
generalpopulation.
Only a small number of 
studies rated as high quality; 
potential publication bias
Lee et al,55 2014
CIM therapies vs single self-
care CIM, non-self-care CIM, 
usualcare/no treatment, other 
multimodalprogram, or other 
control
Systematic review of 26 RCTs for 
management of chronic pain
Pain symptoms
Integrative multimodal therapies resulted in 
positive, but sometimes mixed, effects on 
pain symptoms compared with active 
controls or single self-care modalities. More 
studies are needed to make strong 
conclusions about effectiveness.
Large majority of poor quality, 
including weaknesses in 
randomization and allocation 
concealment
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Dowell et al.
Page 45
Source
Topic or Intervention
Participants or Population
Primary Outcomes
Key Findings
Study Quality
Lunn etal,56 2014
Duloxetine vs placebo or other 
controls
Systematic review of 18 RCTs for 
neuropathic pain, chronic pain 
conditions without identified 
cause, or fibromyalgia
Benefits and harms of 
duloxetine
Duloxetine at 60 mg and 120 mg daily, but 
not lower dosages, were effective in 
reducing pain in diabetic 
peripheralneuropathy pain and in 
fibromyalgia.
Moderate-quality evidence for 
diabetic neuropathy; lower-
quality evidence for 
fibromyalgia; some risk of 
bias
Moore et al,57 2009
Pregabalin vs placebo or any 
active control
Systematic review of 25 double-
blind RCTs for postherpetic 
neuralgia, painful diabetic 
neuropathy, central neuropathic 
pain, or fibromyalgia
Analgesic efficacy 
and associated 
adverse events
Pregabalin was effective in patients with 
postherpetic neuralgia, diabetic neuropathy, 
central neuropathic pain, and fibromyalgia 
at doses of 300 mg, 450 mg, and 600 mg 
(but not at 150 mg) daily. NNTs were 
generally ≤6 for moderate benefit in 
postherpetic neuralgia and diabetic 
neuropathy but ≥7 for fibromyalgia.
Studies all had Oxford quality 
scores based on 
randomization, blinding, and 
reporting of dropout ≥3 (out of 
maximum of 5)
Moore et al,58 2014
Gabapentin vs placebo
Systematic review of 37 RCTs for 
neuropathic pain or fibromyalgia
Analgesic efficacy 
and adverse effects
Gabapentin was significantly more effective 
than placebo in reducing pain in diabetic 
neuropathyand postherpeticneuralgia. 
Evidence was insufficient for other 
conditions.
“Second-tier” evidence (some 
risk of bias, but adequate 
numbers in the trials)
Roelofs et al,59 2008
NSAIDs and COX-2 
inhibitors vs control
Systematic review of 65 RCTs for 
nonspecific low back pain
Acute low back pain
NSAIDs are more effective than placebo for 
acute and chronic low back pain without 
sciatica, but have more adverse effects. 
NSAIDs are not more effective than 
acetaminophen but had more adverse 
effects. No type of NSAIDs, including 
COX-2 inhibitors, was found to be more 
effective than other NSAIDs.
Mixed high- and low-quality 
studies
Saarto et al,60 2010
Antidepressants vs placebo or 
other controls
Systematic review of 61 RCTs for 
neuropathic pain
Pain
TCAs and venlafaxine have low NNTs (3.6 
and 3.1, respectively) for at least moderate 
pain relief.
Study quality limited 
byinsufficient reporting detail
Salerno et al,61 2002
Antidepressants vs placebo
Systematic review of 9 RCTs for 
chronic back pain
Back pain
Antidepressants were associated with small 
but significant improvement in pain 
severity; improvements in function were not 
significant. Most (6) studies evaluated 
TCAs.
Moderate-quality studies
Staiger et al,62 2003
Antidepressants vs placebo
Systematic review of 7 RCTs in 
patients with chronic low back 
pain
Back pain
Four of 5 studies evaluating TCA and 
tetracyclic antidepressants found significant 
improvement in chronic low back pain. 
Other antidepressants studied (2 studies 
evaluating SSRIs and 1 evaluating 
trazodone) did not show significant pain 
improvement.
Mixed quality (quality scores 
ranged from 11–19 out of 22)
Trelle et al,63 2011
NSAIDs vs other NSAIDs or 
placebo
Meta-analysis of 31 RCTs 
comparing any NSAID with other 
NSAID or placebo for any 
medical condition
Myocardial infarction, 
stroke, cardiovascular 
death, death from any 
cause
Compared with placebo, NSAIDs were 
associated with increased risk of myocardial 
infarction, stroke, and cardiovascular death.
Generally high
Welsch et al,64
2015
Opioids (including tramadol) 
vs nonopioids (including 
acetaminophen, NSAIDs/
COX-2 inhibitors, mexiletine, 
Systematic review of 10 RCTs in 
patients with neuropathic pain, 
low back pain, or osteoarthritis
Efficacy (including 
various pain 
measures), 
tolerability, and safety
There was no significant difference between 
opioids and nonopioid analgesics in pain 
reduction; nonopioids were superior to 
opioids in improving physical function and 
One study had a high, 2 
studies a moderate, and 7 
studies a low study quality
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Dowell et al.
Page 46
Source
Topic or Intervention
Participants or Population
Primary Outcomes
Key Findings
Study Quality
anticonvulsants, 
antidepressants, and muscle 
relaxants)
were better tolerated. When patients from 
tramadol trials (n randomized = 2788) were 
removed from results of the review, results 
for pain and function for patients receiving 
opioids (morphine) compared with 
alternative drugs (n randomized = 223) had 
wide, overlapping confidence intervals. 
Improved tolerability foralternative drugs vs 
morphine remained significant.
Wiffen et al,65
2014
Carbamazepine vs placebo or 
other active control
Systematic review consisting of 
10 RCTs in adults with chronic 
neuropathic pain or fibromyalgia
Pain relief
Carbamazepine provided better pain relief 
than placebo for trigeminal neuralgia, 
diabetic neuropathy, and poststroke pain for 
≤4 weeks. Dizziness and drowsiness were 
commonly reported with carbamazepine. In 
4 studies, 65% of patients receiving 
carbamazepine vs 27% receiving placebo 
experienced ≥1 adverse event. In 8 studies, 
3% of patients receiving carbamazepine 
withdrew because of adverse events (vs 0% 
taking placebo).
Third-tier evidence (trials 
involving small numbers of 
participants; considered likely 
to be biased, with outcomes of 
limited clinical utility, or both)
Williams et al,66 2012
Cognitive behavioral therapy 
or behavioral therapy
Systematic review of 42 RCTs for 
patients with nonmalignant 
chronic pain except headache
Pain, disability, mood, 
and catastrophic 
thinking
Cognitive behavioral therapy was found to 
have small to moderate effects on pain, 
disability, mood, and catastrophic thinking 
immediatelyafter treatment when compared 
with usual treatment or deferred cognitive 
behavioral therapy, but only effects on 
mood persisted at follow-up. Behavioral 
therapy had a positive effect on mood 
immediately after treatment.
Mean quality of study design, 
15.8 out of 26 (SD 4.3; range, 
9–24 out of 26)
Abbreviations: CIM, complementary and integrative multimodal; COX-2, cyclooxygenase 2; NNT, number needed to treat; NSAID, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug; RCTs, randomized clinical trials; 
SSRIs, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors; TCA, tricyclic antidepressants.
aAll the studies in this table were included in the contextual evidence review.
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Dowell et al.
Page 47
Table 4.
Morphine Milligram Equivalent Doses for Commonly Prescribed Opioids
a
Opioidb
Conversion Factor
Codeine
0.15
Fentanyl transdermal, μg/h
2.4
Hydrocodone
1
Hydromorphone
4
Methadone, mg/d
 1–20
4
 21–40
8
 41–60
10
 ≥61–80
12
Morphine
1
Oxycodone
1.5
Oxymorphone
3
Tapentadolc
0.4
aAdapted from Von Korff M, Saunders K, Ray GT, et al. Clin J Pain. 2008;24:521–527, and Interagency Guideline on Prescribing Opioids for Pain. 
Washington State Agency Medical Directors’ Group. http://www.agencymeddirectors.wa.gov/Files/2015AMDGOpioidGuideline.pdf. Accessed 
February 19, 2016.
bAll doses are in mg/d except for fentanyl, which is μg/h. Multiply the daily dosage for each opioid by the conversion factor to determine the dose 
in morphine milligram equivalents (MME). For example, tablets containing hydrocodone, 5 mg, and acetaminophen, 300 mg, taken 4 times a day 
would contain a total of 20 mg of hydrocodone daily, equivalent to 20 MME daily; extended-release tablets containing oxycodone, 10 mg, and 
taken twice a day would contain a total of 20 mg of oxycodone daily, equivalent to 30 MME daily.
cTapentadol is a μ-receptor agonist and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor. Morphine milligram equivalents are based on degree of μ-receptor 
agonist activity, but it is unknown if this drug is associated with overdose in the same dose-dependent manner as observed with medications that are 
solely μ-receptor agonists.
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 26.
