 Original Research
More care out of hospital? A qualitative
exploration of the factors influencing the
development of the district nursing
workforce in England
Vari M Drennan
Abstract
Objectives: Many countries seek to improve care for people with chronic conditions and increase delivery of care
outside of hospitals, including in the home. Despite these policy objectives in the United Kingdom, the home visiting
nursing service workforce, known as district nursing, is declining. This study aimed to investigate the factors influencing
the development of district nursing workforces in a metropolitan area of England.
Methods: A qualitative study in a metropolitan area of three million residents in diverse socio-economic communities
using semi-structured interviews with a purposive sample of senior nurses in provider and commissioning organizations.
Thematic analysis was framed by theories of workforce development.
Findings: All participants reported that the context for the district nursing service was one of major reorganizations in
the face of wider National Health Service changes and financial pressures. The analysis identified five themes that can be
seen to impact the ways in which the district nursing workforce was developed. These were: the challenge of
recruitment and retention, a changing case-mix of patients and the requirement for different clinical skills, the
growth of specialist home visiting nursing services and its impact on generalist nursing, the capacity of the district
nursing service to meet growing demand, and the influence of the short-term service commissioning process on the
need for long-term workforce development.
Conclusion: There is an apparent paradox between health policies which promote more care within and closer to
home and the reported decline in district nursing services. Using the lens of workforce development theory, an
explanatory framework was offered with factors such as the nature of the nursing labour market, human resource
practices, career advancement opportunities as well as the contractual context and the economic environment.
Keywords
district nursing, home healthcare, qualitative methods, workforce
Introduction
Many health care systems are increasing ambulatory
and primary care services to address population
changes and contain rising health care costs.1 One ele-
ment is the delivery of nursing within the home, known
variously as home health care, home visiting, public
health, community or district nursing. Home visiting
nursing services feature in many, but not all, health
care systems. Some countries such as the United
Kingdom (UK) and United States of America (USA)
developed these in the 19th century,2 while others intro-
duced them more recently, for example Japan3 and
China.4
Home
visiting
nurses
represent
a
small
percentage of the nursing workforce, with figures rang-
ing from under 7% of registered nurses (RN) in
Australia (2015),5 about 9% in the National Health
Service (NHS) in England (2017)6 to 13% of employed
Professor of Health Care & Policy Research, Centre for Health & Social
Care Research, Faculty of Health, Social Care & Education, Kingston
University and St George’s University of London, UK
Corresponding author:
Vari M Drennan, Centre for Health & Social Care Research, Faculty of
Health, Social Care & Education, Kingston University and St George’s
University of London, Cranmer Terrace, London, SW17 0RE, UK.
Email: v.drennan@sgul.kingston.ac.uk
Journal of Health Services Research &
Policy
2019, Vol. 24(1) 11–18
! The Author(s) 2018
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/1355819618769082
journals.sagepub.com/home/hsr
 RNs in the USA (2016).7 In the UK, home visiting
nurses, commonly referred to as district nurses provide
services to housebound, mainly older people with long-
term conditions or those who are terminally ill. In
England, recent moves to increase self-management
among people with long-term conditions, the provision
of palliative care at home, along with a desire to reduce
unplanned hospital admissions8 point to the need for
more and differently skilled district nursing. Yet, recent
reports have highlighted declining numbers and low
morale
among
the
district
nursing
workforce.9,10
Thus, between 2009 and 2017, the district nursing
workforce fell by 14%, from 32,699 full time equiva-
lents in September 2009 to 28,237 in July 2017 (includ-
ing
RNs
with
and
without
district
nurse
qualifications).6 These developments appear to run
counter to the policy aims of enhancing care in
the community.
Developments in the district nursing workforce have
to be interpreted in the wider context of workforce
development. Workforce development is theorized to
encapsulate more than just employment training in,
but to also include employer engagement with the
labour market, integrative human resources practices
and career advancement opportunities,11 all of which
is shaped by the context and economic environment.12
At the level of individual organizations, workforce
development includes improving performance through
providing learning opportunities as well as responsive-
ness to changes that affect workforce effectiveness.13
There is some evidence that has examined the home
visiting nursing workforce in relation to current and
required nurse numbers (see for example from the
UK,14 Australia,15 and the USA16) but there is a lack
of further exploration of the factors that influence the
broader aspects of workforce development with respect
to the district nursing workforce in the UK or in
other countries.
In this study, the focus is on the NHS in England. It
has a strong suite of human resource practices guided
by the NHS Constitution, which sets out the rights for
patients, public and staff in the NHS, and nationally
agreed employment terms and conditions.17 District
nursing services are commissioned by local Clinical
Commissioning Groups (CCGs), which are responsible
for the planning and commissioning of health care
services for their local area, mainly through block con-
tracts which involve payment for a broadly defined set
of services. Senior NHS nurses in provider and
commissioning organizations are required to partici-
pate in regional workforce development planning, led
by Health Education England (HEE), the national
body responsible for coordinating education and train-
ing within the health and public health workforce in
England. This study investigated the factors influencing
workforce development of the district nursing service in
English metropolitan areas from the perspectives of
senior
nurses
in
provider
and
commissioner
organizations.
Methods
The methodology drew on the interpretivist tradition
and data were collected through semi-structured tele-
phone interviews in 2014.18 A purposive sample was
identified of senior nurses in 8 organizations providing
district nursing services in the 12 CCGs in the metro-
politan area of South London (resident population of
three million living in inner city and suburban areas).
Invitations to participate were sent by publically avail-
able NHS email addresses. A topic guide was devel-
oped
with
the
study
advisory
group
of
NHS
managers and academics. Topic areas included views
on: strengths and weaknesses in the current district
nursing workforce, factors supporting or inhibiting
development, as well as the perceived direction work-
force development should take. Participant verification
was used within the interview to confirm the research-
er’s understanding and interpretation.18 Interviews
were conducted face-to-face or by telephone, as pre-
ferred, by the author and were of 25 and 50 min dura-
tion. With permission, interviews were recorded or
notes were taken and transcribed with identifying fea-
tures removed. Participants provided written and
verbal consent. The data were thematically analysed
and through an iterative analytical process, tested in
subsequent interviews. By the final interviews, no dif-
ferent views were offered. The analysis and interpreta-
tion were then further tested for credibility and
confirmed in a seminar with a different group of 30
senior community nurse managers and educators,
from across Greater London and the surrounding
area. Invitations were sent using publically available
information on NHS organizations’ websites. The
study
received
ethical
approval
from
Kingston
University Research Ethics Sub Committee for the
Faculty of Health,
Social Care & Education in
November 2013.
Findings
Interviews were undertaken with six senior nurses in
provider organizations and with eight CCG senior
nurses (total interviews ¼14). All participants had 10
or more years’ experience in senior positions and all but
one were female. All were or had been involved to some
extent in HEE processes for the allocation of funding
for nursing workforce development.
The district nursing service (known as adult commu-
nity nursing in some) included in this study only
12
Journal of Health Services Research & Policy 24(1)
 provided services to housebound adults. All district
nursing services were reported to include different
grades of registered nurses as well as health care assis-
tants. Most participants reported that their district
nursing services had been recently reorganized for
one of the following reasons:
• As a result of merger with, or separation from, other
NHS funded organizations (a requirement with the
enactment of the Health & Social Care Act 201217),
• Through the creation of new multidisciplinary or
specialist teams,
• To align with other services (such as general prac-
tice) as required by commissioners.
The wider organization and commissioning context
were identified as a significant influence on district
workforce development. The analysis of the interview
data identified five interlinked themes: (i) staffing the
service: the challenge of recruitment and retention;
(ii) changing case-mix of patients and the requirement
for clinical skills; (iii) specialist versus generalist nurs-
ing services; (iv) capacity of the district nursing service;
and (v) influence of the service commissioning process.
We address each of these themes in turn.
Staffing the service: The challenge of recruitment
and retention
Participants from provider services described vacancy
levels that were constant and problematic. They
explained the challenges faced in recruiting the right
calibre of registered nurses and retaining them. Some
described a constant need for recruitment of junior reg-
istered nurses who tended to stay for relatively short
periods of time:
It’s just an endless struggle to keep these posts filled.
(Provider nurse 6)
All participants described negative consequences of
high staff turnover and high use of agency staff, includ-
ing loss of continuity of care for patients:
It means you are always sending someone new to some
patients. (Provider nurse 3)
High staff turnover was also seen to have resulted in
loss of team and multidisciplinary relationships, which
were noted as important to the quality and safety of
care of patients living at home. A vicious circle of
impact within teams was described:
It’s a downward spiral where vacancies lead to more
stress for the rest of the team, so more sickness,
so more vacancies needing cover by agency staff.
(Provider nurse 10)
Issues related to salary and its consequences for recruit-
ment
and
retention
were
frequently
discussed.
Participants who managed services in areas where the
nationally agreed level of payment supplements for
NHS staff was lower described how nurses they had
recruited often quickly left to work in adjacent areas
which paid the higher rate. Some participants pointed
out that although the area they were working in was a
metropolitan area, patients were often widely dis-
persed. This meant that the service required nurses
who are able to drive a car, and who preferably were
car owners and willing to use them for work. The
consequences of employing staff who did not drive
(‘walkers’) were described as problematic as ‘they
slow us down’ (provider nurse 11). This was raised as
an issue for recruiting to any district nursing post (com-
pared to recruiting for a hospital-based position), but
particularly for lower paid grades:
When they get down to the brass tacks of the changing
the insurance and mileage [reimbursement], which is now
less favourable, it can make them [job applicants] change
their minds about working for you. (Provider nurse 3)
All participants were very aware of the demographic
profile of the district nursing workforce as an ageing
one, ‘Shall we say [the staff are] on the mature side’
(provider nurse 4), which needed appropriate work-
force planning and training to replace, ‘it’s a demo-
graphic
time
bomb’
(provider
nurse
6).
They
commented on the importance of having ‘good leaders
in district nursing teams’ (provider nurse 11). Not all
organizations required their team leaders to have a dis-
trict nursing qualification. Opinions were divided on
the value of this qualification, which is known as spe-
cialist practice (district nursing) qualification. There
were those who firmly believed that the job could not
be done without it:
It [the district nurse qualification] makes such a differ-
ence as to how they approach the job, the patients, the
staff. (Provider nurse 8)
There were others who suggested that team leaders
needed to learn about caseload and people manage-
ment in the out-of-hospital setting but that this did
not require a 12-month university course. There was,
however, consensus that there needed to be a clearly
described career pathway into and through district
nursing, which was currently absent. Linked to this
view was a consensus among the senior nurses that
ongoing
reductions
in
NHS
regional
funding
to
Drennan
13
 individual provider organizations for continuing pro-
fessional development for their nursing workforce had
impacted negatively on their attractiveness to potential
employees and their ability to retain nursing as well as
their plans for changing and improving skills and
performance.
The changing patient case-mix and the requirement
for clinical skills
All participants from provider organizations stated
that the patient case-mix was changing, thus creating
increased demand on the district nursing service. There
was a perception of higher volumes of patients who
needed complex, technical procedures to be carried
out in their homes compared to ‘say five or six years
ago’ (provider nurse 3). There was also a higher
number of people choosing to die at home, and this
changing patient mix was seen to require more time
from staff than those needing simple procedures and
‘often needed two staff rather than one’ (provider nurse
8). In workforce terms, providers and some commis-
sioner participants commented on the need to have
nurses with advanced technical and clinical skills to
respond to this growing demand. A small number of
provider organization participants pointed to the chal-
lenge for nurses to maintain the confidence and com-
petence in specific technical skills especially where cases
in which these skills were required were relative-
ly uncommon:
The last time that team had one [patient with a recent
tracheostomy] was seven years ago. (Provider nurse 3)
Some participants pointed to previous workforce devel-
opment initiatives such as staffing rotations between
community nursing and hospital services as a possible
mechanism for both maintaining clinical skills and also
giving a wider cadre of nurses an opportunity for gain-
ing clinical experience in home settings. When asked
why these schemes no longer existed, participants sug-
gested that changes in financing, managers and hospital
shift patterns had all contributed.
Two participants suggested that lack of clinical com-
petency in rarely seen conditions along with technical
procedures were used by some district nurses to draw
boundaries around their caseload. This was seen to be
one of the few ways that district nurses had to control
patient numbers on their caseloads. For other partici-
pants, this was seen to reflect a wider change in district
nurse patient case mix as a consequence of a growth in
specialist services provided in people’s homes.
Specialist versus generalist nursing services
Participants reported that there were increasing num-
bers of specialist teams or specialist nurses being
commissioned to provide services to people in their
own homes, which they contrasted with the generalist
district nursing service. Some participants expressed
concern for the continuity of care for patients where
the specialist teams only looked after housebound
patients only for a specific time period (e.g. post hos-
pital discharge) or for a single condition (e.g. diabetes
when patients had multiple comorbidities). Others
could see the value in specific teams or nurses with
specialist expertise for some conditions or at critical
periods. However, most expressed concerns about the
consequences this changing balance between specialist
and generalist nursing services had for the district nurs-
ing service and workforce development as a whole.
Some participants considered that continuing growth
of specialist services would leave the district nursing
service only undertaking work that was unattractive,
for whatever reason, to others: ‘All the patients, or
work, no one else wants’ (commissioner nurse 9).
At the extreme, participants perceived the growth of
specialist teams and the reduction of the sphere of work
for generalist nurses as likely to make the district nurs-
ing work very unattractive and would therefore further
increase ongoing challenges of recruitment and reten-
tion of staff. They also considered that such a trend
towards specialist teams would make it harder for gen-
eralist district nurses to maintain advanced clinical
skills and therefore map out attractive career pathways
in the community.
Capacity of the district nursing service
After noting the changing profile of the patients, nearly
all participants from provider services commented on
increased levels of patient contacts, higher levels of
staff activity and ‘busy-ness’ of district nursing teams.
There appeared to be consensus that this ‘busy-ness’
led to the nurses becoming ‘task focused’ (commission-
er nurse 12). This was viewed as a problem by partic-
ipants from commissioning organizations who were
looking for district nursing services to actively engage
in the broader agenda of increased anticipatory care for
people with long-term conditions to prevent unplanned
hospital admissions:
They do the dressing and go [leave the patient’s home],
rather than make every contact count in terms of pro-
moting self-management, health promotion and antici-
pating
and
addressing
problems
immediately.
(Commissioner nurse 12)
14
Journal of Health Services Research & Policy 24(1)
 Commissioner nurses considered that nursing teams
could use their staff resources more efficiently. Some
pointed to the lack of patient acuity or dependency
tools to understand the resource demand and manage
staff allocation:
They [the district nursing services] don’t seem to have
any way of categorising the patients in terms of the ill-
ness or dependency on the service. I don’t see how they
can understand the demand and allocate staff according-
ly. (Commissioner nurse 1)
In contrast, participants from provider organizations
reported on burdensome administrative or infrastruc-
ture issues, internal to their organization or externally
imposed, which were seen to increase the demands on
time and to reduce overall efficiency. Examples were
given of increased paperwork to be completed in
order to qualify for payment of added care responsibil-
ities.
Some participants flagged that inefficiencies
resulted from under investment in information technol-
ogy to district nursing and this was seen to be partic-
ularly challenging where community services formed
only a small part of an acute hospital organization:
So we‘ve now got more computers that the nurses can use
– but still not mobile [information technology (IT) for
patient records] and if there is a problem the IT support
from [name of hospital] puts us [the district nursing
service] at the bottom of the priority list after all the
acute services. (Provider nurse 4)
These types of issues led some participants to question
whether the district nursing service workforce had to
include more business workforce support (commissioner
nurse 5) in the future to become more efficient. It also
raised questions about the extent to which team leaders
and senior nurses in district nursing were involved in
the planned development of staff when their focus was
on patient delivery.
The influence of the commissioning process
Divisions were evident in the views between those from
commissioning and those from provider organizations
when discussing the commissioning process. As noted
earlier, district nursing services in the NHS are
commissioned by block contracts and some commis-
sioner participants commented that this approach
would not provide ‘enough granularity’ (commissioner
nurse 13) to understand the activity and outcomes of
district nursing services. They suggested that CCGs
were
‘paying
for
over-performance’
(commissioner
nurse 14) which did not address the pressing issue of
improving the care of people with long-term conditions
and reduce hospital use. Conversely, some provider
participants suggested that CCGs preferred block con-
tracts because these contracts would mask the level of
their activity and ensured that the contract price did
not increase:
It [block contracts] keeps their costs down but not ours.
(Provider nurse 8)
Interviews revealed that some areas experienced quite
adversarial relationships between commissioners and
provider organizations with regard to the problems
and costs of the district nursing service, while others
described more collaborative relationships to address
workforce development. Many of the participants dis-
cussed uncertainty in continuation of contracts for
district nursing services, namely the prospect of con-
tracts being removed from current provider organiza-
tions.
This
was
seen
to
have
consequences
for
workforce development:
So there is a sense of ‘short-term-ism’ in contracts which
makes it very difficult to plan long term for a workforce.
(Provider nurse 10)
Examples were given of integration initiatives with
local authority funded social care teams or general
practice. These were, however, not sustained in subse-
quent commissioning rounds due to changes in com-
missioners or reduction in funding available. Such
developments were cited as examples that made long-
term planning workforce development challenging.
Most participants agreed that these concerns were not
new, however, but rather reflected persistent, long
standing and enduring problems.
Discussion and conclusion
This qualitative study examined the factors that influ-
ence workforce development of the district nursing ser-
vice in the English NHS from the perspectives of senior
nurses in provider and commissioner organizations in
South London. It identified a range of factors many of
which mainly hinder rather than supporting the devel-
opment of the district nursing workforce. From the
perspective of provider organizations, these factors
included difficulties in being able to recruit and retain
a sufficient number of nurses. It also included changing
and increasing demand for the service, which, while
offering the potential for growth and career develop-
ment, was viewed negatively in the context of the local
contracting process for district nursing, which was con-
sidered to inhibit any such developments. There were
some examples of workforce development collabora-
tion between commissioners and provider services,
Drennan
15
 but this did not appear to be the case everywhere. The
data highlighted the impact of the wider (local) system
on
workforce
development.
Key
factors
included
uncertainty created by short-term service contracts, dis-
ruption caused by short-term reorganizations of service
and team configurations, along with competition from
an increasing number of specialist home visiting serv-
ices, which was seen to fragment the work and demand
for generalist home nursing services. These were per-
ceived to inhibit workforce development even when the
relationships were more collaborative. In addition, the
national
NHS
system
level
funding
support
for
employer defined continuing education and clinical
careers
in
district
nursing
were
observed
to
be
diminishing.
Theories of workforce development suggest it as a
dynamic system of influences internal and external to
an organization,13,14 which include the wider labour
market, human resources practices, career advance-
ment opportunities, and the wider context and eco-
nomic
environment.11
With
regard
to
the
wider
labour market, district nursing or home visiting nursing
represents only a small group in the overall nursing
labour market as noted earlier.5,6,17 An increased
demand for nurses from all sectors and concomitant
shortage in supply20,21 means that employers are com-
peting for nurses from the same diminishing labour
pool. Participants in this study described significant
difficulties in recruiting and retaining nurses, reflecting
experiences elsewhere in England22 and suggesting that
this is not an isolated phenomenon. Factors such as
lower financial incentives for district nursing compared
to other nursing work have been identified here which
worked as ‘push’ factors for nurses to join a different
part of nursing labour market. Evidence on factors
influencing the decision of nurses to work as home vis-
iting or district nurses remains scant but studies that do
exist suggest that the intention to remain is linked to
factors such as perceived reasonable workload along
with adequate pay and benefits.23
This study highlights the importance of rising
demand for home nursing and the growing number of
more complex patients. There is evidence of increasing
referrals to district nursing service in England24 and
similar developments have been reported from South
Australia.25 The reported increase in the complexity of
patients in this study was matched by the reported
growth in the use of specialist teams and nurses in
the community. This was seen to have created chal-
lenges for workforce development in that senior
nurses were concerned with maintaining capacity to
respond to these changing needs while balancing this
against the possibility that these patients would not be
referred to the generalist district nursing service. Such
challenges risk the further fragmentation of nursing
work, which was also seen to challenge the creation
of attractive work and career development opportuni-
ties for those in district nursing services. Nurse con-
cerns about increased specialization at the cost of
generalist
community
nursing
services
have
been
noted before,26 while this study reports for the first
time the ambiguities these issues pose for nurse man-
agers in addressing workforce development.
With regard to career advancement opportunities,
study participants were unanimous in arguing for cre-
ating attractive career pathways for nurses, but they
were divided in their views about the nature of the edu-
cation and training required for district nursing. The
curriculum and length of educational preparation for
community nursing differ between countries and there
is no comparative research evidence available on effec-
tiveness of models. This is an area worthy of further
investigation as is the impact of organisational funding
(or lack of it ) for continuing education.
Participants pointed to the challenges posed by a
perceived repeat disruption created by reorganizations
of structures and teams in relation to sustainable work-
force development. Evidence from elsewhere suggests
that reorganizations of health services can take at least
three years for the service to return to earlier levels of
functioning.27 The senior nurses participating in this
study had divergent views of the routes and endpoints
to the development of the district nursing workforce.
This divergence is reflected in the wider narrative
around the district nursing workforce that works
away from the public gaze with a low-status population
and which tends to be overlooked,28 a view born out to
a degree by Allen’s29 work on commissioning processes
for district nursing. Using the lens of workforce devel-
opment, it is possible to theorize that a multiplicity of
factors described above have the potential to inhibit the
growth, capacity and capability of this workforce. This
study provides an explanatory framework for the
apparent paradox between a policy environment that
implies growth and development in the district nursing
workforce against a decline in numbers and morale.
Further investigation is required in other settings to
test whether this explanatory framework is of value
when the financing mechanism is different.
This is a qualitative study in one setting with only
senior nurses as participants and therefore has limitations
in that it can be generalized only at the theoretical level.
New insights have been offered through an explanatory
framework, based on workforce development theory. The
involvement of one researcher in this study may be seen
as a limitation, but this was mitigated by using analysis
verification techniques in the interviews. The use of a
separate expert group to test the analysis for further
insights or contradictory views assisted in ensuring trust-
worthiness and credibility of the findings.
16
Journal of Health Services Research & Policy 24(1)
 Conclusion
There is an apparent paradox between health policies
which promote more care within and closer to home
and the reported decline in district nursing services.
Using the lens of workforce development theory, a
multiplicity of factors with potentially inhibiting influ-
ences on growth and development have been identified.
An explanatory framework has been offered that
includes the nature of the nursing labour market,
human resource practices, career advancement oppor-
tunities as well as the contractual context and the eco-
nomic
environment.
The
interlinking
network
of
factors requires attention from policy actors in provid-
er and commissioner organizations. The extent to
which this framework is valid in other countries with
different
financing
mechanisms
requires
further
investigation.
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with
respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of
this article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial sup-
port for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article: This study was funded by the South London Health &
Social Care System, a network of National Health Service
Organisations, Local Authorities and Universities in south
London, UK. The views reported here are of the author’s
and do not necessarily reflect the funding organisation.
ORCID iD
Vari M Drennan
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-8915-5185
References
1. World Health Organisation. The world health report 2008
– primary health care (Now More Than Ever). Geneva:
World Health Organisation, 2008.
2. Fee E and Bu L. The origins of public health nursing: the
henry street visiting nurse service. Am J Public Health
2010; 100: 1206–1207.
3. Kusakari J. Facts about public health nursing in Japan –
changes during the years 1960–1970. Int J Nurs Stud
1974; 11: 3–19.
4. Bhattacharyya O, Delu Y, Wong ST, et al. Evolution of
primary care in China 1997–2009. Health Policy 2011;
100: 174–180.
5. Australian Government Institute of Health and Welfare.
Nursing and midwifery workforce 2015 data tables, www.
aihw.gov.au/reports/workforce/nursing-and-midwifery-
workforce-2015/data (accessed 22 January 2017).
6. NHS Digital.
NHS Hospital & Community Health
Service (HCHS) monthly workforce statistics July 2017,
Provisional
statistics.
https://digital.nhs.uk/catalogue/
PUB30100 (2017, accessed 20 November 2017)
7. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Occupational employment and
wages,
29-1141
registered
nurses.
Washington,
DC:
Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2016.
8. NHS England. Five year forward view. London: NHS
England, 2014.
9. Queens Nursing Institute. 2020 Vision five years on: reas-
sessing the future of district nursing. London: Queens
Nursing Institute, 2014.
10. Maybin J, Charles A and Honeyman M. Understanding
quality in district nursing services. London: Kings
Fund, 2016.
11. Giloth RP. Learning from the field: economic growth and
workforce development in the 1990s. Econ Develop
Quarter 2000; 14: 340–359.
12. Harris R and Short T. Exploring the notion of workforce
development. In: Harris R and Short T (eds) Workforce
Development. Singapore: Springer, 2013, pp.1–16.
13. Jacobs RL and Hawley JD. The emergence of ‘workforce
development’: definition, conceptual boundaries and impli-
cations. In: R Maclean and D Wilson (eds) International
handbook of education for the changing world of work.
Netherlands: Springer, 2009, pp.2537–2552
14. Hurst K. Primary and community care workforce
planning
and
development.
J
Adv
Nurs
2006;
55: 757–769.
15. Halcomb EJ, Salamonson Y, Davidson PM, et al. The
evolution of nursing in Australian general practice: a
comparative analysis of workforce surveys ten years on.
BMC Fam Pract 2014; 15: 52
16. Beck AJ and Boulton ML. The public health nurse work-
force in US state and local health departments, 2012.
Public Health Rep 2016; 131: 145–152.
17. Department of Health. The health and social care act 2012
(c 7). London: The Stationary Office, 2012.
18. Crotty M. The foundations of social research. London:
Sage, 1998.
19. Seale C. The quality of qualitative methods. London: Sage
Publications Ltd, 1999.
20. NHS Improvement. Evidence from NHS improvement on
clinical staff shortages: a workforce analysis. London:
NHS Improvement, 2016.
21. Canadian Institute of Health Information. Supply of
nurses in Canada declines for first time in 2 decades.
Ottawa:
Canadian
Institute
for
Health
Information, 2015.
22. BBC News. District nursing numbers under pressure,
www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-41974736
(accessed
22
November 2017)
23. Maurits EE, de Veer AJ, van der Hoek LS, et al.
Autonomous home-care nursing staff are more engaged
in their work: a questionnaire survey. Int J Nurs Stud
2015; 52: 1816–1823.
24. NHS Benchmarking Network. Community services find-
ings. Manchester: NHS Benchmarking Network, 2016.
25. Kemp LA, Harris E and Comino EJ. Changes in com-
munity nursing in Australia: 1995–2000. J Adv Nurs 2005;
49: 307–314.
Drennan
17
 26. McKenna H, Keene S and Bradley M. Generic and spe-
cialist nursing roles in the community: an investigation of
professional and lay views. Health Soc Care Commun
2003; 11: 537–545.
27. Fulop N, Protopsaltis G, Hutchings A, et al. Process and
impact of mergers of NHS Trusts: multicentre case study
and management cost analysis. BMJ 2002; doi.org/
10.1136/bmj.325.7358.246.
28. McIntosh J. District nursing: a case of political margin-
ality. In: R White (ed) Political issues in nursing: past,
present and future. Vol.1. London: John Wiley and
Sons, 1985, pp.45–66.
29. Allen P. A socio-legal and economic analysis of contract-
ing in the NHS internal market using a case study of
contracting for district nursing. Soc Sci Med 2002;
54: 255–266.
18
Journal of Health Services Research & Policy 24(1)
