 To cite: Drezner JA, 
Sharma S, Baggish A, 
et al. Br J Sports Med 
2017;51:704–731.
For numbered affiliations see 
end of article.
Correspondence to
Jonathan A Drezner, Department 
of Family Medicine, Director, 
Center for Sports Cardiology, 
University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA 98195, USA;  
jdrezner@ 
uw. 
edu
JAD and SS contributed equally.
Accepted 18 January 2017
Published Online First
3 March 2017
International criteria for electrocardiographic 
interpretation in athletes: consensus statement
Jonathan A Drezner,1 Sanjay Sharma,2 Aaron Baggish,3 Michael Papadakis,2 
Mathew G Wilson,4 Jordan M Prutkin,5 Andre La Gerche,6 Michael J Ackerman,7,8,9,10,11 
Mats Borjesson,12,13 Jack C Salerno,14 Irfan M Asif,15 David S Owens,5 
Eugene H Chung,16 Michael S Emery,17 Victor F Froelicher,18 Hein Heidbuchel,19 
Carmen Adamuz,4 Chad A Asplund,20 Gordon Cohen,21,22 Kimberly G Harmon,1 
Joseph C Marek,23 Silvana Molossi,24,25 Josef Niebauer,26 Hank F Pelto,1 
Marco V Perez,27 Nathan R Riding,4 Tess Saarel,28,29 Christian M Schmied,30 
David M Shipon,31 Ricardo Stein,32 Victoria L Vetter,33 Antonio Pelliccia,34 
Domenico Corrado35,36,37
ABSTRACT
Sudden cardiac death (SCD) is the leading cause of 
mortality in athletes during sport. A variety of mostly 
hereditary, structural or electrical cardiac disorders are 
associated with SCD in young athletes, the majority of 
which can be identified or suggested by abnormalities 
on a resting 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG). 
Whether used for diagnostic or screening purposes, 
physicians responsible for the cardiovascular care of 
athletes should be knowledgeable and competent 
in ECG interpretation in athletes. However, in most 
countries a shortage of physician expertise limits 
wider application of the ECG in the care of the athlete. 
A critical need exists for physician education in 
modern ECG interpretation that distinguishes normal 
physiological adaptations in athletes from distinctly 
abnormal findings suggestive of underlying pathology. 
Since the original 2010 European Society of Cardiology 
recommendations for ECG interpretation in athletes, 
ECG standards have evolved quickly, advanced by a 
growing body of scientific data and investigations that 
both examine proposed criteria sets and establish new 
evidence to guide refinements. On 26–27 February 
2015, an international group of experts in sports 
cardiology, inherited cardiac disease, and sports 
medicine convened in Seattle, Washington (USA), to 
update contemporary standards for ECG interpretation 
in athletes. The objective of the meeting was to define 
and revise ECG interpretation standards based on new 
and emerging research and to develop a clear guide to 
the proper evaluation of ECG abnormalities in athletes. 
This statement represents an international consensus 
for ECG interpretation in athletes and provides expert 
opinion-based recommendations linking specific 
ECG abnormalities and the secondary evaluation for 
conditions associated with SCD.
InTRoduCTIon
Cardiovascular-related sudden death is the leading 
cause of mortality in athletes during sport and exer-
cise.1–3 The majority of disorders associated with 
an increased risk of sudden cardiac death (SCD), 
such as cardiomyopathies and primary electrical 
diseases (channelopathies), are suggested or identi-
fied by abnormalities present on a resting 12-lead 
ECG. Interpretation of an ECG in athletes requires 
careful analysis to properly distinguish physiological 
changes related to athletic training from findings 
suggestive of an underlying pathological condition. 
Whether used for the evaluation of cardiovascu-
lar-related symptoms, a family history of inheritable 
cardiac disease or premature SCD, or for screening 
of asymptomatic athletes, ECG interpretation is 
an essential skill for all physicians involved in the 
cardiovascular care of athletes.
The 2015 summit on ECG interpretation  
in athletes
On 26–27 February 2015, an international group 
of experts in sports cardiology, inherited cardiac 
diseases and sports medicine convened in Seattle, 
Washington, to update contemporary standards 
Consensus statement
This statement has been endorsed by the following societies: American Medical Society for Sports Medicine 
(AMSSM), Austrian Society of Sports Medicine and Prevention, Brazilian Society of Cardiology – Department 
of Exercise and Rehabilitation (SBC – DERC), British Association for Sports and Exercise Medicine (BASEM), 
Canadian Academy of Sport and Exercise Medicine (CASEM), European College of Sports and Exercise Physi-
cians (ECOSEP), European Society of Cardiology (ESC) Section of Sports Cardiology, Fédération Internationale 
de Football Association (FIFA), German Society of Sports Medicine and Prevention, International Olympic 
Committee (IOC), Norwegian Association of Sports Medicine and Physical Activity (NIMF), South African 
Sports Medicine Association (SASMA), Spanish Society of Cardiology (SEC) Sports Cardiology Group, Sports 
Doctors Australia, and the Swedish Society of Exercise and Sports Medicine (SFAIM). The American College 
of Cardiology (ACC) affirms the value of this document. ACC supports the general principles in the document 
and believes it is of general benefit to its membership. 
704
Drezner JA, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:704–731. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331 on 3 March 2017. Downloaded from 
 Consensus statement
for ECG interpretation in athletes through development of an 
international consensus. This summit meeting served as the 
foundation for subsequent work done by the larger writing 
group that ultimately generated this document. The goals of 
the summit meeting were to: (1) update ECG interpretation 
standards based on new research and up to date evidence and 
(2) develop a clear guide to the appropriate evaluation of ECG 
abnormalities for conditions associated with SCD in athletes.
The standards presented were developed with consideration of 
ECG interpretation in the context of an asymptomatic athlete aged 
12–35 years. An athlete is defined as an individual who engages in 
regular exercise or training for sport or general fitness, typically 
with a premium on performance, and often engaged in individual 
or team competition. The prevalence of specific ECG findings in 
athletes may vary based on age, sex, ethnicity, type of sport and 
level of conditioning. Training-related physiological changes are 
more common in athletes exercising intensively at least 4–8 
hours 
per week; thus prudent application of the criteria should occur in 
individuals at lower levels of regular exercise. Novel to these stan-
dards are specific considerations presented for young adolescent 
athletes age 12–16 years, as well as for older athletes ≥30 years 
where the prevalence of occult coronary artery disease sharply 
increases. In the presence of cardiac symptoms or a family history 
of inherited cardiovascular disease or premature SCD, the inter-
pretation standards may require modification.
The recommendations presented in this statement were 
developed with thoughtful attention to balance sensitivity 
and specificity, while maintaining a clear and practical check-
list of findings to guide ECG interpretation for physicians and 
the appropriate evaluation of ECG abnormalities. A summary 
of consensus recommendations from this panel is presented in 
figure 1, table 1 and table 2. Physicians may choose to deviate 
from these consensus standards based on their experience or 
practice setting and according to the individual characteristics 
of the athlete. Ideally, the evaluation of ECG abnormalities is 
performed in consultation with a specialist with knowledge and 
experience in training-related cardiac adaptations and disorders 
associated with SCD in young athletes.
distinguishing normal from abnormal
A challenge in the interpretation of an athlete’s ECG is the ability 
to accurately differentiate findings suggestive of a potentially 
serious cardiovascular disorder from benign physiological adap-
tations occurring as the result of regular, intense training (ie, 
athlete’s heart). Several reports have outlined contemporary ECG 
criteria intended to distinguish normal ECG findings in athletes 
from ECG abnormalities requiring additional evaluation.4–10
Evolution of ECG interpretation standards
Over the last decade, ECG interpretation standards have under-
gone several modifications to improve the accuracy of detecting 
potentially life threatening cardiac conditions in young athletes 
while also limiting false-positive results. In 2005, criteria for 
an abnormal ECG were defined by the Study Group of Sport 
Cardiology of the Working Group of Cardiac Rehabilitation 
and Exercise Physiology and the Working Group of Myocardial 
and Pericardial Diseases of the European Society of Cardiology 
(ESC).11 In 2010, driven by new research and large-population 
clinical investigations,12 13 the ESC updated recommendations 
for interpretation of an athlete’s ECG in a landmark statement 
which pioneered ‘modern’ ECG interpretation standards.5 The 
2010 ESC criteria were the first to divide ECG findings into 
two groups—common and training-related (group 1) versus 
uncommon and training-unrelated (group 2)—based on the 
Figure 1 International consensus standards for ECG interpretation in athletes. AV, atrioventricular; LBBB, left bundle branch block; LVH, left 
ventricular hypertrophy; PVC, premature ventricular contraction; RBBB, right bundle branch block; RVH, right ventricular hypertrophy; SCD, sudden 
cardiac death.
705
Drezner JA, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:704–731. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331 on 3 March 2017. Downloaded from 
 Consensus statement
Table 1 International consensus standards for ECG interpretation in athletes: definitions of ECG criteria
Abnormal ECG findings in athletes
These ECG findings are unrelated to regular training or expected physiological adaptation to exercise, may suggest the presence of pathological cardiovascular disease and 
require further diagnostic investigation.
ECG abnormality
definition
T wave inversion
 
► Anterior
 
► Lateral
 
► Inferolateral
 
► Inferior
≥1 mm in depth in two or more contiguous leads; excludes leads aVR, III and V1
 
► V2-V4
–  
excludes: black athletes with J-point elevation and convex ST segment elevation followed by TWI in V2-V4; athletes < age 16 with 
TWI in V1-V3; and biphasic T waves in only V3
 
► I and AVL, V5 and/or V6 (only one lead of TWI required in V5 or V6)
 
► II and aVF, V5-V6, I and AVL
 
► II and aVF
ST segment depression
≥0.5 mm in depth in two or more contiguous leads
Pathological Q waves
Q/R ratio ≥0.25 or ≥40 ms in duration in two or more leads (excluding III and aVR)
Complete left bundle branch block
QRS ≥120 ms, predominantly negative QRS complex in lead V1 (QS or rS) and upright notched or slurred R wave in leads I and V6
Profound non-specific 
intraventricular conduction delay
Any QRS duration ≥140 ms
Epsilon wave
Distinct low amplitude signal (small positive deflection or notch) between the end of the QRS complex and onset of the T wave in leads 
V1-V3
Ventricular pre-excitation
PR interval <120 ms with a delta wave (slurred upstroke in the QRS complex) and wide QRS (≥120 ms)
Prolonged QT interval*
QTc ≥470 ms (male)
QTc ≥480 ms (female)
QTc ≥500 ms (marked QT prolongation)
Brugada type 1 pattern
Coved pattern: initial ST elevation ≥2 mm (high take-off) with downsloping ST segment elevation followed by a negative symmetric T wave 
in ≥1 leads in V1-V3
Profound sinus bradycardia
<30 beats per minute or sinus pauses ≥3 s
Profound 1° atrioventricular block
≥400 ms
Mobitz type II 2°  
atrioventricular block
Intermittently non-conducted P waves with a fixed PR interval
3° atrioventricular block
Complete heart block
Atrial tachyarrhythmias
Supraventricular tachycardia, atrial fibrillation, atrial flutter
Premature ventricular contractions
≥2 premature ventricular contractions per 10 s tracing
Ventricular arrhythmias
Couplets, triplets and non-sustained ventricular tachycardia
Borderline ECG findings in athletes
These ECG findings in isolation likely do not represent pathological cardiovascular disease in athletes, but the presence of two or more borderline findings may warrant additional 
investigation until further data become available.
ECG abnormality
definition
Left axis deviation
−30° to −90°
Left atrial enlargement
Prolonged P wave duration of >120 ms in leads I or II with negative portion of the P wave ≥1 mm in depth and ≥40 ms in duration in lead V1
Right axis deviation
>120°
Right atrial enlargement
P wave ≥2.5 mm in II, III or aVF
Complete right bundle branch block
rSR’ pattern in lead V1 and an S wave wider than R wave in lead V6 with QRS duration ≥120 ms
normal ECG findings in athletes
These training-related ECG alterations are physiological adaptations to regular exercise, considered normal variants in athletes and do not require further evaluation in 
asymptomatic athletes with no significant family history.
normal ECG finding
definition
Increased QRS voltage
Isolated QRS voltage criteria for left (SV1 + RV5 or RV6 >3.5 mV) or right ventricular hypertrophy (RV1 + SV5 or SV6 >1.1 mV)
Incomplete right bundle branch block rSR’ pattern in lead V1 and a qRS pattern in lead V6 with QRS duration <120 ms
Early repolarisation
J point elevation, ST elevation, J waves or terminal QRS slurring in the inferior and/or lateral leads
Black athlete repolarisation variant
J-point elevation and convex (‘domed’) ST segment elevation followed by T wave inversion in leads V1-V4 in black athletes
Juvenile T wave pattern
T wave inversion V1-V3 in athletes less than age less than 16
Sinus bradycardia
≥30 bpm
Sinus arrhythmia
Heart rate variation with respiration: rate increases during inspiration and decreases during expiration
Ectopic atrial rhythm
P waves are a different morphology compared with the sinus P wave, such as negative P waves in the inferior leads  
(‘low atrial rhythm’)
Junctional escape rhythm
QRS rate is faster than the resting P wave or sinus rate and typically less than 100 beats/min with narrow QRS complex unless the baseline 
QRS is conducted with aberrancy
1° atrioventricular block
PR interval 200–400 ms
Mobitz type I (Wenckebach) 2° 
atrioventricular block
PR interval progressively lengthens until there is a non-conducted P wave with no QRS complex; the first PR interval after the dropped beat 
is shorter than the last conducted PR interval
*The QT interval corrected for heart rate is ideally measured using Bazett’s formula with heart rates between 60–90 bpm; preferably performed manually in lead II or V5 using the 
teach-the-tangent method112 to avoid inclusion of a U wave (please see text for more details). Consider repeating the ECG after mild aerobic activity for a heart rate <50 bpm, or 
repeating the ECG after a longer resting period for a heart rate >100 bpm, if the QTc value is borderline or abnormal.
706 
Drezner JA, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:704–731. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331 on 3 March 2017. Downloaded from 
 Consensus statement
Table 2 Evaluation of ECG abnormalities in athletes
ECG abnormality
Potential cardiac  
disease*
Recommended  
evaluation†
Considerations
T wave inversion 
in the lateral or 
inferolateral  
leads
HCM
DCM
LVNC
ARVC (with 
predominant 
left ventricular 
involvement)
Myocarditis
Echocardiogram
Cardiac MRI
Exercise ECG test
Minimum 24 hours ECG monitor
Lateral or inferolateral T wave inversion is common in primary myocardial disease. Cardiac MRI 
should be a routine diagnostic test for this ECG phenotype and is superior to echocardiography 
for detecting apical HCM, left ventricular hypertrophy localised to the free lateral wall, ARVC 
with predominant left ventricular involvement and myocarditis.
If cardiac MRI is not available, echocardiography with contrast should be considered as an 
alternative investigation for apical HCM in patients with deep T wave inversion in leads V5-V6.
Consider family evaluation if available and genetic screening.
Annual follow-up testing is recommended throughout athletic career in athletes with normal results.
T wave inversion 
isolated to the 
inferior leads
HCM
DCM
LVNC
Myocarditis
Echocardiogram
Consider cardiac MRI based on echocardiogram findings or clinical suspicion.
T wave inversion  
in the anterior  
leads‡
ARVC
DCM
Echocardiogram
Cardiac MRI 
Exercise ECG test
Minimum 24 hours ECG monitor
Signal averaged ECG
The extent of investigations may vary based on clinical suspicion for ARVC and results from  
initial testing.
ST segment 
depression
HCM
DCM
LVNC
ARVC
Myocarditis
Echocardiogram
Consider cardiac MRI and additional testing based on echocardiogram findings or clinical 
suspicion.
Pathological Q 
waves
HCM
DCM
LVNC
Myocarditis
Prior myocardial 
infarction
Echocardiogram
Coronary artery disease risk  
factor assessment
Repeat ECG for septal (V1-V2)  
QS pattern; above investigations  
recommended if septal Q  
waves are persistent
Consider cardiac MRI (with perfusion study if available) based on echocardiogram findings or 
clinical suspicion.
In the absence of cardiac MRI, consider exercise stress testing, dobutamine stress  
echocardiogram or a myocardial perfusion scan for evaluation of coronary artery disease in 
athletes with suspicion of prior myocardial infarction or multiple risk factors for coronary  
artery disease.
Complete left  
bundle branch  
block
DCM
HCM
LVNC
Sarcoidosis
Myocarditis
Echocardiogram
Cardiac MRI (with stress  
perfusion study)§
A comprehensive cardiac evaluation to rule out myocardial disease should be considered.
Profound 
non-specific 
intraventricular 
conduction 
delay ≥140 ms
DCM
HCM
LVNC
Echocardiogram
Consider additional testing based on echocardiogram findings or clinical suspicion.
Epsilon wave
ARVC
Echocardiogram
Cardiac MRI 
Exercise ECG test
Minimum 24 hours ECG monitor
Signal averaged ECG
An epsilon wave in leads V1-V3 is a highly specific ECG maker and a major diagnostic criterion  
for ARVC.
Multiple premature 
ventricular 
contractions
HCM
DCM
LVNC
ARVC
Myocarditis
Sarcoidosis
Echocardiogram
24 hours ECG monitor
Exercise ECG test
If >2000 PVCs or non-sustained ventricular tachycardia are present on initial testing, 
comprehensive cardiac testing inclusive of cardiac MRI is warranted to investigate for 
myocardial disease.
Consider signal averaged ECG.
Ventricular  
pre-excitation
Wolff-Parkinson-
White
Exercise ECG test
Echocardiogram
Abrupt cessation of the delta wave (pre-excitation) on exercise ECG denotes a low-risk pathway.
Electrophysiological study for risk assessment should be considered if a low-risk accessory 
pathway cannot be confirmed by non-invasive testing.
Consider electrophysiology study for moderate to high intensity sports.
Prolonged QTc
Long QT syndrome
Repeat resting ECG on separate day
Review for QT prolonging 
medication
Acquire ECG of first-degree 
relatives if possible
Consider exercise ECG test, laboratory (electrolyte) screening, family screening and genetic 
testing when clinical suspicion is high.
Consider direct referral to a heart rhythm specialist or sports cardiologist for a QTc ≥500 ms.
Brugada type 1 
pattern
Brugada syndrome
Referral to cardiologist or heart 
rhythm specialist
Consider high precordial lead ECG with leads V1 and V2 in second intercostal space or sodium 
channel blockade if Brugada pattern is indeterminate.
Consider genetic testing and family screening.
Profound sinus 
bradycardia <30 
beats per minute
Myocardial or 
electrical disease
Repeat ECG after mild aerobic 
activity
Consider additional testing based on clinical suspicion.
continued
707
Drezner JA, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:704–731. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331 on 3 March 2017. Downloaded from 
 Consensus statement
prevalence of ECG findings, relation to exercise training, and 
association with pathological conditions associated with SCD 
requiring further clinical investigation to confirm (or exclude) 
underlying cardiovascular disease.5 Since then, other investiga-
tors and international panels have proposed updated guidelines 
for ECG interpretation in young athletes.6 9 14 In 2012, leading 
sports medicine, inherited cardiac disease specialists, and sports 
cardiology physicians with expertise in the cardiovascular 
evaluation of young competitive athletes convened in Seattle, 
Washington, to redefine contemporary standards and develop 
an online training course (http:// 
learning. 
bmj. 
com/ 
ECGathlete) 
for ECG interpretation in athletes.10 15–17
Each revision of the ECG standards has improved specificity 
while maintaining the sensitivity for ECG-detectable patholog-
ical conditions associated with SCD. For example, in a study of 
1078 elite Australian athletes, the false-positive rate decreased 
from 17% using the 2010 ESC criteria to 4.2% with the Seattle 
criteria, with no change in sensitivity.18 In another study of 2017 
high school athletes from the U.S., the Seattle criteria produced 
a low false-positive rate (2.8%) with 100% sensitivity for SCD- 
associated conditions.19 In a study of 1417 high school, college 
and professional athletes comparing three published ECG inter-
pretation algorithms for athlete preparticipation screening, the 
proportion of abnormal ECGs declined from 26% to 8.1% to 
5.7% using the ESC, Stanford and Seattle criteria, respectively.20
Recent research has directed additional revisions to ECG inter-
pretation standards that further lower the false-positive rate.21 22 
A ‘refined’ criteria set was investigated in an instrumental study 
examining 4297 white and 1208 black elite athletes, and 103 
athletes diagnosed with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM).23 
The total ECG abnormal rate declined dependent on the criteria 
applied—21.5% (ESC), 9.6% (Seattle) and 6.6% (refined)—
while all three criteria identified 98.1% of athletes with 
established HCM.23 Of the 5505 athletes screened, 15 (0.47%) 
were diagnosed with conditions associated with SCD, including 
5 cases of HCM, 5 cases of Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW), 3 
cases of long QT syndrome (LQTS) and 1 case each of Brugada 
syndrome and an anomalous coronary artery.23 Fourteen of 15 
(93%) serious conditions were identified by ECG, and only one 
identified because of prior symptoms.23 In another study of 2491 
athletes undergoing preparticipation screening, application of 
the ESC, Seattle and ‘refined’ criteria led to abnormal ECG rates 
of 22.3%, 11.6% and 5.3%, respectively, all with 100% sensi-
tivity for the pathological conditions detected.24
Effective use of ECG in the cardiovascular care of athletes 
requires that abnormal findings receive appropriate secondary 
investigations to confirm or exclude conditions associated with 
SCD. However, the clinical response to abnormal ECG findings 
may vary based on physician training and experience. This docu-
ment provides recommendations for the evaluation of specific 
ECG abnormalities.
Limitations
While ECG increases the ability to detect underlying cardio-
vascular conditions that place athletes at increased risk of SCD, 
ECG as a diagnostic tool has limitations in both sensitivity 
and specificity. Specifically, ECG can suggest or detect cardio-
myopathies, ion channelopathies, myocarditis and ventricular 
pre-excitation, yet other causes of SCD in young athletes such 
as anomalous coronary arteries, premature coronary atheroscle-
rosis and aortopathies are not readily detected by ECG. Thus, 
even if correctly interpreted, an ECG will not detect all condi-
tions predisposing to SCD, and evaluation of cardiovascular 
symptoms, a concerning family history or abnormal physical 
examination requires a more comprehensive investigation.
An objective of developing ECG standards is to improve 
the accuracy and reproducibility of interpretation. Indeed, 
studies have demonstrated that systematic evaluation of an 
athlete’s ECG using standardised criteria improves interpreta-
tion accuracy among physicians across disciplines.14 25 However, 
inter-observer variability and the reliability of ECG standards 
even among experienced physicians remains a major concern.26 
27 In one study, paediatric cardiologists, without use of a stan-
dardised criteria set, achieved a sensitivity of only 68% and a 
Table 2 continued
ECG abnormality
Potential cardiac  
disease*
Recommended  
evaluation†
Considerations
Profound 1° 
atrioventricular 
block ≥400 ms
Myocardial or 
electrical disease
Repeat ECG after mild aerobic 
activity
Exercise ECG test
Consider additional testing based on clinical suspicion.
Advanced 2° or 
3° atrioventricular 
block
Myocardial or 
electrical disease
Echocardiogram
Minimum 24 hours ECG monitor
Exercise ECG test
Consider laboratory screening and cardiac MRI based on echocardiogram findings.
Atrial 
tachyarrhythmias
Myocardial or 
electrical disease
Echocardiogram
Minimum 24 hours ECG monitor
Exercise ECG test
Consider cardiac MRI or electrophysiology study based on clinical suspicion.
Ventricular 
arrhythmias¶
Myocardial or 
electrical disease
Echocardiogram
Cardiac MRI
Minimum 24 hours ECG monitor
Exercise ECG test
A comprehensive cardiac evaluation to rule out myocardial disease and primary electrical 
disease should be considered.
Two or more 
borderline ECG 
findings
Myocardial disease
Echocardiogram
Consider additional testing based on clinical suspicion.
*This list of disorders for each ECG abnormality represents the primary cardiac disorders of concern and is not intended to be exhaustive.
†Initial evaluation of ECG abnormalities should be performed under the direction of a cardiologist. Additional testing will be guided by initial findings and clinical suspicion based 
on the presence of symptoms or a family history of inherited cardiac disease or sudden cardiac death.
‡Excludes black athlete repolarisation variant and juvenile pattern in adolescents ≤16 years.
§CT coronary angiography if stress perfusion with cardiac MRI is unavailable.
¶Includes couplets, triplets, accelerated ventricular rhythm and non-sustained ventricular tachycardia.
ARVC, arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy; DCM, dilated cardiomyopathy; HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; LVNC, left ventricular non-compaction.
708 
Drezner JA, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:704–731. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331 on 3 March 2017. Downloaded from 
 Consensus statement
specificity of 70% for recognition of abnormal ECG patterns 
that occur infrequently but represent conditions causing SCD.28
The importance of accurate electrode placement
Misplaced limb leads can cause errors in axis measurement and 
pseudo-Q waves. Misplaced precordial electrodes downward 
can cause pseudo-Q waves and failure to detect ST segment 
depression. Upward misplacement of the precordial leads can 
simulate myocardial injury, pericarditis or the Brugada type 2 
pattern, due to pseudo-ST segment elevation. Right and left arm 
lead reversal is recognised by negative P waves, a negative QRS 
complex and T wave inversion (TWI) in leads I and aVL but not 
in the lateral precordial leads (V5-V6).
Accurate placement of the precordial leads can be challenging. 
Leads V1, V2 and V4 have distinct bony landmarks for their 
placement that are critical for the placement of V3, V5 and V6. 
V1 and V2 are close to the sternum in the fourth intercostal space 
(usually just above the nipple level). V4 is in the fifth intercostal 
space (usually just below the nipple line) and at the mid-clavic-
ular line. V3 is placed on a line between V2 and V4. V5 and V6 
are on a horizontal plane set by V4 and do not curve along the 
interspace. They intersect with vertical lines established by the 
anterior axillary fold (V5) and the mid-point of the axilla (V6).
noRmAL ECG FIndInGS In AThLETES
overview of physiological cardiac adaptations to regular 
exercise
Regular and long-term participation in exercise (minimum of 
4 
hours per week) is associated with unique electrical manifes-
tations that reflect enlarged cardiac chamber size and increased 
vagal tone. These ECG findings in athletes are considered 
normal, physiological adaptations to regular exercise and do not 
require further evaluation (figure 1; table 1).
Increased cardiac chamber size
Voltage criteria for left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) are 
commonly met on an athlete’s ECG. These reflect a physiological 
increase in cardiac mass from athletic cardiac remodelling (figure 2). 
Likewise, voltage criteria for right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH) 
and incomplete right bundle branch block (RBBB) are also common 
ECG findings in athletes and considered a result of increased right 
ventricular (RV) size secondary to regular training.
Increased vagal tone
Common consequences of increased vagal tone include 
early repolarisation, sinus bradycardia, and sinus arrhythmia 
(figure 2). Other, less common markers of increased vagal tone 
are junctional or ectopic atrial rhythms, first-degree atrioven-
tricular (AV) block, and Mobitz type I second-degree AV block 
(Wenckebach phenomenon).
QRS voltage criteria for ventricular hypertrophy
Left ventricular hypertrophy
QRS voltage can be influenced by a variety of factors. Male 
sex, athletic activity and younger age are associated with higher 
QRS voltage, while obesity and pulmonary disease may lower 
voltage.29 All existing ECG criteria for LVH correlate poorly 
with increased left ventricular (LV) wall thickness and LV 
mass on imaging studies.30 Although there are several voltage 
criteria to define LVH, the Sokolow-Lyon criteria are used 
most commonly, defined as the sum of the S wave in V1 and 
the R wave in V5 or V6 (using the largest R wave) as >3.5 mV 
(35 small squares with a standard amplification of the ECG 
at 10 mm/1 mV). Trained athletes often satisfy QRS voltage 
criteria for LVH, with up to 64% of athletes fulfilling the 
Sokolow-Lyon index (figure 2).31–36
The presence of isolated QRS voltage criteria for LVH does 
not correlate with pathology in athletes and is present in isola-
tion (without other associated ECG abnormalities) in fewer than 
2% of patients with HCM.30–32 37–40 Although clearing athletes 
with isolated voltage criteria for LVH may not detect a very 
small minority of individuals with HCM, such individuals have a 
milder phenotype with a low arrhythmogenic risk.40 Conversely, 
pathological LVH is commonly associated with additional ECG 
Figure 2 ECG of a 29-year-old male asymptomatic soccer player showing sinus bradycardia (44 bpm), early repolarisation in I, II, aVF, V4-V6 
(arrows), voltage criteria for left ventricular hypertrophy (S-V1 + R-V5 >35 mm) and tall, peaked T waves (circles). These are common, training-related 
findings in athletes and do not require more evaluation.
709
Drezner JA, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:704–731. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331 on 3 March 2017. Downloaded from 
 Consensus statement
features such as TWI in the inferior and lateral leads, ST segment 
depression and pathological Q waves (figure 3).23 41 Therefore, 
the isolated presence of high QRS voltages that fulfil voltage 
criteria for LVH in the absence of other ECG or clinical markers 
suggestive of pathology are considered part of the normal and 
training-related ECG changes in athletes related to physiolog-
ical increases in cardiac chamber size and/or wall thickness and 
does not in itself require further evaluation. However, the addi-
tional presence of TWI, ST segment depression or pathological 
Q waves should raise the possibility of pathological LVH and 
should prompt further evaluation.
Right ventricular hypertrophy
Voltage criteria for RVH are also fairly common in athletes 
with up to 13% of athletes fulfilling the Sokolow-Lyon index 
(R wave in V1 + largest S wave in V5 or V6 >10.5 
mV).21 33 
The presence of QRS voltage criteria for RVH correlates poorly 
with increased RV wall thickness on echocardiography.21 Most 
importantly, QRS voltages for RVH, when present in isolation, 
do not correlate with underlying pathology in athletes, in partic-
ular arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) 
or pulmonary hypertension.21
In a study comparing 627 athletes to patients with estab-
lished ARVC or pulmonary hypertension, none of the athletes 
with isolated RVH by voltage criteria had any RV pathology on 
advanced cardiac imaging, and none of the patients with ARVC 
or pulmonary hypertension exhibited voltage criteria for RVH 
without additional ECG abnormalities.21 Based on these consid-
erations, it is reasonable to conclude that, similar to voltage 
criteria for LVH, isolated QRS voltage for RVH is part of the 
normal spectrum of ECG findings in athletes and in the absence 
of other ECG or clinical markers of pathology does not require 
further evaluation.
Incomplete right bundle branch block
Incomplete RBBB is defined by a QRS duration <120 ms with 
a RBBB pattern: terminal R wave in lead V1 (commonly char-
acterised as an rSR’ pattern) and wide terminal S wave in leads 
I and V6 (figure 4). Studies suggest that the mildly delayed 
RV conduction in athletes is caused by RV remodelling, with 
increased cavity size and resultant increased conduction 
time, rather than an intrinsic delay within the His-Purkinje 
system.42 Therefore, incomplete RBBB represents a pheno-
type of cardiac adaptation to exercise and in the absence of 
other features suggestive of disease does not require further 
evaluation.
Early repolarisation
By convention, early repolarisation is defined as elevation of the 
QRS-ST junction (J-point) by ≥0.1 
mV often associated with a 
late QRS slurring or notching (J wave) affecting the inferior and/
or lateral leads (figure 2).43–45 Early repolarisation is a common 
finding in healthy populations (2%–44%) and is more prevalent 
in athletes, young individuals, males and black ethnicity.43 46–50 
Early repolarisation consisting of J-point elevation with concave 
ST segment elevation and a peaked T wave is present in up 
to 45% of Caucasian athletes and 63%–91% of black athletes 
of African-Caribbean descent (hereto referred to as ‘black 
athletes’).32 33
Some studies on survivors of cardiac arrest and patients with 
primary ventricular fibrillation (VF) have suggested an associa-
tion between early repolarisation and the risk of VF.44 51 A study 
of middle-aged individuals demonstrated the presence of an 
early repolarisation pattern in the inferior leads accompanied 
by a horizontal or descending ST segment after the J-point, was 
associated with an increased risk of arrhythmic death, while 
a rapidly ascending ST segment, the dominant ST pattern in 
Figure 3 ECG from a patient with HCM demonstrating QRS voltage criteria for LVH in association with deep TWI and ST segment depression 
predominantly in the lateral leads (I, aVL, V4–V6), voltage criteria for left atrial and right atrial enlargement and left axis deviation. HCM, hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy; LVH, left ventricular hypertrophy; TWI, T wave inversion.
710 
Drezner JA, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:704–731. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331 on 3 March 2017. Downloaded from 
 Consensus statement
healthy athletes, was associated with a benign prognosis.43 46 
Early repolarisation of some subtypes appears to be a dynamic 
process in athletes which is affected directly by exercise training, 
increasing in frequency at times of peak fitness.48 49 52 Although 
further studies are warranted to fully elucidate the mechanisms 
and prognostic implications of early repolarisation in competi-
tive athletes, to date there are no data to support an association 
between inferior early repolarisation and SCD in athletes. Based 
on current evidence, all patterns of early repolarisation, when 
present in isolation and without clinical markers of pathology, 
should be considered benign variants in athletes.53
Repolarisation findings in black athletes
The ECG expression of the athlete’s heart is influenced by 
several factors. Over the past decade, ethnicity has emerged 
as a major determinant of cardiac adaptation to exercise with 
black athletes exhibiting a higher prevalence of ECG anomalies, 
including repolarisation changes. Notably, more than two-thirds 
of black athletes exhibit ST segment elevation and up to 25% 
demonstrate TWI on their ECG.23 33 54 55
Black athletes also commonly demonstrate a repolarisation 
variant consisting of J-point elevation and convex ST segment 
elevation in the anterior leads (V1-V4) followed by TWI 
Figure 4 ECG demonstrates incomplete RBBB with rSR’ pattern in V1 and QRS duration of <120 ms. Incomplete RBBB is a common and normal 
finding in athletes and does not require additional evaluation. RBBB, right bundle branch block.
Figure 5 ECG from a black athlete demonstrating voltage criteria for LVH, J-point elevation and convex (‘domed’) ST segment elevation 
followed by TWI in V1-V4 (circles). This is a normal repolarisation pattern in black athletes. LVH, left ventricular hypertrophy; TWI, T wave  
inversion.
711
Drezner JA, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:704–731. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331 on 3 March 2017. Downloaded from 
 Consensus statement
(figure 5). A study of 904 black male athletes of African descent 
demonstrated that 13% exhibited isolated TWI in leads V1-V4 
compared with only 4% of black sedentary controls.33 The 
majority of anterior TWI were preceded by J-point elevation 
and convex (domed) ST segment elevation. None of the athletes 
with anterior TWI showed symptoms or signs of cardiomyop-
athy despite comprehensive evaluation and a 5-year follow-up 
period.33 Similar findings have been described in female and 
adolescent black athletes.54–56 Based on these considerations, 
TWI in leads V1-V4 when preceded by J-point elevation and 
convex ST segment elevation should be considered part of the 
‘black athlete’s heart’ and should not result in further inves-
tigation, in the absence of other clinical or ECG features of 
cardiomyopathy.
Considerations in athletes aged 12–16 years: the ‘juvenile’ 
ECG pattern
TWI confined to the anterior precordial leads may be consid-
ered a normal age-related pattern in adolescent athletes up to 
the age of 16 years. The term ‘juvenile’ ECG pattern is used to 
denote TWI or a biphasic T wave beyond lead V2 in adoles-
cents who have not reached physical maturity (figure 6). The 
juvenile pattern was present in 10%–15% of white, adolescent 
athletes aged 12 years but only in 2.5% of white athletes aged 
14–15 years.32 57 58 Anterior TWI that extends beyond lead V2 is 
rare (0.1%) in white athletes aged ≥16 years or younger athletes 
who had completed puberty when assessed by a paediatrician.32 
57 Based on current evidence, TWI in the anterior leads (V1-V3) 
in adolescent athletes <16 years of age (or prepubertal athletes) 
should not prompt further evaluation in the absence of symp-
toms, signs or a family history of cardiac disease.
Sinus bradycardia
Sinus bradycardia is defined as a heart rate <60 beats per 
minute (bpm) and is present in up to 80% of highly trained 
athletes.32 35 In normal sinus rhythm, the heart rate is 
determined by the balance between the sympathetic and para-
sympathetic nervous systems. Resting sinus bradycardia is 
particularly prevalent in endurance athletes due to increased 
vagal tone and possible structural atrial remodelling.59 60 In the 
absence of symptoms such as fatigue, dizziness, or syncope, 
heart rates ≥30 bpm are considered normal in highly trained 
athletes. Sinus bradycardia should resolve with the onset of 
physical activity.
Figure 6 Normal and abnormal patterns of TWI. (A) Anterior TWI in V1-V3 in a 12-year-old asymptomatic athlete without a family history of SCD 
considered a normal ‘juvenile’ pattern. (B) TWI in V1-V4 in a 17-year-old asymptomatic mixed race (Middle-Eastern/black) athlete without a family 
history of SCD. This is a normal repolarisation pattern in black athletes. (C) Biphasic TWI in V3 in a 31-year-old asymptomatic black athlete without 
a family history of SCD. Anterior biphasic T waves are considered normal in adolescents <16 years old and in adults when found in a single lead, 
most commonly V3. (D) Abnormal TWI in V1-V6 in an adult symptomatic former soccer player with genetically confirmed ARVC and a positive family 
history of SCD (brother died at 26 years of age). (E) An ECG demonstrating the type 1 Brugada pattern with high take-off ST elevation ≥2 mm with 
downsloping ST segment elevation followed by a negative symmetric T wave in V1-V2. (F) Inferolateral TWI in leads I, II, III, aVF, V2-V6 and ST 
segment depression in leads II, aVF, V4-V6 in a 31-year-old asymptomatic professional soccer referee. These markedly abnormal findings require a 
comprehensive evaluation to exclude cardiomyopathy. ARVC, arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy; SCD, sudden cardiac death; TWI, T 
wave inversion.
712 
Drezner JA, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:704–731. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331 on 3 March 2017. Downloaded from 
 Consensus statement
Sinus arrhythmia
Sinus arrhythmia, the physiological fluctuation in heart rate with 
breathing, is considered a normal finding and should not be 
confused with sinus node dysfunction or sick sinus syndrome. 
Differentiating features that suggest sinus node dysfunction include:
 
►
lack of rhythmic changes in the heart rate,
 
►
abrupt sustained rate increases and decreases,
 
►
prolonged pauses or periods of sinus arrest,
 
►
inappropriate rate response to exercise (including slowed 
acceleration and an inappropriately rapid deceleration),
 
►
any association with clinical symptoms such as exercise 
intolerance, pre-syncope and syncope.
In sinus arrhythmia, the P wave axis remains normal in the 
frontal plane and the fluctuation in heart rate should resolve 
with the onset of exercise.
Junctional escape rhythm
A junctional escape (nodal) rhythm occurs when the QRS rate is 
faster than the resting P wave or sinus rate, which is typically slower 
in athletes due to increased vagal tone (figure 7). The R-R interval 
is regular in a junctional escape rhythm, and the QRS complexes 
are narrow unless the baseline QRS has a bundle branch block. 
Sinus rhythm should resume with the onset of physical activity.
Ectopic atrial rhythm
In an ectopic atrial rhythm, P waves are present but of different 
morphology compared with the sinus P wave, typically with a 
rate ≤100 
bpm. Ectopic P waves are most easily seen when the P 
waves are negative in the inferior leads (figure 8). Occasionally, 
two different P wave morphologies may be seen and this is known 
as a ‘wandering atrial pacemaker’. A junctional escape rhythm or 
Figure 7 A 28-year-old asymptomatic Caucasian handball player demonstrating a junctional escape rhythm (red arrows). Note the constant RR 
interval between beats.
Figure 8 ECG shows an ectopic atrial rhythm. The atrial rate is 63 beats per minute and the P wave morphology is negative in leads II, III and aVF 
(arrows), signifying an ectopic atrial rhythm.
713
Drezner JA, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:704–731. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331 on 3 March 2017. Downloaded from 
 Consensus statement
wandering atrial pacemaker is observed in up to 8% of all athletes 
under resting conditions.32 Ectopic atrial rhythms occur due to a 
slowed resting sinus rate from increased vagal tone in athletes. 
Sinus rhythm should resume with the onset of physical activity.
First-degree AV block
First-degree AV block is found in up to 7.5% of athletes on a 
resting ECG and is characterised by a prolonged (>200 ms) 
PR interval.32 35 61 This represents a delay in AV nodal conduc-
tion in athletes, due to increased vagal activity or intrinsic 
AV node changes, and typically resolves with the onset of 
exercise.
mobitz type I (Wenckebach) second-degree AV block
In Mobitz type I second-degree AV block, the PR interval 
progressively lengthens from beat to beat, until there is a 
non-conducted P wave with no QRS complex (figure 9). The 
first PR interval after the dropped beat is shorter than the last 
conducted PR interval before the dropped beat. This represents 
a greater disturbance of AV nodal conduction than first-degree 
AV block, but is usually a normal finding in asymptomatic, well-
trained athletes, and 1:1 conduction should return with the 
onset of exercise.
Sport-specific ECG considerations
Adaptive changes in cardiac structure, function and electrophys-
iology occur in response to regular physical training. A strong 
relationship exists between the amount of training performed, 
resulting fitness, and extent of adaptive cardiac remodelling. 
Using measured VO2 max as a marker of athlete fitness, a robust 
linear association has been demonstrated between fitness and 
cardiac size.62 In this context, it is not surprising that many ECG 
features associated with athletic training are more prevalent 
and more profound in athletes exposed to the greatest training 
stimulus. This concept has most frequently been addressed by 
comparing athletes involved in team, skill-based or strength 
sports with those competing in endurance exercise. In a study 
comparing the ECGs of 1010 elite non-endurance and 251 
endurance athletes, the latter group demonstrated more frequent 
bradycardia, voltage criteria for LVH and early repolarisation—
all features considered common, benign and training-related.63 
However, uncommon features such as TWI extending to lead 
V3 was more common (4.0 vs 1.1%, p<0.0001) in endur-
ance athletes as compared with non-endurance athletes.63 Elite 
rowers also demonstrate a higher prevalence of TWI in the 
anterior septal leads compared with non-endurance or mixed 
athletic cohorts.64 In addition, the prevalence of incomplete and 
complete RBBB appears to increase with cardiac size, thereby 
suggesting these findings are more frequently observed in endur-
ance athletes.42
BoRdERLInE ECG FIndInGS In AThLETES
overview of borderline ECG findings in athletes
Recent data suggests that some ECG findings previously cate-
gorised as abnormal may also represent normal variants or the 
result of physiological cardiac remodelling in athletes and do 
not usually represent pathological cardiac disease. These ECG 
findings, specifically axis deviation, voltage criteria for atrial 
enlargement and complete RBBB, have been categorised as 
‘borderline’ findings in athletes (figure 1; table 1).
Axis deviation and voltage criteria for atrial enlargement
Several studies have shown that the Seattle criteria reduces the 
number of positive ECGs compared with the 2010 ESC criteria 
by at least 40% and improves specificity without compro-
mising sensitivity.18 23 24 65 Despite the improvements, more 
recent publications suggest that axis deviation and voltage 
criteria for atrial enlargement account for a large number of 
ECG patterns that are classified as abnormal in athletes but do 
not correlate with cardiac pathology. In a large study of 2533 
athletes aged 14–35 years and 9997 controls of similar age, 
Figure 9 ECG shows Mobitz type I (Wenckebach) second-degree AV block demonstrated by progressively longer PR intervals until there is a non-
conducted P-wave (arrows) and no QRS complex. Note the first PR interval after the dropped beat is shorter than the last conducted PR interval prior 
to the dropped beat.
714 
Drezner JA, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:704–731. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331 on 3 March 2017. Downloaded from 
 Consensus statement
isolated left or right axis deviation and isolated left or right 
atrial enlargement comprised 42.6% of all ECG findings.22 
The athletes revealed a slightly higher prevalence of these 
findings compared with controls (5.5% vs 4.4%; p=0.023). 
Specifically, athletes showed a higher prevalence of left axis 
deviation and left atrial enlargement versus controls (1.46% 
vs 0.96%; p=0.028% and 2.13% vs 1.37%; p=0.007, respec-
tively), particularly in those who trained over 20 hours per 
week.22 In contrast, there were no significant differences in the 
prevalence of right axis deviation and right atrial enlargement 
between the groups (1.11% vs 1.10%; p=0.983% and 0.83% 
vs 0.92%; p=0.664, respectively).22
Athletes with left axis deviation or left atrial enlargement 
exhibited larger left atrial and ventricular dimensions compared 
with athletes with a normal ECG and those with other physio-
logical ECG changes consistent with athlete’s heart.22 However, 
there were no appreciable differences in the number of athletes 
with cardiac dimensions exceeding predicted upper limits 
between the two groups. In contrast, there were no differences 
in cardiac dimensions between athletes with right axis deviation 
or right atrial enlargement compared with athletes with normal 
or usual physiological ECG changes.22 Echocardiographic evalu-
ation of the 579 athletes and controls with isolated axis deviation 
or voltage criteria for atrial enlargement failed to identify any 
major structural or functional abnormalities, and the prevalence 
of minor congenital abnormalities was similar in these individ-
uals to those with normal ECGs.22
Exclusion of axis deviation or atrial enlargement reduced the 
false-positive rate from 13% to 7.5% 
and improved specificity 
from 90% to 94% with a minimal reduction in sensitivity (91% to 
89.5%)%).22 A US study of 508 university athletes also revealed 
that of the 49 athletes considered to have abnormal ECGs at 
least 29 (59%) exhibited either voltage criteria for left atrial 
enlargement alone or in combination with large QRS complexes, 
and subsequent echocardiography revealed a structurally normal 
heart or findings consistent with athletic training.39
These findings suggest that right axis deviation and right 
atrial enlargement occurring in isolation or in association with 
other electrical markers of ‘athlete’s heart’ are probably normal 
variants, whereas left axis deviation and left atrial enlarge-
ment may reflect a relative increase in LV dimensions in some 
athletes.
Complete RBBB
Although incomplete RBBB is common in young athletes, 
the significance of complete RBBB is less certain. This partic-
ular ECG pattern was placed in the abnormal category in the 
2010 ESC recommendations and more recent ‘refined’ criteria, 
although considered a normal finding in the Seattle criteria if the 
QRS duration was <140 
ms.5 10 23 Complete RBBB is detected in 
approximately 1% of the general population and large datasets 
in young adult athletes reveal a prevalence of 0.5%–2.5%.12 66–68 
In a study of 510 US collegiate athletes, RBBB was reported in 
13 (2.5%) athletes and compared with athletes with normal QRS 
complexes and athletes with incomplete RBBB.42 The athletes 
with complete RBBB exhibited larger right ventricular dimen-
sions and a lower right ventricular ejection fraction but preserved 
fractional area change. None of the athletes with complete 
RBBB or incomplete RBBB had pathological structural cardiac 
disease suggesting that that this particular ECG pattern may be 
a manifestation of more extreme right ventricular adaptation to 
exercise. These patterns among trained athletes could represent 
a spectrum of structural and physiological cardiac remodelling 
characterised by RV dilation with resultant QRS prolongation 
and a relative reduction in the RV systolic function at rest.42
Based on the aforementioned considerations, left axis devi-
ation, left atrial enlargement, right axis deviation, right atrial 
enlargement and complete RBBB are considered borderline 
variants in athletes. The presence of any one of these findings 
in isolation or with other recognised physiological electrical 
patterns of athletic training does not warrant further assessment 
in asymptomatic athletes without a family history of premature 
Figure 10 ECG from an asymptomatic 22-year-old black male athlete demonstrating complete right bundle branch block (QRS ≥120 ms), left 
axis deviation (−57°) and right atrial enlargement (P wave ≥2.5 mm in II and aVF). The presence of two or more borderline ECG findings warrants 
additional investigation to exclude pathological cardiac disease.
715
Drezner JA, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:704–731. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331 on 3 March 2017. Downloaded from 
 Consensus statement
cardiac disease or SCD. Conversely, the presence of more than 
one of these borderline findings in combination places the 
athlete in the abnormal category warranting additional investi-
gation (figure 10).
ABnoRmAL ECG FIndInGS In AThLETES
overview of ECG criteria for the detection of pathological 
cardiac disorders in athletes
Many pathological cardiac disorders associated with SCD 
exhibit abnormalities on a resting ECG. TWI is the most consis-
tent electrical abnormality in patients with cardiomyopathy. 
ST segment depression, pathological Q waves, and left bundle 
branch block (LBBB) are also recognised in cardiomyopathic 
disorders and ischaemic heart disease. Primary electrical disease 
such as ventricular pre-excitation, LQTS and Brugada syndrome 
are suggested and/or diagnosed by abnormal ECG findings. 
None of these abnormal findings as defined in this section 
are recognised features of athletic training and always require 
further assessment to exclude the presence of intrinsic cardiac 
disease (figure 1, table 1, table 2). When ECG abnormalities are 
identified, an athlete’s personal and family history should be 
thoroughly questioned as part of a comprehensive clinical inves-
tigation.
Abnormal T wave inversion
T waves represent repolarisation or recovery of the ventricular 
myocardium and constitute the final waveform of the cardiac 
cycle on ECG. T waves can be described by numerous attri-
butes including duration, symmetry, skewness, slope of the 
ascending and descending waveform, and most importantly, 
directionality. Directionality (ie, positivity or negativity) refers 
to the direction of T wave deflection with regards to the elec-
trically neutral ECG baseline, conventionally defined as the PR 
segment. T wave directionality is typically concomitant with 
the net vector of the QRS complex and is thus deflected above 
the baseline (ie, positive) in most leads. Normal exceptions, 
leads in which T waves are routinely negative, include aVR, 
III and V1. T waves deflected negatively are referred to as 
TWI. When present in leads aside from aVR, III and V1, 
TWI may have an association with underlying structural heart 
disease. TWI ≥1 mm in depth in two or more contiguous leads 
(excluding leads aVR, III and V1) in an anterior, lateral, infero-
lateral or inferior territory is abnormal (with the exception of 
TWI confined to leads V1-V4 in black athletes and leads V1-V3 
in all athletes aged <16 years) and should prompt further eval-
uation for underlying structural heart disease (table 1; table 2).
Clinical considerations
The relationship between abnormal TWI and several forms 
of structural heart disease including HCM, ARVC, dilated 
cardiomyopathy (DCM), left ventricular non-compaction and 
myocarditis is well documented. In a cohort of young (age <35 
years) asymptomatic patients with confirmed HCM, 62% 
exhibited abnormal TWI.69 In a similar study of asymptomatic 
or mildly symptomatic patients with HCM, the prevalence of 
abnormal TWI was reported at 80%.70 Most recently, the prev-
alence of abnormal TWI among athletes with newly diagnosed 
HCM was reported in excess of 90%.71 In a study comparing 
1124 athletes with 255 patients with HCM, TWI in V4-V6 were 
present in 38% of patients with HCM versus 0.8% of athletes 
(p<0.001) (figure 3).72
ARVC is similarly associated with abnormal TWI. Specifically, 
the presence of TWI in the right precordial leads (V1-V3) or 
beyond in the absence of a complete RBBB is common among 
patients with ARVC and has been adopted as a major criterion 
for diagnosis (figure 11).73 74 Recently, the deleterious prognostic 
implications of TWI involving non-anterior lead territories 
among patients with ARVC, particularly inferior lead TWI, have 
been demonstrated.75 76
Abnormal TWI is relatively infrequent among healthy 
white competitive athletes with a reported prevalence ranging 
from <1.0% 
to 4% based on factors including age, sex and type 
Figure 11 ECG from a 30-year-old patient with ARVC showing anterior TWI in V1-V3 preceded by a flat or downsloping ST segment without J-point 
elevation. PVCs are also present. ARVC, arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy; PVC, premature ventricular contraction.
716 
Drezner JA, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:704–731. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331 on 3 March 2017. Downloaded from 
 Consensus statement
of sport but is reported in as many as 12% of black athletes.18 
32 33 39 56 64 77–79 Based on the overlap with the cardiomyopathies, 
abnormal TWI in asymptomatic athletes warrants a comprehen-
sive clinical assessment to exclude underlying cardiomyopathy. 
There are no data relating to the significance of flat or biphasic 
T waves in athletes. Similar to TWI, this panel would recom-
mend further evaluation of biphasic T waves where the negative 
portion is ≥1 
mm in depth in ≥2 leads.
Evaluation
Lateral or inferolateral TWI
There is mounting evidence that TWI in the lateral or infero-
lateral leads, in any athlete, are associated with the presence of 
quiescent cardiomyopathy.33 79–81 Recommendations for the eval-
uation of abnormal TWI and other clinical considerations are 
presented in table 2.
Although rarely seen in athletes without subsequently iden-
tified structural heart disease, TWI affecting the lateral leads 
(V5-V6, I and aVL) is considered abnormal and should prompt 
comprehensive investigation irrespective of ethnicity, including 
cardiac MRI, when echocardiography is non-diagnostic. Echo-
cardiographic quality is variable and may have limited ability 
to detect hypertrophy of the anterolateral LV wall and apex.82 
Contrast-enhanced cardiac MRI provides superior assessment of 
myocardial hypertrophy and may demonstrate late gadolinium 
enhancement which is a non-specific marker suggesting myocar-
dial fibrosis. Exercise ECG testing and Holter monitoring also 
should be considered in the evaluation of lateral or inferolateral 
TWI, especially for ‘grey zone’ hypertrophy (maximal LV wall 
thickness 13–16 
mm) without late gadolinium enhancement, 
where the diagnosis of HCM remains uncertain. In such cases, 
the presence of ventricular tachycardia during exercise or Holter 
may support a pathological diagnosis and is useful in risk strat-
ification.83
Cardiac MRI should be a standard component of the assess-
ment for markedly abnormal ECGs suggestive of apical HCM, 
specifically ECGs with deep (>−0.2 
mV) TWI and ST segment 
depression in the lateral or inferolateral leads in which echocar-
diography may not provide adequate assessment of the LV apex 
and inferior septum. If cardiac MRI is not available, echocar-
diography with contrast should be considered as an alternative 
investigation for apical HCM. For athletes with lateral TWI, 
regular follow-up with serial cardiac imaging is necessary even 
when the initial evaluation is normal, in order to monitor for 
the development of a cardiomyopathy phenotype (figure 12).80 81
Anterior TWI
Anterior TWI is a normal variant in asymptomatic adolescent 
athletes age <16 years and in black athletes when preceded by 
J-point elevation and convex ST segment elevation.84 Anterior 
TWI involving lead V3 is also reported in white, adult, predom-
inantly endurance athletes.63 However, anterior TWI in leads 
V1-V2/V3 also is a recognised pattern in patients with ARVC and 
more rarely HCM (figure 11). There are discrepancies among 
existing guidelines relating to the extent of anterior TWI inver-
sion before considering further investigations.5 6 16 23
A large study of over 14 
000 white adults aged 16–35 years, 
including over 2500 athletes showed that anterior TWI had 
a prevalence of 2.3%.85 Anterior TWI was more common in 
females and athletes and was confined to leads V1-V2 in almost 
all individuals, and only exceeded beyond V2 in 1% of females 
and 0.2% of males.85 None of the individuals with anterior TWI 
were diagnosed with a cardiomyopathy following comprehen-
sive investigation indicating that this particular ECG pattern 
is non-specific in low-risk populations. Based on this report, it 
would be justifiable to investigate only athletes with anterior 
TWI beyond V2 in the absence of other clinical or electrical 
features of ARVC.
Specific information about the J-point and preceding ST 
segment may help differentiate between physiological adapta-
tion and cardiomyopathy in athletes with anterior TWI affecting 
leads V3 and/or V4. A recent study comparing anterior TWI 
in a series of black and white healthy athletes, patients with 
HCM and patients with ARVC showed that in athletes with 
anterior TWI, the combination of J-point elevation ≥1 
mm and 
TWI confined to leads V1-V4 excluded either cardiomyopathy 
with 100% negative predictive value, regardless of ethnicity.84 
Conversely, anterior TWI associated with minimal or absent 
J-point elevation (<1 
mm) could reflect a cardiomyopathy.84 
These data require duplication in larger studies but may prove 
useful in the assessment of a small proportion of white endur-
ance athletes who exhibit anterior TWI and in athletes of black/
mixed ethnicity.34
In most non-black athletes age ≥16 years, anterior TWI 
beyond lead V2 should prompt further evaluation given the 
potential overlap with ARVC. The extent of evaluation is 
dependent on the specific ECG findings suggestive of ARVC 
and will be more extensive in the presence of warning symp-
toms or significant family history. In athletes age ≥16 years 
with TWI beyond V2, concurrent findings of J-point eleva-
tion, ST segment elevation or biphasic T waves more likely 
represent athlete’s heart, while the absence of J-point elevation 
or a coexistent depressed ST segment is more concerning for 
ARVC.84Other ECG findings suggestive of ARVC in the pres-
ence of anterior TWI include low limb lead voltages, prolonged 
S wave upstroke, ventricular ectopy with LBBB morphology 
and epsilon waves.74 A combination of tests is needed to 
effectively make the diagnosis of ARVC and may include echo-
cardiography, cardiac MRI, Holter monitoring, exercise ECG 
test and signal averaged ECG.
Repolarisation variants in the anterior precordial leads in black 
athletes must be distinguished from pathological repolarisation 
changes found in ARVC (figure 13). In ARVC, the J-point and/
or ST segment is usually isoelectric or depressed prior to TWI, 
in contrast to the J-point elevation and ‘domed’ ST segment 
elevation which is the hallmark feature of the physiological repo-
larisation variant in black athletes.
Inferior TWI
The significance of TWI confined to the inferior leads (II, III and 
aVF) has not been studied in detail. TWI isolated only to the 
inferior leads is not a strong predictor of cardiomyopathy in the 
absence of other abnormal ECG or clinical features. However, 
this finding cannot be attributed to physiological remodelling 
and thus warrants further investigation with, at minimum, an 
echocardiogram until larger studies with longer follow-up prove 
otherwise. Cardiac MRI should be considered based on the 
echocardiographic findings or clinical suspicion. Serial assess-
ment, on an annual basis, is advised until data from longitudinal 
studies become available.
ST segment depression
While ST segment depression is common among patients with 
cardiomyopathy, it is not a feature of athletic training (figure 3). 
Prevalence estimates of ST segment depression among patients 
with HCM range from 60%–70%, and in one study the terri-
torial distribution of ST segment depression among patients 
717
Drezner JA, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:704–731. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331 on 3 March 2017. Downloaded from 
 Consensus statement
with HCM was associated with the risk of sudden death or 
appropriate implantable cardioverter-defibrillator therapy.41 86 
87 In contrast, ST segment depressions are extremely rare in 
young athletes with structurally normal and physiologically 
remodelled hearts.33 55 68 72 ST segment depression (relative to 
the isoelectric PR segment) in excess of 0.05 mV (0.5 mm) in 
two or more leads should be considered an abnormal finding 
requiring definitive evaluation for underlying structural heart 
disease.
Evaluation
Echocardiography is the minimum evaluation for athletes with 
ST segment depression to investigate for underlying cardio-
myopathy. Cardiac MRI should be considered based on the 
echocardiographic findings or clinical suspicion.
Pathological Q waves
Q waves are defined as any initial negative deflection of the 
QRS complex and can be found with both physiological elec-
trical activation of the ventricle and with certain pathological 
conditions, including cardiomyopathy, myocardial infarction 
and conduction abnormalities.
Several pathological disorders can lead to the development 
of exaggerated (deep or wide) Q waves or unexpected Q waves 
in atypical leads. HCM commonly results in asymmetric septal 
hypertrophy which can produce abnormal Q waves due to 
increased septal forces, septal fibrosis and asymmetric electrical 
activation (figure 14). Indeed, pathological Q waves are among 
the most common abnormal ECG findings in HCM and present 
in 32%–42% of patients.41 69 Pathological Q waves can also 
result from prior transmural myocardial infarction. Any loss of 
Figure 12 (A) ECG from an 18-year-old black basketball player demonstrating abnormal TWI extending into V5. Initial cardiac imaging was non-
diagnostic. (B) ECG from the same athlete at age 20 showing abnormal TWI in the inferolateral leads with the development of deep TWI and ST 
segment depression in V4-V6. Follow-up cardiac MRI demonstrated distinct findings of apical HCM with a maximum left ventricular wall thickness 
of 21 mm with small foci of late gadolinium enhancement. Athletes with TWI in V5 and/or V6 require serial evaluation for the development of 
cardiomyopathy. HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; TWI, T wave inversion.
718 
Drezner JA, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:704–731. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331 on 3 March 2017. Downloaded from 
 Consensus statement
myocardium and/or loss of myocardial electrical activity due to 
infarction, infiltration or fibrosis may lead to unopposed electrical 
activation of the opposite segments. Additionally, early activation 
from a bypass tract such as in WPW distorts the location of initial 
ventricular activation and may result in broad or atypical Q waves.
Pathological Q waves also may be a result of lead misplace-
ment. In particular, a pseudo-septal infarct pattern with 
pathological Q waves in leads V1-V2 is commonly due to high 
lead placement relative to cardiac position. This finding is more 
common in women than men, and in one series 64% of subjects 
lost this QS pattern on repeat ECG.88
A physiological increase in myocardial mass, such as LVH from 
athletic remodelling, also can result in increased Q wave voltage, 
and the change in cardiac geometry and electrical axis may 
distort the location of Q waves slightly. Thus, although Q waves 
can be a marker of underlying heart conditions, differentiating 
physiological from pathological Q waves can be challenging.
Pathological Q waves have been reported in approximately 
1%–2% of all athletes, and may be higher in males and black 
athletes.23 89 For asymptomatic athletes, pathological Q waves 
were previously defined as >3 mm in depth or >40 ms in dura-
tion in two or more leads (except III and aVR).6 10 In practice, 
Figure 13 Examples of physiological (A) and pathological T wave inversion (TWI) (B). Panel (A) demonstrates TWI in V1-V4 preceded by J-point 
elevations and convex ‘domed’ ST segment elevation (green circles). This should not be confused with pathological TWI as seen in panel (B) which 
demonstrates TWI in V1-V6 with absent J-point elevation and a downsloping ST segment (red circles).
Figure 14 ECG from an 18-year-old female swimmer demonstrating deep and wide pathological Q waves in V4-V6, I and aVL. Diagnostic testing 
revealed hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
719
Drezner JA, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:704–731. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331 on 3 March 2017. Downloaded from 
 Consensus statement
however, this criterion is a common source of false-positive 
ECG results as trained athletes with physiological LVH and 
thin adolescent athletes may have increased precordial voltages 
and deep lateral or inferior Q waves. Long narrow Q waves 
(>3 mm in depth) as previously defined by the Seattle criteria 
have been shown to be an unreliable marker for pathological 
LVH in athletes with increased QRS voltage. In a report of 
13 335 adolescents age 14–18 years screened with ECG, none 
of the 206 (1.5%) individuals with abnormal Q waves but no 
other ECG abnormality had pathological findings on limited 
echocardiogram consistent with cardiomyopathy.90 Thus, 
modification of the criteria for pathological Q waves has the 
potential to greatly improve the specificity of ECG interpre-
tation.
The use of a Q/R ratio overcomes some of these issues by 
normalising Q wave depth to the degree of proceeding R wave 
voltage. Case–control analyses of athletes and patients with 
HCM suggest that this will decrease the false-positive rate 
without compromising sensitivity for the detection of cardio-
myopathy.23 24 Therefore, the consensus of this panel based on 
existing scientific data is to modify the definition for patholog-
ical Q waves in athletes as a Q/R ratio ≥0.25 
or ≥40 ms in 
duration in two or more contiguous leads (except III and aVR).
Evaluation
An ECG with abnormal Q waves should be carefully exam-
ined for the possibility of a bypass tract, looking for a short 
PR interval or evidence of a delta wave. If the pathological Q 
waves are isolated to leads V1-V2, the ECG should be repeated, 
including re-placing the ECG leads to ensure proper positioning. 
Persistence of a QS pattern should undergo additional evalua-
tion.
Pathological Q waves in two or more contiguous leads 
warrants further investigation with echocardiography to exclude 
cardiomyopathy. A detailed family history and assessment of risk 
factors for coronary artery disease also should occur, especially 
in athletes age ≥30 years as stress testing may be warranted in 
athletes with suspicion of prior myocardial infarction or multiple 
risk factors for coronary artery disease.
If the echocardiogram is normal and there are no other 
concerning clinical findings or ECG abnormalities, no additional 
testing is generally necessary. If pathological Q waves are present 
along with other ECG abnormalities, such as ST segment 
depression or TWI, or if suspicious clinical findings are present, 
additional evaluation with cardiac MRI should be considered.
Complete LBBB
LBBB is found in less than 1 in 1000 athletes but is common 
in patients with cardiomyopathy and ischaemic heart disease.9 
41 72 91 92 Thus, complete LBBB always should be considered an 
abnormal finding and requires a comprehensive evaluation to 
rule out a pathological cardiac disorder.
LBBB is recognised by a QRS ≥120 ms, predominantly nega-
tive QRS complex in lead V1 (QS or rS), and upright notched or 
slurred R wave in leads I and V6 (figure 15). Q waves are often 
absent in leads I, V5 and V6, and the ST segment and T waves 
are usually in the opposite direction than the QRS.93
Evaluation
Athletes with complete LBBB require a thorough investigation 
for myocardial disease including echocardiography and a cardiac 
MRI with perfusion study.
Profound non-specific intraventricular conduction delay
Epidemiological studies of non-specific intraventricular conduc-
tion delay in the general population have shown an increased 
risk of cardiovascular death and have been documented 
among patients with cardiomyopathy.94 95 The significance of 
non-specific intraventricular conduction delay with normal 
QRS morphology in healthy, asymptomatic athletes is uncer-
tain.96 The physiology underlying intraventricular conduction 
delay in athletes remains incompletely understood but likely 
includes some combination of neurally mediated conduction 
fibre slowing and increased myocardial mass. In patients with 
LVH, left ventricular mass seems to be closely related to QRS 
duration.97
While the exact cut-off to trigger more investigation in athletes 
with a non-specific intraventricular conduction delay remains 
unclear, this panel recommends that marked non-specific intra-
ventricular conduction delay ≥140 ms in athletes, regardless 
of QRS morphology, is abnormal and should prompt further 
evaluation. In asymptomatic athletes with isolated non-spe-
cific intraventricular conduction delay <140 ms, no further 
diagnostic evaluation is required. Athletes with cardiovascular 
symptoms or a concerning family history of sudden death or 
suspected cardiomyopathy with a non-specific intraventricular 
Figure 15 ECG with complete LBBB demonstrating a QRS ≥120 ms, predominantly negative QRS complex in lead V1, upright R wave in leads I and 
V6, and ST segments and T waves in the opposite direction of the QRS. LBBB is always an abnormal finding in athletes and warrants a comprehensive 
evaluation to exclude myocardial disease. LBBB, left bundle branch block.
720 
Drezner JA, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:704–731. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331 on 3 March 2017. Downloaded from 
 Consensus statement
conduction delay <140 ms or in tandem with other ECG abnor-
malities should be evaluated further.
Evaluation
In asymptomatic athletes with profound non-specific intraven-
tricular conduction delay, an echocardiogram is recommended to 
evaluate for myocardial disease. Other testing may be indicated 
depending on echocardiographic findings or clinical suspicion.
Epsilon waves
Epsilon waves are defined as distinct low-amplitude signals 
localised between the end of the QRS complex and onset of the 
T wave in leads V1-V3 (figure 16). Epsilon waves are challenging 
to detect and appear as a small positive deflection or notch just 
beyond the QRS in leads V1-V3. The presence of epsilon waves 
is a highly specific ECG marker and represents a major diag-
nostic criterion for ARVC.74
High interobserver variability has been found in the assess-
ment of epsilon waves.98 However, epsilon waves are typically 
a manifestation of more advanced disease and unlikely to be an 
isolated ECG finding.98 In patients with ARVC that express an 
epsilon wave, 89% also manifest TWI in the right precordial 
leads and 100% have a delayed S wave upstroke (prolonged 
terminal activation duration) ≥55 ms from the nadir of the S 
wave to the end of the QRS complex.98
Evaluation
Evaluation of epsilon waves, especially in combination with 
right precordial TWI or delayed S wave upstroke, requires the 
exclusion of possible ARVC through a combination of tests 
including echocardiography, cardiac MRI, Holter monitoring, 
exercise ECG test and signal averaged ECG.
Ventricular Pre-excitation
Ventricular pre-excitation occurs when an accessory pathway 
bypasses the AV node resulting in abnormal conduction to the 
ventricle (pre-excitation) with shortening of the PR interval and 
widening of the QRS. This is evident on the ECG as the Wolf-Par-
kinson-White (WPW) pattern defined as a PR interval <120 
ms, 
the presence of a delta wave (slurring of the initial QRS) and a 
QRS duration >120 
ms (figure 17).93 The WPW pattern occurs 
in approximately 1/1000 to 4/1000 athletes.9 12 66 99 The presence 
of an accessory pathway can predispose an athlete to sudden 
death because rapid conduction of atrial fibrillation across the 
accessory pathway can result in VF.
Figure 16 ECG in a young athlete with arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy showing several abnormal features including anterior T 
wave inversion (V1–V4) preceded by a non-elevated J-point and ST segment, an epsilon wave in V1 (magnified and marked with arrow), delayed S 
wave upstroke in V2, and low voltage (<5 mm) QRS complexes in limb leads I and aVL.
Figure 17 ECG demonstrating the classic findings of Wolf-Parkinson-White pattern with a short PR interval (<120 ms), delta wave (slurred QRS 
upstroke) and prolonged QRS (>120 ms).
721
Drezner JA, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:704–731. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331 on 3 March 2017. Downloaded from 
 Consensus statement
Evaluation
A short PR interval associated with a delta wave is consistent 
with the WPW pattern and warrants further assessment of the 
refractory period of the accessory pathway. A short PR interval 
in isolation without a widened QRS or delta wave in an asymp-
tomatic athlete should not be considered for further assessment.
Asymptomatic athletes with WPW pattern should be inves-
tigated for the presence of a low-risk or high-risk accessory 
pathway. Non-invasive risk stratification begins with an exer-
cise stress test in which abrupt, complete loss of pre-excitation 
at higher heart rates suggests a low-risk accessory pathway.100 
101 Intermittent pre-excitation during sinus rhythm on a resting 
ECG is also consistent with a low-risk pathway and may obviate 
the need for an exercise test.102
If non-invasive testing cannot confirm a low-risk pathway or 
is inconclusive, electrophysiology testing should be considered 
to determine the shortest pre-excited RR interval during atrial 
fibrillation.100 If the shortest pre-excited RR interval is ≤250 ms 
(240 bpm), then the accessory pathway is deemed high risk.100 103 
Young athletes with a shortest pre-excited RR interval of ≤250 
ms should proceed with transcatheter pathway ablation.100 An 
echocardiogram also should be considered due to the associa-
tion of WPW with Ebstein’s anomaly and cardiomyopathy. Some 
physicians may choose to subject all competitive athletes with 
WPW pattern involved in moderate-intensity or high-intensity 
sport to electrophysiological studies irrespective of the results 
of the exercise test or 24-hour ECG on the premise that high 
catecholamine concentrations during very intensive exercise 
may modify the refractory period of an accessory pathway in a 
fashion that cannot be reproduced during laboratory tests.
Prolonged QT interval
Congenital LQTS is a potentially lethal, genetically mediated 
ventricular arrhythmia syndrome with the hallmark ECG feature 
of QT prolongation. Symptoms if present include arrhythmic 
syncope, seizures or aborted cardiac arrest/sudden death stem-
ming from torsades de pointes and VF. The pathophysiology of 
LQTS involves delayed ventricular repolarisation originating 
primarily from loss-of-function mutations in genes encoding 
voltage gated potassium channels that govern phase 3 repolar-
isation. LQTS is estimated to affect 1 in 2000 individuals, and 
this may be underestimated given the subpopulation of so-called 
‘normal QT interval’ or ‘concealed’ LQTS.104
Autopsy negative sudden unexplained death represents 
25%–40% of sudden unexpected deaths in persons under age 
40 years.3 105–107 In cases that lack necropsy findings to establish a 
cause of death, cardiac ion channelopathies have been implicated 
by post-mortem genetic testing as the probable cause in up to 
25%–35% of sudden unexplained death in selected cohorts.108–111
Calculating the QTc
Accurate measurement and manual confirmation of the 
computer derived QT interval corrected for heart rate (QTc) 
is critical as the accuracy of computer generated QTc values is 
about 90%–95%. Studies have suggested the ability of cardiolo-
gists and even heart rhythm specialists to accurately measure the 
QTc is suboptimal.112 However, accurate assessment of the QTc 
can be achieved by adhering to the following six principles113:
 
►
Most ECG devices use the Bazett’s heart rate correction 
formula (QTc = QT/√RR; note the RR interval is 
measured in seconds).114 Although there are many heart 
rate correction formulas for the QTc, it is recommended 
to use Bazett’s correction to confirm the computer’s QTc 
as population-based QTc distributions most frequently 
have used Bazett-derived QTc values.
 
►
Bazett’s formula loses accuracy at slow and fast heart rates; 
underestimating the inherent QTc at heart rates <50 
bpm, 
and overestimating the QTc at heart rates >90 
bpm. 
Accordingly, if an athlete has a heart rate <50 
bpm, a repeat 
ECG after mild aerobic activity is recommended to achieve 
a heart rate closer to 60 bpm where the formula is most 
accurate. Likewise, for heart rates >90 
bpm, repeating the 
ECG after additional resting time and ensuring the patient 
is not unduly cold, hot or anxious may help achieve a lower 
heart rate where Bazett’s formula will be more accurate.
 
►
If sinus arrhythmia is present with beat to beat variation 
in heart rate, an average QT interval and average RR 
interval should be used to improve accuracy. Importantly, 
taking the maximum QT interval and dividing it by the 
square root of the shortest RR interval on the ECG will 
grossly overestimate the QTc.115
 
►
To properly perform a manual QT measurement, it is 
critical to identify the end of the T wave since the onset 
of the QRS is typically seen easily. Leads II and V5 usually 
provide the best delineation of the T wave, and these 
leads are often used for the rhythm strip at the bottom 
of the ECG.
 
►
Low amplitude U waves, common in the anterior 
precordial leads, should not be included in the QT 
calculation. Such U wave inclusion will greatly exaggerate 
the QTc. Instead, the ‘Teach-the-Tangent’ or ‘Avoid-the-
Tail’ method to delineate the end of the T wave should be 
followed (figure 18).113
 
►
The morphology of the T wave, not just the length of the 
QT interval, also can suggest the presence of LQTS.116 
For instance, a notched T wave in the lateral precordial 
leads where the amplitude of the second portion of the T 
wave following the notch is greater than the first portion 
of the T wave may represent LQT-2 even in the absence 
of overt QT prolongation.
With this framework, the easiest and most efficient way to 
confirm the computer-derived QTc is to examine lead II and/or 
V5 and determine if the manually measured QT interval matches 
the computer’s QT measurement. If there is concordance within 
about 10 
ms of each other, one can trust that the computer 
can derive accurately an average RR interval and complete the 
Bazett’s calculation. If, however, the manually measured QT 
Figure 18 This figure illustrates the ‘Teach-the-Tangent’ or ‘Avoid-the-
Tail’ method for manual measurement of the QT interval. A straight line 
is drawn on the downslope of the T wave to the point of intersection 
with the isoelectric line. The U wave is not included in the measurement.
722 
Drezner JA, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:704–731. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331 on 3 March 2017. Downloaded from 
 Consensus statement
interval is >10 
ms different than the computer’s QT measure-
ment, an average RR interval should be determined and the QTc 
recalculated using the Bazett’s formula.
QTc cut-offs
Given the overlap between QTc distributions in population-de-
rived cohorts of healthy individuals compared with patients with 
genetically confirmed LQTS, it must be acknowledged that no 
screening programme will identify all persons with LQTS.117–120 
Instead, the QTc cut-off value, where the QTc measurement 
compels further evaluation, must be chosen carefully to balance 
the frequency of abnormal results and the positive predictive 
value that LQTS has been detected incidentally.
Published definitions of a ‘prolonged QTc’ requiring further 
evaluation have varied. Prior guidelines from the ESC for ECG 
interpretation in athletes define a QTc of >440 
ms in males 
and >460 
ms in females (but <500 
ms) as a ‘grey zone’ requiring 
further evaluation, and a QTc ≥500 
ms, otherwise unexplained 
and regardless of family history and symptoms, as indicative 
of unequivocal LQTS.5 In the USA, the American Heart Asso-
ciation/American College of Cardiology/Heart Rhythm Society 
guideline has dropped the term ‘borderline’ QT prolongation 
and instead annotates a QTc >450 
ms in men and >460 
ms in 
women as ‘prolonged QTc’.121 Concern has been raised that these 
QTc cut-offs will produce a high number of false-positive test 
results if followed in a screening population of athletes.117 More 
recent consensus statements on ECG interpretation in athletes 
have recommended that male athletes with a QTc >470 
ms and 
female athletes with a QTc >480 
ms undergo further evalua-
tion for LQTS to better balance false-positive and false-negative 
findings.6 10 These cut-off values are around the 99th percen-
tile and consistent with thresholds defined by the 36th Bethesda 
Conference.122 This consensus group also recommends QTc 
values of >470 
ms in males and >480 
ms in females to define the 
threshold of QT prolongation that warrants further assessment 
in asymptomatic athletes.
Short QT interval
While an abnormal cut-off for a short QT interval has been 
included in past ECG interpretation guidelines, the precise 
cut-off and clinical significance of a short QT interval in athletes 
is unknown. Data from over 18 
000 asymptomatic young British 
individuals suggests that the prevalence of a QTc <320 
ms is 
0.1%; suggesting an abnormal cut-off value of <320 
ms is prag-
matic.123 However, over a mean follow-up period of 5.3 years, 
none of the individuals with a short QT <320 
ms experienced 
any adverse events, syncope or sudden death.123 Based on the 
rarity of this finding and absence of data to suggest long-term 
morbidity in asymptomatic athletes, the consensus of this panel 
recommends that a short QT interval only be investigated in the 
context of concerning clinical markers such as syncope, prema-
ture atrial fibrillation, ventricular arrhythmias or a relevant 
family history.
Evaluation
An athlete identified with a prolonged QTc (≥470 
ms in 
males;≥480 
ms in females) should undergo further evaluation. 
It is critical that an athlete with a single QTc reading above 
these threshold values not be obligated a diagnosis of LQTS, 
but rather that these cut-off values have triggered the need for 
additional evaluation. The importance of additional evaluation 
but not a premature diagnosis of LQTS was demonstrated in a 
study of 2000 elite athletes in which 7 (0.4%) had a prolonged 
QTc (range 460–570 
ms).124 A QTc of <500 
ms in the absence of 
symptoms or familial disease was unlikely to represent LQTS. 
In contrast, a QTc ≥500 
ms was highly suggestive of LQTS as 
all three athletes with a QTc value of >500 
ms exhibited one of 
paradoxical prolongation of the QTc during exercise, a confir-
matory genetic mutation or prolonged QTc in a first-degree 
relative.124 As outlined below, personal symptoms, family history, 
scoring systems, ECG features, stress ECG and genetic testing 
may be needed to clarify the diagnosis.
A personal history of exercise/emotion/auditory-triggered 
syncope or seizures and a family history of exertional syncope, 
exercise/auditory-triggered 
‘epilepsy’, 
postpartum-timed 
syncope/seizure, unexplained motor vehicle accidents, unex-
plained 
drowning 
and 
premature, 
unexplained 
sudden 
death <50 years of age should be reviewed. If the personal/
family history is positive, the athlete should be referred to a heart 
rhythm specialist for further evaluation. If the personal/family 
history is negative, a repeat ECG should be obtained (ideally on 
a different day). If the follow-up ECG is below the QTc cut-off 
values, then no additional evaluation is needed and the athlete 
should be reassured.
On the other hand, if the repeat ECG still exceeds the QTc 
cut-off values, then a screening ECG of the athlete’s first-de-
gree relatives (parents and siblings) should be considered and the 
athlete should be referred to a heart rhythm specialist or cardi-
ologist for the possibility of newly discovered LQTS. Reversible, 
extrinsic factors, such as electrolyte abnormalities (hypoka-
lemia) or the presence of QT prolonging medications, must also 
be evaluated. If an athlete’s ECG shows a QTc >500 
ms and 
no reversible causes are identified, then the athlete should be 
referred immediately to a heart rhythm specialist or cardiolo-
gist as the probability of LQTS and future adverse events has 
increased.125 Further testing, such as provocative treadmill stress 
testing, epinephrine QT stress testing and genetic testing need 
to be considered carefully and should be performed and inter-
preted by a cardiologist familiar with the disease.
LQTS is diagnosed based on a combination of symptoms, 
family history, ECG findings and genetic testing, and the 
Schwartz-Moss score used to invoke low, intermediate and high 
probability.126–128 Genetic testing for LQTS is recommended for 
any athlete where a cardiologist has an index of suspicion for 
LQTS (intermediate or high probability score), or for an asymp-
tomatic patient with no family history but an incidental ECG 
finding with a QTc >480 
ms pre-puberty and >500 
ms post-pu-
berty that is confirmed on repeat ECG testing.129
Brugada type 1 pattern
Brugada syndrome is a primary electrical disease characterised by 
the distinctive Brugada ECG pattern of ‘high take-off’ ST segment 
elevation in the right precordial leads (figure 6). Although three 
types were described, only the type 1 Brugada pattern is now 
considered diagnostic.130–132 Brugada syndrome predisposes to 
ventricular tachyarrhythmias in the absence of clinically demon-
strable structural heart disease, and sudden death in patients with 
Brugada syndrome occurs more often during states of enhanced 
vagal tone.133 Loss of function mutations in the sodium channel 
gene SCN5A accounts for up to 20% of cases.130 134 Brugada 
syndrome is estimated to cause up to 4% of all sudden deaths 
in the general population and 5%–20% of sudden unexplained 
deaths with a structurally normal heart at autopsy.130 135
The type 1 Brugada pattern consists of a coved rSr’ pattern, 
ST-segment elevation ≥2 
mm, and inversion of the terminal 
portion of the T wave in leads V1, V2 and V3. Classic type 2 
and 3 Brugada patterns have a ‘saddleback’ appearance with 
723
Drezner JA, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:704–731. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331 on 3 March 2017. Downloaded from 
 Consensus statement
J-point elevation ≥2 
mm, ST segment elevation >1 
mm in type 2 
and ≤1 
mm in type 3, and either a positive or biphasic T wave. 
A recent consensus document grouped the classic types 2 and 3 
as type 2.131
Distinguishing between true type 1 or 2 patterns and a host 
of Brugada-like ECG patterns can be challenging. Brugada-like 
patterns may be caused by both physiological (normal variant, 
early repolarisation, incomplete RBBB) and pathological 
(ARVC, pulmonary hypertension, hyperkalemia) conditions.131 
136 Pharmacological and ECG manoeuvres may clarify the diag-
nosis. Confirmation of proper precordial lead placement is 
paramount, as high placement of the V1 and V2 electrodes in 
the second and third intercostal space (rather than the fourth 
intercostal space) can accentuate a type 1 Brugada ECG pattern 
in known Brugada patients but also produce type 2 like patterns 
in athletes.137
The coved ST segment elevation in type 1 Brugada pattern 
results in a broad r’ and should be distinguishable from the 
upsloping ST segment elevation of early repolarisation in an 
athlete. In this regard, the ‘Corrado index’ measures the ST 
elevation at the start of the ST segment/J-point (STJ) and 80 ms 
after the start of the ST segment (ST80).138 In type 1 Brugada 
pattern, the downsloping ST segment will have a STJ/ST80 
ratio >1, while the initial upsloping of the ST segment found in 
early repolarisation patterns in an athlete will produce an STJ/
ST80 ratio <1 (figure 19).
Evaluation
The type 1 Brugada ECG pattern is not a recognised variant of 
athlete’s heart and should raise the possibility of a sodium ion 
channelopathy. Patients with a type 1 ECG pattern should be 
referred to a cardiac electrophysiologist for further evaluation, 
regardless of symptoms. If the pattern is unclear, confirm correct 
lead placement, repeat the ECG if necessary, and perform a high 
precordial lead ECG with V1 and V2 placed in the second or third 
intercostal space. If the type 1 pattern is seen on high precordial 
lead ECG, then referral to a heart rhythm specialist is indicated. 
Consideration should be given to potential accentuating factors 
for a Brugada-like ECG pattern, such as hyperkalemia, fever, 
medications with sodium ion channel blocking properties and 
lead placement.
The type 2 Brugada ECG pattern may overlap with repolarisa-
tion changes in the anterior leads in black athletes and endurance 
athletes. Multiple criteria for evaluating type 2 patterns have 
been proposed; however, in the absence of symptoms or a 
concerning family history, athletes with type 2 patterns do not 
require further testing.
Profound sinus bradycardia
Sinus bradycardia is a hallmark feature of athletic conditioning 
with heart rates commonly between 40–60 bpm or even slower. 
A resting heart rate ≤30 
bpm or a sinus pause ≥3 
s may be 
normal in a well-trained athlete but nevertheless should prompt 
further evaluation.
Evaluation
Evaluation of profound sinus bradycardia should include assessing 
the chronotropic response to mild aerobic activity, such as running 
on the spot or climbing stairs. If the heart rate increases appro-
priately and the athlete is asymptomatic, no further testing is 
necessary. If there is no change in heart rate or in athletes with 
a history of symptoms such as presyncope or syncope, further 
testing should be performed to exclude primary sinus node 
disease. Exercise testing is useful in this situation to provide an 
objective measure of the heart rate response to aerobic activity.
Profound first-degree heart block
Mild to moderate first-degree heart block with a PR interval 
of 200 to 399 ms may be present in athletes due to increased 
vagal tone. A PR interval ≥400 ms is significantly prolonged and 
requires further evaluation.
Evaluation
A small amount of aerobic activity should be performed to 
assess if the PR interval shortens appropriately. If the PR 
interval normalises with exercise, the PR prolongation is due 
to vagal mechanisms and is benign. If the PR interval does not 
shorten, or there are symptoms of syncope or a family history 
of cardiac disease or sudden death, further evaluation should 
be performed.139 An exercise test can demonstrate more clearly 
if the PR interval changes at higher heart rates. Depending on 
the clinical scenario, an echocardiogram or ambulatory ECG 
monitor may be indicated.
high-grade AV block
Mobitz type II second-degree AV block and third-degree 
(complete) AV block are pathological disruptions in AV 
conduction and abnormal findings in athletes. In Mobitz 
type II AV block, there are intermittently non-conducted P 
waves with a fixed PR interval. In complete AV block, there 
are more P waves than QRS complexes, and the ventricular 
rhythm is regular due to an undisturbed junctional or ventric-
ular pacemaker. Complete heart block can be confused with 
AV dissociation without block; a situation where the junctional 
pacemaker is faster than the sinus node, leading to more QRS 
complexes than P waves. Intermittent ventricular capture by 
sinus P waves (resulting in an irregular ventricular response) 
excludes complete AV block. AV dissociation without block is 
the expression of autonomic mismatch between AV and sinus 
nodal modulation, but is not pathological. Like all other func-
tional disturbances, a small exercise load with repeat ECG 
recording will show resolution of the ECG findings in AV 
dissociation. Complete heart block requires further evaluation 
for underlying cardiac disease.
Evaluation
If Mobitz II AV block or complete AV block is detected, further 
evaluation includes an echocardiogram, ambulatory ECG 
Figure 19 Brugada type 1 ECG (left) should be distinguished from 
early repolarisation with ‘convex’ ST segment elevation in a trained 
athlete (right). Vertical lines mark the J-point (STJ) and the point 80 
ms after the J-point (ST80), where the amplitudes of the ST segment 
elevation are calculated. The ‘downsloping’ ST segment elevation 
in Brugada pattern is characterised by a STJ/ST80 ratio >1. Early 
repolarisation patterns in an athlete show an initial ‘upsloping’ ST 
segment elevation with STJ/ST80 ratio <1.
724 
Drezner JA, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:704–731. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331 on 3 March 2017. Downloaded from 
 Consensus statement
monitor, and exercise ECG test. Based on these results, labora-
tory testing and cardiac MRI may be considered. Referral to a 
heart rhythm specialist is essential.
multiple premature ventricular contractions
Multiple (≥2) premature ventricular contractions (PVCs) are 
uncommon and present in <1% of athlete ECGs (figure 19).9 
12 When 2 or more PVCs are recorded on a standard (10 
s) 
ECG, it is possible the athlete has a high 24 
hours PVC burden. 
While multiple PVCs are most likely benign in a highly trained 
athlete, their presence may be the hallmark of underlying heart 
disease.140 In athletes with ≥2000 PVCs per 24 
hours, up to 
30% were found to have underlying structural heart disease, in 
contrast to 3% and 0% in those with <2000 
and <100 PVCs 
per day, respectively.141Over half of the athletes with ≥2000 
PVCs also had bursts of non-sustained ventricular tachycardia.141 
Therefore, the finding of ≥2 PVCs on an ECG should prompt 
more extensive evaluation to exclude underlying structural heart 
disease.
Evaluation
The extent of evaluation for ≥2 PVCs is controversial and 
excluding pathology may be difficult. At a minimum, an ambu-
latory Holter monitor, echocardiogram and exercise stress test 
should be performed. The availability of modern small, lead-
less ambulatory recorders allows for longer ECG monitoring, 
including during training and competition, to exclude complex 
ventricular arrhythmias. If the Holter and echocardiogram are 
normal and the PVCs suppress with exercise, no further evalu-
ation is recommended for an asymptomatic athlete. However, 
in athletes with ≥2000 PVCs per 24 
hours or with episodes of 
non-sustained ventricular tachycardia, or with an increasing 
burden of ectopy during an incremental exercise test, additional 
evaluation may include contrast-enhanced cardiac MRI and 
more invasive EP study.142 Therefore, many such cases require 
referral to a specialist centre.143 Although some studies have 
suggested that regression of the PVC burden with detraining 
indicates a good prognosis, other studies have not confirmed 
this.144–146 Thus, detraining as a diagnostic or therapeutic measure 
is not recommended.
Considerations in high-dynamic athletes
In high-level endurance athletes, such as cyclists, triathlon 
athletes and rowers, concern has been raised about the high 
volume and pressure loads on the right ventricle that could 
promote or induce ARVC. Competitive sport definitively 
accelerates and enhances the phenotypic expression of desmo-
somal mutations causing ARVC.147 148 There also is evolving 
evidence that high-dynamic exercise sustained over a long 
period of time may result in ‘exercise-induced’ ARVC, even in 
the absence of desmosomal mutations or a familial history.143 
149–151 PVCs originating from the right ventricular outflow 
tract conduct with LBBB and an inferior axis and are usually 
regarded as benign when associated with an otherwise normal 
ECG; however, this PVC morphology can also be present in 
patients with early ARVC particularly when the QRS exceeds 
160 ms.152 In contrast, PVCs originating from the main body 
of the right ventricle typically show a LBBB pattern and supe-
rior axis (predominantly negative QRS vector in V1 and the 
inferior leads) and may be associated with right ventricular 
pathology particularly in the context of other ECG abnormal-
ities (figure 20). Therefore, a lower threshold for extensive 
evaluation of a single PVC may be warranted in high-dynamic 
athletes, especially when ≥25 years of age and with a LBBB 
morphology and superior axis.
Atrial tachyarrhythmias
Atrial tachyarrhythmias, comprised of supraventricular tachy-
cardia (SVT), atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter, are heart 
rhythms >100 
bpm which originate in the sinus node, atrial 
tissue or AV node. Sinus tachycardia is the most common atrial 
tachyarrhythmia but is very rarely due to intrinsic cardiac disease.
SVT, atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter are rarely seen on a 
resting ECG in athletes and require investigation. One study 
demonstrated just 6 of 32 
561 young athletes during ECG 
screening with an atrial tachyarrhythmia, four (0.01%) with 
ectopic atrial tachycardia and two (<0.01%) with atrial fibril-
lation.9 An examination of ECGs from the South Korean Army 
also found zero soldiers with an atrial tachyarrhythmia.153 Atrial 
tachyarrhythmias are rarely life-threatening and usually lead to 
symptoms like palpitations, shortness of breath, chest pressure, 
dizziness, neck pounding or syncope from rapid heart rates. AV 
Figure 20 ECG from a patient with arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy. Note multiple premature ventricular contractions with a left 
bundle branch block pattern and superior axis (negative QRS vector in inferior leads).
725
Drezner JA, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:704–731. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331 on 3 March 2017. Downloaded from 
 Consensus statement
dyssynchrony also may limit peak physical activity. More impor-
tantly, they can be associated with other conditions that can lead 
to SCD, including LQTS, WPW
, Brugada syndrome, myocar-
ditis, congenital heart disease and any form of cardiomyopathy.
Evaluation
For paroxysmal SVT, a repeat ECG when not in SVT should 
be obtained if possible. If the Valsalva manoeuvre, carotid sinus 
massage or the diving reflex is used to terminate the arrhythmia, 
a rhythm strip should be obtained to assess whether the SVT 
terminates with a P wave or QRS complex which can help eluci-
date the mechanism of the SVT. An echocardiogram, ambulatory 
ECG monitor and exercise treadmill test should be completed, 
and referral to a heart rhythm specialist may be indicated for 
consideration of electrophysiology study and ablation.
If atrial fibrillation or flutter is found, an echocardiogram 
should be completed to assess for structural heart disease and 
anti-coagulation considered based on standard guidelines.154 
An ambulatory ECG monitor should be used to assess if the 
rhythm is paroxysmal or persistent and what the ventricular rate 
is throughout the day. An exercise treadmill test also should be 
completed to assess the maximum heart rate in atrial fibrillation. 
A thorough family history may elucidate an underlying genetic 
cause. Depending on what these results show, cardiac MRI, elec-
trophysiology study with possible ablation and/or genetic testing 
may be considered.
If resting sinus tachycardia >120 
bpm is seen, a repeat ECG 
should be considered after a period of rest as recent exercise 
or anxiety may be the cause. Other underlying aetiologies may 
be sought, including fever, infection, dehydration, stimulant 
use, anaemia, hyperthyroidism or, rarely, underlying cardiac or 
pulmonary disease.
Ventricular arrhythmias
Ventricular couplets, triplets and non-sustained ventricular 
tachycardia always require investigation. Alone, these are not 
life-threatening arrhythmias, but can be a marker for underlying 
cardiac pathology or lead to sustained ventricular tachycardia 
which may cause SCD. These ventricular arrhythmias may be 
idiopathic or secondary to the cardiomyopathies, ion chan-
nelopathies or other diseases such as myocarditis, myocardial 
infarction or sarcoidosis.
Evaluation
If ventricular arrhythmias are seen, the evaluation should include 
a thorough family history, an echocardiogram to evaluate for 
structural heart disease, cardiac MRI to assess for ARVC or 
other cardiomyopathies, ambulatory ECG monitor and exercise 
ECG test. Depending on these results, further evaluation may 
be needed including electrophysiology study or genetic testing.
Considerations in athletes ≥30 years of age
In athletes ≥30 years of age, coronary artery disease is the most 
common cause of SCD.106 107 The number of older athletes at all 
levels of competition is increasing worldwide. In addition, older 
athletes may be less fit compared with 20–30 years ago, increasing 
the possibility of underlying coronary artery disease.155 In a 
cohort study of Swedish competitive cross-country runners with 
a mean age of 60 years, 2% were shown to have severe underlying 
cardiovascular disease, mainly coronary artery disease.156 While 
the overall health benefits of regular exercise and physical activity 
are unequivocal, exercise may be a trigger for acute cardiac events 
in individuals with underlying and silent coronary artery disease. 
The risk of an acute cardiovascular event during exercise seems 
to be U-shaped, with the greatest risk conferred in those who 
are physically inactive but also in those exercising at the highest 
intensity. Therefore, it is important to consider relevant changes 
on a resting ECG that may represent occult coronary artery 
disease in asymptomatic athletes ≥30 years of age.
While resting ECGs have a low sensitivity for coronary artery 
disease, some ECG patterns may suggest underlying coronary 
artery disease such as TWI, pathological Q waves, ST segment 
depression, left or right bundle branch block, abnormal R wave 
progression, left anterior hemiblock and atrial fibrillation.157–159 
Thus, the major role of a resting ECG in screening for coronary 
artery disease may be in older athletes generally considered to 
be at an intermediate risk, where an abnormal ECG would place 
them into a high-risk group warranting further testing.158 160 161
Evaluation
Additional evaluation for underlying coronary artery disease 
should be considered in asymptomatic older athletes with 
TWI, pathological Q waves, ST segment depression, left or 
right bundle branch block, abnormal R wave progression, left 
anterior hemiblock and atrial fibrillation. Initial testing should 
normally include an exercise stress test, resting echocardiogram 
and assessment of traditional risk factors for coronary artery 
disease. When indicated, this evaluation may be complemented 
by coronary CT angiography or a functional stress test.
ECG patterns that require serial follow-up
All abnormal ECG findings discussed in this document should 
prompt a comprehensive evaluation for underlying structural 
and/or electrical heart disease. The specific components of this 
evaluation should be individualised to the athlete based on the 
presence or absence of symptoms and relevant family history 
and on the specific attributes of the abnormal ECG. While the 
abnormal findings delineated in this document were chosen to 
maximise specificity for true underlying disease and therefore 
minimise the likelihood of false-positive ECG testing, no single 
ECG abnormality has perfect accuracy. Further, ECG abnormali-
ties may precede the development of overt structural heart disease 
in athletes with a genetic predisposition to cardiomyopathy.41 80 81 
 
Athletes who demonstrate one or more overtly abnormal ECG 
findings may therefore undergo comprehensive clinical evalu-
ations that reveal no definitive evidence of true pathology. In 
these cases, the clinical significance of the presenting abnormal 
ECG remains uncertain.
Several common heritable cardiomyopathies including HCM, 
ARVC and familial DCM may present with ECG abnormalities 
prior to the onset of overt heart muscle pathology. The natural 
history of athletes with markedly abnormal ECGs but structur-
ally normal hearts on initial evaluation was first documented 
in a study of 81 athletes in which 6% (5/81) developed overt 
cardiomyopathy (HCM, n=3; ARVC, n=1; DCM, n=1) during 
an average follow-up period of 9 years.80 In a more recent series 
of athletes with abnormal ECG findings, 6% (5/85) with initially 
unrevealing clinical evaluations developed features consistent 
with cardiomyopathy (HCM, n=2; ARVC, n=1; arrhythmic 
event, n=2) during a 12-month follow-up period.81
Therefore, athletes with abnormal ECGs suggestive of cardio-
myopathy and initially normal clinical evaluations should be 
followed with serial evaluation during and after their compet-
itive athletic careers. Specifically, asymptomatic athletes with 
abnormal TWI, ST segment depression, pathological Q waves, 
LBBB and profound intraventricular conduction delay (QRS 
726 
Drezner JA, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:704–731. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331 on 3 March 2017. Downloaded from 
 Consensus statement
duration ≥140 ms) require serial cardiac imaging to rule out 
the development of a cardiomyopathic disease (figure 12). These 
athletes may be permitted to participate in competitive athletics 
without restriction contingent on longitudinal follow-up. 
Follow-up assessments should include a medical history to ascer-
tain new cardiovascular symptoms or otherwise unexplained 
decrements in exercise tolerance, a physical examination and 
non-invasive cardiac imaging as deemed suitable for the appro-
priate suspected form of disease. These evaluations should be 
conducted on an annual basis while participating in competi-
tive athletics or more frequently as determined on an individual 
basis. Athletes should be educated about the importance of 
longitudinal surveillance to promote ownership of the process if 
they change teams, medical staff or locations.
Temporary restriction during secondary evaluation of ECG 
abnormalities
Temporary restriction from athletic activity should be consid-
ered for athletes with abnormal ECGs of uncertain clinical 
significance until secondary investigations are completed. While 
the absolute risk of suffering an adverse cardiac event due to 
underlying structural or electrical heart disease while awaiting 
definitive evaluation is low, the risk is not negligible. Although 
this conservative approach is accepted commonly for an athlete 
with symptoms, the asymptomatic athlete who has an abnormal 
ECG during pre-participation screening presents other chal-
lenges.
Athletes in this situation often have limited time to partici-
pate in team-based tryouts, and sport restriction may jeopardise 
their athletic eligibility or generate pressure from coaches, 
managers, parents or the athletes themselves.162 To circumvent 
some of these challenges, proper advanced planning prior to 
pre-participation screening is required to establish avenues for 
prompt secondary testing and consultation for ECG abnor-
malities. If ECG is included in the cardiovascular screening of 
athletes, it must be conducted with adequate cardiology over-
sight and resources to assist with the secondary investigation of 
ECG abnormalities. Ideally, pre-participation screening should 
be performed at a time point that permits athletes to undergo 
additional cardiovascular testing prior to the onset of organised 
competitive athletics. The optimal duration of time between 
pre-participation screening and the beginning of organised team 
based training will vary as a function of local resources.
Considerations in the symptomatic athlete and in the  
athlete with a family history of sudden death or hereditary 
cardiovascular disease
Symptoms suggestive of underlying cardiovascular disease 
including exertional chest discomfort, inappropriate exer-
tional dyspnoea, unexplained/unheralded syncope, unexplained 
seizure-like activity, and exertional palpitations, particularly 
when coupled with abnormal ECG findings, are strongly sugges-
tive of a pathological process. In the symptomatic athlete either 
with or without an abnormal ECG, comprehensive testing should 
be tailored to the presenting symptoms and performed in a timely 
fashion. Asymptomatic athletes with a family history of sudden 
death or a heritable cardiomyopathy or ion channelopathy may 
similarly carry an increased risk of true occult disease.163 164 Great 
care must be taken to confirm the nature of the family history 
as athletes may have incomplete or erroneous information about 
their relatives. In the evaluation of an athlete with a compelling 
family history, genetic testing permits a more definitive assess-
ment of individual and familial risk for specific disease processes 
such as HCM, ARVC and congenital LQTS. The use of genetic 
testing and its interpretation should be performed by a cardio-
vascular specialist with expertise in clinical genetics.
Psychological considerations of caring for the athlete with 
potentially lethal cardiac disease
Athletes diagnosed with serious cardiac diseases, regardless of 
the method used for disease detection, are at risk for psycho-
logical morbidity and represent an emotionally vulnerable 
population.165 Risk factors for increased psychological morbidity 
include a higher level of competition, complete disqualification 
from athletic competition, daily reminders of disease (ie, medica-
tion or implantable cardioverter defibrillator) and unanticipated 
outcomes (ie, failed cardiac procedure).
Informing an athlete that he/she has an underlying cardiac 
disorder that may affect sports participation is difficult. In fact, 
many athletes may not completely comprehend the nature of 
their disease, and several follow-up discussions are likely neces-
sary. Assessment of emotional well-being should be a standard 
part of all follow-up evaluations, and psychological support for 
the athlete may be enhanced by a multi-disciplinary approach. In 
cases where competitive sport is not recommended, additional 
measures should consider helping the athlete refocus away from 
athletics, such as excelling in school or becoming involved in other 
team-related activities (ie, coaching). Athletes disqualified from 
competitive athletics should be offered exercise recommendations 
thought to be safer to foster long-term physical and mental health. 
While exercise guidelines for individuals with inherited cardiac 
disorders exist, more research is needed to fully understand safe, 
disease-specific physical activity recommendations.166 167
ConCLuSIon
Accurate ECG interpretation in athletes requires adequate 
training and an attention to detail to distinguish physiological 
ECG findings from abnormal ECG findings that might indi-
cate the presence of cardiac pathology. Cardiac adaptation and 
remodelling from regular athletic training produce common 
ECG alterations that could be mistaken as abnormal. Whether 
performed for screening or diagnostic purposes, it is critical that 
physicians responsible for the cardiovascular care of athletes be 
guided by ECG interpretation standards that improve disease 
detection and limit false-positive results. The international 
consensus standards presented on ECG interpretation and the 
evaluation of ECG abnormalities serve as an important founda-
tion for improving the quality of cardiovascular care of athletes. 
As new scientific data become available, revision of these recom-
mendations may be necessary to further advance the accuracy of 
ECG interpretation in the athletic population.
Author affiliations
1Department of Family Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA
2Cardiology Clinical Academic Group, St. George’s, University of London, London, UK
3Division of Cardiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, US
4Department of Sports Medicine, ASPETAR, Orthopaedic and Sports Medicine 
Hospital, Doha, Qatar
5Division of Cardiology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA
6Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, Australia
7Department of Cardiovascular Diseases, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA
8Department of Paediatric, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA
9Department of Adolescent Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA
10Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA
11Department of Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA
12Department of Neuroscience, Sahlgrenska University Hospital/Ostra Sahlgrenska 
Academy, Goteborg, Sweden
13Department of Physiology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital/Ostra Sahlgrenska 
Academy, Goteborg, Sweden
727
Drezner JA, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:704–731. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331 on 3 March 2017. Downloaded from 
 Consensus statement
14Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, US
15Department of Family Medicine, University of South Carolina, Greenville, USA
16Division of Cardiology, University of North Carolina, School of Medicine, Chapel 
Hill, North Carolina, USA
17Center of Cardiovascular Care in Athletics, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, Indiana, USA
18Department of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA
19Hasselt University, Hasselt, Belgium
20Georgia Southern University, Statesboro, Georgia, USA
21Division of Paediatric Surgery, University of California, San Francisco School of 
Medicine, San Francisco, California, USA
22Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, University of California, San Francisco School of 
Medicine, San Francisco, California, USA
23Advocate Heart Institute, Chicago, Illinois, USA
24Division of Pediatric, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA
25Division of Cardiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA
26University Institute of Sports Medicine, Research Institute of Molecular Sports 
Medicine and Rehabilitation, Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, Austria
27Center for Inherited Cardiovascular Disease, Stanford University, Stanford, 
California, USA
28Department of Pediatrics, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA
29Department of Cardiology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA
30University Heart Center, Zurich, Switzerland
31Heart Centre of Philadelphia, Jefferson University Hospitals, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA
32Department of Cardiology, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, Brazil
33The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
34Institute of Sports Medicine and Science, Rome, Italy
35Department of Cardiac Science, University of Padua Medical School, Padua, Italy
36Department of Thoracic Sciences, University of Padua Medical School, Padua, Italy
37Department of Vascular Sciences, University of Padua Medical School, Padua, Italy
Acknowledgements The 2nd Summit on Electrocardiographic Interpretation in 
Athletes was sponsored by the American Medical Society for Sports Medicine, the FIFA 
Medical Assessment and Research Center (F-MARC), and the National Collegiate Ath-
letic Association (NCAA). Participating medical societies included the American College 
of Cardiology (ACC) Sports & Exercise Council, and the Section on Sports Cardiology of 
the European Association for Cardiovascular Prevention and Rehabilitation (EACPR), a 
registered branch of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC).
Competing interests None declared.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
© The Authors, 2017. Published by BMJ Publishing Group Ltd & British Association 
of Sport and Exercise Medicine. A concise version of this article has also been 
co-published in the European Heart Journal and the Journal of the American College 
of Cardiology.
RefeRences
 1 Harmon KG, Asif IM, Klossner D, et al. Incidence of sudden cardiac death in national 
collegiate athletic association Athletes. Circulation 2011;123:1594–600.
 2 Maron BJ, Doerer JJ, Haas TS, et al. Sudden deaths in young competitive 
Athletes: analysis of 1866 deaths in the United States, 1980-2006. Circulation 
2009;119:1085–92.
 3 Harmon KG, Asif IM, Maleszewski JJ, et al. Incidence, etiology, and comparative 
frequency of sudden cardiac death in NCAA Athletes: a decade in review. Circulation 
2015.
 4 Corrado D, Biffi A, Basso C, et al. 12-lead ECG in the Athlete: physiological versus 
pathological abnormalities. Br J Sports Med 2009;43:669–76.
 5 Corrado D, Pelliccia A, Heidbuchel H, et al. Section of Sports Cardiology, European 
Association of Cardiovascular Prevention and Rehabilitation. Recommendations 
for interpretation of 12-lead electrocardiogram in the Athlete. Eur Heart J 
2010;31:243–59.
 6 Uberoi A, Stein R, Perez MV, et al. Interpretation of the electrocardiogram of young 
Athletes. Circulation 2011;124:746–57.
 7 Williams ES, Owens DS, Drezner JA, et al. Electrocardiogram interpretation in the 
Athlete. Herzschrittmacherther Elektrophysiol 2012;23:65–71.
 8 Drezner JA. Standardised criteria for ECG interpretation in Athletes: a practical tool. 
Br J Sports Med 2012;46(Suppl 1):i6–8.
 9 Marek J, Bufalino V, Davis J, et al. Feasibility and findings of large-scale 
electrocardiographic screening in young adults: data from 32,561 subjects. Heart 
Rhythm 2011;8:1555–9.
 10 Drezner JA, Ackerman MJ, Anderson J, et al. Electrocardiographic interpretation in 
Athletes: the 'Seattle criteria'. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:122–4.
 11 Corrado D, Pelliccia A, Bjørnstad HH, et al; Study Group of Sport Cardiology of 
the Working Group of Cardiac Rehabilitation and Exercise Physiology and the 
Working Group of Myocardial and Pericardial Diseases of the European Society 
of Cardiology. Cardiovascular pre-participation screening of young competitive 
Athletes for prevention of sudden death: proposal for a common european protocol. 
consensus statement of the study group of sport cardiology of the working 
group of cardiac rehabilitation and exercise physiology and the working group of 
myocardial and pericardial diseases of the european society of cardiology. Eur Heart 
J 2005;26:516–24.
 12 Pelliccia A, Culasso F, Di Paolo FM, et al. Prevalence of abnormal electrocardiograms 
in a large, unselected population undergoing pre-participation cardiovascular 
screening. Eur Heart J 2007;28:2006–10.
 13 Corrado D, Basso C, Pavei A, et al. Trends in sudden cardiovascular death in young 
competitive Athletes after implementation of a preparticipation screening program. 
Jama 2006;296:1593–601.
 14 Drezner JA, Asif IM, Owens DS, et al. Accuracy of ECG interpretation in 
competitive Athletes: the impact of using standised ECG criteria. Br J Sports Med 
2012;46:335–40.
 15 Drezner JA, Fischbach P, Froelicher V, et al. Normal electrocardiographic findings: 
recognising physiological adaptations in Athletes. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:125–36.
 16 Drezner JA, Ashley E, Baggish AL, et al. Abnormal electrocardiographic findings 
in Athletes: recognising changes suggestive of cardiomyopathy. Br J Sports Med 
2013;47:137–52.
 17 Drezner JA, Ackerman MJ, Cannon BC, et al. Abnormal electrocardiographic findings 
in Athletes: recognising changes suggestive of primary electrical disease. Br J Sports 
Med 2013;47:153–67.
 18 Brosnan M, La Gerche A, Kalman J, et al. The Seattle criteria increase the specificity 
of preparticipation ECG screening among elite Athletes. Br J Sports Med 2014;48;.
 19 Price DE, McWilliams A, Asif IM, et al. Electrocardiography-inclusive screening 
strategies for detection of cardiovascular abnormalities in high school Athletes. Heart 
Rhythm 2014;11:442–9.
 20 Pickham D, Zarafshar S, Sani D, et al. Comparison of three ECG criteria for athlete 
pre-participation screening. J Electrocardiol 2014;47:769–74.
 21 Zaidi A, Ghani S, Sheikh N, et al. Clinical significance of electrocardiographic right 
ventricular hypertrophy in Athletes: comparison with arrhythmogenic right ventricular 
cardiomyopathy and pulmonary hypertension. Eur Heart J 2013;34:3649–56.
 22 Gati S, Sheikh N, Ghani S, et al. Should Axis deviation or atrial enlargement be 
categorised as abnormal in young Athletes? the athlete's electrocardiogram: time for 
re-appraisal of markers of pathology. Eur Heart J 2013;34:3641–8.
 23 Sheikh N, Papadakis M, Ghani S, et al. Comparison of electrocardiographic criteria 
for the detection of cardiac abnormalities in elite black and white Athletes. 
Circulation 2014;129:1637–49.
 24 Riding NR, Sheikh N, Adamuz C, et al. Comparison of three current sets of 
electrocardiographic interpretation criteria for use in screening Athletes. Heart 
2015;101:384–90.
 25 Exeter DJ, Elley CR, Fulcher ML, et al. Standardised criteria improve accuracy of ECG 
interpretation in competitive Athletes: a randomised controlled trial. Br J Sports Med 
2014;48:1167–71.
 26 Brosnan M, La Gerche A, Kumar S, et al. Modest agreement in ECG interpretation 
limits the application of ECG screening in young Athletes. Heart Rhythm 
2015;12:130–6.
 27 Magee C, Kazman J, Haigney M, et al. Reliability and validity of clinician ECG 
interpretation for Athletes. Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol 2014;19:319–29.
 28 Hill AC, Miyake CY, Grady S, et al. Accuracy of interpretation of preparticipation 
screening electrocardiograms. J Pediatr 2011;159:783–8.
 29 Hancock EW, Deal BJ, Mirvis DM, et al; American Heart Association 
Electrocardiography and Arrhythmias Committee, Council on Clinical Cardiology, 
American College of Cardiology Foundation, Heart Rhythm Society. AHA/
ACCF/HRS recommendations for the standardization and interpretation of the 
electrocardiogram: part V: electrocardiogram changes associated with cardiac 
chamber hypertrophy: a scientific statement from the American heart association 
electrocardiography and arrhythmias committee, council on clinical cardiology; 
the American college of cardiology foundation; and the heart rhythm society: 
endorsed by the international society for computerized electrocardiology. Circulation 
2009;119:e251–e261.
 30 Sohaib SM, Payne JR, Shukla R, et al. Electrocardiographic (ECG) criteria for 
determining left ventricular mass in young healthy men; data from the LARGE heart 
study. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson 2009;11:2.
 31 Pelliccia A, Maron BJ, Culasso F, et al. Clinical significance of abnormal 
electrocardiographic patterns in trained Athletes. Circulation 2000;102:278–84.
 32 Papadakis M, Basavarajaiah S, Rawlins J, et al. Prevalence and significance of 
T-wave inversions in predominantly caucasian adolescent Athletes. Eur Heart J 
2009;30:1728–35.
 33 Papadakis M, Carre F, Kervio G, et al. The prevalence, distribution, and clinical 
outcomes of electrocardiographic repolarization patterns in male Athletes of African/
Afro-Caribbean origin. Eur Heart J 2011;32:2304–13.
 34 Riding NR, Salah O, Sharma S, et al. ECG and morphologic adaptations in Arabic 
Athletes: are the European society of cardiology's recommendations for the 
interpretation of the 12-lead ECG appropriate for this ethnicity? Br J Sports Med 
2014;48:1138–43.
728 
Drezner JA, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:704–731. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331 on 3 March 2017. Downloaded from 
 Consensus statement
 35 Sharma S, Whyte G, Elliott P, et al. Electrocardiographic changes in 1000 highly 
trained junior elite Athletes. Br J Sports Med 1999;33:319–24.
 36 Huston TP, Puffer JC, Rodney WM. The athletic heart syndrome. N Engl J Med 
1985;313:24–32.
 37 Ryan MP, Cleland JG, French JA, et al. The standard electrocardiogram as a screening 
test for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am J Cardiol 1995;76:689–94.
 38 Sathanandam S, Zimmerman F, Davis J, et al. Abstract 2484: ecg screening criteria for 
LVH does not correlate with diagnosis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circulation 
2009;12:S647.
 39 Weiner RB, Hutter AM, Wang F, et al. Performance of the 2010 european society of 
cardiology criteria for ECG interpretation in Athletes. Heart 2011;97:1573–7.
 40 Calore C, Melacini P, Pelliccia A, et al. Prevalence and clinical meaning of isolated 
increase of QRS voltages in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy versus athlete's heart: 
relevance to athletic screening. Int J Cardiol 2013;168:4494–7.
 41 Lakdawala NK, Thune JJ, Maron BJ, et al. Electrocardiographic features of sarcomere 
mutation carriers with and without clinically overt hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am 
J Cardiol 2011;108:1606–13.
 42 Kim JH, Noseworthy PA, McCarty D, et al. Significance of electrocardiographic right 
bundle branch block in trained Athletes. Am J Cardiol 2011;107:1083–9.
 43 Tikkanen JT, Anttonen O, Junttila MJ, et al. Long-term outcome associated with early 
repolarization on electrocardiography. N Engl J Med 2009;361:2529–37.
 44 Haïssaguerre M, Derval N, Sacher F, et al. Sudden cardiac arrest associated with early 
repolarization. N Engl J Med 2008;358:2016–23.
 45 Macfarlane PW, Antzelevitch C, Haissaguerre M, et al. The early repolarization 
pattern: a consensus paper. J Am Coll Cardiol 2015;66:470–7.
 46 Tikkanen JT, Junttila MJ, Anttonen O, et al. Early repolarization: electrocardiographic 
phenotypes associated with favorable long-term outcome. Circulation 
2011;123:2666–73.
 47 Uberoi A, Jain NA, Perez M, et al. Early repolarization in an ambulatory clinical 
population. Circulation 2011;124:2208–14.
 48 Junttila MJ, Sager SJ, Freiser M, et al. Inferolateral early repolarization in Athletes. J 
Interv Card Electrophysiol 2011;31:33–8.
 49 Noseworthy PA, Weiner R, Kim J, et al. Early repolarization pattern in competitive 
Athletes: clinical correlates and the effects of exercise training. Circ Arrhythm 
Electrophysiol 2011;4:432–40.
 50 Noseworthy PA, Tikkanen JT, Porthan K, et al. The early repolarization pattern 
in the general population: clinical correlates and heritability. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2011;57:2284–9.
 51 Rosso R, Kogan E, Belhassen B, et al. J-point elevation in survivors of primary 
ventricular fibrillation and matched control subjects: incidence and clinical 
significance. J Am Coll Cardiol 2008;52:1231–8.
 52 Brosnan MJ, Kumar S, LaGerche A, et al. Early repolarization patterns associated with 
increased arrhythmic risk are common in young non-Caucasian Australian males and 
not influenced by athletic status. Heart Rhythm 2015;12:1576–83.
 53 Quattrini FM, Pelliccia A, Assorgi R, et al. Benign clinical significance of 
J-wave pattern (early repolarization) in highly trained Athletes. Heart Rhythm 
2014;11:1974–82.
 54 Sheikh N, Papadakis M, Carre F, et al. Cardiac adaptation to exercise in adolescent 
Athletes of African ethnicity: an emergent elite athletic population. Br J Sports Med 
2013;47:585–92.
 55 Di Paolo FM, Schmied C, Zerguini YA, et al. The athlete's heart in adolescent 
Africans: an electrocardiographic and echocardiographic study. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2012;59:1029–36.
 56 Rawlins J, Carre F, Kervio G, et al. Ethnic differences in physiological cardiac 
adaptation to intense physical exercise in highly trained female Athletes. Circulation 
2010;121:1078–85.
 57 Migliore F, Zorzi A, Michieli P, et al. Prevalence of cardiomyopathy in Italian 
asymptomatic children with electrocardiographic T-wave inversion at Preparticipation 
screening. Circulation 2012;125:529–38.
 58 Calò L, Sperandii F, Martino A, et al. Echocardiographic findings in 2261 peri-
pubertal Athletes with or without inverted T waves at electrocardiogram. Heart 
2015;101:193–200.
 59 Stein R, Medeiros CM, Rosito GA, et al. Intrinsic sinus and atrioventricular 
node electrophysiologic adaptations in endurance Athletes. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2002;39:1033–8.
 60 Northcote RJ, Canning GP, Ballantyne D. Electrocardiographic findings in male 
veteran endurance Athletes. Br Heart J 1989;61:155–60.
 61 Meytes I, Kaplinsky E, Yahini JH, et al. Wenckebach A-V block: a frequent feature 
following heavy physical training. Am Heart J 1975;90:426–30.
 62 Prior DL, La Gerche A. The athlete's heart. Heart 2012;98:947–55.
 63 Brosnan M, La Gerche A, Kalman J, et al. Comparison of frequency of significant 
electrocardiographic abnormalities in endurance versus nonendurance Athletes. Am J 
Cardiol 2014;113:1567–73.
 64 Wasfy MM, DeLuca J, Wang F, et al. ECG findings in competitive rowers: normative 
data and the prevalence of abnormalities using contemporary screening 
recommendations. Br J Sports Med 2015;49:200–6.
 65 Bessem B, de Bruijn MC, Nieuwland W. The ECG of high-level junior soccer players: 
comparing the ESC vs. the Seattle criteria. Br J Sports Med 2015;49:1000–6.
 66 Fudge J, Harmon KG, Owens DS, et al. Cardiovascular screening in adolescents 
and young adults: a prospective study comparing the Pre-participation physical 
evaluation monograph 4th edition and ECG. Br J Sports Med 2014;48:1172–8.
 67 Magalski A, McCoy M, Zabel M, et al. Cardiovascular screening with 
electrocardiography and echocardiography in collegiate Athletes. Am J Med 
2011;124:511–8.
 68 Baggish AL, Hutter AM, Wang F, et al. Cardiovascular screening in college Athletes 
with and without electrocardiography: a cross-sectional study. Ann Intern Med 
2010;152:269–75.
 69 Rowin EJ, Maron BJ, Appelbaum E, et al. Significance of false negative 
electrocardiograms in Preparticipation screening of Athletes for hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy. Am J Cardiol 2012;110:1027–32.
 70 Chen X, Zhao T, Lu M, et al. The relationship between electrocardiographic changes 
and CMR features in asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic patients with hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy. Int J Cardiovasc Imaging 2014;30(Suppl 1):55–63.
 71 Sheikh N, Papadakis M, Schnell F, et al. Clinical profile of Athletes with hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging 2015;8:e003454.
 72 Bent RE, Wheeler MT, Hadley D, et al. Systematic comparison of digital 
electrocardiograms from healthy Athletes and patients with hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol 2015;65:2462–3.
 73 Nasir K, Bomma C, Tandri H, et al. Electrocardiographic features of arrhythmogenic 
right ventricular dysplasia/cardiomyopathy according to disease severity: a need to 
broaden diagnostic criteria. Circulation 2004;110:1527–34.
 74 Marcus FI, McKenna WJ, Sherrill D, et al. Diagnosis of arrhythmogenic right 
ventricular cardiomyopathy/dysplasia: proposed modification of the task force 
criteria. Circulation 2010;121:1533–41.
 75 Link MS, Laidlaw D, Polonsky B, et al. Ventricular arrhythmias in the North American 
multidisciplinary study of ARVC: predictors, characteristics, and treatment. J Am Coll 
Cardiol 2014;64:119–25.
 76 Saguner AM, Ganahl S, Kraus A, et al. Electrocardiographic features of disease 
progression in Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy/dysplasia. BMC 
Cardiovasc Disord 2015;15:4.
 77 Bjørnstad H, Storstein L, Meen HD, et al. Electrocardiographic findings of 
repolarization in athletic students and control subjects. Cardiology 1994;84:51–60.
 78 Wilson MG, Chatard JC, Carre F, et al. Prevalence of electrocardiographic 
abnormalities in West-Asian and African male Athletes. Br J Sports Med 
2012;46:341–7.
 79 Chandra N, Bastiaenen R, Papadakis M, et al. Prevalence of electrocardiographic 
anomalies in young individuals: relevance to a nationwide cardiac screening 
program. J Am Coll Cardiol 2014;63:2028–34.
 80 Pelliccia A, Di Paolo FM, Quattrini FM, et al. Outcomes in Athletes with marked ECG 
repolarization abnormalities. N Engl J Med 2008;358:152–61.
 81 Schnell F, Riding N, O'Hanlon R, et al. Recognition and significance of pathological 
T-wave inversions in Athletes. Circulation 2015;131:165–73.
 82 Maron MS, Maron BJ, Harrigan C, et al. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy phenotype 
revisited after 50 years with cardiovascular magnetic resonance. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2009;54:220–8.
 83 Elliott PM, Anastasakis A, Borger MA, et al; Authors/Task Force members. 2014 ESC 
guidelines on diagnosis and management of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: the task 
force for the diagnosis and management of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy of the 
european society of cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J 2014;35:2733–79.
 84 Calore C, Zorzi A, Sheikh N, et al. Electrocardiographic anterior T-wave inversion in 
Athletes of different ethnicities: differential diagnosis between athlete's heart and 
cardiomyopathy. Eur Heart J 2016;37:2515–27.
 85 Malhotra A, Dhutia H, Gati S, et al. Prevalence and significance of anterior T wave 
inversion in young white Athletes and non Athletes. J Am Coll Cardiol 2016;69:1–9.
 86 Maron BJ, Wolfson JK, Ciró E, et al. Relation of electrocardiographic abnormalities 
and patterns of left ventricular hypertrophy identified by 2-dimensional 
echocardiography in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am J Cardiol 
1983;51:189–94.
 87 Haghjoo M, Mohammadzadeh S, Taherpour M, et al. ST-segment depression as a risk 
factor in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Europace 2009;11:643–9.
 88 MacAlpin RN. Clinical significance of QS complexes in V1 and V2 without other 
electrocardiographic abnormality. Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol 2004;9:39–47.
 89 Bent RE, Wheeler MT, Hadley D, et al. Computerized Q wave dimensions in Athletes 
and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients. J Electrocardiol 2015;48:362–7.
 90 Marek J, Toresdahl B, Zimmerman F, et al. The Seattle ECG criteria for abnormal 
Q waves is not associated with findings of cardiomyopathy on limited 
echocardiography. Paper presented at, San Francisco, CA: Heart Rhythm Society 
2014.
 91 Kim JH, Baggish AL. Electrocardiographic right and left bundle branch block 
patterns in Athletes: prevalence, pathology, and clinical significance. J Electrocardiol 
2015;48:380–4.
 92 Le VV, Wheeler MT, Mandic S, et al. Addition of the electrocardiogram to the 
preparticipation examination of college Athletes. Clin J Sport Med 2010;20:98–105.
 93 Surawicz B, Childers R, Deal BJ, et al; American Heart Association 
Electrocardiography and Arrhythmias Committee, Council on Clinical Cardiology, 
American College of Cardiology Foundation, Heart Rhythm Society. AHA/
729
Drezner JA, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:704–731. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331 on 3 March 2017. Downloaded from 
 Consensus statement
ACCF/HRS recommendations for the standardization and interpretation of the 
electrocardiogram: part III: intraventricular conduction disturbances: a scientific 
statement from the American heart association electrocardiography and arrhythmias 
committee, council on clinical cardiology; the American college of cardiology 
foundation; and the heart rhythm society: endorsed by the international society for 
computerized electrocardiology. Circulation 2009;119:e235–e240.
 94 Aro AL, Anttonen O, Tikkanen JT, et al. Intraventricular conduction delay in a 
standard 12-lead electrocardiogram as a predictor of mortality in the general 
population. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol 2011;4:704–10.
 95 Desai AD, Yaw TS, Yamazaki T, et al. Prognostic significance of quantitative QRS 
duration. Am J Med 2006;119:600–6.
 96 Dunn T, Abdelfattah R, Aggarwal S, et al. Are the QRS duration and ST 
depression cut-points from the Seattle criteria too conservative? J Electrocardiol 
2015;48:395–8.
 97 Xiao HB, Brecker SJ, Gibson DG. Relative effects of left ventricular mass and 
conduction disturbance on activation in patients with pathological left ventricular 
hypertrophy. Br Heart J 1994;71:548–53.
 98 Platonov PG, Calkins H, Hauer RN, et al. High interobserver variability in the 
assessment of epsilon waves: implications for diagnosis of arrhythmogenic right 
ventricular cardiomyopathy/dysplasia. Heart Rhythm 2016;13:208–16.
 99 Drezner JA, Prutkin JM, Harmon KG, et al. Cardiovascular screening in college 
Athletes. J Am Coll Cardiol 2015;65:2353–5.
 
100 Cohen MI, Triedman JK, Cannon BC, et al; Pediatric and Congenital Electrophysiology 
Society (PACES), Heart Rhythm Society (HRS), American College of Cardiology 
Foundation (ACCF), American Heart Association (AHA), American Academy of 
Pediatrics (AAP), Canadian Heart Rhythm Society (CHRS). PACES/HRS expert 
consensus statement on the management of the asymptomatic young patient with a 
Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW, ventricular preexcitation) electrocardiographic pattern: 
developed in partnership between the pediatric and congenital electrophysiology 
society (PACES) and the heart rhythm society (HRS). Endorsed by the governing 
bodies of PACES, HRS, the american college of cardiology foundation (ACCF), the 
american heart association (AHA), the american academy of pediatrics (AAP), and 
the canadian heart rhythm society (CHRS). Heart Rhythm 2012;9:1006–24.
 
101 Daubert C, Ollitrault J, Descaves C, et al. Failure of the exercise test to predict the 
anterograde refractory period of the accessory pathway in Wolff Parkinson white 
syndrome. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 1988;11:1130–8.
 
102 Klein GJ, Gulamhusein SS. Intermittent preexcitation in the Wolff-Parkinson-White 
syndrome. Am J Cardiol 1983;52:292–6.
 
103 Klein GJ, Bashore TM, Sellers TD, et al. Ventricular fibrillation in the Wolff-Parkinson-
White syndrome. N Engl J Med 1979;301:1080–5.
 
104 Schwartz PJ, Stramba-Badiale M, Crotti L, et al. Prevalence of the congenital long-QT 
syndrome. Circulation 2009;120:1761–7.
 
105 Tester DJ, Ackerman MJ. Cardiomyopathic and channelopathic causes of sudden 
unexplained death in infants and children. Annu Rev Med 2009;60:69–84.
 
106 Eckart RE, Shry EA, Burke AP, et al; Department of Defense Cardiovascular Death 
Registry Group. Sudden death in young adults: an autopsy-based series of a 
population undergoing active surveillance. J Am Coll Cardiol 2011;58:1254–61.
 
107 Meyer L, Stubbs B, Fahrenbruch C, et al. Incidence, causes, and survival trends from 
cardiovascular-related sudden cardiac arrest in children and young adults 0 to 35 
years of age: a 30-year review. Circulation 2012;126:1363–72.
 
108 Behr E, Wood DA, Wright M, et al; Sudden Arrhythmic Death Syndrome Steering 
Group. Cardiological assessment of first-degree relatives in sudden arrhythmic death 
syndrome. Lancet 2003;362:1457–9.
 
109 Tester DJ, Spoon DB, Valdivia HH, et al. Targeted mutational analysis of the RyR2-
encoded cardiac ryanodine receptor in sudden unexplained death: a molecular 
autopsy of 49 medical examiner/coroner's cases. Mayo Clin Proc 2004;79:1380–4.
 
110 Tan HL, Hofman N, van Langen IM, et al. Sudden unexplained death: heritability 
and diagnostic yield of cardiological and genetic examination in surviving relatives. 
Circulation 2005;112:207–13.
 
111 Finocchiaro G, Papadakis M, Robertus JL, et al. Etiology of sudden death in 
sports: insights from a united kingdom regional registry. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2016;67:2108–15.
 
112 Viskin S, Rosovski U, Sands AJ, et al. Inaccurate electrocardiographic interpretation of 
long QT: the majority of physicians cannot recognize a long QT when they see one. 
Heart Rhythm 2005;2:569–74.
 
113 Postema PG, De Jong JS, Van der Bilt IA, et al. Accurate electrocardiographic 
assessment of the QT interval: teach the tangent. Heart Rhythm 2008;5:1015–8.
 
114 Bazett HC. An analysis of the time-relations of electrocardiograms. Heart 
1920:353–70.
 
115 Johnson JN, Ackerman MJ. The prevalence and diagnostic/prognostic utility of 
sinus arrhythmia in the evaluation of congenital long QT syndrome. Heart Rhythm 
2010;7:1785–9.
 
116 Malfatto G, Beria G, Sala S, et al. Quantitative analysis of T wave abnormalities and 
their prognostic implications in the idiopathic long QT syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol 
1994;23:296–301.
 
117 Johnson JN, Ackerman MJ. QTc: how long is too long? Br J Sports Med 
2009;43:657–62.
 
118 Taggart NW, Haglund CM, Tester DJ, et al. Diagnostic miscues in congenital long-QT 
syndrome. Circulation 2007;115:2613–20.
 
119 Mason JW, Ramseth DJ, Chanter DO, et al. Electrocardiographic reference ranges 
derived from 79,743 ambulatory subjects. J Electrocardiol 2007;40:228–34.
 
120 Vincent GM, Timothy KW, Leppert M, et al. The spectrum of symptoms and 
QT intervals in carriers of the gene for the long-QT syndrome. N Engl J Med 
1992;327:846–52.
 
121 Rautaharju PM, Surawicz B, Gettes LS, et al; American Heart Association 
Electrocardiography and Arrhythmias Committee, Council on Clinical Cardiology, 
American College of Cardiology Foundation, Heart Rhythm Society. AHA/
ACCF/HRS recommendations for the standardization and interpretation of the 
electrocardiogram: part IV: the ST segment, T and U waves, and the QT interval: 
a scientific statement from the American heart association electrocardiography 
and arrhythmias committee, council on clinical cardiology; the American college of 
cardiology foundation; and the heart rhythm society: endorsed by the international 
society for computerized electrocardiology. Circulation 2009;119:e241–50.
 
122 Maron BJ, Zipes DP. 36th Bethesda conference: eligibility recommendations 
for competitive Athletes with cardiovascular abnormalities. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2005;45:1312–77.
 
123 Dhutia H, Malhotra A, Parpia S, et al. The prevalence and significance of a short 
QT interval in 18,825 low-risk individuals including Athletes. Br J Sports Med 
2016;50:124–9.
 
124 Basavarajaiah S, Wilson M, Whyte G, et al. Prevalence and significance of an isolated 
long QT interval in elite Athletes. Eur Heart J 2007;28:2944–9.
 
125 Goldenberg I, Moss AJ, Peterson DR, et al. Risk factors for aborted cardiac arrest and 
sudden cardiac death in children with the congenital long-QT syndrome. Circulation 
2008;117:2184–91.
 
126 Gollob MH, Redpath CJ, Roberts JD. The short QT syndrome: proposed diagnostic 
criteria. J Am Coll Cardiol 2011;57:802–12.
 
127 Schwartz PJ, Moss AJ, Vincent GM, et al. Diagnostic criteria for the long QT 
syndrome. an update. Circulation 1993;88:782–4.
 
128 Schwartz PJ, Crotti L. QTc behavior during exercise and genetic testing for the long-
QT syndrome. Circulation 2011;124:2181–4.
 
129 Ackerman MJ, Priori SG, Willems S, et al. HRS/EHRA expert consensus statement 
on the state of genetic testing for the channelopathies and cardiomyopathies this 
document was developed as a partnership between the heart rhythm society (HRS) 
and the European heart rhythm association (EHRA). Heart Rhythm 2011;8:1308–39.
 
130 Wilde AA, Antzelevitch C, Borggrefe M, et al; Study Group on the Molecular Basis of 
Arrhythmias of the European Society of Cardiology. Proposed diagnostic criteria for 
the Brugada syndrome: consensus report. Circulation 2002;106:2514–9.
 
131 Bayés de Luna A, Brugada J, Baranchuk A, et al. Current electrocardiographic 
criteria for diagnosis of Brugada pattern: a consensus report. J Electrocardiol 
2012;45:433–42.
 
132 Priori SG, Wilde AA, Horie M, et al. HRS/EHRA/APHRS expert consensus statement 
on the diagnosis and management of patients with inherited primary arrhythmia 
syndromes: document endorsed by HRS, EHRA, and APHRS in May 2013 and by 
ACCF, AHA, PACES, and AEPC in June 2013. Heart Rhythm 2013;10:1932–63.
 
133 Antzelevitch C, Brugada P, Borggrefe M, et al. Brugada syndrome: report of the 
second consensus conference: endorsed by the heart rhythm society and the 
European heart rhythm association. Circulation 2005;111:659–70.
 
134 Kapplinger JD, Tester DJ, Alders M, et al. An international compendium of mutations 
in the SCN5A-encoded cardiac sodium channel in patients referred for Brugada 
syndrome genetic testing. Heart Rhythm 2010;7:33–46.
 
135 Tester DJ, Medeiros-Domingo A, Will ML, et al. Cardiac channel molecular autopsy: 
insights from 173 consecutive cases of autopsy-negative sudden unexplained death 
referred for postmortem genetic testing. Mayo Clin Proc 2012;87:524–39.
 
136 Chung EH. Brugada ECG patterns in Athletes. J Electrocardiol 2015;48:539–43.
 
137 Chung EH, McNeely DE, Gehi AK, et al. Brugada-type patterns are easily observed in 
high precordial lead ECGs in collegiate Athletes. J Electrocardiol 2014;47:1–6.
 
138 Zorzi A, Leoni L, Di Paolo FM, et al. Differential diagnosis between early 
repolarization of athlete's heart and coved-type Brugada electrocardiogram. Am J 
Cardiol 2015;115:529–32.
 
139 Groh WJ. Arrhythmias in the muscular dystrophies. Heart Rhythm 2012;9:1890–5.
 
140 Verdile L, Maron BJ, Pelliccia A, et al. Clinical significance of exercise-induced 
ventricular tachyarrhythmias in trained Athletes without cardiovascular 
abnormalities. Heart Rhythm 2015;12:78–85.
 
141 Biffi A, Pelliccia A, Verdile L, et al. Long-term clinical significance of frequent 
and complex ventricular tachyarrhythmias in trained Athletes. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2002;40:446–52.
 
142 Corrado D, Basso C, Leoni L, et al. Three-dimensional electroanatomical voltage 
mapping and histologic evaluation of myocardial substrate in right ventricular 
outflow tract tachycardia. J Am Coll Cardiol 2008;51:731–9.
 
143 Heidbüchel H, Hoogsteen J, Fagard R, et al. High prevalence of right ventricular 
involvement in endurance Athletes with ventricular arrhythmias. role of an 
electrophysiologic study in risk stratification. Eur Heart J 2003;24:1473–80.
 
144 Biffi A, Maron BJ, Verdile L, et al. Impact of physical deconditioning on ventricular 
tachyarrhythmias in trained Athletes. J Am Coll Cardiol 2004;44:1053–8.
730 
Drezner JA, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:704–731. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331 on 3 March 2017. Downloaded from 
 Consensus statement
 
145 Delise P, Lanari E, Sitta N, et al. Influence of training on the number and complexity 
of frequent VPBs in healthy Athletes. J Cardiovasc Med 2011;12:157–61.
 
146 Delise P, Sitta N, Lanari E, et al. Long-term effect of continuing sports activity in 
competitive Athletes with frequent ventricular premature complexes and apparently 
normal heart. Am J Cardiol 2013;112:1396–402.
 
147 James CA, Bhonsale A, Tichnell C, et al. Exercise increases age-related penetrance 
and arrhythmic risk in Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia/cardiomyopathy-
associated desmosomal mutation carriers. J Am Coll Cardiol 2013;62:1290–7.
 
148 Ruwald AC, Marcus F, Estes NA, et al. Association of competitive and recreational 
sport participation with cardiac events in patients with arrhythmogenic right 
ventricular cardiomyopathy: results from the north american multidisciplinary study 
of arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy. Eur Heart J 2015;36:1735–43.
 
149 La Gerche A, Robberecht C, Kuiperi C, et al. Lower than expected desmosomal gene 
mutation prevalence in endurance Athletes with complex ventricular arrhythmias of 
right ventricular origin. Heart 2010;96:1268–74.
 
150 Sawant AC, Bhonsale A, te Riele AS, et al. Exercise has a disproportionate role in 
the pathogenesis of arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia/cardiomyopathy in 
patients without desmosomal mutations. J Am Heart Assoc 2014;3:e001471.
 
151 Heidbuchel H, Prior DL, La Gerche A. Ventricular arrhythmias associated with 
long-term endurance sports: what is the evidence? Br J Sports Med 2012;46(Suppl 
1):i44–50.
 
152 Novak J, Zorzi A, Castelletti S, et al. Electrocardiographic differentiation of idiopathic 
right ventricular outflow tract ectopy from early arrhythmogenic right ventricular 
cardiomyopathy. Europace 2016. Published Online First: 23 June 2016.
 
153 Uhm JS, Hwang IU, Oh YS, Ys O, et al. Prevalence of electrocardiographic findings 
suggestive of sudden cardiac death risk in 10,867 apparently healthy young Korean 
men. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 2011;34:717–23.
 
154 Anderson JL, Halperin JL, Albert NM, et al. Management of patients with atrial 
fibrillation (compilation of 2006 ACCF/AHA/ESC and 2011 ACCF/AHA/HRS 
recommendations): a report of the American college of cardiology/American heart 
association task force on practice guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol 2013;61:1935–44.
 
155 Aagaard P, Sahlén A, Braunschweig F. Performance trends and cardiac biomarkers in 
a 30-km cross-country race, 1993-2007. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2012;44:894–9.
 
156 Sahlén A, Gustafsson TP, Svensson JE, et al. Predisposing factors and consequences 
of elevated biomarker levels in long-distance runners aged >or=55 years. Am J 
Cardiol 2009;104:1434–40.
 
157 Rose G, Baxter PJ, Reid DD, et al. Prevalence and prognosis of electrocardiographic 
findings in middle-aged men. Br Heart J 1978;40:636–43.
 
158 Chou R, Arora B, Dana T, et al. Screening asymptomatic adults with resting or 
exercise electrocardiography: a review of the evidence for the U.S. preventive 
services task force. Ann Intern Med 2011;155:375–85.
 
159 Daviglus ML, Liao Y, Greenland P, et al. Association of nonspecific minor ST-T 
abnormalities with cardiovascular mortality: the Chicago western electric study. Jama 
1999;281:530–6.
 
160 Borjesson M, Urhausen A, Kouidi E, et al. Cardiovascular evaluation of middle-aged/ 
senior individuals engaged in leisure-time sport activities: position stand from the 
sections of exercise physiology and sports cardiology of the European association 
of cardiovascular prevention and rehabilitation. Eur J Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil 
2011;18:446–58.
 
161 Maron BJ, Araújo CG, Thompson PD, et al; World Heart Federation, International 
Federation of Sports Medicine, American Heart Association Committee on Exercise, 
Cardiac Rehabilitation, and Prevention. Recommendations for preparticipation 
screening and the assessment of cardiovascular disease in masters Athletes: an 
advisory for healthcare professionals from the working groups of the world heart 
federation, the international federation of sports medicine, and the American heart 
association committee on exercise, cardiac rehabilitation, and prevention. Circulation 
2001;103:327–34.
 
162 Bakken A, Targett S, Bere T, et al. Health conditions detected in a comprehensive 
periodic health evaluation of 558 professional football players. Br J Sports Med 
2016;50:1142–50.
 
163 Ranthe MF, Carstensen L, Øyen N, et al. Family history of premature death and risk of 
early onset cardiovascular disease. J Am Coll Cardiol 2012;60:814–21.
 
164 Ranthe MF, Carstensen L, Øyen N, et al. Risk of cardiomyopathy in younger persons 
with a family history of death from cardiomyopathy: a nationwide family study in a 
cohort of 3.9 million persons. Circulation 2015;132:1013–9.
 
165 Asif IM, Price D, Fisher LA, et al. Stages of psychological impact after diagnosis with 
serious or potentially lethal cardiac disease in young competitive Athletes: a new 
model. J Electrocardiol 2015;48:298–310.
 
166 Maron BJ, Chaitman BR, Ackerman MJ, et al; Working Groups of the American Heart 
Association Committee on Exercise, Cardiac Rehabilitation, and Prevention, Councils 
on Clinical Cardiology and Cardiovascular Disease in the Young. Recommendations 
for physical activity and recreational sports participation for young patients with 
genetic cardiovascular diseases. Circulation 2004;109:2807–16.
 
167 Takken T, Giardini A, Reybrouck T, et al. Recommendations for physical 
activity, recreation sport, and exercise training in paediatric patients with congenital 
heart disease: a report from the exercise, basic & translational research section 
of the European association of cardiovascular prevention and rehabilitation, 
the European congenital heart and lung exercise group, and the association for 
European paediatric cardiology. Eur J Prev Cardiol 2012;19:1034–65.
731
Drezner JA, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:704–731. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097331 on 3 March 2017. Downloaded from 
