 REVIEW
Comprehensive Review of the Impact of Dairy Foods
and Dairy Fat on Cardiometabolic Risk1–3
Jean-Philippe Drouin-Chartier,4 Julie Anne Côté,6 Marie-Ève Labonté,7 Didier Brassard,4 Maude Tessier-Grenier,4
Sophie Desroches,4 Patrick Couture,4,5 and Benoît Lamarche4*
4Institute of Nutrition and Functional Foods and 5Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec, Laval University, Quebec City, Canada; 6Institut
Universitaire de Cardiologie et de Pneumologie de Québec, Quebec City, Canada; and 7Department of Nutritional Science, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
ABSTRACT
Because regular-fat dairy products are a major source of cholesterol-raising saturated fatty acids (SFAs), current US and Canadian dietary
guidelines for cardiovascular health recommend the consumption of low-fat dairy products. Yet, numerous randomized controlled trials (RCTs)
have reported rather mixed effects of reduced- and regular-fat dairy consumption on blood lipid concentrations and on many other
cardiometabolic disease risk factors, such as blood pressure and inflammation markers. Thus, the focus on low-fat dairy in current dietary
guidelines is being challenged, creating confusion within health professional circles and the public. This narrative review provides perspective on
the research pertaining to the impact of dairy consumption and dairy fat on traditional and emerging cardiometabolic disease risk factors. This
comprehensive assessment of evidence from RCTs suggests that there is no apparent risk of potential harmful effects of dairy consumption,
irrespective of the content of dairy fat, on a large array of cardiometabolic variables, including lipid-related risk factors, blood pressure,
inflammation, insulin resistance, and vascular function. This suggests that the purported detrimental effects of SFAs on cardiometabolic health
may in fact be nullified when they are consumed as part of complex food matrices such as those in cheese and other dairy foods. Thus, the focus
on low-fat dairy products in current guidelines apparently is not entirely supported by the existing literature and may need to be revisited on the
basis of this evidence. Future studies addressing key research gaps in this area will be extremely informative to better appreciate the impact of
dairy food matrices, as well as dairy fat specifically, on cardiometabolic health. Adv Nutr 2016;7:1041–51.
Keywords:
dairy, milk, yogurt, cheese, cholesterol, blood pressure, triglyceride, apolipoprotein B, inflammation
Introduction
Reducing LDL cholesterol concentrations along with man-
aging high blood pressure (BP)8 are considered to be key
targets for the prevention and treatment of cardiovascular
disease (CVD) (1, 2). Several lines of evidence indicate that
lifestyle factors, including poor diet and sedentary life-
style, are also key modifiable risk factors for CVD and
type 2 diabetes (T2D). The CVD-related dietary guidelines
proposed by many health organizations traditionally have
been focused on nutrients that raise or reduce plasma LDL
cholesterol concentrations (3). Low-fat dairy products are
advocated in most dietary guidelines to limit the consumption
2 Author disclosures: B Lamarche is Chair of Nutrition at Laval University. This chair is supported by
unrestricted endowments from the Royal Bank of Canada, Pfizer, and Provigo/Loblaws.
B Lamarche has received funding in the last 5 y for his research from the Canadian Institutes of
Health Research (CIHR), Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, Agriculture
and Agrifood Canada, the Canola Council of Canada, Dairy Farmers of Canada, Dairy Research
Institute, Atrium Innovations, the Danone Institute, and Merck Frosst. B Lamarche has received
speaker honoraria over the last 5 y from Dairy Farmers of Canada (DFC), Dairy Research Institute
(DRI). B Lamarche is Chair of the Expert Scientific Advisory Panel of DFC, and was a member in
2015 of the ad hoc committee on saturated fat of the Heart and Stroke Foundation of Canada.
P Couture has received funding in the last 5 y from the CIHR, Agriculture and Agrifood Canada,
DFC, DRI, Merck Frosst, and Kaneka Corporation. S Desroches has received funding in the last 5 y
from the CIHR and the Danone Institute. J-P Drouin-Chartier has received speaker honoraria in
2016 from DFC. JA Co
ˆte
´, M-E
` Labonte
´, D Brassard, and M Tessier-Grenier, no conflicts of interest.
3Supplemental Material is available from the “Online Supporting Material” link in the online posting of
the article and from the same link in the online table of contents at http://advances.nutrition.org.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: benoit.lamarche@fsaa.ulaval.ca.
8Abbreviations used: BP
, blood pressure; CVD, cardiovascular disease; CRP
, C-reactive protein; DASH,
Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension; MetS, metabolic syndrome; NCEP
, National Cholesterol
Education Program; RCT, randomized controlled trial; T2D, type 2 diabetes; VCAM-1, vascular cell
adhesion molecule 1.
1 This review was supported in part by an unrestricted grant from the Dairy Research
Consortium (Dairy Farmers of Canada, Centre national interprofessionnel de l’e
´conomie
laitie
`re, Dairy Research Institute, Dairy Australia Ltd., Dutch Dairy Association, and Danish Dairy
Research Foundation) and by the Chair of Nutrition at Laval University. J-PD-C is the recipient
of doctoral scholarships from the Canadian Institute of Health Research and the Fonds de
Recherche du Que
´bec—Sante
´. JAC is the recipient of the Alexander Graham Bell doctoral
scholarship from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada. M-EL is
the recipient of a Canadian Institutes of Health Research fellowship (no. MFE-140953). This is a
free access article, distributed under terms (http://www.nutrition.org/publications/
guidelines-and-policies/license/) that permit unrestricted noncommercial use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
ã2016 American Society for Nutrition. Adv Nutr 2016;7:1041–51; doi:10.3945/an.115.011619.
1041
 of the cholesterol-raising SFAs contained in regular and high-
fat dairy products.
However, the Institute of Medicine has suggested that the
benefits of reducing LDL cholesterol concentration by statin
treatment may not be extrapolated to the effect of dietary
change on this risk factor (4). This is possibly the case as
well for BP. Thus, analysis of a larger spectrum of risk factors
may provide insightful information on how diet modifica-
tions likely affect CVD risk. Beyond increased LDL choles-
terol concentrations and BP, low HDL cholesterol, high TGs
(fasting and postprandial), high apoB, and small, dense LDL
also may contribute on their own to increasing coronary artery
disease risk (5, 6). Subclinical inflammation is recognized as
a key feature of the atherosclerotic process (7), and several
markers of subclinical inflammation, such as C-reactive pro-
tein (CRP) and IL-6, have been associated with an increased
risk of coronary artery disease (8, 9). Vascular dysfunction (10)
and impaired coagulation processes (11, 12), as well as in-
sulin resistance (13), also have been identified as key cardi-
ometabolic disease risk factors. The association between each
of these risk factors and CVD risk is reviewed briefly in the
Supplemental Material. Thus, there is a need for an exten-
sive and comprehensive assessment of the impact of dairy
food consumption on traditional and emerging cardiometa-
bolic disease risk factors that is based on data from random-
ized controlled trials (RCTs) to help better inform future
recommendations regarding dairy consumption and cardio-
vascular health. This paper reviews the evidence from RCTs
that assessed the impact of consuming various types of dairy
foods on a wide array of cardiometabolic disease risk factors.
Methods
This review is based primarily on data from meta-analyses of RCTs and
from individual RCTs conducted in disease-free individuals. We specifically
selected meta-analyses and RCTs that assessed the impact of total dairy con-
sumption and of specific dairy foods (i.e., high- and low-fat products, milk,
cheese, and yogurt) on cardiometabolic disease risk factors. Studies that
have compared the impact of various dairy foods (e.g., cheese, milk, and yo-
gurt) on cardiometabolic disease risk factors also were considered. Studies
retained were those in which nonmodified dairy products were considered
as the treatment per se, as opposed to being the control arm of the experiment.
The following MeSH terms in PubMed were used for the literature search,
with no restriction on publication date: “dairy product,” “milk,” “cheese,” and
“yogurt or yoghurt,” in combination with “low-density lipoprotein,” “high-
density lipoprotein,” “non high-density lipoprotein cholesterol,” “apolipopro-
tein B,” “apolipoprotein A-I,” “triglyceride,” “small dense LDL or LDL particle
size,” “glucose,” “insulin or insulin resistance or HOMA,” “fibrinogen,”
“Lp(a),” “inflammation or C-reactive protein or cytokine,” “vascular function
or flow mediated dilation or peripheral arterial tone,” or “adhesion molecules.”
Abstracts or articles published in languages other than English were not con-
sidered. The quality of identified meta-analyses and RCTs was assessed in
broad terms on the basis of study design and duration, level of control of diets,
and sample size.
Dairy and Cardiometabolic Disease Risk Factors
LDL cholesterol
Dairy foods. Benatar et al. (14) meta-analyzed data from 9
RCTs that compared the impact of high- and low-fat dairy in-
take on plasma LDL cholesterol concentrations. To be included
in the analysis, studies had to be RCTs of increased dairy
consumption (low- and/or high-fat) for $1 mo without
additional dietary interventions. Increased total dairy con-
sumption (mean increase of 3.6 servings/d) had no significant
impact on LDL cholesterol concentrations compared with low
dairy consumption. Increased consumption of both low-fat
dairy (foods with <1% fat) and high-fat dairy (full-fat milk,
cheese, butter, cream, and ice cream) also had no significant
impact on LDL cholesterol concentrations (14). We showed
in a recent RCT that consumption of 3 servings/d for 4 wk
of commercially available dairy foods (30 g regular-fat cheddar
cheese, 175 g 1.5%-fat yogurt, or 375 mL 1%-fat milk) slightly
but significantly increased LDL cholesterol in healthy men
and women compared with a dairy-free diet (DLDL choles-
terol: +0.08 mmol/L, P = 0.04) (15). The magnitude of LDL
cholesterol changes in this recent RCT is consistent with
results from the meta-analysis by Benatar et al. (14), and there-
fore is unlikely to modify its conclusions that an increased in-
take of total dairy has no significant impact on LDL cholesterol
concentrations.
The impact of milk consumption per se on LDL choles-
terol concentrations has been documented in a few RCTs.
Barr et al. (16) conducted a parallel-arm RCT in which sub-
jects were instructed to either maintain their usual milk and
dairy intake or to increase their milk consumption (1% fat)
over a period of 12 wk. Postintervention LDL cholesterol
concentrations were similar between the milk group and the
control group. Beavers et al. (17) showed that consumption
of reduced-fat milk for 4 wk had no impact on LDL choles-
terol concentrations compared with intake of a soy beverage
in postmenopausal women. We showed in a controlled feeding
study in 27 postmenopausal women that 2%-fat milk con-
sumption (3.2 servings, 800 mL/2000 kcal) for 6 wk had no
significant effect on LDL cholesterol concentrations compared
with a milk-free control diet (18). Data from these 3 RCTs sug-
gest that milk intake per se has no effect on LDL cholesterol
concentrations.
Investigating the impact of cheese intake on LDL choles-
terol concentrations is of relevance, considering the contri-
bution of this dairy food to total dietary SFA intake in the
population (19). Thorning et al. (20) showed that substitut-
ing cheese for meat or carbohydrates had no significant
effect on post diet LDL cholesterol concentrations in post-
menopausal women. Yogurt consumption per se for 6 wk
in a large RCT comprising 90 healthy women was also shown
to have no effect on LDL cholesterol concentrations compared
with a dairy-free control diet (21).
Dairy fat. To our knowledge, studies that specifically com-
pared the impact of high- and low-fat dairy foods on LDL
cholesterol concentrations are scarce. In a crossover RCT
in healthy men and women, consumption of a high-fat dairy
and Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH)–type
diet did not increase LDL cholesterol significantly compared
with a low-fat dairy and DASH diet (22). Steinmetz et al.
(23) conducted a parallel-arm RCT in which subjects consumed
skimmed milk or whole-fat milk (236 mL/1000 kcal) for
6 wk. Postintervention LDL cholesterol concentrations were
significantly lower in the skimmed milk group than in the
1042
Drouin-Chartier et al.
 whole-fat milk group (mean 6 SE: 2.64 6 0.19 compared
with 2.96 6 0.21 mmol/L, respectively, P = 0.001).
Dairy food matrix. De Goede et al. (24) conducted a meta-
analysis of 5 RCTs that compared the effect of cheese and
butter consumption on blood lipids. Data from 4 of the 5
RCTs were pooled for the specific analysis of LDL cholesterol.
For a similar intake of SFAs, serum LDL cholesterol concentra-
tions were significantly lower after cheese consumption than
after butter consumption (DLDL cholesterol: 20.22 mmol/L;
95% CI: 20.29, 20.14 mmol/L). Consistent with this obser-
vation, LDL cholesterol concentrations after consumption of
40 g dairy fat from cheese/d tended to be lower than after con-
sumption of a similar amount of dairy fat from butter
[median (IQR): 3.7 mmol/L (3.3–3.9 mmol/L) compared
with 3.9 mmol/L (3.5–4.1 mmol/L); P = 0.07] (25). Overall,
these data suggest that constituents of cheese may attenuate
the LDL cholesterol–raising effect of SFAs in normolipidemic
subjects (Table 1). Our search did not retrieve any study that
compared the impact of liquid and solid dairy products on
LDL cholesterol concentrations.
Summary. Data from one meta-analysis and from addi-
tional RCTs are fairly consistent in suggesting that increasing
consumption of dairy products, irrespective of fat content
and form, and in the absence of other dietary change, has
no effect on LDL cholesterol concentrations in healthy individ-
uals (Table 1). The consumption of milk, cheese, or yogurt also
may be relatively neutral in terms of impact on LDL cholesterol,
although data remain limited to draw definitive conclusions at
this point. The extent to which substitution of high-fat dairy for
low-fat dairy influences LDL cholesterol concentrations also
needs further assessment (Table 1). Additional RCTs are needed
to address these knowledge gaps. Finally, data from RCTs also
reinforce the importance of considering the food matrix from
which dietary fat is provided and its impact on cardiometabolic
disease risk factors, including LDL cholesterol.
HDL cholesterol
Dairy foods. The meta-analysis of RCTs by Benatar et al.
(14) suggested that high compared with low dairy intake
has no impact on HDL cholesterol concentrations. This was
also the case when both low- and high-fat dairy foods were an-
alyzed separately. In subsequent RCTs, total dairy product con-
sumption was also shown to have no effect on HDL cholesterol
concentrations (15, 22).
In a parallel-arm RCT, increasing consumption of 1%-fat
milk by 750 mL/d for 12 wk had no impact on HDL choles-
terol concentrations (week 12 compared with baseline, mean 6
SD: 1.43 6 0.42 compared with 1.44 6 0.46 mmol/L), whereas
maintaining usual milk and dairy consumption was associ-
ated with an increase in HDL cholesterol (mean 6 SD:
1.42 6 0.38 compared with 1.38 6 0.37 mmol/L; between-
group comparison, P = 0.02) (16). Also consistent with
the meta-analysis by Benatar et al. (14), we showed that
consumption of milk (800 mL/2000 kcal) for 6 wk in fully
controlled feeding conditions had no effect on plasma
HDL cholesterol concentrations in postmenopausal women
compared with a milk-free diet (18). Consumption of a diet
containing 96–120 g cheese/d for 2 wk increased HDL choles-
terol concentrations compared with a high-carbohydrate diet
(mean 6 SE: 1.39 6 0.07 compared with 1.30 6 0.06 mmol/L,
P < 0.05), but not compared with a high-meat diet (mean 6 SE:
1.39 6 0.07 compared with 1.42 6 0.07 mmol/L, P > 0.05) (20).
This study highlighted the importance of considering the
foods replaced by dairy in a dairy-free diet, because this
may greatly influence the observed effect of dairy con-
sumption on cardiometabolic health. Finally, one RCT
showed that consumption of yogurt for 6 wk had no impact
on HDL cholesterol concentrations compared with a yogurt-
and dairy-free diet (21).
Dairy fat. The crossover RCT by Chiu et al. (22) showed no
difference in HDL cholesterol concentrations between a
high-fat dairy and DASH diet and a low-fat dairy and DASH
diet. Consumption of whole-milk for 6 wk was also shown
to have no effect on HDL cholesterol compared with skimmed
milk (23).
Dairy food matrix. In their meta-analysis of 5 RCTs, de
Goede et al. (24) showed that HDL cholesterol concentrations
were slightly but significantly lower after cheese consump-
tion than after butter consumption (DHDL cholesterol:
20.05 mmol/L; 95% CI: 20.09, 20.02 mmol/L). This is
consistent with the notion that the food matrix may influ-
ence the cholesterol-raising effect of SFAs, with greater ef-
fects seen with butter than with cheese.
Summary. There is relatively robust evidence suggesting
that total dairy intake has no impact on HDL cholesterol
concentrations (Table 1). However, studies on the impact
of specific dairy foods (e.g., milk, cheese, or yogurt) on HDL
cholesterol concentrations are limited and have provided
mixed results. The evidence pertaining to the impact of high-
fat dairy compared with reduced-fat dairy products on HDL
cholesterol concentrations is also limited, but data so far sug-
gests that consumption of dairy fat per se has no impact on
HDL cholesterol concentrations (Table 1). Finally, the HDL
cholesterol–raising impact of dietary SFAs may be attenuated
when they are consumed as part of more complex foods,
such as cheese, compared with butter. Because cholesterol rep-
resents only one of several features of HDL, additional studies
are needed to assess the impact of dairy foods and dairy fat on
HDL functions that have been associated with the risk of CVD,
beyond just HDL cholesterol concentrations (26).
Fasting TGs
Dairy foods. To our knowledge, there is currently no meta-
analysis of the impact of total dairy consumption on fasting
TG concentrations. Eight RCTs were identified, of which 6
had a parallel design (27–32) and 2 had a crossover design
(15, 22). These trials generally compared the impact of $3
servings dairy/d [e.g., from Abdullah et al. (15): 30 g regular-
fat cheddar cheese, 175 g 1.5%-fat yogurt, and 375 mL 1%-fat
Dairy products and cardiometabolic disease risk factors
1043
 milk] to #1 daily serving dairy products in various forms
and with various fat content. Intervention duration varied
from 3 wk (22) to 3 y (27). Despite the fact that subjects’
characteristics in these studies were diverse, results are
highly consistent in showing no effect of dairy consumption
on fasting TG concentrations.
The impact of milk consumption per se on fasting TG
concentrations has been evaluated in only a few RCTs, to
our knowledge, and results are mixed. One trial reported
that increasing usual consumption of dairy by 750 mL
1%-fat milk/d for 12 wk increased fasting TGs compared
with baseline values (mean 6 SD: 1.57 6 0.93 compared
with 1.45 6 0.83 mmol/L), whereas maintaining usual in-
take had no impact on TGs during the same period (mean 6
SD: 1.43 6 0.71 compared with 1.46 6 0.69 mmol/L;
between-group comparison, P = 0.002) (16). Elsewhere,
2 studies showed no impact of milk consumption on fast-
ing TG concentrations (17, 18). Finally, increased con-
sumption of cheese (20) and yogurt (21) compared with
dairy-free diets were shown to have no impact on fasting
TG concentrations.
Dairy fat. In their crossover RCTs, Chiu et al. (22) showed
that consumption of a DASH diet containing whole-fat milk
and yogurt for 3 wk significantly reduced fasting TG con-
centrations compared with a DASH diet with skimmed
milk and yogurt (mean 6 SE: 1.15 6 0.04 compared with
1.32 6 0.04 mmol/L, P < 0.05). On the other hand, consump-
tion of buttermilk (2 L/d) for 3 wk was shown to have no im-
pact on fasting TG concentrations compared with skimmed
milk (2.5 L/d) (33). Similar conclusions were drawn from
a small crossover RCT comprising 8 healthy men in whom
consumption of whole-fat milk or skimmed milk for 6 wk
had no impact on fasting TG concentrations (23). On the
other hand, consumption of skimmed milk (500 mL/d) for
2 wk was shown to reduce fasting TG concentrations com-
pared with whole-milk consumption in 14 normolipidemic
subjects (34).
Dairy food matrix. The meta-analysis of 4 RCTs by de
Goede et al. (24) reported no difference in fasting TG concen-
trations between cheese and butter consumption. Consistent
with this observation, consumption of 40 g dairy fat from
cheddar cheese/d for 4 wk had no significant impact on fasting
TG concentrations compared with 40 g dairy fat from butter/d
in a group of 19 hypercholesterolemic subjects (25).
Summary. Data from RCTs suggest that consumption of
dairy foods in various forms and with different dairy fat con-
tent has no effect on fasting TG concentrations (Table 1). This
assessment, however, is based on a relatively small number of
RCTs. It is also stressed that many of the available RCTs were
conducted on a very limited number of subjects. Change in
fasting TG concentrations was generally not considered the
primary outcome in most of these studies, and the quality
of the RCTs in many instances was considered to be low.
Therefore, there is a lack of good-quality evidence to properly
TABLE 1
Summary of the evidence on the impact of dairy product consumption on cardiometabolic risk factors1
Dairy foods compared with low-dairy or dairy-free diets
Dairy fat
Dairy matrix
Total
dairy
High-fat
Low-fat
Milk
Cheese
Yogurt
High-fat vs.
low-fat dairy
Whole vs.
low-fat or skimmed milk
Cheese
vs. butter
LDL cholesterol
No effect*
No effect*
No effect*
No effecty
No effectx
No effectx
No effectx
Increasedx
Reduced*
HDL cholesterol
No effect*
No effect*
No effect*
Uncertainz
Uncertainz
No effectx
No effectx
No effectx
Reduced*
Fasting TGs
No effectx
No effectx
No effectx
Uncertainz
No effectx
No effectx
Reducedx
Uncertainz
No effect*
Postprandial TGs
Undetermined#
Undetermined#
Undetermined#
No effectx
No effectx
Undetermined#
Undetermined#
Undetermined#
Undetermined#
LDL size
Undetermined#
No effectx
Uncertainz
No effectx
Undetermined#
Undetermined#
Increasedx
Reducedx
Undetermined#
apoB
Undetermined#
No effectx
No effectx
No effectx
No effectx
Undetermined#
No effectx
No effectx
Undetermined#
Non-HDL cholesterol
Undetermined#
No effectx
No effectx
Undetermined#
Undetermined#
Undetermined#
No effectx
Undetermined#
Undetermined#
Cholesterol ratios
Undetermined#
Undetermined#
Undetermined#
No effectx
No effectx
Reducedx
Undetermined#
No effectx
Undetermined#
Inflammation
No effect*
No effect*
No effect*
No effectx
Undetermined#
Undetermined#
No effectx
Undetermined#
Undetermined#
Insulin resistance
Uncertainz
Undetermined#
Uncertainz
No effectx
No effectx
Undetermined#
Undetermined#
Undetermined#
Undetermined#
Blood pressure
No effect*
No effect*
No effect*
No effectx
Undetermined#
Undetermined#
No effectx
Undetermined#
No effectx
Vascular function
No effectx
Undetermined#
No effectx
No effectx
Undetermined#
Undetermined#
Undetermined#
Undetermined#
No effectx
1 Data from studies that assessed the impact of high-fat compared with low-fat cheese, high-fat compared with low-fat yogurt, cheese compared with milk or yogurt, milk compared with butter or yogurt, and yogurt compared with butter on
cardiometabolic risk factors are very limited and discussed in the text only. *Based on data from $1 meta-analysis. y Consistent results reported in $3 randomized controlled trials. x Reported in ,3 randomized controlled trials; data need to be
interpreted with caution. z Effects remain uncertain, available randomized controlled trials having yielded mixed results. # No randomized controlled trials on this topic.
1044
Drouin-Chartier et al.
 assess the impact of dairy intake on fasting plasma TG concen-
trations. Additional studies with larger sample sizes, proper
controls, and change in fasting TG concentrations as primary
outcome are warranted. Finally, there is fairly robust data in-
dicating that the dairy food matrix does not influence the ef-
fect of dairy fat on fasting TG concentrations (Table 1).
Postprandial TGs
Dairy foods. To our knowledge, the literature on the impact
of dairy food consumption on postprandial TG concentrations
is very limited. A crossover RCT conducted in 16 overweight
and obese men compared the postprandial TG response to 4
different meals, all comprising butter cake (168 g) and 1 of
the following 4 beverages: 1) 500 mL water plus 29 g lactose;
2) 500 mL water, 29 g lactose, and 2.3 g calcium; 3) 500 mL
water plus 29 g lactose, 1.3 g calcium, and 23.4 g milk protein;
and 4) 500 mL 0%-fat milk (35). There was no significant dif-
ference in the postprandial TG response between the 4 meals.
In the study by Thorning et al. (20) involving 14 postmenopau-
sal women, consumption of a high-fat cheese diet for 2 wk
compared with high-carbohydrate or high-meat diets had no
significant impact on the TG concentrations measured 3 h after
intake of breakfast meals that had a macronutrient and food
composition similar to that of the intervention period just
completed.
Summary. Limited data from RCTs suggest that acute con-
sumption of milk and cheese has no significant impact on post-
prandial TG concentrations compared with various control
foods (Table 1). However, this assessment is based on only 2
RCTs. To our knowledge, no high-quality RCT has yet evaluated
the impact of dairy food or dairy fat per se on postprandial TGs
as the main outcome. Thus, there is a need for additional stud-
ies to better understand the acute and chronic impact of dairy
consumption in general on postprandial TG concentrations, a
key risk factor for CVD (36).
LDL particle size
Dairy foods. Van Meijl et al. (37) assessed the impact of low-
fat dairy foods (500 mL low-fat milk and 150 g low-fat yogurt)
compared with carbohydrate-rich control products (600 mL
fruit juice and 3 fruit biscuits) on LDL particle size in 35 over-
weight and obese subjects. The low-fat dairy diet had no effect
on LDL size and LDL particle number compared with the con-
trol diet (37). Chiu et al. (22) showed that consumption of a
high-fat dairy and DASH diet for 3 wk had no impact on
LDL particle size, whereas consumption of the low-fat dairy
and DASH diet reduced LDL particle size compared with
the control diet (mean 6 SE: 22.1 6 0.0 compared with
22.2 6 0.0 nm, P < 0.05). Finally, consumption of 2%-fat
milk (800 mL/2000 kcal) for 6 wk had no effect on LDL par-
ticle size compared with a milk-free diet in postmenopausal
women (18).
Dairy fat. In the RCT by Chiu et al. (22), LDL peak diameter af-
ter the high-fat dairy and DASH diet was significantly greater than
after the low-fat dairy and DASH diet (mean 6 SE: 22.3 6 0.0
compared with 22.1 6 0.0 nm, P < 0.05). Consuming nonfat
milk (500 mL/d) for 2 wk was shown to increase LDL size
in a small group of 14 healthy normolipidemic Japanese
subjects (34).
Summary. Evidence regarding the impact of dairy con-
sumption on LDL particle size remains scarce and uncertain,
and thus needs to be interpreted with caution (Table 1).
Data that compared specifically the impact of low- and
high-fat dairy foods on LDL particle size are also very lim-
ited. To best of our knowledge, no study has yet documented
how the dairy food matrix (for example, cheese compared
with butter) influences the impact of dairy fat on LDL particle
size. This is of interest because dietary SFAs have been shown
to increase LDL particle size (38). More studies therefore are
needed to further assess the impact of dairy food consumption
on various features of the LDL particle size phenotype.
apoB
Dairy foods. Chiu et al. (22) showed that consumption of a
DASH diet comprising either high-fat dairy products or
low-fat dairy products had no impact on apoB concentra-
tions compared with a control diet low in dairy products.
Consumption of a National Cholesterol Education Program
(NCEP) diet incorporating 1%-fat milk (800 mL/2000 kcal)
for 6 wk also had no effect on plasma apoB concentrations in
postmenopausal women compared with a dairy-free NCEP diet
(18). Similar results were observed in postmenopausal women
who consumed a high-cheese diet or a high-carbohydrate or
high-meat diet for 2 wk each (20).
Dairy fat. Data from Chiu et al. (22) indicated that con-
sumption of the high-fat dairy and DASH diet had no significant
effects on apoB concentrations compared with a low-fat dairy
and DASH diet. Similarly, Steinmetz et al. (23) showed that con-
sumption of skimmed milk for 6 wk compared with whole-fat
milk had no significant effect on apoB concentrations.
Summary. Available data suggest that total dairy food con-
sumption has no significant impact on apoB concentrations.
These findings are based on only a few RCTs, and data therefore
must be interpreted with caution until additional studies corrobo-
rate these results. T
o our knowledge, no study has yet documented
the effect of the dairy food matrix on apoB concentrations.
Non-HDL cholesterol
To our knowledge, the study by Chiu et al. (22) is the only
one to have assessed the impact of dairy consumption on
non-HDL cholesterol concentrations. Consumption of the
high-fat dairy and DASH and low-fat dairy and DASH diets
for 3 wk had no significant impact on non-HDL cholesterol
concentrations compared with the control diet, which was
low in dairy foods. Non-HDL cholesterol concentrations were
also similar after the high-fat dairy and low-fat dairy DASH diets
(22). This study suggests that consumption of high-fat dairy and
low-fat dairy per se has no impact on non HDL cholesterol
concentrations. This needs to be substantiated by additional
Dairy products and cardiometabolic disease risk factors
1045
 studies on dairy and lipids, which can easily and systemati-
cally report the change in this important cardiometabolic out-
come at no additional cost.
Cholesterol ratios
Dairy foods. We identified 3 RCTs that evaluated the impact
of the inclusion or exclusion of dairy foods on cholesterol
ratios. In postmenopausal women, consumption of 2%-fat
milk (800 mL/2000 kcal) for 6 wk in the context of an
NCEP prudent diet had no significant impact on the total-
to-HDL cholesterol ratio compared with a milk-free NCEP
diet (18). Consumption of a diet high in cheese for 2 wk
also had no effect on the LDL-to-HDL cholesterol and total-
to-HDL cholesterol ratios compared with diets high in carbo-
hydrates or protein from meat in postmenopausal women
(20). Finally, yogurt consumption for 6 wk led to a small but
significant reduction in the total-to-HDL cholesterol ratio
compared with a yogurt-free diet [D compared with baseline
(mean 6 SD): 20.01 6 0.01 compared with 0.01 6 0.02,
P < 0.01] (21).
Dairy fat. Steinmetz et al. (23), in a small study of 8 men
aged 20–36 y, showed that consumption of skimmed milk
for 6 wk had no significant impact on the non-HDL–to-HDL
cholesterol ratio compared with whole milk consumption.
Summary. The impact of dairy food consumption on cho-
lesterol ratios may vary according to the type of dairy foods,
with a beneficial reduction being observed in the case of yogurt,
and neutral effects being reported for milk and cheese. How-
ever, considering that total dairy consumption has been shown
to have a very limited impact on LDL cholesterol or HDL
cholesterol concentrations, it is expected that it will also
have limited effects on cholesterol ratios. Further studies
on this particular outcome are needed so that more robust
conclusions can be drawn (Table 1).
Inflammation
Dairy foods. In a systematic review of RCTs published be-
fore June 2012, we concluded that dairy consumption has
no adverse effect on circulating inflammatory biomarkers
in overweight and obese adults (39). This is consistent
with data from the meta-analysis of 6 RCTs by Benatar
et al. (14), which also concluded that high dairy consump-
tion had no impact on plasma CRP concentrations compared
with low dairy consumption. Benatar et al. (14) also reported
no difference between low- and high-fat dairy with regard to
their impact on CRP concentrations. Three RCTs have been
published since then. Despite heterogeneity in study designs,
results between studies were highly consistent (40–42). Con-
sumption of a combination of low- and high-fat dairy products
(40, 41) or low-fat dairy only (42) had no impact on inflamma-
tory genre expression (40, 41) or on blood concentrations of
inflammatory biomarkers (CRP, adiponectin, IL-1b, IL-6,
monocyte chemoattractant protein 1, and TNF-a) (40–42)
compared with low dairy intake in overweight or obese
subjects.
Three RCTs evaluated the impact of milk consumption
per se on markers of inflammation. A 28-d parallel-arm
RCT in 31 postmenopausal women showed no difference
in skeletal muscle gene expression of TNF-a, IL-1b, and
IL-6 after consumption of 3 daily servings (720 mL/d) of a
commercially available low-fat milk compared with 3 daily
servings (732 mL/d) of a commercially available vanilla
soy beverage (43). In a randomized, crossover, controlled-
feeding RCT in 27 postmenopausal women, we showed
that consumption of 2%-fat milk (800 mL/2000 kcal) for
6 wk compared with a milk-free diet had no impact on
plasma CRP and adiponectin concentrations (18). Finally,
consumption of a high-fat dairy meal comprising cheese
and butter was shown to significantly reduce the postpran-
dial CRP AUC compared with a high-fat nondairy meal sup-
plemented with high-fat milk (mean 6 SD: 20.04 6
0.5 compared with 20.5 6 0.6 mg/L 3 6 h, P < 0.05) (44).
However, AUCs for the 2 dairy meals were not different
from the high-fat nondairy control meal, and no difference
was observed in postprandial IL-6, TNF-a, and endotoxin
concentrations in test meals.
Dairy fat. With the use of a crossover study design, Nestel
et al. (45) compared the impact of a low-fat dairy diet
(skimmed milk and 1%-fat yogurt) with 2 regular-fat dairy
diets, 1 of which included fermented products (full-fat yo-
gurt and cheddar cheese) and the other of which included
no fermented products (butter, cream, and ice cream) on in-
flammatory biomarkers in 12 overweight and obese subjects.
The concentrations of most of the biomarkers investigated
were statistically comparable between diets, with the excep-
tion of plasma IL-6 concentrations, which were significantly
higher after the regular-fat nonfermented dairy diet than
after the low-fat dairy diet (mean 6 SE: 7.0 6 0.9 compared
with 6.2 6 0.7 pg/mL, P < 0.05) (45). Although changes in
biomarkers associated with inflammation, oxidative stress,
or atherogenesis were identified a priori as primary outcome
measures, the small sample size in that study limits its overall
scope.
Summary. Updating results from existing systematic re-
views with data from more recent RCTs confirms that
short-term consumption of dairy products in various forms
and with various fat content has no impact on systemic inflam-
mation, as measured by circulating biomarkers or inflammatory
gene expression (Table 1). The extent to which longer-term
dairy consumption may influence inflammatory processes needs
to be investigated.
Insulin resistance
Dairy foods. Turner et al. (46) recently published a system-
atic review of RCTs that assessed the impact of dairy consump-
tion on plasma glucose and insulin concentrations, as well as
on the HOMA-IR index. Studies targeted in this systematic
review were those in which only dairy intake was altered,
with no other lifestyle or dietary change. Four of the studies re-
viewed reported a favorable effect of dairy consumption on
1046
Drouin-Chartier et al.
 insulin sensitivity (47–50), 5 showed no effect (28, 31, 32, 37,
51), and 1 study found unfavorable effects (52). Studies with
a duration >12 wk were more likely to see favorable effects
of dairy intake on insulin sensitivity than those with a
shorter duration (46). Important differences in method-
ologies, sample size, and type of dairy consumed limited
the ability to conclusively determine a role for dairy in
modulating glucose and insulin homeostasis and insulin
sensitivity (46).
The impact of low-fat dairy food consumption per se on
insulin resistance was evaluated in 3 RCTs. Van Meijl and
Mensink (29) reported that consumption of low-fat milk
and yogurt for 8 wk compared with a dairy-free control
diet had no significant impact on glucose and insulin con-
centrations. Rideout et al. (47) conducted a crossover RCT
in free-living conditions in which subjects consumed 4 serv-
ings low-fat dairy products (1 serving = 250 mL milk or
175 g yogurt or 50 g cheese) or #2 servings low-fat dairy
products daily for periods of 6 mo. Both fasting insulin
concentrations and the HOMA-IR index were lower after
the high-dairy period than after the low-dairy period
(mean 6 SD insulin: 14.8 6 2.4 compared with 16.2 6
3.7 mU/mL; mean 6 SD HOMA-IR: 3.4 6 0.9 compared
with 3.8 6 1.3; P < 0.05 for both). Conversely, Turner et al.
(53) reported that consumption of a diet supplemented
with low-fat dairy (milk, yogurt, or custard) for 4 wk com-
pared with a diet rich in protein from red meat significantly
increased fasting insulin concentrations (mean 6 SD: 6.64 6
4.1 compared with 5.47 6 2.4 mU/L, P < 0.05) and
HOMA-IR index (mean 6 SD: 1.55 6 1.0 compared
with 1.30 6 0.7, P < 0.05) in 47 overweight adults (53).
The Matsuda index was also lower after the dairy diet,
whereas fasting glucose and the Stumvoll index were not
different between the dairy and the red meat diets.
We showed that milk consumption (800 mL/2000 kcal;
2% fat) compared with a milk-free control diet had no sig-
nificant impact on fasting glucose and insulin concentrations
and on Cederholm and Matsuda insulin sensitivity indexes in
postmenopausal women (18). Similar results were observed
in the RCT by Thorning et al. (20), in which consumption of
a diet rich in cheese had no significant impact on the
HOMA-IR index and on fasting and postprandial insulin
and glucose concentrations compared with diets high in
proteins or carbohydrates.
Summary. In sum, short-term intervention studies provide
a mixed portrait regarding the impact of dairy consumption
on insulin resistance, with no evidence, however, of detri-
mental effects (Table 1). On the other hand, prolonged ex-
posure to dairy in RCTs may induce favorable changes
in glucose and insulin homeostasis, which would be consis-
tent with epidemiologic data that related dairy intake to a re-
duced risk of T2D (54). The impact of dairy fat per se or of
different dairy food matrices on insulin sensitivity has not
been evaluated so far, to our knowledge. Additional high-
quality studies with insulin resistance as primary outcome
are needed to substantiate this relation.
BP
Dairy foods. The DASH study (55) provided the first indi-
rect evidence that dairy consumption may reduce BP. How-
ever, because of differences in macronutrient composition of
the various diets in the original DASH trial, the specific con-
tribution of dairy to BP-lowering with the DASH diet,
estimated to be 50%, remains uncertain (56). In their meta-
analysis, Benatar et al. (14) reported no significant effect of to-
tal dairy intake on systolic and diastolic BP. Additional RCTs in
hypertensive subjects provided mixed results regarding the im-
pact of high dairy intake compared with low or no dairy over
periods of 4–5 wk on BP outcomes (57–59). Two studies saw
no effect of dairy intake on systolic and diastolic BP (57, 58),
whereas we reported that consumption of 3 daily servings of
regular-fat dairy (30 g regular-fat cheddar cheese/d, 175 g
1.5%-fat yogurt/d, and 375 mL 1% fat milk/d) significantly re-
duced mean daytime systolic BP compared with a dairy-free
control diet in men (mean 6 SD: 142 6 10 compared with
144 6 10 mm Hg, P = 0.05) (59). Unexpectedly, mean daytime
diastolic BP was higher after the dairy diet than after the con-
trol phase in women (mean 6 SD: 85 6 9 compared with
84 6 8 mm Hg, P = 0.05), but not in men (59).
In the meta-analysis of RCTs by Benatar et al. (14), the
impact of low- and high-fat dairy consumption on systolic
BP and diastolic BP was also not significant (14). Consistent
with this observation, recent RCTs that compared the im-
pact of low- or high-fat dairy consumption with dairy-free
diets reported either no effect (47, 60) or a small beneficial
effect (22) on BP outcomes.
A limited number of RCTs assessed the impact of milk con-
sumption per se on BP. Barr et al. (16) reported no difference
in systolic or diastolic BP between subjects who consumed
milk for 12 wk and a control group that did not consume
milk over the same period of time. We showed that milk con-
sumption (800 mL/2000 kcal; 2% fat) for 6 wk as part of an
NCEP diet tended to reduce mean BP more than an NCEP
milk-free diet in postmenopausal women [(mean difference)
D compared with baseline: 24.1% compared with 21.1%,
P = 0.07)] (18).
Dairy fat. In a crossover RCT, 45 normotensive subjects
consumed low-fat or whole-fat milk and yogurt as part
of their regular diet for 8-wk periods (61). There was no
difference in systolic and diastolic BP between the diets
with low-fat and whole-fat dairy, suggesting that there
was no impact of dairy fat on BP. In the RCT by Chiu
et al. (22), consumption of a high-fat dairy and DASH
diet had no effect on BP compared with the low-fat dairy
and DASH diet.
Dairy food matrix. The impact of consuming equal amounts
of SFAs from cheese and butter on BP outcomes were com-
pared in a crossover RCT involving 49 men and women (62).
Authors reported no difference in systolic or diastolic BP
between the diet supplemented with cheese and the diet sup-
plemented with butter. Schlienger et al. (63) showed in a
parallel-arm RCT that consumption of 30 g camembert
Dairy products and cardiometabolic disease risk factors
1047
 cheese/d for 5 wk had no impact on BP outcomes compared
with consuming 250 mL full-fat yogurt/d in 159 hypercho-
lesterolemic men and women.
Summary. Evidence from short-term RCTs suggests that
dairy food consumption, irrespective of type and fat content,
has no significant effect on BP outcomes (Table 1). Reconcil-
ing data from prospective cohort studies—which suggest that
total dairy, low-fat dairy, and milk intake is associated with a
reduced risk of hypertension (54)—with this apparent neutral
effect of dairy intake based on data from RCTs is challenging.
One potential explanation for such discrepant results is that
dairy consumption may attenuate the unfavorable effects of
other foods on BP over the long term, a phenomenon that
cannot be appreciated in shorter-term RCTs. It is also possible
that dairy consumption per se nullifies the increase in BP seen
in many individuals with aging and with weight gain, thereby
being associated with a protective effect on BP change and,
hence, on the risk of hypertension in the longer term. This hy-
pothesis also needs to be investigated in future studies.
Vascular function
Dairy foods. In a large RCT involving men and postmeno-
pausal women at risk of metabolic syndrome (MetS), a dif-
ference in dairy intake of 250 g milk and yogurt/d and of
20 g cheese/d between a high-dairy group and a low-dairy
group was associated with significantly reduced plasma vas-
cular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM-1) concentrations in
women but not in men (28). Plasma E-selectin also was sig-
nificantly reduced after the dairy diet, but only in subjects
from Norway in this multicenter study (28). It must be
stressed that the difference in dairy consumption between
the dairy group and the control group was rather small
(<2 servings dairy/d), thereby limiting the potential impact
of the intervention per se on outcome measures associated
with endothelial function.
Two other RCTs reported no effect of low-fat dairy con-
sumption on markers of endothelial function (37, 60). Data
from Maki et al. (60), however, suggested that low-fat dairy
consumption may improve vascular function in prehyper-
tensive subjects with endothelial dysfunction at baseline
(mean 6 SE reactive hyperemia index: 2.32 6 0.19 com-
pared with 1.50 6 0.04, P = 0.002), but this was based on
a subanalysis of only 14 hypertensive subjects.
We showed that consumption of 2%-fat milk (800 mL/
2000 kcal) for 6 wk had no impact on intercellular adhesion
molecule 1, VCAM-1, endothelin, and E-selectin concentra-
tions compared with a milk-free diet in postmenopausal
women (18). In a crossover RCT, 19 adults with MetS con-
sumed low-fat milk (475 mL) or an isocaloric volume of rice
drink after an overnight fast. The postprandial flow-mediated
dilation response was unchanged after consumption of the
low-fat milk, but was significantly deteriorated after consump-
tion of the rice drink (64). These data suggest that acute intake
of low-fat milk maintains the integrity of vascular endothelial
function in individuals with MetS compared with a nondairy
drink (64).
Dairy food matrix. Nestel et al. (65) tested how the fer-
mented status of dairy products influences the postprandial
change in biomarkers associated with vascular function in
overweight subjects. Twelve participants consumed single
breakfasts containing a control low-fat milk or 45 g fat
from butter, cream, yogurt, or cheese after an overnight
fast. The various dairy matrices had no differential effects
on surrogate markers of vascular function in that study
(VCAM-1 and intercellular adhesion molecule 1).
Summary. Evidence suggests that intake of total dairy, low-
fat dairy, and milk has no effect on vascular function. How-
ever, the small number of studies so far precludes us from
drawing definite conclusions regarding the impact of dairy
consumption on biomarkers of vascular function or on vas-
cular function per se (Table 1). Favorable effects may be ob-
served in individuals with deteriorated vascular function at
baseline, but this needs to be substantiated and confirmed
by additional studies of good quality.
Interpretation and Conclusions
Despite the fact that dairy products are an important part of
most dietary guidelines around the world, research over the
last decades has provided some discordant information as to
their role in health. Because regular-fat dairy products con-
tribute significantly to dietary fat and SFA intake, and be-
cause SFAs are considered to be involved in the etiology of
CVD, many guidelines advocate consumption of low-fat
dairy products as opposed to regular-fat products. This rec-
ommendation remains controversial to many (66), and this
creates confusion for the public.
To the best of our knowledge, this review represents one
the most comprehensive assessments of the impact of dairy
food consumption on a large spectrum of cardiometabolic
disease risk factors. The following key points can be
emphasized:
1) Data do not support a detrimental impact of total dairy
or high-fat dairy consumption on lipid-related cardio-
metabolic disease risk factors. In most cases, evidence
points toward no effect of dairy consumption on such
risk factors. Results from RCTs on lipid-related cardiome-
tabolic disease risk factors are consistent with results from
meta-analyses of prospective cohort studies, which suggest
no detrimental association between dairy consumption
and cardiovascular-related clinical outcomes (54).
2) Data suggest that the cholesterol-raising effects of SFAs
are attenuated when provided in complex foods such as
milk, cheese, or yogurt. Increasing evidence suggests that
the combination of dairy bioactive peptides, minerals, and
fat constitutes a complex matrix that may limit the choles-
terol-raising effect of SFAs. Studies that compared cheese
and butter provide key evidence to support this concept.
3) Data from several RCTs have shown that dairy foods and
dairy fat consumption have no impact on low-grade
1048
Drouin-Chartier et al.
 systemic inflammation, measured by several surrogate
markers. Whereas RCTs are usually conducted over a rel-
atively short period of time, the long-term effect of dairy
consumption on inflammation needs further investiga-
tion, considering the positive association between milk
consumption and IL-6 concentrations reported in a re-
cent large observational prospective cohort study (67).
4) Data from RCTs suggest that dairy consumption has no
impact on insulin resistance and glucose and insulin ho-
meostasis in the short term, but may be beneficial in the
long term. To some extent, these results are consistent with
large prospective cohort studies associating total dairy,
low-fat dairy, cheese, and yogurt to a reduced risk of
T2D, and total dairy and milk consumption to a reduced
risk of MetS (54). Additional well-designed RCTs with
long interventions are needed to confirm these effects
from a cardiometabolic standpoint.
5) The impact of dairy food consumption, and of dairy fat
per se, on hemostatic function remains undetermined.
Studies on this specific topic are warranted.
6) Data from RCTs that have evaluated the impact of dairy
consumption on either BP or vascular function are very
consistent in showing mostly a null effect, irrespective
of the dairy food matrix or fat content. These results
are not consistent with epidemiologic studies that have
associated total dairy, low-fat dairy, and milk consump-
tion with a reduced risk of hypertension (54). As empha-
sized above, the study of the long-term impact of dairy
consumption on BP or vascular function is challenging.
The hypothesis that dairy consumption may prevent the
age- and body weight gain–related increase in BP needs
to be ascertained with the use of proper study designs.
We purposefully did not comment on the diet of the con-
trol arm in the various RCTs described in this review be-
cause of important heterogeneity between studies. It is
obvious that foods used to substitute dairy products in the
control low-dairy or dairy-free diets would affect the results
and their interpretation. The design of the control arm in fu-
ture RCTs on dairy foods needs to be thought out carefully
to ensure that foods consumed in replacement of dairy re-
flect consumers’ choices and dietary habits. We also pur-
posefully did not review the extensive literature pertaining
to the effect of dairy consumption on body weight. This is
indeed a huge area of research on its own. Although some
of the available literature relating dairy intake to clinical out-
comes and cardiometabolic disease risk may have been con-
founded by concurrent variations in body weight and body
fat, we believe that this is unlikely to have significantly
skewed the association between dairy and health. Also, this
review was not intended to be systematic. Thus, we did
not evaluate potential publication bias and have not performed
meta-analyses of existing data. One must keep in mind that
many of the cardiometabolic disease risk factors investigated
in the RCTs reviewed here were investigated as secondary or ter-
tiary outcomes, as opposed to being considered the primary
outcome variable. This implies that study design and sample
sizes in these RCTs may have provided inadequate settings to
properly document the impact of dairy intake on many of these
cardiometabolic outcomes. Interpretation of studies in which
many cardiometabolic outcomes are investigated together and
simultaneously must be made with great caution.
A large trial on dairy intake and clinical outcomes such as
CVD and T2D is highly unlikely in the future. In that con-
text, interpretation of the association between dairy (in any
forms) and health will need to rely on indirect evidence from
epidemiologic data, as well as a thorough understanding of
their impact on the broadest array of recognized cardiome-
tabolic disease risk factors, not just LDL cholesterol and BP.
This review identified key research gaps that need to be ad-
dressed in the future.
We also believe that the focus on low-fat dairy products
in the current guidelines is not entirely supported by the ex-
isting literature, because no evidence currently supports a
detrimental effect of regular- or high-fat dairy products
compared with low-fat dairy on a large spectrum of cardio-
metabolic disease risk factors. In that context, studies that
compare the impact of low-fat dairy foods with their regu-
lar-fat versions are urgently needed to better address this im-
portant point and to better inform future dietary guidelines
related to dairy consumption.
Acknowledgments
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
References
1. Anderson TJ, Gregoire J, Hegele RA, Couture P, Mancini GB, McPherson
R, Francis GA, Poirier P, Lau DC, Grover S, et al. 2012 update of the
Canadian Cardiovascular Society guidelines for the diagnosis and treat-
ment of dyslipidemia for the prevention of cardiovascular disease in the
adult. Can J Cardiol 2013;29:151–67.
2. Law MR, Morris JK, Wald NJ. Use of blood pressure lowering drugs in
the prevention of cardiovascular disease: meta-analysis of 147 rando-
mised trials in the context of expectations from prospective epidemio-
logical studies. BMJ 2009;338:b1665.
3. Lamarche B, Couture P. It is time to revisit current dietary recommenda-
tions for saturated fat. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 2014;39(12):1409–11.
4. Evaluation of biomarkers and surrogate endpoints in chronic disease.
Washington (DC): The National Academies Press, 2010.
5. Lamarche B, Lewis GF. Atherosclerosis prevention for the next decade:
risk assessment beyond low density lipoprotein cholesterol. Can J Car-
diol 1998;14:841–51.
6. Leiter LA, Fitchett DH, Gilbert RE, Gupta M, Mancini GB, McFarlane
PA, Ross R, Teoh H, Verma S, Anand S, et al. Cardiometabolic risk in
Canada: a detailed analysis and position paper by the cardiometabolic
risk working group. Can J Cardiol 2011;27:e1–33.
7. Libby P, Ridker PM, Hansson GK. Inflammation in atherosclerosis:
from pathophysiology to practice. J Am Coll Cardiol 2009;54:2129–38.
8. Kaptoge S, Seshasai SR, Gao P, Freitag DF, Butterworth AS, Borglykke
A, Di Angelantonio E, Gudnason V, Rumley A, Lowe GD, et al. Inflam-
matory cytokines and risk of coronary heart disease: new prospective
study and updated meta-analysis. Eur Heart J 2014;35:578–89.
9. Buckley DI, Fu R, Freeman M, Rogers K, Helfand M. C-reactive protein
as a risk factor for coronary heart disease: a systematic review and
meta-analyses for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern
Med 2009;151:483–95.
Dairy products and cardiometabolic disease risk factors
1049
 10. Ras RT, Streppel MT, Draijer R, Zock PL. Flow-mediated dilation and
cardiovascular risk prediction: a systematic review with meta-analysis.
Int J Cardiol 2013;168:344–51.
11. Danesh J, Lewington S, Thompson SG, Lowe GD, Collins R, Kostis JB,
Wilson AC, Folsom AR, Wu K, Benderly M, et al. Plasma fibrinogen
level and the risk of major cardiovascular diseases and nonvascular
mortality: an individual participant meta-analysis. JAMA 2005;294:
1799–809.
12. Erqou S, Thompson A, Di Angelantonio E, Saleheen D, Kaptoge S,
Marcovina S, Danesh J. Apolipoprotein(A) isoforms and the risk of vas-
cular disease: systematic review of 40 studies involving 58,000 partici-
pants. J Am Coll Cardiol 2010;55:2160–7.
13. Xun P, Wu Y, He Q, He K. Fasting insulin concentrations and incidence
of hypertension, stroke, and coronary heart disease: a meta-analysis of
prospective cohort studies. Am J Clin Nutr 2013;98:1543–54.
14. Benatar JR, Sidhu K, Stewart RA. Effects of high and low fat dairy food
on cardio-metabolic risk factors: a meta-analysis of randomized stud-
ies. PLoS One 2013;8:e76480.
15. Abdullah MM, Cyr A, Lepine MC, Labonte ME, Couture P, Jones PJ,
Lamarche B. Recommended dairy product intake modulates circulating
fatty acid profile in healthy adults: a multi-centre cross-over study. Br J
Nutr 2015;113(3):435–44.
16. Barr SI, McCarron DA, Heaney RP, Dawson-Hughes B, Berga SL, Stern
JS, Oparil S. Effects of increased consumption of fluid milk on energy
and nutrient intake, body weight, and cardiovascular risk factors in
healthy older adults. J Am Diet Assoc 2000;100:810–7.
17. Beavers KM, Serra MC, Beavers DP, Hudson GM, Willoughby DS. The
lipid-lowering effects of 4 weeks of daily soymilk or dairy milk inges-
tion in a postmenopausal female population. J Med Food 2010;13:
650–6.
18. Drouin-Chartier JP, Gagnon J, Labonte ME, Desroches S, Charest A,
Grenier G, Dodin S, Lemieux S, Couture P, Lamarche B. Impact of
milk consumption on cardiometabolic risk in postmenopausal women
with abdominal obesity. Nutr J 2015;14:12.
19. Huth PJ, Fulgoni VL, Keast DR, Park K, Auestad N. Major food sources
of calories, added sugars, and saturated fat and their contribution to es-
sential nutrient intakes in the U.S. diet: data from the National Health
and Nutrition Examination Survey (2003–2006). Nutr J 2013;12:116.
20. Thorning TK, Raziani F, Bendsen NT, Astrup A, Tholstrup T, Raben A.
Diets with high-fat cheese, high-fat meat, or carbohydrate on cardio-
vascular risk markers in overweight postmenopausal women: a ran-
domized crossover trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2015;102(3):573–81.
21. Sadrzadeh-Yeganeh H, Elmadfa I, Djazayery A, Jalali M, Heshmat R,
Chamary M. The effects of probiotic and conventional yoghurt on lipid
profile in women. Br J Nutr 2010;103:1778–83.
22. Chiu S, Bergeron N, Williams PT, Bray GA, Sutherland B, Krauss RM.
Comparison of the DASH (Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension)
diet and a higher-fat DASH diet on blood pressure and lipids and lipopro-
teins: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2016;103:341–7.
23. Steinmetz KA, Childs MT, Stimson C, Kushi LH, McGovern PG, Potter
JD, Yamanaka WK. Effect of consumption of whole milk and skim milk
on blood lipid profiles in healthy men. Am J Clin Nutr 1994;59:612–8.
24. de Goede J, Geleijnse JM, Ding EL, Soedamah-Muthu SS. Effect of
cheese consumption on blood lipids: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of randomized controlled trials. Nutr Rev 2015;73:259–75.
25. Nestel PJ, Chronopulos A, Cehun M. Dairy fat in cheese raises LDL
cholesterol less than that in butter in mildly hypercholesterolaemic
subjects. Eur J Clin Nutr 2005;59:1059–63.
26. Asztalos BF, Tani M, Schaefer EJ. Metabolic and functional relevance of
HDL subspecies. Curr Opin Lipidol 2011;22:176–85.
27. Baran D, Sorensen A, Grimes J, Lew R, Karellas A, Johnson B, Roche J.
Dietary modification with dairy products for preventing vertebral bone
loss in premenopausal women: a three-year prospective study. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 1990;70:264–70.
28. Wennersberg MH, Smedman A, Turpeinen AM, Retterstol K, Tengblad
S, Lipre E, Aro A, Mutanen P, Seljeflot I, Basu S, et al. Dairy products
and metabolic effects in overweight men and women: results from a
6-mo intervention study. Am J Clin Nutr 2009;90:960–8.
29. van Meijl LE, Mensink RP
. Low-fat dairy consumption reduces systolic
blood pressure, but does not improve other metabolic risk parameters in
overweight and obese subjects. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis 2011;21:355–61.
30. Palacios C, Bertran JJ, Rios RE, Soltero S. No effects of low and high
consumption of dairy products and calcium supplements on body
composition and serum lipids in Puerto Rican obese adults. Nutrition
2011;27:520–5.
31. Crichton GE, Howe PR, Buckley JD, Coates AM, Murphy KJ. Dairy
consumption and cardiometabolic health: outcomes of a 12-month
crossover trial. Nutr Metab (Lond) 2012;9:19.
32. Benatar JR, Jones E, White H, Stewart RA. A randomized trial evaluat-
ing the effects of change in dairy food consumption on cardio-metabolic
risk factors. Eur J Prev Cardiol 2013;21(11):1376–86.
33. Hussi E, Miettinen TA, Ollus A, Kostiainen E, Ehnholm C, Haglund B,
Huttunen JK, Manninen V. Lack of serum cholesterol-lowering effect of
skimmed milk and butter milk under controlled conditions. Athero-
sclerosis 1981;39:267–72.
34. Hidaka H, Takiwaki M, Yamashita M, Kawasaki K, Sugano M, Honda T.
Consumption of nonfat milk results in a less atherogenic lipoprotein
profile: a pilot study. Ann Nutr Metab 2012;61:111–6.
35. van Meijl LE, Mensink RP. Effects of milk and milk constituents on
postprandial lipid and glucose metabolism in overweight and obese
men. Br J Nutr 2013;110:413–9.
36. Nordestgaard BG, Benn M, Schnohr P, Tybjaerg-Hansen A. Nonfasting
triglycerides and risk of myocardial infarction, ischemic heart disease,
and death in men and women. JAMA 2007;298:299–308.
37. van Meijl LE, Mensink RP. Effects of low-fat dairy consumption on
markers of low-grade systemic inflammation and endothelial function
in overweight and obese subjects: an intervention study. Br J Nutr 2010;
104:1523–7.
38. Desroches S, Lamarche B. Diet and low-density lipoprotein particle
size. Curr Atheroscler Rep 2004;6:453–60.
39. Labonté ME, Couture P, Richard C, Desroches S, Lamarche B. Impact
of dairy products on biomarkers of inflammation: a systematic review
of randomized controlled nutritional intervention studies in over-
weight and obese adults. Am J Clin Nutr 2013;97:706–17.
40. Van Loan MD, Keim NL, Adams SH, Souza E, Woodhouse LR, Thomas
A, Witbracht M, Gertz ER, Piccolo B, Bremer AA, et al. Dairy foods in a
moderate energy restricted diet do not enhance central fat, weight, and
intra-abdominal adipose tissue losses nor reduce adipocyte size or in-
flammatory markers in overweight and obese adults: a controlled feed-
ing study. J Obes 2011;2011:989657.
41. Labonté ME, Cyr A, Abdullah MM, Lepine MC, Vohl MC, Jones P,
Couture P, Lamarche B. Dairy product consumption has no impact
on biomarkers of inflammation among men and women with low-
grade systemic inflammation. J Nutr 2014;144(11):1760–7.
42. Jones KW, Eller LK, Parnell JA, Doyle-Baker PK, Edwards AL, Reimer
RA. Effect of a dairy- and calcium-rich diet on weight loss and appetite
during energy restriction in overweight and obese adults: a randomized
trial. Eur J Clin Nutr 2013;67:371–6.
43. Serra MC, Beavers KM, Beavers DP, Willoughby DS. Effects of 28 days
of dairy or soy ingestion on skeletal markers of inflammation and pro-
teolysis in post-menopausal women. Nutr Health 2012;21:117–30.
44. Schmid A, Petry N, Walther B, Butikofer U, Luginbuhl W, Gille D,
Chollet M, McTernan PG, Gijs MA, Vionnet N, et al. Inflammatory
and metabolic responses to high-fat meals with and without dairy pro-
ducts in men. Br J Nutr 2015;113:1853–61.
45. Nestel PJ, Mellett N, Pally S, Wong G, Barlow CK, Croft K, Mori TA,
Meikle PJ. Effects of low-fat or full-fat fermented and non-fermented
dairy foods on selected cardiovascular biomarkers in overweight adults.
Br J Nutr 2013;110:2242–9.
46. Turner KM, Keogh JB, Clifton PM. Dairy consumption and insulin
sensitivity: A systematic review of short- and long-term intervention
studies. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis 2015;25(1):3–8.
47. Rideout TC, Marinangeli CP, Martin H, Browne RW, Rempel CB. Con-
sumption of low-fat dairy foods for 6 months improves insulin resis-
tance without adversely affecting lipids or bodyweight in healthy
adults: a randomized free-living cross-over study. Nutr J 2013;12:56.
1050
Drouin-Chartier et al.
 48. Zemel MB, Richards J, Milstead A, Campbell P. Effects of calcium and
dairy on body composition and weight loss in African-American adults.
Obes Res 2005;13:1218–25.
49. Stancliffe RA, Thorpe T, Zemel MB. Dairy attentuates oxidative and inflam-
matory stress in metabolic syndrome. Am J Clin Nutr 2011;94:422–30.
50. Pal S, Ellis V, Dhaliwal S. Effects of whey protein isolate on body com-
position, lipids, insulin and glucose in overweight and obese individ-
uals. Br J Nutr 2010;104:716–23.
51. Hoppe C, Kristensen M, Boiesen M, Kudsk J, Fleischer Michaelsen K,
Molgaard C. Short-term effects of replacing milk with cola beverages on
insulin-like growth factor-I and insulin-glucose metabolism: a 10 d
interventional study in young men. Br J Nutr 2009;102:1047–51.
52. Hoppe C, Molgaard C, Juul A, Michaelsen KF. High intakes of
skimmed milk, but not meat, increase serum IGF-I and IGFBP-3 in
eight-year-old boys. Eur J Clin Nutr 2004;58:1211–6.
53. Turner KM, Keogh JB, Clifton PM. Red meat, dairy, and insulin sensitivity: a
randomized crossover intervention study. Am J Clin Nutr 2015;101:1173–9.
54. Drouin-Chartier JP, Brassard D, Tessier-Grenier M, Côté JA, Labonté
M-È, Desroches S, Couture P, Lamarche B. Systematic review of the as-
sociation between dairy product consumption and risk of cardiovascular-
related clinical outcomes. Advan Nutr 2016;7:1026–40.
55. Appel LJ, Moore TJ, Obarzanek E, Vollmer WM, Svetkey LP, Sacks FM,
Bray GA, Vogt TM, Cutler JA, Windhauser MM, et al. A clinical trial of
the effects of dietary patterns on blood pressure. DASH Collaborative
Research Group. N Engl J Med 1997;336:1117–24.
56. Craddick SR, Elmer P, Obarzanek E, Vollmer W, Svetkey L, Swain M. The
DASH diet and blood pressure. Curr Atheroscler Rep 2003;5:484–91.
57. Kynast-Gales SA, Massey LK. Effects of dietary calcium from dairy pro-
ducts on ambulatory blood pressure in hypertensive men. J Am Diet
Assoc 1992;92:1497–501.
58. Hilpert KF, West SG, Bagshaw DM, Fishell V, Barnhart L, Lefevre M,
Most MM, Zemel MB, Chow M, Hinderliter AL, et al. Effects of dairy
products on intracellular calcium and blood pressure in adults with es-
sential hypertension. J Am Coll Nutr 2009;28:142–9.
59. Drouin-Chartier JP, Gigleux I, Tremblay AJ, Poirier L, Lamarche B,
Couture P. Impact of dairy consumption on essential hypertension: a
clinical study. Nutr J 2014;13:83.
60. Maki KC, Rains TM, Schild AL, Dicklin MR, Park KM, Lawless AL,
Kelley KM. Effects of low-fat dairy intake on blood pressure, endo-
thelial function, and lipoprotein lipids in subjects with prehyper-
tension or stage 1 hypertension. Vasc Health Risk Manag 2013;9:
369–79.
61. Alonso A, Zozaya C, Vazquez Z, Alfredo Martinez J, Martinez-Gonzalez
MA. The effect of low-fat versus whole-fat dairy product intake on
blood pressure and weight in young normotensive adults. J Hum
Nutr Diet 2009;22:336–42.
62. Hjerpsted J, Leedo E, Tholstrup T. Cheese intake in large amounts
lowers LDL-cholesterol concentrations compared with butter intake
of equal fat content. Am J Clin Nutr 2011;94:1479–84.
63. Schlienger JL, Paillard F, Lecerf JM, Romon M, Bonhomme C, Schmitt
B, Donazzolo Y, Defoort C, Mallmann C, Le Ruyet P, et al. Effect on
blood lipids of two daily servings of Camembert cheese. An interven-
tion trial in mildly hypercholesterolemic subjects. Int J Food Sci Nutr
2014;65(8):1013–18.
64. Ballard KD, Mah E, Guo Y, Pei R, Volek JS, Bruno RS. Low-fat milk in-
gestion prevents postprandial hyperglycemia-mediated impairments in
vascular endothelial function in obese individuals with metabolic syn-
drome. J Nutr 2013;143:1602–10.
65. Nestel PJ, Pally S, MacIntosh GL, Greeve MA, Middleton S, Jowett J,
Meikle PJ. Circulating inflammatory and atherogenic biomarkers are
not increased following single meals of dairy foods. Eur J Clin Nutr
2012;66:25–31.
66. Mozaffarian D. Dietary and policy priorities for cardiovascular disease,
diabetes, and obesity: a comprehensive review. Circulation 2016;133:
187–225.
67. Michaëlsson K, Wolk A, Langenskiold S, Basu S, Warensjo Lemming E,
Melhus H, Byberg L. Milk intake and risk of mortality and fractures in
women and men: cohort studies. BMJ 2014;349:g6015.
Dairy products and cardiometabolic disease risk factors
1051
