 Resting-state connectivity biomarkers define neurophysiological 
subtypes of depression
Andrew T Drysdale1,2,3, Logan Grosenick4,5, Jonathan Downar6, Katharine Dunlop6, 
Farrokh Mansouri6, Yue Meng1, Robert N Fetcho1, Benjamin Zebley7, Desmond J Oathes8, 
Amit Etkin9,10, Alan F Schatzberg9, Keith Sudheimer9, Jennifer Keller9, Helen S Mayberg11, 
Faith M Gunning2,12, George S Alexopoulos2,12, Michael D Fox13, Alvaro Pascual-Leone13, 
Henning U Voss14, BJ Casey15, Marc J Dubin1,2, and Conor Liston1,2,3
1Feil Family Brain and Mind Research Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New 
York, USA
2Department of Psychiatry, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York, USA
3Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, 
New York, USA
4Department of Bioengineering and Center for Mind, Brain and Computation, Stanford University, 
Stanford, California, USA
5Department of Statistics, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York, USA
6Department of Psychiatry, Toronto Western Hospital, Toronto, Canada
7Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York, USA
8Center for Neuromodulation in Depression and Stress and Department of Psychiatry, University 
of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
9Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Science, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA
10Veteran Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA
11Department of Psychiatry, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA
12Institute of Geriatric Psychiatry, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York, USA
Reprints and permissions information is available online at http://www.nature.com/reprints/index.html.
Correspondence should be addressed to C.L. (col2004@med.cornell.edu). 
Note: Any Supplementary Information and Source Data files are available in the online version of the paper.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
J.D., K.D., F.M., D.J.O., A.E., A.F.S., K.S., J.K., H.S.M., F.M.G., G.S.A., M.D.F., A.P.-L., H.U.V., B.J.C., M.J.D. and C.L. collected 
the data. L.G. consulted on all statistical analyses. C.L. designed the protocol for analyzing data pooled across multiple sites and 
identifying clusters. A.T.D., R.F. and C.L. designed and implemented the preprocessing pipeline and methods for validating clusters 
and optimizing classifiers, and C.L. developed and implemented the method for clustering and classification in a low-dimensional 
connectivity-feature space by using canonical correlation analysis (Figs. 1–3). J.D., K.D. and F.M. collected the TMS data. C.L. 
analyzed the TMS response data and other clinical data (Figs. 2 and 4) and tested the subtype classifiers on subjects with other 
diagnoses (Fig. 5). A.T.D., Y.M. and C.L. implemented the permutation testing. A.T.D., B.Z. and C.L. created the figures and wrote 
the manuscript. All authors discussed the results and conclusions and edited the manuscript.
COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS
The authors declare competing financial interests: details are available in the online version of the paper.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Med. 2017 January ; 23(1): 28–38. doi:10.1038/nm.4246.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 13Berenson-Allen Center for Noninvasive Brain Stimulation and Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA
14Department of Radiology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York, USA
15Department of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, USA
Abstract
Biomarkers have transformed modern medicine but remain largely elusive in psychiatry, partly 
because there is a weak correspondence between diagnostic labels and their neurobiological 
substrates. Like other neuropsychiatric disorders, depression is not a unitary disease, but rather a 
heterogeneous syndrome that encompasses varied, co-occurring symptoms and divergent 
responses to treatment. By using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in a large 
multisite sample (n = 1,188), we show here that patients with depression can be subdivided into 
four neurophysiological subtypes (‘biotypes’) defined by distinct patterns of dysfunctional 
connectivity in limbic and frontostriatal networks. Clustering patients on this basis enabled the 
development of diagnostic classifiers (biomarkers) with high (82–93%) sensitivity and specificity 
for depression subtypes in multisite validation (n = 711) and out-of-sample replication (n = 477) 
data sets. These biotypes cannot be differentiated solely on the basis of clinical features, but they 
are associated with differing clinical-symptom profiles. They also predict responsiveness to 
transcranial magnetic stimulation therapy (n = 154). Our results define novel subtypes of 
depression that transcend current diagnostic boundaries and may be useful for identifying the 
individuals who are most likely to benefit from targeted neurostimulation therapies.
Depression is a heterogeneous clinical syndrome that is diagnosed when a patient reports at 
least five of nine symptoms. This allows for several hundred unique combinations of 
changes in mood, appetite, sleep, energy, cognition and motor activity. Such remarkable 
heterogeneity reflects the consensus view that there are multiple forms of depression, but 
their neurobiological basis remains poorly understood1,2. So far, most efforts to characterize 
depression subtypes and develop diagnostic biomarkers have begun by identifying clusters 
of symptoms that tend to co-occur, and by then testing for neurophysiological correlates. 
These pioneering studies have defined atypical, melancholic, seasonal and agitated subtypes 
of depression associated with characteristic changes in neuroendocrine activity, circadian 
rhythms and other potential biomarkers3–5. Still, the association between clinical subtypes 
and their biological substrates is inconsistent and variable at the individual level, and unlike 
diagnostic biomarkers in other areas of medicine, they have not yet proven useful for 
differentiating individual patients from healthy controls or for reliably predicting treatment 
response at the individual level.
An alternative to subtyping patients on the basis of co-occurring clinical symptoms is to 
identify neurophysiological subtypes, or biotypes, by clustering subjects according to shared 
signatures of brain dysfunction6. This type of approach has already begun to yield insights 
into how differing biological mechanisms may give rise to overlapping, heterogeneous 
clinical presentations of psychotic disorders6,7. Neuroimaging biomarkers of abnormal brain 
function have proven utility in the assessment of pain8 and have also shown promise for 
depression, for both the prediction of treatment response9–13 and treatment selection14. 
Drysdale et al.
Page 2
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Resting-state fMRI (rsfMRI) is an especially useful modality because it can be used easily in 
diverse patient populations to quantify functional network connectivity in terms of 
correlated, spontaneous MR signal fluctuations. Depression is associated with dysfunction 
and abnormal functional connectivity in frontostriatal and limbic brain networks15–20, in 
accordance with morphological and synaptic changes in chronic stress models in 
rodents21–24. These studies raise the intriguing possibility that fMRI measures of 
connectivity could be leveraged to identify novel subtypes of depression with stronger 
neurobiological correlates that predict treatment responsiveness.
To this end, we developed a method for defining depression subtypes by clustering subjects 
according to distinct, whole-brain patterns of abnormal functional connectivity in resting-
state networks, unbiased by assumptions about the involvement of particular brain regions, 
and tested it in a large, multisite data set. Our analyses revealed four biotypes that were 
defined by homogeneous patterns of dysfunctional connectivity in frontostriatal and limbic 
networks, and that could be diagnosed with high sensitivity and specificity in individual 
subjects. Importantly, these biotypes were also prognostically informative, predicting which 
patients responded to repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), a targeted 
neurostimulation therapy.
RESULTS
Frontostriatal and limbic connectivity define four depression biotypes
We began by designing and implementing a preprocessing procedure (Online Methods) to 
control for motion-, scanner- and age-related effects in a multisite data set that comprised 
rsfMRI scans for 711 subjects (the ‘training data set’, n = 333 patients with depression; n = 
378 healthy controls). No subjects had comorbid substance-abuse disorders, and patients and 
controls were matched for age and sex. Data that support our approach to controlling for 
motion-related Blood-oxygen-level dependent (BOLD) signal effects, a particularly 
important source of rsfMRI artifact25–27, are presented in Supplementary Figure 1. After co-
registering the functional volumes to a common (Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI)) 
space, we applied an extensively validated parcellation system28 to delineate 258 functional 
network nodes that spanned the whole brain and had stable signals across all sites and scans 
in this data set (Fig. 1a). Next, we extracted BOLD signal residual time series and calculated 
correlation matrices between each node, which provided an unbiased estimate of the whole-
brain architecture of functional connectivity in each subject (Fig. 1b).
Each correlation matrix comprised 33,154 unique connectivity features, which thus 
necessitated a protocol for selecting a subset of relevant, nonredundant connectivity features 
for use in clustering. We reasoned that biologically meaningful depression subtypes would 
be best characterized by a subset of connectivity features that were significantly correlated 
with depressive symptoms. Therefore, to select connectivity features for use in clustering, 
we used canonical correlation analysis (Online Methods) to define a low-dimensional 
representation of connectivity features that were associated with weighted combinations of 
clinical symptoms, as quantified by the 17-item Hamilton Depression Rating Scale 
(HAMD), a commonly used, clinician-rated assessment. To ensure that cluster discovery 
was not confounded by site-related differences in subject recruitment criteria or by other 
Drysdale et al.
Page 3
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 unidentified variables, the cluster-discovery analysis was restricted to a subset of patients 
(the ‘cluster-discovery subset’, n = 220 of the 333 patients with depression) from two sites 
with identical inclusion and exclusion criteria and statistically equivalent depression-
symptom scores (see Supplementary Tables 1–3 for details). This analysis identified linear 
combinations of connectivity features (analogous to principal components) that predicted 
two distinct sets of depressive symptoms (Fig. 1c,d). The first connectivity component 
(canonical variate) defined a combination of predominantly frontostriatal and orbitofrontal 
connectivity features that were correlated with anhedonia and psychomotor retardation (Fig. 
1c, Supplementary Fig. 2 and Supplementary Table 4). The second component defined a 
distinct set of predominantly limbic connectivity features involving the amygdala, ventral 
hippocampus, ventral striatum, subgenual cingulate and lateral prefrontal control areas, and 
that was correlated with anxiety and insomnia (Fig. 1d). Thus, this empirical, data-driven 
approach to feature selection and dimensionality reduction identified two sets of functional 
connectivity features that were correlated with distinct clinical-symptom combinations.
We then tested whether abnormalities in these connectivity feature sets tended to cluster in 
patient subgroups. Multiple statistical learning approaches are available for discovering 
notable structure in large data sets (‘unsupervised learning’). Here we chose to use 
hierarchical clustering—a standard approach that has been used extensively in the biological 
sciences29,30—to discover clusters of patients, by assigning them to nested subgroups with 
similar patterns of connectivity (Online Methods). This analysis revealed four patient 
clusters defined by distinct and relatively homogeneous patterns of connectivity along these 
two dimensions (Fig. 1e,f) and comprising 23.6%, 22.7%, 20.0% and 33.6% of the 220 
patients with depression, respectively. This four-cluster solution was optimal for defining 
relatively homogeneous subgroups that were maximally dissimilar from each other 
(maximizing the ratio of between-cluster to within-cluster variance), while ensuring 
individual cluster sample sizes that provided sufficient statistical power to detect biologically 
meaningful differences (Supplementary Fig. 3). Therefore, we focused our subsequent 
analyses on characterizing and validating these four putative subtypes of depression.
Biotype-specific clinical profiles predicted by frontostriatal and limbic network dysfunction
To understand the neurobiological basis of these biotypes, we began by testing for 
differences in the whole-brain architecture of functional connectivity between patients (n = 
220) and age-, sex- and site-matched healthy controls (n = 378) and for connectivity features 
that differed between patient subgroups. We observed a common neuroanatomical core of 
pathology underlying all four biotypes and encompassing areas spanning the insula, 
orbitofrontal cortex, ventromedial prefrontal cortex and multiple subcortical areas (Fig. 2a,b 
and Supplementary Table 5)—all of which have been implicated in depression 
previously15–20. This led us to ask whether these connectivity features predicted the severity 
of ‘core’ symptoms that were present in almost all patients, regardless of biotype. We found 
that, of the 17 symptoms quantified by the HAMD, three were present in almost all patients 
with depression (>90%): mood (“feelings of sadness, hopelessness, helplessness,” 97.1%), 
anhedonia (96.7%) and anergia or fatigue (93.9%). Across subjects, regardless of biotype, 
abnormal connectivity in this shared neuroanatomical core (as indexed by the first principal 
Drysdale et al.
Page 4
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 component in a principal-component analysis (PCA)) was correlated with severity scores on 
these three symptoms (Fig. 2c; r = 0.72–0.82).
In addition, we found that, superimposed on this shared pathological core, distinct patterns 
of abnormal functional connectivity differentiated the four biotypes (Fig. 2d,e) and were 
associated with specific clinical-symptom profiles (Fig. 2f). For example, as compared to 
controls, reduced connectivity in frontoamygdala networks, which regulate fear-related 
behavior and reappraisal of negative emotional stimuli31–33, was most severe in biotypes 1 
and 4, which were characterized in part by increased anxiety. By contrast, hyperconnectivity 
in thalamic and frontostriatal networks, which support reward processing, adaptive motor 
control and action initiation20,34–37, were especially pronounced in biotypes 3 and 4 and 
were associated with increased anhedonia and psychomotor retardation. And reduced 
connectivity in anterior cingulate and orbitofrontal areas supporting motivation and 
incentive-salience evaluation38–40 was most severe in biotypes 1 and 2, which were 
characterized partly by increased anergia and fatigue.
Importantly, although the connectivity-based biotypes revealed in our analysis were 
associated with differences in clinical symptoms, they did not simply reflect differences in 
overall depression severity. Although overall depression severity scores were modestly but 
significantly decreased in biotype 2 as compared to the other three groups (by 15–16%), 
there were no significant differences in severity between biotypes 1, 3 and 4 (Fig. 2g; see 
Supplementary Fig. 4 for convergent findings in independent data acquired from subjects not 
included in the cluster-discovery analysis). Furthermore, they did not simply recapitulate 
subtypes derived strictly from clinical-symptom measures; whereas clustering according to 
functional connectivity features in random patient subsamples yielded stable clustering 
outcomes, clustering according to clinical symptoms yielded unstable outcomes with 
relatively low longitudinal stability over time (Supplementary Fig. 5).
Functional connectivity biomarkers for diagnosing depression biotypes
By reducing diagnostic heterogeneity, we reasoned that clustering could be leveraged to 
develop classifiers for the diagnosis of depression biotypes solely on the basis of fMRI 
measures of functional connectivity, which have shown promise in smaller-scale, single-site 
studies of depression41–43 and other neuropsychiatric disorders44,45, but that have not 
performed as well when tested in multisite data sets44. To this end, we developed classifiers 
for each depression biotype, testing and optimizing standard, extensively used methods for 
brain parcellation, subject clustering, feature selection and classification to identify 
empirically the most successful approach to clustering and classification (Fig. 3a and Online 
Methods). Throughout, clustering analysis was performed in the same cluster-discovery 
sample (n = 220), whereas classification of patients versus controls was optimized in the full 
training data set (n = 333 patients; n = 378 controls), and leave-one-out cross-validation and 
permutation testing were used to assess performance and significance (Supplementary Fig. 
6; for additional analysis confirming the stability of cluster assignments, see Supplementary 
Fig. 3d–f). The optimization process yielded progressive improvements in classifier 
performance (Fig. 3b). Support-vector machine (SVM) classifiers (using linear kernel 
functions) performed best, yielding overall accuracy rates of up to 89.2% for the clusters 
Drysdale et al.
Page 5
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 characterized above, on the basis of connectivity features associated with the 
neuroanatomical areas summarized in Figure 3c–f. In cross-validation (leave-one-out), 
individual patients and healthy controls were diagnosed correctly with sensitivities of 84.1–
90.9% and specificities of 84.1–92.5% (Fig. 3g).
To further validate the biotypes, we asked whether biotype diagnosis (cluster membership) 
was stable over time by testing these classifiers on a subset of patients (n = 50) who received 
a second fMRI scan while they were actively experiencing depression, 4–6 weeks after the 
first scanning session. We found that, overall, 90.0% of subjects were assigned to the same 
biotype in both scans (Fig. 3h; χ2 = 84.6, P < 0.0001). There were no significant between-
group differences in age, medication usage or head motion during scanning, variables that 
may affect rsfMRI connectivity measures (Supplementary Fig. 7).
It is well established in the machine-learning literature that iterative training and cross-
validation on the same data overestimate classifier performance46, and other studies have 
raised questions about the capacity for classifiers trained on one data set at a single site to 
generalize to data collected at multiple sites44. Therefore, we tested the most successful 
classifier for each depression biotype in an independent replication data set that consisted of 
125 patients and 352 healthy controls acquired from 13 sites, including five sites that were 
not included in the original training data set (Supplementary Table 3). To avoid 
overestimating diagnostic sensitivity, only one classifier—the classifier for the best-fitting 
biotype—was tested on each subject (Online Methods). Overall, 86.2% of subjects in this 
independent, out-of-sample replication data set were correctly diagnosed, including >90% of 
patients in biotypes 3 and 4 (Fig. 3i; Supplementary Table 6). By implementing stricter data 
quality controls and by treating subjects with ambiguous classification outcomes (the lowest 
absolute SVM classification scores; Online Methods) as equivocal test results, as is common 
practice for biomarkers in other areas of medicine, these accuracy rates exceeded 95%.
Connectivity biomarkers predict responsiveness to rTMS
Treatment-response prediction is an important element of validating biomarkers and 
establishing potential for clinical actionability, and neuroimaging measures have already 
shown promise for predicting treatment response in depression9–14. Repetitive transcranial 
magnetic stimulation (rTMS) is a noninvasive neurostimulation treatment for medication-
resistant depression that modulates functional connectivity in cortical networks47–49. 
Although the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is the most common target for stimulation48, 
recent studies have demonstrated efficacy for a dorsomedial prefrontal (DMPFC) target13, 
which raises the intriguing possibility that biotype differences in dysfunctional connectivity 
at the DMPFC target (Fig. 2d) site may give rise to differing treatment outcomes. To test 
this, we asked first whether the four depression biotypes were differentially responsive to 
rTMS in 124 subjects who received repetitive high-frequency stimulation of the dorsomedial 
prefrontal cortex for 5 weeks, beginning shortly after their fMRI scan (Online Methods). 
Treatment response varied significantly with cluster membership (χ2 = 25.7, P = 1.1 × 
10−5). rTMS was most effective for patients in biotype 1, 82.5% of whom (n = 33/40) 
improved significantly (>25% HAMD reduction), as compared to 61.0% for biotype 3 (n = 
25/41) and only 25.0% and 29.6% for biotypes 2 (n = 4/16) and 4 (n = 8/27), respectively 
Drysdale et al.
Page 6
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (see Fig. 4a,b full response rates (>50% reduction) and percentage change in depression 
severity by total HAMD score).
Next, we tested whether connectivity-based biotypes could be used to predict treatment 
response more effectively than clinical symptoms alone. To this end, we trained classifiers to 
differentiate responders and nonresponders using the same approach to feature selection, 
training and leave-one-out cross-validation. The most discriminating connectivity features 
involved the dorsomedial prefrontal stimulation target and the left amygdala, left 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, bilateral orbitofrontal cortex and posterior cingulate cortex 
(Fig. 4c; Supplementary Table 7). Connectivity between other neuroanatomical areas that 
were not directly stimulated by the rTMS protocol—including the ventromedial prefrontal 
cortex, thalamus, nucleus accumbens and globus pallidus—also predicted treatment 
response (Fig. 4d,e). Connectivity features predicted individual differences in the rTMS 
responsiveness with 78.3% accuracy in leave-one-out cross-validation (Fig. 4f,j). 
Classification according to connectivity features plus biotype diagnosis yielded the highest 
predictive accuracy (89.6%; Fig. 4g,j).
By contrast, clinical symptoms alone were not strong predictors of rTMS treatment 
responsiveness at an individual level. To test this, we trained classifiers to differentiate 
responders and nonresponders solely on the basis of clinical data. We found that clinical 
features (insomnia, anhedonia and psychomotor retardation by HAMD) were only modestly 
(62.6%) predictive of treatment responsiveness (Fig. 4h,j). Overall, classifiers based on 
connectivity features and biotype diagnosis significantly outperformed those based on 
clinical features alone (Fig. 4j; P < 0.005). Furthermore, just as we observed for diagnostic 
classifiers in Figure 3, accuracy rates could be improved further (>94%, Fig. 4j) by 
implementing stricter data quality controls and treating subjects with ambiguous 
classification outcomes as equivocal test results (Online Methods). Finally, to further 
evaluate predictive validity, we tested the best-performing classifier, which used a 
combination of connectivity features and biotype diagnosis, in an independent replication set 
(n = 30 subjects) and obtained comparable accuracy rates (87.5–92.6%; Fig. 4i,j). By 
contrast, subtyping subjects on the basis of clinical symptoms yielded highly variable, 
longitudinally unstable clustering outcomes that failed to predict treatment response 
(Supplementary Fig. 5).
Depression biotypes transcend conventional diagnostic boundaries
Collectively, these findings show that our current diagnostic system merges groups of 
patients with at least four distinct patterns of abnormal connectivity under a single 
diagnostic label—major depressive disorder. We concluded our study by testing whether the 
converse also occurs: that is, does our diagnostic system assign different diagnostic labels to 
patients who exhibit the same connectivity biotype? Motivated by studies identifying 
common neuroanatomical and functional changes that are shared across mood and anxiety 
disorders50–53, we first asked whether patients diagnosed with generalized anxiety disorder 
(GAD; n = 39) shared similar patterns of abnormal connectivity with one or more of the 
depression biotypes identified above. GAD was associated with widespread connectivity 
differences in resting-state networks (Fig. 5a–c) that overlapped significantly with those in 
Drysdale et al.
Page 7
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 depression (χ2 = 5,457; P < 0.0001; Fig. 5a–c). Next, to test whether subsets of patients with 
GAD resemble one or more depression biotypes, we applied the optimized classifiers 
developed above to the GAD cohort (Online Methods). Although none of the patients with 
GAD in this analysis met clinical criteria for a diagnosis of depression, 69.2% of them were 
nevertheless classified as belonging to one of the depression biotypes, and a majority of 
these (59.3%) were assigned to the anxiety-associated biotype 4 (Fig. 5d).
Although anxiety symptom severity did not vary significantly by biotype classification (Fig. 
5e), depressive symptom severity (Fig. 5f) and anhedonia (Fig. 5g) were significantly 
increased in patients with GAD who tested positive for one of the depression biotypes, as 
compared to patients with GAD who did not test positive. Furthermore, just as anhedonia 
was increased in patients with depression in biotypes 3 and 4, patients with GAD showed a 
similar trend (Fig. 5g; P < 0.05). Finally, to understand whether these classifiers were 
detecting pathological connectivity related specifically to mood and anxiety as opposed to 
nonspecific differences associated with psychiatric illness in general, we tested them on 
patients with schizophrenia (n = 41), a disorder that is not thought to be closely related to 
unipolar depression. Just 9.8% of patients with schizophrenia tested positive for a depression 
biotype (Fig. 5h).
DISCUSSION
Increasingly, diagnostic heterogeneity has emerged as a major obstacle to understanding the 
pathophysiology of mental illnesses and, in particular, depression. Although major 
depressive disorder—especially highly recurrent depression—is up to 45% heritable54, 
identifying genetic risk factors has proven challenging, even in extremely large genome-
wide association studies55. Likewise, efforts to develop new treatments have slowed, owing 
in part to a lack of physiological targets for the assessment of treatment efficacy and the 
selection of individuals who are most likely to benefit56. All of these challenges have been 
attributed in part to the fact that our diagnostic system assigns a single label to a syndrome 
that is not unitary and that might be caused by distinct pathological processes, which would 
thus require different treatments. Here we have defined four subtypes of depression 
associated with differing patterns of abnormal functional connectivity and distinct clinical-
symptom profiles that transcend conventional diagnostic boundaries, and we have shown 
how neuroimaging biomarkers can be used to diagnose them. Our sample size, cross-
validation in strictly independent samples and replication in independent data sets support 
these results.
However, this is to our knowledge the first effort to apply this type of statistical clustering 
for the purpose of defining depression subtypes and diagnosing them in individual patients, 
so caution is warranted. Replication of our findings in additional, independent, prospectively 
acquired data sets will be crucial for addressing some of the limitations inherent in our 
retrospective, multisite sample. We designed a preprocessing scheme specifically to control 
for site- and scanner-related artifacts, and we performed our clustering analysis on data from 
just two sites with nearly identical acquisition protocols and recruitment criteria. Still, it will 
be essential to replicate these findings in an equally large sample acquired from a single site. 
Furthermore, more extensive and uniform clinical phenotyping—especially within the 
Drysdale et al.
Page 8
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 relatively broad domains of anhedonia and anxiety—will be crucial for further 
understanding how connectivity-based biotypes relate to distinct symptoms and behaviors.
Importantly, we regard the four biotypes identified here as just one, initial solution to the 
problem of diagnostic heterogeneity in a system that relies primarily on the reporting of 
clinical symptoms. This solution is capable of predicting treatment response in a controlled, 
laboratory setting and advances our understanding of how heterogeneous symptom profiles 
in depression might be related to clustered patterns of dysfunctional connectivity. But 
alternative solutions to the problem of depression subtyping also exist, even in our 220-
subject hierarchical clustering analysis, which was suggestive of additional subtypes nested 
within these four clusters. It is likely that relatively restrictive patient-recruitment criteria, 
the size of our cluster-discovery data set, and the ordinal nature of our clinical-symptom 
assessments were also limiting factors. For these reasons, clinical and neuroimaging data 
acquired from much larger populations will be useful for characterizing more complex 
associations between connectivity features and symptoms; for defining robust low-
dimensional representations of this connectivity feature space; and for optimizing the 
mapping between diagnostic subtypes and their underlying neurobiology. It will also be 
crucial to evaluate how these biomarkers perform in real-world, clinical settings, in which 
clinical assessments and treatments might be administered with varying fidelity, which could 
potentially diminish diagnostic and prognostic performance.
These caveats notwithstanding, our results have several potential applications. They may 
inform recent initiatives to rethink our system for diagnosing psychiatric disorders and 
investigating their neuro-physiological and genetic basis, by stratifying subjects into 
subgroups defined by shared neurobiological substrates1. They might also guide optogenetic 
and other circuit neuroscience approaches to investigating how dysfunction in specific 
circuits contributes to depression-and anxiety-related behaviors in experimentally tractable 
animal models57–59. Finally, these biomarkers also have prognostic potential. Patients in 
biotype 1 were approximately three times more likely to benefit from TMS of the 
dorsomedial prefrontal cortex than those in biotypes 2 or 4, and together, biotype diagnosis 
and functional connectivity features could be leveraged to accurately differentiate treatment 
responders from nonresponders on an individual basis. Validating and adapting them for use 
in naturalistic clinical settings will be a key challenge, but our data are also consistent with 
other recent reports that highlight the potential of neuroimaging tools to predict treatment 
response9–14, a major priority for a condition in which most treatments are effective only 
after several months. Biomarkers have already transformed the diagnosis and management 
of cancer, diabetes, heart disease and even pain syndromes8, but they have proven more 
elusive for psychiatry. Our results define one approach for using neuroimaging biomarkers 
to delineate and diagnose novel subtypes of mental illness characterized by uniform 
neurobiological substrates.
ONLINE METHODS
Subjects
All analyses were conducted in one of two data sets, unless otherwise noted (see also 
‘Statistical analysis’ section below for subject details for each analysis, organized by figure 
Drysdale et al.
Page 9
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 panel). Data set 1 (n = 711 subjects, 333 patients and 378 controls) was used for all analyses, 
except those depicted in Figures 3i, 4i and 5. That is, data set 1 was used to identify clusters 
(biotypes) of patients with distinct patterns of dysfunctional connectivity in resting-state 
networks, testing for neurobiological and clinical correlates of these biotypes, and for 
training and testing classifiers to diagnose them. To ensure that cluster discovery was not 
confounded by site-related differences in subject recruitment criteria or other unidentified 
variables, the cluster-discovery analysis (Fig. 1) was restricted to a subset of patients in data 
set 1, the ‘cluster-discovery set’ (n = 220 of the 333 patients), who were recruited and 
scanned from just two sites with identical inclusion and exclusion criteria. Subjects in the 
cluster-discovery set were adult patients meeting Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders (DSM-IV) criteria for (unipolar) major depressive disorder and seeking 
treatment for a currently active, nonpsychotic major depressive episode. They had a history 
of failure to respond to at least two antidepressant medication trials at adequate doses, 
including at least one during the current episode. Patients in the cluster-discovery set were 
excluded from enrollment if they had a currently active substance-use disorder, a psychotic 
disorder, bipolar depression, a history of seizures, unstable medical conditions, current 
pregnancy or other contraindications to MRI (for example, implanted devices, 
claustrophobia or head injury with loss of consciousness). As described in Supplementary 
Table 1, subjects from the two sites included in the cluster-discovery set were matched for 
age, sex and depression severity (HAMD-17 total score). Supplementary Table 1 also 
describes medication status, comorbid diagnoses and additional details about the scanning 
protocols for data acquired at these two sites.
Classifier training, cross-validation and optimization was performed in the full data set 1, 
i.e., the ‘training data set,’ which included patients diagnosed with unipolar major depressive 
disorder and a currently active major depressive episode (n = 333, 59.2% female, mean age 
= 40.6 years) and healthy control subjects without any history of a psychiatric condition (n = 
378, 57.7% female, mean age = 38.0 years). The patient and control groups did not differ 
significantly in age (P = 0.189, Mann-Whitney) or sex (χ2 = 0.61, P = 0.688). The patient 
scans were acquired at separate sites by five principal investigators (the two sites from the 
cluster-discovery set plus three additional sites). The control scans were acquired at these 
same five sites, as well as from seven additional sites that have provided unrestricted public 
access to their data through the 1000 Functional Connectomes Project (http://
fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org). Inclusion and exclusion criteria were generally similar to 
those described above for the two sites in the cluster-discovery set, except that a history of 
treatment resistance was not a requirement. Exclusion criteria common to all sites were 
contraindications for MRI and a recent history of substance abuse or dependence. Other 
inclusion and exclusion criteria—and consequently, the presence of psychiatric co-
morbidities and use of psychiatric medications—varied by site and are detailed in 
Supplementary Table 2. Clustering into connectivity biotypes was not related to medication 
history, age or head motion (Supplementary Fig. 7). Additional demographic information for 
all sites in data set 1 is reported in Supplementary Table 3.
Data set 2 (n = 477)—the ‘replication data set’—was used to test the most successful 
classifier of each depression biotype in patients with active depression (n = 125 from seven 
sites) and healthy controls (n = 352 from 13 sites). Scans in data set 2 were acquired in 
Drysdale et al.
Page 10
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 separate studies, at a later date or were not initially available to us, and they were not used in 
any step of the cluster identification or classifier training procedure. Furthermore, five sites 
were unique to data set 2. Patients with depression at all sites in both data sets met DSM-IV 
criteria for a current major depressive episode (n = 109 unipolar; n = 16 bipolar 2), and 
healthy controls were subjects without any current or past history of a psychiatric or 
neurological condition.
To test whether patterns of abnormal connectivity that were evident in clusters of patients 
with depression were also present in subsets of patients with other psychiatric disorders (Fig. 
5), we tested the same classifiers on patients meeting DSM-IV criteria for a diagnosis of 
generalized anxiety disorder (GAD, n = 39, 69.2% female, mean age = 32.4 years) or 
schizophrenia (n = 41, 78.0% male, mean age = 38.2 years; no co-morbid mood disorders 
and no schizoaffective disorder). Data for the GAD subjects were acquired by one of the co-
authors of this report (A.E.), and inclusion and exclusion criteria are described in 
Supplementary Table 2 (site: Stanford 1; PI: A. Etkin). Data for the schizophrenia subjects 
were obtained through the 1000 Functional Connectomes Project (http://
fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org), made publicly available by the Center of Biomedical Research 
Excellence in Brain Function and Mental Illness (PIs: J. Sui, J. Liu, C. Harenski, R. Thoma 
and C. Abbott). Inclusion criteria were a diagnosis of schizophrenia (but not schizoaffective 
disorder), as confirmed by the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM Disorders (SCID), and 
exclusion criteria were a history of neurological disorder, mental retardation, head trauma 
with loss of consciousness or substance abuse or dependence within the past 12 months. All 
subjects in all data sets provided informed consent, and all recruitment procedures and 
experimental protocols were approved by the Institutional Review Boards of the principal 
investigators’ respective institutions (Weill Cornell Medical College, Stanford University, 
Toronto Western Hospital, Emory University and Harvard Medical School).
Clinical measures
At all sites, initial screening interviews were conducted to determine eligibility to 
participate, and a trained clinician conducted a structured clinical interview (MINI or SCID) 
to confirm all psychiatric diagnoses and rule out exclusionary co-morbid conditions as 
defined in Supplementary Table 2. In addition, specific clinical symptoms were evaluated 
using the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAMD; n = 312 patients; n = 65 healthy 
controls), the Beck depression inventory (BDI, n = 39 patients with GAD) and the Beck 
anxiety inventory (BAI; n = 39 patients with GAD). These assessments were used to test the 
depression biotypes that were associated with specific clinical symptom profiles. For details, 
see ‘Clinical data analysis’ section below.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data acquisition
A resting-state functional MRI scan was obtained by using a T2*-weighted gradient echo 
spiral in-out sequence or a Z-SAGA sequence, yielding whole-brain coverage in all subjects. 
A high-resolution T1-weighted anatomical scan (MP-RAGE or SPGR) was obtained for 
brain parcellation and co-registration purposes. Specific scanning parameters varied by site. 
Most used a TR of ~2 s, in-plane resolution of ~3.5 mm, and obtained 150–180 volumes in 
Drysdale et al.
Page 11
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ~5–6 min. Detailed scanning parameters for each site are reported in Supplementary Table 1 
and Supplementary Table 3.
fMRI data analysis: preprocessing
All data sets were preprocessed using the Analysis of Functional Neuroimages (AFNI) 
software package. Prior to other preprocessing steps, framewise motion parameters were 
calculated by using AFNI’s 3dvolreg function, owing to concerns that slice-time correction 
might lead to systematic underestimates of motion when this step is performed first. After 
estimating framewise motion parameters, preprocessing included standard procedures for 
slice-timing correction, spatial smoothing (with a 4-mm-full-width, half-maximum Gaussian 
kernel), temporal bandpass filtering (0.01–0.1 Hz), linear and quadratic detrending and 
removal of nuisance signals related to head motion, physiological variables and local and 
global hardware artifacts. Functional data sets were co-registered to the corresponding high-
resolution T1 anatomical images, and T1 anatomicals were transformed into the Montreal 
Neurological Institute (MNI) common space by using AFNI’s 3dQwarp function to calculate 
and optimize a nonlinear transformation. To reduce the number of interpolations performed 
on resting-state data, we combined motion-correcting, anatomical-to-structural and 
structural-to-MNI template alignments and applied them to functional scans in a single step.
Motion correction was achieved using AFNI’s 3dvolreg function. Motion artifact is 
increasingly recognized as an important potential confound in resting-state fMRI studies, 
especially those involving clinical populations, and can introduce systematic shifts in signal 
correlations that vary as a function of the distance separating two brain regions25–27. To 
balance the demands of noise reduction and data preservation, we censored volumes 
preceding or following any movement (framewise displacement (FD)) greater than 0.3 mm. 
These volumes were excluded from all further analysis steps, including nuisance regression. 
A small number of subjects (8.9%) were excluded from further analysis if the number of 
remaining volumes was insufficient for performing simultaneous nuisance signal regression 
and band-pass filtering as described below. (Note that descriptions of the number of subjects 
comprising each data set in the ‘Subjects’ section above and in the main text refer to subjects 
that were actually used in each analysis, after excluding scans because of motion 
contamination or poor signal quality, as defined below.)
Next, nuisance signal regression and band-pass filtering were performed simultaneously, 
only on volumes that survived motion censoring, and excluding high-motion volumes. This 
is because noise from high-motion volumes has been shown to contaminate other volumes, 
even if they are eventually omitted from final analyses60,61. Accordingly, the regression step 
included 12 motion parameters (roll, pitch, yaw, translation in three dimensions and their 
first derivatives); non-neuronal signals from eroded white matter and CSF masks; and 
regressors for temporal filtering. Finally, we used AFNI’s ANATICOR function to eliminate 
local and global hardware artifacts62–63. After preprocessing, the residual time series files, 
co-registered to MNI space, were used for all subsequent analyses.
A note on motion artifact—We selected a censoring threshold (FD > 0.3 mm) 
empirically based on analyses showing that it was sufficient to exclude the majority of 
Drysdale et al.
Page 12
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 excursions from so-called floor values in single-subject FD traces (Supplementary Fig. 1), 
which have been associated with significant motion artifact, while preserving enough data to 
allow for stable estimates of signal cor-relations25–27. It is also worth noting that this 
threshold resembles commonly used thresholds (0.2–0.5 mm) in recently published reports 
(reviewed in ref. 64). However, we found that a small number of RSFC features (just 0.7% 
of the connectivity features that differentiated patients and controls, at a liberal threshold of 
P < 0.005, uncorrected) were significantly different in low- versus high-motion subjects after 
ANATICOR regression and censoring at 0.3 mm (Supplementary Fig. 1d). To further 
evaluate whether motion artifact affected cluster discovery and biotype diagnoses, we 
repeated the hierarchical clustering analysis depicted in Figure 1 after excluding the 0.7% of 
RSFC features that varied with motion at this liberal threshold (P < 0.005). 99.1% of all 
subjects were assigned to the same cluster (Supplementary Fig. 1h). To rule out the 
possibility that multivariate classifiers may been influenced by the aggregation of subtle 
between-group differences in motion artifact that were undetectable by the mass univariate 
approach implemented in ref. 64, we conducted additional analyses reported in 
Supplementary Figure 1i,j. The results indicate that our clustering and classification results 
were not biased substantially by motion.
fMRI data analysis: parcellation and whole-brain connectivity estimation
The objective of this analysis was to extend conventional seed-based approaches to generate 
a whole-brain correlation matrix for each subject, quantifying functional connectivity in 
regions of interest spanning the entire brain in terms of correlated, spontaneous fluctuations 
in the resting-state BOLD signal. Most data sets were acquired in a native grid space of ~3.5 
× 3.5 × 5 mm, yielding ~30,000 brain voxels and up to ~4.5 × 108 unique, potential pairwise 
correlations. To increase computational tractability and biological interpretability, all 
analyses reported in the main text used an established and extensively validated functional 
parcellation system28 to delineate functional network nodes (10-mm diameter spheres) 
spanning most cortical, subcortical and cerebellar areas. The originally published 
parcellation identified 264 nodes (ROIs). Here 13 ROIs that have hypothesized roles in 
depression-related pathology, but that are not represented in this 264-node parcellation, were 
added, including the left and right nucleus accumbens, subgenual anterior cingulate, head of 
the caudate nucleus, amygdala, ventral hippocampus, locus coeruleus, ventral tegmental area 
and raphe nucleus, for a total of 264 + 13 = 277 nodes. However, 19 of the 277 nodes—
mostly cerebellar and inferior temporal areas—were excluded from further analyses owing 
to incomplete MRI volume coverage or because of inadequate signal (SNR < 100), as 
discussed in more detail below. Thus, the primary parcellation used in all analyses included 
264 +13 − 19 = 258 functional nodes. In addition, when optimizing the biomarkers 
developed in Figure 3, we tested four strategies for parcellation: (i) The primary functional 
parcellation of Power and colleagues that is described above and is the focus of the analyses 
in the main text28; (ii) a ‘coarse voxelwise’ parcellation strategy, a standard anatomical 
template brain (1 × 1 × 1–mm resolution in MNI space) was resampled to a 10 × 10 × 15–
mm grid space. After excluding voxels (or portions of voxels) corresponding to white matter 
or CSF using masks derived from a segmentation of the original template brain into tissue 
classes (via AFNI’s 3dSeg function), we were left with 945 ROIs spanning all cortical, 
subcortical and cerebellar gray matter; (iii) an anatomical parcellation used the Freesurfer 
Drysdale et al.
Page 13
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 atlas developed by Desikan, Killiany and colleagues that segments the brain into 68 gyral-
based cortical ROIs and an additional 22 subcortical and cerebellar areas for a total of 90 
anatomical regions of interest65; (iv) finally, a second functional parcellation (in addition to 
the used 90 cortical and subcortical ROIs defined by Shirer, Greicius and colleagues using 
independent-components analysis to identify brain voxels that exhibit correlated activity in 
association with one or more cognitive states (rest, episodic-memory retrieval, serial 
calculations or singing lyrics; see ref.66 for details). The best results were obtained from the 
primary functional parcellation devised by Power and colleagues28, which was the focus of 
all other analyses.
After preprocessing the resting-state fMRI data and parcellating the brain as described 
above, BOLD signal time series were extracted from each ROI by averaging across all 
voxels in that ROI, and a correlation matrix was calculated for each subject by using AFNI’s 
3dNetCorr function. However, before doing so, we took additional steps to control for 
scanner- and site-related differences that could potentially confound analyses of data pooled 
across multiple sites. First, we controlled for site-related differences in signal quality or scan 
coverage by excluding ROIs if the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR, the voxelwise mean of the 
magnetic resonance signal over time divided by the s.d. of the time series) was less than 100 
in >5% of subjects. On this basis, we excluded 13 of the 277 ROIs in the primary functional 
parcellation, leaving 264 ROIs for further analysis. Most excluded ROIs were located in the 
inferior cerebellum, which did not have consistent coverage across all sites, or on the ventral 
surface of the temporal lobe or the orbital surface of the frontal lobe, which tended to have 
lower SNR in some scans, likely owing to artifact at the interface with air sinuses. Second, 
for each subject, only voxels with SNR > 100 were used to calculate the mean BOLD signal 
time series for each ROI, to further control for local differences in signal quality on a per 
subject basis. And third, a small number of subjects (2.9%) was excluded from further 
analysis if the signal quality was low (SNR < 100) in any of the remaining 258 ROIs.
Thus, after excluding 13 ROIs with low-quality signal and a small number of subjects with 
excessive head motion (8.9%) or poor signal quality (2.9%), we calculated 258 × 258–
element correlation matrices for each of the remaining subjects (n = 711 for data set 1; n = 
477 for data set 2; see ‘Subjects’ above). To enable us to test hypotheses about functional 
connectivity differences in the depressed and control populations, we applied the Fisher z-
transformation to each correlation coefficient. Next, we used multiple linear regression to 
further control for site- and age-related effects on functional connectivity by regressing the 
Fisher z-transformed correlation coefficients for each matrix element on subjects’ ages and 
dummy variables for each site. The resulting residuals— comprising a 258 × 258–element 
matrix for each subject—were an estimate of the functional connectivity between each ROI 
and every other ROI, controlling for age effects and relative to other subjects whose data 
were acquired on the same scanner. Henceforth, we refer to these matrices of residuals as 
functional connectivity matrices.
fMRI data analysis: canonical correlation analysis and clustering
To ensure that cluster discovery was not confounded by site-related differences in subject 
recruitment criteria or other unidentified variables, the cluster-discovery analysis was 
Drysdale et al.
Page 14
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 restricted to a subset of patients (the ‘cluster-discovery set,’ n = 220 of the 333 patients) 
from two sites with identical inclusion and exclusion criteria (see Supplementary Tables 1–3 
for details). Each subject’s 258 × 258–element correlation matrix contained 33,154 unique 
functional connectivity features, necessitating a protocol for selecting a subset of relevant, 
nonredundant connectivity features for use in clustering. We reasoned that biologically 
meaningful depression subtypes would be best characterized by a low-dimensional 
representation of a subset of those 33,154 connectivity features that were significantly 
correlated with depressive symptoms. Therefore, to select a set of connectivity features for 
use in clustering, we (i) used Spearman’s rank correlation coefficients to identify 
connectivity features that were significantly correlated (P < 0.005) with severity scores for 
one or more of the 17 depressive symptoms, as indexed by individual item responses on the 
Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAMD-17), and then (ii) used canonical correlation 
analysis to define a low-dimensional representation of those connectivity features, in terms 
of linear combinations of connectivity features that were correlated with linear combinations 
of clinical symptoms. This empirical, data-driven approach to feature selection and 
dimensionality reduction identified two linear combinations of functional connectivity 
features (canonical variates) that were correlated with distinct clinical-symptom 
combinations, which we term “anhedonia-related connectivity features” and “anxiety-related 
connectivity features.” The results are depicted in Figure 1, with additional details in 
Supplementary Figure 2.
Next, to assess whether these abnormalities were evenly distributed across patients or tended 
to cluster in subgroups, we used hierarchical clustering to assign subjects to nested 
subgroups with similar patterns of abnormal connectivity along these two dimensions. We 
calculated a dissimilarity matrix describing the Euclidean distance between every pair of 
subjects in this two-dimensional feature space, and then used Ward’s minimum variance 
method to iteratively link pairs of subjects in closest proximity, forming progressively larger 
clusters in a hierarchical tree. These methods were implemented by using MATLAB’s pdist, 
linkage, cluster and clusterdata functions. The height of each link in the resulting 
dendrogram (Fig. 1d) represents the distance between the clusters being linked. On this 
basis, we conservatively identified at least four clusters for which the distance between 
cluster centroids was at least 20 times the mean distance between pairs of subjects within a 
cluster. Additional potential clustering solutions were also evident, nested within these 
subgroups. However, this four-cluster solution was optimal for defining relatively 
homogeneous subgroups that were maximally dissimilar from each other (maximizing the 
ratio of between-cluster to within-cluster variance), while ensuring individual cluster sample 
sizes that provided sufficient statistical power to detect biologically meaningful differences 
between biotypes (Supplementary Fig. 3). To construct the heat maps depicted in Figure 2, 
we used Wilcoxon rank-sum tests to identify connectivity features that were significantly 
different in patients with depression from each cluster, as compared to all controls, and 
Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA to identify connectivity features that differed most between clusters.
As described in the following section, we also investigated whether abnormal resting-state 
connectivity features could be used to diagnose these putative depression subtypes in 
individual subjects by training classifiers to detect them (Fig. 3). In our efforts to optimize 
classifier performance, we compared the hierarchical clustering method described above 
Drysdale et al.
Page 15
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 with k-means clustering, as implemented by MATLAB’s kmeans function, which assigns 
each subject to exactly one of k clusters on the basis of their squared Euclidean distance 
from the centroid of each cluster, iteratively assigning and reassigning subjects to a cluster to 
minimize the sum of the within-cluster sum-of-squares subject-to-centroid distances.
Classification: training and cross-validation of diagnostic classifiers for depression 
biotypes
In analyses depicted in Figure 3, we developed classifiers for diagnosing depression in 
subgroups of patients with similar patterns of abnormal functional connectivity in resting-
state networks, testing and optimizing methods for brain parcellation and feature extraction, 
subject clustering, feature selection and classification to identify empirically the most 
successful approach. This optimization process was conducted exclusively in subjects from 
data set 1 (n = 711). As depicted in Figure 3a and in greater detail in Supplementary Figure 
6, each optimization trial tested a combination of one of four methods for parcellation and 
feature extraction (coarse voxelwise parcellation, anatomical parcellation and two functional 
parcellations; see ‘Parcellation’ above); one of three methods for clustering (no clustering, k-
means clustering or hierarchical clustering; see ‘Clustering’ above); and one of three 
methods for classification: logistic regression, support vector (SVM) classification or linear 
discriminant analysis (LDA).
On each optimization trial, a given combination of methods was evaluated by iteratively 
training classifiers on a subset (the ‘training subset’) of the subjects in data set 1 and then 
testing them on the remaining subjects (the ‘test subset’) through leave-one-out cross 
validation (LOOCV). As above, only the 220 patients in the two-site cluster-discovery set 
were used in the clustering analysis, whereas all 333 patients and 378 controls in data set 1 
were eligible to be used in classification.
Assigning left-out subjects to clusters—The 133 patients (n = 333 − 220 = 133) left 
out of the cluster-discovery set were assigned to one of the four clusters in a two-step 
process. First, the canonical coefficients estimated in the cluster-discovery set were used to 
calculate canonical variate (component) scores for the left-out subjects. Second, LDA 
classifiers trained on the cluster-discovery sample were used to assign left-out subjects to 
one of the four clusters. The same two-step process was used to assign test subjects to the 
best-fitting cluster for the leave-one-out cross-validation analyses described below.
Classifier training—Classifier training was performed using the libsvm classification 
package67, the SPSS Statistics package (IBM: http://www.ibm.com/software/analytics/spss/
products/statistics), or MATLAB classification functions (see schematic in Supplementary 
Fig. 6). Classifiers were trained to discriminate between patients with depression and healthy 
controls on the basis of a set of the most abnormal connectivity features, which were 
selected from the full set of all possible connectivity features (33,154 for the primary 
functional parcellation used in all other figures; 337,431 for the voxelwise parcellation; 
~4,000 for the anatomical and second functional parcellations). In preliminary analyses (data 
not shown), we found that the optimal number of features depended on the parcellation 
strategy and classifier method. Simple logistic-regression classifiers could be trained only on 
Drysdale et al.
Page 16
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 a small set of features constrained by the number of subjects in each group; optimal 
performance was obtained in most cases with the top 20 features. SVM and LDA classifiers 
performed best when trained on the top ~5–10% of the most abnormal features for the 
primary functional and voxelwise parcellations (~1.5–3,000 and 10,000–25,000 features, 
respectively) and the top 25% for the coarser anatomical and functional parcellations (1,000 
features). Thus, in Figure 3b, simple logistic-regression classifiers were trained on the top 20 
features, whereas LDA and SVM classifiers were trained on the top ~2,000 features for the 
primary functional parcellation, ~1,000 features for the anatomical and secondary functional 
parcellations or ~10,000 features for voxelwise parcellation.
After being trained on subjects in the training subset, the resulting classifiers were tested on 
subjects in the test subset. Importantly, subjects in the test subset were left out of all aspects 
of the optimization procedure, including dimension reduction by canonical correlation 
analysis, clustering, feature selection and classifier training. This is crucial, because 
including members of the test subset in the clustering or feature-selection procedures will 
yield biased, inflated estimates of classifier accuracy. Trials that did not use clustering 
yielded one classifier on each iteration, which was then applied to subjects in the test subset, 
and the accuracy rates in Figure 3b represent the percentage of patients and healthy controls 
correctly classified as patients and healthy controls, respectively, averaged over all iterations. 
Trials that used clustering yielded three, four or five classifiers as indicated in Figure 3b. 
Testing each of them on every subject would tend to overestimate accuracy for patients and 
underestimate accuracy for healthy controls. Therefore, we tested only one of the biotype 
classifiers on each subject, on the basis of proximity to the cluster centroid or (in the case of 
the best performing classifiers depicted in Fig. 3g), by using the LDA classifiers for cluster 
assignment described above. For the purposes of defining a cluster’s centroid in order to 
make new cluster assignments, we excluded a small number of subjects (n = 15, or 6.8% of 
all subjects in the cluster-discovery set) with ambiguous cluster identities. These ‘edge 
cases’ were defined as cases with cluster silhouette values <0, indicating a case that was 
poorly matched to its own cluster and possibly better matched to a neighboring cluster. (We 
found that for small clusters, these edge cases could distort the calculation of the cluster’s 
centroid location, resulting in unstable cluster assignments across iterations.) In Figure 3c–f, 
the neuroanatomical locations of the most discriminating nodes were plotted by selecting 
connectivity features that were significantly different from controls (by Wilcoxon rank-sum 
tests) across each round of training and cross-validation. The nodes were colored and scaled 
by summing across all connectivity features associated with that node, as described in ref.68.
Permutation testing—By systematically testing various combinations of methods for 
parcellation, clustering, and classification, we found that the most successful classifier used 
our primary functional parcellation28, hierarchical clustering and SVM classification with 
linear kernel functions, and correctly identified healthy controls and patients with 
sensitivities of 84.1–90.9% and specificities of 84.1–92.5% (Fig. 3g). The statistical 
significance of these results was estimated by permutation testing, randomly permuting the 
diagnostic labels for each subject and applying the exact same procedure for clustering, 
feature selection and classifier training and repeating this procedure 200 times. Permutation 
testing was used to assess the statistical significance of the most successful classifier derived 
Drysdale et al.
Page 17
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 from each of the three classification methods (logistic regression, SVM and LDA). For all 
three methods, the reported accuracy rates exceeded those obtained on all 200 permutation 
tests, indicating a statistical significance of P < 0.005.
Classification: testing classifiers in an independent replication data set
It is well established in the machine-learning literature that iterative training and cross-
validation on the same data overestimate classifier performance, and other studies have 
raised questions about the capacity for classifiers trained on one data set at a single site to 
generalize to data collected at multiple sites44,46. To address these issues, we tested the most 
successful classifier for each depression biotype (primary functional parcellation, 
hierarchical clustering and SVM classification) in an independent replication data set (data 
set 2; n = 477 subjects), comprising 125 patients and 352 healthy controls acquired from 13 
sites, including five sites that were not included in the original training data set. This 
analysis was essentially identical to the analysis of test subjects in cross-validation described 
above. After preprocessing, parcellation and BOLD signal time-series extraction, we 
calculated correlation matrices, and the Fisher z-transformed correlation coefficients were 
corrected for age and site effects. For subjects in data set 2 who were scanned at a site that 
was included in data set 1, we corrected for age and site effects using the beta weights 
calculated for subjects in data set 1 to calculate residuals as described above. For subjects in 
data set 2 who were scanned at new sites that were not included in data set 1 (all healthy 
controls), we used multiple linear regression to estimate beta weights for these new sites. 
Next, the classifier for one depression biotype was tested on each subject by using the two-
step procedure for cluster/biotype assignment described above (‘Assigning left-out subjects 
to clusters’). The overall accuracy rates and accuracies by cluster are reported in Figure 3i. 
To better understand the potential for further improvements in classifier performance in 
future, prospective data sets, we also calculated accuracy rates separately after implementing 
stricter data quality controls and by treating subjects with ambiguous classification outcomes 
as equivocal test results, as is common practice for biomarkers in other areas of medicine. 
These calculations excluded subjects with <300 s of data after censoring, motivated by 
reports that the stability of low-frequency BOLD signal-correlation estimates is higher for 
longer-duration scans;69 subjects with FD motion estimates exceeding 0.18 mm, i.e., the 95th 
percentile in our training set, motivated by our finding in Supplementary Figure 1 that 
classification rates in cross-validation (i.e., in data set 1) were slightly lower in the 5% of 
subjects with the highest levels of motion (χ2 = 5.096, P = 0.024); and the 10% of subjects 
with the lowest absolute SVM classification scores, i.e., equivocal classification outcomes. 
The results of these analyses are depicted in the cross-hatched bars in Figures 3i and 4j.
We also tested whether cluster assignments were stable over time, reasoning that if these 
clusters represent biologically meaningful depression subtypes, then a patient diagnosed 
with one of these subtypes should be diagnosed with the same subtype when re-tested at a 
later date. To assess this, we tested for reproducibility in a subset of subjects (n = 48) who 
were re-scanned 4–6 weeks after the initial scan and remained actively depressed (meeting 
DSM-IV criteria for a major depressive episode). As above, each subject was assigned to a 
cluster using the two-step procedure for biotype assignment described above (‘Assigning 
left-out subjects to clusters’), and we assessed the stability of cluster assignments across 
Drysdale et al.
Page 18
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 scans (Fig. 3h). A chi-squared test was used to assess the statistical significance of the 
longitudinal-stability results.
Clinical-data analysis
To assess whether biotypes of depression defined by unique patterns of resting state 
functional connectivity were associated with specific clinical profiles (Fig. 2f), we used 
Kruskal-Wallis analysis of variance to test for biotype differences in the severity of 
depressive symptoms in the cluster-discovery set (n = 220), as indexed by the HAMD. The 
six symptoms reported in Figure 2f showed the largest main effects of biotype (see 
Supplementary Fig. 4a for results for all 17 HAMD items). In Supplementary Figure 4c, we 
also tested for differences in these same six measures in clinical data acquired from subjects 
that were not included in the clustering analysis (n = 92).
In Figure 2c, we tested whether abnormal connectivity features that were shared across all 
four biotypes predicted the severity of ‘core’ symptoms that were present in almost all 
patients, regardless of biotype. We found that of the 17 symptoms quantified by the HAMD, 
three were present in almost all patients with depression (>90%); these included depressed 
mood (“feelings of sadness, hopelessness, helplessness”, 97.1%), anhedonia (96.7%) and 
anergia or fatigue (93.9%). We used principal-components analysis to define a low-
dimensional representation of these shared, abnormal connectivity features and correlated 
the first component with severity scores for these three symptoms. The results are depicted 
in quartile plots in Figure 2c.
Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation and related analyses
In Figure 4, we tested whether depression biotypes defined by unique patterns of abnormal 
functionally connectivity were differentially responsive to rTMS in a subset of subjects (n = 
154 in total) who received a course of excitatory repetitive TMS (10 Hz or intermittent theta 
burst stimulation) targeting the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex, beginning the week after their 
fMRI scan. The left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is the most common target for stimulation 
in rTMS clinical trials48, but recent studies have demonstrated efficacy for the dorsomedial 
prefrontal cortical (DMPFC) target used here13,70. Of note, DMPFC was among the most 
important neuroanatomical areas differentiating the four biotypes in Figure 2d, which 
suggested to us that biotype differences in dysfunctional connectivity at the DMPFC target 
site may give rise to differing treatment outcomes.
The treatment parameters and scanning parameters for this sample have been previously 
described in detail elsewhere13,71. To summarize, all subjects received five sessions of TMS 
per week for 4–6 weeks (20–30 sessions total), delivered using a MagPro R30 rTMS device 
(MagVenture, Farum, Denmark) and a Cool-DB80 stimulation coil. For subjects who 
received 10-Hz stimulation (n = 86), each session included 3,000 pulses per hemisphere, 
delivered to the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex at 120% of resting motor threshold at a 
frequency of 10 Hz and with a duty cycle of 5 s on and 10 s off, for a total of 3,000 pulses in 
60 trains per hemisphere per session (6,000 pulses total). For subjects who received 
intermittent theta burst stimulation (n = 68), each session included 600 pulses per 
hemisphere, delivered to the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex, at 120% of resting motor 
Drysdale et al.
Page 19
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 threshold, in 50 Hz triplet bursts, five bursts per second, with a duty cycle of 2 s on and 8 s 
off, for a total of 600 pulses in 20 trains per hemisphere per session (1,200 pulses total). To 
increase the tolerability of the DMPFC stimulation protocol, which has been associated with 
discomfort in some reports, all subjects also underwent a scalp-pain acclimatization 
protocol, as detailed in refs. 13,71. Depression severity was assessed using the 17-item 
HAMD before and after the course of treatment, and clinical improvements were measured 
in terms of changes in the total HAMD score.
To assess whether treatment response varied with depression biotype, subjects were 
classified as “treatment responders” or “treatment nonresponders”. Treatment responders 
were subjects who showed either a partial or full response to treatment, conventionally 
defined as a 25–50% or >50% reduction in HAMD scores, and “treatment nonresponders” 
were subjects who showed a <25% reduction in HAMD scores. A chi-squared test was used 
to assess whether treatment response rates varied with depression biotype, and Kruskal-
Wallis analysis of variance was used to test whether change in HAMD varied with 
depression biotype (Fig. 4a,b).
In addition, we tested whether functional connectivity features and biotype diagnosis were 
predictive of treatment response in a training and cross-validation sample (~80% or n = 124 
of the 154 patients; Fig. 4c–g) and then tested the best-performing classifier in an 
independent replication sample (~20%, n = 30 of the 154 patients). Using a procedure 
identical to the one described above, we used the primary functional parcellation, feature 
selection and SVM classification methods to iteratively train classifiers to prospectively 
identify TMS responders and nonresponders on the basis of connectivity features assessed 
before treatment, with leave-one-out cross validation (Fig. 4f). As above, the test subjects 
were left out of all aspects of feature selection and classifier training. We repeated this 
process using both connectivity features and biotype diagnosis, coded as four binary dummy 
variables (Fig. 4g). To understand whether clinical profiles were sufficient to predict 
treatment response without resting-state connectivity measures, we trained classifiers to 
differentiate responders and nonresponders solely on the basis of clinical data using an 
identical approach (Fig. 4h). Finally, we tested the best-performing classifier, which used 
both functional connectivity features and biotype diagnosis, in the independent replication 
sample (Fig. 4i).
Statistics
In Figure 1, canonical correlation analysis was used to define a low-dimensional 
representation of connectivity features (n = 220 patients from the “Toronto” and “Cornell 1” 
sites, Supplementary Table 1) that were predictive of two specific combinations of clinical 
symptoms (see above), and hierarchical clustering analysis (Fig. 1e–f) was used to delineate 
clusters of subjects in a two-dimensional space defined by these two canonical variates.
In Figure 2a–c, Wilcoxon rank-sum tests were used to test for differences in functional 
connectivity between all patients in the cluster-discovery set (n = 220) and all healthy 
controls (n = 378, Supplementary Table 3, training Data set), and Spearman rank 
correlations were used to test for associations with three clinical symptoms that were present 
in at least 90% of patients (n = 220). In Figure 2d,e, Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA (n = 220) was 
Drysdale et al.
Page 20
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 used to test for connectivity features that varied by biotype, and Wilcoxon rank-sum tests 
were used to assess whether these connectivity features were increased or decreased in 
depression (n = 220) as compared to controls (n = 378). In Figure 2f,g, Kruskal-Wallis 
ANOVA (n = 220) was used to test for differences in clinical-symptom severity by biotype.
In Figure 3b,g, classifier accuracy was assessed in leave-one-out cross validation in the full 
training data set (n = 333 patients, n = 378 healthy controls; Supplementary Table 3, training 
data set), with the test subject strictly excluded from all aspects of the clustering and 
classification optimization process, and statistical significance was assessed by establishing 
a null hypothesis distribution by randomly permuting diagnostic labels 500 times (see 
‘Classification’ and ‘Permutation testing’ sections above). In Figure 3h, the longitudinal 
stability of biotype assignments was assessed in a subset of subjects from the cluster-
discovery set (n = 50 patients with depression from “Cornell 1” site) who received a second 
fMRI scan obtained 4–5 weeks after the initial scan, and a chi-squared test (n = 50) was used 
to assess for a statistical dependence between biotype ID on scans 1 and 2. In Figure 3i, the 
most successful classifier identified in Figure 3b was tested in an independent replication 
data set (n = 125 patients, n = 352 healthy controls; Supplementary Table 3, replication data 
set). In Figures 3h and 3i, the scans used for testing longitudinal stability and for replicating 
classifier performance were not used in any aspect of the cluster-discovery process or 
classifier optimization.
In Figure 4a,b, chi-squared tests (a) and Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA (b) were used to test for 
biotype differences in response rates and improvements in depression severity (change in 
total HAMD), respectively, in patients after treatment with TMS (n = 124 patients with 
depression from training data set, “Toronto” site). In Figure 4c–e, Wilcoxon rank-sum tests 
were used to test for functional connectivity differences in TMS partial responders (n = 70) 
versus nonresponders (n = 54). In Figure 4f–i, classifier accuracy for differentiating 
responders (n = 70) and nonresponders (n = 54) was assessed by using leave-one-out cross 
validation and permutation testing, as in Figure 3, and the best-performing classifier was 
tested in an independent replication set (n = 30 patients with depression from replication 
data set, “Toronto” site) in Figure 4j.
In Figure 5a–c, Wilcoxon rank-sum tests were used to test for functional connectivity 
differences in patients with generalized anxiety disorder (n = 39 patients with GAD from 
“Cornell 1” and “Stanford 1” sites) versus healthy controls (n = 378, training data set; 
Supplementary Table 3), and a chi-squared test was used to test for significant overlap in 
depression- and GAD-related connectivity features (Fig. 5b). In Figure 5d and h, we applied 
the biotype classifiers developed in Figure 3 to the patients with GAD (n = 39) and to a 
separate cohort of patients diagnosed with schizophrenia (n = 41 patients with rsfMRI scans 
shared through the 1000 Functional Connectomes Project and the Center of Biomedical 
Research Excellence in Brain Function and Mental Illness (COBRE)). In Figure 5e–g, 
Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA was used to test for biotype differences in clinical symptom severity 
in the same patients with GAD (n = 39). Throughout, all P values are two-tailed, and all 
error bars are either s.e.m. or 95% confidence intervals, as defined in the corresponding 
figure legends.
Drysdale et al.
Page 21
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Data availability
Data from the following sites (Supplementary Tables 2 and 3) are publicly available for 
download through the 1000 Functional Connectomes Project International Data Sharing 
Initiative (http://fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org/index.html): NKI, Atlanta, Cambridge, 
Cleveland, ICBM, New York, COBRE, Beijing, Milwaukee and Leipzig. Data from the 
remaining sites are available at the discretion of the respective principal investigators, listed 
in Supplementary Table 2.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We wish to thank all investigators who volunteered to share MRI data via the 1000 Functional Connectomes Project 
(http://fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org/index.html), which was supported by grants from the NIMH, NIDA, Autism 
Speaks, NINDS and HHMI. Principal investigators from sites that provided data used here include: R.L. Buckner 
(Harvard–MGH), F.X. Castellanos (NYU), A.C. Evans (ICBM), B. Leventhal (Nathan Kline Institute), S.J. Li 
(Medical College of Wisconsin), M.J. Lowe (Cleveland Clinic), H.M. Mayberg (Emory), M.P. Milham (Nathan 
Kline Institute), V. Riedl (Munchen), C. Sorg (Munchen), A. Villringer (Leipzig) and Y.F. Zang (Beijing Normal 
University). We also thank the following investigators at the University of New Mexico who provided public access 
to MRI data from patients diagnosed with schizophrenia through the Center of Biomedical Research Excellence in 
Brain Function and Mental Illness (COBRE): C. Aine, V. Calhoun, J. Canive, F. Hanlon, R. Jung, K. Kiehl, A. 
Mayer, N. Perrone-Bizzozero, J. Stephen and C. Tesche, who were supported by NIH COBRE grant 
1P20RR021938-01A2. We also thank D. Fair (OHSU) and J. Power (NIMH, Weill Cornell) for providing 
comments on the data analysis, as well as members of the Liston Lab and Sackler Institute, for their helpful 
comments on the manuscript. H.S.M. was supported by a grant from the NIMH (P50 MH077083). C.L. was 
supported by grants from the Dana Foundation, Hartwell Foundation, International Mental Health Research 
Organization, Klingenstein-Simons Foundations, NARSAD and NIMH (R00 MH097822, R01 MH109685).
References
1. Insel TR, Cuthbert BN. Medicine. Brain disorders? Precisely. Science. 2015; 348:499–500. 
[PubMed: 25931539] 
2. Nestler EJ, Hyman SE. Animal models of neuropsychiatric disorders. Nat Neurosci. 2010; 13:1161–
1169. [PubMed: 20877280] 
3. Carroll BJ, et al. A specifc laboratory test for the diagnosis of melancholia. Standardization, 
validation, and clinical utility. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1981; 38:15–22. [PubMed: 7458567] 
4. Gold PW, Chrousos GP. Organization of the stress system and its dysregulation in melancholic and 
atypical depression: high vs low CRH/NE states. Mol Psychiatry. 2002; 7:254–275. [PubMed: 
11920153] 
5. Lewy AJ, Sack RL, Miller LS, Hoban TM. Antidepressant and circadian phase-shifting effects of 
light. Science. 1987; 235:352–354. [PubMed: 3798117] 
6. Clementz BA, et al. Identifcation of distinct psychosis biotypes using brain-based biomarkers. Am J 
Psychiatry. 2016; 173:373–384. [PubMed: 26651391] 
7. Hill SK, et al. Neuropsychological impairments in schizophrenia and psychotic bipolar disorder: 
fndings from the Bipolar-Schizophrenia Network on Intermediate Phenotypes (B-SNIP) study. Am J 
Psychiatry. 2013; 170:1275–1284. [PubMed: 23771174] 
8. Wager TD, et al. An fMRI-based neurologic signature of physical pain. N Engl J Med. 2013; 
368:1388–1397. [PubMed: 23574118] 
9. Liston C, et al. Default mode network mechanisms of transcranial magnetic stimulation in 
depression. Biol Psychiatry. 2014; 76:517–526. [PubMed: 24629537] 
Drysdale et al.
Page 22
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 10. Chen CH, et al. Brain imaging correlates of depressive symptom severity and predictors of 
symptom improvement after antidepressant treatment. Biol Psychiatry. 2007; 62:407–414. 
[PubMed: 17217921] 
11. Salvadore G, et al. Increased anterior cingulate cortical activity in response to fearful faces: a 
neurophysiological biomarker that predicts rapid antidepressant response to ketamine. Biol 
Psychiatry. 2009; 65:289–295. [PubMed: 18822408] 
12. Fox MD, Buckner RL, White MP, Greicius MD, Pascual-Leone A. Effcacy of transcranial 
magnetic stimulation targets for depression is related to intrinsic functional connectivity with the 
subgenual cingulate. Biol Psychiatry. 2012; 72:595–603. [PubMed: 22658708] 
13. Downar J, et al. Anhedonia and reward-circuit connectivity distinguish nonresponders from 
responders to dorsomedial prefrontal repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation in major 
depression. Biol Psychiatry. 2014; 76:176–185. [PubMed: 24388670] 
14. McGrath CL, et al. Toward a neuroimaging treatment selection biomarker for major depressive 
disorder. JAMA Psychiatry. 2013; 70:821–829. [PubMed: 23760393] 
15. Greicius MD, et al. Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally 
increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus. Biol Psychiatry. 2007; 
62:429–437. [PubMed: 17210143] 
16. Drevets WC, et al. Subgenual prefrontal cortex abnormalities in mood disorders. Nature. 1997; 
386:824–827. [PubMed: 9126739] 
17. Pezawas L, et al. 5-HTTLPR polymorphism impacts human cingulate-amygdala interactions: a 
genetic susceptibility mechanism for depression. Nat Neurosci. 2005; 8:828–834. [PubMed: 
15880108] 
18. Mayberg HS, et al. Deep brain stimulation for treatment-resistant depression. Neuron. 2005; 
45:651–660. [PubMed: 15748841] 
19. Sheline YI, et al. The default mode network and self-referential processes in depression. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA. 2009; 106:1942–1947. [PubMed: 19171889] 
20. Knutson B, Bhanji JP, Cooney RE, Atlas LY, Gotlib IH. Neural responses to monetary incentives in 
major depression. Biol Psychiatry. 2008; 63:686–692. [PubMed: 17916330] 
21. Cook SC, Wellman CL. Chronic stress alters dendritic morphology in rat medial prefrontal cortex. 
J Neurobiol. 2004; 60:236–248. [PubMed: 15266654] 
22. Liston C, et al. Stress-induced alterations in prefrontal cortical dendritic morphology predict 
selective impairments in perceptual attentional set-shifting. J Neurosci. 2006; 26:7870–7874. 
[PubMed: 16870732] 
23. Gourley SL, Swanson AM, Koleske AJ. Corticosteroid-induced neural remodeling predicts 
behavioral vulnerability and resilience. J Neurosci. 2013; 33:3107–3112. [PubMed: 23407965] 
24. Dias-Ferreira E, et al. Chronic stress causes frontostriatal reorganization and affects decision-
making. Science. 2009; 325:621–625. [PubMed: 19644122] 
25. Power JD, Barnes KA, Snyder AZ, Schlaggar BL, Petersen SE. Spurious but systematic 
correlations in functional connectivity MRI networks arise from subject motion. Neuroimage. 
2012; 59:2142–2154. [PubMed: 22019881] 
26. Satterthwaite TD, et al. Impact of in-scanner head motion on multiple measures of functional 
connectivity: relevance for studies of neurodevelopment in youth. Neuroimage. 2012; 60:623–632. 
[PubMed: 22233733] 
27. Van Dijk KRA, Sabuncu MR, Buckner RL. The infuence of head motion on intrinsic functional 
connectivity MRI. Neuroimage. 2012; 59:431–438. [PubMed: 21810475] 
28. Power JD, et al. Functional network organization of the human brain. Neuron. 2011; 72:665–678. 
[PubMed: 22099467] 
29. Ravasz E, Somera AL, Mongru DA, Oltvai ZN, Barabási AL. Hierarchical organization of 
modularity in metabolic networks. Science. 2002; 297:1551–1555. [PubMed: 12202830] 
30. Rihel J, et al. Zebrafsh behavioral profling links drugs to biological targets and rest/wake 
regulation. Science. 2010; 327:348–351. [PubMed: 20075256] 
31. Wager TD, Davidson ML, Hughes BL, Lindquist MA, Ochsner KN. Prefrontal-subcortical 
pathways mediating successful emotion regulation. Neuron. 2008; 59:1037–1050. [PubMed: 
18817740] 
Drysdale et al.
Page 23
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 32. Milad MR, Quirk GJ. Neurons in medial prefrontal cortex signal memory for fear extinction. 
Nature. 2002; 420:70–74. [PubMed: 12422216] 
33. Phelps EA, Delgado MR, Nearing KI, LeDoux JE. Extinction learning in humans: role of the 
amygdala and vmPFC. Neuron. 2004; 43:897–905. [PubMed: 15363399] 
34. Graybiel AM, Aosaki T, Flaherty AW, Kimura M. The basal ganglia and adaptive motor control. 
Science. 1994; 265:1826–1831. [PubMed: 8091209] 
35. Pizzagalli DA, et al. Reduced caudate and nucleus accumbens response to rewards in unmedicated 
individuals with major depressive disorder. Am J Psychiatry. 2009; 166:702–710. [PubMed: 
19411368] 
36. Ferenczi EA, et al. Prefrontal cortical regulation of brainwide circuit dynamics and reward-related 
behavior. Science. 2016; 351:aac9698. [PubMed: 26722001] 
37. Schultz W, Dayan P, Montague PR. A neural substrate of prediction and reward. Science. 1997; 
275:1593–1599. [PubMed: 9054347] 
38. Cardinal RN, Parkinson JA, Hall J, Everitt BJ. Emotion and motivation: the role of the amygdala, 
ventral striatum, and prefrontal cortex. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2002; 26:321–352. [PubMed: 
12034134] 
39. Gottfried JA, O’Doherty J, Dolan RJ. Encoding predictive reward value in human amygdala and 
orbitofrontal cortex. Science. 2003; 301:1104–1107. [PubMed: 12934011] 
40. Schultz W. Behavioral theories and the neurophysiology of reward. Annu Rev Psychol. 2006; 
57:87–115. [PubMed: 16318590] 
41. Rosa MJ, et al. Sparse network-based models for patient classifcation using fMRI. Neuroimage. 
2015; 105:493–506. [PubMed: 25463459] 
42. Craddock RC, Holtzheimer PE III, Hu XP, Mayberg HS. Disease state prediction from resting state 
functional connectivity. Magn Reson Med. 2009; 62:1619–1628. [PubMed: 19859933] 
43. Zeng LL, et al. Identifying major depression using whole-brain functional connectivity: a 
multivariate pattern analysis. Brain. 2012; 135:1498–1507. [PubMed: 22418737] 
44. Nielsen JA, et al. Multisite functional connectivity MRI classifcation of autism: ABIDE results. 
Front Hum Neurosci. 2013; 7:599. [PubMed: 24093016] 
45. Plitt M, Barnes KA, Martin A. Functional connectivity classifcation of autism identifes highly 
predictive brain features but falls short of biomarker standards. Neuroimage Clin. 2014; 7:359–
366. [PubMed: 25685703] 
46. Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., Friedman, J. The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, 
Inference, and Prediction. Springer-Verlag; 2009. 
47. George MS, et al. Daily repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) improves mood in 
depression. Neuroreport. 1995; 6:1853–1856. [PubMed: 8547583] 
48. Pascual-Leone A, Rubio B, Pallardó F, Catalá MD. Rapid-rate transcranial magnetic stimulation of 
left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in drug-resistant depression. Lancet. 1996; 348:233–237. 
[PubMed: 8684201] 
49. Huang YZ, Rothwell JC, Edwards MJ, Chen RS. Effect of physiological activity on an NMDA-
dependent form of cortical plasticity in human. Cereb Cortex. 2008; 18:563–570. [PubMed: 
17573373] 
50. Davidson RJ, Pizzagalli D, Nitschke JB, Putnam K. Depression: perspectives from affective 
neuroscience. Annu Rev Psychol. 2002; 53:545–574. [PubMed: 11752496] 
51. Oathes DJ, Patenaude B, Schatzberg AF, Etkin A. Neurobiological signatures of anxiety and 
depression in resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging. Biol Psychiatry. 2015; 77:385–
393. [PubMed: 25444162] 
52. Goodkind M, et al. Identifcation of a common neurobiological substrate for mental illness. JAMA 
Psychiatry. 2015; 72:305–315. [PubMed: 25651064] 
53. Baker JT, et al. Disruption of cortical association networks in schizophrenia and psychotic bipolar 
disorder. JAMA Psychiatry. 2014; 71:109–118. [PubMed: 24306091] 
54. Sullivan PF, Neale MC, Kendler KS. Genetic epidemiology of major depression: review and meta-
analysis. Am J Psychiatry. 2000; 157:1552–1562. [PubMed: 11007705] 
Drysdale et al.
Page 24
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 55. Ripke S, et al. A mega-analysis of genome-wide association studies for major depressive disorder. 
Mol Psychiatry. 2013; 18:497–511. [PubMed: 22472876] 
56. Pankevich DE, Altevogt BM, Dunlop J, Gage FH, Hyman SE. Improving and accelerating drug 
development for nervous system disorders. Neuron. 2014; 84:546–553. [PubMed: 25442933] 
57. Krishnan V, et al. Molecular adaptations underlying susceptibility and resistance to social defeat in 
brain reward regions. Cell. 2007; 131:391–404. [PubMed: 17956738] 
58. Chaudhury D, et al. Rapid regulation of depression-related behaviours by control of midbrain 
dopamine neurons. Nature. 2013; 493:532–536. [PubMed: 23235832] 
59. Tye KM, et al. Amygdala circuitry mediating reversible and bidirectional control of anxiety. 
Nature. 2011; 471:358–362. [PubMed: 21389985] 
60. Power JD, Barnes KA, Snyder AZ, Schlaggar BL, Petersen SE. Steps toward optimizing motion 
artifact removal in functional connectivity MRI; a reply to Carp. Neuroimage. 2013; 76:439–441. 
[PubMed: 22440651] 
61. Carp J. Optimizing the order of operations for movement scrubbing: Comment on Power et al. 
Neuroimage. 2013; 76:436–438. [PubMed: 22227884] 
62. Jo HJ, et al. Effective preprocessing procedures virtually eliminate distance-dependent motion 
artifacts in resting state fMRI. J Appl Math. 2013; 2013:935154.
63. Jo HJ, Saad ZS, Simmons WK, Milbury LA, Cox RW. Mapping sources of correlation in resting 
state FMRI, with artifact detection and removal. Neuroimage. 2010; 52:571–582. [PubMed: 
20420926] 
64. Power JD, Schlaggar BL, Petersen SE. Recent progress and outstanding issues in motion correction 
in resting state fMRI. Neuroimage. 2015; 105:536–551. [PubMed: 25462692] 
65. Desikan RS, et al. An automated labeling system for subdividing the human cerebral cortex on 
MRI scans into gyral based regions of interest. Neuroimage. 2006; 31:968–980. [PubMed: 
16530430] 
66. Shirer WR, Ryali S, Rykhlevskaia E, Menon V, Greicius MD. Decoding subject-driven cognitive 
states with whole-brain connectivity patterns. Cereb Cortex. 2012; 22:158–165. [PubMed: 
21616982] 
67. Chang CC, Lin CJ. LIBSVM: A library for support vector machines. ACM Trans Intell Syst 
Technol. 2011; 2:27.
68. Dosenbach NUF, et al. Prediction of individual brain maturity using fMRI. Science. 2010; 
329:1358–1361. [PubMed: 20829489] 
69. Van Dijk KRA, et al. Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, 
properties, and optimization. J Neurophysiol. 2010; 103:297–321. [PubMed: 19889849] 
70. Salomons TV, et al. Resting-state cortico-thalamic-striatal connectivity predicts response to 
dorsomedial prefrontal rTMS in major depressive disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2014; 
39:488–498. [PubMed: 24150516] 
71. Bakker N, et al. rTMS of the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex for major depression: safety, 
tolerability, effectiveness, and outcome predictors for 10 Hz versus intermittent theta-burst 
stimulation. Brain Stimul. 2015; 8:208–215. [PubMed: 25465290] 
Drysdale et al.
Page 25
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Canonical correlation analysis (CCA) and hierarchical clustering define four connectivity-
based biotypes of depression. (a) Data analysis schematic and workflow. After 
preprocessing, BOLD signal time series were extracted from 258 spherical regions of 
interest (ROIs) distributed across the cortex and subcortical structures. The schematics (top) 
show lateral (left) and medial (right) views of right-hemisphere ROIs projected onto an 
inflated cortical surface and colored by functional network (lower left). Left-hemisphere 
ROIs (data not shown) were similar. For each subject, whole-brain functional-connectivity 
Drysdale et al.
Page 26
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 matrices were generated by calculating pairwise BOLD signal correlations between all 
ROIs, as in this example of correlated signals (r2 = 0.88) for DLPFC (solid line) and PPC 
(dashed line) nodes of the FPTC network in a representative subject. (b) Whole-brain, 258 × 
258 functional-connectivity matrix averaged across all healthy controls (n = 378 subjects). z 
= Fischer transformed correlation coefficient. (c,d) CCA was used to define a low-
dimensional representation of depression-related connectivity features and identified an 
“anhedonia-related” component (canonical variate; c) and an “anxiety-related” component 
(d), represented by linear combinations of connectivity features that were correlated with 
linear combinations of symptoms. The scatterplots in c and d illustrate the correlation 
between low-dimensional connectivity scores and low-dimensional clinical scores for the 
anhedonia-related (r2 = 0.91) and anxiety-related components (r2 = 0.95), respectively (P < 
0.00001, n = 220 patients with depression). To the left of each scatterplot, clinical score 
loadings (i.e., the Pearson correlation coefficients between specific symptoms and the 
anhedonia- or anxiety-related clinical score (canonical variate)) are depicted for those 
symptoms with the strongest loadings (HAMD item #, indicated by numbers in superscript; 
for all loadings on all symptoms, see Supplementary Fig. 2). Below each scatterplot, 
connectivity score loadings are summarized by depicting the neuroanatomical distribution of 
the 25 ROIs (top 10%) that were most highly correlated with each component (summed 
across all significantly correlated connectivity features for a given ROI), colored by network, 
as in a. Projections to the medial wall map are for both left- and right-hemisphere ROIs. (e) 
Hierarchical clustering analysis. The height of each linkage in the dendrogram represents the 
distance between the clusters joined by that link. For reference, the dashed line denotes 20 
times the mean distance between pairs of subjects within a cluster. For analyses of additional 
cluster solutions and further discussion, see Supplementary Figure 3. (f) Scatterplot for four 
clusters of subjects along dimensions of anhedonia- and anxiety-related connectivity. Gray 
data points indicate subjects with ambiguous cluster identities (edge cases, cluster silhouette 
values < 0; n = 15, or 6.8% of all subjects). ACC, anterior cingulate cortex; amyg, amygdala; 
antPFC, anterior prefrontal cortex; a.u., arbitrary units; AV, auditory/visual networks; CBL, 
cerebellum; COTC, cingulo-opercular task-control network; D/VAN, dorsal/ventral attention 
network; DLPFC, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; DMN, default-mode network; DMPFC, 
dorsomedial prefrontal cortex; FPTC, frontoparietal task-control network; GP, globus 
pallidus; LIMB, limbic; MR, memory retrieval network; NAcc, nucleus accumbens; OFC, 
orbitofrontal cortex; PPC, posterior parietal cortex; precun, precuneus; sgACC, subgenual 
anterior cingulate cortex; SS1, primary somatosensory cortex; SN, salience network; SSM, 
somatosensory/motor networks; subC, subcortical; thal, thalamus; vHC, ventral 
hippocampus; VLPFC, ventrolateral prefrontal cortex; VMPFC, ventromedial prefrontal 
cortex; vStr, ventral striatum; n.s., not significant. See Supplementary Table 4 for MNI 
coordinates for ROIs in b and c.
Drysdale et al.
Page 27
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Connectivity biomarkers define depression biotypes with distinct clinical profiles. (a) 
Neuroanatomical distribution of the 25 ROIs (top 10%) with the most abnormal connectivity 
features shared by all four biotypes (summed across all connectivity features for a given 
ROI), identified using Wilcoxon rank–sum tests to test for connectivity features that were 
significantly abnormal in all four biotypes relative to healthy controls in data set 1 (n = 378). 
ROIs are colored by network, as in Figure 1a. (b) Heat maps depicting a pattern of abnormal 
connectivity (P < 0.05, false-discovery rate (FDR) corrected) shared by all four biotypes for 
Drysdale et al.
Page 28
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the top 50 most abnormal ROIs, colored on the basis of Wilcoxon rank–sum tests comparing 
patients and controls, as in a. Warm colors represent increase and cool colors decrease in 
depression as compared to controls. (c) Correlations (r = 0.72–0.82, ***P < 0.001, 
Spearman) between shared abnormal connectivity features (as indexed by the first principal 
component (PC) of the features depicted in b and the severity of the core depressive 
symptoms. Insets depict the prevalence of each symptom. Symptom severity measures are z-
scored with respect to controls and plotted as the mean for each quartile, ± s.e.m. (d) 
Neuroanatomical distribution of dysfunctional connectivity features that differed by biotype, 
as identified by Kruskal–Wallis analysis of variance (ANOVA) (P < 0.05, FDR corrected), 
summarized for the 50 ROIs (top ~20%) with the most biotype-specific connectivity features 
(i.e., the 50 ROIs with the largest test statistic summed across all connectivity features, 
showing cluster specificity at a threshold of P < 0.05, FDR corrected). Nodes (ROIs) are 
colored to indicate the biotype with the most abnormal connectivity features and scaled to 
indicate how many connectivity features exhibited significant effects of biotype. (e) Heat 
maps depicting biotype-specific patterns of abnormal connectivity for the functional nodes 
illustrated in d, plus selected limbic areas, colored as in b. Green boxes highlight 
corresponding areas in each matrix discussed in the main text. (f) Biotype-specific clinical 
profiles for the six depressive symptoms that varied most significantly by cluster (P < 0.005, 
Kruskal–Wallis ANOVA). Symptom severities (HAMD) are z-scored with respect to the 
mean for all patients in the cluster-discovery set. See Supplementary Figure 4 for all 17 
HAMD items and for replication in data from subjects left out of the cluster-discovery set. 
(g) Boxplot of biotype differences in overall depression severity (total HAMD score), in 
which boxes denote the median and interquartile range (IQR) and whiskers the minimum 
and maximum values. In f and g, asterisk (*) indicates significant difference from mean 
symptom severity rating for all patients (z = 0) at P < 0.05; error bars depict s.e.m.; n.s., not 
significant. Aud, auditory cortex; HC, hippocampus; lat PFC, lateral prefrontal cortex; lat 
OFC, lateral orbitofrontal cortex; MTG, middle temporal gyrus; PHC, parahippocampal 
cortex; PCC, posterior cingulate cortex; SSM, primary sensorimotor cortex (M1 or S1); 
STG, superior temporal gyrus; vis, visual cortex. Other abbreviations are as in Figure 1. See 
Supplementary Table 5 for Montreal Neurological Institute coordinates for ROIs in a and d.
Drysdale et al.
Page 29
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
Functional connectivity biomarkers for diagnosing neurophysiological biotypes of 
depression. (a) Data analysis schematic and workflow (Online Methods for additional 
details). (b) Optimization of diagnostic-classifier performance (accuracy) across the 
indicated combinations of methods for parcellation, clustering and classification. *P < 0.005, 
as estimated by permutation testing (Online Methods). Double asterisk (**) indicate the best 
performing protocol for parcellation, clustering and classification, and the focus of all 
subsequent analyses. (c–f) The neuroanatomical locations of the nodes with the most 
Drysdale et al.
Page 30
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 discriminating connectivity features are illustrated for each biotype for the four-cluster 
solution denoted by the double asterisk in b, colored and scaled by summing the results of 
Wilcoxon rank–sum tests of patients as compared to controls across all connectivity features 
associated with that node. Red represents increased and blue decreased functional 
connectivity in depression. (g) Sensitivity and specificity by biotype for the most successful 
classifiers identified in b (**). Error bars depict 95% confidence interval for the mean 
accuracy across all iterations of leave-one-out cross-validation. (h) Reproducibility of cluster 
assignments in a second fMRI scan (n = 50) obtained 4–5 weeks after the initial scan (χ2 = 
112.7, P < 0.00001). (i) Classifier performance in an independent, out-of-sample replication 
data set (n = 125 patients, 352 healthy controls). Cross-hatched bars depict classifier 
accuracy with more stringent data quality controls (Online Methods) and excluding 
equivocal classification outcomes (the 10% of subjects with the lowest absolute SVM 
classification scores). Error bars depict 95% confidence intervals.
Drysdale et al.
Page 31
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. 
Connectivity biomarkers predict differential antidepressant response to rTMS. (a) Differing 
response rates to repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) of the dorsomedial 
prefrontal cortex across patient biotypes (clusters) in n = 124 subjects. Response rate 
indicates percentage of subjects showing at least a partial clinical response to rTMS (χ2 = 
25.7, P = 1.1 × 10−5), defined conventionally as >25% reduction in symptom severity by 
HAMD. Full response rates (>50% reduction by HAMD, cross-hatched bars) also varied by 
biotype (χ2 = 22.9, P = 4.3 × 10−5). (b) Boxplot of percent improvement in depression 
Drysdale et al.
Page 32
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 severity by biotype (P = 1.79 × 10−6, Kruskal–Wallis ANOVA), in which boxes denote the 
median and interquartile range and whiskers the minimum and maximum up to 1.5 × the 
IQR, beyond which outliers are plotted individually. Percent improvement = total HAMD 
score before treatment – total HAMD score after treatment/total HAMD score before 
treatment. **P = 0.00001–0.002 (Mann–Whitney), indicating significantly increased versus 
biotypes 2–4; *P = 0.007 (Mann–Whitney), indicating significantly increased versus biotype 
4. (c) Functional connectivity differences in the DMPFC stimulation target in treatment 
responders versus nonresponders (Wilcoxon rank–sum tests, thresholded at P < 0.005). 
Warm colors represent increased and cool colors decreased functional connectivity in 
treatment responders as compared to nonresponders. The 12 ROIs depicted here were 
located within 3 cm of the putative DMPFC target site, estimated in a previously published 
report to be located at Talairach coordinates, x = 0, y = +30, z = +30 (ref.13). (d) The 
neuroanatomical distribution of the most discriminating connectivity features for the 
comparison of rTMS responders versus non-responders, summarized by illustrating the 
locations of the 25 (top 10%) most discriminating ROIs indexed by summing across all 
significantly discriminating connectivity features and colored by functional network as in 
Figure 1a. The red arrows denote the rTMS target site in the two (lower) medial panels. (e) 
Heat maps depicting differences in functional connectivity in patients who subsequently 
improved after receiving rTMS (n = 70), as compared to those who did not (n = 54). (f–i) 
Confusion matrices depicting the performance of classifiers trained to identify subsequent 
treatment responders on the basis of the most discriminating connectivity features (f), 
connectivity features plus biotype diagnosis (g), clinical symptoms alone (h) or connectivity 
features plus biotype diagnosis in an independent replication set (i, n = 30 patients with 
depression). NR, nonresponder; R, responder. (j) Summary of performance (overall 
accuracy) for classifiers in f–i. **significantly greater than clinical features alone (P < 0.001) 
and connectivity features alone (P = 0.003) by permutation testing; *P = 0.04 (significantly 
greater than clinical features alone by permutation testing). Cross-hatched bars depict 
classifier accuracy with more stringent data quality controls (Online Methods) and excluding 
equivocal classification outcomes (the 10% of subjects with the lowest absolute SVM 
classification scores). Error bars depict s.e.m. in a and 95% confidence intervals in j. All 
abbreviations as in Figures 1 and 2. See Supplementary Table 7 for MNI coordinates for 
ROIs in d.
Drysdale et al.
Page 33
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. 
Connectivity biomarkers of depression biotypes transcend diagnostic boundaries. (a) 
Abnormal connectivity features in patients with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD, n = 39) 
relative to healthy controls (n = 378). In this matrix depicting the 50 neuroanatomical nodes 
with the most significantly different connectivity features (Wilcoxon rank–sum tests, 
summed across all 258 features), elements in warm and cool colors depict connectivity 
features that are significantly increased or decreased in GAD, respectively. (b) 30.2% of 
connectivity features that were significantly abnormal in GAD (threshold of P < 0.001 
versus controls, Wilcoxon) were also abnormal in depression (χ2 = 5,457, P < 0.0001). (c) 
The neuroanatomical distribution of the most discriminating connectivity features for the 
comparison of GAD patients versus controls. The nodes are colored and scaled by summing 
across all significantly abnormal connectivity features associated with that node. Red 
represents increased and blue decreased functional connectivity in GAD. (d) Distribution of 
biotype diagnoses in patients with GAD. (e) No significant biotypes differences in anxiety 
symptom severity (P = 0.692; Kruskal–Wallis ANOVA). BAI, Beck anxiety inventory. (f,g) 
Significantly (P < 0.005, Kruskal–Wallis) elevated total depressive-symptom severity (f; 
BDI, Beck depression inventory) and anhedonia severity (g; BDI item 12) in GAD patients 
who tested positive for a depression biotype as compared to those who did not. *P < 0.01, †P 
Drysdale et al.
Page 34
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 = 0.064 in post hoc Mann–Whitney tests relative to “not depressed” group. (h) Distribution 
of biotype diagnoses in patients with schizophrenia (n = 41). Error bars depict s.e.m. 
throughout. All abbreviations as in Figures 1 and 2.
Drysdale et al.
Page 35
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
