 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 4 1
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
Introduction
Peripheral nerves convey to the central nervous system (CNS) 
versatile information about the body’s environment. An impor-
tant function of these nerves is informing the brain about ongo-
ing or imminent body damage, a sensation commonly known 
as pain. It is generally accepted that healthy peripheral nerves 
conduct action potentials (APs) without interruption from their 
respective sites of origin (i.e., at the peripheral nerve endings 
in the skin, viscera, muscle, etc.) to the superficial laminae of 
dorsal spinal cord where synaptic transmission first takes place. 
In the spinal cord, and subsequently in higher CNS centers, 
peripheral somatosensory signals are integrated and analyzed 
(1). It is also generally assumed that before entering the spinal 
cord peripheral nerve fibers receive no bona fide synaptic input 
and cell bodies of peripheral nerve fibers within the sensory 
ganglia are not necessary for AP propagation from the periph-
ery to the spinal cord (2). Yet sensory neuron somata may con-
tribute to pathological peripheral excitation in some chronic 
pain conditions (3–6).
Surprisingly, cell bodies of sensory neurons (particularly 
those that specifically respond to painful stimuli, the nocicep-
tors) express multiple receptors for major neurotransmitters 
such as acetylcholine, glutamate, and GABA (7–10). There is 
currently no coherent theory for (a) why these receptors are 
present in sensory neuron somata; (b) what (if any) are the 
source(s) of neurotransmitters that activate these receptors; 
or (c) what physiological role activation of these receptors may 
play in sensory signaling. Particularly, dorsal root ganglion 
(DRG) neuron cell bodies express sizable GABAA Cl– currents 
(11–15). Yet the common conception is that there are no local 
sources of GABA to activate these receptors (16) and, thus, 
somatic GABAA receptors are perhaps a by-product of recep-
tor trafficking to the presynaptic terminals in the spinal cord 
where these mediate inhibitory “primary afferent depolariza-
tion” (17–19). Here we describe a fully functional local GABA-
ergic transmission within the DRG. We explore its role in acute 
and chronic nociceptive transduction and also its potential as a 
therapeutic target for chronic pain treatment.
Results
Somatic GABA release in DRG. DRG neuron cell bodies respond 
to GABAA receptor agonists with sizable currents (11–15). In addi-
tion, it was recently demonstrated that nociceptive DRG neurons 
can produce GABA and release it from peripheral nerve terminals 
(9); but is there a physiological GABAergic transmission within 
the DRG? To start answering this question, we first tested whether 
The integration of somatosensory information is generally assumed to be a function of the central nervous system (CNS). 
Here we describe fully functional GABAergic communication within rodent peripheral sensory ganglia and show that it can 
modulate transmission of pain-related signals from the peripheral sensory nerves to the CNS. We found that sensory neurons 
express major proteins necessary for GABA synthesis and release and that sensory neurons released GABA in response to 
depolarization. In vivo focal infusion of GABA or GABA reuptake inhibitor to sensory ganglia dramatically reduced acute 
peripherally induced nociception and alleviated neuropathic and inflammatory pain. In addition, focal application of GABA 
receptor antagonists to sensory ganglia triggered or exacerbated peripherally induced nociception. We also demonstrated 
that chemogenetic or optogenetic depolarization of GABAergic dorsal root ganglion neurons in vivo reduced acute and 
chronic peripherally induced nociception. Mechanistically, GABA depolarized the majority of sensory neuron somata, yet 
produced a net inhibitory effect on the nociceptive transmission due to the filtering effect at nociceptive fiber T-junctions. Our 
findings indicate that peripheral somatosensory ganglia represent a hitherto underappreciated site of somatosensory signal 
integration and offer a potential target for therapeutic intervention.
Local GABAergic signaling within sensory ganglia 
controls peripheral nociceptive transmission
Xiaona Du,1 Han Hao,1 Yuehui Yang,1 Sha Huang,1 Caixue Wang,1 Sylvain Gigout,2 Rosmaliza Ramli,2,3 Xinmeng Li,1 Ewa Jaworska,2 
Ian Edwards,2 Jim Deuchars,2 Yuchio Yanagawa,4 Jinlong Qi,1 Bingcai Guan,1 David B. Jaffe,5 Hailin Zhang,1 and Nikita Gamper1,2
1Department of Pharmacology, Hebei Medical University, The Key Laboratory of Neural and Vascular Biology, Ministry of Education, China; The Key Laboratory of New Drug Pharmacology and Toxicology, 
Hebei Province; Shijiazhuang, China. 2Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom. 3School of Dental Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kelantan, Malaysia. 4Department 
of Genetic and Behavioral Neuroscience, Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine and Japan Science and Technology Agency, CREST, Maebashi, Japan. 5Department of Biology, UTSA Neurosciences 
Institute, University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, USA.
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
License: This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Inter-
national License. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
Submitted: January 29, 2016; Accepted: February 2, 2017.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2017;127(5):1741–1756. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI86812.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 4 2
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
Figure 1. Stimulus-induced release of GABA from DRG neurons. (A–E) “Sniffing patch” experiments. (A) Coculture of DRG neurons with HEK293 cells 
transiently cotransfected with α1, β2, and γ2 GABAA subunits and GFP (HEKGABAA cells). (B) An example of recording from the GFP-positive HEKGABAA cell jux-
taposed to a small-diameter rat DRG neuron (as shown in A). Timing of GABA (200 μM) and capsaicin (CAP, 1 μM) applications is indicated by the arrows. 
(C) A similar experiment but with HEKGABAA monoculture (no DRG neurons present). (D) A recording from a nontransfected HEK293 (HEKcontrol) cell in close 
apposition to a small DRG neuron. (E) Mechanical stimulation of DRG neuron in HEKGABAA-DRG coculture did not activate inward current in HEKGABAA cell. (F) 
Summary of the experiments shown in B–E; number of responsive cells from the total number of recordings is indicated within/above each bar. (G) Sum-
mary of experiments shown in E; “Mechano” indicates mechanical stimulation of DRG neuron adjacent to the “sniffing” HEKGABAA cell. *Significant differ-
ence from baseline at P < 0.05 (1-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction). (H–L) HPLC analyses. (H) Release of GABA from the dissociated DRG cultures in 
response to various stimuli (as indicated). (I) Similar to H but acutely extracted, non-dissociated DRGs were used. Asterisks indicate significant difference 
from basal release: *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 (1-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction). Number of experiments is indicated within each bar. 
(J–L) Effects of the synaptic transmission inhibitors concanamycin A (0.5 μM; J) and tetanus toxin (10 μg/ml; K), as well as the GAT1 blocker NO711 (200 μM; 
L), on the basal and high-extracellular-K+-induced GABA release from acutely extracted whole DRGs. Asterisks indicate significant difference from basal 
release: *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001; number symbols indicate significant difference from high-K+-induced release: #P < 0.05, ##P < 0.01, ###P < 0.001 
(1-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction). Number of experiments is indicated within each bar. 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 4 3
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
scription PCR (RT-PCR) detection of transcripts encoding proteins 
involved in GABAergic transmission from the acutely extracted 
whole DRG and spinal cord samples and from 48-hour DRG 
cultures. Multiple α, β, and γ subunits of GABAA receptors were 
detected, with particularly strong expression of α1–2 and γ1–2 sub-
units, in good agreement with previous literature (14, 24). GABAB1 
and GABAB2 subunits of GABAB receptors were also expressed. We 
also detected the following transcripts: (a) the glutamate decar-
boxylase isoforms Gad65 and Gad67 (which decarboxylate gluta-
mate to produce GABA); (b) the vesicular GABA transporter Vgat 
(which packs GABA into vesicles); and (c) the plasma membrane 
GABA transporters Gat1–3 (which remove released GABA from 
the extracellular space). Gad65 and Gad67, Gat1–3, and Vgat were 
detected in the acute DRG at somewhat lower but comparable lev-
els relative to those found in the spinal cord. Among GAT subunits, 
GAT1 showed the strongest expression.
Since whole-DRG tissue or cultures contain non-neuronal 
cells, we tested whether we could detect expression of GABA-
related transcripts in the individual neurons using single-cell RT-
PCR. Indeed that was the case; Gad65, Gad67, and Vgat mRNA 
was detected in approximately 8%–9% of neurons, while Gat1 was 
detected in a larger subpopulation (48%) of DRG neurons (Figure 
2C and Supplemental Table 1; supplemental material available 
online with this article; https:/
/doi.org/10.1172/JCI86812DS1). It 
has to be pointed out that, because of the high rate of false nega-
tives in single-cell RNA analyses (25), the proportions of cells 
identified as positive for a given transcript in Supplemental Table 
1 are likely underestimated.
We then used GAD67-GFP knock-in mice (26) and immu-
nohistochemistry to characterize the GABA-producing DRG 
neurons. We found cytosolic expression of the reporter (GFP) in 
many DRG neurons of all sizes, although expression in larger- 
diameter neurons was more frequent (Figure 2, D–H). There 
was partial overlap between expression of GFP and presence 
of such markers of sensory neuron subtypes as TRPV1 (poly-
modal nociceptors; Figure 2D), IB4 (nonpeptidergic nocicep-
tors; Figure 2E), and more so with neurofilament 200 (NF200, 
myelinated fibers; Figure 2F). There was a very good correla-
tion between GAD67 (GFP) expression and that of VGAT (Fig-
ure 2G). Finally, DRG neurons were abundantly labeled by anti-
SV2 antibody with a characteristic punctate staining suggesting 
vesicular localization of SV2 (Figure 2H); most SV2-positive 
neurons also expressed GAD67.
We also analyzed expression of VGAT in rat DRG (Figure 
3 and Supplemental Table 2). Similarly to GFP in GAD67-GFP 
knock-in mice, VGAT expression was found in neurons of all siz-
es but was twice as frequent in larger-diameter neurons as com-
pared with small ones (Supplemental Table 2). However, since 
there are more small-diameter neurons than larger ones in DRG 
(27), the total number of VGAT-positive small and large neurons 
was comparable (Supplemental Table 2). Again, VGAT immu-
nofluorescence was found in some TRPV1- and IB4- 
positive 
neurons (Figure 3, A and B) but was more often found in larger, 
NF200- and TrkC-positive neurons (Figure 3, C and D). There 
was again a good colocalization of VGAT with SV2 (Figure 3E). 
Importantly, VGAT immunofluorescence was absent in satel-
lite glia (as confirmed with the glial marker S100b; Figure 3F). 
 
DRG neuron somata can release GABA. First, rat DRG neurons 
were cocultured with HEK293 cells transiently cotransfected with 
α1, β2, and γ2 GABAA subunits and GFP (HEKGABAA cells). We then 
performed “sniffing” patch-clamp recordings from HEKGABAA cells 
juxtaposed to small-diameter DRG neurons (Figure 1A). Robust 
inward currents were recorded from HEKGABAA cells in response 
to 200 μM GABA (Figure 1, B–G). Application of the TRPV1 ago-
nist capsaicin (CAP; 1 μM) produced inward currents in 7 of 10 
 
HEKGABAA cells; these currents were similar in kinetics (although 
smaller in amplitude) to GABA-induced currents (Figure 1, B and 
F). HEKGABAA cells in monoculture (without DRG coculture) or non-
transfected HEK cells (HEKcontrol) juxtaposed to small- 
diameter 
DRG neurons in HEKcontrol-DRG coculture never responded to 
CAP (Figure 1, C, D, and F). We were unable to elicit a response in 
HEKGABAA cells when we mechanically stimulated juxtaposed DRG 
neurons of any size (Figure 1, E and G), although this could have 
been an issue of experimental setup. These data strongly suggest 
that some small-diameter, CAP-sensitive (presumed nociceptive) 
DRG neurons are capable of releasing GABA when stimulated.
Next, we used HPLC to detect release of GABA into the 
extracellular space in either dissociated DRG cultures or acutely 
extracted whole-DRG preparation. Depolarization of DRG cul-
tures with elevated extracellular K+, CAP, bradykinin, or ATP 
produced a robust release of GABA into the extracellular space 
(Figure 1H); similar results were obtained with freshly extracted 
whole DRGs (Figure 1I). In the CNS GABA is generally released 
via classical synaptic mechanisms, but can also be released via 
reversal of the GABA transporter GAT1 (20). The inhibitors of 
synaptic transmission concanamycin A (0.5 μM) and tetanus toxin 
(10 μg/ml) both inhibited high-K+-induced GABA release almost 
completely (Figure 1, J and K, respectively). The GAT1 inhibitor 
NO711 (200 μM) produced a significant increase of tonic GABA 
release (Figure 1L), consistent with inhibited GABA uptake. Block-
ing GAT1 partially reduced (but did not abolish) high-K+-induced 
release of GABA (Figure 1L); in the presence of NO711 high K+ 
induced a statistically significant increase in extracellular GABA 
compared with basal levels. Thus, in combination with inhibited 
GABA uptake, the net effect of NO711 must result in increased 
extracellular GABA levels. Collectively, these data suggest that 
both vesicular and nonvesicular mechanisms contribute to the 
depolarization-induced GABA release in DRGs, with the former 
mechanism being predominant.
DRG neuron somata express key components of functional 
GABAergic transmission. In order to be able to release neu-
rotransmitters, DRG neuron somata must express appropriate 
machinery. Electron microscopy of rat DRG sections revealed 
abundant presence of vesicles in DRG somata (Figure 2A); some 
of the vesicles expressed the synaptic vesicle marker SV2 (ref. 
21; and Figure 2A, bottom left). Interestingly, some areas of 
somatic plasma membrane were also clearly labeled by the anti-
SV2 antibody, suggesting vesicle fusion and release sites (22). 
Moreover, some of the vesicles were labeled with anti-GABA 
antibody (Figure 2A, bottom right).
While abundant expression of functional GABAA and GABAB 
receptors in DRG is well known (9, 14, 23), the presence of other 
components of GABAergic transmission in DRG is less well docu-
mented. Figure 2B shows the results of quantitative reverse tran-
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 4 4
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
Stimulation of GABA system in DRG reduces acute pain trans-
duction in vivo. Experiments reported hitherto established that 
DRG neurons can produce and release GABA, but is there a 
physiological role for such somatic/perisomatic release? We 
Two distinct VGAT antibodies stained the exact same subpopu-
lation of neurons (Figure 3G), and omission of primary antibod-
ies resulted in almost complete absence of immunofluorescence 
(Figure 3H), indicating that staining was specific.
Figure 2. DRG neuron somata are equipped for GABAergic transmission. (A) Electron micrographs of DRG sections. Top panels depict examples of somatic 
ultrastructure revealing presence of somatic vesicles. In the top right panel a vesicle (closed arrow) can be seen apparently fusing with the membrane 
(open arrow). Bottom, left: SV2 immunoreactive vesicles (example indicated by closed arrow), located adjacent to and apparently fusing with the DRG 
neuron membrane (open arrow), which is also SV2-positive. Bottom, right: GABA immunoreactivity in vesicles (closed arrow). Open arrow indicates the DRG 
neuronal membrane. (B) Quantitative RT-PCR detection of transcripts encoding key proteins of GABAergic transmission in acutely extracted whole DRG 
and spinal cord tissue samples and in dissociated DRG neuron culture (48 hours), as indicated. Bands correspond to (as labeled) α1–3 and α5, β1–3, and γ1–3 
subunits of GABAA receptors; Gat1–3 GABA transporters; vesicular GABA transporter Vgat; GABAB receptors 1 and 2; and glutamate decarboxylases Gad65 
and Gad67. Also detected is GAPDH. (C) Examples of single-cell RT-PCR detection of Gapdh, Gad65, Gad67, Vgat, Gat1, and Trpv1 from individual dissociated 
DRG neurons. Quantification is given in Supplemental Table 1. (D–H) Analysis of GAD67 expression in DRG sections from GAD67-GFP knock-in mice. Shown is 
the colabeling of GFP with sensory neuron markers TRPV1 (D), IB4 (E), and NF200 (F), as well as with VGAT (G) and SV2 (H). In D–G, arrows indicate examples 
of neurons expressing both GFP and the corresponding marker. (I) GFP labeling in WT mice. (J) Secondary antibody control for DRG section from GAD67-GFP 
knock-in mice. In D–J, micrographs within each panel are of the same magnification; scale bars are labeled on the left image in each panel.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 4 5
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
ure 4B) or the GABAA agonist muscimol (200 μM; 5 μl; Figure 4C) 
to the DRG strongly suppressed nocifensive behavior induced by 
the hind-paw BK injection (200 μM; 50 μl). Focal DRG applica-
tion of saline produced no effect. When BK was injected to the paw 
contralateral to the cannula implant, neither GABA nor muscimol 
reduced the BK-induced nocifensive behavior (Figure 4, B and 
C). Absence of contralateral effects provides additional evidence 
against a spillover from the site of DRG injection to the spinal cord. 
Nocifensive behavior induced by hind-paw injection of CAP (20 
μM; 50 μl) was also significantly reduced by the DRG application 
of GABA (Figure 4D). Focal DRG infusion of the GABAB receptor 
agonist baclofen (200 μM; 5 μl; Figure 4E) also produced marked 
reduction of the BK-induced nocifensive behavior, although the 
effect was significantly less pronounced than that of GABA.
DRG neurons use glutamate as the main excitatory neu-
rotransmitter at their central terminals, but these neurons also 
express a variety of glutamate receptors (8); thus we tested the 
effect of focal DRG application of glutamate (200 μM; 5 μl). Strik-
ingly, glutamate infusion also strongly attenuated BK-induced 
pain (Figure 4E). However, when the same amount of glutamate 
was injected intrathecally (such injections would affect both 
spinal cord and DRG), it produced strong bilateral nocifensive 
behavior (flinching and biting the hind paws) even without hind-
tested the effect of direct focal GABA infusion into the DRG on 
pain-related behavior in rats (see Methods). In this approach, 
a cannula that allows delivery of small volumes of solutions 
directly to the selected spinal ganglion is inserted into a hole 
drilled through the transverse process of the corresponding 
vertebra (ref. 28 and Figure 4A). Since exogenous GABA would 
have strong inhibitory action on nociceptive transmission in the 
spinal cord, we first verified that this injection technique deliv-
ers drugs specifically to the DRG. We injected a fluorescent dye, 
CFSE (20 μM; 5 μl), through the cannula and tested the label-
ing of DRG and the proximal spinal cord. Confocal fluorescent 
imaging revealed a complete lack of staining in the spinal cord, 
while there was abundant fluorescence in the DRG (Figure 4A, 
bottom, and Supplemental Figure 1). We then investigated how 
focal DRG application of drugs targeting the GABA system 
would affect nociceptive transmission.
In the first series of experiments we induced painful sensation 
in a hind paw of a rat by a plantar injection of the noxious inflam-
matory peptide bradykinin (BK) or the TRPV1 agonist capsaicin 
(CAP) and tested the effect of focal DRG preapplication of GABA 
receptor agonists and antagonists, or a GABA uptake blocker, on 
the BK/CAP-induced nocifensive behavior (licking, biting, or 
flinching the paw). Focal application of GABA (200 μM; 5 μl; Fig-
Figure 3. Expression of VGAT in rat DRG. (A–G) Shown is the colabeling of VGAT with sensory neuron markers TRPV1 (A), IB4 (B), NF200 (C), and TrkC 
(D) as well as with SV2 (E) and satellite glia marker S100b (F). In A–E, arrows indicate examples of neurons expressing both VGAT and the corresponding 
marker. (G) Costaining of the same DRG section with 2 different antibodies raised in rabbit (VGATr) and guinea pig (VGATgp). (H) Control for secondary 
antibodies used. Micrographs within each panel are of the same magnification; scale bars are labeled on the left image in each panel. Somatic diameter 
distribution of VGAT-positive DRG neurons is given in Supplemental Table 2.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 4 6
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
paw injection of a proalgesic compound (Figure 4E). These clearly 
opposite effects of glutamate applied to DRG (analgesia) or spinal 
cord/DRG (nociception) suggested that glutamate applied via the 
DRG cannula does not reach the spinal cord. A likely explanation 
for the unexpected inhibitory action of glutamate in DRG will be 
discussed along with the computer modeling data below.
Focal DRG application of the GAT1 inhibitor NO711 (200 
μM; 5 μl; Figure 4F) also significantly attenuated the BK-induced 
nocifensive behavior, suggesting a role of endogenous GABA in 
nociceptive transmission; the result is also in agreement with an 
increase of tonic DRG GABA levels induced by NO711 (Figure 
1H). Another intriguing finding was that focal application of the 
Figure 4. Focal application of GABA to DRG reduces pain in vivo. (A) DRG cannula implant. Top inset shows schematic of the procedure; colors indicate 
route of drug administration. Images on the bottom are bright-field (left) and fluorescent (right) micrographs of DRG (top) and proximal spinal cord (bot-
tom) after the focal application of a fluorescent dye, CFSE (20 μM in 5 ml), via the DRG cannula. All images were taken at the same magnification (as 
indicated by the scale bars). (B) Focal DRG application of GABA (200 μM, 5 μl) via DRG cannula strongly reduced pain produced by hind-paw injection of 
bradykinin (BK, 200 μM, 50 μl). (C) Similar to B but the specific GABAA receptor agonist muscimol (musc, 200 μM, 5 μl) was applied. (D) Focal DRG applica-
tion of GABA (200 μM, 5 μl) via DRG cannula reduced pain produced by hind-paw injection of capsaicin (CAP, 20 μM, 50 μl). (E) Comparison of effects of 
focal DRG application of GABA, muscimol, baclofen, and glutamate (GLUT) (all at 200 μM, 5 μl) on the BK-induced nocifensive behavior. Black bars depict 
effect of intrathecal injection of glutamate (200 μM, 10 μl) and a vehicle control. (F) Focal DRG application of GAT1 inhibitor NO711 (200 μM, 5 μl) signifi-
cantly reduced pain produced by hind-paw injection of BK. (G) Focal DRG application of GABAA receptor inhibitors bicuculline (BIC, 200 μM, 5 μl) and gaba-
zine (200 μM, 5 μl) and GABAB receptor inhibitor CGP35348 (CGP, 200 μM, 5 μl) exacerbated nocifensive behavior produced by hind-paw BK injection. (H) In 
the absence of plantar injection of BK, focal DRG application of bicuculline and gabazine resulted in distress in the paw and nocifensive behavior similar to 
that induced by plantar injection of BK. In B–H the number of experiments is indicated within or above each bar; asterisks indicate significant difference 
from the appropriate control: *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 (Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA with Mann-Whitney test for between-group comparison).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 4 7
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
GABAA antagonists bicuculline (200 μM; 5 μl) and gabazine (200 
μM; 5 μl) and, to a lesser extent, the GABAB receptor antagonist 
CGP35348 (200 μM; 5 μl) exacerbated pain produced by the plan-
tar injection of BK (Figure 4G). Even without BK injection, focally 
applied bicuculline and gabazine generated obvious flinching and 
biting of the ipsilateral paw (Figure 4H), suggesting that there 
may indeed be tonic GABA-mediated inhibition within the DRG 
that, when removed, results in spurious peripheral nerve activity.
We also analyzed concentration dependence of the behavioral 
effects of GABA, muscimol, bicuculline, and NO711 (Supplemen-
tal Figure 2, A–E). All the compounds displayed concentration 
dependence within the used concentration range; prominent anal-
gesic effects of GABA and muscimol were evident at 20 μM.
Since rat hind paws are innervated by L4 as well as L5 DRGs, 
we also tested the effect of GABA applied through the cannula 
implanted to the L4 DRG (Supplemental Figure 2F). Focal applica-
tion of GABA to the L4 DRG also reduced BK-induced nocifensive 
behavior but was less efficacious as compared with the L5 injec-
tions. To further confirm the accuracy of DRG cannula injections, 
we measured GABA, NO711, and bicuculline levels in DRG and 
proximal spinal cord after the L5 DRG cannula injection using 
HPLC. The drugs were detected in the DRG but not in the spinal 
cord (Supplemental Figure 3).
Focal injection of GABA significantly decreased sensitivity of rats 
to thermal and mechanical stimuli as measured with the Hargreaves 
and von Frey tests. Thus, hind-paw withdrawal latency upon presen-
tation with radial heat (Supplemental Figure 4A) and the threshold 
for sensitivity to mechanical stimulation (Supplemental Figure 4B) 
were both increased. Bicuculline significantly increased sensitivity to 
both types of stimulation (Supplemental Figure 4, C and D).
Plantar paw injection of bicuculline (200 μM; 50 μl; Supple-
mental Figure 4E) was largely without an effect. Likewise, plantar 
injection of GABA (200 μM; 50 μl) did not produce noticeable acute 
effects (Supplemental Figure 4F) and failed to reduce BK-induced 
nocifensive behavior (Supplemental Figure 4G). The experiments 
with focal application of drugs to the spinal sensory ganglia in vivo 
established that, acting within the ganglion, exogenous or endog-
enous GABA can strongly suppress nociceptive transmission.
Since either endogenous release or exogenous GABA deliv-
ery to DRG reduced peripheral pain responses, we tested whether 
GABA application to DRG neurons reduces synaptic input to the 
spinal cord in vivo. We quantified the effect of focal DRG applica-
tion of GABA via the DRG cannula on the activation of spinal post-
synaptic neurons by the hind-paw injection of CAP using a neuronal 
activation marker, c-Fos (29). No nuclear c-Fos staining was seen in 
the spinal cord of naive animals (Supplemental Figure 5A). Hind-
paw injection of CAP (20 μM; 50 μl) induced robust nuclear c-Fos 
staining in dorsal horn ipsilateral to the injection site, especially in 
superficial laminae I–II (Supplemental Figure 5B); no contralateral 
staining was apparent (Supplemental Figure 5C). DRG application 
of GABA significantly reduced CAP-induced c-Fos expression in 
the ipsilateral dorsal horn (Supplemental Figure 5, A–F), suggesting 
that it indeed reduced excitatory input to the spinal cord.
Stimulation of GABA system in DRG alleviates chronic neuro-
pathic and inflammatory pain. We next tested whether targeting 
the GABAergic system in DRG can alleviate chronic pain. We used 
a chronic constriction injury (CCI) model of neuropathic pain and 
peripheral injection of CFA as a model of chronic inflammatory 
pain (see Methods); both models are widely used in pain research 
(30). In order to achieve prolonged local release of GABA or GABA 
mimetics into the DRG, we implanted osmotic minipumps in a 
manner similar to the DRG cannula implantation described above 
(see Methods, Supplemental Figure 6A). The pump slowly releases 
its content locally at the site of implantation at a speed of approxi-
mately 0.5 μl/h for approximately 14 days. In most experiments 
we installed minipumps filled either with saline or with a GABA 
modulator at the time of CCI surgery or CFA injection and moni-
tored animals’ sensitivity to the mechanical and thermal stimula-
tion for the next 14 days. As expected, in both CCI and CFA mod-
els a robust mechanical and thermal hyperalgesia was observed in 
rats receiving saline (Figure 5 and Supplemental Figure 6); there 
was slight spontaneous recovery of the thermal hyperalgesia over 
the last week of observation in the CFA model. Yet animals that 
were infused with GABA (Figure 5, A–D) or muscimol (Supple-
mental Figure 6, C–F) or with the GAT1 inhibitor NO711 (Figure 
5, E–H) were significantly less susceptible to both mechanical and 
thermal hyperalgesia in either of the models. Moreover, when a 
GABA-filled osmotic minipump was implanted on day 8 after the 
CCI injury, such a procedure rapidly and significantly attenuated 
mechanical hyperalgesia induced by the CCI (Supplemental Fig-
ure 6B). These results suggest that not only acute but also chronic 
pain can be attenuated by targeting of the GABA system in DRG; 
moreover, alleviation of chronic pain with NO711 suggests that 
endogenous GABA production/release mechanisms in DRG can 
be targeted for pain relief.
Chemo- or optogenetic depolarization of GABAergic DRG neu-
rons reduces pain transduction. Since DRG neurons express VGAT 
(Figures 2 And 3 and ref. 9), we used VGAT-IRES-Cre mice (31) to 
develop a chemogenetic approach for specific depolarization of 
GABAergic DRG neurons in vivo. In this mouse line Cre recom-
binase expression is directed to the VGAT-expressing neurons, 
without disrupting endogenous VGAT expression (31). DRG sec-
tions from the VGAT-Cre mice expressed Cre (Figure 6A), and a 
population of cultured DRG neurons (but not glia) from VGAT-
Cre mice was successfully transduced with AAV9 viruses coding 
for the mCherry-tagged FLEXed DREADD (designer receptor 
exclusively activated by designer drug; ref. 32) receptors coupled 
to Gq (hM3Gq; see Methods). DRG cultures from the WT litter-
mates were not transduced (Figure 6B). Application of the DRE-
ADD ligand clozapine-N-oxide (CNO) to DREADD-expressing 
DRG neurons reliably depolarized these by approximately 4–10 
mV while having no effect on the virus-treated neurons from WT 
mice (Figure 6, C and D). In 2 of 11 neurons CNO induced AP fir-
ing (see example in Figure 6C, bottom left), although the major-
ity of neurons did not fire.
Next, we injected Gq DREADD viruses into L4 DRG of VGAT-
Cre mice (as well as the WT littermates) to test whether CNO-
induced depolarization of VGAT-expressing (GABAergic) DRG 
neurons would affect nociceptive transmission in vivo. L4 DRG was 
chosen because, while in rats L4, L5, and L6 spinal nerves are major 
contributors to the sciatic nerve, in mice the contributing nerves are 
L3, L4, and L5 (33). mCherry fluorescence was readily detectable in 
DRG of virus-injected (see Methods) VGAT-Cre mice but not WT 
mice (Figure 6E). Injection of CNO (5 mg/kg i.p., 30 minutes before 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 4 8
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
repeatedly injected 30 minutes before each 
measurement. The antihyperalgesic effect of 
CNO peaked at the third day after CFA injec-
tion, after which point hyperalgesia recovered; 
perhaps this suggests gradual desensitization 
of the DREADD system in vivo.
In our DREADD experiments we were 
unable to deliver CNO to DRG directly, since 
the virus injection procedure required removal 
of both spinous and transverse processes of L4 
DRG (see Methods) and, therefore, a cannula 
or minipump could not be implanted. In order 
to deliver a depolarizing stimulus to DRG with 
high precision, we used VGAT-ChR2-EYFP 
mice (34), in which all VGAT-expressing 
neurons are expected to express channel-
rhodopsin-2. Consistent with VGAT immuno-
histochemistry (Figure 2) and the VGAT-Cre 
mouse experiments (Figure 6), a population of 
DRG neurons of various sizes expressed yel-
low fluorescent protein (YFP) (Supplemental 
Figure 7A). We then used the sniffing patch 
approach to test whether optical stimulation 
of DRG neurons dissociated from DRG of 
VGAT-ChR2-EYFP mice can trigger GABA 
release. Blue light (473 nm) stimulation of 
such DRG neurons cocultured with HEKGABAA 
cells induced detectable inward currents in 11 of 24 HEKGABAA 
cells juxtaposed to DRG neuron somata (Supplemental Figure 7, 
B and C). HEKGABAA cells in monoculture did not respond to blue 
light (Supplemental Figure 7, B and C). HEKGABAA cells cocultured 
with DRG neurons from the WT littermate control mice were also 
largely unresponsive to blue light, although in 4 of 18 neurons 
very small inward currents could be detected (though it was not 
statistically significant); these may have been produced by GABA 
released from heat-sensitive DRG neurons.
the test) slightly increased basal mechanical (but not thermal) sen-
sitivity of VGAT-Cre mice (Figure 6, F and G), as is expected from 
the depolarization of peripheral nerve terminals. Importantly, 
CNO preinjection (30 minutes) strongly suppressed nocifensive 
behavior induced by the plantar injection of BK (Figure 6H), sug-
gesting that depolarization of GABAergic neurons is indeed antino-
ciceptive. Furthermore, CNO injections significantly reduced both 
mechanical (Figure 6I) and thermal (Figure 6J) hyperalgesia in the 
CFA model of inflammatory pain. In these experiments CNO was 
Figure 5. Focal infusion of GABA or GABA reuptake 
inhibitor to DRG alleviates chronic pain in vivo. (A 
and B) Focal DRG application of GABA (200 μM, ~0.5 
μl/h) via osmotic minipump significantly allevi-
ated mechanical (A) and thermal (B) hyperalgesia 
produced by the plantar injection of CFA. (C and D) 
Similar to A and B but a chronic constriction injury 
(CCI) was applied to a sciatic nerve instead of CFA 
injection. (E–H) Similar to A and B but GAT1 inhibi-
tor NO711 (200 μM, ~0.5 μl/h) was applied via the 
minipump implant instead of GABA. In A–H, the 
CFA/CCI procedure and the minipump implantation 
were performed at the same time. Number symbols 
indicate significant difference between saline and 
drug data sets: #P < 0.05, ##P < 0.01, ###P < 0.001; 
asterisks indicate the difference between groups 
within the corresponding time point: *P < 0.05,  
**P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 (2-way ANOVA with 
Bonferroni correction for saline vs. drug comparison 
or 1-way ANOVA with Fisher LSD post hoc test for 
comparison between the groups). Number of experi-
ments is indicated as n in each panel.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 4 9
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
Figure 6. Chemogenetic depolarization 
of DRG neurons via designer Gq recep-
tors reduces peripherally induced pain. 
(A) Immunohistochemical detection of 
Cre in DRG section from the VGAT-Cre 
mice. (B) Expression of mCherry-tagged 
hM3Gq in cultured DRG neurons from 
the VGAT-Cre mice (and WT littermates) 
transduced with AAV9-DIO-hM3Dq 
DREADD virus. (C) Examples of record-
ings from hM3Dq-expressing DRG 
neurons depolarized by the application 
of 10 μM clozapine-N-oxide (CNO). (D) 
A scatter plot summary of experiments 
shown in C. ***Significant difference 
from the baseline (paired, 2-tailed t 
test). (E) Expression of hM3Dq in L4 
DRG of the VGAT-Cre mouse in vivo 
transduced with the AAV9-DIO-hM3Dq 
virus. (F and G) Effect of the i.p. injec-
tion of CNO (0.9% saline, 5 mg/kg) on 
the mechanical (F) and thermal (G) sen-
sitivity of VGAT-Cre mice injected with 
hM3Dq DREADD viruses into L4 DRG 
(compared with virus-injected WT litter-
mates). (H) CNO injection (i.p.) reduced 
nocifensive behavior (paw licking) of 
VGAT-Cre mice injected with hM3Dq 
DREADD viruses into L4 DRG (compared 
with virus-injected WT littermates). 
In F–H, asterisks indicate significant 
difference from the WT mice: *P < 0.05, 
***P < 0.001 (unpaired, 2-tailed t test); 
number of experiments is shown within 
the bars. (I and J) CNO injection (i.p.) 
reduced mechanical (I) and thermal (J) 
hyperalgesia in CFA model of inflam-
matory pain in VGAT-Cre mice injected 
with hM3Dq DREADD viruses into L4 
DRG (compared with virus-injected WT 
littermates). #Significant difference 
between VGAT-Cre and WT mice data 
sets. Asterisks indicate the difference 
between groups within the correspond-
ing time point: *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 
(2-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correc-
tion for VGAT-Cre vs. WT comparison 
or 1-way ANOVA with Fisher LSD post 
hoc test for comparison between the 
groups). The number of experiments is 
indicated as n in each panel.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 5 0
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
GABAA activation impedes propagation of APs through DRG: an 
electrophysiological and computational study. In contrast to adult 
CNS, where GABAA receptors hyperpolarize neurons (35), in 
somatosensory neurons GABAA (or other Cl– channels) induces 
depolarization (7, 12, 19, 36, 37) due to the relatively high intra-
cellular Cl– concentrations (38). Accordingly, GABA (200 μM) or 
the specific GABAA receptor agonist muscimol (10 μM) produced 
robust depolarization in the majority of cultured small-diameter 
DRG neurons (Figure 7, A and B). Likewise, in intracellular sharp 
electrode recordings from acute DRG slices, GABA and musci-
mol produced comparable responses (Figure 7, C and D; note that 
steady-state current amplitude is plotted in Figure 7D). Bicucul-
line (50 μM) completely abolished GABA-induced depolarization 
(Figure 7D), confirming that it is mediated by GABAA receptors. 
Similar responses in both cultured DRG neurons and neurons in 
acute DRG slices suggest that a high density of functional GABAA 
receptors in DRG neuron somata reflects their native phenotype.
Although neuronal membrane depolarization is usually asso-
ciated with increased excitability, a large GABAA conductance can 
also produce a shunting effect preventing AP generation (39). We 
investigated the effects of GABA on AP firing in small-diameter 
(presumed nociceptive) cultured DRG neurons using the gram-
icidin-perforated patch clamp (gramicidin pores are imperme-
able to Cl– [ref. 40]; therefore endogenous Cl– concentration is 
preserved). In the majority of neurons, firing in response to slow 
Next, we used VGAT-ChR2-EYFP mice with an optical fiber 
implanted through a cannula guide in a manner similar to the DRG 
cannula or minipump implants (see Methods and Supplemental Fig-
ure 7D); in this way DRG can be stimulated optically in vivo in freely 
moving mice with high spatial precision. First, we tested the effect 
of optical stimulation on the pain-related (nocifensive) behavior pro-
duced by plantar BK injection. Ipsilateral stimulation by light signifi-
cantly reduced BK-induced paw licking in VGAT-ChR2-EYFP mice 
as compared with WT littermates (Supplemental Figure 7E); without 
optical stimulation there was no difference in BK-induced nocifen-
sive behavior between the WT and transgenic animals (Supplemen-
tal Figure 7F). Importantly, when BK was injected to the contralat-
eral paw, optical stimulation no longer affected BK-induced pain 
responses (Supplemental Figure 7G), verifying the precision of opti-
cal stimulation. Optogenetic stimulation of ChR2-expressing DRG 
neurons is likely to induce not only GABA but also glutamate release 
from these neurons. If released from central terminals in the spinal 
cord, glutamate is expected to produce excitatory/painful effects 
(similarly to the intrathecal glutamate injection; Figure 4E). Yet opto-
genetic stimulation of DRG in VGAT-ChR2-EYFP mice was clearly 
analgesic (as was the DRG-applied glutamate; Figure 4E). Thus, 
regardless of the transmitter, the antinociceptive effect of optoge-
netic DRG stimulation is likely to be mediated by mechanisms local-
ized to the somatic/perisomatic compartments of the afferent fibers 
(see also the results of the computer modeling presented below).
Figure 7. Effects of GABA on the somatic excitability of DRG neurons. GABAA agonists induce depolarization of DRG neurons in culture (A and B) and 
in acute slice preparation (C and D). Top traces depict exemplary current-clamp recordings during application of 200 μM GABA or 10 μM muscimol (as 
indicated by horizontal bars). (B) Summary of effects of GABA and muscimol during peak and plateau (steady-state) phases of response recorded from 
cultured small-diameter DRG neurons. (D) Summary of a steady-state depolarization produced by GABA and muscimol in DRG slices and also the inhi-
bition of GABA response by bicuculline; number of recordings is indicated within the bars. Asterisks indicate significant difference from the baseline: 
*P < 0.05, ***P < 0.001 (paired, 2-tailed t test). (E–G) GABA inhibits AP firing in most DRG neurons. Shown are exemplary voltage traces before GABA 
application (black) and also during the peak (red) and steady-state (blue) response. Examples represent neurons in which AP firing is reduced (E), 
abolished (F), or increased (G). Stimulus protocol (current ramp) is depicted beneath the traces in E. (H) Proportion of neurons in which AP firing was 
abolished, reduced, or increased or in which there was no response. (I) GABA reduces AP amplitude; further quantification of the effects of GABA on 
DRG excitability is provided in Supplemental Tables 3 and 4.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 5 1
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
Taken together, electrophysiological recordings suggest that, 
despite depolarization, the overall effect of GABA on somatic 
excitability of DRG neurons is inhibitory. However, because of 
specific morphology of DRG neurons, somatic excitability is not 
necessary for the AP propagation from the periphery to the spi-
nal cord (2). So how might GABAergic modulation of somatic/ 
perisomatic compartments of DRG neurons affect the AP propa-
gation through the ganglion? Both measurements (28, 41–44) 
and simulations (28, 45, 46) suggest that the axonal bifurcation 
(T-junction; Figure 8A) within sensory ganglia influences the 
transmission of passing spikes serving a filtering function. Here 
we constructed a biophysical model of the ganglionic portion of an 
adult, mammalian nociceptive neuron using available morphology 
from the literature (refs. 47–50 and Figure 8A) to test the effect of 
somatic GABA-like conductance on propagation of spikes through 
DRG. Activation of a membrane conductance with reversal poten-
tial at –40 mV, corresponding to the Cl– equilibrium potential of 
nociceptive neurons (38), depolarized membrane potential (ECl) at 
the T-junction, resulting in AP failure (Figure 8, B and C). Similar 
somatic depolarization without an increase in membrane conduc-
tance had no effect on spike propagation (Figure 8D), while great-
er depolarization was more likely to generate spontaneous firing 
(Figure 8E). The combination of Na+ channel inactivation and 
increased membrane conductance (GABAA current), along with 
the low safety factor for spike conduction through the T-junction 
 
(28, 46), contributed to blocking spike propagation through the 
DRG. Consistent with electrophysiological data (Figure 7, E–H, 
and Supplemental Tables 3 and 4), under certain conditions (e.g., 
varying ECl, threshold voltage, or GABAA receptor density) GABAA 
receptor activation triggered AP firing (not shown). Yet the main 
conclusion of the modeling was that over a physiologically rele-
vant range of parameters the activation of large ganglionic GABAA 
currents is likely to block AP propagation through the T-junction 
in DRG. It is worth pointing out that GABA-induced depolariza-
tion may still produce excitatory and proalgesic effects at the 
peripheral nerve terminals or elsewhere along the axons, as these 
sites have a higher AP safety factor as compared with T-junction. 
Indeed, increased peripheral depolarization mediated by GABAA 
receptors was suggested to contribute to inflammatory pain (7, 37).
Our model also provides a straightforward explanation for 
“paradoxical” effects of glutamate receptors in DRG: injection of 
glutamate through the DRG cannula in vivo resulted in antinoci-
ceptive effect (Figure 4E, but compare the intrathecal injection 
of glutamate). How does a “classic” excitatory neurotransmitter 
inhibit peripheral neuron excitability? Our data and modeling sug-
gest that large depolarizing currents produced by the ionotropic 
glutamate receptors at the somatic/perisomatic level could, simi-
depolarizing current ramps was reduced (17 of 38; Figure 7, E and 
H) or abolished (11 of 38; Figure 7, F and H) by GABA. In a small 
proportion of neurons GABA either induced no effect (5 of 38; not 
shown) or slightly increased firing (5 of 38; Figure 7, G and H). In 
total, 33 of 38 neurons (87%) responded to GABA with changes 
in excitability; detailed analysis of these effects is presented in 
Supplemental Tables 3 and 4. In all but 5 neurons that showed 
no response, GABA induced significant depolarization and also 
reduced the first AP amplitude (Figure 7I). In neurons where firing 
was reduced there was a significant increase in the threshold cur-
rent (Supplemental Table 3).
Figure 8. Activation of somatic GABAA conductance results in failure of 
peripheral AP at axonal bifurcation in a mammalian nociceptive neuron 
model. (A) Schematic illustration of a model (not to scale). (B) In the 
absence of GABAA current spikes propagated through the T-junction to the 
central axon. (C) Activation of a membrane conductance (Erev = –40 mV) 
within the DRG depolarized the T-junction and blocked spike propaga-
tion. (D and E) Effect of somatic depolarization without an increase in 
membrane conductance. Somatic depolarizing current injection of 30 pA 
depolarized the T-junction while having no effect on spike propagation (D). 
Greater depolarizing stimulus triggered spontaneous firing (E).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 5 2
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
input even when no painful stimuli were applied. These experi-
ments strongly suggest that there is a robust endogenous GABAergic 
inhibition in DRG. The exact mechanisms of GABAergic transmis-
sion in the afferent fibers as well as whether it is indeed restricted 
to their peripheral segments are yet to be elucidated.
While we cannot completely rule out a contribution of pre- 
or postsynaptic effects in the spinal cord to the antinociceptive 
effects of peripheral GABA, there are several arguments that such 
contribution is minimal. (a) Neither the fluorescent dye injected 
through the DRG cannula nor drugs that were injected in the same 
way (GABA, bicuculline, NO711) were detected in the spinal cord. 
(b) There were no contralateral effects of any DRG-injected drugs 
or optogenetic stimulation, suggesting that the application of 
drugs or light was indeed DRG-localized. (c) Application of glu-
tamate to DRG produced unilateral antinociceptive effect, while 
intrathecal application produced bilateral pain. Thus, we believe 
that the majority of GABAergic communication reported here is 
somatic or perisomatic. Indeed, DRG soma is likely to be a most 
voluminous GABA reservoir, while the T-junction is the most like-
ly site of the AP failure following GABAA receptor activation. Our 
hypothesis is summarized in Figure 9: APs generated peripherally 
(at nerve endings or peripheral injury sites) invade the somatic/
perisomatic compartment of sensory neurons (2, 3), which, in 
turn, triggers GABA release and causes autocrine or paracrine 
inhibition of the same or neighboring fibers due to the increased 
AP filtering at the corresponding T-junctions. The physiological 
outcomes of such inhibition can be the isolation of exact origin of 
pain (e.g., by suppressing the activity in fibers innervating border-
ing areas of the skin), suppression of subthreshold signals, and/or 
termination of nociceptive signal.
Abundance of receptors for other major neurotransmitters 
expressed at the somatic/perisomatic sites of sensory neurons and 
previously reported evidence of cross-excitation within the senso-
ry ganglia (55, 56) may indicate that the DRG is indeed a sophis-
ticated preliminary integrator of peripheral somatosensory infor-
mation. Thus, our study proposes an additional mechanism to the 
broadly accepted gate control theory of pain, which postulated 
that integration of ascending peripheral and descending central 
pathways in the superficial dorsal horn can “gate” nociception (ref. 
larly to depolarizing GABAA currents, result in AP failure to propa-
gate past the T-junction. Yet, applied to the postsynaptic neurons in 
the spinal cord (i.e., via the intrathecal injection), glutamate exerts 
the expected excitation. The modeling results also align well with 
the antinociceptive effects of chemo- or optogenetic stimulation 
of GABAergic DRG neurons in vivo (Figure 6 and Supplemental 
Figure 7) and with the recent finding that sensory neuron–specific 
knockout of the NR1 subunit of NMDA receptors resulted in unex-
pected hyperexcitability and pain hypersensitivity (8).
Discussion
Here we identified fully functional local GABAergic communica-
tion between DRG neurons. We demonstrated that key compo-
nents of the GABAergic transmission (GABAA receptors, trans-
porters, and synthesis enzyme) are expressed in DRG and are 
functional. Depolarizing stimuli induced GABA release in DRG, 
and, in turn, most DRG neurons responded to GABA with reduced 
excitability. Focal application of GABA, GABAA agonists, and 
GABA reuptake inhibitors to DRG as well as targeted chemo- or 
optogenetic stimulation of GABAergic DRG neurons in mice pro-
duced strong analgesic effects in vivo. Most importantly, targeting 
the somatic/perisomatic GABAergic system in DRG is efficacious 
in alleviating not only acute but also chronic pain.
Our data suggest that GABA can be produced by several sub-
types of DRG neurons. While this provides a framework for multi-
ple integratory mechanisms, our data support the following conclu-
sions as the minimum: (a) subpopulations of large-, medium-, and 
small-diameter DRG neurons can release GABA upon stimulation; 
and (b) almost all small-diameter DRG neurons can respond to 
GABA. The released GABA is removed from the extracellular space 
by satellite glia, as reported previously (51, 52), and probably by 
neurons as well. Glial GABA release (perhaps nonvesicular, since 
glia lack VGAT) may also contribute to signaling in DRG, particu-
larly to setting tonic GABA levels (53, 54). Of particular importance 
is the fact that not only GABA, but also the GABA reuptake inhibitor 
NO711, produced antinociceptive effect when locally delivered to 
DRG in vivo. Moreover, GABAA receptor antagonists, delivered in 
the same way, not only exacerbated peripherally induced pain but 
produced nocifensive behavior indicative of peripheral nociceptive 
Figure 9. Schematic for peripheral somatosensory integration in DRG. 
Peripheral nociceptive stimulation triggers activity-dependent release of 
GABA from somatic/perisomatic compartments of afferent fibers located 
in DRG, which, in turn, depolarizes T-junctions of GABAA-expressing noci-
ceptive fibers and lowers the AP safety factor at the T-junction. The latter 
effect results in the AP failure at the T-junction and reduced excitatory 
input into the spinal cord. A similar effect could be achieved by targeted 
delivery of GABA or GABA mimetics to the DRG or by the increasing of 
GABA tone with GABA reuptake inhibitor. Thus, DRG can be considered as 
a filter or an additional “gate” for nociceptive transmission.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 5 3
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
pump was incubated in sterile saline (0.9%) at 37°C for 6 hours. 
This pump model releases approximately 0.5 μl/h for 14 days.
In order to verify that drug exposure was limited to the DRG, a 
fluorescent dye, CFSE (Sigma-Aldrich; 20 μM in 5 μl), was injected 
via the cannula. Approximately 30 minutes after injection, the animal 
was sacrificed, and the L5 DRG with the dorsal root and the associated 
lumbar spinal cord segment was excised, submerged in Tissue-Tek 
OCT (Sakura), frozen, and sectioned (15 μm) using a freezing micro-
tome (CM1950, Leica). Slices were then analyzed for the presence of 
dye using confocal microscopy (TCS SP5 II, Leica).
DREADD
VGAT-Cre (Slc32a1tm2(cre)Lowl) mice were from The Jackson Laboratory. 
AAV9-DIO-hM3Dq (Gq DREADD) viruses were obtained from Hanbio 
Biotechnology Co. Ltd. Virus injections into L4 DRG were performed 
under deep anesthesia with an i.p. injection of pentobarbital sodium 
(60–80 mg/kg). L4 DRGs were exposed by removal of both spinous and 
transverse processes of the vertebra bone. The microinjector (Hamilton 
Co.) was inserted into the ganglion to a depth of 500 μm from the exposed 
surface. The virus solution (5 μl) was injected slowly, and the needle was 
removed 2 minutes after the injection was complete. The muscles over-
lying the spinal cord were loosely sutured together, and the wound was 
closed. Animals were allowed to recover for at least 4 weeks before the 
experiments were carried out. Animals developing signs of distress were 
humanely sacrificed. Four to six weeks after injection of DREADD virus 
into the DRG of the VGAT-Cre or WT littermates, behavior tests were 
initiated, carried out 30 minutes after an i.p. injection of clozapine-N- 
oxide (CNO; dissolved in 0.9% saline, 5 mg/kg; Sigma-Aldrich) or saline. 
In some cases, after the behavior testing mice were humanely sacrificed 
and DRG extracted for mCherry visualization.
In vivo optogenetic stimulation
VGAT-ChR2-EYFP mice were from The Jackson Laboratory. The 
implantation of optical fiber was performed similarly to the DRG can-
nula implant with modifications. A stainless steel cannula guide (RWD 
Life Science Co. Ltd., China; diameter 0.64 mm) was forced into the 
hole in the transverse process over the L5 DRG, and the optical fiber 
(RWD Life Science Co. Ltd., China; diameter 0.2 mm, length 1 m) was 
inserted through the guide. The incision was closed with sutures, and 
the fiber was firmly fixed in place with dental cement; the rest of the 
procedure was similar to the cannula implantation. Laser stimulation 
(473 nm, 3 mW, 30 Hz for 10 seconds with 20-second interval) was 
elicited using an MLL-FN-473-50 unit (Changchun New Industries 
Optoelectronics Technology Co., Ltd.) controlled by a pulsing set (S48 
Stimulator, Grass Technologies, An Astro-Med, Inc. Product Group).
Chronic pain models
Chronic constriction injury (CCI) was performed as described previously 
(64). Briefly, rats were anesthetized with an i.p. injection of sodium pen-
tobarbital (60–80 mg/kg). The right hind leg was shaved and cleaned 
using 70% ethanol. The sciatic nerve was exposed by blunt dissection at 
the mid-thigh level, proximal to the sciatic trifurcation. Four nonabsorb-
able sterile surgical sutures (4–0 chromic gut) were loosely tied around 
the sciatic nerve with an approximately 1.0-to-1.5-mm interval between 
the knots. The skin was sutured, and the animal was transferred to a 
recovery cage. To induce chronic inflammatory pain, CFA (100 μl) was 
injected into the plantar surface of the right hind paw of the rat.
57 and Figure 9). Strong analgesic effects of focally applied GABA 
mimetics or GAT1 inhibitor (especially their efficacy in chronic 
pain models) suggest a possibility for therapeutic targeting of DRG 
for pain relief, a seemingly contentious idea that nevertheless is 
supported by earlier studies (14, 58). Indeed, recent and yet unex-
plained clinical evidence indicates that direct electrical stimula-
tion (“neuromodulation”) of the DRGs in human neuropathic pain 
sufferers by the implanted stimulators provides efficacious pain 
relief even to the most resilient types of neuropathic pain (59–61). 
We hypothesize that analgesic efficacy of DRG neuromodulation 
is based on the engagement of the peripheral ganglionic “gate” 
(Figure 9); furthermore, we suggest that lasting pain relief can be 
achieved by peripherally acting GABA mimetics.
Methods
Neuronal cultures and slice preparation
DRG neurons from adult Sprague-Dawley rats (Beijing Vital River Labo-
ratory Animal Technology Co. Ltd.) were dissociated as described previ-
ously (62). For sharp electrode recording, DRG slices were prepared from 
12-day-old Wistar rats as described earlier (63). DRGs were embedded in 
agar and sliced (300 μm) in ice-cold extracellular solution using a vibrat-
ing blade microtome (VT100S, Leica Microsystems). Slices were then 
stored at room temperature for the remainder of the day in carbogenated 
(95% 02/5% CO2) extracellular solution containing (in mM): 115 NaCl, 25 
NaHCO3, 11 d-glucose, 5.6 KCl, 2 MgCl2, 1 NaH2PO4, 2.2 CaCl2 (pH 7.4).
Acute focal application of drugs to DRG in vivo
All surgical procedures were performed under deep anesthesia with 
an i.p. injection of pentobarbital sodium (60–80 mg/kg) in accor-
dance with the Animal Care and Ethical Committee of Hebei Medical 
University under the International Association for the Study of Pain 
guidelines. A DRG cannula for focal application of substances to DRG 
was implanted as previously described (28). Briefly, a midline inci-
sion was made at the L4–L6 spinal level of adult male rats (Sprague- 
Dawley; 180–200 g), and the L5 was identified at the midpoint of a 
link between both sides of the iliac crest. A 0.8-mm hole (~1 mm off the 
inferior edge of the transverse process) was drilled through the trans-
verse process over the L5 DRG. Approaching of a ganglion was veri-
fied by the twitch of the paw. A hooked stainless steel blunt-tip cannula 
(inner diameter 0.64 mm, length 4 mm) was forced into the hole and 
connected to a polypropylene tube (inner diameter 0.41 mm, length 
4.5 mm). The incision was closed with sutures, and the cannula was 
firmly fixed in place with dental cement. Intramuscular injection of 
benzylpenicillin (19 mg/0.1 ml) was given immediately after surgery. 
Procedure for mice was similar, but L4 DRG was used for implanta-
tion and 5 mg/25 μl of benzylpenicillin was used. Postoperatively, rats 
were housed individually in plastic cages with sawdust flooring and 
supplied with water and food ad libitum. Animals were left to recover 
for at least 24 hours before the experiments were carried out. Animals 
developing signs of distress were humanely sacrificed.
For continuous local delivery of drugs, osmotic minipumps 
(ALZET osmotic pump model 2002) were implanted in a procedure 
similar to the DRG cannula implant. The pumps were implanted 
s.c. in the neck while the cannula tube (ALZET Brain infusion kit 2) 
connected to the pump was inserted into the DRG hole. Before the 
implantation, the brain infusion assembly with attached osmotic 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 5 4
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
ing microtome (Leica). Sections were washed once with 0.1 M PBS 
(Sigma- 
Aldrich) and blocked for 2 hours with blocking buffer (3% 
donkey serum in 0.1 M PBS; Sigma-Aldrich). Primary antibodies were 
diluted in 0.3% Triton X-100/PBS buffer before overnight incuba-
tion at 4°C. Detailed antibody information is given in Supplemental 
Table 5. The following day, sections received a further 3 washes in 
PBS before incubation with secondary antibodies and/or GFP booster 
(Chromotek) for 4 hours at room temperature. Sections were washed 
with PBS 3 times and placed on microscope slides in Vectashield with 
DAPI (Vector Laboratories). Staining was visualized using a confocal 
fluorescent microscope (LSM700, Zeiss). Tissue preparation of elec-
tron microscopy is described in Supplemental Methods.
RT-PCR
Total RNA from all DRGs of 1 adult rat was extracted using a commer-
cial RNA isolation kit (RNAiso, Takara). Isolated RNA was dissolved 
in 20 μl diethyl pyrocarbonate–treated (DEPC-treated) water and 
reverse-transcribed using an RT reagent kit (PrimeScript with gDNA 
Eraser, Takara) and a thermal cycler (Mastercycler, Eppendorf). Quan-
titative PCR reaction was performed using a kit (SYBR Premix Ex TaqII 
[Tli RNase H Plus], Takara), and the fluorescent DNA was detected and 
quantified with an FQD-48A(A4) system (BIOER). The PCR products 
were also run on a 2% agarose gel and were visualized using a gel imag-
er (TFP-M/WL, Vilber Lourmat). A list of primers used in standard RT-
PCR experiments is given in Supplemental Table 6.
For single-cell RT-PCR, neurons were aspirated into a patch 
pipette; the electrode tip was then broken into a PCR tube containing 
0.7 μl of oligo-dT (50 mM), 1 μl of dNTP mixture (10 mM), 0.5 μl of 
MgCl2 (25 mM), 0.7 μl of RNaseOUT (40 U/μl; Invitrogen), and 1.4 μl 
of DEPC-treated water. The mixture was heated to 65°C for 5 minutes 
and then placed on ice for 1 minute. Single-strand cDNA was synthe-
sized from the cellular mRNA by addition of 0.5 μl of RT buffer, 1.5 
μl of MgCl2 (25 mM), 1 μl of DTT (1 M), 0.5 μl of RNaseOUT (40 U/
μl), and 1 μl of SuperScript III RT (200 U/μl) and then incubation of 
the mixture at 55°C for 50 minutes followed by 85°C for 5 minutes. 
Synthesis of single-cell cDNA was performed using a C1000 Touch 
thermal cycler–CFX96 Real-Time PCR. First-strand synthesis was 
executed at 95°C (5 minutes) followed by 38 cycles (95°C for 1 minute, 
60°C for 1 minute, 72°C for 1 minute) and a final 10-minute elonga-
tion at 72°C by addition of the specific “outer” primer pairs (Supple-
mental Table 7) into each PCR tube (final volume 60 μl). Then, 2.5 μl 
of the product of the first PCR was used in the second amplification 
round by use of specific “inner” primer (final volume 25 μl; Supple-
mental Table 7). The second amplification round consisted of heat-
ing the samples to 95°C for 5 minutes followed by 30 cycles (95°C 
for 1 minute, 60°C for 50 seconds, 72°C for 1 minute) and 10-minute 
elongation at 72°C. The products of the second PCR were analyzed in 
2% agarose gels and stained with ethidium bromide. SuperScript III 
First-Strand Synthesis System Kit and GoTaq Green Master Mix were 
obtained from Invitrogen and Promega, respectively.
GABA measurement with HPLC and LC–tandem mass spectrometry
GABA release from whole DRGs. All DRGs from 1 adult rat were rapidly 
extracted into saline on ice and washed twice. Standard DRG incuba-
tion solution (150 μl) containing (in mM) 160 NaCl, 2.5 KCl, 5 CaCl2, 
1 MgCl2, 10 HEPES, 8 d-glucose (pH 7.4) was added and incubated for 
30 minutes in 37°C. GABA release was induced in the standard DRG 
Behavioral tests
In all tests, animals were habituated to the testing environment for 3 
hours before behavioral testing. To evaluate the effect of focal applica-
tion of GABA modulators to DRG on the nociceptive processing, com-
pounds were injected via the DRG cannula in a volume of 5 μl imme-
diately before the hind-paw injection of BK (200 μM) or CAP (20 μM). 
The volume of hind-paw injections in mice and rats was 20 μl and 50 
μl, respectively. After the injections, animals were returned to the cage 
and video-recorded for 30 minutes. Time spent licking, biting, and 
flinching the injected paw was analyzed by the operator blind to the 
composition of the drug solution. Mechanical and thermal sensitivity 
were analyzed using the von Frey and Hargreaves methods, respec-
tively (see Supplemental Methods).
Electrophysiology
Perforated patch recordings in current- or voltage-clamp configura-
tions were performed at room temperature. Currents were amplified 
and recorded using an EPC-10 patch amplifier and Patchmaster 2.2 
software (HEKA Electronik) or an Axon Patch 700B amplifier and 
pClamp 10.0 software (Axon Instruments), and were sampled at 5 
kHz. Liquid junction potentials were calculated using the pClamp 
and corrected (65). Continuous current-clamp recording with no 
current injection was used for monitoring of membrane potential 
(Vm). Linear ramps of currents from 0 to 0.8 nA (1 second duration) 
were injected for measuring AP firing parameters. The extracellular 
solution contained (in mM): 160 NaCl, 2.5 KCl, 5 CaCl2, 1 MgCl2, 10 
HEPES, and 8 glucose (pH 7.4). The intracellular solution contained 
(in mM): 150 KCl, 5 MgCl2, 10 HEPES (pH 7.4) (with 0.4 mg/ml 
gramicidin; Sigma-Aldrich).
Sharp electrode recordings were performed from DRG slices 
held in a submerged-type chamber and perfused with carbogenated 
extracellular solution (4–5 ml/min) at room temperature. Electrodes 
were pulled to resistances of 70–120 MΩ when filled with a recording 
solution (1 M K-acetate, 1 mM KCl; pH 7.2 adjusted with acetic acid). 
Recordings were made using a SEC-05L amplifier (npi electronic) and 
digitized (10 kHz) with a PC-based system (Digidata 1200 and Clam-
pex 9.3, Molecular Devices) and analyzed off-line (Clampfit 10.1).
For sniffing patch recordings, HEK293 cells (ATCC) were tran-
siently transfected with cDNA encoding human α1, β2, and γ2 subunits 
of GABAA receptors (gift of David Weiss, Department of Physiology, 
University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, Texas, USA) 
and GFP. The day before recording, transfected HEK293 cells were 
trypsinized and added to the coverslips containing 48-hour DRG cul-
tures. Gramicidin-perforated patch recordings were made the next 
day from the coculture; transfected HEK293 cells were identified by 
GFP fluorescence.
For optical stimulation of DRG neurons from VGAT-ChR2-EYFP 
mice, a 473-nm blue light (3 mW) was elicited using the same device 
as for in vivo stimulation.
Immunohistochemistry
GAD67-GFP mice (26) were transcardially perfused with 4% PFA 
under terminal anesthesia (sodium pentobarbital, 80 mg/kg). Lum-
bar DRGs were removed and stored in 0.1 M phosphate buffer 
(Sigma- 
Aldrich) followed by embedding in 10% porcine skin gelatin 
(Sigma-Aldrich), then postfixed in 4% PFA for 1 hour prior to section-
ing. Thirty-five-micrometer DRG sections were cut using a vibrat-
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 5 5
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
Author contributions
XD designed experiments, performed electrophysiology 
experiments, and analyzed data. HH performed electrophysi-
ology and in vivo experiments, and analyzed data. Y Yang, SH, 
and CW performed HPLC, immunohistochemistry, and PCR 
experiments, and analyzed data. SG performed DRG slice 
recordings and analyzed data. Y Yanagawa provided GAD67-
GFP reporter mice and advised on corresponding experi-
ments. JD, IE, and EJ performed immunostaining and electron 
microscopy, and analyzed data. RR performed VGAT immu-
nostaining and analyzed data. XL performed single-cell PCR 
and analyzed data. JQ designed and supervised HPLC and 
HPLC–mass spectrometry measurements, and analyzed data. 
BG performed in vivo experiments and analyzed data. DBJ 
performed computer modeling. NG, XD, and HZ designed the 
study, supervised experiments, and analyzed data. NG wrote 
the manuscript, helped by all other authors, who also critiqued 
the manuscript for intellectual content.
Acknowledgments
We thank Yuan Wang, Katarzyna Marszalek, and Honling Rong 
for expert technical assistance; Brenda Frater and Lucy Peers for 
help with electron microscopy and immunostaining; and David 
Weiss for GABA receptor constructs. This work was supported 
by a startup grant from the Department of Pharmacology, Hebei 
Medical University, to NG; grants from the National Natural Sci-
ence Foundation of China (31571088 to XD; 31270882 to HZ); Key 
Basic Research Project of Applied Basic Research Program of Hebei 
Province (16967712D to XD); the National Basic Research Program 
(2013CB531302 to HZ); and the Medical Research Council grants 
G1002183 and MR/K021303/1 to NG.
Address correspondence to: Xiaona Du or Hailin Zhang, Depart-
ment of Pharmacology, Hebei Medical University, 361 Zhongshan 
East Road, Shijiazhuang 050017, China. Phone: 8631186266073; 
E-mail: du_xiaona@hotmail.com or duxiaona@hebmu.edu.cn  
(X. Du). Phone: 8631186265562; E-mail: zhanghl@hebmu.edu.cn  
(H. Zhang). Or to: Nikita Gamper, Faculty of Biological Sciences, 
University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, United Kingdom. Phone: 
441133437923; E-mail: n.gamper@leeds.ac.uk.
incubation solution by the addition of ATP (1 mM), BK (100 μM), and 
CAP (1 μM), or by the equimolar substitution of 100 or 150 mM NaCl 
in the incubation solution with KCl for 30 minutes at 37°C. After incu-
bation, 100 μl supernatant was removed and mixed with 300 μl aceto-
nitrile and centrifuged (15,294 g for 10 minutes at 4°C). The superna-
tants were stored at –20°C until analysis.
GABA release from cultured DRG neurons. Dissociated DRG cul-
tures were plated onto glass coverslips coated with poly-d-lysine and 
laminin and cultured for 2–5 days. The culture medium was discarded 
and the cultures were washed with saline once; then 150 μl standard 
DRG incubation solution with or without added agonists, or 150 μl 
high-K+ solution, was added and incubated for 30 minutes at 37°C. 
The rest of the procedure was the same as for the whole-DRG tissue. 
Detailed description of HPLC and LC–tandem mass spectrometry 
conditions is provided in Supplemental Methods.
Computer modeling
A computational model of an unmyelinated nociceptive neuron pass-
ing through the DRG was based on a model recently reported by us 
(28, 46). For detailed description see Supplemental Methods.
Statistics
All data are given as mean ± SEM. Differences between groups were 
assessed by paired or unpaired 2-tailed Student’s t test. For data that 
failed normality testing, a paired-sample Wilcoxon signed rank test or 
Mann-Whitney test was used. Multiple groups were compared using 
1-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction or by Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA 
with Mann-Whitney test. Hyperalgesia data in chronic pain models 
were analyzed using 2-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction. Differ-
ences were considered significant at P ≤ 0.05. Statistical analyses were 
performed using OriginPro 9.1 (Originlab Corp.). In bar charts shown 
in the figures, number of experiments is indicated within or above each 
bar; single, double, and triple asterisks indicate significant difference 
from the appropriate control with P ≤ 0.05, 0.01, or 0.001, respectively.
Study approval
All animal experiments were approved by the Animal Care and Ethi-
cal Committee of Hebei Medical University (Shijiazhuang, China) and 
were in accordance with the International Association for the Study of 
Pain guidelines for animal use.
 1. Basbaum AI, Bautista DM, Scherrer G, Julius D. 
Cellular and molecular mechanisms of pain. Cell. 
2009;139(2):267–284.
 2. Amir R, Devor M. Electrical excitability of the 
soma of sensory neurons is required for spike 
invasion of the soma, but not for through- 
conduction. Biophys J. 2003;84(4):2181–2191.
 3. Amir R, Devor M. Spike-evoked suppression and 
burst patterning in dorsal root ganglion neurons 
of the rat. J Physiol. 1997;501(pt 1):183–196.
 4. Burchiel KJ. Spontaneous impulse generation 
in normal and denervated dorsal root ganglia: 
sensitivity to alpha-adrenergic stimulation and 
hypoxia. Exp Neurol. 1984;85(2):257–272.
 5. Study RE, Kral MG. Spontaneous action potential 
activity in isolated dorsal root ganglion neu-
rons from rats with a painful neuropathy. Pain. 
1996;65(2–3):235–242.
 6. Liu CN, Wall PD, Ben-Dor E, Michaelis M, Amir 
R, Devor M. Tactile allodynia in the absence of 
C-fiber activation: altered firing properties of 
DRG neurons following spinal nerve injury. Pain. 
2000;85(3):503–521.
 
7. Zhu Y, Lu SG, Gold MS. Persistent inflammation 
increases GABA-induced depolarization of rat 
cutaneous dorsal root ganglion neurons in vitro. 
Neuroscience. 2012;220:330–340.
 8. Pagadala P, et al. Loss of NR1 subunit of 
NMDARs in primary sensory neurons leads 
to hyperexcitability and pain hypersensitiv-
ity: involvement of Ca2+-activated small 
conductance potassium channels. J Neurosci. 
2013;33(33):13425–13430.
 9. Hanack C, et al. GABA blocks pathologi-
cal but not acute TRPV1 pain signals. Cell. 
2015;160(4):759–770.
 10. Zhang XL, Albers KM, Gold MS. Inflammation-
induced increase in nicotinic acetylcholine 
receptor current in cutaneous nociceptive 
DRG neurons from the adult rat. Neuroscience. 
2015;284:483–499.
 11. Akaike N, Inoue M, Krishtal OA. ‘Concentration-
clamp’ study of γ-aminobutyric-acid-induced 
chloride current kinetics in frog sensory neu-
rones. J Physiol. 1986;379:171–185.
 12. Gallagher JP, Higashi H, Nishi S. Characteriza-
tion and ionic basis of GABA-induced depolariza-
tions recorded in vitro from cat primary afferent 
neurones. J Physiol. 1978;275:263–282.
 13. Robertson B. Characteristics of GABA-activated 
chloride channels in mammalian dorsal root gan-
glion neurones. J Physiol. 1989;411:285–300.
 14. Obradovic AL, et al. Silencing the α2 subunit of 
γ-aminobutyric acid type A receptors in rat dorsal 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 5 6
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
root ganglia reveals its major role in antinocicep-
tion posttraumatic nerve injury. Anesthesiology. 
2015;123(3):654–667.
 15. Zhang XL, Lee KY, Priest BT, Belfer I, Gold MS. 
Inflammatory mediator-induced modulation 
of GABAA currents in human sensory neurons. 
Neuroscience. 2015;310:401–409.
 16. Gold MS. Molecular biology of sensory transduc-
tion. In: McMahon SB, Koltzenburg M, Tracey 
I, Turk D, eds. Wall & Melzack’s Textbook of Pain. 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA: Saunders; 
2013:31–48.
 17. Carlton SM, Zhou S, Coggeshall RE. Peripheral 
GABA(A) receptors: evidence for peripheral 
primary afferent depolarization. Neuroscience. 
1999;93(2):713–722.
 18. Curtis DR, Lodge D, Brand SJ. GABA and spinal 
afferent terminal excitability in the cat. Brain Res. 
1977;130(2):360–363.
 19. Deschenes M, Feltz P, Lamour Y. A model for an 
estimate in vivo of the ionic basis of presynaptic 
inhibition: an intracellular analysis of the GABA-
induced depolarization in rat dorsal root ganglia. 
Brain Res. 1976;118(3):486–493.
 20. Ransom CB, Tao W, Wu Y, Spain WJ, Richerson 
GB. Rapid regulation of tonic GABA currents in 
cultured rat hippocampal neurons. J Neurophysi-
ol. 2013;109(3):803–812.
 21. Buckley K, Kelly RB. Identification of a trans-
membrane glycoprotein specific for secretory 
vesicles of neural and endocrine cells. J Cell Biol. 
1985;100(4):1284–1294.
 22. Son YJ, et al. The synaptic vesicle protein SV2 
is complexed with an alpha5-containing lam-
inin on the nerve terminal surface. J Biol Chem. 
2000;275(1):451–460.
 23. Persohn E, Malherbe P, Richards JG. In situ 
hybridization histochemistry reveals a diversity 
of GABAA receptor subunit mRNAs in neurons of 
the rat spinal cord and dorsal root ganglia. Neuro-
science. 1991;42(2):497–507.
 24. Ma W, Saunders PA, Somogyi R, Poulter MO, 
Barker JL. Ontogeny of GABAA receptor subunit 
mRNAs in rat spinal cord and dorsal root ganglia. 
J Comp Neurol. 1993;338(3):337–359.
 25. Usoskin D, et al. Unbiased classification of sen-
sory neuron types by large-scale single-cell RNA 
sequencing. Nat Neurosci. 2015;18(1):145–153.
 26. Tamamaki N, Yanagawa Y, Tomioka R, Miyazaki 
J, Obata K, Kaneko T. Green fluorescent pro-
tein expression and colocalization with cal-
retinin, parvalbumin, and somatostatin in the 
GAD67-GFP knock-in mouse. J Comp Neurol. 
2003;467(1):60–79.
 27. Lawson SN. The postnatal development of large 
light and small dark neurons in mouse dorsal root 
ganglia: a statistical analysis of cell numbers and 
size. J Neurocytol. 1979;8(3):275–294.
 28. Du X, et al. Control of somatic membrane poten-
tial in nociceptive neurons and its implications 
for peripheral nociceptive transmission. Pain. 
2014;155(11):2306–2322.
 29. Hunt SP, Pini A, Evan G. Induction of c-fos-like 
protein in spinal cord neurons following sensory 
stimulation. Nature. 1987;328(6131):632–634.
 30. Jasmin L, Kohan L, Franssen M, Janni G, Goff JR. 
The cold plate as a test of nociceptive behaviors: 
description and application to the study of chron-
ic neuropathic and inflammatory pain models. 
Pain. 1998;75(2–3):367–382.
 31. Vong L, Ye C, Yang Z, Choi B, Chua S, Lowell BB. 
Leptin action on GABAergic neurons prevents 
obesity and reduces inhibitory tone to POMC 
neurons. Neuron. 2011;71(1):142–154.
 32. Armbruster BN, Li X, Pausch MH, Herlitze S, 
Roth BL. Evolving the lock to fit the key to create 
a family of G protein-coupled receptors potently 
activated by an inert ligand. Proc Natl Acad Sci U 
S A. 2007;104(12):5163–5168.
 33. Rigaud M, et al. Species and strain differences 
in rodent sciatic nerve anatomy: implica-
tions for studies of neuropathic pain. Pain. 
2008;136(1–2):188–201.
 34. Zhao S, et al. Cell type–specific channelrhodop-
sin-2 transgenic mice for optogenetic dissec-
tion of neural circuitry function. Nat Methods. 
2011;8(9):745–752.
 35. Bormann J. Electrophysiology of GABAA and 
GABAB receptor subtypes. Trends Neurosci. 
1988;11(3):112–116.
 36. De Groat WC. GABA-depolarization of a sensory 
ganglion: antagonism by picrotoxin and bicucul-
line. Brain Res. 1972;38(2):429–432.
 37. Zhu Y, Zhang XL, Gold MS. Activity-dependent 
hyperpolarization of EGABA is absent in cutane-
ous DRG neurons from inflamed rats. Neurosci-
ence. 2014;256:1–9.
 38. Liu B, et al. The acute nociceptive signals induced 
by bradykinin in rat sensory neurons are medi-
ated by inhibition of M-type K+ channels and 
activation of Ca2+-activated Cl- channels. J Clin 
Invest. 2010;120(4):1240–1252.
 39. Kolbaev SN, Achilles K, Luhmann HJ, Kilb W. 
Effect of depolarizing GABA(A)-mediated mem-
brane responses on excitability of Cajal-Retzius 
cells in the immature rat neocortex. J Neurophysi-
ol. 2011;106(4):2034–2044.
 40. Ebihara S, Shirato K, Harata N, Akaike N. 
Gramicidin-perforated patch recording: 
GABA response in mammalian neurones with 
intact intracellular chloride. J Physiol (Lond). 
1995;484(pt 1):77–86.
 41. Dun FT. The delay and blockage of sensory 
impulses in the dorsal root ganglion. J Physiol 
(Lond). 1955;127(2):252–264.
 42. Gemes G, et al. Failure of action potential 
propagation in sensory neurons: mechanisms 
and loss of afferent filtering in C-type units 
after painful nerve injury. J Physiol (Lond). 
2013;591(4):1111–1131.
 43. Stoney SD. Limitations on impulse conduction at 
the branch point of afferent axons in frog dorsal 
root ganglion. Exp Brain Res. 1990;80(3):512–524.
 44. Tagini G, Camino E. T-shaped cells of dorsal 
ganglia can influence the pattern of afferent dis-
charge. Pflugers Arch. 1973;344(4):339–347.
 45. Lüscher C, Streit J, Lipp P, Lüscher HR. Action 
potential propagation through embryonic dorsal 
root ganglion cells in culture. II. Decrease of con-
duction reliability during repetitive stimulation.  
J Neurophysiol. 1994;72(2):634–643.
 46. Sundt D, Gamper N, Jaffe DB. Spike propagation 
through the dorsal root ganglia in an unmyelin-
ated sensory neuron: a modeling study. J Neuro-
physiol. 2015;114(6):3140–3153.
 47. Ha H. Axonal bifurcation in the dorsal root gan-
glion of the cat: a light and electron microscopic 
study. J Comp Neurol. 1970;140(2):227–240.
 48. Hayar A, Gu C, Al-Chaer ED. An improved meth-
od for patch clamp recording and calcium imag-
ing of neurons in the intact dorsal root ganglion 
in rats. J Neurosci Methods. 2008;173(1):74–82.
 49. Lüscher C, Streit J, Quadroni R, Lüscher HR. 
Action potential propagation through embryonic 
dorsal root ganglion cells in culture. I. Influence 
of the cell morphology on propagation proper-
ties. J Neurophysiol. 1994;72(2):622–633.
 50. Zhang JM, Donnelly DF, LaMotte RH. Patch 
clamp recording from the intact dorsal root gan-
glion. J Neurosci Methods. 1998;79(1):97–103.
 51. Schon F, Kelly JS. Autoradiographic localisation 
of [3H]GABA and [3H]glutamate over satellite 
glial cells. Brain Res. 1974;66:275–288.
 52. Schon F, Kelly JS. The characterisation of [3H]
GABA uptake into the satellite glial cells of rat 
sensory ganglia. Brain Res. 1974;66:289–300.
 53. Hanani M. Satellite glial cells in sensory ganglia: 
from form to function. Brain Res Brain Res Rev. 
2005;48(3):457–476.
 54. Lee S, et al. Channel-mediated tonic GABA release 
from glia. Science. 2010;330(6005):790–796.
 55. Amir R, Devor M. Functional cross-excitation 
between afferent A- and C-neurons in dorsal root 
ganglia. Neuroscience. 2000;95(1):189–195.
 56. Kim YS, et al. Coupled activation of primary 
sensory neurons contributes to chronic pain. 
Neuron. 2016;91(5):1085–1096.
 57. Melzack R, Wall PD. Pain mechanisms: a new 
theory. Science. 1965;150(3699):971–979.
 58. Naik AK, Pathirathna S, Jevtovic-Todorovic V. 
GABAA receptor modulation in dorsal root gan-
glia in vivo affects chronic pain after nerve injury. 
Neuroscience. 2008;154(4):1539–1553.
 59. Van Buyten JP, Smet I, Liem L, Russo M, Huy-
gen F. Stimulation of dorsal root ganglia for 
the management of complex regional pain 
syndrome: a prospective case series. Pain Pract. 
2015;15(3):208–216.
 60. Deer TR, Grigsby E, Weiner RL, Wilcosky B, 
Kramer JM. A prospective study of dorsal root 
ganglion stimulation for the relief of chronic pain. 
Neuromodulation. 2013;16(1):67–71; discussion 71.
 61. Pope JE, Deer TR, Kramer J. A systematic review: 
current and future directions of dorsal root gan-
glion therapeutics to treat chronic pain. Pain Med. 
2013;14(10):1477–1496.
 62. Kirton HM, Pettinger L, Gamper N. Transient 
overexpression of genes in neurons using nucleo-
fection. Methods Mol Biol. 2013;998:55–64.
 63. Rose KE, Gigout S, Gamper N. M-current record-
ing from acute DRG slices. Methods Mol Biol. 
2013;998:311–320.
 64. Sommer C, Schäfers M. Painful mononeuropa-
thy in C57BL/Wld mice with delayed wallerian 
degeneration: differential effects of cytokine 
production and nerve regeneration on thermal 
and mechanical hypersensitivity. Brain Res. 
1998;784(1–2):154–162.
 65. Barry PH. JPCalc, a software package for cal-
culating liquid junction potential corrections 
in patch-clamp, intracellular, epithelial and 
bilayer measurements and for correcting junc-
tion potential measurements. J Neurosci Methods. 
1994;51(1):107–116.
