 Food allergy and gastrointestinal disease
Allergen specificity of early peanut consumption
and effect on development of allergic disease in the
Learning Early About Peanut Allergy study cohort
George du Toit, MB, BCh, FRCPCH,a Peter H. Sayre, MD, PhD,c Graham Roberts, FRCPCH, DM,d Kaitie Lawson, MS,f
Michelle L. Sever, MSPH, PhD,f Henry T. Bahnson, MPH,b Helen R. Fisher, MSc, PhD,a Mary Feeney, MSc, RD,a
Suzana Radulovic, MD,a Monica Basting, MA,a Marshall Plaut, MD,e and Gideon Lack, MB, BCh, FRCPCH,a
for the Immune Tolerance Network Learning Early About Peanut Allergy study team
London, Southampton, and Isle of
Wight, United Kingdom; San Francisco, Calif; Bethesda, Md; and Chapel Hill, NC
GRAPHICAL ABSTRACT
The LEAP study five years later: the beneficial effect is peanut-specific 
Background: Early introduction of dietary peanut in high-risk
infants with severe eczema, egg allergy, or both prevented
peanut allergy at 5 years of age in the Learning Early About
Peanut Allergy (LEAP) study. The protective effect persisted
after 12 months of avoiding peanuts in the 12-month extension
of the LEAP study (LEAP-On). It is unclear whether this benefit
is allergen and allergic disease specific.
Objective: We sought to assess the effect of early introduction of
peanut on the development of allergic disease, food sensitization,
and aeroallergen sensitization.
Methods: Asthma, eczema, and rhinoconjunctivitis were
diagnosed based on clinical assessment. Reported allergic
reactions and consumption of tree nuts and sesame were
recorded by questionnaire. Sensitization to food allergens and
From athe Department of Paediatric Allergy, Division of Asthma, Allergy and Lung
Biology, King’s College London, and Guy’s and St. Thomas’ NHS Foundation
Trust, London; bthe Immune Tolerance Network and cthe Division of Hematolo-
gy-Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco;
dthe University of Southampton and Southampton NIHR Biomedical Research
Centre, Southampton, and the David Hide Centre, Isle of Wight; ethe National Insti-
tute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Bethesda; and fRho Federal Systems Divi-
sion, Chapel Hill.
1343
 aeroallergens was determined by means of skin prick testing
and specific IgE measurement.
Results: A high and increasing burden of food allergen and
aeroallergen sensitization and allergic disease was noted across
study time points; 76% of LEAP participants had at least 1
allergic disease at 60 months of age. There were no differences
in allergic disease between LEAP groups. There were small
differences in sensitization and reported allergic reactions for
select tree nuts, with levels being higher in the LEAP
consumption group. Significant resolution of eczema and
sensitization to egg and milk occurred in LEAP participants and
was not affected by peanut consumption.
Conclusion: Early consumption of peanut in infants at high
risk of peanut allergy is allergen specific and does not
prevent the development of other allergic disease,
sensitization to other food allergens and aeroallergens, or
reported allergic reactions to tree nuts and sesame.
Furthermore, peanut consumption does not hasten the
resolution of eczema or egg allergy. (J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2018;141:1343-53.)
Key words: Food allergy, peanut allergy, allergy prevention,
allergen-specific asthma, eczema, atopic dermatitis, rhinoconjuncti-
vitis, tolerance
Atopic diseases represent a public health concern, particularly
in the developed world.1-3 Atopic conditions rarely occur in
isolation, and children frequently have multiple allergic diseases.
For example, infants with eczema are at higher risk offood allergy
and asthma, children with egg allergy are at increased risk of
allergic respiratory diseases, and children with a single food
allergy frequently have additional food allergies.3
Early dietary allergen exposure has been shown to be a successful
strategy for the prevention of peanut allergy (and possibly egg
allergy); however, the specificity of the observed clinical and
immunologic benefits is not known.4-10 Peanuts, tree nuts, and
sesame contain seed storage proteins with highly conserved areas
of shared identity and homology between their amino acid
sequences.11-13 This raises the important clinical question of
whether cross-sensitization to similar allergens accounts for the
frequent co-occurrence of these allergies in allergic populations.
If the consumption of peanut during infancy protects against
the development of peanut allergy, it might also protect against
the development of related food allergies. Israeli children have a
low prevalence of peanut, tree nut, and sesame allergy when
compared with age-matched UK children.14 Israeli children
consume high quantities of both peanut and sesame from an early
age, which is likely to explain the difference in peanut and sesame
allergy rates.14,15 However, the differences in tree nut allergy
cannot be attributed to early tree nut consumption because there
were no differences in the age at which tree nuts were introduced
between the 2 countries. Thus the low levels of tree nut allergy
might be the result of cross-tolerance induced through earlier,
greater, and more frequent consumption of peanut, sesame, or
both in Israel compared with the United Kingdom.
Given the possible clinical relevance of cross-reactivities
between proteins in different foods and given that there is
low-grade evidence that allergen immunotherapy can prevent
new-onset aeroallergen sensitization,16,17 it is reasonable to
investigate whether early dietary allergen exposure has an
influence on the onset or resolution of coexistent food allergies,
other atopic diseases, or both.
Research reported in this publication was supported by the National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases/National Institutes of Health (NIH) under award numbers
NO1-AI-15416, UM1AI109565, HHSN272200800029C, and UM2AI117870. The
content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the
official views of the NIH. Additional support came from Food Allergy Research &
Education (FARE), McLean, Va; the Medical Research Council & Asthma UK Centre;
the UK Department of Health through the National Institute for Health Research
(NIHR) comprehensive Biomedical Research Centre award to Guy’s & St. Thomas’
NHS Foundation Trust in partnership with King’s College London and King’s College
Hospital NHS Foundation Trust. The clinical trials unit is supported by the National
Peanut Board, Atlanta, Ga. The UK Food Standards Agency provided additional
support for the costs of phlebotomy. G.L. acknowledges the Davis Foundation for
academic support.
Disclosure of potential conflict of interest: G. du Toit reports income from grants from the
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)/National Institutes of
Health (NIH), Food Allergy & Research Education (FARE), MRC & Asthma UK
Centre, UK Department of Health through the National Institute of Health Research
(NIHR), and the National Peanut Board (NPB) and grants from the UK Food Standards
Agency (FSA; these grants part funded a salary over the period of this submitted work),
and he has equity holding with FoodMaestro. P. H. Sayre has received a grant from the
NIH. G. Roberts has received a grant from the Immune Tolerance Network. K. Lawson
and M. L. Sever have received grants from the NIAID/NIH (UM2AI117870) and
DAIT-SACCC and have received fees for participation in review activities and
payment
for
manuscript
preparation
from
the
NIAID/NIH
(contract
no.
HHSN272200800029C).
H.
T.
Bahnson
has
received
a
grant
from
Rho
(UM2AI117870) and the Benaroya Research Institute, ITN (UM1AI109565). H. R.
Fisher, S. Radulovic, and M. Basting have received grants from the NIAID (NO1-AI-
15416 [contract] and UM1AI109565 [grant]) and the FSA and have received other
support from FARE, MRC & Asthma UK Centre, UK Department of Health through
NIHR, National Peanut Board, and Osem. G. Lack has received grants from the NIAID
(NO1-AI-15416 [contract] and UM1AI109565 [grant]), the FSA, FARE, MRC &
Asthma UK Centre, UK Department of Health through NIHR, National Peanut Board,
and Osem and has consultant arrangements and stock/stock options with DBV
Technologies. M. Feeney has received grants from the NIAID (NO1-AI-15416
[contract] and UM1AI109565 [grant]) and the FSA and has received other support
from FARE, MRC & Asthma UK Centre, UK Department of Health through the NIHR,
National Peanut Board, and Osem; has consultant arrangements with Aimmune
Therapeutics UK Limited; and has received payment for lectures from Nutricia
Advanced Medical Nutrition. The rest of the authors declare that they have no relevant
conflicts of interest.
Received for publication May 22, 2017; revised August 31, 2017; accepted for publica-
tion September 21, 2017.
Available online October 31, 2017.
Corresponding author: Gideon Lack, MB, BCh, FRCPCH, Children’s Allergy Unit,
2nd Floor, Stairwell B, South Wing, Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust,
Westminster Bridge Road, London SE1 7EH, United Kingdom. E-mail: Gideon.
Lack@kcl.ac.uk.
The CrossMark symbol notifies online readers when updates have been made to the
article such as errata or minor corrections
0091-6749
� 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the American Academy of
Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. This is an open access article under the CC
BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2017.09.034
Abbreviations used
ITT: Intention-to-treat
LEAP: Learning Early About Peanut Allergy
LEAP-On: Twelve-month extension of the LEAP study
(Persistence of Oral Tolerance to Peanut)
PP: Per-protocol
SPT: Skin prick test
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
APRIL 2018
1344 DU TOIT ET AL
 METHODS
Study design
This is an a priori analysis of the Learning Early About Peanut Allergy
(LEAP) and the 12-month extension of the LEAP study (LEAP-On study)
on secondary allergic outcomes.10,18 The LEAP study was a randomized,
open-label, controlled trial comparing 2 strategies to prevent peanut allergy:
consumption or avoidance of peanut by high-risk infants until 60 months of
age. The LEAP-On study was a 2-sample comparison using all evaluable
study participants from the LEAP study assessed at 72 months of age after
12 months of peanut avoidance. Both trials were approved by the institu-
tional review board and were overseen by a National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases Allergy and Asthma Data and Safety Monitoring
Board. Written informed consent was obtained for all LEAP and LEAP-
On participants from their parent/guardian; full study details have been pub-
lished previously.
Enrollment and study procedures
The LEAP study enrolled infants aged at least 4 months and less than
11 months with severe eczema, egg allergy, or both from December 2006 to
May 2009.10 Participants were stratified at baseline into 2 separate study pop-
ulations (strata) based on skin prick test (SPT) results for peanut and then
randomly assigned to avoid (LEAP avoiders) or consume (LEAP consumers)
peanut. The analysis in this article combines data from both the SPT-positive
and SPT-negative strata. Participants randomly assigned to consumption were
fed at least 6 g of peanut protein per week until age 60 months. Clinical
assessments were undertaken at baseline (age 4-11 months) and at the ages
of 12, 30, and 60 months, which included determination of protocol-defined
eczema, asthma, and seasonal and perennial rhinoconjunctivitis, which
are further detailed in the text in this article’s Online Repository at
www.jacionline.org). The LEAP-On clinical assessment was undertaken at
72 months of age after 12 months of peanut avoidance in both groups.18
SPTs and specific IgE measurement
Immune assessments, including SPTs and specific IgE measurements, were
conducted; test methodologies and SPT materials have been published
previously.10 SPT responses to food allergens (peanut, hen’s egg white [using
standardized extract and prick-prick testing with raw hen’s egg white], cow’s
milk, sesame, and soya) were assessed at baseline and 12, 30, and 60 months of
age (ALK-Abell�
o, Hørsholm, Denmark). SPTs to all allergens except soya
were repeated at 72 months of age. At 60 and 72 months, Brazil nut, hazelnut,
cashew, walnut, and almond were also included. Levels of allergen-specific
IgE to peanut, hen’s egg white, cow’s milk, sesame, Brazil nut, hazelnut,
cashew, walnut, and almond were measured at screening and 12, 30, 60, and
72 months of age by using ImmunoCAP (Thermo Fisher, Uppsala, Sweden).
Levels of specific IgE to the aeroallergens house dust mite, cat, dog, timothy
grass pollen, birch pollen, and Alternaria species mold were measured at 30,
60, and 72 months of age (Thermo Fisher).
Mean SPT responses and specific IgE values were calculated for the above
allergens at all available time points; these means are presented for the
intention-to-treat (ITT) and per-protocol (PP) study populations. We defined
sensitization a priori for food allergens as an SPT wheal diameter of 3 mm or
greater or a specific IgE level of 0.35 kU/L or greater and for aeroallergens as a
specific IgE level of 0.35 kU/L or greater. Based on previous publications and
on the optimal predictive value for participants with peanut allergy
in the avoidance arm of LEAP (see this article’s Online Repository at
www.jacionline.org), we made use of high-level cutoffs of SPT wheal
diameters of 5 mm or greater and/or specific IgE levels of 10 kU/L or greater
to define ‘‘likely food allergy’’ in post hoc analyses.19
Visit
FIG 1. Asthma and rhinoconjunctivitis burden over time. Rates of protocol-defined asthma, seasonal
rhinoconjunctivitis, and perennial rhinoconjunctivitis in the consumption (green bars) and avoidance
(gray bars) groups in the ITT population at 30, 60, and 72 months of age are shown. There are no significant
differences between the 2 groups at any time point, as assessed by using x2 tests.
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
VOLUME 141, NUMBER 4
DU TOIT ET AL 1345
 Reported allergic reactions and association with
specific IgE sensitization
At 60 months of age, a study questionnaire recorded details of suspected
allergic reactions that occurred over the duration of the trial. Two-by-two
comparisons were made comparing tree nut and sesame-induced reported
allergic reactions and specific IgE levels of0.35 kU/L or greater toeachallergen.
Consumption of tree nuts and sesame
Participant-reported consumption of Brazil nut, hazelnut, cashew, walnut,
almond, or sesame on at least 1 occasion was assessed from 3-day food diaries
completed at 6 study time points.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed on all LEAP and LEAP-On study
participants for whom an outcome measurement was obtained on an ITT basis
comparing the 2 randomized treatment groups cross-sectionally. Analyses
were also performed on those who met the PP criteria for the LEAP study
(details of which have been published previously). Fisher exact tests, x2 tests,
or multivariate logistic regression were used to compare the proportion of
participants with each disease outcome of interest at the .05 level of
significance. These were planned analyses on secondary outcomes, and no
adjustments have been made for multiple comparisons. All analyses were
performed with SAS software, version 9.4, or JMP, version 12 (SAS Institute,
Cary, NC). Datasets for the analyses are available through TrialShare, a public
Web site managed by the Immune Tolerance Network (https://www.
itntrialshare.org/LEAPON_JACI_2017.url).
RESULTS
Participants
The characteristics of participants screened and enrolled in the
LEAP and LEAP-On studies have been published previously.10,18
No difference in development of allergic disease
between LEAP study intervention groups
No differences were noted between LEAP avoiders and
consumers in the rate of asthma, seasonal rhinoconjunctivitis,
and perennial rhinoconjunctivitis at 30, 60, and 72 months of age
in the ITT population (Fig 1 and Table E1 in this article’s Online
Repository at www.jacionline.org). These findings were repli-
cated in the PP population (Table E2). Additionally, there were
no differences in eczema between the 2 LEAP avoiders and con-
sumers at any study visit in the ITT (Fig 2 and Table E3) and PP
populations (Table E4).
3%
13%
5%
33%
13%
16%
35%
20%
3%
61%
20%
16%
3%
2%
15%
6%
31%
51%
11%
6%
62%
22%
3%
63%
21%
15%
1%
FIG 2. Eczema severity bands over time (SCORAD). Percentage of subjects with SCORAD assessments for
eczema of 0, greater than 0 to 15, 15 or greater to 40, and greater than 40 are shown at baseline and at 12, 30,
60, and 72 months in the avoidance (left bar of each pair) and consumption (right bar of each pair) groups in
the ITT population. There are no significant differences between the 2 groups at any time point, as assessed
by using x2 tests.
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
APRIL 2018
1346 DU TOIT ET AL
 Eczema. The majority of participants in the ITT population
had eczema (defined by a SCORAD score > 0) at baseline (97% in
the avoidance group and 98% in the consumption group); this
decreased across study time points to 72 months of age, with 39%
of participants in the avoidance group and 37% in the consump-
tion group having eczema (Fig 2). Overall, eczema severity
(measured by mean SCORAD score) decreased across study
time points from 34.4 (SD, 18.9) at baseline to 6.8 (SD, 11.2) at
72 months of age (after 12 months of peanut avoidance; see
Table E3). There were no significant differences in the presence
or severity of SCORAD scores between LEAP avoiders and con-
sumers at any time point (Fig 2 and see Table E3). These findings
were replicated in the PP population (see Table E4).
Asthma. In the ITT population the overall rate of asthma
increased from 11.2% at 30 months to 16.5% at 60 months and
16.3% at 72 months of age (see Table E1). There were no
significant
differences
in
rates
of
asthma
diagnosis
or
protocol-defined diagnostic criteria between the LEAP study
avoiders and consumers at 30, 60, or 72 months of age (Fig 1
and see Table E1). These findings were replicated in the PP
population (see Table E2).
Rhinoconjunctivitis. In the ITT population the overall rate
of seasonal allergic rhinoconjunctivitis increased from 14.4% at
30 months to 35.2% at 60 months and 46.3% at 72 months of age
(see Table E1). The rate of perennial allergic rhinoconjunctivitis
increased from 26.4% at 30 months to 42.4% at 60 months and
51.8% at 72 months of age. Rates of seasonal and perennialallergic
rhinoconjunctivitis were similar between LEAP study groups at
30, 60, and 72 months of age (Fig 1 and see Table E1). These
findings were replicated in the PP population (see Table E2).
FIG 3. Peanut SPT responses, peanut-specific IgE levels, and Ara h 2–specific IgE levels. Peanut SPT
responses (top panel), peanut-specific IgE levels (middle panel), and Ara h 2 IgE levels (bottom panel) in the
consumption and avoidance groups in the ITT (left column) and LEAP PP (right column) populations at 4 to
11, 12, 30, 60, and 72 months are shown. Boxes represent 25th and 75th percentiles, and error bars represent
2.5th and 97.5th percentiles. Lines connect the means over time for each randomized group. Solid gray lines
represent the LEAP avoiders. Solid green lines represent LEAP consumers. Gray circles represent LEAP
avoiders. Green circles represent LEAP consumers. *P value of .05 or less resulting from a comparison
between the LEAP avoidance and LEAP consumption groups by using a 2-sample t test. **P value of .01
or less resulting from a comparison between the LEAP avoidance and LEAP consumption groups by using
a 2-sample t test.
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
VOLUME 141, NUMBER 4
DU TOIT ET AL 1347
 No protective effect on surrogate markers of tree
nut and sesame allergy (SPT responses, specific IgE
levels, and reported allergic reactions) in the LEAP
study consumption group
We compared rates of sensitization to tree nut and sesame with
those to peanut. As previously published for peanut, in the
consumption group the mean peanut SPT wheal diameter was
significantly lower at all time points after randomization in both
the ITT and PP populations (Fig 3). In contrast, the mean
peanut-specific IgE level was lower only in the consumption
group at 1 time point at 72 months of age and lower only in the
PP population (Fig 3). Mean Ara h 2 IgE levels were significantly
lower in the consumption group at 60 and 72 months of age in
both the ITT and PP populations (Fig 3).
For tree nuts and sesame, by using a priori sensitization levels
(SPTwheal diameter >
_3 mm or specific IgE level >
_0.35 kU/L), the
only significant difference noted was for walnut in the ITT
population; the consumption group had an increased rate of
walnut
sensitization
at
72
months
compared
with
the
avoidance group (28.2% vs 19.9%, P 5 .025; see Table E5 in
this
article’s
Online
Repository
at
www.jacionline.org).
This difference in walnut sensitization was not seen in the PP pop-
ulation (see Table E6 in this article’s Online Repository at www.
jacionline.org).
In post hoc analyses, by using higher cutoff levels (SPT wheal
diameter >
_5 mm or specific IgE level >
_10 kU/L) as a marker of
likely
food
allergy,
there
were
significant
increases
in
sensitization rates to hazelnut, cashew, and walnut in the
consumption group in the ITT population (see Table E7 in
this article’s Online Repository at www.jacionline.org). These
differences were largely attenuated in the PP population (see
Table
E8
in
this
article’s
Online
Repository
at
www.
jacionline.org).
Considering
sensitization
based
on
SPT
responses only, mean SPT wheal diameters to tree nuts and ses-
ame were broadly similar between the consumption and avoid-
ance groups in the ITT population. The exceptions were to
walnut and cashew at 60 months and to hazelnut at 60 and
72 months, with mean wheal diameters being larger in the con-
sumption group (Fig 4). In the PP population the only difference
between groups was to hazelnut at 72 months of age (Fig 4).
Considering sensitization by IgE only, in the ITT population
mean specific IgE levels to tree nuts and sesame were generally
similar between the consumption and avoidance groups; howev-
er, specific IgE levels were greater in the consumption group for
some nuts at more than 1 time point (Fig 5). Most of these dif-
ferences were not apparent in the PP population. Only for wal-
nut in the ITT population were specific IgE levels greater in the
consumption group at all time points after baseline. These
FIG 4. Tree nut and sesame SPT responses. Sesame, Brazil nut, walnut, cashew, almond, and hazelnut SPT
responses (in millimeters) in the consumption and avoidance groups in the ITT (top row) and LEAP PP
(bottom row) populations at 4 to 11, 12, 30, 60, and 72 months of age are shown for sesame and at 60
and 72 months of age for the other tree nut outcomes. Boxes represent 25th and 75th percentiles, and error
bars represent 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles. Lines connect the means over time for each randomized group.
Solid gray lines represent the LEAP avoiders. Solid green lines represent LEAP consumers. Gray circles
represent LEAP avoiders. Green circles represent LEAP consumers. *P value of .05 or less resulting from
a comparison between the LEAP avoidance and LEAP consumption groups by using a 2-sample t test.
**P value of .01 or less resulting from a comparison between the LEAP avoidance and LEAP consumption
groups by using a 2-sample t test.
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
APRIL 2018
1348 DU TOIT ET AL
 differences in walnut-specific IgE levels were also apparent in
the PP population at 30 and 60 months of age.
When we compared reported reactions to tree nuts and sesame
between the LEAP intervention groups, the only significant
difference noted was for Brazil nut in the ITT population, where
5 participants in the consumption group reported Brazil nut
reactions compared with 0 in the avoidance group (P 5 .031).
A similar difference was noted for Brazil nut in the PP
population (see Table E9 in this article’s Online Repository at
www.jacionline.org). Statistically significant differences were
also noted when we compared the number of subjects reporting
any or more than 1 reaction to tree nuts and sesame in both the
ITT and PP populations (see Table E9). In the ITT population
40 (12.7%) participants in the consumption group reported a
reaction to any nut compared with 23 (7.3%) participants in the
avoidance group (P 5.023). Most subjects who reported reactions
to a tree nut also had specific IgE levels of 0.35 kU/L or greater to
that nut. However, this was not the case in all subjects. For
example, 10 of 26 subjects who reported a reaction to
cashew did not have specific IgE levels of 0.35 kU/L or
greater (see Table E10 in this article’s Online Repository at
www.jacionline.org).
To assess whether there were differences in consumption of
tree nuts or sesame between groups, we compared the number of
participants who reported ever eating tree nuts or sesame in 3-day
food diaries (see Table E11 in this article’s Online Repository at
www.jacionline.org). The large majority of participants did not
report consumption of tree nuts or sesame. Statistically significant
differences were noted for hazelnuts and mixed nuts. For
hazelnuts, 42 (13.2%) consumers reported eating hazelnut
compared with 21 (6.5%) participants in the avoidance arm
(P 5 .005). For mixed nuts, 5 participants in the consumption
group reported mixed nut consumption compared with 0 in the
avoidance group (P 5 .030).
No difference in rates and resolution of
sensitization to other common foods between the
LEAP intervention groups
There were no differences in rates of sensitization to cow’s milk
and egg white at any time point in the ITT (see Table E12 in this
article’s Online Repository at www.jacionline.org) or PP (see
Table E13 in this article’s Online Repository at www.jacionline.
org) populations. No differences were noted in likely allergy rates
by using high-level cutoffs of 5 mm or greater or 10 kU/L or
greater for SPT responses and specific IgE measurements,
respectively (see Tables E14 and E15 in this article’s Online
Repository at www.jacionline.org).
The high rate of raw egg white sensitization of 69.7% in the
overall ITT population at baseline decreased with age to 39.1% by
FIG 5. Tree nut– and sesame-specific IgE levels. Sesame-, Brazil nut–, walnut-, cashew-, almond-, and
hazelnut-specific IgE levels (in kilounits per liter) in the consumption and avoidance groups in the ITT
(top row) and LEAP PP (bottom row) populations at 4 to 11, 12, 30, 60, and 72 months are shown. Boxes
represent 25th and 75th percentiles, and error bars represent 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles. Lines connect
the means over time for each randomized group. Solid gray lines represent the LEAP avoiders. Solid green
lines represent LEAP consumers. Gray circles represent LEAP avoiders. Green circles represent LEAP con-
sumers. *P value of .05 or less resulting from a comparison between the LEAP avoidance and LEAP con-
sumption groups by using a 2-sample t test. **P value of .01 or less resulting from a comparison
between the LEAP avoidance and LEAP consumption groups by using a 2-sample t test.
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
VOLUME 141, NUMBER 4
DU TOIT ET AL 1349
 72 months (see Table E12). A similar decrease was evident for the
rate of SPT wheals of 3 mm or larger to egg white extract (see
Table E12). Rates of soya sensitization and likely allergy in the
ITT and PP populations were low and equivalent between
LEAP groups at all measured time points (see Tables E12-E15
in this article’s Online Repository at www.jacionline.org).
Increase in aeroallergen sensitization with age in
both LEAP study intervention groups
Sensitization rates increased from 30 to 60 and 72 months of age
for all aeroallergens (house dust mite, cat, dog, timothy grass
pollen, birch pollen, and Alternaria species mold) in both the con-
sumption and avoidancegroups in theITT (Fig6 and see Table E16
in this article’s Online Repository at www.jacionline.org) and PP
(see Table E17 in this article’s Online Repository at www.
jacionline.org) populations. The most striking increase was for
timothy grass pollen sensitization. In the ITT population the rate
in the combined avoiders and consumers group increased from
19.9% at 30 months to 48.7% at 60 months and 57.5% at 72 months
of age (see Table E16). There were no significant differences in
aeroallergensensitization between theconsumption andavoidance
groups at any time point (Fig 6 and see Table E16). These findings
were replicated in the PP population (see Table E17).
Similar cumulative allergic disease burden in both
LEAP study intervention groups
At 60 months of age, LEAP participants carried a high
cumulative allergic disease burden, considering together eczema,
asthma, rhinoconjunctivitis, or any likely food allergy defined as
any food allergen SPT response of 5 mm or greater (Fig 7). The
cumulative disease burden was not different between LEAP
avoiders and consumers in the ITT population at 60 or 72 months
of age (see Table E18 in this article’s Online Repository at
www.jacionline.org). When considering the cumulative disease
burden in the combined avoiders and consumers group in the
ITT population at 60 months of age, 76% of participants had at
least 1 allergic disease (seasonal and perennial rhinoconjunctivi-
tis, asthma, eczema, and likely food allergy) at 60 months, and
44% had multiple allergic diseases (Fig 7 and see Table E18).
Strong association between peanut allergy and
allergic disease
We constructed 6 multivariate logistic regression models,
including peanut allergy outcome, baseline egg allergy, and
baseline
SCORAD
score,
to
assess
their
effect
on
the
development
of
asthma,
seasonal
rhinoconjunctivitis,
and
perennial rhinoconjunctivitis separately at 60 and 72 months of
age. Peanut allergy at 60 and 72 months was strongly associated
with
asthma,
seasonal
rhinoconjunctivitis,
and
perennial
rhinoconjunctivitis in the ITT population at the same time point
(P < .001 for the association of peanut allergy with all 3 allergic
diseases at both time points, Fig 8 and see Table E19 in this
article’s Online Repository at www.jacionline.org). Similarly,
baseline egg allergy was associated with seasonal (P 5 .019)
and perennial (P 5.042) rhinoconjunctivitis but not with asthma
(P 5.848) at 60 months of age. Similar findings were apparent at
72 months of age (Fig 8 and see Table E19). The association of
FIG 6. Aeroallergen sensitization. Prevalence of an IgE level of 0.35 kU/L or greater for several aeroallergens
in the consumption (green bars) and avoidance (gray bars) groups at 30, 60, and 72 months of age are shown.
There are no significant differences between the 2 groups at any time point, as assessed by using x2 tests.
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
APRIL 2018
1350 DU TOIT ET AL
 asthma with peanut allergy, as opposed to its lack of association
with egg allergy, is not explained by baseline SCORAD score
because the latter does not influence the development of asthma
(see Table E19).
DISCUSSION
This study found that oral tolerance induction to peanut in the
LEAP study is specific for both allergen and allergic disease; that
is, early consumption of peanut had no preventative effect on the
development of asthma, allergic rhinoconjunctivitis, or surrogate
markers of coexistent food allergies (SPT responses, specific IgE
levels, and reported tree nut and sesame-induced reactions) and
did not hasten the resolution of eczema or egg allergy, which were
key inclusion criteria for LEAP study participation. The noted
similarities in allergic disease burden between LEAP intervention
groups is in contrast with the marked reduction in peanut allergy
observed in the consumption group (see Fig E1 in this article’s
Online Repository at www.jacionline.org).
The allergen specificity of the LEAP intervention is confirmed
by the finding that manifestations of allergic disease in the LEAP
population followed the typical trajectory in young children, with
no differences noted between groups (with the exception of peanut
allergy in LEAP consumers). Sensitization to hen’s egg white and
cow’s milk (see Tables E12-E15) and rates and severity of eczema
decreasedacrossalltime points (see TablesE3and E4).Incontrast,
we observed a significant increase in aeroallergen sensitization and
both seasonal and perennial rhinoconjunctivitis across all
measured time points (Figs 1 and 6). The burden of asthma was
high and equal between LEAP groups, increasing from 11.2% at
30 months of age to 16.3% at 72 months of age (see Table E1).
When considering the association between peanut allergy,
baseline
egg
allergy,
and
other
allergic
diseases,
strong
associations were noted with eczema and seasonal and perennial
rhinoconjunctivitis at 60 and 72 months of age (Fig 8 and see
Table E19). Peanut allergy was also strongly associated with
asthma; this relationship was independent of baseline eczema,
egg allergy, or both (Fig 8). The LEAP study demonstrated that
peanut consumption was strongly associated with the prevention
of peanut allergy but did not prevent asthma (see Fig E1).
Therefore the environmental and genetic risk factors for asthma
and peanut allergy are likely distinct.
There was no evidence that peanut consumption protected
against tree nut and sesame sensitization. Surprisingly, there was a
small signal that peanut consumption was associated with an
increase in sensitization to tree nuts and sesame. We found
higher SPT responses and specific IgE levels to tree nuts and
sesame in the LEAP consumption group compared with the
avoidance group at most time points, and at times, these
differences met statistical significance. In addition, a significantly
higher proportion of subjects (P 5 .023) in the consumption
group reported an allergic reaction to 1 or more tree nuts.
These findings contrast with the LEAP study findings at 60 months
of age, with challenge-proved peanut allergy, peanut SPT
 
 
 
    
 
     
  
 
   
FIG 7. Cumulative burden Venn diagram at 60 months of age. Numbers of participants in the ITT population
with protocol-defined eczema, rhinoconjunctivitis, asthma, or any likely food allergy are shown for the
avoidance group (top left), consumption group (top right), and total study group (bottom). This illustrates
the very high rate of single and multiple allergic diseases in the study population. Figures are numbers
(percentage) of participants.
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
VOLUME 141, NUMBER 4
DU TOIT ET AL 1351
 diameters, and Ara h 2 levels (Fig 3) all reduced markedly within
the LEAP consumption group compared with the avoidance group.
It is possible that early peanut consumption resulted in the
slightly increased rate of sensitization to tree nuts and could
potentially result from exposure to small quantities of epitopes
cross-reactive with those of tree nuts. There is literature to suggest
that low-level allergen exposure (to aeroallergens) results in
allergic responses, whereas high-level allergen exposure drives
tolerance.20,21 In addition, subjects in the consumption group might
have had levels of exposure to tree nuts potentially sufficient to
drive sensitization but insufficient to induce tolerance.
However, there are a number of other explanations for these
unexpected findings. First, the increase in tree nut sensitization
observed in the consumption group was not statistically
consistent over time in that the effect sizes were smaller and
more variable compared with peanut.
Second, to minimize false-negative results, no adjustments
were made for multiple comparisons, which increases the
likelihood of false-positive findings.
Third, if eating peanut causes an increase in tree nut sensitiza-
tion and reported allergic reactions, we would expect to see a
greater effect in the PP analyses, in which infants ate more peanut
compared to the ITT analyses; however, this was not evident for
either the a priori sensitization thresholds (compare Tables E5 and
E6) or the high-level sensitization thresholds that are more indic-
ative of clinical allergy. This suggests that these small and statis-
tically significant differences in sensitization do not represent
important clinical differences (compare Tables E7 and E8).
Fourth, differences in reported allergic reactions can arise
through an ascertainment bias as a consequence of increased
exposure to tree nuts and sesame in participants randomized to
peanut consumption (see Table E9). In support of this,
consumption data recorded in 3-day food diaries suggest more
frequent consumption in the LEAP consumption group (see
Table E11). In addition, this method might underestimate
differences in consumption patterns compared with a food
frequency questionnaire (as was used to record both frequency
and quantity of peanut consumption in LEAP participants).
 
 
 
 
 
 
Neither 
Egg Only
Only
Peanut
and Egg
Peanut
Neither 
Egg Only
Only
Peanut
and Egg
Peanut
Neither 
Egg Only
Only
Peanut
and Egg
Peanut
Perennial 
Peanut
Egg
Peanut
Egg
Peanut
Egg
Peanut
Egg
Peanut
Egg
Peanut
Egg
Only 
Neither 
Egg Only 
Peanut
and Egg
Peanut
Neither 
Egg Only 
Peanut
and Egg
Peanut
Neither 
Egg Only 
Peanut
and Egg
Peanut
Perennial 
Only 
FIG 8. Peanut and egg allergy associations with development of allergic diseases. Rates of protocol-defined
asthma (left), seasonal rhinoconjunctivitis (middle), and perennial rhinoconjunctivitis (right) at 60 (top) and
72 (bottom) months are shown in those with neither egg nor peanut allergy, egg allergy only, peanut allergy
only, or both egg and peanut allergy. The number of subjects contributing to each group is presented in the
denominator, and the number of subjects with each allergic disease within each group is presented in the
numerator of the values annotated within each bar. Presence of egg allergy was defined per inclusion
criteria at baseline, whereas peanut allergy was defined at 60 and 72 months. P values resulting from a
multivariate logistic regression model (outcome of interest being each allergic disease) adjusted for peanut
allergy, baseline egg allergy, and baseline SCORAD score are annotated within each panel.
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
APRIL 2018
1352 DU TOIT ET AL
 Finally, although there was overall a significant increase in
reported reactions to tree nuts and sesame in the consumers
compared with avoiders, between only 20% and 50% of subjects
with a reported reaction had specific IgE levels of 0.35 kU/L or
greater to the reported nut, which suggests that some reported
reactions do not represent true allergic reactions (see Table E10).
In contrast to allergy and dietary data in Israel, where higher
and more frequent peanut consumption patterns are associated
with low rates of reported tree nut and sesame allergy, we
demonstrate that peanut consumption in the LEAP study does not
protect against tree nut and sesame allergy, and furthermore, our
data raise the possibility that peanut consumption can cause
sensitization to tree nuts.14,15 However, in the absence of oral food
challenges to tree nuts and sesame, the clinical significance of
these small and inconsistent differences in surrogate markers of
food allergy remains unclear. The LEAP Trio study will make a
more detailed assessment of these differences at age 10 years.
A strength of this study is that we describe secondary allergy
outcomes for eczema, asthma, and seasonal and perennial
rhinoconjunctivitis using rigorous a priori criteria in a population
of infants with a high allergic disease burden and for which peanut
consumption successfully reduced the rate of peanut allergy. The
major limitation of this study is the absence of OFCs to tree nuts
and sesame. An additional limitation is that severe eczema,
egg allergy, or both served as enrollment criteria, thereby
minimizing the opportunity to assess peanut consumption as an
intervention to prevent the onset of these allergic conditions.
Despite the dramatic decrease in peanut allergy in participants
randomized to peanut consumption, the overall allergic disease
burden in LEAP study participants is high but equivalent between
LEAP groups at 60 and 72 months of age (after 12 months of
peanut avoidance). This demonstrates that oral tolerance induc-
tion to peanut in the LEAP study is specific for both allergen and
allergic disease. The underlying immune mechanisms associated
with tolerance to peanut do not alter the natural history of allergic
disease. Different prevention strategies or strategies that include
multiple dietary interventions need to be tested to assess whether
the reduction in peanut allergy observed in the LEAP consump-
tion group can be extended to other common food allergens and
allergic diseases.
We thank the many nurses, dietitians, doctors, and administrative staff of the
Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust Children’s Allergy Service for
clinical and logistical assistance over the period of the study and Poling Lau
for administrative support in the preparation of this manuscript. Above all, we
thank all of the children and their families who generously took part in this
study.
LEAP-On Study Team
Clinical support: Susan Chan and Adam Fox; Nursing staff: Mable
Abraham, Muhsinah Adam, Louise Coverdale, Claire Duncan, Amy
Nixon,
Una
O’Dwyer-Leeson,
Victoria
Offord,
Aine
Sheridan,
Fiona Watson, and Natalie Witham. Dietitians: Kathryn Cockerell, Gail
Harland, Tiffany Miller, and Charlotte Stedman. Study management and
administration: Catherine Clarke, Richard Cleaver, Gemma Deutsch, and
Alicia Parr. Laboratory projects: Natalia Becares, Matthew Crossley,
Natalia do Couto Francisco, Kerry Richards, Ewa Pietraszewicz, Alick
Stephens, Asha Sudra, Rianne Wester, Alastair Wilson, and Celine Wu.
Play specialists: Jenna Heath and Kathryn Hersee. Phlebotomist: Devi
Patkunam. ITN staff: Adam Asare, Eduard Chani, Judith Evind, Noha
Lim, Audrey Plough, Judith Evind, Don and Whitehouse. National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases staff: Margarita Gomez
Lorenzo and Joy Laurienzo Panza. Rho Federal Systems staff: Jackie
Johnson, Jack Hu, and Travis Mason.
Key messages
d Prevention of peanut allergy through early peanut con-
sumption is allergen specific and allergic disease specific.
d The immune mechanisms underlying tolerance to peanut
do not hasten resolution of other allergic disease.
REFERENCES
1. Muraro A, Halken S, Arshad SH, Beyer K, Dubois AE, Du Toit G, et al. EAACI
food allergy and anaphylaxis guidelines. Primary prevention of food allergy.
Allergy 2014;69:590-601.
2. Nwaru BI, Hickstein L, Panesar SS, Muraro A, Werfel T, Cardona V, et al. The
epidemiology of food allergy in Europe: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Allergy 2014;69:62-75.
3. Venter C, Maslin K, Patil V, Kurukulaaratchy R, Grundy J, Glasbey G, et al. The
prevalence, natural history and time trends of peanut allergy over the first 10 years
of life in two cohorts born in the same geographical location 12 years apart. Pediatr
Allergy Immunol 2016;27:804-11.
4. Bellach J, Schwarz V, Ahrens B, Trendelenburg V, Aksunger O, Kalb B, et al.
Randomized placebo-controlled trial of hen’s egg consumption for primary
prevention in infants. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2017;139:1591-9.e2.
5. Natsume O, Kabashima S, Nakazato J, Yamamoto-Hanada K, Narita M, Kondo M,
et al. Two-step egg introduction for prevention of egg allergy in high-risk infants
with eczema (PETIT): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet
2017;389:276-86.
6. Palmer DJ, Metcalfe J, Makrides M, Gold MS, Quinn P, West CE, et al. Early
regular egg exposure in infants with eczema: a randomized controlled trial.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013;132:387-92.e1.
7. Palmer DJ, Sullivan TR, Gold MS, Prescott SL, Makrides M. Randomized
controlled trial of early regular egg intake to prevent egg allergy. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2017;139:1600-7.e2.
8. Perkin MR, Logan K, Tseng A, Raji B, Ayis S, Peacock J, et al. Randomized trial of
introduction of allergenic foods inbreast-fed infants.N Engl J Med 2016;374:1733-43.
9. Wei-Liang Tan J, Valerio C, Barnes EH, Turner PJ, Van Asperen PA, Kakakios
AM, et al. A randomized trial of egg introduction from 4 months of age in infants
at risk for egg allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2017;139:1621-8.e8.
10. Du Toit G, Roberts G, Sayre PH, Bahnson HT, Radulovic S, Santos AF, et al.
Randomized trial of peanut consumption in infants at risk for peanut allergy.
N Engl J Med 2015;372:803-13.
11. Barre A, Sordet C, Culerrier R, Rance F, Didier A, Rouge P. Vicilin allergens of
peanut and tree nuts (walnut, hazelnut and cashew nut) share structurally related
IgE-binding epitopes. Mol Immunol 2008;45:1231-40.
12. Beyer K, Grishina G, Bardina L, Grishin A, Sampson HA. Identification of an 11S
globulin as a major hazelnut food allergen in hazelnut-induced systemic reactions.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 2002;110:517-23.
13. Masthoff LJ, van Hoffen E, Mattsson L, Lidholm J, Andersson K, Zuidmeer-
Jongejan L, et al. Peanut allergy is common among hazelnut-sensitized subjects
but is not primarily the result of IgE cross-reactivity. Allergy 2015;70:265-74.
14. Du Toit G, Katz Y, Sasieni P, Mesher D, Maleki SJ, Fisher HR, et al. Early
consumption of peanuts in infancy is associated with a low prevalence of peanut
allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2008;122:984-91.
15. Dalal I, Binson I, Reifen R, Amitai Z, Shohat T, Rahmani S, et al. Food allergy is a
matter of geography after all: sesame as a major cause of severe IgE-mediated food
allergic reactions among infants and young children in Israel. Allergy 2002;57:362-5.
16. Di Bona D, Plaia A, Leto-Barone MS, La Piana S, Macchia L, Di Lorenzo G.
Efficacy of allergen immunotherapy in reducing the likelihood of developing
new allergen sensitizations: a systematic review. Allergy 2017;72:691-704.
17. Kristiansen M, Dhami S, Netuveli G, Halken S, Muraro A, Roberts G, et al.
Allergen immunotherapy for the prevention of allergy: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2017;28:18-29.
18. Du Toit G, Sayre PH, Roberts G, Sever ML, Lawson K, Bahnson HT, et al. Effect
of avoidance on peanut allergy after early peanut consumption. N Engl J Med
2016;374:1435-43.
19. Santos AF, Douiri A, Becares N, Wu SY, Stephens A, Radulovic S, et al. Basophil
activation test discriminates between allergy and tolerance in peanut-sensitized
children. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014;134:645-52.
20. Platts-Mills T, Vaughan J, Squillace S, Woodfolk J, Sporik R. Sensitisation,
asthma, and a modified Th2 response in children exposed to cat allergen:
a population-based cross-sectional study. Lancet 2001;357:752-6.
21. Woodcock A, Lowe LA, Murray CS, Simpson BM, Pipis SD, Kissen P, et al. Early
life environmental control: effect on symptoms, sensitization, and lung function at
age 3 years. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2004;170:433-9.
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
VOLUME 141, NUMBER 4
DU TOIT ET AL 1353
