 1
Scientific RepoRts | 6:22095 | DOI: 10.1038/srep22095
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Network centrality and seasonality 
interact to predict lice load in a 
social primate
Julie Duboscq1,2, Valeria Romano1,2, Cédric Sueur1,2,3 & Andrew J.J. MacIntosh4,5
Lice are socially-transmitted ectoparasites. Transmission depends upon their host’s degree of contact 
with conspecifics. While grooming facilitates ectoparasite transmission via body contact, it also 
constrains their spread through parasite removal. We investigated relations between parasite burden 
and sociality in female Japanese macaques following two opposing predictions: i) central females in 
contact/grooming networks harbour more lice, related to their numerous contacts; ii) central females 
harbour fewer lice, related to receiving more grooming. We estimated lice load non-invasively using 
the conspicuous louse egg-picking behaviour performed by macaques during grooming. We tested for 
covariation in several centrality measures and lice load, controlling for season, female reproductive 
state and dominance rank. Results show that the interaction between degree centrality (number of 
partners) and seasonality predicted lice load: females interacting with more partners had fewer lice 
than those interacting with fewer partners in winter and summer, whereas there was no relationship 
between lice load and centrality in spring and fall. This is counter to the prediction that increased 
contact leads to greater louse burden but fits the prediction that social grooming limits louse burden. 
Interactions between environmental seasonality and both parasite and host biology appeared to 
mediate the role of social processes in louse burden.
Many parasites, i.e. organisms that live and feed exclusively within or on other living organisms (hosts), are 
socially-transmitted, either directly through contact between individuals or indirectly through spatial overlap 
and resource sharing1. Risk of infection in social individuals can therefore depend partly upon the nature of their 
social interactions, making the risk of disease and pathogen transmission one of the major costs of sociality2. 
Highly social hosts are expected to encounter a more abundant and diverse parasite community than less social 
hosts, and thus to exert stronger influence on the transmission of parasites through their social networks1. Thus 
the heterogeneity and diversity of contacts between hosts must be considered when tracking parasite/disease 
transmission and attempting to understand infection risk3,4.
From this perspective, social network analysis (SNA) provides a useful tool that captures such heterogeneity 
by taking into account direct and indirect connections (edges) between individuals (nodes), allowing for mul-
tilevel analyses from individuals to populations3. For example, the number of connections an individual has 
(network degree) and their combined ‘weight’ (network strength) can be used to assess an individual’s risk of 
direct exposure to pathogens/parasites from social conspecifics, while other indices such as eigenvector centrality 
extend estimation of exposure risk to include the neighbourhood of an individual’s neighbours3,5. The use of SNA 
in epidemiological studies has also highlighted that social transmission of pathogens can be dynamic because 
host sociality itself is intrinsically dynamic3 and related to various factors which must also be taken into account 
such as environmental seasonality, age, sex, reproductive state, energetic needs and/or preferential attachment 
related to dominance rank, kinship, or friendship2,6.
One common type of network relevant to social animals derives from social grooming (allo-body-care/
allo-grooming/allo-preening, hereafter grooming). Grooming is often highlighted as a mechanism of establishing 
and maintaining group cohesion and social bonds7,8, and at least in non-human primates, its frequency has been 
linked to kinship, dominance rank and access to resources9,10. In many social animals, grooming is also studied 
1Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Département Ecologie, Physiologie et Ethologie, Strasbourg, France. 
2Université de Strasbourg, Institut Pluridisciplinaire Hubert Curien, Strasbourg, France. 3Unit of Social Ecology, 
CP231, Université libre de Bruxelles, Campus Plaine, Brussels, Belgium. 4Kyoto University Primate Research 
Institute, Inuyama, Japan. 5Kyoto University Wildlife Research Center, Kyoto, Japan. Correspondence and requests 
for materials should be addressed to J.D. (email: julie.a.m.duboscq@gmail.com)
received: 09 April 2015
Accepted: 04 February 2016
Published: 26 February 2016
OPEN
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
Scientific RepoRts | 6:22095 | DOI: 10.1038/srep22095
with respect to its direct and indirect health benefits: in addition to reducing physiological stress and releasing 
endorphins (“relaxing” hormones)11–13, social grooming retains the original (hygienic) function of self-grooming 
which evolved to remove dirt and other debris, ectoparasites and/or dead skin. Evidence for this hygienic func-
tion is widespread in animal societies14–16. It is further supported by the preference of groomers to groom body 
parts likely infested with ectoparasites because they are not easily accessible to the individuals themselves (e.g. 
head, shoulders)16–18, and by the finding that preventing grooming through physical incapacitation or social iso-
lation leads to sharp increases in ectoparasite loads19,20.
One common ectoparasite of mammals is the louse, which feeds on blood and requires a host during each 
stage of its life cycle. Adult lice typically lay one to several eggs (nitts) every few days, which are glued to the base 
of a hair. Like many organisms, lice respond to environmental conditions (e.g. temperature, humidity). In ungu-
lates, for instance, adult louse populations peak in spring and drop in summer20,21. Lice are also susceptible to 
their host’s physical condition (e.g. hormonal changes), which they perceive through blood meals (e.g.)21–23. Thus, 
louse reproduction can be triggered or hindered by that of their hosts20. Lice are further affected by changes in the 
pelage of their hosts–their habitat–such as those induced by moulting (sequential hair replacement) or shearing 
(e.g. in domestic sheep)23. All of these are relevant to the extent to which lice affect their hosts. Direct effects of 
infestation include activation of skin allergic reactions such as dermatitis or pruritis20, which have pronounced 
effects on an animal’s body condition, e.g. hair/feather quality20, and ultimately its fitness20. Indirect effects 
include their potential to act as vectors or intermediate hosts of many pathogens (e.g., Rickettsia prowazekii, 
 
Bartonella quintana, and B. recurrentis24; Rickettsia, Anaplasma, and Bartonella spp. in various animals20,25,26, 
including primates27).
Lice and their mammalian hosts are thus a good host-parasite system to study the likelihood or risk of disease/
parasite transmission within host social networks28. Body contact, including grooming, provides an opportunity 
for these parasites to transfer from one host to the next. The host contact network structure is therefore para-
mount in patterns of louse transmission and even population viability, since lice are largely host specific, have a 
direct life cycle, and may not survive more than a few hours away from their host20. At the same time, much of 
the body contact observed in many social animals occurs in the context of social grooming, which may simulta-
neously constrain the spread of such organisms through parasite removal. An individual’s lice load can thus be 
amplified or constrained by its social contact network, illustrating one of the trade-offs between costs and ben-
efits of being social. Yet, studies investigating the links between network centrality and louse infestation and/or 
louse-mediated disease are still too few, and these trade-offs thus generally remain poorly understood.
In this study, we investigated the risk of louse infestation within Japanese macaque social networks. The 
Japanese macaque (Macaca fuscata fuscata) is a social primate species living in multi-female multi-male groups, 
where individuals form linear dominance hierarchies and differentiated affiliative social relationships29. Japanese 
macaques harbour two species of louse (Pedicinis obtusus and P. eurygaster). Based on quantification of egg and 
nymphal/adult stages of lice detected on culled macaques, it was estimated that an average-sized macaque could 
harbour up to 550 louse eggs17. This was approximated to represent 230 nymph/adult lice17, with usually good 
correlation between these life stages (at least in domestic sheep)21. Thus, the number of louse eggs seems a good 
estimation of the host louse population17. Furthermore, video data analysis showed that 98.9% of what groomers 
conspicuously pick out and consume from the hair/skin of groomees consists of louse eggs30. Body parts esti-
mated to have many louse eggs and associated with higher frequencies of conspicuous louse egg-picking gestures 
are groomed longer than other body parts17,31. This louse egg-picking behaviour can thus provide an ideal estima-
tor of lice load among individuals observed under naturalistic conditions. We therefore used the number of louse 
egg-picking gestures during grooming, controlling for total number of observation records of grooming received, 
as a proxy for lice load (see Methods).
Specifically, we first assessed the extent of variation in centrality measures and lice load according to ecological 
and social contexts because host-parasite interactions can be mediated by such contexts32. Japanese macaques 
live in an environment with four distinct seasons and are strict seasonal breeders, with mating seasons occur-
ring between fall and winter and birth seasons occurring between spring and summer (with strong regional 
variation)29. As such, host energetic demands and physiology as well as social contact and proximity networks 
also change seasonally and seasonal changes in host reproductive activity can induce variation in host immune 
defence32 and social tendencies33–35. Individuals furthermore moult seasonally, hair being longest/densest in win-
ter and shortest/sparsest in summer36, which may strongly affect louse reproduction and survival but also louse 
detection during grooming. Host susceptibility to infection can also be related to an individual’s general physical 
condition37. Higher-ranking females in the dominance hierarchy are generally fitter than lower-ranking ones38–41, 
and they may thus better resist infection35,42,43. Such individual, social and environmental variables, along with 
the synergies among them, often correlate with variation in parasitism which in turn may influence transmission 
dynamics and infection risks32. As such we predicted that environmental seasonality, host reproductive status and 
dominance rank would affect host centrality, lice load and their interactions in a way that females, particularly 
low-ranking ones, may be less social and more prone to lice infestation during reproductive seasons (i.e. winter 
and summer), periods where lice population should also be either at its maximum or at its minimum due to local 
conditions (i.e. physiological and hair status of the host).
Then, we tested the relationship between centrality and lice load, accounting for the potential confounding 
factors presented above (also see Methods). Because body contact provides a transmission opportunity for lice, 
and thus an infection risk for hosts, yet grooming may constrain louse density through parasite removal, we made 
two opposing predictions: compared to less central females, 1/ more central females will be most infested with lice 
due to their higher diversity of interacting partners or their higher frequency of body contact in the network; or 
 
2/ more central females will be least infested with lice because they have their louse eggs removed through groom-
ing by a higher diversity of partners and/or more frequently. Evidence for a positive relationship between central-
ity and lice load would indicate that despite increasing exposure risk to potentially deleterious parasites, being 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
Scientific RepoRts | 6:22095 | DOI: 10.1038/srep22095
central still presents advantages. Conversely, a negative relationship would speak in favour of social grooming as 
an efficient antiparasite strategy that can be exploited by females through their grooming networks. To test predic-
tion 1, we investigated the relationship between estimated lice load and centrality measures based on undirected 
weighted networks of body contacts, including grooming. To test prediction 2, we looked at whether lice load was 
related to in-centrality measures derived from directed weighted networks of grooming received. Testing differ-
ent centrality measures allowed us to investigate whether it is the actual number (or diversity) of partners and/or 
 
the actual amount of social contact a female has that influences lice load. First, grooming skills and thus louse 
egg-picking efficiency significantly vary across individuals44. As such, being groomed for long duration by an 
individual poorly skilled at removing louse eggs can have less influence on lice load than being groomed for short 
durations by several individuals with varying degree of efficiency at removing louse eggs. Furthermore, female 
Japanese macaque society is based on strict hierarchical social rules determining who can interact with whom45. 
These social constraints can not only affect the number of partners as much as the frequency of social interactions 
of an individual, but also the areas of the body individuals have access to: lower-ranking females indeed tend 
to avoid eye contact when grooming higher-ranking ones, and thus avoid the head and frontal body parts (in 
bonobos)46. Given that lice are unevenly distributed on the body17, this may also constrain louse egg removal and 
having diverse grooming partners may thus be as advantageous as being groomed for long durations.
Results
Grooming represented 27% (median, range = 
 14–39%, N = 
 20) of all activity scans of female Japanese macaques 
of Koshima during this study. Body contact without grooming represented only 9% (median, range = 
 1–20%, 
N = 
 20) of all scans with body contact. Females were in contact with other adult females in 48% of all scans 
with body contact (median, range = 
 4–88%, N = 
 20), with males in 6% (median, range = 
 0–61%, N = 
 20 females 
and 9 males) and sub-adults, juveniles and infants in 41% (median, range = 
 1–96%, N = 
 20 females and 23–31 
non-adults). Total louse egg-picking events averaged 129 events per female over the whole study period (median, 
range: 36–320, N = 
 20), which represented less than one event per grooming minute-scan (median = 
 0.77, 
range = 
 0.34–2.23, N = 
 20).
Variation in centrality and lice load according to seasonal and individual factors. 
The modu-
larity Q of social networks, representing the extent to which a network is partitioned in smaller units, shifted 
between seasons especially before and after summer where it was highest (Fig. 1). Randomisation tests showed 
that only the centrality measure degree in the contact network was significantly affected by seasonal and/or indi-
vidual factors when compared to null models that randomised the network data. Degree in the contact network 
showed significant variation across seasons (Supplementary Table S2; Figs 1 and 2): it was significantly lower in 
summer and fall compared to winter and spring (Supplementary Table S2; Fig. 2), meaning that females had sig-
nificantly more female social partners during the latter than the former seasons.
Lice load also varied across seasons, being higher in summer and fall compared to spring and winter 
(Supplementary Table S2; Fig. 2). Lice load changed marginally according to the females’ reproductive state, being 
slightly higher in reproductively active females than others (Supplementary Table S2).
Testing prediction 1: increased parasitism with increased centrality in contact networks. 
 
Overall, only one of the centrality measures from contact networks was related to lice load and only through an 
interaction with season (Supplementary Tables S3 & S4, Figs 3–5): females with higher degree had a lower lice 
load than those with lower degree, but only in winter and summer, whereas there was no relationship between 
degree and lice load in spring and fall. Strength did not predict lice load (Supplementary Tables S3 & S4, Figs 3–5). 
Thus, in winter (mating season) and summer (birth season), females in contact with more female social part-
ners had lower parasite burden compared to females in contact with fewer partners. In spring and fall, however, 
females showed similar parasite burden regardless of their centrality. The observed effect of degree centrality 
was significantly more pronounced than the same effect from a set of models that randomised the network data 
 
(p β 
obs < 
 β 
rand = 
 0.043, Supplementary Table S4). Prediction 1 was thus not fulfilled.
Testing prediction 2: decreased parasitism with increased centrality in grooming received network. 
 
Models with grooming received centrality measures showed a tendency towards lice load being related to 
in-degree through an interaction with season and reproductive state separately (Supplementary Table S3 & S4, 
Figs 3–5): females with higher degree in the grooming received network tended to have lower lice load than those 
with lower degree in winter and summer whereas there appeared to be no relationship between degree and lice 
load in spring and fall (Supplementary Table S3 & S4, Figs 3–5). This negative effect of centrality on lice load 
was marginally greater in reproductively active compared to inactive females (Supplementary Table S3 & S4, 
 
Figs 3–5). This means that in winter and summer (the mating and birth seasons respectively, i.e. when some 
females were reproductively active), females receiving grooming from more female social partners had lower par-
asite burden compared to females receiving grooming from fewer partners. In spring and fall, however, females 
showed similar parasite burden regardless of their centrality. However, the observed effect of in-degree centrality 
was not quite more pronounced than the same effect from a set of models that randomised the network data 
 
(p β 
obs < 
 β 
rand p = 
 0.087, Supplementary Table S4). Prediction 2 was thus partially fulfilled.
Discussion
In animal groups, increased centrality in social networks is often linked to increased parasite load and disease 
risk3. In female Japanese macaques of Koshima, centrality in terms of number of connections in contact and 
grooming received networks was negatively associated with lice load, as measured by louse egg-picking gestures 
performed during grooming. However, the relationship between degree and lice load was mediated by season in 
that females with fewer contact or grooming partners presented higher lice burden only during winter (mating 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
Scientific RepoRts | 6:22095 | DOI: 10.1038/srep22095
Figure 1. Seasonal variation in contact and grooming networks. Sociograms of weighted contact (in blue) 
and grooming received (in orange) networks across the four seasons. Node colour shades represent variation 
in number of connections (degree), the darker the higher, and edge thickness represents the strength of the 
connection between two nodes, the thicker the stronger. A bidirectional relationship between two nodes is 
indicated by two edges clockwise. On the side of each network is given the modularity Q as well as the number 
of communities (or splits) found according to eigenvector centrality (Newman 2006).
Figure 2. Variation in centrality indices and lice load across seasons. Coefficient plots of GLMMs testing 
the influence of seasonal and individual factors on centrality measures and lice load (here without the 
influence of centrality). Circle: coefficient value, bold line: one standard error. Levels of categorical predictors 
between parentheses indicate those not included in the intercept (the reference level is winter for season, not 
reproductively active for reproductive state).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
Scientific RepoRts | 6:22095 | DOI: 10.1038/srep22095
season) and summer (birth season). This was concurrent with a tendency towards the negative effect of degree 
centrality in grooming received network on lice load to be greater in reproductively active compared to inactive 
females. These findings did not provide support to the prediction of increased parasitism with increased contact 
centrality, but were in accordance with other studies showing that grooming received can be a predictor of lower 
ectoparasite burden15,19,20,47.
It must be stated up front that our measure of lice load is indirect, observational and dependent upon observ-
ing individuals grooming. Capturing monkeys and marking/collecting lice provides a direct estimate of lice loads 
and allows testing whether lice actually carry pathogens, but this approach is inconvenient and often impossible 
to implement in wild populations. That said, Japanese macaques are very conspicuous when picking items from 
the hair or on the skin of their grooming partners, and 98.9% of what is picked and consumed has been demon-
strated to be louse eggs30. Furthermore, body parts estimated to have many louse eggs are groomed longer with 
more frequent louse egg-picking gestures17,30. Thus, despite the indirect nature of this measure, we believe it to be 
a fair estimate of lice load, particularly when coupled with the demonstration that the amount of eggs is approxi-
mately double that of adult lice17. Such conspicuous hygiene-related behaviours thus provide useful information 
with which to investigate risks of infestation with ectoparasites and/or disease spread in wild animals, at least in 
those species in which such behaviours are readily observed.
The study of this louse egg-picking behaviour led researchers to discover that macaques groom for demonstra-
bly longer durations if they find many louse eggs to pick and eat (so called “grooming-related feeding”), irrespec-
tive of the relationship between groomer and groomee31. Studies on birds have also shown that allopreening of 
self-inaccessible body parts occurred regardless of dominance relationships, which was not true for self-accessible 
body parts15. These studies suggest that some grooming bouts or parts thereof may be less dependent upon social 
preferences than once thought, and instead linked to other ecological functions (e.g. hygiene, feeding) of social 
Figure 3. Interaction between centrality in grooming received network and seasonality in predicting lice 
load. Sociograms of weighted grooming received networks of adult female Japanese macaques of Koshima, 
divided according to season: (a) winter (N = 
 19, f-ok not followed), (b) spring (N = 
 20), (c) summer (N = 
 19, 
f11 no contact with others), and (d) fall (N = 
 19, f23 no contact with others). Variation in node colour 
represents variation in lice load per grooming unit, the darker the node, the higher the lice load. Variation 
in node size represents variation in degree, the bigger the node, the higher the degree. Variation in edge size 
represents the strength of interactions, the thicker the edge the more frequent grooming received between two 
nodes. Edge colour matches the target node, i.e. the node receiving grooming. A bidirectional relationship 
between two nodes is indicated by two edges clockwise.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
Scientific RepoRts | 6:22095 | DOI: 10.1038/srep22095
grooming15,31. This is remarkable because social interactions between group members are often influenced by 
similarity within dyads; kin, individuals of adjacent dominance ranks, or age-mates tend to interact more fre-
quently with each other than with others. Such assortativity may ultimately reflect on the centrality of individuals 
within their network, and arises independently of the distribution of lice in the group. Yet, our study, like that of 
earlier works17,30,31, hints at the possibility that grooming-related feeding may now prove influential in determin-
ing even partially the grooming network structure, at least in macaque societies, a link that should be investigated 
further.
One ecological factor that clearly affects numerous behavioural outcomes is seasonality. We considered sea-
sonality of the environment as well as host and parasite biology, as it is generally highly relevant to infectious 
disease dynamics32. Indeed, the primary result of this study hinges on an interaction between seasonality, net-
work centrality and lice load: the relationship between parasitism and sociality can only be interpreted in light of 
seasonal variation. Winter and summer represent the mating and birth seasons in Koshima, respectively. Both 
seasons show changes in female contacts and/or proximity behaviour33–35 in two opposite fashions: an increase as 
solitary/floater males temporarily join social groups to gain mating opportunities during the mating season48, and 
new individuals are born in the birth season; or conversely, a decrease as during the mating season, consortship 
pairs seek to be alone and during the birth season, females focus a great part of their attention on their newborns, 
somewhat decreasing their involvement in other social interactions34. These two seasons, winter (mating) and 
summer (birth), also have long-lasting effects on the physiology of females (e.g. immunosuppression, energy 
costs). It is therefore not surprising to observe that the greatest contrast observed in the relationship between 
lice load and centrality (from negative to almost absent) exist between the two most physiologically (reproduc-
tively) demanding seasons and the other less demanding seasons. Similarly, louse transfers and thus infection 
risk increased during the mating season in both chipmunks (Tamias striatus) and mouse lemurs (Microcebus 
rufus), presumably because of the concomitant increase in both contact between individuals and host reproduc-
tive activity28,49. Because lice feed on blood, it has been hypothesised that their own reproduction is influenced by 
their hosts’ sexual hormones21,23, in that some stages of the host reproductive activity can trigger the parasite own 
reproductive activity. This is the case for another blood-feeding ectoparasite, the rabbit flea (Spilopsyllus cuniculi), 
in which the reproductive cycle is triggered by pregnancy and parturition of the host doe. The fleas then migrate 
en masse to the nest to breed on the immunologically-naïve young50,51, illustrating the tight links between host 
and parasite biology and the effect of environmental seasonality on the synergy between host and parasite (see 
also next paragraph).
These synergies between host and parasite biology also explain the results of this study. Lice load was highest 
in summer during the periparturient period. Females thus seemed more vulnerable to louse infestation at this 
time. This was particularly the case for reproductively active females, especially those that were less central in 
the social networks. This pattern could be due to the combination of several factors, also linked to the effect 
of environmental seasonality on host and parasite biology. First, the surge of sex hormones in the host around 
birth could have triggered louse reproductive activity and proliferation20–23. Second, the immunosuppressive 
effects of these sex hormones during challenging times such as birth and lactation could have decreased the host’s 
defence against infestation, and made them more susceptible to it52. Third, the presence of immune-naïve hosts 
(newborns) could have constituted a newly available and easy breeding ground for lice, which could have then 
transferred to other individuals, especially vertically to the mother and then on to the mothers’ social partners. 
Fourth, moulting induces changes in the habitat of lice, and in Japanese macaques, begins at the onset of spring 
Figure 4. Coefficient plots of GLMMs. Testing prediction 1: left panel; Testing prediction 2: right panel. Circle: 
coefficient value, bold line: one standard error. Two variables separated by a column denotes an interaction. 
Levels of categorical predictors between parentheses indicate those not included in the intercept (the reference 
level is winter for season, not reproductively active for reproductive state, and non-treated for treatment). 
Black = 
 degree (left) or in-degree (right). Grey = 
 strength (left) or in-strength (right).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
Scientific RepoRts | 6:22095 | DOI: 10.1038/srep22095
Figure 5. Effects of the interaction between number of connections in the network and seasonality or 
reproductive state on lice load. panel (a) shows degree (contact network) and season, panel (b) shows in-
degree (grooming received network) and season, panel (c) shows in-degree (grooming received network) and 
reproductive state. The four seasons (winter, spring, summer, and fall) each have their own square, the two 
reproductive state (active, not active) as well. The line represents predictions from the model and dots the raw 
data transformed (i.e. log of the response (lice load) and square-root of the predictor (centrality)) and scaled.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
8
Scientific RepoRts | 6:22095 | DOI: 10.1038/srep22095
and ends during summer. Hairs are therefore shortest in summer and continue to grow through autumn and 
winter when they are longest. These changes, in addition to natural variations in the louse microhabitat (like 
skin temperature or solar radiation higher in summer21), likely impact louse prevalence and intensity (sensu the 
effect of shearing on louse density in domestic sheep21). We also cannot rule out the possibility that moulting 
impacts the efficiency with which monkeys can find and extract louse eggs: beginning at the hair base, louse eggs 
would be pushed upward during regrowth and the shorter hair may increase their visibility. Increases in lice load 
in summer through fall may thus be linked to the synergistic effects of changing louse habitat, the interaction 
between lice and host reproduction, and changes in behavioural tendencies of hosts. Nevertheless, examining 
factors related to seasonal variation in lice loads, including pelage characteristics, is insufficient in itself to explain 
the observed negative relationship between centrality and lice load during reproductive seasons.
At Koshima, mean centrality indices generally seemed to vary in the opposite direction of mean lice load 
across seasons; the season in which mean centrality was lowest corresponded to the season in which mean lice 
load was highest. However, network modularity did follow somewhat closer to the pattern of mean lice load in 
that the season in which mean lice load was highest was also the season in which modularity was greatest. Greater 
modularity in a network means that the network decomposes into more modules than in a network with lower 
modularity. Greater modularity is hypothesized to negatively impact transmission of infectious agents through-
out social groups by breaking down the chain of transmission53. In our study, periods of increased lice load 
seemed concomitant with periods of higher social network modularity, reflecting either a decrease in females’ 
direct contacts and grooming exchanges or more focused exchanges within smaller cliques of individuals com-
pared to periods with lower louse infestation. It seems likely, then, that decreases in grooming network centrality 
allow lice to multiply at both the individual and group levels, especially during periods of host immunological and 
physiological vulnerability (mating and birth seasons). Conversely, avoidance of social contacts is a well-known 
mechanism to limit the spread of socially-transmitted pathogens53,54. This requires that individuals can determine 
each other’s infection status, which seems likely in many animals55,56 but absent in others57. Of course, a third 
possibility is that changes in network structure and changes in lice load are concomitant but independent. While 
lice load may be environmentally determined, female hosts naturally increase social contacts to access mating 
opportunities and decrease them to care for their infants and minimise risks (of injury, disease), which may be 
stronger drivers of network changes compared to parasitism.
But if the network reflects pathways for parasite transmission, centrality indices such as degree and strength 
measuring risk of exposure are expected to be positively related to parasite infection patterns3. In our study, the 
negative relationship between degree and lice load during the winter and summer breeding seasons relative to 
spring and fall could suggest that individuals other than females have an impact on the lice burden or the like-
lihood of louse infestation during these periods: via vertical transmission between females and their immature 
offspring21 or horizontal transmission from solitary/floater males58. Barring this third-party influence, individual 
variation in grooming/contact given and received could also influence lice load, inasmuch as the presence of a 
“super-groomer” for example could play the role of a super-spreader–a highly contagious individual or simply one 
with many social connections59. Alternatively, such a super-groomer could play the role of “super-delouser”
, as 
there seemed to be variation in louse egg-picking efficiency across individuals44, or if there is variation in groom-
ing site preferences across individuals17. Ultimately, amongst the centrality measures we tested, the only predictor 
of lice load was the number of direct connections females had with others in the social network. This implies 
that infection risk was more related to who is connected to whom in the network rather than how individuals are 
connected. Thus, as was also shown in meerkats (Suricata suricatta)60, frequent social contact does not necessar-
ily increase the risk of infection. From a parasite/pathogen perspective, one contact may be all it takes to change 
environment and continue reproducing on a new host. From a host perspective, having multiple social partners 
can either increase exposure to parasites through increased likelihood of interacting with a super-spreader, or 
increase parasite removal through increased likelihood of interacting with a super-delouser. These contradicting 
possibilities might also explain why observed relationships between centrality and lice load are not straightfor-
ward: grooming simultaneously offers lice a transmission opportunity and hosts a parasite removal opportu-
nity. Our results are weighted toward the latter because less connected females generally exhibited higher louse 
burden, supporting the hypothesis that grooming is an effective antiparasite strategy to be exploited in a social 
context and providing further evidence for the benefits of being social despite the costs related to disease trans-
mission and infection risk.
In this evolutionary arms race, parasites effectively use their hosts’ behaviour to increase their own fitness1, 
but hosts have evolved diverse social and ecological strategies of parasite avoidance and removal61. Due to the 
combined difficulties of accurately depicting animal contact networks from observation and of directly monitor-
ing elusive parasite populations, experimental studies and/or alternative measures/estimations of both networks 
and parasites would help disentangling the synergistic effects of the environment and the interaction between 
host and parasite biology on transmission and infection risks from socially-transmitted pathogens62,63. For exam-
ple, experimental reduction of parasite loads influences the frequency or patterns of host social interactions64,65. 
Conversely, manipulating host contact rates can also induce changes in infection risk66.
Conclusion
In conclusion, our study shows that variation in contact and grooming network centrality in terms of number of 
connections explains variation in lice load in female Japanese macaques in that less central females have higher 
lice burden, providing further evidence of grooming as an efficacious anti-parasite strategy. However, our study 
also demonstrates that this relationship is dependent upon ecological and biological conditions, such as less 
central females have higher lice burden only during winter (cold–long, dense hair–mating season) and summer 
(hot–short, sparse hair–birth season). Our study is the first to estimate lice load from direct observation of wild 
animals and to link this estimate to the centrality status of individuals in their contact networks. This study also 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
9
Scientific RepoRts | 6:22095 | DOI: 10.1038/srep22095
highlights the importance of seasonal variation both in parasite intensity and in host behaviour in explaining 
variance in infection risk and exposure from socially-transmitted external parasites.
Methods
Study site and subjects. 
We studied Japanese macaques on Koshima islet, Miyazaki prefecture, Japan 
(31°27′ 
N, 131°22′ 
E). The region has a warm-temperate climate with monthly mean temperatures ranging 
between 9.3 °C in January and 27.2 °C in August, and monthly mean precipitation between 35 mm in January 
(humidity 60%) and 730 mm in June (humidity 82%; data for 2014 from the Japan Meteorological Agency). 
Koshima is approximately 0.3 km2 and covered by evergreen broadleaved forest67. Provisioning and behavioural 
observations of Koshima macaques started in 1952, and demographic, ecological, behavioural, and life-history 
data have been collected since then68. The main group of Koshima macaques is currently provisioned with ca. 3 kg 
of wheat ca. twice weekly. Koshima is now inhabited by approximately 100 individuals divided into two social 
groups, Maki (ca. 15 individuals) and Main Arctic monkeys (ca. 60 individuals), along with an unknown number 
of solitary males. Monkeys are individually recognisable by facial tattoos and natural physical characteristics 
(scars, body shape or hair colour).
We observed the 19–20 adult females (> 
7 years old) of the Main group. We focused on females because, in 
macaque societies, they form the core of the group and dominate dynamics of social networks, males are often 
few and not very social, and juveniles are difficult to recognise, often have their own subgroup, and usually engage 
in different age-typical activities than the adults69–71. Ten females were in oestrous during the mating season 
(winter); they were thus considered reproductively active during this period. Seven females gave birth between 
the end of June and the beginning of July (summer), and they were considered reproductively active in spring 
(as pregnant), summer and fall (as lactating). All other females were regarded as non-reproductive for this year. 
Additionally, as part of an on-going research project since 2012, half of the adult female cohort is orally admin-
istered an anthelminthic treatment several times a year (MacIntosh, unpublished data). During the observation 
period, treatment was administered to 11 females at the end of March, the middle of July and the middle of 
November (see Supplementary Table S1 and the Statistics part for more details).
Research adheres to the ASAB/ABS guidelines for the use of animals in research and was approved by the ethic 
committee of Kyoto University Primate Research Institute.
Data collection. 
Data were collected from January to November 2014 (total 142 days, 350 h of observation, 
17h30 ± 
 1h15 per female, see Supplementary Table S1). Focal observations were balanced across females and 
time of day (morning/afternoon). To avoid the influence of artificial conditions on our data set, data other than 
dominance interactions were not collected during and up to an hour following provisioning. Focal females were 
followed for 15 min during which their main activities were recorded every minute, while their social, aggres-
sive and other affiliative interactions as well as the identity of each social partner were recorded continuously. 
Amongst recorded activities, we distinguished between grooming given, grooming received, and simple body 
contact. We also collected data on dominance interactions (i.e. winner and loser of agonistic interactions) during 
focal observations and ad libitum.
During social and self-grooming bouts, we counted the number of times per minute-scan the groomer con-
spicuously picked out something in the groomee’s hair or her own and subsequently ate it. The gesture is con-
spicuous in the sense that the groomer will focus on a narrow patch of hair, pinch the base of the hair with the 
thumb and index fingers or her teeth, pull the selected object (a louse egg in 98.9% of the cases) along the length 
of the hair, and eat it30 (see Supplementary Video S1). If the focal female was the groomer and she picked louse 
eggs from the groomee, the louse egg counts were associated to the female groomee. If the focal female was the 
groomee, the louse egg counts were associated to her directly.
Data analysis. 
We divided our dataset in four parts to account for seasonal variations biologically relevant to 
the studied host-parasite system. The winter dataset included observations between January and March and cor-
responded to the macaques’ mating season72, as well as to the period in which macaque hair is at its longest and 
control factor
type
control for (rationale)
interactions between 
control factors
contributions of interaction to model 
fit (LR tests**)
season
categorical: 
winter, spring, 
summer, fall
host: moulting, network changes, 
physiological changes32–36,72,74 parasite: 
habitat change, fitness, population 
viability21,23,32
season* reproductive 
state* centrality
ns
reproductive state
categorical: 
active, not 
active
host: network changes, physiological 
changes32–35 parasite: fitness, 
population viability20,21
season* reproductive 
state
ns
rank
continuous
host: physical condition, access to 
grooming partners9,37,38,43 parasite: 
fitness, population viability21,23,43
repro* centrality
trend in model with in-degree as 
predictor
treatment*
categorical: 
treated, not 
treated
parasite: fitness81
season* centrality
significant in model with degree; trend 
in model with in-degree as predictors
Table 1. Summary of control factors included in GLMMs: type, rationale, interactions between them 
and whether or not interactions contributed significantly to model fit (ns = not significant). *Factor only 
included in models with lice load as response variable. **See Supplementary Table S2.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
10
Scientific RepoRts | 6:22095 | DOI: 10.1038/srep22095
densest36. The spring dataset included observations between April and June and corresponded to a non-breeding 
season and the period in which macaques started moulting. The summer dataset included observations between 
July and September and corresponded to the macaques’ birth season as well as the end of moulting, when the 
hair is at its shortest. Finally, the fall dataset included observations between October and November, and corre-
sponded to a non-breeding season and a period in which hair resumes growth to its full length and density. For 
each season, we computed each female’s total number of scans of grooming received (including self-grooming), 
louse egg-picking gestures, centrality measures, dominance rank, reproductive state, and treatment status.
To compute lice load, we used minute-scans of grooming received, the focal female being either the groomer 
or the groomee, and minute-scans of self-grooming per female as well as minute-counts of louse egg-picking 
gestures across all grooming received bouts per female. Lice load was then calculated per female as follows:
=
∑
∑
+ ∑
minute counts of louse eggpicking gestures
minute scans of grooming received
minute scans of selfgrooming
lice load
(1)
n
n
n
1
1
1
where n is the total number of grooming or self-grooming bouts.
We used SNA to investigate the risk of exposure to louse infestation of females within their social network 
of female group members. First, we calculated the modularity Q of the contact and grooming received networks 
(i.e., the number of clusters in the group) based on eigenvector centrality, which provides a descriptive statistic 
of detection and characterization of community structure in networks73, the higher it is the more clustered the 
network is. Here we use it to describe the global connectedness of the female group and track its changes across 
seasons because inter-individual distances seem to vary across seasons in Japanese macaques: females showed 
lower cohesiveness in summer74. We then computed individual indices of network centrality based on two behav-
ioural datasets different from those used to estimate lice load; these data sets only included adult female-female 
interactions. The first dataset included dyadic total numbers of scans of general body contact, including groom-
ing, between females A and B, which was used to build undirected weighted networks of body contacts (Fig. 1). The 
second dataset included dyadic total numbers of scans of grooming received from female A to female B and from 
female B to female A, which was used to build directed weighted networks of grooming received (Fig. 1). Although 
the two networks are not entirely independent, their actual differences in terms of number and strength of con-
nections, and thus in terms of risk of exposure, are meaningful to test our predictions. From these networks, we 
then computed centrality indices reflecting only direct exposure to lice through the network as lice are exclusively 
transmitted through direct contact between hosts. Node degree reflected the number of direct connections an 
individual has in the network, and node strength, the sum of the weights of an individual’s direct connections (for 
a review, see)3.
To assign dominance rank, we calculated normalised David’s scores (normDS–package EloRating75), an indi-
vidual score of relative power based on the successes (winning vs. losing) of an individual in agonistic interactions 
while accounting for the other group members’ successes76. We based our calculations on matrices of decided 
aggressive interactions, in which we could define a winner and a loser, and of displacements or supplantations 
recorded ad libitum. As there was no change in female hierarchical order across seasons, but individual normDS 
varied in magnitude, we finally assigned females an ordinal rank with 1 being the highest and 20 the lowest.
Statistics. 
Centrality indices were calculated with the appropriate functions provided in the package 
igraph73,77. Network measures are not independent because they derive from a network where all individuals 
are linked to some extent and this non-independence violates many assumptions from most statistical tests. 
When testing the effect of factors on network measures or the effect of network measures on other variables this 
non-independence needs to be taken into account. A robust and modern standard way to do that is to compare 
statistical models based on the original observed data to a distribution of null models based on randomised 
data78,79. In this study, we randomised networks using the function rewire.edges of the package igraph, which 
rewires the end points (or nodes) of edges (i.e. edge rearrangement78) according to a probability of establishing 
connections that we set to vary randomly between 0 and 1 at each randomisation run. We used edge rearrange-
ment to get a null model that randomly rearranges the observed interactions among pairs of nodes because we 
were confident in the observed edges and we constrained rearrangements by keeping the degree distribution of 
the original network to have a biologically meaningful null model78. Although the probability of a connection can 
be based on the number of individuals as potential partners, allowing the probability of establishing a connection 
to vary reflects natural processes of social partner choice. This approach thus provides a more conservative ran-
domisation procedure. After each randomisation, network measures were recalculated and re-integrated in the 
statistical models (exactly the same models with all control factors but with the network measure derived from 
the randomisation). After 2000 randomisations, the statistical parameters of interest (e.g. model estimates or p 
values, see Supplementary Tables S2 & S4) were compared between models based on observed data and “null” 
models based on randomised data. If a substantial proportion (95%) of statistical parameters derived from mod-
els based on observed data were lower/higher than parameters derived from models based on randomised data, 
then we could conclude that the observed effects of or on sociality were different from those expected to arise by 
chance78,79. The randomisation procedure is exactly the same for all analyses.
To analyse relationships between the main variable of interest and the main predictor(s) while accounting for 
potential confounding factors, we built General Linear Mixed Models (GLMM) with Gaussian distributions and 
identity link functions using the function lmer from the lme4 package80. All models contained three main control 
factors: dominance rank, reproductive state and season (Table 1). In models with lice load as the response variable, 
an additional confounding factor, treatment status (binary: was/was not treated, Table 1), was included as the 
experimental anthelminthic treatment (Ivermectin) administered every 4 months to half the adult female cohort 
has been shown previously to affect louse numbers81. However, we observed only a small and transient decrease 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
11
Scientific RepoRts | 6:22095 | DOI: 10.1038/srep22095
in estimated louse infestation approximately one week after treatment (unpublished data), and did not expect this 
result to have a significant effect on overall or seasonal lice load. Regardless, treatment was included in our models 
to control for these potentially confounding effects.
Assessment of the variation in centrality and lice load according to seasonal and individual factors. To assess 
the variability present in host sociality and lice load that may affect the relationship between the two, we built 
GLMMs with each centrality measure as the response variable, season, reproductive state and rank as predictors, 
and individual identity as random effects. Variation in lice load was assessed from the null model that was built 
to test predictions 1 and 2 and that included season, reproductive state, treatment status and individual identity 
as well (see below).
Relationship between measures of centrality and lice load: testing predictions 1 and 2. To address our main ques-
tion concerning the relationship between measures of centrality and lice load, we built GLMMs with lice load as 
the response variable, centrality index as the main predictor, season, reproductive state, rank, and treatment status 
as confounding factors and individual identity as a random effect. 
We also included a three-way interaction between centrality, season, and reproductive state, and its associated 
two-way interactions (centrality by season, centrality by reproductive state, and reproductive state by season). 
The effect of centrality on lice load could indeed depend on seasonal variations in both lice load and centrality, 
and lice load could also be differentially influenced by some stages of host reproduction (e.g., cycling versus lac-
tating), and these stages depend on season. Thus, it may be that the effect of the interaction between centrality 
and season on lice load varies according to female reproductive state, such as females more central in the network 
have more lice in winter and summer but only if they are reproductively active (Table 1). We used likelihood ratio 
tests (LRT) to compare models with and without interactions and removed them if they did not improve model 
fit (at p LRT > 
 0.100). If the p-value of the LRT was between 0.100 and 0.050, we considered the interaction 
to marginally improve model fit and kept it in the model (Supplementary Table S3). Supplementary Table S3 
shows that amongst all interactions tested, only those including centrality and either season or reproductive state 
remained in the models. Note that if an interaction was significant, predictors can be interpreted only within this 
interaction. We transformed (log or square-root) whenever necessary and then standardized (z-transformed) all 
numeric predictors for more accurate model fitting and ease of interpretation/comparison of model estimates. 
We checked several model assumptions (normality and homogeneity of residuals, variance inflation factors82) and 
no obvious violations or influential cases were detected. Because all centrality measures were correlated to each 
other to some extent (r range = 
 0.17–0.92, p range = 
 0.15–0.01), and because our dataset is comparatively small 
and thus could not accommodate their inclusion at once, we ran one model for each centrality measure. We tested 
final fitted models against a null model, comprising only control factors not involved in an interaction and the 
random effect, with a LRT. Control factors included in null models were not considered further. Whenever this 
test showed that adding predictors induced a significant improvement in model fit, we proceeded in interpreting 
the significance of the predictors. All statistics were done in R version 3.1.283. The full results are given in the 
Supplementary Information (Supplementary Tables S2–4).
References
1. Altizer, S. et al. Social organization and parasite risk in mammals: Integrating theory and empirical studies. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Evol. 
Syst. 34, 517–547 (2003).
2. Krause, J. & Ruxton, G. D. Living in groups (eds) 240 (Oxford University Press, 2002).
3. Godfrey, S. S. Networks and the ecology of parasite transmission: A framework for wildlife parasitology. Int. J. Parasitol. Parasites 
Wildl. 2, 235–245 (2013).
4. Kurvers, R. H. J. M., Krause, J., Croft, D. P., Wilson, A. D. M. & Wolf, M. The evolutionary and ecological consequences of animal 
social networks: emerging issues. Trends Ecol. Evol. 29, 326–335 (2014).
5. Borgatti, S. P., Everett, M. G. & Johnson, J. C. Analysing social networks (eds) 296 (SAGE Publications Ltd, 2013).
6. Alexander, R. D. The evolution of social behavior. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 5, 325–383 (1974).
7. Dunbar, R. I. M. Functional significance of social grooming in primates. Folia Primatol. 57, 121–131 (1991).
8. Emery, N. J., Seed, A. M., von Bayern, A. M. P. & Clayton, N. S. Cognitive adaptations of social bonding in birds. Philos. Trans. R. 
Soc. Lond. B. Biol. Sci. 362, 489–505 (2007).
9. Schino, G. Grooming, competition and social rank among female primates a meta analysis. Anim. Behav. 62, 265–271 (2001).
10. Schino, G. & Aureli, F. Grooming reciprocation among female primates: a meta-analysis. Biol. Lett. 4, 9–11 (2008).
11. Aureli, F., Preston, S. D. & de Waal, F. B. M. Heart rate responses to social interactions in free-moving rhesus macaques (Macaca 
mulatta): a pilot study. J. Comp. Psychol. 113, 59–65 (1999).
12. Aureli, F. & Yates, K. Distress prevention by grooming others in crested black macaques. Biol. Lett. 6, 27–29 (2010).
13. Keverne, E. B., Martensz, N. D. & Tuite, B. Beta-endorphin concentrations in cerebrospinal fluid of monkeys are influenced by 
grooming relationships. Psychoneuroendocrinology 14, 155–161 (1989).
14. Hart, B. L. & Hart, L. A. Reciprocal allogrooming in impala, Aepyceros melampus. Anim. Behav. 44, 1073–1083 (1992).
15. Clayton, D. H., Koop, J. A. H., Harbison, C. W., Moyer, B. R. & Bush, S. E. How birds combat ectoparasites. Open Ornithol. J. 3, 41–71 
(2010).
16. Barton, R. A. Grooming site preferences in primates and their functional implications. Int. J. Primatol. 6, 519–532 (1985).
17. Zamma, K. Grooming site preferences determined by lice infection among Japanese macaques in Arashiyama. Primates 43, 41–49 
(2002).
18. James, P. J. & Moon, R. D. Spatial distribution and spread of sheep biting lice, Bovicola ovis, from point infestations. Vet. Parasitol. 
81, 323–339 (1999).
19. Murray, M. D. Effects of host grooming on louse populations. Parasitol. Today 3, 276–278 (1987).
20. Durden, L. A. Lice (Phthiraptera) In Parasitic Diseases Of Wild Mammals (eds Samuel, W. M., Pybus, M. J., Kocan, A. A.) 3–17 (Iowa 
State University Press 2001).
21. James, P. J., Moon, R. D. & Brown, D. R. Seasonal dynamics and variation among sheep in densities of the sheep biting louse, 
Bovicola ovis. Int. J. Parasitol. 28, 283–292 (1998).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
12
Scientific RepoRts | 6:22095 | DOI: 10.1038/srep22095
22. Murray, D. R. The ecology of lice on sheep. IV. The establishment and maintenance of populations of Linognathus ovillus (Neumann). 
Aust. J. Zool. 11, 157–172 (1963).
23. Murray, D. R. Arthropods–The pelage of mammals as an environment. Int. J. Parasitol. 17, 191–195 (1987).
24. Roux, V. & Raoult, D. Body lice as tools for diagnosis and surveillance of reemerging diseases. J. Clin. Microbiol. 37, 596–599 (1999).
25. Hornok, S. et al. Survey on blood-sucking lice (Phthiraptera: Anoplura) of ruminants and pigs with molecular detection of 
Anaplasma and Rickettsia spp. Vet. Parasitol. 174, 355–358 (2010).
26. Reeves, W. K. et al. Louse-borne bacterial pathogens in lice (Phthiraptera) of rodents and cattle from Egypt. J. Parasitol. 92, 313–8 
(2006).
27. Blanc, G. & Woodward, T. E. The infection of Pedicinus albidus rudow, the Maggot’s louse, on typhus carrying monkeys (Macaca 
sylvanus). Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. s1–25, 33–34 (1945).
28. Zohdy, S., Kemp, A., Durden, L., Wright, P. & Jernvall, J. Mapping the social network: tracking lice in a wild primate (Microcebus 
rufus) population to infer social contacts and vector potential. BMC Ecol. 12, 4 (2012).
29. Fooden, J. & Aimi, M. Fieldiana, Zoology: Systematic review of Japanese macaques, Macaca fuscata (Gray, 1870) (eds) 212 (Field 
Museum of Natural History 2005).
30. Tanaka, I. & Takefushi, H. Elimination of external parasites (lice) is the primary function of grooming in free-ranging Japanese 
macaques. Anthropol. Sci. 101, 187–193 (1993).
31. Onishi, K., Yamada, K. & Nakamichi, M. Grooming-related feeding motivates macaques to groom and affects grooming reciprocity 
and episode duration in Japanese macaques (Macaca fuscata). Behav. Processes 92, 125–130 (2013).
32. Altizer, S. et al. Seasonality and the dynamics of infectious diseases. Ecol. Lett. 9, 467–484 (2006).
33. D’Amato, F. R., Troisi, A., Scucchi, S. & Fuccillo, R. Mating season influence on allogrooming in a confined group of Japanese 
macaques: a quantitative analysis. Primates 23, 220–232 (1982).
34. Bardi, M., Shimizu, K., Fujita, S., Borgognini-Tarli, S. & Huffman, M. Social behavior and hormonal correlates during the perinatal 
period in Japanese macaques. Horm. Behav. 39, 239–246 (2001).
35. MacIntosh, A. J. J. et al. Monkeys in the middle: parasite transmission through the social network of a wild primate. PLoS One 7, 
e51144 (2012).
36. Inagaki, H. & Nigi, H. Annual changes in hair length of the Japanese monkey (Macaca fuscata fuscata). Primates 29, 81–89 (1988).
37. Nunn, C. L. & Altizer, S. Infectious diseases in primates: Behavior, Ecology and Evolution. Oxford Series in Ecology and Evolution (eds) 
384 (Oxford University Press, 2006).
38. Sueur, C., MacIntosh, A. J. J., Jacobs, A. T., Watanabe, K. & Petit, O. Predicting leadership using nutrient requirements and 
dominance rank of group members. Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 67, 457–470 (2013).
39. Majolo, B., Lehman, J., de Bortoli Vizioli, A. & Schino, G. Fitness-related benefits of dominance in primates. Am. J. Phys. Anthopol. 
147, 652–660 (2012).
40. Foerster, S., Cords, M. & Monfort, S. L. Social behavior, foraging strategies, and fecal glucocorticoids in female blue monkeys 
(Cercopithecus mitis): Potential fitness benefits of high rank in a forest guenon. Am. J. Primatol. 73, 1–13 (2011).
41. Tsuji, Y. & Takatsuki, S. Interannual variation in nut abundance is related to agonistic interactions of foraging female Japanese 
macaques (Macaca fuscata). Int. J. Primatol. 33, 489–512 (2012).
42. Foerster, S., Kithome, K., Cords, M. & Monfort, S. L. Social status and helminth infections in female forest guenons (Cercopithecus 
mitis). Am. J. Phys. Anthropol. 158, 55–66 (2015).
43. Cohen, S. et al. Chronic social stress, social status, and susceptibility to upper respiratory infections in nonhuman primates. 
Psychosom. Med. 59, 213–221 (1997).
44. Tanaka, I. Matrilineal distribution of louse egg handling techniques during grooming in free-ranging Japanese macaques. Int. 
 
J. Primatol. 98, 197–201 (1995).
45. Chaffin, C. L., Friedlen, K. & de Waal, F. B. M. Dominance style of Japanese macaques compared with rhesus and stumptail 
macaques. Am. J. Primatol. 35, 103–116 (1995).
46. Franz, C. Allogrooming behavior and grooming site preferences in captive bonobos (Pan paniscus): association with female 
dominance. Int. J. Primatol. 20, 525–546 (1999).
47. Akinyi, M. Y. et al. Role of grooming in reducing tick load in wild baboons (Papio cynocephalus). Anim. Behav. 85, 559–568 (2013).
48. Soltis, J., Thomsen, R. & Takenaka, O. The interaction of male and female reproductive strategies and paternity in wild Japanese 
macaques. Macaca fuscata. Anim. Behav. 62, 485–494 (2001).
49. Durden, L. A. Sucking louse (Hoplopleura erratica: Insecta, Anoplura) exchange between individuals of a wild population of eastern 
chipmunks, Tamias striatus, in central Tennessee, USA. J. Zool. 201, 117–123 (1983).
50. Rothschild, M. & Ford, B. Breeding of the rabbit flea (Spilopsyllus cuniculi (Dale)) controlled by the reproductive hormones of the 
host. Nature 201, 103–104 (1964).
51. Mead-Briggs, A. R. & Rudge, A. J. B. Breeding of the rabbit flea, Spilopsyllus cuniculi (Dale): Requirement of a ‘factor’ from a 
pregnant rabbit for ovarian maturation. Nature 187, 1136 (1960).
52. Ansar S. A., Penhale, W. J. & Talal, N. Sex hormones, immune responses, and autoimmune diseases. Mechanisms of sex hormone 
action. Am. J. Pathol. 121, 531–551 (1985).
53. Griffin, R. H. & Nunn, C. L. Community structure and the spread of infectious disease in primate social networks. Evol. Ecol. 26, 
779–800 (2012).
54. Hart, B. L. Behavioural defences in animals against pathogens and parasites: parallels with the pillars of medicine in humans. Philos. 
Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 366, 3406–3417 (2011).
55. Ashley, N. T. & Wingfield, J. C. Sickness behavior in vertebrates In Ecoimmunology (eds Demas, G. & Nelson, R.) 45–91 (Oxford 
University Press, 2011).
56. Kavaliers, M. & Choleris, E. Sociality, pathogen avoidance, and the neuropeptides oxytocin and arginine vasopressin. Psychol. Sci. 
22, 1367–1374 (2011).
57. Fairbanks, B. M., Hawley, D. M. & Alexander, K. A. No evidence for avoidance of visibly diseased conspecifics in the highly social 
banded mongoose (Mungos mungo). Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 69, 371–381 (2015).
58. Fenner, A. L., Godfrey, S. S. & Michael Bull, C. Using social networks to deduce whether residents or dispersers spread parasites in 
a lizard population. J. Anim. Ecol. 80, 835–843 (2011).
59. Fujie, R. & Odagaki, T. Effects of superspreaders in spread of epidemic. Phys. A Stat. Mech. its Appl. 374, 843–852 (2007).
60. Drewe, J. A. Who infects whom? Social networks and tuberculosis transmission in wild meerkats. Proc. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 277, 
633–642 (2010).
61. Hart, B. L. Behavioral adaptations to pathogens and parasites: five strategies. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 14, 273–294 (1990).
62. Craft, M. E. & Caillaud, D. Network models: an underutilized tool in wildlife epidemiology? Interdiscip. Perspect. Infect. Dis. 2011 
(2011).
63. Pedersen, A. B. & Fenton, A. The role of antiparasite treatment experiments in assessing the impact of parasites on wildlife. Trends 
Parasitol. 31, 200–211 (2015).
64. Madden, J. R. & Clutton-Brock, T. H. Manipulating grooming by decreasing ectoparasite load causes unpredicted changes in 
antagonism. Proc. R. Soc. London, Biol. Sci. 276, 1263–1268 (2009).
65. Croft, D. P. et al. Effect of gyrodactylid ectoparasites on host behaviour and social network structure in guppies Poecilia reticulata. 
Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 65, 2219–2227 (2011).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
13
Scientific RepoRts | 6:22095 | DOI: 10.1038/srep22095
66. Monello, R. J. & Gompper, M. E. Differential effects of experimental increases in sociality on ectoparasites of free-ranging raccoons. 
J. Anim. Ecol. 79, 602–9 (2010).
67. Go, M. Seasonal changes in food resource distribution and feeding sites selected by Japanese macaques on Koshima Islet, Japan. 
Primates 51, 149–158 (2010).
68. Yamagiwa, J. Research history of Japanese macaques in Japan In The Japanese Macaques (eds Nakagawa, N., Nakamichi, M. & 
Sugiura, H.) 3–26 (Springer Japan, 2010).
69. Pereira, M. E. & Fairbanks, L. A. Juvenile Primates: Life History, Development and Behavior (eds) 431 (University of Chicago Press, 
1993).
70. Hill, D. A. Affiliative behaviour between adult males of the genus Macaca. Behaviour 130, 293–308 (1994).
71. Yamagiva, J. & Hill, D. A. Intraspecific variation in the social organization of Japanese macaques: past and present scope of field 
studies in natural habitats. Primates 39, 257–273 (1998).
72. Fooden, J. & Aimi, M. Birth-season variation in Japanese macaques, Macaca fuscata. Primates 44, 109–117 (2003).
73. Newman, M. E. J. Modularity and community structure in networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 103, 8577–8582 (2006).
74. Suguira, H., Shimooka, Y. & Tsuji, Y. Varition in spatial cohesiveness in a group of Japanese macaques (Macaca fuscata). Int. 
 
J. Primatol. 32, 1348–1366 (2011).
75. Neumann, C. & Kulik, L. EloRating: Animal dominance hierarchies by Elo Rating (2013). Available at: http://CRAN.R-project.org/
package= 
EloRating (Accessed 28th January 2015).
76. Gammell, M. P., de Vries, H., Jennings, D. J., Carlin, C. M. & Hayden, T. J. David’s score: a more appropriate dominance ranking 
method than Clutton-Brock et al.’s index. Anim. Behav. 66, 601–605 (2003).
77. Csardi, G. & Nepusz, T. The igraph software package for complex network research. InterJournal, Complex Syst. 5, 1–9 (2006).
78. Croft, D. P., Madden, J. R., Franks, D. W. & James, R. Hypothesis testing in animal social networks. Trends Ecol. Evol. 26, 502–507 
(2011).
79. Farine, D. R. Animal social network inference and permutations for ecologists in R using asnipe. Methods Ecol. Evol. 4, 1187–1194 
(2013).
80. Bates, D. M., Maechler, M. & Bolker, B. lme4: Linear mixed-effects models using S4 classes (2011). Available at: http://CRAN.R-
project.org/package= 
lme4. (Accessed 19th February 2011).
81. Foucault, C. et al. Oral ivermectin in the treatment of body lice. J. Infect. Dis. 193, 474–476 (2006).
82. Field, A., Miles, J. & Field, Z. Discovering statistics using R (eds) 957 (SAGE Publications Ltd, 2012).
83. R Development Core Team. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing (2014). 
Available at: http://www.r-project.org/. (Accessed 10th October 2014).
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the Kyoto University Wildlife Research Center’s Cooperative Research Program, the 
Kyoto University Primate Research Centre ethical committee, the prefecture of Miyazaki and the city of Kushima 
for permission to conduct research at Koshima. J.D. and C.S. are funded by the University of Strasbourg Institute 
for Advanced Studies (USIAS), V.R. by the Brazilian Ministry of Education (CAPES), and A.M. by the Japan 
Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) and the Kyoto University Step-Up Fund. We are thankful to Akiko 
Takahashi and Takafumi Suzumura for help in the field and in administrative tasks, to Robert O’Hagan for help in 
data collection and processing, to Cecile Sarabian and Lucie Rigaill for general support, and to Zamma Koichiro, 
Christof Neumann and Cristian Pasquaretta for insightful discussions.
Author Contributions
J.D. designed the study, collected and analysed the data, and drafted the manuscript; V.R. collected data and 
helped draft the manuscript; C.S. and A.M. coordinated the study, provided financial and administrative support, 
participated in data analysis, and helped draft the manuscript. All authors gave final approval for publication.
Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at http://www.nature.com/srep
Competing financial interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.
How to cite this article: Duboscq, J. et al. Network centrality and seasonality interact to predict lice load in a 
social primate. Sci. Rep. 6, 22095; doi: 10.1038/srep22095 (2016).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images 
or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, 
unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, 
users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this 
license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
