 European Journal of Clinical Nutrition (2018) 72:657–664
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41430-018-0138-6
REVIEW ARTICLE
Collateral fattening in body composition autoregulation: its
determinants and significance for obesity predisposition
Abdul G. Dulloo1
● Jennifer L. Miles-Chan1
● Yves Schutz1
Received: 7 February 2018 / Accepted: 10 February 2018 / Published online: 20 March 2018
© The Author(s) 2018. This article is published with open access
Abstract
Collateral fattening refers to the process whereby excess fat is deposited as a result of the body’s attempt to counter a deficit
in lean mass through overeating. Its demonstration and significance to weight regulation and obesity can be traced to work
on energy budget strategies in growing mammals and birds, and to men recovering from experimental starvation. The
cardinal features of collateral fattening rests upon (i) the existence of a feedback system between lean tissue and appetite
control, with lean tissue deficit driving hyperphagia, and (ii) upon the occurrence of a temporal desynchronization in the
recovery of body composition, with complete recovery of fat mass preceeding that of lean mass. Under these conditions,
persistent hyperphagia driven by the need to complete the recovery of lean tissue will result in the excess fat deposition
(hence collateral fattening) and fat overshooting. After reviewing the main lines of evidence for the phenomenon of collateral
fattening in body composition autoregulation, this article discusses the causes and determinants of the desynchronization in
fat and lean tissue recovery leading to collateral fattening and fat overshooting, and points to their significance in the
mechanisms by which dieting, developmental programming and sedentariness predispose to obesity.
From a historical perspective
There is a large body of work conducted over the last
century on the energy budget strategies for growth in farm
animals and laboratory rodents. In reviewing this field that
encompasses nutrient partitioning, tissue growth and appe-
tite control in mammals and birds, Webster [1] emphasized
that food intake and the regulation of nutrient supply is to a
large extent driven by the impetus for lean tissue growth.
This is particularly striking in the congetically obese Zucker
rats in which overeating is essential for achieving a normal
rate of lean tissue growth, albeit at the expense of getting
very fat in the process [2]. He went on to conclude that, to
quote: ‘it may be both fair and kind to recognize the pos-
sibility that children with a predisposition to deposit excess
fat may have a genuine extra hunger to achieve their target
for lean tissue growth’ [1]. Although this contention has
particular relevance for the mechanisms by which catch-up
growth after faltered fetal/neonatal growth predispose to
obesity [3–5], the essence of Webster’s conclusion can in
fact be ascribed to what has more recently been referred to
as ‘collateral fattening’—a process whereby excess fat is
deposited as a result of the body’s attempt to counter a
deficit in lean mass through overeating [6, 7]. Unlike
Webster’s proposal, however, this more recent concept is
not limited to the growth phase of the life cycle.
Indeed, the term collateral fattening derived from the
reanalysis of the data on body composition and food intake
from the Minnesota Starvation Experiment conducted in
young men. In this classic longitudinal study lasting over a
year at the end of World War II [8], the volunteer men of
normal body weight were followed over a 12-week control
(baseline) period before enduring 24 weeks of semistarva-
tion, which resulted in a loss of ~25% of body weight, 70%
of body fat and 27% of fat-free mass (FFM), the latter
corrected for excess hydration. They were then refed in two
distinct phases: a restricted refeeding phase lasting for
12 weeks, followed by another 8 weeks of refeeding on an
ad libitum basis during which they developed marked
hyperphagia lasting for several weeks. By the end of week
20 of refeeding, more body weight and fat were regained
than were lost (Fig. 1)—a phenomenon that Keys and
* Abdul G. Dulloo
abdul.dulloo@unifr.ch
1
Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Cardiovascular
System, Faculty of Science and Medicine, University of Fribourg,
Fribourg, Switzerland
1234567890();,:
 colleagues called ‘post-starvation obesity’ [8] and which
nowadays is more commonly referred to as ‘fat overshoot’.
What these data on dynamic changes in body composi-
tion in relation to food intake revealed is that despite the
complete recovery of body weight and fat mass, hyper-
phagia still persisted for some time until the complete
restoration of FFM to the pre-starvation control (baseline)
level (Fig. 1). Furthermore, the application of statistical
analysis indicated that the degree of hyperphagia that
occurred during the ad libitum refeeding phase is predicted
by the degree of the FFM deficit independently of the fat
mass deficit prior to ad libitum refeeding [9]. Taken toge-
ther, these observations and analyses suggest that the
compensatory hyperphagia that occurs in response to the
loss of body weight is driven not only by the deficit in fat
mass but also by the deficit in lean tissue. Thus, besides
Kennedy’s lipostatic (or adipostatic) theory of food intake
control whereby hyperphagia is a response to compensate
for a deficit in fat mass [10], the possibility arises for the
existence of a control system, which responds specifically to
a deficit in lean mass through compensatory increases in
energy intake. However, as lean tissue can only be gained
with concomitant deposition of body fat (through the pro-
cess of lean-fat partitioning), the process of completing the
recovery of lean mass by overeating (after fat mass is fully
recovered) is accompanied by an excess accumulation of
body fat—hence collateral fattening leading to fat overshoot
(Fig. 2). This process of collateral fattening is therefore a
prerequisite for complete recovery of lean mass, and can
thus be considered as a component of body composition
autoregulation operating during weight recovery.
Autoregulation of body composition during
weight recovery
It is also evident that a prerequisite for collateral fattening
(and fat overshooting) to occur is that there is a temporal
desynchronization in the restoration of the body’s fat mass
vs. lean mass, such that the recovery of fat mass reaches
completion before that of lean mass. What then could be the
causes or determinants of such desynchronization in fat and
lean mass recovery that leads to collateral fattening?
In addressing this issue, it is important to emphasize that
the synchronization of the recoveries of fat mass and lean
mass in a way that these two masses reach complete (100%)
recovery simultaneously would imply that the lean-fat
partitioning characteristic of the individual during weight
recovery is the same as during weight loss. In other words,
the proportion of weight loss as fat (or as FFM) is equal to
the proportion of weight recovered as fat (or as FFM), albeit
after correction for any change in FFM hydration. Such
temporal synchronization in fat and lean tissue recoveries
underlies the existence of an intrinsic control of lean-fat
partitioning—a contention first put forward by Payne and
Dugdale [11]. It is supported by the findings from data on
changes in body composition in the Minnesota Experiment
indicating that despite the large inter-individual variability
Fig. 1 Dynamics of body composition changes in men participating in
all phases of the Minnesota Experiment. The data are plotted to show
the pattern of changes in energy intake, body fat mass (FM) and fat-
free mass (FFM) during semistarvation and refeeding in the 12 men
who completed all phases of the Minnesota Experiment (including the
ad libitum phase of refeeding). All values are expressed as percentages
of the control (pre-starvation) values. C12: end of 12 weeks of control
period; S12 and S24: end of 12 weeks and 24 weeks of semistarvation
respectively; R12 and R20: end of 12 weeks of restricted refeeding and
8 weeks of ad libitum refeeding, respectively. The double-headed
arrow indicates that at the time-point when body fat had been fully
recovered (i.e., 100% of control period value), FFM recovery is still far
from complete, with hyperphagia persisting until completion of FFM
recovery. Adapted from Dulloo et al. [9]
Fig. 2 Concept of ‘collateral fattening’. A deficit in FFM results not
only in a lower energy expenditure (EE) and hence lower energy needs
for weight maintenance, but also in the activation a feedback loop that
drives energy intake (EIN) in an attempt to restore FFM through the
lean-to-fat partitioning characteristic (Pc) of the individual; reproduced
from Dulloo et al. [7]
658
A. G. Dulloo et al.
 in the proportion of weight loss as lean tissue, the lean-fat
partitioning characteristic of a given individual during the
weight loss phase is conserved during the weight recovery
phase [12]; the large inter-individual variability in lean-fat
partitioning (expressed as the P-ratio—the fraction of
body’s energy mobilized or deposited as protein during
weight loss or recovery, respectively) being primarily
determined by the pre-starvation (initial) % body fat [12,
13].
This intrinsic control of lean-fat partitioning has been
incorporated in a conceptual model of body composition
autoregulation during weight recovery (shown in Fig. 3). It
is constructed on the basis of results obtained from classic
studies of starvation and recovery from starvation—in
particular from the reanalysis of the several aspects of the
Minnesota Experiment data on changes in body composi-
tion, food intake and basal metabolic rate [9, 12–14]. Its
main features and operating modes are outlined below.
(I) The control of energy partitioning between lean and
fat compartments confers a ‘basal’ or intrinsic energy par-
titioning characteristic (Pc) of the individual, and the initial
body composition—i.e., the initial fat:FFM ratio—provides
the individual with a ‘memory of partitioning’, which dic-
tates the way fat and FFM are mobilized during weight loss
and deposited during subsequent weight recovery [12, 13].
(II) The hunger-appetite drive leads to hyperphagia,
whose magnitude is determined by the degree of depletion
of both the fat and FFM compartments [9]. This hyper-
phagic response is thus dictated by a ‘memory’ of the initial
fat mass, as well as FFM compartments. Within limits, the
functional role of the hyperphagia is to accelerate the
recovery of both fat and FFM according to the intrinsic
partitioning characteristic of the individual.
(III) The adaptive suppression of thermogenesis that
occurs during weight loss persists, at least in part, during
weight recovery; its magnitude has been shown to be a
specific function of the degree of fat mass depletion, but not
that of FFM depletion [14]. This underscores the concept of
a ‘fat-stores memory’ dictating an adipose-specific control
of thermogenesis whose functional role is to accelerate
specifically the body’s fat reserves and not FFM, thereby
contributing to a disproportionate rate of fat recovery rela-
tive to that of lean tissue. It is distinct from the more rapid
reacting ‘non-specific’ control of thermogenesis, which,
under the control of the leptin/insulin–sympathetic–thyroid
neurohormonal axis, functions as an attenuator of energy
imbalance dictated by alterations in the food energy flux
rather than by fat depletion per se [15].
Fig. 3 Conceptual model for autoregulation of body composition
during weight recovery depicting the various control systems involved,
namely: (i) the intrinsic control of energy partitioning between fat-free
mass (FFM) and fat compartments, which determines the partitioning
characteristic (Pc) of the individual as a function of initial percentage
body fat (or fat: FFM ratio); (ii) the adipose-specific control of ther-
mogenesis, which specifically accelerates fat recovery; (iii) the ‘non-
specific’ control of thermogenesis, which functions as an attenuator of
energy imbalance and is dictated by the food energy flux rather than by
fat depletion, and (iv) the hunger-appetite drive leads to hyperphagia,
the magnitude of which is determined by the extent to which body fat
and FFM are depleted. Adapted from Dulloo and Jacquet [13]
Collateral fattening in obesity predisposition
659
 Causes and significance of temporal
desynchronization in fat vs. FFM recovery
Adaptive thermogenesis driving catch-up fat
A disproportionately greater recovery of fat relative to lean
tissue (i.e., preferential catch-up fat) could, at least in part,
be consequential of energy-conservation (thrifty) mechan-
isms operating specifically for accelerating fat recovery but
not FFM recovery, leading to more fat being deposited in
excess of that determined by the lean-fat partitioning char-
acteristic of the individual. In this case, fat recovery would
reach completion before that of FFM (Fig. 4, panel b vs. a).
Such a control system underlying preferential catch-up
fat driven by suppressed thermogenesis is well described in
animal models of controlled refeeding after caloric restric-
tion [16, 17]. In humans, its existence is suggested from the
reanalysis of data on dynamic changes in basal metabolic
rate and body composition in the Minnesota Experiment.
This showed that the reduction in mass-adjusted basal
metabolic rate in response to weight loss was still present at
the end of the 12-week phase of restricted refeeding, with
the extent of this adaptive reduction in thermogenesis being
specifically a function of fat mass depletion, but not that of
FFM depletion [14]. A similar relationship between the
magnitude of suppressed thermogenesis in the resting
metabolic rate compartment and the recovery of fat mass
(and not FFM) has been demonstrated in patients during
nutritional
rehabilitation
from
non-neoplastic
gastro-
intestinal disease [18]. Furthermore, evidence for an adap-
tive suppression of thermogenesis in both the resting and
non-resting compartment of daily energy expenditure driv-
ing catch-up fat can also be drawn from data on humans
undergoing weight recovery after 2 years of sustained
caloric restriction (resulting in 15% weight loss) in the
Biosphere 2 Experiment [19]. Taken together, the common
observation in all these studies showing preferential catch-
up fat in part through suppressed thermogenesis is that body
fat recovery reaches completion well before FFM is fully
recovered.
It is to be noted that this adipose-specific control of
thermogenesis underlying preferential catch-up fat has been
observed only after substantial depletion of fat mass—as in
the case of the studies mentioned above—where fat deple-
tion represented more than a third of pre-starvation fat
levels. Indeed, in a recent study by Müller et al. [20],
whereby the degree of fat depletion induced by caloric
restriction for 3 weeks was mild (~6% relative to baseline
‘habitual’ levels), the phenomenon of preferential catch-up
fat was not observed. Taken together, it would seem that fat
depletion would need to exceed a ‘threshold’ level for the
occurrence of adaptive thermogenesis driving preferential
catch-up fat and eventually resulting in fat overshooting.
Fig. 4 Schematic diagrams depicting dynamics of body composition
recovery, with fat and FFM synchronization a or desynchronization b,
c during weight recovery. The Y axis represent changes in fat and FFM
as a percentage of initial (baseline) values, and the numbers 1 and 2
represent synchronized fat and FFM recoveries, respectively, as
determined by the intrinsic lean-fat partitioning characteristic of the
individual. a Fat and FFM reached complete (100%) recovery simul-
taneously; there is no fat overshoot. b Fat recovery alone is accelerated
(either by adaptive thermogenesis or by excessive hyperphagia or by
both) such that this catch-up fat results in complete (100%) fat
recovery before complete FFM recovery; this desynchronization
(represented by the gap between the green-filled circles) results in
collateral fattening and fat overshoot. c Altered intrinsic lean-fat par-
titioning at the expense of FFM (i.e., slower recovery of FFM and
hence energy diverted to recovery of fat) also results in complete fat
recovery being reached before complete FFM recovery; this desyn-
chronization (represented by the gap between the green-filled circles)
results in collateral fattening and fat overshoot
660
A. G. Dulloo et al.
 This adipose-specific control of thermogenesis driving
catch-up fat therefore constitutes an adaptive mechanism
that accelerates the restoration of survival capacity (con-
ferred by the body’s fat reserves) toward withstanding the
next period of food scarcity. However, it also contributes to
a desynchronization in fat and FFM recoveries. Besides
adaptive thermogenesis, there are other potential explana-
tions as to why temporal desynchronization in the recov-
eries of the fat and FFM occur; these are discussed below.
Excessive hyperphagia
The degree of hyperphagia may be too high so that the
capacity for increasing the lean tissue synthesis rate is
exceeded. Unlike the very high capacity for fat accumula-
tion in the body, the rate of lean tissue deposition is limited,
and under conditions of excessive caloric load—as may
occur during refeeding on modern diets, that is, refined
energy-densed foods low in bulk and hence with low
satiation—more body fat is deposited than could be deter-
mined by the intrinsic partitioning characteristic of the
individual (Fig. 5). In this case also, one can refer to a
situation of a preferential catch-up fat, thereby resulting in
temporal desynchronization in reaching complete fat and
FFM recovery and consequential collateral fattening (Fig. 4,
panel b).
Impaired lean tissue growth
A desynchronization in fat and FFM recoveries can also
occur as a result of specific impairments in the rate of lean
tissue deposition, and exacerbated by the fact that the
energy spared as a result of diminished lean tissue gain is
diverted to more fat gain—that is, a state of ‘double burden’
on the synchronization of lean and fat tissue recovery (Fig.
4, panel c). Among several factors that could account for
this are situations where refeeding diets do not meet the
requirements for lean tissue growth such as inadequate
quantity or quality of dietary protein, deficiencies in
growth-promoting micronutrients such as zinc and vitamin
A, or due to suboptimal stimulus for muscle growth
resulting from insufficient muscle contractility, as may arise
from a lack of physical activity.
Altered control of partitioning: relevance to aging
and developmental programming
One may also entertain the possibility of a change in the
intrinsic lean-fat partitioning characteristic of the individual
during the weight recovery phase such that a lower lean-fat
partitioning will favor a greater fat regain at the expense of
less lean tissue deposition. This could be postulated to occur
with the aging process, which would be consistent with the
report that in postmenopausal overweight/obese older
women (age ~ 60 years) who were followed through a 5-
month weight loss intervention and a subsequent 12-month
non-intervention period, those who regained weight (≥2 kg)
regained more than two-thirds of the fat lost but only 25%
of lean mass lost [21].
Alterations in the intrinsic lean-fat partitioning char-
acteristic could also result from epigenetic changes resulting
from developmental (fetal or neonatal) programming.
Indeed, a preferential catch-up fat with lean tissue lagging
behind is also a risk factor for obesity and insulin-related
complications in infants and children who experienced
catch-up growth after perinatal growth retardation. In
addition to some evidence for thrifty metabolism [4]—
which seems to persist in adulthood [22]—there is also
evidence based upon early feeding studies in infants [23]
that post-natal catch-up growth may also be attributed to
hyperphagia, which may be driven by the impetus to catch-
up on the lean mass lagging behind fat mass recovery. This
may thus lead to excess fat deposition through collateral
fattening that may extend for years and contribute to their
increased risk for obesity in later life.
Fig. 5 Conceptual overview of the factors contributing to hyperphagia,
which could operate at different rates as well as with different mag-
nitude. Lean (protein) tissue synthesis and retention may lag behind fat
tissue synthesis and storage, because of the more complex and dif-
ferently regulated metabolism in the former, as well as its limited
deposition, in particular in non-stimulated muscles, that is, without
associated exercise. Despite a constant intrinsic partitioning char-
acteristic (Pc), more body fat can be deposited in situation of high and
rapid degree of hyperphagia leading to faster catch-up fat relative to
lean tissue, temporal desynchronization in reaching complete fat vs.
lean mass recovery, and collateral fattening resulting in fat overshoot
and altered body composition with a higher degree of adiposity
Collateral fattening in obesity predisposition
661
 Importance of initial adiposity and relevance
to dieting making one fatter
From a standpoint of body composition autoregulation in
healthy young subjects, it would seem that the desynchro-
nization between lean and fat tissue recoveries would, to a
great extent, be determined by preferential catch-up fat (Fig.
4 panel b), the magnitude of which is determined by the
degree of fat and FFM depletion with impact both on
hyperphagia and suppressed thermogenesis. It can be
argued that for the same loss in body weight (in absolute
amounts or as a percentage of initial weight), a lean person
compared with a fatter person would show greater degrees
of fat and lean tissue depletions, as well as a greater pro-
portion of weight loss as lean tissue (Fig. 6, panel a). Under
these conditions, it therefore follows that the leaner the
individual the greater the temporal desynchronization in fat
and lean tissue recoveries, and hence the greater the fat
overshoot [24]. Support for this contention can be derived
from the data on body composition in the men of the
Minnesota Experiment in which, by virtue of the study
design, a similar degree of weight loss was achieved in all
participants, namely a loss of 25–29% of initial body
weight. As shown in Fig. 6 (panel b), a plot of the amount
of fat overshot against pre-starvation (initial) %body fat
reveals an exponential increase in the extent of fat overshoot
with decreasing initial % body fat [24]. Also superimposed
on this figure are the data from U.S. Army Rangers who,
during rehabilitation after losing about 12% of their weight
due to training in a multi-stressor environment (including
energy deficit through food deprivation), showed substantial
fat overshoots of 4–5 kg on average [25, 26]; data on their
average amount of fat overshoot and average baseline body
fat% fit closely with the exponential curve drawn from the
Minnesota Experiment data.
Such an inverse relationship between fat overshoot and
initial adiposity suggest that dieters with normal body
weight are at higher risk for fat overshooting than over-
weight/obese dieters, and that repeated dieting and weight
cycling put the lean person rather than the overweight/obese
person at greater risks toward becoming fatter [24], as well
as increased cardiometabolic risk [27]. An explanation
based upon collateral fattening would be consistent with the
analysis of several prospective studies [28, 29] indicating
that it is dieting among those individuals with perceived
overweight (but actually of normal weight), rather than in
those who are actually overweight or obese, which most
strongly and consistently predict future weight gain and
obesity (reviewed in refs. Dulloo et al. 24 and Montani et al.
27).
A link between sedentariness and obesity
predisposition
Collateral fattening could also be invoked among the
mechanisms by which a marked reduction in physical
activity in previously active individuals may predispose
them to increased adiposity, beyond that explained by
diminished physical activity energy expenditure. It is now
increasingly recognized that a J-shaped relationship exists
between physical activity levels and energy intake [30, 31],
with energy intake tightly coupled to energy expenditure
across moderate to high activity levels thereby promoting
energy balance, and dysregulation occurring at low levels of
physical activity. Indeed, an increase in sedentariness may
not lead to compensatory decrease in energy intake, thereby
predisposing the individual to increased adiposity and
weight gain. One reason for such intake–expenditure mis-
matching may be attributed to the fact that with increasing
Fig. 6 a Relationship between the proportions of energy mobilized as
protein (P-ratio) during weight loss due to semistarvation and the
initial percentage body fat (%FAT0) in men of the Minnesota
Experiment. Note that P-ratio (expressed in energy terms) is a proxy of
the fraction of weight loss as FFM (i.e., ΔFFM/ΔWeight). Adapted
from Dulloo and Jacquet [13]. b Relationship between the extent of fat
overshooting (kg excess fat regained) and the initial (pre-starvation)
percentage body fat (%FAT0). The exponential curve is drawn from
data on the 12 men who participated in all phases of the Minnesota
Experiment (data for each individual is represented by a blue-filled
diamond symbol). The mean values for men (n = 10) participating in
each of the Army Ranger training experiments for which body com-
position data are available [25, 26] are shown as red-filled circles.
Adapted from Dulloo et al. [24]
662
A. G. Dulloo et al.
 sedentariness, the resulting reduction in muscle contractile
function can lead to subsequent loss of muscle tissue and
hence a deficit in lean mass. Indeed, in healthy young men,
short periods of muscle disuse arising from strict bed rest
for <10 days have been shown to lead to a reduction in
skeletal muscle mass and substantial loss of lean body mass
[32]. Based upon the concept of collateral fattening, a
potential feedback system attempting to restore such deficit
in lean tissue may lead to a stimulatory effect on energy
intake thereby contributing to the intake–expenditure mis-
matching, positive energy balance and concomitant increase
in adiposity.
Concluding remarks
Over the past few years, there has been a resurgence of
interest into the role of body composition in the control of
appetite/hunger, with particular focus on the role of FFM
[33–39]. Various models are being proposed to integrate the
functional relationships of both fat mass and FFM with the
control of energy intake [40–42], with the model of Stubbs
et al. [43] (in a companion paper in this issue) taking into
account the ‘V’- or ‘U’-shaped relationship between appe-
tite/hunger and FFM [7]. Indeed, in examining the role of
FFM in the control of food intake, we have previously
emphasized the distinction between a ‘passive’ vs. an
‘active’ role of FFM [7]: the passive role being mediated by
‘energy-sensing’ mechanisms that translate FFM-induced
energy requirements to energy intake, and the active role
operating in the defense of FFM deficit by driving hyper-
phagia. Thus, the loss of FFM or its deficit resulting from
dieting,
developmental
programming
or
sedentariness
should be regarded not only as contributing to increased
adiposity because of the lowering of maintenance energy
expenditure due to a lower FFM, but also to the body’s
attempt to restore FFM by overeating. This concept of
collateral fattening in body composition autoregulation
provides a system physiology framework in the search for
peripheral signals (proteinstats) linking lean tissue and food
intake. It also serves to emphasize further the importance of
a healthy lifestyle centered on balanced diets and physical
activity in the protection against lean mass deficits per-
taining to both the prevention and treatment of obesity.
Acknowledgements This research work was supported by the Swiss
National Science Foundation (grant no. 320030-176116).
Compliance with ethical standards
Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
1. Webster AJ. Energy partitioning, tissue growth and appetite
control. Proc Nutr Soc. 1993;52:69–76.
2. Radcliffe JD, Webster AJ. Sex, body composition and regulation
of food intake during growth in the Zucker rat. Br J Nutr.
1978;39:483–92.
3. Ong KKL, Ahmed ML, Emmett PM, Preece MA, Dunger DB.
Association between postnatal catch-up growth and obesity in
childhood: prospective cohort study. BMJ. 2000;320:967–71.
4. Dulloo AG, Jacquet J, Seydoux J, Montani JP. The thrifty ‘catch-
up fat’ phenotype: its impact on insulin sensitivity during growth
trajectories to obesity and metabolic syndrome. Int J Obes (Lond).
2006;30(Suppl 4):S23–35.
5. Wells JC.. Worldwide variability in growth and its association
with health: incorporating body composition, developmental
plasticity, and intergenerational effects. Am J Hum Biol. 2017;29:
e22954.
6. Dulloo AG. Collateral fattening: when a deficit in lean body mass
drives overeating. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2017;25:277–9.
7. Dulloo AG, Jacquet J, Miles-Chan JL, Schutz Y. Passive and
active roles of fat-free mass in the control of energy intake and
body composition regulation. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2017;71:353–7.
8. Keys A, Brozek J, Henschel A, Mickelsen O, Taylor HL. The
biology of human starvation. Minnesota: University of Minnesota
Press; 1950.
9. Dulloo AG, Jacquet J, Girardier L. Poststarvation hyperphagia and
body fat overshooting in humans: a role for feedback signals from
lean and fat tissues. Am J Clin Nutr. 1997;65:717–23.
10. Kennedy GC. The role of depot fat in the hypothalamic control of
food
intake
in
the
rat.
Proc
R
Soc
Lond
B
Biol
Sci.
1953;140:578–96.
11. Payne PR, Dugdale AE. A model for the prediction of energy
balance and body weight. Ann Hum Biol. 1977;4:525–35.
12. Dulloo AG, Jacquet J, Girardier L. Autoregulation of body
composition during weight recovery in human: the Minnesota
Experiment
revisited.
Int
J
Obes
Relat
Metab
Disord.
1996;20:393–405.
13. Dulloo AG, Jacquet J. The control of partitioning between protein
and fat during human starvation: its internal determinants and
biological significance. Br J Nutr. 1999;82:339–56.
14. Dulloo AG, Jacquet J. Adaptive reduction in basal metabolic rate
in response to food deprivation in human: a role for feedback
signal from the fat stores. Am J Clin Nutr. 1998;68:599–606.
15. Dulloo AG, Jacquet J. An adipose-specific control of thermo-
genesis in body weight regulation. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord.
2001;25(Suppl. 5):S22–S29.
16. Dulloo AG, Girardier L. Adaptive changes in energy expenditure
during refeeding following low-calorie intake: evidence for a
Collateral fattening in obesity predisposition
663
 specific metabolic component favoring fat storage. Am J Clin
Nutr. 1990;52:415–20.
17. Crescenzo R, Samec S, Antic V, Rohner-Jeanrenaud F, Seydoux
J, Montani JP, et al. A role for suppressed thermogenesis
favouring catch-up fat in the pathophysiology of catch-up growth.
Diabetes. 2003;52:1090–7.
18. Carbonnel F, Messing B, Rimbert A, Rongier M, Koziet J, Dar-
maun D. Energy and protein metabolism during recovery from
malnutrition due to nonneoplastic gastrointestinal disease. Am J
Clin Nutr. 1997;65:1517–23.
19. Weyer C, Walford RL, Harper IT, Milner M, MacCallum T,
Tataranni PA, et al. Energy metabolism after 2 y of energy
restriction: the biosphere 2 experiment. Am J Clin Nutr.
2000;72:946–53.
20. Müller MJ, Enderle J, Pourhassan M, Braun W, Eggeling B,
Lagerpusch M, et al. Metabolic adaptation to caloric restriction
and subsequent refeeding: the Minnesota Starvation Experiment
revisited. Am J Clin Nutr. 2015;102:807–19.
21. Beavers KM, Lyles MF, Davis CC, Wang X, Beavers DP, Nicklas
BJ. Is lost lean mass from intentional weight loss recovered during
weight regain in postmenopausal women? Am J Clin Nutr.
2011;94:767–74.
22. Kensara OA, Wooton SA, Phillips DI, Patel M, Hoffman DJ,
Jackson AA, et al. Substrate-energy metabolism and metabolic
risk factors for cardiovascular disease in relation to fetal growth
and adult body composition. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab.
2006;291:E365–71.
23. Ounsted M, Sleigh G. The infant’s self-regulation of food intake
and weight gain. Difference in metabolic balance after growth
constraint or acceleration in utero. Lancet. 1975;1:1393–7.
24. Dulloo AG, Jacquet J, Montani JP, Schutz Y. How dieting makes
the lean fatter: from a perspective of body composition auto-
regulation through adipostats and proteinstats awaiting discovery.
Obes Rev. 2015;16(Suppl 1):25–35.
25. Nindl BC, Friedl KE, Frykman PN, Marchitelli LJ, Shippee RL,
Patton JF. Physical performance and metabolic recovery among
lean, healthy men following a prolonged energy deficit. Int J
Sports Med. 1997;18:317–24.
26. Friedl KE, Moore RJ, Hoyt RW, Marchitelli LJ, Martinez-Lopez
LE, Askew EW. Endocrine markers of semistarvation in healthy
lean men in a multistressor environment. J Appl Physiol.
2000;88:1820–30.
27. Montani JP, Schutz Y, Dulloo AG. Dieting and weight cycling as
risk factors for cardiometabolic diseases: who is really at risk?
Obes Rev. 2015;16(Suppl 1):7–18.
28. Korkeila M, Rissanen A, Kaprio J, Sorensen TI, Koskenvuo M.
Weight-loss attempts and risk of major weight gain: a prospective
study in Finnish adults. Am J Clin Nutr. 1999;70:965–75.
29. Pietiläinen KH, Saarni SE, Kaprio J. Does dieting make you fat?
A twin study. Int J Obes (Lond). 2012;36:456–64.
30. Mayer J, Roy P, Mitra KP. Relation between caloric intake, body
weight, and physical work: studies in an industrial male popula-
tion in West Bengal. Am J Clin Nutr. 1956;4:169–75.
31. Shook RP, Hand GA, Drenowatz C, Hebert JR, Paluch AE,
Blundell JE, et al. Low levels of physical activity are associated
with dysregulation of energy intake and fat mass gain over 1 year.
Am J Clin Nutr. 2015;102:1332–8.
32. Dirks ML, Wall BT, van de Valk B, Holloway TM, Holloway GP,
Chabowski A, et al. One week of bed rest leads to substantial
muscle atrophy and induces whole-body insulin resistance in the
absence
of
skeletal
muscle
lipid
accumulation.
Diabetes.
2016;65:2862–75.
33. Blundell JE, Caudwell P, Gibbons C, Hopkins M, Näslund E,
King NA, et al. Body composition and appetite: fat-free mass (but
not fat mass or BMI) is positively associated with self-determined
meal size and daily energy intake in humans. Br J Nutr.
2012;107:445–9.
34. Caudwell P, Finlayson G, Gibbons C, Hopkins M, King N,
Näslund E, et al. Resting metabolic rate is associated with hunger,
self-determined meal size, and daily energy intake and may
represent a marker for appetite. Am J Clin Nutr. 2013;97:7–14.
35. Weise CM, Hohenadel MG, Krakoff J, Votruba SB. Body com-
position and energy expenditure predict ad-libitum food and
macronutrient
intake
in
humans.
Int
J
Obes
(Lond).
2014;38:243–51.
36. Piaggi P, Thearle MS, Krakoff J, Votruba SB. Higher daily energy
expenditure and respiratory quotient, rather than fat-free mass,
independently determine greater ad libitum overeating. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2015;100:3011–20.
37. Weise CM, Thiyyagura P, Reiman EM, Chen K, Krakoff J. A
potential role for the midbrain in integrating fat-free mass deter-
mined energy needs: an H2 (15) O PET study. Hum Brain Mapp.
2015;36:2406–15.
38. Cameron JD, Sigal RJ, Kenny GP, Alberga AS, Prud’homme D,
Phillips P, et al. Body composition and energy intake - skeletal
muscle mass is the strongest predictor of food intake in obese
adolescents: the HEARTY trial. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab.
2016;41:611–7.
39. McNeil J, Lamothe G, Cameron, JD, Riou MÈ, Cadieux S,
Lafrenière J, et al. Investigating predictors of eating: is resting
metabolic rate really the strongest proxy of energy intake? Am J
Clin Nutr. 2017;106:1206–12.
40. Blundell JE, Gibbons C, Caudwell P, Finlayson G, Hopkins M.
Appetite control and energy balance: impact of exercise. Obes
Rev. 2015;16(Suppl 1):67–76.
41. Hopkins M, Finlayson G, Duarte C, Whybrow S, Ritz P, Horgan
GW, et al. Modelling the associations between fat-free mass,
resting metabolic rate and energy intake in the context of total
energy balance. Int J Obes (Lond). 2016;40:312–8.
42. MacLean PS, Blundell JE, Mennella JA, Batterham RL. Biolo-
gical control of appetite: a daunting complexity. Obes (Silver
Spring). 2017;25(Suppl 1):S8–S16.
43. Stubbs RJ, Hopkins M, Finlayson GS, Duarte C, Gibbons C,
Blundell JE. Potential effects of fat mass and fat-free mass on
energy intake in different states of energy balance. Eur J Clin
Nutr. 2018. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41430-018-0146-6.
664
A. G. Dulloo et al.
