 NONSTATIN DRUGS (E. DEGOMA, SECTION EDITOR)
Niacin Alternatives for Dyslipidemia: Fool’s Gold or Gold Mine?
Part I: Alternative Niacin Regimens
Richard L. Dunbar1,2,3,4,5 & Harsh Goel6
Published online: 15 February 2016
# The Author(s) 2016. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract Niacin was the first drug demonstrating lowered
cholesterol prevents coronary heart disease (CHD) events,
with two clinical CHD outcome studies establishing a
cardioprotective niacin regimen: 1 g thrice daily with meals.
Though cardioprotective, skin toxicity limits niacin’s use, fos-
tering several variations to improve tolerability. One of these,
an extended-release (ER) alternative, proved immensely suc-
cessful commercially, dominating clinical practice despite
departing from the established regimen in several critical
ways. Hence, improved tolerability may have come at the cost
of diminished efficacy, posing a conundrum: Does it still help
the population at risk for CHD to broaden a drug’s acceptance
by Bwatering it down^? This question is crucial at this stage
now that the ER alternative failed to recapitulate the benefits
of the established cardioprotective niacin regimen in two trials
of the alternative approach: AIM-HIGH and HPS2-THRIVE.
Part I of this review discusses how vastly the ER alternative
departs from the established cardioprotective regimen, why
that is important physiologically, and how it may explain the
findings of AIM-HIGH and HPS2-THRIVE. Given important
gaps left by statin therapy, the established cardioprotective
niacin regimen remains an important evidence-based therapy
for the statin intolerant or statin averse.
Keywords Niacin . Nicotinic acid . Hyperlipidemia . Niacin
conjugates . Niacin prodrugs . Lipids
This article is part of the Topical Collection on Nonstatin Drugs
Richard L. Dunbar and Harsh Goel contributed equally to this work.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article
(doi:10.1007/s11883-016-0563-8) contains supplementary material,
which is available to authorized users.
* Richard L. Dunbar
richard.dunbar@uphs.upenn.edu
Harsh Goel
harsh_goel@hotmail.com
1
Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine,
Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA
2
Division of Translational Medicine and Human Genetics, Perelman
School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, 3600 Spruce
Street, 9-010 Maloney Building, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
3
Institute for Translational Medicine and Therapeutics, Perelman
School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA
4
The Cardiovascular Institute, Perelman School of Medicine at the
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
5
Institute for Diabetes, Obesity, and Metabolism, Perelman School of
Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
6
Department of Medicine, York Hospital, 1001 S. George Street,
York, PA 17403, USA
Curr Atheroscler Rep (2016) 18: 11
DOI 10.1007/s11883-016-0563-8
 Introduction
Almost 60 years ago, Altschul discovered NIcotinic ACid
vitamIN (NI’AC’IN) suppressed lipids in man [1].
Subsequently found to lower cholesterol and triglycerides
(TGs) among the atherogenic lipoproteins (non-HDL-C and
LDL-C) and raise HDL-C [2, 3], niacin became the first to
demonstrate that lowering cholesterol prevents myocardial in-
farction (MI) [3] and, eventually, all-cause mortality [4]. Thus,
niacin became foundational to treating hypercholesterolemia
to prevent MI. Cardioprotection was shown with 1 g thrice
daily with meals in two distinct niacin formulations: (1)
immediate-release (IR) niacin [3] and, later, (2) a longer-
releasing niacin pro-drug, pentaerythrityl tetranicotinate [5].
Accordingly, several consensus groups endorsed niacin to pre-
vent hard coronary heart disease (CHD) events: non-fatal MI
and cardiac death [6–9]. Attempts to capitalize on the benefits
of this regimen included titration well beyond 3 g/day to reach
specific lipid targets [10–13], using up to 12 g/day [10].
Another strategy was to re-tool the pharmacokinetics, radical-
ly altering the dosing schedule to enhance tolerability, the
most commercially successful being prolonged-release alter-
natives. An extended-release (ER) alternative attracted major
backing as Niaspan, but counter-intuitively, at a maximum
dose restricted to only 2 g/day. It is critical to appreciate the
ER alternative is an alternative rather than an equivalent to the
established cardioprotective regimen, the former bearing the
burden of proof in terms of safety, lipid efficacy, and, ultimate-
ly, CHD event reduction.
The Alternative Versus the Established Niacin
Regimen
Though fairly safe, the ER alternative is at a major disadvan-
tage compared to other niacin formulations, in that the FDA
limited the maximum dose to 2 g/day, whereas the established
cardioprotective dose is 3 g/day, raising the obvious question:
For practical purposes, is 2 g really less than 3 g, or is it Bclose
enough for government work?^ Ultimately, this would require
a new round of outcome trials. Importantly, IR-niacin con-
tinues to improve lipids above 2 g/day, as demonstrated by
Knopp et al. in a head-to-head trial comparing IR-niacin to the
ER alternative among hyperlipidemics [14]. At the low end,
both formulations lowered lipids comparably at only half the
usual dose (i.e., 1.5 g daily). However, when titrated to the
established cardioprotective dose (i.e., 3 g daily), IR-niacin
clearly exceeded the ER alternative’s capability to lower lipids
[14]. Considering the FDA approved IR-niacin up to 6 g/day,
the top dose of the ER alternative is only 2/3 the established
cardioprotective dose and only 1/3 the maximum approved
dose of IR-niacin, raising grave doubts as to its equivalency
to the established cardioprotective regimen.
Unfortunately, the problem for the ER alternative runs much
deeper than profound underdosing. Departing further, the ER
alternative was dosed entirely at bedtime rather than throughout
fed portion of the day, abandoning the successful approach of
both trials establishing CHD benefit. Nevertheless, the ER al-
ternative was touted as a gentler alternative to IR-niacin, and
absent contrary evidence presumed cardioprotective long
enough to dominate clinical use, encouraged by small studies
demonstrating atheroprotection [15–17].
Commendably, major stakeholders of the exploratory regi-
men mounted vascular event outcome trials to prove that the
ER alternative could limit cardiovascular events as IR-niacin
and pentaerythrityl tetranicotinate had done, this time against a
statin background. The aborted AIM-HIGH trial [18••] was
almost as large as the Coronary Drug Project (CDP), if much
shorter [3], and the completed HPS2-THRIVE trial was even
larger [19••], together promising a robust test of the alternative
regimen. Surprisingly to many, the ER alternative failed to re-
capitulate benefits of the established cardioprotective regimen.
Perhaps the most obvious explanation for their apparent null
results is the exploratory ER regimen compromised several
critical features of the established cardioprotective regimen
(Table 1). Tellingly, in outcome trials, 1 g thrice daily with
meals reduces hard CHD events singly or pooled, with a pooled
odds ratio (OR) of 0.75 (95 % confidence interval [CI]=0.60 to
0.93, p=0.01, Fig. 1a). In contrast, such benefits appear well
beyond the reach of the exploratory regimen of 2-g single dose
before the overnight fast (OR=1.00, 95 % CI=0.89 to 1.13,
p=0.97).
Whether the exploratory alternative regimen is actually
equivalent is crucial, because it affects how the established
cardioprotective regimen might be used. Substantially
underdosing the alternative is intuitively cause for pause; in-
deed, there is much evidence supporting the dose–response
relationship between cholesterol suppression and CHD risk
(Fig. 1b) [20, 21]. There is also evidence that nocturnally
dosing the ER alternative does not lower postprandial lipids
[22•, 23], thus, failing to suppress an important pool of ath-
erogenic lipids [24, 25]. We found meal-time dosing reduced
postprandial lipidemia [22•], which itself may be
atheroprotective [25, 26]. In contrast, nocturnal dosing of the
ER alternative confers no such benefit [23]. The AIM-HIGH
authors also implicate nocturnal dosing because niacin causes
a multi-fold rebound of free fatty acids (FFA) several hours
post-dose. They contend Bthis metabolic perturbation repeated
every night could promote CVevents via impaired myocardial
fuel supply, subsequent excess in fatty acid anion concentra-
tions, and/or a counter-regulatory hormone response, includ-
ing catecholamines.^ [27]. Conversely, they reason that the
cardioprotective meal-time regimen might forego these ill ef-
fects. At this point, to continue to presume that the alternative
regimen is equivalent to the established cardioprotective reg-
imen strains credibility.
11
Page 2 of 14
Curr Atheroscler Rep (2016) 18: 11
 Revisiting the Established Cardioprotective Regimen
Clearly, a convincing failure of an alternative to live up to
the standard invalidates the alternative; however, such fail-
ure does not invalidate the standard. Now that the pre-
sumption of equivalency between the two opposing
reg-
imens has been debunked, we think it is important to re-
visit the evidence supporting the established
cardioprotective regimen. The CDP compared five
cholesterol-lowering strategies to placebo among MI sur-
vivors [28]. At 1 g thrice daily, IR-niacin prevented recur-
rent MI after 5 years, whereas the other four strategies
failed [3]. Interestingly, among the four failed therapies
was a fibrate; thus, in a head-to-head matchup, niacin
proved cardioprotective whereas a fibrate failed [3]. A sec-
ond study affirmed the pro-drug pentaerythrityl
tetranicotinate 1 g thrice daily combined with the same
failed fibrate from the CDP, preventing MI after 5 years
in the Stockholm Ischemic Heart Disease Study (SIHDS)
[5]. Since the fibrate had proven powerless to prevent MI
as monotherapy, reconciling the results with CDP further
commends niacin as a cardioprotective agent. Because it
used monotherapy, CDP is by far the cleaner study and
more definitively establishes niacin 1 g thrice daily as
cardioprotective. Having used combination therapy, the
SIHDS is corroboratory but less definitive than the CDP.
Furthermore, having used a longer acting pro-drug [29],
we think SIHDS supports the concept that dosing 1 g thrice
daily is more important than the release rate of free nico-
tinic acid. Long-term follow-up of CDP revealed the
niacin-treated group had lower all-cause mortality despite
stopping niacin after 5 years [4]. Such legacy benefits im-
ply prior niacin use fundamentally altered the long-term
disease course rather than simply keeping it in abeyance
during active treatment, the sine qua non for disease-
modifying therapy. Long the only lipid-lowering therapy
to decisively prevent CHD events, niacin became first-line
therapy along with bile acid sequestrants, as reflected by
the Adult Treatment Panel (ATP) guidelines from 1988 to
2001 [30, 31]. Per public records, between 1957 and 2015,
the US FDA approved 39 niacin drug/dose combinations
as prescription-only pharmaceuticals to improve lipids.
These include 26 approved applications featuring niacin:
16 for IR niacin and, more recently, 10 for the ER alterna-
tive [32•]. Importantly, the FDA approved the broad claim
that BIn patients with a history of myocardial infarction and
hyperlipidemia, niacin is indicated to reduce the risk of
recurrent nonfatal myocardial infarction.^ (http://www.
rxabbvie.com/pdf/niaspan.pdf).
The Major Problem with Niacin
Despite benefits, a major limitation of niacin has been the
universally disagreeable dermal side effect, dubbed
Bflushing^, a misleading metonym because it emphasizes
one of the least bothersome symptoms, skin reddening [33].
Though flushing or rubor is cosmetically unappealing, the
bothersome symptoms arise from dermal calor, dolor, tumor,
and especially, pruritus. Since Bflushing^ misdirects attention
from more bothersome symptoms, we prefer the more general
term niacin-associated skin toxicity (NASTy). Despite de-
monstrable CHD benefits, niacin fell short of its potential
due to NASTy effects. Over the years, several measures
emerged to improve tolerability: slow titration, meal-time dos-
ing, pretreatment with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs), especially aspirin, and developing prolonged-
release alternatives dosed once at bedtime [14, 34–36].
Despite partially improving symptoms, overall niacin
adop-
tion remained poor.
Table 1
Major differences between the established cardioprotective regimen and the ER alternative regimen
Strategy employed by clinical event trials
Established cardioprotective regimen
Exploratory regimen
(cardioprotection indeterminate)
Dose tested
3 g/day
>>
2 g/day
Exposures per day
3
>>
1
Portion of day exposed
Diurnal
≠
Nocturnal
Fed/fasting state during drug exposure
Postprandial (breakfast, lunch, and supper)
≠
Post-absorptive (overnight fast)
Adjusted lipid changesa
TC
−12.6 %
>
−7.4 %
TG
−26.4 %
>
−19.5 %
LDL
−15.4 %
>
−9.5 %
HDL
+22.5 %
≈
+21.9 %
Pharmacokinetics of formulation
Immediate-release niacin,
<
Extended-release niacin
longer-release pro-drug
≈
a Lipid changes are from a meta-analysis by Birjmohun et al. (J Am Coll Cardiol 2005;45:185–97)
Curr Atheroscler Rep (2016) 18: 11
Page 3 of 14
11
 Statins Displaced Niacin…
High incidence and morbidity/mortality of CHD and the
strong association with dyslipidemia, along with improved
outcomes from cholesterol suppression spawned new lipid-
lowering drugs, most successfully the statins. Picking up
where niacin left off, statins multiply proved the cholesterol
hypothesis, refined as the LDL hypothesis. More effective at
lowering LDL-C [37, 38], better tolerated, and enjoying
superlative evidence for preventing CHD events [39], statins
displaced niacin as first-line therapy, reflected in the 2001
ATP and subsequent guidelines [9, 40, 41].
…but Statins Leave Much to Be Desired
Despite strengths, statins have significant limitations: Though
better tolerated than niacin, a very conservative estimate is that
10 % of patients remains statin intolerant [42, 43].
NOTE: Weights are from random effects analysi
s
.
.
CDP (IRNA)
SIHDS (PENA)
Subtotal  (I
2 =36.4%, phet=0.210)
AIM-HIGH (ERNA)
HPS2-THRIVE (ERNA)
Subtotal  (I
2 = 13.3%, phet=0.283)
ID
Study
0.80 (0.69, 0.94)
0.62 (0.43, 0.90)
0.75 (0.60, 0.93)
1.14 (0.88, 1.47)
0.97 (0.87, 1.08)
1.00 (0.89, 1.13)
OR (95% CI)
287/1119
72/279
359/1398
130/1718
704/12838
834/14556
Niaci n
Events,
839/2789
100/279
939/3068
114/1696
722/12835
836/14531
Reference
Events,
0.80 (0.69, 0.94)
0.62 (0.43, 0.90)
0.75 (0.60, 0.93)
1.14 (0.88, 1.47)
0.97 (0.87, 1.08)
1.00 (0.89, 1.13)
OR (95% CI)
287/1119
72/279
359/1398
130/1718
704/12838
834/14556
Niaci n
Events,
p=0.967
p=0.010
Favors Niacin  
Parity Favors Usual Care 
.4
.5
.75
1
1.5
Log-Transformed Odds Ratio for Hard CHD Events (CHD Death and NFMI)
by Regimen (Established vs Exploratory)
a
1. Established Cardioprotective Regimen: Multiple Daily/Post-Prandial/Diurnal Dosing, 3g Daily
2. Exploratory Regimen (ER Alternative): Once-Daily/Pre-Fast/Nocturnal Dosing, << 3g Daily
SIHDS
CDP
AIMHIGH
HPS2-THRIVE
1.14
Parity
0.97
0.80
0.62
1
0.80
0.70
0.60
Log-Transformed Odds Ratio
0
-5%
-10%
-15%
Drop in Cholesterol
tau
2 =0.0005,
I
2 =0.0%, R
2 =98.4%
Meta-Regression of Hard CHD Events
As a Function of Cholesterol Suppression
b
11
Page 4 of 14
Curr Atheroscler Rep (2016) 18: 11
 Additionally, statin response varies substantially, with up to
40 % of patients unable to achieve lipid goals with monother-
apy, thus leaving a big therapeutic gap in at-risk populations
[44•]. Moreover, despite reducing hard CHD events 25–35 %
among those who will take them, statins leave substantial
residual risk [45]. Hence, there is a dire need for both an
alternative and adjunct to statins. Obviously, besides
exploiting novel therapeutic pathways, one logical and less
costly approach should be to study the cumulative effect of
established cardioprotective agents added to statins.
Supporting this, when added to baseline statin therapy, niacin
further drops LDL-C and triglycerides and raises HDL-C,
regressing atherosclerotic plaque [15, 17, 46] providing a
sound basis to study clinical outcomes with the established
cardioprotective regimen against a statin background.
Unfortunately, this has never been investigated, and lamenta-
bly, failure of the exploratory ER alternative could frustrate
attempts to fund such a test of the established cardioprotective
regimen.
The Spectacular Failure of the Extended-Release
Alternative
The two failed trials of the exploratory regimen had very differ-
ent purposes. Most straightforward, the HPS2-THRIVE trial
assessed outcomes by adding the exploratory ER alternative
regimen to the background statin therapy [19••]. The AIM-
HIGH trial was designed for a much different reason: to test
the BHDL hypothesis^, namely that raising HDL-C per se
would decrease the residual risk beyond the reach of statins [47].
The HPS2-THRIVE Trial: A Relatively Straightforward
Design to Test the Exploratory Niacin Alternative
The HPS2-THRIVE enrolled patients with established cardio-
vascular disease but without any pre-specified lipid thresholds
for eligibility. Standardization of baseline therapy with simva-
statin 40 mg/day±ezetimibe 10 mg/day was followed by ran-
domization to ER niacin (ERN)-laropiprant 2 g/40 mg daily or
placebo. On baseline statin therapy, ERN-laropiprant lowered
LDL-C further, −10 mg/dL (−16 %), and raised HDL-C,
+6 mg/dL (+14 %), compared to placebo over a median
follow-up of 4 years. There was no difference between groups
in any primary or secondary event end-points besides a sig-
nificant 10 % reduction in revascularization procedures in the
ERN-laropiprant group. Notably, however, baseline LDL-C
was 63 mg/dL and HDL-C was 44 mg/dL, making the results
difficult to extrapolate to the real-world population of
dyslipidemics. Thus, subjects may have simply been too well
treated to make any further impact. Perhaps hypercholesterol-
emia is analogous to other atherosclerotic risks, such as dia-
betes or hypertension: At some point, further treatment has
diminished or no returns.
Intuitively, niacin suppressed LDL-C much more in those
with high baseline LDL-C: −7 mg/dL for LDL-C≤58 mg/dL
vs. −15 mg/dL for LDL-C≥77 mg/dL. In accordance with the
LDL hypothesis, one would expect those with more substan-
tial LDL-C suppression fare better. As predicted, baseline
LDL-C drove substantial heterogeneity in vascular outcomes,
indicating some groups had more of a response than others
Fig. 1 a Meta-analysis of odds ratio for hard CHD events (CHD death
and nonfatal myocardial infarction) comparing the exploratory ER alter-
native to the established cardioprotective regimen. The event rates for
active and comparator groups are as reported in the four cardiovascular
outcomes trials (CDP, SIHDS, AIM-HIGH, and HPS2-THRIVE) [3, 5,
18••, 19••]. We used random-effects meta-analysis techniques to pool the
corresponding log-transformed odds ratios (OR) by the metan procedure
in Stata v14. Initially, we analyzed the exploratory regimen as if it were
equivalent to the established cardioprotective regimen, pooling all four
trials. Unsurprisingly, treating such different approaches as equivalents
revealed a high degree of heterogeneity, I2, as high as 73 % (p = 0.012),
indicating the overwhelming amount of variation between trials is attrib-
utable to heterogeneity. Thus, pooling the trials proved unsupportable. In
marked contrast, treating the exploratory regimen as distinct from the
established cardioprotective regimen rendered heterogeneity insignificant
and inconsequential, as shown. Among trials of the exploratory regimen,
I2 was very low (13 %, p = 0.3), indicating agreement. Specifically, these
trials agreed on inefficacy of the alternative regimen (OR = 1.0, p = 1).
Likewise, among trials of the established cardioprotective regimen, I2 was
low (36 %, p = 0.2), again indicating agreement. Specifically, these trials
agreed on efficacy of the established cardioprotective regimen
(OR = 0.75, p = 0.01). The high heterogeneity when pooling all four trials
but low heterogeneity when distinguishing the exploratory from the
established regimen further supports the concept that the alternative is
not an equivalent with respect to outcomes. This is even more apparent
when considering the clinical effects on hard CHD events (i.e., no benefit
from the alternative, but an odds ratio of 0.75 for the established regimen).
Clinically, this analysis affirms a role for the established regimen and
denies a role for the ER alternative. CI confidence interval, IRNA
immediate-release niacin, PENA pentaerythrityl tetranicotinate, ERNA
extended-release niacin. b Meta-regression between log-transformed
odds ratio for hard CHD events and percent change in cholesterol. As
with Fig. 1, we assessed the odds ratios for hard CHD events for the four
cardiovascular outcome trials, now evaluating whether cardioprotection
is consistent with the cholesterol hypothesis. Specifically, we regressed
the odds ratio for CHD against the drop in total cholesterol for each study
by the metareg procedure in Stata v 14. Meta-regression revealed an
extraordinarily strong relationship, with virtually no heterogeneity
(I2 = 0 %) and nearly perfect correlation (R2 = 98 %). At the low end, it
is intuitive that the alternative regimen of AIM-HIGH and HPS2-
THRIVE conferred no meaningful CHD benefit, as the reduction in cho-
lesterol was modest at best (∼5 %). This accords with the cholesterol
hypothesis, which predicts that minimal reductions in cholesterol trans-
late to minimal benefits on CHD events. On the other hand, the regimens
of CDP and SIHDS present progressive reductions in cholesterol that
correspond to dose-responsive CHD benefits (dose referring to cholester-
ol reduction). This also accords with the cholesterol hypothesis, which
predicts that greater reductions in cholesterol should translate to greater
CHD benefits in a dose-responsive fashion. In addition to distinguishing
the alternative regimen from the established regimen, the strong linear
relationship between cholesterol lowering and CHD prevention by niacin
supports the concept that the lipid-targeting strategy would improve on
the already-substantial benefits of the established regimen
Curr Atheroscler Rep (2016) 18: 11
Page 5 of 14
11
 (p<0.05). Indeed, the group with baseline LDL-C<58 mg/dL
had no benefit from niacin, consistent with their optimal LDL
(OR = 1.08, 95 % CI = 0.96 to 1.20, Fig. 2a). In contrast,
pooling the groups with LDL≥58 mg/dL eliminated heteroge-
neity (now p=0.8), and importantly, those with LDL≥58 mg/
dL had fewer vascular events (OR=0.89, 95 % CI=0.81 to
0.97, NNT 74, p=0.012). Similar benefits were seen in those
with suboptimal ApoB (Supplemental Figure).
Thus, although HPS-THRIVE proved ERN+laropiprant is
no Bpanacea,^ it does point to efficacy among people who
actually have suboptimal LDL-C. Since that is precisely what
one would predict from the LDL hypothesis, we performed a
meta-regression of event reduction as a function of LDL-C
suppression (Fig. 2b). Though this supports a relationship
(R2 = 61 %), there was some heterogeneity suggesting a
threshold effect as an alternative to a strictly linear dose re-
sponse. In either case, the results accord with the LDL hypoth-
esis. Given unimpressive LDL-C reductions from up to 2 g of
the ER alternative, this naturally raises an important question:
Since the established cardioprotective regimen suppresses
LDL-C more aggressively, could we achieve more robust
CHD benefits with the reference dose of 3 g daily? Would a
lipid-targeting strategy work even better? If the LDL hypoth-
esis is correct, one would expect a trial pushing the dose to
maximize LDL-C or non-HDL-C suppression to fare much
better. Nevertheless, the HPS2-THRIVE subset reassures cli-
nicians that in all likelihood the ER alternative would benefit
the not-exactly uncommon group of patients with LDL-
C≥58 mg/dL or ApoB≥60 mg/dL despite statin therapy.
Apart from efficacy, safety took on unusual significance for
HPS2-THRIVE because of the laropiprant component. As
background, the FDA approved 39 niacin drug/dose combi-
nations. In a stunning departure, when laropiprant was pro-
posed to be added to niacin, the FDA rejected the combination
in 2008. In retrospect, this is understandable considering
laropiprant was a novel chemical entity lacking long-term
safety from large populations. Thus, rejection of the only ni-
acin formulation with laropiprant motivated HPS2-THRIVE,
providing the first major long-term safety profile. The trial
validated safety concerns by a high prevalence of adverse
effects. Some were unexpected based on niacin literature, no-
tably, serious bleeding events (2.5 vs. 1.9 %, p<0.001), in-
cluding the intracranial and gastrointestinal bleeding.
Disconcertingly, laropiprant absent niacin inhibits platelet
responsiveness to collagen and enhances the antiplatelet ef-
fects of aspirin and clopidogrel [48, 49]. Accordingly, changes
in platelet function in silico translated to prolonged bleeding
time in vivo among dyslipidemics exposed to laropiprant ab-
sent niacin. Indeed, bleeding time was underestimated be-
cause the protocol censored the maximal bleeding time, but
laropiprant-exposed subjects were still bleeding when they
reached the contrived maximum [48]. Hence, laropiprant’s
penchant to prolong bleeding implicates the novel chemical
entity in the serious bleeding events in HPS2-THRIVE. The
latter also found an unexpected increase in infections (8 vs.
6.6 %, p<0.001). Accordingly, by antagonizing the prosta-
glandin D2 (PGD2) receptor DP1, laropiprant may enhance
the PGD2-mediated regulation of the immune response via a
distinct PGD2 receptor-CRTH2 and increase propensity to
infections [50]. Thus, pre-clinical work supports the concept
that laropiprant may have promoted bleeding and infections in
HPS2-THRIVE. Far from assuaging safety concerns, HPS2-
THRIVE instead raised new concerns, translating theoretical
safety problems into confirmed serious adverse events, seem-
ingly validating the FDA’s denial.
Strictly speaking, the study design does not permit one to
separate adverse effects from laropiprant and the ER alterna-
tive. Although IR-niacin has been studied for many decades
longer than the ER alternative, extensive experience with the
former does not necessarily rule out novel side effects from
the latter, especially since the dosing regimen is so different
(cf. Table 1). The high incidence of adverse events in HPS2-
THRIVE prompted a letter attempting an unplanned post hoc
analysis of the aborted AIM-HIGH trial comparing serious

Fig. 2 a Meta-analysis of odds ratio for a composite of soft vascular
events from the HPS2-THRIVE study, stratified by baseline LDL-C.
Importantly, pooling groups across the baseline LDL-C led to a high
degree of heterogeneity (I2 = 70.3 %, p < 0.05), thus arguing against
pooling all three groups. One group (LDL-C < 58 mg/dL) had an
OR > 1.0, and the other two (LDL-C ≥ 58 mg/dL) had OR < 1.0, and the
latter two had almost identical OR’s (0.89 and 0.87). Affirming this, when
we pooled the latter two groups, heterogeneity was minimized (I2 = 0 %,
p = 0.8). Again, those with optimized LDL-C (i.e., LDL-C < 58 mg/dL)
differed from those with higher LDL-C, having no discernable benefit
from ERN + laropiprant compared to placebo (OR = 1.08, p = 0.2). In
contrast, those with LDL-C ≥ 58 mg/dL appear to benefit from ERN +
laropiprant (OR = 0.89, CI = 0.81 to 0.97, p = 0.01). Oddly, the study was
severely skewed toward people with lower LDL-C, with a minority
having LDL-C > 77 mg/dL. These results suggest that a study enrolling
people with higher LDL-C (e.g., LDL-C > 70 or >100 mg/dL) might be
the ideal way to test the incremental benefit of the ER alternative. b Meta-
regression between log-transformed odds ratio for soft vascular events
from the HPS2-THRIVE and percent change in LDL-C based on
baseline LDL-C. The findings from (a) suggest the study’s primary aim
suffered from targeting a population who does not necessarily benefit
from further LDL lowering. Conversely, the apparent benefit among
those with suboptimal LDL-C suggests higher degrees of LDL
suppression do confer benefits, in accordance with the LDL hypothesis.
To illustrate this, we conducted a meta-regression showing fewer events
with more aggressive LDL-C suppression (R2 = 61 %). Though we used
linear regression, there was heterogeneity (I2 = 51 %), suggesting a
nonlinear model may fit better. In any case, the relationship is
consistent with the LDL hypothesis. As such, this promising result
might be exploited to greater effect using the established
cardioprotective regimen or better yet, the lipid-targeting strategy of
niacin. Both strategies achieve more aggressive LDL-C lowering.
According to the LDL hypothesis, this should build upon the promising
event reductions from the ER alternative in HPS2-THRIVE. The dark
box on the graph represents the hypothesized effect of more robust
niacin regimens. Based on HPS2-THRIVE, we predict that a future trial
using aggressive LDL-C suppression would have a result somewhere
within the dark box (i.e., OR < <0.87)
11
Page 6 of 14
Curr Atheroscler Rep (2016) 18: 11
 adverse events on the ER alternative to low-dose IR-niacin
[51]. In contrast to HPS2-THRIVE, the incidence of serious
bleeding events did not differ (3.4 % on the ER vs. 2.9 % on
IR-niacin, p = 0.36). However, serious infections occurred
with similar frequency as HPS2-THRIVE (8.1 on ER vs.
5.8 % on IR-niacin, p=0.008). The authors cite several factors
that mandate caution while interpreting the AIM-HIGH
findings, concluding Blacking additional clinical and scientific
confirmation, we believe that they should be considered to be
provisional and exploratory.^ Nevertheless, we will probably
never be able to decisively attribute the serious adverse events to
laropiprant alone, since it was promptly withdrawn from the
global market. Other adverse effects in HPS2-THRIVE were
predictable from the niacin literature, including gastrointestinal
1. Baseline LDL Optimal (<58 mg/dL)
LDL <58
LDL 58 to 77
LDL >77
Subtotal
ID
Study
1.08 (0.96, 1.20)
0.89 (0.80, 1.00)
0.87 (0.73, 1.03)
0.89 (0.81, 0.97)
OR (95% CI)
724/4933
685/5505
287/2400
972/7905
Alt+Lrp
Events, ER
679/4927
761/5549
318/2359
1079/7908
Reference
Events,
100.00
70.15
29.85
100.00
Weight
%
1.08 (0.96, 1.20)
0.89 (0.80, 1.00)
0.87 (0.73, 1.03)
0.89 (0.81, 0.97)
OR (95% CI)
724/4933
685/5505
287/2400
972/7905
Alt+Lrp
Events, ER
Pooling the group with optimal LDL with those presenting with higher LDL resulted in excessive heterogeneity: I2 70.3% (phet=0.035)
p=0.012
I 2 0.0% (p
het =0.81)
p=0.203
Favors ER Alternative+Lrp  
Parity
Favors Usual Care 
.7
.8
.9
1
1.1
1.2
Log-Transformed Odds Ratio for Soft Vascular Events by Baseline LDL Status
in the HPS2-THRIVE Study
a
2. Higher LDL Levels at Baseline (>= 58 mg/dL)
LDL >77
LDL 58 to 77
LDL <58
ER Alternative in
HPS2-THRIVE,
2g nightly
Hypothetical Effect
of Robust LDL-c
Suppression
(>=3g daily)
1.08
Parity
0.89
0.87
1.10
1.05
1.00
0.95
0.90
0.85
0.80
0.75
0.70
0.65
0.60
0.55
Log-Transformed Odds Ratio
0
-5%
-10%
-15%
(-20%)
(-25%)
Drop in LDL Cholesterol
tau
 2 =0.0037,
I
 2 =50.8%, R
 2 =60.7%
Meta-Regression of Soft Vascular Events as a
Function of LDL-c Suppression in HPS2-THRIVE
b
Curr Atheroscler Rep (2016) 18: 11
Page 7 of 14
11
 adverse effects (4.8 vs. 3.8 %, p<0.001), new-onset diabetes
(5.7 vs. 4.3 %, p<0.001), and worsened glycemic control
among diabetics (11.1 vs. 7.5 %, p<0.001). Though niacin’s
propensity to perturb glucose homeostasis has been widely re-
ported, the effects are inconsistent in occurrence, persistence,
and severity [52, 53]. Notably, statins consistently raise glucose,
especially intensive statin therapy [54–56]. Though not novel,
the HPS2-THRIVE findings of the effect on diabetes with com-
bination therapy reaffirm longstanding advice that niacin can be
used cautiously in pre-diabetics and diabetics.
The AIM-HIGH Trial: An Aborted Test of the HDL
Hypothesis
Whereas HPS2-THRIVE assessed the overall utility of the
alternative as an adjunctive lipid-altering drug, AIM-HIGH
tried to dissect its HDL-raising potential from its LDL-
lowering properties. Doing so addresses the HDL hypothesis,
namely, that raising HDL-C per se would prevent cardiovas-
cular events. This study was motivated in part by the HDL
Intervention Trial (HIT) trial, where as little as 6 % higher
HDL-C from a fibrate prevented hard CHD events (RRR
22 %) absent LDL-C effects in patients whose primary lipid
problem was low HDL-C [57]. Tellingly, CHD prevention
was related to raising HDL-C [58]. Likewise, the Helsinki
Heart Study (HHS) also found gemfibrozil cardioprotective
[59]; again, CHD benefit was a function of raising HDL-C
[60]. Since niacin is much more effective at raising HDL-C,
it presented an obvious choice to exploit the apparent benefits
of raising HDL-C. Accordingly, AIM-HIGH enrollees had
cardiovascular disease and low HDL-C, but optimal LDL-C
levels. Participants initially took the ER alternative 1500–
2000 mg all at night, and after titration, were randomized to
continue the ER alternative or switch to IR-niacin 100–
150 mg/night. The decision to give the comparator group an
active intervention rather than a bona fide placebo was moti-
vated by a desire to maintain blinding by inducing NASTy
symptoms in both groups. Since the purpose of the trial was to
isolate the HDL-raising effect of niacin, the investigators had
to account for LDL-lowering by niacin, necessitating rigorous
efforts to equalize LDL-C levels between groups post-ran-
domization. Thus, throughout the trial, LDL-C was forced
below 80 mg/dL in both groups by titrating simvastatin to
80 mg/dL and adding ezetimibe 10 mg/day as needed.
This was complicated by an FDA Bblack box^ warning
strongly discouraging simvastatin 80 mg/dL after the
trial started.
To most of the investigators’ shock, both niacin formula-
tions raised HDL-C robustly: median change +9.8 % on low-
dose IR-niacin after 2 years and +25 % on 2 g of the ER
alternative, a net differential of about 15 %. By 3 years on
low-dose IR-niacin, HDL-C rose from 34.9 to 39.1 mg/dL
(+4.2 mg/dL, mean=+12 %, median=+11.8 %). On the ER
alternative, HDL-C rose from 34.5 to 44.1 mg/dL (+9.6 mg/
dL, mean = +28 %, median = 25 %), for a differential of
+5.4 mg/dL between the two forms of niacin favoring the
group on the ER alternative. To put this into context, the mo-
tivating HIT study found a +6 % rise in HDL-C prevented
hard CHD events, but here, niacin was so much more potent
that even the low dose of IR niacin in the intended control
group inadvertently had double the increment of HDL-C from
HIT (+12 vs. +6 %, Fig. 3). The use of such a robustly effec-
tive HDL-raising dose of the active intervention in what was
+4.1
+2.0
+2.1
+3.2
+4.2
mg/dL
mg/dL
mg/dL
mg/dL
mg/dL
47
32
43
43
35
mg/dL
mg/dL
mg/dL
mg/dL
mg/dL
Hard CHD
OR 0.76
(0.62 to 0.92)
Hard CHD
OR 0.66
(0.47 to 0.93)
Gemfibrozil
IR Niacin 100 to 150 mg
AIM−HIGH
"Control" Group
    0%
 +2%
 +4%
 +6%
 +8%
+10%
+12%
+14%
0%
+2%
+4%
+6%
+8%
+10%
+12%
+14%
Percent Increase in HDL−c
Study: 
HIT
HHS
Wink,
Censored
Wink,
Full
AIM−
HIGH
Dose/Day (mg):1200
1200
100
100
100−150
Full−Dose Fibrate
Low−Dose Immediate−Release Niacin
HDL Increment from Low−Dose Niacin vs Full−Dose Gemfibrozil
Fig. 3 Left panel
indicates two outcome trials affirmed the HDL
hypothesis with the fibrate gemfibrozil, HIT, and HHS [58, 59]. The
HIT study is more comparable to AIM-HIGH, having enrolled high-
risk patients with low HDL-C at the baseline. Thus, the dashed red
line provides a benchmark for an HDL-C increment expected to
prevent CHD events. Both the HIT and HHS demonstrated the
fibrate prevented hard CHD (OR = 0.66 to 0.76) with an HDL-C
increment of 6 to 10 %. Right panel indicates two studies where
low-dose niacin was added to a statin-treated background
demonstrating low-dose niacin achieves similar to HDL-C increments
as the fibrate studies [18••, 61]. The study by Wink et al. reported the
HDL-C increment from low-dose niacin in two ways. They censored
their dataset to exclude one subject on low-dose niacin who had an
unusually robust rise in HDL-C, but also reported the full dataset. This
suggests a variable response to low-dose niacin, where some subjects
are hyper-responders and cause analytical problems due to their very
high increments. The AIM-HIGH “control” group received even more
immediate-release niacin than in the Wink study, in most cases 150 %
of the Wink dose. Not surprisingly, the stronger doses used in AIM-
HIGH stimulated a prodigious rise in HDL-C that is not only higher
than the Wink study but also considerably higher than the benchmark
HIT study. Remarkably, by pushing the dose, the AIM-HIGH
investigators managed to double the increment in HDL-C: +12 %
(+4.2 mg/dL) in AIM-HIGH vs. +6 % (+2 mg/dL) in HIT. If the
HDL hypothesis supported by the fibrate studies also translates to
niacin, one would expect the AIM-HIGH “control” group to have
similar benefits as HIT or HHS, and since the HDL-C increment is
so much more robust, perhaps even greater benefits. Unfortunately,
this invalidates the intended control group in AIM-HIGH, because
the control by necessity should represent the untreated state,
specifically a group lacking an HDL-raising dose of niacin, and
preferably lacking niacin altogether. IR immediate release, OR odds
ratio, Hard CHD non-fatal myocardial infarction and/or cardiac death,
HIT HDL intervention trial, HHS Helsinki heart study
11
Page 8 of 14
Curr Atheroscler Rep (2016) 18: 11
 to be the control group had a catastrophic effect on the validity
of the study’s primary aim, to prove the HDL hypothesis.
Superiority of the ER alternative over low-dose IR-niacin
would have affirmed the HDL hypothesis. Regrettably, the
study was unable to distinguish the two active therapies,
resulting in the Bnightmare^ scenario of an un-interpretable
null result. The problem is actually worse than stated, because
contaminating the control group with a highly-efficacious
dose of the experimental intervention unwittingly converted
the study from a controlled experiment of drug efficacy to an
uncontrolled dose–response study, bizarrely lacking the requi-
site drug-free arm. A dose–response study requires a drug-free
control to prove efficacy given a flat dose response. Without a
niacin-free arm, AIM-HIGH’s null results are uninterpretable.
On the one hand, the null could mean raising HDL-C 28 %
with the ER alternative is no better than raising it a robust
12 % with low-dose IR-niacin, but both improve upon usual
care, perhaps more than HITor HHS since the starting HDL-C
increment was better, hence, proving the HDL hypothe-
sis. On the other hand, the null could mean neither dose
is effective, failing to affirm the HDL hypothesis at these
doses. So, which is it? Frustratingly, we have no way to
know. Thus, foregoing a valid control group became a
Bshow-stopper,^ rendering it hard defend AIM-HIGH as
a reliable test of the HDL hypothesis. Indeed, many re-
viewers have expressed significant misgivings about the
validity of the trial’s results [62–64].
Beyond the invalid control group are several other scenarios
to explain null results (Table 2). Any null result invites scrutiny
of a study’s power. Adding the experimental intervention to its
Table 2
Possible interpretations of the AIM-HIGH null result for the HDL hypothesis
Power was undermined by design, implementation, or other flaws
• The HDL hypothesis is operative, but the robust increase in HDL in the IR niacin group narrowed the HDL differential between the groups, thereby
invalidating the power calculations. Thus, the AIM-HIGH null result reflects inadequate power.
• The HDL hypothesis is operative, but the motivating studies also involved unmeasured benefits that inflated the apparent HDL effect. Absent a way
to identify such effects, the elaborate machinations to isolate the HDL benefit in AIM-HIGH inadvertently nullified related benefits, undermining
power.
• The HDL hypothesis is operative, but the ER alternative (1) has countervailing properties that undermine CHD benefits and/or (2) fails to recapitulate
essential properties of the established cardioprotective regimen that augment CHD benefits (cf Table 1). Thus, the AIM-HIGH null result occurred
because the ER alternative is markedly less effective than the established cardioprotective regimen and less effective than expectations, undermining
power.
• The HDL hypothesis is operative, but the effect of niacin was diluted in both groups by enrolling patients who were already treated with niacin. This
is problematic because the legacy effect of niacin in the CDP trial indicates niacin is a disease-altering drug. As such, participants who were already
on niacin might have fewer events than planned, undermining power calculations.
Faulty assumptions doomed the experiment
• The HDL hypothesis is operative when HDL-C rises more than 6 % (cf HIT), but has a flat dose response beyond the unexpected 12 % increase from
IR niacin in the Bcontrol^ group. Thus, the AIM-HIGH null occurred because further increments in HDL-C from the ER alternative were past the
point of diminished returns. This implies the 12 % increase from IR niacin, like the 6 % increase from HIT, is beneficial, but to an unknown extent
because there was no niacin-free control group. In this scenario, the experiment was doomed by the demonstrably false assumption that low doses of
IR niacin had no impact on HDL-C, invalidating the control group.
• The HDL hypothesis is operative, but the AIM-HIGH doses of niacin were not sufficient to raise HDL enough to detect the benefit. This could be
because HIT and HHS involve a second, unmeasured benefit of fibrate, or the ER alternative is simply inferior to the established cardioprotective
regimen.
The experiment was compromised by bias
• The HDL hypothesis is operative, but AIM-HIGH was undermined by introducing a third cardioprotective agent (ezetimibe) in an unbalanced
manner that disproportionately benefited the Bcontrol^ group. Thus, AIM-HIGH was null to the extent that the Bcontrol^ group received game-
changing Bhelp,^ and the study could not cope with this bias, rendering null results untrustworthy.
• The HDL hypothesis is operative, but went undetected because AIM-HIGH was aborted before one of the niacin-treated groups hit an inflection
point that would separate the event curves. Aborting a trial midway not only invalidates power calculations, but far worse, can introduce bias. For
example, if the analytical and especially the biological assumptions used to rationalize aborting the trial were faulty, the decision to not see the
protocol through completion can become a self-fulfilling/self-defeating prophecy. Thus, under this scenario, the AIM-HIGH was null due from
undermining power at best and from investigator bias at worst, rendering null results especially untrustworthy.
HDL hypothesis is actually incorrect
• The HDL hypothesis is fundamentally misguided and incorrect, and the HIT and HHS regimens were primarily cardioprotective due to an
unmeasured benefit of gemfibrozil rather than raising HDL-C. If so, and niacin did not recapitulate fibrates’ unmeasured benefits, both low-dose IR
and the ER alternative would not have conferred benefits despite achieving HDL increments that were multiples of that of HIT. Thus, if and only if
all of the prior possibilities are immaterial, the AIM-HIGH null result would argue against the HDL hypothesis.
Curr Atheroscler Rep (2016) 18: 11
Page 9 of 14
11
 own control severely narrowed the HDL-C differential between
IR- and ER-niacin in AIM-HIGH. Outcome benefits from nar-
row group-wise differences were probably well beyond the de-
tection limit of AIM-HIGH, powered to detect a 25 % reduction
in Bsofter^ clinical events. Complicating matters, almost 20 % of
patients in both groups, had previously been treated with niacin,
having discontinued 30 days before enrollment. The legacy ben-
efits of niacin seen in the CDP several years after niacin discon-
tinuation imply niacin is a disease-modifying drug, thus funda-
mentally altering CHD risk for many years. Such legacy effects
would have persisted throughout the foreshortened AIM-HIGH
trial, reducing overall events, hence further diminishing the
study’s power to detect differences in outcomes.
Additionally, there were more insidious problems. For ex-
ample, there were significant group-wise differences in sim-
vastatin dose and use of ezetimibe (21.5 % on IR vs. 9.5 % on
ER niacin), mandated by on-study LDL-C matching.
Complicating matters, the IMPROVE-IT trial found further
reduction in cardiovascular events when ezetimibe is added
to statins [65••]. Thus, AIM-HIGH allowed unbalanced use of
another cardioprotective agent, introducing a bias to the
Bcontrol^ group, insofar as that group was more likely to re-
ceive Bhelp^ that could have disproportionately affected out-
comes. Compounding these challenges, AIM-HIGH was pre-
maturely terminated after a mean follow-up of only 3 years,
ostensibly for lack of expected benefit from an early peek at the
data and a non-significant increase in ischemic strokes in the
ER alternative group. This is a Bdouble-whammy^ because
aborting the study can decimate the power to detect meaningful
differences, but worse, can introduce bias. It appears the inves-
tigators assumed event curves should exhibit a visible separa-
tion at the time they made their decision, and finding none,
stopped the trial. But what if that assumption was wrong?
What if the curves separate later? Disconcertingly, the CDP
did not show divergent event rate curves for niacin and placebo
until well after 4 years. Thus, AIM-HIGH’s decision to stop the
study prematurely may have irretrievably biased results.
Of course one of the many possibilities behind a null result
is that the HDL hypothesis is incorrect. Given so many un-
challenged alternatives, we find the null results of AIM-HIGH
uninterpretable. Barring new post hoc subanalyses that might
distinguish the groups, results from AIM-HIGH should be
considered hypothesis-generating at best.
Would the ER Alternative Help When Statins Don’t
Deliver?
Regrettably, neither HPS2-THRIVE nor AIM-HIGH decisive-
ly addresses the gap left in the statin-averse, non-responders,
and incomplete responders, almost half the total population at
risk of cardiovascular disease. Thus, we have no way to know
if the exploratory regimen with the ER alternative is helpful in
that population. In contrast, at 1000 mg thrice daily, we do
have evidence supporting IR-niacin and pentaerythrityl
tetranicotinate to prevent CHD events when statins do not de-
liver. Likewise, since both trials of the ER alternative studies
enrolled subjects with fairly low LDL-C, neither adequately
assessed whether the exploratory alternative regimen would
prove cardioprotective when LDL-C is uncontrolled. That said,
the HPS2-THRIVE subgroup with LDL ≥ 58 mg/dL or
ApoB≥60 mg/dL strongly suggests the ER alternative would
prove beneficial in people with
suboptimal lipids.
The Lipid-Targeting Strategy
The other alternative to the established cardioprotective regi-
men has been to titrate niacin to achieve specific lipid targets.
Though this has been tested in small studies of atherosclerosis,
the strategy has not found the backing to be scaled up to larger
outcomes trials. Thus, while atheroprotective, we cannot con-
clude that the lipid-targeting approach is cardioprotective.
Using ≥2–3 g/day, the FATS, HATS, CLAS, and AFREGS
trials affirmed decisive lipid benefits [10–13]. Using higher
doses of niacin than in AIM-HIGH or HPS2-THRIVE, these
studies achieved much more robust differentials in HDL-C
(+25 to +40 %) accompanied by improvements in coronary
atherosclerosis. The differential between the IR- and ER-
niacin arms of AIM-HIGH only resulted in a 15 to 16 %
differential in HDL-C, much less than the lipid-targeting stud-
ies. What if it actually takes an HDL-C differential on the
order of +25 to +40 % to distinguish a benefit on
cardio-
vascular events? If so, the decision to abandon the
atheroprotective lipid-targeting strategy in favor of the ER
alternative with its severe dose restriction may have doomed
AIM-HIGH and HPS2-THRIVE, as they had nothing more
than inconsequential niacin doses to work with. There is a
difficulty in interpreting the lipid-targeting strategy, because
these studies also achieved significant LDL-C changes.
Hence, atheroprotection cannot be attributed to HDL-C or
LDL-C changes separately. Admittedly, that distinction would
be somewhat academic if the strategy proved cardioprotective.
If Not by Raising HDL, How Does Niacin Prevent CHD
Events?
The first outcomes trial of the HDL hypothesis outside the
fibrate class was a wash, since the troubled AIM-HIGH study
did not clearly confirm or deny a role for raising HDL-C. For
the sake of discussion, suppose AIM-HIGH was a valid null
that ruled out the HDL hypothesis. How could we rectify that
with compelling evidence that niacin is cardioprotective? The
simple answer would be that the ER alternative is so inferior
as to be inert. Perhaps AIM-HIGH and HPS2-THRIVE were
hamstrung by capping the ER alternative at 2 g/day, thus lim-
iting the lipid suppression by underdosing.
11
Page 10 of 14
Curr Atheroscler Rep (2016) 18: 11
 A more nuanced answer returns us full circle: niacin is
cardioprotective to the extent it suppresses cholesterol, as illus-
trated in Fig. 1b. By this model, CDP and SIHDS prevented
CHD because they dosed niacin to robustly lower cholesterol,
whereas HPS2-THRIVE and AIM-HIGH delivered modest
cholesterol reductions owing to sparing use of niacin. Indeed,
some investigations using ≤2 g/day of the ER alternative failed
to show LDL-C benefits at all, even after several months [66,
67]. Especially viewed in the context of all four niacin outcome
studies, both new studies nicely accord with the LDL hypoth-
esis. First, the HPS2-THRIVE affirmed patients with optimal
baseline LDL-C or ApoB had little LDL suppression and ac-
cordingly, no benefit. Strikingly, the more Bclinical^ popula-
tion with suboptimal lipids had greater LDL-C suppression
and, accordingly, benefit from the ER alternative, just as the
LDL hypothesis predicts. Second, the null result from the
AIM-HIGH study suggests a benefit from LDL suppression,
because both groups underwent intensive, fastidious LDL-C
management to suppress LDL-C below 80 mg/dL. One group
reached that target by driving simvastatin all the way to 80 mg,
whereas the other added 2 g of the ER alternative first, and both
groups utilized ezetimibe to reach the target. Consider this:
What does it mean that two aggressive strategies to further
suppress LDL-C did just that, and then achieved identical ef-
fects on cardiovascular outcomes?
Parity of CHD events after equalizing LDL-C implies
adding even a modestly LDL-lowering dose of niacin actually
prevents CHD to the same extent as driving simvastatin all the
way to 80 mg to force LDL-C below 80 mg/dL. Thus,
Bneutral^ CHD outcomes from AIM-HIGH actually validate
either method to force LDL that low. This is actually very
helpful information to clinicians who might be concerned
about putting a given patient on 80 mg of simvastatin for fear
of harmful effects. As an eerily apt affirmation of this real-
world concern, during the AIM-HIGH simvastatin 80 mg be-
came strongly discouraged by the FDA due unacceptable
risks, underscoring the frustrating reality that maximizing
statins may be easier said than done for many. In conclusion,
the overall evidence suggests niacin prevents CHD events by
the cholesterol hypothesis after all and as such should be used
to suppress the atherogenic lipoproteins rather than raise
HDL-C.
If Used At All, How Should Niacin Be Used?
If niacin is to be used to prevent MI, we find it harder to
support the exploratory regimen based around the ER alterna-
tive. Instead, the overall evidence supports a return to the
established cardioprotective regimen, namely 1 g thrice daily
with meals. Practically, we find it surprisingly easy to switch
patients from the ER alternative 2 g nightly to IR-niacin 1 g
thrice daily, probably because they have substantial tolerance
to NASTy symptoms by the time they accommodate 2 g of the
ER alternative. For patients intolerant, averse, or non-
responsive to statins, this regimen remains evidence-based
monotherapy to prevent MI, whereas under-dosing the ER
alternative before the overnight fast provides little such assur-
ance. Whether niacin per se would benefit statin-responsive
patients remains unanswered, since the established
cardioprotective regimen has never been tested against a statin
background. For that matter, when introduced the statins were
never subjected to the same standard of being formally tested
against a niacin background to determine incremental benefit.
Thus, formal testing of incremental effects of new lipid drugs
remains in its infancy, with much work to be done.
We submit the exploratory ER regimen (≤2 g/day) has thus
far failed to impress because it strays so far from the established
regimen, but not because of the delayed-release formulation
itself. Since the niacin pro-drug pentaerythrityl tetranicotinate
also delays niacin release, niacin release rates may well prove
immaterial. Accordingly, were the established cardioprotective
regimen tested against a statin background, we predict even the
ER alternative dosed 1 g thrice daily with meals would prevent
CHD among subjects with suboptimal lipids, much as the
longer-acting pentaerythrityl tetranicotinate did. That said, we
suspect a more efficacious approach would be to combine the
established cardioprotective regimen with the lipid-targeting
strategy. Thus, subjects randomized to niacin would receive
the established cardioprotective regimen as a condition of en-
rollment, but would then titrate upwards if they were short of
study-determined non-HDL-C and HDL-C goals, capped at the
highest tolerated approved dose (i.e., up to 2 g thrice daily).
Conclusions: Whither Niacin?
The spectacular failure of the exploratory ER alternative in-
troduces a new barrier to progress. It is tempting to re-
appropriate failure of the ER alternative into a more general
failure of the established cardioprotective regimen, notwith-
standing compelling evidence to the contrary (cf. Fig. 1). As
an analogy, we could appreciate how frustration over the in-
opportune failure of a $20 knockoff Rolex could damage the
Rolex brand, unless the buyer were sufficiently streetwise to
distinguish the knockoff from the genuine article. We fear
further research might be chilled unless a broad coalition of
stakeholders were open to the possibility that the profoundly
disappointing results from the ER alternative in AIM-HIGH
and HPS2-THRIVE do not generalize to the duly-established
cardioprotective regimen. Failing that, developers and their
funders who are already banking on that prospect could ex-
ploit the intense Bbuyer’s remorse^ for the ER alternative and
thereby blaze a new trail by proving the merits of novel niacin
mimetics with little competition from niacin itself. Stoking an
ongoing failure to distinguish the dubious exploratory alterna-
tive from the established cardioprotective regimen could
Curr Atheroscler Rep (2016) 18: 11
Page 11 of 14
11
 quash competition from niacin in perpetuity. Thus, by delving
deeper into the overall evidence and skirting prior pitfalls,
canny prospectors could effectively open a goldmine at the
ER alternative’s grave site. In part II of this review, we will
walk through how several developers have leveraged the over-
all pre-clinical and clinical evidence to develop novel niacin
mimetics, concluding with a review of several mimetics that
have already demonstrated encouraging lipid effects in small,
early phase human trials.
Acknowledgments
Support provided by NIH grant K23HL091130
(R.L. Dunbar) from the NHLBI.
Compliance with Ethical Standards
Conflict of Interest
Richard L. Dunbar declares an NIH grant from the
NHLBI; he also declares a grant from the NIH for the AIM-HIGH study,
where he served as the local principal investigator, overseeing 30 partic-
ipants from the Philadelphia VA Medical Center and 14 from the
University of Pennsylvania.
Harsh Goel also participated in the AIM-HIGH study, assisting Dr.
Dunbar.
Human and Animal Rights and Informed Consent
This article does
not contain any studies with human or animal subjects performed by any
of the authors.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link
to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
References
Papers of particular interest, published recently, have been
highlighted as:
• Of importance
•• Of major importance
1.
Altschul R, Hoffer A, Stephen JD. Influence of nicotinic acid on
serum cholesterol in man. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1955;54(2):
558–9. http://www-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov.ezaccess.libraries.psu.edu/
pubmed/14350806.
2.
Goldberg A, Alagona P, Capuzzi DM, et al. Multiple-dose efficacy
and safety of an extended-release form of niacin in the management
of hyperlipidemia. Am J Cardiol. 2000;85(9):1100––1105. http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10781759.
3.
The coronary Drug Project Research Group. Clofibrate and niacin
in coronary heart disease. JAMA. 1975;231(4):360–81. http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1088963.
4.
Canner PL, Berge KG, Wenger NK, et al. Fifteen year mortality in
Coronary Drug Project patients: long-term benefit with niacin. J
Am Coll Cardiol. 1986;8(6):1245–55. doi:10.1016/S0735-
1097(86)80293-5.
5.
Carlson LA, Rosenhamer G. Reduction of mortality in the
Stockholm Ischaemic Heart Disease Secondary Prevention Study
by combined treatment with clofibrate and nicotinic acid. Acta Med
Scand. 1988;223(5):405–18.
6.
Goodman SD, Hulley SB, Clark LT, Davis CE, Fuster V. Report of
the National Cholesterol Education Program Expert Panel on de-
tection, evaluation, and treatment of high blood cholesterol in
adults. Arch Intern Med. 1988;148(1):36–69.
7.
Grundy SM, Bilheimer D, Chait A, Clark LT, Denke M. Summary
of the second report of the National Cholesterol Education Program
(NCEP) expert panel on detection, evaluation, and treatment of high
blood cholesterol in adults (Adult Treatment Panel II). JAMA.
1993;269(23):3015–23. doi:10.1001/jama.269.23.3015.
8.
Third Report of the National Cholesterol Education Program
(NCEP) Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of
High Blood Cholesterol in Adults (Adult Treatment Panel III) Final
Report. Circulation. 2002;106(25):3143–421. doi:10.2172/
875800.
9.
Jacobson TA, Ito MK, Maki KC, et al. National Lipid Association
recommendations for patient-centered management of dyslipid-
emia: part 1—executive summary. J Clin Lipidol. 2014;8(5):473–
88. doi:10.1016/j.jacl.2014.07.007.
10.
Blankenhorn DH, Nessim SA, Johnson RL, Sanmarco ME, Azen
SP, Cashin-Hemphill L. Beneficial effects of combined colestipol-
niacin therapy on coronary atherosclerosis and coronary venous
bypass grafts. JAMA. 1987;257(23):3233–40. doi:10.1001/jama.
1987.03390230069027.
11.
Brown GB, Zhao X-Q, Chait A, et al. Simvastatin an niacin, anti-
oxidant vitamins, or the combination for the prevention of coronary
disease. N Engl J Med. 2001;345(22):1583–92.
12.
Brown G, Albers JJ, Fisher LD, et al. Regression of coronary artery
disease as a result of intensive lipid-lowering therapy in men with
high levels of apolipoprotein B. N Engl J Med. 1990;323(19):
1289–98.
13.
Whitney EJ, Krasuski RA, Personius BE, Michalek JE, Maranian
AM, Kolasa MW. A randomized trial of a strategy for increasing
high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels: effects on progression of
coronary heart disease and clinical events. Ann Intern Med.
2005;142(2):95–104.
14.
Knopp RH, Alagona P, Davidson M, et al. Equivalent efficacy of a
time-release form of niacin (Niaspan) given once-a-night versus
plain niacin in the management of hyperlipidemia. Metabolism.
1998;47(9):1097–104. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
9751239.
15.
Lee JMS, Robson MD, Yu LM, et al. Effects of high-dose modi-
fied-release nicotinic acid on atherosclerosis and vascular function.
A Randomized, Placebo-Controlled, Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;54(19):1787–94. doi:10.1016/j.
jacc.2009.06.036.
16.
Thoenes M, Oguchi A, Nagamia S, et al. The effects of extended-
release niacin on carotid intimal media thickness, endothelial func-
tion and inflammatory markers in patients with the metabolic syn-
drome. Int J Clin Pract. 2007;61(11):1942–8. doi:10.1111/j.1742-
1241.2007.01597.x.
17.
Villines TC, Stanek EJ, Devine PJ, et al. The ARBITER 6-HALTS
Trial (Arterial Biology for the Investigation of the Treatment Effects
of Reducing Cholesterol 6-HDL and LDL Treatment Strategies in
Atherosclerosis): final results and the impact of medication adher-
ence, dose, and treatment duration. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2010;55(24):2721–6. doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2010.03.017.
18.•• Boden WE, Probstfield JL, Anderson T, Chaitman BR. Niacin in
patients with low hdl cholesterol levels receiving intensive statin
therapy. N Engl J Med. 2011;365(24):2255–67. doi:10.1056/
NEJMoa1005372. The prematurely terminated AIM-HIGH tri-
al, designed to test the HDL hypothesis by adding niacin on
baseline statin ± ezetemibe therapy. Several design features
and premature termination of the trial make it very difficult
to interpret the study findings, as discussed in the text of this
11
Page 12 of 14
Curr Atheroscler Rep (2016) 18: 11
 review. At the very least, the study findings indicate that adding
niacin to baseline medium dose statin therapy is on par with
high dose statin therapy and ezetemibe in cardiovascular risk
reduction.
19.•• Parish S, Tomson J, Wallendszus K, et al. Effects of extended-
release niacin with laropiprant in high-risk patients. N Engl J
Med. 2014;371(3):203–12. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1300955. The
HPS2-THRIVE trial was designed to test whether combination
niacin-laropiprant provided cumulative cardiovascular benefit
over baseline statin therapy. Even though there was lack of
significant benefit in the poooled population, the supplementary
tables indicate that in the subgroup with high LDL-C at base-
line (>77mg/dl), adding niacin to statin may provide additional
cardioprotection, as evidenced by reduced rate of first vascular
events.The study also found an unexpectedly high incidence of
adverse effects not traditionally ascribed to niacin and may
have resulted from laropirant.
20.
Robinson JG, Wang S, Smith BJ, Jacobson TA. Meta-analysis of
the relationship between non-high-density lipoprotein cholesterol
reduction and coronary heart disease risk. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2009;53(4):316–22. doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2008.10.024.
21.
Robinson JG, Smith B, Maheshwari N, Schrott H. Pleiotropic ef-
fects of statins: benefit beyond cholesterol reduction?: a meta-
regression analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;46(10):1855–62.
doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2005.05.085.
22.• Usman MHU, Qamar A, Gadi R, et al. Extended-release niacin
acutely suppresses postprandial triglyceridemia. Am J Med.
2012;125(10):1026–35. doi:10.1016/j.amjmed.2012.03.017. In
our experiment with acutely dosed, preprandial extended-
release niacin did significantly suppress postprandial TGs, an
important source of atherogenic lipids. This highlights an im-
portant source of benefit that is lost with once daily, nighttime
dosing preceding the overnight fast.
23.
Plaisance EP, Mestek ML, Mahurin AJ, Taylor JK, Moncada-
jimenez J, Grandjean PW. Postprandial triglyceride responses to
aerobic exercise and extended-release niacin. Am J Clin Nutr.
2008;88(1):30–7.
24.
Bansal S, Buring JE, Rifai N, Mora S, Sacks FM, Ridker PM.
Fasting compared with nonfasting triglycerides and risk of cardio-
vascular events in women. JAMA. 2007;298(3):309–16. doi:10.
1001/jama.298.3.309.
25.
Nordestgaard BG, Benn M, Schnohr P, Tybjærg-hansen A.
Nonfasting triglycerides and risk of myocardial infarction, ischemic
heart. JAMA. 2007;298(3):299–308.
26.
Ryu JE, Howard G, Craven TE, Bond MG, Hagaman AP, Iii JRC.
Postprandial triglyceridemia and carotid atherosclerosis in middle-
aged subjects. Stroke. 1992;23(6):823–9.
27.
Guyton JR, Slee AE, Anderson T, Fleg JL. Relationship of lipopro-
teins to cardiovascular events in the atherothrombosis intervention
in metabolic syndrome with low hdl/high triglycerides and impact
on Global Health Outcomes (AIM-HIGH) Trial. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2013;62(17):1580–4. doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2013.07.023.Relationship.
28.
The coronary drug project. Design, methods, and baseline results.
Circulation. 1973;47(3 suppl):I1–I50.
29.
Svedmyr N, Harthon L. Comparison between the absorption of
nicotinic acid and pentaerythritol tetranicotinate (Perycit) from or-
dinary and enterocoated tablets. Acta Pharmacol Toxicol (Copenh).
1970;28(1):66–74.
30.
Naito HK. New guidelines and recommendations on the detection,
evaluation, and treatment of patients with undesirable cholesterol
levels. Am J Clin Pathol. 1988;90(3):358–61.
31.
Grundy SM, Bilheimer D, Chait A, Clark LT, Denke M. Summary
of the Second Report of the National Cholesterol Education
Program (NCEP) expert panel on detection, evaluation, and treat-
ment of high blood cholesterol in adults (Adult Treatment Panel II).
JAMA. 1993;269(23):3015–23.
32.• http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/ob/docs/queryai.cfm.
This is the FDA orange book web address. Different niacin
preparations that have been approved in the past can be
searched by putting ‘niacin’ in the search box with the list
option ‘discontinued’.
33.
Dunbar RL, Gelfand JM. Seeing red: flushing out instigators of
niacin-associated skin toxicity. J Clin Invest. 2010;120(8):2651–5.
doi:10.1172/JCI44098.through.
34.
Whelan AM, Price SO, Foler SF, Hainer BL. The effect of aspirin
on niacin-induced cutaneous reactions. J Fam Pract. 1992;34(2):
165–8.
35.
Svedmyr N, Heggelund AAG. Influence of indomethacin on flush
induced by nicotinic acid in man. Acta Pharmacol Toxicol
(Copenh). 1977;41(4):397–400.
36.
ASHP Therapeutic Position Statement on the safe use of niacin in
the management of dyslipidemias. American Society of Health-
System Pharmacists. Am J Heal Syst Pharm. 1997;54(24):2815–
819.
37.
McKenney JM, McCormick LS, Weiss S, Koren M, Kafonek S,
Black DM. A randomized trial of the effects of atorvastatin and
niacin in patients with combined hyperlipidemia or isolated
hypertriglyceridemia. Am J Med. 1998;104(2):137–43. doi:10.
1016/S0002-9343(97)00311-2.
38.
Van JT, Pan J, Wasty T, Chan E, Wu X, Charles MA, et al.
Comparison of extended-release niacin and atorvastatin monother-
apies and combination treatment of the atherogenic lipid pro fi le in
diabetes mellitus. Am J Cardiol. 2002;89(02):1306–8.
39.
Grundy SM, Cleeman JI, Merz CNB, et al. Implications of recent
clinical trials for the national cholesterol education program adult
treatment panel iii guidelines. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol.
2004;24(8):e149–61. doi:10.1161/01.ATV.000013317.49796.0E.
40.
Expert Panel on Detection E and T of HBC in A. Executive
Summary of the Third Report of the National Cholesterol
Education Program (NCEP) Expert Panel on Detection,
Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults
(Adult Treatment Panel III). JAMA. 2001;285(19):2486–97.
41.
Stone NJ, Robinson JG, Lichtenstein AH, et al. 2013 ACC/AHA
Guideline on the treatment of blood cholesterol to reduce athero-
sclerotic cardiovascular risk in adults: a report of the American
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on
Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63(25 Pt B):2889–
934.
42.
Zhang H, Plutzky J, Skentzos S, Morrison F, Mar P, Shubina M.
Discontinuation of statins in routine care settings. Ann Intern Med.
2013;158(7):526–34.
43.
Colivicchi F, Bassi A, Santini M, Caltagirone C. Discontinuation of
statin therapy and clinical outcome after ischemic stroke. Stroke.
2007;38(10):2652–7. doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.487017.
44.• Boekholdt SM, Hovingh GK, Mora S, et al. Very low levels of
atherogenic lipoproteins and the risk for cardiovascular events: a
meta-analysis of statin trials. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64(5):485–
94. doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2014.02.615. In this meta-analysis of statin
trials, the very significant variability in statin response is clearly
evident, with about 40% subjects not achieving target lipid
levels with statin monotherpy, highlighting an important gap
left by statin therapy, among others.
45.
Baigent C, Blackwell L, Emberson J, et al. Efficacy and safety of
more intensive lowering of LDL cholesterol: a meta-analysis of data
from 170,000 participants in 26 randomised trials. Lancet.
2010;376(9753):1670–81. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(10)61350-5.
46.
Guyton JR, Brown BG, Fazio S, Polis A, Tomassini JE,
Tershakovec AM. Lipid-altering efficacy and safety of ezetimibe/
simvastatin coadministered with extended-release niacin in patients
with type IIa or type IIb hyperlipidemia. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2008;51(16):1564–72. doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2008.03.003.
Curr Atheroscler Rep (2016) 18: 11
Page 13 of 14
11
 47.
Boden WE, Probstfield JL, Anderson T, et al. Niacin in patients
with low HDL cholesterol levels receiving intensive statin therapy.
N Engl J Med. 2011;365(24):2255–67. doi:10.1056/
NEJMoa1107579.
48.
De Kam P-J, Luo W-L, Wenning L, et al. The effects of laropiprant
on the antiplatelet activity of co-administered clopidogrel and aspi-
r i n . P l a t e l e t s . 2 0 1 4 ; 2 5 ( 7 ) : 4 8 0 – 7 . d o i : 1 0 . 1 0 8 0 /
01425690701737481.
49.
Dallob A, Luo W-L, Luk JM, et al. The effects of laropiprant, a
selective prostaglandin D2 receptor 1 antagonist, on the antiplatelet
activity of clopidogrel or aspirin. Platelets. 2011;22(7):495–503.
doi:10.3109/09537104.2011.565433.
50.
Ishii M, Asano K, Namkoong H, et al. CRTH2 is a critical regulator
of neutrophil migration and resistance to polymicrobial sepsis. J
Immunol. 2012;188(11):5655–64. doi:10.4049/jimmunol.
1102330.
51.
Anderson TJ, Boden WE, Desvignes-Nickens P, et al. Safety profile
of extended-release niacin in the AIM-HIGH trial. NEJM.
2014;371(3):288–90. doi:10.1016/j.micinf.2011.07.011.Innate.
52.
Goldberg RB, Jacobson TA. Effects of niacin on glucose control in
patients with dyslipidemia. Mayo Clin Proc. 2008;83(4):470–8.
doi:10.4065/83.4.470.
53.
Ding Y, Li Y
, Wen A. Effect of niacin on lipids and glucose in patients
with type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis of randomized, controlled clinical
trials. Clin Nutr. 2014. doi:10.1016/j.clnu.2014.09.019.
54.
Preiss D, Welsh P, Murphy SA, et al. Risk of incident diabetes with
intensive-dose compared with moderate-dose statin therapy.
JAMA. 2011;305(24):2556–64.
55.
Sattar N, Preiss D, Murray HM. Statins and risk of incident diabe-
tes: a collaborative meta-analysis of randomised statin trials.
Lancet. 2010;375(9716):735–42. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(09)
61965-6.
56.
Macedo AF, Douglas I, Smeeth L, Forbes H, Ebrahim S. Statins and
the risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus: cohort study using the UK
clinical practice research datalink. BMC Cardiovasc Disord.
2014;14(1):85. doi:10.1186/1471-2261-14-85.
57.
Rubins HB, Robins SJ, Collins D, et al. Gemfibrozil for the sec-
ondary prevention of coronary heart disease in men with low levels
of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol. NEJM. 1999;341(6):410–8.
doi:10.1097/00008483-200001000-00015.
58.
Robins SJ, Collins D, Wittes JT, et al. Relation of gemfibrozil treat-
ment and lipid. JAMA. 2001;285(12):1585–91.
59.
Frick M, Elo O, Haapa K, et al. Helsinki Heart Study: primary-
prevention trial with gemfibrozil in middle-aged men with dyslip-
idemia. Safety of treatment, changes in risk factors, and incidence
of coronary heart disease. N Engl J Med. 1987;317(20):1237–45.
60.
Manninen V, Elo MO, Frick MH, et al. Lipid alterations and decline
in the incidence of coronary heart disease in the Helsinki Heart
Study. JAMA. 1988;260(5):641–51. doi:10.1001/jama.260.5.641.
61.
Wink J, Giacoppe G, King J. Effect of very-low-dose niacin on
high-density lipoprotein in patients undergoing long-term statin
therapy. Am Heart J. 2002;143(3):514–8. doi:10.1067/mhj.2002.
120158.
62.
Nicholls SJ. Is niacin ineffective? Or did AIM-HIGH miss its tar-
get? Cleve Clin J Med. 2012;79(1):38–43. doi:10.3949/ccjm.79a.
11166.
63.
Brinton EA. Search and rescue for hypotheses surviving AIM-
HIGH, the niacin therapy earthquake: still problematic after the
primary publication. J Clin Lipidol. 2012;6(4):312–7. doi:10.
1016/j.jacl.2012.03.005.
64.
Bloomgarden Z, Handelsman Y. Did AIM-HIGH aim too low? J
Diabetes. 2012;4(1):1–2. doi:10.1111/j.1753-0407.2011.00176.x.
65.•• Cannon CP, Blazing MA, Giugliano RP, et al. Ezetimibe added to
statin therapy after acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med.
2015;372(25):2387–97. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1410489. The
IMPROVE-IT trial. Over 18000 suffering from acute coronary
syndromes were randomized to simvastatin 40 mg/day or sim-
vastatin 40 mg/day + ezetemibe 10 mg/day. There was a signif-
icant reduction in the composite event rate after 7 years. This
study, not available at the time of the AIM-HIGH trial, compli-
cates interpretation of the AIM-HIGH findings.
66.
Linke A, Sonnabend M, Fasshauer M, et al. Effects of extended-
release niacin on lipid profile and adipocyte biology in patients with
impaired glucose tolerance. Atherosclerosis. 2009;205(1):207–13.
doi:10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2008.11.026.
67.
Kane MP, Hamilton RA, Addesse E, Busch RS, Bakst G.
Cholesterol and glycemic effects of niaspan in patients with type
2 diabetes. Pharmacotherapy. 2001;21(12):1473–8.
11
Page 14 of 14
Curr Atheroscler Rep (2016) 18: 11
