 Thin myelin sheaths as the hallmark of remyelination
persist over time and preserve axon function
Ian D. Duncana,1, Rachel L. Marika, Aimee T. Bromanb, and Moones Heidaria
aDepartment of Medical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, WI 53706; and bDepartment of Biostatistics
and Medical Informatics, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, WI 53792
Edited by Lawrence Steinman, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, and approved September 28, 2017 (received for review August 18, 2017)
The presence of thin myelin sheaths in the adult CNS is recognized as
a marker of remyelination, although the reason there is not a
recovery from demyelination to normal myelin sheath thickness
remains unknown. Remyelination is the default pathway after myelin
loss in all mammalian species, in both naturally occurring and
experimental disease. However, there remains uncertainty about
whether these thin sheaths thicken with time and whether they
remain viable for extended periods. We provide two lines of evidence
here that thin myelin sheaths may persist indefinitely in long-lived
animal models. In the first, we have followed thin myelin sheaths in a
model of delayed myelination during a period of 13 years that we
propose results in the same myelin sheath deficiencies as seen in
remyelination; that is, thin myelin sheaths and short internodes. We
show that the myelin sheaths remain thin and stable on many axons
throughout this period with no detrimental effects on axons. In a
second model system, in which there is widespread demyelination
of the spinal cord and optic nerves, we also show that thinly
remyelinated axons with short internodes persist for over the course
of 2 y. These studies confirm the persistence and longevity of thin
myelin sheaths and the importance of remyelination to the long-
term health and function of the CNS.
axon | oligodendrocyte | remyelination
R
emyelination of the CNS is the most robust endogenous form
of repair of the brain and spinal cord and a major thera-
peutic target in demyelinating disease. It has been found to be
the default pathway in a wide variety of experimental demyelinating
disorders, with large and extensive areas of demyelination becoming
totally remyelinated in the recovery phase of each disorder (1). In
human demyelinating diseases, and in particular in multiple scle-
rosis (MS), remyelination can be extensive (2–4), but in MS, it
diminishes with aging and disease course (5, 6). Persistently
demyelinated axons are at risk for degeneration, and axon loss is
likely the basis for patients developing secondary progressive MS
and permanent neurological deficits (7–10). Remyelination in the
CNS has been shown to restore nerve conduction (11), locomotor
function (12, 13), and global neurologic recovery (1). Importantly,
remyelination protects axons from ongoing degeneration (14–17),
and is therefore a crucial repair strategy.
The morphologic hallmark of remyelination in both human
and experimental disease is proposed to be the presence of axons
with thin myelin sheaths that have a significant increase in the g
ratio (axon diameter/total fiber diameter) (6, 18). Remyelinated
axons also have shortened internodal lengths. These features of
remyelinated axons have been described in many human and
animal demyelinating disorders of any cause, in which there is
subsequent remyelination (19–21). Most important, short inter-
nodes with thin myelin sheaths have also been reported in detail
in MS tissue (22, 23). Although the prevailing view is that
remyelination of the adult CNS results only in thin myelin
sheaths (6), some recent studies have suggested that remyelina-
tion can lead to normal-thickness myelin with normal g ratios.
These studies have examined remyelination in the corpus cal-
losum after cuprizone-induced demyelination (24, 25) and in the
spinal cord in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (25).
It was proposed that remyelinated myelin sheaths induced by
neural precursor cell-derived oligodendrocytes (OLs) were thicker
than those generated by oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs),
and the g ratios of these fibers were normal (24). However, these
observations were made in the corpus callosum, where it has been
shown that g ratios can be unreliable measurements of remyeli-
nation (26), and this will require verification in other white matter
tracts. In the study of Samanta et al. (25), remyelinated, small-
diameter axons in the spinal cord were found to have normal g
ratios. This, however, should be verified in all calibers of axons.
We have previously shown that transplantation of OPCs into a
mature myelin mutant, the shaking pup, at 8 mo of age, resulted in
predominantly thin myelin sheaths (27). This may be equivalent to
what is described in the present study; that is, delayed myelination
of mature axons. In contrast, transplantation of OPCs into 2-wk-
old recipients led to the production of normal-thickness myelin
sheaths (27). Powers et al. (28) studied internode lengths and
myelin sheath thickness of remyelinated axons after spinal cord
injury. They showed that internode lengths of remyelinated axons
were short early after injury, but elongated with time (6 mo), with
myelin sheath thickness also increasing to normal. Whether this
relates only to this model (spinal cord injury) is unknown, yet
unlikely. Taken in context, these studies suggest that the estima-
tion of remyelination using thin myelin sheaths as evidence may
be underestimated, yet the proof of this does not appear over-
whelming at present, and longer-term and more complete studies
are needed.
The reason or reasons that remyelinated axons have thin myelin
sheaths have not been determined experimentally, and questions
remain about the long-term effectiveness of remyelination. For
example, can thin myelin sheaths persist for long periods and
continue to support normal conduction and function, preventing
axons from degeneration (29, 30)? If thin myelin is less than opti-
mum, is there a need to develop strategies that restore thin myelin
Significance
The hallmark of remyelination in the CNS has been proposed to
be the presence of thin myelin sheaths. This has been dem-
onstrated in multiple experimental models and in multiple
sclerosis. It is the only surrogate marker of remyelination, and
therefore a crucial fingerprint of myelin repair. However, this
has been challenged recently in separate studies, in which, by
implication, the degree or presence of remyelinated axons has
been underestimated. In this article, we provide evidence from
two different models that thin myelin sheaths and short in-
ternodes persist almost indefinitely. Future attempts to pro-
mote myelin repair in models of multiple sclerosis will be
crucially dependent on a definitive marker of repair. We pro-
pose that the thin myelin sheath remains the gold standard.
Author contributions: I.D.D. designed research; I.D.D., R.L.M., and M.H. performed re-
search; I.D.D. and A.T.B. analyzed data; and I.D.D. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Published under the PNAS license.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: ian.duncan@wisc.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1714183114/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1714183114
PNAS
|
Published online October 24, 2017
|
E9685–E9691
NEUROSCIENCE
PNAS PLUS
 sheaths to their normal thickness (31)? These are difficult questions
to answer in MS, where it is impossible to determine how long
axons have been remyelinated. In experimental rodent animal
models, their short lifespan limits the length of time remyelinated
axons can be followed. In an attempt to answer some of these
questions, we studied two experimental models. In the first, for
more than a decade, we followed the fate of thinly myelinated
axons in the spinal cord of a canine mutant, resulting from a de-
velopmental delay in myelination, which we propose matches the
changes seen in remyelinated fibers. Second, to test whether thinly
remyelinated sheaths persist over time after demyelination, we
turned to a model in which this was studied in animals over the
course of 2 y after myelin repair.
Results
Genetic Disorder. The disorder presented here is a unique de-
velopmental disorder of myelination of the superficial tracts of the
cervical and thoracic spinal cord caused by a mutation in the
FNIP2 gene (32). At 2 wk of age, affected dogs have a severe
tremor, resulting in difficulty in ambulation. We studied the tho-
racic spinal cord from a 2-wk-old affected dog and demonstrated a
zone of hypomyelination of the superficial tracts of the lateral and
ventral columns with almost a total lack of myelin (Fig. 1 C and D)
compared with the same tracts in controls that were completely
myelinated (Fig. 1 A and B). The dorsolateral column appeared
most deficient in myelin. On higher magnification of this area, the
myelin deficiency was more obvious despite the presence of many
glial cells and intact axons (Fig. 1D). Importantly, however, some
larger-diameter axons in this zone were myelinated normally (Fig.
1D, Inset). In contrast, in both of the affected 13-y-old dogs, these
areas appeared completely myelinated, but the outstanding fea-
ture was the presence of many thinly myelinated axons of all ax-
onal calibers in the lateral and ventral columns of the cervical and
thoracic spinal cord (Fig. 2 and Fig. S1). These thinly myelinated
axons were seen predominantly in the subpial zones of the lateral
and ventral columns, the site of original myelination delay (Fig. 1).
This was also seen at both levels of the cord in the second dog,
although less obviously than in the first case (Fig. S1). There were
no other abnormalities in any of the spinal cord sections evalu-
ated. There was no evidence of demyelination or myelin debris
that would suggest myelin was not stable. Myelinated fiber density
appeared identical to controls, and although rare degenerating
axons were seen, this was similar to controls. There was no evi-
dence of abnormal axoplasm, as we have previously identified in
1-μm sections in another canine myelin mutant, in which a wide
array of axonal changes was documented (33). In addition, no
swollen axons or spheroids were present in either case in the
cervical and thoracic spinal cord.
Fig. 3 shows the distribution of g ratio measurements within
each image, by subject and ventral column (VC) or lateral col-
umn (LC) locations. The number of axons measured at each
position ranged from 249 to 505, and mean g ratio ranged from
0.62 to 0.84, with the variability having an SD of 0.07–0.10 (Table
S1). We tested the difference between mean affected and WT g
ratio adjusting for VC or LC location, using random effects for
the subject and 1 μm image factors, to account for potentially
higher correlation of measurements for axons within the same
subject and/or the same 1-μm image (Table S2). g ratios mea-
sured in affected subjects were, on average, 0.126 (SE = 0.027;
P < 0.0001) higher than in WT subjects. There was no difference
in the g ratio between VC and LC locations of the cord.
To determine whether these abnormally thin myelin sheaths also
had short internodes, a hallmark of remyelination, tissue from the
VC of the cervical and thoracic cord of the male dog was em-
bedded for longitudinal sectioning. These sections enabled visual-
ization of myelinated axons from the subpial surface to those in the
more medial gray matter interface. Thinly myelinated short inter-
nodes were only seen in the subpial area and not more medially, as
would be expected from the transverse sections (Fig. 2). In addi-
tion, some axons had adjacent, normal-thickness/thin myelin par-
anodes (Fig. 2J). This confirmed that this is a primary glial defect
and not an abnormality of axons. Not all thinly myelinated inter-
nodes were short, however, and on occasion, they were more than
100 μm. It was also noted that nodal gaps were greater than normal
at many nodes of the thinly myelinated axons (Fig. 4). In the more
medial, normally myelinated areas, nodes of Ranvier with normal
nodal gaps were seen on large-, medium-, and small-caliber axons,
but it was impossible to measure internode length on these axons
because of variation in fiber plane. However, those internodes that
could be followed over some length were always longer than the
thinly myelinated internodes seen in the subpial zone.
Fig. 1.
Myelin deficiency in the subpial zone of the ventral and lateral tracts of the spinal cord in the mutant. Hemisections of the thoracic spinal cord from a
2-wk-old control dog (A and B) and age-matched affected dog (C and D). In the control, the spinal cord appears completely myelinated, and a higher-power
image of the dorsolateral column (arrows) in B confirms this. In contrast, in the affected dog, there is a clear, pale subpial zone (C) that on higher power
shows a marked myelin deficiency compared with the medial white matter (D). However, occasional large-diameter axons (arrow) are myelinated in this area
(D, Inset). [Scale bars: 0.2 mm (A and C), 20 μm (B and D), and 10 μm (D, Inset).]
E9686
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1714183114
Duncan et al.
 FIDID. We have previously shown that irradiation of food at more
than 30 Kgray results in a widespread and severe demyelinating
and remyelinating disorder in cats (1). Here we studied this phe-
nomenon in the spinal cord of three cats that were examined over
the course of 16 mo to 2 y after neurologic recovery, and found
thinly myelinated axons interspersed between mature myelin
sheaths (Fig. 5A). These appeared to be stable lesions, as there was
no myelin vacuolation and no foamy, lipid-filled macrophages,
which are seen during and shortly after demyelination and
remyelination. Longitudinal sections of the spinal cord showed
Fig. 2.
In the aged mutant, hypomyelination persists in the affected tracts, and internodes can be short. In the control dog, the spinal cord is normally myelinated
(A), and this is confirmed on higher-power examination of subpial areas in the LCs (B) and VCs (C). The g ratio of myelinated axons in these areas was measured at
two sites and the ratio noted A. In the first affected dog, the cord appears completely myelinated (D), yet on higher power, there are many thin myelin sheaths of
all axon diameters in both the LC (E) and VC (F) in the subpial zone. This was confirmed by the g ratio measurements from these sites (D). High power of areas (*) in
the control (G) and affected dog (H) show that these areas have a mix of normally myelinated (thick myelin sheaths) and hypomyelinated axons, as reflected by the
g ratio range. (I) A short internode with a thin myelin sheath is seen between thicker internodes. (J) In the ventral column, a 7.6-μm-diameter axon has two short
internodes, as marked by arrows. The node of Ranvier on the right has a paranode with a normal myelin sheath adjacent to the thin, short internode (g ratio, 0.83)
(A). Arrows mark nodes of Ranvier. Internode lengths are detailed. [Scale bars: 0.5 mm (A and D), and 20 μm (B, C, E–J).]
Duncan et al.
PNAS
|
Published online October 24, 2017
|
E9687
NEUROSCIENCE
PNAS PLUS
 frequent thinly myelinated axons with short but variable internode
lengths (Fig. 5 B–E). In one of these animals, the optic nerves were
dominated by thinly myelinated axons, and short internodes were
also seen on longitudinal sections (Fig. 6). Two of the cats with feline
irradiated diet-induced demyelination (FIDID) were part of a clin-
ical trial in Madison, Wisconsin, and the other was a pet cat from
Sydney, Australia, confirming the ubiquitous nature of the disease
process and the long-term persistence of thinly myelinated axons.
Discussion
We provide here compelling evidence for this persistence of thin
myelin sheaths over extended periods in two models, most notably
in the canine genetic disorder. During the prolonged period of
observation of the two affected dogs, from the time of recovery
from their neurologic deficit at 6 mo, to their termination 13 y later,
four possibilities were predicted regarding the fate of the thinly
myelinated axons in the spinal cord. First, they could remain
hypomyelinated, as we have previously demonstrated in mutant
dogs up to 2 y of age (32). Second, the thin myelin sheaths thick-
ened with time, eventually achieving normal thickness and g ratio as
a result of oligodendrocyte compensation and plasticity. Third, thin
myelin was not stable and eventually degenerated, leading to de-
myelination, or fourth, was not sufficient to maintain axonal via-
bility with subsequent axon degeneration. We demonstrate here
that the first outcome, that is, the persistence of hypomyelination
with no other pathologic changes, was the outcome.
As thin myelin sheaths in the adult CNS are thought to indicate
remyelination, do the results in this genetic model match the
changes seen after myelin restoration? As detailed here, many
thinly myelinated axons were seen in the LCs and VCs after 13 y.
These differences were confirmed by the g ratio measurements in
these sites in the cervical and thoracic cord of both dogs. g ratios
were, on average, greater in the affected dogs at all sites measured,
and although the number of test subjects was small, the myelin
sheath abnormalities were consistent in both dogs. In addition to
thin myelin sheaths, as seen on transverse section, thinly myelinated
axons in the subpial zone frequently had short internode lengths
(<100 μm). This is similar to that seen in remyelinated fibers in the
CNS, as shown in study of single teased nerve fibers from the spinal
cord of cats that had been demyelinated by focal lysolecithin in-
jections (34). Some remyelinated axons can have longer internodes,
close to the predicted diameter for the axon caliber (34), and this
was also seen in some thinly myelinated axons in the present study.
Axons in the medial aspect of the cord of varying diameters and
normal-thickness myelin did not appear to have short internodes,
although it was difficult to follow them for long distances.
Given that neurologic function was restored in the affected dogs
by 4–6 mo of age, and this is correlated with the myelination of the
spinal cord superficial tracts (32), it can be concluded that the thin
myelin sheaths restored conduction. It has been known for some
time that endogenous remyelination of CNS axons restores secure
conduction from previous conduction block of axons demyelinated
by lysolecithin injection (11). Despite the neurologic normality and
likely normal conduction in the thinly myelinated axons, we saw
numerous cases of nodal gap widening on the thinly myelinated
axons that may also result in conduction abnormalities. Nodal gap
widening is common and a nonspecific finding in many neurologic
disorders (35). Despite these findings of thin myelin sheaths and
nodal widening, they appear not to have any negative effect on
neurologic function.
Thus, although we propose that the thin myelin sheaths that
persist in this mutant are the same as those seen after remyeli-
nation of the adult CNS, the question remains, as with remye-
lination: Why do these myelin sheaths remain thin? Franklin and
Hinks (36) proposed that thin myelin sheaths in remyelination
result from OLs unsheathing mature axons of mature diameter
and length. In contrast in normal development, early myelin
internodes adapt to changes in axon caliber and length by be-
coming thicker in diameter, and longer. We propose that the
Franklin and Hinks hypothesis applies in the developmental
delay in myelination in these mutants. Myelin sheath thickness in
the peripheral nervous system is controlled by neuregulin III
signaling (37), whereas in the CNS, ERK1/ERK2 signaling, as
found in both loss- and gain-of-function experiments, decreases
or increases myelin sheath thickness, respectively (38, 39). The
model proposed by Franklin and Hinks (36) to explain why
remyelinated sheaths are thin could equally apply to the late-stage
developmental myelination documented here. As oligodendro-
cytes are myelinating (or remyelinating) axons that are close to
their maximum diameter and length, there is no need to undergo
remodeling that is required in the early developing CNS. That is,
the original association of the OL process with an axon is when the
axon reaches a critical diameter, although it is still to undergo
increases in its diameter and length. Indeed, Franklin and Hinks
(36) suggest that remyelination in the adult CNS resulting from
oligodendrocytes derived from adult progenitor cells represents
“delayed” myelination, similar to what occurs in the Weimaraner
mutant. The similarities between myelination and repair have led
to the supposition that remyelination is simply a recapitulation of
development, and although there are differences, these may be
redundant (40). This has been confirmed recently in an in-
vestigation of the key transcription factor, myelin regulatory
Fig. 3.
Measurements of g ratios in the dorsolateral columns and VCs confirms
the presence of abnormally thin myelin sheaths. Distribution of g ratios for
randomly sampled axons within the 1-μm image of the cervical cord from af-
fected and WT dogs. The suffix 1 and 2 in the LC and VC are two sections taken
from those locations. The number of axons measured is shown below the im-
age location. The box represents the median and 25th and 75th percentiles of
the distribution of the values. Whiskers extend out no more than 1.5× the
interquartile range away from the box. Values outside of this range are plotted
as points.
Fig. 4.
Widened nodal gaps seen on affected fibers. Although normal nodes
were common on axons with normal thickness myelin sheaths (A) and those
with thin myelin sheaths (B), many examples of nodal widening were seen at
nodes where adjacent myelin sheaths were thin (C and D). (Scale bars: 20 μm.)
E9688
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1714183114
Duncan et al.
 factor in experimental remyelination after lysolecithin-induced
demyelination of the mouse corpus callosum, and in MS le-
sions (41). Myelin regulatory factor expression, which was es-
sential for remyelination in both, broadly recapitulated the OL
expression seen during development (41).
Although we propose that the thin myelin sheaths result from
delayed myelination of the subpial axons, it could be suggested
that the causative mutation in FNIP2 has a negative effect on
myelination in addition to the proposed effect on migration and
differentiation of OLs and their progenitors (32). However, we
would argue against this, as some OLs that are found early (2 wk)
in the subpial zone are able to myelinate axons normally (Fig.
1D), leading to the presence of scattered, thickly myelinated
axons with a normal g ratio at 13 y, interspersed with the late-
myelinated thin sheaths (Fig. 1H). There is no published evi-
dence to indicate there is heterogeneity of OLs in the subpial
zone of the spinal cord that could result in a difference in
myelinating capacity of a subset of OLs in mutations of FNIP2.
The persistence of thin, remyelinated sheaths after demyelination
was also clearly seen in the FIDID model. In all three cases in
which tissue was collected over the course of 1–2 y after neurologic
recovery, scattered thin myelin sheaths were seen in the spinal
cord VCs and LCs, with these fibers being interspersed between
mature myelin sheaths. This pattern of fiber mixing is seen during
acute disease; that is, scattered myelinated axons (with mature
myelin sheaths) escape demyelination and persist adjacent to
demyelinated and remyelinated axons. In the three recovered cats
recorded here, however, there was no evidence of active myelin
breakdown, demyelinated axons, or macrophages; that is, these
were nonactive areas of myelin damage and repair. The persis-
tence of thin myelinated sheaths and short internodes confirms
that these abnormalities had remained for more than 2 y. In one
cat, this was even more dramatic in the optic nerves, where over
95% of axons had thin myelin sheaths with only occasional re-
sidual mature sheaths, primarily on large axons. The more ex-
tensive remyelination seen in the optic nerves reflects the global
demyelination in the nerve compared with the spinal cord.
Are there alternative explanations for the finding of thinly my-
elinated axons with short internodes in the mature CNS? The
concept that myelin sheaths remain static throughout life has been
challenged by recent studies on oligodendrocyte dynamics in the
normal adult CNS, which showed continuous division of OPCs in
the brain and shortening of internode lengths in some tracts (42).
This was not related to ongoing myelination of nonmyelinated
axons; instead, it was suggested that there is continuous myelin
remodeling that results in shortened internode lengths. Could this
be the reason for this finding in the two dogs examined here? This
would seem to be unlikely, however, as the only areas with thin
myelin/short internodes were in the superficial tracts of the LCs
and VCs. Myelinated axons medial to these zones had normal
myelin sheath thickness and no evidence of shortened internodes
as far as could be determined in longitudinal sections.
Despite the fact that many axons in the spinal cord were only
ensheathed by thin myelin sheaths, there was no evidence that this
compromised axon health or resulted in degeneration (29). The
interactions between the axon and its myelin sheath/oligodendro-
cyte that are essential for axon survival are well recognized (43–46).
Although the primary source of support for the axon has been
shown to the metabolic coupling between the oligodendrocyte and
axon, involving importing glucose and lactate, the myelin sheath
itself is also likely to be involved. In Plp1 knockout mice, there is
late-stage axonal degeneration (47), whereas mutation of the my-
elin gene Cnp1 likewise results in axon degeneration (48). In 19-
mo-old rumpshaker mice which have a mutation in the Plp1 gene,
thin myelin sheaths persist, yet the genetically deficient myelin
results in a late-stage axonopathy (49). Here, however, we show
Fig. 5.
Thin remyelinated sheaths persist in the spinal cord for more than a year after demyelination. (A) Area from the ventral column of the cervical spinal cord
from a cat, 11/4 y after neurologic recovery from FIDID. Remyelinated axons are scattered between axons with normal myelin sheath thickness in an area of normal
axon density. This is a nonactive lesion with no demyelinated axons and no lipid-filled macrophages. (B and C) Longitudinal sections from these areas show short
internodes with thin myelin sheaths, all of which had g ratios >0.80. On some axons, multiple short internodes with thin myelin sheaths were seen (D). (D) The fiber
seen continues in the panel below (E). Arrows mark nodes of Ranvier. (Scale bars: 20 μm.)
Duncan et al.
PNAS
|
Published online October 24, 2017
|
E9689
NEUROSCIENCE
PNAS PLUS
 that biochemically normal, yet thin, myelin sheaths appear to
support the long-term integrity of axons as the myelin fiber density
was qualitatively normal (Fig. 2).
The tissue fixation precluded immunolabeling axons for am-
yloid precursor protein or for demonstrating any increase in
neurofilament phosphorylation (50), both of which may have
been used to indicate axonal disturbance. However, from ob-
servations of axonal pathology in 1-μm sections from another
canine myelin mutant (33), we believe we would have identified
most potential changes in the axoplasm in the present model and
certainly noted if axons were swollen. Absence of any such ab-
normalities leads us to conclude that thin myelin sheaths can
support axon health and function for over the course of 13 y, and
potentially indefinitely. Hence, the need to develop remyelinat-
ing strategies that restore myelin to its normal thickness to
protect axons and sustain function (31) is not required.
Materials and Methods
All animals were handled and treated according to the guidelines and rec-
ommendations of the Research Animal Resources Center and the Animal Care
and Use Committee at the University of Wisconsin–Madison. The genetic
model studied here is a disorder in the Weimaraner breed of dog that has a
unique developmental deficiency in myelination of the superficial tracts of
the cervical and thoracic spinal cord (32, 51). Affected dogs develop a severe
tremor and ataxia at 12–14 d of age, which gradually diminish and are lost in
most cases by 3–4 mo. The disorder is inherited as an autosomal recessive
trait, and the mutation is in the folliculin-interacting protein 2 (FNIP2) (32).
We have proposed that the mutation results in a failure of migration or
differentiation of a subpopulation of oligodendrocytes (32).
In the present study, we followed two homozygous affected littermates, a
male and female, for more than 13 y. The male had a more severe and
persistent tremor and ataxia than the female. In both dogs, however, no
obvious tremor could be detected by 6 mo, and the male was no longer ataxic.
Both dogs were neurologically normal for up to 13 y. Each was killed at
around 13 1/2 y because of nonneurologic disease. Samples of the cervical and
thoracic spinal cord were collected from the male immediately after death
and immersion fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde. Tissue from the female dog was
only available 3–4 h after death and immersion fixed, but the delay resulted
in poorer fixation. For controls for the mature affected dogs, we used sec-
tions from the cervical and thoracic cord of 2-y-old normal dogs (WT; n = 2),
as age-matched controls were not available. By 2 y of age, myelination is
complete in the canine spinal cord, and myelin sheath thickness is repre-
sentative of all mature canines (33). To illustrate the developmental defect
on early myelination of the superficial tracts of the spinal cord and the
change that occurs with time, we examined the thoracic spinal cord of a
2-wk-old affected Weimaraner with tremor and an age-matched control dog.
Blocks from the cervical and thoracic cord were trimmed and processed for
plastic embedding and preparation of 1-μm toluidine blue-stained sections.
One-micrometer sections were then used to measure the g ratios of ∼250–
500 myelinated axons in the LCs and VCs of both animals from the cervical
cord at two adjacent sites, using ImageJ software (NIH). The mean difference
between case and control dogs was analyzed using a linear mixed-effects
model (52), with two levels of random effects: one for measurements from
the same dog and one for measurements taken within the same 1-μm slide.
This model is considered a mixed-effect model with nested factors.
The second model used to study the persistence of thinly myelinated axons
was a unique feline disorder in which feeding irradiated food resulted in
profound and generalized demyelination and remyelination of the CNS (1).
The disorder has been named FIDID. Two cats were studied as part of the
original study at University of Wisconsin–Madison (1) and were killed over
the course of 2 y after complete neurologic recovery. The third cat was part
of an outbreak of clinical disease seen in Sydney, Australia (53). While on an
irradiated diet, the cat developed severe neurologic disease (tetraparesis,
ataxia) but recovered to almost normal ambulation and was studied 14 mo
after recovery. In this animal, pieces of the cervical and thoracic spinal cord
were immersion fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde after euthanasia, processed,
and embedded in plastic. Plastic blocks from spinal cord and optic nerve of
the first two cats were also studied.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We are grateful to Abigail Radcliff for her skilled
preparation of this manuscript and to Dr. John Svaren and Dr. Ian Griffiths
for our many discussions on this research and their review of the paper. We
are also grateful to Dr. Sara Levén for her careful collection of the spinal
cord of the first case and to Dr. Georgina Child for the second cat tissue from
Sydney. These studies were supported in part by National Multiple Sclerosis
Society Grant RG-1501-02876 and by a prior grant from the MS Hope for
a Cure Foundation.
1. Duncan ID, Brower A, Kondo Y, Curlee JF, Jr, Schultz RD (2009) Extensive remyeli-
nation of the CNS leads to functional recovery. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:6832–6836.
2. Brück W, Kuhlmann T, Stadelmann C (2003) Remyelination in multiple sclerosis.
J Neurol Sci 206:181–185.
3. Patrikios P, et al. (2006) Remyelination is extensive in a subset of multiple sclerosis
patients. Brain 129:3165–3172.
4. Patani R, Balaratnam M, Vora A, Reynolds R (2007) Remyelination can be extensive in
multiple sclerosis despite a long disease course. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 33:
277–287.
5. Goldschmidt T, Antel J, König FB, Brück W, Kuhlmann T (2009) Remyelination capacity
of the MS brain decreases with disease chronicity. Neurology 72:1914–1921.
6. Franklin RJ, Goldman SA (2015) Glia disease and repair-remyelination. Cold Spring
Harb Perspect Biol 7:a020594.
7. Hagemeier K, Brück W, Kuhlmann T (2012) Multiple sclerosis–Remyelination failure as
a cause of disease progression. Histol Histopathol 27:277–287.
8. Bjartmar C, Kidd G, Mörk S, Rudick R, Trapp BD (2000) Neurological disability corre-
lates with spinal cord axonal loss and reduced N-acetyl aspartate in chronic multiple
sclerosis patients. Ann Neurol 48:893–901.
9. Lovas G, Szilágyi N, Majtényi K, Palkovits M, Komoly S (2000) Axonal changes in
chronic demyelinated cervical spinal cord plaques. Brain 123:308–317.
10. Medana IM, Esiri MM (2003) Axonal damage: A key predictor of outcome in human
CNS diseases. Brain 126:515–530.
11. Smith KJ, Blakemore WF, McDonald WI (1981) The restoration of conduction by
central remyelination. Brain 104:383–404.
12. Jeffery ND, Blakemore WF (1997) Locomotor deficits induced by experimental spinal
cord demyelination are abolished by spontaneous remyelination. Brain 120:27–37.
13. Liebetanz D, Merkler D (2006) Effects of commissural de- and remyelination on motor skill
behaviour in the cuprizone mouse model of multiple sclerosis. Exp Neurol 202:217–224.
14. Kornek B, et al. (2000) Multiple sclerosis and chronic autoimmune encephalomyelitis:
A comparative quantitative study of axonal injury in active, inactive, and remyeli-
nated lesions. Am J Pathol 157:267–276.
15. Irvine KA, Blakemore WF (2008) Remyelination protects axons from demyelination-
associated axon degeneration. Brain 131:1464–1477.
16. Mei F, et al. (2016) Accelerated remyelination during inflammatory demyelination
prevents axonal loss and improves functional recovery. Elife 5:e18246.
17. Schultz V, et al. (2017) Acutely damaged axons are remyelinated in multiple sclerosis
and experimental models of demyelination. Glia 65:1350–1360.
18. Franklin RJM, Zhao C, Lubetzki C, Ffrench-Constant C (2013) Endogenous remyeli-
nation in the CNS. Myelin Repair and Neuroprotection in Multiple Sclerosis, eds
Duncan ID, Franklin RJM (Springer, New York), pp 71–92.
Fig. 6.
The optic nerve contains predominantly remyelinated axons. (A) In the
second cat, 2 y after recovery, the optic nerve contains predominantly thin,
remyelinated sheaths with only two mature, normal-thickness myelinated axons
(arrows) that were not demyelinated. (B) The nerve also contained short, thin
internodes. (Scale bars: 20 μm.)
E9690
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1714183114
Duncan et al.
 19. Gledhill RF, Harrison BM, McDonald WI (1973) Pattern of remyelination in the CNS.
Nature 244:443–444.
20. Harrison BM, McDonald WI (1977) Remyelination after transient experimental com-
pression of the spinal cord. Ann Neurol 1:542–551.
21. Clifford-Jones RE, Landon DN, McDonald WI (1980) Remyelination during optic nerve
compression. J Neurol Sci 46:239–243.
22. Prineas JW, Connell F (1978) The fine structure of chronically active multiple sclerosis
plaques. Neurology 28:68–75.
23. Prineas JW, Connell F (1979) Remyelination in multiple sclerosis. Ann Neurol 5:22–31.
24. Xing YL, et al. (2014) Adult neural precursor cells from the subventricular zone con-
tribute significantly to oligodendrocyte regeneration and remyelination. J Neurosci
34:14128–14146.
25. Samanta J, et al. (2015) Inhibition of Gli1 mobilizes endogenous neural stem cells for
remyelination. Nature 526:448–452.
26. Stidworthy MF, Genoud S, Suter U, Mantei N, Franklin RJM (2003) Quantifying the
early stages of remyelination following cuprizone-induced demyelination. Brain
Pathol 13:329–339.
27. Archer DR, Cuddon PA, Lipsitz D, Duncan ID (1997) Myelination of the canine central
nervous system by glial cell transplantation: A model for repair of human myelin
disease. Nat Med 3:54–59.
28. Powers BE, et al. (2013) Remyelination reporter reveals prolonged refinement of
spontaneously regenerated myelin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110:4075–4080.
29. Dubois-Dalcq M, et al. (2008) From fish to man: Understanding endogenous re-
myelination in central nervous system demyelinating diseases. Brain 131:1686–1700.
30. Münzel EJ, Williams A (2013) Promoting remyelination in multiple sclerosis-recent
advances. Drugs 73:2017–2029, and erratum (2014)74:157.
31. Cole KLH, Early JJ, Lyons DA (2017) Drug discovery for remyelination and treatment of
MS. Glia 65:1565–1589.
32. Pemberton TJ, et al. (2014) A mutation in the canine gene encoding folliculin-
interacting protein 2 (FNIP2) associated with a unique disruption in spinal cord
myelination. Glia 62:39–51.
33. Mayer JA, et al. (2015) Modeling the natural history of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease.
Neurobiol Dis 75:115–130.
34. Blakemore WF, Murray JA (1981) Quantitative examination of internodal length of
remyelinated nerve fibres in the central nervous system. J Neurol Sci 49:273–284.
35. Arancibia-Carcamo IL, Attwell D (2014) The node of Ranvier in CNS pathology. Acta
Neuropathol 128:161–175.
36. Franklin RJM, Hinks GL (1999) Understanding CNS remyelination: Clues from de-
velopmental and regeneration biology. J Neurosci Res 58:207–213.
37. Brinkmann BG, et al. (2008) Neuregulin-1/ErbB signaling serves distinct functions in
myelination of the peripheral and central nervous system. Neuron 59:581–595.
38. Ishii A, Fyffe-Maricich SL, Furusho M, Miller RH, Bansal R (2012) ERK1/ERK2 MAPK
signaling is required to increase myelin thickness independent of oligodendrocyte
differentiation and initiation of myelination. J Neurosci 32:8855–8864.
39. Ishii A, Furusho M, Bansal R (2013) Sustained activation of ERK1/2 MAPK in oligo-
dendrocytes and schwann cells enhances myelin growth and stimulates oligoden-
drocyte progenitor expansion. J Neurosci 33:175–186.
40. Fancy SP, Chan JR, Baranzini SE, Franklin RJ, Rowitch DH (2011) Myelin regeneration:
A recapitulation of development? Annu Rev Neurosci 34:21–43.
41. Duncan GJ, et al. (2017) Myelin regulatory factor drives remyelination in multiple
sclerosis. Acta Neuropathol, 10.1007/s00401-017-1741-7.
42. Young KM, et al. (2013) Oligodendrocyte dynamics in the healthy adult CNS: Evidence
for myelin remodeling. Neuron 77:873–885.
43. Lee Y, et al. (2012) Oligodendroglia metabolically support axons and contribute to
neurodegeneration. Nature 487:443–448.
44. Nave KA (2010) Myelination and support of axonal integrity by glia. Nature 468:
244–252.
45. Nave KA (2010) Myelination and the trophic support of long axons. Nat Rev Neurosci
11:275–283.
46. Simons M, Nave KA (2015) Oligodendrocytes: Myelination and axonal support. Cold
Spring Harb Perspect Biol 8:a020479.
47. Griffiths I, et al. (1998) Axonal swellings and degeneration in mice lacking the major
proteolipid of myelin. Science 280:1610–1613.
48. Lappe-Siefke C, et al. (2003) Disruption of Cnp1 uncouples oligodendroglial functions
in axonal support and myelination. Nat Genet 33:366–374.
49. Edgar JM, et al. (2004) Age-related axonal and myelin changes in the rumpshaker
mutation of the Plp gene. Acta Neuropathol 107:331–335.
50. Petzold A, et al. (2008) Phosphorylation and compactness of neurofilaments in mul-
tiple sclerosis: Indicators of axonal pathology. Exp Neurol 213:326–335.
51. Kornegay JN, Goodwin MA, Spyridakis LK (1987) Hypomyelination in Weimaraner
dogs. Acta Neuropathol 72:394–401.
52. Laird NM, Ware JH (1982) Random-effects models for longitudinal data. Biometrics
38:963–974.
53. Child G, Foster DJ, Fougere BJ, Milan JM, Rozmanec M (2009) Ataxia and paralysis in
cats in Australia associated with exposure to an imported gamma-irradiated com-
mercial dry pet food. Aust Vet J 87:349–351.
Duncan et al.
PNAS
|
Published online October 24, 2017
|
E9691
NEUROSCIENCE
PNAS PLUS
