 Non-overlapping neural networks in Hydra vulgaris
Christophe Dupre and Rafael Yuste
Neurotechnology Center, Dept. Biological Sciences and Neuroscience, Columbia University, New 
York, NY 10027
Summary
To understand the emergent properties of neural circuits it would be ideal to record the activity of 
every neuron in a behaving animal and decode how it relates to behavior. We have achieved this 
with the cnidarian Hydra vulgaris, using calcium imaging of genetically engineered animals to 
measure the activity of essentially all of its neurons. While the nervous system of Hydra is 
traditionally described as a simple nerve net, we surprisingly find instead a series of functional 
networks that are anatomically non-overlapping and are associated with specific behaviors. Three 
major functional networks extend through the entire animal and are activated selectively during 
longitudinal contractions, elongations in response to light and radial contractions, while an 
additional network is located near the hypostome and is active during nodding. These results 
demonstrate the functional sophistication of apparently simple nerve nets, and the potential of 
Hydra and other basal metazoans as a model system for neural circuit studies.
eTOC blurb
The nervous system of Hydra is traditionally described as made of two nerve nets. By using 
calcium imaging, Dupre and Yuste demonstrate the existence of multiple circuits within these 
nerve nets and show to which behavior they are associated.
Corresponding author and Lead Contact: Christophe Dupre. cd2597@columbia.edu, 906 NWC Building 550 West 120 Street, Box 
4822, New York, NY, 10027. 
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
Author Contributions
Conceptualization, C.D. and R.Y.; Methodology, C.D. and R.Y.; Investigation, C.D.; Writing – Original Draft, C.D.; Writing – Review 
& Editing, C.D. and R.Y.; Funding Acquisition, R.Y.; Resources, C.D. and R.Y..
Conflict of interest: The authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Published in final edited form as:
Curr Biol. 2017 April 24; 27(8): 1085–1097. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2017.02.049.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Keywords
Hydra; Nerve net; Calcium Imaging
Introduction
Understanding the function of any nervous system is a daunting task given the number of 
neurons involved and the difficulty in measuring and analyzing their activity. Cnidarians, as 
a sister group of bilaterians, are extant representative of some of the earliest animals in 
evolution to have nervous systems and thus offer an apparent simplicity that could help 
illuminate the structural and functional design principles of neural circuits. Among 
cnidarians, Hydra is convenient to maintain and manipulate in a laboratory and, 
consequently, has been studied for more than 300 years [1]. The nervous system of Hydra is 
composed of a few hundred to a few thousand neurons, depending on the size of the animal 
[2]. Two main types of neurons have been reported: sensory cells, exposed to the external or 
gastric environment, and ganglion cells, which form a two-dimensional lattice known as 
nerve net [3,4]. Hydra’s nerve net has actually two separate components: one in the 
endoderm and one in the ectoderm. The morphology of both sensory cells and ganglion cells 
can vary, in terms of the size of their cell body and the ramification of their neurites [5].
The function of nerve nets in Hydra is poorly understood. Extracellular recordings reported 
multiple types of electrical activity, some of which are associated with motion or occur in 
response to sensory stimulation. Specifically, longitudinal contraction of the ectoderm, 
which reduces the animal down to a tight ball, is associated with a type of extracellular 
electrical signals named longitudinal contraction bursts (CB) [6]. Tentacles sometimes also 
generate electrical pulses (tentacle pulses), found during contractions [7,8]. But in addition, 
Hydra displays robust spontaneous electrical activity, i.e. activity in the apparent absence of 
any external stimulus and, sometimes, also in the absence of any clear behavior. One 
example of this are the rhythmic electrical potentials [6,9], which have been thought to 
Dupre and Yuste
Page 2
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 propagate in the endoderm of the animal [10] and to increase in frequency during elongation 
of the body column [6]. Activation of the endoderm by rhythmic potentials is thought to 
cause radial contraction (reduction of the radius of the animal) and therefore elongation 
[11,12].
Hydra has a limited and well-characterized behavioral repertoire, including photic response 
and feeding. A dark-habituated Hydra that is exposed to light will respond by elongating its 
body towards it, bending its hypostome-tentacle junction to produce a motion reminiscent of 
nodding [13,14], and eventually moving towards the light source by somersaulting [15]. 
Feeding includes a combination of tentacle motion to spear and paralyze the prey with 
nematocysts in order to bring the prey towards the mouth, which opens to ingest it [16]. A 
few hours after ingestion, the content of the body column is expelled through the mouth by a 
quick radial (as opposed to longitudinal) contraction of the body column after the mouth has 
opened [17].
Elucidation of the links between neuronal activity, anatomy and behavior in Hydra has been 
difficult because of technical limitations. Single-cell recording approaches are difficult 
because Hydra neurons are small and scattered [18], although intracellular recordings reveal 
action potentials [19]. Extracellular studies have provided detailed descriptions of electrical 
signals but could not link them to a particular cell type. In fact, whether rhythmic potentials 
and longitudinal contraction bursts are conducted by neurons or by the muscle/epithelial 
cells is still under debate [10,20,21], and surgical isolations indicate that they can propagate 
along both axes of the epithelium [8]. Also, extracellular recordings, which could be more 
akin to electromyograms, can be disrupted by the motion of the animal [9], and therefore 
cannot be carried out in certain types of behavior. Accordingly, one does not know how 
many networks exist in the nervous system of Hydra and to what behavior each of them 
participates.
The application of modern molecular methods to Hydra has the potential to greatly advance 
our understanding of these essential neurobiological questions. In particular, the recent 
sequencing of Hydra has revealed a surprisingly rich genome [22]. Indeed, in spite of its 
basal metazoan lineage, the Hydra genome is endowed with more than 20,000 genes 
including an extensive complement of neuronal molecular families such as sodium, 
potassium and calcium channels, and receptors for glutamate, GABA, Dopamine, 5HT, and 
many peptides. Many of these molecules are even present in animals that are evolutionary 
more basal than cnidarians, such as the poriferans (sponges) [23]. Also, stable transgenic 
lines have been achieved [24], enabling the use of a large range of modern molecular tools. 
Among these tools, genetically-encoded calcium indicators are particularly well suited for 
functional studies of the Hydra nerve net for many reasons. First, calcium imaging can track 
the action potential activity of neuronal populations [25]. Second, the small size of Hydra 
(500 μm to 1.5 cm in length) makes it possible to have an entire animal under the field of 
view of a traditional microscope. Third, Hydra is transparent and its scattered nerve-net 
organization (disadvantageous for electrophysiological recordings) is advantageous for 
imaging. Indeed, it is rare that two neurons optically overlap during imaging so it is 
therefore easier to obtain single-neuron resolution. Fourth, Hydra does not age [26], so the 
same animal can be used in an indefinite number of experiments. This can reduce the 
Dupre and Yuste
Page 3
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 number of confounding factors and make statistical interpretation more accurate. Fifth, 
Hydra regenerates which makes it more robust against photodamage. Other cnidarians are 
available, such as Hydractinia, Aglantha and Nematostella. These animals offer various 
advantages, such as the broad range of genetic tools that are available in Nematostella [27]. 
In spite of the fact that these species might not have the same optical advantages as Hydra, 
running similar experiments in them would offer exciting comparative perspectives between 
the nervous system of anthozoans (e.g. Nematostella) and hydrozoans (e.g. Hydra). To take 
advantage of these properties and explore the possibility of performing neural circuit studies 
of Hydra, we created a line expressing a calcium indicator (GCaMP6s) in neurons. Using it, 
we attempted to link neuronal activity with the anatomy of the nerve net and the behavior of 
the animal.
Results
Imaging the complete activity of the nervous system of Hydra
In order to record the activity of the entire nervous system of Hydra simultaneously we first 
generated a line of transgenic animals expressing a genetic calcium indicator and then 
developed a method to image whole individuals. To generate the transgenic line, we 
modified a plasmid initially designed by R. Steele (UC Irvine; Addgene cat#34789) [28] and 
which expresses GFP under the control of an actin promoter. In the sequence of this plasmid, 
we substituted GCaMP6s for GFP (see Supplemental Material). We then injected the 
plasmid in fertilized Hydra eggs (Figure 1A) according to an established procedure [29] (see 
also Supplemental Experimental Procedures), with the goal of incorporating the plasmid into 
the interstitial cell lines, which give rise to the neuronal lineage.
Animals generated were mosaic, with transgenic stem cells randomly scattered throughout 
the body. By repeatedly selecting buds that formed on a region of the parent that has higher 
concentration of transgenic stem cells than the rest of the body of the parent, we 
progressively increased the percentage of transgenic neurons in our colony. Once the 
percentage of transgenic neurons seemed to have reached a steady-state, we measured it by 
immunostaining animals for GCaMP6s (using a GFP antibody) and acetylated alpha tubulin, 
a pan-neuronal marker [30]. In these animals, 96 ±3 (SEM) % of cells positive for acetylated 
alpha tubulin also expressed GCaMP6s (see Figure S1). Since it is likely that a small 
percentage of neurons might not have been stained for GFP and/or for anti-acetylated alpha 
tubulin during the immunohistochemistry procedure, we concluded that the transgenic lines 
expressed GCaMP6s in essentially all of its neurons.
To image the activity of every neuron in the animal, we mounted specimens between two 
coverslips separated by a 100μm spacer, which is the average width of a small Hydra (Figure 
1B) and imaged in wide-field mode at max 33Hz frame rate (Movie S1; cf experimental 
procedures). In such preparation, the animal can be considered as a hollow cylinder that is 
imaged from the side, between the top coverslip (top layer in Figure 1B), and the bottom 
coverslip (bottom layer in Figure 1B). Consequently, we expected to see two layers of 
neurons (the two sides of the cylinder) slide on top of each other as the animal is moving in 
this chamber. Indeed, we could identify the two body walls by measuring the trajectory of 8 
neurons in a given region of interest, and plotting these trajectories on top of each other 
Dupre and Yuste
Page 4
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Figure 1C, left and middle panels). Accordingly, the 8 trajectories essentially followed two 
different directions corresponding to the motion of the two layers of the animal. Moreover, 
we could detect calcium transients from neurons in both layers (Figure 1C, right panel). We 
ruled out the possibility that these fluorescence transients come from motion of the cells in 
and out of focus by comparing them to the signal we acquired from animals expressing GFP 
(rather than GCaMP6s) in neurons (Figure S2). For these reasons, we can conclude that our 
preparation allows us to image neuronal activity through the entire animal simultaneously.
In order to extract neuronal activity in spite of the motion of the animal, we manually 
tracked the trajectory of each neuron and measured their fluorescence intensity at each frame 
(cf experimental procedures; Figure 1D and Movie S2). Additionally, we attempted to 
correlate calcium signal with electrical activity of the neurons by approaching extracellular 
electrodes (Figure 2A). We were not able to record the electrical activity of CB neurons, 
because whenever they fired the electrical signal generated by the contracting muscles 
overwhelmed any other signal (Figure 2B). However, we were able to record electrical 
signals from rhythmic potentials neurons, because they can occur when the animal does not 
move. The calcium transients we observed all had the same amplitude, and the electrical 
activity that corresponded to them always involved a single spike (Figure 2C–D). Therefore, 
each RP calcium transient corresponded to one action potential.
Using these traces for each neuron, we built rasterplots representing the activity of every 
neuron over hundreds of frames (Figure 1D). Note that each animal can have a different 
number of neurons, as Hydra can grow and shrink depending on its food intake [2]. In 
addition, we tested how fast and for how long we could image these animals in our 
preparation. The duration of recording was limited by photobleaching and phototoxicity, 
which we assessed by measuring fluorescence intensity and neuronal activity, respectively. 
The speed of recording in our preparation was limited by the minimum acquisition time of 
the camera (30ms). At this maximum speed, it was possible to continuously record neuronal 
activity for more than one hour without any apparent toxicity and little bleaching (Figure 
1E). Because our staining indicates that every neuron was transgenic and our recording 
technique could image both layers of the animal, we believe to be close to imaging the 
activity of every neuron of Hydra simultaneously. Using these recordings, we classified the 
neurons of Hydra according to their morphologies, activity patterns, or any behavior 
observed.
Functional networks of neurons in Hydra
We define functional networks as groups of neurons that participate in a common function 
such as a particular behavior. Among these functional networks, we observed three of them 
where neurons spanning the entire body of the animal were coactive (Figure 3A, red, green 
and blue dots). Here, we define coactive as firing within the same 100ms frame (Movie S1), 
acknowledging that with a higher temporal resolution we might be able to measure a delay 
between the activation of different neurons. Interestingly, these three networks were non-
overlapping, i.e. any neuron belonging to one network did not belong to any of the other two 
networks. Additionally, we observed small functional networks of neurons located under the 
tentacles-hypostome junction and individual neurons showing slower calcium transients 
Dupre and Yuste
Page 5
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 rather than spikes (Figure 3A, yellow dots). We extracted every spike and slow calcium 
transients of the neurons recorded in a segment of the movie (Figure 3B). Accordingly, we 
reported in that segment a total of 14 activity epochs, 4 of them belonging to the coactive 
circuits.
One of the coactive networks involved neurons which became active during a longitudinal 
contraction burst (CB), which is one of the most commonly described behaviors of Hydra 
[9,31]. Such bursts happened on average once every 4.4 min (±53 sec (SEM), n = 6 
animals). In addition, we found networks of neurons active spontaneously, apparently 
corresponding to the rhythmic potentials (RPs) [9]. Unexpectedly, we found not one but two 
independent networks of cells generating these rhythmic potentials (Figure 3A, green and 
red dots), which we named RP1 and RP2 and which fired on average once every 167 sec 
(± 102 sec (SEM), n = 8 animals) and 143 sec (± 21 sec (SEM), n = 8 animals), respectively.
Interactions between rhythmic potentials and longitudinal contraction bursts have been 
described previously [14]. Since they only assumed the existence of one RP system, we 
explored whether this was true for both RP networks. To examine this, we extracted the 
activation events of the CB, RP1 and RP2 in longer movies (up to one hour) in multiple 
animals and computed their cross-correlation (see Supplemental Experimental Procedures). 
Indeed, RP1 showed short-term interruptions when CB became active (see arrows under 
spike train in Figure 3C), which results in a dip at T=0 in the cross-correlogram between 
RP1 and CB (Figure 3C middle) and a decrease in RP1 frequency when CB frequency 
increases (cf. leftward inclination of the loops in Figure 3C right). This indicates an 
antagonistic interaction between RP1 and CB and was present in 7 animals (Figure 3D 
middle). At the same time, no detectable relationship was found between RP1 and RP2 (left) 
or between RP2 and CB (right).
RP1 and CB networks are ectodermal while RP2 is endodermal
We then examined the anatomical characteristics of the three widespread networks. Since 
neurons of a given network fire within the same frame (up to 30 ms in our fastest recordings) 
we assumed they must be connected into the same circuits either via chemical or electrical 
synapses. Since no neuronal connection has been described in Hydra between the 
endodermal and the ectodermal nerve net [32], we assumed that each of RP1, RP2 and CB 
can only exist in one nerve net (either endodermal or ectodermal). We reasoned that the CB 
system should be in the ectoderm because ectodermal neurons innervate the longitudinal 
(vertical) muscle fibers of the ectodermal skin cells in order to cause body wall longitudinal 
contractions. In addition, previous studies showed that the rhythmic potentials exist in the 
endodermal nerve net [10] and cause longitudinal contractions of the endoderm [12] which 
has been interpreted as producing elongation of the body column of the animal [11], because 
endodermal muscle cells are arranged circularly (horizontally). However, if rhythmic 
potentials were generated by the endodermal nerve net, they would not be able to interact 
with CB neurons (as shown in Figure 3D) which are in the ectoderm. Thus, we hypothesized 
that RP1 is in the ectoderm, which allows it to interact with CB, whereas RP2 should be in 
the endoderm, which prevents it from interacting with CB and RP1.
Dupre and Yuste
Page 6
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To test this hypothesis, we measured the presence of neurons belonging to the three 
networks in regions of our recordings that only contain the ectoderm of the animal, by taking 
advantage of the fact that, in our preparation, the animal is laid flat between 2 coverslips. 
Thus, when imaged from the objective, there is an area at the edge of the animal composed 
of ectoderm only, whereas the rest of the animal is a superimposition of both endoderm and 
ectoderm (dashed lines in Figure 4A). Accordingly, we only found RP1 neurons in areas 
containing ectoderm only (arrows), whereas we found RP1 and RP2 neurons in areas 
containing both endoderm and ectoderm. We concluded that RP1 is in the ectodermal nerve 
net whereas RP2 is in the endodermal nerve net.
We then tested whether neurons of RP1, RP2 and CB had different morphological features 
by comparing their soma size, number of primary neurites, and orientation of primary 
neurites (Figure 4B). We also measured these parameters for the individual neurons that did 
not participate in these three networks (“other” cells). The somata of CB neurons was larger 
when compared to all other categories (10.73 μm ± 0.62 (SEM); P<0.01, unpaired T-Test) 
(Figure 4C). Meanwhile, the number of primary neurites was higher (P<0.01, unpaired T-
Test) in RP2 neurons (3.2 ± 0.1) than in RP1 (2.78 ± 0.1), CB (2.9 ± 0.06) and other neurons 
(0.86 ± 0.2) (Figure 4D). The number of primary neurites of the other neurons was 
significantly smaller than all other networks (P<0.01, unpaired T-Test). Some of these 
neurons possessed one short branch (Figure 4B), a feature that is very characteristic of the 
sensory neurons which have been reconstructed from serial section electron microscopy [3]. 
The orientation of the primary neurites was also measured (Figure 4E), by using the oral-
aboral axis as a reference (top-left panel). No specific orientation was found for any of the 
three major networks.
To further identify the spatial structure of the three networks, we first examined the overall 
distribution of neurons, finding that the overall density of neurons was higher in the 
hypostome (3679 ± 401 neurons/mm2) than in any other part of the animal (P<0.05, Paired 
T-test, n=5) and higher in the peduncle (2668.5 ± 264) than in the body column (1339.7 
± 234) (P<0.05, Paired T-test, n=5; Figure 4F). These measurements match previous studies 
[5,33], where the authors dissociated specific parts of Hydra (hypostome, body column and 
peduncle) and measured the ratio between neurons and skin cells in each part. Other studies 
using staining methods came to similar conclusions [34–37]. Using these measurements, we 
calculated that CB and RP1 neurons involved a large proportion of the neurons in the animal 
(36.8% ± 1.87 and 37.1 ± 1.6), as compared with RP2 (16 ± 2) and single other cells (9.93 
± 1.17) (P<0.05, paired T-Test; Figure 4G). This quantification also supports that RP2 is 
generated by the endodermal nerve net, since previous studies [5] showed a 1/5 ratio (20%) 
between endodermal and ectodermal neurons, which is similar to the ratio we found (22%) 
between the number of neurons participating in RP2, as compared with the sum of neurons 
in the RP1 and CB networks (see Figure S3). Additionally, this quantification supports our 
earlier claim that the other neurons are probably sensory cells, since previous studies [3] also 
reported a very small proportion of sensory cells, as compared with ganglion cells.
Taken together, our data indicate that CB and RP1 networks are composed of two 
independent sets of ectodermal neurons, whereas the RP2 network is endodermal. Cells that 
are not part of these networks are likely to be sensory neurons.
Dupre and Yuste
Page 7
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 RP1 is associated with elongations and RP2 with radial contractions
We then examined whether the activity of these non-overlapping networks correlated with 
any behavior. As stated, CB activity was clearly associated with the longitudinal contraction 
bursts of the animal. Also, as rhythmic potentials were thought to be in the endodermal 
nerve net, their activation should cause contraction of endodermal muscles and elongation of 
the body in response to a photic stimulus. For these reasons, since we found that RP1 is 
ectodermal, we hypothesized that the RP circuit mediating photic response was RP2. To test 
this we measured the activity of the nervous system of Hydra following photic stimulation. 
We induced light response by first dark-habituating animals overnight under dim infra-red 
light (Figure 5A). When we switched to fluorescence imaging, the light emitted by the arc 
lamp caused photic stimulation which resulted in elongation response (Figure 5B, where 
dashed lines mark contour of animal before elongation; Movie S3). To our surprise, while all 
three networks were mostly silent during at least 40 seconds before elongation onset, only 
RP1, and not RP2, became active after elongation onset (Figure 5C). Therefore, we 
concluded that RP1, rather than RP2, is correlated with elongations. This is in fact consistent 
with the fact that neurons of the tentacles are connected to photosensors [30,38] and RP2 is 
not present in the tentacles (Figure 3A). Also, the fact that RP1 neurons cause elongation 
and CB neurons cause longitudinal contraction is consistent with the anti-correlation that we 
observed between them (Figure 3D) and hints at a push-pull mechanism where the 
morphology of the animal results from a combination of the activity of two opposed neural 
ectodermal networks. It is important to note that, as observed previously [6], the RP1 
network is also active independently of the elongation response to light, which suggests that 
it might be correlated with other behaviors.
We then turned our attention to the functional role of RP2. To our surprise, we discovered 
that radial contraction was also linked to a change in the frequency of rhythmic potentials, 
but that this change was specific to RP2. The slow radial contraction behavior was readily 
noticed in our time-lapse movies, if we played them at various speeds to recognize changes 
in animal morphology that happen at slower time scales (Figure 5D–E; see also Movie S4). 
Indeed, the frequency of RP2 decreased significantly after radial contraction (P < 0.012, 
paired T-Test), whereas the activity of the other networks did not change. Additionally, the 
frequency of RP2 was on average 10 times higher than RP1 and CB, which indicates a 
particularly high level of excitation before radial contraction. Therefore, we concluded that 
RP2 participates in radial contraction. This is consistent with the fact that RP2 is located in 
the endoderm (Figure 4A), and that endodermal neurons are connected to sensory cells 
which are exposed to the gastric environment [3]. In this context, RP2 neurons could act as 
an integrator of information about the gastric environment which would put them in a 
position to decide when radial contraction has to occur. If we consider the body column of 
Hydra as a cylinder, the relaxation of the ectodermal longitudinal fibers by RP1 during 
elongation would change its length whereas the activation of the endodermal circular fibers 
by RP2 during radial contraction would change its diameter.
Thus, we concluded that the three networks are involved in three different behaviors 
selectively: the longitudinal contraction bursts are correlated with the activity of CB, the 
elongation response to light with RP1 and the radial contraction with RP2. Thus, rather than 
Dupre and Yuste
Page 8
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 being a single network, the nerve net of Hydra creates different behaviors by using 
anatomically separate networks of neurons.
Subtentacle network is associated with nodding
Besides the three animal-wide networks (CB, RP1 and RP2), where synchronous activation 
of neurons occurred throughout the body of the animal, we also observed local activation of 
neurons in some experiments. In particular, there was one local network that did not belong 
to either RP1, RP2 or CB and that was correlated with nodding behavior, i.e., gentle swaying 
of the hypostome of the animal and its tentacles to one side but without turning the rest of 
the body. This network was located just under the tentacles and we decided to call it the 
subtentacle network (STN). Specifically, the STN was located at the junction between the 
tentacle and the body column (Figure 6A). In the STN, calcium signal could propagate 
downward (Figure 6B) but also upward (Figure 6C). Note that in the example shown in 
Figure 6 neuron 1 is only activated when the signal propagates downward, which indicates 
that the activation of the STN circuit does not always recruit all of its neurons. The 
propagation speed of the calcium signal was 251 μm/sec ±54.6 (SEM, n=5).
The behavioral correlation of the STN with nodding was robust: when activated, the animal 
always nodded (4 out of 4 animals). To quantify this, we measured the angle formed 
between the hypostome and the body column (Figure 6D left) as the fluorescence of the 
STN neurons changes and observed that the hypostome of the animal starts nodding at the 
same time as the neurons get activated (Figure 6D right). We did not notice any difference in 
nodding when the activation was upward or downward.
Neuronal activity can propagate in 2 directions and at 2 different speeds in tentacles
In addition to the STN, we found another example of a local activation of neurons in the 
tentacles, where propagation can be bidirectional and occur at multiple propagation speeds. 
Specifically, in the tentacles of 4 animals we detected calcium signal which propagates 
slowly, enabling us to determine the exact direction of propagation of activity. We observed 
that activity could flow upward or downward (Figure 7A and 7B, first part of the traces) and, 
interestingly, in both cases slow propagation was followed by coactivation of all regions of 
interest (Figures 7A and 7B, second part of the traces). The average speed of the slow 
propagating activity was 63 ± 30 μm/sec (SEM, n=4), whereas during coactivation, the speed 
of signal propagation could not be measured at our resolution of 33Hz (here on a field of 
view of 130×130 μm). This speed was therefore higher than 7 mm/sec, consistent with 
previous electrophysiological measurements that indicated 4.6 cm/sec [9]. However, since 
we cannot measure the speed of this signal propagation, it is possible that these different 
regions of interest are not activated in the same sequence and instead are activated in a 
random fashion. In all 4 observations, the neurons mediating slow propagation and 
coactivation were also part of the CB network, and coactivation corresponded to a 
longitudinal contraction burst.
Dupre and Yuste
Page 9
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Discussion
Hydra as a novel preparation for whole nervous system imaging
As opposed to conventional electrical circuits, the brain is made of neurons that receive and 
send connections to a large number of other neurons in many different regions at the same 
time. This organization appears ideal for the generation of emergent functional properties, 
built with the aggregate spatiotemporal activity of a large number of cells, and these 
emergent functional states, such as attractors, could be used to implement memories and 
many computations [39,40].
To capture these emergent states of function, it seems ideal to be able to measure “every 
spike from every neuron” and build a “Brain Activity Map” [41], as a step towards 
deciphering the role of these emergent states in the function of the nervous system or in the 
generation of behavior or internal brain states. In this regard, whole-brain imaging methods 
have been recently successful in measuring the activity of large numbers of neurons in 
animal models such as the worm [42–45], fruit fly [46,47] and zebrafish [48–53]. Work on 
these species could provide critical insights relevant to understanding the function of the 
nervous system of mammals and humans.
Here we introduce Hydra as an alternative for large-scale measurements of neural activity 
and to capture and investigate the emergent properties of neural systems. The choice of each 
animal model has pluses and minuses. While one cannot apply to Hydra traditional genetic 
tools, through the recent sequencing of its genome [22] and the development of successful 
transgenesis [24] one can have access to many of the modern molecular approaches standard 
in other fields of neuroscience. Also, as a preparation, Hydra offers some significant 
advantages for imaging entire nervous systems. Firstly, it is a cnidarian, and thus represents 
some of the first nervous systems in evolution, which could enable the elucidation of basic 
principles of neural circuits more easily. Secondly, Hydra can reproduce asexually by 
budding, enabling the generation of clonal individuals and the examination of the structural 
and functional generation of a new animal. Thirdly, its nervous system is distributed without 
any ganglia, and the animal is transparent, so every neuron can be imaged in isolation. 
Fourthly, because the body of Hydra is flexible, it is possible to place it between two 
coverslips separated by 100 μm and keep the animal alive for weeks without observing any 
sign of injury. The behaviors we measured in this study, longitudinal contraction bursts, 
elongation response to light and nodding do occur in Hydra’s natural habitat [6,9,13,14]. 
Because the definition of radial contraction is vague, we verified it by ourselves in an 
unrestrained preparation (Movie S5). However, in our restrained preparation these behaviors 
might be expressed in a different way. Typically, nodding and elongation response to light 
will only be possible on the plane that is parallel to the coverslips. Also, longitudinal and 
radial contractions could be somewhat slowed down because of friction of the animal against 
the coverslips, and the deformation of the body of the animal could be altered. To test this, 
we measured the duration of both types of contractions and resulting change in width of the 
animal (Figure S4), and did not detect any significant difference between these behaviors in 
an unrestrained preparation and between two coverslips.
Dupre and Yuste
Page 10
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 When used with low-magnification objectives, such preparation allows having the entire 
network of neurons in focus and alleviates the need for scanning multiple planes in z. 
Therefore, it is possible to observe the activity of the entire nervous system of Hydra with a 
higher temporal resolution while keeping a spatial resolution of single neurons. These 
advantages make it easier to measure single calcium transients in a behaving animal and 
attribute them correctly to the neurons that generated them, getting to the ideal of measuring 
every spike from every neuron [41]. In fact, using immunocytochemistry we estimate that 
we are indeed recording the activity of essentially every neuron in the animal. Moreover, at 
least for many neurons, we are likely also imaging individual calcium transients.
As an animal model for circuit neuroscience, Hydra is amenable for imaging and offers a 
small repertoire of behaviors to study. We presented the activity of the nervous system 
during longitudinal contraction bursts, elongation response to light, radial contraction and 
nodding, but other behaviors exist such as somersaulting and feeding. Both of these 
behaviors add another layer of complexity, because they happen in multiple steps which 
require coordination of activity across the entire animal. For instance, feeding behavior 
engages first a concerted motion of the tentacles, after which the prey is brought to the 
mouth in order to be swallowed and digested through peristaltic motion of the body column. 
Therefore, imaging Hydra during these behaviors would help exploring coordination of 
activity across different parts of its nervous system.
Nonoverlapping coactive networks of neurons in the nerve nets of Hydra
Using calcium imaging, we perform the first functional measurements of neurons in Hydra 
and can associate previously recorded electrical signal such as RPs and CBs to specific 
populations of neurons. Also, a striking feature of the RP1, RP2 and CB networks is the fact 
that their neurons are coactive (they fire simultaneously or at least within 100ms). We are 
still ignorant about the exact connectivity of these neurons, and the joint activity could be 
the result of either gap junctions connecting every neuron, strong chemical synapses that 
have a very low failure rate, or inputs from another circuit that is connected to every neuron 
of this network. Indeed, both chemical synapses and gap junctions have been found in Hydra 
[54,55], but a third circuit mediating coactivation seems less likely since we do not observe 
activity of any other circuit that is simultaneous to RP1, RP2 or CB.
But regardless of the exact mechanisms of coactivation, we have discovered that the nervous 
system of Hydra is divided into networks that are non-overlapping structurally and 
functionally, i.e., where individual neurons participate selectively in specific networks and 
no neuron belongs to more than one network. Moreover, these networks (CB, RP1, RP2 and 
STN) are associated with specific behaviors of the animal (longitudinal contractions, 
elongation, radial contraction, and nodding, respectively). As mentioned above, most 
neurotransmitters can be found in the Hydra genome, so there could be a molecular 
identification to the networks of neurons we identified functionally.
The finding of non-overlapping networks indicates that the nervous system of Hydra, and 
perhaps other cnidarians, is not a single nerve net but is built out of distinct networks which 
activity can be linked to specific behaviors. Thus, evolution has carved out a behavioral 
repertoire by selectively linking subsets of neurons out of a tapestry of apparently similar 
Dupre and Yuste
Page 11
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cells, since each subset of neurons is associated with a specific behavior. This carving could 
occur by selectively connecting neurons into subcircuits, or by modifying synaptic strengths. 
Future work combining connectomics with functional imaging could examine these 
mechanisms of functional specificity.
Two rhythmic potentials networks
The use of whole-brain calcium imaging has also allowed us to identify two networks 
associated with the rhythmic potentials, previously described using extracellular recordings 
[14]. These two networks (RP1 and RP2) are located in the ectoderm and endoderm of the 
animal respectively. A previous study reported that rhythmic potentials are only generated in 
the endoderm [10] by showing their absence in an area where the endoderm had been 
surgically removed. However, in that study the authors reported having recorded in rare 
instances rhythmic potentials in the ectoderm but they attributed this signal to an incomplete 
removal of the endoderm in the recorded region. According to our present results it is likely 
that in most cases the authors recorded the endodermal RP2 signal and in rare instances they 
recorded the ectodermal RP1 signal. Also, our report that contraction of the endoderm 
causes radial contraction is in apparent contradiction with the report that rhythmic potentials 
could cause contraction of the endoderm [12]. Indeed, since a change in the frequency of 
rhythmic potentials was observed during elongation response [6], it was concluded that 
contraction of endodermal cells would cause elongation of the animal. However, based on 
our data, we suggest that the contractions observed by [12] originated in the endodermal 
RP2 system which is correlated with radial contraction, whereas the response to light in [6] 
arose from the ectodermal RP1 which is correlated with elongation.
Interestingly, although RP1 and RP2 are associated with elongation and radial contraction, 
respectively, since changes in their frequency of activation were clearly associated with 
behavior, there was no clear cut temporal correspondence between the activity of RP1 and 
elongation or between the activation or RP2 and radial contraction (Figure 5). Thus, we 
hypothesize that, rather than directly triggering or controlling behavior, these two rhythmic 
potential networks may integrate sensory information which then subsequently triggers the 
behavioral response, through a different cellular element, perhaps even through epithelial 
cells.
Bidirectional propagation in the subtentacle network
Slow potentials that occur simultaneously to asymmetric longitudinal contraction of the 
body column were reported in [6]. However, in their experiments it was not possible to prove 
or exclude the participation of neurons. Here, we describe the activity of a specific network 
of neurons (the STN) that are located under the base of the tentacles and which are activated 
during such behavior.
The sequence of activation of the STN can either initiate in the body column and travel 
towards the tentacles, or initiate in the tentacle-hypostome junction and travel downward. 
This flexibility could have a role, such as fine-tuning the resulting motor output by changing 
which part of the body should bend first. Also, it may have no specific function but arise 
from the fact that the STN can be activated by different neurons. Indeed, it is possible that 
Dupre and Yuste
Page 12
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 activity in the body column and in the hypostome can initiate STN activity. Then, depending 
on which one happens, the STN will start either at the hypostome-tentacle junction or in the 
body column.
Multiple conduction speeds
The existence of multiple conduction speeds within the same network has been described in 
other hydrozoans such as Aequorea [18] (p. 482) and anthozoans such as Calliactis [56]. For 
instance, in the hydrozoan Aequorea, the radial conduction system is slow (0.002–0.02 m/
sec, i.e. 2–20 mm/sec) whereas the swimming beat system is much faster (0.9 m/sec). In our 
experiments, we observed that in the tentacles of Hydra there are calcium transients that 
travel at 63 ± 30 μm/sec (SEM, n=4) and others that might travel at more than 7 mm/sec 
which differs by two orders of magnitude. As mentioned above, the neurons where slow and 
fast propagation was observed are part of CB and it is only during fast propagation that 
longitudinal contraction occurred. Therefore, slow propagation could be the result of a 
different type of activity that is initiated in one neuron and travels to its neighbors. Such 
activity could increase the excitability of ganglion and sensory neurons, but could even 
affect the sensory structures such as nematocytes to which they are connected. In this regard, 
measuring calcium transients in nematocytes would provide valuable information to study 
their interactions with neurons.
Broader relevance to neuroscience
The findings presented here may extend to understand the structure and function of the 
nervous systems of other cnidarians and basal metazoans. The electrical activity and 
behaviors of other polyps and medusae has been studied before [18] and many similarities 
are shared among animals of this phylum. Such similarities include the existence of nerve 
nets, the spontaneous longitudinal contractions and the characteristic sequence in feeding 
behavior. Accordingly, the presence of two networks in the ectodermal nerve net and one 
network in the endodermal nerve net could be a general feature of the polyp form of 
cnidarians. From a different perspective one could take advantage of the subtle differences 
between polyps of different species, which change in size, shape and in the type of prey they 
feed on. In such comparative studies, one could test the role of a specific feature on the 
anatomy, electrical activity and behavior, in an animal where most of the other parameters 
are essentially the same.
In addition to the interest in the neurobiology of basal metazoans, studies on the nervous 
system of Hydra could have relevance to understand neural circuits in bilaterian species. 
Indeed, coordinated spontaneous activity, robustly present in Hydra, is common to all 
nervous systems observed, including visual cortex [57] and human EEGs. Additionally, it 
has been proposed that brain waves have evolved from an early form of spontaneous activity 
such as the one observed in Hydra [58]. Also, our finding that the activity of the endodermal 
nerve net is correlated with the activity of the gastric cavity (radial contraction, Figure 5B) is 
reminiscent of the enteric nervous system controlling the gastro-intestinal tract of higher 
animals. More generally, the study of simpler organisms could enable to discern some basic 
principles such as emergent properties of neural circuits, analyze the anatomical, biophysical 
Dupre and Yuste
Page 13
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and synaptic mechanisms that generate them, and understand how they relate to behavior or 
internal brain states.
Experimental procedures
Hydra maintenance
Hydra were maintained in the dark at 18C and were fed freshly hatched Artemia nauplii 
once a week or more frequently when necessary.
Transgenics
Transgenic lines were created according to Juliano et al, 2014 using a modified version of 
the pHyVec1 plasmid (Addgene cat#34789) [28] where we replaced the GFP sequence with 
a GCaMP6s sequence that was codon-optimized for Hydra (DNA2.0, Menlo Park, CA). By 
embryo microinjection one gets mosaic animals, where ectoderm, endoderm and interstitial 
lineages can become transgenic separately [59]. We selected animals only expressing 
GCaMP6s in the interstitial cell lineage. Also, interstitial cell lineage includes neurons, 
cnidocytes and gland cells. However, it was possible to discriminate them from neurons in 
our movies because of their morphological features (only neurons have neurites).
Imaging
In order to record the activity of the nervous system of Hydra, we developed a new 
preparation for functional imaging. Animals were placed between two coverslips that are 
separated by one 100um spacer to keep them on focus. In this preparation, animals might not 
behave as they would in their natural habitat. However, it makes it convenient to look at the 
activity of the nervous system of Hydra during specific behaviors. Imaging was performed 
using a fluorescence dissecting microscope (Leica M165) equipped with a long-pass GFP 
filter set (Leica filter set ET GFP M205FA/M165FC), a 1.6× Planapo objective and a 
sCMOS camera (Hamamatsu ORCA-Flash 4.0) or an Olympus IX-70 inverted microscope 
equipped with 10× water immersion objective, a U-MIWIB2 GFP filter cube and an EM-
CCD (Hamamatsu EM-CCD C9100-12). In both setups, illumination came from a mercury 
arc lamp and the software micromanager [60] controlled the microscope. Single neurons 
were tracked manually, frame by frame, using the graphic user interface of TrackMate [61] 
and no automated tracking algorithm was ever used (Movie S2). Such single neuron tracking 
was only performed to generate Figure 1D and 3B and show that the three circuits of 
neurons (RP1, RP2 and CB) are mutually exclusive. When a neuron was particularly 
challenging to track (cf blue circle in Figure 1D bottom left), visual landmarks from the 
surrounding tissue were used as guiding points. For the rest of the manuscript, we only 
measured at which frame these (RP1, RP2 and CB) networks of neurons fire, which we call 
“coactivation events” (Figure 1C (right)). This is much more straightforward to measure for 
two reasons. First, whenever any of these circuits is activated, a larger number of neurons 
fire during the same frame which makes it easy to detect. Second, each circuit is easily 
recognizable: activation of CB always results in longitudinal contraction and RP1 but not 
RP2 invades the tentacles. Data coming from these measurements was then plotted as a 
spike train (Figure 1C (right, green bars), Figure 3 and Figure 5), where each spike indicates 
coactivation of all the neurons of that circuit. All the collected data was handled with 
Dupre and Yuste
Page 14
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 MATLAB (The Mathworks, Natick, MA). The main advantage of this preparation is the fact 
that there is no need to scan in the z axis, and therefore the acquisition speed is only limited 
by the camera. The main disadvantage is the fact that by using widefield imaging rather than 
confocal or 2-photon imaging, the spatial resolution is worse (about 1μm for widefield when 
compared to less than 0.4 μm for the others). This can result in cross-contamination between 
regions of interest, and for instance increase in fluorescence of some RP1 neurons during a 
CB event because of light scattering coming from CB neurons lying in close proximity of 
the recorded RP1 neuron (e.g. in Figure 2C). This cross-contamination makes it difficult to 
tell whether a neuron is firing based on fluorescence trace alone. However, it is easy to tell in 
movies when a neuron is firing because its neurites are also lighting up. For this reason, the 
spike times were manually measured in the movies for each neuron.
Pseudocoloring
We used pseudocoloring as a method for identifying neurons that fired during the same 
frame (e.g. in Figure 4A). For a given firing event, using ImageJ [62] we subtracted the 
frame before neurons fired from the frame during which neurons fired. We then added the 
result of this subtraction in a specific color to the frame before neurons fired.
Electrophysiology
Sharp electrodes were pulled from borosillicate glass (Sutter cat# BF150-86-10) with a 
Sutter p97 pipet puller in order to obtain a resistance of 50-100 MΩ. They were then filled 
with 3M KCl and 40μM Alexa488. Animals were impaled under visualization with calcium 
imaging using a similar setup as in the previous experiments, except that the microscope was 
an upright Olympus BX51WI. Electrical signal was acquired with a MultiClamp 700B 
(Axon Instruments) and the software PackIO (packio.org).
Statistical methods
Statistics are indicated as average ± SEM in figures and in the text. Cross-correlation was 
computed between spike trains using the MATLAB function xcorr. To compare the number 
of spikes before vs after radial contraction, we ran a two-tailed paired T-test assuming equal 
variance using Microsoft Excel. To compare morphological parameters, 2-tailed, paired or 
unpaired student T-tests were used as specified in text.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank Sydney Brenner for suggestion to work on Hydra, Charles David, Rob Steele, Celina Juliano, Shuting 
Han and John Szymanski for technical help and comments; Kaniz Fatema, Stephen Leong and Sanjana Salwi for 
help with neuron tracking and Mac Passano and George Mackie for their correspondence. This work was supported 
by NIH Pioneer award DP1EY024503 (RY). This material is based upon work supported by the Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency (DARPA) under contract no. HR0011-17-C-0026 and the US Army Research Laboratory 
and the US Army Research Office (contract W911NF-12-1-0594; MURI).
Dupre and Yuste
Page 15
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 References
1. van Leeuwenhoek A. Green weeds growing in water, and some animalcula found about them. Philos 
Trans R Soc. 1702; art IV:1304–1311.
2. David CN. A quantitative method for maceration of hydra tissue. Wilhelm Roux Arch für 
Entwicklungsmechanik der Org. 1973; 171:259–268.
3. Westfall JA, Wilson JD, Rogers RA, Kinnamon JC. Multifunctional features of a gastrodermal 
sensory cell in Hydra: three-dimensional study. J Neurocytol. 1991; 20:251–261. [PubMed: 
2051175] 
4. Parker, GH. The Elementary Nervous system. Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott Co.; 1919. 
5. Epp L, Tardent P. The Distribution of Nerve Cells in Hydra attenuata Pall. 1978; 193:185–193.
6. Passano LM, McCullough CB. the Light Response and the Rhythmic Potentials of Hydra. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A. 1962; 48:1376–82. [PubMed: 16590985] 
7. Rushforth NB, Burke DS. Behavioral and electrophysiological studies of Hydra. II. Pacemaker 
activity of isolated tentacles. 1971; 140:502–519.
8. Kass-Simon G. Longitudinal Conduction of Contraction Burst Pulses from Hypostomal Excitation 
Loci in Hydra attenuata. J Comp Physiol. 1972; 49:29–49.
9. Passano LM, McCullough CB. Co-ordinating systems and behaviour in Hydra. II. The rhythmic 
potential system. 1965
10. Kass-Simon G, Passano LM. A Neuropharmacological Analysis of the Pacemakers and 
Conducting Tissues of Hydra attenuata. 1978; 79:71–79.
11. Kay JC, Kass-Simon G. Glutamatergic transmission in hydra: NMDA/D-serine affects the 
electrical activity of the body and tentacles of Hydra vulgaris (Cnidaria, Hydrozoa). Biol Bull. 
2009; 216:113–25. [PubMed: 19366922] 
12. Shibley G. Gastrodermal contractions correlated with rhythmic potentials and prelocomotor bursts 
in Hydra. Am Zool. 1969; 9:586.
13. Haug G. Die Lichtreaktionen der Hydren (Chlorohydra viridissima und Pelmatohydra oligactis). Z 
vergleich Physiol. 1933; 19:246–303.
14. Passano LM, McCullough CB. Pacemaker Hierarchies controlling the behaviour of hydras. Nature. 
1963; 199:1174–1175. [PubMed: 14072038] 
15. Trembley, A. Mémoires pour servir à l’histoire d’un genre de polypes d’eau douce, à bras en forme 
de cornes. Leiden, Netherlands: Jean and Herman Verbeek; 1744. 
16. Ewer RF. On the functions and mode of action of the nematocysts of hydra. Proc zool Sot Lond. 
1947; 117:365–376.
17. Lasker HR, Syron JA, Clayton WS. The feeding response of Hydra viridis: effects of prey-density 
on capture rates. Biol Bull. 1982; 162:290–298.
18. Bullock, TH., Horridge, GA. Structure and Function in the Nervous System of Invertebrates. San 
Francisco and London: W.H. Freeman a. Comp. Ltd; 1965. 
19. Kass-Simon G, Diesl VK. Spontaneous and evoked potentials from dissociated epithelial cells of 
Hydra. Nature. 1977; 265:75–77. [PubMed: 834245] 
20. Campbell RD, Josephson RK, Schwab WE, Rushforth NB. Excitability of nerve-free hydra. 
Nature. 1976; 262:388–390. [PubMed: 958390] 
21. Ruggieri RD, Pierobon P, Kass-Simon G. Pacemaker activity in hydra is modulated by glycine 
receptor ligands. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol. 2004; 138:193–202. [PubMed: 
15275654] 
22. Chapman JA, Kirkness EF, Simakov O, Hampson SE, Mitros T, Weinmaier T, Rattei T, 
Balasubramanian PG, Borman J, Busam D, et al. The dynamic genome of Hydra. Nature. 2010; 
464:592–6. [PubMed: 20228792] 
23. Sakarya O, Armstrong KA, Adamska M, Adamski M, Wang IF, Tidor B, Degnan BM, Oakley TH, 
Kosik KS. A Post-Synaptic Scaffold at the Origin of the Animal Kingdom. PLoS One. 2007; 
2:e506. [PubMed: 17551586] 
Dupre and Yuste
Page 16
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 24. Wittlieb J, Khalturin K, Lohmann JU, Anton-Erxleben F, Bosch TCG. Transgenic Hydra allow in 
vivo tracking of individual stem cells during morphogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006; 
103:6208–11. [PubMed: 16556723] 
25. Yuste R, Katz LC. Control of postsynaptic Ca2+ influx in developing neocortex by excitatory and 
inhibitory neurotransmitters. Neuron. 1991; 6:333–344. [PubMed: 1672071] 
26. Martínez DE. Mortality patterns suggest lack of senescence in hydra. Exp Gerontol. 1998; 33:217–
225. [PubMed: 9615920] 
27. Layden MJ, Rentzsch F, Röttinger E. The rise of the starlet sea anemone Nematostella vectensis as 
a model system to investigate development and regeneration. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol. 
2016; 5:408–428. [PubMed: 26894563] 
28. Dana CE, Glauber KM, Chan TA, Bridge DM, Steele RE. Incorporation of a horizontally 
transferred gene into an operon during cnidarian evolution. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e31643. [PubMed: 
22328943] 
29. Juliano CE. Generation of Transgenic Hydra by Embryo Microinjection. J Vis Exp. 2014; 
91:e51888.
30. Plachetzki DC, Fong CR, Oakley TH. Cnidocyte discharge is regulated by light and opsin-
mediated phototransduction. BMC Biol. 2012; 10:17. [PubMed: 22390726] 
31. Passano LM, McCullough CB. Co-ordinating systems and behaviour in Hydra. I Pacemaker system 
of the periodic contractions. J Exp Biol. 1964; 41:643–664.
32. Hufnagel, L., Kass-Simon, G. The Ultrastructural Basis for the Electrical Coordination Between 
Epithelia of Hydra. In: Mackie, GO., editor. Coelenterate Ecology and Behavior. New York: 
Springer US; 1976. p. 695-704.
33. Tardent, P., Weber, C. A qualitative and quantitative inventory of nervous cells in Hydra attenuata 
Pall. In: Mackie, GO., editor. Coelenterate Ecology and Behavior. New York: Springer US; 1976. 
p. 501-502.
34. Hansen GN, Williamson M, Grimmelikhuijzen CJP. A new case of neuropeptide coexpression 
(RGamide and LWamides) in Hydra, found by whole-mount, two-color double-labeling in situ 
hybridization. Cell Tissue Res. 2002; 308:157–65. [PubMed: 12012215] 
35. Norgaard Hansen G, Williamson M, Grimmelikhuijzen CJP. Two-color double-labeling in situ 
hybridization of whole-mount Hydra using RNA probes for five different Hydra neuropeptide 
preprohormones: evidence for colocalization. Cell Tissue Res. 2000; 301:245–253. [PubMed: 
10955720] 
36. Koizumi O, Itazawa M, Mizumoto H, Minobe S, Javois LC, Grimmelikhuijzen CJ, Bode HR. 
Nerve ring of the hypostome in hydra. I Its structure, development, and maintenance. J Comp 
Neurol. 1992; 326:7–21. [PubMed: 1479070] 
37. Yum S, Takahashi T, Koizumi O, Ariura Y, Kobayakawa Y, Mohri S, Fujisawa T. A novel 
neuropeptide, Hym-176, induces contraction of the ectodermal muscle in Hydra. Biochem Biophys 
Res Commun. 1998; 248:584–590. [PubMed: 9703970] 
38. Guertin S, Kass-Simon G. Extraocular spectral photosensitivity in the tentacles of Hydra vulgaris. 
Comp Biochem Physiol Part A Mol Integr Physiol. 2015; 184:163–170.
39. Hopfield JJ. Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collective computational 
abilities. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1982; 79:2554–2558. [PubMed: 6953413] 
40. Hopfield JJ, Tank DW. “Neural” computation of decisions in optimization problems. Biol Cybern. 
1985; 52:141–152. [PubMed: 4027280] 
41. Alivisatos AP, Chun M, Church GM, Greenspan RJ, Roukes ML, Yuste R. The brain activity map 
project and the challenge of functional connectomics. Neuron. 2012; 74:970–4. [PubMed: 
22726828] 
42. Venkatachalam V, Ji N, Wang X, Clark C, Mitchell JK, Klein M, Tabone CJ, Florman J, Ji H, 
Greenwood J, et al. Pan-neuronal imaging in roaming Caenorhabditis elegans. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
U S A. 2016; 113:E1082–8. [PubMed: 26711989] 
43. Nguyen JP, Shipley FB, Linder AN, Plummer GS, Liu M, Setru SU, Shaevitz JW, Leifer AM. 
Whole-brain calcium imaging with cellular resolution in freely behaving Caenorhabditis elegans. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015:33.
Dupre and Yuste
Page 17
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 44. Prevedel R, Yoon YG, Hoffmann M, Pak N, Wetzstein G, Kato S, Schrödel T, Raskar R, Zimmer 
M, Boyden ES, et al. Simultaneous whole-animal 3D imaging of neuronal activity using light-field 
microscopy. Nat Methods. 2014; 11:727–30. [PubMed: 24836920] 
45. Schrödel T, Prevedel R, Aumayr K, Zimmer M, Vaziri A. Brain-wide 3D imaging of neuronal 
activity in Caenorhabditis elegans with sculpted light. Nat Methods. 2013; 10:1013–20. [PubMed: 
24013820] 
46. Chhetri RK, Amat F, Wan Y, Höckendorf B, Lemon WC, Keller PJ. Whole-animal functional and 
developmental imaging with isotropic spatial resolution. Nat Methods. 2015; 12:1171–1178. 
[PubMed: 26501515] 
47. Grover D, Katsuki T, Greenspan RJ. Flyception: imaging brain activity in freely walking fruit flies. 
Nat Methods. 2016; 13:569–572. [PubMed: 27183441] 
48. Ahrens MB, Li JM, Orger MB, Robson DN, Schier AF, Engert F, Portugues R. Brain-wide 
neuronal dynamics during motor adaptation in zebrafish. Nature. 2012; 485:471–7. [PubMed: 
22622571] 
49. Dunn TW, Mu Y, Narayan S, Randlett O, Naumann EA, Yang CT, Schier AF, Freeman J, Engert F, 
Ahrens MB. Brain-wide mapping of neural activity controlling zebrafish exploratory locomotion. 
Elife. 2016; 5:1–29.
50. Wolf S, Supatto W, Debrégeas G, Mahou P, Kruglik SG, Sintes JM, Beaurepaire E, Candelier R. 
Whole-brain functional imaging with two-photon light-sheet microscopy. Nat Methods. 2015; 
12:379–380. [PubMed: 25924070] 
51. Panier T, Romano SA, Olive R, Pietri T, Sumbre G, Candelier R, Debrégeas G. Fast functional 
imaging of multiple brain regions in intact zebrafish larvae using selective plane illumination 
microscopy. Front Neural Circuits. 2013; 7:65. [PubMed: 23576959] 
52. Portugues R, Feierstein CE, Engert F, Orger MB. Whole-brain activity maps reveal stereotyped, 
distributed networks for visuomotor behavior. Neuron. 2014; 81:1328–1343. [PubMed: 24656252] 
53. Tomer R, Lovett-Barron M, Kauvar I, Andalman A, Burns VM, Sankaran S, Grosenick L, Broxton 
M, Yang S, Deisseroth K. SPED Light Sheet Microscopy: Fast Mapping of Biological System 
Structure and Function. Cell. 2015; 163:1796–1806. [PubMed: 26687363] 
54. Westfall, Ja, Yamataka, S., Enos, PD. Ultrastructural evidence of polarized synapses in the nerve 
net of Hydra. J Cell Biol. 1971; 51:318–23. [PubMed: 5111879] 
55. Westfall, Ja, Kinnamon, Sims. Neuro-neuronal gap junctions in Hydra. J Neurocytol. 1980; 9:725–
732. [PubMed: 7205334] 
56. Mcfarlane ID. Two Slow Conduction Systems in the Sea Anemone Calliactis Parasitica. J Exp 
Biol. 1969; 51:377–385. [PubMed: 4390826] 
57. Miller JEK, Ayzenshtat I, Carrillo-Reid L, Yuste R. Visual stimuli recruit intrinsically generated 
cortical ensembles. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2014; 111:E4053–61. [PubMed: 25201983] 
58. Passano LM. Primitive Nervous Systems. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1963:306–313. [PubMed: 
14060649] 
59. Khalturin K, Anton-Erxleben F, Milde S, Plötz C, Wittlieb J, Hemmrich G, Bosch TCG. 
Transgenic stem cells in Hydra reveal an early evolutionary origin for key elements controlling 
self-renewal and differentiation. Dev Biol. 2007; 309:32–44. [PubMed: 17659272] 
60. Edelstein A, Amodaj N, Hoover K, Vale R, Stuurman N. Computer control of microscopes using 
μManager. Curr Protoc Mol Biol. 2010; 92:14.20.1–14.20.17.
61. Schindelin J, Arganda-carreras I, Frise E, Kaynig V, Longair M, Pietzsch T, Preibisch S, Rueden C, 
Saalfeld S, Schmid B, et al. Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-image analysis. Nat 
Methods. 2012; 9:676–682. [PubMed: 22743772] 
62. Schneider CA, Rasband WS, Eliceiri KW. NIH Image to ImageJ: 25 years of image analysis. Nat 
Methods. 2012; 9:671–675. [PubMed: 22930834] 
Dupre and Yuste
Page 18
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Highlights
•
Introduce Hydra as new model system for neural circuits
•
Functional anatomy of four behavioral responses
•
First complete Brain Activity Map achieved
Dupre and Yuste
Page 19
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Imaging the entire nervous system activity of Hydra
A. To create the transgenic line, we injected into fertilized Hydra eggs (left) a plasmid that 
causes expression of GCaMP6s (right). B. Imaging preparation (left) and sample cross-
section (right). C. Left: trajectory of 5 representative neurons. Middle: close-up on the 
trajectory of the 8 tracked neurons, showing a difference in direction of the neurons of the 
top layer (blue) versus the neurons of the bottom layer (red). Right: Single calcium spikes in 
neurons from both layers (top; see also Figure S2), with manual detection of coactivation 
events (bottom). D. First frame (top left), trajectory of all neurons (top right), close-up on 
the position of 2 representative neurons (bottom left) and fluorescence (bottom right) of all 
the detected neurons during a typical recording. Measurements were made on the first 20 
seconds (real time, i.e. 1.6 seconds of movie time) of Movie S1. E. Entire animal (left) 
imaged for more than one hour at 30 frames per second, with fluorescence signal (right) 
coming from the cell circled in yellow. See also Figures S1, S2 and S4 and Movies S1 and 
S2.
Dupre and Yuste
Page 20
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Simultaneous recording of electrical activity and calcium imaging
A. Preparation (scale bar = 20 μm). Electrode comes from the top and is slightly out of focus 
B. Extracellular electrode placed near a contraction burst neuron, with fluorescence signal 
recorded from that contraction neuron. Contractions produce overwhelming electrical signal. 
C. Extracellular electrode was placed close to a neuron from one RP network (RPa, which 
could be either RP1 or RP2) and far from a neuron from the other RP network (RPb). 
Accordingly, the spikes recorded in electrical activity match calcium spikes of neuron A 
(blue trace) but not neuron B (red trace). Note that there is cross-contamination between the 
fluorescence signals from neuron A and B, but one can distinguish them because of their 
amplitude difference (large spikes in neuron A result in small spikes in neuron B and vice-
versa). D. Superimposition of nine spikes from extracellular recording and their 
corresponding calcium traces for neuron A. The color of each electrical trace matches the 
color of the corresponding fluorescence trace. In B–D, the fluorescence traces are in 
arbitrary units.
Dupre and Yuste
Page 21
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. The nervous system of Hydra includes three major networks
A. Topographical distribution of neurons in Hydra (same dataset as Figure 1D), grouped in 5 
categories: rhythmic potentials #1 (RP1, green), rhythmic potentials #2 (RP2, red), 
longitudinal contraction bursts (CB, blue) and other neurons (others, yellow). CB’ indicates 
neurons of the tentacles which did not fire during the two CB events of this time window, 
but fired during another CB event. B. Spikes (black) and slow calcium transients (grey) of 
the 559 cells shown in A. Neurons are grouped by identity (colored dots on the right), and 
activity events are marked with an arrow (top). Note the difference in scale between the y 
axis of the top and bottom plots, due to the large number of neurons belonging to RP1, RP2 
and CB. Also, note that the 2 activity epochs labeled as CB are the last 2 spikes of a 
longitudinal contraction burst. C. Left: Spiking activity of the three networks in one 
representative animal. Each spike represents the coactivation of the neurons of one network 
(RP1, RP2 or CB). Arrows indicate decrease in RP1 frequency during a longitudinal 
Dupre and Yuste
Page 22
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 contraction burst. Middle: Cross-correlation between RP1 and CB. Right: plot of the firing 
frequency over time of the three networks. Numbers indicate longitudinal contraction bursts. 
D. Cumulated (over 7 animals) cross-correlation between RP1–RP2 (left), RP1-CB (middle) 
and RP2-CB (right).
Dupre and Yuste
Page 23
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Anatomical differences between the three major networks
A. Pseudocolored (cf methods) RP1 and RP2 networks in an animal’s body column. Top: 
RP1 only, middle: RP2 only, bottom: RP1 + RP2. Areas containing the ectoderm only and 
the endoderm + ectoderm are delineated with white dashed lines and six example neurons 
present in the “ectoderm only” area are marked with an arrow. B. Pseudocolored neurons 
representative of each of the 4 main categories. C. Soma size. D. Number of primary 
neurites. Note that jitter was added to the data points so that they do not overlap exactly on 
the plot. E. Orientation of primary neurites in neurons of the three main networks. The 
method to measure the angle at each neurite is described in the top-left panel. F. Neuron 
density in various body areas. G. Percentage of neurons belonging to each network. Data are 
represented as mean ± SEM. * indicates P<0.05 (unpaired T-Test). See also Figure S3.
Dupre and Yuste
Page 24
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Behavioral association of two rhythmic potentials networks
A. Dark-habituated animal at rest. B: elongation response during exposure to blue light (see 
Movie S3). Dashed line marks body contour of animal at rest. C: spike trains of RP1, RP2 
and CB neurons in 4 animals, where t=0 indicates onset of elongation. Histograms compare 
firing frequency before vs during elongation response. D: Animal before radial contraction, 
a behavior that also occurs in unrestrained preparations (Movie S5). E: animal after radial 
contraction (see Movie S4). Dashed line marks body contour of animal before radial 
contraction. F: Spike trains of RP1, RP2 and CB neurons in 8 animals, where t=0 indicates 
radial contraction. Histograms compare firing frequency before vs after radial contraction. 
Data are represented as mean ± SEM. * indicates (P < 0.05, paired T-Test). See also Movies 
S3–S5.
Dupre and Yuste
Page 25
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Subtentacle network (STN) causes nodding behavior and can conduct signal in both 
directions
A. Representative Hydra. White square marks area containing a STN. Arrows mark the two 
directions of propagation: upward and downward. B. Left: Region boxed in A during 
downward propagation, with 4 neurons marked with a white square. Right: Calcium trace of 
the 4 neurons during downward propagation. C. Same as B but for upward propagation. D. 
Left: representative Hydra at the end of nodding. θ marks angle, arrow marks one STN 
neuron. Right: evolution of angle and STN neuron activity over time.
Dupre and Yuste
Page 26
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. Signal propagates in both directions and at two different speeds in tentacles
A. Left: Representative tentacle during upward propagation, with 6 example neurons boxed 
and numbered in white. Right: Calcium signal of the 6 neurons during slow propagation and 
coactivation. B. Same as A but for downward propagation.
Dupre and Yuste
Page 27
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
