 Cortically coordinated NREM thalamocortical
oscillations play an essential, instructive
role in visual system plasticity
Jaclyn Durkina,1, Aneesha K. Sureshb,1, Julie Colbathc, Christopher Broussardd, Jiaxing Wue, Michal Zochowskif,g,
and Sara J. Atonc,2
aNeuroscience Graduate Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; bCommittee on Computational Neuroscience, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637; cDepartment of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; dInformation Technology
Advocacy and Research Support, College of Literature, Science, and the Arts, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; eProgram in Applied Physics,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; fProgram in Biophysics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; and gDepartment of Physics, University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109
Edited by Gina G. Turrigiano, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA, and approved August 22, 2017 (received for review June 12, 2017)
Two long-standing questions in neuroscience are how sleep
promotes brain plasticity and why some forms of plasticity occur
preferentially during sleep vs. wake. Establishing causal relation-
ships between specific features of sleep (e.g., network oscillations)
and sleep-dependent plasticity has been difficult. Here we demon-
strate that presentation of a novel visual stimulus (a single oriented
grating) causes immediate, instructive changes in the firing of
mouse lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) neurons, leading to in-
creased firing-rate responses to the presented stimulus orientation
(relative to other orientations). However, stimulus presentation
alone does not affect primary visual cortex (V1) neurons, which
show response changes only after a period of subsequent sleep.
During poststimulus nonrapid eye movement (NREM) sleep, LGN
neuron overall spike-field coherence (SFC) with V1 delta (0.5–4 Hz)
and spindle (7–15 Hz) oscillations increased, with neurons most re-
sponsive to the presented stimulus showing greater SFC. To test
whether coherent communication between LGN and V1 was essen-
tial for cortical plasticity, we first tested the role of layer 6 cortico-
thalamic (CT) V1 neurons in coherent firing within the LGN-V1
network. We found that rhythmic optogenetic activation of CT V1
neurons dramatically induced coherent firing in LGN neurons and, to
a lesser extent, in V1 neurons in the other cortical layers. Optoge-
netic interference with CT feedback to LGN during poststimulus
NREM sleep (but not REM or wake) disrupts coherence between
LGN and V1 and also blocks sleep-dependent response changes in
V1. We conclude that NREM oscillations relay information regarding
prior sensory experience between the thalamus and cortex to pro-
mote cortical plasticity.
sleep | vision | thalamocortical | plasticity | coherence
C
onverging behavioral (1), biochemical (2–4), neuroanatomi-
cal (5), and electrophysiological (2, 6–8) evidence supports
the idea that following novel sensory experiences, sleep can
promote cortical plasticity. The sleep-dependent mechanisms
driving these changes have remained elusive. Sleep-associated
changes in network activity (1, 6, 7, 9, 10), neuromodulator tone
(11), transcription (4), translation (4), and protein phosphory-
lation (2, 3) have all been correlated with cortical plasticity
following novel experiences (12). In recent years, neuroscientists
have speculated that the high-amplitude, low-frequency thala-
mocortical oscillations that characterize nonrapid eye move-
ment (NREM) sleep play a critical role in promoting sensory
cortical plasticity and learning (12). While it has been hypoth-
esized that such NREM oscillations promote general synaptic
“downscaling” (13), converging data suggest that they could
instead promote synaptic strengthening (5–7, 9). While rhythmic
stimulation of the cortex at frequencies meant to mimic NREM
oscillations (1–2 Hz) is sufficient to promote cortical plasticity
and learning (9, 10), it is unclear whether naturally occurring
oscillations are necessary for sleep-dependent processes. An-
other critical question is whether NREM oscillations play an
instructive role in experience-initiated plasticity—i.e., whether
these oscillations relay information about prior experience
through thalamocortical circuitry.
Orientation-specific response potentiation (OSRP) in mouse
primary visual cortex (V1) (14) is initiated by a novel visual
stimulus (a flickering grating of a single orientation) presented
over a period of several minutes (7). OSRP is expressed in
V1 several hours later, as enhanced neuronal responses to stimuli
of the same orientation; critically, sleep deprivation following visual
experience prevents OSRP consolidation (7, 8). Recent data sug-
gest that OSRP is mediated by potentiation of lateral geniculate
nucleus (LGN) synapses in V1 (15). To clarify the role of thala-
mocortical and corticothalamic (CT) communication in OSRP
consolidation, we first tested how visual experience alone affected
neuronal firing and OSRP in both LGN and V1 neurons and then
determined how coherent firing between the two areas was af-
fected during subsequent sleep. We also tested the effects of
optogenetic manipulations of layer 6 corticothalamic (CT) neu-
rons, aimed at either mimicking or disrupting NREM sleep oscil-
lations, on both neuronal firing patterns and OSRP following
visual experience.
Significance
Previous studies have demonstrated a role of state-specific
neural activity in plasticity; however, a mechanism for these
changes has yet to be elucidated. Here, we demonstrate that
sensory response changes occur in thalamic neurons immedi-
ately following novel visual experience, but that subsequent
nonrapid eye movement (NREM) oscillations are required for
subsequent response changes in the primary visual cortex (V1).
Consequently, we show that disruption of NREM oscillations
specifically blocks sleep-dependent plasticity in V1. We con-
clude that following a novel sensory experience, neural activity
patterns unique to NREM facilitate transfer of information
from the visual thalamus to the V1, leading to adaptive re-
sponse changes in V1 neurons.
Author contributions: J.D. and S.J.A. designed research; J.D., A.K.S., J.C., and S.J.A. per-
formed research; C.B., J.W., and M.Z. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; J.D., A.K.S.,
J.C., and S.J.A. analyzed data; and J.D. and S.J.A. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
1J.D. and A.K.S. contributed equally to this work.
2To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: saton@umich.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1710613114/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1710613114
PNAS
|
September 26, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 39
|
10485–10490
NEUROSCIENCE
 Results
LGN, but Not V1, Neurons Show Immediate Orientation-Specific
Response Changes Following Visual Stimulation. Previous studies
[by our laboratory (7, 8) and others (14)] have demonstrated that
orientation preference in V1 neurons is unchanged immediately
after presentation of a single oriented grating stimulus, even for
stimulus durations of up to an hour. To test whether LGN
neurons are similarly unaffected across stimulus presentation, we
generated orientation tuning curves for individual V1 and LGN
neurons in anesthetized mice before and after a 30-min grating
presentation. Surprisingly, many LGN neurons showed dramatic
orientation-specific response changes during this treatment (e.g.,
the ratio of neuronal firing rate for X° over the neuronal firing
rate for the orthogonal, X + 90°). These increases in X°/X + 90°
were present across a number of recordings for different pre-
sented stimulus orientations (Fig. 1 and SI Appendix, Figs. S1 and
S2; n = 147 neurons from seven experiments), but, consistent
with our previous findings (7), were not seen in V1 neurons
recorded from the same mice (n = 32 neurons). Among many of
the recorded LGN neurons, visually evoked firing-rate responses
increased significantly across the 30-min grating presentation, a
phenomenon that we had not previously seen in V1 (8) (Fig. 2A).
The amount that individual neuron firing rates changed across
stimulus presentation, while heterogeneous, predicted the amount
of change in X°/X + 90° after stimulus presentation (Fig. 2B and
SI Appendix, Fig. S6A). This rapid response change did not result
in an increase in the proportion of LGN neurons selective for the
presented stimulus orientation (SI Appendix, Figs. S1 and S2);
rather, neuronal firing-rate responses to X° selectively increased
(e.g., relative to X + 90° and X ± 45°).
To better understand the relationship of these firing-rate
changes to OSRP seen in V1 across a period of poststimulus
sleep, we simultaneously recorded both LGN and V1 neurons in
nonanesthetized animals during and after presentation of a grat-
ing at the beginning of the rest phase (CT0). Here again, we found
that firing-rate responses increased significantly across stimulus
presentation in LGN, but not in V1 (Fig. 2C). Firing increases
were not seen in LGN neurons recorded from mice presented
with a blank screen [not significant (N.S.); Fig. 2C]. Firing-rate
increases among LGN neurons during stimulus presentation
predicted increases in X°/X + 90° measured across the rest period
(Fig. 2D and SI Appendix, Fig. S6B). Critically, as we had pre-
viously shown for V1 neurons following OSRP induction (8), fir-
ing rates in LGN neurons remained elevated during poststimulus
NREM sleep (Fig. 2E). Taken together, these data suggest that
oriented grating presentation leads to (i) rapid changes in X°/X +
90° in LGN neurons and (ii) long-lasting changes in firing of LGN
neurons during subsequent NREM sleep.
LGN Neurons Show Increased Spike-Field Coherence with NREM
Thalamocortical Oscillations During OSRP Consolidation. OSRP is
expressed in V1 only after several hours of poststimulus sleep;
critically, sleep deprivation following visual experience prevents
OSRP consolidation (7, 8) (SI Appendix, Fig. S3). To assess
whether communication between LGN and V1 changes during
poststimulus sleep, we continuously recorded LGN and V1
neuronal firing and corresponding local field potential (LFP)
activity (SI Appendix, Figs. S4 and S5). Recordings spanned a
24-h period of baseline sleep and wake, a 30-min stimulus pre-
sentation, and a subsequent 12-h OSRP consolidation window.
We then characterized the temporal relationships [in the form of
spike-field coherence (SFC)] between LGN neuronal firing and
V1 LFP oscillations during OSRP consolidation (Fig. 3). LGN
neuron SFC with V1 delta and spindle oscillations increased
during NREM in the hours following oriented grating pre-
sentation (Fig. 3B and SI Appendix, Fig. S6C).
We also tested whether LGN neurons underwent an increase in
coherent firing during NREM per se by assessing the periodicity
of firing before and after oriented grating exposure. We found
that following stimulus presentation, coherent LGN neuronal
firing in the delta frequency band predicted the extent of their
OSRP across the poststimulus period (Fig. 3C and SI Appendix,
Fig. S6D). These data suggest that, as is true for V1 neurons (7),
waking visual experience leads to changes in LGN neuron co-
herent firing during subsequent NREM sleep. Because OSRP is
present only in the LGN immediately following experience, we
hypothesized that LGN-V1 coherence during NREM oscillations
could promote sleep-dependent OSRP consolidation in V1.
Layer 6 CT Input Is Sufficient to Drive Coherent Firing in the LGN-V1
Network. CT input is necessary for coordinating NREM delta and
spindle oscillations within thalamic circuits (16, 17). Thus, CT-
mediated coordination might be critical for promoting the ob-
served changes in LGN-V1 coherence during poststimulus NREM
sleep. To test the sufficiency of V1 layer 6 (L6) CT input to drive
coherent firing in LGN and V1, we recorded LGN and V1 firing
patterns in transgenic mice expressing channelrhodopsin 2 (ChR2)
in L6 CT neurons (Ntsr1:ChR2) (Fig. 4 A, B, G, and H and SI
Appendix, Fig. S7). After recording baseline activity in both areas,
we measured changes in firing rhythmicity in response to rhythmic
optogenetic activation of V1 L6 CT neurons across a range
Fig. 1.
Visual experience immediately alters response properties in LGN, but not in V1, neurons. (A) Visual responses of LGN and V1 neurons were recorded
from mice under isoflurane anesthesia. At time point A, mice were presented randomly with a series of oriented full-field grating stimuli (0, 22.5, 45, 67.5, 90,
112.5, 135, and 157.5 degrees) and a blank screen (bl) to assess baseline orientation tuning and visual responsiveness. One stimulus was chosen at random and
presented for a 30-min period. At time point B, visual response properties were reassessed. (B) Tuning curves for representative LGN neurons (Top) show
increased relative responses to the presented orientation (vs. other orientations; presented stimulus indicated with arrowhead) from time point A (solid line)
to time point B (dotted line). Consistent with our prior findings (7), V1 neurons (Bottom) do not show an enhanced response to the presented orientation
immediately following stimulus presentation. Values indicate mean firing-rate response (±SEM) to each stimulus. (C) Immediately following visual stimulus
presentation, LGN neurons (but not V1 neurons) showed a significant increase in relative responsiveness to the presented stimulus orientation [relative to the
orthogonal orientation (X°/X + 90°); arrow indicates P < 0.05, repeated measures (RM) ANOVA on ranks; *P < 0.05 for LGN vs. V1 neurons].
10486
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1710613114
Durkin et al.
 of frequencies: 0.5, 1, 2, 3, and 4 Hz. In both V1 and LGN re-
cordings, we observed phase-locking of both neurons’ firing and LFP
activity to optogenetically induced rhythms of CT activity (Fig. 4 B
and H). Only a subset of stimulation frequencies (1, 2, and 3 Hz)
increased V1 neuron firing coherence significantly from baseline
(Fig. 4C). In contrast, stimulation at all frequencies increased LGN
neuron firing coherence and led to more pronounced (i.e., higher
amplitude) firing rhythms compared with those induced in V1 (Fig.
4I). The proportion of LGN neurons significantly affected by opto-
genetic stimulation of V1 CT neurons (Fig. 4L) was also much
greater than the proportion of neurons affected in V1 (Fig. 4F).
Optogenetic stimulation of L6 CT neurons similarly affected the
rhythmicity of LFP activity in both V1 (Fig. 4 D and E) and LGN
(Fig. 4 J and K). Optogenetic activation of V1 CT neurons also
induced higher-frequency (11–15 Hz) spindle-like LFP events in V1
(SI Appendix, Fig. S8A). These events were time-locked to rhythmic
optogenetic stimulation and varied in density and duration based on
stimulation frequency (SI Appendix, Fig. S8 B and C).
Optogenetic Inhibition of L6 CT Neurons Disrupts V1-LGN Coherence
During NREM Sleep. We next tested whether optogenetic inhibition
of L6 CT neurons could disrupt coherent NREM oscillations fol-
lowing induction of OSRP. To do this, we virally transduced L6 CT
neurons in V1 with archaerhodopsin3 (Arch) (18) in L6 CT neurons
in V1 (SI Appendix, Fig. S9). Light delivery to V1 of transduced mice
reliably and reversibly suppressed firing in the majority of V1
L6 neurons (and target neurons in the LGN) over a timescale of
seconds to minutes (Fig. 5A and SI Appendix, Fig. S10). NREM-
targeted light delivery in the hours following visual stimulus pre-
sentation significantly reduced delta and spindle-frequency LFP
power in V1, relative to baseline NREM sleep (Fig. 5B and SI
Appendix, Fig. S11). Spindle-frequency coherence between LGN
LFPs and V1 LFPs was significantly reduced during NREM-targeted
inhibition of V1 CT neurons (Fig. 5C). This was associated with a
disruption in the temporal relationship between V1 and LGN fields,
leading to longer delays (relative to lag times seen at baseline) be-
tween V1 and LGN spindle-frequency activity (an effect not seen in
Fig. 3.
LGN neurons show increased SFC with V1 NREM oscillations fol-
lowing stimulus presentation. (A) Mice implanted with electrodes targeted
to LGN and V1 were recorded as described in Fig. 2C. LGN SFC with
V1 oscillations was calculated during NREM at baseline and after stimulus
presentation. (B) Following stimulus presentation, LGN neurons showed
significantly increased SFC with V1 LFPs filtered at spindle frequency (*P =
0.01, Wilcoxon signed rank test). There was a similar trend for increased SFC
in the delta frequency band (P = 0.088, Wilcoxon signed rank test). (C) In-
creases in LGN neurons firing periodicity at delta frequencies during NREM
predicted their ORSP across the day. Pearson product moment R and P values
are shown for 35 stably recorded LGN neurons.
Fig. 2.
Stimulus-induced firing enhancement in LGN neurons predicts re-
sponse changes and persists during subsequent NREM sleep. (A) Two repre-
sentative LGN neurons recorded from an anesthetized mouse show firing-rate
increases across the 30-min stimulus presentation (mean rate plotted in 1-min
bins). (B) Firing-rate increases predicted the change in X°/X + 90° (i.e., OSRP)
across stimulus presentation. Pearson product moment R and P values are
shown for 147 LGN neurons. (C, Top) Mice implanted with electrodes tar-
geting both LGN and V1 were recorded over a 24-h baseline period, presented
with an oriented grating at CT0, and then allowed 12 h of ad libitum sleep.
Visual response properties were assessed at CT0 and CT12. (C, Bottom Left)
V1 neurons showed no change in firing rate between the first and last 5 min
of the 30-min grating presentation (time point A and time point B, re-
spectively, N.S., Wilcoxon signed rank test, n = 34 neurons from six mice).
However, LGN neuronal firing rates increased significantly (P = 0.018, Wil-
coxon signed rank test, n = 35 neurons). (C, Bottom Right) Neither V1 nor LGN
neurons showed a significant change in firing rate between the first and last
5 min of a 30-min blank screen presentation (N.S., Wilcoxon signed rank test,
n = 16 and 11 neurons, respectively, from three experiments). (D) As was true
in anesthetized recordings, firing-rate increases in LGN neurons across stimulus
presentation predicted OSRP across the day. Pearson product moment R and P
values are shown for 35 stably recorded LGN neurons. (E) Compared with baseline
recording (black), LGN neuron firing rates during the first 8 h of poststimulus
NREM (red) remained significantly elevated (two-way RM ANOVA, treatment ×
time interaction P < 0.001; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01). N.S., not significant.
Durkin et al.
PNAS
|
September 26, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 39
|
10487
NEUROSCIENCE
 the absence of CT inhibition; Fig. 5D; N.S. for delta frequency ac-
tivity, SI Appendix, Fig. S12). LGN neuron SFC with V1 delta and
spindle oscillations was also significantly reduced during V1 CT in-
hibition (Fig. 5E). Taken together, these changes demonstrate that
inhibition of L6 CT neurons desynchronizes NREM oscillations and
thalamocortical communication during OSRP consolidation.
Optogenetic Inhibition of CT Neurons During NREM, but Not REM or
Wake, Disrupts V1 Plasticity. We next tested the necessity of state-
specific CT activity for consolidation of OSRP in V1. Follow-
ing presentation of a visual stimulus to induce OSRP, Arch-
expressing mice underwent a 6-h period of state-targeted V1
CT neuron inhibition during bouts of NREM, REM, or wake
(Fig. 6A and SI Appendix, Fig. S15). This intervention had no
significant effect on sleep architecture across either the 6-h pe-
riod of optogenetic inhibition or the 6 h of subsequent recovery
sleep (N.S., two-way ANOVA; SI Appendix, Figs. S16 and S17).
There were no significant differences in V1 OSRP between
control mice without CT neuron inhibition, mice with REM- or
wake-targeted inhibition of CT neurons, and mice expressing a
control (YFP) transgene following NREM-targeted light delivery
to V1 (N.S., Holm–Sidak test). However, inhibition of CT neurons
during NREM blocked OSRP in a manner similar to sleep dep-
rivation (P < 0.001, ANOVA; Fig. 6B and SI Appendix, Figs.
S19 and S20). Similarly, the distribution of orientation preference
changed across a period of sleep (leading to a greater proportion
of neurons preferring X°) in control mice without CT neuron
inhibition, mice with REM- or wake-targeted inhibition of CT
Fig. 4.
Stimulation of ChR2-expressing CT neurons induced coherent firing in V1 and LGN. (A) For V1 recordings from anesthetized Ntsr1::ChR2 mice, a 32-
channel silicone probe was lowered into the V1 until stable recordings were obtained, and an optical fiber was targeted to V1 L6. Neuronal responses were
aggregated across all layers of the visual cortex. (B) Peri-event spike rasters and histograms are shown for a representative neuron at baseline and during
optogenetic stimulation of V1 L6. (C) V1 neurons showed increased coherent firing at the frequency of optogenetic stimulation compared with baseline. *P <
0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001, Wilcoxon signed rank test. (D) LFP activity is shown at baseline and during optogenetic stimulation. (E) LFP power at the
frequency of stimulation (blue bars) was significantly increased from baseline (black bars) values during stimulation. *P < 0.05 and ***P < 0.001, Holm–Sidak
post hoc test vs. baseline. (F) The proportion of V1 neurons that showed statistically significant (P < 0.01) periodic suppression and activation are shown for
each frequency during baseline (Left) and during optogenetic stimulation (Right). (G) For LGN neuronal recordings in anesthetized Ntsr1::ChR2 mice, a 32-
channel silicone probe was lowered into LGN until stable recordings were obtained, and an optical fiber was targeted to V1 L6. (H–L) Data for LGN spiking and
LFP activity are shown as in B–F. For L, all LGN neurons showed significant rhythmicity during optogenetic stimulation of L6 CT neurons.
10488
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1710613114
Durkin et al.
 neurons, and mice expressing a control (YFP) transgene, but not
mice with NREM-targeted inhibition (SI Appendix, Fig. S20).
NREM-targeted CT inhibition appeared to specifically disrupt
sleep-associated OSRP consolidation, as there were no immediate
effects of L6 CT neuron inhibition on orientation tuning in any
layer of V1 (SI Appendix, Fig. S14). Thus, these data suggest that
CT coordination of NREM oscillations in the LGN-V1 network
plays a critical role in promoting sleep-dependent V1 OSRP.
Discussion
Our present data show that novel visual experience rapidly alters
response properties in LGN neurons to enhance their responsive-
ness in favor of the presented stimulus orientation. This change is
selective, occurring before expression of V1 OSRP, which relies on
subsequent sleep (7) (SI Appendix, Fig. S3). This experience also
alters the temporal relationship between LGN neuron firing and
V1 activity during subsequent NREM oscillations.
Previous studies have found that a subset of mouse LGN neurons
shows orientation-selective responses (19–21). However, until now,
it was unknown whether orientation-selective responses in the LGN
(like that in the V1) can change in response to visual experience.
Our data suggest that sensory response plasticity does occur in
LGN neurons. Prior work in the somatosensory system (22, 23)
suggested that thalamic neurons can change their response prop-
erties rapidly following disruption of peripheral sensory input.
These data demonstrate that, following novel sensory experience,
thalamic neurons in the visual pathway also show rapid response
plasticity and that these changes precede response plasticity in V1.
Fig. 5.
NREM-targeted optogenetic inhibition of V1 L6 CT neurons disrupts coherent thalamocortical oscillations. (A) LGN and V1 activity was simultaneously
recorded in Ntsr1-cre transgenic mice transduced with Arch-GFP. L6 V1 CT neurons were optogenetically inhibited across bouts of NREM sleep in the first 6 h
of the poststimulus ad libitum sleep period. Light delivery reliably inhibited L6 neuronal firing and slightly reduced firing in LGN neurons. (B, Left) V1 power
spectral density during NREM-targeted L6 inhibition (expressed as a change from baseline; n = 64 LFPs from 11 mice, green) was significantly reduced relative
to that of no-laser (noninhibited) control mice (n = 76 LFPs from 14 mice, red; *P < 0.05 for no-laser vs. inhibited conditions, Bonferroni-corrected Student’s
t test for each frequency value). (B, Right) Total integrated spectral power changes (from baseline) across delta (0.5–4 Hz) and spindle (7–15 Hz) frequency
bands significantly decreased during inhibition (green; * indicates P < 0.01 and P < 0.001, respectively) compared with no-laser control mice (red). Power
recovered to normal levels after the 6-h inhibition period (N.S., Mann–Whitney rank sum test). (C) Spindle-frequency coherence decreased between V1 and
LGN LFPs during NREM inhibition [n = 77 LFP pairs recorded across both inhibition and control conditions in four mice; P < 0.001 (indicated by *) and P = 0.786,
respectively, for during and after 6-h NREM-targeted inhibition; Mann–Whitney rank sum test]. (D) NREM-targeted inhibition caused an increase in the time
lag between V1 and LGN LFPs at their maximum spindle-frequency coherence, relative to baseline (P < 0.001, Kolmogorov–Smirnov test for inhibition vs. no-
laser conditions). (E) NREM-targeted inhibition of L6 CT neurons decreased interareal SFC between LGN and V1. LGN spike to V1 LFP SFC at delta frequency:
condition × time interaction P < 0.001; at spindle frequency: main effect of time P = 0.01 and condition × time interaction P < 0.001; two-way RM ANOVA; n =
54 neurons from seven mice and 40 neurons from five mice for no-laser control and inhibition conditions, respectively. V1 spike and LGN LFP SFC at delta
frequency: main effect of time P < 0.05 and condition × time interaction P < 0.001 and at spindle frequency: N.S.; n = 29 neurons from six mice and 17 neurons
from four mice for no-laser control and inhibition conditions, respectively. *P < 0.05, Holm–Sidak post hoc test.
Durkin et al.
PNAS
|
September 26, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 39
|
10489
NEUROSCIENCE
 Why does subsequent OSRP in V1 require poststimulus sleep?
One possibility is that information is relayed between LGN and
V1 during poststimulus NREM, which in turn drives plasticity in
the cortex. This interpretation is consistent with what is known
about the circuit-level mechanisms of OSRP consolidation. LGN-
to-V1 long-term potentiation (LTP) and OSRP are mutually oc-
cluding in vivo (15), suggesting that potentiation of thalamocortical
synapses underlies OSRP consolidation in V1. We have previously
shown that OSRP consolidation is dependent on poststimulus
sleep (7, 8). Here we show that in freely sleeping mice, disruption
of V1 CT neuron activity during NREM oscillations is sufficient to
block OSRP consolidation. While CT neurons also influence the
firing of neurons in the other layers of V1 (24), we find that their
effects on firing among LGN neurons are much more widespread
and dramatic (Fig. 4). We also find that optogenetic inhibition of
CT neurons disrupts communication between LGN and V1 during
NREM delta and spindle oscillations (Fig. 5). Because we have
previously shown that coherent firing of V1 neurons during NREM
oscillations predicts the extent of OSRP consolidation (7), a par-
simonious interpretation is that thalamocortical coherence during
NREM is essential for promoting OSRP in V1. Based on our
current data, we conclude that information regarding stimulus
characteristics of prior experience is relayed between the thalamus
and cortex during subsequent NREM oscillations.
We find that V1-to-LGN CT communication, which coordinates
thalamocortical oscillations associated with NREM sleep, plays an
essential role for consolidating sensory response plasticity in V1.
Materials and Methods
All animal procedures were approved by the University of Michigan Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee. For anesthetized recording of visual response
properties, or effects of L6 stimulation, 2- to 3-mo-old mice were anesthetized
with isoflurane, and a 32-site silicon probe was inserted into either V1 or LGN for
neuronal recording. For chronic recording from behaving mice, 2-mo-old mice
were implanted with drivable headstages composed of two bundles with seven
stereotrodes each, using previously described methods (7). Signals from each
electrode were split and differentially filtered to obtain spike data and LFP data
at each recording site. Individual neurons were tracked throughout the ex-
periment as described previously (7, 25). Complete materials and methods are
in SI Appendix, SI Materials and Methods.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Sha Jiang and Amanda Morrison for
expert technical assistance with these studies. Support for this research
was provided by a Young Investigator Award from the Brain and Behavioral
Research Foundation; an Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Fellowship; research
Grant EY021503 from the National Institutes of Health (to S.J.A.); and a
National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship (to J.D.).
1. Huber R, Ghilardi MF, Massimini M, Tononi G (2004) Local sleep and learning. Nature
430:78–81.
2. Aton SJ, et al. (2009) Mechanisms of sleep-dependent consolidation of cortical plas-
ticity. Neuron 61:454–466.
3. Dumoulin MC, et al. (2015) Extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) activity during
sleep consolidates cortical plasticity in vivo. Cereb Cortex 25:507–515.
4. Seibt J, et al. (2012) Protein synthesis during sleep consolidates cortical plasticity
in vivo. Curr Biol 22:676–682.
5. Yang G, et al. (2014) Sleep promotes branch-specific formation of dendritic spines
after learning. Science 344:1173–1178.
6. Aton SJ, et al. (2013) Visual experience and subsequent sleep induce sequential plastic
changes in putative inhibitory and excitatory cortical neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
110:3101–3106.
7. Aton SJ, Suresh A, Broussard C, Frank MG (2014) Sleep promotes cortical response
potentiation following visual experience. Sleep 37:1163–1170.
8. Durkin J, Aton SJ (2016) Sleep-dependent potentiation in the visual system is at odds
with the synaptic homeostasis hypothesis. Sleep 39:155–159.
9. Chauvette S, Seigneur J, Timofeev I (2012) Sleep oscillations in the thalamocortical
system induce long-term neuronal plasticity. Neuron 75:1105–1113.
10. Miyamoto D, et al. (2016) Top-down cortical input during NREM sleep consolidates
perceptual memory. Science 352:1315–1318.
11. Gais S, Born J (2004) Low acetylcholine during slow-wave sleep is critical for de-
clarative memory consolidation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101:2140–2144.
12. Aton SJ (2013) Set and setting: How behavioral state regulates sensory function and
plasticity. Neurobiol Learn Mem 106:1–10.
13. Tononi G, Cirelli C (2003) Sleep and synaptic homeostasis: A hypothesis. Brain Res Bull
62:143–150.
14. Frenkel MY, et al. (2006) Instructive effect of visual experience in mouse visual cortex.
Neuron 51:339–349.
15. Cooke SF, Bear MF (2010) Visual experience induces long-term potentiation in the
primary visual cortex. J Neurosci 30:16304–16313.
16. Contreras D, Destexhe A, Sejnowski TJ, Steriade M (1996) Control of spatiotemporal
coherence of a thalamic oscillation by corticothalamic feedback. Science 274:771–774.
17. Timofeev I, Steriade M (1996) Low-frequency rhythms in the thalamus of intact-cortex
and decorticated cats. J Neurophysiol 76:4152–4168.
18. Chow BY, et al. (2010) High-performance genetically targetable optical neural si-
lencing by light-driven proton pumps. Nature 463:98–102.
19. Piscopo DM, El-Danaf RN, Huberman AD, Niell CM (2013) Diverse visual features
encoded in mouse lateral geniculate nucleus. J Neurosci 33:4642–4656.
20. Zhao X, Chen H, Liu X, Cang J (2013) Orientation-selective responses in the mouse
lateral geniculate nucleus. J Neurosci 33:12751–12763.
21. Tang J, Ardila Jimenez SC, Chakraborty S, Schultz SR (2016) Visual receptive field
properties of neurons in the mouse lateral geniculate nucleus. PLoS One 11:e0146017.
22. Nicolelis MA, Lin RC, Woodward DJ, Chapin JK (1993) Induction of immediate spa-
tiotemporal changes in thalamic networks by peripheral block of ascending cutane-
ous information. Nature 361:533–536.
23. Krupa DJ, Ghazanfar AA, Nicolelis MA (1999) Immediate thalamic sensory plasticity
depends on corticothalamic feedback. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:8200–8205.
24. Bortone DS, Olsen SR, Scanziani M (2014) Translaminar inhibitory cells recruited by
layer 6 corticothalamic neurons suppress visual cortex. Neuron 82:474–485.
25. Ognjanovski N, et al. (2017) Parvalbumin-expressing interneurons coordinate hippocampal
network dynamics required for memory consolidation. Nat Commun 8:15039.
Fig. 6.
NREM-targeted inhibition of CT neurons disrupts consolidation of V1 response plasticity after visual experience. (A) Experimental paradigm for eval-
uating the effects of poststimulus-state–targeted optogenetic inhibition of V1 CT neurons on OSRP consolidation. (B) NREM-targeted inhibition of V1 CT neurons
(laser-NREM) reduced OSRP in V1, while inhibition in other states did not affect OSRP. *P < 0.001, Dunn’s post hoc test versus no-laser controls, laser-wake, laser-
REM, and YFP-expressing control mice with light delivery targeted to V1 during NREM (P < 0.001; Kruskal–Wallis ANOVA on ranks). With the exception of
neurons recorded from mice with NREM-targeted inhibition, neurons recorded from all groups showed a significant increase in relative responsiveness to the
presented stimulus orientation [relative to the orthogonal orientation (X°/X + 90°); short arrows indicate P < 0.05, RM ANOVA on ranks].
10490
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1710613114
Durkin et al.
