 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Vital Directions for Health and Health Care
Priorities From a National Academy of Medicine Initiative
Victor J. Dzau, MD; Mark B. McClellan, MD, PhD; J. Michael McGinnis, MD, MPP; Sheila P. Burke, MPA, RN;
Molly J. Coye, MD, MPH; Angela Diaz, MD, MPH; Thomas A. Daschle, BA; William H. Frist, MD;
Martha Gaines, JD, LLM; Margaret A. Hamburg, MD; Jane E. Henney, MD; Shiriki Kumanyika, PhD, MPH;
Michael O. Leavitt, BA; Ruth M. Parker, MD; Lewis G. Sandy, MD; Leonard D. Schaeffer, BA;
Glenn D. Steele Jr, MD, PhD; Pamela Thompson, MS, RN; Elias Zerhouni, MD
IMPORTANCE Recent discussion has focused on questions related to the repeal and
replacement of portions of the Affordable Care Act (ACA). However, issues central to the
future of health and health care in the United States transcend the ACA provisions receiving
the greatest attention. Initiatives directed to certain strategic and infrastructure priorities are
vital to achieve better health at lower cost.
OBJECTIVES To review the most salient health challenges and opportunities facing the
United States, to identify practical and achievable priorities essential to health progress,
and to present policy initiatives critical to the nation’
s health and fiscal integrity.
EVIDENCE REVIEW Qualitative synthesis of 19 National Academy of Medicine–commissioned
white papers, with supplemental review and analysis of publicly available data and published
research findings.
FINDINGS The US health system faces major challenges. Health care costs remain high
at $3.2 trillion spent annually, of which an estimated 30% is related to waste, inefficiencies,
and excessive prices; health disparities are persistent and worsening; and the health and
financial burdens of chronic illness and disability are straining families and communities.
Concurrently, promising opportunities and knowledge to achieve change exist. Across
the 19 discussion papers examined, 8 crosscutting policy directions were identified
as vital to the nation’
s health and fiscal future, including 4 action priorities and 4 essential
infrastructure needs. The action priorities—pay for value, empower people, activate
communities, and connect care—recurred across the articles as direct and strategic
opportunities to advance a more efficient, equitable, and patient- and community-focused
health system. The essential infrastructure needs—measure what matters most,
modernize skills, accelerate real-world evidence, and advance science—were the most
commonly cited foundational elements to ensure progress.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE The action priorities and essential infrastructure needs
represent major opportunities to improve health outcomes and increase efficiency and value
in the health system. As the new US administration and Congress chart the future of health
and health care for the United States, and as health leaders across the country contemplate
future directions for their programs and initiatives, their leadership and strategic investment
in these priorities will be essential for achieving significant progress.
JAMA. doi:10.1001/jama.2017.1964
Published online March 21, 2017.
Editorial
Author Affiliations: Author
affiliations are listed at the end of this
article.
Corresponding Author: Victor J.
Dzau, MD, National Academy of
Medicine, 500 Fifth St NW,
Washington, DC 20001
(vdzau@nas.edu).
Clinical Review & Education
JAMA | Special Communication
(Reprinted)
E1
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/pdfaccess.ashx?url=/data/journals/jama/0/ on 03/24/2017
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
T
he US health and health care system is at a critical junc-
ture. Discussions about repeal of the Affordable Care Act
(ACA) introduce considerable uncertainty into the health
care marketplace and for the 20 million people newly insured dur-
ing the past 6 years,1 but the range of health and health care chal-
lenges spans far beyond the coverage provisions of the ACA.
Unparalleledhealthcosts,structuralinefficiencies,fragmentedcare
delivery, payment hardships, and proliferating administrative re-
quirementsimposeburdensonindividuals,clinicians,employers,and
entire communities. The consequences are especially severe for
those who are ill, lack needed medical and social services, and have
lowerincomes,asindicatedbytheassociationoflowerincomeswith
substantiallylowerlifeexpectancies(Figure1).Butinadequateand
inappropriatetreatment,overdiagnosisandunderdiagnosis,medi-
cal errors, and excessive costs are also experienced by many other
individuals in the United States.
These serious systemwide challenges are complicated by in-
creases in illness and disability from an aging population, emerging
infectiousdiseases,andphysical,behavioral,andmentalhealthdis-
orders such as opioid abuse, tobacco use, obesity, depression, and
theirrelatedchronicdiseases.AlthoughUSresidentswithhigherin-
comes have never been healthier, conditions such as these are life-
altering threats for many individuals. The most recent data on US
life expectancy indicate not only sustained health disparities by in-
come level and by race/ethnicity, but also a decline in overall life
expectancy for the first time in nearly 2 decades.3
Atthesametime,compellingopportunitiesandnoveltoolsare
emerging to possibly solve these problems. Insights now under-
scorethecentralimportanceofsocial,behavioral,andenvironmen-
tal factors for people’
s health throughout the life span. Technology
is reshaping every dimension of health care, from the ability to
treat organ system failure and the capacity to visualize metabolic
processes in real time to the use of digital systems that can record,
inform,connect,andassesscareexperiences,introducingnewpos-
sibilities for precision medicine, the creation of evidence, and the
delivery of care.4 Scientific discoveries offer breakthrough poten-
tial for greater precision in the prevention, detection, and treat-
ments of illness and disease.
Thenation’
schallengeistochooseprioritiesandactionablesteps
to address them that will have the greatest effect in improving the
healthofthepopulation.Moreover,asindicatedinFigure2,itisnot
onlythenation’
shealthbutitsfiscalcapacitythatisatrisk,ashealth
carespendingreducesinvestmentsineducation,infrastructure,and
otherarenasimportanttothedailylivesofUSresidents.In1974,the
United States spent $14.8 billion on major health care programs,
$55 billion on Social Security, and an estimated $199.6 billion on all
otherspending;by2015,thishadchangedto$936.5billion,$881.9
billion,and$1869.9billion,respectively(notethatmajorhealthcare
programsincludespendingforMedicare[netofpremiumsandother
offsetting receipts], Medicaid, and the Children’
s Health Insurance
Programaswellasspendingtosubsidizehealthinsuranceandtosta-
bilize premiums for health insurance purchased by individuals and
small employers). The $3.2 trillion spent annually for health care in
the United States6 is far higher than anywhere else in the world,7
and the magnitude of the nation’
s excessive expenditures was es-
timatedin2009atapproximately30%ofhealthcarecosts8andin
2012 at between 21% and 47%9—including unnecessary services,
delivery inefficiencies, excess administrative costs, high prices,
missedpreventionopportunities,andfraud—underscoringtheneed
for better use of resources. Because this trajectory of health care
spending is unsustainable, reforms are needed that enable health
care organizations, communities, and individuals to redirect re-
sources to uses that achieve better health, promote efficiency,
and reduce waste. Given that the leading health determinants
are outside of health care,10 policies must not only encourage
morejudicioususeofhealthcareservices,butalsoensuresupports
Figure 1. Race- and Ethnicity-Adjusted Life Expectancy for 40-Year-Olds by Household Income Percentile, 2001-2014
90
85
80
75
70
0
100
1.9 million
2.0 million
80
112
119
60
71
77
40
45
50
Expected Age at Death for 40-Year-Olds, y
Household Income Percentile
Mean household income
  in thousands, $ a
Women
Men
20
24
26
Women
Men
Expected age at death, y
Bottom 1%: 78.8 (95% CI, 78.7-78.9)
Women by household income percentile
Top 1%: 88.9 (95% CI, 88.7-89.1)
Bottom 1%: 72.7 (95% CI, 72.6-72.9)
Men by household income percentile
Top 1%: 87.3 (95% CI, 87.2-87.5)
Higher income is associated with longer life expectancy across the income
distribution. The vertical height of each bar depicts the 95% confidence
interval. The difference between expected age at death in the top and bottom
income percentiles is 10.1 years (95% CI, 9.9-10.3 years) for women and 14.6
years (95% CI, 14.4-14.8 years) for men. To control for differences in life
expectancies across racial and ethnic groups, race and ethnicity adjustments
were calculated using data from the National Longitudinal Mortality Survey
and estimates were reweighted so that each income percentile bin has
the same fraction of black, Hispanic, and Asian adults. Reprinted from JAMA.2
a Averaged across years and ages. The data are in thousands unless
otherwise indicated.
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
NAM’
s Vital Directions for Health and Health Care Initiative
E2
JAMA
Published online March 21, 2017
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/pdfaccess.ashx?url=/data/journals/jama/0/ on 03/24/2017
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
for better health behavior and facilitate integration of health-
related social service interventions.2 Furthermore, by fostering in-
centives and culture change supportive of proven, value-based
models of care payment and delivery as well as connected health
care and information, greater efficiency, better results, and more
person-engaged care could be achieved.11
AsthenewadministrationandCongressworktocraftthefuture
of US health and health care, this Special Communication is offered
bymembersofasteeringcommitteeofexperiencednonpartisanex-
perts and opinion leaders assembled by the National Academy of
Medicine (NAM). In the spirit of the chartered mandate and long-
standing service of the National Academies to provide trusted, in-
dependentcounseltothenation,theNAMlastyearlaunchedanini-
tiativetoconsiderpracticalandachievableprioritiesessentialtothe
nation’
s health and fiscal integrity. Underscoring the importance of
the issues, this initiative is named Vital Directions for Health and
Health Care.
The Priorities
The Vital Directions initiative is motivated by the vision of a health
system that performs optimally in promoting, protecting, and re-
storingthehealthofindividualsandpopulationsandhelpseachper-
sonreachherorhisfullpotentialforhealthandwell-being(Figure3).
Attainment of this vision requires focusing on 3 core goals—better
healthandwell-being,high-valuehealthcare,andstrongscienceand
technology—and, in turn, pursuing the action priorities and infra-
structure needs required for their achievement (Box 1).
Across the 3 goals of the Vital Directions for Health and Health
Careinitiative—betterhealthandwell-being,high-valuehealthcare,
and strong science and technology—the Vital Directions Steering
Committee identified 19 issue areas to be assessed in expert-
writtenarticles.TheNationalAcademyofMedicineconvenedmore
than 150 of the nation’
s leading health and policy experts to author
the 19 articles, each of which addressed pressing policy challenges
andopportunitiesandofferedspecificrecommendationsforachiev-
ingprogress(Box2).SummarizedinthisSpecialCommunicationare
the most potentially transformative crosscutting policy directions
identifiedfromthoseassessments,indicatedasactionprioritiesand
infrastructure needs essential to addressing these priorities. These
strategies and priorities are offered to assist the new administra-
tion and others leading change throughout health and health care
at national, state, local, and institutional levels. Pursuing these ac-
tionprioritiesandessentialinfrastructureneedsaspartofmajor2017
legislative and executive initiatives can achieve better health and
lower costs.
Action Priorities
From across the spectrum of the 19 discussion papers developed
throughtheVitalDirectionsinitiative,4crosscuttingactionpriorities
emerged:payforvalue,empowerpeople,activatecommunities,and
connect care. Whether from the perspective of the need to prevent
andcontrolheartdisease,cancer,ordiabetes;toprevent,identify,and
treat people with problems of mental health and addiction; or to
streamlineandimproveaccesstotherangeofservicesneeded,these
4 action priorities are vital to progress. Moreover, because these pri-
orities represent a substantial departure from current patterns of
health and health care services, their advancement requires strong
leadership, commitment, and strategic emphasis.
Pay for Value—Deliver Better Health
and Better Results for All
Leaders throughout the United States adhere to the principle that
no individual should lack access to basic health services. Central to
the realization of this principle is ensuring that those services
deliver the greatest possible value and minimize waste. But the
nation falls substantially short of that aim. Although contributions
vary across population groups, shortfalls in medical treatment have
a relatively small effect on the occurrence of early deaths through-
out the population—accounting for only about an estimated 10% of
Figure 2. Historical (1974-2015) and Projected (2016-2039)
Federal Spending on Health Care and Other Programs
0
1974
1994
2004
2014
2034
2024
25
20
% of GDP
Year
15
10
5
1984
Social Security
Health care programs
All other spending
All other spending includes other mandatory spending and discretionary
spending (including defense and nondefense). Data are from the Congressional
Budget Office.5 GDP indicates gross domestic product.
Figure 3. Vital Directions Framework
A health system that performs optimally in promoting, protecting, and
restoring the health of individuals and  populations and helps each person
reach his or her full potential for health and well-being
The vision
• Pay for value
• Empower people
• Activate communities
• Connect care
Action priorities
• Measure what matters most
• Modernize skills
• Accelerate real-world evidence
• Advance science
Essential  infrastructure needs
Core goals
Better health and
well-being
High-value
health care
Strong science
and technology
Achieving the vision of the Vital Directions for Health and Health Care requires
focusing on 3 core goals—better health and well-being, high-value health care,
and strong science and technology—and pursuing the action priorities and
infrastructure needs required for their achievement.
NAM’
s Vital Directions for Health and Health Care Initiative
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
Published online March 21, 2017
E3
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/pdfaccess.ashx?url=/data/journals/jama/0/ on 03/24/2017
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
premature deaths overall—while behavioral patterns, genetic pre-
dispositions, social circumstances, and environmental exposures
have been estimated to account for approximately 40%, 30%,
15%, and 5% of premature deaths, respectively.12 Yet the majority
of health expenditures are devoted exclusively to treatment.
Because payments have not been explicitly linked to the value
of the services or evidence of their necessity, per-person health
expenditures in the United States are much higher than in other
high-income countries.7
To advance value-based care for all, policy reforms should do
the following:
•Drive health care payment innovation providing incentives for
outcomes and value. Payment for individual services inherently
encouragesvolumeoveroutcomes.Therewardfocusadoptedby
all payers needs to target patient- and population-specific pro-
files that yield better outcomes at reasonable costs for care for
a designated population over a specified period.13
•Helpcliniciansdevelopthecorecompetenciesrequiredfornew
payment models. As new payment models are implemented and
tested for their effects on care outcomes and value as well as pa-
tient and clinician satisfaction, clinician practices need to develop
the adaptive core competencies to succeed.
•Remove barriers to integration of social services with medical
services.Treatmentsarefrequentlyprescribedwithoutconsider-
ation of the social, behavioral, and environmental factors that are
important determinants of health.14 Integrated arrangement,
financing, and delivery of nonmedical social services (eg, food,
housing,transportation,andincomeassistance)withmedicalser-
vices is important to improve outcomes, yield savings, and en-
hance equity.15 Integration of this sort could be achieved through
virtual integration models such as Medicaid health homes, which
use a team-based clinical care approach while connecting care to
community resources and supports.16
The following are example policy initiatives from the Vital
Directions discussion papers:
•Sustain and accelerate the implementation, demonstration, and
assessment of alternative payment models supported by public
and private health care payers to reward value and improve
outcomes and health.
•Reward measurement streamlining that helps identify and re-
wardinnovationandoutcomesdeliveringvalueatsystemwideand
population levels (population-based payments).
•Support public-private collaborations among industry and gov-
ernment, for example, the Accountable Care Learning Collabora-
tive, which helps clinicians and other health care delivery groups
andorganizationsdevelopcompetenciesneededforsuccessinthe
use of alternative payment models.17
•Implement successful models for health and social services inte-
gration, for example, funding stream integration so that Medicaid
managedcareplanscancoordinatewithsocialandcommunityin-
terventions proven effective in improving outcomes and reduc-
ing costs.
Empower People—Democratize Action for Health
Consistently and effectively engaging patients and families is es-
sentialtoimprovehealthoutcomesandefficientuseofcare.Yetcare
and care instructions are still too often poorly matched to the per-
sonalcontextofpatients’
dailylivesortheirindividualgoals.18Health
care must not only be safe and effective, but also be understand-
ableandpractical,accountingforpatientandfamilyknowledgeand
Box 1. Vital Directions for Health and Health Care: The Priorities
Action Priorities
Pay for value—deliver better health and better results for all
Empower people—democratize action for health
Activate communities—collaborate to mobilize resources
for health progress
Connect care—implement seamless digital interfaces for best care
Essential Infrastructure Needs
Measure what matters most—use consistent core metrics
to sharpen focus and performance
Modernize skills—train the workforce for 21st-century health care
and biomedical science
Accelerate real-world evidence—derive evidence from each care
experience
Advance science—forge innovation-ready clinical research
processes and partnerships
Box 2. Vital Directions for Health and Health Care: Issue Areas
Better Health and Well-being
Systems strategies for better health throughout the life course
Addressing social determinants of health and health disparities
Preparing for better health and health care for an aging population
Chronic disease prevention: tobacco, physical activity,
and nutrition for a healthy start
Improving access to effective care for people who have mental
health and substance use disorders
Advancing the health of communities and populations
High-Value Health Care
Benefit design to promote effective, efficient, and affordable care
Payment reform for better value and medical innovation
Competencies and tools to shift payments from volume to value
Tailoring complex care management, coordination, and integration
for high-need, high-cost patients
Realizing the full potential of precision medicine in health and
health care
Fostering transparency in outcomes, quality, safety, and costs
The democratization of health care
Workforce for 21st-century health and health care
Strong Science and Technology
Information technology interoperability and use for better care
and evidence
Data acquisition, curation, and use for a continuously learning
health system
Innovation in development, regulatory review, and use
of clinical advances
Targeted research: brain disorders as an example
Training the workforce for 21st-century science
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
NAM’
s Vital Directions for Health and Health Care Initiative
E4
JAMA
Published online March 21, 2017
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/pdfaccess.ashx?url=/data/journals/jama/0/ on 03/24/2017
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
circumstances and linking them with easy access to ongoing infor-
mation and communication channels. Furthermore, individuals’
healthdataareincreasinglysiloedandareofteninelectronichealth
recordsthatmaybeimpossibletoaccesswhenneeded.Beyondthe
need for a platform to integrate health data is the need for practical
assurancetopatientsofownershipoftheirowndata,whichinmost
cases are now held by physicians and hospitals.19
To empower people, policy reforms should do the following:
•Link care and personal context. Clinicians should work together
with patients and their families to ensure that care provided
matches closely with each individual’
s goals.
•Communicateinawayappropriatetoliteracy.Tofostertrustand
activepatientengagement,policymakersandhealthleadersshould
focusonmakinginformationmoreavailable,understandable,and
useful for all. Improving health literacy also stands to have signifi-
cant economic benefit; low health literacy has been estimated to
cost the United States $106 billion to $238 billion annually.20
•Promote effective telehealth tools. Telehealth technologies—
use of internet, telephone, and other methods—have shown
some promise in increasing patient access to medical care, par-
ticularly in remote or underserved areas, and reducing costs.21,22
Harmonizing state-specific physician licensure rules and restric-
tionsaswellasreimbursementeligibilityrequirementswouldhelp
promote their scalability and broader use.
•Ensure patient data access, ownership, and privacy. Empower-
ingpatientsthroughownershipandprotectionoftheirhealthdata
wouldallowpatientstheopportunitytouse,acton,andderivethe
most (personal) value from their health information.23 Data own-
ership combined with better assurance of data privacy and secu-
ritywouldincreasethelikelihoodthatpatientswouldbewillingto
share their health information.
The following are example policy initiatives from the Vital
Directions discussion papers:
•Promote development of clinical practice guidelines and decision
support tools to encourage physicians to engage with each patient
on their personal context and goals in making care decisions.
•Support patient communication research on and decision-
making strategies to determine the most effective approaches to
relayinginformationoncare,cost,andquality,suchasthePatient-
Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI) Communication
and Dissemination Research program focusing on approaches to
communicate and disseminate health information and research
findings to patients.24
•Establish harmonized licensure and reimbursement for tele-
health clinicians, so that telehealth clinicians may provide ser-
vices across state lines.
Activate Communities—Collaborate to Mobilize Resources
for Health Progress
Health begins in communities, where people live, work, and play.
However, as the nation experiences increasing health disparities,
the gap in life spans between the rich and the poor has increased2
and discrepancies between urban and rural health care access and
quality persist.25 In 2015, aggregate population-wide life expec-
tancy experienced a concerning decline. Whether this will continue
is unclear. Health disparities are not inevitable; they are a product
not only of health care access and quality, but also of community-
based social, economic, and environmental conditions that can be
changed. Work sponsored by the NAM Culture of Health program
assessed the health-related effect from targeting social determi-
nants in 9 communities and found that, altogether, multisectoral
community-wide leadership can be effective in reducing the
adverse effects of key social determinants on health disparities.26
Moreover, the United States invests far less than peer nations on
community-based social services (Figure 4) that are important to
health outcomes. Community-wide leadership and capacity are
essential not only to reducing disparities, but also to combating the
nation’
s most pressing and costly health threats—such as chronic
disease and multiple comorbidities—by promoting healthy environ-
ments and behaviors and ensuring that the necessary supports are
in place to achieve health improvement.
Toactivatecommunities,policyreformsshoulddothefollowing:
•Invest in local leadership and infrastructure capacity for public
healthinitiatives.Transformativechangeinhealthandhealthcare
requiresmaintainingandstrengtheningthecapacitytodeliveres-
sentialpublichealthservices,includingongoingcollaborationwith
business, education, housing, and transportation stakeholders.
Figure 4. Health Care and Social Service Spending Across Countries
in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
France
Sweden
Austria
Switzerland
Denmark
Germany
Belgium
Italy
Finland
Netherlands
Portugal
Hungary
United 
States
Norway
Greece
Spain
Slovenia
United Kingdom
Poland
Luxembourg
Japan
New Zealand
Canada
Czech Republic
Australia
Iceland
Israel
Slovak Republic
Ireland
Chile
Estonia
Turkey
Korea
Mexico
0
35
Expenditures as % of GDP
30
25
20
15
5
10
Total social service 
expenditures
Total health service 
expenditures
Compared with other high-income countries, the United States spends a
greater proportion of health care and social service expenditures on health care
services. For every $1 spent on health care, about $2 is spent on social services
by countries in the OECD overall but only about $0.50 is spent on social
services by the United States.27 GDP indicates gross domestic product. Data are
from OECD countries (n = 30) from 1995 to 2005 according to the 2009
release of the OECD Health Data 2009 Statistics and Indicators and OECD
Social Expenditure Database. Adapted from Bradley and Taylor.27
NAM’
s Vital Directions for Health and Health Care Initiative
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
Published online March 21, 2017
E5
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/pdfaccess.ashx?url=/data/journals/jama/0/ on 03/24/2017
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
•Expand community-based strategies targeting high-need
individuals. High-need patients, often characterized as those with
multiple comorbidities, disproportionately drive health care costs,
withthetop1%and5%ofspendersaccountingfor22.8%and50.4%
ofhealthcarespending,respectively(Figure5).28Therightcarefor
these patients requires close alignment and coordination of medi-
calandsocialservices.Communitycare(health)teams,typicallyas-
sociated with patient-centered medical homes, can help coordi-
nate these services for complex patients, but they strongly rely on
community-basedorganizationstoprovidethesocialsupportsand
servicesneeded(eg,food,housing,income,andcareassistance).29
•Provide strong state-based capacity for guidance, assistance,
and synergy for local health efforts. Success in achieving better
healthatlowercostwilldependonstrategiesimplementedatthe
locallevel.Resources,flexibility,andinsightsfromsuccessfulstate
innovationmodelsandmodelMedicaidwaiversthatencourageand
empower local leaders can provide guidance for customizing and
scaling community health innovations.
The following are example policy initiatives from the Vital
Directions discussion papers:
•Require that tax-exempt health organizations meeting Internal
Revenue Service requirements for community benefit work
through coordinated community-wide public-private partner-
ships and multisectoral initiatives.
•Support states’flexible use of grant funds for technical assistance
tolocalleadershipandcollaborativeactionworkingtoidentifyand
mobilize action on the most important health challenges.
•Identify best practices from pilot programs from the Center for
Medicare&MedicaidInnovation(CMMI)onapproacheslinkingrel-
evant health, education, social service, and legal system activities
and resources to address individuals at highest risk and with the
greatest needs.
•GivestatesflexibilitytouseMedicaidfundstoimplementbestprac-
tices in targeting the most effective efforts for high-risk, vulner-
able children (eg, prenatal to age 3 years) as well as adults at par-
ticular risk with complex, multifactorial conditions.
Connect Care—Implement Seamless Digital Interfaces
for Best Care
Health care in the United States is complex and often difficult to
navigate—for patients, families, and clinicians—but tools are avail-
able.Theexpandedadoptionofhealthinformationtechnologyhas
introducedpowerfulnewopportunitiesforbetterhealthandhealth
care,30 including the potential for greater accountability and value,
enhanced public engagement, improved public health surveil-
lance, and more rapid development and distribution of new thera-
pies.Yetimportantchallengesremain.Systemincompatibilitiesand
cliniciandiscomfortlevelsneedtobeovercome.Clinicaldatadonot
consistentlyfollowthepatienttoinformcareacrosssettingsandover
time.Aggregateclinicaldataarenotavailabletoinformhealthpolicy,
generate discovery, or improve care efficiency and effectiveness.31
To achieve connected care, policy reforms should do the
following:
•Makenecessaryinfrastructureandregulatorychangesforclinical
data accessibility and use. The following barriers need to be
removed: specifications for data developed but not adopted,
commercially protective coding practices, proprietary data
ownership and use restrictions, and misinterpretation of control
requirements for use of clinical data as a resource for new knowl-
edge. The recently passed 21st Century Cures Act contains provi-
sions to encourage sharing and use of clinical data, but those pro-
visions require local action.
•Createprinciplesandstandardsforend-to-endinteroperability.
Specificstandardsareneededforend-to-end(system,clinician,and
individual) interoperability. Despite the rapidly progressing tech-
nical capacity of digital technology for health, interoperability be-
tween and among systems is very limited, leading to serious clini-
calandadministrativeinefficienciesandinhibitingmoreresponsive
and effective care.32
•Identify information technology and data strategies that sup-
portcontinuouslearning.Thetechnicalcapacitynowexistsforcon-
tinuous communication and learning throughout health care—
among organizations, between clinicians, between devices, and
betweenpatientsandcarepartners.Comprehensivestrategyand
action are required to improve data infrastructure, foster public
trust around data privacy and security, and resolve inconsistent
state and local policies on data use and sharing.
The following are example policy initiatives from the Vital
Directions discussion papers:
•Use US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) regula-
tory and reimbursement mechanisms to enforce existing stan-
dardsforinteroperabilityacrosselectronichealthrecordsandmedi-
cal devices.
•Through the HHS, sponsor a public-private standards organiza-
tion to commission the necessary additional standards, for ex-
ample,open,standardizedapplicationprogramminginterfacesto
supportcontinuouslyimprovingstandardizedservice-orientedar-
chitecture for interoperability and clinical decision support.
•Streamline inconsistent state and local security and privacy poli-
cies related to data exchange and use, such as federal guidelines
enabling states and localities to harmonize data use policies and
reciprocal support agreements.
•Building on the principle of patient ownership of data, foster ac-
tive patient access and use of their own data for care and evi-
dence improvement.
Figure 5. Distribution of Personal Health Care Spending in the US Civilian
Noninstitutionalized Population, 2014
100
80
60
40
20
0
0
100
80
60
40
Cumulative % of Expenditures
Cumulative % of Civilian Noninstitutionalized Population
20
90
70
50
30
10
100
77.2
49.6
33.8
17.9
9.9
5.4
2.8
1.3
0.5
0.1
0
Top 1% of spenders account for 22.8% of spending
Top 5% of spenders account for 50.4% of spending 
In 2014, the top 1% of health care spenders accounted for 22.8% of total health
care spending and the top 5% of health care spenders accounted for 50.4% of
total health care spending. Data are from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey,
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.28
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
NAM’
s Vital Directions for Health and Health Care Initiative
E6
JAMA
Published online March 21, 2017
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/pdfaccess.ashx?url=/data/journals/jama/0/ on 03/24/2017
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Essential Infrastructure Needs
Toachievethe4actionpriorities,theremustbecommitmenttoes-
sential infrastructure needs common across the 19 Vital Directions
discussionpapers:measurewhatmattersmost,modernizeskills,ac-
celeratereal-worldevidence,andadvancescience.Thefoundation
for progress in any of those 19 areas resides in the availability of ac-
curateinformationonthecentraldeterminantsofprogress,theskills
to address those determinants, the pace at which new approaches
can be developed, and the knowledge and tools available to better
understand, assess, and improve those approaches.
Measure What Matters Most—Use Consistent Core Metrics
to Sharpen Focus and Performance
Measurement is essential to guide progress. Ironically, as measure-
ment tools and skills have advanced, the proliferation of reporting
requirementshasresultedinclinicalmeasuresnownumberinginthe
thousands, raising serious concerns about the time, cost, validity,
generalizability, and overall clinician and financial burden of clinical
measurement. Results become meaningless if measures are unre-
liable and inconsistent.
Toachievemeaningfulmeasurement,policyreformsshoulddo
the following:
•Focusreliablyandconsistentlyonfactorsmostimportanttobet-
terhealthandhealthcare.Toreducetheburdenandincreasethe
utility of measurement, an anchor set of core measures standard-
ized and available consistently over time at national, state, local,
and institutional levels can provide baseline reference points and
improve the reliability of broader measurement, evaluation, ac-
countability,andresearchefforts.TheNationalAcademiesreport
VitalSigns:CoreMetricsforHealthandHealthCareProgress33pro-
vides a framework for 15 such measures of health, care quality,
value, and engagement.
•Createthenationalcapacityforidentifying,standardizing,imple-
menting, and revising core measures. The Vital Signs committee
recommended that the Secretary of Health and Human Services
identify a lead organization for each of the 15 core measures and,
in turn, engage related stakeholder organizations in the refine-
ment process. The committee also recommended creation of an
ongoing,independentcapacitytostewardtherevisionprocessover
the longer term.
•Invest in the science of performance measurement. With the in-
creasing capacity and importance of performance measurement,
an ongoing investment is needed for continuous assessment of
measures application, proposing and testing improved ap-
proaches,andperiodicupdatingofindividualmeasures,theircom-
ponents, and the measure set.34
The following are example policy initiatives from the Vital
Directions discussion papers:
•InitiateanHHSprocesstorefineandimplementtheVitalSignscore
measures nationally, beginning with the federal categorical and
health care funding programs, including a variation to be used by
states in return for Medicaid management flexibility.
•Provide waivers from Medicare reporting requirements for
health care organizations working in multiorganization collabora-
tions to implement and report on core systemwide perform-
ance measures.
•Explorethedesignofanindependent,standards-settingbodyfor
reports on health care performance measures, possibly modeled
after the Financial Accounting Standards Board, which estab-
lishes financial accounting and reporting standards for compa-
nies and nonprofit organizations.35
•Establish a multiagency collaborative research initiative on the
science of performance measurement, including how best to
develop, test, evaluate, and improve measures.
Modernize Skills—Train the Workforce for 21st-Century
Health Care and Biomedical Science
Investing in and strengthening the capacity of the health care and
biomedicalscienceworkforcesiscriticaltoensuringthehealth,eco-
nomic, and physical security of the United States as well as global
leadership in research and innovation. This investment must take
new directions. The health care workforce of the 21st century must
be adept at managing increasingly complex patients and popula-
tions, particularly as people live longer and the burden of chronic
disease continues to increase, the complexity of medicine in-
creases,andtheresearchtoolsbecomemoresophisticated.Ensur-
ing a 21st-century biomedical science workforce will require mod-
ern education and training approaches; existing pathways are
becoming outdated and fragmented36 and no longer guarantee
stable, successful careers.
To modernize the skills of the health care and biomedical sci-
ence workforce, policy reforms should do the following:
•Reformhealthcaretrainingtomeetthenation’
schanginghealth
needsandopportunities.Reorientingtrainingandpracticetoco-
ordinated team-based approaches is essential to care delivery in
today’
s increasingly complex care environment. This can be done
by fostering the skills to work collaboratively in interdisciplinary
teams and keep pace with technology advances.37
•Create new education and training pathways for the science
workforce. The science workforce of the future will need to be
diverse, multidisciplinary, team oriented, and adept at data ana-
lytics and informatics. Attracting and retaining the most talented
individuals will require innovative education pathways and pro-
grams to create and support a cutting-edge, cross-disciplinary
health science workforce.
The following are example policy initiatives from the Vital
Directions discussion papers:
•Engagethescientificcommunity,privatefoundations,statehigher
education officials, and federal health professions funders in pro-
posingapublic-privatenationalinitiativeonhealthprofessionsedu-
cationthatisteambased,collaborative,multidisciplinary,andskilled
in health information technology and informatics.
•Require that organizations delivering care as Medicare alterna-
tive payment models have the clinical research, information
technology, and systems engineering personnel for continuous
learning and improvement.
•Implement a prominent initiative to attract the most talented
people to shape and lead the new biomedical research enter-
prise, a sort of NextGen Opportunity Fund.38
Accelerate Real-World Evidence—Derive Evidence
From Each Care Experience
The potential to analyze large amounts of health-related data from
actual patient care holds immense promise for improving medical
NAM’
s Vital Directions for Health and Health Care Initiative
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
Published online March 21, 2017
E7
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/pdfaccess.ashx?url=/data/journals/jama/0/ on 03/24/2017
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
care by better informing care decisions, increasing drug and medi-
cal device safety, more accurately evaluating treatment effective-
ness,andacceleratingscientificdiscovery.39However,progresshas
been hampered by technical, regulatory, and cultural barriers, in-
cluding an outdated clinical research model, an inadequate data-
sharingincentivestructure,andgapsinmethodsappropriatelysuited
for such data. Randomized clinical trials, while still the gold stan-
dardofclinicalresearch,areveryexpensiveandcanbelimitedintheir
generalizability and ability to reflect results in clinical practice.40
Theprospectsnowexistforahealthsystemthatisconstantlylearn-
ing, adjusting, and improving, and elements of the recently en-
acted 21st Century Cures Act provide impetus to this work.
To accelerate reliable evidence, policy reforms should do the
following:
•Advancecontinuouslylearningclinicalresearchdrawingonreal-
worldevidence.Complementingrandomizedclinicaltrials,theabil-
ity to collect data from actual clinical practice presents a great op-
portunitytogainnewinsightsabouttheefficacyandsafetyofnew
drugsandmedicaldevicesaswellastherelativeeffectivenessand
efficiency of those in use. The National Institutes of Health (NIH),
theUSFoodandDrugAdministration(FDA),andotherleadingre-
search agencies are actively developing strategies in this respect.
•Fosteracultureofdatasharingbystrengtheningincentivesand
standards.Aswithroutineclinicaldata,researchparticipantshave
presumptive rights to access and share their own health data. Re-
searchers have a responsibility to accept that strong science and
goodscientificcitizenshiprequireindividual-leveldatatobemore
accessibleforevaluationandreuse,withappropriatesafeguards.41
•Partner with patients and families to support evidence genera-
tionandsharing.Partneringwithpatients—andintheprocess,bet-
ter ensuring their privacy and improving trust—is a linchpin for ef-
fectiveevidencegenerationanddatasharingforcareimprovement
and learning. Patient engagement throughout the research pro-
cess can help identify unmet needs and future research priorities
as well as improve clinical outcomes.42
The following are example policy initiatives from the Vital
Directions discussion papers:
•Create public-private partnerships to build on existing pilot stud-
iestoassessandexpandreal-worldevidencedevelopmentinboth
preapproval and postapproval settings.
•Provideincentivesfordatasharing,suchasareimbursementben-
efit for health systems that facilitate data access and sharing be-
tween patients and researchers.
•Implementinitiativestobuildpatientskillsetsforengagement,bet-
ter define value in terms that reflect the patient perspective, and
determine measures for trustworthiness and participation.
Advance Science—Forge Innovation-Ready Clinical Research
Processes and Partnerships
Preeminenceinscienceandtechnologyhasdriventhenation’
shealth
and economic vitality. This requires national investment and
unwavering support for science—basic and applied. However,
cumbersome and outdated regulatory processes can make it diffi-
cult for the pharmaceutical industry to bring promising drugs and
devices to market in a timely fashion. With US global investment in
biomedical research softening,43 maintaining leadership in science
andinnovationwillrequiremodernizedandadaptiveregulatorypro-
cesses, research partnerships, and commercialization models.
Toadvancethepaceofinnovation,policyreformsshoulddothe
following:
•Promote the conditions for scientific innovation. Science needs
investment. Important conditions for success include commit-
ment to funding, support for basic and applied research, and ac-
celerationintranslation.Furthermore,takingadvantageofdatasets
rapidlygrowingtoverylargesizes,newformsofscience,technol-
ogy, and evidence development can boost clinical care research.
Opportunities include making greater use of evidence from ac-
tual clinical settings and of cognitive computing to better under-
stand and ensure the most effective and appropriate interven-
tions for the best possible clinical outcomes.
•Support an adaptive and patient-driven regulatory framework.
Aligning discovery and development with current needs will re-
quirepatientinputandpartnershipinallstagesofresearchandde-
velopment;multidisciplinaryteams;moreefficientclinicaltrialswith
adaptive designs; and a blend of real-world and randomized clini-
cal trial evidence.
•Foster cross-disciplinary and public-private partnerships. More
collaboration among the government, academia, and industry sci-
entistswillbenecessarytoadvanceinnovation,includinginthemost
challenging therapeutic areas such as autoimmune, neurodegen-
erative,andinflammatorydiseases.44Explorationofmultifocalpub-
lic-private research partnerships has been the focus of initiatives
at the NIH and FDA, including those related to the programs ex-
pandingbrainandcancerresearch.Pharmaceuticalanddevicecom-
panies are exploring sharing trial data in the interest of advancing
very-large-scale clinical databases to facilitate discovery.
The following are example policy initiatives from the Vital
Directions discussion papers:
•Ensure research funding for basic and applied sciences.
•Create public-private programs to invest in and advance the sci-
ence and related applications of big data analysis, such as cogni-
tive computing.
•Facilitate patient support for evidence generation through ex-
panded use of clinical data for discovery and real-time outcomes
monitoring (eg, the FDA’
s National Medical Evidence Generation
Collaborative, “EvGen”
45).
•Implement precompetitive collaborations including industry,
government,andacademiatoachieveneededbreakthroughsinthe
mostchallengingtherapeuticareasthatcannotbedonebyanysec-
toralone(eg,theAcceleratingMedicinesPartnershipledbytheNIH).
The Urgency
Theopportunitiesdescribedarerealandsubstantial.Asanation,the
United States has the world’
s largest observable discrepancy be-
tweentheamountspentonhealthcareandthehealthstatusofthe
population,butitalsoispositionedwiththeknowledgeneededfor
improving value and outcomes. Greater involvement of people in
their care processes, support for active community-wide initia-
tives, harnessing transformative connectivity of the digital infra-
structure, and accelerating the movement toward a reward system
based on results are all possible. Evidence exists on the potential of
these priorities and on the steps necessary to deliver better health
for all people in the United States at a sustainable cost. Further-
more, there are strong indications that these priorities will garner
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
NAM’
s Vital Directions for Health and Health Care Initiative
E8
JAMA
Published online March 21, 2017
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/pdfaccess.ashx?url=/data/journals/jama/0/ on 03/24/2017
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
broad support, with recent bipartisan legislation in some of these
areas, such as the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act
(MACRA) for payment reform and the 21st Century Cures Act for
more efficient drug development and approval.
The urgency is as compelling as the opportunities. Major con-
cernssuchassustained,yetpreventable,healthdisparitiesandper-
verse payment system incentives that drive unnecessary services
and costs threaten achievement of possibilities for better health,
greater equity, and even global economic competitiveness. Impor-
tantly, there is no easy fix or simple budgetary adjustment that will
resolve excessive health care spending. As noted earlier, the ex-
cess costs stem from inefficiencies in multiple components of the
health system, and their remediation will require a priori commit-
menttotheprioritiesindicated.Infact,ifevenarelativelysmallpor-
tion of the approximately $1 trillion now spent unnecessarily on
health care can be redirected to the high-priority investment op-
portunities described herein, the health and productivity benefits
will ripple far beyond the health sector.
The complexity and magnitude of the issues as well as the
promise for gain call for vigorous leadership from every quarter,
including prominent federal initiatives as well as the state and local
levels.Atthisvitalinflectionpointinhealthandhealthcare,thechal-
lenges are great, but so are the opportunities and knowledge to di-
rect change. Prioritizing the nation’
s health through strong leader-
shipandstrategicinvestmentisbothpossibleandimperativeforall
Americans to reach their full potentials for health and well-being.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Published Online: March 21, 2017.
doi:10.1001/jama.2017.1964
Author Affiliations: National Academy of
Medicine, Washington, DC (Dzau, McGinnis,
Hamburg, Henney); Robert J. Margolis, MD,
Center for Health Policy, Duke University,
Washington, DC (McClellan); Malcolm Wiener
Center for Social Policy, John F. Kennedy School of
Government, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts (Burke); AVIA, Chicago, Illinois
(Coye); Departments of Pediatrics and Preventive
Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
Mount Sinai Adolescent Health Center, New York,
New York (Diaz); The Daschle Group, Washington,
DC (Daschle); Owen Graduate School of
Management, Vanderbilt University, Nashville,
Tennessee (Frist); Center for Patient Partnerships,
University of Wisconsin–Madison Law School
(Gaines); Perelman School of Medicine, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia (Kumanyika); Leavitt
Partners, Salt Lake City, Utah (Leavitt); Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia
(Parker); UnitedHealth Group, Minnetonka,
Minnesota (Sandy); University of Southern
California, Los Angeles (Schaeffer); xG Health
Solutions, Columbus, Maryland (Steele); American
Organization of Nurse Executives, Chicago, Illinois
(Thompson); Global Research and Development,
Sanofi, Paris, France (Zerhouni).
Author Contributions: Drs Dzau and McGinnis had
full access to all of the data in the study and take
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis.
Study concept and design: Dzau, McClellan,
McGinnis, Coye, Daschle, Frist, Gaines, Hamburg,
Kumanyika, Leavitt, Parker, Sandy, Schaeffer,
Steele, Thompson, Zerhouni.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data:
McClellan, McGinnis, Burke, Diaz, Gaines, Henney.
Drafting of the manuscript: Dzau, McClellan,
McGinnis, Burke, Daschle, Sandy, Steele.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: Dzau, McClellan, McGinnis,
Coye, Diaz, Frist, Gaines, Hamburg, Henney,
Kumanyika, Leavitt, Parker, Sandy, Schaeffer,
Thompson, Zerhouni.
Statistical analysis: Diaz.
Obtained funding: Dzau, McGinnis.
Administrative, technical, or material support:
McClellan, Coye, Diaz, Daschle, Hamburg.
Study supervision: Dzau, McGinnis, Diaz, Frist,
Hamburg, Leavitt, Sandy, Steele.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors have
completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest.
Dr McClellan reported receiving personal fees from
Johnson & Johnson. Dr Frist reported serving as a
board member of Teladoc, MDSave, the Robert
Wood Johnson Foundation, and the Kaiser Family
Foundation; and being cofounder and board
chairman of Aspire Health. Dr Henney reported
serving as the home secretary of the National
Academy of Medicine, member of the board of
trustees for the China Medical Board, board
member of The Commonwealth Foundation until
2016, member of the board of directors of Cigna
Corp, lead director of the board for
AmerisourceBergen Corp, and member of the
board of directors of Cubist Pharmaceuticals
(acquired by Merck in 2016). Mr Schaeffer reported
serving on the board of directors of Walgreens
Boots Alliance, a publicly held company that
distributes to and operates prescription
pharmacies. Dr Zerhouni reported serving as
president of research and development for Sanofi.
No other disclosures were reported.
Funding/Support: The National Academy
of Medicine’
s Vital Directions for Health
and Health Care initiative is sponsored
by the California Health Care Foundation,
The Commonwealth Fund, the Gordon and Betty
Moore Foundation, The John A. Hartford
Foundation, the Josiah Macy Jr. Foundation, the
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, and the
National Academy of Medicine’
s Harvey V. Fineberg
Impact Fund.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The funding agencies
had no role in the design and conduct of the study;
collection, management, analysis, and
interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or
approval of the manuscript; and decision to submit
the manuscript for publication.
Disclaimer: This Special Communication reflects
the views of the identified members of the National
Academy of Medicine’
s Vital Directions for Health
and Health Care initiative and does not represent
formal consensus positions of the National
Academies or the organizations of the
participating authors.
Additional Contributions: Valuable assistance in
preparation of the text was provided by Elizabeth
Finkelman, MPP (National Academy of Medicine);
she was compensated by the California Health Care
Foundation, The Commonwealth Fund, the Gordon
and Betty Moore Foundation, The John A. Hartford
Foundation, the Josiah Macy Jr. Foundation,
the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, and the
National Academy of Medicine’
s Harvey V. Fineberg
Impact Fund.
Additional Information: Additional information on
this and other National Academy of Medicine
activities may be found at https://nam.edu/.
REFERENCES
1. Uberoi N, Finegold K, Gee E. Health insurance
coverage and the Affordable Care Act, 2010-2016.
March 3, 2016. https://aspe.hhs.gov/system/files
/pdf/187551/ACA2010-2016.pdf. Accessed June 14,
2016.
2. Chetty R, Stepner M, Abraham S, et al.
The association between income and life
expectancy in the United States, 2001-2014. JAMA.
2016;315(16):1750-1766.
3. Xu JQ, Murphy SL, Kochanek KD, Arias E.
Mortality in the United States, 2015. Hyattsville, MD:
National Center for Health Statistics; 2016.
4. Topol E. How technology is transforming health
care. 2013. http://health.usnews.com/health
-news/hospital-of-tomorrow/articles/2013/07/12
/how-technology-is-transforming-health-care.
Accessed December 14, 2016.
5. Congressional Budget Office. Historical budget
data, March 2016, and long-term budget
projections, July 2016. https://www.cbo.gov/about
/products/budget-economic-data. Accessed
February 10, 2017.
6. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
National health expenditure fact sheet. 2016.
https://www.cms.gov/research-statistics-data
-and-systems/statistics-trends-and-reports
/nationalhealthexpenddata/nhe-fact-sheet.html.
Accessed December 27, 2016.
7. Squires D, Anderson C. U.S. Health Care From
a Global Perspective: Spending, Use of Services,
Prices, and Health in 13 Countries. New York, NY:
The Commonwealth Fund; 2015. http://www
.commonwealthfund.org/~/media/files
/publications/issue-brief/2015/oct/1819_squires_us
_hlt_care_global_perspective_oecd_intl_brief_v3.pdf.
Accessed December 27, 2016.
8. Institute of Medicine. Best Care at Lower Cost:
The Path to Continuously Learning Health Care in
America. Washington, DC: National Academies Press;
2013.
9. Berwick DM, Hackbarth AD. Eliminating waste
in US health care. JAMA. 2012;307(14):1513-1516.
NAM’
s Vital Directions for Health and Health Care Initiative
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
Published online March 21, 2017
E9
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/pdfaccess.ashx?url=/data/journals/jama/0/ on 03/24/2017
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
10. McGinnis JM, Berwick DM, Daschle TA, et al.
Systems Strategies for Better Health Throughout
the Life Course: A Vital Direction for Health and
Health Care. Washington, DC: National Academy
of Medicine; 2016.
11. Institute of Medicine. Evidence-Based Medicine
and the Changing Nature of Health Care: 2007 IOM
Annual Meeting Summary. Washington, DC: National
Academies Press; 2008.
12. McGinnis JM, Williams-Russo P, Knickman JR.
The case for more active policy attention to health
promotion. Health Aff (Millwood). 2002;21(2):78-93.
13. Mitchell E. Population-based payment models:
overcoming barriers, accelerating adoption. May 16,
2016. https://hcp-lan.org/2016/05/pbp-models
-overcoming-barriers-accelerating-adoption/.
Accessed December 27, 2016.
14. McGinnis JM, Foege WH. Actual causes of
death in the United States. JAMA. 1993;270(18):
2207-2212.
15. Taylor LA, Coyle CE, Ndumele C, et al.
Leveraging the Social Determinants of Health:
What Works? Boston, MA: Blue Cross
Blue Shield of Massachusetts Foundation; 2015.
http://bluecrossfoundation.org/sites/default/files
/download/publication/Social_Equity_Report_Final
.pdf. Accessed December 27, 2016.
16. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration. Health homes and medical homes.
http://www.integration.samhsa.gov/integrated
-care-models/health-homes. Accessed January 31,
2017.
17. McClellan MB, Leavitt MO. Competencies and
tools to shift payments from volume to value. JAMA.
2016;316(16):1655-1656.
18. Légaré F, Witteman HO. Shared decision
making: examining key elements and barriers to
adoption into routine clinical practice. Health Aff
(Millwood). 2013;32(2):276-284.
19. Kish LJ, Topol EJ. Unpatients—why patients
should own their medical data. Nat Biotechnol.
2015;33(9):921-924.
20. Vernon JA, Trujillo A, Rosenbaum S,
DeBuono B. Low Health Literacy: Implications for
National Health Policy. Washington, DC: Department
of Health Policy, School of Public Health & Health
Services, George Washington University; 2007.
21. Berman M, Fenaughty A. Technology and
managed care: patient benefits of telemedicine
in a rural health care network. Health Econ. 2005;14
(6):559-573.
22. Hailey D, Roine R, Ohinmaa A. Systematic
review of evidence for the benefits of telemedicine.
J Telemed Telecare. 2002;8(suppl 1):1-30.
23. Krumholz HM, Bourne PE, Kuntz RE, Paz HL,
Terry SF, Waldstreicher J. Data Acquisition,
Curation, and Use for a Continuously Learning
Health System: A Vital Direction for Health and
Health Care. Washington, DC: National Academy of
Medicine; 2016.
24. Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute.
Communication and dissemination research.
http://www.pcori.org/about-us/our-programs
/communication-and-dissemination-research.
Accessed January 27, 2017.
25. Stanford School of Medicine. Healthcare
disparities and barriers to health care: rural health
fact sheet. 2010. http://ruralhealth.stanford.edu
/health-pros/factsheets/downloads/rural_fact
_sheet_5.pdf. Accessed January 31, 2017.
26. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering,
and Medicine. Communities in Action: Pathways to
Health Equity. Washington, DC: National Academies
Press; 2017.
27. Bradley EH, Taylor LA. The American Health
Care Paradox: Why Spending More Is Getting Us Less.
New York, NY: PublicAffairs; 2013.
28. Mitchell EM. Concentration of health
expenditures in the US civilian noninstitutionalized
population, 2014. November 2016. https://meps
.ahrq.gov/data_files/publications/st497/stat497
.shtml. Accessed February 2, 2017.
29. Center for Health Care Strategies and State
Health Access Data Assistance Center. Community
care teams: an overview of state approaches.
March 2016. http://www.chcs.org/media
/Community-Care-Teams-An-Overview-of-State
-Approaches-030316.pdf. Accessed January 31,
2017.
30. Office of the National Coordinator for Health
Information Technology. Information technology
in health care: the next consumer revolution. 2013.
https://www.healthit.gov/patients-families
/benefits-health-it. Accessed December 27, 2016.
31. Perlin JB, Baker DB, Brailer DJ, et al. Information
Technology Interoperability and Use for Better Care
and Evidence: A Vital Direction for Health and Health
Care. Washington, DC: National Academy of
Medicine; 2016.
32. Office of the National Coordinator for Health
Information Technology. Connecting health and
care for the nation: a 10-year vision to achieve
an interoperable health IT infrastructure. 2014.
https://www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files
/ONC10yearInteroperabilityConceptPaper.pdf.
Accessed December 12, 2016.
33. Institute of Medicine. Vital Signs: Core Metrics
for Health and Health Care Progress. Washington, DC:
National Academies Press; 2015.
34. Pronovost PJ, Austin JM, Cassel CK, et al.
Fostering Transparency in Outcomes, Quality, Safety,
and Costs: A Vital Direction for Health and Health
Care. Washington, DC: National Academy of
Medicine; 2016.
35. Austin JM, McGlynn EA, Pronovost PJ.
Fostering transparency in outcomes, quality, safety,
and costs. JAMA. 2016;316(16):1661-1662.
36. Kruse J. Fragmentation in US medical
education, research, and practice: the need for
system wide defrag. Fam Med. 2013;45(1):54-57.
37. Lipstein SH, Kellermann AL, Berkowitz B, et al.
Workforce for 21st-Century Health and Health Care:
A Vital Direction for Health and Health Care.
Washington, DC: National Academy of Medicine;
2016.
38. Zerhouni E, Berg JM, Hrabowski FA, Kington R,
Landis SCR. Training the Workforce for 21st Century
Science: A Vital Direction for Health and Health Care.
Washington, DC: National Academy of Medicine;
2016.
39. Network for Excellence in Health Innovation.
Real World Evidence: A New Era for Health Care
Innovation. Cambridge, MA: Network for Excellence
in Health Innovation; 2015.
40. Kennedy-Martin T, Curtis S, Faries D, Robinson
S, Johnston J. A literature review on the
representativeness of randomized controlled trial
samples and implications for the external validity of
trial results. Trials. 2015;16:495.
41. Krumholz HM, Terry SF, Waldstreicher J.
Data acquisition, curation, and use for
a continuously learning health system. JAMA.
2016;316(16):1669-1670.
42. Rosenblatt M, Boutin MM, Nussbaum SR.
Innovation in medicine and device development,
regulatory review, and use of clinical advances. JAMA.
2016;316(16):1671-1672.
43. Moses H III, Matheson DHM, Cairns-Smith S,
George BP, Palisch C, Dorsey ER. The anatomy of
medical research: US and international
comparisons. JAMA. 2015;313(2):174-189.
44. Rosenblatt M, Austin CP, Boutin M, et al.
Innovation in Development, Regulatory Review, and
Use of Clinical Advances: A Vital Direction for Health
and Health Care. Washington, DC: National Academy
of Medicine; 2016.
45. US Food and Drug Administration. National
Medical Evidence Generation Collaborative
(EvGen Collaborative). https://www.fda.gov
/ScienceResearch/SpecialTopics/EvGenSystem
/default.htm. Accessed January 27, 2017.
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
NAM’
s Vital Directions for Health and Health Care Initiative
E10
JAMA
Published online March 21, 2017
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/pdfaccess.ashx?url=/data/journals/jama/0/ on 03/24/2017
