 REVIEW
Open Access
Medicating patients during extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation: the evidence is
building
Amy L. Dzierba1*, Darryl Abrams2 and Daniel Brodie2
Abstract
This article is one of ten reviews selected from the
Annual Update in Intensive Care and Emergency
Medicine 2017. Other selected articles can be found
online at http://ccforum.com/series/annualupdate2017.
Further information about the Annual Update in
Intensive Care and Emergency Medicine is available
from http://www.springer.com/series/8901.
Background
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO), which
can support gas exchange or hemodynamics in patients
with severe respiratory or cardiac failure, has demon-
strated considerable evolution over the last decade [1],
with a steady rise since 2009 in the number of ECMO‐
treated patients and number of centers providing ECMO
support [2, 3]. With more adult patients being placed on
ECMO support, there is an increased need to under-
stand the complex changes in drug pharmacokinetics
and pharmacodynamics that occur with the addition of
an ECMO circuit to the management of a critically ill
patient.
The relationship between the dose of a drug and the
elicited response may be altered in critically ill patients as
a
result
of
pharmacokinetic
and
pharmacodynamic
changes [4]. The use of extracorporeal mechanical sup-
port, such as ECMO, can further increase the variability of
pharmacokinetic alterations [5]. Therefore, the combin-
ation of critical illness and ECMO presents considerable
challenges to providing optimal pharmacotherapy. The
ability to anticipate alterations in pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics in this patient population is essential
* Correspondence: ald9012@nyp.org
1Columbia University Medical Center, Department of Pharmacy,
NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY 10032, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
for providing an individualized therapeutic plan that maxi-
mizes therapeutic benefit while minimizing potential
toxicity.
Despite improvements in extracorporeal technology
and resurgence in its use in respiratory and cardiac fail-
ure, there remains a paucity of data on pharmacotherapy
in patients receiving ECMO. This chapter summarizes
our current understanding of the effects of ECMO on
the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of several
drug classes commonly used to manage these critically
ill patients.
The effect of critical illness and ECMO on
pharmacokinetics
Pharmacokinetics encompasses the absorption, distribu-
tion, metabolism and elimination of a drug, ultimately in-
fluencing the concentration at the targeted site of action.
In contrast, pharmacodynamics denotes the relationship
between the drug concentration and the physiologic and
biochemical effects of the drug on the body, including the
intensity of therapeutic and adverse effects. The relation-
ship between pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics is
influenced by the drug, the underlying disease process,
and the presence of extracorporeal factors. The culmin-
ation of all of these factors can lead to considerable and
unpredictable alterations in pharmacokinetics. Figure 1
summarizes the effects of serum drug concentrations and
the resultant pharmacokinetic changes influenced by crit-
ical illness and ECMO.
The elimination of drugs from the body is highly
dependent on clearance of the drugs from the body
and on volume of distribution. The patient’s physi-
ology and the specific physiochemical properties of
drugs, such as protein binding, hydrophilicity, mo-
lecular weight, and degree of ionization at a given
physiologic pH, may influence both clearance and
volume
of
distribution.
The
presence
of
ECMO
frequently leads to additional alterations, including an
© Dzierba et al. 2017
Dzierba et al. Critical Care  (2017) 21:66 
DOI 10.1186/s13054-017-1644-y
 increased volume of distribution and either increased or
decreased drug clearance [5].
The liver and the kidneys are the two major organ sys-
tems responsible for drug metabolism and elimination,
with less significant elimination occurring through the
biliary system, gastrointestinal tract and lungs. Critically
ill patients often develop organ insufficiency or failure
during the course of their illness thereby altering drug
elimination rates. Decreased renal blood flow or function
will lead to a decreased glomerular filtration rate, affect-
ing drugs that are dependent on this route of elimination
(mainly hydrophilic drugs), whereas decreases in hepatic
perfusion or function may lead to toxicity through
decreased enzymatic activity or decreases in extraction
efficiency.
The distribution of drug throughout the body (volume
of distribution) is largely dependent on the drug’s hydro-
philicity and its acid‐ionization constant. Drugs that are
hydrophilic will have a lower volume of distribution and
their concentrations will primarily be influenced by
fluid‐shifts and large‐volume fluid resuscitation. In con-
trast, lipophilic drugs penetrate into the tissues, leaving
lower concentrations in the blood and increasing the
apparent volume of distribution. The ECMO circuit may
increase the volume of distribution through either
hemodilution or sequestration of drugs [5, 6]. An initial
increase in volume of distribution that occurs at the
initiation of ECMO from the introduction of priming
solutions (plasma, saline, or albumin), primarily affecting
hydrophilic drugs, may result in decreased plasma con-
centrations and, potentially, therapeutic failure of a drug.
This increased volume may also lead to the dilution of
plasma proteins, notably albumin, affecting drugs that
are highly protein‐bound, leading to potential toxicities
as a result of an increase in the proportion of the
unbound fraction of a drug.
Modern extracorporeal circuits typically consist of
cannulae, polyvinyl chloride (PVC) tubing, a centrifugal
pump, and an artificial membrane for gas exchange
(often termed a ‘membrane oxygenator’). The membrane
oxygenator and PVC tubing comprise a large surface
area for potential drug sequestration, which may lead
to drug loss over time, particularly for lipophilic
drugs [5, 7, 8]. The composition of the tubing and
membrane oxygenator may play a role in the amount
of drug that is sequestered. Some studies have ob-
served that both PVC tubing and the membrane oxy-
genators absorb drugs to a similar extent, whereas
others have shown significant differences. This may
be explained by both the age of the circuit and the
type of pump used [8–12].
Albumin and α1‐acid glycoprotein, both synthesized in
the liver, are the two major blood proteins that bind to
drugs. In critical illness, albumin concentrations decrease
Fig. 1 Changes in pharmacokinetics with critical illness and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. 1increased α1‐acid glycoprotein and decreased
albumin concentrations; 2mostly affecting hydrophilic drugs
Dzierba et al. Critical Care  (2017) 21:66 
Page 2 of 7
 in response to increased vascular permeability, decreased
production and increased catabolism; whereas, α1‐acid
glycoprotein is an acute‐phase reactant that may increase
in response to physiologic stress. The changes in protein
concentrations could affect both the amount of free drug
available and the overall volume of distribution. Addition-
ally the deposition of protein on the inner surface of the
ECMO tubing may potentially increase the sequestration
of drugs that have a high affinity for protein binding [13].
A recent ex vivo model tested the changes in concentra-
tions over time of highly protein bound drugs [14]. Highly
protein bound drugs in this experiment included ceftriax-
one, caspofungin and thiopentone, all of which had signifi-
cantly lower mean drug recoveries at 24 h (80, 56, and
12%, respectively) compared to drugs that were not highly
protein bound [14].
Since lipophilic and highly protein bound drugs are
more prone to sequestration in ECMO circuits, an
understanding of the physicochemical properties of
drugs
can
assist
in
determining
the
relationship
between the dose administered and the anticipated
blood concentration [5, 15]. The octanol‐water parti-
tion coefficient or log P, is a common way to report
the measure of a drug’s lipophilicity [16]. Drugs with
high log P values (around 2.0) will have a propensity
to be very soluble in organic materials such as the
PVC tubing used in the ECMO circuit. However, to
date, there has been no characterization of the drug‐
circuit interaction beyond 24 h and, as such, little is
known regarding the adsorptive capacity of the circuit
over longer periods of ECMO support. Table 1 sum-
marizes the effects of critical illness and ECMO on
pharmacokinetics of drugs based on degree of lipo-
philicity of the drug.
Analgesia and sedation
Patients receiving ECMO often require analgesia and
sedation to reduce oxygen consumption, facilitate patient‐
ventilator synchrony, diminish patient stress and discom-
fort, and prevent patient‐initiated device dislodgement or
removal [1]. However, achieving the desired level of
sedation and preventing delirium in the critically ill
patient receiving ECMO remains a challenge in ICUs,
owing to paradigm shifts in analgosedation regimens as
well as pharmacokinetic alterations of commonly used an-
algesics and sedatives. Medication selection should be
based on the patient’s needs, with titration to a predeter-
mined goal in accordance with recently published guide-
lines [17]. Limited data exist on the most appropriate
opioid and sedative medication regimen to use in ECMO
patients to achieve the desired level of sedation while min-
imizing excess sedative exposure. Commonly used intra-
venous opioids include fentanyl, hydromorphone and
morphine, while sedatives often include propofol, dexme-
detomidine and benzodiazepines. The choice of agent
used is dependent on the desired physiological endpoint
while balancing unwanted adverse effects of each individ-
ual agent.
Three ex vivo studies using adult ECMO circuits
composed of PVC tubing and a hollow polymethyl-
pentene
fiber
membrane
oxygenator
demonstrated
significant losses of commonly used opioids and seda-
tives [6, 18, 19]. One investigation observed as much
as a 93% loss in dexmedetomidine concentrations at
24 h [18]. Another study, measuring concentrations
of morphine, fentanyl, and midazolam over a 24‐hour
period, demonstrated that the average drug recovery
relative to baseline was lower with lipophilic drugs
[6]. Only 3% of fentanyl and 13% of midazolam were
detectable at 24 h; however, the ECMO circuit did
not substantially alter morphine concentrations, with
103% recovery at 24 h. Of interest, in the first hour of
ECMO support, up to 70 and 50% of fentanyl and midazo-
lam, respectively, were lost in the circuit [6]. The most re-
cent ex vivo study using adult ECMO circuits primed with
human whole blood observed a recovery of only 30% of
baseline propofol concentrations at 30 min and negligible
concentrations at 24 h [19]. Additionally, midazolam con-
centrations were substantially reduced with 54 and 11% of
baseline concentrations measured at 30 min and 24 h, re-
spectively [19]. Similar findings have also been observed
in neonatal circuits composed of PVC tubing and earlier
generation silicone membrane oxygenators. These investi-
gations observed up to a 68% loss of midazolam and a
98% loss of propofol within 40–120 min and up to a 30%
reduction in lorazepam concentrations [11, 12].
Adult patients receiving ECMO for respiratory failure
appear to have increased requirements of analgesia and
sedation over time [20, 21]. The first case report demon-
strating increased sedation requirements was in a 30‐
year‐old man with severe respiratory failure requiring
venovenous ECMO as a bridge to lung transplantation.
Over 19 days of ECMO support, his requirements of
morphine and propofol to maintain deep levels of
Table 1 Effect of critical illness and extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation (ECMO) on pharmacokinetics (PK) of drugs, based
on degree of lipophilicity
Hydrophilic drugs
Lipophilic drugs
Volume of distribution (Vd)
Low
High
Primary mode of
clearance
Renal
Hepatic
Log P
Low
High
Potential effect of critical
illness on PK
Increased Vd
No change in Vd
Effect of ECMO on PK
Increased Vd
Increased Vd
No change in clearance
Increased clearance
Log P: octanol‐water partition coefficient (measure of drug’s lipophilicity)
Dzierba et al. Critical Care  (2017) 21:66 
Page 3 of 7
 sedation increased significantly [20]. A small, single‐cen-
ter, retrospective study observed an increase in opioid
and sedative requirements over time in 29 consecutive
patients requiring ECMO (13 venovenous, 16 venoarter-
ial) where the sedation protocol was to keep patients
heavily sedated during the first few days of ECMO
followed by daily lightening of sedation when possible
[21]. This study reported an increase in the average daily
dose of midazolam and morphine of 18 mg (p = 0.001)
and 29 mg (p = 0.02), respectively [21]. Interestingly, the
authors did not find any significant increase in fentanyl
requirements over time. Additionally, patients receiving
venovenous ECMO had a significantly higher daily mid-
azolam dose requirement than did patients receiving
venoarterial ECMO (p = 0.005) [21]. A more recent sin-
gle‐center, prospective cohort study set out to determine
the median daily dose of opioids and benzodiazepines in
32 patients receiving either venovenous or venoarterial
ECMO [22]. In this mixed cohort the median daily dose
of opioids and benzodiazepines, 3875 micrograms and
24 mg respectively, was found to be lower than that re-
ported from previous trials. Additionally, the authors did
not find increasing requirements throughout the dur-
ation of ECMO support. The lower opioid and benzodi-
azepine requirements observed in this study could be a
result of the study institution’s analgosedation approach,
lower goal sedation scores, and use of other non‐benzo-
diazepine sedatives [22].
The only comparative trial to date is a recent retro-
spective cohort study that enrolled consecutive adult
patients with severe respiratory failure with (n = 34) or
without (n = 60) venovenous ECMO support requiring at
least one sedative to maintain a level of wakefulness ap-
propriate to maintain patient comfort and safety while
optimizing oxygenation and ventilator support [23]. The
authors found that the maximum median 6‐hour seda-
tive exposure was nearly twice as high in the ECMO
group and was reached nearly 3 days later when com-
pared to the group not receiving ECMO. However, there
was no significant difference in 6‐hour sedative exposure
in adjusted analyses [23]. Therefore, this study chal-
lenges whether the increased requirements of opioids
and sedatives are a result of circuit‐related factors alone
or whether other factors, such as tolerance, age or
pharmacogenomics, play a central role.
Existing data are sparse to guide the appropriate dos-
ing of opioids and sedatives in adult patients receiving
ECMO in the context of modern extracorporeal technol-
ogy. Many of the first‐line agents used in the manage-
ment of pain and sedation are lipophilic and therefore
have a high propensity to be adsorbed or sequestered by
the extracorporeal circuit [6, 11, 12]. One approach to
achieving adequate sedation in patients receiving ECMO
would be to start with continuous infusions of both an
opioid and a sedative, anticipating requirements that
exceed standard doses with the ultimate goal of minim-
izing the deleterious effects of sedative agents, especially
benzodiazepines, with daily interruptions or down titra-
tions. Additionally, clinicians should anticipate the need
for significant dose reductions at the time of ECMO dis-
continuation given the likely rapid decrease in volume of
distribution. Failure to do so could result in overuse of
these medications. The reduction in dosing may be diffi-
cult to calibrate, so it is prudent to carefully monitor for
signs of withdrawal and delirium. Consideration of
adjunct agents, such as sub‐anesthetic doses of keta-
mine, may help facilitate achieving sedation goals. Two
uncontrolled studies demonstrated reductions in seda-
tive rates with the addition of low‐dose ketamine infu-
sions [24, 25]. Most recently, a randomized trial did not
show any differences in opioid or sedative requirements
with the addition of low‐dose ketamine to standard sed-
ation practices as compared to standard sedation prac-
tices alone in patients receiving venovenous ECMO for
severe respiratory failure [26]. Standard sedation prac-
tices consisted of infusions of fentanyl or hydromor-
phone and midazolam to achieve a Richmond Agitation
Sedation Scale (RASS) of −5 at the initiation of ECMO.
The median cumulative amount of fentanyl and midazo-
lam equivalents in the low‐dose ketamine group were
almost twice and four times as high, respectively, when
compared to the control group from ECMO initiation to
the decision to achieve wakefulness [26]. However,
patients
receiving
low‐dose
ketamine
infusion
had
similar improvements in their RASS scores over the 72‐
hours after the decision to achieve wakefulness [26].
The incidence of delirium in patients receiving ECMO
is not well characterized; however, given the high use of
benzodiazepines in these patients, it may be reasonable
to presume that the rates are as high as those reported
in the critically ill patient population not receiving
ECMO [27]. When appropriate, the use of a regimented
analgosedation approach, daily interruption of sedation,
and early mobilization may help minimize opioid and
sedative exposure and thus reduce the incidence of delir-
ium associated with these drugs, as appears to be the
case in critically ill patients in general [17].
Antimicrobials
Infections are commonly encountered in critically ill
patients and are associated with higher mortality [28]. In
a critically ill patient, source control, in addition to
timely and appropriate antimicrobial administration,
remains the cornerstone of successful treatment of infec-
tion [29]. Selecting the appropriate dose of an antimicro-
bial can be challenging given the potential effects of
critical illness and ECMO on drug concentrations,
particularly considering that most antimicrobial dosing
Dzierba et al. Critical Care  (2017) 21:66 
Page 4 of 7
 regimens have been established in healthy adults with
normal physiology [5]. Changes in volume of distribu-
tion and clearance from critical illness and the ECMO
circuit may affect pharmacodynamic parameters that ul-
timately determine the effectiveness of the antimicrobial
agent. Inappropriate antimicrobial dosing may result in
substantial drug losses, leading to therapeutic failure, de-
velopment of resistance, and worse outcomes in patients
with life‐threating infections whereas an empiric in-
crease in dose may potentially lead to accumulation and
toxicity.
Vancomycin, a moderately protein bound, hydrophilic
antimicrobial agent is commonly used to treat Gram‐
positive bacterial infections. Two in vitro ECMO studies
observed steady vancomycin drug concentrations over
24 and 48‐hour periods [6, 19]. In a matched cohort
study of adult critically ill patients, those receiving
ECMO had a similar volume of distribution and clear-
ance of vancomycin compared to those not receiving
ECMO in the first 24 h of therapy [30]. All patients re-
ceived a 35 mg/kg loading dose over 4 h, followed by a
continuous infusion targeting a serum concentration of
20–30 mg/l [30]. Linezolid, an alternative Gram‐positive
antimicrobial, was studied in three adult patients receiv-
ing ECMO, the results of which suggest that therapeutic
targets may not be achieved with standard dosing when
the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) is greater
than 1 mg/l [31].
Aminoglycosides, including gentamicin and tobramycin,
are hydrophilic drugs with low protein binding and with
increased volume of distribution in the context of critical
illness, resulting in decreased maximal concentrations.
Additionally, in the context of a higher volume of distribu-
tion from the ECMO circuit, standard or higher initial
doses may be needed with normal or extended intervals in
order to provide sufficient peak concentrations. The study
of aminoglycoside pharmacokinetic alterations during
ECMO is largely limited to the neonatal population; how-
ever, one observational study in adult patients demon-
strated comparable pharmacokinetics with amikacin in
critically ill patients with or without ECMO support [32].
Therapeutic drug monitoring is readily available for this
class of antimicrobial agents, making it feasible to target
effective concentrations while limiting potential toxicity.
Extended‐spectrum
penicillins,
cephalosporins
and
carbapenems are commonly used in the treatment of
Gram‐negative infections in the critically ill patient
population. As a class, these antimicrobials are generally
hydrophilic, largely dependent on renal elimination, and
have moderate to low protein binding; however, variabil-
ity exists with certain drugs such as ceftriaxone. Opti-
mizing the time‐dependent, bactericidal effect of this
class will be achieved by maximizing the time concentra-
tions above the MIC. The use of extended or continuous
infusions seems to be a reasonable approach to optimize
the pharmacodynamics in critically ill patients receiving
ECMO [4].
Conflicting data have been reported on meropenem, a
hydrophilic carbapenem with low protein binding. While
some studies suggest a significant loss of meropenem
within the ECMO circuit [6, 33, 34], other investigations
have found no effect in vivo compared to other critically
ill patients [35]. A recent retrospective, case‐control
study observed no differences in pharmacokinetic para-
menters with either piperacillin/tazobactam or merope-
nem in patients receiving ECMO compared to those not
receiving ECMO [35]. Of interest, nearly 30% of all drug
levels measured for the two aformentioned drugs were
subtherapeutic, which may be a consequence of other
pathophysiological disturbances not controlled for in
this critically ill population [35]. Mechanical circulatory
support in general can induce a systemic inflammatory
response, independent of the underlying critical illness,
which, in turn, may augment renal clearance. Classes of
antimicrobials in which direct correlations of augmented
renal clearance and lower serum drug concentrations
have been observed include beta‐lactams, aminoglyco-
cides and glycopeptides [36].
Regarding other antimicrobial drug classes, azithromy-
cin pharmacokinetics appear to be similar between
patients receiving ECMO and non‐ECMO critically ill
controls [37] and tigecycline levels in one patient were
similar to expected levels based on population pharma-
cokinetics [38]. Concentrations of ciprofloxicin, a fluoro-
quinolone that is lipophilic with low to moderate
protein binding, do not seem to be affected by ECMO
[14]. To date there are no data on pharmacokinetic
changes with polymyxin B or polymyxin E (colistin) that
are used to treat multi‐drug resistant Gram‐negative in-
fections. ECMO does not appear to affect oseltamivir
pharmacokinetics directly; however, patients with renal
dysfunction may experience impaired drug clearance
[39–41].
Data on the pharmacokinetic changes of antifungal
agents in adult patients receiving ECMO are limited to
in vitro studies or case reports. While fluconazole does
not seem to be affected by the ECMO circuit with a
mean drug recovery of 91% at 24 h, voriconazole con-
centrations appear to be significantly affected, with up to
a 71% loss at 24 h [14, 42]. Despite adequate serum con-
centrations of caspofungin at recommended doses, data
suggest some sequestration by the ECMO circuit [43].
Lipophilic formulations of amphotericin B as well as
posaconazole and isavuconazole, both highly protein
bound, may result in significant sequestration within the
ECMO circuit.
When designing an appropriate antimicrobial dosing
regimen for patients receiving ECMO, the biochemical
Dzierba et al. Critical Care  (2017) 21:66 
Page 5 of 7
 properties of each drug should be considered, generally
favoring a high initial concentration while monitoring
for potential toxicities. Whenever possible, monitoring
of drug concentrations, including peaks and troughs as
appropriate, will help inform an effective dose and inter-
val. Individualized dosing strategies may be necessary,
especially when targeting a specific microorganism.
Further insight into pharmacokinetic changes of antimi-
crobials in adult ECMO patients will be provided with
the ongoing Analgesia, Sedation, and Antibiotic Pharma-
cokinetics during Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygen-
ation (ASAP ECMO) trial [44].
Limitations to current studies
Although there are known pharmacokinetic changes
occurring as a consequence of ECMO support, there are
very limited data addressing the clinical outcomes asso-
ciated with these observations. For example, agents used
for sedation or blood pressure control can be titrated to
predetermined clinical endpoints, permitting the bedside
clinician to use a dose for which the effects may be eas-
ily observed and measured. However, in the absence of
therapeutic drug monitoring, attainment of adequate
antimicrobial concentrations may not be so readily
observed, instead requiring the clinician to rely on
surrogate endpoints, such as white blood cell counts or
temperature curves, to assess effectiveness. Much of the
existing data is limited to simulated circuits that do not
account for metabolism or elimination. Additionally
studies have not addressed how changing blood flow
rates or using different ECMO configurations could im-
pact the amount of drug sequestered within the circuit.
Finally, many of the studies do not have control subjects,
have not addressed the effects of circuits over longer
time intervals, and have not studied the impact of add-
itional extracorporeal circuits, such as continuous renal
replacement therapy, on pharmacokinetic parameters.
Future directions
There is potential for novel strategies, such as altering
the materials used in ECMO tubing or creating poly-
meric micelles for drug delivery, to minimize drug
sequestration within the ECMO circuit. Absorption of
lipophilic drugs to traditional medical grade PVC tubing
containing di‐ethylhexyl phthalate, a plasticizer, has been
well established over the years. One in vitro study ob-
served less adsorption capacity for lipophilic drugs when
alternative materials, such as Teflon or silicone‐caou-
tchouc mixture (SRT 460), were used [13]. Another
method would be to encapsulate intravenous lipophilic
drugs within micelles, a concept that has previously been
demonstrated with gene therapy [45]. The idea is to
solubilize appropriate portions of lipophilic drugs into
the
hydrophobic
core,
allowing
attraction
of
the
lipophilic tail to the surface of the ECMO tubing and
drug release with minimal adherence to the surface of
the tubing.
Conclusion
The pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of drugs
administered to critically ill patients are influenced by
several factors, including the physiochemical properties
of the drugs, the etiology and severity of the underlying
illness, and the function of the organs responsible for
drug metabolism. The presence of ECMO has an add-
itional impact on drug distribution and metabolism, par-
ticularly due to increases in volume of distribution and
sequestration by circuit components. Data are limited
regarding the optimal regimen and dosing of sedatives
and analgesics for critically ill patients receiving ECMO
support, with the existing literature suggesting that, in
many cases, higher amounts of analgosedation may be
necessary to achieve therapeutic levels than would be ex-
pected for critically ill patients not receiving ECMO.
Certain classes of antimicrobials may likewise be affected
by ECMO, potentially leading to sub‐therapeutic drug
concentrations if usual dosing regimens are used. Emer-
ging data from the ASAP ECMO trial should help
inform the appropriate administration of many com-
monly used antimicrobials, sedatives and analgesics in
patients receiving ECMO.
Acknowledgements
Not applicable.
Funding
Publication costs were funded by the Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and
Critical Care Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center.
Availability of data and materials
Not applicable.
Authors’ contributions
AD, DA, and DB contributed to the body of the manuscript. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
DB is currently on the medical advisory boards of ALung Technologies and
Kadence. All compensation for these activities is paid to Columbia University.
ALD and DA declare that they have no competing interests.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.
Author details
1Columbia University Medical Center, Department of Pharmacy,
NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY 10032, USA. 2Division of
Pulmonary, Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, Allergy
and Critical Care, 622 West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA.
Dzierba et al. Critical Care  (2017) 21:66 
Page 6 of 7
 References
1.
Brodie D, Bacchetta M. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for ARDS in
adults. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:1905–14.
2.
Paden ML, Conrad SA, Rycus PT, Thiagarajan RR, Registry ELSO.
Extracorporeal life support organization registry report 2012. Asaio J. 2012;
59:202–10.
3.
Karagiannidis C, Brodie D, Strassmann S, et al. Extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation: evolving epidemiology and mortality. Intensive Care Med.
2016;42:889–96.
4.
Roberts JA, Lipman J. Pharmacokinetic issues for antibiotics in the critically
ill patient. Crit Care Med. 2009;37:840–51.
5.
Shekar K, Fraser JF, Smith MT, et al. Pharmacokinetic changes in patients
receiving extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. J Crit Care. 2012;27:741.
6.
Shekar K, Roberts JA, McDonald CI, et al. Sequestration of drugs in the
circuit may lead to therapeutic failure during extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation. Crit Care. 2012;16:R194.
7.
Preston TJ, Ratliff TM, Gomez D, et al. Modified surface coatings and their
effect on drug adsorption within the extracorporeal life support circuit.
J Extra Corpor Technol. 2010;42:199–202.
8.
Preston TJ, Hodge AB, Riley JB, et al. In vitro drug adsorption and plasma
free hemoglobin levels associated with hollow fiber oxygenators in the
extracorporeal life support (ECLS) circuit. J Extra Corpor Technol.
2007;39:234–7.
9.
Rosen DA, Rosen KR, Silvasi DL. In vitro variability in fentanyl absorption by
different membrane oxygenators. J Cardiothorac Anesth. 1990;4:332–5.
10.
Wildschut ED, Ahsman MJ, Allegaert K, et al. Determinants of drug
absorption in different ECMO circuits. Intensive Care Med. 2010;36:2109–16.
11.
Mulla H, Lawson G, von Anrep C, et al. In vitro evaluation of sedative
drug losses during extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. Perfusion.
2000;15:21–6.
12.
Bhatt-Meht V, Annich G. Sedative clearance during extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation. Perfusion. 2005;20:309–15.
13.
Unger JK, Kuehlein G, Schroers A, Gerlach JC, Rossaint R. Adsorption of
xenobiotics to plastic tubing incorporated into dynamic in vitro systems
used in pharmacological research – limits and progress. Biomaterials.
2001;22:2031–7.
14.
Shekar K, Roberts JA, Mcdonald CI, et al. Protein-bound drugs are prone to
sequestration in the extracorporeal membrane oxygenation circuit: results
from an ex vivo study. Crit Care. 2015;19:164.
15.
Shekar K, Roberts JA, Barnett AG, et al. Can physicochemical properties of
antimicrobials be used to predict their pharmacokinetics during
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation? Illustrative data from ovine models.
Crit Care. 2015;19:437.
16.
Poole SK, Poole CF. Separation methods for estimating octanol-water
partition coefficients. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci. 2003;
797:3–19.
17.
Barr J, Fraser GL, Puntillo K, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the
management of pain, agitation, and delirium in adult patients in the ICU.
Crit Care Med. 2013;41:263–306.
18.
Wagner D, Pasko D, Phillips K, et al. In vitro clearance of dexmedetomidine
in extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. Perfusion. 2013;28:40–6.
19.
Lemaitre F, Hasni N, Leprince P, et al. Propofol, midazolam, vancomycin and
cyclosporine therapeutic drug monitoring in extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation circuits primed with whole human blood. Crit Care. 2015;19:40.
20.
Shekar K, Roberts JA, Ghassabian S, et al. Sedation during extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation – why more is less. Anaesth Intensive Care.
2012;40:1067–9.
21.
Shekar K, Roberts JA, Mullany DV, et al. Increased sedation requirements in
patients receiving extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for respiratory
and cardiorespiratory failure. Anaesth Intensive Care. 2012;40:648–55.
22.
DeGrado JR, Hohlfelder B, Ritchie BM, Anger KE, Reardon DP, Weinhouse GL.
Evaluation of sedatives, analgesics, and neuromuscular blocking agents in
adults receiving extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. J Crit Care.
2016;37:1–6.
23.
Der Nigoghossian C, Dzierba AL, Etheridge J, et al. Effect of extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation use on sedative requirements in patients with
severe acute respiratory distress syndrome. Pharmacotherapy.
2016;36:607–16.
24.
Tellor B, Shin N, Graeta TJ, Avidan MS. Ketamine infusion for patients
receiving extracorporeal membrane oxygenation support: a case series.
F1000Res. 2015;4:16.
25.
Floroff CK, Hassig TB, Cochran JB, Mazur JE. High-dose sedation and
analgesia during extracorporeal membrane oxygenation: A focus on the
adjunctive use of ketamine. J Pain Palliat Care Pharmacother. 2016;30:36–40.
26.
Dzierba AL, Brodie D, Bacchetta M, et al. Ketamine use in sedation
management in patients receiving extracorporeal membrane oxygenation.
Intensive Care Med. 2016;42:1822–3.
27.
Buscher H, Vaidiyanathan S, Al-Soufi S, et al. Sedation practice in veno-
venous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation: an international survey.
ASAIO J. 2013;59:636–41.
28.
Dellinger RP, Levy MM, Rhodes A, et al. Surviving Sepsis Campaign:
international guidelines for management of severe sepsis and septic shock:
2012. Crit Care Med. 2013;41:580–637.
29.
Kumar A, Roberts D, Wood KE, et al. Duration of hypotension before
initiation of effective antimicrobial therapy is the critical determinant of
survival in human septic shock. Crit Care Med. 2006;34:1589–96.
30.
Donadello K, Roberts JA, Cristallini S, et al. Vancomycin population
pharmacokinetics during extracorporeal membrane oxygenation therapy:
a matched cohort study. Crit Care. 2014;18:632.
31.
De Rosa FG, Corcione S, Baietto L, et al. Pharmacokinetics of linezolid during
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2013;41:590–1.
32.
Gélisse E, Neuville M, de Montmollin E, et al. Extracoporeal membrane
oxygenation (ECMO) does not impact on amikacin pharmacokinetics:
a case-control study. Intensive Care Med. 2016;42:946–8.
33.
Shekar K, Roberts JA, Ghassabian S, et al. Altered antibiotic pharmacokinetics
during extracorporeal membrane oxygenation: cause for concern?
J Antimicrob Chemother. 2013;68:726–7.
34.
Shekar K, Fraser JF, Taccone FS, et al. The combined effects of extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation and renal replacement therapy on meropenem
pharmacokinetics: a matched cohort study. Crit Care. 2014;18:565.
35.
Donadello K, Antonucci E, Cristallini S, et al. Beta-lactam pharmacokinetics
during extracorporeal membrane oxygenation therapy: A case-control
study. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2015;45:278–82.
36.
Udy AA, Roberts JA, Boots RJ, Paterson DL, Lipman J. Augmented renal
clearance: implications for antibacterial dosing in the critically ill. Clin
Pharmacokinet. 2010;35:606–8.
37.
Turner RB, Rouse S, Elbarbry F, et al. Azithromycin pharmacokinetics in
adults with acute respiratory distress syndrome undergoing treatment with
extracorporeal-membrane oxygenation. Ann Pharmacother. 2016;50:72–3.
38.
Veinstein A, Debouverie O, Grégoire N, et al. Lack of effect of extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation on tigecycline pharmacokinetics. J Antimicrob
Chemother. 2012;67:1047–8.
39.
Lemaitre F, Luyt CE, Roullet-Renoleau F, et al. Impact of extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation and continuous venovenous hemodiafiltration on
the pharmacokinetics of oseltamivir carboxylate in critically ill patients with
pandemic (H1N1) influenza. Ther Drug Monit. 2012;34:171–5.
40.
Mulla H, Peek GJ, Harvey C, et al. Oseltamivir pharmacokinetics in critically ill
adults receiving extracorporeal membrane oxygenation support. Anesth
Intensive Care. 2013;41:66–73.
41.
Eyler RF, Heung M, Pleva M, et al. Pharmacokinetics of oseltamivir and
oseltamivir carboxylate in critically ill patients receiving continuous
venovenous hemodialysis and/or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation.
Pharmacotherapy. 2012;32:1061–9.
42.
Mehta NM, Halwick DR, Dodson BL, et al. Potential drug sequestration
during extracorporeal membrane oxygenation: results from an ex vivo
experiment. Intensive Care Med. 2007;33:1018–24.
43.
Spriet I, Annaert P, Meersseman P, et al. Pharmacokinetics of caspofungin
and voriconazole in critically ill patients during extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2009;63:767–70.
44.
Shekar K, Roberts JA, Welch S, et al. ASAP ECMO: Antibiotic, sedative and
analgesic pharmacokinetics during extracorporeal membrane oxygenation:
a multi-centre study to optimise drug therapy during ECMO. BMC
Anesthesiol. 2012;12:29.
45.
Jones M, Leroux J. Polymeric micelles – a new generation of colloidal drug
carriers. Eur J Pharm Biopharm. 1999;48:101–11.
Dzierba et al. Critical Care  (2017) 21:66 
Page 7 of 7
