 Cell Host & Microbe
Commentary
Sociovirology: Conflict, Cooperation,
and Communication among Viruses
Samuel L. Dı
´az-Mun
˜ oz,1,* Rafael Sanjua
´ n,2,3 and Stuart West4
1Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California, Davis, One Shields Avenue, Davis, CA 95616, USA
2Institute for Integrative Systems Biology (I2SysBio), Universitat de Vale
` ncia, C/Catedra
´ tico Agustı
´n Escardino 9, 46980 Paterna
Valencia, Spain
3Department of Genetics, Universitat de Vale
` ncia, C/Dr. Moliner 50, Burjassot, Vale
` ncia 46100, Spain
4Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PS, UK
*Correspondence: samdiazmunoz@ucdavis.edu
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2017.09.012
Viruses are involved in various interactions both within and between infected cells. Social evolution theory
offers a conceptual framework for how virus-virus interactions, ranging from conflict to cooperation, have
evolved. A critical examination of these interactions could expand our understanding of viruses and be
exploited for epidemiological and medical interventions.
Virus-virus interactions are pervasive and
highly diverse (DaPalma et al., 2010;
Figure 1). Some viruses need another,
‘‘helper’’ virus to complete their infection
cycle, and other viruses are commonly
activated or suppressed by the presence
of secondary viral infections. Viral pro-
teins can mix and produce mosaic-like
viral particles (pseudotypes) when a cell
is coinfected with two different viruses.
Viral coinfection of microbes is wide-
spread (Dı
´az-Mun
˜ oz, 2017), and viruses
have
mechanisms
enabling
multiple
viral genomes to be cotransmitted in the
same infectious unit (reviewed in Sanjua
´ n,
2017). Coinfecting viral genomes can be
distinct, variants of the same virus, or
even
genetically
identical,
suggesting
different types of functional interplay.
Furthermore, bacteriophages use a form
of communication to regulate lysis of the
infected cell (Erez et al., 2017). Finally,
virus-virus interactions in the absence of
cellular coinfection can also be mediated
by changes at the host level, such as
immune responses.
Despite this growing body of empirical
evidence suggesting virus-virus interac-
tions, we lack a well-founded conceptual
framework that provides an understand-
ing
of
how
these
interactions
have
evolved and how they could shape viral
pathogenesis.
Social
evolution
theory
was originally developed to explain animal
behavior, but has since been extended to
microorganisms, including bacteria and
unicellular eukaryotes. Yet this social
perspective has not been embraced in
the study of viruses.
Potential misgivings with this social-
evolution approach include the idea that
viruses are too simple to interact socially,
or that to infer traits like cooperation
would be anthropomorphic. On the flip
side, social interactions have driven the
evolution of life at all levels of complexity
and thus could have a role in viral
evolution as well: genes cooperate to
form genomes, cells cooperate to form
multicellular organisms, and multicellular
organisms form complex cooperative so-
cieties. Conflict is also ubiquitous: ‘‘self-
ish’’ genes drive their transmission at a
cost to the genome, cells exploit collec-
tively
produced
goods
like
nutrient-
scavenging molecules, and organisms
compete with each other for resources.
Since no complex phenotypes are neces-
sary for the evolution of social traits, the
appearance of anthropomorphism or the
‘‘simple’’ organization of viruses may not
pose problems for the application of
sociobiology models in virology.
We
argue
for
a
social
evolution
approach
to
understand
and
predict
virus-virus interactions. This framework
can clarify unexplained phenomena in
virus-virus
interactions
by
identifying
evolved viral social traits, their genetic
and mechanistic basis, and the selective
pressures underlying these traits. We
outline how this approach could lead to
new breakthroughs in both fundamental
and applied virology.
Cooperation and the Individual
Social interactions take place when the
traits of one individual influence the fitness
of another individual. As such, evolu-
tionary analysis of social interactions re-
lies fundamentally on natural selection.
The only major difference with non-social
models is that two or more interacting
individuals are involved. For example,
cooperative traits, which benefit others,
will only be selected for by natural selec-
tion if they provide a fitness benefit to the
individual performing them (Figure 2A).
Cooperative traits cannot evolve merely
because they provide a benefit to a
population. Furthermore, the evolution of
cooperation does not require the ability
of
individuals
to
foresee
the
conse-
quences of their actions. In other words,
cooperation and social evolution can be
explained by, and are not at odds with,
individual-based natural selection.
One way cooperation can be evolution-
arily favored is when it is directed toward
genetically identical individuals or rela-
tives. From an evolutionary perspective,
helping a genetically identical individual
reproduce is the same as reproducing
yourself. By extension, helping relatives
reproduce provides a fitness benefit to
the actor, as relatives share a fraction of
the actor’s genes. This process by which
individuals
increase
their
fitness
by
helping relatives reproduce is termed kin
selection.
An
important
potential
difficulty
in
applying social evolution to virology re-
sides in the definition of an individual.
One may consider the virion as an individ-
ual. Yet in some cases, including para-
myxoviruses,
birnaviruses,
filoviruses,
retroviruses, and inoviruses, a virion can
Cell Host & Microbe 22, October 11, 2017 ª 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.
437
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
 carry multiple genome copies (n-ploidy).
Functionally, these n-ploid virions should
be similar to multiple virions entering the
same cell, because they would both lead
to infections with multiple viral genomes.
As such, we suggest that the definition of
an individual should be set at the level of
the single infectious viral genome.
Another potential complication stems
from the fact that some viruses, notably
RNA viruses, show extremely high muta-
tion rates, leading to the suggestion that
the minimal level at which an individual
RNA virus can be defined is a sequence
cloud, or quasispecies (Andino and Dom-
ingo, 2015). In this case, the individual
could be redefined as the consensus (or
predominant) sequence of the quasispe-
cies. If, however, functional social interac-
tions
are
established
among
genetic
variants within such clouds, then it re-
mains useful to keep the definition of the
individual at the single viral genome level,
because
this
allows
identifying
and
analyzing such interactions.
If we think of a genome as an individ-
ual, then the natural history of viruses is
filled with opportunities for social inter-
actions (Figure 1), even though experi-
mental demonstration is still lacking in
many
cases.
A
single
viral
genome
entering a cell needs to accomplish both
replication and gene expression (tran-
scription and translation). The mRNAs
and proteins resulting from viral gene
expression
can
provide
a
collective
benefit to genomes in the cell, such as
generating capsids and proteins that
block host immunity. The fact that these
factors act as public goods permits, but
does not guarantee, cooperation (Chao
and Elena, 2017). Cooperation is more
likely to evolve if most interacting ge-
nomes are identical, since such high
relatedness allows kin selection to oper-
ate (Turner and Chao, 1999). Studied
with this social evolution lens, even the
infection and replication of a single viral
genome within a single cell is an inher-
ently social process (Figure 1A).
Conflict and Cheating Viruses
Evidence in favor of viruses acting as
cooperative social agents is, paradoxi-
cally, provided by the occasional spread
of uncooperative ‘‘cheats.’’ If individuals
are not genetically identical, they will not
necessarily have the same evolutionary
interests, creating the potential for con-
flict.
Social
evolution
theory
predicts
that if multiple genomes infect a cell, one
that invests less in cooperative traits
such as transcription and invests more in
its
own
replication
will
be
favored,
because it will benefit from cooperation
without paying as much of the cost
(Chao and Elena, 2017). This is analogous
to the tragedy of the commons in humans,
where cooperation breaks down due to
selfish interests, even though everyone
could do better in the long run by
cooperating.
Two important variables determine the
extent to which multiple genomes infect
a cell: the multiplicity of infection (MOI)
and the rate of spontaneous mutation.
Figure 1. Virus-Virus Interactions Are Diverse and Provide Multiple Opportunities for Social Evolution
(A–F) Indicated by gray shadows and depicting social interactions, where the action of a viral genome changes the fitness of other viral genomes. Cells are ovals
with black borders.
(A) A viral genome (thick curved segment) enters the cell and performs transcription (mRNAs, thin curved segments +) and translation, leading to generation of
shared intracellular viral proteins (open hexagons). Transcription-translation is a social and potentially cooperative trait because it benefits the other viral
genomes in the cell.
(B–F) Viral genomes can prevent or promote reproduction of other genomes by changing the probability that they can infect a cell or host by: (B) blocking the entry
of other viral genomes into the cell; (C) producing host-level immune changes (dark red outline) that favor the transmission of all infecting viral genomes; (D)
inducing the cell to produce molecules essential for transmission to neighboring cells, benefiting all viral genomes in the cell; (E) producing viral proteins that
communicate cell infection status, signaling to other viral genomes the abundance of cells available for reproduction; and (F) manipulating host immune signals
to induce distant cells to differentially expose receptors favoring entry of some viral genomes over others.
Cell Host & Microbe
Commentary
438
Cell Host & Microbe 22, October 11, 2017
 High mutation rates such as those ex-
hibited by RNA viruses result in extremely
diverse populations, whereas a high MOI
can bring genomes from different line-
ages into the same host cells. These vari-
ables can enable genomes to interact in
coinfection, as long as there is sharing of
viral products within cells.
A clear experimental test of the associ-
ation between MOI and cheater evolution
was generated with bacteriophage phi6
(Turner and Chao, 1999). Serial passage
at high MOI led to the evolution of a
cheater virus optimized to increase its
fitness
in
coinfection
by
favoring
its
replication over other coinfecting viruses,
reducing
average
population
fitness.
In contrast, passage at low MOI selected
a virus optimized to grow efficiently
in monoinfection and to high popula-
tion fitness. Thus, coinfection generates
conditions ripe for the emergence of
cheats.
Defective interfering particles (DIPs)
appear to be ‘‘cheats.’’ DIPs usually have
a large portion of their genome deleted,
including essential proteins, and hence
can only reproduce in the presence of
completely functional ‘‘helper’’ viruses.
However, their smaller genomes provide
a replication advantage, outcompeting
helper viruses in mixed infections of cells
and severely reducing viral population
fitness. In the laboratory, artificially high
MOIs are well-known to promote the
emergence of DIPs (Marriott and Dim-
mock, 2010). However, a pending chal-
lenge is to measure MOIs in vivo and to
determine the ensuing levels of intra-host
genetic relatedness in viruses.
In turn, the association between muta-
tion rate and cheating has been shown
in
experimental
populations
of
RNA
viruses treated with base analog muta-
gens. This selected for a fraction of viral
genomes with DIP-like behavior, greatly
reducing population fitness (reviewed in
Andino and Domingo, 2015).
Finally, evidence that viral proteins can
function as public goods inside the cell
is supported by well-known processes
in virology, such as pseudotyping, in
which a viral particle contains the enve-
lope proteins of a different virus. How-
ever,
many
plus-strand
RNA
viruses
replicate
in
well-defined
subcellular
structures. This situation suggests that,
in some cases, intracellular viral product
sharing might be restricted, which would
tend to prevent the spread of cheaters.
Thus,
the
details
of
viral
population
structure at the intracellular level and
the identification and mechanistic char-
acterization
of
public
goods
will
be
crucial milestones to reach in the socio-
virology field.
Diversity and Heterotypic
Coinfection
As detailed above, kin selection theory
predicts that high coinfection rates select
against cooperation, because they re-
duce
genetic
relatedness.
However,
mutually beneficial cooperation involving
genetically distinct individuals (‘‘hetero-
typic cooperation’’) can also evolve. All
that is required is that the individuals
have some shared interest, such that
they have higher fitness if they cooperate.
Cooperation between different genetic
variants is a familiar concept in virology,
but rigorous evidence supporting it re-
mains scarce. The finding that population
genetic diversity correlated with the ability
of poliovirus to cause disease in mice led
to the suggestion of cooperation, with
similar processes postulated for hepatitis
B virus, among others (reviewed in Andino
and Domingo, 2015). Measuring genetic
diversity (e.g., using quasispecies theory
or mutation-selection balance) is a first
step to establish that interactions poten-
tially exist, but does not provide infor-
mation on the nature of the interactions
and their fitness outcomes.
Genetic
complementation,
whereby
the genetic defects of the interacting
viruses are mutually compensated, is not
intrinsically cooperation, but represents
a possible mechanism for heterotypic
Figure 2. The Problem of Cooperation and Testing Virus-Virus Interactions Using Social Evolution Theory
(A) Imagine a population of viruses that perform a costly cooperative action such as transcription (indicated by C). A selfish cheater that does not perform the
cooperative action (indicated by S) arises in this population through mutation or coinfection. This selfish cheater is able to benefit from the cooperative behavior of
the cooperators without paying the cost. Consequently, the selfish cheater will increase in frequency, even though this leads to a reduction in mean fitness.
(B) Testing for evolved social interactions, such as cheating and cooperation. Left: Strains are competed in isolation and in combination to quantify fitness and
confirm social traits. Middle: When grown as single infections, a population of cooperators (blue) achieves higher growth than a cheater population (red). Right:
In coinfection (purple), the population has lower growth than a population composed solely of cooperators. The social composition of the population reveals
why: cheaters (dotted red) initially increase population growth by exploiting cooperators (dotted blue), but growth stalls as the population becomes dominated by
cheaters.
Cell Host & Microbe
Commentary
Cell Host & Microbe 22, October 11, 2017
439
 cooperation. A potential example comes
from influenza viruses, when one strain
has a more efficient hemagglutinin, which
mediates virus attachment to host cells,
and another has a more efficient neur-
aminidase that facilitates the release of
virions from infected cells. In cell culture,
these viruses reproduce better together
than they do independently, because
one is advantaged in cell entry and the
other is advantaged in cell exit (Xue
et al., 2016). Multiple genome infections
also lead to higher viral growth in measles
virus and even gain of functions, such
as
extended
cell
tropism
(Shirogane
et al., 2012). A possible reason why inter-
acting genomes may surpass wild-type
fitness is that some beneficial mutations
show strong negative epistasis when
combined in the same viral genome.
Adaptive immunity evasion in hepatitis
C
virus
provides
another
suggested
instance of cooperation. Some variants
may encode dominant antigens to monop-
olize immune responses and favor other
viruses, leading to a complex network of
cross-immunoreactivity that mitigates the
immune pressure acting on certain vari-
ants (Skums et al., 2015). As opposed to
the above examples, this may not be a
mutually beneficial interaction, because
the variants encoding the flag antigen
would play an altruistic role (Figure 1F).
To what extent this outcome is evolution-
arily stable is unclear because, as dis-
cussed
above,
altruistic
cooperative
behavior is critically dependent on genetic
relatedness and kin selection.
Cooperation or Not Cooperation?
As a note of caution, many of the above ex-
amples of distinct viral genomes engaging
in positive or mutually beneficial interac-
tions are not necessarily cooperation.
Whereas cooperation is colloquially used
as a synonymfor ‘‘helping,’’ in evolutionary
terms it requires that a trait provides a
benefit
to
another
individual
(mutual
benefit or altruism) and that the trait has
evolved at least partially due to this benefit
(West et al., 2007). This latter clause is
required because we are interested in
whether the benefit to others is an adapta-
tion (Figure 2), and not just a byproduct of
an otherwise selfish trait. For example,
when an elephant produces dung, this is
beneficial to the elephant, but also benefi-
cial to a dung beetle that uses that dung.
However,
elephants
have
clearly
not
evolved defecation to help dung beetles,
and so although defecation is mutually
beneficial, it is not cooperation.
Thus, the challenge resides in explain-
ing cooperative traits that evolved to
benefit others, which becomes difficult
with complex interactions. Intercellular vi-
rus-virus interactions mediated through
changes in the host, such as breakage
of physical barriers or immune suppres-
sion, could easily fall into the elephant-
dung beetle category. Similarly, some of
these synergistic interactions reported
as heterotypic cooperation between virus
variants may be transient.
The designation of byproduct rather
than cooperation does not imply that the
observed phenomena are not important.
Rather, they raise different questions
about why they are favored by natural se-
lection, which can be crucial for under-
standing and manipulating these viral so-
cial interactions. The utility of identifying
cooperation or cheating, as opposed to
a transient interaction, is that they repre-
sent evolved social interactions. This
identification
has
two
consequences.
First, we can uncover the genetic under-
pinnings of the trait. For instance, the spe-
cific mechanism underlying cheating by
DIPs has led to DIP-derived treatments
that depend only on the gene, rather
than the entire viral particle. Second, we
can establish the environmental and so-
cial pressures that led to selection of
that trait. This knowledge of the selective
regime can lead to generalizable princi-
ples, such as low-MOI vaccine propaga-
tion to avoid the appearance of DIPs.
In practice, the key first step will be to
test whether evolved social interactions
are really occurring between strains, and
what form they take (Figure 2B). First,
one can measure the fitness of each part-
ner alone and in combination (Borderı
´a
et al., 2015). This will show whether a
given interaction is beneficial or detri-
mental, and whether it can be exploited
by potential cheats. Second, to show an
evolved social interaction, as opposed to
a transient interaction, the genetic mech-
anisms underlying the interaction can be
uncovered and exploited in experimental
manipulations. For instance, one can en-
gineer strains with and without the trait
to test whether a beneficial trait is cooper-
ation or a detrimental trait is cheating. This
experimentation can falsify alternative,
non-adaptive explanations such as inci-
dental interactions. Finally, if the condi-
tions favoring a cooperative or cheating
interaction are known or hypothesized,
evolutionary experiments in which these
conditions are manipulated can provide
further conclusive evidence for an evolved
social interaction.
The recently discovered arbitrium sys-
tem, whereby bacteriophages produce
virus-encoded small peptides that are de-
tected by specific virus-encoded recep-
tors in neighboring cells, provides a good
test case (Erez et al., 2017). This system
could be a cooperative trait, because it
specifically senses phage population den-
sity and suppresses lysis. Thus, viruses
forgo the chance to produce more prog-
eny to prevent the exhaustion of available
host cells. If tests, as described above,
determine
arbitrium
is
an
evolved
social trait, this knowledge can be ex-
ploited, for instance, to develop phage
therapies that disrupt the arbitrium sys-
tem, achieving better bacterial clearance.
Virulence and Social Interactions
Virulence can be a social trait. In the
simplest
scenario,
greater
pathogen
growth will increase transmission, but
also increase host mortality (virulence).
Consequently, overall viral transmission
can be maximized at an intermediate
growth rate, where the host is prudently
exploited, with the associated virulence
an unavoidable consequence. Myxoma
virus provides a potential example of pru-
dent exploitation in the field. Myxoma vi-
rus causes a lethal disease known as
myxomatosis in the European rabbit and
was released as a means to control rabbit
populations in Australia and France. How-
ever, after years of natural infection, the
virus evolved toward slightly reduced
fatality rates and prolonged host survival
times, increasing opportunities for both
vector-borne
and
direct
transmission
(Kerr et al., 2015).
Virus or host dispersal can also influ-
ence the social evolution of virulence.
Consider a spatially structured population
with limited dispersal of both virus and
hosts. In this case, if a viral strain grows
quickly, then it can deplete the local sup-
ply of susceptible hosts and hence slow
transmission of that strain in the long
run.
Theoretical
models
predict
that
such spatially structured populations will
select for lower virulence and hence
more prudent host exploitation, as first
Cell Host & Microbe
Commentary
440
Cell Host & Microbe 22, October 11, 2017
 experimentally verified in an insect virus
(Boots and Mealor, 2007).
In contrast to the above example, low
virulence can also evolve in response to
decreased relatedness. When host ex-
ploitation relies on intra- and intercellular
cooperation between individual genomes,
coinfection can select for cheats, leading
to the breakdown of cooperation and,
consequently, lower parasite growth and
reducedvirulence(TurnerandChao,1999).
Implications
A social perspective on virus evolution
can open new research and treatment
possibilities. Social thinking can cast
viruses in a new light and question funda-
mental assumptions to advance basic
virology. Similarly, by focusing on virus-
virus antagonism and alliances, we may
be able to uncover new weapons in our
own virus-host battle.
The central role of genetic relatedness
and kin selection in the evolution of coop-
eration can help us better understand key
processes in virology, such as superinfec-
tion exclusion, which makes the cell
refractory to entry of other, potentially
non-identical genomes, and why some vi-
ruses tend to be transmitted as groups
(collective infectious units). The social
evolution perspective also draws atten-
tion to certain long-held assumptions
regarding standard virological practices.
For example, studies have found that pla-
que assays may not yield clonal popula-
tions (reviewed in Sanjua
´ n, 2017). Social
evolution theory can inform which types
of viruses are more likely to be affected
by this phenomenon and its impact on
routine laboratory studies.
The social evolution perspective also
opens the door to engineering of new, bet-
ter viral interventions by deploying our
knowledge of social evolution. New atten-
uated vaccines using DIPs could be
generated
by
using
social
principles
underlying
the
emergence
of
cheats
(Marriott and Dimmock, 2010). Theory on
cheating and how it impacts population
fitness could be used in epidemiology to
predict the best strategies to limit viral
spread. On the other hand, knowledge of
kin-selected clonal reproduction can be
used to increase viral yield in vaccine pro-
duction or to increase viral vector gene de-
livery. Likewise, knowledge of evolved
interactions
between
bacteriophages
could lead to improved phage therapy.
In sum, there is growing evidence that
virus-virus interactions are pervasive and
that viruses have mechanisms to mediate
these interactions. We suggest that these
traits are best understood and predicted
using
a
social
evolution
approach.
As such, sociovirology holds promise
for breakthroughs in fundamental and
applied virology.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
R.S. was funded by ERC Consolidator Grant
724519-Vis-aVis. S.L.D.-M. was funded by NIH
grant 4R00AI119401-02.
REFERENCES
Andino, R., and Domingo, E. (2015). Virology 479-
480, 46–51.
Boots, M., and Mealor, M. (2007). Science 315,
1284–1286.
Borderı
´a, A.V., Isakov, O., Moratorio, G., Hen-
ningsson, R., Ag€
uera-Gonza
´ lez, S., Organtini, L.,
Gn€
adig, N.F., Blanc, H., Alcover, A., Hafenstein,
S., et al. (2015). PLoS Pathog. 11, e1004838–e20.
Chao, L., and Elena, S.F. (2017). Proc. Biol. Sci.
284, 20170228–20170229.
DaPalma, T., Doonan, B.P., Trager, N.M., and
Kasman, L.M. (2010). Virus Res. 149, 1–9.
Dı
´az-Mun
˜ oz, S.L. (2017). Virus Evol 3, vex011.
Erez, Z., Steinberger-Levy, I., Shamir, M., Doron,
S., Stokar-Avihail, A., Peleg, Y., Melamed, S.,
Leavitt, A., Savidor, A., Albeck, S., et al. (2017). Na-
ture 541, 488–493.
Kerr, P.J., Liu, J., Cattadori, I., Ghedin, E., Read,
A.F.,
and
Holmes,
E.C.
(2015).
Viruses
7,
1020–1061.
Marriott, A.C., and Dimmock, N.J. (2010). Rev.
Med. Virol. 20, 51–62.
Sanjua
´ n, R. (2017). Trends Microbiol. 25, 402–412.
Shirogane, Y., Watanabe, S., and Yanagi, Y.
(2012). Nat. Commun. 3, 1235–1237.
Skums, P., Bunimovich, L., and Khudyakov, Y.
(2015). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112, 6653–6658.
Turner, P.E., and Chao, L. (1999). Nature 398,
441–443.
West, S.A., Griffin, A.S., and Gardner, A. (2007).
J. Evol. Biol. 20, 415–432.
Xue, K.S., Hooper, K.A., Ollodart, A.R., Dingens,
A.S., and Bloom, J.D. (2016). Elife 5, e13974.
Cell Host & Microbe
Commentary
Cell Host & Microbe 22, October 11, 2017
441
