 VTA dopaminergic neurons regulate ethologically relevant 
sleep–wake behaviors
Ada Eban-Rothschild1, Gideon Rothschild2, William J Giardino1, Jeff R Jones1, and Luis de 
Lecea1
1Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, California, 
USA
2Department of Physiology and Center for Integrative Neuroscience, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA
Abstract
Dopaminergic ventral tegmental area (VTA) neurons are critically involved in a variety of 
behaviors that rely on heightened arousal, but whether they directly and causally control the 
generation and maintenance of wakefulness is unknown. We recorded calcium activity using fiber 
photometry in freely behaving mice and found arousal-state-dependent alterations in VTA 
dopaminergic neurons. We used chemogenetic and optogenetic manipulations together with 
polysomnographic recordings to demonstrate that VTA dopaminergic neurons are necessary for 
arousal and that their inhibition suppresses wakefulness, even in the face of ethologically relevant 
salient stimuli. Nevertheless, before inducing sleep, inhibition of VTA dopaminergic neurons 
promoted goal-directed and sleep-related nesting behavior. Optogenetic stimulation, in contrast, 
initiated and maintained wakefulness and suppressed sleep and sleep-related nesting behavior. We 
further found that different projections of VTA dopaminergic neurons differentially modulate 
arousal. Collectively, our findings uncover a fundamental role for VTA dopaminergic circuitry in 
the maintenance of the awake state and ethologically relevant sleep-related behaviors.
Motivated behaviors are critically dependent on arousal, and the capacity to organize periods 
of sleep and wakefulness in response to specific environmental and homeostatic conditions 
is essential for survival in nature. Nonetheless, little is known about the neuronal 
mechanisms that coordinate motivational processes with sleep–wake regulation. VTA 
dopaminergic neurons are central regulators of motivational processes1–5, yet their role in 
Reprints and permissions information is available online at http://www.nature.com/reprints/index.html.
Correspondence should be addressed to L.d.L. (llecea@stanford.edu). 
Note: Any Supplementary Information and Source Data files are available in the online version of the paper.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
A.E.-R. and L.d.L. conceived and designed the study. A.E.-R. performed all experiments and analyzed data. G.R. wrote the Matlab 
analysis code and analyzed the fiber photometry data. W.J.G. performed histology, immunostaining and confocal imaging, and W.J.G. 
and A.E.-R. analyzed the immunohistochemical co-expression data. J.R.J. set up the fiber photometry rig. A.E.-R. wrote the 
manuscript with feedback from all the authors. L.d.L. supervised the study.
COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Neurosci. 2016 October ; 19(10): 1356–1366. doi:10.1038/nn.4377.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the generation and maintenance of wake-fulness is controversial and underexplored from a 
causal perspective6.
A current model for sleep–wake regulation proposes that it is governed by complex 
interactions between several neuronal populations that show robust arousal-state-dependent 
alterations in firing rate7. Early electrophysiological findings suggested that VTA and 
substantia nigra pars compacta dopaminergic neurons do not change their mean firing rate 
across sleep–wake states8–11. Moreover, lesions of VTA and substantia nigra pars compacta 
dopaminergic neurons result in lack of behavioral arousal but do not modify time spent in 
electrocortical wakefulness12. These findings led to the influential hypothesis that VTA 
dopaminergic neurons are not involved in the proper regulation of sleep–wake states and are 
only essential for behavioral but not electrocortical wakefulness6,7.
In contrast, growing evidence suggests that dopamine is required for normal electrocortical 
sleep–wake states. Stimulants enhancing dopaminergic tone are among the most potent 
wake-promoting substances known13 and their arousing effects are abolished in mice 
deficient in dopamine signaling14,15. Humans with reduced levels of dopamine reuptake 
transporter display altered slow-wave activity following sleep deprivation16. Genetically 
modified animal models, lesioning studies and pharmacological manipulations support a role 
for dopamine in arousal regulation14,17–21, yet its source remains unclear. Extracellular 
dopamine levels in the nucleus accumbens (NAc) and the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) 
fluctuate across arousal states22. Furthermore, a more detailed examination of VTA 
dopaminergic neuron firing patterns revealed changes in the temporal pattern, rather than 
mean rate, across sleep–wake states23. During motivated waking and REM (rapid eye 
movement) sleep, VTA dopaminergic neurons are strongly activated and exhibit pronounced 
burst firing, whereas during quite waking and non-REM (NREM) sleep these neurons 
exhibit slow firing rates with an irregular pattern23. Taken together, these findings make 
VTA dopaminergic neurons appealing candidates to link motivational processes and sleep–
wake regulation; however, functional proof of this hypothesis has remained lacking.
In this study, we recorded neuronal activity in VTA dopaminergic neurons of freely 
behaving mice using fiber photometry and combined behavioral, chemogenetic and 
optogenetic manipulations with polysomnographic recordings. We examined the necessity of 
VTA dopaminergic neurons for electrocortical and behavioral wakefulness under basal 
conditions and in the presence of salient stimuli related to mating, feeding and predation. We 
also examined the sufficiency of VTA dopaminergic neurons and their projections to 
generate and maintain wakefulness. We uncovered a fundamental role for VTA 
dopaminergic circuitry in ethologically relevant sleep-related behavior, in addition to a 
pivotal role in the maintenance of the behavioral and electrocortical awake state.
RESULTS
We assessed population activity of VTA dopaminergic neurons across spontaneous sleep–
wake states using fiber photometry technology24,25 by injecting a Cre-dependent adeno-
associated virus (AAV) encoding the fluorescent calcium indicator GCaMP6f (AAV-DJ-
EF1α-DIO-GCamP6f) into the VTA of tyrosine hydroxylase (Th)-IRES-Cre (Th-Cre) 
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 2
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 knock-in mice (n = 4 mice). We implanted the mice with a fiber optic probe for subsequent 
delivery of excitation light and collection of fluorescent emission24’25 and with 
electroencephalogram-electromyogram (EEG-EMG) electrodes for simultaneous sleep–
wake recordings (Fig. 1a,b). We recorded calcium and EEG-EMG signals during the 
inactive, light phase in the home environment of mice. When comparing the fluorescence 
signal and rate of calcium transients across arousal states, we found robust alterations in Th+ 
VTA population activity (Fig. 1c–f and Supplementary Fig. 1h–k). During NREM sleep, 
Th+ VTA neurons showed a lower fluorescence and calcium transient rate than during either 
wake or REM sleep (Fig. 1c–e and Supplementary Fig. 1h–k). Notably, Th+ VTA neurons 
began to decrease their activity before wake-to-NREM transitions and increase their activity 
before NREM-to-REM and NREM-to-wake transitions (Fig. 1f and Supplementary Fig. 
1l). In contrast, Th+ VTA neurons showed a higher fluorescence and calcium transient rate 
during REM sleep than during either wake or NREM sleep (Fig. 1c–f and Supplementary 
Fig. 1h–k), consistent with previous data23. These findings demonstrate that Th+ VTA 
neurons change their population activity across sleep–wake states and offer a mechanistic 
framework for the participation of Th+ VTA neurons in the regulation of sleep and 
wakefulness.
Th+ VTA neurons are necessary for wakefulness
To examine the causal role of VTA dopaminergic neurons in electro-cortical and behavioral 
wakefulness, we employed a chemogenetic approach26. We injected an AAV encoding a 
modified inhibitory muscarinic G protein–coupled receptor (AAV5-EFlα-DIO-hM4Di-
mCherry, ‘hM4Di’ hereafter; or the control virus AAV5-EFlα-DIO-mCherry, ‘mCherry’ 
hereafter) into the VTA of Th-Cre mice and implanted EEG-EMG electrodes (Fig. 2a,b and 
Supplementary Fig. 2). Once neurons express the hM4Di receptor they can be inhibited by 
systemic clozapine-n-oxide (CNO) administration26.
To examine the necessity of Th+ VTA neurons for wakefulness, we injected mice with saline 
or CNO (1 mg kg−1; intraperitoneal injection) at the beginning of the active, dark phase 
(Zeitgeber time ZT 14) and monitored their EEG-EMG signals for 24 h). CNO inhibition of 
Th+ VTA neurons promoted all polysomnographic characteristics of sleep (Fig. 2c,d and 
Supplementary Fig. 3a,b). In hM4Di mice, CNO administration reduced wakefulness and 
increased NREM and REM sleep during the 2 h following injection, as compared with saline 
and mCherry controls (Fig. 2d and Supplementary Fig. 3a,b). The EEG power spectrum 
during NREM and REM sleep, induced by inhibition of Th+ VTA neurons, was similar to 
the spectrum displayed during spontaneous sleep (Fig. 2e – h), and NREM sleep episodes 
showed a typical increase in delta power with time (Supplementary Fig. 3c). CNO reduced 
the latency for NREM sleep in hM4Di mice but did not alter REM latency (Fig. 2i,j). CNO 
increased NREM episode duration in hM4Di mice, while leaving the number of episodes 
intact (Fig. 2k,l). In contrast, CNO administration increased the number of REM episodes in 
hM4Di mice rather than their duration (Fig. 2k,l). These findings show that Th+ VTA 
neurons are necessary for the maintenance of both electrocortical and behavioral 
wakefulness and that their inhibition induces polysomnographic and behavioral 
characteristics of sleep.
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 3
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Th+ VTA neurons are necessary for salience-induced wakefulness
Dopaminergic VTA neurons are activated in response to ethologically relevant salient stimuli 
(Fig. 3a)1–5, yet it remains unknown whether they are necessary for the generation and 
maintenance of wakefulness in face of salient stimuli. We inhibited Th+ VTA neurons during 
the active (dark) phase while presenting male mice different salient stimuli. Forty-five 
minutes after saline or CNO administration (at ZT 13.75), we provided mCherry and hM4Di 
mice palatable food (6 g of high-fat chow) while simultaneously recording EEG-EMG 
signals for 1 h. In the presence of palatable food all three control groups were mostly awake 
(Fig. 3b). In contrast, CNO administration to hM4Di mice before the palatable food 
presentation prevented the maintenance of wakefulness and promoted NREM sleep (Fig. 3b 
and Supplementary Fig. 4a,b). When the palatable food was made inaccessible, control 
mice showed near-complete wakefulness and persistence in behavioral response to the 
stimulus (Fig. 3c, Supplementary Fig. 4b and Supplementary Video 1). CNO 
administration to hM4Di mice, in contrast, promoted NREM sleep and prevented the 
maintenance of wakefulness and persistence in behavioral response (Fig. 3c, 
Supplementary Fig. 4a,b and Supplementary Video 2), even after 16 h of food deprivation 
(Fig. 3d). Nonetheless, during a 1-h accessible palatable food test, control and CNO-treated 
hM4Di mice consumed similar amounts of high-fat chow (Fig. 3e), suggesting that the 
reduction in wakefulness and increase in sleep following Th+ VTA neuron inhibition was not 
due to the mouse’s inability to perceive the salience of the stimulus.
Next we examined the necessity of Th+ VTA neurons to wakefulness in face of mating-
related stimuli. In the presence of an adult female mouse, either freely moving or restricted 
to a mesh cage, all three control groups were mostly awake (Fig. 3f,g, Supplementary Fig. 
4b and Supplementary Videos 3 and 5). In contrast, CNO administration to hM4Di mice 
prevented the maintenance of wakefulness and promoted NREM sleep (Fig. 3f,g, 
Supplementary Fig. 4a,b and Supplementary Videos 4 and 6). Nevertheless, during test 
periods where they remained awake, CNO-treated hM4Di mice showed typical mating 
related-behaviors (Supplementary Video 4), strengthening the premise that the reduction in 
wakefulness following Th+ VTA neurons inhibition was not due to the inability to perceive 
the salience of the stimulus.
Lastly, we examined the necessity of Th+ VTA neurons to arousal in face of an aversive 
stimulus. As with the appetitive stimuli, CNO administration to hM4Di mice before the 
presentation of predator odor prevented the maintenance of wakefulness and promoted 
NREM sleep (Fig. 3h and Supplementary Fig. 4a,b).
Together these findings demonstrate that Th+ VTA neuron inhibition prevents a proper 
arousal response in face of some of the most salient stimuli for animals, related to feeding, 
reproduction and predation. Our findings strongly suggest that Th+ VTA neurons have a key 
role in salience-induced arousal.
Inhibition of Th+ VTA neurons prompts nest-building behavior
Sleep typically occurs in a species-specific site, commonly the home environment or 
nest27–29. We thus wished to examine whether sleep induced by inhibition of Th+ VTA 
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 4
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 neurons was context specific and would persist in mice removed from their home 
environment and transferred to a novel one. We transferred mCherry and hM4Di mice to a 
new cage containing ad libitum food and water and a 3 g Nestlet (a pressed cotton square 
used for nest construction) 45 min after saline or CNO administration (ZT 13.75) while 
simultaneously recording their EEG-EMG signal for 1 h (Fig. 4a). CNO administration to 
hM4Di mice slightly increased NREM sleep compared to the control groups, which were 
continuously active during the entire test period (Fig. 4b). CNO-treated hM4Di mice slept 
during only 14.9% ± 5.9 of the test period in the novel environment, substantially less than 
in the familiar home environment (Fig. 3b–d,f–h), and only toward the end of the hour 
(mean latency for NREM episode: 46.57 ± 3.12 min; Supplementary Fig. 5a). Notably, 
CNO-treated hM4Di mice were mainly engaged in nest-building during the test period 
(Supplementary Video 7), and we found newly constructed nests at the end of the hour in 
all CNO-treated hM4Di mice cages (Fig. 4c,d). In contrast, mice from all three control 
groups left their newly provided nesting material practically untouched during the test period 
(Fig. 4c,d and Supplementary Video 8). Nesting behavior induced by CNO was 
indistinguishable from the goal-directed behavior observed during normal nest-building and 
included pulling, carrying, fraying, push-digging, sorting and fluffing of nesting material 
and bedding (Supplementary Video 7), as previously described30. To exclude the 
possibility that nest construction was induced by hypothermia, we monitored core body 
temperature for 4 h following CNO administration, finding no decrease in body temperature 
from baseline in either mCherry or hM4Di mice (Supplementary Fig. 5b).
We next wished to examine whether the nest-building behavior we observed was a response 
to the lack of a nest in the new environment or was a nonspecific, stereotypic behavior 
elicited by Th+ VTA neurons inhibition, unrelated to sleep. We thus repeated the first 
experiment but here we transferred test mice together with their old nest to the new 
environment (Fig. 4e). All control groups were continuously active during the test period, 
scattering the material of their old nest about the cage (Fig. 4f,g and Supplementary Video 
9). In contrast, in the presence of their old nest, CNO-treated hM4Di slept as in their home 
environment (Fig. 3b–d,f–h) and significantly more than in a new cage without their nest 
(one-tailed t-test; t6 = 2.5, P = 0.02). Moreover, in the presence of their old nest, CNO-
treated hM4Di left their newly provided nesting material practically untouched (Fig. 4g and 
Supplementary Video 10). Together, our findings strongly indicate that, in addition to 
promoting sleep, Th+ VTA neuron inhibition unleashes a complex, ethologically relevant 
sleep-related behavior in a context-dependent manner.
We next wished to determine population activity of Th+ VTA neurons during nest-building 
behavior. In this experiment, we sought to induce nest-building without transferring the mice 
to a new environment or introducing novel objects (i.e., new nesting material), which are 
known to activate VTA dopaminergic neurons. Therefore, we scattered the already built nest 
about the home environment of the test mice while performing time-locked fiber 
photometry, EEG-EMG and video recordings (Fig. 4h). We also introduced three glass 
marbles (novel objects) to the test mice following the nest scattering. We performed a 
detailed 1-s behavioral scoring of the videos and found that Th+ VTA neurons showed low 
fluorescence and calcium transient rates during nest-building, compared to active waking 
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 5
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and novel object exploration (Fig. 4i–j). These findings suggest that sleep-related nest-
building behavior naturally occurs under low dopaminergic tone.
Stimulation of Th+ VTA neurons initiates wakefulness
We next examined the capacity of Th+ VTA neurons to initiate and maintain wakefulness. 
While the chemogenetic approach is particularly suitable for carrying out prolonged 
inhibitions, it lacks the temporal resolution needed to study sleep-to-wake transitions. 
Therefore, we used optogenetics, which allows millisecond timescale precision, to study the 
effects of Th+ VTA stimulation on wakefulness initiation and maintenance. We injected an 
AAV encoding channelrho-dopsin-2 (AAV5-DIO-EF1α-ChR2-eYFP, hereafter ChR2 mice; 
AAV5-DIO-EF1α-eYFP, hereafter eYFP mice, were used as controls) into the VTA of Th-
Cre mice and implanted a fiber optic probe above the VTA and EEG-EMG electrodes (Fig. 
5a,b). We examined the effect of photostimulation (5 s of photostimulation at 1 or 25 Hz) on 
sleep-to-wake transitions during the inactive, light phase. Phasic 25-Hz stimulation of Th+ 
VTA neurons during NREM sleep induced an almost immediate transition to wakefulness in 
ChR2 but not in eYFP mice, even following 4 h of sleep deprivation (Fig. 5c,d and 
Supplementary Fig. 5b). In ChR2 mice the 25-Hz stimulation during NREM sleep induced 
a decrease in slow-wave activity (Supplementary Fig. 5c). Optogenetic stimulation of Th+ 
VTA neurons at 1 or 25 Hz during REM sleep decreased REM episode duration in ChR2 
mice compared with eYFP controls (Fig. 5e). Taken together, our findings demonstrate that 
Th+ VTA neurons have a potent capacity to initiate wakefulness, even in the face of 
homeostatic sleep pressure.
Stimulation maintains wakefulness and inhibits nest-building
To investigate whether Th+ VTA neurons can maintain wakefulness, we delivered optical 
stimuli at 25 Hz for 2 s min−1 during the first 6 h of the light phase (ZT 0–ZT 6; Fig. 6a). 
Semichronic stimulation of Th+ VTA neurons was sufficient to induce almost continuous 
wakefulness and to inhibit both NREM and REM sleep during the entire 6 h of stimulation 
in ChR2 but not in eYFP mice (Fig. 6b – e). Moreover, optical stimulation produced a 
prominent 9-Hz theta component in the wake EEG power spectrum, which was present 
across all 6 h in ChR2 mice (Supplementary Fig. 6d). The NREM sleep EEG power 
spectrum in the first hour following termination of stimulation was noticeably different from 
the remaining hours of the light phase in ChR2 mice and contained a higher delta power 
(Supplementary Fig. 6e). During the following dark phase (ZT 12–ZT 0), the duration of 
wakefulness was significantly reduced and the duration of NREM and REM sleep was 
significantly increased in ChR2 mice (Fig. 6d,e). These rebound effects were similar to those 
observed following sleep deprivation by gentle handling during this circadian phase31. To 
validate the involvement of dopamine in the photostimulation-induced wakefulness, we 
pretreated mice with D1 and D2 receptor antagonists (SCH-23390 and eticlopride, 
respectively, 1 mg kg−1, i.p., as in ref. 32), before the semichronic photostimulation. 
Dopamine receptor antagonism blocked the wake maintenance and sleep suppression 
induced by Th+ VTA neurons stimulation (Supplementary Fig. 6f), indicating that 
dopamine signaling is key to this process.
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 6
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To further investigate the causal role of Th+ VTA neurons in nest-building behavior, we 
removed the old nest from the home environment of test mice just before the initiation of a 
semichronic photostimulation (2 s min−1, from ZT 0–ZT 3), provided new nesting material 
and quantified nest-building 3 h later (Fig. 6f). Mice promptly rebuild a nest during the light 
phase if their old one is removed and new nesting material is provided. Control mice 
constructed nearly perfect nests during the test period, whereas ChR2 mice stimulated at 25 
Hz left the nesting material practically untouched (Fig. 6g,h) despite being continuously 
awake. Taken together, these findings demonstrate that Th+ VTA neurons are potent in 
maintaining electrocortical and behavioral wakefulness and that optically driven activity in 
these neurons is sufficient to suppress the motivation to engage in ethologically relevant 
sleep-related behavior.
Th+ VTA neuron projections differentially modulate arousal
To elucidate the role of downstream targets of Th+ VTA neurons in the modulation of sleep–
wake states, we implanted a fiber optic probe above four output regions: the NAc, mPFC, 
central amygdala (CeA) and dorsal-lateral striatum (DLS) of Th-Cre mice following ChR2 
and eYFP viral infusion into the VTA (AAV-DJ-DIO-EF1α-ChR2-eYFP or AAV-DJ-DIO-
EF1α-eYFP; n = 6 per group for NAc and mPFC and 4 per group for CeA and DLS; Fig. 7a 
– d). Phasic photostimulation (25 Hz for 5 s) of the NAc, CeA and DLS projections in ChR2 
mice during NREM sleep significantly reduced the latency to wake compared to that in 
eYFP mice and to 1-Hz stimulation (P < 0.01 for all three projections; Fig. 7e,g,h and 
Supplementary Fig. 7a,c,d). In contrast, photostimulation of the mPFC projections had no 
significant effect on NREM sleep duration (Fig. 7f and Supplementary Fig. 7b). During 
REM sleep, photostimulation of the NAc and DLS projections in ChR2 mice had no effect 
on REM duration (Fig. 7i,l and Supplementary Fig. 7e,h), whereas photostimulation of the 
mPFC and CeA projections reduced REM-to-wake latency compared with the control 
groups (Fig. 7j,k and Supplementary Fig. 7f,g).
To examine the capacity of Th+ VTA projections to maintain wake-fulness, we delivered 
optical stimuli (25 Hz for 2 s min−1) during the first 6 h of the light phase (ZT 0–ZT 6; Fig. 
7m–x). The only projection capable of maintaining arousal was the NAc, and semichronic 
stimulation of this circuit increased wakefulness and decreased NREM and REM sleep (Fig. 
7m,q,u) but to a lesser extent than optically activating Th+ VTA cell bodies (Fig. 6d). 
Semichronic stimulation of all other projections had no significant effect on sleep–wake 
architecture (P(interaction) > 0.2 for all projections; Fig. 6n–p,r–t,v–x). Interestingly, 
semichronic stimulation of either of the terminals did not prevent the construction of a new 
nest (Supplementary Fig. 7i–l), in contrast to Th+ VTA cell body stimulation (Fig. 6h). 
Together our findings suggest that different projections of Th+ VTA neurons differentially 
modulate arousal, but most of the examined effects on sleep–wake states are mediated by the 
NAc projections.
DISCUSSION
To uncover the causal role of VTA dopaminergic neurons in sleep–wake regulation, we 
combined fiber photometry, behavioral, chemogenetic, optogenetic and polysomnographic 
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 7
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 methods with spatial and temporal resolutions relevant to natural sleep–wake events. We 
demonstrate a causal role for VTA dopaminergic neurons in the regulation of sleep–wake 
states and sleep-related behaviors. We reveal arousal state-dependent alteration in neuronal 
activity of VTA dopaminergic neurons, identifying a reduction in population activity during 
NREM sleep. We show that VTA dopaminergic neurons are capable of maintaining long-
term wakefulness during a period of high sleep pressure and are necessary for the 
maintenance of wakefulness even during a period of low sleep pressure. We further show 
that even in arousal-promoting environments VTA dopaminergic neurons are necessary for 
the maintenance of wakefulness. We begin to establish a circuit through which VTA 
dopaminergic neurons regulate arousal and demonstrate that the NAc pathway promotes 
wakefulness and suppresses sleep. Finally, we uncover a fundamental role for VTA 
dopaminergic neurons in the regulation of goal-directed and sleep-related nesting behavior. 
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of a causal regulation of sleep-
related nest-building by a specific neuronal population.
Pharmacological agents targeting dopamine-signaling pathways can potently modulate 
wakefulness13,19, and genetically modified animal models lacking different components of 
dopamine-signaling pathways (for example, dopamine transporters and dopamine receptors) 
also clearly implicate dopamine in sleep–wake regulation14,15,17–19,32, yet the neuronal 
sources of dopamine in this regard have thus far been unclear. Early lesioning and 
electrophysiological studies8,9,11,12 led to the influential hypothesis that VTA dopaminergic 
neurons are not involved in the regulation of sleep–wake states6,7, and one neuronal 
population hypothesized to mediate the effects of dopamine on arousal was the group of 
ventral periaqueductal gray matter (vPAG) dopaminergic neurons7,33. vPAG dopaminergic 
neurons show c-Fos immunoreactivity during wakefulness but not during sleep, and 
lesioning these neurons reduces wakefulness and increases sleep34. We now show that VTA 
dopaminergic neurons not only display arousal-state-dependent alterations in population 
activity but potently and bidirectionally regulate sleep–wake states. We demonstrate that 
VTA dopaminergic neurons are necessary for arousal and that their chemogenetic inhibition 
suppresses wakefulness to promote both NREM and REM sleep, whereas optogenetic 
stimulation promotes long-term wakefulness and suppresses sleep. Future studies may 
uncover the functional relationship between vPAG and VTA dopaminergic populations in 
sleep–wake regulation and reveal whether they act in concert or in independent pathways to 
generate and maintain arousal.
Our findings strongly indicate that the sleep induced by inhibition of VTA dopaminergic 
neurons is physiological. Following chemogenetic inhibition mice show polysomnographic 
characteristics of sleep, reduced muscular activity and typical EEG power spectrum for each 
sleep state. In addition, before inducing sleep, chemogenetic inhibition of VTA 
dopaminergic neurons promotes nest-building, a sleep-preparatory behavior. We further 
demonstrate that activity in VTA dopaminergic neurons is relatively low during 
experimentally induced nest-building, and optogenetic activation suppresses this behavior. 
Interestingly, nest-building in zebra finches (Taeniopygia guttata) is also correlated with 
reduced VTA dopaminergic activity35. (Although zebra finches sleep in their nests, they also 
rear their young there, and this study was not performed in the context of sleep.) These 
findings suggest that sleep and sleep-related behaviors are normally displayed in a state of 
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 8
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 reduced VTA dopaminergic tone. Our study proposes an active role for VTA dopaminergic 
neurons in the maintenance of the behavioral and electrocortical wake state and places VTA 
dopaminergic neurons at a crucial node in the sleep–wake circuitry. The observed increase in 
REM sleep following the inhibition of VTA dopaminergic neurons was unexpected in light 
of our (and previous)23 findings of increased activity in these neurons during REM sleep. 
Further investigations may uncover whether activity in functionally distinct subpopulations 
of VTA dopaminergic neurons is associated with REM initiation and maintenance.
The capacity to increase wakefulness in response to specific environmental conditions and 
homeostatic needs is essential for survival in nature. Strong behavioral and electrocortical 
arousal are required for motivated behaviors, such as mating, food-seeking and predator 
confrontation. VTA dopaminergic neurons are well placed to integrate motivational 
information for the allocation of suitable levels of arousal for behavioral performance, yet 
their causal role in electrocortical wake generation had not been thoroughly explored. 
Among the known neuronal populations that contribute to the awake state and act in concert 
to generate and maintain arousal are the noradrenergic locus coeruleus, histaminergic 
tuberomammillary nucleus, cholinergic basal forebrain and hypocretinergic lateral 
hypothalamus neurons6,7. It is thus notable that inhibition of VTA dopaminergic neurons is 
sufficient to prevent arousal in the face of some of the most salient stimuli for animals, 
related to reproduction, feeding and predation. Relating our findings to previous work 
linking dopamine to motivation4,5, our results suggest that VTA dopaminergic inhibition not 
only hampers the motivation to properly attend to salient stimuli but also lessens the 
motivation to stay awake. Yet, following VTA dopaminergic inhibition, mice do engage in 
complex goal-directed and sleep-related nest-building behavior, suggesting that in parallel 
with the reduced wake motivation, the motivation to sleep and to engage in sleep-related 
behaviors is increased. It has been suggested that the NAc participates in the regulation of 
sleep–wake states36,37, and our findings that photostimulation of VTA–NAc projections 
initiate and maintain wakefulness support this premise and begin to establish the circuit 
through which VTA dopaminergic neurons regulate sleep–wake states. Taken together, our 
findings suggest that VTA dopaminergic neurons are a critical link between motivational 
processes and sleep–wake regulation and implicate VTA dopaminergic neurons as key 
mediators of adaptive salience-induced arousal. It is also notable that dopamine is a major 
regulator of sleep–wake states in insects38–40, which could suggest an ancient origin for 
dopamine in arousal regulation.
A large body of literature has demonstrated that VTA dopaminergic neurons have essential 
roles in motivation, reward-seeking and reinforcement learning1–5,41. In addition, 
optogenetic and chemogenetic tools are frequently used to activate and inhibit these 
neurons24,42–46. However, few studies have examined dopamine-related behaviors over 
longer timescales, as we have done here. Our findings that VTA dopaminergic neurons can 
potently and bidirectionally regulate arousal have, therefore, far-reaching implications 
outside the field of sleep research and emphasize the importance of considering arousal 
influences in experimental designs.
Several neuropsychiatric disorders, including major depressive and bipolar disorders, 
schizophrenia and substance abuse, are accompanied by dysregulation of dopamine 
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 9
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 signaling pathways and the sleep–wake cycle47–50, yet relatively little is known about their 
mechanistic relationship. It is hypothesized that many comorbid pathologies found in these 
neuropsychiatric disorders arise from a destabilization of sleep–wake mechanisms48. Our 
findings suggest a mechanistic framework for this association and reveal opportunities for 
investigations on dopamine-related sleep–wake dysregulation in neuropsychiatric disorders.
ONLINE METHODS
Mice
Tyrosine hydroxylase knock-in mice (Th-IRES-Cre; EM:00254) were obtained from the 
European Mouse Mutant Archive and backcrossed to C57BL/6J wild-type mice for >15 
generations. We used only male heterozygous mice, aged 8–10 weeks at the start of 
experimental procedures. During all sleep and behavioral experimentations, mice were 
housed in individual Plexiglas recording chambers at constant temperature (23 ± 1 °C), 
humidity (40–60%) and circadian cycle (12 h light-dark cycle; lights on (ZT 0) at 7:00 a.m.). 
Food and water were available ad libitum. All experiments were performed in accordance 
with the guidelines described in the US National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and 
Use of Laboratory Animals and were approved by Stanford University’s Administrative 
Panel on Laboratory Animal Care.
Virus preparation
Cre-inducible recombinant AAV vectors carrying chemogenetic (AAV-EF1α-DIO-hM4Di-
mCherry and AAV-EF1α-DIO-mCherry) and optogenetic (AAV-EF1α-DIO-ChR2(H134R)-
eYFP and AAV-EF1α-DIO-eYFP) transgenes were serotyped with AAV5 coat proteins and 
packaged by the viral vector core at the University of North Carolina. The final viral 
concentration of the chemogenetic transgenes were 5 × 1012 genome copies (gc) ml−1 and 
the optogenetic transgene were 2 × 1012 gc ml−1. The transgenes for fiber photometry (AAV-
EF1α-DIO-GCaMP6f and AAV-EF1α-DIO-GFP) and optogenetic terminal stimulations 
(AAV-EF1α-DIO-ChR2(H134R)-eYFP and AAV-EF1α-DIO-eYFP) were serotyped with 
AAV-DJ coat proteins and packaged by the viral vector core at Stanford University. The final 
viral concentrations were 1.1 × 1013 and 5.8 × 1013 gc ml−1, respectively. Aliquots of virus 
were stored at −80 °C before stereotaxic injection.
Surgery
At the start of surgical procedures, mice were anesthetized with ketamine and xylazine (100 
and 20 mg kg−1, respectively; intraperitoneal injection, i.p.) and placed on a stereotaxic 
frame (David Kopf Instruments, Tujunga, CA, USA). To selectively express the viral 
constructs in dopaminergic neurons of the VTA, we infused recombinant AAV unilaterally 
to the VTA (AP = −3.3 mm; ML = 0.2 mm; DV = −4.5 mm) of Th-IRES-Cre mice. The 
virus was injected through a stainless steel 33-gauge internal cannula (Plastics One, Inc., 
Roanoke, VA) attached to a 10 μl Hamilton syringe, at a rate of 0.05–0.1 μl min−1 (1 μl total 
volume in chemogenetic and optogenetic cell body experiments and 0.4 μl of the AAV-DJ 
viruses in fiber photometry and optogenetic terminal stimulation experiments). After 
infusion, the cannula was kept at the injection site for at least 8 min and then slowly 
withdrawn. After injections, mice were implanted with two gold-plated miniature screw 
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 10
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 electrodes (AP = 1.5 mm, ML = −1.5 mm and AP = −3.5 mm, ML = −2.8 mm) and two 
EMG wire electrodes (316SS/44T, Medwire), previously soldered to a four-pin connector. 
The EMG electrodes were inserted between the neck musculature. The EEG-EMG device 
was affixed to the skull with C&B Metabond (Parkell) and dental acrylic. Mice used for 
fiber photometry and optogenetic experiments also received surgical implantation of a 
monofiberoptic cannula (400 μm and 200 μm, respectively; Doric Lenses, Inc., Quebec, 
Canada), above the VTA (AP = −3.3 mm; ML = 0.2 mm; DV = −4.3 mm), NAc (AP = 1.1 
mm; ML = 1 mm; DV = −3.8 mm), mPFC (AP = 1.7 mm; ML = 0.35 mm; DV = −1.45 
mm), CeA (AP = −1.4 mm; ML = 2.68 mm; DV = −4.15 mm) or DLS (AP = 0.5 mm; ML = 
2 mm; DV = −2.9 mm). We used surgical sutures to close the skin, and the mouse was kept 
in a warm environment until resuming normal activity. Mice were allowed to recover for 3 
weeks, and then acclimated to a flexible EEG-EMG connection cable and an optical patch 
cord (in fiber photometry and optogenetic experiments) for ∼10 d within individual 
recording chambers. Each cable was flexible so that mice could freely move about their 
cages. We found that 79 ± 1.2% of hM4Di cells in the VTA co-expressed TH (n = 4 mice).
Fiber photometry recordings
Fiber photometry recordings were performed similarly to those in ref. 25. Briefly, we 
sinusoidally modulated blue light from a 470-nm excitation LED (M470F3, Thorlabs, NJ, 
USA) at 211 Hz, using a custom Matlab program (MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA) and a 
multifunction data acquisition device (NI USB-6259, National Instruments, Austin, TX, 
USA). The blue light was passed through a GFP excitation filter (MF469-35, Thorlabs), 
reflected off a dichroic mirror (MD498, Thorlabs), and coupled using a fiber collimation 
package (F240FC-A, Thorlabs) into a low-fluorescence patch cord (400 μm, 0.48 NA; Doric 
Lenses) connected to the implanted optic fiber (400 μm, 0.48 NA; Doric Lenses) by a 
zirconia sleeve (Doric Lenses). GCaMP6f fluorescence was collected through the excitation 
patch cord, passed through a GFP emission filter (MF525-39, Thorlabs), and focused onto a 
photodetector (Model 2151, Newport, Irvine, CA, USA) using a lens (LA1540-A, Thorlabs). 
The signal was sent to a lock-in amplifier (30-ms time constant, Model SR830, Stanford 
Research Systems, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) that was synchronized to 211 Hz. Signals from the 
amplifiers were collected at 1 KHz using a custom Matlab program and a multifunction data 
acquisition device (National Instruments).
Fiber photometry data analysis
The photometry signal was down-sampled using interpolation to match the EEG and EMG 
sampling rate of 256 Hz (see below). For each experiment, the photometry signal F was 
converted to ΔF/F by
In a minority of sessions, the photometry signal showed a short decay at the beginning of the 
recording. To address this in a general way across all sessions, the ΔF/F signal from each 
session was fitted with a decreasing exponential of the form a × ebx, where a > 0 and b < 0. 
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 11
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 We then subtracted the exponential fit from the original ΔF/F signal. This procedure 
corrected the signal decrease when it occurred and left the signal unchanged when no 
decrease was observed. We detected transients similar to those reported by previous 
studies24 (Supplementary Fig. 1 a – g). Briefly, we generated two filtered ΔF/F signals, one 
low-pass filtered at 0–4 Hz, and the other low-pass filtered at 0–40 Hz. We calculated a trace 
of the derivative of their squared difference and identified candidate transient times by 
thresholding this signal at mean + 2 s.d. We further required that candidate transient times be 
during high ΔF/F times by thresholding at mean + 2 s.d. Lastly, the exact peak time of each 
transient was identified by taking the maximal value of the thresholded signal within each 
transient. For each session and for each arousal state, we calculated the following calcium 
transient measures: (i) mean transient rate, (ii) mean transient amplitude and (iii) mean 
transient amplitude × amplitude rate.
For the sleep–wake analysis (Fig. 1 and Supplementary Fig. 1), we recorded data during 8 
sessions per mouse, each 10–45 min long. We only used sessions during which mice showed 
all three arousal states (wake, NREM sleep and REM sleep). For each session we calculated 
the mean ΔF/F during all times of wake, NREM sleep and REM sleep. For the state 
transition analyses, we identified all time points of state transition and aligned ΔF/F around 
these times (± 50 s). Transition-aligned ΔF/F traces were Gaussian smoothed (sigma = 3 s).
For the salient stimuli presentation (Fig. 3a), we recorded data for 5 min, once for each 
mouse (n = 4). For the nest-building behavior experiment (Fig. 4h – j), we recorded data for 
45 min once for each mouse (n = 4).
Polysomnographic recording and analysis
EEG and EMG signals derived from the surgically implanted electrodes were amplified 
(Grass Technologies) and digitized at 256 Hz using sleep recording software (Vital 
Recorder, Kissei Comtec America). Using sleep analysis software (SleepSign for Animal, 
Kissei Comtec America) we digitally filtered the signal (EEG: 0.3–25 Hz, EMG: 25–50 Hz) 
and spectrally analyzed it by fast Fourier transformation. The recordings were first scored 
semiautomatically by 4-s epochs for wake, NREM sleep and REM sleep. The scoring was 
next inspected visually based on the EEG-EMG waveforms and power spectra and corrected 
when appropriate. All scoring was done by an investigator (A.E.-R.) blind to the viral 
transgene delivered to the animal and to the experimental manipulation. Wakefulness was 
defined as desynchronized low-amplitude EEG and heightened tonic EMG activity with 
phasic bursts. NREM sleep was defined as synchronized, high-amplitude, low-frequency 
(0.5–4 Hz) EEG and substantially reduced EMG activity compared with wakefulness, with 
no phasic bursts. REM sleep was defined as having a pronounced theta rhythm (4–9 Hz) 
with no EMG activity. The EEG power spectrum data (Fig. 2h and Supplementary Fig. 
4a,b and 6c,d,e) are expressed as relative values to the total power of the same stage. For the 
change in delta power with time analysis (Supplementary Fig. 3c) we used episodes lasting 
≥60 s and examined the correlation for the first 60 s of NREM sleep. We omitted one hM4Di 
mouse from the spectrogram presented in Figure 2f – g because he showed < 1% REM sleep 
following saline injection.
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 12
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Salient stimuli presentation
Test mice, individually housed and connected to an EEG-EMG recording cable, were 
injected during the dark phase (ZT 13.75) with either saline or CNO (1 mg kg−1). Forty-five 
minutes later, a stimulus was placed in their home cage, for a period of 1 h. EEG-EMG 
signals were continuously recorded from the test mice during this period. In each 
experimental session, each test mouse was exposed to one stimulus following either saline or 
CNO injection. Half of the mice were first treated with saline, while the other half first with 
CNO. We performed different experiments at least 1 week apart.
In experiments in which salient stimuli were inaccessible, we placed each stimulus on a petri 
dish lid and covered it by an inverted cylindrical wire grating (11 cm in height, bottom 
diameter 10.5 cm, bars spaced 1 cm apart; Galaxy Cup, Spectrum Diversified Designs, Inc., 
Streetsboro, OH, USA) before the placement in the test mice cages. A weighted glass beaker 
was placed on top of the wire cylinder to prevent test mice from climbing it. In the 
experiment with the high-fat chow (see below), an additional paper tube punctuated with 
small holes was placed between the chow and the wire cylinder; to prevent test mice from 
consuming the chow.
We used three salient stimuli: (i) 8-week-old female C57BL/6J mice (Jackson Laboratory); 
(ii) high-fat chow (D12451, Research Diets, Inc.); and (iii) 10 μl of 2,3,5-trimethyl-3-
thiazoline, a component of fox odor (TMT, #300000368; Contech Enterprises Inc., Canada) 
applied to filter paper. Test mice were habituated for 5 d to the presence of an empty wire 
cylinder in their home cage (1 h d−1). Female mice were habituated for 5 d to handling and 
to the placement in a wire cylinder (30 min d−1). Each female participated in only one 
experimental session (i.e., a single exposure to one test mouse). We provided test mice with 
a small piece (0.3 g) of high-fat chow during the two days preceding the high-fat chow 
experiment.
In each experimental session, we video recorded one mouse using a Panasonic Lumix DMC-
ZS7 camera. The speed of the videos was accelerated ×16 or ×64, as indicated.
Food deprivation
16 h before the compound injection (at ZT 22) we removed all pieces of food from the home 
cage environment of the mice.
Nest-building behavior
In the chemogenetic experiment presented in Figure 4a–d, we injected mice with either 
saline or CNO (1 mg kg−1) during the dark phase (ZT 13.75). Forty-five minutes after the 
injections, we transferred the test mice to new individual cages containing 3 g pressed cotton 
squares (1–1.5 squares, to match 3 g precisely; Nestlet, Ancare, UK agent, Lillico). We 
evaluated nest-building 1 h later. Each mouse was tested following both saline and CNO 
injection, at least 1 week apart. Half of the mice were treated first with saline and the other 
with CNO.
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 13
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 In the optogenetic experiment (Fig. 6f – h and Supplementary Fig. 7i – l), just before the 
beginning of the photostimulation (ZT 0) we removed the nest (i.e., all pieces of cotton) 
from the home cage of the test mice. Upon the start of photostimulation we placed a new 3 g 
Nestlet in the home cages of the test mice. We evaluated nest-building 3 h later (at ZT 3).
We evaluated nest building, as in ref. 51, using a five-point scale:
1.
Nestlet not noticeably touched (>90% intact).
2.
Nestlet partially torn up (50–90% remaining intact).
3.
Nestlet mostly shredded but with no identifable nest site; i.e., the cotton is not 
gathered into a nest but spread around the cage (<50% of the Nestlet remains 
intact, but <90% is within a quarter of the cage floor area).
4.
An identifable but flat nest (>90% of the Nestlet is torn up). The material is 
gathered into a nest within a quarter of the cage floor area, with walls higher than 
mouse body height (of a mouse curled up on its side) for less than 50% of its 
circumference.
5.
A perfect or near-perfect nest (>90% of the Nestlet is torn up). The nest is a 
crater, with walls higher than mouse body height for more than 50% of its 
circumference.
For analysis, we used the nonparametric Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed rank test, as in ref. 
51.
In the chemogenetic experiment presented in Figure 4h – j we used shredded paper as 
nesting material, since it enabled the transfer of nests without altering their shape; nests 
made solely from cotton are easily damaged by handling.
Fiber photometry during nest-building
We scattered the already built nest about the home environment of test mice while 
performing time-locked fiber photometry, EEG-EMG and video recordings. We also 
introduced three glass marbles (novel objects) to the test mice home cage after scattering the 
nest. We video recorded mice using a Panasonic Lumix DMC-ZS7 camera and performed a 
detailed 1-s behavioral scoring of the videos off-line. Novel object’ was defined as a direct 
contact between the test mouse and a marble. Active waking was defined as a state in which 
the test mouse was awake and alert, but not engaging in grooming, nest-building or novel 
object exploration. ‘Nest-building’ was assigned to mice engaging in pulling, carrying, 
fraying, push-digging, sorting and fluffing of nesting material and bedding, as previously 
described30. For the comparison of mean fluorescence we used data from all 1-s epochs in 
four experimental mice (‘novel object’ n = 374; ‘active waking’ n = 2,801; ‘nest-building’ n 
= 2,143). For the comparison of mean transient rate, we used mean values per mice (n = 4).
Core body temperature measurement
Body temperature was recorded, at the beginning of the light phase, with a lubricated rectal 
probe connected to digital thermometer (BAT-12 Microprobe-Thermometer; Physitemp; NJ, 
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 14
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 USA) 15, 30, 60, 120 and 240 min following CNO (1 mg kg−1) administration in mCherry 
and hM4Di mice.
Photostimulation
Three weeks after viral infection and implantation, mice were connected to fiber optic patch 
cords (Doric Lenses) using zirconia sleeves (Doric Lenses). Mice were allowed to habituate 
to the patch cords for 7–10 d. All optogenetic stimulations (15 ms pulses at 1 and 25 Hz; see 
text) were generated by a waveform generator (Master-8; AMPI, Jerusalem, Israel) that 
triggered blue-light lasers (473 nm; LaserGlow). We adjusted the light power of the lasers 
such that the light power exiting the optic fiber was 20 mW In acute photostimulation 
experiments, we monitored EEG-EMG signals in real time in order to precisely time the 
delivery of optical stimuli (5 s at 1 or 25 Hz) at the onset of NREM or REM epochs (∼10 s 
from onset).
Sleep deprivation
Mice were sleep deprived for 4 h by gentle handling. Mice were continuously observed by 
an experimenter (A.E.-R.) and their EEG-EMG signal was recorded. If an animal remained 
motionless for a few seconds, he was gently touched with a soft brush. This method of sleep 
deprivation has been shown not to increase plasma corticosterone or adrenocorticotropic 
hormone levels, suggesting that this procedure does not produce significant stress in mice52.
Pharmacological injections
Pharmacological compounds were prepared in sterile 0.9% saline. All compounds were 
administered i.p. Compounds included: CNO (1 mg kg−1, Enzo Life Sciences, Inc.), D1-
antagonist (1 mg kg−1; Sigma-Aldrich, SCH-23390 hydrochloride) and D2-antagonist (1 mg 
kg−1; Sigma-Aldrich, eticlopride hydrochloride).
Histology
Mice were anesthetized with ketamine and xylazine (100 and 20 mg kg−1, respectively, i.p.) 
and perfused transcardially with 1× PBS, followed by 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS. Brains 
were extracted, postfixed overnight at 4 °C, and cryoprotected in 30% sucrose dissolved in 
1× PBS containing 0.1% NaN3 for 48 h at 4 °C. Brains were sectioned at 30 μm on a 
cryostat (Leica Microsystems), collected in PBS containing 0.1% NaN3 and stored at 4 °C. 
Sections underwent immunohistochemical staining as described below. Primary antibodies 
were used at 1:2,000 dilution: chicken anti-tyrosine hydroxylase (#TYH, Aves Labs, Inc.) 
and rabbit anti-Fos (#sc-52, Santa Cruz). Immunofluorescent secondary antibodies were 
used at 1:500 dilution: donkey anti-chicken Alexa Fluor 488 (#703-545-155, Jackson 
ImmunoResearch Laboratori;es, Inc.) for mCherry and TH colocalization, and donkey anti-
chicken CF350 (#20275, Biotium) plus donkey anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 488 (#711-545-152, 
Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, Inc.) for c-Fos and TH double-labeling.
For immunofluorescence staining, brain sections were washed in PBS for 5 min and then 
incubated in a blocking solution composed of PBS with 0.3% Triton X-100 (PBST) 
containing 4% bovine serum albumin for 1 h. Sections were then incubated for ∼16 h in 
block solution containing primary antibodies. After three 5-min washes in PBS, sections 
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 15
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 were incubated in blocking solution for 1 h and then incubated for 2 h in blocking solution 
containing secondary antibodies. Sections were washed three times for 5 min each in PBS, 
mounted onto SuperFrost Plus glass slides (VWR, #48311-703) and coverslipped with 
Vectashield containing DAPI Mounting Media (Vector Laboratories, #H-1200).
Microscopy and image analysis
Images for mCherry and TH colocalization were collected on a Zeiss LSM710 inverted 
confocal microscope and generated with ZEN software (Zeiss). Images for c-Fos protein and 
TH analyses were collected on a Zeiss Axioimager M1 wide-field fluorescent microscope 
using reflected light (immunofluorescence staining). Digital images were minimally 
processed using ImageJ (NIH) to enhance brightness and contrast for optimal representation. 
All digital images were processed in parallel, with experimenters blind to the viral 
transduction.
All immunohistochemical analyses were performed on serial sections from n = 4 mice per 
group. For mCherry and TH colocalization analyses, mCherry-positive neurons in the VTA 
were scored for presence of TH (3 sections per mouse; −2.90 to −3.60 mm from bregma). 
For c-Fos protein and TH double-labeling analyses, TH-positive neurons in midline cell 
groups from hypothalamus to hindbrain were scored for the presence of c-Fos protein (18 
sections per mouse, −1.6 to −4.4 mm from bregma). All ChR2 vs. eYFP analyses were 
performed by investigators blind to the viral transduction.
Statistics
Sample sizes were chosen based upon previous publications using optogenetic and 
chemogenetic tools for the study of the sleep–wake circuitry53–55. Data distribution was 
assumed to be normal but this was not formally tested. Mice were removed from analysis if 
no viral expression was found (n = 4). We used two-way RM ANOVAs for analyses of 
latencies, durations, calcium signal and EEG power spectrograms across arousal states (Figs. 
1d,e, Fig. 2d,h –k, 3b–h, 4b,f, 5d,e, 6d,e and 7e–x). We used Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed 
rank tests for the analysis of nest-building behavior (Figs. 4d and 6h). We used two-way 
ANOVAs for the analysis of fluorescence across behavioral states and one-way ANOVAs for 
transient rate analysis (Fig. 4i,j, respectively). We analyzed all data using Prism 6.0 
(GraphPad Software) except for fluorescence and transient rates following nest destruction 
(Fig. 4i–j), which were analyzed using Matlab R2015a software. Data are presented as mean 
± s.e.m. unless otherwise indicated. For the preparation of the figures, we used Matlab 
R2008b, Matlab R2015a and Prism 6.0 and then exported the data into Adobe Illustrator 
CS6 (Adobe Systems).
A Supplementary Methods Checklist is available.
Data availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author 
upon reasonable request.
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 16
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Code availability
Data analyses were conducted in Matlab using scripts available from the corresponding 
author upon reasonable request.
Acknowledgments
We thank T. Davidson for assistance in the set-up of the fiber photometry rig, A. Whittle for assistance in core body 
temperature measurements and for feedback on the manuscript, A. Rolls and P. Bonnavion for early training in 
sleep–wake recording and viral manipulations and discussion and J. Garner for discussion. This work was 
supported by National Institutes of Health (NIH) grants RO1-MH087592, RO1-MH102638 and RO1-AG04767 
(L.d.L.), a Brain and Behavior Research Foundation (NARSAD) grant (L.d.L.), the US Israel Binational Science 
Foundation and the Klarman Family Foundation (L.d.L.), Edmond and Lily Safra Center of Brain Science (ELSC) 
postdoctoral fellowships (A.E.-R.) and NIH F32 AA022832 (W.J.G.). We thank the Stanford Neuroscience 
Microscopy Service, supported by NIH NS069375.
References
1. Robbins TW, Everitt BJ. A role for mesencephalic dopamine in activation: commentary on Berridge 
(2006). Psychopharmacology (Berl.). 2007; 191:433–437. [PubMed: 16977476] 
2. Berridge KC, Robinson TE. What is the role of dopamine in reward: hedonic impact, reward 
learning, or incentive salience. Brain Res. Brain Res. Rev. 1998; 28:309–369. [PubMed: 9858756] 
3. Salamone JD, Correa M. The mysterious motivational functions of mesolimbic dopamine. Neuron. 
2012; 76:470–485. [PubMed: 23141060] 
4. Wise RA. Dopamine, learning and motivation. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2004; 5:483–494. [PubMed: 
15152198] 
5. Schultz W. Multiple dopamine functions at different time courses. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007; 
30:259–288. [PubMed: 17600522] 
6. España RA, Scammell TE. Sleep neurobiology from a clinical perspective. Sleep. 2011; 34:845–
858. [PubMed: 21731134] 
7. Saper CB, Fuller PM, Pedersen NP, Lu J, Scammell TE. Sleep state switching. Neuron. 2010; 
68:1023–1042. [PubMed: 21172606] 
8. Steinfels GF, Heym J, Strecker RE, Jacobs BL. Behavioral correlates of dopaminergic unit activity 
in freely moving cats. Brain Res. 1983; 258:217–228. [PubMed: 6824912] 
9. Trulson ME, Preussler DW. Dopamine-containing ventral tegmental area neurons in freely moving 
cats: activity during the sleep-waking cycle and effects of stress. Exp. Neurol. 1984; 83:367–377. 
[PubMed: 6692873] 
10. Trulson ME, Preussler DW, Howell GA. Activity of substantia nigra units across the sleep-waking 
cycle in freely moving cats. Neurosci. Lett. 1981; 26:183–188. [PubMed: 7301205] 
11. Miller JD, Farber J, Gatz P, Roffwarg H, German DC. Activity of mesencephalic dopamine and 
non-dopamine neurons across stages of sleep and walking in the rat. Brain Res. 1983; 273:133–
141. [PubMed: 6616218] 
12. Jones BE, Bobillier P, Pin C, Jouvet M. The effect of lesions of catecholamine-containing neurons 
upon monoamine content of the brain and EEG and behavioral waking in the cat. Brain Res. 1973; 
58:157–177. [PubMed: 4581335] 
13. Boutrel B, Koob GF. What keeps us awake: the neuropharmacology of stimulants and wakefulness-
promoting medications. Sleep. 2004; 27:1181–1194. [PubMed: 15532213] 
14. Wisor JP, et al. Dopaminergic role in stimulant-induced wakefulness. J. Neurosci. 2001; 21:1787–
1794. [PubMed: 11222668] 
15. Qu WM, Huang ZL, Xu XH, Matsumoto N, Urade Y. Dopaminergic D1 and D2 receptors are 
essential for the arousal effect of modafinil. J. Neurosci. 2008; 28:8462–8469. [PubMed: 
18716204] 
16. Holst SC, et al. Dopaminergic role in regulating neurophysiological markers of sleep homeostasis 
in humans. J. Neurosci. 2014; 34:566–573. [PubMed: 24403155] 
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 17
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 17. Dzirasa K, et al. Dopaminergic control of sleep-wake states. J. Neurosci. 2006; 26:10577–10589. 
[PubMed: 17035544] 
18. Qu WM, et al. Essential role of dopamine D2 receptor in the maintenance of wakefulness, but not 
in homeostatic regulation of sleep, in mice. J. Neurosci. 2010; 30:4382–4389. [PubMed: 
20335474] 
19. Monti JM, Monti D. The involvement of dopamine in the modulation of sleep and waking. Sleep 
Med. Rev. 2007; 11:113–133. [PubMed: 17275369] 
20. Zhou QY, Palmiter RD. Dopamine-deficient mice are severely hypoactive, adipsic, and aphagic. 
Cell. 1995; 83:1197–1209. [PubMed: 8548806] 
21. Ungerstedt U. Adipsia and aphagia after 6-hydroxydopamine induced degeneration of the nigro-
striatal dopamine system. Acta Physiol. Scand. Suppl. 1971; 367:95–122. [PubMed: 4332694] 
22. Léna I, et al. Variations in extracellular levels of dopamine, noradrenaline, glutamate, and aspartate 
across the sleep--wake cycle in the medial prefrontal cortex and nucleus accumbens of freely 
moving rats. J. Neurosci. Res. 2005; 81:891–899. [PubMed: 16041801] 
23. Dahan L, et al. Prominent burst firing of dopaminergic neurons in the ventral tegmental area during 
paradoxical sleep. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2007; 32:1232–1241. [PubMed: 17151599] 
24. Gunaydin LA, et al. Natural neural projection dynamics underlying social behavior. Cell. 2014; 
157:1535–1551. [PubMed: 24949967] 
25. Lerner TN, et al. Intact-brain analyses reveal distinct information carried by SNc dopamine 
subcircuits. Cell. 2015; 162:635–647. [PubMed: 26232229] 
26. Alexander GM, et al. Remote control of neuronal activity in transgenic mice expressing evolved G 
protein-coupled receptors. Neuron. 2009; 63:27–39. [PubMed: 19607790] 
27. Hediger H. Comparative observations on sleep. Proc. R. Soc. Med. 1969; 62:153–156. [PubMed: 
5775231] 
28. Meddis R. On the function of sleep. Anim. Behav. 1975; 23:676–691. [PubMed: 169715] 
29. Moruzzi G. Sleep and instinctive behavior. Arch. Ital. Biol. 1969; 107:175–216. [PubMed: 
4311356] 
30. Gaskill BN, et al. Heat or insulation: behavioral titration of mouse preference for warmth or access 
to a nest. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e32799. [PubMed: 22479340] 
31. Curie T, et al. Homeostatic and circadian contribution to EEG and molecular state variables of 
sleep regulation. Sleep. 2013; 36:311–323. [PubMed: 23450268] 
32. Burgess CR, Tse G, Gillis L, Peever JH. Dopaminergic regulation of sleep and cataplexy in a 
murine model of narcolepsy. Sleep. 2010; 33:1295–1304. [PubMed: 21061851] 
33. Brown RE, Basheer R, McKenna JT, Strecker RE, McCarley RW. Control of sleep and 
wakefulness. Physiol. Rev. 2012; 92:1087–1187. [PubMed: 22811426] 
34. Lu J, Jhou TC, Saper CB. Identification of wake-active dopaminergic neurons in the ventral 
periaqueductal gray matter. J. Neurosci. 2006; 26:193–202. [PubMed: 16399687] 
35. Hall ZJ, Healy SD, Meddle SL. A role for nonapeptides and dopamine in nest-building behaviour. 
J. Neuroendocrinol. 2015; 27:158–165. [PubMed: 25514990] 
36. Lazarus M, Chen JF, Urade Y, Huang ZL. Role of the basal ganglia in the control of sleep and 
wakefulness. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 2013; 23:780–785. [PubMed: 23465424] 
37. Qiu MH, et al. The role of nucleus accumbens core shell in sleep-wake regulation their 
involvement in modafinil-induced arousal. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e45471. [PubMed: 23029032] 
38. Andretic R, van Swinderen B, Greenspan RJ. Dopaminergic modulation of arousal in Drosophila. 
Curr. Biol. 2005; 15:1165–1175. [PubMed: 16005288] 
39. Kume K, Kume S, Park SK, Hirsh J, Jackson FR. Dopamine is a regulator of arousal in the fruit 
fly. J. Neurosci. 2005; 25:7377–7384. [PubMed: 16093388] 
40. Pimentel, D., et al. Operation of a homeostatic sleep switch. Nature. 2016. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1038/nature19055
41. Salamone JD, Cousins MS, Snyder BJ. Behavioral functions of nucleus accumbens dopamine: 
empirical conceptual problems with the anhedonia hypothesis. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 1997; 
21:341–359. [PubMed: 9168269] 
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 18
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 42. Zhang, F., et al. Optogenetics in freely moving mammals: dopamine and reward. Cold Spring Harb. 
Protoc. 2015. http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/pdb.top086330
43. Adamantidis AR, et al. Optogenetic interrogation of dopaminergic modulation of the multiple 
phases of reward-seeking behavior. J. Neurosci. 2011; 31:10829–10835. [PubMed: 21795535] 
44. Tye KM, et al. Dopamine neurons modulate neural encoding and expression of depression-related 
behaviour. Nature. 2013; 493:537–541. [PubMed: 23235822] 
45. Chaudhury D, et al. Rapid regulation of depression-related behaviours by control of midbrain 
dopamine neurons. Nature. 2013; 493:532–536. [PubMed: 23235832] 
46. Danjo T, Yoshimi K, Funabiki K, Yawata S, Nakanishi S. Aversive behavior induced by 
optogenetic inactivation of ventral tegmental area dopamine neurons is mediated by dopamine D2 
receptors in the nucleus accumbens. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2014; 111:6455–6460. [PubMed: 
24737889] 
47. Cousins DA, Butts K, Young AH. The role of dopamine in bipolar disorder. Bipolar Disord. 2009; 
11:787–806. [PubMed: 19922550] 
48. Wulff K, Gatti S, Wettstein JG, Foster RG. Sleep and circadian rhythm disruption in psychiatric 
and neurodegenerative disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2010; 11:589–599. [PubMed: 20631712] 
49. Parekh PK, Ozburn AR, McClung CA. Circadian clock genes: effects on dopamine, reward and 
addiction. Alcohol. 2015; 49:341–349. [PubMed: 25641765] 
50. Winton-Brown TT, Fusar-Poli P, Ungless MA, Howes OD. Dopaminergic basis of salience 
dysregulation in psychosis. Trends Neurosci. 2014; 37:85–94. [PubMed: 24388426] 
51. Deacon RM. Assessing nest building in mice. Nat. Protoc. 2006; 1:1117–1119. [PubMed: 
17406392] 
52. Palchykova S, Winsky-Sommerer R, Meerlo P, Dürr R, Tobler I. Sleep deprivation impairs object 
recognition in mice. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 2006; 85:263–271. [PubMed: 16423541] 
53. Anaclet C, et al. The GABAergic parafacial zone is a medullary slow wave sleep-promoting center. 
Nat. Neurosci. 2014; 17:1217–1224. [PubMed: 25129078] 
54. Carter ME, et al. Tuning arousal with optogenetic modulation of locus coeruleus neurons. Nat. 
Neurosci. 2010; 13:1526–1533. [PubMed: 21037585] 
55. Jego S, et al. Optogenetic identification of a rapid eye movement sleep modulatory circuit in the 
hypothalamus. Nat. Neurosci. 2013; 16:1637–1643. [PubMed: 24056699] 
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 19
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Population activity of Th+ VTA neurons across sleep–wake states, (a) Representative images 
of the VTA from a GCaMP6f-expressing mouse, showing viral expression and the 
placement of the tip of the fiber above the VTA (one of four mice), (b) Schematic of the in 
vivo recording configuration, (c) Representative fluorescence trace, EEG, EEG power 
spectrogram and EMG trace across spontaneous sleep–wake states. ΔF/F, change in 
fluorescence from median of the entire time series. Brown circles, transients detected using a 
filtering-based algorithm. (d,e) Mean ± s.e.m. fluorescence (d) and transient rate (e) during 
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 20
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 wake, NREM sleep and REM sleep (n = 4 mice, 8 sessions per mouse; two-way repeated-
measures (RM) ANOVA between arousal state and mice, arousal state: F2,14 = 36.95 
(fluorescence) and 89.26 (transient rate), P = 2.6 × 10−6 (fluorescence) and 1.08 × 10−8 
(transient rate); followed by Tukey’s post hoc tests, *P= 0.015, ***P=3 × 10−4, ****P= 1 × 
10−6 (fluorescence) and ****P(wake-NREM) = 9 × 10−5, (wake–REM) = 9 × 10−6 and 
(NREM–REM) = 6 × 10−9. (f) Fluorescence aligned to arousal state transitions. Top, 
individual transitions with color-coded fluorescence intensity (wake-NREM, n = 254; 
NREM-wake, n = 172; NREM–REM, n=86; REM-wake, n = 84). Bottom, average 
responses from all the transitions expressed as mean (blue trace) ± s.e.m. (gray shading). 
Trials in top panel are sorted by the duration of the second state (shortest, top; longest, 
bottom).
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 21
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Chemogenetic inhibition of Th+ VTA neurons decreases wakefulness and increases sleep. 
(a) hM4Di expression in the VTA and co-expression of mCherry in Th+ cells (one of seven 
mice). (b) Schematic of injection and implant. (c) Hypnogram, fast Fourier transform–
derived delta power and EMG activity over 2 h after injection (one of seven mice). (d) 
Percent (mean ± s.e.m.) time in wake, NREM and REM sleep during 2 h after njection (n = 
7 per group, two-way RM ANOVAs between compound injected and virus, interaction: F1,12 
= 41.96 (wake), 42.03 (NREM), 9.64 (REM); P = 3 × 10−5 (wake and NREM), 0.0091 
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 22
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (REM)). (e) Representative EEG-EMG traces. EEG power spectrogram (μV) of (f) wake-to-
NREM sleep transitions and (g) NREM-to-REM sleep transitions (aligned to state transition 
at 8 s and 60 s, respectively; dashed white line). Presented are averages across all transitions 
(wake-to-NREM, n = 99 transitions (saline) and n = 138 (CNO); NREM-to-REM n = 10 
(saline) and n = 30 (CNO)), in all mice (n = 6 per group). (h–l) Sleep–wake parameters 
(mean ± s.e.m.) during the 2 h after injection (n = 7 per group, two-way RM ANOVAs 
followed by Sidak’s post hoc tests, *P = 0.011, **P(CNO: mCherry-hM4Di) = 0.009 and 
(hM4Di: saline-CNO) = 0.001, ***P = 2 × 10−4, ****P(NREM–hM4Di: saline–CNO) = 7 × 
10−5, ****P(REM-CNO: mCherry-hM4Di) = 5 × 10−5. (h) EEG power spectrum of arousal 
states episodes (two-way RM ANOVAs between compound injected and frequency, 
compound injected: P > 0.18). (i,j) Latency to the first (i) NREM and (j) REM sleep episode 
(interaction: F1,12 = 11.03 (NREM), 0.16 (REM); P = 0.006 (NREM), 0.96 (REM)). (k) 
Duration of individual arousal state episodes (interaction: F1,12 = 13.83 (NREM), 0.15 
(REM); P = 0.004 (NREM), 0.71 (REM)). (l) The total number of arousal state episodes 
(interaction: F1,12 = 0.93 (NREM), 15.52 (REM); P = 0.35 (NREM), 0.002 (REM)).
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 23
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
Activity in Th+ VTA neurons is necessary for wake maintenance even in the face of salient 
stimuli, (a) Th+ VTA neurons population activity in response to salient stimuli. Time 0 
represents contact with food or predator odor and the placement of the female mouse in the 
cage. Presented are average responses (n = 4 mice; blue trace) ± s.e.m. (gray shading). (b-
d,f-h) Percent time in wake, NREM and REM sleep (mean ± s.e.m.; n = 4 per group for b-
d,f,h and n = 5 for g; two-way RM ANOVA between compound injected and viral 
transduction, followed by Sidak’s post hoc test; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ****P 
< 0.0001. (b) In the presence of high-fat chow (interaction: F1,6 = 6.75 (wake) and 7.58 
(NREM), P= 0.04 (wake) and 0.03 (NREM)). (c,d) In the presence of inaccessible high-fat 
chow (c) in normally fed mice (interaction: F1,6 = 241.3 (wake) and 162.1 (NREM), P= 4.5 
× 10−6 (wake) and 1.4 × 10−5 (NREM)) and (d) in 16-h food-deprived mice (interaction: 
F1,6 = 193.1 (wake) and 173.1 (NREM), P= 8.65 × 10−6 (wake) and 1.9 × 10−5 (NREM)). 
(e) Amount (mean ± s.e.m.) of high-fat chow consumed during a 1-h test period in the 
presence of 6 g high-fat chow (interaction: F1,6 = 1.45, P= 0.27). (f) In the presence of a 
freely moving female mouse (interaction: F1,6 = 12.31 (wake) and 12.56 (NREM), P= 0.01 
for wake and NREM)). (g) In the presence of an inaccessible female mouse (interaction: F1,8 
= 50.22 (wake) and 34.97 (NREM), P= 0.0001 (wake) and 3.5 × 10−4 (NREM)). (h) In the 
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 24
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 presence of a predator odor (virus: F1,6 = 13.9 (wake) and 14.75 (NREM), P= 0.0098 (wake) 
and 0.0086 (NREM); compound injected: F1,6 = 16.9 (wake) and 17.47 (NREM), P= 0.0063 
(wake) and 0.0058 (NREM)).
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 25
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. 
Chemogenetic inhibition of Th+ VTA neurons promotes nest-building behavior. (a) Diagram 
of experiment. (b) Percentage (mean ± s.e.m.) of time spent awake, in NREM sleep and in 
REM sleep following the transfer to a new cage in mCherry and hM4Di mice (n = 4 per 
group). Two-way RM ANOVA between compound injected and viral transduction, 
interaction: F1,6 = 5.847 (wake) and 6.328 (NREM), P = 0.052 (wake) and 0.0456 (NREM); 
followed by Sidak’s post hoc tests, *P(hM4Di: saline–CNO) = 0.02, (CNO: mCherry-
hM4Di) = 0.007. (c) Representative pictures of mCherry and hM4Di mouse cages following 
saline (top) and CNO (bottom) injections at the end of the 1-h test period (one each of 13 
mCherry and 9 hM4Di mice). (d) Nesting score (mean ± s.e.m.) represents the amount of 
nesting material used and shape of the nest during the 1-h test period (1, poor; 5, good). 
Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed rank test, mCherry: n = 13, W = 3, P = 0.75; hM4Di: n = 9, 
W = 45, **P = 0.0039. (e) Diagram of experiment. (f) Percentage (mean ± s.e.m.) of time 
spent awake, in NREM and REM sleep during the test hour following the transfer to a new 
cage, in mCherry and hM4Di mice (n = 4 per group). Two-way RM ANOVA between 
compound injected and viral transduction, followed by Sidak’s post hoc tests: P(CNO: 
mCherry–hM4Di) = 5 × 10−5 and (hM4Di: saline–CNO) = 0.001. (g) Representative 
pictures of mCherry and hM4Di mouse cages following saline (top) and CNO (bottom) 
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 26
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 injections, at the end of the 1-h test period (n = 4 mice each). (h) Timeline of experiment. (i) 
Fluorescence changes during novel object exploration, active waking and nest-building, 
calculated per 1-s epoch. Box plot: central mark indicates median; bottom and top edges 
indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles, respectively. The whiskers extend to the most extreme 
data points not considered outliers, and the outliers are plotted ndividually using the “+” 
symbol. From 4 mice, novel object, n = 374 epochs; active waking n = 2,801 epochs; nest-
building n = 2,143 epochs), two-way ANOVA between behavioral state and mice, behavioral 
state: F3,2 = 37.25, P = 5.2 × 10−50; followed by Sidak’s post hoc tests, P(active waking-
novel object) = 1 × 10−5, (active waking–nest building) = 9 × 10−10 and (novel object–nest 
building) = 9 × 10−10. (j) Mean (± s.e.m.) transient rate during novel object exploration, 
active waking and nest-building (n = 4 mice). One-way ANOVA; F2,9 = 10.56, P = 0.0044; 
followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test, **P = 0.0033
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 27
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. 
Optogenetic activation of Th+ VTA neurons is sufficient to initiate wakefulness. (a) 
Representative immunofluorescence image of the VTA from an eYFP mouse, showing 
expression of the fluorescent protein eYFP and Th+ cells of the VTA. Scale bar, 50 μm (one 
of eight mice). (b) Schematic of injection and implant. (c) Representative traces of EEG-
EMG recordings showing an immediate sleep-to-wake transition during NREM sleep after 
acute photostimulation (25 Hz for 5 s) of Th+ VTA neurons during the inactive (light) phase 
in a mouse transduced with ChR2 (bottom) but not in a mouse transduced with eYFP (top). 
(d) Mean latency (± s.e.m.) to wake from NREM sleep following optogenetic stimulation at 
1 and 25 Hz of eYFP (white) and ChR2 (blue) mice (n = 8 per group; 6–10 stimulations per 
frequency per mouse). Two-way RM ANOVA between stimulation condition and viral 
transduction; F1,14 = 63.27 (virus), 38 (frequency) and 28.34 (interaction), P = 1.4 × 10−6 
(virus), 2.5 × 10−5 (frequency) and 1 × 10−4 (interaction); followed by Sidak’s post hoc 
tests, *P = 0.035, ****P(ChR2: 1 HzαΔ±μ–25 Hz) = 2 × 10−6 and P(25 Hz: eYFP–ChR2) = 
5 × 10−10. (e) Mean latency (± s.e.m.) to wake from REM sleep following optogenetic 
stimulation at 1 and 25 Hz of eYFP (white) and ChR2 (blue) mice (n = 9 per group; 6–10 
stimulations per frequency per mouse). Two-way RM ANOVA between stimulation 
condition and viral transduction; F1,16 = 59.25 (virus), 1.2 (frequency) and 3.45 
(interaction), P = 1 × 10−6 (virus), 0.29 (frequency) and 0.08 (interaction).
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 28
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. 
Optogenetic activation of Th+ VTA neurons is sufficient to maintain wakefulness and 
suppress nest-building behavior. (a) Diagram of stimulation protocol. (b,c) Representative 
hypnogram, fast Fourier transform–derived delta power and EMG activity over the 12 h of 
the nactive, light phase in (b) an eYFP and (c) a ChR2 mouse. Light blue shading represents 
the stimulation phase. (d) Percent (mean ± s.e.m.) time spent awake (left), in NREM sleep 
(middle) and REM sleep (right) during 24 h, starting with the photostimulation (n = 7 per 
group; two-way RM ANOVA between time and viral transduction, interaction: F23,138 = 
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 29
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 11.65 (wake), 10.38 (NREM), and 12.18 (REM), P = 1 × 10−15 for wake, NREM and REM 
sleep; followed by Sidak’s post hoc tests, Wake: P(ZT 0) = 3 × 10−6, P(ZT 1) = 3 × 10−10, 
P(ZT 2) = 4 × 10−9, P(ZT 3) = 5 × 10−8, P(ZT 4) = 5 × 10−9, P(ZT 5) = 1 × 10−6; NREM: 
P(ZT 0) = 3 × 10−6, P(ZT 1) = 1 × 10−9, P(ZT 2) = 3 × 10−8, P(ZT 3) = 1 × 10−7, P(ZT 4) = 
9 × 10-9, P(ZT 5) = 4 × 10−6; REM: P(ZT 0) = 0.02, P(ZT 1) = 1 × 10−7, P(ZT 2) = 3 × 
10−9, P(ZT 3) = 8 × 10−6, P(ZT 4) = 2 × 10−5, P(ZT 5) = 5 × 10−6, P(ZT 14) = 0.025, P(ZT 
15) = 0.003, P(ZT 16) = 0.01, P(ZT 18) = 0.03, P(ZT 19) = 0.03, P(ZT 20) = 0.03. (e) 
Duration (mean ± s.e.m.) per 6-h bin; n = 7 per group; two-way RM ANOVA between time 
and viral transduction; interaction: F3,36 = 54.92 (wake), 81.64 (NREM), and 56.8 (REM), P 
= 1.6 × 10−13 (wake), 1 × 10−15 (NREM), and 9.9 × 10−14 (REM). (f) Diagram of 
experiment. (g) Representative pictures of the cages of eYFP and ChR2 mice at the end of 
the 3-h stimulation period at 0 Hz and 25 Hz (one of eight each). (h) Nesting score (mean ± 
s.e.m.); n = 8 mice per group, Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed rank test; eYFP: W = 0, P = 
0.99; ChR2: W = −36, **P = 0.0078.
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 30
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. 
Th+ VTA neuron projections differentially modulate arousal. (a–d) Representative images of 
Th+ VTA fibers expressing ChR2 at the (a) NAc, (b) mPFC, (c) CeA and (d) DLS. Scale 
bars, 100 μm (one of six mice for a and b and one of four mice for c and d). Note that each 
column represents one output region. (e–h) Mean latency (± s.e.m.) to wake from NREM 
sleep following optogenetic stimulation at 1 and 25 Hz of eYFP and ChR2 mice (8–12 
stimulations per frequency per mouse); two-way RM ANOVA between frequency and viral 
transduction (interactions: F1,10 = 5.4 (NAc), F1,12 = 0.94 (mPFC), F1,6 = 31.71 (CeA), F1,6 
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 31
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 = 29.73 (DLS), P(NAc) = 0.042, P(mPFC) = 0.35, P(CeA) = 0.001, P(DLS) = 0.002), 
followed by Sidak’s post hoc tests (NAc: **P = 0.002, ****P = 9 × 10−6, CeA: **P = 0.001, 
****P = 1 × 10−5, DLS: *P = 0.046, ***P = 2 × 10−4, ****P = 4 × 10−7). (i–l) Mean atency 
(± s.e.m.) to wake from REM sleep following optogenetic stimulation at 1 and 25 Hz of 
eYFP and ChR2 mice (8–12 stimulations per frequency per mouse); two-way RM ANOVA 
between frequency and viral transduction (interactions: F1,10 = 0.8 (NAc), F1,12 = 5.081 
(mPFC), F1,6 = 1.032 (CeA), F1,6 = 1.94 (DLS); P(NAc) = 0.3, P(mPFC) = 0.043, P(CeA) = 
0.35 , P(DLS) = 0.2; virus (CeA): F1,6 = 6.207, P = 0.047) followed by Sidak’s post hoc 
tests (mPFC: **P = 0.003, ****P = 9 × 10−6). (m–x) The percentage (mean ± s.e.m.) of time 
spent (m–p) awake, (q–t) in NREM sleep and (u–x) in REM sleep during 24 h starting with 
photostimulation of the different output regions in eYFP (white) and ChR2 (blue) mice. n = 
6 per group for NAc and mPFC and n = 4 per group for CeA and DLS experiments; two-
way RM ANOVA between time and viral transduction (NAc interactions: wake F23,115 = 
2.829, P = 0.0001; NREM F23,115 = 2.455, P = 0.0009; REM: F23,115 = 2.938, P = 8 × 10−5), 
followed by Sidak’s post hoc tests (NAc wake: P(ZT 0) = 0.005, P(ZT 1) = 0.022, P(ZT 2) = 
0.0004; NREM: P(ZT 0) = 0.003, P(ZT 2) = 0.001; REM: P(ZT 1) = 0.01, P(ZT 2) = 0.005).
Eban-Rothschild et al.
Page 32
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
