 Evidence based pathways to intervention 
1 
Evidence based pathways to intervention for children with 
Language Disorders 
*Ebbels, S.H; McCartney, E; Slonims, V; Dockrell, J.E; Norbury, C.F
*corresponding author. Contact: ebbelss@moorhouseschool.co.uk
This is the peer reviewed version of the following article: Ebbels, S. H., 
McCartney, E. , Slonims, V. , Dockrell, J. E. and Norbury, C. F. (2019), Evidence-
based pathways to intervention for children with language disorders. 
International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 54: 3-19, which 
has been published in final form at https://doi.org/10.1111/1460-6984.12387. 
This article may be used for non-commercial purposes in accordance With Wiley 
Terms and Conditions for self-archiving. 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention 
2 
Abstract 
Background: Paediatric SLT roles often involve planning individualised intervention for specific 
children, working collaboratively with families and education staff, providing advice, training and 
coaching and raising awareness. A tiered approach to service delivery is currently recommended, 
whereby services become increasingly specialised and individualised for children with greater needs. 
Aims: To stimulate discussion regarding delivery of SLT services by examining evidence 
regarding the effectiveness of 1) intervention for children with language disorders at different tiers and 
2) SLT roles within these tiers; and to propose an evidence-based model of SLT service delivery and a
flowchart to aid clinical decision-making.  
Methods: Meta-analyses and systematic reviews, together with controlled, peer-reviewed 
group studies where recent systematic reviews were not available, of interventions for children with 
language disorders are discussed, alongside the differing roles SLTs play in these interventions. Gaps in 
the evidence base are highlighted. 
Main Contribution: The service delivery model presented resembles the tiered model 
commonly used in education services, but divides individualised (Tier 3) services into Tier 3A: indirect 
intervention delivered by non-SLTs, and Tier 3B: direct intervention by an SLT. We report evidence for 
intervention effectiveness, which children might best be served by each tier, the role SLTs could take 
within each tier, and the effectiveness of these roles. Regarding universal interventions provided to all 
children (Tier 1) and those targeted at children with language weaknesses or vulnerabilities (Tier 2), 
there is growing evidence that approaches led by education services can be effective when staff are 
highly trained and well-supported. There is currently limited evidence regarding additional benefit of 
SLT-specific roles at Tiers 1 and 2. With regard to individualised intervention (Tier 3), children with 
complex or pervasive language disorders can progress following direct individualised intervention (Tier 
3B), whereas children with milder or less pervasive difficulties can make progress when intervention is 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
3 
 
managed by an SLT, but delivered indirectly by others (Tier 3A), provided they are well-trained, -
supported and -monitored. 
Conclusions: SLTs have a contribution to make at all tiers, but where prioritisation for clinical 
services is a necessity, we need to establish the relative benefits and cost-effectiveness at each tier. 
Good evidence exists for SLTs delivering direct individualised intervention and we should ensure that 
this is available to children with pervasive and/or complex language disorders. In cases where service 
models are being provided which lack evidence, we strongly recommend that SLTs investigate the 
effectiveness of their approaches. 
 
 
 
 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
4 
 
What this paper adds 
What is already known on this subject. A tiered approach to service delivery is often 
recommended, in which intervention for children with language disorders becomes increasingly 
individualised. A current dilemma is how to balance time spent supporting and training other 
professionals who can reach a greater number of children against the provision of individualised 
intervention for a smaller number of children with the most severe language disorders, in the context of 
limited resources.  
What this study adds. We aim to stimulate discussion by highlighting available evidence 
regarding the effectiveness of intervention and SLT roles at different tiers. We provide a model that is 
based on this evidence and that 1) describes the children who may best be served by each type of input 
and 2) illustrates what form SLT input could take at different tiers. We also provide a flowchart to aid 
clinical decision making. 
Clinical implications. Our evidence review indicates that SLTs must ensure sufficient training 
and skills in others asked to deliver language interventions. Furthermore, education staff and families 
may require on-going support to enable them to deliver evidence-based programmes as intended. 
Children with complex and pervasive language impairments have distinct needs and are likely to require 
individualised SLT support which includes close collaborative working between SLTs, education staff and 
families, and in some cases direct SLT intervention. Thus, service delivery models should ensure SLTs 
have sufficient time to work effectively with these children.  
 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
5 
 
Speech and Language Therapists (SLTs) are an integral part of the children’s workforce. They 
contribute specialist knowledge and skills regarding children’s speech, language, and communication 
development and work alongside other professionals to enhance communication, especially in children 
with difficulties in these areas. There have been recent changes in the roles and locations in which 
paediatric SLTs work and many are now based in the community and in schools. Indeed many are now 
employed directly by schools. Roles may be determined or facilitated by the model of employment and 
whilst a move away from the clinic into educational provision and the community is positive, leading to 
increased collaborative working in ecologically valid contexts, it has also led to an increasing focus on 
the language needs of all children, as opposed to only those with severe needs (Bercow, 2008). Without 
increased staffing levels, this may have resulted in decreased time for direct intervention (less than a 
quarter of the average SLT’s time is spent on this (Pring et al., 2012)), and an accompanying 
dissatisfaction with service delivery models from some SLTs (Pring et al., 2012) and parents (Dockrell et 
al., 2006). Other parents are more positive, especially those whose children attend schools with 
specialist provision (Lindsay et al., 2016). 
We aim in this paper to consider the effectiveness of different roles played by SLTs as part of an 
integrated workforce and to stimulate discussion about how best to provide services in an effective 
manner.  Different models of employment of SLTs apply internationally and influence service delivery, 
practitioner roles and skills set. However, issues regarding prioritisation of unmet need are universal, so 
our discussion aims to be relevant to SLTs/SLPs internationally.  
Recent models of SLT service delivery for children and young people conceptualise services as 
involving a hierarchy of SLT involvement, whereby some support is provided for all and greater support 
for those children with more severe needs (e.g., Gascoigne, 2006, Law et al., 2013). These models 
resemble those in education and youth justice services, variously called Tiers/Stages/Waves or Response 
to Intervention (RTI) models (e.g., Fuchs and Fuchs, 2006, Snow et al., 2015). However, there is a lack of 
clarity about the precise nature and aims of SLT roles at different tiers, and evidence that these roles are 
effective in achieving these aims is sparse.  
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
6 
 
Our purpose here is first to present a modified version of a tiered intervention model, which 
splits Tier 3 in order to provide clarity regarding interventions at this tier. Then, we summarise for each 
tier the available evidence regarding the effectiveness of a) support and/or intervention for children at 
that tier and b) SLT roles within each tier. This paper is a discussion paper, not a systematic review. 
However, we draw on evidence from systematic reviews and meta-analyses where possible. Where 
these are not available or more recent studies are available, we include discussion of individual studies, 
although we do not include single case studies. Based on the evidence reviewed, we then suggest an 
overall model of SLT service delivery and a flowchart to aid clinical decision making.  
We recognize that evidence is not the only influence on clinical decision making; evidence based 
practice involves using clinical expertise and experience to make decisions about the care of individual 
clients by integrating the values of the “fully informed” client with the best available evidence from 
systematic research into the decision making process. In addition, there are ethical, financial, national 
and local political considerations which influence service decisions. However, outcomes should inform 
the decision making process.  By summarising the evidence we aim to a) help clinicians to present an 
overview of the evidence to clients, so they are “fully informed” and b) stimulate discussion about the 
direction of the profession in relation to children’s SLT services, highlighting where further research is 
needed.  An important premise is the general agreement that communication is a human right and that 
SLTs have a key role to play in maximising functional communication in children with speech, language 
and communication needs (see recent issue of International Journal of Speech Language Pathology, 
McLeod, 2018). 
 In this paper, we focus primarily on children with Language Disorder. Language Disorder arises 
in development and is affected by a complex interplay of genetic and environmental factors. We use the 
term Language Disorder in the manner set out in Bishop et al. (2017); to refer to all children with 
language difficulties that cause functional impairment in everyday life and are associated with poor 
prognosis. This includes children whose language difficulties occur in isolation (for which the 
recommended term is Developmental Language Disorder, or DLD) and those whose language difficulties 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
7 
 
are associated with other conditions such as autism. For brevity we have limited ourselves to literature 
relating to the populations which comprise a significant percentage of children’s SLT services. We do 
also consider pre-school children with low language where the prognosis is unclear, who would often be 
served by Tier 1 and Tier 2 interventions. Both groups of children (those with language disorders and 
those with language difficulties with unclear prognosis) are included in the umbrella term Speech 
Language and Communication Needs (see RCSLT, 2017). 
  SLTs working with language difficulties or language disorder are part of the multi-disciplinary 
children’s workforce who have complementary skills and a common goal of maximising the child’s 
functioning, activity, well-being and participation, both in education and socially. The SLT’s specific role 
in part depends on the roles and working models of the other professionals in that workforce. Close 
collaboration between SLTs, families and other professionals supporting children with language 
difficulties and disorders is a crucial component of effective support for these children and their 
families.  
Tiered intervention models 
Tiered intervention models generally divide intervention into three different levels, waves, 
stages or tiers (e.g., Fuchs and Fuchs, 2006, Gascoigne, 2006, Law et al., 2013, Snow et al., 2015). 
However, there is a mismatch in terminology used in education versus health services (shown 
schematically in Figure 1).  
 
 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
8 
 
 
Figure 1 – Response to intervention model of intervention for children with language 
disorders 
 
Education intervention tiers are generally related to the characteristics of children. Tier 1 aims to 
provide high-quality teaching for all; Tier 2 provides education-led language programmes for children 
performing just below age expectations; and Tier 3 focuses on children with identified language 
disorders, who are not making expected progress and are likely to require individualised intervention. 
Tiers are thus broadly matched to interventions, but focus on child need  (e.g., Fuchs and Fuchs, 2006). 
In contrast, “universal”, “targeted” and “specialist” SLT services describe the type of support or 
intervention provided by SLTs or the aims of the intervention in terms of prevention (Law et al., 2013). 
“Specialist interventions” usually involve individualised intervention devised by an SLT for a specific child 
(which broadly aligns with education’s Tier 3) and aim to improve skills, reduce the functional impact of 
the impairment and increase participation, potentially preventing negative secondary sequelae. The 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
9 
 
labels “targeted” and “specialist” are both used to describe intervention managed but not directly 
delivered by an SLT. This is confusing. For example, Scottish Government (2010) guidance reflects most 
allied health profession practice in stating that when an SLT has a duty of care and is managing 
intervention (regardless of whether the intervention is delivered ‘directly’ by an SLT or ‘indirectly’ by 
non-SLTs under the direction of the SLT), this is specialist intervention. However, some  (e.g., Law et al., 
2012, 2017) regard indirect intervention as “targeted” intervention because it is not delivered by a SLT, 
even though it is individualised to the child and overseen by an SLT. This lack of consistency is indicated 
in Figure 1 by the dashed arrows. To avoid confusion, we split Tier 3 into Tier 3B for direct 
individualised/specialist intervention and Tier 3A for indirect individualised intervention (currently called 
variously “specialist” or “targeted” - see Figure 1). We consider it essential to distinguish “indirect” work 
for which an SLT has a duty of care (which we call Tier 3A) from that delivered by education services at 
Tier 2, where the SLT does not have a duty of care, although the child may be recognised as having 
special educational or additional support needs. 
The precise definition of “targeted intervention” is unclear in SLT practice, but the primary focus 
is on “vulnerable” children (Gascoigne, 2006) with the aim of decreasing the prevalence of language 
difficulties in the population (Law et al., 2013). The provision of small group work at Tier 2 for children 
who have been identified as having language levels below age expectations would fall under “targeted” 
interventions in most definitions. However, any lack of distinction between Tier 2 and what we call Tier 
3A is problematic if it is unclear whether or not an SLT has a legal and ethical responsibility for the 
intervention provided.   
“Targeted” intervention can also, in most interpretations, cover interventions/advice for 
vulnerable groups of children who, due to family circumstances such as economic hardship, are deemed 
to be at increased risk of language difficulties. These children have not been identified as having 
language levels below age expectations and some may have language abilities within the expected 
range. This is sometimes referred to as “targeted selective” intervention, (as opposed to “targeted 
indicated” where the children’s lower language levels are known, see above, Asmussen et al., 2016). In 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
10 
 
this paper, we will discuss studies under Tier 1 if they are designed to help all children, but under Tier 2 if 
they provide intervention for a limited number, often in small groups.  
“Universal” SLT services aim to  prevent future problems (Law et al., 2013), by providing 
effective, inclusive, communication environments for all. SLT roles in universal services often focus on 
two important areas: improving the ability of parents and professionals to identify speech, language 
and/or communication difficulties in children, and enhancing interaction to maximise opportunities for 
all children to develop good communication skills (thus aligning with Tier 1).  
The lack of agreement in terminology hinders mutual understanding and effective collaboration 
between education and health services, and in practice intervention levels are not always clearly 
signalled (Law et al., 2012, p14), leading to confusion about where responsibilities for intervention lie.  In 
this paper, we consider the evidence for effectiveness of interventions in terms of levels shown inside 
the triangle in Figure 1, mapped to education services’ Tiers 1, 2 and 3 which we label: 
1. High quality teaching and interactions for all children (Tier 1) 
2. Education-led small groups following manualised language programmes (Tier 2) 
3. Individualised intervention where children are registered on an SLT caseload and where 
the SLT has a duty of care (Tier 3). This is split into: 
A. Tier 3A: Indirect individualised intervention planned and monitored by the SLT 
but delivered by parents or a member of the children’s workforce. 
B. Tier 3B: Direct individualised intervention, delivered by the SLT who planned the 
intervention.  
Figure 1 shows lines between the tiers and for clarity we will discuss the evidence for each tier 
separately. However, both the interventions and children’s needs are better viewed as a continuum. 
Aims 
 For each tier, we first summarise the evidence for effectiveness of intervention for children 
with language difficulties and disorders, then consider the roles SLTs may play in the delivery of 
intervention, and summarise the available evidence regarding the effectiveness of these roles. In 
addition, we consider evidence of effectiveness of SLTs’ joint collaborative work and training with 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
11 
 
parents and other professionals, across all tiers. Finally, we describe a model of service delivery based 
on the evidence reviewed. 
Method 
For each tier, we first searched for systematic reviews and meta-analyses published from year 
2000 using the SpeechBite website (http://speechbite.com/), Cochrane database, and Google Scholar. 
Where several reviews or meta-analyses exist for a topic, we chose the most recent and the most 
relevant to the discussions in this paper (i.e., those focusing on service delivery rather than specific 
interventions). Where we found no recent systematic reviews or meta-analyses, we discuss older 
systematic reviews, more recent narrative reviews and individual papers published in the relevant area 
since the last review. We excluded single case studies and indicate whether other studies were 
randomised control trials (RCTs). 
 
Tier 1 interventions (high quality teaching and interactions for all children) 
Evidence of effectiveness of Tier 1 interventions 
For children enrolled in education, effective Tier 1 provision requires active classroom 
management and teaching to support the development of oral language skills. Tier 1 intervention may 
involve teachers or early educators delivering language programmes to all children in their classes and 
large-scale cluster RCTs have shown these can result in improved performance in grammar, morphology 
and vocabulary (Neuman et al., 2011, Vadasy et al., 2015, Apthorp et al., 2012). However, a large Danish 
RCT  providing  a lower level of input (Bleses et al., 2017) did not result in significant changes in child 
language.  The fact that the number of sessions delivered was a significant predictor suggests that better 
results may have been achieved with more intervention. 
Tier 1 intervention may also involve professional development (PD) for education staff. Several 
large-scale RCTs in Canada and the United States have explored the effectiveness of PD for pre-school 
educators and a recent meta-analysis of studies of PD focusing on language and/or literacy (Markussen-
Brown et al., 2017) found medium effects on adult-child interactions and large effects on the physical 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
12 
 
classroom space, but no significant effect on educator knowledge. Less than half of the included studies 
reported child outcomes, but the meta-analysis revealed a non-significant effect on child vocabulary and 
small to medium significant effects on phonological awareness and alphabet knowledge. Surprisingly, 
the improvements in child outcomes were not mediated by improvements in the way the adults 
interacted with the children. Markussen-Brown et al. (2017) found better outcomes for PD of longer 
duration and greater intensity (the average amount of PD was around 50-60 hours) and while courses 
alone had no significant effects, courses plus components such as coaching and feedback had 
significantly larger effects. The most important predictor was whether the PD included more than one 
component (e.g., course plus coaching and feedback, or the addition of a language curriculum or use of 
assessment data to guide lesson planning).  
Fewer studies have been carried out considering the effects of PD for teachers in schools. Snow 
et al.’s (2014) cluster RCT involving fourteen primary schools in a socio-economically disadvantaged area 
found six days of PD plus follow-up support improved children’s average oral language and literacy skills. 
It is not clear whether the changes applied to children with language disorders, as their results are not 
reported separately. 
 In a smaller study comparing two secondary schools, one intervention and one control (Starling 
et al., 2012), adolescents with language disorder were assessed following teacher training in language 
modification techniques (8 hours training plus observation and coaching). Results indicated positive 
changes in the adolescents’ written expression and listening comprehension, but not reading or 
speaking.  However, due to the design of this study it is possible that changes may have resulted from 
school differences rather than the intervention per se. 
The above studies on PD for education professionals involved a high level of commitment from 
researchers and education staff. Courses alone do not appear to be effective unless combined with 
other components such as individual coaching and feedback, tailored to the needs of individual staff.  
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
13 
 
Tier 1 services also focus on children before they enter education and often aim to change 
parents’ interaction with their children, to increase the amount of contingent talk (McGillion et al., 2017, 
Landry et al., 2006) or increase the vocabulary children are exposed to, for example via interactive 
shared book reading (Mol et al., 2008). A meta-analysis of parenting education programs for children 
aged 3 to 5 years (Grindal et al., 2016) found little beneficial effect unless opportunities to practice 
parenting skills were provided. The addition of coaching and feedback led to larger effects. However, 
evidence from RCTs with parents of infants (below 1 year old) found training alone via a video focused 
on increasing contingent talk (where the caregiver talks about what is in the infant’s current focus of 
attention, Landry et al., 2006, McGillion et al., 2017), can lead to positive effects on children’s language. 
However, these may not be maintained in the longer-term (McGillion et al., 2017).  
Meta-analyses of family-based emergent literacy interventions (Mol et al., 2008, Manz et al., 
2010) found moderate effects on expressive language, and smaller effects on receptive language. 
However, the effectiveness was substantially reduced for “at risk” children in families with low incomes 
or less educated mothers. A similar result was found in  a meta-analysis of vocabulary interventions for 
children aged 0-6 years (Marulis and Neuman, 2013); while these were generally effective, effect sizes 
were significantly lower in children from low SES backgrounds and were further reduced if children had 
additional risk factors. Thus, careful evaluation of Tier 1 interventions designed to enhance language in 
all children is needed to establish whether they are effective for children at highest risk for continuing 
language difficulties. 
SLT roles in Tier 1 interventions 
There has been little evaluation of the effectiveness of SLT-specific roles in universal health and 
education services for children. These Tier 1 roles usually focus on training others to promote the 
development of speech, language and communication.  Law and Pagnamenta (2017) found that more 
than 50% of UK SLT services are working at Tier 1 with children aged 0-2 years, but it is unclear if training 
provides the 50-60 hours in the studies discussed in the previous section.  A recent scoping review 
(Smith et al., 2017) focused on SLT roles in health promotion for children aged 0-3 years concluded “the 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
14 
 
lack of quality in reporting and study design result in an inability to draw any conclusions regarding the 
effectiveness of speech and language therapy health-promotion services for early language delay”. 
  Other SLT roles at Tier 1 focus on raising awareness  in the general public (especially parents) 
and policymakers of 1) the importance of language to economic independence, health and well-being 
and 2) identification of children with language disorders and the ‘red flags’ and risk factors for a 
persistent language disorder (further discussed below). Public awareness raising is often the remit of 
membership organisations, professional bodies and charities. The effectiveness of SLTs in these activities 
should be measured against these other lobbying and public information activists. However, SLT services 
have a role in raising awareness among those who are potential referrers of important ‘red flags’ and 
risk factors for persistent language disorders. 
Tier 1 intervention is often described as ‘preventative,’ (e.g., Law et al., 2013) but most models 
of education and SLT service delivery acknowledge that a number of children are likely to need more 
targeted or individualised support at Tiers 2 or 3. Longitudinal studies of children with DLD indicate that 
difficulties persist well beyond the early years and may affect social and work contexts into adulthood 
and thus long-term support may be required.  
Tier 2 interventions (education-led small groups delivering language programmes) 
Evidence of effectiveness of Tier 2 interventions 
A number of research studies have evaluated interventions delivered to support oral language 
skills in small groups of children with weaknesses or “vulnerabilities”. Some studies could be described 
as “targeted selective” because recipients were in high-risk groups rather than being included based on 
their actual language abilities. For example, Dockrell et al. (2010) found improved receptive and 
expressive language performance following “Talking Time” groups with pre-school children from 
deprived areas learning English as an additional language. Other studies were RCTs involving children 
with identified language difficulties  (“targeted indicated”)  with a  focus on improving receptive and 
expressive language (e.g., Nuffield Language Programme, Bowyer-Crane et al., 2008, Fricke et al., 2013, 
2017, Talk Boost, Lee and Pring, 2016) and vocabulary (Connections, Vadasy, 2015b).  A pair of RCTs in 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
15 
 
the US evaluated Tier 2 interventions in a response to intervention model for children whose difficulties 
persisted  following high quality Tier 1 intervention in pre-school settings (Lonigan and Phillips, 2016). In 
Study 1, they found no benefit from the language intervention groups, but some benefit was evident in 
Study 2 after extensive modifications including reducing the group size from six to four, increasing 
training to twenty hours for the professionals delivering the intervention and reducing the number of 
intervention targets. However, the authors suggest that even more intervention than the 15 hours 
provided may be required. 
The above interventions were typically carried out by education staff in schools, with 
researchers providing training and on-going support, and measuring fidelity of delivery of the 
intervention. Evidence is emerging that generalisation to regular practice in which training is not 
provided by the developer of the programme and is at lower intensities  results in  smaller effect sizes 
than the original studies (Fricke et al., 2017), and in some cases no significant effects (Thurston et al., 
2016).  Therefore more effectiveness trials of promising interventions are needed to establish the 
quantity and quality of training required for these programmes to be successfully delivered in schools 
without support from the original developers.  
SLT roles in Tier 2 interventions 
Whilst SLTs frequently present school staff with language and communication programmes, the 
majority of the studies discussed above were led by education or psychology researchers, and in the 
studies with large and significant effects, the originators of the intervention provided the training to 
those delivering it. Given the small effects in the RCTs by Fricke et al. (2017) and Thurston et al. (2016) 
when SLTs provided the training, indications are that training and support for such programmes needs to 
be at higher intensity than was provided in these studies, and the quality of training and coaching 
provided by SLTs needs to be evaluated.  
Tier 3 interventions (individualised intervention) 
Individualised interventions are based on assessment of a particular child’s needs. In clinical 
practice, the recommendation is that the professional with a duty of care for the child should monitor 
the delivery and outcomes of each period of intervention. Planning will usually take into account the 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
16 
 
views of the child, family and education staff. When asking others to share the delivery of intervention, 
the SLT has a responsibility to provide the necessary training, support and resources to ensure a high 
quality intervention specifically tailored to the child’s needs. In the UK, many SLTs use an “episodes of 
care” approach in which the SLT 'opens' or initiates an ‘episode’ of intervention and when this is 
completed they ‘close’ it, discharging the child from their care until any further re-referral. This  
contrasts with education provision which is on-going throughout the school years, and now (in the UK at 
least) potentially to 25 years (Department for Education and Department of Health, 2015). Whilst 
“episodes of care” allow a service to manage the demands of a large caseload of children, there is a risk 
of failure to assess the need for further provision for children after discharge. For example, in a study by 
McCartney and Muir (2016) SLTs reported that failure to understand the need for re-referral resulted in 
some school leavers with learning disabilities missing SLT assessment of post-school intervention needs. 
Thus, careful explanation and discussion with other professionals regarding re-referral processes, and 
the meaning of this form of case closure or ‘discharge’, is required. 
In the next sections we split individualised intervention into direct intervention, delivered by the 
SLT (often with others supporting practice and the generalisation of new skills) versus indirect 
intervention, delivered by non-SLTs, such as parents or education staff. 
Direct individualised intervention (Tier 3B) 
For children with DLD (many of whom would previously have been diagnosed as having Specific 
Language Impairment, SLI), good evidence exists of positive effects of individualised 1:1 direct 
intervention with an SLT for improving expressive language skills and vocabulary (for reviews see Law et 
al., 2003, Ebbels, 2014, Lowe et al., in press) and some studies are beginning to emerge considering the 
effectiveness of delivery of intervention via telehealth (Wales et al., 2017). Fewer studies explore the 
effectiveness of intervention for children with severe and pervasive difficulties, including receptive 
language difficulties (see review by Boyle et al., 2010). In general, studies using standardised tests as 
outcome measures fail to show significant effects of intervention for children with receptive difficulties; 
see Boyle et al. (2009) and Gillam et al. (2008), both RCTs. These data raise the issue of the use of 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
17 
 
assessments in populations for whom they were not developed or for purposes for which they were not 
designed (Dockrell and Marshall, 2015). Standardised tests can be a measure of change for some 
children, e.g., they detected expressive language gains in Boyle et al. (2009)’s cohort, but they may not 
be sufficiently sensitive to smaller changes in children with severe and pervasive difficulties. Studies 
using more tailored measures of progress generally show larger effect sizes and indeed such studies 
have found significant gains with intervention targeting either a range of areas (Ebbels et al., 2017, 
Gallagher and Chiat, 2009) or the specific language areas of receptive vocabulary and word finding 
(Throneburg et al., 2000, Wright et al., in press, Ebbels et al., 2012, Hyde-Wright et al., 1993)  and 
production and comprehension of specific grammatical structures (Ebbels et al., 2014, 2007). Note that 
Gallagher & Chiat (2009) and Ebbels et al. (2007, 2012, 2014) were RCTs; the others provide a lower 
level of evidence.  
There is also emerging evidence that children with severe, complex and pervasive 
communication and language disorders (including those associated with autism and learning disabilities) 
can make progress with direct individualised intervention, usually in combination with collaborative 
work (discussed further below). Relevant studies tend to focus on the acquisition of specific skills, e.g. 
requesting using Picture Exchange Communication Scheme (PECS, Bondy and Frost, 1994, not RCT), or 
precursor skills for language e.g., joint attention (Green et al., 2010). Evidence is also emerging of 
benefits from direct intervention targeting social communication for children with autism, with 
outcomes relating to language abilities (Kasari et al., 2012) and parents’ ability to respond to their child 
in a synchronous manner (Green et al., 2010). The National Institute for Health Care and Excellence for 
children and young people with autism (NICE, 2013) noted suggestive evidence for benefit from direct, 
early social communication intervention when data from a number of studies were combined (Kendall 
et al., 2013).  
Indirect individualised intervention (Tier 3A) 
Individualised intervention may be delivered indirectly, i.e. planned by an SLT but delivered by 
others. For pre-school children this is often via parents and for school-aged children via education staff. 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
18 
 
Systematic reviews and meta-analyses of SLT interventions with preschool children (Roberts and Kaiser, 
2011, DeVeney et al., 2017, Tosh et al., 2017, Lawler et al., 2013) suggest that parental delivery of 
individualised intervention can lead to improved speech and language skills for children with expressive 
language difficulties, including those with intellectual disabilities. Roberts and Kaiser (2011) reported 
that the majority of studies analysed found larger effect sizes for expressive relative to receptive 
language and indeed expressive language was the focus of most parent implemented intervention.  
Tosh et al. (2017) explored the amount of coaching provided to parents and concluded that 
home programmes are effective when delivered with high dosage rates and when parents receive direct 
coaching from an SLT. In addition, they found that across all studies reviewed, effective home 
programmes had a similar cost to SLT services as direct intervention for comparable gain, with 
indications that direct intervention provides a more consistent treatment response. Tosh et al. (2017) 
also caution that the quality of the majority of studies providing evidence of the effectiveness of home 
programmes is low and thus “the evidence supporting the use of home programs remains poor”. For 
children with language disorder and autism, a systematic review of parent-mediated approaches (Oono 
et al., 2013) did not find evidence of gains in child-related measures of language, communication or 
behaviour or reductions in parent stress, but did find evidence of positive change in patterns of parent-
child interaction and possibly in receptive vocabulary and severity of autism symptoms.  
In educational settings, indirect intervention is usually delivered by education staff or SLT 
assistants; indeed Tosh et al. (2017) found no studies involving parents with children over 7 years of age. 
Studies which have demonstrated benefit for children in educational settings (both with pre-schoolers 
and school-aged children) have involved well-trained and supported staff under the direct management 
of a research team, SLT or specialist teacher. This applies to interventions aiming to improve joint 
attention (Lawton and Kasari, 2012) or joint engagement (Wong, 2013) in children with autism; a range 
of specific speech and language targets in children with speech and/or language disorders (Mecrow et 
al., 2010), and to expressive language targets for children with expressive (but not receptive) language 
impairments (Boyle et al., 2009). Boyle et al. (2009) reported minimal treatment effects for children with 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
19 
 
receptive language impairments and/or progress on receptive language targets. In addition, an 
effectiveness study (McCartney et al., 2011), used the same intervention as that used in Boyle et al. 
(2009) delivered by school staff, who were provided  with the manualised programme, with little on-
going supervision. This study did not result in improved receptive or expressive language. The authors 
suggest that a likely reason for the differences between the studies was that, in the effectiveness study 
(McCartney et al., 2011), the intervention was not delivered as intended by the education staff, who 
were receiving lower levels of support.  
Joint collaborative work with parents and/or education staff 
Collaborative work with parents, health and education staff occurs at all tiers: i.e., for the 
benefit of individual children with identified language disorders (Tier 3), children with language 
weaknesses (Tier 2), and whole classes of children (Tier 1). Collaborative work is an aspect of SLT 
services which is not practised universally but which we view as important; hence we consider what this 
approach may add in this specific section. Collaborative work involves joint planning and decision-
making about the priorities and method of delivery of an intervention, and is different from training or 
directing an assistant where the SLT may take on the role of “expert”. The aim is often to reduce the 
functional impact of a child’s difficulties on their access to the curriculum, social participation or well-
being, and to practise new skills in a range of settings (Archibald, 2017).  
When parents are working with SLTs on areas of language and communication development, 
these are likely to be specific to their individual child’s needs (i.e., Tier 3). A meta-analysis (Hampton and 
Kaiser, 2016) showed interventions delivered simultaneously by SLTs and parents to be more effective in 
improving the spoken language of children with autism than interventions delivered by a clinician or 
parent only.  
Collaborative work between education staff and SLTs may focus on individual children or on 
whole classes, and systematic reviews (Archibald, 2017, Cirrin et al., 2010) have concluded that 
collaborative work between SLTs and teachers is beneficial in classes with high numbers of “at-risk” 
children and also for children with identified language disorders (i.e., across Tiers 1 to 3).  
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
20 
 
Training for parents or education staff 
In order to support decision making and the delivery of intervention activities, training for 
parents and others (particularly education staff) is relevant to all tiers, but needs to be intensive and 
involve continuing support. At Tier 1, successful professional development for education staff can range 
from eight hours (Starling et al., 2012) to more than 50-60 hours (Snow et al., 2014; Markussen-Brown 
et al., 2017), and effective training is accompanied by individual observation sessions with coaching 
and/or feedback.  Studies of effective Tier 2 interventions involved relatively intensive initial training 
(four days in Fricke et al., 2013; Bowyer-Crane et al., 2008) followed by on-going training (at least 
fortnightly), support and monitoring for staff delivering programmes. Larger studies with less training 
showed smaller effects (Fricke et al., 2017, Thurston et al., 2016). Studies at Tier 3A demonstrating good 
outcomes for children had high levels of support for parents (Tosh et al., 2017) or involved professionals 
who were employed and supervised directly by the SLT service or research team (Boyle et al., 2009; 
Mecrow et al., 2010). In the only study where the level of support provided to staff carrying out Tier 3A 
intervention resembles that provided by current routine SLT services provided in the UK (McCartney et 
al., 2011), the intervention was not delivered as planned and the children showed little progress. This 
highlights the need for regular monitoring and support in order to ensure that indirect intervention 
takes place as intended. 
SLTs routinely delegate direct work to others, but the UK Health and Care Professions Council 
(HCPC) standards of conduct, performance and ethics (2016) state explicitly: “You must only delegate 
work to someone who has the knowledge, skills and experience needed to carry it out safely and 
effectively” and “you must continue to provide appropriate supervision and support to those you 
delegate work to” (page 7). In view of this, it is crucial to establish the levels of training, support, 
coaching and monitoring required for positive outcomes for children across all tiers of intervention. The 
evidence cited suggests that limited training offered as a cost-saving substitution for other forms of 
intervention is unlikely to be effective. Services providing such training need to examine the outcomes 
for children, in order to establish whether their input has been effective.  
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
21 
 
Models of service delivery and intervention 
Based on the evidence summarised above, we have constructed a model of SLT service delivery 
(Figure 2) presenting possible SLT roles, and a flowchart (Figure 3) showing the key questions which may 
indicate different pathways to intervention and the intervention an individual child might receive. The 
answers to these questions indicate the need for an SLT assessment (‘red flags’ and ‘risk factors’ 
predicting on-going problems are discussed below) and the appropriate tier of intervention for a child at 
a given point in time, which depends on factors shown in Figure 2: relating to poor response to 
intervention, complexity and severity in terms of both receptive language difficulties and impact of 
impairment on functioning. 
 Figure 2: SLT roles in response to intervention model of intervention for children with language 
disorders 
Our model in Figure 2 expands on our previous model in Figure 1. Here we have incorporated 
research evidence to help identify children requiring individualised approaches. We have included 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
22 
 
severity of receptive language difficulties as a core factor in our model because the evidence suggests 
that these children do not make progress unless provided with direct SLT and/or joint collaborative 
work. We have added a second triangle on the right which provides examples of possible SLT roles at 
each tier. Collaborative working and coaching/training cut across all tiers, whereas other SLT roles may 
be more specific to each tier. Our inversion of the right hand triangle represents firstly the weight of the 
current evidence base concerning SLT roles in supporting children with language disorders and secondly 
our view that those children with the greatest needs require the largest proportion of SLT time and 
specialist skills. This is not to say that children with milder difficulties do not require support, but rather 
that the specific technical skills of an SLT may not be essential for improving language outcomes for 
these children (as shown by the success of Tier 1 and Tier 2 studies discussed above which did not 
involve SLTs). The model is based on current knowledge but, the limited evidence available means it 
may change if further evidence emerges on treatment outcomes and (cost-)effectiveness of different 
SLT roles. 
Identification of children likely to require individualised intervention at Tier 3 
 ‘Response to Intervention’ models have been criticised for creating a “wait to fail” approach 
(see Reynolds and Shaywitz, 2009), where the impression is that children have to fail at Tiers 1 and 2 
before accessing Tier 3. To avoid this, a pathway is needed for children who should see an SLT without 
delay, including those who are the focus of Bishop et al. (2017), who are likely to have a persisting 
language disorder. This requires proper evaluation of factors which identify children at risk of a 
persisting disorder who need individualised intervention from those likely to resolve their language 
difficulties either spontaneously or with good support at Tiers 1 and 2. This appraisal should take into 
account the wide variability in child language ability and rate of language development, especially in the 
pre-school years when early language difficulties are not necessarily predictive of later disorder and 
some children with language disorder meet early language milestones (Eadie et al., 2014, Zambrana et 
al., 2014). In these circumstances it is important to consider factors which predict persistent difficulties 
in order to target scarce resources for early intervention. These can be split into ‘red flags’ and ‘risk 
factors’. Individual ‘red flags’ indicate the need for assessment by an SLT without delay; ‘risk factors’ in 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
23 
 
contrast are associated with language difficulties at a group or population level  but do not individually 
indicate the need for immediate SLT assessment for an individual.  
Important ‘red flags’ in the pre-school period are listed in Bishop et al. (2016) based on those in 
Visser-Bochane et al. (2017) and are repeated here for ease of reference:  
 
1 to 2 years: no babbling, not responding to speech and/or sounds, no interaction;  
 
2-3 years: minimal interaction, no display of intention to communicate, no words, 
minimal reaction to spoken language, regression or stalling of language development; 
 
 3-4 years: at most two-word utterances (in their first language), child does not 
understand simple commands, close relatives cannot understand much of child’s 
speech.  
Children with any of these red flags should be referred for an SLT assessment. Similar ‘red flags’ have 
been suggested for autism spectrum disorder (e.g., Baird et al., 2003).  
Longitudinal research has identified additional ‘risk factors’ which do not individually indicate 
the need for immediate SLT assessment, but are associated with an increased risk of a persistent 
language disorder at a group or population level. The most reliable predictor of later language levels is 
earlier language levels (McKean et al., 2017, 2016, Norbury et al., 2017). Other risk factors identified to 
date are: a positive family history of language or literacy difficulties (Zambrana et al., 2014); pervasive 
language deficits affecting both receptive and expressive language, which probably reflect more severe 
language difficulties (Eadie et al., 2014, Tomblin et al., 2003), particularly in girls (Zambrana et al., 2014); 
lower non-verbal IQ (e.g., Eadie et al., 2014, Tomblin et al., 2003, McKean et al., 2017); low socio-
economic status (Fisher, 2017). Some risk factors may be identified before a child begins to talk. A meta-
analysis of case history risk factors for DLD (Rudolph, 2017) found 11 risk factors were statistically 
significant predictors of DLD. Of these, the most reliable were: lower maternal education level, lower 5-
minute Apgar score, later birth order, biological sex, family history and prematurity. These risk factors 
were as informative as late talker status (but no more) and are all identifiable from the day the child is 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
24 
 
born. However Rudolph (2017) cautions that no single risk factor is by itself a strong predictor of DLD. 
Zambrana et al. (2014) identify cumulative risk from multiple risk factors, such that children with low 
language and multiple risk factors should be considered to be at high risk of persistent language disorder 
and hence could be fast-tracked for an SLT assessment. There are also a number of clinical markers of 
DLD and/or social communication difficulties which may also be helpful in identifying children likely to 
need individualised SLT. For social communication, these include difficulties with social responsiveness, 
joint attention and symbolic understanding (Roy and Chiat, 2014) and for DLD, difficulties with sentence 
repetition (Conti-Ramsden et al., 2001) and regular past tense (Conti-Ramsden, 2003, Rice and Wexler, 
1996, Werfel et al., 2017). However the status of these remains controversial (Pawłowska, 2014). 
Age is also an important factor. Whilst the majority of children with early delays in expressive 
language will spontaneously improve by school entry (Rescorla, 2011, Paul et al., 2000), language 
difficulties still evident, or which have emerged, by school entry tend not to resolve (e.g., Conti-
Ramsden et al., 2012). Thus, by 4-5 years, language abilities are much more stable and school-aged 
children with language difficulties are at high risk of persistent language disorder. In older children and 
adolescents, language abilities should be checked in those who exhibit behavioural and mental health 
issues (Hollo et al., 2014). 
Language disorders in the context of other developmental conditions such as Down syndrome, 
or autism are unlikely to resolve spontaneously (Pickles et al., 2014). Intervention for these populations 
is likely to have a broad remit: establishing communication within the family, perhaps introducing 
alternative and augmentative communication methods, developing and monitoring oral language, and 
providing evidence for statutory assessment of education, health and social care plans.  
Evidence-based pathways to intervention for children with Language Disorders 
We now bring together the evidence reviewed above into a flowchart (Figure 3), to enable 
evidence-based decisions regarding the appropriate tier of intervention for an individual child. It 
includes key decision points, such as whether to refer for an SLT assessment, or to provide direct or 
indirect SLT intervention. Children can move between tiers based on their response to intervention and 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
25 
 
the functional impact of their difficulties at any given point in time. This model encompasses constant 
monitoring, including of children who do not appear to have language difficulties when they are young, 
but whose language difficulties may emerge, or be identified later. Some children have multiple co-
occurring difficulties requiring a model of intervention at different tiers simultaneously.  
Children with the ‘red flags’ listed above and those with language difficulties and multiple risk 
factors should be assessed by an SLT.  Children with language difficulties but few additional risk factors 
may be best served by evidence based Tier 1 and 2 services. For this model to work well,  professionals 
working with children will need training in how to identify language difficulties, ‘red flags’ and ‘risk 
factors’ and how to assess progress in response to Tier 1 and 2 interventions. This should increase the 
number of appropriate referrals to SLT so that the current high levels of unmet and unrecognised need 
(Norbury et al., 2016) are reduced. 
The primary purpose of Figure 3 is to indicate pathways to intervention, using a response to 
intervention approach through close monitoring of outcomes and subsequent changes to provision 
where necessary.  Response to intervention could be monitored by education staff for education-led 
interventions (at Tiers 1 and 2) and by the SLT for interventions where the SLT has a duty of care (at 
Tiers 3A and 3B). For this to be effective, it is important to define good or poor response to an 
intervention (Reynolds & Shaywitz, 2009) particularly for children with complex developmental 
disorders such as autism (Lord et al., 2005). We would suggest that a child be referred for an SLT 
assessment if they have not reached expected language levels after Tier 2 intervention. Judgements 
regarding progress following SLT-led intervention should be made in relation to specific individual 
targets, rather than broad standardised assessments. Failure to progress should result in a re-evaluation 
of the intervention and the outcome measures used and, if necessary, modification of the focus, 
method, or dosage, bearing in mind that children with pervasive difficulties are unlikely to make rapid 
progress after short-term interventions. 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
1 
 
 
Figure 3: Flowchart of pathways to intervention 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
1 
 
Prioritisation 
Our models in Figures 2 and 3 are based on the evidence we have reviewed. We are uncertain as 
to the extent to which such information influences managers under pressure to prioritise their service 
delivery. All health provider services strive to balance the need to reach the maximum number of 
individuals versus focusing on a smaller number where the impact on the individual could be greatest.  
An important factor is the degree to which other services provide effective support for a particular 
group of children and whether SLTs would add a unique and significant component to this. To inform 
this process it is essential to distinguish between interventions provided by education at Tiers 1 and 2 
where, at present, the evidence to support effective SLT-specific roles is limited and those at Tier 3 
where the role of the SLT is central. 
An associated but different issue is the on-going debate about the prioritisation of younger 
children, with the aim of preventing potential future difficulties.  This concept is primarily used in illness 
prevention, but its use in SLT services is receiving increased attention (Law et al., 2013). Thus, it has 
been suggested that Tier 1 services constitute primary prevention of future (language) problems, Tier 2 
services aim to reduce the prevalence of (language) difficulties (secondary prevention), while Tier 3 
services aim to reduce negative impacts of difficulties (tertiary prevention). It is unclear how 
“preventable” language difficulties are in terms of primary and secondary prevention.  However, the 
concept of tertiary prevention has utility where the aims are to avoid functional impairments or 
secondary sequelae (such as poor mental health) and enhance skill development in individuals with long 
term conditions (including language disorder), even if the condition itself cannot be prevented. 
 If, as Law et al (2017) point out, a focus on prevention of later difficulties is likely to mean “an 
element of over-provision will be inevitable” (p56), then the prioritisation of this work by SLTS needs to 
be questioned. The risk is that Tier 3 SLT services will receive insufficient resource allocation leaving 
children with severe language disorders (who arguably have the most to gain from the expertise of SLT) 
without adequate intervention, with potential profound and lifelong consequences. Funding for public 
health initiatives may support awareness raising, and preventative strategies and education policy has 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
2 
 
provided much at Tier 2 levels of provision. We suggest that SLT services use red flags and risk factors to 
prioritise individuals likely to have long-term difficulties. This would enable services to provide early and 
effective intervention to those at highest risk of long-term difficulties whatever their age. 
 In the context of a health provider, discharge from treatment is often seen as the desired 
outcome of successful treatment and in the past this may have resulted in SLT services prioritising 
children whose difficulties are likely to resolve with small amounts of input. This approach is not 
appropriate for children with neurodevelopmental disorders such as language disorder. It is essential 
therefore that SLTs are clear about the anticipated outcomes of their work and the means of measuring 
progress, so that investment of therapy time can be measured against realistic targets.  The principles of 
communication as a human right and an important means of preventing harm (Department of Health, 
2012) are relevant here. A key question therefore is how SLT services demonstrate that they can provide 
high quality intervention for children with severe and complex communication and language disorders 
which adapts to the changing needs of the individual, their family and society.  Service delivery decisions 
have not been adequately supported by research that includes health economics to indicate cost 
effectiveness.  
Dosage  
Underlying much of the discussion in this paper is the issue of dosage. How much intervention, 
training, coaching, monitoring, feedback, or joint planning time is required in order for an intervention 
to be effective? And is this cost-effective? It is clear that adequate dosage depends on many factors, 
including: 1) the desired outcome or target (i.e. solution focussed for a specified problem or long term 
skill building); 2) the nature of the child’s difficulties and their functional impact; 3) the pre-existing 
knowledge and skills of the child’s family and other professionals working with the child, and 4) the 
demands of the child’s environment. The research literature on dosage is rather limited, but does give 
examples where inadequate dosage has resulted in a poor outcome: six hours of direct intervention 
over eight months aimed at improving scores on standardised tests (Glogowska et al., 2000), training for 
education staff without coaching, feedback or provision of a language programme (Markussen-Brown et 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
3 
 
al., 2017), or provision of targets and materials to those delivering indirect intervention with only one 
mid-intervention contact with the SLT (McCartney et al., 2011). Such evidence can be useful to service 
managers and commissioners, but is very limited at present. 
Ineffective services benefit no-one and may even cause harm to children who struggle to access 
the education curriculum and participate socially; to families who lose trust in the professionals 
providing such services, especially if they have invested time and energy in treatments resulting in 
opportunity costs, and to professionals who doubt the value of their work, leading to low morale. Thus, 
the priority must be to provide interventions which are known to have a good chance of being effective, 
for the benefit of (and to avoid harm to) all involved and to instigate trials to evaluate emerging 
interventions. Economic evaluations also need to be incorporated into future intervention research so 
that the cost-effectiveness of interventions is evaluated. 
Limitations 
This discussion paper is ambitious in its aims. It was not possible to carry out a systematic 
review of all relevant papers and policy documents. Instead we drew on systematic or narrative reviews 
and meta-analyses wherever possible and considered the implications of their combined findings for 
service delivery. Where high level evidence was not available or was out-dated, we discussed individual 
papers that illuminated a specific point. We included only group studies with experimental control and 
statistical analyses. We acknowledge that we may have missed important papers in some areas and that 
our models may need to change in the light of further evidence. Our discussion is also limited by gaps in 
the research evidence, particularly around dosage and the value added by different models of service 
delivery, especially the added value of SLT contributions to Tiers 1 and 2. 
Conclusions and points for discussion 
Response to intervention models have been developed to cater for the needs of a wide range of 
children and all tiers of service delivery are required for the models to work effectively. Our primary 
focus in this paper is discussion of where SLTs fit into this model for children with language difficulties 
and disorders. SLTs working in children’s services have roles ranging from awareness raising and public 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
4 
 
engagement (Tier 1), to advice, support, training and coaching for parents and professionals working 
with children at risk of or failing to make expected progress (Tiers 1 to 3), and finally to individualised 
direct or indirect intervention for children with severe and persisting language disorders (Tier 3). At all 
tiers, SLTs should be working collaboratively with families, and health and education services, with a 
particular focus on generalising children’s skills and maximising access to the curriculum, social 
participation and well-being. We highlight the need to incorporate evidence of the effectiveness of 
these SLT roles in service planning. Our model and flowchart reflect the current evidence and we hope 
will provide a framework for discussions about service delivery and clinical decisions for intervention for 
children with language disorders.  
Points for discussion include: 
1) How can SLTs raise awareness of language disorders (and their impact on children families 
and society) among professionals, families, policy makers and the general public and how 
can we measure if we have been effective in this endeavour? 
2) How can SLTs improve identification of children with language disorders? 
3) How can SLTs best work with professionals who support children with speech, language and 
communication needs? 
4) How can SLTs best support children with language disorders and their families? 
5) Given limited resources and the need for cost effective interventions, what factors should 
influence decisions about prioritisation of SLT services for children and young people? 
While discussions may be influenced by political, financial, local, philosophical and ideological 
perspectives, we hope to promote the consideration of evidence regarding the effectiveness of different 
approaches to intervention and SLT service delivery models.  Ineffective services waste limited resources 
and time (including the time of SLTs, parents, education staff, and the children themselves) and yet 
there is evidence that SLTs frequently fail to use evidence-based interventions, preferring to use their 
own local methods (Roulstone et al., 2012). SLTs should be clear whether and how their services differ 
from evidence-based interventions and collect data to establish the efficacy of their work. Locally 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
5 
 
gathered data could contribute to national or international evidence to compare effectiveness across 
services that have different delivery models, and thus create a resource to help the selection of service 
delivery models.  
The evidence indicates that children with complex and pervasive language disorders and those 
with additional complex needs require the specialist skills of SLTs at Tier 3 in order to make progress.  
SLTs need to have adequate time to work directly with these children, and collaboratively with their 
families and educators, to improve their skills and reduce the functional impact of their language 
disorder. Thus, we argue that Tier 3 is the core part of our service, while acknowledging that we also 
have roles supporting schools, pre-schools, families and communities at Tiers 1 and 2, particularly via 
close, collaborative working relationships with all those who work with and care for children. 
 
References 
APTHORP, H., RANDEL, B., CHERASARO, T., CLARK, T., MCKEOWN, M. & BECK, I. 2012. 
Effects of a supplemental vocabulary program on word knowledge and passage 
comprehension. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 5, 160-188. 
ARCHIBALD, L. M. 2017. SLP-educator classroom collaboration: A review to inform reason-
based practice. Autism & Developmental Language Impairments, 2, 
2396941516680369. 
ASMUSSEN, K. A., FEINSTEIN, L., MARTIN, J. & CHOWDRY, H. 2016. Foundations for Life:  
What works to support parent-child interaction in the early years. London: The 
Early Intervention Foundation. 
BAIRD, G., CASS, H. & SLONIMS, V. 2003. Diagnosis of autism. Bmj, 327, 488-493. 
BERCOW, J. 2008. The Bercow Report: A review of services for children and young people 
(0-19) with speech, language and communication needs. 
BISHOP, D. V. M., SNOWLING, M. J., THOMPSON, P. A., GREENHALGH, T. & AND THE, C.-C. 
2017. Phase 2 of CATALISE: a multinational and multidisciplinary Delphi consensus 
study of problems with language development: Terminology. Journal of Child 
Psychology and Psychiatry, 58, 1068-1080. 
BISHOP, D. V. M., SNOWLING, M. J., THOMPSON, P. A., GREENHALGH, T. & CONSORTIUM, C. 
2016. CATALISE: A Multinational and Multidisciplinary Delphi Consensus Study. 
Identifying Language Impairments in Children. PLoS ONE, 11, e0158753. 
BLESES, D., HØJEN, A., JUSTICE, L. M., DALE, P. S., DYBDAL, L., PIASTA, S. B., MARKUSSEN‐
BROWN, J., CLAUSEN, M. & HAGHISH, E. 2017. The Effectiveness of a Large‐Scale 
Language and Preliteracy Intervention: The SPELL Randomized Controlled Trial in 
Denmark. Child Development. 
BONDY, A. S. & FROST, L. A. 1994. The picture exchange communication system. Focus on 
autism and other developmental disabilties, 9, 1-19. 
BOWYER-CRANE, C., SNOWLING, M. J., DUFF, F. J., FIELDSEND, E., CARROLL, J. M., MILES, J., 
GOTZ, K. & HULME, C. 2008. Improving early language and literacy skills: differential 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
6 
 
effects of an oral language versus a phonology with reading intervention. Journal of 
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 49, 422-432. 
BOYLE, J. M., MCCARTNEY, E., O'HARE, A. & FORBES, J. 2009. Direct versus indirect and 
individual versus group modes of language therapy for children with primary 
language impairment: principal outcomes from a randomized controlled trial and 
economic evaluation. International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 
44, 826-846. 
CIRRIN, F. M., SCHOOLING, T. L., NELSON, N. W., DIEHL, S. F., FLYNN, P. F., STASKOWSKI, M., 
TORREY, T. & ADAMCZYK, D. F. 2010. Evidence-Based Systematic Review: Effects of 
Different Service Delivery Models on Communication Outcomes for Elementary 
School-Age Children. Language Speech and Hearing Services in Schools, 41, 233-264. 
CONTI-RAMSDEN, G. 2003. Processing and linguistic markers in young children with 
specific language impairment (SLI). Journal of Speech Language and Hearing 
Research, 46, 1029-1037. 
CONTI-RAMSDEN, G., BOTTING, N. & FARAGHER, B. 2001. Psycholinguistic markers for 
specific language impairment (SLI). Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and 
Allied Disciplines, 42, 741-748. 
CONTI-RAMSDEN, G., ST CLAIR, M. C., PICKLES, A. & DURKIN, K. 2012. Developmental 
Trajectories of Verbal and Nonverbal Skills in Individuals With a History of Specific 
Language Impairment: From Childhood to Adolescence. Journal of Speech Language 
and Hearing Research, 55, 1716-1735. 
COUNCIL, H. A. C. P. 2016. Standards of conduct, performance and ethics. London: Health 
and Care Professions Council. 
DEVENEY, S. L., HAGAMAN, J. L. & BJORNSEN, A. L. 2017. Parent-Implemented Versus 
Clinician-Directed Interventions for Late-Talking Toddlers: A Systematic Review of 
the Literature. Communication Disorders Quarterly, 39, 293-302. 
DOCKRELL, J. & MARSHALL, C. 2015. Measurement issues: Assessing language skills in 
young children. Child and Adolescent Mental Health, 20, 116-125. 
DOCKRELL, J. E., STUART, M. & KING, D. 2010. Supporting early oral language skills for 
English language learners in inner city preschool provision. British Journal of 
Educational Psychology, 80, 497-515. 
EADIE, P., NGUYEN, C., CARLIN, J., BAVIN, E., BRETHERTON, L. & REILLY, S. 2014. Stability 
of language performance at 4 and 5 years: measurement and participant variability. 
International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 49, 215-227. 
EBBELS, S. H. 2014. Effectiveness of intervention for grammar in school-aged children with 
primary language impairments: A review of the evidence. Child Language Teaching 
and Therapy, 30, 7-40. 
EBBELS, S. H., MARIC, N., MURPHY, A. & TURNER, G. 2014. Improving comprehension in 
adolescents with severe receptive language impairments: a randomised control trial 
of intervention for coordinating conjunctions. International Journal of Language & 
Communication Disorders, 49, 30-48. 
EBBELS, S. H., NICOLL, H., CLARK, B., EACHUS, B., GALLAGHER, A. L., HORNIMAN, K., 
JENNINGS, M., MCEVOY, K., NIMMO, L. & TURNER, G. 2012. Effectiveness of semantic 
therapy for word-finding difficulties in pupils with persistent language 
impairments: a randomized control trial. International Journal of Language & 
Communication Disorders, 47, 35-51. 
EBBELS, S. H., VAN DER LELY, H. K. J. & DOCKRELL, J. E. 2007. Intervention for verb 
argument structure in children with persistent SLI: a randomized control trial. 
Journal of Speech Language and Hearing Research, 50, 1330-1349. 
EBBELS, S. H., WRIGHT, L., BROCKBANK, S., GODFREY, C., HARRIS, C., LENISTON, H., 
NEARY, K., NICOLL, H., NICOLL, L., SCOTT, J. & MARIĆ, N. 2017. Effectiveness of 1:1 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
7 
 
speech and language therapy for older children with (developmental) language 
disorder. International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 52, 528-
539. 
FISHER, E. L. 2017. A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Predictors of Expressive-
Language Outcomes Among Late Talkers. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing 
Research, 60, 2935-2948. 
FRICKE, S., BOWYER-CRANE, C. A., HALEY, A. J., HULME, C. & SNOWLING, M. 2013. Efficacy 
of language intervention in the early years. Journal of Child Psychology and 
Psychiatry, 54, 280-290. 
FRICKE, S., BURGOYNE, K., BOWYER-CRANE, C., KYRIACOU, M., ZOSIMIDOU, A., MAXWELL, 
L., LERVÅG, A., SNOWLING, M. J. & HULME, C. 2017. The efficacy of early language 
intervention in mainstream school settings: a randomized controlled trial. Journal of 
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 58, 1141-1151. 
FUCHS, D. & FUCHS, L. S. 2006. Introduction to response to intervention: What, why, and 
how valid is it? Reading Research Quarterly, 41, 93-99. 
GALLAGHER, A. & CHIAT, S. 2009. Evaluation of speech and language therapy interventions 
for pre-school children with specific language impairment: a comparison of 
outcomes following specialist intensive, nursery-based and no intervention. 
International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 44, 616-638. 
GASCOIGNE, M. 2006. Supporting children with speech, language and communication needs 
within integrated children's services., London, RCSLT Position Paper, RCSLT. 
GLOGOWSKA, M., ROULSTONE, S., ENDERBY, P. & PETERS, T. J. 2000. Randomised 
controlled trial of community based speech and language therapy in preschool 
children. British Medical Journal, 321, 923. 
GREEN, J., CHARMAN, T., MCCONACHIE, H., ALDRED, C., SLONIMS, V., HOWLIN, P., LE 
COUTEUR, A., LEADBITTER, K., HUDRY, K., BYFORD, S., BARRETT, B., TEMPLE, K., 
MACDONALD, W. & PICKLES, A. 2010. Parent-mediated communication-focused 
treatment in children with autism (PACT): a randomised controlled trial. The Lancet, 
375, 2152-2160. 
GRINDAL, T., BOWNE, J. B., YOSHIKAWA, H., SCHINDLER, H. S., DUNCAN, G. J., MAGNUSON, 
K. & SHONKOFF, J. P. 2016. The added impact of parenting education in early 
childhood education programs: A meta-analysis. Children and Youth Services Review, 
70, 238-249. 
HAMPTON, L. H. & KAISER, A. P. 2016. Intervention effects on spoken-language outcomes 
for children with autism: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of 
Intellectual Disability Research, 60, 444-463. 
HEALTH, D. F. E. A. D. O. 2015. Special educational needs and disability code of practice: 0 
to 25 years. Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/send-
code-of-practice-0-to-25 (Accessed: 29th November 2017). 
HEALTH, D. O. 2012. Winterbourne View Hospital: Department of Health review and 
response. 
HYDE-WRIGHT, S. H., GORRIE, B., HAYNES, C. & SHIPMAN, A. 1993. What's in a name? 
Comparative therapy for word-finding difficulties using semantic and phonological 
approaches. Child Language Teaching and Therapy, 9, 214-229. 
KASARI, C., GULSRUD, A., FREEMAN, S., PAPARELLA, T. & HELLEMANN, G. 2012. 
Longitudinal Follow Up of Children with Autism Receiving Targeted Interventions 
on Joint Attention and Play RH = Targeted Interventions on Joint Attention and Play. 
Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 51, 487-495. 
KENDALL, T., MEGNIN-VIGGARS, O., GOULD, N., TAYLOR, C., BURT, L. R., BAIRD, G. & 
GROUP, G. D. 2013. Management of autism in children and young people: summary 
of NICE and SCIE guidance. Bmj, 347, f4865. 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
8 
 
LANDRY, S. H., SMITH, K. E. & SWANK, P. R. 2006. Responsive parenting: establishing early 
foundations for social, communication, and independent problem-solving skills. 
Developmental psychology, 42, 627. 
LAW, J., CHARLTON, J., DOCKRELL, J., GASCOIGNE, M., MCKEAN, C. & THEAKSTON, A. 2017. 
Early Language Development: Needs, provision, and intervention for preschool 
children from socioeconomically disadvantaged backgrounds. A Report for the 
Education Endowment Foundation. October 2017.: The Education Endowment 
Foundation. 
LAW, J., GARRETT, Z. & NYE, N. 2003. Speech and Language Therapy Interventions for 
Children with Primary Speech and Language Delay or Disorder (Cochrane Review). 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Issue 3, Art.No: CD004110. DOI: 
10.1002/14651858. 
LAW, J., LEE, W., ROULSTONE, S., WREN, Y., ZENG, B. & LINDSAY, G. 2012. What works : 
Interventions for children with speech language and communication needs, 
Nottingham, DfE. 
LAW, J. & PAGNAMENTA, E. 2017. Public Health Interventions: Promoting the development 
of young children’s language. Bulletin of the Royal College of Speech and Language 
Therapists. 
LAW, J., REILLY, S. & SNOW, P. C. 2013. Child speech, language and communication need re-
examined in a public health context: a new direction for the speech and language 
therapy profession. International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 
48, 486-496. 
LAWLER, K., TAYLOR, N. F. & SHIELDS, N. 2013. Outcomes After Caregiver-Provided Speech 
and Language or Other Allied Health Therapy: A Systematic Review. Archives of 
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 94, 1139-1160. 
LAWTON, K. & KASARI, C. 2012. Teacher-implemented joint attention intervention: Pilot 
randomized controlled study for preschoolers with autism. Journal of consulting and 
clinical psychology, 80, 687. 
LEE, W. & PRING, T. 2016. Supporting language in schools: Evaluating an intervention for 
children with delayed language in the early school years. Child Language Teaching 
and Therapy, 32, 135-146. 
LINDSAY, G., RICKETTS, J., PEACEY, L. V., DOCKRELL, J. E. & CHARMAN, T. 2016. Meeting 
the educational and social needs of children with language impairment or autism 
spectrum disorder: the parents’ perspectives. International Journal of Language & 
Communication Disorders, 51, 495-507. 
LONIGAN, C. J. & PHILLIPS, B. M. 2016. Response to instruction in preschool: Results of two 
randomized studies with children at significant risk of reading difficulties. Journal of 
educational psychology, 108, 114. 
LORD, C., WAGNER, A., ROGERS, S., SZATMARI, P., AMAN, M., CHARMAN, T., DAWSON, G., 
DURAND, V. M., GROSSMAN, L., GUTHRIE, D., HARRIS, S., KASARI, C., MARCUS, L., 
MURPHY, S., ODOM, S., PICKLES, A., SCAHILL, L., SHAW, E., SIEGEL, B., SIGMAN, M., 
STONE, W., SMITH, T. & YODER, P. 2005. Challenges in Evaluating Psychosocial 
Interventions for Autistic Spectrum Disorders. Journal of Autism and Developmental 
Disorders, 35, 695-708. 
LOWE, H., HENRY, L., MÜLLER, L.-M. & JOFFE, V. L. in press. Vocabulary intervention for 
adolescents with language disorder: a systematic review. International Journal of 
Language & Communication Disorders, n/a-n/a. 
MANZ, P. H., HUGHES, C., BARNABAS, E., BRACALIELLO, C. & GINSBURG-BLOCK, M. 2010. A 
descriptive review and meta-analysis of family-based emergent literacy 
interventions: To what extent is the research applicable to low-income, ethnic-
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
9 
 
minority or linguistically-diverse young children? Early Childhood Research 
Quarterly, 25, 409-431. 
MARKUSSEN-BROWN, J., JUHL, C. B., PIASTA, S. B., BLESES, D., HØJEN, A. & JUSTICE, L. M. 
2017. The effects of language-and literacy-focused professional development on 
early educators and children: A best-evidence meta-analysis. Early Childhood 
Research Quarterly, 38, 97-115. 
MARULIS, L. M. & NEUMAN, S. B. 2013. How Vocabulary Interventions Affect Young 
Children at Risk: A Meta-Analytic Review. Journal of Research on Educational 
Effectiveness, 6, 223-262. 
MCCARTNEY, E., BOYLE, J., ELLIS, S., BANNATYNE, S. & TURNBULL, M. 2011. Indirect 
language therapy for children with persistent language impairment in mainstream 
primary schools: outcomes from a cohort intervention. International Journal of 
Language & Communication Disorders, 46, 74-82. 
MCGILLION, M., PINE, J. M., HERBERT, J. S. & MATTHEWS, D. 2017. A randomised controlled 
trial to test the effect of promoting caregiver contingent talk on language 
development in infants from diverse socioeconomic status backgrounds. Journal of 
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 58, 1122-1131. 
MCKEAN, C., LAW, J., MENSAH, F., CINI, E., EADIE, P., FRAZER, K. & REILLY, S. 2016. 
Predicting Meaningful Differences in School-Entry Language Skills from Child and 
Family Factors Measured at 12 months of Age. International Journal of Early 
Childhood, 48, 329-351. 
MCKEAN, C., REILLY, S., BAVIN, E. L., BRETHERTON, L., CINI, E., CONWAY, L., COOK, F., 
EADIE, P., PRIOR, M., WAKE, M. & MENSAH, F. 2017. Language Outcomes at 7 Years: 
Early Predictors and Co-Occurring Difficulties. Pediatrics. 
MCLEOD, S. 2018. Communication rights: Fundamental human rights for all. International 
Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 20, 3-11. 
MECROW, C., BECKWITH, J. & KLEE, T. 2010. An exploratory trial of the effectiveness of an 
enhanced consultative approach to delivering speech and language intervention in 
schools. International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 45, 354-367. 
MOL, S. E., BUS, A. G., DE JONG, M. T. & SMEETS, D. J. H. 2008. Added Value of Dialogic 
Parent–Child Book Readings: A Meta-Analysis. Early Education and Development, 19, 
7-26. 
NEUMAN, S. B., NEWMAN, E. H. & DWYER, J. 2011. Educational Effects of a Vocabulary 
Intervention on Preschoolers' Word Knowledge and Conceptual Development: A 
Cluster-Randomized Trial. Reading Research Quarterly, 46, 249-272. 
NICE, N. I. F. H. A. C. E. 2013. Autism spectrum disorder in under 19s: support and 
management. London: NICE. 
NORBURY, C. F., VAMVAKAS, G., GOOCH, D., BAIRD, G., CHARMAN, T., SIMONOFF, E. & 
PICKLES, A. 2017. Language growth in children with heterogeneous language 
disorders: a population study. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 58, 1092-
1105. 
OONO, I. P., HONEY, E. J. & MCCONACHIE, H. 2013. Parent‐mediated early intervention for 
young children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Evidence‐Based Child Health: 
A Cochrane Review Journal, 8, 2380-2479. 
PAUL, R., BISHOP, D. & LEONARD, L. 2000. Predicting outcomes of early expressive 
language delay: Ethical implications. Speech and language impairments in children: 
Causes, characteristics, intervention and outcome, 195-209. 
PAWŁOWSKA, M. 2014. Evaluation of Three Proposed Markers for Language Impairment in 
English: A Meta-Analysis of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies. Journal of Speech, 
Language, and Hearing Research, 57, 2261-2273. 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
10 
 
PICKLES, A., ANDERSON, D. K. & LORD, C. 2014. Heterogeneity and plasticity in the 
development of language: a 17‐year follow‐up of children referred early for possible 
autism. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 55, 1354-1362. 
PRING, T., FLOOD, E., DODD, B. & JOFFE, V. 2012. The working practices and clinical 
experiences of paediatric speech and language therapists: a national UK survey. 
International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 47, 696-708. 
RCSLT 2017. RCSLT briefing paper on Language Disorder with a specific focus on 
Developmental Language Disorder. London: RCSLT. 
RESCORLA, L. 2011. Late talkers: do good predictors of outcome exist? Developmental 
Disabilities Research Reviews, 17, 141-150. 
REYNOLDS, C. R. & SHAYWITZ, S. E. 2009. Response to Intervention: Ready or not? Or, from 
wait-to-fail to watch-them-fail. School Psychology Quarterly, 24, 130. 
RICE, M. L. & WEXLER, K. 1996. Toward tense as a clinical marker of specific language 
impairment in English-speaking children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 
39, 1239-1257. 
ROBERTS, M. Y. & KAISER, A. P. 2011. The Effectiveness of Parent-Implemented Language 
Interventions: A Meta-Analysis. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 20, 
180-199. 
ROULSTONE, S., WREN, Y., BAKOPOULOU, I., GOODLAD, S. & LINDSAY, G. L. 2012. Exploring 
interventions for children and young people with speech, language and 
communication needs: A study of practice. In: DFE (ed.). London. 
ROY, P. & CHIAT, S. 2014. Developmental pathways of language and social communication 
problems in 9–11 year olds: Unpicking the heterogeneity. Research in developmental 
disabilities, 35, 2534-2546. 
RUDOLPH, J. M. 2017. Case History Risk Factors for Specific Language Impairment: A 
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. American Journal of Speech-Language 
Pathology, 26, 991-1010. 
SCOTTISH_GOVERNMENT 2010. Guidance on Partnership Working between Allied Health 
Professions and Education, 
http://www.gov.scot/Resource/Doc/313416/0099357.pdf. 
SMITH, C., WILLIAMS, E. & BRYAN, K. 2017. A systematic scoping review of speech and 
language therapists’ public health practice for early language development. 
International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 52, 407-425. 
SNOW, P. C., EADIE, P. A., CONNELL, J., DALHEIM, B., MCCUSKER, H. J. & MUNRO, J. K. 2014. 
Oral language supports early literacy: A pilot cluster randomized trial in 
disadvantaged schools. International Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 16, 495-
506. 
SNOW, P. C., SANGER, D. D., CAIRE, L. M., EADIE, P. A. & DINSLAGE, T. 2015. Improving 
communication outcomes for young offenders: a proposed response to intervention 
framework. International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 50, 1-13. 
STARLING, J., MUNRO, N., TOGHER, L. & ARCIULI, J. 2012. Training secondary school 
teachers in instructional language modification techniques to support adolescents 
with language impairment: a randomized controlled trial. Language, speech, and 
hearing services in schools, 43, 474-495. 
THRONEBURG, R. N., CALVERT, L. K., STURM, J. J., PARAMBOUKAS, A. A. & PAUL, P. J. 2000. 
A comparison of service delivery models: effects on curricular vocabulary skills in 
the school setting. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 9, 10-20. 
THURSTON, A., ROSETH, C., O'HARE, L., DAVISON, J. & STARK, P. 2016. Talk of the Town. 
Evaluation report and executive summary. Education Endowment Foundation. 
 Evidence based pathways to intervention  
11 
 
TOMBLIN, J. B., ZHANG, X., BUCKWALTER, P. & O'BRIEN, M. 2003. The stability of primary 
language disorder: Four years after kindergarten diagnosis. Journal of Speech 
Language and Hearing Research, 46, 1283-1296. 
TOSH, R., ARNOTT, W. & SCARINCI, N. 2017. Parent-implemented home therapy 
programmes for speech and language: a systematic review. International Journal of 
Language & Communication Disorders, 52, 253-269. 
VADASY, P. F., SANDERS, E. A. & LOGAN HERRERA, B. 2015. Efficacy of Rich Vocabulary 
Instruction in Fourth-and Fifth-Grade Classrooms. Journal of Research on 
Educational Effectiveness, 8, 325-365. 
VISSER-BOCHANE, M. I., GERRITS, E., VAN DER SCHANS, C. P., REIJNEVELD, S. A. & LUINGE, 
M. R. 2017. Atypical speech and language development: a consensus study on 
clinical signs in the Netherlands. International Journal of Language & Communication 
Disorders, 52, 10-20. 
WALES, D., SKINNER, L. & HAYMAN, M. 2017. The Efficacy of Telehealth-Delivered Speech 
and Language Intervention for Primary School-Age Children: A Systematic Review. 
2017, 16. 
WERFEL, K. L., HENDRICKS, A. E. & SCHUELE, C. M. 2017. The Potential of Past Tense 
Marking in Oral Reading as a Clinical Marker of Specific Language Impairment in 
School-Age Children. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 60, 3561-
3572. 
WONG, C. S. 2013. A play and joint attention intervention for teachers of young children 
with autism: A randomized controlled pilot study. Autism, 17, 340-357. 
WRIGHT, L., PRING, T. & EBBELS, S. H. in press. Effectiveness of vocabulary intervention for 
older children with Developmental Language Disorder (DLD). International Journal 
of Language & Communication Disorders. 
ZAMBRANA, I. M., PONS, F., EADIE, P. & YSTROM, E. 2014. Trajectories of language delay 
from age 3 to 5: persistence, recovery and late onset. International Journal of 
Language & Communication Disorders, 49, 304-316. 
  
