 Joint hypermobility is a common but often poorly recognised
connective tissue condition.1 Individuals with hypermobility are
(up to 16 times) overrepresented among those with panic or
anxiety disorders.2 Hypermobility is also linked to stress-
sensitive
psychosomatic
disorders
including
irritable
bowel
syndrome, fibromyalgia and chronic fatigue and is associated with
hypersensitivity to nociceptive stimuli.1 Additionally, individuals
with
hypermobility
often
exhibit
autonomic
abnormalities,
typically postural tachycardia syndrome, where there is enhanced
cardiovascular reactivity and a phenomenological overlap with
anxiety disorders.3 Thus, direct and indirect evidence links
hypermobility to anxiety and stress-sensitive medical disorders.
Within a programme of research motivated to detail the
theoretical contribution of central autonomic control to emotion
regulation and psychiatric disorders,4,5 we performed a voxel-
based morphometry (VBM) study of brain magnetic resonance
imaging
(MRI)
scans
in
participants
with
and
without
hypermobility, none of whom had an anxiety disorder.
Method
High-resolution (0.9 mm isometric voxels) structural brain MRI
scans (192 sagittal slices, repetition time 11.4ms, echo time 4.4ms,
inversion time 300 ms) were acquired using a Siemens Avanto 1.5T
scanner (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) from 72 volunteers, free
from clinical anxiety. The participants’ characteristics are shown
in online Table DS1. Objective measures of hypermobility, anxiety
and interoceptive sensitivity (subjective awareness of internal bodily
physiological responses)4 were acquired using the Beighton scale,
Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI) and Porges Body Perception
Questionnaire (PBPQ) respectively.6–8 Regional brain volumes
were quantified using VBM incorporating diffeomorphic registration
(DARTEL)
within
SPM8
(http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/).9
Voxel-wise comparisons of spatially normalised grey-matter
volume maps of the hypermobile and non-hypermobile groups
were performed within a general linear model treating age, gender,
handedness and whole brain volume as potentially confounding
covariates. Main effects of group, and within-group correlations
with hypermobility score, are reported for all brain clusters of
510 contiguous voxels with significance threshold P50.001
uncorrected. Left and right amygdala were defined a priori regions
of interest, using 8 mm spheres centred on coordinates (27, 71,
719) and (724, 72, 719), based on reported associations
between amygdala and anxiety (see e.g. Hayano et al).10 We report
these results using a stringent family-wise error (FWE) volume-
corrected threshold of P50.05. Resting supine heart rate was
recorded for 5 min prior to scanning using a pulse oximeter
(Nonin 8600F0; Nonin Medical, Plymouth, Minnesota, USA) and
heart rate variability was analysed using the Kubios HRV tool
(University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland).
Results
Thirty-six participants scored 1 or more on the Beighton scale
(the hypermobile group). There was no significant group
difference in age, gender or handedness. Bilateral amygdala
volume was significantly greater in the hypermobile group than
in
the
non-hypermobile
group,
meeting
both
uncorrected
(P50.001) and small-volume corrected FWE thresholds (right
amygdala P = 0.014; left amygdala P = 0.021) (Fig. 1, online Table
DS2). Cohen’s d effect sizes were large for the amygdala bilaterally
(left 0.80, right 0.85). Other group volumetric differences are
reported in online Table DS2 and included regions within anterior
cingulate and parietal cortices.
Within the hypermobile group, degree of hypermobility
correlated positively with the volume of left lateral occipital
cortex and negatively with right superior temporal cortex and
bilateral inferior parietal cortices (online Fig. DS1, Table DS2).
Interestingly, this group scored significantly higher for interoceptive
sensitivity (mean PBPQ scores: non-hypermobile 88.4, s.d.= 31.0;
hypermobile 104.3, s.d.= 32.2; t(1,70) = 2.13, P= 0.018) and showed
a trend towards higher anxiety (non-hypermobile 6.47, s.d.= 7.0;
hypermobile 9.31, s.d.= 9.7; t(1,70)= 1.42, P= 0.08). The relationship
between hypermobility and interoceptive sensitivity persisted after
controlling for anxietydifferences (P=0.041). There was no significant
group difference in resting heart rate, standard deviation of inter-
beat interval, or high (parasympathetic) or low (predominantly
sympathetic) frequency components of heart rate variability.
Discussion
We observed structural differences in key emotion-processing
brain regions. Notably, the effect size of this amygdala volume
difference was comparable to, or greater than, observations from
volumetric
studies
of
clinical
psychiatric
populations.
The
hypermobile group also displayed decreased volume within other
regions implicated in emotional arousal and attention (anterior
cingulate, parietal lobe). Moreover, the degree of hypermobility
508
Brain structure and joint hypermobility: relevance
to the expression of psychiatric symptoms
J. A. Eccles, F. D. C. Beacher, M. A. Gray, C. L. Jones, L. Minati, N. A. Harrison and H. D. Critchley
Summary
Joint hypermobility is overrepresented among people with
anxiety and can be associated with abnormal autonomic
reactivity. We tested for associations between regional
cerebral grey matter and hypermobility in 72 healthy
volunteers using voxel-based morphometry of structural
brain scans. Strikingly, bilateral amygdala volume
distinguished those with from those without hypermobility.
The hypermobility group scored higher for interoceptive
sensitivity yet were not significantly more anxious. Our
findings specifically link hypermobility to the structural
integrity of a brain centre implicated in normal and abnormal
emotions and physiological responses. Our observations
endorse hypermobility as a multisystem phenotype and
suggest potential mechanisms mediating clinical vulnerability
to neuropsychiatric symptoms.
Declaration of interest
None.
The British Journal of Psychiatry (2012)
200, 508–509. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.111.092460
Short report
 correlated negatively with superior temporal volume, a region
implicated in processing social and emotional signals.11 Differences
in brain structure were not due to overt psychopathology (the
hypermobile group only trended toward higher anxiety scores)
or basal physiology (no difference was observed in cardiovascular
measures at rest).
Our data implicate the amygdala as a likely neural substrate
mediating previously reported clinical associations between hyper-
mobility, anxiety and psychosomatic conditions. Speculatively,
potential
mechanisms
include
heightened
susceptibility
of
individuals with hypermobility to (threat of) pain and/or a
perturbation of autonomic control. Differences in amygdala
activity occur in pain disorders including fibromyalgia, irritable
bowel syndrome and chronic regional pain syndrome.12 Anxiety
itself is also linked theoretically to the abnormal generation and
mapping of bodily arousal through the engagement of amygdala
and insula.5 It is also noteworthy that the hypermobility group
showed structural differences within anterior cingulate cortex, a
central driver of autonomic arousal and a region implicated in
the cognitive control of pain and negative emotions.4,12 Enhanced
interoceptive sensitivity also points to a more finely tuned sensory
representation of internal bodily signals within the hypermobile
group.
Heightened
interoceptive
awareness
is
coupled
to
exaggerated cardiovascular arousal responses.13 Moreover, in postural
tachycardia syndrome, which commonly occurs with hypermobility
(and may have a common basis in collagen variants), heart rate
acceleration
compensates
for
dysfunctional
vasoconstriction
giving rise to physiological symptoms (e.g. palpitations and
light-headedness) that are shared with panic and anxiety states.3
Such deregulated responses are likely to affect neural processes
supporting emotional feelings.4,5
Differences in the structural integrity of temporal and parietal
cortices may underlie wider behavioural phenotypical expression of
hypermobility: abnormalities in superior temporal cortex are also
seen in autism.11 Inferior parietal cortex can affect proprioceptive
awareness and hypermobility is itself linked to dyspraxia.1 Our
findings suggest that processes compromising function in neuro-
developmental conditions may occur in individuals with hyper-
mobility, putatively enhancing vulnerability to stress and anxiety.
Limitations to our study include the use of a non-clinical
sample; interestingly, neuroimaging studies of clinical anxiety
groups rarely report enlarged amygdala, suggesting that hyper-
mobility is a distinct phenotype or that amygdala enlargement
might be protective in our non-clinical group. Additionally, we
used an inclusive definition of hypermobility, although the
categorisation of this condition remains debatable.14 To conclude,
we present the first neuroimaging study of hypermobility that also
examines autonomic and interoceptive indices. The observed
differences in the structural integrity of specific emotional brain
regions provide a starting point for future research into constitutional
vulnerabilities to common psychiatric symptoms that have the
potential to inform more individually tailored therapeutic approaches.
Jessica A. Eccles, MB BCh, MRCPsych, Department of Psychiatry, Brighton and
Sussex Medical School, and Sussex Partnership National Health Service (NHS)
Foundation Trust, Sussex Education Centre, Hove; Felix D. C. Beacher, PhD,
Marcus A. Gray, PhD, Catherine L. Jones, PhD, Ludovico Minati, MSc,
Department of Psychiatry, Brighton and Sussex Medical School, Brighton; Neil A.
Harrison, PhD, MRCPsych, Hugo D. Critchley, DPhil, MRCPsych, Department
of Psychiatry, Brighton and Sussex Medical School, Brighton, Sussex Partnership
NHS Foundation Trust, Sussex Education Centre, Hove and Sackler Centre for
Consciousness Science, University of Sussex, Brighton, UK
Correspondence: Dr Jessica Eccles, Psychiatry, Brighton and Sussex Medical
School Brighton, BN1 9RR, UK. Email: J.Eccles@bsms.ac.uk
First received 16 Feb 2011, final revision 14 Nov 2011, accepted 19 Dec 2011
Funding
This work was funded by a Wellcome Trust programme grant (no. 074333) to H.D.C. J.A.E is
supported by the National Institute for Health Research and N.A.H. by the Wellcome Trust.
References
1 Grahame R. Hypermobility: an important but often neglected area within
rheumatology. Nat Clin Pract Rheumatol 2008; 4: 522–4.
2 Garcia Campayo J, Asso E, Alda M, Andres EM, Sobradiel N. Association
between joint hypermobility syndrome and panic disorder: a case–control
study. Psychosomatics 2010; 51: 55–61.
3 Mathias CJ, Low DA, Iodice V, Owens AP, Kirbis M, Grahame R. Postural
tachycardia syndrome – current experience and concepts. Nat Rev Neurol
2011; 8: 22–34.
4 Critchley HD. Psychophysiology of neural, cognitive and affective integration:
fMRI and autonomic indicants. Int J Psychophysiol 2009; 73: 88–94.
5 Paulus MP, Stein MB. An insular view of anxiety. Biol Psychiatry 2006; 60:
383–7.
6 Beighton P, Solomon L, Soskolne CL. Articular mobility in an African
population. Ann Rheum Dis 1973; 32: 413–8.
7 Beck AT, Epstein N, Brown G, Steer RA. An inventory for measuring clinical
anxiety: psychometric properties. J Consult Clin Psychol 1988: 56: 893–7.
8 Porges S. Body Perception Questionnaire. Laboratory of Developmental
Assessment, University of Maryland, 1993.
9 Ashburner J. A fast diffeomorphic image registration algorithm. NeuroImage
2007; 38: 95–113.
10 Hayano F, Nakamura M, Asami T, Uehara K, Yoshida T, Roppongi T, et al.
Smaller amygdala is associated with anxiety in patients with panic disorder.
Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 2009; 63: 266–76.
11 Boddaert N, Chabane N, Gervais H, Good CD, Bourgeois M, Plumet MH,
et al. Superior temporal sulcus anatomical abnormalities in childhood autism:
a voxel-based morphometry MRI study. NeuroImage 2004; 23: 364–9.
12 Tracey I, Bushnell MC. How neuroimaging studies have challenged us to
rethink: is chronic pain a disease? J Pain 2009; 10: 1113–20.
13 Herbert BM, Pollatos O, Flor H, Enck P, Schandry R. Cardiac awareness and
autonomic cardiac reactivity during emotional picture viewing and mental
stress. Psychophysiology 2010; 47: 342–54.
14 Remvig L, Jensen DV, Ward RC. Are diagnostic criteria for general joint
hypermobility and benign joint hypermobility syndrome based on
reproducible and valid tests? A review of the literature. J Rheumatol 2007;
34: 798–803.
509
Brain structure and hypermobility
Right amygdala volume (cm3)
1.2 –
0.3 –
(a)
(b)
Non-hypermobile Hypermobile
Left amygdala volume (cm3)
Non-hypermobile Hypermobile
1.2 –
0.3 –
Fig. 1
(a) Regions of grey-matter volume difference in hyper-
mobile participants compared with the non-hypermobile group
(white areas; threshold P50.001 uncorrected). (b) Significant
group differences in right and left amygdala volumes.
