 266
Journal of Marketing Research
Vol. XLII (August 2005), 266–277
*Kristine R. Ehrich is an assistant professor, Department of Marketing,
Washington State University (e-mail: ehrich@wsu.edu). Julie R. Irwin is
Associate Professor of Marketing, McCombs School of Business, Univer-
sity of Texas at Austin (e-mail: Julie.Irwin@mccombs.utexas.edu). The
authors thank the three anonymous JMR reviewers for their helpful com-
ments. They also thank Kristine Ehrich’s dissertation committee (Susan
Broniarczyk, Wayne Hoyer, Jay Koehler, and Art Markman) for their sug-
gestions on previous versions of this article. In addition, they extend par-
ticular thanks to the members of the Irwin Lab (Rajesh Bhargave, Joe
Goodman, Ethan Pew, Rebecca Walker, and Jennifer Young) for all of their
indefatigable help with this research.
KRISTINE R. EHRICH and JULIE R. IRWIN*
Attribute information is not always readily available to consumers. This
is especially true for ethical attributes, such as labor practices, environ-
mental friendliness, and so forth. Intuitively, it might be expected that
consumers who would use an attribute in their decision making should
seek attribute information, especially if it is easily obtainable. In three
studies, the authors measure discrepancies between requests for avail-
able ethical attribute information and actual use of the same attribute in a
conjoint task. In both between-subjects and within-subjects designs, the
authors show that consumers (1) underrequest ethical attribute informa-
tion and (2) are especially likely to show request/use inconsistency if they
care about the underlying ethical issue. Negative emotions, especially
the avoidance of anger, appear to drive this willful ignorance. These
results add to the growing literature on avoidance mechanisms and con-
sumer decision making and may shed light on when ethical attributes do 
(and do not) play a role in actual purchase behavior.
Willful Ignorance in the Request for Product
Attribute Information
Imagine a consumer shopping for a wooden rocking chair
for her living room. She has just begun her search and is
browsing the selection of chairs in the first store that she
visits. Several of the chairs rock like a dream and have
beautiful wood grain. As she continues her search, she
remembers a newspaper article she read about wood
sources. She had read that wood can come from one of two
distinct sources: sustainable wood (i.e., trees grown for the
specific purpose of being cut for production of consumer
goods or those whose harvest will not harm the environ-
ment or ecosystem) and wood harvested from old-growth
rain forests. Protecting the environment has always been
important to this consumer, but the store provides no infor-
mation about the source of its wood. Thus, she faces a
dilemma: She should ask for the wood information in order
to make an informed choice, but knowing where the wood
comes from could cause stress and even push her toward a
different choice than the one she might like to make. In this
set of studies, we examine this dilemma and demonstrate
that consumers do sometimes show an inconsistency in the
request for and use of ethical attribute information. They
request the information at a significantly lower rate than
they would have used the information had it been available.
This “willful ignorance” stems from the avoidance of nega-
tive emotion and is especially strong for those consumers
who care about the issue the most.
MOTIVATION FOR RESEARCH
Products high on ethical attributes are seldom the top-
selling product in their category, despite being widely avail-
able (see, e.g., www.ecomall.com; www.realgoods.com).
However, in surveys of consumer attitudes toward ethical
goods, respondents tend to respond favorably. For example,
in a study commissioned by the Marymount University
Center for Ethical Concerns (1999), 76% of the surveyed
consumers indicated that they would avoid shopping in
stores if they knew that the clothing was made with sweat-
shop labor, and 86% claimed that they would be willing to
spend an extra $1 or $2 for clothing that was certified to
have come from legitimate labor. These findings concur
with anecdotal evidence that ethical issues matter to people;
that is, people give to charities, recycle, vote according to
their moral beliefs, and so forth. Yet in the marketplace,
concern for these ethical issues may be underrepresented.
Why might purchase behavior be incongruent with
underlying values? Undoubtedly, there are multiple factors.
Some consumers may be showing “moral hypocrisy” (Bat-
son, Thompson, and Chen 2002): They would like to appear
 Willful Ignorance
267
moral, but they do not actually behave that way. Perhaps it
is that consumers care about ethical issues but not as much
as they care about price and quality, and when sacrifices
must be made, they trade off the ethical attributes first. In
both of these situations, the value is not deeply held; people
may claim to be committed to a principle, but their actual
preferences suggest otherwise. Social psychologists have
documented many situations in which an expressed attitude
does not correspond with the purchase intention or actual
purchase behavior because of social norms, barriers to pur-
chasing (e.g., the price is too high), or a mismatch between
the attitude and decision elicitations (e.g., comparing gen-
eral attitude questions with specific decisions; Eagly and
Chaiken 1998).
In this work, we examine an additional possibility for
inconsistencies between ethical values and actual purchas-
ing decisions. We suggest that even if a consumer does gen-
uinely care about an issue, avoidance mechanisms can inter-
rupt the flow from deeply held values to actual purchasing.
In previous research on moral hypocrisy and attitude–
decision links, the attribute information was provided for the
decision maker. However, often product attribute informa-
tion is not readily available. To gather the missing informa-
tion, the consumer must perform research (e.g., magazines,
Internet, books) or contact the salesperson or another on-site
expert. Ethical attribute information usually is of this type.
There are exceptions (e.g., dolphin-safe tuna, postconsumer
recycled paper), but in general, consumers must specifically
seek ethical attribute information if they want to know about
it. We propose that this aspect of ethical attribute informa-
tion can induce a mismatch between consumer sentiment
and behavior because it allows consumers to be willfully
ignorant of attribute values that may cause them stress.
Common sense suggests that consumers should ask for
any information that might play a pivotal role in their deci-
sion making. Given a low cost of obtaining the information,
more relevant information is preferable to less. Why might
consumers not seek information that would benefit them?
One potential reason could be negative affect or stress,
which in other contexts has been shown to induce anom-
alous decision making (e.g., Bettman, Luce, and Payne
2000; Irwin and Baron 2001; Irwin and Spira 1997; Luce
1998). In particular, customers may choose to avoid making
a decision in order to cope with this negativity and instead
may use such strategies as staying with the status quo. In
previous research, the status quo has been operationalized
as a choice to keep the current product (Irwin 1994; Luce
1998; Luce, Payne, and Bettman 1999). In the case of miss-
ing product information, the status quo is operationalized as
a decision that is made using only the information provided
rather than asking for additional information. As a way to
avoid the emotional and cognitive costs of incorporating
knowledge of the potentially unfavorable ethical attribute
into the decision, consumers might choose to pass up the
opportunity to learn about it. Although not requesting infor-
mation can have the same consequential effect as ignoring it
when it is provided (i.e., the information is not incorporated
into the decision, thus reducing its quality), these two possi-
bilities do not have the same psychological effect on the
consumer. In general, omitting a potentially stressful action
is more comfortable than choosing to act, even when the
two behaviors have the same outcome (Baron and Ritov
1994; Ritov and Baron 1995, 1999).
In this series of studies, we show that compared with
nonethical attributes, consumers tend to request and use
ethical attribute information inconsistently in the direction
of willful ignorance: They underrequest the ethical attribute
information. We also show that they are especially likely to
demonstrate this inconsistency when they care about the
ethical issue in question. This last point is important
because no one would be surprised if disinterested con-
sumers did not request ethical attribute information. The
inconsistency is interesting only if it actually acts against
the consumers’ best interests—that is, if the inconsistency
causes the consumers to make a different decision from
what they would have if all information had been provided.
To measure what attributes consumers actually would have
used had they been given full information, we use a con-
joint task to show that the propensity to ask for attribute
information does not match actual use of the information
when it is provided. Finally, we show that explicit choice
moderates this tendency: People are especially unwilling to
learn about the ethical status of a product they have already
chosen on the basis of its other attributes.
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
By definition, decisions involve conflict; trade-offs
between attributes must be made (Hogarth 1987). Trade-
offs can be quite uncomfortable, and the strategies that con-
sumers use to cope with this inherent conflict have formed
the core of much of the modern research in consumer deci-
sion making (for a thorough review, see Bettman, Luce, and
Payne 1998).
Missing Attribute Information and Definition of Ethical
Attributes
It is not feasible for retailers and manufacturers to pres-
ent all attribute information to consumers. It is unlikely that
the information would fit easily on the product packaging,
and even if it did, the cognitive difficulty and associated dis-
tress of attempting to process all attribute information
would likely prove overwhelming to consumers and drive
them away from the product. Sometimes, however, the
eliminated information may be important to consumers, and
they may need to seek more information about the product,
particularly if this information would weigh heavily in the
decision. As we subsequently show, ethical attributes do not
always follow this expectation.
In our framework, ethical attributes refer to attributes that
reflect a person’s conscience. Some examples of ethical
attributes are the protection of natural resources, avoidance
of unfair labor practices, and a concern for animal welfare
(Baron and Spranca 1997; Irwin and Baron 2001). Any
attribute may carry some ethical weight (e.g., price may be
considered an ethical attribute if someone is trying to forgo
spending in favor of contributing to a charity), which means
that the designation “ethical attribute” is more continuous
than discrete, but in our formulation, ethical attributes
derive their attractiveness primarily from their ties with eth-
ical values. Previous work has shown that ethical attributes
are special; they often induce preference reversals and other
decision anomalies more than do attributes with less ethical
weight (Baron and Spranca 1997; Irwin 1994; Irwin and
Baron 2001; Irwin and Spira 1997; Strahilevitz 1997). In
this article, we explore another proposed aspect of ethical
attributes: We expect that ethical attribute information
 268
JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, AUGUST 2005
induces a larger inconsistency between request and use than
does other attribute information. This inconsistency is theo-
retically and practically notable because it is positively cor-
related with actually caring about the attribute (as measured
by both attitude scales and actual use of the attribute when
it is available).
Negative Emotion and Decision Making
Ethical attributes can cause increased decision difficulty
and are emotion laden (Irwin 1994; Irwin and Baron 2001;
Irwin and Spira 1997). An increase in negative emotion has
been shown to cause people to avoid using certain attribute
information, to delay decision making, or even to avoid
making decisions altogether (Anderson 2003; Luce 1998;
Luce, Payne, and Bettman 2000). A particularly striking
example comes from the field of medical research in which
patients who may carry the BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes,
which increase the possibility of breast cancer, often choose
to forgo genetic testing (Biesecker et al. 2000). In addition,
previous false-positive effects, which increase negative
emotion and stress, decrease willingness to seek test infor-
mation (Kahn and Luce 2003; Luce and Kahn 1999).
Our research follows from the extant literature on ways
that consumers sometimes postpone, avoid, or in other ways
protect themselves from decisions or decisional informa-
tion. We agree with the theoretical underpinnings of previ-
ous research that suggest that consumers sometimes choose
not to act (even though the action might have helped them
make a better decision) to avoid trade-off difficulty and
stress. In the consumer decision-making literature, most of
the experimental demonstrations of this kind of behavior
have involved consumers deciding not to make a decision
even though the decision might have benefited them. One
way that consumers avoid decision making is by staying
with the status quo. In the medical decision-making litera-
ture, researchers have found that patients neglect taking
appropriate tests to escape the potential stress of the results,
even though having the test results would enable them to
make more-informed decisions about future treatment. To
our knowledge, no one has studied whether consumers neg-
lect to seek product attribute information even though they
would use the information if they had it. In other words, no
one has explored the inconsistencies between seeking the
information and using it.
Omission Versus Commission
We argue that people tend to seek and use ethical attrib-
ute information inconsistently. They do not seek the infor-
mation at the same rate that they use it if is available, and
they are especially likely to show this inconsistency when
they claim that this information is important to them. Previ-
ous work in the area of the omission–commission bias hints
at this type of inconsistency. This research has found that
people tend to be concerned more with consequences of
actions than with consequences of inactions (Katz 1996).
Ritov and Baron (1995, 1999) show that the omission bias
is stronger when people care about an issue. This finding is
congruent with work on loss aversion and status quo biases
(e.g., Irwin 1994; Luce 1998) that shows that the status quo
(i.e., inaction) is more attractive when there is more nega-
tive emotion involved in the decision. Note, however, that
previous research has never (to our knowledge) examined
actual inaction in soliciting information about products.
The omission bias work contrasted moral actions (e.g.,
adding a poisonous substance to soup) with inactions (e.g.,
not telling a potential victim that the poisonous substance
has been added by someone else). The status quo work
examined the decision to trade versus keep a particular
product.
Dissonance and Distortion
Work in the area of cognitive dissonance (Festinger
1957) supports the contention that consumers are nega-
tively disposed to information that makes them uncomfort-
able (i.e., that is dissonant with their behaviors or prefer-
ences). Thus, when a choice is made, consumers may be
less likely to seek ethical attribute information with a
potentially unfavorable value about the chosen product
than to seek ethical attribute information about a product
that was not chosen. Similarly, consumers are prone to
distorting information to favor a particular alternative
(Russo, Meloy, and Husted 1998). This distortion of
attributes appears to be a function of preference for the
product. In our third study, we add this basic idea to our
theory by showing that people are especially unlikely to
ask for information about the ethical attributes of items
they have chosen (as opposed to items they have not cho-
sen). Again, note that this is not what common sense pre-
dicts. Information about an item that will not be chosen is
less useful than information about an item that may be
purchased.
The Discrepancy Between Requesting and Using: Conjoint
Task
In all of our studies, we measure consumer requests for
ethical attribute information. One measure of whether con-
sumers are inclined to request the information is to examine
only request percentages. However, this measure confounds
several opposing processes. For example, consumers may
not seek the information because they do not care about it;
that is, they are not so much avoiding the information as
ignoring it. Other alternative explanations are that con-
sumers may not know what the attribute information means
or may not believe that the attribute has an effect on the eth-
ical quality of the product. Because we are interested in
whether consumers are inconsistent—whether they do not
ask for information that they would use if they had it—we
elicited conjoint weights from the participants.
All participants provided likelihood-of-purchase ratings
for a full factorial design of attribute value combinations.
Then, we regressed these likelihood-of-purchase ratings on
the attribute values and the resultant conjoint weights. Con-
joint weights have been used in other tests of consumer
decision anomalies (e.g., Irwin and Baron 2001; Irwin and
Spira 1997; Kivetz, Netzer, and Srinivasan 2004). This
method is useful because the weights arise from the con-
sumers’ aggregate preferences, not from self-reports of
attribute importance. In addition, managers can trust con-
joint weights more than subjective indicators of attribute
weights because conjoint tasks have been shown to predict
actual market behavior (Wittink and Bergestuen 2001).
Measuring Ethical Concern
In examining people’s motivation to underrequest ethical
attribute information (i.e., not to request the information at
the rate at which they would use it if it were available), we
 Willful Ignorance
269
propose that this request/use inconsistency will be espe-
cially pronounced for people who care deeply about the
issue. To measure this concern, we use both rated attribute
importance and concern scales that have been developed in
the protected value literature. Protected values are strongly
held values such that people will indicate that the values
cannot be traded off; that is, they will claim that the values
are protected from trade-offs with other values (Baron and
Spranca 1997; Irwin and Baron 2001). For our purposes,
these “sacred” values (Tetlock et al. 2000) allow for a con-
servative and convincing test of our thesis that the inconsis-
tency is due to motivational forces. If people who indicate
that the attribute is of sacred importance to them are less
likely to ask for the attribute than they are to use the attrib-
ute, we can assume that concern is driving consumers to
keep themselves from viewing information they do not want
to view. Drawing from previous research, we assume that
decisions that involve moral or protected values are likely to
be difficult and emotional and that more difficult and emo-
tional decisions are likely to invoke coping strategies that
are less present in decisions without these qualities (Kahn
and Baron 1995). Because of this increase in difficulty and
emotion, we predict that people who claim greater concern
for the issue in question will show greater inconsistencies
than will the general population. Note that to increase con-
struct validity, we also measure concern in other ways (e.g.,
importance ratings, emotion ratings) to show that these
measures produce the same pattern of results as the concern
measures.
On the basis of this review of the literature, we propose
the following hypotheses, which are relevant for all three of
our studies:
H1: Participants’ conjoint weight rankings are higher for the
ethical attribute information than are the rankings of attrib-
ute requests.
H2: The effect predicted in H1 is moderated by how concerned
people are about the issue in question. Participants with
greater concern show a greater difference between request
and use than do participants with less concern. In other
words, concerned participants are especially likely to
underrequest the ethical attribute information.
STUDY 1
One objective of Study 1 is to establish whether partici-
pants request information about ethical attributes at the
same rate at which they use that information if it is provided
to them. In other words, is there an inconsistency between
asking for and using ethical attribute information? A second
objective of Study 1 is to investigate whether involvement
with the ethical issue moderates this relationship. Are
people who care about the issue especially likely to show a
decreased relative tendency to ask for the ethical informa-
tion? Note that all of these behaviors could potentially lead
to suboptimal decision making. People should request
information that they would use (if it were available), and
they should be especially likely to request the information if
they care about the issue.
Method
We recruited 227 participants from an introductory
undergraduate marketing course and offered them extra
credit for their participation in this paper-and-pencil study.
We ran studies in groups of approximately 12–15 people.
Because of missing values, we analyzed 222 responses.
This was a between-subjects design: roughly half (n = 112)
of the participants had the opportunity to request attribute
information (Version A), and the other half (n = 115) com-
pleted a conjoint task (Version B) using the same attributes
as in Version A.
Procedure
In Version A, we explained to participants that they
would be shopping for a wooden desk and chair set. We
asked them to answer the questions as they would if they
were actually in the market for a desk. As Assar and
Chakravarti (1984) recommend, we presented the partici-
pants with a list of all attributes as follows:
Here are the possible levels of the attributes for the
desk you are considering. All of the levels of the attrib-
utes are possible and can occur for any of the desks.
Workmanship
How well made the desk is.
Medium: Nicely finished, but nothing special, a little
machine-made looking.
High: Well finished, with a fine furniture look.
Designer: Gorgeous, very special and hand-made look-
ing, one of a kind.
Comfort
How comfortable the desk and chair are.
Medium: OK, for an hour or so.
High: Great, good for a few hours of studying.
Excellent: The most comfortable piece of furniture you
own; you could live there.
Wood Source
Whether the wood the desk is made from comes from
endangered rain forests.
Tree-farm wood: not from the rain forest wood, does
not deplete anything.
A mix of woods: some tree farm wood, some rain for-
est wood.
Rain forest wood: made from depleting the rain forest.
Price
How much you would have to pay—assume you would
pay this if you said you would buy the desk.
$350.
$550.
$750.
We told participants that they would not be shown the
attribute information about each desk outright but would be
given a 4 × 16 blank product matrix with the four columns
labeled A (Workmanship), B (Comfort), C (Wood Source),
and D (Price). The far left column was numbered 1–16, cor-
responding to each desk set. Each person filled in his or her
matrix by asking for attribute information from the experi-
menter. Then, after they completed the matrix, they made a
purchasing decision using the attribute information that
they had requested.
To ensure that participants understood that they needed to
ask for the attribute information in order to know it (i.e.,
that none of the attribute values would be constant across
desks), we told participants that “all levels of attributes are
 270
JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, AUGUST 2005
1In Study 1, there was an effect of sex on the difference ranking of the
wood source attribute: Females showed a significant difference between
use of the ethical attribute and request for it. We have neither a hypothesis
nor theoretical reasoning for this result.
possible and can occur for any desk.” Although they
believed that all levels were possible, to make the number
of combinations more manageable, we offered only the
high and low values of each attribute, resulting in 16
orthogonal combinations. The participants were instructed
to raise their hand and ask for the attribute information that
they wanted to know about by pointing to a column (A, B,
C, or D) when the experimenter came to them. This
methodology simulated having to ask a salesperson for
information. To avoid influencing anyone seated nearby,
participants were asked to do this silently, using the column
letter and not the attribute name. We also told them that
because time was limited, they might not see all four of the
attributes, and therefore they should first ask for the attrib-
ute that was most important to their decision, then the next
most important, and so forth. We then asked whether there
were any questions. When participants understood the
methodology, we proceeded.
The experimenter had folded sheets of paper, labeled on
the outside with A, B, C, and D and on the inside with a list
of different levels of the corresponding attribute. The
participants received the sheet, copied down the informa-
tion onto their blank matrix, and then raised their hand
again to ask for another attribute (their next most important
attribute). In Study 1, we limited the time and limited
participants to two attributes each. We had promised them
that they would use this information in a decision task, so
they completed a conjoint task using these two-attribute
desks, rating their likelihood of purchasing the desks on a 1
(“very unlikely”) to 10 (“very likely”) scale. We collected
the likelihood-of-purchase data only to provide a plausible
reason for why the participants needed to request the attrib-
ute information, but we did not analyze it, because it was
based on different attributes for each participant.
Following the rating of all 16 desks, we asked all partici-
pants the following question about their value for protecting
rain forest wood (i.e., a statement of their concern):
Which of the following best represents your view about
rain forest wood?
A. Use of rain forest wood should be determined by the
free market.
B. Protection of the rain forests should be balanced
against market values.
C. Protection of the rain forest should be absolute.
This question has been used with success in previous
research (e.g., Baron and Spranca 1997; Irwin and Baron
2001). We also asked the participants questions about the
importance of the issue of the use of rain forest wood,
workmanship, price, and comfort when buying furniture.
Finally, we asked the participants their sex and age. With
one exception, there were no effects of these variables in
any of the three studies.1
In Version B of Study 1 (the conjoint task on the full
matrix), we presented participants with the same attribute
descriptions as in Version A. We then presented them with
the orthogonal matrix of desks with the attribute values
filled in. In others words, they received the same matrix that
participants in Version A would have had if they had been
able to fill in the entire attribute matrix. Participants rated
their likelihood of purchase of each desk set on a scale from
1 (“very unlikely to purchase”) to 10 (“very likely to pur-
chase”). Following the rating of all 16 desks, we asked
participants in Version B the same questions that we asked
participants in Version A; that is, we asked them about their
concern for rain forest wood, the importance of each attrib-
ute, and their sex and age.
Analysis and Results
Measures. Study 1 is a between-subjects comparison of
request for the ethical attribute (from Version A) with use of
the attribute (from Version B). Thus, we compared the order
in which Version A participants asked for the wood attribute
(first, second, or not at all) with the ranked importance of
the attribute in the conjoint task in Version B. The request
rankings are straightforward; a lower ranking signifies less
importance (i.e., that it was requested relatively later). To
obtain the use ranks, we used a standard ordinary least
squares conjoint method, regressing the likelihood-of-
purchase ratings for the desks on the attribute levels for the
desks for each participant (recall that we used a full facto-
rial design). Thus, each participant from Version B had a
conjoint slope for wood source that we could compare with
the attribute request rankings in Version A. To compare like
scales, we converted the raw conjoint slopes to ranks, which
enabled us to compare these with the attribute request
ranks. Note that this is a conservative test because there
were only four attributes and thus only four ranks to provide
the variance to test the hypotheses. As with the request
ranks, a lower-use rank signifies that it was used less (i.e.,
that it was less important).
Results. As we predicted in H1, overall, participants were
more likely to show a discrepancy between the use of and
the request for the wood source attribute; that is, they were
more likely to use the wood source attribute than they were
to request it (F(1, 220) = 4.03, p < .04). Furthermore, as we
predicted in H2 (and counter to intuitive expectations), this
difference was moderated by the level of concern that
participants had about the abuse of rain forests. The greater
the concern (i.e., the more participants stated that they cared
about how rain forest wood was used), the greater was the
discrepancy between attribute request and attribute use
(F(1, 218) = 22.21, p < .0001). In addition to the interaction
between the linear protected value effect and request/use,
we also checked for a polynomial interaction (i.e., whether
protected value squared interacted with request/use).
Indeed, as Figure 1 shows, this interaction also was signifi-
cant (F(1, 218) = 14.29, p < .001). The effect of protected
values on the discrepancy was especially great for those
who were most concerned. Recall that those participants
who were in the high-concern category answered that “the
protection of rain forest wood should be absolute.” In other
words, they indicated that, to them, nothing should interfere
with the protection of rain forest wood. Figure 1 shows the
mean rank for requesting (Version A) and using (Version B)
the wood source attribute by level of concern about rain for-
est wood (Irwin and McClelland 2001).
Recall that the attribute request and use tasks enable us to
test for request versus use differences in the attributes other
than wood source. We expected that there would be a differ-
 Willful Ignorance
271
0
.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
1
2
3
Ranking of Wood Source
Concern About Protection of Rain Forest Wood
Use
Request
Figure 1
STUDY 1: DIFFERENCE IN WOOD SOURCE RANKING (USE
VERSUS REQUEST) BY CONCERN FOR RAIN FOREST WOOD
0
.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1
0
Predicted Ranking of Wood Source
Stated Importance of Rain Forest Wood
Use
Request
Figure 2
STUDY 1: DIFFERENCE IN WOOD SOURCE RANKING (USE
VERSUS REQUEST) BY IMPORTANCE OF ISSUE OF RAIN
FOREST
ence because there were only four attributes and the analy-
ses used ranks. If one attribute was requested/used first
(second, third, or fourth), the other attributes could not have
been. Indeed, all four attributes showed an effect of request
versus use: The workmanship and comfort attributes were
requested less than they were used (workmanship:
F(1, 220) = 19.2, p < .0001; comfort: F(1, 220) = 4.33, p <
.03), and the price attribute was used more than it was
requested (F(1, 220) = 12.83, p < .0004). Note that this
inconsistency is not caused by the same sort of avoidance
mechanisms that we believe underlie the wood type incon-
sistency, because price is not primarily an ethical attribute
and, furthermore, should not usually induce the sort of
strong negative reactions that discourage consumers from
asking for attribute information.
To address this issue, at the end of the task, we measured
the participants’ importance ratings for each of the four
attributes. When regressing the use of and request for the
wood source attribute on the importance of the protection of
rain forest wood, we obtained the same results as we did
with the concern questions (F(1, 218) = 10.02, p < .0002):
The more important the issue of protecting rain forests, the
greater was the discrepancy between using and requesting
the attribute. There were no polynomial effects of concern
on the discrepancy, probably because (unlike the three-point
protected value measure) participants viewed (at least psy-
chologically) the importance scale as roughly linear. The
significant interaction confirms the concern results (see Fig-
ure 2). This effect was not obtained for price; importance did
not moderate the discrepancy. Thus, the price request/use
discrepancy does not appear to be driven by the same sort of
avoidance mechanisms that underlie the wood source dis-
crepancy. Rather, the evidence suggests that the price incon-
sistency is an aftereffect of the wood source inconsistency
(because all the attribute measures are intercorrelated).
Discussion
In Study 1, we found support for our hypotheses in a
between-subjects study. We showed that participants indeed
used the wood source attribute more than they requested it
and that this discrepancy was greater for participants who
cared more about the issue. In other words, participants
who stated that they care very much about the protection of
rain forest wood were the most likely to show a large dis-
crepancy between their request for and use of the ethical
attribute information. They used the information more than
they requested it. We believed that it would also be useful to
show that the same participants would not ask for ethical
attribute information at the rate at which they later used the
information. Thus, Study 2 had two purposes: (1) to repli-
cate the results of Study 1 and (2) to show that the results
can be obtained even in a within-subjects design.
STUDY 2
Method
We recruited 185 participants from an introductory
undergraduate marketing course and offered them extra
credit for their participation in this within-subjects paper-
and-pencil study. Because of missing values, we analyzed
176 responses.
Procedure
As in Study 1, we presented participants with the oppor-
tunity to “shop” for a desk set. The procedure for Study 2
was essentially the same as that in Study 1 with two main
differences. In Study 2, we gave all participants the blank
product matrix and told them to request the attributes in the
same manner as we described for Study 1. However, this
time, although we told the participants that time was limited
 272
JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, AUGUST 2005
and that they should first request the attributes most impor-
tant to their decision, then the next most important, and so
forth, in case time ran out (as in Study 1), we actually gave
these participants enough time to request all four attributes.
This portion of the study was not stopped until each partici-
pant had requested information about all four attributes,
ensuring that each person had examined all available infor-
mation about all 16 desks. This methodological change was
useful because it enabled us to run the conjoint task on the
same participants.
When all participants had a completed matrix, they pro-
ceeded to the conjoint portion in which they rated their like-
lihood of purchase for all 16 desks. Following the rating of
all 16 desks, we asked all participants the same demo-
graphic and rain forest concern questions as those in Study
1. There were no significant demographic effects. Finally,
we asked the participants four questions about the impor-
tance of the issue of rain forest wood in general and the
importance of workmanship, price, and comfort when buy-
ing furniture.
Analysis and Results
Measures. Again, we measured attribute request and
attribute use, though in Study 2, these measures were
within-subjects measures. Attribute request was a ranking
of the order in which participants asked for the information
(with lower rankings indicating that it was requested later),
and attribute use was a ranking given to the attributes from
the ordinary least squares weights that we gathered from the
full-information conjoint task (with lower rankings indicat-
ing that it was used less).
Results. The within-subjects difference between attribute
use and attribute request shows that participants were more
likely to use the wood source information in their
likelihood-of-purchase ratings than to request the informa-
tion (F(1, 175) = 20.94, p < .0001). Thus, H1 was confirmed
within subjects. Furthermore, this difference was moderated
by how concerned participants were about this particular
ethical attribute (F(2, 173) = 9.93, p < .0001), thus confirm-
ing H2. These results show that this interaction is due to the
hesitancy of the high-concern participants to request the
attribute information about which they care so much.
Although there is a significant difference in the use of this
ethical attribute information when comparing the high-
concern participants with the other participants (M = 2.37
versus M = 1.44; F(1, 174) = 34.04, p < .0001), there is no
significant difference in the request for the ethical attribute
information when comparing these groups (M = 1.50 versus
M = 1.30).
As in Study 1, all three of the other variables showed
effects of request versus use; we expected this because the
attribute ranks are correlated. Again, workmanship and
comfort were requested more than they were used (work-
manship: F(1, 175) = 27.49, p < .0001; comfort: F(1, 175) =
34.24, p < .0001), and price was used more than it was
requested (F(1, 175) = 16.01, p < .0001). Wood source
importance showed the same moderating effect as in Study
1: The use/request discrepancy was greater as importance
increased (F(1, 174) = 14.01, p < .0002). These results are
virtually identical to those shown in Figure 2; the main dif-
ference is that the results are within subjects.
Discussion
The within-subjects nature of Study 2 underscores the
point that attribute request/use inconsistency obtains even
for the same people and that this underrequest depends on
the participants’ concern about the issue; that is, more con-
cern leads to more inconsistency. In our first two studies,
we have two types of importance measures: conjoint
weights and indicated importance on our value questions.
We find that indicated importance actually increases the
discrepancy between use of the attribute and request for it,
which supports our notion that the reduced tendency to ask
for the attribute is moderated by active avoidance mecha-
nisms and not by indifference or random error.
Simply requesting information first appears to reduce use
of the ethical attribute information, though only marginally.
We compared use of the wood source attribute in Study 1
(in which the information was provided in the conjoint)
with that in Study 2 (in which the participants requested the
information before using it in the conjoint). Participants
were marginally more likely to use the attribute in their
decision if it was provided than if they had to request it
(F(1, 286) = 2.70, p < .10). Note that participants in the two
studies had access to the same information; the only differ-
ence is whether the participant had to request it before using
it. In addition, this effect was moderated by concern;
participants who were more concerned were especially
likely to show the effect (F(1, 114) = 3.80, p < .05).
Although we had no hypotheses about this effect, it con-
firms the general idea that the ethical attribute information
induces avoidance mechanisms in consumers who care
about the issue.
STUDY 3
Our first two studies used both the same product category
(desks) and the same ethical attribute (wood source). In
addition, participants in these studies did not actually
choose among the desks; we told them that there were desks
available that differed on certain attributes (which we
described) and asked them to tell us which attribute infor-
mation they would be interested in viewing if they were in
the market for a desk.
Study 3 expands our research domain to a different prod-
uct category and ethical attribute in case there is something
special about rain forest wood (beyond its ethical weight)
that leads participants to request information at a lesser rate
than they would use that information. In Study 3, we used
cellular phones as the product category and type of labor as
the ethical attribute. In addition, Study 3 tested whether
actually choosing among products leads to an increase in
the discrepancy between request for and use of this
(unknown but available) ethical attribute information. This
addition enabled us to establish further that willful igno-
rance is underlying the request/use discrepancy that we
observe. If the information does not make the consumer
uncomfortable, there is no reason to remain ignorant of the
attribute information. The cognitive dissonance (Festinger
1957) that accompanies actual choice should cause con-
sumers to be negatively disposed to information that might
make them uncomfortable (i.e., dissonant with their behav-
iors or preferences). We expect that choice increases com-
mitment to the product based on the other attributes and
 Willful Ignorance
273
Figure 3
STUDY 3: CELLULAR PHONES
Phone A
Phone B
thus decreases the desire to know whether the chosen prod-
uct contains an unethical attribute value. In other words,
willful ignorance should be especially prevalent for chosen
products. Our expectations for Study 3 are as follows:
H3: The underrequesting of ethical attribute information is
greater for chosen products than it is for rejected products.
H4: The discrepancy in H3 is moderated by concern about the
ethical attribute.
Study 3 included direct measures of sadness and anger,
which enabled us to test the hypothesis that this discrepancy
in the request for and use of ethical attribute information is
driven by aversion to negative emotion. This addition is
helpful in establishing that willful ignorance underlies our
observed request/use discrepancies:
H5: As the discrepancy in H3 increases, negative emotion
decreases.
Method
We recruited 198 participants from an introductory
undergraduate marketing class and offered them extra credit
for their participation in this paper-and-pencil study.
Because of missing values, we analyzed 187 responses.
Procedure
Pretest. In a pretest, 62 undergraduate students judged
the attractiveness of several cellular phones (from photo-
copied pictures) on a scale ranging from 1 (“not attractive at
all”) to 8 (“very attractive”). Two of the cellular phones,
which we show in Figure 3, were rated as significantly dif-
ferent on attractiveness (t = 30.21, p < .0001; Phone A: M =
1.66; Phone B: M = 6.82). We used these two cellular
phones in Study 3.
Main study. Study 3 had a 2 × 2 between-subjects design:
choice/no choice (before the attribute request) × informa-
tion (information about the attractive versus the unattractive
phone). We told participants that they would be taking part
in a confidential marketing study about shopping for cellu-
lar phones, and we asked them to evaluate the two phones.
We told participants in the choice condition to imagine that
they were looking at cellular phones online. We asked them
to assume that except for what was shown in the photo-
graphs, both phones had the same features, and we then
asked that they look at the photograph and answer the ques-
tions that followed. We showed participants each phone
separately, and there were two questions directly under each
picture: (1) “How much does Phone A (B) appeal to you?”
(on a scale ranging from 1 = “not at all” to 8 = “very
much”) and (2) “How likely are you to choose Phone A
(B)?” (on a scale ranging from 1 = “not at all likely” to 8 =
“very likely”). After participants in the choice condition had
seen photographs of both phones and had answered those
questions, we asked them, “Of these two phones, which of
these would you buy?” We asked them to circle Phone A or
Phone B. Participants in the no-choice condition viewed the
photographs of the phones but did not answer any questions
about or choose among the phones at this stage.
We then explained to all participants that cellular phones
can vary on dimensions other than the features usually asso-
ciated with them, and we presented the following
statements:
Warranty
Some companies have begun offering warranties last-
ing from one to two years on their phones. This war-
ranty is some indication of how long the cell phone will
last.
Labor
Some cell phone companies have factories in less-
developed countries. Some of these factories employ
children under the age of 12. This is not found to affect
the product quality. The children typically work 8- to
12-hour days.
Delivery Time
This cell phone is being offered online. Sometimes the
cell phones are in stock and can be sent within one
week, and sometimes the cell phones are not in stock
and need to be ordered before they can be sent to the
customer, taking up to three weeks.
After participants rated the readability of these sentences on
a scale ranging from 1 to 8 (to ensure that they read the
information), we told them that additional information was
available about one of the cellular phones they had previ-
ously seen. We randomly assigned participants to one of
two conditions: They were offered additional information
about either Phone A (the unattractive cellular phone) or
Phone B (the attractive cellular phone). Stapled, folded
sheets of paper were attached to the back of the study and
labeled on the outside with “Warranty Information,” “Labor
 274
JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, AUGUST 2005
2After the view task, we asked all participants to circle the correspon-
ding picture of the cellular phone they would buy. Note that this choice
task serves two purposes: to provide validity to the view task and to elimi-
nate a confound in the conjoint task. All participants chose a phone before
completing the conjoint. However, this choice is nonconsequential,
because all participants chose the same phone, and the choice followed the
open task.
Practices Information,” or “Delivery Time Information.” We
told participants that if they wanted to learn additional
information about this particular phone, they could open the
corresponding stapled sheet and read the information. We
stressed that they did not need to open any of the stapled
sheets—they could open 0, 1, 2, or all 3—and that they
should open a sheet only if the information was important
to them.
We informed participants that time was limited, so there-
fore they should open the sheets in the order of importance
(to them) in case time expired. If participants chose to open
a sheet, we asked them to write on the packet which sheet
they opened and the order in which they opened it. Experi-
menters checked the participants as they completed the task
to ensure that they correctly recorded the information. The
information did not vary from one cellular phone to the
other; that is, for both the attractive and unattractive cellular
phones, the sheet labeled “Warranty Information” said,
“This cell phone has a 2-year warranty”; the sheet labeled
“Labor Practices Information” said, “This cell phone com-
pany has factories that use child labor”; and the sheet
labeled “Delivery Time Information” said, “This cell phone
will be delivered to your house in one week.” Hereinafter,
we refer to the task of choosing and reading additional
information as the “view” task.2
Finally, participants completed a conjoint task with a set
of cellular phones that differed on two levels for each of the
attributes (i.e., warranty, labor practices, and delivery time).
We asked participants to assume that all functional features
were the same and that the phones varied only by the attrib-
utes listed in each description. The conjoint task provided
the use variable, that is, how participants actually used the
information when it was provided to them. After partici-
pants rated their likelihood of purchase for each of the eight
phones, we asked general questions about shopping behav-
ior. We rated all questions on a scale ranging from 1 (“not at
all important”) to 8 (“very important”). These all began
with, “When you are shopping…” and were followed with,
“[H]ow important to you is price? Delivery time? Quality?
Convenience? Buying products from a company that main-
tains high ethical standards (e.g., those that do not use ani-
mal testing, those that do not harm the environment during
manufacturing, those that do not use sweatshop or child
labor)?”
We also asked the following concern question about labor
practices:
What are your feelings regarding child labor (the
employment in manufacturing plants of children ages
6–12 who are paid a few cents an hour)?
A. Children should be used as workers as often as pos-
sible; they are often a cheap form of labor, thereby
reducing the price of the products that are
manufactured.
B. Children should be used as workers but only under
the guidelines for number of hours worked in one
day and should receive pay equal to that of adults.
C. Children under the age of 12 should not be allowed
to work in manufacturing plants.
We followed this with two questions and asked partici-
pants to rate their responses on an eight-point scale: “How
sad would you feel if you found out that you bought an item
made in a plant utilizing child labor?” (1 = “not at all sad”;
8 = “very sad”) and “How angry do you get when you hear
about companies employing children in their manufacturing
plants?” (1 = “not very angry”; 8 = “very angry”). Finally,
we asked demographic questions, and we asked participants
what they believed the purpose of the study was. None of
the participants correctly guessed the purpose of the study.
Analysis and Results
Recall that Studies 1 and 2 measured participants’ ten-
dency to ask for (and use) a variety of product attributes
when no product attributes were initially given. That is,
both the request and use variables measure preferences on
these dimensions with products that are essentially blank
slates. Participants could not become attached to certain
products before considering whether to request ethical
attribute information. In addition, in both Studies 1 and 2,
the task was focused on purchasing; we asked participants
to request information to help them make desk purchases.
Study 3 is different. All participants viewed both cellular
phones and could easily see that one was smaller, lighter,
and more attractive than the other. Thus, this attribute infor-
mation had already been given to the participants before we
asked their preference for requesting ethical attribute infor-
mation. It is also important to note that though the view
variable in Study 3 is specific to a particular cellular phone,
the use measure from the conjoint task is a more global
measure of attribute use. In addition, we did not give the
participants in the no-choice condition a purchasing task;
rather, we simply asked them to look at phones and then
request information about them.
In the choice condition, only six respondents chose the
unattractive phone. We deleted these participants; our
analysis focuses on the participants who chose the attractive
phone. In the view task in Study 3, which corresponds to
the request task in Studies 1 and 2, participants could
choose to view any number of attributes. Thus, for com-
pleteness, the view scale reflected both the order in which
participants requested the information and how many attrib-
utes they requested. We compared this view scale with the
conjoint weights (we rescaled both scales from 0 to 1). Fig-
ure 4 shows the inconsistency measure (use versus view) by
condition. As we predicted in H3, participants who chose a
product (Phone B) and were subsequently offered ethical
attribute information about that product showed a much
larger inconsistency between viewing the ethical attribute
information and using this information than did those who
were offered the same information about the unchosen
phone (F(1, 186) = 4.22, p < .04). In other words, choosing
the product (versus merely viewing the phones and making
no choice) induced a greater subsequent discrepancy
between viewing and use of the ethical attribute informa-
tion. As we predicted in H4, this difference depended on
concern about labor practices: The difference was stronger
 Willful Ignorance
275
Use–View of Labor Information
Do not choose
Choose
Information Offered On
Attractive
Unattractive
.10
.08
.06
.04
.02
.00
–.02
Figure 4
STUDY 3: INTERACTION OF CHOICE AND INFORMATION TYPE
ON DISCREPANCY BETWEEN VIEW AND USE OF LABOR
INFORMATION
for those with greater concern (F(7, 179) = 3.91, p < .05).
Note that Figure 4 also shows the opposite effect when
information was offered on the unattractive phone. When
the ethical attribute information could bolster participants’
decisions not to favor the unattractive phone, they were
happy to seek out the ethical attribute information.
Thus, this interaction underscores the theory that con-
sumers do not ask for ethical attribute information that may
make them uncomfortable. The interaction shown in Figure
4 suggests that this inconsistency between desire to view
ethical attribute information and desire to use that informa-
tion is not ubiquitous. When participants had not chosen a
cellular phone but were given some of the more salient
attribute information (i.e., style and attractiveness), which
led them to favor one product over another, they showed a
curiosity about the ethical attribute information. Because
they were not in a purchasing situation, there was no threat
in finding out the information, and thus they requested it.
However, when a choice was made (in favor of the attrac-
tive product), this curiosity was outweighed by the desire to
protect their emotions.
When participants were shown the labor practices infor-
mation of one phone—that is, when they chose to view the
ethical attribute information—they switched their choice of
phones to the other phone (F(1, 184) = 20.44, p < .0001).
This analysis included everyone, though analysis by choice
group was comparable. Although they did not know the
attribute values of the phone to which they were switching,
participants switched away from the phone with the unfa-
vorable labor practices. This switch is yet another measure
of what people would do with the information if they had it:
They would use it. Not asking for the information does
potentially lead to decision making that differs from what
they would do with full information.
Recall that we measured participants’ sadness and anger
over labor practices at the conclusion of the survey.
Throughout our studies, we have assumed that consumers
neglect ethical attribute information to protect their feel-
ings, and indeed Study 3 shows that this strategy is effec-
tive. As the discrepancy between view and use of ethical
attribute information increased, the reported sadness
(F(1,185) = 9.74, p < .002) and anger (F(1, 185) = 12.22,
p < .0006) over child labor issues decreased. As we pre-
dicted, both sadness and anger were reduced when partici-
pants chose to view ethical attribute information at a lesser
rate than they would use it, thus confirming H5. The esti-
mated effects for sadness and anger were nearly identical.
When the discrepancy between request for and use of the
child labor information is 1 (i.e., information was requested
at about the same rate that it was used), the negative emo-
tion is approximately 3.8; however, when the discrepancy is
3 (i.e., information was used much more than it was
requested), the negative emotion is approximately .1. Recall
that concern is positively related to not asking for the labor
practice information, thus confirming that the relationships
here are not driven simply by indifference. Even more dra-
matically, we find that not asking for the ethical attribute
information mediates the relationship between choice/
information and the level of anger the participant reports
(Sobel = 1.70, p < .07). This underscores our contention
that emotional preservation drives this discrepancy between
the desire to view ethical attribute information and the use
of that information. There were no such mediation effects
with sadness, suggesting that anger plays a more primary
role in this process.
Discussion
As in Studies 1 and 2, Study 3 confirms that consumers
underrequest ethical attribute information, especially when it
is information that is important to them and is likely to cause
emotional stress. In Study 3, we duplicated the results from
Studies 1 and 2 with some additional findings: We found evi-
dence of willful ignorance with a new ethical attribute, child
labor, and a new product category, cellular phones. In addi-
tion, Study 3 shows that consumer reluctance to ask for ethi-
cal attributes is exacerbated when (1) they are in purchasing
and choice situations and (2) the information pertains to an
item they find otherwise attractive. Finally, and perhaps most
important, we establish that not seeking ethical attribute
information, even though it would be used in making a
choice decision, is indeed an act of emotional protection.
GENERAL DISCUSSION
When consumers encounter the complicated market-
place, ethical values are only one of many motivations
pushing them toward particular purchases. On an almost
daily basis, people wrestle with decision difficulty of one
form or another wanting one thing while knowing they
should opt for another and having too many options or too
much information (Bazerman, Tenbrunsel, and Wade-
Benzoni 1998). Adding to the complexity of the purchasing
process is the potential absence of information about some
important attributes, including ethical attribute information.
However, consumers can obtain this information. They can
 276
JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, AUGUST 2005
ask salespeople or managers, they can research on the Inter-
net, and they can read any of the myriad books meant to
help with the process. In our research, we show that con-
sumers who care about such information do not seek it out
at the rate at which they would have used the information if
it were readily available, and we show that the reason con-
sumers do not seek the information is that it proves difficult
for them. Specifically, in Study 3, we show that both anger
and sadness over labor practices were reduced when people
did not ask for the labor practice information. In other
words, when faced with this complex marketplace, con-
sumers are trying both to buy the best product for their
needs and to manage the stress of the encounter. Sometimes
this stress management takes the form of willful ignorance.
Contribution to Marketing Theory
Previous research has shown that under stress, consumers
stay with the status quo and otherwise neglect making a
decision (e.g., Luce 1998). Consumers behave this way
because they prefer to avoid negative emotions. Our work
shows another way that consumers appear to avoid negative
emotion: by not asking for information they would have
otherwise used had it been available. This type of inconsis-
tency is the strongest for attractive objects that are already
chosen, and it is the weakest for rejected, unattractive
objects, suggesting that consumers manage their emotions
by seeking information that is unlikely to cause them stress.
In Study 3, we observed consumers managing their emo-
tions in this way, implicitly reducing their sadness and
anger by not asking for ethical attribute information. Con-
sumer research has shown that consumers have many avoid-
ance tactics at their disposal when encountering disturbing
information—for example, interpreting new attribute infor-
mation in accordance with their preferences (Russo, Meloy,
and Husted 1998). Our work shows that consumers some-
times save themselves the trouble of distorting or ignoring
potentially stressful information simply by not seeking it
out in the first place.
Our work contributes to marketing theory by combining
the knowledge that ethical attributes demonstrate anom-
alous behavior more than do traditional attributes (Baron
and Spranca 1997; Irwin 1994; Irwin and Baron 2001;
Strahilevitz 1997) with the knowledge that people tend to
shy away from that which causes emotional stress and diffi-
culty (Kahn and Luce 2003; Luce 1998). We demonstrate
that consumers sometimes not only neglect ethical attribute
information but also do so in a counterintuitive manner.
Consumers who, both implicitly through conjoint tasks and
explicitly through statements of belief, hold ethical attrib-
utes as important are likely to underrequest information
about the attributes (i.e., request at a level lower than their
actual use of the attribute information). This is also an
important addition to knowledge about internal conflict in
the marketplace (Bazerman, Tenbrunsel, and Wade-Benzoni
1998). We demonstrate that when knowledge of a product’s
attribute has the potential to strike a negative emotional
chord but is something that the consumer cares deeply
about, the internal conflict causes anomalous treatment of
the attribute. It is important to remember that this conflict
does not cause a difference in the use of the attribute but
rather causes a discrepancy between the use of the attribute
and the propensity to seek information. We believe that our
research contributes to the growing literature on how avoid-
ance mechanisms affect consumer choice and that further
research can study other ways that willful ignorance may
affect consumer decision making.
Contribution to Marketing Practice
Our results have implications for practitioners who are
marketing products with ethical attributes. All of our stud-
ies suggest that consumers are not particularly willing to
seek ethical attribute information when the knowledge of
this information has potentially negative emotional conse-
quences. This may prove frustrating for many marketing
managers who take pains to incorporate ethical attributes
into their products only to face consumers who willfully
remain ignorant of information that would affect their pur-
chasing. Knowing that this ethical attribute information is
actually important to consumers, managers whose products
contain ethical attribute information of a favorable nature
(e.g., wood from sustainable forests, labor that follows
strict labor regulations, cars with emissions at an acceptable
level) should emphasize these attributes in a way that
makes it difficult for consumers not to be aware of the
information and incorporate it into their decisions. In all
three studies, we show that consumers who claim that they
care about ethical attribute information indeed do care
about it in their conjoint decisions. If the attribute informa-
tion is available, they will use it. Conversely, marketing
practitioners with something to hide about their product’s
ethical attributes may not need to worry about consumer
reaction. As long as the information is not readily available,
consumers are unlikely to seek it. This should help explain
why, even though ethical concerns are increasing in impor-
tance in the news and popular press, the effect of this
increased concern is not witnessed in marketplace behavior
to a corresponding degree. Because, to a large extent, only
ethical attributes with positive or favorable values are
advertised, these are the attributes that affect consumer
decisions; attributes with negative values are successfully
neglected.
Do Consumers Actually Have Moral Values?
Both theoreticians and practitioners may wonder
whether our concerned consumers were actually concerned
or were showing moral hypocrisy (Batson, Thompson, and
Chen 2002) by professing ethical concern but then not
requesting the ethical information. We argue that the con-
joint results suggest that our participants’ professed moral
values are real and that given the right conditions, con-
sumers would reflect these values in their actual purchas-
ing. Note that both the concern questions and the attribute
importance questions correlated highly with conjoint
weights. The locus of the request/use discrepancy was in
the request variable, not the use variable. Thus, the seem-
ing mismatch between ethical attributes and market suc-
cess may have more to do with marketing (i.e., with the
presentation of the attribute information) than with con-
sumer sentiment. The data support the conclusion that, at
least in this study, consumers are not exhibiting moral
hypocrisy but rather are holding their moral values close
and, in turn, are protecting themselves. In other words,
willful ignorance does not (in our work) evidence a lack of
moral involvement.
 Willful Ignorance
277
Notably, when the pressure of a choice (and, by exten-
sion, a purchasing situation) was relieved (i.e., the no-
choice conditions in Study 3), consumers behaved in a way
that makes logical sense: They asked for ethical attribute
information for the product they would consider buying. It
was only when we invoked purchasing and choice (i.e.,
Studies 1 and 2 and the choice conditions in Study 3) that
the underrequesting inconsistencies appeared. At this point,
purchasing became potentially less driven by ethical attrib-
utes than it might have been with complete information.
Thus, ironically, purchasing and the marketplace may push
consumers toward inconsistencies and away from their best
selves.
REFERENCES
Anderson, Christopher (2003), “The Psychology of Doing Noth-
ing: Forms of Decision Avoidance Result from Reason and
Emotion,” Psychological Bulletin, 129 (January), 139–67.
Assar, Amardeep and Dipankar Chakravarti (1984), “Attribute
Range Knowledge: Effects on Consumers’ Evaluation of
Brand–Attribute Information and Search Patterns in Choice,” in
AMA Educators’ Proceedings, Russell W. Belk, Robert Peter-
son, Gerald S. Albaum, Morris B. Holbrook, Roger A. Kerin,
Naresh K. Malhotra, and Peter Wright, eds. Chicago: American
Marketing Association, 62–67.
Baron, Jonathan and Ilana Ritov (1994), “Reference Points and
Omission Bias,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 59 (3), 475–95.
——— and Mark Spranca (1997), “Protected Values,” Organiza-
tional Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 70 (1), 1–16.
Batson, C.D., Elizabeth R. Thompson, and Hubert Chen (2002),
“Moral Hypocrisy: Addressing Some Alternatives,” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 83 (2), 330–39.
Bazerman, Max H., Anne E. Tenbrunsel, and Kimberly Wade-
Benzoni (1998), “Negotiating with Yourself and Losing: Mak-
ing Decisions with Competing Internal Preferences,” Academy
of Management Review, 23 (2), 225–41.
Bettman, James R., Mary Frances Luce, and John W. Payne
(1998), “Constructive Consumer Choice Processes,” Journal of
Consumer Research, 25 (December), 187–217.
Biesecker, Barbara Bowles, Naoko Ishibe, Donald W. Hadley,
Therese R. Giambarresi, Ronald G. Kase, Caryn Lerman, and
Jeffery P. Struewing (2000), “Psychosocial Factors Predicting
BRCA1/BRCA2 Testing Decisions in Members of Hereditary
Breast and Ovarian Cancer Families,” American Journal of
Medical Genetics, 93 (4), 257–63.
Eagly, Alice and Shelley Chaiken (1998), “Attitude Structure and
Function,” in The Handbook of Social Psychology, Vol. 1, 4th
ed., D. Gilbert, S. Fiske, and G. Lindzey, eds. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 269–322.
Festinger, Leon (1957), A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance.
Evanston, IL: Row, Peterson.
Hogarth, Robin M. (1987), Judgement and Choice: The Psychol-
ogy of Decision. Brisbane, Australia: John Wiley & Sons.
Irwin, Julie R. (1994), “Buying/Selling Price Preference Rever-
sals: Preference for Environmental Changes in Buying Versus
Selling Modes,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 60 (3), 431–57.
——— and Jonathan Baron (2001), “Response Mode Effects and
Moral Values,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 84 (2), 177–97.
——— and Gary H. McClelland (2001), “Misleading Heuristics
for Moderated Multiple Regression Models,” Journal of Mar-
keting Research, 38 (February), 100–109.
——— and Joan S. Spira (1997), “Anomalies in the Values for
Consumer Goods with Environmental Attributes,” Journal of
Consumer Psychology, 6 (4), 339–63.
Kahn, Barbara E. and Jonathan Baron (1995), “An Exploratory
Study of Choice Rules Favored for High-Stakes Decisions,”
Journal of Consumer Psychology, 4 (4), 305–28.
——— and Mary Frances Luce (2003), “Understanding High-
Stakes Consumer Decisions: Mammography Adherence Fol-
lowing False-Alarm Test Results,” Marketing Science, 22 (Sum-
mer), 393–410.
Katz, Leo (1996), Ill-Gotten Gains: Evasion, Blackmail, Fraud,
and Kindred Puzzles of the Law. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Kivetz, Ran, Oded Netzer, and V. Srinivasan (2004), “Alternative
Models for Capturing the Compromise Effect,” Journal of Mar-
keting Research, 41 (August), 237–57.
Luce, Mary Frances (1998), “Choosing to Avoid: Coping with
Negatively Emotion Laden Consumer Decisions,” Journal of
Consumer Research, 24 (March), 409–33.
——— and Barbara E. Kahn (1999), “Avoidance or Vigilance?
The Psychology of False-Positive Test Results,” Journal of Con-
sumer Research, 26 (December), 242–59.
———, John W. Payne, and James R. Bettman (1999), “Emo-
tional Trade-Off Difficulty and Choice,” Journal of Marketing
Research, 36 (May), 43–59.
———, ———, and ——— (2000), “Coping with Unfavorable
Attribute Values in Choice,” Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 81 (March), 274–99.
Marymount University Center for Ethical Concerns (1999), 
“The Consumer and Sweatshops,” (accessed April 5, 2005),
[available at http://www.marymount.edu/news/garmentstudy/
overview.html].
Ritov, Ilana and Jonathan Baron (1995), “Outcome Knowledge,
Regret and Omission Bias,” Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 64 (2), 119–27.
——— and ——— (1999), “Protected Value and Omission Bias,”
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 79
(2), 79–94.
Russo, J. Edward, Margaret G. Meloy, and Victoria Husted (1998),
“Predecisional Distortion of Product Information,” Journal of
Marketing Research, 35 (November), 438–52.
Strahilevitz, Michal (1999), “The Effects of Product Type and
Donation Magnitude on Willingness to Pay More for a Charity-
Linked Brand,” Journal of Consumer Psychology, 8 (3),
215–41.
Tetlock, Philip E., Orie V. Kristel, S. Beth Elson, Melanie C.
Green, and Jennifer S. Lerner (2000), “The Psychology of the
Unthinkable: Taboo Trade-Offs, Forbidden Base Rates, and
Heretical Counterfactuals,” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 78 (5), 853–70.
Wittink, D.R. and T. Bergestuen (2001), “Forecasting with Con-
joint Analysis,” in Principles of Forecasting, J.S. Armstrong, ed.
Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic Press.
