 Cardioprotection and lifespan extension by the natural 
polyamine spermidine
A full list of authors and affiliations appears at the end of the article.
Abstract
Aging is associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease and death. Here we show that 
oral supplementation of the natural polyamine spermidine extends the lifespan of mice and exerts 
cardioprotective effects, reducing cardiac hypertrophy and preserving diastolic function in old 
mice. Spermidine feeding enhanced cardiac autophagy, mitophagy and mitochondrial respiration, 
and it also improved the mechano-elastical properties of cardiomyocytes in vivo, coinciding with 
increased titin phosphorylation and suppressed subclinical inflammation. Spermidine feeding 
failed to provide cardioprotection in mice that lack the autophagy-related protein Atg5 in 
cardiomyocytes. In Dahl salt-sensitive rats that were fed a high-salt diet, a model for hypertension-
induced congestive heart failure, spermidine feeding reduced systemic blood pressure, increased 
titin phosphorylation and prevented cardiac hypertrophy and a decline in diastolic function, thus 
delaying the progression to heart failure. In humans, high levels of dietary spermidine, as assessed 
from food questionnaires, correlated with reduced blood pressure and a lower incidence of 
cardiovascular disease. Our results suggest a new and feasible strategy for the protection from 
cardiovascular disease.
Introduction
Cardiovascular disease has reached epidemic proportions in the elderly and remains the 
worldwide leading cause of death. Human aging is typically accompanied by cardiac 
hypertrophic remodeling and a progressive decline of left ventricular (LV) diastolic 
function1,2. Abnormal diastolic function is present in >20% of the population >65 years of 
age3. Although less than half of all patients with diastolic dysfunction show clinical signs of 
Correspondence should be addressed to: frank.madeo@uni-graz.at, simon.sedej@medunigraz.at, or kroemer@orange.fr.
*These authors contributed equally
#These authors jointly directed this work.
Author Contributions
T.E., S. Sedej, G.K. and F.M. designed and supervised the study; T.E., M.A., G.K., S. Sedej, and F.M. wrote the manuscript. T.E., 
M.A., S. Schroeder, U.P., S. Stekovic, T. Pendl, A.H., J. Schipke, A.Z., A.S., M.T., C.R., C.D., A.S.G., V.H., C.Ma., G.T., S.N., A.M., 
Z.H., A.K., D.C.-G., S.B., F.P., O.K., E.S., P.R., C.S., A.R., M.H., F.N., D.J., B.R., J.R, T.M., M.M., P.W., M.v.F.-S., R.P. and S.Sedej 
performed experiments, analyzed and discussed data. K.E., K.M., J.B., H.F., V.G.-D., M.H.d.A., G.H., B.P., L.S., T. Pieber, J.W., 
S.J.S., W.A.L., C. Mühlfeld, J. Sadoshima., J.D., and S.K. discussed & analyzed data and gave conceptual advice.
Competing Financial Interests
F.M., T.E., D.C-G., S.J.S. and S. Stekovic. have equity interests in TLL, a company founded in 2016 that will develop natural food 
extracts.
Accession Codes
Array data are available via Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database with identifier GSE86882. Proteome data are available via 
ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004916.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Med. 2016 December ; 22(12): 1428–1438. doi:10.1038/nm.4222.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 congestive heart failure, even patients not meeting the diagnostic criteria are at increased risk 
to develop heart failure4. No treatment has yet been shown to convincingly target and 
prevent age-associated diastolic dysfunction or heart failure, likely because our 
understanding of the fundamental mechanisms underlying progressive deteriorations in the 
(ultra-)structure and function of the aging heart is incomplete.
Recent studies have revealed that autophagy, a major cellular quality control mechanism, 
may be able to minimize the functional decline of aging cardiomyocytes by degrading and 
recycling long-lived proteins, which are potentially toxic if damaged, as well as cytoplasmic 
components and dysfunctional organelles (in particular, damaged mitochondria)5,6. 
Clearance of dysfunctional mitochondria through a specific type of selective autophagy, 
termed mitophagy, may be beneficial for cardiac function, because mitochondria can 
overproduce reactive oxygen species if they are functionally impaired and ignite lethal 
signalling pathways if they are permeabilized. In view of the established longevity-extending 
effects of enhanced cytoprotective autophagy in model organisms, it seems plausible that 
autophagy might also be able to counteract cardiac aging7. We previously discovered that 
the natural polyamine spermidine, a dietary compound, extends lifespan and health span 
through induction of autophagy in yeast, flies and worms8,9. Dietary supplementation of 
spermidine delayed age-associated memory impairment in flies10, prevented motor 
impairment in flies elicited by transgenic expression of human α-synuclein11, and protected 
mice from TDP-43-associated proteinopathies12, in line with a general neuroprotective 
action of this polyamine. In several model organisms, the lifespan extending and 
neuroprotective effects of spermidine were abolished upon inactivation of essential 
autophagy-related genes8,10. Here, we explored the potential cardioprotective effects of 
spermidine in rodent models of physiological cardiac aging (mice) and high salt-induced 
congestive heart failure (rats). We also provide evidence that dietary spermidine intake in 
humans inversely correlates with cardiovascular disease.
Results
Spermidine extends the lifespan of wild-type C57BL/6 mice
In view of the life prolonging effects of spermidine in model organisms8,9, we tested the 
long-term survival effects of specific polyamines in C57BL/6J wild-type female mice, which 
had a life-long (Fig. 1a) access to drinking water supplemented with distinct polyamines. 
Strikingly, spermidine- or spermine-supplemented mice had a significantly extended median 
lifespan as compared to control (receiving normal drinking water) or putrescine-
supplemented mice (Fig. 1b, c and Supplementary Tables 1 and 2). To enhance the 
translational potential of these findings, we administered spermidine late-in-life, (a regimen 
more applicable to humans) to pre-aged male and female mice (Fig. 1a). Again, we found 
that spermidine feeding significantly prolonged median lifespan by ~10% (Fig. 1d and 
Supplementary Fig. 1). Spermidine-fed animals displayed increased circulating spermidine 
levels, confirming its systemic bioavailability (Fig. 1e). Food and water consumption, body 
weight and lean/fat mass composition were similar in spermidine-fed and control groups 
(Supplementary Fig. 2), excluding the possibility that polyamine supplementation extends 
lifespan by inducing a calorically-restricted state13.
Eisenberg et al.
Page 2
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Dietary spermidine delays cardiac aging by improving diastolic function
Tumor burden and cardiac aging are significant predictors of mortality in C57BL/6 mice and 
humans14,15. Comprehensive pathological characterization of tissues collected from mice at 
an advanced age (28 months), as well as from old mice that became moribund and were 
sacrificed as “end-of-life” animals16, revealed similarly high tumor frequencies in 
spermidine-treated and control mice (Supplementary Fig. 3 and Supplementary Tables 3, 4). 
This finding suggests that the potential ability of spermidine to inhibit tumor formation, 
which has been observed after chemo-induction of tumors17, does not explain its life 
prolonging effects.
Since only minor histopathological abnormalities were observed in cardiac tissue obtained 
from 28-month-old or from “end-of-life” animals (Supplementary Tables 3, 4), we next 
subjected aged mice with late-in-life spermidine supplementation to structural and 
functional cardiac phenotyping. Spermidine reversed age-associated (23 months) 
echocardiography-detectable hypertrophy, as indicated by a reduction in tibia length-
normalized left ventricular mass (LV mass/TL) and posterior wall thickness (PW/TL) to 
values below those observed in middle-aged (18 months) wild-type mice (Fig. 1f, 
Supplementary Table 5). Hypertrophic remodeling is the most common age-related 
myocardial abnormality that is associated with diastolic and/or systolic dysfunction, 
eventually leading to heart failure in humans18. Evaluation of cardiac function by invasive 
hemodynamic pressure-volume measurements revealed that compared with age-matched 
control mice, mice fed spermidine late-in-life had significantly enhanced diastolic 
properties, as reflected by a reduction of LV end-diastolic pressure (EDP; Fig. 1g, h) with a 
trend towards improved active relaxation (shortened time constant of LV pressure decay τ; 
Supplementary Table 6), as well as significantly reduced LV passive stiffness, as reflected by 
decreased myocardial stiffness constant β (Fig. 1i), with a downward shift of the end-
diastolic pressure-volume relationship [EDPVR] obtained by transient vena cava occlusion 
for load-independent cardiac function assessment (Supplementary Fig. 4). The systolic 
properties of aged hearts were less affected by spermidine. Load-dependent parameters, such 
as ejection fraction (EF) and dP/dtmax as indicators of LV contractility, were comparable in 
all tested groups (Fig. 1j, Supplementary Tables 5, 6). However, ventricular-vascular 
coupling (VVC), a parameter that describes the interaction of the LV with the arterial 
system, is positively correlated with cardiovascular performance and is associated with 
prognosis in heart failure patients19, was increased in mice fed spermidine late-in-life and 
was similar to the value observed in young mice (Fig. 1k). Notably, spermidine did not affect 
systemic systolic and diastolic blood pressure (Fig. 1l), indicating that reduced hypertrophic 
remodeling, improved VVC and enhanced cardiac function were independent of arterial 
afterload. Moreover, 24-month-old control mice displayed a moderate but significant 
increase in relative lung weight (LW/TL), a sign of pulmonary congestion that results from 
abnormal diastolic function, as compared to that in young animals (Supplementary Table 7). 
This age-dependent increase in relative lung weight was less pronounced and was non-
significant in spermidine-treated animals (Supplementary Table 7). Despite the evidence for 
pulmonary congestion, a typical complication in heart failure, in physiologically aged 
C57BL/6 mice, these mice are not considered to represent an experimental model of heart 
failure20. Old C57BL/6 mice exhibit diastolic dysfunction with an increased risk for the 
Eisenberg et al.
Page 3
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 development of heart failure, thus closely recapitulating human cardiac aging in the absence 
of hypertension and associated comorbidities20.
Cardiomyocyte composition and function are improved by spermidine
In the elderly patient, cardiac hypertrophy is related to structural and functional remodeling 
that may involve (i) changes in the composition and structure of the extracellular matrix, 
mainly characterized by fibrotic (collagen-rich) tissue; (ii) altered coronary microvascular 
rarefaction; and/or (iii) effects on cardiomyocytes themselves21. To test if spermidine 
reverses age-induced cardiac fibrosis and decreased coronary microvascular density, we 
subjected the hearts of aged mice fed spermidine late-in-life to ultrastructural analysis by 
design-based stereology. Electron microscopy did not reveal changes in the volume fraction 
or absolute volume of collagen, interstitium, capillaries or cardiomyocytes in the LV 
(Supplementary Fig. 5a and Supplementary Table 8). However, age-related effects on 
subcellular cardiomyocyte composition were reversed by spermidine, as reflected by 
increased relative mitochondrial and myofibrillar volumes and a reduced (mitochondria- and 
myofibril-free) sarcoplasmic volume (Fig. 2a, b, Supplementary Fig. 5b and Supplementary 
Table 8). These results suggest that spermidine has cardiomyocyte-intrinsic effect. We 
hypothesized that the increased myocardial compliance (i.e. myocardial elasticity) induced 
by spermidine originates from improved contractile apparatus and cardiomyocyte 
function22. Consistent with this idea, both transcriptome and proteome analyses of cardiac 
tissue extracts (Supplementary Fig. 6 and Supplementary Tables 9, 10) revealed a 
rejuvenated molecular phenotype with respect to components of the cytoskeletal apparatus 
(i.e. myosin heavy chain proteins, ankyrins, integrins, dystonin), inflammatory processes and 
mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I proteins (i.e. members of the Nduf protein 
family), all of which are essential for cardiomyocyte mechano-elastical functionality23 and 
healthy cardiac aging24,25. Accordingly, the respiratory competence of cardiac 
mitochondria through respiratory chain complex I was increased in mice supplemented with 
spermidine as compared to control mice (Fig. 2c, Supplementary Fig. 7a, b); thus, 
spermidine reversed an age-induced decline in mitochondrial respiratory function26. 
Furthermore, spermidine reversed the age-associated decline of the mitochondria-related 
metabolite levels, including that of NADPH and mevalonate (Supplementary Fig. 7c-e), of 
which the latter has been linked to mitochondrial surveillance27 and cardiac health28. 
Moreover, determination of the (chronic) low-grade inflammatory status of aged mice (see 
Methods) revealed that spermidine reduced the age-dependent rise in plasma levels of the 
pro-inflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis factor-α (TNFα) (Fig. 2d, Supplementary Fig. 
8). The passive stiffness of cardiomyocytes is determined primarily by titin-related 
mechanisms22, which are negatively affected by inflammatory conditions, in part mediated 
by TNFα29. Cardiomyocytes co-express a larger (more compliant) and a smaller (stiffer) 
isoform of titin, termed N2BA and N2B, respectively. While the isoform composition of 
titin, as assessed by the N2BA/[N2B+N2BA] ratio, was unchanged (Fig. 2e, f), spermidine 
enhanced the levels of both total and serine 4080 phosphorylation of the N2B isoform (Fig. 
2e, g, Supplementary Fig. 5c). Phosphorylation of N2B on serine 4080 is known to reduce 
cardiomyocyte stiffness via cGMP/PKG-dependent signalling22.
Eisenberg et al.
Page 4
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Spermidine enhances cardiomyocyte autophagic flux in both young and aged mice
We previously identified spermidine as a potent inducer of autophagy8,9, a cellular process 
crucial for general proteostasis as well as mitochondrial and cardiomyocyte function5. 
Therefore, we next tested whether spermidine supplementation improves autophagic flux in 
aging cardiomyocytes. To assess basal autophagic flux, we treated ad libitum-fed 13-month-
old C57BL/6J wild-type mice supplemented with spermidine for the final four weeks with 
the vacuolar protease inhibitor leupeptin, which blocks autophagosome turnover, and 
quantified levels of the autophagosomal marker LC3-II30. Treatment with leupeptin induced 
a significant increase of LC3-II levels in hearts from spermidine-supplemented mice, 
whereas age-matched controls showed a reduced (and non-significant) elevation of this 
marker (Fig. 3a, Supplementary Fig. 9e), indicating that spermidine increases cardiac 
autophagic flux in vivo. Cellular spermidine content in cardiac tissue was significantly 
increased in spermidine-supplemented animals as compared to controls (Fig. 3b).
The capacity of orally supplemented spermidine to induce autophagic flux in vivo in 
cardiomyocytes was corroborated by using transgenic cardiomyocyte-specific tandem-
fluorescent mRFP-GFP-LC3 mice31. These mice serve as an autophagy reporter strain, 
carrying labeled autophagosomes; both red (mRFP) and green (GFP) fluorescence, as well 
as labeled autolysosomes; red (mRFP) fluorescence only. In this experiment, chloroquine 
was used to block autophagosome turnover for assessment of autophagic flux. Spermidine 
substantially increased the number of autophagosomes and autolysosomes under both 
vehicle- and chloroquine-treated conditions (Fig. 3c, d). Moreover, spermidine stimulated 
mitophagy in cardiomyocytes of both young and aged mice, as assessed in mice expressing 
the mitochondrial-targeted form of the fluorescent biosensor Keima (Mito-Keima). Mito-
Keima fluorescence shows pH-dependent excitation characteristics, shifting excitation 
maxima to a higher wavelength after mitochondria come into contact with the acidic milieu 
of lysosomes in the context of mitophagy32. Thus, the ratio of 561 nm to 457 nm excited 
Keima fluorescence (refered to as Mito-Keima positive area) increases with a drop in pH 
(Online Methods). Spermidine treatment clearly increased the Mito-Keima-positive area in 
cardiomyocytes—indicative of increased mitophagy (Fig. 3e and Supplementary Fig. 9a-d). 
Together, these results suggest that autophagy may contribute to the improved 
cardiomyocyte structure and function induced by spermidine.
Autophagy is required for spermidine-mediated cardioprotection
To determine whether the in vivo cardioprotective effects of spermidine depend on 
autophagy, we took advantage of mice that have a cardiomyocyte-specific autophagy defect, 
Atg5fl/fl-MLC2a-Cre+ mice (Atg5-/-)5,6. We first verified that cardiomyocytes in these mice 
lack LC3-II and show increased levels of p62/SQSTM1, a direct target/substrate and cargo-
receptor of autophagy known to increase in autophagy-deficient cardiomyocytes 
(Supplementary Fig. 10a-c). As these mice develop severe systolic impairment and heart 
failure early in life and do not reach the same age as wild-type animals5,6, we assessed 
cardiac function at 16 weeks of age, when Atg5-/- animals showed no echocardiography-
detectable cardiac abnormalities under control conditions (Fig. 3f, g and Supplementary 
Table 11) and had systolic and diastolic properties that were comparable to those of Atg5fl/fl-
MLC2a-Cre- control mice (Atg5+/+), as evaluated by invasive hemodynamics (Fig. 3h-k; 
Eisenberg et al.
Page 5
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Supplementary Fig. 10d, e and Supplementary Table 11-13). Strikingly, the spermidine-
induced reduction of LV hypertrophy (i.e. reduction of LVmass/TL and PW/TL) observed in 
Atg5+/+ mice was not detected in Atg5-/- mice, in which spermidine actually aggravated LV 
hypertrophy (Fig. 3f and Supplementary Table 11). This increased LV hypertrophy in 
spermidine-treated Atg5-deficient mice was associated with reduced diastolic function, as 
documented by a significantly elevated EDPVR β, indicative of increased LV passive 
stiffness (Fig. 3i; Supplementary Fig. 10d and Supplementary Table 12). Notably, significant 
increases in LV contractility, as indicated by a higher end-systolic elastance (Ees, the slope 
of end-systolic pressure–volume relationship (ESPVR)) and VVC were observed in 
spermidine-treated Atg5+/+ but not Atg5-/- mice (Fig. 3j, k, Supplementary Fig. 10e and 
Supplementary Table 12). Hence, spermidine-treated Atg5-/- mice showed impaired systolic 
function, as indicated by a reduced ejection fraction (Fig. 3g). Collectively, these data 
indicate that spermidine prevents typical age-related cardiac deterioration in an autophagy-
dependent manner, reducing LV hypertrophic remodeling and improving diastolic function, 
contractility and ventricular-vascular coupling.
Spermidine reduces blood pressure and delays progression to heart failure in Dahl rats
From a clinical perspective, hypertension represents one of the most important risk factors 
for the development of heart failure33 and occurs in the majority of elderly patients suffering 
from cardiovascular disease 33. Because hypertension and a manifest heart failure 
phenotype are absent in physiologically aging wild-type mice14, we employed Dahl salt-
sensitive rats fed a high-salt diet, which constitute a clinically relevant animal model of 
hypertension-induced hypertrophy, diastolic dysfunction and heart failure34. These rats also 
exhibit phenotypic traits observed in hypertension-associated diseases in humans, including 
comorbidities such as renal dysfunction35. Dahl salt-sensitive rats fed a high-salt diet had 
progressively increased mean arterial blood pressure, an effect that was delayed by 4 weeks 
when spermidine was co-administered with high-salt (Fig. 4a, b and Supplementary Fig. 11). 
Spermidine supplementation increased the plasma levels of spermidine in Dahl rats and led 
to significantly decreased plasma levels of ornithine, the substrate for the rate-limiting 
enzyme in polyamine biosynthesis, compared to control animals (Fig. 4c). This effect on 
ornithine levels may connect polyamine metabolism to the bioavailability of arginine 
(Supplementary Fig. 12a), the only source for the generation of the vasodilator nitric oxide 
(NO)36, which has been shown to abrogate salt-sensitive hypertension in Dahl salt-sensitive 
rats37. Therefore, the anti-hypertensive effect of spermidine might be explained by effects 
on arginine metabolism. Indeed, spermidine increased arginine bioavailability, as determined 
by an elevated global arginine bioavailability ratio (GABR, defined as arginine/[ornithine
+citrulline]) (Fig. 4c), and increased the arginine/ornithine ratio, while also decreasing the 
cumulative level of ornithine and citrulline (Supplementary Fig. 12c, d). These findings 
suggest the ability of spermidine to improve NO production/bioavailability. Elevation of the 
GABR and the arginine/ornithine ratio, as well as decreased levels of ornithine plus 
citrulline (indicative of diminished arginine catabolism) have been associated with reduced 
cardiovascular risk38,39.
To explore whether spermidine attenuates hypertension-induced hypertrophic remodeling 
and the progression to heart failure in this model, we assessed cardiac dimensions and 
Eisenberg et al.
Page 6
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 function. Spermidine treatment reduced tibia length-normalized LV mass, posterior wall 
thickness and heart weight, indicating that it attenuated the increase in cardiac hypertrophy 
observed in controls (Fig. 4d and Supplementary Table 14, 15). Furthermore, spermidine 
enhanced diastolic function, as reflected by a reduction in the E/E’ ratio, a parameter that 
strongly correlates with mean LV filling pressure40 (Fig. 4e). Indeed, LV-EDP was reduced 
(Fig. 4f, g) along with a reduction in LV stiffness, as reflected by a decreased myocardial 
stiffness constant for indexed volumes βi (Fig. 4h, Supplementary Table 16) with a 
downward shift of the EDPVR (Supplementary Fig. 13) as well as an increase in the levels 
of total and S4080 phosphorylation of the N2B titin isoform (Supplementary Fig. 14a, b). 
Comparable to our findings in aging mice, enhanced diastolic function in rats was 
accompanied by a significant reduction of circulating TNFα levels (Supplementary Fig. 
14c), a pro-inflammatory marker with increased levels in heart failure patients41.
In control animals fed a high-salt diet, relative lung and liver weights (normalized to tibia 
length) increased from 7 weeks of age to 14 or 19 weeks of age (Fig. 4i). Spermidine 
treatment significantly delayed the increases in relative lung and liver weights (Fig. 4i and 
Supplementary Table 15), suggesting that spermidine reduces pulmonary and systemic fluid 
accumulation, respectively, which are characteristic of heart failure. Ejection fraction was 
preserved (>70%) in all groups (Fig. 4j), implying that spermidine delays the progression 
from hypertension-induced hypertrophy to a phenotype that resembles heart failure with 
preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF). Control animals fed a high-salt diet showed higher 
arterial elastance (i.e. arterial stiffness) for indexed volumes (Eai), a surrogate of arterial 
load42, at 14 or 19 weeks of age, compared to 7 weeks of age. These animals appeared to 
compensate for this increased arterial elastance by increasing LV contractility, as indicated 
by an increase in end-systolic elastance for indexed volumes (Eesi; Supplementary Fig. 13b 
and Supplementary Table 16), leading to comparable VVC values in the control groups of 
different ages (Fig. 4k and Supplementary Table 16). Notably, spermidine administration 
decreased arterial stiffness (Supplementary Table 16), resulting in a significantly improved 
VVC (Fig. 4k and Supplementary Table 16), similar to the effects we observed in both 
young and old Atg5-competent mice treated with spermidine.
Renal abnormalities are commonly observed in chronic arterial hypertension43 and 
contribute to the pathogenesis of heart failure in humans44 as well as in Dahl rats45, which 
have impaired renal salt metabolism leading to water retention and, thus, systemic volume-
overload. Spermidine treatment of high-salt fed Dahl rats delayed the appearance of several 
signs of hypertensive renal injury, namely arterial hyalinosis with fibrosis, 
glomerulosclerosis and thrombotic microangiopathy (Fig. 4l and Supplementary Fig. 15a-c). 
Measurement of urinary lipocalin-2 (Lcn-2) levels, a sensitive marker of acute renal 
damage46, corroborated the protective action of spermidine on renal function (Fig. 4m). 
Induction of autophagy by spermidine8,9 may contribute to renal tissue homeostasis and 
contribute to the anti-hypertensive effects of spermidine supplementation. Compared to 
control animals, spermidine-supplemented animals showed a significant increase in renal 
spermidine content (Supplementary Fig. 15d) and a significant decrease in the levels of 
SQSTM1/p62, a specific autophagy substrate whose levels decrease when autophagic flux is 
enhanced (Supplementary Fig. 15e). These findings suggest that autophagic processes might 
play a role in spermidine-induced kidney protection.
Eisenberg et al.
Page 7
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Dietary spermidine inversely correlates with cardiovascular disease in humans
Finally, we evaluated the association of dietary spermidine intake with cardiovascular 
diseases (including heart failure) and blood pressure in human subjects. In a prospective, 
population-based cohort (Bruneck Study47), dietary intake of spermidine (as assessed by 
food questionnaires) was inversely associated with the risk of both fatal heart failure (a 
~40% reduction in risk in the high compared to low spermidine intake groups) and clinically 
overt heart failure; both risks were more pronounced in men (Fig. 5a, b). Intake of 
spermidine was also inversely related to the risk of other cardiovascular diseases, as assessed 
by a composite of acute coronary artery disease, stroke and death due to vascular disease 
(Fig. 5c), and to systolic and diastolic blood pressures (Fig. 5d), which were significantly 
lower in the high compared to low spermidine intake groups. High intake of spermine or of 
spermine and spermidine combined showed similar associationsas high intake of spermidine 
(Supplementary Fig. 16). In contrast, putrescine intake did not show these associations (Fig. 
5a-c) and tended to be associated with an increase in blood pressure (Fig. 5d). Notably, 
spermidine intake showed a significant inverse association with plasma levels of soluble N-
terminal pro-B type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP), the key clinically-used biomarker for 
heart failure (r = -0.115, p=0.001). Moreover, in an exploratory approach, we tested whether 
spermidine intake correlated with the levels of 131 plasma proteins (data not shown). This 
analysis revealed strong inverse associations for proteins complicit in cardiac disease, 
including chitinase-3-like protein 1 (CHI3L1), which is implicated in plaque inflammation, 
matrix degeneration, and plaque rupture (r=-0.19, P=1.2×10-6, FDR q=2.7×10-4); and 
growth/differentiation factor 15 (GDF-15), which is implicated in heart failure, atrial 
fibrillation, chronic kidney disease, and possibly vascular calcification (r=-0.13, P=1.0×10-3, 
FDR q=4.7×10-2).
Discussion
This study reveals that spermidine treatment in mice ameliorates hypertrophic remodeling of 
the aged heart, blocks age-related changes in cardiomyocyte composition and functionality, 
enhances diastolic function independently of effects on systemic blood pressure and extends 
lifespan. It thus appears plausible that lifespan prolongation by spermidine is due to 
suppression of death from cardiac-related causes; however, to what degree the effects of 
spermidine on the heart account for its lifespan prolonging effects is a highly challenging 
question and remains to be investigated in a suitable experimental setting. Other protective 
effects of spermidine (including anti-tumorigenic effects17) may also contribute to its 
lifespan-extending effects, although we did not detect a reduced cancer incidence in aged 
spermidine-treated C57BL/6 mice, Notably, unlike other longevity-promoting agents48,49, 
spermidine had no detectable effects on glucose and insulin metabolism (Supplementary Fig. 
17). Our data extend previous findings on the ability of spermidine to reduce arterial 
stiffness in aged mice50.
The cardioprotective effects of spermidine may be due to several underlying mechanisms, 
including both direct cardiac effects as well as extracardiac (systemic and renal) effects (Fig. 
6). Systemic effects by spermidine may involve anti-inflammatory processes as well as 
blood pressure lowering effect (in the setting of salt-induced hypertension). Both chronic 
Eisenberg et al.
Page 8
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 low-grade inflammation and hypertension reportedly cause mechano-elastical impairments 
and mitochondrial dysfunction of cardiomyocytes29. Oral supplementation of spermidine 
promotes basal autophagic flux in cardiac tissue, and the direct protective effects of 
spermidine on the heart appear to require cardiomyocyte autophagy. Re-activation of basal 
autophagy by spermidine has recently been reported to maintain the regenerative function of 
skeletal muscle stem cells in aging mice51. It remains to be tested whether spermidine has a 
similar effect on other adult stem cells, including the putative cardiac ones that have been 
described to produce new and functional cardiomyocytes. Spermidine may otherwise 
facilitate rejuvenation of aged cardiomyocytes through increasing their mitochondria and 
myofilament content (as we observed in this study).
Additionally, we found that spermidine reduces salt-induced hypertension, left ventricular 
hypertrophy and delays the progression to heart failure in Dahl salt-sensitive rats. 
Comparable with our findings in aged mice, spermidine-fed Dahl rats showed increased 
ventricular-vascular coupling (denoting improved cardiovascular efficiency) and enhanced 
titin phosphorylation. A mechanistic link between spermidine and titin phosphorylation is 
suggested by the increased global arginine bioavailability ratio in spermidine-treated Dahl 
salt-sensitive rats. As arginine is the precursor to NO, which activates soluble guanylyl 
cyclase, increased arginine bioavailabilty should lead to increased activity of PKG, one of 
the main kinases that phosphorylates titin. PKG phosphorylates titin in a cardiac-specific 
domain (N2-Bus), and we found that spermidine treatment led to increased phosphorylation 
of N2-Bus both globally and at the PKG-specific residue (S4080). The functional 
consequence of titin phosphorylation is a reduction in titin-based myocardial passive 
stiffness22, possibly explaining how spermidine preserves the diastolic properties of the 
heart, which are disturbed in heart failure. In addition, the reduction of subclinical levels of 
circulating TNFα may contribute to spermidine-induced titin-phosphorylation by further 
increasing NO bioavalability through the reduction of oxidative stress29 (Fig. 6). It remains 
to be elucidated whether a crosstalk between autophagy and titin phosphorylation exists.
In line with our experimental findings, epidemiological analyses corroborate the novel 
concept that spermidine-rich diets are preventive against cardiovascular disease and reduce 
the risk of cardiac death in humans. Interventional studies are warranted to test the 
therapeutic potential of dietary spermidine. It has to be acknowledged that estimation of 
dietary spermidine intake was based on food frequency questionnaires, which is the standard 
method in nutritional epidemiology, yet an indirect way of quantification that does not 
consider differences in food processing and preparation.
In summary, spermidine intake reduces cardiovascular pathologies, including hypertension 
and cardiac dysfunction associated with heart failure. In the aging population, the incidence 
and prevalence of heart failure are increasing in association with comorbidities such as 
obesity, diabetes and renal abnormalities. Our study paves the way for prospective clinical 
trials to evaluate the potential cardiovascular- and other health-promoting effects of 
spermidine-enriched diets.
Eisenberg et al.
Page 9
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Online Methods
Animal housing and polyamine supplementation
Wild-type C57BL/6 mice were purchased from Charles River (C57BL/6J:Crl females), 
Envigo, former Harlan Laboratories (C57BL/6N:Hsd females) or Janvier Labs, France 
(C57BL6/J:Rj males). Mice used for the late-in-life longevity experiments (Fig. 1d, 
Supplementary Tables 1, 2) were obtained from our in-house animal facility (C57BL/6J 
mice derived from various breeding lines were divided equally to spermidine-supplemented 
or control groups). These mice originated from more than 20 breeding pairs originally used 
for backcrossing transgenic strains. We used only wild-type mice (confirmed by PCR-based 
genotyping) that originated from at least five backcrosses to the C57BL/6J strain. The 
C57BL/6J colony established in house for backcrossing is renewed (purchased from Janvier 
labs) at least every 18 months to reduce genetic drift. Supplementation of polyamines (see 
Fig. 1a and Methods below) was conducted either life-long (starting at age 4 month) or late-
in-life (starting at age 18 month). Analysis of lifespan, ‘omics’ and blood parameters, 
ultrastructural analyses, mitochondrial function as well as cardiac parameters 
(hemodynamics and echocardiography, non-invasive blood pressure measurements) were 
performed in independent cohorts of animals. Cardiomyocyte-specific Atg5-deficient male 
mice (Atg5flox/flox-MLC2a-Cre+ mice; Atg5-/-) were generated from Atg5flox/flox mice 
(obtained from Riken BRC, Japan, with the kind consent of Dr. Noboru Mizushima)52 
crossed with knock-in mice expressing Cre recombinase driven by the cardiomyocyte-
specific α-myosin light chain (MLC2a-Cre) promoter53. After weaning, Atg5flox/flox-
MLC2a-Cre+ (Atg5-/-) and Atg5flox/flox-MLC2a-Cre- (Atg5+/+, controls) mice were each 
randomly divided into two treatment groups (spermidine-treated and non-treated controls). 
Treatment was initiated in young one-month-old mice that were treated for up to 12-14 
weeks of age before they were subjected to cardiac functional analyses (echocardiography 
and hemodynamics). This time point was selected based on a previous study6, showing that 
cardiac restricted Atg5-/- mice have no cardiac phenotype at 3 months of age. PCR analysis 
of genomic DNA from ear biopsies was performed for the assessment of genotypes using 
published primers “exon3-1”, “short 2” and “check 2”; loxP-flanked Atg5 allele52 and 
primers “MLC2a-1“, 5‘-GGATCTATGTGGAGCCCTGTCT-3’ and MLC2a-2“, 5‘-
GCACACAAGTCCCTGGCTCTGT-3’ (Cre allele)53. Adult ventricular cardiomyocytes 
were isolated from 12-16-week-old Atg5-/- male mice and their age-matched control 
littermates using a previously reported protocol54. Isolated cardiomyocytes were then 
subjected to immunoblotting of LC3, p62 and Atg5 to confirm Atg5-deficiency and impaired 
autophagy (see Supplementary Fig. 10). Dahl salt-sensitive male rats (N = 60 in total), an 
experimental model of hypertensive heart failure45, were purchased at the age of 4 weeks 
from the Charles River Laboratories (USA). Low salt laboratory chow containing 0.3% 
NaCl (AIN-76A, Research Diets, Inc. USA) was fed to 60 weaning Dahl rats until the diet 
was switched to a high-salt diet (AIN-76A with 8% NaCl, Research Diets, Inc. USA) at 7 
weeks of age. Twelve rats fed the low-salt diet were sacrificed at the age of 7 weeks and 
served as a young control group. The remaining 48 rats were randomly divided into two 
cohorts each consisting of two groups (N=12 animals per group): group 1 received regular 
drinking water without spermidine (non-treated control), whereas group 2 received regular 
drinking water supplemented with spermidine for a period of 7 (short-term cohort) or 12 
Eisenberg et al.
Page 10
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 (long-term cohort) weeks (see Fig. 4a). Blood pressure was assessed independently in the 
short- and long-term cohorts, with comparable results at similar ages (i.e. 7, 9, 11 weeks). 
Hemodynamic cardiac assessment was conducted as a terminal procedure independently in 
the two cohorts, yielding also comparable results with respect to spermidine effects, but at 
different ages (14 and 19 weeks).
Animals were housed under SPF (mice) or conventional (rats) conditions in a 12h light/dark 
cycle with access to food (standard chow for mice, Ssniff V1534) and water ad libitum. 
Autoclaved nest material and paper houses served as cage enrichment for mice. The 
polyamines spermidine (3 mM in all experiments, with the exception of mouse life-long 
supplementation for lifespan estimation, 0.3 mM; mouse pathology analysis, glucose 
tolerance test, metabolic parameters, and body composition, 0.3 and 3 mM), spermine (3 
mM) and putrescine (3 mM) were administered orally via drinking water prepared from 
aqueous stock solutions as described elsewhere8 Control animals received regular drinking 
water. Food and water consumption was recorded twice a week at indicated ages (averaged 
over a time period of 4 weeks) by weighing water bottles and food pellets. Animal cages 
were always randomly assigned to treatment or control groups.
With the exception of animal care and housing as well as experiments performed on the 7-
week-old rats cohort, the experimenters were blinded to the age and treatment of the 
animals. All animal experiments were performed in accordance with national and European 
ethical regulation (Directive 2010/63/EU) and approved by the responsible institutional 
(Rutgers-New Jersey Medical School's Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee) or 
government agencies (District Government of Upper Bavaria, Germany, and 
Bundesministerium für Wissenschaft, Forschung und Wirtschaft, BMWFW, Austria: 
BMWF-66.010/0161-II/3b/2012, BMWF-66.007/0011-II/3b/2013, BMWF-66.010/0053-
WF/II/3b/2014; BMWF-66.010/0160-WF/V/3b/2014, BMWFW-66.007/0002-WF/V/3b/
2015, BMWFW-66.007/0024-WF/V/3b/2015).
Mouse lifespan analysis
For lifespan experiments, the housing group size was maintained at two or more animals per 
cage. This was assured by joining single-housed animals (i.e. last survivor in a cage) to other 
cages of the same treatment group. Regular sentinel observation was used to ascertain the 
SPF health status of the animals. Animals were inspected daily for their general health 
status. Whenever the health condition of an animal indicated that its welfare was 
compromised, the mouse was euthanized and classified as either (i) an end-of-life (EOL)16 
animal likely dying within the next 24-48 hours, or (ii) a censored animal (due primarily to 
severe bite wounds, obvious tumors or skin lesions after excessive grooming). EOL animals 
were defined by established “estimation of death” criteria similar to the Interventions 
Testing Program (ITP) program guidelines of the National Institute on Aging (NIA)55, with 
the exception that any one of these criteria was considered sufficient to indicate close natural 
death. The majority of animals were simply found dead during daily inspections 
(Supplementary Table 1). Of note, the overall lifespan observed in the present study was 
slightly shorter compared to other studies using C57BL/6 mice15,56, a difference that may 
be due to differences in housing conditions, estimation-of-death criteria or the highly 
Eisenberg et al.
Page 11
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 stringent criteria we used to identify mice in severe discomfort, which must be euthanized, 
thus affecting the number of censored mice. Survival data were analyzed by Kaplan-Meier 
method and significant differences in survival distribution curves between the groups were 
determined using the Breslow test. OriginPro 2016 software (OriginLab) was used for 
survival data analysis, including also the calculation of lifespan estimates. Censored animals 
were still counted as live individuals before the time at which they were euthanized. 
However, during the life-long supplementation experiment (C57BL/6J:Crl female mice), we 
observed an unusually high incidence of C57BL/6-typical alopecia57 with signs of 
ulcerative dermatitis early in life (between the age of 200 and 300 days), which required us 
to euthanize about 40% of all mice. We decided not to censor these mice, but rather to 
completely exclude them from the survival analysis. Notably, in this experiment, the fraction 
of animal loss early during the experiment was similar in the spermidine-supplemented and 
control groups.
Analysis of body composition and metabolic parameters in aging mice
Body composition (relative lean- and fat mass) was determined by in vivo NMR 
spectroscopy using the Minispec mq NMR analyser (Brucker Optics, USA), according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions. General activity (assessed by the total number of beam breaks, 
XT+YT counts) as well as the respiratory exchange rate (RER, expressed as the volumetric 
quotient of carbon dioxide elimination of the animal divided by oxygen consumption, 
VCO2/VO2) was determined using PhenoMaster™ cages (TSE-Systems). Mice were singly 
housed and the first complete 12 hour dark- and light-cycles were recorded for parameter 
analysis after an initial adaptation phase of 8 hours.
Intraperitoneal glucose tolerance test
Intraperitoneal glucose tolerance tests were performed as previously described58. Briefly, 
the food was removed for 16 to 18 hours overnight. During the experiment, mice were singly 
housed in empty cages without food, water or bedding. The basal fasting blood glucose level 
was determined using a drop of blood collected from the tail vein, using an Accu-Chek 
Aviva glucose analyzer (Roche/Mannheim). Thereafter mice were injected intraperitoneally 
with 2 g of glucose/kg fasting body mass and blood glucose levels were determined 15, 30, 
60 and 120 minutes after glucose injection.
Fasting insulin determination
Fasting insulin was measured in plasma obtained from 3 hour fasted mice (water supplied ad 
libitum) using an ultra-sensitive mouse insulin ELISA Kit (Crystal Chem, Downers Grove, 
Illinois, USA). The wide range assay protocol was performed according to the 
manufacturer’s protocol. Insulin concentrations of the samples were calculated using a semi-
logarithmic 4-parameter fit standard curve in Prism 6 (GraphPad Software Inc, La Jolla, 
California, USA).
Non-invasive blood pressure measurements
Systolic, mean and diastolic blood pressures, as well as heart rate, were non-invasively 
measured in conscious animals by the tail-cuff method using the CODA™ system (Kent 
Eisenberg et al.
Page 12
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Scientific Corporation, USA). Animals were placed in a cylindrical holder on a temperature-
controlled platform (kept at 37 °C) and recordings were performed in steady-state 
conditions. Blood pressure values were averaged from three consecutive measurements.
Echocardiography
Transthoracic echocardiography was performed similarly as described59. Briefly, lightly 
anaesthetized mice (0.5% isoflurane and 99.5% O2) and rats (2% isoflurane and 98% O2) 
were placed on a temperature-controlled warming pad (kept at 37 °C) and imaged in the 
supine position using a high-resolution micro-imaging system equipped with a 30-Mhz and 
17.5-Mhz linear array transducer (Vevo770™ Imaging System, VisualSonics Inc., Canada), 
respectively. Parasternal long-axis M-mode tracings of the left ventricle (LV) were recorded 
at the level just above the papillary muscles and LV end-diastolic diameter (LVEDD), LV 
end-systolic diameter (LVESD), interventricular septum thickness (IVS) and LV posterior 
wall thickness (PW) were measured. Fractional shortening was calculated using the 
equation: 100x([LVEDD-LVESD]/LVEDD). Left ventricular end-systolic and end-diastolic 
volumes as well as ejection fraction were calculated according to the Teichholtz formula and 
the LV mass was calculated according to the Troy formula60. The ratio of peak early filling 
velocity of transmitral flow (E) to the corresponding mitral valve annulus velocity (E’) was 
evaluated using pulsed-wave and tissue Doppler imaging, respectively. All measures were 
averaged from three consecutive cardiac cycles under stable conditions.
Hemodynamic pressure-volume measurements
Invasive hemodynamic measurements and analysis of pressure-volume (PV) loops were 
performed as a terminal procedure according to established protocols61. Mice and rats were 
anaesthetized (induction: 3-4% isoflurane with 96-97% O2; maintenance: 1-2% isoflurane 
with 98-99% O2), intubated and mechanically ventilated (rats, SAR 1000, CWE, Inc.; mice, 
Harvard Mini-Vent (type 845), Harvard Apparatus). The animals were placed on a 
temperature-controlled heating platform (TC-1000, CWE, Inc.) and their core temperature 
was maintained at 37.5 °C. Heart rate (HR) was continuously monitored using an 
electrocardiogram (Animal Bio Amp, FE136; ADInstruments). A mouse 1.4 F or rat 2.0 F 
pressure-conductance catheter (SPR-839 and SPR-838, respectively; Millar instruments) was 
inserted into the right carotid artery and advanced into the ascending aorta. After recording 
aortic (systemic) blood pressure, the catheter was advanced through the aortic valve into the 
LV where PV signals were continuously obtained (MPVS ultra, Millar Instruments) and 
recorded in a digital-form (MPVS PL3508 PowerLab 8/35, ADInstruments) at the 
acquisition rate of 2 kHz for later offline analysis (LabChart 8 pro, ADinstruments). 
Animals were allowed to stabilize for 5 minutes, then baseline load-dependent parameters of 
systolic and diastolic function, including LV end-systolic pressure (ESP), LV end-diastolic 
pressure (EDP), LV end-systolic volume (ESV), LV end-diastolic volume (EDV), stroke 
volume (SV), cardiac output (CO), arterial elastance (Ea), ejection fraction (EF), maximal 
slope of LV systolic pressure increment (dP/dtmax), maximal slope of diastolic pressure 
decrement (dP/dtmin) and time constant of LV pressure decay (τ) were measured and 
averaged from 10 consecutive beats, with ventilation suspended at end-expiration. After 
baseline measurements, transient occlusion of the inferior vena cava (again with ventilation 
suspended) was performed and used to calculate multibeat-derived load-independent 
Eisenberg et al.
Page 13
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 measures of cardiac systolic and diastolic functions: linear end-systolic pressure-volume 
relationship (ESPVR), calculated as ESP=end-systolic elastance (Ees)*ESV+V0, was used 
for the evaluation of cardiac contractility, while exponential end-diastolic pressure-volume 
relationship (EDPVR), calculated as EDP=α*expβ*EDV, was implemented in assessing end-
diastolic stiffness. In addition, ventricular-vascular coupling (VVC), indicative of 
cardiovascular efficiency, was calculated as the ratio between Ees and Ea. To correct for the 
large differences in body (and heart) size between young (7-week-old) and older (14- and 
19-week-old) Dahl salt-sensitive rats, volumes were indexed to body surface area63 as 
defined by 9.1x(body weight)2/3. A polyethylene catheter was inserted into the right external 
jugular vein for hypertonic saline (10% NaCl) injection (10 µl in mice and 40 µl in rats) to 
calculate parallel conductance at the end of the experiment. Due to detected discrepancies of 
conductance- and echocardiography-derived left ventricular (LV) volumes in Atg5-deficient 
mice (not shown), the slope factor α (a factor that is used to correct conductance-based 
estimation of ventricular volumes) was calculated using echocardiography-derived stroke 
volume, which correlates with the gold-standard method of volume estimation using 
Doppler flow-probes62. After assessment of hemodynamic parameters, animals were 
sacrificed and a gravimetric analysis of different organs, including heart, lungs, liver, spleen 
and kidneys, was performed.
Histological evaluation
Tissues were fixed in 4% neutral-buffered formaldehyde and paraffin-embedded. Kidneys 
were cut into 4 µm thick sections followed by periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) staining (Merck, 
Darmstadt, Germany). The extent of glomerular injury was evaluated by assigning a 
semiquantitative PAS score as described previously64. Furthermore, we evaluated the extent 
of arterial hyalinosis and fibrosis semiquantitatively using a similar scoring system as above. 
The number of tubular casts in 6 adjacent high-power fields (magnification 400x) was 
counted. To assess the extent of renal fibrosis and damage, picrosirius red staining was 
performed. Renal tissue was first stained with Gill’s hematoxilin (Merck), then with 1% 
Sirius red (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) in a saturated aqueous solution of picric 
acid and then differentiated in acidified water. To investigate the cardiac death and cancer 
development phenotype (pathology analysis), 4 µm thick sections of heart, liver, brain, 
spleen and kidney were stained with hematoxylin/eosin stain as follows: after rehydration, 
sections were stained in Mayers’ acid hemalum for 2 min, blued in tap water for 2 min, 
contrasted with Eosin Y for 15 sec, rinsed in tap water for 5 sec, dehydrated in an increasing 
ethanol series and placed in xylene before mounting with Entellan® (all chemicals from 
Merck, Germany). Slides were read using an Axioplan® brightfield microscope (Zeiss, 
Germany) by two pathologists independently (D.J., F.N.).
Assessment of urinary Lcn-2 levels
Urinary levels of Lcn-2 protein were assessed using the Rat Lcn-2/NGAL DuoSet (R&D 
Systems, Abingdon, UK) kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Transcriptome expression profiling
Expression profiling was done from hearts of four treated (3 mM life-long spermidine 
supplemented, see Fig. 1a) and four untreated mice at the age of 30-32 months, as well as 
Eisenberg et al.
Page 14
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 from four six months old untreated control mice. Mice were sacrificed between 9 and 12 
p.m. (noon). Hearts were dissected, immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at 
-80 °C. For total RNA isolation using RNeasy Midi kits (Qiagen), hearts were thawed in 
Trizol Reagent (Sigma) and homogenized using a Polytron homogenizer (Heidolph). 500 ng 
of total RNA was amplified in a single round using the Illumina TotalPrep RNA 
Amplification Kit (Ambion). 750 ng of amplified RNA was hybridized to Illumina 
MouseRef8 v2.0 Expression Bead Arrays covering 25.600 annotated RefSeq transcripts. 
Staining and scanning (Illumina HiScan Array reader) were done according to the Illumina 
expression protocol. Illumina Genomestudio software was used for background correction 
and normalization (cubic spline algorithm). Significant gene regulation was analysed using 
SAM (Significant Analysis of Microarrays) included in the TM4 software package65. False 
discovery rates (FDRs) were calculated by 1000 random permutations. The selection of the 
top differentially expressed genes with reproducible up- or down-regulation includes genes 
with an FDR below 10% and a mean fold change above 1.5 fold. Over-represented 
functional annotations (Gene Ontology) were identified using the Ingenuity Pathway 
Analysis. Genes and samples were clustered for heat map representation using the 
hierarchical clustering function (complete linkage) of Genesis software (release 1.7.6)66.
Proteomics analysis
Heart specimens were obtained from three aged, three young and three aged mice treated 
with spermidine. Whole tissue lysates (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM 
EGTA, 1% Triton X-100 supplemented with 1x Complete® protease inhibitor cocktail 
(Roche)) were prepared in SDS loading buffer, samples were reduced with 1 mM DTT 
(Sigma-Aldrich) for 5 min at 95 °C and alkylated using 5.5 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-
Aldrich) for 30 min at 20 °C. Protein mixtures were separated by 4-12% gradient SDS-
PAGE (NuPAGE, Invitrogen). The gel lanes were cut into 6 equal slices, the proteins were 
in-gel digested with trypsin (Promega)67, and the resulting peptide mixtures were processed 
on STAGE tips68 and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Mass spectrometric (MS) measurements 
were performed on an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) 
coupled to an Agilent 1200 nanoflow–HPLC (Agilent Technologies GmbH, Waldbronn, 
Germany) as described69. MS raw data files were uploaded into MaxQuant software 
(version 1.4.1.2 (ref. 70)), which was used for identification of proteins and protein ratio 
assignment for peak detection, generation of peak lists of mass error corrected peptides and 
for database searches. A full-length UniProt mouse database additionally containing 
common contaminants such as keratins and enzymes used for in–gel digestion (based on 
UniProt mouse FASTA version July 2014) was used as a reference. 
Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation and protein 
amino-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications and label-free was chosen as 
the quantitation mode. Three miscleavages were allowed, enzyme specificity was trypsin/P, 
and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. The average mass precision of identified 
peptides was in general less than 1 ppm after recalibration. Peptide lists were further used by 
MaxQuant to identify and relatively quantify (label-free quantification, LFQ) proteins using 
the following parameters: peptide and protein false discovery rates, based on a forward-
reverse database, were set to 0.01; the minimum peptide length was set to 7; the minimum 
number of peptides for identification and quantitation of proteins was set to two, of which 
Eisenberg et al.
Page 15
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 one must be unique; the minimum ratio count was set to two; and identified proteins were 
requantified. The ‘match-between-run’ option (1 min) was used. The 10% most reproducible 
changes based on TTEST analysis between aged control and aged spermidine groups 
(yielding a p-value cut-off p<0.15) were considered as potential hits. To visualise age- or 
spermidine-induced changes in protein abundance (heat map presentation), the LFQ protein 
intensities of each sample were divided by the mean of respective aged control intensities 
(LFQ Ratios). Proteins and samples were clustered for heat map representation using the 
hierarchical clustering function (complete linkage) of Genesis software (release 1.7.6)66.
Metabolite analysis by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and mass 
spectrometry (MS)
Tissue metabolite analysis was performed on whole tissue lysates. Tissues were snap frozen 
in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C until metabolite extraction. For metabolite extraction, 
tissues were pulverized on dry ice using mortar and pestle. A quantitative HPLC-MS/MS-
based determination of polyamines (ornithine, putrescine, spermidine and spermine) was 
performed essentially as described71 in plasma or from whole blood and cardiac tissue acid 
extracts as indicated. Plasma was prepared by centrifugation of EDTA-collected blood at 
2,500 g for 20 min. 10 µl EDTA-collected blood or 10-15 mg pulverized tissue was used to 
generate whole blood- or tissue-extracts, respectively, with a final extract volume of 750 µl.
For metabolomic analysis, mice (12 animals per group) were fasted overnight (12-16 hours) 
and hearts were removed and snap frozen (liquid nitrogen) immediately after sacrificing the 
animals. Cardiac tissue extracts using 20-40 mg tissue wet weight were prepared by cold-
methanol extraction as described72. A boiling ethanol extract from yeast grown aerobically 
on 13C-glucose as the carbon source served as an internal standard for MS analysis73 and 
was spiked into tissue samples before extraction. Metabolomics samples were measured 
with a LC/MS system from Thermo Fisher Scientific™. A Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC 
setup equipped with an Atlantis T3 C18 pre- and analytical column (Waters, USA) was used 
for compound separation prior to mass spectrometric detection with an Exactive™ Orbitrap 
system. The method was adapted from Buescher et al.74. The injection volume was 10 µL 
per sample and negative ionization of metabolites was carried out via heated electrospray 
ionization. For the online detection of the metabolites a full scan of all masses between 70 
and 1,100 m/z with a resolution of 50,000 (at m/z 200) was used. LC/MS-data acquisition 
was conducted with Xcalibur software (version 2.2 SP1, Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, 
USA)), automated peak integration with TraceFinder™ software (version 3.2, Thermo 
Fisher Scientific (Waltham, USA)). Screening and manual correction of peak integrations 
were done within the TraceFinder™ package. 12C-peak area/13C-peak area ratios were 
normalized to the respective tissue sample wet weight. Age- or spermidine-induced changes 
in metabolite abundance were identified by dividing 12C-peak area/13C-peak area ratios of 
each sample to the mean of respective aged control samples (Aged control-normalized 
Ratios) and the median was used for heat map representation. Principal Component Analysis 
(PCA) was applied to the complete dataset using the R-function prcomp (stats-package) with 
R version 3.1.1 in order to detect potential clustering and distances between samples.
Eisenberg et al.
Page 16
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Plasma arginine and citrulline determination
Arginine and citrulline concentrations were measured in serum with modifications of 
previously described chromatographic methods75,76. Briefly, after precipitation of serum 
with perchloric acid following neutralization of the supernatant with sodium carbonate, the 
extracted amino acids were derivatized online with o-phtalaldehyde and separated on a 
reverse phase column with gradient elution. Quantification was performed with ratios of 
fluorescence signals of the relevant amino acids to the internal standard norvaline in 
comparison to the appropriate calibration curves. Intra-assay and inter-assay CV’s were all 
below 10%.
Isolation of cardiac mitochondria and high-resolution respirometry
Isolation of cardiac mitochondria and high-resolution respirometry was performed similarly 
to published methods26, using an isolation buffer containing 0.2% BSA and 5 mg/ml 
bacterial protease (Sigma-Aldrich, P8038). Hearts were quickly excised immediately after 
terminal blood collection under isoflurane anaesthesia and processed as described26. Optical 
density at 600 nm (OD600) of the final mitochondrial suspension (isolation buffer including 
BSA, but excluding protease) was determined by serial dilutions in a TECAN GeniusPro 
plate reader and served as an estimate of mitochondrial mass used for normalization. 
Oxygen consumption was assayed at 37 °C with an Oxygraph-2k high-resolution 
respirometer (Oroboros Instruments, Austria) according to the manufacturer’s 
recommendations. OD600 equivalents of isolated myocardial mitochondria corresponding to 
10-20 µg mitochondrial protein were diluted in 2 ml equilibrated measurement medium (100 
mM sucrose, 20 mM K+-TES (pH=7.2), 50 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, 4 mM 
KH2PO4, 3 mM malate and 0.1% (v/v) BSA) within a closed and calibrated system with 
constant stirring. For measurement of complex I activity, 5 mM pyruvate and 10 mM 
glutamate were added as reduced substrates after initially recording residual oxygen 
consumption (ROX) resulting in leak respiration (LEAK), followed by sequential additions 
of 450 µM ADP (OXPHOS) and 10 µM cytochrome c (OXPHOS + CytC). 1.25 µM 
oligomycin were finally used to monitor the residual respiration (proton leak) followed by 
titration with FCCP (0.5 µM steps) to assess maximum respiration in uncoupled state and 
subsequent inhibition of respiratory activity through antimycin A. For each oxygraphic 
protocol (see Supplementary Fig. 7a), two mice were always processed in pairs (one aged 
control (24M) combined with either one aged spermidine-supplemented (24M+S) or one 
young control (5M)). The absolute oxygen concentration remained above 100 nmol/ml 
throughout all recordings.
Plasma cytokine determination
Plasma cytokine levels of apparently healthy mice or rats (i.e. subclinical cytokine levels) 
were assessed by electrochemiluminescence-based immunoassays using the MSD V-Plex 
Plus Proinflammatory Panel 1 (mouse) assay kit or a customized TNFα / IL-10 V-Plex Rat 
cytokine kit (Meso Scale Diagnostics, USA). 25 µl of plasma derived from EDTA-collected 
whole blood by centrifugation (20 min, 2500 g) was processed according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions. Whole blood was obtained from isoflurane-anesthetized 
animals at the age of 21 (non-fasted) or 23 (overnight-fasted before sacrifice) months by 
Eisenberg et al.
Page 17
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 terminal bleeding (mice) or directly from the heart immediately at the end of hemodynamic 
assessment (rats). In addition to analyzing the complete inflammatory cytokine dataset 
(subclinical inflammatory status) of aged mice (Supplementary Fig. 8a), we performed an 
additional analysis, in which mice with potentially acute inflammatory conditions were 
excluded (Supplementary Fig. 8b), due to the fact that such mice, though lacking overt 
clinical manifestations, may strongly confound interpretation of the age-associated (chronic) 
low-grade inflammation status. Animals with two or more statistically-identified outlier 
cytokines were considered as animals with an acute inflammatory condition. Animals with a 
single outlier cytokine were included in the analysis, but the respective value was winsorized 
(see Supplementary Fig. 8). An outlier cytokine was identified using the 2.2-fold inter-
quartile range (IQR) labeling rule applied to the respective group. Of note, the total number 
of excluded and winsorized values was similar in all aged groups.
Immunoblotting and assessment of autophagic flux
Measurements of the protein levels of APG5L/ATG5 and the autophagy-substrate p62/
SQSTM1, as well as measurements of LC3 lipidation (LC3-II/GAPDH ratio), were 
performed on tissue extracts using lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 1 mM 
EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100 supplemented with 1x Complete® protease inhibitor 
cocktail (Roche). Immunoblotting on polyvinylidenfluorid (PVDF) membranes was 
performed by standard procedures and probed with antibodies recognizing APG5L (ATG5) 
(dilution: 1:1000, ab018327, Abcam), p62 (SQSTM1) (dilution: 1:1000, PM045, MBL), 
LC3B (dilution: 1:1000, #2775, Cell Signaling Technologies), GAPDH (dilution: 1:1000, 
#2118, Cell Signaling Technologies), and horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-linked anti–rabbit 
IgG (dilution: 1:3000, #7074, Cell Signaling Technologies). Data were analyzed and 
quantified by densitometry with ImageLab software (Bio-Rad laboratories). Full scans of 
representative blots are shown in Supplementary Fig. 18. Autophagic flux in wild-type 
animals was assessed using leupeptin-based inhibition of LC3-II turnover according to a 
published protocol30. Following 4 weeks spermidine supplementation, 13-month-old 
C57BL6/JRj male mice (Janvier, France) were subjected to intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection of 
leupeptin (40 mg/kg body weight, Sigma, Austria) or vehicle (0.9% sterile sodium chloride 
solution). Fifty minutes after the i.p. injection, animals were sacrificed and hearts were 
excised. Age-matched mice that did not receive spermidine were used as controls. Cardiac 
tissues were subjected to immunoblot analysis of LC3 (see above).
Autophagic flux using transgenic animals
Transgenic mice with cardiac-specific expression of tandem-fluorescent mRFP-GFP-LC3 
(Tg-tf-LC3) generated on a C57/BL6 background with the mouse α-Myosin Heavy Chain 
promoter were used31. In order to evaluate autophagic flux in vivo, 3-month-old Tg-tf-LC3 
mice were supplemented with 3 mM spermidine for 2 weeks (mice receiving normal 
drinking water served as controls). In some mice, chloroquine (10 mg/kg) was injected 4 
hours before euthanasia and the number of fluorescent LC3 dots (indicative of 
autophagosomes and autolysosomes) was determined by confocal microscopy. Fresh heart 
slices were embedded with tissue-TEK OCT compound (Sakura Finetechnical Co., Ltd.) and 
frozen at -80 °C. Sections 10 µm in thickness were obtained from the frozen tissue samples 
using the Leica Biosystems CM3050 S Research Cryostat (Leica), air-dried for 30 min, fixed 
Eisenberg et al.
Page 18
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 with 10% formalin for 10 min, mounted using a reagent containing DAPI, and viewed under 
a fluorescence microscope.
Mitophagy evaluation
Evaluation of mitochondrial autophagy was achieved by monitoring Mito-Keima and 
Lamp1–YFP fluorescence as previously described32. Briefly, 6-month-old (young) and 18-
month-old (aged) C57BL/6J mice were injected with AAV-Mito-Keima77 and AAV9-
Lamp1-YFP77 4 weeks preceding analyses of Mito-Keima fluorescence and Lamp1–YFP 
fluorescence using confocal microscopy. Mice were treated with spermidine (3 mM) or 
vehicle (normal drinking water) for 3 weeks. Ratiometric images of Mito-Keima 
fluorescence (561 nm/457 nm excitation) were calculated and visualized in blue color. High 
ratiometric signals were defined as Mito-Keima positive areas, indicating mitochondrial 
autophagy (mitophagy). Mito-Keima fluorescence detected after excitation at 561 nm is 
shown in red color, while fluorescence after excitation at 457 nm is shown in green color. 
Merged images of Mito-Keima fluorescence (after 561 nm excitation) and Lamp1–YFP 
(shown in blue color) confirmed lysosomal localization of Mito-Keima-positive areas.
Titin isoform separation and phosphorylation assays
Homogenized myocardial samples were analyzed by 1.8% SDS–PAGE. Protein bands were 
visualized using Coomassie blue, scanned, and measured densitometrically, as described78. 
In place of a protein size marker in the titin range, human heart and diaphragm extracts 
(Source: Biobank at Dept. of Cardiovascular Physiology, Bochum, Germany) were used as 
standards for N2B/N2BA and N2A isoforms identification79, respectively. Western blotting 
was performed using anti-phosphoserine/threonine antibodies (Cat. No. PP2551, Biotrend 
Chemicals, Cologne, Germany, former ECM Biosciences) to measure global titin 
phosphorylation, and with affinity-purified phosphosite-specific anti-titin antibodies against 
phospho-S4080 in the N2Bus domain of mouse titin (custom-made against the peptide 
LFS(PO3H2)EWLRNI; dilution 1:500; Eurogentec, Brussels, Belgium)79. As a secondary 
antibody, we used horseradish peroxidase-conjugated IgG (Acris Antibodies, Herford, 
Germany). For signal amplification we used the Enhanced Chemoluminescence Western blot 
detection kit (GE Healthcare, Little Chalfront, UK). Staining was visualized using the 
LAS-4000 Image Reader (Fuji Science Imaging Systems), and densitometry was performed 
using Quantity One 1-D Analysis software (Bio-Rad laboratories). Equal protein loading 
and transfer was confirmed by densitometry of the signal on Coomassie-stained 
polyvinylidenfluoride (PVDF) membranes and western blot signals were normalized to the 
corresponding PVDF signals. Full scans of representative blots are shown in Supplementary 
Fig. 18. Two samples per group were processed in parallel on the same blot and the 
standards (always using the same identical extracts) were used for intra-gel normalization, 
allowing for quantitative inter-gel comparisons.
Design-based stereology
Mouse hearts were fixed by vascular perfusion with 4% neutral buffered formaldehyde and 
kept in the fixative for at least 24 h. Then the left ventricle (including the interventricular 
septum) was isolated, weighed and randomly sampled for electron microscopy (EM). The 
samples were post-incubated in a fixative containing 1.5% paraformaldehyde and 1.5% 
Eisenberg et al.
Page 19
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 glutaraldehyde in 0.15 M Hepes buffer. Subsequently, the samples were post-fixed with 1% 
osmium tetroxide, stained en bloc with a half-saturated uranyl acetate/water solution, 
dehydrated in an ascending acetone series and finally embedded in epoxy resin. From the 
embedded samples, ultrathin sections were generated, mounted on EM support grids and 
post-stained with lead citrate and uranyl acetate. The sections were analysed with a 
Morgagni transmission electron microscope (FEI, Eindhoven, Netherlands) and test fields 
for morphometry were assessed using a digital camera according to a systematic uniform 
random sampling scheme80. To estimate the volume fractions of cardiomyocytes and their 
organelles (myofibrils, mitochondria, sarcoplasm, nuclei, lipofuscin granules) as well as 
interstitium and its subcompartments (collagen fibrils, capillaries), point grids were 
projected onto the test fields and the number of points hitting the structures of interest and 
the reference volume were counted. The volume fraction of a structure was calculated by 
dividing the number of points hitting the structure by the number of points hitting the 
reference volume81. The total volume was then calculated by multiplying the volume 
fraction of a structure with the reference volume, e.g. the volume of the left ventricle. The 
latter was estimated by dividing the ventricular weight by the density of muscle tissue, 1.06 
g/cm3 (ref. 82).
Human study subjects, quantification of nutritional intakes and data analyses
Study subjects belonged to the Bruneck Study, a prospective, population-based survey on the 
epidemiology and pathogenesis of atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease (CVD)47. 
Extended study details and risk factor assessment using validated standard procedures can be 
found online in the Supplementary Note (Section on Information on Human Data Analysis). 
Long-term average dietary intakes were ascertained by a dietitian-administered 118-item 
food frequency questionnaire (FFQ). This questionnaire was based on the gold standard FFQ 
by Willett and Stampfer83 and modified to better fit the dietary peculiarities in the survey 
area. Special nutrient data were compiled for polyamines using published data (see online 
Table at the Supplementary Information on Human Data Analysis). Death due to heart 
failure was defined according to the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and 
Related Health Problems, 10th revision (ICD-10) diagnosis codes I50.x, I13.0, I13.2, I11.00, 
I11.01 and I97.1 (considering heart failure following cardiac surgery or due to presence of 
cardiac prosthesis). Clinically overt heart failure was defined according to gold standard 
Framingham criteria (presence of at least 2 major criteria or 1 major criterion in conjunction 
with 2 minor criteria)84 and assessed as part of the 2010 re-examination of the Bruneck 
Cohort. The primary composite CVD (incident CVD) endpoint included vascular death 
(from myocardial infarction [MI], ischemic stroke, or sudden cardiac death), acute coronary 
artery disease (consisting of nonfatal MI, new-onset unstable angina defined as angina at 
rest, crescendo angina or new-onset severe angina, and acute coronary interventions), and 
ischemic stroke. MI was defined by the World Health Organization’s criteria for definite 
disease status. Stroke was classified according to the criteria of the National Survey of 
Stroke. All other revascularization procedures (percutaneous intervention, bypass, and 
surgery) were carefully recorded. Ascertainment of events or procedures did not rely on 
hospital discharge codes or the patient’s self-report but rather on a careful review of medical 
records provided by the general practitioners and files of the Bruneck Hospital and the 
extensive clinical and laboratory examinations performed as part of the study protocols. 
Eisenberg et al.
Page 20
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Incident CVD events were ascertained from 1995 through 2010, and 100% follow-up was 
achieved85. Causes of death as well as clinically overt heart failure were categorized by a 
senior researcher who was unaware of the dietary data. Dietary intakes were cumulatively 
averaged over follow-up visits to capture long-term dietary behaviour and to reduce within-
subject variability. Polyamine intake was log-transformed and adjusted for total caloric 
intake by using the residual method86 in a log-log simple linear model. Polyamine intake 
was then scaled to unit variance such that effects were estimated for a one-standard deviation 
increase in intake.
Plasma protein levels were measured by the Olink Proseek Multiplex Inflammation I (n=92 
proteins) and Olink Proseek Multiplex CVD I (n=92 proteins) proximity extension assays87 
in samples from participants of the Bruneck 2000 assessment (n=658). For proteins 
measured in both assays (n=23 proteins), measurements from the newer Inflammation I 
assay were used, and proteins with more than 25% non-detects (n=30) were excluded, 
leaving 131 proteins for analysis. Proteins with skewness exceeding 1 were log-transformed. 
Skewness was calculated using the e1071 package for R, which used a formula m3/s3, where 
m3 is Σi (xi - µ)3/n, µ the sample mean, n the sample size, s the sample standard deviation, 
and xi the individual data values. Polyamine intake was averaged over the assessments made 
in 1995 and 2000, calorie-adjusted and log-transformed. Association of dietary polyamine 
intake to the plasma protein levels was tested using Pearson correlation partial to age, sex, 
and caloric intake, and in this analysis multiple testing was accounted for by the Benjamini-
Hochberg procedure (particularly suitable for high-dimensional data).
The numbers of unique subjects and of diet records used for this analysis were 829 and 
2540, respectively. Statistical procedures are detailed in the Supplementary Note. All P 
values are two-sided and an α level of 0.05 is used throughout. Analyses were conducted 
with R 3.1.1. See Supplementary Note on Human Data Analysis for more details on 
outcome and methodologies.
Statistical analysis of the experimental data
Data are presented either as dot-plots and line graphs showing mean ± s.e.m., or as box-
plots, showing mean (dot), median (center line) and interquartile range (IQR), along with 
whiskers showing minima and maxima within 1.5 or 2.2 IQR as indicated. Sample sizes 
were chosen based on literature (i.e. lifespan analyses55) or using standard power analysis 
(statistical power: ≥ 0.8 and α value: < 0.05) based on our preliminary echocardiographic 
data obtained from young and aged animals yielding 9 or 12 animals per group (Student’s t-
test or ANOVA, respectively). For some measurements in mice, sample size was adapted to 
the observed effect size and numbers increased to 15-20 animals per group. Indicated sample 
size (see figure legends) always refers to biological replicates (independent animals). If not 
otherwise stated, statistical testing was performed using IBM SPSS statistics software 
(Version 23). Student’s t-test (paired or unpaired, as appropriate) and analysis of variance 
(ANOVA) with Tukey’s post-hoc tests were used for comparisons between two or multiple 
groups, respectively. Where appropriate, a two-way ANOVA was applied (independent or 
mixed design that was Greenhouse-Geisser-corrected in case of sphericity violation as tested 
by Mauchly’s test) followed by testing simple main effects (i.e. multiple comparisons of 
Eisenberg et al.
Page 21
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 different levels of each factor that were Bonferroni-corrected if the factor had more than 2 
levels) in case of main factor88 or interaction significance. Myocardial chamber stiffness 
constant (β) and end-systolic elastance (Ees) were compared between the groups including 
other parameters in the fitting equation (α in case of exponential end-diastolic pressure-
volume relationship and V0 in case of linear end-systolic pressure-volume relationship) as 
co-variates to account for their influence using analysis of co-variance (ANCOVA)89 after 
confirming homogeneity of regression slopes between the compared groups.
The reported significance values are always two-sided. Overall normal distribution of data 
(residuals) was confirmed using Shapiro-Wilk’s test. Homogeneity of variance was tested 
using Levene’s test. Data violating these assumptions were transformed to meet the 
assumptions or tested as follows: non-normally distributed data were tested by non-
parametric Kruskal-Wallis test after confirming equality of ranks variances (tested by non-
parametric Levene’s test) and followed by multiple comparisons using Mann-Whitney U test 
controlling for family-wise error rate by adjusting the significance level (α) according to the 
number of multiple comparisons (n) (α=0.05/n). Whenever heterogeneous variances were an 
issue, Welch’s t-test or Welch’s test with Games-Howell-corrected post-hoc comparisons 
were applied.
To compare tumor incidence in aged mice, binomial logistic regression was conducted. 
Details of statistical analysis applied to Human data, Omics data or lifespan analyses by 
Kaplan-Meier method are indicated in their respective sections in the Methods.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Authors 
Tobias Eisenberg1,2,*, Mahmoud Abdellatif3,*, Sabrina Schroeder1, Uwe 
Primessnig3,4, Slaven Stekovic1, Tobias Pendl1, Alexandra Harger1,5, Julia 
Schipke6,7, Andreas Zimmermann1, Albrecht Schmidt3, Mingming Tong8, Christoph 
Ruckenstuhl1, Christopher Dammbrueck1, Angelina S. Gross1, Viktoria Herbst3, 
Christoph Magnes9, Gert Trausinger9, Sophie Narath9, Andreas Meinitzer10, Zehan 
Hu11,12, Alexander Kirsch13, Kathrin Eller13, Didac-Carmona Gutierrez1, Sabrina 
Büttner1,14, Federico Pietrocola15,16,17,18,19, Oskar Knittelfelder1, Emilie 
Schrepfer30,31, Patrick Rockenfeller1,20, Corinna Simonini3, Alexandros Rahn6, 
Marion Horsch21, Kristin Moreth21, Johannes Beckers21,22,23, Helmut Fuchs21, 
Valerie Gailus-Durner21, Frauke Neff21,24, Dirk Janik21,24, Birgit Rathkolb21,23,25, 
Jan Rozman21,23, Martin Hrabe de Angelis21,22,23, Tarek Moustafa1,5, Guenter 
Haemmerle1, Manuel Mayr26, Peter Willeit27,28, Marion von Frieling-Salewsky29, 
Burkert Pieske3,4,36, Luca Scorrano30,31, Thomas Pieber5,9, Raimund Pechlaner27, 
Johann Willeit27, Stephan J. Sigrist32,33, Wolfgang A. Linke29, Christian Mühlfeld6,7, 
Junichi Sadoshima8, Joern Dengjel11,12, Stefan Kiechl27, Guido 
Kroemer15,16,17,18,19,34,35,#, Simon Sedej2,3,#, and Frank Madeo1,2,#
Eisenberg et al.
Page 22
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Affiliations
1Institute of Molecular Biosciences, NAWI Graz, University of Graz, Graz, Austria 
2BioTechMed Graz, Graz, Austria 3Department of Cardiology, Medical University of 
Graz, Graz, Austria 4Department of Internal Medicine and Cardiology, Campus 
Virchow-Klinikum, Charité – University Medicine Berlin, Berlin, Germany 
5Department of Internal Medicine, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria 
6Institute of Functional and Applied Anatomy, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, 
Germany 7Cluster of Excellence REBIRTH (From Regenerative Biology to 
Reconstructive Therapy), Hannover, Germany 8Department of Cell Biology and 
Molecular Medicine, Rutgers-New Jersey Medical School, Newark, USA 9Joanneum 
Research Forschungsgesellschaft m.b.H., HEALTH, Institute for Biomedicine and 
Health Sciences, Graz, Austria 10Clinical Institute of Medical and Chemical 
Laboratory Diagnostics, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria 11FRIAS Freiburg 
Institute for Advanced Studies, Department of Dermatology, Medical Center, ZBSA 
Center for Biological Systems Analysis, BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling 
Studies, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany 12Department of Biology, 
University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland 13Clinical division of Nephrology, 
Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria 14Department of Molecular Biosciences, 
The Wenner-Gren Institute, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden 15Equipe 11 
labellisée Ligue contre le Cancer, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris, 
France 16Cell Biology and Metabolomics platforms, Gustave Roussy 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Villejuif, France 17INSERM, U1138, Paris, France 
18Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France 19Université Pierre 
et Marie Curie, Paris, France 20Kent Fungal Group, School of Biosciences, 
University of Kent, Canterbury, Kent, UK 21German Mouse Clinic, Institute of 
Experimental Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for 
Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany 22Chair of Experimental Genetics, 
School of Life Science Weihenstephan, Technische Universität München, Freising, 
Germany 23German Center for Diabetes Research (DZD), Neuherberg, Germany 
24Institute of Pathology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for 
Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany 25Institute of Molecular Animal 
Breeding and Biotechnology, Gene Center, Ludwig-Maximilians-University 
München, Munich, Germany 26King’s British Heart Foundation Centre, King’s 
College London, London, UK 27Department of Neurology, Medical University of 
Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria 28Department of Public Health and Primary Care, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 29Department of Cardiovascular 
Physiology, Ruhr University Bochum, Bochum, Germany 30Department of Biology, 
University of Padua, Padua, Italy 31Dulbecco-Telethon Institute, Venetian Institute of 
Molecular Medicine, Padua, Italy 32Institute for Biology, Freie Universität Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany 33NeuroCure, Charité, Berlin, Germany 34Pôle de Biologie, Hôpital 
Européen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France 35Karolinska Institute, Department of 
Women's and Children's Health, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden 
36Department of Internal Medicine and Cardiology, German Heart Center Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany
Eisenberg et al.
Page 23
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Acknowledgements
We thank N. Mizushima (University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan) for providing Atg5flox/flox mice and K. Chien 
(Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA) for providing MLC2a-Cre mice. We are grateful to R. 
Schreiber for assistance with high-resolution respirometry. FM is grateful to the Austrian Science Fund FWF 
(Austria) for grants P23490-B12, P24381, P 27893, I1000 and grant ‘SFB Lipotox’ and to BMWFW and the Karl-
Franzens University for grant ‘Unkonventionelle Forschung’. S. Sedej is supported by the Austrian Science Fund 
FWF through grant P27637-B28 and by a grant from the Austrian Heart Foundation (Österreichischer Herzfonds). 
TE is recipient of an APART fellowship of the Austrian Academy of Sciences. MA received funding from the FWF 
(P27637-B28) and was trained within the frame of the PhD Program Molecular Medicine of the Medical University 
of Graz. SB is supported by the Austrian Science Fund FWF (grant P27183-B24) and Swedish Research Council 
(grant 2015-05468). JD is supported by the DFG via CRC1140 and by the Swiss National Science Foundation, 
grant 31003A-166482/1. PR is supported by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF) project J3742-B28 and NAWI Graz. 
WAL is supported by EU (FP7) program MEDIA and German Research Foundation, SFB1002, TPA8. GK is 
supported by the LeDucq Foundation, Cancéropôle Ile-de-France; Institut National du Cancer (INCa); the European 
Research Council (ERC); the LabEx Immuno-Oncology; and the Paris Alliance of Cancer Research Institutes 
(PACRI). The project was supported by grants from the Helmholtz Portfolio Theme 'Metabolic Dysfunction and 
Common Disease’ (JB), the Helmholtz Alliance ‘Imaging and Curing Environmental Metabolic Diseases 
(ICEMED)’ (JB) and by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (Infrafrontier grant 01KX1012.) 
(MHA). SJS was supported by grants from the Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (Smartage, 
01GQ1420A), from the Forschungszentrum für neurodegenerative Erkrankungen and from the Deutsche 
Forschungsgemeinschaft (Exc 257). S.K., J.W., R.P., P.W. and M.M. are supported by an excellence initiative 
(Competence Centers for Excellent Technologies - COMET) of the Austrian Research Promotion Agency FFG: 
“Research Center of Excellence in Vascular Ageing – Tyrol, VASCage” (K-Project Nr. 843536) funded by the 
BMVIT, BMWFW, the Wirtschaftsagentur Wien and the Standortagentur Tirol. This work was supported by the 
National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre based at Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS 
Foundation Trust and King’s College London in partnership with King’s College Hospital. M.M. is a Senior 
Research fellow of the British Heart Foundation. The authors are grateful for the support by the animal facilities 
staff of the Institutes of Biomedical Research (IBF, Medical University of Graz) and Molecular Biosciences (IMB, 
University of Graz) and acknowledge the Center for Medical Research (ZMF) of the Medical University of Graz for 
technical assistance.
References
1. Zile MR, Brutsaert DL. New concepts in diastolic dysfunction and diastolic heart failure: Part I: 
diagnosis, prognosis, and measurements of diastolic function. Circulation. 2002; 105:1387–1393. 
[PubMed: 11901053] 
2. Chiao YA, Rabinovitch PS. The Aging Heart. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2015; 5 a025148. 
3. Redfield MM, et al. Burden of systolic and diastolic ventricular dysfunction in the community: 
appreciating the scope of the heart failure epidemic. JAMA. 2003; 289:194–202. [PubMed: 
12517230] 
4. Bui AL, Horwich TB, Fonarow GC. Epidemiology and risk profile of heart failure. Nat Rev Cardiol. 
2011; 8:30–41. [PubMed: 21060326] 
5. Nakai A, et al. The role of autophagy in cardiomyocytes in the basal state and in response to 
hemodynamic stress. Nat Med. 2007; 13:619–624. [PubMed: 17450150] 
6. Taneike M, et al. Inhibition of autophagy in the heart induces age-related cardiomyopathy. 
Autophagy. 2010; 6:600–606. [PubMed: 20431347] 
7. Madeo F, Zimmermann A, Maiuri MC, Kroemer G. Essential role for autophagy in life span 
extension. J Clin Invest. 2015; 125:85–93. [PubMed: 25654554] 
8. Eisenberg T, et al. Induction of autophagy by spermidine promotes longevity. Nat Cell Biol. 2009; 
11:1305–1314. [PubMed: 19801973] 
9. Morselli E, et al. Spermidine and resveratrol induce autophagy by distinct pathways converging on 
the acetylproteome. J Cell Biol. 2011; 192:615–629. [PubMed: 21339330] 
10. Gupta VK, et al. Restoring polyamines protects from age-induced memory impairment in an 
autophagy-dependent manner. Nat Neurosci. 2013; 16:1453–1460. [PubMed: 23995066] 
11. Büttner S, et al. Spermidine protects against α-synuclein neurotoxicity. Cell Cycle Georget Tex. 
2014; 13:3903–3908.
Eisenberg et al.
Page 24
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 12. Wang I-F, et al. Autophagy activators rescue and alleviate pathogenesis of a mouse model with 
proteinopathies of the TAR DNA-binding protein 43. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 
109:15024–15029. [PubMed: 22932872] 
13. Weindruch R, Walford RL, Fligiel S, Guthrie D. The retardation of aging in mice by dietary 
restriction: longevity, cancer, immunity and lifetime energy intake. J Nutr. 1986; 116:641–654. 
[PubMed: 3958810] 
14. Dai D-F, et al. Overexpression of Catalase Targeted to Mitochondria Attenuates Murine Cardiac 
Aging. Circulation. 2009; 119:2789–2797. [PubMed: 19451351] 
15. Blackwell BN, Bucci TJ, Hart RW, Turturro A. Longevity, body weight, and neoplasia in ad 
libitum-fed and diet-restricted C57BL6 mice fed NIH-31 open formula diet. Toxicol Pathol. 1995; 
23:570–582. [PubMed: 8578100] 
16. Treuting PM, et al. Reduction of age-associated pathology in old mice by overexpression of 
catalase in mitochondria. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2008; 63:813–822. [PubMed: 18772469] 
17. Soda K, Kano Y, Chiba F, Koizumi K, Miyaki Y. Increased polyamine intake inhibits age-
associated alteration in global DNA methylation and 1,2-dimethylhydrazine-induced 
tumorigenesis. PloS One. 2013; 8:e64357. [PubMed: 23696883] 
18. Paulus WJ, et al. How to diagnose diastolic heart failure: a consensus statement on the diagnosis of 
heart failure with normal left ventricular ejection fraction by the Heart Failure and 
Echocardiography Associations of the European Society of Cardiology. Eur Heart J. 2007; 
28:2539–2550. [PubMed: 17428822] 
19. Ky B, et al. Ventricular-arterial coupling, remodeling, and prognosis in chronic heart failure. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2013; 62:1165–1172. [PubMed: 23770174] 
20. Dai D-F, Rabinovitch PS. Cardiac aging in mice and humans: the role of mitochondrial oxidative 
stress. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2009; 19:213–220. [PubMed: 20382344] 
21. Heinzel FR, Hohendanner F, Jin G, Sedej S, Edelmann F. Myocardial Hypertrophy and Its Role in 
Heart Failure with Preserved Ejection Fraction. J Appl Physiol Bethesda Md 1985. 2015; jap.
00374.2015. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00374.2015
22. Linke WA, Hamdani N. Gigantic business: titin properties and function through thick and thin. Circ 
Res. 2014; 114:1052–1068. [PubMed: 24625729] 
23. Borbély A, et al. Cardiomyocyte stiffness in diastolic heart failure. Circulation. 2005; 111:774–
781. [PubMed: 15699264] 
24. López-Otín C, Blasco MA, Partridge L, Serrano M, Kroemer G. The hallmarks of aging. Cell. 
2013; 153:1194–1217. [PubMed: 23746838] 
25. Salvioli S, et al. Inflamm-aging, cytokines and aging: state of the art, new hypotheses on the role of 
mitochondria and new perspectives from systems biology. Curr Pharm Des. 2006; 12:3161–3171. 
[PubMed: 16918441] 
26. Duicu OM, et al. Ageing-induced decrease in cardiac mitochondrial function in healthy rats. Can J 
Physiol Pharmacol. 2013; 91:593–600. [PubMed: 23889593] 
27. Liu Y, Samuel BS, Breen PC, Ruvkun G. Caenorhabditis elegans pathways that surveil and defend 
mitochondria. Nature. 2014; 508:406–410. [PubMed: 24695221] 
28. Yeganeh B, et al. Targeting the mevalonate cascade as a new therapeutic approach in heart disease, 
cancer and pulmonary disease. Pharmacol Ther. 2014; 143:87–110. [PubMed: 24582968] 
29. Paulus WJ, Tschöpe C. A novel paradigm for heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: 
comorbidities drive myocardial dysfunction and remodeling through coronary microvascular 
endothelial inflammation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013; 62:263–271. [PubMed: 23684677] 
30. Haspel J, et al. Characterization of macroautophagic flux in vivo using a leupeptin-based assay. 
Autophagy. 2011; 7:629–642. [PubMed: 21460622] 
31. Hariharan N, Zhai P, Sadoshima J. Oxidative stress stimulates autophagic flux during ischemia/
reperfusion. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2011; 14:2179–2190. [PubMed: 20812860] 
32. Shirakabe A, et al. Drp1-Dependent Mitochondrial Autophagy Plays a Protective Role Against 
Pressure Overload-Induced Mitochondrial Dysfunction and Heart Failure. Circulation. 2016; 
133:1249–1263. [PubMed: 26915633] 
33. Gottdiener JS, et al. Predictors of congestive heart failure in the elderly: the Cardiovascular Health 
Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2000; 35:1628–1637. [PubMed: 10807470] 
Eisenberg et al.
Page 25
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 34. Doi R, et al. Development of different phenotypes of hypertensive heart failure: systolic versus 
diastolic failure in Dahl salt-sensitive rats. J Hypertens. 2000; 18:111–120. [PubMed: 10678551] 
35. Qu P, et al. Time-course changes in left ventricular geometry and function during the development 
of hypertension in Dahl salt-sensitive rats. Hypertens Res Off J Jpn Soc Hypertens. 2000; 23:613–
623.
36. Palmer RM, Ashton DS, Moncada S. Vascular endothelial cells synthesize nitric oxide from L-
arginine. Nature. 1988; 333:664–666. [PubMed: 3131684] 
37. Chen PY, Sanders PW. L-arginine abrogates salt-sensitive hypertension in Dahl/Rapp rats. J Clin 
Invest. 1991; 88:1559–1567. [PubMed: 1658045] 
38. Tang WHW, Wang Z, Cho L, Brennan DM, Hazen SL. Diminished global arginine bioavailability 
and increased arginine catabolism as metabolic profile of increased cardiovascular risk. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2009; 53:2061–2067. [PubMed: 19477356] 
39. Sourij H, et al. Arginine bioavailability ratios are associated with cardiovascular mortality in 
patients referred to coronary angiography. Atherosclerosis. 2011; 218:220–225. [PubMed: 
21632053] 
40. Ommen SR, et al. Clinical utility of Doppler echocardiography and tissue Doppler imaging in the 
estimation of left ventricular filling pressures: A comparative simultaneous Doppler-
catheterization study. Circulation. 2000; 102:1788–1794. [PubMed: 11023933] 
41. Torre-Amione G. Immune activation in chronic heart failure. Am J Cardiol. 2005; 95:3C–8C. 
discussion 38C–40C. 
42. Kelly RP, et al. Effective arterial elastance as index of arterial vascular load in humans. Circulation. 
1992; 86:513–521. [PubMed: 1638719] 
43. Leoncini G, et al. Renal and cardiac abnormalities in primary hypertension. J Hypertens. 2009; 
27:1064–1073. [PubMed: 19357534] 
44. Gori M, et al. Association between renal function and cardiovascular structure and function in 
heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Eur Heart J. 2014; 35:3442–3451. [PubMed: 
24980489] 
45. Klotz S, et al. Development of heart failure in chronic hypertensive Dahl rats: focus on heart failure 
with preserved ejection fraction. Hypertension. 2006; 47:901–911. [PubMed: 16585423] 
46. Mori K, Nakao K. Neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin as the real-time indicator of active 
kidney damage. Kidney Int. 2007; 71:967–970. [PubMed: 17342180] 
47. Stegemann C, et al. Lipidomics profiling and risk of cardiovascular disease in the prospective 
population-based Bruneck study. Circulation. 2014; 129:1821–1831. [PubMed: 24622385] 
48. Schindler CE, Partap U, Patchen BK, Swoap SJ. Chronic rapamycin treatment causes diabetes in 
male mice. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2014; 307:R434–443. [PubMed: 24965794] 
49. Miller RA, et al. Rapamycin-mediated lifespan increase in mice is dose and sex dependent and 
metabolically distinct from dietary restriction. Aging Cell. 2014; 13:468–477. [PubMed: 
24341993] 
50. LaRocca TJ, Gioscia-Ryan RA, Hearon CM Jr, Seals DR. The autophagy enhancer spermidine 
reverses arterial aging. Mech Ageing Dev. 
51. García-Prat L, et al. Autophagy maintains stemness by preventing senescence. Nature. 2016; 
529:37–42. [PubMed: 26738589] 
52. Hara T, et al. Suppression of basal autophagy in neural cells causes neurodegenerative disease in 
mice. Nature. 2006; 441:885–889. [PubMed: 16625204] 
53. Wettschureck N, et al. Absence of pressure overload induced myocardial hypertrophy after 
conditional inactivation of Galphaq/Galpha11 in cardiomyocytes. Nat Med. 2001; 7:1236–1240. 
[PubMed: 11689889] 
54. Sedej S, et al. Na+-dependent SR Ca2+ overload induces arrhythmogenic events in mouse 
cardiomyocytes with a human CPVT mutation. Cardiovasc Res. 2010; 87:50–59. [PubMed: 
20080988] 
55. Miller RA, et al. An aging Interventions Testing Program: study design and interim report. Aging 
Cell. 2007; 6:565–575. [PubMed: 17578509] 
Eisenberg et al.
Page 26
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 56. Yuan R, et al. Aging in inbred strains of mice: study design and interim report on median lifespans 
and circulating IGF1 levels. Aging Cell. 2009; 8:277–287. [PubMed: 19627267] 
57. Kastenmayer RJ, Fain MA, Perdue KA. A retrospective study of idiopathic ulcerative dermatitis in 
mice with a C57BL/6 background. J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci JAALAS. 2006; 45:8–12.
58. Rozman J, et al. Glucose tolerance tests for systematic screening of glucose homeostasis in mice. 
Curr Protoc Mouse Biol. 2015; 5:65–84. [PubMed: 25727201] 
59. Sedej S, et al. Subclinical abnormalities in sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) release promote 
eccentric myocardial remodeling and pump failure death in response to pressure overload. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2014; 63:1569–1579. [PubMed: 24315909] 
60. Troy BL, Pombo J, Rackley CE. Measurement of left ventricular wall thickness and mass by 
echocardiography. Circulation. 1972; 45:602–611. [PubMed: 4258936] 
61. Pacher P, Nagayama T, Mukhopadhyay P, Bátkai S, Kass DA. Measurement of cardiac function 
using pressure-volume conductance catheter technique in mice and rats. Nat Protoc. 2008; 3:1422–
1434. [PubMed: 18772869] 
62. Tournoux F, et al. Validation of noninvasive measurements of cardiac output in mice using 
echocardiography. J Am Soc Echocardiogr Off Publ Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2011; 24:465–470.
63. Abdellatif M, et al. Spectral transfer function analysis of respiratory hemodynamic fluctuations 
predicts end-diastolic stiffness in preserved ejection fraction heart failure. Am J Physiol Heart Circ 
Physiol. 2016; 310:H4–13. [PubMed: 26475584] 
64. Wolf D, et al. CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells inhibit experimental anti-glomerular basement 
membrane glomerulonephritis in mice. J Am Soc Nephrol JASN. 2005; 16:1360–1370. [PubMed: 
15788479] 
65. Saeed AI, et al. TM4: a free, open-source system for microarray data management and analysis. 
BioTechniques. 2003; 34:374–378. [PubMed: 12613259] 
66. Sturn A, Quackenbush J, Trajanoski Z. Genesis: cluster analysis of microarray data. Bioinforma 
Oxf Engl. 2002; 18:207–208.
67. Shevchenko A, Tomas H, Havlis J, Olsen JV, Mann M. In-gel digestion for mass spectrometric 
characterization of proteins and proteomes. Nat Protoc. 2006; 1:2856–2860. [PubMed: 17406544] 
68. Rappsilber J, Mann M, Ishihama Y. Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation 
and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc. 2007; 2:1896–1906. [PubMed: 
17703201] 
69. Sprenger A, Küttner V, Bruckner-Tuderman L, Dengjel J. Global proteome analyses of SILAC-
labeled skin cells. Methods Mol Biol Clifton NJ. 2013; 961:179–191.
70. Cox J, Mann M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range 
mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 2008; 26:1367–1372. 
[PubMed: 19029910] 
71. Magnes C, et al. Polyamines in biological samples: rapid and robust quantification by solid-phase 
extraction online-coupled to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. J Chromatogr A. 
2014; 1331:44–51. [PubMed: 24485539] 
72. Yuan M, Breitkopf SB, Yang X, Asara JM. A positive/negative ion-switching, targeted mass 
spectrometry-based metabolomics platform for bodily fluids, cells, and fresh and fixed tissue. Nat 
Protoc. 2012; 7:872–881. [PubMed: 22498707] 
73. Braun RJ, et al. Accumulation of Basic Amino Acids at Mitochondria Dictates the Cytotoxicity of 
Aberrant Ubiquitin. Cell Rep. 2015; doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.02.009
74. Buescher JM, Moco S, Sauer U, Zamboni N. Ultrahigh performance liquid chromatography-
tandem mass spectrometry method for fast and robust quantification of anionic and aromatic 
metabolites. Anal Chem. 2010; 82:4403–4412. [PubMed: 20433152] 
75. Roth M. Fluorescence reaction for amino acids. Anal Chem. 1971; 43:880–882. [PubMed: 
5576608] 
76. Schwarz EL, Roberts WL, Pasquali M. Analysis of plasma amino acids by HPLC with photodiode 
array and fluorescence detection. Clin Chim Acta Int J Clin Chem. 2005; 354:83–90.
77. Shirakabe A, et al. Evaluating mitochondrial autophagy in the mouse heart. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 
2016; 92:134–139. [PubMed: 26868976] 
Eisenberg et al.
Page 27
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 78. Neagoe C. Titin Isoform Switch in Ischemic Human Heart Disease. Circulation. 2002; 106:1333–
1341. [PubMed: 12221049] 
79. Hamdani N, et al. Crucial role for Ca2(+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase-II in regulating 
diastolic stress of normal and failing hearts via titin phosphorylation. Circ Res. 2013; 112:664–
674. [PubMed: 23283722] 
80. Mayhew TM. Taking tissue samples from the placenta: an illustration of principles and strategies. 
Placenta. 2008; 29:1–14. [PubMed: 17658596] 
81. Mühlfeld C, Nyengaard JR, Mayhew TM. A review of state-of-the-art stereology for better 
quantitative 3D morphology in cardiac research. Cardiovasc Pathol Off J Soc Cardiovasc Pathol. 
2010; 19:65–82.
82. Méndez J, Keys A. Density and composition of mammalian muscle. Metabolism. 1960; 9:184–188.
83. Willett WC, et al. Reproducibility and validity of a semiquantitative food frequency questionnaire. 
Am J Epidemiol. 1985; 122:51–65. [PubMed: 4014201] 
84. McKee PA, Castelli WP, McNamara PM, Kannel WB. The natural history of congestive heart 
failure: the Framingham study. N Engl J Med. 1971; 285:1441–1446. [PubMed: 5122894] 
85. Willeit P, et al. Discrimination and net reclassification of cardiovascular risk with lipoprotein(a): 
prospective 15-year outcomes in the Bruneck Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014; 64:851–860. 
[PubMed: 25169167] 
86. Willett W, Stampfer MJ. Total energy intake: implications for epidemiologic analyses. Am J 
Epidemiol. 1986; 124:17–27. [PubMed: 3521261] 
87. Assarsson E, et al. Homogenous 96-plex PEA immunoassay exhibiting high sensitivity, specificity, 
and excellent scalability. PloS One. 2014; 9:e95192. [PubMed: 24755770] 
88. Wei J, Carroll RJ, Harden KK, Wu G. Comparisons of treatment means when factors do not 
interact in two-factorial studies. Amino Acids. 2012; 42:2031–2035. [PubMed: 21547361] 
89. Burkhoff D, Mirsky I, Suga H. Assessment of systolic and diastolic ventricular properties via 
pressure-volume analysis: a guide for clinical, translational, and basic researchers. Am J Physiol 
Heart Circ Physiol. 2005; 289:H501–512. [PubMed: 16014610] 
Eisenberg et al.
Page 28
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 1. Spermidine extends lifespan and improves cardiac diastolic function in mice.
(a) Schematic overview of spermidine administration to aging wild-type C57BL/6J mice. 
Spermidine was supplemented to drinking water starting from the age of 4 months (life-
long) or 18 months (late-in-life) and cardiovascular parameters (Fig. 1f-l) or molecular 
phenotypes (Figs. 2 and 3) were analyzed at the indicated time points (M, months).
(b-d) Kaplan-Meier survival analyses. In the life-long supplementation experiment using 
C57BL/6J female mice (b, c), the same control group was used. The late-in-life 
supplementation experiment (d) used C57BL/6J male and female mice. Dashed lines depict 
median lifespans. N=40/41 (b, control/spermidine), N=40/20/17 (c, control/putrescine/
Eisenberg et al.
Page 29
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 spermine), N=91/86 (d, control/spermidine) mice (see Supplementary Tables 1 and 2 for 
more details). P-values, calculated using Breslow test, represent pairwise comparisons of 
survival curves between the groups Spermidine vs. Control (b), Spermine vs. Control (c), 
and Spermidine vs. Control (d).
(e-k) Effects of late-in-life supplementation of spermidine in C57BL6/J male mice, analyzed 
at the indicated ages (M, months). Shown are whole blood polyamine levels (e), left 
ventricular mass-to-tibia length ratio (LVmass/TL), indicative of cardiac hypertrophy (f), 
representative hemodynamic pressure-volume loops (g), left ventricular end-diastolic 
pressure (EDP) (h), myocardial stiffness constant (end-diastolic pressure-volume 
relationship [EDPVR] β obtained from exponential fits presented in Supplementary Fig. 4a) 
(i), ejection fraction, as determined by echocardiography (j) and ventricular-vascular 
coupling (VVC) (k). N=15/18 (e, 24M/24M+S), N=10/14/20/20 (f, j, 4M/18M/23M/23M
+S), N=10/8/10/10 (h, i, k, 4M/18M/24M/24M+S) mice.
(l) Systolic and diastolic arterial blood pressures in mice analyzed in (e). N=8/11 (l, 
24M/24M+S) mice.
***p<0.001, **p<0.01, *p<0.05 and #p<0.06 (ANOVA with post-hoc Tukey, ANCOVA 
(panel i) or Welch’s t-test (panel e), see Methods). For box-and-whisker plots, whiskers 
show minima and maxima within 1.5 interquartile range.
Eisenberg et al.
Page 30
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 2. Spermidine improves cardiomyocyte composition and mitochondrial function in mice.
C57BL/6J male mice were supplemented with spermidine (+S) late-in-life (see Fig. 1a for 
the feeding scheme) and hearts were subjected to molecular and biochemical analyses at the 
indicated ages (M, months).
(a, b) Representative transmission electron micrographs (a) and quantification of left 
ventricular cardiomyocyte composition using design-based stereology (b). Relative volumes 
of mitochondria Vv(mi/myo), myofibrils Vv(mf/myo) and mitochondria- and myofibril-free 
sarcoplasm Vv(sp/myo) per cardiomyocyte are shown. mi, mitochondria; mf, myofibrils; 
myo, cardiomyocyte; nu, nucleus; sp, sarcoplasm. Scale bar represents 2 µm. N=10/15/14 
(4M/24M/24M+S) mice.
(c) Oxygen consumption (complex I-mediated respiration) of isolated cardiac mitochondria 
using high-resolution respirometry. N=8 (left), N=5 (right) mice/group.
Eisenberg et al.
Page 31
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 (d) Plasma TNFα levels after late-in-life spermidine supplementation of C57BL6/J male 
mice. Mice that had a possibly acute inflammatory condition were excluded (see 
Supplementary Fig. 8 and Methods). N=12/12/13/9/10 (5M/21M/21M+S/23M/23M+S) 
mice.
(e) Titin isoform composition and phosphorylation. Representative Western Blots probed 
with a pan-phospho-serine/threonine-antibody for detection of total N2B phosphorylation 
(P-N2B, quantified in g), Coomassie-stained PVDF membrane for detection of total N2B 
(Total-N2B), and a Coomassie Blue-stained gel for detection of N2BA and N2B isoforms 
quantified in f (see Methods for details on isoform identification).
(f) The N2BA/(N2BA+N2B) ratio was quantified by densitometry using normalization 
standards for inter-gel comparisons (see Methods). (N=12 mice/group).
(g) Quantification of total N2B phosphorylation (left) and serine 4080 (S4080)-specific N2B 
phosphorylation (right, from densitometry of western blots representatively shown in 
Supplementary Fig. 5c). (N=12 mice/group).
Panels b,c, f,g: ***p<0.001, **p<0.01 and *p<0.05 (ANOVA with post-hoc Tukey, Welch’s 
test with post-hoc Games-Howell or t-test (paired in panel c) as appropriate, see Methods). 
Panel d: P-value represent factor (T, treatment; A, age) comparisons by two-way ANOVA 
including 21M and 23M groups followed by simple main effects (**p<0.01, *p<0.05 vs. 
age-matched control); +++p<0.001 (ANOVA post-hoc Tukey comparing controls). For box-
and-whisker plots, whiskers show minima and maxima within 1.5 interquartile range.
Eisenberg et al.
Page 32
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 3. Spermidine ameliorates cardiac function through induction of autophagy.
(a, b) Cardiac autophagic flux assessed by the LC3-II/GAPDH ratio, determined using 
western blot analysis (Supplementary Fig. 9e) (a) and cardiac tissue levels of spermidine (b) 
50 min after intraperitoneal injection of leupeptin or vehicle in 13-month-old C57BL/6J 
male mice with or without 4 weeks of spermidine supplementation to the drinking water. 
N=7/13 (Vehicle/Leu) mice/group. Co, Control; Spd, Spermidine; Leu, Leupeptin.
(c, d) Young (3-month-old) transgenic mice harboring cardiac-specific expressed tandem-
fluorescence mRFP-GFP-LC3 (tf-LC3) were subjected to spermidine treatment for 2 weeks 
Eisenberg et al.
Page 33
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 and hearts were analyzed by confocal microscopy 4 hours after intraperitoneal injection of 
chloroquine (CQ) or vehicle to assess autophagic flux. Representative RFP/GFP/Hoechst 
overlays (c) and quantification of autophagosomes (orange puncta in c, arrows) and 
autolysosomes (red puncta in c, arrowheads) (d) are shown. Scale bars represent 50 µm. 
N=3 mice/group.
(e) Mitophagy was assessed in young (6-month-old) or aged (18-month-old) C57BL/6J 
wild-type mice treated with or without 2 weeks of spermidine supplementation and injected 
with AAV9-Mito-Keima. The positive ratiometric area (see Supplementary Fig. 9b-d) of 
Mito-Keima fluorescence (561 nm/457 nm excitation), indicative of mitophagy, was 
quantified. N=3 mice/group.
(f-k) Cardiomyocyte-specific Atg5-deficient mice (Atg5-/-) were analyzed at 16 weeks of 
age and compared to age-matched Atg5+/+ littermates, with or without 12 weeks of 
spermidine supplementation (see Supplementary Fig. 10). Shown are tibia length-
normalized left ventricular mass (LVmass/TL) (f), ejection fraction (EF) (g), representative 
pressure-volume loops (h), myocardial stiffness constant (end-diastolic pressure-volume 
relationships [EDPVR] β obtained from exponential fits, Supplementary Fig. 10d) (i), end-
systolic elastance (Ees, slope of the end-systolic pressure-volume relationship, 
Supplementary Fig. 10e) (j) and ventricular-vascular coupling (VVC) (k). N=16/15 and 
N=12/14 (f, g, Co/Spd) mice, Atg5+/+ and Atg5-/-, respectively. N=10/10 and N=9/11 (i-k, 
Co/Spd) mice, Atg5+/+ and Atg5-/-, respectively.
P-values represent factor (T, treatment; G, genotype) comparisons by two-way ANOVA 
(ANCOVA in panel i) followed by simple main effects (***p<0.001, **p<0.01, *p<0.05 and 
#p<0.06). Dot-plots show means ± s.e.m. For box-and-whisker plots, whiskers show minima 
and maxima within 1.5 interquartile range.
Eisenberg et al.
Page 34
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 4. Spermidine ameliorates salt-induced hypertension and heart failure in Dahl salt-
sensitive rats.
(a) Schematic overview of spermidine administration (starting from the age of 7 weeks) to 
Dahl salt-sensitive rats fed a high-salt diet (8% NaCl) ad libitum. Cardiovascular parameters 
(b-k) and renal tissue characteristics (l, m) were recorded at the indicated ages.
(b) Mean arterial blood pressure (MBP) by the non-invasive tail-cuff method. (N=10 rats/
group). Red symbols denote the first time point at which there is a non-significant difference 
in MBP compared to the peak MBP of the group.
Eisenberg et al.
Page 35
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 (c) Plasma spermidine and ornithine content and global arginine bioavailability ratio 
(GABR). N=12/12/12, 11/12/12, 11/12/10 (7wk/9wk/9wk+S) rats, left, center and right sub-
panels, respectively.
(d, e) Echocardiographic assessment of tibia length-normalized LV mass (LVmass/TL) (d) 
and the ratio of peak early Doppler transmitral flow velocity (E) to the corresponding 
myocardial tissue Doppler velocity (E') (e). N=10 rats/group.
(f-k) Representative pressure-volume loops (f), LV end-diastolic pressure (EDP) (g), 
myocardial stiffness constant for indexed volumes (end-diastolic pressure-volume 
relationship [EDPVR] βi) (h), tibia length (TL)-normalized lung and liver weights (i), 
ejection fraction (EF) (j), and ventricular-vascular coupling (VVC) (k). N=10/9/9/10/10 
(7wk/14wk/14wk+S/19wk/19wk+S) rats.
(l) Representative micrographs of 9 rats/group analyzed for renal fibrosis in 19-week-old 
rats, as assessed by picrosirius red collagen staining.
(m) Urinary lipocalin-2 (Lcn-2) levels. N=12/10/10 (7wk/19wk/19wk+S) rats.
***p<0.001, **p<0.01 and *p<0.05 (ANOVA with post-hoc Tukey in panel c, m, Kruskal-
Wallis with corrected multiple-comparisons in panel d). Panels b, e, g-k: p-values represent 
factor (T, treatment; A, age) comparisons by two-way ANOVA (mixed-design in b and e) 
including 14wk and 19wk groups followed by simple main effects (***p<0.001, **p<0.01, 
*p<0.05 vs. age-matched control); +++p<0.001, ++p<0.01, +p<0.05 (ANOVA with post-hoc 
Tukey comparing controls). Dot- and line-plots show means ± s.e.m. For box-and-whisker 
plots, whiskers show minima and maxima within 1.5 interquartile range.
Eisenberg et al.
Page 36
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 5. Dietary spermidine intake inversely correlates with human cardiovascular disease.
(a-c) Associations of polyamine intake (spermidine or putrescine) in human subjects with 
death due to heart failure (a), clinically overt heart failure (b) and incident cardiovascular 
disease (CVD, a composite of acute coronary artery disease, stroke and death to due vascular 
disease) (c). Hazard ratios (a and c, time-to-event analysis) and odds ratios (b, cross-
sectional analysis) are indicated for one standard deviation higher intake of the given 
polyamine. Models were unadjusted (U) or had multivariable adjustment (M) for age, sex, 
total caloric intake, current smoking, diabetes, alcohol consumption, and diastolic blood 
pressure. *Death due to heart failure was defined according to the International Statistical 
Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems, 10th revision (ICD-10) codes I50.x, 
I13.0, I13.2, I11.00, I11.01, or I97.1, and the results represent sub-distribution hazard ratios 
based on the Fine and Gray model and account for the competing risk of death due to causes 
unrelated to heart failure. **Diagnosis of clinically overt heart failure (ascertained in 2010) 
relied on gold standard Framingham criteria. ***See methods for incident CVD criteria.
(d) Association of polyamine (spermidine or putrescine) intake with systolic (BPsys) and 
diastolic (BPdia) blood pressures repeatedly assessed in 829 participants of the Bruneck 
Study (1995-2010). The effects shown represent the average difference in blood pressure 
(mmHg) associated with one standard deviation higher intake of the given polyamine (M1) 
Eisenberg et al.
Page 37
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 or between the first and third tertile groups (M2) under adjustment for age, sex, and total 
caloric intake.
Eisenberg et al.
Page 38
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 6. Mechanistic model of spermidine-mediated cardioprotection in aging and hypertensive 
heart failure.
Oral (dietary) supplementation of spermidine improves cardiac function by (i) promoting 
protective autophagy and mitophagy in cardiomyocytes; (ii) reducing subclinical, chronic 
inflammation (circulating TNFα levels) that impinges on cardiomyocyte function; (iii) 
improving systemic arginine bioavailability that may favor the production of the vasodilator 
nitric oxide (NO), and thus decrease systemic blood pressure; and (iv) inhibiting kidney 
damage through induction of autophagy. Improved renal function by spermidine treatment 
may additionally contribute to reduced arterial blood pressure and cardioprotection in the 
setting of salt-induced hypertension. In conjunction with spermidine’s anti-inflammatory 
action, its autophagy-dependent effects on cardiomyocytes lead to enhanced mitochondrial 
volume and function, increased titin phosphorylation and reduced hypertrophy, which in turn 
result in improved mechano-elastical properties of cardiomyocytes.
Eisenberg et al.
Page 39
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
