 Tuberculosis: an Infection-Initiated Autoimmune Disease?
Paul Elkington1,*, Marc Tebruegge1, and Salah Mansour1
1NIHR Southampton Respiratory Biomedical Research Unit, Clinical and Experimental Sciences 
Academic Unit, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, UK
Abstract
Tuberculosis is caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis and provided original proof that an 
infectious agent can cause human disease. However, key steps in tuberculosis pathogenesis remain 
poorly understood. We propose that autoimmunity is a critical and overlooked process driving 
pathology in tuberculosis, and present clinical and experimental observations supporting this 
hypothesis.
Keywords
tuberculosis; host immune response; autoimmunity; pathology; CD1
Tuberculosis (TB) is the leading cause of death by an infectious disease. Robert Koch 
identified the causative organism, Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), providing “Koch’s 
postulates” to prove that a disease is caused by an infectious agent. Furthermore, many lines 
of evidence in humans and mice demonstrate that the immune system is essential in 
protecting the host against Mtb. Therefore, it seems counter-intuitive to suggest that TB has 
an autoimmune component. However, diverse evidence suggests that autoimmunity is a 
critical process exacerbating pathology in TB, leading to cavitation and transmission.
The Host Immune Response Is Essential to TB Transmission
Mtb is transmitted by patients with pulmonary TB. The host immune response is central to 
containing Mtb, as patients with HIV-induced immunocompromise have a greatly increased 
TB risk, but conversely also drives the underlying lung pathology. Patients with advanced 
HIV infection rarely develop cavitation, whereas during immune system reconstitution tissue 
damage often occurs. Pulmonary disease most frequently occurs in young adults with the 
strongest immunological response [1]. Similarly, in rabbit models, cavitation is accelerated 
by pre-sensitisation with purified protein derivative (PPD) to drive a strong delayed-type 
*Address for correspondence: Paul Elkington, Professor of Respiratory Medicine, Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University of 
Southampton, Mailpoint 811, Southampton General Hospital, Southampton SO16 1YD, Tel 00 44 23 8079 6149, Fax 00 44 20 8383 
3394, p.elkington@soton.ac.uk. 
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Trends Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Trends Immunol. 2016 December ; 37(12): 815–818. doi:10.1016/j.it.2016.09.007.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 hypersensitivity reaction, but inhibited by immunosuppression. Immunity is thought to be 
directed against Mtb antigens, with progressive accumulation of total mycobacterial 
antigenic load over time precipitating inflammation and lung tissue destruction [2]. 
However, a striking feature of TB granulomas is the paucity of mycobacteria, while 
extensive pathology develops. It remains unclear how so few mycobacteria drive such a 
florid inflammatory immune response.
Diverse Autoimmune Phenomena Occur in Human TB
Physicians treating TB patients observe numerous clinical events associated with 
autoimmune diseases that are unexplained by current disease paradigms. For example, 
autoantibodies associated with autoimmune diseases such as Wegener’s granulomatosis and 
systemic lupus erythematosus are detected in 40% of TB patients [3]. Poncet’s disease is an 
inflammatory polyarthritis occurring in TB patients in the absence of detectable 
mycobacteria in the joint spaces. In the eye, TB can cause uveitis without mycobacteria, 
which resolves with anti-mycobacterial treatment. Uveitis is typically associated with 
autoimmune diseases such as inflammatory bowel disease, Behcet’s disease and ankylosing 
spondylitis. Similarly, erythema nodosum, an inflammatory cutaneous disorder affecting the 
shins, occurs in TB and autoimmune diseases such as Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis and 
sarcoidosis.
Genomic analyses show single nucleotide polymorphisms that associate with TB severity 
also associate with autoimmune disease, and CTLA-4 autoimmunity associated genotype 
contributes to TB severity [4]. Additionally, autoreactive T cells are reported to be increased 
in TB patients. Systemic autoimmunity can be trigged by intra-vesical administration of 
Mycobacterium bovis BCG for bladder cancer. When considered together, these phenomena 
suggest that mycobacteria induce inappropriate host responses to self-antigens, causing 
autoimmune inflammation.
Furthermore, experimental studies link Mtb with development of autoimmunity. For 
example, Mtb antigens are used in Freund’s adjuvant in animal models of autoimmune 
diseases [5], suggesting that these antigens seem to overcome tolerance to host antigens 
when co-administered. In experimental models, immunisation to Mtb can drive autoimmune 
arthritis by causing cross-reactivity with proteoglycan in cartilage [6]. Similarly, an acetone-
precipitable fraction of Mtb can specifically drive release of the autoantigen proliferating 
cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) from human cells [7]. Whilst these attributes of Mtb inducing 
autoimmune phenomena have been extensively used experimentally for modelling of 
autoimmune diseases, the concept that the same process is occurring in TB patients is not 
considered.
TB and Sarcoidosis Are Virtually Indistinguishable
Further evidence for autoimmunity TB comes from sarcoidosis, a human disease even 
considered part of the same disease spectrum as TB by some. Sarcoidosis is an autoimmune 
disease with no proof of an infectious aetiology, despite extensive investigation for 
mycobacteria within lesions, that resolves with systemic corticosteroid treatment. 
Elkington et al.
Page 2
Trends Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Sarcoidosis has several similarities with TB, suggesting a common fundamental process. 
Firstly, histological analysis shows well-organised granulomas formed from activated 
macrophages, multinucleate giant cells and peripheral T cells, and lesions are often 
histologically indistinguishable from TB granulomas (Figure 1). Secondly, both TB and 
sarcoidosis typically affect the lung upper lobes and the mediastinal lymph nodes. Thirdly, 
sarcoidosis and TB can affect other organs, including the central nervous system, and 
neurosarcoidosis and TB meningitis can be clinically indistinguishable. Finally, analysis of 
peripheral blood gene signatures show highly similar expression patterns [8]. Therefore, 
similarities between the autoimmune disease sarcoidosis and the infectious disease TB 
suggest common antigens drive the two diseases. Since sarcoidosis is an autoimmune 
disease that resolves with corticosteroids, the implication is that similar autoantigens 
contribute to pathology in TB. Adjunctive corticosteroids are routinely used in treatment of 
pericardial and meningeal TB and intriguingly, corticosteroids accelerate radiographic 
resolution in pulmonary TB and potentially reduce TB mortality.
Investigating an Autoimmune Process of Unknown Aetiology
The clinical phenomena presented suggest that the interaction of host with mycobacterial 
antigens elicits the subsequent development of an additional autoimmune inflammatory 
process, exacerbating pathology in TB. However, the host antigens involved are unknown, 
presenting a significant challenge. Nevertheless, the clinical and experimental associations 
are so strong that ignoring this possibility risks neglecting a central process in TB 
pathogenesis.
A bioinformatic approach may identify pathways up-regulated in granulomas, and indicate 
the antigen presenting molecules and T cell receptors most likely involved. One approach 
could be RNA-Seq analysis of TB granulomas, sarcoid granulomas and suitable control 
tissues. Analysis TB and sarcoid tissue, combined with protein interaction networks, may 
indicate pathways induced to inform ex vivo analyses. Alternatively, a hypothesis-driven 
approach may identify antigens. Mtb causes extensive extracellular matrix destruction and 
cleavage of collagen and elastin releases novel epitopes that may be autoreactive, which 
have been identified in other destructive pulmonary pathologies [9]. Therefore, investigating 
T cell responses to lung structural fibrils may be fruitful. Alternatively, bioinformatic 
approaches suggest cross-reactive T cell epitopes between the Mtb and human proteomes, 
leading these authors to suggest that autoimmunity contributes to pathology [10]. 
Additionally, direct evidence of cross-reactivity of antibodies to mycobacterial 65-kDa heat 
shock protein and human lactoferrin has been demonstrated.
Finally, and perhaps most likely, key antigens may be shared between Mtb and humans. For 
example, specific lipid antigens are common to both Mtb and the host, such as 
glycerophospholipids. These antigens include phosphatidylglycerol and 
phosphatidylinositol, which are presented by CD1d to NKT cells. Phosphatidylglycerol is 
also presented by CD1b molecules to CD1b self-reactive T cells. CD1-restricted 
presentation may explain why the HLA associations in TB, although described, are weak, 
and why mice do not develop typical human pathology, since they lack Group I CD1 
molecules. These host lipids may include stress antigens such as cholesterol esters or 
Elkington et al.
Page 3
Trends Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 squalene, presented by CD1c and CD1a respectively, to self-reactive T cells. We hypothesise 
that host lipids presented by Group I CD1 are the common antigens for TB and sarcoidosis.
Concluding Remarks
Diverse evidence from both clinical observation and animal studies suggests that 
development of autoimmunity is a fundamental process in human TB. This concept has wide 
implications and the evidence is sufficiently strong to justify further investigation. 
Experimental data rarely challenge established dogma; instead, concepts must evolve and 
then experiments investigate these hypotheses [11]. Apoptosis of infected cells has recently 
been shown to induce self-reactive T cells to promote auto-inflammation in other infections 
[12], and extensive macrophage apoptosis occurs in TB, providing a potential central 
mechanism. Whilst it may seem implausible that Mtb induces autoimmunity to transmit, 
such ingenious immunological deception may explain why pathological processes in TB 
remain so enigmatic.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank Dr Sanjay Jogai for providing the histological images. Samples used in this study were sourced from the 
Southampton Research Biorepository, University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust and University of 
Southampton. PE is supported by the Antimicrobial Resistance Cross Council Initiative funded by the 
Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council and the Medical Research Council MR/N006631/1, and 
the US National Institute for Health R33AI102239. MT is supported by a Clinical Lectureship provided by the UK 
National Institute for Health Research and funding from the UK Technology Strategy Board / Innovate UK.
References
1. Comstock GW, et al. The prognosis of a positive tuberculin reaction in childhood and adolescence. 
Am J Epidemiol. 1974; 99(2):131–138. [PubMed: 4810628] 
2. Hunter RL. Tuberculosis as a three-act play: A new paradigm for the pathogenesis of pulmonary 
tuberculosis. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2016; 97:8–17. [PubMed: 26980490] 
3. Kakumanu P, et al. Patients with pulmonary tuberculosis are frequently positive for anti-cyclic 
citrullinated peptide antibodies, but their sera also react with unmodified arginine-containing 
peptide. Arthritis Rheum. 2008; 58(6):1576–1581. [PubMed: 18512773] 
4. Pagan AJ, Ramakrishnan L. Immunity and Immunopathology in the Tuberculous Granuloma. Cold 
Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2015; 5(9)
5. Billiau A, Matthys P. Modes of action of Freund's adjuvants in experimental models of autoimmune 
diseases. J Leukoc Biol. 2001; 70(6):849–860. [PubMed: 11739546] 
6. van Eden W, et al. Arthritis induced by a T-lymphocyte clone that responds to Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis and to cartilage proteoglycans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1985; 82(15):5117–5120. 
[PubMed: 3927297] 
7. Haftel HM, et al. Induction of the autoantigen proliferating cell nuclear antigen in T lymphocytes by 
a mycobacterial antigen. J Clin Invest. 1994; 94(4):1365–1372. [PubMed: 7929811] 
8. Maertzdorf J, et al. Common patterns and disease-related signatures in tuberculosis and sarcoidosis. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109(20):7853–7858. [PubMed: 22547807] 
9. Lee SH, et al. Antielastin autoimmunity in tobacco smoking-induced emphysema. Nat Med. 2007; 
13(5):567–569. [PubMed: 17450149] 
Elkington et al.
Page 4
Trends Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 10. Chodisetti SB, et al. Potential T cell epitopes of Mycobacterium tuberculosis that can instigate 
molecular mimicry against host: implications in autoimmune pathogenesis. BMC Immunol. 2012; 
13:13. [PubMed: 22435930] 
11. Behr MA, Waters WR. Is tuberculosis a lymphatic disease with a pulmonary portal? Lancet Infect 
Dis. 2014; 14(3):250–255. [PubMed: 24268591] 
12. Campisi L, et al. Apoptosis in response to microbial infection induces autoreactive TH17 cells. Nat 
Immunol. 2016; 17(9):1084–1092. [PubMed: 27455420] 
Elkington et al.
Page 5
Trends Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Text box
Directions for Future Research
•
What is the mechanism whereby Mycobacterium tuberculosis induces 
immune cells to respond to host antigens?
•
Do Mtb adjuvants prime a response to bystander host antigens, and if 
so, what are these host antigens?
•
Alternatively, are there antigens that are shared between host and 
pathogen?
•
In addition to auto-immunity related phenomena, does immune 
dysregulation similar to human auto-inflammatory conditions play a 
role?
•
What are the optimal experimental approaches and model systems to 
investigate this phenomenon?
◦
Unbiased genomic and proteomic approaches
◦
Hypothesis driven approaches, such as lung structural fibrils 
or CD1-presented lipids
◦
Autoantibody profiling as a surrogate marker for T cell 
immunity
◦
Human clinical investigation versus tractable model systems
•
What novel experimental tools are required, such as for characterisation 
of CD1-restricted T cell responses in the peripheral circulation and in 
lung granulomas?
•
If mycobacterial infection drives autoimmunity as an evolutionary 
strategy, what are the implications for novel vaccination approaches?
•
Is autoimmune inflammation also the principal mechanism driving the 
TB-Immune Reconstitution Inflammatory Syndrome that occurs during 
HIV treatment?
•
Will inhibiting autoimmune inflammation, whilst concurrently 
preserving anti-mycobacterial effector immune responses, reduce 
mortality of patients with advanced TB?
Elkington et al.
Page 6
Trends Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. The Histological Appearances of Sarcoidosis and Tuberculosis Are Often 
Indistinguishable
A) Lymph node biopsy of sarcoidosis; the patient improved with systemic 
immunosuppression with corticosteroids. B) Lymph node biopsy of tuberculosis; 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis culture was positive and the patient recovered with antibiotic 
therapy. Scale bar 100µm.
Elkington et al.
Page 7
Trends Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
