 The new bundled payment program for joint replacement may 
unfairly penalize hospitals that treat patients with medical 
comorbidities
Chad Ellimoottil, M.D., M.S.1,2, Andrew M. Ryan, Ph.D1,3, Hechuan Hou, M.S.2, James M. 
Dupree, M.D., M.P.H1,2, Brian Hallstrom, M.D.4, and David C. Miller, M.D., M.P.H1,2
1Institute for Healthcare Policy and Innovation, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
2Dow Division of Health Services Research, Department of Urology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor
3School of Public Health, Department of Health Management and Policy, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor
4Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
Abstract
The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) recently implemented the Comprehensive 
Care for Joint Replacement (CJR) model. While many stakeholders are enthusiastic that the 
program will reduce spending for joint replacement, others are concerned that the program will 
unintentionally penalize hospitals that treat medically complex patients. This concern stems from 
the fact that the program may not include a mechanism to sufficiently account for patient 
complexity (i.e., risk adjustment). Using Medicare claims, we examined this concern and found an 
inverse association between patient complexity and year-end bonuses (i.e., reconciliation 
payments). Specifically, reconciliation payments were reduced by $827 per episode for each 
standard deviation increase in a hospital’s patient complexity (p<0.01). Moreover, we found that 
risk adjustment could increase reconciliation payments to some hospitals by as much as $114,184 
annually. Our findings suggest that CMS should include risk adjustment in the CJR model and 
future bundled payment programs.
INTRODUCTION
On April 1st 2016, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) implemented the 
Comprehensive Care for Joint Replacement (CJR) model.1 This program introduced 
mandatory episode-based bundled payments to 800 hospitals across 67 metropolitan 
statistical areas.2 To the extent that lower extremity joint replacement is one of the most 
common procedures performed among Medicare beneficiaries, the CJR model represents 
perhaps the most aggressive move yet by CMS toward alternative payment models. Under 
the CJR model, all providers (e.g., hospitals, physicians, post-acute care providers) will 
Address Correspondence to: Chad Ellimoottil, M.D., M.S, University of Michigan, 2800 Plymouth Rd, Bldg 16, 1st Floor, Ann Arbor, 
MI 48109, cellimoo@med.umich.edu, Office: 734-232-2247, Fax: 734-232-2400. 
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
Published in final edited form as:
Health Aff (Millwood). 2016 September 01; 35(9): 1651–1657. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2016.0263.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 continue to receive standard fee-for-service payments from Medicare for all claims from 
admission through 90 days after discharge. However, at the end of each performance year, 
CMS will compare participating hospitals’ 90-day episode payments against a “target 
episode price” based on historical spending for this procedure. Hospitals will receive 
additional payments if their actual 90-day episode spending (and that of their affiliated 
physicians and post-acute care providers) is less than the target, but will be required to pay 
CMS back if their episode spending exceeds this metric. In the CJR model, such bonuses 
and penalties are referred to as “reconciliation payments”.
In contrast to prior bundled payment demonstrations from CMS (e.g., Bundled Payments for 
Care Improvement initiative), CJR is unique in that each hospital’s target episode price is 
calculated by blending its own historical episode spending with the average spending of 
other hospitals in the same region. Over time, the blended price is increasingly weighted 
towards the regional benchmark such that, by the fourth year of the program, the target price 
is based entirely on regional episode spending. By implementing region-based target pricing, 
CMS is aiming to reduce episode payment variation resulting from disparate practice 
patterns (e.g., post-acute care utilization) across geographic regions.
While differences in hospital episode spending can certainly be driven by variation in 
service utilization, it is also true that payment differences can reflect the disparities in patient 
complexity (i.e., hospital case-mix).3 While this issue may be less relevant for a program 
like BPCI, where an individual hospital’s spending is benchmarked against its own historical 
episode payments, the CJR model is different because it determines reconciliation payments 
by benchmarking a hospital performance against other hospitals in a given region without 
accounting for patient-specific factors (e.g., age, medical comorbidities, functional status) 
that are known to impact episode spending. During the rulemaking period, many 
commenters identified this issue as an important limitation of the CJR model and expressed 
reservations that, by not adjusting for hospital case-mix, CMS may unfairly penalize 
hospitals that treat more medically complex patients.
Despite these concerns, CMS did not include a mechanism to account for important patient 
characteristics such as age and comorbidity in the calculation of target prices, offering 
several reasons for this decision. First, CMS stated that there is no need for additional risk 
adjustment because there is sufficient stratification of patients through the use of different 
target prices for episodes associated with complicated inpatient stays (i.e., MS-DRG 469) or 
hip fractures. Second, they argued that there is no gold standard risk adjustment model for 
patients undergoing joint replacement. Third, commercially available risk adjustment tools 
were built using different patient populations than those in the CJR model and may therefore 
not be applicable to Medicare beneficiaries. Finally, although CMS uses Hierarchical 
Condition Category (CMS-HCC) risk scores to predict future expenditures of patients in 
Medicare Advantage plans4, these scores have not been sufficiently validated for joint 
replacement episodes. Nonetheless, CMS is currently utilizing a CMS-HCC framework for 
other programs including Medicare Spending Per Beneficiary Hospital Compare.5 Given the 
multiple stakeholder concerns around this topic, it seems reasonable for CMS to further 
evaluate the merits of risk adjustment for CJR and future bundled payment programs.
Ellimoottil et al.
Page 2
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 In this context, we examined the association between patient complexity and hospital 
reconciliation payments for lower extremity joint replacement episodes, and we estimated 
the financial impact for hospitals of excluding more granular patient characteristics in the 
calculation of target prices.
METHODS
Data and study population
We identified all Medicare claims for individuals in the state of Michigan who underwent 
lower extremity joint replacement (MS-DRG 469 and 470) from 2011 through 2013. We 
only included patients who underwent one of these procedures in a hospital that was 
geographically located in a metropolitan statistical area (a requirement for inclusion in the 
CJR program), and performed more than 20 cases during the study period. We also excluded 
patients who did not have complete 90-day claims, were not continuously enrolled in 
Medicare Part A and B, those who died during the episode of care, and those who had HMO 
coverage or were eligible for Medicare because of end-stage renal disease or disability. In 
addition, in order to reduce some of the heterogeneity associated with infrequent and 
expensive procedures, we excluded patients who had a primary diagnosis of fracture (12.3% 
of episodes). On average fracture cases accounted for 1.5% of an individual hospital’s 
episodes (range 0.03–5.42%). This study was deemed exempt from review by the 
Institutional Research Board at our health system.
Defining episodes of care and calculating 90-day episode payments
We defined 90-day episodes of care according to specifications from the CJR program.1 
Specifically, we first identified all hospitalization, professional, and post-acute care claims 
from the index admission through 90 days after discharge and then excluded claims based on 
DRGs and ICD-9 primary diagnosis codes that matched the exclusion list published by 
CMS.1 Next, we calculated the total 90-day payment for each joint replacement episode by 
aggregating the payments received for each claim attributed to the joint replacement episode 
of care. Then, following the methods used by CMS in the CJR Final Rule, we removed 
payments for disproportionate share hospitals, indirect medical education, and new 
technologies. Finally, we truncated extremely high-cost and low-cost episodes to limit the 
influence of outliers. Specifically, we excluded 362 (1.53%) episodes with 90-day payments 
lower than $4,000. In addition, we assigned the value of the 95th percentile to episodes with 
costs above the 95th percentile. CMS uses a similar approach to reduce the impact of outliers 
in many of their hospital performance programs, including the CJR model. To account for 
changes in Medicare payments during the years of the study, we adjusted all payments to 
2013 dollars.
Defining hospital case-mix and calculating reconciliation payments
We used Medicare claims to calculate a hierarchical condition category (CMS-HCC) risk 
score for each beneficiary in our study. Specifically, we used HCC software (V1212.70.F1) 
and collected information (i.e., age, gender, comorbidity, and dual eligible status and 
original reason for Medicare entitlement) from Medicare claims to calculate each patient’s 
risk score. Using established methods, we reviewed each patient’s prior 12-months of 
Ellimoottil et al.
Page 3
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 inpatient, outpatient and select professional claims to collect this information.4 For example, 
if patient had a joint replacement surgery on October 14, 2011, we searched claims from 
October 14, 2010 through October 14, 2011 for their comorbidities. We then aggregated 
these patient risk scores to calculate an average for each hospital. We used average hospital 
risk-score as a proxy for hospital case-mix.
We calculated each hospital’s reconciliation payment using methods similar to those 
outlined in the CJR rule. Specifically, we first calculated target prices for each hospital using 
2011–2012 spending for MS-DRG 469 and 470 separately. Next, we aggregated 2013 
spending for MS-DRG 469 and 470 and subtracted the target amount (i.e., target price 
multiplied by number of cases for each MS-DRG). Finally, we calculated per capita 
reconciliation payments by dividing the total reconciliation payment by case volume for 
each MS-DRG.
Assessing the relationship between hospital case-mix and reconciliation payments under 
two specific Scenarios
We examined the association between average CMS-HCC risk scores and the estimated 
reconciliation payments that hospitals would receive under two different Scenarios. In the 
first Scenario, we calculated reconciliation payments using the hospital’s own 2011–2012 
spending to define target episode spending. This Scenario is closely aligned with the 
Bundled Payments for Care Improvement (BPCI) initiative. In the second Scenario, we used 
the 2011–2012 average regional spending (average state spending in this case) to set the 
target episode price. The use of a regional target is consistent with the CJR model. For both 
Scenarios, we fit linear regression models with heteroscedastic robust standard errors to test 
the association between CMS-HCC risk scores and reconciliation payments per joint 
episode. For these models, reconciliation payment per joint episode was used as our 
dependent variable and CMS-HCC risk score was our primary exposure variable. We also 
performed a multivariable analysis to examine the independent association of CMS-HCC 
risk score on reconciliation payments. Based on prior literature, we expected that teaching 
hospitals, hospitals with a larger number of beds, and those with a higher proportion of 
Medicaid patients would have higher expenditures, which may in turn impact reconciliation 
payments. Therefore, these variables were included in our multivariable analysis.
Estimating the impact of risk adjustment on reconciliation payments
We estimated the impact of CMS’ policy decision by calculating the net difference in 
reconciliation payments that hospitals would receive with and without risk adjustment. Our 
risk adjustment model included log-transformed 90-day episode payment as our dependent 
variable and average CMS-HCC risk score as our independent variable. We used the model 
to estimate an expected 90-day episode payment for each patient and then utilized a standard 
observed to expected framework to arrive at the risk-adjusted 90-day episode payment.6 
Next, we aggregated these risk-adjusted payments to the hospital level and calculated 
reconciliation payments as described above. Finally, we calculated the difference between 
the risk-adjusted and unadjusted reconciliation payments for each hospital. All analyses 
were performed using statistical software (STATA 13/SE, College Station, TX), and at the 
5% significance level.
Ellimoottil et al.
Page 4
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Sensitivity analysis
We performed several sensitivity analyses to confirm our findings. First, we examined 
variation in average hospital CMS-HCC scores by MS-DRG categories (469 and 470) and 
fracture status. The purpose of this analysis was to understand how hospitals differed for 
these specific subpopulations. Second, we examined the association between average CMS-
HCC risk score and reconciliation payments after including patients with fractures. Third, 
we examined the association between average CMS-HCC risk score and reconciliation 
payments with our truncated cases included. The purpose of the latter two sensitivity 
analyses was to ensure that our exclusion of fractures and low payment cases would not 
substantially alter the estimates from our primary analyses. Finally, because we used average 
state spending to set the regional target price in our analysis and the actual CJR model 
utilizes average U.S. census division spending, we performed a sensitivity analysis using the 
target price published by CMS for the East North Central census division (MS-DRG 469: 
$50,954, MS-DRG 470: $25,480).
Limitations
Our study has several limitations. First, our analysis of Michigan hospitals may limit the 
generalizability of this study for national joint replacement bundled payment programs such 
as CJR. However, this concern is tempered by the fact that Michigan hospitals do not differ 
in important ways from the hospitals selected for inclusion in the CJR program (e.g., 
utilization rates for knee replacement and hip replacement, teaching status, proportion of 
Medicaid patients served, bed size). Second, in this analysis, we did not include several 
provisions that are included in the CJR program (e.g., stop-loss mechanism, quality floor). 
While such specifications may impact the absolute dollars that are transferred between CMS 
and the CJR hospitals, we do not believe that the inclusion of these provisions would 
substantially change our primary findings related to risk adjustment. Finally, our risk 
adjustment model did not include other important variables for joint replacement (e.g., body 
mass index, procedure type, functional status). However, we deliberately used a risk-
adjustment model that has a low administrative burden and is already being used by CMS 
for several existing programs.
RESULTS
We identified 23,251 Medicare beneficiaries who underwent lower extremity joint 
replacement procedures (i.e., DRG 469 and 470) in 60 Michigan hospitals from 2011 
through 2013. The average CMS-HCC risk score for individual hospitals varied from 0.7 to 
1.8 (mean: 1.12, standard deviation: 0.19) (Exhibit 1). This variation was greater for patients 
within MS-DRG 469 (Supplemental Exhibit 1).
In Scenario 1, we identified no significant association between reconciliation payments and 
CMS-HCC risk scores when target episode prices were set using hospital historical spending 
(r=−0.15, p=0.24). This finding reflects the relative year-over-year consistency of patient 
complexity within hospitals. In contrast, for Scenario 2, there was a statistically significant, 
inverse association between reconciliation payments and CMS-HCC risk scores when target 
prices were set to a regional benchmark (r= −0.37, p=0.003) (Exhibit 2). Specifically, for 
Ellimoottil et al.
Page 5
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 each standard deviation increase in CMS-HCC risk score, reconciliation payments per joint 
episode were reduced by $827 (95% CI, −$1,368 to −$285). This estimate remained stable 
and significant after adjusting for teaching status, number of beds, and proportion of 
Medicaid patients served by the hospital.
We found that risk adjustment consistently reduced reconciliation payments to hospitals with 
the lowest CMS-HCC risk scores, and consistently increased reconciliation payments to 
hospitals with the highest risk scores (Exhibit 1). In aggregate, the inclusion of CMS-HCC 
risk scores in the calculation of reconciliation payments would lead to reductions in annual 
reconciliation payments by as much as $146,360 for hospitals with the least medically 
complex patients, and gains as large as $114,184 for hospitals with the most medically 
complex patients. Our sensitivity analyses identified no substantive changes in our primary 
findings.
DISCUSSION
Using methods analogous to those utilized by the CJR program, we found that region-based 
target pricing led to reduced reconciliation payments to hospitals that treat medically 
complex patients. In addition, we found that, after risk adjustment with CMS-HCC risk 
scores, estimated reconciliation payments were substantially increased for hospitals that treat 
high complexity patients and reduced for hospitals that treat low complexity patients. The 
magnitude of these gains was similar to the incentive payments received by hospitals 
through CMS’ Hospital Value-Based Purchasing program.7 Collectively, these findings 
suggest that risk adjustment is important for bundled payment programs that utilize regional 
spending benchmarks, including the CJR model.
Our primary finding that patient complexity is associated with the magnitude and direction 
(i.e., bonus versus penalty) of hospital reconciliation payments is consistent with numerous 
studies showing that underlying clinical factors influence episode payments for multiple 
conditions.8–11 In fact, many published risk-adjustment models for joint replacement include 
even more risk-adjustment variables such as anesthesia class and functional status.12,13 
While the current study used only age, gender, comorbidity, and dual eligible status and 
original reason for Medicare entitlement to assess risk, our results imply that even a modest 
risk-adjustment model would have important implications for reconciliation payments 
received by hospitals when target prices are based on regional benchmarks.
Our results have several immediate implications for policymakers. Our finding that risk-
adjustment of the target price will have a significant impact on reconciliation payments 
suggests that CMS should strongly consider amending the current CJR target pricing 
strategy to account for participating hospital’s patient population during the second 
performance year of CJR (i.e., the year when hospitals begin to face penalties). At present, 
CMS sets a different target price for each of the following cohorts: 1) MS-DRG 469 with hip 
fracture; 2) MS-DRG 469 without hip fracture; 3) MS-DRG 470 with hip fracture; 4) MS-
DRG 470 without hip fracture. Our results suggest that CMS should further refine cohort-
specific target prices at each hospital by accounting for key patient characteristics that 
impact determinants of episode payments, including complications, readmissions, and 
Ellimoottil et al.
Page 6
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 utilization of post-acute care services. Such additional risk-adjustment will raise the target 
price for hospitals that serve older, sicker and more medically complex patients and lower 
the target price for hospitals that treat predominantly younger and/or healthier populations. 
This methodological refinement is essential because target prices–and the corresponding 
reconciliation payments–are increasingly anchored to regional payment data during the latter 
years of the program.
In this study, we used CMS-HCC risk scores to refine target prices. We selected this 
particular measure for three reasons. First, HCCs are used by CMS for risk adjustment in a 
number of other performance programs, including programs that are focused on joint 
replacement and episode payments (e.g., Medicare Spending Per Beneficiary, Hospital 
Compare measures, Hospital Readmission Reduction Program). Second, HCCs can be 
obtained from administrative claims with minimal burden. Third, many of the factors that 
make up the CMS-HCC risk score (i.e., age, gender, comorbidity, and dual eligible status 
and original reason for Medicare entitlement) have been independently shown to impact 
expenditures. In addition to HCCs, CMS should consider other important risk adjustment 
variables such as socioeconomic status, marital status, body mass index and functional 
status. While CMS may need to devote resources to identifying and validating specific 
variables that adequately account for patient characteristics, our findings suggest that 
without sufficient risk adjustment, hospitals will be financially penalized for treating 
medically complex patient populations.
There are several reasons why our findings support this position. First, the difference 
between risk-adjusted and unadjusted payments can be significant for some hospitals. In 
fact, the magnitude of the annual additional payment or penalty is similar to the amount 
currently received by hospitals through Hospital Value-Based Purchasing. Second, if CMS 
continues to use regional targets as it expands bundled payment programs to include other 
conditions,14 the effect of not adjusting for medical comorbidities will likely be 
compounded for some hospitals. Because a hospital’s patient population is often determined 
by its fixed geographic and structural characteristics, hospitals that are disadvantaged by the 
CJR model will likely be disadvantaged by future bundled payment programs that do not 
incorporate risk-adjustment. Third, CMS is already using HCC based risk-adjustment for 
several of its episode-based payment metrics (e.g., Medicare Spending Per Beneficiary, 
Hospital Compare 30-day Payment Measure for Joint Replacement). It is not clear why this 
should be different for CJR, especially with the findings reported herein. Fourth, as 
evidenced by comments from key stakeholders during the rulemaking process, patient level 
risk adjustment is strongly supported by clinicians, hospital administrators and many other 
organizations (e.g., Medicare Payment Advisory Commission). Finally, the absence of risk 
adjustment in the CJR program may lead to unintended consequences such as reduced 
access to necessary surgical and/or post-acute care for beneficiaries with chronic disease. 
For example, providers that have established gainsharing agreements or contracts with CJR 
participant hospitals may decline to care for patients that have predicted expenditures that 
exceed the hospital’s unadjusted target price. By closely aligning reimbursement and 
predicted expenditures, CMS may partially mitigate patient selection concerns in the CJR 
program.
Ellimoottil et al.
Page 7
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 This analysis suggests that CMS-HCC based risk-adjustment impacts reconciliation 
payments when target prices are regionalized. Moving forward, research in this area should 
focus on defining risk-adjustment variables beyond the CMS-HCC model that are predictive 
of episode cost, reflect underlying severity of illness of the patient, and can be relatively 
easily obtained from administrative claims. For this purpose, clinical registry data may be an 
option if it can be linked to Medicare claims.15–17 Clinical registry data often have robust 
risk adjustment variables that are not available from administrative claims. The trade-off is, 
however, that these data are labor-intensive and expensive to obtain. For example, in 2011 
Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan funded and established the Michigan Arthroplasty 
Registry Collaborative Quality Initiative (MARCQI). MARCQI is a statewide quality 
collaborative established to improve care of patients undergoing joint replacement.15 The 
MARCQI data registry includes information on clinical indications for surgery, procedure 
details, surgical approach, and specific complications that may not be identifiable from 
billing data.
In the end, the goal of any alternative payment model should be to provide hospitals with 
realistic incentives to promote high-quality care and reduce costs. While we believe that the 
Comprehensive Care for Joint Replacement model could serve as an important step in that 
direction, the inclusion of CMS-HCC based risk adjustment would make the program more 
equitable and acceptable for all participants and limit potential unintended consequences for 
Medicare beneficiaries with multiple comorbid conditions.
References
1. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Medicare Program: Comprehensive Care for Joint 
Replacement payment model for acute care hospitals furnishing lower extremity joint replacement 
services. Federal Register. Nov 24. 2015 Available at: https://www.federalregister.gov/articles/
2015/11/24/2015-29438/medicare-program-comprehensive-care-for-joint-replacement-payment-
model-for-acute-care-hospitals
2. Mechanic RE. Mandatory Medicare Bundled Payment — Is It Ready for Prime Time? N Engl J 
Med. 2015; 373:1291–1293. [PubMed: 26308595] 
3. Miller DC, Gust C, Dimick JB, et al. Large variations in Medicare payments for surgery highlight 
savings potential from bundled payment programs. Health Aff (Millwood). 2011; 30:2107–15. 
[PubMed: 22068403] 
4. Pope GC, Kautter J, Ellis RP, et al. Risk adjustment of Medicare capitation payments using the 
CMS-HCC model. Health Care Financ Rev. 2004; 25:119–41. [accessed September 1, 2014] 
Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15493448. [PubMed: 15493448] 
5. QualityNet. [accessed January 15, 2016] Available at: http://www.qualitynet.org/dcs/ContentServer?
c=Page&pagename=QnetPublic%2FPage%2FQnetTier4&cid=1228774267858
6. Shahian DM, Normand S-LT. Comparison of “risk-adjusted” hospital outcomes. Circulation. 2008; 
117:1955–63. [PubMed: 18391106] 
7. Werner RM, Dudley A. Medicare’s new hospital value-based purchasing program is likely to have 
only a small impact on hospital payments. Health Aff. 2012; 31:1932–1940.
8. Abdelsattar ZM, Birkmeyer JD, Wong SL. Variation in Medicare Payments for Colorectal Cancer 
Surgery. J Oncol Pract. 2015; 11:391–5. [PubMed: 26130817] 
9. Schoenfeld AJ, Harris MB, Liu H, et al. Variations in Medicare payments for episodes of spine 
surgery. Spine J. 2014; 14:2793–8. [PubMed: 25017141] 
10. Cram P, Ravi B, Vaughan-Sarrazin MS, et al. What Drives Variation in Episode-of-care Payments 
for Primary TKA? An Analysis of Medicare Administrative Data. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2015; 
473:3337–47. [PubMed: 26239239] 
Ellimoottil et al.
Page 8
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 11. Li Y, Lu X, Wolf BR, et al. Variation of Medicare payments for total knee arthroplasty. J 
Arthroplasty. 2013; 28:1513–20. [PubMed: 23845765] 
12. Schilling PL, Bozic KJ. Development and Validation of Perioperative Risk-Adjustment Models for 
Hip Fracture Repair, Total Hip Arthroplasty, and Total Knee Arthroplasty. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 
2016; 98:e2. [PubMed: 26738909] 
13. SooHoo NF, Li Z, Chan V, et al. The Importance of Risk Adjustment in Reporting Total Joint 
Arthroplasty Outcomes. J Arthroplasty. 2015
14. Burwell SM. Setting value-based payment goals--HHS efforts to improve U.S. health care. N Engl 
J Med. 2015; 372:897–9. [PubMed: 25622024] 
15. Markel DC, Allen MW, Zappa NM. Can an Arthroplasty Registry Help Decrease Transfusions in 
Primary Total Joint Replacement? A Quality Initiative. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2016; 474:126–31. 
[PubMed: 26215083] 
16. Franklin PD, Lewallen D, Bozic K, et al. Implementation of patient-reported outcome measures in 
U.S. Total joint replacement registries: rationale, status, and plans. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2014; 
96(Suppl 1):104–9. [PubMed: 25520425] 
17. Maradit Kremers H, Lewallen LW, Lahr BD, et al. Do claims-based comorbidities adequately 
capture case mix for surgical site infections? Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2015; 473:1777–86. 
[PubMed: 25480123] 
Ellimoottil et al.
Page 9
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 EXHIBIT 1. 
Figure shows statewide variation in patient complexity. If risk-adjustment is implemented in 
the CJR model, hospitals that treat medically complex patients will receive additional 
reimbursement from CMS
SOURCE: Authors’ analysis of data from the Medicare Research Identifiable Files, 2011–
2013
NOTES: Each marker represents a hospital in Michigan. CMS-HCC risk scores reflect the 
medical complexity of the hospital’s patient population and incorporate age, gender, 
comorbidity, and dual eligible status and original reason for Medicare entitlement. Net 
difference is calculated by subtracting risk-adjusted reconciliation payments from 
unadjusted reconciliation payments. A negative net difference means that the hospital would 
expect a reduction in reconciliation payments with risk adjustment. Regional target prices 
were used to calculate reconciliation payments.
Ellimoottil et al.
Page 10
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 EXHIBIT 2. 
Reconciliations payments are significantly associated with average CMS-HCC risk scores 
when a regional benchmark is used
SOURCE: Authors’ analysis of data from the Medicare Research Identifiable Files, 2011–
2013
NOTES: Each marker represents a hospital in Michigan. Each hospital’s reconciliation 
payment represents the difference between target episode spending and actual episode 
spending divided by the total number of joint replacements performed. A negative 
reconciliation payment means the hospital must repay Medicare.
Ellimoottil et al.
Page 11
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
