 ARTICLE
OPEN
DMAb inoculation of synthetic cross reactive antibodies
protects against lethal influenza A and B infections
Sarah T. C. Elliott1, Nicole L. Kallewaard2, Ebony Benjamin2, Leslie Wachter-Rosati2, Josephine M. McAuliffe2, Ami Patel1,
Trevor R. F. Smith3, Katherine Schultheis
3, Daniel H. Park1, Seleeke Flingai1, Megan C. Wise1, Janess Mendoza3, Stephanie Ramos3,
Kate E. Broderick3, Jian Yan3, Laurent M. Humeau3, Niranjan Y. Sardesai3, Kar Muthumani1, Qing Zhu2 and David B. Weiner1
Influenza virus remains a significant public health threat despite innovative vaccines and antiviral drugs. A major limitation to
current vaccinations and therapies against influenza virus is pathogenic diversity generated by shift and drift. A simple, cost-
effective passive immunization strategy via in vivo production of cross-protective antibody molecules may augment existing
vaccines and antiviral drugs in seasonal and pandemic outbreaks. We engineered synthetic plasmid DNA to encode two novel and
broadly cross-protective monoclonal antibodies targeting influenza A and B. We utilized enhanced in vivo delivery of these plasmid
DNA-encoded monoclonal antibody (DMAb) constructs and show that this strategy induces robust levels of functional antibodies
directed against influenza A and B viruses in mouse sera. Mice receiving a single inoculation with anti-influenza A DMAb survive
lethal Group 1 H1 and Group 2 H3 influenza A challenges, while inoculation with anti-influenza B DMAb yields protection against
lethal Victoria and Yamagata lineage influenza B morbidity and mortality. Furthermore, these two DMAbs can be delivered
coordinately resulting in exceptionally broad protection against both influenza A and B. We demonstrate this protection is similar to
that achieved by conventional protein antibody delivery. DMAbs warrant further investigation as a novel immune therapy platform
with distinct advantages for sustained immunoprophylaxis against influenza.
npj Vaccines  (2017) 2:18 ; doi:10.1038/s41541-017-0020-x
INTRODUCTION
Influenza virus infection remains a serious threat to global health
and the world economy. Annual influenza epidemics result in a
large number of hospitalizations, with an estimated 3–5 million
cases of severe disease and approximately 250,000–500,000
deaths
globally
(http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/
fs211/en), with much higher mortality rates possible during
pandemics. Despite substantial innovations in treatment and
prevention of influenza, licensed antiviral drugs and vaccines do
not eliminate the risk of infection. Prompt treatment with
therapeutic antiviral neuraminidase (NA) inhibitors can lower
influenza morbidity, but these drugs have a limited therapeutic
window and are subject to sporadic resistance.1–3 Active antiviral
immunization with prophylactic influenza vaccines has remarkably
lowered seasonal influenza morbidity and mortality at the
population level. However, at-risk groups such as infants, the
elderly, and otherwise immune-compromised individuals lack
optimal
adaptive
immune
responses
following
vaccination.
Furthermore, to counteract the high rate of influenza virus
antigenic drift, seasonal vaccines must be re-formulated and re-
administered
annually
at
great
cost
with
significant
time
constraints. Emerging strains of influenza arising from antigenic
shift (re-assortment) and cross-species transmission to humans
also pose a considerable pandemic threat.4 The limited capacity to
develop a new vaccine to meet the immediacy and high demand
accompanying a pandemic outbreak highlights the global need
for new, broad, cost-effective intervention strategies against
influenza.5
Passive immunization utilizing antibody-based approaches is a
notable alternative or adjunct therapy for transient protection
against influenza.6 Relatively recently, several laboratories have
described
new
classes
of
influenza-neutralizing
monoclonal
antibodies that target conserved sites in the hemagglutinin (HA)
antigen and cross-react across diverse influenza A or influenza B
viruses.7–10 Preclinical studies in mice and ferrets reveal these
novel cross-reactive antibodies can effectively prevent and treat
severe influenza infection, supporting their further study for
antibody immunoprophylaxis or immunotherapy in influenza
virus-infected humans. While great strides in antibody delivery
are being made, the expense of bioprocessed monoclonal
antibodies, as well as current requirements for frequent admin-
istration, likely pose limitations for universal adoption of this
approach and dissemination to global populations. Alternative
delivery technologies which co-opt aspects traditionally asso-
ciated with immunization, such as viral vectored gene therapy,
have shown some promise in delivering anti-influenza antibodies
in mice,11, 12 but permanence concerns and pre-existing anti-
vector serology may limit utility of repeatedly using these viral
vectors in humans.
A distinct approach to antibody immune therapy which would
allow for simplicity of production and lower costs, with high
stability and ease of deliverability could be advantageous. In this
regard, the technology of DNA-encoded protein antigen delivery
Received: 9 February 2017 Revised: 17 May 2017 Accepted: 24 May 2017
1Wistar Institute of Anatomy & Biology, Philadelphia, PA, USA; 2Department of Infectious Diseases and Vaccines, MedImmune LLC, Gaithersburg, MD, USA and 3Inovio
Pharmaceuticals, Plymouth Meeting, PA, USA
Correspondence: David B. Weiner (dweiner@wistar.org)
Sarah T. C. Elliott and Nicole L. Kallewaard contributed equally to this work.
www.nature.com/npjvaccines
Published in partnership with the Sealy Center for Vaccine Development
 has specific advantages as demonstrated by recent successes in
the DNA vaccine field: plasmid DNA is well-tolerated and non-
integrating, it does not require cold-chain distribution, it can be
delivered repeatedly, and it is relatively inexpensive to produce.13
However, to date, the ability to produce substantial levels of
protein expression systemically from in vivo delivery of plasmid
DNA has not been considered feasible.
In this study, we describe construction, development, and
in vivo delivery of DNA plasmids encoding optimized influenza-
specific broadly neutralizing antibodies, FluA and FluB, that target
diverse influenza A and influenza B viruses, respectively. Delivery
of FluA DMAb and FluB DMAb results in robust in vivo expression
of functional antibodies which protect mice against lethal
challenge. We show for the first time that FluA and FluB DMAbs
are functionally equivalent to their corresponding protein mono-
clonal antibodies purified from in vitro cell production. These
DMAb impart simultaneous prophylactic cross-protection against
diverse strains of influenza A and influenza B virus when given in
combination. Furthermore, FluA DMAb and FluB DMAb afford
immediate protection without inhibiting host antiviral immunity.
The DMAb anti-influenza technology provides a unique alternative
strategy
to
seasonal vaccination,
bioprocessed
recombinant
protein monoclonal antibodies or gene therapy approaches for
universal prevention of severe influenza infection. This approach
has important implications for protection against and treatment of
infectious diseases.
RESULTS
FluA and FluB DNA-encoded monoclonal antibodies are expressed
in vitro and in vivo
Broadly-neutralizing monoclonal antibodies against influenza A
(FluA) and influenza B (FluB) were isolated from human memory B-
cells as previously described.14, 15 The FluA monoclonal antibody
is closely related to a recently published broadly-neutralizing
monoclonal antibody, which shows a wide range of HA cross-
reactivity due to the binding to the HA stalk and is capable of
neutralizing influenza A viruses from both group 1 and group 2
(average IC50 of 2.56 μg/mL, data not shown).10 The FluB
monoclonal antibody was identified and selected based on its
ability to potently neutralize influenza B viruses belonging to both
Victoria and Yamagata lineages (average IC50 of 0.64 μg/mL, data
not shown). This antibody binds to a conserved region in the
globular head of influenza B HA, and can inhibit viral hemagglu-
tination of red blood cells. To test the utility of DMAb delivery to
prevent severe influenza infection, a synthetic DNA transgene
encoding either human IgG FluA or FluB was synthesized de novo,
and cloned into a mammalian expression plasmid. Multiple
modifications were made to enhance DMAb expression including
DNA codon optimization, RNA optimization, and formulation of
plasmid DNA (Supplemental Fig. S1), as well as plasmid vector
design, incorporation of leader sequences for processing and
secretion,
and
CELLECTRA®
electroporation
techniques.16,
17
Quantitative enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) of
human IgG in human embryonic kidney 293 T cells transfected
with either FluA DMAb or FluB DMAb synthetic constructs
confirmed intracellular expression and extracellular secretion of
FluA and FluB antibodies, respectively (Fig. 1a). Human IgG
Western blot also demonstrated antibody heavy-chain and light-
chain expression in transfected 293 T cells (Fig. 1b).
Athymic CAnN.Cg-Foxn1nu/Crl nude mice were inoculated with
FluA or FluB DMAb plasmid DNA via intramuscular injection at
doses from 100 to 300 μg, utilizing intramuscular electroporation
(IM-EP) formulated with hyaluronidase to enhance DMAb delivery
and expression (Supplemental Figure S1). Peak expression levels in
nude mouse sera reached a mean of 10.0 μg/mL (±2.6 SEM) and
31.8 μg/mL
(±8.1
SEM)
for
FluA
DMAb
and
FluB
DMAb,
respectively. Notably, significant human IgG expression persisted
10 weeks (Fig. 1c, d) and beyond, indicative of the in vivo stability
of DNA plasmid and antibody expression.
We next defined the expression of anti-influenza DMAbs in
immune-competent BALB/c mice (Fig. 1e, f), an established
influenza challenge model. BALB/c mice received 100–300 μg of
plasmid DNA via IM-EP. The FluA DMAb construct generated
modest levels of human IgG in BALB/c mouse sera as measured
5 days post delivery (300 μg plasmid mean, 1.8 μg/mL ± 0.3 SEM).
Similar to what was observed in nude mice, FluB DMAb expression
was more robust than FluA DMAb expression 5 days post delivery
(200 μg mean, 5.4 μg/mL ± 0.6 SEM; 300 μg mean, 10 μg/mL ± 1.9
SEM). Unlike the stable expression observed in nude mice, serum
DMAb levels in BALB/c mice were undetectable 10 days post
delivery, likely due to mouse adaptive anti-human-IgG responses
against the expressed DMAb. Collectively, these data clearly
demonstrated DMAb human IgG was produced at substantial
levels in vivo following administration of plasmid constructs.
In vivo-expressed influenza DMAbs are functionally active and
demonstrate broad cross-reactivity
In vitro binding activity in sera collected from DMAb-treated
BALB/c mice was determined to test if DMAbs generated in vivo
retained cross-reactivity to multiple subtypes of influenza A and
both lineages of influenza B. FluA DMAb from sera bound to a
comprehensive array of influenza A Group 1 and Group 2 HA
antigens from viruses known to infect humans (Table 1) including
recombinant trimeric HA from representative seasonal H1, H3 and
potentially pandemic H2, H5, H6, H7, H9 influenza isolates (Fig. 2a),
as well as recombinant monomeric HA H10 (Supplemental Fig. S2).
FluB DMAb in murine sera bound to influenza B HA from
representative Victoria and Yamagata lineage viruses (Fig. 2b).
Half-maximal effective concentrations (EC50) of reciprocal serum
dilutions indicated higher binding activity in sera of mice receiving
more plasmid DNA, reflecting increased DMAb expression levels.
The potent in vitro neutralization capabilities of the parent FluB
monoclonal antibody allowed for neutralization activity testing
whereas the potency of the FluA monoclonal antibody did not allow
for differentiation from the non-specific interference of mouse
serum in the microneutralization assay. Sera from mice that received
FluB DMAb plasmid constructs effectively neutralized both Yama-
gata and Victoria lineage influenza B viruses in an in vitro cell-based
assay (Fig. 2c), with a similar pattern of reactivity as seen in binding
assays. After normalizing for human IgG concentration in each
sample, the calculated half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50)
from mice treated with FluB DMAb plasmid (0.015 μg/mL for B/
Florida/4/2006 and 0.030 μg/mL for B/Malaysia/2506/2004) was
similar to that of purified recombinant FluB monoclonal antibody
(0.011 μg/mL for B/Florida/4/2006 and 0.047 μg/mL for B/Malaysia/
2506/2004). The HA-binding activity and neutralization titers of
human IgG observed in serum of mice receiving FluA or FluB DMAb
plasmid constructs confirmed in vivo expression of functional DMAb
and demonstrated the remarkable, broad cross-reactivity of these
novel anti-influenza FluA and FluB antibodies.
Influenza DMAbs protect mice from diverse influenza A and
influenza B lethal challenges
To assess the in vivo utility of the technology, DMAb-treated
animals were evaluated in lethal influenza challenge models.
Animals were administered 300 μg FluA DMAb plasmid DNA or an
irrelevant DMAb construct against dengue virus (DVSF-3)17 via IM-
EP, then challenged with a lethal dose of A/California/7/2009
H1N1 (A/CA/09 H1) 4 days post administration (Fig. 3). For direct
in vivo comparison of DMAb and recombinant IgG, a dilution
series of FluA protein monoclonal antibody was delivered
intraperitoneally (i.p.) to separate groups of mice 1 day prior to
infection. Serum samples obtained from all animals at the time of
Influenza DNA antibody immunoprophylaxis
STC Elliott et al.
2
npj Vaccines (2017)  18 
Published in partnership with the Sealy Center for Vaccine Development
 infection showed that FluA DMAb construct delivery resulted in
similar mean human IgG concentrations and HA binding activity
as observed in mice treated with 0.3 mg/kg of recombinant FluA
IgG (Fig. 3a, Supplemental Fig. S3). When challenged with a lethal
dose of A/CA/09 H1 virus, FluA DMAb treatment provided a 90%
survival benefit whereas all animals treated with control DVSF-3
DMAb succumbed to infection (Fig. 3b). Corresponding to human
IgG expression levels, the FluA DMAb treatment and 0.3 mg/kg of
FluA purified protein exhibited similar protection from lethality
and influenza-induced weight loss (Fig. 3c).
Expanding these results with another clinically relevant influenza A
virus, a similar study was performed using a lethal challenge of rA/
Hong Kong/8/68 H3N1 (rA/HK/68 H3) 5 days post DMAb adminis-
tration. Again at the time of infection, human antibody levels showed
FluA DMAb and 0.3 mg/kg of recombinant FluA IgG at similar
concentrations in sera (Fig. 3d). After lethal rA/HK/68 H3 challenge,
FluA DMAb provided a significant survival benefit compared to
DMAb control (80% survival rate with FluA DMAb versus 0% survival
rate with DVSF-3 DMAb) (Fig. 3e). These results show FluA DMAb
effectively protected animals from lethal infection by two clinically
relevant seasonal H1 and H3 subtypes known to cause disease in
humans, and importantly demonstrates similar in vivo antiviral
activity of FluA antibody generated via the DMAb platform versus
bioproecessed recombinant FluA antibody-delivered i.p.
To evaluate the protective capability of the FluB DMAb, we
performed similar lethal challenge studies with influenza B. In
these studies, mice were administered 200 μg FluB DMAb
construct or control DMAb construct via IM-EP, then challenged
with a lethal dose of virus from the Victoria (B/Malaysia/2506/
2004 (B/Mal/04)) or Yamagata lineage (B/Florida/4/2006 (B/Fla/
06)) 5 days later (Fig. 4). Again, for direct comparison of DMAb
versus purified protein, recombinant FluB monoclonal antibody
was administered i.p. to separate groups 1 day prior to infection.
Quantification of human IgG present in mouse serum at time of
challenge showed that FluB DMAb yielded similar mean human
IgG concentrations and HA binding activity as observed in
animals treated with 1 mg/kg of FluB protein i.p. (Fig. 4a, d,
Supplemental Fig. S3). Remarkably, 100% of FluB DMAb-treated
mice survived both Victoria and Yamagata lethal influenza B
challenge, whereas non-specific DMAb controls fully succumbed
to both infections by Day 8 (Fig. 4b, e). Consistent with survival
data, FluB DMAb protected mice from influenza B-related
morbidity with treated animals exhibiting little-to-no weight loss
(Fig. 4c, f). In addition, FluB DMAb-treated mice exhibited
significantly lower lung viral loads than those observed in control
mice (Supplemental Fig. S4). Survival, weight loss, lung viral loads,
and in vitro binding activity in sera of FluB DMAb-treated mice
closely paralleled the same parameters in mice receiving 1 mg/kg
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
FluA
FluB
pVax1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Human IgG (µg/mL)
Supernatant
FluA
FluB
pVax1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Lysate
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0
5
10
15
20
Day
Human IgG (µg/mL)
300 µg
100 µg
200 µg
FluA DMAb
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0
10
20
30
40
50
Day
Human IgG (µg/mL)
FluB DMAb
100 µg
200 µg
300 µg
100 
µg
200 
µg
300 
µg
0
1
2
3
FluA 
DMAb 
plasmid 
DNA
Human IgG (µg/mL)
100 
µg
200 
µg
300 
µg
0
5
10
15
20
FluB 
DMAb 
plasmid 
DNA
Human IgG (µg/mL)
FluA FluB
pVax1
IgG
S
L
S
L
S
L
FluA FluB
62
38
49
28
17
kDa
Fig. 1
In vitro and in vivo expression of DNA-encoded monoclonal antibody (DMAb) constructs. a 293 T cells were transfected with FluA or
FluB DMAb plasmid constructs, or empty plasmid (pVax1). Human IgG expression in cell supernatants (left) and lysates (right) was quantified
by ELISA. (n = 3 biological replicates, mean ± SEM). b Western blot of human IgG heavy-chain and light-chain peptides in reduced DMAb-
transfected 293 T cell supernatants (S) and lysates (L) (left), and purified protein monoclonal antibody FluA and FluB (IgG, right). Samples derive
from the same experiment and gels/blots were processed in parallel. c, d DMAb human IgG in CAnN.Cg-Foxn1nu/Crl nude mouse sera after
intramuscular electroporation (IM-EP) (Day 0) with 100–300 μg of FluA (c) or FluB (d) DMAb plasmid DNA. Sera were collected up to 35 days
post electroporation in mice treated with 100 μg FluA DMAb, and up to 70 days in all other groups. (n = 5 animals per group, mean ± SEM). e, f
Levels of DMAb human IgG in BALB/c mouse sera 5 days post administration of 100–300 μg of FluA (e) or FluB (f) DMAb plasmid DNA. Dotted
line indicates limit of detection (LOD). (n = 5 animals per group, mean ± SEM)
Influenza DNA antibody immunoprophylaxis
STC Elliott et al.
3
Published in partnership with the Sealy Center for Vaccine Development
npj Vaccines (2017)  18 
 purified FluB protein IgG, again confirming the in vivo functional
equivalence of DMAb and purified recombinant monoclonal
antibodies.
Co-administration of FluA and FluB DMAb protects mice against
influenza A and B challenge, and homologous re-challenge
Influenza A and B viruses co-circulate, and a comprehensive
immunoprophylactic strategy against seasonal infection should
target both influenza types. To test the ability of the DMAb
platform to serve in this role, both FluA DMAb and FluB DMAb
constructs were administered to BALB/c mice. Comparator groups
of animals received a mix of purified recombinant FluA and FluB
monoclonal antibodies i.p. Mice were challenged with a lethal
dose of either A/CA/09 H1 or B/Fla/06. Serum samples at the time
of infection showed that the DMAb-treated animals had an
average of 3 μg/mL of total human IgG (Fig. 5a). Influenza A-
specific and B-specific ELISAs showed that FluA and FluB DMAbs
exhibited expression levels similar to those observed in sera of
mice receiving 0.3 mg/kg of recombinant FluA monoclonal
antibody and 1 mg/kg recombinant FluB monoclonal antibody
delivered i.p., respectively (Fig. 5b). All mice receiving FluA plus
FluB DMAb were completely protected from lethal infection,
whereas 90% and 100% of mice treated with control DMAb
succumbed to the influenza A and B infections, respectively
(Fig. 5c, d). DMAb administration and delivery of protein IgG
resulted in similar levels of protection, apparent in both survival
rate and body weight loss (Supplemental Fig. S5).
Twenty-one days following initial infection, sera of surviving
BALB/c mice had undetectable levels of human IgG (data not
shown), indicating DMAb and recombinant protein were no
longer present. Serum hemagglutination inhibition (HAI) and
mouse anti-HA binding antibodies against the infecting influenza
strain confirmed that mice mounted a host immune response to
infection (Supplemental Fig. S6). DMAb-treated mice were able to
mount host immune responses against the virus to the same
extent as the purified IgG-treated animals.
Fig. 2
Serum FluA DMAb and FluB DMAb are functional. Functional assays performed with sera from BALB/c mice collected 5 days after
treatment with 100–300 μg of FluA DMAb plasmid DNA (a) or FluB DMAb plasmid DNA (b) and (c). a ELISA binding EC50 values (reciprocal
dilution) for individual mouse serum samples to influenza A HA proteins from Group 1 (H1, A/California/07/2009 H1N1; H2, A/Missouri/2006
H2N3; H5, A/Vietnam/1203/2004 H5N1; H6, A/teal/Hong Kong/W312/97 H6N1; H9, A/chicken/Hong Kong/G9/1997 H9N2) and Group 2 (H3, A/
Perth/16/2009 H3N2; H7, A/Netherlands/219/2003 H7N7). b ELISA Binding EC50 values (reciprocal dilution) for individual mouse serum
samples to influenza B HA proteins from the Yamagata (Yam B/Florida/4/2006) and Victoria (Vic B/Brisbane/60/2008) lineages. c Neutralization
IC50 values (reciprocal dilution) for individual mouse serum samples against influenza B viruses from the Yamagata (Yam virus B/Florida/4/
2006) and Victoria (Vic virus B/Malaysia/2506/2004) lineages. (n = 5 animals per group, mean ± SD)
Table 1.
Serum DMAbs bind to hemagglutinin antigens from
influenza virus subtypes known to cause disease in humans
Hemagglutinin Zoonotic transmission
to humansa
Non-human
Hostsb
DMAb
Bindingc
Influenza A–Group 1
H1d
Sw
Av, Sw
+
H2
Av
Av, Sw
+
H5
Av
Av, Sw
+
H6
Av
Av
+
H9
Av
Av, Sw
+
Influenza A–Group 2
H3d
Sw
Av, Sw, Other
+
H7
Av
Av, Other
+
H10
Av
Av
+
Influenza B
Victoriad
N/A
N/A
+
Yamagatad
N/A
N/A
+
a Species from which influenza viruses crossed into humans. Av – Avian, Sw
– Swine, N/A – not applicable or unknown
b Non-human species known to carry influenza viruses with the listed
hemagglutinin subtype
c DMAb expressed in mouse sera binds to hemagglutinin antigens of the
listed subtype by ELISA (+)
d Components of commercially-available seasonal influenza vaccines
Influenza DNA antibody immunoprophylaxis
STC Elliott et al.
4
npj Vaccines (2017)  18 
Published in partnership with the Sealy Center for Vaccine Development
 Twenty-eight days following initial infection, all surviving mice
(including one DMAb control mouse that survived initial A/CA/09
H1 infection) were re-challenged with a lethal dose of homo-
logous influenza virus to confirm that the level of mouse host
immune response was protective. All previously-challenged mice
survived the lethal homologous re-challenge without substantial
weight loss, whereas 80–90% of untreated age-matched mice
naïve to infection did not survive (Fig. 5e, f, Supplemental Fig. S5).
These
results
demonstrate
protective
host
anti-influenza
responses developed in the presence of protective levels of FluA
and FluB antibodies whether expressed in vivo as DMAb or
delivered as protein monoclonal antibody, demonstrating that
DMAbs did not antagonize each other or the host immune
response to influenza.
Fig. 3
FluA DMAb protects mice from diverse lethal influenza A challenges. BALB/c mice were treated with FluA DMAb plasmid DNA (closed
symbols) 4–5 days prior to intranasal infection with A/California/7/2009 H1N1 (a–c) or re-assorted rA/HongKong/8/68 × PR8 H3N1 (d–f). 1 day
prior to infection, separate mice received 0.03–1 mg/kg FluA protein monoclonal antibody i.p. (open symbols). Mice treated with 300 μg
irrelevant DMAb (DVSF-3) or 1 mg/kg non-specific protein monoclonal antibody (R347) served as controls. a, d Human IgG in mouse sera at
the time of influenza infection. Dotted line indicates LOD. (a n = 10 animals, d n = 5 animals per group, mean ± SD). b, e Kaplan–Meier survival
curves of BALB/c mice challenged with influenza A (n = 10 animals per group, *p ≤ 0.0001 FluA DMAb versus Control DMAb). c, f Weight of
BALB/c mice following influenza A challenge. Dotted line indicates 25% maximum weight loss. (n = 10 animals per group, mean ± SEM)
Fig. 4
FluB DMAb protects mice from diverse lethal influenza B challenges. BALB/c mice were treated with FluB DMAb plasmid DNA 5 days
prior to infection with B/Malaysia/2506/2004 Victoria (a–c) or B/Florida/4/2006 Yamagata (d–f) lineage virus. One day prior to infection,
separate groups of mice received 0.03–1 mg/kg FluB protein monoclonal antibody i.p. a, d Human IgG in mouse sera at the time of infection.
Dotted line indicates LOD (n = 10 animals per group, mean ± SD). b, e Kaplan–Meier survival curves of BALB/c mice challenged with influenza B
(n = 10 animals per group, *p ≤ 0.0001 FluB DMAb versus Control DMAb). c, f Weight of BALB/c mice following influenza B challenge. Dotted
line indicates 25% maximum weight loss. (n = 10 animals per group, mean ± SEM)
Influenza DNA antibody immunoprophylaxis
STC Elliott et al.
5
Published in partnership with the Sealy Center for Vaccine Development
npj Vaccines (2017)  18 
 DISCUSSION
Seasonal influenza infection results in an annual average of $10
billion USD in direct medical costs and $80 billion USD economic
burden in the United States alone.18 Despite availability of
influenza vaccines and anti-viral drugs, large sub-populations
remain
susceptible
to
complications
arising
from
seasonal
influenza infection. Almost 90% of deaths attributed to seasonal
influenza in the United States occur in adults 65 years and older,19
a population in which estimated vaccine efficacy is as low as 36%
in years of significant antigenic drift (http://www.cdc.gov/flu/
professionals/vaccination/effectivenessqa.htm) with standard vac-
cine technology. In addition to the persistent hazards of seasonal
infection, pandemic influenza outbreaks threaten to outpace
vaccine design. Therefore, innovative universal interventions
against influenza infection are vital.
Most of the current efforts to create a universal influenza
vaccine have focused on the design of recombinant antigens that
can serve as immunogens to spur active immunity and maturation
of host cross-protective anti-influenza antibodies.20–22 The con-
cordant discovery of novel broadly-neutralizing anti-influenza
monoclonal
antibodies
suggests
passive
immunization
may
complement or bypass traditional immunization strategies against
influenza. Here, we sought to bypass active immunization and
generate cross-protective antibody responses via inoculation with
DMAbs. We show that this approach generated functional anti-
influenza antibodies in mouse sera following inoculation with
plasmid DNA constructs encoding two antibodies against HA from
influenza subtypes known to cause disease in humans, leading to
significant protection against lethal seasonal influenza A and
influenza B challenges. Studies are underway to further enhance
DMAb expression, and to assess the in vivo capability of DMAb to
protect against highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses and
other potentially pandemic strains.
A plethora of protein monoclonal antibodies are commercially
available for treatment of auto-immune disease, cancer, and other
chronic conditions. Yet given the expense of administering
biologics, and their limited half-life, only one protein monoclonal
antibody has been approved and is routinely used for prophylaxis
against an infectious disease target (palivizumab, RSV).23 DMAb
technology is a notable delivery alternative as DMAb produced
from muscle cells in vivo and purified monoclonal antibodies
manufactured in vitro confer similar levels of protection against
lethal influenza infection in mice. Plasmid DNA lacks limitations
posed by pre-existing anti-vector serology and the DMAb platform
may be utilized repeatedly to deliver additional anti-influenza
antibodies to combat viral escape, or antibodies aimed at entirely
different pathogens.16,
17 Plasmid DNA also has little risk of
genomic integration (reviewed in ref. 24) and similar plasmid
designs have demonstrated safety in DNA vaccine human clinical
studies.25
DNA plasmid-based delivery of monoclonal antibodies provides
conceptual advantages at each step of the supply chain. In
production, DMAb are inexpensive relative to protein monoclonal
antibody (and viral vectors) because DNA replication does not
require mammalian cell culture. DNA is simple to scale up and
stable for storage, a particularly important consideration in
resource-limited settings. The potential for long-term DMAb
expression with sustainable passive immune protection against
Fig. 5
Co-administration of FluA and FluB DMAb protects mice from lethal influenza A/B challenge and homologous re-challenge. BALB/c
mice received both FluA and FluB DMAb. Separate mice were treated with both FluA plus FluB protein monoclonal antibody. Mice received
initial infection with either influenza A/California/7/2009 or B/Florida/4/2006. a Total human IgG levels in mice sera at the time of infection (n
= 8 animals per group, mean ± SD). b Influenza A-specific and B-specific human IgG in mouse serum at the time of infection quantified by HA
binding ELISA (n = 8 animals per group, mean ± SD). c, d Kaplan–Meier survival curves following initial infection with A/California/07/2009 (c)
or B/Florida/4/2006 (d) (n = 10 animals per group, *p ≤ 0.0001 Flu DMAb versus control DMAb). e, f 28 days following initial infection, surviving
mice received homologous influenza re-infection. Kaplan–Meier survival curves following re-infection, compared to mice receiving neither
DMAb/IgG treatment nor initial infection (naïve). (Number of animals in each group are shown)
Influenza DNA antibody immunoprophylaxis
STC Elliott et al.
6
npj Vaccines (2017)  18 
Published in partnership with the Sealy Center for Vaccine Development
 influenza infection may circumvent the need for frequent
recombinant antibody injections. Long-term expression of DMAb
can be further augmented by emerging antibody half-life
extension
technologies.26
Conceivably,
inoculation
with
influenza-specific DMAbs may have utility to augment a vaccine
campaign, generating almost immediate prophylaxis against
severe influenza
infection
while allowing
for an adequate
vaccine-induced immune response to mature. DMAbs may also
provide a vital option for severely immune impaired individuals
incapable of mounting functional active immune responses.
DMAb technology is an exceptionally compelling tool warranting
further
exploration
for
sustained
protection
against
severe
infection by diverse strains influenza A and B viruses, as well as
further investigation against infectious diseases more generally.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
DNA-encoded monoclonal antibody (DMAb) constructs
Monoclonal antibodies were isolated using similar methodology as
described previously.10, 14, 15 The influenza A monoclonal antibody (FluA)
was isolated based on cross-reactive binding to H5 and H7 HA proteins10
and the influenza B monoclonal antibody (FluB) was isolated based on
neutralization activity against distinct lineages of influenza B. Variable gene
sequences were isolated from cross-reactive clones by reverse transcrip-
tion polymerase chain reaction, cloned, and further modified to revert
nonessential non-germline framework amino acid changes. Full-length
human IgG1κ were transiently expressed in CHO cells and purified for use
in in vivo studies. Plasmid DMAb constructs were engineered as previously
described.16, 17 DMAb constructs encoded fully human IgG1κ monoclonal
antibodies FluA DMAb and FluB DMAb. Antibody amino acid sequences
were DNA codon-optimized and RNA-optimized for expression in human/
mouse, and resulting DNA transgenes were synthesized de novo
(Genscript,
Piscataway,
NJ,
USA).
These
synthetic
transgenes
were
restriction-cloned into a modified pVax1 mammalian expression vector
(Invitrogen) under the cytomegalovirus immediate-early promoter. IgE
heavy-chain and light-chain leader sequences were added for cellular
processing and secretion. In initial studies (Figs. 1–4), transgenes consisted
of antibody heavy-chain and light-chain sequences separated by a furin/
picornavirus-2A peptide cleavage site sequence, yielding expression of
heavy-chain and light-chain peptides from a single plasmid. In later studies
with co-administration of FluA and FluB DMAb (Fig. 5), two FluA DMAb
constructs individually expressing heavy-chain or light-chain FluA peptides
were mixed for expression of heavy-chain and light-chain FluA peptides
from separate plasmids.
Transfection and western blot
Human 293 T cells (ATCC) were maintained in Dulbeco’s modified Eagle
medium (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS).
One day prior to transfection, cells were plated at 0.25 × 106 cells per well
in a 12-well plate and transfected with 0.5 μg plasmid DNA using
GeneJammer
(Agilent
Technologies).
48 h
later,
supernatants
were
collected and adherent cells were lysed with 1× cell lysis buffer (Cell
Signaling) with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Boehringer Mannheim).
Approximately 50 μg of total supernatant/lysate protein and 10 μg of
protein IgG were run with SeeBlue Plus2 pre-stained protein standard
(Thermo Fisher Scientific) on precast 4–12% bis-tris gels (Invitrogen) and
transferred to an Immobilon-FL PVDF membrane (EMD Millipore) using the
iBlot 2 Dry Blotting System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Heavy-chain and
light-chain peptides were identified using IRDye 800CW goat anti-human
IgG (H + L) (LI-COR Biosciences) (1:10,000). Fluorescent blots were scanned
with the Odyssey CLx (LI-COR Biosciences).
Quantitative ELISA
For quantification of total human IgG1κ in cell lysates, cell supernatants,
and mouse sera in Fig. 1 and Supplemental Fig. S1, 96-well MaxiSorp plates
(Nunc) were coated overnight at 4 °C with 10 μg/mL goat anti-human IgG
Fc fragment (Bethyl Laboratories). Plates were blocked with 10% FBS in
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Sample was diluted in 1× PBS + 0.1%
Tween20 and added to plates for 1 h. A standard curve was generated
using purified human IgG1κ (Bethyl Laboratories). Plates were stained with
HRP-conjugated secondary antibody goat anti-human kappa light-chain
(Bethyl Laboratories) (1:20,000) for 1 h and developed using SigmaFast
OPD (Sigma-Aldrich). Absorbance at an OD of 450 nm was measured on a
Synergy2 plate reader (Biotek).
Quantitation of human IgG in murine challenge studies was performed
using 384-well black MaxiSorp plates (Nalgene Nunc) coated overnight at
4 °C with 10 μg/mL goat anti-Human IgG (H + L) (Pierce). Plates were
blocked with Casein Blocker (Thermo), and serum samples and a standard
curve (10 μg/mL of ChromPure Human IgG, whole molecule) (Jackson
Labs) were serially diluted. Plates were washed and stained with a donkey
anti-Human IgG-HRP secondary antibody (Jackson) (1:4,000) and visualized
using SuperSignal ELISA Pico Reagent (Thermo). Luminescence was
measured using Perkin Elmer Envision.
Quantification of specific influenza A or B human IgG in the sera of mice
was performed as described above, with 3 μg/mL of HA protein from A/
Vietnam/1203/2004 (H5N1) or 3 μg/mL of HA from B/Florida/4/2006
(Yamagata) as coating reagent. FluA or FluB purified protein IgG were
used as standards for the influenza A and B assays, respectively.
Binding ELISA
Recombinant HA proteins were expressed and purified as previously
described.27
ELISA
binding
assays
were
performed
using
384-well
MaxiSorp plates (Nunc) coated with 5 µg/mL of purified HA protein from
A/Perth/16/2009 (H3N2), A/Hong Kong/G9/1997 (H9N2), and B/Brisbane/
60/2008 (Victoria); or 3 µg/mL of purified HA protein from A/California/07/
2009 (H1N1), A/Vietnam/1203/2004 (H5N1), A/Netherlands/2003 (H7N7), A/
Missouri/2006 (H2N3), and B/Florida/4/2006 (Yamagata). ELISA plates were
blocked with Casein (Thermo Scientific) and serially diluted antibodies
were incubated for 1 h at room temperature. Bound antibodies were
detected using a peroxidase-conjugated mouse anti-human IgG antibody
(KPL) (1:10,000), followed by development with TMB solution (KPL), and
absorbance measurement at an OD of 450 nm. Mouse serum reactivity to
HA was preformed as described above with the exception of secondary
antibody of peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG antibody (DAKO)
(1:5,000).
Viral stocks, neutralization, and hemmaglutination inhibition
Wild-type influenza strains were obtained from the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, or purchased from the American Tissue Culture
Collection. A re-assortant H3 virus produced by reverse genetics (rA/HK/68)
contained the H3 HA from A/Hong Kong/8/68 (H3N2) and the remaining
seven gene segments from A/Puerto Rico/8/34 (H1N1); the HA of this virus
also contained a N165S mutation that enhances murine pathogenesis.28 All
viruses were propagated in embryonated chicken eggs, and virus titers
were determined by mean 50% tissue culture infective dose (TCID50) per
milliliter. The microneutralization assay was performed as previously
described.27 Briefly, 60 TCID50 of virus per well was added to three-fold
serial dilutions of serum or purified FluB antibody diluted in naïve serum in
a 384-well plate in complete MEM medium containing 0.75 μg/mL N-tosyl-
L-phenylalanyl chloromethyl keytone Trypsin (Worthington) in duplicate
wells. After 1-h incubation at 33 °C and 5% CO2, 2 × 104 Madin–Darby
Canine Kidney cells per well were added to the plate. Plates were
incubated at 33 °C and 5% CO2 for approximately 40 h, and NA activity was
measured by adding a fluorescently-labeled substrate methylumbelliferyl-
N-acetyl neuraminic acid (MU-NANA) (Sigma) to each well at 37 °C for 1 h.
Virus replication represented by NA activity was quantified by reading
fluorescence using the following settings: excitation 355 nm, emission 460
nm, ten flashes per well. HAI assay was performed with serum collected on
Day 21 post infection as previously described.27
Intramuscular DNA electroporation
Thirty minutes prior to DNA electroporation, female BALB/c and CAnN.Cg-
Foxn1nu/Crl mice (Charles River) were pre-treated at each delivery site with
an intramuscular (i.m.) injection of 12 Units (30 μL) hyaluronidase enzyme
(Sigma-Aldrich). Treatment groups were selected at random and data
collection was not blinded. In initial studies (Figs. 1–4), 100 μg (30 μL) of
either FluA or FluB DMAb plasmid was injected i.m. to the tibialis anterior
(TA) and/or quadriceps (Q) muscle; mice received 100 μg DNA at one site
(TA), 200 μg DNA at two sites (right TA + left TA), or 300 μg DNA at three
sites (right TA + left TA + Q). In later co-administration studies (Fig. 5), mice
received both FluA and FluB DMAb constructs. We modified the FluA
construct design to express heavy-chain and light-chain peptides on
separate plasmids, generating equivalent serum levels of FluA IgG from
fewer injection sites than the one-plasmid design. One hundred μg of a 1:1
Influenza DNA antibody immunoprophylaxis
STC Elliott et al.
7
Published in partnership with the Sealy Center for Vaccine Development
npj Vaccines (2017)  18 
 (wt:wt) mixture of FluA heavy-chain and light-chain plasmid were delivered
over two sites (right TA + right Q), and 200-μg plasmid FluB was delivered
over two sites as before (left TA + left Q). IM-EP was performed
immediately after each DNA injection with a CELLECTRA® 3P adaptive
constant current device (Inovio Pharmaceuticals).13, 29, 30
Lethal influenza challenge
Six- to eight-week-old BALB/c mice (Harlan Laboratories) received FluA
DMAb, FluB DMAb, or an irrelevant control DMAb (DVSF-3, previously
described)17 via IM-EP 4–5 days prior to infection. One day prior to
infection, protein IgG monoclonal antibody with amino acid sequence
identical to that encoded by plasmid DMAb was administered to separate
groups of mice i.p. at doses ranging from 0.03 to 1.0 mg/kg. Control mice
received non-specific protein IgG R347 i.p. Mice received intranasal
infection with 3 × LD50 of A/California/07/2009 (H1N1) (9.5 × 104 TCID50/
mouse), 7 × LD50 of rA/HK/68 (H3) (1.2 × 105 TCID50/mouse), 10 × LD50 B/
Malaysia/2506/2004 (Victoria) (3.6 × 104 TCID50/mouse), or 7 × LD50 B/
Florida/4/2006
(Yamagata)
(7.0 × 104
TCID50/mouse).
All
mice
were
monitored daily for weight loss and survival for 12 days. The percent
change in weight was calculated based on the pre-infection weight.
Animals that lost ≥ 25% of their total weight were euthanized, and weight
loss was recorded as the limit for the remainder of the study. Blood was
collected on the day of infection to assess the amount of human IgG in the
serum. To assess viral load in the lungs, additional mice were euthanized
5 days post infection. In homologous re-infection studies, blood samples
were taken from all surviving mice 21 days after initial infection to confirm
clearance and absence of human IgG (data not shown). Twenty-eight days
after the initial infection, previously-infected surviving mice were re-
challenged with a virus strain and lethal dose identical to the initial
infection (alongside age-matched naïve controls).
All animal housing and experimentation were approved by and
conducted in accordance with the guidelines set by the National Institutes
of Health, the Animal Care and Use Review Office of the U.S. Army Medical
Department, the University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, and MedImmune Institu-
tional Animal Care and Use Committee. All murine challenge studies were
conducted in accordance with and subsequently performed in Association
for the Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care-certified
facilities.
Analyses and statistics
Standard curves and graphs were prepared using GraphPad Prism 6. EC50
and IC50 values were calculated using a non-linear regression of log
(reciprocal serum dilution) vs response. Survival data were expressed using
Kaplan–Meier
survival
curves
with
p-values
calculated
by
log-rank
(Mantel–Cox) test.
Data availability
Data that support the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding author upon reasonable request.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Jose Martinez and the MedImmune Laboratory Animal Resource staff for
in vivo study assistance; Frances Palmer-Hill for binding assay optimization; Sandrina
Phipps, Arnita Barnes, and Kinaki Shethal for generating HA reagents; Jacqueline Chu,
Alexander Ross, and Spencer Bianco for technical assistance. S.T.C.E. was supported
by National Institutes of Health T32-CA-115299 and K.M. received support from the
Wistar Science Discovery Award. The studies described in this manuscript were
funded by grants from the Defense Advanced Projects Research Agency (DARPA)
(W31P4Q-13-1-0003, W31P4Q-15-1-0003), and the National Institutes of Health (R01
AI092843).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
S.T.C.E. designed experiments, analyzed experiments, prepared manuscript, revised
manuscript; N.L.K. designed experiments, analyzed experiments, prepared manu-
script, revised manuscript; E.B. designed experiments, performed experiments; L.W.
designed experiments, performed experiments; J.M.M. designed experiments,
performed experiments, A.P. designed experiments, revised manuscript; T.R.F.S.
designed experiments, performed experiments; K.S. designed experiments, per-
formed experiments; D.H.P. performed experiments; S.F. designed experiments; M.C.
W. designed experiments; J.M. designed experiments; S.R. designed experiments; K.E.
B. designed experiments; J.Y. designed experiments; L.M.H. designed experiments; K.
M. designed experiments; N.Y.S. reviewed data, revised manuscript, provided
supervision; Q.Z. edited manuscript, provided supervision; D.B.W. designed experi-
ments, reviewed data, revised manuscript, provided supervision.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Supplementary Information accompanies the paper on the npj Vaccines website
(doi:10.1038/s41541-017-0020-x).
Competing interests: K.M. reports receiving grants from DARPA and Inovio,
receiving consulting fees from Inovio related to DNA vaccine development, and a
pending patent application (to Inovio) for delivery of DNA-encoded monoclonal
antibodies. T.R.F.S., K.S., J.M., S.R., K.E.B., J.Y., L.M.H., N.Y.S. are employees of Inovio
Pharmaceuticals and as such receive salary and benefits, including ownership of
stock and stock option, from the company. D.B.W. has received grant funding,
participates in industry collaborations, has received speaking honoraria, and has
received fees for consulting, including serving on scientific review committees and
board services. Remuneration received by D.B.W. includes direct payments or stock or
stock options, and in the interest of disclosure he notes potential conflicts associated
with this work with Inovio and possibly others. In addition, he has a patent DNA
vaccine delivery pending to Inovio. N.L.K., E.B., L.W., J.M.M., Q.Z. are employees of
MedImmune/AstraZeneca and may own stock in the company.
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
REFERENCES
1. de Jong, M. D. et al. Oseltamivir resistance during treatment of influenza A (H5N1)
infection. N. Engl. J. Med. 353, 2667–2672 (2005).
2. Monto, A. S. et al. Detection of influenza viruses resistant to neuraminidase
inhibitors in global surveillance during the first 3 years of their use. Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 50, 2395–2402 (2006).
3. Hurt, A. C., Holien, J. K., Parker, M., Kelso, A. & Barr, I. G. Zanamivir-resistant
influenza viruses with a novel neuraminidase mutation. J. Virol. 83, 10366–10373
(2009).
4. Knossow, M. & Skehel, J. J. Variation and infectivity neutralization in influenza.
Immunology 119, 1–7 (2006).
5. Lambert, L. C. & Fauci, A. S. Influenza vaccines for the future. N. Engl. J. Med. 363,
2036–2044 (2010).
6. Reber, A. & Katz, J. Immunological assessment of influenza vaccines and immune
correlates of protection. Expert Rev. Vaccines 12, 519–536 (2013).
7. Corti, D. et al. A neutralizing antibody selected from plasma cells that binds to
group 1 and group 2 influenza A hemagglutinins. Science 333, 850–856 (2011).
8. Dreyfus, C. et al. Highly conserved protective epitopes on influenza B viruses.
Science 337, 1343–1348 (2012).
9. Xiao, X. et al. A novel antibody discovery platform identifies anti-influenza A broadly
neutralizing antibodies from human memory B cells. MAbs 8, 916–927 (2016).
10. Kallewaard, N. L. et al. Structure and Function Analysis of an Antibody Recog-
nizing All Influenza A Subtypes. Cell 166, 596–608 (2016).
11. Limberis, M. P. et al. Intranasal antibody gene transfer in mice and ferrets elicits
broad protection against pandemic influenza. Sci. Transl. Med. 5, 187ra72 (2013).
12. Balazs, A. B., Bloom, J. D., Hong, C. M., Rao, D. S. & Baltimore, D. Broad protection
against influenza infection by vectored immunoprophylaxis in mice. Nat. Bio-
technol. 31, 647–652 (2013).
13. Broderick, K. E. & Humeau, L. M. Electroporation-enhanced delivery of nucleic acid
vaccines. Expert Rev. Vaccines 14, 195–204 (2015).
14. Pappas, L. et al. Rapid development of broadly influenza neutralizing antibodies
through redundant mutations. Nature 516, 418–422 (2014).
15. Traggiai, E. et al. An efficient method to make human monoclonal antibodies
from memory B cells: potent neutralization of SARS coronavirus. Nat. Med. 10,
871–875 (2004).
16. Muthumani, K. et al. Rapid and long-term immunity elicited by DNA-encoded
antibody prophylaxis and DNA vaccination against chikungunya virus. J. Infect.
Dis. 214, 369–378 (2016).
17. Flingai, S. et al. Protection against dengue disease by synthetic nucleic acid
antibody prophylaxis/immunotherapy. Sci. Rep. 5, 12616 (2015).
18. Molinari, N.-A. M. et al. The annual impact of seasonal influenza in the US:
Measuring disease burden and costs. Vaccine 25, 5086–5096 (2007).
19. Thompson, M. G., Shay, D. K., Zhou, H., Bridges, C. B., Cheng, P. Y., Burns, E.,
Bresee, J. S. & Cox, N. Estimates of deaths associated with seasonal influenza ---
United States, 1976-2007. MMWR. Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 59, 1057–1062 (2010).
Influenza DNA antibody immunoprophylaxis
STC Elliott et al.
8
npj Vaccines (2017)  18 
Published in partnership with the Sealy Center for Vaccine Development
 20. Yassine, H. M. et al. Hemagglutinin-stem nanoparticles generate heterosubtypic
influenza protection. Nat. Med. 21, 1065–1070 (2015).
21. Bommakanti, G. et al. Design of an HA2-based Escherichia coli expressed influ-
enza immunogen that protects mice from pathogenic challenge. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. 107, 13701–13706 (2010).
22. Impagliazzo, A. et al. A stable trimeric influenza hemagglutinin stem as a broadly
protective immunogen. Science 349, 1301–1306 (2015).
23. Group, Im.-R. S. Palivizumab, a humanized respiratory syncytial virus monoclonal
antibody, reduces hospitalization from respiratory syncytial virus infection in
high-risk infants. The IMpact-RSV study group. Pediatrics 102, 531–537 (1998).
24. Flingai, S. et al. Synthetic DNA vaccines: improved vaccine potency by electro-
poration and co-delivered genetic adjuvants. Front. Immunol. 4, 354 (2013).
25. Bagarazzi, M. L. et al. Immunotherapy against HPV16/18 generates potent
TH1 and cytotoxic cellular immune responses. Sci. Transl. Med. 4, 155ra138
(2012).
26. Borrok, M. J. et al. pH-dependent binding engineering reveals an FcRn affinity
threshold that governs IgG recycling. J. Biol. Chem. 290, 4282–4290 (2015).
27. Benjamin, E. et al. A broadly neutralizing human monoclonal antibody directed
against a novel conserved epitope on the influenza virus H3 hemagglutinin
globular head. J. Virol. 88, 6743–6750 (2014).
28. Jin, H. et al. Multiple amino acid residues confer temperature sensitivity to human
influenza virus vaccine strains (FluMist) derived from cold-adapted A/Ann Arbor/
6/60. Virology 306, 18–24 (2003).
29. Hirao, L. A. et al. Intradermal/subcutaneous immunization by electroporation
improves plasmid vaccine delivery and potency in pigs and rhesus macaques.
Vaccine 26, 440–448 (2008).
30. Amante, D. H. et al. Skin Transfection Patterns and Expression Kinetics of Elec-
troporation-Enhanced Plasmid Delivery Using the CELLECTRA-3P, a Portable
Next-Generation Dermal Electroporation Device. Hum. Gene Ther. Methods 26,
134–146 (2015).
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2017
Influenza DNA antibody immunoprophylaxis
STC Elliott et al.
9
Published in partnership with the Sealy Center for Vaccine Development
npj Vaccines (2017)  18 
