 Article
Psychedelic drug use in healthy
individuals: A review of benefits,
costs, and implications for drug policy
James W.B. Elsey
Abstract
The potential of psychedelic drugs in the treatment of mental health problems is increasingly being recognized. However,
relatively little thrust has been given to the suggestion that individuals without any mental health problems may benefit
from using psychedelic drugs, and that they may have a right to do so. This review considers contemporary research into
the use of psychedelic drugs in healthy individuals, including neurobiological and subjective effects. In line with findings
suggesting positive effects in the treatment of mental health problems, such research highlights the potential of psyche-
delic drugs for the enhancement of wellbeing even in healthy individuals. The relatively low risk associated with usage
does not appear to align with stringent drug laws that impose heavy penalties for their use. Some policy implications, and
suggestions for future research, are considered.
Keywords
Psychedelics, ayahuasca, psilocybin, DMT, LSD, drug policy, drug use, healthy participants
Researchers and clinicians are becoming increasingly
open to the possibility that psychedelic drugs might
prove useful in the treatment of mental health prob-
lems. Studies conducted primarily in the 1950s and
1960s furnished a wealth of (methodologically imper-
fect) clinical findings to suggest beneficial effects of
psychedelic drugs in the treatment of mood, anxiety,
and
addictive
disorders
(Grinspoon
and
Bakalar,
1979; Sessa, 2005). However, due to highly restrictive
drug laws that effectively foreclosed research into
psychedelic drugs in the 1960s, their possible benefits
have been widely overlooked (Nutt et al., 2013).
More recent studies have begun to corroborate the
suggestion
that
treatments
involving
psychedelic
drugs may be effective in the alleviation of a range
of mental health problems (see Vollenweider and
Kometer, 2010 for a review). In light of such findings,
several authors have argued for changes in drug policy
in order to facilitate basic research and treatment
innovation regarding psychedelics (Gross, 2013; Nutt
et al., 2013).
However, relatively little thrust has been given to the
argument that even healthy individuals can experience
considerable benefits from consuming psychedelics, and
that they may have a right to experience these (Walsh,
2016). Bioethical discussion of the use of drugs in the
healthy population to improve wellbeing has typically
focused on the use of pharmaceuticals such as selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and other anti-
depressants as a means of improving mood (Kramer,
1993; Schermer, 2015). Either through the true lack of
effects or due to inadequate research designs, evidence
for strong mood enhancing effects of such substances in
healthy individuals is scarce (Ilieva, 2015; Repantis
et al., 2009). Without evidence for clear effects, and
with the necessity for relatively long-term, daily usage
before any such effects are likely to be apparent
(Harmer, 2008), coupled with the possibility of unpleas-
ant side effects further deterring usage, it seems unlikely
Roeterseilandcampus – gebouw G, the Netherlands
Corresponding author:
James W.B. Elsey, Roeterseiland Campus, Building G, 129 Nieuwe
Achtergracht, Amsterdam, Postbus 15933, Noord Holland, 1001 NK,
the Netherlands.
Email: j.w.b.elsey@uva.nl
Drug Science, Policy and Law
Volume 3: 1–11
! The Author(s) 2017
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/2050324517723232
journals.sagepub.com/home/dsp
 that a large number of otherwise healthy individuals
would seek to use these pharmaceuticals for the purpose
of improving their lives. In contrast, over 30 million
people in the United States are estimated to have experi-
mented with psychedelic drugs (Krebs and Johansen,
2013a), and with new research garnering considerable
attention and suggesting positive effects, it seems pos-
sible that more individuals may seek out psychedelic
experiences. Use of psychedelic drugs in this way may
prompt not only bioethical, but legal discussions. It is
essential that such discussions proceed in a way that
takes current scientific research into account.
The purpose of this review is to provide an up to
date overview of current knowledge regarding psyche-
delic drug effects in healthy individuals, with the hope
of grounding future discussion of psychedelics in the
existing evidence base. I first describe the psychedelic
state and present research on its neurobiological under-
pinnings. I then review contemporary research on the
effects of psychedelic drugs in healthy individuals. This
is followed by consideration of possible adverse effects.
Finally, I consider some implications of such research
for drug policy.
Psychedelic drugs and the
psychedelic state
Psychedelics are a type of drug capable of reliably
bringing about states of altered perception, thought,
and feeling that are not usually experienced, besides
in dreams or during religious exaltation (Jaffe, 1990),
and have been used for their mind-altering properties
for thousands of years (Bruhn et al., 2002; Schultes and
Hofmann, 1979; Strassman, 1984). Classic psychedelics
include dimethyltryptamine (DMT—found in aya-
huasca), lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), mescaline
(found in peyote), and psilocybin (found in ‘‘magic
mushrooms’’). Psychedelic researchers have delineated
three broad stages of psychedelic drug effects (Majic
´
et al., 2015).
Firstly, shortly after drug administration, a short-
term (lasting from minutes to hours) acute psychedelic
state is induced. This phase is characterized by a sig-
nificant alteration of conscious experience, and in some
cases may result in a ‘complete mystical experience’,
also known as a psychedelic peak experience (Majic
´
et al., 2015). Complete mystical experiences include a
sense of unity (e.g. merging with the universe, the sense
that all things are one), ineffability (being unable to
fully describe the experience in words), a deep positive
mood, a sense of sacredness or awe, transcendence of
time and space, and a noetic quality (a feeling of reve-
lation or intuitive understanding) (Pahnke, 1969).
Secondly, it has been reported that following the
acute drug phase, a ‘psychedelic afterglow’ state may
be produced, in which the recipient of the drug may
have an elevated mood and feel less burdened by previ-
ous worries (Pahnke, 1969). This phase typically sub-
sides after approximately 2–4 weeks (Majic
´ et al., 2015;
Pahnke, 1969). Finally, as discussed in more detail
below, over the long term there may be lasting psycho-
logical changes precipitated either by general drug effects
or the subjective psychedelic/mystical experience itself.
Neurobiology of psychedelic drugs
Neuroscience research has recently begun to investigate
the acute effects of psychedelic drugs on the human
brain. Brain imaging has been performed on partici-
pants in the acute drug state for LSD (e.g. Carhart-
Harris et al., 2016; Tagliazucchi et al., 2016), psilocybin
(e.g. Carhart-Harris et al., 2012), and ayahuasca/DMT
(e.g. Palhano-Fontes et al., 2015), enabling researchers
to piece together a possible model for the effects of
these substances.
Studies
of the psychedelic
state
typically show
changes in the connectivity and activity of brain regions
constituting the ‘‘default mode network’’ (DMN), par-
ticularly regions that are usually highly active, such as
the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) and medial pre-
frontal cortex (mPFC) (Carhart-Harris et al., 2014;
Raichle et al., 2001). The DMN is a network of brain
regions that is typically engaged when the mind wanders,
and is often thought to support metacognitive processes
such as self-reflection, thinking about others, and think-
ing about one’s past and future (Carhart-Harris et al.,
2014; Raichle and Snyder, 2007).
Although the connectivity of brain regions compris-
ing the DMN appears integral to sustaining normal
waking consciousness, it has also been pointed out
that this may come at the price of restricting other pos-
sible brain states and thus limiting conscious experience
(Carhart-Harris et al., 2014). Indeed, while the integrity
of
communication
between
brain
regions
within
this network appears to be decreased by psychedelic
drugs, there are also increases in connectivity between
what are usually more independently functioning brain
networks, and these connectivity changes are correlated
with the altered state of consciousness under the influ-
ence of psychedelics (Tagliazucchi et al., 2016). Hence,
it seems that in the acute drug phase, psychedelics
disrupt normal or even entrenched patterns of brain
activity that characterize waking experience, enabling
a
greater
range
of
activity
patterns
to
surface
(Tagliazucchi et al., 2014). This may explain the unu-
sual insights and perspectives that frequently become
available under the influence of psychedelics. In sup-
port of this possibility, Lebedev et al. (2016) found
that reduced organization of brain activity during the
acute drug phase predicted later increases in the
2
Drug Science, Policy and Law
 personality dimension of openness, a dimension that
includes facets such as intellectual curiosity and creativ-
ity. Higher magnetoencephalography signal diversity in
spontaneous brain activity was also observed in partici-
pants experiencing altered states of consciousness after
taking LSD, psilocybin, or ketamine, and preliminary
evidence was found suggesting that these signal diver-
sity measures were related to the intensity of the psy-
chedelic state (Schartner et al., 2017).
Brain regions that appear most affected by the admin-
istration of psychedelics in humans overlap with sites
that have a high density of serotonin 2 A (5-HT2A) recep-
tors (Carhart-Harris et al., 2012; Tagliazucchi et al.,
2016), corroborating animal and human research indi-
cating that psychedelic drugs act primarily through
agonistic activity at 5-HT2A receptors (Glennon et al.,
1984; see Nichols, 2004; Vollenweider and Kometer,
2010 for reviews). Recent research in humans provided
concrete evidence for the role of 5-HT2A receptors in the
altered state of consciousness brought about by psyche-
delics: ketanserin—a 5-HT2A receptor antagonist—com-
pletely
blocked
the
subjective
effects
of
LSD
(Kraehenmann et al., 2017; Preller et al., 2017).
Such agonistic effects may underpin not only the acute
drug state, but also longer-term changes as a result of
psychedelic usage. For example, it has been found (in
rodents) that repeated administration of LSD lead to
the reduced expression of 5-HT2A receptors, particularly
in prefrontal cortical areas (Buckholtz et al., 1990). These
receptors are overexpressed in the brains of humans with
depression (Meyer et al., 2003), are linked to stress resili-
ence in healthy individuals (Frokjaer et al., 2008), and are
also targets of antidepressant drugs (Yamauchi et al.,
2006). Hence, changes to 5-HT2A receptor sites, particu-
larly in prefrontal cortical regions involved in the
regulation of emotion, could be partly responsible for
long-term outcomes as a result of psychedelic use.
Effects of psychedelic drugs in
healthy individuals
Though the neurobiological effects of psychedelic drugs
are only recently being elucidated, interest in the psy-
chological impact of psychedelic states has been of
interest to psychologists for several decades. Early
and contemporary researchers of psychedelics empha-
sized the therapeutic potential of psychedelic drugs in a
range of disorders, ranging from depression and anx-
iety disorders to alcoholism and other addictions
(Grinspoon and Bakalar, 1979; Nutt et al., 2013;
Sessa, 2005). However, these drugs also induce pro-
found mystical or spiritual experiences in healthy indi-
viduals, with potentially transformative effects. In this
section, research on the impact of psychedelic drugs on
healthy individuals will be considered.
In a classic study known as ‘‘The Good Friday
experiment’’, Pahnke (1963) administered psilocybin
or nicotinic acid (an active placebo) to 20 students at
a theological seminary in order to assess whether the
drug might facilitate mystical experiences. Participants
then attended the local Good Friday Mass. The major-
ity of participants in this study found the experience
very
profound.
A
follow-up
conducted
between
24 and 27 years after the original study revealed that
most of those who received psilocybin felt a continued
benefit from their participation, with a deepened appre-
ciation of life and nature, as well as enhanced joy and
appreciation for unusual experiences and emotions
(Doblin, 1991). Likewise, in a study of LSD assisted
psychotherapy, Savage et al. (1966) reported data on
a subset of psychiatrically healthy individuals who had
complained of a lack of purpose or meaning in their
lives. Following a supervised intake of LSD, the
participants scored higher on self-report measures of
self-actualization and creativity. As a whole, the par-
ticipants in this study reported feeling a greater sense of
meaning and purpose in their lives, oneness with
humanity, and decreased valuation of superficial pur-
suits such as material gains and social status. They also
reported an increase in confidence and assertiveness,
with many of these changes still apparent months later.
More recent studies have largely corroborated these
findings. For example, Griffiths et al. (2006) gave
healthy volunteers a dose of psilocybin and supervised
them during an 8-hour period in a comfortable envir-
onment. The majority of participants were found to
have a ‘‘complete mystical experience’’, including a
sense of unity, transcendence of time and space, and
positive mood. Strikingly, even at a 14-month follow-
up, 58% of participants said the experience was among
the five most personally significant in their lives, 67%
said that it was one of the most spiritually meaningful
in their lives, and 64% noted an increased sense of
wellbeing and life satisfaction (Griffiths et al., 2008).
Similarly, MacLean et al. (2011) determined a likely
effective dose of psilocybin for reliably producing a
mystical experience in an independent sample of
healthy
participants.
These
participants
likewise
reported increases in wellbeing and satisfaction, as
well as moderate positive changes regarding behaviors
in relationships and caring for themselves.
Schmid et al. (2015, and Liechti et al., 2017; see also
Liechti, 2017, for a review of clinical research on LSD)
assessed the acute effects of LSD in healthy subjects,
and similarly found significant increases in relevant psy-
chological states, such as a sense of oneness, disembodi-
ment, and an increased sense of personal wellbeing and
trust. Psychedelic and mystical experiences were more
likely when 200 mg, rather than 100 mg, of LSD was
used.
Schmid
et
al.
(2015)
supplemented
their
Elsey
3
 assessment of subjective effects with a range of auto-
nomic (e.g. heart rate) and endocrine (e.g. plasma cor-
tisol and oxytocin) measurements. Such additional
physiological measures may prove informative if used
more widely, potentially helping map how neural
changes translate to physiological effects and subjective
experiences (though it may be noted that excessive
or intrusive measurement may negatively affect the
‘‘setting’’, perhaps reducing positive outcomes under
the influence of psychedelics).
Taking LSD in combination with listening to music
may lead to particularly emotive experiences. It has
long been argued that both the set (characteristics of
the person taking the drug) and setting (characteristics
of the environment) are strong determinants of the
quality of a psychedelic experience (Pahnke, 1969).
Providing an appropriate environment in which to
catalyze positive and meaningful experiences can opti-
mize the beneficial effects of psychedelics. Music may
be one such environmental factor, and has been used
consistently in psychedelic psychotherapy and in ritual
contexts over the long history of human psychedelic
usage (Kaelen et al., 2015; Nettl, 1956). In a recent
study, Kaelen et al. (2015) found that feelings such as
wonder,
transcendence,
power,
and
tenderness
in
response to music were increased under the influence
of LSD, relative to placebo. The authors suggest
that, given the relation of these emotions to crucial
components of the psychedelic peak experience, the
appropriate use of music may increase the likelihood
of participants reaching this state of consciousness.
Such results indicate that the environment can be care-
fully tailored so as to maximize the chances of achiev-
ing new and positive breakthroughs.
Consistent with the description of psychedelics as
enabling new insights, it has also been suggested that
their use may facilitate creative pursuits (Sessa, 2008).
Both artists and scientists have reported inspiration or
insights as a result of psychedelic experiences (Narby,
2002; Sessa, 2008). de Rios and Janiger (2003) found
that drawings produced by visual artists after LSD ses-
sions showed changes in some features, which were
thought to reflect a greater freedom of expression.
Harman and colleagues gave mescaline to 27 male par-
ticipants with jobs that typically required creative prob-
lem solving, and assessed its impact on their creativity
(Harman et al., 1966). This study was of particular
interest because participants were not only assessed
on a range of psychometric tests, but also worked on
a real life issue they had been trying to solve. Many
participants in this study came up with genuine solu-
tions to their problems under the influence of mesca-
line, and reported an enduring impact on their creative
process several weeks later. However, it is unclear the
extent to which suggestion might also have contributed
towards such creativity, or to subjective reports of it:
participants were specifically prepped to anticipate
improvements in their creative output, and it is
known that psychedelics can increase suggestibility
(Carhart-Harris et al., 2014a). In a more recent study,
participants were assessed before and two weeks after
engaging in several ayahuasca sessions in a ritual set-
ting (Frecska et al., 2012). Relative to a control group,
participants who took ayahuasca displayed increased
originality in a standardized test of creative thinking.
Hence, both experimental studies and anecdotal reports
indicate that psychedelics may enhance the creative
process.
Further
controlled
studies
are
certainly
warranted.
Further studies using experimental tasks 2–3 hours
after the peak effects of LSD administration have
passed, but when participants are still under the influ-
ence of the drug, have shown that social and emotional
processes are affected by psychedelics (Dolder et al.,
2016; Mueller et al., 2017). Participants were impaired
at recognizing fearful faces and showed a trend towards
being less able to recognize sad faces, but had no
changes in relation to angry or happy faces (Dolder
et al., 2016). Relative to neutral faces, when viewing
fearful faces, participants on LSD displayed reduced
activation of the right medial frontal gyrus, as well as
the left amygdala (Mueller et al., 2017), a brain region
crucial for the detection of biologically relevant stimuli
(Pessoa and Adolphs, 2010). Participants on LSD
were also found to display greater feeling for and arou-
sal over people pictured in emotionally provocative
scenes
(‘emotional
empathy’),
though
they
were
impaired at actually inferring the mental state of the
people seen in the pictures (‘theory of mind’ or ‘cogni-
tive empathy’). Finally, these participants made more
prosocial choices in a set of resource allocation tasks,
and reported feeling greater trust, closeness, and a
desire to be with others. Hence, important socioemo-
tional stimuli may be processed and responded to dif-
ferently when under the influence of psychedelics.
It can be seen that the effects of psychedelic drugs
could go beyond the relatively small and inconsistent
effects of pharmaceuticals such as SSRIs in healthy sub-
jects, in that they not only produce improvements in
mood, but may also give access to states of conscious-
ness and insights of great significance, even after a
single dose. In so doing, psychedelic drugs may cater
to a major human need for meaning, connectedness,
and purpose; needs which it may be argued are widely
overlooked in Western, individualistic cultures. Several
prominent psychologists have emphasized that these
factors are central to human flourishing. For example,
Maslow (1969) proposed that the peak of human
actualization might be the recognition of a higher
goal or purpose outside of oneself. Similarly, Frankl
4
Drug Science, Policy and Law
 (1946/1985) identified the search for meaning and pur-
pose as a fundamental human drive. The capacity of the
psychedelic experience to help resolve such existential
concerns is a plausible contributor to the positive effects
of psilocybin on mood and anxiety in patients with
advanced cancer (Grob et al., 2011; Ross et al., 2016).
In addition, the ability of psychedelic drugs to facili-
tate
the
creative
process
may
further
promote
self-expression, and pave the way to solutions to both
professional and personal challenges. In summary, cur-
rent empirical findings indicate that psychedelics have
the potential to significantly improve wellbeing among
otherwise healthy individuals, and may also help foster
novel perspectives, supporting the resolution of profes-
sional and personal challenges.
Possible adverse effects
With any intervention, one should always consider the
associated risks. This may be especially important
where drugs are taken for the purpose of ‘self improve-
ment’ or ‘enhancement’ rather than treatment: where
clear cut cases of treatment are concerned, a person
may have exhausted all other avenues, and even sizable
risks could be tolerated if it meant that they might be
unburdened of severe pathology. People may have
lower tolerance for risk when pursuing an intervention
for non-therapeutic purposes. With regards to psyche-
delics, Griffiths et al. (2008) summarize possible risks
that have been raised by other commentators, namely:
(1) acute panic, leading to dangerous behavior under
the influence of the drug, (2) the manifestation or
exacerbation of psychiatric conditions, (3) enduring
perceptual disturbances, and (4) the development of
an abusive pattern of drug use. Each of these issues is
discussed below.
Regarding the induction of panic and the exacerba-
tion of psychiatric issues, it is notable, even paradoxical
(Carhart-Harris et al., 2016), that the same psychedelic
drugs that are being considered for the purposes of
therapy and enhancement are also being utilized for
their propensity to model psychotic episodes. Acute
effects of psychedelic drugs can be aversive, with para-
noia and the fear of going insane noted by some
who take them (Hofmann and Ott, 2013). A sizable
minority of participants in Griffiths and colleagues’
LSD studies noted feelings of panic while on the
drug, though these feelings typically dissipated over
the session, and had no lasting impact. In reviewing
controlled studies of ayahuasca, dos Santos et al.
(2016) also noted that participants can experience
unpleasant states in the acute phase after drug intake,
but emphasize that in no such studies were any lasting
psychotic
or
otherwise
highly
negative
outcomes
observed. Other researchers likewise noted transient
increases in anxiety in participants under the influence
of LSD (Carhart-Harris et al., 2016; Schmid et al.,
2015). However, these participants experienced signifi-
cantly greater increases in feeling a blissful state. In the
aforementioned studies, negative emotions were argu-
ably balanced or even outweighed by feelings of awe
and other positive emotions, as well as longer-term
improvements in wellbeing. These findings are in line
with a pooled analysis of 110 healthy experimental par-
ticipants who had received psilocybin (Studerus et al.,
2011): strong feelings of dysphoria or panic were only
observed when the highest doses were given in a small
number of participants, and the psychedelic experience
was mostly deemed to have been pleasurable and
enriching.
Carhart-Harris et al. (2016) have suggested that
some of the potentially aversive aspects of the psyche-
delic experience, such as thought disorganization and
ego dissolution, may directly relate to later positive
changes. For example, they observed a positive trend
level association between thought disorganization in
the acute drug state and later increases in openness.
Such unusual states of consciousness could be the sub-
jective reflection of the disordered patterns of brain
activity described earlier, which are similarly predictive
of later personality changes (Lebedev et al., 2016).
Whatever the case, controlled studies have not found
evidence for dangerous behavior under the influence of
psychedelics, or of psychological damage.
While it appears that claims of common and severe
negative effects of psychedelic drugs have been exagger-
ated (Strassman, 1984), some reports of negative effects
should not be dismissed. Two subjects in Pahnke’s ori-
ginal ‘Good Friday’ experiment found the experience to
be extremely unpleasant, with one even needing to
receive a tranquilizer (Doblin, 1991). It is possible
that being surrounded by several other psychedelic
naı¨ve users, as well as inadequate preparation, could
have contributed to this negative outcome. Careful con-
trol over the setting in which the drug is taken can
minimize such occurrences.
In case studies reporting adverse reactions to psyche-
delic drugs, it is often difficult to disentangle the dir-
ect effects of psychedelics from other drugs, or the
influence of premorbid risk factors that should not
necessarily deter psychologically healthy individuals.
For example, dos Santos and Strassman (2011) describe
a young man who experienced psychotic episodes on
two separate occasions after having taken ayahuasca,
one of which included causing superficial harm to him-
self. This man had no personal or family history of
psychoticism. Yet, he had also been a daily user of can-
nabis for six years and often took cannabis in combin-
ation with ayahuasca. In addition, he had already been
taking ayahuasca on a regular basis for two years
Elsey
5
 without adverse effects. Boulos et al. (2015) report a
case of a 15-year-old male who made a near lethal sui-
cide attempt shortly after having taken a synthetic psy-
chedelic. Though he reported no prior suicidal ideation,
this individual had a family history of schizophrenia and
reported alcohol abuse and regular cannabis intake. In
cases such as these, it can be difficult to disentangle clear
psychedelic effects from drug interactions, interactions
with predisposing factors, or even chance events. While
such instances should not be ignored, weight should be
given to controlled or at least larger scale studies of
adverse effects, from which firmer conclusions can be
drawn than from individual cases.
As reported in dos Santos et al.’s (2016) systematic
review of ayahuasca research, beyond a few exceptional
case studies, there is little evidence for serious adverse
effects in relation to the use of ayahuasca, at least in
ritual contexts. Gable (2007) reports psychotic incidents
in relation to ayahuasca use of between approximately
0.05–0.1% over a five-year period (corresponding to an
estimated 25,000 ayahuasca sessions) in the Unia
˜o do
Vegetal (UDV) religious group. Lima and To
´ foli
(2011) also used data from a UDV context, and reported
29 cases with psychotic features from 1994 to 2007 (a
time period corresponding to an estimated 1.56 million
ayahuasca doses), of which just 19 actually appeared to
have ayahuasca as a clear precipitating factor. Many of
these cases were suggested to have premorbid character-
istics linked with psychoticism. Regarding psychedelic
use more generally, it is calculated that, in 2010, there
were 32 million individuals in the US who had used a
psychedelic
substance
at
least
once
(Krebs
and
Johansen, 2013a). Consistent with the low risk of
mental health problems associated with ayahuasca,
independent population studies in the United States
have found no evidence for a link between psychedelic
use and mental health problems or suicidality (Johansen
and Krebs, 2015; Krebs and Johansen, 2013b). In fact,
one recent population study found that, when independ-
ent risk factors were controlled, use of psychedelics was
actually associated with lower psychological distress
and suicidality (Hendricks et al., 2015).
In addition to a lack of negative acute or enduring
mental health effects, no evidence has been found to
support the idea that the use of psychedelics leads to
any kind of enduring perceptual disturbances, known
as ‘hallucinogen persisting perceptual disorder’ (HPPD)
(Krebs and Johansen, 2013b). Despite the high level
of vivid mental imagery brought about under the influ-
ence of psilocybin, Studerus et al. (2011) found no evi-
dence for enduring visual hallucinations or flashbacks
in their pooled analysis of experimental psilocybin
recipients. Large-scale population studies have also
failed to provide any evidence of HPPD in relation to
psychedelic use (Johansen and Krebs, 2015; Krebs and
Johansen, 2013b). This is true even in ritual users, who
typically have much greater exposure than participants
in experimental studies (dos Santos et al., 2016;
Halpern et al., 2005).
Even if a drug had no direct negative physical or
mental health effects, dependence and compulsive use
could lead to a range of problems, such as financial
difficulties, legal trouble, or simply opportunity cost
in pursuing the drug. However, the current scientific
consensus is that classic psychedelic drugs do not
have addictive properties (Bonson, 2012; Nutt et al.,
2007). In fact, psychedelic drugs are being investigated
as a potential means of treating addiction (Halpern,
1996; Sessa and Johnson, 2015). It is possible that their
disorganizing effects on the brain and cognition might
help dismantle the well-worn neural pathways support-
ing drug dependence, just as they facilitate moves away
from entrenched patterns of thought and behavior.
Long-term, frequent use of psychedelics might be
linked to brain and personality changes. For example,
Bouso et al. (2015) found that members of the Santo
Daime church in Spain, who use the psychedelic aya-
huasca on a roughly fortnightly basis as part of reli-
gious rituals, displayed lower cortical thickness in the
PCC (the area identified as a major hub in the DMN
that is affected by psychedelic drugs) relative to
matched controls, and this cortical thickness was asso-
ciated with levels of spirituality. These brain differences
are not necessarily negative, however. The ayahuasca
users in Bouso et al. (2015) actually outperformed non-
users on a range of neuropsychological tests, possibly
suggesting cognitive- as well as affective-enhancing cap-
abilities of such drugs. However, as a cross-sectional
study, it remains to be seen whether the observed dif-
ferences between subjects reflect a predisposing factor
to, or a consequence of, psychedelic use.
In summary, scientific research suggests that, when
administered at appropriate doses under supervised
conditions, psychedelic drugs have a very good safety
profile. An overall positive experience and long-term
beneficial effects typically balance acute aversive reac-
tions. Evidence does not support a link between psy-
chedelic use and mental health problems, and may even
indicate protective effects. Moreover, use of psychedelic
drugs does not lead to drug dependency. Risk factors
for negative effects should certainly be investigated, and
it is recognized that those with some premorbid char-
acteristics, such as psychotic or manic/bipolar disorders
might be particularly at risk (dos Santos et al., 2016). It
should also be stressed that psychedelic drugs can be
dangerous if used at improper dosages, in combination
with other drugs, or in an unsafe environment, and that
the purity of illicitly acquired drugs is rarely certain and
could cause other complications. Yet, given the lack of
evidence for dangers posed by psychedelics, Johansen
6
Drug Science, Policy and Law
 and Krebs (2015) summarize their view by stating that
the prohibition of psychedelic drugs seems partly the
result of ‘‘media sensationalization, lack of informa-
tion, and cultural biases’’ (p. 8), and that prohibition
is difficult justify as a public health measure.
Drug policy and psychedelic use in the
healthy population
In several cases in different countries, exemptions have
been made for the use of psychedelics as part of reli-
gious practices. While precise exemptions differ by
state, use of peyote by the Native American Church is
legal in the United States. Other uses of psychedelics
have become more of a global issue for lawmakers.
Religious groups such as the Santo Daime and Unia
˜ o
de Vegetal, which frequently incorporate ayahuasca
into their spiritual practices, have expanded outside of
their native country of Brazil, prompting assessments
of the rights of individuals to use psychedelic drugs in
religious contexts even in countries where there is no
longstanding tradition of use (Labate and Feeney,
2012). When considering the use of ayahuasca in reli-
gious ceremonies, the United States Supreme Court has
ruled that drug laws may be trumped by freedom to
practice religion, in accordance with the Religious
Freedom Restoration Act of 1993 (Tupper, 2008).
The Netherlands has also granted the right to use aya-
huasca in religious and spiritual ceremonies to the
Santo Daime, owing to insufficient evidence that the
brew causes any harm (Adelaars, 2001). However,
other countries have not always granted freedom of
use. The fact that ayahuasca contains DMT was
enough to suggest a public health risk that was
deemed to outweigh religious freedom in Germany
(Labate and Feeney, 2012; Rohde and Sander, 2011).
Exemptions for religious purposes raise questions
regarding
appropriate
definitions
of
religion,
and
there have been concerns over whether religious preten-
sions might merely be used to cloak the otherwise illegal
consumption of psychedelic substances (Sandberg,
2011). More libertarian commentators, however, have
argued that such considerations may be beside the
point. Religious and therapeutic exemptions are seen
to perpetuate the notion that the state has a right to
determine appropriate uses of substances even when no
evidence can be furnished that their use impinges on the
rights or wellbeing of individuals in wider society
(Walsh, 2016). Walsh (2016) proposes that, instead of
pursuing specific exemptions for psychedelic drugs in
religious and therapeutic contexts, a broader exemption
can be made for the use of psychedelics on the grounds
of cognitive liberty. Prohibitions on psychedelic drugs
may be seen to amount to prohibitions on the right to
control one’s own mind and conscious experience,
precluding access to volitionally chosen but otherwise
inaccessible drug states (Boire, 2001; Roberts, 1997).
Given that considerations of religious legitimacy typic-
ally make distinctions between ‘merely’ philosophical
perspectives and religious views, even securing the
right to consume psychedelics in religious practices
means that the potentially life enhancing experiences
and insights that might be gained through their use is
essentially off limits (without risk of legal repercus-
sions) to those who do not hold mystical beliefs.
Walsh (2010) notes that article 9 of the European
Convention on Human Rights enshrines not only the
right to religious freedom, but also freedom of thought.
If freedom of thought is to mean anything, it is argued,
it must surely incorporate freedom to direct one’s own
mental states to the extent that this is possible (Boire,
2001; Roberts, 1997; Walsh, 2016).
The use of psychedelic drugs only for the purpose of
treatment has also been a subject of debate. The dis-
tinction
between
treatment
and
enhancement,
or
between therapeutic and recreational uses, is not imme-
diately clear. Making a binary distinction between
treatment, which would be argued to be the remedi-
ation of some specific pathology, and enhancement—
the improvement of a function or capacity deemed
normal—begs several questions. Firstly, a clear defin-
ition of pathology would be needed to justify an inter-
vention. This is particularly troublesome where mental
health is concerned, because pathology is most fre-
quently inferred based on the presence of symptoms
that are not specific to any one disorder, which are
present to varying degrees in the general population,
and for which the underlying causes (i.e. pathology)
are largely unknown. Secondly, it assumes that normal-
ity is synonymous with good health and wellbeing, and
that this is merely the lack of (ill-defined) disease con-
structs. To the contrary, many authors argue that con-
ceptions of health and wellbeing ought to encompass
not only the absence of clear pathology, but also the
potential of humans to develop and realize their full
potential (Labate and Cavnar, 2013; Walsh, 2016).
Current research on the use of psychedelics suggests
that these drugs may allow otherwise healthy individ-
uals to improve themselves and increase their wellbeing,
with no apparent cost—and possibly benefits—to those
around them.
A distinction between the use of psychedelics for
clear cases of treatment versus enhancement may still
make sense in healthcare settings, where service pro-
viders must make judgments as to the most pressing
cases, and where public funds may be used to support
interventions. It seems reasonable to suggest that treat-
ments for severe mental health problems should be
prioritized over less pressing desires for improvements
in wellbeing in healthcare settings. From a legal
Elsey
7
 perspective, however, the nebulous boundary between
treatment and enhancement, and indeed between reli-
gious and personal discovery or spiritual uses, raises
problems for the clarity of law. For example, is a
person who has used a psychedelic to try and gain
insight into their non-clinical levels of anxiety con-
sidered to be self-medicating, or enhancing their self?
Is this use to be considered wrong purely by virtue of
being outside of a healthcare setting and therefore ille-
gal? Moreover, the distinction between treatment and
enhancement does not track any meaningful change in
the cost to society that the law is aimed at protecting,
nor benefits that might be gleaned by the individuals
that make up society.
Unfortunately, some policy developments may be
proceeding without due consideration of different
drugs and their effects. The recent enactment of the
Psychoactive Substances Act in May 2016 in the UK,
which aims to prohibit psychoactive substances, not
only ignores consideration of benefits people might
derive from a psychoactive substance, but even side-
steps the need to demonstrate potential for harm. It is
notable that this act seems to have been made to curb
the proliferation of ‘new psychoactive substances’
(NPSs), also known as ‘legal highs’, whose presence
in the market is the direct result of bans on existing
psychoactive substances that are known to pose little
danger, notably typical psychedelics LSD and magic
mushrooms (DMT) (Gross, 2013). If a rational drug
policy were pursued regarding existing psychoactive
substances, then there would be less impetus for the
development of new ones, the risk profiles and purity
of which are unknown. Despite evidence indicating that
psychedelic drugs pose little threat to the individual
user or cost to society and may have substantial bene-
fits, LSD, DMT, and psilocybin remain among the
most strictly prohibited substances in the UK, USA,
and elsewhere (Nutt et al., 2007).
Of course, it may be argued that regardless of actual
drug laws, psychedelics are relatively easy to procure
illegally. Nevertheless, risk to those consuming psyche-
delics obtained illegally is likely to be higher than where
use is legalized. For example, beyond potential legal
ramifications, there are no checks on the purity of illi-
citly obtained drugs. Furthermore, ‘copycat’ substances
are sometimes produced to avoid trouble with the law,
and the risk profile of these may differ markedly from
known psychedelics. Beyond personal use of psyche-
delics in healthy subjects, current drug laws stifle the
use of psychedelics for research purposes in healthy
individuals. Very few research labs currently have per-
mission to investigate psychedelics, and permissions
typically impose standards that are very difficult and
costly to meet (Nutt et al., 2013). Research in healthy
subjects will prove highly informative in understanding
the nature of the psychedelic state and drug mechan-
isms, which may ultimately help in understanding how
these drugs can best be utilized therapeutically.
Several suggestions have been made regarding how
policy regarding psychedelics might be made more rea-
sonable. Nutt et al. (2007) have strongly urged that
drug classification should correspond to what empirical
investigation actually shows to be the relative harms of
different drugs. Classification also tends to consider
possible benefits of usage for medical purposes. As we
have discussed above, there are significant benefits that
might be gained from the use of psychedelics outside of
strictly medical settings, and these might also be con-
sidered when rating drugs. Some public health experts
have suggested other ways that a more reasonable
stance towards psychedelics might be taken, based on
models of treatment administration or use in religious
contexts. For example, Haden et al. (2016) have sug-
gested that psychedelics could be administered in con-
trolled settings to healthy individuals provided that
trained individuals oversee it. Certifications advancing
in their rigor and the usage of psychedelics that they
allow (e.g. whether one can offer psychedelic psycho-
therapy, or charge for one’s services) could be earned
that provide supervisors with the knowledge and skills
to safely administer psychedelic drugs to healthy indi-
viduals. Production, purity, and sale of the drugs could
be monitored and controlled, and tax revenue could be
increased, as well as increasing safety of usage by train-
ing in set and setting. Whatever specific course of action
is taken with regards to drug policy, consideration
of evidence regarding risks and benefits can only
improve policy.
Conclusion
Many drug researchers have urged the reclassification
of psychedelic drugs so that their therapeutic potential
can be fully realized (Nutt et al., 2013). From current
results, it would seem that it is not only those with
psychological impairments who might stand to gain
from the use of psychedelics. When used appropriately,
psychedelic drugs have been shown to have positive
effects among healthy individuals, with single doses
capable of producing lasting changes in wellbeing and
purpose. A rational drug policy derived from empirical
research into the potential costs and benefits of differ-
ent drugs may not only facilitate the treatment of
mental disorders, but the safe and enriching use of psy-
chedelic drugs more generally.
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with
respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.
8
Drug Science, Policy and Law
 Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.
References
Adelaars A (2001) Court case in Holland against the use of
ayahuasca by the Dutch Santo Daime Church. Journal of
Clandestine Laboratory Investigating Chemists Association
11(3): 12.
Boire RG (2001) On cognitive liberty. The Journal of
Cognitive Liberties 2(1): 7–22.
Bonson KR (2012) Hallucinogenic drugs. In: Encyclopedia of
Life Sciences (eLS). Chichester: John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Boulos N, Davis MC, Hedrick R, et al. (2015) Near-lethal
violent suicide attempt in a 15-year-old adolescent with no
prior psychiatric history following ingestion of ‘N-Bomb’
drug. Annals of Clinical Psychiatry 27(3): 221–222.
Bouso JC, Palhano-Fontes F, Rodrguez-Fornells A, et al.
(2015) Long-term use of psychedelic drugs is associated
with differences in brain structure and personality in
humans.
European
Neuropsychopharmacology
25(4):
483–492.
Bruhn JG, De Smet PA, El-Seedi HR, et al. (2002) Mescaline
use for 5700 years. The Lancet 359(9320): 1866.
Buckholtz NS, Zhou D, Freedman DX, et al. (1990)
Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) administration select-
ively downregulates serotonin2 receptors in rat brain.
Neuropsychopharmacology 3(2): 137–148.
Carhart-Harris RL, Erritzoe D, Williams T, et al. (2012)
Neural correlates of the psychedelic state as determined
by fMRI studies with psilocybin. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 109(6): 2138–2143.
Carhart-Harris RL, Leech R, Hellyer PJ, et al. (2014) The
entropic brain: a theory of conscious states informed by
neuroimaging research with psychedelic drugs. Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience, 8.
Carhart-Harris RL, Kaelen M, Whalley MG, et al. (2015a)
LSD
enhances
suggestibility
in
healthy
volunteers.
Psychopharmacology 232(4): 785–794.
Carhart-Harris RL, Leech R, Hellyer PJ, et al. (2015b)
The entropic brain: A theory of conscious states informed
by
neuroimaging
research
with
psychedelic
drugs.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 8: 20.
Carhart-Harris RL, Muthukumaraswamy S, Roseman L,
et al. (2016) Neural correlates of the LSD experience
revealed by multimodal neuroimaging. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 113(17): 4853–4858.
De Rios MD and Janiger O (2003) LSD, Spirituality, and the
Creative Process: Based on the Groundbreaking Research of
Oscar Janiger, MD. Rochester, VT: Park Street Press.
Doblin R (1991) Pahnke’s ‘‘Good Friday experiment’’:
A
long-term
follow-up
and
methodological
critique.
The Journal of Transpersonal Psychology 23(1): 1–28.
Dolder PC, Schmid Y, Mu
¨ ller F, et al. (2016) LSD acutely
impairs fear recognition and enhances emotional empathy
and sociality. Neuropsychopharmacology 41(11): 2638–
2646.
dos Santos RG, Balthazar FM, Bouso JC, et al. (2016) The
current state of research on ayahuasca: A systematic
review of human studies assessing psychiatric symptoms,
neuropsychological
functioning,
and
neuroimaging.
Journal of Psychopharmacology 30(12): 1230–1247.
dos Santos RG and Strassman RJ (2011) Ayahuasca and
psychosis. British Journal of Psychiatry (eLetter), 3
December. Available at: http://bjp.rcpsych.org/content/
190/1/81.2.e-letters#ayahuasca-and-psychosis (accessed 9
January 2017).
Frankl
VE
(1946/1985)
Man’s
Search
for
Meaning.
New York, NY: Simon and Schuster.
Frecska E, Mo
´ re
´ CE, Vargha A, et al. (2012) Enhancement of
creative expression and entoptic phenomena as after-
effects of repeated ayahuasca ceremonies. Journal of
Psychoactive Drugs 44(3): 191–199.
Frokjaer VG, Mortensen EL, Nielsen F, et al. (2008)
Frontolimbic serotonin 2A receptor binding in healthy
subjects is associated with personality risk factors for
affective disorder. Biological Psychiatry 63(6): 569–576.
Gable RS (2007) Risk assessment of ritual use of oral
dimethyltryptamine
(DMT)
and
harmala
alkaloids.
Addiction 102(1): 24–34.
Glennon RA, Titeler M and McKenney JD (1984) Evidence
for 5-HT2 involvement in the mechanism of action of hal-
lucinogenic agents. Life Sciences 35(25): 2505–2511.
Griffiths RR, Richards WA, McCann U, et al. (2006)
Psilocybin can occasion mystical-type experiences having
substantial and sustained personal meaning and spiritual
significance. Psychopharmacology 187(3): 268–283.
Griffiths RR, Richards WA, Johnson MW, et al. (2008)
Mystical-type experiences occasioned by psilocybin medi-
ate the attribution of personal meaning and spiritual sig-
nificance 14 months later. Journal of Psychopharmacology
22(6): 621–632.
Grinspoon L and Bakalar JB (1979) Psychedelic Drugs
Reconsidered. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Grob CS, Danforth AL, Chopra GS, et al. (2011) Pilot study
of psilocybin treatment for anxiety in patients with
advanced-stage cancer. Archives of General Psychiatry
68(1): 71–78.
Gross M (2013) Drugs prohibition is criminals’ gain, neuro-
science’s loss. Current Biology 23(14): R588.
Haden M, Emerson B and Tupper KW (2016) A public-
health-based vision for the management and regulation
of psychedelics. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs 48(4):
243–252.
Halpern JH (1996) The use of hallucinogens in the treatment
of addiction. Addiction Research 4(2): 177–189.
Halpern JH, Sherwood AR, Hudson JI, et al. (2005)
Psychological and cognitive effects of long-term peyote
use
among
Native
Americans.
Biological
Psychiatry
58(8): 624–631.
Harman WW, McKim RH, Mogar RE, et al. (1966)
Psychedelic agents in creative problem-solving: A pilot
study. Psychological Reports 19(1): 211–227.
Harmer CJ (2008) Serotonin and emotional processing: Does
it
help
explain
antidepressant
drug
action?
Neuropharmacology 55(6): 1023–1028.
Hendricks PS, Thorne CB, Clark CB, et al. (2015) Classic
psychedelic use is associated with reduced psychological
Elsey
9
 distress and suicidality in the United States adult popula-
tion. Journal of Psychopharmacology 29(3): 280–288.
Hofmann A and Ott J (2013) LSD: My Problem Child.
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Ilieva I (2015) Enhancement of healthy personality through
psychiatric medication: The influence of SSRIs on neur-
oticism and extraversion. Neuroethics 8(2): 127–137.
Jaffe JH (1990) Drug addiction and drug abuse. The
Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics 8: 522–573.
Johansen P and Krebs TS (2015) Psychedelics not linked to
mental health problems or suicidal behavior: A population
study. Journal of Psychopharmacology 29(3): 270–279.
Kaelen M, Barrett FS, Roseman L, et al. (2015) LSD
enhances
the
emotional
response
to
music.
Psychopharmacology 232(19): 3607–3614.
Kraehenmann R, Pokorny D, Vollenweider L, et al. (2017)
Dreamlike effects of LSD on waking imagery in humans
depend
on
serotonin
2A
receptor
activation.
Psychopharmacology 234(13): 2031–2046.
Kramer P (1993) Listening to Prozac: A Psychiatrist Explores
Antidepressant Drugs and the Remaking of the Self.
New York: Viking.
Krebs TS and Johansen P (2013a) Over 30 million psychedelic
users in the United States. F1000Research 2: 98.
Krebs TS and Johansen P (2013b) Psychedelics and mental
health: A population study. PloS One 8(8): e63972.
Labate BC and Cavnar C (2013) The Therapeutic use of
Ayahuasca. Berlin: Springer.
Labate BC and Feeney K (2012) Ayahuasca and the process
of regulation in Brazil and internationally: Implications
and challenges. International Journal of Drug Policy
23(2): 154–161.
Lebedev AV, Kaelen M, Lo
¨ vde
´ n M, et al. (2016) LSD-
induced entropic brain activity predicts subsequent per-
sonality change. Human Brain Mapping 37(9): 3203–3213.
Liechti ME (2017) Modern clinical research on LSD.
Neuropsychopharmacology. Epub ahead of print 14 June
2017. DOI: 10.1038/npp.2017.86.
Liechti ME, Dolder PC and Schmid Y (2017) Alterations of
consciousness and mystical-type experiences after acute
LSD
in
humans.
Psychopharmacology
234(9–10):
1499–1510.
Lima FAS and To
´ foli LF (2011) An epidemiogical surveil-
lance system by the UDV: Mental health recommenda-
tions concerning the religious use of hoasca. In: Labate
BC and Jungaberle H (eds) The Internationalization of
Ayahuasca. Zurich: Lit Verlag, pp.185–199.
MacLean KA, Johnson MW and Griffiths RR (2011)
Mystical experiences occasioned by the hallucinogen psilo-
cybin lead to increases in the personality domain of open-
ness. Journal of Psychopharmacology 25(11): 1453–1461.
Majic
´ T, Schmidt TT and Gallinat J (2015) Peak experiences
and the afterglow phenomenon: When and how do thera-
peutic effects of hallucinogens depend on psychedelic
experiences?
Journal
of
Psychopharmacology
29(3):
241–253.
Maslow AH (1969) Various meanings of transcendence. The
Journal of Transpersonal Psychology 1(1): 56–66.
Meyer
JH,
McMain
S,
Kennedy
SH,
et
al.
(2003)
Dysfunctional
attitudes
and 5-HT2
receptors
during
depression and self-harm. American Journal of Psychiatry
160(1): 90–99.
Mueller F, Lenz C, Dolder PC, et al. (2017) Acute effects
of LSD on amygdala activity during processing of fear-
ful stimuli in healthy subjects. Translational Psychiatry
7(4): e1084.
Narby J (2002) Shamans and scientists. In: Grob CS (ed.)
Hallucinogens: A Reader. New York, NY: Putnam,
pp.159–163.
Nettl B (1956) Music in Primitive Culture. Boston, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Nichols
DE
(2004)
Hallucinogens.
Pharmacology
&
Therapeutics 101(2): 131–181.
Nutt D, King LA, Saulsbury W, et al. (2007) Development of
a rational scale to assess the harm of drugs of potential
misuse. The Lancet 369(9566): 1047–1053.
Nutt D, King LA and Nichols DE (2013) Effects of Schedule
I drug laws on neuroscience research and treatment innov-
ation. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 14(8): 577–585.
Pahnke WN (1963) Drugs and mysticism: An analysis of the
relationship between psychedelic drugs and the mystical con-
sciousness: A thesis. PhD Thesis, Harvard University.
Pahnke WN (1969) The psychedelic mystical experience in the
human encounter with death. Harvard Theological Review
62(1): 1–21.
Palhano-Fontes F, Andrade KC, Tofoli LF, et al. (2015)
The psychedelic state induced by ayahuasca modulates
the activity and connectivity of the default mode network.
PLoS One 10(2): e0118143.
Pessoa L and Adolphs R (2010) Emotion processing and the
amygdala: From a ‘low road’ to ‘many roads’ of evaluat-
ing biological significance. Nature Reviews Neuroscience
11(11): 773–783.
Preller KH, Herdener M, Pokorny T, et al. (2017) The fabric
of meaning and subjective effects in LSD-induced states
depend on serotonin 2A receptor activation. Current
Biology 27(3): 451–457.
Raichle ME, MacLeod AM, Snyder AZ, et al. (2001)
A default mode of brain function. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 98(2): 676–682.
Raichle ME and Snyder AZ (2007) A default mode of brain
function: A brief history of an evolving idea. NeuroImage
37(4): 1083–1090.
Repantis D, Schlattmann P, Laisney O, et al. (2009)
Antidepressants for neuroenhancement in healthy individ-
uals: A systematic review. Poiesis & Praxis 6(3–4): 139–174.
Roberts TB (1997) Academic and religious freedom in the
study of the mind. In: Forte R (ed.) Entheogens and the
Future of Religion. San Francisco, CA: Council on
Spiritual Practices.
Rohde SA and Sander H (2011) The development of the legal
situation of Santo Daime in Germany. In: Labate BC and
Jungaberle H (eds) The Internationalization of Ayahuasca.
Mu
¨ nster: LIT Verlag, pp.339–352.
Ross S, Bossis A, Guss J, et al. (2016) Rapid and sustained
symptom reduction following psilocybin treatment for
anxiety and depression in patients with life-threatening
cancer:
A
randomized
controlled
trial.
Journal
of
Psychopharmacology 30(12): 1165–1180.
10
Drug Science, Policy and Law
 Sandberg R (2011) Judging Religious Drug use: The Misuse of
the Definition of ‘‘Religion’’. In: Labate BC and Jungaberle
H (eds) The Internationalization of Ayahuasca. Zurich,
Switzerland: Lit Verlag, pp.389–401.
Savage C, Fadiman J, Mogar R, et al. (1966) The effects of
psychedelic (LSD) therapy on values, personality, and
behavior. International Journal of Neuropsychiatry 2(3):
241–254.
Schartner MM, Carhart-Harris RL, Barrett AB, et al. (2017)
Increased spontaneous MEG signal diversity for psycho-
active doses of ketamine, LSD and psilocybin. Scientific
Reports 7: 46421.
Schermer M (2015) Ethics of pharmacological mood enhance-
ment. In: Clausen J and Levy N (eds) Handbook of
Neuroethics. Dordrecht: Springer, pp.1177–1190.
Schmid Y, Enzler F, Gasser P, et al. (2015) Acute effects of
lysergic acid diethylamide in healthy subjects. Biological
Psychiatry 78(8): 544–553.
Schultes RE and Hofmann A (1979) Plants of the Gods. Their
Sacred, Healing and Hallucinogenic Powers. Rochester,
VT: Healing Arts Press.
Sessa B (2005) Can psychedelics have a role in psychiatry
once again? The British Journal of Psychiatry 186(6):
457–458.
Sessa B (2008) Is it time to revisit the role of psychedelic
drugs
in
enhancing
human
creativity?
Journal
of
Psychopharmacology 22(8): 821–827.
Sessa B and Johnson MW (2015) Can psychedelic compounds
play a part in drug dependence therapy? The British
Journal of Psychiatry 206(1): 1–3.
Strassman RJ (1984) Adverse reactions to psychedelic drugs:
A review of the literature. The Journal of Nervous and
Mental Disease 172(10): 577–595.
Studerus E, Kometer M, Hasler F, et al. (2011) Acute, sub-
acute and long-term subjective effects of psilocybin in
healthy humans: A pooled analysis of experimental stu-
dies. Journal of Psychopharmacology 25(11): 1434–1452.
Tagliazucchi E, Carhart-Harris R, Leech R, et al. (2014)
Enhanced repertoire of brain dynamical states during the
psychedelic experience. Human Brain Mapping 35(11):
5442–5456.
Tagliazucchi E, Roseman L, Kaelen M, et al. (2016)
Increased global functional connectivity correlates with
LSD-induced ego dissolution. Current Biology 26(8):
1043–1050.
Tupper KW (2008) The globalization of ayahuasca: Harm
reduction or benefit maximization? International Journal
of Drug Policy 19(4): 297–303.
Vollenweider FX and Kometer M (2010) The neurobiology of
psychedelic drugs: Implications for the treatment of mood
disorders. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 11(9): 642–651.
Walsh C (2010) Drugs and human rights: private palliatives,
sacramental
freedoms
and
cognitive
liberty.
The
International Journal of Human Rights 14(3): 425–441.
Walsh
C
(2016)
Psychedelics
and
cognitive
liberty:
Reimagining drug policy through the prism of human
rights. International Journal of Drug Policy 29: 80–87.
Yamauchi M, Miyara T, Matsushima T, et al. (2006)
Desensitization of 5-HT 2A receptor function by chronic
administration of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.
Brain Research 1067(1): 164–169.
Elsey
11
