 Autonomous sweat extraction and analysis applied to
cystic fibrosis and glucose monitoring using a fully
integrated wearable platform
Sam Emaminejada,b,c,d,1,2, Wei Gaob,c,d,1, Eric Wub, Zoe A. Daviese, Hnin Yin Yin Nyeinb,c,d, Samyuktha Challaa,f,
Sean P. Ryane, Hossain M. Fahadb,c,d, Kevin Chenb,c,d, Ziba Shahparb,c,d, Salmonn Talebia,f, Carlos Millaf,3, Ali Javeyb,c,d,3,
and Ronald W. Davisa,3
aStanford Genome Technology Center, Stanford School of Medicine, Palo Alto, CA 94304; bDepartment of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences,
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720; cBerkeley Sensor and Actuator Center, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720; dMaterials Sciences
Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720; eThe Stanford Cystic Fibrosis Center, Center for Excellence in Pulmonary Biology,
Stanford School of Medicine, Palo Alto, CA 94305; and fDepartment of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
Contributed by Ronald W. Davis, February 14, 2017 (sent for review December 15, 2016; reviewed by Maneesh Jain and Andre Marziali)
Perspiration-based wearable biosensors facilitate continuous moni-
toring of individuals’ health states with real-time and molecular-level
insight. The inherent inaccessibility of sweat in sedentary individuals
in large volume (≥10 μL) for on-demand and in situ analysis has
limited our ability to capitalize on this noninvasive and rich source
of information. A wearable and miniaturized iontophoresis interface
is an excellent solution to overcome this barrier. The iontophoresis
process involves delivery of stimulating agonists to the sweat glands
with the aid of an electrical current. The challenge remains in de-
vising an iontophoresis interface that can extract sufficient amount
of sweat for robust sensing, without electrode corrosion and burn-
ing/causing discomfort in subjects. Here, we overcame this challenge
through realizing an electrochemically enhanced iontophoresis inter-
face, integrated in a wearable sweat analysis platform. This interface
can be programmed to induce sweat with various secretion profiles
for real-time analysis, a capability which can be exploited to advance
our knowledge of the sweat gland physiology and the secretion
process. To demonstrate the clinical value of our platform, human
subject studies were performed in the context of the cystic fibrosis
diagnosis and preliminary investigation of the blood/sweat glucose
correlation. With our platform, we detected the elevated sweat elec-
trolyte content of cystic fibrosis patients compared with that of
healthy control subjects. Furthermore, our results indicate that oral
glucose consumption in the fasting state is followed by increased
glucose levels in both sweat and blood. Our solution opens the
possibility for a broad range of noninvasive diagnostic and general
population health monitoring applications.
wearable | biosensors | noninvasive | iontophoresis |
personalized medicine
W
earable biosensors have received considerable attention
owing to their great promise for a wide range of clinical and
physiological applications (1–10). Despite significant progress
made in printed and flexible biosensors in the field, a majority of
wearable devices focus on monitoring of physical activity or se-
lected electrophysiological parameters, providing only limited in-
formation regarding physiological changes of complex homeostatic
responses (4–10). Wearable chemical sensors offer great oppor-
tunities for collecting physiological information at the molecular
level (3, 9–19). Recently research advances have resulted in a va-
riety of wearable sweat sensors that can be used for real-time
analysis of sweat biomarkers including electrolytes, metabolites,
and heavy metals (11–20). We recently demonstrated a fully in-
tegrated wearable sensing system for real-time monitoring of
multiple analytes in human perspiration during physical exercise
which allows accurate measurement of sweat analytes through
signal processing and calibration (16).
The inherent inaccessibility of sweat in sedentary individuals in
large volume (≥10 μL) for on-demand and in situ analysis remains
to limit our ability to capitalize on this noninvasive and rich source
of information for broad population monitoring. A wearable and
miniaturized iontophoresis interface is an excellent solution to
overcome this barrier. The iontophoresis process involves delivery
of stimulating agonists to the sweat glands with the aid of an
electrical current. The challenge remains in devising an ionto-
phoresis interface that can extract and deliver sufficient amount of
sweat to the sensor surface for robust sensing, without electrode
corrosion and burning/causing discomfort in subjects.
Iontophoresis is currently a widely used method to stimulate
local sweat secretion at a selected site (21). The conventional
procedure involves stimulation, collection, and analysis all in sep-
arate steps, which not only requires extensive manual sample
handling steps, but also fails to provide real-time insight into the
secretion process. Despite the technological shortcomings, sweat
analysis has shown great potential for a variety of clinical and
physiological applications. For example, the sweat chloride level in
iontophoresis-extracted sweat sample is currently considered the
Significance
The inherent inaccessibility of sweat in sedentary individuals in
large volume (≥10 μL) for on-demand and in situ analysis has
limited our ability to capitalize on this noninvasive and rich source
of information. Through devising an electrochemically enhanced,
programmable, and miniaturized iontophoresis interface, in-
tegrated in a wearable sensing platform, we demonstrated a
method for periodic sweat extraction and in situ analysis. The
system can be programmed to induce sweat with various secre-
tion profiles, which in combination with the in situ analysis ca-
pability allow us to gain real-time insight into the sweat-secretion
and gland physiology. To demonstrate the clinical value of our
platform, human subject studies were performed in the context
of the cystic fibrosis diagnosis and preliminary investigation of
the blood/sweat glucose correlation.
Author contributions: S.E., W.G., C.M., A.J., and R.W.D. designed research; S.E., W.G.,
E.W., Z.A.D., H.Y.Y.N., S.C., S.P.R., H.M.F., K.C., Z.S., S.T., C.M., A.J., and R.W.D. performed
research; S.E., W.G., E.W., C.M., A.J., and R.W.D. contributed new reagents/analytic tools;
S.E., W.G., E.W., C.M., A.J., and R.W.D. analyzed data; and S.E., W.G., E.W., C.M., A.J., and
R.W.D. wrote the paper.
Reviewers: M.J., Cirina; and A.M., University of British Columbia.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
1S.E. and W.G. contributed equally to this work.
2Present address: Department of Electrical Engineering, University of California, Los An-
geles, CA 90095.
3To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: cmilla@stanford.edu, ajavey@
berkeley.edu, or krhong@stanford.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1701740114/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1701740114
PNAS
|
May 2, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 18
|
4625–4630
ENGINEERING
PHYSIOLOGY
 gold standard for screening cystic fibrosis (CF), a genetic chronic
disease that affects lungs and digestive system (21–23). A strong
correlation between blood and sweat ethanol concentrations has
been reported which could enable continuous blood-alcohol mon-
itoring by sweat analysis (24, 25). In a recent work, real-time sweat
ethanol monitoring using a wearable tattoo-based iontophoretic-
biosensing system has been developed (20). Sweat extracted from
iontophoresis has also been shown to contain glucose levels that can
accurately reflect blood glucose (26).
Here, we devised an electrochemically enhanced iontophoresis
interface which can extract sufficient sweat volume for robust
analysis without causing discomfort in patients. This interface can
be programmed to induce sweat periodically with various secretion
profiles. Hence, it can be used to gain an unprecedented insight
into the secretion process to advance the state of the science and
our knowledge of the sweat gland physiology. Accordingly, we in-
tegrated this capability to demonstrate a fully integrated and au-
tonomous platform that can stimulate sweat secretion and measure
analytes of interest in the sweat collected (e.g., glucose, Na+, and
Cl−) in situ and in real time (Fig. 1). The developed platform
makes the physiologically rich sweat sample accessible on demand
for general population health monitoring. As a result, it can be
used for a wide range of applications in personalized medicine such
as in-home continuous patient monitoring in response to poten-
tially novel CF modulating drugs and enabling further clinical in-
vestigations including diabetes and prediabetes monitoring in a
practical and noninvasive modality.
This system implements a wirelessly programmable iontophoresis
capability to induce sweat with different excretion rate profiles and
at periodic time intervals. Through integration of sensing electrodes
on the same substrate as that of the iontophoresis electrodes, the
induced sweat can be analyzed on-site immediately. The sensors are
capable of quantifying sweat Na+, Cl−, and glucose, with high sen-
sitivity in the physiologically relevant ranges of interest. As shown in
Fig. 1, our platform consists of an electrode array, containing the
sweat induction and sensing electrodes, integrated with a wireless
flexible printed circuit board (FPCB). The independent function-
ality of the individual sensors and the iontophoresis process is
preserved through electrically decoupling the switchable sweat
sensing and sweat induction modes of operation (Fig. 1C).
The electrodes were patterned on a mechanically flexible poly-
ethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate to form a stable sensor–skin
contact (Fig. 1B). The sweat induction electrodes interface the skin
with a thin layer of agonist agent hydrogel in between. To electri-
cally connect the sweat induction electrodes and the hydrogels, thin
stainless steel (corrosion-proof) contacts are used. The hydrogels
are loaded with cholinergic sweat gland secretory stimulating com-
pounds (e.g., pilocarpine). Depending on the devised compound
formulation, different patterns of sweat secretion can be achieved.
The sensing electrodes interface the skin through a water-absorbent
thin rayon pad. To demonstrate the sweat analysis capability, we
developed potentiometric sodium and chloride sensors, functional-
ized with ion-selective films (Fig. 1B), as well as an amperometric
glucose sensor with the aid of glucose oxidase. The panel of target
analytes was selected based on their informative role in terms of
clinical diagnosis or providing understanding of an individual’s
physiological state. Specifically, sodium and chloride levels in sweat
are diagnostic markers for CF, and glucose level in iontophoresis-
induced sweat is reported to be potentially related to that in blood
and thus applicable to diabetes screening and monitoring.
The FPCB module consolidates the required integrated circuit
chips and peripheral electronics to implement iontophoresis, sig-
nal processing, control, and wireless transmission circuitries, thus
delivering a fully integrated seamless and programmable system
(Figs. S1–S3). Fig. 1D illustrates the system-level overview of the
induction and sensing modes of operation. The sweat induction
circuit consists of a programmable current source for iontopho-
resis current delivery and a protection circuit that sets an upper
limit on the iontophoresis current as a safety mechanism to avoid
overheating and burning the skin.
The sweat sensing circuit consists of two signal-conditioning paths
in relation to the corresponding transduced signal, where each in-
cludes an analog front end to amplify the signal as well as a low-pass
filter to minimize the high-frequency noise and electromagnetic in-
terference (Fig. S2). The FPCB at its core uses a microcontroller
that can be programmed to set the mode of operation through
controlling a bank of switches to turn on/off the respective circuits
and electrical paths. The microcontroller’s digital-to-analog (DAC)
port is used to drive the iontophoresis circuit and its analog-to-digital
(ADC) port is used to convert the analog-processed signal into the
digital domain. The microcontroller interfaces with an onboard
wireless transceiver to communicate the incoming/outgoing data
from/to a Bluetooth-enabled mobile handset with a custom-
developed application. The mobile application has a user-friendly
interface for programming the mode of operation as well as dis-
playing and sharing the iontophoresis and sweat analysis data
through email, short message service, and cloud servers (Fig. S4).
The iontophoresis circuit was implemented as a digitally pro-
grammable current source, ensuring that variation in the skin
condition (such as thickness and conductivity) of individuals does
not affect iontophoresis performance. Fig. 2A demonstrates the
programmability and current source behavior of the circuit. The
circuit delivers a current proportional to the output voltage of
the microcontroller’s DAC port, and this current is independent of
load sizes ranging from 5 to 20 kΩ (the typical skin impedance in
Fig. 1.
(A) Image of the autonomous sweat extraction and sensing platform
(a thin layer of agonist agent hydrogel will be placed underneath the ionto-
phoresis electrodes). (B) Image of iontophoresis and sweat sensor electrodes
for Na+ and Cl− sensing. (C) Schematic illustrations of the iontophoresis and
sensing modes. (D) System-level block diagram of the platform showing the
iontophoresis and sensing circuits.
4626
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1701740114
Emaminejad et al.
 our context is ∼10 kΩ). The programmability of the current source
circuit allows for inducing different iontophoresis current profiles,
which in turn allows for sweat stimulation with controlled intensity
and duration of sweat rate. Fig. 2 B and C illustrates our platform’s
capability to generate iontophoretic currents with a sawtooth wave
profile (Fig. 2B) and a square wave profile (Fig. 2C).
The sensing electrodes of our platform can be modified differ-
ently according to the specific applications. Fig. 2 D–F illustrates
examples of the modified electrochemical sensors for sweat chlo-
ride, sodium, and glucose analysis (the corresponding calibration
curves are shown in Fig. S5). Ag/AgCl electrodes were chosen for
chloride ion detection (23) whereas the measurement of sodium
ions was achieved by using previously reported sodium ionophore
X selectophore-based ion-selective electrodes (15). A polyvinyl
butyral (PVB)-coated electrode containing saturated chloride ions
was chosen as the reference electrode due to its stable potentials in
different analyte solutions (16). The performance of Na+ and Cl−
sensor was characterized in different NaCl solutions with physio-
logically relevant concentrations. The potential differences be-
tween the ion-selective electrodes and the PVB-coated reference
electrode were measured through a differential amplifier. Fig. 2 D
and E shows the representative voltage responses of the Na+ and
Cl− sensors, measured in 10–160 mM NaCl solutions, respectively.
Both ion-selective sensors show a near-Nernstian behavior with
sensitivities of 63.2 and 55.1 mV per decade of concentration for
Na+ and Cl− sensors, respectively. Fig. S6 illustrates the long-term
continuous measurement of a Cl− sensor over a 6-h period in 20,
40, and 80 mM NaCl solutions. The repeatability of the chloride
sensors is demonstrated in Fig. S7. Three typical Cl− sensors show
nearly identical absolute potentials in 10–80 mM NaCl solutions
with a variation of <1% in sensitivity. Fig. 2F shows the chro-
noamperometric responses of a glucose sensor to glucose solutions
with a typical sweat concentration range from 0 to 100 μM. The
sensitivity of the glucose sensor is estimated as 2.1 nA/μM. Results
of long-term stability studies of these electrochemical sensors in-
dicate that the sensitivities of the biosensors are consistent over
2 wk with sensitivity variations of <5% (16).
By modulating the formulation of the compounds that are
loaded into the iontophoresis hydrogel, we can achieve different
patterns of sweat-secretion rate. We characterized the induced
sweat rate profiles as stimulated by three different cholinergic ag-
onist hydrogels (acetylcholine, methacholine, and pilocarpine) each
at two different concentrations. For this characterization step, 2 mA
of current over duration of 5 min was applied using a pair of ring-
shaped electrodes (WR Medical Electronics Co., area: 4.3 cm2),
with the sweat-rate sensor (Q-sweat, WR Medical Electronics Co.)
mounted on the positive electrode, sealing the stimulated area. As
illustrated in Fig. 3A, for all of the formulations sweat secretion
initiated in just a few minutes from the start of iontophoresis. In
particular, acetylcholine hydrogel presented a high sweat-rate re-
sponse [354 nL/min/cm2 for 10% (wt/vol) acetylcholine] with a
short-lived effect. This pattern is suitable for the case where peri-
odic sweat sampling with short intervals is required. To demon-
strate the periodic sweat stimulation capability, we used our
integrated platform and custom-developed acetylcholine-based
hydrogel to induce sweat repeatedly in the same area. To retrieve
the induced sweat rate information, immediately after each stimu-
lation step, the stimulated area was wiped dry and sealed with the
commercial sweat-rate sensor (Q-sweat, WR Medical Electronics
Co.). After each characterization step, the same hydrogels were
reused for the subsequent stimulation. By modulating the duration
of the applied iontophoresis as well as the concentration of the
agonist agent, we were able to tune the active sweat-secretion
window from a few minutes (Fig. 3B, acetylcholine 1%, iontopho-
resis current: 1 mA for 10 s) to tens of minutes (Fig. 3C, acetyl-
choline 10%, iontophoresis current: 1 mA for 5 min).
Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 3A, pilocarpine and methacholine-
based hydrogels provide long duration of secretion beyond the
60-min characterization window, where about half of the secretion
period was spent at about the peak rate. Specifically, methacholine
at 10% concentration gave the optimal combination of a rapid
onset of secretion with high secretory rate and sustained secretion
at high rate that is also above the minimum recommended for
sweat chloride analysis in CF (>100 nL/min/cm2). Therefore, for
subsequent on-body sweat extraction and sensing experiments we
used this formulation for our hydrogels.
This integrated platform can be used both as a diagnostic and
clinical investigation tool. To demonstrate its diagnostic capability,
the platform was used in the context of CF. As a genetic disease,
CF usually leads to an early death and is present in 1 out of every
3,000 newborn Caucasians. By current standards, sweat testing for
CF diagnosis is performed by highly qualified certified laboratories
in two steps: first, a sufficient amount of sweat is collected and then
transferred for chloride content determination in a second step.
Typically the test entails at least two technicians involved and takes
a few hours to complete. A sweat chloride level of ≥60 mM is
indicative of a high likelihood of CF, whereas in subjects with sweat
chloride <30 mM the disease is unlikely (21). It is also known that
the Cl−-based sweat test and genetic analysis are not always suffi-
cient for some CF patients with rare mutations whereas the ratio of
the sweat sodium and chloride levels can aid the CF diagnosis (27).
Our device can potentially serve as a reliable tool for early
screening of cystic fibrosis through on-demand sweat stimulation
and simultaneous sodium and chloride sensing in sweat. The
Fig. 2.
Experimental characterizations of the ionto-
phoresis and sensing system. (A) Controlled ionto-
phoresis current output for various resistive loads. (B
and C) Programmed iontophoresis current to gener-
ate (B) sawtooth and (C) square wave patterns. (D and
E) The open-circuit potential responses of the sodium
(D) and chloride (E) sensors in NaCl solutions. (F) The
chronoamperometric responses of a glucose sensor to
glucose solutions. Data recording was paused for 30 s
for each solution change.
Emaminejad et al.
PNAS
|
May 2, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 18
|
4627
ENGINEERING
PHYSIOLOGY
 repeated sweat extraction and sensing is also very useful for
monitoring the severity and recovery of CF patients. In this case,
the wearable system is packaged in a smart wristband and worn by
the subjects. A 1-mA current is applied onto the skin for 10 min,
which effectively delivers cholinergic agonists to the dermal space
to reach the sweat glands and induce sweating. When sweating
begins, the sensors measure potential differences between the
reference and the working electrodes. The response stabilizes at
∼20 min after iontophoresis, indicating that sufficient sweat has
been generated. Fig. 4 A and B illustrates the real-time on-body
measurement (20∼25 min) sweat electrolyte levels for a repre-
sentative healthy subject and a CF patient, respectively (full data
illustrated in Fig. S8). It can be clearly observed that both Na+ and
Cl− levels for the healthy subjects fall below 20 mM while the
patient has higher sweat Na+ and Cl− levels (>60 mM). In situ
sweat analysis using our wearable system was performed on six
healthy volunteers and three CF patients. As displayed in Fig. 4C,
the average sodium and chloride levels (based on the sensor
readings at 25 min) for healthy subjects are 26.7 and 21.2 mM,
respectively, while the average sodium and chloride levels (based
on the sensor readings at 25 min) for CF patient subjects are
82.3 and 95.7 mM, respectively. It should be noted that, in agree-
ment with a previous report (27), sweat sodium levels are lower
than sweat chloride levels for CF patient subjects in contrast to
healthy subjects where sweat sodium levels are higher, indicating
another method to consolidate the screening assessment of CF.
Furthermore, we can use our platform as an investigation tool to
enable a wide range of clinical and physiological applications. As an
additional potential application, with our platform we conducted
preliminary studies toward understanding the metabolic correlation
of glucose content in iontophoresis induced sweat vs. blood. Al-
though there is literature reporting that sweat glucose level is related
with blood glucose level (26), their metabolic correlation has not
been well studied. To evaluate the utility of our wearable platform
for noninvasive glucose monitoring, real-time sweat stimulation and
glucose-sensing measurements were conducted on a group of sub-
jects engaged in both fasting and postglucose intake trials.
Fig. 5 illustrates that the sweat and blood glucose levels of seven
healthy subjects before and after glucose intake (30 g oral glucose)
follow a similar pattern. Here, the blood glucose analysis is per-
formed using a commercially available glucometer (GE100, Bionime
Corp.). The off-body measurement results from the collected
sweat sample induced by our wearable device indicate that oral
glucose consumption in fasting subjects usually results in increase
of glucose level in both sweat and blood (from six out of seven
subjects). To get more accurate measurements of sweat glucose
level and a further understanding of the correlation between sweat
and blood glucose levels, future work will involve the integration
of the temperature, pH, and sweat-rate sensors to calibrate the
glucose measurements in sweat.
In conclusion, we have demonstrated a fully integrated and
autonomous platform that enables continuous and noninvasive
monitoring of individuals. This platform extracts sweat (at a high
secretion rate) on demand or periodically and performs sweat
analysis in situ. Through optimization of sweat-stimulating drug
concentration in the custom-developed hydrogels and careful de-
sign of the iontophoresis electrodes, we were able to consistently
achieve secretory rates in excess of 100 nL/min/cm2 and extract
sufficient amounts of sweat for reliable analysis without causing
skin damage or discomfort in the subjects. Additionally, in-
corporation of simultaneous in situ analysis functionality inherently
allowed for significant reduction of the sweat sample degradation,
evaporation, or contamination. To illustrate the value of our so-
lution as a diagnostic tool, we used the platform to detect the el-
evated sweat sodium and chloride ions content in the CF patients.
Furthermore, to demonstrate the utility of the platform as a clin-
ical and physiological investigation tool, we applied our solution to
conduct a preliminary study toward understanding the metabolic
correlation of glucose content in sweat vs. blood. To precisely es-
tablish the correlation between the sweat and blood glucose, in the
future sweat-rate monitoring functionality can be integrated to
allow for normalization of the analyte content with respect to the
sweat-rate information of the individual. Furthermore, future ef-
forts will be focused on integration of a wider panel of biomarker,
and peripheral electrochemical and physical (e.g., pH and tem-
perature) sensors to deliver a versatile wearable platform for large-
scale clinical and physiological investigations. We envision that
through enabling such large-scale studies, our platform would help
to establish the relationship between the sweat profile and the
physiological state of the individuals, hence paving the way for
adoption of sweat-based sensing as a noninvasive and seamless
method of diagnosis and screening for general population.
Fig. 3.
(A) Induced sweat-secretion rate characteristics in response to three
different custom-developed cholinergic agonist hydrogels with two different
concentrations: acetylcholine (blue), methacholine (black), and pilocarpine
(red). Bars represent values for response latency (time in seconds to onset of
secretion from start of iontophoresis), response duration (total time in minutes
of secretion above baseline, measurements stopped at 60 min), peak secretory
rate in response to stimulation, time to reach peak secretory rate, and time
spent secreting at the peak rate. (B) Sweat-rate profile pertaining to periodic
sweat induction using acetylcholine 1%-based hydrogel with iontophoresis
current of 1 mA for 10 s. (C) Sweat-rate profile pertaining to periodic sweat
induction using acetylcholine 10%-based hydrogel with iontophoresis current
of 1 mA for 5 min (bottom panel). The control curves in B and C represent the
sweat-rate profile in the contralateral arm without iontophoresis.
4628
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1701740114
Emaminejad et al.
 Materials and Methods
Materials. Selectophore-grade sodium ionophore X, bis(2-ethylehexyl) seba-
cate (DOS), sodium tetrakis[3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)phenyl] borate (Na-TFPB),
high-molecular-weight polyvinyl chloride (PVC), tetrahydrofuran, sodium tet-
raphenylborate (NaTPB), cyclohexanone, polyvinyl butyral resin BUTVAR B-98
(PVB), sodium chloride (NaCl), 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT), poly(so-
dium 4-styrenesulfonate) (NaPSS), glucose oxidase (from Aspergillus niger),
chitosan, single-walled carbon nanotubes, iron (III) chloride, potassium ferri-
cyanide (III), were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Moisture-resistant 100-μm-thick
PET was from McMaster-Carr. All reagents were used as received.
Fabrication of Electrodes Array. The fabrication process takes similar steps as in a
previous paper (16). In brief, PET is cleaned with isopropyl alcohol and O2 plasma
etching. An electrode array of 3.2 mm diameter is patterned via photolithography
and is thermally evaporated with 30/100 nm of Cr/Au, followed by lift-off in ace-
tone. The electrode array is additionally coated with 500-nm parylene C insulation
layer in an SCS Labcoter 2 Parylene Deposition System, and the 3-mm-diameter
sensing electrode area is defined via photolithography. The fabricated array is
further etched with O2 plasma to remove the parylene layer at the defined sensing
area. Finally, 200 nm Ag is deposited via thermal evaporation and lift-off in acetone.
Preparation of Na+- and Cl−-Selective Sensors. The Cl−-selective Ag/AgCl electrode
was prepared obtained by injecting 10 μl 0.1-M FeCl3 solution on top of evaporated
Ag electrode using a micropipette for 1 min. The Na+-selective membrane mixture
consisted of Na ionophore X (1% weight by weight, wt/wt), Na-TFPB (0.55% wt/wt),
PVC (33% wt/wt), and DOS (65.45% wt/wt). Next, 100 mg of the membrane mix-
ture was dissolved in 660 μl of tetrahydrofuran. The ion-selective solutions were
sealed and stored at 4 °C. The solution for the PVB reference electrode was pre-
pared by dissolving 79.1 mg PVB and 50 mg of NaCl into 1 ml methanol.
Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) PEDOT:PSS was chosen as the ion–electron
transducer to minimize the potential drift of the ion-selective electrodes (ISEs) and
deposited onto the working electrodes by galvanostatic electrochemical poly-
merization with an external Ag/AgCl reference electrode from a solution con-
taining 0.01M EDOT and 0.1 M NaPSS. A constant current of 14 μA (2 mA cm−2)
was applied to produce polymerization charges of 10 mC onto each electrode.
Ion-selective membranes were then prepared by drop-casting 10 μl of the
Na+-selective membrane mixture onto the corresponding electrodes. The
common reference electrode for the Na+ and Cl− ISEs was modified by casting
10 μl of reference solution onto the Ag/AgCl electrode. The modified elec-
trodes were left to dry overnight. However, to obtain the best performance,
the ion-selective sensors were covered with a solution containing 50 mM NaCl
through microinjection for 1 h before measurements. This conditioning pro-
cess was important to minimize the potential drift.
Preparation of Glucose Sensors. First, 1% chitosan solution was prepared by dis-
solving chitosan in 2% acetic acid and magnetic stirring for about 1 h; next, the
chitosan solution was mixed with single-walled carbon nanotubes (2 mg ml−1) by
ultrasonic agitation over 30 min to prepare a viscous solution of chitosan and carbon
nanotubes. To prepare the glucose sensors, the chitosan/carbon nanotube solution
was mixed thoroughly with glucose oxidase solution (10 mg ml−1 in PBS of pH 7.2) in
the ratio 2:1 (volume/volume). A Prussian blue mediator layer was deposited onto
the Au electrodes by cyclic voltammetry from 0 to 0.5 V (versus Ag/AgCl) for one
cycle at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1 in a fresh solution containing 2.5 mM FeCl3, 100 mM
KCl, 2.5 mM K3Fe(CN)6, and 100 mM HCl. The glucose sensor was obtained by drop-
casting 3 μl of the glucose oxidase/chitosan/carbon nanotube solution onto the
Prussian blue/Au electrode. The sensor arrays were allowed to dry overnight at 4 °C
with no light. The solutions were stored at 4 °C when not in use.
Preparation of Agonist Agent Hydrogels. Hydrogels with cholinergic agonists at
different concentrations were prepared based on previously reported methods
(28). In brief, a 3% agarose gel was prepared in a glass beaker by melting the
agarose in water for 1 min in a microwave. The liquefied hot gel was allowed to
cool down to 47 °C, a magnetic stirrer was dropped into the beaker, and this was
placed on a hot plate stirrer set at 47 °C. Then, the appropriate amount of the
agonist solution was added to make the desired final concentration and allowed
to mix well by stirring for 1 min. The melted gel was then poured into cylindrical
molds and allowed to solidify for 1 h at 4 °C. Next, the hardened gel was sliced in
1-mm disks which were in turn cut with the aid of metal dies to the shape of the
iontophoresis electrodes before application to the subject’s skin.
Overall System Design. The overall system was based around the Atmel
ATmega328P 8-bit microcontroller with accompanying analog circuitry for both
sensor reading and iontophoresis current delivery. The microcontroller’s
onboard 10-bit ADC was used to both read sensor data and to monitor ion-
tophoresis current. A Bluetooth transceiver was connected to the micro-
controller to interface the system to a cell phone. Using the cell phone, the
Fig. 4.
Wearable sweat extraction and sensing sys-
tem for CF diagnosis. (A) Real-time on-body mea-
surement of sweat sodium ion and chloride ion
levels of a healthy subject after iontophoresis-based
sweat stimulation. (B) Real-time measurement of
sweat sodium and chloride levels of a CF patient.
(C) Comparison of sweat electrolyte levels between
six healthy subjects and three CF patients.
Fig. 5.
Comparison of the blood and sweat glucose levels of seven subjects during 12-h fasting and 1 h after glucose intake (30 g glucose).
Emaminejad et al.
PNAS
|
May 2, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 18
|
4629
ENGINEERING
PHYSIOLOGY
 system could be commanded to output varying levels of iontophoresis current
or to transmit sensor readings in real time.
Signal-Conditioning
Circuit
Design
and
Processing.
Low-leakage
analog
switches were used to interface between the sensors and the beginning of the
analog signal-conditioning circuits. The state of these switches was digitally
controlled by the microcontroller, and the switches were set to high impedance
(open circuit) during iontophoresis to protect the signal-conditioning circuitry
and to minimize the possibility of burning the test subject.
The signal-conditioning circuitry was implemented in relation to the corre-
sponding sensing mode. For the amperometric glucose sensors, the sensor output
is in the form of an electrical current, necessitating the use of a transimpedance
amplifier (TIA) first stage to amplify the signal and to convert it from a current to a
voltage. A 1-MΩ resistor was placed in feedback for the TIA to set the current-to-
voltage gain to −106, to allow us to measure current with nanoampere precision.
Because the sensor outputs positive current from the Ag/AgCl reference elec-
trode toward the working electrode, and because the TIA has a negative gain,
the Ag/AgCl reference electrode was biased to +2.5 V to keep the signal within
0–5-V range of the microcontroller’s ADC. For the potentiometric Na+ and Cl−
sensors, the sensor output is in the form of a differential voltage. The first stage
for
the
potentiometric
sensing
channels
consisted
of
Analog
Devices
AD8422 instrumentation amplifiers with gain set to 5, providing high impedance
inputs for the sensors with maximal common-mode noise rejection. By setting
the first stage gain to 5, we were able to achieve millivolt-level resolution over
the physiologically relevant range of Na+ and Cl− concentrations. The PVB ref-
erence electrode for the potentiometric sensors was allowed to float, with a
10-kΩ resistor to +2.5 V to provide a path for the input bias current for the
amplifiers. The reference terminals of the instrumentation amplifiers were tied
to +2.5 V to allow for maximal output swing in single-supply operation.
All of the analog signal-conditioning paths were terminated with a four-pole
unity gain low-pass filter, with −3dB frequency set to 1 Hz to minimize noise and
interference in the measurements. The filter outputs were connected to the 10-bit
ADC on the microcontroller. ADC readings were oversampled 1,000× in software
on the microcontroller to further improve resolution and accuracy. These readings
were then relayed over Bluetooth to cell phone.
Schematics for the analog signal-conditioning circuitry are shown in Fig. S2.
Iontophoresis Current Delivery and Protection Circuit Design. To deliver a
wirelessly controllable iontophoresis current through loads of varying resistance,
we designed a current DAC and protection circuitry to interface with the
microcontroller. A second-order low-pass filter followed by voltage buffer was
connected to a microcontroller output pin to convert the ATmega328P’s pulse-
width-modulated output to a dc voltage. This voltage was then used to control
a voltage-controlled current source, based on an AD8276 difference amplifier
with an external bipolar junction transistor output stage. This architecture
enabled us to use Bluetooth commands to control delivery of iontophoresis
currents to the test subject, and allowed us to program iontophoresis currents
with arbitrary ramp-up/ramp-down profiles.
An ammeter based on the INA282 high-side current shunt monitor was placed
in series with the current DAC, and the output was connected to one of the
microcontroller’s ADC channels to provide real-time monitoring of current de-
livery, and to enable the microcontroller to shut off current output if excessive
current was being drawn. A junction field-effect transistor and 250-Ω series re-
sistor were placed in series with the current path as a safety measure to ensure a
maximum short-circuit current of 2 mA. Lastly, analog switches were placed at
both positive and negative iontophoresis terminals to fully shut off current
when necessary.
A schematic showing the current delivery circuitry is given in Fig. S3.
Power Distribution. The system was powered by a single rechargeable lithium-
ion polymer battery with a nominal supply voltage of 3.7 V. A single +5-V boost
regulator was used to generate the supply voltages for the microcontroller
and for the analog signal-conditioning blocks. A +2.5-V virtual ground was
used to bias the sensors at midsupply and to enable efficient, single-supply
operation of the analog blocks. A +36-V boost regulator was used to generate
the supply voltage for the current DAC, to ensure that the system could deliver
appropriate amounts of iontophoresis current through a wide range of
physiologically relevant resistive loads. Lastly, a 3.3-V low-dropout regulator
was used to provide power for the Bluetooth module.
The Setup of Wearable System for On-Body Testing. A water-absorbent thin
rayon pad was placed between the skin and the sensor array during on-body
experiments to absorb and maintain sweat for stable and reliable sensor read-
ings, and to prevent direct mechanical contact between the sensors and skin. The
on-body measurement results were also consistent with ex situ tests using freshly
collected sweat samples. The on-body evaluation of the wearable platform was
performed in compliance with the protocols that were approved by the In-
stitutional Review Board at University of California, Berkeley (2015-05-7578) and
the Institutional Review Board at Stanford University (no. 31310). All subjects
gave written, informed consent before participation in the study.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. The work at Stanford University was supported by the
National Institutes of Health Grant P01 HG000205; the work at University of
California, Berkeley was supported by National Science Foundation Nanomanu-
facturing Systems for Mobile Computing and Energy Technologies Center. The
sensor fabrication was performed in the Electronic Materials Laboratory (funded
by the Director, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Material
Sciences and Engineering Division of the US Department of Energy under Con-
tract DE-AC02-05CH11231) and Stanford Nanofabrication Facility. K.C. acknowl-
edges support from the Robert N. Noyce Fellowship in Microelectronics.
1. Kim DH, et al. (2011) Epidermal electronics. Science 333(6044):838–843.
2. Hammock ML, Chortos A, Tee BC, Tok JB, Bao Z (2013) 25th anniversary article: The
evolution of electronic skin (e-skin): A brief history, design considerations, and recent
progress. Adv Mater 25(42):5997–6038.
3. Bandodkar AJ, Jeerapan I, Wang J (2016) Wearable chemical sensors: Present chal-
lenges and future prospects. ACS Sens. 1:464–482.
4. Wang C, et al. (2013) User-interactive electronic skin for instantaneous pressure vi-
sualization. Nat Mater 12(10):899–904.
5. Xu S, et al. (2014) Soft microfluidic assemblies of sensors, circuits, and radios for the
skin. Science 344(6179):70–74.
6. Kaltenbrunner M, et al. (2013) An ultra-lightweight design for imperceptible plastic
electronics. Nature 499(7459):458–463.
7. Tee BCK, et al. (2015) A skin-inspired organic digital mechanoreceptor. Science
350(6258):313–316.
8. Takei K, Honda W, Harada S, Arie T, Akita S (2015) Toward flexible and wearable
human-interactive health-monitoring devices. Adv Healthc Mater 4(4):487–500.
9. Chen K, et al. (2016) Printed carbon nanotube electronics and sensor systems. Adv
Mater 28(22):4397–4414.
10. Imani S, et al. (2016) A wearable chemical-electrophysiological hybrid biosensing
system for real-time health and fitness monitoring. Nat Commun 7:11650.
11. Bandodkar AJ, et al. (2014) Epidermal tattoo potentiometric sodium sensors with wireless
signal transduction for continuous non-invasive sweat monitoring. Biosens Bioelectron
54:603–609.
12. Huang X, et al. (2014) Stretchable, wireless sensors and functional substrates for
epidermal characterization of sweat. Small 10(15):3083–3090.
13. Rose DP, et al. (2015) Adhesive RFID sensor patch for monitoring of sweat electrolytes.
IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 62(6):1457–1465.
14. Bandodkar AJ, et al. (2015) Tattoo-based noninvasive glucose monitoring: a proof-of-
concept study. Anal Chem 87(1):394–398.
15. Schazmann B, et al. (2010) A wearable electrochemical sensor for the real-time
measurement of sweat sodium concentration. Anal Methods 2:342–348.
16. Gao W, et al. (2016) Fully integrated wearable sensor arrays for multiplexed in situ
perspiration analysis. Nature 529(7587):509–514.
17. Lee H, et al. (2016) A graphene-based electrochemical device with thermoresponsive
microneedles for diabetes monitoring and therapy. Nat Nanotechnol 11(6):566–572.
18. Gao W, et al. (2016) Wearable microsensor array for multiplexed heavy metal mon-
itoring of body fluids. ACS Sens. 1:866–874.
19. Nyein HY, et al. (2016) A Wearable electrochemical platform for non-invasive simul-
taneous monitoring of Ca2+ and pH. ACS Nano 10(7):7216–7224.
20. Kim J, et al. (2016) Noninvasive alcohol monitoring using a wearable tattoo-based
iontophoretic-biosensing system. ACS Sens, 10.1021/acssensors.6b00356.
21. Farrell PM, et al. (2017) Diagnosis of cystic fibrosis: Consensus guidelines from the
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. J Pediatr 181S:S4–S15, 15.e1.
22. Gibson LE, Cooke RE (1959) A test for concentration of electrolytes in sweat in cystic
fibrosis of the pancreas utilizing pilocarpine by iontophoresis. Pediatrics 23(3):545–549.
23. Gonzalo-Ruiz J, et al. (2009) Early determination of cystic fibrosis by electrochemical
chloride quantification in sweat. Biosens Bioelectron 24(6):1788–1791.
24. Buono MJ (1999) Sweat ethanol concentrations are highly correlated with co-existing
blood values in humans. Exp Physiol 84(2):401–404.
25. Gamella M, et al. (2014) A novel non-invasive electrochemical biosensing device for in
situ determination of the alcohol content in blood by monitoring ethanol in sweat. Anal
Chim Acta 806:1–7.
26. Moyer J, Wilson D, Finkelshtein I, Wong B, Potts R (2012) Correlation between sweat
glucose and blood glucose in subjects with diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 14(5):398–402.
27. Augarten A, et al. (1995) The significance of sweat Cl/Na ratio in patients with bor-
derline sweat test. Pediatr Pulmonol 20(6):369–371.
28. Sletten DM, Kimpinski K, Weigand SD, Low PA (2009) A novel gel based vehicle for the
delivery of acetylcholine in quantitative sudomotor axon reflex testing. Auton Neurosci
150(1-2):127–130.
4630
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1701740114
Emaminejad et al.
