 OB S T R U C T I V E S L E E P A P N E A
Increased internalization of complement inhibitor CD59
may contribute to endothelial inflammation in
obstructive sleep apnea
Memet Emin,1* Gang Wang,1* Francesco Castagna,1 Josanna Rodriguez-Lopez,1 Romina Wahab,1
Jing Wang,1† Tessa Adams,1‡ Ying Wei,2 Sanja Jelic1§
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), characterized by intermittent hypoxia (IH) during transient cessation of breathing,
triples the risk for cardiovascular diseases. We used a phage display peptide library as an unbiased approach to in-
vestigate whether IH, which is specific to OSA, activates endothelial cells (ECs) in a distinctive manner. The target of a
differentially bound peptide on ECs collected from OSA patients was identified as CD59, a major complement inhibitor
that protects ECs from the membrane attack complex (MAC). A decreased proportion of CD59 is located on the EC
surface in OSA patients compared with controls, suggesting reduced protection against complement attack. In vitro,
IH promoted endothelial inflammation predominantly via augmented internalization of CD59 and consequent MAC
deposition. Increased internalization of endothelial CD59 in IH appeared to be cholesterol-dependent and was
reversed by statins in a CD59-dependent manner. These studies suggest that reduced complement inhibition may
mediate endothelial inflammation and increase vascular risk in OSA patients.
INTRODUCTION
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), a condition that affects a quarter of
Western adults, triples the risk for hypertension, ischemic stroke, coro-
nary artery disease, and venous thromboembolism and increases all-
cause mortality (1–7). OSA is characterized by repetitive cessation of
breathing, resulting in episodes of hypoxia/reoxygenation that activate
the endothelium, a key step in the development and progression of
cardiovascular diseases (8–10). Consequent platelet aggregation, leuko-
cyte and monocyte adhesion, and macrophage activation likely contrib-
ute to cardiovascular risk (9, 11, 12). However, the initial stimulus that
mediates endothelial activation in OSA has not been characterized.
The cyclic nature of the hypoxic insult clearly distinguishes OSA
from other conditions that activate the endothelium, such as hyper-
tension, diabetes, or elevated low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol.
Furthermore, diseases associated with continuous hypoxia, such as
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, interstitial lung disease, and
pulmonary hypertension, are not considered independent risk factors
for cardiovascular disease after adjustment for common confounders
such as smoking (13). In contrast, repetitive hypoxia/reoxygenation, a
phenomenon specific to OSA that is usually associated with relatively
mildhypoxemia,clearlypromotesvascularinflammationandaccelerates
atherosclerosis, whereas treatment of OSA with continuous positive air-
way pressure (CPAP) promotes regression of atherosclerosis (10, 14–16).
This led us to hypothesize that repetitive hypoxia/reoxygenation that
characterizes OSA activates endothelium in a distinctive manner.
To gain insight into pathways that mediate vascular risk in OSA, we
used an unbiased approach using a phage display library and mass spec-
trometry to identify differentially expressed plasma membrane proteins
on endothelial cells (ECs) harvested from patients with OSA and OSA-
free controls. This resulted in the discovery that OSA patients have
altered cellular distribution of CD59, with a greater proportion found
intracellularly in OSA patients compared with controls. CD59, a major
complement regulator, is a glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)–
anchored plasma membrane protein that inhibits the formation of
the terminal complement membrane attack complex (MAC) and
protects host cells from complement-mediated injury (17). Our studies
showed that intermittent hypoxia (IH) decreases protection against
complement activity by promoting the internalization of CD59 and
thus deposition of the MAC on ECs, suggesting a mechanism of vascu-
lar injury in OSA. Increased internalization of CD59 appeared to be
dependent on cholesterol-enriched lipid raft formation in ECs and
was blocked by statins, suggesting an additional protective effect of sta-
tins in OSA patients.
RESULTS
Binding of phage display peptide to complement regulator
CD59 is increased in ECs of OSA patients
We hypothesized that repetitive hypoxia/reoxygenation during transient
cessation of breathing, which resembles recurrent ischemia-reperfusion
injury and is specific to OSA, may alter EC receptors in a manner that
differs from endothelial activation in other cardiovascular diseases. We
used a phage display library to profile ECs harvested from OSA patients
and OSA-free controls (18). ECs were scraped from the forearm vein
with a J-shaped endovascular wire threaded through an angiocath
(Fig. 1A). Although OSA patients (n = 76) were slightly older than
controls (n = 52), the two groups were matched for gender, adiposity,
daytimesleepiness,bloodpressure,andcomorbidities(tableS1).Scraped
ECswere purified using magnetic beadscoated with endothelial-specific
antibodies (CD146) and exposed to a library of phage displaying a large
variety of seven–amino acid peptides. Among peptides that bound
to scraped ECs, peptide FHENWPS (peptide F) showed the greatest
1Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Columbia University
College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY 10032, USA. 2Division of Bio-
statistics, Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY
10032, USA.
*These authors are co-first authors.
†Present address: NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA.
‡Present address: Department of Cardiology, VU University Medical Center, 1081 HZ
Amsterdam, Netherlands.
§Corresponding author. E-mail: sj366@cumc.columbia.edu
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
6 January 2016
Vol 8 Issue 320 320ra1
1
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 enrichment for binding to ECs from OSA patients compared with
controls (Fig. 1B). We did not detect binding of peptide F to bovine
serum albumin or polystyrene plates (table S2). Confocal microsco-
py showed both plasma membrane and intracellular binding of pep-
tide F in scraped ECs, which were identified on slides by positive
immunofluorescence for von Willebrand factor (Fig. 1C) (14). This
was expected because we had previously observed that scraped ECs
are leaky (14). Binding of peptide F to intracellular sites appeared to
be particularly prominent in ECs from OSA patients (Fig. 1C).
To identify molecular targets of peptide F, we first carried out SDS-
PAGE of HUVEClysates incubatedwithpeptide F withorwithout cross-
linking and then performed Western blotting with antibody to peptide F.
However, no specific signal could be detected, possibly indicating a con-
formational target. Thus, we next incubated HUVEC lysate with peptide
F, followed by native PAGE and Western blotting with anti–peptide F
antibodies (Fig. 1D). This revealed a single major band at molecular
weight of 250 kD (Fig. 1D). The region of bound peptide F was cut
out from the gel, subjected to trypsin digestion, and analyzed by mass
Fig. 1. EC plasma membrane proteins are differentially
expressed in OSA patients and OSA-free controls. (A) Har-
vesting of venous ECs from study participants (n = 76 OSA pa-
tients and n = 52 controls, demographics in table S1). (B) Frequency of
peptide F binding to ECs harvested from OSA patients [n = 18: 45% male;
age,44.6±2.4years;bodymassindex(BMI),38.1±2.1kg/m2;apnea-hypopnea
index (AHI), 26.2 ± 6.2 events/hour; oxygen desaturation index (ODI), 11.4 ±
2.8 events/hour] and controls (n = 20: 55% male; age, 40.9 ± 2.7 years; BMI,
27.9 ± 1.3 kg/m2; AHI, 1.3 ± 0.4; ODI, 0.37 ± 0.3 events/hour) expressed as a
percentage of the total number of bound peptides (mean ± SE; two-sided
Student’s t test adjusted for age, gender, and BMI shown in fig. S2, P =
0.001). (C) Representative confocal image of peptide F binding to ECs har-
vested from OSA patients (n = 10: 30% male; age, 50.3 ± 3.2 years; BMI, 34.9 ±
1.8 kg/m2; AHI, 19.4 ± 5.8 events/hour; ODI, 12.3 ± 3.3 events/hour) and
controls (n = 10: 60% male; age, 38.4 ± 3.4 years; BMI, 29.4 ± 1.6 kg/m2;
AHI, 1.9 ± 0.7 events/hour; ODI, 1.1 ± 0.6 events/hour); ECs are identified
byimmunofluorescenceforvonWillebrandfactor.Scalebars,10mm.(D)Native
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) and Western blotting with anti–
peptide F antibodies (Ab) of human umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVEC)
lysate incubated with or without peptide F. The region of bound peptide F
(a single major band at molecular weight of 250 kD) was cut out from the
gel (red rectangle), subjected to trypsin digestion, and analyzed by mass
spectrometry. Among proteins identified in this region, CD59 was the only
one that is expressed on the plasma membrane. (E) In vitro binding of re-
combinant CD59 (rCD59; molecular weight, 18 to 20 kD) to peptide F (mo-
lecular weight, 700 to 800 daltons) after cross-linking but not to control
peptide (Western blots probed with anti–peptide F, anti–control peptide,
and anti-CD59 antibodies; n = 3). (F) Immunoprecipitation with beads
coated withanti-DDK antibodies ofhuman embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 cells
transfected with Myc-DDK–tagged human CD59 plasmid incubated with
peptide F, followed by SDS-PAGE and Western blotting with anti-CD59, anti-
DDK, and anti–peptide F antibodies, showing specific binding of peptide F to
CD59 (n = 3).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
6 January 2016
Vol 8 Issue 320 320ra1
2
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 spectrometry. Among proteins identified in this region, CD59 was the
onlyonethatisexpressedonthe plasmamembrane andwasthusselected
for further study. Although the molecular weight of CD59 is 18 to 20 kD,
its migration at higher molecular weight in the native gel likely reflects its
presence in membrane fragments and/or in higher-order complexes.
A direct interaction between CD59 and peptide F was first con-
firmed by the in vitro binding of recombinant CD59 (molecular weight,
18 to 20 kD) to peptide F (molecular weight, 700 to 800 daltons) after
cross-linking but not to a control peptide (Western blot probed with
anti–peptide F antibodies; Fig. 1E). To further demonstrate interaction
between CD59 and peptide F, we transfected HEK293 cells with Myc-
DDK–tagged human CD59 plasmid. Afterincubation andcross-linking
of transfected cells with peptide F, immunoprecipitation with beads
coated with anti-DDK antibodies was performed, followed by SDS-
PAGEandWesternblottingwithanti-CD59,anti-DDK,andanti–peptide
Fantibodies.ThisconfirmedspecificbindingofpeptideFtoCD59(Fig.1F).
Cellular distribution of CD59 is altered in OSA
On the basis of the identification of CD59 as the target of peptide F, we
next used flow cytometry to confirm increased CD59 in ECs from OSA
patients. Expression of CD59 in ECs scraped from OSA patients was
twofold greater than that from controls (mean fluorescence ± SE,
1479 ± 220 versus 763 ± 146; two-sided Student’s t test, P = 0.01)
(Fig. 2A). Because scraped ECs are leaky as a result of the harvesting
process, fluorescence intensity on flow cytometry represents both plas-
ma membrane and intracellular expression of CD59. The expression of
CD59 was similar in platelets and leukocytes in OSA patients and
controls (fig. S1), suggesting that the effects of IH on CD59 localization
and function may be limited (or at least the most pronounced) to the
vascular endothelium in OSA. Consistent with the overall increase in
CD59 protein in OSA ECs, expression of CD59 mRNA was increased
twofold in OSA patients compared with controls, but this did not reach
significance (two-sided Student’s t test, P = 0.07) (Fig. 2B). Linear re-
gression confirmed that the difference in total cellular protein and
mRNA expression of CD59 is not confounded by age, gender, or
BMI (fig. S1). Quantitative confocal microscopy revealed that, in con-
trast to controls, most of the endothelial CD59 protein in OSA patients
is intracellular (Fig. 2C). The proportion of total CD59 present on the
EC plasma membrane, which is the site of its protective activity, was
reduced in OSA patients (n = 10) compared with controls (n = 10)
(two-sided exact permutation test, P = 0.01) (Fig. 2, D and E). These
data suggest that although the overall amount of CD59 is increased
in ECs from OSA patients, there is a striking difference in its cellular
distribution, with a greater proportion of CD59 found intracellularly
in OSA patients. This suggested the hypothesis that IH might promote
the internalization of CD59, thus limiting its effectiveness in controlling
complement activation.
Endocytosis of endothelial plasma membrane CD59 is
increased in IH
To address this hypothesis, we investigated whether endocytosis of
endothelial CD59 is affected by IH (alternating periods of 30-min
normoxia/30-min hypoxia at 2% oxygen for a total of 8 hours) using
cultured HUVECs. Endocytosis of CD59 is clathrin- and dynamin-
independent and involves the scaffolding protein flotillin (19–21). To
take a snapshot of endocytosis in live cells, HUVECs were incubated
with primary antibodies to CD59 and flotillin-1 for 5 min at 37°C to
allow endocytosis, then washed, fixed, and permeabilized, and then in-
cubated with secondary antibodies to detect plasma membrane CD59
and internalized CD59 with flotillin (Fig. 3, A and B). Consistent with
our hypothesis, endocytosis of CD59 with flotillin was markedly
increased in IH; in contrast, CD59 did not colocalize with endocytosed
transferrin (Fig. 3, A and B). In contrast, thiswasnot observed with con-
tinuous hypoxia (2% oxygen for 8 hours) (Fig. 3, A and B), indicating
that increased CD59 endocytosis is specific to hypoxia/reoxygenation.
Endothelial deposition of MAC is increased in IH
To investigate whether reduced plasma membrane CD59 observed in
OSA has functional consequences, we assessed deposition of MAC on
HUVECs in IH. After incubation with 20% normal human serum
(serving as a source of complement components), IH increased depo-
sition of MAC on HUVECs by 3.7-fold compared with normoxic con-
dition (Fig. 3C). In parallel with the lack of effect on CD59 endocytosis,
continuoushypoxia didnot affect deposition of MACon HUVECs(Fig.
3C), indicating that diminished protection against complement activa-
tion is specific to hypoxia/reoxygenation. Amounts of circulating MAC
were similar in the serum of OSA patients (n = 30) and controls (n = 27)
[enzyme-linkedimmunosorbentassay (ELISA); 6.08± 6.59versus8.09±
7.01;two-sidedStudent’sttestadjustedforage,gender,andBMI (fig.S2),
P = NS]. However, MAC deposition was greater in ECs of OSA patients
compared with controls (two-sided exact permutation test, P = 0.006)
(Fig. 3D), suggesting that protection against complement activity is im-
paired in the endothelium of OSA patients.
Enhanced endothelial MAC deposition promotes
inflammation in IH
Deposition of MAC on nucleated cells increases nuclear translocation
of nuclear factor kB (NFkB) and activation of proinflammatory genes
(22, 23). We assessed whether diminished protection against com-
plement activity in IH affects endothelial inflammation. Nuclear trans-
locationofNFkBandexpressionofproinflammatorycytokinesmonocyte
chemoattractantprotein–1(MCP-1)andintercellularadhesionmolecule–
1 (ICAM-1) were increased in HUVECs exposed to IH and normal ser-
um compared with normoxia (Fig. 4, A and B), whereas expression of
vascular cell adhesion molecule–1 (VCAM-1) was not affected (fluores-
cence intensity by flow cytometry; mean ± SE, 7.5 ± 0.5 versus 8.0 ± 0.6
for normoxia and IH, respectively; two-sided exact permutation test,
P = NS). After addition of recombinant CD59, which binds competi-
tively to C8 and C9, thereby reducing MAC formation, nuclear trans-
location of NFkB was reduced. Expression of MCP-1 and ICAM-1 was
similar in normoxia and IH in the presence of recombinant CD59 (Fig.
4, A and B). To investigate whether IH promotes endothelial inflamma-
tion through complement activity, we also exposed HUVECs to IH in
the presence of serum inactivated by heat, which renders serum free of
complement components. Nuclear translocation of NFkB and the ex-
pression of MCP-1 and ICAM-1 were similar in normoxia and IH in
the absence of complement-containing serum, suggesting that IH pro-
motes endothelial inflammation predominantly via complement (Fig. 4,
A and B). Nuclear fluorescence intensity of NFkB was greater in ECs of
OSA patients compared with controls (two-sided exact permutation
test, P = 0.006) (Fig. 4C), thereby confirming that OSA isassociatedwith
endothelial inflammation.
Statins prevent CD59 internalization
In the subset of OSA patients who were receiving statin therapy, the
percentage of total CD59 located on the plasma membrane was similar
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
6 January 2016
Vol 8 Issue 320 320ra1
3
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 to controls and significantly greater than in their OSA counterparts who
were not taking statins (P = 0.05), suggesting that statins preserve CD59
on the EC plasma membrane in OSA (Fig. 5A). This unexpected obser-
vation led to an investigation of statin effects on CD59 localization and
function. HUVECs were incubated with atorvastatin during normoxia
or IH. Colocalization of internalized CD59 and flotillin-1 was minimal
in IH after atorvastatin treatment and similar to that observed with nor-
moxiaandcontinuoushypoxia,suggestingthatatorvastatinabolishesen-
hanced CD59 endocytosiscaused by IH (Fig. 5B). Asexpected, CD59 did
not colocalize with endocytosed transferrin in IH or continuous hypoxia
Fig. 2. Cellular distribution of CD59 is
altered in OSA. (A) Mean fluorescence inten-
sity of total cellular CD59 (flow cytometry,
shaded area represents isotype control;
the quantity of cells on the y axis is expressed
as percentage of total specimens). Bar graph
quantitatestotalCD59fluorescence(n=8OSA
patients: 62% male; age, 42.3 ± 5.2 years; BMI,
35.9 ± 2.0 kg/m2; AHI, 21.3 ± 8.7 events/hour;
ODI, 12.9 ± 4.5 events/hour; n = 9 controls:
33% male; age, 36.7 ± 4.6 years; BMI, 35.8 ±
3.2 kg/m2; AHI, 3.2 ± 0.7 events/hour; ODI,
2.0 ± 0.5 events/hour) (mean ± SE; two-sided
exact permutation test). (B) Quantitation of
the CD59 mRNA expression in ECs harvested
from OSA patients (n = 21: 67% male; age,
45.5 ± 2.7 years; BMI, 35.6 ± 2.1 kg/m2; AHI,
23.5 ± 5.5 events/hour; ODI, 19.3 ± 6.1 events/
hour) expressed as a fold change over con-
trols (n = 15: 27% male; age, 34.1 ± 3.4 years;
BMI, 36.6 ± 3.0 kg/m2; AHI, 1.3 ± 0.4 events/
hour; ODI, 0.3 ± 0.2 events/hour) (two-sided
Student’s t test adjusted for age, gender,
and BMI, shown in fig. S2). (C) Representa-
tive confocal images of cellular distribution
of CD59 in ECs harvested from OSA patients
(n = 10: 30% male; age, 50.3 ± 3.2 years; BMI,
34.9 ± 1.8 kg/m2; AHI, 19.4 ± 5.8 events/
hour; ODI, 12.3 ± 3.3 events/hour) and con-
trols (n = 10: 40% male; age, 34.5 ± 3.7 years;
BMI,34.1±3.0kg/m2;AHI,2.2±0.6events/hour;
ODI, 1.4 ± 0.6 events/hour); EC plasma mem-
brane is identified by immunofluorescence for
vascular endothelial (VE)–cadherin (CD144).
Scale bars, 10 mm. (D) Histogram representing
the percentage of total endothelial CD59 lo-
cated on the plasma membrane for individ-
ualpatients[n=10OSApatients;n=10controls;
demographics in the legend for (C)]. (E) Quan-
titation of the percentage of total endothelial
CD59 located on the plasma membrane [n =
10 OSA patients; n = 10 controls; demograph-
ics in the legend for (C)]. Linear regression
confirmed that the difference in plasma mem-
brane expression of CD59 is not confounded
by age, gender, or BMI (fig. S2) (mean ± SE;
two-sided exact permutation test). FITC, fluo-
rescein isothiocyanate.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
6 January 2016
Vol 8 Issue 320 320ra1
4
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 with or without atorvastatin treatment (fig. S3). Deposition of MAC was
similar in normoxia and IH in HUVECs incubated with atorvastatin,
confirming that statins preserve plasma membrane CD59 in IH (Fig.
5C). After we knocked down CD59 with smallinterfering RNA(siRNA)
(fig. S4) in HUVECs incubated with atorvastatin in IH, deposition of
MAC was similar to IH without statins, indicating a loss of protective
effects of atorvastatin on MAC deposition in IH (Fig. 5D). Therefore,
the protective effect of atorvastatin against endothelial deposition of
MAC in IH is CD59-dependent.
To investigate whether statins affect proinflammatory effects of
MAC deposition in IH, HUVECs were incubated with atorvastatin
and normal serum. Atorvastatin reduced nuclear translocation of NFkB
in IH (Fig. 5E). Thus, statins stabilize plasma membrane localization of
endothelial CD59 and reduce IH-induced endothelial MAC deposition
and consequent inflammation.
IH reduces expression of cholesterol
efflux–promoting genes
To investigate the mechanisms that mediate enhanced endocytosis of
CD59 in IH and the protective effects of statins, we quantified the ex-
pression of genes that regulate endothelial cholesterol efflux and synthe-
sis. Increased cellular cholesterol results in more abundant lipid rafts
and enhanced endocytosis of GPI-anchored proteins, which reside
in lipid rafts (24). Prolonged continuous hypoxia (48 hours) promotes
Fig. 3. IH increases endocytosis of endothelial CD59 and consequent
MAC deposition. (A) Representative confocal images of CD59 endocytosis
in HUVECs in normoxia, IH, and continuous hypoxia (CH). Arrows indicate
endocytosed CD59 with flotillin (colocalized area in mm2). Endocytosis
mediated by transferrin is shown on the bottom panel. Scale bars, 10 mm.
(B) Quantitation of colocalized area of endocytosed CD59 with flotillin-
1 and transferrin (n = 8). (C) Quantitation of the percentage of HUVECs pos-
itive for MAC deposition in normoxia, IH, and continuous hypoxia (flow
cytometry), indicating the percentage of dead cells in each condition below
the graph (identified by propidium iodide staining) (n = 8). (D) Representa-
tive confocal images of MAC deposition on ECs harvested from OSA patients
and controls. Scale bars, 10 mm. Bar graph quantitates MAC deposition area
(mm2) on ECs of OSA patients (n = 8: 62% male; age, 39.0 ± 4.2 years; BMI,
37.2 ± 3.5 kg/m2; AHI, 13.7 ± 2.4 events/hour; ODI, 11.5 ± 2.8 events/hour)
and controls (n = 10: 33% male; age, 39.4 ± 4.4 years; BMI, 34.1 ± 3.4 kg/m2;
AHI, 1.9 ± 0.9 events/hour; ODI, 1.7 ± 1.0 events/hour). Linear regression
confirmed that the difference in MAC deposition on ECs among groups
is not confounded by age, gender, or BMI (fig. S2). All data throughout
the figure are shown as means ± SE (two-sided exact permutation test).
NS, not significant.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
6 January 2016
Vol 8 Issue 320 320ra1
5
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 cellular accumulation of cholesterol
by reducing its efflux via adenosine
triphosphate–binding cassette subfamily A
member 1 (ABCA1) and ABCG1 cassette
transporters in macrophages (25). Expres-
sion of ABCA1 and ABCG1 mRNA in
HUVECs was reduced by 60%, and chol-
era toxin B staining of the plasma mem-
brane lipid rafts was more prominent in
IH compared with normoxia, whereas
8 hours of continuous hypoxia had no
significant effect (Fig. 6, A and B), sug-
gesting that IH increases cholesterol-
enriched membrane domain formation in
ECs. Although the mRNA expression of
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A
(HMG-CoA) reductase and synthase, key
enzymes in cholesterol biosynthesis, was
not altered by IH (fig. S5), statins may re-
duce cholesterol biosynthesis and thus re-
verseincreasedcholesterol-enrichedplasma
membrane domain formation and endo-
cytosis of endothelial CD59, thereby pre-
serving protection against complement
activity in OSA.
DISCUSSION
Using ECs harvested from OSA patients
and a phage display library, we have iden-
tified a role for complement regulator
CD59 in OSA. Although we discovered
that the overall amount of CD59 is in-
creased in ECs from OSA patients, its cel-
lular distribution is also markedly altered,
witharelativedecreaseofcellsurfaceCD59
and an increased intracellular abundance.
We used HUVECs to confirm that IH
promotes endocytosis of CD59, decreasing
protection against complement activity.
Consequently, deposition of MAC on
ECs is increased in IH, resulting in endo-
thelial inflammation. Because the expres-
sion of CD59 is up-regulated by NFkB
activation (26–28), our results suggest that
IH promotes internalization of CD59 in
ECs of OSA patients, causing increased
MAC deposition and NFkB activation
and eventually a compensatory increase in
CD59 expression in an attempt to restore
protection against complement activity.
However, such restoration of homeostasis
appears to be achieved at the expense of increased NFkB activation with
its attendant adverse effects on EC function (10). Our data suggest that
the abnormal cycle of increased internalization of CD59 and inflamma-
tion in IH can be disrupted by statin therapy, potentially uncovering a
protective effect of statins on vascular function in OSA patients.
The complement pathway has not been previously linked to in-
creased cardiovascular risk in OSA; however, CD59 deficiency pro-
motes MAC deposition and accelerates atherosclerosis in ApoE−/−
and Ldlr−/− mice (29, 30), whereas selective overexpression of human
CD59 in the endothelium and hematopoietic cells renders ApoE−/− mice
Fig. 4. IH promotes endothelial inflammation
in a CD59-dependentmanner.(A) Representative
confocal images showing nuclear translocation
of NFkB in HUVECs exposed to normoxia or IH
and incubated with 20% normal serum before
and after addition of recombinant CD59 and with
heat-inactivated serum. Scale bars, 10 mm; inset,
5 mm. Bar graph quantitates NFkB fluorescence
intensity in HUVECs (n = 9). (B) Quantitation of
the mean fluorescence of MCP-1 and ICAM-1 in
permeabilized HUVECs incubated with 20% normal
serum with or without recombinant CD59, or with
heat-inactivated serum in normoxia and IH (flow
cytometry; n = 5). (C) Representative confocal
images of NFkB fluorescence intensity in ECs of
OSA patients and controls. Scale bars, 10 mm. Bar
graph quantitates NFkB fluorescence intensity in
ECs from OSA patients (n = 9: 55% male; age,
42.4 ± 4.5 years; BMI, 34.5 ± 3.4 kg/m2; AHI, 8.2 ± 1.6 events/hour; ODI, 5.4 ± 1.8 events/hour) and controls
(n = 7: 14% male; age, 43.9 ± 5.0 years; BMI, 36.0 ± 4.9 kg/m2; AHI, 1.4 ± 0.7 events/hour; ODI, 0.9 ± 0.9 events/
hour). Linear regression confirmed that the difference in NFkB fluorescence intensity in ECs among groups is
not confounded by age, gender, or BMI (fig. S2). All data throughout the figure are shown as means ± SE
(two-sided exact permutation test).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
6 January 2016
Vol 8 Issue 320 320ra1
6
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 resistant to atherogenesis (31). Deposition of MAC stimulates an in-
flammatory response, including increased nuclear translocation of
NFkB and expression of proinflammatory genes, which promote ath-
erosclerosis (22, 23, 26). Increased NFkB activity and expression of
proinflammatory cytokines have been noted in OSA without a clear
understanding of the underlying mechanisms (10, 32). Our finding that
IH-induced endocytosis of CD59 causes MAC deposition on ECs and
inflammation links complement activation to vascular inflammation in
Fig. 5. Statins prevent IH-induced inter-
nalization of CD59 and MAC deposition
on ECs in CD59-dependent manner.
(A) Quantitation of the percentage of total en-
dothelial CD59 located on the plasma mem-
brane in OSA patients taking statins (n = 10
controls not taking statins: 60% male; age,
38.4 ± 3.4 years; BMI, 29.4 ± 1.6 kg/m2; AHI,
1.9 ± 0.7 events/hour; ODI, 1.1 ± 0.6 events/
hour; n = 9 OSA patients not taking statins:
33% male; age, 48.7 ± 3.0 years; BMI, 34.9 ±
2.0 kg/m2; AHI, 19.4 ± 5.8 events/hour; ODI,
12.3 ± 3.3 events/hour; n = 5 OSA patients
takingstatins:60%male;age,56.4± 4.6years;
BMI, 32.6 ± 2.2 kg/m2; AHI, 16.2 ± 2.3 events/
hour; ODI, 8.5 ± 4.3 events/hour). Linear re-
gressionconfirmed that thedifferenceinplas-
ma membrane expression of CD59 among
groups is not confounded by age, gender,
or BMI (fig. S2). (B) Representative confocal
images of CD59 endocytosis in HUVECs in
normoxia,IH,andcontinuoushypoxiawithout
and with atorvastatin (n = 4). Arrows indicate
endocytosed CD59 with flotillin (colocalized
area in mm2). Scale bars, 10 mm. Bar graph
quantitates colocalized area of endocytosed
CD59 with flotillin-1. (C) Quantitation of the
percentage of HUVECs positive for MAC dep-
osition in normoxia and IH after incubation
with 20% normal serum and atorvastatin
(n = 4; flow cytometry). (D) Quantitation of
the percentage of HUVECs positive for MAC
deposition in IH after incubation with 20%
normal serum with and without atorvastatin,
and with or without transfection with CD59
siRNA to achieve CD59 knockdown (n = 4;
flow cytometry). (E) Representative confocal
images of nuclear translocation of NFkB in
HUVECs exposed to normoxia or IH and incu-
bated with 20% normal serum with or with-
out atorvastatin. Bar graph quantitates NFkB
fluorescence intensity in HUVECs in normox-
ia and IH with and without atorvastatin (n =
4). Scale bars, 20 mm; inset, 10 mm. All data
throughout the figure are shown as means
± SE (two-sided exact permutation test).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
6 January 2016
Vol 8 Issue 320 320ra1
7
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 OSA. MAC-induced nuclear translocation of NFkB is the main regula-
tor of inducible expression of CD59, which likely underlies the observed
compensatory trend toward up-regulation of CD59 gene expression to
protect cells from complement-mediated injury and greater intra-
cellular abundance of CD59 protein in OSA patients (26–28). However,
this new “steady state” is accompanied by increased NFkB-mediated
inflammation, which may be detrimental to endothelial health in
OSA. IH did not substantially affect NFkB translocation or proinflam-
matory cytokine expression in ECs in the absence of complement, sug-
gesting that complement activation and decreased complement
inhibition are predominant contributors to vascular inflammation in
conditions associated with IH, such as OSA.
Whereas children with a rare homozygous loss of function of CD59
in hematopoietic cells suffer from thromboembolic events, hemolysis,
and peripheral neurologic disease before the age of 5 years, their heter-
ozygous parents are asymptomatic. The heterozygous parents were not
followed longitudinally, thereby precluding definitive conclusions re-
garding the effects of heterozygous loss of function of CD59 on car-
diovascular risk. Chronically increased internalization of endothelial
CD59, which appears to occur in untreated OSA before the onset of
clinically evident cardiovascular disease, may underlie chronic endothe-
lial inflammation that likely contributes to the well-documented in-
creased cardiovascular risk in OSA (33–37).
GPI-anchoredproteins,includingCD59,areinternalizedbyaclathrin-
independent pathway that is cholesterol-dependent (38). Filipin, which
trapscholesterol,selectivelyinhibitsendocytosisofGPI-anchoredproteins
but not clathrin cargo, indicating that free cholesterol in the membrane is
required for GPI-anchored protein endo-
cytosis (24). IH increased free cholesterol
content in EC plasma membrane, likely by
reducing gene expression of cholesterol ef-
fluxmediatorsABCA1andABCG1,which
may underlie the increased endocytosis of
CD59. Mice deficient in the p50 subunit of
NFkB on a high-cholesterol diet are pro-
tected from IH-induced ABCA1 inhibition
andacceleratedatherosclerosis, suggesting
that ABCA1 and ABCG1 inhibition in IH
may be mediated by NFkB activation (39).
Currently, no targeted therapy is avail-
able for vascular manifestations of OSA.
Our unexpected finding that statins re-
ducecomplement-relatedvascularinflam-
mation in OSA suggests a therapeutic
strategy for OSA-related vascular risk that
may be complementary to CPAP. Statins
also have antioxidant effects, which may
be particularly beneficial in conditions as-
sociated with oxidative stress such as OSA
(40). Statin effects on CD59 in IH appear
to be cholesterol-dependent. Decreased
cholesterol influences plasma membrane
sorting of GPI-anchored proteins and raft-
mediatedendocytosis(41).Ourfindingthat
atorvastatin preserves cell surface CD59
corroborates previous reports that atorvas-
tatin increases endothelial expression of
CD59 (by inhibiting geranylgeranylation)
and another GPI-anchored protein, ecto-5′-nucleotidase (by inhibiting
isoprenylation of Rho–guanosine triphosphatases), in the setting of pro-
longed continuous hypoxia (18 to 72 hours) (42, 43). Statin-induced re-
duction of cholesterol results in decreased endocytosis of CD59 and
protects ECs from MAC deposition in IH and OSA. Thus, in addition
to lowering LDL cholesterol and acting as antioxidants, statins may ex-
ert endothelial protection in OSA by inhibiting complement activation.
The main limitation of this study is that we searched for possible
pathways that activate the endothelium in OSA by profiling venous
ECs harvested from OSA patients. The precise mechanisms underlying
cardiovascular risk in OSA cannot be ascertained from the study of the
venous endothelium. Local biomechanical forces that affect arterial ECs
at specific sites play an essential role in determining regional suscepti-
bility to atherosclerosis, and endothelial biopsy at specific sites of the
arterial vasculature will likely be required to determine the precise mech-
anisms underlying atherosclerosis in OSA. However, venous and ar-
terial ECs are exposed to the same circulating proinflammatory factors
and hypoxia/reoxygenation in OSA. Inflammatory and oxidative path-
ways are activated similarly in venous and arterial ECs in healthy
subjects and patients with atherosclerosis (44, 45). Furthermore, the
culturing process rapidly erases arteriovenous gene expression differ-
ences that are present in freshly isolated ECs (46). Thus, direct investi-
gation of easily accessible freshly isolated human venous ECs without
artifact of culture condition may be particularly useful in conditions as-
sociated with systemic endothelial activation, such as OSA (2, 5, 6). An-
other limitation is the duration of hypoxic episodes. For in vitro
experiments, we used repetitive 30-min episodes of hypoxia, which differ
Fig. 6. IH increases cellular cholesterol by
decreasing gene expression of cholesterol ef-
flux mediators. (A) Quantitation of the ABCA1
and ABCG1 mRNA expression in HUVECs in nor-
moxia, IH, and continuous hypoxia expressed as a fold change over normoxia (n = 4). (B) Represent-
ative confocal images of cholera toxin B staining of the plasma membrane (depicting lipid rafts
containing free cholesterol) in HUVECs in normoxia, IH, and continuous hypoxia. Scale bars, 10 mm.
Bar graph quantitates cholera toxin B–positive area (mm2) (n = 4). All data throughout the figure are
shown as means ± SE (two-sided exact permutation test).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
6 January 2016
Vol 8 Issue 320 320ra1
8
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 from the duration of the hypoxic episodes in OSA patients that typically
last 20 to 40 s. This was due to the time required to achieve the set level
of hypoxia in the hypoxic chamber, which is slightly longer than the typ-
ical hypoxic episode in OSA, and to ensure sufficient exposure to IH
during in vitro experiments. An additionallimitation of our study is that
some OSA patients had undergone a split-night polysomnography
study, which includes CPAP titration; however, all patients had at
least 2 hours of baseline polysomnographic recording, and only those
with at least 30 obstructive events during the baseline recording
underwent split-night CPAP titration, thereby ensuring that OSA was
well documented.
In conclusion, repetitive IH, a hallmark of OSA, promotes internal-
ization of complement inhibitor CD59 and consequent MAC deposi-
tion on ECs, increasing nuclear translocation of NFkB. The resulting
chronic endothelial inflammation may contribute to increased cardio-
vascular risk in OSA. Internalization of CD59 appears to be cholesterol-
dependent, and MAC deposition on ECs in IH is reversed by statins in a
CD59-dependent manner, suggesting a possible therapeutic strategy to
reduce vascular risk in OSA.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
We prospectively recruited participants from the Sleep Disorders
Center at Columbia University. All study participants underwent noc-
turnal polysomnography. An AHI ≥5 obstructive events/hour of
sleep established the diagnosis of OSA. Study participants with AHI
<5 events/hour were considered OSA-free. All patients with suspected
sleep-disorderedbreathing who were referredfornocturnalpolysomno-
graphy were screened. Patients with coronary artery disease, heart fail-
ure,ahistory ofstroke,diabetesmellitus,chronicobstructiveorrestrictive
pulmonary disease, chronic kidney disease, or tobacco use within the
past 10 years were ineligible for the study. The Columbia University
Committee on Human Research approved the study. All study partici-
pants gave written informed consent. There was no prespecified effect
size in this prospective study. Post hoc poweranalysisshowedthatwhen
statistical significance was reported for human samples, the probability
of rejecting the null hypothesis was >90%. No samples were excluded
from the study. Experiment endpoints were defined prospectively. The
number of replicates in each experiment is stated individually for each
experiment. The prespecified hypothesis defining the research objec-
tives was that repetitive hypoxia/reoxygenation that characterizes
OSA activates the endothelium in a distinctive manner. Nocturnal poly-
somnography was performed with an Embla signal recording system
and Somnologica Window NT Software (Flaga Group hf. Medical De-
vices) as previously described (14). Briefly, sleep stages were scored in
30-s epochs according to standard criteria. An obstructive apnea was
defined as a cessation of upper airway flow in association with
continued respiratory effort of at least 10 s. An obstructive hypopnea
was defined as a discrete reduction in airflow associated with a decrease
in oxygen saturation of 2% or more for at least 10 s in the presence of
thoracoabdominal ventilatory efforts. AHI was defined as the number
of obstructive apnea plus hypopnea episodes per hour of sleep. An ODI
was defined as the number of ≥3% arterial oxygen desaturations/hour
of sleep. Daytime sleepiness was assessed by Epworth sleepiness scale
(0 to 9, normal sleepiness; 10 to 24, increased sleepiness) (47). All study
participants had at least 2 hours of a baseline polysomnographic record-
ing. EC harvesting was performed between 9:00 and 11:00 a.m. after
polysomnography while study participants were in a fasting state as de-
scribed previously (14). In OSA patients who underwent split-night
polysomnography with CPAP titration, harvesting was performed
48 hours later to avoid any CPAP interference.
EC harvesting and isolation
A 20-gauge angiocatheter was inserted into a superficial forearm vein.
Under sterile conditions, three J-shaped vascular guide wires (Arrow)
were sequentially advanced into the vein up to 10 cm. ECs were re-
trievedfromwiretipsbywashingwithECdissociationbuffer.Harvesting
yielded ~2000 to 5000 ECs. For immunofluorescence, ECs were recov-
ered by centrifugation at 4°C, 150g for 6 min, and then the cell pellet
was resuspended in red blood cell (RBC) lysis buffer (eBioscience),
incubated at 4°C for 5 min, centrifuged at 150g for 6 min, fixed with 4%
paraformaldehyde (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) in phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS) for 10 min, washed twice with PBS, transferred to poly-
L-lysine–coated slides (Sigma), and then air-dried at 37°C. The slides
were stored at −80°C until analyzed. For phage display and mRNA ex-
traction, the cell pellet was resuspended in isolation buffer, incubated
with biotinylated mouse anti-human monoclonal antibody directed
against CD146 (1:200; catalog no. MAB16985B, Millipore) at 4°C for
15 min, incubated at 4°C with Streptavidin FlowComp Dynabeads
(1:100; Invitrogen) for 45 min, and then subjected to EC isolation by
magnet. For flow cytometry, the cell pellet was resuspended in RBC lysis
buffer, incubated at 4°C for 5 min, and then centrifuged at 150g for
6 min. The isolated cell pellet was resuspended in PBS.
Phage display library
Panning, or in vitro selection binding, was performed by incubating a
library of 2 × 1011 M13 phage–displayed seven–amino acid peptides
(New England Biolabs) with purified harvested ECs on 96-well poly-
styrene plates according to the manufacturer’s protocol. After 2 hours
of incubation at room temperature, unbound phage was washed away
and EC-bound phage was eluted by lowering the pH. Eluted phage was
then amplified by Escherichia coli [mid-log phase E. coli ER2738; OD600
(opticaldensityat600nm)≈0.5].Aliquotsofthebacterialcultureandphage
mixture were plated onto LB agar plates containing 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-
indolyl-b-D-galactoside (X-Gal) and isopropyl-b-D-thiogalactopyranoside
(IPTG) and incubated overnight at 37°C. Two additional amplification
cycles were performed to enrich the pool of selected phages. After three
amplification cycles, 24random plaqueswere transferred to diluted E.coli
culture for additional amplification. Only plaques from plates containing
<100 plaques were used to ensure that each plaque contains a single
phage–derived DNA insert. Samples were purified and sequenced at
the Columbia University Proteomics Core Facility. For positive control,
panningwasperformedusingstreptavidinasthetarget.Boundphagewas
eluted with 0.1 mM biotin in tris-buffered saline for 30 min. After three
amplification cycles, the consensus sequence for streptavidin-binding
peptides was S/T/N L L/I/V A/N HPQ, with the HPQ motif being the
most prominent (18). For negative control, an identical panning protocol
was performed without target cells in 20 ml of NaHCO3 and bovine serum
albumin on 96-well polystyrene plates. Isolated phages from the negative
control experiment are shown in table S2.
Cell culture
HUVECs (BD Biosciences) were cultured in EC medium with 2%
endotoxin-freeheat-inactivatedfetalbovineserum(FBS;LifeTechnologies)
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
6 January 2016
Vol 8 Issue 320 320ra1
9
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 until they reached the required confluence for each experiment. During
8 hours of normoxia, IH, or continuous hypoxia, HUVECs were in-
cubated with either 20% normal human serum or heat-inactivated ser-
um (Sigma-Aldrich) as detailed for each experiment. For atorvastatin
experiments, HUVECs were incubated with 20% normal serum with
or without addition of 1 mM atorvastatin (Sigma-Aldrich) for 8 hours
in normoxia, IH, or continuous hypoxia. Passages 3 to 5 were used
forallexperiments.HEK293[AmericanTypeCultureCollection(ATCC)]
were cultured in Eagle’s minimum essential medium with 10% FBS
(ATCC).
Immunofluorescence
For confirmation of the binding of peptide F to harvested ECs, un-
permeabilized ECs were incubated with 2 mg of peptide F (Proteintech
Group) for 2 hours at 4°C. After washing three times with PBS and
blocking with PBS containing 5% donkey serum (Sigma-Aldrich),
ECs were incubated with rabbit polyclonal antibodies directed against
peptide F (1:500; Proteintech), followed by Texas Red–conjugated don-
key anti-rabbit secondary antibodies (1:50; Jackson ImmunoResearch
Laboratories). Appropriate negative control slides were generated with-
out either peptide F or anti–peptide F antibody. Nuclei were stained
with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI; Molecular Probes by Life
Technologies). ECs were identified by positive staining with mouse
anti-human antibodies directed against von Willebrand factor (1:50;
DAKO), followed by FITC-conjugated donkey anti-mouse secondary
antibodies (1:50; Jackson ImmunoResearch). For assessment of cellular
distribution of CD59, harvested ECs were identified by positive staining
with goat anti-human polyclonal antibodies directed against CD144
(VE-cadherin) (1:50; R&D Systems) followed by FITC-conjugated don-
key anti-goat secondary antibodies (1:50; Jackson ImmunoResearch).
CD59 expression was assessed with rabbit anti-human antibodies di-
rected against CD59 (1:50; Abcam) followed by Texas Red–conjugated
donkey anti-rabbit secondary antibodies (1:50; Jackson Immuno-
Research). ECs were analyzed with a confocal microscope (Nikon A1,
Nikon Instruments Inc.). The threshold for positive staining was set at
40% of maximum fluorescence intensity. We used ImageJ to draw two
lines along the EC plasma membrane, which was defined as the area
with positive staining for VE-cadherin. The inner line was drawn along
the interior border of VE-cadherin–positive area, and the outer line was
drawn along the exterior border of VE-cadherin–positive area. The flu-
orescence intensity of the CD59-positive area between two lines was
quantified (mm2) and represented EC surface CD59 expression. The flu-
orescence intensity of the CD59-positive area in each EC located within
an outer line represented total EC CD59 expression (mm2). The ratio of
the CD59-positive area between two lines divided by the CD59-positive
area located within an outer line (total EC CD59 expression) repre-
sented the proportion of CD59 located on the EC surface. At least 25
consecutive ECs were analyzed for each slide. Investigators who ana-
lyzed the slides were blinded to the OSA status of the study participant.
To assess endocytosis of CD59, HUVECs that were grown to 70 to 80%
confluence were exposed to normoxia, IH, or continuous hypoxia for
8 hours with or without 1 mM atorvastatin. During the last 5 min, cells
were incubated with primary antibodies directed against CD59 (mouse
anti-human,1:50;BDBiosciences)andflotillin-1(rabbitanti-human,1:100;
Thermo Scientific) or transferrin (rabbit anti-human, 1:100; Thermo Scien-
tific) at 37°C for 5 min, washed, and then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde
at room temperature for 10 min. Cells were then permeabilized with 0.1%
Triton X-100 (Acros Organics), washed, and incubated with FITC-
conjugated donkey anti-mouse (1:50; Jackson ImmunoResearch) and
Texas Red–conjugated donkey anti-rabbit (1:50; Jackson Immuno-
Research) secondary antibodies at room temperature for 30 min,
washed with PBS, and stained with DAPI. We used ImageJ software
for colocalization analysis. Colocalization was expressed in mm2. For as-
sessment of MAC deposition on harvested ECs, unpermeabilized har-
vested ECs were identified by positive staining with goat anti-human
polyclonal antibodies directed against CD144 (VE-cadherin) (1:50;
R&D Systems), followed by FITC-conjugated donkey anti-goat
secondary antibodies (1:50; Jackson ImmunoResearch). MAC deposi-
tion was assessed with mouse anti-human monoclonal antibodies
directed against C5b-9 (MAC) (clone aE11, 1:10; DAKO), followed
by Texas Red–conjugated donkey anti-mouse secondary antibodies
(Jackson ImmunoResearch; 1:50), and analyzed with a fluorescence mi-
croscope (Nikon Eclipse E600). For assessment of NFkB activation
in vitro, HUVECs were permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 and
incubated with rabbit anti-human antibodies directed against the
p65 subunit of NFkB (1:50; Novus), followed by FITC-conjugated
donkey anti-rabbit secondary antibodies (1:50; Jackson Immuno-
Research), and stained with DAPI. For assessment of NFkB activation
in harvested ECs, permeabilized harvested ECs were identified by pos-
itive staining with goat anti-human polyclonal antibodies directed
against CD144 (VE-cadherin) (1:50; R&D Systems), followed by
FITC-conjugated donkey anti-goat secondary antibodies (1:50; Jackson
ImmunoResearch). Nuclear fluorescence of NFkB was assessed by
confocal microscopy after staining with rabbit anti-human antibo-
dies directed against the p65 subunit of NFkB (1:50; Novus), followed
by Texas Red–conjugated donkey anti-rabbit secondary antibodies
(1:50; Jackson ImmunoResearch), and stained with DAPI. For assess-
ment of cholesterol-enriched membrane domains, HUVECs were
permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 and incubated with cholera
toxin subunit B conjugated with Alexa Fluor 488 (1:100; Molecular
Probes by Life Technologies) and stained with DAPI. All HUVECs
prepared for immunofluorescence were analyzed by confocal microscopy
(Nikon A1).
Native gel and mass spectrometry
HUVEC whole-cell lysate (100 mg was incubated with 30 mg of peptide
F (CFHENWPS, Proteintech) at 4°C for 2 hours. The mixture was
diluted with 2× native sample buffer (Bio-Rad) and loaded on a
10% native gel in running buffer without SDS [NativePAGE Run-
ning Buffer (20×), Thermo Scientific]. The gel was transferred to a
nitrocellulose membrane and probed with antibodies directed
against peptide F (rabbit polyclonal antibody, 1:500; Proteintech).
A duplicate gel was stained with GelCode Blue Stain Reagent (Ther-
mo Scientific). The corresponding band of interest was cut and sent
to Columbia University Protein Chemistry Core Facility for mass
spectrometry.
In vitro interaction of peptide F with recombinant CD59
Peptide F (2 mg) (CFHENWPS, Proteintech) and control peptide (2 mg)
(CPLAYGTW, Proteintech) were incubated separately with 1 mg of
recombinant CD59 (R&D Systems) in 21 ml of PBS on a slow shaker
overnight at 4°C. The cross-linking reagent 3,3′-dithiobis[sufosucci-
nimidylpropionate] (DTSSP) (Thermo Scientific) was added to a fi-
nal concentration of 2 mM. After rotation at room temperature for 1 hour,
the samples were diluted in 2× sample buffer (Bio-Rad) with b-mercapto-
ethanol and loaded on 15% SDS-PAGE.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
6 January 2016
Vol 8 Issue 320 320ra1
10
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Transfection of HEK293 cells with Myc-DDK–tagged human
CD59 plasmid
HEK293 cells were transfected with 5 mg of (Myc-DDK-tagged)-
Human CD59 plasmid (OriGene) and 2.5 ml of EndoFectin Plus trans-
fection reagent (GeneCopoeia) in a confluent 35-mm plate according to
the manufacturer’s protocol. After transfection for 72 hours, the
HEK293 cells were lysed with immunoprecipitation (IP) lysis buffer
(Thermo Scientific). The expression of Myc-DDK–tagged human
CD59 was confirmed by detecting DDK with anti-DDK monoclonal
antibody (OriGene) by Western blotting.
Immunoprecipitation
Transfected HEK293 cell lysate was incubated with 500 mg of peptide F
(Proteintech) or control peptide (Proteintech) overnight at 4°C. The
sample was cross-linked with 2 mM DTSSP (Thermo Scientific) for
1 hour at room temperature. The sample was precleared by adding
10 mg of mouse immunoglobulin G and 20 ml of protein A/G agarose
and incubatedat 4°Cfor 2hours. After centrifugation at 1000g for5 min,
the supernatant was incubated with 5 mg of anti-DDK antibodies
(OriGene) overnight at 4°C. Protein A/G PLUS-Agarose beads (40 ml)
(Santa Cruz Biotechnology) were added and incubated for 2 hours at
4°C, then centrifuged for 5 min at 1000g at 4°C. The pellet was washed
three times withIPlysisbuffer(ThermoScientific), followedby addition
of 80 ml of 2× sample buffer (Santa Cruz Biotechnology). The sample
was boiled for 5 min and then centrifuged for 5 min at 1000g at 4°C. The
supernatant was loaded onto a 15% SDS-PAGE gel and probed with
antibodies to peptide F (nonreducing condition), DDK, and CD59
(both in reducing condition with 5% b-mercaptoethanol).
Immunoblotting
HUVECs were lysed on ice for 5 min with lysis buffer (Thermo Scien-
tific) containing 25 mM tris (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1 mM
EDTA, 5% glycerol, and Halt Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Sci-
entific). Total amount of protein in the lysate was quantified by protein
assay (Bio-Rad) to ensure equal protein loading on gels. Protein samples
were separated on 15% SDS-PAGE, followed by immunoblotting with
appropriate antibodies.
Flow cytometry
Harvested EC samples were incubated with RBC lysis buffer at 4°C for
5minandthencentrifugedat150gfor5min.Thepelletswereresuspended
in 100 ml of PBS. To evaluate CD59 expression, samples were incubated
with mouse anti-human antibodies directed against CD59 that were
preconjugated with FITC (1:20; eBioscience), mouse anti-human anti-
bodies directed against CD144 (VE-cadherin, 1:20; eBioscience) that
were preconjugated with allophycocyanin (APC), and mouse anti-
human antibodies directed against CD45 that were preconjugated with
phycoerythrin (PE) (1:20; eBioscience) at 4°C for 1 hour. Samples were
washed with cold PBS three times, then resuspended with 500 ml of PBS,
and analyzedby flow cytometry (BDFACSCalibur). ECs were identified
as intact cells positive for CD144/CD59 and negative for CD45. To
assess MAC (C5b-9) deposition on HUVECs after 8 hours of exposure
to normoxia, IH, or continuous hypoxia, cells were incubated with
mouse anti-human antibodies directed against C5b-9 (1:10; DAKO)
at 4°C for 1 hour, washed with cold PBS, resuspended with 500 ml of
PBS, and analyzed by flow cytometry. Dead cells were identified as pos-
itive for propidium iodide staining (Thermo Scientific). For assessment
of inflammation, HUVECs collected after trypsinization were incubated
with mouse anti-human antibodies directed against MCP-1 (1:20; pre-
conjugated with PE), ICAM-1 (1:20; preconjugated with PE), and
VCAM-1 (1:20; preconjugated with PE) (all from Abcam) at 4°C for
1 hour, washed with cold PBS, resuspended with 500 ml of PBS, and
analyzed by flow cytometry.
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
Serum was collected from all study participants at the time of EC
harvesting, centrifuged at 2000 RCF (relative centrifugal force) for
10 min at 4°C, aliquoted, and stored at −80°C until analyzed. Human
terminal complement complex C5b-9 ELISA kit (Novatein Biosciences)
was used to quantify the amount of human terminal complement
complex C5b-9 (MAC) in the serum according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. Analysis was performed with a Multiskan EX reader (Thermo
Scientific).
Quantitative real-time PCR
We used TaqMan (Life Technologies) method on Applied Biosystems
7500 Fast Real-Time PCR System. mRNA was extracted using TRIzol
(Life Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. mRNA
(1 mg) was used for first-strand complementary DNA (cDNA) synthesis
with SuperScript III Kit (Life Technologies) according to the manufac-
turer’s protocol. The first strand cDNA was further diluted 10 times
with ribonuclease-free water and stored at −80°C. For 20 ml of real-
time PCRs, the following reagents were added: 10 ml of TaqMan Gene
ExpressionMaster Mix (2×) (Life Technologies),1 ml of TaqMan Gene
Expression Assay (20×), 5 ml of nuclease-fee water, and 4 ml of cDNA.
This reaction mix was added to the wells as duplicates for each sample.
Real-time PCR products were run on a 1% agarose gel to confirm the
size of the products. All the real-time PCR primers and probes were
designed to span an exon junction to eliminate the contamination of
genomic DNA. TaqMan primers and probes were used for CD59,
b-actin, HMG-CoA synthase and reductase, ABCG1, and ABCA1.
Results were expressed as Ct values normalized to the housekeeping
gene b-actin.
Intermittent and continuous hypoxia exposure
We used a hypoxia chamber (BioSpherix) housed inside an incubator
kept at 37°C for all hypoxia experiments. HUVECs subjected to IH were
exposed to 21% O2 with 5% CO2 for normoxia and 2% O2 with 5% CO2
for hypoxia for alternating 30-min cycles for a total exposure time of
8 hours. For continuous hypoxia, HUVECs were exposed to 2% O2 with
5% CO2 for 8 hours.
Transfection and siRNA CD59 treatment of HUVECs
siRNA treatment was carried out with Lipofectamine RNAiMax
(Life Technologies) for 48 hours according to the manufacturer’s
protocol using 50 nM oligonucleotide. The specific oligonucleotides
were directed at human CD59 (AGCCGUCAAUUGUUCAUCUtt)
(siRNA ID s2696, s2698, or combination of s2696 and s2698; Life
Technologies). Two scramble siRNAs were used as a negative control,
and siRNA against glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH)
(Life Technologies) was used as a positive control. Successful transfec-
tion was confirmed by >90% reduction in CD59 protein expression in
three independent experiments using Western blotting. Because the ex-
pression of CD59 was almost completely knocked down by either
siRNA (s2696 or s2698), s2698 was arbitrarily selected for subsequent
experiments.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
6 January 2016
Vol 8 Issue 320 320ra1
11
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Statistical analysis
Results are presented as means ± SE or percentage (%), as appropriate.
The baseline characteristics of OSA patients and control subjects are
expressed as the group-specific summary statistics, including age,
gender, BMI, arterial oxyhemoglobin saturation (SaO2) nadir, AHI,
ODI, time spent below SaO2 of 90% during sleep (t <90%), Epworth
sleepiness scale, systolic and diastolic blood pressure, and physician-
confirmed diagnosis of hypertension and dyslipidemia. Whether base-
line characteristics significantly differ between the two groups was
formally tested by two-sample t test (for continuous variables) or c2 test
(for binary variables). Two-sample t test was used for comparisons of
mean values of peptide F frequency and the expression of mRNA and
total and plasma membrane CD59 protein between OSA patients and
controls (48). For the expression of plasma membrane CD59 protein in
OSA patients receiving statin therapy, OSA patients who were or were
not receiving statin therapy were compared with controls using two-
sample t test. For sensitivity analysis, these comparisons were repeated
using Wilcoxon rank tests and exact permutation tests (48, 49). A linear
model for each outcome was constructed, with OSA status as the
primary predictor and age, BMI, and gender as covariates. We used
linear models to evaluate whether these covariates are associated with
the outcome and whether the observed differences between OSA pa-
tients and controls are confounded by age, BMI, and/or gender. P values
of <0.05 indicate statistical significance. No statistical method was used
to predetermine sample size. Because of the small sample size in
experiments using cultured cells, two-sided exact permutation test
was used for all comparisons (49).
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/8/320/320ra1/DC1
Fig. S1. Expression of CD59 in leukocytes and platelets.
Fig. S2. Linear regression analysis.
Fig. S3. Endocytosis of CD59 with transferrin.
Fig. S4. Confirmation of HUVEC transfection with CD59 siRNA.
Fig. S5. Cholesterol biosynthesis in IH.
Table S1. Baseline characteristics of patients with OSA and control subjects.
Table S2. Phages isolated after panning without target cells and with bovine serum albumin in
polystyrene wells.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. T. Young, M. Palta, J. Dempsey, J. Skatrud, S. Weber, S. Badr, The occurrence of sleep-
disordered breathing among middle-aged adults. N. Engl. J. Med. 328, 1230–1235 (1993).
2. J. M. Marin, S. J. Carrizo, E. Vicente, A. G. N. Agusti, Long-term cardiovascular outcomes in
men with obstructive sleep apnoea-hypopnoea with or without treatment with continu-
ous positive airway pressure: An observational study. Lancet 365, 1046–1053 (2005).
3. J. M. Marin, A. Agusti, I. Villar, M. Forner, D. Nieto, S. J. Carrizo, F. Barbé, E. Vicente, Y. Wei,
F. J. Nieto, S. Jelic, Association between treated and untreated obstructive sleep apnea and
risk of hypertension. JAMA 307, 2169–2176 (2012).
4. H. K. Yaggi, J. Concato, W. N. Kernan, J. H. Lichtman, L. M. Brass, V. Mohsenin, Obstructive
sleep apnea as a risk factor for stroke and death. N. Engl. J. Med. 353, 2034–2041 (2005).
5. M. Arzt, R. Luigart, C. Schum, L. Lüthje, A. Stein, I. Koper, C. Hecker, R. Dumitrascu, R. Schulz,
Sleep-disordered breathing in deep vein thrombosis and acute pulmonary embolism. Eur.
Respir. J. 40, 919–924 (2012).
6. I. Arnulf, M. Merino-Andreu, A. Perrier, S. Birolleau, T. Similowski, J.-P. Derenne, Obstructive
sleep apnea and venous thromboembolism. JAMA 287, 2655–2656 (2002).
7. N. S. Marshall, K. K. H. Wong, P. Y. Liu, S. R. J. Cullen, M. W. Knuiman, R. R. Grunstein, Sleep
apnea as an independent risk factor for all-cause mortality: The Busselton Health Study.
Sleep 31, 1079–1085 (2008).
8. M. I. Cybulsky, M. A. Gimbrone Jr., Endothelial expression of a mononuclear leukocyte
adhesion molecule during atherogenesis. Science 251, 788–791 (1991).
9. C. Arnaud, P. C. Beguin, S. Lantuejoul, J.-L. Pepin, C. Guillermet, G. Pelli, F. Burger, V. Buatois,
C. Ribuot, J.-P. Baguet, F. Mach, P. Levy, M. Dematteis, The inflammatory preatherosclerotic
remodeling induced by intermittent hypoxia is attenuated by RANTES/CCL5 inhibition.
Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 184, 724–731 (2011).
10. S. Jelic, D. J. Lederer, T. Adams, M. Padeletti, P. C. Colombo, P. H. Factor, T. H. Le Jemtel,
Vascular inflammation in obesity and sleep apnea. Circulation 121, 1014–1021 (2010).
11. L. Dyugovskaya, P. Lavie, L. Lavie, Increased adhesion molecules expression and produc-
tion of reactive oxygen species in leukocytes of sleep apnea patients. Am. J. Respir. Crit.
Care Med. 165, 934–939 (2002).
12. P. N. Hopkins, Molecular biology of atherosclerosis. Physiol. Rev. 93, 1317–1542 (2013).
13. S. Yusuf, S. Hawken, S. Ounpuu, T. Dans, A. Avezum, F. Lanas, M. McQueen, A. Budaj, P. Pais,
J. Varigos, L. Lisheng; INTERHEART Study Investigators, Effect of potentially modifiable risk
factors associated with myocardial infarction in 52 countries (the INTERHEART study):
Case-control study. Lancet 364, 937–952 (2004).
14. S. Jelic, M. Padeletti, S. M. Kawut, C. Higgins, S. M. Canfield, D. Onat, P. C. Colombo, R. C. Basner,
P. Factor, T. H. LeJemtel, Inflammation, oxidative stress, and repair capacity of the vascular
endothelium in obstructive sleep apnea. Circulation 117, 2270–2278 (2008).
15. V. Savransky, J. Jun, J. Li, A. Nanayakkara, S. Fonti, A. B. Moser, K. E. Steele, M. A. Schweitzer,
S. P. Patil, S. Bhanot, A. R. Schwartz, V. Y. Polotsky, Dyslipidemia and atherosclerosis in-
duced by chronic intermittent hypoxia are attenuated by deficiency of stearoyl coenzyme
A desaturase. Circ. Res. 103, 1173–1180 (2008).
16. L. F. Drager, L. A. Bortolotto, A. C. Figueiredo, E. M. Krieger, G. F. Lorenzi, Effects of con-
tinuous positive airway pressure on early signs of atherosclerosis in obstructive sleep apnea.
Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 176, 706–712 (2007).
17. S. Meri, B. P. Morgan, A. Davies, R. H. Daniels, M. G. Olavesen, H. Waldmann, P. J. Lachmann,
Human protectin (CD59), an 18,000-20,000 MW complement lysis restricting factor, inhibits
C5b-8 catalysed insertion of C9 into lipid bilayers. Immunology 71, 1–9 (1990).
18. J. J. Devlin, L. C. Panganiban, P. E. Devlin, Random peptide libraries: A source of specific
protein binding molecules. Science 249, 404–406 (1990).
19. O. O. Glebov, N. A. Bright, B. J. Nichols, Flotillin-1 defines a clathrin-independent endocytic
pathway in mammalian cells. Nat. Cell Biol. 8, 46–54 (2006).
20. M. Frick, N. A. Bright, K. Riento, A. Bray, C. Merrified, B. J. Nichols, Coassembly of flotillins
induces formation of membrane microdomains, membrane curvature, and vesicle
budding. Curr. Biol. 17, 1151–1156 (2007).
21. T. Aït-Slimane, R. Galmes, G. Trugnan, M. Maurice, Basolateral internalization of GPI-
anchored proteins occurs via a clathrin-independent flotillin-dependent pathway in polar-
ized hepatic cells. Mol. Biol. Cell 20, 3792–3800 (2009).
22. K. S. Kilgore, E. Schmid, T. P. Shanley, C. M. Flory, V. Maheswari, N. L. Tramontini, H. Cohen,
P. A. Ward, H. P. Friedl, J. S. Warren, Sublytic concentrations of the membrane attack
complex of complement induce endothelial interleukin-8 and monocyte chemoattrac-
tant protein-1 through nuclear factor-kappa B activation. Am. J. Pathol. 150, 2019–2031
(1997).
23. C. D. Collard, A. Agah, W. Reenstra, J. Buras, G. L. Stahl, Endothelial nuclear factor-kB trans-
location and vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 induction by complement: Inhibition with
anti-human C5 therapy or cGMP analogues. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 19, 2623–2629
(1999).
24. N. Naslavsky, R. Weigert, J. G. Donaldson, Characterization of a nonclathrin endocytic
pathway: Membrane cargo and lipid requirements. Mol. Biol. Cell 15, 3542–3552
(2004).
25. S. Parathath, S. L. Mick, J. E. Feig, V. Joaquin, L. Grauer, D. M. Habiel, M. Gassmann, L. B. Gardner,
E. A. Fisher, Hypoxia is present in murine atherosclerotic plaques and has multiple adverse
effects on macrophage lipid metabolism. Circ. Res. 109, 1141–1152 (2011).
26. Y. Du, X. Teng, N. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Chen, P. Ding, Q. Qiao, Q. Wang, L. Zhang, C. Yang,
Z. Yang, Y. Chu, X. Du, X. Zhou, W. Hu, NF-kB and enhancer-binding CREB protein scaf-
folded by CREB-binding protein (CBP)/p300 proteins regulate CD59 protein expression to
protect cells from complement attack. J. Biol. Chem. 289, 2711–2724 (2014).
27. W. Cui, Y. Zhao, C. Shan, G. Kong, N. Hu, Y. Zhang, S. Zhang, W. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang,
L. Ye, HBXIP upregulates CD46, CD55 and CD59 through ERK1/2/NF-kB signaling to protect
breast cancer cells from complement attack. FEBS Lett. 586, 766–771 (2012).
28. D. Gancz, M. Lusthaus, Z. Fishelson, A role for the NF-kB pathway in cell protection from
complement-dependent cytotoxicity. J. Immunol. 189, 860–866 (2012).
29. G. An, T. Miwa, W.-L. Song, J. A. Lawson, D. J. Rader, Y. Zhang, W.-C. Song, CD59 but not
DAF deficiency accelerates atherosclerosis in female ApoE knockout mice. Mol. Immunol.
46, 1702–1709 (2009).
30. S. Yun, V. W. Y. Leung, M. Botto, J. J. Boyle, D. O. Haskard, Brief report: Accelerated ather-
osclerosis in low-density lipoprotein receptor-deficient mice lacking the membrane-bound
complement regulator CD59. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 28, 1714–1716 (2008).
31. G. Wu, W. Hu, A. Shahsafaei, W. Song, M. Dobarro, G. K. Sukhova, R. R. Bronson, G.-. Shi,
R. P. Rother, J. A. Halperin, X. Qin, Complement regulator CD59 protects against athero-
sclerosis by restricting the formation of complement membrane attack complex. Circ. Res.
104, 550–558 (2009).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
6 January 2016
Vol 8 Issue 320 320ra1
12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 32. R. Mehra, F. Xu, D. C. Babineau, R. P. Tracy, N. S. Jenny, S. R. Patel, S. Redline, Sleep-
disordered breathing and prothrombotic biomarkers: Cross-sectional results of the Cleve-
land Family Study. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 182, 826–833 (2010).
33. M. Yamashina, E. Ueda, T. Kinoshita, T. Takami, A. Ojima, H. Ono, H. Tanaka, N. Kondo, T. Orii,
N. Okada, H. Okada, K. Inoue, T. Kitani, Inherited complete deficiency of 20-kilodalton ho-
mologous restriction factor (CD59) as a cause of paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria.
N. Engl. J. Med. 323, 1184–1189 (1990).
34. N. Motoyama, N. Okada, M. Yamashina, H. Okada, Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria due to
hereditary nucleotide deletion in the HRF20 (CD59) gene. Eur. J. Immunol. 22, 2669–2673 (1992).
35. Y. Nevo, B. Ben-Zeev, A. Tabib, R. Straussberg, Y. Anikster, Z. Shorer, A. Fattal-Valevski,
A. Ta-Shma, S. Aharoni, M. Rabie, S. Zenvirt, H. Goldshmidt, Y. Fellig, A. Shaag, D. Mevorach,
O. Elpeleg, CD59 deficiency is associated with chronic hemolysis and childhood relapsing
immune-mediated polyneuropathy. Blood 121, 129–135 (2013).
36. B. Höchsmann, C. Dohna-Schwake, H. A. Kyrieleis, U. Pannicke, H. Schrezenmeier, Targeted
therapy with eculizumab for inherited CD59 deficiency. N. Engl. J. Med. 370, 90–92 (2014).
37. M. Anliker, I. von Zabern, B. Höchsmann, H. Kyrieleis, C. Dohna-Schwake, W. A. Flegel,
H. Schrezenmeier, C. Weinstock, A new blood group antigen is defined by anti-CD59,
detected in a CD59-deficient patient. Transfusion 54, 1817–1822 (2014).
38. S. Sabharanjak, P. Sharma, R. G. Parton, S. Mayor, GPI-anchored proteins are delivered to
recycling endosomes via a distinct cdc42-regulated, clathrin-independent pinocytic
pathway. Dev. Cell 2, 411–423 (2002).
39. D. Song, G. Fang, S.-Z. Mao, X. Ye, G. Liu, Y. Gong, S. F. Liu, Chronic intermittent hypoxia
induces atherosclerosis by NF-kB-dependent mechanisms. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1822,
1650–1659 (2012).
40. S. Lim, P. Barter, Antioxidant effects of statins in the management of cardiometabolic dis-
orders. J. Atheroscler. Thromb. 21, 997–1010 (2014).
41. S. Mayor, S. Sabharanjak, F. R. Maxfield, Cholesterol-dependent retention of GPI-anchored
proteins in endosomes. EMBO J. 17, 4626–4638 (1998).
42. A. R. Kinderlerer, R. Steinberg, M. Johns, S. K. Harten, E. A. Lidington, D. O. Haskard, P. H. Maxwell,
J. C. Mason, Statin-induced expression of CD59 on vascular endothelium in hypoxia: A
potential mechanism for the anti-inflammatory actions of statins in rheumatoid arthritis.
Arthritis Res. Ther. 8, R130 (2006).
43. S. Ledoux, D. Laouari, M. Essig, I. Runembert, G. Trugnan, J. B. Michel, G. Friedlander,
Lovastatin enhances ecto-5’-nucleotidase activity and cell surface expression in endothe-
lial cells: Implication of rho-family GTPases. Circ. Res. 90, 420–427 (2002).
44. A. E. Silver, S. D. Beske, D. D. Christou, A. J. Donato, K. L. Moreau, I. Eskurza, P. E. Gates,
D. R. Seals, Overweight and obese humans demonstrate increased vascular endothelial
NAD(P)H oxidase-p47phox expression and evidence of endothelial oxidative stress. Circulation
115, 627–637 (2007).
45. C. Antoniades, C. Shirodaria, N. Warrick, S. Cai, J. de Bono, J. Lee, P. Leeson, S. Neubauer,
C. Ratnatunga, R. Pillai, H. Refsum, K. M. Channon, 5-methyltetrahydrofolate rapidly im-
proves endothelial function and decreases superoxide production in human vessels:
Effects on vascular tetrahydrobiopterin availability and endothelial nitric oxide synthase
coupling. Circulation 114, 1193–1201 (2006).
46. X. L. Aranguren, X. Agirre, M. Beerens, G. Coppiello, M. Uriz, I. Vandersmissen, M. Benkheil,
J. Panadero, N. Aguado, A. Pascual-Montano, V. Segura, F. Prósper, A. Luttun, Unraveling a
novel transcription factor code determining the human arterial-specific endothelial cell
signature. Blood 122, 3982–3992 (2013).
47. M. W. Johns, A new method for measuring daytime sleepiness: The Epworth sleepiness
scale. Sleep 14, 540–545 (1991).
48. G. Box, W. Hunter, J. S. Hunter, Statistics for Experimenters (John Wiley and Sons Inc., Hoboken,
NJ, 2005).
49. J. Röhmel, Precision intervals for estimates of the difference in success rates for binary
random variables based on the permutation principle. Biom. J. 38, 977–993 (1996).
Funding: This work was supported by NIH/National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (R01HL106041
to S.J.). Author contributions: M.E., G.W., F.C., J.R.-L., R.W., J.W., and T.A. performed the experiments
and collected, analyzed, and discussed the data; Y.W. designed statistical plan and performed
statistical analysis; and S.J. managed and designed the study, conceived the experiments, and
wrote the manuscript, which was revised and approved by all authors. Competing interests:
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Submitted 21 July 2015
Accepted 4 November 2015
Published 6 January 2016
10.1126/scitranslmed.aad0634
Citation: M. Emin, G. Wang, F. Castagna, J. Rodriguez-Lopez, R. Wahab, J. Wang, T. Adams,
Y. Wei, S. Jelic, Increased internalization of complement inhibitor CD59 may contribute to
endothelial inflammation in obstructive sleep apnea. Sci. Transl. Med. 8, 320ra1 (2016).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
6 January 2016
Vol 8 Issue 320 320ra1
13
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 inflammation in obstructive sleep apnea
Increased internalization of complement inhibitor CD59 may contribute to endothelial
Ying Wei and Sanja Jelic
Memet Emin, Gang Wang, Francesco Castagna, Josanna Rodriguez-Lopez, Romina Wahab, Jing Wang, Tessa Adams,
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aad0634
, 320ra1320ra1.
8
Sci Transl Med 
drugs protect against cardiovascular disease.
endothelial cell surface and protected them from injury, revealing yet another mechanism by which these versatile
no longer protect the cells, resulting in damage to the vascular walls. In contrast, statins stabilized CD59 on the 
endothelial cells and protects them from being injured by circulating complement. After internalization, CD59 could
that intermittent hypoxia causes internalization of CD59, a protein that is normally found on the membrane of 
 provide a mechanism, which helps to explain this correlation. The authors discovered
et al.
disease, and now Emin 
breathing during sleep, which results in intermittent hypoxia. It greatly increases patients' risk of cardiovascular 
Obstructive sleep apnea is a common medical condition characterized by intermittent cessation of
Sleep tight, don't let the complement bite
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/8/320/320ra1
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2016/01/04/8.320.320ra1.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/361/6408/1174.full
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/8/320/320ra1#BIBL
This article cites 48 articles, 20 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
