 Irritable bowel syndrome
Paul Enck1, Qasim Aziz2, Giovanni Barbara3, Adam D. Farmer2, Shin Fukudo4, Emeran A. 
Mayer5, Beate Niesler6, Eamonn M. M. Quigley7, Mirjana Rajilić-Stojanović8, Michael 
Schemann9, Juliane Schwille-Kiuntke1, Magnus Simren10, Stephan Zipfel1, and Robin C. 
Spiller11
1Department of Internal Medicine VI (Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy), University 
Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
2Wingate Institute of Neurogastroenterology, Barts and London School of Medicine and Dentistry, 
Queen Mary University of London, London, UK
3Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, St. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna, Italy
4Department of Behavioural Medicine, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, 
Japan
5Oppenheimer Center for Neurobiology of Stress, Division of Digestive Diseases, David Geffen 
School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, California, USA
6Department of Human Molecular Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany
7Lynda K and David M Underwood Center for Digestive Disorders, Division of Gastroenterology 
and Hepatology, Houston Methodist Hospital, Weill Cornell Medical College, Houston, Texas, 
USA
8Department of Biochemical Engineering and Biotechnology, Faculty of Technology and 
Metallurgy, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia
9Department of Human Biology, Technical University Munich, Freising-Weihenstephan, Germany
10Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Nutrition, Institute of Medicine, Sahlgrenska 
Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden
11NIHR Nottingham Digestive Diseases Biomedical Research Unit, University of Nottingham, 
Nottingham, UK
Abstract
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a functional gastrointestinal disease with a high population 
prevalence. The disorder can be debilitating in some patients, whereas others may have mild or 
moderate symptoms. The most important single risk factors are female sex, younger age and 
Correspondence to P.E. Department of Internal Medicine VI (Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy), University Hospital 
Tübingen, Osianderstraße 5, 72076 Tübingen, Germany. paul.enck@uni-tuebingen.de. 
Author contributions Introduction (P.E. and R.C.S.); Epidemiology (P.E. and J.S.-K.); Mechanisms/pathophysiology (G.B., B.N., 
M.R.-S., M.Schemann and E.A.M.); Diagnosis, screening and prevention (M.Simren); Management (E.M.M.Q., Q.A., A.D.F. and 
S.Z.); Quality of life (S.F.); Outlook (R.C.S.); Overview of Primer (P.E.).
Competing interests J.S.-K., M.R.-S. and S.Z. declare no potential conflict of interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Rev Dis Primers. ; 2: 16014. doi:10.1038/nrdp.2016.14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 preceding gastrointestinal infections. Clinical symptoms of IBS include abdominal pain or 
discomfort, stool irregularities and bloating, as well as other somatic, visceral and psychiatric 
comorbidities. Currently, the diagnosis of IBS is based on symptoms and the exclusion of other 
organic diseases, and therapy includes drug treatment of the predominant symptoms, nutrition and 
psychotherapy. Although the underlying pathogenesis is far from understood, aetiological factors 
include increased epithelial hyperpermeability, dysbiosis, inflammation, visceral hypersensitivity, 
epigenetics and genetics, and altered brain–gut interactions. IBS considerably affects quality of 
life and imposes a profound burden on patients, physicians and the health-care system. The past 
decade has seen remarkable progress in our understanding of functional bowel disorders such as 
IBS that will be summarized in this Primer.
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a functional bowel disorder (that is, not associated with 
structural or biochemical abnormalities that are detectable with the current routine 
diagnostic tools) characterized by abdominal pain or discomfort, stool irregularities and 
bloating (BOX 1). Symptoms can be debilitating in many individuals, but may be mild or 
moderate in other patients. In addition, IBS is often associated with other somatic 
comorbidities (for example, pain syndromes, overactive bladder and migraine), psychiatric 
conditions (including depression and anxiety) and visceral sensitivity. The population 
prevalence of IBS is high (~11%) and the condition has considerable consequences for 
quality of life (QOL) that are comparable to other chronic diseases, such as diabetes mellitus 
and hepatitis. IBS is diagnosed based on symptoms, and a distinction is made between the 
following subtypes of IBS: IBS with pain or discomfort and predominant constipation (IBS-
C), IBS with diarrhoea (IBS-D), mixed IBS (IBS-M) and unsubtyped IBS (IBS-U) (FIG. 1). 
Moreover, other diseases (including other functional gastrointestinal diseases, such as 
functional dyspepsia and gastroesophageal reflux disease) that may cause the typical IBS 
symptoms should be excluded. Although a substantial proportion of patients will experience 
spontaneous remission over time, there is currently no treatment that cures IBS; relief of 
symptoms is the most that can be achieved.
IBS is a multifactorial disease. Hence, the underlying pathogenesis is considered complex 
and the precise molecular pathophysiology is far from understood. Several functional 
alterations have been described, such as altered visceral sensitivity, functional brain 
alterations, bowel motility and secretory dysfunctions, and somatic and psychiatric 
comorbidities. Furthermore, gastrointestinal abnormalities — such as immune activation, gut 
dysbiosis (microbial imbalance), impaired mucosal functions, nerve sensitization, post-
infectious plasticity, altered expression and release of mucosal and immune mediators, and 
altered gene expression profiles — have been associated with IBS. However, a coherent link 
between particular pathologies and IBS symptoms is yet to be established.
Moreover, results from studies assessing the contribution of most of the proposed 
pathological factors are inconsistent and the particular aetiology is often not related to 
particular gut symptoms. For example, some studies have found evidence for gut micro-
inflammation in IBS, whereas others could not confirm this finding, despite similar 
gastrointestinal symptoms. Such discrepancies, which also apply to the other biomarker 
candidates (not only to inflammation), strongly suggest the existence of IBS subpopulations, 
Enck et al.
Page 2
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 which, despite the similarity in gut symptoms, can be defined and distinguished by their 
pathophysiology and in-depth assessments of clinical and molecular biomarker clusters. The 
same heterogeneity is evident with respect to clinical diagnosis and management. Indeed, 
medical treatment, nutritional intervention and psychotherapy lack consistent and 
homogeneous efficacy, but can be effective in some subgroups.
This Primer summarizes recent progress in our understanding of IBS prevalence, 
comorbidities, QOL and the putative roles of inflammation, genetics, the intestinal 
microbiota and the brain–gut axis in IBS pathogenesis. Furthermore, we will discuss the 
current diagnostic approach and highlight the therapeutic options in IBS, including drugs, 
nutrition and psychotherapy.
Epidemiology
Global prevalence and incidence
Prevalence rates of IBS vary between 1.1% and 45%, based on population studies from 
countries worldwide (FIG. 2; Supplementary information S1 (table)), with a pooled global 
prevalence of 11.2% (95% CI: 9.8–12.8)1. Prevalence rates of 5–10% are reported for most 
European countries, the United States and China1. Population statistics for IBS in most 
African and many Asian countries are unavailable, which might point to the inability to 
differentiate between infectious diarrhoea and IBS in tropical countries, especially in those 
nations with poor health-care systems or limited patient access to medical care, or to less 
attention of the health-care system for functional disorders, once an acute infection has been 
excluded2.
Gathering subtype-specific prevalence information is complex. IBS subtypes overlap 
considerably in terms of symptoms, and patients vary over time in terms of their 
predominant symptoms, and thus switch subtype3. The few population studies that have 
differentiated between IBS subtypes suggest that, in countries with a total IBS prevalence of 
~10%, IBS-C and IBS-D each account for one-third of the affected population4. Incidence 
rates of IBS (that is, the annual occurrence of new cases) are not reported for most countries, 
but a few long-term surveys (≥10 years) in the United States allow for an estimation of the 
annual incidence in the range of 1–2%5. At the same time, disappearance rates of 2% have 
been reported6, indicating spontaneous disease remission.
Association between IBS and other disorders
Not only do IBS subtypes overlap6 but population-based studies also report a substantial 
overlap of ≥20% with other functional gastrointestinal disorders of the upper and lower 
gastrointestinal system: functional dyspepsia, heartburn, gastroesophageal reflux disease and 
nausea on the one hand7, and diarrhoea, incontinence, pelvic floor dyssynergia and 
constipation on the other hand8. An overlap of IBS with inflammatory bowel diseases 
(IBDs; including Crohn disease and ulcerative colitis) during remission phases has been 
proposed9 but is not mutually agreed on10.
Other IBS-associated disorders (FIG. 3) include functional non-gastrointestinal syndromes, 
such as urological chronic pelvic pain syndrome (this term includes inter-stitial cystitis and 
Enck et al.
Page 3
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 chronic prostatitis), vulvodynia, overactive bladder, prostatic pain syndrome, premenstrual 
syndrome, sexual (including erectile) dysfunction, chronic pelvic pain, fibromyalgia 
syndrome, chronic fatigue syndrome, migraine, eating disorders, nutritional intolerances and 
others11. All of these syndromes considerably overlap with IBS in population studies to a 
degree that is often beyond what is expected based on the prevalence rates of the individual 
diseases. Given that many of these conditions are only diagnosed in specialized centres, it 
has been questioned as to whether some of these conditions — for example, IBS and chronic 
pelvic pain — are one and the same disease12.
In addition, most epidemiological studies note the presence of psychiatric comorbidities 
(such as anxiety, depression, somatization or neuroticism) not only for IBS but also for these 
IBS-associated diseases. Again, the rates are above the expected levels for IBS and the 
population prevalence of these symptoms13. Thus, the entire disease entity (IBS, functional 
gastrointestinal disorders and other functional non-gastrointestinal disorders) has been 
included in the term `somatic symptom disorder' in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders 5th Edition (DSM-5)14 and in psychiatric or psychosomatic clinical 
management15. Patients with IBS who were treated by psychiatrists frequently did not 
receive adequate attention with respect to their gastrointestinal symptoms before the release 
of DSM-5.
Risk factors for IBS
The best-documented risk factor for IBS is female sex, which is associated with an odds 
ratio of 1.67 (95% CI: 1.53–1.82) across many population-based studies16, with explanations 
varying between sex-different health care, consultation behaviour and biological functions 
(for example, hormonal regulation of gut functions). The incidence of IBS decreases with 
advancing age (>50 years)1, but is similar in children and adolescents compared with adults 
and does not necessarily transmit from childhood to adulthood17. However, family 
aggregation has been reported18 that is driven by genetics19 as well as by social learning20. 
BOX 2 lists the personal, disease, psychosocial and social factors that have been found to be 
associated with increased risk of IBS, although some of these factors have only been 
identified in individual studies21 or have been found to vary between countries and settings.
Post-infectious IBS
Several studies have shown an association between IBS and preceding gastrointestinal 
infections of bacterial, viral or other origin22,23. The pooled odds ratio is 7.3 (95% CI: 4.7–
11.1) for the development of IBS after infectious gastroenteritis24, with a median prevalence 
of ~10%22. This association seems to differ with respect to epidemic infectious events that 
affect many people at the same time and individual infections, such as travellers' diarrhoea. 
That is, prevalence data are reported to be higher (15–30%) in epidemic events22 and lower 
(5–10%) following travellers' diarrhoea23; these differences are presumably due to different 
reporting biases in these populations. Thus, a median prevalence of 10% might better reflect 
the true prevalence of post-infectious IBS than the extreme values reported in individual 
studies. Risk factors for the development of post-infectious IBS are female sex, younger age, 
the severity of the initial infection and premorbid psychological conditions22–24. Based on 
symptoms alone, post-infectious IBS cannot be distinguished from IBS without an infectious 
Enck et al.
Page 4
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 origin, but inflammatory biomarkers may. The most valid distinction may be a sudden onset 
that is well remembered by the patient and is associated with fever, bloody stools and a 
positive laboratory stool test for an infective agent.
Mechanisms/pathophysiology
Although the aetiology of IBS remains largely undetermined, our understanding of the 
potential mechanisms involved in gut dysfunction, visceral sensation and symptom 
generation is rapidly advancing. Growing evidence suggests that, in IBS, the epithelial 
barrier, gut microbiota, food antigens and bile acids elicit abnormal responses in the key 
regulators of sensorimotor functions, including the hypothalamus–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) 
axis, the immune system, the brain–gut axis and the enteric nervous system (ENS) (FIG. 4). 
Accordingly, these factors might have a role as potential biomarkers of disease (BOX 3). In 
addition to these putative biomarkers, psychological factors (`psychomarkers') such as 
depression and anxiety, which are known to respond to abdominal symptoms (bottom-up), 
and psychosocial factors (`stress') that influence physiological (intestinal) functions, such as 
motility and visceral sensitivity (top-down), have been acknowledged and will be discussed 
in more detail.
The epithelial barrier
The epithelial gut lining represents an enormous surface that is in constant contact with the 
environment and with billions of bacteria that constantly challenge the intestinal immune 
system. Increased intestinal permeability is considered an early event in IBS that leads to 
low-grade immune cell infiltration of the gut mucosa25. Indeed, increased epithelial 
permeability has been primarily described in post-infectious IBS in general and in IBS-D in 
particular, although some reports have also shown that IBS-C and IBS-M might also involve 
an increase in epithelial permeability25. Evidence for the presence of this remodelling in IBS 
has been provided by electron microscopy, which has detected enlarged spaces between 
epithelial cells and cytoskeletal condensation in gut biopsies of patients with IBS-D26. In 
addition, Ussing chamber experiments, which measure epithelial membrane properties on 
colonic mucosal biopsies, have shown excessive passage of macromolecules from the 
luminal to the basolateral side of gut tissue in biopsies obtained from patients with IBS 
compared with asymptomatic controls, hence providing the functional correlate for the 
described structural epithelial barrier defects27.
Morphological and functional changes in intestinal permeability are related to abnormal 
gene and protein expression of tight junction proteins, including a reduction in the 
expression of occludin and zonula occludens protein 1 (REFS 25,28). These findings have 
recently been corroborated by genetic and epigenetic findings in tight junction proteins 
claudin 1, claudin 2 and cingulin, as outlined below. Tight junction changes are probably the 
result of both bacterial-mediated and proteasome-mediated degradation triggered by low-
grade inflammation29. Accordingly, inflammatory mediators including eicosanoids, 
histamine and proteases increase intestinal permeability. This may involve the participation 
of ENS neurons, which may amplify these effects27,30.
Enck et al.
Page 5
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Increased intestinal permeability has been linked to diarrhoea and pain severity26, suggesting 
that this mechanism might have a role in symptom generation in IBS. Although the exact 
causes underlying the `leaky' gut barrier in IBS remain elusive, it has been postulated that 
numerous factors could be involved, including genetics, epigenetics, dysbiosis and food 
allergies25. Confocal laser endomicroscopy of the duodenal mucosa of patients with IBS 
after challenge with food to which the patients reported intolerance showed epithelial breaks 
and increased intervillous spaces, indicative of increased intestinal permeability. These 
studies suggest a causative effect of food in the increased epithelial permeability in IBS31.
Bile acids
A subset of patients with features compatible with IBS-D present with increased levels of 
total faecal bile acids caused by increased excretion and synthesis of serum C4 (7α-
hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one; a surrogate for bile acid synthesis), which in turn influences 
bowel habit by accelerating colonic transit and inducing diarrhoea and visceral 
hypersensitivity in IBS32–34. Of note, genes involved in bile acid metabolism and function 
have been reported to be associated with colonic transit in IBS-D, as outlined below.
Immune response
It has been argued that the immune system participates in the pathophysiology of IBS based 
on the clinical observation that infectious gastroenteritis is a strong risk factor for the 
development of IBS24. Additional clinical support comes from the evidence that about one-
third of patients with IBD in remission experience IBS-like symptoms35. These inferential 
data have been subsequently enriched by quantitative immunohistochemistry data showing 
increased infiltration of T cells and mast cells in the mucosa of the small and large intestine 
of some patients with IBS36.
Two randomized controlled trials (RCTs)37,38 in patients with IBS demonstrated that the 
anti-inflammatory agent mesalazine was not superior to placebo in alleviating IBS 
symptoms, although both studies clearly indicated that subgroups, particularly patients with 
post-infectious IBS, had sustained symptomatic responses. Thus, these studies confirm the 
hypothesis that immune activation has a considerable role in some patients with IBS.
Although mucosal immunocyte numbers are not always increased in IBS, there is strong 
functional and molecular evidence of an increased state of activation of immune cells in 
about half of patients with IBS36. Data from several studies point to the importance of mast 
cells as key components of inducing and maintaining low-grade immune activation in IBS36. 
For instance, higher proportions of mast cells were found in a degranulating state in colonic 
biopsies from patients with IBS than in control samples, suggesting that increased activation 
of mast cells is involved in the condition39. In addition, biopsy supernatants from patients 
with IBS contained higher amounts of mast cell mediators, including proteases and 
histamine36 as well as polyunsaturated fatty acid metabolites40, than controls. Mucosal 
immune activation is coupled with altered gene expression of several components of the host 
mucosal immune response to microbial pathogens (see below), suggesting that the 
microbiota might contribute to the observed immune activation36.
Enck et al.
Page 6
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Neuroimmune interactions
Mucosal mediators isolated from biopsy samples from patients with IBS have been 
extensively studied to identify their effect on bowel physiology and sensory perception in 
isolated tissues or laboratory animals41. Compared with controls, mucosal mediators from 
patients with IBS evoked higher activation of visceral and somatic pain pathways when 
applied to intestinal preparations isolated from rodents42,43. Mast cells and enteroendocrine 
cells have been suggested to participate in this abnormal neural signalling, as indicated by 
the activation of human ENS neurons via mast cell-derived histamine, enteroendocrine cell-
derived serotonin (also known as 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)) and protease-dependent 
mechanisms30,42 (FIG. 5). Although most of the proteases are secreted by mast cells, some 
of the serine and cysteine proteases that are present at a higher level in the mucosa or stool 
of patients with IBS than controls might be of other, probably pancreatic or bacterial, origin. 
In line with these findings, serine proteases in faecal supernatants from individuals with 
IBS-D evoked colonic hypersensitivity to distension44. By contrast, faecal cysteine protease 
activity was augmented in some patients with IBS-C compared with controls and increased 
protease activity correlated with abdominal pain and impaired epithelial permeability45. 
Further work showed the implication of serine proteases that act on protease-activated 
nociceptors located on intestinal nerves conveying pain stimuli to the brain43. Importantly, 
mucosal mediators from patients with IBS and visceral hypersensitivity — but not from 
normosensitive patients with IBS — acutely activated spinal nociceptors when given to 
animal models46. In the same model, chronic exposure to soluble mediators from patients 
with IBS-D was shown to sensitize nociceptive neurons47, implying that chronicity is 
associated with long-lasting plasticity alterations.
Attention has been directed to agonists of the transient receptor potential cation channels 
(TRPs), which have been implicated in the pathogenesis of sensory hyperalgesia. Colon 
tissue samples from patients with IBS have increased levels of specific polyunsaturated fatty 
acids, which stimulate sensory neurons from mice via the activation of TRP subfamily V 
member 4 (TRPV4) and generate visceral hypersensitivity40. The importance of those 
visceral afferents that express TRPs in IBS symptomatology is underscored by the finding 
that peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) supernatants from patients with IBS-D 
cause mechanical hypersensitivity of visceral afferents via tumour necrosis factor (TNF) and 
TRPA1; this was not observed if control supernatants were used48.
Recent data support the concept that the chronic release of factors with known effects on 
nerves in the intestinal milieu might not only have functional effects but could also affect the 
ENS and sensory fibres in a structural manner. For example, immunohistochemistry showed 
a 57.7% and 56.1% increase in mucosal neurons and neuronal outgrowth, respectively, in 
patients with IBS compared with healthy controls49. Indeed, the intestinal mucosa of 
patients with IBS contains increased levels of nerve growth factor (NGF), primarily in 
mucosal mast cells. Experimentally, the effect of NGF was demonstrated in primary cell 
cultures of the rat myenteric plexus and the neuroblastoma cell line SH-SY5Y, which 
showed an increase in neurite growth, and protein and mRNA expression of growth-
associated protein 43 (GAP43; also known as neuromodulin) — a key neuronal growth 
Enck et al.
Page 7
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 protein — following exposure to supernatant obtained from mucosal biopsies of patients 
with IBS49.
Microbiota
The gastrointestinal microbiota is a diverse and numerous ecosystem that inhabits the entire 
gastrointestinal tract and has a systemic influence on our health. Owing to its enormous 
complexity and high interindividual variability, the microbiota is still in large part undefined 
regarding the scope of its contribution to human physiology and tolerable compositional 
variations under which normal functions are preserved50. The evidence for an involvement 
of altered gut microbiota composition in IBS pathophysiology has been accumulating (BOX 
4), but the aetiological role remains uncertain. The most prominent markers of IBS are 
derived from uncultured bacteria. Two groups of uncultured Clostridiales are significantly 
depleted in IBS51,52, and bacteria related to Ruminococcus torques (a species belonging to 
the Lachnospiraceae) are profoundly enriched in patients with IBS51,53,54 and levels 
positively correlate with bowel symptoms51,52,55. In addition, increased Firmicutes to 
Bacteroidetes ratios have been observed at the phylum level, at least in a subset of patients51 
(for a recent review see REF. 56). Given the provided evidence, the dysbiosis of microbiota 
in IBS has been acknowledged by the Rome Foundation Working Team57 as a plausible 
contributing factor to the disorder. Experiments with animal models have shown that 
colonization of germ-free animals with microbiota from patients with IBS can induce 
visceral hypersensitivity58, impair intestinal permeability and alter gastrointestinal transit 
time59 — indicating the importance and the possible aetiological role of the microbiota in 
IBS.
Although diet changes have an effect on the abundance of particular microbial groups, the 
microbiotic signature (in terms of present species) is very stable60. To observe a profound 
effect, the dietary change has to be dramatic (for example, vegans switching to high-fat and 
high-protein diets61). Dietary interventions (such as low dietary content of fermentable 
oligosaccharides, disaccharides, monosaccharides and polyols (FODMAPs; BOX 5), or the 
addition of sweeteners (fructo-oligosaccharides) or fibre (psyllium)) can improve symptoms 
of some but not all patients with IBS. Future studies should evaluate the relevance of these 
microbial groups for IBS and could contribute to a better understanding of the role of the 
microbiota in the pathophysiology of IBS that is currently acknowledged for the following 
contexts.
Fermentation of non-digestible foods—An important role of the microbiota is 
degradation of non-digestible dietary components62. It is generally accepted that 
fermentation of carbohydrates is desirable because of the beneficial effects of the main 
fermentation products — short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) — including energy supply to 
gastrointestinal epithelial cells, a decrease in inflammation and improvement in gut barrier 
function63. However, in patients with IBS, the presence of the resistant carbohydrates 
FODMAPs can provoke IBS symptoms64. This might be a result of overproduction or 
underproduction of relevant metabolites owing to the disturbed microbiotic balance, for 
example, due to an increased abundance of gas-producing and decreased abundance of gas-
utilizing microorganisms. The quantity and composition of SCFAs in the gut differs between 
Enck et al.
Page 8
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 patients with IBS and healthy controls, although the available data are not always in 
agreement65,66. Moreover, the production of microbial SCFAs stimulates regulatory T cell 
differentiation and affects the balance between pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory 
mechanisms67, suggesting that inadequate levels of SCFAs could provoke low-grade 
intestinal inflammation as observed in patients with IBS68,69. Finally, studies of microbiota 
show that the abundance of several SCFA-producing bacteria — including Roseburia, 
Blautia and Veillonella70 — is significantly increased compared with the levels of these 
bacteria in healthy controls, providing a potential mechanistic basis for the development of 
IBS symptoms.
Other carbohydrate-utilizing gastrointestinal bacteria — namely, Dorea spp. — show 
significant increases in abundance in patients with IBS51; these are the main gas-producing 
bacteria in the human gastrointestinal tract71. The overproduction of gas is associated with 
IBS72 and this phenomenon could underlie flatulence and abdominal pain. The excessive 
production of gas can also cause faster colonic transit in patients with IBS-D, as the colons 
of these patients are more sensitive to increased intestinal volume than healthy controls73. 
Intestinal gases are efficiently removed by methanogenic archaea74, which seem to be 
depleted in patients with IBS51,52 and are negatively correlated with the presence of loose 
stools52. However, a significant increase in the abundance of this microbial group is 
characteristic of patients with slow transit and constipation75, whereas the degree of the 
methanogenic activity could be correlated with the severity of constipation in those with 
IBS-C76.
Another potential pathway for microbiotic involvement in IBS is protein degradation. The 
luminal contents of patients with IBS contain increased levels of proteases30, which could be 
due to the increased secretion of endogenous and microbial proteases in response to protein-
rich nutrition (typical of western diets), but could also be due to insufficient endogenous 
protease degradation by the disturbed gastrointestinal microbial community77. Serine 
protease inhibitors are produced by many bacteria, including bifidobacteria78, and their 
activity could prevent the excessive proteolytic activity of intestinal content in IBS. The 
depletion of bifidobacteria has been noted in both faecal and mucosal samples of patients 
with IBS51,79, suggesting an important role for this bacterial genera in IBS. The 
fermentation of proteins generates numerous health-compromising substances80. Among 
these, hydrogen sulfide is a relevant toxin that impairs epithelial metabolism81 and can be 
further converted to tetrathionate, which stimulates the growth of tetrathionate-utilizing 
pathogens from Gammaproteobacteria82,83. The abundance of several Gammaproteobacteria 
significantly correlates with bowel symptoms in patients with IBS51,52, and also with the 
levels of the inflammatory markers interleukin 6 (IL-6) and IL-8 (REF. 51) that are typically 
increased in IBS54.
Microbiota and 5-HT—5-HT is an important metabolite that, among other functions, 
regulates gastrointestinal motility; disturbed levels of 5-HT seem to be relevant for IBS 
pathology84. As much as 90% of 5-HT is produced in enteroendocrine cells present in the 
gastrointestinal tract, and it has been recently shown that intestinal bacteria are needed for 
the stimulation of 5-HT synthesis. Attempts to identify microorganisms that are capable of 
5-HT synthesis have shown that, in contrast to Bacteroides spp. and altered Schaedler flora 
Enck et al.
Page 9
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (a community of eight bacterial strains), only specific spore-forming commensal bacteria 
have this feature. The majority of these spore-forming bacteria belong to the Clostridales 
class within the Firmicutes phylum. Two recent comprehensive studies51,85 revealed an 
increase of the Firmicutes phylum members on the account of the Bacteroidetes members in 
IBS. Given that the Clostridiales class within the Firmicutes phylum are the most diverse 
and the most abundant group of the microbiota70, it is not clear if the observed feature of the 
IBS microbiota is associated with 5-HT-mediated pathophysiology, but this possible link 
should certainly be further investigated.
Brain and behaviour
IBS is narrowly defined by recurrent abdominal pain and discomfort associated with altered 
bowel habits in the absence of an organic origin and/or explanation of symptoms. However, 
given that IBS is nearly always associated with increased anxiety and patients often show 
comorbidities with other chronic pain and psychiatric conditions, a more widespread 
dysregulation of the nervous and immune systems is probably implicated86.
The brain, the gut and its microbiota and the immune system show reciprocal associations in 
health and disease. On the one hand, the brain, via the autonomic nervous system and the 
HPA axis, can influence intestinal motility and fluid secretion87, intestinal epithelial 
permeability25,88,89, immune function90 and gut microbial composition91, all of which have 
been reported to be dysregulated in IBS. On the other hand, several of these peripheral 
alterations can influence brain structure and function either developmentally or in response 
to acute perturbations, setting up circular regulatory loops between the gut and the brain92.
In addition to its role in the bidirectional communications with the gut, the brain plays an 
essential part in assessing the salience of received or expected interoceptive (sensory) 
information93, determining how much of this information is amplified or tuned down, to 
what degree it is modulated by affect94 and how much of this interoceptive information from 
the gut is consciously perceived (visceral sensitivity). One of the best-studied behavioural 
aspects of IBS-related central processing of gut-related information involves a coping 
strategy referred to as catastrophizing, a term that refers to a bias towards prediction of a 
high likelihood of worst outcomes95. This measure strongly correlates with the severity of 
pain symptoms and is a primary treatment target in cognitive–behavioural therapy.
Multimodal brain imaging has made it possible to identify differences in functional (evoked 
and resting state) and structural (grey matter and white matter tracts) aspects of specific 
brain networks that provide a neurobiological substrate for previously observed affective and 
cognitive features of IBS (reviewed in REFS 92,96) (FIG. 6). These networks include the 
salience, attention, sensorimotor and emotional arousal networks. Profound sex-related 
differences in these networks have also been identified in both healthy individuals and 
patients with IBS (reviewed in REF. 96). Cross-sectional correlations of brain networks with 
several clinical and non-brain biological parameters show a relationship between some of 
these brain signatures with IBS symptom severity and duration, a history of early adverse 
life events93, gut metabolite and microbial composition97, gene expression profiles in 
PBMCs98 and gene polymorphisms99. On the basis of these neurobiological findings, a 
comprehensive IBS pathophysiological model can be formulated (FIG. 6), which includes 
Enck et al.
Page 10
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 alterations in the appraisal of and selective attention to interoceptive signals (salience and 
attentional network), central sensory processing of interoceptive information (sensorimotor 
network) and engagement of emotional arousal associated with experience and expectation 
of gut sensations. This disease model not only identifies neurobiological correlates of well-
characterized clinical and behavioural features of IBS but also provides a plausible 
explanation for the common coexistence of IBS with other chronic pain conditions and with 
increased trait anxiety.
Although these findings have identified disease-relevant brain alterations in patients with 
IBS, mechanistic and longitudinal studies are required to determine the causality between 
these factors. For example, are central sensorimotor alterations a consequence of increased 
signals from the gut, are they the consequence of dorsal horn sensitization by increased 
descending pain-facilitating signals or are they a genetically determined trait that 
predisposes individuals to IBS and might be present in asymptomatic relatives100? The 
correlation of gut microbial signatures and PBMC expression profiles with structural 
alterations in the sensorimotor network suggests a possible role of these peripheral factors in 
influencing the brain. Similarly, are the altered salience and attention network alterations a 
secondary response to the chronically increased perception of visceral signals or are they a 
primary abnormality that is responsible for the generation of aberrant endogenous pain 
modulation, as well as emotional and autonomic nervous system responses? Future studies 
will need to address the question of whether these brain signatures differ between subgroups 
of patients with IBS, such as male and female patients, patients with a history of early 
adversity, patients with different durations of symptoms and patients with post-infectious 
IBS.
Genetic and epigenetic data
The latest genetic and epigenetic findings support current models of IBS pathogenesis that 
suggest disturbed intestinal barrier function, immune response and neuronal signal 
transduction101 (FIG. 6). The data even point towards potential diagnostic biomarkers or 
therapeutic options (BOX 3). For example, silencing the microRNA-29 (mir-29) family or 
amplifying mir-199a expression might have important therapeutic implications for selected 
patients with IBS and symptoms caused by increased intestinal permeability or 
hypersensitivity102,103.
Genetic data—Genetic studies to date range from family and twin studies to candidate 
gene approaches and, more recently, genome-wide association studies (GWAS). Regardless 
of enlarged sample sizes, increased statistical power and meta-analyses, genetic variants 
associated with IBS are still scarce and/or have not been replicated in independent cohorts. 
A recent paper summarizes all currently available genetic data that have been replicated101.
Polymorphisms or variants in several genes have been found to be associated with IBS. 
Genes encoding proteins involved in homeostasis of epithelial barrier function, such as 
cadherin 1 (CDH1) and cell division cycle 42 (CDC42), the immune system, such as IL6, 
IL10, TNF and TNF superfamily member 15 (TNFSF15; encoding cytokines and neuronal 
signal transduction) and others (such as neurexophilin 1 (NXPH1) and sodium voltage-gated 
Enck et al.
Page 11
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 channel α-subunit 5 (SCN5A)) have been replicated in several studies101. In 2014, a small 
pilot study reported an association between IBS and a locus on chromosome 10 (containing 
the protocadherin 15 (PCDH15) gene) in a discovery sample from Australia that could not 
be replicated in additional cohorts from Sweden and the United States104. Mutations in the 
following genes encoding proteins involved in the serotonergic system have also been shown 
to be associated with IBS: solute carrier family 6 member 4 (SLC6A4; also known as 5-
HTTLPR or SERT), 5-HT receptor 3A (HTR3A), HTR3E and HTR4 (REF. 101). A 
polymorphism in SLC6A4 has been found to be associated with altered brain responses, 
visualized through functional brain imaging following visceral pain stimuli in patients with 
IBS105. Furthermore, a functional polymorphism in HTR3A could be associated with altered 
amygdala responsiveness, anxiety and increased symptom score in IBS106. These findings 
underline the effect of polymorphic serotonergic and other genes in modulating gut-derived 
brain response in areas that process visceral perception and integrate autonomic control, 
salience and somatosensory and emotional central networks (FIG. 6).
Variants of genes encoding proteins that are involved in bile acid synthesis regulation (the 
Klotho-β (KLB) gene, the fibroblast growth factor receptor 4 (FGFR4) gene and the G 
protein-coupled bile acid receptor 1 (GPBAR1) gene) are associated with accelerated 
colonic transit in patients with IBS-D107,108. These variants also correlate with the colonic 
transit response to chenodeoxycholic acid (a bile acid used to treat constipation) in IBS-C109 
and to colesevelam (a bile acid sequestrant used to treat diarrhoea) in patients with IBS-
D110,111.
Finally, a locus at 7p22.1 in which the genes KDEL endoplasmic reticulum protein retention 
receptor 2 (KDELR2) and GRID2-interacting protein (GRID2IP) localize was significantly 
associated with IBS risk in the index GWAS (a large twin discovery sample from Sweden) 
and all replication cohorts in Europe, the United States and Australia112. However, the 
underlying molecular cause for this association finding has not been elucidated.
Epigenetic data—Even less insight into the role of epigenetics in IBS pathology is 
available compared to the genetic implications. To date, only a few miRNA studies have 
been performed. These studies reported on the differential expression profiles of miR-29a, 
miR-29b, miR-103, miR-16, miR-125b and miR-199a in the intestinal mucosa of patients 
with IBS-D. Upregulation of miR-29a and miR-29b was reported to accompany 
downregulation of the target genes encoding glutamine synthetase (GLUL)102, claudin 1 
(CLDN1) and NF-κB-repressing factor (NKRF); CLDN1 and NKRF correlated with 
increased gut permeability103. In addition, decreased expression of miR-103, miR-16 and 
miR-125b correlated with the upregulation of the target genes encoding the tight junction 
proteins claudin 2 (CLDN2) and cingulin (CGN)113. In turn, a diminished miR-199 level 
correlated with an upregulation of TRPV1 and increased visceral sensitivity114. Moreover, 
variants residing in miRNA target regions of the 5-HT receptor genes HTR3E and HTR4B 
— namely, c.⋆76G>A and c.⋆61T>C — were found to be associated with IBS-D. Both 
variants were reported to impair miRNA regulation and to lead to disturbed expression 
regulation of miR-510 and miR-16, respectively115,116. One pilot study further indicated 
increased levels of circulating miR-150 and miR-342-3p in the blood of patients with 
IBS117. Of note, miR-150 has been described to be associated with IBD and pain, whereas 
Enck et al.
Page 12
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 miR-342-3p has been predicted to target genes that are relevant for pain signalling, colonic 
motility and smooth muscle function118.
Diagnosis, screening and prevention
The diagnosis of IBS relies on the patient fulfilling diagnostic criteria for IBS119 in 
conjunction with normal results on a limited number of additional tests and investigations 
used to rule out other diagnoses with reasonable certainty (FIG. 7). Although a substantial 
proportion of clinicians120 prefer a process of thorough exclusion of other diseases, the 
current recommendation is to base diagnosis on symptoms119. There is currently no valid 
biomarker for IBS121. The choice of the tests or investigations deemed necessary to rule out 
other conditions varies depending on the clinical situation and the symptom profile of the 
patient. In the majority of cases with a typical clinical history compatible with IBS, only a 
limited number of laboratory tests are recommended without any need to perform invasive 
investigations. Screening for IBS risk and for prevention of IBS development is currently not 
applicable, given the heterogeneity of the disease and the multiplicity of putative 
pathophysiological mechanisms.
Diagnostic criteria
As individual symptoms have poor sensitivity and specificity to diagnose IBS, diagnostic 
criteria incorporating a combination of symptoms have been developed, similar to the DSM 
system within psychiatry. The first attempt was the so-called Manning criteria, published in 
1978 (REF. 122). In this publication, several symptoms were shown to be more common in 
patients with IBS than in patients with another organic gastrointestinal disease. By 
combining these symptoms, IBS could be discriminated from other organic gastrointestinal 
diseases. The experience from the Manning criteria was then used to develop the Rome 
Foundation criteria, with three different versions over the past 15 years (Rome I, II and III); 
the latest criteria, the Rome III criteria, was published in 2006 (REFS 119,123,124). The 
updated Rome IV criteria are expected in May 2016. The sensitivity and specificity of the 
Rome criteria have been found to be 69–96% and 72–85%, respectively, in different studies, 
but a problem with these studies is how to define the gold standard for an IBS diagnosis121.
The common feature in all of these diagnostic criteria is abdominal pain and/or discomfort 
associated with abnormal bowel habit (diarrhoea (loose and frequent stools), constipation 
(hard and infrequent stools) or alternating constipation and diarrhoea). All of these criteria 
require a certain duration and frequency of the symptoms to fulfil the diagnostic criteria for 
IBS; that is, the symptoms should be chronic and recurring. Thus, the practical clinical use 
of the diagnostic criteria for IBS involves demonstrating through the clinical history the 
presence of a combination of these symptoms for ≥3 days per month in the past 3 months, 
with symptom onset ≥6 months before the diagnosis (Rome III criteria). However, it should 
be noted that patients with some organic gastrointestinal disease also meet these diagnostic 
criteria125 and, as such, the sensitivity and specificity of these criteria is suboptimal to 
distinguish the different disease entities125,126.
Enck et al.
Page 13
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Clinical features
Besides the symptoms included in the diagnostic criteria, there are other clinical features 
that support a diagnosis of IBS, even though none of them is mandatory for an IBS 
diagnosis. One recent study found that variations in stool consistency and frequency or an 
unpredictable bowel pattern (`irregularly irregular') could be used to discriminate IBS-D 
adequately from organic gastrointestinal disease127. Moreover, abnormal stool frequency (>3 
bowel movements per day or <3 bowel movements per week), excessive straining during 
defaecation, urgency (having to rush to the toilet), feelings of incomplete evacuation and 
mucus with bowel movements support an IBS diagnosis, but are nonspecific124. The same is 
true for postprandial worsening or exacerbation of symptoms, which is common in IBS128, 
but is also observed in other gastrointestinal diseases. The presence of other functional 
gastrointestinal diagnoses (such as functional dyspepsia)129, as well as reporting numerous 
functional non-gastrointestinal symptoms and syndromes (such as chronic fatigue, 
fibromyalgia, uro-gynaecological symptoms, muscle and joint pain and sleep 
disturbances)11,130 and psychological comorbidity (such as anxiety and depression)131, are 
all common and support an IBS diagnosis.
Physical examination
A physical examination should be part of the evaluation to reassure patients and also to help 
exclude another organic cause of the symptoms. Admittedly, an abdominal examination, 
which is part of the routine examination, rarely discloses a specific diagnosis (that is, 
abdominal tenderness is present in various diseases), but the absence of objective findings on 
a physical examination has been found to support a diagnosis of IBS132. A digital rectal 
examination is an important part of the physical examination and a useful tool to identify 
patients with dyssynergic defaecation, which is important to exclude in patients with 
constipation133,134 as well as to exclude rectal cancer. Perianal inspection should also be part 
of the examination to rule out perianal fistulas and other relevant anal pathology.
Laboratory tests
From the existing literature, it is not obvious which laboratory test to recommend in the 
diagnostic work-up of patients with IBS symptoms. Only serological tests for coeliac disease 
seem to be more likely to be abnormal in patients with symptoms compatible with IBS than 
in the general population135, even though a large multicentre trial failed to confirm this136. 
However, few studies have systematically evaluated the usefulness of laboratory tests in 
patients with potential IBS. A recent systematic review demonstrated that C-reactive protein 
(CRP) levels of ≤0.5 mg per dl or faecal calprotectin levels of ≤40 μg per g essentially 
exclude IBD in patients with IBS symptoms137. On the basis of the existing literature, it 
seems reasonable to perform a complete blood count and CRP measurement, as these are 
inexpensive and can be used to reassure the health-care provider and the patient. A thyroid 
profile can be included if the clinical suspicion of thyroid disease is high, a serological test 
for coeliac disease can be recommended in patients with non-constipated IBS and — if there 
is suspicion of an inflammatory process — a faecal calprotectin measurement can be added. 
Stool analyses to detect gastrointestinal infections can be considered if diarrhoea is 
predominant and difficult to treat, especially in regions where infectious diarrhoea is 
Enck et al.
Page 14
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 common138. As stated previously, there is currently no valid diagnostic biomarker, even 
though preliminary data have suggested that certain biomarkers or biomarker assays (BOX 
3) for clinical use might prove to be valid following further scientific investigation139,140.
Alarm features
Alarm features for IBS are symptoms that should raise the clinical concern of another 
gastrointestinal disease rather than IBS. Whether the use of alarm features (BOX 6) 
improves the performance of diagnostic criteria for IBS is not totally clear125,141. However, 
from a clinical point of view, it seems reasonable to use these to select patients for further 
diagnostic testing, even though these may be present in a substantial proportion of patients 
without indicating a serious underlying condition in the gastrointestinal tract142. Alarm 
symptoms can necessitate further investigations to rule out another gastrointestinal disease 
before an IBS diagnosis can be recommended. Moreover, the predominance of diarrhoea, 
especially when watery and frequent, should alert the clinician to consider alternative 
diagnoses143.
Invasive investigations
In the majority of patients with symptoms compatible with IBS and normal routine 
laboratory tests but without alarm features144, no additional invasive investigations are 
needed and, importantly, performing investigations does not seem to improve patient 
satisfaction or QOL145,146.
Colonoscopy should be performed when alarm features prompt an investigation and when 
there is suspicion of an inflammatory condition in the gastrointestinal tract based on history 
or laboratory parameters (increased CRP or faecal calprotectin levels)137, or based on the 
indications for colorectal cancer screening in countries with population screening 
programmes147,148.
When the patient complains of watery diarrhoea as the predominant symptom, a 
colonoscopy with biopsies should also be considered to rule out microscopic colitis, 
especially in women >50 years of age143,149. Moreover, bile acid-induced diarrhoea has 
recently been found to be a very important differential diagnosis in patients with IBS 
symptoms with frequent, loose stools32,33, and a diagnostic test should be considered (75-
homocholic acid taurine (75SeHCAT) test or serum C4 levels)150. Unfortunately, these tests 
are not available in all centres, therefore a therapeutic trial with a bile acid-binding agent is 
often used as an indirect, but far from perfect, assessment of bile acid-induced diarrhoea.
Carbohydrate malabsorption is another differential diagnosis in patients with IBS-D151–153, 
and lactose or fructose hydrogen breath tests can be considered154,155, but a trial period with 
dietary exclusion of the suspected carbohydrate for several weeks is often used instead.
If coeliac disease is suspected, based on a positive serological test or the clinical history, an 
upper gastrointestinal endoscopy with duodenal biopsies should be performed. Small 
intestinal bacterial overgrowth has been proposed to be common in IBS, but its prevalence 
and clinical importance is uncertain, therefore routine clinical testing for this cannot be 
Enck et al.
Page 15
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 advocated156,157, especially as valid tests with adequate sensitivity and specificity are 
lacking.
Management
Only a fraction of patients with IBS-like symptoms (~50%) seek medical care158. Most of 
these patients will initially consult primary care physicians for their symptoms, and the 
factors that drive this consultation are symptom severity, especially pain, the occurrence of 
alarm symptoms (BOX 6) and concerns that symptoms might indicate an underlying severe 
disease — for example, cancer159. Therefore, in many cases, gastrointestinal specialist care 
is needed to exclude diseases that can mimic IBS symptoms — for example, by endoscopy. 
Once a positive diagnosis of IBS has been established, clinical management can be carried 
out as well by primary care physicians and at substantially lower costs160.
Management of IBS involves an integrated approach, including the establishment of an 
effective patient–provider relationship, education, reassurance, dietary alterations, 
pharmacotherapy and behavioural and psychological treatment161. Owing to the fact that 
~50–70% of patients with IBS report additional somatic and psychological symptoms when 
they are asked161,162, a stepped-care approach including aspects of cognitive and 
interpersonal therapy is most appropriate15. The initial treatment strategy should be based on 
predominant symptoms and includes antispasmodics for abdominal pain, antidiarrhoeals for 
IBS-D and laxatives for IBS-C, whereas nutritional interventions and psychotherapy can be 
used in all subtypes.
Nutrition
Food ingestion is one of the most commonly reported factors that results in the exacerbation 
of symptoms among patients with IBS163,164. Postprandial symptoms per se and fear of their 
occurrence (anticipatory anxiety) contribute profoundly to reduced QOL in IBS128. Up until 
recently, food-related symptoms had received scant attention from clinical scientists, leaving 
patients to find their own way through the plethora of usually non-validated and untested 
diagnostic tests and dietary regimens, which could result in clinically relevant nutritional 
deficits165.
It has become evident that food intolerance (a physiological reaction to food allergens that is 
not associated with an immune response), and not classical IgE-mediated food allergy 
(which involves activation of the immune system), is the major mechanism responsible for 
symptomatic responses to certain foods165. This is not to say that immune responses to food 
or food components are irrelevant for IBS. For example, one study demonstrated that 
exposure of the small intestine to certain food antigens led to subtle ultrastructural changes 
in the duodenal mucosa of patients with IBS, but not in controls31. Another study also 
reported local immune responses to gluten among a group of non-coeliac patients with 
IBS166. Taken together, these observations leave the door open to the possibility that at least 
some patients with IBS may mount an, as yet to be defined, immunological response to 
certain dietary components, a response that seems to be confined to the mucosal immune 
system.
Enck et al.
Page 16
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 How does one explain food-related symptoms in IBS? Given the primacy of food ingestion 
as a stimulus to most gastrointestinal functions, postprandial pain and rectal urgency in IBS 
could simply reflect an exaggeration of a normal physiological phenomenon. Exaggerated 
motor responses to food and, especially to lipids, have also been demonstrated in the small 
intestine in IBS167. Furthermore, tryptophan, the 5-HT precursor, and related compounds 
present in some foods could modulate psychological comorbidities and gastrointestinal 
symptoms in IBS168. Food-related symptoms could also be mediated through interactions 
between our diet, the products of digestion and the gut microbiota. Products of bacterial 
metabolism, such as deconjugated bile salts, SCFAs and gases, could exert potent effects on 
colonic physiology and thereby induce symptoms.
Although patients with IBS readily incriminate specific food items as those that are 
especially likely to precipitate symptoms, only 11–27% of those are correctly identified 
when confirmed in formal, blinded food challenge studies169. The limitations of dietary 
surveys and the poor reproducibility of reported food intolerances notwithstanding, some 
food items are reported as being more problematic: wheat, fruit and vegetables170. Current 
enthusiasm for diets low in FODMAPs is consistent with these observations.
Fibre and fibre-based supplements accelerate colon transit, increase stool bulk and facilitate 
its passage, resulting in an increase in stool frequency. These effects translate into clinically 
meaningful benefits for people with chronic constipation and IBS-C. Indeed, fibre and 
products based on synthetic fibre-like substances became a cornerstone in the management 
of IBS. However, RCTs found that not all patients gained relief and some even complained 
of exacerbation of their symptoms (including pain, bloating and distension). Recent meta-
analyses and systematic reviews have shed some light on this issue by showing that fibres 
are heterogeneous and the consumption of soluble fibres such as psyllium, calcium 
polycarbophil and ispaghula bring symptomatic benefits, whereas insoluble fibres, 
represented by bran, are ineffective in patients with IBS169.
Interest in the use of low FODMAP diets (BOX 5) in patients with IBS is increasing. RCTs 
have confirmed some beneficial effects of low FODMAP diets on IBS symptoms171, but 
they were not superior to conventional dietary advice when directly compared172. There are 
some limitations; studies to date have been small and, as has been the case with many 
studies of dietary interventions in IBS, suffer from some methodological limitations173. 
Furthermore, low FODMAP diets are complex, may require supervision by a qualified 
dietician and involve the elimination of many food items commonly regarded as components 
of a `healthy' diet. Some initial investigations suggest that the low FODMAP diet may 
suppress the growth of bacterial species commonly regarded as important components of 
healthy microbiota, such as bifidobacteria174. Included in the FODMAP category are some 
molecules, such as lactose, fructose and sorbitol; some patients with IBS may benefit from 
the removal of one of these substances alone175. Predicting responders is difficult, as 
commonly used challenge tests, such as the lactose or fructose breath hydrogen test, do not 
seem to be of value175,176.
The concept of `non-coeliac gluten sensitivity' has been advanced to explain instances of 
IBS-type symptoms that develop in individuals who do not satisfy diagnostic criteria for the 
Enck et al.
Page 17
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 diagnosis of coeliac disease (that is, positive serology and appropriate changes in small 
intestinal morphology)177. This remains an unsettled and contentious issue with some 
studies reporting that, when tested in a blinded manner, gluten did induce the usual IBS 
symptoms in some patients with IBS178. Others argue that gluten contributes little to IBS 
symptomatology, but that fructans (FODMAPs contained in wheat), and not gluten, are the 
culprits of wheat-related problems. Results of clinical trials assessing the role of gluten 
exposure in IBS pathology have therefore, not surprisingly, yielded mixed results179,180. 
Although gluten-free diets are currently enjoying considerable popularity among patients 
with IBS and the population at large in the United States, the rationale for gluten exclusion 
in IBS has yet to be firmly established.
Patients with IBS commonly consume any one or combinations of a wide variety of dietary 
supplements ranging from vitamins to `digestive enzymes', anti-oxidants and essential oils. 
Few, if any, of these have been subjected to rigorous study. Prebiotics (non-digestible food 
ingredients that beneficially affect the host by selectively stimulating the growth and activity 
of one species or a limited number of species of bacteria in the colon) and probiotics (live 
microbial food ingredients that alter the microflora and confer health benefit) have also been 
used for decades in IBS in the absence of supportive data. Prebiotics and probiotics are now 
subjected to more-rigorous studies, as they might contribute to altered microbiota in 
IBS181,182. Although these studies must be interpreted with care, a recent meta-analysis does 
suggest efficacy for probiotics (as a category) in IBS183. However, high-quality RCTs 
remain few in number and available data provide scant information to assist the consumer in 
choosing a particular product to alleviate symptoms184 or to make a recommendation on 
prebiotics or synbiotics (a combination of a prebiotic and a probiotic) in IBS185.
Drug therapy
Broadly speaking, the current therapeutic armamentarium in IBS aims to alter predominant 
problematic bowel habits and/or visceral pain. However, an emerging area is manipulation of 
the gastrointestinal microbiota.
Antispasmodic drugs—Pain in IBS is mediated through central and peripheral 
mechanisms, and is in part the result of smooth muscle spasms. The mode of action of 
antispasmodic drugs is probably their ability to antagonize the binding of acetylcholine to 
the muscarinic receptor at the neuromuscular junction, with smooth muscle relaxation as a 
consequence186. Some studies have demonstrated a beneficial effect of otilonium bromide 
and hyoscine over placebo, with a number needed to treat (NNT) of four patients187. An 
adverse effect of anti-muscarinic agents is constipation because of their strong inhibition of 
intraluminal fluid secretion186. Accordingly, these drugs are best used in patients without 
constipation and should be taken 20 minutes before meals to ease postprandial symptoms. 
Peppermint oil, which also inhibits smooth muscle contraction albeit by calcium channel 
blockade, is beneficial in reducing IBS symptoms188. A recent RCT in patients with IBS-D 
and IBS-M demonstrated that a novel formulation of peppermint oil, designed to cause a 
sustained release within the small bowel, was superior to placebo in causing a reduction in 
total symptoms189.
Enck et al.
Page 18
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Low-dose antidepressants—Antidepressants, such as tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) 
or selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), are recommended by existing guidelines 
for the treatment of pain in patients who are refractory to antispasmodics and dietary 
alterations190. However, these drugs are not licensed anywhere in the world for the treatment 
of patients with IBS, and their use is off-label. Given the lack of licensed indication, the 
rationale for using such drugs should be discussed in detail with patients. The exact 
analgesic mechanism of action of low-dose antidepressants is incompletely understood but is 
considered to be both peripheral, via alterations of histaminergic and/or cholinergic 
transmission within the gastrointestinal tract, and central, via modulation of both ascending 
visceral sensory afferents and central transmission191. SSRIs are generally well tolerated. 
Adverse effects such as constipation, dry mouth, drowsiness and fatigue are reported with 
TCAs. TCAs may be particularly effective for treating pain in patients with IBS-D, but are 
less suitable for patients who have IBS-C.
Laxatives and motility accelerants—In those with constipation, simple laxatives such 
as senna and docusate are often effective in managing symptoms. However, the use of 
lactulose is not recommended as it is often poorly tolerated by patients with IBS because of 
worsening of bloating and discomfort. Linaclotide, a minimally absorbed guanylyl cyclase C 
agonist peptide (FIG. 8), can be used as second-line therapy after laxatives have failed in 
patients with IBS-C and symptoms have lasted for >1 year. Linaclotide has a dual action 
through increasing intraluminal fluid secretion thereby giving its laxation effect but also an 
analgesic effect via modulation of colonic nociceptors192, and its effects caused reduced 
abdominal pain, bloating and bowel symptoms in two well-designed Phase III RCTs193,194. 
Lubiprostone, a minimally absorbed, locally active, bicyclic fatty acid derivative of 
prostaglandin E1, activates type 2 chloride channels on the enterocyctic apical membrane, 
thereby stimulating fluid secretion. Lubiprostone has been shown to improve global 
intestinal symptoms in IBS-C195. 5-HT4 receptor agonists (such as prucalopride), which 
promote gut motility through the activation of the serotoninergic pathways, have been shown 
to be effective in increasing complete spontaneous bowel movements in patients with 
chronic constipation196.
Antidiarrhoeals—The μ-opioid receptor agonist loperamide is frequently used as a first-
line agent in IBS-D and improves diarrhoea by inducing peristalsis, which prolongs the 
gastrointestinal transit time. As loperamide does not cross the blood–brain barrier, central 
adverse effects are limited. Its main benefit is reducing stool frequency and defaecation 
urgency, and improving the consistency of the stool197. Eluxadoline, a mixed μ-opioid 
receptor agonist and δ-opioid receptor antagonist, has been evaluated in a Phase III RCT, 
although safety concerns have been expressed concerning the excess rates of pancreatitis198.
5-HT3 receptor antagonists, such as alosetron, ramosetron and ondansetron, are effective in 
the management of IBS-D symptoms. The mechanism of action of 5-HT3 receptor 
antagonists is complex and incompletely understood, but is considered to proceed through 
inhibition of the ascending excitatory component of the peristaltic reflex and of the high 
amplitude propagating contractions within the gastrointestinal tract199. However, a central 
effect of 5-HT3 receptor antagonists on pain cannot be excluded200. Safety concerns, with 
Enck et al.
Page 19
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 respect to ischaemic colitis, have been confined to alosetron, which subsequently led to 
restrictions in its prescription201. Consequently, other 5-HT3 receptor antagonists have been 
investigated, with ondansetron202 and ramosetron demonstrating efficacy in RCTs203.
Manipulation of the microbiota—Given the burgeoning evidence of the role of the 
microbiota in IBS, both antibiotics and probiotics have been evaluated. The non-absorbable 
antibiotic, rifaximin, has been demonstrated to cause a reduction in symptoms, with a NNT 
of approximately 11 patients, although it is not clear whether repeated courses of treatment 
are needed204. The mechanisms by which rifaximin exerts its positive effects on IBS 
symptoms are incompletely understood and may include modulation of the gut microbiota, 
but also direct effects on local micro-inflammation. Rifaximin is approved for use in the 
United States, but has not yet received regulatory approval in Europe. Probiotics can reduce 
pain and symptom severity, although recent meta-analyses have highlighted that 
inconsistencies in study design render definitive recommendations problematic183,184,205; 
again, it is unclear whether probiotics act on IBS symptoms through direct modulation of the 
microbiota, indirect via the gut immune system or otherwise.
Others—A proportion of patients use herbal supplements either as single herbs or in 
combination. Four weeks of treatment with iberogast, which is a mixture of nine plant 
extracts, improved abdominal pain and QOL in a double-blind RCT of 208 patients with all 
types of IBS206. Although the mechanism of action is poorly understood, it is probably 
multifaceted via acetylcholine, 5-HT and opioid receptors in the gastrointestinal tract207. 
Although herbal remedies represent a promising intervention, further rigorously designed 
larger RCTs in the subtypes of IBS are needed.
Psychotherapy
The biopsychosocial model of IBS suggests that abdominal symptoms secondarily influence 
anxiety and depression (bottom-up) and psychosocial factors influence physiological factors, 
such as motor function, sensory threshold and stress reactivity of the gut (top-down)208.
Treatment concepts that target these psychosocial factors of patients with IBS should be 
based on evidence-based models that take the following three components into account: 
altered peripheral regulation of gut function, altered brain–gut signalling and reducing 
psychological distress, including general hypervigilance and a general mindset of 
catastrophizing209. Such models might be helpful as a basis of patient education and a target 
for effective treatments. To further improve treatment programmes, we have to learn more 
about IBS-specific interactions and the role of stress and visceral sensitivity for clearer 
evidence on which group of patients might benefit from which treatment approach. In 
addition, it should be noted that patients with IBS often experience additional functional 
symptoms, pointing to the complexity of the condition15.
The effect of IBS symptoms on patients' feelings of shame, fearfulness and embarrassment 
is well established; patients report being poorly understood by their physicians, as well as by 
their family members and friends210. Patients who experience a positive therapeutic 
physician–patient relationship have fewer IBS-related follow-up visits211.
Enck et al.
Page 20
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 International treatment guidelines for IBS have advocated for a graded treatment 
approach212,213. The National Institute of Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines 
advise that patients whose symptoms do not respond to pharmacological treatments after 12 
months and who develop a continuing symptom profile (refractory IBS) should be 
considered for referral to cognitive–behavioural therapy (CBT), hypnotherapy (gut-directed 
hypnosis) or other psychological therapy, such as psychodynamic (interpersonal) therapy 
and mindfulness-based therapy190.
BOX 7 describes the four major psychological-based therapies for patients with IBS. Several 
meta-analyses have been performed in the field of psychological and behavioural therapies 
(including studies in stress reduction and relaxation) that took 45 RCTs into account with a 
total of 3,325 patients with IBS of all subtypes (TABLE 1). Overall, the NNT for 
psychological therapies is four patients (95% CI: 3–5) and, therefore, better than the 
majority of drugs214. In a stepped-care approach (beginning with the least intensive or 
invasive treatment and stepping up or down depending on the needs of the patients), a 
psychology-based self-aid (educational) approach has been shown recently in a meta-
analysis as an effective treatment option for all subtypes of IBS250. Compared with control 
treatments, a medium effect size was demonstrated on decreased symptom severity and a 
large effect size on increased patient's QOL.
The best evidence is available for CBT. Although CBT is not routinely available in primary 
care, it can be accessed in some local hospitals and health-care systems. There are medium-
to-large significant pooled effect sizes for an improvement of IBS symptoms using CBT 
with a medium significant pooled effect size for QOL and a small-to-medium pooled effect 
size for psychological comorbid symptoms. The NNT for CBT is only three patients, with a 
limited variance between the RCTs. Nevertheless, to date there is no evidence of a 
superiority of CBT compared with other psychological treatments in IBS.
Validation of psychodynamic (interpersonal) therapy, gut-directed hypnosis and 
mindfulness-based therapy (BOX 7) has only been done in a very limited number of tertiary 
treatment centres and the generalization of these treatment approaches is limited. Finally, 
mindfulness-based therapy for IBS shows some promising initial results, particularly in the 
subgroup of female patients with IBS215. Very limited data on multi-component therapies 
and on the combination of antidepressants and psychological treatments are available169. 
Overall, there is a lack of reports of adverse effects of psychological and behavioural 
treatment approaches and treatment resistance in patients with IBS. Psychological therapies 
have also regularly not distinguished between IBS subtypes and, thus, might have missed 
differential indications and advantages and disadvantages.
Quality of life
In the field of medicine, general QOL and disease-specific QOL are distinguished. General 
QOL is a measure of the entire health perception of a person. Representative general QOL 
can be assessed using the Medical Outcome Study 36-item Short-Form Health Survey 
(SF-36)216 or the EuroQOL survey217. SF-36 is the most popular instrument that can 
evaluate physical functioning, physical role, bodily pain, general health perceptions, vitality, 
Enck et al.
Page 21
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 social functioning, emotional role and mental health216. Disease-specific QOL is a measure 
of life disturbance that is specifically caused by the disease218,219.
QOL in patients with IBS is greatly disturbed. Patients with IBS showed impaired general 
QOL with lower values on all SF-36 subscales except physical functioning than healthy 
controls in one study220, whereas lower values on the SF-36 subscales in patients with IBS 
(except physical functioning, physical role and emotional role) than in healthy controls were 
observed in another study221. All subscales of SF-36, except the physical functioning and 
physical role domains, were lower in patients with IBS than in healthy controls regardless of 
culture222. The degree of disturbance of general QOL in patients with IBS has been shown 
to be worse in several subcategories than in those with gastroesophageal reflux disease, 
diabetes mellitus or severe chronic kidney disease220. Finally, a study has shown that 
patients with IBS had more disturbed general QOL in physical role, bodily pain, general 
health perceptions and social functioning than non-consulters with IBS (individuals who do 
not seek treatment)221.
QOL seems to be the same among IBS subtypes. However, disease-specific QOL, as 
measured with the IBS-QOL in patients with IBS-D or IBS-M, was worse than in patients 
with IBS-C in one study222. In this study, increased food avoidance in patients with IBS-D 
and IBS-M may have been responsible for the lower QOL222, but there are controversial 
reports218.
In severe IBS, both gastrointestinal symptoms and psychiatric comorbidity independently 
contribute to disturbed QOL223 (FIG. 9). Another study revealed that the QOL of patients 
with IBS was more influenced by the extraintestinal symptoms — such as tiring easily, low 
in energy, the feeling that there is something seriously wrong with their body, feeling tense, 
feeling nervous, feeling hopeless, difficulty sleeping and low sexual interest — than by 
gastrointestinal symptoms224. The psychological and psychosocial dimensions of food 
ingestion might also have a role. Eating with family and friends is probably the most 
common form of social interaction worldwide. An inability to participate in such a 
fundamental component of social intercourse because of a fear of pain, urgency, diarrhoea or 
distension occurring during or immediately after a meal can be devastating and can result in 
social isolation210.
Systematic reviews have clarified that improvement of IBS-related pain by treatment results 
in better QOL in patients with IBS225. The disease-specific IBS-QOL and IBS-QOL 
questionnaires can measure the efficacy of treatment, especially long-term therapies226. 
Although the SF-36 can also detect the efficacy of long-term treatment (>1 year), it is less 
sensitive than the IBS-QOL. Both measures struggle to detect drug or psychotherapy 
efficacy in the short term (<1 month)226,227, but IBS-QOL is sensitive enough to detect 
efficacy for mid-term (3 months) treatment203. A therapeutic gain of ≥14 points in IBS-QOL 
denotes a clinically meaningful change. Even if primary end points based on cardinal 
symptoms of IBS are similar between treatments, a treatment resulting in better QOL may 
be preferred by patients over another treatment that does not improve QOL.
Enck et al.
Page 22
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Outlook
The field of research into IBS has expanded considerably over the past decade with many 
new studies, in part driven by the development of new therapeutic agents. This trajectory 
seems likely to continue as patients with IBS account for a substantial proportion of all 
gastrointestinal consultations, and many questions in the field remain unanswered (BOX 8).
Patient stratification and biomarkers
Many classes of drugs have been evaluated by RCTs in IBS and these have often produced 
disappointingly small differences from placebo187,214,228. These small differences conceal 
the fact that some patients benefit from the drugs. Proper stratification of patients by relevant 
underlying disease mechanism has been an issue, therefore many trials use unselected 
patients with IBS, independent of the underlying disease mechanisms and clinical 
presentations. The use of 5-HT receptor-modulating drugs has taught the research 
community that restricting 5-HT3 receptor antagonists to patients without constipation 
improved their effectiveness with significant differences from placebo229,230, owing to the 
fact that 5-HT3 receptor antagonists slow transit and aggravate constipation. However, RCTs 
rarely measure transit as a requirement for trial entry, which depends on symptoms recorded 
in daily symptom diaries. The use of more-objective biomarkers to select patients for RCTs 
would be expected to improve the effect size and reduce the number needed to test to show a 
significant difference from placebo.
The lack of reproducible, widely available biomarkers that reflect the targets of `older' drugs 
has been a considerable limitation. Antispasmodics are a good example of such drugs that 
have fallen out of favour because we cannot reliably identify those with excessive motor 
activity who might be expected to respond. Future novel non-invasive motility assessments, 
such as MRI231, capsule endoscopy232 and the pressure-sensitive, temperature-sensitive and 
pH-sensitive SmartPill (Given Imaging Ltd, Yoqneam, Israel)233 (which can measure 
intestinal contractions), hold the possibility of identifying such patients in the future.
Although individual genetic markers seem likely to be associated with only quite modest 
increases in risk for IBS, they might be important predictors of drug sensitivity in particular 
pathways. 5-HT3 receptor antagonists are good examples of drugs with a wide range of 
sensitivities such that effective doses for one patient can produce unacceptable constipation 
in another. This finding may be due to a combination of important functional 
polymorphisms in genes involved in 5-HT synthesis (tryptophan hydroxylase 1 (TPH1)), 
those involved in 5-HT reuptake via the 5-HT transporter (SLC6A4) and polymorphisms in 
the 5-HT3 receptor genes (which alter sensitivity). Several small studies have suggested 
significant differences in responder status to one 5-HT3 receptor antagonist, ramosetron, 
according to polymorphisms in TPH1 (REF. 234) and to another 5-HT3 receptor antagonist, 
alosetron, according to polymorphisms in SLC6A4 (REF. 235). However, these studies are 
underpowered and have not yet been reproduced202. By analogy with other complex 
disorders236, the effect of any one individual polymorphism may be limited but combining 
polymorphisms that predict low 5-HT production with rapid uptake and low receptor 
sensitivity would be expected to be associated with higher odds ratios for success of 5-HT 
manipulation. Future studies should be powered to examine this notion such that the dose 
Enck et al.
Page 23
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 can be tailored to individual patients. Similarly, polymorphisms in the FGF19–FGFR4 
pathway, which controls bile acid synthesis107,108, influence colonic transit and should be 
explored to see if different combinations alter sensitivity to bile acid sequestrants or bile acid 
transporter inhibitors.
Mode of action of food intolerances
Dietary restrictions such as low FODMAP diets (BOX 5) are another example in which 
implementation of an effective treatment is hampered by lack of biomarkers to predict 
response or reliably identify the key component (or components) of food that are responsible 
for symptoms. Although poorly absorbed fermentable carbohydrates can undoubtedly cause 
symptoms in some patients, visceral sensitivity is the key to why some individuals 
experience symptoms and some do not237, at least in the case of lactose malabsorption. 
However, no trial of lactose exclusion in IBS has used measures of sensitivity to stratify 
patients. While rectal barostat tests to assess visceral sensitivity are difficult, although not 
impossible to standardize across centres, alternatives might be to use simple cutaneous 
pressure or thermal stimulation238. More remotely, somatization questionnaires concerning 
non-gastrointestinal symptoms such as headache, backache, dyspnoea and palpitations have 
been shown to correlate, albeit weakly, with rectal distension pressure thresholds for pain239.
The physical form of food is another key variable whose importance is yet to be defined. 
Many of the dietary components implicated in IBS symptoms are actually consumed as 
solids and hence delivered into the duodenum more slowly after trituration by antral 
contractions. The rapid entry of osmotically active poorly absorbed substrates — mainly in 
liquid form — such as lactose in a patient with lactose malabsorption240,241 or mannitol in 
healthy volunteers241 result in a rapid influx of water into the small intestine, which 
probably stimulates transit and rapid delivery into the colon. This leads to the virtually 
instantaneous generation of gas242, mainly hydrogen, given that the microbiota are unable to 
fully metabolize the sudden excess of substrate. Furthermore, distension of the ascending 
colon generates propulsive colonic motility, which a sensitized individual may experience as 
cramps; a slower delivery in a solid matrix may be better tolerated. Future studies should 
define how the physical form of FODMAPs alters their tolerability, which would allow a 
less restrictive diet that may be easier to follow and, hence, more widely adopted than at 
present.
Functional effect of changes in microbiota
Many studies have found profound differences in the microbiota of selected patients with 
IBS, but the agreement on the involved species between studies is poor57. Given the very 
large number of different species that have overlapping metabolic capabilities and functional 
effects, focusing on function may be more helpful than just identifying the species present.
Analysis of urine and stool metabolites, including bile acids and endogenous tryptase, may 
provide simpler biomarkers of function that could predict responsiveness to microbiota 
manipulation. Thus, low levels of butyrate, a SCFA, might encourage the provision of 
prebiotics that favour butyrate-producing bacteria, such as Eubacterium rectale and 
Roseburia cecicola. Future studies should also take into account the important role of transit 
Enck et al.
Page 24
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 time and its variability. The challenge of rapid transit favours organisms with either 
enhanced growth capacity or those that adhere to the mucosa to deal with rapid flow within 
the colon243, although, these results need to be replicated and studied in more detail to 
enable dissection of the extent to which differences in microbiota are the cause or the effect 
of rapid transit. Better insight might also enable the tailoring of diet to the existing 
microbiota in a patient, based on their metabolic capabilities and response to a substrate 
provided in the diet.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
The research leading to these results has received funding from the People Programme of the European Union's 
Seventh Framework Programme under REA grant agreement no. 607652 (NeuroGUT), involving of some of the 
authors. Most of the authors are also engaged in and have received support of the international network COST 
Action BM1106 GENIEUR (GENes in Irritable Bowel Syndrome Research Network EURope, 
www.GENIEUR.eu).
The authors have received unrestricted research grants from Alfa Wassermann (G.B.), Alimentary Health 
(E.M.M.Q.), Astellas (S.F.), Boehringer-Ingelheim (M.Schemann), Cadi Group (G.B.), Danone Research 
(M.Simren), Falk (G.B.), Ferring (M.Simren), IMA (G.B.), Italchimici (G.B.), Ironwood (R.C.S.), Kao (S.F.), 
Lesaffre (R.C.S.), Lotenzatto (G.B.), Ono Pharmaceuticals (Q.A. and S.F.), Parmalat (G.B.), Pfizer (Q.A.), Pretexin 
(Q.A.), Rhythme (E.M.M.Q.), Schwabe (M.Schemann), Shire (P.E.), Sofar (G.B.), Steigerwald (M.Schemann), 
SymbioPharm (P.E.), Therevance (E.M.M.Q.), Vivrant (E.M.M.Q.), Yakult (G.B.) and Zespri (G.B.), have served as 
a consultant/advisory board members for Actavis (E.M.M.Q.), Albireo (M.Simren), Afa Wassermann (G.B.), 
Alimentary Health (E.M.M.Q.), Allergan (G.B. and M.Simren), Almirall (A.D.F., E.M.M.Q., G.B., M.Simren, P.E. 
and R.C.S.), Astellas (S.F.), AstraZeneca (M.Simren and P.E.), Bionorika (M.Schemann), Boehringer-Ingelheim 
(P.E.), Chr Hansen (M.Simren), Commonwealth (E.M.M.Q. and G.B.), Danone (E.A.M., G.B., M.Simren and 
R.C.S.), Ferring (P.E.), Glycom (M.Simren), IM Sciences (E.M.M.Q.), Ironwood (G.B.), Italchimici (G.B.), Ipsen 
(R.C.S.), Kissei (S.F.), Melasci (G.B.), Menarini (G.B.), Noos (G.B.), Parmalat (G.B.), Nestlé (M.Simren), Salix 
(E.M.M.Q.), Shire (E.M.M.Q., M.Simren and P.E.), Sofar (G.B.), SymbioPharm (P.E.), Synergy (E.M.M.Q. and 
G.B.), Takeda (M.Schemann), Yakult (G.B.), Yuhan Corp (R.C.S.) and Zenspri (G.B.), and as a speaker for Abbott 
(S.F.), Alfa Wassermann (G.B.), Almirall (B.N., E.M.M.Q., G.B., M.Simren, P.E. and Q.A.), Astellas (S.F.), 
AstraZeneca (E.M.M.Q.), Chiesi (P.E.), Danone (G.B.), Falk (B.N. and P.E.), Gruenenthal (P.E. and Q.A.), Heel 
(P.E.), Ironwood (E.M.M.Q.), Melasci (G.B.), Menarini (G.B. and R.C.S.), Noos (G.B.), Shire (A.D.F., E.M.M.Q., 
G.B., M.Simren and P.E.), Sofar (G.B.), Steigerwald (M.Schemann), SymbioPharm (P.E.), Takeda (M.Simren), 
Tillotts (M.Simren) and Yakult (G.B.).
References
1. Lovell RM, Ford AC. Global prevalence of and risk factors for irritable bowel syndrome: a meta-
analysis. Clin. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2012; 10:712–721.e4. [PubMed: 22426087] This meta-
analysis covers epidemiological population-based data across 90 studies in 33 countries worldwide 
and reports not only the pooled prevalences but also several risk factors common to all studies.
2. Gwee KA. Irritable bowel syndrome in developing countries — a disorder of civilization or 
colonization? Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 2005; 17:317–324. [PubMed: 15916618] 
3. Olafsdottir LB, Gudjonsson H, Jonsdottir HH, Thjodleifsson B. Stability of the irritable bowel 
syndrome and subgroups as measured by three diagnostic criteria — a 10-year follow-up study. 
Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 2010; 32:670–680. [PubMed: 20604748] 
4. Hungin AP, Whorwell PJ, Tack J, Mearin F. The prevalence, patterns and impact of irritable bowel 
syndrome: an international survey of 40,000 subjects. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 2003; 17:643–650. 
[PubMed: 12641512] 
5. Halder SL, et al. Natural history of functional gastrointestinal disorders: a 12-year longitudinal 
population-based study. Gastroenterology. 2007; 133:799–807. [PubMed: 17678917] 
Enck et al.
Page 25
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 6. Ford AC, Forman D, Bailey AG, Axon AT, Moayyedi P. Irritable bowel syndrome: a 10-yr natural 
history of symptoms and factors that influence consultation behavior. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2008; 
103:1229–1239. [PubMed: 18371141] 
7. Yarandi SS, Nasseri-Moghaddam S, Mostajabi P, Malekzadeh R. Overlapping gastroesophageal 
reflux disease and irritable bowel syndrome: increased dysfunctional symptoms. World J. 
Gastroenterol. 2010; 16:1232–1238. [PubMed: 20222167] 
8. Ford AC, et al. Characteristics of functional bowel disorder patients: a cross-sectional survey using 
the Rome III criteria. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 2014; 39:312–321. [PubMed: 24308816] 
9. Long MD, Drossman DA. Inflammatory bowel disease, irritable bowel syndrome, or what?: A 
challenge to the functional-organic dichotomy. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2010; 105:1796–1798. 
[PubMed: 20686466] 
10. Keohane J, et al. Irritable bowel syndrome-type symptoms in patients with inflammatory bowel 
disease: a real association or reflection of occult inflammation? Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2010; 
105:1789–1794.
11. Whitehead WE, et al. Comorbidity in irritable bowel syndrome. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2007; 
102:2767–2776. [PubMed: 17900326] 
12. Matheis A, Martens U, Kruse J, Enck P. Irritable bowel syndrome and chronic pelvic pain: a 
singular or two different clinical syndrome? World J. Gastroenterol. 2007; 13:3446–3455. 
[PubMed: 17659691] 
13. Janssens KA, Zijlema WL, Joustra ML, Rosmalen JG. Mood and anxiety disorders in chronic 
fatigue syndrome, fibromyalgia, and irritable bowel syndrome: results from the LifeLines Cohort 
study. Psychosom. Med. 2015; 77:449–457. [PubMed: 25768845] 
14. Barsky AJ. Assessing the new DSM-5 diagnosis of somatic symptom disorder. Psychosom. Med. 
2016; 78:2–4. [PubMed: 26599912] 
15. Henningsen P, Zipfel S, Herzog W. Management of functional somatic syndromes. Lancet. 2007; 
369:946–955. [PubMed: 17368156] 
16. Lovell RM, Ford AC. Effect of gender on prevalence of irritable bowel syndrome in the 
community: systematic review and meta-analysis. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2012; 107:991–1000. 
[PubMed: 22613905] 
17. Goodwin L, White PD, Hotopf M, Stansfeld SA, Clark C. Life course study of the etiology of self-
reported irritable bowel syndrome in the 1958 British birth cohort. Psychosom. Med. 2013; 
75:202–210. [PubMed: 23324872] 
18. Saito YA, et al. Familial aggregation of irritable bowel syndrome: a family case–control study. Am. 
J. Gastroenterol. 2010; 105:833–841. [PubMed: 20234344] 
19. Bengtson MB, Aamodt G, Vatn MH, Harris JR. Co-occurrence of IBS and symptoms of anxiety or 
depression, among Norwegian twins, is influenced by both heredity and intrauterine growth. BMC 
Gastroenterol. 2015; 15:9. [PubMed: 25649866] 
20. van Tilburg MA, et al. Psychosocial mechanisms for the transmission of somatic symptoms from 
parents to children. World J. Gastroenterol. 2015; 21:5532–5541. [PubMed: 25987776] 
21. Koloski NA, et al. Identification of early environmental risk factors for irritable bowel syndrome 
and dyspepsia. Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 2015; 27:1317–1325. [PubMed: 26202154] 
22. Schwille-Kiuntke J, Frick JS, Zanger P, Enck P. Post-infectious irritable bowel syndrome — a 
review of the literature. Z. Gastroenterol. 2011; 49:997–1003. [PubMed: 21811952] 
23. Schwille-Kiuntke J, Mazurak N, Enck P. Systematic review with meta-analysis: post-infectious 
irritable bowel syndrome after travellers' diarrhoea. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 2015; 41:1029–
1037. [PubMed: 25871571] 
24. Thabane M, Kottachchi DT, Marshall JK. Systematic review and meta-analysis: the incidence and 
prognosis of post-infectious irritable bowel syndrome. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 2007; 26:535–
544. [PubMed: 17661757] This is so far the largest meta-analysis of 18 reports of IBS occurrence 
following an acute gastrointestinal viral or bacterial infection (called post-infectious IBS) and its 
potential risk factors and predictors.
25. Bischoff SC, et al. Intestinal permeability — a new target for disease prevention and therapy. BMC 
Gastroenterol. 2014; 14:189. [PubMed: 25407511] 
Enck et al.
Page 26
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 26. Martinez C, et al. Diarrhoea-predominant irritable bowel syndrome: an organic disorder with 
structural abnormalities in the jejunal epithelial barrier. Gut. 2013; 62:1160–1168. [PubMed: 
22637702] 
27. Piche T, et al. Impaired intestinal barrier integrity in the colon of patients with irritable bowel 
syndrome: involvement of soluble mediators. Gut. 2009; 58:196–201. [PubMed: 18824556] 
28. Bertiaux-Vandaele N, et al. The expression and the cellular distribution of the tight junction 
proteins are altered in irritable bowel syndrome patients with differences according to the disease 
subtype. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2011; 106:2165–2173. [PubMed: 22008894] 
29. Coeffier M, et al. Increased proteasome-mediated degradation of occludin in irritable bowel 
syndrome. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2010; 105:1181–1188. [PubMed: 19997094] 
30. Buhner S, et al. Activation of human enteric neurons by supernatants of colonic biopsy specimens 
from patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterology. 2009; 137:1425–1434. [PubMed: 
19596012] This paper reports the relevance of a novel technique to identify biomarkers of micro-
inflammation in IBS by using supernatants from biopsies of patients with IBS applied in vitro to 
isolated neurons of the ENS of animals.
31. Fritscher-Ravens A, et al. Confocal endomicroscopy shows food-associated changes in the 
intestinal mucosa of patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterology. 2014; 147:1012–
1020.e4. [PubMed: 25083606] 
32. Slattery SA, Niaz O, Aziz Q, Ford AC, Farmer AD. Systematic review with meta-analysis: the 
prevalence of bile acid malabsorption in the irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhoea. Aliment. 
Pharmacol. Ther. 2015; 42:3–11. [PubMed: 25913530] 
33. Bajor A, Tornblom H, Rudling M, Ung KA, Simren M. Increased colonic bile acid exposure: a 
relevant factor for symptoms and treatment in IBS. Gut. 2015; 64:84–92. [PubMed: 24727487] 
34. Valentin, N., et al. Biomarkers for bile acid diarrhoea in functional bowel disorder with diarrhoea: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Gut. 2015. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/gutjnl-2015-309889
35. Barbara G, Cremon C, Stanghellini V. Inflammatory bowel disease and irritable bowel syndrome: 
similarities and differences. Curr. Opin. Gastroenterol. 2014; 30:352–358. [PubMed: 24811054] 
36. Barbara G, et al. The immune system in irritable bowel syndrome. J. Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 
2011; 17:349–359. [PubMed: 22148103] 
37. Barbara G, et al. Randomised controlled trial of mesalazine in IBS. Gut. 2016; 65:82–90. 
[PubMed: 25533646] 
38. Lam C, et al. A mechanistic multicentre, parallel group, randomised placebo-controlled trial of 
mesalazine for the treatment of IBS with diarrhoea (IBS-D). Gut. 2016; 65:91–99. [PubMed: 
25765462] 
39. Barbara G, et al. Activated mast cells in proximity to colonic nerves correlate with abdominal pain 
in irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterology. 2004; 126:693–702. [PubMed: 14988823] 
40. Cenac N, et al. Quantification and potential functions of endogenous agonists of transient receptor 
potential channels in patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterology. 2015; 149:433–
444.e7. [PubMed: 25911511] 
41. Nasser Y, Boeckxstaens GE, Wouters MM, Schemann M, Vanner S. Using human intestinal 
biopsies to study the pathogenesis of irritable bowel syndrome. Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 2014; 
26:455–469. [PubMed: 24602069] 
42. Barbara G, et al. Mast cell-dependent excitation of visceral-nociceptive sensory neurons in irritable 
bowel syndrome. Gastroenterology. 2007; 132:26–37. [PubMed: 17241857] 
43. Cenac N, et al. Role for protease activity in visceral pain in irritable bowel syndrome. J. Clin. 
Invest. 2007; 117:636–647. [PubMed: 17304351] 
44. Annahazi A, et al. Fecal proteases from diarrheic-IBS and ulcerative colitis patients exert opposite 
effect on visceral sensitivity in mice. Pain. 2009; 144:209–217. [PubMed: 19450926] 
45. Annahazi A, et al. Luminal cysteine-proteases degrade colonic tight junction structure and are 
responsible for abdominal pain in constipation-predominant IBS. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2013; 
108:1322–1331. [PubMed: 23711626] 
46. Buhner S, et al. Neuronal activation by mucosal biopsy supernatants from irritable bowel syndrome 
patients is linked to visceral sensitivity. Exp. Physiol. 2014; 99:1299–1311. [PubMed: 24951498] 
Enck et al.
Page 27
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 47. Valdez-Morales EE, et al. Sensitization of peripheral sensory nerves by mediators from colonic 
biopsies of diarrhea-predominant irritable bowel syndrome patients: a role for PAR2. Am. J. 
Gastroenterol. 2013; 108:1634–1643. [PubMed: 23958521] 
48. Hughes PA, et al. Sensory neuro-immune interactions differ between irritable bowel syndrome 
subtypes. Gut. 2013; 62:1456–1465. [PubMed: 22767422] 
49. Dothel G, et al. Nerve fiber outgrowth is increased in the intestinal mucosa of patients with irritable 
bowel syndrome. Gastroenterology. 2015; 148:1002–1011.e4. [PubMed: 25655556] 
50. Turnbaugh PJ, et al. The human microbiome project: exploring the microbial part of ourselves in a 
changing world. Nature. 2007; 449:804–810. [PubMed: 17943116] 
51. Rajilić-Stojanović M, et al. Global and deep molecular analysis of microbiota signatures in fecal 
samples from patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterology. 2011; 141:1792–1801. 
[PubMed: 21820992] 
52. Jalanka-Tuovinen J, et al. Faecal microbiota composition and host-microbe cross-talk following 
gastroenteritis and in postinfectious irritable bowel syndrome. Gut. 2014; 63:1737–1745. 
[PubMed: 24310267] 
53. Saulnier DM, et al. Gastrointestinal microbiome signatures of pediatric patients with irritable 
bowel syndrome. Gastroenterology. 2011; 141:1782–1791. [PubMed: 21741921] 
54. Scully P, et al. Plasma cytokine profiles in females with irritable bowel syndrome and extra-
intestinal co-morbidity. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2010; 105:2235–2243. [PubMed: 20407431] 
55. Malinen E, et al. Association of symptoms with gastrointestinal microbiota in irritable bowel 
syndrome. World J. Gastroenterol. 2010; 16:4532–4540. [PubMed: 20857523] 
56. Rajilić-Stojanović M, et al. Intestinal microbiota and diet in IBS: causes, consequences, or 
epiphenomena? Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2015; 110:278–287. [PubMed: 25623659] This narrative 
review summarizes state-of-the-art knowledge on the role of the gut microbiota and its influence 
through dietary, probiotic and pharmacological manipulation.
57. Simrén M, et al. Intestinal microbiota in functional bowel disorders: a Rome foundation report. 
Gut. 2013; 62:159–176. [PubMed: 22730468] 
58. Crouzet L, et al. The hypersensitivity to colonic distension of IBS patients can be transferred to rats 
through their fecal microbiota. Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 2013; 25:e272–e282. [PubMed: 
23433203] 
59. De Palma G, et al. The adoptive transfer of anxiety and gut dysfunction from IBS patients to axenic 
mice through microbiota transplantation. Gastroenterology. 2014; 146:S-845.
60. Rajilić-Stojanović M, Heilig HG, Tims S, Zoetendal EG, de Vos WM. Long-term monitoring of the 
human intestinal microbiota composition. Environ. Microbiol. 2013; 15:1146–1159.
61. David LA, et al. Diet rapidly and reproducibly alters the human gut microbiome. Nature. 2014; 
505:559–563. [PubMed: 24336217] 
62. Cummings JH, Macfarlane GT. Role of intestinal bacteria in nutrient metabolism. Clin. Nutr. 1997; 
16:3–11. [PubMed: 16844615] 
63. Hamer HM, et al. Review article: the role of butyrate on colonic function. Aliment. Pharmacol. 
Ther. 2008; 27:104–119. [PubMed: 17973645] 
64. Shepherd SJ, Parker FC, Muir JG, Gibson PR. Dietary triggers of abdominal symptoms in patients 
with irritable bowel syndrome: randomized placebo-controlled evidence. Clin. Gastroenterol. 
Hepatol. 2008; 6:765–771. [PubMed: 18456565] 
65. Treem WR, Ahsan N, Kastoff G, Hyams JS. Fecal short-chain fatty acids in patients with diarrhea-
predominant irritable bowel syndrome: in vitro studies of carbohydrate fermentation. J. Pediatr. 
Gastroenterol. Nutr. 1996; 23:280–286. [PubMed: 8890079] 
66. Mortensen PB, Andersen JR, Arffmann S, Krag E. Short-chain fatty acids and the irritable bowel 
syndrome: the effect of wheat bran. Scand. J. Gastroenterol. 1987; 22:185–192. [PubMed: 
3033815] 
67. Arpaia N, et al. Metabolites produced by commensal bacteria promote peripheral regulatory T-cell 
generation. Nature. 2013; 504:451–455. [PubMed: 24226773] 
68. Spiller RC. Inflammation as a basis for functional GI disorders. Best Pract. Res. Clin. 
Gastroenterol. 2004; 18:641–661. [PubMed: 15324705] 
Enck et al.
Page 28
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 69. Bercik P, Verdu EF, Collins SM. Is irritable bowel syndrome a low-grade inflammatory bowel 
disease? Gastroenterol. Clin. North Am. 2005; 34:235–245. [PubMed: 15862932] 
70. Rajilić-Stojanović M, de Vos WM. The first 1000 cultured species of the human gastrointestinal 
microbiota. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 2014; 38:996–1047. [PubMed: 24861948] 
71. Taras D, Simmering R, Collins MD, Lawson PA, Blaut M. Reclassification of Eubacterium 
formicigenerans Holdeman and Moore 1974 as Dorea formicigenerans gen. nov., comb. nov., and 
description of Dorea longicatena sp. nov., isolated from human faeces. Int. J. Syst. Evol. 
Microbiol. 2002; 52:423–428. [PubMed: 11931151] 
72. King TS, Elia M, Hunter JO. Abnormal colonic fermentation in irritable bowel syndrome. Lancet. 
1998; 352:1187–1189. [PubMed: 9777836] 
73. Pritchard SE, et al. Fasting and postprandial volumes of the undisturbed colon: normal values and 
changes in diarrhea-predominant irritable bowel syndrome measured using serial MRI. 
Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 2014; 26:124–130. [PubMed: 24131490] 
71. Pimentel M, Gunsalus RP, Rao SSC, Zhang H. Methanogens in human health and disease. Am. J. 
Gastroenterol. Suppl. 2012; 1:28–33.
75. Attaluri A, Jackson M, Valestin J, Rao SSC. Methanogenic flora is associated with altered colonic 
transit but not stool characteristics in constipation without IBS. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2010; 
105:1407–1411. [PubMed: 19953090] 
76. Chatterjee S, Park S, Low K, Kong Y, Pimentel M. The degree of breath methane production in 
IBS correlates with the severity of constipation. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2007; 102:837–841. 
[PubMed: 17397408] 
77. Tooth D, et al. Characterisation of faecal protease activity in irritable bowel syndrome with 
diarrhoea: origin and effect of gut transit. Gut. 2014; 63:753–760. [PubMed: 23911555] 
78. Ivanov D, et al. A serpin from the gut bacterium Bifidobacterium longum inhibits eukaryotic 
elastase-like serine proteases. J. Biol. Chem. 2006; 281:17246–17252. [PubMed: 16627467] 
79. Kerckhoffs APM, et al. Lower Bifidobacteria counts in both duodenal mucosa-associated and fecal 
microbiota in irritable bowel syndrome patients. World J. Gastroenterol. 2009; 15:2887–2892. 
[PubMed: 19533811] 
80. Rajilić-Stojanović M. Function of the microbiota. Best Pract. Res. Clin. Gastroenterol. 2013; 27:5–
16. [PubMed: 23768548] 
81. Jørgensen J, Mortensen P. Hydrogen sulfide and colonic epithelial metabolism. Dig. Dis. Sci. 2001; 
46:1722–1732. [PubMed: 11508674] 
82. Thiennimitr P, et al. Intestinal inflammation allows Salmonella to use ethanolamine to compete 
with the microbiota. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA. 2011; 108:17480–17485. [PubMed: 21969563] 
83. Weissfeld AS, Sonnenwirth AC. Rapid isolation of Yersinia spp. from feces. J. Clin. Microbiol. 
1982; 15:508–510. [PubMed: 7076823] 
84. Spiller R. Serotonin and GI clinical disorders. Neuropharmacology. 2008; 55:1072–1080. 
[PubMed: 18687345] 
85. Jeffery IB, et al. An irritable bowel syndrome subtype defined by species-specific alterations in 
faecal microbiota. Gut. 2012; 61:997–1006. [PubMed: 22180058] 
86. Mayer, EA.; Bushnell, MC. Functional Pain Syndromes: Presentation and Pathophysiology. Mayer, 
EA.; Bushnell, MC., editors. IASP Press; 2009. p. 531-565.
87. Mayer EA, et al. Functional GI disorders: from animal models to drug development. Gut. 2008; 
57:384–404. [PubMed: 17965064] 
88. Camilleri M. Peripheral mechanisms in irritable bowel syndrome. N. Engl. J. Med. 2012; 
367:1626–1635. [PubMed: 23094724] 
89. Keita AV, Soderholm JD. The intestinal barrier and its regulation by neuroimmune factors. 
Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 2010; 22:718–733. [PubMed: 20377785] 
90. Elenkov IJ, Chrousos GP. Stress system — organization, physiology and immunoregulation. 
Neuroimmunomodulation. 2006; 13:257–267. [PubMed: 17709947] 
91. Mayer EA, Savidge T, Shulman RJ. Brain–gut microbiome interactions and functional bowel 
disorders. Gastroenterology. 2014; 146:1500–1512. [PubMed: 24583088] 
Enck et al.
Page 29
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 92. Mayer EA, Labus JS, Tillisch K, Cole SW, Baldi P. Towards a systems view of IBS. Nat. Rev. 
Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2015; 12:592–605. [PubMed: 26303675] This narrative review 
summarizes the current knowledge on brain networks in relation to genomic-, gastrointestinal-, 
immune- and gut microbiota-related parameters and develops a novel model to understand their 
importance in IBS.
93. Grupe DW, Nitschke JB. Uncertainty and anticipation in anxiety: an integrated neurobiological and 
psychological perspective. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2013; 14:488–501. [PubMed: 23783199] 
94. Elsenbruch S, et al. Patients with irritable bowel syndrome have altered emotional modulation of 
neural responses to visceral stimuli. Gastroenterology. 2010; 139:1310–1319. [PubMed: 
20600024] 
95. Lackner JM, Gurtman MB. Pain catastrophizing and interpersonal problems: a circumplex analysis 
of the communal coping model. Pain. 2004; 110:597–604. [PubMed: 15288400] 
96. Mayer EA, Gupta A, Kilpatrick LA, Hong JY. Imaging brain mechanisms in chronic visceral pain. 
Pain. 2015; 156:S50–S63. [PubMed: 25789437] 
97. Labus JS, et al. Regional brain morphology is associated with gut microbial metabolites in irritable 
bowel syndrome (IBS). Gastroenterology. 2015; 148:S-142.
98. Mayer EA, et al. Correlation between gene expression profiles in peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells and structural and functional brain networks in chronic visceral pain. 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2014; 39:S641–S642.
99. Orand A, et al. Catecholaminergic gene polymorphisms are associated with GI symptoms and 
morphological brain changes in irritable bowel syndrome. PLoS ONE. 2015; 10:e0135910. 
[PubMed: 26288143] 
100. Erpelding N, Moayedi M, Davis KD. Cortical thickness correlates of pain and temperature 
sensitivity. Pain. 2012; 153:1602–1609. [PubMed: 22516588] 
101. Gazouli M, et al. Lessons learned: resolving the enigma of genetic factors in irritable bowel 
syndrome. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2015; 13:77–87. [PubMed: 26726033] This 
narrative review summarizes the current knowledge about genetic and epigenetic findings in IBS 
and critically discusses the methodological limitations that have to be overcome to underline 
clinical relevance of the findings.
102. Zhou Q, Souba WW, Croce CM, Verne GN. MicroRNA-29a regulates intestinal membrane 
permeability in patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Gut. 2010; 59:775–784. [PubMed: 
19951903] 
103. Zhou Q, et al. MicroRNA 29 targets nuclear factor-κB-repressing factor and claudin 1 to increase 
intestinal permeability. Gastroenterology. 2015; 148:158–169.e8. [PubMed: 25277410] 
104. Holliday EG, et al. Genome-wide association study identifies two novel genomic regions in 
irritable bowel syndrome. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2014; 109:770–772. [PubMed: 24797007] 
105. Fukudo S, et al. Impact of serotonin transporter gene polymorphism on brain activation by 
colorectal distention. NeuroImage. 2009; 47:946–951. [PubMed: 19426812] 
106. Kilpatrick LA, et al. The HTR3A polymorphism c.–42C>T is associated with amygdala 
responsiveness in patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterology. 2011; 140:1943–
1951. [PubMed: 21420406] 
107. Wong BS, et al. A Klothoβ variant mediates protein stability and associates with colon transit in 
irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea. Gastroenterology. 2011; 140:1934–1942. [PubMed: 
21396369] 
108. Camilleri M, et al. Genetic variation in GPBAR1 predisposes to quantitative changes in colonic 
transit and bile acid excretion. Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 2014; 307:G508–
G516. [PubMed: 25012842] 
109. Rao AS, et al. Chenodeoxycholate in females with irritable bowel syndrome-constipation: a 
pharmacodynamic and pharmacogenetic analysis. Gastroenterology. 2010; 139:1549–1558.e1. 
[PubMed: 20691689] 
110. Wong BS, et al. Pharmacogenetics of the effects of colesevelam on colonic transit in irritable 
bowel syndrome with diarrhea. Dig. Dis. Sci. 2012; 57:1222–1226. [PubMed: 22271411] 
111. Camilleri M, et al. Effect of increased bile acid synthesis or fecal excretion in irritable bowel 
syndrome-diarrhea. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2014; 109:1621–1630. [PubMed: 25070056] 
Enck et al.
Page 30
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 112. Ek WE, et al. Exploring the genetics of irritable bowel syndrome: a GWA study in the general 
population and replication in multinational case–control cohorts. Gut. 2014; 64:1774–1782. 
[PubMed: 25248455] 
113. Martinez C, et al. Differential expression of miRNAs in the jejunal mucosa of IBS-D is involved 
in intestinal epithelial barrier dysfunction through modulation of specific tight junction proteins. 
United European Gastroenterol. J. 2015; 3(Suppl. 5):A88.
114. Zhou, Q., et al. Decreased miR-199 augments visceral pain in patients with IBS through 
translational upregulation of TRPV1. Gut. 2015. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/gutjnl-2013-306464
115. Wohlfarth C, et al. Impaired miRNA regulation may lead to altered 5-HT4 receptor levels in IBS-
D patients. United European Gastroenterol. J. 2013; 1(Suppl. 1):A27.
116. Kapeller J, et al. First evidence for an association of a functional variant in the microRNA-510 
target site of the serotonin receptor-type 3E gene with diarrhea predominant irritable bowel 
syndrome. Hum. Mol. Genet. 2008; 17:2967–2977. [PubMed: 18614545] 
117. Fourie NH, et al. Elevated circulating miR-150 and miR-342-3p in patients with irritable bowel 
syndrome. Exp. Mol. Pathol. 2014; 96:422–425. [PubMed: 24768587] 
118. Gheinani AH, Burkhard FC, Monastyrskaya K. Deciphering microRNA code in pain and 
inflammation: lessons from bladder pain syndrome. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 2013; 70:3773–3789. 
[PubMed: 23463234] 
119. Longstreth GF, et al. Functional bowel disorders. Gastroenterology. 2006; 130:1480–1491. 
[PubMed: 16678561] 
120. Spiegel BM, Farid M, Esrailian E, Talley J, Chang L. Is irritable bowel syndrome a diagnosis of 
exclusion?: A survey of primary care providers, gastroenterologists, and IBS experts. Am. J. 
Gastroenterol. 2010; 105:848–858. [PubMed: 20197761] 
121. Sood R, Law GR, Ford AC. Diagnosis of IBS: symptoms, symptom-based criteria, biomarkers or 
`psychomarkers'? Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2014; 11:683–691. [PubMed: 25069544] 
This narrative review describes how — based on current knowledge — symptoms, symptom-
based criteria, biomarkers and psychomarkers, and their combinations may enable the diagnosis 
of IBS.
122. Manning AP, Thompson WG, Heaton KW, Morris AF. Towards positive diagnosis of the irritable 
bowel. Br. Med. J. 1978; 2:653–654. [PubMed: 698649] 
123. Drossman DA, Thompson WG, Talley NJ. Identification of sub-groups of functional 
gastrointestinal disorders. Gastroenterol. Int. 1990; 3:159–172.
124. Thompson WG, et al. Functional bowel disorders and functional abdominal pain. Gut. 1999; 
45(Suppl. 2):II43–II47. [PubMed: 10457044] 
125. Ford AC, et al. Validation of the Rome III criteria for the diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome in 
secondary care. Gastroenterology. 2013; 145:1262–1270.e1. [PubMed: 23994201] 
126. Whitehead WE, Drossman DA. Validation of symptom-based diagnostic criteria for irritable 
bowel syndrome: a critical review. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2010; 105:814–820. [PubMed: 
20179688] 
127. Pimentel M, et al. New clinical method for distinguishing D-IBS from other gastrointestinal 
conditions causing diarrhea: the LA/IBS diagnostic strategy. Dig. Dis. Sci. 2010; 55:145–149. 
[PubMed: 19169820] 
128. Bohn L, Storsrud S, Tornblom H, Bengtsson U, Simren M. Self-reported food-related 
gastrointestinal symptoms in IBS are common and associated with more severe symptoms and 
reduced quality of life. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2013; 108:634–641. [PubMed: 23644955] 
129. Ford AC, Marwaha A, Lim A, Moayyedi P. Systematic review and meta-analysis of the 
prevalence of irritable bowel syndrome in individuals with dyspepsia. Clin. Gastroenterol. 
Hepatol. 2010; 8:401–409. [PubMed: 19631762] 
130. Vandvik PO, Wilhelmsen I, Ihlebaek C, Farup PG. Comorbidity of irritable bowel syndrome in 
general practice: a striking feature with clinical implications. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 2004; 
20:1195–1203. [PubMed: 15569123] 
131. Jerndal P, et al. Gastrointestinal-specific anxiety: an important factor for severity of GI symptoms 
and quality of life in IBS. Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 2010; 22:646–e179. [PubMed: 20367800] 
Enck et al.
Page 31
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 132. Kruis W, et al. A diagnostic score for the irritable bowel syndrome. Its value in the exclusion of 
organic disease. Gastroenterology. 1984; 87:1–7. [PubMed: 6724251] 
133. Soh JS, et al. The diagnostic value of a digital rectal examination compared with high-resolution 
anorectal manometry in patients with chronic constipation and fecal incontinence. Am. J. 
Gastroenterol. 2015; 110:1197–1204. [PubMed: 26032152] 
134. Tantiphlachiva K, Rao P, Attaluri A, Rao SSC. Digital rectal examination is a useful tool for 
identifying patients with dyssynergia. Clin. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2010; 8:955–960. [PubMed: 
20656061] 
135. American College of Gastroenterology Task Force on Irritable Bowel Syndrome. et al. An 
evidence-based position statement on the management of irritable bowel syndrome. Am. J. 
Gastroenterol. 2009; 104:S1–S35.
136. Cash BD, et al. The prevalence of celiac disease among patients with nonconstipated irritable 
bowel syndrome is similar to controls. Gastroenterology. 2011; 141:1187–1193. [PubMed: 
21762658] 
137. Menees SB, Powell C, Kurlander J, Goel A, Chey WD. A meta-analysis of the utility of C-
reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, fecal calprotectin, and fecal lactoferrin to 
exclude inflammatory bowel disease in adults with IBS. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2015; 110:444–
454. [PubMed: 25732419] 
138. Dickinson B, Surawicz CM. Infectious diarrhea: an overview. Curr. Gastroenterol. Rep. 2014; 
16:399. [PubMed: 25064318] 
139. Pimentel M, et al. Development and validation of a biomarker for diarrhea-predominant irritable 
bowel syndrome in human subjects. PLoS ONE. 2015; 10:e0126438. [PubMed: 25970536] 
140. Jones MP, et al. A biomarker panel and psychological morbidity differentiates the irritable bowel 
syndrome from health and provides novel pathophysiological leads. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 
2014; 39:426–437. [PubMed: 24387672] 
141. Vanner SJ, et al. Predictive value of the Rome criteria for diagnosing the irritable bowel 
syndrome. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 1999; 94:2912–2917. [PubMed: 10520844] 
142. Whitehead WE, et al. Utility of red flag symptom exclusions in the diagnosis of irritable bowel 
syndrome. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 2006; 24:137–146. [PubMed: 16803612] 
143. Stotzer PO, et al. Are the definitions for chronic diarrhoea adequate? Evaluation of two different 
definitions in patients with chronic diarrhoea. United European Gastroenterol. J. 2015; 3:381–
386.
144. Gunnarsson J, Simren M. Efficient diagnosis of suspected functional bowel disorders. Nat. Clin. 
Pract. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2008; 5:498–507. [PubMed: 18679389] 
145. Begtrup LM, et al. A positive diagnostic strategy is noninferior to a strategy of exclusion for 
patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Clin. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2013; 11:956–962.e1. 
[PubMed: 23357491] 
146. Spiegel BM, et al. Is a negative colonoscopy associated with reassurance or improved health-
related quality of life in irritable bowel syndrome? Gastrointest. Endosc. 2005; 62:892–899. 
[PubMed: 16301033] 
147. Cairns SR, et al. Guidelines for colorectal cancer screening and surveillance in moderate and high 
risk groups. Gut. 2010; 59:666–689. [PubMed: 20427401] 
148. Rex DK, et al. American College of Gastroenterology guidelines for colorectal cancer screening 
2009 [corrected]. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2009; 104:739–750. [PubMed: 19240699] 
149. Chey WD, et al. The yield of colonoscopy in patients with non-constipated irritable bowel 
syndrome: results from a prospective, controlled US trial. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2010; 105:859–
865. [PubMed: 20179696] 
150. Vijayvargiya P, Camilleri M, Shin A, Saenger A. Methods for diagnosis of bile acid 
malabsorption in clinical practice. Clin. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2013; 11:1232–1239. [PubMed: 
23644387] 
151. Money ME, Camilleri M. Review: management of postprandial diarrhea syndrome. Am. J. Med. 
2012; 125:538–544. [PubMed: 22624684] 
Enck et al.
Page 32
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 152. Melchior C, Gourcerol G, Dechelotte P, Leroi AM, Ducrotte P. Symptomatic fructose 
malabsorption in irritable bowel syndrome: a prospective study. United European Gastroenterol. 
J. 2014; 2:131–137.
153. Misselwitz B, et al. Lactose malabsorption and intolerance: pathogenesis, diagnosis and 
treatment. United European Gastroenterol. J. 2013; 1:151–159.
154. Rana SV, Malik A. Breath tests and irritable bowel syndrome. World J. Gastroenterol. 2014; 
20:7587–7601. [PubMed: 24976698] 
155. Simren M, Stotzer PO. Use and abuse of hydrogen breath tests. Gut. 2006; 55:297–303. [PubMed: 
16474100] 
156. Ford AC, Spiegel BM, Talley NJ, Moayyedi P. Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth in irritable 
bowel syndrome: systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2009; 
7:1279–1286. [PubMed: 19602448] 
157. Posserud I, Stotzer PO, Bjornsson ES, Abrahamsson H, Simren M. Small intestinal bacterial 
overgrowth in patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Gut. 2007; 56:802–808. [PubMed: 
17148502] 
158. Heaton KW, et al. Symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome in a British urban community: 
consulters and nonconsulters. Gastroenterology. 1992; 102:1962–1967. [PubMed: 1587415] 
159. Ringstrom G, Abrahamsson H, Strid H, Simren M. Why do subjects with irritable bowel 
syndrome seek health care for their symptoms? Scand. J. Gastroenterol. 2007; 42:1194–1203. 
[PubMed: 17852851] 
160. Flik CE, Laan W, Smout AJ, Weusten BL, de Wit NJ. Comparison of medical costs generated by 
IBS patients in primary and secondary care in the Netherlands. BMC Gastroenterol. 2015; 
15:168. [PubMed: 26612205] 
161. Khan S, Chang L. Diagnosis and management of IBS. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2010; 
7:565–581. [PubMed: 20890316] 
162. Hausteiner-Wiehle C, Henningsen P. Irritable bowel syndrome: relations with functional, mental, 
and somatoform disorders. World J. Gastroenterol. 2014; 20:6024–6030. [PubMed: 24876725] 
163. Posserud I, et al. Symptom pattern following a meal challenge test in patients with irritable bowel 
syndrome and healthy controls. United European Gastroenterol. J. 2013; 1:358–367.
164. Bohn L, Storsrud S, Simren M. Nutrient intake in patients with irritable bowel syndrome 
compared with the general population. Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 2013; 25:23–30.e21. [PubMed: 
22937900] 
165. Hayes PA, Fraher MH, Quigley EM. Irritable bowel syndrome: the role of food in pathogenesis 
and management. Gastroenterol. Hepatol (N. Y.). 2014; 10:164–174. [PubMed: 24829543] 
166. Wahnschaffe U, Ullrich R, Riecken EO, Schulzke JD. Celiac disease-like abnormalities in a 
subgroup of patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterology. 2001; 121:1329–1338. 
[PubMed: 11729112] 
167. Kellow JE, Miller LJ, Phillips SF, Zinsmeister AR, Charboneau JW. Altered sensitivity of the 
gallbladder to cholecystokinin octapeptide in irritable bowel syndrome. Am. J. Physiol. 1987; 
253:G650–G655. [PubMed: 3318495] 
168. Kennedy PJ, et al. Acute tryptophan depletion reduces kynurenine levels: implications for 
treatment of impaired visuospatial memory performance in irritable bowel syndrome. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl.). 2015; 232:1357–1371. [PubMed: 25338777] 
169. Ford AC, et al. American College of Gastroenterology monograph on the management of irritable 
bowel syndrome and chronic idiopathic constipation. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2014; 109:S2–S26. 
[PubMed: 25091148] 
170. Guo YB, et al. Association between diet and lifestyle habits and irritable bowel syndrome: a case–
control study. Gut Liver. 2014; 9:649–656. [PubMed: 25266811] 
171. Halmos EP, Power VA, Shepherd SJ, Gibson PR, Muir JG. A diet low in FODMAPs reduces 
symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterology. 2014; 146:67–75.e5. [PubMed: 
24076059] 
172. Bohn L, et al. Diet low in FODMAPs reduces symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome as well as 
traditional dietary advice: a randomized controlled trial. Gastroenterology. 2015; 149:1399–
1407.e2. [PubMed: 26255043] In this paper, the data compare a diet low in FODMAPs with 
Enck et al.
Page 33
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 conventional dietary advice in IBS and report equal efficacy, thus counteracts the current 
enthusiasm with low FODMAP diets in patients with IBS.
173. Moayyedi P, et al. The effect of dietary intervention on irritable bowel syndrome: a systematic 
review. Clin. Transl Gastroenterol. 2015; 6:e107. [PubMed: 26291435] 
174. Halmos EP, et al. Diets that differ in their FODMAP content alter the colonic luminal 
microenvironment. Gut. 2015; 64:93–100. [PubMed: 25016597] 
175. Berg LK, et al. Effect of fructose-reduced diet in patients with irritable bowel syndrome, and its 
correlation to a standard fructose breath test. Scand. J. Gastroenterol. 2013; 48:936–943. 
[PubMed: 23834159] 
176. Wilder-Smith CH, Materna A, Wermelinger C, Schuler J. Fructose and lactose intolerance and 
malabsorption testing: the relationship with symptoms in functional gastrointestinal disorders. 
Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 2013; 37:1074–1083. [PubMed: 23574302] 
177. Ludvigsson JF, et al. The Oslo definitions for coeliac disease and related terms. Gut. 2013; 62:43–
52. [PubMed: 22345659] 
178. Vazquez-Roque MI, et al. A controlled trial of gluten-free diet in patients with irritable bowel 
syndrome-diarrhea: effects on bowel frequency and intestinal function. Gastroenterology. 2013; 
144:903–911.e3. [PubMed: 23357715] 
179. Rodrigo L, Blanco I, Bobes J, de Serres FJ. Effect of one year of a gluten-free diet on the clinical 
evolution of irritable bowel syndrome plus fibromyalgia in patients with associated lymphocytic 
enteritis: a case–control study. Arthritis Res. Ther. 2014; 16:421. [PubMed: 25160886] 
180. Biesiekierski JR, et al. No effects of gluten in patients with self-reported non-celiac gluten 
sensitivity after dietary reduction of fermentable, poorly absorbed, short-chain carbohydrates. 
Gastroenterology. 2013; 145:320–328.e3. [PubMed: 23648697] 
181. Lee KN, Lee OY. Intestinal microbiota in pathophysiology and management of irritable bowel 
syndrome. World J. Gastroenterol. 2014; 20:8886–8897. [PubMed: 25083061] 
182. Shanahan F, Quigley EM. Manipulation of the microbiota for treatment of IBS and IBD-
challenges and controversies. Gastroenterology. 2014; 146:1554–1563. [PubMed: 24486051] 
183. Ford AC, et al. Efficacy of prebiotics, probiotics, and synbiotics in irritable bowel syndrome and 
chronic idiopathic constipation: systematic review and meta-analysis. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 
2014; 109:1547–1561. [PubMed: 25070051] 
184. Mazurak N, Broelz E, Storr M, Enck P. Probiotic therapy in the irritable bowel syndrome — why 
is the evidence for clinical efficacy still poor and what can be done about it? J. Neurogastroeterol. 
Motil. 2015; 21:471–485.
185. Hill C, et al. Expert consensus document. The International Scientific Association for Probiotics 
and Prebiotics consensus statement on the scope and appropriate use of the term probiotic. Nat. 
Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2014; 11:506–514. [PubMed: 24912386] 
186. Krueger D, et al. Effect of hyoscine butylbromide (Buscopan®) on cholinergic pathways in the 
human intestine. Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 2013; 25:e530–e539. [PubMed: 23682729] 
187. Ford AC, et al. Effect of fibre, antispasmodics, and peppermint oil in the treatment of irritable 
bowel syndrome: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ. 2008; 337:a2313. [PubMed: 
19008265] 
188. Ruepert L, et al. Bulking agents, antispasmodics and antidepressants for the treatment of irritable 
bowel syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2011; 8:CD003460. [PubMed: 21833945] 
189. Cash BD, Epstein MS, Shah SM. A novel delivery system of peppermint oil is an effective 
therapy for irritable bowel syndrome symptoms. Dig. Dis. Sci. 2016; 61:560–571. [PubMed: 
26319955] 
190. National Institute of Health and Care Excellence. CG61. Irritable bowel syndrome in adults: 
diagnosis and management of irritable bowel syndrome in primary care. NICE. 2008. [online], 
http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg61/documents
191. Moret C, Briley M. Antidepressants in the treatment of fibromyalgia. Neuropsychiatr. Dis. Treat. 
2006; 2:537–548. [PubMed: 19412502] 
192. Castro J, et al. Linaclotide inhibits colonic nociceptors and relieves abdominal pain via guanylate 
cyclase-C and extracellular cyclic guanosine 3′,5′-monophosphate. Gastroenterology. 2013; 
145:1334–1346.e11. [PubMed: 23958540] 
Enck et al.
Page 34
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 193. Chey WD, et al. Linaclotide for irritable bowel syndrome with constipation: a 26-week, 
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial to evaluate efficacy and safety. Am. J. 
Gastroenterol. 2012; 107:1702–1712. [PubMed: 22986437] 
194. Rao S, et al. A 12-week, randomized, controlled trial with a 4-week randomized withdrawal 
period to evaluate the efficacy and safety of linaclotide in irritable bowel syndrome with 
constipation. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2012; 107:1714–1724. [PubMed: 22986440] 
195. Drossman DA, et al. Clinical trial: lubiprostone in patients with constipation-associated irritable 
bowel syndrome — results of two randomized, placebo-controlled studies. Aliment. Pharmacol. 
Ther. 2009; 29:329–341. [PubMed: 19006537] 
196. Tack J, van Outryve M, Beyens G, Kerstens R, Vandeplassche L. Prucalopride (Resolor) in the 
treatment of severe chronic constipation in patients dissatisfied with laxatives. Gut. 2009; 
58:357–365. [PubMed: 18987031] 
197. Efskind PS, Bernklev T, Vatn MH. A double-blind placebo-controlled trial with loperamide in 
irritable bowel syndrome. Scand. J. Gastroenterol. 1996; 31:463–468. [PubMed: 8734343] 
198. Lembo AJ, et al. Eluxadoline for irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea. N. Engl. J. Med. 2016; 
374:242–253. [PubMed: 26789872] 
199. Clave P. Treatment of IBS-D with 5-HT3 receptor antagonists versus spasmolytic agents: similar 
therapeutical effects from heterogeneous pharmacological targets. Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 
2011; 23:1051–1055. [PubMed: 22093116] 
200. Berman SM, et al. Condition-specific deactivation of brain regions by 5-HT3 receptor antagonist 
alosetron. Gastroenterology. 2002; 123:969–977. [PubMed: 12360456] 
201. Chang L, et al. Incidence of ischemic colitis and serious complications of constipation among 
patients using alosetron: systematic review of clinical trials and post-marketing surveillance data. 
Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2006; 101:1069–1079. [PubMed: 16606352] 
202. Garsed K, et al. A randomised trial of ondansetron for the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome 
with diarrhoea. Gut. 2014; 63:1617–1625. [PubMed: 24334242] 
203. Fukudo S, Ida M, Akiho H, Nakashima Y, Matsueda K. Effect of ramosetron on stool consistency 
in male patients with irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea. Clin. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2014; 
12:953–959.e4. [PubMed: 24315882] 
204. Pimentel M, et al. Rifaximin therapy for patients with irritable bowel syndrome without 
constipation. N. Engl. J. Med. 2011; 364:22–32. [PubMed: 21208106] 
205. Didari T, Mozaffari S, Nikfar S, Abdollahi M. Effectiveness of probiotics in irritable bowel 
syndrome: updated systematic review with meta-analysis. World J. Gastroenterol. 2015; 
21:3072–3084. [PubMed: 25780308] 
206. Madisch A, Holtmann G, Plein K, Hotz J. Treatment of irritable bowel syndrome with herbal 
preparations: results of a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, multi-centre trial. 
Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 2004; 19:271–279. [PubMed: 14984373] 
207. Simmen U, et al. Binding of STW 5 (Iberogast®) and its components to intestinal 5-HT, 
muscarinic M3, and opioid receptors. Phytomedicine. 2006; 13(Suppl. 5):51–55. [PubMed: 
16973340] 
208. Fond G, et al. Anxiety and depression comorbidities in irritable bowel syndrome (IBS): a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur. Arch. Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 2014; 264:651–660. 
[PubMed: 24705634] 
209. Hungin AP, et al. Irritable bowel syndrome: an integrated explanatory model for clinical practice. 
Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 2015; 27:750–763. [PubMed: 25703486] 
210. Drossman DA, et al. A focus group assessment of patient perspectives on irritable bowel 
syndrome and illness severity. Dig. Dis. Sci. 2009; 54:1532–1541. [PubMed: 19337833] 
211. Owens DM, Nelson DK, Talley NJ. The irritable bowel syndrome: long-term prognosis and the 
physician-patient interaction. Ann. Intern. Med. 1995; 122:107–112. [PubMed: 7992984] 
212. Spiller R, et al. Guidelines on the irritable bowel syndrome: mechanisms and practical 
management. Gut. 2007; 56:1770–1798. [PubMed: 17488783] 
213. Fukudo S, et al. Evidence-based clinical practice guidelines for irritable bowel syndrome. J. 
Gastroenterol. 2015; 50:11–30. [PubMed: 25500976] 
Enck et al.
Page 35
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 214. Ford AC, et al. Effect of antidepressants and psychological therapies, including hypnotherapy, in 
irritable bowel syndrome: systematic review and meta-analysis. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2014; 
109:1350–1365. [PubMed: 24935275] 
215. Gaylord SA, et al. Mindfulness training reduces the severity of irritable bowel syndrome in 
women: results of a randomized controlled trial. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2011; 106:1678–1688. 
[PubMed: 21691341] 
216. Ware JE Jr, Sherbourne CD. The MOS 36-item Short-Form Health Survey (SF-36). I. Conceptual 
framework and item selection. Med. Care. 1992; 30:473–483. [PubMed: 1593914] 
217. EuroQoL-Group. EuroQol — a new facility for the measurement of health-related quality of life. 
Health Policy. 1990; 16:199–208. [PubMed: 10109801] 
218. Patrick DL, Drossman DA, Frederick IO, DiCesare J, Puder KL. Quality of life in persons with 
irritable bowel syndrome: development and validation of a new measure. Dig. Dis. Sci. 1998; 
43:400–411. [PubMed: 9512138] 
219. Hahn BA, Kirchdoerfer LJ, Fullerton S, Mayer E. Evaluation of a new quality of life 
questionnaire for patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 1997; 
11:547–552. [PubMed: 9218081] 
220. Gralnek IM, Hays RD, Kilbourne A, Naliboff B, Mayer EA. The impact of irritable bowel 
syndrome on health-related quality of life. Gastroenterology. 2000; 119:654–660. [PubMed: 
10982758] 
221. Halder SL, et al. Impact of functional gastrointestinal disorders on health-related quality of life: a 
population-based case–control study. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 2004; 19:233–242. [PubMed: 
14723614] This population-based, nested case–control study compares patients with IBS, 
patients with functional dyspepsia and patients with both diagnoses to healthy control individuals 
for health-related QOL (SF-36) and reports that most of the determinants of QOL are 
psychological in nature.
222. Singh P, et al. Patients with irritable bowel syndrome-diarrhea have lower disease-specific quality 
of life than irritable bowel syndrome-constipation. World J. Gastroenterol. 2015; 21:8103–8109. 
[PubMed: 26185382] 
223. Creed F, et al. Health-related quality of life and health care costs in severe, refractory irritable 
bowel syndrome. Ann. Intern. Med. 2001; 134:860–868. [PubMed: 11346322] 
224. Spiegel BM, et al. Clinical determinants of health-related quality of life in patients with irritable 
bowel syndrome. Arch. Intern. Med. 2004; 164:1773–1780. [PubMed: 15364671] 
225. El-Serag HB, Olden K, Bjorkman D. Health-related quality of life among persons with irritable 
bowel syndrome: a systematic review. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 2002; 16:1171–1185. [PubMed: 
12030961] 
226. Fukudo S, Hongo M, Kaneko H, Takano M, Ueno R. Lubiprostone increases spontaneous bowel 
movement frequency and quality of life in patients with chronic idiopathic constipation. Clin. 
Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2015; 13:294–301.e5. [PubMed: 25158925] 
227. Fukudo S, Hongo M, Kaneko H, Ueno R. Efficacy and safety of oral lubiprostone in constipated 
patients with or without irritable bowel syndrome: a randomized, placebo-controlled and dose-
finding study. Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 2011; 23:544–e205. [PubMed: 21303430] 
228. Ford AC, et al. Efficacy of 5-HT3 antagonists and 5-HT4 agonists in irritable bowel syndrome: 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2009; 104:1831–1843. [PubMed: 
19471254] 
229. Bardhan KD, et al. A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled dose-ranging study to 
evaluate the efficacy of alosetron in the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome. Aliment. 
Pharmacol. Ther. 2000; 14:23–34. [PubMed: 10632642] 
230. Camilleri M, et al. Efficacy and safety of alosetron in women with irritable bowel syndrome: a 
randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2000; 355:1035–1040. [PubMed: 10744088] 
231. Marciani L, et al. Stimulation of colonic motility by oral PEG electrolyte bowel preparation 
assessed by MRI: comparison of split versus single dose. Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 2014; 
26:1426–1436. [PubMed: 25060551] 
Enck et al.
Page 36
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 232. Malagelada C, et al. Classification of functional bowel disorders by objective physiological 
criteria based on endoluminal image analysis. Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 2015; 
309:G413–G419. [PubMed: 26251472] 
233. Rao SS, et al. Investigation of colonic and whole-gut transit with wireless motility capsule and 
radiopaque markers in constipation. Clin. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2009; 7:537–544. [PubMed: 
19418602] 
234. Shiotani A, et al. Pilot study of biomarkers for predicting effectiveness of ramosetron in diarrhea-
predominant irritable bowel syndrome: expression of S100A10 and polymorphisms of TPH1. 
Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 2015; 27:82–91. [PubMed: 25428414] 
235. Camilleri M, et al. Serotonin-transporter polymorphism pharmacogenetics in diarrhea-
predominant irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterology. 2002; 123:425–432. [PubMed: 
12145795] 
236. Barrett JC, et al. Genome-wide association defines more than 30 distinct susceptibility loci for 
Crohn's disease. Nat. Genet. 2008; 40:955–962. [PubMed: 18587394] 
237. Yang J, et al. Lactose intolerance in irritable bowel syndrome patients with diarrhoea: the roles of 
anxiety, activation of the innate mucosal immune system and visceral sensitivity. Aliment. 
Pharmacol. Ther. 2014; 39:302–311. [PubMed: 24308871] 
238. Rodrigues AC, Nicholas Verne G, Schmidt S, Mauderli AP. Hypersensitivity to cutaneous thermal 
nociceptive stimuli in irritable bowel syndrome. Pain. 2005; 115:5–11. [PubMed: 15836964] 
239. Dorn SD, et al. Increased colonic pain sensitivity in irritable bowel syndrome is the result of an 
increased tendency to report pain rather than increased neurosensory sensitivity. Gut. 2007; 
56:1202–1209. [PubMed: 17483191] 
240. Christopher NL, Bayless TM. Role of the small bowel and colon in lactose-induced diarrhea. 
Gastroenterology. 1971; 60:845–852. [PubMed: 5581327] 
241. Marciani L, et al. Postprandial changes in small bowel water content in healthy subjects and 
patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterology. 2010; 138:469–477.e1. [PubMed: 
19909743] 
242. Florent C, et al. Influence of chronic lactulose ingestion on the colonic metabolism of lactulose in 
man (an in vivo study). J. Clin. Invest. 1985; 75:608–613. [PubMed: 3973020] 
243. Vandeputte D, et al. Stool consistency is strongly associated with gut microbiota richness and 
composition, enterotypes and bacterial growth rates. Gut. 2015; 65:57–62. [PubMed: 26069274] 
244. Andresen V, et al. Irritable bowel syndrome — the main recommendations. Dtsch. Arztebl. Int. 
2011; 108:751–760. [PubMed: 22163251] 
245. Henrich JF, et al. Identifying effective techniques within psychological treatments for irritable 
bowel syndrome: a meta-analysis. J. Psychosomat. Res. 2015; 78:205–222.This meta-analysis 
summarizes data from 48 RCTs, which tested psychological interventions in patients with IBS, 
and reports that, overall, improvement in gastrointestinal symptoms was strongly associated with 
improvement in psychological distress.
246. Creed F, et al. The cost-effectiveness of psychotherapy and paroxetine for severe irritable bowel 
syndrome. Gastroenterology. 2003; 124:303–317. [PubMed: 12557136] 
247. Peters SL, Muir JG, Gibson PR. Review article: gut-directed hypnotherapy in the management of 
irritable bowel syndrome and inflammatory bowel disease. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 2015; 
41:1104–1115. [PubMed: 25858661] 
248. Hutton J. Cognitive behaviour therapy for irritable bowel syndrome. Eur. J. Gastroenterol. 
Hepatol. 2005; 17:11–14. [PubMed: 15647633] 
249. Hyphantis T, Guthrie E, Tomenson B, Creed F. Psychodynamic interpersonal therapy and 
improvement in interpersonal difficulties in people with severe irritable bowel syndrome. Pain. 
2009; 145:196–203. [PubMed: 19643544] 
250. Liegl G, Plessen CY, Leitner A, Boeckle M, Pieh C. Guided self-help interventions for irritable 
bowel syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur. J. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2015; 
27:1209–1221. [PubMed: 26164395] 
Enck et al.
Page 37
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 1 | IBS definition and subtypes: Rome III criteria
Diagnostic criteria* for irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) include recurrent abdominal pain 
or discomfort‡ at least 3 days per month in the past 3 months associated with two or more 
of the following:
•
Improvement with defaecation
•
Onset associated with a change in the frequency of stool
•
Onset associated with a change in the form (appearance) of stool
*Criteria fulfilled for the past 3 months with symptom onset at least 6 months before 
diagnosis.
‡Discomfort means an uncomfortable sensation not described as pain. In 
pathophysiological research and clinical trials, a pain or discomfort frequency of at least 
2 days per week during screening evaluation for subject eligibility. Adapted with 
permission from REF. 119, American Gastroenterology Association.
Enck et al.
Page 38
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 2 | Risk factors for IBS
Personal factors
•
Sex (female)
•
Age (>50 years)
•
Birth cohort*
•
Breast feeding (<6 months)*
•
Herbivore pet in childhood*
•
Birth weight (low)*
•
Body mass index (low)*
Psychological factors
•
Illness behaviour
•
Low quality of life
•
Acute psychological stress
•
Stressful life events
•
Sexual or physical abuse history
•
Anxiety, depression or somatization
•
Intimate partner violence*
•
Addictive behaviour*
Somatic issues
•
Gastrointestinal infection
•
Somatic symptoms (pains, for example, joint pain and migraine)
•
Endometriosis
•
Abdominal obesity
•
Diverticular disease (left side)
•
Antibiotic use
•
Abdominal surgery
•
Spicy food consumption*
•
Sleep problems*
•
Low exercise level*
Social conditions
•
Socioeconomic status (childhood)
Enck et al.
Page 39
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 •
Family history of substance abuse
•
Family history of mental illness
•
Working conditions (insufficient autonomy)*
•
Shift work*
•
Marital status (never married)*
•
Number of family members (with more members increasing the risk)*
•
Childhood war exposure*
Less well-established factors are marked (*) and are based on single studies (for example, 
REF. 21), whereas all others have been shown in more than one study.
Enck et al.
Page 40
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 3 | Structural and functional biomarker candidates in IBS*
Altered motility and stool behaviour
•
Altered colonic transit time
•
Impaired bile acid transport‡
Mucosal permeability
•
Reduced epithelial resistance§
•
Reduced expression of ZO1§
Immune imbalance
•
Increased numbers of intraepithelial CD3+ lymphocytes§
•
Increased mucosal cell density and reactivity§
•
Increased nerve mast cell association in the lamia propria region§
•
Increased levels of TH2 cytokines in the blood∥
•
TNFSF15 and TNF polymorphisms§,∥
•
Increased levels of the pattern recognition receptors TLR2 and TLR4§
•
Increased levels of anti-flagellin autoantibodies∥
•
Increased levels of histamine and proteases in biopsy supernatants§
•
Increased production of IL-1β and TNF by PBMCs∥
•
Increased levels of β-defensin 2 antimicrobial peptide‡
Neural plasticity
•
Increased nerve fibre density in the epithelium and lamina propria§
•
Mostly visceral hypersensitivity, but ≤40% of patients are 
normosensitive or hyposensitive
•
Mucosal biopsy supernatants activate the enteric nervous system 
independent of stool behaviour or visceral sensitivity§
•
Mucosal biopsy supernatants activate sensory fibres and dorsal root 
ganglion neurons (mostly hypersensitive IBS)
•
PBMC supernatants evoke mechanical hypersensitivity involving 
cytokines and TRPA1
Serotonin metabolism and signalling
•
Increased plasma levels of serotonin in IBS-D∥
•
Increased enterochromaffin cell density§
•
Altered SERT expression and polymorphism§
Enck et al.
Page 41
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 •
Serotonin receptor and transporter polymorphisms§
Others
•
Increased levels of cysteine and serine proteases‡
•
Increased levels of mucosal PARM1§
•
Increased levels of BDNF and NGF§
•
Increased levels of rectal PYY and somatostatin cell count§
•
Altered microbiota diversity and composition‡
BDNF, brain-derived neurotrophic factor; IBS, irritable bowel syndrome; IBS-D, IBS 
with diarrhoea; IL-1β, interleukin 1β; NGF, nerve growth factor; PARM1, prostate 
androgen-regulated mucin-like protein 1; PBMC, peripheral blood mononuclear cell; 
PPY, peptide YY; SERT, serotonin reuptake transporter; TH2, T helper 2; TLR, Toll-like 
receptor; TNF, tumour necrosis factor; TNFSF15, TNF superfamily member 15; TRPA1, 
transient receptor potential cation channel subfamily A member 1; ZO1, zonula 
occludens 1. *Based on data available in REF. 244. ‡In stool. §Intestinal biopsy. ∥In 
blood.
Enck et al.
Page 42
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 4 | Dysbiosis in IBS
Microbiota species increased in IBS
•
Enterobacteriaceae
•
Veillonella
•
Streptococcus*
•
Dorea
•
Blautia
•
Roseburia
•
Ruminococcus
•
Methanobrevibacter‡
Microbiota species decreased in IBS
•
Bifidobacterium
•
Collinsella
•
Streptococcus‡
•
Faecalibacterium
•
Christensenellaceae
•
Clostridiales
•
Uncultured
•
Methanobrevibacter§
IBS, irritable bowel syndrome. *IBS with diarrhoea. ‡IBS with constipation. §Mixed-type 
IBS.
Enck et al.
Page 43
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 5 | FODMAPs and a low FODMAP diet*
FODMAPs stands for fermentable oligosaccharides (fructans present in wheat, rye, onion 
and garlic chicory; and galactans present in legumes and beans), disaccharides (lactose 
present in milk and milk products), monosaccharides (fructose present in artificial 
sweeteners) and polyols (sugar alcohols present in apples, pears, stone fruit, cauliflower, 
mushrooms and sweeteners). A low FODMAP diet may include reasonable amounts of:
•
Vegetables: bamboo shoots, cucumber, carrot, corn, aubergine 
(eggplant), lettuce, leafy greens, pumpkin, potato, squash, yam, tomato 
and courgette (zucchini), among others
•
Fruits: banana, cantaloupe, grapes, grapefruit, kiwifruit, kumquat, 
lemon, lime, mandarin, orange, passion fruit, pawpaw, pineapple, 
rhubarb and tangerine, among others
•
Protein: beef, chicken, canned tuna, egg, egg whites, fish, lamb, pork, 
shellfish, turkey, cold cuts, nuts and seeds, among others
•
Dairy and non-dairy alternatives: lactose-free milk, cream cheese, hard 
cheeses (cheddar, parmesan and Swiss), mozzarella and sherbet 
(almond milk, rice milk and rice-milk ice-cream), among others
•
Grains: wheat-free grains or wheat-free flours and products made with 
these (for example, bagels, breads, crackers, noodles, pancakes, pastas, 
pretzels and waffles), corn flakes, cream of rice, grits, oats, quinoa and 
rice, among others
•
Beverages: water, coffee and tea, and low FODMAP fruit or vegetable 
juices, among others
*See REFS 171,174.
Enck et al.
Page 44
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 6 | Alarm features for IBS
•
Unintended weight loss (>10% in 3 months)
•
Presence of blood in the stools not caused by haemorrhoids or anal 
fissures
•
Symptoms that awaken the patient in the night
•
Fever in association with the bowel symptoms
•
Family history of colorectal cancer, inflammatory bowel disease or 
coeliac disease
•
New onset of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) symptoms after 50 years 
of age
Enck et al.
Page 45
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 7 | Evidence-based psychological treatments
Cognitive–behavioural therapy
Cognitive–behavioural therapy (CBT) is based on the assumption that irritable bowel 
syndrome (IBS) symptoms are a response to stressful life events, maladaptive behaviour 
and an inappropriate attribution of symptoms. CBT aims to modify these behaviours and 
thoughts through education, which consists of the explanation of IBS symptoms and the 
CBT model, and by identification of the psychological factors that are interacting with 
their physical symptoms. On the basis of these findings, patients and therapists work 
together to identify the potential associations between IBS symptoms and their thoughts, 
emotions and actions. Finally, behavioural therapy (for example, stress management) is 
applied245.
Psychodynamic (interpersonal) therapy
Psychodynamic (interpersonal) therapy (PIT) aims to obtain insights into symptom 
development as a consequence of interpersonal conflicts or difficulties in relationships 
with key people. Patients are encouraged to discuss their symptoms in depth, emotional 
factors are explored and links between symptoms and emotional factors are identified246.
Gut-directed hypnosis
In gut-directed hypnosis (GDH), as opposed to standard hypnotherapy, suggestions are 
made on how to control and normalize gastrointestinal function and metaphors are used 
to bring about improvement. GDH differs from other forms of psychological treatment in 
which therapy is provided to patients in a conscious state. After information on the 
effects of hypnosis is given, participants are provided with a compact disk (created by 
hypnotherapists) for practicing at home on a daily basis247.
Mindfulness-based therapy
Mindfulness-based therapy (MBT) for IBS has been adapted from the mindfulness-based 
stress reduction programme. The basic course emphasizes the relevance of mindfulness in 
coping with IBS-related symptoms and perceptions. With a range of behavioural and 
cognitive techniques, MBT promotes sensory versus emotional processing of 
interoceptive signals and counteracts catastrophizing as a maladaptive cognitive coping 
style215.
Enck et al.
Page 46
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 8 | Key questions to be addressed in future research
Can we develop clinically applicable biomarkers to stratify patients to disease 
mechanisms, thereby reducing the number of patients needed to evaluate new therapeutic 
agents? Possible factors that should be taken into account are:
•
Transit time
•
Evidence of bile acid excess
•
Immune activation
•
Biopsy supernatant mediators that activate enteric neurons
•
Mucosal serotonin availability
Can we assess the role of genetic markers in irritable bowel syndrome? Possible factors 
that should be taken into account are:
•
Gene and environment interactions
•
Biomarker discovery — for example, by genome-wide association 
studies
•
Pharmacogenetics
Can we identify the mode of action of food intolerances to allow rational designs of 
diets? Possible tests are:
•
Nutrient challenge meals
•
MRI studies of intestinal volumes and gas or water content of the stool
Can we characterize the functional effects of changes in microbiota to improve efficacy 
of manipulation of the microbiota as a novel therapy? Possible studies are:
•
Randomized controlled trials of fermentable oligosaccharides, 
disaccharides, monosaccharides and polyols (FODMAP) intervention 
with assessment of changes in microbiota
•
Effect of placebo-controlled diets on faecal or serum bacterial 
metabolites
Enck et al.
Page 47
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. IBS subtypes according to the Rome III criteria
A two-dimensional graph of the four possible irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) subtypes 
according to bowel form at a particular point in time, and the percentage of time this bowel 
form has to be present to meet the criteria for IBS with constipation (IBS-C), IBS with 
diarrhoea (IBS-D), mixed-type IBS (IBS-M) and unsubtyped IBS (IBS-U). Adapted with 
permission from REF. 119, American Gastroenterology Association.
Enck et al.
Page 48
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. IBS prevalence in population studies around the world
Pooled prevalence data per country are colour-coded. Data from REF. 1 are supplemented by 
studies from another nine countries (see Supplementary information S1 (table)). IBS, 
irritable bowel syndrome; N/A, not applicable.
Enck et al.
Page 49
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. IBS-associated comorbidities
A model of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) and its associations with other clinical, 
intestinal, extra-intestinal and psychiatric conditions. For each of the listed disorders, 
overlap with IBS symptoms has been reported in the literature11. The different components 
should be viewed as layers of complexity: the IBS subtypes are part of the group of 
functional bowel disorders, these are part of all kinds of functional disorders and these again 
are part of a `layer' of psychiatric disorders. GERD, gastroesophageal reflux disease; IBS-C, 
IBS with constipation; IBS-D, IBS with diarrhoea; IBS-M, mixed-type IBS; IBS-U, 
unsubtyped IBS; PMS, premenstrual syndrome.
Enck et al.
Page 50
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Overview of the pathophysiology of IBS
Although the aetiology of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) has not yet been completely 
elucidated, various factors have a role, including composition of the gut microbiota, 
intestinal permeability, immune cell reactivity and sensitivity of the enteric nervous system, 
the brain–gut axis (spinal, vagal or pelvic pathways) or the brain. The figure highlights those 
mediators that are probably involved in IBS pathology. The plus symbols indicate whether a 
mediator activates or inhibits its target cell; those in parentheses denote actions established 
in animal models and those without parentheses are effects demonstrated in humans (human 
tissue). 5-HT, 5-hydroxytryptamine (also known as serotonin); CGRP, calcitonin gene-
related peptide; GDNF, glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor; IL, interleukin; PAR2, 
proteinase-activated receptor 2; TNF, tumour necrosis factor.
Enck et al.
Page 51
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Neuroimmune interactions in the gut
An intimate anatomical and functional association between enteric neurons, terminals from 
extrinsic nerves and cells of the enteric immune system is the basis for neuroimmune 
interactions in the gut wall. Functional signalling between nerves and immune cells mostly 
happens in the epithelial and submucosal layers where there is a high density of immune 
cells — in particular, T lymphocytes, mast cells and macrophages. The neuroimmune 
interactions are bidirectional. Enteric neurons, extrinsic nerves and glial cells respond to 
cytokines and mast cell mediators. Some patients with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) have 
circulating autoantibodies against neuronal structures and antibodies that are generated as a 
response to antigen exposure from the lumen. Neurons can respond directly to antibodies 
through direct activation of channels or receptors. They also respond to antigens through 
pathways involving neuronal Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3), TLR4 and TLR7. Direct signalling 
between microbiota and the host involves activation of neurons through polysaccharide A. 
These direct effects of luminal factors are very likely to be outnumbered by signalling 
between epithelial (in particular, enteroendocrine cells), immune and nerve cells. Neurons 
also express receptors for adenosine and ATP; both molecules are released in the gut wall 
under inflammatory or stress conditions. Reciprocally, nerves release factors that affect 
epithelial or immune cells. The best-documented effect is the activation of mast cells 
through the release of calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) from extrinsic visceral 
afferents or enteric neurons. Conversely, acetylcholine (ACh) inhibits the activation of 
macrophages. Neurogenic inflammation, which is sometimes observed in animal models, is 
probably caused by the release of CGRP and substance P from extrinsic fibres followed by 
permeabilization of blood vessels. In addition, adipocytes in the lamina propria nestle 
against nerve fibres, and release of their pro-inflammatory mediators modulates nerve 
activity. The plus and minus symbols indicate whether a mediator activates or inhibits its 
target cell; those in parentheses denote actions established in animal models and those 
without parentheses are effects demonstrated in humans (human tissue). 5-HT, 5-
hydroxytryptamine (also known as serotonin); CCK, cholecystokinin; CRF, corticotropin-
Enck et al.
Page 52
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 releasing factor; IL-10, interleukin 10; NGF, nerve growth factor; PUFA, polyunsaturated 
fatty acid; TRP, transient receptor potential cation channel.
Enck et al.
Page 53
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Summary of the genetic findings associated with different pathophysiological 
mechanisms underlying IBS
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)-related pathways that are potential pharmacogenetic targets 
are marked in red when based on genetic findings and in blue when based on epigenetic 
findings; those in black are currently not seen as potential pharmacogenetic targets101. 
Various pathways might be affected in specific subgroups of patients with IBS: epithelial 
barrier (permeability), immune function, impaired bile acid metabolism and function, 
neuronal processing and signal transduction via spinal afferents from the periphery to the 
central nervous system in addition to the bidirectional crosstalk via the brain–gut axis, 
presumably contributing to psychological conditions such as anxiety, depression and 
somatization. Brain networks that have been associated with structural and functional 
alteration in IBS are depicted. ADRA, adrenoceptor-α; aINS, anterior insula; aMCC, 
anterior midcingulate cortex; CDC42, cell division cycle 42; CDH1, cadherin 1; CGN, 
cingulin; CLDN, claudin; COMT, catechol-O-methyltransferase; CRHR1, corticotropin-
releasing hormone receptor 1; FGFR4, fibroblast growth factor receptor 4; GLUL, 
glutamate-ammonia ligase (also known as glutamine synthetase); GPBAR1, G protein-
coupled bile acid receptor 1; GRID2IP, GRID2-interacting protein; HPA, hypothalamus–
pituitary–adrenal; HTR, 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor; hypo, hypothalamus; IL, interleukin; 
KLB, Klotho-β; LCC, locus coeruleus complex; mir, microRNA; mPFC, medial prefrontal 
cortex; NKRF, nuclear factor-κB-repressing factor; NR3C1, nuclear receptor subfamily 3 
group C member 1; NTS, solitary nucleus; OFC, orbitofrontal cortex; PAG, periaqueductal 
grey; PGR, progesterone receptor; SCN5A, sodium voltage-gated channel α-subunit 5; 
sgACC, subgenual anterior cingulate cortex; SLC6A4, solute carrier family 6 member 4; 
Enck et al.
Page 54
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 TNF, tumour necrosis factor; TNFSF15, TNF superfamily member 15; TRPV1, transient 
receptor potential cation channel subfamily V member 1.
Enck et al.
Page 55
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. A diagnostic algorithm for patients with IBS
This diagram gives a schematic overview of the sequential approach to irritable bowel 
syndrome (IBS) diagnosis144. CBC, complete blood count; CRP, C-reactive protein. Figure 
from REF. 144, Nature Publishing Group.
Enck et al.
Page 56
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 8. Mechanisms of action of different drugs used for the treatment of IBS
Drugs currently used for the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) (orange boxes) 
target nerve activity, epithelial functions or the contractile state of the smooth muscle layers. 
Several drugs act by enhancing the activity of chloride channels to increase fluid secretion 
into the intestinal lumen as a consequence. Other mechanisms of action include modulation 
of visceral sensitivity at a central or peripheral level. Finally, drugs act to modulate signal 
transduction at the neuromuscular junction or alter motility by direct myogenic actions. The 
plus and minus symbols indicate whether a mediator activates or inhibits its target cell; those 
in parentheses denote actions established in animal models and those without parentheses 
are effects demonstrated in humans (human tissue). 5-HT, 5-hydroxytryptamine (also known 
as serotonin); ACh, acetylcholine; CFTR, cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance 
regulator; CIC2, chloride channel protein 2; GC-C, guanylyl cyclase C; VIP, vasoactive 
intestinal peptide.
Enck et al.
Page 57
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 9. Concept of multifactorial quality-of-life effects in IBS
The genome and epigenome partially determine (`filter') the response of an individual to 
external stressors (psychosocial factors) and internal stressors (ingested food or microbiota). 
These, together with social support, appraisal, emotion and coping behaviours against 
stressors, determine the stress response affecting the brain–gut interactions. This response 
might involve regional brain activation, changes in autonomic and neuroendocrine function, 
which might lead to many of the clinical manifestations observed in irritable bowel 
syndrome (IBS), including visceral hypersensitivity, alteration in gastrointestinal motility, 
increased mucosal permeability and low-grade inflammation. These gastrointestinal 
symptoms and other extra-intestinal manifestations (such as multiple somatic symptoms and 
psychiatric comorbidities) impair the quality of life (QOL) of patients with IBS.
Enck et al.
Page 58
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Enck et al.
Page 59
Table 1
Evidence-based psychological treatments for IBS
Psychological treatment approach*
n of studies (n of 
participants)
Main findings
Comments
CBT248
18 RCTs (1,380)
• Symptom score: medium-to-
large significant pooled effect 
size‡ (0.67)
• CBT was superior to waiting lists, basic 
support or medical treatment alone at the 
end of treatment but not superior to other 
psychological treatments
• QOL: medium significant 
pooled effect size (0.48)
• Psychological distress 
(depression and anxiety): small-
to-medium pooled effect size 
(0.21)
• NNT for CBT was 3 (95% CI: 
2–6)
PIT249
2 RCTs (273)
Both studies compared PIT with 
`supportive listening' applied by 
the same therapist. Compared 
with controls:
• PIT is less well standardized in terms of 
its performance (that is, duration, setting 
and phases)
• PIT significantly improved 
symptoms
• PIT showed a large cost-
effectiveness
• PIT was widely acceptable
• PIT significantly improved 
QOL
• PIT significantly reduced costs
• The calculated OR for benefit 
was 2.92 (95% CI: 1.76–4.83)
• NNT for dynamic 
psychotherapy was 3.5 (95% CI: 
2–25)
GDH247
7 RCTs (452)
• 6 of 7 RCTs reported a 
significant reduction (all P < 
0.05) in overall gastrointestinal 
symptoms compared with 
supportive therapy only
• Very few professionals are trained for the 
specific implementation of GDH and 
therefore their services can be difficult to 
access
• Response rates ranged between 
24% and 73%
• Efficacy was maintained long 
term in four of five studies
• NNT was 4 (95% CI: 3–8)
• The mechanisms by which GDH exerts its 
effect are poorly understood
MBT215
2 RCTs (79)
• Women showed greater 
reductions of symptoms 
compared with a control group 
immediately after training 
(26.4% versus 6.2%; P = 0.006) 
and at 3 months follow-up 
(38.2% compared with 11.8%; P 
= 0.001)
• In another RCT, the IBS symptom severity 
in the mindfulness-based stress reduction 
group was not retained at 6 months follow-
up
• Changes in QOL, distress and 
anxiety were not different 
between groups immediately 
after treatment
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Enck et al.
Page 60
Psychological treatment approach*
n of studies (n of 
participants)
Main findings
Comments
• Significantly greater 
improvement in the MBT group 
than in the control group evident 
at 3 months follow-up
• The beneficial effects persisted 
for ≥3 months
Relaxation214§
6 RCTs (255)
• Overall, no benefit of relaxation 
training or therapy in IBS was 
detected in the RCTs
• The field of studies on relaxation 
techniques is diverse
GSHs250
10 RCTs (886)
• Compared with control 
conditions, a moderate effect size 
on symptom seventy (0.72) and a 
large effect size on the increase 
of patients' QOL (0.84) was 
found
• GSHs might be an easily accessible and a 
cost-effective treatment alternative. 
However, there is a wide heterogeneity and 
variance in its performance
The NNT data are based on Ford et al.214. CBT, cognitive–behavioural therapy; GDH, gut-directed hypnosis; GSH, guided self-help intervention; 
IBS, irritable bowel syndrome; MBT, mindfulness-based therapy; NNT, number needed to treat; OR, odds ratio; PIT, psychodynamic 
(interpersonal) therapy; QOL, quality of life; RCT, randomized controlled trial.
*See REF. 245.
‡Effect size (for example, Cohen's d): effect sizes of 0.2–0.5 are regarded as small, between 0.5 and 0.8 as moderate and >0.8 as large.
§Methods and techniques applied are progressive muscle relaxation, biofeedback and transcendental or yoga meditations.
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 26.
