 Abstracts for the Sixth Biennial SIRS Conference
Concurrent Symposia 
S59 
35.3 CHILDHOOD EXPOSURE TO GREEN SPACE 
– A NOVEL RISK-DECREASING MECHANISM 
FOR SCHIZOPHRENIA?
Kristine Engemann*,1, Carsten Bøcker Pedersen1, 
Constantinos Tsirogiannis1, Preben Bo Mortensen1, 
Jens-Christian Svenning1
1Aarhus University
Background: Schizophrenia risk has been linked to urbanization but the 
underlying mechanistic link remains unknown. Less green space in urban-
ized areas, where schizophrenia risk is high, could point to green space as 
an important factor. Green space is hypothesized to positively influence 
mental health and could mediate schizophrenia risk through noise and 
particle pollution removal, stress relief or other unknown mechanisms. 
However, the effect of green space on schizophrenia risk has not been dis-
entangled from that of urbanization and it is unclear if different measures 
of green space associate differently with risk.
Methods: We used satellite data from the Landsat program to quantify green 
space for Denmark in 30 × 30m resolution for the years 1985–2013. The effect 
of quantity and heterogeneity of green space and urbanization at place of 
residence on schizophrenia risk was estimated using cox regression from a 
longitudinal population-based sample of the Danish population (943 027 per-
sons). Schizophrenia risk was controlled for a range of individual and socioec-
onomic characteristics that may confound the effect of green space including 
age, sex and parental education, salary, and employment status.
Results: Living at the lowest amount of green space was associated with a 
1.52-fold increased risk of developing schizophrenia compared to persons 
living at the highest level of green space. This association remained after 
adjusting for known risk factors for schizophrenia: urbanization, age, sex, 
and socioeconomic status. The strongest protective association was observed 
during the earliest childhood years and closest to place of residence.
Discussion: We found green space to decrease schizophrenia risk independ-
ent of urbanization - consequently pointing to green space as a new envi-
ronmental risk factor for schizophrenia development. This study supports 
findings from other studies highlighting the natural environment as an 
important factor for human health, and points to a new methodological 
framework that combines epidemiological studies with big data approaches.
35.4 A PUBLIC HEALTH APPROACH TO THE 
PREVENTION OF PSYCHOSIS
Robin Murray*,1, Marta Di Forti1, Evangelos Vassos1, 
Antonella Trotta1, Harriet Quigley1, Olesya Ajnakina1,  
Diego Quattrone1, Giada Tripoli1, Victoria Rodriguez1, 
Craig Morgan1
1Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King’s College 
London
Background: The main attempt to prevent the development of psychosis 
has been through clinics for people at clinical high risk. Such an approach is 
useful for research but can never reach the majority of individuals who will 
become psychotic. Biological markers could be used to identify individuals 
with unusual vulnerabilities e.g. those with copy number variations such as 
VCFS. However, identifying the with such markers is unlikely to impact on 
the majority of cases, and as yet no useful interventions are available. How 
therefore to prevent psychosis?
Methods: Data will be presented from 3 studies of first onset psychosis 
(FEP) which used similar methods of ascertainment and assessment of 
cases and controls; AESOP and GAP from South London and the EU-GEI 
across 16 sites in 5 European countries.
Results: The identified risk factors for psychosis were the polygenic risk 
score for schizophrenia, childhood abuse, living in a city, being from an 
ethnic minority, drug abuse, adverse life events. Clearly, reducing some of 
these (e.g. urbanicity or migration) is not within the powers of psychia-
trists. The GAP study showed that the polygenic risk score accounted for 
the greatest variance in caseness; those with scores in the highest quin-
tile were 7 times more likely to be a psychotic case than those in those 
lowest quintile. The GAP study also gave estimates of the population 
attributable fraction (PAF): these indicated that if no one was exposed to 
child abuse and use of high potency cannabis, then 16% and 24% respec-
tively of psychosis in South London could be prevented. The EU-GEI 
study showed striking differences in the incidence of psychosis between 
Northern and Southern Europe; data will be prevented concerning the 
contribution of risk factors, especially cannabis use, to this.
Discussion: The knowledge that schizophrenia is the extreme of a contin-
uum of psychosis has important implications for prevention. Preventive 
approaches to hypertension or obesity do not focus on identifying individ-
uals carrying biological markers; rather they encourage members of the 
general population to take exercise and reduce their calorie intake. A sim-
ilar approach should be adopted for psychosis. In the long-term attempts 
to reduce risk factors should be made e.g. addressing psychotogenic 
aspects of city living or by decreasing discrimination of ethnic minorities. 
This will be difficult. However, an obvious place to start is by attempt-
ing to influence society’s patterns of consumption of high-potency can-
nabis. Unfortunately, public policy in the US and certain other countries 
appears to be moving in the opposite direction with increases in consump-
tion and potency. Are these countries sleep-walking to more psychosis?
Plenary
36. INVESTING IN RECOVERY – AN ECONOMIC 
AS WELL AS MORAL IMPERATIVE
David McDaid
London School of Economics and Political Science
Overall Abstract: ‘Recovery’ is a key concept in mental health policy around 
the globe. The World Health Organization has called for ‘a recovery-based 
approach that puts the emphasis on supporting individuals with mental disor-
ders and psychosocial disabilities to achieve their own aspirations and goals’. 
Investing in evidence-based actions to help foster recovery should therefore 
be core to any system of support for anyone experiencing schizophrenia or 
other severe mental health problems. While there is clearly a moral impera-
tive to maximise opportunities for recovery, the economic case for action can 
also be compelling and complementary. However, the opportunity to make 
an economic argument to support investment in recovery is not always taken, 
and even when made it is often too narrow in ambition and scope to have a 
major influence policy and practice. This presentation will highlight examples 
of the economic potential of recovery-focused services in health, employment, 
education and housing services. It will look at strengths and weaknesses in the 
way in which economic evidence is presented to policy makers, including the 
extent to which implementation challenges have been considered. It will argue 
that in making the economic case for recovery it is just as vital to look at the 
role of the messenger as well as the message that is being communicated.
Plenary
37. THE GUT MICROBIOME: A KEY REGULATOR 
OF NEURODEVELOPMENT AND BEHAVIOUR
John Cryan
University College Cork
Overall Abstract: The brain-gut-microbiota axis is emerging as a research area 
of increasing interest for those investigating the biological and physiological 
basis of neurodevelopmental, age-related and neurodegenerative disorders. 
