  
© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel
1664–9737/16/0044–0138$39.50/0 
 
Recommendations 
 
Intervent Neurol 2015;4:138–150 
 
Mechanical Thrombectomy-Ready 
Comprehensive Stroke Center Requirements 
and Endovascular Stroke Systems of Care: 
Recommendations from the Endovascular 
Stroke Standards Committee of the Society of 
Vascular and Interventional Neurology (SVIN) 
 
Joey D. English 
  
a    Dileep R. Yavagal 
  
b    Rishi Gupta 
  
c    Vallabh Janardhan 
  
d 
    
Osama O. Zaidat 
  
e    Andrew R. Xavier 
  
f    Raul G. Nogueira 
  
g 
    
Jawad F. Kirmani 
  
h    Tudor G. Jovin 
  
i 
  
 
a 
  
Neurointerventional Surgery, California Pacific Medical Center,  
San Francisco, Calif. 
, 
 
b 
  
Neurology and Neurosurgery, University of Miami School of Medicine,  
Miami, Fla. 
, 
 
c 
  
Neurosurgery, WellStar Medical Group,  
Marietta, Ga. 
,  
d 
  
Neurology, Medical City Dallas 
Hospital,  
Dallas, Tex. 
,  
e 
  
Medical College of Wisconsin,  
Milwaukee, Wis. 
,  
f 
  
Neurology, Detroit 
Medical Center,  
Detroit, Mich. 
,  
g 
  
Emory University School of Medicine,  
Atlanta, Ga. 
,
 
h 
  
Stroke and Neurovascular Center, JFK Medical Center,  
Edison, N.J. 
, and  
i 
  
Neurology, 
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,  
Pittsburgh, Pa. 
, USA
 
 
Key Words 
 
Acute ischemic stroke · Large vessel occlusion · Mechanical thrombectomy · Systems of care 
 
Abstract 
 
Five landmark multicenter, prospective, randomized, open-label, blinded end point clinical tri-
als have recently demonstrated significant clinical benefit of endovascular therapy with me-
chanical thrombectomy in acute ischemic stroke (AIS) patients presenting with proximal intra-
cranial large vessel occlusions. The Society of Vascular and Interventional Neurology (SVIN) 
appointed an expert writing committee to summarize this new evidence and make recommen-
dations on how these data should guide emergency endovascular therapy for AIS patients. 
 
© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel 
 
Second-Generation Trials of Endovascular Therapy for Acute Ischemic Stroke 
 
In the MR CLEAN  
[1] 
, ESCAPE  
[2] 
, EXTEND IA  
[3] 
, SWIFT PRIME  
[4] 
 and REVASCAT  
[5] 
 tri-
als, acute ischemic stroke (AIS) patients with proven large vessel occlusions (LVOs) were ran-
domized to standard medical care [including treatment with intravenous tissue plasminogen 
 
Published online: February 19, 2016 
 
Joey D. English, MD, PhD 
 
Neurointerventional Surgery, California Pacific Medical Center 
 
45 Castro St, Suite 421 
 
San Francisco, CA 94114 (USA) 
 
E-Mail joeyenglish 
  
@ 
  
gmail.com 
www.karger.com/ine
 
DOI: 10.1159/000442715 
 139
Intervent Neurol 2015;4:138–150
 
DOI: 10.1159/000442715 
 
English et al.: Mechanical Thrombectomy-Ready Comprehensive Stroke Center 
Requirements and Endovascular Stroke Systems of Care 
www.karger.com/ine
© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel
activator (IV tPA) for eligible patients] versus standard medical care combined with endovas-
cular mechanical thrombectomy (MT), with favorable neurological outcome measured using the 
90-day modified Rankin score (mRS). All trials were stopped early by the respective trials’ data 
safety monitoring boards after interim analyses showed overwhelming efficacy of endovascular 
intervention.
 
 
These trials were conducted at high-volume cerebrovascular centers with extensive 
experience and proven capabilities in all aspects of the 24/7 care of the complex AIS patient, 
including expertise in emergency clinical and radiographic evaluation, neurointerventional 
experience with stent retriever-based MT, neurointensive care units with stroke neurolo-
gists, neurointensivists and stroke-trained nursing staff, and neurosurgical management of 
AIS-related complications. Such experience was critical to achieving the goals of (as stated in 
the ESCAPE Methods) ‘fast treatment times and efficient work-flow’ and expert postinter-
vention management, criteria by which the enrolling centers in these trials were selected.
 
 
In summary, 5 studies, representing 1,287 randomized patients, provide level 1A evidence 
in support of endovascular treatment of LVO AIS patients in experienced high-volume stroke 
centers capable of performing stent-retriever-based MT therapy (summarized in  
table 1 
). 
Moreover, the powerful treatment effect of endovascular MT, as evidenced by a number 
needed to treat (NNT) of 3–7 for achieving an independent level of neurological functioning, 
is of a magnitude that few therapies in clinical medicine can claim. For comparison, the NNT 
for IV tPA in AIS is 8, while the NNT for percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) compared 
to systemic fibrinolysis for preventing death in acute coronary syndromes is 30 (see also 
Trial
Patients
IV tPA
TICI
2B/3
 
90-day mRS 0 – 2
med 
ical
endovascular
MR CLEAN
500
89%
59%
19%
33%
ESCAPE
315
75%
72%
29%
53%
EXTEND IA
70
100%
8 
6%
40%
71%
SWIFT PRIME
196
100%
88%
36%
60%
REVASCAT
206
73%
66%
28%
44%
 
Table 1.  
Summary of recent 
stroke trials
 
Table 2. Summary of the estimated effects of various interventions for heart attacks and stroke in terms of 
the NNT
a
NNT to prevent 1 death or dependency at 1 year [32]
Care of an AIS patient in a stroke unit
18
Aspirin for AIS
83
b
NNT to prevent 1 stroke at 1 year [32]
Endarterectomy for symptomatic severe carotid stenosis
26
Anticoagulation for nonvalvular atrial fibrillation
41
Endarterectomy for asymptomatic severe carotid stenosis
100
c
NNT to benefit functional outcome
Mechanical thrombectomy in AIS [1, 4]
3 – 7
IV tPA in 0- to 3-hour time window for AIS [33]
8
IV tPA in 3- to 4.5-hour time window for AIS
14
d
NNT to prevent 1 death at 1 month [34]
IV thrombolysis in 0- to 6-hour time window for STEMI
43
IV thrombolysis in 6- to 12-hour time window for STEMI
63
 140
Intervent Neurol 2015;4:138–150
 
DOI: 10.1159/000442715 
 
English et al.: Mechanical Thrombectomy-Ready Comprehensive Stroke Center 
Requirements and Endovascular Stroke Systems of Care 
www.karger.com/ine
© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel
 
table 2 
). Given the overwhelming benefit of endovascular therapy for LVOs in high-volume 
experienced centers, it is now imperative that as many patients as possible with this other-
wise devastating condition be triaged to centers capable of providing this therapy in the 
shortest possible time frame. Our great public health challenge is to now translate these trial 
results into everyday practice while maintaining the high standards of the enrolling centers 
of these trials.
 
Impact of Level 1A Data and Unmet Needs 
 
Approximately 700,000 AIS occur annually in the United States, of which 40–45% 
(280,000–315,000) are estimated to be due to LVOs  
[6] 
. In addition, the percentage of AIS due 
to LVOs is likely growing secondary to the increased prevalence of atrial fibrillation and 
cervical carotid disease in our aging population. By comparison, the annual volume of aneu-
rysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage (aSAH) in the US is approximately 30,000, less than 10% 
of the number of LVO AIS patients. More analogous is the incidence of myocardial infarction 
in the US: approximately 915,000 cases occur annually, of which 30% ( 
∼ 
275,000) are due to 
a disease process best treated with endovascular PCI – ST-segment elevation myocardial 
infarctions (STEMIs).
 
 
Several analyses, however, suggest that the percentage of LVO AIS patients that might 
currently qualify for endovascular MT in the US might at the most be 20,000 per year  
[7, 8] 
. 
Given the prevalence of LVO stroke in our society, and the availability of now proven inter-
ventions, this number is grossly inadequate. Why would less than 10% of all LVO AIS patients 
qualify for endovascular treatment (compared to approximately 70% of all STEMI patients 
receiving PCI or IV lytic therapy)? The answer is multifactorial but nonetheless simple: most 
patients do not currently reach capable endovascular centers before extremely time-sensitive 
irreversible brain injury has occurred. This delay is related to (1) persistent poor public 
understanding of life-threatening emergency stroke symptoms and (2) woefully inadequate 
systems of care. Increasing the number of LVO patients that will qualify for and thus benefit 
from endovascular therapy will require extensive work to educate the public and to create 
systems of care that facilitate fast and efficient triage of AIS patients to centers capable of 
providing comprehensive medical, endovascular and surgical care, including appropriate 
patient selection, endovascular MT therapy and expert postintervention management. Such 
systems are akin to those that have evolved for the management of acute trauma and acute 
myocardial infarction.
 
Recommendations 
 
The Society of Vascular and Interventional Neurology (SVIN) guideline writing commit-
tee is making recommendations for effective application of AIS endovascular therapy using 
the framework of the ‘8 Ds’ in the Stroke Chain of Survival endorsed in the AHA/ASA 2013 
Guidelines for the Early Management of Patients with Acute Ischemic Stroke  
[9] 
: Detection, 
Dispatch, Delivery, Door, Data, Decision, Drug (or other intervention) and Disposition 
( 
table 3 
). Critical components of this effort will include: (1) public health education campaigns 
regarding stroke symptoms and the availability of highly effective treatment options that are 
critically time dependent; (2) education of first responders regarding in-field recognition and 
triage of stroke patients to MT-capable centers in a time-dependent fashion, and (3) continued 
evolution of the comprehensive stroke center (CSC) model to incorporate specific criteria for 
receiving and treating LVO AIS patients.
 141
Intervent Neurol 2015;4:138–150
 
DOI: 10.1159/000442715 
 
English et al.: Mechanical Thrombectomy-Ready Comprehensive Stroke Center 
Requirements and Endovascular Stroke Systems of Care 
www.karger.com/ine
© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel
 
 
Detection and Dispatch 
 
The primary reason most AIS patients do not qualify for treatment (either with IV tPA or 
MT therapy) is delayed presentation from symptom onset. Public understanding of stroke is 
poor, with surveys showing that only about half of interviewees can identify common stroke 
symptoms  
[10] 
. Worse yet, identification of stroke symptoms is often not associated with an 
understanding of their time-sensitive emergency nature, with only about half of all stroke 
patients utilizing the 9-1-1 EMS system  
[11] 
. The most important step towards increasing the 
number of LVO AIS patients receiving treatment will thus likely involve continued aggressive 
public health education of stroke symptom recognition, their emergency nature and the avail-
ability of proven but time-sensitive treatment options. For example, educational efforts via 
primary care physicians or public health campaigns could be specifically targeted towards 
patients with a known increased risk of an LVO AIS (e.g., patients with atrial fibrillation, 
cardiac valvular disease, cervical carotid disease, or prior embolic stroke). Ultimately, 
increasing the number of AIS patients receiving treatment will be heavily dependent upon 
increasing the percentage of AIS patients who seek immediate emergency medical attention 
for stroke symptoms.
 
 
Recommendations  
 
Public health campaigns regarding stroke symptoms, their emergency nature (necessi-
tating use of the 9-1-1 EMS system) and the availability of time-sensitive treatments are 
needed.
 
 
Delivery 
 
The AHA/ASA guidelines emphasize the importance of ‘prompt triage and transport to the 
most appropriate stroke hospital and prehospital notification’ of the patient’s impending 
arrival by first responders  
[9] 
. Such in-field recognition and triage to specific hospitals has been 
central to optimizing care of the acute trauma patient and acute myocardial infarction patient. 
For example, guidelines for EMS evaluation of acute trauma patients stratify patients according 
to injury mechanism and severity, through which patients are routed to one of five levels of 
trauma care hospitals, bypassing lower-level trauma centers if necessary  
[12] 
. This approach 
has been noted to improve mortality following motor vehicle crashes  
[13, 14] 
. For patients with 
STEMI, AHA guidelines recommend direct transport to a PCI-ready facility, bypassing hospitals 
that do not offer that treatment  
[15] 
. These recommendations emphasize that the aim of bypass 
is to reduce times to treatment for PCI and also suggest this method is preferable in patients 
with a transport time of under 30 min. These guidelines were adopted based on the DANAMI-2 
trial that showed the benefit of PCI despite longer travel distances  
[16] 
.
 
Table 3. Stroke chain of survival (modified from 2013 AHA/ASA guidelines)
8D approach
Detection
Patient or bystander recognition of stroke signs and symptoms
Dispatch
Immediate activation of 9-1-1 and priority EMS dispatch
Delivery
Prompt triage and transport to most appropriate stroke hospital and prehospital notification
Door
Immediate ED evaluation ideally by pre notified neurologists; if evaluation done at an outside hospital,
direct transport to brain imaging or angiography suite or stroke intervention lab is encouraged
Data
Prompt ED evaluation, stroke team activation, laboratory studies and brain imaging
Decision
Diagnosis and determination of most appropriate therapy; discussion with patient and family
Drug
Administration of appropriate drugs or other interventions
Disposition
Timely admission to stroke unit or intensive care unit, or transfer
 142
Intervent Neurol 2015;4:138–150
 
DOI: 10.1159/000442715 
 
English et al.: Mechanical Thrombectomy-Ready Comprehensive Stroke Center 
Requirements and Endovascular Stroke Systems of Care 
www.karger.com/ine
© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel
 
 
Similar triage systems for AIS patients, with an emphasis on improved in-field stroke 
recognition and transportation of LVO AIS patients to the ‘most appropriate stroke hospital’ 
(a high-volume MT-capable facility described below) rather than the ‘nearest stroke hospital’, 
are now necessary. Though stroke triage may be more challenging due to the absence of an 
objective test in the field (e.g., an EKG for STEMI), simple clinical examination skills may help 
to triage the more severe strokes. Such basic clinical examination skills have been stan-
dardized as part of several prehospital stroke severity scales (summarized in  
table 4 
), and 
have been studied or utilized by different EMS agencies across the world. Most of these scales 
allow for a relatively high sensitivity of detecting an LVO AIS patient in the field.
 
 
The goal is to identify and triage as many LVO AIS patients rapidly to the ‘most appro-
priate facility’ with comprehensive stroke care, including endovascular MT. The strict analogy 
to the acute trauma and STEMI patient suggests that these more evolved triage systems 
provide an ideal template for one focused on the acute stroke patient.
 
 
Recommendations  
 
The American Heart Association’s ‘Mission Lifeline’ project  
[17] 
 states that one of its 
main goals is ‘to create STEMI systems of care and improve existing ones to ensure prompt, 
seamless, effective treatment to STEMI patients’. A similar multisociety collaborative approach 
should be created to drive development of LVO AIS systems of care. A reasonable model 
would be to consider a triage system based upon the severity and duration of symptoms: all 
patients within the time window for IV tPA treatment might best be delivered to the nearest 
stroke center unless the added transport time to an endovascular capable hospital is less than 
30 min, whereas all patients ineligible for IV tPA due to symptom duration might best be 
triaged directly to the nearest endovascular-capable hospital.
 
Table 4. Summary of the prehospital stroke severity scales used for prehospital triage of LVO AIS patients to the most appropriate 
stroke facility
Name of scale
Initial study 
location
Sample 
size, n
Components
Score (cutoff 
for triage)
Sensitivity/
specificity 
PPV/PLR/
NPV/NLR
3-Item Stroke Scale
(3I-SS) [35]
Frankfurt am Main, 
Germany
171
level of consciousness
gaze
motor: arm and leg
0 – 6 (>4)
0.67/0.92
PPV 0.74
NPV 0.89
Los Angeles Motor Scale
(LAMS) [36]
Los Angeles, 
Calif., USA
119
face droop
arm drift
grip strength
0 – 5 (>4)
0.81/0.89
PLR 7.36
NLR 0.21
Texas Stroke Intervention 
Prehospital Stroke Scale
(TSI-PSS or LEGS score) [37] 
Dallas-Fort Worth, 
Tex., USA
174
leg strength
eye fields
gaze
speech/language
(also called LEGS score)
0 – 16 (>4)
0.66/0.76
PPV 0.52
PLR 2.73
NPV 0.85
NLR 0.45
Rapid Arterial Occlusion 
Evaluation Scale (RACE) [38]
Barcelona,
Spain
654
face droop
motor: arm and leg
gaze
language/aphasia
agnosia
0 – 9 (>5)
0.85/0.68
PPV 0.42
NPV 0.94
PPV = Positive predictive value; NPV = negative predictive value; PLR = positive likelihood ratio; NLR = negative likelihood 
ratio.
 143
Intervent Neurol 2015;4:138–150
 
DOI: 10.1159/000442715 
 
English et al.: Mechanical Thrombectomy-Ready Comprehensive Stroke Center 
Requirements and Endovascular Stroke Systems of Care 
www.karger.com/ine
© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel
 
 
Door, Data, Decision, Drug and Disposition 
 
Door, data, decision, drug and disposition encompass the critical management steps that 
begin once the AIS patient arrives at the receiving hospital. These include immediate emer-
gency department (ED) triage to a high-acuity area (Door), prompt ED evaluation, 24/7 stroke 
team activation, laboratory studies and advanced brain imaging (Data), diagnosis and deter-
mination of the most appropriate therapy (Decision), administration of appropriate drugs
or other interventions (Drug, and now mechanical endovascular reperfusion), and timely 
admission to a stroke unit or intensive care unit (Disposition).
 
 
The recently completed endovascular stroke trials have clearly demonstrated that high-
volume stroke centers are best suited to provide this complex care quickly and efficiently. 
With regard to acute stroke management, existing criteria for such CSCs by accreditation 
bodies such as The Joint Commission (TJC), Der Norske Veritas (DNV) or Hospital Facilities 
Accreditation Program (HFAP) have to date focused on the treatment of AIS patients with IV 
tPA. Given the level 1A data supporting endovascular therapy for LVO AIS patients, these 
guidelines should now be revised to incorporate specific criteria pertaining to endovascular 
management of AIS.
 
 
The current eligibility requirements for CSCs (for example, based on current TJC crite-
ria) include seven criteria: patient volume, advanced imaging capabilities, posthospital co-
ordination, dedicated neurointensive care, a peer review process for quality control, partici-
pation in stroke research and reporting of performance measures.
 
 
Volume 
 
Patient outcomes in disease processes such as acute trauma  
[18] 
, STEMI  
[19] 
 and aSAH 
 
[20, 21] 
 have been shown to be superior at high-volume facilities. Similarly, higher-volume 
endovascular stroke centers have lower times to reperfusion and better outcomes with MT 
 
[22] 
. Accordingly, TJC requirements for annual patient volume at CSCs include 20 patients 
with subarachnoid hemorrhage and 25 AIS patients treated with IV tPA. Given these TJC 
recommendations for aSAH and IV tPA treatment volumes, along with the prevalence of AIS 
compared to aSAH, where 85% of all strokes are ischemic in nature, a minimum requirement 
of 25–30 MT-treated patients per year is recommended. Also, given the association of opera-
tor volume and outcomes, each CSC-affiliated neurointerventionalist should have a minimum 
of 10 MT procedures per year.
 
 
Advanced Imaging Capabilities 
 
Current imaging criteria for CSCs include 24/7 availability of CT and CT angiography, MR 
and MR angiography, and catheter angiography, along with the ability to perform routine 
carotid duplex ultrasound, transcranial Doppler ultrasonography, extracranial ultrasonog-
raphy, transesophageal echocardiography and transthoracic echocardiography. All are 
critical for the management of the LVO AIS patient. In addition, CSCs performing endovas-
cular AIS interventions need the capacity to triage and treat two simultaneous LVO AIS 
patients, thus necessitating the 24/7 availability of 2 neurointerventionalists, 2 stroke inter-
ventional labs and all associated support staff (e.g., radiology technicians, nursing staff).
 
 
Stroke centers have traditionally been focused on providing resources and optimizing 
processes to improve delivery of thrombolytic medications, namely IV tPA. With the advent of 
cutting-edge clot retrieval devices and recent landmark endovascular stroke trials showing the 
functional outcome and mortality benefit of stroke intervention, the need for standardization of 
stroke intervention labs within stroke centers across the country has become paramount. The 
SVIN has compiled Stroke Interventional Laboratory Consensus (SILC) criteria to help stan-
dardize stroke intervention labs within stroke centers in an effort to promote high quality and 
rapid stroke care. The required elements of a stroke interventional lab are summarized in  
table 5 
.
 144
Intervent Neurol 2015;4:138–150
 
DOI: 10.1159/000442715 
 
English et al.: Mechanical Thrombectomy-Ready Comprehensive Stroke Center 
Requirements and Endovascular Stroke Systems of Care 
www.karger.com/ine
© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel
 
 
Posthospital Care Coordination 
 
Many LVO AIS patients currently treated at high volume stroke centers are patients 
transferred from outside hospitals. This system will likely evolve in the future towards direct 
transport of the suspected AIS patient to a CSC. In either scenario, CSCs need a monitored 
system that ensures adequate communication with the patient’s discharge facility (e.g., to an 
acute rehabilitation facility) and the patient’s local physicians to coordinate long-term care 
(e.g., acute rehabilitation needs, treatment plan for secondary prevention of stroke). Centers 
would be best served by cooperative protocols or transfer agreements to transition patients 
earlier to rehabilitation. Stroke centers should ensure that acute in-patient rehabilitation 
facilities that receive their patients be adequately resourced and trained in standardized 
outcome scales. In addition, stroke centers should encourage acute in-patient rehabilitation 
facilities to obtain appropriate certifications such as TJC stroke rehabilitation certification or 
Commission for Accreditation of Rehabilitation Facilities (CARF) certification.
 
 
Dedicated Neurointensive Care Unit and Expert Neurointensivist and Neurosurgical 
Management 
 
The TJC requirements for CSC management of aSAH patients and post-IV tPA AIS patients 
include a dedicated neurointensive care unit and 24/7 in-house expertise in cerebrovascular 
disease management. The medical management of the LVO AIS patient is equally complex, 
involving the prevention or management of secondary brain injury (e.g., ischemia-related 
cerebral edema and/or hemorrhagic conversion), reocclusion and the identification and 
treatment of the underlying etiology of the patient’s presenting LVO. Integral components of 
such expert management also include early mobilization and aggressive physical, occupa-
tional and speech/swallow therapy services. Given the potential for complications (intrace-
rebral hemorrhage, perforation with subarachnoid hemorrhage, etc.) that in some cases 
require emergent neurosurgical intervention (e.g., external ventricular drain placement, 
hematoma evacuation, hemicraniectomy) immediate availability of neurosurgical expertise 
on a 24/7 basis is also critical to the management of these patients.
 
 
As with previous studies showing improved outcomes for acute myocardial infarction 
patients treated in dedicated coronary care units  
[23] 
, treatment of AIS patients  
[24] 
, aSAH 
patients  
[25] 
 and head trauma patients  
[26] 
 in a dedicated neurological intensive care unit 
by a neurointensivist has been associated with improved neurological outcomes. These 
observations suggest that expert postoperative management of endovascular-treated LVO 
 
Table 5. Required elements for a Stroke Interventional Lab within a Stroke Center (SVIN-SILC: Stroke Interventional Laboratory 
Consensus criteria)
8M approach
Manpower
Essential personnel including medical director, physicians, nurses and radiology technicians
Machines
Appropriate angiographic equipment and facility level resources
Materials
Medical device inventory, angiography room supplies and medications
Methods
Standardized protocols for stroke workflow optimization within hospital and within the stroke 
interventional lab
Metrics, volume
Annual volume criteria for facilities as well as stroke interventionists to obtain as well as maintain 
certification or credentials
Metrics, quality
Benchmarks for performance improvement and quality assurance with meaningful measures within
the stroke interventional lab
Metrics, safety
Radiation and procedural safety practices
Money
Fair market value compensation standards for physician manpower needs to provide 24/7 coverage
of stroke interventional labs
 145
Intervent Neurol 2015;4:138–150
 
DOI: 10.1159/000442715 
 
English et al.: Mechanical Thrombectomy-Ready Comprehensive Stroke Center 
Requirements and Endovascular Stroke Systems of Care 
www.karger.com/ine
© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel
AIS patients is a critical aspect of achieving a favorable neurological outcome  
[27] 
. 24/7 
immediately available in person expertise in cerebrovascular disease management by teams 
of vascular neurologists or neurocritical care specialists should be required for all endovas-
cular AIS centers.
 
 
Peer Review Process 
 
The current JC guidelines require that ‘the hospital will have a peer review process to 
review and monitor the care provided to patients with ischemic stroke, subarachnoid hemor-
rhage and administration of tPA’. CSCs performing MT interventions for LVOs should incor-
porate into this process specific performance measures related to the fast and efficient endo-
vascular treatment of these patients (see below). In addition to an internal peer review 
process, a national database for endovascular performance measures akin to the AHA Get 
with the Guidelines registry for IV tPA treatment metrics would be useful to gauge individual 
centers’ quality outcomes and identify potential performance improvement measures.
 
 
Participation in Stroke Research 
 
The current JC eligibility criteria for CSCs state ‘the CSC will participate in Institutional 
Review Board-approved patient-centered stroke research’. The level 1A data generated by 
the MR CLEAN, ESCAPE, EXTEND IA, SWIFT PRIME and REVASCAT trials will stimulate 
numerous future clinical trials focused on optimizing endovascular therapy for LVO AIS 
patients (e.g., the use of advanced imaging for patient selection especially beyond the conven-
tional time window, the evaluation of novel MT devices, the use of procedural sedation, the 
impact of preoperative neuroprotective strategies). Experienced high-volume CSCs will 
remain the optimal setting for such stroke research and provide another important reason 
for directing AIS patients to CSCs. As part of the performance improvement process within 
stroke centers, it is essential for a CSC to have a coordinator tasked with maintenance of an 
endovascular stroke registry or database that would serve not only as a means of quality 
improvement but also as a source of meaningful clinical data analysis.
 
 
Performance Measures 
 
A primary emphasis of the MR CLEAN, ESCAPE, EXTEND IA, SWIFT PRIME and REVASCAT 
trials was measurement and implementation of fast treatment times and efficient workflow. 
Performance measures of all aspects of endovascular therapy for LVO AIS patients will be 
critical for identifying and correcting institutional barriers to fast and safe treatments for 
these patients. The recent January 2015 JC CSC core performance measures (CSTKs) incor-
porate some but not all of these variables. Of the 8 core performance measures for CSCs, 3 
overlap with all AIS patients (CSTK-01, documentation of presenting NIHSS; CSTK-02, docu-
mentation of the 90-day mRS outcome, and CSTK-05, documentation of the overall rate of 
hemorrhagic transformation of an AIS). Two are unique to CSC performance of endovascular 
therapy of LVOs: CSTK-07, the median time to revascularization, and CSTK-08, the postinter-
vention TICI reperfusion score.
 
 
CSTK-07 requires documentation of the time from hospital arrival to the time of initial 
MT therapy (e.g., first pass with a mechanical reperfusion device). More granular procedural 
details, however, would be even more helpful in identifying steps associated with significant 
delays to treatment, and minimize door to revascularization times. Required documentation 
of the following procedural metrics is thus recommended:
 
 
– 
First medical contact to hospital arrival 
 
– 
Time from hospital arrival to stroke team evaluation 
 
– 
Time from hospital arrival to imaging (if necessary) 
 
• 
Recommended less than 10 min 
 146
Intervent Neurol 2015;4:138–150
 
DOI: 10.1159/000442715 
 
English et al.: Mechanical Thrombectomy-Ready Comprehensive Stroke Center 
Requirements and Endovascular Stroke Systems of Care 
www.karger.com/ine
© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel
 
– 
Time from imaging study to groin puncture 
 
• 
Recommended less than 60 min 
 
– 
Time from hospital arrival to groin puncture 
 
• 
Recommended less than 90 min 
 
– 
Time from groin puncture to first MT attempt 
 
• 
Recommended less than 30 min 
 
– 
Time from groin puncture to TICI 2B or better or conclusion of procedure 
 
• 
Recommended less than 60 min 
 
Other critical procedural data not captured in the current JC CSC performance measures 
include the following:
 
 
– 
Preoperative ASPECTs score and core infarct volume (on baseline CT or MR) 
 
– 
Location of LVO on preoperative vascular imaging and initial diagnostic cerebral 
angiogram 
 
– 
Preintervention TICI score 
 
– 
Use of procedural general anesthesia versus conscious sedation 
 
– 
Postintervention infarct volume 
 
– 
Endovascular complications 
 
• 
Intracranial vessel perforation 
 
• 
Embolization to previously uninvolved territory 
 
• 
Arterial dissection 
 
• 
Groin hematoma requiring transfusion or surgical repair 
 
Most importantly, key clinical outcome measures must be obtained and documented, 
including the following:
 
 
– 
NIHSS at 24 h and hospital discharge 
 
– 
Symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage 
 
– 
Discharge destination 
 
– 
mRS and NIHSS at discharge and 90 days 
 
– 
Hospital and 90-day mortality 
 
Ongoing peer review of these performance measures should be conducted both inter-
nally in any hospital performing MT interventions and against other institutions via a national 
database, all in an effort to drive continued workflow quality improvement, with the goals of 
minimizing door to revascularization times and of ensuring safe and effective use of MT ther-
apies. Specific goals for procedural success and procedural safety, along with metrics for 
clinical outcomes, should be determined, and a peer review process (including both internally 
and those by accrediting bodies) should be triggered when institutions fail to achieve these 
goals on an annual basis. Fundamental criteria would include the following:
 
 
– 
Door to groin puncture times of less than 90 min in >75% of patients 
 
– 
TICI 2B or 3 reperfusion greater than 50% of the time 
 
– 
Symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage rate of less than 10% 
 
– 
90-day mortality rate of less than 25% 
 
– 
90-day mRS of 0–2 in greater than 30% 
 
The Necessary Evolution of the CSC Model 
 
The current model for CSCs envisions a single facility with high volumes of both hemor-
rhagic and ischemic stroke patients. The prevalence and treatment acuity of these two subsets 
of stroke, however, suggest the need for a divergence in triage and care. Hemorrhagic stroke 
is less common than ischemic stroke, accounting for only 15% of all stroke. As a general
rule, the endovascular or surgical treatment for hemorrhagic stroke (e.g. ruptured cerebral 
 147
Intervent Neurol 2015;4:138–150
 
DOI: 10.1159/000442715 
 
English et al.: Mechanical Thrombectomy-Ready Comprehensive Stroke Center 
Requirements and Endovascular Stroke Systems of Care 
www.karger.com/ine
© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel
aneurysm, ruptured arteriovenous malformation) is urgent but not emergent, and such inter-
ventions are typically performed within 24 h of arrival to the treating facility. These two 
factors (uncommon, not requiring immediate treatment) might favor transfer of patients 
needing highly specialized expertise in aspects of hemorrhagic stroke treatment not available 
at some endovascular MT-capable centers to centers with added expertise in hemorrhagic 
stroke management (e.g., surgical clipping), even if the transfer were to require several hours 
 
[28] 
. Relatively few such added expertise hemorrhagic stroke facilities are likely necessary 
given the overall low volume of these patients.
 
 
Ischemic stroke, however, is extremely common, accounting for 85% of all stroke patients. 
In addition, treatment with either IV tPA or endovascular therapy is extremely time sensitive, 
and treatment delays (including those associated with patient transfer) need to be minimized 
as much as possible. While in-field evaluation and triage to an endovascular-capable hospital 
is one important way to minimize treatment delays, the availability of more MT-capable 
hospitals that can directly receive acute stroke patients from EMS (e.g., within 30–45 min of 
EMS triage) will prove central to effective treatment of these patients.
 
 
Given the rare nature of aneurysmal SAH, however, it is unlikely that all MT-capable 
hospitals with sufficient AIS volume could also meet aSAH volume criteria for CSC status as 
currently defined. The concept of the CSC should thus evolve to accommodate the emerging 
need for more regional MT-capable hospitals that will not have substantial aSAH volume. One 
possible model would be to designate CSCs capable of fulfilling endovascular AIS and all other 
aspects of ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke treatment criteria, but not those for aneurysmal 
SAH clipping, and CSCs capable of fulfilling criteria for both aneurysm clipping and endovas-
cular AIS treatments. EMS transport to the nearest MT-capable CSC stroke center could then 
most efficiently triage ischemic stroke patients; patients found to have aSAH in which surgical 
clipping is deemed necessary could be stabilized and then transferred to the nearest CSC 
facility with aneurysm clipping capabilities (see  
table 6 
 for a summary of the proposed nec-
essary elements for all AIS comprehensive stroke centers).
 
Conclusions 
 
Twenty years have passed since IV tPA was first shown to provide benefit to AIS patients, 
becoming the first and only approved treatment for AIS. Despite disappointment with initial 
clinical trials that failed to show benefit in unselected patients treated with intra-arterial 
 
Table 6. Required elements for AIS Comprehensive Stroke Centers
1
24/7 stroke neurology team available within 15 min either in person or via telemedicine (telephone or telecamera)
2
24/7 neurointerventionalists available within 30 min
3
Advanced imaging capabilities, including 24/7 availability of CT and CT angiography, MR and MR angiography and 
catheter angiography
4
24/7 neurosurgery coverage available within 30 min
5
24/7 NeuroICU and neurointensivists available within 30 min
6
Capacity to handle two simultaneous acute LVO patients
2 NeuroIR suites or stroke intervention labs (including associated teams of RNs, techs, etc.)
2 available neurointerventionalists
7
Minimum volume requirements
Minimal of 30 endovascular MT cases/year
Minimum of 10 MT cases per operator per year
Minimal of 25 IV tPA cases/year
 148
Intervent Neurol 2015;4:138–150
 
DOI: 10.1159/000442715 
 
English et al.: Mechanical Thrombectomy-Ready Comprehensive Stroke Center 
Requirements and Endovascular Stroke Systems of Care 
www.karger.com/ine
© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel
lytics and/or first-generation endovascular devices  
[29–31] 
, several prospective randomized 
trials have now provided powerful level 1A evidence of overwhelming efficacy of endovas-
cular MT with stent retriever devices in LVO AIS patients at experienced high-volume stroke 
centers. Endovascular acute stroke therapy has thus changed almost overnight from a 
treatment with unclear benefit to a patient’s best opportunity for avoiding death or major 
neurological disability, a treatment now becoming the standard of care.
 
 
This patient population, however, currently remains dramatically underserved, with 
fewer than 10% currently receiving this powerful intervention. To substantially increase the 
percentage of patients receiving endovascular therapy for their LVO stroke will require 
significant public health and infrastructure investments, from patient education to creation 
of regional triage systems of care with more endovascular MT-capable hospitals (see  
table 7 
 
for a summary of these recommendations). While an enormous challenge, such efforts have 
the potential to dramatically impact the lives of numerous patients facing a terrible disease 
associated with significant death and disability.
 
Disclosure Statement 
 
J.D.E. reports consulting work with Stryker Neurovascular, Medtronic and Silk Road Medical. D.R.Y. 
reports consulting work with Aldagen/Cytomedix and Medtronic, is a steering committee member for the 
SWIFT Prime Trial, a DSMB member for the ESCAPE trial, and a co-principal investigator for the RECOVER-
Stroke trial. R.G. reports consulting work with Stryker Neurovascular, Medtronic, Rapid Medical, and 
Penumbra, and royalties from UpToDate. He is also the Associate Editor of the  
Journal of Neurointerventional 
Surgery 
, the  
Journal of Neuroimaging 
, and  
Interventional Neurology 
. He receives grant support from Zoll, 
Penumbra, Medtronic, Stryker Neurovascular and the Wellstar Foundation. O.O.Z. reports consulting work 
with Stryker Neurovascular, Penumbra, and Medtronic, is on the steering committee for THERAPY and 
DEFUSE 3 clinical trials, is an NIH STROKENET endovascular committee co-chair, and is the PI for ARISE II 
embotrap stent retriever trial and the PI for the ATLAS aneurysm stent study. R.G.N. is Trevo-2 and DAWN 
Trials Principal Investigator for Stryker Neurovascular; he is also on the SWIFT and SWIFT Prime Trials 
Steering Committee and the STAR Trial Angiographic Core Lab of Covidien, in the 3D Separator Trial Exec-
utive Committee of Penumbra Inc. and is a member of the Stroke Trial DSMB of Rapid Medical. Furthermore, 
 
Table 7. Summary of recommendations
1
Endovascular MT, in addition to treatment with IV tPA in eligible patients, is recommended for anterior circulation large 
vessel occlusion ischemic strokes in patients presenting within 6 h of symptom onset (level 1A evidence)
2
Public health campaigns regarding stroke symptoms, their emergency nature (necessitating use of the 9-1-1 EMS 
system), and the availability of time-sensitive treatments are needed
3
Systems of care focused upon the out-of-hospital triage and transport of patients to specialized treatment centers are 
now required for ischemic stroke, analogous to systems that have evolved for STEMI and trauma patients; a multisociety 
collaborative approach akin to the American Heart Association’s ‘STEMI Mission Lifeline’ project [17] could help drive 
development of such LVO AIS systems of care
4
Endovascular MT-capable hospitals should meet specific requirements regarding AIS and endovascular case volume, 
infrastructure, 24/7 imaging and clinical expertise, efficient workflow and procedural and clinical outcomes, all followed 
with specific performance measures as outlined
5
The CSC model must evolve given the marked differences in both the prevalence and treatment acuity of acute ischemic 
stroke compared to aSAH; the number of MT-capable hospitals necessary to treat LVO AIS patients will likely be far 
greater than the number of centers required to treat the relatively low volume of aSAH patients; two categories of CSCs 
are thus likely necessary: those centers that have high volumes of AIS patients alone and those centers that remain 
referral centers of hemorrhage stroke as well
 149
Intervent Neurol 2015;4:138–150
 
DOI: 10.1159/000442715 
 
English et al.: Mechanical Thrombectomy-Ready Comprehensive Stroke Center 
Requirements and Endovascular Stroke Systems of Care 
www.karger.com/ine
© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel
he is Editor-In-Chief of the journal  
Interventional Neurology 
. T.G.J. reports consulting work with Silk Road 
Medical, Blockade Medical and Codman Neurovascular, is an advisory board member with Medtronic, and a 
PI of the Styrker Neurovascular-sponsored DAWN clinical trial. V.J., A.R.X. and J.F.K. report no relevant disclo-
sures.
 
 
References 
 
 1 
Berkhemer OA, Fransen PS, Beumer D, et al: A randomized trial of intraarterial treatment for acute ischemic 
stroke. N Engl J Med 2015; 
  
372: 
  
11–20. 
 
 2 
Goyal M, Demchuk AM, Menon BK, et al: Randomized assessment of rapid endovascular treatment of ischemic 
stroke. N Engl J Med 2015; 
  
372: 
  
1019–1030. 
 
 3 
Campbell BC, Mitchell PJ, Kleinig TJ, et al: Endovascular therapy for ischemic stroke with perfusion-imaging 
selection. N Engl J Med 2015; 
  
372: 
  
1009–1018. 
 
 4 
Saver JL, Goyal M, Bonafe A, et al: Stent-retriever thrombectomy after intravenous t-PA vs. t-PA alone in stroke. 
N Engl J Med 2015; 
  
372: 
  
2285–2295. 
 
 5 
Jovin TG, Chamorro A, Cobo E, et al: Thrombectomy within 8 hours after symptom onset in ischemic stroke. N 
Engl J Med 2015; 
  
372: 
  
2296–22306. 
 
 6 
Smith WS, Lev MH, English JD, et al: Significance of large vessel intracranial occlusion causing acute ischemic 
stroke and TIA. Stroke 2009; 
  
40: 
  
3834–3840. 
 
 7 
Cloft HJ: The neurointerventional bubble. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2010; 
  
31: 
  
1162–1164. 
 
 8 
Hirsch JA, Yoo AJ, Nogueira RG, et al: Case volumes of intra-arterial and intravenous treatment of ischemic 
stroke in the USA. J Neurointerv Surg 2009; 
  
1: 
  
27–31. 
 
 9 
Jauch EC, Saver JL, Adams HP Jr, et al: Guidelines for the early management of patients with acute ischemic 
stroke: a guideline for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Asso-
ciation. Stroke 2013; 
  
44: 
  
870–947. 
 
10 
Pancioli AM, Broderick J, Kothari R, et al: Public perception of stroke warning signs and knowledge of potential 
risk factors. JAMA 1998; 
  
279: 
  
1288–1292. 
 
11 
Porteous GH, Corry MD, Smith WS: Emergency medical services dispatcher identification of stroke and tran-
sient ischemic attack. Prehosp Emerg Care 1999; 
  
3: 
  
211–216. 
 
12 
Sasser SM, Hunt RC, Faul M, et al: Guidelines for field triage of injured patients: recommendations of the 
National Expert Panel on Field Triage, 2011. MMWR Recomm Rep 2012; 
  
61: 
  
1–20. 
 
13 
Haas B, Stukel TA, Gomez D, et al: The mortality benefit of direct trauma center transport in a regional trauma 
system: a population-based analysis. J Trauma Acute Care Surg 2012; 
  
72: 
  
1510–1515; discussion 5–7. 
 
14 
Nathens AB, Jurkovich GJ, Cummings P, Rivara FP, Maier RV: The effect of organized systems of trauma care 
on motor vehicle crash mortality. JAMA 2000; 
  
283: 
  
1990–1994. 
 
15 
O’Gara PT, Kushner FG, Ascheim DD, et al: 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of ST-elevation 
myocardial infarction: executive summary: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/
American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation 2013; 
  
127: 
  
529–555. 
 
16 
Andersen HR, Nielsen TT, Rasmussen K, et al: A comparison of coronary angioplasty with fibrinolytic therapy 
in acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med 2003; 
  
349: 
  
733–742. 
 
17 
O’Connor RE, Nichol G, Gonzales L, et al: Emergency medical services management of ST-segment elevation 
myocardial infarction in the United States – a report from the American Heart Association Mission: Lifeline 
Program. Am J Emerg Med 2014; 
  
32: 
  
856–863. 
 
18 
Demetriades D, Martin M, Salim A, Rhee P, Brown C, Chan L: The effect of trauma center designation and 
trauma volume on outcome in specific severe injuries. Ann Surg 2005; 
  
242: 
  
512–517; discussion 7–9. 
 
19 
McGrath PD, Wennberg DE, Dickens JD Jr, et al: Relation between operator and hospital volume and outcomes 
following percutaneous coronary interventions in the era of the coronary stent. JAMA 2000; 
  
284: 
  
3139–3144. 
 
20 
Boogaarts HD, van Amerongen MJ, de Vries J, et al: Caseload as a factor for outcome in aneurysmal subarachnoid 
hemorrhage: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Neurosurg 2014; 
  
120: 
  
605–611. 
 
21 
Prabhakaran S, Fonarow GC, Smith EE, et al: Hospital case volume is associated with mortality in patients 
hospitalized with subarachnoid hemorrhage. Neurosurgery 2014; 
  
75: 
  
500–508. 
 
22 
Gupta R, Horev A, Nguyen T, et al: Higher volume endovascular stroke centers have faster times to treatment, 
higher reperfusion rates and higher rates of good clinical outcomes. J Neurointerv Surg 2013; 
  
5: 
  
294–297. 
 
23 
Rotstein Z, Mandelzweig L, Lavi B, Eldar M, Gottlieb S, Hod H: Does the coronary care unit improve prognosis 
of patients with acute myocardial infarction? A thrombolytic era study. Eur Heart J 1999; 
  
20: 
  
813–818. 
 
24 
Knopf L, Staff I, Gomes J, McCullough L: Impact of a neurointensivist on outcomes in critically ill stroke patients. 
Neurocrit Care 2012; 
  
16: 
  
63–71. 
 
25 
Josephson SA, Douglas VC, Lawton MT, English JD, Smith WS, Ko NU: Improvement in intensive care unit 
outcomes in patients with subarachnoid hemorrhage after initiation of neurointensivist co-management.
J Neurosurg 2010; 
  
112: 
  
626–630. 
 
26 
Varelas PN, Eastwood D, Yun HJ, et al: Impact of a neurointensivist on outcomes in patients with head trauma 
treated in a neurosciences intensive care unit. J Neurosurg 2006; 
  
104: 
  
713–719. 
 150
Intervent Neurol 2015;4:138–150
 
DOI: 10.1159/000442715 
 
English et al.: Mechanical Thrombectomy-Ready Comprehensive Stroke Center 
Requirements and Endovascular Stroke Systems of Care 
www.karger.com/ine
© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel
 
27 
Suarez JI: Outcome in neurocritical care: advances in monitoring and treatment and effect of a specialized 
neurocritical care team. Crit Care Med 2006; 
  
34:S232–S238. 
 
28 
Wilson TJ, Saadeh Y, Stetler WR Jr, et al: Transfer time to a high-volume center for patients with subarachnoid 
hemorrhage does not affect outcomes. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis 2015; 
  
24: 
  
416–423. 
 
29 
Broderick JP, Palesch YY, Demchuk AM, et al: Endovascular therapy after intravenous t-PA versus t-PA alone 
for stroke. N Engl J Med 2013; 
  
368: 
  
893–903. 
 
30 
Ciccone A, Valvassori L, Nichelatti M, et al: Endovascular treatment for acute ischemic stroke. N Engl J Med 
2013; 
  
368: 
  
904–913. 
 
31 
Kidwell CS, Jahan R, Gornbein J, et al: A trial of imaging selection and endovascular treatment for ischemic 
stroke. N Engl J Med 2013; 
  
368: 
  
914–923. 
 
32 
Hankey GJ, Warlow CP: Treatment and secondary prevention of stroke: evidence, costs, and effects on indi-
viduals and populations. Lancet 1999; 
  
354: 
  
1457–1463. 
 
33 
Saver JL, Gornbein J, Grotta J, et al: Number needed to treat to benefit and to harm for intravenous tissue plas-
minogen activator therapy in the 3- to 4.5-hour window: joint outcome table analysis of the ECASS 3 trial. 
Stroke 2009; 
  
40: 
  
2433–2437. 
 
34 
Indications for fibrinolytic therapy in suspected acute myocardial infarction: collaborative overview of early 
mortality and major morbidity results from all randomised trials of more than 1000 patients. Fibrinolytic 
Therapy Trialists’ (FTT) Collaborative Group. Lancet 1994; 
  
343: 
  
311–322. 
 
35 
Singer OC, Dvorak F, du Mesnil de Rochemont R, Lanfermann H, Sitzer M, Neumann-Haefelin T: A simple 
3-item stroke scale: comparison with the National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale and prediction of middle 
cerebral artery occlusion. Stroke 2005; 
  
36: 
  
773–776. 
 
36 
Nazliel B, Starkman S, Liebeskind DS, et al: A brief prehospital stroke severity scale identifies ischemic stroke 
patients harboring persisting large arterial occlusions. Stroke 2008; 
  
39: 
  
2264–2267. 
 
37 
Chen S, Venizelos A, Pandhi A, et al: Texas Stroke Intervention Pre-Hospital Stroke Scale (aka LEGS score): a 
novel triaging tool for interventional stroke therapy (abstract). Interv Neurol 2014; 
  
2: 
  
60. 
 
38 
Perez de la Ossa N, Carrera D, Gorchs M, et al: Design and validation of a prehospital stroke scale to predict 
large arterial occlusion: the rapid arterial occlusion evaluation scale. Stroke 2014; 
  
45: 
  
87–91. 
 
 
