 Research Paper
Effects of Long-Term Storage Time and Original Sampling Month on
Biobank Plasma Protein Concentrations
Stefan Enroth a,⁎, Göran Hallmans b, Kjell Grankvist c, Ulf Gyllensten a
a Department of Immunology, Genetics, and Pathology, Biomedical Center, SciLifeLab Uppsala, Uppsala University, SE 75108 Uppsala, Sweden
b Department of Biobank Research, Umeå University, SE 90187 Umeå, Sweden
c Department of Medical Biosciences, Clinical Chemistry, Umeå University, SE 90185 Umeå, Sweden
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 4 July 2016
Received in revised form 19 August 2016
Accepted 24 August 2016
Available online 26 August 2016
The quality of clinical biobank samples is crucial to their value for life sciences research. A number of factors
related to the collection and storage of samples may affect the biomolecular composition. We have studied the
effect of long-time freezer storage, chronological age at sampling, season and month of the year and on the abun-
dance levels of 108 proteins in 380 plasma samples collected from 106 Swedish women. Storage time affected 18
proteins and explained 4.8–34.9% of the observed variance. Chronological age at sample collection after adjust-
ment for storage-time affected 70 proteins and explained 1.1–33.5% of the variance. Seasonal variation had an
effect on 15 proteins and month (number of sun hours) affected 36 proteins and explained up to 4.5% of the
variance after adjustment for storage-time and age. The results show that freezer storage time and collection
date (month and season) exerted similar effect sizes as age on the protein abundance levels. This implies that in-
formation on the sample handling history, in particular storage time, should be regarded as equally prominent
covariates as age or gender and need to be included in epidemiological studies involving protein levels.
© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Keywords:
Plasma proteins
Biobank
Covariate
Storage time
Sampling month
Proximity extension assay
1. Introduction
The stability of biomolecules in clinical biobanks is essential to many
applications in life sciences. The short-term stability is important in
order to handle batch effects in the laboratory analyses, while the
long-term stability is essential for collection of samples for rare-dis-
eases, for monitoring individual variance in longitudinal studies over
extended time periods, and for retrospective studies with samples
stored over different time-spans or storage methods. Biobanks should
strive to maintain the biomolecular composition of the sample at the
time of collection, in order to allow for unbiased comparisons of samples
obtained using different methods, collected at different time points,
stored over different time-spans, and subjected to different number of
freeze-thaw cycles. In previous studies of solid tissue or plasma samples
that have been stored frozen, parameters such as sample handling and
short-term effects of storage regimes on blood samples before freezing
have been examined (Skogstrand et al., 2008). Plasma and serum cyto-
kines concentrations have been found to increase with storage time be-
fore separation and freezing. It has also been shown that concentrations
of three of the investigated proteins in sets of brain tissue were signifi-
cantly affected by freezer storage time (Harish et al., 2011). The number
of freeze-thaw cycles can have an effect on different proteins (Lee et al.,
2015). In addition, other factors, such as time of day, weekday and gen-
eral intra-individual variation have also been described (Stenemo et al.,
2016). However, there have been no examinations of a large set of pro-
teins for these parameters.
Sample collection for a cohort is often carried out at the time of diag-
nosis, time of treatment or time of screening of healthy individuals, and
not confined to a certain time of the year. This implies that environmen-
tal factors, such as pollen concentration in the spring, may cause down-
stream effects on proteins in immune response pathways. For instance,
plasma levels of soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (sICAM-1)
and soluble E-selectin have been shown to be increased in inhalation al-
lergic children compared to healthy controls (Reich et al., 2003). Also,
seasonal differences in variables such as sunlight and ultra violet
(UV)-radiation could affect the abundance levels of circulating proteins.
This is particularly relevant in parts of the world where there are large
differences in amount of solar radiation between different parts of the
year. UV-radiation causes inflammatory responses in the skin and sev-
eral cytokines are affected by UV-radiation. Specifically, production of
C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 5 (CXCL5) have been shown to be up-
regulated in human skin (Reichert et al., 2015) in response to UV-radi-
ation and changes in plasma levels of several interleukins have been
shown in vivo in mouse models (Vostalova et al., 2013), suggesting
that seasonal variation is likely to be measurable in human plasma. In
order to investigate the effect of storage time in freezer, chronologic
EBioMedicine 12 (2016) 309–314
DOI of original article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2016.10.005.
⁎ Corresponding author at: Stefan Enroth, Biomedical Centre (BMC), Box 815, SE 75108
Uppsala, Sweden.
E-mail address: stefan.enroth@igp.uu.se (S. Enroth).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2016.08.038
2352-3964/© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
EBioMedicine
journal homepage: www.ebiomedicine.com
 age at sampling, sampling month, and season (sunlight), we deter-
mined the abundance level of 122 plasma proteins using the Protein Ex-
tension Assay (PEA) in 106 women sampled at 380 occasions spanning
from 1988 to 2014.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Samples
380 female plasma samples from the Västerbotten intervention pro-
gram (Hallmans et al., 2003) (VIP, N = 208) and Mammography
Screening Project (MA, N = 172) were obtained from the Umeå Biobank
in Sweden. The plasma samples were drawn between 1988 and 2014
and donated by 106 women. The plasma was treated with ethylenedi-
aminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) separated and frozen within 1 h after
sampling, followed by long time storage in −80 °C. In the VIP cohort
almost all samples has been taken after overnight fasting. The samples
analyzed had not previously been thawed.
2.2. Protein Abundance Measurements
Plasma protein abundance levels were quantified using the Proxim-
ity Extension Assay (PEA) (Assarsson et al., 2014) multiplex assays from
Olink Proteomics AB, Uppsala, Sweden. In brief, for each observed pro-
tein, a pair of oligonucleotide-labeled antibodies probes bind to the
targeted protein, and if the two probes are in close proximity, a PCR tar-
get sequence is formed by a proximity-dependent DNA polymerization
event and the resulting sequence is subsequently detected and quanti-
fied using standard real-time PCR. Data is then normalized and trans-
formed using internal extension controls and inter-plate controls, to
adjust for intra- and inter-run variation. The final assay read-out is
given in Normalized Protein eXpression (NPX), which is an arbitrary
unit on log2-scale where a high value corresponds to a higher protein
expression. Each protein has specific lower limit of quantification
(LLOQ) and an upper limit of quantification (ULOQ) between which a
1-unit increase in NPX correspond to a two-fold increase in protein con-
centration. Internal controls specify a run-specific lower limit of detec-
tion (LOD) as 3 times the standard deviation over background. The
manufacturers webpage (www.olink.com) contains information on
protein-specific detection limits and records of technical validations of
intra- and inter-variability (in terms of coefficients of variation (CV) of
each analyzed protein. Samples were analyzed for the complete Proseek
Multiplex Inflammation panel I and 20 proteins each from the Proseek
Multiplex CVD I panel and Proseek Multiplex Oncology II panels
(http://www.olink.com/proseek-multiplex/). The plasma samples
were analyzed, quality-controlled and pre-processed into NPX at Olink
Proteomics AB, Uppsala, Sweden. In total, 122 unique proteins were
quantified out of which 10 were overlapping between the Inflammation
panel and either of the other panels.
2.3. Statistical Analysis
All statistical analyses were carried out in R (R Development Core
Team, 2014). Effect of storage time on protein levels was examined by
fitting a linear model with protein abundance levels as response and
whole years since original sampling date as variable. Significance was
evaluated by ANOVA-analysis. Proteins where storage time was found
to be a significant influence was adjusted by removing the contribution
of storage time using the beta (β)-coefficient from the linear models as
described above. Contribution of individual age to protein abundance
levels was analyzed in the same way using storage-time adjusted pro-
tein levels as input. Monthly and seasonal variation in protein levels
was examined using storage time and age-adjusted protein levels
using a two-sided Wilcoxon ranked-sum test. Contribution of monthly
sun hours to protein levels were examined by fitting a linear model
with protein levels as response and sun hours as variable. This analysis
was repeated with a 1–11 month shift in sun hours, allowing for a pos-
sible delay in protein levels depending on sun activity. Significance was
evaluated by ANOVA analysis. Calculations of the variance explained by
a variable to the response, were carried out using the ‘summary’-func-
tion applied to the fitted linear models.
2.4. Ethical Considerations
The study has been approved by the Regional Ethics Board in Umeå,
Dnr 2013-314-32M and 2012-229-31M.
3. Results
3.1. Study Design
The Västerbotten Intervention Program (Hallmans et al., 2003) in-
vites participants at 10-year intervals starting from the age of 30 or
40, while women conduct mammography check-ups at intervals nor-
mally spaced 18–24 months apart. Because of the different sampling-
strategies in the VIP and the MA-cohorts, the VIP-samples allows for
study of the impact of storage time independent of the actual age of
the individual, by restricting the analysis to a given age-span. The sam-
ples from the MA-cohort have a more uniform distribution of ages and,
when corrected for storage time, are suited for analysis of the contribu-
tion of chronological age at sampling to protein levels. Among the sam-
ples used here, the oldest was collected in 1988 and the most recent in
2014 (Fig. 1A). Out of the 106 women, 96 had N1 sample, and the max-
imum age-range for a single woman was 33.5 years (first sample at age
40.3 and latest at 73.8 years) (Fig. 1B). Ages of participants in the VIP
ranged from 29 to 70 and in MA from 42 to 73. Overall the samples
were collected over the entire year, with the exception of July with 0
samples (Fig. 1C). July is traditionally the time of summer vacation in
Sweden and no samples have been collected during this month.
3.2. Protein Abundance Levels
Relative abundance levels for 132 proteins were quantified using the
Proximity Extension Assay (PEA) in 380 plasma samples from 106
Swedish women in the Umeå-area from the VIP and MA-cohorts. Each
of the 132 assays had a lower limit of detection specified by the manu-
facturer and here, 14 of the 132 (10.6%) assayed proteins had N80% of
the individual measurements below the detection limit. This is similar
to the pattern seen previously when analyzing protein levels from
these panels in non-disease cohorts (Enroth et al., 2015a; Enroth et al.,
2014). These 14 proteins (IL2RB, IL1a, IL2, TSLP, RA1, PD-L1, IL24,
ARTN, TNF, IL20, IL33, IL4, LIF and NRTN) were excluded from further
statistical analysis. Moreover, 10 of the 118 remaining proteins were
replicated over two different panels (Material and Methods). Each pair
of replicated assays was significantly correlated (p b 8.0 × 10−53,
Spearman's Rho), with a mean correlation coefficient (R2) of 0.78. The
highest correlation was found for C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 11
(CXCL11) with R2 = 0.93 (p b 2.2 × 10−209), while the lowest was
found for the Cluster of differentiation 40 protein (CD40) with R2 =
0.62 (p b 1.4 × 10−77) (Supplementary Fig. 1).
3.3. Correlation with Storage Time
Since the majority of samples in our data have been sampled on mul-
tiple occasions, it is difficult to separate the effect of the ageing of the in-
dividuals from the storage time in the freezer. Therefore, we restricted
the analysis of storage time to 92 individuals' aged 50 ± 0.5 years.
Due to the sampling strategy of the VIP-study, this age-interval contains
the highest number of samples (Fig. 1A). The storage time distribution
among these individuals does not differ from the rest of the samples
(p N 0.4, Wilcoxon ranked sum test), and is thus representative of the
complete material. Analysis of coefficients of variance (CV) for all
310
S. Enroth et al. / EBioMedicine 12 (2016) 309–314
 proteins for these samples in bins of storage time (Supplementary Fig.
2A) did not indicate any clear trends of changes in CV with increased
storage-time. We found that 18 of the 108 proteins investigated were
influenced by storage time (Supplementary Table 1, nominally signifi-
cant, p b 0.05), and one protein (Cancer antigen 125; CA-125 also
known as Mucin 16) remained statistically significant after correction
for testing of multiple hypotheses (Bonferroni, p b 0.05/108 =
4.6 × 10−4). Storage time induces either an increase or a decrease in
levels for different proteins (Supplementary Table 1, Fig. 2A, B).
Among the 18 proteins, storage time alone explained between 4.9 and
34.9% of the observed variance (Fig. 2C). Using the 18 protein-specific
linear models built from the 92 observations with fixed ages, all obser-
vations were adjusted for the storage time, removing the contribution of
storage time from the measurements.
3.4. Correlation with Age
Using the storage time adjusted observations, we proceeded to in-
vestigate if there was any effect of age using all 380 samples (Material
and Methods). As above, analysis of CV for all proteins for these samples
in bins of age at sample collection (Supplementary Fig. 2B) did not indi-
cate any clear trends of changes in CV with increased age of the individ-
ual. We found 70 out of 108 proteins to be significantly influenced by
age (Fig. 2DE, Supplementary Table 2, nominal p-value b 0.05). Out of
these, 45 proteins remained significant when adjusting for multiple
testing (Bonferroni, p b 0.05 / 108 = 4.6 × 10−4). Age explained be-
tween 1.1 and 33.5% of the variance seen in the residuals after correcting
for storage time (Fig. 2F). 16 of the 70 proteins were among the 18 pre-
viously corrected for storage time. Using multiply sampled individuals
from the VIP-cohort, the effect of age on protein levels (after correction
for storage time) can be easily visualized. For example, levels of
Interleukin 27 subunit alpha (IL-27A) increased with age (Supplemen-
tary Fig. 3A), while for the Kit ligand (SCF) levels decreased with age
(Supplementary Fig. 3B).
3.5. Seasonal Differences and Correlations With Sampling Month
We grouped all 380 measurements according to the season (Winter,
Spring, Summer or Autumn) the samples were originally collected.
Using meteorological data for the Umeå-region obtained from the
Swedish
Meteorological
and
Hydrological
Institute
(Swedish
Meteorological and Hydrological Institute, 2016) (SMHI) we investigat-
ed any difference between season and protein abundance levels, adjust-
ed for storage time and age. 15 of the 108 proteins showed nominally
significant differences between any two seasons (Supplementary
Table 3). Six tests were performed per protein (each season versus the
others) and no differences remained significant after adjusting the
significance threshold for multiple hypotheses testing (p b 0.06 / 6 /
108 = 7.7 × 10−5. Out of the 15 nominal associations, 12 involved sum-
mer or winter compared to any other season. The town of Umeå is locat-
ed at 63 degrees North and receives an average of 60 sunlight hours per
month during the winter months (November to March) compared to
over 260 h per month during summer (June to August) (Fig. 3A).
Fig. 3 B–D shows three examples where the observed protein levels
are lower during the summer than the other seasons.
With the exception of July, the samples used were collected
throughout the whole year. Using the protein abundance levels
corrected for storage time and age, the majority of the analyzed proteins
showed statistically different distributions between at least one pair of
months, with February and November being the months most often
displaying alternate distributions to another month. This corresponds
well with the seasonal analysis. We therefore reasoned that increased
Fig. 1. Study design. (a) Distribution of samples over time and individual age at time of sampling. Blue dots correspond to samples from the Västerbotten Intervention Program (VIP) and
red dots to samples from the Mammography Screening Program (MA). (b) The VIP-study has been collecting samples since 1985 and the vast majority of the individuals in this study have
donated samples at multiple occasions, some over a period of over 3 decades. (c) With the exception of July, the samples have been collected throughout the whole year.
311
S. Enroth et al. / EBioMedicine 12 (2016) 309–314
 or decreased sunlight hours could explain some of the variance seen on
the plasma protein abundance levels. We also reasoned that there could
be a delay in effect on protein levels and therefore repeated the varia-
tion analysis allowing the sun hours to be shifted 0 to 11 months com-
pared to the protein abundance levels.
We found nominally significant correlations between protein levels
and sun hours for 36 proteins, most commonly offset:ed 3–5 or 9–
11 months (Supplementary Table 4 and Fig. 3F,G). After correction for
multiple hypotheses testing (Bonferroni) for all offsets (12) and pro-
teins (108), none of these associations remained significant. The corre-
lation between sun hours and protein levels was found to be highest in a
particular month, and flanked by lower correlations in the adjacent
months with either positive of negative sign due to the 0 to 11 month
shifts, where an 11 months shift in sunlight corresponds to a 1 month
delay in effect on the protein abundance levels. The contribution of
sun hours on actual protein levels was, however, small (Fig. 3H), and ex-
plained at most 4.5% (Interleukin 10 receptor subunit alpha; IL10RA) of
the variation seen among the proteins. In the linear modeling, the coef-
ficient for IL10RA was positive, meaning that an increase in sunlight also
increases the observed levels of IL10RA.
4. Discussion
Biobanking of clinical samples is central to the advancement of life
sciences research. A number of factors related to both collection and
storage of samples may affect the biomolecular composition, and subse-
quently the results obtained from analyzing the samples. Large efforts
have been made in collecting carefully matched case and control co-
horts, adjusting for non-disease related factors such as age and gender,
or risk factors such as body mass index (BMI), weight and smoking. Few
studies have had the possibility to investigate the contribution of factors
related to collection and long-term sample storage separately from e.g.
chronological age at sample collection and gender. Here we have taken
advantage of the sampling strategy of the Västerbotten Intervention
Program and Mammography screening program in northern Sweden
to disentangle the effects of freezer storage time and individual age. In-
dividual age has been shown to affect the plasma protein abundance
levels in many studies, and specifically in three studies employing the
same protein detection assay as used here, the proximity extension
assay (Enroth et al., 2015a; Enroth et al., 2014; Larsson et al., 2015). In
a previous study we showed that the plasma protein profile alone ex-
plain over 85% of the variation seen in age (Enroth et al., 2015b). Age
alone can account for over 27% of the variation seen in a single protein
(Enroth et al., 2014). In the present study, among individuals aged 50
and whose samples had been stored over the course of up to 30 years,
we found storage time alone to account for up to 35% of the variation
seen in a single protein. This demonstrates the large variance intro-
duced by storage time, and underscores the inclusion of storage time
as an important variable in future epidemiological studies.
To the best of our knowledge, no other studies have investigated the
effect of storage time on the plasma protein levels and we therefore can-
not compare the effects found here to others' results. We studied the re-
producibility of our age effects by comparison to Larsson et al. (Larsson
et al., 2015), that examined the influence of age and gender on 63 cyto-
kines in 33 individuals and employing the same assay as here. In total,
19 of the 20 nominally significant reported associations with age were
replicated here using nominally significant p-values (11 of 15 after mul-
tiple hypothesis testing). The only association that was not replicated
Fig. 2. Associations and variance explained by different variables. (a) Decreasing protein abundance levels (NPX) with longer storage time, (b) Increasing abundance levels (NPX) with
longer storage time. (c) Fraction of variance explained by storage time (all proteins with nominally significant associations, Supplementary Table 1). (d) Increasing protein abundance
levels (NPX) for CUB domain-containing protein 1 (CDCP1) with age after storage-time component removed (linear model). (e) Same as (d), but decreasing with increased age of
individual for Neurotrophin-3 (NT-3). (f) Fraction of variance explained by age in the residuals after correcting for storage time (all proteins with nominally significant associations,
Supplementary Table 2).
312
S. Enroth et al. / EBioMedicine 12 (2016) 309–314
 was for MCP-3, which had a calculated significance level with age at
p = 0.38 in our material. This discrepancy could be due to several
reasons; we have female samples only (N = 380) whereas Larsson
and colleagues had both male (N = 16) and female samples (N =
17) and both sample size and gender distribution could influence
the analysis. Larsson et al. (Larsson et al., 2015), however, found no
significant gender difference for MCP-3 and we found no significant
storage effects, so the underlying reasons have to be sought
elsewhere.
We also noticed that there are statistically significant differences in
protein abundance levels depending on the season, or month, the sam-
ples were collected. After adjusting our protein abundance levels for
storage time and individual age, we found only nominally significant
associations with monthly sun hours, explaining up to 4.6% of the vari-
ation seen in protein abundance levels. The lack of significant associa-
tions with monthly sun hours could be attributed to a number of
factors. Although UV-radiation have previously been shown to directly
affect the circulating levels of plasma proteins (Vostalova et al., 2013;
Reichert et al., 2015), the sun hours are likely to be viewed as a proxy
variable to other seasonal changes such as blooming or pollen levels
which in turn triggers the immune system, or various forms of changes
in lifestyle such as seasonal intakes of food and changes in habits of
physical activity. The number of sun-hours per month available from
the SMIHI is also an average over the past 30 years and the actual sun-
hours at the individual sampling dates could differ from the used
number. Taken together, there are several sources of additional noise
not accounted for in our analysis of sun-hours compared to protein
levels. Our study was further limited by analyzing only female samples
from the north of Sweden and the effects seen here may therefore not
necessarily be directly applicable to a different population. We also can-
not rule out that there are effects of general changes in lifestyle of indi-
viduals aged 50 during the course of three decades in terms of dietary
habits, exercise patterns and direct or secondary inhalation from
smoking at e.g. work places that would contribute to the storage time
variation. Daily smoking among women aged 16–84 in Sweden have
for instance gone down from 29% in the early 80s to 13% in 2010
(Centralförbundet för alkohol-och narkotikaupplysning (CAN), 2012).
The smoking history of the currently investigated cohort is however
not known. We, and others, have previously shown that smoking affects
circulating proteins such as interleukin 12 (IL-12) (Kroening et al.,
2008; Enroth et al., 2015b). Here, we did not find any effects of storage
time on IL-12 but further studies are warranted to elucidate effects due
to common lifestyle changes over the past decades in a general popula-
tion to investigate such mechanisms.
In conclusion, we have shown that storage time has similar effect
sizes on protein levels in biobanked plasma samples as individual age.
We also show that there is significant seasonal variation that can be par-
tially explained by environmental factors such as variations in sunlight.
The results emphasize the need to include sample key parameters as
natural covariates in epidemiological studies.
Fig. 3. Seasonal and monthly variation in protein abundance levels. (a) Mean sun hours per season (Winter, Spring, Summer, Autumn) (b–d) proteins abundance levels (NPX) over seasons
for Latency-associated peptide transforming growth factor beta-1 (LAP-TGF-beta-1), Heat shock 27 kDa protein (HSP 27) and Interleukin-20 receptor subunit alpha (IL-20RA). Red
connections indicate nominally significant (p b 0.05, two-sided Wilcox test) differences between pair of seasons. (e) Sun hours per month. (f–g) Monthly differences in protein
abundance levels for two proteins (LAP-TGF-beta-1 and HSP-27). Solid lines represent responses from linear models fitted with 0–11 months offset between sunlight and protein
abundance levels (NPX). Blue lines indicate nominally significant contribution of sunlight hours to protein abundance levels for a specific offset. The best model in (f) was found for an
offset of 8 months delay, and for (g) with a 1 month delay. (h) Fraction of variance explained by sunlight (as a proxy variable for a number of possible factors) on protein abundance
levels after adjusting for storage time and age of the individual.
313
S. Enroth et al. / EBioMedicine 12 (2016) 309–314
 Funding Sources
This study was supported by the Swedish Cancer Foundation (Grant
no. CF-2017) and the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research (Grant
no. SSF-SB12-0086). The funding sources had no role in the study
design, the data collection and analysis, decision to publish the results,
or the preparation of the manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest
Ulf Gyllensten and Stefan Enroth are authors on a patent application
entitled ‘Determination and analysis of Biomarkers in clinical samples’,
United Kingdom Patent Application UK nos. 1410956.5 and 1414913.2
(2014, Pending). The remaining authors declare no competing financial
interests.
Author Contributions
Conceived of the study (SE, UG), designed analyses (SE), analyzed
data (SE), produced figures (SE), wrote the paper (SE, UG), provided
samples (GH, KG), data collection (UG). All authors read, corrected,
and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
We thank the Umeå Biobank (Biobank North) for providing samples
and Åsa Ågren and Kerstin Enquist at Biobank North for assistance with
the sample extraction. The PEA measurements were performed by Olink
Proteomics AB, Uppsala, Sweden.
Appendix A. Supplementary Data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2016.08.038.
References
Assarsson, E., Lundberg, M., Holmquist, G., Bjorkesten, J., Thorsen, S.B., Ekman, D.,
Eriksson, A., Rennel Dickens, E., Ohlsson, S., Edfeldt, G., Andersson, A.C., Lindstedt,
P., Stenvang, J., Gullberg, M., Fredriksson, S., 2014. Homogenous 96-plex pea
immunoassay exhibiting high sensitivity, specificity, and excellent scalability. PLoS
One 9, E95192.
Centralförbundet För Alkohol-Och Narkotikaupplysning (Can), 2012,. Drogutvecklingen i
Sverige 2011. In: LEIFMAN, H.K. (Ed.), Stockholm.
Enroth, S., Bosdotter Enroth, S., Johansson, A., Gyllensten, U., 2015a. Effect of genetic and
environmental factors on protein biomarkers for common non-communicable dis-
ease and use of personally normalized plasma protein profiles (PNPPP). Biomarkers
20 (6-7), 355–364. http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/1354750X.2015.1093546.
Enroth, S., Enroth, S.B., Johansson, A., Gyllensten, U., 2015b. Protein profiling reveals con-
sequences of lifestyle choices on predicted biological aging. Sci. Rep. 5, 17282.
Enroth, S., Johansson, A., Enroth, S.B., Gyllensten, U., 2014. Strong effects of genetic and
lifestyle factors on biomarker variation and use of personalized cutoffs. Nat. Commun.
5, 4684.
Hallmans, G., Agren, A., Johansson, G., Johansson, A., Stegmayr, B., Jansson, J.H., Lindahl, B.,
Rolandsson, O., Soderberg, S., Nilsson, M., Johansson, I., Weinehall, L., 2003. Cardiovas-
cular disease and diabetes in the Northern Sweden health and disease study cohort —
evaluation of risk factors and their interactions. Scand. J. Public Health Suppl. 61,
18–24.
Harish, G., Venkateshappa, C., Mahadevan, A., Pruthi, N., Bharath, M.M., Shankar, S.K.,
2011. Effect of storage time, postmortem interval, agonal state, and gender on the
postmortem preservation of glial fibrillary acidic protein and oxidatively damaged
proteins in human brains. Biopreserv. Biobanking 9, 379–387.
Kroening, P.R., Barnes, T.W., Pease, L., Limper, A., Kita, H., Vassallo, R., 2008. Cigarette
smoke-induced oxidative stress suppresses generation of dendritic cell IL-12 and
IL-23 through ERK-dependent pathways. J. Immunol. 181, 1536–1547.
Larsson, A., Carlsson, L., Gordh, T., Lind, A.L., Thulin, M., Kamali-Moghaddam, M., 2015. The
effects of age and gender on plasma levels of 63 cytokines. J. Immunol. Methods.
Lee, J.E., Kim, S.Y., Shin, S.Y., 2015. Effect of repeated freezing and thawing on biomarker
stability in plasma and serum samples. Osong Public Health Res. Perspect. 6, 357–362.
R Develpment Core Team, 2014. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Comput-
ing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria.
Reich, M., Niess, J.H., Bar, C., Zwacka, G., Markert, U.R., 2003. Elevated nonspecific plasma
proteins in allergic patients. J. Investig. Allergol. Clin. Immunol. 13, 60–65.
Reichert, O., Kolbe, L., Terstegen, L., Staeb, F., Wenck, H., Schmelz, M., Genth, H., Kaever, V.,
Roggenkamp, D., Neufang, G., 2015. UV radiation induces CXCL5 expression in human
skin. Exp. Dermatol. 24, 309–312.
Skogstrand, K., Ekelund, C.K., Thorsen, P., Vogel, I., Jacobsson, B., Norgaard-Pedersen, B.,
Hougaard, D.M., 2008. Effects of blood sample handling procedures on measurable in-
flammatory markers in plasma, serum and dried blood spot samples. J. Immunol.
Methods 336, 78–84.
Stenemo, M., Teleman, J., Sjostrom, M., Grubb, G., Malmstrom, E., Malmstrom, J., Nimeus,
E., Jul 2016. Cancer associated proteins in blood plasma: determining normal varia-
tion. Proteomics 16 (13), 1928–1937. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/pmic.201500204
Epub 2016 Jun 2.
Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute. 2016. Swedish Meteorological and Hy-
drological Institute [Online]. (Available) http://www.smhi.se2016
Vostalova, J., Rajnochova Svobodova, A., Galandakova, A., Sianska, J., Dolezal, D., Ulrichova,
J., 2013. Differential modulation of inflammatory markers in plasma and skin after
single exposures to UVA or UVB radiation in vivo. Biomed. Pap. Med. Fac. Univ.
Palacky Olomouc Czech Repub. 157, 137–145.
314
S. Enroth et al. / EBioMedicine 12 (2016) 309–314
