 A Chikungunya Fever Vaccine Utilizing an Insect-Specific Virus 
Platform
Jesse H. Erasmus1,2, Albert J. Auguste2,3, Jason T. Kaelber4, Huanle Luo2, Shannan L. 
Rossi2,3, Karla Fenton2, Grace Leal2, Dal Y. Kim5, Wah Chiu4, Tian Wang2, Ilya Frolov5, 
Farooq Nasar6, and Scott C. Weaver1,2,3,7,*
1Institute for Translational Science, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA
2Institute of Human Infections and Immunity, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, 
Texas, USA
3Department of Pathology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas USA
4National Center for Macromolecular Imaging, Verna and Marrs McLean Department of 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, and Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA
5Department of Microbiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA
6Virology Division, United States Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases, 
Frederick, MD, USA
7Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, 
Texas, USA
Abstract
Traditionally, vaccine development involves tradeoffs between immunogenicity and safety. Live-
attenuated vaccines typically offer rapid and durable immunity but reduced safety, while the 
inability of inactivated vaccines to replicate enhances safety at the expense of immunogenicity, 
often necessitating multiple doses and boosters. To overcome these tradeoffs, we developed the 
insect-specific alphavirus, Eilat virus (EILV), as a vaccine platform. To address the chikungunya 
virus (CHIKV) pandemic, we used an EILV cDNA clone to design a chimeric virus containing the 
CHIKV structural proteins. The recombinant EILV/CHIKV virus was structurally identical at 10Å 
to wild-type CHIKV by single particle cryoelectron microscopy, mimicked the early stages of 
CHIKV replication in vertebrate cells from attachment and entry to viral RNA delivery, yet 
remained completely defective for productive replication, providing a high degree of safety. A 
single dose of EILV/CHIKV produced in mosquito cells elicited rapid (within 4 days) and long-
*Corresponding author. Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 
77555-0609. sweaver@utmb.edu. 
Author contributions: JHE, FN, IF, TW, WC, and SCW conceived the project and designed experiments; JHE, FN, DYK, HL, AJA, 
SLR, GL, and JTK performed experiments; JHE, AJA, KF, FN, IF, TW, WC, JTK and SCW did data analysis; JHE and SCW wrote 
the paper.
Competing interests: SCW, FN, and JHE have a patent (US 9,422,529) entitled “Alphavirus Compositions and Methods of Use”, 
which includes technology reported in this manuscript. The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not reflect 
the official policy or position of the U.S. Department of Defense, or the Department of the Army.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Med. 2017 February ; 23(2): 192–199. doi:10.1038/nm.4253.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 lasting (>290 days) neutralizing antibodies that provided complete protection in two different 
mouse models. In nonhuman primates, EILV/CHIKV elicited rapid and robust immunity that 
protected against viremia and telemetrically-monitored fever. Our EILV platform represents the 
first structurally native application of an insect-specific virus in preclinical vaccine development 
and highlights the potential application of such viruses in vaccinology.
Traditionally, viral vaccine development begins with a pathogenic virus, followed by 
inactivation to render it replication-defective, or attenuation to maintain limited replication 
that stimulates rapid, robust and long-lived immunity. However, inherent in these attenuation 
approaches is the risk of disease, either from incomplete inactivation, underscored by the 
Cutter incident (1) that left 200 children paralyzed due to residual live polio virus, or from 
inadequate or unstable attenuation that is only recognized upon vaccination of large 
populations when rare vulnerable individuals develop disease. An example is the live-
attenuated yellow fever vaccine 17D, which in rare cases produces life-threatening disease 
(2); this risk is particularly high for RNA viruses, which mutate frequently with the potential 
for reversion of attenuating mutations (3). Live-attenuated viruses have also been used as 
vectors to express heterologous viral proteins, but these backbones are still derived from 
pathogenic viruses and may carry the risk of disease, especially in persons 
immunocompromised by therapies for cancer, transplantation or other diseases.
Alternative vaccination approaches include immunization with DNA or RNA that expresses 
viral proteins, or in vitro-synthesized viral protein subunits, expressed individually or as 
assembled virus-like particles devoid of nucleic acids. These approaches offer a high degree 
of safety but typically require multiple doses and periodic boosters; some can also be 
expensive to manufacture. All of these traits are suboptimal for vaccines against diseases 
that occur in resource-poor endemic settings where outbreaks can be sudden and explosive, 
as highlighted by the recent expansions of chikungunya, Zika, and Ebola viruses (4,5).
To overcome these tradeoffs in vaccine design, we examined insect viruses that are abundant 
but largely ignored. Next generation sequencing of 70 different insect species revealed 112 
novel viruses, previously unknown due to their lack of any disease association (6). Many of 
these viruses are descended from ancestors of virulent viral pathogens, such as Ebola virus, 
but typically are restricted to replication in insects only. They therefore offer a diverse 
resource for vaccine vector development because natural selection in the absence of 
vertebrate infection has resulted in host range restrictions that may provide a highly 
favorable safety profile. We also anticipated that the lack of chemical or physical 
inactivation would leave the CHIKV proteins present in a chimeric virus in native, functional 
form, thereby maintaining wild-type immunogenicity and antigenicity. Here, we report the 
first application of such an insect-specific virus in vaccine development.
Eilat virus (EILV) is an alphavirus isolated from mosquitoes in Israel (7). The genus 
Alphavirus (family Togaviridae) is comprised of small, icosahedral, enveloped viruses that 
package single-stranded, positive-sense RNA genomes ~11–12 kb in length. The genome 
encodes two open reading frames (ORFs): the nonstructural polyprotein, responsible for 
replicating the viral genome, is translated directly from the first ORF, while the structural 
polyprotein is translated from a second ORF located on subgenomic RNA transcripts driven 
Erasmus et al.
Page 2
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 by a subgenomic promoter (8). The majority of the 31 recognized alphavirus species are 
transmitted by mosquitoes and replicate in both invertebrates and many vertebrate taxa, 
allowing for their maintenance in enzootic cycles with occasional spillover into humans, 
sometimes causing severe disease during explosive outbreaks (9). EILV is the only described 
insect-specific alphavirus and is fundamentally and completely defective for vertebrate cell 
infection due to an inability to enter cells as well as to replicate its RNA genome, even after 
its artificial delivery into the cytoplasm (10). Phylogenetically, EILV groups within the 
mosquito-borne clade of alphaviruses that includes many important human pathogens such 
as chikungunya virus (CHIKV). The host-restricted characteristics of EILV coupled with the 
genetic tractability of alphaviruses (11,12) provide an opportunity to develop EILV as a 
novel vaccine platform for alphaviral diseases.
CHIKV, first associated with human disease in the 1950s in present-day Tanzania (13), has 
repeatedly emerged to cause widespread mosquito-borne epidemics with attack rates 
reaching 90% (14). Chikungunya fever (CHIKF) is characterized by severe, debilitating 
polyarthralgia with chronic joint pain that can persist for years in >60% of those affected 
(15). Although infection is rarely fatal, its disabling nature results in devastating economic 
impacts. For example, a La Reúnion Island outbreak resulted in an estimated loss of 55,000 
life-years, and a health-care cost of US$50–55 million (14). Despite several vaccine 
candidates in pre-clinical and clinical development, none is licensed and no specific 
therapeutics are available for CHIKF.
We previously demonstrated the utility of an EILV/CHIKV chimeric virus as an antigen for 
serodiagnostics (16). Here, we further developed this chimera as a highly safe yet highly 
immunogenic vaccine for CHIKF, with protective efficacy demonstrated in multiple animal 
models after a single dose.
Results
EILV/CHIKV replicates to high titers in mosquito cells
We previously described an infectious cDNA clone of EILV/CHIKV (Fig. 1a) containing the 
structural polyprotein ORF of a 2014 CHIKV strain isolated from an infected patient from 
the British Virgin Islands (17). In vitro-transcribed RNA was electroporated into C7/10 
mosquito cells, yielding a viral titer of 1×1010 plaque-forming units (PFU)/ml while 
passaged virus replicated to a mean peak titer of 1.4×109 PFU/ml by 36 hours post-infection 
(Fig. 1b). Interestingly, EILV/CHIKV replicated to higher titers and produced more overt 
cytopathic effects (CPE) than those previously reported for EILV (7), and formed plaques on 
mosquito cells similar in size and kinetics to those produced by EILV (Fig. 1c).
Structural analysis and comparison with wild-type CHIKV
Single-particle cryo-electron microscopy (EM) reconstruction at 9.85Å resolution (gold-
standard fourier shell correlation: FSC) revealed EILV/CHIKV virions with typical 
alphavirus structure, including trimeric spikes composed of heterodimers of the E1 and E2 
envelope glycoproteins (Fig. 1d–f) embedded in the plasma membrane-derived lipid 
envelope and interacting with the capsid proteins (Fig. 1e–f). To evaluate whether the EILV/
Erasmus et al.
Page 3
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 CHIKV structure differed from that of wild-type (wt) CHIKV, the previously published 
CHIKV cryo-EM structure (18)(European Molecular Data Base 5577) was low-pass filtered 
to 8Å, then aligned to the chimera and resampled onto a common grid before inspecting the 
maps and measuring the FSC. The cross-resolution (FSC=0.33) of the wt and EILV/CHIKV 
structures was 9.85Å, equal to the resolution of the EILV/CHIKV map, and no differences in 
structural protein conformation were observed (Supplementary Fig. 1).
Entry into vertebrate cells via endocytosis and genome translation
EILV was previously shown to be entry-deficient in vertebrate cells but EILV/CHIKV entry 
was not previously assessed. We therefore evaluated the ability of EILV/CHIKV to attach to 
vertebrate cells and assessed the effect of formalin-inactivation on this process. We purified 
EILV/CHIKV and live-attenuated CHIKV strain 181/clone25, a vaccine candidate developed 
by the U.S. Army (19). One-half of the EILV/CHIKV preparation was subjected to formalin-
inactivation and the other mock-inactivated with diluent. These three preparations (181/
clone25, live and inactivated EILV/CHIKV) were conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 
succinimidyl ester (AF488) as well as a mock conjugation to control for any nonspecific 
binding by the fluorophore. Unconjugated dye was removed by desalting column 
chromatography. NIH 3T3 cells were then exposed at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 
100 PFU/cell to EILV/CHIKV-AF488, inactivated EILV/CHIKV-AF488, 181/clone25-
AF488, or a PBS-AF488 control at 4°C. Mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) was quantified 
by flow cytometry and background fluorescence, determined by the PBS-AF488 control, 
was subtracted. While EILV/CHIKV- and 181/clone25-bound cells exhibited a MFI of 1987 
and 2239, respectively, a significantly lower MFI (756) was detected from formalin-
inactivated EILV/CHIKV-bound cells (Fig. 2a). The slightly higher MFI detected from 181/
clone25-bound cells compared to live EILV/CHIKV may reflect the cell culture-adaptive 
Gly→Arg E2-82 substitution that increases binding to heparan sulfate and other 
glycosaminoglycans present on cultured cell surfaces (20,21).
To visualize entry, we performed thin-section EM of Vero cells exposed to EILV/CHIKV, or 
formalin-inactivated EILV/CHIKV at a MOI of 1000 PFU/cell. Immediately after exposure 
to Vero cells, 70nm virions were observed binding to cell membranes (Fig. 2b) followed by 
the formation of clathrin-coated pit structures (22,23) within 15 seconds (Fig. 2c). At 5 
minutes, EILV/CHIKV particles were associated with and observed within clathrin-coated 
vesicles, suggesting entry via clathrin-mediated endocytosis (Fig. 2d). In contrast, formalin-
inactivated EILV/CHIKV was never detected entering cells and large aggregates of virus 
particles were visualized in close proximity to cell surfaces (Supplementary Fig. 2). This 
aggregation may also have contributed to an increase in MFI that was detected in the virus-
binding experiment, suggesting that the specific cell surface binding of inactivated virus, per 
particle, is lower than we estimated (Fig. 2a).
Finally, to assess the ability of EILV/CHIKV to deliver genomic RNA and subsequent 
translation of this RNA by the host cell, we generated a recombinant virus containing GFP 
fused to nonstructural protein 3 of EILV (EILV/nsP3-GFP/CHIKV; Supplementary Fig. 3a). 
Vero or C7/10 cells (positive control) were infected at a MOI of 100 PFU/cell with EILV/
nsP3-GFP/CHIKV, or mock-infected. Cells were then fixed, permeabilized, and stained at 8 
Erasmus et al.
Page 4
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 HPI, and analyzed by fluorescence microscopy (Supplementary Fig. 3b–e). Similar to the 
C7/10 positive control, GFP foci were observed within the cytoplasm of Vero cells, 
indicating the localization of small nsP3-containing protein complexes previously described 
for replicating alphaviruses (24), while mock-infected controls were devoid of GFP foci.
EILV/CHIKV is replication-restricted and highly attenuated in vertebrates
We indirectly examined whether the translated non-structural proteins formed a functional 
replication complex by measuring translation of the subgenomic RNA, which is mediated by 
replicase-dependent transcription (8). We generated a recombinant construct containing 
nano-luciferase under the control of a second subgenomic promoter (EILV/nLUC/CHIKV)
(Fig. 3a). 293T or C7/10 cells (positive control) were then infected at a MOI of 20 PFU/cell 
with EILV/nLUC/CHIKV and luciferase activity was measured over 8 hours. While infected 
C7/10 mosquito cells showed an exponential increase in luciferase activity, infected 293T 
cells exhibited only background levels (Fig. 3b).
Next, we performed in vivo experiments to assess the host-restricted, replication-deficient 
phenotype of EILV/CHIKV. Previously, we reported on the safety of EILV/CHIKV as a 
diagnostic antigen by inoculating infant CD-1 mice intracranially and measuring viral loads 
in the brain, as well as survival (16). As a positive control for neurovirulence, we used the 
live-attenuated CHIKV strain 181/clone25 (19). Here we conducted a blinded analysis of 
histological brain sections collected during that study but not previously analyzed. At 7 days 
post-infection, 181/clone25-infected mice exhibited multifocal regions of neutrophilic 
inflammation and necrosis (microabcesses) within the neuronal parenchyma (Supplementary 
Fig. 4); one of 6 181/clone25-infected mice succumbed to illness, while none infected with 
EILV/CHIKV showed any signs of disease or histopathological lesions.
To more stringently examine the vertebrate cell replication deficiency and safety of EILV/
CHIKV, we intracranially inoculated infant A129 IFN α/β receptor-knockout (IFNα/βR−/−) 
mice with 8.7 log10 PFU of EILV/CHIKV in C7/10 cell medium and compared weight 
change and survival to mice inoculated with a 10,000-fold lower dose of attenuated CHIKV 
strain 181/clone25 (Fig 3c–d), or C7/10 cell medium alone. All 6 of the mice died within 2 
days of infection with CHIKV strain 181/clone25, while EILV/CHIKV-inoculated mice all 
survived at least 120 days and showed weight gains similar to those of mock-infected mice. 
To further confirm the host-restricted EILV/CHIKV phenotype, we performed 5 serial, 
intracranial, blind passages of EILV/CHIKV in 2–4 day-old IFNα/βR−/− mice (n=3 per 
passage), with 2-day incubations, starting with an 8.8 log10 PFU dose. When the 5th brain 
homogenate was inoculated into an additional infant A129 mouse cohort, all (n=8) survived. 
While we detected EILV/CHIKV RNA by qRT-PCR in passage 1 mouse brain homogenate, 
as well as infectious virus by plaque assay in 2 out of 3 mice (335 and 45 PFU), presumably 
due to the presence of residual inoculum virus, no evidence of replication was detected in 
subsequent passages (Fig. 3e).
Immunization of C57BL/6 mice induces robust humoral and cellular responses
An immunocompetent C57BL/6 mouse model was used to assess immunogenicity of EILV/
CHIKV compared to dose-matched, formalin-inactivated EILV/CHIKV or a dose of live-
Erasmus et al.
Page 5
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 attenuated strain 181/clone25 used in clinical trials (25). Four-week-old mice were 
vaccinated subcutaneously (SC) with a single 8.8 log10 PFU dose of live or inactivated 
EILV/CHIKV, or with a 5.5 log10 PFU dose of strain 181/clone25 used in prior studies (25), 
or mock-vaccinated with PBS. Rapid seroconversion was observed at 4 days post-
vaccination (DPV) in 4 out of 5 mice vaccinated with live EILV/CHIKV, with 80% plaque-
reduction neutralizing test (PRNT80) titers of 1:20–1:80, measured on Vero cells, while all 
other cohorts remained seronegative (<1:20). After 4 DPV, all groups showed an upward 
trend in PRNT80 titers and at 28 DPV there was a significant difference (p < 0.0001) 
between live and inactivated EILV/CHIKV, or strain 181/clone25 (Fig. 4a). One mouse 
vaccinated with 181/clone25 failed to seroconvert. Three mice per group were sacrificed at 4 
or 8 DPV and splenocytes were isolated, stimulated with a peptide pool of CHIKV CD8 T-
cell epitopes corresponding to proteins E1, E2, and C, as previously described (26), stained 
for CD3, CD8, and IFN-γ, and analyzed by flow cytometry (Fig. 4b & Supplementary Fig. 
5). At 4 DPV, compared to mock-vaccinated mice, live EILV/CHIKV-vaccinated mice 
exhibited higher mean numbers of antigen-specific IFN-γ-producing CD8+ T cells 
(21.5×104 versus 7.6×104 cells, p < 0.0001, Fig. 4b). At 8 DPV, EILV/CHIKV-vaccinated 
mice exhibited further elevation in numbers of activated CD8+ T-cells, following peptide 
stimulation, compared to mock-vaccinated animals (33.7×104 versus 5.9×104 cells, p < 
0.0001, Fig. 4b).
Due to a lack of characterized CHIKV CD4 T-cell epitopes, a similar experiment was 
performed and splenocytes were harvested at 4, 8, and 28 DPV, stimulated with PMA and 
ionomycin, stained for CD3, CD4, CD8, and IFN-γ, and analyzed by flow cytometry 
(Supplementary Fig. 6). At 4 DPV, live EILV/CHIKV-vaccinated mice exhibited higher 
percentages of CD4+ (3.9% versus 1.6%) and CD8+ T cells (8.1% versus 4.7%) producing 
IFN-γ compared to sham- and inactivated EILV/CHIKV-vaccinated animals (p < 0.0001, 
Fig. 4b–c). Immune responses in live EILV/CHIKV-vaccinated mice remained stronger than 
observed in the other groups at later time points (8, 28 DPV). Formalin-inactivation of 
EILV/CHIKV delayed the activated phenotype for both CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells until 28 
DPV, compared to live EILV/CHIKV (p < 0.0001). Strain 181/clone25-vaccinated mice 
demonstrated an enhancement of activated CD8+ T-cells, peaking at 8 DPV and CD4+ T-
cells at 28 DPV (p < 0.001), compared to sham-vaccinated mice.
At day 30 post-vaccination, all mice were challenged with 6 log10 PFU of wt CHIKV strain 
99659, a 2014 human isolate from the British Virgin Islands. All mice vaccinated with live 
or inactivated EILV/CHIKV were completely protected from viremia, while mock-
vaccinated mice exhibited viremia with a mean peak titer of 2.7 log10 PFU/ml; 181/clone25-
vaccinated mice had a mean viremia titer of 2.2 log10 PFU/ml at 2 days post-challenge 
(DPC). At 3 DPC, mock-vaccinated mice had a mean titer of 2 log10 PFU/ml whereas no 
viremia could be detected in any EILV/CHIKV- or 181/clone25-vaccinated mice (Fig. 4d). 
All mice vaccinated with live EILV/CHIKV were completely protected from footpad 
swelling, while the duration of swelling was shortened in mice vaccinated with 181/clone25. 
In contrast, inactivated EILV/CHIKV initially protected mice from swelling, but by 7 DPC a 
slight but insignificant increase in footpad thickness was observed (Fig. 4e).
Erasmus et al.
Page 6
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Single-dose, long-term efficacy in IFNα/βR−/− mice
Long-term efficacy was evaluated in A129 IFNα/βR−/− mice because this model provides a 
lethal end-point upon CHIKV challenge. Six-week-old mice were vaccinated SC with a 
single 8.5 log10 PFU dose of live or inactivated EILV/CHIKV, or with 5.5 log10 PFU of 
strain 181/clone25, or mock-vaccinated with PBS. By day 28, live EILV/CHIKV induced 
PRNT80 titers between 1:160–1:1280, similar to those in C57BL/6 mice at 28 DPV, with a 
slight decline to 1:40–1:1280 at 289 DPV (Fig. 5a). In contrast, strain 181/clone25 induced 
>1:1280 PRNT80 titers at day 28, which were sustained through 289 DPV. In the C57BL/6 
model, 181/clone25 induced PRNT80 titers of only <1:20–1:320 at 28 DPV, significantly 
lower (p<0.0001) than those following EILV/CHIKV vaccination (Fig 4a). In IFNα/βR−/− 
mice, inactivated EILV/CHIKV induced similar PRNT titers to those in C57BL/6 mice at 28 
DPV and significantly lower (p<0.05) than those induced by EILV/CHIKV in both animal 
models, followed by a slow decline to <1:20–1:160 at 289 DPV (Fig. 5a). Following 
challenge at 292 DPV with 1,000 PFU of CHIKV-99659, live EILV/CHIKV- and 181/
clone25-vaccinated mice were fully protected from weight loss, footpad swelling, viremia, 
and death, compared to mock-vaccinated mice (p<0.05), which lost on average 12% of their 
weight, exhibited a mean peak viremia of 6.2 log10 PFU at 4 DPC, and were moribund 
between 6–7 DPC (Fig. 5b–e). While inactivated EILV/CHIKV protected mice from death 
and viremia, they experienced a mean 8% weight loss and prolonged footpad swelling. 
Blinded histopathological analysis of pelvic limb sections showed that, upon challenge, 
mock-vaccinated animals exhibited full thickness subcutaneous edema of the distal digit 
with associated perivascular scant mixed inflammation (Supplementary Fig. 7). Inactivated 
EILV/CHIKV-vaccinated mice had a locally extensive neutrophilic cellulitis with scattered 
myocyte degeneration and regeneration. Neither 181/clone 25- nor live EILV/CHIKV-
vaccinated mice had significant histopathological findings.
Single-dose of EILV/CHIKV protects NHPs against CHIKV challenge
Because CHIKV infection of nonhuman primates (NHPs), especially cynomolgus macaques, 
closely mimics human CHIKF (27,28), we tested the efficacy of EILV/CHIKV as a single-
dose vaccine in this model. Five male macaques 3–5 years of age and seronegative for anti-
alphavirus immunity by hemagglutination inhibition (data not shown) were divided into two 
cohorts to achieve a similar weight distribution (3.0 – 5.8 kg), and each was implanted with 
a telemetric device to measure temperature at one-minute intervals throughout the study. 
Three animals were vaccinated intramuscularly in the right quadriceps with 8.1 log10 PFU of 
live EILV/CHIKV and 2 macaques were mock-vaccinated with uninfected C7/10 mosquito 
cell supernatant to assess potential hypersensitivity to mosquito cell proteins potentially 
present in vaccine preparations. Following the injections, no swelling or redness was 
detected at the injection sites and all body temperatures remained normal. Neutralizing 
antibody titers were determined on 4, 7, 14, and 28 DPV. By 4 DPV, all three vaccinated 
subjects seroconverted with PRNT80 titers of 1:20, after which antibody titers increased with 
the oldest animal peaking at 1:80 while the other 2 macaques developed titers of 1:320 and 
1:640 at 28 DPV (Fig. 6a).
At 31 DPV, all animals were challenged SC with 5 log10 PFU of CHIKV strain La Réunion, 
shown previously to induce viremia, fever, and hypothermia in cynomolgus macaques (28), 
Erasmus et al.
Page 7
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and monitored twice daily for signs of disease with continued telemetric monitoring. 
Approximately 1 DPC, both mock-vaccinated subjects experienced fever while the 3 
vaccinated subjects continued to exhibit typical diurnal temperature fluctuations similar to 
baseline readings (Fig. 6c). Fevers in the mock-vaccinated subjects peaked at 2 DPC with a 
maximum mean temperature difference of 2.6°C compared to the 3 vaccinated subjects, 
coinciding with a peak mean viremia of 4.4 log10 PFU/ml in the mock-vaccinated animals 
(Fig. 6b). All 3 vaccinated subjects exhibited normal, baseline diurnal body temperatures 
throughout the study and viremia remained undetectable (limit of detection 5 PFU/ml; Fig. 
6b,c). By 20 DPC, an anamnestic immune response was observed in EILV/CHIKV-
vaccinated NHPs with a 2–4 fold increase in neutralizing titers (Fig. 6a).
To assess T-cell responses, frozen PBMCs from (7, 14, and 51 DPV), were thawed, 
stimulated with PMA and ionomycin (due to a lack of characterized CHIKV T-cell epitopes 
in NHPs), stained for CD3, CD4, CD8, and IFN-γ, and analyzed by flow cytometry 
(Supplementary Fig. 8). In contrast to the C57BL/6 mouse study, only a small, insignificant 
difference in the percentage of IFN-γ CD4 double-positive cells, compared to mock-
vaccinated animals, was observed at 7 (0.83% versus 0.55%) and 14 DPV (0.73% versus 
0.3 %), this response increased at 20 days after challenge to 2.4% compared to 2.2% in the 
mock-vaccinated animals (Supplementary Fig. 8b). Interestingly, while an enhancement of 
activated CD8 T-cells was not detected in the EILV/CHIKV-vaccinated NHPs 
(Supplementary Fig. 8c), the total number of CD8+ T-cells was elevated compared to mock-
vaccinated NHPs (Supplementary Fig. 8d).
Finally, to test the ability of EILV/CHIKV-induced antibodies to cross-neutralize other 
CHIKV strains, sera from the 3 vaccinated NHPs collected 28 DPV were tested against 3 
strains representing the Asian, West African, and Indian Ocean lineages, which span the 
maximum genetic and antigenic diversity within the CHIKV species (Table 1). All three 
CHIKV strains were neutralized, with PRNT80 titers reduced only 2–8-fold compared to 
homotypic titers (Supplementary Table 1).
Discussion
Live-attenuated vaccines typically offer rapid and durable immunity but can be reactogenic, 
as exemplified by 5 Phase II human volunteers who developed arthralgia after vaccination 
with CHIKV vaccine strain 181/clone25 (25). While the inability of inactivated vaccines to 
replicate offers higher safety, immunogenicity tends to be lower than that of live-attenuated 
formulations, often necessitating multiple doses and periodic boosters. Also, genetic 
instability of live RNA viruses can result in reversion to a pathogenic phenotype.
We overcame the tradeoffs of safety versus immunogenicity using the host-restricted EILV 
as a genetic backbone for CHIKV chimeras. The replication-defective nature of EILV/
CHIKV in vertebrate cells, despite its ability to replicate to exceptionally high titers in insect 
cells, provides attractive safety and cost features. Our repeated inability to detect EILV/
CHIKV genomes after the first murine brain passage indicated the absence of genome 
replication and lack of potential for the acquisition of replication-competence. Previously, 
utilizing a Sindbis virus (SINV) chimera containing the EILV 3′ untranslated genome 
Erasmus et al.
Page 8
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 region (UTR), we demonstrated that the EILV 3′ UTR is able to initiate minus strand 
transcription in vertebrate cells. However, following electroporation of the wt EILV genome 
into vertebrate cells, minus-strand replication could only be detected by RT-PCR if SINV 
nsPs were provided in trans (10). Here we demonstrated that the EILV nsP ORF is translated 
in vertebrate cells (Supplemental Fig. 3b); however, translation of the subgenomic RNA 
could not be detected (Fig. 3b), indicating that EILV nsPs are unable to mediate transcription 
needed for mutation and adaptation. Therefore, the EILV/CHIKV block in vertebrate cell 
replication appears to reflect incompatibilities between EILV nsPs and vertebrate host-
factors.
In contrast to formalin-inactivated virus, EILV/CHIKV is exceptionally immunogenic. Using 
three different animal models, we demonstrated rapid, robust, and durable immunogenicity 
(Figs. 4a, b, 5a, 6a), following a single SC or IM dose. Compared to dose-matched, 
formalin-inactivated EILV/CHIKV, significant differences in murine neutralizing antibodies 
and activated CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells were detected as well as differences in the longevity 
of neutralizing responses (Figs. 4, 5, Supplementary Fig. 6). Structurally, EILV/CHIKV was 
identical to CHIKV (Fig. 1 & Supplementary Fig. 1), corroborating our previous findings of 
its antigenic authenticity (16). However, unlike wt EILV, EILV/CHIKV chimeras attach and 
enter vertebrate cells via clathrin-mediated endocytosis (Fig. 3) to deliver genomic RNA that 
is subsequently translated but nonfunctional for replication (Supplementary Fig. 3).
There is no well-supported mechanism to explain the reduced immunogenicity of formalin-
inactivated versus live alphavirus vaccines (29–32). As the endocytic-pathway intersects 
with antigen presentation on major histocompatibility complex (MHC) I (33) and II 
molecules (34), the efficiency of antigen presentation via this pathway is improved up to 
10,000-fold compared phagocytosis (35,36). Formalin-inactivation abolishes MHC I 
presentation of measles virus (37), entry of porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome 
virus (38), binding, entry, and viral RNA infectivity of polio virus (39), and modifies the 
antigenic structures of Japanese encephalitis virus (40).
We demonstrated that EILV/CHIKV activates the endocytic pathway like vertebrate-
infectious alphaviruses (22), while inactivation significantly reduces binding to vertebrate 
cells (Fig. 3d), presumably by interfering with receptor-mediated entry. We also 
demonstrated that the EILV/CHIKV genome is translated upon delivery into vertebrate cells 
(Supplementary Fig. 3), but the role of this delivery and/or translation in enhancing 
immunogenicity requires further investigation. The improved infectivity of antigen 
presenting cells such as dendritic cells by alphaviruses derived from mosquito cells such as 
EILV/CHIKV compared to mammalian cells (41), due to mannose-enriched glycosylation, 
suggests an additional immunogenicity mechanism.
Finally, we showed that a single dose of EILV/CHIKV protected two mouse models from all 
measures of disease up to 292 DPV. Formalin-inactivated EILV/CHIKV, despite inducing 
measurable immune responses and protecting IFNα/βR−/− mice from a fatal outcome, 
reduced but did not eliminate disease in this model. For a NHP model, we utilized 
cynomolgus macaques, which develop human-like CHIKF (27) and have proven valuable to 
assess CHIKF vaccines (28,30,42). In contrast to replication-deficient vaccines that require 
Erasmus et al.
Page 9
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 multiple doses to protect NHPs (42), EILV/CHIKV provided complete protection after a 
single dose in our pilot study. Rapid, single-dose immunogenicity, coupled with a high 
degree of safety, is desirable to vaccine travelers to CHIKF-endemic countries as well as to 
control explosive outbreaks when prompt immune responses can halt transmission.
In summary, we introduce EILV as an affordable and efficient alphavirus vaccine platform. 
Due to their host-restricted nature, EILV-based chimeras do not require inactivation, 
maximally preserving native antigens to permit receptor-mediated endocytosis and improved 
antigen presentation. Due to their fundamental host restriction, EILV chimeras combine the 
safety of inactivated vaccines with the immunogenicity and ease-of-production of live-
attenuated vaccines.
We have also generated EILV chimeras for eastern and Venezuelan equine encephalitis 
viruses, and both replicate efficiently in mosquito cells. Further work is needed to determine 
if this approach can be extended to other families of viruses. Over 28 insect-specific 
flaviviruses have been characterized (43) and their application in vaccine development for 
flavivirus pathogens should be explored, especially considering the recent expansion of Zika 
virus and congenital Zika syndrome (44).
Online Methods
Cell cultures
C7/10 cells (American Type Culture Collection, Rockville, MD), derived from A. albopictus 
mosquitoes, were maintained at 29°C with 5% CO2 in Dulbecco’s minimal essential 
medium (DMEM) containing 10% (V/V) heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS), sodium 
pyruvate (1 mM), penicillin (100 U/mL), streptomycin (100 μg/mL), and 1% (v/v) tryptose 
phosphate broth (Sigma, St. Louis, MO). Vero, NIH 3T3, and 293T cells (ATCC, Manassas, 
VA) were propagated at 37°C with 5% CO2 in DMEM containing 10% (V/V) heat-
inactivated FBS, penicillin (100U/mL), and sreptomycin (100 μg/mL). Our lab utilizes 
C7/10 and Vero cells for virus isolations and samples are routinely analyzed by deep 
sequencing. By this method, no contaminating viral sequences were detected. Vero cells 
were also tested and found to be negative for mycoplasma contamination.
Plasmid constructs
The original plasmid encoding the cDNA of EILV (pEILV) was previously described (7,10). 
EILV/CHIKV (Fig. 1a) was generated by replacing the structural protein open reading frame 
(str ORF) with that of CHIKV-99659, a human isolate from the British Virgin Islands (17). 
CHIKV-99659 was isolated on Vero cells, passaged twice on C7/10 cells and cDNA was 
generated from trizol-extracted total RNA. Two overlapping fusion RT-PCR fragments 
containing the EILV subgenomic promoter from an XbaI site to Bsu36I in CHIKV str ORF 
and from NcoI in CHIKV str ORF to NotI in the EILV 3′ UTR were joined with a third RT-
PCR fragment from Bsu36I to NcoI in CHIKV str ORF by restriction digest and ligation 
reactions and sub-cloned into a shuttle vector. Finally, the assembled fragment between XbaI 
and NotI sites was cloned back into pEILV by restriction digest and ligation reactions, to 
complete the EILV/CHIKV construct. Additional constructs are described in the figure 
Erasmus et al.
Page 10
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 legends. All full-length cDNA clones were Sanger-sequenced using ABI PRISM Big Dye 
(Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA).
Recombinant virus rescue
Recombinant viruses were rescued as previously described (7). Briefly, plasmids encoding 
the full-length viral genomes were purified by CsCl-gradient ultracentrifugation, linearized 
by digestion with NotI, and purified by phenol-chloroform extraction. RNA was then 
transcribed and capped using an mMessage mMachine SP6 kit (Ambion, Waltham, MA), 
analyzed by agarose gel-electrophoresis, and electroporated into C7/10 cells without further 
purification. After 24 hours incubation at 29°C, cell supernatant was replaced with fresh 
complete medium. At 48 hours after electroporation, supernatant was harvested, clarified by 
centrifugation, and stored at −80°C.
Virus replication, concentration, and purification
EILV/CHIKV was amplified by infection of C7/10 cells at a multiplicity (MOI) of 0.1 PFU/
cell and at 48 hours post-infection (HPI), supernatants were harvested and clarified by 
centrifugation for 10 min at 3,000×g. To concentrate virus for vaccine studies, clarified 
supernatants were mixed with polyethylene glycol (PEG) 8000 and NaCl to 7% and 2.3% 
(wt/vol), respectively, incubated overnight at 4°C, and the precipitate was pelleted by 
centrifugation for 30 min at 3,100×g. Pellets were then resuspended in PBS and titrated by 
C7/10 plaque assay as described below. To further purify PEG-precipitated virus for virus-
cell binding assays and cryo-electron microscopic analysis, resuspended virus was overlaid 
onto a 20–70% continuous sucrose gradient and separated from contaminants by 
ultracentrifugation for 1.5 hrs at 210,000xg. The virus band was collected and applied to a 
100-kDa Amicon filter (Millipore, Billerica, MA). Sucrose was then removed by 5 washes 
with PBS.
To prepare dose-matched, formalin-inactivated EILV/CHIKV, PEG-precipitated EILV/
CHIKV was split in half. One preparation was formalin-inactivated as previously described 
(29), while the other was mock-inactivated. Briefly, virus was passed through a membrane 
filter to remove debris and warmed to 37°C. Virus was inactivated by the addition of 10% 
formaldehyde solution (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) with stirring to a final concentration of 0.1% 
(v/v), or mock-inactivated by the addition of an equivalent volume of PBS. Virus 
suspensions were incubated with mixing for 3 days at 37°C followed by 4 days at 4°C with 
vigorous mixing twice daily. Formaldehyde was neutralized by the addition of 3.5% (w/v) 
sodium metabisulfite (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) to a final concentration of 0.035% (w/v). 
Inactivation was confirmed by cytopathic effect (CPE) assay on C7/10 cells.
Virus and neutralizing-antibody titers
Plaque assays on mosquito cells were performed as previously described (7). Eighty percent 
plaque-reduction neutralization tests (PRNT80) were performed on Vero cells as previously 
described (45) using strain 181/clone25 as the control virus. NHP sera were further tested 
against additional strains of CHIKV as noted in the figure legends. To quantify EILV/
CHIKV genome copies in mouse brain tissue, viral RNA was extracted from brain 
homogenate using Qiagen viral RNA mini kit according to manufacturer’s instructions 
Erasmus et al.
Page 11
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Qiagen, Venlo, Netherlands). RNA was then reverse-transcribed and cDNA was 
subsequently amplified and quantified by qRT-PCR using TaqMan RNA-to-CT 1-step kit 
(Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) with forward and reverse primers: 
TGGAGCTTCTGTCTGTCACC, and ACGTACGGAGACGGGATAAC, respectively, and 
probe: 56-FAM-TCGCTTGATTAATCACGTGCGAG-3BHQ_1, according to 
manufacturer’s instructions, using the QuantStudio 6 Flex Real-Time PCR system (Thermo 
Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). An RNA standard, used to generate an absolute standard 
curve, was generated by transcribing RNA from the EILV/CHIKV plasmid using SP6 
polymerase as described above. Transcribed RNA was treated with DNase to remove DNA 
template, purified by phenol-chloroform extraction, and quantified by measurement of UV 
absorption at 260nm using the DeNovix DS-11 spectrophotometer (DeNovix Inc, 
Wilmington, DE).
Cryo-electron microscopy and reconstruction
EILV/CHIKV virions in Tris/EDTA/NaCl (TEN) buffer (0.05 M Tris-HCl [pH 7.4], 0.1 M 
NaCl, 0.001 M EDTA) were diluted with an equal volume of TEN buffer to reduce particle 
concentration. Three μL of the diluted virion solution was applied to a Quantifoil grid (mesh 
size 200) and blotted with an FEI Vitrobot Mark IV for 2 s at 100% relative humidity and 
room temperature before plunge freezing. Preliminary imaging on a JEM-2010F 
cryomicroscope was used for initial model generation in EMAN2 (46). Final imaging was 
performed in a JEM-3200FSC cryomicroscope with Omega-type energy filter. 348 
micrographs were recorded at 1.96Å/pix on a DE-20 direct electron detector. 60 electrons 
per Å2 were captured. Damage compensation and motion correction were performed as 
previously described (47).
The dataset was split in half and kept independent through all processing until the generation 
of the final map, except that handedness was corrected manually by reference to published 
alphavirus structures (48). Reconstruction was performed by multi-pathway simulated 
annealing (49). Particles were excluded if orientation solutions from multiple simulated 
annealing initializations did not agree to within 2°. Of the 21,024 particles boxed, 13,455 
were retained by this criterion in the final reconstruction. A radial structure factor was 
applied and the map was low-pass filtered to 8Å.
Thin-section electron microscopy
Vero cell monolayers were prepared and infected with EILV/CHIKV or formalin-inactivated 
EILV/CHIKV for 1hr at 4°C. Following cold-binding to cells at a MOI of 1000 PFU/cell and 
fixation for 0 or 15 seconds, or 5 minutes after incubation at 37°C, the cells were processed 
for thin-section EM as previously described (22). Infected Vero (3 time points including 0, 
15 secs, and 5 mins) cell monolayers were fixed in 2.5% formaldehyde/0.1% glutaraldehyde 
in 0.05 M cacodylate buffer pH 7.3 containing 0.03% trinitrophenol and 0.03% CaCl2 for at 
least 1 hour at room temperature. Monolayers were then washed in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer, 
scraped and pelleted by centrifugation. Pellets were post-fixed in 1% OsO4, 0.1 M 
cacodylate buffer, pH 7.3, washed with distilled water, en bloc stained with 2% aqueous 
uranyl acetate for 20 minutes at 60°C, then dehydrated in graded series of ethanol and 
embedded in Poly/Bed 812 (Polysciences, Warrington, PA). Ultrathin sections were cut on 
Erasmus et al.
Page 12
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Leica EM UC7 ultramicrotome (Leica Microsystems, Buffalo grove, IL), stained with lead 
citrate and examined on a Philips (Eindhoven, Netherlands) 201 electron microscope at 60 
KV.
Virus-fluorophore conjugation and binding assay
Viruses were conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 (AF488) succinimidyl ester (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific, Waltham, MA) as previously described (50). Viruses were diluted to 
1×109PFU/ml (as determined by mosquito cell plaque assay) and AF488 in DMSO was 
added to a final concentration of 100 uM and suspensions were incubated for 1 hr at room 
temp with occasional mixing. Unconjugated dye was then removed by desalting-column 
chromatography (GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences, Pittsburgh, PA) according to manufacturer’s 
instructions and conjugated virus was stored at −80°C before the binding assay was 
performed.
Quantification of virus-bound cells was performed as previously described with 
modifications (51). Briefly, NIH 3T3 cells were detached non-enzymatically using 
CellStripper (Corning), pelleted, and washed once with binding buffer (50 mM HEPES, 100 
mM NaCl, 1 mg/ml BSA, pH 7.4), and 2×105 cells per sample were equilibrated to 4°C. 
Cells were then pelleted and groups of triplicate samples were resuspended in binding buffer 
containing EILV/CHIKV, formalin-inactivated EILV/CHIKV, or strain 181/clone25 at a MOI 
of 100 PFU/cell followed by shaking incubation at 4°C for 90 min. Unbound virus was then 
washed from pelleted cells with 1ml of binding buffer and virus-bound cells were pelleted 
and resuspended in 4% paraformaldehyde (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA) 
followed by incubation at 4°C for 30 min. Samples were then washed with 1ml binding 
buffer, pelleted, and resuspended in 300 μl binding buffer for analysis by flow cytometry 
using a C6 Flow Cytometer (Accuri cytometers, Ann Arbor, MI)
Fluorescence microscopy
Vero or C7/10 cells were seeded onto glass coverslips in 6-well plates (Corning, Tewksbury, 
MA) and infected with EILV/nsP3-GFP/CHIKV at a MOI of 100, followed by incubation at 
29°C. Eight hours after infection, cells were washed and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde 
(Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA). Cells were then washed and permeabilized in 
PBS (0.5% Triton X-100) and stained with phalloidin DyLight 550 conjugate and DAPI 
(ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Coverslips were then washed and mounted onto 
glass slides with MOWIOL (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) and imaged on an Olympus BX61 
microscope (Olympus Life Sciences, Waltham, MA).
Luciferase assay
C7/10 or 293T cell monolayers were cooled to 4°C and infected in triplicate in 6-well costar 
plates at a MOI of 20 with EILV/nLUC/CHIKV. After 1hr incubation at 4°C, monolayers 
were washed once with cold PBS and C7/10 cells or 293T cells were incubated in complete 
media at 29°C or 37°C, respectively. At 0, 1, 2, 4, and 8 hours post-infection, cells were 
harvested, pelleted, resuspended in PBS, and frozen at −80°C until all samples were 
collected. Luciferase activity was determined by Nano-Glo Luciferase Assay (Promega, 
Madison, WI) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were thawed and equal 
Erasmus et al.
Page 13
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 volume of luciferase substrate-containing buffer was added to the cells and mixed. 
Luminescence was then measured on a SpectraMax luminometer (Molecular Devices, 
Sunnyvale, CA).
Flow cytometry
Larger volumes of murine blood were collected at 7 and 14 DPV and peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated and frozen at −80°C until all samples could be 
processed at the same time for flow cytometry. To measure intracellular IFN-γ production in 
murine CD8 T-cells in response to CHIKV antigen, splenocytes were isolated and stimulated 
for 6 hours with previously described pool of peptides (26) corresponding to CD8 T-cell 
epitopes located in E1 (HSMTNAVTI), E2 (IILYYYELY), and C (ACLVGDKVM) (10 
ug/ml/peptide, Sigma, St. Louis, MO), in a Golgi-plug (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) 
containing medium. To measure non-specific intracellular IFN-γ production in CD4 and 
CD8 murine or NHP T-cells, splenocytes or PBMCs were isolated from mice or NHPs, 
respectively, and stimulated with 50 ng/ml PMA (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) and 500 ng/ml 
ionomycin (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) for 4 h at 37°C in a Golgi-plug containing medium. 
Following peptide or mitogen stimulation, cells were harvested, stained with antibodies for 
CD3, CD4, or CD8, fixed and permeabilized with BD Cytofix/Cytoperm (BD Biosciences, 
San Jose, CA) before adding PE-conjugated anti-IFN-γ, or control PE-conjugated rat IgG1 
(eBiosciences, San Diego, CA) for murine splenocytes, or PE-conjugated mouse IgG1 for 
NHP PBMCs (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA). Cells were then washed and analyzed by 
using a C6 Flow Cytometer (Accuri cytometers, Ann Arbor, MI).
Animal studies
All animal studies were approved by the UTMB Institutional Animal Care and Use 
Committee. The facility where animal studies were conducted is accredited by the 
Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care, International and 
follows guidelines set forth by the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, 
National Research Council, 2011. All sample sizes were determined based on power 
analysis assuming LD100 challenge doses and subsequent survival rates of 0.99 versus 0.01 
with α=0.05 using a one-sided Fisher’s exact test. Mice were non-specifically and blindly 
distributed into their respective groups but sample collection and analyses were not blinded 
except for the histological tissue sections which were blindly analyzed. No exclusion criteria 
were established prior to beginning the studies but we failed to collect blood from one 
mouse during an experiment as described in the figure legends. Cynomolgus macaques were 
ranked by weight and alternately distributed into two groups to achieve an approximately 
similar distribution of weights between groups and sample collection and analyses were 
blinded. No data was excluded from analyses.
Mouse safety studies
Seven-day old male and female A129 IFN α/β receptor knockout mice (n=6/group), 
obtained from colonies maintained under specific pathogen-free conditions at University of 
Texas Medical Branch (UTMB; Galveston, TX), were infected intracranially (IC) with 8.7 
log10 PFU of EILV/CHIKV, 4 log10 PFU of strain 181/clone25, or PEG-precipitated C7/10 
Erasmus et al.
Page 14
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cell-supernatant as a negative control in a 10 μl volume and monitored daily for weight 
change and survival.
To assess the potential of EILV/CHIKV to acquire a replication-competent phenotype in 
vivo, we infected three 2- to 4-day old male and female IFNα/βR−/− mice IC with 8.8 log10 
PFU of EILV/CHIKV or 1 mouse with PBS in a 10 μl volume and sacrificed all 4 mice on 
day 2 post-infection. We then harvested and homogenized the brain in a 500 μl volume of 
PBS and re-infected a new cohort of 2- to 3-day old IFNα/βR−/− mice. This was repeated for 
5 passages. Upon infection of the 5th cohort, mice were monitored for weight-change and 
survival for 21 days.
Mouse immunogenicity and efficacy studies
To assess immunogenicity and efficacy in an immunocompetent mouse model of CHIKV-
infection, five 4-week old female C57BL/6 mice (Charles River, Wilmington, MA) per 
group were vaccinated subcutaneously (SC) with 8.8 log10 PFU of EILV/CHIKV, or with 
dose-matched formalin-inactivated EILV/CHKV, or with 5.5 log10 PFU of live-attenuated 
CHIKV strain 181/clone25, or with PBS in a 100 μl volume. Mice were bled at 4, 7, 15, and 
28 DPV to assess neutralizing antibody titers and, in a separate experiment, 3 mice per 
group were sacrificed at 4, 8, and 28 DPV so spleen could be harvested for analysis of T-cell 
activation. Mice were then challenged intradermally (ID) in the rear footpad on day 30 with 
6 log10 PFU of CHIKV-99659 in a 10 μl volume, monitored daily for signs of illness, weight 
loss, and footpad swelling, and were bled at 1, 2, and 3 DPC to assess viremia. Animals 
were euthanized on day 12 post-challenge.
Long-term immunogenicity and efficacy was assessed in an immunocompromised mouse 
model of CHIKV-infection. IFNα/βR−/− mice were bred at the University of Texas Medical 
Branch (UTMB). Eight male or female IFNα/βR−/− mice per group, 6-weeks old, were 
vaccinated SC with 8.5 log10 PFU of EILV/CHIKV, or with dose-matched formalin-
inactivated EILV/CHIKV, or with 5.5 log10 PFU of strain 181/clone25, or with PBS in a 100 
μl volume. Mice were bled at 28, 70, 105, and 289 DPV to assess neutralizing antibody 
titers, and challenged ID in the rear footpad on day 292 with 3 log10 PFU of CHIKV-99659 
in a 10 μl volume. Animals were monitored daily for signs of disease, weight loss, footpad 
swelling, and were euthanized by CO2 exposure if they became moribund. Three mice from 
each group were sacrificed on day 5 post-challenge, blood was collected for viremia titers, 
and rear-legs were harvested for histology. Seventeen days post challenge, surviving mice 
were euthanized.
Tissues were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin (RICCA Chemical Company, 
Arlington, TX) and bone was decalcified overnight in fixative/decalcifier (VWR 
International, Radnar, PA) and processed for histology as previously described (52).
Nonhuman primate immunogenicity and efficacy studies
Five colony-bred, male Chinese-origin cynomolgus macaques (Macaca fascicularis), 3–5 
years old and weighing 3–6 kg were obtained from Shin Nippon Biomedical Laboratories 
(Alice, TX). All subjects tested negative for infection with simian immunodeficiency virus, 
simian type D retrovirus, simian T-lymphotropic virus, and fecal swabs were negative for 
Erasmus et al.
Page 15
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 shigella, and campylobacter. Serum was also screened by hemagglutination inhibition and 
found to be negative for antibodies against CHIKV, Semliki Forest, and Sindbis viruses (data 
not shown). All blood collections, vaccinations, and infections were performed under 
anesthesia by intramuscular (IM) injection of ketamine.
One-week prior to the start of the study, subjects were bled via the femoral vein to obtain 
baseline serology, and TA-D70 telemetry devices (Data Sciences International, St. Paul, 
MN) that record body temperature and activity, were surgically implanted inter-muscularly 
in the dorsum of all 5 subjects. Hair was clipped along the dorsum and the surgical site was 
prepared for aseptic placement of the telemetry device. A 2–4 cm incision was made in the 
skin and an inter-muscular pocket was made for the telemetry device. The device was 
anchored to the underlying tissue with suture and the subcutaneous tissue and skin were 
closed with suture. Analgesics were provided during and after the surgical procedure along 
with a topical antibiotic. Animals were housed individually in cages specifically designed to 
be mounted with receivers matched to each TA-D70 device and configured to transmit the 
signals to a data acquisition base station running Ponemah. Primary (temperature) and 
secondary (activity) sample rates were set to 20 and 10 samples/second, respectively, and 
data collection was started on the day following surgery and was collected every minute, 24 
hours per day and moving averages of temperature and activity were calculated in 60 minute 
intervals and reported as an hourly average.
On the day of vaccination, animals were anesthetized and their right thighs were shaved. 
EILV/CHIKV, 8.1 log10 PFU (n=3), or C7/10 cell supernatant from mock-infected cells 
(n=2) was administered IM into the right quadriceps of each animal in a 1ml volume and the 
injection site was monitored for any adverse reactions. Animals were then monitored twice 
daily for any clinical signs of disease until challenge. On days 4, 7, 14, and 28 post-
vaccination, animals were anesthetized and blood was collected in EDTA, heparin, or serum 
Vacutainers (Beckton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ). Sera were collected and anamnestic 
neutralizing antibody responses were determined at 1, 7, and 20 DPC, while viremia titers 
were determined at 1–4 and 7 DPC. PBMCs from 20 DPC were also isolated and frozen at 
−80°C.
Thirty-one days after vaccination, all subjects were challenged SC with 5 log10 PFU of 
CHIKV-LR in a 100 μl volume and monitored three times daily for clinical signs of disease 
and bled on days 1, 2, 3, 4, 7 post-challenge to assess viremia, and antibody titers. At the 
end of the study, 20 days after challenge, all subjects were bled for final measurements and 
transferred to another protocol.
For T-cell assays, approximately 10 ml of blood was collected at 7, 14, and 51 DPV and 
PBMCs were isolated by density gradient centrifugation in 90% ficol-hypaque (Sigma), 
counted, and frozen at −80°C in freezing media (90% FBS, 10% DMSO). Prior to flow 
cytometry assays, PBMCs were thawed and re-counted to assess viability. Approximately 
50% of cells from 7 and 14 DPV did not survive the freeze-thaw while only ~10% loss was 
noted for the 51 DPV samples.
Erasmus et al.
Page 16
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Statistics
Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism software (version 6.0h) and 
RStudio (version 0.99.491). Data distribution and variance was evaluated for normality and 
similarity, respectively, by qqplot and boxplot analyses in RStudio, as sample sizes were too 
small for traditional normality tests. One-way and two-way ANOVAs with Tukey’s multiple 
comparison tests as well as multiple T- and Fisher exact tests were used as specified in the 
figure legends.
Data availability
Cryo-em micrographs and reconstructions are deposited at emdatabank.org: accession 
number EMD-3406.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank C. Klages and W. Lawrence for their technical assistance with the nonhuman primate study, V. Popov and 
F. Murphy for providing electron microscopy training and discussion, N. Dobias and the UTMB research histology 
core for assistance with tissue preparations, O. Escaffre for confocal microscopy assistance, and C. Mire for 
critically reading the manuscript
Funding: Support for this work came from NIH grants AI120942 (to SCW), Welch Foundation grant (to WC), and 
a grant from the UTMB Technology Commercialization Program. JHE is supported by a UTMB McLaughlin 
Fellowship. Electron microscopy was supported by NIH grant P41GM103832 (to WC).
References
1. Offit, PA. The cutter incident: How america’s first polio vaccine led to the growing vaccine crisis. 
Yale University Press; 2005. 
2. Whittembury A, Ramirez G, Hernandez H, Ropero AM, Waterman S, Ticona M, et al. Viscerotropic 
disease following yellow fever vaccination in Peru. Vaccine. 2009; 27(43):5974–81. [PubMed: 
19679215] 
3. Holland J, Spindler K, Horodyski F, Grabau E, Nichol S, VandePol S. Rapid evolution of RNA 
genomes. Science. 1982 Mar 26; 215(4540):1577–85. [PubMed: 7041255] 
4. Weaver SC, Lecuit M. Chikungunya virus and the global spread of a mosquito-borne disease. N 
Engl J Med. 2015 Mar 26; 372(13):1231–9. [PubMed: 25806915] 
5. Weaver SC, Costa F, Garcia-Blanco MA, Ko AI, Ribeiro GS, Saade G, et al. Zika virus: History, 
emergence, biology, and prospects for control. Antiviral Res. 2016 Mar 18.130:69–80. [PubMed: 
26996139] 
6. Li CX, Shi M, Tian JH, Lin XD, Kang YJ, Chen LJ, et al. Unprecedented genomic diversity of RNA 
viruses in arthropods reveals the ancestry of negative-sense RNA viruses. Elife. 2015; 4
7. Nasar F, Palacios G, Gorchakov RV, Guzman H, Da Rosa AP, Savji N, et al. Eilat virus, a unique 
alphavirus with host range restricted to insects by RNA replication. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 
Sep 4; 109(36):14622–7. [PubMed: 22908261] 
8. Strauss JH, Strauss EG. The alphaviruses: Gene expression, replication, and evolution. Microbiol 
Rev. 1994 Sep; 58(3):491–562. [PubMed: 7968923] 
9. Powers AM, Brault AC, Shirako Y, Strauss EG, Kang W, Strauss JH, Weaver SC. Evolutionary 
relationships and systematics of the alphaviruses. J Virol. 2001 Nov; 75(21):10118–31. [PubMed: 
11581380] 
Erasmus et al.
Page 17
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 10. Nasar F, Gorchakov RV, Tesh RB, Weaver SC. Eilat virus host range restriction is present at 
multiple levels of virus life cycle. J Virol. 2014 Nov 12.
11. Kuhn RJ, Griffin DE, Owen KE, Niesters HG, Strauss JH. Chimeric sindbis-ross river viruses to 
study interactions between alphavirus nonstructural and structural regions. J Virol. 1996 Nov; 
70(11):7900–9. [PubMed: 8892913] 
12. Paessler S, Fayzulin RZ, Anishchenko M, Greene IP, Weaver SC, Frolov I. Recombinant sindbis/
venezuelan equine encephalitis virus is highly attenuated and immunogenic. J Virol. 2003 Sep; 
77(17):9278–86. [PubMed: 12915543] 
13. Lumsden WH. An epidemic of virus disease in southern province, tanganyika territory, in 1952–
53: II. General description and epidemiology. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 1955 Jan; 49(1):33–57. 
[PubMed: 14373835] 
14. Soumahoro MK, Boelle PY, Gaüzere BA, Atsou K, Pelat C, Lambert B, et al. The chikungunya 
epidemic on la réunion island in 2005–2006: A cost-of-illness study. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2011 
Jun.5(6):e1197. [PubMed: 21695162] 
15. Schilte C, Staikovsky F, Couderc T, Madec Y, Carpentier F, Kassab S, Michault A. Chikungunya 
Virus-associated Long-term Arthralgia: A 36-month Prospective Longitudinal Study. PLoS 
Neglected Tropical Diseases. 2013; 7(3)
16. Erasmus JH, Needham J, Raychaudhuri S, Diamond MS, Beasley DW, Morkowski S, et al. 
Utilization of an eilat virus-based chimera for serological detection of chikungunya infection. 
PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2015 Oct.9(10):e0004119. [PubMed: 26492074] 
17. Lanciotti, Robert S., Valadere, Anne Marie. Transcontinental Movement of Asian Genotype 
Chikungunya Virus. Emerging infectious diseases. 2014; 20(8)doi: 10.3201/eid2008.14026
18. Sun S, Xiang Y, Akahata W, Holdaway H, Pal P, Zhang X, et al. Structural analyses at pseudo 
atomic resolution of chikungunya virus and antibodies show mechanisms of neutralization. Elife. 
2013; 2:e00435. [PubMed: 23577234] 
19. Levitt NH, Ramsburg HH, Hasty SE, Repik PM, Cole FE, Lupton HW. Development of an 
attenuated strain of chikungunya virus for use in vaccine production. Vaccine. 1986 Sep; 4(3):157–
62. [PubMed: 3020820] 
20. Gardner CL, Hritz J, Sun C, Vanlandingham DL, Song TY, Ghedin E, et al. Deliberate attenuation 
of chikungunya virus by adaptation to heparan sulfate-dependent infectivity: A model for rational 
arboviral vaccine design. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2014 Feb.8(2):e2719. [PubMed: 24587470] 
21. Gorchakov R, Wang E, Leal G, Forrester NL, Plante K, Rossi SL, et al. Attenuation of 
chikungunya virus vaccine strain 181/clone 25 is determined by two amino acid substitutions in 
the E2 envelope glycoprotein. J Virol. 2012 Jun; 86(11):6084–96. [PubMed: 22457519] 
22. Helenius A, Kartenbeck J, Simons K, Fries E. On the entry of semliki forest virus into BHK-21 
cells. J Cell Biol. 1980 Feb; 84(2):404–20. [PubMed: 6991511] 
23. Eyden B. Organelles in tumor diagnosis: An ultrastructural atlas. Igaku-Shoin Medical Publishers. 
1996
24. Frolova E, Gorchakov R, Garmashova N, Atasheva S, Vergara LA, Frolov I. Formation of nsp3-
specific protein complexes during sindbis virus replication. J Virol. 2006 Apr; 80(8):4122–34. 
[PubMed: 16571828] 
25. Edelman R, Tacket CO, Wasserman SS, Bodison SA, Perry JG, Mangiafico JA. Phase II safety and 
immunogenicity study of live chikungunya virus vaccine TSI-GSD-218. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 
2000 Jun; 62(6):681–5. [PubMed: 11304054] 
26. Muthumani, Karuppiah, Lankaraman, Katthikbabu M., Laddy, Dominick J., Sundaram, Senthil G., 
Chung, Christopher W., Sako, Eric, Wu, Ling, et al. Immunogenicity of Novel Consensus-based 
DNA Vaccines Against Chikungunya Virus. Vaccine. 2008; 26(40)doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.
2008.03.060
27. Labadie K, Larcher T, Joubert C, Mannioui A, Delache B, Brochard P, et al. Chikungunya disease 
in nonhuman primates involves long-term viral persistence in macrophages. J Clin Invest. 2010 
Mar; 120(3):894–906. [PubMed: 20179353] 
28. Roy CJ, Adams AP, Wang E, Plante K, Gorchakov R, Seymour RL, et al. Chikungunya vaccine 
candidate is highly attenuated and protects nonhuman primates against telemetrically monitored 
disease following a single dose. J Infect Dis. 2014 Jun 15; 209(12):1891–9. [PubMed: 24403555] 
Erasmus et al.
Page 18
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 29. White A, Berman S, Lowenthal JP. Comparative immunogenicities of chikungunya vaccines 
propagated in monkey kidney monolayers and chick embryo suspension cultures. Appl Microbiol. 
1972 May; 23(5):951–2. [PubMed: 4624213] 
30. Nakao E, Hotta S. Immunogenicity of purified, inactivated chikungunya virus in monkeys. Bull 
World Health Organ. 1973 May; 48(5):559–62. [PubMed: 4204490] 
31. Tiwari M, Parida M, Santhosh SR, Khan M, Dash PK, Rao PV. Assessment of immunogenic 
potential of vero adapted formalin inactivated vaccine derived from novel ECSA genotype of 
chikungunya virus. Vaccine. 2009 Apr 21; 27(18):2513–22. [PubMed: 19368794] 
32. Kumar M, Sudeep AB, Arankalle VA. Evaluation of recombinant E2 protein-based and whole-
virus inactivated candidate vaccines against chikungunya virus. Vaccine. 2012 Sep 21; 30(43):
6142–9. [PubMed: 22884660] 
33. Burgdorf S, Lukacs-Kornek V, Kurts C. The mannose receptor mediates uptake of soluble but not 
of cell-associated antigen for cross-presentation. J Immunol. 2006 Jun 1; 176(11):6770–6. 
[PubMed: 16709836] 
34. Mellman I, Steinman RM. Dendritic cells: Specialized and regulated antigen processing machines. 
Cell. 2001 Aug 10; 106(3):255–8. [PubMed: 11509172] 
35. Engering AJ, Cella M, Fluitsma DM, Hoefsmit EC, Lanzavecchia A, Pieters J. Mannose receptor 
mediated antigen uptake and presentation in human dendritic cells. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1997; 
417:183–7. [PubMed: 9286359] 
36. Arnold-Schild D, Hanau D, Spehner D, Schmid C, Rammensee HG, de la Salle H, Schild H. 
Cutting edge: Receptor-mediated endocytosis of heat shock proteins by professional antigen-
presenting cells. J Immunol. 1999 Apr 1; 162(7):3757–60. [PubMed: 10201889] 
37. Cardoso AI, Beauverger P, Gerlier D, Wild TF, Rabourdin-Combe C. Formaldehyde inactivation of 
measles virus abolishes cd46-dependent presentation of nucleoprotein to murine class i-restricted 
ctls but not to class ii-restricted helper T cells. Virology. 1995 Sep 10; 212(1):255–8. [PubMed: 
7676641] 
38. Delrue I, Delputte PL, Nauwynck HJ. Assessing the functionality of viral entry-associated domains 
of porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus during inactivation procedures, a potential 
tool to optimize inactivated vaccines. Vet Res. 2009; 40(6):62. [PubMed: 19674538] 
39. Wilton T, Dunn G, Eastwood D, Minor PD, Martin J. Effect of formaldehyde inactivation on 
poliovirus. J Virol. 2014 Oct; 88(20):11955–64. [PubMed: 25100844] 
40. Fan YC, Chiu HC, Chen LK, Chang GJ, Chiou SS. Formalin inactivation of japanese encephalitis 
virus vaccine alters the antigenicity and immunogenicity of a neutralization epitope in envelope 
protein domain III. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2015 Oct.9(10):e0004167. [PubMed: 26495991] 
41. Klimstra WB, Nangle EM, Smith MS, Yurochko AD, Ryman KD. DC-SIGN and L-SIGN can act 
as attachment receptors for alphaviruses and distinguish between mosquito cell- and mammalian 
cell-derived viruses. J Virol. 2003 Nov; 77(22):12022–32. [PubMed: 14581539] 
42. Akahata W, Yang ZY, Andersen H, Sun S, Holdaway HA, Kong WP, et al. A virus-like particle 
vaccine for epidemic chikungunya virus protects nonhuman primates against infection. Nat Med. 
2010 Mar; 16(3):334–8. [PubMed: 20111039] 
43. Bolling BG, Weaver SC, Tesh RB, Vasilakis N. Insect-Specific virus discovery: Significance for 
the arbovirus community. Viruses. 2015 Sep; 7(9):4911–28. [PubMed: 26378568] 
44. França GVA, Schuler-Faccini L, Oliveira WK, Henriques CMP, Carmo EH, Pedi VD, Victora CG. 
Congenital Zika virus syndrome in Brazil: A case series of the first 1501 livebirths with complete 
investigation. The Lancet. 2016:891–897.
45. Beaty, BJ., Calisher, CH., Shope, RE. Arboviruses. In: Schmidt, NJ., Emmons, RW., editors. 
Diagnostic procedures for viral, rickettsial and chlamydial infections. Washington DC: American 
Public Health Association; 1989. p. 797-855.
46. Tang G, Peng L, Baldwin PR, Mann DS, Jiang W, Rees I, Ludtke SJ. EMAN2: An extensible 
image processing suite for electron microscopy. J Struct Biol. 2007 Jan; 157(1):38–46. [PubMed: 
16859925] 
47. Bammes BE, Chen D-H, Jin L, Bilhorn RB. Visualizing and correcting dynamic specimen 
processes in TEM using a direct detection device. Microscopy and Microanalysis. 2013; 19(S2):
1320–1.
Erasmus et al.
Page 19
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 48. Zhang R, Hryc CF, Cong Y, Liu X, Jakana J, Gorchakov R, et al. 4.4 Å cryo-em structure of an 
enveloped alphavirus venezuelan equine encephalitis virus. EMBO J. 2011 Sep 14; 30(18):3854–
63. [PubMed: 21829169] 
49. Liu X, Jiang W, Jakana J, Chiu W. Averaging tens to hundreds of icosahedral particle images to 
resolve protein secondary structure elements using a multi-path simulated annealing optimization 
algorithm. J Struct Biol. 2007 Oct; 160(1):11–27. [PubMed: 17698370] 
50. Zhang S, Tan HC, Ooi EE. Visualizing dengue virus through alexa fluor labeling. J Vis Exp. 2011; 
(53):e3168. [PubMed: 21775958] 
51. Kroschewski H, Allison SL, Heinz FX, Mandl CW. Role of heparan sulfate for attachment and 
entry of tick-borne encephalitis virus. Virology. 2003 Mar 30; 308(1):92–100. [PubMed: 
12706093] 
52. Plante K, Wang E, Partidos CD, Weger J, Gorchakov R, Tsetsarkin K, et al. Novel chikungunya 
vaccine candidate with an ires-based attenuation and host range alteration mechanism. PLoS 
Pathog. 2011 Jul.7(7):e1002142. [PubMed: 21829348] 
Erasmus et al.
Page 20
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Characterization of EILV/CHIKV. (a) Genome organization of EILV/CHIKV chimeric virus 
containing the EILV 5′ and 3′ untranslated regions (UTRs) and subgenomic (SG) promoter 
as well as encoding genes for EILV nonstructural proteins (nsPs) and CHIKV structural 
proteins (sPs) (b) Replication kinetics of EILV/CHIKV on C7/10 cells in serum-containing 
or serum-free media. Monolayers were infected at a multiplicity of infection (measured in 
mosquito cells) of 0.1 PFU/cell and supernatants were collected at the indicated time points 
and titrated on C7/10 cell monolayers. Each data point represents the mean + s.d. titer of 
samples from triplicate infections and the experiment was performed twice. (c) EILV/
CHIKV plaques 3 days after infection of C7/10 cells. (d) Cryo-electron micrograph 
(cryoEM) of EILV/CHIKV particles (scale bar = 100 nm). (e) Cross-section of EILV/
CHIKV cryo-EM maps revealing transmembrane helices of E2/E1 glycoproteins interacting 
with capsid proteins. (f) A 9.85Å cryo-EM single-particle reconstruction of EILV/CHIKV, 
colored radially from E2/E1 heterodimer trimeric spikes in blue, green, and yellow through 
to the capsid proteins in red underlying the lipid bi-layer revealed through the cutaway. 
Particle reconstructions were identical to a previously published structure of CHIKV virus-
like particles (Supplementary Fig.1).
Erasmus et al.
Page 21
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Binding and entry of EILV/CHIKV into vertebrate cells. (a) To study the effect of formalin-
inactivation on binding, EILV/CHIKV, formalin-inactivated EILV/CHIKV, and live-
attenuated strain 181/clone25 were conjugated to AF488 and dose-matched for binding to 
NIH 3T3 cells for 90 min at 4°C along with PBS-conjugation (red) to control for 
background fluorescence. Cells were then washed and three biological replicates per group 
were analyzed by flow cytometry (top graph) and background fluorescence was subtracted 
to calculate mean fluorescence intensity (bottom graph), two independent experiments were 
performed. Data reported as individual and mean values. (Statistical analysis: one-way 
ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test: ** = p < 0.0001). To assess downstream 
entry events, EILV/CHIKV was bound to Vero cells for 1hr at 4°C and monolayers were 
washed and then incubated at 37°C. (b) EILV/CHIKV particles were observed binding to the 
surface of Vero cells at time 0. (c) Fifteen seconds post-binding, clathrin-coated (arrows) pits 
formed around EILV/CHIKV particles. (d) Five-minutes post-binding, EILV/CHIKV 
particles were observed within clathrin-coated (arrows) vesicles (scale bar = 100 nm).
Erasmus et al.
Page 22
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
EILV/CHIKV is restricted from replication in vertebrate cells and does not cause disease in 
newborn IFN α/β receptor-knockout (IFNα/βR−/−) mice. (a) Genome organization of EILV/
nLUC/CHIKV, generated by inserting nano luciferase (nLUC) directly after the subgenomic 
promoter of EILV followed by a duplication of this subgenomic promoter. (b) Luciferase 
assay of cells collected at 0, 1, 2, 4, and 8 hours after 293T or C7/10 cell infection in 
triplicate with EILV/nLUC/CHIKV at a multiplicity of infection of 20 PFU (measured in 
mosquito cells)/cell along with inoculum only at the same time points. Experiment was 
Erasmus et al.
Page 23
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 repeated three times and data were reported as mean + s.d.. (c, d) Newborn (7 day old, n=6/
group) IFNα/βR−/− mice were infected intracranially with 8.7×108 PFU EILV/CHIKV, 
1×104 PFU strain 181/clone25, or uninfected C7/10 cell supernatant and (c) weight change 
and (d) survival was recorded. Experiment was performed twice. (e) EILV/CHIKV was 
passaged in newborn (2–4 day old, n=3/passage) IFNα/βR−/− mouse brain and genomes 
were quantified in inoculum (passage 0) and following each passage, 2 days post-infection. 
All mice (n=8) survived the 5th passage (data not shown). Inoculum (passage 0) was 
reported as individual replicates as well as their mean value while remaining passages are 
reported as individual and mean values of 3 mouse replicates. (c–e) Experiment was 
performed once.
Erasmus et al.
Page 24
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. 
Single-dose of EILV/CHIKV is immunogenic and efficacious in a non-lethal, 
immunocompetent model of CHIKV infection. C57BL/6 mice (n=5/group) were vaccinated 
with EILV/CHIKV, formalin-inactivated EILV/CHIKV, strain 181/clone25, or mock 
vaccinated, and (a) 80% plaque-reduction neutralizing antibody titers (PRNT80) for serum 
collected 4, 8, 15, and 28 days post-vaccination (DPV) were determined. Dashed line 
indicates the lower limit of detection (1:20). (b) Splenocytes were harvested at 4 and 8 DPV 
(independent experiment, n=3/group/time point), stimulated with a peptide pool containing 
CHIKV murine CD8 T-cell epitopes (26), stained for CD3, CD8, and IFN-γ, and analyzed 
by flow cytometry (representative flow plots located in Supplementary Fig. 5). (c,d) All 
mice were challenged intradermally with 1×106 PFU of CHIKV-99659 in the rear footpad at 
30 DPV and (c) viremia was determined at 1, 2, and 3 days post-challenge from 3 animals 
per group and (d) footpad height was measured for all 5 animals per group represented as 
mean + s.d.. (a–c) Individual data points as well as mean values reported. (Statistical 
Erasmus et al.
Page 25
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 analysis: two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test, (a) EILV/CHIKV 
compared to all groups p < 0.0001, (b) compared to mock ** p< 0.0001, * p < 0.001, (d) 
compared to EILV/CHIKV or strain 181/clone25 * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.0001). Experiment 
performed twice.
Erasmus et al.
Page 26
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. 
A single-dose of EILV/CHIKV is immunogenic and provides long-term protection in a 
lethal, immunocompromised model of CHIKV-infection. IFNα/βR−/− mice (n=8/group) 
were vaccinated with EILV/CHIKV, formalin-inactivated EILV/CHIKV, live-attenuated 
strain 181/clone25, or mock vaccinated and (a) 80% plaque-reduction neutralizing antibody 
titers (PRNT80) were determined at 28, 70, 105, and 289 days post vaccination (DPV) for all 
8 animals and each data point and mean value was plotted. (b–e) Four days after challenge 
with 1×103 PFU of CHIKV-99650 ID in the rear footpad, three mice per group were 
sacrificed and blood and pelvic limbs were harvested for (d) viremia and histopathological 
analyses (Supplementary Fig. 7), respectively. The remaining five mice per group were 
utilized for analysis of (b) weight change, (c) footpad swelling, and (e) survival at the 
indicated time points with (b,c) represented as mean + s.d.. (d) Blood could not be collected 
from one mouse so the remaining two are plotted as individual data points as well as the 
mean value(Statistical analysis: two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test, 
(a) EILV/CHIKV compared to all groups * p < 0.05, (b–c) formalin-inactivated EILV/
CHIKV and mock * p < 0.05, Fisher’s exact test of final survival proportions, (e) compared 
to mock * p < 0.05). Experiment performed once.
Erasmus et al.
Page 27
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. 
Nonhuman primates are protected against CHIKV-infection after a single-dose of EILV/
CHIKV. Cynomolgus macaques, implanted with telemetrically-monitored temperature 
sensors, were vaccinated with 1.3×108 PFU of EILV/CHIKV (n=3) or mock-vaccinated with 
uninfected C7/10 cell supernatant (n=2) intramuscularly and (a) 80% plaque-reduction 
neutralizing antibody titers (PRNT80) were determined at 4, 7, 14, 28, 32, 38, and 51 DPV. 
Each data point represents mean + s.d. (b,c) All animals were challenged SC with 105 PFU 
of the virulent La Reunion strain of CHIKV at 30 DPV and (b) viremia titers were measured 
and reported as individual values as well as mean values, and (c) body temperature-
measurements were recorded every minute and reported as hourly means + s.d. Experiment 
Erasmus et al.
Page 28
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 performed once. (Statistical analysis: (b) Multiple two-sided T-tests without assuming 
consistent s.d. * p < 0.05)
Erasmus et al.
Page 29
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
