 Communication between viruses guides lysis-lysogeny 
decisions
Zohar Erez#1, Ida Steinberger-Levy#1,2, Maya Shamir1, Shany Doron1, Avigail Stokar-
Avihail1, Yoav Peleg3, Sarah Melamed1, Azita Leavitt1, Alon Savidor4, Shira Albeck3, Gil 
Amitai1,#, and Rotem Sorek1,#
1Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 7610001, Israel
2Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Israel Institute for Biological Research, 
Ness-Ziona, Israel
3Israel Structural Proteomics Center (ISPC), Faculty of Biochemistry, Weizmann Institute of 
Science, Rehovot 7610001, Israel
4de Botton Institute for Protein Profiling, The Nancy and Stephen Grand Israel National Center for 
Personalized Medicine, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 7610001, Israel
# These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
Temperate viruses can become dormant in their host cells, a process called lysogeny. In every 
infection, such viruses need to decide between the lytic and the lysogenic cycles, i.e., whether to 
replicate and lyse their host or to lysogenize and keep the host viable. Here we show that viruses 
(phages) of the spBeta group use a small-molecule communication system to coordinate lysis-
lysogeny decisions. During infection of its Bacillus host cell, the phage produces a 6aa 
communication peptide that is released to the medium. In subsequent infections, progeny phages 
measure the concentration of this peptide and lysogenize if the concentration is sufficiently high. 
We found that different phages encode different versions of the communication peptide, 
demonstrating a phage-specific peptide communication code for lysogeny decisions. We termed 
this communication system the “arbitrium” system, and further show that it is encoded by 3 phage 
genes: aimP, producing the peptide, aimR, the intracellular peptide receptor, and aimX, a negative 
regulator of lysogeny. The arbitrium system enables an offspring phage to communicate with its 
predecessors, i.e., to estimate the amount of recent prior infections and hence decide whether to 
employ the lytic or lysogenic cycle.
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
#Correspondence: gil.amitai@weizmann.ac.il; rotem.sorek@weizmann.ac.il. 
Author contributions
Z.E. directly performed or was involved in all experiments unless otherwise stated. I.S.L performed conditioned media and proteinase 
K assays. S.D annotated phi3T genome. A.S analyzed the mass spectrometry results. Y.P and S.A expressed and purified AimR-6His. 
A.S.A, A.L. and S.M constructed strains. G.A performed MST, cross linking and ChIP-seq experiments. M.S performed RNA-seq 
experiments. R.S supervised the project.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2017 January 26; 541(7638): 488–493. doi:10.1038/nature21049.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Introduction
Temperate phages may choose to infect either through the lytic or the lysogenic cycles1. 
Whereas the lytic cycle leads to lysis of the bacterial cell, in the lysogenic cycle the phage 
genome integrates into the bacterial genome, and the lysogenized bacterium becomes 
immune to further infection by the same phage1. In accordance, growth dynamics of 
bacteria infected by temperate phages presents partial, but not full, lysis of the culture, 
followed by culture recovery due to growth of lysogenized bacteria.
The factors influencing lysis-lysogeny decisions were so far studied in depth mainly for the 
phage lambda, infecting Escherichia coli2. The decision was shown to be probabilistic in 
nature, but influenced from the nutritional state of the infected bacterium as well as by the 
number of co-infecting phage particles2,3. In the current study we report that phages 
infecting Bacillus species can rely on small molecule communication to execute lysis-
lysogeny decisions.
Results
Conditioned media promote phi3T lysogeny
We initiated this study by attempting to test the hypothesis, which was not verified here 
eventually, that bacteria secrete communication molecules to alert other bacteria from phage 
infection. For this, we prepared conditioned media from cultures of Bacillus subtilis str. 168 
infected by four different phages: phi29, phi105, rho14, and phi3T (Fig 1A). To prepare 
these conditioned media we infected bacteria growing at mid-log phase with the phage at a 
multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 1, and collected the conditioned media three hours 
following infection (or without infection, for control media). The collected media were 
finely filtered to retrieve small molecules and eliminate remaining bacteria and phages, and a 
fresh batch of bacteria was added to the conditioned and control media and subsequently 
infected by the same phage (Fig 1A).
For one of the phages we tested, phi3T, the infection dynamics in the conditioned medium, 
as inferred from the bacterial growth curve, was dramatically different than the dynamics in 
the control medium: whereas a substantial fraction of the infected bacterial culture had lysed 
in the control medium two hours post infection, the culture grown in the conditioned 
medium appeared to be much more protected from lysis (Fig 1B). This effect was not 
detected for any of the other three phages we tested, for which we did not observe a 
difference in infection dynamics between the control and conditioned media (Extended data 
fig 1). Moreover, the conditioned medium prepared from phi3T infection did not affect the 
infection dynamics of other phages, and vice versa, conditioned media prepared from other 
phages did not affect the infection dynamics of phi3T (Extended data fig 1). These results 
imply that a small molecule is released to the medium during infection of B. subtilis by 
phi3T and this molecule can affect infection dynamics of downstream infections by this 
phage.
Quorum sensing (QS) in Bacilli and other Firmicutes is typically based on short peptides 
that are secreted into the medium and sensed by intra-cellular or membrane bound 
Erez et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 receptors4–6. We therefore examined whether the active substance in the medium is 
proteinaceous by treating the conditioned medium with proteinase K. Infection dynamics in 
the proteinase-treated conditioned medium were similar to the dynamics in the control 
medium, suggesting that the active component in the medium is indeed proteinaceous 
(Extended data fig 2). Since communication peptides in Bacillus quorum sensing systems 
are frequently imported into the cell by the oligopeptide permease transporter (OPP), we 
tested phage infection dynamics in bacteria in which an essential subunit of the OPP 
transporter, oppD, was deleted (Fig 1C). The phage-derived conditioned medium lost its 
effect when the bacteria lacking the functional OPP were infected by phi3T, suggesting that 
the active substance in the conditioned medium is a 3aa-20aa long peptide, which is the size 
range of peptides that can be imported by the OPP transporter of Gram positive bacteria 7.
Examination of the phage infection dynamics in the oppD mutant showed increased culture 
lysis in both control and conditioned media as compared to infection of WT bacteria (Fig 
1C). Since phage phi3T is a temperate phage 1,8, the increased lysis observed in the 
infection dynamics curve of the oppD mutant was suggestive that the active peptide released 
to the medium may promote lysogeny of the phage. To check this hypothesis we examined 
phage phi3T integration into the B. subtilis genome during infection using a semi-
quantitative PCR assay. Indeed, increased lysogeny was observed when the bacterial culture 
was infected in the conditioned medium (Fig 1D). Combined, these results imply that during 
phi3T infection a short peptide is released to the medium and, as this peptide accumulates, it 
acts as a communication agent affecting the lysis/lysogeny decision of later generations of 
the phage progeny. We named the putative communication molecule arbitrium (the Latin 
word for “decision”).
Phage-produced peptide induces lysogeny
Phi3T was isolated 4 decades ago and was characterized as belonging to the spBeta group of 
phages, although to date its genome has not been sequenced8. To search for the possible 
genetic system encoding the arbitrium peptide, we sequenced and analyzed the genome of 
phi3T, which assembled into a single 128 kbps contig containing 201 predicted genes, 128 
(64%) of which show significant homology to spBeta. We found three ORFs that were 
predicted to have an N-terminal signal peptide, suggesting that they are secreted or 
membrane-localized. While two of these genes seemed irrelevant (one integral membrane 
protein and the other was a large nuclease), the third gene exhibited features reminiscent of 
Bacillus quorum sensing peptides (Fig 2A). Peptides belonging to the Phr family of quorum 
sensing systems in B. subtilis are typically processed from a pre-pro-peptide that contains an 
N-terminal signal sequence, which is recognized by the Sec system and cleaved upon 
secretion4. Once outside the cell, the pro-peptide is further processed by B. subtilis 
extracellular proteases to produce the mature short (5-6 aa) peptide that is typically found on 
the C-terminal end of the pro-peptide4. Our candidate gene encoded a short ORF (43 aa), 
and displayed both an N-terminal signal sequence and the consensus cleavage site for 
peptide maturation at its C-terminus (Fig 2A, Extended data table 1). If this phi3T-encoded 
protein is secreted and matured extracellularly, then the predicted mature communication 
peptide after pro-peptide cleavage would be Ser-Ala-Ile-Arg-Gly-Ala (SAIRGA). Indeed, 
mass spectrometry analysis confirmed the presence of the SAIRGA peptide in the 
Erez et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 conditioned medium but not in the control medium or in medium derived from phi3T in 
which the gene encoding the peptide was silenced (Extended data fig 3).
To test whether the predicted mature peptide is indeed the arbitrium molecule that influences 
the phage lysogeny decision, we infected bacteria with phi3T in LB medium supplemented 
with increasing amounts of synthesized SAIRGA peptide. A clear concentration-dependent 
effect on the phage infection dynamics was observed, such that reduced culture lysis was 
apparent when the medium contained higher concentrations of the synthesized peptide (Fig 
2B). These effects were specific to that peptide, and were neither observed for shorter 
versions of the peptide (SAIRG or AIRGA), nor for PhrC, a known quorum sensing peptide 
of B. subtilis (Fig 2B, Extended data fig 4). The maximal effect on the culture growth curve 
was observed at SAIRGA peptide concentration of 500 nM, above which the effect seemed 
saturated (Fig 2B).
To verify that the observed effect of the SAIRGA peptide on the dynamics of the infected 
culture was the result of increased lysogeny, we directly sequenced total DNA of bacteria 
collected from a time course experiment during infection by phi3T with and without the 
peptide. By comparing the fraction of sequencing reads passing through the intact phage 
integration site in the bacterial genome to reads demonstrating phage integration at that site, 
we directly quantified the fraction of lysogenized bacteria at each time point. We found 
consistently elevated lysogeny in the presence of the SAIRGA peptide, such that 48% 
(+/-7.9%) of the bacteria were lysogenized at 60 minutes post infection, as compared to 18% 
(+/-3.3%) of bacteria grown without the addition of the synthesized peptide (Fig 2C). These 
results imply that the phage-encoded gene we identified is secreted and processed into the 
mature arbitrium communication peptide that further affects the phage lysis/lysogeny 
decision. We denoted this gene aimP.
To examine the dynamics of arbitrium peptide accumulation during the course of phage 
infection, we infected bacteria with phi3T in low MOI (1:1000 phage:bacteria), and recorded 
the peptide concentrations in the medium using targeted mass spectrometry during several 
cycles of phage replication, in parallel to recording phage and bacterial counts. Our results 
show that the peptide accumulates to detectable quantities after 3 cycles of phage infection 
(t=120), and significantly accumulates after 4 infection cycles when the phage:bacteria ratios 
reach ~1:1 (Figure 3). After 150-180 minutes the peptide reaches concentrations that are 
effective in lysogeny promotion as measured in Figure 2B.
The aimP gene is located immediately downstream of a gene encoding a 378 aa long protein, 
suggesting that these two genes may be functionally linked. This upstream gene encodes a 
predicted tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) domain, typical of intracellular peptide receptors of 
the RRNPP family in QS systems of Gram positive bacteria9–11 (Fig 2A). We therefore 
hypothesized that this upstream gene, which we denoted aimR, is the receptor of the AimP-
derived arbitrium peptide. To test this hypothesis we purified a C-terminal His-tagged AimR, 
and used microscale thermophoresis (MST) to measure the binding between the purified 
receptor and the synthesized arbitrium peptide. This analysis showed high-affinity binding, 
at an effective peptide concentration of EC50=138 nM (118-162 nM at confidence interval of 
95%), between the phi3T AimR receptor and the cognate SAIRGA peptide (Fig 2D), 
Erez et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 confirming that AimR most probably functions as the intracellular receptor of the arbitrium 
SAIRGA peptide.
Phage-specific communication code
To appreciate the abundance of this system in nature, we used a homology search to find 
homologs of the aimR gene in available sequenced genomes. We found 112 instances of 
AimR homologs, virtually all of them in Bacillus phages or in prophages found integrated 
within Bacilli genomes, suggesting that this gene primarily fulfills a phage-related function 
(Fig 4A; Supplementary table 1). In all cases, aimR homologs were found upstream of aimP 
candidate genes, i.e., short polypeptides encoding an N-terminal signal peptide, followed by 
a pro-peptide conforming with the processing maturation signal of the Bacillus extracellular 
proteases (Supplementary table 1; Extended data table 1). Although the sequences of the 
predicted mature peptides were diverse, all of them maintained strict rules for their sequence 
composition, with an obligatory glycine residue at the 5th position, glycine or alanine at the 
6th position, and a preference for positively charged residue at the 4th position (Fig 4B, 4C). 
While most (72%) of the phages harboring homologs of the arbitrium system belonged to 
the spBeta group, arbitrium was also found in other types of phages, including phi105-like 
and Mu-like phages (Supplementary table 1).
To test the hypothesis that the phage-encoded communication peptides guide phage 
lysogeny in a sequence-specific manner, we examined the infection dynamics of the spBeta 
phage, which is heteroimmune relative to phi3T, and in which we identified a homolog of 
the AimR-AimP system. The predicted mature AimP-derived arbitrium peptide of spBeta 
was GMPRGA, a sequence that differs by the 3 N-terminal amino acids from the SAIRGA 
peptide of phi3T. Whereas the GMPRGA peptide promoted lysogeny of spBeta, it did not 
affect the lysogeny profile of phi3T; and similarly, the phi3T-derived SAIRGA peptide had 
no effect on the infection dynamics of spBeta (Figs 4D-4F). In accordance, the spBeta-
derived GMPRGA peptide did not show specific binding to the phi3T AimR receptor (Fig 
2D). These results demonstrate a sequence-specific peptide code that guides phage lysogeny 
in a phage-specific manner.
Mechanism of the arbitrium system
In communication systems of Gram positive bacteria, the binding of the communication 
peptide to its receptor usually leads to reprograming of the transcriptional response. This can 
occur either directly, when the receptor is a transcription regulator such as in the cases of the 
PrgX12,13 in Enterococci, the PlcR14–16 of the Bacillus cereus group, and in other 
systems17,18; or indirectly, as in the case of Rap/Phr systems of Bacilli, in which the 
receptor is a phosphatase that regulates downstream transcriptional regulators by 
dephosphorylation19,20, or steric interference21. The presence of a predicted helix-turn-
helix (HTH) motif in the N-terminus of AimR suggested that the receptor of the arbitrium 
system directly binds DNA. To examine whether AimR binds the phage DNA in vivo, we 
engineered a His-tagged aimR gene into a B. subtilis 168 strain in which a dCas9 (CRISPRi) 
technology22 was used to silence the expression of the phage AimR gene, but not the cloned 
His-tagged AimR (Methods). We then performed a ChIP-seq assay 15 minutes after phage 
infection with and without the presence of the arbitrium peptide. Sequencing of the DNA 
Erez et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 bound to AimR clearly showed that AimR binds a single site in the phage genome, directly 
downstream of the aimP gene (Fig 5A, 5B). Moreover, this binding only occurred when the 
arbitrium peptide was lacking from the medium, suggesting that binding of the arbitrium 
peptide to its AimR receptor leads to dissociation of the receptor from its binding site on the 
phage DNA.
During the process of AimR purification we noticed that the protein migrates as homodimer 
in a gel filtration column. Upon addition of the phi3T-derived SAIRGA peptide, however, 
the protein strictly migrated as a monomer (Fig 5C). This observation was corroborated 
using a cross linking assay (Extended data fig 5). These results suggest that the arbitrium 
peptide transfers the signal via alteration of the oligomeric state of its AimR receptor from a 
DNA binding dimer to a peptide-bound, dissociated monomer. Addition of the spBeta 
GMPRGA peptide did not lead to a change in the AimR oligomeric state, pointing, again, to 
the high specificity between the peptide and its receptor in the arbitrium system (Fig 5C, 
Extended data fig 5).
To examine whether binding of the arbitrium peptide to its AimR receptor leads to a 
transcriptional response in the phage genome we applied RNA-seq to RNA extracted from 
bacteria during a time course of infection with and without the peptide. The most dramatic 
change in the expression was observed for a single transcript, which we denoted aimX, that 
was immediately downstream to the AimR DNA binding site (Fig 5D-G, Extended data fig 
6). This transcript showed substantial expression in the absence of the arbitrium peptide 
starting 10 minutes after infection, but its expression was reduced more than 20 fold when 
the medium was supplemented by 1 µM of the SAIRGA peptide (Fig 5D-G).
The above results suggest that AimR, when bound to the phage DNA as a dimer in the 
absence of the arbitrium peptide, is a transcriptional activator of AimX. Indeed, when AimR 
was silenced using dCas9, the expression of AimX was dramatically reduced (Fig 5D). 
Moreover, silencing of AimR resulted in increased lysogeny, suggesting that binding of 
AimR to the phage DNA inhibits lysogeny (or promotes lysis), possibly by activating the 
expression of AimX (Fig 5H).
Since the AimR knockdown did not lead to a dramatic transcriptional effect for any 
transcript except AimX at 20 minutes post infection (Extended data fig 6), we hypothesized 
that the main function of AimR is to control the expression of aimX, and that the expressed 
AimX works downstream to the AimR-AimP communication system to execute the lysis-
lysogeny decision. Consistent with this hypothesis, knockdown of AimX using dCas9 
resulted in increased lysogeny (Fig 5H). Moreover, complementing with an ectopic AimX 
on the background of AimR knockdown (in which AimX expression is naturally silenced, 
Fig 5D) resulted in culture lysis, demonstrating that AimX functions downstream to AimR, 
and works as the inhibitor of the lysogenic or the promoter of the lytic cycle (Fig 5H).
The aimX transcript encodes a short (51 aa) ORF, followed by an unusually long stretch of 
additional 62 bases of non-coding RNA region that terminates in a stem-loop structure. A 
homolog of this ORF follows the aimR-aimP operon only in 17 of the 112 phages in which 
the arbitrium system was identified (Supplementary table 1). We therefore examined the 
Erez et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 expression of the arbitrium locus in the spBeta phage, in which the AimX ORF is absent. We 
found that although no detectable ORF was present in the region downstream aimP, a non-
coding RNA (ncRNA) was expressed from that intergenic region in spBeta (Extended data 
fig 7). Moreover, this ncRNA was responsive to the arbitrium peptide such that in the 
presence of the spBeta arbitrium, its transcription was abolished, akin to AimX in phage 
phi3T (Extended data fig 7). These results imply that AimX possibly exerts its function as a 
regulatory non-coding RNA in a manner that remains to be clarified in future studies.
Combined together, our results point to the following model: upon initial infection of a 
bacterial culture, phi3T expresses the early operon AimR-AimP. AimR, as a dimer, activates 
the expression of AimX, which, in turn, blocks the pathway to lysogeny and/or promotes the 
lytic cycle in a manner yet unknown. At the same time, AimP is secreted into the medium 
and processed into the mature arbitrium peptide. After several cycles of infection, arbitrium 
peptides will accumulate in the medium. Now, when a phage particle infects a yet-
uninfected bacterium, the concentration of the arbitrium peptide, which is internalized into 
the bacteria by the OPP transporter, will be high enough to bind the AimR receptor. Upon 
binding, the AimR receptor changes it oligomeric state from the active dimer to the inactive 
monomer, silencing the AimX lysogeny-inhibitor and leading to lysogeny (Figure 6).
Discussion
We have shown that phages belonging to the spBeta group of phages use communication 
peptides in order to decide whether to enter a lytic cycle or lysogenize the infected 
bacterium. In a sense, the communication mechanism we described allows an offspring 
phage to communicate with its ancestors, i.e., measure the amount of the predecessor phages 
that completed successful infections in prior cycles. The biological logic behind this strategy 
is clear: when a single phage encounters a bacterial colony, there is ample prey for the 
progeny phages that are produced from the first cycles of infection, and hence a lytic cycle is 
preferred. In later stages of the infection dynamics the number of bacterial cells is reduced to 
a point that progeny phages are at risk of no longer having a new host to infect. Then, it is 
logical for the phage to switch into lysogeny to preserve chances for viable reproduction. 
The arbitrium system provides an elegant mechanism for a phage particle to estimate the 
amount of recent prior infections and hence decide whether to employ the lytic or lysogenic 
cycle.
Although the presence of the arbitrium peptide in the medium has a dramatic effect on phage 
lysogeny (Fig 2B, 2C) this effect is not absolute: even at maximal peptide concentrations 
only ~50% of the cells become lysogenized after 60 minutes, indicating that probability of 
lysogeny significantly rises, but is still a stochastic event (Fig 2C). Similarly, in the absence 
of the peptide, the phage does not become obligatorily lytic, as observed from an experiment 
with phi3T in which aimP was deleted (Extended data fig 8). Therefore, there seems to be a 
basal, possibly stochastic, tendency of the phage to lysogenize independently, which is 
supplemented by the arbitrium system that allows reference to prior infections.
Peptide communication systems are known to exist on conjugative plasmids both in 
Bacilli23,24 and in Enterococci12,13, where they can regulate the plasmids horizontal 
Erez et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 transfer. The presence of bacterial quorum sensing systems on phage genomes was noted 
previously4,25, but their roles were either unknown or linked to interference with the host 
bacterial communication25. To our knowledge this study is the first demonstration of actual 
small-molecule communication between viruses. We found this communication to be 
manifested through the arbitrium system in a large group of Bacillus phages; we envision 
that such a strategy will also be discovered for other phages utilizing different 
communication systems. Moreover, this strategy may not be limited to phages, and possibly 
also guide dormancy/lysis decisions in viruses infecting eukaryotes.
Extended Data
Extended data figure 1. Specificity of conditioned media.
Conditioned media were prepared using initial infection of B. subtilis 168 by four phages: 
phi3T, phi105, phi29 and rho14. Presented are growth curves of B. subtilis 168 in the 
different media, infected with each phage at MOI=0.1. (A) Infection with phi3T. (B) 
Infection with phi105. (C) Infection with phi29. (D) Infection with rho14. Data represent 
average of 3 replicates, and error bars represent standard error.
Erez et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended data figure 2. Proteinase K treatment reduces the effect of conditioned medium.
Growth curves of B. subtilis 168 infected by phi3T at MOI=0.1, in control and conditioned 
media, with and without pre-treatment with proteinase K. Data represent average of 3 
technical replicates, and error bars represent standard error.
Erez et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended data figure 3. Mass spectrometry verifies the presence of the SAIRGA peptide in 
conditioned medium.
Presented are extracted ion chromatograms of targeted MS analysis experiment. B2, Y3, Y4 
and Y5 refer to fragmentation products of the peptides made by the instrument in the 
MS/MS process, with the expected m/z ion masses indicated. Y-axis represents the ion 
intensity of each fragment ion (arbitrary units). (A) Reference synthesized SAIRGA peptide 
at 100 nM concentration in LB. (B) Control medium from B. subtilis 168. (C) Conditioned 
medium from phi3T-infected B. subtilis 168. Arrowhead depicts the expected retention time 
of the SAIRGA peptide. (D) Control medium from B. subtilis 168 expressing dCas9 with a 
spacer targeting aimP. (F) Conditioned medium derived from phi3T-infected B. subtilis 168 
expressing dCas9 with a spacer targeting aimP.
Extended data figure 4. 5aa versions of the 6aa arbitrium peptide do not guide lysogeny.
Growth curves of B. subtilis 168 infected by phi3T at MOI=0.1, in LB media supplemented 
with synthesized SAIRGA, AIRGA or SAIRG peptide. Shown is average of 3 biological 
replicates, each with 3 technical replicates. Error bars represent standard error.
Erez et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended data figure 5. Exposure of AimR to SAIRGA peptide reduces propensity for 
dimerization.
Purified AimR was eluted from a gel-filtration column, dialyzed, then mixed with SAIRGA 
peptide (f.c. 100 µM) dissolved in water or with equal amount of volume without peptide 
and incubated at room temperature for 5 minutes. The protein samples were then mixed for 
30 minutes with different concentrations of the crosslinker BS3 
bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate. Presented are electrophoresis results analyzed using the 
TapeStation instrument (Agilent Technologies), showing that in the absence of peptide, 
purified AimR tends to preferentially be cross linked into dimers, whereas in the presence of 
the SAIRGA peptide, dimerization is significantly reduced.
Erez et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended data figure 6. Phage gene expression 20 minutes post infection.
Each dot represents a single phage gene. Axes represent average RNA-seq read count per 
gene from 3 replicates, after normalization to control for RNA-seq library size. X axis, 
expression when phage infection was in the presence of 1 µM of SAIRGA peptide; Y axis, 
no peptide.
Erez et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended data figure 7. Expression of the arbitrium locus in phage spBeta during infection.
RNA-seq coverage of the arbitrium locus at 20 minutes post infection, with (black) or 
without (green) 1 µM of synthesized GMPRGA peptide in the medium. RNA-seq coverage 
was normalized to the number of reads mapped to the phage genome in each RNA-seq 
library. Shown are two replicates of the experiment.
Erez et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended data figure 8. Infection experiments with phi3T delta-aimP and derived conditioned 
media.
Growth curves of B. subtilis 168 infected with phi3T or phi3T delta-aimP in (A) conditioned 
medium derived from phi3T; (B) conditioned medium derived from phi3T delta-aimP; and 
(C) control medium. Each medium was generated in biological replicate, and the two 
replicates are presented separately. Each curve represents the average of three technical 
replicates, and error bars represent standard error.
Extended data table 1
Signal for cleavage by extracellular proteases in the 
AimP pre-pro-peptide.
Shown are the amino acid sequences of B. subtilis quorum sensing Phr genes divided to their 
domains4. Recognition signal for B. subtilis extracellular proteases is in green. Signal 
peptide in the phi3T AimP protein was predicted by the SignalP 4.1 web server26.
Signal peptide
Pro-peptide
Mature peptide
PhrA
MKSKWMSGLLLVAVGFSFTQVMVHA
GETANTEGKTFHIA
ARNQT
PhrC
MKLKSKLFVICLAAAIFTAAGVASANA
EALDFHVT
ERGMT
Erez et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Signal peptide
Pro-peptide
Mature peptide
PhrF
MKLKSKLLLSCLALSTVGVATTIANA
PTHQIEVA
QRGMI
PhrG
MKRFLIGAGVAAVILSGWFIA
DHQTHSQEMKVA
EKMIG
Phr-pTA1060
MKFKGLFSAVLIVSLLVGAGYSFV
HHDEVSVA
SRNAT
AimP
MKKVFFGLVILTALAISFVAGQQSVSTASA
SDEVTVA
SAIRGA
Extended Materials and Methods
Phages and strains in this study—Bacillus subtilis str. 168 was obtained from the 
Bacillus Genetic Stock Center (BGSC). Bacillus subtilis BEST7003 was obtained from Prof. 
Itaya Mitsuhiro at Keio University, Japan. The DS4979 strain (oppD::kan)27 was obtained 
from Dr. Avigdor Eldar at Tel Aviv University. The 3610 strain was obtained from Dr. Ilana 
Kolodkin-Gal at the Weizmann Institute. Bacillus phages phi3T, spBeta, phi105, rho14 and 
phi29 were all obtained from the BGSC.
Oligos and reagents—All oligos used in this study were purchased from either Sigma 
(St. Louis, Missouri) or Integrated DNA Technologies (IDT, San Jose, California). Native 
synthetic peptides were purchased from Peptide 2.0 Inc. (Chantilly, Virginia), at 98% purity, 
desalted. Isotopically labeled peptide was purchased from GenScript (Piscataway, New 
Jersey), purified using HPLC to 95% purity.
Phi3T genome sequencing—Phage DNA was extracted using the Qiagen DNeasy 
blood and tissue kit (CAT# 69504) and subjected to Illumina sequencing on a MiSeq 
machine with single read length of 50 bases. Genome was assembled using the Velvet 
software package28 with hash_length=31. Genome was assembled into 3 contigs that were 
further manually assembled based on end-homologies. Assembled genome was permuted to 
conform with the spBeta phage genome coordinates (accession NC_001884). ORFs were 
predicted using Glimmer29 with options -o50 -g110 -t30, and products were assigned to the 
ORFs using rpsblast against the Conserved Domain Database (CDD) version 3.12 with e-
value of 1e-05. Intergenic regions were searched for short ORFs using blastx against the nr 
database (e-value <= 1e-05), and the ORFs were adjusted accordingly. ORFs were also 
annotated using blastp against the spBeta phage proteins (e-value <= 1e-05) (Supplementary 
table 2). The annotated genome was deposited in Genbank under accession KY030782.
Preparation of conditioned and control media—Overnight cultures of B. subtilis 168 
were diluted 1:50 in LB media supplemented with 0.1 mM MnCl2 and 5 mM MgCl2, and 
incubated at 37°C with shaking until reaching O.D600=0.5. For the conditioned medium 
only, phages were added to the bacterial culture at MOI=1. Cultures were then incubated for 
3 hours at 37°C with shaking. The media were centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 10 minutes at 
4°C and the supernatant was filtered with 0.2 µm filter (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, 
Whatman, CAT# 10462200). Phages and large molecules were further filtered out from the 
media by using Amicon Ultra centrifugal filters at a cutoff of 3,000 NMWL (3 kDa) 
Erez et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 (Milipore, CAT# UFC900324). A plaque assay was performed in order to verify that no 
phages were left in the medium. The medium was kept at 4°C for up to two months.
For the Proteinase K assay 7.5 mg (per reaction) of Proteinase K–Agarose from Tritirachium 
album (Sigma, CAT# P9290) were washed twice with 750 µl of sterile water and then 
resuspended with 750 µl of LB supplemented with 0.1 mM MnCl2 and 5 mM MgCl2. Next 
the tubes were centrifuged again, and the supernatant was discarded. 1.5 ml of phi3T-derived 
conditioned medium or control medium was added to a tube containing the washed 
proteinase K. The media were incubated for 2 hours at 37°C with the proteinase K. The 
media were centrifuged and the supernatants were collected for the infection assay.
Growth dynamics of phage-infected cultures—Overnight cultures of bacteria were 
diluted 1:100 in LB media and incubated at 37°C with shaking until reaching O.D600=0.1. 
The bacterial culture was centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 10 minutes at room temperature. The 
supernatant was discarded and the pellet was resuspended in LB medium supplemented with 
0.1 mM MnCl2 and 5 mM MgCl2 at 10% of the initial volume. The concentrated bacterial 
culture was added to control medium, conditioned medium or medium supplemented with 
synthesized arbitrium peptide in a ratio of 1:9 (bacteria to medium). The culture was 
incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. The culture was then infected with phages at 
MOI=0.1. Optical density measurements at a wavelength of 600 nm were taken using a 
TECAN Infinite 200 plate reader in a 96- well plate.
For infection experiments that did not include conditioned medium or addition of a 
synthesized peptide, the diluted overnight culture was grown to early-logarithmic phase and 
then infected as above.
Infection dynamics—for the infection dynamics experiments described in Figure 3, an 
overnight culture of B. subtilis 168 was diluted 1/100 and incubated at 37°C with shaking 
until reaching O.D600=0.5. Next, 0.1 mM MnCl2 and 5 mM MgCl2 were supplemented to 
the medium, and the bacterial culture was split into two flasks. One flask was supplemented 
with phage phi3T at MOI=0.001, the second was not infected and used as control. Samples 
for measuring PFU/ml, CFU/ml and peptide concentration were taken every 15 minutes 
during the time course of 180 minutes. O.D600 was also measured every 15 minutes. For 
CFU measurements, samples were taken from the uninfected culture, diluted in 1xPBS, and 
plated on LB agar plates. For the PFU measurements, samples were taken from the infected 
culture, centrifuged for 5 minutes at 4000 RPM and in 4°C. Next, the supernatant was 
filtered using 0.2 µm filter (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Whatman, CAT# 10462200). 
Phage concentrations from these media were measured using a drop assay in serial dilution. 
For peptide concentration, the media that were filtered previously with the 0.2 µm filter were 
filtered twice using Amicon Ultra centrifugal filters at a cutoff of 3,000 NMWL (3 kDa) 
(Milipore, CAT# UFC900324). The media were sent to targeted mass spectrometry analysis. 
Infection dynamics experiments were done in biological triplicates.
Semi quantitative PCR assay for lysogeny—An overnight culture of bacteria was 
diluted 1/100 until reaching O.D600 =0.1. Medium was replaced (with conditioned medium 
or control medium) as described above, and incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. 
Erez et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Bacteria were infected by phi3T at MOI=5. Cell pellets were collected at times 0, 15, 30, 40 
and 60 minutes post infection in the presence of conditioned or control medium. DNA was 
extracted using Qiagen DNeasy blood and tissue kit (CAT# 69504). Multiplex PCR assays to 
detect phage phi3T DNA (both as free phage DNA and as a lysogen), B. subtilis DNA, and 
the junction between integrated phage and bacterial genome were performed as previously 
described by Goldfarb et al 30. As controls, genomic DNA from uninfected B. subtilis 168 
bacteria, as well as a phi3T lysogen (1L1 clone obtained from BGSC), were subject to the 
same multiplex PCR procedure.
Mass spectrometry—Conditioned media was filtered using 3 kDa MW cutoff filters 
(Millipore). The low molecular weight fraction was spiked with isotopically labeled internal 
standard (IS) peptide (SA{Ile(13C6,15N)}RGA) at a final concentration of 50 pg/µl, and 
then subjected to desalting using the Oasis HLB uElution plates (Waters Corp.). Samples 
were dried and stored at -80°C until analysis. ULC/MS grade solvents were used for all 
chromatographic steps. Each sample was loaded using split-less nano-Ultra Performance 
Liquid Chromatography (10 kpsi nanoAcquity; Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The mobile 
phase was: A) H2O + 0.1% formic acid and B) acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Desalting of 
the samples was performed online using a reversed-phase C18 trapping column (180 µm 
internal diameter, 20 mm length, 5 µm particle size; Waters). The peptides were then 
separated using a T3 HSS nano-column (75 µm internal diameter, 250 mm length, 1.8 µm 
particle size; Waters) at 0.35 µl/minute. For the experiments that are presented in Figure 3 
and Extended data figure 3D-E, peptides were separated on the T3 HSS nano-column at 
45°C and eluted from the column into the mass spectrometer using the following gradient: 
4% to 15%B in 15 minutes, 15% to 90%B in 5 minutes, maintained at 90% for 5 minutes 
and then back to initial conditions. For the experiments that are presented in Extended data 
figure 3A-C, peptides were separated on the T3 HSS nano-column at 55°C and eluted from 
the column into the mass spectrometer using the following gradient: 4% to 35%B in 50 
minutes, 35% to 90%B in 5 minutes, maintained at 90% for 5 minutes and then back to 
initial conditions.
The nanoUPLC was coupled online through a nanoESI emitter (10 μm tip; New Objective; 
Woburn, MA, USA) to a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo 
Scientific) using a FlexIon nanospray apparatus (Proxeon). Data was acquired in parallel 
reaction monitoring (PRM) mode, targeting precursor masses 287.6690 and 291.1776, the 
doubly charged form of native and isotopically labeled (IS) SAIRGA peptide, respectively. 
MS2 resolution was set to 35,000 and the maximum injection time set to 200 msec, 
automatic gain control was set to 2e5. Raw data was imported to Skyline software31 version 
3.5. Product ion intensities were extracted and the total area under the curve (AUC) was 
calculated. Peptide concentration was determined based on the ratio of the AUC from the 
native versus IS, multiplied by the concentration of the standard. A calibration curve was run 
to verify that the measurements are within the linear dynamic range. Since the IS was added 
to the filtered conditioned media, we performed a recovery experiment to calculate the 
recovery factor in order to obtain the concentration in the unfiltered conditioned medium. 
We calculated recovery of 40%, thus all concentration measurements were multiplied by 2.5 
to yield actual concentration in the pre-filtered medium.
Erez et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 AimR expression and purification—AimR was cloned into the expression vector 
pET28a (Novagen) using Transfer-PCR (TPCR)32. Cloning was performed using the 
following primers TP28_aimR_F (5’ 
TTTGTTTAACTTTAAGAAGGAGATATACCATGATTAAGAATGA ATGCGAAAAGG) 
and TP28_aimR_cHis_R (5’-CTTTGTTAGCAGCCGGATCTTAGTGGTG 
GTGGTGGTGGTGAATAGAGATAAGGTTTAATAATTCAAG). The integrity of the newly 
constructed clone, designated pET28-AimR-cHis, was verified by Sanger sequencing. The 
AimR clone was expressed in E. coli BL21(DE3) cells. Freshly transformed BL21(DE3) 
cells harboring pET28-AimR-cHis were inoculated as a starter culture into 250 ml non-
baffled flask containing 100 ml of LB medium supplemented with 30 µg/ml Kanamycin. 
Growth was performed at 37oC and 250 rpm agitation for ~16 hours. Following overnight 
growth, 12.5 ml from the starter culture were inoculated into 5 liter non-baffled flasks 
containing 1.25 liter of LB medium (1:100 dilution of the starter culture, starting OD600 
~0.05) supplemented with 30 µg/ml Kanamycin. Large-scale growth and protein expression 
was performed using a constant shaking of 200 rpm. Cell growth was performed at 37oC, 
until OD600 reached ~0.7. Protein expression was performed at 15oC for about 18 hours 
using 200 μM IPTG (Isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside) as an inducer.
For protein purification, the cell pellet was resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8, 
0.3 M NaCl, 20 mM Imidazole, 2 mM DTT, 0.2 mg/ml Lysozyme, 1 µg/ml DNAse, protease 
inhibitor cocktail (Calbiochem)), disrupted by a cell disrupter at 4oC and clarified at 15,000 
g for 30 minutes. The clarified lysate was loaded onto a HisTrap_FF_5 ml column (GE 
Healthcare) and washed with buffer containing 50 mM Tris pH 8, 0.3 M NaCl, 20 mM 
imidazole and 2 mM DTT. AimR was eluted from the column in one step with the same 
buffer containing 0.5 M imidazole. Fractions containing AimR were pooled and injected to a 
size exclusion column (HiLoad_16/60_Superdex_200_prepgrade, GE_Healthcare) 
equilibrated with 20 mM Tris pH 8, 0.3 M NaCl, 2 mM TCEP. Fractions containing pure 
AimR were pooled and flash frozen in aliquots using liquid nitrogen. Purity was verified by 
the protein running as a single band on SDS PAGE gel stained with coomassie blue (10 µl at 
2 mg/ml loaded per lane), and migration as a single peak on an analytical size exclusion 
column.
Pure AimR was injected to an analytical gel filtration column 
(Superdex_200_Increase_10/30 GL, GE Healthcare) equilibrated with buffer containing 20 
mM Tris pH 8, 0.3 M NaCl, 2 mM TCEP. The migration position of pure AimR was 
compared to that of AimR-peptide mixtures at the following molar ratios: AimR and 
SAIRGA peptide (1:2), AimR and GMPRGA peptide (1:1). The column was calibrated 
(inset of Figure 5C) by monitoring the migration positions of the following known proteins/
polymers: blue dextran (2000 kDa), Thyroglobulin (669 kDa), Apoferritin (443 kDa), beta-
amylase (200 kDa), alcohol dehydrogenase (150 kDa), Albumin (66 kDA), Carbonic 
anhydrase (29 kDa).
Cross linking assays—Cross-linking was generated by reacting the amine-reactive 
reagent BS3 with the AimR protein in the presence or absence of the 6 aa peptide SAIRGA. 
Purified AimR (1.37 mg/ml) was eluted from a gel-filtration column in 20 mM Tris pH 8, 
300 mM NaCl, 2 mM TCEP. The protein was then dialyzed against 20 mM Hepes pH 7.5, 
Erez et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM DTT in a 10 KDa cutoff/3 ml G2 Dialysis Cassette (TermoFisher 
scientific) according to the manufacturer instructions. The dialyzed protein was centrifuged 
at 21,000 g 4°C for 5 minutes yielding 0.5 mg/ml (11.1 µM). Protein was then mixed with 
SAIRGA peptide (f.c. 100 µM) dissolved in water or with equal amount of volume without 
peptide and incubated at room temperature for 5 minutes. The protein samples were then 
mixed for 30 minutes with 5 different bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate (BS3) concentrations 
(0.25,0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 4.0 mM). BS3 was prepared by dissolving 1 mg in 70 µl water yielding a 
25 mM stock concentration. After the incubation period, samples were quenched for 15 
minutes (25°C) with Tris-HCl pH 7.5 in a final concentration of 50 mM. Results were 
analyzed by electrophoresis in protein Screen Tape using a TapeStation (Agilent 
Technologies). Sizes of dimer and monomer were verified using a Novex Bolt 4-12% Bis-
Tris gel using an SDS-PAGE apparatus (Novex Bolt).
Microscale Thermophoresis (MST)—Two-step purified 6xHis-tagged AimR stored in 
Tris/NaCl buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM TCEP) at -80°C was thawed on 
ice and centrifuged at 21,000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C prior to the analysis. Peptides 
(SAIRGA and GMPRGA) were solubilized in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl to a 
final concentration of 100 µM. AimR was diluted to 200 nM and was incubated with 16 
different peptide concentrations varying between 9-4000 nM, which were prepared in Tris/
NaCl buffer containing 0.1% [v/v] Pluronic acid (NanoTemper). Roughly 3 μl were loaded 
into NT.LabelFree Zero-Background Premium Coated Capillaries (NanoTemper) and 
inserted into a Monolith NT.LabelFree device (NanoTemper). MST experiments were 
performed at 60% MST power (infra-red laser) and 20% LED power at 23 °C using the 
Monolith NT.LabelFree instrument (Nanotemper). Ratios between normalized initial 
fluorescence and post-temperature-jump and thermophoresis were calculated and averaged 
from 3 independent runs (runs were incubated for 20 minutes at room temperature before the 
measurement). A plot of fluorescence ratios versus peptide concentration was used to assess 
the binding capacity of the phage protein and its cognate peptide ligand.
ChIP-Seq—For the ChIP-seq experiments, cell cultures of B. subtilis 168 AimR-His tag 
complementation strain (described in CRISPRi section of the methods) were grown in 100 
ml to O.D of 0.1 in LB at 37°C. Then, 50 ml of culture was centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 10 
minutes at room temperature. The pellets were then suspended with 25 ml LB either 
containing or lacking the peptide (SAIRGA) at a final concentration of 1 µM. The cultures 
were then placed for an additional hour in incubation at room temperature with shaking. 
After 1 hour, the cultures were infected with phage (MOI=0.5). After 15 minutes of phage 
infection the cultures were centrifuged for 5 minutes at 4°C 3000 g. The supernatant was 
discarded and the pellets were resuspended with 1 ml of ice-cold 1xPBS (10 mM Phosphate, 
137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, pH of 7.4).
For the formaldehyde fixation of protein to DNA, the 1 ml PBS resuspended pellets were 
then mixed with 62.5 µl formaldehyde (Thermoscientific 16% formaldehyde solution (w/v) 
methanol-free ampule) yielding a final formaldehyde concentration of 1% (w/v) within the 
solution. The formaldehyde-containing cell suspension was incubated at room temperature 
for 10 minutes with mild agitation. After 10 minutes, 75 µl 2 M Glycine (f.c. 150 mM) was 
Erez et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 added to quench residual formaldehyde. Glycine-containing samples were kept on ice for an 
additional 10 minutes followed by centrifugation at 5500 g, 4°C for 1 minute. Supernatant 
was discarded and pellets were washed with a 1 ml of ice-cold 1xPBS. Centrifugation and 
wash were repeated 3 times for each sample.
The cell pellets were then suspended with 600 µl lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 
7.5, 150 mM NaCl and a protease inhibitor mix (cOmplete ULTRA Tablets Roche). The 
lysis-buffer-containing cells were applied on a lysing matrix B (MP Biomedicals) 0.1 mm 
silica beads. The mixture and beads were placed in a FastPrep-24 (MP Biomedicals) 
apparatus and shaken aggressively for 20 sec 6m/sec at 4°C. The beads were then separated 
from lysed cells by centrifugation of 10,000 g for 1 minute at 4°C according to the 
manufacturer instructions. Then, 300 µl of the supernatant, containing the lysed cell mixture, 
was transferred into a 1.5 ml Bioruptor® Plus TPX microtubes (diagenode) and kept on ice 
for 10 minutes (according to manufacturer’s instructions). The sample was then sonicated at 
4°C with full power for 15 minutes (30 sec off/on cycles) using the BioRuptor plus 
(Diagenode) apparatus. Sonication sheared the DNA to an average size of ~500 bp. Samples 
were then centrifuge at 20,000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C.
For the IP experiments, supernatant containing the lysis buffer and cellular content was then 
mixed with Triton X-100 and deoxycholate yielding a final IP-buffer composition containing 
50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% [vol/vol] Triton X-100, 0.1% [wt/vol] sodium 
deoxycholate supplemented with proteases inhibitors (cOmplete ULTRA Tablets Roche). 
Anti-6X His tag® ChIP-grade antibody (abcam (ab9108)) was then added to sonicated 
samples and gently mixed over night at 4°C. In parallel, Protein G Dynabeads (100.04D; 
Invitrogen) were washed three times with IP buffer.
DNA-protein-antibody complexes (300 µl) were captured with a 100 µl Dynabeads protein 
G by mixing them for 1 hour at room temperature with rotation. 0.72 µl of 0.5 M EDTA (f.c. 
1 mM) was added to that mixture to prevent DNase activity at room temperature. Beads 
were applied to a magnetic stand (Qiagen) and washed three times with IP buffer (200 µl) at 
room temperature. Two elution steps were applied with 100 μl and 50 μl of elution buffer (50 
mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 10 mM EDTA, 1% [wt/vol] SDS) for 15 minutes at 65°C on a 
rocking platform. Eluate (100 μl) was incubated with 5 μl of proteinase K (20 mg ml−1) for 1 
hour at 50°C and then for 6 hours at 65°C. Immunoprecipitated DNA was recovered using a 
QIAquick PCR Purification kit (Qiagen). Immunoprecipitated DNA was then converted into 
NGS libraries using an existing protocol33 and was sequenced on a NextSeq500 Illumina 
machine generating 75 nt-long reads.
Sequencing-based assay for lysogeny—An overnight culture of bacteria was diluted 
1/100 until reaching O.D600=0.1. Medium was replaced as described above (LB 
supplemented with 0.1 mM MnCl2 and 5 mM MgCl2 with or without SAIRGA), and 
incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. Bacteria were infected by phi3T at MOI=2. Cell 
pellets were collected at times 5, 10, 20 and 60 minutes post infection in the presence or 
absence of SAIRGA peptide at 1 µM final concentration in the medium. DNA was extracted 
using Qiagen DNeasy blood and tissue kit (CAT# 69504) and subjected to Illumina-based 
whole genome sequencing on NextSeq500. The relative abundance of lysogens in each 
Erez et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 sample was estimated using the number of reads mapped to the uninterrupted integration site 
versus reads mapped to the integration junction spanning the prophage DNA on one end and 
the bacterial DNA on the other end.
CRISPRi experiments—Construction of strains silencing phage genes was done by 
inserting a dCas9 construct controlled by a xylose promoter22 (a gift from the Carol Gross 
lab, UCSF), into the lacA region in B. subtilis 168 genome, and sgRNA with spacers 
targeting the gene of choice under constitutive promoter to thrC region (Spacer targeting 
aimR: ACCATTTACTTTTTCATAAC, spacer targeting aimX: 
TTTCCGCTTCATTCTCAAGA, spacer targeting aimP: TGTGCTTACTGATTGTTGGC). 
Infection assays in CRISPRi strains were performed in LB supplemented with 0.1 mM 
MnCl2, 5 mM MgCl2 and 0.2% xylose.
For complementation assays of aimR on the background of aimR-silenced CRISPRi strain, 
aimR was amplified from the phi3T genome using the fwd primer 
AAGAATTCCTCATTGTGTTTAGGTAAAATAAGAAATTC and the rev primer 
AACTGCAGTTAGTGGTGGTGGTGGTGGTGAATAGAGATAAGGTTTAATAATTCAAG 
(that includes a 6xHis tag). These primers amplify aimR together with 158 bases from its 
upstream region, with a 6xHis at its C-terminus. The amplified fragment was cloned into the 
pBS1C plasmid (received from BGSC). Then, the native protospacer adjacent motif in the 
complemented aimR gene was changed by a synonymous point mutation (C->A at codon 
#20 of the aimR gene) using a primer set containing the point mutation and Gibson 
assembly. The modified gene was then integrated into the amyE locus in the B. subtilis 
genome. The aimX complementation was constructed on the background of aimR-silenced 
CRISPRi strain. For this, aimX was amplified from the phi3T genome using the fwd primer 
AAACTAGTTTTAAGGGAAAGTTCCAGAAATTC and rev primer 
AACTGCAGTCCGTTGCCAATAGATTATGC. These primers amplify aimX together with 
60 bases from its upstream region and 107 bases from its downstream region (containing the 
gene terminator). The amplified aimX was cloned into a pBS1C plasmid modified to contain 
a xylose promoter, and was then integrated into the amyE locus in the B. subtilis genome.
RNA-seq—For determining the difference in gene expression with and without the peptide, 
bacteria (B. subtilis 168 or B. subtilis BEST7003) were incubated for 1 hour in LB medium 
supplemented with 0.1 mM MnCl2 and 5 mM MgCl2 and in the presence or absence of 1 
µM synthesized SAIRGA peptide. Next the bacteria were infected with phi3T (MOI=0.1). 
Cell pellets were then collected at times 0, 5, 10 and 20 minutes post infection.
RNA extraction and RNA-seq was done as described in Dar et al. 34. Briefly, pellets were 
next lysed using the Fastprep homogenizer (MP Biomedicals, Santa Ana, California), and 
RNA was extracted with the FastRNA PRO blue kit (MP Biomedicals, 116025050) 
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. RNA samples were treated with TURBO 
deoxyribonuclease (DNase) (Life technologies, AM2238) and fragmented with 
fragmentation buffer (Ambion) in 72°C for 1:45 minutes. The reactions were cleaned by 
adding x2.5 SPRI beads. The beads were washed twice with 80% EtOH, and air dried for 5 
minutes. The RNA was eluted using H2O. rRNA was depleted by using the Ribo-Zero rRNA 
Removal Kit (epicenter, MRZB12424). Strand-specific RNA-seq was performed using the 
Erez et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 NEBNext Ultra Directional RNA Library Prep Kit (NEB, E7420) with the following 
adjustments: all cleanup stages were performed using x1.8 SPRI beads, and only one 
cleanup step was performed after the end repair step.
For determining the effect of CRISPRi silencing of the aimR gene, bacteria at early 
logarithmic stage were infected with phi3T (MOI=0.1), and cell pellets were collected 20 
minutes post infection. RNA-seq libraries were prepped as described above.
RNA-seq libraries were sequenced using the Illumina NextSeq500 platform. Sequenced 
reads were demultiplexed and adapters were trimmed using fastx_clipper with default 
parameters. Reads were mapped to the reference genomes (gene annotation and sequences 
were downloaded from Genbank: NC_000964 for Bacillus subtilis str. 168, AP012496 for 
Bacillus subtilis BEST7003, NC_001884 for spBeta and KY030782 for phi3T) using 
NovoAlign (Novocraft) V3.02.02 with default parameters. All downstream analyses and 
normalized genome-wide RNA-seq coverage maps were generated as described in Dar et 
al34.
Differential expression analysis—Reads per gene were calculated for each biological 
replicate of time-point 20 minutes post infection, with and without the synthetic peptide, and 
normalized relative to the total mapped reads hitting the phage genome in each replicate. 
Log10 transformation of the average of 3 replicates per gene in each condition was used to 
plot Extended data figure 6 and calculate the fold change of gene AimX.
Identification of AimR homologs and the arbitrium peptide code—Homologs for 
the phi3T AimR receptor were searched for using the BLAST option in the Integrated 
Microbial Genomes (IMG) web server (https://img.jgi.doe.gov/cgi-bin/mer/main.cgi). The 
phi3T AimR was provided as a query sequence and was searched against all isolate genomes 
with an e-value threshold of 1e-35. The gene neighborhood for each AimR homolog was 
visually inspected via the IMG “gene neighborhood” representation, and genes found 
located next to proteins annotated as phage proteins were considered as found in a prophage. 
The immediate downstream gene for each AimR homolog was considered the respective 
AimP gene if it contained a signal peptide as predicted by the IMG web server. If no 
immediate downstream gene was annotated, the intergenic region immediately downstream 
to the AimR homolog was translated using the Expasy Translate Tool (http://web.expasy.org/
translate/), and short translated ORFs were inspected for the AimP signature. Phages 
harboring the arbitrium system were typed according to the following parameters: prophage 
genome length, prophage gene order, and Phaster35 and Virfam36 classifications. Results of 
this analysis are presented in Supplementary table 1.
Construction of aimP phage deletion strain—In order to exchange aimP with an 
antibiotic cassette, a plasmid composed of four fragments was constructed as follows: (i) the 
upstream region flanking aimP (1000 bp upstream to aimP start codon) was amplified using 
the fwd primer TGAAGAGCAACTTTTAAGTG and the rev primer 
TATTCTCACCTCCTTTCAAAT. (ii) the Spectinomycin resistance cassette was amplified 
from plasmid p15a-pDR110 using the fwd primer 
GTTTGACAAATTTGAAAGGAGGTGAGAATACGAATGGCGATTTTCGTTC and the 
Erez et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 rev primer GTATTATGTATTACCTATTCAATTATTTAACCCCCTATGCAAGGGTTTATT. 
(iii) the downstream region flanking aimP (1001 bp downstream to aimP stop codon) was 
amplified using the fwd primer TTAAATAATTGAATAGGTAATACATAATAC and the rev 
primer CAGATTTCTATTTGCTTCATTAAG. (iv) the origin of replication and Ampicillin 
resistance was amplified from the plasmid pBS1C using the fwd primer 
TTATGACTTAATGAAGCAAATAGAAATCTGCGGGACTTACCGAAAGAAAC and the 
rev primer 
AAGAAGTATTCACTTAAAAGTTGCTCTTCATTCTTGACACTCCTTATTTGA. The four 
fragments were assembled together using NEBuilder® HiFi DNA Assembly Master Mix 
(NEB, E2621S). The plasmid was transformed into NEB® 10-beta Competent E. coli (NEB, 
C3019I) for amplification of the plasmid, and then transformed into B. subtilis BEST7003 
harboring a phi3T prophage. The deletion of aimP was verified using Illumina sequencing. 
The phages were then induced using Mitomycin C (Sigma, M0503). Conditioned media 
preparation and infection dynamics assays with this phage were performed as described 
above.
Data availability
The phi3T genome was deposited in GenBank under accession number KY030782. Phage 
gene annotations are in Supplementary table 2. AimR homologs list and the corresponding 
peptides for each one are in Supplementary table 1. RNA-seq and ChIP-seq data were 
deposited in the European Nucleotide Database (ENA), accession number PRJEB18541.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
We thank J. Peters and C. Gross for generously sharing the Bacillus dCas9 system; A. Eldar for the oppD mutant 
and for advice on QS systems in Bacilli; I. Kolodkin-Gal for the 3610 strain;Y. Levin from the De Botton Institute 
for Protein Profiling for assistance in mass spectrometry; D. Fass and G. Armoni for advice regarding protein 
structure; and H. Sharir for assistance in the MST analysis. We also thank D. Pollack, I. Kolodkin-Gal, O. Dym and 
T. Unger for support and discussion throughout the study. R.S. was supported, in part, by the Israel Science 
Foundation (personal grants 1303/12, 1360/16 and I-CORE grant 1796/12), the European Research Council (ERC) 
(grants ERC-StG 260432 and ERC-CoG 681203), Human Frontier Science Program (HFSP grant RGP0011/2013), 
the Abisch-Frenkel foundation, the Pasteur-Weizmann council grant, the Minerva Foundation, the Leona M. and 
Harry B. Helmsley Charitable Trust, and by a Deutsch-Israelische Projektkooperation (DIP) grant from the DFG. 
The ISPC is supported by the Dana and Yossie Holander Center for Structural Proteomics.
References
1. Rutberg, L. The Molecular Biology of Bacilli Vol. 1 Bacillus subtilis. Ch. Temperate bacteriophages 
of Bacillus subtilis. Dubnau, DA., editor. Academic press; 1982. p. 247-268.
2. Oppenheim AB, Kobiler O, Stavans J, Court DL, Adhya S. Switches in bacteriophage lambda 
development. Annu Rev Genet. 2005; 39:409–29. [PubMed: 16285866] 
3. Zeng L, et al. Decision making at a subcellular level determines the outcome of bacteriophage 
infection. Cell. 2010; 141:682–691. [PubMed: 20478257] 
4. Pottathil M, Lazazzera BA. The extracellular Phr peptide-Rap phosphatase signaling circuit of 
Bacillus subtilis. Front Biosci. 2003; 8:d32–45. [PubMed: 12456319] 
5. Perego M. Forty years in the making: understanding the molecular mechanism of peptide regulation 
in bacterial development. PLoS Biol. 2013; 11:e1001516. [PubMed: 23526885] 
Erez et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 6. Waters CM, Bassler BL. Quorum sensing: cell-to-cell communication in bacteria. Annu Rev Cell 
Dev Biol. 2005; 21:319–46. [PubMed: 16212498] 
7. Lanfermeijer FC, Detmers FJ, Konings WN, Poolman B. On the binding mechanism of the peptide 
receptor of the oligopeptide transport system of Lactococcus lactis. EMBO J. 2000; 19:3649–56. 
[PubMed: 10899119] 
8. Tucker RG. Acquisition of thymidylate synthetase activity by a thymine-requiring mutant of 
Bacillus subtilis following infection by the temperate phage phi 3. J Gen Virol. 1969; 4:489–504. 
[PubMed: 4979518] 
9. Rocha-Estrada J, Aceves-Diez AE, Guarneros G, de la Torre M. The RNPP family of quorum-
sensing proteins in Gram-positive bacteria. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2010; 87:913–23. [PubMed: 
20502894] 
10. Do H, Kumaraswami M. Structural mechanisms of peptide recognition and allosteric modulation 
of gene regulation by the RRNPP family of quorum-sensing regulators. J Mol Biol. 2016; 
428:2793–804. [PubMed: 27283781] 
11. Perez-Pascual D, Monnet V, Gardan R. Bacterial cell-cell communication in the host via RRNPP 
peptide-binding regulators. Front Microbiol. 2016; 7:706. [PubMed: 27242728] 
12. Dunny GM, Berntsson RP-A. Enterococcal sex pheromones: evolutionary pathways to complex, 
two-signal systems. J Bacteriol. 2016; 198:1556–62. [PubMed: 27021562] 
13. Shi K, et al. Structure of peptide sex pheromone receptor PrgX and PrgX/pheromone complexes 
and regulation of conjugation in Enterococcus faecalis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2005; 
102:18596–601. [PubMed: 16339309] 
14. Lereclus D, Agaisse H, Gominet M, Salamitou S, Sanchis V. Identification of a Bacillus 
thuringiensis gene that positively regulates transcription of the phosphatidylinositol-specific 
phospholipase C gene at the onset of the stationary phase. J Bacteriol. 1996; 178:2749–56. 
[PubMed: 8631661] 
15. Slamti L, Lereclus D. A cell-cell signaling peptide activates the PlcR virulence regulon in bacteria 
of the Bacillus cereus group. EMBO J. 2002; 21:4550–9. [PubMed: 12198157] 
16. Declerck N, et al. Structure of PlcR: Insights into virulence regulation and evolution of quorum 
sensing in Gram-positive bacteria. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2007; 104:18490–5. [PubMed: 
17998541] 
17. Dubois T, et al. Activity of the Bacillus thuringiensis NprR-NprX cell-cell communication system 
is co-ordinated to the physiological stage through a complex transcriptional regulation. Mol 
Microbiol. 2013; 88:48–63. [PubMed: 23388036] 
18. Fleuchot B, et al. Rgg proteins associated with internalized small hydrophobic peptides: a new 
quorum-sensing mechanism in streptococci. Mol Microbiol. 2011; 80:1102–1119. [PubMed: 
21435032] 
19. Parashar V, Mirouze N, Dubnau DA, Neiditch MB. Structural basis of response regulator 
dephosphorylation by Rap phosphatases. PLoS Biol. 2011; 9:e1000589. [PubMed: 21346797] 
20. Ishikawa S, Core L, Perego M. Biochemical characterization of aspartyl phosphate phosphatase 
interaction with a phosphorylated response regulator and its inhibition by a pentapeptide. J Biol 
Chem. 2002; 277:20483–9. [PubMed: 11923303] 
21. Baker MD, Neiditch MB. Structural basis of response regulator inhibition by a bacterial anti-
activator protein. PLoS Biol. 2011; 9:e1001226. [PubMed: 22215984] 
22. Peters JM, et al. A comprehensive, CRISPR-based functional analysis of essential genes in 
bacteria. Cell. 2016; 165:1493–506. [PubMed: 27238023] 
23. Johnson CM, Grossman AD. Integrative and Conjugative Elements (ICEs): What they do and how 
they work. Annu Rev Genet. 2015; 49:577–601. [PubMed: 26473380] 
24. Auchtung JM, Lee CA, Monson RE, Lehman AP, Grossman AD. Regulation of a Bacillus subtilis 
mobile genetic element by intercellular signaling and the global DNA damage response. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA. 2005; 102:12554–9. [PubMed: 16105942] 
25. Hargreaves KR, Kropinski AM, Clokie MRJ. What does the talking?: quorum sensing signalling 
genes discovered in a bacteriophage genome. PLoS One. 2014; 9:e85131. [PubMed: 24475037] 
26. Emanuelsson O, Brunak S, von Heijne G, Nielsen H. Locating proteins in the cell using TargetP, 
SignalP and related tools. Nat Protoc. 2007; 2:953–971. [PubMed: 17446895] 
Erez et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 27. Patrick JE, Kearns DB. Laboratory strains of Bacillus subtilis do not exhibit swarming motility. J 
Bacteriol. 2009; 191:7129–33. [PubMed: 19749039] 
28. Zerbino DR, Birney E. Velvet: algorithms for de novo short read assembly using de Bruijn graphs. 
Genome Res. 2008; 18:821–9. [PubMed: 18349386] 
29. Salzberg SL, Delcher AL, Kasif S, White O. Microbial gene identification using interpolated 
Markov models. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998; 26:544–8. [PubMed: 9421513] 
30. Goldfarb T, et al. BREX is a novel phage resistance system widespread in microbial genomes. 
EMBO J. 2015; 34:169–83. [PubMed: 25452498] 
31. MacLean B, et al. Skyline: an open source document editor for creating and analyzing targeted 
proteomics experiments. Bioinformatics. 2010; 26:966–8. [PubMed: 20147306] 
32. Erijman A, Dantes A, Bernheim R, Shifman JM, Peleg Y. Transfer-PCR (TPCR): A highway for 
DNA cloning and protein engineering. J Struct Biol. 2011; 175:171–177. [PubMed: 21515384] 
33. Garber M, et al. A high-throughput chromatin immunoprecipitation approach reveals principles of 
dynamic gene regulation in mammals. Mol Cell. 2012; 47:810–22. [PubMed: 22940246] 
34. Dar D, et al. Term-seq reveals abundant ribo-regulation of antibiotics resistance in bacteria. 
Science. 2016; 352:aad9822. [PubMed: 27120414] 
35. Arndt D, Grant JR, Marcu A, Sajed T, Pon A, Liang Y, Wishart DS. PHASTER: a better, faster 
version of the PHAST phage search tool. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016; 44:W16–21. [PubMed: 
27141966] 
36. Lopes A, et al. Automated classification of tailed bacteriophages according to their neck 
organization. BMC Genomics. 2014; 15:1027. [PubMed: 25428721] 
Erez et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 1. Effect of conditioned media on the infection dynamics of phage phi3T.
(A) Preparation protocol of control and conditioned media. (B) Growth curves of B. subtilis 
168 infected by phi3T at MOI=0.1, in control and conditioned media. (C) Growth curves of 
B. subtilis strain 3610 (WT) and its derivative DS4979 (oppD::kan) infected by phi3T at 
MOI=0.1. For panels B-C, data represents average of 3 biological replicates, each with 3 
technical replicates; error bars represent SE. (D) Semi-quantitative PCR assay for phage 
lysogeny during an infection time course of B. subtilis 168 with phi3T. “No DNA”, control 
without DNA; “WT”, DNA from uninfected culture; “Lysogen”, genomic DNA of a phi3T 
lysogen .
Erez et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 2. The arbitrium peptide and its receptor.
(A) The arbitrium locus in the phage genome. (B) Growth curves of B. subtilis 168 infected 
by phi3T at MOI=0.1, in LB media supplemented with synthesized SAIRGA peptide. 
Numbers represent peptide concentrations. Average of 3 biological replicates, each with 3 
technical replicates. (C) Sequencing-based quantitative determination of the fraction of 
lysogenized bacteria. Top – schematics of the analysis. Percent lysogeny was calculated as 
the fraction of reads spanning the phage/bacteria integration junction out of total reads 
covering this junction. Integration junction is red; integrated phage is green. Bottom: percent 
lysogenized bacteria during infection of B. subtilis 168 with phi3T at MOI=2. Average of 
three biological replicates, error bars denote SE. Synthesized SAIRGA peptide was added at 
1 µM. (D) Microscale thermophoresis (MST) analysis of the binding between purified AimR 
and synthesized SAIRGA or GMPRGA peptides. Average and SE of three replicates.
Erez et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 3. Accumulation of arbitrium peptide during an infection time course.
B. subtilis 168 culture was grown to OD=0.5 and then infected at t=0 by phi3T at 
MOI=0.001. PFU, plaque forming units; CFU, colony forming units, sampled from the 
uninfected control. For peptide, PFU and OD shown is average of triplicate (except for t=30 
where it is duplicate) with error bars representing SE. CFU was measured in duplicates, and 
error bars represent the two measured points around the average. (A) Growth of infected and 
uninfected bacteria, and phage, during the infection time course. (B) Accumulation of 
peptide during the infection course as compared to bacteria and phage.
Erez et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 4. A peptide communication code guiding lysogeny in Bacillus phages.
(A) Selected instances of AimR homologs in sequenced genomes. Locus tags are indicated 
for AimR homologs, along with the percent amino acid sequence identity to the phi3T 
AimR. Mature arbitrium peptide is indicated below the AimP homolog. (B) Distribution of 
arbitrium peptides among 112 homologs of AimP. (C) Amino acid profile of arbitrium 
peptide types. (D) Growth curves of B. subtilis BEST7003 infected by spBeta at MOI=0.1, 
in LB media supplemented with synthesized GMPRGA peptide. The BEST7003 strain was 
used for spBeta infection as the B. subtilis 168 strain is naturally immune to spBeta. (E) 
Growth curves of B. subtilis BEST7003 infected by spBeta at MOI=0.1, in LB media 
supplemented with synthesized SAIRGA peptide. (F) Growth curves of B. subtilis 168 
infected by phi3T at MOI=0.1, in LB media supplemented with synthesized GMPRGA 
peptide. Data in panels D-F represent average of 3 biological replicates, each with 3 
technical replicates; error bars represent SE.
Erez et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 5. DNA binding and transcription regulation in the arbitrium system.
(A) ChIP-seq of His-tagged AimR 15 minutes post-infection with or without 1 µM of 
SAIRGA peptide. Shown is the ratio, along the phage genome, between sequenced pulled-
down DNA during infection without the peptide and DNA pulled-down when the peptide 
was present in the medium. (B) Same as panel A, shown is a zoomed-in region in the phage 
genome. (C) Gel-filtration results of purified AimR with or without the presence of either 
SAIRGA or GMPRGA peptide. Inset presents a calibration curve for the gel filtration using 
proteins of known sizes. (D) Expression of the AimX gene during infection. Data presented 
Erez et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 for individual biological replicates (E-G) RNA-seq coverage of the arbitrium locus at 5 
minutes (E), 10 minutes (F) and 20 minutes (G) post infection. (H) Growth curves of WT 
and dCas9-silenced bacterial strains during phi3T-infection. Strains were infected at t=0 at 
MOI=0.1. Shown is average of 3 biological replicates, each with 3 technical replicates; error 
bars represent SE.
Erez et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 6. Mechanistic model for communication-based lysis-lysogeny decisions.
(A) Dynamics of arbitrium accumulation during infection of a bacterial culture by phage. 
(B) At the first encounter of a phage with a bacterial population, the early genes aimR and 
aimP are expressed immediately upon infection. AimR, as a dimer activates AimX 
expression. AimX is an inhibitor of lysogeny, possibly as a regulatory ncRNA, directing the 
phage to a lytic cycle. At the same time AimP is expressed, secreted and processed 
extracellularly to produce the mature peptide. (C) At later stages of the infection dynamics, 
the arbitrium peptide accumulates in the medium and is internalized into the bacteria by the 
OPP transporter. Now when the phage infects the bacterium, the expressed AimR receptor 
binds the arbitrium molecules and cannot activate the expression of AimX, leading to 
lysogeny preference.
Erez et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 18.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
