 Putting Patients First by Reducing Administrative Tasks in Health Care:
A Position Paper of the American College of Physicians
Shari M. Erickson, MPH; Brooke Rockwern, MPH; Michelle Koltov, MPH; and Robert M. McLean, MD; for the Medical Practice and
Quality Committee of the American College of Physicians*
This American College of Physicians (ACP) position paper, initi-
ated and written by ACP'
s Medical Practice and Quality Commit-
tee and approved by the Board of Regents on 21 January 2017,
reports policy recommendations to address the issue of admin-
istrative tasks to mitigate or eliminate their adverse effects on
physicians, their patients, and the health care system as a whole.
The paper outlines a cohesive framework for analyzing adminis-
trative tasks through several lenses to better understand any
given task that a clinician and his or her staff may be required to
perform. In addition, a scoping literature review and environ-
mental scan were done to assess the effects on physician time,
practice and system cost, and patient care due to the increase in
administrative tasks. The findings from the scoping review, in
addition to the framework, provide the backbone of detailed
policy recommendations from the ACP to external stakeholders
(such as payers, governmental oversight organizations, and ven-
dors) regarding how any given administrative requirement, reg-
ulation, or program should be assessed, then potentially revised
or removed entirely.
Ann Intern Med. 2017;166:659-661. doi:10.7326/M16-2697
Annals.org
For author affiliations, see end of text.
This article was published at Annals.org on 28 March 2017.
T
he American College of Physicians (ACP) has long
identified reducing administrative tasks as an im-
portant objective, maintaining significant policy and
participating in many efforts with this goal in mind, in-
cluding developing the “Patients Before Paperwork”
initiative in 2015. The growing number of administra-
tive tasks imposed on physicians, their practices, and
their patients adds unnecessary costs to the U.S. health
care system, individual physician practices, and the pa-
tients themselves. Excessive administrative tasks also
divert time and focus from more clinically important
activities of physicians and their staffs, such as provid-
ing actual care to patients and improving quality, and
may prevent patients from receiving timely and appro-
priate care or treatment. In addition, administrative
tasks are keeping physicians from entering or remain-
ing in primary care and may cause them to decline par-
ticipation in certain insurance plans because of the ex-
cessive requirements. The increase in these tasks also
has been linked to greater stress and burnout among
physicians.
Moreover, defining administrative tasks in health
care (also colloquially called hassles or burdens) is
nearly as challenging as the tasks themselves. Tasks
that become burdensome may differ from payer to
payer; appear one month without notice, then reap-
pear modified or changed the next; and often result
from not using documentation that already exists in the
medical record. Equally if not more challenging is to
identify the best means to address these tasks to miti-
gate or eliminate their adverse effects on physicians,
their patients, and the system as a whole.
However, taking an analytic approach to defining
and mitigating administrative tasks is critical to ad-
dressing them in a more comprehensive, cross-cutting,
and holistic manner, rather than fixing one problematic
task only to have another arise in its place. The ACP
developed a framework (Figure 1) and taxonomy (Fig-
ure 2) for evaluating the sources, intent, effect, and
consequences of existing and new administrative tasks.
It proposes recommendations to reduce excessive ad-
ministrative tasks in health care.
This executive summary provides a synopsis of the
full position paper (Appendix, available at Annals.org).
METHODS
The ACP'
s Medical Practice and Quality Committee
developed these positions and recommendations. The
committee is charged with addressing national, state,
or local policies on improving access, payment, cover-
age, coding, documentation, and medical review, as
well as developing programs to support the quality,
safety, and affordability of patient care. To better un-
See also:
Related article . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 669
Editorial comment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 677
* This paper, authored by Shari M. Erickson, MPH; Brooke Rockwern, MPH; Michelle Koltov, MPH; and Robert M. McLean, MD, was developed for the Medical
Practice and Quality Committee of the American College of Physicians. Individuals who served on the Medical Practice and Quality Committee at the time of
the project'
s approval were Robert M. McLean, MD† (Chair); Christina M. Reimer, MD‡ (Vice Chair); Eileen D. Barrett, MD, MPH‡; Thomas A. Bledsoe, MD‡;
Jacqueline W. Fincher, MD‡; Jason M. Goldman, MD‡; M. Douglas Leahy, MD‡; Michael Mignoli, MD‡; Ryan D. Mire, MD‡; Deep Shah, MD, MSc‡; Charles
Michael Soppet, MD‡; Mark P. Tschanz, MC‡; and Peter Basch, MD‡ (Chair, ACP Medical Informatics Committee). Approved by the ACP Board of Regents on
21 January 2017.
† Author.
‡ Nonauthor contributor.
Annals of Internal Medicine
POSITION PAPER
© 2017 American College of Physicians 659
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 derstand the effects of administrative tasks on practic-
ing clinicians, their patients, and the physician–patient
relationship, the committee analyzed the literature by
conducting a scoping review and environmental scan.
This process involved an extensive search of electronic
databases, journals, and Web sites, including Annals of
Internal Medicine, Health Affairs, New England Journal
of Medicine, Journal of the American Medical Associa-
tion, Commonwealth Fund, PubMed, Academy Health,
Kaiser Family Foundation, Urban Institute, Center for
Health System Change, Agency for Healthcare Re-
search and Quality, other governmental agencies, and
medical associations (see Appendix Table 1, available
at Annals.org, for a comprehensive list of resources).
The initial literature review was done in early 2014
and later updated with 2 additional searches to identify
any relevant new articles. Only articles published in
2000 or later were considered. In total, more than 60
articles were reviewed, with about half meeting the fol-
lowing screening criteria:
• English-language articles or reports
• Studies involving U.S. clinical settings
• Studies involving health care professionals in the
clinical practice or hospital setting, such as physi-
cians, physician assistants, nurse practitioners, and
clinical practice office staff, but excluding oral
health professionals
Studies focusing on the burden of disease or ill-
ness, cost or financial burden of disease or illness, or
cost of drug or health insurance administration were ex-
cluded. Priority was given to articles or reports presenting
evidence from data-driven research rather than opin-
ion. A limited number of editorial reviews, letters, per-
spective pieces, and clinical guidelines were included.
Although this paper briefly discusses issues related
to physician workforce and burnout, the literature re-
view focused primarily on assessing the effects on phy-
sician time, practice and system cost, and patient care
due to the increase in administrative tasks, and then to
identify recommendations to modify, mitigate, reduce,
or eliminate these tasks as appropriate.
Draft recommendations were reviewed by the ACP
Board of Regents, Board of Governors, Council of Early
Career Physicians, Council of Resident/Fellow Mem-
bers, Council of Student Members, Council of Medical
Subspecialty Societies, and outside expert reviewers.
The ACP'
s Medical Informatics Committee reviewed
draft recommendations referencing the use of health
information technology. The position paper and rec-
ommendations were reviewed by the ACP Board of Re-
gents and approved on 21 January 2017.
ACP POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS
After considering the sources, intents, and effects
of administrative tasks in health care—and the literature
addressing these issues—the committee developed the
following 7 public policy statements and recommenda-
tions as strategies to put patients first by reducing ex-
cessive administrative tasks in health care.
1. The ACP calls on stakeholders external to the
physician practice or health care clinician environment
who develop or implement administrative tasks (such as
payers, governmental and other oversight organiza-
tions, vendors and suppliers, and others) to provide fi-
nancial, time, and quality-of-care impact statements for
public review and comment. This activity should occur
for existing and new administrative tasks. Tasks that are
determined to have a negative effect on quality and pa-
tient care, unnecessarily question physician and other
clinician judgment, or increase costs should be chal-
lenged, revised, or removed entirely. (See Appendix
Figures 1 and 2 for examples, available at Annals.org.)
2. Administrative tasks that cannot be eliminated
from the health care system must be regularly reviewed,
revised, aligned, and/or streamlined in a transparent
manner, with the goal of minimizing burden, by all
stakeholders involved.
3. Stakeholders, including public and private pay-
ers, must collaborate with professional societies, front-
line clinicians, patients, and electronic health record
vendors to aim for performance measures that minimize
unnecessary clinician burden, maximize patient and
Figure 1. Framework for analyzing administrative tasks.
Sources
   External
   Internal
Intents
   Products and services
   Quality and safety
   Cost and fraud reduction
   Financial security
   Lack of clear intent
Effects
   Cost and time–BIR
   Cost and time–measurement and reporting
   EHR/health IT
   Appropriate and timely patient care
   Physician satisfaction and burnout
Solutions
   Assessment of tasks by stakeholders
   Transparent alignment and streamlining of tasks
   Collaborate to improve performance measures
   Innovative use of health IT
   Eliminate or replace duplicative tasks
   Research effects and best practices
BIR = billing and insurance-related; EHR = electronic health record;
IT = information technology.
Glossary
Administrative tasks: Processes, procedures, and requirements with
which physicians or their patients are required to comply that affect,
directly or indirectly, the provision of medical care services. (Note: Task
is defined by the Oxford Dictionary as “a piece of work to be done or
undertaken.”)
Hassle: Defined by the Oxford Dictionary as “irritating inconvenience.”
Burden: Defined by the Oxford Dictionary as “a load, typically a heavy
one; a duty or misfortune that causes worry, hardship, or distress.”
POSITION PAPER
Putting Patients First by Reducing Administrative Tasks in Health Care
660 Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 9 • 2 May 2017
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 family centeredness, and integrate the measurement of
and reporting on performance with quality improve-
ment and care delivery.
4. To facilitate the elimination, reduction, align-
ment, and streamlining of administrative tasks, all key
stakeholders should collaborate in making better use of
existing health information technologies, as well as de-
veloping more innovative approaches.
5. As the U.S. health care system evolves to focus
on value, stakeholders should review and consider
streamlining or eliminating duplicative administrative
requirements.
6. The ACP calls for rigorous research on the effect
of administrative tasks on our health care system in
terms of quality, time, and cost; physicians, other clini-
cians, their staff, and health care provider organizations;
patient and family experience; and, most important, pa-
tient outcomes.
7. The ACP calls for research on best practices to
help physicians and other clinicians reduce administra-
tive burden within their practices and organizations. All
key stakeholders, including clinician societies, payers,
oversight entities, vendors and suppliers, and others,
should actively be involved in the dissemination of
these evidence-based best practices.
CONCLUSION
The ACP presents a framework for analyzing ad-
ministrative tasks through the lenses of sources, intents,
effects, and solutions. This framework enables a better
understanding of each administrative task that a clini-
cian and his or her staff may be required to complete.
This framework is the backbone of ACP policy recom-
mendations for stakeholders outside the physician
practice or health care provider environment (such as
payers, governmental and other oversight organiza-
tions, and vendors and suppliers) regarding the assess-
ment of each administrative requirement, regulation, or
program to determine whether it should be chal-
lenged, revised, or eliminated entirely. These recom-
mendations also outline steps that key stakeholders
can and should undertake to align and streamline,
transparently and cohesively, administrative tasks that
remain in place. These guidelines are particularly im-
portant as the health care system evolves from one
based on the volume to one based on the value of
services provided. The ACP also calls for meaningful
collaboration to improve the development, testing, and
implementation of measures and to ensure that health
information technology is used as innovatively as pos-
sible to streamline processes and reduce burden. In
addition, although some consistency was found in the
literature analysis on the effects of administrative tasks,
much more research is needed in that area, as well as
on the subject of best practices to mitigate or reduce
the burden of these tasks. Once defined, best practices
must be disseminated widely. Excessive administrative
tasks have serious adverse consequences for physi-
cians and their patients. Stakeholders must work to-
gether to address the administrative burdens that pre-
vent physicians from putting their patients first.
From American College of Physicians, Washington, DC.
Disclaimer: The authors of this article are responsible for its
contents, including any clinical or treatment recommenda-
tions.
Financial Support: Financial support for the development of
this guideline comes exclusively from the ACP operating
budget.
Disclosures: Disclosures can be viewed at www.acponline
.org/authors/icmje/ConflictOfInterestForms.do?msNum=M16
-2697.
Requests for Single Reprints: Shari M. Erickson, MPH, Ameri-
can
College
of
Physicians,
25
Massachusetts
Avenue
NW, Suite 700, Washington, DC 20001; e-mail, serickson
@acponline.org.
Current author addresses and author contributions are avail-
able at Annals.org.
Figure 2. Taxonomy of administrative tasks external to the
practice and health care environment.
Task
questions
physician
judgment
Task
improves
quality of
care
Task 
promotes
timely and
appropriate
care
Task has
negative
financial
effect
Task should be eliminated.
Task is worthwhile.
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
Task requires careful consideration of
alternatives.
Each circle indicates a characteristic of an administrative task.
Putting Patients First by Reducing Administrative Tasks in Health Care
POSITION PAPER
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 9 • 2 May 2017 661
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 Current Author Addresses: Ms. Erickson, Ms. Rockwern, Ms.
Koltov, and Dr. McLean: American College of Physicians, 25
Massachusetts Avenue NW, Suite 700, Washington, DC
20001.
Author Contributions: Conception and design: S.M. Erickson,
B. Rockwern, M. Koltov, R.M. McLean.
Analysis and interpretation of the data: S.M. Erickson, M. Kol-
tov, R.M. McLean.
Drafting of the article: S.M. Erickson, R.M. McLean.
Critical revision for important intellectual content: S.M. Erick-
son, B. Rockwern, M. Koltov, R.M. McLean.
Final approval of the article: S.M. Erickson, B. Rockwern, M.
Koltov, R.M. McLean.
Provision of study materials or patients: S.M. Erickson.
Administrative, technical, or logistic support: B. Rockwern.
Collection and assembly of data: B. Rockwern, M. Koltov.
APPENDIX: PUTTING PATIENTS FIRST BY
REDUCING ADMINISTRATIVE TASKS IN HEALTH
CARE: A POSITION PAPER OF THE AMERICAN
COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS
The ACP has long identified reducing administra-
tive tasks as an important objective, maintaining signif-
icant policy and participating in many efforts with this
goal in mind. The growing number of administrative
tasks imposed on physicians, their practices, and their
patients adds unnecessary costs to the U.S. health care
system, individual physician practices, and the patients
themselves. Excessive administrative tasks also divert
time and focus from more clinically important activities
of physicians and their staffs, such as providing actual
care to patients and improving quality, and may pre-
vent patients from receiving timely and appropriate
care or treatment. In addition, administrative tasks are
keeping physicians from entering or remaining in pri-
mary care and may cause them to decline participation
in certain insurance plans because of the excessive re-
quirements. The increase in administrative tasks also
has been linked to greater stress and burnout among
physicians.
The ACP developed this paper to assess the effect
of increased administrative tasks on patient care; pro-
pose a framework for evaluating the intent, effect, and
consequences of existing and new administrative tasks;
and offer comprehensive solutions to modify, mitigate,
reduce, and even eliminate administrative tasks.
The ACP is the largest medical specialty organiza-
tion and the second-largest physician group in the
United States. Its members include 148 000 internal
medicine physicians (internists), related subspecialists,
and medical students. Internal medicine physicians are
specialists who apply scientific knowledge and clinical
expertise to the diagnosis, treatment, and compassion-
ate care of adults across the spectrum from health to
complex illness.
Background
What Are Administrative Tasks?
Defining administrative tasks in health care (also
colloquially called hassles or burdens) is challenging—
one simply knows a hassle when it appears. Tasks that
become burdensome may differ from payer to payer;
appear one month without notice, then reappear mod-
ified or changed the next; and often result from not
using documentation that already exists in the medical
record. Equally if not more challenging is to identify the
best means to address these tasks to mitigate or elimi-
nate their adverse effects on physicians, their patients,
and the system as a whole. However, taking an analytic
approach to defining and mitigating administrative
tasks is critical to addressing them in a more compre-
hensive, cross-cutting, and holistic manner, rather than
fixing one problematic task only to have another arise
in its place.
The ACP developed the following framework to
guide the consideration of administrative tasks and
serve as the backbone for its policy recommendations
(Figure 1). This framework categorizes tasks through
several lenses to best identify a set of solutions. First,
one must consider the source of the task. Is it external
to the clinician practice or health care organization, or
is it being generated within the practice? In many
cases, the task may arise from both external and inter-
nal drivers. Second, what is the ultimate intent of the
administrative task? Is the intent clear? Third, what is
the effect of this task? Is it completely negative, result-
ing in wasted time for the clinician and a lack of im-
proved care or outcomes for the patient; generally neg-
ative, with some positive outcomes; positive in the end
but with adverse or unintended consequences; or over-
all positive? Perhaps the value added to patient care is
high enough that activities that typically are viewed as
burdensome—and that increase administrative work—
are instead viewed as worthwhile. Finally, once the
source, intent, and effect of the tasks are understood,
what approaches may be broadly applied to address
several of them in a more focused and cohesive way?
In addition, to whom should these approaches be di-
rected most appropriately: policymakers, payers, in-
dustry,
health
systems,
professional
organizations,
practices, patients, or other key stakeholders? These
framework components are discussed in greater detail
later. Figure 2 illustrates a taxonomy for administrative
tasks, and Appendix Figure 1 provides an example as-
sessment of an administrative task determined to be
worthwhile and that should be retained. Appendix Fig-
ure 2 provides an example assessment of an adminis-
trative task determined to be burdensome and that
should be eliminated.
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 9 • 2 May 2017
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 Sources of Administrative Tasks
External Sources.
The most numerous and well-
known tasks faced by physician practices and other or-
ganizations that provide health care are imposed by
outside forces. These external sources include, but are
not limited to, public and private payers; governments
and policymakers; private certification, accreditation,
and recognition organizations; vendors and suppliers;
health care consumers; and other clinician practices
and health care provider organizations.
Public and Private Payers. All payers, whether pub-
lic or private, have their own approaches, rules, and
requirements related to insurance eligibility verifica-
tion; appropriate billing for services; prior authoriza-
tions for medications, procedures, and other services;
appeals for lack of payment; reporting of quality and
resource use measures, as well as feedback reports on
those measures; referrals and treatment plans; alterna-
tive payment model (APM) participation; and many
other areas.
Governmental Entities and Oversight.
Many gov-
ernmental entities also impose administrative tasks on
physicians—either directly or indirectly. During the past
several years, Congress passed laws intended to re-
form and improve the health care system, including the
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA); the
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA); the Stark Law and Federal Anti-Kickback Stat-
ute; and, more recently, the Medicare Access and CHIP
(Children'
s Health Insurance Program) Reauthorization
Act of 2015 (MACRA). With regard to the complexity of
health care administration, these laws have changed
operating rules for health plans, initiated and advanced
quality and other reporting programs for physicians
and other clinicians, and facilitated the development of
value-based payment approaches and APMs. Once
such laws are passed, the regulatory agencies, most
notably the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
(CMS) and Office of the National Coordinator for Health
Information Technology, are responsible for imple-
menting them. Other entities are involved as well, in-
cluding the Agency for Healthcare Research and Qual-
ity (AHRQ), Government Accountability Office, National
Committee on Vital and Health Statistics, and Office of
the Inspector General. External advisory entities, such
as the Medicare Payment Advisory Committee, Medic-
aid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission, and
Congressional Budget Office, also provide input to
both Congress and the agencies on issues related to
health care payment and delivery system reform.
Beyond the previously outlined administrative has-
sles that apply to all payers, unique programs and re-
quirements, such as the Physician Quality Reporting
System (PQRS), Value-Based Payment Modifier (VBM)
program, and Medicare (and Medicaid) Electronic
Health Record (EHR) Incentive Payment Program (typi-
cally referred to as Meaningful Use [MU]), are relevant
for physicians participating in Medicare. However, com-
pliance is difficult for internal medicine practices and
other health care provider organizations. Each of these
programs is complex and presents challenges for phy-
sicians and practices to participate in them successfully.
Moreover, each was established by a different law;
therefore, despite efforts by CMS and the Office of the
National Coordinator for Health Information Technol-
ogy to align the programs as much as possible, PQRS,
VBM, and MU have had to use different measures, as
well as variable reporting, feedback, payment ap-
proaches, criteria, and time frames. The MACRA law is
intended to better align these different reporting and
payment
programs
within
Medicare
fee-for-service
(that is, Medicare Part B) plans by combining the PQRS,
VBM, and MU programs into a new payment approach
called
the
Merit-Based
Incentive
Payment
System
(MIPS). However, concerns exist regarding how MIPS
and other components of the MACRA law will be imple-
mented and whether the system will be a new source of
administrative tasks for practices. In particular, the ACP
has strongly recommended that CMS actively work to
improve the measures to be used in the MIPS quality
performance category and that it not consider the ex-
isting quality measurements in the PQRS, VBM, and MU
as the starting point for MIPS implementation. Further,
the ACP has stressed the importance of CMS continu-
ing to improve the measurements and reporting sys-
tems to be used in MIPS to ensure that they are evi-
dence based and measure the correct items; move
toward clinical outcomes, patient- and family-centered
measures, care coordination measures, and measures
of population health and prevention; and do not create
unintended adverse consequences. Also important is
for these measures and reporting systems to be
aligned with those of Medicaid and the Government
Performance and Results Act program maintained
through such departments as the Veterans Health Ad-
ministration and Indian Health Service, as well as pri-
vate payers over time. Along these lines, the ACP has
called on CMS to collaborate with specialty societies,
frontline clinicians, EHR vendors, and patient represen-
tatives in developing, testing, and implementing mea-
sures, with a focus on decreasing clinician burden and
integrating performance measurement and reporting
with quality improvement and care delivery (1). The fi-
nal rule for the first year of MACRA implementation,
released in October 2016, contained several improve-
ments over the proposed rule; however, how this im-
plementation will play out in the real world remains to
be seen.
Although the ACA is relatively new, it has been in
place longer than MACRA; therefore, enough time has
passed to evaluate whether it truly has increased ad-
ministrative tasks. When the ACA was enacted, the pri-
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 9 • 2 May 2017
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 mary concern at the practice level was whether and
how practices could accept a potentially large number
of new patients, particularly those covered by Medic-
aid, and avoid a negative effect on their ability to pro-
vide high-quality patient care. To date, such concerns
seem to be unfounded. Although Medicaid enrollment
grew by 15.4 million members from October 2013 to
July 2016 (2) and the number of persons younger than
65 years directly purchasing coverage increased by
16.5 million between 2013 and 2015 (3), most primary
care clinicians have not had to close their doors and
have been able to provide high-quality care to all their
patients since January 2014, regardless of whether
their Medicaid or newly insured populations have in-
creased (4). Of importance, however, is that when prac-
tices do absorb new patients and perhaps increase the
number of health plans they accept, their administrative
burden likely increases (5).
Outside the ACA, Medicaid also may be a source
of burden for physicians and their practices, because it
is administered under both state and federal regula-
tions regarding financing and implementation while
also being subject to broad federal oversight. Practices
located near state borders face additional burdens in
complying with different state program requirements.
Many states also contract with managed care compa-
nies to administer their Medicaid programs, and each
company has a distinct set of requirements.
The 1995 and 1997 Evaluation and Management
(E&M) guidelines are another burden resulting from
government oversight and involvement that affects
physicians in practice. These guidelines were devel-
oped by Congress, are regulated and maintained by
CMS in conjunction with other federal agencies, and
are used by all public and private payers. To receive
reimbursement, all practicing clinicians must follow
these guidelines when documenting their provision of
E&M services; noncompliance may result in billing
fraud, potential fines, restriction from participation in
Medicare and Medicaid, and even criminal penalties.
Although organized medicine initially supported the
development of these guidelines as a means to ensure
that documentation of cognitive services could be ex-
ternally verified, these rules have since been imple-
mented in a manner that is “difficult to understand and
use, and even counterintuitive” (6–8). For example, de-
termining the “level of service” to code and bill for is
overly complex and time consuming because of ambi-
guity among the 5 levels of service defined in the E&M
documentation.
In addition, federal and state regulatory agencies,
as well as Congress, impose health care–related admin-
istrative tasks on physicians and practices beyond pay-
ment and coverage issues. One example is HIPAA,
passed by Congress in 1996 and strengthened by ad-
ditional laws and guidance over time. Practices must
continually keep up to date and comply with HIPAA
rules, or they may face civil monetary penalties. An-
other example is the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) standards that medical offices
must meet to ensure worker safety.
Oversight by Private Entities.
In addition to the
government entities and oversight discussed earlier,
physicians face administrative tasks resulting from over-
sight by private entities, including but not limited to
certification boards and accreditation organizations.
Approaches to board certification and maintenance of
certification vary among specialties, with the American
Board of Internal Medicine serving as the primary cer-
tification organization for internal medicine physicians.
Although board certification and maintenance of certi-
fication technically are voluntary, they typically are re-
quired for physicians to practice in certain systems and
are viewed as critically important for patients to be able
to ensure that their physician has the necessary exper-
tise and knowledge to practice in a particular specialty.
However, becoming certified and maintaining certifica-
tion often are viewed as burdensome (9), although the
environment has been evolving rapidly, and many
changes have been made or are in progress.
Accreditation or certification by such private enti-
ties as the Joint Commission, National Committee for
Quality Assurance (NCQA), and URAC represents an-
other source of administrative tasks. The Joint Commis-
sion accredits many types of health care organizations,
including hospitals, physician offices, nursing homes,
office-based surgery centers, behavioral health treat-
ment facilities, and providers of home care services,
and certifies programs or services based within or as-
sociated with a health care organization (for example,
Primary Care Medical Homes). The NCQA accredits
health plans and provider organizations, such as Ac-
countable Care Organizations (ACOs), and certifies
programs and specific services. In addition, the NCQA
offers recognition programs for clinician practices, in-
cluding Patient-Centered Medical Homes (PCMHs) and
Patient-Centered Specialty Practices, and for clinical ar-
eas of care, such as diabetes, heart and stroke, and
back pain. Similarly, URAC offers accreditation pro-
grams for health plans, case management programs,
PCMHs, and others. All these accreditation, certifica-
tion, and recognition programs are intended to assist
payers, clinicians, patients, families, and other key
stakeholders in determining whether a health care or-
ganization is providing high-quality care, and several
have been used to facilitate uptake of new payment
models by both public and private payers (10–12).
However, these programs often are associated with sig-
nificant cost, staff time, and administrative burden. Col-
lecting the data and information to report on the stan-
dards and elements associated with these programs
involves a great deal of work and attention to detail,
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 9 • 2 May 2017
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 which may affect the ability of a clinician and his or her
staff to spend enough time tending to their patients'
needs. In addition, many concerns have been raised
about the ability of these programs to improve quality,
patient outcomes, and experience with care.
Vendors and Suppliers. Physicians and other clini-
cians in practice must interact in some way with exter-
nal vendors and suppliers, including EHR vendors; sup-
pliers of other health information technology (IT), such
as registries; durable medical equipment (DME) com-
panies and sellers; pharmaceutical companies and
their representatives; home nursing associations; and
various consultants. Although all these entities can
and often do provide significant value and important
services to patients, physicians, and practices, they also
may be a source of burden and cost. Purveyors of EHR
systems are working to comply with regulations, such
as MU and the E&M documentation guidelines, but at
the expense of being unable to offer tools that are tai-
lored to a practice'
s workflow and the clinical needs of
its patients. In addition, EHR vendors have not yet had
adequate discussions with frontline clinicians to better
understand their needs, often leading to workarounds
that create additional steps and burden. Therefore, the
lack of usability and meaningful interoperability of
EHRs has become one of the greatest sources of dissat-
isfaction among clinicians (13). Another problem prac-
tices face is the ever-rising costs of health IT products
and services. Every new health IT module needed to
perform a specific function comes with added costs.
Often, EHR vendors charge additional fees for every
interface to another system or service, as well as ongo-
ing fees for moving data. Currently, a practice may be
required to submit data to dozens of agencies. In the
future, a practice also may have to exchange data with
thousands of health care apps that patients may want to
use. Moving large quantities of patient data from one
system to another may be costly.
With regard to DME, when physicians prescribe or
order certain equipment for their patients, the pro-
cesses and paperwork are very tedious and confusing,
often leading to delays in patients receiving necessary
devices. Physicians also may be frustrated by unsolic-
ited requests by DME companies and sales representa-
tives to prescribe equipment, such as power wheel-
chairs and diabetic test strips, partly as the result of
direct-to-consumer advertising as well as fraudulent
tactics by some DME companies that are considered
“bad actors” in the system (14).
Other Practices and Health Care Organizations.
High-quality and longitudinal care for patients requires
that all parties involved in providing that care coordi-
nate as a team. However, the need to regularly interact
with other practices and health care organizations may
be another source of administrative tasks for physicians
and other clinicians in practice. These interactions oc-
cur, for example, among specialists in primary care, in-
ternal medicine subspecialists, and other clinicians; am-
bulatory physician practices and hospitals; and other
care sites, such as urgent care centers and retail clinics.
Often, physicians in practice are unaware that their pa-
tients have been seen by other clinicians or providers,
or they become aware too late to meaningfully contrib-
ute to or provide the needed follow-up care. When in-
formation is shared, it is not always relevant, appropri-
ate, or helpful, or may not be what the physician needs
to ensure high-quality care.
Physicians in practice also interact with public
health authorities, often via data submission to surveil-
lance registries. Although gathering data on public
health threats is critically important, the Health and
Medicine Division of the National Academies recently
acknowledged that “collecting and entering the data
into the proper forms and format requires time and ef-
fort beyond the usual health care delivery processes.
Because resources devoted to the registry often do not
immediately benefit the practice or its patients, clini-
cians may be reticent to register patients or collect and
record data on busy days” (15). These requirements
may be even more burdensome if the obligation to re-
port is not satisfied via a standard report into a single
utility.
Measurement of Patient Experience and Evolving
Consumer Expectations.
The primary goal of physi-
cians and other clinicians is to provide their patients
with the best care possible, regardless of administrative
tasks or other barriers. In general, most physicians also
want a better understanding of their patients'expecta-
tions, concerns, and interests. Currently, one of the
main approaches to assessing patient experience is
through surveys, primarily the Consumer Assessment
of Healthcare Providers and Systems (CAHPS) surveys
developed by AHRQ. These instruments have under-
gone extensive testing and generally are considered
the most valid method available for evaluating patient
experiences (16–18). However, at the practice level, the
CAHPS surveys may be burdensome and costly to con-
duct, evaluate, and report. In addition, some payers
have added even more complexity and cost to these
surveys; for example, CMS requires larger practices to
use an external CMS-certified survey vendor to report
on CAHPS for PQRS.
Consumers have substantial needs (such as com-
pletion of disability forms and timely communication of
laboratory results), and their expectations are evolving,
with patients and families becoming more engaged in
their own care, seeking access to their records both in
person and remotely (via telephone, the Internet, apps,
patient portals, and other means), and direct communi-
cation with their physicians and care team (including
inquiries related to direct-to-consumer advertising for
DME and pharmaceuticals). Physicians may welcome
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 9 • 2 May 2017
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 and appreciate these changes because they may lead
to more effective patient care and increased patient
and family satisfaction. However, reshaping practices to
be more centered on the patient and his or her family
requires concerted effort and attention so that it does
not become a source of administrative complexity.
Internal Sources. Although external sources of ad-
ministrative tasks are the most well-known and cited,
internal sources of burdens and hassles also exist for
physician practices and other health care provider or-
ganizations. Often, these internal sources are related to
external administrative tasks that a practice is ap-
proaching in a way that is understandable but less than
ideal. Two major internal sources of practice burden
are inefficient workflows and lack of effective team-
based care both within the practice and in interactions
with other practices and health care organizations. Sev-
eral effective approaches have been identified, tested,
and implemented within and across practices to im-
prove workflows and facilitate team-based care, includ-
ing active previsit planning, team huddles, standing or-
ders, revision of staff roles and responsibilities, and
care coordination agreements (19–21). Establishing
certain workflow protocols and appropriate nonphysi-
cian staffing conventions that consider scope of prac-
tice is crucial in addressing internal sources of burden.
For example, studies have shown that practices that
adopt new forms of delegation and care processes us-
ing teamwork approaches have reported improved cli-
nician satisfaction and productivity (22, 23). In addition,
use of standing orders, for example, is a methodology
that authorizes nurses and other clinical staff to carry out
medical orders according to a preapproved protocol
without the clinician'
s direct examination (24). However,
within a largely volume-based reimbursement system, im-
plementing these approaches is extremely challenging
and resource intensive, particularly in the absence of
strong clinical and key staff leadership or if the opportu-
nities to engage in training on these different approaches
are limited or nonexistent.
Practices also may face administrative burdens if
they cannot efficiently and effectively use the available
technology, such as EHRs, registries, and population
health management software. Although EHRs have
many inherent problems and are affected by several
environmental and regulatory drivers, as discussed ear-
lier they still may offer benefits, such as the ability to
track laboratory results effectively, view patient infor-
mation both longitudinally and discretely, manage
patient populations, and access patient records re-
motely—but only if the practice understands these ben-
efits and is trained to take advantage of them.
Finally, in the changing delivery and payment sys-
tem environment, which is moving toward paying for
value rather than volume, practices may not be able to
institute the effective management approaches needed
to be fully successful, such as establishing new policies
and procedures, ensuring access to the most up-to-
date clinical guidelines, revising budgeting and com-
pensation structures, and rethinking their scheduling
and rooming procedures. These management chal-
lenges then may exacerbate existing administrative
tasks or even become their own source of burden
themselves.
Intents of Administrative Tasks
As outlined earlier, the sources of administrative
tasks are diverse. Likewise, their intentions are varied,
but overall they may be classified into 5 main catego-
ries according to whether the task
• Provides and pays for products and services
• Ensures high-quality, high-value, safe, and effec-
tive provision of products and services
• Reduces excess and inappropriate costs and pre-
vents or identifies fraud and abuse in the health
care system
• Ensures financial security and potential profitabil-
ity for the stakeholder
• Lacks a clear intent
Products and Services.
Public and private payers
and many vendors, as described earlier, are responsi-
ble for providing many products and services, such as
health insurance, pharmaceuticals, EHRs, and DME, to
clinicians, practices, health care organizations, employ-
ers, and patients. These products and services must be
paid for by the recipients, and payment arrangements
in health care are tremendously complex, often involv-
ing third and fourth parties. Therefore, the service pro-
viders have a strong need to ensure that they are re-
ceiving appropriate and timely payment, leading to the
creation of several tasks that affect all relevant stake-
holders, including claims processing delays, payment
denials and appeals processes, insurance eligibility ver-
ifications, discount programs, and more.
High-Quality,
High-Value,
Safe,
and
Effective
Services. The intention of all the sources of tasks out-
lined here is to ensure that the products and services
provided, as well as the health care system as a whole,
are safe, effective, and of the highest possible quality
and value. Of course, this intent must be balanced
against the other intentions discussed in this section,
such as product sales and profit (and, at times, one may
argue that the latter takes precedence). Examples of
differing intentions from the sources described in this
paper that are related to high-quality, high-value, and
safe care include the following:
Public and private payers, who have an interest in
keeping their beneficiaries healthy (which can keep
premiums low and attract new clients), and in ensuring
that the clinicians who use their products and partici-
pate in their programs are providing high-quality, high-
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 9 • 2 May 2017
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 value, and safe care (such as through quality measure-
ment and reporting, prior authorizations, and feedback
reports). Public payers also have an obligation to the
citizens they serve to ensure their tax dollars are used
wisely, including via public reporting of quality data.
Oversight entities, including regulatory agencies
and Congress, who want to protect the country'
s citi-
zens from undue harm (such as through HIPAA and
OSHA standards) and improve the health care system
(such as through the ACA and MACRA), as well as pri-
vate entities working to ensure that individuals and or-
ganizations have the necessary judgment, skills, activi-
ties, and processes in place to provide high-quality,
high-value, and safe care.
Vendors and other suppliers, who must ensure that
their products and services meet the needs of their
users.
Clinicians, practices, and other health care organi-
zations, who want to provide the best possible care to
their patients and patient population and therefore
may choose to participate in new payment and delivery
systems, projects, or programs.
Patients and their families, who want to receive the
best care possible at the most appropriate and acces-
sible time and place.
Cost Reduction and Fraud Prevention. Along with
ensuring quality and safety, administrative tasks also in-
tend to reduce excess and inappropriate costs and pre-
vent or identify fraud and abuse in the health care sys-
tem. These intents are common across all sources of
administrative tasks; however, each source has some-
what different reasons for wanting these outcomes, and
sometimes these reasons conflict. In addition, the com-
plexity of the U.S. health care payment system leads to
significant waste, overuse or inappropriate use of ser-
vices, and intentional or unintentional fraud or abuse
by several entities.
All public and private payers must address these
issues—and do so in various ways, including through
prior authorizations, appropriate-use criteria programs,
audits, documentation guidelines, and referral and
treatment plan requirements. In fact, if a payer man-
ages to reduce utilization (that is, costs), regardless of
whether it is appropriate or inappropriate, then the sav-
ings generated may benefit the company. Today'
s
health care system is evolving from one that incentiv-
izes payment for the volume of services to one that
pays for value, which typically is defined as an equation
involving both quality and cost–resource use metrics.
Therefore, many payers are using new approaches to
measuring resource use, adding to the evolving area of
quality measures. Along these lines, most stakeholders
anticipate a growing movement toward measuring out-
comes of services and treatments for patients and their
families, as well as patient and family experience, as a
better way to ensure that the most appropriate care, in
terms of both cost and quality, is provided. As the de-
livery and payment system environment continues to
evolve from volume to value based—largely via the im-
plementation of APMs, which measure both quality
and resource use and offer opportunities for practice
transformation—many of the burdens outlined here may
be addressed more meaningfully and less problemati-
cally. In other words, once we can accurately measure
and incentivize improvements in patient outcomes and
experience, many of the tasks described here, such as
prior authorizations, might be eliminated or signifi-
cantly limited.
Clinicians, practices, and other health care provider
organizations generally have focused on providing the
highest-quality care and often do not have access to
the information they need to fully account for the cost
of products and services (25, 26). Also, concern is
growing that an increased focus on cost reduction, par-
ticularly as it is monitored and enforced by payers and
oversight entities, will result in patients not getting the
care they need (that is, underutilization). However, cli-
nicians generally recognize that they have to consider
the cost of services, particularly as it affects their pa-
tients who, for example, may not be able to access cer-
tain pharmaceuticals they need because of high prices,
as well as how it affects the health care system as a
whole.
Patients and their families also are interested in re-
ducing costs, perhaps more so today because of the
increase in high-deductible health plans and growth in
other out-of-pocket expenses (27, 28); however, pa-
tients also want to ensure that they receive all the ser-
vices they need. Meeting the needs of patients and
their families, as well as providing the outcomes they
desire, is central to ensuring that our health care system
evolves into one that is truly patient centered; however,
clinicians may find challenges in fulfilling these goals
given the stresses caused by the current health care
payment and delivery environment. Certain strategies,
such as shared decision making (for example, AHRQ'
s
SHARE approach) (29), may help to facilitate meaning-
ful discussions that lead to higher-quality and cost-
effective care in the eyes of both clinicians and patients.
Financial Security and Profit. Related to the intents
of cost reduction and fraud prevention are those of en-
suring overall financial security and profitability for an
individual or organization. Payers must have appropri-
ate funds available to pay for the products and services
they insure in the health care system, with some having
the further intention of garnering a profit for their
shareholders. Government oversight entities have a re-
sponsibility to protect and appropriately use the tax-
payer money that funds their operations. Private over-
sight organizations, as well as vendors and other
suppliers, also must ensure their security and perhaps
realize a profit, depending on their organizational
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 9 • 2 May 2017
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 structure. Many vendors, including those that supply
health IT, devices, and pharmaceuticals, have a signifi-
cant need to reinvest funds into ongoing development,
research, and innovation, although analysts have found
it difficult to determine precisely how much new or re-
invested funding goes into or is needed for research
and development versus how much is acquired as
profit (30). On the clinician side, practices and other
health care provider organizations also must protect
their financial security to continue providing services in
their communities.
Lack of Clear Intent. Finally, some sources of ad-
ministrative tasks have no clear intent, leading to addi-
tional administrative tasks. This situation is particularly
relevant to clinician practices and other health care pro-
vider organizations, who, for instance, may be perform-
ing an obsolete task simply because it has always been
done that way, even though the environment has
evolved. As discussed earlier, several sources of bur-
dens and hassles are internal to a physician'
s practice;
these typically are related to external pressures, such as
inefficient workflows and a lack of effective team-based
care. Often, these tasks indicate a lack of necessary re-
sources, including funding and staff, to make effective
changes, as well as inadequate practice leadership
(from clinicians or key staff members), knowledge, and
training.
Effect of Administrative Tasks
Methods of Literature Review.
To better under-
stand the effects of administrative tasks on practicing
clinicians, their patients, and the physician–patient rela-
tionship, the ACP did a literature analysis, which en-
tailed a scoping review and environmental scan that
included an extensive search of electronic databases,
journals, and Web sites (Appendix Table 1). Articles
were screened to ensure that they focused on practic-
ing physicians and their patients rather than on disease
burden, implementation of mental health parity, admin-
istrative claims data, malpractice-related costs, or oral
health and dentistry. The specific screening criteria
were as follows:
• English-language articles or reports
• Studies involving U.S. clinical settings
• Studies involving health care professionals in the
clinical practice or hospital setting, such as physi-
cians, physician assistants, nurse practitioners,
and clinical practice office staff but excluding oral
health professionals
Studies that focused on the burden of disease or
illness, cost or financial burden of disease or illness, or
cost of drug or health insurance administration were
excluded. Priority was given to articles or reports pre-
senting evidence from data-driven research, rather
than opinion. Only a limited number of editorial re-
views, letters, perspective pieces, and clinical guide-
lines were included.
In addition, articles published before 2000 were
excluded because of the extensive changes to the
health care system since then. Further review narrowed
the focus to original research studies, secondary re-
search and reviews, and policy papers. The initial liter-
ature review was done in early 2014 and was updated
with 2 additional searches to identify relevant new arti-
cles. In total, more than 60 articles were reviewed,
about half of which met the screening criteria. Of im-
portance is that although this paper touches briefly on
issues related to physician workforce and burnout, the
literature review focused primarily on assessing the ef-
fects on physician time, practice and system cost, and
patient care due to the growth in administrative tasks,
leading to the development of recommendations to
modify, mitigate, reduce, or eliminate administrative
tasks as appropriate.
Results and Discussion of Literature Review. Over-
all, the findings of the literature analysis were consistent
regarding the effect of administrative tasks on time
spent by clinicians and their staff on billing and
insurance-related (BIR) activities (3 to 5 hours per week)
and quality measurement and reporting (potentially up
to 15 hours per week).
The related cost effects of BIR time were found to
be approximately 12% to 14% of revenue, or about
$68 000 to $85 000 per year per full-time equivalent
(FTE) physician. Prior authorizations alone may cost
around $3000 per year per physician. Documentation
within EHRs and other health IT, although it may be
considered part of the BIR as well as of performance
measurement and reporting activities, has been stud-
ied separately, with findings indicating that for every
hour a physician spends with a patient, he or she
spends an additional 2 hours on EHR and other “desk”
work. Research also is beginning to show that excessive
or unnecessary administrative tasks may have impor-
tant effects on patient care, as well as leading to in-
creased physician burnout. These findings are dis-
cussed in more detail later.
Measurement of Patient Experience and Evolving
Consumer Expectations.
The literature on BIR and
other administrative activities generally focuses on the
effect of these tasks on costs or time (Appendix Table
2, available at Annals.org). On the basis of available
research, physicians and their staff spend an estimated
3 to 5 hours per week on administrative tasks—largely
on BIR activities (EHR effects are discussed more spe-
cifically later in this paper)—with some estimates as high
as 8.7 hours per week (31–35). If time is converted to
cost effects, practices spend approximately $68 000 to
more than $85 000 per year per FTE physician on ad-
ministrative tasks, which some experts have translated
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 9 • 2 May 2017
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 to an estimated 10% to 14% of net practice revenue
(31, 32, 34, 36). One study that focused specifically on
the cost effects of prior authorizations by using real-
time self-observation found that the average burden on
primary care physicians ranged from $2161 to $3430
per FTE physician annually for these activities (37).
Other researchers reviewed the cost effect of BIR activ-
ities at the national level and found that these aggre-
gate costs are in the hundreds of billions of dollars,
significantly greater than the cost of similar activities in
Canada (33, 35, 38).
Measurement and Reporting Impacts.
Casalino
and colleagues (42) found that physicians and staff
spent more than 15.1 hours per physician per week
dealing with external quality measures, with 2.6 of
those hours spent by the physician. These activities in-
cluded tracking measure specifications, data collection
processes, data entry into the EHR, and data transmis-
sion. Translated to cost, this time spent represents ap-
proximately $40 069 per physician per year, or a total
of $15.4 billion annually for general internists, family
physicians,
cardiologists,
and
orthopedists
in
the
United States. Although earlier studies found lower and
more variable estimates of time and cost (43, 44), given
the growth of value-based payment approaches in
health care, one may reasonably assume that the
burden of quality measurement and reporting has in-
creased.
Another study, in 2008, focused specifically on the
burden of quality reporting in hospitals. The research-
ers found that in addition to the increase in quality-
reporting programs, the number of conditions mea-
sured and data that must be gathered also increased.
In addition, the variation across quality-reporting pro-
grams contributes to the administrative burden on hos-
pitals. Hospitals in this study identified various ap-
proaches to help manage quality-reporting activities;
however, administrative burden persisted (45).
EHR/Health IT Impacts.
Although documentation
within EHRs may be considered a component of BIR
and even performance measurement and reporting ad-
ministrative burden, increased use of EHRs and other
health IT tools has led to interest in exploring the ef-
fects of using them on a daily basis. A time-and-motion
study in ambulatory practice across 4 specialties found
that for every hour a physician spent providing direct
clinical care to patients, he or she spent nearly 2 hours
on EHR and other desk work, plus another 1 to 2 hours
each night (46). The EHR and desk work included doc-
umentation and review, accessing test results, and ar-
ranging medication orders; other administrative tasks,
such as BIR activities and scheduling, were considered
separately. In addition, a 2012 survey of internal medi-
cine physicians showed that the average time spent on
EHR documentation was 6.5 hours per week greater
than that spent on paper record systems (47). In an-
other study, Goldberg and colleagues (48) reviewed
EHRs in primary care practices to identify challenges
faced by practices using this system. They found that
costs, lack of knowledge of EHR functions, and prob-
lems transforming office operations were barriers to
meaningful EHR use. In addition, practices reported
that during system upgrades, major disruptions in pa-
tient care occurred.
A recent study examining the productivity of physi-
cians using EHRs in the emergency department found
similar problems, with 43% of physician time spent on
data entry and an average of 4000 total mouse clicks
for charting functions and documenting patient en-
counters during a busy 10-hour shift (49).
An ACP policy paper by Kuhn and colleagues (6)
cited several related articles on the effects of EHRs and
outlined the evolving purposes and drivers of clinical
documentation in EHRs that have contributed to these
outcomes. One of these drivers is the ease at which
previous entries can be carried forward, thus making it
difficult for physicians to find the most useful and ac-
tionable information. Perhaps the most significant
driver cited in this article, however, was the issuance of
the E&M guidelines of 1995 and 1997, which created a
complex system of rules that seem to have overridden
clarity and conciseness (7, 8).
Impacts on Clinical and Patient Care.
The afore-
mentioned studies focused largely on the effects of ad-
ministrative tasks on physicians, their practices, and the
health care system, particularly those related to time
and cost; however, these tasks also affect patients. Al-
though the effects on patients may be inferred from
reviewing the available data on physician time, more
direct research on patient effects is severely limited. A
2013 nationwide survey of residents found that the
workload created by clinical documentation may be a
barrier to optimal patient care as well as to education,
with 73% reporting compromises in patient care due to
documentation requirements (50). In addition, a time–
motion study of hospitalists found that they spend
more time reviewing and documenting EHRs than inter-
acting with patients (51).
Related work by Sinsky and colleagues (46), also
discussed earlier, focused on how physician time is al-
located in ambulatory care and found that physicians
spent 49.2% of their time on EHR and desk work, versus
33.1% on direct clinical face time with patients and
staff. Although the authors noted that EHR activities
may be hypothesized to decrease physicians'time en-
gaging with patients, they drew no specific conclusions
along those lines. Also of note, the study included time
in which physicians and patients interact together with
the computer (for example, in discussing relevant infor-
mation presented by the EHR during an in-person visit)
as part of the EHR work, which might be addressed via
follow-up studies evaluating the challenges and oppor-
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 9 • 2 May 2017
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 tunities associated with EHR use and its effect on pa-
tient care in greater depth.
Impacts on Physician Satisfaction - Burnout.
Also
important to acknowledge are the extensive data on
the effect of administrative tasks on physician burnout.
Research has shown that burnout is more prevalent
among physicians than other U.S. workers and is in-
creasing (52, 53). Physician burnout has been linked to
several causes, such as workflow, work control, the em-
phasis on quality and communications in an organiza-
tion, trust in an organization, cohesiveness, and align-
ment of values between physicians and their leaders
(54, 55). More specifically, with regard to administrative
tasks, EHRs and externally imposed regulations have
been linked to increased stress and burnout (13, 56,
57). These findings have led to pursuit of the Triple
Aim, an initiative to enhance patient experience, im-
prove population health, and reduce costs, to be ex-
panded to the Quadruple Aim, with the added goal of
improving the work–life balance of clinicians and their
staff (58).
Approaches to Addressing Administrative Tasks: ACP
Policy Recommendations
After reviewing the sources, intents, and effects of
administrative tasks in health care—and the literature
addressing these issues—the ACP outlined a set of pub-
lic policy statements and recommendations as follows:
1. The ACP calls on stakeholders external to the
physician practice or health care clinician environment
who develop or implement administrative tasks (such as
payers, governmental and other oversight organiza-
tions, vendors and suppliers, and others) to provide fi-
nancial, time, and quality-of-care impact statements for
public review and comment. This activity should assess
the questions outlined as follows and occur for existing
and new administrative tasks:
a. Could the requirement interfere with or enhance
the ability of clinicians to provide timely and ap-
propriate patient care (both in person and re-
motely, in real time and asynchronously)? What
are the expected or potential opportunity costs of
the requirement in terms of its effect on time
spent by clinicians providing care for patients
and on any time spent by patients to address the
requirement?
b. Does the requirement improve the quality of care
delivered to the individual patient and/or to the
population? If so, how?
c. Does the requirement have a financial impact on
the physician practice, provider organization, pa-
tient and his/her family, and/or the health system
that diverts resources from patient care? To what
extent can this impact be quantified?
d. Does the requirement call into question physician
judgment in terms of expertise, training, educa-
tion, and experience? If so, what are the reasons
these questions are being raised?
e. Overall, can stakeholders propose alternative ap-
proaches to accomplish their goal for consider-
ation by the public?
The ACP believes that framing new and existing ad-
ministrative requirements in this way may help all stake-
holders to better identify the need for these require-
ments
and
their
effect
on
physicians
and
other
clinicians, practices and other health care provider or-
ganizations, and patients and their families, as well as
the health care system as a whole. Tasks that are deter-
mined to have a negative effect on quality and patient
care, that unnecessarily question the judgment of phy-
sicians and other clinicians, and/or that increase costs
should be challenged, revised, or removed entirely.
(See Figure 2 for an illustration of this recommenda-
tion, as well as Appendix Figures 1 and 2 for specific
examples.)
As this paper describes in detail, administrative
tasks are developed and implemented by various
stakeholders, and each complexity is established with
different goals and intents in mind. Some of these in-
tents are valid and reasonable, and others are not;
however, all these tasks may and often do result in sub-
stantial effects on the health care system; physicians;
other clinicians; practices and other health care pro-
vider organizations; and, most importantly, patient out-
comes and well-being. Therefore, the ACP believes
that the stakeholders external to the physician practice
or health care provider environment have a responsibil-
ity to provide detailed assessments of the effects of
their requirements, including identifying any potential
alternative approaches to meet the same goals.
2. Administrative tasks that cannot be eliminated
from the health care system must be regularly reviewed,
revised, aligned, and/or streamlined in a transparent
manner, with the goal of minimizing burden, by all
stakeholders involved:
a. Payers, public and private oversight entities, and
vendors and suppliers must work together and
actively engage with clinician societies and front-
line clinicians to harmonize their administrative
policies, procedures, processes, and forms re-
garding such issues as prior authorizations, pay-
ment
reviews,
reporting
requirements,
and
others.
b. Payers, public and private oversight entities, and
vendors and suppliers also must be fully trans-
parent with clinicians, health care provider orga-
nizations, and patients and families about their
requirements in terms of their intent, expected
effect, and specific implementation approaches
(as described earlier).
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 9 • 2 May 2017
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 i. Any approaches by external entities imposing
tasks on clinicians that are determined to be
fraudulent should be addressed swiftly and
appropriately by the Office of the Inspector
General or other relevant entities. (For exam-
ple, a “bad actor” in the DME industry know-
ingly uses fraudulent tactics to fill unsolicited
requests for patients. These requests result in
tedious and confusing processes and proce-
dures for clinicians and their practices and
may not even be appropriate for the patient.)
ii. Further, any administrative tasks imposed by
external entities that are intended to address
fraudulent activity must be designed to swiftly
and appropriately prevent such fraud with the
minimum possible burden on clinicians (for
example,
prior-authorization
forms
and
appropriate-use criteria.)
c. Evidence-based approaches that clinician prac-
tices and other health care provider organizations
can use to best address internal inefficiencies that
are a result of external regulations and require-
ments should be disseminated widely by all
stakeholders involved.
The ACP believes that many issues related to ad-
ministrative tasks are a result of variation in the require-
ments across the U.S. health care system, including
among payers. On average, physicians contract with
nearly a dozen or more health plans. Therefore, a com-
mon recommendation within the literature is to reduce
the complexity of requirements or payment rules by
creating more uniform and standard interactions with
payers (both public and private), contractors, and other
physicians. Cutler and colleagues (59) noted that al-
though standardization will not solve all the problems,
it is a central factor in reducing administrative costs.
This effort should include standardizing the information
from health plans that is available to physician practices
at the time of service with regard to patient cost sharing
and how the patient'
s financial liability varies by service
(60). In addition, the Commonwealth Fund recom-
mends integrating administrative record systems, elec-
tronic claim submissions, shared provider enrollment
and credentialing systems, and common quality report-
ing to reduce the redundancy and complexity that in-
crease time and staffing costs for practices and hospi-
tals (61). Other experts have called for “more rapid
progress toward the timely availability of accurate and
actionable information regarding cost and coverage of
health IT across the care continuum, particularly before
and at the point-of-care, to support more informed and
timely shared-decision making and to support prior au-
thorization avoidance” (62). UnitedHealth Group pro-
poses using a single standardized process for accredi-
tation and licensing nationwide to reduce cost without
compromising quality (63). In addition, such organiza-
tions as the American Medical Association and Medical
Group Management Association recommend standard-
ization of the prior-authorization process (64, 65). In re-
viewing CMS contractors that conduct postpayment
reviews, the Government Accountability Office recog-
nized that differences among contractors impedes effi-
ciency and effectiveness of claims reviews by increasing
administrative burden for providers. It recommends
that CMS reduce differences in postpayment review re-
quirements if it can be done without impeding the effi-
ciency of its efforts to reduce improper payments (66).
Of importance is that the ACA has led to some limited
progress through provisions requiring the adoption of
operating rules for each existing transaction (such as
payments and remittance advice and claims status), a
standard unique identifier for health plans, and stan-
dards for electronic funds transfer and electronic health
care claims attachments. The law also created a new
requirement for health plans to certify their compliance
with the adopted standards and operating rules, as well
as a new set of penalties that may be imposed on
health plans for failure to comply or to certify their com-
pliance (67).
One approach often proposed to address variation
in requirements across payers and other stakeholders
is the implementation of a single-payer system in the
United States. The ACP supports a single-payer financ-
ing model as an option—one in which one government
entity is the sole third-party payer of health care costs—
because it can achieve universal access to health care
without barriers based on ability to pay. “Single-payer
systems generally have the advantage of being more
equitable, with lower administrative costs than systems
using private health insurance, lower per capita health
care expenditures, high levels of consumer and patient
satisfaction, and high performance on measures of
quality and access” (68). However, the ACP is aware of
the limitations of a single-payer system, including po-
tential delays in obtaining elective procedures and lack
of consumer choice. Moreover, the single payer would
still have to analyze the effects of its administrative re-
quirements on quality, cost, patient care, and physician
judgment transparently to fully address the many reg-
ulations clinicians face.
The ACP agrees with many approaches identified
in the literature and therefore strongly recommends
aligning and streamlining administrative requirements.
It also calls on stakeholders to take further steps by
actively engaging with clinician societies and frontline
clinicians and by being fully transparent in their re-
quirements with regard to their intent, expected effect,
and specific implementation approaches.
In terms of streamlining and addressing inefficien-
cies in clinician practices as they work to comply with
external requirements, Shipman and Sinsky (69) exam-
ined these issues in primary care today and have
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 9 • 2 May 2017
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 worked to highlight innovative ways to address some of
them. On the basis of their research, the authors con-
cluded that inefficiency can be reduced through team-
work, workflow, technology, and a reexamination of
policies. Evidence-based approaches such as these
should be identified and disseminated widely by all
stakeholders, including clinician societies, payers, over-
sight entities, vendors, suppliers, and others.
3. Stakeholders, including public and private pay-
ers, must collaborate with specialty societies, frontline
clinicians, patients, and EHR vendors to aim for perfor-
mance measures that minimize unnecessary clinician
burden, maximize patient and family centeredness, and
integrate the measurement of and reporting on perfor-
mance with quality improvement and care delivery.
a. Constant monitoring of the evolving measure-
ment system also will be critical to identifying and
mitigating
any
potential
unintended
conse-
quences, such as increased clinician burden and
burnout, adverse effects on underserved popula-
tions and the clinicians who care for them, and
attention being disproportionately diverted to-
ward the things being measured to the neglect of
other critically important areas that cannot be
measured
directly
(such
as
empathy
and
humanity).
Many stakeholders have outlined approaches to
ease quality-reporting requirements and measurement
processes, including proposals to adopt common qual-
ity designation standards and create a single health in-
formation database for quality determination (63).
Along these lines, the ACP participates in the Core
Quality Measures Collaborative organized by America'
s
Health Insurance Plans and involving public and private
payers, including CMS; the National Quality Forum; the
NCQA; other clinician specialty societies; employers;
and consumers, with the goal of creating consistency
and alignment across measures being used by both
public and private payers (70). The collaborative'
s par-
ticipants agreed on core measure sets for select areas
of practice: ACO/PCMH/primary care, cardiology, gas-
troenterology, HIV/hepatitis C, medical oncology, ob-
stetrics and gynecology, and orthopedics. These pay-
ers are now expected to focus their quality-reporting
programs according to these measures, which might
lead to reduced burden for clinicians and practices.
However, the ACP strongly recommends that they not
abandon their own efforts but continue to improve the
measures and reporting systems they already use (1).
Of critical importance is for payers and measure
developers to continue improving measures and re-
porting systems (including relevant health IT capabili-
ties), particularly those used within value-based pay-
ment models, to ensure that they measure the right
things; move toward clinical outcomes, patient- and
family-centered measures, care coordination measures,
and measures of population health and prevention;
and do not lead to unintended adverse consequences.
This work should be accomplished transparently by en-
gaging in open discussions with key stakeholders, such
as practicing clinicians and patients, regarding the next
steps toward building a more meaningful measure
portfolio.
4. To facilitate the elimination, reduction, align-
ment, and streamlining of administrative tasks, all key
stakeholders should collaborate in better utilizing exist-
ing health information technologies, as well as develop-
ing more innovative approaches. Restructuring digital
approaches to collecting, sharing, and reporting infor-
mation and responding to requests should be a top pri-
ority of key stakeholders and implemented in a manner
that involves direct input from frontline clinicians and
patients to ensure that these approaches are affordable
and truly meet their needs.
a. All stakeholders must actively work to refocus the
EHR system to ensure that its primary purpose is
to support clinical care delivery. The use of EHR
data collection capabilities for secondary or alter-
native purposes, such as for billing documenta-
tion,
measure
and
public
health
reporting,
regulatory compliance, and others, must be rede-
signed in a manner that does not distract or de-
tract from patient care and that effectively and
efficiently provides patients with access to their
own information.
b. All stakeholders must work to ensure that report-
ing requirements are modified and standardized
to take full advantage of the capabilities inherent
in EHR technology. Reporting burdens would be
reduced dramatically if all stakeholders agreed
to use the same data and structure definitions.
Decision
rules
could
be
programmed
into
EHR systems to eliminate the need for prior
authorizations.
On the basis of the literature review, many organi-
zations have recommended the use of technology in
the health care system, such as increasing interopera-
bility and implementing electronic payment, to help re-
duce administrative tasks. UnitedHealth Group has pro-
posed that clinicians be required to receive both claims
payments and remittance advices electronically. In ad-
dition, it recommends that EHRs be integrated with
personal health records to make health care truly in-
teroperable (63).
Although the original intent behind the design of
EHRs was to facilitate patient management and care,
the technology largely has been co-opted for other
purposes. Payers see the EHR as the source of billing
documentation. Health care enterprises see it as a tool
for enforcing compliance with organizational directives.
The legal system sees the EHR as a statement of legal
facts. Public health entities see it as a way to use clini-
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 9 • 2 May 2017
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 cians to collect their data at drastically reduced costs.
Measurement entities see the EHR as a way to auto-
mate the collection of measure data, reducing their re-
liance on chart abstraction. Governmental entities see it
as a way to observe and enforce compliance with reg-
ulations. All these impositions on EHR systems have
created distractions from their potential value in sup-
porting care delivery. Vendors of EHR systems consider
it their primary responsibility to meet the requirements
of all of these entities. They argue that the time re-
quired to meet all these nonclinical requirements
leaves them no time to enhance the value of EHR sys-
tems for clinical care. The ability of these systems to
support care delivery will not improve unless physicians
and others who deliver care insist that the functions
needed by clinicians and their patients take priority
over nonclinical requirements.
Policymakers and other key stakeholders, there-
fore, should collaborate with frontline clinicians and
their patients to restructure the existing technology to
help streamline information and processes in our
health care system. The recent ACP article “Clinical
Documentation in the 21st Century” notes that EHRs
must support the concept of “write once–reuse many
times” and embed tags to identify the original source of
information when used after its creation (6). An EHR
system must allow clinicians to easily search available
data during note writing and provide the option to link
content from previous entities or copy and paste with
appropriate tags. To the extent that the “reusability” of
the collected data increases, the need to collect addi-
tional data for secondary purposes will decrease (6).
Along with other health IT, EHRs actually may be-
come a solution to the problem of administrative bur-
den. To make this possible, all major stakeholders must
agree on and implement several changes, including us-
ing the same data elements and reporting formats; en-
hancing clinical decision support to replace the need
for other non–real-time forms of guidance and over-
sight, such as prior authorization; and using shared reg-
istries to collect data from practice reports to then be
queried by all agencies to meet their requirements. A
major source of reporting burden is the tendency of
each agency that collects data to use different data def-
initions and report formats. All stakeholders must be
willing to accept the same clinical definitions for data
elements and report formats. If they do, the technology
can be programmed to generate and send reports au-
tomatically. If technologies, such as clinical decision
support, are used to the full extent of their capabilities,
many reporting requirements may be eliminated. For
example, a physician has no reason to fill out a prior-
authorization form to order a prescription or test if the
payers' decision rules are embedded in the ordering
system. If reporting requirements are standardized,
then reports may be shared and collected into reposi-
tories. Physicians would submit one report for use by
all interested stakeholders. This standardization also
would dramatically reduce practice costs for data inter-
faces, as well as the time clinicians and their staff spend
completing additional forms and reports.
5. As the U.S. health care payment and delivery sys-
tem evolves to focus on value, stakeholders should re-
view and consider streamlining or eliminating duplica-
tive administrative requirements.
a. Physicians and other clinicians who demonstrate
consistency in their performance on quality, cost,
and/or patient experience measures should have
the opportunity to receive decreased regulatory
and other oversight through transparent and
streamlined exception application processes.
b. Further, as physicians and other clinicians take on
more innovative and evidence-based care deliv-
ery approaches (such as shared decision making,
population management, and enhanced patient
access) and progress along the continuum to-
ward taking on greater financial risk tied to the
health outcomes and experiences of their pa-
tients, they should be given exemptions from cer-
tain requirements that clearly are tied to the
current fee-for-service system, such as prior
authorizations.
c. Physicians and practices identified as outliers
compared with their peers, after risk adjustment
based on their patient population, with regard to
their billing patterns, prescribing approaches,
quality and cost of care, patient experience mea-
sures, and other factors, should be provided with
transparent and streamlined appeal opportuni-
ties, as well as education and practical resources
to address any identified issues.
The ACP strongly supports the shift to a value-
based health care system (71) and believes that policy-
makers and other key stakeholders must critically eval-
uate the need for many administrative requirements as
the health care system evolves from one based on the
volume of services to one based on value, as demon-
strated, for example, by the increasing movement to-
ward measuring health outcomes and patient experi-
ence; growing implementation of the PCMH, Patient-
Centered Specialty Care, and ACO delivery models;
and use of shared savings and bundled payment ap-
proaches that often involve assuming financial risk. A
framework for this evolution has been developed by
the Health Care Payment Learning and Action Network
(72). Many requirements may no longer be necessary
or valid overall or for certain subsets of clinicians who
are consistent performers, implement approaches to
deliver innovative care, or assume greater financial risk
tied to patient outcomes and experiences. Outliers
should be evaluated closely, because their billing pat-
terns and prescribing approaches may be appropriate
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 9 • 2 May 2017
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 because of their patient populations, then be given an
opportunity for meaningful consideration and provided
with educational resources as needed.
CMS has begun to study and potentially address
this issue through a long-term effort that “aims to re-
shape the physician experience by reviewing regula-
tions and policies to minimize administrative tasks and
seek other input to improve clinician satisfaction” (73).
The first component of this effort is the launch of an
18-month pilot program intended to reduce medical
review for certain physicians, particularly those partici-
pating in advanced APMs, while keeping program in-
tegrity intact. This initiative is encouraging and may be-
gin to address the ACP'
s call for change, as stated in
the aforementioned recommendation.
6. The ACP calls for rigorous research on the effect
of administrative tasks on our health care system in
terms of quality, time, and cost; physicians, other clini-
cians, their staff, and health care provider organizations;
patients and family experience; and, most important,
patient outcomes. Specifically, this research should be-
gin to elucidate the overall effect in terms of quality,
time, and cost to our system; the more direct effect on
physicians, their practices, and other health care pro-
vider organizations; and, most important, the effect on
patient outcomes and patient and family experience as
a result of these tasks. This research should facilitate the
ability of stakeholders to better articulate and under-
stand the need for some requirements, to identify alter-
native approaches for overly burdensome administra-
tive tasks, and to eliminate unnecessary requirements
whenever possible.
A literature review indicates that clear gaps and
challenges exist in the currently available research.
Many articles acknowledge the difficulty of improving
BIR research and the need for more intervention stud-
ies (74). In addition, the Center for American Progress
determined that data are lacking regarding the time or
financial effects of administrative tasks on patients (60).
These studies must be done to make policymakers
aware of the effect of various interventions on BIR costs,
as well as to help other stakeholders to better articulate
and understand the need for some requirements, iden-
tify alternative approaches for overly burdensome ad-
ministrative tasks, and eliminate unnecessary require-
ments whenever possible.
7. The ACP calls for research on best practices to
help physicians and other clinicians reduce administra-
tive burden within their practices and organizations. All
key stakeholders, including clinician societies, payers,
oversight entities, vendors and suppliers, and others,
should actively be involved in the dissemination of
these evidence-based best practices.
Regarding research on the effects of the adminis-
trative tasks themselves, evidence-based literature is
lacking on best practices to help clinicians and their
practices address these burdens on a daily basis. As
discussed earlier, Sinsky (23), Linzer (75), and their col-
leagues identified key strategies, such as developing
practice models to help physicians maintain control
over their workload and reduce EHR-associated stress,
but more work is needed in this area. Information on
best practices and practice redesign also should be in-
corporated in the medical education curriculum. In ad-
dition, greater effort will be required from all stakehold-
ers to disseminate these best practices widely and
provide practical advice and tools to help implement
them.
Conclusion
The ACP presents a cohesive framework for analyz-
ing administrative tasks through the lenses of sources,
intents, effects, and solutions to better understand the
tasks a clinician and his or her staff must complete. This
framework is the backbone of ACP'
s policy recommen-
dations for stakeholders outside the physician practice
or health care provider environment (such as payers,
governmental and other oversight organizations, and
vendors and suppliers) that call for assessing each ad-
ministrative requirement, regulation, or program to de-
termine whether it should be challenged, revised, or
eliminated. These recommendations also outline steps
that key stakeholders can and should take to align and
streamline, transparently and cohesively, the tasks that
are kept in place. This guidance is particularly impor-
tant as the health care system evolves from one based
on volume to one based on value of services provided.
The ACP also calls for meaningful collaboration to im-
prove the development, testing, and implementation of
measures and to ensure that health IT is used innova-
tively to streamline processes and reduce burden. In
addition, although some consistency was found in the
literature analysis regarding the effects of administra-
tive tasks, much more research is needed in that area,
as well as on the subject of best practices, to mitigate
or reduce the burden of administrative tasks. Once de-
fined, best practices must be disseminated widely.
Excessive administrative tasks have serious adverse
consequences for physicians and their patients. Stake-
holders must work together to address the administra-
tive burdens that fail to put patients first.
Web-Only References
1. McLean R. Letter to Andy Slavitt regarding CMS quality measure
development plan: supporting the transition to the merit-based in-
centive payment system (MIPS) and alternative payment models
(APMs). 1 March 2016. Accessed at www.acponline.org/acp_policy
/letters/comments_cms_draft_quality_measures_development_plan
_2016.pdf on 7 November 2016.
2. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Medicare
& Medicaid Services. Medicaid & CHIP: July 2016 monthly applica-
tions, eligibility determinations and enrollment report. 27 September
2016.
Accessed
at
www.medicaid.gov/medicaid/program
-information/downloads/july-2016-enrollment-report.pdf on 1 No-
vember 2016.
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 9 • 2 May 2017
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 3. Collins SR, Gunja MZ, Beutel S. New U.S. census data show the
number of uninsured Americans dropped by 4 million, with young
adults making big gains. The Commonwealth Fund. 13 September
2016. Accessed at www.commonwealthfund.org/publications/blog
/2016/sep/2015-census-data-insurance on 7 November 2016.
4. Hamel L, Doty MM, Norton M, Ryan J, Brodie M, Abrams MK,
et al; The Kaiser Family Foundation; The Commonwealth Fund. Ex-
periences and attitudes of primary care providers under the first year
of ACA coverage expansion: findings from the Kaiser Family Foun-
dation/Commonwealth Fund 2015 National Survey of Primary Care
Providers. 18 June 2015. Accessed at www.commonwealthfund.org
/publications/issue-briefs/2015/jun/primary-care-providers-first-year
-aca on 7 November 2016.
5. Friedberg MW, Chen PG, White C, Jung O, Raaen L, Hirshman S,
et al. Effects of Health Care Payment Models on Physician Practice in
the United States. Santa Monica, CA: RAND; 2015. Accessed at http:
//130.154.3.8/content/dam/rand/pubs/research_reports/RR800
/RR869/RAND_RR869.pdf on 7 November 2016.
6. Kuhn T, Basch P, Barr M, Yackel T; Medical Informatics Committee
of the American College of Physicians. Clinical documentation in the
21st century: executive summary of a policy position paper from the
American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2015;162:301-3.
[PMID: 25581028] doi:10.7326/M14-2128
7. Berenson RA, Goodson JD. Finding value in unexpected places—
fixing the Medicare physician fee schedule. N Engl J Med. 2016;374:
1306-9. [PMID: 26959109] doi:10.1056/NEJMp1600999
8. Berenson RA, Basch P, Sussex A. Revisiting E&M visit guidelines—a
missing piece of payment reform. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:1892-5.
[PMID: 21591942] doi:10.1056/NEJMp1102099
9. Sandhu AT, Dudley RA, Kazi DS. A cost analysis of the American
Board of Internal Medicine'
s maintenance-of-certification program.
Ann Intern Med. 2015;163:401-8. [PMID: 26216046] doi:10.7326/
M15-1011
10. National Committee for Quality Assurance. Latest Evidence: Ben-
efits of NCQA Patient-Centered Medical Home Recognition. Wash-
ington, DC: National Committee for Quality Assurance; 2016. Ac-
cessed
at
www.ncqa.org/Portals/0/Programs/Recognition/PCMH
/NCQA1005-1016_PCMH%20Evidence_Web.pdf on 21 November
2016.
11. Patient-Centered Primary Care Collaborative. Results and evi-
dence: research that demonstrates the medical home'
s cost and
quality impact. 2016. Accessed at www.pcpcc.org/results-evidence
on 15 November 2016.
12. The Joint Commission. 184 Joint Commission ambulatory care
accredited orgs (1384 sites*) with primary care medical home
(PCMH) certification (by state) as of 11/1/2016. 2016. Accessed at
www.jointcommission.org/assets/1/18/PCMH_list2.PDF on 15 No-
vember 2016.
13. Friedberg MW, Chen PG, Van Busum KR, Aunon F, Pham C,
Caloyeras JP, et al. Factors Affecting Physician Professional Satisfac-
tion and Their Implications for Patient Care, Health Systems, and
Health Policy. Santa Monica, CA: RAND; 2013. Accessed at www
.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR439.html
on
20
November
2016.
14. Ventola CL. Direct-to-consumer pharmaceutical advertising: ther-
apeutic or toxic? P T. 2011;36:669-84. [PMID: 22346300]
15. Institute of Medicine Committee on a National Surveillance Sys-
tem for Cardiovascular and Select Chronic Diseases. A Nationwide
Framework for Surveillance of Cardiovascular and Chronic Lung Dis-
eases. Washington, DC: National Academies Pr; 2011. Accessed at
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK83157 on 21 November 2016.
16. Dyer N, Sorra JS, Smith SA, Cleary P, Hays R. Psychometric prop-
erties of the consumer assessment of healthcare providers and sys-
tems (CAHPS®) clinician and group adult visit survey. 2012. Ac-
cessed at www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3480671 on 17
November 2016.
17. Anhang Price R, Elliott MN, Zaslavsky AM, Hays RD, Lehrman
WG, Rybowsky L, et al. Examining the role of patient experience
surveys in measuring health care quality. 2015. Accessed at www
.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4349195
on
17
November
2016.
18. Weinick RM, Quigley DD, Mayer LA, Sellers CD. Use of CAHPS
patient experience surveys to assess the impact of health care inno-
vations. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf. 2014;40:418-27. [PMID:
25252390]
19. Ozkaynak M, Unert KM, Johnson SA, Brixey JJ, Haque SN. Clin-
ical workflow analysis, process redesign, and quality improvement.
In: Finnell JT, Dixon BE. Clinical Informatics Study Guide. Basel, Swit-
zerland: Springer Publishing; 2016:135-61. Accessed at http://link
.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-319-22753-5_7 on 17 No-
vember 2016.
20. Grant RW, Uratsu CS, Estacio KR, Altschuler A, Kim E, Fireman B,
et al. Pre-Visit Prioritization for complex patients with diabetes: ran-
domized trial design and implementation within an integrated health
care
system.
Contemp
Clin
Trials.
2016;47:196-201.
[PMID:
26820612] doi:10.1016/j.cct.2016.01.012
21. Eisenstat SA, Chang Y, Porneala BC, Geagan E, Wilkins G, Chase
B, et al. Development and implementation of a collaborative team
care model for effective insulin use in an academic medical center
primary care network. Am J Med Qual. 2016. [PMID: 27259871]
22. O’
Malley AS, Gourevitch R, Draper K, Bond A, Tirodkar MA.
Overcoming challenges to teamwork in patient-centered medical
homes: a qualitative study. J Gen Intern Med. 2015;30:183-92.
[PMID: 25385207] doi:10.1007/s11606-014-3065-9
23. Sinsky CA, Sinsky TA, Rajcevich E. Putting pre-visit planning into
practice. Fam Pract Manag. 2015;22:34-8. [PMID: 26761083]
24. Nemeth LS, Ornstein SM, Jenkins RG, Wessell AM, Nietert PJ.
Implementing and evaluating electronic standing orders in primary
care practice: a PPRNet study. J Am Board Fam Med. 2012;25:594-
604. [PMID: 22956695] doi:10.3122/jabfm.2012.05.110214
25. Ryskina KL, Smith CD, Weissman A, Post J, Dine CJ, Bollmann K,
et al. U.S. internal medicine residents'knowledge and practice of
high-value care: a national survey. Acad Med. 2015;90:1373-9.
[PMID: 26083399] doi:10.1097/ACM.0000000000000791
26. Stammen LA, Stalmeijer RE, Paternotte E, Oudkerk Pool A, Dries-
sen EW, Scheele F, et al. Training physicians to provide high-value,
cost-conscious care: a systematic review. JAMA. 2015;314:2384-
400. [PMID: 26647260] doi:10.1001/jama.2015.16353
27. Dolan R. Health policy brief: high deductible health plans. Health
Affairs. 4 February 2016. Accessed at http://healthaffairs.org/health
policybriefs/brief_pdfs/healthpolicybrief_152.pdf on 17 November
2016.
28. Brot-Goldberg ZC, Chandra A, Handel BR, Kolstad JT. What
does a deductible do? The impact of cost-sharing on health care
prices, quantities, and spending dynamics. October 2015. Accessed
at www.nber.org/papers/w21632 on 17 November 2016.
29. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. SHARE approach
essential steps of shared decision making: expanded reference
guide with sample conversation starters (workshop curriculum
tool 2). 2014. Accessed at www.ahrq.gov/professionals/education
/curriculum-tools/shareddecisionmaking/tools/tool-2/index.html on
14 November 2016.
30. Daniel H; Health and Public Policy Committee of the American
College of Physicians. Stemming the escalating cost of prescription
drugs: a position paper of the American College of Physicians. Ann
Intern Med. 2016. [PMID: 27018758] doi:10.7326/M15-2768
31. Blanchfield BB, Heffernan JL, Osgood B, Sheehan RR, Meyer GS.
Saving billions of dollars—and physicians'time—by streamlining bill-
ing practices. Health Aff (Millwood). 2010;29:1248-54. [PMID:
20430822] doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2009.0075
32. Casalino LP, Nicholson S, Gans DN, Hammons T, Morra D, Kar-
rison T, et al. What does it cost physician practices to interact with
health insurance plans? Health Aff (Millwood). 2009;28:w533-43.
[PMID: 19443477] doi:10.1377/hlthaff.28.4.w533
33. Morra D, Nicholson S, Levinson W, Gans DN, Hammons T, Casa-
lino LP. US physician practices versus Canadians: spending nearly
four times as much money interacting with payers. Health Aff (Mill-
wood).2011;30:1443-50.[PMID:21813866]doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2010
.0893
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 9 • 2 May 2017
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 34. Sakowski JA, Kahn JG, Kronick RG, Newman JM, Luft HS. Peer-
ing into the black box: billing and insurance activities in a medical
group. Health Aff (Millwood). 2009;28:w544-54. [PMID: 19443478]
doi:10.1377/hlthaff.28.4.w544
35. Woolhandler S, Campbell T, Himmelstein DU. Costs of health
care administration in the United States and Canada. N Engl J Med.
2003;349:768-75. [PMID: 12930930]
36. Kahn JG, Kronick R, Kreger M, Gans DN. The cost of health
insurance administration in California: estimates for insurers, physi-
cians, and hospitals. Health Aff (Millwood). 2005;24:1629-39. [PMID:
16284038]
37. Morley CP, Badolato DJ, Hickner J, Epling JW. The impact of
prior authorization requirements on primary care physicians'offices:
report of two parallel network studies. J Am Board Fam Med. 2013;
26:93-5. [PMID: 23288287] doi:10.3122/jabfm.2013.01.120062
38. Jiwani A, Himmelstein D, Woolhandler S, Kahn JG. Billing and
insurance-related administrative costs in United States'health care:
synthesis of micro-costing evidence. BMC Health Serv Res. 2014;14:
556. [PMID: 25540104] doi:10.1186/s12913-014-0556-7
39. Cutler DM, Ly DP. The (paper) work of medicine: understanding
international medical costs. J Econ Perspect. 2011;25:3-25. [PMID:
21595323]
40. Long SK. Physicians may need more than higher reimbursements
to expand Medicaid participation: findings from Washington State.
Health Aff (Millwood). 2013;32:1560-7. [PMID: 24019360] doi:10
.1377/hlthaff.2012.1010
41. Woolhandler S, Himmelstein DU. Administrative work consumes
one-sixth of U.S. physicians'working hours and lowers their career
satisfaction. Int J Health Serv. 2014;44:635-42. [PMID: 25626223]
42. Casalino LP, Gans D, Weber R, Cea M, Tuchovsky A, Bishop TF,
et al. US physician practices spend more than $15.4 billion annually
to report quality measures. Health Aff (Millwood). 2016;35:401-6.
[PMID: 26953292] doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2015.1258
43. Halladay JR, Stearns SC, Wroth T, Spragens L, Hofstetter S, Zim-
merman S, et al. Cost to primary care practices of responding to
payer requests for quality and performance data. Ann Fam Med.
2009;7:495-503. [PMID: 19901308] doi:10.1370/afm.1050
44. West DR, Radcliff TA, Brown T, Cote MJ, Smith PC, Dickinson
WP. Costs associated with data collection and reporting for diabetes
quality improvement in primary care practices: a report from
SNOCAP-USA. J Am Board Fam Med. 2012;25:275-82. [PMID:
22570390] doi:10.3122/jabfm.2012.03.110049
45. Ix M. Reducing the administrative burden of health care quality
reporting. Find Brief. 2008;11:1-4. [PMID: 19143115]
46. Sinsky C, Colligan L, Li L, Prgomet M, Reynolds S, Goeders L,
et al. Allocation of physician time in ambulatory practice: a time and
motion study in 4 specialties. Ann Intern Med. 2016;165:753-60.
[PMID: 27595430] doi:10.7326/M16-0961
47. McDonald CJ, Callaghan FM, Weissman A, Goodwin RM, Mund-
kur M, Kuhn T. Use of internist'
s free time by ambulatory care elec-
tronic medical record systems. JAMA Intern Med. 2014;174:1860-3.
[PMID: 25200944] doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2014.4506
48. Goetz Goldberg D, Kuzel AJ, Feng LB, DeShazo JP, Love LE.
EHRs in primary care practices: benefits, challenges, and successful
strategies. Am J Manag Care. 2012;18:e48-54. [PMID: 22435884]
49. Hill RG Jr, Sears LM, Melanson SW. 4000 clicks: a productivity
analysis of electronic medical records in a community hospital ED.
Am J Emerg Med. 2013;31:1591-4. [PMID: 24060331] doi:10.1016/
j.ajem.2013.06.028
50. Christino MA, Matson AP, Fischer SA, Reinert SE, Digiovanni
CW, Fadale PD. Paperwork versus patient care: a nationwide survey
of residents' perceptions of clinical documentation requirements
and patient care. J Grad Med Educ. 2013;5:600-4. [PMID: 24455008]
doi:10.4300/JGME-D-12-00377.1
51. Tipping MD, Forth VE, O’
Leary KJ, Malkenson DM, Magill DB,
Englert K, et al. Where did the day go?—a time-motion study of hos-
pitalists. J Hosp Med. 2010;5:323-8. [PMID: 20803669] doi:10.1002/
jhm.790
52. Shanafelt TD, Boone S, Tan L, Dyrbye LN, Sotile W, Satele D,
et al. Burnout and satisfaction with work-life balance among US phy-
sicians relative to the general US population. Arch Intern Med. 2012;
172:1377-85. [PMID: 22911330]
53. Shanafelt TD, Hasan O, Dyrbye LN, Sinsky C, Satele D, Sloan J,
et al. Changes in burnout and satisfaction with work-life balance in
physicians and the general US working population between 2011
and 2014. Mayo Clin Proc. 2015;90:1600-13. [PMID: 26653297] doi:
10.1016/j.mayocp.2015.08.023
54. Linzer M, Manwell LB, Williams ES, Bobula JA, Brown RL, Varkey
AB, et al; MEMO (Minimizing Error, Maximizing Outcome) Investiga-
tors. Working conditions in primary care: physician reactions and
care quality. Ann Intern Med. 2009;151:28-36. [PMID: 19581644]
55. Linzer M, Poplau S, Babbott S, Collins T, Guzman-Corrales L,
Menk J, et al. Worklife and wellness in academic general internal
medicine: results from a National Survey. J Gen Intern Med. 2016;
31:1004-10. [PMID: 27138425] doi:10.1007/s11606-016-3720-4
56. Babbott S, Manwell LB, Brown R, Montague E, Williams E,
Schwartz M, et al. Electronic medical records and physician stress in
primary care: results from the MEMO Study. J Am Med Inform Assoc.
2014;21:e100-6.
[PMID:
24005796]
doi:10.1136/amiajnl
-2013-001875
57. Shanafelt TD, Dyrbye LN, Sinsky C, Hasan O, Satele D, Sloan J,
et al. Relationship between clerical burden and characteristics of the
electronic environment with physician burnout and professional sat-
isfaction. Mayo Clin Proc. 2016;91:836-48. [PMID: 27313121] doi:10
.1016/j.mayocp.2016.05.007
58. Bodenheimer T, Sinsky C. From triple to quadruple aim: care of
the patient requires care of the provider. Ann Fam Med. 2014;12:
573-6. [PMID: 25384822] doi:10.1370/afm.1713
59. Cutler D, Wikler E, Basch P. Reducing administrative costs and
improving the health care system. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:1875-78.
doi:10.1056/NEJMp1209711
60. Wikler E, Basch P, Cutler DM. Paper cuts: reducing health care
administrative costs. Center for American Progress. 11 June 2012.
Accessed at www.americanprogress.org/issues/healthcare/reports
/2012/06/11/11658/paper-cuts on 7 November 2016.
61. The Commonwealth Fund Commission on a High Performance
Health System. Confronting costs: stabilizing US health spending
while moving toward a high performance health care system. The
Commonwealth Fund. 10 January 2013. Accessed at www.common
wealthfund.org/Publications/Fund-Reports/2013/Jan/Confronting
-Costs.aspx?page=all on 7 November 2016.
62. Basch P, McClellan M, Botts C, Katikaneni P. Health policy issue
brief March 2015—high value health IT: policy reforms for better care
and lower costs. The Brookings Institution. 2015. Accessed at www
.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/16-high-value-health
-it-policy-reforms-mcclellan.pdf on 7 November 2016.
63. UnitedHealth Group. Health care cost containment—how tech-
nology can cut red tape and simplify health care administration. June
2009. Accessed at www.unitedhealthgroup.com/~/media/UHG/PDF
/2009/UNH-Working-Paper-2.ashx?la=en on 7 November 2016.
64. American Medical Association. Standardization of prior authori-
zation process for medical services white paper. June 2011. Ac-
cessed at http://massneuro.org/Resources/Transfer%20from
%20old%20sit/AMA%20White%20Paper%20on%20Standardizing
%20Prior%20Authorization.pdf on 7 November 2016.
65. Medical Group Management Association. Position paper: ad-
ministrative simplification for medical group practices. June 2005.
Accessed
at
www.mgma.com/about/about-mgma-medical-group
-management/position-papers/mgma-position-paper-administrative
-simplification on 7 November 2016.
66. United States Government Accountability Office. Medicare pro-
gram integrity: increasing consistency of contractor requirements
may improve administrative efficiency. Report to Congressional re-
questors. July 2013. Accessed at http://gao.gov/assets/660/656132
.pdf on 7 November 2016.
67. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Transactions over-
view. 2016. Accessed at www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance
/Administrative-Simplification/Transactions/TransactionsOverview
.html on 7 November 2016.
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 9 • 2 May 2017
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 68. Ginsburg JA, Doherty RB, Ralston JF Jr, Senkeeto N, Cooke M,
Cutler C, et al; Public Policy Committee of the American College of
Physicians. Achieving a high-performance health care system with
universal access: what the United States can learn from other coun-
tries. Ann Intern Med. 2008;148:55-75. [PMID: 18056654]
69. Shipman SA, Sinsky CA. Expanding primary care capacity by re-
ducing waste and improving the efficiency of care. Health Aff (Mill-
wood). 2013;32:1990-7. [PMID: 24191091] doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2013
.0539
70. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Core measures. 16
February 2016. Accessed at www.cms.gov/Medicare/Quality
-Initiatives-Patient-Assessment-Instruments/QualityMeasures/Core
-Measures.html on 17 November 2016.
71. American College of Physicians. The Role of Performance As-
sessment in a Reformed Health Care System. Philadelphia: American
Coll Physicians; 2011. Accessed at www.acponline.org/acp_policy
/policies/role_of_performance_assessment_in_reformed_health
caresystems_2012.pdf on 9 January 2017.
72. Alternative Payment Model Framework and Progress Tracking
(APM FPT) Work Group. Alternative Payment Model (APM) Frame-
work Final White Paper. Washington, DC: Health Care Payment
Learning and Action Network; 2016. Accessed at https://hcp-lan.org
/groups/apm-fpt/apm-framework on 7 November 2016.
73. CMS announces new initiative to increase clinician engagement
[press release]. Baltimore: Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Servic-
es; 2016. Accessed at www.cms.gov/Newsroom/MediaReleaseData
base/Press-releases/2016-Press-releases-items/2016-10-13.html on
7 November 2016.
74. Excess administrative costs. In: Institute of Medicine (US) Round-
table on Evidence-Based Medicine; Yong PL, Saunders RS, Olsen LA,
eds. The Healthcare Imperative: Lowering Costs and Improving Out-
comes: Workshop Series Summary. Washington, DC: National Acad-
emies Pr; 2010:141-74. Accessed at www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books
/NBK53942 on 7 November 2016.
75. Linzer M, Levine R, Meltzer D, Poplau S, Warde C, West CP. 10
bold steps to prevent burnout in general internal medicine [Edito-
rial]. J Gen Intern Med. 2014;29:18-20. [PMID: 24002633] doi:10
.1007/s11606-013-2597-8
Appendix Table 1. Complete List of Resources Used in
Scoping Review and Environmental Scan
Literature Search
Category
Specific Sources
Electronic databases
PubMed
ScienceDirect
SpringerLink
Journals
Annals of Internal Medicine
Health Affairs
Journal of the American Medical Association
Journal of General Internal Medicine
New England Journal of Medicine
Medical Care Research and Review
Annals of Family Medicine
American Journal of Managed Care
American Journal of Emergency Medicine
Journal of Graduate Medical Education
Journal of Hospital Medicine
Mayo Clinic Proceedings
Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association
Journal of Economic Perspectives
American Journal of Medical Quality
Family Practice Management
Journal of the American Board of Family
Medicine
Journal of the Association of American
Medical Colleges
Government
agencies
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
Government Accountability Office
Membership
associations
American Academy of Family Physicians
American College of Physicians
American Medical Association
Medical Group Management Association
Patient-Centered Primary Care
Collaborative
Private and/or
research
organizations
Academy Health
Brookings Institution
Center for American Progress
Center for Studying Health System Change
Commonwealth Fund
Health Care Payment Learning and Action
Network
Institute of Medicine/National Academy of
Medicine
Kaiser Family Foundation
Mathematica Policy Research
National Committee for Quality Assurance
RAND Corporation
UnitedHealth Group
Urban Institute Health Policy Center
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 9 • 2 May 2017
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 Appendix Figure 1. Example of using framework and taxonomy to determine whether an administrative task is worthwhile
and should be kept.
Task: Writing in reason for referral from specialist in primary to internal medicine subspecialists or other clinicians
Analysis based on Figure 1
Source: External–other practices and health care organizations
   Additional relevant details:
      Through ACP’s High-Value Care Coordination Project, a collaboration between ACP’s Council of Subspecialty
      Societies and patient advocacy groups:
         Protocols were developed to promote high-quality care coordination among specialists in primary
         care, internal medicine subspecialists, and other clinicians.
         A checklist was developed containing relevant information to include on all referral forms.
Intent: High-quality, high-value, safe, and effective services; cost reduction; and fraud prevention
Effect:
   Negative: Additional physician/staff time spent filling out relevant information for referral
   Positive: Improves clinical hand-off, thus improving quality of care and making care delivery by the receiving
   clinician more appropriate and timely, with the potential to save money by avoiding unnecessary duplication.
Solutions: Given positive effects on patient care, this task should be deemed worthwhile and should be
kept; however, it should be regularly reviewed to ensure that it aligns with other tasks and the ongoing
goal of minimizing burden.
Analysis based on Figure 2
Improves quality care
X
X
X
X
Yes
No
Timely and appropriate care
Questions physician judgment
Negative financial effect
ACP = American College of Physicians.
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 9 • 2 May 2017
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 Appendix Figure 2. Example of using framework and taxonomy to determine whether an administrative task is unnecessarily
burdensome and requires careful consideration of alternatives.
Task: Using a physician decision support system (which in most cases is separate from the EHR) to provide payer and
laboratory with advance notification of outpatient laboratary tests
Analysis based on Figure 1
Source: External–private payer
   Additional relevant details:
      The physician decision support system is designed to provide the payer with advance notice of outpatient laboratory
      tests (as well as clinical review for appropriateness) and to steer those tests to a subset of in-network labs. The
      ordering physician also is required to send the notification to the laboratory. If the laboratory does not receive the
      notification, it will not be paid for the test.
Intent: Cost and fraud reduction
Effect:
   Negative: Additional physician time for BIR issues, possible delays in timely andappropriate patient care if
   laboratory does not receive advance notice from physician, decreased physician satisfaction
Solutions: Given the negative effects, this task should be reviewed and evaluated with careful considerations of
alternatives, or eliminated entirely.
Analysis based on Figure 2
Improves quality care
X
X
X
X
Yes
No
Timely and appropriate care
Questions physician judgment
Negative financial effect
?
BIR = billing and insurance-related; EHR = electronic health record.
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 9 • 2 May 2017
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 Appendix Table 2. Summary of Literature on Billing and Insurance and Other Administrative Effects
Article Title
Time Estimates
Cost Estimates
Other Data
Saving Billions of Dollars—and Physicians'
Time—by Streamlining Billing
Practices (31)
4 h of professional time per physician and 5 h
of practice support staff time could be
saved each week; 74% of burden is time
costs
12% of net patient revenue to cover costs
of excessive administrative complexity
–
What Does It Cost Physician Practices to
Interact With Health Insurance
Plans? (32)
43 min per workday by physicians
(interacting with health plans)—3 h per
week, 3 wk per year; primary care
physicians spent more time (3.5 h per
week)
Cost of the hours per year by physicians
spent on interacting with health
plans—approximately $68 000
–
The (Paper)Work of Medicine:
Understanding International Medical
Costs (39)
–
–
2.2 administrative workers for every
office-based physician (in the
United States) for billing and
payment
Billing and Insurance-Related
Administrative Costs in United States
Health Care: Synthesis of
Micro-Costing Evidence (38)
–
BIR costs in 2012: $471 billion, with $70
billion in physician practices
–
The Cost of Health Insurance
Administration in California: Estimates
for Insurers, Physicians, and
Hospitals (36)
–
Medical groups in California spend 13.9%
of total revenues on BIR costs
–
Physicians May Need More Than Higher
Reimbursements to Expand Medicaid
Participation: Findings From
Washington State (40)
–
–
Paperwork for Medicaid was a
problem for 23.6% of physicians
The Impact of Prior Authorization
Requirements on Primary Care
Physicians'Offices: Report of Two
Parallel Network Studies (37)
–
Prior authorization: Annual cost per FTE
physician, $2161–3430
–
US Physician Practices Versus Canadians:
Spending Nearly Four Times as Much
Money Interacting With Payers (33)
3.4 h per week interacting with payers in the
United States (vs. 2.2 h in Canada)
Ontario physician practices spent $20 410
per year per physician compared with
$82 975 in the United States
Difference in time between the United
States and Canada could save $27.6
billion per year
–
Peering Into the Black Box: Billing and
Insurance Activities in a Medical
Group (34)
35 min per day by physicians
At least $85 286 per FTE physician (10%
of revenue) per year
0.67 nonclinical FTEs per physician
working on billing and
administrative functions
Costs of Health Care Administration in
the United States and Canada (35)
13.5% of physicians'time spent on
administrative tasks
Health administrative costs: $294.3 billion
in 1999
–
Administrative Work Consumes
One-Sixth of U.S. Physicians'Working
Hours and Lowers Their Career
Satisfaction (41)
Physicians spend 8.7 h per week on
administration (not limited to BIR activities)
–
–
BIR = billing and insurance-related; FTE = full-time equivalent.
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 9 • 2 May 2017
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
