 1
SCIENtIFIC REPORts |  (2018) 8:13338  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-30440-7
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Comments on two recent 
publications on GM maize  
and Roundup
Dennis Eriksson1, Klaus Ammann2, Bruce Chassy3 & Aakash Chawade  
1
Two -omics studies on genetically modified maize and Roundup-fed rats, recently published in 
the journal Scientific Reports, contain serious flaws in the experimental design, methodology and 
interpretation of results, which we point out here. The use of -omics technologies are of increasing 
importance in research, however we argue for a cautious approach to the potential application in food 
safety assessments as these exceptionally sensitive and complex methods require a thorough and 
detailed evaluation of the biological significance of obtained results.  
Arising from: Mesnage et al. Sci Rep 7:39328 (2017), Mesnage et al. Sci Rep 6:37855 (2016).
Two studies recently published in Scientific Reports1,2 contain a number of questionable issues related to the 
experimental design and the interpretation of the obtained data. We here point these out and discuss why cau-
tion about the far-reaching conclusions presented in the two studies is necessary. The first study (here called the 
“GM maize report”) claims that genetic transformation process caused metabolic disturbances in genetically 
modified (GM) NK603 Roundup-tolerant maize, questioning the compositional similarity of this cultivar to a 
non-GM control cultivar1. The second study (here called the “Roundup report”) reports that exposure of rats to 
an ultra-low dose of the glyphosate-based herbicide Roundup were found to cause significant metabolome and 
proteome changes allegedly indicative of liver dysfunction2. Both reports are based on samples collected from an 
earlier two-year study3,4.
The GM maize report does not provide evidence in support of the claim that the transformation process has 
caused the observed metabolic differences. First, no evidence is presented to prove that DKC2678 (Roundup-tolerant 
NK603) is near-isogenic to DKC 2675. Similar identity numbers in a seed catalogue (Materials and Method, p. 101) 
is no guarantee that the two cultivars are genetically near-identical. The appropriate control comparator should have 
been a known near-isogenic, or, preferably, a progenitor line. Lack of standardised protocols such as randomised 
block field design precludes the evaluation of possible confounding environmental factors, which are often found to 
have a greater impact on variation than transgenesis5,6. The lack of spatially separated biological replicates does not 
conform to standard experimental design, and the use of only two temporal replicates undermines statistical power. 
It is not clearly described how the technical replicates were obtained, neither is the merging of the two biological 
replicates for the metabolome analysis explained (Figure 1, p. 3; Materials and Method, p. 10–111). The authors cite 
one study (Frank et al.5) which reported that approximately 3% of metabolites in NK603 maize kernels differed 
compared to isogenic lines, however without mentioning that the cited study itself explained that natural variability 
and environmental factors were the dominant parameters driving the variability of the maize metabolite profiles. 
The authors do acknowledge that further experiments made under different environmental conditions are needed 
(Discussion, p. 81) but nevertheless proceed with over-sensationalist claims that the transformation process caused 
a general disturbance and a metabolic imbalance in energy and carbohydrate metabolism in the GM plants (Title; 
Discussion, p. 101). There is also no reference to the expected natural variation in the levels of selected proteins and 
metabolites among maize cultivars, severely hampering any conclusion about the observed differences. The polyam-
ines cadaverine and putrescine are highlighted in the GM maize report as being of potential negative health concern, 
however maize kernels normally contain a wide range of these substances, which may even be beneficial at moderate 
levels7. In our opinion, the study lacks a suitable experimental design to prevent the influence of the environment, 
and lacks references to the natural variation of these compounds in maize. Thus, the study does not allow the authors 
to argue, as they do (e.g. Discussion, p. 101), that the nutritional quality has been hampered by metabolic imbalances 
1Department of Plant Breeding, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Alnarp, Sweden. 2Institute of Plant 
Sciences, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland. 3Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, University 
of Illinois, Urbana, USA. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to D.E. (email: dennis.
eriksson@slu.se)
Received: 8 February 2017
Accepted: 8 June 2018
Published: xx xx xxxx
OPEN
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
SCIENtIFIC REPORts |  (2018) 8:13338  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-30440-7
nor that the observed differences are due to the transformation process and the resulting expression of a transgenic 
protein. In conclusion, it is not possible from this study to determine the cause of the observed differences between 
the two maize varieties, or to link these results to any effect of biological relevance.
In the Roundup report, it is relevant to note that the analysed liver samples came from the same rat material 
used for a several years old study3 which has been criticised for the use of Sprague-Dawley rats which display a 
high rate of age-related spontaneous tumours, flawed statistical analysis and low statistical power due to the small 
sample size, and lack of experimental details to scientifically assess the quality of the study8–10. In the statistical 
analysis of the metabolome data, the authors chose to reduce the type II error (false negatives) by looking at the 55 
metabolites that were significant at the more lenient p-value threshold (p < 0.05) instead of correcting for multi-
ple comparisons as in the proteome analysis, while the Benjamini-Hochberg False Discovery Rate (FDR) analysis 
only yielded three significantly different metabolites at a threshold of q < 0.05 (Results, p. 6; Discussion, p. 92). 
 
The p-value threshold (p < 0.05) implies that 34 (5%) of the 673 analysed compounds could be obtained by 
chance alone in two identical situations and thus could be false positives, making the conclusions unreliable 
without further testing and validation. Though not completely incorrect, we would emphasise that this approach 
calls for careful treatment and interpretation of the results. In conclusion, the choice of sample material for the 
experiments, the statistical analysis and the interpretations are questionable. The authors do acknowledge that 
small sample size and aged animals give little statistical power (Discussion, p. 92), but nonetheless go ahead with 
speculative conclusions (Title; Abstract; Discussion, p. 7; Conclusions, p. 102).
Both reports claim disproportionate biological implications based on the presented -omics data. We recommend 
the authors to acknowledge the wealth of studies with contradictory results. Of relevance to -omics research related 
to GM crops, an article was cited in the GM maize report that evaluated 44 publications containing -omic profiling 
studies, of which twelve were on GM maize. It concluded that natural variability, conventional breeding techniques 
and environmental factors consistently have a higher impact on gene expression, protein and metabolite levels than 
transgenesis11. The evaluation was later updated to include a total of 60 GM crop profiling -omic studies that reinforced 
the original conclusion12. More recent studies13,14, along with a consensus in the scientific community15, also confirm 
this general perspective. The authors seem to misinterpret the Substantial Equivalence concept, which recognizes that 
differences between varieties will always be observed, providing a starting-point of the food safety evaluation rather 
than an end-point in itself. Any observed differences indicated by molecular profiling are not necessarily biologically 
meaningful in a health and safety context, and rather than using a single comparator it would be more appropriate to 
develop a reference class model covering variety, growth location, replications and other sources of variation16.
Both GM crops and glyphosate are currently subjects of political discussion in the European Union. Since 
the accumulated scientific body of evidence can (and should) be used to guide policy decisions, it is imperative 
that the research is solid and indisputable. While we support the research and development of cost-effective and 
accurate methods for safety assessment of food and feed crops, we disagree with the claims of the GM maize and 
Roundup reports since the problems with the experimental design and data interpretation prevent the experi-
mental evidence to support the conclusions. Ultimately, the wider discussion concerns the standards of scientific 
publication. Researchers are constantly balancing between the urge to publish generated data and the require-
ments to further validate, or reject, their hypotheses through repetition and potential generalisation. One impor-
tant guideline is that the more spectacular a finding is, the more rigorous are the requirements for validation. It 
is against this background that we wish to question the claims of the two reports criticised here and weigh their 
presented findings against the accumulated body of evidence in the research area.
References
 1. Mesnage, R. et al. An integrated multi-omics analysis of the NK603 Roundup-tolerant GM maize reveals metabolism disturbances 
caused by the transformation process. Sci. Rep. 6, 37855 (2016).
 2. Mesnage, R. et al. Multiomics reveal non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in rats following chronic exposure to an ultra-low dose of 
Roundup herbicide. Sci. Rep. 7, 39328 (2017).
 3. Retraction notice to Long term toxicity of a Roundup herbicide and a Roundup-tolerant genetically modified maize. Food Chem. 
Toxicol. 63, 244 (2014).
 4. Séralini, G.-E. et al. Republished study: long-term toxicity of a Roundup herbicide and a Roundup-tolerant genetically modified 
maize. Environ. Sci. Eur. 26, 14 (2014).
 5. Frank, T., Rohlig, R. M., Davies, H. V., Barros, E. & Engel, K. H. Metabolite profiling of maize kernels–genetic modification versus 
environmental influence. J. Agric. Food Chem. 60, 3005–3012 (2012).
 6. Coll, A. et al. Natural variation explains most transcriptomic changes among maize plants of MON810 and comparable non-GM 
varieties subjected to two N-fertilization farming practices. Plant Mol. Biol. 73, 349–362 (2010).
 7. Bandeira, C. M., Evangelista, W. P. & Abreu Gloria, M. B. Bioactive amines in fresh, canned and dried sweet corn, embryo and 
endosperm and germinated corn. Food Chem. 131(4), 1355–1359 (2012).
 8. Butler, D. Hyped GM maize study faces growing scrutiny. Nature 490, 158 (2012).
 9. Nicole, W. A closer look at GE corn findings. Environ. Health Perspect. 120(11), A421 (2012).
 
10. Panchin, A. Y. & Tuzhikov, A. I. Published GMO studies find no evidence of harm when corrected for multiple comparisons. Critical 
Rev. Biotech. 37(2), 213–217 (2016).
 
11. Ricroch, A. E., Bergé, J. B. & Kuntz, M. Evaluation of genetically engineered crops using transcriptomic, proteomic, and 
metabolomics profiling techniques. Plant Physiol. 155, 1752–1761 (2011).
 
12. Ricroch, A. E. Assessment of GE food safety using “-omics” techiques and long-term animal feeding studies. New Biotechnol. 30(4), 
349–354 (2013).
 
13. Harrigan, G. G. et al. Evaluation of metabolomics profiles of grain from maize hybrids derived from near-isogenic GM positive and 
negative segregant inbreds demonstrates that observed differences cannot be attributed unequivocally to the GM trait. Metabolomics 
12, 82 (2016).
 
14. Simó, C., Ibáñez, C., Valdés, A., Cifuentes, A. & García-Cañas, V. Metabolomics of genetically modified crops. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 15, 
18941–18966 (2014).
 
15. Ladics, G. S. et al. Genetic basis and detection of unintended effects in genetically modified crop plants. Transgenic Res. 24, 587–603 (2015).
 
16. van Dijk, J. P. et al. Safety assessment of plant varieties using transcriptomics profiling and a one-class classifier. Reg. Toxicol. 
Pharmacol. 70, 297–303 (2014).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
SCIENtIFIC REPORts |  (2018) 8:13338  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-30440-7
Author Contributions
D.E. prepared the initial draft. D.E., K.A., B.C. and A.C. contributed equally to the discussions and to the 
preparation and finalising of the manuscript.
Additional Information
Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Cre-
ative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per-
mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
 
© The Author(s) 2018
