 Registered charity number: 207890
 
Showcasing research from Keele University and University of 
Warwick, UK, and University of Florida and the University of 
Texas at San Antonio, USA, featuring data from the Diamond 
and Advanced Light Source synchrotrons. 
 
Nanoscale synchrotron X-ray speciation of iron and calcium 
compounds in amyloid plaque cores from Alzheimer's disease 
subjects 
 
 
Could X-rays be used to expose the complex biochemistry, 
biomineralisation and magnetic oxide phases forming in 
neurodegenerative diseases? Everett  
et al. demonstrate the use 
of synchrotron X-rays to probe iron and calcium biochemistry in 
plaques isolated from the brains of individuals with Alzheimer's 
disease. Their results suggest links between disease pathology 
and the presence of chemically-reduced iron in the brain. 
Nanoscale
rsc.li/nanoscale
ISSN 2040-3372
 
PAPER 
 
Pengpeng Chen, Gang Zhao  
et al. 
 
 
Near-infrared laser mediated modulation of ice crystallization by 
two-dimensional nanosheets enables high-survival recovery of 
biological cells from cryogenic temperatures 
Volume 10  Number 25  7 July 2018  Pages 11683–12206
As featured in:
rsc.li/nanoscale
See Joanna F. Collingwood  
et al. 
, 
 
Nanoscale 
, 2018,  
10 
, 11782.
 Nanoscale
PAPER
Cite this: Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11782
Received 12th September 2017,
Accepted 19th March 2018
DOI: 10.1039/c7nr06794a
rsc.li/nanoscale
Nanoscale synchrotron X-ray speciation of iron
and calcium compounds in amyloid plaque cores
from Alzheimer’s disease subjects†
James Everett,a,b Joanna F. Collingwood,
*b,c Vindy Tjendana-Tjhin,
b
Jake Brooks,
b Frederik Lermyte,
b Germán Plascencia-Villa,
d
Ian Hands-Portman,e Jon Dobson,
c,f George Perry
g and Neil D. Telling
a
Altered metabolism of biometals in the brain is a key feature of Alzheimer’s disease, and biometal inter-
actions with amyloid-β are linked to amyloid plaque formation. Iron-rich aggregates, including evidence
for the mixed-valence iron oxide magnetite, are associated with amyloid plaques. To test the hypothesis
that increased chemical reduction of iron, as observed in vitro in the presence of aggregating amyloid-β,
may occur at sites of amyloid plaque formation in the human brain, the nanoscale distribution and
physicochemical states of biometals, particularly iron, were characterised in isolated amyloid plaque cores
from human Alzheimer’s disease cases using synchrotron X-ray spectromicroscopy. In situ X-ray magnetic
circular dichroism revealed the presence of magnetite: a finding supported by ptychographic observation
of an iron oxide crystal with the morphology of biogenic magnetite. The exceptional sensitivity and
specificity of X-ray spectromicroscopy, combining chemical and magnetic probes, allowed enhanced
differentiation of the iron oxides phases present. This facilitated the discovery and speciation of ferrous-
rich phases and lower oxidation state phases resembling zero-valent iron as well as magnetite.
Sequestered calcium was discovered in two distinct mineral forms suggesting a dynamic process of
amyloid plaque calcification in vivo. The range of iron oxidation states present and the direct observation
of biogenic magnetite provide unparalleled support for the hypothesis that chemical reduction of iron
arises in conjunction with the formation of amyloid plaques. These new findings raise challenging ques-
tions about the relative impacts of amyloid-β aggregation, plaque formation, and disrupted metal homeo-
stasis on the oxidative burden observed in Alzheimer’s disease.
Introduction
Disrupted metal ion homeostasis has been linked to the devel-
opment and progression of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Calcium
is the most abundant metal element in the human brain,
and disturbed calcium signalling pathways and elevated intra-
cellular calcium levels have been reported in conjunction
with AD pathogenesis.1–3 Transition metals are present at trace
levels in comparison to calcium, but they still play many
essential roles in normal brain metabolism. Of the transition
metals associated with AD pathology, iron is the most
abundant in the healthy brain and is critical for normal brain
function.
In the AD brain, iron concentration is significantly elevated
in several tissue regions including the putamen.4 Locally elev-
ated concentrations of atypical iron oxide aggregates and evi-
dence of neurotoxic redox-active iron phases correlate with
pathological
hallmarks
of
AD
throughout
the
brain.
Sophisticated regulatory processes are required to maintain
homeostasis, trafficking and storage for the many biometals
essential to neuronal function.5 For example, iron is essential
in energy production, nerve impulse transduction and neuro-
transmitter synthesis;5,6 these roles are enabled through con-
trolled iron valence state changes in vivo, with both ferric
†Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/
c7nr06794a. Raw images and spectral data for this paper will be accessible via
the Keele Research Repository at http://dx.doi.org/10.21252/KEELE-0000027.
aInstitute for Science and Technology in Medicine, Thornburrow Drive, Keele
University, Staffordshire, ST4 7QB, UK
bWarwick Engineering in Biomedicine, School of Engineering, Library Road,
University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK. E-mail: J.F.Collingwood@warwick.ac.uk
cDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville,
FL 32611, USA
dDepartment of Physics and Astronomy. The University of Texas at San Antonio
(UTSA), San Antonio, TX, 78249, USA
eSchool of Life Sciences, Gibbet Hill Campus, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4
7AL, UK
fJ. Crayton Pruitt Family Department of Biomedical Engineering, Institute for Cell
and Tissue Science & Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA
gDepartment of Biology and UTSA Neurosciences Institute. The University of Texas at
San Antonio (UTSA), San Antonio, TX, 78249, USA
11782 | Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11782–11796
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Open Access Article. Published on 24 April 2018. Downloaded on 6/4/2019 9:23:27 PM. 
 This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online
View Journal  | View Issue
 (Fe3+) and ferrous (Fe2+) iron normally present in the brain.
Non-heme iron is stored as a comparatively redox-inactive ferri-
hydrite-like mineral typically of the form (5Fe2O3·9H2O), a
ferric oxyhydroxide phase within the 12 nm protein cage ferri-
tin.5,7 Iron binding is protective against iron partaking in
redox reactions (e.g. Fenton chemistry) which may overwhelm
antioxidant defences with the excess generation of reactive
oxygen species (ROS).8 The most chemically available ‘labile’
and redox-active form is ferrous iron which may comprise ∼5%
of total intracellular iron.9 Redox-active iron levels are under-
stood to be tightly regulated by oxidation–reduction (redox)
processes such as the ferroxidase function of ferritin.5,10
Likewise, calcium (Ca) is vital for brain function and it plays
fundamental roles in the development and plasticity of the
nervous system. A large gradient exists between extracellular
(10−3 M) and intracellular Ca2+ (10−7 M) pools, maintained by
active pumping of Ca2+ through channels in the cell mem-
brane.11 Maintaining these gradients enables cells to use tran-
sient increases in intracellular calcium concentrations as an
initiation event for a variety of cellular responses, including:
neurotransmitter release, metabolic regulation, cell growth,
synaptic efficiency and long-term potentiation. Therefore the
maintenance of both calcium and iron homeostasis in brain is
fundamental to its normal function, with metal dysregulation
being shown to have catastrophic effects.11–14
Iron dysregulation has been implicated in the development
of AD, an age-related neurodegenerative condition which is the
most common cause of dementia amongst the elderly.15 The
underlying causes of the disease are not fully understood, and
no effective treatments or cure exist. Evidence of significant
cell damage, in conjunction with markers of oxidative stress,
has resulted in oxidative damage being investigated as a major
effector of neurodegeneration.16–18 Increased levels of material
incorporating ferrous iron, potentially capable of catalysing
redox chemistry have been reported post-mortem in AD sub-
jects compared to age-matched disease-free controls.19–22 It is
therefore possible that increased redox-active iron loading in
AD provides a source of oxidative stress. As iron accumulation
and oxidative stress have been shown as early events in AD,23
the presence of inappropriate levels of redox-active iron could
be a key event in triggering Aβ aggregation and free radical
damage in AD.
Although the origin of the ferrous iron associated with AD
is
unclear,
evidence
implicates
amyloid-β
(Aβ)
in
this
phenomenon.17,24–28 Aβ is the major constituent of amyloid
plaque cores (APC),29 a hallmark lesion of AD that is under-
stood to convey neurotoxicity directly through its ability to
produce reactive species including ROS,30,31 and indirectly by
inducing the formation of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs, com-
prised of hyper-phosphorylated tau protein).32,33 There are
numerous reports of iron-containing Aβ plaques, including
some reports that plaques incorporate ferrous-rich phases
(such as the magnetic iron oxide, magnetite [Fe3O4]), as evi-
denced by histochemical staining,21 microscopic particle-
induced
X-ray
emission
analysis
(microPIXE),34
MRI,35
HR-TEM and 3D electron tomography.36 Furthermore, Aβ
plaques have been shown to be associated with ferritin in
AD,37 and ferritin isolated from AD post-mortem brain was
reported to contain increased levels of ferrous iron compared
to controls.38 These observations indicate that Aβ is associated
with the formation of phases incorporating ferrous iron by
altering the way iron is handled. Indeed, the ability of Aβ to
directly alter iron chemistry has been demonstrated previously.
In vitro studies showed that Aβ can induce the redox-cycling of
iron precipitates,26 while our previous X-ray absorption studies
showed that Aβ chemically reduces a variety of ferric iron
phases (including ferrihydrite) into pure ferrous forms.24,25
The conversion of redox-inactive iron into redox-active phases
has the potential to cause significant oxidative damage to
neuronal populations; therefore, targeting amyloid/iron inter-
action in AD may prove an effective means to lower overall oxi-
dative stress and delay disease progression.
Another factor indicated in the development of AD is dis-
rupted
calcium
signalling.1,39,40
Perturbed
intracellular
calcium homeostasis induced signal-transduction cascades
associated with AD, mutations in genes associated with famil-
ial AD showed a direct effect on calcium homeostasis, and
calcium was implicated as a co-factor in the formation of Aβ
plaques and NFTs,1 suggesting that Aβ may be directly involved
in disrupted calcium handling. Transgenic mice displaying
amyloid deposition displayed impaired calcium homeostasis,39
whilst in vitro studies showed that addition of Aβ to cell cul-
tures induced an influx of calcium across the cell membrane.41
Levels of Ca2+ are higher in aged neurons, which may reflect
compromised management of calcium gradients across the
cell membranes.42 Calcium has been observed in amyloid
deposits isolated from the thalamus of transgenic APP mice
and the hippocampus of human AD cases,43 whilst increased
calcium levels have also been observed in human tissues dis-
playing amyloid pathology.44,45 Some forms of calcium dys-
regulation may be a compensatory process in AD to modulate
neuronal excitability and slow pathology.42
In our most recent investigation we provided ex vivo evi-
dence demonstrating both ferrous iron and magnetite to be
directly correlated with the presence of APC in cortical tissue
from a transgenic mouse model of AD.46 However, the ability
of Aβ to induce chemical reduction and biomineralisation of
iron within human AD tissues is unproven, and the species of
calcium and ferrous-rich iron phases associated with APC are
not precisely described. Following the suggestion that the
source of Aβ, the amyloid precursor protein APP, has a funda-
mental role in normal brain iron trafficking,47 it is even more
critical that Aβ aggregates are considered in the context of
brain metal ion (dys)metabolism. Understanding the chemical
speciation of metals associated with AD pathology is crucial in
the development of therapies intended to diagnose, monitor
and treat the disorder. Identifying iron species and mineral
phases disproportionately associated with AD could support
clinical diagnosis using non-invasive iron-sensitive techniques
such as MRI. Better understanding of iron species associated
with AD may also facilitate the development of novel therapies
intended to alleviate iron-associated toxicity.48 There are chal-
Nanoscale
Paper
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11782–11796 | 11783
Open Access Article. Published on 24 April 2018. Downloaded on 6/4/2019 9:23:27 PM. 
 This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online
 lenges to overcome if iron is to be selectively chelated for thera-
peutic
purposes
without
compromising
iron
trafficking
required for healthy brain function.
The aim of the present study was to investigate the distri-
bution and physicochemical properties of iron-rich deposits in
human APC, using a non-destructive spectromicroscopy tech-
nique that has not previously been applied to studies of
human APC, Scanning Transmission X-ray Microscopy (STXM).
This method has unique potential for precise determination of
the nanoscale distribution and speciation of trace levels of
organic and inorganic material in APC.
Experimental methods
This study used spectromicroscopy with high spatial and
energy resolution to determine the physicochemical character-
istics of iron deposits in human APC. The technique of choice
was STXM, a synchrotron-based X-ray technique which offers
outstanding sensitivity to probe and subsequently map chemi-
cal speciation at spatial resolutions routinely approaching
20 nm. Further to this,
STXM X-ray Circular Magnetic
Dichroism (XMCD) was performed to elucidate the magnetic
state of iron inclusions identified within APC.
Isolation of amyloid plaque core (APC) material
Human brain tissue was obtained with the informed written
consent of relatives, from autopsy AD patients. The protocols
used to obtain, isolate and identify the APCs were approved by
the Bioethics Committee (Department of Pathology, Case
Western Reserve University), and this study was performed
under UK ethical approval 07/MRE08/12 and USA IRB 03-00-26.
Brains from two AD cases (Braak stage VI) were removed at
autopsy (5 h post-mortem) divided in half, cut into one cm
slices and stored at −70 °C. Frozen tissue sections were thawed
and grey matter from the frontal and temporal lobes was iso-
lated by removing blood vessels, meninges and white matter.
Grey matter was then homogenized by heating to 95 °C in the
presence of 2% SDS and 50 mM Tris-buffer, before being fil-
tered (110 µm pore size) to remove large tissue debris. The
resulting material was pelleted through centrifugation at 800
rpm. AD tissues were further homogenized through the
addition of 0.1% SDS, 150 mM NaCl and 0.02% NaN3 before
being filtered (35 µm pore size) and pelleted at 1000 rpm for
15–30 min. APC were isolated from the 35 µm filtrate through
ultracentrifugation at
20 000
rpm in
a sucrose gradient
(1.8–1.2 M sucrose, in a 0.1% SDS, 150 mM NaCl and 0.02%
NaN3 solution). The resulting interfaces were collected and
recovered for a final time with 0.1% SDS, 150 mM NaCl and
0.02% NaN3, before being concentrated through centrifugation
at 1200 rpm.
Embedding and Sectioning of APC
Approximately 40 µL of pelleted APC was transferred into a
centrifugal concentrator (Corning® Spin-X® UF; 40 kDa cut-
off) and was spun at 6690 rpm for 10 minutes. APC were de-
hydrated through an ethanol series (100 µL; 40%–100% dry),
with waste ethanol being removed through centrifugation
(6690 rpm for 10 minutes). Other chemical fixatives were not
introduced, to limit metal ion leeching or transformation of
mineral compounds. Once dehydrated, APC were embedded in
a STXM compatible aliphatic resin comprised of a 1 : 1 molar
mixture of trimethylolpropane triglycidyl ether : 4,4′-methyl-
enebis(2-methylcyclohexylamine). This resin contains no car-
bonyl or aromatic groups, making it an ideal embedding sub-
strate when examining protein-based structures, due the lack
of strong spectral features at the carbon K-absorption edge
that overlap with protein peaks. Resin was polymerized over
24 h at 60 °C.
Semi-thin sections containing APC were cut to a thickness
of either 500 nm or 200 nm using a Reichert-Jung Ultra-cut
microtome. A 500 nm thickness was cut to maximise the prob-
ability of observing APC, whereas a 200 nm thickness was cut
to allow carbon spectroscopy using STXM. Non-metallic blades
were used throughout the sectioning process to prevent metal
contamination in the sample material.
Congo red staining
Sections 500 nm in thickness from both AD cases were stained
for amyloid structures using a 1% Congo red solution.
Sections were stained for approximately 30 minutes, and
excess stain was removed with deionized H2O. Stained sections
were examined for birefringence under cross-polarized light
using an Olympus IX51 microscope (60× objective lens).
Scanning transmission X-ray microscopy
X-ray spectromicroscopy experiments were performed at the
Advanced
Light
Source
(Lawrence
Berkeley
National
Laboratory, Berkeley CA, USA), on beamline 11.0.2 using the
STXM end-station, and Diamond Light Source, (Oxfordshire,
UK) on beamline I08, with a focused X-ray spot size of ca.
25 nm (25 nm zone plate) in both instances. Energy-specific
images were created by raster scanning the sample across the
focussed beam and recording transmitted X-ray intensity.
Exposure times were kept to a minimum (≤5 ms per point) to
prevent X-ray induced photo-reduction of APC constituents,
based on our previous experiments using various iron stan-
dard samples.46
To map distributions of chemical species associated with
APC, paired images were taken at the energy corresponding to
the spectral feature of interest and an off-peak energy a few eV
below the feature. The off-peak image was then subtracted to
create a difference map, revealing the chemical speciation
image over the region of interest for the selected spectral
feature.
X-ray absorption spectra were obtained from a series of
images (a ‘stack’) taken at energies spanning a desired absorp-
tion edge. The signal intensity recorded in the stack was con-
verted to optical density using background regions that did
not contain any sample material. For carbon K-edge absorp-
tion spectra, the background signal from the resin was sub-
tracted as described in Telling et al.46 This method of spectro-
Paper
Nanoscale
11784 | Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11782–11796
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Open Access Article. Published on 24 April 2018. Downloaded on 6/4/2019 9:23:27 PM. 
 This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online
 microscopy allows X-ray absorption spectra to be generated
from each pixel of an image, enabling spectral analysis of
highly localised regions of interest. For stack measurements,
the dark count (background noise attributable to the beam-
line) was subtracted prior to the generation of the X-ray
absorption spectra.
XMCD experiments were performed at Diamond Light
source on beamline I08 using circularly polarised light. XMCD
measurements were obtained by attaching NdFeB permanent
ring magnets (allowing X-ray transmission) to the back face of
the sample probe, with a sample section being mounted to the
front face. The magnetic field at the sample position was
∼150 mT, which is below the saturation field for magnetite,
but sufficient to allow a degree of magnetic polarization.
XMCD spectra were obtained by performing stacks over the
iron L3-absorption edge (700–716 eV) using both right and left
circularly polarised X-rays, with an exposure time of 5 ms per
pixel. XMCD spectra were created by subtracting X-ray absorp-
tion spectra obtained under right circularly polarised (RCP)
light from equivalent spectra obtained under left circularly
polarised light (LCP). In addition to the APC material, an
embedded synthetic magnetite nanopowder reference sample
was created using the same embedding series as for the APC.
APC and magnetite samples were prepared in separate labora-
tories so no cross contamination of samples could occur.
STXM data were processed using the aXis 2000 software
package (http://unicorn.mcmaster.ca/aXis2000.html). For iron
L3-edge X-ray absorption spectra collected for XMCD analysis,
a 3-point smoothing filter was applied to the raw data. ImageJ
software was used to adjust the brightness and contrast of
X-ray microscopy images. Pseudo-coloured composite images
were created by converting grey scale X-ray microscopy images
to false colour before recombining the images as overlays.
Twelve
plaque
cores
were
examined
using
X-ray
spectromicroscopy.
Analysis of X-ray absorption spectra
To obtain an estimate of the relative proportion of different
iron phases within iron inclusions, reference X-ray absorption
spectra from standards of Fe3+, Fe2+, Fe3O4 and Fe0 were used
to fit the measured iron L2,3-edge X-ray absorption spectra
from each area, using a non-linear least-squares fitting pro-
cedure. A precise quantitative determination of the phase pro-
portions would require the accurate scaling of the X-ray
absorption spectra from these reference samples. However, the
required scaling factors are not easy to determine when com-
paring iron phases with oxidation states that vary from pure
metal to Fe3+, due to the widely varying spectral shape and
post-edge absorption intensities. Approximate scaling was
instead determined by normalising the X-ray absorption inten-
sity for each reference material (after background subtraction)
to the integrated intensity over the L2,3 absorption edges
(Fig. S1†), following a method similar to that discussed in
Regan et al.49 However, we note here that the reference spectra
we have used have only a limited post L2 range, and so the
scaling is less accurate than would be obtained using more
extended spectra. Despite this limitation, the estimated iron
phase proportions derived in this way give a reliable indication
of the relative differences between the individual iron-rich
regions measured in the different inclusions.
We note that no evidence of chemical reduction was
observed in ferric iron standards prepared using the same
embedding series as for the APC, as described in the ESI† of
our previously published work from the APP/PS1 mouse model
of Alzheimer’s disease (see Telling et al.46).
Ptychography
Ptychography images of resin-embedded APC (500 nm thick-
ness) were collected at the ALS beamline 11.0.2 using the
STXM end-station. Paired images of the APC were taken at a
peak iron L3-edge absorption energy (710 eV) and an off peak
energy (705 eV) allowing an iron ptychography contrast map to
be created.
Results
Identification of amyloid plaque cores (APC)
To confirm the presence and structural arrangement of APC in
resin-embedded sections, Congo red staining was performed
on 500 nm thick sections obtained from both AD cases. These
were examined for birefringence using cross-polarizing optical
microscopy. In both cases abundant areas with “apple-green”
birefringence were observed (Fig. 1), confirming the presence
and, importantly, the preservation of the fibrillar arrangement
of APC. Radially symmetric birefringence, characteristic of
spherulite amyloid structures50 (see Fig. 1c) was also observed
throughout all sections examined, further verifying the pres-
ence of amyloid material.
Iron and calcium loading of APC
The spatial distribution and chemical composition of APC in
unstained 200 nm and 500 nm thick sections were determined
using STXM. All resin-embedded sections in this study utilised
a specialist aliphatic embedding resin that does not contain
strong spectral features at the C, N or O absorption K-edges,
differentiating it from commonly-used electron microscopy
epoxy resins.51 We have elsewhere demonstrated how the con-
Fig. 1
Congo red stained sections containing APC exhibiting birefrin-
gence under cross-polarized light. Sections (a) and (b) were obtained
from case X, whilst section (c) was taken from case Y.
Nanoscale
Paper
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11782–11796 | 11785
Open Access Article. Published on 24 April 2018. Downloaded on 6/4/2019 9:23:27 PM. 
 This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online
 tribution to the X-ray absorption from the resin can be sub-
tracted from images obtained at the carbon absorption K-edge,
in order to map a specific protein or peptide distribution in
embedded sections of mouse brain tissue.46 The analytical
procedure from the tissue analysis was applied to the isolated
APC in the present study. Additionally, in the thicker 500 nm
sections (which impede X-ray transmission at the principal
carbon K-edge absorption energy of 288.5 eV for proteins), the
oxygen K-edge was used to identify peptide (here amyloid)
content from APC, as well as to identify other oxygenated com-
pounds. Validation for the use of the oxygen K-edge in these
thicker sections is demonstrated in ESI Fig. S2,† where near-
equivalent peptide maps were obtained using protein X-ray
absorption features at the carbon K-edge (285.0 eV) and the
oxygen K-edge (532.1 eV).
The oxygen K-edge was ultimately chosen over the carbon
K-edge for peptide mapping in 500 nm thick sections, as this
absorption edge was far less susceptible to X-ray saturation
effects.
For the 500 nm thick sections, an X-ray beam energy of 530
eV (which is near the oxygen K-edge, but not associated with
any spectral features) was used to observe the entire APC.
Images obtained at this energy showed the APC to be dense
granular structures ranging from 5 to 25 µm in size (see ESI
Fig. S3†). To determine precisely the energies of the spectral
features observed near the oxygen K-edge, an image stack was
collected over the 525 eV–545 eV energy range from a typical
APC (ca. 3.5 µm in diameter) as shown in Fig. 2a. The resulting
X-ray absorption spectrum (Fig. 2g, lowest trace) included four
main features: (1) a sharp peak at 532.1 eV, corresponding to
1 s to π* transitions from protein carbonyl groups;52 (2) a
shallow peak at 533.8 eV, characteristic of 1 s to π* transitions
from the carbonyl groups of carbonates;53 (3) a peak at 537.6
eV, attributed to calcium oxide (CaO) bonds;53 and finally (4) a
1 s to σ* carbonyl group carbonate peak at 540 eV (ref. 53)
(although there was insufficient information in this energy
region to define the exact position of this particular peak).
By examining localised regions of interest within this APC
(highlighted as coloured boxes in Fig. 2a; top left), its hetero-
geneous nature was revealed with different constituents domi-
nating the oxygen spectra in these selected regions (Fig. 2g;
top). For example, the area labelled G1 (Fig. 2a) showed a
single spectral feature at the oxygen K-edge at 532.1 eV
(Fig. 2g) which was attributed to peptides. The map obtained
from this spectral feature (Fig. 2b) showed strong intensity in
the region of G1, which did not appear in the other maps
(Fig. 2c–e). Of particular note, area G2 showed a strong feature
at 533.8 eV attributed to carbonates (Fig. 2g, peak 2), and the
corresponding map obtained using this feature (Fig. 2d)
revealed the presence of small dense clusters. These carbon-
ate-containing clusters were associated with the spectral
feature from calcium oxide bonds (CaO) at 537.6 eV, and they
can also be observed in the Ca map (Fig. 2c), suggesting them
to be calcium carbonate. Interestingly, further areas of the APC
demonstrating CaO absorption features (Fig. 2g, area G3) did
not also show carbonate X-ray absorption features, indicating
diversity in the calcium species present, beyond calcium car-
bonate. It should also be noted that water could contribute to
the absorption feature at 537.6 eV (ref. 54) (peak 3 in Fig. 2g),
which would be consistent with the presence of a hydrous
calcium phase such as hydroxyapatite.
The APC displayed an inhomogeneous peptide distribution
as evidenced by dense peptide spots and striations (Fig. 2b). A
high level of calcium loading was observed throughout the
APC (Fig. 2c), with some smaller (100–500 nm) localised
regions
of
carbonate
and
iron
deposition
also
present
(Fig. 2d). Importantly, while carbonate was only found in APC
regions containing calcium, there were calcium-rich regions
Fig. 2
X-ray spectromicroscopy images and speciation dependent con-
trast maps, oxygen K-edge X-ray absorption spectra, and iron L2,3-edge
X-ray absorption spectra, from an amyloid plaque core of case Y. (a) Off
resonance 530 eV image. (b) Oxygen K-edge peptide map. (c) Calcium
L-edge map. (d) Oxygen K-edge carbonate map. (e) Iron L-edge map. (f)
Composite image displaying peptide (green), calcium (blue), carbonate
(sky blue) and iron (red) content of the plaque core. (g) Oxygen K-edge
X-ray absorption
spectra from the whole sectioned plaque core
(bottom), and localised plaque core regions (top) as identified in the 530
eV microscopy image (a). (h) Iron L2,3-edge X-ray absorption spectra
from reference Fe3+ [ferritin], Fe2+ [FeCl2] and magnetite [Fe3O4] and
iron zero [Fe0] standards (bottom), and two amyloid plaque core iron
deposits (top) as labelled in the iron contrast map (e). The dashed line at
708 eV and dotted line at 709.5 eV in the iron reference spectra show
the peak absorption energies for Fe2+ and Fe3+ cations respectively.
Paper
Nanoscale
11786 | Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11782–11796
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Open Access Article. Published on 24 April 2018. Downloaded on 6/4/2019 9:23:27 PM. 
 This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online
 that did not contain carbonate, indicating that not all calcium
in APC was present as a carbonate phase. Alternative forms
might be calcium divalent ions and calcium phosphate phases
such as the aforementioned hydroxyapatite.
Iron L3-edge mapping showed iron to be present as well-
defined dense clusters, and also distributed throughout the
whole APC at a lower concentration (Fig. 2e). The two dense
iron-containing regions (labelled H1 and H2 in Fig. 2e) were
examined at a series of energies across the iron L2,3 absorption
edge (700 eV–740 eV) to provide X-ray absorption spectra allow-
ing the oxidation state of the iron to be elucidated. In order to
provide an estimate of the relative proportions of the iron
phases contributing to each iron L2,3-edge X-ray absorption
spectrum measured in the APC, a non-linear least-squares
fitting procedure was employed. Equivalent iron L2,3-edge
X-ray absorption spectra from iron reference standards exhibit-
ing different known oxidation states are presented in Fig. 2h
(bottom), and scaled iron references used for fitting are shown
in Fig. S1,† to facilitate accurate characterization of iron-rich
inclusions in the APC. From the fits shown in Fig. 2h, both
areas H1 and H2 contained predominantly ferric (Fe3+) iron,
with H2 being a pure ferric phase (Fig. 2h, top).
For 200 nm thick sections, with an example shown in
Fig. 3, an energy near the calcium L-edges (350 eV) was used to
identify APC features (a) and the carbon K-edge was used to
determine the spatial distribution of the peptide (Fig. 3b). In
this example the calcium L-edge (as opposed to the carbon
K-edge) was preferred for initial identification of APC, as a
weaker contrast was obtained at the carbon edge due to carbon
background signal in the embedding resin. As before, serial
images were collected over the entire carbon K-edge (280–320
eV) to establish the exact position of carbon-based absorption
features in the energy spectrum. The carbon K-edge X-ray
absorption spectrum from the APC (shown in Fig. 3h) was
comprised of a 3-peak structure, with two sharp peaks at (1)
285 eV and (2) 288.5 eV, corresponding to the 1 s to π* tran-
sitions of peptide aromatic and amide groups respectively, and
a further peak (3) at 290.5 eV corresponding to the 1 s to π*
transition of carbonate.55 The peak (1) at 285 eV was chosen
for chemical mapping of peptide content, owing to its sharp
energy resolution, and its lower absorption intensity compared
to the high intensity peak (2) at 288.5 eV; with this higher
energy peak being particularly vulnerable to X-ray saturation
effects due to the strong absorption of 288.5 eV photons by
both the resin and peptide.
Using these characteristic spectral features, species-specific
spatial distribution maps within APC were generated as shown
in Fig. 3, including peptide (285 eV, Fig. 3b), iron (710 eV,
Fig. 3c), calcium (352.6 eV, Fig. 3d) and carbonate (290.5 and
533.8 eV, Fig. 3e and f respectively). As in Fig. 2, the APC is
seen to be comprised of peptides varying in thickness/density
resulting in intense protein spots, although these features
were less apparent than in the 500 nm sections where more
APC material was present (see ESI Fig. S4† for comparisons of
peptide maps from 200 nm and 500 nm thick sections).
As in our first observations, the APC was heavily loaded
with calcium (Fig. 3d). To confirm that large areas of carbonate
were present throughout the plaque, corresponding maps were
taken at carbonate spectral features using both the carbon
K-edge (290.5 eV, Fig. 3e) and oxygen K-edge (533.8 eV, Fig. 3f)
showing consistent contrast features, thus confirming the
presence of carbonate. The carbonate distribution was con-
fined to areas also containing calcium whilst the calcium
content extends beyond this, indicating multiple calcium
forms to be present. Further deposits of iron (ca. 200–500 nm
diameter) were identified throughout this core (Fig. 3c), the
oxidation states of which are considered in the following
section. Additional examples of APC examined from both AD
patient cases (labelled as case X and case Y) are shown in
Fig. 4, confirming that the same pattern of concurrent calcium
and iron loading was observed within the peptide rich amyloid
cores. This pattern was repeated for all APC examined (see also
ESI Fig. S5†). Furthermore, the identification of overlapping
yet distinct calcium and calcium carbonate content was con-
sistently observed throughout APC from both AD cases.
Nanoscale iron distribution, oxidation and magnetic state
Scanning transmission X-ray microscopy (STXM) images and
speciation-dependent contrast maps of APC from case Y are
displayed in Fig. 5(a–e). As with the previously described
Fig. 3
(a–g) X-ray microscopy images and speciation dependent con-
trast maps of an amyloid plaque core from case X (scale bar = 1 µm). (a)
Off resonance calcium L-edge (350 eV) image. (b) Carbon K-edge
protein map. (c) Iron L-edge map. (d) Calcium L-edge map. (e) Carbon
K-edge
carbonate
map.
(f)
Oxygen
K-edge
carbonate
map
(g)
Composite image showing: protein (green), calcium (blue), oxygen
K-edge carbonate (sky blue), and iron (red) content of the plaque core.
(h) Amyloid plaque core carbon K-edge X-ray absorption spectrum.
Energy positions for 1 s to π* transitions for aromatics, amides and car-
bonates are labelled 1, 2 and 3 respectively.
Nanoscale
Paper
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11782–11796 | 11787
Open Access Article. Published on 24 April 2018. Downloaded on 6/4/2019 9:23:27 PM. 
 This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online
 plaques, the APC was comprised of dense areas of peptides
(Fig. 5b), exhibiting regions of carbonate (Fig. 5c) and iron
deposition (Fig. 5d). This structure was too dense for calcium
mapping at 352.6 eV. Examination of the iron deposits (high-
lighted in Fig. 5d) across the iron L2,3 absorption edge revealed
iron to be present in ferric and ferrous-rich states (Fig. 5f).
Area F1 appeared as a pure Fe3+ material with a principal iron
L3 peak at 709.5 eV and a separate low energy feature at 708 eV,
both arising from Fe3+ cations (as also seen in the Fe3+ spectra
in Fig. 2h). Area F2 displayed features consistent with an
increase of the ferrous iron containing phases Fe2+ and Fe3O4,
as evidenced by the enhancement of the feature at 708 eV in
relation to the principal Fe3+ peak at 709.5 eV. As the principal
Fe2+ peak resides at 708 eV (see for example the ferrous chlor-
ide standard in Fig. 2h), this suggests a slight increase in Fe2+
content. The presence of Fe3O4 (ca. 10%) in area F2 was deter-
mined through the relative intensities of the iron L2-edge Fe2+
and Fe3+ absorption features (found at 721 eV and 723 eV
respectively), which were approximately equal in intensity.
Fitting showed that an increase in 708 eV peak intensity
arising solely through the presence of Fe2+ resulted in a poor
L2 edge fit, with the peak feature at 721 eV dominating the
peak at 723 eV. By including both Fe3O4 and Fe2+, a more accu-
rate L2-edge fit was created, whilst maintaining the fit at the
L3-edge. However, calculating a precise fit and percentage
value for the phases contributing to the F2 spectrum was
difficult, as the spectrum displayed signs of saturation, mani-
festing as an enhanced post-edge absorption intensity when
compared to the fitted data.
The spectrum from F3 showed subtle changes in L3-edge
features, with the low energy 708 eV peak becoming less dis-
cernible (in comparison to the ferric standard) appearing as a
shoulder on the 709.5 eV peak feature. A shoulder feature on
the principal Fe3+ cation feature is characteristic of the mixed-
valence mineral magnetite (a magnetite reference spectrum
can be seen in Fig. 2h). The F3 spectrum fit showed this iron
inclusion to be comprised primarily of magnetite (ca. 60%)
with a minor contribution from Fe3+ cations. The iron L2,3
absorption edge spectrum from the small dense iron deposit
labelled F4 in Fig. 5d is shown as the uppermost spectrum in
Fig. 5f. This deposit was shown to be in a chemically reduced
state as the low energy peak feature at 708 eV was not discern-
ible, appearing as a shoulder on the 709.5 eV peak feature,
again consistent with the redox-active mixed-valence mineral
magnetite. The fit of the F4 spectrum showed this area to be
principally comprised of magnetite (ca. 81%), with minor con-
tributions from Fe3+ and Fe2+ (see ESI Fig. S6† for the calcu-
lated iron components used for fitting). The observation of
magnetite in APC is consistent with observations by other
techniques.36,56,57
Evidence of chemically reduced, redox-active iron phases
was also observed in case X from the APC displayed in Fig. 3
(see also Fig. 5g). From the iron L2,3-edge X-ray absorption
spectra shown in Fig. 5h, the two iron deposits observed in
this plaque core were heavily reduced, resembling a ferrous
mineral phase, whilst also displaying features consistent with
zero valence (Fe0) iron.58,59 Whilst the principal iron L3-edge
absorption feature for both Fe2+ and Fe0 resides at 708 eV,
these two phases are easily distinguishable by the broader
line-shape of the spectrum for Fe0 which lacks the multiplet
fine structure seen in the oxide spectra, as well as the more
prominent L2 peak and post-L2 edge absorption intensity for
Fe0 (see for example Fig. S7†).
The fit for region H1 determined this area to be ca. 60%
comprised of a spectrum resembling Fe0 with further contri-
butions from Fe2+ and Fe3+ cations (see ESI Fig. S7† for the cal-
culated components used for fitting). The evidence for the
presence of Fe0 is particularly convincing at the iron L2-absorp-
Fig. 4
STXM images and speciation dependent contrast maps of
amyloid plaque cores from case X (a), and case Y (b and c). The maps
show the off-resonance (530 eV) image, oxygen K-edge peptide map
(532 eV), calcium L-edge map (352 eV), oxygen K-edge carbonate map
(533 eV), iron L-edge map (710 eV), and composite image displaying
peptide (green), calcium (blue), carbonate (sky blue) and iron (red)
content of the plaque core.
Paper
Nanoscale
11788 | Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11782–11796
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Open Access Article. Published on 24 April 2018. Downloaded on 6/4/2019 9:23:27 PM. 
 This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online
 tion edge where this area strongly resembles the Fe0 reference.
Likewise, fitting of region H2 indicated a spectrum resembling
Fe0 to be the predominant phase. The presence of iron in such
low oxidation states was unexpected; this is the first time evi-
dence consistent with Fe0 has been reported in human APC to
our knowledge, confirming the sensitivity of X-ray spectro-
microscopy as a tool to probe chemical species within complex
material of biological origin.
A further APC from case Y is presented in Fig. 6. Speciation
dependent mapping showed this plaque similarly comprised
of peptides (Fig. 6b) and carbonate (Fig. 6c), with iron content
primarily confined to a sub-micron region in the centre of the
plaque (Fig. 6d). A high magnification iron oxidation state
difference map was created for this region to specifically differ-
entiate iron species by subtracting the image acquired at the
prominent Fe2+ peak (708 eV) from the image taken at the pro-
Fig. 5
STXM images, speciation dependent contrast maps and iron L2,3-edge absorption spectra from an amyloid plaque from case Y (a–f) and case
X (g–h). (a) Off resonance 530 eV image. (b) Oxygen K-edge protein map. (c) Oxygen K-edge carbonate map. (d) Iron L-edge map. (e) Composite
image showing: protein (green), carbonate (sky blue) and iron (red). Scale bars = 2 µm. (f) Iron L2,3-edge absorption spectra from the iron deposits
labelled in the iron map (d). (g) Iron L-edge map and composite (inset) of the amyloid plaque core shown in Fig. 3 (scale bar = 1 µm). (h) Iron L2,3-
edge absorption spectra form the iron deposits labelled in the iron map (g). The solid lines for the spectra correspond to best fit curves created by
superposition of suitably scaled iron reference X-ray absorption spectra see Fig. S1.†
Nanoscale
Paper
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11782–11796 | 11789
Open Access Article. Published on 24 April 2018. Downloaded on 6/4/2019 9:23:27 PM. 
 This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online
 minent Fe3+ peak (710 eV), resulting in Fe3+ deposits showing
a bright contrast and Fe2+ a dark contrast. This oxidation state
difference map revealed localised variation in Fe3+ and Fe2+
content even within single nanoscale iron deposits (Fig. 6f).
Examination of specific X-ray absorption across the iron L2,3-
edge (Fig. 6g) revealed significant variation in the oxidation
state across this area containing particulate iron (Fig. 6f), with
evidence of primarily ferric iron (areas G1, G2 and G3) and a
Fe2+ dominated spectrum (area G5) consistent with a largely
ferrous material (ca. 74%) as determined by the fitting of the
spectra. Area G4 shows evidence of saturation effects at the L3-
edge, resulting in an artificially high shoulder feature on the
peak feature at 709.5 eV, giving the false impression of a high
Fe2+ content. An attempted fit for this spectrum is provided as
a dashed black line in Fig. 6g; however, due to the saturation
effects, a quantitative analysis of the constituent iron phases
in this area was not possible.
Iron L3-edge X-ray microscopy images, speciation maps, cir-
cular polarization-dependent X-ray absorption and XMCD
spectra from case X APC sections (adjacent to those shown in
Fig. 3 and 5(g, h)), measured under an applied magnetic field
are displayed in Fig. 7. Iron L3-edge X-ray absorption and
XMCD spectra from a reference magnetite standard (labelled
Fe3O4) examined on the same beamline are shown in Fig. 7c
and d. The magnetite XMCD spectrum displays a characteristic
3-point
negative–positive–negative
peak
structure
corres-
ponding to magnetic iron cations present in Fe2+ octahedral,
Fe3+ tetrahedral and Fe3+ octahedral sites respectively (see
Telling et al., 201746). Thus the appearance of these features in
XMCD spectra obtained from APC would indicate the presence
of ordered magnetite. Conversely, the absence of XMCD peak
features (i.e. where the spectra obtained under RCP and LCP
are identical) would indicate the presence of a non-magnetic
iron phase.
XMCD spectra obtained from three iron-rich inclusions
highlighted in Fig. 7b are displayed in Fig. 7d. By examining
these spectra, a clear difference in magnetic ordering can be
observed across the areas. Area C1 shows a weak XMCD effect,
with a single poorly defined negative peak, whereas areas C2
and C3 display XMCD features consistent with magnetite. In
particular, the XMCD spectra from area C3 displays a 3-point
negative–positive–negative peak structure consistent with the
magnetite reference in terms of both shape and relative peak
intensities. Likewise, the examination of an iron inclusion
from a further case X APC shown in Fig. 7(e–h), provided an
XMCD spectrum consistent with a magnetite-like phase.
However, in this case the relative positive and negative peak
intensities in the XMCD spectrum (Fig. 7h), as well as the
shape of the X-ray absorption spectra (Fig. 7g) suggest a more
oxidised form similar to maghemite (see Telling et al.46).
Taken together these data strongly indicate the presence of
varying oxidation states of the mineral magnetite within APC
from human AD tissue.
To examine the morphology of iron deposits in APC in even
greater detail, high-resolution ptychographic imaging was
employed. Ptychography involves scanning a sample and sim-
ultaneously collecting scattered X-rays in addition to trans-
mitted X-rays, thereby allowing a much greater spatial resolu-
tion to be resolved (ca. 2 nm) compared to traditional STXM
Fig. 6
STXM images, speciation dependent contrast maps and iron L2,3-
edge absorption spectra from an amyloid plaque core from case Y. (a)
Off resonance 530 eV image. (b) Oxygen K-edge protein map. (c)
Oxygen K-edge carbonate map. (d) Iron L-edge map. (e) Composite
image showing: protein (green), carbonate (sky blue) and iron (red)
content. Scale bars = 2 µm. (f) High magnification iron oxidation state
difference map of the inset area (yellow dashed line) in (d) showing Fe3+
(white), and Fe2+ (black) content of the iron deposits. Scale bar =
200 nm. (g) Iron L2,3-edge absorption spectra from the iron regions
labelled in the iron oxidation state difference map (f). The solid and
dashed black lines for the spectra correspond to best fit curves created
by superposition of suitably scaled iron reference X-ray absorption
spectra, see Fig. S1.†
Paper
Nanoscale
11790 | Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11782–11796
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Open Access Article. Published on 24 April 2018. Downloaded on 6/4/2019 9:23:27 PM. 
 This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online
 techniques (20–30 nm in spatial resolution).60 Fig. 8 shows a
ptychography image and iron content map from iron region 2
of the APC shown in Fig. 5(a–e). A dense triangular shaped
object ca. 300 nm in diameter can be seen in the left field of
the 710 eV image. Iron mapping showed the entirety of the tri-
angular deposit to contain iron, with the structure strongly
resembling the morphology of magnetite biominerals pre-
viously observed
in
magnetotactic
microorganisms61
and
extracted from human brain tissue.62,63 A single crystal of mag-
netite this large would be magnetically blocked. Altering the
intensity threshold in the iron contrast image (see Fig. 8,
inset) revealed a lower-concentration background of iron dis-
tributed beyond the triangular deposit, indicating the presence
of iron throughout the APC in addition to the dense iron
deposits. Elongated (rod-like) structures are also observed in
the 710 eV image (Fig. 8a), but not in the iron map, that are
consistent
with
the
size/morphology
of
nanocrystalline
calcium-based minerals such as calcite64 or hydroxyapatite,65
supporting the earlier interpretation of the calcium and car-
bonate maps seen in all the APC.
Discussion
The precise analysis achieved here with X-ray spectromicro-
scopy and X-ray magnetic circular dichroism revealed APC
associated with diffuse iron, and dense iron deposits incorpor-
ating ferrous iron, as well as the mixed-valence iron oxide mag-
netite. In addition, evidence consistent with zero-valent iron
was observed in these structures for the first time. Calcium
deposits were also observed within APC, including novel evi-
dence of plaque calcification and calcium carbonate depo-
sition. The presence of these iron and calcium features was
observed consistently in multiple plaques isolated from the
two independent AD cases.
The incorporation of iron into APC is in agreement with
previous examination of human AD tissues, for example by his-
tology,21 micro particle-induced X-ray emission analysis,34 and
MRI.35 The present spectromicroscopy observations in human
APC are supported by our recent in vitro Aβ/iron24,25 and
ex vivo transgenic APP/PS1 mouse X-ray spectromicroscopy
studies.46,66 In the APC presented here, iron was principally
evident as sub-micron dense deposits, with no direct corre-
lation between peptide and iron morphology being observed.
These findings are consistent with observations of iron parti-
culates in regions of dense amyloid pathology with an appar-
ently amorphous structure.46 For both AD cases investigated,
iron L2,3-edge X-ray absorption spectra from APC demonstrated
iron to be present in multiple different oxidation states. These
ranged from pure ferric phases (Fe3+), to the mixed-valence
(Fe2+/Fe3+) magnetic phase magnetite, predominantly ferrous
(Fe2+) and, outstandingly, spectra consistent with zero-valent
(Fe0) materials. Importantly, this variation in Fe oxidation state
Fig. 7
(a, e) X-ray microscopy images (b, f) iron L3 edge speciation
maps (c, g) X-ray absorption spectra and (d, h) XMCD spectra from an
APC of case X. Panels (c) and (g) show X-ray absorption spectra obtained
using LCP (blue spectra) and RCP (red spectra). Panels (d) and (h) show
the corresponding XMCD spectra created by subtracting the RCP
spectra from the LCP spectra. All spectra were obtained in a magnetic
field of ∼150 mT applied parallel to the incident X-ray beam.
Fig. 8
Ptychography image (710 eV; left) and iron contrast map (right)
of iron deposit 2 located in the amyloid plaque core of Fig. 5(a–e). High
contrast iron map (right; inset) shows additional iron detail in this region.
Nanoscale
Paper
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11782–11796 | 11791
Open Access Article. Published on 24 April 2018. Downloaded on 6/4/2019 9:23:27 PM. 
 This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online
 occurred across individual APC, and within single nanoscale
deposits, a result in keeping with our STXM examination of
transgenic mouse APP/PS1 tissue.46
Our recent in vitro studies used X-ray spectromicroscopy to
demonstrate
that
aggregation
of
synthetic
Aβ(1–42)
is
accompanied by chemical reduction of ferric iron into a pure
ferrous form.24,25 Earlier studies indicated redox cycling of
iron in the presence of Aβ,26,28 further supported by evidence
for mixed valence iron oxide in an APP/PS1 mouse model of
AD.66 These new findings in human APC support the hypo-
thesis of a dynamic processes occurring in vitro and in vivo,
and strongly implicate Aβ in the formation of elevated levels of
potentially redox-active ferrous and zero-valent iron phases in
human brain. Interactions of Aβ with Fe ions can occur by
coordination through His residues in the N-terminal region, as
observed by Raman scattering.67 In prior work it was suggested
that Aβ becomes oxidized in the process of reducing iron by
residue Met-35 of Aβ(1–42).68,69 Recently, however, it has been
shown that Met-35 is inaccessible once amyloid fibres have
formed, since this residue is buried in a hydrophobic interface
region.70 The X-ray spectromicroscopy measurements per-
formed here permitted unambiguous identification of the
redox state of a variety of iron species, but did not provide
information about the oxidation state of the Aβ in the APC. In
the context of our prior in vitro analysis, this evidence for a
ferrous and zero-valent iron fraction also occurring in the APC
is noteworthy because it indicates the stability of the analyte
during sample handling. These APC were necessarily resin-
embedded and sectioned prior to analysis, which was not
required for synchrotron X-ray analysis of the aggregates
formed in vitro that also evidenced chemical reduction of iron
in the presence of aggregating Aβ.24,25
The ability of Aβ to cycle iron throughout the ferrihydrite–
magnetite–wüstite and potentially even zero-valent iron phase
paradigm in vivo, implicates aggregating Aβ in the sustained
generation of free-radical-producing iron species. The catalytic
behaviour of iron in Fenton chemistry and related processes
means that the free radical burden is likely to be more influ-
enced by local iron chemistry than by absolute iron concen-
tration. In the AD brain with evidence for disrupted iron
metabolism and localised iron accumulation, there would be
no shortage of fuel for these reactions; the localised nature of
redox-active iron formation would have the potential to cata-
lyse generation of free radical burdens inducing neuronal
damage/death over time. Indeed, increased levels of oxidative
stress have previously been reported in tissues with a high
density of Aβ deposition,69 although the capacity of amyloid to
directly generate free radicals has often been debated.71,72
From our observations we suggest that Aβ is acting indirectly
rather than directly in this regard, with free radicals generated
through Aβ conversion of redox-inactive iron phases into
redox-active forms.
Gaining a better understanding of the impacts on iron bio-
chemistry of aggregating Aβ versus established APC remains a
pressing issue, emphasized in recent work showing that Aβ
immunization
increased
iron
deposition
in
the
choroid
plexus.73 The debate continues as to whether APC formation
has a protective effect through lowering the availability of
unbound redox-active metal ions, and whether this protective
effect may offset free radical damage arising indirectly from Aβ
fibril formation. One explanation is that the aggregating
mono- or oligomeric Aβ is a driver of free radical generation
through its chemical reduction of iron,24 and that subsequent
formation of dense insoluble aggregates may serve a protective
role in having sequestered (effectively chelated) the redox-
active iron species typical of those reported here in the APC.
This is consistent with the hypothesis that Aβ plaques may be
a physiological response rather than a pathological process in
their own right.74 However, the nanoscale X-ray spectromicro-
scopy analysis presented here indicates that iron is present in
a range of oxidation states, which could indicate the dynamic
redox-cycling occurring within APC upon metal overload; in
this scenario, dissolution of plaques may create local sources
of toxic reactive iron species in the brain.
Ptychography obtained at the iron L3-edge enabled the mor-
phology of iron deposits within APC to be resolved at a remark-
ably high spatial resolution of ca. 2 nm. Through this
approach we identified an iron deposit with a strong resem-
blance to a single magnetite/maghemite crystal. Further mag-
netic characterization of iron inclusions within APC using
XMCD confirmed the presence of magnetite in multiple
plaque cores. This supports prior work suggesting a role for Aβ
in the biosynthesis of magnetite in human brain,36 where evi-
dence for magnetite has previously been reported in inorganic
materials extracted from brain tissue homogenates,62,63 in iso-
lated
ferritin,38
in
ferritin-core-sized
iron
oxide
deposits
located within APC by electron beam methods,36 and in
plaque-rich human tissue from AD cases.57
The precise source(s) of the iron integrated into APC in vivo
is not yet known. Multiple sources of iron may be relevant to
amyloid–iron interaction in AD such as: ferritin-bound ferri-
hydrite, transferrin, labile iron pools (including jettisoned
ferritin iron content75), hemosiderin formed at sites of micro-
bleeds and haemorrhage in the brain, from disrupted neuro-
nal mitochondria, and/or potential external sources of iron
such as airborne particulate matter which have been suggested
to enter the brain via the olfactory bulb.76 Furthermore, the
influence of the initial iron phase upon amyloid’s reductant
properties in vivo has not previously been characterised. Closer
examination of the location and characteristics of amyloid/
iron structures within intact AD tissues may provide clearer
indications as to the source of amyloid–associated iron.
In all APC examined here, extensive accumulation of
calcium was observed. By characterizing both calcium carbon-
ate and total calcium content we demonstrated that calcium
within APC was present in more than one form. Although the
non-carbonate calcium phases observed could not be fully
characterised, oxygen K-edge X-ray absorption features indi-
cated this material was comprised of a hydrous calcium phase.
Apatite, a calcium phosphate mineral (Ca5(PO4)3), is produced
in biological systems and readily associates with water to form
hydroxyapatite (Ca5(PO4)3(OH)). It is therefore possible that
Paper
Nanoscale
11792 | Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11782–11796
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Open Access Article. Published on 24 April 2018. Downloaded on 6/4/2019 9:23:27 PM. 
 This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online
 hydroxyapatite is the crystalline form adopted by the non-car-
bonate calcium phase observed. Subsequent analysis of the
phosphor content of APC would be required to confirm this.
Ptychographic images of APC revealed the presence of rod-like
features with size and morphology matching calcium-based
crystalline phases such as calcite or hydroxyapatite,64,65 which
indicated that calcium biomineralization may be occurring
during the formation of amyloid plaques in AD. Importantly,
the confirmed presence of multiple calcium phases suggests
that a dynamic process of plaque calcification may occur
in vivo.
From the present experiments it was not possible to deter-
mine the origin of the calcium, or the effect of calcium on
amyloid/iron interactions (such as competitive calcium/iron
binding to amyloid). Examples of potential sources for the
calcium observed in APC include: transferrin, in which carbon-
ates are used for iron binding; calmodulin or other calcium
binding proteins such as lithostathine (an inflammatory
protein shown to accumulate in APC); or pools of extracellular
Ca2+ used in processes such as neurotransmitter release.11,14 It
is not yet determined if the forms of calcium observed in the
APC are representative of the original source(s) of calcium, or
if a biomineralization pathway (to be determined) produces
carbonate in conjunction with APC formation.
The accumulation of calcium within APC may drive, or
arise from, disrupted calcium trafficking and homeostasis in
AD patients. Calcium triggers numerous signalling pathways
in both excitable and non-excitable brain cells, whilst also reg-
ulating synaptic connections.11,14 In prior work, Aβ impacted
calcium signalling pathways to the detriment of neuronal
health and function.1 Maintaining equilibrium in the extra-
cellular Ca pool is vital to sustain these calcium signalling
pathways, so the binding of calcium by Aβ as evidenced in this
present study may have a detrimental effect upon Ca-depen-
dent cellular signalling arising from the propensity of Aβ to act
as a metal-binding protein.
Concurrent deposition of iron and calcium has previously
been observed at significantly lower spatial resolution in tissue
exhibiting
amyloid
aggregates
(in
the
thalamus
of
APP
mice43,77), and in APC from the hippocampus.43,44 The results
presented here are unique in obtaining the iron and calcium
distribution, and the chemical speciation and mineral phase
of iron and calcium inclusions with nanoscale resolution in
human APC from confirmed AD cases. In particular, the
appearance of dense calcium carbonate regions, co-located
with another calcium phase (potentially based on apatite), was
an unprecedented result. One interpretation of the distri-
bution variation of the two calcium phases observed in these
APC is that the transformation from apatite-like phases to
calcium carbonate may occur over time. Detailed investigation
of such processes, to predict age-dependent characteristics of
calcifications in vivo, will help determine if features such as
calcifications have utility as markers of disease progression to
aid
with
clinical
staging.
Notably,
“ferro-calcic”
amyloid
plaques have been evidenced in magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) contrast in the thalamus of transgenic APP/PS1 mice,77
where the MRI properties of dense iron and calcium-rich
deposits are sufficiently different from the surrounding tissue
that they provide endogenous contrast. It will be important to
distinguish calcium from iron deposition if the impact of iron
modifying treatments is to be evaluated clinically by MRI.
The roles of iron and calcium cannot be fully explored
without consideration of the wider range of metal and metal-
loid elements detected in human APC, including other tran-
sition metals (e.g. copper, zinc, manganese), aluminium (non-
essential, and which facilitates iron-mediated oxidative reac-
tions as well as affecting Aβ aggregation), and silicon, amongst
others.34,36,44,78 In semi-quantitative synchrotron XRF analysis
of the transition metal burden in human APC, copper concen-
tration was elevated to the greatest extent (relative to copper
concentration in the surrounding tissue) and linked with elev-
ated production of H2O2, a key component of Fenton chem-
istry. The proportionate increase in iron and calcium was com-
paratively modest for these more abundant elements.44 To
provide effective neuroprotection against toxicity arising from
amyloid–metal reactions, a better understanding of the many
competing interactions and influence of co-factors on reaction
rates, including the chemically bound and unbound forms of
each species, is required. For example, labile iron is more
chemically available to partake in redox chemistry than com-
plexed iron species (e.g. Fe2+ and Fe3+ of haemoglobin), and
would be readily reduced in the presence of oxidants such as
the H2O2 associated with copper loading in AD plaques, fuel-
ling the catalytic production of ROS by iron.44,79
With
iron
being
essential to healthy
brain function,
especially for energy production in mitochondria, it is of para-
mount importance to determine how to distinguish normally-
metabolized iron from any iron species that elevates neuronal
stress. To date, therapies that target iron metabolism in AD
have been unsuccessful. One reason may be the lack of speci-
ficity resulting in depletion of iron stores and other essential
metal cations required to sustain neuronal health (Cu, Zn, Mg,
among others).8,80 This study represents a significant advance
in the spatial resolution and precise speciation with which
various iron phases are described in APC from AD cases. As
different iron phases have distinct physicochemical properties,
these findings may prove vital in the tailoring of AD diagnos-
tics and therapies that discriminate detrimental forms of iron
from those that are essential to normal function.
Conclusions
The X-ray spectromicroscopy methodology developed in this
study enabled characterization of the distribution of organic
materials (proteins), and precise nanoscale imaging and spe-
ciation of inorganic materials (iron and calcium compounds)
in APC. The STXM methods enabled this to be done without
the need for chemical fixation or contrast agents that signifi-
cantly affect metal chemistry, and with significantly lower
beam dose than required for equivalent electron-beam ana-
lyses. The unique concurrent characterization of iron and
Nanoscale
Paper
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11782–11796 | 11793
Open Access Article. Published on 24 April 2018. Downloaded on 6/4/2019 9:23:27 PM. 
 This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online
 calcium within human amyloid plaques is a finding that will
enable progress in understanding the implications of inter-
actions between amyloid-β, calcium, and iron, where disrupted
calcium signalling pathways and elevated intracellular calcium
have previously been observed in Alzheimer’s disease. These
iron and calcium species observed within the APC are
assumed to be the products of metal–amyloid interactions
in vivo, where wider evidence points to these interactions
playing a role in the progression of AD.
The results support the hypothesis that iron is chemically
reduced in the presence of aggregating Aβ and implicate this
process as source of excess free radical generation. Whereas it
has previously been assumed that these chemically reduced
iron phases are rich in ferrous iron (Fe2+), we have now found
evidence consistent with the presence of both zero-valent (Fe0)
as well as ferrous-rich iron phases within pathological Aβ
structures. These observations do not completely exclude the
possibility of other phases such as iron sulphide.81 In
addition,
through
detailed
magnetic
characterization,
we
demonstrate the mixed valence magnetic iron phase magnetite
to be present within APC. Furthermore, we provide direct evi-
dence that APC have the capacity to bind large quantities of
calcium-rich species; this may be a significant sign of dis-
rupted calcium homeostasis and cellular signalling, resulting
in neuronal deterioration over time. The new observation that
multiple calcium phases are present in APC suggests that a
dynamic process of plaque calcification may occur in vivo.
Importantly, this unique application of X-ray spectromicro-
scopy has enabled concurrent in situ nanoscale characteriz-
ation of iron and calcium minerals in human APC. These new
observations support the hypothesis that Aβ plays a major role
in disrupted iron and calcium biochemistry, and raise ques-
tions about whether Aβ binding enhances or counteracts the
increased oxidative burden and disrupted neuronal signalling
evidenced in AD. Determining the key mechanisms governing
the formation of APC and neuronal responses to these metal–
amyloid phases has scope to facilitate improved diagnosis of
AD, as iron and calcium minerals affect magnetic resonance
imaging signals. It also offers new perspectives for the develop-
ment of therapies that successfully target iron toxicity in
Alzheimer’s disease patients.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by EPSRC grants EP/K035193/1 (JFC),
EP/N033191/1-EP/N033140/1
(JFC-NDT),
the
Alzheimer’s
Association (AARFD-17-529742), University of Warwick alumni
donations (VTT, JE), the RCMI Program from NIH at UTSA
(5G12RR013646, G12MD007591), San Antonio Life Sciences
Institute (SALSI)-Clusters in Research Excellence Program, and
Semmes Foundation. The amyloid plaque cores were isolated
from tissues obtained with informed consent, and were ana-
lysed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki under the
remit of ethical approval 07/MRE08/12 from the UK National
Research Ethics Service. We thank Tolek Tyliszczak (Advanced
Light Source, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, CA, USA)
for specialist technical assistance with data collection at beam-
line 11.0.2. The Advanced Light Source is supported by the
Director, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, of
the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-
05CH11231. We thank Diamond Light Source for access to
beamline I08 (proposal SP15247 and SP15854-3) that contribu-
ted to the results presented here, and thank Tohru Araki,
Majid Kazemian Abyaneh and Burkhard Kaulich for technical
assistance at the beamline. We thank Sandra Siedlak (Case
Western Reserve University, Cleveland OH, USA) for technical
assistance in isolation of the amyloid plaque cores.
References
1 F. M. LaFerla, Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 2002, 3, 862–872.
2 I. Bezprozvanny and M. P. Mattson, Trends Neurosci., 2008,
31, 454–463.
3 C. Supnet and I. Bezprozvanny, J. Alzheimers Dis., 2010,
20(Suppl 2), S487–S498.
4 Y. Tao, Y. Wang, J. T. Rogers and F. Wang, J. Alzheimers Dis.,
2014, 42, 679–690.
5 J. R. Connor, S. L. Menzies, J. R. Burdo and P. J. Boyer,
Pediatr. Neurol., 2001, 25, 118–129.
6 L. Zecca, M. B. H. Youdim, P. Riederer, J. R. Connor and
R. R. Crichton, Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 2004, 5, 863–873.
7 J. F. Collingwood and N. D. Telling, in Iron Oxides: From
Nature to Applications, ed. D. Faivre, Wiley-VCH Verlag
GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany, 2016, ch. 7, DOI:
DOI: 10.1002/9783527691395.ch7.
8 D. Kell, Nature, 2009, 460, 669.
9 Z. I. Cabantchik, Front. Pharmacol., 2014, 5, 45.
10 D. M. Lawson, A. Treffry, P. J. Artymiuk, P. M. Harrison,
S. J. Yewdall, A. Luzzago, G. Cesareni, S. Levi and P. Arosio,
FEBS Lett., 1989, 254, 207–210.
11 T. B. Simons, Neurosurg. Rev., 1988, 11, 119–129.
12 Y. Ke and Z. M. Qian, Lancet Neurol., 2003, 2, 246–253.
13 P. Munoz and A. Humeres, Biometals, 2012, 25, 825–835.
14 A. Ghosh and M. Greenberg, Science, 1995, 268, 239–247.
15 A. S. Association, Alzheimers Dement., 2012, 8, 131–168.
16 D. Pratico, Drug Dev. Res., 2002, 56, 446–451.
17 M. A. Smith, C. A. Rottkamp, A. Nunomura, A. K. Raina
and G. Perry, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Mol. Basis Dis., 2000,
1502, 139–144.
18 C.
C.
Conrad,
P.
L.
Marshall,
J.
M.
Talent,
C. A. Malakowsky, J. Choi and R. W. Gracy, Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun., 2000, 275, 678–681.
19 J. Dobson, Exp. Brain Res., 2002, 144, 122–126.
20 D. Hautot, Q. A. Pankhurst, N. Khan and J. Dobson,
Proc. R. Soc. B, 2003, 270, S62–S64.
Paper
Nanoscale
11794 | Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11782–11796
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Open Access Article. Published on 24 April 2018. Downloaded on 6/4/2019 9:23:27 PM. 
 This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online
 21 M. A. Smith, P. L. R. Harris, L. M. Sayre and G. Perry, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1997, 94, 9866–9868.
22 C. Quintana and L. Gutierrez, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 2010,
1800, 770–782.
23 A. Nunomura, G. Perry, G. Aliev, K. Hirai, A. Takeda,
E.
K.
Balraj,
P.
K.
Jones,
H.
Ghanbari,
T.
Wataya,
S. Shimohama, S. Chiba, C. S. Atwood, R. B. Petersen and
M. A. Smith, J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol., 2001, 60, 759–767.
24 J.
Everett,
E.
Cespedes,
L.
R.
Shelford,
C.
Exley,
J.
F.
Collingwood,
J.
Dobson,
G.
van
der
Laan,
C. A. Jenkins, E. Arenholz and N. D. Telling, J. R. Soc.,
Interface, 2014a, 11, 20140165.
25 J.
Everett,
E.
Cespedes,
L.
R.
Shelford,
C.
Exley,
J.
F.
Collingwood,
J.
Dobson,
G.
van
der
Laan,
C. A. Jenkins, E. Arenholz and N. D. Telling, Inorg. Chem.,
2014b, 53, 2803–2809.
26 A. Khan, J. P. Dobson and C. Exley, Free Radicals Biol. Med.,
2006, 40, 557–569.
27 X. D. Huang, C. S. Atwood, M. A. Hartshorn, G. Multhaup,
L. E. Goldstein, R. C. Scarpa, M. P. Cuajungco, D. N. Gray,
J. Lim, R. D. Moir, R. E. Tanzi and A. I. Bush, Biochemistry,
1999, 38, 7609–7616.
28 T. Rival, R. M. Page, D. S. Chandraratna, T. J. Sendall,
E.
Ryder,
B.
Liu,
H.
Lewis,
T.
Rosahl,
R.
Hider,
L. M. Camargo, M. S. Shearman, D. C. Crowther and
D. A. Lomas, Eur. J. Neurosci., 2009, 29, 1335–1347.
29 C. L. Masters, G. Multhaup, G. Simms, J. Pottgiesser,
R. N. Martins and K. Beyreuther, EMBO J., 1985, 4, 2757–
2763.
30 M.
A.
Smith,
K.
Hirai,
K.
Hsiao,
M.
A.
Pappolla,
P. L. R. Harris, S. L. Siedlak, M. Tabaton and G. Perry,
J. Neurochem., 1998, 70, 2212–2215.
31 A. Monji, H. Utsumi, T. Ueda, T. Imoto, I. Yoshida,
S. Hashioka, K. Tashiro and N. Tashiro, Life Sci., 2002, 70,
833–841.
32 J. Gotz, F. Chen, J. van Dorpe and R. M. Nitsch, Science,
2001, 293, 1491–1495.
33 A. Yamamoto, R. W. Shin, K. Hasegawa, H. Naiki, H. Sato,
F. Yoshimasu and T. Kitamoto, J. Neurochem., 2002, 82,
1137–1147.
34 M. A. Lovell, J. D. Robertson, W. J. Teesdale, J. L. Campbell
and W. R. Markesbery, J. Neurol. Sci., 1998, 158, 47–52.
35 M. D. Meadowcroft, D. G. Peters, R. P. Dewal, J. R. Connor
and Q. X. Yang, NMR Biomed., 2015, 28, 297–305.
36 J. F. Collingwood, R. K. K. Chong, T. Kasama, L. Cervera-
Gontard, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, G. Perry, M. Posfai,
S. L. Siedlak, E. T. Simpson, M. A. Smith and J. Dobson,
J. Alzheimers Dis., 2008, 14, 235–245.
37 I. Grundkeiqbal, J. Fleming, Y. C. Tung, H. Lassmann,
K. Iqbal and J. G. Joshi, Acta Neuropathol., 1990, 81, 105–
110.
38 C. Quintana, J. M. Cowley and C. Marhic, J. Struct. Biol.,
2004, 147, 166–178.
39 K.
V.
Kuchibhotla,
S.
T.
Goldman,
C.
R.
Lattarulo,
H.-Y. Wu, B. T. Hyman and B. J. Bacskai, Neuron, 2008, 59,
214–225.
40 M. Kawahara, Curr. Alzheimer Res., 2004, 1, 87–95.
41 H. Lin, R. Bhatia and R. Lal, FASEB J., 2001, 15, 2433–
2444.
42 C. Supnet and I. Bezprozvanny, Cell Calcium, 2010, 47, 183–
189.
43 C.
Quintana,
T.-D.
Wu,
B.
Delatour,
M.
Dhenain,
J. L. Guerquin-Kern and A. Croisy, Microsc. Res. Tech., 2007,
70, 281–295.
44 L. M. Miller, Q. Wang, T. P. Telivala, R. J. Smith,
A. Lanzirotti and J. Miklossy, J. Struct. Biol., 2006, 155, 30–
37.
45 F. Watt, Cell. Mol. Biol., 1996, 42, 17–26.
46 N. D. Telling, J. Everett, J. F. Collingwood, J. Dobson, G. van
der Laan, J. J. Gallagher, J. Wang and A. P. Hitchcock, Cell
Chem. Biol., 2017, 24, 1205–1215.
47 D. G. Peters, J. R. Connor and M. D. Meadowcroft,
Neurobiol. Dis., 2015, 81, 49–65.
48 S. Ayton, P. Lei and A. I. Bush, Neurotherapeutics, 2015, 12,
109–120.
49 T. J. Regan, H. Ohlag, C. Stamm, F. Nolting, J. Luning,
J. Stohr and R. L. White, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter
Mater. Phys., 2001, 64, 2124422.
50 C. Exley, E. House, J. F. Collingwood, M. R. Davidson,
D. Cannon and A. M. Donald, J. Alzheimers Dis., 2010, 20,
1159–1165.
51 J. Li, A. P. Hitchcock, H. D. H. Stöver and I. Shirley,
Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 2428–2432.
52 T. Weidner, N. Samuel, K. McCrea, L. Gamble, R. Ward and
D. Castner, Biointerphases, 2010, 5, 9–16.
53 R. T. DeVol, R. A. Metzler, L. Kabalah-Amitai, B. Pokroy,
Y. Politi, A. Gal, L. Addadi, S. Weiner, A. Fernandez-
Martinez, R. Demichelis, J. D. Gale, J. Ihli, F. C. Meldrum,
A. Z. Blonsky, C. E. Killian, C. B. Salling, A. T. Young,
M. A. Marcus, A. Scholl, A. Doran, C. Jenkins, H. A. Bechtel
and P. Gilbert, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2014, 118, 8449–8457.
54 J. D. Smith, C. D. Cappa, K. R. Wilson, B. M. Messer,
R. C. Cohen and R. J. Saykally, Science, 2004, 306, 851–853.
55 J. Cosmidis, K. Benzerara, N. Nassif, T. Tyliszczak and
F. Bourdelle, Acta Biomater., 2015, 12, 260–269.
56 G.
Plascencia-Villa,
A.
Ponce,
J.
F.
Collingwood,
M. J. Arellano-Jimenez, X. Zhu, J. T. Rogers, I. Betancourt,
M. Jose-Yacaman and G. Perry, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 24873.
57 J. F. Collingwood, A. Mikhaylova, M. Davidon, C. Batich,
W. J. Streit, J. Terry and J. Dobson, J. Alzheimers Dis., 2005,
7, 267–272.
58 A. Michelin, E. Drouet, E. Foy, J. J. Dynes, D. Neff and
P. Dillmann, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2013, 28, 59–66.
59 J. Leveneur, G. I. N. Waterhouse, J. Kennedy, J. B. Metson
and D. R. G. Mitchell, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 20978–
20985.
60 D. A. Shapiro, Y.-S. Yu, T. Tyliszczak, J. Cabana, R. Celestre,
W. Chao, K. Kaznatcheev, A. L. D. Kilcoyne, F. Maia,
S. Marchesini, Y. S. Meng, T. Warwick, L. L. Yang and
H. A. Padmore, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 765–769.
61 W.
Lin,
K. Benzerara, D.
Faivre and Y.
Pan, Front.
Microbiol., 2014, 5, 293.
Nanoscale
Paper
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11782–11796 | 11795
Open Access Article. Published on 24 April 2018. Downloaded on 6/4/2019 9:23:27 PM. 
 This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online
 62 J.
L.
Kirschvink,
A.
Kobayashi-Kirschvink
and
B. J. Woodford, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1992, 89,
7683–7687.
63 P. P. Schultheiss-Grassi, R. Wessiken and J. Dobson,
Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1999, 1426, 212–216.
64 K. Benzerara, N. Menguy, F. Guyot, C. Dominici and
P. Gillet, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 7438–
7442.
65 P. Gentile, C. Wilcock, C. Miller, R. Moorehead and
P. Hatton, Materials, 2015, 8, 2297.
66 J. J. Gallagher, M. E. Finnegan, B. Grehan, J. Dobson,
J. F. Collingwood and M. A. Lynch, J. Alzheimers Dis., 2012,
28, 147–161.
67 J. Dong, C. S. Atwood, V. E. Anderson, S. L. Siedlak,
M. A. Smith, G. Perry and P. R. Carey, Biochemistry, 2003,
42, 2768–2773.
68 X. D. Huang, R. D. Moir, R. E. Tanzi, A. I. Bush and
J. T. Rogers, Redox-Active Metals. Neurol. Disord., 2004,
1012, 153–163.
69 D. A. Butterfield, A. M. Swomley and R. Sultana, Antioxid.
Redox Signaling, 2013, 19, 823–835.
70 M. A. Walti, F. Ravotti, H. Arai, C. G. Glabe, J. S. Wall,
A. Bockmann, P. Guntert, B. H. Meier and R. Riek, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, E4976–E4984.
71 S. I. Dikalov, M. P. Vitek, K. R. Maples and R. P. Mason,
J. Biol. Chem., 1999, 274, 9392–9399.
72 Z. Y. Cai, B. Zhao and A. Ratka, NeuroMol. Med., 2011, 13,
223–250.
73 N.
Joseph-Mathurin,
O.
Dorieux,
S.
G.
Trouche,
A. Boutajangout, A. Kraska, P. Fontes, J. M. Verdier,
E. M. Sigurdsson, N. Mestre-Frances and M. Dhenain,
Neurobiol. Aging, 2013, 34, 2613–2622.
74 R. J. Castellani and G. Perry, Biochem. Pharmacol., 2014, 88,
671–676.
75 D. B. Kell and E. Pretorius, Metallomics, 2014, 6, 748–773.
76 B. A. Maher, I. A. Ahmed, V. Karloukovski, D. A. MacLaren,
P. G. Foulds, D. Allsop, D. M. Mann, R. Torres-Jardon and
L. Calderon-Garciduenas, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.,
2016, 113, 10797–10801.
77 M. Dhenain, N. El Tannir El Tayara, T.-D. Wu, M. Guégan,
A. Volk, C. Quintana and B. Delatour, Neurobiol. Aging,
2009, 30, 41–53.
78 C. Exley and E. R. House, Monatsh. Chem., 2011, 142, 357–
363.
79 H. Wu, J.-J. Yin, W. G. Wamer, M. Zeng and Y. M. Lo,
J. Food Drug Anal., 2014, 22, 86–94.
80 X. Li, J. Jankovic and W. Le, J. Neural Transm., 2011, 118,
473–477.
81 J. Kowalska, B. Nayyar, J. Kowalska, B. Nayyar, J. Rees,
C. Schiewer, S. Lee, J. Kovacs, F. Meyer, T. Weyhermüller,
E. Otero and S. DeBeer, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 8147–
8158.
Paper
Nanoscale
11796 | Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11782–11796
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Open Access Article. Published on 24 April 2018. Downloaded on 6/4/2019 9:23:27 PM. 
 This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online
