 https://doi.org/10.1177/0269216318756259
Palliative Medicine
2018, Vol. 32(5) 939 
–949
© The Author(s) 2018
Reprints and permissions: 
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0269216318756259
journals.sagepub.com/home/pmj
Who cares for the carers at hospital 
discharge at the end of life? A qualitative 
study of current practice in discharge 
planning and the potential value of using 
The Carer Support Needs Assessment Tool 
(CSNAT) Approach
Gail Ewing1
, Lynn Austin2, Debra Jones3 and Gunn Grande3
Abstract
Background: Carer factors prevent patients achieving timely and appropriate hospital discharge. There is a lack of research into 
interventions to support carers at hospital discharge.
Aim: To explore whether and how family carers are currently supported during patient discharge at end of life; to assess perceived benefits, 
acceptability and feasibility of using The Carer Support Needs Assessment Tool (CSNAT) Approach in the hospital setting to support carers.
Design: Qualitative.
Setting/participants: Three National Health Service Trusts in England: focus groups with 40 hospital and community-based 
practitioners and 22 carer interviews about experiences of carer support during hospital discharge and views of The CSNAT Approach. 
Two workshops brought together 14 practitioners and five carers to discuss implementation issues. Framework analysis was conducted.
Results: Current barriers to supporting carers at hospital discharge were an organisational focus on patients’ needs,  what 
practitioners perceived as carers’ often ‘unrealistic expectations’ of end-of-life caregiving at home and lack of awareness of patients’ 
end-of-life situation. The CSNAT Approach was viewed as enabling carer support and addressing difficulties of discussing the realities 
of supporting someone at home towards end of life. Implementation in hospital required organisational considerations of practitioner 
workload and training. To enhance carer support, a two-stage process of assessment and support (hospital with community follow-up) 
was suggested using the CSNAT as a carer-held record to manage the transition.
Conclusion: This study identifies a novel intervention, which expands the focus of discharge planning to include assessment of carers’ 
support needs at transition, potentially preventing breakdown of care at home and patient readmissions to hospital.
Keywords
Carers, needs assessment, palliative care, discharge planning, qualitative research, person-centred care
What is already known about the topic?
•
•
Family carers are essential in making it possible for patients to remain at home towards the end of life and play an impor-
tant role in achieving hospital discharge.
•
•
The multiple impacts on carers of taking on this role and their need for support are well recognised in end-of-life care 
policy guidance.
•
•
Palliative-care patients are often re-admitted to hospital following discharge due to breakdown in carer support at home.
1Centre for Family Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
2Centre for Primary Care, Institute of Population Health, The 
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
3Division of Nursing, Midwifery and Social Work, The University of 
Manchester, Manchester, UK
Corresponding author:
Gail Ewing, Centre for Family Research, University of Cambridge, Free 
School Lane, Cambridge CB2 3RQ, UK. 
Email: ge200@cam.ac.uk
756259 PMJ0010.1177/0269216318756259Palliative MedicineEwing et al.
research-article2018
Original Article
 940 
Palliative Medicine 32(5)
What this paper adds?
•
•
A novel intervention for hospital discharge: expanding the focus of discharge practice to include assessment of carers’ 
support needs at transition to help prevent breakdown of care at home and patient readmission to hospital.
•
•
Identification of carers’ lack of awareness of the realities of 24-h caregiving and of patients’ end-of-life situation as a 
major barrier for practitioners wishing to support carers during discharge.
•
•
The potential of 
The Carer Support Needs Assessment 
T
ool (CSNAT) Approach to facilitate conversations about the reali-
ties of caregiving at home towards the end of life, thereby eliciting carer concerns and enabling the provision of support.
Implications for practice, theory or policy
•
•
Enabling successful discharge of palliative-care patients to home and prevention of readmissions is a key issue for health 
services.
•
•
To date, the focus of interventions to achieve this outcome has been on patients, yet we know that carers are crucial in 
enabling palliative-care patients to remain at home.
•
•
This study identifies key issues to be considered in turning current policy ‘aspirations’ for person-centred care for carers 
into practice realities within a hospital context.
Background
Timely discharge from hospital and avoidance of readmis-
sions are major concerns of health services. In the United 
Kingdom, there is guidance about hospital discharge in 
general from different sources1–5 and specifically about 
hospital care at end of life (EOL).6–10 In both contexts, 
guidance makes clear the need to involve carers in dis-
charge where they are involved in supporting patients at 
home. However, guidance references to involving carers 
‘with the patient’s permission’ suggest their involvement 
relates more to meeting patients’ rather than carers’ needs 
with regard to caregiving after discharge to home.
We know from research that the majority of patients wish 
to die at home11 and that family carers are essential in mak-
ing home-care possible.12,13 Carer factors are an important 
contributor to difficulties in achieving timely and appropriate 
hospital discharge.14,15 The odds of discharging patients from 
hospital to die at home are considerably reduced if carers are 
reluctant to support discharge.16 However, such reluctance 
may stem from lack of preparation and information.17
Discharge is not a single event, but a process that 
includes prevention of breakdown of home-care and read-
mission.14 Likelihood of remaining at home until death is 
reduced by two-thirds if carers prefer otherwise, even if 
patients are supported by palliative home-care,18 and a 
major reason for hospital admission is breakdown of infor-
mal care at home, even where carers willingly take on 
care.19 Carers therefore form a crucial component in suc-
cessful discharge: ensuring they are prepared for home-
care is likely to increase likelihood of discharge and 
decrease that of readmission.
However, research reviews show that carers often feel 
uninvolved and unsupported in the discharge process and 
that staff do not routinely identify and support carers.20–22 
The majority of carers report not being asked about their 
needs or whether they can cope after the patient is dischar
ged.14,20–25 Often health professionals do not realise that 
what appears routine to them is challenging to carers.14
There has been a lack of research into interventions to 
support carers at hospital discharge in general: a scoping 
review of service provision for carers around hospital dis-
charge found only five studies involved an intervention, 
none of which focussed on the discharge process as directly 
related to carers.22 A systematic review of randomised con-
trolled trials (RCTs) of discharge planning interventions 
found only 14 separate studies conducted over a 19-year 
period.26 The review concluded that integration of caregiv-
ers into discharge planning reduces risk of hospital read-
mission, but was unable to determine the most effective 
method of caregiver integration. An Australian trial has 
tested a specific carer intervention at discharge: the Further 
Enabling Care at Home (FECH) programme which 
involved telephone assessment and support delivered by a 
dedicated FECH nurse.27 The trial showed significant 
improvements for carers enrolled in the programme in pre-
paredness to care after discharge and reduction in car-
egiver strain.
The Carer Support Needs Assessment Tool (CSNAT) 
Approach, which formed part of the FECH programme, 
is an intervention developed, tested and implemented in 
hospice home-care as a comprehensive, person-centred 
approach for assessing and supporting carers.28–33 The 
aim of this study is to focus on carers in the discharge 
process: (1) to explore whether and how carers of pallia-
tive-care patients are currently supported at discharge 
from hospital at EOL and (2) to assess perceived benefits, 
acceptability and feasibility of using The CSNAT 
Approach in the hospital setting to support carers during 
discharge. This is the first development stage of the 
 Ewing et al. 
941
Medical Research Council (MRC) Framework for 
Evaluation of Complex Interventions34 to develop an 
intervention to facilitate discharge. Figure 1 provides an 
overview of The CSNAT Approach.
Methods
Qualitative design: focus groups, interviews and 
workshops
Ethical approval was received from NRES Committee 
Northwest–Greater Manchester West on 9/10/14 (REC 
reference no. 14/NW/1311). All participants provided 
written consent.
Setting and scope
The study was conducted between December 2014 and 
November 2015 across three National Health Service 
(NHS) Trusts in England serving a diverse population in 
terms of social deprivation, ethnicity and urban/rural areas. 
The primary NHS site recruited practitioners and carers. 
The other sites recruited practitioners.
The study focussed on discharges to home of patients 
with a palliative condition who had a carer (see Figure 2 
for criteria of discharges). ‘Family carer’ or ‘carer’ may 
not always be a conventional family member, but denotes 
a lay person who provides a close, supportive role.
Recruitment and data collection
Focus groups with healthcare professionals
Practitioners were purposively sampled from teams involved 
in discharge of patients with a palliative condition to home 
(specialist palliative care, complex discharge, community 
Macmillan and district nursing teams) aiming for broad rep-
resentation of different healthcare professionals (HCPs). A 
lead contact in each Trust facilitated recruitment by distrib-
uting study recruitment packs to teams containing an invita-
tion letter, study information leaflet, reply form and freepost 
envelope for its return. Interested HCPs responded directly 
to study researchers.
In total, 40 practitioners took part, 29 from hospital, 11 
from community. Participants are described in Table 1.
Eight focus groups (FGs) were conducted, lasting 35–
105 min, facilitated by two researchers (L.A./G.E., L.A./
D.J. or G.E./D.J.). Discussions were recorded with 
participants’ permission. The topic guide covered four 
broad areas: (1) current assessment processes leading up to 
patient discharge including involvement of carers, (2) 
exploration of carer-related concerns surrounding dis-
charge, (3) initial views of the CSNAT and its person-cen-
tred approach and (4) when/how The CSNAT Approach 
may be used at discharge to improve carer support.
Interviews with carers/next of kin
Bereaved and current carers/next of kin (hereafter called 
carers) were invited to participate. Carers of patients dis-
charged from the Trust shortly before death and who were 
6–18 months post-bereavement were eligible and were iden-
tified by the Trust’s Information Team together with the spe-
cialist palliative-care team (SPCT) and complex discharge 
team (CDT). Current carers were identified at weekly hospi-
tal multidisciplinary teams (MDTs). The SPCT highlighted 
any instances of concern about carers’ ability to participate 
in an interview. All invitation packs to carers were sent by 
the SPCT: interested carers responded directly to the study 
researcher (L.A.) who provided further information, 
arranged an interview with them at home and took informed 
consent prior to interview. Table 2 summarises recruitment 
and characteristics of 22 carer participants.
Interviews with carers were recorded with their permis-
sion. Discussions began with an exploration of carer’s 
experience of the discharge process and any concerns they 
In palliative-care, carers and family are part of the ‘unit of care’: therefore in this context practitioners describe their role as 
‘being there for the carer as well as the patient’. Practitioners provide carers with support alongside their care of the patient using 
an informal practitioner-led process.
The Carer Support Needs Assessment Tool (CSNAT) was developed to provide an evidence based, holistic assessment for carers 
in the absence of any comprehensive framework used in practice. The CSNAT identifies the support domains of importance to 
carers to (a) help them support the patient at home (as part of their co-worker role) and (b) preserve their own wellbeing whilst 
doing this (their client role) [28]. These domains have been incorporated into a 14 item assessment tool which was validated in a 
palliative home-care setting and shown to be comprehensive, with good face, content and criterion validity [29].
For use in practice the tool itself is incorporated into a five stage person-centred process of assessment and support: The CSNAT 
Approach [30]. This entails a shift from current practitioner-led identification of carer needs to one that is practitioner facilitated 
but carer-led.  As such it is intended to open up conversations with carers, enabling them to consider, express and prioritise their 
support needs and have support provided that is tailored to their individual needs. It has been implemented widely in community 
palliative practice in the UK and abroad.
Figure 1. The CSNAT Approach.
 942 
Palliative Medicine 32(5)
had about the planned discharge. Carers’ views about the 
CSNAT were sought: asking them to reflect back on their 
caring experiences and say whether they felt it would have 
helped them discuss any concerns.
Workshops with HCPs and carers
Workshops were mentioned to participants at the end of 
FGs and interviews. Carers who expressed an interest in 
further participation were invited to the workshops. All 
practitioner participants were also invited. Two workshops 
took place with 14 HCPs (7 SPCT, 4 CDT, 2 district nurses 
and 1 community nurse team leader) plus five carers (all 
bereaved). Attendance was dependent on availability on 
days scheduled for workshops.
Workshops lasted 2.5 h (including lunch/refreshments) 
and were recorded with participants’ permission. Each work-
shop began with a brief overview of the study, key findings 
and a reminder of The CSNAT Approach. This was followed 
by (1) whole group discussion of the tool itself and then (2) 
small group discussions of how this new approach might be 
used with carers at hospital discharge towards EOL.
Data analysis
All recordings were fully transcribed, checked and 
anonymised. A thematic analysis was conducted, based 
on the framework approach.35 The analysis process 
involved two researchers (D.J./G.E.). Initial transcripts 
were read and re-read by the researchers to gain familiar-
ity with the data. Then each researcher, independently, 
developed an indexing framework of key issues arising 
from both data and topic guides. Key issues identified 
were compared and discussed, and a coding framework 
agreed to organise the data. Atlas/ti was used to facilitate 
data management. The coding framework was applied to 
all transcripts by D.J., checked by G.E. and minor addi-
tional codings were added. Both researchers wrote notes/
memos throughout the process of data collection and 
analysis. Broad themes derived from the data were iden-
tified and interpretations discussed and agreed.
Findings
Findings are organised into three sections, representing 
practitioners’ and carers’ perspectives: (1) current barriers 
to supporting carers at hospital discharge, (2) utility of 
The CSNAT Approach for hospital discharge and (3) fit of 
The CSNAT Approach within a hospital context. Italics 
indicate verbatim quotations. ID numbers beginning with 
P indicate responses from practitioners and those with C 
are from carers. We have also indicated which FG (e.g. 
FG1) or workshop (e.g. W1a) the quotation came from.
Current barriers to supporting carers at 
hospital discharge
Organisational focus on patients’ needs, not carers’. Needs 
assessments on discharge naturally focussed on patients: ‘… 
because the patient and the duty of care that we have to the 
patient is uppermost in our mind’ (P2FG3). Emphasis was 
placed on practical aspects of discharge (e.g. equipment 
needs and services for patients) often driven by getting NHS 
Community Healthcare (CHC) funding in place: ‘so the 
care is planned and I think it’s a very physical approach, a 
practical approach, I don’t think the emotional element sits 
in with it really’ (P2FG2). Services had no procedures for 
identifying carers’ support needs at patient discharge as 
unlike hospice contexts, services were not formally ‘there 
for the carer as well as the patient’. While carers participated 
in discharge conversations, this often depended on them 
being present when the patient was assessed. The assess-
ment therefore focussed on patients’ needs: any carer con-
cerns were picked up informally. The following quotation 
exemplifies the lack of a carer remit ‘Honestly, the carers 
are my second thought and they’re only my thought if there 
To allow examination of the discharge process including whether it was suitable and feasible to use the CSNAT with carers, the 
following criteria for discharges were used:
••
‘Fast track’ discharges where there was an expectation that patients going home had “weeks to months” to live (as 
described by R1FG1) and therefore there was likely to be involvement of the carer in the process.
It should be noted that the term ‘fast track’ here refers to access to a national funding stream in the UK, NHS Continuing 
Healthcare, not speed of discharge. 
••
Complex discharges involving either the Complex Discharge Team (CDT) and the Specialist Palliative-care Team 
(SPCT) or both
Excluded were: 
••
‘Rapid discharges’ where patient were in the last days of life
••
Routine discharges of palliative-care patients by ward teams
Figure 2. Scope of palliative-care discharges.
 Ewing et al. 
943
becomes a difficulty, so as long as they’re happy with every-
thing and everything is going along, I don’t consider their 
[needs]’ (P5FG7). Carers’ experiences reflected this: none 
of those interviewed described any formal assessment of 
their needs. However, carers had very a strong sense that 
they needed support at this time: ‘I think that’s what they 
need, people need support when they come out. The carer 
needs the support as much as the patient, because without 
the carer where does the patient go?’ (C5).
Carers’ ‘unrealistic expectations’ of caregiving at EOL and support 
at home. Further problems could occur if carers had what 
practitioners described as ‘unrealistic expectations’ about 
caregiving at home. Practitioners found that carers often just 
wanted the patient to go home, but they did not necessarily 
have a clear idea of the reality of 24-h caregiving: You try 
and make them aware of the sort of responsibility as well that 
they’re going to have at home and how they’re going to deal 
with the situation and get their thoughts about how they feel 
they’ll cope when they get home. (P4FG7) This was echoed 
by district nurses who cared for patients post-discharge: 
‘[carers] don’t realise until they get home the physical 
and emotional demands that that then brings, and quite 
often within 24 or 48 hours of being home, you get a bit 
of a crisis going on’ (P2FG5). Others recognised that as 
the process itself was designed to help facilitate dis-
charge, the level of detail carers needed got missed.
Mistaken impressions had also to be managed regard-
ing level of nursing support likely to be available at home: 
‘that a Macmillan nurse will be in that house 24 hours a 
day. They will order all the care, they will order all the 
medications, they will sort all the financial stuff out’ 
(P3FG1) or that district nurses could be expected to 
respond instantly if symptoms change. Expectations of 
Table 1. Healthcare professional participants.
Sites
Number 
invited
Roles
Number who 
took part
Roles
Trust 1
 
  
Members of the SPCT 
MDT
11
Chaplain, manager, palliative 
medicine consultant, CNSs, 
EOLC facilitators, AHPs
9
Chaplain
Manager
4 CNSs
2 EOL facilitators
1 AHP
  
CDT MDT
15
Manager, AHPs, social 
workers, nurses
7
Manager
AHP manager
5 CDT nurses
  
Community-based 
team 1
6a
Community Macmillan nurses
2
2 Community Macmillan nurses
  
Community-based 
team 2
b
DNs
7
6 DNs
1 Student nurse
Trust 2
 
  
Teams dealing with 
palliative care and 
discharges within the 
acute hospital
23c
Palliative medicine 
consultants, specialist cancer 
nurses, palliative CNSs and 
discharge planning nurses and 
assessors
7
3 Palliative-care CNSs
4 CDT nurses/assessors
Trust 3
 
  
Hospital- and 
community-based 
practitioners most 
involved in palliative-
care discharges
9d
Palliative medicine consultant
SPC and case managers
SPC CNSs
CDT nurses
AHPs
8
1 Consultant
3 SPC CNS (2 hospital and 1 community)
1 Case manager
1 SPC community manager
1 CDT nurse
1 AHP
Total
64+
40
29 Hospital-based
11 Community-based
SPCT: specialist palliative-care team; MDT: multidisciplinary team; CNS: clinical nurse specialist; EOLC: end-of-life care; AHPs: allied health profes-
sionals; CDT: complex discharge team; DN: district nurse; SPC: specialist palliative care.
Managers/service leads in each Trust facilitated recruitment. They were asked to invite staff most involved in discharge of palliative-care patients to 
home.
aTeam not fully staffed at recruitment due to sick leave and posts vacant.
bInformation on district nurses invited by the facilitating nurse manager not available.
cThe facilitating service lead sent out a general invitation to all staff who might be involved in discharge of palliative-care patients and their carers to 
home, including tumour-specific CNSs.
dFacilitating service lead identified key staff involved in discharge planning.
 944 
Palliative Medicine 32(5)
availability of support at night were a particular difficulty 
because ‘nights are often the thing that tip people over the 
edge’ (P5FG5). Practitioners felt that conversations about 
expectations needed to happen earlier in the process: 
‘someone explaining the actual nitty-gritty of things to 
people might be a bit more realistic for them to make that 
informed choice rather than get home and have the shock 
of it’ (P6FG5).
Lack of awareness of EOL situations. A significant barrier to 
preparing carers for patients’ discharge expressed by all 
practitioner groups was when carers had limited awareness 
that patients were approaching EOL. This posed difficul-
ties for practitioners with eliciting carer concerns: they 
described not having skills for EOL conversations and for 
some this resulted in them ‘trying to backtrack’ (P4FG4) 
or ‘backpedalling’ (P5FG7) to avoid these discussions 
altogether. Furthermore, lack of carer awareness meant 
practitioners were unable to put in place certain supports 
on discharge: ‘… denying them, for example, Hospice at 
Home, you know, and Macmillan, denying them all sorts of 
services’ (P1FG2).
Utility of the CSNAT for comprehensive, carer-
centred assessment in hospital
Given absence of any assessment process for carers at dis-
charge and problems associated with this, initial practi-
tioner responses to using the CSNAT were very positive: 
‘I think it looks good’ (P2FG1). They said it covered 
everything they would expect to see: ‘Yes, definitely the 
right questions’ (group agreement FG8), with one group 
reflecting on its usefulness: ‘because we’ve got nothing at 
all in place and also I am aware that there are quite a few 
things on here that we don’t do very well’ (P3FG5). Carers 
too were entirely positive: ‘it’s a good tool’ (C21); ‘I think 
that would be very useful’ (C22). They reflected: ‘They 
should be asking all these questions, you know, to the car-
ers’ (C11); ‘I think all those are something that need deal-
ing with, don’t they’ (C6). Potential benefits were also 
identified, outlined below.
Legitimising support for carers themselves. Carers identified 
their own reluctance to consider support for themselves at 
this time: ‘because I think you put yourself on the back 
burner, you do, all carers put themselves on the back 
burner’ (C21). The CSNAT was therefore seen as valua-
ble: ‘[it] gives the carer permission to think about them-
selves’ (C21W2a). Practitioners concurred, ‘relatives feel 
that they need the permission to say, do you know what, I 
can’t do this and I need help’ (P2W1b). Furthermore, 
practitioners felt that using the CSNAT would clearly 
indicate their interest in supporting carers: … with the 
best will in the world, they’re also very focused on that 
individual, and then a ‘How are you?’, it’s polite and it’s 
respectful and it’s cursory, but it’s not like this. It actually 
says we actually care about how you are feeling. (P4FG5)
Visibility of support needs. Carers found actually being 
able to see the CSNAT questions useful in enabling them 
Table 2. Characteristics of carer participants.
Recruitment
N 
= 
201 bereaved carers identified
 
n 
= 
19 responded and agreed to take parta
 
N 
= 
4 current carers identified
 
n 
= 
1 responded and agreed to take part
 
Participants
N 
= 
22 (21 bereaved, 1 current carer)
 
 
All but one patient had a cancer diagnosis
 
Relationship with patient
Wife/husband
9
Daughter/son
9
Niece
3
Friend
1
Sex
Female
19
Male
3
Age range (years)
21–30
1
31–40
1
41–50
9
51–60
6
61–70
4
71–80
1
Ethnicity
White British
19
Black British
1
Black African
1
Not recorded
1
aTwo interviews involved two carers.
 Ewing et al. 
945
to consider support needed as most had no idea what car-
egiving towards EOL involved. One carer explained, 
because you’re completely at sea, you’ve no idea, you’re 
going home with your family member with their bag of 
drugs and if somebody said, ‘what kind of help do you 
need?’ you wouldn’t know, you need to have … in a situ-
ation like that you’ve got to have prompts and sugges-
tions, would you need help with this, would you need … 
and that’s perfect. (C20) This contrasted with the cur-
rent situation where ‘the ball’s put in your court to 
think of what you need to ask’ (C3), which was unhelp-
ful when carers felt they did not know what to ask. Giv-
ing carers the opportunity to see the CSNAT domains 
made a few practitioners worry that carers might be 
upset: ‘I worry as well is whether the main people 
absolutely panic and think what’s going to happen. 
They’ve given me this, I haven’t even thought of half of 
this one’ (P2FG6). However, this view was not 
expressed by carers.
Assisting communication of support needs. The CSNAT 
Approach was seen as enabling carers to communicate 
their needs: ‘And I think because it does give people the 
opportunity to say, “No I don’t need that, I don’t need that, 
actually I really do need this”’ (C20). Having a copy of the 
tool itself further enabled this: ‘… sometimes you don’t 
know what to ask and you can’t remember. Whereas if 
you’ve got something written down that you can go back 
to, you can make notes or you can gather your thoughts’ 
(C7). This was particularly pertinent when carers were 
becoming overwhelmed or feeling emotional. This view 
was shared by practitioners: ‘when it’s on paper’. ‘You can 
put down your thoughts and feelings on a piece of paper 
when you’re on your own’ (P1W2a).
Facilitating discussion with carers of caregiving at EOL and 
support at home. Importantly, practitioners felt that The 
CSNAT Approach would help address carers’ lack of 
awareness about caregiving at home which was a signifi-
cant barrier to providing support, for instance: You could 
actually hand it to them and say, ‘I want you to look at 
this, and the next time we come back, we’re going to talk 
about it’. Because sometimes you haven’t got, like, time 
to spend going slowly through something. But if they’ve 
had a chance to just have a quick look, to look at it when 
they were quiet, and think, right, I just need that. And 
then the next time the nurse comes, you can say, ‘Have 
you had a look at that, and what did you think?’ And then 
it just, sort of, like, opens things up. (P6W1d) Having a 
‘way in’ to these types of conversations was valuable: 
You know, sometimes that [the CSNAT] could perhaps be 
a really good prompt for that scenario. And I have to say, 
as a practitioner, those scenarios where you have some-
one saying no, I’m going to take them home, I’m doing it 
all myself, are the hardest ones to work through. (P5W2a) 
The ‘way in’ to opening up discussions was also made 
easier by the questions: ‘none of [the questions] say that 
you’re dying, do they?’ (P2W1b) but ‘a lot of them are 
what they should be discussing on discharge anyway’ 
(P3W1b).
Fit of The CSNAT Approach within a hospital 
context
Practitioners and carers identified organisational issues to 
be addressed to implement this approach.
Organisational factors
Responsibility for the process of carer assessment.  The 
many practitioners potentially involved in hospital dis-
charge towards EOL may diffuse responsibility for sup-
porting carers. There was no consensus on who would be 
best placed to assess and support carers, each role having 
advantages and disadvantages. For example, it was con-
sidered well suited to SPCT members, but they may see 
only a small percentage of hospital palliative-care patients. 
Thus, responsibility for carer support would need to be 
determined within each hospital setting.
Time and workload capacity. Consideration of workload 
implications for assessment was required, as carer assess-
ment is not usual hospital practice: ‘I don’t think it’s the 
time to do that. I honestly don’t. They don’t have time 
to do the drug rounds let alone anything else’ (P2W1a). 
Carers’ experiences reflected this: Nurses are running 
round like blue-arsed what’s-its, so you don’t want to ask 
them either. So you end up with this, ‘It’ll be alright, It’ll 
be alright’. And you don’t ask because you know every-
one’s so busy. So you need to have something built in. 
(C21W2a)
Skills and training. Implementation of a new way of 
working had implications for training. Most hospital 
staff are generalists unlikely to have skills in EOL 
communication or awareness of carers’ situation, so 
training was seen as essential. In addition, hospital 
practitioners are not necessarily familiar with commu-
nity resources, particularly around carer support: ‘it’s 
about the information, it’s about what’s out there. And 
if you don’t know what’s happening, you can be talking 
about home, and people have this lovely rosy view, but 
the practicalities are very different’ (P9W2b). There 
was also recognition of the need for more education of 
staff in person-centred care ‘actually identifying what 
is important to that person and then supporting [them]’ 
(P2W1b), given this underpins the CSNAT approach.
Incorporating 
The CSNAT Approach into routine practice 
In addition, consideration of how carers could be included 
in the discharge process was required, including when the 
 946 
Palliative Medicine 32(5)
process was initiated, and how it could follow patients and 
carers through to the home-care setting.
Earlier engagement with carers. A clear message was that 
the CSNAT needed to be introduced early in the patient’s 
hospital stay, not when preparing for discharge as this 
was ‘a bit too late […] I think it’s great that it’s there for 
discharge but I think it needs to be more thought about 
earlier on’ (C17). Practitioners agreed, reflecting that car-
ers are too focussed on getting patients home at this stage; 
this reality summed up as ‘Just get him home, stop giving 
me forms’ (P5aW2d). Instead, it was felt that the CSNAT 
could be used even before discharge was discussed: … to 
actually pick up any carer concerns, and then if discharge 
was then an option I think and kind of refer back to that. 
So it’s almost like a two part thing, it’s assessing the concerns 
but then checking out those concerns in relation to proposed 
discharge. (P1W1a) Advantages of its earlier use included 
making more time available for discussions, rather than 
rushing conversations immediately prior to discharge. 
Importantly, it would also provide an opportunity to 
‘manage carers’ expectations’
.
A two-stage process of assessment. To ensure meaningful 
support for carers at discharge, a hospital-based assess-
ment alone was viewed as insufficient. Rather, a two-stage 
process linking hospital carer assessment with follow-up by 
community staff was viewed as essential as the full impact 
of caregiving was only realised once at home. One carer 
explained, ‘because until she was home we hadn’t realised 
we’d have a problem at night. […] we thought she’d go to bed 
and she’d be able to go to the toilet like she always could before 
and she couldn’t’ (C4). Thus, a further review was seen as 
crucial: P3: ‘… maybe even a couple of days later, because 
until they’re actually at home they don’t’
. P2: ‘They don’t 
know what they don’t know’
. P1: ‘A lot of people just have 
no idea what it’s like’ (W1a). Incorporation of the CSNAT 
into referrals to community nursing would enable the two 
stages of the process to be linked to alert community staff 
to the carer’s situation and act as prompt for completing a 
home-based assessment: ‘So if that [the CSNAT] […] came 
through with the initial discharge and then we would have a 
copy of the notes with maybe something on it, redo on such 
and such a date’ (P3W1a).
CSNAT as a carer-held record. To manage transition between 
hospital and home, workshops discussed the CSNAT as a 
carer held-record: ‘if the carer was to take ownership of this 
document, then it would be their continuity of care wouldn’t 
it, for them to take from the hospital to the community, to get 
the answers along the way’ (P1W2a). Others agreed: ‘I think 
ideally it would go with the carer’ (P4W1b), but were scepti-
cal about how this might work ‘in the real world’
, identify-
ing that ‘it would work in a percentage of cases and then in 
other cases it wouldn’t work because people have different 
lives and lifestyles’ (P1W1b). Carers themselves felt it was a 
realistic option: I think it starts there with a normal mini meeting 
in the hospital, things are discussed, the person [patient] moves out, 
the carer takes the CSNAT […] home with them and the link hap-
pens where the practitioners say, right, okay, district nurses or com-
munity need to come in and help but then it starts again. (C4W1c)
Discussion
This article examines carer support during hospital dis-
charge of palliative-care patients. Within current hospital 
practice, barriers to supporting carers were an organisa-
tional focus on patients’ needs, carers’ ‘unrealistic expec-
tations’ of EOL caregiving at home and lack of awareness 
of patients’ EOL situation. Given absence of any routine 
process for identifying carers’ support needs at patient 
discharge, The CSNAT Approach was viewed positively 
by both practitioners and carers. Anticipated benefits 
included legitimising carer support, providing visibility of 
support needs and assisting their communication. 
Importantly, practitioners felt The CSNAT Approach 
could facilitate conversations about the realities of sup-
porting someone at home towards EOL. In order to 
achieve its implementation within discharge planning, 
organisational factors were highlighted: which practition-
ers would undertake the assessment and workload and 
training implications. Incorporation into practice required 
engaging carers earlier in the hospital stay and managing 
transition between hospital and home through a two-stage 
process of assessment of carers’ support needs using 
CSNAT as a carer-held record.
We found little evidence from carers or practitioners 
that carers’ needs were identified and supported within the 
discharge process. On one hand, this is perhaps unsurpris-
ing in the hospital setting where the majority of practition-
ers would identify their role as caring for patients, unlike 
in hospice care where the ethos also includes supporting 
carers. However, the End of Life Care Strategy36 has long 
recognised the impact on carers of caregiving, and National 
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) has 
Quality Standards for end-of-life care37 and transitions 
between hospital and home9 which include comprehensive 
assessment and holistic support for carers and family 
according to their needs and preferences. Failure to imple-
ment these standards would appear to be a missed opportu-
nity to better prepare carers for caregiving at home and so 
reduce the likelihood of readmissions.
A common difficulty for practitioners was preparing 
carers for the realities of EOL caregiving. Consequently, 
when introduced to The CSNAT Approach, practitioners’ 
 Ewing et al. 
947
reactions were very positive. As in previous CSNAT stud-
ies,32 anticipated benefits included giving carers permis-
sion to consider their own needs, opening up conversations, 
assisting communication about support needs and offer-
ing a ‘way in’ to difficult discussions. As such, The 
CSNAT Approach may enable practitioners to achieve the 
‘honest, informed and timely conversations’ which are 
one of the building blocks identified for achieving the 
Ambitions for Palliative and EOL Care for carers as well 
as patients.38
While recognising the utility of the CSNAT, participants 
were clear about practicalities to be addressed including 
who should undertake the assessment and the implications 
for workload. In addition, training reinforcing person-cen-
tred approaches to assessment and support would be 
required. The current vision for EOL care38 is based on the 
House of Care model which puts person-centred care at its 
core. Implementation of person-centred-care with patients 
is not without difficulty, requiring re-consideration of pro-
fessional roles.39 The challenge of this approach for carers 
is even greater, particularly in acute hospitals where carers 
are not within the remit of the majority of services. A value 
of this study is that it identifies what is required to turn cur-
rent policy ‘aspirations’ for carers into practice realities 
within acute hospitals and provides a foundation for further 
work on implementation in this context.
Carers and practitioners identified how carer assessment 
and support could be facilitated through the transition 
between hospital and home. This involved a two-stage pro-
cess: (1) starting assessment early in the hospital stay, in 
keeping with the principles of effective discharge planning40 
and (2) follow-up review by community practitioners at 
home, using the CSNAT as a carer-held record to manage 
the transition. This is a novel intervention, focussed on sup-
porting carers, to enhance the discharge process. There is 
existing evidence that both transition-care planning and 
coordination41 and integration of informal carers in dis-
charge planning29 are factors affecting hospital readmis-
sions. In addition, we know that interventions which assist 
transition from hospital to home are effective in reducing 
hospital readmissions and that those starting during the hos-
pital stay and continuing after discharge are more effective 
than those starting after discharge.42 This potential interven-
tion puts these factors into practice, underpinning further 
work on intervention implementation.
Limitations of the study
This was an initial exploratory study; however, it was 
conducted within three large hospitals with key staff 
involved in discharge planning. Due to the difficult and 
sensitive subject area, many carers did not respond to the 
invitation to take part. Those who did take part provided 
highly valuable insights into current practice and poten-
tial use of The CSNAT Approach. The study was limited 
to perceptions of acceptability and feasibility of The 
CSNAT Approach as an intervention: the real test comes 
when it is implemented in practice. Nevertheless, the 
consistency and agreement between both practitioners 
and carers provides a strong underpinning for a future 
implementation study.
Implications for practice
Enabling successful discharge of palliative-care patients to 
home and prevention of readmissions is a key issue for health 
services. To date, the focus of interventions to achieve this 
outcome has been on patients. Yet we know that carers are 
crucial in enabling palliative-care patients to remain at home. 
This study shifts the focus of current practice of discharge 
planning to include whether and in what way the support 
needs of carers might be assessed and addressed during the 
transition to home-care. In so doing, it offers a new direction 
for intervention development for hospital discharge with the 
potential to improve support for carers over the transition to 
home and prevent breakdown of care at home which is often 
a cause of readmission of patients to hospital.
Accessing the CSNAT
The CSNAT is a copyright tool available free of charge to the 
NHS and not-for-profit organisations. Registration and a 
licence are required for its use. For further details about obtain-
ing an inspection copy, please contact Dr Gail Ewing at the 
University of Cambridge (ge200@cam.ac.uk) or Professor 
Gunn Grande at the University of Manchester (gunn.grande@
manchester.ac.uk).
Acknowledgements
The authors are extremely grateful for the time and contribution 
of carers and practitioners who took part in this study. Special 
thanks are due to Mary Ledwick, our PPI advisor, who provided 
guidance and support throughout the study and who along with 
Dr Janet Diffin helped facilitate study workshops. The authors 
also wish to thank Dusia Romaniuk for facilitating participant 
recruitment. All authors have made a substantial contribution to 
the work of this paper and approved the final version of the man-
uscript. G.E.: substantial contribution to the study design, acqui-
sition of funding, data collection, analysis and interpretation of 
data and drafted the article; L.A.: data collection, interpretation 
of data and revised article critically for important intellectual 
content; D.J.: data collection, analysis and interpretation of data 
and revised article critically for important intellectual content; 
G.G.: project lead, designed the study, acquisition of funding, 
data collection, analysis and interpretation of data and revised 
article critically for important intellectual content.
Data management and sharing
The primary data for the study consist of a corpus of audio-recorded 
focus groups, interviews and workshops. The authors do not have 
participants’ consent to share these data with third parties. This 
includes person-identifiable data within interview transcripts.
 948 
Palliative Medicine 32(5)
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with 
respect to the research, authorship and/or publication of this 
article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support 
for the research, authorship and/or publication of this article: The 
study was funded by a Marie Curie Project Award – reference no. 
MCCC-RP-14-A17071. The work was supported by NIHR 
CLAHRC Greater Manchester. The views expressed in this arti-
cle are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the 
NHS, NIHR or the Department of Health.
ORCID iDs
Gail Ewing 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9547-7247
Gunn Grande 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2200-1680
References
 1. Department of Health. Achieving timely ‘simple’ discharge 
from hospital: a toolkit for the multi-disciplinary team. 
London: Department of Health, 2004.
 2. Department of Health. Ready to go? Planning the discharge 
and the transfer of patients from hospital and intermediate 
care. London: Department of Health, 2010.
 3. British Medical Association. Hospital discharge: the 
patient, carer and doctor perspective. London: British 
Medical Association, 2014.
 4. Queen’s Nursing Institute. Discharge planning: best 
practice in transitions of care. London: Queen’s Nursing 
Institute, 2016.
 5. Carers UK. Coming out of hospital. London: Carers UK, 
2015.
 6. Department of Health. End of Life Care Strategy: quality mark-
ers and measures for end of life care. Part 3 – quality markers 
for acute hospitals. London: Department of Health, 2009.
 7. NHS England. Transforming end of life care in acute hospitals: 
the route to success ‘how to’ guide, https://www.england.nhs.
uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/transforming-end-of-life-
care-acute-hospitals.pdf (accessed 16 August 2017).
 8. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. 
Transition between inpatient hospital settings and commu-
nity or care home settings for adults with social care needs 
(NICE guideline). London: National Institute for Health and 
Care Excellence, 2015.
 9. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Transition 
between inpatient hospital settings and community or care 
home settings for adults with social care needs (quality 
standard). London: National Institute for Health and Care 
Excellence, 2016.
 
10. The National Council for Palliative Care. Getting serious about 
prevention: enabling people to stay out of hospital at the end of 
life. London: The National Council for Palliative Care, 2015.
 
11. Gomes B, Calanzani N, Gysels M, et al. Heterogeneity 
and changes in preferences for dying at home: a systematic 
review. BMC Palliat Care 2013; 12: 7.
 
12. Grande GE, Addington-Hall JM and Todd CJ. Place 
of death and access to home care services: are certain 
patient groups at a disadvantage? Soc Sci Med 1998; 
47(5): 565–579.
 
13. Gomes B and Higginson I. Factors influencing death at 
home in terminally ill patients with cancer: systematic 
review. BMJ 2006; 332: 515–521.
 
14. Association of Directors of Adult Social Services. Carers 
as partners in hospital discharge: improving carer recog-
nition, support and outcomes within timely and supported 
discharge processes (a review). London: Association of 
Directors of Adult Social Services, 2010.
 
15. Connolly M, Grimshaw J, Dodd M, et al. Systems and peo-
ple under pressure: the discharge process in an acute hospi-
tal. J Clin Nurs 2009; 18: 549–558.
 
16. Alonso-Babarro A, Bruera E, Varela-Cerdeira M, et al. Can 
this patient be discharged home? Factors associated with at-
home death among patients with cancer. J Clin Oncol 2011; 
29(9): 1159–1167.
 
17. Stajduhar K, Funk L and Outcalt L. Family caregiver learn-
ing – how family caregivers learn to provide care at the end 
of life: a qualitative secondary analysis of four datasets. 
Palliat Med 2013; 27(7): 657–664.
 
18. Grande G and Ewing G. Death at home unlikely if informal 
carers prefer otherwise: implications for policy. Palliat Med 
2008; 22(8): 971–972.
 
19. Gott M, Frey R, Robinson J, et al. The nature of, and reasons 
for, ‘inappropriate’ hospitalisations among patients with 
palliative care needs: a qualitative exploration of the views 
of generalist palliative care providers. Palliat Med 2013; 
27(8): 747–756.
 
20. The Princess Royal Trust for Carers ‘Out of Hospital’ 
Project: learning from the pilot projects, final report, 
London, 2010, http://static.carers.org/files/out-of-hospital-
final-report-6-may-2010-5221.pdf
 
21. Bauer M, Fitzgerald L, Haesler E, et al. Hospital discharge 
planning for frail older people and their family: are we 
delivering best practice? A review of the evidence. J Clin 
Nurs 2009; 18: 2539–2546.
 
22. Borthwick R, Newbronner L and Stuttard L. ‘Out of 
Hospital’: a scoping study of services for carers of peo-
ple being discharged from hospital. Health Soc Care 
Community 2009; 17(4): 335–349.
 
23. Hanratty B, Holmes L, Lowson E, et al. Older adults’ expe-
riences of transitions between care settings at the end of life 
in England: a qualitative interview study. J Pain Symptom 
Manage 2012; 44(1): 74–83.
 
24. Carers UK. Pressure points: carers and the NHS (research 
summary), https://www.carersuk.org/for-professionals/pol-
icy/policy-library/pressure-points-carers-and-the-nhs (2016 
accessed 8 September 2017).
 
25. Carers UK. State of caring 2017, https://www.carersuk.
org/for-professionals/policy/policy-library/state-of-caring-
report-2017 (accessed 8 September 2017).
 
26. Rodakowski J, Rocco PB, Ortiz M, et al. Caregiver integration 
during discharge planning for older adults to reduce resource 
use: a metaanalysis. J Am Geriatr Soc 2017; 65: 1748–1755.
 
27. Toye C, Parsons R, Slatyer S, et al. Outcomes for family 
carers of a nurse-delivered hospital discharge interven-
tion for older people (the Further Enabling Care at Home 
Program): single blind randomised controlled trial. Int J 
Nurs Stud 2016; 64: 32–41.
 Ewing et al. 
949
 
28. Ewing G and Grande GE. Development of a Carer Support 
Needs Assessment Tool (CSNAT) for end-of-life care prac-
tice at home: a qualitative study. Palliat Med 2013; 27(3): 
244–256.
 
29. Ewing G, Brundle C, Payne S, et al. The Carer Support 
Needs Assessment Tool (CSNAT) for use in palliative and 
end-of-life care at home: a validation study. J Pain Symptom 
Manage 2013; 46: 395–405.
 
30. Ewing G, Austin L, Diffin J, et al. Developing a person-
centred approach to carer assessment and support. Br J 
Community Nurs 2015; 20(12): 580–584.
 
31. Grande GE, Austin L, Ewing G, et al. Assessing the impact 
of a Carer Support Needs Assessment Tool (CSNAT) inter-
vention in palliative home care: a stepped wedge cluster 
trial. BMJ Support Palliat Care 2017; 7(3): 326–334.
 
32. Ewing G, Austin L and Grande G. The role of the Carer 
Support Needs Assessment Tool (CSNAT) in palliative 
home care: qualitative study of practitioners’ perspectives 
of its impact and mechanisms of action. Palliat Med 2016; 
30(4): 392–400.
 
33. Austin L, Ewing G and Grande G. Factors influencing prac-
titioner adoption of carer-led assessment in palliative home-
care: a qualitative study of the use of the Carer Support 
Needs Assessment Tool (CSNAT). PLoS ONE 2017; 12(6): 
e0179287.
 
34. Craig P, Dieppe P, Macintyre S, et al. Developing and eval-
uating complex interventions: the new Medical Research 
Council guidance. BMJ 2008; 337: a1655.
 
35. Ritchie J and Lewis J. Qualitative research practice: a 
guide for social science students and researchers. London: 
SAGE, 2003.
 
36. Department of Health. End of Life Care Strategy: promoting 
high quality care for all adults at the end of life. London: 
Department of Health, 2008.
 
37. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Quality 
standard for end of life care for adults: quality statement 
7: holistic support – families and carers. London: National 
Institute for Health and Care Excellence, 2011.
 
38. National Palliative and End of Life Care Partnership. 
Ambitions for Palliative and End of Life Care: a national 
framework for local action 2015–2020, p. 11, http://end-
oflifecareambitions.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/
Ambitions-for-Palliative-and-End-of-Life-Care.pdf 
(accessed 8 September 2017).
 
39. Coulter A, Roberts S and Dixon A. Delivering better ser-
vices for people with long-term conditions: building the 
house of care. London: King’s Fund, 2013.
 
40. Lees L. The key principles of effective discharge planning. 
Nurs Times 2013; 109(3): 18–19.
 
41. Feigenbaum P, Neuwirth E, Trowbridge L, et al. Factors con-
tributing to all-cause 30-day readmissions: a structured case 
series across 18 hospitals. Med Care 2012; 50(7): 599–605.
 
42. Baert A, Weltons C and Sermeus W. Effectiveness of dis-
charge interventions from hospital to home on hospital read-
missions: a systematic review. JBI Database System Rev 
Implement Rep 2016; 14(2): 106–173.
