 1
SCIENtIFIC REpoRtS |  (2018) 8:4325  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-22750-7
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Intravenous administration of 
anti-inflammatory mesenchymal 
stem cell spheroids reduces chronic 
alcohol intake and abolishes binge-
drinking
Fernando Ezquer1, Paola Morales2,3, María Elena Quintanilla2, Daniela Santapau1,  
Carolyne Lespay-Rebolledo2, Marcelo Ezquer1, Mario Herrera-Marschitz2 & Yedy Israel2
Chronic alcohol intake leads to neuroinflammation and astrocyte dysfunction, proposed to perpetuate 
alcohol consumption and to promote conditioned relapse-like binge drinking. In the present study, 
human mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) were cultured in 3D-conditions to generate MSC-spheroids, 
which greatly increased MSCs anti-inflammatory ability and reduced cell volume by 90% versus 
conventionally 2D-cultured MSCs, enabling their intravenous administration and access to the brain. It 
is shown, in an animal model of chronic ethanol intake and relapse-drinking, that both the intravenous 
and intra-cerebroventricular administration of a single dose of MSC-spheroids inhibited chronic 
ethanol intake and relapse-like drinking by 80–90%, displaying significant effects over 3–5 weeks. 
The MSC-spheroid administration fully normalized alcohol-induced neuroinflammation, as shown 
by a reduced astrocyte activation, and markedly increased the levels of the astrocyte Na-glutamate 
(GLT-1) transporter. This research suggests that the intravenous administration of MSC-spheroids may 
constitute an effective new approach for the treatment of alcohol-use disorders.
Alcohol-use disorders constitute a leading cause of morbidity and premature mortality worldwide, accounting for 
1 in 10 deaths among working-age adults in the United States1. Chronic alcohol intake is also the most common 
cause of peripheral and central nervous system toxicity2.
Several studies in humans and rodents have shown that chronic alcohol consumption leads to an increase 
in inflammatory cytokines, both in the periphery3 and the brain4,5. In the brain, alcohol-induced neuroinflam-
mation activates astrocytes and microglia, inducing the secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines and neuro-
degeneration6. Furthermore, pro-inflammatory conditions increase voluntary alcohol consumption in rodents 
and humans7,8. Research has indicated that alcohol-induced neuroinflammation remains up-regulated for long 
periods even after discontinuation of alcohol consumption, whereas the peripheral levels return rapidly to nor-
mal, indicating the presence of a potent mechanism of auto-perpetuation of neuroinflammation, which could be 
related to the lack of regulatory T cells in the brain9,10. This phenomenon is associated with a marked increase in 
the risk of relapse in abstinent patients7,8.
Neuroinflammation is also associated with the chronic use of other addictive drugs11,12 including cocaine, 
opiates, marijuana and methamphetamine. Drug relapse observed for alcohol and other drugs is causally associ-
ated with the existence of high levels of extracellular glutamate, since the administration of N-acetyl cysteine or 
ceftriaxone which increase the level of the astrocyte Na-glutamate transporter-1 (GLT-1) and remove glutamate 
from the extracellular space, markedly reduce relapse13,14. These studies further suggest the existence of a com-
mon mechanism of addictive drug relapse.
1Centro de Medicina Regenerativa, Facultad de Medicina Clínica Alemana-Universidad del Desarrollo, Santiago, 
Chile. 2Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology Program, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of Chile, Santiago, 
Chile. 3Department of Neuroscience, Faculty of Medicine, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile. Fernando Ezquer and 
Paola Morales contributed equally to this work. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to 
Y.I. (email: yisrael@uchile.cl)
Received: 14 November 2017
Accepted: 22 February 2018
Published: xx xx xxxx
OPEN
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
SCIENtIFIC REpoRtS |  (2018) 8:4325  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-22750-7
Cell therapy based on mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) is emerging as a clinical option for various diseases in 
which dysregulation of the immune system is involved15. The immunomodulatory potential of MSCs is well doc-
umented, indicating several mechanisms for various targets in the immune system16. While the possible effect of 
MSCs on GLT-1 levels has not been addressed, recently in a well-validated animal model of high-alcohol intake17, 
it was reported that the intra-cerebroventricular administration of rat MSCs18 or human MSCs that were activated 
in vitro by incubation with TNFα
 and IFNγ
19, markedly reduced chronic alcohol intake and relapse-like drink-
ing. Clearly, the intra-cerebroventricular administration is not a preferred route for the treatment of a chronic 
disease such alcoholism. Although MSCs have been shown to cross the blood-brain barrier when intravenously 
injected20,21, this route is highly inefficient, since, due to their large size; approximately 90% of intravenously 
administered MSCs are rapidly entrapped in the lungs and other organs causing hemodynamic alterations22,23.
Previous studies showed that the three-dimensional aggregation of MSCs in hanging droplets (generating 
“MSC-spheroids”) greatly reduces their size and enhances their immunomodulatory paracrine secretion, com-
pared with traditional 2D monolayer cultures15,24. In MSC-spheroids, mild hypoxic conditioning due to oxygen 
transport limitation within the 3D cellular structure and increased cell-cell contact have been implicated in the 
increased paracrine secretion25,26. The aggregation of MSCs into 3D spheroids induces a 75% reduction in indi-
vidual cell volume, as seen when spheroids are disaggregated15,27. This size reduction could allow intravenously 
administered MSC-spheroids to reach the brain.
In this study, we determined whether the intra-cerebroventricular (ICV) or the intravenous administration 
of human MSC-spheroids to high-alcohol drinker rats reduces neuroinflammation and inhibits chronic alcohol 
intake and relapse-like drinking.
We also addressed the role of the glutamate transporter GLT-1 in contributing to the effects of MSC-spheroids 
on ethanol relapse. To assess the possible translational potential of the intravenous administration of 
MSC-spheroids, the study also determined the distribution of administered MSC-spheroids and the safety of this 
procedure.
Results
MSCs cultured as 3D-spheroid structures increase their anti-inflammatory potential. 
Human 
AD-MSCs were isolated from samples of subcutaneous adipose tissue obtained from liposuction aspirates with 
patient consent and ethical approval. After two sub-cultures, plastic-adherent cells exhibited a robust adipo-
genic and osteogenic phenotype when stimulated in defined differentiation media (Supplementary Figure 1A). 
Additionally, after immune-phenotypification plastic-adherent cells showed the presence of surface markers 
characteristic of MSCs, including CD29, CD13, CD105, CD73, CD90, CD44 and absence of marker characteris-
tics of erythroid precursors (CD235a), endothelial cells (CD31) and hematopoietic cells (CD45) (Supplementary 
Figure 1B), confirming that isolated cells were MSCs.
Mesenchymal stem cells were incubated in high-density 3D structures using the hanging drop method 
(3D-spheroids) and compared to conventional 2D cultures (Fig. 1A). After hanging drop culturing for three days, 
RT-qPCR was performed to measure the expression level of anti-inflammatory molecules. Compared to con-
ventional 2D-cultured MSCs, MSC-spheroids showed a nearly 900-fold increase in IL10 mRNA levels [Student t 
test; t: 3. 485, p < 0.025] and a 40-fold increase in TSG6 mRNA levels [Student t test; t: 4.745, p < 0.002] (Fig. 1B), 
two potent anti-inflammatory molecules. Increased expression of IL10 and TSG6 seems to be specific, since 
other anti-inflammatory molecules commonly secreted by MSCs, such as IL4 and IL5 were not increased by 
this procedure (Fig. 1B). Furthermore, the protein levels of IL10 and TSG6 in the secretome of MSC-spheroids 
also increased [Student t test; t: 3.169, p < 0.025 for IL10 and Student t test; t: 4.742, p < 0.009 for TSG6] com-
pared to 2D-cultured MSCs (Fig. 1C), suggesting that culturing of MSCs into 3D-spheroids improved their 
anti-inflammatory potential.
The intra-cerebroventricular administration of MSC-spheroids reduces astrocyte activation 
and MCP-1 expression. 
The histologic hallmark of alcohol-induced neuroinflammation is the activation of 
astrocytes, seen as an enlargement and increased thickness of astrocytic processes assessed by immunoreactivity 
against GFAP4. Astrocyte activation also induces the secretion of several pro-inflammatory molecules, including 
the monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1). To assess whether MSC-spheroid administration reduced 
alcohol-induced neuroinflammation, spheroids were disaggregated and 5 ×
 105 MSC-spheroids were ICV 
injected. GFAP immunoreactivity was evaluated in hippocampus samples obtained 21 days after MSC-spheroid 
or vehicle administration. Animals that were never exposed to ethanol (water group) were used as controls. 
Chronic alcohol consumption induced a significant increase in the thickness [one-way ANOVA; F(2,394) = 31.86, 
p < 0.0001] and length [one-way ANOVA; F(2,584) = 27.12, p < 0.0001] of primary astrocytic processes, also 
inducing a significant increase in the MCP-1 mRNA level in the hippocampus [one-way ANOVA; F(2,14) = 5.988, 
p < 0.01] (Fig. 2A,B and C). The administration of MSC-spheroids fully reversed the changes induced by chronic 
ethanol intake, restoring to normal levels the hippocampal astrocyte GFAP and MCP-1 (Fig. 2A,B and C), thus 
indicating a strong anti-inflammatory effect of MSC-spheroids.
Intra-cerebroventricular (ICV) administration of a single dose of MSC-spheroids greatly reduces 
chronic ethanol intake and relapse-like drinking after ethanol deprivation. 
To evaluate the effect 
of MSC-spheroids on chronic ethanol intake, 5 ×
 105 disaggregated MSC-spheroids were ICV injected into rats 
that had ingested ethanol under free choice of 10% ethanol versus tap water for 17 weeks. Prior to MSC-spheroid 
administration rats consumed 10–12 g ethanol/kg/day. An 88% reduction in ethanol intake was observed 24 hours 
after MSC-spheroid administration compared to vehicle-treated rats [Student t test; t: 10.29 p < 0.0001] (Fig. 3A). 
An inhibitory effect on chronic ethanol intake was still observed after three weeks, time at which 60% of the maxi-
mum inhibitory effect was present [two-way ANOVA; Ftreatment (1,210) = 2427.0, p < 0.0001] (Fig. 3A). The reduction 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
SCIENtIFIC REpoRtS |  (2018) 8:4325  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-22750-7
Figure 1. Culture of mesenchymal stem cells into 3D-spheroids increases the production of anti-inflammatory 
factors. (A) Microphotographs of MSCs cultured in conventional 2D culture or aggregated into 3D spheroids. 
Scale bar 250 μ
m. (B) Levels of IL10 and TSG6 mRNA determined by quantitative RT-PCR analysis of 
2D-MSCs or 3D MSC-spheroids three days after seeded. Data of each target gene was normalized against the 
mRNA levels of the housekeeping genes EEF1A1 and RPL13A and presented as fold change of expression 
in MSC-spheroid versus 2D-MSC. (C) Levels of IL10 and TSG6 determined by ELISA in the secretome of 
2D-MSCs or 3D MSC-spheroids three days after seeded. Data are presented as pg of IL10 or TSG6 secreted by 
1 ×
 106 MSC-spheroids or 1 ×
 106 2D-MSC. Data are shown as mean ± SEM. N = 4 per experimental condition. 
All determinations *p < 0.05 (see text).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
SCIENtIFIC REpoRtS |  (2018) 8:4325  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-22750-7
in ethanol intake was clearly correlated with an increased in water intake (Fig. 3B) [two-way ANOVA; Ftreatment 
(1,200) = 466.4.3, p < 0.0001]. Therefore, the hydric balance was maintained. Three weeks after the MSC injection, 
the hippocampal GSSG/GSH ratio was 150% higher in chronic ethanol-drinking animals treated with vehicle 
versus ethanol naïve animals, an increase that was fully normalized by MSC-spheroid administration [one-way 
ANOVA; F(2,18) = 29.93, p < 0.0001] (Fig. 3C).
To evaluate whether MSC-spheroids could also inhibit relapse-like drinking, a new group of rats that had 
been drinking 10% ethanol for 14 weeks was ICV injected with a single dose of 5 ×
 105 MSC-spheroids or vehi-
cle. Voluntary ethanol intake was evaluated for seven days after MSC-spheroids administration and thereafter, a 
14-day withdrawal period was imposed to induce the alcohol deprivation effect, followed by a 60-minute ethanol 
re-access. According with the above data, MSC-spheroid administration induced a rapid reduction in chronic 
ethanol intake [two-way ANOVA; Ftreatment (1,104) = 109.9, p < 0.0001] (Fig. 3D left), but also a 75–80% reduc-
tion of alcohol-relapse drinking (binge drinking) compared to vehicle-treated animals [Student t test; t: 7. 347, 
p < 0.0003] (Fig. 3D right).
As expected, the reduction of ethanol consumption in the 60-minute ethanol re-access observed in 
MSC-spheroids-treated rats correlated with a marked 80% reduction in blood ethanol levels to 20 mg/dl, while 
vehicle-treated rats showed intoxicating blood ethanol levels, slightly above 100 mg/dl [Student t test; t: 6. 81, 
p < 0.0005] (Fig. 3E).
Intravenous administration of MSC-spheroids reduces chronic ethanol intake and relapse-like 
drinking to the same level achieved by the intra-cerebroventricular route. 
Researchers have 
consistently reported that, due to their large size, when 2D-cultured MSCs are administered by the intrave-
nous route, over 90% of administered cells are trapped in the lungs and other organs23,28. Thus, the number of 
MSCs that could reach the brain by the intravenous route is extremely low. As indicated, the culture of MSCs in 
3D-spheroids structures significantly reduces MSC size27, which could prevent MSC lodging in several organs, 
increasing the number of cells that could reach the brain.
Figure 2. Intra-cerebroventricular administration of MSC-spheroids normalizes both the ethanol-
induced activation of hippocampal astrocytes and the increases in MCP-1 levels. (A) Confocal microscopy 
microphotographs of GFAP immunoreactivity was evaluated in hippocampal astrocytes of animals injected 
intra-cerebroventricularly with 5 ×
 105 MSC-spheroid or vehicle. Rats that had consumed ethanol for 17 
weeks were intra-cerebroventricularly injected with a single dose of 5 ×
 105 MSC-spheroids or vehicle. After 
the MSC-spheroid administration the animals remained for one additional week in an ethanol and water 
free-choice condition, followed by a 2-week ethanol deprivation period and thereafter were allowed a 60-min 
period of ethanol re-access and euthanized for immunohistochemistry and mRNA studies. Animal consuming 
only water were used as controls. Scale bar 25 μ
m. (B left) Thickness and (B right) length of primary astrocytic 
process evaluated by confocal microscopy and FIJI image analysis software. (C) Level of mRNA of the pro-
inflammatory factor MCP-1 in the hippocampus of the same animals, determined by quantitative RT-PCR 
analysis. Data were normalized against the mRNA levels of the housekeeping genes ß-actin and GAPDH. Data 
are shown as mean ± SEM. N = 6 per experimental condition. All determinations, *p < 0.05 (see text).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
SCIENtIFIC REpoRtS |  (2018) 8:4325  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-22750-7
To evaluate whether the intravenous administration of MSC-spheroids also has a therapeutic potential in the 
reduction of ethanol intake, rats that had consumed ethanol for 12 weeks were intravenously injected with a single 
dose of 1 ×
 106 MSC-spheroids or vehicle.
We observed a marked reduction, initially a 93% reduction, in voluntary ethanol intake [2-way ANOVA; 
Ftreatment (1,350) = 1100, p < 0.0001], and a significant increase in water intake [2-way ANOVA; Ftreatment (1,200) = 466.4, 
p < 0.0001] in MSC-spheroids treated animals compared with vehicle-treated rats, which lasted over four weeks 
(Fig. 4A left and B). The reduction of ethanol intake observed after MSC-spheroid administration by the intrave-
nous route was comparable to the inhibition achieved by MSC-spheroid administration by the ICV route (88% 
reduction by the ICV route vs. 93% reduction by the intravenous route).Compared to vehicle treated rats, the 
intravenous administration of MSC-spheroids also reduced by 80% the relapse-like binge drinking after a 14-day 
alcohol deprivation period [Student t test; t: 7.347, p < 0.0001] (Fig. 4A right) and decreased blood ethanol levels 
after the 60-minute ethanol re-access [Student t test; t: 4.096, p < 0.002] (Fig. 4C).
As for the ICV administration of MSC-spheroids, the administration of MSC-spheroids by the intravenous 
route also reduced the increase in the thickness [one-way ANOVA; F(2, 569) = 105.0; p < 0.0001] and length 
[one-way ANOVA; F(2,1221) = 66.49 p < 0.0001] of primary astrocytic processes in the hippocampus observed in 
ethanol-vehicle group compared with the water group (Fig. 4D,E) and also normalized the hippocampal increase 
in the GSSG/GSH ratio observed in ethanol-vehicle group compared with the water group [one-way ANOVA; 
F(2,17) = 4.54, p < 0.0001] (Fig. 4F), indicating that MSC-spheroids administered via the intravenous route also 
effectively reduce the ethanol-induced neuroinflammation and oxidative stress. Animal general behavioral and 
safety issues are subsequently indicated.
Figure 3. Intra-cerebroventricular administration of MSC-spheroids inhibits chronic ethanol intake and 
relapse-like ethanol intake in the (ADE) ethanol post-deprivation condition and normalizes oxidative stress 
(GSSG/GSH). (A) Voluntary ethanol intake of animals that had consumed ethanol for 17 weeks and were 
injected with a single dose of 5 ×
 105 MSC-spheroid or vehicle into the left cerebral ventricle. Data are expressed 
as g of pure ethanol consumed/kg body weight/day. (B) Voluntary water intake in the same animals of figure 
A. Data are expressed as ml water consumed/kg body weight/day. A large proportion of the calories in the 
alcohol group is consumed in liquid form, while the water (chow) group consumes all their calories from 
a solid dry diet throughout the study. Their water consumption it is not indicated (nor it was determined) 
(C) GSSG/GSH ratio in hippocampus samples obtained twenty-two days after MSC-spheroid or vehicle 
administration. Animals consuming only water were used as controls. (D) Relapse-like drinking in animals that 
had consumed ethanol for 14 weeks and were injected with a single dose of 5 ×
 105 MSC-spheroid or vehicle 
into the left cerebral ventricle. Voluntary ethanol intake was determined after a 60-minute ethanol re-access, 
following a 14-day ethanol deprivation period. Ethanol intake during the 60-minute re-access is expressed 
as g of pure ethanol consumed/kg body weight/60 minutes. (E) Blood ethanol level attained by animals in 
Figure D after the 60-minute relapse-like ethanol consumption. Data are shown as mean ± SEM. N = 6 per 
experimental condition. Repeated measures analyses were conducted for Fig. 3A and D; left side and Fig. 3B. All 
determinations, *p < 0.05 (see text).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
SCIENtIFIC REpoRtS |  (2018) 8:4325  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-22750-7
Intravenous administration of MSC-spheroids increases the astrocyte Na-glutamate transporter-1 
 
(GLT-1) levels. 
The levels of the Na-glutamate transporter-1 (GLT-1) were measured by Western blot in 
animals that had consumed ethanol for 12 weeks and were intravenously injected with a single dose of 1 ×
 106 
MSC-spheroids or vehicle. Following the intravenous MSC-spheroid injection, the rats continued under the eth-
anol and water free-choice condition for four weeks, while on the subsequent two weeks animals were deprived 
of ethanol and thereafter were allowed a 60-min period of ethanol re-access. Subsequently, samples of prefrontal 
cortex and nucleus accumbens were processed for Western blot analyses (i.e., six weeks after the administration 
of the MSC-spheroids). In line with the anti-inflammatory effect and the inhibitory effect on alcohol-relapse of 
MSCs, the intravenous administration of MSC-spheroids increased the levels of GLT-1 by 180% in prefrontal 
Figure 4. Intravenous administration of MSC-spheroids inhibits chronic ethanol intake and relapse-like 
ethanol intake in the ethanol post-deprivation condition (ADE), and normalizes astrocyte (GFAP) activation 
and oxidative stress (GSSG/GSH ratio): (A left) Voluntary ethanol intake of animals that had consumed ethanol 
for 12 weeks and were intravenously injected with a single dose of 1 ×
 106 MSC-spheroids or vehicle. Ethanol 
intake is expressed as g of pure ethanol consumed/kg body weight/day. (A right) Rats that had consumed 
ethanol for 12 weeks were injected with a single dose of 1 ×
 106 MSC-spheroids or vehicle. After the intravenous 
MSC-spheroid administration the animals remained for four weeks in the ethanol and water free-choice 
condition, followed by a 2-week ethanol deprivation period. Relapse drinking after the deprivation period 
was determined by allowing animals a 60-minute ethanol re-access. Ethanol intake during the 60-minute 
re-access is expressed as g of pure ethanol consumed/kg body weight/60 minutes. (B) Voluntary water intake 
in the same animals of figure A. Data are expressed as ml of water consumed/kg body weight/day. Repeated 
measures analyses were conducted for Fig. 4A,B. (C) Blood ethanol level evaluated after the 60-minute relapse-
like ethanol consumption. (D) Confocal microscopy microphotographs of GFAP immunoreactivity evaluated 
in hippocampal astrocytes of animals intravenously injected with 1 ×
 106 MSC-spheroid or vehicle, after the 
60-minute ethanol re-access. Animals consuming only water were used as control. Scale bar 25 μ
m. (E left) 
Thickness and (E right) length of primary astrocytic process evaluated by confocal microscopy. (F) GSSG/GSH 
ratio in hippocampus samples evaluated after the 60-minute relapse-like ethanol consumption. Data are shown 
as mean ± SEM. N = 6 per experimental condition. All determinations, *p < 0.05 (see text).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
SCIENtIFIC REpoRtS |  (2018) 8:4325  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-22750-7
cortex [one-way ANOVA; F(2,13) = 8.52, p < 0.005] (Fig. 5) and by 120% in nucleus accumbens [one-way ANOVA; 
F(2,14) = 4.5, p < 0.05] (Fig. 5), compared with rats drinking only water or vehicle treated rats.
Intravenously injected MSC-spheroids efficiently reach the brain. 
The difference in cell size 
between MSCs in conventional 2D-cultures and 3D-spheroids was determined. Three days after seeding, MSCs 
were trypsinized and cell size was measured by optic microscopy and flow cytometry. As has been reported27, we 
observed a 50–60% reduction in cell diameter [Student t test; t: 8.013, p < 0.0013]; thus, MSC-spheroids had a 90% 
smaller volume than 2D-cultured MSCs (Fig. 6A). To evaluate whether intravenously injected MSC-spheroids 
reached the brain, animals that had consumed ethanol for 12 weeks were intravenously injected with a single dose 
of 1 ×
 106 2D-cultured MSCs labeled with DiR and GFP; a single dose of 1 ×
 106 MSC-spheroids labeled with DiR 
and GFP; or vehicle. Twenty-four hours after MSC administration, animals were perfused with PBS, the organs 
were removed, and the presence of MSCs in different organs was evaluated using the MS FX PRO image system, 
which detects the DiR signal. As expected, intravenously administered 2D-cultured MSCs were mainly trapped 
in the lungs and liver with few cells reaching the brain (Fig. 6B). Conversely, after intravenous administration of 
MSC-spheroids, fewer cells were trapped in the lungs while a marked increase in MSC distribution to brain, liver 
Figure 5. Intravenous administration of MSC-spheroids increases GLT-1 levels. GLT-1 level in prefrontal 
cortex and nucleus accumbens of rats that had consumed ethanol for 12 weeks and were intravenously 
injected with a single dose of 1 ×
 106 MSC-spheroids or vehicle. GLT-1 levels were evaluated by Western blot 
analysis six weeks after MSC-spheroid or vehicle administration. After the MSC-spheroid administration the 
animals remained for four weeks in the ethanol and water free-choice condition, followed by a 2-week ethanol 
deprivation period and a 60-minute ethanol re-access. Animals consuming only water were used as untreated 
controls. Data are presented as percentage ratios of GLT-1/β
-actin, relative to control levels. Data are shown as 
mean ± SEM. Immunoblots shown are representative of N = 6 per experimental condition. *p < 0.05. W: water; 
E + V: Ethanol + vehicle; E + Sp: Ethanol + MSC-spheroid.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
8
SCIENtIFIC REpoRtS |  (2018) 8:4325  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-22750-7
and kidneys was observed (Fig. 6B). The localization of MSC-spheroids in the brain was also confirmed by the 
presence of GFP positive cells in brain sections. In MSC-spheroid-treated rats, GFP-MSCs were seen adhered to 
brain blood vessels and were also present in the brain parenchyma compared to the brains of 2D-MSC treated rats 
in which GFP-MSCs were not found (Fig. 6C). Images are representative of 3 animals per experimental condition.
Intravenous administration of MSC-spheroid is not associated with adverse events. 
 
Intravenously administered MSC-spheroids showed a broad systemic and brain distribution in alcoholic rats. 
Therefore, we evaluated if MSC-spheroid administration was associated with any systemic adverse events. No 
differences in general parameters of wellbeing, including weight gain [2-way ANOVA; Ftreatment (1,200) = 0.35, 
p = 0.54; N.S.] or total fluid intake (water + ethanol solutions) [2-way ANOVA; Ftreatment (1,56) = 2.81, p = 0.09; N.S.] 
between chronic ethanol consuming rats treated with MSC-spheroids and those treated with vehicle were found 
(Fig. 7A,B). Additionally, no differences were observed between MSC-spheroid treated rats and vehicle-treated 
rats in motor coordination [Student t test; t: 0.3087, p = 0.76 N.S.] (Fig. 7C) and in anxiety in an open field 
Figure 6. Intravenously injected MSC-spheroids efficiently reach the brain while 2D-MSCs remain logged 
in other organs. (A) MSC size evaluated by optic microscopy and flow cytometry after trypsinization of 
human MSCs cultured for three days in conventional 2D cultures or as 3D spheroids. (B) DiR fluorescence of 
brain, lungs, liver and kidneys of animals that had consumed ethanol for 12 weeks, 24-hours after they were 
intravenously injected with a single dose of 1 ×
 106 DiR and GFP-labeled MSC-spheroids; DiR and GFP-
labeled 2D-cultured MSCs or vehicle. DiR fluorescence was evaluated using the MS FX PRO image system. 
(C) Confocal microscopy microphotographs showing presence of MSC-spheroids in brain blood vessels and 
in the brain parenchyma (white arrows). Since GFP-2D-MSCs were not found in the regions inspected in the 
brain, only GFP-3D-spheroid microphotographs are shown. Scale bar 10 μ
m. Images are representative of three 
animals per experimental condition. *p < 0.05.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
9
SCIENtIFIC REpoRtS |  (2018) 8:4325  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-22750-7
test [Student t test, p > 0.05 N.S.] (Fig. 7D). Specific anxiety measures were not different: Open field path 
length: t = 0.9426, p = 0.368; Time quiet: t = 1.167, p = 0.2702; Time center: t = 1.255, p = 0.2410. Location of 
MSC-spheroids to brain parenchyma was not associated with an increase in the apoptosis of brain cells [Student t 
test; t: 1.004 p = 0.32 N.S.] (Fig. 7E). Furthermore, no differences were observed between the experimental groups 
in plasma levels of markers associated with hepatic damage (AST and ALT), hepatic function (direct bilirubin and 
total bilirubin) and renal function (creatinine and BUN) [Student t test, p > 0.05 N.S.] (Supplementary Table 1), 
suggesting that the intravenous administration of MSC-spheroids is safe.
Discussion
Cumulative evidence indicates that the neuroimmune system and the induction of neuroinflammation con-
tribute to drug abuse and dependence, including alcoholism11,12. Postmortem studies show that the level 
of the pro-inflammatory cytokine MCP-1, a chemokine released following TLR4 activation, and the activ-
ity of astrocytes and microglia in hippocampus are elevated in alcoholics compared with non-alcoholic con-
trols29. Pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL1β
 and NFκ
B activation are increased in the brain of rats fed 
alcohol-containing liquid diets30, thus linking neuroinflamation to alcohol intake. Accordingly, animals lacking 
specific innate immune related genes or treated with TLR4 inhibitors, which prevent astrocyte pro-inflammatory 
responses, showed reduced preference for alcohol drinking7,31, while mice that lack MCP-1 or its receptor, display 
a reduced preference for alcohol32.
Marked increases in brain reactive oxygen species (ROS) have been reported following chronic ethanol intake 
in rodents33. ROS are known to inactivate IkB, the NFkB inhibitor, allowing the entrance of the NFkB p65 moiety 
into the nucleus, thus activating the synthesis of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including TNF-α
34. A vicious cycle 
develops since TNF-α
 further uncouples mitochondria, inducing superoxide ion generation34 and the production 
of additional ROS.
While in the present studies is not possible to firmly conclude that the reduction in ethanol intake induced 
by MSC-spheroids followed the reduction in neuroinflammation, the fact that inducing neuroinflammation by 
lipopolisaccharde administration leads to increases in ethanol intake7 strongly suggests that the reduction in 
alcohol-induced neuroinfammation by MSC led to the reduction in alcohol intake.
It is noted that MSCs are non-immunogenic due to their low expression of antigen-presenting molecules35 
which limits the ability of MSCs to trigger an unwanted allogeneic response when transferred into an un-matched 
recipient, allowing xenotransplantation without the need of immunosuppression36–38.
A possible neurochemical mechanism for the regulation of cued drinking behavior is an over-activation of 
the glutamatergic transmission39,40. A hyper-glutamatergic state would drive drinking behavior, as it activates 
the limbic dopamine system, potentiating the cued reward system41. In the present study, increases in GLT-1 
Figure 7. Intravenous administration of MSC-spheroids is not associated to adverse reactions. (A) Body weight 
and (B) total fluid intake of animals that had consumed ethanol for 12 weeks and were intravenously injected 
with a single dose of 1 ×
 106 MSC-spheroids or vehicle. Total fluid intake is expresses as ml of water + water in 
ethanol consumed/kg body weight/day. (C) Motor coordination evaluated forty days after MSC-spheroid or 
vehicle administration measuring the retention time using the rotarod test. (D) Exploratory behavior examined 
in a circular arena (open field) forty days after MSC-spheroid administration measuring locomotion, time spent 
without motion and time spent in the center of the arena. (E) Apoptotic rate in the hippocampus evaluated in 
brain sections by the TUNEL technique. Data are presented as percentage of TUNEL positive cells/DAPI/mm2. 
The administration of MSC-spheroids to alcohol consuming animals did not modify the parameters assessed. 
Data are shown as mean ± SEM. N = 6 per experimental condition.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
10
SCIENtIFIC REpoRtS |  (2018) 8:4325  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-22750-7
protein levels were not observed in the brain of rats that had chronically consumed ethanol for 12 weeks and while 
deprived of ethanol for two weeks. However, in the latter a marked increase in oxidative stress is seen as shown 
by an elevated GSSH/GSH ratio. Oxidation of adjacent cysteine residues in GLT-1 greatly reduces the activity of 
this transporter without altering the GLT-1 protein level42, which was detected by western blot analysis. Thus, 
an excess of glutamate likely exists in the synaptic region in oxidative stress conditions. A normalization of the 
GSSG/GSH ratio as well as the ant-inflammatory effect of MSC-spheroids is expected to increase the removal of 
glutamate by elevating GLT-1 protein. Present studies are in line with reports that increases in GLT-1 levels mark-
edly inhibit the relapse of many addictive drugs14.
The anti-inflammatory and antioxidant effects of MSCs are well documented in animal models of stroke, cer-
ebral ischemia and traumatic brain injury, where markers of neuroinflammation and oxidative stress are reduced 
by MSCs43,44. The present study used MSC-spheroids, since culturing MSCs into 3D structures greatly improves 
the generation and the secretion of the anti-inflammatory cytokines IL10 and TSG6, which counter the inflam-
matory effects of TNFα
 and IL1β
, inhibiting NF-κ
B activation45. These results are in line with observations of 
other groups who observed that the culture of MSCs in 3D-spheroids greatly improves the paracrine immuno-
modulatory activity of these cells24,46. We showed that a single ICV injection of human MSC-spheroids induced 
a 90% reduction in chronic alcohol intake. The effect was long-lasting, as 60% of the maximum inhibitory effect 
was retained three weeks after MSC-spheroids administration, suggesting a potent therapeutic effect of the cells. 
In line with the neuroinflammation-ROS potentiation30 and the powerful antioxidant potential of MSCs, the ICV 
administration of MSC-spheroids also fully inhibited the ethanol-induced increases in the GSSG/GSH ratio in 
the hippocampus.
Binge drinking (≥
5 drinks on one occasion for men and ≥
4 drinks on one occasion for women), is a common 
form of relapse behavior. Binge drinking, as well as chronic ethanol intake at moderate levels, induce neuroin-
flammation, partly due to increases in gut permeability via the generation of gut acetaldehyde disrupting intes-
tinal tight junctions, thus allowing the gut biome bacterial endotoxins to enter the portal circulation47. Released 
LPS potentiates the secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines by the liver and the effect of these cytokines is 
expressed across intracerebrally via TNF-α
 receptors to activate brain neuroimmune signaling that persists for 
long periods48. This pro-inflammatory mechanism also leads to increases in ROS4.
In the present study, rats that had consumed ethanol chronically for 2 to 3 months, without overt intoxica-
tion were administered MSC-spheroids. Subsequently, a two-week period of alcohol deprivation followed by 
60-minute alcohol re-access (ADE) was applied, a condition after which highly intoxicating amounts of ethanol 
are consumed, akin to binge-drinking. This paradigm has been considered to be the primary model to assess 
relapse-like behavior in rats49,50. Using this animal model, the study showed that the administration of a single 
dose of MSC-spheroids, whether ICV or intravenously, greatly reduced binge drinking.
The histological and biochemical analyses in this report concentrated on the hippocampus; the brain region 
most pathologically affected by chronic ethanol intake, including a prolonged ethanol intake without binge drink-
ing51,52. In this brain area, ethanol activates microglia and astrocytes via TLR4, which can be evidenced by specific 
morphological changes including increasing the thickness and length of primary processes (i.e., astrocyto-
sis)51,53. This activation promotes the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, chemokines and ROS which in turn, 
promote neuronal death in hippocampus and other brain regions54. Here, it was observed that MSC-spheroid 
administration fully normalized both the ethanol-induced astrocyte changes and the GSSG/GSH elevation in the 
hippocampus, suggesting a potent anti-inflammatory effect of MSC-spheroids. Furthermore, the ethanol-induced 
increase in MCP-1 expression was also normalized by MSC-spheroid administration. In line with these results, 
a recent study, which employed siRNA to target TLR4/MCP-1 demonstrated that blocking the activity of TLR4/
MCP-1 blunted binge drinking55.
The inhibitory effect on ethanol intake observed after the ICV administration of MSC-spheroids in this 
study was similar to that reported after the ICV administration of human 2D-MSCs (rather than spheroids) 
that had been activated in vitro by incubation with the pro-inflammatory cytokines TNFα
 and IFNγ
19. 
Intra-cerebroventricularly injected rat MSCs without prior in vitro activation were also shown to markedly inhibit 
relapse-like drinking in rats18. While these early findings constituted a significant proof-of-principle, the main 
disadvantage of the ICV administration is its invasiveness. Thus, the possibility of intravenously administering a 
novel form of 3D-MSCs, namely MSC-spheroids constitutes a significant translational advantage. The effect on 
biochemical and histological parameters of an ICV injection of 2D-cultured MSC19 was remarkably similar to 
data presented here for the ICV administration of 3D MSC-spheroids.
Several studies have demonstrated that when MSC-spheroids are disaggregated, the cells obtained show a 
significant size reduction, on the order of 0.25–0.4 the volume of their conventional 2D-cultured counterparts15,27. 
This size reduction (to the size of leukocytes) increases the number of cells that reach the brain after an intra-
venous administration. As was observed, due to their large size, when 2D-cultured MSCs were intravenously 
injected, the cells were mostly entrapped in pulmonary capillaries, with few cells reaching the brain. Conversely, 
when spheroid-derived MSCs were intravenously injected, fewer cells were entrapped in the lungs and more 
reached the brain, where MSC-spheroids could be detected adhered to brain blood vessels, and were also present 
in the brain parenchyma. These data agree with studies of Ge et al. who described that the intra-carotid injec-
tion of conventional 2D-cultured MSCs caused severe vascular obstruction, compared to the lack of dysfunction 
induced by 3D-cultured MSCs56.
Surprisingly, we observed that the administration of MSC-spheroids by the non-invasive intravenous route, 
while distributed in a large volume, induced strong and long-lasting reductions in chronic alcohol intake and in 
relapse-like drinking that were almost identical to those observed after the ICV administration of MSC-spheroids. 
The inhibitory effects of MSC-spheroids on chronic ethanol intake by either route was nearly maximal within 
24-hours of their administration, suggesting that the release of soluble factors is associated with their inhibitory 
effects.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
11
SCIENtIFIC REpoRtS |  (2018) 8:4325  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-22750-7
While we cannot discard that part of the effect of MSC-spheroids on ethanol intake and astrocyte morphology 
may in part have a hepatic origin, several studies have shown that MSCs hold their natural potential to home to 
the brain in injured sites57,58. However, the precise localization of the infused cells in brain areas is not known. In 
alcoholic rats, one possibility is that increased permeability of the blood-brain barrier induced by ethanol59 allows 
for selective cell entry to the brain.
Safety considerations are a main concern when using a systemic route of stem cells administration. Available 
results from clinical studies support the overall safety of cell therapy using MSCs by the intravenous route60,61 
since these cells are non-immunogenic nor associated to tumor formation. The present study indicates that the 
intravenous administration of MSC-spheroids did not induce changes in classical signs of sickness (reduced 
weigh gain, reduced fluid intake) compared with vehicle treated rats, nor differences in specific markers such 
as the presence of TUNEL positive cells in the brain or motor coordination and open field performance. Since 
we detected MSCs also in liver and kidneys we measured biochemical parameters characteristic of liver damage, 
including serum transaminases AST and ALT, markers of hepatic function such as serum bilirubin and markers 
of renal function such as creatinine and nitrogen ureic levels. No differences were detected in any of these mark-
ers between the alcoholic animals treated with MSC-spheroids or with vehicle, suggesting that the intravenous 
administration of MSCs-spheroids is safe.
Neuroinflammation and astrocyte activation have been implicated in drug-use disorders62, as well as in a vari-
ety of other brain diseases, including Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, Huntington’s disease, multiple scle-
rosis and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, conditions in which the potential of MSC therapy has been reported38,63,64. 
The present study broadens the therapeutic potential of MSC-spheroids to alcohol-use disorders, in which avail-
able therapies have limited effectiveness; in the range of 15 to 20% (reviewed by Donohue et al.)65.
Overall, the study shows that a single dose of mesenchymal stem cell-spheroids administered intravenously 
or intracerebrally to rats consuming alcohol chronically fully abolished alcohol-induced neuroinflammation, 
inhibited voluntary alcohol intake and reduced relapse-like binge drinking by 80–90%, with significant effects 
that lasted at least 3 to 5 weeks. Intravenously administered mesenchymal stem cell-spheroids may constitute a 
novel treatment for alcohol-use disorders.
Methods
Isolation, expansion and characterization of human adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells 
(hAD-MSCs). 
Human AD-MSCs were isolated from fresh subcutaneous adipose tissue obtained from aspi-
rates of four patients undergoing cosmetic liposuction at Clínica Alemana, Santiago, Chile after obtaining written 
informed consent. Protocols were approved by the Ethics Committee of Facultad de Medicina, Clínica Alemana-
Universidad del Desarrollo. AD-MSCs were isolated and expanded as previously described66. All methods were 
performed in accordance with the internationals guidelines and regulations. Their adipogenic and osteogenic dif-
ferentiation potential and their immune-phenotyping were determined as previously described66 (Supplementary 
Figure 1).
Generation and dissociation of MSC-spheroids. 
Human AD-MSCs at passage three were collected by 
trypsin digestion and resuspended at a cell density of 7.5 ×
 105 cells/ml in α
-MEM (Gibco, Grand Island, NY) 
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Gibco, Auckland, NZ). Thirty-five microliters of cell solu-
tion per drop (containing 20,000 cells) were seeded onto the cover of a culture plate. Cell drops were cultured 
inversely for three days as previously reported15. To dissociate spheroids, they were digested with 0.25% trypsin/
EDTA (Gibco) for 10 min and trypsin was then inactivated by adding an equal volume of saline containing 10% 
rat serum.
Measurement of cell size. 
The sizes of MSCs derived from conventional 2D-MSC cultures or from dissoci-
ated 3D-MSC-spheroids were determined by hemocytometer microscopy and flow cytometry. For flow cytomet-
ric analysis of cell size, 1 ×
 105 MSCs were stained for the Annexin V-FITC apoptosis detection kit (Invitrogen, 
Grand Island, NY) and cell size was estimated from the viable population by comparing forward scatter proper-
ties of the cells.
Quantification of mRNA levels of anti-inflammatory factors in 2D-MSCs and 3D-MSC-spheroids. 
 
Three days after spheroid formation, total RNA was purified using Trizol (Invitrogen). RNA isolated from MSCs 
seeded in conventional 2D-cultures was used as control. One microgram of total RNA was used to perform 
reverse transcription with MMLV reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen) and oligo dT primers. Real-time PCR reac-
tions were performed to amplify the anti-inflammatory factors IL4, IL5, IL10 and TSG6 using a Light-Cycler 1.5 
thermocycler (Roche, Indianapolis, IN) as previously reported66. Relative quantifications were performed by the 
Δ
Δ
CT method.
Quantification of protein levels of anti-inflammatory factors in the secretome of MSC-spheroids. 
 
Three days after MSC-spheroid formation, the secretome was obtained by harvesting the culture media. The 
media was centrifuged at 400 ×
 g for 10 min to remove whole cells and at 12,000 ×
 g for 20 min to remove cell 
debris. As control, secretome of the same number of 2D-cultured MSCs was obtained and concentrated using 
3 kDa cutoff filters (Millipore, Midlesex, MA) to reach to the same volume of MSC-spheroid secretome. IL10 and 
TSG6 abundance were evaluated in the secretomes using the human IL10 High sensitivity ELISA kit (Invitrogen) 
and the human TSG6 ELISA kit (RayBio, Norcross, GA) respectively.
Animal model of chronic alcohol consumption. 
Two-month-old female Wistar-derived rats selec-
tively bred as alcohol consumers (University of Chile Bibulous; UChB)67 were used in the experiments. It is 
noted that the present work only studied female rats. For rats selectively bred for their high-ethanol intake e.g. 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
12
SCIENtIFIC REpoRtS |  (2018) 8:4325  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-22750-7
the Indianapolis bred rats, females have or higher (HAD-2) or equal (HAD-1) ethanol intake than males68. For 
Sardinian high-ethanol intake bred rats, females show higher levels of ethanol intake than males69. Males of 
the UChB rat line show a 20% lower ethanol intake than UChB females (unpublished). Unlike commercial 
strains, rats bred for their high ethanol intake spontaneously consume 10 and 20% ethanol solutions and show 
relapse-like characteristics seen in alcohol-use disorders. Both the Indianapolis-bred Wistar-derived P-rat (high 
Preference) and the Santiago-bred Wistar derived UChB (Bbibulous) rat have been shown to markedly increase 
their ethanol intake following chronic ethanol administration and relapse-like intoxication following by a pro-
longed alcohol deprivation period followed by re-access to ethanol17,49.
Animal experimental procedures were approved by the Ethics Committee for Studies with Laboratory 
Animals at the Faculty of Medicine, University of Chile (17038-MED-UCH). All methods were performed in 
accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations. For induction of chronic alcohol intake, animals had 
continuous 24 hour free-choice access to 10% v/v ethanol and water for 12 to 17 weeks. Relapse-like alcohol 
drinking was assessed after the animals were deprived of ethanol for 14 days and were allowed re-access to etha-
nol solutions for only 60 minutes.
Intracerebroventricular (ICV) administration of MSC-spheroids. 
After 100 or 117 days of chronic 
alcohol consumption, rats were ICV injected with 10 μ
l of a solution containing 5 ×
 105 MSC-spheroids resus-
pended in saline containing 10% rat serum as previously described19. Control animals were ICV injected with 
10 μ
l of saline containing 10% rat serum (vehicle).
Intravenous administration of MSC-spheroids. 
After 82 days of chronic alcohol consumption, rats 
under moderate sedation with acepromazine (1 mg/kg i.p.) were slowly injected by the tail vein with 1 ×
 106 
MSC-spheroids in 300 μ
l of saline containing 10% rat serum. Control animals received 300 μ
l of vehicle. It is noted 
that a larger dose of MSC-spheroids was used when administered intravenously, as the volume of distribution by 
the intravenous route is at least one order of magnitude larger than the volume of distribution of the ICV route.
A note on the use of vehicle as control. 
The election of a “mock cell” as control is not simple; even the 
administration of platelets was shown to contribute to tissue regeneration70. Fibroblasts, as an option, are specifi-
cally not an “innocuous” control cell, since there is abundant bibliography reporting on the effects associated with 
the administration of these cells. For example, the transplantation of human MSCs in a rat model or Parkinson’s 
disease resulted in therapeutic effects while control animals infused with saline showed no effects, and animals 
injected with fibroblasts presented exacerbated neurodegeneration and motor deficits71. Thus, fibroblast admin-
istration or the administration of other cells is a research question per se. In line with many other research groups, 
in different animal models64,72,73 we have adhered to administering the vehicle carrying the MSCs as control 
group.
Determination of chronic daily ethanol intake and quantification of ethanol intake in the alco-
hol deprivation effect (ADE) relapse model. 
Ethanol intake was determined every 24 hours from vol-
ume difference of inverted graduated cylinders. Ethanol intake was expressed as g of ethanol consumed/kg body 
weight/day. Seven days after ICV administration or 25 days after intravenous administration of MSC-spheroids 
a 14-day withdrawal period was imposed, followed by a 60-minute ethanol re-access19. Ethanol intake was 
expressed as g of ethanol consumed/kg body weight/60 minutes.
Blood ethanol and glutathione determinations. 
After animals had 60 minutes of re-access to ethanol 
and water, 100 μ
l of blood was collected from the tip of the tail. Samples were immediately added to 0.9 ml of 
distilled water at 4 °C in a glass vial sealed and analyzed by head space gas chromatography (Perkin Elmer SRI 
8610) as previously described74. The ratio of oxidized and reduced glutathione (GSSG/GSH) was determined in 
hippocampus samples as previously described19.
Evaluation of MSC-spheroids distribution after intravenous administration. 
For MSC detection, 
cells were transduced for 8 hours with a lentiviral vector (MOI 5) coding for GFP as previously reported75. 72 hours 
after transduction, GFP expression was confirmed by confocal microscopy and flow cytometry (Supplementary 
Figure 2). GFP-MSCs were seeded in conventional 2D cultures or in 3D-spheroids for three days. After that, 2D 
cultured GFP-MSCs and GFP-MSC-spheroids were trypsinized and labeled with DiR tracer (1,1′
-Dioctadecyl-
3,3,3′
,3′
-Tetramethyl indo tricarbocyanine Iodide, Thermo Fisher) according to supplier’s instructions. After 
labeling, cells were rinsed and slowly injected by the tail vein (1 ×
 106 2D-MSCs or 1 ×
 106 MSC-spheroids in 
300 μ
l of saline containing 10% rat serum). Control animals received 300 μ
l of vehicle. Twenty-four hours after 
injection, animals were anesthetized and perfused intracardially with 100 ml of 0.1 M PBS (pH 7.4), followed by 
200 ml formalin solution. The brain, lungs, liver and kidneys were removed and DiR fluorescence was inspected 
in an In-Vivo MS FX PRO equipment, (In-Vivo Imaging Systems,Bruker, Ettlingen GE). For GFP detection, brain 
coronal sections (30 μ
m) were obtained, counterstained with 4,6 diamino-2-phenylindiol (DAPI, Invitrogen), and 
examined by confocal microscopy (Olympus-fv10i) at 10 and 60×
 magnification.
Evaluation of behavioral parameters. 
Exploratory behavior was examined in a circular arena (open 
field) placed in a noise-free room as previously described76. Motor coordination was evaluated 24 hour after 
alcohol deprivation using the rotarod test. The rod accelerated from five rpm to 40 rpm over a five-minute period.
Evaluation of physiological and biochemical parameters. 
Water intake was determined daily and 
body weight determined twice a week. At the end of the experiments, animals were anesthetized with chlo-
ral hydrate (280 mg/kg i.p.) and blood samples were obtained by heart puncture. Plasmatic levels of aspartate 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
13
SCIENtIFIC REpoRtS |  (2018) 8:4325  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-22750-7
aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) (markers of hepatic damage); total and direct biliru-
bin (markers of hepatic function) and creatinine and blood urea nitrogen (markers of renal function) were evalu-
ated spectrophotometrically using the AST Assay Kit, ALT Assay Kit, Bilirrubin Total Assay Kit, Direct Billirubin 
Assay Kit (all from Wiener Lab, Argentina), Creatinine Assay Kit (Crystal Chem) and QuantiChrom Urea Assay 
Kit (BioAssay Systems, Hayward, CA) respectively, following manufacturer´s instructions.
Determination of astrocyte reactivity. 
Astrocyte reactivity was determined in hipoccampus as it is the 
area showing the greatest damage in alcohol chronically fed rats51,52. Immunofluorescence against the astrocyte 
marker glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) was evaluated in coronal cryo-sections of the hippocampus (30 μ
m 
thick) as previously reported19. Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI. Microphotographs (3 to 4) were taken 
from the lacunosum moleculare stratum of hippocampus using a confocal microscope (Olympus FV10i). The area 
analyzed for each stack was 0.04 mm2 and the thickness (Z axis) was measured for each case. The total length and 
thickness of astrocyte primary processes was assessed for six GFAP positive cells per Z-stack, using FIJI image 
analysis software (http://fiji.sc/Fiji) as previously reported19.
Quantification of mRNA levels of MCP-1 in hippocampus. 
Total RNA from hippocampus of 
MSC-spheroids or vehicle-treated rats was purified using Trizol. RT-PCR was performed for amplification of the 
pro-inflammatory chemokine MCP-1 as previously indicated66.
Quantification of GLT-1 levels in prefrontal cortex and nucleus accumbens. 
Samples of prefron-
tal cortex and nucleus accumbens of MSC-spheroids or vehicle-treated rats were procured and proteins were 
extracted. Western blot procedures to examine the levels of GLT-1 were performed as previously described13. The 
same membranes were also assessed for β
-actin immunobloting as loading control. Immunoblots were quantified 
using the Image Studio Lite software. GLT-1 was determined in prefrontal cortex and nucleus accumbens since 
the levels of GLT-1 in these two areas modulate chronic alcohol intake, as shown in the Indianapolis-bred high 
ethanol drinker Wistar-derived P-rat13.
Quantification of apoptotic rate. 
Coronal cryo-sections of the brains (30 μ
m thick) were obtained and 
mounted on silanized slides. Presence of apoptotic cells was evaluated by the TUNEL technique, using the In Situ 
Cell Death Detection Kit (Roche) following manufacturer´s instructions. Nuclei were counterstaining with DAPI 
and samples were observed by confocal microscopy focusing on the hippocampus and quantified using the FIJI 
image analysis software. The data are expressed as percentage of TUNEL positive cells/DAPI/mm2.
Statistical analysis. 
Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism (SanDiego, CA). Data are 
expressed as means ± SEM. Two-way (treatment ×
 day) analysis of variance (ANOVA), followed by Bonferroni’s 
post hoc test or ANOVA for repeated measures when required, was conducted to compare the ethanol intake or 
water intake between vehicle and hMSCs groups. One-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni’s post hoc test was 
used to analyze total length and thickness of primary processes of GFAP positive astrocytes for GSSG/GSH ratios, 
MPC-1 and GLT-1 data. When appropriate, a Student’s t-test was used to determine if two sets of data were signif-
icantly different from each other. A level of P < 0.05 was considered for statistical significance.
References
 1. Stahre, M., Roeber, J., Kanny, D., Brewer, R. D. & Zhang, X. Contribution of excessive alcohol consumption to deaths and years of 
potential life lost in the United States. Preventing Chronic Disease 11, E109 (2014).
 2. Pfefferbaum, A., Sullivan, E. V., Rosenbloom, M. J., Mathalon, D. H. & Lim, K. O. A controlled study of cortical gray matter and 
ventricular changes in alcoholic men over a 5-year interval. Archives of General Psychiatry 55, 905–912 (1998).
 3. Leclercq, S. et al. Role of intestinal permeability and inflammation in the biological and behavioral control of alcohol-dependent 
subjects. Brain, Behavior, and Immunity 26, 911–918 (2012).
 4. Crews, F. T. & Vetreno, R. P. Mechanisms of neuroimmune gene induction in alcoholism. Psychopharmacology 233, 1543–1557 
(2016).
 5. Schneider, R. Jr. et al. N-acetylcysteine Prevents Alcohol Related Neuroinflammation in Rats. Neurochemical Research 42, 2135–2141 
(2017).
 6. Crews, F. T. & Vetreno, R. P. Neuroimmune basis of alcoholic brain damage. International Review of Neurobiology 118, 315–357 
(2014).
 7. Blednov, Y. A. et al. Neuroimmune regulation of alcohol consumption: behavioral validation of genes obtained from genomic 
studies. Addiction Biology 17, 108–120 (2012).
 8. Mayfield, J., Ferguson, L. & Harris, R. A. Neuroimmune signaling: a key component of alcohol abuse. Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology 23, 513–520 (2013).
 9. Qin, L. et al. Increased systemic and brain cytokine production and neuroinflammation by endotoxin following ethanol treatment. 
Journal of Neuroinflammation 5, 10 (2008).
 
10. Montesinos, J., Pascual, M., Rodriguez-Arias, M., Minarro, J. & Guerri, C. Involvement of TLR4 in the long-term epigenetic changes, 
rewarding and anxiety effects induced by intermittent ethanol treatment in adolescence. Brain, Behavior, and Immunity 53, 159–171 
(2016).
 
11. Coller, J. K. & Hutchinson, M. R. Implications of central immune signaling caused by drugs of abuse: mechanisms, mediators and 
new therapeutic approaches for prediction and treatment of drug dependence. Pharmacology & Therapeutics 134, 219–245 (2012).
 
12. Cui, C., Shurtleff, D. & Harris, R. A. Neuroimmune mechanisms of alcohol and drug addiction. International Review of Neurobiology 
118, 1–12 (2014).
 
13. Sari, Y., Toalston, J. E., Rao, P. S. S. & Bell, R. L. Effects of ceftriaxone on ethanol, nicotine or sucrose intake by alcohol-preferring (P) 
rats and its association with GLT-1 expression. Neuroscience 326, 117–125 (2016).
 
14. Roberts-Wolfe, D. J. & Kalivas, P. W. Glutamate Transporter GLT-1 as a Therapeutic Target for Substance Use Disorders. CNS & 
Neurological Disorders Drug Targets 14, 745–756 (2015).
 
15. Bartosh, T. J. et al. Aggregation of human mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) into 3D spheroids enhances their antiinflammatory 
properties. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 107, 13724–13729 (2010).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
14
SCIENtIFIC REpoRtS |  (2018) 8:4325  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-22750-7
 
16. Gebler, A., Zabel, O. & Seliger, B. The immunomodulatory capacity of mesenchymal stem cells. Trends in Molecular Medicine 18, 
128–134 (2012).
 
17. Tampier, L. et al. The alcohol deprivation effect: marked inhibition by anticatalase gene administration into the ventral tegmental 
area in rats. Alcoholism, Clinical and Experimental Research 37, 1278–1285 (2013).
 
18. Israel, Y. et al. Intracerebral Stem Cell Administration Inhibits Relapse-like Alcohol Drinking in Rats. Alcohol and Alcoholism 52, 
1–4 (2017).
 
19. Ezquer, F. et al. Activated mesenchymal stem cell administration inhibits chronic alcohol drinking and suppresses relapse-like 
drinking in high-alcohol drinker rats. Addiction Biology, In press (2017).
 
20. Osaka, M. et al. Intravenous administration of mesenchymal stem cells derived from bone marrow after contusive spinal cord injury 
improves functional outcome. Brain Research 1343, 226–235 (2010).
 
21. Akiyama, Y., Radtke, C., Honmou, O. & Kocsis, J. D. Remyelination of the spinal cord following intravenous delivery of bone 
marrow cells. Glia 39, 229–236 (2002).
 
22. Gao, J., Dennis, J. E., Muzic, R. F., Lundberg, M. & Caplan, A. I. The dynamic in vivo distribution of bone marrow-derived 
mesenchymal stem cells after infusion. Cells, Tissues, Organs 169, 12–20 (2001).
 
23. Schrepfer, S. et al. Stem cell transplantation: the lung barrier. Transplantation Proceedings 39, 573–576 (2007).
 
24. Zimmermann, J. A. & McDevitt, T. C. Pre-conditioning mesenchymal stromal cell spheroids for immunomodulatory paracrine 
factor secretion. Cytotherapy 16, 331–345 (2014).
 
25. Bhang, S. H. et al. Angiogenesis in ischemic tissue produced by spheroid grafting of human adipose-derived stromal cells. 
Biomaterials 32, 2734–2747 (2011).
 
26. Lee, E. J. et al. Spherical bullet formation via E-cadherin promotes therapeutic potency of mesenchymal stem cells derived from 
human umbilical cord blood for myocardial infarction. Molecular Therapy 20, 1424–1433 (2012).
 
27. Tsai, A. C., Liu, Y., Yuan, X. & Ma, T. Compaction, fusion, and functional activation of three-dimensional human mesenchymal stem 
cell aggregate. Tissue Engineering. Part A 21, 1705–1719 (2015).
 
28. Lee, R. H. et al. Intravenous hMSCs improve myocardial infarction in mice because cells embolized in lung are activated to secrete 
the anti-inflammatory protein TSG-6. Cell Stem Cell 5, 54–63 (2009).
 
29. He, J. & Crews, F. T. Increased MCP-1 and microglia in various regions of the human alcoholic brain. Experimental Neurology 210, 
349–358 (2008).
 
30. Valles, S. L., Blanco, A. M., Pascual, M. & Guerri, C. Chronic ethanol treatment enhances inflammatory mediators and cell death in 
the brain and in astrocytes. Brain Pathology 14, 365–371 (2004).
 
31. Liu, J. et al. Binge alcohol drinking is associated with GABAA alpha2-regulated Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) expression in the central 
amygdala. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 108, 4465–4470 (2011).
 
32. Blednov, Y. A. et al. Perturbation of chemokine networks by gene deletion alters the reinforcing actions of ethanol. Behavioural Brain 
Research 165, 110–125 (2005).
 
33. Montoliu, C., Valles, S., Renau-Piqueras, J. & Guerri, C. Ethanol-induced oxygen radical formation and lipid peroxidation in rat 
brain: effect of chronic alcohol consumption. Journal of Neurochemistry 63, 1855–1862 (1994).
 
34. Kastl, L. et al. TNF-alpha mediates mitochondrial uncoupling and enhances ROS-dependent cell migration via NF-kappaB 
activation in liver cells. FEBS Letters 588, 175–183 (2014).
 
35. Le Blanc, K. & Mougiakakos, D. Multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells and the innate immune system. Nat Rev Immunol 12, 
383–396 (2012).
 
36. Gonzalez-Rey, E. et al. Human adult stem cells derived from adipose tissue protect against experimental colitis and sepsis. Gut 58, 
929–939 (2009).
 
37. Gonzalez, M., Gonzalez-Rey, E., Rico, L., Buscher, D. & Delgado, M. Treatment of experimental arthritis by inducing immune 
tolerance with human adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells. Arthritis Rheum 60, 1006–1019 (2009).
 
38. Zhang, J. et al. Human bone marrow stromal cell treatment improves neurological functional recovery in EAE mice. Exp Neurol 195, 
16–26 (2005).
 
39. Crews, F. T. et al. Cytokines and alcohol. Alcoholism, Clinical and Experimental Research 30, 720–730 (2006).
 
40. Gass, J. T., Sinclair, C. M., Cleva, R. M., Widholm, J. J. & Olive, M. F. Alcohol-seeking behavior is associated with increased glutamate 
transmission in basolateral amygdala and nucleus accumbens as measured by glutamate-oxidase-coated biosensors. Addiction 
Biology 16, 215–228 (2011).
 
41. Spanagel, R. et al. The clock gene Per2 influences the glutamatergic system and modulates alcohol consumption. Nature Medicine 11, 
35–42 (2005).
 
42. Trotti, D., Danbolt, N. & Volterra, A. Glutamate transporters are oxidant-vulnerable: a molecular link between oxidative and 
excitotoxic neurodegeneration? Trends Pharmacol Sci 19, 328–334 (1998).
 
43. Chen, J. et al. Therapeutic benefit of intracerebral transplantation of bone marrow stromal cells after cerebral ischemia in rats. 
Journal of the Neurological Sciences 189, 49–57 (2001).
 
44. Li, Y. et al. Human marrow stromal cell therapy for stroke in rat: neurotrophins and functional recovery. Neurology 59, 514–523 
(2002).
 
45. English, K. Mechanisms of mesenchymal stromal cell immunomodulation. Immunology and Cell Biology 91, 19–26 (2013).
 
46. Follin, B. et al. Increased Paracrine Immunomodulatory Potential of Mesenchymal Stromal Cells in Three-Dimensional Culture. 
Tissue Engineering. Part B, Reviews 22, 322–329 (2016).
 
47. Ferrier, L. et al. Impairment of the intestinal barrier by ethanol involves enteric microflora and mast cell activation in rodents. The 
American Journal of Pathology 168, 1148–1154 (2006).
 
48. Qin, L. et al. Systemic LPS causes chronic neuroinflammation and progressive neurodegeneration. Glia 55, 453–462 (2007).
 
49. Rodd-Henricks, Z. A. et al. Alcohol deprivation effect is prolonged in the alcohol preferring (P) rat after repeated deprivations. 
Alcoholism, Clinical and Experimental Research 24, 8–16 (2000).
 
50. Holter, S. M. & Spanagel, R. Effects of opiate antagonist treatment on the alcohol deprivation effect in long-term ethanol-experienced 
rats. Psychopharmacology 145, 360–369 (1999).
 
51. Franke, H., Kittner, H., Berger, P., Wirkner, K. & Schramek, J. The reaction of astrocytes and neurons in the hippocampus of adult 
rats during chronic ethanol treatment and correlations to behavioral impairments. Alcohol 14, 445–454 (1997).
 
52. Walker, D. W., Barnes, D. E., Zornetzer, S. F., Hunter, B. E. & Kubanis, P. Neuronal loss in hippocampus induced by prolonged 
ethanol consumption in rats. Science 209, 711–713 (1980).
 
53. Beynon, S. B. & Walker, F. R. Microglial activation in the injured and healthy brain: what are we really talking about? Practical and 
theoretical issues associated with the measurement of changes in microglial morphology. Neuroscience 225, 162–171 (2012).
 
54. Ward, R. J. et al. Neuro-inflammation induced in the hippocampus of ‘binge drinking’ rats may be mediated by elevated extracellular 
glutamate content. Journal of Neurochemistry 111, 1119–1128 (2009).
 
55. June, H. L. et al. CRF-amplified neuronal TLR4/MCP-1 signaling regulates alcohol self-administration. Neuropsychopharmacology 
40, 1549–1559 (2015).
 
56. Ge, J. et al. The size of mesenchymal stem cells is a significant cause of vascular obstructions and stroke. Stem Cell Reviews 10, 
295–303 (2014).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
15
SCIENtIFIC REpoRtS |  (2018) 8:4325  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-22750-7
 
57. Azizi, S. A., Stokes, D., Augelli, B. J., DiGirolamo, C. & Prockop, D. J. Engraftment and migration of human bone marrow stromal 
cells implanted in the brains of albino rats–similarities to astrocyte grafts. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America 95, 3908–3913 (1998).
 
58. Chen, J. et al. Intravenous administration of human bone marrow stromal cells induces angiogenesis in the ischemic boundary zone 
after stroke in rats. Circulation Research 92, 692–699 (2003).
 
59. Rubio-Araiz, A. et al. Disruption of blood-brain barrier integrity in postmortem alcoholic brain: preclinical evidence of TLR4 
involvement from a binge-like drinking model. Addiction Biology 22, 1103–1116 (2017).
 
60. Bang, O. Y., Lee, J. S., Lee, P. H. & Lee, G. Autologous mesenchymal stem cell transplantation in stroke patients. Annals of Neurology 
57, 874–882 (2005).
 
61. Lee, J. S. et al. A long-term follow-up study of intravenous autologous mesenchymal stem cell transplantation in patients with 
ischemic stroke. Stem Cells 28, 1099–1106 (2010).
 
62. Crews, F. T. Immune function genes, genetics, and the neurobiology of addiction. Alcohol Research: Current Reviews 34, 355–361 (2012).
 
63. Wang, H. et al. Human mesenchymal stem cell transplantation changes proinflammatory gene expression through a nuclear factor-
kappaB-dependent pathway in a rat focal cerebral ischemic model. J Neurosci Res 91, 1440–1449 (2013).
 
64. Schwerk, A. et al. Adipose-derived human mesenchymal stem cells induce long-term neurogenic and anti-inflammatory effects and 
improve cognitive but not motor performance in a rat model of Parkinson’s disease. Regen Med 10, 431–446 (2015).
 
65. Donoghue, K. et al. The efficacy of acamprosate and naltrexone in the treatment of alcohol dependence, Europe versus the rest of the 
world: a meta-analysis. Addiction 110, 920–930 (2015).
 
66. Oses, C. et al. Preconditioning of adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells with deferoxamine increases the production of 
pro-angiogenic, neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory factors: Potential application in the treatment of diabetic neuropathy. PloS 
One 12, e0178011 (2017).
 
67. Quintanilla, M. E., Israel, Y., Sapag, A. & Tampier, L. The UChA and UChB rat lines: metabolic and genetic differences influencing 
ethanol intake. Addiction Biology 11, 310–323 (2006).
 
68. Dhaher, R., McConnell, K., Rodd, Z., McBride, W. & Bell, R. Daily patterns of ethanol drinking in adolescent and adult, male and 
female, high alcohol drinking (HAD) replicate lines of rats. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 102, 540–548 (2012).
 
69. Loi, B. et al. High alcohol intake in female Sardinian alcoholpreferring rats. Alcohol 48, 345–351 (2014).
 
70. Martinez-Zapata, M. et al. Efficacy and safety of the use of autologous plasma rich in platelets for tissue regeneration: a systematic 
review. Transfusion 49, 44–56 (2009).
 
71. Pereira, M. et al. Contamination of mesenchymal stem-cells with fibroblasts accelerates neurodegeneration in an experimental 
model of Parkinson’s disease. Stem Cell Rev 7, 1006–1017 (2011).
 
72. Guo, L. et al. Three-dimensional spheroid-cultured mesenchymal stem cells devoid of embolism attenuate brain stroke injury after 
intra-arterial injection. Stem Cells Dev 23, 978–989 (2014).
 
73. Xu, Y., Shi, T., Xu, A. & Zhang, L. 3D spheroid culture enhances survival and therapeutic capacities of MSCs injected into ischemic 
kidney. J Cell Mol Med 20, 1203–1213 (2016).
 
74. Quintanilla, M. E., Tampier, L., Sapag, A., Gerdtzen, Z. & Israel, Y. Sex differences, alcohol dehydrogenase, acetaldehyde burst, and 
aversion to ethanol in the rat: a systems perspective. American Journal of Physiology. Endocrinology and Metabolism 293, E531–537 
(2007).
 
75. Lin, P., Correa, D., Lin, Y. & Caplan, A. I. Polybrene inhibits human mesenchymal stem cell proliferation during lentiviral 
transduction. PloS One 6, e23891 (2011).
 
76. Allende-Castro, C. et al. Further studies on the hypothesis of PARP-1 inhibition as a strategy for lessening the long-term effects 
produced by perinatal asphyxia: effects of nicotinamide and theophylline on PARP-1 activity in brain and peripheral tissue: 
nicotinamide and theophylline on PARP-1 activity. Neurotoxicity Research 22, 79–90 (2012).
Acknowledgements
Studies were supported by FONDECYT grants # 1170712,118042  and 1150589. We thank Dr. Erranz for the lentiviral 
 
GFP-coding vector, Dr. José Luis Valdés, for his contribution to the behavioral studies, Drs. Marcelo Kogan and 
Edison Salas-Huenuleo for the analyses and vivo distribution of MSCs, Mr. Juan Santibañez for technical support 
and Dr. Anne Bliss for proofreading the manuscript.
Author Contributions
F.E.*: Conception and design, financial support, collection of data, data analysis, manuscript writing, final 
approval of manuscript; P.M.*: Conception and design, collection of data, data analysis, final approval of 
manuscript, M.E.Q.: Conception and design, collection of data, data analysis, final approval of manuscript: 
D.S.: Collection of data, data analysis, final approval of manuscript: C.L.R.: Collection of data, final approval of 
manuscript; M.E.: Conception and design, financial support, final approval of manuscript; M.H.M.: Conception 
and design, collection of data, approval of manuscript; Y.I.: Conception and design, financial support, data 
analysis, manuscript writing, final approval of manuscript.
Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-22750-7.
Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Cre-
ative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per-
mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
 
© The Author(s) 2018
