 91
DA N I E L  FA H E Y
CONGO’S “MR. X”: 
THE MAN WHO FOOLED THE UN
DOI: 10.1215/07402775-3642608 
B
ENI, 
Democratic 
Republic 
of Congo—It was, by all ac-
counts, a spectacle. Most 
murder trials take place in 
the stuffy confines of a courthouse, 
but this one was outside on a plat-
form in the center of a sprawling 
town called Beni, in eastern Demo-
cratic Republic of Congo. Heav-
ily armed soldiers surrounded the 
stage, upon which sat several mili-
tary judges and the accused. Each 
day, hundreds of people gathered 
to watch the proceedings, which 
were broadcast from loudspeakers. 
MONUSCO/ MYRIAM ASMANI
Vol. XXXIII, No. 2, Summer 2016 © 2016 World Policy Institute
Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/world-policy-journal/article-pdf/33/2/91/504572/0330091.pdf
by guest
on 04 June 2019
 92
WORLD POLICY JOURNAL      
E S S A Y  |  CONGO
DANIEL FAHEY is a writer based in Northern California. He formerly worked for the U.N. Security Council as 
coordinator of the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of Congo.
of the plot to assassinate Ndala. He said ADF 
had paid an accomplice in the Congolese army 
more than $25,000 for the details of Ndala’s 
itinerary, which enabled ADF to plan the am-
bush. When asked to identify the abettor, he 
pointed to Nzanzu. Nzanzu protested and said 
he did not know the anonymous witness, but 
three days later, the court convicted the colonel 
of complicity in Ndala’s murder and sentenced 
him to death. He is currently in detention in the 
Congolese capital, Kinshasa. 
Few people knew it at the time, but the mys-
terious Mr. X was under the protection of the 
U.N. peacekeeping mission in the DRC, known 
as MONUSCO. He had shown up at a MONUS-
CO base two months before the trial began and 
grabbed everyone’s attention by claiming that 
Taliban-trained terrorists were on their way from 
Afghanistan to the DRC to join ADF in attacks on 
MONUSCO bases and staff. Mr. X also brought up 
the assassination of Ndala, telling a convoluted 
story at odds with known facts, but MONUSCO’s 
analysts were less concerned about Ndala’s as-
sassination than the incoming terrorists. In ex-
change for sharing this information, Mr. X want-
ed the U.N. to relocate him far from Congo.
In the following weeks, Mr. X kept talking 
to awestruck MONUSCO intelligence analysts. 
He described himself as a dashing special agent: 
negotiating arms deals with Europeans, leading 
commando raids in Uganda, and even driving 
a motorcycle loaded with land mines from So-
malia to Congo. He said ADF was working with 
half a dozen terrorist groups including al-Qaida, 
al-Shabab, Hezbollah, and Boko Haram. When 
asked who was making ADF’s crude bombs, he 
first said Moroccan and Malian men, but later 
changed his story and claimed it was three 
white people, including a German woman. 
To be sure, Mr. X was a creative storytell-
er, but even more fascinating than his tales of 
Periodically the crowd would shout or applaud, 
adding to the theatrical atmosphere. 
The victim in this case—Congolese army 
Colonel Mamadou Ndala—was a national hero. 
In November 2013, Ndala had led the belea-
guered Congolese army to its greatest victory in 
years, against a powerful and widely despised 
rebel group called M23, which was backed by 
the Rwandan government. In the wake of that 
triumph, people chanted Ndala’s name when 
he appeared in public and wore T-shirts embla-
zoned with his image. A month after the vic-
tory, the army command reassigned Ndala to 
Beni to launch a military operation against an 
enigmatic, Islamist rebel group called the Allied 
Democratic Forces, or ADF.
On the morning of Jan. 2, 2014, as Ndala 
was traveling north from Beni, assailants lying 
in ambush fired rocket-propelled grenades and 
shot AK-47s at his jeep, instantly killing him. 
Government spokesmen first blamed bandits 
and then faulted corrupt army officers. But 
many people believed the government in Kin-
shasa had ordered Ndala’s assassination, be-
cause he had become too popular. When the 
trial began, the government shifted its story 
once again, claiming ADF rebels had killed 
Ndala in collaboration with a rogue army offi-
cer named Colonel Birotcho Nzanzu. The pros-
ecution’s case was weak, but drama and politics 
drove this trial, not the pursuit of justice.
On a hot day in November 2014, one month 
into the murder trial, the prosecution sum-
moned a surprise anonymous witness, whom 
they called “Mr. X.” Up walked a man, covered 
head to toe, to take the stand. He wore a flow-
ing white djellaba, had a scarf wrapped around 
his head, and sported sunglasses. He took a seat 
and told the court his story.
Mr. X said until recently he had been a se-
nior ADF commander and had inside knowledge 
Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/world-policy-journal/article-pdf/33/2/91/504572/0330091.pdf
by guest
on 04 June 2019
 93
SUMMER 2016
I N T E L L I G E N C E  F A I L U R E S
ularly supplied by agents living in nearby towns 
and cities. Within these camps, ADF had its 
own banking system, medical clinics, schools, 
and police force. Mukulu was chief judge of a 
court system that imposed punishments like 
stoning for adultery and having one’s mouth 
sewn shut for speaking during prayer. Mukulu 
kept telling his population that ADF’s ultimate 
objective was to take over Uganda, but he made 
no clear effort to do so and likely gave up that 
goal in order to preserve his forest fiefdom.
Around 2010, for reasons that remain un-
clear, ADF’s leaders became highly secretive and 
insular. In contrast to other rebel groups in the 
DRC, which promoted themselves on Twitter and 
Facebook, ADF stayed away from social media. To 
discourage people from escaping and providing 
information about the group’s activities, ADF be-
headed or crucified people caught trying to flee. 
The Ugandan government occasionally stated 
that ADF was working with al-Qaida and al-Sha-
bab, but with reliable information about ADF al-
most nonexistent, these claims appeared to have 
had more to do with Uganda’s interest in being 
part of the U.S.-led “war on terror” than with any 
actual links to terrorist groups. All anyone really 
knew was that around 2,000 men, women, and 
children were living in several fortified forest 
camps under Mukulu’s version of Sharia.
In mid-January 2014, the Congolese army 
launched the operation against ADF that Ndala 
had been planning when he was assassinated. 
As government soldiers pushed into the forest 
toward ADF’s camps, the fighting was intense 
and often at close range. Rebels shouted “Allahu 
derring-do was the fact that MONUSCO’s ana-
lysts believed him. These analysts made Mr. X 
the prism through which they understood ADF 
and violence in the Beni area, and as a result 
the mission’s response to a series of brutal mas-
sacres around the time of the murder trial was 
passive and ineffective. Their misplaced faith in 
Mr. X also led them to make the naïve and ill-
advised decision to provide Mr. X to the Con-
golese government for the Ndala murder trial. 
The strange story of Mr. X sheds light on the 
emerging role of intelligence in U.N. peacekeep-
ing operations, but it is also a warning about the 
unpredictable effects of intelligence failures.
FOREST DYSTOPIA
The ADF are one of the least understood rebel 
groups in eastern Congo. In early 1995, a few 
dozen Ugandan militants fled across the border 
to the DRC (then called Zaire) after losing a pow-
er struggle within Uganda’s Muslim community. 
Mobutu Sese Seko—the kleptocratic dictator 
of Zaire and long-standing bon ami of the U.S. 
government—quickly saw utility in helping this 
group become an army that could be a pawn in 
his regional chess game. 
In late 1996, shortly after the Rwandan 
and Ugandan governments started the war that 
would finally topple Mobutu, ADF launched 
its first attack against a Ugandan border post. 
For the next five years, ADF and the Ugandan 
army regularly fought in the forests and moun-
tains along the DRC-Uganda border. ADF always 
managed to survive and regroup, but was a local 
menace, never seriously threatening the stabil-
ity of the Ugandan government.
ADF’s leader was a charismatic Ugandan 
imam named Jamil Mukulu. In the early 2000s, 
Mukulu transformed ADF from a rebel group 
seeking to take over Uganda into a movement 
attempting to create a utopian society based on 
Mukulu’s own interpretation of Islam. Under his 
guidance, ADF established a network of camps 
in the forests northeast of Beni, which were reg-
ADF BEHEADED OR 
CRUCIFIED PEOPLE CAUGHT 
TRYING TO FLEE.
Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/world-policy-journal/article-pdf/33/2/91/504572/0330091.pdf
by guest
on 04 June 2019
 94
WORLD POLICY JOURNAL      
E S S A Y  |  CONGO
worked separately from MONUSCO, and often 
went down so-called “red roads” into danger-
ous areas to visit places where attacks had taken 
place, talk to witnesses, and, when we could, in-
terview the rebels themselves.
In April 2014, government soldiers cap-
tured ADF’s headquarters, a camp called Ma-
dina, and we were eager to visit. When we ar-
rived, we found dozens of mud and stick huts 
set on a ridgeline, beneath sprawling trees. As 
we walked around, I stuffed my backpack with 
papers and notebooks that were lying about. 
I collected proclamations from ADF’s leaders, 
medical record books, and religious texts. On 
some huts, we found drawings of flowers and 
phrases written in English like “Show me love” 
and “I (heart) you.” In a clearing that was used 
for Islamic instruction and prayer, we discov-
ered a class schedule for ADF’s primary school 
that contained a quote, in English: “No man is 
rich enough to buy time past, use time pres-
ent to plan time future.” I later figured out this 
Akhbar!” (“God is great!”) as they defended their 
terrain, and the advancing Congolese soldiers 
yelled back “We will make you eat pork!” and 
“We will rape your women!”
Hundreds died on both sides, but by late 
April, government troops had seized all of ADF’s 
bases. The rebel group’s leaders led around 
1,000 survivors deeper into the forest, but once 
outside the tight control of the camps, people 
started to escape. Some were wounded, and 
some were starving to death, but all of them 
had stories to tell. 
During 2014, I worked for the U.N. Security 
Council as the coordinator of the Group of Ex-
perts on DRC. The Group consisted of six expa-
triates—three Africans, two Europeans, and one 
American (me)—plus three Congolese staff, who 
investigated armed groups and human rights 
violations in eastern Congo. We tried to figure 
out how rebel groups financed their activities, 
where they got their guns and bullets, and what 
they were doing to civilian populations. We 
DAMIEN GLEZ
Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/world-policy-journal/article-pdf/33/2/91/504572/0330091.pdf
by guest
on 04 June 2019
 95
SUMMER 2016
I N T E L L I G E N C E  F A I L U R E S
MONUSCO analysts understandably got ex-
cited—talk of imminent attacks on MONUSCO 
by Taliban-trained jihadists could not be ig-
nored—but their infatuation with Mr. X pre-
vented them from seeing him for what he was: 
a charlatan. Thus began an intelligence failure 
that continues to reverberate two years later, 
limiting MONUSCO’s abilities to understand 
and address violence in the Beni area.
Intelligence is the end product of a process 
to collect, analyze, and disseminate informa-
tion. Analysts organize and evaluate informa-
tion collected from communications, docu-
ments, imagery, interviews, social media, and 
other sources in order to provide accurate in-
sight and timely advice to decision makers, but 
sometimes analysts make mistakes. Intelligence 
derived from interviews called human intelli-
gence, or HUMINT, is particularly challenging. 
Interrogators may have difficulty distinguishing 
true from false statements or use coercive tech-
niques that produce faulty information. The 
person being interviewed may have an unreli-
able memory or intentionally provide mislead-
ing information. In addition, analysts reviewing 
HUMINT may misinterpret statements or make 
errors in judgment. A common problem is con-
firmation bias, in which analysts believe narra-
tives that confirm pre-existing assumptions.
A famous example of an intelligence fail-
ure caused by HUMINT is the “Curveball” case. 
was a variation of a phrase penned by the Irish 
poet Oscar Wilde. 
Back in Beni, my colleagues and I inter-
viewed dozens of people who had been with 
ADF. Most had been rebel soldiers, but we also 
talked to their wives and children as well as to 
people who had been held as slaves. The first 
thing we often did during an interview was 
show old photos of senior ADF commanders, in-
cluding Mukulu. We would ask people to iden-
tify the leaders and then pose basic questions 
about life in the ADF camps.
We were practicing what intelligence ana-
lysts call asset validation. That is, by showing 
photos and asking fundamental questions, we 
were making sure these people were credible 
and had actually been with ADF. This process 
helped us weed out several people who lied 
about having been kidnapped by ADF, prob-
ably because they thought they were going to 
get some assistance from the U.N. Many of the 
ex-combatants also lied to us, most likely to 
conceal their own involvement in crimes, but 
with sustained contact over the course of sev-
eral weeks, we earned the trust of a few key 
ex-rebels, and gained fresh insights into ADF. 
We learned that Mukulu had disappeared 
in April with about 30 senior commanders and 
most of his family. The ex-rebels told us the 
names of the other commanders who were still 
in the forest, including the identities of the 
two men making ADF’s crude bombs. From the 
documents we analyzed, we discovered that 
people in London, England, had been send-
ing money via Western Union to ADF agents 
in eastern Congo. What we did not find—from 
any of our interviews, documents, or visits to 
ADF camps—was evidence that ADF was work-
ing with any foreign terrorist organizations. 
INTELLIGENCE FAILURES
In August 2014, Mr. X appeared at a MONUS-
CO base 36 miles from Beni, carrying little be-
sides stories about ADF and its terrorist links. 
THE U.N. “ALWAYS SEEMED 
TO BE BEHIND THE EIGHT 
BALL, REACTING TO, RATHER 
THAN ANTICIPATING, WHAT 
WAS GOING TO HAPPEN.”
Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/world-policy-journal/article-pdf/33/2/91/504572/0330091.pdf
by guest
on 04 June 2019
 96
WORLD POLICY JOURNAL      
E S S A Y  |  CONGO
about the unfolding genocide. In his book Shake 
Hands with the Devil, Lieutenant-General Romeo 
Dallaire, the former UNAMIR force commander, 
bemoaned “our lack of intelligence and basic 
operational information,” which led to a situ-
ation where the U.N. “always seemed to be be-
hind the eight ball, reacting to, rather than an-
ticipating, what was going to happen.” 
The U.N.’s failures in Rwanda and elsewhere 
led to the realization, as expressed by Canadian 
scholar Walter Dorn, that “more resources must 
be devoted to strengthening the U.N.’s informa-
tion/intelligence capacity if it is to engage in 
proactive peacekeeping and conflict resolution 
to prevent future wars, genocides, and other 
crimes against humanity.”
Yet change came slowly. After several years 
of planning, in 2006 the U.N.’s Department 
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) formally 
established Joint Mission Analysis Cells, or 
JMACs, to provide intelligence to mission and 
DPKO leaders. As a new entity, the JMACs faced 
several challenges, including acquiring com-
petent staff. In a 2008 article in International 
Peacekeeping, security academic Philip Shetler-
Jones noted that JMAC personnel “may lack the 
skills and security of tenure required to gain 
the confidence of sources, and/or the experi-
ence to develop into top quality analysts.” He 
also identified lack of training among JMAC 
analysts as a problem that “limits the quality 
of JMAC’s output.”
MONUSCO was one of the first peacekeep-
ing operations to have a JMAC, but the unit ex-
emplified the problem of poorly trained staff. 
I saw this firsthand in 2013, when I debunked 
a JMAC report after a quick Google search. The 
report had claimed that the Rwandan govern-
ment was the only possible source of a type of 
grenade found among rebel stockpiles, even 
though the Congolese army tends to be the big-
gest supplier of arms to rebels. I found several 
photos of Congolese soldiers with the same gre-
nades online, and later that day saw Congolese 
In the aftermath of the 9/11 attacks, when the 
Bush administration started to build a case for 
invading Iraq, a key element in the administra-
tion’s argument was the claim by a man known 
as “Curveball,” an Iraqi defector seeking refugee 
status in Germany, that Iraq had mobile labo-
ratories for making biological weapons. Some 
American and German analysts warned that 
Curveball was a fabricator, but others embraced 
him because his narrative fit pre-conceived no-
tions about Iraq’s weapons. A U.S. government 
inquiry later determined that poor asset valida-
tion, confirmation bias by intelligence analysts, 
and inadequate leadership and management 
of those analysts enabled Curveball’s claims to 
influence U.S. policy and the rationale for war. 
The Curveball story was all the more remark-
able because it highlighted shortcomings with-
in the Central Intelligence Agency and Defense 
Intelligence Agency, two long-established and 
professional parts of the large, well-funded U.S. 
intelligence apparatus.
The United Nations does not have a dedi-
cated intelligence agency, but its need for reli-
able analyses of political and military develop-
ments increased during the early 1990s, when 
the Security Council expanded the number and 
scope of its peacekeeping operations. In the 
early post-Cold War era, the Security Council 
charted an ambitious and aggressive course, but 
U.N. missions faced challenges in understand-
ing dynamics in conflict areas in Africa and 
the Balkans. Many countries were reluctant to 
share their own intelligence with the U.N., and 
international resistance to creating U.N. “spies” 
made substantial organizational improvements 
unachievable. Extreme violence in places like 
Rwanda and Bosnia and Herzegovina show-
cased the U.N.’s intelligence shortcomings, but 
also led to reforms.
In 1994, the U.N. Mission in Rwanda (UN-
AMIR) lacked its own unified intelligence ca-
pacity and received little information from the 
United States, France, and other governments 
Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/world-policy-journal/article-pdf/33/2/91/504572/0330091.pdf
by guest
on 04 June 2019
 97
SUMMER 2016
I N T E L L I G E N C E  F A I L U R E S
intelligent and skilled analyst, although the 
U.N. was paying him to be a translator. 
Immediately after Hamza’s death, MONUS-
CO’s leadership pulled nearly all of their Congo-
lese staff out of Beni, including the people who 
had extensive contacts within the Muslim com-
munity and knew the most about ADF. With 
few staff in Beni and security restrictions on 
movement outside MONUSCO’s base, the U.N. 
reports about ADF became little more than one-
dimensional repetitions of claims made by Con-
golese army officers.
FANTASTIC MR. X
When Mr. X appeared at MONUSCO’s doorstep 
in August 2014, he was a deus ex machina for 
MONUSCO analysts and leaders desperate for 
information about ADF. Mr. X easily convinced 
analysts who wanted to believe his stories, how-
ever fantastic and implausible, because they 
knew little about ADF and were excited by the 
terrorist talk.
I first heard about Mr. X a few days after 
he showed up at a MONUSCO base in the town 
of Butembo, when an enthusiastic analyst from 
the G2’s office alerted me about “something 
big.” He said that a lieutenant colonel from 
ADF had surrendered, but this was the first sign 
something was amiss: ADF did not use ranks 
like lieutenant colonel—you were either a com-
mander or a soldier. In the weeks that followed, 
soldiers carrying the grenades only a few hun-
dred meters from the JMAC office.  
The Rwandan government had often ac-
cused JMAC’s analysts of bias, and although 
I had discounted such accusations out of in-
stitutional loyalty, I had trouble understand-
ing how JMAC had made such a controversial 
but easy-to-disprove claim about the grenades. 
While most of the analysts had no training in 
the ethics or methods of properly gathering and 
analyzing information, they still seemed quite 
confident in their work.
In addition to JMAC, MONUSCO had a mili-
tary intelligence unit called the G2. The G2 
typically consists of a few staff officers from 
North American and European countries who 
are trained intelligence operatives, as well as a 
mélange of officers from various countries with 
little or no intelligence training. In 2013, a mil-
itary officer in the G2’s office confided in me 
that most of the officers assigned to the G2 had 
no experience in intelligence, no French or local 
language skills, and generally no prior knowl-
edge of the DRC.
The individual shortcomings of MONUSCO’s 
intelligence analysts are compounded by organi-
zational dynamics. The regular rotation of U.N. 
staff limits institutional knowledge and memory, 
and results in assemblages of analysts who of-
ten have only a superficial understanding of the 
conflict in the DRC. Indeed, Columbia University 
Professor Severine Autesserre, among others, has 
called attention to the ways in which the “lack 
of local knowledge and deficient data collection 
techniques” among analysts in MONUSCO (and 
other peacekeeping missions) leads to poor stra-
tegic and operational decision-making. 
In 2014, the G2 and JMAC also faced an-
other limitation with respect to understanding 
ADF: lack of a presence in Beni. In February 
2014, an unknown assailant killed a Congolese 
man named Hamza Katsambya, who was work-
ing for MONUSCO in Beni. I had worked closely 
with Hamza in 2013, and found him to be an 
MR. X’S CLAIMS READ LIKE 
A SCREENPLAY FOR AN 
ACTION MOVIE—ONE THAT 
WAS CLEARLY A WORK IN 
PROGRESS.
Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/world-policy-journal/article-pdf/33/2/91/504572/0330091.pdf
by guest
on 04 June 2019
 98
WORLD POLICY JOURNAL      
E S S A Y  |  CONGO
I am pretty sure I did roll my eyes when he 
responded to my question about ADF’s links to 
foreign terrorist groups. “Al-Shabab, Boko Ha-
ram, and the Taliban,” he said. As I wrote down 
his response, he blurted out, “It is true what I 
am telling you!”
I asked about Mukulu’s whereabouts, so 
I could hear this story for myself. He told me 
that in early 2014, Mukulu had traveled to Pak-
istan to pick up 35 Ugandan ADF commanders, 
who had trained for three years in Iran, Sudan, 
and Afghanistan and were experts in attacking 
“NATO forces.” Mr. X went on to say that Mu-
kulu was bringing these men back to Congo in 
September 2014, and would use them to attack 
MONUSCO. There was not then, and is not now, 
any evidence to suggest this story was remotely 
true; in fact, Mukulu was arrested in March 
2015 in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, where he had 
been living with his family since mid-2014.
I asked Mr. X about his future plans, and he 
said he wanted the U.N. to relocate him and his 
family to a safe country. He told me the Congolese 
and Ugandan governments and ADF all wanted 
to kill him, so he wanted to leave the region.
After about an hour, I had heard enough. I 
thought again about challenging him, but decid-
ed against it; I regret that decision now, because 
it might have dispelled the aura of credibility 
that came to surround Mr. X and prevented 
him from testifying in the Ndala murder trial. 
As I packed up, Mr. X said he had something 
important he wanted to tell me: ADF is bringing 
people to the DRC from Boko Haram, Mali, and 
Afghanistan. ADF has a “new plan” to turn the 
DRC into “northern Mali.” 
When I left the apartment, a man was stand-
ing next to the armed guards, waiting for me to 
leave so he could deliver Mr. X’s hot lunch. 
GROUPTHINK
After I interviewed Mr. X, I warned the G2 and 
JMAC that he was a liar, but by that time, his 
stories had settled into the minds of MONUSCO’s 
I heard more about Mr. X’s stories, and incred-
ible as they sounded to me, the fact that MO-
NUSCO’s analysts believed them pushed me to 
interview him myself.
I visited Mr. X on Sept. 2, 2014, at a MO-
NUSCO camp a few miles outside the city of 
Goma. After getting special permission to talk 
to him from MONUSCO’s chief of military intel-
ligence, I was led to a door guarded by two Indi-
an peacekeepers armed with rifles and wearing 
light blue helmets and flak jackets. I entered an 
apartment and greeted Mr. X, who was healthy 
and alert, around 40 years old, and eager to talk. 
He started out by telling me that as head of 
recruitment for ADF, he had personally recruit-
ed more than 800 Ugandan men, all of whom 
had served in the Ugandan army, but that he 
did not recruit women or children, who were 
too difficult to transport to ADF’s forest camps. 
This contradicted the testimonies of the Ugan-
dan ADF veterans I had interviewed—none of 
whom had prior military experience—but also 
failed to account for the women and children 
who told me they were recruited or forced to 
join ADF. I knew what Mr. X was telling me 
was untrue, but decided not to confront him, 
which, in retrospect, was probably a mistake. 
When I showed him photos of seven ADF 
leaders—including Mukulu—and he could not 
identify anyone, I did not call him a fake. When 
he told me that no one knew what Mukulu re-
ally looked like because he constantly wore 
plastic masks to conceal his identity, I did not 
show him the Interpol wanted poster with Mu-
kulu’s picture or play the videos of Mukulu on 
YouTube. When I asked him who made ADF’s 
explosives, and he said one man from Morocco 
and one from Mali, I did not tell him that half a 
dozen ex-combatants had told me the names of 
two Ugandan men who were the bombmakers. 
When he told me that he had recently negotiat-
ed an arms deal with a Bulgarian named Victor 
in a fancy hotel in Kampala, Uganda, I may have 
rolled my eyes, but I did not press him further.
Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/world-policy-journal/article-pdf/33/2/91/504572/0330091.pdf
by guest
on 04 June 2019
 99
SUMMER 2016
I N T E L L I G E N C E  F A I L U R E S
MONUSCO’s analysts began reporting that 
ADF and unnamed “allies” were responsible for 
the bloodshed in the Beni area. Local popula-
tions were less concerned about the killers’ as-
sociations than with the fact that no one was 
preventing the murders from happening or ar-
resting the real perpetrators. Residents already 
had little faith in the Congolese army, but they 
initially had greater expectations of U.N. troops. 
Nonetheless, soon after the massacres began, 
there were rumors that U.N. soldiers were ac-
tually sponsoring some of the violence to cyni-
cally keep the war going, and as the killings con-
tinued, discontent with MONUSCO only grew. 
People attacked U.N. vehicles on several occa-
sions, and in late October, a crowd of protesters 
broke through the gate at the main MONUCSO 
base near Beni, demanding action to protect 
local populations. MONUSCO increased its pa-
trols, and Kobler talked tough, but mass killings 
continued through 2015 and into 2016.
In October 2015, I returned to Goma for a 
meeting about ADF and the situation in Beni. 
One year after the start of massacres that had by 
then killed more than 500 people, independent 
investigators established that ADF carried out 
some deadly attacks, but that many incidents—
perhaps a majority of them—involved other 
armed groups and Congolese army soldiers. 
The causes of the violence included local power 
struggles, ethnic tensions, and criminal activity. 
analysts, who had become personally invested in 
his claims. As groupthink took over, dissenting 
views were not welcome. They interpreted each 
new event—an attack on a village, people throw-
ing stones at U.N. vehicles—as evidence of Mr. X’s 
credibility and as something he had predicted. 
In late October 2014, as I prepared the 
Group of Experts’ final report, I asked JMAC for 
an intelligence assessment of ADF. To my sur-
prise, the G2 and JMAC gave us a report that was 
almost entirely based on the testimony of Mr. 
X. Their report repeated the story about Mu-
kulu going to Pakistan, but in a new twist, said 
that he was picking up 25 Nigerian Boko Haram 
fighters—not the 35 Ugandan ADF command-
ers Mr. X had told me about—and was bringing 
them back to the DRC to attack MONUSCO. Mr. 
X’s claims read like a screenplay for an action 
movie—one that was clearly a work in progress.
The MONUSCO assessment was produced a 
few weeks after a series of massacres began in 
the Beni area. Starting in early October 2014, 
armed men—and sometimes women—attacked 
villages, hacking people to death with machetes, 
and occasionally abducting villagers and looting 
goods. Based on descriptions of the incidents, 
ADF appeared to be responsible for some of 
the massacres, but others seemed to have been 
carried out by government soldiers and other 
militias active in the Beni area. In some cases 
attackers wore Congolese army uniforms and 
talked in languages not spoken by ADF fighters; 
they also sometimes killed children and raped 
women, which ADF did not typically do.
Congolese government officials blamed ADF 
for the carnage and soon implicated members of 
the political opposition as ADF supporters. They 
arrested dozens of people in the Beni area—in-
cluding members of political parties that op-
posed the Joseph Kabila regime—and shut down 
five radio stations. MONUSCO’s chief, Martin 
Kobler, echoed government claims about ADF’s 
responsibility for the killings, but remained qui-
et about the ensuing political crackdown.
MR. X’S LIES HELPED 
KINSHASA AND MONUSCO 
MISLEAD THE CONGOLESE 
PEOPLE AND THE 
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY.
Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/world-policy-journal/article-pdf/33/2/91/504572/0330091.pdf
by guest
on 04 June 2019
 100 WORLD POLICY JOURNAL      
E S S A Y  |  CONGO
The creation of a permanent U.N. spy agen-
cy is unlikely, but the DPKO could address this 
problem by ensuring that only qualified profes-
sionals serve in intelligence positions. In 2013, 
DPKO established a large intelligence cell for the 
U.N. mission in Mali (MINUSMA) that includes 
dozens of experienced Scandinavian and Dutch 
intelligence operatives, but this is exceptional 
because of both the distinctive role of interna-
tional terrorist groups in Mali and the unique 
willingness of some governments to release 
their assets for this peacekeeping mission.
In early 2016, independent investigators told 
me that Mr. X was in Kinshasa, living well and 
working for the Congolese army. The status of 
MONUSCO’s efforts to help him achieve refugee 
status abroad remains unclear. “No man is rich 
enough to buy back his past,” wrote Oscar Wilde, 
but Mr. X is proof that a man who can spin tales 
about his past may be able to buy a new future.
While Mr. X enjoys freedom, Nzanzu re-
mains in custody. The DRC currently has a mor-
atorium on the death penalty, so he remains in 
prison indefinitely. What is increasingly clear, 
however, is that both Mr. X and Nzanzu are 
small cogs in a larger struggle for power be-
tween parts of the Congolese government, op-
position political forces, and local business 
interests in the Beni area. Kinshasa skillfully 
capitalized upon MONUSCO’s intelligence fail-
ure to blame ADF for Ndala’s murder and the 
Beni massacres—thereby diverting attention 
away from the Congolese army. A lingering 
question remains whether the government sent 
Mr. X to MONUSCO, hoping the U.N. would give 
his stories its imprimatur. In the DRC, anything 
is possible, but as Mr. X demonstrates, the truth 
can be hard to find, especially when people are 
told exactly what they want to hear. l
While I was back in Goma, I was disap-
pointed, but not surprised, to learn that Mr. 
X’s stories still informed MONUSCO’s under-
standing of ADF and that MONUSCO’s analysts 
continue to view ADF as the puppet master 
behind all of the violence in Beni. I chal-
lenged the analysts in the way I should have 
addressed Mr. X a year ago—with direct ques-
tions about the flaws and contradictions in 
their analysis. They acknowledged that many 
of Mr. X’s prophecies had not come true, but 
could not admit they made a mistake by mak-
ing Mr. X the centerpiece of their analysis and 
enabling him to be the star witness in the 
Ndala murder trial. 
The story of Mr. X—like that of Curveball—
demonstrates what can happen when a fabrica-
tor fools biased analysts, but it also shows how 
misguided or misinformed leaders use fabrica-
tors to deceive the public. Just as Curveball’s 
lies became a key element in the Bush adminis-
tration’s argument for invading Iraq, Mr. X’s lies 
helped Kinshasa and MONUSCO mislead the 
Congolese people and the international com-
munity about the identities of those responsible 
for the massacres in Beni.
The shortcomings in MONUSCO’s intelli-
gence units also confront other U.N. operations. 
Intelligence collection is now a regular part of 
all peacekeeping missions—of which there are 
currently 16—but the lack of a stable, profes-
sional intelligence agency within the DPKO 
leads to the creation of ad hoc units for each 
mission, populated and led by people with 
varying levels of skill, loyalty, and motivation. 
In such a context, the potential for intelligence 
failure is great, but because the quality of U.N. 
intelligence is poorly understood, its frequency 
and severity is unknown.
Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/world-policy-journal/article-pdf/33/2/91/504572/0330091.pdf
by guest
on 04 June 2019
