 The Journal of Infectious Diseases
S86 • JID 2017:216 (Suppl 1) • Fahmy et al
The Journal of Infectious Diseases®  2017;216(S1):S86–93
Introduction of Inactivated Polio Vaccine, Withdrawal of 
Type 2 Oral Polio Vaccine, and Routine Immunization 
Strengthening in the Eastern Mediterranean Region
Kamal Fahmy,1 Lee M. Hampton,2 Houda Langar,1 Manish Patel,3 Tahir Mir,1 Chandrasegarar Soloman,4 Andreas Hasman,5 Nasir Yusuf,6 and Nadia Teleb1
1Eastern Mediterranean Region Office, World Health Organization, Cairo, Egypt; 2Global Immunization Division, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, and 3Task 
Force for Global Health, Decatur, Georgia; 4Middle East and North Africa Regional Office, United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), Amman, Jordan; 5South Asian Regional Office, 
UNICEF Kathmandu, Nepal; and 6East and South Africa Regional Office, UNICEF Nairobi, Kenya
The Global Polio Eradication Initiative has reduced the global incidence of polio by 99% and the number of countries with endemic 
polio from 125 to 3 countries. The Polio Eradication and Endgame Strategic Plan 2013–2018 (Endgame Plan) was developed to 
end polio disease. Key elements of the endgame plan include strengthening immunization systems using polio assets, introducing 
inactivated polio vaccine (IPV), and replacing trivalent oral polio vaccine with bivalent oral polio vaccine (“the switch”). Although 
coverage in the Eastern Mediterranean Region (EMR) with the third dose of a vaccine containing diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis 
antigens (DTP3) was ≥90% in 14 countries in 2015, DTP3 coverage in EMR dropped from 86% in 2010 to 80% in 2015 due to civil 
disorder in multiple countries. To strengthen their immunization systems, Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Somalia developed draft plans 
to integrate Polio Eradication Initiative assets, staff, structure, and activities with their Expanded Programmes on Immunization, 
particularly in high-risk districts and regions. Between 2014 and 2016, 11 EMR countries introduced IPV in their routine immuni-
zation program, including all of the countries at highest risk for polio transmission (Afghanistan, Pakistan, Somalia, and Yemen). 
As a result, by the end of 2016 all EMR countries were using IPV except Egypt, where introduction of IPV was delayed by a global 
shortage. The switch was successfully implemented in EMR due to the motivation, engagement, and cooperation of immunization 
staff and decision makers across all national levels. Moreover, the switch succeeded because of the ability of even the immunization 
systems operating under hardship conditions of conflict to absorb the switch activities.
Keywords. inactivated polio vaccine; routine immunization strengthening; tOPV-bOPV; switch (“the switch”).
 
Since its launch in 1988, the Global Polio Eradication Initiative 
(GPEI) has reduced the global incidence of polio by 99% and 
the number of countries with endemic polio from 125 to 3 
countries, as of 15 August 2016 [1]. In May 2012, the World 
Health Assembly called on the World Health Organization 
(WHO) to develop and finalize a comprehensive poliomy-
elitis endgame strategy. The Polio Eradication and Endgame 
Strategic Plan 2013–2018 (Endgame Plan) was developed to 
end polio disease from both wild poliovirus and circulating 
vaccine-derived polioviruses (cVDPVs) [2]. Countries of the 
Eastern Mediterranean Region (EMR) of WHO have made 
marked progress against polio eradication, with only Pakistan 
and Afghanistan continuing to have endemic polio [3]. From 
its beginning, the regional effort against polio has depended on 
use of oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV), most commonly trivalent 
OPV (tOPV). However, although OPV is very effective in pre-
venting poliovirus infections as well as paralytic poliomyelitis, 
the attenuated poliovirus in OPV can undergo genetic changes 
during replication, and rarely, in communities with low vac-
cination coverage, can result in vaccine-derived polioviruses 
(VDPVs) capable of causing paralytic polio [4].
The EMR has been affected by multiple outbreaks of polio 
caused by cVDPVs, including type 2 cVDPV (cVDPV2) out-
breaks in Egypt, Somalia, Afghanistan, Yemen, and Pakistan and 
cVDPV3 outbreaks in Yemen [5, 6]. In total, the EMR has had 
at least 164 cases of paralytic polio caused by cVDPV2s and 4 
cases of paralytic polio caused by cVDPV3s since 1988. The vast 
majority of those cases have been identified since 2006. At the 
same time, no cases of polio caused by wild poliovirus type 2 have 
been detected anywhere in the world since 1999 [7]. In 2009, biva-
lent oral polio vaccine (bOPV), which contains only attenuated 
types 1 and 3 polioviruses, became available [8]. In addition to 
not carrying the risk of causing cVDPV2s, bOPV generates better 
immunogenicity against types 1 and 3 polioviruses [8]; therefore, 
the EMR along with the rest of the world decided in 2012 to begin 
preparations for ceasing tOPV use and switching to bOPV use [2].
Switching from tOPV to bOPV is not without risks. If tOPV 
use stopped while cVDPV2 transmission was still ongoing, 
an outbreak might occur or worsen [9]. The existence of civil 
S U P P L E M E N T  A R T I C L E
© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious Diseases Society of 
America. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution 3.0 IGO (CC BY 3.0 IGO) License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/igo/) 
which permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original work is properly cited.
DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jix133
Correspondence: K. Fahmy, MD, PhD, World Health Organization, Eastern Mediterranean 
Regional Office, Abel Razek el Sanhouri St, PO Box 7608, Nasr City, Cairo 11371, Egypt (fah-
myk@who.int).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jid/article-abstract/216/suppl_1/S86/3935077 by guest on 05 June 2019
 Endgame in Eastern Mediterranean Region • JID 2017:216 (Suppl 1) • S87
unrest in multiple countries in the EMR and the resulting dis-
ruptions in immunization services, as well as low population 
immunity to polio infections, required implementation of a 
multilayered effort to minimize the risks involved with ceasing 
tOPV use [10, 11].
The global and regional plans for switching from tOPV to 
bOPV contained multiple elements for minimizing and miti-
gating the inherent risks [12]. To provide protection against 
paralytic polio caused by cVPDV2s as well as provide some 
protection against type 2 poliovirus infections, all countries 
not already using inactivated polio vaccine (IPV), which can-
not cause cVDPV2s, were advised to introduce IPV into their 
immunization schedules. To reduce the risk for spread of type 
2 polioviruses from countries that continued to use tOPV to 
other countries that had ceased tOPV use, a globally synchro-
nized switch from tOPV to bOPV was planned for April 2016, 
timed in the low poliovirus transmission season. To further 
boost population immunity to type 2 poliovirus infections, 
mass vaccination campaigns with tOPV were held in many 
high-risk countries before the switch. To guard against acciden-
tal use of tOPV after the switch from tOPV to bOPV, all coun-
tries engaged in an extensive monitoring process to check cold 
chain stores and health facilities to ensure that no tOPV was 
stored in the cold chain after the switch.
The objective of this article is to reflect the activities related 
to the implementation of the Endgame Plan in the EMR in light 
of the serious challenges faced by some EMR countries, particu-
larly the activities of the WHO Eastern Mediterranean Regional 
Office (WHO EMRO) and the United Nations Children’s Fund 
(UNICEF) Middle East and North Africa Regional Office 
(UNICEF MENA), Eastern and Southern Africa Regional 
Office, and Regional Office for South Asia.
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION IN 
THE EASTERN 
MEDITERRANEAN REGION
In line with the Global Vaccine Action Plan [13], the EMR 
aimed at achieving by 2020 at least 90% routine immunization 
(RI) coverage nationally and 80% in every district, for all vac-
cines provided through the national Expanded Programme on 
Immunization (EPI).
EMR countries have achieved remarkable improvement 
in routine vaccination coverage during the past 2 decades. 
Coverage with the third dose of a vaccine containing diph-
theria, tetanus, and pertussis antigens (DTP3) was >90% 
in 14 countries in 2015 based on WHO and UNICEF esti-
mates (Figure 1), and the regional average of the regional 
DTP3 coverage reached 86% in 2010 based on WHO/
UNICEF estimates. However, with the prevailing geopo-
litical situation and conflicts in the region, DTP3 coverage 
in the EMR dropped from 86% in 2010 to 80% in 2015, 
and 3.8 million infants missed receiving their third dose of 
DTP vaccine in the same year; most of these infants were 
in 6 countries of the region (Figure 2). Overall regional 
coverage of the third dose of OPV (OPV3) in the EMR 
similarly decreased from 86% in 2010 to 80% in 2015, but 
with vast intercountry and intracountry variations. OPV3 
coverage was 90%–99% in 14 countries during 2010–2015. 
During this period, OPV3 coverage increased from 73% 
to 75% in Lebanon, and from 47% to 49% in Somalia, but 
decreased in Syria from 83% to 50%.
Figure 1. World Health Organization/United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) estimates of proportion of children who had received 3 doses of diphtheria-tetanus-pertus-
sis–containing vaccine by 1 year of age in 2015 in the Eastern Mediterranean region. Source: www.who.int/immunization_monitoring/globalsummary/timeseries/tswucov-
eragedtp3.html. World Health Organization and UNICEF national immunization coverage estimates, 2016. Abbreviations: OPT, Occupied Palestinian Territory; UAE, United 
Arab Emirates.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jid/article-abstract/216/suppl_1/S86/3935077 by guest on 05 June 2019
 S88 • JID 2017:216 (Suppl 1) • Fahmy et al
STRENGTHENING RI 
THROUGH INTEGRATED EPI 
AND GPEI ACTIVITIES
A key activity of the Polio Endgame Plan focuses on strength-
ening RI using polio assets in 10 focus countries with the larg-
est polio assets and weak immunization systems. Three of these 
countries are in the EMR: Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Somalia. 
Each of these countries developed a draft plan (“ONE EPI Plan”) 
and put forth efforts to integrate national EPI and GPEI activi-
ties by using GPEI-funded assets, staff, structure, and activities 
to strengthen the immunization system, particularly in high-
risk districts and regions.
Pakistan
Pakistan developed an EPI-GPEI integration plan in 2013. 
The initial plan included 16 pilot districts, later expanded to 
an additional 30 districts, including districts in the Federally 
Administered Tribal Areas. Within the 30 additional districts, 
polio staff such as the District Polio Eradication Officers and 
Union Council Medical Officers received training on RI sup-
port. These staff subsequently provided aid in RI microplan-
ning, monitoring, and reporting for district and provincial 
meetings. Polio social mobilizers were also trained to pro-
mote RI and to report and refer unvaccinated children to 
immunization services. Because of the decentralized govern-
ment health structure in Pakistan, the national EPI plan was 
developed separately from the 8 specific plans for each of the 
provinces.
Afghanistan
Afghanistan implemented a pilot project using polio assets to 
strengthen RI in 30 districts (6 of which were low-performing 
districts in the east and south) with the aim of achieving a 10% 
annual reduction in the number of unimmunized children from 
2014 through 2018. Within the 30 pilot districts, polio officers 
were trained in RI, assisting with microplanning, evaluating, 
and monitoring 30% of fixed and outreach vaccination sessions, 
and supporting vaccine-preventable diseases and acute flaccid 
paralysis surveillance. Social mobilizers were trained to pro-
mote RI and to identify, trace, and refer unvaccinated children. 
Polio field staff also attended weekly EPI management meetings 
to coordinate actions and share findings.
Somalia
Polio staff and equipment in Somalia have been very useful for 
providing RI services in conflict regions because of an ongoing 
civil war concentrated in the South Central Zone. Throughout 
Somalia, polio staff were closely involved in the RI system, 
including collection, transmission, and analysis of data as well 
as vaccine management and monthly program reviews. Using 
GPEI resources, the federal government of Somalia has been 
improving RI implementation and coverage in high-risk areas 
not reached by the current RI program in the Banadir region 
of Somalia’s South Central Zone and the Marrodjex and Sool 
regions of Somaliland. For example, all GPEI staff in Somalia 
employed by WHO and UNICEF have received training to 
assist with RI activities, including a detailed microplanning 
workshop for maternal and child health leads and workshops 
for community health workers in conflict zone. Despite the 
ongoing conflicts, Somalia has developed an updated integrated 
EPI/GPEI plan that includes specific activities for strengthening 
of RI using GPEI-funded workers and assets.
INACTIVATED POLIOVIRUS VACCINE 
INTRODUCTION IN ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION
In alignment with the Endgame Plan, the WHO’s Strategic 
Advisory Group of Experts (SAGE) on Immunization 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Afghani…
Bahrain
Djibouti
Egypt
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Libya
Morocco
Oman
Pakistan
OPT
Qatar
Saudi…
Somalia
Sudan
Syria
Tunisia
UAE
Yemen
Country
Percentage of Children
Figure 2. Distribution of unvaccinated children in the Eastern Mediterranean region by country, 2015. Source: www.who.int/immunization_monitoring/globalsummary/
countries?countrycriteria%5Bcountry%5D%5B%5D=AFG&commit=OK. World Health Organization/United Nations Children’s Fund national immunization coverage esti-
mates, 2016. Abbreviation: DTP3, third dose of a vaccine containing diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis antigens.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jid/article-abstract/216/suppl_1/S86/3935077 by guest on 05 June 2019
 Endgame in Eastern Mediterranean Region • JID 2017:216 (Suppl 1) • S89
recommended in 2013 that all countries using only OPV should 
add at least 1 dose of IPV to their national immunization sched-
ule [14]. While the addition of IPV to RI programs involves 
similar planning and implementation process as for other 
new vaccine introductions [15], several factors relevant to the 
introduction of IPV in the EMR warrant consideration. These 
include the unprecedented strict timelines so that the introduc-
tion would occur before the switch, financial support for the 
accelerated strategy, complexities of multiple injections and 
possible health workers’ and caregivers’ aversion to it, global 
supply shortages, and communication nuances related to IPV.
ACCELERATED IPV INTRODUCTION IN 
THE EASTERN 
MEDITERRANEAN REGION
IPV was included in the vaccination schedule of 10 of the EMR’s 
22 (45%) countries before the implementation of the Endgame 
Plan. Of the 11 countries that had to introduce IPV into the RI 
program, 4 were deemed by GPEI to be at high risk of cVPDV2 
outbreak or importation [16].
During 2014–2016, 11 countries introduced IPV in their 
RI program (Table 1), including all of the high-risk countries 
(Afghanistan, Pakistan, Somalia, and Yemen). Iraq and Libya 
introduced IPV as a combination vaccine (hexavalent vaccine) 
whereas others introduced standalone IPV. All of these intro-
ductions were nationwide on the same day, except in Pakistan, 
which chose a phased introduction over a few months begin-
ning in July 2015 because of its decentralized health structure.
The global effort to introduce IPV in all countries has been 
complicated by major shortfalls in the production of IPV as 
well as demand for IPV for use in mass campaign supplemen-
tal immunization activities (SIAs). A global shortage of IPV has 
resulted in introduction delays in approximately 20 countries 
worldwide until 2017. At least 29 other countries are expected 
to experience national stockouts of IPV before being resup-
plied [12]. Among EMR countries, Egypt was the only country 
affected by the shortage, and as a result of the shortage will not 
be able to introduce IPV until 2017.
FINANCIAL SUPPORT OF IPV INTRODUCTION
EMR countries greatly benefitted from financial support for 
the introduction of IPV from GPEI. Of the 12 EMR countries 
introducing IPV as part of the Endgame Plan, 6 were eligible for 
financial support from GPEI administered by Gavi, the Vaccine 
Alliance. However, Egypt and Iran, both middle-income coun-
tries that did not meet eligibility for support for IPV introduc-
tion, expressed concerns about financial constraints that would 
prevent them from introducing IPV according to the Endgame 
timelines. WHO EMRO and UNICEF MENA staff advocated 
to GPEI on behalf of both countries. As a result, Egypt received 
support for 1 year’s supply of IPV and for operational costs of 
vaccine introduction. Iran requested and received support for 
operational costs of introduction.
TECHNICAL SUPPORT FOR IPV INTRODUCTION
Multiple sources of technical support facilitated IPV introduc-
tions in EMR countries. A dedicated session was incorporated 
in the yearly EMR EPI manager meetings in 2014 and 2015, 
where all documents and updates on IPV introduction were 
shared with the countries of the region. These sessions provided 
a platform for countries to voice their specific concerns and 
needs. Following training workshops in Atlanta and Nairobi in 
2014, consultants and staff from the WHO and UNICEF EMR 
regional offices and from other GPEI partner organizations pro-
vided direct technical support to most of the target countries for 
a variety of activities including development of IPV introduc-
tion plans, financial support applications, operational readiness, 
cold chain assessments and upgrades, training of health workers, 
and logistical preparations for IPV introduction. In addition, 
an assessment of IPV introduction in Tunisia was conducted in 
2014 in collaboration with Johns Hopkins University. The expe-
rience from Tunisia highlighted the motivation and enthusiasm 
of decision makers toward polio eradication, the highly devel-
oped national decision-making capacity and structure of the 
country’s National Immunization Technical Advisory Group, 
and the national government’s concerns for health equity which 
prompted it to create budgetary space for IPV introduction. 
The findings from this evaluation were circulated to other EMR 
countries to facilitate and to motivate additional IPV introduc-
tions, including a video that documented IPV introduction in 
Tunisia’s RI system [17]. Future efforts will focus on evaluations 
of IPV introduction and coverage assessments in target coun-
tries to assess outcomes of introduction efforts.
REGISTRATION OF IPV AND BOPV
Licensing of IPV and bOPV in all countries were important 
prerequisites for the global switch from tOPV to bOPV, and 
could have been a serious bottleneck for the Endgame given the 
Table 1. Dates of Inactivated Polio Vaccine Introduction in the Eastern 
Mediterranean Region, 2014–2016
Country
Planned IPV  
Introduction Date
Actual IPV  
Introduction Date
Afghanistan
June 2015
September 2015
Djibouti
October 2015
April 2016
Egypt
December 2015
Not yet introduced
Iran
August 2015
September 2015
Iraq
July 2015
January 2016
Libya
April 2014
April 2014
Morocco
April 2015
June 2015
Pakistan
May 2015
July 2015
Somalia
October 2015
November 2015
Sudan
February 2015
June 2015
Tunisia
September 2014
September 2014
Yemen
November 2014
November 2015
Abbreviation: IPV, inactivated polio vaccine.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jid/article-abstract/216/suppl_1/S86/3935077 by guest on 05 June 2019
 S90 • JID 2017:216 (Suppl 1) • Fahmy et al
variability in the registration process and the lack of established 
infrastructure to fast-track registration and of developed reg-
ulatory authorities, particularly in resource-poor settings. To 
enable a smooth introduction of IPV and switch from tOPV 
to bOPV, registration of the appropriate IPV presentations by 
the end of 2014 and of bOPV by the end of 2015 was ideal. 
IPV and bOPV were available from multiple manufacturers. 
These vaccines had been licensed in their country of origin by 
a National Regulatory Authority (NRA) and then extensively 
reviewed and approved by the WHO prequalification program. 
Countries themselves have varying requirements to license vac-
cines and typically follow 1 of 3 types of regulatory pathways: 
accept WHO prequalified vaccines without requiring further 
registration, use a WHO-supported expedited review process to 
fast-track vaccine registration, or require full in-country review 
and registration of the vaccine. WHO EMRO staff mapped the 
regulatory requirements in each of the OPV using countries to 
determine licensure status for IPV and bOPV. In October 2014, 
WHO EMRO held several expedited review workshops for 
the joint evaluation of the marketing authorization files to be 
submitted by 2 IPV manufacturers that month. WHO EMRO 
also provided direct regulatory one-on-one support to selected 
countries, with a view to ensure that all countries had com-
pleted this important step by the end of 2014.
With regard to bOPV, the marketing authorization of the vac-
cine intended to be supplied was issued by the NRAs following 
the same regulatory pathway as IPV and was done smoothly 
because NRAs had experience with the registration and use of 
tOPV. WHO EMRO regularly followed up with the NRAs to 
ensure that appropriate bOPV products were registered by all 
countries before the tOPV-bOPV switch dates. Efforts are ongo-
ing by WHO EMRO to ensure that NRAs from EMR countries 
complete the registration of bOPV vaccines from at least 2 man-
ufacturers to prevent potential stockouts in case of shortage.
SWITCH FROM 
TRIVALENT ORAL POLIOVIRUS 
VACCINE 
TO BIVALENT ORAL POLIOVIRUS VACCINE
Intense preparations for the switch and efforts by immuniza-
tion managers and staff throughout the region resulted in all 
EMR countries ceasing official use of tOPV by 12 May 2016. 
Although 16 EMR countries reported that they had stopped use 
of tOPV by 1 May 2016, Egypt, Kuwait, Libya, Qatar, Syria, and 
the United Arab Emirates required a few more days to provide 
that confirmation to WHO EMRO. Egypt was the last country 
to report its cessation of tOPV use on 12 May. A tightly syn-
chronized switch from tOPV to bOPV in which all countries 
switched within weeks of each other would have lower risks for 
subsequent cVDPV2 outbreaks than a loosely synchronized 
switch in which countries switched over many months [2, 9]. 
Preparations for the switch in the EMR began well in advance 
and included early advocacy and communications with coun-
try decision makers and senior management of EPI programs, 
workshops to provide platforms for discussion, dissemination 
of guidance, and training of consultants, catalytic funding sup-
port, and technical assistance.
After the May 2015 World Health Assembly resolution that 
urged all countries using OPV to prepare for an April 2016 
global switch from tOPV to bOPV, staff from the WHO and 
UNICEF EMR regional offices were closely involved with the 
global planning activities on the switch, providing regional 
input on switch strategies, operational guidance, documents, 
and communications that were generated during late 2014 and 
early 2015. Adapting material from an early 2015 Atlanta work-
shop on the switch to meet EMR needs, the WHO and UNICEF 
EMR regional offices organized an August 2015 meeting in 
Cairo, Egypt, for immunization program managers and staff
 
from countries throughout the region. This meeting involved 
a briefing of participants on the rationale and context for the 
switch, discussions of challenges in carrying out the switch, and 
possible ways of addressing those challenges. Countries drafted 
preliminary plans for conducting the switch during small facil-
itated group sessions. The WHO and UNICEF EMR regional 
offices later held a follow-up meeting in Amman, Jordan in 
March 2016 that allowed immunization program managers to 
review advanced plans for the switch and discuss how to resolve 
any outstanding problems with their preparations. An inter-
net-based training session (“webinar”) organized by UNICEF 
MENA and supported by the Task Force for Global Health, in 
February 2016, also provided orientation and update to the 
switch and its component activities to hundreds of immuniza-
tion staff members throughout the region.
Direct support to countries from WHO, UNICEF, and other 
GPEI partner organizations also facilitated the switch. A spe-
cific workshop on the switch was conducted in Pakistan with 
involvement of staff from all of Pakistan’s provinces. Staff visits 
to Tunisia, Djibouti, and Yemen were deemed by countries to 
be supportive to their programs for planning and implement-
ing the switch. WHO EMRO and UNICEF MENA supported a 
specific session on the switch in Tunis to support the program 
in Libya, which has been under severe internal conflicts. The 
WHO and UNICEF EMR regional offices had routine commu-
nications with all countries to gather feedback, provide support, 
and track progress toward the switch.
Ultimately, the success of the switch in the EMR was a direct 
result of the motivation, engagement, and cooperation of immu-
nization staff and decision makers across all national levels. 
While global and regional efforts were needed to jump-start the 
process and to provide the initial strategic planning, coordina-
tion, and guidance, particularly to facilitate the synchronization 
in April–May 2016, the switch was a set of national activities 
that were adapted from standardized global and regional guid-
ance and tailored by countries to meet the local needs. Country 
ownership in developing plans, seeking funds, identifying pri-
orities, lobbying leadership, conducting inventories, expediting 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jid/article-abstract/216/suppl_1/S86/3935077 by guest on 05 June 2019
 Endgame in Eastern Mediterranean Region • JID 2017:216 (Suppl 1) • S91
bOPV registration, establishing committees with roles and 
responsibilities, training workers, developing monitoring and 
disposal strategies, and dealing and implementing creative local 
solutions, particularly in conflict situations, was ultimately the 
reason for the success of the switch in the EMR.
To ensure that no countries were prevented from completing 
the switch from tOPV to bOPV during the goal switch period 
of 17 April to 1 May because of lack of financial resources, the 
WHO and UNICEF regional offices worked with GPEI to secure 
financial assistance for countries when needed. Countries devel-
oped switch budgets and funding requests with support from the 
WHO and UNICEF regional offices, reflecting the total funds 
needed to conduct the switch, the proportion funded by the gov-
ernment and partners, and the funding gap requested from GPEI. 
The budgets were submitted to GPEI for approval. Ultimately, 
Afghanistan, Egypt, Jordan, Libya, Pakistan, Somalia, Sudan, 
Tunisia, and Yemen received catalytic financial support for the 
switch from GPEI; US$3.3 million were allocated through GPEI, 
including an additional increase of US$0.5 million to support 
Libya because of its critical situation. In addition, US$50 000 
were provided by WHO EMRO to support Djibouti and Tunisia.
To maximize population immunity to type 2 poliovirus 
infections before the switch, 12 EMR countries collectively con-
ducted 24 SIAs with tOPV between November 2015 and April 
2016 (Table 2). Afghanistan, Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Libya, 
Pakistan, Somalia, Syria, and Yemen each conducted at least 
1 national immunization day (NID) campaign involving the 
entire country. In addition, Afghanistan, Egypt, Iraq, Lebanon, 
Sudan, and Syria each conducted at least 1 subnational immu-
nization day (sNID) that targeted a portion of the country. The 
number of children targeted in these tOPV SIAs ranged from 
6080 in a mop-up SIA held in Egypt in response to detection of 
an aVDPV2, to 35 717 767 in an NID held in Pakistan. Pakistan 
and Afghanistan also held IPV SIAs in selected areas as part of 
their efforts to end transmission of type 1 wild poliovirus; these 
SIAs also helped to boost immunity to type 2 polioviruses.
All EMR countries conducted monitoring of the switch, draw-
ing entirely on their own human resources for that monitoring. 
Monitors inspected cold chain stores and health facilities for the 
presence of bOPV and any residual tOPV withdrawn. Monitors 
also checked for the presence of IPV if a country had introduced 
IPV by the time of the switch. The monitors’ findings were 
reviewed by independent national switch validation committees, 
whose members were drawn from outside government. These 
committees in turn advised each country’s ministry of health on 
whether or not tOPV had been successfully withdrawn from the 
cold chain after the switch, or if any necessary corrective action 
was needed. Once a switch validation committee found that 
tOPV had been successfully withdrawn in its country, the minis-
try of health reported the findings to WHO EMRO. By 15 May, 2 
weeks after the goal switch date, 10 EMR countries had reported 
that tOPV had been successfully withdrawn, and that total rose 
further to 17 by 23 May. By 30 June, all EMR countries except 
for Iraq and Libya had reported positive conclusions from their 
switch validation committees. By 30 September, Libya had also 
reported a positive conclusion from its switch validation com-
mittee, but Iraq indicated that it had not fully withdrawn tOPV 
as it retained a large stock of tOPV in its central cold store even 
though it had stopped use of tOPV.
COUNTRIES’ SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE FOR 
THE 
SWITCH IN 
THE EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN REGION
The experiences of Egypt, Syria, Iraq, and Libya illustrate some 
of the challenges of carrying out the synchronized global switch 
from tOPV to bOPV within the goal time period of 17 April 
to 1 May. Egypt’s principal challenge related to the country not 
receiving expected supplies of IPV before the switch because of 
the global shortage of IPV.
As a result of the shortage, in early 2016 GPEI decided to 
include Egypt among the 20 countries that would not receive 
their initial supply of IPV until the fourth quarter of 2017. GPEI 
had prioritized supplying IPV first to Afghanistan and Pakistan 
because of their endemic wild poliovirus type 1 transmission; 
second to the other countries considered to be at highest risk for 
cVDPV2 because of their having cVDPV outbreaks since 2000 
or estimated RI coverage of <80% for DTP3; third to SIAs con-
ducted in response to polio outbreaks; and finally to countries 
considered to be at low risk for polio outbreaks. Even though 
Egypt had experienced cVDPV2 outbreaks in the 1980s and 
1990s, it was considered to be at relatively low risk because it 
had not had a cVDPV outbreak since 2000 and had relatively 
high immunization coverage. However, in October 2015, SAGE 
had recommended that the globally synchronized switch in 
April 2016 proceed despite the global IPV shortage because 
the benefits of proceeding with the switch outweighed the risks 
from cVDPV2s related to delays in IPV introduction in the 
Table 2. Trivalent Oral Poliovirus Vaccine Supplemental Immunization 
Activities in Eastern Mediterranean Region, November 2015–April 2016
Country
No. of Supplemental  
Immunization Activities
Cumulative Target 
 
Population
Afghanistan
2 NIDs, 1 sNID
18 311 656
Djibouti
1 NID
129 578
Egypt
1 NID, 1 sNID, 1 Mop-up
13 432 335
Iraq
1 NID, 1 sNID
9 035 177
Jordan
1 NID
904 261
Lebanon
2 sNIDs
384 870
Libya
1 NID
Unknown
Pakistan
1 NID
35 717 767
Somalia
2 NIDs
3 916 470
Sudan
2 sNIDs
8 915 674
Syrian Arab Republic
1 NID, 1 sNID
3 726 471
Yemen
2 NIDs
10 981 274
Source: Global Polio Eradication Initiative Polio Information System, 4 October 2016.
Abbreviations: NID, National Immunization Day, sNID, Subnational Immunization Day.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jid/article-abstract/216/suppl_1/S86/3935077 by guest on 05 June 2019
 S92 • JID 2017:216 (Suppl 1) • Fahmy et al
countries deemed to be at low risk for polio outbreaks [18]. In 
light of these developments, the Egyptian immunization pro-
gram had to decide whether or not to follow SAGE’s October 
2015 recommendations and proceed with the switch in April or 
May 2016 before introducing IPV.
Egyptian officials were wary about proceeding with the switch 
without IPV, and their concerns about the possibility of cVDPV2 
outbreaks following the switch were exacerbated by the detection 
of multiple ambiguous VDPV2s (aVDPV2s), VDPV2s isolated 
only from a single acute flaccid paralysis case or from a single 
environmental sample and not linked to an individual with 
known immunodeficiency, in late 2015 and early 2016. After 
learning that GPEI would not be supplying it with IPV until 
2017, Egypt tried to secure additional tOPV on the international 
market in April 2016 but found that all OPV manufacturers had 
ceased selling tOPV. However, at the same time, staff from WHO 
EMRO and WHO headquarters in Geneva worked to convince 
Egyptian officials to proceed with the switch by providing the 
rationale for GPEI’s allocation of IPV to countries as well as 
scientific evidence and policy support for proceeding with the 
switch in the absence of IPV. The rationale for proceeding with 
the switch despite the absence of IPV was further bolstered by 
the fact that Egypt’s population immunity to type 2 polioviruses 
had been increased, and the risk from cVDPV2s correspond-
ingly decreased, by a national tOPV SIA in February 2016 as well 
as by a smaller subnational SIA with tOPV in December 2015. 
Ultimately, Egypt chose to use its last reserves of tOPV in an SIA 
in response to an aVDPV2 detected in environmental samples 
in the Sinai Peninsula in March 2016 and ceased tOPV use by 
12 May 2016. Egypt already had a stockpile of bOPV in-country 
and was able to switch to bOPV immediately. After the com-
pletion of its switch monitoring, Egypt reported that monitors 
had visited its national vaccine cold store, 27 governorate cold 
stores, 281 district cold stores, and 454 health facilities and had 
found that all of them had withdrawn tOPV in the cold chain 
and switched to bOPV.
Syria faced a different set of challenges because it had intro-
duced IPV in 2008 but continued to use tOPV
. As of April 2016, 
it had not yet procured bOPV
. At one point the Syrian Ministry 
of Health indicated that it would switch from tOPV to bOPV in 
September 2016, which could have posed a risk of transmitting 
type 2 polioviruses to countries that had ceased tOPV use [11]. 
However, after discussions with WHO EMRO and WHO head-
quarters, Syria agreed to switch from tOPV to bOPV in early May. 
Fortunately, Syria was able to purchase and quickly receive bOPV 
directly from a manufacturer, allowing tOPV use to stop on 1 May 
2016. Following the completion of its switch monitoring, Syria 
reported on 22 May 2016 that monitors had visited its 3 national 
vaccine cold stores, 13 governorate cold stores, 67 district cold 
stores, and 357 health facilities and had found that although none 
of them had tOPV or bOPV in the cold chain, 93% of district cold 
stores and 60% of health facilities had IPV in stock.
Libya’s challenges during the switch related primarily to the 
difficulty of conducting the switch in a country with a sizable 
amount of civil disorder as well as weak communication and 
coordination between the various national and provincial gov-
ernments. Libya was able to secure bOPV by April 2016 and offi-
cially switched from tOPV to bOPV by 1 May. Due to ongoing 
civil disorder, its immunization program had problems moving 
tOPV for disposal, and its monitors had difficulties visiting all 
of district cold stores and health facilities. Following the com-
pletion of its switch monitoring, Libya reported on 3 September 
2016 that monitors had visited its 1 national vaccine cold store, 
3 provincial cold stores, 25 district cold stores, and 231 health 
facilities and had found no tOPV vials in the cold chain.
Iraq faced difficulties during the switch with conducting all 
needed activities in the midst of civil disorder and deciding what 
to do with its excess tOPV after the switch. While Iraq officially 
switched from tOPV to bOPV by 30 April, it initially had difficul-
ties in ensuring that the switch actually took place in all parts of 
the country. In addition, at the time of the switch Iraq considered 
retaining 0.97 million doses of tOPV that it had in its national cold 
store for use in RI or SIAs in case it ever had a shortage of bOPV
. 
Discussions with senior staff from WHO EMRO and WHO 
headquarters highlighted the risks to the population of Iraq and 
other countries if tOPV were used after the switch. Monitoring of 
tOPV in Iraq’s cold chain was expected to be finalized once Iraq 
removes its remaining tOPV from its national cold store.
CONCLUSIONS
Overall, the supporting effort to introduce IPV in all countries 
and the switch from tOPV to bOPV in the EMR and was very suc-
cessful. The coordinated simultaneous withdrawal of tOPV and 
introduction of bOPV within and across the 22 EMR countries 
using OPV despite the many logistical and political challenges was 
a major accomplishment for the region’s immunization programs, 
as was the introduction of IPV in 11 countries between 2013 and 
2016. That success indicates the importance of the multifaceted 
approach to reducing the risks associated with the switch, partic-
ularly in light of the challenges that arose in executing individ-
ual components of the risk reduction strategy. The tOPV SIAs in 
Egypt carried out in 2015 and 2016 in preparation for the switch 
provided additional population immunity that helped to miti-
gate any additional risks that accrued from the global IPV sup-
ply shortage preventing Egypt from introducing IPV in 2015. 
Conversely, the use of IPV in Syria helped provide children pro-
tection against polio caused by types 1 and 3 polioviruses when 
the introduction of bOPV was delayed. The careful monitoring of 
the switch at the local, national, and regional levels helped to alert 
WHO EMRO and UNICEF MENA to Iraq’s keeping tOPV in its 
national cold store after the switch, and to alert Iraq to the impor-
tance of not using the remaining tOPV
. The long lead time for the 
switch also allowed lengthy, essential preparations for the switch, 
such as the registration and ordering of bOPV
, to be completed in 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jid/article-abstract/216/suppl_1/S86/3935077 by guest on 05 June 2019
 Endgame in Eastern Mediterranean Region • JID 2017:216 (Suppl 1) • S93
time. Multifaceted approaches to solving problems and addressing 
risks, flexibility in applying those approaches, and adequate time 
for preparation will be needed in future steps to eliminate the risks 
posed by use of OPV
, including the eventual withdrawal of bOPV
.
The introduction of IPV and synchronized switch from tOPV 
to bOPV in almost all EMR countries not using it in 2013 are 
also an indication of what the EMR EPI and GPEI can accom-
plish, particularly when supported with funding, technical assis-
tance, and other resources. The cooperation shown among all 
EMR countries in an effort targeting polio regardless of national 
income levels or other differences can also serve as a model for 
efforts against other diseases, including measles and rubella.
Notes
Disclaimer.  The findings and conclusions in this article are those of the 
authors and do not necessarily represent the official position of the WHO, 
UNICEF, the Task Force for Global Health, or the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC).
Financial support. This work was supported by funds from the GPEI, 
WHO, UNICEF, and the CDC. M. P. was supported by the Bill and Melinda 
Gates Foundation (grant OPP1095024).
Supplement sponsorship. This work is part of a supplement coordi-
nated by the Task Force for Global Health with funding provided by The 
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention.
Potential conflicts of interest. All authors: No reported conflicts of 
interest. All authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of 
Potential Conflicts of Interest. Conflicts that the editors consider relevant to 
the content of the manuscript have been disclosed.  
References
 1. World Health Organization. Government of Nigeria reports 2 wild polio cases, 
first since July 2014. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2016/nige-
ria-polio/en/. Accessed 14 August 2016.
 2. Global Polio Eradication Initiative. Polio Eradication and Endgame Strategic Plan 
2013–2018. 
WHO/POLIO/13.02. 
http://www.polioeradication.org/Portals/0/
Document/Resources/StrategyWork/PEESP_EN_US.pdf.
 3. Morales M, Tangermann RH, Wassilak SG. Progress toward polio eradication—
worldwide, 2015-2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016; 65:470–3.
 4. Kew OM, Sutter RW, de Gourville EM, Dowdle WR, Pallansch MA. Vaccine-
derived polioviruses and the endgame strategy for global polio eradication. Annu 
Rev Microbiol 2005; 59:587–635.
 5. Kew OM, Wright PF, Agol VI, et al. Circulating vaccine-derived polioviruses: cur-
rent state of knowledge. Bull World Health Organ 2004; 82:16–23.
 6. Burns CC, Diop OM, Sutter RW, Kew OM. Vaccine-derived polioviruses. J Infect 
Dis 2014; 210(suppl 1):S283–93.
 7. Immunization Systems Management Group, Global Polio Eradication Initiative. 
Introduction of inactivated poliovirus vaccine and switch from trivalent to biva-
lent oral poliovirus vaccine—worldwide, 2013–2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep 2015; 64:699–702.
 8. Sutter RW
, John TJ, Jain H, et al. Immunogenicity of bivalent types 1 and 3 oral 
poliovirus vaccine: a randomised, double-blind, controlled trial. Lancet 2010; 
376:1682–8.
 9. Thompson KM, Duintjer Tebbens RJ. Modeling the dynamics of oral poliovirus 
vaccine cessation. J Infect Dis 2014; 210(suppl 1):S475–84.
10. Arie S. Polio virus spreads from Syria to Iraq. BMJ 2014; 348:g2481.
11. Roberts L. A war within a war. Science 2014; 343:1302–5.
12. Hampton LM, Farrell M, Ramirez-Gonzalez A, et al. Introduction of inactivated 
poliovirus vaccine and cessation of use of trivalent oral polio vaccine—worldwide, 
2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016; 65:934–38.
13. World Health Organization. Global vaccine action plan 2011–2020. Geneva, 
Switzerland: WHO, 2013.
14. World Health Organization. Polio vaccines: WHO position paper, January 2014. 
Wkly Epidemiol Rec 2014; 89:73–92.
15. World Health Organization. Principles and considerations for adding a vaccine 
to a national immunization programme: from decision to implementation and 
monitoring. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO, 2014.
16. World Health Organization. Definition and rationale of risk tiers for IPV intro-
duction. http://www.who.int/immunization_standards/vaccine_quality/4a_risk_
tiers_for_ipv_introduction.pdf. Accessed 4 October 2016.
17. International Vaccine Access Center. Preventing polio in Tunisia: the introduction 
of inactivated polio vaccine. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=elFqvZeKtyY&-
feature=youtu.be. Accessed 26 September 2016.
18. World Health Organization. Meeting of the strategic advisory group of experts 
on immunization, October 2015—conclusions and recommendations. Wkly 
Epidemiol Rec 2015; 90:681–700.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jid/article-abstract/216/suppl_1/S86/3935077 by guest on 05 June 2019
