 Mapping the structural organization of the brain in
conduct disorder: replication of findings in two
independent samples
Graeme Fairchild,1,2,* Nicola Toschi,3,4,5,* Kate Sully,1 Edmund J.S. Sonuga-Barke,1,6
Cindy C. Hagan,2,7 Stefano Diciotti,8 Ian M. Goodyer,2 Andrew J. Calder,9,† and
Luca Passamonti9,10,11
1Academic Unit of Psychology, University of Southampton, Southampton; 2Department of Psychiatry, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; 3Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, University of Rome “Tor Vergata”, Rome,
Italy; 4Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Boston, MA; 5Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA;
6Department of Experimental, Clinical & Health Psychology, Gent University, Gent, Belgium; 7Department of
Psychology, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA; 8Department of Electrical, Electronic, and Information
Engineering, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy; 9Medical Research Council, Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit,
Cambridge, UK; 10Institute of Bioimaging and Molecular Physiology, National Research Council, Catanzaro, Italy;
11Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
Background: Neuroimaging methods that allow researchers to investigate structural covariance between brain
regions are increasingly being used to study psychiatric disorders. Structural covariance analyses are particularly
well suited for studying disorders with putative neurodevelopmental origins as they appear sensitive to changes in
the synchronized maturation of different brain regions. We assessed interregional correlations in cortical thickness
as a measure of structural covariance, and applied this method to investigate the coordinated development of
different brain regions in conduct disorder (CD). We also assessed whether structural covariance measures could
differentiate between the childhood-onset (CO-CD) and adolescence-onset (AO-CD) subtypes of CD, which may differ
in terms of etiology and adult outcomes. Methods: We examined interregional correlations in cortical thickness in
male youths with CO-CD or AO-CD relative to healthy controls (HCs) in two independent datasets. The age range in
the Cambridge sample was 16–21 years (mean: 18.0), whereas the age range of the Southampton sample was 13–
18 years (mean: 16.7). We used FreeSurfer to perform segmentations and applied structural covariance methods to
the resulting parcellations. Results: In both samples, CO-CD participants displayed a strikingly higher number of
significant cross-cortical correlations compared to HC or AO-CD participants, whereas AO-CD participants
presented fewer significant correlations than HCs. Group differences in the strength of the interregional correlations
were observed in both samples, and each set of results remained significant when controlling for IQ and comorbid
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder symptoms. Conclusions: This study provides new evidence for quantitative
differences in structural brain organization between the CO-CD and AO-CD subtypes, and supports the hypothesis
that both subtypes of CD have neurodevelopmental origins. Keywords: Cortical thickness; structural covariance;
conduct disorder; antisocial behavior; developmental taxonomic theory.
Introduction
Structural covariance is an important property of
brain
organization.
Brain
regions
that
develop
together show higher covariance in neuroanatomical
measures, such as cortical thickness, than regions
that develop according to different maturational
schedules (Alexander-Bloch, Giedd, & Bullmore,
2013). Recently, there has been increasing interest
in
applying
structural
covariance
methods
to
investigate psychiatric disorders with putative neu-
rodevelopmental origins, such as autism (Dziobek,
Bahnemann,
Convit,
&
Heekeren,
2010),
and
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD; Li
et al., 2015). In the present study, we employed
structural covariance methods based on cortical
thickness data to compare youths with conduct
disorder (CD) and typically developing individuals
in terms of the overall number of significant interre-
gional correlations in cortical thickness and test for
group differences in the relative strength of these
correlations.
We also assessed for differences between the two
main subtypes of CD – that is the childhood-onset
subtype of CD (CO-CD) and the adolescence-onset
subtype (AO-CD; American Psychiatric Association,
2013). According to the developmental taxonomic
theory, CO-CD is a neurodevelopmental disorder,
whereas AO-CD is an exaggerated form of teenage
rebellion in which individuals imitate the behavior
of antisocial peers (Moffitt, 1993). However, con-
trary to this theory, we found that both forms of CD
are associated with alterations in brain structure
and function (Fairchild et al., 2011; Passamonti
et al., 2010). Consequently, we reformulated the
developmental taxonomic theory to create a new
model of CD which proposes that CO-CD and AO-
CD differ on a quantitative, rather a qualitative,
basis (Fairchild, van Goozen, Calder, & Goodyer,
*Joint first authorship.
†Deceased
© 2016 The Authors. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Association for Child and Adolescent
Mental Health.
This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 57:9 (2016), pp 1018–1026
doi:10.1111/jcpp.12581
 2013). Nevertheless, it remains to be determined
whether brain-based measures are able to discrim-
inate between these CD subtypes, as we previously
found little or no evidence for differences between
CO-CD and AO-CD in brain function and structure
(Fairchild et al., 2011; Passamonti et al., 2010).
The neurodevelopmental changes that have been
described as occurring in childhood differ quanti-
tatively and qualitatively from those observed in
adolescence (e.g. childhood is associated with pro-
gressive
cellular
maturational
events
such
as
synaptogenesis, while adolescence is characterized
by synaptic pruning Giedd et al., 1999); hence, it is
of interest to investigate whether CO-CD and AO-
CD
are
associated
with
distinct
alterations
in
structural
covariance
that
may
in
turn
reflect
different neurodevelopmental influences. Structural
covariance methods may be particularly informative
in this respect, given their sensitivity to changes in
the coordinated development of brain regions across
the entire cortex.
The notion that neurodevelopmental abnormalities
may contribute to the pathophysiology of CD has
also been supported by recent morphometric studies
showing that CD youths, relative to age-matched
healthy controls (HCs), display alterations in cortical
thickness, folding, and surface area (Fairchild et al.,
2015; Hyatt, Haney-Caron, & Stevens, 2012), which
are aspects of cortical structure that differ in etiology
and
developmental
trajectories
(Panizzon
et al.,
2009). Likewise, it is possible that CD youths,
relative to HCs, present significant changes in the
coordinated growth of multiple cortical areas across
the brain, rather than just a specific region or
network. This is because the genetic and environ-
mental factors that increase risk for CD may exert
similar neurotrophic influences across intercon-
nected brain regions or areas that subserve similar
functions (Lerch et al., 2006). Furthermore, CD-
related genetic and environmental risk factors may
alter brain developmental trajectories in different
ways depending on whether they are activated or
occur in childhood or adolescence.
To our knowledge, this study is the first to test for
changes in structural covariance in youths with CD
relative to HCs. We applied a method developed by
Lerch and colleagues known as ‘Mapping Anatomical
Correlations
Across
Cerebral
Cortex’
(MACACC;
Lerch et al., 2006) to analyze cortical thickness data
collected in two independent samples of participants
(n = 83 recruited in Cambridge and n = 69 recruited
in Southampton). Critically, the MACACC approach
assesses for interregional correlations in cortical
thickness across the entire cortex, enabling us to
test whether CD is associated with global changes in
brain structure. Previous studies have shown that
neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism may
be associated with widespread changes in structural
covariance networks (Alexander-Bloch et al., 2013),
so one of our key aims was to test whether CD is
associated with similar global changes in the struc-
tural organization of the brain.
We also hypothesized that youths with CD would
display increases or reductions in the strength
of interregional correlations in cortical thickness
relative to HCs. This hypothesis was guided by
previous work showing both increases and reduc-
tions in the strength of interregional correlations in
adults with antisocial personality disorder, relative
to age-matched HCs (Yang et al., 2012). Further-
more, we predicted that youths with CO-CD would
show more pronounced alterations in interregional
correlations in cortical thickness than youths with
AO-CD, given that CO-CD is typically more severe
and linked to less favorable adult outcomes (Burt,
Donnellan, Iacono, & McGue, 2011). Finally, we
hypothesized that the group differences in correla-
tion strength would be identified within and across a
number of prefrontal and temporal regions previ-
ously implicated in the pathophysiology of antisocial
behavior (Yang et al., 2012). These hypotheses were
tested in two independent samples recruited in
separate locations, using similar psychiatric assess-
ment procedures.
Participants
Fifty-eight male adolescents and young adults with
CD and 25 sex- and age-matched HCs (age range:
16–21 years) were recruited at Cambridge University
between 2007 and 2010. Part of this sample was
included in earlier neuroimaging studies published
by our group (Fairchild et al., 2011; Passamonti
et al., 2010). An independent sample of 37 CD and
32 HC participants (all male; age range: 13–18 years)
was recruited at Southampton University between
2012 and 2014.
At both sites, CD participants were recruited from
pupil referral units and Youth Offending Services
(YOSs), whereas HCs were recruited from main-
stream schools and colleges. At schools and colleges,
participants were contacted by sending an informa-
tion pack about the study from the school/college to
their homes. At pupil referral units and YOSs, a
member of staff (usually their keyworker) described
the study to potential volunteers and asked them
whether they were interested in taking part. If they
were interested in participating, they either sent back
reply slips or gave permission for the staff member to
pass on their contact details to the research team.
Once we received reply slips or contact details,
we arranged to visit the participants’ homes to
carry out separate semistructured diagnostic inter-
views with them and their primary caregiver. The
Suffolk National Health Service Research Ethics
Committee approved the Cambridge study, whereas
the University of Southampton’s Ethics Committee
and
Research
Governance
Office
approved
the
Southampton study. Written informed consent was
obtained from all participants and their parents.
© 2016 The Authors. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Association for
Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
doi:10.1111/jcpp.12581
Structural covariance in conduct disorder
1019
 Conduct disorder was assessed in the same way
in both samples: participants and their parents
underwent
separate
semistructured
diagnostic
interviews using the Kiddie-Schedule for Affective
Disorders and Schizophrenia-Present and Lifetime
Version (K-SADS-PL; Kaufman et al., 1997). Diag-
noses
were
reached
by
combining
information
from both interviews. Participants were classified
as having CO-CD if they or their parents reported
that
at
least
one
CD
symptom
and
functional
impairment was present before age 10. Alternatively,
if
the
individual
only
developed
CD
symptoms
after
age
10,
an
AO-CD
diagnosis
was
given.
According to these criteria, 33 participants were
classified as having CO-CD and 25 as having AO-CD
in the Cambridge sample, whereas 23 individuals
had CO-CD and 14 had AO-CD in the Southampton
sample.
The exclusion criteria applied in Cambridge and
Southampton were broadly similar: (a) presence of
serious physical or psychiatric illnesses (e.g. autism,
schizophrenia, bipolar disorder), as disclosed in the
K-SADS-PL interview; and (b) any contraindication
to brain scanning (e.g. claustrophobia or metal in the
body). In Cambridge, we also excluded CD partici-
pants with IQs < 85, as estimated using the two
subtest version of the Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of
Intelligence (Wechsler, 1999), whereas in Southamp-
ton the cutoff on the same instrument was IQ < 75.
In an attempt to match groups in IQ, we only
included HCs with IQs < 115 in both samples. We
administered the full ADHD supplement of the
K-SADS-PL
to
participants
in
both
samples
to
comprehensively assess for all 18 of the DSM-IV
symptoms of ADHD and evaluate the impact of
threshold and subthreshold ADHD comorbidity on
the key findings by regressing out the contribution of
ADHD symptoms when assessing for significant
interregional correlations within each group, as well
as group differences in interregional correlation
strength. At both sites, we obtained data on psycho-
pathic traits using the self-report Youth Psycho-
pathic traits Inventory (Andershed, Kerr, Stattin, &
Levander, 2002). In the Cambridge sample, we
obtained data on participants’ socioeconomic status
using the ACORN geodemographic tool, which is
based on UK postcodes (http://acorn.caci.co.uk/).
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
In Cambridge, structural MRI data were acquired on
a 3-Tesla Siemens Tim-Trio scanner at the Medical
Research Council Cognition and Brain Sciences
Unit. The following parameters were used: voxel
size = 1 9 1 9 1 mm,
repetition
time = 2250 ms;
echo time = 2.99 ms; flip angle = 9°. Total scanning
time was 4 min and 16 s.
In Southampton, the structural MRI data were
acquired on a 1.5-Tesla Siemens Magnetom scanner
at the Southampton General Hospital using the
following
parameters:
voxel
size = 1.2 9 1.2 9
1.2 mm,
repetition
time = 2400 ms,
echo
time =
3.62 ms, flip angle = 8°. Total scanning time was
7 min and 41 s.
Stringent quality control procedures were adopted
during data collection and preprocessing in both
samples. Specifically, all structural images were
checked immediately after acquisition for movement
artifacts, and repeated until a high-quality T1-
weighted image was available. Before including T1-
weighted images in the study, they were carefully
reviewed by two coauthors (G.F., L.P.) and an expe-
rienced radiographer who was blind to group status
and the researchers’ assessments. Additional visual
inspection after cortical surface reconstruction was
manually performed by another coauthor (N.T.), who
is an expert in advanced neuroimaging analyses. To
minimize discomfort and reduce motion artifacts, the
structural MRI data were collected at the beginning
of each scanning session.
MACACC approach
Quantification of cortical thickness values was per-
formed using FreeSurfer v.5.3.0 (http://surfer.nmr.
mgh.harvard.edu) (Dale, Fischl, & Sereno, 1999;
Fischl & Dale, 2000). This method involves vertex-
wise reconstruction of the white matter and pial
surface and parcellation of the cortex into 34 regions
of interest (ROIs) per hemisphere according to the
Desikan–Killiany atlas (Desikan et al., 2006). An
average cortical thickness value was then extracted
for each ROI by reconstructing the gray–white matter
boundary and the cortical surface; the distance
between these surfaces was calculated individually
at each point/vertex across the cortical mantle (see
Supporting information for further details).
In both samples, the cortical thickness data were
mean-centered across regions within each partici-
pant, before computing the interregional correlations
and testing for group differences in correlation
strength. This was done to limit the possibility that
the findings were driven by scaling effects. Following
this step, we regressed out the effects of age, IQ, and
ADHD symptoms before computing the interregional
correlation coefficients in the Cambridge sample.
This enabled us to adjust for these variables which
differed between the CD and HC groups (Table 1).
Likewise, in the Southampton sample, we mean-
centered cortical thickness across regions within
each participant to adjust for possible scaling effects
and regressed out the contribution of IQ and ADHD
symptoms before computing the interregional corre-
lations. Age was not included as a covariate in this
case, as the groups were deliberately matched on
this variable (Table 1). Nevertheless, for complete-
ness and to show the impact of these variables on the
structural
covariance
findings,
the
interregional
correlation results that were obtained without con-
trolling
for
these
variables
are
reported
in
© 2016 The Authors. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Association for
Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
1020
Graeme Fairchild et al.
J Child Psychol Psychiatr 2016; 57(9): 1018–26
 Supporting information. To confirm that our results
were not attributable to group differences in brain
size, we also repeated all analyses regressing out
estimated total intracranial volume (eTIV) along with
demographic and clinical variables.
Next,
cortical
thickness
correlation
matrices
were generated within each group and in each
sample
by
computing
the
Pearson’s
correlation
coefficients (R-values) between each pair of regions
across subjects with an associated p-value that was
corrected for multiple comparisons using a false-
discovery-rate (FDR) procedure. To test for signifi-
cant differences across groups, and to avoid a priori
assumptions about the distribution of differences
between group-wise R-values for each correlation,
the null distribution was built using a random
sampling technique (1 9 106 samples – see Support-
ing information for details about the procedure) and
the resulting p-value was corrected for multiple
comparisons
(Benjamini-Hochberg’s
correction,
p < .05, FDR).
Finally, to assess the degree of comparability
between the results obtained with the Cambridge
and Southampton samples, we produced correlation
matrices illustrating the overlap between the sam-
ples in terms of the significant interregional correla-
tions identified within each group (i.e. HCs, CO-CD,
and AO-CD).
Results
Participant characteristics
In both samples, youths with CD had higher levels of
psychopathic traits and reported more CD and
ADHD
symptoms
than
HCs
(Table 1).
In
the
Table 1 Demographic and clinical characteristics of the participants
Cambridge sample
HCs (n = 25)
CO-CD (n = 33)
AO-CD (n = 25)
One-way ANOVA analyses
Measure
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
Age (years)
18.5
1.1
17.8
1.1
17.9
1.1
F = 3.12; p = .05
Verbal IQ
99.0
13.1
89.6
14.0
96.0
16.9
F = 3.13; p = .05
Performance IQ
107.5
11.7
104.5
10.7
105.6
12.7
F = 0.5; p = .62
Psychopathic traits (YPI)
98.5
13.2
124.1
21.0
123.7
17.7
F = 17.5; p < .001
Lifetime/ever CD symptoms
0.4
0.6
9.0
1.8
7.4
2.5
F = 172.3; p < .0001
Lifetime/ever ADHD symptoms
2.5
2.3
9.0
4.7
6.0
4.3
F = 18.7; p < .001
SES (ACORN class)
n
%
n
%
N
%
v² (exact test)
Wealthy achievers (1)
4
16.0
0
0.0
2
8.0
v2 = 13.7, p = .09
Urban prosperity (2)
7
28.0
2
6.1
6
24.0
Comfortably off (3)
6
24.0
13
39.4
6
24.0
Moderate means (4)
2
8.0
4
12.1
1
4.0
Hard-pressed (5)
6
24.0
14
42.4
10
40.0
Comorbid diagnoses
n
%
n
%
N
%
v² (exact test)
Number with comorbid ADHDa
–
–
11
33.3
3
12.0
Number with comorbid MDDa
–
–
3
9.0
2
8.0
Regular use of:
Tobacco
7
28.0
28
84.8
20
80.0
v2 = 23.6, p < .001
Alcohol
13
52.0
20
60.6
20
80.0
v2 = 4.5, p = .11
Cannabis
4
16.0
19
57.6
16
64.0
v2 = 14.0, p = .001
Current medication use
n
%
n
%
N
%
Methylphenidate
–
–
2
6.0
0
0
Southampton sample
HCs (n = 32)
CO-CD (n = 23)
AO-CD (n = 14)
Measure
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
One-way ANOVA analyses
Age (years)
16.6
1.1
16.7
1.4
16.8
1.2
F = 0.10; p = .91
Estimated full-scale IQ
103.4
10.0
94.7
12.4
89.4
7.7
F = 9.89; p < .001
Psychopathic traits (YPI)b
101.7
16.3
125.5
22.3
120.4
18.1
F = 11.57; p < .001
Lifetime/ever CD symptoms
0.3
0.6
9.4
2.0
7.6
1.7
F = 300.8; p < .0001
Lifetime/ever ADHD symptoms
0.7
1.4
8.1
4.9
6.4
3.4
F = 36.8; p < .001
Comorbid diagnoses
n
%
n
%
N
%
v² (exact test)
Number with comorbid ADHDa
–
–
6
26.1
2
14.3
Number with comorbid MDDa
–
–
2
8.7
0
0
Current medication use
n
%
n
%
N
%
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
–
–
1
4.3
2
14.2
Methylphenidate
–
–
2
8.6
0
0
ADHD, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; AO-CD, adolescence-onset conduct disorder; CO-CD, childhood-onset conduct
disorder; HCs, healthy controls; IQ, intelligence quotient; SD, standard deviation; SES, socioeconomic status; YPI, Youth
Psychopathic traits Inventory. ACORN is a geodemographic tool for assessing socioeconomic status using UK postcodes.
aA current psychiatric disorder was an exclusion criterion for the control group.
bYPI data were unavailable for one control subject.
© 2016 The Authors. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Association for
Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
doi:10.1111/jcpp.12581
Structural covariance in conduct disorder
1021
 Cambridge sample, post hoc tests comparing the
CO-CD and AO-CD subgroups revealed that CO-CD
youths endorsed more CD (p = .03) and ADHD
symptoms (p = .04) than AO-CD participants. Like-
wise, in the Southampton sample, youths with CO-
CD tended to display more CD and ADHD symptoms
than AO-CD youths, although these differences were
not statistically significant (ps > .2).
Structural covariance results
In both samples, CO-CD youths displayed a higher
number of significant interregional correlations in
cortical thickness than HCs and AO-CD partici-
pants. In contrast, AO-CD youths showed fewer
significant
interregional
correlations
in
cortical
thickness than HCs (Figure 1).
Direct group comparisons revealed significant dif-
ferences in the strength of the interregional correla-
tions in many regions. In the Cambridge sample,
there were 18 significant differences between the HC
and CO-CD groups, 48 differences between the HC
and AO-CD groups, and 118 differences between the
CO-CD and AO-CD groups. In the Southampton
sample,
there
were
422
significant
differences
between the HC and CO-CD groups, 48 differences
between the HC and AO-CD groups, and 68 differ-
ences between the CO-CD and AO-CD groups.
These differences were localized both within and
across frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital cor-
tices (see Supporting information). The pattern of
significant
cross-cortical
correlations
across
the
groups and the results of the group comparisons
were very similar (albeit stronger) when age, IQ, and
ADHD symptoms were not included as covariates
(see Supporting information). The general pattern of
significant interregional correlations and group dif-
ferences in correlation strength also remained sim-
ilar when eTIV was regressed out rather than mean-
centering cortical thickness within each subject
prior to computing the correlation coefficients (Cam-
bridge sample: HCs vs. CO-CD: 21 differences; HCs
vs. AO-CD: 69 differences; CO-CD vs. AO-CD: 83
differences; Southampton sample: HCs vs. CO-CD:
279 differences; HCs vs. AO-CD: 64 differences; CO-
CD vs. AO-CD: 106 differences; Supporting informa-
tion). There were also no significant group differ-
ences in the variance of cortical thickness measures
or in the variance of eTIV values in the 68 regions
included in the analyses in either sample (see
Figure 1 Cross-cortical correlation matrices between regions in healthy controls (HCs) and youths with childhood-onset conduct disorder
(CO-CD) and adolescence-onset conduct disorder (AO-CD) in the Cambridge (A) and Southampton samples (B). Significant interregional
correlations in cortical thickness between pairs of brain regions (when applying a threshold of p < .05, false-discovery-rate correction for
multiple comparisons) are denoted by black dots in the correlation matrices. The X and Y axes show the 34 regions of interest per
hemisphere (i.e. 68 cortical regions in total) from the Desikan–Killiany atlas
© 2016 The Authors. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Association for
Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
1022
Graeme Fairchild et al.
J Child Psychol Psychiatr 2016; 57(9): 1018–26
 Supporting information). Therefore, it is unlikely
that the key findings were explained by greater
variability in overall cortical thickness or overall
brain volume within the CD groups relative to the
HCs.
Finally, when studying the degree of similarity of
the results obtained across the Cambridge and
Southampton samples, there was substantial over-
lap in terms of the significant interregional correla-
tions identified in each sample. In particular, 222
interregional correlations were identified as overlap-
ping between the two HC samples, whereas 724 and
109 overlapping correlations were identified in the
two CO-CD and AO-CD groups, respectively (Fig-
ure 2 and Supporting information).
Discussion
Our first key finding was that youths with CO-CD
showed a strikingly higher number of significant
interregional correlations in cortical thickness rela-
tive to either HCs or AO-CD participants, whereas
AO-CD youths displayed fewer significant interre-
gional correlations than HCs and CO-CD youths.
Notably, this pattern held across two independent
samples studied in separate locations, although we
used different scanners and structural MRI acquisi-
tion parameters. Furthermore, there was substantial
overlap in terms of the significant interregional
correlations identified in each group across two
independent samples, which supports the robust-
ness of our findings.
Our second key finding was that there were
significant differences between the three groups in
the strength of the interregional correlations in
cortical thickness, and these were localized both
within and across a number of frontal, parietal,
temporal, and occipital cortices. Again, there was
substantial overlap between the two samples in
terms of the correlations that were identified as
differing in strength. Overall, these results suggest
that alterations in brain structure in CD may be
much more widespread than originally thought and
may involve several networks, rather than being
restricted to specific cortical regions like the ventro-
medial prefrontal cortex (Blair, 2013). The diffuse
pattern
of
structural
covariance
abnormalities
observed in CD resembles the changes reported in
other
neurodevelopmental
disorders
like
autism
(Alexander-Bloch et al., 2013), and suggests that,
in common with these disorders, CD may be asso-
ciated with rather global disruptions in brain matu-
ration. Furthermore, group differences in the overall
number and strength of the interregional correla-
tions were independent of ADHD comorbidity. This is
important as the CD youths differed from HCs in
ADHD
symptoms,
and
the
CO-CD
participants
endorsed
more
ADHD
symptoms
than
AO-CD
youths, consistent with previous studies (Moffitt &
Caspi, 2001). In addition, the results were indepen-
dent of group differences in IQ, which is noteworthy
as Lerch et al. (2006) found that IQ modulates
interregional correlations in cortical thickness in
typically developing children.
The present findings, which are among the first to
demonstrate marked differences in brain structure
between the CO and AO subtypes of CD, may be
clinically relevant as structural covariance alter-
ations may represent brain-based biomarkers cap-
able of distinguishing between these forms of CD.
Furthermore, demonstrating that youths with CO-
CD differ from their AO-CD counterparts in the
overall number and strength of interregional corre-
lations in cortical thickness supports the notion that
age-of-onset is an important specifier for CD and
should be retained in future classification systems
(ICD and DSM).
It is also important to emphasize that our results
suggest that both CO-CD and AO-CD are associated
with changes in the synchronized development of the
brain, consistent with the hypothesis that neurobi-
ological factors contribute to the etiology of both CD
Figure 2 Cross-cortical correlation matrices showing the degree of overlap (red dots) between the significant interregional correlations
identified in the Cambridge and Southampton samples. Blue dots represent correlations that were significant only in the Cambridge
sample, whereas green dots represent correlations that were significant only in the Southampton sample. HCs, healthy controls; CO-CD,
childhood-onset conduct disorder; AO-CD, adolescence-onset conduct disorder
© 2016 The Authors. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Association for
Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
doi:10.1111/jcpp.12581
Structural covariance in conduct disorder
1023
 subtypes (Fairchild et al., 2013) and challenging the
view that such factors are not involved in the etiology
of AO-CD (Moffitt, 1993). However, the fact that
opposite
changes
in
structural
covariance
were
observed in the CO-CD and AO-CD subgroups
relative to HCs may seem difficult to reconcile with
our earlier work showing relatively few or no differ-
ences between the CO-CD and AO-CD subtypes in
brain structure and function using different neu-
roimaging modalities and methods (Fairchild et al.,
2011; Passamonti et al., 2010). A possible explana-
tion of these apparent inconsistencies is that struc-
tural covariance methods are more sensitive in
revealing the abnormalities that distinguish between
the CO-CD and AO-CD subtypes, compared to
univariate analyses assessing brain structure or
function at the voxel-wise level.
The
biological
underpinnings
of
interregional
correlations in cortical thickness are not well under-
stood; hence, we can only speculate regarding the
neurodevelopmental basis of the present findings.
There is, however, evidence that brain networks
identified by applying structural covariance methods
to
cross-sectional
structural
MRI
data
strongly
resemble patterns of maturational coupling between
distinct networks (Alexander-Bloch et al., 2013).
This suggests that brain regions that develop accord-
ing to similar maturational trajectories tend to
covary in structure. Accordingly, one interpretation
of our findings is that the CO-CD subgroup shows a
more synchronized pattern of brain development
than the other groups (as indicated by greater
numbers of significant interregional correlations),
although
this
increased
synchronization
could
reflect either accelerated development of cortical
regions that normally mature later or delayed devel-
opment of regions that typically mature earlier in life.
Conversely, the reductions in structural covariance
observed in AO-CD youths, relative to HC and CO-
CD participants, may reflect specific disruptions in
neurodevelopmental processes that occur during
adolescence (e.g. synaptic pruning). In other words,
if neuronal pruning is altered in the AO-CD group
against a background of relatively normal brain
development in childhood, it is possible that the
coordinated pattern of brain development across
different cortical regions would be impaired. This
might lead to fewer significant interregional correla-
tions in cortical thickness and changes in correlation
strength relative to the other groups.
Strengths and limitations
This is one of the first clinical neuroimaging studies
to present findings from independent discovery and
replication samples using the same analytic method,
despite concerns about the replicability of neu-
roimaging data (Horga, Kaur, & Peterson, 2014).
The degree of correspondence between the two
groups of results is particularly encouraging as there
were substantial variations between the datasets in
terms of MRI acquisition parameters and magnet
strengths.
Second, each of the samples was relatively large,
homogeneous, and well-characterized from a psychi-
atric perspective, with detailed information available
from diagnostic interviews and clinical data collected
from participants and their parents/carers. In addi-
tion, we were able to show that the results did not
appear to be explained by group differences in age, IQ,
and ADHD symptoms. We note, however, that the CD
groups had higher proportions of participants coming
from lower socioeconomic strata, and they reported
increased rates of substance use relative to HCs.
Consequently, future research should examine the
contribution of these variables to group differences in
structural covariance. Importantly, we also deliber-
ately restricted our sample to males, as there is
evidence for sex differences in trajectories of antisocial
behavior, as well as in structural covariance mea-
sures (Raznahan et al., 2011). Nevertheless, future
studies should investigate whether these results
generalize to females with CD.
Third, this was the first studyto report differences in
interregional
correlations
in
cortical
thickness
between the CO-CD and AO-CD subtypes and our
results demonstrate the value of this approach. How-
ever, we note that retrospective accounts of age-of-
onset of CD should be treated with caution (Henry,
Moffitt, Caspi, Langley, & Silva, 1994), although we
attempted to mitigate against this issue by obtaining
detailed information from participants and parents
and asking both informants to consider salient life
landmarks (e.g. the transition from primary to sec-
ondary school) to assist accurate recall.
Fourth, we used only a single excitation in the MRI
anatomical
pulse
sequences,
which
may
have
reduced signal-to-noise ratio and therefore accuracy
of the delineation of gray–white matter interfaces.
Furthermore, the MACACC method involves per-
forming a large number of statistical tests and it
may be considered a data-driven approach, although
we applied a stringent correction for multiple com-
parisons and the results appeared robust and repli-
cated across two datasets. The MACACC approach is
also uninformative about the coordinated develop-
ment of subcortical regions or covariance between
cortical and subcortical regions. Applying structural
covariance methods to whole-brain measurements of
gray matter density or white matter microstructure
could enable researchers to investigate interactions
between cortical and subcortical networks involving
the amygdala and striatum, which are critically
implicated in CD (Blair, 2013). Nevertheless, the
MACACC approach may offer unique information
relative to that provided by other methods such as
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI). Specifically, there is
evidence that MACACC can identify correlations
between brain regions that have no direct anatomical
connections, as only 35–40% of the interregional
© 2016 The Authors. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Association for
Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
1024
Graeme Fairchild et al.
J Child Psychol Psychiatr 2016; 57(9): 1018–26
 correlations revealed using MACACC converged with
the connectivity patterns identified via DTI-based
approaches (Gong, He, Chen, & Evans, 2012).
Finally, the present findings suggest several possi-
ble avenues for future research. For example, future
studies
should
investigate
convergence
between
structural covariance measures and functional con-
nectivity indices in similar populations. It would also
be interesting to integrate cortical thickness-based
methods with DTI-based approaches (Gong et al.,
2012), to examine whether increased structural
covariance in CO-CD is associated with altered white
matter microstructural properties. Another interest-
ing question is whether similar changes in structural
covariance would be observed in CO-CD and AO-CD
individuals during later phases of development (e.g.
adulthood). Lastly, examining the impact of environ-
mental adversity and substance use on structural
covariance measures could help extend the present
findings and shed light on psychiatric conditions
related to CD (e.g. substance use disorders).
Conclusions
The present study demonstrates that interregional
correlations in cortical thickness may distinguish
between the CO and AO forms of CD, and that both
CD subgroups significantly differ from typically
developing adolescents in both the overall number
and
strength
of
the
interregional
correlations
observed. Structural covariance methods may help
researchers to refine the diagnosis and classification
of CD and improve our ability to distinguish between
CD subtypes which may differ in etiology and adult
outcomes. Longitudinal studies investigating devel-
opmental trajectories of structural covariance, mat-
urational coupling, and functional connectivity in
children at high risk for externalizing disorders are
now needed to characterize the neurodevelopmental
basis of CD and differences between CO-CD and AO-
CD subtypes in brain maturation.
Supporting information
Additional Supporting Information may be found in the
online version of this article:
Data S1. Supplementary methods.
Data S2. Supplementary figures.
Data S3. Supplementary tables.
Acknowledgements
This research was funded by Wellcome Trust grant
083140 (G.F., I.M.G.), Medical Research Council project
U.1055.02.001.00001.01
(A.J.C),
an
Adventure
in
Research grant from Southampton University (G.F.F),
a PhD studentship from Southampton University (K.S.),
and the Betty Behrens Research Fellowship at Clare
Hall, Cambridge University (L.P.). The authors dedicate
this paper to the late Dr. Andy Calder who died
unexpectedly in 2013. He was an inspirational and
dedicated scientist who was admired and respected by
all of us. E.J.S.S-B. receives speaker fees, research
funding, and conference support from Shire Pharma-
ceuticals; speaker fees from Janssen Cilag and Medice;
book royalties from OUP and Jessica Kingsley; consul-
tancy from Neurotech solutions, Aarhus University,
Copenhagen University, and KU Leusven. All other
authors report no financial relationships with commer-
cial interests in relation to this report.
Correspondence
Luca
Passamonti,
Department
of
Clinical
Neuro-
sciences, University of Cambridge, Herchel Smith Build-
ing, Robinson Way, Cambridge Biomedical Campus,
Cambridge CB2 0SZ, UK; Email: lp337@medschl.cam.
ac.uk
Key points
• Structural covariance analyses are a new set of methods that can be used to investigate the coordinated
development of different brain regions.
• We calculated interregional correlations in cortical thickness as a measure of structural covariance in male
youths with childhood-onset conduct disorder (CO-CD) or adolescence-onset CD (AO-CD), and healthy controls
(HCs), in two independent samples recruited at different locations.
• In both samples, CO-CD youths displayed more significant interregional correlations than AO-CD youths and
HCs, whereas AO-CD individuals displayed fewer correlations than HCs. The three groups also differed in the
strength of the interregional correlations across frontal, temporal, parietal, and occipital regions.
• These findings illustrate the value of structural covariance methods in studying psychiatric disorders with
putative neurodevelopmental origins like CD.
References
Alexander-Bloch, A., Giedd, J.N., & Bullmore, E. (2013).
Imaging
structural
co-variance
between
human
brain
regions. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 14, 322–336.
American Psychiatric Association (2013). Diagnostic and sta-
tistical manual of mental disorders (DSM-5�). Arlington, VA:
Author.
Andershed, H., Kerr, M., Stattin, H., & Levander, S. (2002).
Psychopathic traits in non-referred youths: Initial test of a
© 2016 The Authors. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Association for
Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
doi:10.1111/jcpp.12581
Structural covariance in conduct disorder
1025
 new
assessment
tool.
The
Hague,
the
Netherlands:
Elsevier.
Blair, R.J.R. (2013). The neurobiology of psychopathic traits in
youths. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 14, 786–799.
Burt, S.A., Donnellan, M.B., Iacono, W.G., & McGue, M.
(2011). Age-of-onset or behavioral sub-types? A prospective
comparison of two approaches to characterizing the hetero-
geneity within antisocial behavior. Journal of Abnormal Child
Psychology, 39, 633–644.
Dale, A.M., Fischl, B., & Sereno, M.I. (1999). Cortical surface-
based analysis. I. Segmentation and surface reconstruction.
Neuroimage, 9, 179–194.
Desikan, R.S., Segonne, F., Fischl, B., Quinn, B.T., Dickerson,
B.C., Blacker, D., . . . & Killiany, R.J. (2006). An automated
labeling system for subdividing the human cerebral cortex
on MRI scans into gyral based regions of interest. NeuroI-
mage, 31, 968–980.
Dziobek, I., Bahnemann, M., Convit, A., & Heekeren, H.R.
(2010). The role of the fusiform-amygdala system in the
pathophysiology of autism. Archives of General Psychiatry,
67, 397–405.
Fairchild, G., Passamonti, L., Hurford, G., Hagan, C.C., von
dem Hagen, E.A., van Goozen, S.H., . . . & Calder, A.J. (2011).
Brain structure abnormalities in early-onset and adoles-
cent-onset conduct disorder. American Journal of Psychia-
try, 168, 624–633.
Fairchild, G., Toschi, N., Hagan, C.C., Goodyer, I.M., Calder,
A.J., & Passamonti, L. (2015). Cortical thickness, surface
area, and folding alterations in male youths with conduct
disorder and varying levels of callous-unemotional traits.
NeuroImage Clinical, 8, 253–260.
Fairchild, G., van Goozen, S.H., Calder, A.J., & Goodyer, I.M.
(2013). Research review: Evaluating and reformulating the
developmental taxonomic theory of antisocial behaviour.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 54, 924–940.
Fischl, B., & Dale, A.M. (2000). Measuring the thickness of the
human cerebral cortex from magnetic resonance images.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 97, 11050–11055.
Giedd, J.N., Blumenthal, J., Jeffries, N.O., Castellanos, F.X.,
Liu, H., Zijdenbos, A., . . . & Rapoport, J.L. (1999). Brain
development during childhood and adolescence: A longitu-
dinal MRI study. Nature Neuroscience, 2, 861–863.
Gong, G., He, Y., Chen, Z.J., & Evans, A.C. (2012). Conver-
gence and divergence of thickness correlations with diffu-
sion
connections
across
the
human
cerebral
cortex.
NeuroImage, 59, 1239–1248.
Henry, B., Moffitt, T.E., Caspi, A., Langley, J., & Silva, P.A.
(1994). On the “remembrance of things past”: A longitudinal
evaluation
of
the
retrospective
method.
Psychological
Assessment, 6, 92–101.
Horga, G., Kaur, T., & Peterson, B.S. (2014). Annual research
review: Current limitations and future directions in MRI
studies
of
child-
and
adult-onset
developmental
psy-
chopathologies. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry,
55, 659–680.
Hyatt, C.J., Haney-Caron, E., & Stevens, M.C. (2012). Cortical
thickness and folding deficits in conduct-disordered adoles-
cents. Biological Psychiatry, 72, 207–214.
Kaufman, J., Birmaher, B., Brent, D., Rao, U., Flynn, C.,
Moreci, P., . . . & Ryan, N. (1997). Schedule for Affective
Disorders and Schizophrenia for School-Age Children-Pre-
sent and Lifetime Version (K-SADS-PL): Initial reliability and
validity data. Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 36, 980–988.
Lerch, J.P., Worsley, K., Shaw, W.P., Greenstein, D.K., Lenroot,
R.K., Giedd, J., & Evans, A.C. (2006). Mapping anatomical
correlations across cerebral cortex (MACACC) using cortical
thickness from MRI. NeuroImage, 31, 993–1003.
Li, X., Cao, Q., Pu, F., Li, D., Fan, Y., An, L., . . . & Wang, Y.
(2015). Abnormalities of structural covariance networks in
drug-naive boys with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
Psychiatry Research, 231, 273–278.
Moffitt, T.E. (1993). Adolescence-limited and life-course-per-
sistent antisocial behavior: A developmental taxonomy.
Psychological Review, 100, 674–701.
Moffitt, T.E., & Caspi, A. (2001). Childhood predictors differ-
entiate life-course persistent and adolescence-limited anti-
social pathways among males and females. Development
and Psychopathology, 13, 355–375.
Panizzon, M.S., Fennema-Notestine, C., Eyler, L.T., Jernigan,
T.L., Prom-Wormley, E., Neale, M., . . . & Kremen, W.S.
(2009). Distinct genetic influences on cortical surface area
and cortical thickness. Cerebral Cortex, 19, 2728–2735.
Passamonti, L., Fairchild, G., Goodyer, I.M., Hurford, G.,
Hagan, C.C., Rowe, J.B., & Calder, A.J. (2010). Neural
abnormalities in early-onset and adolescence-onset conduct
disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 67, 729–738.
Raznahan, A., Lerch, J.P., Lee, N., Greenstein, D., Wallace,
G.L., Stockman, M., . . . & Giedd, J.N. (2011). Patterns of
coordinated anatomical change in human cortical develop-
ment: A longitudinal neuroimaging study of maturational
coupling. Neuron, 72, 873–884.
Wechsler, D. (1999). Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence
(WASI). San Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation.
Yang, Y., Raine, A., Joshi, A.A., Joshi, S., Chang, Y.T., Schug,
R.A., . . . & Narr, K.L. (2012). Frontal information flow and
connectivity in psychopathy. British Journal of Psychiatry,
201, 408–409.
Accepted for publication: 20 April 2016
First published online: 15 June 2016
© 2016 The Authors. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Association for
Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
1026
Graeme Fairchild et al.
J Child Psychol Psychiatr 2016; 57(9): 1018–26
