 Clonal Evolution of Chemotherapy-resistant Urothelial 
Carcinoma
Bishoy M. Faltas1,2,3,#, Davide Prandi4,#, Scott T. Tagawa1,2,3, Ana M. Molina1,2, David M. 
Nanus1,2,3, Cora Sternberg5, Jonathan Rosenberg6, Juan Miguel Mosquera7, Brian 
Robinson7, Olivier Elemento1,8,9, Andrea Sboner1,7,9, Himisha Beltran1,2,3,*, Francesca 
Demichelis1,4,9,*, and Mark A. Rubin1,3,7,*
1Caryl and Israel Englander Institute for Precision Medicine, New York Presbyterian Hospital-Weill 
Cornell Medicine. New York, NY
2Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Weill Cornell Medicine. 
New York, NY
3Sandra and Edward Meyer Cancer Center at Weill Cornell Medicine. New York, NY
4Centre for Integrative Biology, University of Trento. Trento, Italy
5Department of Medical Oncology, San Camillo and Forlanini Hospitals. Rome, Italy
6Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center. New York, NY
7Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine. Weill Cornell Medicine. New York, NY
8Department of Physiology and Biophysics. Weill Cornell Medicine. New York, NY
9Institute for Computational Biomedicine, Weill Cornell Medicine. New York, NY
Abstract
Chemotherapy-resistant urothelial carcinoma (UC) has no uniformly curative therapy. 
Understanding how selective pressure from chemotherapy directs UC’s evolution and shapes its 
clonal architecture is a central biological question with clinical implications. To address this 
question, we performed whole-exome sequencing and clonality analysis of 72 UCs including 16 
matched sets of primary and advanced tumors prospectively collected before and after 
chemotherapy. Our analysis provided several insights: (i) chemotherapy-treated UC is 
Corresponding Authors: Mark A. Rubin, MD, rubinma@med.cornell.edu. Francesca Demichelis, PhD, f.demichelis@unitn.it.
#co-first authorship
*co-senior authorship
URLs.
CLONET, https://bitbucket.org/deid00/clonet/; Oncotator, https://www.broadinstitute.org/oncotator/; Oncotator datasource corpus, 
http://www.broadinstitute.org/~lichtens/oncobeta/oncotator_v1_ds_Jan262015.tar.gz; REACTOME pathway database, http://
www.reactome.org/; Sanger signatures http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic/signatures/.
Accession codes. All BAM files and associated sample information are deposited in dbGap phs001087.v1.p1.
Author Contributions. Initiation and design of study: B.M.F, H.B, M.A.R., F.D.; Enrolled subjects and contributed samples and 
clinical data: H.B, D.M.N., S.T.T., A.M; Statistical and bioinformatics analyses: D.P., O.E., A.S., F.D.; Supervision of research: 
B.M.F, M.A.R., J.R, F.D; Writing of the first draft of the manuscript: B.M.F, D.P, H.B, M.A.R., F.D.; All authors contributed to the 
writing and editing of the revised manuscript and approved the manuscript.
Conflict of Interest. The authors have no competing interests. The authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 09.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Genet. 2016 December ; 48(12): 1490–1499. doi:10.1038/ng.3692.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 characterized by intra-patient mutational heterogeneity and the majority of mutations are not 
shared, (ii) both branching evolution and metastatic spread are very early events in the natural 
history of UC; (iii) chemotherapy-treated UC is enriched with clonal mutations involving L1-cell 
adhesion molecule (L1CAM) and integrin signaling pathways; (iv) APOBEC induced-mutagenesis 
is clonally-enriched in chemotherapy-treated UC and continues to shape UC’s evolution 
throughout its lifetime.
Introduction
Urothelial carcinoma (UC) results in 15,000 deaths annually in the United States1. 
Individuals with metastatic UC are standardly treated with platinum-based chemotherapy2–5. 
However, nearly all will progress and develop chemotherapy resistance3,6,7. Ultimately, the 
majority of patients will die of metastatic chemotherapy-resistant UC2,3,5. Little is known 
about the clonal architecture of advanced chemotherapy-treated UC or the evolutionary 
dynamics that lead to metastasis and chemotherapy resistance. Large genomic studies like 
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) have focused only on untreated primary tumors8. In 
particular, the extent to which chemotherapy-treated tumors share the genetic profile of the 
primary tumor remains unknown.
To understand the relative contributions of different subclones and the effects of 
chemotherapy as a selective pressure in UC, we performed whole exome sequencing and 
clonality analysis of matched sets of primary, metastatic and germline samples. Because 
cancers are genetically heterogeneous, we set out to address two fundamental questions: (i) 
what is the degree of clonal divergence between primary and metastatic UC? (ii) How does 
chemotherapy impact the genomic landscape of tumor cell populations in advanced and 
metastatic UC?
We employed the computational framework of CLONET (CLONality Estimate in Tumors) 
we developed previously9 (online methods) to adjust genomic events for tumor purity and 
ploidy, and then determine the relative abundance of tumor cell subpopulations through 
clonality analysis of genomic lesions. By comparing the frequency and patterns of 
CLONET-adjusted events between primary and metastatic tumors obtained from different 
anatomical sites and at different time points over each patient’s clinical course, we were able 
to reconstruct phylogenetic trees and compare clonal evolutionary patterns across the study 
cohort. We then proceeded to examine the clonally-enriched genomic signatures and trace 
the evolutionary footprints of mutagenesis mechanisms including the APOBEC3 family of 
cytidine-deaminases during each cancer’s evolution.
Results
Clonal mutational heterogeneity in chemotherapy-treated UC
To characterize the clonal architecture of advanced chemotherapy-treated UC, we performed 
whole exome sequencing of 72 prospectively collected urothelial tumors from 32 patients 
including 16 matched sets of primary, metastatic UCs and germline samples and two rapid 
autopsy cases (Fig. 1, Supplementary Table 1). The study was designed to enrich for patients 
Faltas et al.
Page 2
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 with advanced disease, 28/32 (88%) of patients either presented with or developed 
metastatic disease during the study period (Fig. 1, Supplementary Table 1). Overall, the most 
frequent mutations and copy number alterations in our cohort were consistent with the 
results of the TCGA dataset of untreated UC8 (Supplementary Fig. 1, Supplementary Table 
2). We observed no statistically significant difference in the number of SNVs between pre-
chemotherapy and post-chemotherapy tumors (Supplementary Fig. 2).
To compare the clonal structure of pre-chemotherapy and post-chemotherapy tumors across 
the study cohort, we investigated the number of private and shared mutations between the 
pre-chemotherapy and post-chemotherapy tumors within each patient as a fraction of the 
total mutational burden (Fig. 2a). On average, only 28.4% (range 0.2%–76.4%) of mutations 
were shared between pre- and post-chemotherapy samples (Fig. 2a). This effect was 
consistent across primary-primary tumor pairs and primary-metastatic tumor pairs (p=0.17, 
Wilcoxon test) (Fig. 2a). Surprisingly, even mutations in previously reported driver genes10 
including PIK3CA, KMT2D (MLL2), ATM and TP53 were not consistently shared between 
matched pre-chemotherapy and post-chemotherapy tumors (Fig. 2b). We confirmed these 
findings with targeted sequencing of 250 common driver genes achieving an average 
coverage of 400x and an excellent concordance with variant allele frequencies obtained from 
whole exome sequencing (Pearson correlation = 0.93, P<10−171) (Supplementary Fig. 3). 
Some post-chemotherapy tumors even evolved to develop different mutations in the same 
key gene. For example, in patient WCM077, the primary pre-chemotherapy tumor and the 
pelvic post-chemotherapy lymph node metastasis shared a TP53 p.Y234C mutation while 
the post-chemotherapy lung metastasis had a separate private TP53 p.G266V mutation that 
was not shared with the primary tumor (Fig. 2b, Supplementary Fig. 4). Taken together, our 
results demonstrate significant mutational heterogeneity in tumor samples from the same 
patient and suggest that chemotherapy is associated with a significant change in the 
mutational landscape of advanced urothelial carcinoma.
Early branching evolution in chemotherapy-treated UC
We conducted a phylogenetic analysis of 21 sets of matched tumors from patients from 
whom at least two tumor samples were available per patient using the parsimony ratchet 
method11 (Fig. 3, Supplementary Fig. 5). This analysis revealed a pattern of early branching 
evolution with several successive waves of clonal expansion occurring early in each patient’s 
UC. In every reconstructed evolutionary tree, the primary tumor was positioned as a branch 
indicating that the ancestral clone gave rise to multiple cell populations that evolved in 
parallel during the early stages of tumor evolution.
In order to better understand the pattern of clonal evolution during the course of 
chemotherapy, we followed another individual with UC from the time of diagnosis through 
death over a period of 16 months. We collected a total of 12 samples from 8 anatomical sites 
and at three different time-points: the primary untreated tumor obtained by transurethral 
resection of bladder tumor (TURBT) acquired at initial diagnosis, four areas of residual 
primary bladder tumor and one pelvic lymph node obtained by radical cystectomy and 
lymph node dissection following four cycles of gemcitabine-cisplatin chemotherapy, and six 
metastases obtained at time of rapid autopsy after docetaxel-ramucirumab therapy (4 distant 
Faltas et al.
Page 3
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 lymph nodes, 2 liver metastases) (Fig. 4a). We analyzed the genomes of these tumors to 
characterize the full evolutionary arc of the cancer from the time of diagnosis to death. 
Metastatic tumors obtained at autopsy harbored high clonal fractions (i.e. the percentages of 
clonal alterations compared to all alterations in a sample) (mean 83%, range 69%–91%) 
(Fig. 4b). Allele-specific copy number analysis identified a sub-clonal heterozygous deletion 
of the tumor suppressor CDKN2A in the primary tumor that evolved into a homozygous 
clonal deletion in the distant metastatic lymph nodes and liver lesions obtained from the 
autopsy. This was confirmed by fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH) (Fig. 4c) 
suggesting that CDKN2A loss was selected as the tumor evolved under pressure from 
chemotherapy. Comparison of clonality-adjusted frequencies of somatic alterations across all 
tumor samples from this patient revealed substantial heterogeneity. This heterogeneity 
followed several distinct patterns. Certain subclonal mutations (i.e. RYR2, ANKRD62, 
NCOA3 and LSS) were present in the primary tumor persisted and became enriched in the 
chemotherapy-treated metastatic lesions. Other subclonal mutations (i.e. POLD2, FOXP1, 
FGFR4, TRRAP, and EGFR) present in the primary were not observed in the metastatic 
lesions and were considered “private” to the primary tumor. We also observed other private 
mutations, which were present exclusively in the metastatic lesions (Fig. 4d). In fact, each 
tumor in this patient harbored a unique set of private mutations (mean 26.3, range 5–138) 
that was not shared with any of the other tumors (Fig. 4d).
Using clonally adjusted non-silent mutations from each tumor, we reconstructed the 
evolutionary tree of this patient’s UC (online methods) (Fig. 4e). This reconstruction 
revealed a complex branching evolutionary pattern. Early truncal mutations (RYR2, 
ANKRD62, NCOA3 and LSS) were present in the initial founder clone and shared by all 
descendent clones. At each clonal divergence node, additional mutations were acquired 
including mutations in driver genes such as TP53 and TSC1. Surprisingly, at the time of the 
patient’s initial cancer diagnosis, at least 5 waves of clonal expansion (each represented by a 
branching node, numbered 1–5) (Fig. 4e) had already occurred from the lowest common 
ancestor as observed in the mutational analysis of the TURBT tumor. This pattern suggests 
that branching evolution was a very early event in this tumor’s development. While the 
untreated TURBT tumor had a high fraction of tumor cells harboring founder mutations 
(Fig. 4e), it also had the farthest genetic distance from all other tumors. We attributed this 
long genomic distance to the high number of private mutations in the TURBT primary tumor 
sample (138 mutations) (Fig. 4d, Supplementary Table 3), many of which involve genes 
implicated in cellular responses to cisplatin including POLD2 and FOXP112–15. After 
neoadjuvant chemotherapy, these mutations disappeared from the evolutionary record when 
the cancer cells harboring them were likely eradicated by treatment and thus were not 
observed subsequently in any of the other tumors (Fig. 4d, 4e).
Interestingly, one of the earliest cancer cell clades had already separated at the first 
divergence node resulting in a population that metastasized to a pelvic lymph node (Fig. 4e). 
This lymph node was later dissected and removed at the time of radical cystectomy. Surgical 
removal of this lymph node possibly eliminated mutations from this particular clade from 
entering the genetic pool that later contributed to the development of additional distant 
metastases. On the other hand, by the time cystectomy took place, distant metastatic spread 
Faltas et al.
Page 4
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 had already occurred originating from a different cancer cell clade that branched at 
divergence node 5 to give rise to both bladder tumor #2 and all the lymph node and visceral 
distant metastases that were later collected at the time of the rapid autopsy. This transition 
from the primary to the metastatic state was marked by the acquisition of a non-silent 
mutation in tetraspanin8 (TSPAN8), a well-recognized pro-metastatic and angiogenesis-
promoting gene16–18(Fig. 4d, 4e). This sequence supports a possible role for this mutation as 
a key driver event underlying the metastatic spread of this patient’s UC. Altogether, our data 
strongly suggests that both branching evolution and metastatic spread are very early events 
in the natural history of UC.
Heterogeneity in copy number alterations
To understand how copy number alterations (CNA) evolve throughout the lifetime of UC 
and during chemotherapy, we conducted a detailed analysis of somatic genomic aberrations. 
Hierarchical clustering of 44 tumor samples based on allele-specific copy number alterations 
(online methods) showed two distinct clusters (Fig. 5a). Cluster A was defined by 9p21 
(CDKN2A, CDKN2B and MTAP) deletions in the setting of euploid copy number 
background. Cluster B was characterized by several enriched amplifications including 
1q21.1 (SETDB1 and MLLT11) amplifications, (P=0.0002, Fisher’s exact test) and 6p22.3 
(E2F3) amplifications, (P=0.001, Fisher’s exact test) (Supplementary Table 4). This cluster 
was also enriched with TP53 mutations (P=0.0001, Fisher’s exact test). The same CNAs 
clusters are consistently observed when extending our cohort with TCGA untreated UC10 
(Supplementary Fig. 6). We also observed an enrichment of tumors belonging to the TCGA 
bladder cancer cluster III (‘basal/squamous-like’)10 in our copy number cluster A (Fisher’s 
exact test P=0.02) (Supplementary Fig. 7). There was no statistically significant differential 
enrichment in the number of metastatic samples or chemotherapy treated-samples between 
the two clusters suggesting that these clusters may reflect a relatively stable feature of UC 
biology that is independent of treatment effects or disease stage. Overall, tumor samples 
from the same patient tended to cluster in the same group despite the presence of private 
CNAs. To quantify the degree of intra- and inter-patient heterogeneity, we interrogated 
CNAs from a panel of more that 30000 genes from the Ensembl catalog19. For each pair of 
tumor samples, we computed the Hamming Distance (HD) as the ratio between the number 
of genes that have different discrete copy number and the total number of genes analyzed. 
We identified a significant difference between intra-patient tumor pairs (median HD=0.20) 
and inter-patient pairs (median HD=0.53) (P=0.00000003, Wilcoxon test) (Fig. 5b). This 
limited intra-patient heterogeneity with respect to inter-patient heterogeneity suggests that 
each patient’s cancer is relatively stable during evolution at the copy number level.
We investigated the frequency of combined copy number alterations and mutations 
constituting the ATM/RB/FANCC signature that was previously associated with 
chemotherapy response in the neoadjuvant setting20. We identified this signature in 11/15 
(73.3%) in our pre-chemotherapy tumors and 11/29 (37.9%) (p=0.05) in post-chemotherapy 
tumors supporting the hypothesis that clones harboring these molecular alterations are likely 
to disappear after treatment and are superseded by tumor clones with wild-type ATM/RB/
FANCC that eventually progress to metastatic chemotherapy-resistant disease.
Faltas et al.
Page 5
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Clonal enrichment of mutations in chemotherapy-treated UC
We hypothesized that the evolution of chemotherapy-treated UC would proceed in a 
direction that ultimately leads to the selection of mutations conferring proliferative or 
chemotherapy-resistance advantages. Using density analysis of CLONET-adjusted variant 
allele frequencies between pre-chemotherapy and post-chemotherapy tumors, we observed a 
significant increase in the number of clonal mutations in the post-chemotherapy samples 
across the study cohort (P=0.0134, Fisher’s exact test) (Fig. 6a, Supplementary Fig. 8) 
confirming the association between chemotherapy and increased clonality. To dissect the 
functional impact of these clonally enriched mutations, we conducted gene set enrichment 
analysis (GSEA) to identify enriched pathways in post-chemotherapy samples (Fig. 6b). 
This analysis showed a clonal enrichment of mutations in pathways involved in the trans-
membrane transport of small molecules (odds ratio = 1.9, FDR = 0.002) suggesting that 
mutations in multi-drug resistance genes may play a role in the progression of advanced 
chemotherapy-treated UC. In addition, GSEA demonstrated a significant enrichment in 
mutations mediating L1-cell adhesion molecule (L1CAM) (odds ratio = 1.9, FDR = 0.12), 
and integrin signaling pathways (odds ratio = 2.8, FDR = 0.02). The majority of mutations 
identified in the L1CAM and integrin signaling pathways (83% and 90% respectively) were 
missense mutations which can conceivably lead to gain-of-function molecular changes that 
activate these pathways. These results suggest a prominent role for mutations in L1CAM 
and integrin signaling pathways in conferring a selective advantage for resistance to 
chemotherapy in UC. Mutations in these pathways may also provide a potential mechanistic 
link between metastatic spread, tumor microenvironment, and drug-resistance that cooperate 
to promote tumor survival21–25.
Mutagenesis mechanisms driving the evolution of UC
To characterize the evolution of mutational signatures in advanced chemotherapy-treated 
UC, we examined the six possible single-base substitutions (C>A, C>G, C>T, T>A, T>C, 
and T>G). We identified significant differences in these mutational patterns between 
chemotherapy-naïve and chemotherapy-treated tumors with a statistically significant 
enrichment of C>A and C>G changes in the chemotherapy-treated tumors (Fig. 7a).
To distinguish between potential mutagenic mechanisms responsible for these changes, we 
matched mutational patterns derived from statistical analysis of nucleotide changes to well-
defined signatures of potential mutagens. We observed a significant increase in C>A 
nucleotide substitutions in tumors treated with cisplatin-based chemotherapy consistent with 
the specific mutagenesis signature induced in C. elegans genome after cisplatin 
treatment26,27. Further analysis of context motifs of various base substitutions showed 
enrichment in the (C> T or G changes at the TCW motifs, W–A or T) (Fig. 7b) which is 
highly suggestive of APOBEC-induced mutagenesis28,29. To confirm this finding, we 
compared the signature in our cohort to previously reported Sanger signatures28–30 (online 
methods). We observed 4 distinct signatures in our cohort (Fig. 7c). The first signature was 
very similar to Sanger signatures 2 and 13, attributed to APOBEC mutagenesis28–31. We 
detected three additional signatures corresponding to previously described mutagenic 
processes associated with age, smoking and ERCC2 mutations28,30. The low frequency of 
ERCC2 mutations in our cohort of chemotherapy-treated UC (Supplementary Fig. 1) is 
Faltas et al.
Page 6
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 consistent with previous reports suggesting that ERCC2 mutations are enriched in 
responders to cisplatin-based chemotherapy32,33 and likely selected against in tumors that 
progress through chemotherapy.
Because of the prominence of APOBEC-induced mutagenesis in UC, we focused on 
understanding how APOBEC-induced mutations evolve during chemotherapy by comparing 
the frequency of APOBEC-induced mutations in chemotherapy-naïve and chemotherapy-
treated tumors. We observed a significant enrichment in the APOBEC3-induced mutagenesis 
(C > T or G changes at the TCW motifs, W–A or T) in post-chemotherapy tumors (Fig. 7d). 
To dissect the relative contributions of individual members of APOBEC3 cytosine-
deaminases to this enrichment, we examined the preferred motif contexts favored by 
individual APOBEC enzymes for mutating respective cytosines34,35. APOBEC3A favors 
YTCA, while APOBEC3B favors RTCA motifs (wherein Y = pyrimidine, R = purine)34. 
APOBEC3G induces cytosine substitutions in the single stranded DNA overhang strand with 
a preference for the 5′-CCC-3′ motifs35,36. APOBEC3F preferentially mutates cytosines in 
the TTC motif (where the underlined C is the mutated nucleotide)37. We detected a 
significant enrichment in APOBEC3A-induced mutations (P=0.00001, Fisher’s exact test), 
and a similar enrichment of APOBEC3B mutagenesis (P=0.0395, Fisher’s exact test) in 
post-chemotherapy tumors. In contrast, APOBEC3G mutagenesis was substantially 
decreased in post-chemotherapy tumors (Fig. 7d). Furthermore, we observed a 
corresponding statistically significant increase in the clonality of APOBEC-induced 
mutations in post-chemotherapy tumors (Fig. 7e). Enrichment analysis of APOBEC-induced 
mutations highlighted key pathways involved in chemotherapy resistance including the ABC 
family of proteins (odds ratio=2.7, P=0.038, Fisher’s exact test) and homologous 
recombination DNA-damage repair (odds ratio=3.8, P=0.033, Fisher’s exact test) 
(Supplementary Table 5). Our findings suggest that the APOBEC mutational process is not 
merely a transient event in early UC oncogenesis but that it continues to shape the evolution 
of advanced UC and may promote clonal expansions of chemotherapy-resistant clones.
Discussion
Advanced chemotherapy-resistant UC remains a formidable clinical challenge with limited 
therapeutic options38. Whole-exome analysis of matched samples from the same patient 
from different anatomical sites and at sequential time points offers a unique opportunity to 
reconstruct the evolutionary dynamics and understand the mutagenic pressures shaping the 
evolution of primary untreated UC to advanced chemotherapy-treated UC.
Our analyses identified substantial spatial and temporal heterogeneity between tumors 
separated in time or by anatomical location within the same patient. The majority of 
mutations in the post-chemotherapy tumors were not shared with primary chemotherapy-
naive tumors. Branching evolution was the predominant path from primary chemotherapy-
naïve UC to advanced chemotherapy-treated UC. Very early in this path, several clonal 
waves separate from the original founder clone, many of which metastasize early in the 
tumor’s lifetime and continue to evolve in parallel with the primary tumor. Our findings shed 
light on the importance of addressing gaps in the existing knowledge of the clonality of early 
events in UC oncogenesis including multicentricity and malignant seeding, which could lead 
Faltas et al.
Page 7
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 to alternative interpretations of the phylogenetic trees. Additionally, our findings suggest that 
extensive heterogeneity and early branching evolution should be taken into consideration as 
additional layers of biological complexity that go beyond the traditional two-pathway UC 
oncogenesis model and potentially eclipse grade and stage classifciations39.
We demonstrate for the first time that chemotherapy-treated UC is significantly clonally 
enriched in mutations in L1CAM and integrin-signaling pathways. The majority of these 
mutations were missense mutations that could potentially lead to activation of these 
pathways but the precise functional impact of these mutations warrants future studies. Our 
results are consistent with data in pre-clinical models of other tumor types such as 
cholangiocarcinoma, ovarian carcinoma and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma 
demonstrating that L1CAM plays a key role in cisplatin-resistance and protecting cells from 
apoptosis40–43. L1CAM directly binds to integrin receptors via its RGD-motif in the sixth 
Ig-domain44,45 and there is considerable cross-talk between the two pathways46,47. Previous 
studies demonstrated that integrin-signaling plays important roles in overriding 
chemotherapy-induced cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in small-cell lung cancer cells through 
activation of the PI3-kinase pathway48,49. Overexpression of Beta 1-integrin in 
hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines protected them against apoptosis induced by 
chemotherapeutic agents by activating MAP-kinase signaling50. Stimulating Beta1-integrin 
with an antibody ligand in leukemia cells prevented procaspase-8-mediated induction of 
apoptosis in a PI3K-dependent manner51. Collectively, these observations suggest that 
alterations in L1CAM and integrin signaling pathways potentially play a key role in 
chemotherapy-resistance in UC and provide a mechanistic intersection between the 
microenvironment and drug-resistance through cell-adhesion-mediated drug resistance 
(CAM-DR) phenomenon21,52,53. This phenomenon has been implicated in chemotherapy 
resistance in several malignancies54,55. L1CAM is potentially targetable with antibodies that 
have demonstrated efficacy in xenograft animal models of cholangiocarcinomas56,57, ovarian 
and pancreatic ductal carcinomas58. Focal Adhesion Kinase (FAK) inhibitors, which target 
integrin signaling, have been shown to profoundly sensitize cancer cells to chemotherapy 
and novel molecular therapeutics and are currently in early phase clinical trials59,60. Our 
results suggest that similar therapeutic approaches merit further study in chemotherapy-
resistant UC.
We clearly demonstrate an increase in APOBEC signatures in chemotherapy-treated tumors. 
One possible explanation for this interesting finding is that platinum-based chemotherapy 
increases the formation of APOBEC mutagenesis-prone single-stranded DNA (ssDNA)61,62. 
This ssDNA is formed during 5′→3′ resection that occurs at DNA double-strand-breaks 
during homology-directed repair 63. While allowing for error-free repair of these double-
strand-breaks DNA induced by the excision of platin-DNA adducts this process may 
potentially increase the availability of intermediary ssDNA to APOBEC mutagenesis63. Our 
results also suggest that APOBEC3A is the main enzyme responsible for mutagenesis in 
advanced chemotherapy-treated UC. This is in accordance with recent data suggesting that 
APOBEC3A-mediated mutagenesis is the key mutagenic cytidine deaminase in most tumor 
types because of its high proficiency in generating DNA breaks64. These findings suggest a 
potential mechanism by which chemotherapy acts to increase the genomic diversity of 
chemotherapy-treated tumors that requires future study. Our data demonstrate that the clonal 
Faltas et al.
Page 8
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 evolution of chemotherapy-treated UC is characterized by a dramatic divergence of the 
mutational landscape in the face of relative stability at the copy-number level over the 
lifetime of each tumor. This finding potentially reflects the dominance of APOBEC-induced 
mutagenesis in UC as a mechanism that preferentially induces single nucleotide changes 
throughout the tumors’ lifetime and during chemotherapy. An alternative explanation for the 
marked genomic alterations we observed in chemotherapy-treated samples is that a certain 
degree of genetic drift occurs over time irrespective of the effect of chemotherapy. However, 
it is unlikely that genetic drift is the sole mechanism accounting for the genetic 
heterogeneity we observed because chemotherapy is a potent selective pressure that is 
expected to alter the evolutionary dynamics affecting the pace and steering the direction of 
genetic drift. In fact, our results are consistent with evolutionary models suggesting that 
cancer’s adaptation ensues from the interaction between stochastic processes such as 
mutation generation and clonal selection, which is a deterministic phenomenon65. Our 
findings support this evolutionary model by demonstrating a complex and dynamic interplay 
between mutagenic mechanisms such as APOBEC-induced mutagenesis, and extrinsic 
selective pressures such as chemotherapy to constantly shape the clonal evolution of UC. As 
genetic information is passed from parent to progeny clones, each process leaves an 
evolutionary record of molecular alterations in descendent clones that allows reconstruction 
of the process. However, it is important to note that this record fully exists only in clones 
that survive selection. Unfit clones are eliminated from the record and can only be captured 
by serial sampling of cancer cells throughout the tumor’s lifetime whereas resistant clones 
are selected to expand and supersede previous clonal waves.
One major strength of our study is that it is the most comprehensive study of the clonal 
evolution of chemotherapy-resistant urothelial carcinoma. Limitations of our study include a 
small sample size. Of note, we included muscle invasive tumor samples from patients who 
were never treated with chemotherapy as controls.
Our findings have several potential clinical implications: First, genomic divergence between 
untreated and treated clones suggests that clinically actionable molecular targets in 
metastatic chemotherapy-treated tumors may be missed when relying only on biopsies of 
untreated primary tumors at the time of diagnosis, and that repeat metastatic biopsies during 
the course of clinical care would be needed to detect the most recent version of the rapidly 
changing molecular landscape of a given patient’s UC. Second, further study of the 
functional role of L1CAM and integrin-signaling in mediating chemotherapy-resistance in 
UC could lead to a potential strategy for reversing or preventing chemotherapy resistance by 
targeting these pathways. Third: despite its initial effectiveness in eliminating cancer cells, 
platinum-based chemotherapy is associated with unintended significant mutagenic editing of 
the genomic landscape of post-chemotherapy tumors. Our insight into the nature of these 
edits is crucial towards a complete understanding of the basis of chemotherapy-resistance in 
advanced UC, which may lay the foundation for the development of rational therapeutic 
strategies for preventing the emergence or reversing the chemotherapy-resistant state of UC.
In summary, our results demonstrate that advanced chemotherapy-treated UC undergoes 
extensive and dynamic clonal evolution throughout the lifetime of the tumor with significant 
genetic editing that continues during and after chemotherapy. Our findings lay the 
Faltas et al.
Page 9
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 foundation for an evolutionary understanding of advanced chemotherapy-treated UC and 
present opportunities for advancing cancer precision medicine.
Online Methods
Patient enrollment and tumor procurement
All experimental procedures were carried out in accordance with approved guidelines and 
were approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at Weill-Cornell Medicine. Patients 
signed informed consent under (IRB) approved protocol (IRB #1305013903). Clinical 
information was collected from the chart. Smoking status was collected from self-
administered questionnaires. Tumor samples were obtained from patients through surgical 
resection or core biopsies.
Rapid autopsy procedures
The Englander Institute for Precision Medicine at Weill Cornell Medicine-New York 
Presbyterian has been established to promote personalized medicine focused on molecular 
diagnostics and therapeutics. Two patients in our series selected the option to be enrolled in 
the IRB-approved rapid autopsy program. In addition, patients’ next-of-kin provided written 
consent before autopsy. The WCM117 and WCM259 rapid autopsies were conducted within 
6 hours after death. A systematic autopsy protocol is followed where normal and malignant 
fresh tissue is collected, allocating samples to be snap frozen or formalin-fixed. The goal is 
to maximize the amount of tissue collected for research purposes. Once the tissue harvest is 
complete, the autopsy proceeds in accordance with the protocol established by the WCM 
Autopsy Service. For our current study, tissue samples from multiple sites were procured 
from each patient as detailed above. After H&E evaluation and frozen slide annotation, DNA 
was extracted for WES.
DNA extraction and next generation sequencing
In this study, we used a New York State approved whole exome sequencing assay developed 
in our CLIA laboratory called, EXaCT-11. After macro-dissection of target lesions, tumor 
DNA was extracted from FFPE or cored OCT-cryopreserved tumors using the Promega 
Maxwell 16 MDx (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Germline DNA was extracted from 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells using the same method. Pathological review by one of 
the study pathologists (JMM, BR, MAR) confirmed the diagnosis and determined tumor 
content. A minimum of 200ng of DNA was used for whole exome sequencing. DNA quality 
was determined by TapeStation Instrument (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) and was 
confirmed by real-time PCR before sequencing. Sequencing was performed using Illumina 
HiSeq 2500 (2x100bp). A total of 21,522 genes were analyzed with an average coverage of 
85x (range 60–102, Supplementary Table 6) using Agilent HaloPlex Exome (Agilent 
Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). We developed a targeted sequencing assay of 250 cancer 
genes (referred to as N250) using hybrid-capture SeqCap EZ Choice Enrichment Kits 
(Roche Sequencing, Pleasanton, CA) (Supplementary Table 7 and Supplementary Table 8). 
Sequencing was performed using Illumina HiSeq 2500 (PE 2x75) achieving an average 
coverage of 400x.
Faltas et al.
Page 10
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Study sample size definition
Our study includes 72 samples from 32 patients. However, patient WCM117 comprises 12 
samples (17% of the total) and to avoid possible statistical biases in the analysis, we utilized 
WCM117 (12 samples) only in Fig. 4, as a specific case study to better understand how 
chemotherapy shapes evolution. Finer analysis, as allele specific copy number (Fig. 5a) and 
SNVs clonality (Fig. 6a) also require an estimate of ploidy and purity. After manual 
inspection of CLONET outputs, we ended up with 44 samples in 25 patients with reliable 
ploidy and purity estimates. The exact number of samples and patients used in each figure is 
reported in Supplementary Notes.
Sequence data processing pipeline
All the study samples data were processed through the computational analysis pipeline of 
the Institute of Precision Medicine at Weill Cornell/New York Presbyterian Hospital (IPM-
Exome-pipeline)1. Raw reads quality has been assessed with FASTQC as described 
previously1. Multi-sample patient data were tested for genotype distance using SPIA2. 
Pipeline output includes segment DNA copy number data, somatic copy-number aberrations 
(SCNAs) (Supplementary Table 9), and putative somatic single nucleotide variants (SNVs) 
(Supplementary Table 10). Finally, to assess tumor ploidy and purity we applied CLONET3 
on segmented data and allelic fraction (AF) of germline heterozygous SNP loci (termed 
informative SNPs, see Allele specific copy number analysis). Upon visual inspection of 
CLONET output, 53 of 72 samples data were deemed appropriate for downstream copy 
number analysis; excluded samples data were not associated with chemotherapy treatment 
(p=0.4384) or biopsy site (p=1).
We have previously published on how EXaCT-1 was developed and optimized for use with 
FFPE and Frozen samples- in contrast to many research-grade assays1. To further ensure that 
our results reflect biological effects rather than technical variability between different 
sample types, we took special care to account for variations in tumor content for each 
sample in order to correctly map the clonal evolution of UC. In particular, we did not 
observe any significant difference (P=0.1, Wilcoxon test) when comparing FFPE and fresh 
samples purity (Supplementary Fig. 9a). Similarly, we did not detect differences (P=0.137, 
Wilcoxon test) in the numbers of identified non-silent SNVs between FFPE and fresh 
samples (Supplementary Fig. 9b).
Allele-specific copy number analysis
Somatic copy number altered regions are defined by the log2 of the ratio between the tumor 
and normal local coverage normalized by the global tumor and normal coverage ratio 
(named log2R). CLONET refines copy number data adjusting each log2R to account for 
both aneuploidy and tumor purity. Combining purified log2R values and AF of informative 
SNPs, CLONET assigns allele-specific copy number values, represented as a pair (cnA, 
cnB), to each genomic segment4. Quality filters require at least 10 informative SNPs and a 
mean coverage of 20 reads to call allele-specific values of a segment. If a segment does not 
pass filters, adjusted log2R values below −0.4 (above 0.4) were categorized as copy number 
loss (gain).
Faltas et al.
Page 11
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Differential copy number analysis between pre- and post-chemotherapy has been performed 
on a set of 1160 genes selected among putative cancer genes [COSMIC5 and Intogen6] 
(cancerGenes) and bladder-specific genes (Supplementary Table 11).
Unsupervised clustering analysis was performed on allele-specific copy number of cancer 
Genes by means of hierarchical clustering. Briefly, each gene gID is represented as a pair of 
real values corresponding to the allele-specific copy number of the genomic segment 
comprising gID. Then, the Euclidean distance on allele-specific copy number calls is used as 
distance; this approach distinguishes between ambiguous cases such as copy number wild 
type status (allele-specific values (1,1)) and copy number neutral loss (2,0) both 
corresponding to log2R=0 leading to more informative clusters (Supplementary Table 4). 
Copy number based analysis identified two clusters that we named WCM_A and WCM_B 
(Fig. 5, Supplementary Fig. 6), which we compared with the original four TCGA clusters (I, 
II, III, IV) resulted from integrated analysis of mRNA, miRNA and protein data7 
(Supplementary Fig. 7). Given a TCGA cluster X, we tested the null hypothesis that clusters 
WCM_A and WCM_B contain the same proportion of samples from X using Fisher’s exact 
test (significance level = 0.05).
Single nucleotide variations analysis
To improve the quality of SNVs calls in targeted exons, we applied an integrated approach. 
We first ran both MuTect8 and SNVseeqer9 to nominate putative aberrant genomic positions. 
Then, closely looked at the identified positions by means of ASEQ10 in normal and germline 
samples executing pileup analysis; for each single nucleotide position identified as putative 
aberrant, ASEQ returns information about the read count for each of the 4 bases A, C, G, 
and T. To reduce false positives, we required base quality and read quality above 20. Finally, 
a genomic position is considered aberrant in a tumor sample, if the read count of the 
alternative base is 0 in the matched germline and 3 or more in the tumor. This step allows to 
(i) filter out remaining germline SNPs, that is, positions where the alternative base is present 
in the control sample; (ii) check for the presence of SNVs with low AFs in patient’s multiple 
samples data. This step is particularly relevant in this study, because SNVs identification 
methods are designed to work on a single normal-tumor pair, and they do not consider that 
samples from the same patient could share the same SNVs because they are not independent 
samples. Finally, we annotated genomic position with information relevant for cancer 
analysis with Oncotator11 (v1.8.0.0). We exploited the last Oncotator datasource corpus 
including annotations about gene/transcript names, functional consequence (e.g. missense or 
nonsense), the predicted impact on protein function, annotation from cancer specific 
resources as COSMIC or TCGAscape, and possible published results about the specific 
mutation (Supplementary Table 10). A full description of the resources used by Oncotator is 
available in the tool help page. We identified 13 possible functional consequences 
(Supplementary Fig. 10) described in the Sequence Ontology12. To avoid overestimating 
divergence among samples from the same patient, we were conservative in defining SNVs 
that more likely produce a change in the protein, i.e., they affect the phenotype, and we 
considered non-silent only mutation classified as missense, nonsense, splice_site, nonstop, 
and start codon. However, for the analysis described in Fig. 7, we included all the identified 
mutations (Supplementary Fig. 10) as mutational mechanisms also affect mutations with 
Faltas et al.
Page 12
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 neutral functional effects. To further confirm our findings and to check for possible biases 
introduced by the definition of silent mutations, we also performed the analysis of Figs. 2, 3, 
4, and 6 using both silent and non-silent SNVs obtaining comparable results (Supplementary 
Fig. 11, 12, 13 and 14).
SNVs enrichment analysis
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) refers to a computational method that identifies set 
of genes that are statistically enriched for a given observable variable. In this study, we 
interrogated the REACTOME pathway database to search for pathways showing a 
significant increase in the number of SNVs. We applied Fisher’s exact test followed by FDR 
correction by Benjamin-Hochberg (BH) procedure. REACTOME pathways with FDR≤0.2 
are reported in Fig. 6b. We also checked if, among significant pathways, there is statistically 
significant difference between pre- and post-chemotherapy samples. Given a pathway P, 
Fisher’s exact test determines the probability that the number of SNVs in P is different when 
considering pre- and post-chemo samples. After FDR correction (BH procedure), we 
highlighted nodes in Fig.6b with FDR≤0.2.
Phylogenetic analysis
High-quality variants identified in the previous steps were used to re-construct the 
phylogenetic tree of each patient using the parsimony Ratchet method13 (Fig. 3, Fig. 4e and 
Supplementary Fig. 5). In this representation, each node models a population of tumor cells. 
Nodes with no children, named leafs, represent cell populations from a tumor sampling, i.e., 
a tumor biopsy. Internal nodes model inferred tumor cell populations from observed SNVs. 
The node named WT represents a hypothetical population of wild type cells (cells with no 
somatic aberrations). In phylogenetic trees, an edge connects two nodes; the length of an 
edge is proportional to the number of SNVs. For instance, in Fig. 4e, node 1 corresponds to 
the least common ancestor inferred from all the available biopsies with the number of 
mutations proportional to the length of the edge from WT to 1. Node 1 is also connected to 
the Pelvic LN met and to the inferred cell population 2. A branch represents a time point in 
the evolution of the tumor where two distinct cell populations emerge; the length of the 
branches models the number of SNVs that are private to each population. In Fig. 4e, we 
observed few private mutations in the Pelvic LN met with respect to the number of SNVs 
shared by all the other samples, as supported by heatmap in Fig. 4d.
Clonality of single nucleotide variants
Original CLONET implementation allows for the computation of the clonality of an SNV 
with copy number normal genomic segment, i.e. the segment has an allele-specific copy 
number (1, 1). Here we extended it to allow for SNV clonality estimation independently 
from the copy number status of the genomic segments in which the SNV lies. Given the 
tumor purity P, the allele specific copy number (cnA, cnB), and the number of reads nRef 
and nAlt supporting the reference and the alternative base, respectively, estimating the 
clonality of a SNV requires to compute expected AF. We observed that AF could assume 
only a finite number of values given the DNA copy number state. For instance, let’s assume 
that a locus is aberrant (mutated) in one allele and wild-type (not mutated) in two alleles, i.e. 
Faltas et al.
Page 13
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 SNV in a copy number aberrant segment (CN=3). In this case, with tumor cellularity equal 
to 100% and clonal SNV, the VAF would be equal to 1/3. Given the number of allele cnSNV 
harboring a SNV, the expected VAF is defined as
To estimate cnSNV, we followed parsimony approach assuming cnSNV that best explains 
VAF adjusted by DNA admixture, computed as previously described3. We computed the 
clonality of SNVs using the distance between the observed and expected VAF as
Complete proof in Supplementary Notes.
Single nucleotide variants signatures
SNVs are partitioned into six mutation classes (column “Mutation class”, Supplementary 
Table 10) corresponding to six types of base pair substitution, C>A, C>G, C>T, T>A, T>C, 
T>G. The null hypothesis that pre- and post-chemotherapy samples are equally likely to 
harbor SNVs of a specific mutation class is tested with Fisher’s exact test (Fig. 7a). The 
fingerprint of a SNV includes the two bases immediately 5′ and 3′ to each SNV position 
(column “Genomic context”, Supplementary Table 10) for a total of 96 possible mutation 
fingerprints14. Fisher’s exact test adjusted for multiple hypotheses testing with Benjamin-
Hochberg procedure returns the likelihood that a mutation fingerprint is enriched in pre- or 
post-chemotherapy samples (Fig. 7b). As the set of mutation fingerprints of a tumor sample 
is a proxy for the mutational processes that shape the cancer genome, we studied the 
mutational signatures of our study samples and compared them the with the Sanger 
signatures14 applying the same approach recently proposed15. Briefly, the Sanger signatures 
were obtained from the identification of 30 mutational processes signatures (named Sanger 
signatures) upon application of the original tool on more than 10,000 samples from 40 
distinct human cancer types14. In our dataset, we identify 4 mutational signatures (Fig. 7c); 
the Sanger signature analysis reveals that APOBEC proteins play a role in the mutational 
processes shaping UC genomes. We checked for statistically significant differences between 
pre- and post-chemotherapy of individual members of the APOBEC family using Fisher’s 
exact test followed by Benjamin-Hochberg FDR correction (Fig. 7d). To test if the clonality 
of APOBEC induced SNVs is enriched in post-chemotherapy samples, we dichotomized the 
SNV clonality levels (threshold 0.6) and then we applied Fisher’s exact test (Fig. 7e).
Fluorescence in situ hybridization
Two 4-μm-thick tissue sections from each block were cut for FISH analysis. CDKN2A 
deletion was determined using FISH probe (BAC clone RP11-149I2) and a reference probe, 
Faltas et al.
Page 14
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 located at 9p21. At least 100 nuclei were evaluated per sample using a fluorescence 
microscope (Olympus BX51; Olympus Optical).
Statistical analysis
For statistical tests, two-sided Mann–Whitney–Wilcoxon test (referred to as Wilcoxon test in 
the main text) was used to check for significant differences between two distributions. The 
two-sided Fisher’s exact test was applied to determine whether the deviations between the 
observed and the expected counts were significant. When appropriate p-values were adjusted 
for multiple hypotheses testing with Benjamin-Hochberg procedure. Boxplot statistics were 
computed with the function “boxplot” of R programming language. No statistical methods 
were used to predetermine study sample size.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank our patients and their families for participation in this study. We would like to thank Barry 
Sleckman for constructive review of the manuscript. We would also like to acknowledge Douglas Scherr and 
Christopher Barbieri for contributing samples, our research and clinical pathology fellows Jacqueline Fontugne, 
Myriam Kossai, Chantal Pauli, Kenneth Hennrick and Kyung Park for their assistance during rapid autopsies, and 
S.S. Chae and D. Wilkes for technical assistance and constructive comments. We would also like to thank Theresa 
Y. MacDonald, Jessica Padilla and Tarcisio Fedreizzi for technical assistance. Work was also partially supported by 
the Translational Research Program at WCMC Pathology and Laboratory Medicine. This work was supported by: 
Conquer Cancer Foundation John and Elizabeth Leonard Family Foundation Young Investigator Award (B.M.F), 
NIH/NCATS Grant # KL2TR000458 (B.M.F), Early Detection Research Network US NCI 5U01 CA111275-09 
(J.M.M., M.A.R. and F.D.), Damon Runyon Cancer Research Foundation Clinical Investigator Award CI-67-13 
(H.B.), H2020 European Research Council ERC-CoG 648670 (F.D.).
References
1. Howlader, N., et al. SEER cancer statistics review, 1975–2010. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer 
Institute; 2013. 
2. von der Maase H, et al. Long-term survival results of a randomized trial comparing gemcitabine plus 
cisplatin, with methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, plus cisplatin in patients with bladder cancer. 
J Clin Oncol. 2005; 23:4602–8. [PubMed: 16034041] 
3. Clark PE, et al. Bladder cancer. J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2013; 11:446–75. [PubMed: 23584347] 
4. Sternberg CN, et al. Randomized phase III trial of high-dose-intensity methotrexate, vinblastine, 
doxorubicin, and cisplatin (MVAC) chemotherapy and recombinant human granulocyte colony-
stimulating factor versus classic MVAC in advanced urothelial tract tumors: European Organization 
for Research and Treatment of Cancer Protocol no. 30924. J Clin Oncol. 2001; 19:2638–46. 
[PubMed: 11352955] 
5. Sternberg CN, et al. Seven year update of an EORTC phase III trial of high-dose intensity M-VAC 
chemotherapy and G-CSF versus classic M-VAC in advanced urothelial tract tumours. Eur J Cancer. 
2006; 42:50–4. [PubMed: 16330205] 
6. Bellmunt J, et al. Phase III trial of vinflunine plus best supportive care compared with best 
supportive care alone after a platinum-containing regimen in patients with advanced transitional cell 
carcinoma of the urothelial tract. J Clin Oncol. 2009; 27:4454–61. [PubMed: 19687335] 
7. Bellmunt, JaPDP. New therapeutic challenges in advanced bladder cancer. Seminars in oncology. 
2012; 39:598–607. [PubMed: 23040256] 
8. Comprehensive molecular characterization of urothelial bladder carcinoma. Nature. 2014; 507:315–
22. [PubMed: 24476821] 
Faltas et al.
Page 15
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 9. Prandi D, et al. Unraveling the clonal hierarchy of somatic genomic aberrations. Genome Biol. 
2014; 15:439. [PubMed: 25160065] 
10. Network CGAR. Comprehensive molecular characterization of urothelial bladder carcinoma. 
Nature. 2014; 507:315–22. [PubMed: 24476821] 
11. Nixon KC. The Parsimony Ratchet, a New Method for Rapid Parsimony Analysis. Cladistics. 
1999; 15:407–414.
12. Zheng Y, et al. Identification of Pold2 as a novel interaction partner of protein inhibitor of activated 
STAT2. Int J Mol Med. 2012; 30:884–8. [PubMed: 22824807] 
13. Lee YS, Gregory MT, Yang W. Human Pol ζ purified with accessory subunits is active in 
translesion DNA synthesis and complements Pol η in cisplatin bypass. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2014; 111:2954–9. [PubMed: 24449906] 
14. van Boxtel R, et al. FOXP1 acts through a negative feedback loop to suppress FOXO-induced 
apoptosis. Cell Death Differ. 2013; 20:1219–29. [PubMed: 23832113] 
15. Choi EJ, et al. FOXP1 functions as an oncogene in promoting cancer stem cell-like characteristics 
in ovarian cancer cells. Oncotarget. 2016; 7:3506–19. [PubMed: 26654944] 
16. Greco C, et al. E-cadherin/p120-catenin and tetraspanin Co-029 cooperate for cell motility control 
in human colon carcinoma. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:7674–83. [PubMed: 20858717] 
17. Wei L, Li Y, Suo Z. TSPAN8 promotes gastric cancer growth and metastasis via ERK MAPK 
pathway. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015; 8:8599–607. [PubMed: 26309511] 
18. Zöller M. Tetraspanins: push and pull in suppressing and promoting metastasis. Nat Rev Cancer. 
2009; 9:40–55. [PubMed: 19078974] 
19. Kinsella RJ, et al. Ensembl BioMarts: a hub for data retrieval across taxonomic space. Database 
(Oxford). 2011; 2011:bar030. [PubMed: 21785142] 
20. Plimack ER, et al. Defects in DNA Repair Genes Predict Response to Neoadjuvant Cisplatin-based 
Chemotherapy in Muscle-invasive Bladder Cancer. Eur Urol. 2015; 68:959–67. [PubMed: 
26238431] 
21. Eke I, Cordes N. Focal adhesion signaling and therapy resistance in cancer. Semin Cancer Biol. 
2015; 31:65–75. [PubMed: 25117005] 
22. Maiuthed A, Chanvorachote P. Cisplatin at sub-toxic levels mediates integrin switch in lung cancer 
cells. Anticancer Res. 2014; 34:7111–7. [PubMed: 25503138] 
23. Seguin L, Desgrosellier JS, Weis SM, Cheresh DA. Integrins and cancer: regulators of cancer 
stemness, metastasis, and drug resistance. Trends Cell Biol. 2015; 25:234–40. [PubMed: 
25572304] 
24. Tsutsumi S, et al. L1 Cell adhesion molecule (L1CAM) expression at the cancer invasive front is a 
novel prognostic marker of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. J Surg Oncol. 2011; 103:669–73. 
[PubMed: 21360711] 
25. Weidle UH, Eggle D, Klostermann S. L1-CAM as a target for treatment of cancer with monoclonal 
antibodies. Anticancer Res. 2009; 29:4919–31. [PubMed: 20044598] 
26. Meier B, et al. C. elegans whole-genome sequencing reveals mutational signatures related to 
carcinogens and DNA repair deficiency. Genome Res. 2014; 24:1624–36. [PubMed: 25030888] 
27. Szikriszt B, et al. A comprehensive survey of the mutagenic impact of common cancer cytotoxics. 
Genome Biol. 2016; 17:99. [PubMed: 27161042] 
28. Alexandrov LB, et al. Signatures of mutational processes in human cancer. Nature. 2013; 500:415–
21. [PubMed: 23945592] 
29. Nik-Zainal S, et al. Mutational processes molding the genomes of 21 breast cancers. Cell. 2012; 
149:979–93. [PubMed: 22608084] 
30. Kim J, et al. Somatic ERCC2 mutations are associated with a distinct genomic signature in 
urothelial tumors. Nat Genet. 2016
31. Roberts SA, et al. An APOBEC cytidine deaminase mutagenesis pattern is widespread in human 
cancers. Nat Genet. 2013; 45:970–6. [PubMed: 23852170] 
32. Liu D, et al. Clinical Validation of Chemotherapy Response Biomarker ERCC2 in Muscle-Invasive 
Urothelial Bladder Carcinoma. JAMA Oncol. 2016
Faltas et al.
Page 16
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 33. Van Allen EM, et al. Somatic ERCC2 mutations correlate with cisplatin sensitivity in muscle-
invasive urothelial carcinoma. Cancer Discov. 2014; 4:1140–53. [PubMed: 25096233] 
34. Hoopes JI, et al. APOBEC3A and APOBEC3B Preferentially Deaminate the Lagging Strand 
Template during DNA Replication. Cell Rep. 2016; 14:1273–82. [PubMed: 26832400] 
35. Lackey L, et al. APOBEC3B and AID have similar nuclear import mechanisms. J Mol Biol. 2012; 
419:301–14. [PubMed: 22446380] 
36. Chelico L, Pham P, Goodman MF. Stochastic properties of processive cytidine DNA deaminases 
AID and APOBEC3G. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2009; 364:583–93. [PubMed: 
19022738] 
37. Harris RS, Liddament MT. Retroviral restriction by APOBEC proteins. Nat Rev Immunol. 2004; 
4:868–77. [PubMed: 15516966] 
38. Faltas BM, Karir BS, Tagawa ST, Rosenberg JE. Novel molecular targets for urothelial carcinoma. 
Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2015; 19:515–25. [PubMed: 25633079] 
39. Knowles MA, Hurst CD. Molecular biology of bladder cancer: new insights into pathogenesis and 
clinical diversity. Nat Rev Cancer. 2015; 15:25–41. [PubMed: 25533674] 
40. Yoon H, et al. L1 cell adhesion molecule and epidermal growth factor receptor activation confer 
cisplatin resistance in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma cells. Cancer Lett. 2012; 316:70–6. 
[PubMed: 22088438] 
41. Stoeck A, et al. L1-CAM in a membrane-bound or soluble form augments protection from 
apoptosis in ovarian carcinoma cells. Gynecol Oncol. 2007; 104:461–9. [PubMed: 17030349] 
42. Sebens Müerköster S, et al. Drug-induced expression of the cellular adhesion molecule L1CAM 
confers anti-apoptotic protection and chemoresistance in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cells. 
Oncogene. 2007; 26:2759–68. [PubMed: 17086212] 
43. Sebens Müerköster S, et al. alpha5-integrin is crucial for L1CAM-mediated chemoresistance in 
pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Int J Oncol. 2009; 34:243–53. [PubMed: 19082495] 
44. Kiefel H, et al. L1CAM: a major driver for tumor cell invasion and motility. Cell Adh Migr. 2012; 
6:374–84. [PubMed: 22796939] 
45. Gast D, et al. The RGD integrin binding site in human L1-CAM is important for nuclear signaling. 
Exp Cell Res. 2008; 314:2411–8. [PubMed: 18555990] 
46. Voura EB, Ramjeesingh RA, Montgomery AM, Siu CH. Involvement of integrin alpha(v)beta(3) 
and cell adhesion molecule L1 in transendothelial migration of melanoma cells. Mol Biol Cell. 
2001; 12:2699–710. [PubMed: 11553709] 
47. Burgett ME, et al. Direct contact with perivascular tumor cells enhances integrin αvβ3 signaling 
and migration of endothelial cells. Oncotarget. 2016
48. Hodkinson PS, et al. ECM overrides DNA damage-induced cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in small-
cell lung cancer cells through beta1 integrin-dependent activation of PI3-kinase. Cell Death Differ. 
2006; 13:1776–88. [PubMed: 16410797] 
49. Sethi T, et al. Extracellular matrix proteins protect small cell lung cancer cells against apoptosis: a 
mechanism for small cell lung cancer growth and drug resistance in vivo. Nat Med. 1999; 5:662–8. 
[PubMed: 10371505] 
50. Zhang H, et al. Beta 1-integrin protects hepatoma cells from chemotherapy induced apoptosis via a 
mitogen-activated protein kinase dependent pathway. Cancer. 2002; 95:896–906. [PubMed: 
12209735] 
51. Argyris EG, et al. The interferon-induced expression of APOBEC3G in human blood-brain barrier 
exerts a potent intrinsic immunity to block HIV-1 entry to central nervous system. Virology. 2007; 
367:440–51. [PubMed: 17631933] 
52. Shain KH, Dalton WS. Cell adhesion is a key determinant in de novo multidrug resistance (MDR): 
new targets for the prevention of acquired MDR. Mol Cancer Ther. 2001; 1:69–78. [PubMed: 
12467240] 
53. Damiano JS. Integrins as novel drug targets for overcoming innate drug resistance. Curr Cancer 
Drug Targets. 2002; 2:37–43. [PubMed: 12188919] 
54. Hazlehurst LA, Dalton WS. Mechanisms associated with cell adhesion mediated drug resistance 
(CAM-DR) in hematopoietic malignancies. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2001; 20:43–50. [PubMed: 
11831646] 
Faltas et al.
Page 17
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 55. Hehlgans S, Haase M, Cordes N. Signalling via integrins: implications for cell survival and 
anticancer strategies. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007; 1775:163–80. [PubMed: 17084981] 
56. Cho S, et al. Generation, characterization and preclinical studies of a human anti-L1CAM 
monoclonal antibody that cross-reacts with rodent L1CAM. MAbs. 2016; 8:414–25. [PubMed: 
26785809] 
57. Min JK, et al. L1 cell adhesion molecule is a novel therapeutic target in intrahepatic 
cholangiocarcinoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2010; 16:3571–80. [PubMed: 20501614] 
58. Schäfer H, et al. Combined treatment of L1CAM antibodies and cytostatic drugs improve the 
therapeutic response of pancreatic and ovarian carcinoma. Cancer Lett. 2012; 319:66–82. 
[PubMed: 22210381] 
59. Golubovskaya VM. Targeting FAK in human cancer: from finding to first clinical trials. Front 
Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2014; 19:687–706. [PubMed: 24389213] 
60. Schultze A, Fiedler W. Therapeutic potential and limitations of new FAK inhibitors in the 
treatment of cancer. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2010; 19:777–88.
61. Rezaee M, Sanche L, Hunting DJ. Cisplatin enhances the formation of DNA single- and double-
strand breaks by hydrated electrons and hydroxyl radicals. Radiat Res. 2013; 179:323–31. 
[PubMed: 23368416] 
62. Zellweger R, et al. Rad51-mediated replication fork reversal is a global response to genotoxic 
treatments in human cells. J Cell Biol. 2015; 208:563–79. [PubMed: 25733714] 
63. Roberts SA, Gordenin DA. Hypermutation in human cancer genomes: footprints and mechanisms. 
Nat Rev Cancer. 2014; 14:786–800. [PubMed: 25568919] 
64. Chan K, et al. An APOBEC3A hypermutation signature is distinguishable from the signature of 
background mutagenesis by APOBEC3B in human cancers. Nat Genet. 2015; 47:1067–72. 
[PubMed: 26258849] 
65. Lipinski KA, et al. Cancer Evolution and the Limits of Predictability in Precision Cancer 
Medicine. Trends Cancer. 2016; 2:49–63. [PubMed: 26949746] 
66. Beltran H, et al. Whole-Exome Sequencing of Metastatic Cancer and Biomarkers of Treatment 
Response. JAMA Oncol. 2015; 1:466–74. [PubMed: 26181256] 
67. Demichelis F, et al. SNP panel identification assay (SPIA): a genetic-based assay for the 
identification of cell lines. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008; 36:2446–56. [PubMed: 18304946] 
68. Beltran H, et al. Divergent clonal evolution of castration-resistant neuroendocrine prostate cancer. 
Nat Med. 2016; 22:298–305. [PubMed: 26855148] 
69. Futreal PA, et al. A census of human cancer genes. Nat Rev Cancer. 2004; 4:177–83. [PubMed: 
14993899] 
70. Rubio-Perez C, et al. In silico prescription of anticancer drugs to cohorts of 28 tumor types reveals 
targeting opportunities. Cancer Cell. 2015; 27:382–96. [PubMed: 25759023] 
71. Cibulskis K, et al. Sensitive detection of somatic point mutations in impure and heterogeneous 
cancer samples. Nat Biotechnol. 2013; 31:213–9. [PubMed: 23396013] 
72. Jiang Y, Soong TD, Wang L, Melnick AM, Elemento O. Genome-wide detection of genes targeted 
by non-Ig somatic hypermutation in lymphoma. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e40332. [PubMed: 22808135] 
73. Romanel A, Lago S, Prandi D, Sboner A, Demichelis F. ASEQ: fast allele-specific studies from 
next-generation sequencing data. BMC Med Genomics. 2015; 8:9. [PubMed: 25889339] 
74. Ramos AH, et al. Oncotator: cancer variant annotation tool. Hum Mutat. 2015; 36:E2423–9. 
[PubMed: 25703262] 
75. Eilbeck K, et al. The Sequence Ontology: a tool for the unification of genome annotations. 
Genome Biol. 2005; 6:R44. [PubMed: 15892872] 
Faltas et al.
Page 18
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Clinical characteristics of study cohort
(a) Bar graph illustrating number of tumor samples sequenced from each study subject. 
Treatment status of each sample is color-coded within each bar (see inset). Gender, smoking 
status development of metastases and history of intravesical Bacillus Calmette-Guerin 
(BCG) for pre-existing non-muscle invasive bladder cancer are represented on the bottom 
(b) Schematic illustrating anatomical sites of primary and metastatic tumor samples.
Faltas et al.
Page 19
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Clonal mutational heterogeneity in chemotherapy-treated UC
(a) Percentage of shared and unique SNVs in matched chemotherapy-naive and 
chemotherapy-treated UC tumors. (b) Discordance in the mutational status in selected driver 
genes between chemotherapy-naive and chemotherapy-treated UC tumors. Each column 
represents a paired set of pre- and post-chemotherapy tumors obtained from an individual 
subject. Individuals with more than one paired set of tumors are highlighted with matching 
color designations. Primary-primary tumors are represented on the left (vertical hatching) 
and primary-metastatic tumors are represented on the right (slanted hatching). Note: ERCC2 
missense mutations were identified in two tumor samples, WCM259_3 (p.Q755H) and 
WCM141_1 (p.T484M), matched pre- and post-chemotherapy samples were not available 
from either patient.
Faltas et al.
Page 20
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Early branching evolution in UC
Phylogenetic trees (top), shared and private clonally-adjusted mutations (bottom) from 6 
patients with three or more tumor samples per patient. All cases showed early metastatic 
spread occurring as branching evolution occurred early in the natural history of the disease. 
All primary tumors temporally preceded the development of metastasis but were assigned 
“branch” values based on genomic distance suggesting early branching evolution and 
metastatic spread.
Faltas et al.
Page 21
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Reconstructing the spatio-temporal evolution of UC over time and through different 
treatments
Analysis of 12 tumor samples collected during disease progression and at the time of death 
of patient WCM117 (a) (top) Circles represent sites of sequenced tumors. (bottom) Timeline 
and clinical course (vertical lines) in the natural history of the disease. (b) CLONET-
adjusted variant allele frequencies of selected mutations. Each dot represents the fraction of 
cells harboring the corresponding mutation. (c) Fluorescence in-situ hybridization for 
CDKN2A (red) and reference (green) probes in primary cystectomy tumor #4 (right) and 
right supraclavicular lymph node collected at time of autopsy (left) (scale bar 5 μm). Middle 
panel: allele-specific copy number. Axes correspond to different alleles. Dots represent 
CDKN2A allele-specific copy number. (d) CLONET-adjusted shared and private mutations. 
Faltas et al.
Page 22
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fractions of tumor cells harboring each mutation represented by shades of green (scale 
upper left corner of panel). Gray: clonality information was not available. (e) Reconstruction 
of evolutionary tree. WT: taken last ancestor with wild-type genome that acquires a series of 
mutations during oncogenesis. The length of the branches represents the distance between 
two tumors based on the number of shared mutations. Samples are color-coded consistently 
across panels: Yellow: primary pre-chemotherapy TURBT. Orange: 4 different areas of post-
gemcitabine cisplatin bladder tumors and pelvic lymph node metastatic lesion removed 
through cystectomy and lymph node dissection. Green: post-docetaxel-ramucirumab 
metastatic lesions removed during autopsy.
Faltas et al.
Page 23
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Hierarchical clusters of 44 UC tumor samples by copy-number alterations
(a) Copy number gains are represented in red and copy number losses are represented in 
blue. Each column represents one tumor sample. Clinical annotations are represented on top. 
Matched samples from the same patient are represented in the same color in the “matched 
samples” annotation track. Selected genes harboring frequent copy number alterations are 
listed on the left. (b) Dots represent pairs of samples in Fig. 5a from the same patient (left) 
and from different patients (right). Left boxplot: median 0.2, IQR (0.13, 0.28), whiskers 
(0.05, 0.49). Right boxplot: median 0.53, IQR (0.42, 0.66), whiskers (0.07, 0.93).
Faltas et al.
Page 24
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Clonal enrichment of mutations in chemotherapy-treated UC
(a) Density plot representing clonality of non-silent single nucleotide variants (SNVs) on the 
X-axis and the density distribution on the Y-axis. Pre-chemotherapy tumor samples are 
represented in blue color and post-chemotherapy tumor samples in green. Box plots (right) 
represent the percentage of clonal SNVs in pre-chemotherapy tumor and post-chemotherapy 
tumors demonstrating a significant increase in clonality in post-chemotherapy UC tumors. 
Left boxplot: median 0.5, IQR (0.41, 0.71), whiskers (0.24, 0.88). Right boxplot: median 
0.83, IQR (0.61, 0.89), whiskers (0.22, 0.94). (b) Results of Gene set Enrichment Analysis 
(GSEA) of mutations in chemotherapy-treated UC. Each node represents one REACTOME 
pathway. Node size represents number of genes in each pathway. Enriched pathways post-
chemotherapy samples are represented by nodes in red color.
Faltas et al.
Page 25
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. Mutagenesis in advanced UC is shaped by chemotherapy and APOBECs
(a) Composite bar graphs representing the distribution of all possible nucleotide 
substitutions in non-silent SNVs in sequenced pre-chemotherapy (left) and post-
chemotherapy (right) UC tumors. (b) Nucleotide motif contexts for each category of single 
nucleotide substitutions. Blue: pre-chemotherapy tumors, green: post-chemotherapy tumors. 
(c) Four mutational signatures identified in UC. (d) Significant enrichment of APOBEC 
signatures in post-chemotherapy tumors. (e) Significant increases in the clonality of 
APOBEC-induced mutations in post-chemotherapy UC. Number of SNVs, exact p-values, 
and total number of samples are reported in Supplementary Note.
Faltas et al.
Page 26
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
