 HGF-independent regulation of MET and
GAB1 by nonreceptor tyrosine kinase FER
potentiates metastasis in ovarian cancer
Gaofeng Fan,1 Siwei Zhang,1,2 Yan Gao,3 Peter A. Greer,3 and Nicholas K. Tonks1
1Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York 11724, USA; 2Department of Molecular Genetics and
Microbiology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York 11794, USA; 3Department of Biomedical and Molecular Sciences,
Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario K7L3N6, Canada
Ovarian cancer cells disseminate readily within the peritoneal cavity, which promotes metastasis, and are often
resistant to chemotherapy. Ovarian cancer patients tend to present with advanced disease, which also limits
treatment options; consequently, new therapies are required. The oncoprotein tyrosine kinase MET, which is the
receptor for hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), has been implicated in ovarian tumorigenesis and has been the subject
of extensive drug development efforts. Here, we report a novel ligand- and autophosphorylation-independent acti-
vation of MET through the nonreceptor tyrosine kinase feline sarcoma-related (FER). We demonstrated that the
levels of FER were elevated in ovarian cancer cell lines relative to those in immortalized normal surface epithelial
cells and that suppression of FER attenuated the motility and invasive properties of these cancer cells. Furthermore,
loss of FER impaired the metastasis of ovarian cancer cells in vivo. Mechanistically, we demonstrated that FER
phosphorylated a signaling site in MET: Tyr1349. This enhanced activation of RAC1/PAK1 and promoted a kinase-
independent scaffolding function that led to recruitment and phosphorylation of GAB1 and the specific activation of
the SHP2–ERK signaling pathway. Overall, this analysis provides new insights into signaling events that underlie
metastasis in ovarian cancer cells, consistent with a prometastatic role of FER and highlighting its potential as a
novel therapeutic target for metastatic ovarian cancer.
[Keywords: ovarian cancer; tyrosine phosphorylation; FER; MET; GAB1]
Supplemental material is available for this article.
Received November 19, 2015; revised version accepted June 7, 2016.
Ovarian cancer is the leading cause of death from gyneco-
logical malignancies and ranks fifth of all cancer-related
deaths in women (Siegel et al. 2015). Despite recent ad-
vances in surgery and chemotherapy, the overall survival
from ovarian cancer has not improved significantly for the
last four decades. In particular, the failure to detect this
“silent killer” disease early results in tumor progression
to an advanced stage, accompanied by metastasis. Al-
though dissemination of most cancer cells requires migra-
tion within the vasculature, the exfoliated ovarian
carcinoma cells may be transported throughout the peri-
toneal cavity to adjacent organs by normal peritoneal flu-
id; this lack of an anatomical barrier further accelerates
metastasis (Longuespee et al. 2012). It is almost impossi-
ble to render patients free of the disease with surgery
due to this diffuse feature, and ∼70% of patients present
with disease that has spread beyond the ovaries. There-
fore, delineating the molecular basis for ovarian carcino-
ma metastasis may not only inform prognosis but also
promote the identification of novel therapeutic targets.
The c-Met oncogene, which encodes a receptor protein
tyrosine kinase (PTK), and its cognate ligand, hepatocyte
growth factor (HGF), have been shown to play an impor-
tant role in the aggressive behavior of ovarian cancer.
c-MET is overexpressed in up to 60% of tumors from
patients with ovarian cancer (Huntsman et al. 1999;
Koon et al. 2008), and its expression has been implicated
in the early steps of ovarian carcinogenesis (Wong et al.
2001) as well as the advanced stages of the disease associ-
ated with poor prognosis (Ayhan et al. 2005; Sawada et al.
2007). Targeting c-MET by RNAi in ovarian carcinoma-
derived cell lines inhibited adhesion, invasion, peritoneal
dissemination, and tumor growth through an α5β1 integ-
rin-dependent mechanism (Sawada et al. 2007).
Corresponding author: tonks@cshl.edu
Article is online at http://www.genesdev.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/gad.284166.
116.
© 2016 Fan et al.
This article is distributed exclusively by Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory Press for the first six months after the full-issue publi-
cation date (see http://genesdev.cshlp.org/site/misc/terms.xhtml). After
six months, it is available under a Creative Commons License (At-
tribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International), as described at http://creati-
vecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
1542
GENES & DEVELOPMENT 30:1542–1557 Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; ISSN 0890-9369/16; www.genesdev.org
 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 on June 2, 2019 - Published by 
genesdev.cshlp.org
Downloaded from 
 MET is produced as a single-chain precursor (∼170
kDa); through cleavage at a furin site that is located be-
tween residues 307 and 308, the mature form of MET is
formed with a highly glycosylated extracellular α subunit
(45 kDa) and a transmembrane β subunit (140 kDa) linked
by a disulphide bond (Birchmeier et al. 2003). The kinase
domain and the C-terminal tail, which are important
for signal propagation, are within the β subunit. In the
classic ligand-dependent activation model, binding of
HGF induces MET dimerization and autophosphoryla-
tion of tyrosine residues in its activation loop (Tyr1234
and Tyr1235). In this form, the receptor PTK acquires en-
hanced kinase activity and further autophosphorylates
two additional tyrosines in its C terminus; namely, 1349
and 1356. This creates docking sites for adaptor proteins
with SH2 or PH domains, including GRB2, GAB1, and
SHC (Trusolino et al. 2010; Gherardi et al. 2012). Intra-
cellular signaling components are then recruited to the
adaptor proteins to activate further the downstream
RAS–RAF–MEK–MAPK, PI3K–AKT, and STAT3 signal-
ing pathways (Trusolino et al. 2010). Accordingly, several
strategies have been adopted to inhibit c-MET activation
in cancers, including monoclonal antibodies against
HGF to block ligand–receptor binding or small molecule
inhibitors that target the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)
function directly (Comoglio et al. 2008). However, in ovar-
ian cancer, AMG-102, a humanized antibody developed
against HGF, which is capable of preventing HGF binding
to c-MET and subsequent downstream activation, showed
very weak anti-tumor effect as a monotherapy in clinical
trials (Gordon et al. 2010; Liu et al. 2010). Gastric cancer
also developed resistance to a potent small molecule in-
hibitor of MET, PHA-665752, by selectively harboring
KRAS amplification (Cepero et al. 2010) and/or triggering
downstream BRAF and CRAF activation (Petti et al. 2015).
These observations suggest that there may still be un-
known mechanisms by which the cancer cell may bypass
robust HGF–MET inhibition and reinitiate downstream
signaling pathways in a ligand-independent manner.
Instead of gene mutations or the production of auto-
crine or paracrine HGF, MET overexpression underlies
the most frequent cause of HGF/MET hyperactivation
in human tumors (Boccaccio and Comoglio 2006). Such
high levels of MET expression alone may facilitate recep-
tor oligomerization and tyrosine kinase activation in a
ligand-independent manner. Alternatively, it is also con-
ceivable that some yet to be identified PTK(s) may acti-
vate MET and/or its downstream signaling cascades in
the absence of HGF. Whereas treating with MET inhibitor
in the former case could still inhibit activation of the re-
ceptor, the latter possibility would be consistent with
the failure of HGF–MET inhibition to treat cancer cells.
Here, we report an alternative, HGF-independent activa-
tion of MET through a nonreceptor PTK, feline sarcoma-
related (FER). We demonstrate that FER was essential for
ovarian cancer cell motility and invasiveness both in vitro
and in vivo and may attenuate the responsiveness of ovar-
ian cancer cells to the MET inhibitor PHA-665752. Con-
sidering that frequent amplification/up-regulation of
MET accounts for therapy resistance and poor prognosis
in a variety of cancers, including ovarian cancer, our find-
ings pinpoint an important new signaling hub involving
the role of FER in MET activation, which may provide a
novel strategy for therapeutic intervention.
Results
Up-regulated non-RTK FER was responsible for elevated
motility and invasiveness of ovarian cancer-derived cell
lines
Aberrant activation of β-catenin-mediated Wnt signaling
pathways has been reported to be a feature of ovarian can-
cer (Barbolina et al. 2011; Arend et al. 2013). Furthermore,
deregulation of PI3K/PTEN and Wnt/β-catenin signaling
pathways by conditional inactivation of the Pten and
Apc tumor suppressor genes in murine ovarian surface ep-
ithelium results in the formation of adenocarcinomas
morphologically similar to human ovarian endometrioid
adenocarcinoma (Wu et al. 2007). In light of this, we com-
pared the distribution of β-Catenin between two human
ovarian surface epithelial (HOSE) cell lines (Tsao et al.
1995) and 11 ovarian carcinoma-derived cell lines. The re-
sult suggested an increase of nuclear β-catenin in most
ovarian cancer cells tested (Supplemental Fig. S1A). Con-
comitantly, phosphorylation of β-catenin on Tyr142 was
also enhanced in tumor cells (Supplemental Fig. S1B).
We and others have reported previously that the PTK
FER is a key regulator of β-catenin phosphorylation (Piedra
et al. 2003; Xu et al. 2004). Our data now also reveal that
expression of FER was up-regulated in all 11 ovarian can-
cer cell lines (Fig. 1A). In addition, ectopic expression of
FER in control HOSE11–12 cells resulted in a dramatic in-
crease in Tyr142 phosphorylation of β-catenin (Fig. 1B) as
well as in cell motility (Fig. 1C). The aim of these studies
is to investigate the potential importance of FER in the
control of cell migration and invasion and its impact on
ovarian cancer metastasis.
It is important to note that, like breast cancer, ovarian
cancer is not a single disease; instead, there are various
categories of ovarian cancer. In our panel of cells, we tried
to sample this diversity. Suppression of FER by RNAi (Fig.
1D) led to a pronounced decrease in the motility of three
different ovarian cancer cell lines (Fig. 1E) as well as in
cell invasion (Fig. 1F). These phenotypes that were associ-
ated with loss of FER were not due to changes in prolifer-
ation because we did not detect any change in cell growth
by either CellTiter-Glo cell viability assay (Fig. 1G) or Ki-
67 staining (Fig. 1H). On the basis of genomic data analysis
(Domcke et al. 2013), CAOV4 and CAOV3 cells are cate-
gorized as high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSOC)
lines. To solidify our observations further, we tested the
role of FER in another HGSOC line, OVCAR4. Compared
with the HOSE11–12 control, FER expression was also up-
regulated in OVCAR4 cells (Supplemental Fig S2A).
Knockdown of FER with shRNA (Supplemental Fig S2B)
impaired both cell migration (Supplemental Fig S2C)
and invasion (Supplemental Fig S2D), suggesting a critical
role of FER in regulating ovarian cancer cell motility and
invasiveness, especially in HGSOC lines.
HGF-independent regulation of MET and GAB1 by FER
GENES & DEVELOPMENT
1543
 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 on June 2, 2019 - Published by 
genesdev.cshlp.org
Downloaded from 
 Suppression of FER led to attenuated tyrosine
phosphorylation of HGF receptor (HGFR/MET)
and inhibition of the downstream SHP2–MAPK
signaling pathway
Up-regulation and activation of FER has been reported in
multiple cancers, including lung (Rikova et al. 2007), he-
patic (Li et al. 2009), prostate (Zoubeidi et al. 2009), breast
(Albeck and Brugge 2011), and ovarian cancer (Ren et al.
2012). Its oncogenic role has been implicated in the control
of cell motility and invasion, suppression of apoptosis, and
drug resistance (Greer 2002; Craig 2012). Nevertheless,
due to the limited number of known substrates of FER,
the molecular basis for its protumorigenic function is still
largely unknown. Given its robust effect on ovarian cancer
cell migration and invasion, we examined its downstream
effectors/substrates first bymeasuring changes in theglob-
al tyrosine phosphorylation profile. Phosphorylation of a
Figure 1.
FER was up-regulated in ovarian cancer-derived cell lines and was essential for cell motility and invasiveness. (A) Total cell
lysates from two control and 11 ovarian carcinoma-derived cell lines were immunoblotted for FER and loading control actin. (B)
HOSE11–12 cells were transiently transfected with either empty vector or FER constructs and immunoblotted for tyrosine phosphoryla-
tion of β-catenin, FER, and a loading control, ERK. (C) The effect of FER overexpression on cell motility was measured by Boyden chamber
assay 24 h after seeding. Representative bright-field images are illustrated, together with quantitation. Mean ± S.E.M. n = 3. (D) shRNA
knockdown of FER in three ovarian cancer-derived cell lines. (E,F) The effects of FER loss on cell motility (E) and invasiveness (F)
were measured by Boyden chamber assay 24 h after seeding. Representative bright-field images are illustrated, together with quantitation.
Mean ± S.E.M. n = 3. (G,H) Cell growth was assessed by CellTiter-Glo luminescent cell viability assay at the indicated time intervals (G)
and by Ki-67 immunostaining (H).
Fan et al.
1544
GENES & DEVELOPMENT
 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 on June 2, 2019 - Published by 
genesdev.cshlp.org
Downloaded from 
 band of ∼140 kDa, which comigrated on SDS-PAGE with
the mature form of MET, was markedly diminished in
two CAOV4 cell lines in which FER was suppressed with
different shRNAs (Fig. 2A). Tandem MET immunoprecip-
itation and pTyr immunoblotting confirmed the decrease
of total MET tyrosine phosphorylation in FER-deficient
CAOV4 cells (Fig. 2B). The phosphorylation status of
both activation loop phosphorylation sites (Tyr1234 and
Tyr1235) and the C-terminal docking site (Tyr1349), the
regulation of which by autophosphorylation in trans has
been established, were profoundly decreased in the ab-
sence of FER (Fig. 2C). This decrease in phosphorylation
of MET was observed in all three ovarian cancer cell lines
tested (Fig. 2D; Supplemental Fig. S3A) even after HGF
treatment, which rules out effects specific to one cell
type. Interestingly, the SHP2–MAPK axis downstream
from MET, but not PI3K–AKT and SRC, was primarily at-
tenuated upon FER loss (Fig. 2C,D). Activation of the
PI3K–AKT pathway is MET-dependent in CAOV4 cells,
since MET knockdown with siRNA markedly decreased
AKT activation (Supplemental Fig S3B). Furthermore,
lossof FER showed nodiscernableeffects on either EGF-in-
duced EGFR–ERK (Fig. 2E) or IL-6-induced STAT3–p38 ac-
tivation (Fig. 2F), suggesting a specific impact of FER on
MET regulation in these cells. In addition, loss of FER
in ovarian cancer cells had no apparent impact on the reg-
ulation of its known substrates, cortactin and p130CAS, in
both basal and HGF stimulation conditions (Supplemental
Fig. S3C,D), further suggesting that MET is the major tar-
get of FER in these cells.
In an alternative approach, which also helps to exclude
potential off-target effects of shRNA, we tested mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) generated from mice that
express a FER-D743R mutant. Asp743 contributes to the
conformational stability of the catalytic loop by forming
hydrogen bonds with the backbone amide groups of the
catalytic loop residues. Mutation of aspartic acid 743 to
arginine resulted in inactivation of the FER kinase domain
as well as destabilization of the protein (Cole et al. 1999).
Consistent with previous findings, we observed that the
pTyr immunoreactive band that comigrated with the ma-
ture form of MET was lost from the lysate of FER-D743R-
expressing MEFs (Fig. 2G). Tandem MET immunoprecip-
itation and pTyr immunoblotting further confirmed the
decrease of total MET tyrosine phosphorylation in FER-
D743R MEF cells (Fig. 2G). In particular, tyrosine phos-
phorylation of the MET activation loop and SHP2 were
markedly decreased (Fig. 2H). Together, these results il-
lustrate that this FER-mediated regulation of MET was
not restricted to one cell type and occurred in both normal
and cancer cells.
The kinase activity of FER and MET were essential for cell
motility
We performed a rescue experiment in FER-D743R-ex-
pressing MEFs to address the importance of the kinase ac-
tivityof FER to its function in cell motility. We established
MEF cell lines that expressed either MYC-tagged wild-
type or kinase-dead mutant (K592R) FER in the FER-
D743R background to a level of expression similar to
that of FER in wild-type MEFs (Fig. 3A). The migration as-
say confirmed that destabilization-mediated loss of FER
resulted in an approximately threefold decrease in cell mo-
tility (Fig. 3B,C). Furthermore, wild-type FER rescued the
defect in cell migration completely, whereas the kinase-
dead mutant FER was largely ineffective (Fig. 3B,C).
We examined further whether MET was essential for
FER-modulated cell migration in ovarian cancer cells.
MET expression was suppressed by two distinct siRNAs
in CAOV4 cells in the absence or presence of ectopic
FER (Fig. 3D). A wound healing assay was performed to
measure the impact of FER and MET on cell motility.
The motility of CAOV4 cells in this assay was dramati-
cally decreased upon MET knockdown (Fig. 3E,F). In con-
trast, overexpression of FER further accelerated cell
motility compared with parental CAOV4 control cells;
however, this did not compensate for the loss of MET
(Fig. 3E,F), which suggests that MET was a critical down-
stream effector of FER in the regulation of cell migration
in ovarian cancer-derived cell lines.
Activation of RAC1–PAK1, the downstream effector
of MET in cell motility regulation, was attenuated upon
FER loss
MET regulates cell migration mainly by modulating cad-
herin and integrin adhesion molecules through the
RAC1–PAK and RAP1–FAK pathways (Gherardi et al.
2012), respectively. Therefore, we investigated whether
these signaling pathways were impaired due to the inacti-
vation of MET upon FER loss in ovarian cancer cells. We
observed robustly elevated expression of PAK1, but not
PAK2 or PAK4, in most ovarian cancer-derived cells com-
pared with two normal HOSE controls (Supplemental Fig.
S4A). We failed to detect any expression of PAK3 in the
same cell extracts, probably due to its restricted expression
pattern in dendritic cells (Molli et al. 2009). Knockdown of
FER dampened the activation of PAK1, illustrated by the
decreased phosphorylation of its activating site, Ser144
(Supplemental Fig. S4B). Using a GST pull-down assay
with the RAC1-binding domain of PAK1 as bait (Supple-
mental Fig. S4C), we demonstrated that, in cells lacking
FER, this inactivation was associated with decreased bind-
ing of RAC1, the direct upstream activator of PAK1.
In addition, we investigated the RAP1–FAK signaling
pathway in these cells. Whereas the expression level of
FAK was up-regulated in certain ovarian cancer cell lines
compared with HOSE controls (Supplemental Fig. S4D),
its activation was unchanged in the presence or absence
of FER upon HGF stimulation (Supplemental Fig. S4E).
Together, these results are consistent with FER playing
an important role in regulating MET-induced ovarian can-
cer cell motility through RAC1–PAK1.
FER bound to and directly phosphorylated MET at
Tyr 1349
To elucidate the molecular mechanism by which FER reg-
ulates MET, first we examined, by immunoprecipitation,
HGF-independent regulation of MET and GAB1 by FER
GENES & DEVELOPMENT
1545
 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 on June 2, 2019 - Published by 
genesdev.cshlp.org
Downloaded from 
 Figure 2.
Loss of FER attenuated tyrosine phosphorylation of HGFR (MET) and MET-mediated downstream signaling. (A) Anti-phospho-
tyrosine antibody immunoblot (4G10) to examine the impact of FER knockdown on tyrosine phosphorylation in CAOV4 cells. The blot
was reprobed with antibodies against MET, FER, and the loading control actin. (B) Tyrosine phosphorylation of MET was examined by
immunoprecipitation followed by blotting with anti-phosphotyrosine antibody 4G10. The blot was reprobed for MET to indicate equal
immunoprecipitation efficiency and loading. (C) CAOV4 cells expressing either control or FER shRNA were lysed and immunoblotted
as indicated to measure the activation of MET and MET-regulated downstream signaling pathways. (D–F) Cells were serum-starved
and stimulated with recombinant human HGF (D), EGF (E), or IL-6 (F) for the indicated times; lysed; and immunoblotted with the des-
ignated antibodies to illustrate the impact of FER deficiency on HGF-, EGF-, or IL-6-induced signaling. (G, top) Anti-phosphotyrosine an-
tibody immunoblot (PY20) to examine the effects of a destabilized FER-D743R mutant on tyrosine phosphorylation in mouse embryonic
fibroblasts (MEFs). The position of MET is indicated by an arrowhead. The blot was reprobed for MET. (Bottom) MET was immunopre-
cipitated from both Fer+/+ and FerDR/DR MEF cell lysates, and tyrosine phosphorylation was examined by immunoblotting with antibody
4G10. (H) Fer+/+ and FerDR/DR MEF cells were lysed and immunoblotted as indicated to illustrate the impact of FER destabilization on
MET and MET-mediated downstream signaling pathways.
Fan et al.
1546
GENES & DEVELOPMENT
 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 on June 2, 2019 - Published by 
genesdev.cshlp.org
Downloaded from 
 whether there was any physical interaction between
them. We detected ectopically expressed FER and MET
in the same complex (Fig. 4A). Furthermore, this interac-
tion was also detected at the endogenous level of ex-
pression in three ovarian cancer-derived cell lines tested
(Fig. 4B). To address the potential significance of this in-
teraction in relaying signals, we introduced a mutant
form of MET (mATP MET, with a K1003R mutation),
which is disabled in endogenous ATP loading and auto-
phosphorylation. We observed that wild-type FER pro-
moted phosphorylation of the MET mATP mutant at
Tyr1349 (Fig. 4C), whereas kinase-dead mutant (FER
K592R) or SH2 mutant FER did not. In contrast, we did
not detect phosphorylation of the activation loop Tyr res-
idues 1234 and 1235 of MET by FER (Fig. 4C). In addition,
we also observed increased wild-type MET Tyr1349 phos-
phorylation in the presence of either wild-type or mutant
FER, likely due to the increased level of wild-type MET ex-
pression and autophosphorylation. Due to the lack of a re-
liable phospho-specific antibody, we were unable to
measure phosphorylation of Tyr1356 in MET. The inter-
action was not attenuated by either mutations in FER
that affect its kinase activity or SH2 domain recognition
or mutations in MET that abolish overall autophosphory-
lation or phosphorylation of specific tyrosine residues
(1349 and/or 1356) (Fig. 4D,E).
Downstream, we observed enhanced colocalization of
GRB2 and mATP MET when FER was expressed (Sup-
plemental Fig. S5). Furthermore, FER enhanced the in-
teraction between mATP MET and GAB1, and this
interaction was abolished when Tyr1349 in mATP MET
was mutated to Phe (Fig. 4F). Also, we observed increased
phosphorylation of Tyr580 of SHP2 and activation of ERK
signaling in the presence of FER (Fig. 4C). Neither kinase-
dead nor SH2 mutant forms of FER could activate the
SHP2–ERK signaling pathway to the level observed with
Figure 3.
The kinase activity of FER and its downstream effector, MET, were essential for cell motility. (A) MEF cell lysates Fer+/+,
FerDR/DR, and FerDR/DR rescued with either 6xMYC-tagged wild type or the kinase-dead FER-K592R mutant were immunoblotted
with antibody against FER to demonstrate comparable expression. Actin was probed as the loading control. (B,C) A Boyden chamber assay
was performed on the indicated MEF cells, in which migration was monitored 24 h after seeding. Representative images are illustrated (B),
along with quantitation (mean ± SEM; n = 3) (C). (D) Both MET siRNAs and a FER expression construct were delivered as indicated into
CAOV4 cells by electroporation. After 48 h, the expression levels of MET and FER were measured by immunoblotting, with actin as a
loading control. (E,F) Forty-eight hours after electroporation and seeding, a wound healing assay was performed on the cell lines indicated
in D. Wound recovery was recorded 6 h after scratch injury. Representative images are illustrated (E), together with quantitation (mean ±
SEM; n = 3) (F).
HGF-independent regulation of MET and GAB1 by FER
GENES & DEVELOPMENT
1547
 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 on June 2, 2019 - Published by 
genesdev.cshlp.org
Downloaded from 
 wild-type FER (Fig. 4C). Of note, FER activated signaling
downstream from mATP MET to a level that was compa-
rable with that of wild-type MET in terms of SHP2 phos-
phorylation and ERK activation (Fig. 4C). Consistent
with their coimmunoprecipitation, we also observed the
colocalization of ectopically expressed FER and MET
Figure 4.
FER bound to and phosphorylated MET at Tyr1349. (A) After transient transfection in 293T cells, MET was immunoprecipi-
tated and probed for association with FER (left) and vice versa (right). (B) Endogenous MET was immunoprecipitated from CAOV4,
CAOV3, and OVCAR5 ovarian cancer cells and probed for association with FER (left) and vice versa (right). (C) 293T cells were transiently
transfected with the indicated constructs, lysed, and immunoblotted as indicated to illustrate the phosphorylation of MET by FER and its
impact on downstream SHP2–ERK signaling. (D) MET was coexpressed with either wild-type or mutant forms of FER (kinase-dead K592R
or SH2 mutant) in 293T cells to compare the effects of mutations in FER on its association with MET. (E) FER was coexpressed with either
wild-type or Tyr→Phe mutants of MET (Y1349F, Y1356F, or YY1349,1356FF) in 293T cells to compare the effects of the MET point mu-
tations on its association with FER. (F) FER was expressed alone or with either mATP or mATP Y1349F mutant forms of MET in 293T
cells. MET was immunoprecipitated, and the association with GAB1 in each sample was assessed by immunoblotting. (G) 293T cells were
transiently transfected with MET mATP alone or together with either FER or BRK, and the phosphorylation of MET on Tyr1349 was as-
sessed by immunoblotting. (H) 6xMYC-tagged wild-type or inactive K592R FER was expressed alone or cotransfected with MET, immu-
noprecipitated with anti-MYC antibody, and probed for tyrosine phosphorylation with either 4G10 (global Tyr phosphorylation) or
pTyr402-FER-specific antibodies. (I) Transfected 293T cells were treated with or without MET inhibitor PHA-665752 (4 h), as indicated,
and the cell lysates were immunoblotted with the designated antibodies to illustrate the effect of the small molecule inhibitor on MET
phosphorylation and downstream SHP2–ERK signaling.
Fan et al.
1548
GENES & DEVELOPMENT
 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 on June 2, 2019 - Published by 
genesdev.cshlp.org
Downloaded from 
 mATP (Supplemental Fig. S5). In addition, these effects on
MET were FER-specific, since other nonreceptor PTKs
such as BRK/PTK6, although active, did not phosphory-
late MET at Tyr1349 (Fig. 4G)
The kinase activity of FER has been shown to be affect-
ed by multiple stimuli, including growth factors EGF
(Kim and Wong 1995) and PDGF (Kim and Wong 1995;
Craig et al. 2001), hydrogen peroxide (Sangrar et al.
2007), ECM–integrin signaling (Ivanova et al. 2013), and
the PLD–PA pathway (Itoh et al. 2009); therefore, we test-
ed whether HGF-MET could also be an upstream modula-
tor of FER. MYC-tagged wild-type or kinase-dead FER was
transiently coexpressed with MET in 293T cells, and tyro-
sine phosphorylation of FER was compared following im-
munoprecipitation with MYC antibody 9E10. We did not
detect tyrosine phosphorylation (either overall or site-spe-
cific, Tyr402) of kinase-inactive FER in the presence of
MET (Fig. 4H), suggesting that the activity of FER was
not regulated by MET.
In addition, we tested whether FER-mediated trans-
phosphorylation could be blocked by PHA-665752, a
potent, selective, ATP-competitive inhibitor of MET
(Christensen et al. 2003). As shown in Figure 4I, PHA-
665752 robustly inhibited the kinase activity of MET
and its downstream SHP2–ERK signaling in a dose-depen-
dent manner. The selectivity of its inhibition of MET over
FER was indicated by the fact that both concentrations
of inhibitor had no effect on autophosphorylation of
FER. Furthermore, neither transphosphorylation of MET
mATP mutant by FER nor downstream SHP2–ERK activa-
tion was not affected by PHA-665752. This observation il-
lustrates that the activity of MET was not required for
FER-mediated transphosphorylation.
FER formed a complex with GAB1 via MET and
phosphorylated GAB1 at Tyr627
Considering that FER phosphorylated kinase-dead MET at
Tyr1349, which was accompanied by specific activation
of the SHP2–ERK pathway, we examined the mechanism
of this signal selectivity. It has been reported that GAB1
could bind to MET directly and that this interaction
was dependent on Tyr1349 (Weidner et al. 1996; Nguyen
et al. 1997). In addition, GAB1 possesses multiple tyro-
sine residues, which, upon phosphorylation, provide dock-
ing sites for different signaling components, including
regulatory subunit p85 of PI3K and SHP2. Interestingly,
binding of SHP2 to GAB1 facilitates the dephosphoryla-
tion of p85-binding sites, ensuring MEK–ERK activation
exclusively (Zhang et al. 2002). To pursue this, we tested
first whether the global tyrosine phosphorylation of
GAB1 was affected upon FER expression. We confirmed
that tyrosine phosphorylation of GAB1 was increased by
wild-type but not inactive K592R FER (Fig. 5A). We also
detected four other pTyr proteins in the GAB1 immuno-
complex following FER expression (at ∼140, 90, 72, and
68 kDa), suggesting either more than one substrate of
FER or an indirect impact of FER through GAB1 phosphor-
ylation. Furthermore, experiments using a phospho-spe-
cific antibody suggested that Tyr627 of GAB1 was
phosphorylated by FER (Fig. 5B). Consistently, the phos-
phorylation of this site was diminished in FER-deficient
CAVO4 cells (Fig. 5C). Of note, it has been reported that
Tyr627 of GAB1, when phosphorylated, is responsible
for SHP2 recruitment and RAS–MEK–ERK activation
(Zhang et al. 2002). We observed consistently the FER-me-
diated positive regulation of Tyr580 phosphorylation in
SHP2 (Fig. 5B,C) and ERK (Fig. 5B) activation, leaving
the AKT signaling pathway unchanged (Fig. 5B). We ob-
served
FER-mediated
phosphorylation
of
Tyr627
in
GAB1 in CAOV4, CAOV3, and OVCAR5 cells (Fig. 5D), il-
lustrating that this effect was not restricted to one specific
cell line. Furthermore, the extent of phosphorylation of
Tyr627 in GAB1 was decreased in FER D743R transgenic
MEFs (Fig. 5E), ruling out possible RNAi off-target effects.
Loss of GAB1 dramatically decreased the activation of
PAK1, suggesting an indispensable role of GAB1 regulat-
ing downstream PAK1–RAC1 activation (Fig. 5F).
To investigate whether there was any physical asso-
ciation between FER and GAB1, we conducted immuno-
precipitation experiments in all three ovarian cancer
cell lines, examining the endogenous levels of the pro-
teins. Interestingly, compared with IgG control antibody,
we detected GAB1 in the immunocomplex precipitated
by the FER antibody and vice versa (Fig. 5G). To test
whether this interaction was direct or MET-mediated,
we expressed FER and MET mATP either alone or com-
bined
in
293T
cells
and
then
immunoprecipitated
GAB1. FER was observed only in GAB1 immunoprecipi-
tates in the presence of MET mATP, and the presence of
FER coincided with phosphorylation of the GAB1-inter-
acting motif Tyr1349 (Fig. 5H). This suggests an indirect
interaction between GAB1 and FER, with a “scaffold”
role of kinase-dead MET to nucleate these signaling com-
ponents and facilitate downstream pathway activation
even without the kinase activity of MET.
Loss of FER impaired the metastasis of ovarian cancer
cells to the lung through MET inactivation
Our observation that FER-deficient ovarian cancer cells
showed reduced migration and invasion prompted us
to investigate its role further in vivo. We adopted a xeno-
graft mouse model with subcutaneous injection of either
shCon or shFER CAOV4 cells to evaluate whether expres-
sion of FER affected the metastasis of ovarian cancer cells
(Fig. 6A). Five weeks after inoculation, the mean subcuta-
neous tumor volume in each group reached ∼250 mm3,
with no significant difference in the presence or absence
of FER (Fig. 6B). In addition, we did not observe signs of
metastasis in any of the mice at that time (Fig. 6A). In
order to relieve the tumor burden as well as provide a
clean background to monitor the outgrowth of metastatic
lesions, we performed surgery to remove all of the subcu-
taneous tumors. We did not see a significant difference in
tumor weight in all three groups (Fig. 6C), consistent with
the cell-based assays (Fig. 1G,H), suggesting that FER had
no impact on ovarian cancer cell proliferation. In addi-
tion, we achieved complete removal of the subcutaneous
HGF-independent regulation of MET and GAB1 by FER
GENES & DEVELOPMENT
1549
 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 on June 2, 2019 - Published by 
genesdev.cshlp.org
Downloaded from 
 tumor, with no luminescence signal in imaging 4 d after
surgery (Fig. 6A).
We continued to monitor the incidence of tumor metas-
tasis, and, from day 53, which was ∼2.5 wk after surgery,
we began to detect a signal in the lungs of mice in the
shCon group but not from the shFER groups (Fig. 6A).
This observation was consistent throughout the whole
course of the experiment, until we sacrificed all of the
mice at the end of week 10. We collected the lung, liver,
and bone from each mouse and tested the intensity and in-
cidence of the luminescence signal. We detected the sig-
nal from the lung only in the control shCon group (Fig.
6A); furthermore, both the number of nodules (Fig. 6D)
and the area (Fig. 6E) of lung metastases were significantly
higher in the shCon group as compared with both FER-de-
ficient groups. H&E staining further confirmed the fre-
quency as well as outgrowth properties of metastasis
nodules in lung sections from shCon mice (Fig. 6F),
strongly supporting the role of FER in ovarian tumor me-
tastasis in vivo.
In order to examine potential changes in HGF–MET sig-
naling in the presence and absence of FER, we performed
immunohistochemistry staining on subcutaneous tu-
mors. We did not observe changes in cell morphology in
subcutaneous tumors by H&E staining (Fig. 6G). Anti-
body staining confirmed the clear knockdown of FER
throughout the xenograft experiment (Fig. 6G). It is impor-
tant to note that the signal of MET activation (pTyr1349
and pTyr1234/1235) was significantly stronger in the
shCon group compared with the shFER groups (Fig. 6G).
Overall, this analysis provides compelling evidence to
suggest a prometastatic role of FER in ovarian tumorigen-
esis, suggesting that its inhibition may potentially atten-
uate metastasis.
Loss of FER attenuated metastasis of ovarian cancer
cells injected into the peritoneal cavity
A prominent feature of ovarian cancer is that the tumor
cells may be transported throughout the peritoneal cavity
to adjacent organs by normal peritoneal fluid, which ac-
celerates metastasis. In order to recapitulate this situation
more accurately, we adopted a mouse model with intra-
peritoneal injection.
CAOV4 cells expressing either control shRNA (shCon;
n = 6) or shRNAs targeting FER (sh1 [n = 7] and sh2 [n = 6])
(Fig. 7A) were injected, and necropsy procedures were per-
formed 4 wk after inoculation. Representative images
Figure 5.
FER formed a complex with GAB1 via MET and phosphorylated GAB1 at Tyr627. 293T cells were transiently transfected with
either wild-type FER or a kinase-dead FER-K592R mutant. (A) Tyrosine phosphorylation of GAB1 was examined by immunoprecipitation
and blotting with anti-phosphotyrosine antibody 4G10. (B) The whole-cell lysates were immunoblotted as indicated to show the increased
tyrosine phosphorylation of GAB1 and SHP2 and the impact on downstream signaling. (C) Tyrosine phosphorylation of GAB1 and SHP2
was compared in CAOV4 cells expressing either control or FER targeted shRNAs. (D) Cells were serum-starved and stimulated with hHGF
for the indicated times, lysed, and immunoblotted with both pTyr627 and total GAB1 antibodies to demonstrate FER-regulated GAB1
phosphorylation. (E) Phosphorylation status of Tyr627 of GAB1 in Fer+/+ and FerDR/DR MEF cells. (F) Control or GAB1 siRNAs were de-
livered into CAOV4 cells by electroporation. After 48 h, the expression levels of GAB1 and activation of PAK1 were measured by immu-
noblotting. (G) Endogenous FER was immunoprecipitated from CAOV4, CAOV3, and OVCAR5 ovarian cancer cells, and its association
with GAB1 was examined by immunoblotting (left) and vice versa (right). (H) Endogenous GAB1 was immunoprecipitated from lysates of
293T cells transfected with FER and the MET mATP mutant alone or together. The association of FER and MET was assessed by
immunoblotting.
Fan et al.
1550
GENES & DEVELOPMENT
 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 on June 2, 2019 - Published by 
genesdev.cshlp.org
Downloaded from 
 from mice intraperitoneally injected with control shRNA-
expressing CAOV4 cells are illustrated in Supplemental
Figure S6. Consistent with the subcutaneous injection
mouse model, the ability of CAOV4 cells to metastasize
to surrounding tissue/organs, including the peritoneal
wall, diaphragm, omentum, mesentery, ovary, stomach,
and liver, was greatly decreased in the absence of FER
(Fig. 7B–H; Supplemental Fig. S7). Metastatic tumor quan-
tifications from all three groups are summarized in the
Supplemental Table.
Expression of FER was elevated and inversely correlated
with progression-free survival in ovarian cancer patients
In support of these functional studies of FER in ovarian
cancer cell lines, we searched the Human Protein Atlas
Figure 6.
Loss of FER reduced lung metastasis burden of ovarian cancer cell xenografts with inactivation of MET. (A) At the indicated
time points, mice injected with CAOV4 cells expressing either shCon (n = 5), FER sh1 (n = 5), or FER sh2 (n = 4) were imaged using IVIS
bioluminescence imaging. Representative images are shown. (B,C) Measurements of subcutaneous tumor volume (B) and weight (C)
for mice injected with either shCon, FER sh1, or FER sh2 CAOV4 cells. (D) Metastasis lesion count (naked eye as well as IVIS imaging
confirmation) with mice injected with either shCon, FER sh1, or FER sh2 CAOV4 cells. (E) Metastasis lesion area measurement with
mice injected with either shCon, FER sh1, or FER sh2 CAOV4 cells. (F) Representative H&E staining of lung sections from mice with
metastatic lesions that express the control shRNA (shCon). (G) H&E and immunohistochemistry staining (pTyr MET and FER) of sub-
cutaneous tumor sections from mice injected with CAOV4 cells expressing either shCon, FER sh1, or FER sh2. The immunohistochem-
istry image was scored with Aperio software.
HGF-independent regulation of MET and GAB1 by FER
GENES & DEVELOPMENT
1551
 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 on June 2, 2019 - Published by 
genesdev.cshlp.org
Downloaded from 
 to compare the protein expression level of the kinase be-
tween normal ovaries and malignant ovarian carcinomas.
Consistent with our findings, we observed high expres-
sion of FER in human ovarian cancer samples; in contrast,
the kinase was essentially undetectable in normal ovarian
tissue but was present in ovarian follicles (Supplemental
Fig. S8A).
We analyzed the clinical data from over a thousand
ovarian cancer patients (http://www.kmplot.com) in or-
der to investigate further a relationship between FER ex-
pression and tumor metastasis. The data indicate that
expression of FER was inversely correlated with progres-
sion-free survival (Supplemental Fig. S8B). The extent of
separation between low and high expression was similar
Figure 7.
Loss of FER reduced metastasis of ovarian cancer cells via the peritoneal cavity. (A) Knockdown efficiency was confirmed by
immunoblotting in both FER shRNA CAOV4 cell lines prior to intraperitoneal injection. (B–H) Mice were injected intraperitoneally with
5 × 106 CAOV4 cells expressing either shCon (n = 6), FER sh1 (n = 7), or FER sh2 (n = 6). After 4 wk, necropsy procedures were performed,
and the ability of CAOV4 cells to metastasize to surrounding tissue/organs, including the peritoneal wall (B), diaphragm (C), omentum
(D), mesentery (E), ovary (F), stomach (G), and liver (H), were assessed. (I) Working model: In the absence of the ligand HGF, FER directly
phosphorylated MET, GAB1, and possibly SHP2. This led to the activation of SHP2–MAPK and RAC1–PAK1 signaling downstream from
MET to potentiate the motility and invasiveness of ovarian cancer cells.
Fan et al.
1552
GENES & DEVELOPMENT
 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 on June 2, 2019 - Published by 
genesdev.cshlp.org
Downloaded from 
 to VCAM1 (Supplemental Fig. S8C), a known metastasis
gene in ovarian cancer (Slack-Davis et al. 2009).
Discussion
In this study, we demonstrated that expression of the non-
receptor PTK FER was elevated in malignant ovarian tu-
mors and was inversely correlated with progression-free
survival. In ovarian cancer cell lines, we observed that
the levels of FER were elevated relative to those in immor-
talized normal surface epithelial cells and thatsuppression
of FER attenuated the enhanced motility and invasive
properties of these cancer cells. Mechanistically, we dem-
onstrated that FER was an integral component of a novel
pathway that underlies ligand-independent signaling
downstream from the receptor PTK MET. In particular,
FER phosphorylated a signaling site, Tyr1349, in MET,
which enhanced activation of RAC1/PAK1 and promoted
a kinase-independent scaffolding function that led to re-
cruitment and phosphorylation of GAB1 and the specific
activation of the SHP2–ERK signaling pathway (Fig. 7I).
Overall, this analysis provides new insights into signaling
events that underlie metastasis in ovarian cancer cells,
consistent with a prometastatic role of FER and highlight-
ing its potential as a novel therapeutic target for metastatic
ovarian cancer.
Given the pathological role of HGF–MET signaling in
tumor growth and metastasis, it has been the subject of
intense effort to develop various strategies to inhibit
the receptor activation and downstream signaling (Como-
glio et al. 2008). This includes small molecule inhibitors
of its PTK function, particularly by competing with ATP
binding. Alternatively, truncated forms of HGF (namely,
NK2 or NK4) have been developed to compete for recep-
tor binding without fully activating its tyrosine kinase
function. Finally, anti-HGF-neutralizing antibodies have
been generated with the goal of lowering the concentra-
tion of functional MET ligand in the microenvironment.
A common feature of these approaches is the focus exclu-
sively on HGF-dependent MET activation. In contrast, in
this study, we demonstrated that Tyr1349, one of the C-
terminal signaling sites of MET, was a novel substrate of
the PTK FER. The evidence presented here also argues
that this ligand- and autophosphorylation-independent
activation of MET played an essential role in sustaining
tumorigenic signaling downstream from the receptor.
As such, this activation mechanism was insensitive to
the potent, active site-directed MET inhibitor PHA-
665752. In fact, a fourth category of inhibitor, involving
a peptide that interferes with the C-terminal dock-
ing site of MET and which has been shown to display
greater inhibitory effect and toxicity tolerance than the
MET inhibitor PHA-665752 (Cantelmo et al. 2010; Cho
et al. 2013), becomes a more attractive strategy in this
context. Considering the data presented here, it is possi-
ble that combinations of agents that block both ligand-
dependent and ligand-independent activation of MET
may be the most effective strategies for therapeutic
intervention.
Aberrant up-regulation and activation of FER has been
reported in a number of different cancers. Using an unbi-
ased and global phosphoproteomic approach, the Comb
group (Ren et al. 2012) observed activation of FER in 15
out of 69 (21.7%) ovarian tumors, whereas the ratio in nor-
mal controls is one out of 19 (5.2%). Several receptors
have been identified as upstream activators of FER, in-
cluding EGFR (Kim and Wong 1995), PDGFR (Kim and
Wong 1995; Craig et al. 2001), and integrin (Ivanova
et al. 2013). In addition, STAT3 (Priel-Halachmi et al.
2000), cortactin (Kim and Wong 1995; Craig et al. 2001;
Sangrar et al. 2007), and Rac GTPase regulators (Fei
et al. 2010; Ahn et al. 2013), the functions of which are
closely related to tumor progression and metastasis,
have been identified as substrates of FER. Interestingly,
through an unbiased kinome screening, Fukuda’s group
(Yoneyama et al. 2012) has identified FER as a key nega-
tive regulator of laminin-binding glycan, expression of
which profoundly attenuates tumor cell migration. Mech-
anistically, they found that FER–STAT3 signaling sup-
presses the transcription of several glycosyltransferases,
which are required for laminin-binding glycan synthesis.
Recent studies also suggested a role of FER in resistance
to the anti-cancer agent quinacrine, an effect that was me-
diated by an EGF-dependent activation of the NF-κB path-
way (Guo and Stark 2011). We found that FER was also up-
regulated in a panel of ovarian carcinoma-derived cell
lines as well as human ovarian tumor samples, and its el-
evation inversely correlated with progression-free sur-
vival, including after chemotherapy, in ovarian cancer
patients (Supplemental Fig. S8). Five-year survival rates
are 90% and 70%, respectively, for women diagnosed
with stage I or II ovarian cancer. Unfortunately, due to
the lack of a reliable and accurate screening test for the
early detection of this disease, <35% of women are diag-
nosed before stage III, and five-year survival for stage III
or IV is <25%. Therefore, it is not surprising that
Kaplan-Meier curves display a sharp negative slope from
0 to 24 mo after diagnosis, with both low and high expres-
sion of FER, a situation similar to that observed with the
established metastasis-promoting gene VCAM1 in ovari-
an cancer. Nevertheless, it is clear that patients with
low FER expression displayed a better prognosis.
Unlike PTKs of the SRC and ABL family, the activation
mechanism of FER in cancer has yet to be fully elucidated.
There is evidence to indicate that FER directly associates
with receptor proteins through its SH2 domain (Kim and
Wong 1995). The resolution of the structure of the SH2 ki-
nase domain fragment of FES, the other member of the
FER family, revealed an important interface that was crit-
ical for allosteric regulation of the kinase by the SH2 do-
mains, with FES activation occurring only upon ligand
binding to its SH2 domain (Filippakopoulos et al. 2008).
Considering the conservation of these critical interface
residues between FER and FES, it is likely that activation
of FER also uses its SH2 domain. Interestingly, our results
demonstrated specificity in the effects of FER on MET and
selectivity for activation of SHP2–MAPK rather than
PI3K–AKT or SRC downstream signaling pathways (Fig.
2). Consistent with the report from the Mochizuki group
HGF-independent regulation of MET and GAB1 by FER
GENES & DEVELOPMENT
1553
 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 on June 2, 2019 - Published by 
genesdev.cshlp.org
Downloaded from 
 (Kogata et al. 2003), we found that tyrosine phosphoryla-
tion of GAB1—in particular Tyr627, the major docking
site for the SH2 domain of SHP2—was robustly increased
in the presence of FER (Fig. 5). It is possible that the nega-
tive effect of SHP2 on PI3K activation via dephosphoryla-
tion of GAB1 p85-binding sites (Zhang et al. 2002)
contributes to the activation of ERK MAPK following
FER-mediated GAB1 tyrosine phosphorylation and SHP2
recruitment.
It is also important to note that the MET mutant
that was deficient in ATP binding, although catalytically
inactive, behaved like a “scaffold protein” to provide a
platform for nucleating signaling components, includ-
ing FER and GAB1, which facilitated the tyrosine phos-
phorylation of GAB1 as well as propagation of MAPK
downstream signaling. This observation reinforces the
concept that targeting the enzymatic activity of RTKs
alone may not be sufficient in cancer treatment. In a pio-
neering study in this area, to elucidate the mechanisms
underlying resistance to small molecule MET inhibitors,
Park and colleagues (Lai et al. 2014) demonstrated that
STAT3 and ERK pathways promote MET-dependent
proliferation and MET-independent gastric cancer cell
survival, respectively. Interestingly, although several re-
ports supported the direct MET-dependent tyrosine
phosphorylation of STAT3, other MET-independent re-
gulators of STAT3 were also reported, with FER being
among them (Priel-Halachmi et al. 2000). In addition,
Park and colleagues (Lai et al. 2014) illustrated the impor-
tance of ERK reactivation in promoting cell survival in the
absence of MET activity, and combination treatments
with both MET and MEK inhibitors showed improved
efficacy compared with either alone. Considering the nov-
el role of kinase FER in both MET and GAB1 tyrosine
phosphorylation and downstream ERK activation demon-
strated in this study, it is possible that FER may play a
broader role in mediating the activation of ERK in other
cancer contexts.
The FES and FER proteins represent a unique family of
non-RTKs, distinguishing themselves from other tyrosine
kinases by an N-terminal FES/FER/CIP4 homology/Bin1/
Amphiphysin/RVS (F-BAR) lipid-binding domain (Greer
2002; Craig 2012). A function in the regulation of cyto-
skeletal rearrangement, cell polarity, vesicular trafficking,
and endocytosis has been suggested for F-BAR domains.
Unlike other F-BAR-containing proteins such as CIP4 or
FBP17, the capacity of FER to promote deformation of pro-
tein-free liposomes into tubules is much weaker (Tsujita
et al. 2006). However, it has been shown that the F-BAR
domain along with the F-BAR extension domain (FX) of
FER could bind specifically to, and be activated by, phos-
phatidic acid (PA) in the plasma membrane and that this
PLD–PA-mediated regulation of FER plays a positive
role in cell migration (Itoh et al. 2009). In addition, our
published results demonstrate that ligand-induced endo-
cytosis of RTK EGFR is suppressed in the presence of
FER (Sangrar et al. 2015). This suggests that FER may exert
another tier of regulation on MET as well augment the ki-
nase activity of the receptor. In fact, upon down-regula-
tion, the activation loop of MET is dephosphorylated
and inactivated by an ER-anchored protein tyrosine phos-
phatase, PTP1B. Interestingly, we reported previously
that there was a decrease in expression of PTP1B in all
11 tested ovarian cancer cell lines compared with the
two normal controls (Fan et al. 2013, 2015), further
supporting the idea that MET-dependent signals may be
augmented at the level of both enhanced phosphorylation
and activation as well as attenuated dephosphorylation
and inactivation.
In summary, we report a novel mode of HGF-indepen-
dent regulation of MET by the non-RTK FER. Important-
ly, activation of MET by this mechanism would not be
inhibited effectively by the conventional MET-directed
inhibitors that are the current focus of research. The im-
plications of this study are that simultaneous targeting
of FER together with MET may result in more effective
treatment for ovarian cancer. Although no specific inhib-
itor of FER has been reported as yet, the recent success of
inhibitor screens targeting the other family member ki-
nase FES (Hellwig et al. 2012) suggest that it may be pos-
sible to exploit this strategy in the near future.
Materials and methods
Cell culture
Ovarian cancer cell culture conditions are described in Fan et al.
(2013, 2015).
RNAi
shRNA knockdown of FER was established in CAVO4, CAOV3,
and OVCAR5 by lentiviral infection following puromycin selec-
tion. Detailed protocols are described in Fan et al. (2015). The
shRNAs used were FER shRNA#1 seq (5′-GCAGAAAGTTTGC
AAGTAATG-3′) and FER shRNA#2 seq (5′-GCCAAGGAAC
GATACGACAAA-3′)siRNAs targeting MET were purchased
from Sigma: MET siRNA1 (SASI_Hs01_00133002) and siRNA12
(SASI_WI_00000001). siRNA was delivered into CAOV4 ovarian
cancer cells by AMAXA electroporation (Kit T, Program T-020,
Lonza).
Cell proliferation assay
CellTiter-Glo luminescent cell viability assay (Promega) was
used to evaluate the role of FER in ovarian cancer cell prolifer-
ation. In brief, 1.5 × 103 cells per well were seeded in a 96-well
plate and grown for the indicated time intervals. CellTiter-Glo
reagent was added to each well and mixed for ∼15 min on an
orbital shaker to induce cell lysis followed by luminescence
reading. Results represent mean ± SEM from three independent
experiments.
Cell migration and invasion assays
Cell motility was measured using cell culture inserts (8.0-μm
pore size) for six-well plates (BD Falcon). Cell invasion was quan-
titated using BioCoat BD Matrigel invasion chambers (8.0-μm
pore size). Cells (2 × 105) were grown in the insert. After 24 h,
those cells retained inside the insert were removed, and those
that migrated to the other side of the insert were fixed and stained
with Karyomax Giemsa stain (Gibco, Invitrogen).
Fan et al.
1554
GENES & DEVELOPMENT
 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 on June 2, 2019 - Published by 
genesdev.cshlp.org
Downloaded from 
 Wound healing assay
To measure cell migration, a confluent monolayer of cells was
“wounded” by scraping a 200-μL pipette tip across the monolayer
to produce lesions with a constant length. Any loose cells were
removed by washing three times with PBS. Phase images were
taken by a Zeiss Axiovert 200 M using AxioVision 4.4 software.
Immunofluorescence
Cells were fixed for 15 min in 3.6% formaldehyde diluted in PBS.
After washing with PBS, the cells were incubated in 100% ice-
cold methanol for 10 min at −20°C. Following fixation, cells
were incubated in blocking solution (5% goat serum, 0.3% Triton
X-100 in PBS) for 1 h at room temperature and then incubated
with primary antibodies diluted in blocking solution overnight
at 4°C. Following washing with PBS, the cells were stained with
secondary antibodies diluted in blocking solution for 1 h at
room temperature. The nuclei of the cells were highlighted by
DAPI. The cells were mounted in Prolong Antifade (Molecular
Probe, Invitrogen)
RNA extraction and quantitative RT–PCR (qRT–PCR)
Total RNA was extracted from ovarian cancer cells using the TRI-
zol reagent (Tel-Test, Inc.) according to the manufacturer’s in-
structions. Two micrograms of RNA was used for cDNA
synthesis with iScript (Bio-Rad). RNA expression was measured
by real-time qRT–PCR using the SYBR Green method (Applied
Biosystems). Each assay was done in triplicate, and the expression
of each gene was calculated relative to the expression of β-actin
cDNA.
Immunoblotting, immunoprecipitation, and GST pull-down
assay
Cell extracts were prepared in RIPA lysis buffer (50 mM Tris HCl
at pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate,
0.1% SDS) containing 50 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM sodium
orthovanadate, and 1× Complete protease inhibitor cocktail
(Roche). Total protein concentration was determined by the Brad-
ford assay. The primary antibodies used were as follows: p-Tyr
(4G10: Millipore; pY20: Sigma,); Myc (9E10), PTP1B (FG6); FER,
pErk1/2,
Erk1/2, pY1234/1235 MET,
pY1349 MET,
MET,
pY580 SHP2, SHP2, pS473 AKT, pT308 AKT, AKT, pY416
SRC, pY527 SRC, SRC, pY1068 EGFR, EGFR, pY705 STAT3,
STAT3, pY627 GAB1, GAB1, β-catenin, pY421 cortactin, cortac-
tin, pY165 p130CAS, p130CAS, PAK1, PAK2, PAK4, pS144
PAK1, RAC1, pY397 FAK, pY576 FAK, pY861 FAK, and FAK
(Cell Signaling Technology); pp38 (Promega); p38 and BRK (Santa
Cruz Biotechnology); pY402 FER and pY342 BRK (Millipore);
pY142 β-catenin (Abcam); and β-tubulin and β-actin (Sigma). Pre-
cleared cell extracts were incubated with the indicated antibody
for 4 h in a cold room with rotation followed by 1 h of pull-
down by 1:1 protein A/G agarose beads. Immunoprecipitates
were washed with lysis buffer three times before electrophoresis.
For GST pull-down assays, precleared cell extracts were incubat-
ed with GST-RBD (RAC-binding domain on PAK; a gift from Lin-
da Van Aelst’s laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory) for 4 h
at 4°C with rotation. Immunoprecipitates were washed in lysis
buffer three times before electrophoresis.
Animal work
All study protocols involving mice were approved by the Institu-
tional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Cold Spring Har-
bor Laboratory and conducted in accordance with National
Institutes of Health guidelines for the care and use of animals.
In the subcutaneous injection model, 1 × 106 CAOV4 cells ex-
pressing shCon or shFER with a luciferase expression cassette
were suspended in 10 μL of 1:1 mixture with DMEM and growth
factor-reduced Matrigel (BD Biosciences) and subcutaneously in-
jected into SCID-Beige mice (Taconic Laboratory). Subcutaneous
tumor growth was monitored periodically by injecting 100 μL of
15 mg/kg D-luciferin (Gold Biotechnology) intraperitoneally
and imaging the animal using a Xenogen imager (Xenogen IVIS-
200 Optical in vivo imaging system). Tumor volume (in cubic
millimeters) was measured with calipers before imaging (formu-
la: volume = width2 × length/2). A secondary surgery was per-
formed to remove subcutaneous tumors 5 wk after inoculation.
The volume (in cubic millimeters) and weight (in grams) of all
subcutaneous tumors were measured. The clearance of subcuta-
neous tumors was examined 4 d after surgical resection by imag-
ing. The recurrence of tumors was continually monitored twice a
week by luminescence imaging until 10 wk after the first xeno-
graft. Lung, liver, and bone tissues were harvested and submerged
for 3 min in D-luciferin for ex vivo luminescence imaging. All tis-
sues were rinsed in DPBS and fixed in formaldehyde solution
(Sigma) for immunohistochemistry analysis.
In the intraperitoneal injection model, 5 × 106 CAOV4 cells ex-
pressing shCon or shFER were suspended in 500 μL of sterilized
PBS and intraperitoneally injected into SCID-Beige mice (Taconic
Laboratory). Four weeks later, necropsy procedures were per-
formed to assess tumor spreading in the peritoneal cavity of the
mice.
Histology
Paraffin-embedded tissues were sectioned and stained with H&E
or specific immunohistochemical stains. The following primary
antibodies were used for immunohistochemical staining: HGF
(AF-294),
pY1349
MET
(AF3950),
and
pY1234,1235
MET
(AF2480) (R&D Systems); and FER (Haigh et al. 1996). Slides
were digitally scanned using the Aperio ScanScope software.
Statistics
All statistics were performed using a standard Student’s t-test.
Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Robert Lucito (Hofstra University) for helpful com-
ments in the preparation of the manuscript, Dr. Morag Park (Mc-
Gill University) and Dr. Linda Van Aelst (Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory [CSHL]) for providing plasmid constructs, Raisa Puzis
(Animal and Tissue Imaging Shared Resource, CSHL Cancer Cen-
ter) for assistance with immunohistochemistry staining, Pamela
Moody (Flow Cytometry Shared Resource, CSHL Cancer Center)
for helping with flow cytometry analysis, and Stephan Hearn (Mi-
croscopy Shared Resource, CSHL Cancer Center) for helping
with image capture. We also thank Dr. Anne-Marie Mes-Masson
(University of Montreal), Dr. Hongwu Zheng, Dr. Senthil K.
Muthuswamy, and Dr. Michael Feigin for insightful discussions.
This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants
CA53840 and GM55989 to N.K.T., Canadian Institutes of Health
Research grant 219806 to P.A.G., and Cold Spring Harbor Labora-
tory Cancer Center Support Grant CA45508. N.K.T. is also grate-
ful for support from the following foundations: the Gladowsky
Breast Cancer Foundation, the Don Monti Memorial Research
Foundation, the Irving Hansen Foundation, West Islip Breast
HGF-independent regulation of MET and GAB1 by FER
GENES & DEVELOPMENT
1555
 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 on June 2, 2019 - Published by 
genesdev.cshlp.org
Downloaded from 
 Cancer Coalition for Long Island, Glen Cove CARES, Find a Cure
Today (FACT), Constance Silveri, the Robertson Research Fund,
and the Masthead Cove Yacht Club Carol Marcincuk Fund. G.
F., P.A.G., and N.K.T. designed the study. G.F. contributed to
all aspects of the experimental work. S.Z. and Y.G. contributed
to the animal work. All of the authors contributed to the analysis
of the data. G.F. and N.K.T. wrote the paper.
References
Ahn J, Truesdell P, Meens J, Kadish C, Yang X, Boag AH, Craig
AW. 2013. Fer protein-tyrosine kinase promotes lung adeno-
carcinoma cell invasion and tumor metastasis. Mol Cancer
Res 11: 952–963.
Albeck JG, Brugge JS. 2011. Uncovering a tumor suppressor for
triple-negative breast cancers. Cell 144: 638–640.
Arend RC, Londono-Joshi AI, Straughn JM Jr, Buchsbaum DJ.
2013. The Wnt/β-catenin pathway in ovarian cancer: a review.
Gynecol Oncol 131: 772–779.
Ayhan A, Ertunc D, Tok EC, Ayhan A. 2005. Expression of the c-
Met in advanced epithelial ovarian cancer and its prognostic
significance. Int J Gynecol Cancer 15: 618–623.
Barbolina MV, Burkhalter RJ, Stack MS. 2011. Diverse mecha-
nisms for activation of Wnt signalling in the ovarian tumour
microenvironment. Biochem J 437: 1–12.
Birchmeier C, Birchmeier W, Gherardi E, Vande Woude GF. 2003.
Met, metastasis, motility and more. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 4:
915–925.
Boccaccio C, Comoglio PM. 2006. Invasive growth: a MET-driven
genetic programme for cancer and stem cells. Nat Rev Cancer
6: 637–645.
Cantelmo AR, Cammarota R, Noonan DM, Focaccetti C, Como-
glio PM, Prat M, Albini A. 2010. Cell delivery of Met docking
site peptides inhibit angiogenesis and vascular tumor growth.
Oncogene 29: 5286–5298.
Cepero V, Sierra JR, Corso S, Ghiso E, Casorzo L, Perera T, Como-
glio PM, Giordano S. 2010. MET and KRAS gene amplification
mediates acquired resistance to MET tyrosine kinase inhibi-
tors. Cancer Res 70: 7580–7590.
Cho KW, Park JH, Park CW, Lee D, Lee E, Kim DJ, Kim KJ, Yoon
SH, Park Y, Kim E, et al. 2013. Identification of a pivotal endo-
cytosis motif in c-Met and selective modulation of HGF-de-
pendent aggressiveness of cancer using the 16-mer endocytic
peptide. Oncogene 32: 1018–1029.
Christensen JG, Schreck R, Burrows J, Kuruganti P, Chan E, Le P,
Chen J, Wang X, Ruslim L, Blake R, et al. 2003. A selective
small molecule inhibitor of c-Met kinase inhibits c-Met-de-
pendent phenotypes in vitro and exhibits cytoreductive anti-
tumor activity in vivo. Cancer Res 63: 7345–7355.
Cole LA, Zirngibl R, Craig AW, Jia Z, Greer P. 1999. Mutation of a
highly conserved aspartate residue in subdomain IX abolishes
Fer protein-tyrosine kinase activity. Protein Eng 12: 155–162.
Comoglio PM, Giordano S, Trusolino L. 2008. Drug development
of MET inhibitors: targeting oncogene addiction and expedi-
ence. Nat Rev Drug Discov 7: 504–516.
Craig AW. 2012. FES/FER kinase signaling in hematopoietic cells
and leukemias. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed) 17: 861–875.
Craig AW, Zirngibl R, Williams K, Cole LA, Greer PA. 2001. Mice
devoid of fer protein-tyrosine kinase activity are viable and
fertile but display reduced cortactin phosphorylation. Mol
Cell Biol 21: 603–613.
Domcke S, Sinha R, Levine DA, Sander C, Schultz N. 2013. Eval-
uating cell lines as tumour models by comparison of genomic
profiles. Nat Commun 4: 2126.
Fan G, Lin G, Lucito R, Tonks NK. 2013. Protein-tyrosine phos-
phatase 1B antagonized signaling by insulin-like growth fac-
tor-1 receptor and kinase BRK/PTK6 in ovarian cancer cells.
J Biol Chem 288: 24923–24934.
Fan G, Aleem S, Yang M, Miller WT, Tonks NK. 2015. Protein-ty-
rosine phosphatase and kinase specificity in regulation of SRC
and breast tumor kinase. J Biol Chem 290: 15934–15947.
Fei F, Kweon SM, Haataja L, De Sepulveda P, Groffen J, Heister-
kamp N. 2010. The Fer tyrosine kinase regulates interactions
of Rho GDP-dissociation inhibitor α with the small GTPase
Rac. BMC Biochem 11: 48.
Filippakopoulos P, Kofler M, Hantschel O, Gish GD, Grebien F,
Salah E, Neudecker P, Kay LE, Turk BE, Superti-Furga G,
et al. 2008. Structural coupling of SH2-kinase domains links
Fes and Abl substrate recognition and kinase activation. Cell
134: 793–803.
Gherardi E, Birchmeier W, Birchmeier C, Vande Woude G. 2012.
Targeting MET in cancer: rationale and progress. Nat Rev
Cancer 12: 89–103.
Gordon MS, Sweeney CS, Mendelson DS, Eckhardt SG, Anderson
A, Beaupre DM, Branstetter D, Burgess TL, Coxon A, Deng H,
et al. 2010. Safety, pharmacokinetics, and pharmacodynamics
of AMG 102, a fully human hepatocyte growth factor-neutral-
izing monoclonal antibody, in a first-in-human study of pa-
tients with advanced solid tumors. Clin Cancer Research
16: 699–710.
Greer P. 2002. Closing in on the biological functions of Fps/Fes
and Fer. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 3: 278–289.
Guo C, Stark GR. 2011. FER tyrosine kinase (FER) overexpression
mediates resistance to quinacrine through EGF-dependent ac-
tivation of NF-κB. Proc Natl Acad Sci 108: 7968–7973.
Haigh J, McVeigh J, Greer P. 1996. The fps/fes tyrosine kinase is
expressed in myeloid, vascular endothelial, epithelial, and
neuronal cells and is localized in the trans-golgi network.
Cell Growth Differ 7: 931–944.
Hellwig S, Miduturu CV, Kanda S, Zhang J, Filippakopoulos P,
Salah E, Deng X, Choi HG, Zhou W, Hur W, et al. 2012.
Small-molecule inhibitors of the c-Fes protein-tyrosine ki-
nase. Chem Biol 19: 529–540.
Huntsman D, Resau JH, Klineberg E, Auersperg N. 1999. Com-
parison of c-met expression in ovarian epithelial tumors and
normal epithelia of the female reproductive tract by quantita-
tive laser scan microscopy. Am J Pathol 155: 343–348.
Itoh T, Hasegawa J, Tsujita K, Kanaho Y, Takenawa T. 2009. The
tyrosine kinase Fer is a downstream target of the PLD–PA
pathway that regulates cell migration. Sci Signal 2: ra52.
Ivanova IA, Vermeulen JF, Ercan C, Houthuijzen JM, Saig FA,
Vlug EJ, van der Wall E, van Diest PJ, Vooijs M, Derksen
PW. 2013. FER kinase promotes breast cancer metastasis by
regulating α6- and β1-integrin-dependent cell adhesion and
anoikis resistance. Oncogene 32: 5582–5592.
Kim L, Wong TW. 1995. The cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase FER is
associated with the catenin-like substrate pp120 and is acti-
vated by growth factors. Mol Cell Biol 15: 4553–4561.
Kogata N, Masuda M, Kamioka Y, Yamagishi A, Endo A, Okada
M, Mochizuki N. 2003. Identification of Fer tyrosine kinase
localized on microtubules as a platelet endothelial cell adhe-
sion molecule-1 phosphorylating kinase in vascular endothe-
lial cells. Mol Biol Cell 14: 3553–3564.
Koon EC, Ma PC, Salgia R, Welch WR, Christensen JG, Berkowitz
RS, Mok SC. 2008. Effect of a c-Met-specific, ATP-competi-
tive small-molecule inhibitor SU11274 on human ovarian car-
cinoma cell growth, motility, and invasion. Int J Gynecol
Cancer 18: 976–984.
Fan et al.
1556
GENES & DEVELOPMENT
 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 on June 2, 2019 - Published by 
genesdev.cshlp.org
Downloaded from 
 Lai AZ, Cory S, Zhao H, Gigoux M, Monast A, Guiot MC, Huang
S, Tofigh A, Thompson C, Naujokas M, et al. 2014. Dynamic
reprogramming of signaling upon met inhibition reveals a
mechanism of drug resistance in gastric cancer. Sci Signal 7:
ra38.
Li H, Ren Z, Kang X, Zhang L, Li X, Wang Y, Xue T, Shen Y, Liu Y.
2009. Identification of tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins asso-
ciated with metastasis and functional analysis of FER in hu-
man hepatocellular carcinoma cells. BMC Cancer 9: 366.
Liu X, Newton RC, Scherle PA. 2010. Developing c-MET path-
way inhibitors for cancer therapy: progress and challenges.
Trends Mol Med 16: 37–45.
Longuespee R, Boyon C, Desmons A, Vinatier D, Leblanc E, Farre
I, Wisztorski M, Ly K, D’Anjou F, Day R, et al. 2012. Ovarian
cancer molecular pathology. Cancer Metastasis Rev 31:
713–732.
Molli PR, Li DQ, Murray BW, Rayala SK, Kumar R. 2009. PAK sig-
naling in oncogenesis. Oncogene 28: 2545–2555.
Nguyen L, Holgado-Madruga M, Maroun C, Fixman ED, Kami-
kura D, Fournier T, Charest A, Tremblay ML, Wong AJ,
Park M. 1997. Association of the multisubstrate docking pro-
tein Gab1 with the hepatocyte growth factor receptor requires
a functional Grb2 binding site involving tyrosine 1356. J Biol
Chem 272: 20811–20819.
Petti C, Picco G, Martelli ML, Trisolini E, Bucci E, Perera T, Isella
C, Medico E. 2015. Truncated RAF kinases drive resistance to
MET inhibition in MET-addicted cancer cells. Oncotarget 6:
221–233.
Piedra J, Miravet S, Castano J, Palmer HG, Heisterkamp N, Garcia
de Herreros A, Dunach M. 2003. p120 Catenin-associated Fer
and Fyn tyrosine kinases regulate β-catenin Tyr-142 phos-
phorylation and β-catenin-α-catenin interaction. Mol Cell
Biol 23: 2287–2297.
Priel-Halachmi S, Ben-Dor I, Shpungin S, Tennenbaum T, Mola-
vani H, Bachrach M, Salzberg S, Nir U. 2000. FER kinase acti-
vation of Stat3 is determined by the N-terminal sequence.
J Biol Chem 275: 28902–28910.
Ren H, Tan ZP, Zhu X, Crosby K, Haack H, Ren JM, Beausoleil S,
Moritz A, Innocenti G, Rush J, et al. 2012. Identification of an-
aplastic lymphoma kinase as a potential therapeutic target in
ovarian cancer. Cancer Res 72: 3312–3323.
Rikova K, Guo A, Zeng Q, Possemato A, Yu J, Haack H, Nardone
J, Lee K, Reeves C, Li Y, et al. 2007. Global survey of phospho-
tyrosine signaling identifies oncogenic kinases in lung cancer.
Cell 131: 1190–1203.
Sangrar W, Gao Y, Scott M, Truesdell P, Greer PA. 2007. Fer-me-
diated cortactin phosphorylation is associated with efficient
fibroblast migration and is dependent on reactive oxygen spe-
cies generation during integrin-mediated cell adhesion. Mol
Cell Biol 27: 6140–6152.
Sangrar W, Shi C, Mullins G, LeBrun D, Ingalls B, Greer PA. 2015.
Amplified Ras–MAPK signal states correlate with accelerated
EGFR internalization, cytostasis and delayed HER2 tumor on-
set in Fer-deficient model systems. Oncogene 34: 4109–4117.
Sawada K, Radjabi AR, Shinomiya N, Kistner E, Kenny H, Becker
AR, Turkyilmaz MA, Salgia R, Yamada SD, Vande Woude GF,
et al. 2007. c-Met overexpression is a prognostic factor in ovar-
ian cancer and an effective target for inhibition of peritoneal
dissemination and invasion. Cancer Res 67: 1670–1679.
Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. 2015. Cancer statistics, 2015. CA
Cancer J Clin 65: 5–29.
Slack-Davis JK, Atkins KA, Harrer C, Hershey ED, Conaway M.
2009. Vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 is a regulator of ovar-
ian cancer peritoneal metastasis. Cancer Res 69: 1469–1476.
Trusolino L, Bertotti A, Comoglio PM. 2010. MET signalling:
principles and functions in development, organ regeneration
and cancer. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11: 834–848.
Tsao SW, Mok SC, Fey EG, Fletcher JA, Wan TS, Chew EC, Muto
MG, Knapp RC, Berkowitz RS. 1995. Characterization of hu-
man ovarian surface epithelial cells immortalized by human
papilloma viral oncogenes (HPV-E6E7 ORFs). Exp Cell Res
218: 499–507.
Tsujita K, Suetsugu S, Sasaki N, Furutani M, Oikawa T, Taken-
awa T. 2006. Coordination between the actin cytoskeleton
and membrane deformation by a novel membrane tubulation
domain of PCH proteins is involved in endocytosis. J Cell Biol
172: 269–279.
Weidner KM, Di Cesare S, Sachs M, Brinkmann V, Behrens J,
Birchmeier W. 1996. Interaction between Gab1 and the c-
Met receptor tyrosine kinase is responsible for epithelial mor-
phogenesis. Nature 384: 173–176.
Wong AS, Pelech SL, Woo MM, Yim G, Rosen B, Ehlen T, Leung
PC, Auersperg N. 2001. Coexpression of hepatocyte growth
factor-Met: an early step in ovarian carcinogenesis? Oncogene
20: 1318–1328.
Wu R, Hendrix-Lucas N, Kuick R, Zhai Y, Schwartz DR, Akyol A,
Hanash S, Misek DE, Katabuchi H, Williams BO, et al. 2007.
Mouse model of human ovarian endometrioid adenocarcino-
ma based on somatic defects in the Wnt/β-catenin and PI3K/
Pten signaling pathways. Cancer Cell 11: 321–333.
Xu G, Craig AW, Greer P, Miller M, Anastasiadis PZ, Lilien J, Bal-
samo J. 2004. Continuous association of cadherin with β-cate-
nin requires the non-receptor tyrosine-kinase Fer. J Cell Sci
117: 3207–3219.
Yoneyama T, Angata K, Bao X, Courtneidge S, Chanda SK,
Fukuda M. 2012. Fer kinase regulates cell migration through
α-dystroglycan glycosylation. Mol Biol Cell 23: 771–780.
Zhang SQ, Tsiaras WG, Araki T, Wen G, Minichiello L, Klein R,
Neel BG. 2002. Receptor-specific regulation of phosphatidyli-
nositol 3′-kinase activation by the protein tyrosine phospha-
tase Shp2. Mol Cell Biol 22: 4062–4072.
Zoubeidi A, Rocha J, Zouanat FZ, Hamel L, Scarlata E, Aprikian
AG, Chevalier S. 2009. The Fer tyrosine kinase cooperates
with interleukin-6 to activate signal transducer and activator
of transcription 3 and promote human prostate cancer cell
growth. Mol Cancer Res 7: 142–155.
HGF-independent regulation of MET and GAB1 by FER
GENES & DEVELOPMENT
1557
 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 on June 2, 2019 - Published by 
genesdev.cshlp.org
Downloaded from 
  
10.1101/gad.284166.116
Access the most recent version at doi:
 
30:
2016, 
Genes Dev. 
  
Gaofeng Fan, Siwei Zhang, Yan Gao, et al. 
  
tyrosine kinase FER potentiates metastasis in ovarian cancer
HGF-independent regulation of MET and GAB1 by nonreceptor
  
Material
Supplemental
  
 
http://genesdev.cshlp.org/content/suppl/2016/07/11/30.13.1542.DC1
  
References
  
 
http://genesdev.cshlp.org/content/30/13/1542.full.html#ref-list-1
This article cites 58 articles, 25 of which can be accessed free at:
  
License
Commons 
Creative
.
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/
at 
Creative Commons License (Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International), as described 
). After six months, it is available under a
http://genesdev.cshlp.org/site/misc/terms.xhtml
six months after the full-issue publication date (see 
This article is distributed exclusively by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the first
Service
Email Alerting
  
 
click here.
right corner of the article or 
Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article - sign up in the box at the top
© 2016 Fan et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 on June 2, 2019 - Published by 
genesdev.cshlp.org
Downloaded from 
