 M U L T I P L E S C L E R O S I S
Copyright © 2017
The Authors, some
rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim
to original U.S.
Government Works
BCAS1 expression defines a population
of early myelinating oligodendrocytes
in multiple sclerosis lesions
Maryam K. Fard,1*† Franziska van der Meer,2* Paula Sánchez,1 Ludovico Cantuti-Castelvetri,1
Sunit Mandad,3,4 Sarah Jäkel,5 Eugenio F. Fornasiero,3 Sebastian Schmitt,1
Marc Ehrlich,6,7 Laura Starost,6,7 Tanja Kuhlmann,7 Christina Sergiou,2 Verena Schultz,2
Claudia Wrzos,2 Wolfgang Brück,2 Henning Urlaub,4,8 Leda Dimou,5,9,10
Christine Stadelmann,2†‡ Mikael Simons1,10,11,12†‡
Investigations into brain function and disease depend on the precise classification of neural cell types. Cells of
the oligodendrocyte lineage differ greatly in their morphology, but accurate identification has thus far only
been possible for oligodendrocyte progenitor cells and mature oligodendrocytes in humans. We find that
breast carcinoma amplified sequence 1 (BCAS1) expression identifies an oligodendroglial subpopulation in
the mouse and human brain. These cells are newly formed, myelinating oligodendrocytes that segregate from
oligodendrocyte progenitor cells and mature oligodendrocytes and mark regions of active myelin formation in
development and in the adult. We find that BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes are restricted to the fetal and early post-
natal human white matter but remain in the cortical gray matter until old age. BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes are
reformed after experimental demyelination and found in a proportion of chronic white matter lesions of pa-
tients with multiple sclerosis (MS) even in a subset of patients with advanced disease. Our work identifies a
means to map ongoing myelin formation in health and disease and presents a potential cellular target for re-
myelination therapies in MS.
INTRODUCTION
Oligodendrocytes wrap several layers of their plasma membrane
around axons to generate myelin (1), which provides electrical insula-
tion to increase the speed of nerve conduction (2). Oligodendrocyte and
myelin development progresses along a typical chronological and topo-
graphic sequence, starting in areas related to basic homeostasis and pro-
gressing to regions controlling more complex functions (3). However, in
mice, myelin formation is not only a developmental process driven by a
predefined intrinsic program but also extends into adulthood where it is
regulated by environmental factors (4–6). The developing and adult
mouse central nervous system (CNS) both contain an abundant popu-
lation of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells that continuously generate
oligodendrocytes (7) and provide a source for reforming myelin after
injury (8). Both oligodendrocyte progenitor cell proliferation and differ-
entiation can increase within active neuronal circuits, and there is evi-
dence that adult-born oligodendrocytes are actively engaged in forming
new myelin sheaths in mice (9–11). For example, in adult mice, learning
a new motor task is associated with changes in white matter structure
(12). In humans, a large number of studies have demonstrated white
matter changes upon learning and training, such as extensive piano
playing (13), suggesting de novo myelination upon neuronal stimula-
tion (14). However, human studies are often based on magnetic reso-
nance imaging, which does not provide direct information on myelin;
therefore, whether and how brain activity modulates myelin changes is
not well understood. Birth dating of oligodendrocytes, by analysis of the
integration of nuclear bomb test–derived 14C into cells, provided evi-
dence for the generation of only few new oligodendrocytes in the adult
human corpus callosum (15), suggesting that adaptive myelination in
the white matter of humans may be more limited as compared to mice.
Evidence for the de novo formation of myelin in adults comes from
studies on human demyelinating diseases, of which multiple sclerosis
(MS) is the most prevalent. On average, in MS, only 20% of patients
display efficient (above 60%) remyelination of lesions as shown by histo-
chemistry in areas of pale myelin stain called “shadow plaques” (16).
Currently, no molecular marker exists that allows the discrimination
of myelinated from remyelinated axons, and ongoing myelination is no-
toriouslydifficulttodetect;consequently,ithasthusfarnotbeenpossible
to determine whether new myelin sheaths are formed in chronically de-
myelinated MS lesions. Because failure of remyelination contributes to
disease progression in MS, remyelinating oligodendrocytes might repre-
sent an important drug target. Here, we set out to develop a new method
to visualize actively myelinating oligodendrocytes in mouse and human
to map areas of active myelination in health and disease. This led to the
identification of breast carcinoma amplified sequence 1 (BCAS1) as a
marker for ongoing myelination and remyelination. BCAS1 was origi-
nally identified as mRNA amplified in human cancer cell lines (17), but
recent transcriptome studies have shown that it is also highly expressed
in the brain and, more specifically, in oligodendrocytes (18). The
1Max Planck Institute for Experimental Medicine, 37075 Göttingen, Germany. 2Depart-
ment of Neuropathology, University of Göttingen Medical Center, 37075 Göttingen,
Germany. 3Department of Neuro- and Sensory Physiology, University of Göttingen
Medical Center, 37073 Göttingen, Germany. 4Max Planck Institute for Biophysical
Chemistry, 37073 Göttingen, Germany. 5Department of Physiological Genomics, Bio-
Medical Center, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany. 6Insti-
tute of Neuropathology, University Hospital Münster, 48149 Münster, Germany.
7Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Biomedicine, 48149 Münster, Germany. 8Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, De-
partment of Clinical Chemistry, University of Göttingen Medical Center, Robert Koch
Straße 40, 37075 Göttingen, Germany. 9Molecular and Translational Neuroscience, De-
partment of Neurology, Medical Faculty, Ulm University, 89081 Ulm, Germany.
10Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy), 81377 Munich, Germany. 11Insti-
tute of Neuronal Cell Biology, Technical University of Munich, 80805 Munich, Germany.
12German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), 6250 Munich, Germany.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Corresponding author. Email: cstadelmann@med.uni-goettingen.de (C.S.); 
khojasteh@em.mpg.de (M.K.F.); msimons@gwdg.de (M.S.)
‡These authors contributed equally to this work as co-senior authors.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Fard et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam7816 (2017)
6 December 2017
1 of 12
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 function of BCAS1 is unknown, but there is evidence that it interacts
with the dynein light chain (19) and is required for brain function be-
cause its absence results in reduced anxiety and schizophrenia-like be-
havioral abnormalities in mice (20).
We found that BCAS1+ cells represent a population of oligodendro-
cytes that segregates from mature oligodendrocytes and their progeni-
tors in humans. Our results show that in humans, the high density of
BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes is only found in the white matter in the fetal
and early postnatal period, whereas in the frontal cortex, oligodendro-
cytes expressing BCAS1 are numerous throughout adulthood. We ob-
served BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes at the lesion edge in a proportion of
fully demyelinated white matter lesions in MS patients, suggesting that
endogenous remyelination might be active during MS even at late stages.
RESULTS
BCAS1 expression identifies newly
generated oligodendrocytes
We examined our previously generated proteome database for oligo-
dendrocyte specific proteins and noticed that BCAS1 was one of the
most enriched proteins in oligodendrocytes (21). We generated a poly-
clonal antibody (see Supplementary Materials for details) against
BCAS1 and validated its specificity by preabsorption of the antibody
with recombinant BCAS1 protein before immunolabeling. Preabsorp-
tion eliminated staining of mouse brain sections (fig. S1A). In addition,
transfectionsofBcas1 cDNA(complementary DNA)into neuroblastoma
cells followed by immunofluorescence staining showed labeling only in
transfected cells (fig. S1B), and costaining of the polyclonal antiserum
with anti-BCAS1 mouse monoclonal antibody on the mouse and human
brain section revealed overlapping staining pattern (fig. S1C). Finally,
abolished BCAS1 immunoreactivity on adult Bcas1 knockout mouse
brain sections demonstrated that the staining was specific for BCAS1
(fig. S1D).
Immunofluorescence on frozen mouse tissue sections of the corpus
callosum and somatosensory cortex [postnatal day 40 (P40) and
4 months] showed that all BCAS1+ cells were of the oligodendrocyte
lineage,asshownbycolabelingwiththelineagemarkers,sex-determining
region Y box 10 protein (SOX10), oligodendrocyte transcription factor
1 (OLIG1), and OLIG2 (Fig. 1, A and B, and fig. S2, A and B). Immuno-
labeling with antibodies against neural/glial antigen 2 (NG2; a marker for
oligodendrocyte progenitor cells) revealed that a small fraction (16.5 ±
2.8%) of the BCAS1+ cells were oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (Fig. 1C).
The remaining cells were more differentiated, as shown by theirreactivity
with antibodies against mature oligodendrocytes such as adenomatous
polyposiscoliprotein(76.2±3.5%ofoverlap)(Fig.1C;anti-adenomatous
polyposis coli antibody, clone CC1) and myelin-associated glycoprotein
(MAG;47.5±3.2%ofoverlap),aproteininvolvedinoligodendrocyteand
axon contact (Fig. 1C).
To analyze whether BCAS1+ cells were newly formed oligodendro-
cytes, we performed fate mapping experiments. We crossbred trans-
genic mice expressing a tamoxifen-inducible Cre DNA recombinase
inserted into the NG2 locus [NG2-CreERT2 (22)] with a widely used
reporter mouse strain containing a membrane-targeted enhanced green
fluorescent protein (EGFP) gene inserted into the Gt(ROSA)26Sor locus
(23). NG2-CreERT2 × R26R-tdTomato-membrane EGFP (mEGFP) mice
were injected with tamoxifen at P30 to induce Cre-dependent GFP
expression in oligodendrocyte progenitor cells. When we analyzed the
progenies of the labeled cells at 7, 18, and 40 days after injection by
immunostaining, we observed an increase in the number of cells co-
expressing BCAS1 and GFP from days 7 to 18 in the somatosensory
cortex, indicating that BCAS1+ cells differentiate from oligodendrocyte
progenitor cells (Fig. 1D).
BCAS1+ premyelinating and myelinating oligodendrocytes
are present during development and in adult mice
Immunofluorescence on somatosensory cortex during postnatal devel-
opment (P40) showed that BCAS1 was expressed in CC1+ oligodendro-
cytes with different morphologies—cells with multiple, symmetrically
radiating processes and with several segments aligned in parallel
(fig. S3A). Oligodendrocytes that radially extend processes are reminis-
cent of previously described premyelinating oligodendrocytes at an early
stage of the oligodendrocyte differentiation (24, 25). To determine
whether BCAS1+ cells with radiating processes represent premyelinating
oligodendrocytes, we used transgenic mice,in whichtheproteolipidpro-
tein (PLP) promoter drives the expression of GFP (PLP-GFP) (26). PLP
is one of the major structural proteins in myelin and therefore not only
highly expressed in mature myelin-forming oligodendrocytes but also
present in premyelinating cells during development (24). We detected
GFP+ premyelinating oligodendrocytes in early postnatal development
(P9 andP14), when manyoligodendrocytes are formed (Fig. 2, A and B).
Whereas all of the GFP+ premyelinating oligodendrocytes also showed
immunoreactivity against BCAS1, most of the BCAS1+ premyelinating
cells (70.5 ± 8.1% at P9 and 76.3 ± 1.7% at P14) did not express GFP,
demonstrating that BCAS1 is expressed in a larger population of newly
Fig. 1. BCAS1 expression identifies newly generated oligodendrocytes. (A) Con-
focal images of breast carcinoma amplified sequence 1 (BCAS1) (pink) and oligo-
dendrocyte transcription factor 2 (OLIG2) (white) in the corpus callosum (CC) of
postnatal day 40 (P40) mice. Scale bars, 5 mm. (B) Bar graph shows the percentage
of BCAS1+ cells expressing sex-determining region Y box 10 protein (SOX10),
OLIG1, or OLIG2. (C) Bar graph shows the percentage of BCAS1+ cells expressing
neural/glial antigen 2 (NG2), CC1, or myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG) in the
corpus callosum of P40 mice. (D) Left (experimental plan): NG2-CreERT2 × R26R-
tdTomato-mEGFP mice were used to induce the expression of mEGFP by tamoxifen
(TMX) at P30 as illustrated. Right: Quantification of the percentage of double-positive
[GFP+ (green fluorescent protein–positive) and BCAS1+] cells over time. One-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA), followed by Bonferroni’s post hoc test, *P < 0.05; n = 3,
three sections per animal. Quantitative data are means ± SEM.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Fard et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam7816 (2017)
6 December 2017
2 of 12
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 formed oligodendrocytes in the somatosensory cortex at both P9 and
P14 (Fig. 2B). When the analysis was performed in the adult somato-
sensory cortex (at 4 months), we found that all BCAS1+ premyelinating
oligodendrocytes were negative for GFP, suggesting that the previ-
ously identifiedPLP+ premyelinating oligodendrocytesconstitute a sub-
population (29.5 ± 8.1% at P9, 23.7 ± 1.7% at P14, and 0% at 4 months)
of oligodendrocytes present only during development (Fig. 2B). Thus,
a PLP−/BCAS1+ premyelinating subpopulation may be involved in
continued oligodendrogenesis in the adult.
Next, we analyzed the other major population of BCAS1+ oligoden-
drocytes, the cells with T-shaped processes that resemble myelinating
oligodendrocytes by morphology. Because many of these BCAS1+ cells
contained numerous processes aligned in parallel reminiscent of myelin
sheaths, we tested whether these cells were producing myelin segments
enwrapping axons. High-resolution confocal images of somatosensory
cortex sections confirmed ensheathment of axons by BCAS1+ segments
as shown by costaining with antibodies against a neurofilament (Fig. 2C).
A total of 17.1 ± 1.9% of these BCAS1+ cells displayed myelin segments
Fig. 2. BCAS1+ premyelinating and myelinating oligodendrocytes are present during development and in adult mice. (A) Immunohistochemical analysis of
transgenic mice in which the proteolipid protein (PLP) promoter drives the expression of GFP (PLP-GFP mice); representative confocal images show BCAS1 (pink) and
GFP (green) expression in premyelinating oligodendrocytes (pre-mOLGs) in the developing and adult somatosensory cortex (CX) of P9, P14, and 4-month-old mice. Blue
arrows indicate BCAS1+/GFP−, and yellow arrows indicate BCAS1+/GFP+ pre-mOLGs. Scale bars, 10 mm. (B) Quantification of the percentage of pre-mOLGs positive for
GFP, BCAS1, or both in the somatosensory cortex of P9, P14, and 4-month-old mice. Student’s two-tailed t test, unpaired,*P < 0.05, ***P < 0.001. (C) Representative
confocal image of BCAS1+ segments (pink) aligned along neurofilament-positive (white) axons in the somatosensory cortex of P15 mice. Scale bar, 4 mm. (D) Left: Representative
confocal image of BCAS1+ segments (pink) flanked by contactin-associated protein 1 (CASPR) clusters (white) on both sides of a node in the somatosensory cortex of P15 mice.
Scale bar, 3 mm. Right: Quantification of the percentage of nodes in the somatosensory cortex of P15 mice showing BCAS1+ segments and CASPR expression on one side (one
BCAS1+ paranode), both sides (two BCAS1+ paranodes), or without BCAS1+ segments (zero BCAS1+ paranode). (E) Representative confocal images showing BCAS1 (pink) and GFP
(green; PLP-GFP mice) expression in myelinating (mOLGs) in the developing and adult somatosensory cortex of P9, P14, and 4-month-old mice. Blue, yellow, and white arrows
show BCAS1+/GFP−, BCAS1+/GFP+, and BCAS1−/GFP+ mOLGs, respectively. Scale bars, 10 mm. (F) Quantification of the percentage of mOLG positive for GFP, BCAS1, or both in the
somatosensory cortex of P9, P14, and 4-month-old mice. Quantitative data are means ± SEM; n = 3, three sections per animal [only n = 2 for P9 in (F)]; one-way ANOVA, followed by
Bonferroni’s post hoc test, ***P < 0.001. (G) Schematic illustration of the phases of OLG maturation and the relative expression of NG2, CC1, and BCAS1. OPCs, oligodendrocyte
progenitor cells. (H) Schematic illustration representing the pattern of the expression of BCAS1 and PLP (green) during development and in adulthood.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Fard et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam7816 (2017)
6 December 2017
3 of 12
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 with a patchy arrangement along the axons resembling the previously
reported “intermittent myelin” of cortical pyramidal neurons (fig. S3B)
(27). Because the formation of myelin is accompanied by the generation
of axon-glial junctions, so-called paranodes, at the edges of the sheaths
(28), we immunostained the somatosensory cortex of P15 mice for the
neuronal and paranodal protein contactin-associated protein 1. BCAS1+
segments were flanked by contactin-associated protein 1 clusters on
one side (one paranode, 17.1 ± 1.9%) or both sides (two paranodes,
62.2 ± 2.9%), indicating the formation of myelin sheaths (Fig. 2D).
The ensheathment of axons together with the formation of axon-glial
paranodal junctions define the BCAS1+ cells with segments aligned in
parallel as myelin-forming oligodendrocytes.
To further analyze these cells, we used the PLP-GFP reporter mice to
visualize myelinating oligodendrocytes and found that, at P9, all GFP+
myelinating oligodendrocytes were also positive for BCAS1 (Fig. 2, E
and F). However, when the analysis was performed at P14, a population
of GFP+ myelinating oligodendrocytes that lacked BCAS1 expression
emerged (Fig. 2, E and F), suggesting that BCAS1 expression is lost
when oligodendrocytes mature into later stages of oligodendrocyte
differentiation (Fig. 2, G and H). At 4 months, we observed a complete
segregationofGFP+andBCAS1+myelinatingoligodendrocytes(Fig.2F).
To verify the segregation of BCAS1+ and PLP+ oligodendrocytes in
adult mice, we crossbred transgenic mice expressing a tamoxifen-inducible
Cre inserted into the PLP locus (PLP-CreERT2) with GFP reporter mice
(R26R-tdTomato-mEGFP). We injectedtamoxifen at P110to induce GFP
expression in oligodendrocytes (fig. S3C). When brain sections were
analyzed by immunohistochemistry 18 days after injection, no overlap
between BCAS1+ and GFP+ cell populations was seen in adult mice
(fig. S3C). In addition, immunostainings of the somatosensory cortex of
adult wild-type mice showed that BCAS1+ myelinating oligodendro-
cytes were only positive for MAG and negative for PLP and that only
few (17.7 ± 4.3%) expressed myelin basic protein (MBP), supporting
our hypothesis that these cells constitute a distinct population of oligo-
dendrocytes (fig. S3, D to G). Thus, BCAS1+ cells represent a population
of oligodendrocytes that are at an intermediate state of differentia-
tion, segregating from both oligodendrocyte progenitor cells and mature
oligodendrocytes.
Ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase 6 (ENPP6) has
recently been used as a marker to track the formation of newly formed
oligodendrocytes (9). When we analyzed the corpus callosum and the
fimbria hippocampi, a further prominent white matter tract, we found a
significant increase in ENPP6+ cell bodies from P0 to P7 in the fimbria
(P = 0.0291) and a significant decrease until P21 (P = 0.0405). In addi-
tion, BCAS1+ cells were abundant in the fimbria at P7 and decreased
until P21 (fig. S4, A to C). However, higher densities of BCAS1+ cells
were identified already at P0 (in the fimbria), and BCAS1+ cells con-
tinued to be more abundant as compared to ENPP6+ cells in the corpus
callosum and fimbria at P7 and in the corpus callosum at P21. At P7,
BCAS1+ cells coexpressing MAG were found to be more abundant than
ENPP6+/MAG+ cells, indicating that myelin protein expression starts
earlier in BCAS1+ cells (fig. S4, D and E).
BCAS1+ cells represent a transient population
of oligodendrocytes
To determine the expression of BCAS1 during oligodendrocyte differ-
entiation, we used primary cultures of oligodendrocytes. After ~3 days
in culture, oligodendrocytes progenitor cells start to differentiate into
oligodendrocyteswithmultiple,symmetricallyradiatingprocesses,which
further mature into with flat myelin-like membrane sheets, in which
proteins and lipids of myelin, such as MBP, PLP, and galactosylceramide/
sulfatide (recognized by the antibody O4), are localized. BCAS1 was
expressed in 85.9 ± 2.2% of the population of O4+ oligodendrocytes with
arborized morphology at 3 days in vitro (fig. S5A). However, after 5 days
in culture, when oligodendrocytes formed sheets and expressed MBP, we
observed a reduction in BCAS1 immunolabeling (fig. S5B). BCAS1 was
virtually excluded from the compacted myelin-like membrane sheets but
remained at low levels in the cytosol-enriched, noncompacted areas
(fig. S5C). This is in contrast to galactosylceramides/sulfatides (recog-
nized by O1 and O4 immunolabeling), another oligodendroglial marker,
which remain enriched in myelin sheets of differentiated cells in vitro
(fig. S6A) and in vivo (fig. S6B). To extend the analysis to human cells,
we generated oligodendrocytes from induced pluripotent human stem
cells (iPSCs) derived from healthy human adults (29). We found that
BCAS1 was expressed in 86.1 ± 2.3% of the O4+ oligodendrocytes with
arborized morphology at 24 days in vitro (fig. S7A). To analyze the cells
at a later time point of differentiation, we performed immunolabeling
against MBP at 32 days in vitro, when cells have formed myelin-like
membrane sheets. We found that only 4 ± 1.2% of the fully mature
MBP+ oligodendrocytes were labeled with antibodies against BCAS1
(fig. S7B), demonstrating the enrichment of BCAS1 at an early differ-
entiation stage in both mouse- and human-cultured oligodendrocytes.
To determine whether BCAS1 is also transiently expressed in oligo-
dendrocytes in vivo, we used 5-ethynyl-2′-deoxyuridine (EdU), a thy-
midine analog, to pulse-label dividing cells followed by a chase to
identify the progeny of dividing cells (Fig. 3, A to D). When EdU was
administered for 10 days via the drinking water to 4-month-old mice,
65 ± 2.7% of the BCAS1+ cells incorporated EdU (Fig. 3B). Notably,
after 40 days of a “chase” only, 7.7 ± 1.3% of the EdU+/BCAS1+ cells
were left revealing their transient nature (Fig. 3B). To exclude dilution
of the EdU labeling as the underlying reason, we also visualized mature
oligodendrocytes by immunolabeling for CC1 in the corpus callosum.
As expected, we found an increase in the number of EdU+/CC1+ in
BCAS1− cells at day 18 (but not significant at day 40), indicating their
differentiation into a stable population of oligodendrocytes (Fig. 3D).
ThenumberofEdU+/CC1+/BCAS1+cells,however,decreasedwithtime,
confirming our conclusion of their transient nature (Fig. 3D). When
similar experiments were performed in the somatosensory cortex, we
observed that only 12.1 ± 1.5% of the BCAS1+ cells incorporated EdU
after 10 days of administration (+0 days; Fig. 3C). In contrast to the
corpus callosum, the fraction of EdU+/BCAS1+ cells increased slightly
to 17.9 ± 1.1% after 40 days of a chase (+40 days; Fig. 3C). In addition,
analysis of premyelinating and myelinating oligodendrocytes individu-
ally showed that the number EdU+/BCAS1+ remained stable after the
chase (fig. S8, A and B). Thus, BCAS1+ cells constitute a transient cell
population in the corpus callosum but not in the cortex.
To further explore the dynamics of the BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes in
the somatosensory cortex, we deleted the establishment of sister chro-
matid cohesion N-acetyltransferase 2 (Esco2) in the oligodendrocyte
lineage using the inducible Sox10-CreERT2 × Escofl/fl mouse line (re-
ferred to as Sox10-Escofl and Sox10-Esco2wt mice for control) to spe-
cifically ablate proliferating oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (30, 31).
Upon tamoxifen administration, Esco2 is depleted, resulting in a detri-
mental block of the cohesion apparatus and subsequent apoptosis of all
cells undergoing mitosis, that is, proliferating oligodendrocyte progen-
itor cells. To label the recombined cells, we crossed these mice with the
CAG-EGFP reporter mouse line to induce the permanent expression
of GFP. Recombination was induced by tamoxifen in adult mice (8 to
10 weeks of age), and the number of GFP+/BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Fard et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam7816 (2017)
6 December 2017
4 of 12
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 was quantified (Fig. 3, E to G). Although the number of GFP+/BCAS1+
myelinating oligodendrocytes cells remained stable at 6 weeks after
induction (Fig. 3G), we found a marked reduction in the number of
GFP+/BCAS1+ premyelinating oligodendrocytes (reduction from 92.1 ±
3.1% in control to 29.5 ± 1.3% in the knockout; fig. S8C) and GFP+/
BCAS1+ myelinating oligodendrocytes (reduction from 97.6 ± 2.4%
in control to 13.9 ± 7.3% in the knockout) when animals were analyzed
16 weeks after induction (Fig. 3, F and G). We therefore conclude that in
the cortex, BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes also represent a transient cell pop-
ulation being continuously generated from proliferating oligodendro-
cyte progenitor cells, albeit with a much longer lifetime as compared
to the corpus callosum.
Myelination continues into adulthood but declines
in aged mice
To determine the abundance of BCAS1+ cells in the white matter (cor-
pus callosum) and gray matter (somatosensory cortex), we compared
their density to NG2+ oligodendrocyte progenitor cells in young (P40)
and adult (4 months) animals. BCAS1 staining of the corpus callosum of
adult, 4-month-old mice showed a marked reduction of labeled cells
compared to younger animals (P40) (fig. S9A). Quantification of the
number of BCAS1+ cells in the corpus callosum revealed numbers simi-
lar to NG2+ oligodendrocyte progenitor cells at P40 and at 4 months
(fig. S9A). Because of its transient expression, BCAS1 immunoreactivity
can serve as a tool to map areas with ongoing oligodendrocyte forma-
tion in the brain. Therefore, we determined the number of BCAS1+ oli-
godendrocytes up to old age (21-month-old mice) in the somatosensory
and frontal cortex, areas that are known to myelinate relatively late.
BCAS1+ myelinating oligodendrocytes were found at a density of
715.5 ± 66.8 cells/mm3 in young (P40) mice and remained as an abun-
dant cell population in the adult mice (4 and 7 months of age), where
they were found in the somatosensory cortex at a density of 379 ±
11.9 cells/mm3(4months)and347.7±26.6cells/mm3(7months;Fig.4A)
and in the frontal cortex at a density of 206.4 ± 57.8 cells/mm3 (7 months;
fig. S9B). Only in much older mice (21 months of age) that the number
of BCAS1+ myelinating oligodendrocytes decreased to low levels in the
somatosensory cortex (71.2 ± 11.7 cells/mm3; Fig. 4A). BCAS1+ pre-
myelinating oligodendrocytes were also found at higher densities in
the somatosensory cortex of young (P40) and adult (4 and 7 months)
mice compared to aged (21 months) mice (Fig. 4A). These results sug-
gested that generation of myelinating oligodendrocytes continues into
adulthood but declines in aged mice.
Using an alternative approach, we used a mass spectrometry method
to determine the synthesis rate of myelin proteins from development
into old age. This method is based on in vivo stable isotope labeling with
amino acids in mice (SILAC) (32). Young (1 month), adult (4 months),
and old (18 and 26 months) mice were fed for 30 or 60 days with a diet
containing the stable 13C isotope incorporated in lysines (13C-lysines)
(Fig. 4B). Subsequently, myelin was purified from isolated brains by
density centrifugation, and the incorporation of 13C-lysines into pro-
teins was compared to the amount of native 12C-lysines by mass spec-
trometry to obtain a measure of their relative synthesis rates. The 13C-/
12C-lysine ratio of the three most abundant proteins of compacted
myelin— MBP, PLP, and claudin11—was compared to the ratio of the
three major structural proteins of axons—neurofilament light, medium,
and heavy chains—that copurify with myelin. Although the calculation
of the 13C/12C-lysine ratios revealed that the metabolism of neurofila-
ments had reached steady state in 4-month-old animals and remained
at similar level throughout the life, we found that this was not the case for
myelin proteins. The incorporation of the 13C-lysines into myelin
Fig. 3. BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes are a transient cell population. (A) Experimental design: 5-Ethynyl-2′-deoxyuridine (EdU) was administered to a 4-month-old mice
as shown in the scheme. Analyses were performed 10 (+0 days), 17 (+7 days), 28 (+18 days), and 50 (+40 days) days after injection. (B and C) Quantification of the
percentage of EdU+/BCAS1+ cells directly (0 days) and 40 days after the end of the treatment in the corpus callosum (B) and somatosensory cortex (C). Student’s two-
tailed t test, unpaired, *P < 0.05, ***P < 0.001. (D) Line graph showing the time-course expression analysis of the fraction of CC1+ oligodendrocytes that were EdU+ and
either BCAS1+ or BCAS1− plotted versus the time after the end of the EdU exposure in the corpus callosum. One-way ANOVA, followed by Newman-Keuls’ post hoc test,
*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01. (E) Experimental design: Proliferating OPCs were ablated by tamoxifen injection in inducible Sox10-iCreERT2 × Esco2fl/fl × CAG-EGFP mice (FL) and
compared to control animals Sox10-iCreERT2 × Esco2wt/wt × CAG-EGFP (WT). Esco2, establishment of sister chromatid cohesion N-acetyltransferase 2. Tamoxifen was
injected in 8- to 10-week-old animals, and analyses were performed 6 and 16 weeks after injection. Recombined cells are marked by EGFP. (F and G) Representative
images of BCAS1 and GFP expression in the somatosensory cortex of WT and FL mice 16 weeks after tamoxifen injection (F) and quantification of the percentage of
BCAS1+ mOLGs that are positive for GFP at 6 and 16 weeks postinduction (wpi) in the somatosensory cortex (G). Scale bars, 15 mm. Student’s two-tailed t test, unpaired,
**P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001. 6 wpi/WT versus 16 wpi/KO, P = 0.0028; 6 wpi/KO versus 16wpi/KO, P = 0.0028; 16 wpi/WT versus 16 wpi/KO, P = 0.0004. KO, knockout. For all
quantifications, n = 3 (only n = 2 for the +6 wpi group), three sections per animal. Quantitative data are means ± SEM.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Fard et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam7816 (2017)
6 December 2017
5 of 12
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 proteins occurred at a higher rate in 1- and 4-month-old mice when
compared to 18- and 26-month-old animals (Fig. 4B). Overall, the
high ratios of 13C-/12C-lysines in myelin proteins are consistent with
prominentmyelinationat1month,stillactivemyelinationin4-month-old
mice but reduced myelin protein synthesis in aged mice. Thus, our
SILAC-based quantification provides further evidence that myelination
continues into adulthood but declines in aged mice.
One of the possible reasons for adult myelination could be the ex-
tensive turnover of myelinating oligodendrocytes in adult mice. Hence,
we used the PLP-CreERT2 × R26R-tdTomato-mEGFP reporter mice to
induce the expression of EGFP by tamoxifen at P30 in oligodendrocytes
and to track the fate of developmentally born oligodendrocytes. We
followed these animals for up to 12 months of age and found an increase
in EGFP signal intensity with time in corpus callosum and somato-
sensory cortex (fig. S10, A to D). When we quantified the density of
GFP+ cells in the somatosensory cortex of tamoxifen-treated transgenic
animals, we found that the number of GFP+ oligodendrocytes labeled
18 days after tamoxifen injection did not change over the 11 months of
chase, suggesting that developmentally born myelinating oligodendro-
cytes survive into late adulthood and expand their myelin sheaths
(fig. S10, E and F). Hence, these results do not support an extensive
turnover of myelinating oligodendrocytes but rather suggest that the
generation of new myelin sheaths in the adult is likely due to a matu-
ration or adaptive process that continues into adulthood in mice.
BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes are largely restricted to the fetal
and early postnatal human white matter but are numerous
in the gray matter until old age
Next, we set out to determine whether the results obtained from rodents
also hold true for humans. Although a previous work provided evidence
that the number of oligodendrocytes remains relatively stable through-
out human life (15), tools to visualize actively myelinating oligodendro-
cytes in human brain are lacking. When newborn human autopsy cases
(n = 3) were stained with BCAS1 antibodies, we observed, as in mice,
cells with multiple and branched processes (Fig. 5A). BCAS1+ cells co-
expressed OLIG2 and SOX10, suggesting oligodendroglial origin (Fig. 5,
A and B). On the contrary, only 3.5 ± 1.4% of the BCAS1+ cells was also
positive for NG2 (Fig. 5, A and B), and no cells were positive for the
proliferation marker Ki67 (fig. S11A). When we performed colabeling
with markers for mature oligodendrocytes, tubulin polymerization pro-
moting protein (TPPP/p25), and CC1, only very limited (0.6 ± 0.3% for
TPPP/p25) or no overlap (0% for CC1), was seen (Fig. 5, A and B). We
also colabeled BCAS1 or NG2 with ENPP6. In human tissue, ENPP6
colocalized with NG2 (74.4 ± 5.3%), and the overlap with BCAS1 was
limited (12.2 ± 3.8%; fig. S11, B to F). We found that BCAS1+ cells dis-
played multiple, symmetrically radiating processes or segments aligned
in parallel closely resembling the morphology observed in mice. As in
mice, BCAS1+ cell bodies were not labeled with antibodies against PLP,
whereassomecellswerestainedwithantibodiesagainstMAG (9.8±2.4%
Fig. 4. Myelination continues into adulthood but decreases in aged mice. (A) Cell density quantification (left) and immunohistochemistry (right) of BCAS1+ pre-
mOLGs and mOLGs in the somatosensory cortex in P40 and 4-, 7-, and 21-month-old mice. Scale bars, 30 mm. White and blue arrows indicate BCAS1+ pre-mOLGs and
BCAS1+ mOLGs, respectively. One-way ANOVA, followed by Newman-Keuls’ post hoc test, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01. Student’s two-tailed t test, unpaired, for intergroup analysis,
*P < 0.05, ***P < 0.001. n = 3, three sections per animal. Quantitative data are means ± SEM. (B) Left (experimental design): Mass spectrometry analysis was performed in
1-, 4-, 18-, and 26-month-old mice fed for 30 or 60 days with a diet containing lysine labeled with 13C (13C-isotope). Right: The 13C isotope incorporation rates (13C-lysines/
12C-lysines ratio) are shown for three axonal proteins—neurofilament light (NFL), neurofilament medium (NFM), and neurofilament heavy (NFH) chains—and for the three major
myelin proteins—PLP, myelin basic protein (MBP), and CLD11; four animals per group, 4-month-old groups versus 18- and 26-month-old groups, one-way ANOVA, followed by
Bonferroni’s post hoc test. 30 days feeding: P < 0.0001, PLP; P = 0.0226, MBP; P < 0.0001, CLD11; P = 0.0800, NFH; P = 0.2355, NFM; P = 0.2700, NFL. 60 days feeding: P <
0.0001, PLP; P = 0.0016, MBP; P < 0.0001, CLD11; P = 0.1338, NFH; P = 0.0671, NFM; NFL, P = 0.0229. n = 4, three technical replicates. Error bars indicate SD.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Fard et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam7816 (2017)
6 December 2017
6 of 12
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 of overlap) and MBP (7.5 ± 1.4% of overlap) (fig. S11, G to I). Hence, we
found BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes to be distinct from NG2+oligodendro-
cyte progenitor cells, PLP+ premyelinating oligodendrocytes, and mature
oligodendrocytes.WethereforeconcludedthatBCAS1immunoreactivity
identifies a unique stage of oligodendrocyte differentiation in the human
brain. We mapped the distribution and the density of BCAS1+ cells in the
gray and white matter throughout life in human brains (Fig. 5, C to G,
fig. S12,andtable S1). BCAS1+cellsstartedto appear in thewhite matter
at a gestational age of 17 to 27 weeks (37 ± 1.7 cells/mm2) and reached
their highest values in newborns (154.7 ± 20.8 cells/mm2) before drop-
ping to 16.8 ± 4.5 cells/mm2 in 2- to 8-year-old children. Their density
reached 6.8 ± 2.3 cells/mm2 in 18- to 26-year-old individuals and re-
mained low until old age (83 to 90 years old) (Fig. 5C). At 1 year of
age, abundant BCAS1+ myelin sheaths were observed in the white
and gray matter (Fig. 5D and fig. S12), further suggesting that BCAS1+
cells are likely to represent myelinating oligodendrocytes. In addition, the
number of BCAS1+ cells correlated with the established typical chrono-
logical sequence of myelination in the white matter, suggesting that these
cells might be useful for identifying active myelination. As a comparison,
we quantified the amount of NG2+ oligodendrocyte progenitor cells in
the white matter and found that the number of NG2+ cells also peaked in
newborns (260 ± 57.3 cells/mm2), but in contrast to BCAS1+ cells, the
density of NG2+ oligodendrocyte progenitor cells remained stable (166 ±
24 cells/mm2) throughout life into old age (Fig. 5C and fig. S12). Our
resultssuggestthat, in contrast to NG2+oligodendrocyte progenitorcells,
BCAS1+ cells are a transient cell population preferentially expressed
during the active phase of myelination in the human white matter.
Brain regions controlling more complex tasks, such as the frontal
cortex, generate myelin relatively late. We therefore determined the
number of BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes in the human frontal cortex and
found the highest densities during developmental myelination in adoles-
cence and young adulthood (Fig. 5, E and F). However, in contrast to the
white matter, the cell density did not change substantially, ranging from
30 to 90 cells/mm2 throughout adult life (Fig. 5, E and F). We deter-
mined the fraction of cells with a myelinating morphology (segments
aligned in parallel) and found the highest density in the 1- to 2-year-old
individuals (36.7 ± 4.3% of all BCAS1+ cells), followed by the 6- to
16-year-oldindividuals(17.3±4.9%),and2to4%inthe38-to40-year-old
Fig. 5. BCAS1+ cells represent a transient oligodendroglial subpopulation enriched during active myelination in the human brain. (A) Immunohistochemistry
showing colocalization of BCAS1 with OLIG2, NG2, CC1, and tubulin polymerization promoting protein (TPPP/p25). (B) Quantification of the percentage of BCAS1+ cells
positive for SOX10, OLIG2, NG2, TPPP/p25, and CC1 in newborns (n = 3 to 4). (C) Quantification of the density of BCAS1+ and NG2+ cells in the white matter throughout
development and adult life (BCAS1: 17 to 27 weeks, n = 2; all other time points, n = 3 to 5; NG2, n = 2 to 5 per time point; Mann-Whitney test,*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01; BCAS1
0 year versus BCAS1 2 to 8 years, P = 0.0357; BCAS1 2 to 8 years versus NG2 2 to 8 years, P = 0.0079; BCAS1 11 to 16 years versus NG2 11 to 16 years, P = 0.0159; BCAS1
18 to 26 years versus NG2 18 to 26 years, P = 0.0179; BCAS1 38 to 46 years versus NG2 38 to 46 years, P = 0.0357; BCAS1 83 to 90 years versus NG2 83 to 90 years, P =
0.0286). (D) BCAS1 expression in the white matter around birth (0 year) and at 1 year of age (1 year). Inset and image in the center show magnification of the BCAS1+
cells in a newborn human, as indicated by the arrowhead. (E) Quantification of BCAS1+ cell density in the frontal cortex (n = 3 to 6). (F) Representative images of BCAS1
expression in the frontal cortex in humans around birth (0 year) and at 2 to 8, 38 to 46, and 57 to 65 years of age (as indicated). The insets show magnifications of BCAS1+ cells,
as indicated by arrowheads, with few or no segments (left) and with several segments (right). (G) Percentage of BCAS1+ cells with a myelinating morphology in the frontal
cortex in humans at different ages; n = 3 to 5. Kruskal-Wallis test with Dunn’s post hoc test, *P < 0.05. Quantitative data are means ± SEM. Scale bars, 50 mm.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Fard et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam7816 (2017)
6 December 2017
7 of 12
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 and 57- to 60-year-old individuals (Fig. 5G). These results contrast
with the white matter tracts and point to the possibility of adult adapt-
ive myelination in the human frontal cortex.
BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes are reformed in a proportion of
chronic white matter lesions in MS
Having shown that BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes are enriched in the fetal
and early postnatal white matter, we asked whether they are reformed
after a demyelinating event. We first used a mouse model of focal de-
myelination in the white matter induced by lysolecithin (lysophospha-
tidylcholine) injection. In lesioned animals, demyelination is complete
within 4 days, followed by a repair process that is maximal between 2
and 3 weeks after injection. We found that BCAS1+ cell density in-
creased from days 3 to 12 after injection in the phase of most intense
remyelination (Fig. 6, A and B). We repeated the analysis in a chronic
model of demyelination, in which mice are fed with a demyelinating
toxin, cuprizone, for 6 weeks. We observed that BCAS1+ cells de-
creased in the first week of feeding but already started to increase at
week 3 and reached their highest densities at week 4, coinciding with
remyelination (Fig. 6, C and D).
Next, we asked whether BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes are also reformed
in human MS lesions. In MS, damaged myelin can be replaced by new
sheaths, but the ability to do so is limited (8). Thus far, weaker myelin
staining, so-called shadow plaques, is taken as evidence for remyelina-
tion, but this analysis does not provide information on the time point of
remyelination (33, 34). We found that completely demyelinated chronic
lesions in the white matter only rarely contained BCAS1+ oligodendro-
cytes (Fig. 7A and fig. S13A), consistent with the notion that remyelina-
tion is incomplete in MS (16). In contrast, partially remyelinated lesions,
as shown by the pale myelin staining at the borders of the lesions, con-
tained clusters of BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes (Fig. 7, A to E). The density
of the BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes was highest at the lesion border and
within the remyelinating areas but low in the lesion core, suggesting that
remyelination starts at the lesion border in the white matter (Fig. 7, A
to H). BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes were also increased in the normal-
appearing white matter surrounding chronic lesions with remyelina-
tion (fig. S13). Our analysis of MS lesions from patients up to 74 years of
age showed that the capacity to generate or maintain BCAS1+ oligoden-
drocytes is retained until old age (table S2). Finally, we examined lesions
that were fully remyelinated (completely covered with pale myelin cor-
responding to shadow plaques) and found that such lesions contained
low densities of BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes (Fig. 7, A to I, and fig. S13).
Thus, BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes are found in the predicted chron-
ological sequence of remyelination in human MS lesions, suggesting
that a proportion of these cells are engaged in actively reforming myelin.
Finally, we determined whether inflammatory activity was a prerequi-
site for the presence of BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes in chronic MS lesions.
MS lesions were classified on the basis of the presence or absence of
macrophages/activated microglia (inflammatory activity) and the presence
or absence of ongoing demyelination (demyelinating activity) (Fig. 8, A
and B). We found that BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes were not only found
in lesions with ongoing inflammatory and/or demyelinating activity but
also in completely inactive lesions (Fig. 8, C and D), suggesting that re-
cruitmentofoligodendrocyteprogenitorcellsandstimulation of remye-
lination are at least in part independent of lesion activity.
DISCUSSION
The systematic classification of all neural cell types is a central goal
toward deconstructing the CNS into its basic components. Del Rio
Hortega grouped oligodendrocytes into different subtypes on the
basis of their morphological characteristics such as the number and ori-
entation of their cellular processes. Recent single RNA sequencing tran-
scriptome analyses confirm oligodendrocyte heterogeneity (35, 36).
Nonetheless, molecular tools to distinguish the cellular subtypes or
stages of the oligodendrocyte lineage are lacking. Currently, we are
largely restricted to the discrimination of oligodendrocyte progenitor
cells from mature oligodendrocytes in the human brain (37–39).
ENPP6 has recently been used as a marker to track the formation of
newly formed oligodendrocytes in mice (9); however, it may not be suit-
able for this purpose in human tissue sections, as demonstrated in the
present work. PLP+ premyelinating oligodendrocytes were detected in
the developing and diseased human brain, but they seem to represent a
minor cell population of newly formed oligodendrocytes (24, 25). In
addition, most markers, such as O1 or O4, do not detect newly formed
oligodendrocytes in the adult and are more appropriate to the analysis
of the developing brain (40). Thus, to measure myelination and remye-
lination in human adults, we have thus far been limited to indirect
methods, such as magnetic resonance imaging in vivo and electron mi-
croscopy or semiquantitative histochemical staining techniques in the
tissue. In addition, as of yet, no marker for actively ongoing remyelina-
tion exists, and consequently, it has thus far not been possible to deter-
mine when new myelin sheaths are reformed in MS (33). Here, we
identified BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes in the mouse and human brain
that represent a population of newly generated and early oligodendro-
cytes transiently present during the active phase of myelination and
might thus be used to report areas of active myelination and remyelina-
tion. BCAS1 is a relatively short-lived protein with a lifetime of ~18 days
[~155 days for MBP and ~188 days for PLP (calculations from our in
vivo SILAC experiments); see Materials and Methods] that resides in
Fig. 6. BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes are reformed during remyelination in ro-
dents. (A) Representative images of BCAS1 expression of lysolecithin-induced le-
sions in the rat corpus callosum on days 3 and 6 after injection. BCAS1+ cells are
shown in brown, and cell nuclei are shown in blue. (B) Quantification of BCAS1+
cell density in lysolecithin-induced lesions 3, 6, 12, and 20 days after injection (n = 3;
Kruskal-Wallis test with Dunn’s post hoc test, *P < 0.05). (C) Representative images of
BCAS1 expression in the corpus callosum 1 and 4 weeks after the start of cuprizone
treatment in mice. BCAS1+ cells are shown in brown, and cell nuclei are shown in
blue. (D) Quantification of BCAS1+ cell density in the corpus callosum 1 week after
the start of cuprizone treatment and 2 days remyelination (2d RM) and 3 weeks re-
myelination (3wks RM) after the treatment was discontinued; n = 4 to 14 animals.
Kruskal-Wallis test with Dunn’s post hoc test, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01. Quantitative data
are means ± SEM. Scale bars, 50 mm.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Fard et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam7816 (2017)
6 December 2017
8 of 12
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 the cytosolic spaces of oligodendrocytes and myelin and is down-
regulated with differentiation. BCAS1 immunoreactivity is first seen
in the soma but later appears in newly formed myelin sheaths, sug-
gesting that BCAS1+ cells might represent myelinating oligodendro-
cytes. Whereas a fraction of the BCAS1+ cells represent oligodendrocyte
progenitor cellsin mice, asdetermined by NG2colabeling, the overlap is
less than 5% in humans. In addition,
BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes are also distinct
from TPPP/p25+ and CC1+ mature hu-
man oligodendrocytes but overlap fully
with SOX10 and OLIG2, demonstrating
that BCAS1+ cells are segregated from other
known oligodendroglial subpopulations.
In mice but not in humans, a large fraction
of the BCAS1+ cells colocalized with CC1;
this difference is possibly attributed to dif-
ferences in the expression pattern of CC1
in mice and human. Quantifying the den-
sity of BCAS1+ cells, we found a peak in
the first year of postnatal white matter de-
velopment, although they continued to be
present in relatively large quantities in the
frontal human cortex into old age. These
data are in good agreement with the birth
dating of oligodendrocytes by 14C inte-
gration, which showed that the number
of oligodendrocytes in the white matter
is largely established during the first years,
whereas gray matter oligodendrocytes
continue to be generated in adulthood
(15). The number of BCAS1+ cells also de-
clines in the white matter of adult mice,
but in contrast to humans, they were pres-
ent in relatively high density into adult-
hood before dropping to very low levels
in old age. Differences between mouse
and human oligodendrocytes are likely
to exist; however, currently, there are no
tools available to determine whether mye-
linating oligodendrocytes are formed
from oligodendrocyte progenitor cells or
preexisting immature oligodendrocytes
in humans. Thus, we cannot exclude the
interesting possibility that BCAS1+ gray
matter oligodendrocytes are long-lived
and represent a precursor cell population
for (re)myelination in the human brain.
In the prototypic human inflammatory
demyelinating disease MS, remyelination
is considered the prime neuroprotective
treatment strategy (8). Our work suggests
that active remyelination at the lesion edge
is ongoing in a proportion of established,
fully demyelinated MS lesions, even at ad-
vanced stages of the disease. Thus, older
patients are likely to remain receptive to
regenerativetherapies,whichisinlinewith
the conclusions drawn from experimental
mousemodels(41).Surprisingly,we found
that BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes were not only found in lesions with
ongoing inflammatory and/or demyelinating activity but also in com-
pletely inactive lesions.
Thereareanumberoflimitationstothepresentstudy.Oligodendroglial
morphology, metabolism, and function are more complex and less well
understood in humans as compared to rodents (42). In addition, the
Fig. 7. BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes identify areas of ongoing remyelination in chronic multiple sclerosis. (A) Quan-
tification of BCAS1+ cell density in the normal-appearing white matter (NAWM), the immediate periplaque white matter
(PPWM), the lesion center (LC), and remyelinated lesion areas (RM), if present, of chronic demyelinated lesions (n = 10),
chronic lesions with areas of remyelination at the lesion edge (n = 18; ***P < 0.001), and fully remyelinated shadow
plaques (n = 7). Kruskal-Wallis test with Dunn’s post hoc test was used for statistical analysis. (B) Luxol fast blue/periodic
acid–Schiff (LFB/PAS) histochemistry depicts the frontal subcortical white matter containing a chronic demyelinated
multiple sclerosis lesion with two adjoining sharply delineated lesion areas of pale LFB staining (RM1 and RM2) and
a neighboring lesion area with more intense but still visibly reduced LFB staining [shadow plaque (SP)]. (C) BCAS1
immunohistochemistry on a serial section of (B). Frames in (C) and (D) indicate lesion areas depicted at a higher mag-
nification below. LB, lesion border. (D to J) Multiple sclerosis lesion areas as indicated in (C) immunostained for BCAS1.
Arrowheads indicate BCAS1+ cells. Error bars indicate SEM. Scale bars, 2 mm (B and C) and 50 mm (all other images).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Fard et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam7816 (2017)
6 December 2017
9 of 12
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 process of remyelination may operate on a different time scale and re-
quire additional cues in the human brain compared to the mouse brain
(43). Thus, even if we unraveled the dynamic nature of BCAS1+ oligo-
dendrocytes by lineage tracing in mice,
we cannot extrapolate these findings to
humans.Asaconsequence,wedonotknow
how long BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes persist
inthehumanbrain.WefoundthatBCAS1+
oligodendrocytesare formedin the fetaland
newborn brain, largely disappear from the
adult white matter, and are reformed in
MS lesions. Yet, we lack information on
theirlifetimeandcellularstateinMSlesions.
Whether BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes in
humans represent newly formed or old
cells locked in an intermediate state of dif-
ferentiation cannot be determined to date.
Nevertheless,theobservationthatBCAS1+
cells are associated with partially remyeli-
nated lesions suggests that at least some of
these cells are actively engaged in forming
myelin. We envision that the identification
of BCAS1+ cells as an actively myelinating
oligodendroglialcellpopulationinhumans
that segregates from oligodendrocyte pro-
genitor cells and mature oligodendrocytes
will have profound implications for the
functional analysis of myelination and
remyelination in highly prevalent neu-
roinflammatory, neurodegenerative, and
neuropsychiatric diseases. Furthermore,
thisworkprovidesaconceptualandmethod-
ological basis for efforts to identify myelin-
regenerative compounds (44, 45).
MATERIAL AND METHODS
Study design
The primary objective of this study was
to develop molecular tools to distin-
guish the cellular subtypes or stages of
the oligodendrocyte lineage. Immuno-
histochemistry and functional studies
including lineage tracing and cell and pro-
tein turnover studies were performed in
mice to establish BCAS1+ cells as an oli-
godendroglial subpopulation. The forma-
tion of BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes during
remyelination was determined in two ex-
perimental models of demyelination and
lysolecithin- and cuprizone-induced de-
myelination. Immunohistochemical studies
were performed to associate BCAS1+ cells
with developmental myelination along
the life span of a human brain. The brain
tissue of patients with MS was examined
to establish BCAS1+ cells as a cellular
marker of ongoing remyelination in the
disease. The number of biological repli-
cates (n) per experiment is noted in each figure legend. The quan-
titative analyses were performed blinded. No outlier removal was
performed.
Fig. 8. Ongoing remyelination occurs independently from multiple sclerosis lesion activity. (A) Representative
images showing the expression of the pan-macrophage/activated microglia marker KiM1P (brown) and MBP (blue) at
the rim of multiple sclerosis lesions. Rows represent different inflammatory and demyelinating lesion activities according
to Kuhlmann et al. (33). Insets in (A) highlight KiM1P+ phagocytes containing MBP+ particles. (B) Representative images
showing BCAS1 expression at the rim of multiple sclerosis lesions of varying inflammatory and demyelinating activity;
BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes are indicated by arrowheads. BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes extending multiple processes are
observed at the lesion rim in all stages of lesion activity. (C) Percentage of lesions with different inflammatory and
demyelinating activities containing areas of ongoing remyelination (ongoing RM) with BCAS1+ cells (n = 15). (D) Quan-
tification of BCAS1+ cell density in areas with ongoing remyelination of multiple sclerosis lesions of different
lesion activities (n = 15). Quantitative data are means ± SEM. Scale bars, 500 mm (A, left column) and 50 mm (all
other images).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Fard et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam7816 (2017)
6 December 2017
10 of 12
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Statistical analysis
All statistics were calculated using the GraphPad Prism 6 software
(GraphPad Software). The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test with Dallal-
Wilkinson-Lillie for P value was carried out to test for normal dis-
tribution. To compare the two groups, a Student’s two-tailed t test
or the Mann-Whitney test was applied. One-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) followed by Bonferroni’s, Tukey’s, or Newman-Keuls’ post
hoc test was performed for comparison of three and more than three
groups, or one-way ANOVA with Kruskal-Wallis test with Dunn’s
multiple comparison tests was used as indicated in the figure legends.
Data are means ± SEM if not stated otherwise. Asterisks correspond to
P values of <0.05 (*), <0.01 (**), and <0.001 (***).
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencesignaling.org/cgi/content/full/9/419/eaam7816/DC1
Materials and Methods
Fig. S1. Validation of antiserum raised against BCAS1.
Fig. S2. BCAS1 specifically labels cells of oligodendrocyte lineage.
Fig. S3. Characterization of BCAS1+ pre-mOLGs and mOLGs.
Fig. S4. Characterization of ENPP6+ oligodendrocytes in mice.
Fig. S5. BCAS1 is down-regulated in fully matured oligodendrocytes prepared from mice.
Fig. S6. Comparison of BCAS1 with O1 and O4 immunolabeling.
Fig. S7. BCAS1 is down-regulated in fully matured oligodendrocytes prepared from human
iPSCs.
Fig. S8. Dynamics of BCAS1+ cells generation in adult mouse cortex.
Fig. S9. Quantification of the number of BCAS1+ cells in the adult mouse brain.
Fig. S10. Developmentally born mOLGs continue myelination into late adulthood.
Fig. S11. BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes are distinct from PLP+ and ENPP6+ oligodendrocytes in the
human brain.
Fig. S12. Characterization of BCAS1+ oligodendrocytes in the human brain.
Fig. S13. BCAS1+ oligodendroglia are rare in and around chronic demyelinated MS lesions and
fully remyelinated shadow plaques.
Table S1. Clinical characteristics of patients to study the developmental expression of BCAS1.
Table S2. Clinical characteristics of MS patients.
Table S3. Primary data.
References (46–48)
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. N. Snaidero, W. Möbius, T. Czopka, L. H. P. Hekking, C. Mathisen, D. Verkleij, S. Goebbels,
J. Edgar, D. Merkler, D. A. Lyons, K.-A. Nave, M. Simons, Myelin membrane wrapping of
CNS axons by PI(3,4,5)P3-dependent polarized growth at the inner tongue. Cell 156,
277–290 (2014).
2. K.-A. Nave, H. B. Werner, Myelination of the nervous system: Mechanisms and functions.
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 30, 503–533 (2014).
3. N. Baumann, D. Pham-Dinh, Biology of oligodendrocyte and myelin in the mammalian
central nervous system. Physiol. Rev. 81, 871–927 (2001).
4. K.-J. Chang, S. A. Redmond, J. R. Chan, Remodeling myelination: Implications for
mechanisms of neural plasticity. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 190–197 (2016).
5. H. Wake, P. R. Lee, R. D. Fields, Control of local protein synthesis and initial events in
myelination by action potentials. Science 333, 1647–1651 (2011).
6. C. Demerens, B. Stankoff, M. Logak, P. Anglade, B. Allinquant, F. Couraud, B. Zalc,
C. Lubetzki, Induction of myelination in the central nervous system by electrical activity.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 93, 9887–9892 (1996).
7. E. G. Hughes, S. H. Kang, M. Fukaya, D. E. Bergles, Oligodendrocyte progenitors balance
growth with self-repulsion to achieve homeostasis in the adult brain. Nat. Neurosci. 16,
668–676 (2013).
8. R. J. M. Franklin, C. Ffrench-Constant, Remyelination in the CNS: From biology to therapy.
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 9, 839–855 (2008).
9. L. Xiao, D. Ohayon, I. A. McKenzie, A. Sinclair-Wilson, J. L. Wright, A. D. Fudge, B. Emery,
H. Li and W. D. Richardson, Rapid production of new oligodendrocytes is required in
the earliest stages of motor-skill learning. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 1210–1217 (2016).
10. K. M. Young, K. Psachoulia, R. B. Tripathi, S.-J. Dunn, L. Cossell, D. Attwell, K. Tohyama,
W. D. Richardson, Oligodendrocyte dynamics in the healthy adult CNS: Evidence for
myelin remodeling. Neuron 77, 873–885 (2013).
11. B. A. Barres, M. C. Raff, Proliferation of oligodendrocyte precursor cells depends on
electrical activity in axons. Nature 361, 258–260 (1993).
12. I. A. McKenzie, D. Ohayon, H. Li, J. P. de Faria, B. Emery, K. Tohyama, W. D. Richardson,
Motor skill learning requires active central myelination. Science 346, 318–322 (2014).
13. S. L. Bengtsson, Z. Nagy, S. Skare, L. Forsman, H. Forssberg, F. Ullén, Extensive piano
practicing has regionally specific effects on white matter development. Nat. Neurosci. 8,
1148–1150 (2005).
14. R. J. Zatorre, R. D. Fields, H. Johansen-Berg, Plasticity in gray and white: Neuroimaging
changes in brain structure during learning. Nat. Neurosci. 15, 528–536 (2012).
15. M. S. Y. Yeung, S. Zdunek, O. Bergmann, S. Bernard, M. Salehpour, K. Alkass, S. Perl,
J. Tisdale, G. Possnert, L. Brundin, H. Druid, J. Frisén, Dynamics of oligodendrocyte
generation and myelination in the human brain. Cell 159, 766–774 (2014).
16. P. Patrikios, C. Stadelmann, A. Kutzelnigg, H. Rauschka, M. Schmidbauer, H. Laursen,
P. S. Sorensen, W. Brück, C. Lucchinetti, H. Lassmann, Remyelination is extensive in a
subset of multiple sclerosis patients. Brain 129, 3165–3172 (2006).
17. C. Collins, J. M. Rommens, D. Kowbel, T. Godfrey, M. Tanner, S.-I. Hwang, D. Polikoff,
G. Nonet, J. Cochran, K. Myambo, K. E. Jay, J. Froula, T. Cloutier, W.-L. Kuo, P. Yaswen,
S. Dairkee, J. Giovanola, G. B. Hutchinson, J. Isola, O.-P. Kallioniemi, M. Palazzolo, C. Martin,
C. Ericsson, D. Pinkel, D. Albertson, W.-B. Li, J. W. Gray, Positional cloning of ZNF217
and NABC1: Genes amplified at 20q13.2 and overexpressed in breast carcinoma.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 95, 8703–8708 (1998).
18. Y. Zhang, K. Chen, S. A. Sloan, M. L. Bennett, A. R. Scholze, S. O’Keeffe, H. P. Phatnani,
P. Guarnieri, C. Caneda, N. Ruderisch, S. Deng, S. A. Liddelow, C. Zhang, R. Daneman,
T. Maniatis, B. A. Barres, J. Q. Wu, An RNA-sequencing transcriptome and splicing
database of glia, neurons, and vascular cells of the cerebral cortex. J. Neurosci. 34,
11929–11947 (2014).
19. K. Ninomiya, T. Ishimoto, T. Taguchi, Subcellular localization of PMES-2 proteins regulated
by their two cytoskeleton-associated domains. Cell. Mol. Neurobiol. 25, 899–911 (2005).
20. T. Ishimoto, K. Ninomiya, R. Inoue, M. Koike, Y. Uchiyama and H. Mori, Mice lacking BCAS1,
a novel myelin-associated protein, display hypomyelination, schizophrenia-like abnormal
behaviors, and upregulation of inflammatory genes in the brain. Glia 65, 727–739 (2017).
21. K. Sharma, S. Schmitt, C. G. Bergner, S. Tyanova, N. Kannaiyan, N. Manrique-Hoyos,
K. Kongi, L. Cantuti, U.-K. Hanisch, M.-A. Philips, M. J. Rossner, M. Mann, M. Simons,
Cell type- and brain region-resolved mouse brain proteome. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 1819–1831
(2015).
22. W. Huang, N. Zhao, X. Bai, K. Karram, J. Trotter, S. Goebbels, A. Scheller, F. Kirchhoff,
Novel NG2-CreERT2 knock-in mice demonstrate heterogeneous differentiation potential
of NG2 glia during development. Glia 62, 896–913 (2014).
23. L. Madisen, T. A. Zwingman, S. M. Sunkin, S. W. Oh, H. A. Zariwala, H. Gu, L. L. Ng,
R. D. Palmiter, M. J. Hawrylycz, A. R. Jones, E. S. Lein, H. Zeng, A robust and
high-throughput Cre reporting and characterization system for the whole mouse
brain. Nat. Neurosci. 13, 133–140 (2010).
24. A. Chang, W. W. Tourtellotte, R. Rudick, B. D. Trapp, Premyelinating oligodendrocytes in
chronic lesions of multiple sclerosis. N. Engl. J. Med. 346, 165–173 (2002).
25. B. D. Trapp, A. Nishiyama, D. Cheng, W. Macklin, Differentiation and death of
premyelinating oligodendrocytes in developing rodent brain. J. Cell Biol. 137, 459–468
(1997).
26. N. Spassky, C. Olivier, I. Cobos, B. LeBras, C. Goujet-Zalc, S. Martínez, B. Zalc, J. L. Thomas,
The early steps of oligodendrogenesis: Insights from the study of the plp lineage in
the brain of chicks and rodents. Dev. Neurosci. 23, 318–326 (2001).
27. G. S. Tomassy, D. R. Berger, H.-H. Chen, N. Kasthuri, K. J. Hayworth, A. Vercelli, H. S. Seung,
J. W. Lichtman, P. Arlotta, Distinct profiles of myelin distribution along single axons of
pyramidal neurons in the neocortex. Science 344, 319–324 (2014).
28. M. N. Rasband, E. Peles, The nodes of Ranvier: Molecular assembly and maintenance.
Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 8, a020495 (2016).
29. M. Ehrlich, S. Mozafari, M. Glatza, L. Starost, S. Velychko, A.-L. Hallmann, Q.-L. Cui,
A. Schambach, K.-P. Kim, C. Bachelin, A. Marteyn, G. Hargus, R. M. Johnson, J. Antel,
J. Sterneckert, H. Zaehres, H. R. Schöler, A. Baron-Van Evercooren, T. Kuhlmann, Rapid and
efficient generation of oligodendrocytes from human induced pluripotent stem cells
using transcription factors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 114, E2243–E2252 (2017).
30. S. Schneider, A. Gruart, S. Grade, Y. Zhang, S. Kröger, F. Kirchhoff, G. Eichele,
J. M. Delgado García, L. Dimou, Decrease in newly generated oligodendrocytes leads
to motor dysfunctions and changed myelin structures that can be rescued by
transplanted cells. Glia 64, 2201–2218 (2016).
31. G. Whelan, E. Kreidl, G. Wutz, A. Egner, J.-M. Peters and G. Eichele, Cohesin
acetyltransferase Esco2 is a cell viability factor and is required for cohesion in pericentric
heterochromatin. EMBO J. 31, 71–82 (2012).
32. M. Krüger, M. Moser, S. Ussar, I. Thievessen, C. A. Luber, F. Forner, S. Schmidt, S. Zanivan,
R. Fässler, M. Mann, SILAC mouse for quantitative proteomics uncovers kindlin-3 as
an essential factor for red blood cell function. Cell 134, 353–364 (2008).
33. T. Kuhlmann, S. Ludwin, A. Prat, J. Antel, W. Brück, H. Lassmann, An updated histological
classification system for multiple sclerosis lesions. Acta Neuropathol. 133, 13–24 (2016).
34. J. W. Prineas, R. O. Barnard, E. E. Kwon, L. R. Sharer, E. S. Cho, Multiple sclerosis:
Remyelination of nascent lesions. Ann. Neurol. 33, 137–151 (1993).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Fard et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam7816 (2017)
6 December 2017
11 of 12
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 35. S. Marques, A. Zeisel, S. Codeluppi, D. van Bruggen, A. Mendanha Falcão, L. Xiao, H. Li,
M. Häring, H. Hochgerner, R. A. Romanov, D. Gyllborg, A. B. Muñoz-Manchado,
G. La Manno, P. Lönnerberg, E. M. Floriddia, F. Rezayee, P. Ernfors, E. Arenas,
J. Hjerling-Leffler, T. Harkany, W. D. Richardson, S. Linnarsson, G. Castelo-Branco,
Oligodendrocyte heterogeneity in the mouse juvenile and adult central nervous system.
Science 352, 1326–1329 (2016).
36. A. Zeisel, A. B. Muñoz-Manchado, S. Codeluppi, P. Lönnerberg, G. La Manno, A. Juréus,
S. Marques, H. Munguba, L. He, C. Betsholtz, C. Rolny, G. Castelo-Branco,
J. Hjerling-Leffler and S. Linnarsson, Cell types in the mouse cortex and
hippocampus revealed by single-cell RNA-seq. Science 347, 1138–1142 (2015).
37. M. R. Freeman, D. H. Rowitch, Evolving concepts of gliogenesis: A look way back and
ahead to the next 25 years. Neuron 80, 613–623 (2013).
38. B. Emery, Regulation of oligodendrocyte differentiation and myelination. Science 330,
779–782 (2010).
39. S. A. Goldman, N. J. Kuypers, How to make an oligodendrocyte. Development 142,
3983–3995 (2015).
40. S. A. Back, N. L. Luo, N. S. Borenstein, J. M. Levine, J. J. Volpe, H. C. Kinney, Late
oligodendrocyte progenitors coincide with the developmental window of vulnerability
for human perinatal white matter injury. J. Neurosci. 21, 1302–1312 (2001).
41. J. M. Ruckh, J.-W. Zhao, J. L. Shadrach, P. van Wijngaarden, T. N. Rao, A. J. Wagers,
R. J. M. Franklin, Rejuvenation of regeneration in the aging central nervous system.
Cell Stem Cell 10, 96–103 (2012).
42. F. J. Sim, C. R. McClain, S. J. Schanz, T. L. Protack, M. S. Windrem, S. A. Goldman, CD140a
identifies a population of highly myelinogenic, migration-competent and efficiently
engrafting human oligodendrocyte progenitor cells. Nat. Biotechnol. 29, 934–941 (2011).
43. D. Buchet, C. Garcia, C. Deboux, B. Nait-Oumesmar, A. Baron-Van Evercooren, Human
neural progenitors from different foetal forebrain regions remyelinate the adult mouse
spinal cord. Brain 134, 1168–1183 (2011).
44. F. J. Najm, M. Madhavan, A. Zaremba, E. Shick, R. T. Karl, D. C. Factor, T. E. Miller,
Z. S. Nevin, C. Kantor, A. Sargent, K. L. Quick, D. M. Schlatzer, H. Tang, R. Papoian,
K. R. Brimacombe, M. Shen, M. B. Boxer, A. Jadhav, A. P. Robinson, J. R. Podojil, S. D. Miller,
R. H. Miller, P. J. Tesar, Drug-based modulation of endogenous stem cells promotes
functional remyelination in vivo. Nature 522, 216–220 (2015).
45. F. Mei, S. P. J. Fancy, Y.-A. A. Shen, J. Niu, C. Zhao, B. Presley, E. Miao, S. Lee, S. R. Mayoral,
S. A. Redmond, A. Etxeberria, L. Xiao, R. J. M. Franklin, A. Green, S. L. Hauser, J. R. Chan,
Micropillar arrays as a high-throughput screening platform for therapeutics in multiple
sclerosis. Nat. Med. 20, 954–960 (2014).
46. D. P. Leone, S. Genoud, S. Atanasoski, R. Grausenburger, P. Berger, D. Metzger,
W. B. Macklin, P. Chambon, U. Suter, Tamoxifen-inducible glia-specific Cre mice for
somatic mutagenesis in oligodendrocytes and Schwann cells. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 22,
430–440 (2003).
47. T. Nakamura, M. C. Colbert, J. Robbins, Neural crest cells retain multipotential
characteristics in the developing valves and label the cardiac conduction system.
Circ. Res. 98, 1547–1554 (2006).
48. C. Simon, H. Lickert, M. Götz, L. Dimou, Sox10-iCreERT2: A mouse line to inducibly trace
the neural crest and oligodendrocyte lineage. Genesis 50, 506–515 (2012).
Acknowledgments: We thank G. Schulz, K. Schulz, and O. Kowatsch for their expert
technical assistance. We also thank G. Eichele (Max Planck Institute, Göttingen, Germany)
for Esco2fl/fl mice, B. Zalc (INSERM, Paris, France) for PLP-G mice, and F. Kirchhoff
(University of Saarland, Homburg, Germany) for NG2-CreERT2 mice, and we are grateful for
being able to use PLP-CreERT2 mice in collaboration with U. Suter (ETH Zürich,
Switzerland). Funding: This work was supported by an ERC CoG grant (M.S.) and grants
from the German Research Foundation (SPP128, SPP1757, SFB1286, and TRR43), the
Tschira-Stiftung and the Adelson Foundation (M.S.), the Cluster of Excellence and DFG
Research SyNergy (M.S. and L.D.), the Hertie-Stiftung, and the German Multiple Sclerosis
Society (C. Stadelmann and W.B.). Author contributions: M.S., C. Stadelmann, M.K.F., and
F.v.d.M. designed the research and analyzed the data. M.K.F. performed mouse in vitro
and in vivo experiments, EdU and SILAC pulse labeling, morphological analysis, and
characterization of oligodendroglial subpopulations in mice. F.v.d.M. performed the
experiments using human samples. C. Sergiou, V.S., and C.W. performed remyelination
experiments in mice. S.S. generated Bcas1 knockout mice. S.M. and E.F.F. performed and
analyzed the mass spectrometry data. M.E. and L.S. performed the experiments using
human iPSCs. P.S. and L.C.-C. performed immunohistochemistry. T.K. supervised the
experiments using human iPSCs. H.U. supervised mass spectrometry analysis. S.J. and
L.D. performed the experiments with Esco2 mice. W.B. provided the human samples. M.S.
wrote the paper. C. Stadelmann, M.K.F., F.v.d.M., L.D., W.B., H.U., and L.D. edited the
manuscript. Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Data and materials availability: All data are contained within the manuscript
and the Supplementary Materials.
Submitted 16 January 2017
Resubmitted 13 July 2017
Accepted 14 November 2017
Published 6 December 2017
10.1126/scitranslmed.aam7816
Citation: M. K. Fard, F. van der Meer, P. Sánchez, L. Cantuti-Castelvetri, S. Mandad, S. Jäkel,
E. F. Fornasiero, S. Schmitt, M. Ehrlich, L. Starost, T. Kuhlmann, C. Sergiou, V. Schultz, C. Wrzos,
W. Brück, H. Urlaub, L. Dimou, C. Stadelmann, M. Simons, BCAS1 expression defines a
population of early myelinating oligodendrocytes in multiple sclerosis lesions. Sci. Transl.
Med. 9, eaam7816 (2017).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Fard et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam7816 (2017)
6 December 2017
12 of 12
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 multiple sclerosis lesions
BCAS1 expression defines a population of early myelinating oligodendrocytes in
Schultz, Claudia Wrzos, Wolfgang Brück, Henning Urlaub, Leda Dimou, Christine Stadelmann and Mikael Simons
Eugenio F. Fornasiero, Sebastian Schmitt, Marc Ehrlich, Laura Starost, Tanja Kuhlmann, Christina Sergiou, Verena 
Maryam K. Fard, Franziska van der Meer, Paula Sánchez, Ludovico Cantuti-Castelvetri, Sunit Mandad, Sarah Jäkel,
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aam7816
, eaam7816.
9
Sci Transl Med 
responses to remyelinating compounds for treating demyelinating disorders.
lesions, suggesting that remyelination might occur during MS and that BCAS1 expression could be used to track 
 cells are present around
+
rodent and human brain tissue. In brain samples from deceased MS patients, BCAS1
oligodendrocytes constitute a unique population expressing breast carcinoma amplified sequence 1 (BCAS1) in 
. show that myelinating
et al
areas of active myelination hampers the development of effective therapies. Fard 
demyelinating disorders. Although remyelinating strategies have been proposed, the lack of markers to detect 
Neuronal axon demyelination causes motor and cognitive impairments in multiple sclerosis (MS) and other
Mapping active myelination with BCAS1
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/419/eaam7816
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2017/12/04/9.419.eaam7816.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/448/eaam9507.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/442/eaal2563.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/430/eaao2304.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/7/310/310ra166.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/8/362/362ra146.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/8/364/364ra152.full
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/419/eaam7816#BIBL
This article cites 48 articles, 16 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
