 Accepted Article
This article has been accepted for publication and undergone full peer review but has not 
been through the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process, which may 
lead to differences between this version and the Version of Record. Please cite this article as 
doi: 10.1111/ejn.13492 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Received Date : 12-Sep-2016 
Revised Date   : 17-Nov-2016 
Accepted Date : 23-Nov-2016 
Article type      : Research Report 
 
Synaesthesia lost and found: Two cases of person- and music-colour synaesthesia. 
Francesca R Farina1, Kevin J Mitchell2*†, Richard AP Roche3† 
1School of Psychology, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland. 
2Trinity College Institute of Neuroscience and Smurfit Institute of Genetics, Trinity College 
Dublin, Ireland. 
3Department of Psychology, Maynooth University, Maynooth, Co Kildare, Ireland. 
* Corresponding author; † Joint senior authors 
Author email addresses: 
FRF Francesca.Farina@ucd.ie KJM Kevin.Mitchell@tcd.ie RAPR Richard.Roche@nuim.ie  
Keywords: aura, pharmacology, injury, suppression, conscious experience 
Abstract 
Synaesthesia is a developmental condition involving cross-communication between sensory 
modalities or substreams whereby an inducer (e.g. a sound) automatically evokes a 
concurrent percept in another modality (e.g. a colour). Whether this condition arises due to 
atypical structural connectivity (e.g., between normally unconnected cortical areas) or 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
altered neurochemistry remains a central question. We report the exceptional cases of two 
synaesthetes – subjects AB and CD – both of whom experience coloured auras around 
individuals, as well as coloured perceptions in response to music. Both subjects have, in 
recent years, suffered a complete loss or reduction of their synaesthetic experiences, one 
(AB) through successive head traumas, including a lightning strike, followed by a number of 
medications, and the other (CD) while taking anxiolytic medications. Using semi-structured 
interviews and data from the Synaesthesia Battery and a colourpicker task, we characterise 
the phenomenological characteristics of their pre-loss synaesthesia, as well as the 
subsequent restoration of each subject’s synaesthetic experiences (in the months post-
trauma for AB, and after cessation of medication for CD). Even after years of suppression, 
the patterns of associations were highly consistent with those experienced pre-injury. The 
phenomenological experience of synaesthesia can, thus, like most conscious experiences, be 
modulated by pharmacologically diverse medications or head injury. However, the 
underlying neural substrates mediating specific synaesthetic pairings appear remarkably 
“hard-wired” and can persist over very long periods even under conditions that alter or 
completely suppress the conscious synaesthetic experience itself. 
 
Introduction 
Synaesthetic experiences occur in 2-4% of the population (Simner et al., 2006). To date, 
over 60 different forms of synaesthesia have been identified (Day, 2015), while new 
varieties of the condition continue to be added. The most common – and most studied – 
form is grapheme-colour, in which colours are evoked by achromatic text (Chiou & Rich, 
2014). Sound-colour synaesthesia, whereby a sound (musical or non-musical) elicits a 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
specific colour, is also well-documented in the literature (Goller, Otten & Ward, 2009; 
Rizzo & Eslinger, 1989), although prevalence estimates are considerably lower (0.2%; 
Banissy, Kadosh, Maus, Walsh & Ward, 2009). Most recently, Ramachandran and 
colleagues (2013) characterised a novel form of emotion-evoked synaesthesia involving 
coloured halos around faces in a subject TK. This constituted only the eighth published 
report of this experience, following an initial report of a 7 year-old synaesthete in 1934 
(Riggs & Karwoski, 1934), and later subjects BB (Cytowic, 1989), GW (Ward, 2004), R, F, L 
and M (Milán et al., 2007; 2012).  
Neurobiological models of synaesthesia postulate that synaesthetic experiences 
arise due to aberrations in neural connectivity or neural communication. Hubbard (2007) 
describes four neural models of the synaesthetic experience which attribute the 
phenomenon to cross-activation between adjacent cortical regions (due to decreased 
pruning of prenatal pathways), disinhibited long-range feedback in multisensory areas, 
feedback in re-entrant processing circuits in visual areas and beyond, and/or 
overactivation of parietally-driven binding mechanisms (hyperbinding). Bargary and 
Mitchell (2008) also argue for structural differences as a parsimonious explanation, which 
can be reconciled with a role for learning in the emergence of specific associations 
(Mitchell and Newell (2015)). Neuroimaging studies have not distinguished between these 
models. Depsite many positive findings, a meta-analysis found no consistent structural 
differences at the macroscopic scale or consistent patterns of functional differences 
between the brains of synaesthetes and non-synaesthetes (Hupé and Dojat (2015)).  
 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Here, we report the cases of two synaesthetes – subjects AB and CD – both of whom 
experience coloured auras for individuals, as well as coloured perceptions in response to 
music. Remarkably, both AB and CD have, in recent years, suffered a temporary loss or 
reduction of their synaesthetic experiences due to head trauma and medication, 
respectively. We believe this constitutes the first report of the loss and subsequent return of 
these forms of synaesthetic experiences, and suggest that the study of such rare cases may 
shed light on the nature of this phenomenon.   
 
Results 
Synaesthete AB, a 21 year-old ambidextrous (left-hand dominant) female, has had 
synaesthetic perceptions since childhood. Specifically, she experiences projected visual 
colours in response to musical notes, chords and instruments, and strong associated colours 
or auras in response to people. Her musical concurrents are unidirectional, and appear – 
typically in the centre of the visual field – as semi-transparent percepts comparable to ink or 
paint dropped into water. Evoked colours are temporally synchronous to the on/offset of 
the sounds, and are influenced by characteristics such as pitch (higher notes present higher 
in the visual field with more pastel shades; lower notes appear in lower regions with more 
solid colours), volume (louder evokes more intense colour), type of instrument (see Figure 
1a for colours associated with different notes before and after loss, and Figure 1b for 
representations of different instruments) and expectation (more vivid colours for 
unexpected sounds). Despite being unable to read sheet music, AB can play the tin whistle 
(a traditional Irish flute), flute, glockenspiel, marimba and piano by ear, and cites her 
learning these instruments as being aided by her synaesthesia, where ‘wrong’ colours flag 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
out of tune notes (see Figure 1c, right, for a representation of a complete song). Her person-
colour associations are not projected in the visual field; rather, known individuals evoke a 
strong colour association in the mind’s eye, with specific personality traits linked to different 
colours (e.g. blue people are emotional, green are loyal; see Figure 1c, left, for a list). No 
two people have the same colour, but colours for couples can intermingle; further, some 
people can have multiple colours, while a person’s voice can differ from the colour of their 
personality. Colours are strongly influenced by emotion, and AB again states that this form 
of synaesthesia is beneficial in that her emotional response to a person is partly determined 
by their colour.  
 
Between the ages of 13 and 16, AB suffered two minor concussions, neither of 
which affected her synaesthetic experiences (see Figure 2). These traumas did, however, 
lead to increased migraines for which she prescribed Paramax (paracetamol with 
metoclopramide hydrochloride) at age 16. While on this medication, AB experienced a 
short-lived suppression of her coloured concurrents. AB started at university at age 18, at 
which time she was experiencing synaesthetic associations as normal. While at university, 
AB was introduced to the condition of synaesthesia, prompting her to complete the online 
Synesthesia Battery (Eagleman et al., 2007; see Table 1). In the battery, synaesthetes are 
indicated by a score below one and non-synaesthetes by a score of two or above. AB 
scored below one on the piano scale-colour (0.57) and instrument-colour scales (0.78). She 
did not receive a chord-colour score as her colours were not sufficiently varied to make a 
valid assessment. As part of the battery, AB completed the Vividness of Visual Imagery 
Questionnaire (VVIQ-2), a widely-used measure of self-reported imagery (Marks, 1973). 
Individuals who score 3 or above are considered to visualise more strongly than the 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
general population; AB scored above average (4.72). She also completed the projector-
associator measure included in the battery. ‘Projector’ and ‘associator’ categories are 
used to describe the way in which an individual’s synaesthesia is experienced. Projectors 
physically see their synaesthetic associations in space (e.g. the colour red projected onto 
the letter A printed in black), while associators experience their associations in the mind’s 
eye, i.e. they are aware that the letter A is red, but do not physically see this colour 
(Dixon, Smilek & Merikle, 2004). AB’s score was negative (-1), indicating a projector-type 
association. She also reported having personality-colour and emotion-colour associations, 
although these were not assessed in the battery. 
At age 19, AB contracted viral meningitis, resulting in a change in her experienced 
colours for the duration of the illness (one month); they remained vivid, but were evoked 
by the ‘wrong’ notes and appeared ‘displaced’. AB did not experience any other sensory 
disturbances during this time. After her recovery, she reports that the colours returned to 
normal. In the months that followed, she sustained two further concussions. The first of 
these caused her to lose consciousness; AB reports that following this incident, her music-
evoked colours moved from the centre to the lower periphery of her visual field and 
appeared muted or softened, without much change to her person-colour synaesthesia. The 
second concussion produced no loss of consciousness, but resulted in increased anxiety and 
emotionality, and a change in her synaesthetic experiences. These became quite intense 
and vibrant, and also bothersome as the colours “seemed weird” and easily led to sensory 
overload. Again, the sensory disturbances experienced by AB were restricted to her 
synaesthesia.  
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Two months later, by which time her experiences were “on their way back to 
normal”, AB was involved in a lightning strike (she was inside a metal cabin with her hand on 
the windowsill when the structure was hit by lightning), leading to a brief hospitalisation. 
This event had several effects, only some of which were related to her synaesthesia. AB 
experienced memory loss for a period of several days immediately after the lightning strike, 
as well as increased anxiety afterwards. In addition, her normal colour experiences were 
essentially abolished, though she did experience “an awful lot of white” due to a ringing in 
her ears, and later developed pins and needles, which she describes as seeing white flashes 
in her head. She suffered a number of panic attacks during this time and describes 
uncharacteristic synaesthetic experiences preceding them, including perceptions of intense, 
strange colours, mostly golds and silvers, which she describes as possibly “not even real 
colours”. Following the lightning strike, AB was prescribed Xanax (Alprazolam) for one 
month. This caused a temporary muting of her colours for both music and people, but by 
July of that year they had partially returned to their original colours with high consistency 
(r=0.69; calculated via RGB correlation coefficients, see Figure 1a). Over this time, AB 
developed seizures, which led to her being prescribed Keppra (Levetiracetam) in December 
of the same year. This resulted in a complete suppression of her synaesthetic colour 
experiences, as well as generally low mood and difficulty concentrating. After a month of 
increasing dosage of this medication, AB was removed from it due to the severe side effects. 
Within the 8-year period described, AB was not prescribed any other medications that 
affected her synaesthesia. She did report occasional use of over-the-counter medication 
for migraines (Ibuprofen); however, this had no effect on her synaesthetic experiences. 
She also reported a single instance of recreational drug use (cannabis). This caused her to 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
experience heightened emotionality which temporarily enhanced her synaesthesia for this 
period (approximately four hours), similar to the effects of a seizure. 
 
By the following year, AB had returned to normal cognitive and emotional 
functioning, but reports no restoration of her evoked colours at that time. Increased 
migraine caused heightened emotionality and distractibility, along with a partial return of 
her concurrents, albeit with altered or ‘wrong’ colours. Normal colour associations returned 
one month later. In June, by which time she was seizure-free, AB completed a second 
Synesthesia Battery (see Table 1) and semi-structured interview with the authors. She 
scored positively for instrument-colour associations (0.45), while her scores for piano scale-
colour (1.08) and chord-colour (1.84) were inconclusive (i.e. less than two). AB reported 
that she experienced different colours for each note within a given chord, and therefore 
found it difficult to choose one colour on these measures. As such, she was instructed to 
select the colour which was the strongest/most vivid of those experienced. This may 
explain why her colour-associations were more consistent than those observed when AB 
first completed the battery. AB also had an above average score of 5 on the VVIQ-2. AB’s 
colour concurrents for people were examined using a RGB colour-picker task (similar to 
Eagleman et al., 2007). In this task, AB was presented with the names of familiar (family 
and friends, chosen by AB herself) and unfamiliar people (chosen by the experimenters 
and introduced to AB shortly before the task) and asked to adjust the colour of each 
person using a RGB colour-picker until it matched her synaesthetic colour (three 
presentations; randomised order). AB’s scores were found to be highly consistent for all 
categories (i.e. family members, friends and strangers; see Figure 3, Top). 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
CD, a 31 year-old ambidextrous (right-hand dominant) male with a family history of 
autism, has experienced coloured auras around people and colours in response to music 
since childhood. Colours for people are automatically experienced around the person 
(usually the head) in the visual field, with specific colours associated with CD’s mood and/or 
emotional reactions to the person (see Figure 1d). The degree to which auras are projected 
in space depends largely on the colour itself; for example, brown and black are typically 
perceived in sustained projections, while red appears much less frequently. When hearing 
music, he perceives semi-independent “colour blotches” in the centre and periphery of the 
visual field; unlike AB, these are entirely based on his emotional reactions to the music. He 
also has vague but consistent colour associations for some numbers, and visualises numeric 
functions in three-dimensional space; this can be used as an arithmetical aid. CD also 
possesses mild but consistent emotional associations for some letter groupings (e.g. ‘abc’ 
and ‘ijk’), as well as personification of letters (although these personalities tend to be 
inconsistent and were more prevalent during his childhood). Up to the age of 30, CD viewed 
his synaesthetic experiences as being profoundly negative.  
At age 20, while taking Lexapro (Escitalopram) for Seasonal Affective Disorder, he 
first experienced a reduction of his visualisations, with a complete loss of colours for people 
and music occurring within 4-5 weeks. This absence persisted until the age of 27, when he 
ceased taking the medication, resulting in the eventual return in June of that year of 
coloured concurrents to people and music (Figure 2). CD was briefly prescribed Ritalin 
(Methylphenidate) the following January, leading to an alteration of his perceived colours 
for people; specifically, perceived colours were more purple-tinted and/or purple auras 
were enhanced. CD was not prescribed any other drugs during this time. By the time he 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
completed the Synesthesia Battery (see Table 1) and semi-structured interview (age 30), 
CD’s original perceptual experiences (which he now views as positive) were returning and 
his visualisations were ‘becoming more coherent’. His battery scores indicated an 
associator-type synaesthete (-0.33) with instrument-colour associations (0.57) and above 
average VVIQ (4.22). CD’s person-colour associations were found to be highly consistent 
across categories (see Figure 3, Bottom). 
 
Discussion 
Both of these cases of music- and person-colour synaesthesia follow the classic descriptions 
of developmental synaesthesia, rather than being injury- or drug-induced. Yet, the 
synaesthetic experiences were modified by injury, by infection, migraine or seizure, or by a 
variety of drugs. Whether synaesthesia arises due to atypical structural connectivity (e.g., 
between normally unconnected cortical areas) or altered neurochemistry remains a 
central 
question. 
These 
results 
provide 
some 
supporting 
evidence 
for 
the 
neuroanatomical account; specifically, the changes to AB’s synaesthetic experiences 
during seizures and migraines (akin to a recent case study by Alstadhaug & Benjaminsen, 
2010), and following head trauma. However, AB also experienced non-synaesthetic 
sensorimotor disturbances in some cases, e.g. after the lightning strike. Thus, we cannot 
exclude the possibility that the synaesthetic changes observed were mediated by other, 
unknown effects occurring as the result of these incidents.  
It is also possible to interpret the drug effects reported here as supporting the 
neurochemical account of synaesthesia, though the diversity of pathways involved 
suggests another interpretation. Previous reports on the pharmacology of synaesthesia 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
have focused mainly on the range of hallucinogenic drugs that can induce audiovisual 
synaesthesia-like experiences in non-synaesthetes or enhance them in synaesthetes, with a 
smaller number of reports of drugs that modulate the experience of developmental 
synaesthesia (see Sinke et al., 2012, for a recent review). Several authors have noted that 
many of these drugs, most notably the hallucinogens LSD, psilocybin and mescaline, act by 
modulating serotonin signalling (see Luke & Terhune, 2013) even leading to the proposal 
that mutations in serotonin pathway genes might underlie the condition (Brang & 
Ramachandran, 2008). Lexapro, which completely suppressed the synaesthetic experiences 
of CD for the eight years he was taking it, is a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor, which is 
consistent with previous reported effects of fluoxetine (Brang & Ramachandran, 2008; Luke 
et al., 2012). However, the other drug effects reported here do not support such a selective 
relationship to serotonin signalling. Metoclopromide (present in Paramax) is an antagonist 
of dopamine receptors; Levetiracetam (Keppra) binds synaptic vesicle glycoprotein SV2A 
and modulates presynaptic L-type calcium channels, leading to reduced neurotransmitter 
release; Alprazolam (Xanax) is a benzodiazepine which allosterically increases chloride flux 
through GABA-A receptors, thus increasing inhibition; and Methylphenidate (Ritalin) is a 
norepinephrine and dopamine reuptake inhibitor. Thus, whatever the neural substrate of 
these synaesthetic experiences, they can clearly be modulated by a diverse range of drugs 
targeting very different pathways. In this respect, synaesthesia does not differ from most 
other conscious experiences. The pattern of drug responsiveness does not implicate a 
particular neurochemical pathway, nor does it suggest that synaesthetic experiences arise 
from a disturbance in such a pathway. 
 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Remarkably, the drugs and other factors described here did not just change the 
intensity of the synaesthetic experience or affect whether it reached conscious awareness. 
They also led to qualitative changes in the nature of the concurrent percepts, specifically in 
the location in space of projected colours or in the specific colours induced. Furthermore, 
the changes were not short-lived – they persisted over days, weeks, months or years. 
However, despite the series of unfortunate events which caused successive alterations to 
AB’s synaesthetic experiences over an eight-year period and the complete suppression of 
CD’s synaesthesia also over an eight-year period, in both cases their synaesthesia has since 
returned to a similar level and qualitative nature as prior to these events. In the case of AB, 
direct comparison of colours for musical notes before and after the most severe set of 
events (recorded at ages and 18 and 21; Figure 2a) shows a number of changes but an 
overall high level of consistency (0.69). These findings provide strong evidence that the 
neural substrates of synaesthetic associations, once they are consolidated in what is 
presumably an early critical period (Newell & Mitchell, 2015), remain “hard-wired” 
thereafter and can persist over very long periods even under conditions that alter or 
completely suppress the conscious synaesthetic experience itself. 
 
Acknowledgements 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the contributions of Julia Januszweski and Laura Rai 
(Maynooth University) for transcribing the interviews with AB and CD, and Ríona McArdle 
(University of Newcastle) for the initial introduction to AB. Special thanks to AB and CD for 
their time, openness and willingness to engage with our tasks, and for feedback on the 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
manuscript. Ethical approval for data collected was granted by the Maynooth University 
Research Ethics Committee, BSRESC-2015-001. 
 
References 
Alstadhaug, K. B. & Benjaminsen, E. (2010). Synesthesia and migraine: case report. BMC 
Neurology, 10(1), 1. 
Banissy, M. J., Kadosh, R. C., Maus, G. W., Walsh, V. & Ward, J. (2009). Prevalence, 
characteristics and a neurocognitive model of mirror-touch synaesthesia. Experimental 
Brain Research, 198, 261-72. 
Bargary G. & Mitchell K. J. (2008). Synaesthesia and cortical connectivity. Trends in 
Neuroscience, 31(7), 335–342. 
Brang D. & Ramachandran V. S. (2008). Psychopharmacology of synesthesia: the role of 
serotonin S2a receptor activation. Med. Hypotheses 70, 903–904. 
Chiou, R. & Rich, A. N. (2014). The role of conceptual knowledge in understanding 
synaesthesia: Evaluating contemporary findings from a “hub-and-spokes” perspective. 
Frontiers in Psychology, 5(105), 1-55. 
Cytowic, R.E. (2002). Synesthesia: A Union of the senses. Hong Kong: Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology. 
Day, S.A. (2015). Linguistic Synesthesia. International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral 
Sciences (2nd Ed), 193-198. 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Dixon, M. J., Smilek, D. & Merikle, P. M. (2004). Not all synaesthetes are created equal: 
Projector versus associator synaesthetes. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 
4(3), 335-343. 
Eagleman, D.M. et al. (2007). A standardized test battery for the study of synesthesia. 
Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 159(1), 139-145. 
Goller, A. I., Otten, L. J. & Ward, J. (2009). Seeing sounds and hearing colors: an event-
related potential study of auditory–visual synesthesia. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 
21(10), 1869-1881. 
Hubbard, E. M. (2007). Neurophysiology of synesthesia. Current Psychiatry Reports, 9(3), 
193-199. 
Hupé, J.M. & Dojat, M. (2015). A critical review of the neuroimaging literature on 
synesthesia. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 9, 1-35. 
Luke, D. P. & Terhune, D. B. (2013). The induction of synaesthesia with chemical agents: a 
systematic review. Frontiers in psychology, 4(753), 1-12. 
Luke D., Terhune D. B. & Friday R. (2012). Psychedelic synaesthesia: evidence for a 
serotonergic role in synaesthesia. Seeing Perceiving 25, 74. 
Marks, D.F. (1973). Visual imagery differences in the recall of pictures. British Journal of 
Psychology, 64, 17-24. 
Milán, E. G., Hochel, M., González, A., Tornay, F., McKenney, K., Díaz Caviedes, R., Mata 
Martín, J. L., Rodríguez Artacho, MA., Domínguez García, E. & Vila, J. (2007). Experimental 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
study of phantom colors in a color blind synaesthete. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 
14(4), 75-95. 
Milán, E. G., Iborra, O., Hochel, M., Rodríguez Artacho, MA., Delgado-Pastor, L.C., Salazar, E., 
& González-Hernández, A. (2012). Auras in mysticism and synaesthesia: a comparison. 
Consciousness & Cognition, 21(1), 258-268. 
Newell, F. N. & Mitchell, K. J. (2015). Multisensory integration and cross-modal learning in 
synaesthesia: a unifying model. Neuropsychologia, 15, 30111-1. 
Ramachandran, V.S., Miller, L., Livingstone, M.S. & Brang, D. (2013). Colored halos around 
faces and emotion-evoked colors: A new form of synesthesia. Neurocase, 18(4), 352-358. 
Riggs, L.A. & Karwoski, T. (1934). Synaesthetsia. British Journal of Psychology, 25, 29-41. 
Rizzo, M. & Eslinger, P. J. (1989). Colored hearing synesthesia An investigation of neural 
factors. Neurology, 39(6), 781-781. 
Simner J, Sagiv N, Mulvenna C, Tsakanikos E, Witherby S. A, et al. (2006). Synaesthesia: 
the prevalence of atypical cross-modal experiences. Perception, 35(8), 1024-1033. 
Sinke, C., Halpern, J. H., Zedler, M., Neufeld, J., Emrich, H. M. & Passie, T. (2012). Genuine 
and drug-induced synesthesia: a comparison. Consciousness and Cognition, 21(3), 1419-
1434. 
Ward, J. (2004). Emotionally Mediated Synaesthesia. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 21(7), 761-
772. 
 
 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Figure 1 
 
Figure 1: a) RGB-accurate colour concurrents for musical notes for AB before (upper) and 
after (lower) loss of synaesthetic experiences. Consistency pre- and post-loss, calculated via 
correlation coefficients: Red: 0.71, Green: 0.74, Blue: 0.63. Mean = 0.69. b) Depiction of AB’s 
experience of music from piano (left) and flute (right) wherein colour percepts are 
experienced in the centre of the visual field within the confines of an imaginary 
box/corridor. The shape of the corridor’s boundaries varies according to the instrument; e.g. 
for the flute, it appears “more curvy to the right side”. c) Left: RGB-accurate colour 
concurrents for AB’s personality traits associated with people; Right: depiction of AB’s 
experience of a complete song (Flight Facilities - Stand Still) whereby colour concurrents are 
described “as if projected on the inside of a dome” above her head. d) Left: depiction of 
CD’s coloured auras, with independent central and peripheral concurrents; Right: RGB-
accurate colour concurrents for CD’s emotions, ranging from positive associations (green, 
purple) to ambiguous (blue, red) to negative (brown, black). Colour block sizes reflect the 
frequency of occurrence of each emotional association in CD’s experience. 
 
Figure 2 
Figure 2: Timeline of events and resultant effects on synaesthetic experience for AB (upper) 
and CD (lower). Significant events depicted include concussions/head trauma, migraine, 
seizures, taking medication and lightning strike. Grey blocks indicate time spent on 
medication, or duration of meningitis. Hashed areas on colour bars indicate periods of 
altered synaesthetic colours. Icons were sourced from thenounproject.com and include 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Lightning Bolt by artworkbean, Pill by Sergey Demushkin, Burst by Bohdan Burmich, User by 
JM Waideaswaran and Music by Sherrinford. 
 
Figure 3 
Figure 3: RGB-accurate colour concurrents for specific people for AB (upper) and CD (lower) 
on three successive occasions using a colour-picker. Consistency scores were calculated by 
correlating red, green and blue values for each set of names (relatives, friends, strangers) 
across presentations 1 and 2, 1 and 3 and 2 and 3, resulting in a correlation coefficient for 
each colour for each category. These three colour coefficients were then averaged to 
produce mean correlation scores for each name type. Mean correlation coefficients for 
red, green and blue values are shown for each category: Relatives/Family Members; Friends; 
Strangers/Unknown. Names included in the Relatives and Friends categories were self-
selected by AB and CD. Names in the Strangers/Unknown category were selected by the 
authors; these individuals were introduced briefly to AB and CD before the task. All names 
have been changed to preserve anonymity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Table 1 
 
 
Age 18 
Age 20 
Subject AB 
 
 
Battery Results 
Piano scale → colour: 0.57  
(< 1.0 synaesthetic) 
Piano scale → colour: 1.08 
 
Instruments → colour: 0.78  
(< 1.0 synaesthetic) 
Instruments → colour: 0.45 
 
Visual imagery: 4.72  
(>3 higher than average) 
Visual imagery: 5 
 
Projector associator: -1 
(negative = associator) 
Chord → colour: 1.84  
(< 1.0 synaesthetic) 
Subject CD 
 
Age 31 
Battery Results 
- 
Instruments → colour: 0.57  
(< 1.0 synaesthetic) 
 
- 
Visual imagery: 4.22 (>3 higher 
than average) 
 
- 
Projector associator: -0.33 
(negative = associator) 
 
 
Table 1: Data from the Online Synesthesia Battery (Eagleman et al., 2007) for AB (taken at 
ages 18 and 20) and CD (age 31). For inducer-concurrent pairs, scores below 1.0 (in bold) 
indicate the presence of synaesthesia; for visual imagery, a Vividness of Visual Imagery 
Questionnaire (VVIQ-2) score above 3.0 indicated above average imagery. Negative scores 
on the projector-associator scale are indicative of associator-type. 
 
 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
