 THE
JOURNAL
•
RESEARCH
•
www.fasebj.org
Protective effects of mitochondria-targeted
antioxidants and statins on cholesterol-
induced osteoarthritis
Saba Farnaghi,*,1 Indira Prasadam,*,1 Guangping Cai,† Thor Friis,* Zhibin Du,* Ross Crawford,*,‡
Xinzhan Mao,†,2 and Yin Xiao*,§,3
*Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation, School of Chemistry, Physics, and Mechanical Engineering, and §Australia–China Centre for
Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia; †Department of
Orthopaedic Surgery, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, China; and ‡Department of Orthopedics, Prince Charles
Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia
ABSTRACT: The contribution of metabolic factors on the severity of osteoarthritis (OA) is not fully appreciated. This
study aimed to define the effects of hypercholesterolemia on the progression of OA. Apolipoprotein E-deficient
(ApoE2/2) mice and rats with diet-induced hypercholesterolemia (DIHC) rats were used to explore the effects of
hypercholesterolemiaontheprogressionofOA.BothmodelsexhibitedOA-likechanges,characterizedprimarilyby
a loss of proteoglycans, collagen and aggrecan degradation, osteophyte formation, changes to subchondral bone
architecture, and cartilage degradation. Surgical destabilization of the knees resulted in a dramatic increase of
degradativeOAsymptomsinanimalsfedahigh-cholesteroldietcomparedwithcontrols. Clinically relevant doses
of free cholesterol resulted in mitochondrial dysfunction, overproduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS),
and increased expression of degenerative and hypertrophic markers in chondrocytes and breakdown of the
cartilage matrix. We showed that the severity of diet-induced OA changes could be attenuated by treatment
with both atorvastatin and a mitochondrial targeting antioxidant. The protective effects of the mitochondrial
targeting antioxidant were associated with suppression of oxidative damage to chondrocytes and restoration of
extracellular matrix homeostasis of the articular chondrocytes. In summary, our data show that hypercholester-
olemia precipitates OA progression by mitochondrial dysfunction in chondrocytes, in part by increasing ROS
production and apoptosis. By addressing the mitochondrial dysfunction using antioxidants, we were able at-
tenuate the OA progression in our animal models. This approach may form the basis for novel treatment options
for this OA risk group in humans.—Farnaghi, S., Prasadam, I., Cai, G., Friis, T., Du, Z., Crawford, R., Mao, X.,
Xiao, Y. Protective effects of mitochondria-targeted antioxidants and statins on cholesterol-induced osteo-
arthritis. FASEB J. 31, 356–367 (2017). www.fasebj.org
KEY WORDS: hypercholesterolemia
• ApoE2/2 mice
• oxidative stress
• cartilage
The role of cholesterol in the development of coronary
artery disease is well documented, with numerous studies
demonstrating itsdeleterious effectsin the development of
atherosclerosis(1,2).Itsroleintheetiologyofosteoarthritis
(OA) is not as well understood, although epidemiologic
studies suggest a strong association between elevated se-
rum cholesterol levels and OA (3–5). Chondrocytes have
naturally high levels of cholesterol in their cell membranes
ABBREVIATIONS: 3-D, 3-dimensional; ACC, articular cartilage chondrocyte; ApoE2/2, apolipoprotein E-deficient; BSA, bovine serum albumin; BV, bone
volume; CD, control diet; DCFDA, 29,79-dichlorofluorescin diacetate; GPX, glutathione peroxidase; DIHC, diet-induced hypercholesterolemia; DMM, de-
stabilization of the medial meniscus; HC, hypercholesterolemia; HCD, high-cholesterol diet; IHC, immunohistochemical; micro-CT, micro–computed to-
mography; MDA, malondialdehyde; MSX, medial menisectomy; OA, osteoarthritis; p0, passage 0; ROS, reactive oxygen species; sGAG, sulfated
glycosaminoglycan; SOD, superoxide dismutase; TUNEL, terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling; TV, total volume
1 These authors contributed equally to this work.
2 Correspondence: Orthopedic Trauma Research Laboratory, The Second XiangYa Hospital, Central South University, 139 Middle RenMin Rd., Changsha,
China 410011. E-mail: maoxinzhan72@126.com
3 Correspondence: Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation, Queensland University of Technology, 60 Musk Ave., Kelvin Grove, QLD 4059,
Australia. E-mail: yin.xiao@qut.edu.au
doi: 10.1096/fj.201600600R
This article includes supplemental data. Please visit http://www.fasebj.org to obtain this information.
356
0892-6638/17/0031-0356 © FASEB
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 02, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 356-367.
 (6) and produce their own cholesterol, expressing all the
necessary proteins for cholesterol biosynthesis, such
as 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A synthase 1,
acetyl-coenzyme A acetyltransferase 1, or low-density li-
poprotein receptor (7).Thereis evidencethat indicates that
cholesterol has a regulatory role in chondrogenic differ-
entiation and that its expression is particularly sensitive to
hypoxic conditions (8). Aberrant regulation of cholesterol
homeostasis is a characteristic feature of OA development,
with accumulation of cholesterol and fatty acids found
particularly within the superficial zone of the cartilage (9).
Abnormal cholesterol accumulation occurs when choles-
terol influx into the cells, by the actions of apolipoproteins,
exceedscholesterolefflux(10).Thegeneexpressionofthe2
liver X receptor subtypes a andb, aswell asthecholesterol
transporters APOA1 and ABCA1, have been shown to
be down-regulated in OA chondrocytes compared with
normal controls (11). Mice fed a high-cholesterol diet
(HCD) for an extended period suffer degenerative OA-like
changes to their cartilage (12), thus establishing a causal
relationship between cholesterol homeostasis and the de-
velopment and/or progression of OA.
Mitochondria are membrane-enclosed organelles that
produce energy for cells by oxidative phosphorylation and
have a central role in a number of cellular functions (13).
Mitochondrial dysfunction has been linked to hypercholes-
terolemia (HC), hyperglycemia, and hypertriglyceridemia
and is an inevitable consequence of aging (14, 15). There is a
strong association between increased cholesterol oxidation
products and mitochondrion-derived oxidative stress,
which leads to increased production of mitochondrial
reactive oxygen species (ROS) (16). ROS are natural by-
products of cellular metabolism and are involved in in-
tracellular signaling. In normal circumstances, ROS are
neutralized by superoxide dismutases (SODs) and gluta-
thione peroxidase (GPX). Human chondrocytes constitu-
tively express GPX and cytosolic Cu/Zn SOD and
mitochondrial SOD. The SODs transform O2
×2 into hydro-
gen peroxide (H2O2), which is then eliminated by GPX and
catalases(17).ExcessiveamountsofROScanoverwhelmthe
mitochondrial oxidative stress defenses, inducing irrepara-
ble harm in susceptible cells, thereby causing permanent
damage to the associated tissues. Increased production of
ROS, in particular superoxide and radicals derived from
superoxide, are associated with cell dysfunction in human
disease (18) and animal models (19), and evidence shows a
link between oxidative stress and cartilage degradation in
humans (20, 21). It is still unclear whether high cholesterol
levels affect chondrocyte mitochondrial function and in
particular whether an overall impairment to deal with in-
creased ROS production precipitates cartilage damage.
In the presentstudywe testedthehypothesisthat dietary
cholesterol and elevated plasma cholesterol levels play a
leading role in triggering the onset and progression of OA.
We sought to determine if mitochondrial dysfunction could
be the potential mechanism behind cartilage damage in re-
sponse to high cholesterol by causing chondrocyte pheno-
type changes and apoptosis. We also explored whether the
application of atorvastatin or the mitochondria-specific an-
tioxidant treatment could attenuate cholesterol-induced ef-
fects on articular cartilage.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animal models
Five-week-old male background C57BL/6 (control) and apoli-
poprotein E-deficient (ApoE2/2) mice were purchased from
Animal Center of Central–South University, China and Animal
Resources Centre (Perth, WA, Australia). Experiments were
performed in accordance with protocols approved by the In-
stitutional Animal Care and Use Committees and Institutional
Biosafety Committees of both Central–South University and
Queensland University of Technology. The mice were fed either
standard rodent chow [control diet (CD)] or an HCD (standard
diet supplemented with 10% cocoa butter, 1.25% cholesterol, and
0.5% sodium cholate) (Specialist Feeds Research Diets, Perth,
WA, Australia) for 4 wk prior to OA induction to induce the
hypercholesterolemia phenotype in the mice according pre-
viously published studies (22). For the rat dietary hypercholes-
terolemia model, 8-wk-old male Wistar rats (Animal Resources
Centre) were fed either CD or HCD for 6 wk prior to OA in-
duction. Body weight and food consumption were measured
each week and blood samples were taken to assess serum lipid
profiles (total cholesterol) using an Abcam Cholesterol Assay Kit
(ab65390; Sapphire Bioscience, Redfern, NSW, Australia) to
confirm the HC phenotype.
Induction of OA in mice and rats and treatment with
mitochondria-specific antioxidant and atorvastatin
To induce OA in the mice, the right knee was opened using a
medial parapatellar approach, and the medial meniscal ligament
was dissected to achieve destabilization of the medial meniscus
(DMM) of the right knee joint (23). Mice in the control group un-
derwent a sham operation that did not dissect the medial meniscal
ligament; OA in rats was induced by medial menisectomy (MSX)
surgery (24–26). One week after surgery, a group of ApoE2/2
mice and rats with diet-induced hypercholesterolemia (DIHC)
were treated with either the mitochondria-specific antioxidant
MitoTempo(0.7mg/kg/d,i.p.)(Sigma-Aldrich,CastleHill,NSW,
Australia) or atorvastatin (3 mg/kg/d, oral gavage) (Merck Mil-
lipore, Bayswater, VIC, Australia) to evaluate whether these
treatments had any therapeutic effects on cholesterol-induced
OA. These animals were euthanized at 8 wk postsurgery, and
knee joint tissues were harvested and processed for histologic
evaluation.
Lipoprotein analysis
Blood samples were collected in EDTA tubes after 4 h of food
deprivation by tail incisions at 0, 4, and 8 wk postsurgery.
The plasmas were centrifuged for 10 min at 600 rpm, col-
lected, and stored at 280°C. For lipoprotein profiles, plasma
from each group was fractionated and analyzed for total
cholesterol using a Cholesterol Assay Kit following the
manufacturer’s protocol.
Radiography, histology,
and immunohistochemistry
Kneejointradiographswerecapturedusingabench-topFaxitron
MX20 X-ray system (Faxitron Biopics, Tucson, AZ, USA). For
histology, the knee joints were fixed overnight in 4% para-
formaldehyde and then dehydrated, embedded in paraffin, and
cut with a microtome to generate 5-mm-thick sections, cut in
100-mm intervals across the entire joint. Sections were stained
with safranin O following our previously described protocols
ROLE OF HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA IN OSTEOARTHRITIS
357
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 02, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 356-367.
 (26), and disease severity was scored using a Mankin score by 3
observers under blinded conditions. Immunohistochemistry
was performed according to our previously published studies
(25, 27) to detect cartilage degradation products: the aggrecan
NITEGE epitope, or the collagen DIPEN neoepitope (kind gift
from Professor Amanda Fosang, Murdoch Childrens Re-
search Institute, Melbourne, VIC, Australia), type X collagen
(Abcam), MMP13 (Abcam), CYCS, and malondialdehyde
(MDA) (Abcam) antibodies. To conduct semiquantitative
data analysis, the positive cells from different fields of ob-
servation were counted and normalized to the cell number per
100 total cells in each group.
Bone evaluation using micro–computed tomography
Subchondral bone volume (BV) was calculated using micro–
computed tomography (micro–CT) (Scanco, Br ¨
uttisellen,
Switzerland) scanning as described previously (28). To assess
subsequent new bone formation and osteophytes, fluorescence
dyes (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA) were
given intraperitoneally: alizarin red S (Sigma-Aldrich, Waltham,
MA) (25 mg/kg, 3 d before being euthanized) and calcein
(Sigma-Aldrich) (10 mg/kg, 10 d before alizarin injection). The
samples were resin embedded as described previously (27) to
visualize the fluorochrome labeling.
Human cartilage collection and in vitro
cholesterol loading
Cholesterol was delivered to chondrocytes by using cholesterol
(Chol):methyl-b-cyclodextrin (MbCD) complex (Sigma-Aldrich).
This method has been widely used to successfully deliver cho-
lesterol in a variety of cell types. Human articular chondrocytes
were isolated and differentiated in 3-dimensional (3D) pellets as
described previously (29). The pellets were treated with different
doses of Chol:MbCD complexes in 0.2% (w/v) bovine serum
albumin (BSA)for 14 d. Pellets incubated with 0.2% BSA (vehicle)
without Chol:MbCD treatment served as controls. Similarly,
cartilage disks were harvested from the femoropatellar grooves
of the knee joints of 1- to 2-wk-old calves (obtained from a local
butcher shop) as previously described and treated with Chol:
MbCD complex as described above. MitoTempo treatment
(10 mM) was performed for 14 d in cholesterol-stimulated
(30 mg/ml; hypercholesterolaemia-like concentration) articu-
lar cartilage chondrocyte (ACC) pellets after preincubation for
1 h at the dose of 5 mM. The same method was used to treat
bovine explants by MitoTempo for 7 d. Chol:MbCD-only treat-
ment of the ACC pellets and bovine discs served as controls.
Sulfated glycosaminoglycan assay
Sulfated glycosaminoglycan (sGAG) assay was performed based
on a protocol provided in the Blyscan sGAG assay kit (Biocolor
Life Science Assays; Labtek, West Ipswich, QLD, Australia).
Supernatants from the chondrocyte pellet culture and bovine
explant culture were collected every 3 d and immediately stored
at 280°C. sGAG content was measured at the wavelength of 595
nm by a microplate spectrophotometer (Benchmark Plus,
Tacoma, WA, USA).
MTT assay
Freshly digested primary chondrocytes [passage 0 (p0)] were
seeded in a 96-well tissue culture plate at a density of 5000
cells per well. After 24 h incubation, the culture medium was
removed and replaced with serum-free DMEM supplemented
with Chol:MbCD (30 mM) for 24 h. Cells incubated with 0.2%
BSA (vehicle) without Chol:MbCD served as controls. MTT
[(3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide]
(Sigma-Aldrich) assay was applied to test the overall metabolic
activity. MTT solution (20 ml of 5 mg/ml solution) was added
to each well. After incubation for 4 h, the DMEM-MTT solu-
tion was carefully removed and replaced by 100 ml of di-
methyl sulfoxide to dissolve the formazan crystals. The
absorbance was read at 595 nm by a microplate spectropho-
tometer (Benchmark Plus, Tacoma, WA, USA).
ATP assay
Freshly digested primary chondrocytes (p0) were seeded at
high density (1.8 3 105 cells/cm2) to retain the chondrogenic
phenotype. On the day of the experiment, growth medium
was removed and replaced with serum-free DMEM sup-
plemented with 30 mM Chol:MbCD for 24 h. Cells incubated
with 0.2% BSA (vehicle) without Chol:MbCD served as controls.
The cellular ATP content of chondrocytes were determined by a
bioluminescence assay based on the luciferase requirement for
ATP in producing emitted light, according to the manufacturer’s
protocol (Promega Corp., Alexandria, NSW, Australia).
Rhodamine 123 assay
Freshly digested primary chondrocytes (p0) were plated at high
densities and treated with 30 mM Chol:MbCD for 24 h. Cells
incubated with 0.2% BSA (vehicle) without Chol:MbCD served
as controls. Chondrocytes were washed with phosphate-
buffered saline and centrifuged (10,000 g, 4 min) twice. Cells
were counted using trypan blue, and 90 ml of suspended chon-
drocytes (1 3 106 cells/ml) in sodium citrate buffer and 10 ml of
Rhodamine 123 solution (500 mM) (Sigma-Aldrich) were in-
cubated for 10 min at 37°C in the dark. After incubation, stained
cells were centrifuged for 1 min at 10,000 g, and the pellet was
suspended in HEPES buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Tulla-
marine, NSW, Australia). Stained sample (20 ml) was read using a
fluorescent plate reader at 505-nm excitation and 534-nm emis-
sion wavelengths.
Cellular ROS detection
Cellular ROS detection assay was performed according to the
protocol for the 29,79-dichlorofluorescin diacetate (DCFDA) Cel-
lular ROS Detection Assay Kit (Abcam). Freshly digested pri-
mary chondrocytes (p0) were seeded at high densities and left
overnight to attach. On the day of experiment, growth medium
was removed and replaced with serum-free DMEM with 30 mM
Chol:MbCD for 24 h. Cells incubated with 0.2% BSA (vehicle)
without Chol:MbCD served as controls. After 24 h, cells were
incubated with DCFDA reagent for 45 min at 37°C in the dark.
The fluorescence was read using a fluorescence plate reader to
perform an endpoint read at 485-nm excitation wavelength and
535-nm emission wavelength.
JC-1 staining
Mitochondrial transmembrane potential, DCm, is an important
parameter of mitochondrial function and is used as an indicator of
cellhealth.JC-1isalipophilic,cationicdyethatcanselectivelyenter
the mitochondria and reversibly change color from green to red
as the membrane potential increases. Freshly digested primary
chondrocytes (p0) were grown on glass coverslips placed in 6-well
358
Vol. 31
January 2017
FARNAGHI ET AL.
The FASEB Journal x www.fasebj.org
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 02, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 356-367.
 Figure 1. Hypercholesterolemia-induced OA-like changes and atorvastatin-attenuated cartilage damage induced by
hypercholesterolemia. A) ApoE2/2 mice were fed the HCD or CD for 4 wk, after which they underwent sham or DMM
surgery to induce OA. Five weeks after surgery, the animals were euthanized, and knee joints were harvested and processed for
histology and stained with safranin O. The images shown are sagittal sections of the tibia medial compartment where
proteoglycans stain red and bone stains green. Black arrows indicate areas with loss of proteoglycan. Scale bars, 100 mm (n = 6).
For atorvastatin treatment, ApoE2/2 mice were fed HCD for 4 wk, after which ApoE2/2 mice underwent OA surgery. At 1 wk
postsurgery, the sham- and OA-induction-surgery animals were administered atorvastatin orally every day for 5 wk, after which the
animals were euthanized, and knee joints were harvested and processed for histology. Safranin-O images revealed treatment effects of
atorvastatin in the HCD-fed sham-surgery and OA ApoE2/2 mice. Scale bars, 100 mm (n = 6 animals). B) Wistar rats were fed an HCD
or CD for 6 wk, after which the rats underwent sham surgery or MSX surgery to induce OA. Eight weeks after surgery the animals were
euthanized, and knee joints were harvested. Images show safranin O staining of sagittal sections of the tibial medial
compartments. Black arrows indicate loss of proteoglycan. Scale bars, 100 mm. For atorvastatin treatment, DIHC rats were fed
HCD for 6 wk, after which the rats underwent DMM OA or sham surgery. At 1 wk postsurgery, the sham- and OA-treated animals
were administered atorvastatin orally every day for 8 wk, after which the animals were euthanized, and knee joints were harvested
and processed for histology. Safranin-O images revealed treatment effects of atorvastatin in the HCD-fed sham- and OA-treated
DIHC rats. Scale bars, 100 mm (n = 8 animals). C) Mankin scores in ApoE2/2 mice and DIHC rats with or without OA induction
and atorvastatin treatment and 2 dietary regimes (n = 6 for ApoE2/2 and n = 8 for DIHC per group). Data are means 6 SD.
*P , 0.05. D) Total serum cholesterol level in ApoE2/2 mice and rats fed an HCD and CD and total serum cholesterol level in
ApoE2/2 mice and DIHC rats that received atorvastatin. Data are means 6 SD. *P , 0.05 (n = 8 per group). E) Safranin O and
Alcian blue staining of 3D-cultured ACCs stimulated with different doses of cholesterol. F) Corresponding sGAG released into
conditioned medium. ACC pellets incubated with vehicle served as controls. Primary p0 chondrocyte pellets were used in all
experiments. Scale bars, 100 mm. Data are means 6 SD. *P , 0.05 vs. control (n = 4 per group).
ROLE OF HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA IN OSTEOARTHRITIS
359
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 02, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 356-367.
 plates and treated with 30 mM Chol:MbCD complexes for 24 h.
Cells incubated with 0.2% BSA (vehicle) without Chol:MbCD
served as controls. Cells were incubated with JC-1 dye (Sigma-
Aldrich) for 20 minat 37°Cina humidifiedatmosphere containing
5% CO2. JC-1 aggregates were visualized under a fluorescence
microscope (Carl Zeiss Microimaging GmbH, Gottingen, Ger-
many) using FITC/Cy3 filters. Mitochondrial depolarization is
indicated by a shift from red to green fluorescence.
Transmission electron microscopy
Transmission electron microscopy can capture images at a
significantly higher resolution than light microscopes and is,
therefore, particularly well suited to study small organelles
such as mitochondria. Primary p0 chondrocytes were seeded
on a 6-well plate and grown overnight, after which the growth
medium was removed and replaced with serum-free DMEM
supplemented with 30 mM Chol:MbCD for 24 h. Cells in-
cubated with 0.2% BSA (vehicle) without Chol:MbCD served
as controls. After 24 h incubation time, the cells were fixed
with 3% glutaraldehyde. As a second fixative procedure,
osmium tetroxide was used to crosslink and stabilize cells
and organelle membrane lipids. Fixation was followed by
dehydration of the tissue in ethanol, followed by embed-
ding in resin. Thin sections were cut off from resin blocks
and stained. Images of the stained slides were then captured
using a JEM-1400 Transmission Electron Microscope (Jeol,
Tokyo, Japan).
In situ cell death detection (apoptosis) using TUNEL
Chondrocyte apoptosis was assessed principally at single cell
level based on labeling of DNA strand breaks [terminal deoxy-
nucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) tech-
nology] using the Fluorescein In Situ Cell Death Detection Kit
(Merck Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
TUNEL-positive chondrocytes were visualized under a fluores-
cence microscope (Carl Zeiss Microimaging GmbH).
RNA extraction, real-time PCR, and
Western blotting
Total RNA was extracted using Trizol reagent (Thermo Fisher
Scientific) as described in our previous studies (29). Real-time
quantitative PCR, using SYBR Green detection chemistry, was
performed on the ABI 7500 Fast Real Time PCR system (Ap-
plied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). Melt curve analyses
of all real-time PCR products were performed and shown to
produce a single DNA duplex. All samples were measured in
triplicate, and the mean value was considered for compara-
tive analysis. Quantitative measurements were determined
using the 22DDCt method, and 18s and b-actin expression was
used as the internal controls. All samples were performed in
triplicate. Protein levels were determined using Western
blotting, and this technique was performed as described in
our previous studies (29, 30).
Statistical analyses
Data are expressed as means 6 SD. Data were analyzed using
Student’s t test or multiple-factor ANOVA, followed by a post hoc
test when appropriate using Prism statistical software (Graph-
Pad, La Jolla, CA, USA). A value of P , 0.05 was considered
statistically significant.
RESULTS
Hypercholesterolemia induces OA-like
changes in ApoE2/2 mice and DIHC rats
The development of hypercholesterolemia has been at-
tributed to both impaired cholesterol regulation (nature)
and high-cholesterol food intake (nurture). To test this
hypothesis, we chose 2 animal models—ApoE2/2 mice
and the DIHC model (normal rats fed an HCD)—as
translationalmodelstomimichypercholesterolemia.Both
animal models have been used extensively to study
hypercholesterolemia-related diseases.
There were no statistically significant differences
in weight between the CD and HCD groups: CD
ApoE2/2 mice weighed 21.61 6 1.38 g vs. HCD
ApoE2/2 mice at 21.81 6 1.25 g, and CD rats weighed
304.17 6 7.16 g vs. HCD rats at 319.02 g 6 12.81
(P . 0.05) (Supplemental Fig. 1A). Similarly, there was no
significant difference in daily food intake between the
HCD rats compared with controls (CD 16.85 6 0.79 g vs.
HCD 17.83 6 0.75 g; P . 0.05) (Supplemental
Fig. 1B). Plasma cholesterol levels were measured in
ApoE2/2 mice and DIHC rats and in rats treated with
the cholesterol-lowering drug atorvastatin to further
confirm that the effects induced were cholesterol re-
lated. Mice and rats fed HCD had significantly higher
cholesterol levels than the control groups, and ator-
vastatin reduced cholesterol levels in both the models
(Fig. 1D).
Next,wetestedwhetherhigh cholesterolledtoOA-like
changes in the knees of the animals. Safranin-O staining
was used to assess the relative amounts of proteogly-
cans. ApoE2/2 mice fed HCD developed spontaneous
OA symptoms, characterized by decreased intensity of
safranin-O staining and increased Mankin scores. Mice
subjected to DMM OA surgery and fed HCD showed
more severe OA symptoms compared with the OA group
on CD (Fig. 1A, C). We found similar evidence in the rat
cohort, with significant proteoglycan loss, detectable
changes to cartilage surfaces, and clustering of chon-
drocytes in both sham- and OA-surgery rats fed HCD
compared with the respective CD group (Fig. 1B). In
line with these results, Mankin scores rose significantly
in the HCD group both with and without surgically
induced OA compared with the CD group (Fig. 1C).
These results support the notion that factors related
to metabolic syndrome, such as HC, make a significant
contribution to the development, progression, and
severity of OA. In both OA ApoE2/2 mouse and DIHC
rat models, the extent of cartilage degeneration
strongly depended on what diet the animals had been
given.
Atorvastatin treatment attenuates
degradative changes induced
by hypercholesterolemia
Histologic assessment of the knee joint showed that
atorvastatin treatment significantly reduced cartilage
360
Vol. 31
January 2017
FARNAGHI ET AL.
The FASEB Journal x www.fasebj.org
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 02, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 356-367.
 degradation in animals fed HCD and even in those with
surgically induced OA. Atorvastatin treatment of HCD-
fed OA ApoE2/2 mice showed less evidence of carti-
lage
degradation
compared
with
untreated
OA
ApoE2/2 mice on HCD (Fig. 1A). The Mankin scores
reiterated these observations with a lower score in
atorvastatin-treated sham-surgery and OA ApoE2/2
mice fed HCD (Fig. 1C). Atorvastatin treatment of
DIHC rats also resulted in reduced proteoglycan loss
and maintained cartilage surface integrity (Fig. 1B) and
significantly lowered Mankin scores in HCD rats with
and without surgically induced OA compared with
untreated animals (Fig. 1C). These results suggest that
cholesterol elevation caused the cartilage damage since
the cholesterol-lowering drug could revert some these
changes in both mice and rats.
Figure 2. Hypercholesterolemia induces molecular changes similar to OA cartilage. A, B) IHC staining of COL10, NITEGE, and
DIPEN in ApoE2/2 (A; n = 9) and DIHC rat models (B) fed either a CD or HCD diet (sham-treated group; n = 6). The
percentage of total positive cells was used as a standard measure for quantification. Scale bars, 50 mm. C) The mRNA expression
of MMP13, RUNX2, ACAN, and SOX9 after cholesterol stimulation (30 mg/ml) in 3D-cultured ACCs (n = 4 in triplicate) at d 7 of
redifferentiation. ACC pellets incubated with 0.2% BSA (vehicle) and without Chol:MbCD served as controls. The data have been
normalized to untreated ACC controls, and the value has been arbitrarily set to 1. b-actin and 18s rRNA were used as endogenous
housekeeping genes. D) Representative Western blot analyses of MMP13 and ACAN expression after cholesterol stimulation in
3D-cultured ACCs (n = 3 separate experiments) at d 14. E) Representative immunofluorescence staining of COL10, ACAN, and
MMP13 in 3D-cultured ACCs after cholesterol stimulation for 14 d. The percentage of positive cells over total number of cells was
used as a standard measure of protein expression. ACC pellets incubated with 0.2% BSA (vehicle) without Chol:MbCD
served as controls. Scale bars, 50 mm. P0 chondrocyte pellets were used in all experiments (n = 3). Data are means 6 SD.
*P , 0.05 vs. control.
ROLE OF HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA IN OSTEOARTHRITIS
361
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 02, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 356-367.
 Figure 3. Cholesterol challenge altered mitochondrial function and morphology. A) ATP synthesis, ROS levels, Rhodamine 123
intensity, and MTT were assessed in ACCs after treatment with 30 mg/ml cholesterol for 24 h (n = 5 with triplicate replicates). Cells
incubated with 0.2% BSA (vehicle) without Chol:MbCD served as controls. Data are means 6 SD. *P , 0.05 vs. percentage control. B)
Top panels: Representative transmission electron microscopy images of ACCs treated with cholesterol for 24 h. Cells incubated with
0.2% BSA (vehicle) without Chol:MbCD served as controls. Scale bars, 200 nm. Bottom panels: Representative JC-1 staining image of
live ACCs after cholesterol treatment for 24 h (n = 5 in triplicates). Cells incubated with 0.2% BSA (vehicle) without Chol:MbCD served
as controls. Scale bars, 50 mm. C) Top panels: representative IHC staining of CYCS and MDA in sham-surgery CD or HCD ApoE2/2
mice and DIHC rat groups. Scale bars, 50 mm. Bottom panels: TUNEL staining of sham CD or HCD ApoE2/2 mice and DIHC rat
groups. Scale bars, 50 mm (n = 6). The percentage of total positive cells was used as a standard measure for quantification. D) mRNA
expression of BAX, CASP9, and CYCS after cholesterol stimulation in 3D-cultured ACCs (n = 4 in triplicate). ACC pellets incubated with
0.2% BSA (vehicle) without Chol:MbCD served as controls. Data are means 6 SD. *P , 0.05 vs. control. The data have been normalized
to untreated ACC controls arbitrarily set to 1. b-actin and 18s rRNA were used as endogenous housekeeping genes. Representative
Western blot analyses of phosphorylated JNK and phosphorylated ERK expression in 3D-cultured ACCs after cholesterol stimulation
for 14 d. Tubulin was used as a loading control (n = 3). ACC pellets incubated with 0.2% BSA (vehicle) without Chol:MbCD served
as controls. Primary p0 chondrocyte pellets were used in all experiments. Data are means 6 SD. *P , 0.05 vs. control.
362
Vol. 31
January 2017
FARNAGHI ET AL.
The FASEB Journal x www.fasebj.org
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 02, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 356-367.
 X-ray analysis and fluorescent labeling of
bone remodeling
The radiographic hallmarks of primary OA include
medial tibia-femoral and patella-femoral joint space
narrowing as well as subchondral bone sclerosis
(31). To accurately assess the joint space, knee X-ray
images were taken of the sham-surgery rats to estab-
lish a baseline. A comparison showed there was a
nonuniform joint space narrowing in rats fed HCD
compared with the CD group (Supplemental Fig. 1C).
To evaluate new bone formation and bone remodeling,
OA-operated rats (MSX-induced OA) were injected with
alizarin red and calcein dyes after surgery, which fluo-
rescently labeled bone remodeling. There was an enrich-
ment of fluorescent bands in the HCD group compared
with the CD group, indicating a higher degree of sub-
chondral bone remodeling and osteophyte formation at
the edges inthe HCD group compared with the CDgroup
(Supplemental Fig. 1D).
In vitro cholesterol challenge of ACC
pellet culture
Histologic assessment of ACC pellet cultures showed a
dose-dependent proteoglycan loss in response to choles-
terol, as assessed by safranin-O and alcian blue staining
(Fig. 1E). The levels of sGAG and galactosaminoglycan
release by ACC pellets in response to the cholesterol
challenge revealed an increase in proteoglycan release
(Fig. 1F). The impact of cholesterol on cartilage ex-
plants was also tested by treating bovine cartilage
disks with 50 mg/ml cholesterol. There was an in-
creased amount of proteoglycan metabolites released
into supernatants from explant cartilage subjected
to cholesterol challenge, indicative of proteoglycan
breakdown (P , 0.05) (Supplemental Fig. 1E).
Micro-CT scans of subchondral bone
Micro-CT observation revealed substantial changes in the
subchondral bone of HCD-fed ApoE2/2 mice and DIHC
rats compared with controls. The BV/total volume (TV)
ratios in ApoE2/2 mice and DIHC rats fed CD were sig-
nificantly higher than in HCD-fed animals (P , 0.05)
(Supplemental Fig. 2). Micro-CT was also used to evaluate
the effects of atorvastatin treatment on the BV/TV ratio of
the tibial plateau. The BV/TV ratio of the HCD-fed ani-
mals was markedly lower compared with the control
group in both ApoE2/2 mice and DIHC rats. However,
atorvastatin rescued these effects and maintained the BV/
TVratioatlevelssimilartothecontrolgroup(Supplemental
Fig. 2).
Hypercholesterolemia induces chondrocyte
hypertrophy and cartilage degradation
Immunohistochemical analysis of OA marker expres-
sion was used to determine whether HCD resulted in
OA-like cartilage changes. There was increased ex-
pression of COL10, NITEGE, and DIPEN in ApoE2/2
mice fed HCD compared with the CD group (Fig. 2A).
DIHC rats also showed increased COL10, NITEGE, and
DIPEN expression in HCD-fed rats compared with CD
groups (Fig. 2B).
Cholesterol disrupts chondrocytes
homeostasis of ACC pellet cultures
Cholesterol treatment led to increased MMP13 and
RUNX2 mRNA expression, whereas gene expression of
the chondrogenic marker gene SOX9 was decreased (Fig.
2C). Western blot analysis showed a down-regulation of
ACAN protein expression, whereas MMP13 protein ex-
pression was significantly up in response to the cholesterol
challenge (Fig. 2D). These results were confirmed by im-
munofluorescent staining of 3D-cultured ACC pellets.
Histologic sections of the cholesterol-treated 3D pellets
showed an increase of COL10 and MMP13 expression and
decreased ACAN expression compared with vehicle
controls (Fig. 2E).
Excess cholesterol alters mitochondrial
function and morphology
Next, we tested whether the mechanism affecting ACCs in
response to high cholesterol acts via mitochondrial dys-
function, thereby leading to cell phenotype changes and
apoptosis. Four separate functional assays were per-
formed to evaluate mitochondrial function in response to
high cholesterol: a luciferase-based assay for ATP pro-
duction, a fluorescent probe (DCFDA) for ROS levels,
Rhodamine 123 intensity of mitochondrial membrane
potential, and an MTT assay for mitochondrial NADH
activity. These assays revealed a decrease in ATP genera-
tion, increased ROS, and breakdown of mitochondrial
membrane potential, as suggested by the rhodamine as-
say, whereas the MTT assay revealed a significant de-
crease of the mitochondrial NADH activity. These results
all point to functional impairment of the mitochondria as
the result of high cholesterol (Fig. 3A).
The number and morphology of mitochondria can
change during development, during the cell cycle, or
when cells are faced with cytotoxic conditions. Trans-
mission electron microscopy was used to assess evi-
dence of morphologic changes to the mitochondria in
cholesterol-challenged ACCs. The mitochondria in un-
treated ACCs (vehicle only) were pristine with intact,
healthy structures and visible cristae and a lack of frag-
mentation. By contrast, the mitochondria of cholesterol-
treated ACCs had fragmented double membranes
and cristae disruption—features characteristic of apo-
ptosis. In addition, the size of the mitochondria in the
cholesterol-treated ACCs showed evidence of shrink-
age compared with vehicle controls (Fig. 3B). Live cell
imaging using JC-1 dye revealed a noticeable shift from
red to green fluorescence in cholesterol-treated ACCs
compared with controls (Fig. 3B). This is indicative of
ROLE OF HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA IN OSTEOARTHRITIS
363
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 02, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 356-367.
 depolarization of the mitochondrial membrane in the
cholesterol treatment group. Under normal conditions,
the dye concentrates in the mitochondrial matrix, where it
forms red fluorescence. Excess cholesterol leads to the dis-
sipation of the dye from the mitochondria into the cytosol,
which shifts the fluorescence from red to green, indicating
membrane disruption of the mitochondria (Fig. 3B).
Lipid peroxidation is associated with hypercholesterol-
emia and can result in cell and tissue damage, which can
lead to increased ROS levels. It is detected by excess pro-
ductionofMDAandcytochromeC(CYCS)expression,both
sensitive oxidative stress markers, and there was a signifi-
cant increase of both in ApoE2/2 mice and DIHC rats fed
HCD compared with the CD groups (Fig. 3C), suggesting
Figure 4. Antioxidant Mito-
Tempo rescued cartilage
integrity induced by hyper-
cholesterolemia. A) ApoE2/2
mice and DIHC rats were
fed HCD for 4 and 6 wk,
respectively, after which the
animals underwent OA sur-
gery. Beginning 1 wk after
surgery, the animals were
treated intraperitoneally with
MitoTempo antioxidant every
day for 5 wk (ApoE) and 8 wk
(DIHC rats), after which the
animals were euthanized and
knee joints harvested. A rep-
resentative safranin-O image
and Mankin scores show
treatment
effects
from
MitoTempo in the HCD-fed
OA ApoE2/2 and OA DIHC
rats. Scale bars, 100 mm (n = 6
ApoE2/2 mice; n = 8 DIHC
rats). B) Safranin-O staining
of
cholesterol-stimulated
ACCs in 3D culture and
bovine explants and corre-
sponding
sGAG
released
after MitoTempo treatment.
MitoTempo treatment re-
duced the proteoglycan loss
induced by cholesterol chal-
lenge. ACC pellets incubated
with cholesterol and without
MitoTempo served as a con-
trol. Data are means 6 SD.
*P , 0.05 vs. control (n = 4).
C ) Top panels: TUNEL
staining of apoptotic cells
in OA ApoE2/2 mice fed
HCD and OA DIHC rats
fed HCD after MitoTempo
treatment. Note the decrease
in the number of apopto-
tic cells in the MitoTempo
group quantitatively. Scale
bars, 50 mm. Bottom panels:
IHC
staining
of
COL10,
NITEGE, and DIPEN after
MitoTempo
treatment
in
OA ApoE2/2 mice and OA
DIHC rats fed HCD. Note
the
decreased
COL10,
NITEGE, and DIPEN ex-
pression in the MitoTempo
group. The percentage of
total positive cells was used
as a standard measure for
quantification. Scale bars,
50 mm (n = 4).
364
Vol. 31
January 2017
FARNAGHI ET AL.
The FASEB Journal x www.fasebj.org
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 02, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 356-367.
 hypercholesterolemia induced oxidative stress. TUNEL
staining, which is indicative of cell death, showed an
increase in the number of TUNEL-positive cells in the
cartilage of the HCD group compared with the CD
controls (Fig. 3C).
Furthermore, the mRNA expression of BAX, a proa-
poptotic marker, was found to be significantly up-
regulated in cholesterol-stimulated 3D-cultured ACCs
compared with controls. We also found increased ex-
pression of CASP9, and CYCS in cholesterol-stimulated
ACCs showed mitochondria-mediated damage (Fig. 3D).
Western blot analysis showed increased levels of stress
signaling phosphorylated JNK and ERK in cholesterol-
treated chondrocytes, suggesting an involvement of these
pathwaysincholesterol-induceddamageofchondrocytes
(P , 0.05) (Fig. 3D).
MitoTempo antioxidant rescues
cartilage integrity
To assess potential role of oxidative stress in
hypercholesterolemia-induced OA, we tested Mito-
Tempo, an antioxidant that specifically targets the mi-
tochondria. ApoE2/2 mice and DIHC rats treated with
MitoTempo showed no significant changes in plasma
cholesterol levels (Supplemental Fig. 3C). In spite of
this, animals fed HCD and treated with MitoTempo
exhibited significantly less OA-like changes, such as
proteoglycan loss and vertical fissures, compared with
the controls, results that were reiterated by the Mankin
scores in both animal models (Fig. 4A). Immunohisto-
chemical staining showed lower expression of NITEGE,
DIPEN, and COL10 in the MitoTempo-treated animals
fed HCD, and fewer TUNEL-positive cells were found in
the treatment group compared with the controls (Fig. 4C).
Micro-CT scans of the tibial plateau showed significantly
lower BV/TV ratios in ApoE2/2 mice and DIHC rats fed
HCD and revealed that MitoTempo treatment restored the
BV/TV ratios to levels resembling the control group, al-
though this did not reach significance in the DICH rat
group (Supplemental Fig. 2).
We ran experiments to determine the in vitro effects
of MitoTempo by first incubating ACC pellet cultures
with 10 mM MitoTempo before subjecting them to
cholesterol stimulation. Safranin-O staining and sGAG
assays revealed reduced proteoglycan loss in response
to MitoTempo treatment (Fig. 4B). Immunofluorescent
staining showed significantly higher ACAN expression
in the MitoTempo-treated pellets compared with con-
trols, whereas COL10 and MMP13 expression was sig-
nificantly reduced in these pellets (Supplemental Fig.
3A). Quantitative RT-PCR analysis showed that Mito-
Tempo treatment resulted in significantly reduced
MMP13 and RUNX2 expression in the presence of
cholesterol compared with untreated controls (Sup-
plemental Fig. 3B). Furthermore, MitoTempo treatment
restored mitochondrial functions, probably by pre-
serving mitochondrial integrity and reducing ROS
levels, and reduced the expression of apoptotic markers
BAX, CYCS, and CASP9 (Supplemental Fig. 4A, B).
DISCUSSION
In this study we demonstrate in 2 animal models that el-
evated plasma cholesterol levels trigger oxidative stress in
themitochondriaanddegradativechangestochondrocyte
that lead to OA development and progression. We further
show that the cholesterol-lowering drug atorvastatin and
the mitochondria-specific antioxidant MitoTempo have
protective effects that attenuated OA symptomscaused by
high cholesterol.
Two animal models, ApoE2/2 mice and DIHC rats,
were used to mimic human hypercholesterolemia. Our
results showed that hypercholestrolemia is associated
withchangesinthecartilageandsubchondralboneinboth
models. The synovial circulation of the knee is physically
connected to the systemic circulation via the synovial
capillaries and lymphatic system (32). It is still an open
question whether or not metabolic factors such as high
cholesterol affect the synovial circulation in a similar way
to that of the systemic vasculature. The changes seen in
cartilage may have been attributed to both direct and
indirect effects of high cholesterol. A significant level of
cholesterol has been found in the synovial fluid of patients
with OA and correlates with serum cholesterol levels (33).
Under such circumstances chondrocytes are exposed to
elevatedcholesterollevelsinthesynovialfluid,whichmay
then diffuse into the cartilage (33–35). This could alter the
fluidity of the cell membrane and activate the membrane
lipid signaling pathways, causing damage to chon-
drocytes. Using chondrocyte and cartilage tissue culture,
we demonstrated the direct impact of cholesterol on car-
tilagedegenerationandchondrocytehypertrophy.Recent
studies have also shown alterations of the gut microbiota
inthe context ofhigh-fat diets inhumansand rodents, and
this could contribute to the onset of overactive innate
immunity, leading to inflammation in fat cells. It is pos-
sible that this inflammatory response could directly affect
local joint environment by activating the macrophages in
synovium into a proinflammatory M1 phenotype (36, 37).
Increased body weight did not appear to have an effect on
the development of OA because no correlation was found
between body weight and cartilage changes in either
ApoE2/2 or DIHC animal models. The changes observed
in this study can, therefore, be attributed to the effects of
high cholesterol, independent of variables such as body
weight and in conjunction with the mechanical instability
caused by surgically induced OA (DMM or MSX) in these
models. The results of the in vitro experiments mirrored the
in vivo results: chondrocytes treated with physiologic con-
centrations of free cholesterol had impaired cartilaginous
gene expression and displayed degenerative changes. In
addition to cartilage changes, we found significant changes
to the subchondral bone as well as osteophyte formation,
which are both symptomatic of OA development, in the
ApoE2/2 and DIHC animals fed an HCD.
The cholesterol-induced cartilage degeneration was
further confirmed by the application of a cholesterol-
lowering drug atorvastatin, which is an HMG-CoA re-
ductase inhibitor. We tested the efficacy of atorvastatin
as a positive control to attenuate cholesterol-induced
OA changes in vivo. These experiments showed a
ROLE OF HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA IN OSTEOARTHRITIS
365
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 02, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 356-367.
 statistically significant protective effect from atorvasta-
tin conferred on articular cartilage and subchondral bone
against the progression of OA-like symptoms. Corrob-
orating our findings is arecent study that showed dietary
cholesterol played a role in the development of OA in an
APOE*3Leiden mouse model. In that study, the drug
ezetimibe was used to lower plasma cholesterol by
inhibiting intestinal cholesterol absorption. Treatment
with ezetimibe did not reduce the severity of OA in an-
imals fed a cholesterol-rich diet, which suggests factors
other than cholesterol exposure contributed to the de-
velopment of OA (38). Another study has shown that
overall HDL cholesterol plasma levels maybe less critical
compared with impaired HDL functionality as a mea-
sure of predisposition to OA (39).
In the present study, we found that cholesterol-
induced OA-like changes were triggered via mitochon-
drial pathways. Some of the strongest evidence for this
hypothesis was the observation that cells subjected to a
cholesterol challenge suffered a loss of mitochondrial
membrane integrity that activated the intrinsic apo-
ptotic pathway, resulting in the release of a number of
cell-death
promoting
molecules,
including
cyto-
chrome C. The other indication of mitochondrial in-
volvement was the observation that cholesterol-treated
cells produced higher levels of ROS that were com-
mensurate with cartilage degeneration. Mitochondrial
dysfunction affects other pathways implicated in carti-
lage degradation, including oxidative stress, defective
chondrocyte biosynthesis, increased cytokine-induced
chondrocyte inflammation and matrix catabolism, carti-
lage matrix calcification, and increased chondrocyte ap-
optosis (40).
The in vitro results pointed to mitochondrial dysfunc-
tion as a likely culprit to the adverse effects of high cho-
lesterol on chondrocytes. This prompted us to evaluate a
mitochondrial-specific antioxidant as a treatment option
for OA induced by high cholesterol levels. MitoTempo
was chosen over more common antioxidants, such as
ascorbic acid or tocopherols, because of its demonstrated
specificity against mitochondrial ROS and superoxide
production (41). It has been reported that MitoTempo
preservesphysiologicROS signalingin nonmalignant skin
fibroblasts and selectively targeted tumor cells with ab-
normal mitochondrial activities (42). MitoTempo de-
creases mitochondrial superoxide levels by mimicking the
action of superoxide dismutase. This prevents the forma-
tion of O2-derived ROS, including cytosolic H2O2 and self-
propagating lipid peroxides, and allows the cells to clear
out excess ROS. In particular, we report that Mito-
Tempo prevents high cholesterol-induced OA changes
in both animal models and in vitro cell culture studies.
Thesefindingsofferarationaletotestmitochondria-targeted
antioxidants as a genuine treatment option against
hypercholesterolemia-induced OA.
CONCLUSIONS
In summary, our results indicate that hypercholesterol-
emia is a critical mediator of increased mitochondrial
oxidative stress, which leads to the progression of OA.
Inhibition of mitochondrial oxidative stress and dysfunc-
tion by the use of mitochondria-targeted antioxidants
offers therapeutic potential for the prevention and treat-
ments tailored specifically for this risk group.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by a program grant from the
Prince Charles Hospital Research Foundation (Grant MS2014-
12) and by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(Grant 81371997). The authors thank Wei Shi and Inga
Mertens-Walker (Institute of Health and Biomedical Innova-
tion, Queensland University of Technology), and Siamak
Saifzadeh (Medical Engineering Research Facility, Queensland
University of Technology) for technical assistance and Prof.
Amanda Fosang (Murdoch Childrens Research Institute,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia) for DIPEN and NITEGE anti-
bodies. S.F. and I.P. are co–first authors. The authors declare
no conflicts of interest.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
S. Farnaghi, I. Prasadam, X. Mao, and Y. Xiao designed the
studyandplannedtheexperiments;S.Farnaghi,I.Prasadam,
G.Cai,andX.Maoperformedtheexperimentsandcollected
the data; S. Farnaghi, I. Prasadam, T. Friis, R. Crawford,
X. Mao, and Y. Xiao analyzed and interpreted the data; and
S. Farnaghi, I. Prasadam, T. Friis, X. Mao, and Y. Xiao
prepared the manuscript.
REFERENCES
1.
Hansson, G. K. (2005) Inflammation, atherosclerosis, and coronary
artery disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 352, 1685–1695
2.
Libby, P., Ridker, P. M., and Hansson, G. K. (2011) Progress and
challenges in translating the biology of atherosclerosis. Nature 473,
317–325
3.
Erb, N., Pace, A. V., Douglas, K. M., Banks, M. J., and Kitas, G. D.
(2004) Risk assessment for coronary heart disease in rheumatoid
arthritis and osteoarthritis. Scand. J. Rheumatol. 33, 293–299
4.
De Seny, D., Cobraiville, G., Charlier, E., Neuville, S., Lutteri, L.,
Le Goff, C., Malaise, D., Malaise, O., Chapelle, J. P., Relic, B., and
Malaise, M. G. (2015) Apolipoprotein-A1 as a damage-associated
molecular patterns protein in osteoarthritis: ex vivo and in vitro pro-
inflammatory properties. PLoS One 10, e0122904
5.
Zhuo, Q., Yang, W., Chen, J., and Wang, Y. (2012) Metabolic
syndrome meets osteoarthritis. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 8, 729–737
6.
Ghadially, F. N., Mehta, P. N., and Kirkaldy-Willis, W. H. (1970)
Ultrastructure of articular cartilage in experimentally produced
lipoarthrosis. J. Bone Joint Surg. Am. 52, 1147–1158
7.
Arkill, K. P., and Winlove, C. P. (2006) Fatty acid transport in articular
cartilage. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 456, 71–78
8.
Georgi, N., Cillero-Pastor, B., Eijkel, G. B., Periyasamy, P. C., Kiss,
A., van Blitterswijk, C., Post, J. N., Heeren, R. M., and Karperien,
M. (2015) Differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells under
hypoxia and normoxia: lipid profiles revealed by time-of-flight
secondary ion mass spectrometry and multivariate analysis. Anal.
Chem. 87, 3981–3988
9.
Villalvilla,A.,G´
omez,R.,Largo,R.,andHerrero-Beaumont,G.(2013)
Lipid transport and metabolism in healthy and osteoarthritic
cartilage. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 14, 20793–20808
10.
W¨
ustner, D., and Solanko, K. (2015) How cholesterol interacts with
proteins and lipids during its intracellular transport. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1848, 1908–1926
11.
Tsezou, A., Iliopoulos, D., Malizos, K. N., and Simopoulou, T. (2010)
Impaired expression of genes regulating cholesterol efflux in human
osteoarthritic chondrocytes. J. Orthop. Res. 28, 1033–1039
366
Vol. 31
January 2017
FARNAGHI ET AL.
The FASEB Journal x www.fasebj.org
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 02, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 356-367.
 12.
Gierman, L. M., K¨
uhnast, S., Koudijs, A., Pieterman, E. J.,
Kloppenburg, M., van Osch, G. J., Stojanovic-Susulic, V., Huizinga,
T. W., Princen, H. M., and Zuurmond, A. M. (2014) Osteoarthritis
development is induced by increased dietary cholesterol and can be
inhibitedbyatorvastatininAPOE*3Leiden.CETPmice:atranslational
model for atherosclerosis. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 73, 921–927
13.
Castellana, S., Vicario, S., and Saccone, C. (2011) Evolutionary
patterns of the mitochondrial genome in Metazoa: exploring the role
of mutation and selection in mitochondrial protein coding genes.
Genome Biol. Evol. 3, 1067–1079
14.
Puddu, P., Puddu, G. M., Galletti, L., Cravero, E., and Muscari, A.
(2005)
Mitochondrial
dysfunction
as
an
initiating
event
in
atherogenesis: a plausible hypothesis. Cardiology 103, 137–141
15.
Lee, H. C., and Wei, Y. H. (2012) Mitochondria and aging. Adv. Exp.
Med. Biol. 942, 311–327
16.
Lordan, S., Mackrill, J. J., and O’Brien, N. M. (2009) Oxysterols
and mechanisms of apoptotic signaling: implications in the
pathology of degenerative diseases. J. Nutr. Biochem. 20,
321–336
17.
Henrotin, Y., Kurz, B., and Aigner, T. (2005) Oxygen and reactive
oxygen species in cartilage degradation: friends or foes? Osteoarthritis
Cartilage 13, 643–654
18.
Ostalowska,A.,Birkner,E.,Wiecha,M.,Kasperczyk,S.,Kasperczyk,A.,
Kapolka, D., and Zon-Giebel, A. (2006) Lipid peroxidation and
antioxidant enzymes in synovial fluid of patients with primary and
secondary osteoarthritis of the knee joint. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 14,
139–145
19.
Johnson, K., Svensson, C. I., Etten, D. V., Ghosh, S. S., Murphy, A. N.,
Powell, H. C., and Terkeltaub, R. (2004) Mediation of spontaneous
knee osteoarthritis by progressive chondrocyte ATP depletion in
Hartley guinea pigs. Arthritis Rheum. 50, 1216–1225
20.
Afonso, V., Champy, R., Mitrovic, D., Collin, P., and Lomri, A. (2007)
Reactive oxygen species and superoxide dismutases: role in joint
diseases. Joint Bone Spine 74, 324–329
21.
Regan, E., Flannelly,J., Bowler, R., Tran, K., Nicks, M., Carbone, B. D.,
Glueck,D., Heijnen, H., Mason, R., and Crapo, J.(2005) Extracellular
superoxide dismutase and oxidant damage in osteoarthritis. Arthritis
Rheum. 52, 3479–3491
22.
Madenspacher, J. H., Draper, D. W., Smoak, K. A., Li, H., Griffiths,
G. L., Suratt, B. T., Wilson, M. D., Rudel, L. L., and Fessler, M. B.
(2010)Dyslipidemiainducesopposingeffectsonintrapulmonaryand
extrapulmonary host defense through divergent TLR response
phenotypes. J. Immunol. 185, 1660–1669
23.
Yang, S., Kim, J., Ryu, J. H., Oh, H., Chun, C. H., Kim, B. J., Min,
B. H., and Chun, J. S. (2010) Hypoxia-inducible factor-2alpha is a
catabolic regulator of osteoarthritic cartilage destruction. Nat.
Med. 16, 687–693
24.
Prasadam, I., Mao, X., Wang, Y., Shi, W., Crawford, R., and Xiao, Y.
(2012) Inhibition of p38 pathway leads to OA-like changes in a rat
animal model. Rheumatology (Oxford) 51, 813–823
25.
Prasadam, I., Zhou, Y., Shi, W., Crawford, R., and Xiao, Y. (2014) Role
of dentin matrix protein 1 in cartilage redifferentiation and
osteoarthritis. Rheumatology (Oxford) 53, 2280–2287
26.
Prasadam, I., Mao, X., Shi, W., Crawford, R., and Xiao, Y. (2013)
Combination of MEK-ERK inhibitor and hyaluronic acid has a syn-
ergistic effect on anti-hypertrophicand pro-chondrogenicactivities in
osteoarthritis treatment. J. Mol. Med. (Berl) 91, 369–380
27.
Jaiprakash, A., Prasadam, I., Feng, J. Q., Liu, Y., Crawford, R., and
Xiao, Y. (2012) Phenotypic characterization of osteoarthritic
osteocytes from the sclerotic zones: a possible pathological role in
subchondral bone sclerosis. Int. J. Biol. Sci. 8, 406–417
28.
Afara, I. O., Prasadam, I., Crawford, R., Xiao, Y., and Oloyede, A.
(2013) Near infrared (NIR) absorption spectra correlates with
subchondral bone micro-CT parameters in osteoarthritic rat mod-
els. Bone 53, 350–357
29.
Prasadam, I., van Gennip, S., Friis, T., Shi, W., Crawford, R., and
Xiao, Y. (2010) ERK-1/2 and p38 in the regulation of hyper-
trophic changes of normal articular cartilage chondrocytes in-
duced by osteoarthritic subchondral osteoblasts. Arthritis Rheum.
62, 1349–1360
30.
Prasadam, I., Friis, T., Shi, W., van Gennip, S., Crawford, R., and Xiao,
Y. (2010) Osteoarthritic cartilage chondrocytes alter subchondral
boneosteoblastdifferentiationviaMAPKsignallingpathwayinvolving
ERK1/2. Bone 46, 226–235
31.
Brandt, K. D., Fife, R. S., Braunstein, E. M., and Katz, B. (1991)
Radiographic grading oftheseverityofknee osteoarthritis:relation of
the Kellgren and Lawrence grade to a grade based on joint space
narrowing, and correlation with arthroscopic evidence of articular
cartilage degeneration. Arthritis Rheum. 34, 1381–1386
32.
Levick, J. R., and McDonald, J. N. (1995) Fluid movement across
synovium in healthy joints: role of synovial fluid macromolecules.
Ann. Rheum. Dis. 54, 417–423
33.
Oliviero, F., Lo Nigro, A., Bernardi, D., Giunco, S., Baldo, G., Scanu,
A., Sfriso, P., Ramonda, R., Plebani, M., and Punzi, L. (2012) A
comparative study of serum and synovial fluid lipoprotein levels in
patients with various arthritides. Clin. Chim. Acta 413, 303–307
34.
Oliviero, F., Sfriso, P., Baldo, G., Dayer, J. M., Giunco, S., Scanu, A.,
Bernardi, D., Ramonda, R., Plebani, M., and Punzi, L. (2009)
Apolipoprotein A-I and cholesterol in synovial fluid of patients with
rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis and osteoarthritis. Clin. Exp.
Rheumatol. 27, 79–83
35.
Ananth, L., Prete, P. E., and Kashyap, M. L. (1993) Apolipoproteins
A-I and Band cholesterolin synovial fluidofpatients withrheumatoid
arthritis. Metabolism 42, 803–806
36.
Collins, K. H., Paul, H. A., Reimer, R. A., Seerattan, R. A., Hart, D. A.,
and Herzog, W. (2015) Relationship between inflammation, the gut
microbiota, andmetabolic osteoarthritis development:studies in a rat
model. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 23, 1989–1998
37.
Clarke, S. F., Murphy, E. F., Nilaweera, K., Ross, P. R., Shanahan,
F., O’Toole, P. W., and Cotter, P. D. (2012) The gut microbiota
and its relationship to diet and obesity: new insights. Gut Microbes
3, 186–202
38.
Gierman, L. M., Kuhnast, S., Koudijs, A., Pieterman, E. J.,
Kloppenburg, M., van Osch, G. J., Stojanovic-Susulic, V., Huizinga,
T. W., Princen, H. M., and Zuurmond, A. M. (2013) Osteoarthritis
development is induced by increased dietary cholesterol and
can be inhibited by atorvastatin in APOE*3Leiden.CETP mice: a
translational model for atherosclerosis. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 73,
921–927
39.
Laakmann, S., Auel, H., and Kochzius, M. (2012) Evolution in the
deep sea: biological traits, ecology and phylogenetics of pelagic
copepods. Mol. Phylogenet. Evol. 65, 535–546
40.
Wang, L., Park, P., La Marca, F., Than, K., Rahman, S., and Lin, C. Y.
(2013) Bone formation induced by BMP-2 in human osteosarcoma
cells. Int. J. Oncol. 43, 1095–1102
41.
Dikalova, A. E., Bikineyeva, A. T., Budzyn, K., Nazarewicz, R. R.,
McCann, L., Lewis, W., Harrison, D. G., and Dikalov, S. I. (2010)
Therapeutic targeting of mitochondrial superoxide in hypertension.
Circ. Res. 107, 106–116
42.
Nazarewicz, R. R., Dikalova, A., Bikineyeva, A., Ivanov, S., Kirilyuk,
I. A., Grigor’ev, I. A., and Dikalov, S. I. (2013) Does scavenging of
mitochondrial superoxide attenuate cancer prosurvival signaling
pathways? Antioxid. Redox Signal. 19, 344–349
Received for publication May 10, 2016.
Accepted for publication September 28, 2016.
ROLE OF HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA IN OSTEOARTHRITIS
367
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 02, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 356-367.
