 Fifteen-minute consultation:
problems in the healthy
paediatrician—managing the effects
of shift work on your health
Michael Farquhar
ABSTRACT
Sleep is fundamental to good health. Healthcare
professionals receive little teaching on the
importance of sleep, particularly with respect to
their own health when working night shifts.
Knowledge of basic sleep physiology, together
with simple strategies to improve core sleep and
the ability to cope with working nights, can
result in significant improvements both for
healthcare professionals and for the patients they
care for.
INTRODUCTION
Sleep is an essential active process.
W
e spend about a third of our lives
asleep. W
e cannot survive without sleep.
Getting enough good quality sleep under-
pins every aspect of physical and mental
health. Sleep deprivation rapidly takes its
toll on even the healthiest and most
robust of people and can lead to an
inability to function effectively.
Moderate
sleep
deprivation—equiva-
lent to being awake for 16–18 hours—
can have the same effect on reaction time
as being at the legal blood alcohol limit
for safe driving.
Up to 20% of road traffic accidents are
thought to be fatigue related, and are sig-
nificantly more likely to lead to serious
harm or death.1
Symptoms related to poor sleep are
common,
particularly
in
healthcare
professionals.
Sleep quality can be affected by other
health issues, including mental health
factors (eg, stress, depression), physical
health factors (eg, pain) or common ill-
nesses (eg, asthma, eczema). A primary
sleep
disorder
(eg,
obstructive
sleep
apnoea, restless legs syndrome, narco-
lepsy) may also be present. Difficulties
with
sleep,
including
problems
with
getting to sleep and maintaining sleep,
are
a
common
reason
for
adults
to
present to their general practitioner.
Significant sleep disruption increases
risks of cardiovascular disease, diabetes
and obesity, reduces the effectiveness of
the immune system2 and impacts cogni-
tive function and emotional regulation.
Despite this, most healthcare profes-
sionals receive very little education about
sleep, and the importance of sleep to
health.3
Thinking about healthy sleep is espe-
cially
relevant
for
healthcare
profes-
sionals, who often work shift patterns to
provide essential and emergency health-
care 24 hours a day, 7 days a week,
365 days a year. Regularly working both
night shifts and long daytime shifts will
impact sleep routines and make achieving
good quality sleep more challenging.
The ‘hero’ attitude, that patient care is
always more important than appropriate
self-care, is well intentioned but misguided.
It is absolutely paramount that this is under-
stood by all staff and consistently reinforced
by senior clinicians and managers.
NATURAL SLEEP RHYTHMS
W
e function on a natural cycle of wake
and sleep. Our brains and bodies are
evolved to primarily be awake by day and
asleep by night.
Natural cycling of wake and sleep, cir-
cadian
rhythm,
is
regulated
by
the
“You’re not healthy unless your sleep is healthy”
Professor William Dement, Stanford
University, one of the founders of
modern sleep medicine
127
Farquhar M. Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed 2017;102:127–132. doi:10.1136/archdischild-2016-312119
Best practice
 
Correspondence to
Dr Michael Farquhar, 
Department of Children’s Sleep 
Medicine, Evelina London 
Children’s Hospital, Guy’s and St 
Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, 
London SE1 7EH, UK; Michael.
Farquhar@gstt.nhs.uk; @
DrMikeFarquhar
Received 20 October 2016
Revised 21 November 2016
Accepted 23 November 2016
Published Online First 
16 December 2016
To cite: Farquhar M. Arch 
Dis Child Educ Pract Ed 
2017;102:127–132.
copyright.
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by
http://ep.bmj.com/
Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed: first published as 10.1136/archdischild-2016-312119 on 16 December 2016. Downloaded from 
 suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), the primary body
clock, in the hypothalamus. The SCN is affected by
many cues, with the most important being environ-
mental light. Release of melatonin, which helps regu-
late wake and sleep, is controlled by the SCN.
There is an independent need for sleep, which
increases the longer we have been awake. This can
only be reduced by sleeping, just like hunger is only
reduced by eating.
When we act against our circadian rhythm we feel
fatigued and function less effectively. W
e experience
this sense of disorientation as ‘jet lag’ when we rapidly
move time zones via air travel. It can take up to a day
for each time zone crossed for people to regain their
normal sense of wake and sleep.
W
e cycle regularly through different sleep stages,
principally
light
sleep
(non-rapid
eye
movement
(REM) stages 1 and 2), deep sleep (non-REM stage 3)
and REM (or dream) sleep (figure 1).
Deep sleep is physically refreshing, and effectively
‘recharges your batteries’. REM sleep is important for
consolidation of learning, and emotional regulation.
Sleep is essential for learning—getting a good
night’s sleep will help you retain knowledge for
Membership exams far more than staying up into the
early hours ever will!
WORKING NIGHT SHIFTS
W
e are not physiologically evolved to function at
night as we do in daytime, nor are we adapted to
achieve good quality sleep during the day.
W
orking at night is equivalent to working while jet-
lagged: your body is trying to function on Sydney
time while your brain thinks that it is Greenwich
Mean Time.
W
orking night shifts has associated risks and conse-
quences (see box 1).4
The experience of feeling dangerously sleepy while
driving home from work is very common among
hospital night shift workers,13 and continues to result
in fatal outcomes for National Health Service (NHS)
staff.14 15
Effects of relative sleep deprivation, fatigue and of
working at night are well recognised by other profes-
sions (eg, airline pilots), and are reflected in the
Highway Code.16
It is essential that professionals working night shifts,
especially in intense, demanding hospital roles which
require an ability to respond rapidly and to make key
decisions quickly and competently, take steps to opti-
mise their sleep and ability to function at night.
There is a personal responsibility for professionals
to come to work having taken steps to ensure that
they are able to function as effectively as possible.
There is also a responsibility for this to be sup-
ported by employers. Hospitals must consider strat-
egies, particularly around night shifts, to ensure that
staff are able to function at their best, and that their
staff’s own safety is taken into account. There is
natural variation in how well individuals cope with
working
night
shifts.
Employers
should
consider
regular screening of shift workers for health conse-
quences of working shifts.
These ideas are not always well recognised in the
NHS, which needs a significant culture shift in how to
approach working at night.17
IMPROVING SLEEP
Core sleep
Establishing good sleep routine and habits is the foun-
dation of addressing sleep difficulties.
Investing time in getting sleep right every night, not
just when working nights, is key to improving long-
term sleep quality.
Environment
Sleep environment is important. Bedrooms should be
dark, cool, quiet and comfortable.
Figure 1
Hypnogram. REM, rapid eye movement. Adapted
from Luke Mastin.
Box 1
Risks and consequences of working night
shifts
Night shift workers:
▸
sleep less well and for shorter times in the day
▸
are less alert and perform less well than day shift
workers5–9
▸
are more likely to make simple mistakes and avoid-
able errors, leading to increased risks to patient
safety
▸
process information, particularly novel situations,
slower
▸
have impaired alertness, vigilance and reaction time
▸
are more likely to make decisions that involve higher
degrees of risk
▸
have increased risk of road traffic accidents after a
shift10
Long-term effects of night shift working include:
▸
increased risk of primary sleep disorders
▸
increased risk of obesity and diabetes
▸
increased risk of cardiovascular disease11
▸
a possible relationship with increased incidence of
cancer12
Farquhar M. Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed 2017;102:127–132. doi:10.1136/archdischild-2016-312119
128
Best practice
copyright.
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by
http://ep.bmj.com/
Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed: first published as 10.1136/archdischild-2016-312119 on 16 December 2016. Downloaded from 
 Minimising environmental light and noise is even
more important when attempting to sleep during the
daytime.
Key features about good sleep environments are
summarised in box 2.
Routine and habits
Good quality sleep is maintained by regular routine.
Everyone’s need for sleep is different. Most adults
will need approximately 7–8 hours good quality sleep
each night. If you are getting adequate sleep regularly,
you should wake feeling refreshed at approximately
the same time each morning whether an alarm is used
or not. If you regularly ‘catch up’ sleep at the
weekend or on days off, or if you often have symp-
toms suggestive of sleep deprivation, this implies you
are not allowing enough time for sleep each night.
This should be addressed as a priority.
Regularly spending time in bed awake encourages
your brain to associate being in bed with wake, which
can lead to difficulties in getting to sleep.
Key features about good sleep routine are sum-
marised in box 3.
Electronics
Electronic devices in the bedroom can have a major
impact on sleep.18
Light, particularly at the blue end of the spectrum,
has a direct effect on the primary body clock, which
leads to suppression of natural melatonin secretion.
Additionally, the stimulatory effect of engaging with
activities when the brain is trying to wind down and
relax has an inhibitory effect on sleep.
There should be an electronic curfew for at least
30–60 min before the intended bedtime. Electronic
screens should be avoided in the bedroom.
If this is not possible, then enabling features, such
as ‘Night Shift’ on Apple iOS devices or f.lux on
other devices, which reduce the amount of emitted
blue light from electronic screens in the evening, may
reduce some of the impact on sleep. Brightness set-
tings on devices should be as low as possible.
NIGHT SHIFTS
Improving how you function on night shifts involves
thinking about preparing for the shift, the shift itself,
what you do after the shift and how you recover after
a run of nights (see boxes 4 and 5).
During the night shift
See box 5.
Rest, breaks and naps
Breaks are not a luxury, especially when doing busy or
intense night work.
Box 2
Good sleep environment
Your bed, including mattress and pillows, should be com-
fortable and supportive
Make your bedroom as dark as possible:
▸
invest in blackout blinds/curtains
▸
do not switch on main bright lights if you need to
get up through the night
▸
consider a good quality eye mask for daytime
sleeping
External noise should be reduced as much as possible:
▸
consider use of white noise (eg, a fan, quiet relaxing
music, a radio turned to static)
▸
consider use of ear plugs
▸
your bedroom should be cool
▸
aim for a temperature of ∼18–20°C
▸
a warm bath, or wearing bedsocks, can encourage
peripheral vasodilation before sleep, which helps to
optimise core body temperature
Some natural remedies, such as lavender, can improve
sleep quality
Box 3
Good sleep routine
▸ Ensure as much natural daylight exposure as possible
▸ Regular exercise, but not too close to bedtime, sup-
ports sleep—in adults with insomnia, regular exercise
can be more effective than ‘sleeping tablets’ in
improving sleep quality
▸ Eat regular meals
▸ Do not eat your main meal within 2 hours of bedtime
▸ A light prebed snack (eg, a bowl of cereal, fruit,
yoghurt) 30 min before bed can help prevent disrup-
tion from night-time hunger, but avoid evening
‘grazing’
▸ Minimise use of alcohol, caffeine and nicotine, par-
ticularly in the evening period
▸ These can affect both the ability to get to sleep and
the quality of sleep obtained
▸ Set sleep and wake times that permit the amount of
sleep that is right for you
▸ Aim to go to bed at roughly the same time each night
and get up at the same time each morning
Minimise electronics use for the 30–60 min before bed
▸ Consider relaxation strategies to ‘wind down’ before
bed
▸ Do not use your phone as your alarm clock
▸ Your phone should preferably be charged outwith
your bedroom while you sleep
▸ Avoid spending long periods of time awake in bed.
Your bed should only be for sleep or sex
▸ If you are unable to sleep, get out of bed and do a
quiet/relaxing activity (reading, jigsaw puzzle, building
LEGO, etc) for 15 min, then return to bed and try to
sleep again
Farquhar M. Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed 2017;102:127–132. doi:10.1136/archdischild-2016-312119
129
Best practice
copyright.
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by
http://ep.bmj.com/
Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed: first published as 10.1136/archdischild-2016-312119 on 16 December 2016. Downloaded from 
 Regular rest is essential to ensure safe, effective
patient care is delivered to the best of your capability.
Unless critically ill patients require immediate atten-
tion, your patients are always better served by clini-
cians who have had appropriate periods of rest during
their shift.
Use breaks to take short naps; 15–20 min naps
during night shift can have significant positive bene-
fits. They can significantly improve levels of alertness
and responsiveness19 and can reduce the risks to your
health of working night shifts. They help to reduce
risks to patients as a result of fatigued professionals.
The right length of short nap will vary between
individuals. It is worth doing some experimentation
to find the best for you. Longer naps are not better, as
they may result in you entering deeper stages of sleep
which can be more difficult to quickly wake from and
increase the chance of ‘sleep inertia’ (grogginess on
waking). Set an alarm, or ask a colleague to wake you.
Prolonged sleep during a single night may also
affect your ability to sleep during the day, which is
particularly relevant when doing consecutive night
shifts.
Not everyone is able to ‘power nap’ in this fashion,
in which case relaxation in a dark, quiet room may
also be of some benefit.
Naps during night shift breaks are supported by the
Royal College of Physicians, the Royal College of
Nursing and the British Medical Association.20–22
Caffeine
Use caffeine carefully. Caffeine increases alertness23
but too much can lead to irritability and reduced
effectiveness. Caffeine can reduce subsequent sleep
quality and duration up to 6 hours after ingestion, so
aim to use it mainly in the earlier part of your night
shift.
Taking caffeine just before a planned short nap
maximises its impact; caffeine takes 15–20 min to
take effect, meaning it is just kicking in as you wake
up at the end of your nap to give you a double boost.
After the shift
If you are too tired to drive—DO NOT. See box 6.
Once awake for ∼16–18 hours, reaction times are
likely to be similar as if you are at the legal drink-
drive limit. Your ability to safely drive, and your
judgement as to whether you think you can are
impaired.
Employers should have a policy on how to assist
staff who feel too tired to safely drive. If alternative
provisions (eg, public transport) are not possible, then
ideally a bed should be provided, free of charge, for
you to have enough sleep to then be able to safely
drive home. You should be aware of your employer’s
policy.
Recovery
You will have slept less, and less well, while you are
on nights.
Your priority should be to re-establish your normal
routine as quickly as possible.
See box 7.
HOW CAN HOSPITALS MAKE THINGS BETTER?
While professionals have a personal responsibility to
ensure they are able to function during night shift to
work as effectively as possible, employers also have a
responsibility to support their staff. Simple interven-
tions can make big differences.
Where health services are under increasing pressure,
even basic measures to support staff can be difficult
to achieve. Nevertheless, attention to appropriate,
Box 5
During the night shift
▸ Aim to stick to a consistent routine during each shift
▸ Work as a team to provide effective cover for breaks
▸ Consider use of ‘bleep filtering’ systems to minimise
interruption to team members on breaks
▸ Avoid high calorie/high fat/high carbohydrate foods—
night shift calories DO count, and contribute signifi-
cantly to increased risks of impaired glucose tolerance
and cardiovascular disease of working night shifts
▸ Try to maintain your normal eating patterns/times as
much as possible when working nights
▸ Aim to minimise eating between 24:00 and 06:00
where possible, and when you do eat/snack choose
healthier satisfying options (eg, soups/ wholegrain
sandwiches/yoghurt/fruit/salads/nuts, etc)
▸ Keep well hydrated; carry a water bottle and drink
regularly
Maximise exposure to bright light in non-clinical areas
▸ Your patients need their sleep—keep light and noise
disruption in clinical areas to a minimum
Your breaks are essential
▸ During breaks, have short (15–20 min) naps
▸ Use caffeine carefully
▸ Watch the 4 am dip. This is when both you and your
patients are at their lowest physiological ebb. Take
time to double check all critical calculations in
particular
Box 4
Preparing for the night shift
▸ Maintain a good core sleep routine
▸ ‘Bank’ sleep in the 24 hours before starting nights;
have a long lie, or try to have an afternoon nap
▸ Exercise in the morning may help encourage napping
in the natural circadian ‘siesta time’ in the early
afternoon
▸ Ensure you are well fed and well hydrated
Farquhar M. Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed 2017;102:127–132. doi:10.1136/archdischild-2016-312119
130
Best practice
copyright.
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by
http://ep.bmj.com/
Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed: first published as 10.1136/archdischild-2016-312119 on 16 December 2016. Downloaded from 
 adequate rest and other factors to improve perform-
ance during night shifts are not areas where com-
promise can safely be made. The attendant risk of
fatigue-related error rapidly escalates when working in
pressured medical environments.
It is absolutely paramount this is acknowledged and
actively supported by senior healthcare and clinical
leaders. See box 8.
GET HELP IF YOU NEED IT
Doctors and other healthcare professionals are at
increased risk of having formal sleep disorders. If you
think you have a genuine sleep problem, see your own
doctor or occupational health service. Do not ignore
it—it will often just get worse.
Avoid the temptation to self-medicate, whether with
prescription medication or non-prescription options,
such
as
alcohol,
sedative
antihistamines
or
non-
prescribed melatonin.
CONCLUSION
Finding a pattern of wake and sleep in preparation for,
while working, and recovering from night shift is a
very individual process. There are no universal ‘magic
bullets’ that will improve the experience for everyone.
Simple strategies by both professionals and employ-
ers to support core sleep and while working night
shifts are likely to make working nights a bit less chal-
lenging and to improve both personal health and
patient safety.
Further reading: A more comprehensive list of refer-
ences is included in the Royal College of Physicians
summary document ‘W
orking the Night Shift’.17
Twitter Follow Michael Farquhar @DrMikeFarquhar
Box 7
Recovery
▸ Postnights team breakfasts are not just a social event.
They allow you to informally ‘decompress’ and reflect
on events which may have occurred during your shifts.
Airing worries and anxieties in a supportive environ-
ment will likely help you sleep better
▸ After your final night, aim for a short morning nap
(1–2 hours), ideally before midday, then get up and
do as many ‘normal’ activities as possible
Re-establish normal eating and exercise patterns
▸ Aim for as close to your normal bedtime as possible
▸ Aim for a short lie in only on the following morning;
try to get up as close to your normal wake time as
possible, and to go to bed only slightly earlier than
usual
▸ You are likely to need two ‘normal’ nights to success-
fully re-establish your usual sleep pattern
▸ …remember your judgement is likely to be a bit
impaired after nights, so beware the attraction of the
postnights spending spree!
Box 8
How can hospitals make things better?
▸ Use forward-rotating (day-evening-night) rota designs
▸ Minimise frequent transitions between day and night
shifts
▸ Provide
adequate
recovery
time
after
nights
to
re-establish normal wake/sleep patterns
▸ Provide basic education for staff at induction regard-
ing sleep and working nights, as well as general
healthy lifestyle advice and support
▸ Ensure staff are compliant with current rest/break
entitlement requirements:
–
Current ‘New Deal’ contract: at least 30 min con-
tinuous rest after approximately 4 hours duty
–
New contract: at least one 30 min paid break for a
shift rostered to last more than 5 hours and a
second 30 min paid break for a shift rostered to
last more than 9 hours
▸ Encourage team-based ‘hospital at night’ approach,
including bleep filtering and protection policies to
permit consistent breaks
▸ Provide appropriate rest areas (not necessarily an
‘on-call room’) overnight, which allow staff to nap
during breaks if they choose to
▸ Provide access to good quality food for night staff
▸ Provide beds, free of charge, for postnights staff who
feel too tired to drive home
▸ Offer regular screening of shift workers for primary
sleep disorders
Box 6
After the night shift
If too tired to drive—DO NOT
▸ Use public transport if you can
▸ If possible wear sunglasses on the way home—day-
light will encourage your brain to feel awake and
reduce your chance of getting good quality sleep
Be cautious of wearing sunglasses if driving however
▸ Aim to be in bed as quickly as possible after your
shift ends—the later you get to sleep, the less total
sleep you are likely to get
▸ Resist the temptation to use electronic devices
▸ Have a light meal/snack about 30 min before going to
sleep—do not go to bed hungry
▸ Avoid alcohol, nicotine and caffeine
▸ If you share a house/flat with other people, make sure
they clearly know you are trying to sleep
▸ Do not allow daytime deliveries during the time you
expect to be asleep
▸ Your phone should preferably be in a different room
in airplane mode
▸ On waking ensure you are exposed to bright light for
the first 20 min after waking
▸ Try to do some light exercise
Farquhar M. Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed 2017;102:127–132. doi:10.1136/archdischild-2016-312119
131
Best practice
copyright.
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by
http://ep.bmj.com/
Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed: first published as 10.1136/archdischild-2016-312119 on 16 December 2016. Downloaded from 
 Competing interests None declared.
Provenance and peer review Commissioned; externally peer
reviewed.
REFERENCES
1
http://www.rospa.com/road-safety/advice/drivers/fatigue/
road-accidents/
2
Besedovsky L, Lange T
, Born J. Pflugers sleep and immune
function arch. Eur J Physiol 2012;463:121.
3
Urquhart DS, Orme J, Suresh S. Undergraduate sleep medicine
teaching in UK medical schools: a questionnaire survey. Thorax
2011;66:A78.
4
Kecklund G, Azelsson J. Health consequences of shift work
and insufficient sleep. BMJ 2016;355:i5210.
5
Lockley SW
, Cronin JW
, Evans EE, et al. Effect of reducing
interns’ weekly work hours on sleep and attentional failures.
N Engl J Med 2004;351:1829–37.
6
Landrigan CP
, Rothschild JM, Cronin JW
, et al. Effect of
reducing interns’ work hours on serious medical errors among
interns in intensive care units. N Engl J Med
2004;351:1838–48.
7
Friedman RC, Bigger JT
, Kornfeld DS. The intern and sleep
loss. N Engl J Med 1971;285:201–3.
8
Grantcharov TP
, Bardram L, Funch-Jensen P
, et al.
Laparoscopic performance after one night on-call in a surgical
department: prospective study. BMJ 2001;323:1222–3.
9
Eastridge BJ, Hamilton EC, O’Keefe GE, et al. Effect of sleep
deprivation on the performance of simulated laparoscopic
surgical skill. Am J Surg 2003;186:169–74.
10
Lee M, Howard M, Horrey W
, et al. High risk of near-crash
driving events following night-shift work. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2016;113:176–81.
11
Vyas M, Garg A, Iansavichus A, et al. Shift work and vascular
events: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 2012;345:e4800.
12
Kamdar BB, T
ergas AI, Mateen FJ, et al. Night-shift work and
risk of breast cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Breast Cancer Res T
reat 2013;138:291.
13
Johnson S. The Guardian, 26th July 2016 ‘I fell asleep at the
wheel’: the dangers of doctors driving home.
14
Stewart S. The Daily Record, 16th October 2011. W
orked to
death—exhausted young doctor veers off road and dies after
gruelling nightshift.
15
BBC News webpage 12th July 2016 “Dr Ronak Patel had been
singing to stay awake” before fatal crash http://www.bbc.co.uk/
news/uk-england-suffolk-36767868
16
Rule 91 The Highway Code. https://www.gov.uk/guidance/
the-highway-code/rules-for-drivers-and-motorcyclists-89-
to-102
17
Rimmer A. BMJ Careers, 18th July 2016 NHS needs culture
shift regarding sleeping at work.
18
Gringras P
, Middleton B, Skene D, et al. Bigger, brighter,
bluer—better? Current light-emitting devices—adverse sleep
properties and preventative strategies. Front. Public Health, 13
October 2015.
19
Ruggiero JS, Redeker NS. Effects of napping on sleepiness and
sleep-related performance deficits in night-shift workers: a
systematic review. Biol Res Nurs 2014;16:134–42.
20
Horrocks N, Pounder R. W
orking the night shift: preparation,
survival and recovery—a guide for junior doctors. RCP
W
orking Group. Clin Med (Lond) 2006 Jan-Feb;6:61–7.
21
Royal College of Nursing: A Shift in the Right Direction.
2012. https://www.rcn.org.uk/-/media/royal-college-of-nursing/
documents/publications/2012/october/pub-004286.pdf
22
Real Life Advice BMAW
ebpage 26th July 2016. https://www.
bma.org.uk/advice/career/applying-for-training/top-tips-for-
new-doctors/what-to-expect-as-an-f1/real-life-advice.
23
Ker K, Edwards P
, Felix LM, et al. Caffeine for the prevention
of injuries and errors in shift workers. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 2010;5:CD008508.
Farquhar M. Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed 2017;102:127–132. doi:10.1136/archdischild-2016-312119
132
Best practice
copyright.
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by
http://ep.bmj.com/
Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed: first published as 10.1136/archdischild-2016-312119 on 16 December 2016. Downloaded from 
