 AGS Position Statement: Making Medical Treatment Decisions
for Unbefriended Older Adults
Timothy W. Farrell, MD, AGSF,1,2 Eric Widera, MD,3,4 Lisa Rosenberg, MD,5 Craig D. Rubin,
MD, AGSF,6 Aanand D. Naik, MD,7,8 Ursula Braun, MD, MPH,7,8 Alexia Torke, MD, MS,9
Ina Li, MD,10 Caroline Vitale, MD, AGSF,11,12 Joseph Shega, MD,13,14for the Ethics, Clinical
Practice and Models of Care, and Public Policy Committees of the American Geriatrics Society
In this position statement, we define unbefriended older
adults as patients who: (1) lack decisional capacity to
provide informed consent to the medical treatment at
hand; (2) have not executed an advance directive that
addresses the medical treatment at hand and lack capac-
ity to do so; and (3) lack family, friends or a legally
authorized surrogate to assist in the medical decision-
making process. Given the vulnerable nature of this pop-
ulation, clinicians, health care teams, ethics committees
and other stakeholders working with unbefriended older
adults must be diligent when formulating treatment deci-
sions on their behalf. The process of arriving at a treat-
ment decision for an unbefriended older adult should be
conducted according to standards of procedural fairness
and include capacity assessment, a search for potentially
unidentified surrogate decision makers (including non-tra-
ditional surrogates) and a team-based effort to ascertain
the unbefriended older adult’s preferences by synthesizing
all available evidence. A concerted national effort is
needed
to
help
reduce
the
significant
state-to-state
variability in legal approaches to unbefriended patients.
Proactive efforts are also needed to identify older adults,
including
“adult
orphans,”
at
risk
for
becoming
unbefriended and to develop alternative approaches to
medical
decision
making
for
unbefriended
older
adults. This document updates the 1996 AGS position
statement on unbefriended older adults. J Am Geriatr
Soc 65:14–15, 2017.
Key words: unbefriended; capacity assessment; surro-
gate decision maker; substituted judgment; best interest;
ethics committee; position statement
W
hen caring for older adults who lack capacity to
make medical treatment decisions, clinicians often
rely upon advance directives or surrogate decision makers
for guidance. However, at times clinicians face the particu-
larly challenging situation of making medical treatment
decisions
for
unbefriended
older
adults.
Unbefriended
older adults are unable to participate in directed decision
making, lack an advance directive pertaining to the medi-
cal decision under consideration and the ability to execute
an advance directive, and also lack a legally assigned sur-
rogate decision maker or others (such as family or friends)
to assist in the medical decision-making process.1 Given
the barriers to the care of unbefriended older adults, spe-
cial attention must be paid so that treatment decisions
regarding these highly vulnerable patients are made in a
practical, ethical, and timely manner.
This paper represents a statement of the official policy
positions of the American Geriatrics Society (AGS) and is
an update of the 1996 AGS position statement on this
topic.2 The rationale for each recommendation is provided
in the full position paper (see the Appendix, available at
www.GeriatricsCareOnline.org).
METHODS
The
AGS
Ethics
Committee,
which
is
charged
with
addressing issues that improve public and professional
understanding of ethical and moral issues intrinsic to car-
ing for older adults, developed these policy and clinical
recommendations in collaboration with the AGS Clinical
Practice and Models of Care Committee and the AGS Pub-
lic Policy Committee. These committees conducted a struc-
tured literature review and examined relevant reports and
1University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT; 2VA Salt
Lake City Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center, Salt Lake
City, UT ; 3University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA;
4San Francisco VA Medical Center, San Francisco, CA; 5Roseman
University of Health Sciences, Las Vegas, NV; 6University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX; 7Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX; 8Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center, Houston, TX;
9Indiana University, Indianapolis, IN; 10Christiana Care Health System,
Wilmington, DE; 11University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI; 12VA Ann
Arbor Healthcare System, Ann Arbor, MI; 13VITAS Hospice Care
Healthcare, Gotha, FL; and 14University of Central Florida, Gotha, FL.
DOI: 10.1111/jgs.14586
JAGS
65:14–15, 2017
© 2016, Copyright the Authors
Journal compilation © 2016, The American Geriatrics Society
0002-8614/17/$15.00
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
 studies pertinent to this statement. The draft recommenda-
tions were reviewed and approved by the following AGS
Committees:
Clinical
Practice
and
Models
of
Care,
Ethnogeriatrics, and Public Policy. The position paper and
recommendations were reviewed and approved by the
AGS Executive Committee on behalf of the AGS Board of
Directors.
AGS Policy and Clinical Practice Recommendations
The AGS believes that a concerted national effort is needed
to help reduce the significant state-to-state variability in
legal approaches to unbefriended patients. Variations in
laws across states create confusion for health care providers,
particularly those who practice near state borders. As a con-
sequence, harms including treatment delays or prolongation
of potentially burdensome treatments may result. Proactive
efforts are also needed to identify older adults without
potential surrogates (often referred to as “adult orphans”)
who are at risk for becoming unbefriended and to encourage
this group to engage in advance care planning and/or iden-
tify a health care surrogate. These individuals retain capac-
ity to make their own medical decisions, but lack a
surrogate decision maker or have yet to complete advance
health care directives including living wills or durable power
of attorney documents.3
Policy Recommendations
1. National stakeholders should work together to create
legal standards regarding unbefriended older adults that
could be considered for adoption by all states.
2. Clinicians, health care organizations, and other stake-
holders should work proactively to prevent older adults
without
potential
surrogates
from
becoming
unbe-
friended.
3. Clinicians, health care organizations, communities, and
other stakeholders should develop innovative, efficient
and accessible approaches to promote adequate protec-
tions and procedural fairness in decision making for
unbefriended older adults.
Clinical Practice Recommendations
4. Medical decision making for unbefriended older adults
should include adequate safeguards against ad hoc
approaches and ensure procedural fairness.
5. Clinicians should consider non-traditional surrogate
decision makers for unbefriended older adults.
6. Clinicians should assess medical decision-making capac-
ity in a systematic fashion.
7. Clinicians and healthcare institutions should develop
and standardize/systematize methods to make decisions
for unbefriended older adults in urgent, life-threatening
situations.
8. Clinicians and healthcare institutions should ensure that
patients with long-term incapacity have longitudinal
access to a decision-making surrogate who is familiar with
the patient’s medical condition and specific circumstances.
9. When applying the best interest standard to unbe-
friended older adults, institutional committees (such as
an ethics committee) should synthesize all available
evidence, including cultural and ethnic factors, during
deliberations about treatment decisions.
SUMMARY
Unbefriended older adults are among the most vulnerable
members of society and, as such, those responsible for
making medical treatment decisions on their behalf owe
them a special duty of diligence and care. Health care pol-
icy makers, clinicians, health care institutions and commu-
nities alike must work to ensure that medical decision
making for this population proceeds in an ethical and
equitable fashion. Proactive preventive steps should be
taken to reduce older adults’ risk of becoming unbe-
friended. When older adults do become unbefriended, their
best interest would be served by applying a consensus legal
standard across all states to their medical decision making.
Clinicians who care for older adults at risk of becoming
unbefriended should follow a systematic process to deter-
mine capacity and identify surrogate decision makers.4 In
order to ensure procedural fairness, health care teams, and
not individual clinicians, should synthesize all available
evidence when making medical treatment decisions for
unbefriended older adults.4
Financial Support: Financial support for the develop-
ment of this paper comes exclusively from the AGS operat-
ing budget.
Disclosures: Drs. Braun, Farrell, Li, Rosenberg, Rubin,
Vitale, and Widera have no conflicts to disclose. Dr. Naik
is supported by the Houston Center for Innovations in
Quality,
Effectiveness,
and
Safety
(CIN
13–413)
and
received honoraria from the John A. Hartford Foundation.
Dr. Shega receives salary and bonuses from VITAS Health-
care and has received honoraria from the American Acad-
emy of Hospice and Palliative Medicine. He is reimbursed
for expenses by VITAS Healthcare and the American
Academy of Hospice and Palliative Medicine.
Dr. Torke
previously served as a volunteer member of the Wishard
Volunteer Advocates Program board.
Requests for Single Reprints: Mary Jordan Samuel,
Senior Manager, Special Projects and Governance, Ameri-
can Geriatrics Society, 40 Fulton Street, 18th Floor, New
York, NY 10038.
An expanded version of this article, which includes
additional background and rationale for the recommenda-
tions as well as current author addresses and contributions,
is available in the online version of this article which can
be accessed by searching for the title on the Journal’s
home page: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/journal/10.1111/
(ISSN)1532-5415.
REFERENCES
1. Karp N, Wood E. Incapacitated and alone: medical decision-making for the
unbefriended elderly. American Bar Association Commission on Law and
Aging (2003). Available at: http://www.americanbar.org/content/dam/aba/
administrative/law_aging/2003_Unbefriended_Elderly_Health_Care_Desci-
sion-Making7-11-03.authcheckdam.pdf. Accessed February 25, 2016.
2. AGS Ethics Committee. Making treatment decisions for incapacitated older
adults without advance directives. J Am Geriatr Soc 1996;44:986–987.
3. Connor DM, et al. The unbefriended patient: an exercise in ethical clinical
reasoning. J Gen Intern Med 2015;31:128–132.
4. Moye J, Naik AD. Preserving rights for individuals facing guardianship.
JAMA 2011;305:936–937.
JAGS
JANUARY 2017–VOL. 65, NO. 1
15
 ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Current Author Addresses: Timothy W. Farrell, MD, AGSF,
University of Utah School of Medicine, VA Salt Lake City
Geriatric Research, Education and Clinical Center, 30 N
1900 E, AB 193 SOM, Salt Lake City, UT 84132-0001.
Eric Widera, MD, University of California San Francisco,
San Francisco VA Medical Center, NHCU, SFVAMC Bldg
208, San Francisco, CA 94121.
Lisa Rosenberg, MD, Roseman University of Health
Sciences, 2963 Kedleston St., Las Vegas, NV 89135-2232.
Craig D. Rubin, MD, AGSF, University of Texas South-
western Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas,
TX 75390-8889.
Aanand D. Naik, MD, Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical
Center and Baylor College of Medicine, 2002 Holcombe
(152), Houston, TX 77030.
Ursula K. Braun, MD, MPH, Michael E. DeBakey VA
Medical Center and Baylor College of Medicine, 1 Baylor
Plz, MS230, Houston, TX 77030-3411.
Alexia Torke, MD, MS, Indiana University, 1101 West 10th
St., Indianapolis, IN 46202.
Ina Li, MD, Christiana Care Health System, N. 1400
Washington St., Suite 327, Wilmington, DE 19801-1024.
Caroline Vitale, MD, AGSF, University of Michigan, VA
Ann Arbor Healthcare System, 2215 Fuller Rd, GRECC
11G, Ann Arbor, MI 48105-2303.
Joseph Shega, MD, VITAS Healthcare, Volunteer Faculty,
Associate Professor of Medicine, University of Central Flor-
ida, 9616 Lake Hugh Dr, Gotha, FL 34734-4600.
Author Contributions: All authors contributed to the
paper, including review of the evidence, writing and edit-
ing. The authors wish to acknowledge Nancy Lundebjerg,
MPA for her critical review of the manuscript.
The AGS Ethics Committee members who contributed
to this position statement include: Christina Bell, MD,
PhD; Ursula Braun, MD, MPH; Anthony Caprio, MD; Jef-
frey Escher, MD; Manuel Eskildsen, MD, MPH; Timothy
W. Farrell, MD, AGSF; Aanand D. Naik, MD; Ramona
Rhodes, MD; Lisa Rosenberg, MD; Joseph Shega, MD;
Alexia Torke, MD, MS; Elizabeth Vig, MD, MPH; Caro-
line Vitale, MD, AGSF; and Eric Widera, MD.
The Clinical Practice and Models of Care Committee,
Ethnogeriatrics Committee and Public Policy Commit-
tee reviewed the statement. The AGS Executive Committee
reviewed the statement and provided final approval on July
21, 2016.
APPENDIX: EXPANDED BACKGROUND AND
RATIONALE
Over the last decade there has been growing recognition of
the need for improved approaches to medical decision
making for unbefriended older adults, likely due to the
confluence of several factors that affect medical decision-
making capacity and the availability of surrogate decision
makers. The US population is aging, and consequently,
there has been increased attention to geriatric syndromes
that impact capacity, such as dementia or delirium. Older
adults may often lose the capacity to make their own deci-
sions during an acute exacerbation of a serious medical ill-
ness that requires an invasive or intensive therapeutic
intervention. According to one study, among older adults
near the end of life, 42.5% required a medical decision at
the end of life, of which 70.3% lacked decision-making
capacity when care decisions were required.5 Within the
intensive care unit setting, 16% of those individuals admit-
ted6 and one in four who died lacked decision-making
capacity and a surrogate during their entire ICU stay.7
Approximately 3 to 4% of patients residing in the long-
term care setting are thought to be unbefriended.8 Many
older adults might have had surrogates earlier in their
lives, but as they reach the extremes of age, those surro-
gates may be unavailable to act as medical decision mak-
ers. The aging Baby Boomer generation is particularly at
risk as more than 10 million live alone and 20% are child-
less.9 Additional research is needed to better quantify the
number of unbefriended older adults across other care set-
tings, including outpatient practice. Additional research is
also needed to better understand how cultural and ethnic
factors affect preferences for care and to help identify
options for non-traditional surrogate decision makers.
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS
Creating Model Legal Standards
The AGS supports greater uniformity with respect to states’
legal standards involving unbefriended older adults. Existing
laws and pending legislation governing surrogate decision
making lack uniformity and are often unclear.10 Seven states
(Massachusetts,
Minnesota,
Missouri,
Nebraska,
New
Hampshire, Rhode Island and Vermont) lack surrogate con-
sent laws.11 Among those states with surrogate consent laws,
most states adopt a hierarchical approach involving a ranked
list of family members, while other states require consensus
among a group of surrogate decision makers.11 There are dif-
ferences among jurisdictions as to the extent of the surro-
gate’s authority, the authority of nonfamily members, the
permissibility of the patient’s physician to act as a surrogate
in certain circumstances, the degree of illness or disability
that a patient must have in order for the surrogate to make
decisions regarding life-sustaining treatment and how to pro-
ceed when limits are placed on specific surrogates. In addi-
tion,
some
jurisdictions
require
“clear
and
convincing
evidence” of the patient’s previously expressed wishes, a stan-
dard that might be interpreted to require such compelling evi-
dence that it is of little practical use. Decision-making
standards that depend on knowledge of the patient’s wishes,
whether
clearly
known
or
merely
presumed,
will
be
JAGS
65:e1–e5, 2017
© 2016, Copyright the Authors
Journal compilation © 2016, The American Geriatrics Society
0002-8614/17/$15.00
 insufficient for patients who lack both an advance directive
and a surrogate decision maker, or who never had decisional
capacity, such as those with severe developmental disability.
In jurisdictions where laws and regulations are cum-
bersome, impractical, or do not advance the widespread
preferences for natural and comfortable dying, health pro-
fessionals should work to educate legislators as to the need
for change in these laws. Laws should be based on the
needs and interests of the patient as he or she might have
defined them, and not as the physician, the institution, or
the state would define them.
Preventing Older Adults Without Potential Surrogates
From Becoming Unbefriended
Advocacy
for
unbefriended
older
adults
must
extend
beyond
the
design
of
protocols
for
medical
decision
making on their behalf. Clinicians, health care organiza-
tions
and
other
stakeholders
must
also
proactively
attempt to prevent older adults from becoming unbe-
friended. Older adults without potential surrogates (often
referred
to
as
“adult
orphans”)
are
individuals
who
retain capacity for medical decisions, but lack a surro-
gate decision maker or have yet to complete advance
health care directives, including living wills or durable
power of attorney documents.3 Robust patient-centered
and interdisciplinary team-based efforts in the commu-
nity setting, through the involvement of health care pro-
fessionals
including
but
not
limited
to
primary
care
physicians and social workers, are needed to assist these
individuals in documenting their care preferences. Com-
munity-based clinicians may lack sufficient resources to
provide the time-intensive and resource-intensive advance
care planning services required for older adults without
potential surrogates, especially if the older adult has
impaired decision-making capacity for the matters of
concern. As of January 2016, specific, Center for Medi-
care & Medicaid Services (CMS)-approved reimburse-
ment codes for advance care planning12 should promote
goals of care and advance care planning discussions,
hopefully allowing for older adults without potential sur-
rogates to have increased documentation of their care
preferences in the medical record or in the form of a
living will. For these individuals, this documentation is
paramount – especially if they have no surrogate deci-
sion maker to appoint as a durable power of attorney
for healthcare decisions – and may facilitate future deci-
sion making, according to the substituted judgment stan-
dard.
Whenever possible, clinicians should strongly encour-
age older adults who have an available and appropriate
surrogate decision maker to appoint him or her as the
durable power of attorney for health care decisions (and
for other domains as appropriate, such as financial deci-
sions). Assigning an appropriate surrogate decision maker
in this way usually prevents the arduous process of
appointing a guardian through a court of law. Documen-
tation of patient preferences will also help to improve the
likelihood that end of life preferences are known and fol-
lowed by a future surrogate. Clinicians should consider
utilizing
patient-friendly
materials
to
facilitate
the
advance care planning process.13–15
Promoting Protections and Procedural Fairness in
Decision Making for the Unbefriended
Identifying
public
guardians
can
be
time
consuming,
expensive and slow. Moreover, some states prohibit public
guardians from authorizing DNR orders or other end of
life decisions, potentially creating additional barriers to the
provision
of
high-quality
care
for
older
adults
with
advanced illness.10 As a result, the AGS encourages clini-
cians, health care organizations, communities and other
stakeholders to develop innovative models for medical
decision making for unbefriended older adults, such as sev-
eral
already
developed.16
For
example,
the
Veterans
Administration allows physicians to make certain deci-
sions, but applies increasingly strict procedural standards
as the treatment decision becomes more complex. Deci-
sions to withhold or withdraw life sustaining treatments
can also be made after review by an interdisciplinary com-
mittee,17 which might include a physician, nurse, social
worker and community member. Certain states, such as
Arkansas, allow attending physicians to make decisions on
behalf of unbefriended adult patients in consultation with
an institution’s ethics officials.18 Indiana law allows for
volunteers to serve as guardians.19 One successful program
developed by the Indianapolis safety-net hospital matches
trained volunteers to unbefriended adults.20 All volunteers
are supervised by an attorney with expertise in guardian-
ship and elder care. Guardians receive extensive training
and are generally paired with one patient at a time. In a
published report describing the first 50 patients enrolled in
this program, 15 patients died during the observation per-
iod. All had a DNR order in place at the time of death
and all but one had a comfort-focused plan of care docu-
mented in the medical record. In 3 cases, the patient
regained capacity and the guardianship was terminated.
The program has since transitioned to a local non-profit
organization and serves several area hospitals.21
CLINICAL RECOMMENDATIONS
Medical Decision-making for the Unbefriended
Regardless of the person or entity involved, the process
used for decision making for unbefriended older adults
should not proceed on an ad hoc basis. Rather, health
care institutions’ policies should specify how decisions
should be made. At minimum, such policies should be
consistent with state law and ensure adequate protections
for the unbefriended. This includes ensuring that there is
oversight by a legitimate body, transparency in decision
making,
reason-giving
based
on
relevant
principles
and
procedures
for
appealing
and
revising
individual
decisions.22
When caring for unbefriended older adults, clinicians
often rely on their own best judgment on how to proceed,
with little to no oversight. For example, in a landmark
study, 14% of life support decisions for unbefriended ICU
patients were made without hospital or judicial oversight.3
Potential advantages of the clinician as decision maker
include a genuine understanding of an individual’s progno-
sis, a theoretically enhanced ability to consider what is in
the
patient’s
best
interest,
a
sense
of
professional
e2
JANUARY 2017–VOL. 65, NO. 1
JAGS
 obligation and the ability to make timely decisions. Laws
in several states, however, prohibit clinicians from serving
as medical surrogate decision makers, even when requested
by the patient.23 Disadvantages of the clinician as decision
maker include inadequate protections for unbefriended
patients against physician bias or conflicts of interest
within the medical decision-making process.24 Further-
more, clinicians making unilateral decisions do not typi-
cally explain the benefits, burdens, and alternatives to a
decision maker who is independent from the clinical team.
For some incapacitated persons, displaced health care
decisions are made by a guardian, also called a guardian
of person or conservator of person – a surrogate decision
maker appointed by a judge. However, guardianship might
not always be appropriate or available. Guardianship cre-
ates a duty for one individual to make decisions for
another individual, and may be restricted to medical deci-
sion making or may be more global in scope. With the
imposition of global forms of guardianship, the individ-
ual’s constitutional rights are removed; in recent years,
more limited forms of guardianship have been favored by
the courts. The guardian may be completely unknown to
the patient, or a “stranger guardian.”25 While indicated in
some circumstances, guardianship is generally a last resort
to be avoided through less restrictive alternatives whenever
possible.26 For those individuals who are permanently
incapacitated and who also lack an advance directive,
guardianship is a reasonable option. For an individual
who is acutely ill with the possibility of recovering capac-
ity, guardianship is less appropriate (see position 7).
In contrast to health care proxies and durable powers
of attorney, guardianship protections include court over-
sight by definition. Disadvantages of the guardianship sys-
tem include the time and expense required to establish
guardianship. These barriers can potentially delay the pro-
vision of appropriate care, including symptom relief at the
end of life. If assigned a guardian while temporarily inca-
pacitated, the individual under guardianship must prove
that he or she has regained capacity in order for guardian-
ship to be removed. This proof must be provided in a
court of law at a time when the individual does not con-
trol her own resources (e.g. no authority to spend money
on an attorney or on medical consultation to re-evaluate
capacity). For these reasons, guardianship is generally ill-
suited for complex and often urgent treatment decisions
(see position 7).
Decision-making
pathways
for
unbefriended
older
adults must have adequate safeguards. For example, treat-
ment decisions derived from team consensus (including,
but not limited to, 2 or more attending physicians and also
available surrogate(s)), are preferred over treatment deci-
sions derived from an individual. When time allows, an
external entity such as an ethics committee could be
authorized to review treatment options and to consent to
the proposed treatment decision on behalf of the unbe-
friended patient.
Non-traditional Surrogates
There should be an attempt made by health care teams to
locate an advance directive and to identify family members
and friends who have been meaningfully involved in the
patient’s life such that they are familiar with the patient’s
values and preferences. If the clinical circumstances permit,
clinicians should consider enlisting the assistance of a
social worker, case manager or state agency to assist in
identifying a person or persons who know the individual
well.
It should not be assumed that the absence of tradi-
tional surrogates (next-of-kin) means the patient lacks a
suitable surrogate decision maker. A nontraditional surro-
gate,27 such as a close friend, partner, a live-in companion
who is not married to the patient, a neighbor, a member
of the clergy, or others who know the patient well, may be
the appropriate surrogate. Health professionals should
make a conscientious effort to identify such individuals.
The most appropriate surrogate for the incapacitated
patient is one who has loving and intimate knowledge of
the patient’s wishes or value system. In some cases, surviv-
ing family members have only remote knowledge of the
patient’s values, or are estranged, whereas close friends or
others with more proximate interactions with the incapaci-
tated patient might better represent the patient’s recent
and relevant value system. If such a patient has developed
other intimate relationships, there may well be an identifi-
able and appropriate surrogate. Clinicians should familiar-
ize themselves with hospital and other institutional policy
and state law regarding the involvement of nonfamily
surrogates.28
Assessing Medical Decision-Making Capacity
Autonomy in decision making is a fundamental ethical
principle that should be adhered to whenever possible.
Clinicians should advocate for older adults’ participation
in decision making to the extent possible, even after they
have been determined to lack capacity to make medical
decisions.29 Decisional capacity is specific to each patient
and
to
a
particular
medical
decision.
For
example,
although it is increasingly recognized that patients with
mild cognitive impairment are at risk for impaired deci-
sional capacity,30 these patients still often retain decisional
capacity for most or all choices, including the ability to
designate a surrogate decision maker. Furthermore, those
with more severe cognitive impairment who cannot com-
prehend complex decisions may still possess the capacity
to make simple decisions or to convey their opinions
regarding the burdens and benefits of ongoing treatments.
In instances of cognitive impairment, delirium, or psychi-
atric conditions, every attempt should be made to alleviate
any exacerbating factors and improve capacity for partici-
pation in decision making.
Capacity should be formally assessed using accepted
guidelines if not already done within a reasonable period
of time. Such assessment need not be reserved for special-
ists such as psychiatrists, as primary care physicians and
geriatricians should also be capable of performing capacity
assessments. Since capacity can change over time, it should
also be assessed periodically even when there is not a med-
ical decision at hand. When an explicit capacity evaluation
is required, clinicians should be encouraged to use a struc-
tured approach to capacity assessment since evidence sug-
gests that unstructured capacity assessments are often
performed poorly.31
JAGS
JANUARY 2017–VOL. 65, NO. 1
e3
 Clinicians should attempt to address communication
barriers prior to making medical treatment decisions for
all older adults, including unbefriended patients. Commu-
nication barriers may include sensory deficits (e.g. vision
or hearing loss), limited health literacy, differences in lan-
guage or differences in culture. Appropriate recognition of
communication barriers may identify patients previously
thought to lack capacity who in fact retain capacity to
make some or all of their medical decisions.
Making Decisions for the Unbefriended in Urgent,
Life-threatening Situations
For urgent, life-threatening situations, such as emergent
surgery, clinicians and health care institutions should
develop methods to make decisions for incapacitated older
adults who lack surrogates. These methods might include
allowing the attending physician and a consulting physi-
cian to make time-sensitive choices within established pro-
tocols subject to retrospective review.
Surrogate decision-making laws and policies should
not hinder the patient’s ability to die naturally and com-
fortably. Non-beneficial life-sustaining treatments should
not
be
performed
on
terminally
ill
patients
solely
because they lack a surrogate decision maker. Among
the few patients who survive resuscitation, patients with
advanced illness experience poor outcomes,32–37 including
the inability to live independently and/or a quality of life
which may not represent what is valuable to them in
living.
Long-Term Incapacity
There are many incapacitated patients, such as those resid-
ing in long term care institutions, for whom health care
decisions will be recurrent over their remaining lifetime.
The admission process to a long term care institution
should trigger ascertainment of surrogacy by a formalized
process. Patients with long-term incapacity and no surro-
gate available are best served by having a longitudinal sur-
rogate who is familiar with their medical conditions and
specific circumstances. The broader community should
develop a formal process to ensure that an appropriate
guardian is appointed or that other decision-making proce-
dures are followed.
Use of Institutional Committees
The best interest standard38 is typically applied only as a
last resort when there is no advance directive available and
a surrogate decision maker cannot be identified. According
to this approach, when informants do not exist or are not
able or willing to provide information about a patient’s
wishes, decision makers must rely on this best interest
standard in which decisions are made from the perspective
of a reasonable person after weighing a treatment’s bene-
fits and burdens.
Institutional committees, such as ethics committees,
should require the synthesis of all available evidence
about unbefriended older adults’ treatment preferences,
including cultural and ethnic factors, when applying the
best
interest
standard.
This
evidence
can
include
information from those who are not legally assigned sur-
rogates but who nonetheless have participated in the
unbefriended patient’s care, such as a primary care physi-
cian. For example, one hospital emphasizes marshalling
all available resources,39 including learning about the
patient’s social and medical history through discussion
with friends, religious affiliations, current and previous
care providers and the patient’s own statements or wishes
to gain a sense of the patient’s life story and priorities.
Next, this institution formulates an objective assessment
of the patient’s current response to his or her illness and
treatment course, including whether it will be in the best
interest of the patient to continue this course. Lastly, all
options from the health care team (caregivers, consul-
tants, primary care providers, social workers, etc.) are
considered. This process allows a group of people directly
connected to the patient to build a consensus on what
the patient would have likely chosen.
CONCLUSION
This position statement updates the 1996 AGS position
statement on unbefriended older adults.2 Key additions
include a call to help decrease state-to-state variability in
legal standards regarding the unbefriended, as well as a
strong recommendation to develop innovative models to
overcome significant legal, financial, and other barriers to
timely and appropriate medical decision making for this
population. Clinicians should ensure procedural fairness
regarding medical decision making by adopting a system-
atic, team-based approach that synthesizes all available
evidence regarding unbefriended older adults’ treatment
preferences. The AGS also supports proactive efforts to
prevent older adults from becoming unbefriended. By
adopting these measures, clinicians and policymakers will
be well positioned to improve the care of unbefriended
older adults.
REFERENCES
5. Silveira MJ, Kim SYH, Langa KM. Advance directives and outcomes of surro-
gate decision making before death. N Engl J Med 2010;362:1211–1218.
6. White DB, Curtis JR, Lo B et al. Decisions to limit life-sustaining treatment
for critically ill patients who lack both decision-making capacity and surro-
gate decision-makers. Crit Care Med 2006;34:2053–2059.
7. White DB, Curtis JR, Wolf LE et al. Life support for patients without a
surrogate decision maker: Who decides? Ann Intern Med 2007 Jul
3;147:34–40.
8. Incapacitated and Alone: Healthcare decision making for older people. Sec-
tion of Individual Rights and Responsibilities. American Bar Association
(2004). Available at: http://www.americanbar.org/publications/human_rights_
magazine_home/human_rights_vol31_2004/spring2004/hr_spring04_incapaci-
tated.html. Accessed February 25, 2016.
9. Redfoot D, Feinberg L, Houser A. The aging of the baby boom and the
growing care gap: a look at future declines in the availability of family
caregivers
(2013).
http://www.aarp.org/content/dam/aarp/research/pub-
lic_policy_institute/ltc/2013/baby-boom-and-the-growing-care-gap-insight-
AARP-ppi-ltc.pdf. Accessed March 6, 2016.
10. Cohen AB, Wright MS, Cooney L et al. Guardianship and end of life deci-
sion making. JAMA Intern Med 2015;175:1687–1691.
11. Wynn S. Decisions by surrogates: An overview of surrogate consent laws in
the United States. Bifocal 2014; 36(1). Available at: http://www.american-
bar.org/publications/bifocal/vol_36/issue_1_october2014/default_surrogate_
consent_statutes.html
12. Department of Health and Human Services. MLN Matters: Advance care
planning as an optional element of an Annual Wellness Visit (AWV). Avail-
able at: https://www.cms.gov/Outreach-and-Education/Medicare-Learning-
e4
JANUARY 2017–VOL. 65, NO. 1
JAGS
 Network-MLN/MLNMattersArticles/Downloads/MM9271.pdf.
Accessed
March 6, 2016.
13. Sudore R. PREPARE: An online advance care planning tool. Available at:
https://www.prepareforyourcare.org. Accessed March 6, 2016.
14. Institute for Healthcare Improvement. The Conversation Project. Available
at: http://theconversationproject.org/. Accesssed March 6, 2016.
15. US Department of Veterans Affairs. National Center for Ethics in Health-
care:
Goal
of
care
conversations
training.
Available
at:
http://
www.ethics.va.gov/goalsofcaretraining.asp. Accessed March 6, 2016.
16. Pope TM, Sellers T. Legal briefing: The unbefriended: Making healthcare
decisions
for
patients
without
surrogates
(Part
2).
J
Clin
Ethics
2012;23:177–191.
17. Department of Veterans Affairs. Veterans Health Administration Hand-
book 1004.01 (2009). Available at: file:///C:/Users/u0676413/Downloads/
1004_01_HK_2009-08-14.pdf. Accessed February 25, 2016.
18. Arkansas Health Care Decisions Act: Arkansas Code 20-6-105. Available
at:
ftp://www.arkleg.state.ar.us/acts/2013/Public/ACT1264.pdf.
Accessed
February 25, 2016.
19. Volunteer Advocates for Seniors or Incapacitated Adults: Indiana Code 29-
3-8.5. Available at: http://indianacode.info/ic/title29/part53.htm. Accessed
February 25, 2016.
20. Bandy R, Sachs GA, Montz K et al. Wishard Volunteer Advocates Pro-
gram: An intervention for at-risk, incapacitated, unbefriended adults. J Am
Geriatr Soc 2014;62:2171–2179.
21. Center for At Risk Elders. http://www.indianacare.org/. Accessed August
12, 2015.
22. White DB, Jonson A, Lo B. Am J Crit Care 2012;21:202–207.
23. Rai A, Siegler M, Lantos J. The physician as health care proxy. Hastings
Cent Rep 1999;29:14–19.
24. Anstey MH, Adams JL, McGlynn EA. Perceptions of the appropriateness
of care in California adult intensive care units. Crit Care 2015;19:51.
25. Bandy R. Stranger decision-making and stranger guardians [unpublished
thesis.]
26. Guardianship: An agenda for reform. American Bar Association Commission
(1989). Available at: http://www.americanbar.org/content/dam/aba/adminis-
trative/law_aging/2011/2011_aging_gship_agda_refrm.authcheckdam.pdf.
Accessed February 25, 2016.
27. American Geriatrics Society Ethics Committee. American Geriatrics Society
care of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender older adults position state-
ment: American Geriatrics Society Ethics Committee. J Am Geriatr Soc
2015;63:423–426.
28. AMA Opinion 8.081 – Surrogate Decision Making. Available at: http://
www.ama-assn.org/ama/pub/physician-resources/medical-ethics/code-medical-
ethics/opinion8081.page Accessed March 23, 2016.
29. Casanto MD, Simon S, Roman J. National Guardianship Association: a
model code of ethics for guardians. Available at: http://www.guardian-
ship.org/documents/Code_of_Ethics.pdf. Accessed February 25, 2016.
30. Jefferson AL, Lambe S, Moser DJ et al. Decisional capacity for research
participation in individuals with mild cognitive impairment. J Am Geriatr
Soc 2008;56:1236–1243.
31. Applebaum PS. Assessment of patients’ competence to consent to treat-
ment. N Engl J Med 2007;357:1834–1840.
32. Sandroni C, Nolan J, Cavallaro F et al. In-hospital cardiac arrest: Inci-
dence, prognosis and possible measures to improve survival. Intensive Care
Med 2007;33:237–245. Epub 2006 Sep 22.
33. Peberdy MA, Ornato JP, Larkin GL et al. ; National Registry of Car-
diopulmonary Resuscitation Investigators. Survival from in-hospital cardiac
arrest during nights and weekends. JAMA 2008;299:785–792.
34. Levy PD, Ye H, Compton S et al. American Heart Association national
registry of cardiopulmonary resuscitation investigators. Factors associated
with neurologically intact survival for patients with acute heart failure and
in-hospital cardiac arrest. Circ Heart Fail 2009;2:572–581.
35. Meaney PA, Nadkarni VM, Kern KB et al. Rhythms and outcomes of adult
in-hospital cardiac arrest. Crit Care Med 2010;38:101–108.
36. Goldberger ZD, Chan PS, Berg RA et al. Duration of resuscitation efforts
and survival after in-hospital cardiac arrest: An observational study. Lancet
2012;380:1473–1481.
37. Abbo ED, Yuen TC, Buhrmester L et al. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation out-
comes in hospitalized community-dwelling individuals and nursing home res-
idents based on activities of daily living. J Am Geriatr Soc 2013;61:34–39.
38. Kopelman LM. The best interests standard for incompetent or incapaci-
tated persons of all ages. J Law Med Ethics 2007;35:187–196.
39. Sadovnikoff N, Jurchak M. Substituted judgments in the absence of surro-
gates. Crit Care Med 2007;35:2467–2468.
JAGS
JANUARY 2017–VOL. 65, NO. 1
e5
