 *For correspondence:
Carlos_Aizenman@brown.edu
Competing interests: The
authors declare that no
competing interests exist.
Funding: See page 17
Received: 26 February 2016
Accepted: 23 May 2016
Published: 24 May 2016
Reviewing editor: Gary L
Westbrook, Vollum Institute,
United States
Copyright Felch et al. This
article is distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License, which
permits unrestricted use and
redistribution provided that the
original author and source are
credited.
Multisensory integration in the
developing tectum is constrained by the
balance of excitation and inhibition
Daniel L Felch1,2, Arseny S Khakhalin1,3, Carlos D Aizenman1*
1Department of Neuroscience, Brown University, Providence, United States;
2Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Tulane University, New Orleans, United
States; 3Department of Biology, Bard College, New York, United States
Abstract Multisensory integration (MSI) is the process that allows the brain to bind together
spatiotemporally congruent inputs from different sensory modalities to produce single salient
representations. While the phenomenology of MSI in vertebrate brains is well described, relatively
little is known about cellular and synaptic mechanisms underlying this phenomenon. Here we use an
isolated brain preparation to describe cellular mechanisms underlying development of MSI
between visual and mechanosensory inputs in the optic tectum of Xenopus tadpoles. We find MSI
is highly dependent on the temporal interval between crossmodal stimulus pairs. Over a key
developmental period, the temporal window for MSI significantly narrows and is selectively tuned
to specific interstimulus intervals. These changes in MSI correlate with developmental increases in
evoked synaptic inhibition, and inhibitory blockade reverses observed developmental changes in
MSI. We propose a model in which development of recurrent inhibition mediates development of
temporal aspects of MSI in the tectum.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.15600.001
Introduction
Multisensory integration (MSI) is a well-characterized phenomenon of both neural output and behav-
ior where the response triggered by a stimulus of a given sensory modality is altered by the coinci-
dent presentation of a stimulus of a different sensory modality (for reviews see Stein and Stanford,
2008; Stein et al., 2009). The result can be either enhancement or suppression of the response rela-
tive to the responses evoked by a single unimodal stimulus (Stanford et al., 2005).
One central brain area where inputs from multiple sensory modalities first interact is the optic tec-
tum. This midbrain structure, also known as the superior colliculus in mammals, contains laminae that
are segregated functionally, as well as anatomically—its superficial layers receive a direct retinal pro-
jection that maintains its topographic map of visual space (Graybiel, 1975; Straznicky and Gaze,
1972) and its deep and intermediate layers receive inputs carrying both auditory information (Knud-
sen, 1982; Lowe, 1986) as well as somato- and mechanosensory information and motor feedback
signals (for a review see May, 2006). In a given multisensory neuron in the colliculus, the amount of
integration is dependent on both the overlap between spatial receptive fields for the two stimulus
modalities
and
the
time
window
between
stimulus
presentations
in
a
crossmodal
pair
(Meredith et al., 1987; Meredith and Stein, 1996). The integrative capabilities of multisensory col-
licular neurons develop in an activity dependent manner which has been proposed to depend on
repeated associations of spatiotemporally aligned stimuli during a critical period (Knudsen, 2002;
Knudsen and Brainard, 1991; Wallace et al., 2006; Wallace and Stein, 2007; Xu et al., 2012;
Yu et al., 2010).
Felch et al. eLife 2016;5:e15600. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.15600
1 of 19
RESEARCH ARTICLE
 Despite great interest within the field in understanding potential cellular and synaptic mecha-
nisms for multisensory integration and its development (Rowland et al., 2007b), very little experi-
mental work exists on this question (Binns and Salt, 1996; Skaliora et al., 2004). The prevalent
experimental models of multisensory integration have been the superior colliculus of cats and
rodents and to some degree the optic tectum of the barn owl; their location within the animal makes
these structures difficult to access with whole-cell recording techniques in vivo and impossible to iso-
late in vitro without significantly disrupting the neural networks in which they operate. In Xenopus
laevis tadpoles, the optic tectum is superficially located and thus accessible for whole-cell recordings
in vivo (Khakhalin et al., 2014) and can be isolated in an intact whole-brain preparation for record-
ings ex vivo (Pratt and Aizenman, 2007). This is a tremendous advantage over other preparations,
where assessing synaptic events during MSI is usually inferred from local extracellular field
potentials.
In Xenopus, as in other vertebrates, the dominant input to the optic tectum is visual, originating
from the contralateral retina, and terminating in the superficial layers of the tectal neuropil
(Deeg et al., 2009; Sze
´kely and La
´za
´r, 1976). Inputs from the various mechanosensory modalities
that ascend via hindbrain nuclei terminate within the deeper layers (Behrend et al., 2006;
Deeg et al., 2009; Hiramoto and Cline, 2009; Lowe, 1986; 1987). Our laboratory and others have
characterized the development of hindbrain mechanosensory projections to the tectum in Xenopus
tadpoles, and have shown that these inputs converge in single tectal neurons from very early devel-
opmental stages. In this study we use the Xenopus tadpole to begin to examine the cellular and cir-
cuit level mechanisms underlying multisensory integration of these hindbrain and visual inputs in the
developing midbrain.
Results
Temporal interactions
Experiments were performed between developmental stages 44–46 and 48–9. During this develop-
mental time span, tectal neurons already have been innervated by both visual and mechanosensory
inputs and respond synaptically to activation of either pathway (Deeg et al., 2009; Hiramoto and
Cline, 2009). During this timeframe tectal circuits also undergo a period of refinement, both of sen-
sory receptive fields (Dong and Aizenman, 2012; Dong et al., 2009; Tao and Poo, 2005) and of
local recurrent circuitry (Pratt et al., 2008). Tectal neurons also undergo dramatic change in their
intrinsic excitability (Ciarleglio et al., 2015; Pratt and Aizenman, 2007), and behavioral data dem-
onstrate that even young Xenopus tadpoles generate behavioral responses to visual and mechano-
sensory stimuli (Dong et al., 2009; Roberts et al., 2009). We used a whole brain ex vivo
preparation which allows us to preserve intact the relevant brain circuits (Wu et al., 1996). We iso-
lated inputs carrying either visual or mechanosensory information by placing stimulating electrodes
in the optic chiasm to activate visual pathways (V) and in the contralateral hindbrain to activate
mechanosensory pathways (HB; Figure 1A). Previous descriptions of crossmodal integration, evi-
denced in either the number or temporal distribution of action potentials, reveal that the inter-stimu-
lus interval (ISI) between two crossmodal inputs is a key factor that determines the direction and
magnitude of the integrative response (Meredith et al., 1987). This temporal relationship can be
further modulated by the relative size of the individual responses, where greater multisensory
enhancement is observed if the stronger modality precedes the weaker one (Miller et al., 2015). To
assess how ISI influences the ability of Xenopus tectal neurons to integrate crossmodal stimulus
pairs, we performed cell-attached recordings from tectal neuron somata to measure individual spikes
evoked by stimulation of sensory inputs (Figure 1B). Stimulus intensities were set such that response
sizes for each modality were roughly matched. We systematically varied the time interval between
the two electrical stimuli delivered to the different sensory pathways. Figure 1C shows examples of
spike time raster plots at different ISI’s in both developmental groups. From these examples two
observations become evident. First that paired responses have a faster onset and can have a greater
gain than single modality responses. And second that these changes show a temporal dependence
on ISI. The temporal dependence of crossmodal responses on ISI is revealed in the population
means of the Multi-Sensory Index (MSIn; see Materials and methods) values from both developmen-
tal groups (stages 44–46 and stages 48–49; Figure 1D). In general, greater and more-positive MSIn
Felch et al. eLife 2016;5:e15600. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.15600
2 of 19
Research article
Neuroscience
 values were observed as a result of shorter inter-stimulus intervals, whereas negative MSIn values—
indicating a suppression of responses due to crossmodal paired stimuli—are produced exclusively
by longer inter-stimulus intervals, of up to 1000 ms. Noticeably, the net average MSIn values (both
negative and positive) appear to be reduced in the older animals.
Figure 1. Multisensory integration in tectal neurons is dependent on interstimulus interval (ISI). (A) Diagram
showing placement of the ’V’ and ’HB’ bipolar electrodes relative to tectal afferents and recording location. (B)
Raw traces of cell-attached spikes generated during single and paired stimulation. Letters indicate times of
stimulus presentation and modality of stimulus. (C) Example raster plots from two cells, one from a stages 44–46
animal (left) and one from a stages 48–49 animal (right) as a function of ISI. (D) Grouped data from both
developmental groups. In a given cell, data are averaged over trials at each ISI, to determine the MSIn ratio.
Plotted here is the population means of these trial-averaged MSIn ratios, at the ISI’s tested. Error bars show +/– S.
E.M. MSIn = (combined response – single response) / single response.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.15600.002
Felch et al. eLife 2016;5:e15600. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.15600
3 of 19
Research article
Neuroscience
 One possibility that may explain the apparent decrease in MSIn in older animals is that that at
stages 48–49 individual cells could be strongly selective for one or only a few adjacent ISI’s, but vary
widely with respect to the ISI to which they are most sensitive. As a result, these differences could
be drowned out in the population averages. Thus, to investigate the possibility that tectal neurons
become tuned to respond best to different crossmodal ISI’s over development, we measured the
ISI’s at which each cell’s maximal MSIn values were generated and plotted these ISI values as a histo-
gram for both developmental stages (Figure 2A,B). We found that in the stage 48–49 group, maxi-
mum MSIn responses occur at a relatively broad range of ISIs (Figure 2B) across the population of
cells, in contrast to the younger tadpoles, where maximal MSI mostly occurs at short ISIs
(Figure 2A). Another way to describe this is that in the older tadpoles, tectal neurons, as a popula-
tion, are tuned to respond optimally to a wider range of crossmodal ISIs (Figure 2D; median ISI, st
44–6 = 200 ms, IQR = 300 ms (n=26), st 48–9 = 400 ms, IQR = 775 ms (n=40), p<0.05, Mann-Whit-
ney). However, despite these differences in temporal tuning, the peak MSIn value that could be
achieved by a given cell was still roughly twice as large in the younger developmental group
(Figure 2C; mean max MSI, st 44–6 = 1.15 ± 0.31 (n=26), st 48–9 = 0.55 ± 0.10 (n=40), p<0.05,
unpaired T-test).
Next we tested whether any systematic differences between H-V and V-H pairings could be hid-
den in these combined data. Thus we compared the peak MSIn values at the same ISI, across the
two stimulus sequences, and consistently we found that both sequences were equally effective in
evoking multisensory responses (see Table 1). Likely this is a result of the fact that in these experi-
ments stimulus intensities were adjusted so that response magnitudes were similar across modalities.
As a result, we do not distinguish between different stimulus sequences for the remainder of this
study.
Independent of the magnitude of a cell’s responses to its preferred stimulus, another measure of
developmental refinement is the degree of its selectivity for that particular stimulus combination.
Because responses to paired stimuli peak at different ISIs in different cells, to study the tuning of ISI
selectivity across cells it is necessary to align their MSIn-versus-ISI distributions at the peak MSIn
value in each neuron. This alignment of all ‘ISI tuning curves’ at their maximal MSIn values should
provide a common reference point for comparing the shapes of the entire curve, across cells. Tuning
curves of individual cells, representing different combinations of H and V offsets, were aligned at
their central peak in the X axis to allow for direct comparison of average temporal tuning curve
shapes as shown in Figure 2E. In the stage 44–6 tadpoles it was evident that across cells, crossmo-
dal response enhancement was present over a wider range of ISIs surrounding the central peak, and
that this tuning narrowed significantly over development. To quantify this difference we determined
the best curve fit for each data, and the resulting curves were compared statistically using an F test,
which tests whether the dataset is best fit by two separate curves or by a single curve. We found sig-
nificant differences between the tuning curves between developmental stages (F-test: F = 9.966
(2716), p<0.00001), with the curve being narrower in the older group.
Taken together, these data suggest that over development, peak multisensory responses
decrease in terms of absolute gain, however cells become preferentially tuned to a greater diversity
of temporal intervals, yet also become more sharply tuned around their preferred interval.
Deviations from linearity
While the MSI metric reveals how the response to a single stimulus is changed by a preceding input,
it does not quantitatively address the manner in which the two inputs interact. The method
described by Stanford et al. (Stanford et al., 2005) allows us to compare the actual output of multi-
sensory responses to what is expected from a purely additive combination of responses to individ-
ual, single modality inputs (for details of how the predicted sum is determined, see Materials and
methods). Evoked multisensory responses could either result in supralinear, linear or sub linear sum-
mation, examples of sublinear and supralinear summation are shown in Figure 3A. When we com-
pared the maximal evoked crossmodal response to the response predicted by a linear sum of both
inputs, we found that for both developmental stages data points fall below the line of unity indicat-
ing a tendency for sub-linear summation (i.e. predicted > actual, Figure 3B). This tendency toward
sublinearity was evident by plotting a cumulative probability distribution of Z-scores across cells
(Figure 3C), and by comparing the relative proportion of cells showing sublinear, linear and supralin-
ear responses (Figure 3D). Although the cumulative probability curve shifts towards the right
Felch et al. eLife 2016;5:e15600. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.15600
4 of 19
Research article
Neuroscience
 (supralinear) over development (Figure 3C), we found no statistical differences in the distribution of
Z scores across developmental groups (Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, D = 0.260, p=0.230), indicating
that the overall distributions of integrating responses remains stable during this developmental
period. However there was a shift, such that the proportion of cells showing sublinear responses
decreased and the proportion showing linear responses increased over development (Figure 3D).
Comparison to unisensory pairs
One possible explanation for the observed developmental decrease in the net gain of multisensory
responses and the shortening of the temporal window for multisensory integration could be that
these both reflect developmental changes intrinsic to tectal neurons and the tectal network.
Between stages 45 and 49, the temporal dynamics in tectal network activity change, such that
Figure 2. Developmental changes in temporal tuning and gain of MSI. (A, B) Histogram bars show the ISI that for each cell, exhibited maximal MSIn
values. Notice that values cluster at shorter ISIs in the younger tadpoles. Older tadpoles are tuned to a broader range of ISIs. (C) Maximum MSIn ratios
are compared across developmental stages, and show decrease in MSIn gain over development. Error bars indicate +/– S.E.M. (D) The identity of the
ISI’s responsible for the maximal response (and thus the maximum MSIn ratio) in each developmental group are compared. Error bars show
interquartile range. *p<0.05. (E) MSIn-versus-ISI tuning curves from crossmodal pairs were aligned at their peak values, and then averaged across cells.
Solid lines connect the population means. Shaded areas demarcate +/– S.E.M. Stage 48–49 cells are more narrowly tuned around their preferred ISI.
MSIn = (combined response – single response) / single response.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.15600.003
Felch et al. eLife 2016;5:e15600. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.15600
5 of 19
Research article
Neuroscience
 evoked recurrent excitation in the tectum decreases, and becomes more temporally compact
(Pratt et al., 2008). Furthermore, tectal neurons become less excitable over this developmental
time window, generating fewer action potentials when depolarized (Ciarleglio et al., 2015;
Pratt and Aizenman, 2007). If the effects on the temporal properties and raw magnitude of multi-
sensory integration are simply due to changes overall in tectal circuitry and excitability, respectively,
then these changes should also be manifested in all paired interactions, including responses to pairs
of unisensory stimuli. To test this, we performed paired stimulation of either V or HB inputs over the
same range of ISIs we used for the crossmodal pairs. We found that at both developmental stages
paired unimodal responses showed significant response enhancement over a wide range of ISIs
(Figure 4A,B), in contrast to what we had observed for crossmodal responses (Figure 1D,
2A). Moreover, there was significantly more enhancement in response to unimodal pairs than there
was for crossmodal pairs, and no developmental decrease was observed in the gain of the paired
responses (Figure 4C, compare to 2C; mean max PPE, st 44–6 = 2.25 ± 0.44 (n=29), st 48–9 = 2.57
± 0.33 (n=26), p = 0.56, unpaired T-test). Similarly, there was also no developmental difference in
the range of ISIs that produced the maximal enhancement (Figure 4D, compare to 2D; median ISI,
st 44–6 = 400 ms, IQR = 300 ms (n=29), st 48–9 = 400 ms, IQR = 300 ms (n=26, p<0.34, Mann-Whit-
ney). Finally, when we looked at the temporal tuning around the maximal ISI, there was no narrowing
of the temporal tuning window for unimodal pairs over development as both tuning curves were not
significantly different from each other (Figure 4E, compare to 2E, F = 1.394 (2,544), p = 0.249).
Taken together, these data suggest that even at Stage 49, tectal cells can still exhibit robust
enhancement to paired stimuli, and thus are not constrained by developmental changes in network
dynamics and cellular excitability. In light of this observation, the temporal changes in multisensory
integration observed during development likely occur through a different mechanism.
Inhibition underlies developmental changes in multisensory integration
A second hypothesis for explaining developmental changes in multisensory integration is related to
the development of inhibition. In the superior colliculus it has been proposed that maturation of
inhibitory feedback correlates with the emergence of multisensory integration. In the tectum,
between developmental stages 45 and 49 there is a large increase in evoked inhibitory drive, as well
as a negative shift in the Cl- equilibrium potential (Akerman and Cline, 2006; Miraucourt et al.,
2012). Inhibition is known to both narrow the tuning of sensory neurons to their preferred responses
and to alter the timing and reliability of sensory driven spike output (Shen et al., 2011). Thus, in the
tectum, this increased inhibitory drive could constrain multisensory interactions by decreasing the
amount of enhancement and narrowing the temporal window for interaction.
If inhibitory inputs are constraining multisensory responses in stage 48–49 tadpoles, then we can
make three experimental predictions to test this hypothesis. First, we would predict that blocking
inhibition should broaden the temporal tuning for multisensory integration and increase the overall
levels of multisensory enhancement. Second, inhibitory blockade should alter the spike timing of
Table 1. Comparisons between presentation order for cross-modal stimuli do not reveal consistent differences in MSI ratios, in either
developmental group. Top: Within both developmental groups, maximum MSIn ratios are compared between the two cross-modal
sequences. n.s.: not significant (unpaired t-test). Bottom: The identity of the ISI’s responsible for the maximal response is compared
between the two cross-modal, within each developmental group. *p<0.05 (Mann-Whitney rank-sum test); n.s.: not significant (Mann-
Whitney rank-sum test). V = visual, H = hindbrain
Stage 44–46 (n=13)
Stage 48–49 (n=20)
Crossmodal Order
Mean MSIn ± SEM
p
Summary
Mean MSIn ± SEM
p
Summary
VH
0.98 ± 0.57
0.605
n.s
0.50 ± 0.17 (n=20)
0.628
n.s.
HV
1.31 ± 0.26
0.60 ± 0.12
Median ISI (ms) ± IQR
Median ISI (ms) ± IQR
VH
200 ± 250
0.964
n.s.
350 ± 675
0.731
n.s
HV
100 ± 350
500 ± 875
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.15600.004
Felch et al. eLife 2016;5:e15600. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.15600
6 of 19
Research article
Neuroscience
 Figure 3. Interaction between different modalities is mostly linear or sublinear. (A) Traces show examples of two possible outcomes of interactions
between different modality responses. The upper traces show an example of sublinear summation, where the combined response evoked fewer spikes
than the sum of the individual responses. The bottom example shows supralinear summation, where the combined response evokes more spikes than
the sum of the individual responses. (B) For each cell, the maximum raw spike counts after paired stimulation (combined response) is plotted against
the spike count predicted by the sum of adding individual modality responses. Dashed line represents the line of unity. Notice that most points cluster
to the right of the dashed line, indicating a sublinear interaction. (C) Cumulative Frequency Distributions of Z-score values are plotted for the
comparison between predicted and actual number of action potentials recorded after paired stimulation, in each cell. Vertical dashed lines indicate Z =
Figure 3 continued on next page
Felch et al. eLife 2016;5:e15600. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.15600
7 of 19
Research article
Neuroscience
 multimodal responses, and third, the balance of excitation to inhibition of multisensory responses
should decrease over development.
We first tested the prediction that inhibitory blockade in stage 48–49 tadpoles broadens the tem-
poral window for multisensory integration, and increases the overall enhancement in multisensory
responses. To block inhibition we performed recordings in the presence of 100 mM picrotoxin, a
GABAA receptor blocker. We found that inhibitory blockade resulted in an overall increase in MSIn
values over a wide range of ISIs (Figure 5A). The ISI values at which the maximum MSIn was
recorded were also shorter and became less variable across cells (Figure 5B,D; median ISI, PTX =
100 ms, IQR = 425 ms (n=22), no drug = 400 ms, IQR = 775 ms (n=40), p = 0.029, Mann-Whitney)
and the overall maximum MSIn per cell increased significantly (Figure 5C; mean max MSIn, PTX =
1.96 ± 0.25 (n=22), no drug = 0.55 ± 0.100 (n=40), p = 0.0001, unpaired T-test). Inhibitory blockade
also caused a significant broadening of the temporal tuning of the multisensory integration window
(Figure 5E, F = 28.72(2678), p<0.0001). These effects are all similar to what we had observed in the
younger, stage 45 tadpoles without inhibition blocked. Inhibitory blockade also affected the linearity
of crossmodal responses. In the presence of picrotoxin, there was an increase in the relative propor-
tion of neurons showing supralinear responses (Figure 5F), significantly shifting the cumulative distri-
bution of Z-scores to the right (Figure 5G, D = 0.595, p<0.0001, Kolmogorov-Smirnov test).
Interestingly, inhibitory blockade did not have any effect on response enhancement caused by unim-
odal stimulus pairs, suggesting that its effects are not due to general enhancement of network excit-
ability (Max PPR, Control: 2.57 ± 0.32, n=26, PTX: 2.17 ± 0.3, n=12, p=0.39; Difference in Z-scores,
D=0.267, p=0.413, Kolmogorov-Smirnov test).
In mammals, spiking responses to crossmodal stimulus pairs always have a more rapid onset, than
responses to single stimuli of either modality (Rowland et al., 2007a). In our preparation we observe
the same effect at both developmental stages and across multiple ISIs. Figures 6A and B show the
median onset and IQR of spiking responses to both single stimuli and paired stimuli at multiple ISIs
for all cells, and we consistently find that paired crossmodal responses are significantly faster than
single stimulus responses (Figure 6D; st 44–6: p<0.0001, n=25, st 48–49: p=0.04, n= 36, PTX:
p<0.0001, n=19, paired T-test). Inhibition in the tectum is known to affect the precision of the spike
output pattern of tectal neurons (Shen et al., 2011). We find that in picrotoxin, while paired
responses still have a faster onset than single responses (Figure 6C,D), the onset of paired
responses is significantly delayed when compared to stage 48–9 controls (Figure 6E; p<0.05). This
suggests that inhibition not only regulates the temporal tuning and gain of multisensory integration,
but also regulates the timing of tectal cell output.
Finally we tested the third prediction stemming from the hypothesis that enhanced inhibition con-
strains multisensory responses in older tadpoles: that we would expect to observe differences in the
relative amount of inhibition to excitation during cross modal responses at the different develop-
mental time points. We performed whole-cell voltage clamp recordings excitatory and inhibitory syn-
aptic responses during crossmodal stimulation at different ISIs. To isolate excitatory from inhibitory
conductances, we recorded at the reversal potential for Cl- (�45 mV) to isolate excitatory currents
and at the reversal potential for ionotropic glutamate receptors (+5 mV) to isolate inhibitory currents
(Akerman and Cline, 2006; Khakhalin and Aizenman, 2012). We then converted the synaptic cur-
rents into conductance values (see Materials and methods). Sample excitatory and inhibitory conduc-
tances are shown in Figure 7A, at different ISIs. Overall, we found that inhibitory conductances were
much greater in general than excitatory conductances and that the ratio of excitation to inhibition
varied greatly across cells, consistent with prior observations (Akerman and Cline, 2006;
Khakhalin and Aizenman, 2012). Based on our previous studies, it is hard to predict a tectal cell’s
spike output by simply looking at the raw values of individual conductances. Thus it would be more
informative to look at the relative enhancement of both excitation and inhibition separately in
response to crossmodal pairs. We calculated the MSIn of evoked crossmodal responses to assess
Figure 3 continued
+/–1.97, the point at which actual responses are +/–2 S.D.’s away from the respective predicted response. For greater detail on generation of the
predicted responses and calculation of Z-scores, see Materials and methods. (D) Distribution of cells by interaction type shows few developmental
differences.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.15600.005
Felch et al. eLife 2016;5:e15600. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.15600
8 of 19
Research article
Neuroscience
 the amount of response enhancement of both excitation and inhibition at the different ISIs (see
Materials and methods). At both developmental stages we found on average an overall enhance-
ment of both excitatory and inhibitory multisensory responses across all ISIs (Figure 7B,C). However
we found proportionally greater enhancement across ISIs of excitatory responses in the stage 44–46
tadpoles, compared to stage 48–49 (p=0.037, 2-way ANOVA). In contrast we found that enhance-
ment of inhibitory conductances, and its dependence on ISI, did not change over this developmental
time window. We also compared data from individual cells by plotting the maximal Excitatory MSIn
Figure 4. Developmental changes in MSI do not simply reflect changes in network dynamics. (A) Grouped data showing enhancement of unisensory
pairs at both developmental groups. In a given cell, data are averaged over multiple trials at each ISI, to determine the PPR. Plotted here is the
population means of these trial-averaged PPR ratios, at the ISI’s tested. Error bars show +/– S.E.M. (B) Histogram bars show the ISI that for each cell,
exhibited maximal PPR values. Notice that values tend to cluster at shorter ISIs in both groups. (C) Maximum PPR ratios are compared across
developmental stages, and show no change in PPR gain over development. Error bars indicate +/– S.E.M. (D) The identity of the ISI’s at which maximal
PPR occurred, separated by developmental group. Error bars show interquartile range. n. s. = not significant. (E) PPR-versus-ISI tuning curves from
unimodal pairs were aligned at their peak values, and then averaged across cells. Since pairs were unisensory, only one direction is shown. Solid lines
connect the population means. Shaded areas demarcate +/– S.E.M. Tuning for unisensory pairs does not change over development. PPR = (paired
response – single response) / single response.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.15600.006
Felch et al. eLife 2016;5:e15600. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.15600
9 of 19
Research article
Neuroscience
 vs. the corresponding Inhibitory MSIn for both developmental stages (Figure 7D). In both cases
maximal Excitatory and Inhibitory MSIn values were positively correlated (St 44–46: r = 0.758,
p<0.0001; St 48–49: r=0.767, p<0.0001). However the ratio between excitatory enhancement and
inhibitory enhancement was greater in younger tadpoles than in older tadpoles, overall, consistent
with the observation that excitatory currents show proportionally greater MSIn values than inhibitory
currents (test for differences in slopes of linear fits: p=0.023, F = 5.56(1,45).
Taken together, these data indicate that in younger tadpoles, the ratio of excitation to inhibition,
in response to crossmodal stimulus, is greater than in the older group, which may in part explain the
greater amount of multisensory enhancement of spike output observed in the younger tadpoles.
This change in the excitation to inhibition ratio may also explain the sharpening of the temporal tun-
ing of multisensory responses. However, these data do not directly account for the dependence of
Figure 5. Inhibitory blockade broadens tuning window and enhances gain of MSI. (A) Grouped data from stage 48–9 tadpoles in control condition and
in the presence of GABAA receptor blocker PTX. In a given cell, data are averaged over trials at each ISI, to determine the MSI ratio. Plotted here are
the population means of these trial-averaged MSIn ratios, at each ISI tested. Error bars show +/– S.E.M. (B) Histogram bars show the ISI at which each
cell exhibited maximal MSIn values in control and PTX groups. Notice that PTX shifts the preferred ISI values to shorter intervals. (C) Maximum MSIn
ratios are compared across control and PTX conditions, and show increase in MSI gain with inhibitory blockade. Error bars indicate +/– S.E.M. (D) The
identity of the ISI’s responsible for the maximal response (and thus the maximum MSI ratio) in control and PTX groups are compared. Error bars show
interquartile range. *p<0.05. (E) MSI-versus-ISI tuning curves from crossmodal pairs were aligned at their peak values, and then averaged across cells.
Solid lines connect the population means. Shaded areas demarcate +/– S.E.M. PTX treated cells are more broadly tuned around their preferred ISI. (F)
For each cell, the maximum raw spike counts after paired stimulation (combined response) is plotted against the spike count predicted by the linear
sum of individual modality responses. Dashed line represents the line of unity. Notice that in PTX treated group most points cluster to the left of the
dashed line. (C) Cumulative Frequency Distributions of Z-score values are plotted for the comparison between predicted and actual number of action
potentials recorded after paired stimulation, in each cell. Vertical dashed lines indicate Z = +/–1.97, the point at which actual responses are +/–2 S.D.’s
away from the respective predicted response. For greater detail on generation of the predicted responses and calculation of Z-scores, see Materials
and methods. Z-scores in the PTX treated group are significantly shifted toward the right (p<0.0001, Kolmogorov-Smirnov test).
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.15600.007
Felch et al. eLife 2016;5:e15600. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.15600
10 of 19
Research article
Neuroscience
 Figure 6. Crossmodal responses have faster onset latencies than single unimodal responses across groups, but inhibitory blockade slows response
onset times. (A, B, C) Plot of response onset times for single responses and crossmodal responses at multiple ISIs for all experimental groups. For each
Figure 6 continued on next page
Felch et al. eLife 2016;5:e15600. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.15600
11 of 19
Research article
Neuroscience
 multisensory integration on ISI. One possibility is that the temporal dynamics of concurrent excita-
tion and inhibition may vary as a function of ISI, thus resulting in different patterns of spike output.
In order to test this hypothesis we would need to record excitation and inhibition simultaneously
during a single response, due to the trial-to-trial variability in response shape, something that was
not done in the present study.
Discussion
In this study we provide novel insight into the synaptic and circuit-level mechanisms that underlie
developmental changes in the temporal rules mediating multisensory integration in the optic tectum.
We found that optic tectal neurons exhibit enhanced responses to crossmodal stimulus pairs, com-
pared to single modality responses, and that this enhancement is heavily dependent on the ISI. The
temporal window for multisensory enhancement becomes narrower between developmental stages
44–46 and 48–49, but across the tectal population neurons become preferentially tuned to a wider
range of ISIs. We also find that the net gain of multisensory responses decreases between these
stages. Across both developmental stages we also consistently observed a speeding up of response
latency in paired compared to single responses. Inhibitory blockade in older tadpoles results in a
broadening of the integration window, increased gain, and delays in response latency. Furthermore,
the balance of excitation to inhibition during crossmodal responses decreases over this developmen-
tal period.
Taken together our data are consistent with a model in which crossmodal inputs to the tectum
recruit local networks of excitatory neurons, resulting in enhanced tectal cell responses. Crossmodal
inputs also recruit local inhibition, and the relative enhancement of inhibition, versus excitation,
increases over development. This change in relative enhancement sculpts the temporal sensitivity of
the tectal network such that individual neurons become more narrowly tuned to specific ISIs, thus
enhancing the diversity of responses to different temporal combinations of inputs. Local inhibition
also serves to constrain the timing of evoked multisensory responses, by limiting the temporal win-
dow in which spikes can occur during a response, and thus shortening response latencies.
Our data are consistent with this model in several ways. First we show that pharmacologically
blocking inhibition results in a broadening of the window for multisensory integration in the older
tadpoles. During inhibitory blockade, tectal cells are no longer narrowly tuned to a specific ISIs,
respond with a greater gain, and preferentially respond to shorter ISIs. All of these characteristics
are similar to what we observed in the younger tadpoles. Second, we find that the relative amount
of multisensory enhancement (as measured by higher MSIn values) of inhibitory to excitatory
responses is greater in the older tadpoles, indicating that they receive more inhibition relative to
excitation. There is ample evidence throughout the nervous system that suggests that the inhibition
to excitation ratio can sharpen the tuning of sensory neurons to their preferred stimulus (Pouille and
Scanziani, 2001; Priebe and Ferster, 2008; Shen et al., 2011; Wehr and Zador, 2003). Having
more inhibition can limit the range of stimuli that can effectively drive a cell above spike threshold.
Our observation that the balance of excitation and inhibition changes developmentally for multisen-
sory responses is consistent with this view.
Inhibitory blockade also results in alterations of how crossmodal inputs summate, by causing an
increase in the proportion of neurons that show supralinear summation. Our data show that at both
developmental stages tectal neurons tend to either mostly show linear or sublinear summation, with
a small percentage of cells showing supralinear responses. Thus it is likely that inhibition is also con-
straining, to a degree, the amount of multisensory integration in the younger tadpoles. Finally,
blocking inhibition delays the median onset latency of multisensory responses, which is consistent
Figure 6 continued
paired ISI, as well as the appropriate control stimulus (left axis), the. 25,. 50 (median), and. 75 quartiles of post-stimulus times for all first spikes are
plotted on the bottom axis. Dashed lines connect 0.25 and 0.75 quartile values, and solid lines connect. 50 quartile (median) values. (D) Comparison of
response onset times of paired vs. unpaired responses shows that across conditions, cross modal responses occur faster than single modality
responses. (E) Comparison between paired response onset times across groups shows that while there is no significant speeding up of the response
over development, picrotoxin delays onset times. Bars indicate median values, error bars show the IQR. *p< 0.05
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.15600.008
Felch et al. eLife 2016;5:e15600. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.15600
12 of 19
Research article
Neuroscience
 with a role for feedforward and feedback inhi-
bition in controlling the temporal output of
neuronal
responses
of
sensory
neurons
(Pouille and Scanziani, 2001; Shen et al.,
2011). Although inhibitory feedback has been
proposed to be a central mechanism for regu-
lating multisensory integration in the superior
colliculus (Rowland et al., 2007b), to our
knowledge ours is the first experimental evi-
dence directly supporting this model.
Recent work by Miller et al. (2015) shows
that
the
temporal
tuning
of
crossmodal
responses can be strongly dependent on input
size disparity, such that if the stronger modal-
ity is presented first, there will be a greater
amount of multisensory enhancement than if
the weaker modality is presented first. When
both modalities are matched in their response
sizes, then the temporal order becomes less
important. This ‘stronger-first’ rule is thought
to result from differential recruitment of inhibi-
tion. In our findings we did not observe any
differences between the order in which visual
or
hindbrain
inputs
were
activated,
likely
because we used responses of similar size in
our experiments. It will be interesting to see in
future studies if the ‘stronger first’ rule is pre-
served in the tectum, and whether this rule
can be disrupted by inhibitory blockade.
Our findings in the optic tectum also share
other fundamental similarities and differences
with other animal models of multisensory inte-
gration. (i) In the superior colliculus of mam-
mals (Meredith et al., 1987) as well as in the
optic tectum of owls (Bergan and Knudsen,
2009),
there
are
clear
demonstrations
of
dependency of multisensory integration to the
temporal interval between different modality
inputs. Furthermore, a developmental narrow-
ing of the temporal window underlying multi-
sensory
integration
has
been
shown
behaviorally in humans (Hillock et al., 2011)
and has been proposed to mediate develop-
ment of important cognitive processes such as
temporal binding. (ii) Second, like in the tad-
pole tectum, in mammals, collicular cells show
also differences in the type of integration, hav-
ing a combination of supralinear, linear and
sublinear responses (Alvarado et al., 2007).
(iii)
Third,
another
important
aspect
that
underlies the development of multisensory
integration in the mammalian colliculus is the
presence of cortical feedback (Jiang et al.,
2001; Wallace et al., 1993; Wallace and
Stein, 2000). While tadpoles do not have a
proper
cortex,
during
the
developmental
Figure 7. Multisensory responses have a greater
inhibitory to excitatory ratio in older animals. (A)
Figure 7 continued on next page
Felch et al. eLife 2016;5:e15600. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.15600
13 of 19
Research article
Neuroscience
 stages used in this study tadpoles do have
forebrain
feedback
into
the
tectum
(Zittlau et al., 1988), as well a local recurrent
circuits (Pratt et al., 2008) which can provide
the necessary excitatory network activity to
drive
multisensory
integration
in
individual
neurons. The relative contributions of both of
these feedback circuits on multisensory inte-
gration remains to be determined, yet based
on the timing of the tectal neuron spiking, it is
likely that it is this recurrent activity that drives
the majority of spiking activity, rather than the
afferent input itself (Pratt et al., 2008). Since
the temporal output characteristics of these
recurrent circuits has been shown to be highly
plastic in response to experience (Pratt et al.,
2008), this raises the possibility that this net-
work plasticity can help tune the selectivity of
different tectal cells over development to spe-
cific combinations of crossmodal ISIs. This type
of network plasticity may also help explain
observations in the mammalian superior colli-
culus where temporal statistics of cross-modal stimuli during development and in adulthood shape
the temporal tuning of multisensory responses (Xu et al., 2012: Yu et al., 2013). Using the Xenopus
tadpole tectum preparation it should be possible to study this type of plasticity at the cellular level.
Our findings also show some important differences with the mammalian literature. (i) In the pres-
ent study we find that pairs of unimodal stimuli result in greater integration over a wider range of
intervals than crossmodal pairs. This finding is opposite to what is observed in mammals, where
crossmodal inputs are more effective than unimodal ones (Alvarado et al., 2007). There are likely
two mechanisms underlying this difference. The first is due to presynaptic interactions that lead to
paired pulse facilitation, which has been described for both visual and hindbrain inputs in the tad-
pole tectum (Deeg et al., 2009). The second may be due to localization of inputs in the dendritic
arbor of tectal neurons. Unisensory pairs thus, might be more effective in driving local dendritic
depolarization since they are not spatially segregated, and therefore activate non linear response
elements such as NMDA receptors or voltage gate Ca++ channels, thus enhancing the amount of
integration. (ii) A second key difference is that the developmental decrease in pair-driven enhance-
ment of excitatory conductances and spike output appears to contradict developmental studies in
mammals, where the progressive refinement of superior colliculus receptive fields is associated with
the capacity for response enhancement, after paired stimulation (Wallace and Stein, 1997). Indeed,
an analogous developmental refinement of visually-driven receptive fields, specifically, is found for
both excitatory and inhibitory conductances—recorded in the same neuron—in the X. laevis optic
tectum over the same developmental stages examined here (Tao and Poo, 2005). One possible
explanation for this discrepancy is the use of bipolar stimulating electrodes in our preparation to
evoke action potentials throughout an afferent pathway. While this stimulation paradigm provides
excellent temporal control of stimulus delivery, this stimulation method by its nature has no selectiv-
ity for spatiotopic organization. Each stimulus is therefore considered ’whole-field’, and loses its spa-
tial specificity. Furthermore, in vivo stimuli are likely to also have more temporally complex patterns
that may result in somewhat different multisensory interactions. It will be important in future studies
to compare the rules underlying multisensory integration using in vivo visual and mechanosensory
stimuli.
A second possible explanation to this discrepancy between tadpole tectum and mammalian colli-
culus, is that in tadpoles tectal neurons are innervated by sensory input from very early developmen-
tal stages (Gaze et al., 1974), and thus the developmental stages of the circuits in this study may
correspond to a much younger stage than what is typically looked at in mammalian studies.
Overall, our findings use a reduced preparation to describe, for the first time at the cellular level,
the development the temporal properties underlying multisensory integration in the Xenopus
Figure 7 continued
Sample excitatory (red) and inhibitory (blue) synaptic
conductances recorded at different ISIs. S1 and S2
show timing of the individual modality responses (V
and HB, respectively in this example). (B) Plot of
crossmodal enhancement of excitatory synaptic
conductances as a function of ISI at both
developmental stages. Notice that excitation becomes
relatively less enhanced in the older tadpoles. (C) Plot
of crossmodal enhancement of inhibitory synaptic
conductances as a function of ISI at both
developmental stages. Notice that there is no
developmental change in the amount of inhibitory
enhancement. P value determined from 2-way ANOVA.
(D) Plot of maximum excitatory and inhibitory
enhancement for each cell. Dotted line represents
linear fit for each developmental group. p value
determined by an F-Test and compares both fits.
Notice that older cells exhibit relatively more inhibitory
than excitatory enhancement.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.15600.009
Felch et al. eLife 2016;5:e15600. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.15600
14 of 19
Research article
Neuroscience
 tadpole optic tectum. We have used this preparation to uncover some of the basic phenomenology
of multisensory integration in this preparation, and have shown that recruitment of recurrent inhibi-
tion is a central mechanism in mediating this process. We have also shown that some of the basic
features and computations of multisensory integration observed in higher order mammalian prepara-
tions are conserved in the developing amphibian tectum, indicating that these are likely to be funda-
mental and evolutionarily conserved processes. These studies further open the door to follow up
studies focusing on the behavioral consequences of these processes, as well as on the role of early
sensory experience in determining the temporal properties of multisensory integration. Several neu-
rodevelopmental disorders including autism, are often accompanied with deficits in sensory integra-
tion (Baum et al., 2015; Markram and Markram, 2010; Foxe et al., 2015). Thus, these results will
not only enhance our general understanding of the development and merging of neural circuits and
systems, but they will better allow us to understand how these processes may go awry in neurodeve-
lopmental disorders.
Materials and methods
Experimental animals
Wild-type Xenopus laevis tadpoles were raised on a 12 hr light/dark cycle at 18˚C in 10% Steinberg’s
solution. In our laboratory, tadpoles reach the Nieuwkoop and Faber (Nieuwkoop and Faber, 1956)
developmental stages 44–46 at 7–10 dpf, and stage 48–49 at 14 dpf. Xenopus laevis tadpoles
between developmental stages 44 and 49 were utilized for this study. The Brown University Institu-
tional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) approved all handling of animals in accordance with
National Institutes of Health (NIH) guidelines.
Whole-brain preparation
The whole-brain preparation is as follows, after Wu et al. (1996): animals were first anesthetized in
0.01% tricaine methane sulfonate (MS-222) in 10% Steinberg’s, the dorsal surface of skin was then
removed to expose the brain, the dorsal midline was cut at all levels from base of spinal cord
through the olfactory bulbs, and the brain dissected out. The preparation was transferred to a
recording chamber with room temperature HEPES-buffered extracellular saline (containing: 115 mM
NaCl, 4 mM KCl, 3 mM CaCl2, 3 mM MgCl2, 5 mM HEPES, and 10 mM glucose; pH 7.2, 255 mOsm)
and positioned on top of a block of Sylgard, with the exposed walls of the ventricle facing upwards.
Shortened insect pins were inserted through the caudal extent of hindbrain and through one or both
olfactory bulbs. For stimulation of retinal ganglion cell axons, a bipolar stimulating electrode consist-
ing of two adjacent 25-mm platinum leads (CE2C75; FHC, Bowdoin, ME) was placed at the optic chi-
asm (OC), and for stimulation of mechanosensory projections, a second bipolar stimulating
electrode was placed in the rostral hindbrain (HB) contralateral to the recording site (see Figure 1).
Individual neurons in the optic tectum were visualized through a light microscope with a 60� water-
immersion objective, in combination with an infrared CCD camera. To achieve access to the tectal
cells at the recording site the jagged tip of a broken glass micropipette was used to lift away the
periventricular membrane, with the aid of a micromanipulator. These recording sites were selected
consistently from within in the middle third of the optic tectum’s rostral-caudal dimension, to avoid
introducing variability in the maturational state of neurons studied at a given stage of tadpole devel-
opment, given that the tectal circuit matures along a rostral-to-caudal gradient in individual animals
(Pratt et al., 2008; Wu et al., 1996).
Electrophysiology
Glass micropipettes were pulled for tip resistances of 8–12 MW. For whole-cell recording micropip-
ettes were filled with filtered Cs+-methane sulfonate/TEA intracellular saline (containing: 80 mM Cs+-
methane sulfonate, 20 mM TEA, 5 mM MgCl2, 20 mM HEPES, 10 mM EGTA, 2 mM ATP, and
0.3 mM GTP; pH 7.2, 255 mOsm), and for loose cell-attached (LCA) recording of action potentials,
the same micropipettes were filled with filtered extracellular saline. In experiments where blocking
GABAA-receptor mediated inhibition was required, 0.1 mM picrotoxin was added to the extracellular
solution. Electrophysiological signals were detected with an Axopatch 200B amplifier, digitized at
10 kHz by a Digidata 1322A analog-to-digital converter, and formatted for recording by pClamp 9
Felch et al. eLife 2016;5:e15600. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.15600
15 of 19
Research article
Neuroscience
 acquisition software. Leak subtraction was performed on-line, in real-time by the acquisition soft-
ware. In our recording conditions the junction potential is predicted to be 12 mV, but was uncor-
rected in the recorded traces. To detect changes in access resistance over the course of a recording,
a 5 mV depolarizing square wave was applied at the start of each trace. In all experiments, only cells
demonstrating responses to both optic chiasm and hindbrain stimulation were chosen for recording.
Loose-cell attached recordings were used to measure action potentials without breaking through
the cell membrane and without electrical access, and were defined as having seal resistances in the
40–200 MW range. The pipette tip was dirtied prior to cell contact to prevent formation of a tight
seal. Action potentials were detected off-line by importing the digitized traces into the AxoGraphX
analysis environment and by using an amplitude threshold to identify events and determine post-
stimulus onset times.
Experiments to examine the temporal characteristics of excitatory and inhibitory synaptic conduc-
tances were performed with whole cell recordings. Voltage-clamp mode was used to isolate synaptic
conductances mediated by excitatory neurotransmitter receptors and those mediated by inhibitory
neurotransmitter receptors. By using the voltage-clamp to hold the cell’s membrane potential at the
reversal potential of a given synaptic current, it is possible to eliminate the driving force on the ions
mediating that current and thus ’zero’ the amplitude of that particular type of synaptic event. Previ-
ous work in the laboratory has shown that the reversal potential of excitatory AMPA and NMDA
receptor-mediated currents is +5 mV and the reversal potential of synaptic currents mediated by
inhibitory GABAA receptors is –45 mV (Bell et al., 2011).
Stimulus properties
Electrical stimulation was initiated automatically by the acquisition software. At pre-specified time
points, ISO-Flex stimulus isolators (AMPI, Jerusalem, Israel) were activated for 0.2 ms by an ON-OFF
command signal from the digitizer. The output of each stimulus isolator (one for each stimulus elec-
trode) was manually set, based on the responsiveness and dynamic range of each cell, to deliver
between 10 mA and 800 mA across the poles of it’s bipolar electrode, for the duration of the com-
mand signal. Stimulus strength was set to ensure that spike output from both inputs was closely
matched.
Data analysis
All analyses were performed offline, using AxoGraphX software and the MATLAB programming envi-
ronment. Prism software (GraphPad) was used for curve fitting and statistical tests. Sample sizes
were based on power analyses and known variability from prior work in our experimental system.
Statistical tests used, p and N values are indicated within the results. Non-parametric tests were
used when appropriate. No outliers were removed from the data, and all multiple comparisons were
corrected using a Bonferroni correction. Determination of the Multisensory Index was performed as
described by Meredith and Stein (Meredith and Stein, 1983), using the equation: MSIn = (CM –
SM)/SM. where SM is the average number of action potentials evoked by a single-stimulus presenta-
tion (Single Modality), CM is the average number of action potentials evoked by the paired-stimulus
presentation (Combined Modality), and MSIn is the Multisensory Index. This measure indicates the
difference (or ’gain’) in a cell’s response (positive or negative) resulting from the addition of a second
stimulus, corrected for the cell’s maximal single-stimulus response. Because MSIn corrects for each
neuron’s maximal output in the single-stimulus condition, it is a normalized measure that can be
compared across neurons that may vary in overall spike output. In this study MSIs were calculated
separately for both sensory modalities and combinations of temporal sequences. Determination of
the predicted neuronal response to paired stimuli, both unimodal and crossmodal, was performed in
the manner of Stanford and colleagues (Stanford et al., 2005). For each cell, responses after each
trial of the individual (baseline) stimulus presentations were collected and, as appropriate for the
type of paired responses being predicted, all possible unimodal trial-by-trial combinations or all pos-
sible crossmodal trial-by-trial combinations were determined. For each such combination of trials,
the sum of spike counts recorded in each was calculated. Thus, with 33 single-stimulus trials deliv-
ered through each modality, in each cell, 33 � 33 = 1089 possible sums exist. In the actual experi-
ments, however, at each ISI 4 trials of paired stimuli were presented, and the mean response over
these trials was determined. To mirror these procedures in the predictive analysis, for each cell and
Felch et al. eLife 2016;5:e15600. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.15600
16 of 19
Research article
Neuroscience
 for each type of stimulus pair, 4 of the possible sums were randomly selected (with replacement)
and their mean taken. This randomly sampling and averaging was repeated 10,000 times for each
pair type, to create an approximately normal distribution of predicted mean sums. In each cell, Z-
score comparisons of the actual mean response, at each ISI of each pair type, were then performed
against this distribution.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Irina Sears and Phouangmaly Mimi Oupravanh for animal and lab
care. This work was supported by NSF IOS-1353044 (CDA), NEI 5T32-EY018080 (DLF, PI: MJ Para-
diso) and a Fox Postdoctoral Fellowship from Brown University (ASK).
Additional information
Funding
Funder
Grant reference number
Author
National Science Foundation
NSF IOS-1353044
Daniel L Felch
Arseny S Khakhalin
Carlos D Aizenman
NIH Office of the Director
NEI 5T32-EY018080
Daniel L Felch
Brown University
Fox Postdoctoral Fellowship Arseny S Khakhalin
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the decision to
submit the work for publication.
Author contributions
DLF, Conception and design, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or
revising the article; ASK, CDA, Conception and design, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting
or revising the article
Author ORCIDs
Arseny S Khakhalin,
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-0429-1728
Carlos D Aizenman,
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7378-7217
Ethics
Animal experimentation: The Brown University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
(IACUC) approved all handling of animals in accordance with National Institutes of Health (NIH)
guidelines. Experiments were performed under IACUC protocol #1308000008C002, most recently
renewed August 12, 2015.
References
Akerman CJ, Cline HT. 2006. Depolarizing GABAergic conductances regulate the balance of excitation to
inhibition in the developing retinotectal circuit in vivo. Journal of Neuroscience 26:5117–5130. doi: 10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.0319-06.2006
Alvarado JC, Vaughan JW, Stanford TR, Stein BE. 2007. Multisensory versus unisensory integration: contrasting
modes in the superior colliculus. Journal of Neurophysiology 97:3193–3205. doi: 10.1152/jn.00018.2007
Baum SH, Stevenson RA, Wallace MT. 2015. Behavioral, perceptual, and neural alterations in sensory and
multisensory function in autism spectrum disorder. Progress in Neurobiology 134:140–160. doi: 10.1016/j.
pneurobio.2015.09.007
Behrend O, Branoner F, Zhivkov Z, Ziehm U. 2006. Neural responses to water surface waves in the midbrain of
the aquatic predator Xenopus laevis laevis. The European Journal of Neuroscience 23:729–744. doi: 10.1111/j.
1460-9568.2006.04577.x
Bell MR, Belarde JA, Johnson HF, Aizenman CD. 2011. A neuroprotective role for polyamines in a Xenopus
tadpole model of epilepsy. Nature Neuroscience 14:505–512. doi: 10.1038/nn.2777
Bergan JF, Knudsen EI.. 2009.. Visual modulation of auditory responses in the owl inferior colliculus. Journal of
Neurophysiology 101:2924–2933. doi: 10.1152/jn.91313.2008
Felch et al. eLife 2016;5:e15600. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.15600
17 of 19
Research article
Neuroscience
 Binns KE, Salt TE. 1996. Importance of NMDA receptors for multimodal integration in the deep layers of the cat
superior colliculus. Journal of Neurophysiology 75:920–930.
Ciarleglio CM, Khakhalin AS, Wang AF, Constantino AC, Yip SP, Aizenman CD. 2015. Multivariate analysis of
electrophysiological diversity of Xenopus visual neurons during development and plasticity. eLife 4. doi: 10.
7554/eLife.11351
Deeg KE, Sears IB, Aizenman CD. 2009. Development of multisensory convergence in the Xenopus optic tectum.
Journal of Neurophysiology 102:3392–3404. doi: 10.1152/jn.00632.2009
Dong W, Lee RH, Xu H, Yang S, Pratt KG, Cao V, Song YK, Nurmikko A, Aizenman CD. 2009. Visual avoidance in
Xenopus tadpoles is correlated with the maturation of visual responses in the optic tectum. Journal of
Neurophysiology 101:803–815. doi: 10.1152/jn.90848.2008
Dong W, Aizenman CD. 2012. A competition-based mechanism mediates developmental refinement of tectal
neuron receptive fields. Journal of Neuroscience 32:16872–16879. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2372-12.2012
Foxe JJ, Molholm S, Del Bene VA, Frey HP, Russo NN, Blanco D, Saint-Amour D, Ross LA. 2015. Severe
multisensory speech integration deficits in high-functioning school-aged children with Autism Spectrum
Disorder (ASD) and their resolution during early adolescence. Cerebral Cortex 25:298–312. doi: 10.1093/
cercor/bht213
Gaze RM, Keating MJ, Chung SH. 1974. The evolution of the retinotectal map during development in Xenopus.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences 185:301–330. doi: 10.1098/rspb.
1974.0021
Graybiel AM. 1975. Anatomical organization of retinotectal afferents in the cat: an autoradiographic study. Brain
Research 96:1–23. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(75)90566-1
Hillock AR, Powers AR, Wallace MT. 2011. Binding of sights and sounds: age-related changes in multisensory
temporal processing. Neuropsychologia 49:461–467. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2010.11.041
Hiramoto M, Cline HT. 2009. Convergence of multisensory inputs in Xenopus tadpole tectum. Developmental
Neurobiology 69:959–971. doi: 10.1002/dneu.20754
Jiang W, Wallace MT, Jiang H, Vaughan JW, Stein BE. 2001. Two cortical areas mediate multisensory integration
in superior colliculus neurons. Journal of Neurophysiology 85:506–522.
Khakhalin AS, Aizenman CD. 2012. GABAergic transmission and chloride equilibrium potential are not
modulated by pyruvate in the developing optic tectum of Xenopus laevis tadpoles. PloS One 7:e34446. doi: 10.
1371/journal.pone.0034446
Khakhalin AS, Koren D, Gu J, Xu H, Aizenman CD. 2014. Excitation and inhibition in recurrent networks mediate
collision avoidance in Xenopus tadpoles. The European Journal of Neuroscience 40:2948–2962. doi: 10.1111/
ejn.12664
Knudsen EI. 1982. Auditory and visual maps of space in the optic tectum of the owl. Journal of Neuroscience 2:
1177–1194.
Knudsen EI, Brainard MS. 1991. Visual instruction of the neural map of auditory space in the developing optic
tectum. Science 253:85–87. doi: 10.1126/science.2063209
Knudsen EI. 2002. Instructed learning in the auditory localization pathway of the barn owl. Nature 417:322–328.
doi: 10.1038/417322a
Lowe DA. 1986. Organisation of lateral line and auditory areas in the midbrain of Xenopus laevis. The Journal of
Comparative Neurology 245:498–513. doi: 10.1002/cne.902450406
Lowe DA. 1987. Single-unit study of lateral line cells in the optic tectum of Xenopus laevis: evidence for bimodal
lateral line/optic units. The Journal of Comparative Neurology 257:396–404. doi: 10.1002/cne.902570308
Markram K, Markram H. 2010. The intense world theory - a unifying theory of the neurobiology of autism.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 4. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2010.00224
May PJ. 2006. The mammalian superior colliculus: laminar structure and connections. Progress in Brain Research
151:321–378. doi: 10.1016/S0079-6123(05)51011-2
Meredith MA, Stein BE. 1983. Interactions among converging sensory inputs in the superior colliculus. Science
221:389–391. doi: 10.1126/science.6867718
Meredith MA, Nemitz JW, Stein BE. 1987. Determinants of multisensory integration in superior colliculus
neurons. I. Temporal factors. Journal of Neuroscience 7:3215–3229.
Meredith MA, Stein BE. 1996. Spatial determinants of multisensory integration in cat superior colliculus neurons.
Journal of Neurophysiology 75:1843–1857.
Miller RL, Pluta SR, Stein BE, Rowland BA. 2015. Relative unisensory strength and timing predict their
multisensory product. Journal of Neuroscience 35:5213–5220. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4771-14.2015
Miraucourt LS, Silva JS, Burgos K, Li J, Abe H, Ruthazer ES, Cline HT. 2012. GABA expression and regulation by
sensory experience in the developing visual system. PloS One 7:e29086. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029086
Nieuwkoop PD, Faber J. 1956. Normal Table of Xenopus laevis (Daudin). New York: Garland Publishing, Inc.
Pouille F, Scanziani M. 2001. Enforcement of temporal fidelity in pyramidal cells by somatic feed-forward
inhibition. Science 293:1159–1163. doi: 10.1126/science.1060342
Pratt KG, Aizenman CD. 2007. Homeostatic regulation of intrinsic excitability and synaptic transmission in a
developing visual circuit. Journal of Neuroscience 27:8268–8277. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1738-07.2007
Pratt KG, Dong W, Aizenman CD. 2008. Development and spike timing-dependent plasticity of recurrent
excitation in the Xenopus optic tectum. Nature Neuroscience 11. doi: 10.1038/nn2076
Priebe NJ, Ferster D. 2008. Inhibition, spike threshold, and stimulus selectivity in primary visual cortex. Neuron
57:482–497. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.02.005
Felch et al. eLife 2016;5:e15600. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.15600
18 of 19
Research article
Neuroscience
 Roberts A, Feetham B, Pajak M, Teare T. 2009. Responses of hatchling Xenopus tadpoles to water currents: first
function of lateral line receptors without cupulae. The Journal of Experimental Biology 212:914–921. doi: 10.
1242/jeb.027250
Rowland BA, Quessy S, Stanford TR, Stein BE. 2007a. Multisensory Integration Shortens Physiological Response
Latencies. Journal of Neuroscience 27:5879–5884. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4986-06.2007
Rowland BA, Stanford TR, Stein BE. 2007b. A model of the neural mechanisms underlying multisensory
integration in the superior colliculus. Perception 36:1431–1443. doi: 10.1068/p5842
Shen W, McKeown CR, Demas JA, Cline HT. 2011. Inhibition to excitation ratio regulates visual system responses
and behavior in vivo. Journal of Neurophysiology 106:2285–2302. doi: 10.1152/jn.00641.2011
Skaliora I, Doubell TP, Holmes NP, Nodal FR, King AJ. 2004. Functional topography of converging visual and
auditory inputs to neurons in the rat superior colliculus. Journal of Neurophysiology 92:2933–2946. doi: 10.
1152/jn.00450.2004
Stanford TR, Quessy S, Stein BE. 2005. Evaluating the operations underlying multisensory integration in the cat
superior colliculus. Journal of Neuroscience 25:6499–6508. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5095-04.2005
Stein BE, Stanford TR. 2008. Multisensory integration: current issues from the perspective of the single neuron.
Nature Reviews. Neuroscience 9:255–266. doi: 10.1038/nrn2331
Stein BE, Stanford TR, Rowland BA. 2009. The neural basis of multisensory integration in the midbrain: its
organization and maturation. Hearing Research 258. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2009.03.012
Straznicky K, Gaze RM. 1972. The development of the tectum in Xenopus laevis: an autoradiographic study.
Journal of Embryology and Experimental Morphology 28:87–115.
Sze
´ kely G, La
´za
´r G. 1976. Cellular and synaptic architecture of the optic tectum. In: Llina
´s R, Precht W (Eds).
Neurobiology Frog. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. p 407–434.
Tao HW, Poo MM. 2005. Activity-dependent matching of excitatory and inhibitory inputs during refinement of
visual receptive fields. Neuron 45:829–836. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.01.046
Wallace MT, Meredith MA, Stein BE. 1993. Converging influences from visual, auditory, and somatosensory
cortices onto output neurons of the superior colliculus. Journal of Neurophysiology 69:1797–1809.
Wallace MT, Stein BE. 1997. Development of multisensory neurons and multisensory integration in cat superior
colliculus. Journal of Neuroscience 17:2429–2444.
Wallace MT, Stein BE. 2000. Onset of cross-modal synthesis in the neonatal superior colliculus is gated by the
development of cortical influences. Journal of Neurophysiology 83:3578–3582.
Wallace MT, Carriere BN, Perrault TJ, Vaughan JW, Stein BE. 2006. The development of cortical multisensory
integration. Journal of Neuroscience 26:11844–11849. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3295-06.2006
Wallace MT, Stein BE. 2007. Early experience determines how the senses will interact. Journal of
Neurophysiology 97:921–926. doi: 10.1152/jn.00497.2006
Wehr M, Zador AM. 2003. Balanced inhibition underlies tuning and sharpens spike timing in auditory cortex.
Nature 426:442–446. doi: 10.1038/nature02116
Wu G, Malinow R, Cline HT. 1996. Maturation of a central glutamatergic synapse. Science 274:972–976. doi: 10.
1126/science.274.5289.972
Xu J, Yu L, Rowland BA, Stanford TR, Stein BE. 2012. Incorporating cross-modal statistics in the development
and maintenance of multisensory integration. Journal of Neuroscience 32:2287–2298. doi: 10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.4304-11.2012
Yu L, Rowland BA, Stein BE. 2010. Initiating the development of multisensory integration by manipulating
sensory experience. Journal of Neuroscience 30:4904–4913. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5575-09.2010
Yu L, Rowland BA, Xu J, Stein BE. 2013. Multisensory plasticity in adulthood: cross-modal experience enhances
neuronal excitability and exposes silent inputs. Journal of Neurophysiology 109:464–474. doi: 10.1152/jn.
00739.2012
Zittlau KE, Claas B, Mu
¨ nz H, Munz H. 1988. Horseradish peroxidase study of tectal afferents in Xenopus laevis
with special emphasis on their relationship to the lateral-line system. Brain, Behavior and Evolution 32:208–219.
doi: 10.1159/000116548
Felch et al. eLife 2016;5:e15600. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.15600
19 of 19
Research article
Neuroscience
