 Feng et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau5148     13 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
1 of 12
HEALTH AND MEDICINE
A new painkiller nanomedicine to bypass the  
blood-brain barrier and the use of morphine
Jiao Feng1, Sinda Lepetre-Mouelhi1, Anne Gautier1,2, Simona Mura1, Catherine Cailleau1, 
François Coudore3, Michel Hamon2, Patrick Couvreur1*
The clinical use of endogenous neuropeptides has historically been limited due to pharmacokinetic issues, includ-
ing plasma stability and blood-brain barrier permeability. In this study, we show that the rapidly metabolized 
Leu- 
enkephalin (LENK) neuropeptide may become pharmacologically efficient owing to a simple conjugation 
with the lipid squalene (SQ). The corresponding LENK-SQ bioconjugates were synthesized using different chemical 
linkers in order to modulate the LENK release after their formulation into nanoparticles. This new SQ-based nano-
formulation prevented rapid plasma degradation of LENK and conferred on the released neuropeptide a notable 
antihyperalgesic effect that lasted longer than after treatment with morphine in a rat model of inflammation 
(Hargreaves test). The biodistribution study as well as the use of brain-permeant and -impermeant opioid receptor 
antagonists indicated that LENK-SQ NPs act through peripherally located opioid receptors. This study represents 
a novel nanomedicine approach, allowing the specific delivery of LENK neuropeptide into inflamed tissues for 
pain control.
INTRODUCTION
Pain represents an important global health challenge for many rea-
sons, including high prevalence, serious associated sequelae, and the 
relative lack of efficient treatment, especially for neuropathic pain 
alleviation. Pain-relevant disorders such as arthritis, cancer, and 
pathological changes in the nervous system are highly prevalent and 
bring great inconvenience and distress to the patients (1). Chronic 
pain has a significant impact not only on the patients themselves 
but also on the broader community and economy. With the acti-
vation of μ-opioid receptors, morphine and the related synthetic 
opioids become the most powerful and most widely used painkill-
ers in current clinical practice. However, morphinic treatments are 
associated with severe side effects, such as respiratory depression 
and addiction linked to the development of opioid tolerance and 
dependence (2). According to the National Vital Statistics System of 
the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/National Center 
for Health Statistics (3), every day, more than 115 people in the 
United States die after overdosing on opioids. The misuse of and 
addiction to opioids, especially morphine, is a serious national crisis 
in the United States (and probably also in other countries) that affects 
public health as well as social and economic welfare. This highlights 
the need to urgently find new painkillers. In this context, endogenous 
neuropeptides, such as enkephalin, remain an attractive option. 
Enkephalins activate both - and -opioid receptors, but with a 
10-fold higher affinity toward -opioid receptors (4). Compared 
with -opioid receptor agonists, -opioid receptor ligands are 
believed to have a much lower abuse potential (5), as well as reduced 
respiratory (6), gastrointestinal (7), and cognitive (8) impairments. 
However, enkephalins have historically been limited because of 
pharmacokinetic issues and rapid plasma metabolization.
To date, the two main approaches to enhancing the analgesic 
activity of opioid peptides relied on (i) the increase of the stability of 
endogenous peptides using enkephalinase inhibitors or (ii) the chemi-
cal synthesis of exogenous peptides with enhanced lipophilicity and 
degradation resistance. However, because of insufficient enzymatic 
specificity, the enkephalinase inhibitors are often endowed with 
poorly tolerated side effects (9). In addition, the derivatization of 
peptides often ends up with biologically inactive compounds, and 
the same applies to neuropeptides covalently linked to transport 
vectors for crossing the blood-brain barrier (BBB) (10). This explains 
why none of the research efforts performed decades ago has resulted 
in marketed medicines.
On the other hand, although nanoparticulate drug delivery sys-
tems are an efficient approach for protecting drug molecules from 
rapid metabolization, only a few were applied to enkephalins and en-
kephalin derivatives. In a primary study, Kreuter et al. (11) showed 
that intravenously injected dalargin-loaded polybutylcyanoacrylate 
nanoparticles (NPs) coated with a non-ionic surfactant induced 
time- and dose-dependent antinociceptive effects. In subsequent 
studies, positively charged nanocarriers were also used for the delivery 
of opiate- 
related drugs and peptides into the brain (12–15). Never-
theless, these approaches have met with limited success because, 
in general, the amount of NPs able to cross the BBB remains 
very low (less than 1% of the injected dose) (16). In addition, the 
toxicity and elimination of NPs from the brain parenchyma remain 
a major issue; this is especially true for the abovementioned cationic 
nanodrugs.
Thus, the design of safe analgesic nanoformulations capable of 
restricting their activity peripherally and optimizing drug concen-
tration at the site of injury may overcome these issues. Another ad-
vantage of targeting peripheral opioid receptors is that it prevents 
and reverses the effects of multiple excitatory agents expressed in 
damaged tissue (17).
Here, we report a very simple and easy way to use the currently 
unusable Leu-enkephalin (LENK) as an analgesic drug following intra-
venous injection. To this goal, a new nanoformulation was achieved, 
which proved capable of precise and efficient delivery of LENK for 
1Institut Galien Paris-Sud, UMR8612, Univ. Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, Châtenay- 
Malabry 92290, France. 2Centre de Psychiatrie et Neurosciences, INSERM UMR 894, 
Université Paris Descartes, 75014 Paris, France. 3Laboratoire de Neuropharmacologie, 
INSERM UMRS 1178, Univ. Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, Châtenay-Malabry 
92290, France.
*Corresponding author. Email: patrick.couvreur@u-psud.fr
Copyright © 2019 
The Authors, some 
rights reserved; 
exclusive licensee 
American Association 
for the Advancement 
of Science. No claim to 
original U.S. Government 
Works. Distributed 
under a Creative 
Commons Attribution 
NonCommercial 
License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Feng et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau5148     13 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
2 of 12
pain control. Practically, LENK was conjugated to squalene (SQ), a 
natural and biocompatible lipid, through various chemical linkers, 
resulting in a library of LENK lipidic prodrugs, which allowed the 
controlled release of the peptide. As shown previously with anticancer 
compounds (18), the linkage of LENK with SQ triggered the sponta-
neous self-assembly of the bioconjugates into LENK-squalene 
nanoparticles (LENK-SQ NPs) in water, which was attributed to the 
dynamically folded conformation of the natural lipid. The analgesic 
effect of these LENK-SQ NPs was evaluated in a carrageenan- 
induced pain model using a thermal nociception test (Hargreaves) 
to assess hyperalgesia. Pain sensitivity was rated in response to a hot 
stimulus on the inflamed hind paw of rats. In addition, the in vivo 
biodistribution of NPs was investigated in mice using in vivo fluo-
rescence imaging for assessing the ability of the LENK-SQ NPs to 
target the inflamed tissue. Last, a toxicological study was also per-
formed to ensure the safety of these NPs.
RESULTS
Synthesis of LENK-SQ conjugates
In this study, various LENK-SQ conjugates were designed with dif-
ferent linkers using bioconjugation (Fig. 1). Conjugation of squalene 
to LENK was performed by exploiting two sites: C-terminal acid 
and N-terminal amine. To modulate the release kinetics of LENK 
from NPs, we used three linkers with different sensitivity to hydro-
lysis in the following order: dioxycarbonyl (LENK-SQ-Diox also 
called “sensitive bound”) > diglycolic (LENK-SQ-Dig) > amide 
(LENK-SQ-Am).
Practically, the squalenic acid was coupled to C-terminal LENK 
using a dioxycarbonyl linker (LENK-SQ-Diox, conjugate 1) or 
squalenol was conjugated to N-terminal LENK through a diglycolic 
spacer (LENK-SQ-Dig, conjugate 2). Starting from squalenic acid, it 
was also possible to perform the linkage to N-terminal LENK using 
a simple amide bond (LENK-SQ-Am, conjugate 3).
The LENK-SQ-Diox conjugate was synthesized by alkylation of 
the carboxylate function of the peptide with the chloromethyl ester 
of squalenic acid, which was prepared upon treatment of squalenic 
acid with chloromethyl chlorosulfate. To avoid N-terminal conju-
gation, the Fmoc (9-fluorenylmethoxycarbonyl) strategy was first 
adopted for the protection of the primary amino group of LENK, 
but due to the early release of the peptide from Fmoc-LENK-SQ 
during the deprotection step, this approach was abandoned in favor 
of the Alloc (allyloxycarbonyl) strategy. Thus, LENK was protected 
with an Alloc group on its N-terminal amine before reacting 
with the chloromethyl ester of squalenic acid. Subsequent deprotec-
tion of Alloc-LENK-SQ under neutral conditions was then achieved 
via the catalytic transfer hydrogenation method using triethylsi-
lane (TES) and 10% Pd-C (19), affording pure LENK-SQ-Diox in 
9.5% yield.
The LENK-SQ-Dig prodrug with a 2′-diglycolate spacer was 
synthesized by the reaction of squalenol with diglycolic anhydride 
before reaction with the condensing agent and LENK, resulting in 
69% yield. The oxa moiety of the linker was intended to enhance the 
susceptibility to hydrolysis by increasing the distance between LENK 
and SQ and, thus, the accessibility to the linkage. Direct conjugation 
between LENK and squalenic acid via single amide bond was 
achieved by acid activation using ethyl chloroformate, affording 
LENK-SQ-Am in 73% yield.
Preparation and characterization of LENK-SQ NPs
All bioconjugates showed the capability to self-assemble as NPs in 
aqueous solution after nanoprecipitation from LENK-SQ ethanolic 
solutions. When measured by dynamic light scattering (DLS), the 
size of the NPs varied from 60 to 120 nm, depending on the linkage 
between squalene and enkephalin (Fig. 2). The difference in NP zeta 
potential was related to the nature of the exposed amino acids onto 
the NP surface. In the case of the LENK-SQ-Diox bioconjugate, the 
SQ conjugation on the C-terminal LENK peptide let its N-terminal 
site free (primary amino group), leading to a net positive charge. In 
contrast, the zeta potential became negative when the conjugation 
with SQ was performed on the N-terminal LENK peptide (LENK-SQ- 
Dig and LENK-SQ-Am). Drug loadings (Fig. 2) ranged between 53 
and 60%, which was much higher than in conventional nanoparticles 
or liposomes, which amounted to a maximum of 5% (20, 21). Figure 2 
shows representative cryogenic transmission electron microscopy 
(cryo-TEM) images of the LENK-SQ NPs at a concentration of 
4 mg/ml in Milli-Q water. They displayed spherical and mono-
disperse structures with sizes ranging from 50 to 100 nm. The slight 
discrepancy between DLS and cryo-TEM size measurements could 
be attributed to the known hydrodynamic radius-related differences 
(22). The sizes and the surface charges of the LENK-SQ NPs were 
found to be quite stable at +4°C (fig. S6).
Fig. 1. Chemical structures of the bioconjugates. (1) Leu-enkephalin-squalene with dioxycarbonyl linker (LENK-SQ-Diox), (2) Leu-enkephalin-squalene with diglycolic 
linker (LENK-SQ-Dig), and (3) Leu-enkephalin-squalene with amide linker (LENK-SQ-Am).
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Feng et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau5148     13 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
3 of 12
In vitro release of LENK from NPs in serum
The incubation of LENK-SQ-Diox in serum resulted in a decrease 
of the bioconjugate, which correlated well with the release of the 
peptide (Fig. 3A). The concentration of the bioconjugate decreased 
gradually till 7 hours, while LENK-SQ-Diox NPs progressively re-
leased the free LENK peptide. The peptide was then slowly degrad-
ed by the peptidases of the serum but still lasted beyond 10 hours 
after incubation (Fig. 3A). The incubation of LENK-SQ-Dig in se-
rum resulted in a decrease of the bioconjugate until complete disap-
pearance at 2 hours, but no presence of free peptide was detected. 
The reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (RP-
HPLC) analyses, however, highlighted a slow release of the peptide 
still attached to its linker. This release reached a maximum at 
45 min, followed by progressive degradation of the peptide-linker 
fragment that could still be detected over 10 hours (Fig. 3B). In con-
trast, LENK-SQ-Am remained stable in serum, without a signifi-
cant decrease for a period of 48 hours, and no peptide was released 
in the course of the experiment (Fig. 3C). It was observed that the 
degradation of the free LENK peptide was very fast (half-life, 2 min), 
whereas the LENK-SQ bioconjugate was unaffected during the course 
of the experiment (60 min) (fig. S7).
Analgesic efficacy of LENK-SQ NPs
The antihyperalgesic effect of LENK-SQ NPs was determined in a 
carrageenan-induced paw edema model in rats. Baseline measure-
ments of paw withdrawal latencies (PWLs) were made before carra-
geenan injection using the Hargreaves test (23) and presented a 
mean value ± SEM (n = 8) of 6.65 ± 0.37 s. Then, thermal sensitivi-
ties were evaluated 3 hours after carrageenan injection into the right 
hind paw, which corresponded to the peak inflammatory response. 
We assessed antihyperalgesic effects using the same test at various 
times after acute administration of the different drug treatments at 
this 3-hour inflammation peak (Fig. 4).
Effect of intraplantar -carrageenan injection on thermal sensitivity
Intraplantar injection of -carrageenan into the right hind paw in-
duced a local inflammatory response characterized by marked edema, 
hyperthermia, and hyperalgesia restricted to the injected right hind 
paw. Thermal hypersensitivity was developed in all the rats, with 
a mean decrease of 52.48% PWL compared to the basal PWLs in 
naïve rats. (P < 0.001; see Fig. 5).
Effect of morphine on thermal hyperalgesia
The acute treatment with morphine (1 mg/kg; Fig. 5A) reduced the 
thermal hyperalgesia, as shown by the resulting significant in-
crease in PWLs. Ten minutes after morphine injection, the PWL 
reached 12.87 ± 1.38 s, while it remained at 3.05 ± 0.20 s after treat-
ment with a control dextrose solution (Fig. 5A). However, mor-
phine antihyperalgesic pharmacological activity disappeared rapidly, 
and no significant effect was observed as soon as 100 min after mor-
phine administration (Fig. 5A).
Effect of LENK-SQ NPs on thermal hyperalgesia
We evaluated the antihyperalgesic effect of LENK-SQ NPs with the 
three different linkers during 4 hours after their administration 
(Fig. 5, C to H). All injected rats with LENK-SQ NPs displayed sig-
nificant reduction of thermal hyperalgesia, as expressed by a marked 
increase of the respective area under the curve (AUC) values in 
comparison with -carrageenan–treated rats injected with either 
the free LENK peptide or the blank SQ NPs (Fig. 5, D, F, and H). In 
particular, the antihyperalgesic activity was significant at all time 
points from 10 to 130 min in rats injected with LENK-SQ Diox NPs 
or LENK-SQ Am NPs (Fig. 5, C and G). As shown in Fig. 5E, LENK-
SQ- 
dig NPs also displayed a significant antihyperalgesic effect, with 
a maximum increase in PWL maintained from 10 to 130 min after 
injection, and a progressive decline down to baseline at 220 min. 
Maximal PWL values reached after the administration of LENK-SQ 
NPs in -carrageenan–treated rats corresponded to basal PWL val-
ues measured in control naïve rats, before -carrageenan treatment 
(Fig. 5, C, E, and G), indicating a pure antihyperalgesic action of 
these NPs. In contrast, morphine injection in -carrageenan– 
treated 
rats resulted in PWL values twice as high as those found in control 
naïve rats (Fig. 5A), as expected from not only an antihyperalgesic 
effect but also the well-established analgesic effect of the opiate 
agonist. In addition, blank SQ NPs (without the LENK) did not 
demonstrate any antihyperalgesic activity (Fig. 5), which indicated 
that the analgesic response to LENK-SQ NP administration resulted 
from the release of the LENK peptide.
Effects of opioid receptor blockade using naloxone and 
naloxone methiodide
To ascertain the involvement of central or peripheral opioid recep-
tors during the antihyperalgesic effect of LENK-SQ NPs, we sub-
cutaneously injected naloxone (Nal, a brain-permeant opioid receptor 
antagonist) or naloxone methiodide (Nal-M, a brain-impermeant 
opioid receptor antagonist) (24) 15 min before the injection of mor-
phine or NPs (Fig. 4). Preadministration of the nonselective opioid 
receptor antagonist Nal (0.5 mg/kg subcutaneously) abolished the 
amplitude and the duration of the antihyperalgesic effect of mor-
phine (PWL, 3.20 ± 0.59 s versus 12.87 ± 1.38 s at 10 min) and de-
creased the corresponding AUC value by 81% in comparison with 
the morphine group (Fig. 5B). The peripheral opioid receptor an-
tagonist, Nal-M, was markedly less effective since it reduced the 
morphine’s effect by only 13% (Fig. 5, A and B). Preadministration 
of either Nal or its quaternary derivative Nal-M abrogated the anti-
hyperalgesic effect of the three LENK-SQ NPs (Fig. 5, C to H). Nal 
pretreatment caused a reduction of 66, 105, or 73% AUC values 
compared to these found in rats injected with LENK-SQ-Diox, 
LENK-SQ-Dig, and LENK-SQ-Am NPs alone, respectively. The 
corresponding reductions in AUC values with Nal-M reached 81, 
99, and 96%, respectively, indicating that the selective blockade of 
only the peripheral opioid receptors was enough to abrogate the an-
tihyperalgesic effects of LENK-SQ NPs.
Fig. 2. NP characterization. Representative cryo-TEM images showing the forma-
tion of NPs from different bioconjugates: (A) LENK-SQ-Diox NPs, (B) LENK-SQ-Dig 
NPs, and (C) LENK-SQ-Am NPs. Scale bars, 100 nm. Physicochemical characteristics 
of NPs [i.e., size, polydispersity index (PDI), zeta potential, and % drug loading] are 
shown in the table.
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Feng et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau5148     13 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
4 of 12
Biodistribution of LENK-SQ NPs
We assessed the in vivo biodistribution of LENK-SQ-Am NPs after 
intravenous injection of fluorescent DiD (1,1′-dioctadecyl-3,3,3′,3′- 
tetramethylindodicarbocyanine, 4-chlorobenzenesulfonate salt)–labeled 
LENK-SQ-Am NPs in a murine -carrageenan–induced paw edema 
model (right hind paw). The fluorescence in tissues was monitored 
up to 24 hours, noninvasively, from the abdomen side using an IVIS 
Lumina (Fig. 6). Mice injected with saline into the paw were used as 
non-inflamed control. The real-time in vivo imaging showed, in 
comparison with the healthy paw, an increase of two to three times that 
of the average radiant efficiency within the inflamed paw after intra-
venous injection of fluorescent LENK-SQ-Am NPs (Fig. 6, A, D, and F). 
In a control experiment, when the -carrageenan–administered mice 
were intravenously injected with a single DiD solution, no significant 
accumulation of fluorescence was observed in the inflamed paw (Fig. 6, 
C and F). In another control experiment, mice were injected locally 
with saline in the hind paw and intravenously treated with fluorescent 
LENK-SQ NPs. No significant accumulation of fluorescence at the 
hind paw level was observed under this condition (Fig. 6, B and E), 
showing that the accumulation of fluorescence in the -carrageenan– 
inflamed paw was not due to the local hind paw injection per se. In an 
additional experiment, it was shown that the incubation in serum of 
LENK-SQ NPs containing the fluorescent dye (DiD) and a fluorescence 
quencher [DiR (1,1′-dioctadecyltetramethyl indotricarbocyanine 
iodide)] resulted in the progressive appearance of fluorescence, the 
dynamics of which indicate a relatively slow dissociation of LENK-SQ 
NPs in serum: 20% after 5 min and 50% after 30 min. This suggested 
that, under our in vivo conditions, a significant proportion of intact 
NPs could reach the inflamed tissue (fig. S8).
Last, in a separate experiment, 4 hours after the intravenous in-
jection of fluorescent NPs or DiD solution, animals were eutha-
nized and transcardially perfused with 40 ml of saline to remove the 
fluorescence from the blood. After collection of tissues, a strong 
ex vivo fluorescence signal was again observed not only in the in-
flamed paw but also in the liver, the spleen, and the lungs, whereas 
no detectable accumulation of fluorescence occurred in the brain of 
the animals (fig. S9).
Toxicity study
The overall toxicity of LENK-SQ NPs was investigated 24 and 
48 hours after their intravenous administration (20 mg/kg) in rats 
and compared to control animals injected with 5% dextrose solution. 
The levels of aspartate transaminase (AST; fig. S10A) and alanine 
transaminase (ALT; fig. S10B) were not increased in the LENK-SQ 
NP group, indicating no toxicity toward the liver, which was con-
firmed by histological analysis of this tissue at 24 and 48 hours 
(fig. S10, C to F). The observations of the spleen (fig. S10, G to J), the 
kidneys (fig. S10, K to N), the lungs (fig. S10, O to R), and the heart 
(fig. S10, S to V) did not show any morphological damage after 
LENK-SQ NP administration either. Together, these results show 
that the LENK-SQ NPs may be considered as safe upon systemic 
intravenous administration at the therapeutic dose of 20 mg/kg.
DISCUSSION
Peptides and proteins have great potential as therapeutic macro-
molecules. However, their use in clinical practice is generally ham-
pered by poor serum stability and rapid metabolization (25). In this 
context, the “squalenoylation” technology should be of great interest, 
as we showed here that it allows the delivery of therapeutic amounts 
of LENK neuropeptide for efficient pain control. The so-called 
squalenoylation approach, which refers to the linkage of a drug to 
the squalene, has already been proposed for small molecules, mainly 
for anticancer compounds, such as gemcitabine, doxorubicin, or 
cisplatin (26), or for other molecules, such as adenosine, ddI, or 
ddC (27). Nevertheless, the conjugation of a peptide to SQ has been 
an innovative but tricky achievement for the following reasons: (i) 
Peptides are unstable biomolecules, and their chemical engineering 
is not easy, and (ii) peptides are hydrophilic molecules, whereas 
SQ is a lipid, insoluble in water. This makes the chemical reaction 
rather uncertain, and (iii) the chemical modification of a peptide often 
results in a loss of its pharmacological activity. The chemical approach 
used in the present study has overcome all these complications, al-
lowing the design of a small library of innovative enkephalin- 
squalene bioconjugates with a preserved pharmacological activity. 
For the synthesis of these bioconjugates, we took advantage of the 
remarkable, dynamically folded conformation of SQ to chemically 
conjugate this natural lipid with the neuropeptide using different 
linkers. Although it is well known that the N terminus of LENK 
is required for binding to opioid receptors (28), the conjugation on 
N terminus was also achieved, based on the fact that the amide 
bond is susceptible to be cleaved by overexpressed peptidases with-
in an inflammation site (29). Thus, we synthesized the resulting 
LENK-SQ prodrugs with either direct amide bond or diglycolic or 
Fig. 3. In vitro bioconversion of LENK-SQ bioconjugates into LENK in the presence of serum. (A) LENK-SQ with dioxycarbonyl linker, (B) LENK-SQ with diglycolic 
linker, and (C) LENK-SQ with amide bond. Solid lines and dashed lines represent the bioconjugates and the released peptides, respectively.
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Feng et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau5148     13 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
5 of 12
dioxycarbonyl linker to investigate the possible influence of the 
linkage stability on the peptide release. It was expected that LENK-
SQ-Diox released faster than LENK-SQ-Dig, and LENK-SQ-Am was 
supposed to trigger the slower release as reported in the literature 
(30). Both LENK-SQ-Am and LENK-SQ-Dig were obtained in 
good yields (around 70%). The third one with dioxycarbonyl linker 
led to a lower yield due to an additional step for removal of the Alloc 
group, followed by two successive purifications.
The LENK-SQ bioconjugates were then formulated as nanopar-
ticles in dextrose solution (2 mg/ml) with impressively high drug 
payload (i.e., 53 to 59%) using a simple nanoprecipitation technique 
without the aid of any surfactant. It is noteworthy that this drug 
payload was markedly higher than that in liposomes (20) or PLGA 
[poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)] (21) enkephalin-loaded nanoparticles 
(0.4 and 4.75%, respectively, drug loading), which might explain why 
the latter two nanoformulations had never been used for in vivo pharma-
cological studies. The size of the NPs varied from 61 to 112 nm, de-
pending on the peptide and the conjugation site (Fig. 2). The NPs 
displayed spherical and monodisperse structures with net positive or 
negative surface charge (Fig. 2), which could be attributed to the free 
terminal function of the peptide depending on the bioconjugation 
mode. Free N-terminal amine function led to a net positive surface 
charge, while free C-terminal acid function resulted in a net negative 
surface charge.
To ascertain that the free LENK peptide could be released from 
the LENK-SQ NPs, we tested the chemical stability of the different 
linkers (i.e., direct amide or dioxycarbonyl or diglycolate spacers) 
after incubation of the LENK-SQ NPs with mouse serum (Fig. 3). 
Corresponding experiments showed that the LENK peptide was 
released from LENK-SQ-Diox and LENK-SQ-Dig but not from 
LENK-SQ-Am (Fig. 3). In the case of LENK-SQ-Diox and LENK-
SQ-Dig, the release of the respective LENK and LENK linker frag-
ment was followed by a progressive degradation of the peptide, due 
to serum enkephalinases (Fig. 3, A and B). In the case of the LENK-
SQ-Diox bioconjugate, both the LENK and the SQ moieties were 
each linked to the dioxycarbonyl linker through an ester bond. 
In the case of the LENK-SQ-Dig bioconjugate, the diglycolate linker 
was attached on one side to squalene by an ester bond and on the 
other side to the LENK through an amide bond; in the LENK-SQ-
Am bioconjugate, a direct amide bond connected the LENK to the 
SQ moiety. The absence of release of LENK from LENK-SQ-Am 
was expected given that, in general, an amide bond is chemically 
and enzymatically more stable than an ester bond (31, 32). Further-
more, it is well known that N-terminal modification of linear 
peptides increases the peptidase resistance, which is the case for 
LENK-SQ-Am and LENK-SQ-Dig (33). Last, as mouse serum is 
particularly rich in esterases, it was expected that the release of 
LENK from LENK-SQ NPs mainly resulted from enzymatic hydro-
lysis of the ester bond (31). All three conjugates were then recruited 
for antihyperalgesia experiments. It was expected that the more 
aggressive in vivo enzymatic content, particularly rich in proteolytic 
enzymes at the inflammation site, will contribute to the release 
of LENK from all the bioconjugates (29). The presence of high con-
centrations of proteolytic enzymes such as chymotrypsin, cathepsin 
D, and other proteases in inflammatory exudates has been reported, 
which also indicates their important role in the inflammatory 
process (29).
Then, the antihyperalgesic properties of LENK-SQ NPs were 
evaluated using an animal model of inflammatory hyperalgesia that 
mimics human clinical pain conditions (34). We assessed the anti-
hyperalgesic activity after a single intravenous administration of the 
different LENK-SQ NPs in the -carrageenan–induced inflamma-
tory paw model using the Hargreaves test. All LENK-SQ NPs dis-
played a significant antihyperalgesic effect on inflamed hind paw. 
The antihyperalgesic effect was less intense than after morphine 
treatment, but NPs evidenced a much longer-lasting effect. Un-
expectedly, LENK-SQ-Am NPs, which was expected to release the 
peptide slower in comparison with the other two NPs, exhibited a 
stronger effect with a shorter duration, probably because the enzy-
matic serum capability is not predictive of the enzymatic ecosystem 
in the inflamed paw. LENK-SQ-Dig and LENK-SQ-Diox NPs had 
nearly the same antihyperalgesic profile with prolonged effect, 
resulting in a significantly higher AUC than morphine and LENK-
SQ-Am NPs. In particular, the LENK-SQ-Dig NPs showed an anti-
hyperalgesic effect that lasted twice as long as morphine. In addition, 
as expected for an analgesic compound, PWL values after morphine 
treatment in -carrageenan–treated rats exceeded basal values in 
naïve healthy rats, whereas, in contrast, under the conditions 
used here, PWL values after LENK-SQ NPs just reached these 
basal values (Fig. 5). This would suggest that LENK NPs are devoid 
Fig. 4. Experimental design for algesimetry. The antinociceptive effect of NPs was tested in a pathophysiological context induced by an intraplantar carrageenan injection 
(2% saline, 100 l). Involvement of central or peripheral opioid receptors was performed using a brain-permeant opioid antagonist, naloxone (Nal), and a brain- 
impermeant 
opioid receptor antagonist, naloxone methiodide (Nal-M). NP suspensions or control solutions were injected intravenously with a dose volume of 10 ml/kg during 30 s. 
The Hargreaves test was performed 10 min after the NP administration and then every 30 min up to a period of  250 min. The dose of LENK-SQ NPs (20 mg/kg) was equivalent 
to LENK (11.48 mg/kg) and to SQ NPs (8.28 mg/kg) and corresponded to 20.66 mmol/kg for both LENK-SQ and LENK. s.c., subcutaneous; i.pl., intraplantar. 
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Feng et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau5148     13 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
6 of 12
Fig. 5. Antihyperalgesic effect of LENK-SQ NPs and morphine. Antihyperalgesic effects of acute treatment with morphine (A and B), LENK-SQ-Diox NPs (C and D), LENK-
SQ-Dig NPs (E and F), and LENK-SQ-Am NPs (G and H) in -carrageenan–induced inflammatory pain injected rats. Administration of morphine, LENK-SQ NPs, Nal, Nal-M, 
LENK, blank SQ NPs, or dextrose solution (vehicle) was performed (arrows, 0 on abscissa) 3 hours after -carrageenan injection into the right hind paw. Morphine (A), LENK-SQ-
Diox NPs (C), LENK-SQ-Dig NPs (E), and LENK-SQ-Am NPs (G) induced an increase in PWL (in seconds, means ± SEM of independent determinations in five to nine animals 
per group) in the Hargreaves test. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, compared to dextrose solution or LENK solution; ###P < 0.001, compared to morphine; $P < 0.05, $$P < 0.01, 
$$$P < 0.001, compared to LENK-SQ NPs. Two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with repeated measures, Bonferroni post test. Nal or Nal-M was administered 15 min before 
morphine or LENK-SQ NP injection. Basal on abscissa: Control (naïve) rats (before -carrageenan injection). (B, D, F, and H) Bars are the means ± SEM of AUCs (seconds × 
minutes) of the cumulative durations derived from the time course changes (A, C, E, and G) in PWL after the various treatments. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, one-way 
ANOVA, Tukey post test, compared to dextrose (vehicle) or LENK solution; $P < 0.05, $$P < 0.01, $$$P < 0.001, compared to LENK-SQ NPs.
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Feng et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau5148     13 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
7 of 12
of analgesic properties but are especially potent to counteract hyper-
algesia in subjects suffering from chronic pain. However, further 
studies are required to assess this hypothesis.
Pretreatment with Nal (a prototypical opioid antagonist) prevented 
the increase in PWL evoked by LENK-SQ NPs and morphine, indi-
cating that the antihyperalgesic effect of all these compounds was 
mediated by opioid receptors. On the other hand, pretreatment with 
Nal-M [which does not cross the BBB (24)] only marginally decreased 
the antihyperalgesic effect of morphine, suggesting that the drug 
acted mainly through central and, to a lesser extent, peripheral opi-
oid receptors. In contrast, Nal-M pretreatment abolished the anti-
hyperalgesic effect of LENK-SQ NPs, which demonstrated that all 
three LENK-SQ NPs acted exclusively through peripherally located 
opioid receptors.
To investigate the ability of LENK-SQ NPs to address the peptide 
toward the inflamed tissue, biodistribution studies were performed 
using in vivo fluorescence imaging in a mouse carrageenan-induced 
paw edema model. Our data highlighted the ability of the NPs to 
gain access to the peripheral inflamed tissue. Intravenous injection 
of fluorescent DiD–labeled LENK-SQ NPs in inflammation- 
bearing 
mice resulted in a marked increase of fluorescence within the in-
flamed hind paw, up to a level that is threefold higher than that in 
the contralateral non-inflamed paw or in the paw of mice treated 
with saline only (instead of -carrageenan). The very low accumula-
tion of fluorescence in the non-inflamed paw and in the brain con-
firmed that the antihyperalgesic effect resulted from the targeting 
of LENK-SQ NPs toward peripheral opioid receptors in inflamed 
tissue rather than toward central opioid receptors. It is likely that 
the LENK-SQ distributed within the inflamed area as NPs rather 
than in a single LENK-SQ molecular form. Whole-body imaging in 
Fig. 6 shows strong fluorescence in the inflamed paw, which was 
not the case when the fluorescent dye was injected as a free compound. 
Fig. 6. IVIS Lumina scan of mice and of their organs after intravenous administration of fluorescent LENK-SQ-Am NPs or control fluorescent dye solution (ven-
tral view). (A) Biodistribution of fluorescent LENK-SQ-Am NPs in mice with inflamed right hind paw. (B) Biodistribution of fluorescent LENK-SQ-Am NPs in mice with 
non-inflamed hind paw (saline injected only into the right hind paw). (C) Biodistribution of free dye in mice with inflamed right paw. (D) Zoom of group A at 2 hours. 
 
(E) Zoom of group B at 2 hours. (F) Quantitative analysis of the paws with the same region of interest (ROI). R, right hind paw; L, left hind paw.
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Feng et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau5148     13 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
8 of 12
In addition, after incubation of LENK-SQ NPs in serum, a significant 
proportion of NPs remained intact (fig. S8). Last, safety of LENK-SQ 
NPs after intravenous injection was confirmed by normal levels of 
transaminases and normal histology of vital organs.
Thus, the novelty of the approach resulted from the unexpected 
ability of the peptidic NPs to target the small area of the body where 
inflammation and nociception occur. As this resulted in an effective 
pain alleviation, which lasted even longer than with morphine and 
avoided any diffusion into the CNS, such properties of LENK-SQ 
NPs might open novel perspectives for pain management.
CONCLUSION
On the basis of the bioconjugation of LENK to squalene, we describe 
here a new nanoformulation capable of precise and efficient delivery 
of LENK for pain control associated with inflammatory events. Our 
data demonstrated that the antihyperalgesic activity of LENK-SQ NPs 
took place at the level of peripheral opioid receptors. The experi-
mental approach to making these nanoparticles is simple and easy 
(i.e., it does not require any complicated nanoparticle surface func-
tionalization), which should facilitate further pharmaceutical devel-
opment and clinical translation. Although further studies are needed to 
more precisely determine how dosage, administration frequency, and 
timing of treatment with LENK-SQ may affect the clinical outcome, 
this study opens a new exciting perspective for an efficient treatment 
of intense pain, which evades the severe side effects associated with 
morphine or related synthetic opioids. Last, because of the versatility 
of the approach, the application of this delivery system to other 
therapeutic peptide molecules may be reasonably envisioned.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
All the chemicals used were of analytical grade. Squalene (SQ), 
diglycolic anhydride, ethyl chloroformate, chloromethyl chloro-
sulfate, ammonium acetate, n-Bu4NHSO4, TES, and triethylamine 
(TEA) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (France). Pd-C was ob-
tained from Alfa Aesar (France). DiD and DiR were purchased, 
respectively, from PromoKine (Germany) and Interchim (France). 
Roti-Histofix 4% (formaldehyde) was provided by Roth (Germany).
All the drugs used were of analytical grade. Morphine sulfate salt 
pentahydrate, -carrageenan, naloxone hydrochloride (Nal, , , and 
 opioid receptors antagonist), and naloxone methiodide (Nal-M, a 
nonspecific opioid receptor antagonist that does not cross the BBB) 
were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Saint-Quentin-Fallavier, France). 
Ketamine and xylazine were purchased from Centravet (Maisons- 
Alfort, France). LENK and Alloc-LENK were purchased from 
Ontores Biotechnologies (Zhejiang, China).
General information on chemicals
Analytical thin-layer chromatography was performed on Merck silica 
gel 60F254 glass precoated plates (0.25 mm layer). Column chromatog-
raphy was performed on Merck silica gel 60 (230-400 mesh). HPLC 
water was purified using a Milli-Q system (Millipore, France). Tetra-
hydrofuran (THF) was distilled from sodium/benzophenone ketyl. 
Dimethylformamide (DMF), dichloromethane (DCM), and pyri-
dine were dried on calcium hydride (CaH2) before distillation under 
an argon atmosphere. Methanol (MeOH) was dried over magnesium 
and distilled. All reactions involving air- or water-sensitive com-
pounds were routinely conducted in glassware, which was flame-dried 
under a positive pressure of nitrogen. HPLC-grade acetonitrile 
(ACN), MeOH, ethanol (EtOH), and ethyl acetate (AcOEt) were 
provided by Carlo Erba (Rodano, Italy).
Synthesis of LENK-SQ-Diox
1,1′,2-Tris-norsqualenic acid chloromethyl ester
1,1′,2-Tris-norsqualenic acid was synthesized by oxidation of 1,1′,2- 
 
tris- 
norsqualenic aldehyde by Jones reagent as previously reported 
(35, 36). A solution of KHCO3 (300 mg, 3.0 mmol) in water (2 ml) 
was added to a solution of 1,1′,2-tris-norsqualenic acid (400 mg, 
1 mmol) and n-Bu4NHSO4 (34 mg, 0.1 mmol) in DCM (2 ml). The 
reaction mixture was vigorously stirred, and chloromethyl chloro-
sulfate (185 mg, 1.15 mmol) was added dropwise. After stirring for 
1 hour, DCM (10 ml) was added to extract the product. The organic 
phase was separated, washed with brine, dried over magnesium sul-
fate, and concentrated under reduced pressure to afford a pale yellow 
oil that was used in the following step without further purification.
Alloc-Leu-enkephalin-squalene (Alloc-LENK-SQ-Diox)
The 1,1′,2-tris-norsqualenic acid chloromethyl ester (200 mg, 
0.445 mmol) was added into a mixture of Alloc-LENK (285 mg, 
0.445 mmol) and NaHCO3 (37 mg, 0.4 mmol) in 3 ml of DMF. The 
reaction mixture was stirred at 40°C under argon for 4 days. The 
final reaction mixture was concentrated in vacuo, and the residue 
was purified by flash column chromatography on silica gel DCM/
EtOH (100:0 to 97:3) to afford the title compound as a pale yellow 
oil (168 mg, 40% yield).
Leu-enkephalin-squalene with dioxycarbonyl 
linker (LENK-SQ-Diox)
TES (1215 mg, 10 mmol) was added dropwise neat to a stirred solu-
tion of Alloc-LENK-SQ (110 mg, 0.1 mmol) and 10% Pd-C (20% by 
weight of Alloc-LENK-SQ-Diox) in MeOH (11 ml) under argon. 
When the reaction was completed, the mixture was filtered through 
celite to remove the Pd-C, and the residual TES and solvent were 
removed by evaporation. The residue was first purified by flash col-
umn chromatography on silica gel with DCM/EtOH (90:10). The 
resulting product was dissolved in 200 l of EtOH before undergo-
ing a second purification via the semi-preparative RP-HPLC system 
(Waters, MA, USA) on an Uptisphere C18 column (100 mm 
by 21.2 mm; pore size, 5 m; Interchim, CA, USA) to obtain the 
pure product (23 mg; 23% yield). HPLC was then performed using 
a gradient elution with the mobile phase composed of an ammonium 
acetate buffer (20 mM) and ACN. Elution was carried out at a flow 
rate of 21 ml/min for 10 min with the linear gradient from 10 to 
100% ACN, and then, the system was held at 100% ACN with iso-
cratic flow for 10 min. Temperature was set at 30°C, and ultraviolet 
(UV) detection was monitored at 280 and 257 nm. The retention 
time was 15 min, and the total yield of the pure product, after cou-
pling and deprotection steps, corresponded to 9.5%.
Synthesis of LENK-SQ-Dig
1,1′,2-Tris-norsqualenol was synthesized from squalene via 1,1′,2- 
tris-norsqualenic aldehyde according to previously reported methods 
(35, 36). Diglycolic anhydride (150 mg, 1.29 mmol) was added to a 
solution of 1,1′,2-tris-norsqualenol (200 mg, 0.52 mmol) in 3 ml of 
dry pyridine. The reaction was stirred overnight at room tempera-
ture. The solvent was removed and the residue was extracted with 
DCM from dilute hydrochloric acid and brine. Conversion to the 
squalene–diglycolic acid, monitored by TLC, was approximately 100%. 
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Feng et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau5148     13 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
9 of 12
The resultant product was dried under vacuum and used in the follow-
ing step without further purification. Ethyl chloroformate (10.8 mg, 
0.1 mmol) was added to a solution of squalene–diglycolic acid 
(50 mg, 0.1 mmol) and TEA (12 mg, 0.12 mmol) in 1 ml of anhy-
drous THF under argon at 0°C. The reaction was stirred for 1 hour 
at room temperature, and a solution of LENK (55 mg, 0.1 mmol) in 
1 ml anhydrous DMF was added. The mixture was maintained at 
40°C for 2 days with stirring under argon. The solvents were removed 
in vacuo, and the crude product was purified using silica gel chroma-
tography (purified with gradient eluent DCM/EtOH: 100:0 to 90:10). 
Then, ammonium salt was eliminated by simple filtration on silica 
using EtOH/AcOEt (40:60) as solvents. The pure bioconjugate was 
obtained with 69% yield.
Synthesis of LENK-SQ-Am
1,1′,2-Tris-norsqualenic acid (100 mg, 0.25 mmol) and TEA (34.79 mg, 
0.3 mmol) were dissolved in 1.5 ml of anhydrous THF under argon, 
and ethyl chloroformate (27 mg, 0.25 mmol) was added to the mix-
ture at 0°C. The reaction was allowed to warm at room temperature 
and kept under stirring for 1 hour. A solution of LENK (138 mg, 
0.25 mmol) in 1.5 ml of anhydrous DMF was then added to the re-
action, and the mixture was kept under stirring for 2 days. The sol-
vents were removed in vacuo, and the crude product was purified 
twice using silica gel chromatography [purification with gradient 
eluent DCM/EtOH (100:0 to 90:10) and then simple filtration with 
EtOH/AcOEt (40:60) to remove the ammonium salt]. The pure bio-
conjugate was obtained with 73% yield.
Preparation and characterization of LENK-SQ NPs
Preparation of nanoparticles
LENK-SQ NPs were prepared using the nanoprecipitation method-
ology. Briefly, the LENK-SQ bioconjugate (i.e., LENK-SQ-Diox, 
LENK-SQ-Dig, or LENK-SQ-Am) was dissolved in EtOH (8 mg/ml) 
and added dropwise under stirring (500 rpm) into a 5% aqueous 
dextrose solution (EtOH/dextrose solution volume ratio, 1:4). The 
solution became spontaneously turbid with a Tyndall effect, indi-
cating the formation of the nanoparticles. EtOH was then completely 
evaporated using a Rotavapor (80 rpm, 30°C, 30 mbar) to obtain an 
aqueous suspension of pure LENK-SQ NPs (final concentration, 
2 mg/ml). Blank SQ NPs (LENK-free NPs) were prepared by the 
same method as described above by adding dropwise an ethanolic 
solution of squalenic acid into 5% aqueous dextrose solution. Fluo-
rescently labeled LENK-SQ NPs were also obtained by the same 
procedure, except that the fluorescent probe DiD was solubilized in 
the ethanolic phase together with the LENK-SQ-Am bioconjugate 
(DiD/LENK-SQ-Am ratio was 4 wt %) before addition to the dex-
trose solution. Fluorescence quencher LENK-SQ NPs were also 
prepared by the same way using DiR as a fluorescent probe (DiD/
DiR/LENK-SQ-Am ratio was 2:2:100 wt). The peptide drug loadings 
into the NPs were expressed as percentage (%), calculated from the 
ratio between LENK peptide Mw and LENK-SQ bioconjugate Mw. 
The LENK-SQ NPs were regularly observed by cryo-TEM. All the 
NPs were freshly prepared and used within 2 hours (conservation at 
4°C) before in vivo experiments.
DLS measurements
The mean particle size, polydispersity index (PDI), and zeta poten-
tial were primarily evaluated by DLS (Nano ZS, Malvern; 173° 
scattering angle at 25°C). The measurements were performed in 
triplicate following appropriate dilution of the NPs in water (DLS) 
or in 0.1 mM KCl (zeta potential). The results represent the mean 
and SD of three repeated sample preparations or more.
Cryo-TEM
The morphology of the LENK-SQ NPs was investigated by cryo-TEM. 
NPs were vitrified using a chamber designed and set up in the labo-
ratory where both humidity and temperature could be controlled. 
Four microliters of solution of LENK-SQ NPs (4 mg/ml in Milli-Q 
water) was deposited onto a perforated carbon film mounted on a 
200-mesh electron microscopy grid. The homemade carbon film 
hole dimensions were about 2 mm in diameter. Most of the drop 
was removed with a blotting filter paper, and the residual thin films 
remaining within the holes were quick-frozen by plunging them 
into liquid ethane cooled with liquid N2. The specimen was then 
transferred, using liquid N2, to a cryo-specimen holder and observed 
using a JEOL FEG-2010 electron microscope. Micrographs were re-
corded at 200 kV under low-dose conditions at a magnification of 
 
 
×40,000 on SO-163 Kodak films. Micrographs were digitized using 
a film scanner (Super Coolscan 8000 ED, Nikon), and analyses were 
made using the ImageJ software.
In vitro LENK release from NPs in serum
Frozen serum of male SWISS mice (900 l) was quickly thawed and 
then preincubated at 37°C for 30 min before the addition of 300 l 
of LENK-SQ-Dig NPs or LENK-SQ-Am NPs (2 mg/ml). In the case of 
LENK-SQ-Diox NPs, diluted serum (30% in 5% dextrose solution) 
was used for the release study. At various time intervals, aliquots 
(80 l) were collected and added into 320 l of ACN to denature 
and precipitate the enzymes and proteins of the serum, to remove 
them after centrifugation (3000g for 15 min). To quantify the residual 
LENK-SQ bioconjugate and the released LENK, the resulting super-
natants (150 l) were evaporated to dryness at 40°C under nitrogen 
flow and then solubilized in 150 l of Milli-Q water. Free peptide 
quantification was performed using RP-HPLC on an Uptisphere 
Strategy C18HQ column (4.6 mm by 100 mm, 5 m; Interchim), a 
1525 Binary LC Pump (Waters), a 2707 Auto-sampler (Waters), 
and a 2998 PDA detector (Waters). The HPLC was carried out using 
a gradient elution with the mobile phase composed of 5 mM ammo-
nium acetate in Milli-Q water (phase A) and 5 mM ammonium ac-
etate in ACN (phase B). Elution was carried out at a flow rate of 
1 ml/min for 13 min with the linear gradient from 10 to 100% of B; 
then, the system was held at 100% of B with isocratic flow for 10 min. 
Temperature was set at 35°C, and UV detection was monitored at 
257 nm. The detection limit of the HPLC technique was 0.39 g/ml 
for the peptide. This method exhibited linearity (R2 = 0.99998) over 
the assayed concentration range (0.39 to 200 g/ml) and demon-
strated good precision with relative SD being all less than 2.01%. 
The accuracy corresponded to 96 ± 5%.
General information on in vivo study
Animals
Adult male Sprague-Dawley rats (200 to 220 g on arrival, 280 to 
300 g at the time of experiments) and adult male Swiss mice (18 to 
20 g on arrival, 22 to 25 g at the time of experiments) were purchased 
from JANVIER LABS (France) for algesimetry tests and biodis-
tribution, respectively. They were housed in a standard controlled 
environment (22° ± 1°C, 60% relative humidity, 12-hour light/12-hour 
dark cycle, lights on at 8:00 a.m.) with food and water available ad 
libitum, without any handling for at least 1 week before being used for 
experiments. In all cases, experiments were performed in conformity 
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Feng et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau5148     13 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
10 of 12
with the guidelines of the Committee for Research and Ethical Issues 
of the International Association for the Study of Pain (37) and ap-
proved by the Animal Care Committee of the University Paris- 
Sud 
in accordance with the principles of laboratory animal care and the 
European legislation 2010/63/EU. All efforts were made to reduce 
animal numbers and minimize their suffering, as defined in the spe-
cific agreement (registered under no. 7493-2016102520355414).
Carrageenan-induced paw edema model
Since the demonstration that indomethacin reduces inflammation 
caused by intraplantar injection of -carrageenan, this acute model 
is widely accepted for screening compounds with anti-inflammatory 
potentialities (38). -Carrageenan was dissolved in physiological 
saline (NaCl, 0.9%) just before injection. Rats or mice received a 
single intraplantar injection of -carrageenan solution in the plantar 
region of the right hind paw (23, 39) to induce inflammation. The 
injected -carrageenan dose corresponded to 100 l (2% solution, 
w/v) for rat and 20 l (3% solution, w/v) for mice. Inflammation 
reached its maximum 3 hours after -carrageenan injection. Thermal 
nociceptive test was then performed on the ipsilateral inflamed 
hind paw.
Nociceptive behavioral study in rats
Thermal nociceptive test
Hypersensitivity to thermal nociceptive stimuli was assessed using 
the Hargreaves test (23). Rats were placed individually in an open 
Plexiglas cylindrical chamber (20 cm in diameter, 35 cm high) on a 
3-mm-thick transparent glass floor and allowed to habituate for at 
least 20 min before testing. A movable radiant heat source (Model 
7370; Ugo Basile Plantar Test, Italy) was positioned under the glass 
floor directly beneath the plantar surface of the right hind paw, and 
the time (in seconds) that elapsed from switching on the radiant 
heat until paw withdrawal was measured automatically. A cutoff 
time of 20 s was established to prevent tissue damage. Each trial was 
repeated three times with 5-min intervals for basal threshold and 
two times spaced (2-min intervals) after NP treatments 3 hours after 
-carrageenan injection. The average of PWLs was calculated and 
expressed as means ± SEM.
Experimental design for algesimetry test
Basal responses to thermal stimuli were obtained on the day before 
the -carrageenan injection. On the basis of previous studies, acute 
pharmacological treatments were performed 3 hours after carra-
geenan injection, which corresponded to the peak inflammatory 
response. The efficacy of these treatments on thermal hyperalgesia 
was evaluated by measurement of PWLs using the Hargreaves test 
at regular time intervals after drug or vehicle administration, first at 
10 min and then each at 30 min for a period of 4 hours (Fig. 4).
Acute pharmacological treatments
Morphine and LENK were dissolved in 5% dextrose solution, whereas 
Nal and Nal-M were dissolved in physiological saline (NaCl, 0.9%). All 
these drugs and NP suspensions were prepared just before administra-
tion. All acute treatments were performed 3 hours after -carrageenan 
intraplantar injection according to Fig. 4. Nal and Nal-M were in-
jected subcutaneously, whereas the intravenous route in the tail vein 
was used for LENK-SQ NPs, LENK, and their controls. The antago-
nist (Nal or Nal-M) was administered 15 min before the agonist 
(morphine or tested NPs). A single dose of morphine (1 mg/kg), 
Nal (0.5 mg/kg), and Nal-M (0.5 mg/kg) was administered on the 
basis of literature data (40). A single intravenous dose of LENK-SQ 
NPs (20 mg/kg, equivalent to 11.48 mg/kg of LENK) or control un-
conjugated SQ NPs (8.28 mg/kg) was used based on the maximal 
volume of LENK-SQ NPs that could be injected.
Biodistribution study in mice
In vivo imaging biodistribution studies were performed after intra-
venous injection of fluorescent LENK-SQ-Am NPs (250 l, 2 mg/ml 
containing 4% DiD) or control fluorescent DiD solution (250 l, 
80 g/ml in 5% dextrose solution) in shaved mice bearing -carrageenan– 
induced inflammation. In parallel, control non-inflamed shaved 
mice (injected with 20 l of saline into the right hind paw instead of 
-carrageenan) also received injection of fluorescent LENK-SQ NPs. 
The biodistribution of the NPs was recorded at 0.5, 2, 4, 6, and 
24 hours with the IVIS Lumina LT Series III system (Caliper Life 
Sciences) using 640 nm excitation and 695 to 775 nm emission filters, 
respectively. During imaging, the mice were kept on the imaging 
stage under anesthesia with 2% isoflurane gas in oxygen flow (1 liter/min) 
and were imaged in ventral position. Images and measures of fluo-
rescence signals were acquired and analyzed with Living Imaging. 
To measure photon radiance, regions of interest (ROIs; threshold of 
35%) were selected on the paw of the mice, and average radiant ef-
ficiency values were used for quantification. Threshold of ROI for 
the inflamed paw was then pasted on the non-inflamed paw to com-
pare the radiance with the same region.
In a separate experiment, fluorescent LENK-SQ NP–injected mice 
were deeply anesthetized with a mixture of ketamine (100 mg/kg, 
i.p.) and xylazine (10 mg/kg, i.p.) before euthanasia by transcardiac 
perfusion of 40 ml of saline (8 ml/min), until the fluid exiting the 
right atrium was entirely clear. Then, liver, spleen, kidneys, heart, 
lungs, brain, and inflamed right hind paw were excised and imme-
diately imaged with the imager. The fluorescence emitted was quan-
tified with Living Image software over the ROI (threshold of 20%).
Toxicity study in rats
Adult male Sprague-Dawley rats were injected with either LENK-
SQ-Am NPs (20 mg/kg) or 5% dextrose (n = 3 animals per group). 
At 24 or 48 hours after injection, the animals were anesthetized with 
2% isoflurane gas in oxygen flow (1 liter/min), and blood was col-
lected from tail blood vessels by anticoagulant (heparin, 500 UI/ml)– 
treated syringes. The blood samples were centrifuged at 1000g for 
15 min, and the plasma was collected and stored at −20°C before 
analysis. The AST and ALT levels in plasma were analyzed by Cerba 
Vet, France.
In a separate experiment, 24 or 48 hours after injection, rats were 
deeply anesthetized by Dolethal. Liver, kidneys, spleen, heart, and 
lungs were then excised, fixed by 4% formaldehyde, paraffin-embedded, 
and cut into 5-m-thick sections. Hematoxylin and eosin staining was 
performed on all the organs for analysis of the morphology (Zeiss).
Statistical analyses
All values are expressed as means ± SEM, and statistical analyses 
were made with GraphPad Prism 6 software (San Diego, CA, USA). 
A two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used with or without 
repeated measures as appropriate (see Materials and Methods and 
legends to figures). The comparison between groups was performed 
using the Bonferroni post hoc test. A one-way ANOVA followed by 
a Tukey post test was used to compare three or more groups in 
AUC bars. AUCs were calculated using the trapezoidal rule. For all 
analyses, statistical significance was set at P ≤ 0.05.
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Feng et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau5148     13 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
11 of 12
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Supplementary material for this article is available at http://advances.sciencemag.org/cgi/
content/full/5/2/eaau5148/DC1
Supplementary Text
Fig. S1. Synthesis of LENK-SQ-Diox.
Fig. S2. Synthesis of LENK-SQ-Dig.
Fig. S3. Synthesis of LENK-SQ-Am.
Fig. S4. 1H spectrum of LENK-SQ bioconjugates.
Fig. S5. 13C spectrum of LENK-SQ bioconjugates.
Fig. S6. Size and zeta potential of LENK-SQ NPs kept at +4°C.
Fig. S7. Hydrolysis of LENK or LENK-SQ-Am NPs in the presence of serum.
Fig. S8. In vitro colloidal stability of LENK-SQ-Am NPs in mouse serum.
Fig. S9. Biodistribution of fluorescent LENK-SQ-Am NPs or control fluorescent dye solution in 
mice with or without inflamed paw.
Fig. S10. Toxicity study of LENK-SQ-Am NPs upon systemic administration.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
 1. D. S. Goldberg, S. J. McGee, Pain as a global public health priority. BMC Public Health 11, 
770 (2011).
 2. B. L. Kieffer, C. Gavériaux-Ruff, Exploring the opioid system by gene knockout. Prog. 
Neurobiol. 66, 285–306 (2002).
 3. J. M. Adams, Increasing naloxone awareness and use: The role of health care 
practitioners. JAMA 319, 2073–2074 (2018).
 4. J. Anna, F. Jakub, J. Tomasz, Opioid receptors and their ligands. Curr. Top. Med. Chem. 4, 
1–17 (2004).
 5. C. Contet, B. L. Kieffer, K. Befort, Mu opioid receptor: A gateway to drug addiction.  
Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 14, 370–378 (2004).
 6. J. A. Kiritsy-Roy, L. Marson, G. R. Van Loon, Sympathoadrenal, cardiovascular and blood 
gas responses to highly selective mu and delta opioid peptides. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 
251, 1096–1103 (1989).
 7. A. Tavani, P. Petrillo, A. La Regina, M. Sbacchi, Role of peripheral mu, delta and kappa 
opioid receptors in opioid-induced inhibition of gastrointestinal transit in rats. 
J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 254, 91–97 (1990).
 8. L. Dykstra, A. L. Granger, R. M. Allen, X. Zhang, K. C. Rice, Antinociceptive effects of the 
selective delta opioid agonist SNC80 alone and in combination with mu opioids in  
the squirrel monkey titration procedure. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 163, 420–429 
(2002).
 9. D. J. Campbell, Long-term neprilysin inhibition—Implications for ARNIs. Nat. Rev. Cardiol. 
14, 171–186 (2016).
 10. D. Goodwin, P. Simerska, I. Toth, Peptides as therapeutics with enhanced bioactivity. 
Curr. Med. Chem. 19, 4451–4461 (2012).
 11. J. Kreuter, V. E. Petrov, D. A. Kharkevich, R. N. Alyautdin, Influence of the type of 
surfactant on the analgesic effects induced by the peptide dalargin after its delivery 
across the blood–brain barrier using surfactant-coated nanoparticles. J. Control. Release 
49, 81–87 (1997).
 12. Y.-C. Chen, W.-Y. Hsieh, W.-F. Lee, D.-T. Zeng, Effects of surface modification of 
PLGA-PEG-PLGA nanoparticles on loperamide delivery efficiency across the blood–brain 
barrier. J. Biomater. Appl. 27, 909–922 (2013).
 13. A. Lalatsa, A. G. Schätzlein, N. L. Garrett, J. Moger, M. Briggs, L. Godfrey, A. Iannitelli, 
J. Freeman, I. F. Uchegbu, Chitosan amphiphile coating of peptide nanofibres reduces 
liver uptake and delivers the peptide to the brain on intravenous administration. 
J. Control. Release 197, 87–96 (2015).
 14. M. Popov, I. Abu Hammad, T. Bachar, S. Grinberg, C. Linder, D. Stepensky, E. Heldman, 
Delivery of analgesic peptides to the brain by nano-sized bolaamphiphilic vesicles made 
of monolayer membranes. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 85, 381–389 (2013).
 15. A. Lalatsa, V. Lee, J. P. Malkinson, M. Zloh, A. G. Schätzlein, I. F. Uchegbu, A prodrug 
nanoparticle approach for the oral delivery of a hydrophilic peptide, leucine5-enkephalin, 
to the brain. Mol. Pharm. 9, 1665–1680 (2012).
 16. S. Wohlfart, S. Gelperina, J. Kreuter, Transport of drugs across the blood–brain barrier by 
nanoparticles. J. Control. Release 161, 264–273 (2012).
 17. C. Stein, M. Schäfer, H. Machelska, Attacking pain at its source: New perspectives on 
opioids. Nat. Med. 9, 1003–1008 (2003).
 18. A. Maksimenko, F. Dosio, J. Mougin, A. Ferrero, S. Wack, L. H. Reddy, A.-A. Weyn, 
E. Lepeltier, C. Bourgaux, B. Stella, L. Cattel, P. Couvreur, A unique squalenoylated and 
nonpegylated doxorubicin nanomedicine with systemic long-circulating properties and 
anticancer activity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111, E217–E226 (2014).
 19. P. K. Mandal, J. S. McMurray, Pd−C-induced catalytic transfer hydrogenation with 
triethylsilane. J. Org. Chem. 72, 6599–6601 (2007).
 20. G. V. Betageri, N. B. Vutla, A. K. Banga, Liposomal formulation and characterization of  
the opioid peptide leucine enkephalin. Pharm. Pharmacol. Commun. 3, 587–591  
(2011).
 21. Y. Chen, F. Wang, H. A. E. Benson, Effect of formulation factors on incorporation of the 
hydrophilic peptide dalargin into PLGA and mPEG-PLGA nanoparticles. Biopolymers 90, 
644–650 (2008).
 22. V. S. Chernyshev, R. Rachamadugu, Y. H. Tseng, D. M. Belnap, Y. Jia, K. J. Branch, 
A. E. Butterfield, L. F. Pease III, P. S. Bernard, M. Skliar, Size and shape characterization of 
hydrated and desiccated exosomes. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 407, 3285–3301 (2015).
 23. K. Hargreaves, R. Dubner, F. Brown, C. Flores, J. Joris, A new and sensitive method for 
measuring thermal nociception in cutaneous hyperalgesia. Pain 32, 77–88 (1988).
 24. K. M. Buller, A. S. Hamlin, P. B. Osborne, Dissection of peripheral and central endogenous 
opioid modulation of systemic interleukin-1 responses using c-fos expression in the rat 
brain. Neuropharmacology 49, 230–242 (2005).
 25. A. K. Sato, M. Viswanathan, R. B. Kent, C. R. Wood, Therapeutic peptides: Technological 
advances driving peptides into development. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 17, 638–642 
(2006).
 26. P. Couvreur, B. Stella, L. H. Reddy, H. Hillaireau, C. Dubernet, D. Desmaële,  
S. Lepêtre-Mouelhi, F. Rocco, N. Dereuddre-Bosquet, P. Clayette, V. Rosilio, V. Marsaud, 
J.-M. Renoir, L. Cattel, Squalenoyl nanomedicines as potential therapeutics. Nano Lett. 6, 
2544–2548 (2006).
 27. A. Gaudin, M. Yemisci, H. Eroglu, S. Lepetre-Mouelhi, O. F. Turkoglu, B. Dönmez-Demir, 
S. Caban, M. F. Sargon, S. Garcia-Argote, G. Pieters, O. Loreau, B. Rousseau, O. Tagit, 
N. Hildebrandt, Y. Le Dantec, J. Mougin, S. Valetti, H. Chacun, V. Nicolas, D. Desmaële, 
K. Andrieux, Y. Capan, T. Dalkara, P. Couvreur, Squalenoyl adenosine nanoparticles 
provide neuroprotection after stroke and spinal cord injury. Nat. Nanotechnol. 9, 
1054–1062 (2014).
 28. H. H. Büscher, R. C. Hill, D. RÖMer, F. Cardinaux, A. Closse, D. Hauser, J. Pless, 
Evidence for analgesic activity of enkephalin in the mouse. Nature 261, 423–425 
(1976).
 29. A. H. M. Viswanatha Swamy, P. A. Patil, Effect of some clinically used proteolytic enzymes 
on Inflammation in rats. Indian J. Pharm. Sci. 70, 114–117 (2008).
 30. N. Sémiramoth, C. Di Meo, F. Zouhiri, F. Saïd-Hassane, S. Valetti, R. Gorges, V. Nicolas, 
J. H. Poupaert, S. Chollet-Martin, D. Desmaële, R. Gref, P. Couvreur, Self-assembled 
squalenoylated penicillin bioconjugates: An original approach for the treatment of 
intracellular infections. ACS Nano 6, 3820–3831 (2012).
 31. M. F. Simões, E. Valente, M. J. R. Gómez, E. Anes, L. Constantino, Lipophilic pyrazinoic acid 
amide and ester prodrugs stability, activation and activity against M. tuberculosis.  
Eur. J. Pharm. Sci. 37, 257–263 (2009).
 32. P. T. Wong, S. K. Choi, Mechanisms of drug release in nanotherapeutic delivery systems. 
Chem. Rev. 115, 3388–3432 (2015).
 33. R. Oliyai, Prodrugs of peptides and peptidomimetics for improved formulation and 
delivery. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 19, 275–286 (1996).
 34. N. E. Burma, H. Leduc-Pessah, C. Y. Fan, T. Trang, Animal models of chronic pain: 
Advances and challenges for clinical translation. J. Neurosci. Res. 95, 1242–1256 
(2016).
 35. E. E. van Tamelen, T. J. Curphey, The selective oxidation of the terminal double bonds in 
squalene. Tetrahedron Lett. 3, 121–124 (1962).
 36. C. Skarbek, L. L. Lesueur, H. Chapuis, A. Deroussent, C. Pioche-Durieu, A. Daville, J. Caron, 
M. Rivard, T. Martens, J.-R. Bertrand, E. Le Cam, G. Vassal, P. Couvreur, D. Desmaele, 
A. Paci, Preactivated oxazaphosphorines designed for isophosphoramide mustard 
delivery as bulk form or nanoassemblies: Synthesis and proof of concept. J. Med. Chem. 
58, 705–717 (2014).
 37. M. Zimmermann, Ethical guidelines for investigations of experimental pain in conscious 
animals. Pain 16, 109–110 (1983).
 38. C. A. Winter, E. A. Risley, G. W. Nuss, Anti-inflammatory and antipyretic activities of 
indomethacin, 1-(p-chlorobenzoyl)-5-methoxy-2-methyl-indole-3-acetic acid. 
J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 141, 369–376 (1963).
 39. S. T. Meller, C. P. Cummings, R. J. Traub, G. F. Gebhart, The role of nitric oxide in the 
development and maintenance of the hyperalgesia produced by intraplantar injection of 
carrageenan in the rat. Neuroscience 60, 367–374 (1994).
 40. H. Brasch, G. Zetler, Caerulein and morphine in a model of visceral pain. Naunyn 
Schmiedebergs Arch. Pharmacol. 319, 161–167 (1982).
Acknowledgments: We thank V. Domergue for animal housing and care at the Animex 
facility, IPSIT, Châtenay-Malabry, France, and J. Mougin (Institut Galien Paris-Sud,  
Châtenay-Malabry, France) and G. Frébourg (Electron Microscopy Facility/FR 3631-CNRS-UPMC) 
are acknowledged for their contribution to cryo-TEM. We thank M. Varna-Pannerec (Institut 
Galien Paris-Sud, Châtenay-Malabry, France) and D. Courilleau (CIBLOT Plateforme, 
Châtenay-Malabry, France) for help concerning the histological study. C. Dejean (BioCIS, 
Châtenay-Malabry, France) is acknowledged for help with the nuclear magnetic resonance 
interpretations. Funding: J.F. is a fellow of the Chinese Scholarship Council (CSC). Part of this 
work was supported by the RBUCE-UP grant agreement (no. 00001002483/78) between the 
ERC and Université Paris-Sud, by the ERC under the Framework Program FP7/2007-2013 (grant 
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Feng et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau5148     13 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
12 of 12
agreement no. 249835), and by the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique. UMR 8612 
(P.C. team) is a member of the laboratory of excellence NANOSACLAY. Author contributions: 
P.C. and S.L.-M. were involved in planning and supervised the work. J.F. and S.L.-M. conceived 
and designed the bioconjugates. P.C. and S.L.-M. conceived and planned the experiments.  
J.F., S.L.-M., and P.C. developed the methodology. M.H. and A.G. developed the experimental 
design for algesimetry and F.C. attended meetings. J.F. carried out the experiments.  
A.G. participated in algesimetry experiments, and S.M. and C.C. participated in biodistribution 
studies. P.C., J.F., and S.L.-M. contributed to the analysis and interpretation of the results.  
M.H. contributed to the interpretation of the results of the behavioral study. J.F. wrote the 
manuscript (in consultation with S.L.-M. and P.C.). S.L.-M. and P.C. revised the manuscript.  
M.H. and A.G. revised the nociceptive behavioral study part. S.M. and C.C. participated in the 
manuscript revision. Competing interests: P.C., J.F., and S.L.-M. are inventors on a European 
Application patent related to this work filed by CNRS and the University of Paris-Sud  
(no. 18306002.9, filed 23 July 2018). The other authors declare that they have no competing 
interests. Data and materials availability: All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in  
the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials. Additional data 
related to this paper may be requested from the authors.
Submitted 19 June 2018
Accepted 28 December 2018
Published 13 February 2019
10.1126/sciadv.aau5148
Citation: J. Feng, S. Lepetre-Mouelhi, A. Gautier, S. Mura, C. Cailleau, F. Coudore, M. Hamon, 
P. Couvreur, A new painkiller nanomedicine to bypass the blood-brain barrier and the use of 
morphine. Sci. Adv. 5, eaau5148 (2019).
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 A new painkiller nanomedicine to bypass the blood-brain barrier and the use of morphine
Patrick Couvreur
Jiao Feng, Sinda Lepetre-Mouelhi, Anne Gautier, Simona Mura, Catherine Cailleau, François Coudore, Michel Hamon and
DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aau5148
 (2), eaau5148.
5
Sci Adv 
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/5/2/eaau5148
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2019/02/11/5.2.eaau5148.DC1
REFERENCES
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/5/2/eaau5148#BIBL
This article cites 40 articles, 4 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
registered trademark of AAAS.
is a
Science Advances 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
(ISSN 2375-2548) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New
Science Advances 
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
