 A rapidly-acting glutamatergic ARC→PVH satiety circuit 
postsynaptically regulated by α-MSH
Henning Fenselau1,*, John N. Campbell1,*, Anne M.J. Verstegen1,*, Joseph C. Madara1, Jie 
Xu1, Bhavik P. Shah1, Jon M. Resch1, Zongfang Yang1, Yael Mandelblat-Cerf1, Yoav 
Livneh1, and Bradford B. Lowell1,2,c
1Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel 
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA, 02215
2Program in Neuroscience, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA
Abstract
Arcuate nucleus (ARC) neurons sense the fed/fasted state and regulate hunger. Agouti-related 
protein (ARCAgRP) neurons are stimulated by fasting, and once activated, they rapidly (within 
minutes) drive hunger. Pro-opiomelanocortin (ARCPOMC) neurons are viewed as the counterpoint 
to ARCAgRP neurons. They are regulated in an opposite fashion and decrease hunger. However, 
unlike ARCAgRP neurons, ARCPOMC neurons are extremely slow in affecting hunger (many 
hours). Thus, a temporally analogous, rapid ARC satiety pathway does not exist or is presently 
unidentified. Here, we show that glutamate-releasing ARC neurons expressing oxytocin receptor, 
unlike ARCPOMC neurons, rapidly cause satiety when chemo- or optogenetically manipulated. 
These glutamatergic ARC projections synaptically converge with GABAergic ARCAgRP 
projections on melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R)-expressing satiety neurons in the paraventricular 
hypothalamus (PVHMC4R neurons). Importantly, transmission across the 
ARCGlutamatergic→PVHMC4R synapse is potentiated by the ARCPOMC neuron-derived MC4R 
agonist, α-MSH. This excitatory ARC→PVH satiety circuit, and its modulation by α-MSH, 
provides new insight into regulation of hunger/satiety.
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
cCorresponding author: Bradford B. Lowell, MD, PhD, blowell@bidmc.harvard.edu, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and 
Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Center for Life Sciences, Rm-703, 3 Blackfan Circle, 
Boston, MA 02115.
Correspondence and request for materials should be addressed to B.B.L. (blowell@bidmc.harvard.edu)
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
Author Contributions
H.F. and B.B.L. designed the experiments and analyzed data. J.N.C. performed the single cell RNA-seq experiments with help from 
Y.M.. H.F. and A.M.V. conducted the behavioral and histological studies with help from J.M.R. and Z.Y.. H.F. performed the 
electrophysiological experiments with help from J.C.M. and Y.L.. J.Y. generated Pomc-IRES-Cre mice. B.P.S. generated Pomclox 
mice. H.F. and B.B.L. wrote the manuscript with comments from all of the authors.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Data availability
RNA-Seq data are available at Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), accession number GSE81789. The authors declare that all other 
relevant data supporting the findings of this study are available on request.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Neurosci. 2017 January ; 20(1): 42–51. doi:10.1038/nn.4442.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Introduction
The ARC is located adjacent to the median eminence, which lacks a blood brain barrier. 
Unique properties that likely involve tanycytes allow circulating factors controlling energy 
balance such as leptin, insulin and various gut-secreted hormones to access ARC neurons1, 2. 
Importantly, the ARC contains two key opposing regulators of energy balance: ARCPOMC 
and ARCAgRP neurons. ARCPOMC neurons release the MC4R agonist α-MSH and promote 
negative energy balance, whereas ARCAgRP neurons release the MC4R antagonist AgRP, as 
well as the inhibitory transmitters GABA and NPY, to do the opposite. Evidence supporting 
this model is extremely robust. Ablation of ARCPOMC neurons3, 4, or genetic deficiency of 
POMC5, 6 or MC4R7–10 results in hyperphagia and massive obesity. Ablation of ARCAgRP 
neurons, on the other hand, causes starvation11, while opto- or chemogenetic stimulation of 
ARCAgRP neurons drives intense feeding12, 13. Indeed, the antagonistic “yin-yang” function 
of these two neurons is a constant feature of essentially all proposed models of homeostatic 
hunger/satiety regulation14–16. At odds with this widely held view, however, is the finding 
that opto- and chemo-genetic activation of ARCPOMC neurons fails to decrease feeding over 
a period of less than 8–12 hours of stimulation4, 12, 17. This is in striking contrast to the 
potent effect on hunger observed just minutes following ARCAgRP neuron 
stimulation12, 13, 18. This lack of rapid effect strongly suggests that ARCPOMC neurons, by 
themselves, are not the full counterpoint to ARCAgRP neurons. Based on this, we 
hypothesized that a functionally important, presently unknown neural component of the 
ARC-based homeostatic satiety system is missing from current models.
The paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus (PVH) is an important effector site for 
hunger/satiety regulation by ARCPOMC and ARCAgRP neurons. ARCPOMC and ARCAgRP 
neurons send dense projections to the PVH19, 20, injection of MC4R ligands and NPY into 
the PVH potently affect feeding20, 21, and, as determined via Cre/lox gene knockout studies, 
the hyperphagia-preventing actions of MC4Rs are mediated specifically by MC4Rs on PVH 
neurons8, 22. Importantly, ARCAgRP neurons selectively, monosynaptically engage and 
consequently inhibit PVHMC4R neurons23 and optogenetic stimulation of ARCAgRP 
terminals in the PVH stimulates intense feeding within minutes23, 24. Of note, the ability of 
ARCAgRP terminal stimulation in the PVH to increase feeding is markedly blunted by 
concurrent light/ChR2 stimulation of the downstream PVHMC4R neurons23. Thus, 
PVHMC4R satiety neurons are important effectors of the ARC-based melanocortin system 
and as such exert marked control over hunger/satiety.
The ability of ARCAgRP neurons to rapidly affect feeding relates to their release of the fast-
acting inhibitory transmitters GABA and NPY18, 24. Blockade of either NPY1 receptors or 
GABAA receptors markedly attenuates the rapid feeding response to optogenetic ARCAgRP 
terminal stimulation in the PVH24. Inhibition of melanocortin receptors via Ay-mediated 
ectopic expression of agouti, on the other hand, is without effect12. Similarly, in mice unable 
to release NPY or GABA from ARCAgRP neurons, chemogenetic stimulation of ARCAgRP 
neurons no longer affects feeding over a 2-hour period18. However, in these same mice, 
AgRP, working through MC4Rs, induces feeding but only after 4 hours of stimulation18. 
Thus, the ability of ARCAgRP neurons to rapidly affect feeding depends upon release of the 
fasting-acting transmitters, GABA and NPY. AgRP (and subsequent MC4R inhibition) 
Fenselau et al.
Page 2
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 effects feeding but only after a protracted period. Of interest, the reduced feeding seen 
following prolonged stimulation of ARCPOMC neurons is absent in Ay mice12, suggesting 
that it is mediated by αMSH (and not GABA or glutamate). Consistent with the role of 
GABA in mediating rapid effects of AgRP neurons, light/ChR2-evoked release of 
transmitter from ARCAgRP→PVH projections generates robust GABAergic IPSCs in PVH 
neurons23–25. In striking contrast, similar light/ChR2-evoked release studies in 
ARCPOMC→PVH projections are largely ineffective in generating either IPSCs or EPSCs in 
PVH neurons26. In total, the above findings are consistent with αMSH, as opposed to 
GABA and glutamate, being the relevant effector released by ARCPOMC neurons.
Given that rapid effects of ARCAgRP neurons are mediated by release of fast-acting 
transmitters and that AgRP (MC4R antagonist) mediates only slow effects, and that PVH-
projecting ARCPOMC neurons appear to release αMSH (MC4R agonist) but not fast-acting 
transmitters, we hypothesized that this transmitter profile of ARCPOMC neurons accounts for 
their slow and not fast suppression of feeding. Related to this, given that rapid effects of 
ARCAgRP neurons are mediated by inhibitory transmitters, we hypothesized that a rapidly 
acting ARC satiety neuron, if it existed, would be excitatory and release the fast-acting 
transmitter, glutamate, onto PVH satiety neurons. Of interest, it was recently discovered that, 
by virtue of their expression of Nav1.7 (Scn9a), PVH neurons summate excitatory inputs 
over greatly extended timescales, allowing near-perfect integration of inputs magnifying 
their effects on neuronal firing27. Remarkably, genetic deletion of Nav1.7 in PVH neurons 
decreased their firing due to diminished summation of excitatory inputs and this resulted in 
massive obesity27. Thus, glutamatergic input from some presently unknown source plays a 
key role in regulating the activity of PVH satiety neurons, and subsequently hunger/satiety.
The majority of neurons in the ARC are GABAergic; far fewer are glutamatergic28. This 
raises the possibility that vesicular glutamate transporter 2 (ARCVglut2) neurons, or one of 
the few subsets of ARCVglut2 neurons, has a specific function – for example, satiety. In the 
present study, we pursue the above-mentioned hypotheses and investigate the role of 
ARCVglut2 neurons in regulating hunger/satiety.
Results
ARCVglut2 neurons, unlike ARCPOMC neurons, rapidly promote satiety
To compare and contrast the temporal dynamics by which ARCPOMC neurons increase 
satiety, as well as another process they control - interscapular brown adipose tissue (iBAT) 
thermogenesis16, Cre-dependent AAV-DIO-hM3Dq13 was injected into the ARC of Pomc-
Cre BAC transgenic mice29 (Fig. 1a). Temperature transponders were implanted 
subcutaneously above iBAT to assess thermogenesis. Clozapine-N-oxide (CNO) effectively 
activated ARCPOMC neurons as evidenced by increased firing and induction of Fos 
(Supplementary Fig. 1a–d). As previously observed4, 12, ARCPOMC neuron stimulation 
failed to rapidly decrease dark-cycle feeding (i.e., within 4 hours; Fig. 1b), but did decrease 
feeding after 24 and 48 hours (Supplementary Fig. 1e). In striking contrast, ARCPOMC 
neurons rapidly induced iBAT thermogenesis (Fig. 1c). This result demonstrates that 
ARCPOMC neurons, as a group, are capable of generating rapid responses. To ensure that 
failure to rapidly regulate satiety was not due to inadequate Cre expression by Pomc-Cre 
Fenselau et al.
Page 3
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 BAC transgenic mice (e.g., in a specific subset of POMC neurons), we generated Pomc-
IRES-Cre knockin mice (Supplementary Fig. 1f). Consistent with Cre being driven by the 
endogenous Pomc allele, Cre activity was restricted to the ARC, and within the ARC, to 
neurons immunopositive for POMC (Supplementary Fig. 1f–h). We next bilaterally 
transduced ARCPOMC neurons in Pomc-IRES-Cre mice with AAV-DIO-hM3Dq 
(Supplementary Fig. 1i). CNO administration effectively activated hM3Dq-expressing 
ARCPOMC neurons as assessed by induction of Fos (Supplementary Fig. 1j). Stimulation of 
ARCPOMC neurons in Pomc-IRES-Cre mice, however, again failed to rapidly suppress dark-
cycle feeding (Fig. 1d). Thus, ARCPOMC neurons do not rapidly suppress feeding.
To determine if any ARC glutamatergic neurons rapidly induce satiety, we injected AAV-
DIO-hM3Dq into the ARC of [Vglut2 (Slc17a6)-IRES-Cre] mice28. Vglut2 is the major 
glutamate synaptic vesicle transporter in the hypothalamus, hence Vglut2-IRES-Cre mice 
target relevant glutamatergic ARC neurons28. Small volumes (2–5 nl) were injected to avoid 
expression in neighboring, non-ARC areas (Supplementary Fig. 2a, b). hM3Dq/CNO 
stimulation of ARCVglut2 neurons, in contrast to ARCPOMC neurons, rapidly and markedly 
suppressed feeding (Fig. 1e). To determine if ARCVglut2 neurons are necessary, as well as 
sufficient for satiety, we transduced ARCVglut2 neurons with AAV-DIO-hM4Di13 
(Supplementary Fig. 2a, c). CNO markedly inhibited hM4Di-expressing ARCVglut2 neuron 
firing as evidenced by decreased firing (Supplementary Fig. 2d). Importantly, hM4Di/CNO-
mediated inhibition of ARCVglut2 neurons rapidly increased light-cycle feeding (Fig. 1f). 
Thus, ARCVglut2 neurons rapidly and bidirectionally regulate satiety.
Fasting decreases ARCVglut2 neuron activity
Given their role in promoting satiety, ARCVglut2 neurons should be activated by feeding and 
inhibited by fasting. In agreement with this, we found that the firing rates of ARCVglut2 
neurons in brain slices from fasted mice, compared with fed mice, were considerably lower 
– indeed 13 of 17 neurons were silent (Fig. 2a). Consistent with reduced ARCVglut2 neuron 
activity, fasting significantly increased both frequency and amplitude of spontaneous 
inhibitory postsynaptic currents (sIPSCs; Fig. 2b). The fasting-induced increase in sIPSCs 
raises the possibility that ARCVglut2 neurons, like ARCPOMC neurons24, are negatively 
regulated by GABAergic ARCAgRP neurons. To probe connectivity between ARCAgRP and 
ARCVglut2 neurons, we performed ChR2-assisted circuit mapping (CRACM)30, 31. To this 
end, we stereotaxically injected AAV-DIO-ChR2-mCherry into the ARC of Agrp-IRES-
Cre::Vglut2-IRES-Cre::Npy-hrGFP mice and recorded light-evoked inhibitory poststynaptic 
currents (IPSCs) in ARCVglut2 neurons (mCherry-positive, GFP-negative; Fig. 2c). Light-
evoked IPSCs, which were completely blocked by the GABAAR antagonist bicuculline, 
were detected in 13 of 14 ARCAgRP→ARCVglut2 neurons (Fig. 2c). Thus, ARCVglut2 
neurons, which are inhibited by fasting (Fig. 2a), receive strong GABAergic inhibitory input 
from hunger-inducing ARCAgRP neurons, which are themselves activated by fasting32.
ARCVglut2→PVH projections, unlike ARCPOMC→PVH projections, are effective in 
glutamatergic transmission
To determine if ARCVglut2 neurons project to sites where ARCAgRP and ARCPOMC neurons 
project and regulate hunger, we injected the anterograde tracer, AAV-DIO-Synaptophysin-
Fenselau et al.
Page 4
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mCherry, into the ARC of Vglut2-IRES-Cre mice and performed immunohistochemistry for 
AgRP and POMC (Supplementary Fig. 3a–f). ARCVglut2, ARCAgRP and ARCPOMC neurons 
projected to many of the same sites, including the PVH. Some ARCVglut2 terminals in the 
PVH contained POMC but many did not (Supplementary Fig. 3d). Thus, ARCVglut2 
projections converge with hunger-regulating ARCAgRP and ARCPOMC projections on 
downstream targets.
To compare ARCPOMC→PVH and ARCVglut2→PVH synaptic function, we performed 
CRACM on unidentified PVH (uPVH) neurons. We stereotaxically injected AAV-DIO-
ChR2 into the ARC and recorded from unidentified PVH (uPVH) neurons in brain slices 
containing ChR2-expressing ARC terminals. When Pomc-Cre or Pomc-IRES-Cre mice were 
used, we failed to detect light-evoked excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs) in any of 71 
ARCPOMC→uPVH neurons tested (Fig. 3a, b). Given that ARCPOMC neurons express 
GABAergic markers (GAD isoforms)33, 34, we also assessed if any PVH-projecting 
ARCPOMC neurons synaptically release GABA. Remarkably, we failed to detect light-
evoked IPSCs in any of the 71 ARCPOMC→uPVH neurons tested (data not shown). In 
contrast, when Vglut2-IRES-Cre mice were used, we readily detected robust light-evoked 
EPSCs in many (12/30) ARCVglut2→uPVH neurons (Fig. 3c). The light-evoked EPSCs 
were mediated by glutamate as they were blocked by the α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-
isoxazole propionic acid receptor (AMPAR) antagonist CNQX (Fig. 3c). Thus, ARCVglut2 
neurons, unlike ARCPOMC neurons, synaptically release glutamate onto PVH neurons. This 
raises the important possibility that the PVH is an important effector site of rapidly-acting 
ARCVglut2 satiety neurons.
RNA-seq assessment of ARCVglut2 satiety neurons
ARCVglut2 neurons are a heterogeneous population that includes ARCPOMC neurons33, 34 
and fertility-regulating ARCKiss1 neurons35 though other subtypes may exist as well. To 
identify subtypes of ARCVglut2 neurons, we profiled their gene expression using single-cell 
RNA-seq. Specifically, we isolated GFP-labeled neurons from the ARC of Vglut2-IRES-
Cre::L10-GFP (loxSTOPlox-L10-GFP) mice (Fig. 4a) and sequenced their mRNA using the 
Smart-Seq2 RNA-seq method36. Since ARC neuron types are generally known for the 
neuropeptides they express, our first analysis focused on neuropeptide genes. A clustering 
analysis of 23 ARCVglut2 neurons based on their expression of 90 neuropeptide genes 
showed three subpopulations (Supplemental Fig. 4a–c and Supplemental table 1). 
Specifically, we found that 44% were POMC neurons (the majority of which co-expressed 
cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript peptide; Cartpt), 17% were Kiss1/Tac2 
neurons and 39% lacked a strong marker and so are annotated as “Other” neurons (Fig. 4b, 
c; Supplementary Fig. 4b). Consistent with the RNA-seq data, approximately 38% of 
ARCVglut2 neurons are POMC neurons as assessed by immunohistochemistry (Fig. 4d; 
105.4 ± 9.3 of 274.1 ± 10.3 GFP-positive cells were POMC-positive; mean ± SEM; counts 
from a total of 9 section, 3 sections from each of n = 3 mice; mice from multiple litters).
Given the absence of glutamatergic transmission from ARCPOMC→PVH neurons (Fig. 3a, 
b), we wondered if the Pomc-positive and Pomc-negative subtypes of ARCVglut2 neurons 
differ in their expression of genes involved in synaptic transmission. We assigned ARCVglut2 
Fenselau et al.
Page 5
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 neurons to Pomc-positive and Pomc-negative subsets based on their expression of Pomc, and 
then ranked genes according to the percentage of each ARCVglut2 subset expressing the gene 
above a calculated expression threshold37. The analysis revealed that two genes encoding 
presynaptic molecules needed for fast, Ca2+-triggered neurotransmitter release, Cplx1 
(complexin 1) and Syt1 (synaptotagmin 1)38, 39, were the 12th and 15th, respectively, most 
enriched genes in Pomc-negative ARCVglut2 neurons relative to Pomc-positive ARCVglut2 
neurons. We then compared expression levels of these two genes by the Pomc-positive and 
Pomc-negative subsets of ARCVglut2 neurons, as well as the expression levels of Vglut2 
(Slc17a6), which confers capacity to synaptically release glutamate. Of interest, Cplx1, Syt1 
and Vglut2 gene expression were reduced in Pomc-positive versus Pomc-negative 
ARCVglut2 neurons by 80%, 78% and 71%, respectively (Supplementary Fig. 4d). The much 
lower expression of Cplx1, Syt1 and Vglut2, by Pomc-positive ARCVglut2 neurons, 
compared with Pomc-negative ARCVglut2 neurons, may explain their ineffective 
glutamatergic transmission onto PVH neurons. However, our results do not exclude the 
possibility that higher translational activity or greater protein stability could compensate for 
the lower transcript levels in Pomc-positive ARCVglut2 neurons relative to Pomc-negative 
ARCVglut2 neurons.
Glutamatergic ARC satiety neurons are marked by expression of the oxytocin receptor
Since a subset of ARCVglut2 neurons is Kiss1-positive, we addressed whether ARCKiss1 
neurons regulate satiety. Kiss1-Cre mice35 were used for this purpose. First, we injected 
AAV-DIO-ChR2 into the ARC and performed CRACM. Of note, we detected light-evoked 
EPSCs in a small subset (2/14) of ARCKiss1→uPVH neurons (Supplementary Fig. 5a), 
indicating that glutamatergic ARCKiss1 afferents are a minority of the ARCVglut2 neuron 
afferents to PVH. Next, we bilaterally transduced ARCKiss1 neurons with AAV-DIO-hM3Dq 
(Supplementary Fig. 5b). CNO administration effectively activated hM3Dq-expressing 
ARCKiss1 neurons as assessed by Fos induction (Supplementary Fig. 5c). Stimulation of 
ARCKiss1 neurons, however, failed to rapidly suppress dark-cycle feeding (Supplementary 
Fig. 5d). Thus, ARCKiss1 (as well as the ARCPOMC) neurons are not the subset that rapidly 
induces satiety.
Of interest, our RNA-seq analysis revealed that some ARCVglut2 neurons express the gene 
encoding the oxytocin receptor (Oxtr; Fig. 5a). Notably, we failed to detect Oxtr expression 
in Kiss1-positive ARCVglut2 neurons (Fig. 5a) or Vglut2-negative ARC neurons we profiled 
using single-cell RNA-Seq (unpublished data). Given these findings and a previous study 
demonstrating that intra-ARC injections of oxytocin rapidly suppresses feeding40, we 
wondered whether ARCOxtr marks the subset of ARCVglut2 neurons that rapidly induce 
satiety when stimulated. To further investigate ARCOxtr neurons, we obtained Oxtr-Cre 
mice41. Consistent with GENSAT’s expression atlas, Cre activity was restricted to a small 
number of ARC neurons (Fig. 5b). Also, confirming our RNA-seq analysis, approximately 
50% of ARCOxtr neurons expressed POMC as assessed by immunohistochemistry (Fig. 5b). 
To characterize the effect of oxytocin on ARCOxtr neurons, we recorded from fluorescently 
labeled cells in brain slices from Oxtr-Cre::tdTomato mice and found that bath-applied 
oxytocin markedly increased the firing rate of synaptically isolated ARCOxtr neurons (i.e., in 
presence of CNQX, D-AP5 and bicuculline; Fig. 5c). Thus, Oxtr-Cre targets a small 
Fenselau et al.
Page 6
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 population of ARC neurons that are directly activated by oxytocin. Some of these are a 
subset of ARCPOMC neurons while others are not.
Next, we probed connectivity of ARCOxtr neurons to unidentified PVH (uPVH) neurons. 
Following AAV-DIO-ChR2 delivery into the ARC of Oxtr-Cre mice, we detected light-
evoked glutamatergic EPSCs in a subset (7/21) of ARCOxtr→uPVH neurons (Fig. 5d). 
Given that the majority of ARC neurons are GABAergic28, we also assessed if any PVH-
projecting ARCOxtr neurons synaptically release GABA. Remarkably, we failed to detect 
light-evoked IPSCs in any of the ARCOxtr→uPVH neurons tested (Supplementary Fig. 6a). 
Thus, no PVH-projecting ARCOxtr neurons are GABAergic. Given that ARCPOMC neurons 
are incapable of light-evoked synaptic release of glutamate in the PVH (Fig. 3a, b), these 
excitatory ARCOxtR afferents must come from ARCOxtr neurons that lack POMC.
To assess the effect of ARCOxtr stimulation on dark-cycle feeding, we bilaterally transduced 
ARCOxtR neurons with AAV-DIO-hM3Dq (Supplementary Fig. 6b). CNO administration 
effectively activated ARCOxtr neurons as assessed by Fos induction (Supplementary Fig. 6c). 
Of note, stimulation of ARCOxtr neurons rapidly suppressed dark-cycle feeding (Fig. 5e). In 
addition, stimulation of ARCOxtr neurons decreased refeeding in mice that were fasted for 
24 hours (Supplementary Fig. 6d). To determine if the PVH is a downstream effector site for 
ARCOxtR neurons, we optogenetically activated ChR2-expressing ARCOxtr terminals in the 
PVH (Fig. 5f). This terminal stimulation rapidly suppressed dark-cycle feeding (Fig. 5f and 
Supplementary Fig. 6e). Thus, as with hunger-promoting inhibitory ARCAgRP neurons, the 
PVH is an important effector site for satiety-promoting glutamatergic ARCOxtr neurons.
Excitatory ARCVglut2 and inhibitory ARCAgRP projections synaptically converge on 
PVHMC4R neurons
To see if glutamatergic ARC neurons, like ARCAgRP neurons23, preferentially engage 
PVHMC4R neurons, we performed CRACM experiments using Mc4r-t2a-Cre mice23. In 
these studies, AAV-DIO-GFP was injected into the PVH to visualize PVHMC4R neurons and 
Cre-independent AAV-Chr2 was injected into the ARC (see methods). Light evoked, 
AMPAR-mediated EPSCs could be detected in the majority (14/21) of 
ARCGlutamatergic→PVHMC4R neurons (Fig. 6a, d and Supplementary Fig. 7a). In contrast, 
only a small subset (1/7) of ARCGlutamatergic→PVHMC4R-negative neurons received light-
evoked EPSCs (Fig. 6d and Supplementary Fig. 7b). Thus, ARCGlutamatergic neurons 
selectively engage PVHMC4R neurons.
To test if ARCOxtR neurons also preferentially engage PVHMC4R neurons, we generated 
Oxtr-Cre::Mc4r-t2a-Cre mice. AAV-DIO-GFP was injected into the PVH to visualize 
PVHMC4R neurons and AAV-DIO-ChR2-mCherry was injected into the ARC. We detected 
light-evoked EPSCs in the vast majority (17/20) of ARCOxtr→PVHMC4R neurons (Fig. 6b, 
d) and, again only in a small subset (3/10) of PVHMC4R-negative neurons (Fig. 6d and 
Supplementary Fig. 7c). We also tested ARCPOMC→PVHMC4R connectivity in Pomc-
Cre::Mc4r-t2a-Cre mice. AAV-DIO-GFP was injected into the PVH to visualize PVHMC4R 
and AAV-DIO-ChR2-mCherry was injected into the ARC. In agreement with our earlier 
results, we failed to detect light-evoked EPSCs in all but one PVHMC4R neuron (Fig. 6c, d). 
Fenselau et al.
Page 7
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 These CRACM studies demonstrate that, like ARCAgRP neurons23, excitatory ARCOxtr 
neurons, preferentially engage PVHMC4R neurons.
Due to the high connectivity of both ARCAgRP→PVHMC4R (ref.23) and 
ARCOxtr→PVHMC4R neurons (Fig. 6b, d), we reasoned that convergence of ARCAgRP input 
and ARCOxtr input onto the same downstream PVH neurons was likely. To assess this 
possibility, we transduced both ARCAgRP and ARCOxtr neurons in Agrp-IRES-Cre::Oxtr-
Cre mice with AAV-DIO-ChR2 and recorded light-evoked IPSCs (ARCAgRP input) and 
light-evoked EPSCs (ARCOxtr input) from the same downstream uPVH neurons. This was 
accomplished by alternating between the holding potential of 0 mV (ARCAgRP input) and 
−70 mV (ARCOxtr input), respectively (Fig. 6e). Of 16 uPVH neurons tested, 2 received 
only ARCAgRP input, 2 received only ARCOxtr input, and 6 received dual input from both 
(Fig. 6e). Thus, ARCAgRP and ARCOxtr afferents often converge on single PVH neurons.
α-MSH post-synaptically increases glutamatergic transmission onto PVHMC4R neurons
Given that PVHMC4R neurons are a key downstream site for ARCVglut2 neurons, we 
wondered if the fast acting glutamatergic and slow acting α-MSH satiety pathways interact 
via α-MSH-mediated effects on plasticity of excitatory inputs onto PVHMC4R neurons. This 
possibility is of interest because i) ARCPOMC neurons heavily innervate the PVH where α-
MSH promotes satiety15, 16, and ii) α-MSH/MC4R action in other contexts can affect 
synaptic plasticity42, 43. To address this possibility, we recorded spontaneous excitatory 
postsynaptic currents (sEPSC) from PVHMC4R neurons identified in Mc4r-t2a-
Cre::tdTomato [Ai9 (Rosa26-CAG-loxSTOPlox-tdTomato)] mice and tested the affect of the 
POMC-derived MC4R agonist α-MSH on sEPSCs in PVHMC4R neurons. We found that ex 
vivo treatment with α-MSH (250 nM)42 markedly increased the number of large-amplitude 
sEPSCs and the mean amplitude of sEPSCs (Fig. 7a, b). In contrast, the frequency of 
sEPCSs in PVHMC4R neurons was not affected by α-MSH (Fig. 7a, b). Given that the 
postsynaptic neurons express the MC4R, a receptor for α-MSH, this raises the important 
possibility that α-MSH potentiates glutamatergic transmission via a postsynaptic 
mechanism. Consistent with this, we found that α-MSH increased by 2-fold the ratio of the 
amplitude of electrically-evoked AMPAR- to N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR)-
EPSCs (AMPAR/NMDAR ratio) – a measure of postsynaptic plasticity (Supplementary Fig. 
8a). In contrast, we failed to detect changes in glutamate release probability by α-MSH 
treatment, as assessed by paired-pulse ratios (PPRs) of electrically-evoked EPSCs – further 
arguing against a presynaptic mechanism (Supplementary Fig. 8b).
We next determined if absence of endogenous α-MSH, in vivo, affects glutamatergic 
synaptic activity onto PVHMC4R neurons. Towards these ends, we generated Pomclox/lox 
mice (Supplementary Fig. 8c) and crossed them to Mc4r-t2a-Cre mice to generate 
Pomclox/lox::Mc4r-t2a-Cre mice. In these mice, Pomc deletion (POMC knock out; POMC 
KO) was achieved by delivery of AAV-Cre-mCherry into the ARC (Fig. 7c). Visualization of 
PVHMC4R neurons was achieved by delivery of AAV-DIO-GFP into the PVH (Fig. 7c). 
AAV-Cre-mCherry effectively deleted POMC expression as revealed by POMC 
immunohistochemistry (Fig. 7c). We found that the number of large-amplitude sEPSCs and, 
consistent with this, the mean amplitude of sEPSCs in PVHMC4R neurons in POMC KO 
Fenselau et al.
Page 8
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mice was markedly reduced (Fig. 7c, d). In contrast, we failed to detect changes in the 
frequency of sEPSCs in PVHMC4R neurons in POMC KO mice (Fig. 7c, d). Together, these 
results demonstrate that α-MSH released by ARCPOMC neuron terminals postsynaptically 
augments glutamatergic synaptic activity in PVHMC4R neurons.
To determine if glutamateric transmission across the ARCOxtr→PVHMC4R synapse is 
specifically increased by α-MSH, we delivered AAV-DIO-ChR2-EYFP into the ARC of 
Oxtr-Cre::Mc4r-t2a-Cre::tdTomato mice and recorded light-evoked EPSCs from PVHMC4R 
neurons (tdTomato-positive; Fig. 7e). We found that α-MSH significantly increased the 
AMPAR/NMDAR ratios of light-evoked EPSCs (Fig. 7f). In contrast, the PPRs of light-
evoked EPSCs in ARCOxtr→PVHMC4R neurons were not affected by α-MSH (Fig. 7g). 
These findings demonstrate that excitatory ARCOxtr→PVHMC4R inputs are postsynaptically 
potentiated by α-MSH.
Discussion
Current models for homeostatic control of feeding lack a rapidly-acting ARC-based satiety 
mechanism that is temporally analogous to that provided by rapidly-acting, hunger-
promoting ARCAgRP neurons. In the present study we report the discovery of this missing 
component, namely glutamate-releasing neurons in the ARC that express the oxytocin 
receptor. We demonstrate that chemogenetic activation/inhibition of ARCVglut2/Oxtr neurons, 
in contrast to ARCPOMC neurons, rapidly and robustly decreases/increases hunger, 
respectively. Furthermore, we show that the PVH is an important effector site for 
ARCVglut2/Oxtr neurons. They project to and specifically induce EPSCs in PVHMC4R 
neurons, and optogenetic stimulation of their terminals in the PVH rapidly decreases 
feeding. Using a “convergent CRACM” approach to simultaneously test for dual input, we 
show that ARCVglut2/Oxtr satiety neurons and inhibitory ARCAgRP hunger neurons converge 
onto the same downstream PVHMC4R neurons (Supplemental Fig. 9). In contrast to the 
hunger-promoting system where slow- (AgRP) and rapid-acting signals (GABA and NPY) 
are conveyed by one group of neurons (ARCAgRP neurons)18, 24, the counteracting satiety-
promoting system is split into two parallel-projecting neurons, the previously known 
ARCPOMC neurons which deliver slow-acting α-MSH, and the previously unknown 
ARCVglut2/Oxtr neurons which release the rapid-acting transmitter, glutamate (Supplemental 
Fig. 9). Importantly, these two parallel-projecting satiety neurons interact as α-MSH 
released by ARCPOMC neurons postsynaptically increases glutamatergic transmission across 
the ARCVglut2/Oxtr→PVHMC4R synapse (Supplemental Fig. 9). This missing rapid-acting 
component, working in concert with ARCPOMC neurons, provides the full “yang” to the 
ARCAgRP neuron’s “yin”.
Many ARCPOMC neurons express glutamatergic (Vglut2) or GABAergic (GAD isoforms) 
markers33, 34 suggesting that they are capable of synaptically releasing glutamate and/or 
GABA. Despite this, a recent study26 established that ARCPOMC→PVH projections are 
largely ineffective in releasing glutamate or GABA in response to light/ChR2-evoked 
depolarization (light-evoked currents could be detected in only 3/66 of PVH neurons). In the 
present study, we confirm the ineffectiveness of synaptic transmission by ARCPOMC→PVH 
projections. Indeed, we observed no light/ChR2-evoked glutamatergic currents and no light/
Fenselau et al.
Page 9
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ChR2-evoked GABAergic currents in all 71 PVH neurons sampled. In striking contrast, 
using Vglut2-IRES-Cre mice to express ChR2 in all ARCVglut2 neurons, we observed light/
ChR2-evoked glutamatergic currents in a substantial subset (40%) of PVH neurons. Thus, 
ARCVglut2→PVH projections, unlike ARCPOMC→PVH projections, are effective in rapid 
glutamatergic synaptic transmission. Since the PVH contains neurons that promote 
satiety8, 19–24 and since PVH neurons efficiently integrate and summate excitatory synaptic 
inputs to control neuron excitability27, we believe our findings to be significant, and suggest 
an important, unique role for glutamatergic transmission from POMC-negative ARCVglut2 
neurons. The reason why POMC-positive ARCVglut2 PVH projections are ineffective in 
synaptic transmission is presently unknown, but could be related to their much lower 
expression of genes involved in fast, Ca2+-triggered glutamate release38, 39, Vglut2, Syt1 and 
Cplx1 (Supplementary Fig. 4).
It is noteworthy that ARCVglut2 neurons express the oxytocin receptor and that Oxtr-Cre 
mice target glutamatergic ARC neurons that exert strong, rapid control over satiety. It has 
previously been established that exogenous administration of oxytocin acutely decreases 
food intake in mice40, monkeys44 and humans45. Given that i) acute suppression of feeding 
occurs with intra-ARC injection of oxytocin40, ii) oxytocin exerts a direct stimulatory effect 
on ARCOxtr neurons and iii) ARC neurons are highly accessible to circulating factors, our 
finding provide a potential basis for the satiety-inducing effect of exogenously administered 
oxytocin. This possibility is of interest as oxytocin is being investigated as an anti-obesity 
drug46. Given their accessibility to circulating factors and that ARCVglut2/Oxtr neurons exert 
hitherto unknown strong control over satiety, they may also provide neural mechanisms for 
other previously observed effects for which the basis is either unknown or incompletely 
understood – examples include but are not limited to regulation of satiety/hunger by 
cannabinoids or orally administered GLP-1R agonists. Further studies will be needed to 
address these possibilities.
Given that both ARCVglut2 and ARCPOMC neurons project to the PVH, the site where 
hunger-suppressing MC4Rs reside8, 22, 23, we examined how these two “parallel” satiety-
promoting projections interact. While MC4R agonists are capable of directly increasing 
membrane potential and firing of PVHMC4R neurons in ex vivo brain slices, the magnitude 
of these increases in PVHMC4R neurons that project to the central lateral parabrachial 
nucleus (cLPBN), the downstream site through which PVHMC4R neurons mediate satiety, is 
generally small23. This raises the possibility that the direct effect of αMSH/MC4Rs on 
neuron excitability plays a smaller role in regulating cLPBN-projecting PVHMC4R neuron 
activity. Based on this, and importantly on the fact that opto- or chemogenetic stimulation of 
ARCPOMC neurons is unable to rapidly reduce feeding (Fig. 1 and refs. 4, 12, 17), we suggest 
that ARCPOMC neurons do not work in isolation but instead decrease hunger by increasing 
the strength of excitatory synaptic transmission onto PVHMC4R satiety neurons 
(Supplementary Fig. 9). Using an ex vivo CRACM approach, to selectively monitor the 
strength of ARCVglut2/Oxtr→PVHMC4R synapses, we show that α-MSH postsynaptically 
upregulates glutamatergic transmission across this projection. This is consistent with two 
prior studies demonstrating that MC4Rs affect excitatory synaptic transmission via 
postsynaptic mechanisms – albeit in opposite directions depending upon cellular 
context42, 43. Our observation suggests that αMSH released by ARCPOMC neurons sets the 
Fenselau et al.
Page 10
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 gain on ARCVglut2 excitatory input to downstream PVHMC4R satiety neurons – and hence 
satiety. This plasticity is likely important given that the vast majority of PVHMC4R neurons 
receive functionally consequential monosynaptic excitatory input from ARCVglut2 neurons. 
Thus, relevant “substrate” exists for αMSH/MC4R-mediated plasticity. Overall, our work 
provides a novel mechanism for α-MSH/MC4R regulation of satiety, namely plasticity of 
excitatory input onto PVHMC4R neurons.
Online methods
Animals
All animal care and experimental procedures were approved by the National Institute of 
Health and Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center Institutional Animal Care and Use 
Committee. Mice were housed at 22–24 °C with a 12 h light (06:00)/dark (18:00) cycle with 
standard mouse chow (Teklad F6 Rodent Diet 8664) and water provided ad libitum. Pomc-
Cre29, Vglut2-IRES-Cre28, Npy-hrGFP47, L10-GFP25, Agrp-IRES-Cre48, Kiss1-Cre35, 
Oxtr-Cre41, tdTomato49, Mc4r-t2a-Cre23 mice were maintained on a mixed background and 
have been described previously. All Cre driver and Cre-reporter mice were used in the 
heterozygous state. For all behavioral studies male mice between 8–12 weeks were used. For 
electrophysiological studies male and female mice between 5–12 weeks were used.
Generation of mice
Pomc-IRES-Cre mice—Mice were generated using recombineering techniques as 
previously described28. Briefly, a selection cassette containing an internal ribosomal entry 
sequence (IRES) linked to Cre-recombinase and an Frt-flanked kanamycin resistance gene 
was targeted just downstream of the stop codon of the Pomc gene, so that Cre-recombinase 
expression was driven by the endogenous gene. A targeting plasmid containing the Cre-
containing selection cassette and 4 kb genomic sequence upstream and downstream of the 
Pomc stop codon was isolated and used for embryonic stem cell targeting. Correctly targeted 
clones were identified by long range PCR and injected into blastocysts. Chimeric animals 
generated from blastocyst implantation were then bred for germline transmission of the 
altered Pomc-allele. Germline-expressing Flpe recombinase transgene mice50 were then 
used to remove the neomycin selection cassette.
Pomclox mice—A BAC clone containing the mouse Pomc genomic sequence was used to 
generate Pomclox mice using recombineering. To insert the first loxP sequence in intronic 
region between exon 2 and 3 located at ~922 bases downstream of the start codon, a PCR 
amplicon containing a loxP-kanamycin/neomycin-loxP cassette from the pSV-Cre plasmid 
was amplified with a forward primer containing 71 bp of Pomc homologous sequence 
upstream of the XhoI site and 19 bp of lox-kanamycin/neomycin-loxP and a reverse primer 
containing 71 bp of Pomc homologous sequence downstream of the XhoI site and 21 bp 
corresponding to the 3′ end of the lox-kanamycin/neomycin-loxP cassette. The PCR 
amplicon was transformed into electrocompetent EL350 bacteria that had been previously 
transfected with the Pomc BAC clone. Homologous recombination in the EL350 cells was 
induced as described previously33 to insert the lox-kanamycin/neomycin-loxP cassette into 
the Pomc BAC at the XhoI site. The kanamycin/neomycin cassette was removed, leaving 
Fenselau et al.
Page 11
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 behind one loxP sequence. The modified BAC was then transformed into EL250 bacteria, 
and the second loxP sequence was inserted at ~640 bases downstream of the stop codon by 
generating a second PCR amplicon containing a loxP-frt-kanamycin-frt cassette from the 
pL451 plasmid using a forward primer containing 70 bp of Pomc homologous sequence 
upstream of the SalI site and 19 bp of loxP-frtkanamycin-frt and a reverse primer containing 
69 bp of Pomc homologous sequence downstream of the SalI site and 19 bp corresponding 
to the 3′ end of the loxP-frt-kanamycin-frt cassette. Homologous recombination was 
induced in the EL250 cells containing the modified Pomc BAC to insert the loxP-
frtkanamycin-frt cassette into the SalI site and concomitant deletion of the restriction site. 
The targeting construct spanning ~4 kb upstream of the first loxP sequence and 4 kb 
downstream of the second loxP sequence was lifted out of the modified BAC and 
electroporated into W4 ES cells. Positively identified clones were injected into blastocysts, 
resulting in a number of 100% chimeric founders. The founders were bred to female mice 
bearing a germline-expressing Flpe recombinase transgene50 to obtain germ-line 
transmission of the Pomclox allele and to remove the frt-kanamycin-frt cassette.
Validation of Pomc-IRES-Cre mice
Pomc-IRES-Cre mice were crossed with tdTomato reporter mice. Cre activity in Pomc-
IRES-Cre::tdTomato mice was highly restricted to the ARC, and was only seen in 
ARCPOMC neurons (Supplementary Fig. 1g, h). Thus, fidelity of Cre expression in Pomc-
IRES-Cre mice is superior to Pomc-Cre BAC transgenic mice51.
Brain tissue preparation
Animals were terminally anesthetized with 7% chloral hydrate diluted in saline (350 mg/kg) 
and transcardially perfused with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) followed by 10% neutral 
buffered formalin (PFA). Brains were removed, stored in the same fixative for 2 hours, 
transferred into 20% sucrose at 4°C overnight, and cut into 30 μm sections on a freezing 
microtome (Leica) coronally into four equal series. A single series of sections per animal 
was used in the histological studies.
To determine the number of POMC-expressing ARCVglut2 neurons, three sections, which 
covered the ARC, from each animal were used. POMC immunoreactive ARCVglut2 cells 
from one hemisphere were manually counted. As previously reported, the expression level of 
Slc17a6 (Vglut2) across the ARC52 and in ARCPOMC neurons in particular53 is not affected 
by fasting. These findings suggest that the number of POMC-expressing ARCVglut2 neurons 
as reported here (Fig. 4b–d) is not affected by the fed/fasted state.
Immunohistochemistry
Brain sections were washed in PBS with Tween-20, pH 7.4 (PBST) and blocked in 3% 
normal donkey serum/PBST for 1 h at room temperature. Then, brain sections were 
incubated overnight at room temperature in blocking solution containing primary antiserum 
(rat anti-mCherry, Life Technologies M11217, 1:1,000; rabbit anti-POMC precursor, 
Phoenix Pharmaceuticals H-029-30, 1:3,000, goat anti-AgRP, Neuromics GT15023, 1:3,000, 
chicken anti-GFP, Life Technologies A10262, 1:1,000, goat anti-Fos, Calbiochem PC38, 
1:1,000). The next morning sections were extensively washed in PBS and then incubated in 
Fenselau et al.
Page 12
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Alexa-fluorophore secondary antibody (Molecular Probes, 1:1,000) for 1 h at room 
temperature. After several washes in PBS, sections were mounted on gelatin-coated slides 
and fluorescence images were captured with Olympus VS120 slide scanner microscope.
Electrophysiology
Animals were deeply anesthetized, decapitated and brains were quickly removed into ice-
cold cutting solution consisting of (in mM): 72 sucrose, 83 NaCl, 2.5 KCl, 1 NaH2PO4, 26 
NaHCO3, 22 glucose, 5 MgCl2, 1 CaCl2, oxygenated with 95% O2/5% CO2, measured 
osmolarity 310 – 320 mOsm/l. 300-μm-thick coronal sections were cut with a Leica 
VT1000S vibratome and incubated in oxygenated cutting solution at 34 °C for 45 min. 
Slices were transferred to oxygenated aCSF (126 mM NaCl, 21.4 mM NaHCO3, 2.5 mM 
KCl, 1.2 mM NaH2PO4, 1.2 mM MgCl2, 2.4 mM CaCl2, 10 mM glucose) and stored in the 
same solution at room temperature (20–24 °C) for at least 60 min prior to recording. A 
single slice was placed in the recording chamber where it was continuously superfused at a 
rate of 3–4 ml per min with oxygenated aCSF. Neurons were visualized with an upright 
microscope (SliceScope, Scientifica) equipped with infrared-differential interference 
contrast and fluorescence optics. Borosilicate glass microelectrodes (5–7 MΩ) were filled 
with internal solution.
Loose-seal, cell-attached recordings (seal resistance, 20–50 MΩ) were made in voltage 
clamp mode with aCSF as internal solution and holding current maintained at Vh = 0 mV.
To assess the effect of CNO on hM3Dq-expressing ARCPOMC neurons, 5- to 7-week-old 
Pomc-Cre mice were injected with AAV8-DIO-hM3Dq-mCherry into the ARC 2–3 weeks 
before recording. To assess the effect of CNO on hM4Di-expressing ARCVglut2 neurons, 5- 
to 7-week-old Vglut2-IRES-Cre mice were injected with AAV8-DIO-hM4Di-mCherry into 
the ARC 2–3 weeks before recording. After acquisition of stable loose-seal cell-attached 
recordings for 3–5 min, aCSF solution containing CNO (10 μM) was perfused into the brain 
slice preparation.
To assess the effect of oxytocin on ARCOxtr neurons, loose-seal cell-attached recordings 
were performed on fluorescently labeled ARC cells in Oxtr-Cre::tdTomato mice. CNQX (10 
μM), D-AP5 (50 μM) and bicuculline (10 μM) were added to the aCSF to synaptically 
isolate ARCOxtr neurons. After acquisition of stable recordings for 3–5 min, aCSF solution 
containing oxytocin (200 nM) was perfused into the brain slice preparation.
To assess effects of fasting on ARCVglut2 neurons, recordings were performed on 
fluorescently labeled ARC cells in Vglut2-IRES-Cre::L10-GFP mice. Two groups of 
animals were provided with fresh cages 24 hours prior to euthanasia. The fed group had ad 
libitum access to food, while no food was provided to the fasted group.
sIPSCs in ARCVglut2 neurons were recorded in whole-cell voltage-clamp mode, with 
membrane potential clamped at Vh = −70 mV using a CsCl-based internal solution 
consisting of (in mM): 140 CsCl, 1 BAPTA, 10 HEPES, 5 MgCl2, 2 Mg-ATP, and 0.3 Na2-
GTP (pH 7.35 adjusted with NaOH; 295 mOsm · kg−1) in presence of D-AP5 and CNQX.
Fenselau et al.
Page 13
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 For CRACM experiments, recordings were obtained using a Cs+-based low Cl− internal 
solution consisting of (in mM): 135 CsMeSO3, 10 HEPES, 1 EGTA, 4 MgCl2, 4 Na2-ATP, 
0.4 Na2-GTP, 10 Na2-phosphocreatine (pH 7.3 adjusted with CsOH; 295 mOsm · kg−1; ECl 
= −70 mV). Light-evoked EPSCs and IPSCs were recorded in whole-cell voltage-clamp 
mode, with membrane potential clamped at Vh = −70 mV and 0 mV, respectively. CNQX 
and D-AP5 or bicuculline were included to isolate glutamatergic/GABAergic currents. The 
light-evoked EPSC/IPSC detection protocol consisted of four blue light pulses (473 nm 
wavelength, 5 msec) administered 1 s apart during the first 4 s of an 8-s sweep, repeated for 
a total of 30 sweeps. Evoked EPSCs/IPSCs with short latency (≤6 ms) upon light stimulation 
were considered as light-driven. As discussed by others, such currents are most likely 
monosynaptic31. Number of animals used for CRACM experiments: 
ARCAgRP→ARCVglut2, n = 3; ARCPOMC (Pomc-Cre)→uPVH, n = 2; ARCPOMC (Pomc-
IRES-Cre)→uPVH, n = 5; ARCVglut2→uPVH, n = 2; ARCKiss1→uPVH, n = 2; 
ARCOxtr→uPVH, n = 2; ARCGlutamatergic→PVHMC4R or PVHMC4R-negative, n = 2; 
ARCPOMC→PVHMC4R, n = 2; ARCOxtr→PVHMC4R or PVHMC4R-negative, n = 2.
For CRACM experiments in which recordings were made from PVHMC4R neurons, the 
PVHMC4R neurons were labeled with AAV8-DIO-GFP injected into the PVH of Mc4r-t2a-
Cre mice (Fig. 6a, Supplementary Fig. 7a, b), Oxtr-Cre::Mc4r-t2a-Cre (Fig. 6b, 
Supplementary Fig. 8c) or Pomc-Cre::Mc4r-t2a-Cre (Fig. 6c). For these experiments 
mCherry-tagged ChR2 was used. The Vglut2-IRES-Cre allele could not be used to 
selectively express ChR2 in ARCVglut2 neurons (Fig. 6a and Supplementary Fig. 7a, b) since 
most neurons in the PVH express Vglut2 and Cre activity from the Mc4r-t2a-Cre allele is 
necessary to selectively visualize PVHMC4R neurons. Instead, ARC neurons were transduced 
with Cre-independent AAV-ChR2-mCherry and synaptic blockers were used to isolate 
glutamatergic EPSCs. Note that no Cre activity could be detected in the PVH of Oxtr-Cre 
mice. Thus, Cre activity from the Mc4r-t2a-Cre allele visualized PVHMC4R neurons in Oxtr-
Cre::Mc4r-t2a-Cre mice transduced with AAV-DIO-GFP (Fig. 6b and Supplementary Fig. 
7c) or in Oxtr-Cre::Mc4r-t2a-Cre::tdTomato (Fig. 7e–g) mice. As previously reported23, no 
Cre activity could be detected in the ARC of Mc4r-t2a-Cre::tdTomato mice.
For monitoring α-MSH-induced synaptic changes, recordings were performed on 
fluorescently labeled PVH cells in Mc4r-t2a-Cre::tdTomato mice. Brain slices were 
incubated in aCSF containing α-MSH (250 nM) for at least 2–3 h at room temperature (20–
24°C) before recordings were made. Acute application of α-MSH during recordings failed, 
on average, to affect sEPSC amplitude or frequency during 12 min of application. For all 
experiments examining the effects of α-MSH incubation, recordings from control cells kept 
in aCSF were interleaved with recordings from cells undergoing α-MSH treatment.
Spontaneous EPSCs (sEPSCs) and electrically-evoked EPSCs were recorded at Vh = −70 
mV using a Cs+-based internal solution (see above) in presence of bicuculline. A patch 
pipette filled with aCSF was placed within 20–40 μm from the cell body of the patched 
neuron, and EPSCs were evoked electrically by single monopolar square pulse stimulation. 
Test pulses of 0.1 ms duration (150 – 400 μA) were given at intervals of 15 s. Paired-pulse 
ratios (PPRs) of electrically-evoked EPSCs were obtained by applying a pair of synaptic 
stimuli 50 ms apart. PPRs of light-evoked EPSCs were recorded at Vh = −70 mV and 
Fenselau et al.
Page 14
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 obtained by applying a pair of light stimuli 100 ms apart. PPRs were determined by dividing 
the amplitude of the second EPSC by the amplitude of the first EPSC averaged over 5 min 
epochs of 20 EPSCs.
AMPAR/NMDAR ratios were recorded using an internal solution consisting of (in mM): 
135 CsMeSO3, 10 HEPES, 0.2 EGTA, 4 MgCl2, 4 Na2-ATP, 0.4 Na2-GTP, 10 TEA, 0.1 
spermine (pH 7.3 adjusted with CsOH; 295 mOsm · kg−1) in presence of bicuculline. 
Electrically-evoked AMPAR/NMDAR ratios were recorded at Vh = +40 mV and AMPAR-
mediated EPSCs were isolated by adding D-AP5 to block NMDAR–mediated synaptic 
currents. The NMDAR-mediated EPSCs were calculated by subtracting the AMPAR-
mediated EPSCs from the EPSCs measured in the absence of D-AP5. The electrically-
evoked AMPAR/NMDAR ratios were calculated by dividing the peak amplitudes. Light-
evoked AMPAR/NMDAR ratios were recorded in presence of bicuculline and were 
calculated as the ratio of the peak amplitude of the light-evoked EPSC at Vh = −70 mV 
(AMPAR-mediated EPSCs) to the magnitude of the light-evoked EPSC recorded at Vh = 
+40 mV at 25–50 ms after light stimulation (NMDAR-mediated EPSCs). Access resistance 
(<30 MΩ) was continuously monitored by a voltage step and recordings were accepted for 
analysis if changes were <15%.
All recordings were made using a Multiclamp 700B amplifier, and data were filtered at 2 
kHz and digitized at 10 kHz. To photostimulate channelrhodopsin2-positive fibers, a laser or 
LED light source (473 nm) was used. The blue light was focused onto the back aperture of 
the microscope objective, producing wide-field exposure around the recorded cell of 10–15 
mW per mm2. The light power at the specimen was measured using an optical power meter 
PM100D (Thorlabs). The light output was controlled by a programmable pulse stimulator, 
Master-8 (A.M.P.I.) and pClamp 10.2 software (Axon Instruments). All recordings were 
analyzed offline using Clampfit 10.
Single-cell RNA-seq
Single-cell RNA sequencing was performed as previously described23. Briefly, ARCVglut2 
neurons were identified based on their fluorescence (GFP-positive in Vglut2-IRES-
Cre::L10-GFP mice). Brain slices were sectioned as for electrophysiological experiments 
(see above) and the ARC was micro-dissected, and dissociated with papain. Individual GFP-
positive ARC cells were isolated from suspension by micropipette, then washed, frozen at 
−80 °C, and lysed for cDNA synthesis and PCR amplification. To control for mRNA 
contamination during cell picking, an equivalent volume of cell-picking buffer was sampled 
and processed with each batch of single-cell samples. Amplified cDNA was analyzed by 
quantitative PCR (qPCR) for expression of the housekeeping gene expression, Actb. Single-
cell samples showing low or undetectable levels of Actb expression were excluded from 
further use, as were batches of samples in which the cell-picking buffer showed evidence of 
mRNA contamination (i.e., Actb-positive). Barcoded RNA-seq libraries were constructed 
with a commercially available kit (Ovation Rapid Library Kit NuGen, California, USA) and 
sequenced in multiplex by Illumina HiSeq (50-base single-end reads). Pass-filter reads were 
aligned to the mouse genome (mm10) and quantified by TopHat/Bowtie2/Cufflinks software 
in units of RPKM (reads per kilobase exon per million fragments mapped).
Fenselau et al.
Page 15
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Cluster analysis
Each of the 23 ARCVglut2 neurons was represented by the expression of 90 neuropeptide 
genes (Supplemental table 1). Of the 92 neuropeptide genes provided (gene list from 
www.neuropeptides.nl54), we excluded Oxt and Avp from our analysis due to cross-
contamination. To cluster the neurons to groups we first reduced the representation of each 
neuron to 3 dimensions. Dimensionality reduction was performed with the tSNE algorithm, 
using free and open source software written in Matlab (distributed under the FreeBSD 
License. https://lvdmaaten.github.io/tsne/). The software first performs a dimensionality 
reduction using standard Matlab principal component analysis. The first 10 principal 
components for each neuron were then fed into the tSNE procedure (with perplexity 
parameter set to 2). Following this procedure each neuron was represented by 3 tSNE 
dimensions. Next, we performed clustering using ‘kmeans’ procedure to find the four major 
groups. All analysis was done in Matlab.
Viral injections
Stereotaxic injections were performed using previously described procedures23. Mice were 
anesthetized with xylazine (5 mg per kg) and ketamine (75 mg per kg) diluted in saline 
(0.9%) and placed into a stereotaxic apparatus (KOPF). For postoperative care, mice were 
injected intraperitoneally with meloxicam (0.5 mg per kg). A micromanipulator (Grass 
Technologies, model S48 stimulator) was used to deliver the viruses at 2–5 nl per min and 
the pipette was withdrawn 5 min after injection. AAV1-FLEX-ChR2(H134R)-mCherry, 
AAV9-FLEX-ChR2(H134R)-EYFP, AAV9-CAG-ChR2(H134R)-mCherry (University of 
Pennsylvania School of Medicine), AAV8-DIO-hM3Dq-mCherry, AAV8-DIO-hM4Di-
mCherry, AAV8-hSyn-mCherry-Cre, AAV5-hSyn-mCherry (University of North Carolina 
Vector Core), AAV8-DIO-synaptophysin-mCherry (Virovek, Inc) were injected into the 
ARC (coordinates, bregma: AP: −1.35 mm, DV: −6.00 mm, ML: ±0.2 mm). Mice with 
‘missed’ injections, incomplete ‘hits’ or expression outside the ARC were excluded from 
analysis after post hoc examination of mCherry/GFP expression. AAV8-DIO-GFP 
(University of North Carolina Vector Core) was injected into the PVH (coordinates, bregma: 
AP: −0.75 mm, DV: −4.85 mm, ML: −0.20 mm).
Optic fiber implantation
Fiber implantation was performed using previously described procedures23. Optical fibers 
(200 μm diameter core; Thor Labs) were implanted unilaterally over the PVH (coordinates, 
bregma: AP: −0.70 mm, DV: −4.35 mm, ML: 0 mm). Fibers were fixed to the skull using 
dental acrylic and mice were allowed 2 weeks for recovery before acclimatization to the 
recording chambers for 1 week.
Food intake studies
All animals were singly housed for at least 2.5 weeks following surgery and handled for 10 
consecutive days before the assay to acclimate mice to the experimental procedure. Feeding 
studies were performed in home cages with ad libitum food access to chow. The day before 
the experiment, mice were provided with fresh cages to avoid leftover of food spilling in the 
bedding. CNO was administered at 1 mg per kg of body weight. Saline was delivered at the 
Fenselau et al.
Page 16
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 same volume to maintain consistency in the studies. Mice with ‘missed’ injections, 
incomplete ‘hits’ or expression outside the ARC were excluded from analysis after post hoc 
examination of mCherry expression.
For light-cycle measurements, animals were injected with either saline or CNO at 9:00 AM 
and food intake was monitored 1, 2, 3 and 4 h after i.p. injection from 9:00 AM to 1:00 PM. 
For refeeding experiments, mice were provided with fresh cages at 9:00 AM the day prior 
the experiment and no food was provided. Following 24 hour fasting, mice were injected 
with either saline or CNO at 8:45 the following day and food intake was monitored 1, 2, 3 
and 4 h after i.p. injection from 9:00 AM to 1:00 PM. For dark-cycle measurements, animals 
were injected with either saline or CNO at 6:00 PM and food intake was monitored 1, 2, 3 
and 4 h after i.p. injection from 6:00 PM to 10:00 PM. For 24 and 48 hours food intake 
measurements, animals were injected with either saline or CNO three times per day.
For in vivo optogenetic studies, fiber optic cables were firmly attached to the implanted fiber 
optic cannulae with zirconia sleeves. Light pulse trains (5 ms pulses of 20 Hz; 3 s on, 1 s off) 
were programmed using a waveform generator that provided input to a blue light LED (473 
nm). The light power exiting the fiber optic cable was adjusted so that it had 5–8 mW 
measured using an optical power meter. After completion of photostimulation experiments, 
mice were perfused and the approximate locations of fiber tips were identified.
iBAT temperature
iBAT temperature was measured using a previously described method55. Temperature 
transponders (IPTT-300, Bio Medic Data Systems) were implanted subcutaneously above 
the iBAT pad between the scapula under anesthesia. Animals were allowed 1 week recovery 
and acclimation was performed with saline injection for 5 consecutive days. Data were 
collected using a handheld reader system (DAS-7006/7r; Bio Medic Data System) at time 
points indicated.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using Prism 6.0 (GraphPad) software. No statistical 
method was used to predetermine sample size. Sample sizes were chosen similar to those 
reported in previous publications13, 23, 25, 28. Randomization and blinding methods were not 
used. All data presented met the assumptions of the statistical test employed. Experimental 
animals were excluded if histological validation of the injection site demonstrated absence 
of reporter expression. This was established prior to data collection. N values represent final 
number of validated animals. For examining differences in the distribution of sEPSC 
amplitudes, we used MATLAB (Mathworks) to generate normalized frequency distributions 
and compared them using a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Fenselau et al.
Page 17
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the following NIH grants to B.B.L.: R01 DK075632, R01 DK096010, R01 
DK089044, P30 DK046200, P30 DK057521; to J.M.R.: F32 DK103387; to J.N.C., AHA Postdoctoral Fellowship 
14POST20100011. Y.M. was supported by a Charles A. King postdoctoral fellowship. Y.L. was supported by an 
EMBO postdoctoral fellowship. We thank members of B.B.L. lab for helpful discussions.
References
1. Langlet F. Tanycytes: a gateway to the metabolic hypothalamus. J Neuroendocrinol. 2014; 26:753–
760. [PubMed: 25131689] 
2. Rodriguez EM, Blazquez JL, Guerra M. The design of barriers in the hypothalamus allows the 
median eminence and the arcuate nucleus to enjoy private milieus: the former opens to the portal 
blood and the latter to the cerebrospinal fluid. Peptides. 2010; 31:757–776. [PubMed: 20093161] 
3. Xu AW, et al. Effects of hypothalamic neurodegeneration on energy balance. PLoS Biol. 2005; 
3:e415. [PubMed: 16296893] 
4. Zhan C, et al. Acute and Long-Term Suppression of Feeding Behavior by POMC Neurons in the 
Brainstem and Hypothalamus, Respectively. J Neurosci. 2013; 33:3624–3632. [PubMed: 23426689] 
5. Krude H, et al. Severe early-onset obesity, adrenal insufficiency and red hair pigmentation caused by 
POMC mutations in humans. Nat Genet. 1998; 19:155–157. [PubMed: 9620771] 
6. Yaswen L, Diehl N, Brennan MB, Hochgeschwender U. Obesity in the mouse model of pro-
opiomelanocortin deficiency responds to peripheral melanocortin. Nat Med. 1999; 5:1066–1070. 
[PubMed: 10470087] 
7. Huszar D, et al. Targeted disruption of the melanocortin-4 receptor results in obesity in mice. Cell. 
1997; 88:131–141. [PubMed: 9019399] 
8. Balthasar N, et al. Divergence of melanocortin pathways in the control of food intake and energy 
expenditure. Cell. 2005; 123:493–505. [PubMed: 16269339] 
9. Vaisse C, Clement K, Guy-Grand B, Froguel P. A frameshift mutation in human MC4R is associated 
with a dominant form of obesity. Nat Genet. 1998; 20:113–114. [PubMed: 9771699] 
10. Yeo GS, et al. A frameshift mutation in MC4R associated with dominantly inherited human 
obesity. Nat Genet. 1998; 20:111–112. [PubMed: 9771698] 
11. Luquet S, Perez FA, Hnasko TS, Palmiter RD. NPY/AgRP neurons are essential for feeding in 
adult mice but can be ablated in neonates. Science. 2005; 310:683–685. [PubMed: 16254186] 
12. Aponte Y, Atasoy D, Sternson SM. AGRP neurons are sufficient to orchestrate feeding behavior 
rapidly and without training. Nat Neurosci. 2011; 14:351–355. [PubMed: 21209617] 
13. Krashes MJ, et al. Rapid, reversible activation of AgRP neurons drives feeding behavior in mice. J 
Clin Invest. 2011; 121:1424–1428. [PubMed: 21364278] 
14. Myers MG Jr, Olson DP. Central nervous system control of metabolism. Nature. 2012; 491:357–
363. [PubMed: 23151578] 
15. Morton GJ, Meek TH, Schwartz MW. Neurobiology of food intake in health and disease. Nat Rev 
Neurosci. 2014; 15:367–378. [PubMed: 24840801] 
16. Gautron L, Elmquist JK, Williams KW. Neural control of energy balance: translating circuits to 
therapies. Cell. 2015; 161:133–145. [PubMed: 25815991] 
17. Koch M, et al. Hypothalamic POMC neurons promote cannabinoid-induced feeding. Nature. 2015; 
519:45–50. [PubMed: 25707796] 
18. Krashes MJ, Shah BP, Koda S, Lowell BB. Rapid versus delayed stimulation of feeding by the 
endogenously released AgRP neuron mediators GABA, NPY, and AgRP. Cell Metab. 2013; 
18:588–595. [PubMed: 24093681] 
19. Bagnol D, et al. Anatomy of an endogenous antagonist: relationship between Agouti-related 
protein and proopiomelanocortin in brain. J Neurosci. 1999; 19:RC26. [PubMed: 10479719] 
20. Cowley MA, et al. Integration of NPY, AGRP, and melanocortin signals in the hypothalamic 
paraventricular nucleus: evidence of a cellular basis for the adipostat. Neuron. 1999; 24:155–163. 
[PubMed: 10677034] 
Fenselau et al.
Page 18
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 21. Giraudo SQ, Billington CJ, Levine AS. Feeding effects of hypothalamic injection of melanocortin 
4 receptor ligands. Brain Res. 1998; 809:302–306. [PubMed: 9853124] 
22. Shah BP, et al. MC4R-expressing glutamatergic neurons in the paraventricular hypothalamus 
regulate feeding and are synaptically connected to the parabrachial nucleus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U 
S A. 2014; 111:13193–13198. [PubMed: 25157144] 
23. Garfield AS, et al. A neural basis for melanocortin-4 receptor-regulated appetite. Nat Neurosci. 
2015; 18:863–871. [PubMed: 25915476] 
24. Atasoy D, Betley JN, Su HH, Sternson SM. Deconstruction of a neural circuit for hunger. Nature. 
2012; 488:172–177. [PubMed: 22801496] 
25. Krashes MJ, et al. An excitatory paraventricular nucleus to AgRP neuron circuit that drives hunger. 
Nature. 2014; 507:238–242. [PubMed: 24487620] 
26. Atasoy D, et al. A genetically specified connectomics approach applied to long-range feeding 
regulatory circuits. Nat Neurosci. 2014; 17:1830–1839. [PubMed: 25362474] 
27. Branco T, et al. Near-Perfect Synaptic Integration by Nav1.7 in Hypothalamic Neurons Regulates 
Body Weight. Cell. 2016; 165:1749–1761. [PubMed: 27315482] 
28. Vong L, et al. Leptin action on GABAergic neurons prevents obesity and reduces inhibitory tone to 
POMC neurons. Neuron. 2011; 71:142–154. [PubMed: 21745644] 
29. Balthasar N, et al. Leptin receptor signaling in POMC neurons is required for normal body weight 
homeostasis. Neuron. 2004; 42:983–991. [PubMed: 15207242] 
30. Atasoy D, Aponte Y, Su HH, Sternson SM. A FLEX switch targets Channelrhodopsin-2 to multiple 
cell types for imaging and long-range circuit mapping. J Neurosci. 2008; 28:7025–7030. [PubMed: 
18614669] 
31. Petreanu L, Huber D, Sobczyk A, Svoboda K. Channelrhodopsin-2-assisted circuit mapping of 
long-range callosal projections. Nat Neurosci. 2007; 10:663–668. [PubMed: 17435752] 
32. Hahn TM, Breininger JF, Baskin DG, Schwartz MW. Coexpression of Agrp and NPY in fasting-
activated hypothalamic neurons. Nat Neurosci. 1998; 1:271–272. [PubMed: 10195157] 
33. Jarvie BC, Hentges ST. Expression of GABAergic and glutamatergic phenotypic markers in 
hypothalamic proopiomelanocortin neurons. J Comp Neurol. 2012; 520:3863–3876. [PubMed: 
22522889] 
34. Wittmann G, Hrabovszky E, Lechan RM. Distinct glutamatergic and GABAergic subsets of 
hypothalamic pro-opiomelanocortin neurons revealed by in situ hybridization in male rats and 
mice. J Comp Neurol. 2013; 521:3287–3302. [PubMed: 23640796] 
35. Cravo RM, et al. Characterization of Kiss1 neurons using transgenic mouse models. Neuroscience. 
2011; 173:37–56. [PubMed: 21093546] 
36. Picelli S, et al. Smart-seq2 for sensitive full-length transcriptome profiling in single cells. Nat 
Methods. 2013; 10:1096–1098. [PubMed: 24056875] 
37. Usoskin D, et al. Unbiased classification of sensory neuron types by large-scale single-cell RNA 
sequencing. Nat Neurosci. 2015; 18:145–153. [PubMed: 25420068] 
38. Sudhof TC. Neurotransmitter release: the last millisecond in the life of a synaptic vesicle. Neuron. 
2013; 80:675–690. [PubMed: 24183019] 
39. Blakely RD, Edwards RH. Vesicular and plasma membrane transporters for neurotransmitters. 
Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2012; 4
40. Maejima Y, et al. Oxytocinergic circuit from paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei to arcuate 
POMC neurons in hypothalamus. FEBS Lett. 2014; 588:4404–4412. [PubMed: 25448678] 
41. Nakajima M, Gorlich A, Heintz N. Oxytocin modulates female sociosexual behavior through a 
specific class of prefrontal cortical interneurons. Cell. 2014; 159:295–305. [PubMed: 25303526] 
42. Lim BK, Huang KW, Grueter BA, Rothwell PE, Malenka RC. Anhedonia requires MC4R-
mediated synaptic adaptations in nucleus accumbens. Nature. 2012; 487:183–189. [PubMed: 
22785313] 
43. Shen Y, Fu WY, Cheng EY, Fu AK, Ip NY. Melanocortin-4 receptor regulates hippocampal 
synaptic plasticity through a protein kinase A-dependent mechanism. J Neurosci. 2013; 33:464–
472. [PubMed: 23303927] 
Fenselau et al.
Page 19
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 44. Blevins JE, et al. Chronic oxytocin administration inhibits food intake, increases energy 
expenditure, and produces weight loss in fructose-fed obese rhesus monkeys. Am J Physiol Regul 
Integr Comp Physiol. 2015; 308:R431–438. [PubMed: 25540103] 
45. Lawson EA, et al. Oxytocin reduces caloric intake in men. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2015; 23:950–
956. [PubMed: 25865294] 
46. Blevins JE, Baskin DG. Translational and therapeutic potential of oxytocin as an anti-obesity 
strategy: Insights from rodents, nonhuman primates and humans. Physiol Behav. 2015; 152:438–
449. [PubMed: 26013577] 
47. van den Pol AN, et al. Neuromedin B and gastrin-releasing peptide excite arcuate nucleus 
neuropeptide Y neurons in a novel transgenic mouse expressing strong Renilla green fluorescent 
protein in NPY neurons. J Neurosci. 2009; 29:4622–4639. [PubMed: 19357287] 
48. Tong Q, Ye CP, Jones JE, Elmquist JK, Lowell BB. Synaptic release of GABA by AgRP neurons is 
required for normal regulation of energy balance. Nat Neurosci. 2008; 11:998–1000. [PubMed: 
19160495] 
49. Madisen L, et al. A robust and high-throughput Cre reporting and characterization system for the 
whole mouse brain. Nat Neurosci. 2010; 13:133–140. [PubMed: 20023653] 
50. Farley FW, Soriano P, Steffen LS, Dymecki SM. Widespread recombinase expression using FLPeR 
(flipper) mice. Genesis. 2000; 28:106–110. [PubMed: 11105051] 
51. Padilla SL, Reef D, Zeltser LM. Defining POMC neurons using transgenic reagents: impact of 
transient Pomc expression in diverse immature neuronal populations. Endocrinology. 2012; 
153:1219–1231. [PubMed: 22166984] 
52. Jovanovic Z, Tung YC, Lam BY, O’Rahilly S, Yeo GS. Identification of the global transcriptomic 
response of the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus to fasting and leptin. J Neuroendocrinol. 2010; 
22:915–925. [PubMed: 20553370] 
53. Henry FE, Sugino K, Tozer A, Branco T, Sternson SM. Cell type-specific transcriptomics of 
hypothalamic energy-sensing neuron responses to weight-loss. Elife. 2015; 4
54. Burbach JP. Neuropeptides from concept to online database http://www.neuropeptides.nl. Eur J 
Pharmacol. 2010; 626:27–48. [PubMed: 19837055] 
55. Kong D, et al. GABAergic RIP-Cre neurons in the arcuate nucleus selectively regulate energy 
expenditure. Cell. 2012; 151:645–657. [PubMed: 23101631] 
Fenselau et al.
Page 20
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Regulation of feeding by ARCPOMC versus ARCVglut2 neurons
a, Experimental schematic. b, d, e, Effect of CNO/hM3Dq stimulation of ARCPOMC 
neurons (b, d) or ARCVglut2 neurons (e) on dark-cycle feeding. c, Effect of CNO/hM3Dq 
stimulation of ARCPOMC neurons on iBAT temperature. f, Effect of CNO/hM4Di inhibition 
of ARCVglut2 neurons on light-cycle feeding. b–f, Data are presented as mean ± SEM. Mice 
from multiple litters. Repeated measures two-way ANOVA followed by Sidak’s multiple 
comparisons test (b, n = 5 animals; Treatment F(1,4) = 0.3265, P = 0.5983; time F(4,16) = 
89.82, P < 0.0001; interaction F(4,16) = 3.037, P = 0.0485. 1h, P = 0.4831; 2h, P = 0.9980; 
3h, P = 0.4831; 4h, P = 0.0610; c, n = 4 animals. Treatment F(1,3) = 8.931, P = 0.0582; time 
F(5,15) = 8.008, P = 0.0008; interaction F(5, 15) = 6.494, P = 0.0021. 30 min, ****P < 
0.0001; 1h, ****P < 0.0001; 2h, **P = 0.0011; 3h, *P = 0.0102; 4h, ***P = 0.0008; d, n = 4 
animals; Treatment F(1,3) = 0.7301, P = 0.4557; time F(4,12) = 75.69, P < 0.0001; 
interaction F(4, 12) = 1.475, P = 0.2703; e, n = 4 animals. Treatment F(1,3) = 63.28, P = 
0.0041; time F(4,12) = 40.61, P < 0.0001; interaction F(4, 12) = 10.40, P = 0.0007. 1h, **P 
= 0.0040; 2h, ****P < 0.0001; 3h, ****P < 0.0001; 4h, ****P < 0.0001; f, n = 6 animals. 
Treatment F(1,5) = 16.55, P = 0.0096; time F(4,20) = 24.66, P < 0.0001; interaction F(4, 20) 
= 7.808, P = 0.0006. 1h, ***P = 0.0002; 2h, **P = 0.0016; 3h, ****P < 0.0001; 4h, ****P < 
0.0001).
Fenselau et al.
Page 21
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Effects of fasting on ARCVglut2 neurons and their inhibition by ARCAgRP neuron 
afferents
a, Top, schematic shows experimental approach used in (a) and (b). a, Representative traces 
(middle) and summary (bottom) of fasting effects on the firing rate of ARCVglut2 neurons as 
assessed using cell-attached recordings. Number of animals: Fed/fasted, N = 3/3. Sample 
size (cells): Fed/fasted, n = 19/17; Fed (M = 0.7437, s.d. = 0.6771) versus fasted (M = 
0.2208, s.d. = 0.4725): Two-tailed Mann-Whitney test: U = 61, ***P = 0.0007. b, 
Representative traces (top) and summary (bottom) of fasting effects on sIPSCs in ARCVglut2 
neurons. Number of animals, fed/fasted, N = 3/3; sample size (cells), fed/fasted, n = 12/13. 
Unpaired two-tailed t-test: sIPSC amplitude: Fed (M = 37.33, s.d. = 12.95) versus fasted (M 
= 51.34, s.d. = 15.5): t(23) = 2.442, *P = 0.0227; sIPSC frequency: Fed (M = 0.9563, s.d. = 
0.6858) versus fasted (M = 2.423, s.d. = 1.667): t(23) = 2.830, **P = 0.0095. Data are 
presented as mean ± SEM. c, ARCAgRP→ARCVglut2 CRACM. Top, schematic of the 
connection tested. ARCAgRP and ARCVglut2 neurons were transduced with a Cre-dependent 
ChR2 tagged with mCherry (AAV-DIO-ChR2-mCherry). ChR2-expressing ARCAgRP 
neurons were identified by co-expression of mCherry and hrGFP (note that NPY expression 
in the ARC marks all AgRP neurons47). ARCVglut2 neurons were identified by expression of 
mCherry and absence of hrGFP. Bottom, representative traces of light-evoked IPSCs before 
and after bath application of bicuculline (GABAA receptor antagonist). Vh = 0 mV was used 
to prevent movement of Na+ and Ca2+ through ChR2 which was expressed in the patched 
ARCVglut2 neurons, in addition to the afferent ARCAgRP neurons.
Fenselau et al.
Page 22
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. ARCVglut2→PVH projections, unlike ARCPOMC→PVH projections, are effective in 
glutamatergic transmission
a–c, ARC→PVH CRACM. Top, schematics showing connection being tested. ARCPOMC or 
ARCVglut2 neurons were transduced with Cre-dependent ChR2. Below, representative traces 
showing assessment of light-evoked EPSCs. c, Bottom, representative traces of light-evoked 
EPSCs before and after bath application of CNQX (AMPAR antagonist)
Fenselau et al.
Page 23
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. RNA-seq analysis of ARCVglut2 neurons
a, Schematic and representative ARC dissection images for single-cell RNA-seq of GFP-
positive ARCVglut2 neurons. Scale bar represents 200 μm and applies to all images. b, 
Detection of housekeeping (Gapdh), glutamatergic (Slc17a6; Vglut2), GABAergic (Slc32a1; 
Vgat), and selected neuropeptide (Pomc, Cartpt, Kiss1, and Tac2) transcripts in ARCVglut2 
neurons. Expression values are in units of RPKM (reads per kilobase gene model per million 
mapped reads). c, Percentages of ARCVglut2 neurons that are Pomc/Cartpt, Pomc only, 
Kiss1/Tac2 or “Other” neurons. d, Co-localization of POMC and GFP immunoreactivity in 
the ARC from a Vglut2-IRES-Cre::L10-GFP mouse. Scale bar represents 100 μm and 
applies to all images.
Fenselau et al.
Page 24
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Oxtr expression marks ARCGlutamatergic neurons that rapidly promote satiety
a, Oxtr expression in ARCVglut2 neurons as determined by RNA-seq. b, Co-localization of 
POMC protein in tdTomato-positive ARCOxtr neurons. Approximately 50% of ARCOxtr 
neurons expressed POMC. c, Representative trace (top) and summary (bottom) of oxytocin’s 
effect on ARCOxtr neuron firing rate. Scale bars, 50 pA, 30 sec. 6 slices from 3 mice; mice 
from multiple litters; cells, n = 6. Baseline (M = 1.261, s.d. = 0.8192) versus Oxytocin (M = 
2.991, s.d. = 1.495): Paired two-tailed t-test, t(5) = 4.253, **P = 0.0081. d, CRACM of 
ARCOxtr→PVH connectivity. Below, representative traces showing light-evoked EPSCs. e, 
Effect of CNO/hM3Dq stimulation of ARCOxtr neurons on dark-cycle feeding (n = 6 
animals). f, Left, experimental schematic. Right, effect of ARCOxtr terminal 
photostimulation in the PVH on dark-cycle feeding (n = 5 animals). e, f, Data are presented 
as mean ± SEM. Repeated measures two-way ANOVA followed by Sidak’s multiple 
comparisons test. e, Mice from multiple litters, n = 6 animals. Treatment F(1,5) = 26.25, P = 
0.0037; time F(4,20) = 63.88, P < 0.0001; interaction F(4, 20) = 15.31, P < 0.0001.1h, P = 
0.1760; 2h, **P = 0.0025; 3h, ****P < 0.0001; 4h, ****P < 0.0001. f, Mice from multiple 
litters, n = 4 animals. Repeated measures two-way ANOVA: Treatment F(1,3) = 36.87, P = 
0.0090; time F(4,12) = 24.90, P < 0.0001; interaction F(4, 12) = 14.04, P = 0.0002. Sidaks 
multiple comparisons test: 1h, P = 0.1276; 2h, *P = 0.0195; 3h, ***P = 0.0001; 4h, ****P < 
0.0001.
Fenselau et al.
Page 25
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. ARCGlutamatergic and ARCOxtr neurons preferentially engage PVHMC4R neurons
a–c, CRACM of ARC→PVH connectivity. Top, schematics show connections being tested. 
Below, representative traces showing assessment of light-evoked EPSCs. d, Percentage of 
PVHMC4R+ (MC4R-positive) or PVHMC4R− (MC4R-negative) neurons with light-evoked 
EPSCs. e, Convergent CRACM of ARCAgRP and ARCOxtr afferents onto PVH neurons. 
Schematic shown on the top right. Left, representative traces of light-evoked ARCAgRP-
mediated IPSCs (top)/ARCOxtr-mediated EPSCs (bottom) recorded from the same uPVH 
neuron. Right, Venn diagram summary for all 10 neurons receiving input.
Fenselau et al.
Page 26
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. α-MSH post-synaptically increases excitatory input onto PVHMC4R neurons
a, Top, experimental schematic. a, b, Representative traces (a, bottom) and summary (b) of 
α-MSH effects on sEPSCs. 8 slices from 4 mice; mice from multiple litters; sample size 
(cells): control/α-MSH, n = 12/13. sEPSC amplitude: Control (M = 17.6, s.d. = 3.923) 
versus α-MSH (M = 25.88, s.d. = 7.668): Unpaired two-tailed t-test, t(23) = 3.353, **P = 
0.0028. sEPSC frequency: Control (M = 1.29, s.d. = 1.011) versus α-MSH (M = 1.379, s.d. 
= 0.8736): Two-tailed Mann-Whitney test: U = 65, P = 0.4951 b, Bottom, sEPSC amplitude 
distribution showing that α-MSH significantly increased the frequency of large-amplitude 
sEPSCs (Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, P < 0.0001). c, Left, experimental schematic. Right, 
POMC and mCherry immunolabeling in control and Pomc knockout (Pomc KO) mice. c, d, 
Representative traces (c, Bottom) and summary (d) of Pomc KO effects on sEPSCs. Number 
of slices: Control/Pomc KO, N = 4/4. Number of animals: Control/Pomc KO, N = 2/2. 
Sample size (cells): Control/Pomc KO, n = 8/5; sEPSC amplitude: Control (M = 18.96, s.d. 
= 5.721) versus Pomc KO (M = 12.88, s.d. = 1.293): Unpaired two-tailed t-test, t(11)= 
2.304, *P = 0.0417. sEPSC frequency: Control (M = 1.703, s.d. = 0.853) versus Pomc KO 
(M = 1.553, s.d. 0.3897): Unpaired two-tailed t-test: t(11) = 0.3653, P = 0.7218. Bottom, 
sEPSC distribution showing decreased frequency of large-amplitude sEPSCs in Pomc KO 
mice (Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, P < 0.0001). e, Experimental schematic. f, g, 
Representative traces (left) and summary (right) of α-MSH effects on light-evoked AMPAR/
NMDAR ratios (f, slices from 3 mice; mice from multiple litters. Sample size (cells): 
Control/α-MSH, n = 8/11; Control (M = 3.365, s.d. = 1.622) versus α-MSH (M = 5.642, s.d. 
Fenselau et al.
Page 27
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 = 1.980): Unpaired two-tailed t-test: t(17) = 2.661, *P = 0.0165) and on light-evoked Paired-
Pulse ratios (PPRs) (g, Slices from 3 mice; mice from multiple litters. Sample size (cells): 
control/α-MSH, n = 4/6. Control (M = 0.72, s.d. = 0.1186) versus α-MSH (M = 0.6533, s.d. 
= 0.1093): Unpaired two-tailed t-test: t(8) = 0.9150, P = 0.387).
Fenselau et al.
Page 28
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
