 DENGUE VACCINE
Benefits and risks of the
Sanofi-Pasteur dengue vaccine:
Modeling optimal deployment
Neil M. Ferguson,1*† Isabel Rodríguez-Barraquer,2* Ilaria Dorigatti,1
Luis Mier-y-Teran-Romero,2 Daniel J. Laydon, Derek A. T. Cummings2,3
The first approved dengue vaccine has now been licensed in six countries. We propose that
this live attenuated vaccine acts like a silent natural infection in priming or boosting host
immunity. A transmission dynamic model incorporating this hypothesis fits recent clinical trial
data well and predicts that vaccine effectiveness depends strongly on the age group
vaccinated and local transmission intensity. Vaccination in low-transmission settings may
increase the incidence of more severe “secondary-like” infection and, thus, the numbers
hospitalized for dengue. In moderate transmission settings, we predict positive impacts
overall but increased risks of hospitalization with dengue disease for individuals who are
vaccinated when seronegative. However, in high-transmission settings, vaccination benefits
both the whole population and seronegative recipients. Our analysis can help
inform policy-makers evaluating this and other candidate dengue vaccines.
T
he first dengue vaccine, the product of a 20-
year development process by Sanofi Pasteur
Ltd., has now been approved for use in six
countries. Its development was considera-
bly more challenging than for other flavi-
virus infections because of the immunological
interactionsbetweenthefourdenguevirus(DENV)
serotypes and the risk of immune-mediated en-
hancement of disease (1–3). Individuals experi-
encing their second natural DENV infection have
a higher risk, by more than sixfold, of severe dis-
ease compared with those experiencing primary
infection (4, 5), which is hypothesized to be due
to heterotypic antibody-dependent enhancement
(4). If future trials are to avoid similar conse-
quences, the ideal DENV vaccine should gener-
ate a balanced protective response against each
of the four serotypes (1).
The Sanofi-Pasteur vaccine, Dengvaxia, a re-
combinant chimeric live attenuated DENV vaccine
based on a yellow fever 17D vaccine backbone,
was evaluated in two large multicenter phase 3
trials. One trial was conducted in Southeast Asia
(6), among ~10,000 children aged 2 to 14 years,
and the other in Latin America (7), among ~21,000
children aged 9 to 16 years. Both trials reported
efficacy of ~60% against virologically confirmed
symptomatic dengue disease (the primary out-
come), as well as higher efficacy against severe
dengue and variation in efficacy by serotype
(6–8). The trials also revealed high efficacy in re-
cipients who were seropositive to DENV at the
time of vaccination, but much lower (and statis-
tically insignificant) efficacy in those who were
seronegative at the time of vaccination. Both trials
also found lower vaccine efficacies in younger age
groups—a pattern consistent with reduced effi-
cacy in individuals who have not lived long enough
to experience a natural infection.
Reduced efficacy in seronegative recipients ini-
tially indicates that it would be beneficial, but not
essential, to optimize the target age group when
developing vaccination programs. However, in
July 2015,long-term follow-up results for the third
year of the trial showed that vaccinees in the
youngest age group (2- to 5-year-olds) of the Asian
trial had a substantially and significantly higher
risk of hospitalization for virologically confirmed
dengue disease than controls had (9). In other age
groups (in both trials), the vaccine was still pro-
tective against hospitalization, albeit efficacy was
lower than that seen in the active phase of the
trial [see supplementary materials (10)]. Im-
munogenicity data (11–18) have shown that sero-
positivevaccinerecipientsattainhighandsustained
antibody levels after the first dose of vaccine,
whereas peak antibody levels in seronegative re-
cipients are on average a factor of 10 lower and
show rapid decay, apparent even between vaccine
doses (18). Serological data were only collected
from a subset of participants in each phase 3
trial, so it is not possible to determine whether
the risk excess seen in the 2- to 5-year-old age
group is driven by the effect of vaccine in the large
proportion of seronegative recipients in this age
group, but at present, this appears to be the most
plausible explanation (19).
These trial results pose challenges in consid-
ering how best to use the vaccine. The hetero-
geneities in the efficacy profile—combined with
the uncertainties regarding the vaccine’s mech-
anism of action (20) and the underlying com-
plexity of DENV epidemiology and transmission
dynamics—make it far from simple to extrapolate
from the trial results to predict the potential im-
pact of wide-scale use of this vaccine.
We therefore developed mathematical models
of DENV transmission (10) to explore hypotheses
about vaccine action and to examine the poten-
tial consequences for the impact of routine use of
this vaccine. Given the trial results (see table S1),
any model needs to incorporate waning of effi-
cacy over time. Hence, we fitted a “simple” model
to the publicly available trial data (6–8), where
efficacy was allowed to decay from an initial high
value to some lower long-term value, with these
efficacy values assumed to be different for sero-
positive and seronegative vaccine recipients. The
resulting parameter estimates and poor overall
fit (table S5 and fig. S5) led us to propose a more
biologically motivated model, in which the im-
munological effect of vaccination is comparable
to a silent natural infection (fig. S1). Seronegative
recipients gain transient protective cross-reactive
immunity akin to that observed for natural infec-
tion (21–23). After this protection decays, lower
concentrations of heterotypic antibodies increase
the risk of severe disease upon a breakthrough
primary infection to the same level seen for sec-
ondary infections in nonvaccinees (4, 5). Con-
versely, vaccination of recipients who have already
had one DENV infection results in a boosting of
immunity to levels comparable with someone
who has had two natural infections, and their
next infection will not have the higher severity
associated with natural secondary infections, but
rather, the much lower risk of severe disease as-
sociated with tertiary and quaternary (post-
secondary) infections (24).
This model fitted well the patterns seen in both
the active and long-term follow-up phases of the
phase 3 clinical trial, including the variation in
vaccine efficacy by age, serostatus at the time of
vaccination, and time since vaccination (Fig. 1).
The poorest aspect of model fit is to the sevenfold
greater incidence of hospitalization with dengue
seen in 2- to 5-year-old vaccine recipients com-
pared with controls in the first year of the long-
term follow-up in the Asian trial. However, model
predictions lie within the confidence bounds of
the data, and the model successfully reproduces
a relative risk >1 for vaccine recipients compared
with controls in that age group. Indeed, had the
long-term follow-up data on the effects of vacci-
nation in the 2- to 5-year-old age group not been
included, our model would still have predicted a
relative risk >1 in that age group, based on trends
seen in the other age groups and the results of
the active phase (table S4).
Consistent with prior knowledge (5), our pa-
rameter estimates indicated that secondary infec-
tions are abouttwiceas likely to cause symptomatic
infection as either primary or postsecondary
infections (table S3). In addition, we estimated
that the vaccine initially induces near-perfect
heterologous protection in seronegative recip-
ients but that this decays rapidly, with a mean
duration of 7 months [95% credible interval (CI)
of 4 to 11 months]. Our analysis did not resolve
the extent to which such transient heterologous
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
2 SEPTEMBER 2016 • VOL 353 ISSUE 6303
1033
1MRC Centre for Outbreak Analysis and Modelling, School of
Public Health, Imperial College London, Norfolk Place,
London W2 1PG, UK. 2Department of Epidemiology, Johns
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 615 North Wolfe
Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. 3Department of Biology
and Emerging Pathogens Institute, University of Florida, Post
Office Box 100009, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.
*These authors contributed equally to this work. †Corresponding
author. Email: neil.ferguson@imperial.ac.uk
RESEARCH
|
REPORTS
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 protection is induced in seropositive recipi-
ents; the modal posterior estimate of the efficacy
of such protection is 0 but the 95% CI spans 0
to 100%.
To predict the implications of our model of
vaccine responses on the effectiveness of immu-
nization policies, we simulated the effect of routine
vaccination at 80% coverage, and explored the
effect of varying the age at vaccination between 2
and 18 years of age. We deliberately examined
ages below the 9-year minimum age approved
by regulators to give greater insight into the in-
teraction between age, transmission intensity,
seroprevalence, and the impact of vaccination
on dengue disease. Owing to the dependence of
efficacy on serostatus at the time of vaccination,
the impact of the vaccine critically depends on
the proportion of the target age group who have
experienced 0, 1, or more natural DENV infec-
tions before vaccination. Therefore, we quantify
transmission intensity as the long-term average
of the proportion of 9-year-olds who are sero-
positive. This metric maps monotonically onto the
more commonly used metric of the basic repro-
duction number, R0 (fig. S3), but has the advan-
tages of being directly related to the key driver of
vaccine efficacy (i.e., serostatus), which is readily
measurable and interpretable and not depen-
dent on specific model assumptions (25).
The predicted mean population impact of rou-
tine vaccination on symptomatic dengue disease
and case incidence of hospitalization with den-
gue over 10- and 30-year periods is shown in Fig. 2.
In high-transmission settings, vaccination is asso-
ciated with modest (20 to 30%) reductions in
both symptomatic disease and hospitalization.
For a specific level of transmission, there is an
optimal age of vaccination that decreases as trans-
mission intensity increases. Although short-term
(10-year) impacts are generally positive, over
longer periods of time (30 years), vaccination
may have positive or negative impacts on the
incidence of symptomatic dengue disease and
hospitalized dengue. This is particularly true in
low-transmission settings. Vaccination is more
likely to have a negative outcome for hospitalized
dengue than symptomatic dengue as secondary
or secondary-like infections (i.e., primary infec-
tions in vaccine recipients) have an approximately
eightfold higher risk of hospitalization than pri-
mary infections but only a twofold higher risk
of uncomplicated symptomatic disease (10, 26).
The population-level impacts of vaccination hide
enormous heterogeneity in benefits and risks at
the level of the individual recipient (Fig. 3, A and
B): Seropositive recipients always gain a sub-
stantial benefit from vaccination (>90% reduc-
tion in the risk of being hospitalized with dengue),
whereas seronegative recipients experience an
increased risk of being hospitalized with dengue.
This is true both in the short-term (see supplemen-
tary materials) and in the long-term and raises fun-
damentalissuesaboutindividual versus population
benefits of vaccination. The increase in risk is
greatest for low-transmission settings, where a
substantialfractionofseronegativerecipientswould
not normally experience a natural secondary in-
fection. Conversely, in the highest-transmission
settings, the main effect of vaccination on sero-
negative individuals is to bring forward in time
the more severe secondary-like infection that they
would have eventually naturally experienced. This,
combined with a small indirect effect of vaccina-
tion on reducing transmission, leads to a small
overall positive benefit to all recipients in high-
transmission settings. Restricting the minimum
licensed age of use of the vaccine to 9 years mit-
igates, but does not remove, the risk of negative
population-level impacts in low-transmission set-
tings where the majority of 9-year-olds are still
seronegative. Conversely, in high-transmission set-
tings, the optimal age to target for vaccination
can be below 9 years.
The vaccination policies that risk producing
adverse outcomes can therefore be defined. The
minimum average prevaccination seroprevalence
required to avoid negative impacts is shown in
Figure 3C from both the individual and popula-
tion perspectives. An overall negative impact on
the entire population can be avoided by choos-
ing a target age for vaccination in which average
seroprevalence exceeds ~35%. In contrast, it is
harder to avoid an increased risk of hospitaliza-
tion for individuals who are seronegative when
vaccinated. Doing so requires that the indirect
effects of vaccination in reducing overall dengue
transmission exceed the increased risk of disease
which vaccination causes in seronegative indi-
viduals via immune priming. Over a period of 30
years, this is only possible in high–transmission
intensity settings when R0 > 3 or seropreva-
lence in 9-year-olds exceeds ~70%. Only for the
youngest age of vaccination considered (2 years,
below the licensed minimum age) do population
and individual thresholds converge. In part based
on the modeling presented here, the World
Health Organization’s Strategic Group of Experts
on Immunization has recently recommended
population serological surveys be undertaken
in populations where the vaccine is being con-
sidered for use and that vaccination is only recom-
mended where seroprevalence in the targeted age
group exceeds 50% (and preferably 70%) (27).
Serological testing of individuals offers an alter-
native solution to mitigate the potential risks and
to maximize the benefits of dengue vaccination;
rapid diagnostic tests could be used to screen po-
tential vaccine recipients, with only seropositive
individuals being vaccinated. Indeed, data from
immunogenicity studies suggest that a single-dose
vaccination schedule might be enough to achieve
protective immunity in seropositive individuals.
Such a policy could result in up to a 30% reduction
in the incidence of hospitalization for dengue
and a much-reduced risk of negative outcomes
(Fig. 4A) after vaccinating only a fraction (those
testing seropositive) of the target age group (Fig.
4B). Although such a policy would be logistically
challenging in the context of mass vaccination
campaigns, it should not be ruled out—if the cost
of testing can be reduced to a level comparable
with the cost of buying and delivering a single
vaccine dose, such a strategy is likely to have
substantially greater cost-effectiveness than the
current three-dose strategy without testing. Using
serological testing to inform vaccination decisions
is not an entirely novel concept, as it has been
recommended for pregnant women in relation to
rubella and hepatitis B vaccination (28, 29).
Because vaccination only transiently reduces the
risk of infection and the main effect of vaccination
1034
2 SEPTEMBER 2016 • VOL 353 ISSUE 6303
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
Fig. 1. Model fit to publicly available data from the Asian phase 3 clinical trial. See (6). Modal (best-
fit) estimate and 95% credible intervals for four conditions. (A) Proportion of participants of the immu-
nological subset of the trial who were seronegative at the time of receiving their first dose, by age. (B) Attack
rate of virologically confirmed symptomatic dengue in immunological subset in first 2 years after dose 1 by trial
arm and baseline serostatus. (C) Attack rate of virologically confirmed symptomatic dengue in all trial
participants in first 2 years after dose 1 by trial arm and age group. (D) Attack rate of virologically confirmed
hospitalization with dengue disease in all trial participants in third year after dose 1 (first year of long-term
follow-up) by trial arm and age group. Fit to Latin American trial shown in the supplementary materials (10).
RESEARCH
|
REPORTS
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 is to modify the risk of disease, our findings
predict that the indirect effect of vaccination on
DENV transmission will be limited. This explains
why we found that the predicted impacts of rou-
tine vaccination (whether positive or negative)
scale almost linearly with vaccine coverage. Our
default assumption was that symptomatic infec-
tions are twice as infectious as asymptomatic
infections, which leads to vaccination slightly
reducing transmission in high–transmission in-
tensity settingsbutslightlyincreasingtransmission
in low-transmission settings. Making the alter-
native assumption that all infections are equally
infectious reduces the chance and magnitude of
negative impacts of vaccine for low-transmission
intensities but also reduces the positive impacts
of vaccination when transmission intensity is high
(figs. S9 and S10).
Our results also show that the effectiveness of
vaccination would be expected to vary over time
(figs. S6 to S8). In low-transmission settings, the
introduction of vaccination could perturb trans-
mission dynamics and lead to transient reductions
in dengue disease incidence for 5 to 10 years. Only
when the transmission dynamics reequilibrate are
the long-term impacts seen. From the individual
perspective, it is also important to consider the
effect of vaccination on the cumulative lifetime
risk of dengue disease and hospitalization. Among
seronegative recipients, reductions in risk result-
ing from short-term vaccine-induced protection
might exceed later increases in risk resulting from
vaccine-induced immunological priming. This is
particularly true in high-transmission settings
where, in the absence of vaccination, nearly every-
one experiences secondary infection with dengue
at some point in their lives. Special consideration
should be given to the policy and ethical consid-
erations of shifting infections and/or symptomatic
episodes among individuals to different times in
their lives.
Our analysis has several limitations. We were
not able to estimate serotype-specific efficacy pa-
rameters. Owing to cross-reactive immunity, in
any one year, DENV incidence in single popula-
tions tends to be dominated by a single serotype,
which is reproduced by our transmission model.
However, the phase 3 trials showed substantial
attack rates from all four serotypes, but under-
pinning this was much greater heterogeneity in
serotype-specific attack rates between the coun-
tries contributing to the trial. To capture observed
serotype-specific attack rates it is necessary to fit
country- and serotype-specific trial data, which
are not currently publicly available (30). How-
ever, in the supplementary materials (10), we show
how the apparent serotype-specific efficacies seen
may reflect differences between serotypes in the
propensity to cause disease in primary, secondary,
and postsecondary infection rather than actual
differences in (serostatus-specific) efficacy (fig.
S12). Including such asymmetry does not qual-
itatively affect model predictions (figs. S13 and
S14). We also do not consider persistent variation
in exposure to DENV at the individual or neigh-
borhood level; if substantial proportions of the
population consistently experience lower or
higher levels of exposure than the average through-
out their lives, then both the risks (to the low-
exposure group) and benefits (to the high-exposure
group) of vaccination may be larger than we es-
timate here. Although characterizing real-world
levels of exposure heterogeneity is difficult, this
issue should be a priority for future work.
All efficacy outcomes measured in the trial were
based on clinically apparent disease, so we are cur-
rently unable to resolve whether the vaccine
protects against infection or just against disease
(20, 31). Our baseline model assumes a combina-
tion of both—short-lived protection against in-
fection, followed by a long-lived modification
of future disease risk. We are also unable to assess
the impact of breakthrough infections on vaccine-
acquired immunity. If vaccination truly acts as a
silent infection, then breakthrough infections in
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
2 SEPTEMBER 2016 • VOL 353 ISSUE 6303
1035
Fig. 2. Predicted population effects of vaccination on dengue disease for a range of transmission
intensities (x axes) and ages of vaccination ( y axes). Color scale indicates proportion of cases averted
in the whole population (A) over 10 years, for all symptomatic dengue; (B) over 10 years, for participants
hospitalized with dengue; (C) over 30 years, for all symptomatic dengue; and (D) over 30 years, for
hospitalization with dengue. Negative proportions of cases averted indicate vaccination increases risk.
Solid contours indicate the optimal age of vaccination for each transmission intensity. Dashed contours
indicate the youngest age group that may be targeted to avoid negative effects at the population level.
Fig. 3. Predicted individual effects of vaccination over 30 years. Proportion of hospitalized cases
averted among individual vaccine recipients who are vaccinated: (A) when seronegative and (B) when
seropositive. Dashed contour indicates the youngest age group that may be targeted to avoid negative
effects at the individual level. (C) Minimum proportion of the age group (1-year age bands) targeted for
routine vaccination that should be seropositive at the time of vaccine introduction to avert negative
impacts (over a 30-year time frame) at the population (red) and individual (blue) level.
RESEARCH
|
REPORTS
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 seronegative vaccinees should induce a broadly
multitypic and protective immune response (akin
to unvaccinated individuals who have experienced
twonaturalinfections)—ourcurrentmodelassump-
tion. Understanding any differences between nat-
urally and vaccine-acquired immunity will be
critical in assessing the overall impact of vacci-
nation on this group. In addition, although not
required to reproduce the main trends seen in
the trial, variation of efficacy with age cannot be
ruled out. If vaccine efficacy were lower in younger
age groups, independent of serostatus, the pre-
dicted outcomes of vaccination programs target-
ing older children would increase, particularly in
lower-transmission settings. Last, in the modeling
presented here, we assumed that vaccine-induced
protection in seropositive individuals is long-
lasting—future data may allow this optimistic as-
sumption to be tested.
Successful licensing of the first vaccine against
a major global pathogen is a significant achieve-
ment. However, the dependence of vaccine efficacy
on prior immunity presents challenges to planning
large-scale use. Other recent modeling efforts
have predicted impacts of vaccination that are
more beneficial than those presented here but
used models that were not fit to the data from
the clinical trial (32) or the long-term follow-up
(30). Our analysis indicates that to maximize the
population impact of vaccination and to prevent
negative impacts, it will be necessary to carefully
tailor vaccination strategies to local epidemio-
logical conditions. Our results indicate that the
vaccine should only be used in moderate- to high-
transmission settings, at least until more data are
available to clarify the extent to which the vaccine
primes seronegative recipients for a higher risk of
hospitalized disease. Careful selection of the age
group to target for routine vaccination can maxi-
mize benefits, but our current estimates indicate
that in all but the highest-transmission settings,
use of this vaccine may lead to an increase in the
risk of hospitalization for dengue in seronegative
recipients even if the overall impact of vaccina-
tion is positive. We predict routine vaccination
will cause, at most, moderate (10 to 20%) reduc-
tions in disease incidence, so it is important to
set realistic expectations of impact for the policy-
makers and populations of countries likely to
implement such policies. Population serosurveys
can mitigate risks in planning routine vaccination,
but individual serological testing, if feasible, might
radically improve the benefit-risk trade-off.
The partial efficacy of this vaccine raises the
question of how its use might be combined with
more effective vector control measures [e.g., using
new technologies, such as Wolbachia (33) to
achieve greater overall public health impact]. Care-
ful modeling of combined intervention strategies
is a priority for future work, but a priori, the ef-
ficacy profile of this vaccine suggests the need for
caution. If new vector control interventions sub-
stantially reduce (but do not eliminate) dengue
transmission, population seroprevalence will de-
cline over time. Unless vaccination strategies ac-
count for such effects, introduction of routine
immunization against a background of recently
substantially enhanced vector control may pose
the same long-term risks of negative impacts of
vaccination that we predict for vaccine use in
other settings having low transmission intensity.
Efficacy data for the other DENV vaccine can-
didates under development are not yet available,
but all candidates show similar differences in
immunogenicity by prior serostatus to those seen
for the Sanofi-Pasteur vaccine (34, 35). There-
fore, even though there are potentially relevant
structural differences between the candidates, it
is feasible that they may share similar efficacy
profiles. Therefore, our analysis may have appli-
cation beyond the Sanofi vaccine. More gener-
ally, our work and that undertaken for the RTS,S
malaria vaccine (36) reinforce the value of mod-
eling in interpreting trial results and planning
how best to use partially effective vaccines with
complex efficacy profiles.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1.
J. R. Stephenson, Bull. World Health Organ. 83, 308–314
(2005).
2.
R. Edelman, J. Hombach, Vaccine 26, 4113–4119 (2008).
3.
B. R. Murphy, S. S. Whitehead, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 29,
587–619 (2011).
4.
S. B. Halstead, Prog. Allergy 31, 301–364 (1982).
5.
D. S. Burke, A. Nisalak, D. E. Johnson, R. M. Scott, Am. J. Trop.
Med. Hyg. 38, 172–180 (1988).
6.
M. R. Capeding et al., Lancet 384, 1358–1365 (2014).
7.
L. Villar et al., N. Engl. J. Med. 372, 113–123 (2015).
8.
A. Sabchareon et al., Lancet 380, 1559–1567 (2012).
9.
S. R. Hadinegoro et al., N. Engl. J. Med. 373, 1195–1206 (2015).
10. Supplementary materials are available on Science Online.
11. L. Á. Villar et al., Pediatr. Infect. Dis. J. 32, 1102–1109
(2013).
12. G. H. Dayan et al., Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 89, 1058–1065 (2013).
13. Y. Sin Leo et al., Hum. Vaccin. Immunother. 8, 1259–1271 (2012).
14. C. F. Lanata et al., Vaccine 30, 5935–5941 (2012).
15. R. Z. Capeding et al., Vaccine 29, 3863–3872 (2011).
16. D. Morrison et al., J. Infect. Dis. 201, 370–377 (2010).
17. I. Dorigatti et al., Vaccine 33, 3746–3751 (2015).
18. M. R. Capeding, T. M. Laot, M. Boaz, T. A. Wartel, D. Crevat,
Trials Vaccinol. 4, 19–23 (2015).
19. B. Guy, N. Jackson, Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 14, 45–54 (2016).
20. I. Rodríguez-Barraquer, L. Mier-y-Teran-Romero, D. S. Burke,
D. A. T. Cummings, PLOS Negl. Trop. Dis. 7, e2126 (2013).
21. T. J. Kochel et al., J. Infect. Dis. 191, 1000–1004 (2005).
22. A. B. Sabin, Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 1, 30–50 (1952).
23. A. B. Sabin, Bacteriol. Rev. 14, 225–232 (1950).
24. S. Olkowski et al., J. Infect. Dis. 208, 1026–1033 (2013).
25. P. S. Wikramaratna, C. P. Simmons, S. Gupta, M. Recker, PLOS
ONE 5, e12347 (2010).
26. A. Nisalak et al., Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 68, 191–202 (2003).
27. Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization,
“Summary of the April 2016 meeting of the Strategic Advisory
Group of Experts on Immunization (SAGE),” Geneva,
Switzerland, 12 to 14 April 2016 (SAGE, WHO, Geneva, 2016);
http://www.who.int/immunization/sage/meetings/2016/
april/SAGE_April_2016_Meeting_Web_summary.pdf?ua=1.
28. H. Q. McLean, A. P. Fiebelkorn, J. L. Temte, G. S. Wallace,
MMWR Recomm. Rep. 62 (RR-04), 1–34 (2013).
29. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Morb. Mortal.
Wkly. Rep. 37, 341–346 (1988)
30. L. Coudeville, N. Baurin, E. Vergu, Vaccine 10.1016/
j.vaccine.2015.11.023 (2015).
31. I. Rodríguez-Barraquer, L. Mier-y-Teran-Romero, N. Ferguson,
D. S. Burke, D. A. T. Cummings, Lancet 385, 1726 (2015).
32. T. J. Hladish et al., PLOS Negl. Trop. Dis. 10, e0004661 (2016).
33. N. M. Ferguson et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 279ra37 (2015).
34. C. Sirivichayakul et al., J. Infect. Dis. 213, 1562–1572 (2016).
35. B. D. Kirkpatrick et al., J. Infect. Dis. 212, 702–710 (2015).
36. M. A. Penny et al., Lancet 387, 367–375 (2016).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge research funding from the UK Medical
Research Council, the UK National Institute of Health Research
under the Health Protection Research Unit initiative, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and National Institute of
General Medical Sciences (NIH) under the MIDAS initiative, and the
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. Views expressed do not
necessarily represent those of the funders. N.M.F., I.R.-B., and
D.A.T.C. have advised Sanofi Pasteur Ltd., without payment, on the
implications that this work has on the use of their vaccine. We thank
N. Grassly for comments on the manuscript and N. Jackson and
L. Coudeville at Sanofi Pasteur for useful discussions. All clinical trial
data used for these models are publicly available in the original
publications (cited), and model code is available from the authors.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencemag.org/content/353/6303/1033/suppl/DC1
Materials and Methods
Supplementary Text
Figs. S1 to S14
Tables S1 to S5
References (37–54)
25 April 2016; accepted 29 July 2016
10.1126/science.aaf9590
1036
2 SEPTEMBER 2016 • VOL 353 ISSUE 6303
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
Fig. 4. Expected population effects of vaccination if vaccination is preceded by serological testing
(with a rapid test assumed to have 90% sensitivity and specificity) and only individuals who test
seropositive for dengue are vaccinated. For the population, 80% coverage is assumed. (A) Proportion
of hospitalizations averted over a 30-year period for different transmission intensities and target age at
vaccination. (B) Proportion of vaccine doses saved (y axis) if only seropositive individuals are targeted,
for different transmission intensities (x axis) and target ages (different curves).
RESEARCH
|
REPORTS
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Benefits and risks of the Sanofi-Pasteur dengue vaccine: Modeling optimal deployment
Cummings
Neil M. Ferguson, Isabel Rodríguez-Barraquer, Ilaria Dorigatti, Luis Mier-y-Teran-Romero, Daniel J. Laydon and Derek A. T.
DOI: 10.1126/science.aaf9590
 (6303), 1033-1036.
353
Science 
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/353/6303/1033
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2016/08/31/353.6303.1033.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/8/330/330ra36.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/7/279/279ra37.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/7/304/304ra142.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/7/304/304ra141.full
REFERENCES
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/353/6303/1033#BIBL
This article cites 52 articles, 9 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(print ISSN 0036-8075; online ISSN 1095-9203) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science 
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
