 SPECIAL ARTICLE
“Urinary Tract Infection”—Requiem for a Heavyweight
Thomas E. Finucane, MD
“Urinary tract infection” (“UTI”) is an ambiguous, expan-
sive, overused diagnosis that can lead to marked, harmful
antibiotic overtreatment. “Significant bacteriuria,” central
to most definitions of “UTI,” has little significance in iden-
tifying individuals who will benefit from treatment. “Uri-
nary
symptoms”
are
similarly
uninformative.
Neither
criterion is well defined. Bacteriuria and symptoms remit
and recur spontaneously. Treatment is standard for acute
uncomplicated cystitis and common for asymptomatic bac-
teriuria, but definite benefits are few. Treatment for “UTI”
in older adults with delirium and bacteriuria is widespread
but no evidence supports the practice, and expert opinion
opposes it.
Sensitive diagnostic tests now demonstrate that healthy
urinary tracts host a ubiquitous, complex microbial com-
munity. Recognition of this microbiome, largely unde-
tectable using standard agar-based cultures, offers a new
perspective on “UTI.” Everyone is bacteriuric (and viruric).
From this perspective, most people who are treated for a
“UTI” would probably be better off without treatment.
Elderly adults, little studied in this regard, face particular
risk. Invasive bacterial diseases such as pyelonephritis and
bacteremic bacteriuria are also “UTIs.”
Mindful decisions about antibiotic use will require a
far better understanding of how pathogenicity arises within
microbial communities. It is likely that public education
and meaningful informed-consent discussions about antibi-
otic treatment of bacteriuria, emphasizing potential harms
and
uncertain
benefits,
would
reduce
overtreatment.
Emphasizing the microbiome’s significance and using the
term “urinary tract dysbiosis” instead of “UTI” might also
help and might encourage mindful study of the relation-
ships among host, aging, microbiome, disease, and antibi-
otic treatment. J Am Geriatr Soc 2017.
Key words: Urinary tract infection; Delirium; Micro-
biome; Medical overtreatment; patient safety
“U
rinary tract infection” (“UTI”) is among the most-
common
reasons
for
antibiotic
treatment
in
humans. Its definition is ambiguous (Table 1), as are defini-
tions of “significant bacteriuria” and “symptoms referable
to the urinary tract”—two frequently cited diagnostic crite-
ria. These ambiguities, sometimes accompanied by an expli-
cit belief that “bacteria are not normal inhabitants of the
urinary tract,”1 encourage extensive antibiotic overtreat-
ment of bacteriuria. Elderly adults are especially endan-
gered. Current treatment paradigms rely for diagnosis on
bacteriuria identified using standard laboratory cultures,
hereinafter
called standard bacteriuria.
Clear evidence
shows that urine is not sterile2 but instead that the urinary
tract hosts a complex, generally beneficial microbiome.
These findings are not integrated into clinical practice.
Recognition
of
the
urinary
microbiome’s
significance
should ultimately advance efforts to limit overtreatment.
This discussion has important limitations. It concerns
noncatheterized, medically stable adults without structural or
functional urinary tract abnormalities. Most studies focus on
young and middle-aged women; data on men and elderly
adults are far sparser. Pregnant women and individuals soon
to undergo urologic surgery, who benefit from antibiotic
treatment of asymptomatic bacteriuria,3 are not considered
here. Persons with spinal cord injury and those ill enough to
require urgent antibiotic treatment regardless of urinary find-
ings are also not considered here. Invasive bacterial diseases,
such as bacteremic bacteriuria and pyelonephritis, arise in
the urinary tract and, like pneumonia in the respiratory tract,
can be lethal without antibiotic treatment. At both sites, most
“infections” should not be treated. Identifying when benefits
of treatment outweigh burdens in respiratory infections and
“UTI” is a complex, essential task that is considered here
only in passing. Finally, rapid advances in understanding of
the relationship between microbiome and disease may
quickly render this discussion obsolete. The ubiquitous uri-
nary tract virome,4 for example, is ignored in clinical deci-
sion-making but may be as important to “UTI” as the
respiratory tract virome is to “upper respiratory infection.”
CURRENT DIAGNOSIS
“Bacteriuria”
Cultures done on agar-based media, used since the 19th
century to determine presence or absence of bacteria, are
From the Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center, Baltimore, Maryland.
Address correspondence to: Thomas E. Finucane, MD, Johns Hopkins
Bayview Medical Center, 5200 Eastern Ave., MFL-C, Suite 2200,
Baltimore, MD 21224. E-mail: tfinucan@jhmi.edu
DOI: 10.1111/jgs.14907
JAGS
2017
© 2017, Copyright the Author
Journal compilation © 2017, The American Geriatrics Society
0002-8614/17/$15.00
 used to determine whether urine is sterile or there is bac-
teriuria. (For brevity, the terms “asymptomatic bacteri-
uria” and “significant bacteriuria” will hereafter refer to
bacteriuria identified using standard agar-based cultures,
standard bacteriuria, as is done in current practice.)
“Significant Bacteriuria”
In 1956, it was proposed that, “contamination may be dis-
tinguished from true bacilluria by quantitation of the num-
bers of bacteria in the urine.” “True bacilluria” meant
bacilluria resulting from “actual multiplication of bacteria
within the urinary tract.” A count of 105 was chosen
“arbitrarily as the dividing line.”5 Also in 1956, the phrase
“significant bacteriuria” was used to indicate that “clini-
cally significant infection is present.. . . [a] degree of bac-
teriuria approximating 103 . . . is required for the certain
diagnosis of infection.”6 In the subsequent 6 decades, the
“dividing line” has remained approximate and arbitrary.
Clinical studies have defined “significant bacteriuria” with
thresholds ranging from 100 to 100,000 bacteria per mL.7
The significance of “significant bacteriuria” remains only
that the bacteriuria is unlikely to have resulted from con-
tamination. No threshold colony count identifies individu-
als who are more likely to become ill or to benefit from
antibiotic treatment.
“Symptoms Referable to the Urinary Tract”
Definition and ascertainment of “urinary tract symptoms”
are highly imprecise. A systematic review of symptoms and
signs to diagnose “UTI,” which was defined as significant
bacteriuria, found that “none of the identified studies
described the precision of the history or physical examina-
tion in the diagnosis of UTI.” The summary prevalence of
significant bacteriuria in individuals with urinary symp-
toms was 48%.7
A previous study showed that “lower urinary tract
symptoms” are not related to standard bacteriuria in
nondysuric ambulatory older men and women (mean age
85). Serial symptom questionnaires and urine cultures were
used to identify a group of individuals who had standard
bacteriuria at one time and not at another. The question-
naire asked about lower urinary tract symptoms other than
dysuria (e.g., frequency, urgency, suprapubic pain) and
about symptoms of well-being (anorexia, sleep distur-
bance, fatigue, malaise, weakness). “No differences in
symptoms were found when bacteriuric subjects were com-
pared with themselves when they were nonbacteriuric . . .
bacteriuria without dysuria in the elderly seems to be
asymptomatic.”8
Urinary tract symptoms do not reliably indicate risk
or presence of “bacteremic bacteriuria” (sometimes also
called “bacteremic UTI” or “urosepsis”) or pyelonephritis.
In a representative study of individuals with bacteremia,
the same bacterial species cultured from the urine, and
ascertainment of symptoms, only one of 37 participants
aged 75 and older had dysuria.9 In individuals diagnosed
with pyelonephritis, urinary symptoms are uncommon
enough that they are not integrated in many clinical defini-
tions. Further complicating the diagnosis of pyelonephritis,
“flank” and “loin” may refer generally to any non-midline
lower abdominal, lumbar, or inguinal region or, in men,
to scrotal contents.
Pyuria
Pyuria is common in elderly adults with bacteriuria. No
evidence suggests that its presence is related to the likeli-
hood of benefit from antibiotic treatment. “Pyuria accom-
panying bacteriuria is not an indication for antimicrobial
treatment.”3
CURRENT TREATMENT
Acute Uncomplicated Cystitis
Antibiotic treatment for individuals with acute dysuria and
significant bacteriuria is standard of care, but five random-
ized placebo-controlled trials show no benefit beyond
modestly faster symptom improvement.10 In the two trials
that reported episodes of pyelonephritis and in a separate
metaanalysis of five antibiotic treatment trials, the inci-
dence of pyelonephritis was low and approximately the
same in individuals receiving placebo as in those receiving
antibiotic treatment.11 A randomized trial of approxi-
mately 500 women younger than 65 compared ibuprofen
with fosfomycin for treatment of acute cystitis. The inci-
dence of pyelonephritis was approximately the same in the
two groups, and all affected women recovered fully with
outpatient treatment. Improvement in symptom scores in
women with acute cystitis assigned to ibuprofen lagged
approximately 1 day behind those of women treated with
antibiotics. A safe, effective urinary analgesic would be an
important advance in reducing antibiotic use. At 28 days,
the group assigned to fosfomycin had received 283 course
of antibiotics, compared with 81 in the ibuprofen group.12
Lower urinary tract symptoms do not herald serious
illness. “Acute uncomplicated cystitis rarely progresses to
Table 1. Representative Definitions of “Urinary Tract
Infection” (“UTI”)
Definition
Example
Bacteriuria
“in all of the included studies, UTI was
defined by the presence of (bacteriuria).”7
Bacteriuria and urinary
symptoms
“UTI refers to significant bacteriuria in a
patient with symptoms or signs attributable
to the urinary tract and no alternate
source. Asymptomatic bacteriuria (ASB)
refers to significant bacteriuria in a patient
without symptoms or signs attributable to
the urinary tract. Bacteriuria is a non-
specific term that refers to UTI and ASB
combined.”1
Urinary symptoms
“study to describe the course of lower
urinary tract infection . . . (included women
with) . . . urgency, dysuria, suprapubic
pain, and loin pain14
Subset of “infection of
the urinary tract”1
“CA-UTI, CA-ASB, and CA-bacteriuria are
each considered to represent infection of
the urinary tract, because bacteria are not
normal inhabitants of the urinary tract.”
CA=catheter associated.
2
FINUCANE ET AL.
2017
JAGS
 severe disease, even if untreated; thus, the primary goal of
treatment is to ameliorate symptoms.”13 The situation is
fluid, with frequent spontaneous resolution of bacteriuria
and of symptoms.8,14 “The generally benign (other than
symptoms) nature of ‘symptomatic UTI’ is suggested by
the billions of persons around the world and over the eons
who have suffered ‘UTI’ without access to antibiotics and
have recovered fully.”15
Asymptomatic Bacteriuria
Pregnant women and individuals scheduled to undergo
invasive urinary tract procedures benefit from treatment of
asymptomatic bacteriuria. Strong evidence confirms that
antibiotic treatment is not beneficial in most other groups
that have been studied, including elderly men and women
living at home or in institutions, persons with spinal cord
injury, catheterized individuals while the catheter remains
in
place,
women
with
diabetes
mellitus,
and
pre-
menopausal, nonpregnant women3. Despite this evidence,
antibiotic treatment of asymptomatic bacteriuria is com-
mon, perhaps because it may be diagnosed as a “UTI” and
out of concern that “bacteria are not normal inhabitants
of the urinary tract”1 (Table 1).
“UTI” in the Emergency Department
Of 25.4 million U.S. adult emergency department (ED) visits
over 8 years during which “UTI” was diagnosed, urinary
symptoms were identified in only 32%. Of individuals aged
85 and older, 17% had urinary symptoms.16
Delirium and Other Geriatric Syndromes
No evidence suggests that antibiotic treatment of bacteri-
uria improves outcomes in individuals with delirium, falls,
confusion, or other geriatric syndromes.17,18 Guidelines
and consensus statements do not recommend testing for,
making the diagnosis of, or treating a “UTI” in otherwise
asymptomatic, noncatheterized long-term care residents
who become delirious, even if they are febrile (Table 2).
Antibiotic treatment for the combination of fever and
delirium is accepted, regardless of urinary tract findings,
elsewhere in the statement.29
Nonetheless, the practice is extremely common. One
study followed 551 nursing home residents for 1 year, for
example, and found that the three most-common reasons
for suspecting “UTI” and sending a urine culture were
altered mental status (39%), change in behavior (19%),
and change in character of the urine (16%), trailed by dys-
uria (8%), falls, syncope, and several other indications.
Approximately one-third of these residents who had cul-
tures done had standard bacteriuria.19 The prevalence of
standard bacteriuria discovered incidentally in nursing
home residents who are well ranges from 15% to 50%.3
Sepsis
Initiatives
encouraging prompt
antibiotic
treatment
of
early sepsis necessarily set low thresholds for diagnosis. In
individuals with suspected infection who are not in the
intensive care unit, the Quick Sequential [Sepsis-related]
Table 2. Expert guidance about delirium and bacteri-
uria in institutionalized, non-catheterized patients who
become delirious. None identify delirium as a reason to
culture the urine or initiate antibiotic treatment
1. Surveillance Definitions of Infections in Long-Term Care
Facilities: Revisiting the McGeer Criteria.27
“Surveillance Definitions for Urinary Tract Infections [abridged]
A. For residents without an indwelling urinary catheter (both 1
and 2 must be present)
1. At least one of
a. Acute dysuria or acute pain, swelling or tenderness of
testes, epididymis, or prostate.
b. Fever or leukocytosis and at least one of
Pain at (i) costovertebral angle or (ii) suprapubic area
Gross hematuria (iii)
New or worse urinary incontinence (iv), urge (v), or
frequency (vi)
c. Without fever or leukocytosis, at least 2 of (ii) – (vi).
2. Significant bacteriuria
Comment. UTI should be diagnosed when there are localizing
genitourinary signs and symptoms and a positive urine culture
result. A diagnosis of UTI can be made without localizing symptoms
if a blood culture isolate is the same as the organism isolated from
the urine and there is no alternate site of infection. In the absence
of a clear alternate source of infection, fever or rigors with a
positive urine culture result in the non-catheterized resident or acute
confusion in the catheterized resident will often be treated as UTI.
However, evidence suggests that most of these episodes are likely
not due to infection of a urinary source.”
Note: Non-catheterized residents who become delirious and who
have bacteriuria, fever and leukocytosis do not meet the definition
of “UTI.”
2. Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation of Fever and
Infection in Older Adult Residents of Long-Term Care Facilities:
2008 Update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America.28
“13. In noncatheterized residents, the diagnostic laboratory
evaluation of suspected UTI should be reserved for those with acute
onset of UTI-associated symptoms and signs (e.g., fever, dysuria,
gross hematuria, new or worsening urinary incontinence, and/or
suspected bacteremia) (A-II).”
Note: For non-catheterized residents of long-term-care facilities,
delirium is not a reason to send laboratory tests for UTI.
3. Development of Minimum Criteria for the Initiation of
Antibiotics in Residents of Long–Term Care Facilities: Results of a
Consensus Conference29
(re: UTI). “For residents who do not have an indwelling catheter,
minimum criteria for initiating antibiotics include acute dysuria alone
or fever (>37.9°C [100°F] or 1.5°C [2.4°F] increase above baseline
temperature) and at least one of the following: new or worsening
urgency, frequency, suprapubic pain, gross hematuria,
costovertebral angle tenderness, or urinary incontinence.”
Note: For non-catheterized residents of long-term-care facilities
who are febrile, delirium is not a reason to initiate antibiotics for
“UTI”. Elsewhere in the Consensus, however, antibiotic treatment
for the combination of fever and delirium is accepted, regardless
of urinary tract findings.
4. American Geriatrics Society identifies five things that
healthcare providers and patients should question30
“Don’t use antimicrobials to treat bacteriuria in older adults unless
specific urinary tract symptoms are present.”
JAGS
2017
“UTI,” ANTIBIOTICS, AND THE MICROBIOME
3
 Organ Failure Assessment identifies individuals as being at
high risk and in need of “timely management” if two or
three of the following criteria are met: respiratory rate
greater than 22 breaths per minute, pulse greater than 100
beats per minute, and altered mental status, defined as a
Glasgow Coma Scale score less than 15.20 This threshold
endangers frail elderly adults, and considering “UTI” to be
a
“suspected
infection”
lowers
the
threshold
further.
Chronic stable confusion, as with dementia, will reduce
the Glasgow Coma Scale score to 14, confirming “altered
mental status.” If mild transient vital sign abnormalities
occur, the individual qualifies for “timely management.”
Unmindful application of these criteria can lead to serious
overtreatment and perhaps a missed diagnosis of other
causes of delirium.
Delirium accompanies several serious illnesses, but in
individuals with limited cognitive reserve, minor perturba-
tion can lead to delirium. Individuals with new delirium
require careful, ongoing evaluation and prompt treatment if
they become unstable. For those who are otherwise stable,
it is likely that surveillance without antibiotic treatment is
preferable.17 Deciding when a person has become sick
enough to require antibiotics is a challenge. The presence of
standard bacteriuria should not be part of that decision.
Joint Replacement Surgery
An observational study of 1,497 individuals undergoing
joint replacement found asymptomatic bacteriuria in 12%.
At 1-year follow-up the, rate of prosthetic joint infection
was three times as high in individuals with bacteriuria
(4.3%) as in those without (1.4%) (P < .001), but antibi-
otic treatment of bacteriuria did not reduce the risk of
infection, and “microorganisms isolated in prosthetic joint
infections were not the same as those in preoperative urine
cultures in any patient with asymptomatic bacteriuria.”21
As with incident delirium, bacteriuria seems to be more a
marker of vulnerability than a cause of disease.
INSIGHTS FROM THE MICROBIOME
Urinary Tract
The urine-bearing urinary tract extends without interrup-
tion from Bowman’s capsule to the urethral orifice, essen-
tially a part of the body surface. Continuous production of
urine presents perineal and ascending microbes with a reli-
able supply of nutrition. The biological plausibility of a
sterile urinary tract is quite low.
Infection
The urinary tract resembles the respiratory tract, also an
open system (from alveolus to nose and mouth). Both are
traditionally
considered
sterile,
and
both
have
been
demonstrated to host complex microbial communities.
Gene sequencing techniques have identified a ubiquitous,
diverse community of bacterial species in the urinary tract
that are uncultivable using standard techniques,22 here-
inafter called uncultivable bacteria. The viability of most
uncultivable bacteria has been confirmed using more-sensi-
tive expanded quantitative urine cultures.2 Intracellular
bacterial colonies and a ubiquitous urinary virome, not
detected
using
standard
cultures
and
of
unknown
pathogenicity, have also been identified.4
The pathogenic role of uncultivable bacteria remains
unknown. A woman with Escherichia coli “UTI” on stan-
dard cultures but much less E. coli deoxyribonucleic acid
(3% of total sequences) according to gene-sequencing tech-
niques than Aerococcus (40% of sequences) and Acti-
nobaculum (25% of sequences) was reported.22 In current
practice, a polymicrobial culture result is considered to be
uninformative, but this study suggests microbial communi-
ties may play an unexpected role in pathogenicity. Basing
antibiotic treatment on the results of standard cultures is
difficult to justify and has not been shown to be beneficial
in individuals with asymptomatic bacteriuria or acute cys-
titis.
A trial of 673 women (mean age 39) with asymp-
tomatic bacteriuria and a history of recurrent “symp-
tomatic
UTI”
demonstrated
potential
harm
to
the
microbiome from antibiotic treatment. Women random-
ized to treatment were more likely to have “symptomatic
UTI” over 1 year of follow-up than those randomized to
no treatment. The authors conclude that asymptomatic
bacteriuria “may play a protective role in preventing
symptomatic recurrence.”23 In 27 months of additional
follow-up, recurrent “symptomatic UTI” and prevalence of
antibiotic-resistant bacteria were significantly higher, qual-
ity of life was significantly poorer, and pyelonephritis was
more common, although not significantly so, in the treated
group.24
CONCLUSION
Significant bacteriuria and urinary symptoms are common,
often occur together, and generally resolve spontaneously.
Neither is strongly linked to serious urinary tract disease
or to likelihood of benefit from antibiotic treatment, with
the limited exceptions discussed above. In individuals with
standard bacteriuria who develop geriatric syndromes such
as delirium, no data suggest benefit
from treatment.
Nonetheless, treatment for “UTI” is common for individu-
als with symptoms, bacteriuria, or both and for those with
delirium and standard bacteriuria.
Attempts to improve management of bacteriuria in
elderly adults face familiar clinical problems. First, clinical
trials focus mainly on younger subjects and do not readily
generalize to elderly adults. A greater prevalence of struc-
tural and functional urinary tract abnormalities, mobility
impairment, and impaired immune function, for example,
may alter benefits and burdens of treatment in unpre-
dictable ways. Second, harms from undertreating invasive
disease may be severe. Third, harms from overtreatment
may also be severe. Studies of symptoms, urine dipstick
findings, and colony counts on standard cultures cannot
define which subsets of individuals will benefit from antibi-
otics directed to the urinary tract. Intervention trials will
be necessary to develop an evidence base for management
decisions.
Current management strategies logically require the
improbable belief that only organisms identifiable using
agar-based culture are worthy of concern. A more likely
explanation for clinician behavior, although less logical,
4
FINUCANE ET AL.
2017
JAGS
 would be a characteristic cognitive error that has been
called WYSIATI or “What you see is all there is.” Many
decisions are made unmindfully, relying only on evidence
that is easily accessible. “The confidence that individuals
have in their beliefs depends mostly on the quality of the
story they can tell about what they see, even if they see lit-
tle.”25 Treatment decisions often seem to rely on the diag-
nosis of “UTI” to justify treatment. In the decision to treat
bacteriuria in individuals with incident delirium, for exam-
ple, infection can cause delirium, “UTI” is an infection (a
key step), standard bacteriuria is a “UTI,” antibiotic treat-
ment for standard bacteriuria should help resolve delirium,
and delirium frequently does resolve with treatment. The
quality of this story is high enough that clinicians routinely
ignore two reproducible but less immediately accessible
findings. First, bacteriuria is present in all individuals, with
or without delirium. Second, delirium and bacteriuria can
each resolve spontaneously.
A small study further suggests that the term “UTI”
plays an important role in decisions to treat. When urine
specimens obtained from asymptomatic, noncatheterized
medical and surgical inpatients (mean age 79) were posi-
tive, the results were not conveyed to clinicians. Instead,
the following modified report was posted to the electronic
medical record. “The majority of positive urine cultures
from inpatients without an indwelling urinary catheter rep-
resent asymptomatic bacteriuria. If you strongly suspect
that your patient has developed a urinary tract infection,
please call the microbiology laboratory.” Physicians called
for only five of the 37 modified reports, and antibiotic
treatment rates fell from 48% to 12%. At 72 hours no
patient had a “UTI” or sepsis.26 Simply calling out the
ambiguity of “UTI” reduced overtreatment.
Repetitively calling out the ambiguity of “UTI,” for
example by annotating it with quotation marks in text and
the bimanual “air quotes” sign in conversation, might be
similarly effective.15 New nomenclature seems likely to be
important. Replacing “UTI” with “bacteriuria” plus modi-
fiers seems preferable (e.g., bacteriuria with dysuria, bac-
teriuria
with
delirium).
The
phrase
“urinary
tract
dysbiosis” could be applicable to most scenarios now
called “UTI” without the connotation that antibiotics are
indicated.
It is likely that careful discussion of risks and benefits
would reduce antibiotic overuse. For individuals with
acute uncomplicated cystitis, the limited benefit (symptom
control) and important risks of antibiotic treatment should
be disclosed, and many people would accept temporizing
measures. In one trial of individuals with acute cystitis,
72% of 1,605 participants agreed to placebo-controlled
randomization.14 If a safe, effective urinary tract analgesic
were available, the rate might be even higher. Decision-
making with or on behalf of long-term care residents with
bacteriuria who develop delirium should also include dis-
closure of the high prevalence of asymptomatic bacteriuria
in stable residents, the corresponding likelihood that the
bacteriuria is coincidental, lack of evidence of benefit from
treatment, risks imparted by treatment, and consistent
expert advice counselling against treatment. Public educa-
tion would also help because some individuals and their
families resolutely expect antibiotic treatment on hearing
the diagnosis of “UTI.”
“UTI” remains deeply entrenched in clinical medicine,
fortified by familiarity, convenience, the generally good
outcomes that follow antibiotic treatment of generally self-
limited syndromes, and a now-fading biological plausibil-
ity. In current practice, “I think this patient has a UTI”
often means, “I want to give this patient antibiotics.” Clin-
icians considering intervention should not ask whether the
individual has a real “UTI” but should ask instead
whether there is evidence that antibiotic treatment directed
at standard bacteriuria is more likely to benefit than harm
this individual. Microbiome studies suggest that treatment
is even less beneficial and more harmful than is already
believed. Clinicians have a major opportunity to improve
care and public health.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Conflict of Interest: None.
Author Contributions: Thomas Finucane is the sole
author.
Sponsor’s Role: None.
REFERENCES
1. Hooton TM, Bradley SF, Cardenas DD et al. Diagnosis, prevention, and
treatment of catheter-associated urinary tract infection in adults: 2009
International Clinical Practice Guidelines from the Infectious Diseases Soci-
ety of America. Clin Infect Dis 2010;50:625–663.
2. Hilt EE, McKinley K, Pearce MM et al. Urine is not sterile: Use of
enhanced urine culture techniques to detect resident bacterial flora in the
adult female bladder. J Clin Microbiol 2014;52:871–876.
3. Nicolle LE, Bradley S, Colgan R et al. Infectious Diseases Society of Amer-
ica guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of asymptomatic bacteriuria
in adults. Clin Infect Dis 2005;40:643–654.
4. Sobel JD. Urinary tract infections. In: Mandell GL, Douglas RG Jr, Bennett
JE et al., eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of
Infectious Diseases, 7th Ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Living-
stone, 2009, pp. 957–985.
5. Kass EH. Asymptomatic infections of the urinary tract 1956. J Urol
2002;167(2 Pt 2):1016–1019; discussion 1019–1021.
6. Sanford JP, Favour CB, Mao FH et al. Evaluation of the positive urine cul-
ture: An approach to the differentiation of significant bacteria from con-
taminants. Am J Med 1956;20:88–93.
7. Bent S, Nallamothu BK, Simel DL et al. Does this woman have an acute
uncomplicated urinary tract infection? JAMA 2002;287:2701–2710.
8. Boscia
JA,
Kobasa
WD,
Abrutyn
E
et al.
Lack
of
association
between bacteriuria and symptoms in the elderly. Am J Med 1986;81:
979–982.
9. Woodford HJ, Graham C, Meda M et al. Bacteremic urinary tract infec-
tion in hospitalized older patients—are any currently available diagnostic
criteria sensitive enough? J Am Geriatr Soc 2011;59:567–568.
10. Falagas ME, Kotsantis IK, Vouloumanou EK et al. Antibiotics versus pla-
cebo in the treatment of women with uncomplicated cystitis: A meta-analy-
sis of randomized controlled trials. J Infect 2009;58:91–102.
11. Foxman G. The epidemiology of urinary tract infection. Nat Rev Urol
2010;7:653–660.
12. G�
agyor I, Bleidorn J, Kochen MM et al. Ibuprofen versus fosfomycin for
uncomplicated urinary tract infection in women: Randomised controlled
trial. BMJ 2015;351:h6544.
13. Hooton TM. Uncomplicated urinary tract infection. N Engl J Med
2012;366:1028–1037.
14. Ferry SA, Holm SE, Stenlund H et al. The natural course of uncomplicated
lower urinary tract infection in women illustrated by a randomized placebo
controlled study. Scand J Infect Dis 2004;36:296–301.
15. Finucane TE. ‘Urinary tract infection’ and the microbiome. Am J Med
2016;130:e97–e98.
16. Caterino JM, Ting SA, Sisbarro SG et al. Age, nursing home residence, and
presentation of urinary tract infection in U.S. emergency departments,
2001–2008. Acad Emerg Med 2012;19:1173–1180.
17. McKenzie R, Stewart MT, Bellantoni MF et al. Bacteriuria in individuals
who become delirious. Am J Med 2014;127:255–257.
JAGS
2017
“UTI,” ANTIBIOTICS, AND THE MICROBIOME
5
 18. Balogun SA, Philbrick JT. Delirium, a symptom of UTI in the elderly: Fact
or fable? A systematic review Can Geriatr J 2013;17:22–26.
19. Juthani-Mehta M, Drickamer MA, Towle V et al. Nursing home practi-
tioner survey of diagnostic criteria for urinary tract infections. J Am Geri-
atr Soc 2005;53:1986–1990.
20. Singer M, Deutschman CS, Seymour CW et al. The Third International
Consensus
Definitions
for
sepsis
and
septic
shock
(Sepsis-3).
JAMA
2016;315:801–810.
21. Sousa R, Mu~
noz-Mahamud E, Quayle J. Is asymptomatic bacteriuria a risk
factor for prosthetic joint infection? Clin Infect Dis 2014;59:41–47.
22. Wolfe AJ, Toh E, Shibata N. Evidence of uncultivated bacteria in the adult
female bladder. J Clin Microbiol 2012;50:1376–1383.
23. Cai T, Mazzoli S, Mondaini N et al. The role of asymptomatic bacteriuria
in young women with recurrent urinary tract infections: To treat or not to
treat? Clin Infect Dis 2012;55:771–777.
24. Cai T, Nesi G, Mazzoli S et al. Asymptomatic bacteriuria treatment is
associated with a higher prevalence of antibiotic resistant strains in
women with urinary tract infections. Clin Infect Dis 2015;61:1655–
1661.
25. Kahneman D. Thinking Fast and Slow. New York: Farrar, Straus and Gir-
oux, 2011.
26. Leis JA, Rebick GW, Daneman N et al. Reducing antimicrobial therapy for
asymptomatic bacteriuria among noncatheterized inpatients: a proof-of-
concept study. Clin Infect Dis 2014;58:980–983.
27. Stone ND, Ashraf MS, Calder J et al. Surveillance definitions of infections
in long-term care facilities: Revisiting the McGeer criteria. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 2012;33:965–977.
28. High KP, Bradley SF, Gravenstein S et al. Clinical practice guideline for
the evaluation of fever and infection in older adult residents of long-term
care facilities: 2008 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America.
Clin Infect Dis 2009;48:149–171.
29. Loeb M, Bentley DW, Bradley S et al. Development of minimum criteria
for the initiation of antibiotics in residents of long-term-care facilities:
results
of
a
consensus
conference.
Infect
Control
Hosp
Epidemiol
2001;22:120–124.
30. AGS Choosing Wisely Workgroup. American Geriatrics Society identifies
five things that healthcare providers and patients should question. J Am
Geriatr Soc 2013;61:622–631.
6
FINUCANE ET AL.
2017
JAGS
