 Human health alters the sustainability of fishing
practices in East Africa
Kathryn J. Fiorellaa,b,1, Erin M. Milnerc, Charles R. Salmend, Matthew D. Hickeye, Dan O. Omollof, Abdi Odhiambof,
Brian Mattahf, Elizabeth A. Bukusig, Lia C. H. Fernaldc, and Justin S. Brasharesb
aAtkinson Center for a Sustainable Future, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853; bDepartment of Environmental Science, Policy & Management, University
of California, Berkeley, CA 94720; cSchool of Public Health, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720; dNorth Memorial Family Medicine Residency
Program, Department of Family Medicine and Community Health, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55411 eDepartment of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco, CA 94110; fResearch Department, Organic Health Response, Mfangano Island, Kenya; and gCentre for Microbiology Research,
Kenya Medical Research Institute, Nairobi, Kenya
Edited by Bonnie J. McCay, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ, and approved February 17, 2017 (received for review September
9, 2016)
Understanding feedbacks between human and environmental
health is critical for the millions who cope with recurrent illness
and rely directly on natural resources for sustenance. Although
studies have examined how environmental degradation exacer-
bates infectious disease, the effects of human health on our use of
the environment remains unexplored. Human illness is often tacitly
assumed to reduce human impacts on the environment. By this logic,
ill people reduce the time and effort that they put into extractive
livelihoods and, thereby, their impact on natural resources. We
followed 303 households living on Lake Victoria, Kenya over four
time points to examine how illness influenced fishing. Using fixed
effect conditional logit models to control for individual-level and
time-invariant factors, we analyzed the effect of illness on fishing
effort and methods. Illness among individuals who listed fishing as
their primary occupation affected their participation in fishing. How-
ever, among active fishers, we found limited evidence that illness
reduced fishing effort. Instead, ill fishers shifted their fishing methods.
When ill, fishers were more likely to use methods that were illegal,
destructive, and concentrated in inshore areas but required less travel
and energy. Ill fishers were also less likely to fish using legal methods
that are physically demanding, require travel to deep waters, and are
considered more sustainable. By altering the physical capacity and
outlook of fishers, human illness shifted their effort, their engage-
ment with natural resources, and the sustainability of their actions.
These findings show a previously unexplored pathway through
which poor human health may negatively impact the environment.
environmental change | fishing livelihoods | Lake Victoria | health and
environment | social-ecological systems
E
nvironmental degradation is widely recognized as a cause of
and contributor to adverse human health outcomes (1). Whether
through poor air quality, deforestation, or declining biodiversity, our
alteration of the environment has been implicated in a range of
health concerns, including the rise of asthma, the spread of malaria,
and outbreaks of zoonotic diseases, such as Ebola, Zika, and Lyme
(2). Quantifying the impacts of declining environmental health on
human health is a large and growing field of study. However, re-
markably little research has engaged specifically with how human
illness impacts environmental change and the sustainable use of
natural resources. This knowledge gap is glaring given the hundreds
of millions of people on our planet who depend on natural re-
sources for food and income while also confronting the highest
burden of infectious diseases (3).
Human illness may alter individual and household use of
natural resources in a variety of ways and thereby shape feedback
loops between human interaction and environmental sustain-
ability (Fig. 1). The physical effects of illness may force indi-
viduals or their families to change the effort or methods with
which they engage natural resources. Illness may also alter the
outlook of resource users, affecting their livelihood strategies,
investment in equipment or labor, and attention to environmental
sustainability. Ultimately, characterizing the relative importance of
the feedbacks that link human health and environmental sustain-
ability will influence our understanding of social-ecological systems,
poverty traps, and natural resource management on a rapidly
changing planet.
The Malthusian hypothesis commonly used to link declining
human health to environmental outcomes predicts that illness
will reduce human populations or harvest effort, benefitting the
environment (Fig. 1, Right) (4). Studies of illness and labor
productivity primarily focus on and show this pathway [for ex-
ample, showing that HIV reduces commercial tea, homestead
banana, and subsistence harvests (5–7)]. Such findings have been
used to argue that the negative impact of disease, specifically
HIV, on household labor has contributed broadly to food
shortages across southern Africa (8, 9).
Human illness may also drive changes in natural resource use
that are detrimental, rather than beneficial, to environmental
sustainability (Fig. 1, Left). A “syndemic” framework has been
proposed to understand how disease, specifically HIV in this
case, is linked to environmental degradation (10). Where illness
reduces physical capital, this shift may lead to a range of
household vulnerabilities and alter livelihoods (10). Either illness
or environmental changes may constitute a “shock,” with con-
sequent effects on household expenses, planning horizons, and
outlook. Illness may also prompt households to turn to natural
resources as a “safety net.” Evidence for this mechanism suggests
Significance
We accept that the environment influences human health, but
we know little about how human health affects the environ-
ment. However, millions of people around the world rely on
natural resources for food and livelihoods and confront a high
burden of illness. Experience of illness may change people’s
physical capacities, outlook, and planning horizons and shape
how they engage with the environment. We analyze these
impacts in fishing communities of Lake Victoria, Kenya. Al-
though illness may cause the sickest individuals not to fish,
many fishers continue fishing but shift their methods. When
sick, fishers use methods that are less physically demanding
but illegal and environmentally destructive. Our findings sug-
gest that environmental sustainability may be integrally sha-
ped by the health of resource users.
Author contributions: K.J.F., E.A.B., L.C.H.F., and J.S.B. designed research; K.J.F., E.M.M.,
D.O.O., A.O., and B.M. performed research; K.J.F., E.M.M., C.R.S., and M.D.H. analyzed
data; and K.J.F. and J.S.B. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: kf326@cornell.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1613260114/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1613260114
PNAS
|
April 18, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 16
|
4171–4176
ENVIRONMENTAL
SCIENCES
SUSTAINABILITY
SCIENCE
 that HIV-affected households may be more reliant on safety net
resources, such as bushmeat and wild plants (11, 12). In addition
to increasing environmental pressure, harvesting resources that
are low-yielding or expose households to legal consequences is a
strategy engaged only when shocks constrain options. Conversely,
research also demonstrates that the positive health shock of
improved medication access may increase conservation agricultural
practices in some households (13).
Finally, illness may have longer-term effects on the relation-
ship between people and their ecosystems by altering the outlook
of resource harvesters. Over time, shortened lifespans as a result
of disease may reduce communities’ environmental knowledge
and promote patterns of increasingly exploitive and environ-
mentally unsustainable behaviors (14, 15).
Here, we studied the behavior of fishers around Lake Victoria,
Kenya to examine the dynamics through which two dimensions of
illness, measured separately as mental and physical health, impact
local engagement with the environment. We analyzed fishing effort
and methods using panel data from a random sample of 303 house-
holds across four time points from December of 2012 to March of
2014. Our analyses provide a quantitative analysis of the pathways
through which illness may impact the environment (Fig. 1).
Destructive fishing practices and unsustainable harvest are key
concerns throughout global fisheries, including Lake Victoria.
To reduce destructive practices, fishing gear and catch regula-
tions are mandated, and the fishery is comanaged by fishers,
national ministries, and a lake-wide organization. Despite these
safeguards, Nile perch (Lates niloticus), the prevailing fishery,
declined by 65% in inshore areas and 30% in deep zones in Lake
Victoria from 2002 to 2014 (16), and catch per unit effort
dropped 40% in the same time period (17). Fishers in Lake
Victoria use a range of fishing techniques spanning different gear
types, fish species, and the targeting of near- and off-shore habitats.
The legality and destructiveness of fishing methods are tied to their
physical demands. Methods that are more sustainable involve
traveling into deeper waters, more selective targeting of large fish,
higher levels of physical exertion, and fishing at night for dagaa
(Rastrineobola argentea), a second targeted species. As is the case
throughout small-scale fisheries, fishing livelihoods around Lake
Victoria are comprised of diverse roles in and out of the fishery,
with fishers switching their participation in fishing, altering the
methods that they use throughout the year, and fishing in multiple
ways at a single time point (18).
The prevalence of HIV in the Lake Victoria region increased
throughout the 1980s and 1990s after extensive migration to the
lakeshores by those eager to join an increasingly lucrative interna-
tional trade in Nile perch (19). The high HIV prevalence around
Lake Victoria, reaching 27% among adults in the communities that
we studied (20), is mirrored in global fishing communities (21). The
fishing methods of Lake Victoria are represented throughout the
world’s fisheries. Similar methods are found in coastal, near-shore
fisheries and the extensive global inland fisheries, with inland wa-
ters the focus of 42% of the fishing boats operating in Africa (22).
Although HIV is a particular concern in fishing communities and
many resource-dependent settings, myriad health concerns beset rural
communities that steward natural resources.
We examined pathways through which fisher illness may im-
pact the sustainability of fishing practices by quantifying (i) fishing
effort (e.g., hours fished, catch per unit effort, and investment in
labor), (ii) legality of fishing practices, and (iii) fishing methods
used (e.g., gillnet and long line). To assess illness, we used the
Measured Outcomes Survey–HIV (MOS-HIV), a validated metric
of health-related quality of life that provides for physical and
mental health summary scores (Methods, Fig. S1, and Tables S1
and S2) (23, 24). Scores were created so that higher scores indicate
poorer health and are centered at zero and normalized to 1 SD.
We examined pathways from mental and physical health to fishing
practices using panel regression models (fishing effort: hours,
travel, nights away, and catch per unit effort) and fixed effect
conditional logit models (fishing participation, fishing method
Illness reduces 
environmental 
impact
Altered ecosystem 
services impact family 
food security, livelihoods
Reduced shing 
e ort, investment 
impacts food security
Ill shers reduce shing 
e ort and capital 
investment 
Ill shers increase reliance 
on environmentally 
destructive practices
Illness increases
environmental 
impact 
Food 
insecurity 
and poverty 
increase risk 
of illness
No
Fishing
Destructive Fishing
Food Insecurity
Illness
Reduced E ort
Fig. 1.
(Right) Traditional and (Left) alternative pathways linking human and environmental health in fishing communities. In the face of illness, households
may alter their pressure on environmental resources to increase their reliance on destructive practices or curtail their harvest effort. These feedbacks portend
sharply different environmental consequences of human illness, even as outcomes for households remain similar.
4172
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1613260114
Fiorella et al.
 legality, and fishing methods), which enabled us to compare an
individual with himself at different time points. This methodology
thus provided a control for individual-level as well as time-
invariant factors, so that we could make robust comparisons that
aggregate how changes in an individual’s experience of illness are
associated with altered fishing behavior.
We first tested if poor physical and mental health reduced par-
ticipation in fishing. For individuals who identified their primary
occupation as fishing, with poorer physical health fishers were 66%
less likely to participate in fishing [odds ratio (OR) = 0.34, SE =
0.19, P < 0.06] (Fig. 2 and Tables S3 and S4). Among individuals
not currently fishing (33–37% of all individuals), substantial pro-
portions were engaged in professional (34–37%; e.g., teacher or
government official) and other nonfishing occupations (45–50%;
e.g., agriculture or carpenter). Among all individuals, even con-
trolling for occupation, there was no effect of illness on whether an
individual was fishing at a given time point (Table S4).
Contrary to predictions that fishing effort and catch per unit
effort would decline as physical capacity was reduced by poor
physical and mental health, we found limited evidence for any as-
sociation between fishing effort and increasing morbidity levels (Fig.
2 and Table S5). Among only individuals currently fishing (63–67%
of all individuals and 91–95% of fishers), there was no effect of
mental or physical health on the total hours fished per month,
nights spent away, or income per hour fishing and a modest effect
on the travel time to fish (Table S5). Although high variance in
these effort variables may mask a relationship, the magnitude of
coefficients associated with the type of fishing suggests that, rather
than being associated with illness, the number of hours spent fishing
was largely driven by the choice of fishing methods.
We next tested if fishers responded to poor health by changing
their fishing methods. We predicted that, when ill, fishers would
select inshore fishing methods that demand less travel and by
targeting smaller fish, are physically easier. We grouped methods
by their legality and targeted fisheries to compare legal offshore
methods and illegal inshore methods. With poorer physical
health, fishers were 43% less likely to use only legal methods
targeting offshore fisheries (OR = 0.57, SE = 0.15, P < 0.03) and
69% more likely to use any illegal method focused on inshore
fishing areas (OR = 1.69, SE = 0.43, P < 0.04) (Fig. 3 and Table
S6). Physical health as opposed to mental health or a combina-
tion drove this relationship.
In analyzing the role of physical health in individual fishing
methods (e.g., beach seine or gillnet), we found a pattern of
results further indicating that fishers coped with illness through
fishing method selection (Fig. 3 and Table S7). The inshore
methods chosen by fishers when physically ill require less travel,
have relatively lower physical demands, and are outlawed by
fishing regulations. In contrast, methods used by physically
healthy fishers require fishers to reach deep water or fish over-
night to target the more sustainable mature Nile perch and dagaa
fisheries. Because of the wide diversity of combinations of
methods that fishers use, effects were estimated using multiple
models. For relatively less common methods, the number of
fishers that switched in and out of a given method was small, and
we thus compared fixed effect conditional logit models with
random effect models, which yielded similar ORs (Table S7).
Links between human population growth and pressure on
natural resources have shaped assumptions that human illnesses
may indirectly benefit the environment by reducing the capacity
of harvesters to effectively harvest resources (4). Contrary to
findings of previous studies in agricultural systems (5–9), our analyses
provided little evidence that illness altered fishing effort to indirectly
benefit the environment. We found only limited evidence for the
pathway highlighting environmental benefits, and in fact, our results
support an alternative conclusion: physical health shifted the strategy
A
B
Fig. 2.
For men (n = 253) facing markedly different levels of illness, we observe that (A) fishing participation is widespread; individuals not fishing are largely
employed in other sectors, whereas a smaller number of fishers who experience poor health are not fishing. (B) Fishing effort, measured as hours fishing, is
relatively stable across experiences of (i) physical health and (ii) mental health. Individual experience of poorer health (moving to the right on each graph) is
assessed in multivariate panel regression models. Models show that mental and physical health did not affect participation in fishing, hours fished, nights
spent away from home, or income earned per hour and had a modest effect on hours traveled (Tables S4 and S5).
Fiorella et al.
PNAS
|
April 18, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 16
|
4173
ENVIRONMENTAL
SCIENCES
SUSTAINABILITY
SCIENCE
 and sustainability of fishers’ use of natural resources (Fig. 1). These
findings underscore the complexity of the relationship between hu-
man health and use of natural resources.
Our findings have implications for the sustainability of the
Lake Victoria fisheries. In driving selection for and against
particular methods, in this setting, physical health may play a role
in concentrating fishers in inshore areas and fostering the uptake
of illegal fishing practices widely identified as destructive (25).
For example, beach seines have long been implicated in the
depletion of inshore Lake Victoria fisheries (26). These methods
along with monofilament nets capture a high proportion of juv-
enile fish and disturb shallow fish breeding habitats (26). The
limited duration of our study left us unable to quantify the po-
tential longer-term effects of illness on dynamics of resource use,
disentangle the importance of illness in driving illegal fishing
relative to other motivations, or measure the ecological impli-
cations of fishing practices.
Ultimately, the reliance of ill fishers on illegal harvest prac-
tices will be mediated by local regulations and their enforcement.
Around Lake Victoria, enforcement of fishery regulations is
notoriously weak (25). Critically, our findings suggest that fishing
regulations may particularly impact the sick. Although physical
rather than mental health drove the impacts that we observed,
altered outlooks, planning, and regulation observance may also
accompany poor physical health. A community reliant on local
enforcement through comanagement may mirror choices made
by individuals and may have less community planning for or
attention to environmental sustainability. Comanagers may even
permit environmentally destructive practices among the sick, a
scenario with analogs to tradeoffs made by fishers in coastal
Kenyan communities (27).
We measured only one aspect of how illness may alter the
environment, although illness may impact not only fisheries and
fishers but also, Lake Victoria communities and women. Nega-
tive impacts could occur when family members of fishers who die
from illness turn to the environment as a safety net or when
ecological knowledge of sustainable practices is lost, driving
cross-generational changes in environmental engagement. Men
are the predominant harvesters of fish, but women play a sub-
stantial role in processing and trading fish around Lake Victoria.
Women’s fish access, migration, and HIV risk are also affected
by reliance on the same natural resource (28–30). In some cases,
women may access fish through transactional fish for sex ex-
changes, which are shaped by fish availability and exacerbate HIV
risk (31). Family members’ engagement of alternative livelihoods
may also stem from illness, although with uncertain environmental
consequences. For example, although reliance on agriculture may
relieve pressure on fisheries, deforestation and farming on steep
slopes in the region may also have negative environmental and hy-
drological consequences. Moreover, the long time horizon to harvest
for agricultural crops relative to fish may shape the ways illness
impacts engagement with natural resources.
Our work was conducted in an HIV-affected community, and
much of the literature on illness and labor dynamics focuses on
Fig. 3.
ORs of (A) fishing method legality and (B)
fishing with a particular method. ORs for poorer
physical health (A, B) and poorer mental health (A)
and 95% confidence intervals (vertical lines) are de-
rived from full conditional fixed effect logit models
(Tables S6 and S7) among individuals who report
participation in fishing in the preceding 3 mo. In the
Lake Victoria fishery, five fishing methods pre-
dominate. Three methods—long line, gillnet, and
small seine for dagaa—are legal offshore methods
(green) and subject to regulations designed to provide
for fishery sustainability, including mesh dimensions,
hook sizes, and movement patterns. Two methods—
beach seine and monofilament—are focused on inshore
regions (red), and although outlawed by fishery regu-
lations because they are environmentally destructive,
they remain widely practiced (51). Odds are for 1 SD
poorer (A, Left) physical health and (A, Right) mental
health as well as (B) physical health comparing across
individuals who sometimes participated in fishing
methods. Models include a full set of time-variant
covariates (physical health, mental health, income,
fishery role, and time point). Where the 95% confi-
dence intervals cross one, the association is not statisti-
cally significant. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01.
4174
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1613260114
Fiorella et al.
 HIV/AIDS. Although time horizons and discounting may differ
in individuals who anticipate a shortened lifespan, the physical
experience of frequent illness is not unique to individuals living
with HIV/AIDS. Social and economic consequences of illnesses
ranging from malaria to tuberculosis are substantial in many
regions, especially sub-Saharan Africa (32). The extent of all-
cause morbidity in adults in developing countries is relatively
unknown; although contemporaneous information is unavail-
able, a study of self-reported morbidity found that, staggeringly,
Kenyan men, nonpregnant women, and pregnant women were ill
21, 38, and 41% of days, respectively (33). Although the partic-
ular etiology, associated stigma, and psychological effects of HIV
are relevant to the impact of illness on the environment, we
contend that the chronic experience of illness faced by many
communities may have environmental implications independent
of a specific disease.
Meaningfully addressing the health of people, particularly adults,
who rely on natural resources may be important for ensuring en-
vironmental sustainability. Coupled models that integrate ecological
processes with infectious diseases and economic development
provide promising approaches to extend understanding in these
systems (34). Meeting basic needs of healthcare and medications
will also shape the physical effort and long-term investment that
people bring to their livelihoods in ways that do not only increase
the pressure that they exert on the environment. As such, insti-
tutions and organizations focused on protecting the environment
may need to more deeply consider the health of communities.
Our study emphasizes the importance of considering health,
governance, and ecosystems through an integrative lens. We
focus on links between health and environmental use, and the
integration with governance is equally important. Improving
environmental governance remains a key challenge for protected
areas, forests, fisheries, and other resources (1), and imple-
menting sustainable harvest practices, conservation efforts, and
community-based resource management often falls to commu-
nities dependent on natural resources for food and income. The
loss of natural resources invariably affects these communities
first and most severely. Although promising governance regimes
may incentivize resource stewardship and adjust property rights,
where these mechanisms fail to address the vulnerabilities that re-
source users face, these strategies are likely insufficient (35). Fisher
vulnerability—and thereby resource vulnerability—may be closely
related to the health of resource users. This finding is potentially
relevant to temporally similar forms of resource harvest, including
hunting, harvesting forest products, and burning charcoal, and may
have additional analogs to agriculture.
Our findings on human–environment health linkages in East
Africa highlight the need for critical reevaluation of the long-
standing assumption that disease provides a natural check to
human overexploitation of the environment. Although evidence
from agricultural systems suggests that widespread illness may
reduce food production (8, 9), we find that illness may also alter
resource use and the sustainability of harvest practices. We must
disentangle these complex feedback systems to better address the
linked fates of human health and environmental sustainability.
Methods
Study Site. We conducted this study on Mfangano Island located within Homa
Bay County in Nyanza Province, Kenya. A continental island in Lake Victoria,
Mfangano Island is ∼65 km2 and home to 21,000 people (36). Fishery in-
volvement for trade and subsistence is widespread, and Mfangano Island has
limited health infrastructure and electricity, and no running water or paved
roads. Food insecurity is common throughout Mfangano Island and ubiq-
uitous among the 27% of adults living with HIV/AIDS (20, 37–39).
Survey Methods. From December of 2012 to March of 2014, we collected data
at four time points: baseline and 3, 6, and 12 mo. Data are from 303 par-
ticipant households randomly selected from an enumerated sampling list of
all households with a child <2 y of age and living on Mfangano Island, Kenya.
We present data from adult male respondents, who were initially present in
253 (83%) households. Local enumerators conducted surveys in Dholuo, the
local language. We obtained written consent from study participants before
enrollment. The study protocol was reviewed and approved by the Univer-
sity of California, Berkeley Committee on Human Research and the Ethical
Review Committee of the Kenya Medical Research Institute.
We created surveys through a compilation of validated measures and
adaptations. Fishing activities surveys were created based on Lake Victoria
Frame Surveys documenting regional fishing methods (40). Fishers reported
fishing methods, role, region, and income over the preceding 3 mo. Although it
is possible that illegal and destructive fishing methods were underreported, we
aimed to minimize bias by conducting interviews in private and away from fish
landing sites; the relative commonality of illegal methods in practice and our
results suggest that underreporting is not common.
The MOS-HIV was used to assess health-related quality of life (23, 24). The
MOS-HIV has been used in hundreds of studies around the world, adapted
for use in East Africa (41, 42), and used to assess health in HIV-affected
populations (43). The MOS-HIV has also been validated against metrics of
disease progression (e.g., WHO stage and treatment adherence), mental
health (e.g., Center for Epidemiological Depression Scale), and physical
health [e.g., CD4 count and Karnofsky Performance Status (23, 44)] and is
highly correlated to other health questionnaires [e.g., Quality of Well-Being
Scale and Short Form Health Survey-12 (45, 46)]. We used a modified version
of the scale designed for use in East Africa (41, 42). The MOS-HIV is a
35-question scale measuring self-reported health-related quality of life
designed to assess 11 dimensions of health: general health perceptions,
pain, physical functioning, social functioning, role functioning, mental
health, energy/fatigue, cognitive function, health distress, quality of life,
and health transition. Raw scores were tallied and transformed to a 0–100
scale (Table S1). Previous analyses identified a two-factor structure that
provides for mental and physical health summary scores (44). Mental and
physical health subscales have been shown to be reliable and valid in a high-
income reference population [Roche reference (44)] as well as with an East
African reference population (41). We calculated mental and physical health
summary scores using each of these reference populations as well as with Z
scores derived from the reference and our population; resulting scores are
all highly correlated (Table S2), and we used the Roche reference weights
and Z scores in subsequent analyses because of relative similarities in sub-
scale averages with our population and the potential for broad comparison
based on their wider use. Importantly, mental and physical health summary
scores are independent of disease status; for example, an individual with HIV
that is well-controlled by antiretroviral therapy may register low morbidity.
We did not find evidence of differences in participation in or time spent
fishing related to mental and physical health, although there may be a small
survival bias (n = 4 fishers died during our study; 1.5%). However, fishing
incomes remained relatively high, and migration to the lakeshore was sub-
stantial, with fishing-crew populations fluctuating up to 50% (47, 48). Thus,
individual deaths may not have an aggregate effect on fishing pressure
when fluctuation in fisher populations is substantial relative to even the
region’s high death rate. Similar conclusions about the unlikeliness of fisher
deaths reducing fishing pressure have been reached in research considering
the impact of HIV on fisheries across Africa (14).
Statistical Methods. We examined the effects of mental and physical health
on whether individuals are fishing, legality of fishing methods, and specific
types of fishing activities using conditional fixed effects logit models (49, 50).
Our regression model was as follows:
cit = αi + δti + βMit + γXit + «it,
[1]
where cit is a binary variable equal to one if participant i is engaged in that
particular kind of fishing at time t and zero if participant i is not engaged in
that particular kind of fishing at time t; αi is an individual-specific effect that
accounts for all characteristics specific to individual i, and δt is a time effect
that accounts for all variation within a given time t. Mit denotes our mor-
bidity measure, and the variable is centered at 0 and normalized, such that
1 and −1 are 1 SD away from the mean (Fig. S1). Xit is a vector of control
variables, and «it is an error term.
The model thus estimated within-individual differences across time points
by using the individual as a control for himself in estimating the effect of the
predictor variables when the outcome was present compared with the time
points when the outcome was not present. The approach controlled for
individuals’ time-invariant characteristics (e.g., sex, ethnicity, fishing pref-
erences, and history with particular methods, etc.) both observed and un-
observed. In comparing the relative difference in a participant’s responses to
Fiorella et al.
PNAS
|
April 18, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 16
|
4175
ENVIRONMENTAL
SCIENCES
SUSTAINABILITY
SCIENCE
 the MOS-HIV questionnaire, we thus also accounted for individual differ-
ences in reporting on the scale. Moreover, comparisons of within-individual
differences minimized the potential effects of survival bias, because indi-
viduals who die are still included during the time points in which they are
surveyed. We transformed the estimated coefficients to ORs and similarly
transformed SEs and 95% confidence intervals. All models also included
time-variant covariates that may alter selection of fishing methods: fishing
net income, fishery role (e.g., laborer or gear owner), and season.
Fishing methods were not exclusive, meaning that fishers often partici-
pated in more than one type of fishing and switched fishing methods often.
Because there was substantial variation in methods that were paired, we
were unable to concurrently estimate engagement in fishing activities with a
multinomial model. Our conditional fixed effect logit models included in-
dividuals who sometimes used a particular fishing method at any of four time
points to estimate within-individual differences. The models did not include
individuals who always or never used a particular method, because differ-
ences in behavior are necessary to estimate ORs. We also conducted less
restrictive random effects logit models that did not exclude individuals who
never or always participated in fishing or a particular fishing method and
compared results using Hausman tests (Tables S4–S7). Although only some of
the Hausman tests rejected the random effects model at the 10% level, they
showed relatively similar effect sizes. We present results from conditional
fixed effect models in the text and figures.
We used longitudinal regression models to examine fishing effort rep-
resented using continuous measures of hours that fishers fished per month,
income per hour fishing, nights spent away, and hours traveled to fish and
similarly compared fixed and random effects models (Table S5). We divided
our physical and mental health summary scores into quintiles to calculate
the hours and days spent fishing by individuals experiencing different levels
of illness to visualize changing effort across morbidity quintiles (Fig. 2), al-
though we used the aforementioned controlled regression models to assess
associations between these continuous variables.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank C. Barrett, H. Bodwitch, K. Gaynor, and the
Barrett group for comments on earlier versions of this manuscript and
M. Potts and L. Fortmann for feedback in shaping this study. We also thank the
Ekialo Kiona Center, Organic Health Response, Kenya Ministry of Fisheries
Development, Kenya Medical Research Institute, and the Mfangano Island
community. National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program,
National Science Foundation Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement grant,
Cornell’s Atkinson Center (K.J.F.), and National Science Foundation Coupled
Human and Natural Systems Grant 115057 (to J.S.B.) supported this work.
1. IPCC (2014) Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability, eds
Field CB, et al. (Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, UK and New York).
2. Myers SS, et al. (2013) Human health impacts of ecosystem alteration. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 110(47):18753–18760.
3. Dasgupta P (2001) Human Well-Being and the Natural Environment (Oxford Univ
Press, New York).
4. Malthus TR (1798) An Essay on the Principle of Population (J. Johnson, London).
5. Fox MP, et al. (2004) The impact of HIV/AIDS on labour productivity in Kenya. Trop
Med Int Health 9(3):318–324.
6. Byrne R (2002) AIDS in Zambia, the effect on subsistence farmers. Geogr Rev 15:29–31.
7. Nguthi FN, Niehof A (2008) Effects of HIV/AIDS on the livelihood of banana-farming
households in Central Kenya. NJAS Wagening J Life Sci 56(3):179–190.
8. de Waal A, Whiteside A (2003) New variant famine: AIDS and food crisis in southern
Africa. Lancet 362(9391):1234–1237.
9. Mason NM, Jayne TS, Chapoto A, Myers RJ (2010) A test of the new variant famine
hypothesis: Panel survey evidence from Zambia. World Dev 38(3):356–368.
10. Talman A, Bolton S, Walson JL (2013) Interactions between HIV/AIDS and the envi-
ronment: Toward a syndemic framework. Am J Public Health 103(2):253–261.
11. Hunter LM, Twine W, Patterson L (2007) “Locusts are now our beef”: Adult mortality
and household dietary use of local environmental resources in rural South Africa.
Scand J Public Health Suppl 69:165–174.
12. Challe JFX, Struik PC (2008) The impact on orchid species abundance of gathering
their edible tubers by HIV/AIDS orphans: A case of three villages in the Southern
Highlands of Tanzania. NJAS Wagening J Life Sci 56(3):261–279.
13. Damon M, Zivin JG, Thirumurthy H (2015) Health shocks and natural resource man-
agement: Evidence from Western Kenya. J Environ Econ Manage 69:36–52.
14. Allison EH, Seeley JA (2004) HIV and AIDS among fisherfolk: A threat to ‘responsible
fisheries’? Fish Fish (Oxf) 5:214–234.
15. Axelrod R, Hamilton WD (1981) The evolution of cooperation. Science 211(4489):
1390–1396.
16. Taabu-Munyaho A, et al. (2014) Spatial and temporal variation in the distribution and
density of pelagic fish species in Lake Victoria, East Africa. Aquat Ecosyst Health Manag
17(1):52–61.
17. Omwoma S, et al. (2014) Declining commercial fish catches in Lake Victoria’s Winam
Gulf: The importance of restructuring Kenya’s aquaculture programme. Lakes
Reservoirs: Res Manage 19(3):206–210.
18. Geheb K, Binns T (1997) ‘Fishing farmers’ or ‘farming fishermen’? The quest for
household income and nutritional security on the Kenyan shores of Lake Victoria. Afr
Aff (Lond) 96(382):73–93.
19. Balirwa JS (2007) Ecological, environmental and socioeconomic aspects of the Lake
Victoria’s introduced Nile perch fishery in relation to the native fisheries and the
species culture potential: Lessons to learn. Afr J Ecol 45(2):120–129.
20. Kenya Ministry of Health (2013) Kenya County HIV Service Delivery Profiles (Ministry
of Health, Nairobi, Republic of Kenya).
21. Allison EH, Seeley JA (2004) Another group at high risk for HIV. Science 305(5687):1104.
22. FAO (2012) The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture, ed Fisheries and Aquaculture
Department (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome).
23. Wu AW, Revicki DA, Jacobson D, Malitz FE (1997) Evidence for reliability, validity and
usefulness of the Medical Outcomes Study HIV Health Survey (MOS-HIV). Qual Life
Res 6(6):481–493.
24. Wu AW, Hays RD, Kelly S, Malitz F, Bozzette SA (1997) Applications of the Medical Out-
comes Study health-related quality of life measures in HIV/AIDS. Qual Life Res 6(6):531–554.
25. Njiru M, Kazungu J, Ngugi CC, Gichuki J, Muhoozi L (2008) An overview of the current
status of Lake Victoria fishery: Opportunities, challenges and management strategies.
Lakes Reservoirs: Res Manage 13:1–12.
26. Lake Victoria Fisheries Organization (2012) State of Fish Stocks (Lake Victoria Fisheries
Organization, Jinja, Uganda).
27. Daw TM, et al. (2015) Evaluating taboo trade-offs in ecosystems services and human
well-being. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112(22):6949–6954.
28. Camlin CS, Kwena ZA, Dworkin SL, Cohen CR, Bukusi EA (2014) “She mixes her
business”: HIV transmission and acquisition risks among female migrants in western
Kenya. Soc Sci Med 102:146–156.
29. Camlin CS, Kwena ZA, Dworkin SL (2013) Jaboya vs. jakambi: Status, negotiation, and
HIV risks among female migrants in the “sex for fish” economy in Nyanza Province,
Kenya. AIDS Educ Prev 25(3):216–231.
30. Mojola SA (2011) Fishing in dangerous waters: Ecology, gender and economy in HIV
risk. Soc Sci Med 72(2):149–156.
31. Fiorella KJ, et al. (2015) Transactional fish-for-sex relationships amid declining fish
access in Kenya. World Dev 74:323–332.
32. Mathers CD, Loncar D (2006) Projections of global mortality and burden of disease
from 2002 to 2030. PLoS Med 3(11):e442.
33. Murray CJL, Feachem RGA, Phillips MA, Willis C (1992) Adult morbidity: limited data
and methodological uncertainty. The Health of Adults in the Developing World,
World Bank Publication Series, eds Feachem RGA, Phillips MA, Kjellstrom T, Murray C,
Over M (Oxford Univ Press, Oxford), pp 113–160.
34. Ngonghala CN, et al. (2014) Poverty, disease, and the ecology of complex systems.
PLoS Biol 12(4):e1001827.
35. Allison EH, et al. (2012) Rights-based fisheries governance: From fishing rights to
human rights. Fish Fish (Oxf) 13:14–29.
36. Mbita Division (2009) Population Projection (Nairobi, Government of Kenya, Kenya).
37. Fiorella KJ, et al. (2014) Fishing for food? Analyzing links between fishing livelihoods
and food security around Lake Victoria, Kenya. Food Secur 6:1–10.
38. Nagata JM, et al. (2013) Socio-demographic and health associations with body mass index at
the time of enrollment in HIV care in Nyanza Province, Kenya. AIDS Care 25(12):1491–1498.
39. Nagata JM, et al. (2015) Around the table: Food insecurity, socio-economic status, and
instrumental social support among women living in a rural Kenyan island community.
Ecol Food Nutr 54(4):358–369.
40. Lake Victoria Fisheries Organization (2013) Regional frame survey report. Regional Status
Report on Lake Victoria Biennial Frame Surveys Between 2000 and 2012 (Lake Victoria
Fisheries Organization, Jinja, Uganda), pp 1–64.
41. Mast TC, et al. (2004) Measuring quality of life among HIV-infected women using a
culturally adapted questionnaire in Rakai district, Uganda. AIDS Care 16(1):81–94.
42. Stangl AL, Bunnell R, Wamai N, Masaba H, Mermin J (2012) Measuring quality of life
in rural Uganda: Reliability and validity of summary scores from the medical outcomes
study HIV health survey (MOS-HIV). Qual Life Res 21(9):1655–1663.
43. McDonnell KA, Gielen AC, O’Campo P, Burke JG (2005) Abuse, HIV status and health-
related quality of life among a sample of HIV positive and HIV negative low income
women. Qual Life Res 14(4):945–957.
44. Revicki DA, Sorensen S, Wu AW (1998) Reliability and validity of physical and mental
health summary scores from the Medical Outcomes Study HIV Health Survey. Med
Care 36(2):126–137.
45. Copfer AE, et al. (1996) The use of two measures of health-related quality of life in
HIV-infected individuals: A cross-sectional comparison. Qual Life Res 5(2):281–286.
46. Chariyalertsak S, et al. (2011) Reliability and validity of Thai versions of the MOS-HIV
and SF-12 quality of life questionnaires in people living with HIV/AIDS. Health Qual
Life Outcomes 9:15.
47. Nunan F, et al. (2012) Finding space for participation: Fisherfolk mobility and co-
management of Lake Victoria fisheries. Environ Manage 50(2):204–216.
48. Nunan F (2010) Mobility and fisherfolk livelihoods on Lake Victoria: Implications for
vulnerability and risk. Geoforum 41:776–785.
49. Chamberlain G (1980) Analysis of covariance with qualitative data. Rev Econ Stud 47:225–238.
50. Allison PD (2005) Fixed Effects Regression Methods for Longitudinal Data (SAS In-
stitute Inc., Cary, NC).
51. Government of Kenya (2012) Fisheries (General) Regulations. In Cap. 378.
4176
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1613260114
Fiorella et al.
