 Author’s Accepted Manuscript
Can smartphone mental health interventions reduce
symptoms of anxiety? A meta-analysis of
randomized controlled trials
Joseph Firth, John Torous, Jennifer Nicholas,
Rebekah Carney, Simon Rosenbaum, Jerome Sarris
PII:
S0165-0327(17)30015-0
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2017.04.046
Reference:
JAD8920
To appear in:
Journal of Affective Disorders
Received date: 3 January 2017
Revised date:
6 March 2017
Accepted date: 23 April 2017
Cite this article as: Joseph Firth, John Torous, Jennifer Nicholas, Rebekah
Carney, Simon Rosenbaum and Jerome Sarris, Can smartphone mental health
interventions reduce symptoms of anxiety? A meta-analysis of randomized
controlled 
trials, Journal 
of 
Affective 
Disorders,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2017.04.046
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for
publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of
the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and
review of the resulting galley proof before it is published in its final citable form.
Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which
could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
www.elsevier.com/locate/jad
 Can smartphone mental health interventions reduce symptoms of anxiety? A 
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials 
Joseph Firth1*, John Torous2,3, Jennifer Nicholas4,5, Rebekah Carney1, Simon Rosenbaum4,5, 
Jerome Sarris6,7 
1Division of Psychology and Mental Health, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of 
Manchester, UK;  
2Department of Psychiatry, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Canter, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA;  
3Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States;  
4Black Dog Institute, UNSW Australia, Australia;  
5School of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, UNSW Australia, Australia;  
6Department of Psychiatry, University of Melbourne, The Melbourne Clinic, Melbourne, Australia;  
7Centre for Human Psychopharmacology, Swinburne University of Technology, Hawthorn, Australia. 
*Corresponding author: Division of Psychology and Mental Health, University of Manchester, 
Room 3.306, Jean McFarlane Building, Oxford Road, Manchester,  M13 9PL, UK. Tel.: +44 (0)161 
306 7914. joseph.firth@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk 
 
Abstract 
Background:  
Various psychological interventions are effective for reducing symptoms of anxiety when used alone, 
or as an adjunct to anti-anxiety medications. Recent studies have further indicated that smartphone-
 supported psychological interventions may also reduce anxiety, although the role of mobile devices 
in the treatment and management of anxiety disorders has yet to be established.  
Methods:  
We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis of all randomized clinical trials (RCTs) 
reporting the effects of psychological interventions delivered via smartphone on symptoms of 
anxiety (sub-clinical or diagnosed anxiety disorders). A systematic search of major electronic 
databases conducted in November 2016 identified 9 eligible RCTs, with 1837 participants. Random-
effects meta-analyses were used to calculate the standardized mean difference (as Hedges’ g) 
between smartphone interventions and control conditions. 
Results:  
Significantly greater reductions in total anxiety scores were observed from smartphone 
interventions than control conditions (g=0.325, 95% C.I.=0.17 to 0.48, p<0.01), with no evidence of 
publication bias. Effect sizes from smartphone interventions were significantly greater when 
compared to waitlist/inactive controls (g=0.45, 95% C.I.=0.30 to 0.61, p<0.01) than active control 
conditions (g=0.19, 95% C.I.=0.07 to 0.31, p=0.003).  
Limitations:  
The extent to which smartphone interventions can match (or exceed) the efficacy of recognised 
treatments for anxiety has yet to established. 
Conclusions:  
This meta-analysis shows that psychological interventions delivered via smartphone devices can 
reduce anxiety. Future research should aim to develop pragmatic methods for implementing 
smartphone-based support for people with anxiety, while also comparing the efficacy of these 
interventions to standard face-to-face psychological care. 
 Keywords: e-health; mhealth; apps; panic disorder; anxiety disorders; obsessive-compulsive disorder 
 
Introduction 
Anxiety disorders are among the most prevalent mental health conditions worldwide, 
affecting up to 29.8% of the population over the course of a year (Baxter et al., 2013). These 
disorders impair quality of life and impact negatively upon people’s ability to function in 
society and to maintain employment (Mendlowicz and Stein, 2000; Waghorn et al., 2005), 
all of which contributes to the severe economic and societal burden of anxiety disorders 
(Baxter et al., 2014). Furthermore, many individuals experience sub-clinical anxiety 
conditions and symptoms which again impair quality of life and functioning (Haller et al., 
2014). Symptoms include frequent nervousness, pervasive worry and pessimistic thoughts, 
and can develop into full-threshold anxiety disorders if left untreated (Haller et al., 2014). 
A core element of treatment for many anxiety disorders is pharmacological including 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor 
(SNRIs), or benzodiazepines (Baldwin et al., 2005). However, various psychological 
interventions have also proven effective for reducing symptoms of anxiety, when used 
either in addition to or instead of pharmacological treatment. Examples include cognitive 
behaviour therapy (Deacon and Abramowitz, 2004), relaxation training (Norton, 2012), and 
mindfulness (Vøllestad et al., 2012). Unfortunately, such interventions may be inaccessible 
for many people, due to difficulties obtaining and attending appointments from remote 
locations, costliness, or unavailability through health services (Gunter and Whittal, 2010).  
 Recently, ubiquitous internet access and the spread of computerized technologies have 
presented new methods for providing such interventions. Evidence has indicated that 
computerized versions of various cognitive and/or behavioural therapies can provide 
efficacious, remote treatment for anxiety disorders, and reduce symptoms with similar 
efficacy to face-to-face treatments (Andrews et al., 2010; Cuijpers et al., 2009). Interest in 
using computerized interventions to improve mental health has recently increased with the 
dawn and rapid uptake of smartphone technologies (Firth et al., 2016). The wide-scale 
uptake and pervasive usage of these devices has the potential to revolutionize current 
methods for gathering and using data in mental healthcare (Torous and Baker, 2016). 
Furthermore, an array of mental health ‘apps’ are already available for tracking anxiety and 
delivering digital interventions which can even be tailored to individual needs (Coulon et al., 
2016; Shen et al., 2015). 
However, despite the rapid growth and great potential of this research area, there has been 
no systematic evaluation of the empirical evidence for using smartphones in the treatment 
of anxiety. Thus, this meta-analysis was conducted to examine the efficacy of smartphone-
supported psychological interventions for reducing symptoms of anxiety. We also aimed to 
use sub-group analyses along with a systematic review of studies to explore which types of 
smartphone interventions were most efficacious, and in what context. The findings of this 
study will therefore indicate the overall utility of smartphone interventions in the 
management of anxiety, and inform the design of future interventions as smartphone 
technology continues to advance.  
 
 Methods 
This systematic review and meta-analysis followed the PRISMA statement for transparent 
and comprehensive reporting of methodology and results (Moher et al., 2009). 
Search Strategy  
We searched the following electronic databases for this review: Cochrane Central Register 
of Controlled Trials, Health Technology Assessment Database, Allied and Complementary 
Medicine (AMED), Health Management Information Consortium (HMIC), Ovid MEDLINE, 
Embase, and PsycINFO from inception to November 2016. The search was structured 
according to the PICO framework (Schardt et al., 2007) using a variety of search terms 
relevant to anxiety disorders/symptoms along with terms for smartphone interventions to 
capture all potentially eligible results. The search terms used are displayed Supplement 1. 
Reference lists of retrieved articles were also searched and a search of Google Scholar was 
conducted using similar key words to identify any additional relevant articles.  
Eligibility Criteria 
Only English-language research articles were included in the review. We aimed to include all 
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) reporting changes in anxiety following mental health 
interventions delivered via smartphone devices. Since we aimed to examine the effects of 
smartphone interventions on all forms of anxiety (sub-clinical or diagnosed anxiety 
disorders), eligibility was not restricted by diagnostic status, medication usage, or any other 
sample characteristics (such as age or gender). Studies recruiting participants from the 
general population or clinical settings were eligible for inclusion.  
 Intervention eligibility was judged by three independent investigators (JF, JN, and JT), and 
any discrepancies were resolved through discussion until mutual agreement was reached. 
For the purposes of this review, smartphones were classified as any mobile phone device 
with at least 3G internet connectivity and the capacity to run downloaded applications 
(‘apps’). We included all studies which aimed to improve mental health and/or psychological 
well-being using smartphones as a primary mode of delivery for the intervention, and 
compared this to a control condition, using random allocation of participants. However, only 
interventions which had a duration of at least 1 week were included in the analysis, meaning 
single-session studies which only measured changes in state anxiety before-and-after a 
single usage of a smartphone app were excluded. Multi-component interventions which 
incorporated smartphones as a key aspect of a broader computerized or face-to-face 
interventions were eligible, provided that the smartphones were used to deliver some form 
of psychological treatment/support (rather than only assessing adherence or outcomes of 
the broader intervention). 
Studies with either waitlist control conditions or active comparators were eligible for 
inclusion, provided that the comparison condition did not deliver a mental health 
intervention using a smartphone device. Studies which compared smartphone interventions 
to anti-anxiety medications, i.e. by randomizing participants to either smartphone or 
medication conditions, were also eligible. Where reported study data was insufficient to 
determine eligibility, the corresponding authors were contacted twice over a period of 8 
weeks to request the necessary information.  
 
 
 Data Extraction 
A systematic data extraction tool was used to extract the following from each study: 
 (i) Study details: Including; sample size (n), mean age of participants (years), sample 
characteristics (general or clinical population, inclusion criteria, diagnoses), and trial design 
(cross-over vs. parallel designs, trial quality). 
(ii) Smartphone intervention: Length (weeks), frequency (instructions given for usage), 
details (summary of intervention and psychological theories/techniques used), additional 
components (e.g. face-to-face or computerized aspects), details of control conditions 
(waitlist/inactive, attention-matched or non-inferiority active comparator).  
(iii) Effects on overall anxiety: This was defined as the total score on the primary outcome of 
any clinically-validated rating scale used for assessing symptoms of anxiety. Where studies 
applied more than one relevant measure of anxiety without specifying a primary outcome, 
data from changes in each measure was extracted to calculate a mean total change. Studies 
which measured anxiety only as a secondary outcome were also included in the main 
analysis, although our systematic review of studies examined the differential effects of 
smartphone interventions specifically targeting anxiety vs. those which targeted other 
aspects of mental health.  
(iv) Effects on specific anxiety symptoms: Changes in individual aspects of anxiety (e.g. 
nervousness, panic, hyperventilation), assessed using specific measures was also extracted 
for narrative synthesis.  
 
 
 Statistical Analyses 
The meta-analyses were conducted in Comprehensive Meta-Analysis 2.0 (Borenstein et al., 
2005) using a DerSimonian-Laird random-effects model (van der Kemp et al., 2012) to 
account for heterogeneity between studies. The mean change scores in total anxiety for 
smartphone intervention and control conditions were pooled to calculate the difference 
between conditions as Hedges’ g (with 95% confidence intervals (CI)). A p value of <0.05 was 
considered statistically significant. For studies which used more than one measure of 
anxiety, the average change across all measures was computed and used in the pooled 
analysis. For studies which only used scales assessing severity of specific anxiety disorders 
(e.g. social anxiety, panic disorder), without reporting changes on a total anxiety scale, the 
average change in these scales was calculated and used as the total anxiety change score for 
analyses. In multi-arm trials which had more than one comparator condition, the outcome 
data from active comparison groups was used for main analyses to reduce the possibility of 
general intervention effects impacting results. Additionally, subgroup analyses were 
conducted to examine the effect of smartphone interventions in comparison to either 
inactive/waitlist control conditions or active comparator conditions. 
Heterogeneity between studies was examined using Cochran’s Q (with p-value) and I² 
estimates. These statistics provide an estimate of the extent to which statistical 
heterogeneity between studies has arisen due to genuine differences, rather than due to 
chance. To assess the quality of each RCT, the Cochrane Collaboration’s risk of bias tool 
(Higgins et al., 2011) was applied, which examines six aspects of trial design (sequence 
generation, allocation sequence concealment, blinding of participants and personnel, 
blinding of outcome assessment, incomplete outcome data, selective outcome reporting) 
 which may introduce sources of bias. Sensitivity analyses were applied to investigate if 
significant effects remained present after only including RCTs with complete outcome data 
or intention-to-treat (ITT) analyses.  
To examine the possibility of publication bias affecting results, Eggers’ t-test was conducted 
on each meta-analysis. Additionally, a ‘file draw analysis’ was used to compute a ‘fail-safe N’ 
(Orwin, 1983) for each significant effect observed. This estimates the number of null studies 
which would have to exist to invalidate the results of the meta-analysis i.e. the number of 
non-significant unpublished trials which would cause the p-value to be >0.05. Finally, to 
further account for the potential impact of publication bias, a Duval and Tweedie’s trim-and-
fill analysis was applied to each analysis, in order to remove any small studies with large 
effect sizes from the positive side of the funnel plot. 
Results 
Search results 
The search returned 1285 results, reduced to 893 after duplicates were removed. A further 
845 articles were excluded after reviewing the titles and abstracts. Full versions were 
retrieved for 48 articles, of which 8 articles were eligible for inclusion. One additional 
eligible article was retrieved from an additional search of Google Scholar. Thus, a total of 9 
unique studies with independent samples were included in this review. The article screening 
process is detailed in Figure 1. 
Included studies and participant details 
Full details of each study are displayed in Table 1. Outcome data for anxiety symptoms was 
available for a total of 1837 participants; 960 in the smartphone intervention conditions and 
 877 participants in comparison conditions. Mean participant age was 36.1 years (range = 
18–43 years) and 34.8% were male. No studies required a diagnosed anxiety disorder as 
inclusion criteria for the trial. However, all studies did used some indication of mental health 
issues as inclusion criteria: Three studies recruited clinical populations with either major 
depression (Ly et al., 2015), diagnosed or probable ADHD (Moell et al., 2015), or any mental 
health issue as assessed by a General Practitioner (GP) (Reid et al., 2011). Four studies 
recruited from general populations, but used clinically-validated scales to include only 
participants with symptoms of mental health conditions (Enock et al., 2014; Ivanova et al., 
2016; Pham et al., 2016; Roepke et al., 2015; Proudfoot et al., 2013). One study recruited 
oncology nurses with high levels of stress (Villani et al., 2013). 
Smartphone interventions lasted an average of 6.1 weeks (range = 4-10 weeks). Four of the 
studies used smartphones alone to deliver entirely app-based interventions (Enock et al., 
2014; Pham et al., 2016; Roepke et al., 2015; Villani et al., 2013), whereas four others used 
additional laptop/desktop computer aspects (Moell et al., 2015; Reid et al., 2011; Ivanova et 
al., 2016; Proudfoot et al., 2013). One study used the smartphone intervention to support 
face-to-face therapy (Ly et al., 2015).  
Three studies measured anxiety outcomes using the ‘Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7-item’ 
(GAD-7) scale, two using the anxiety subscale of the ‘Depression Anxiety Stress Scales’ 
(DASS), and one study for each of the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS), the 
‘State and Trait Anxiety Inventory’ (STAI), the ‘Beck Anxiety Inventory’ (BAI), the ‘Social 
Interaction Anxiety Scale (SIAS)’ and the ‘Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale’ (LSAS). The results 
of bias assessments are shown in Supplement 1. The most common risk of bias was due to 
inadequate blinding of participants, who were either directly aware of treatment or control 
 condition status (i.e. in waitlist controlled trials), or could have conceivably detected or 
assumed their treatment condition in attention-matched controlled trials.  
Overall effects of smartphone interventions on symptoms of anxiety 
Figure 2 displays the pooled effect size from smartphone interventions for symptoms of 
anxiety, along with individual effect sizes for each intervention studied. Intention-to-treat 
(ITT) or complete outcome data was available from all 9 RCTs, with a total of 1581 
participants (880 in smartphone conditions, 701 in control conditions). Random-effects 
meta-analysis found a small-to-moderate positive effect of smartphone mental health 
interventions on total symptoms of anxiety in comparison to all control conditions (g=0.325, 
95% C.I=0.17 to 0.48, p<0.001). There was significant heterogeneity across the study data 
(Q=15.9, p=0.044, I² =49.6%). The funnel plot for publication bias is displayed in Supplement 
2. Egger’s regression test found no evidence of publication bias (p=0.98), and the fail-safe N 
was 75, indicating that 75 additional 'null' studies would be needed for the observed p-value 
to exceed 0.05. Also, the results remained unchanged after applying the trim-and-fill 
analysis, and after removing the single study which did not apply ITT analyses.  
Subgroup analyses (Figure 3) revealed that effect sizes were significantly greater in trials 
which compared smartphone interventions to waitlist conditions than effect sizes in studies 
which used active comparator conditions (Q=6.9, p=0.009). Smartphone interventions had a 
moderate effect on anxiety when compared to waitlist control conditions (N=6, n=1212, 
g=0.452, 95% C.I.=0.30 to 0.61, p<0.001), with no indication of heterogeneity (Q=7.4, 
p=0.19, I2=32%) or publication bias (Egger’s t=0.45, p=0.76). When compared to active 
control conditions, smartphone interventions had only a small effect (N=5, n=1026, g=0.189, 
 95% C.I.=0.07 to 0.31, p=0.003), again with no heterogeneity or publication bias (Q=1.74, 
p=0.78, I2=0%, Egger’s t=0.11, p=0.9). 
Smartphone interventions specifically targeting anxiety 
Four studies specifically targeted symptoms of anxiety. Pham et al. (2016) found that a 
smartphone app which uses a game-like interface to train users in diaphragmatic breathing 
was acceptable among people experiencing symptoms of anxiety, but did not significantly 
reduce anxiety, panic or hyperventilation more than waitlist conditions. Villani et al. (2013) 
used smartphones to deliver multimedia videos for Mobile Stress Innoculation Training (M-
SIT) to nurses experiencing elevated levels of stress. M-SIT significantly reduced state 
anxiety with each usage, and reduced trait anxiety after 4 weeks. However, reductions in 
trait anxiety after M-SIT intervention were not significantly greater than the control 
condition (who received neutral multimedia videos).  
Enock et al. (2014) targeted social anxiety using Cognitive Bias Modification (CBM) via 
smartphone devices, and compared this to a neutral training condition (again using 
smartphones) and a waitlist control. The CBM training reduced social anxiety significantly 
more than the waitlist control (p=0.018), although there was no difference between the 
CBM and neutral training treatments (p=0.41). Finally, Ivanova et al. (2016) used 
smartphones and laptops to deliver ‘Acceptance and Commitment Therapy’ (ACT) for social 
anxiety or panic disorders. This consisted of weekly online ACT modules, along with 
behavioural exercises and mood tracking. Additionally, half of the intervention group 
received personalised guidance messages from a therapist twice per week who remotely 
tracked their progress, whilst the other half were ‘unguided’; receiving only automated 
progress messages. Both groups receiving ACT had reduced anxiety significantly more than 
 the waitlist control after 10 weeks (d=0.39, p<0.05), with no difference between 
guided/unguided conditions. 
Smartphone interventions for overall mental health 
Three studies examined the effects of smartphone apps which focussed on overall mental 
well-being (e.g. anxiety, depression, stress and quality of life), using principles of CBT and 
emotional self-monitoring to identify target areas in order to provide individually-tailored 
advice and support. Reid et al. (2011) used the ‘Mobiletype’ app to engage help-seeking 
young people in regular self-monitoring of their behaviours and emotional states. Although 
anxiety was decreased after 4 weeks, equivalent reductions were observed in the control 
group who received an adapted neutral version of Mobiletype, designed for monitoring 
activities unrelated to mental health. Roepke et al. (2015) compared two versions of the 
smartphone app ‘SuperBetter’ to waitlist control conditions. Results showed that both the 
standard SuperBetter app and the enhanced version (with added CBT and Positive 
Psychology features) reduced anxiety significantly more than the waitlist group after 6 
weeks (p<0.01). Lastly, Proudfoot et al. (2013) used a smartphone app alongside a 
desktop/laptop computer interface to deliver the ‘myCompass’ intervention, combining self-
monitoring with various psychological modules for CBT, problem solving, and positive 
psychology. The myCompass intervention had a moderate effect on anxiety in comparison 
to both the active control (weekly SMS and email fact sheets about mental health) and 
waitlist conditions (Cohen’s d=0.40 and 0.47, respectively).  
Smartphone interventions targeting other disorders 
Two studies targeted other mental disorders using anxiety as a secondary outcome. Moell et 
al. (2015) aimed to improve organisation and attention in people with ADHD using 
 ‘LivingSMART’; comprising of a smartphone loaded with various apps which may help ADHD 
(e.g. Google Calendar, Evernote for organisation and Stayfocusd or SimplyNoise for 
distractions), along with computerized training in how to use these apps effectively. The 
LivingSMART intervention succeeded in its primary outcome, although small improvements 
in anxiety were not statistically significant (Cohen’s d=0.24, p=0.1). Ly et al. (2015) used a 
non-inferiority design to compare 10 weeks of weekly face-to-face ‘Behavioural Activation’ 
(BA) sessions for major depression, to 10-weeks of smartphone-delivered BA with only 4 
face-to-face sessions. Results showed that smartphone-supported BA had the same positive 
effects on anxiety as the full course of face-to-face therapy.  
Discussion 
This is the first meta-analysis to examine the efficacy of smartphone-supported 
psychological interventions for reducing symptoms of anxiety. The systematic search 
identified 9 RCTs delivering psychological interventions using smartphone devices (Table 1), 
with a combined sample size of 1837 participants. The number of eligible studies for this 
meta-analysis is similar to research in physical health conditions, as a recent meta-analysis 
in diabetes self-management found positive effects from smartphone interventions across 
13 studies with 1022 participants in total (Cui et al., 2016). The literature-base for anxiety 
also appears slightly larger than that for severe mental health conditions, such as 
schizophrenia, as a recent meta-analysis in this area identified only 5 relatively small trials 
(Firth & Torous, 2015).   
A random-effects meta-analysis found these interventions reduced total anxiety symptoms 
significantly more than control conditions (g=0.325, p<0.001) (Figure 2), with no evidence of 
publication bias affecting results. The greatest benefits were observed among the RCTs 
 which compared smartphone interventions to waitlist control conditions (g=0.45, p<0.001). 
Significantly smaller effects were observed among the studies which controlled for 
attention/user engagement, although smartphone interventions still significantly reduced 
anxiety symptoms more than the comparison conditions (g=0.19, p=0.003), thus indicating 
that delivering psychological treatment with smartphone devices is a promising and 
efficacious method for managing anxiety.  
Systematic review of the studies revealed that the three stand-alone smartphone 
interventions which directly targeted anxiety had no significant effect beyond control 
conditions (Enock et al., 2014; Pham et al., 2016; Villani et al., 2013). However, reductions in 
anxiety symptoms did occur from ‘SuperBetter’, an app which targeted depression and 
general mental health (Roepke et al. 2015). Significant benefits were also found from 
interventions which integrated smartphone aspects within broader therapeutic 
interventions (Ivanova et al., 2016; Proudfoot et al., 2013). 
The strongest evidence for using smartphones to treat anxiety disorders currently appears 
to be in the context of integrating these devices to enhance and support the delivery of 
existing face-to-face or internet-based therapy programs. However, future research should 
also directly compare smartphone-only therapies to face-to-face interventions for anxiety, 
in order to establish the relative efficacy of these methods, as this has not been examined to 
date. Interestingly however, Ivanova et al. (2016) showed that an entirely internet-delivered 
‘ACT’ intervention for anxiety was equally as effective as a therapist-supported version. 
Furthermore, Ly et al. (2015) showed that face-to-face sessions of a BA intervention could 
be dramatically reduced and replaced with smartphone-support without losing efficacy.  
 The diminished effect sizes of smartphone interventions in studies with active control 
groups suggest the complexity of digital mental health research. While none of the studies 
were designed to investigate the notion of a digital placebo effect (Firth and Torous, 2016), 
these results suggest the using a digital device in itself may offer some measure of 
psychological benefits. For instance, two studies which used adequate comparison 
conditions to match both groups for smartphone interaction found no significant difference 
in reductions in anxiety between their psychological interventions and supposedly 
psychologically-inactive control conditions (Enock et al., 2014; Villani et al., 2013). 
Additionally, Roepke et al. (2013) found that the standard ‘SuperBetter’ mental health app 
was equally efficacious as an enhanced version which added CBT and Positive Psychology 
techniques. Interestingly, a previous meta-analysis of a different technology-based 
intervention, virtual reality treatment, found a similar pattern: Across 23 studies (with 608 
participants), virtual reality interventions significantly reduced anxiety in comparison to 
waitlist conditions, but were no more effective than traditional behavioural/ psychological 
treatments (Opris et al. 2012).  
In order design these digital tools to be maximally effective in future, we require better 
understanding of the numerous factors that influence outcomes of smartphone 
interventions for anxiety. In particular, further research should explore the aspects of 
mental health apps which facilitate or hinder user engagement, and examine the impact this 
may have on intervention efficacy.  Smartphones could potentially offer a range of novel 
self-management strategies for people with clinical and sub-clinical anxiety, along with 
providing mobile services for the millions of people globally who require psychological 
support but struggle to access regular healthcare (Gunter and Whittal, 2010). The cost-
 effectiveness of delivering psychological interventions through smartphone devices on a 
wide-scale has yet to be established. Nonetheless, with continued technological advances 
constantly occurring, it is possible to envisage that efforts in this area could ultimately lead 
to novel digital interventions which improving upon existing treatments for anxiety, in some 
form.  
Although the apps reviewed here demonstrated some efficacy in reducing anxiety, less than 
half are currently available to the general population through the app stores (namely 
‘Flowy’, ‘myCompass’, ‘SuperBetter’, and ‘LivingSMART’ components). While no research 
has examined the scientific quality of all commercially-available anxiety apps, studies of 
apps for other mental health conditions indicate that the majority do not have 
demonstrated efficacy or adhere to evidence-based practice (Larsen et al., 2016; Nicholas et 
al., 2015). For instance, prior reviews of commercially-available mindfulness apps 
(sometimes used to address anxiety symptoms) suggest that the vast majority are not 
evidence-based and offer poor quality of information, engagement, and functionality (Mani 
et al., 2015). Given the accessibility and availability of mental health apps, ensuring that 
consumers have access to evidence-based interventions is vital, and may necessitate 
methodological changes in mHealth research.  
A limitation of this review is the significant heterogeneity found in overall analysis. The 
differences across the RCTs included in this review should be considered when interpreting 
our findings. For instance, whereas all studies used some mental health inclusion criteria, 
the degree to which participants were affected by anxiety differed substantially between 
and within studies. There remains a dearth of evidence on which patient groups may most 
benefit from smartphone apps for anxiety. Like any tool, there will be circumstances when 
 these apps are likely to be useful but also those where they may cause harm or be 
ineffective. Researching the adverse effects of apps, none which were study outcomes of 
any papers in this review, may help ensure that right anxiety apps are paired with the right 
patient. Understanding negative experience or reasons for dropping out of studies may 
provide the information necessary to create more engaging and personal apps in the future.  
There were also differences between studies in terms of the interventions applied and 
control conditions used, although these kinds of heterogeneity are typical to meta-analytic 
research. Additionally, the validity of the results is supported by our findings that there was 
no statistically heterogeneity among studies when examining subgroups which compared 
smartphone interventions to either active or waitlist control conditions, and no evidence of 
publication bias influencing effect size. Additionally, systematic review of studies was 
undertaken to describe the details and findings of each intervention type. 
In conclusion, there is preliminary evidence that psychological interventions delivered via 
smartphone devices can reduce symptoms of anxiety, although further research is needed 
to establish the extent to which these effects are driven by the therapy itself vs. expectancy 
effects/performance bias. Future research should investigate pragmatic approaches for 
integrating smartphone support within existing health services, and to compare 
smartphone-delivered interventions with face-to-face therapy for anxiety. Given the 
increased clinical interest and technical ability of smartphones to detect and intervene in 
anxiety, it is important that high quality research keeps pace with the potential of these 
apps in ensuring patients are offered safe and effective digital tools. 
 
Acknowledgments  
 JF is funded by an MRC Doctoral Training Grant. SR is funded by a Society for Mental Health 
Research Early Career Fellowship (Australia). RC is funded by an Economic and Social Research 
Council grant. JS is funded by an NHMRC Research Fellowship (APP1125000) 
 
Figure 1. PRISMA flow chart of study selection. 
Figure 2. Meta-analysis of the effects of smartphone interventions on symptoms of anxiety. 
Box size represents study weighting. Diamond represents overall effect size and 95% 
confidence intervals.  
Figure 3. Meta-analysis showing effects of smartphone interventions on symptoms of 
anxiety in (a) comparison to waitlist conditions, and (b) comparison to active controls. Box 
size represents study weighting. Diamond represents overall effect size and 95% confidence 
intervals. 
 
 
Supplementary Information 
Supplement 1. Terms used for systematic search. 
Supplement 2. Risk of bias summaries for included studies. 
Supplement 3. Forest-plot of publication bias. 
 
 
 
 References 
Andrews G, Cuijpers P, Craske MG, McEvoy P & Titov N. Computer therapy for the anxiety and 
depressive disorders is effective, acceptable and practical health care: a meta-analysis. PloS 
one 2010;5:e13196. 
Baldwin DS, Anderson IM, Nutt DJ, Bandelow B, Bond A, Davidson JR, den Boer JA, Fineberg NA, 
Knapp M & Scott J. Evidence-based guidelines for the pharmacological treatment of anxiety 
disorders: recommendations from the British Association for Psychopharmacology. Journal 
of Psychopharmacology 2005;19:567-596. 
Baxter A, Scott K, Vos T & Whiteford H. Global prevalence of anxiety disorders: a systematic review 
and meta-regression. Psychological Medicine 2013;43:897-910. 
Baxter A, Vos T, Scott K, Ferrari A & Whiteford H. The global burden of anxiety disorders in 2010. 
Psychological medicine 2014;44:2363-2374. 
Borenstein M, Hedges L, Higgins J & Rothstein H. Comprehensive meta-analysis version 2. 
Englewood, NJ: Biostat 2005;104. 
Boudreaux ED, Waring ME, Hayes RB, Sadasivam RS, Mullen S & Pagoto S. Evaluating and selecting 
mobile health apps: strategies for healthcare providers and healthcare organizations. 
Translational behavioral medicine 2014;4:363-371. 
Coulon SM, Monroe CM & West DS. A Systematic, Multi-domain Review of Mobile Smartphone Apps 
for Evidence-Based Stress Management. American journal of preventive medicine 2016. 
Cui M, Wu X, Mao J, Wang X, Nie M. T2DM Self-Management via Smartphone Applications: A 
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. PloS one 2016;11:e0166718. 
Cuijpers P, Marks IM, van Straten A, Cavanagh K, Gega L & Andersson G. Computer‐aided 
psychotherapy for anxiety disorders: a meta‐analytic review. Cognitive behaviour therapy 
2009;38:66-82. 
Deacon BJ & Abramowitz JS. Cognitive and behavioral treatments for anxiety disorders: A review of 
meta‐analytic findings. Journal of Clinical Psychology 2004;60:429-441. 
Enock PM, Hofmann SG & McNally RJ. Attention bias modification training via smartphone to reduce 
social anxiety: A randomized, controlled multi-session experiment. Cognitive Therapy and 
Research 2014;38:200-216. 
Firth J, Torous J & Yung AR. Ecological momentary assessment and beyond: The rising interest in e-
mental health research. Journal of psychiatric research 2016;80:3-4. 
Firth J & Torous J. Smartphone apps for schizophrenia: a systematic review. JMIR mHealth and 
uHealth 2015;3:e102. 
Gunter RW & Whittal ML. Dissemination of cognitive-behavioral treatments for anxiety disorders: 
Overcoming barriers and improving patient access. Clinical psychology review 2010;30:194-
202. 
Haller H, Cramer H, Lauche R, Gass F & Dobos GJ. The prevalence and burden of subthreshold 
generalized anxiety disorder: a systematic review. BMC psychiatry 2014;14:1. 
Higgins JP, Altman DG, Gøtzsche PC, Jüni P, Moher D, Oxman AD, Savović J, Schulz KF, Weeks L & 
Sterne JA. The Cochrane Collaboration’s tool for assessing risk of bias in randomised trials. 
Bmj 2011;343:d5928. 
Ivanova E, Lindner P, Ly KH, Dahlin M, Vernmark K, Andersson G & Carlbring P. Guided and unguided 
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy for social anxiety disorder and/or panic disorder 
 provided via the Internet and a smartphone application: A randomized controlled trial. 
Journal of Anxiety Disorders 2016;44:27-35. 
Larsen ME, Nicholas J & Christensen H. A systematic assessment of smartphone tools for suicide 
prevention. PloS one 2016;11:e0152285. 
Ly KH, Topooco N, Cederlund H, Wallin A, Bergstrom J, Molander O, Carlbring P & Andersson G. 
Smartphone-supported versus full behavioural activation for depression: A randomised 
controlled trial. PloS one 2015;10. 
Mani M, Kavanagh DJ, Hides L & Stoyanov SR. Review and evaluation of mindfulness-based iPhone 
apps. JMIR mHealth and uHealth 2015;3. 
Mendlowicz MV & Stein MB. Quality of life in individuals with anxiety disorders. American Journal of 
Psychiatry 2000;157:669-682. 
Moell B, Kollberg L, Nasri B, Lindefors N & Kaldo V. Living smart - a randomized controlled trial of a 
guided online course teaching adults with adhd or sub-clinical adhd to use smartphones to 
structure their everyday life. Internet Interventions 2015;2:24-31. 
Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J & Altman DG. Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and 
meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. Annals of internal medicine 2009;151:264-269. 
Nicholas J, Larsen ME, Christensen H & Proudfoot J. Systematic assessment of mobile apps for 
bipolar disorder: Features and content. Bipolar Disorders 2015;17:129. 
Norton PJ. A randomized clinical trial of transdiagnostic cognitve-behavioral treatments for anxiety 
disorder by comparison to relaxation training. Behavior Therapy 2012;43:506-517. 
Opriş D, Pintea S, García‐Palacios A, Botella C, Szamosközi Ş, David D. Virtual reality exposure 
therapy in anxiety disorders: a quantitative meta‐analysis. Depression andAanxiety 
2012;29:85-93. 
Orwin RG. A fail-safe N for effect size in meta-analysis. Journal of educational statistics 1983;157-
159. 
Pham Q, Khatib Y, Stansfeld S, Fox S & Green T. Feasibility and efficacy of an mHealth game for 
managing anxiety: "Flowy" randomized controlled pilot trial and design evaluation. Games 
for Health 2016;5:50-67. 
Proudfoot J, Clarke J, Birch MR, Whitton AE, Parker G, Manicavasagar V, Harrison V, Christensen H & 
Hadzi-Pavlovic D. Impact of a mobile phone and web program on symptom and functional 
outcomes for people with mild-to-moderate depression, anxiety and stress: A randomised 
controlled trial. BMC psychiatry 2013;13. 
Reid SC, Kauer SD, Hearps SJ, Crooke AH, Khor AS, Sanci LA & Patton GC. A mobile phone application 
for the assessment and management of youth mental health problems in primary care: a 
randomised controlled trial. BMC family practice 2011;12:131. 
Roepke AM, Jaffee SR, Riffle OM, McGonigal J, Broome R & Maxwell B. Randomized controlled trial 
of SuperBetter, a smartphone-based/internet-based self-help tool to reduce depressive 
symptoms. Games for Health 2015;4:235-246. 
Schardt C, Adams MB, Owens T, Keitz S & Fontelo P. Utilization of the PICO framework to improve 
searching PubMed for clinical questions. BMC medical informatics and decision making 
2007;7:1. 
Shen N, Levitan M-J, Johnson A, Bender JL, Hamilton-Page M, Jadad AAR & Wiljer D. Finding a 
depression app: A review and content analysis of the depression app marketplace. JMIR 
mHealth and uHealth 2015;3:e16. 
 Torous J & Firth J. The digital placebo effect: mobile mental health meets clinical psychiatry. The 
Lancet Psychiatry 2016;3:100-2. 
Torous J & Baker JT. Why Psychiatry Needs Data Science and Data Science Needs Psychiatry: 
Connecting With Technology. JAMA psychiatry 2016;1-2. 
van der Kemp WJM, Klomp DWJ, Kahn RS, Luijten PR & Hulshoff Pol HE. A meta-analysis of the 
polyunsaturated fatty acid composition of erythrocyte membranes in schizophrenia. 
Schizophrenia Research 2012;141:153-161. 
Villani D, Grassi A, Cognetta C, Toniolo D, Cipresso P & Riva G. Self-help stress management training 
through mobile phones: an experience with oncology nurses. Psychological services 
2013;10:315-322. 
Vøllestad J, Nielsen MB & Nielsen GH. Mindfulness‐and acceptance‐based interventions for anxiety 
disorders: A systematic review and meta‐analysis. British Journal of Clinical Psychology 
2012;51:239-260. 
Waghorn G, Chant D, White P & Whiteford H. Disability, employment and work performance among 
people with ICD-10 anxiety disorders. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry 
2005;39:55-66. 
 
 
 
Table 1. Details of included studies 
 
Exercise 
n= 
Control 
n= 
Mean 
age 
Study aims 
Design 
Smartphone 
intervention details 
 
Other 
intervention 
aspects 
Enock et 
al. 2014 
158 
144 
34.8 
Using 
Cognitive Bias 
Modification 
(CBM) in 
people with 
high levels of 
social anxiety, 
to modify 
attentional 
biases and 
reduce anxiety  
3-arm trial comparing 
4 weeks of CBM 
training vs. inactive 
training vs. waitlist 
control. 
Participants instructed to 
perform 3 brief sessions 
per-day on the 
smartphone; responding 
to images of faces 
showing disgust or 
neutral expressions, 
training their attentional 
deployment away from 
disgust faces 
 
 
None 
 
Ivanova 
et al. 
2016 
101 
51 
 
Assessing 
internet-
delivered 
‘Acceptance 
and 
Commitment 
Therapy’ 
(ACT) as an 
intervention 
for social 
anxiety 
disorder and 
3-arm trial comparing 
10-weeks of guided 
online ACT program 
vs. unguided online 
ACT program vs. 
waitlist control 
Participants instructed to 
complete one module of 
online ACT per week, 
accessed by smartphone 
or laptop. Able to 
register completed 
modules to unlock new 
behaviour exercise, and 
rate their mood. Guided 
group received progress 
comments from a 
therapist twice weekly. 
 
Participants 
also provided 
with pen-and-
paper booklet 
for completing 
written 
assignments 
and a CD with 
ACT exercises. 
 panic disorder 
Unguided group received 
only automated 
feedback. 
Ly et al.  
2015 
46 
47 
30.6 
Examining if 
smartphone-
delivery of BA 
intervention 
for depression 
can reduce the 
need for face-
to-face 
sessions 
without 
reducing 
efficacy.  
10-weeks non-
inferiority trial, 
comparing 10 
standard BA sessions 
to 4 BA sessions with 
smartphone-support. 
Smartphone app 
designed to replace 
depressive behaviours 
with healthy positive 
behaviours instead. 
Participants instructed to 
use this daily to save and 
recall anti-depressive 
behaviours and increase 
daily activity.  
 
Participants in 
the smartphone 
condition also 
received 4 face-
to-face  BA 
sessions (every 
2-3 weeks over 
the 10 week 
trial). 
Moell et 
al. 2015 
26 
27 
36.8 
Using a range 
of existing 
apps to 
improve 
organisation 
and daily lives 
of people with 
ADHD 
6 weeks of Living 
SMART training vs. 
waitlist control 
condition. 
 
Smartphone apps were 
provided for facilitating 
life organisation (Google 
Calendar, Evernote, G-
tasks) and improving 
attentional control 
(Stayfocusd, 
SimplyNoise) along with 
other general apps for 
daily life.  
 
A 
laptop/desktop 
computer 
training 
program was 
provided for 
instructions on 
how best make 
use of the 
smartphone 
apps. 
Participants 
were also 
allocated a 
coach to 
contact 
whenever they 
required help 
with using the 
technologies. 
Pham et 
al. 2016 
31 
32 
30.6 
Assessing if 
gamified 
diaphragmatic 
breathing can 
alleviate 
anxiety in 
people with 
high levels 
4 weeks of ‘Flowy’ 
breathing app 
compared to waitlist 
control with weekly 
email on breathing 
exercises. 
The ‘flowy’ app uses 
touch-screen tracking for 
the user to trace their 
finger in synchrony with 
their inhaling/exhaling 
during guided breathing 
exercises delivered in 
game-style format.  
 
 
None 
Proudfoot 
et al. 
2013 
242 
248 
39 
Using multi-
faceted digital 
intervention to 
reduce 
depression, 
anxiety and 
stress 
3-arm trial comparing 
7 weeks of 
myCompass digital 
intervention with 
attention-matched and 
waitlist control.  
Smartphone-enabled 
self-monitoring of 
problematic moods, 
thoughts and behaviours 
to identify symptoms of 
common mental health 
problems, track their 
severity and receive 
feedback, helpful advice 
and mental health 
management tips by 
SMS. 
 
Interactive 
computer 
modules also 
provided to 
deliver a range 
of evidence-
based 
psychological 
interventions 
including CBT, 
positive 
psychology and 
problem-
solving 
training. 
 Reid et 
al. 2011 
68 
46 
18 
Using mobile 
assessments of 
daily 
functioning to 
improve self-
awareness and 
also facilitate 
advice for 
health 
professionals 
2-to-4 weeks of using 
‘Mobiletype’ 
(tracking mental 
health relevant 
thoughts / behaviours) 
vs. using a control 
app which tracks 
irrelevant behaviours  
Smartphone app 
‘Mobiletype’ used to 
twice-daily in response 
to random beeping 
signal; recording daily 
activities, companions, 
stressful events, 
alcohol/drug use, sleep, 
exercise and/or diet, and 
then linking these 
thoughts/behaviours 
with current emotional 
states 
 
Participants 
review the 
information 
gathered by 
Mobiletype 
with their GP, 
and are 
provided with 
prescriptive 
guides for 
managing their 
mental health. 
Roepke 
et al. 
2015 
190 
93 
40.2 
Improving 
overall mental-
wellbeing in 
non-clinical 
sample using 
smartphone 
application 
3-arm trial comparing 
1-month of  standard 
mental health app, 
enhanced version of 
app and waitlist 
control 
Participants instructed to 
use either Standard 
‘SuperBetter’ app or 
enhanced version for 10-
minutes per day. 
Standard version 
supports self-esteem and 
self-acceptance. Enhance 
version applies 
principles of CBT and 
positive psychology.  
 
None 
Villani et 
al. 2011 
15 
15 
43 
Delivering 
multi-media 
content via 
mobile phones 
to reduce stress 
in oncology 
nurses 
Comparing 8 sessions 
of Mobile Stress 
Inoculation Training 
(M-SIT) to 8 sessions 
of equivalent multi-
media input but with 
neutral content 
Training modules 
delivered via mobile 
devices included 
relaxations skills, 
relaxing videos and 
inoculating videos from 
cancer awareness 
campaigns. 
 
None 
 
 
Table 2. Meta-analyses examining effects smartphone mental health interventions for 
symptoms of anxiety 
 
Sam
ple 
 
                            Meta-
analysis 
Heterogeneity 
Publication bias 
(Egger’s) 
 
Stu
dies 
Total n 
Hedg
e’s g 
        95% 
CI 
P value 
Q-
valu
e 
P 
valu
e 
I2 
Interc
ept 
P value 
Main Analysis 
9 
1837 
 
 
0.32
5 
  
0.17
3 
0.
47
7 
 <.000 15.
9 
0.0
44 
49.
6 
-
0.04 
0.98 
 
Smartphone vs. 
Waitlist Control 
6 
1212 
 
0.45
2 
 
  
0.29
8 
 
0.
60
5 
 <.000 7.4
0 
0.1
93 
32.
4 
0.45 
0.76 
 
Smartphone vs. 
5 
1026 
 
  
0.
   .003 
1.7
0.7
0.0
0.12 
0.90  
  
Sam
ple 
 
                            Meta-
analysis 
Heterogeneity 
Publication bias 
(Egger’s) 
Active Control 
 
0.18
9 
0.06
6 
31
1 
4 
84 
0 
 
 
 
 
Highlights 
 This is the first meta-analysis of smartphone-based psychological interventions for 
anxiety. 
 Our systematic search identified 9 randomized controlled trials with 1837 participants 
in total. 
 Smartphone interventions reduced anxiety significantly more than control conditions.  
 
 
 
fig 1 
  
Fig 2 
 
 
Fig 3 
