 David B. Fischer, MD*
Aaron D. Boes, MD,
PhD*
Athena Demertzi, PhD
Henry C. Evrard, PhD
Steven Laureys, PhD
Brian L. Edlow, MD
Hesheng Liu, PhD
Clifford B. Saper, MD,
PhD
Alvaro Pascual-Leone,
MD, PhD
Michael D. Fox, MD,
PhD‡
Joel C. Geerling, MD,
PhD‡
Correspondence to
Dr. Fischer:
d.b.fisch@gmail.com
or Dr. Fox:
foxmdphd@gmail.com
Supplemental data
at Neurology.org
A human brain network derived from
coma-causing brainstem lesions
ABSTRACT
Objective: To characterize a brainstem location specific to coma-causing lesions, and its func-
tional connectivity network.
Methods: We compared 12 coma-causing brainstem lesions to 24 control brainstem lesions using
voxel-based lesion-symptom mapping in a case-control design to identify a site significantly asso-
ciated with coma. We next used resting-state functional connectivity from a healthy cohort to
identify a network of regions functionally connected to this brainstem site. We further investi-
gated the cortical regions of this network by comparing their spatial topography to that of known
networks and by evaluating their functional connectivity in patients with disorders of
consciousness.
Results: A small region in the rostral dorsolateral pontine tegmentum was significantly associ-
ated with coma-causing lesions. In healthy adults, this brainstem site was functionally con-
nected to the ventral anterior insula (AI) and pregenual anterior cingulate cortex (pACC).
These cortical areas aligned poorly with previously defined resting-state networks, better
matching the distribution of von Economo neurons. Finally, connectivity between the AI and
pACC was disrupted in patients with disorders of consciousness, and to a greater degree than
other brain networks.
Conclusions: Injury to a small region in the pontine tegmentum is significantly associated with
coma. This brainstem site is functionally connected to 2 cortical regions, the AI and pACC, which
become disconnected in disorders of consciousness. This network of brain regions may have a role
in the maintenance of human consciousness. Neurology® 2016;87:2427–2434
GLOSSARY
AI 5 anterior insula; ARAS 5 ascending reticular activating system; MCS 5 minimally conscious state; pACC 5 pregenual
anterior cingulate cortex; rs-fcMRI 5 resting-state functional connectivity MRI; VEN 5 von Economo neuron; VS/UWS 5
vegetative state/unresponsive wakefulness syndrome.
Arousal, or wakefulness, is an integral component of consciousness and prerequisite for other
brain functions, yet its neuroanatomy in humans is poorly understood. Classically, the brain-
stem “reticular formation” has been considered important for wakefulness.1 Experiments in
rodents suggest this brainstem area can be subdivided into functionally discrete regions, and
that injury to one region in the pontine tegmentum reliably disrupts arousal and produces
coma.2 A homologous brainstem region is likely present in humans, based on analysis of
coma-causing lesions.3 However, it remains unclear whether there is a human brainstem site
significantly more associated with coma-causing lesions than with non–coma-causing le-
sions, and exactly where this site is located. Such a brainstem site would likely maintain
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
‡These authors contributed equally to this work.
From the Berenson-Allen Center for Noninvasive Brain Stimulation, Division of Cognitive Neurology, Department of Neurology (D.B.F., A.D.B.,
A.P.-L., M.D.F.), and Department of Neurology (C.B.S., A.P.-L., M.D.F., J.C.G.), Harvard Medical School and Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, Boston; Harvard Medical School (D.B.F.), Boston; Departments of Pediatric Neurology (A.D.B.) and Neurology (B.L.E.), Harvard
Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA; Brain and Spine Institute (Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière-ICM)
(A.D.), Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France; Coma Science Group (A.D., S.L.), GIGA-Research & Cyclotron Research Centre, University and
University Hospital of Liège, Belgium; Functional and Comparative Neuroanatomy Lab (H.C.E.), Centre for Integrative Neuroscience, Tübingen;
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics (H.C.E.), Tübingen, Germany; Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging (B.L.E., H.
L., M.D.F.), Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA.
Go to Neurology.org for full disclosures. Funding information and disclosures deemed relevant by the authors, if any, are provided at the end of the article.
© 2016 American Academy of Neurology
2427
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 arousal through ascending projections to
other brain regions (originally termed the
ascending reticular activating system, or
ARAS),1,4 but this network of brain regions
in humans is also unclear.
Here, we aim to identify the brainstem
region affected by coma-causing lesions
and its functional connectivity network.
First, we localize coma-causing brainstem
lesions, using strict clinical criteria for coma,
and statistically compare these to control
lesions that do not impair conscious wake-
fulness. Second, we use connectome data
derived from resting-state functional con-
nectivity MRI (rs-fcMRI) to determine the
network associated with these brainstem
lesions in healthy individuals. Finally, we
investigate the functional connectivity of
this network in patients with disorders of
consciousness.
METHODS See appendix e-1 at Neurology.org for a full
description of the methods. In a case-control design, we first
collected a series of focal brainstem lesions—which either
caused coma or were “controls” (i.e., did not impair conscious
wakefulness)—from local cases and cases reported in the
literature. Lesions were delineated by CT, MRI, or autopsy (see
table e-1). We reproduced all lesions onto a template brain,
separately overlapped coma and control lesions, and compared
locations of the 2 lesion groups through 2 methods: subtracting
the control from the coma lesions, and conducting voxel-based
lesion-symptom mapping (computing the degree to which each
voxel is preferentially involved by coma lesions as compared to
control lesions).5 These methods identified a “coma-specific
region” of the brainstem significantly more affected by coma-
causing lesions compared to control lesions.
We then used rs-fcMRI to investigate the brain network
associated with our coma-specific brainstem region.6,7 Rs-
fcMRI identifies spatially disparate regions of the brain that
exhibit synchronous (i.e., correlated) fluctuations in the fMRI
signal. To identify this region’s connectivity network in the
normal brain, we utilized a normative rs-fcMRI dataset acquired
from 98 right-handed, healthy participants (48 men, ages 22 6
3.2 years).7 By measuring fluctuations in activity in the coma-
specific region, and correlating those fluctuations to those of all
other voxels in the brain, we identified regions “functionally
connected” to the coma-specific brainstem region (t value .
4.25, indicating regions of correlation at p , 0.00005, uncor-
rected). We also used a voxel-wise t test to determine whether
these identified regions were significantly more connected to
coma lesions than to control lesions.
At the standard rs-fcMRI statistical threshold of t . 4.25, our
primary analysis identified only cortical connectivity, and failed to
identify functional connectivity to subcortical sites previously
implicated in arousal.2,4,8,9 We therefore relaxed statistical thresh-
olds and examined connectivity specifically to some of these
structures, such as the thalamus (t . 3.75, p , 0.0005, uncor-
rected), hypothalamus, basal forebrain, amygdala, and bed
nucleus of the stria terminalis (t . 2, p , 0.05, uncorrected).
Each subcortical structure was tested for connectivity to coma
lesions vs control lesions.
We compared the topography of the cortical regions identi-
fied by our network analysis to that of previously defined
resting-state networks.10,11 Although correspondence to such net-
works was poor, we noted that these cortical regions resembled
the previously reported locations of von Economo neurons
(VENs) (see discussion). To assess the correspondence between
the identified network nodes and the distribution of VENs in the
human brain, we used MRI and histology of a postmortem brain
to develop a brain-wide mask of VEN distribution. We then
quantitatively evaluated the correspondence of the identified cor-
tical nodes to the brain-wide VEN distribution, as well as to
previously defined resting-state networks.10,11 For each node, we
expressed overlap as: (voxels within both node and mask)/(voxels
within node).
To assess connectivity of the identified network in disorders
of consciousness, we used an independent rs-fcMRI dataset
acquired from 26 patients in a minimally conscious state
(MCS), 19 patients in a vegetative state/unresponsive wakefulness
syndrome (VS/UWS), 6 patients in coma, and 21 age-matched
healthy controls. We compared connectivity between the 2 corti-
cal nodes of our network to connectivity between nodes of the
default mode network and motor network. We then compared
network connectivity between healthy controls, patients with
coma, and patients with disorders of consciousness characterized
by impaired awareness (MCS and VS/UWS). We collapsed across
MCS and VS/UWS in our main analysis to maximize statistical
power and because connectivity between our cortical nodes did
not significantly differ between these conditions. To standardize
across networks, we expressed internode connectivity as a ratio of
connectivity in healthy controls. We used t tests to identify
whether network connectivity differed from zero, differed
between groups, or differed between networks.
Standard protocol approvals, registrations, and patient
consents. The Partners Institutional Review Board approved this
study. See appendix e-1 for a full description of lesion collection
and patient recruitment.
RESULTS Lesion analysis. We collected 36 focal
brainstem lesions from patients encountered locally
or described in the literature.3,12–15 Twelve lesions
caused coma (7 local cases, 5 literature cases; mean
age 57.3 6 16.5 years; mean lesion volume 3,540 6
2,988 mm3) while 24 control lesions did not (8 local
cases, 16 literature cases; mean age 58.1 6 12.8 years;
mean lesion volume 2,364 6 2,644 mm3). There was
no significant difference in lesion volume between the
coma and control cases (p 5 0.26). See table e-1 and
figure e-1A for additional case details.
Coma-causing lesions maximally overlapped in
the pontine tegmentum (10 of 12 cases; figure 1A).
In contrast, control lesions primarily involved the
pontine base (11 of 24; figure 1B). Subtracting con-
trol lesions from the coma lesions, or performing
voxel-based lesion-symptom mapping (p , 0.05, cor-
rected for false discovery rate), revealed a 2-mm3
“coma-specific region” significantly more involved
by coma lesions compared to control lesions, located
in the left pontine tegmentum, near the medial para-
brachial nucleus (figure 1, C–E). Ten of 12 coma
2428
Neurology 87
December 6, 2016
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 lesions, but only the periphery of 1 of 24 control
lesions, involved this region (figure e-2A). The 2
coma lesions that spared this region involved the mid-
brain immediately rostral to it (figures e-2, B and C,
and e-3A). Some coma-causing lesions involved this
left-lateralized region alone, without appearing to
extend, at least within limits of MRI resolution, into
the right pontine tegmentum or midline midbrain (e.
g., cases 8 and 9, figure e-1A).
Network analysis. To identify brain regions in the net-
work of the coma-specific region, we performed an
rs-fcMRI analysis of data from a large cohort of
healthy participants.7 This analysis revealed 2 nodes
functionally connected to our brainstem region: one
node was located in the left ventral, anterior insula
(AI) (in an agranular subregion also known as
frontoinsular
cortex16)
extending
into
a
small
portion of the claustrum, and the second was
located in the pregenual anterior cingulate cortex
(pACC) (figures 2 and e-3, B and C; table e-2).
These
findings
were
similar
with
or
without
regression of the global signal (figure e-4)17 and
were not driven by CSF signal (figure e-5). Voxels
within both nodes were functionally connected to
all
12
coma
lesions
(figure
2C),
and
were
significantly more connected to coma lesions than
to control lesions (p , 0.05; figure 2D). At a lower
statistical threshold, the coma-specific region showed
connectivity
to
midline
and
lateral
thalamus,
posterior hypothalamus, and basal forebrain (figure
e-6). However, unlike connectivity to the AI and
pACC, none of these connections were specific to
coma lesions over control lesions.
Together, the AI and pACC do not match any
cortical network previously defined by rs-fcMRI anal-
ysis10,11: the AI node straddles the salience network,
limbic network, and default mode network, while the
pACC node falls mostly within the default mode
network. However, these 2 cortical regions are
histologically unique as 2 primary sites of VENs,
spindle-shaped neurons found in a select group of
mammalian species (see discussion). Microscopic
plotting of VENs in a human brain revealed that
the AI and pACC nodes identified here correspond
more closely to the VEN distribution than to any
major resting-state network (figures 3 and e-7).
We conducted 3 additional analyses to further
investigate
rs-fcMRI
between
the
coma-specific
brainstem region, AI, and pACC. First, we used par-
tial correlations to assess the directness of connectivity
between each node.18 Stronger partial correlations
were observed between the brainstem node and AI
(r 5 0.15) and between the AI and pACC (r 5 0.26),
than between the brainstem node and pACC (r 5
0.06). This pattern persisted when using unweighted
(i.e., binarized) seeds (figure e-8).
Second, we investigated the brainstem connectiv-
ity of the AI and pACC nodes. The AI node exhibited
connectivity to the original brainstem node, and less
so to a symmetric region of the contralateral pontine
tegmentum (figure 4A). In contrast, the pACC node
exhibited connectivity to the midline pontine base,
not the tegmentum (figure 4B).
Third, we investigated the laterality of our fcMRI
findings by flipping the brainstem node to the right
and rerunning the connectivity analysis. The left AI
and pACC remained the only cortical sites with
Figure 1
Lesion analysis
(A) Twelve coma lesions exhibited greatest overlap in the upper pontine tegmentum. (B)
Twenty-four control lesions exhibited greatest overlap in the pontine base. Subtracting
the control lesion voxels from the coma lesion voxels (C) and voxel-based lesion-symptom
mapping (p , 0.05, corrected) (D) yielded a coma-specific region in the left pontine tegmen-
tum (red). (E) Multiple nuclei implicated in arousal surround the coma-specific region, includ-
ing the dorsal raphe (yellow dots), locus coeruleus (black dots), and parabrachial nucleus (red
dashed line). 4V 5 fourth ventricle; ml 5 medial lemniscus; mlf 5 medial longitudinal fascic-
ulus; scp 5 superior cerebellar peduncle.
Neurology 87
December 6, 2016
2429
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 significant connectivity to the right-flipped brainstem
node. Compared to the original left-sided brainstem
node, these regions were more weakly connected with
the right-flipped brainstem node: volumes of signifi-
cantly connected voxels were smaller (AI 2.0 vs 3.4
cm3; pACC 1.6 vs 5.6 cm3), and mean t scores were
reduced (AI 5.43 vs 5.89; pACC 4.75 vs 4.85).
AI-pACC connectivity in disorders of consciousness.
Finally, we used rs-fcMRI to investigate connectivity
of our network in patients with disorders of
consciousness, including coma, MCS, and VS/
UWS.19 We focused our analysis on cortical AI-
pACC
connectivity
because
(1)
brainstem
connectivity was unreliable in this smaller dataset,
and (2) this facilitated comparison to other cortical
networks, including the default mode network and
motor network. In comatose patients, connectivity
was absent (not significantly different from zero)
across all 3 networks. In patients with disrupted
awareness (MCS or VS/UWS), connectivity was
reduced in all networks (p , 0.001), but only
absent between the AI and pACC (figure 5). This
reduction in AI-pACC connectivity exceeded that of
other networks (p , 0.05) including the default mode
network, a network previously implicated in disorders
of consciousness.20 Splitting MCS and VS/UWS into
separate groups, only AI-pACC connectivity was
absent in both groups. Motor network connectivity
was present in both groups, and default mode network
connectivity was present in MCS and absent in VS/
UWS (figure e-9).
DISCUSSION In this article, we identify and charac-
terize a human brain network derived from coma-
causing brainstem lesions. First, we show that
a small region of the left rostral dorsolateral
pontine tegmentum is significantly more associated
with coma-causing compared to control lesions,
implicating it in arousal. Next, we show that this
brainstem region is functionally connected to the
left AI, and secondarily to the pACC. Finally, we
show that patients with disorders of consciousness
exhibit a connectivity deficit between the AI and
pACC.
Disrupting neurons bilaterally in or near the
medial parabrachial nucleus impairs arousal in ro-
dents.2,21 Our findings suggest that a similar brain-
stem region is important for arousal in humans.
These findings replicate and extend those of Parvizi
and Damasio (2003),3 refining the localization of this
region by incorporating more coma-causing lesions
and statistical comparisons to control lesions. Of
note, in our results, this arousal-promoting brainstem
region was relatively left-lateralized. This finding runs
counter to conventional wisdom that a lesion must
destroy midline or bilateral brainstem tissue to impair
consciousness.1,3 As such, this finding should be in-
terpreted with caution and requires replication in
larger cohorts. However, there are reasons to think
this result may be important. First, the left parabra-
chial region exhibited stronger connectivity to the
identified network than the homologous parabrachial
region on the right, suggesting that brainstem con-
nectivity in this region may be asymmetric. Second,
the left parabrachial region is more active during wake
relative to sleep.22 Finally, hemorrhages can occur
unilaterally in the right pontine tegmentum without
disrupting consciousness.23
Brainstem arousal neurons project through an
ascending activating system (i.e., ARAS), but the tar-
gets of this system are unclear.2,9 Our results suggest
that the left AI, and secondarily the pACC, may be
important targets of this system. These functional
connectivity results are consistent with known axonal
projections between the parabrachial region and AI24
and from the AI to ACC25 in rodents and monkeys.
Other regions that receive axonal projections from the
Figure 2
Network analysis
The coma-specific brainstem region exhibits functional connectivity to clusters in the ante-
rior insula (AI) (A) and pregenual anterior cingulate cortex (pACC) (B). Voxels within these no-
des were functionally connected to all 12 coma lesions (green) (C) and were more functionally
connected to coma lesions (orange; p , 0.05) than control lesions (blue; p , 0.05) (D).
2430
Neurology 87
December 6, 2016
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 parabrachial region include the thalamus, hypothala-
mus, basal forebrain, central nucleus of the amygdala,
and bed nucleus of the stria terminalis.2,4,8,9 Several of
these regions exhibited functional connectivity to our
coma-specific brainstem region at lower thresholds
but failed to show selective connectivity to coma le-
sions over control lesions. This nonspecific connec-
tivity may reflect limitations of our functional
connectivity technique (see below) but may also indi-
cate that some of these structures are not as critical to
arousal as once thought: large thalamic ablations, for
instance, do not impair wakefulness in experimental
animals.2
The 2 regions that did show selective connectivity
to coma-causing brainstem lesions, the AI and pACC,
were previously implicated in arousal and awareness
(i.e., the content of experience). Both regions are
more active during wakefulness22,26 and autonomic
arousal.27 Moreover, the AI and ACC become jointly
active during awareness of visual, somatosensory,
interoceptive, and other sensory stimuli.27,28 Our AI
node includes an anterior portion of the claustrum,
which has been speculated to have a role in
consciousness.29 Finally, in a case report, electrical
disruption of the AI selectively impaired conscious
awareness (figure e-10)30; to date, there are no reports
of other brain regions producing this effect.
Of note, brainstem connectivity to the AI appears
left-lateralized, even when generated from a right-
sided brainstem seed. Although unexpected, the
implication of left-lateralized cortical regions in sus-
taining consciousness is supported by prior findings:
left hemispheric inhibition with intracarotid amobar-
bital more frequently disrupts consciousness than
right-sided
inhibition31;
decreased
connectivity
within the left hemisphere, but not the right, predicts
diminished levels of consciousness32; seizures that
impair consciousness tend to originate in the left
hemisphere33; loss of consciousness after penetrating
trauma is more frequent when the brain injury in-
volves frontotemporal regions of the left hemisphere
relative to the right34; and it was the left AI that, when
electrically disrupted, eliminated consciousness.30
That said, the right hemisphere may underlie other
elements of consciousness, such as attention.35 Thus,
the left-lateralization of the network identified here,
Figure 3
von Economo neuron distribution
von Economo neurons (VENs), identified by their spindle morphology (A), are located in the agranular region (demarcated with black arrowheads) of the ante-
rior insula, represented by red dots (B). The distribution of VENs (red) closely corresponds to the regions of the network nodes (yellow) in the agranular ante-
rior insula (AI) (C) and pregenual anterior cingulate cortex (pACC) (D). The AI and pACC nodes correspond closely to the distribution of VENs, and not to any
previously defined resting-state network (E). Rather, the network spans several other resting-state networks.
Neurology 87
December 6, 2016
2431
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 and the lateralization of consciousness more generally,
warrants further investigation.
Although we identified our AI and pACC regions
based on resting-state functional connectivity with
a single site, these regions do not fall within a single
previously defined resting-state network. However,
both regions do correspond to the distribution of
VENs.36 These spindle-shaped neurons are found in
the AI and ACC of particular mammals, such as hu-
mans, other great apes, whales, dolphins, and ele-
phants.28,36 Based on their large size and dendrites
that span all cortical layers, VENs have been proposed
to rapidly integrate and transmit information across
large brains.36 Species with VENs in the AI and ACC
are generally capable of more complex cognition, such
as self-recognition in a mirror.28 Moreover, selective
degeneration of VENs has been observed in behav-
ioral variant frontotemporal dementia, a condition in
which cognition and self-regulation are impaired.37
Although the precise function of these neurons re-
mains unknown, it has been speculated that they have
a role in some form of self-awareness.28,37
Given that our AI-pACC network was identified
by coma-causing lesions, one might expect it to be
disrupted in patients with disorders of consciousness.
Here, we show that connectivity between the AI and
pACC is disrupted in these patients, and to a greater
extent than connectivity within the default mode net-
work, a network previously implicated in disorders of
consciousness.20
There are several limitations to the current
work. First, the rarity of focal brainstem lesions
Figure 4
Brainstem connectivity of cortical nodes
(A) The anterior insula node exhibits functional connectivity to the coma-specific region, and to a lesser extent, the homol-
ogous region of the right pontine tegmentum. (B) The pregenual anterior cingulate node exhibits functional connectivity only
to the pontine base. Images are shown from rostral to caudal.
Figure 5
Network connectivity in disorders of consciousness
In patients with disorders of consciousness (minimally conscious state or vegetative state/
unresponsive wakefulness syndrome), connectivity was more diminished between the ante-
rior insula (AI) and pregenual anterior cingulate (pACC) nodes than within the motor or default
mode networks (*p , 0.05). Error bars represent SEM.
2432
Neurology 87
December 6, 2016
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 causing coma limited the number of new lesions we
could include, so additional cases were acquired
from a retrospective literature review, creating
potential for selection and reporting bias. Prospec-
tive validation in an independent and larger cohort
may further refine the coma-specific brainstem
region. Second, rs-fcMRI has limited spatial resolu-
tion, a factor particularly relevant in the brainstem;
better resolution and larger cohorts may refine
functional brainstem anatomy further. Third, rs-
fcMRI cannot determine whether functional asso-
ciations are mediated by mono- or polysynaptic
connections, or the directionality of these connec-
tions, and the absence of rs-fcMRI connectivity
does not imply absence of anatomical connectivity.
Fourth,
several
of
our
results
appeared
left-
lateralized, but because handedness was difficult
to ascertain from some comatose patients and our
rs-fcMRI dataset cohort was right-handed, it is
unknown whether lateralization of this network
depends on hemispheric dominance. Fifth, in dis-
orders of consciousness, AI-pACC connectivity
did not differentiate between MCS and VS/UWS.
Because both conditions involve severe impair-
ments in awareness, larger cohorts may be necessary
to reveal subtle differences in AI-pACC connectiv-
ity between these 2 groups. Sixth, given a correla-
tion between insula-ACC connectivity and heart
rate variability,38 we cannot exclude the possibility
that
connectivity
differences
between
healthy
individuals and individuals with disorders of con-
sciousness may be confounded by unanticipated
differences in heart rate variability. Finally, while
lesions involving the insula and cingulate cortex can
disrupt aspects of consciousness in humans and
experimental animals,28 some patients with exten-
sive ACC or AI lesions later regain consciousness.39
The role of these regions in supporting conscious-
ness, including the possibility of redundant support
between regions, must be clarified through further
investigation.
In light of the evidence provided, it is worth spec-
ulating whether this brainstem-AI-pACC network
could have a role in human consciousness. Con-
sciousness is often defined in terms of 2 components:
arousal and awareness.1,40 While arousal is thought to
be sustained through ascending projections of brain-
stem structures, awareness is thought to depend more
on the cerebral cortex.40 Here, we identify a network
comprising a brainstem region, which when lesioned
disrupts arousal, and VEN-containing cortical re-
gions, which show disrupted connectivity in patients
with impaired awareness. This network may therefore
serve as a neuroanatomical interface between arousal
and awareness, the 2 fundamental components of
human consciousness.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
D.B.F., A.D.B., M.D.F., J.C.G., and A.P.-L. contributed to study
design. D.B.F., A.D.B., B.L.E., H.L., and J.C.G. collected lesions.
D.B.F. and J.C.G. reproduced lesions. D.B.F., A.D.B., and M.D.F. con-
ducted statistical analyses. D.B.F., C.B.S., and J.C.G. analyzed brainstem
histology. A.D. and S.L. collected and analyzed data from patients with
disorders of consciousness. J.C.G. and H.C.E. plotted von Economo
neurons. H.C.E. prepared the binarized von Economo neuron masks.
D.B.F. wrote the manuscript. All authors discussed the results and com-
mented on the manuscript.
STUDY FUNDING
This work was supported by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
the Parkinson’s Disease Foundation, the NIH (Shared Instrument Grant
S10RR023043,
K23NS083741,
R01HD069776,
R01NS073601,
R01NS085477,
R21MH099196,
R21NS082870,
R21NS085491,
R21HD07616,
R25NS065743,
R25NS070682,
T32
HL007901,
P01HL095491), American Academy of Neurology/American Brain
Foundation, Sidney R. Baer, Jr. Foundation, Harvard Catalyst, the Bel-
gian National Funds for Scientific Research, the European Commission,
the James McDonnell Foundation, the European Space Agency, Mind
Science Foundation, the French Speaking Community Concerted
Research Action (ARC-06/11-340), the Public Utility Foundation “Uni-
versité Européenne du Travail,” “Fondazione Europea di Ricerca
Comment:
Coma-causing brainstem lesions
Accurate diagnosis and prognosis of patients with severe long-term disorders
of consciousness (and remission rates from these conditions) are challenging, espe-
cially when the patient’s capacity to show signs of consciousness is absent. The rate
of misdiagnosis in these patients is as high as 43%,1 and reliable prognostic
markers are rare.2 This study identifies—in a healthy cohort and in patients in
coma—brainstem sites consistently associated with coma, and network areas func-
tionally connected with this brainstem site.3 The novel finding is a coma-specific
region in the left pontine tegmentum near the medial parabrachial nucleus that is
associated more with coma-producing than with non–coma-producing brainstem
lesions. This area’s functional connectivity with the left ventral anterior insula (AI)
and the pregenual anterior cingulate cortex (pACC) match well with the distribu-
tion of von Economo neurons. There are stronger partial correlations between the
pontine node and the AI, and between the AI and the pACC, than between the
pontine node and the pACC. After flipping the brain activation to the right side,
the left AI and pACC remained connected to the pontine node, indicating the
existence of a left-lateralized network involving the pons, AI, and pACC.
This study is important for neurologists because it concerns the neurologic
evaluation of patients in coma and remission states, to define treatment aims
and care; it provides new insights into the neuroanatomical bases of arousal and
consciousness in humans and a better understanding of coma-producing brain net-
work disruptions. This new insight can help the establishment of new diagnostic
and prognostic neuroimaging markers to reduce misdiagnosis and misprognosis
that are of great value in an era of increasing cost pressure in health care when neu-
rologists must still recommend the best acute treatment and neurorehabilitation
for their patients.
1.
Schnakers C, Vanhaudenhuyse A, Giacino J, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of the vege-
tative and minimally conscious state: clinical consensus versus standardized neuro-
behavioral assessment. BMC Neurol 2009;9:35.
2.
Gosseries O, Pistoia F, Charland-Verville V, Carolei A, Sacco S, Laureys S. The role
of neuroimaging techniques in establishing diagnosis, prognosis and therapy in dis-
orders of consciousness. Open Neuroimag J 2016;10:52–68.
3.
Fischer DB, Boes AD, Demertzi A, et al. A human brain network derived from coma-
causing brainstem lesions. Neurology 2016;87:2427–2434.
S.M. Golaszewski, MD, MEng
From the Department of Neurology and Neuroscience Institute, Christian Doppler Clinic, Paracelsus
Medical University Salzburg, Austria.
Study funding: No targeted funding reported.
Disclosure: The author reports no disclosures relevant to the manuscript. Go to Neurology.org for full
disclosures.
Neurology 87
December 6, 2016
2433
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 Biomedica,” the University and University Hospital of Liège, the Center
for Integrative Neuroscience, and the Max Planck Society.
DISCLOSURE
The authors report no disclosures relevant to the manuscript. Go to
Neurology.org for full disclosures.
Received April 13, 2016. Accepted in final form September 6, 2016.
REFERENCES
1.
Posner J, Saper C, Schiff N, Plum F. Plum and Posner’s
Diagnosis of Stupor and Coma, 4th ed. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press; 2007.
2.
Fuller P, Sherman D, Pedersen NP, Saper CB, Lu J. Re-
assessment of the structural basis of the ascending arousal
system. J Comp Neurol 2011;519:933–956.
3.
Parvizi J, Damasio AR. Neuroanatomical correlates of
brainstem coma. Brain 2003;126:1524–1536.
4.
Magoun HW. An ascending reticular activating system in
the brain stem. AMA Arch Neurol Psychiatry 1952;67:
145–154.
5.
Rorden C, Karnath HO, Bonilha L. Improving lesion-
symptom mapping. J Cogn Neurosci 2007;19:1081–1088.
6.
Fox MD, Raichle ME. Spontaneous fluctuations in brain
activity observed with functional magnetic resonance
imaging. Nat Rev Neurosci 2007;8:700–711.
7.
Boes AD, Prasad S, Liu H, et al. Network localization of
neurological symptoms from focal brain lesions. Brain
2015;138:3061–3075.
8.
Saper C, Loewy A. Efferent connections of the parabra-
chial nucleus in the rat. Brain Res 1980;197:291–317.
9.
Saper CB, Scammell TE, Lu J. Hypothalamic regula-
tion of sleep and circadian rhythms. Nature 2005;437:
1257–1263.
10.
Yeo BTT, Krienen FM, Sepulcre J, et al. The organization
of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic func-
tional connectivity. J Neurophysiol 2011;106:1125–1165.
11.
Seeley WW, Menon V, Schatzberg AF, et al. Dissociable
intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and
executive control. J Neurosci 2007;27:2349–2356.
12.
Dehaene I, Dom R. A mesencephalic locked-in syndrome.
J Neurol 1982;227:255–259.
13.
Hawkes C. “Locked-in” syndrome: report of seven cases.
Br Med J 1974;4:379–382.
14.
Nyberg-Hansen R, Løken A, Tenstad O. Brainstem lesion
with coma for five years following manipulation of the
cervical spine. J Neurol 1978;218:97–105.
15.
Lu J, Liu H, Zhang M, et al. Focal pontine lesions provide
evidence that intrinsic functional connectivity reflects
polysynaptic anatomical pathways. J Neurosci 2011;31:
15065–15071.
16.
Seeley WW, Merkle FT, Gaus SE, Craig AD, Allman JM,
Hof PR. Distinctive neurons of the anterior cingulate and
frontoinsular cortex: a historical perspective. Cereb Cortex
2012;22:245–250.
17.
Wong CW, Olafsson V, Tal O, Liu TT. The amplitude of
the resting-state fMRI global signal is related to EEG vig-
ilance measures. Neuroimage 2013;83:983–990.
18.
Marrelec G, Krainik A, Duffau H, et al. Partial correlation
for functional brain interactivity investigation in functional
MRI. Neuroimage 2006;32:228–237.
19.
Demertzi A, Antonopoulos G, Heine L, et al. Intrinsic
functional connectivity differentiates minimally conscious
from unresponsive patients. Brain 2015;138:2619–2631.
20.
Vanhaudenhuyse A, Noirhomme Q, Tshibanda LJF, et al.
Default network connectivity reflects the level of con-
sciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients.
Brain 2010;133:161–171.
21.
Benarroch EE. Parabrachial nuclear complex: multiple
functions and potential clinical implications. Neurology
2016;86:676–683.
22.
Jakobson AJ, Laird AR, Maller JJ, Conduit RD, Fitzgerald PB.
Brain activity in sleep compared to wakefulness: a meta-
analysis. J Behav Brain Sci 2012;2:249–257.
23.
Caplan LR, Goodwin JA. Lateral tegmental brainstem
hemorrhages. Neurology 1982;32:252–260.
24.
Saper CB. Reciprocal parabrachial-cortical connections in
the rat. Brain Res 1982;242:33–40.
25.
Saleem K, Kondo H, Price J. Complementary circuits
connecting the orbital and medial prefrontal networks
with the temporal, insular, and opercular cortex in the
macaque monkey. J Comp Neurol 2008;506:659–693.
26.
Braun AR, Balkin TJ, Wesenten NJ, et al. Regional cere-
bral blood flow throughout the sleep-wake cycle: an H2
(15)O PET study. Brain 1997;120:1173–1197.
27.
Medford N, Critchley HD. Conjoint activity of anterior
insular and anterior cingulate cortex: awareness and
response. Brain Struct Funct 2010;214:535–549.
28.
Craig ADB. How do you feel—now? The anterior insula
and human awareness. Nat Rev Neurosci 2009;10:59–70.
29.
Crick FC, Koch C. What is the function of the claustrum?
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2005;360:1271–1279.
30.
Koubeissi MZ, Bartolomei F, Beltagy A, Picard F. Elec-
trical stimulation of a small brain area reversibly disrupts
consciousness. Epilepsy Behav 2014;37:32–35.
31.
Glosser G, Cole LC, Deutsch GK, et al. Hemispheric
asymmetries in arousal affect outcome of the intracarotid
amobarbital test. Neurology 1999;52:1583–1590.
32.
Rosazza C, Andronache A, Sattin D, et al. Multimodal
study of default-mode network integrity in disorders of
consciousness. Ann Neurol 2016;79:841–853.
33.
Englot DJ, Yang L, Hamid H, et al. Impaired conscious-
ness in temporal lobe seizures: role of cortical slow activity.
Brain 2010;133:3764–3777.
34.
Salazar A, Grafman J, Vance S, Weingartner H, Dillon J,
Ludlow C. Consciousness and amnesia after penetrating
head injury: neurology and anatomy. Neurology 1986;36:
178–187.
35.
Corbetta M, Shulman GL. Spatial neglect and attention
networks. Annu Rev Neurosci 2011;34:569–599.
36.
Allman JM, Tetreault NA, Hakeem AY, et al. The von
Economo neurons in frontoinsular and anterior cingulate
cortex in great apes and humans. Brain Struct Funct 2010;
214:495–517.
37.
Seeley WW, Carlin DA, Allman JM, et al. Early fronto-
temporal dementia targets neurons unique to apes and
humans. Ann Neurol 2006;60:660–667.
38.
Chang C, Metzger CD, Glover GH, Duyn JH, Heinze HJ,
Walter M. Association between heart rate variability and
fluctuations in resting-state functional connectivity. Neuro-
image 2013;68:93–104.
39.
Philippi CL, Feinstein JS, Khalsa SS, et al. Preserved self-
awareness following extensive bilateral brain damage to the
insula, anterior cingulate, and medial prefrontal cortices.
PLoS One 2012;7:e38413.
40.
Laureys S, Boly M, Moonen G, Maquet P. Two dimen-
sions of consciousness: arousal and awareness. Encycl Neu-
rosci 2009;2:1133–1142.
2434
Neurology 87
December 6, 2016
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
