 Background Paper 
 
 
 
Pandemic risk 
 
 
Olga B. Jonas 
The World Bank 
 Pandemic Risk1  
Olga Jonas2 
October 2013 
 
 
Everybody knows that pestilences have a way of recurring in the world; yet somehow we find it 
hard to believe in ones that crash down on our heads from a blue sky. 
‒ Author and Philosopher Albert Camus, The Plague, 1948 
 
We have some idea what might happen if, in the face of other pressing global challenges, we divert 
our focus from making systemic improvements in public health and veterinary services — and that 
prospect is frightening. We must continue to help countries develop essential human and 
institutional capacity. We must ensure that authorities have the resources to fulfill the 
responsibilities they have to their citizens, and to the world as signatories to the International 
Health Regulations and OIE International Standards for Animal Diseases. 
‒ World Bank address to a ministerial conference on responses to pandemic threat, 2008 
 
Even though we can't compute the odds for threats like bioterrorism or a pandemic, it’s important 
to have the right people worrying about them and taking steps to minimize their likelihood and 
potential impact. …….…. But bioterrorism and pandemics are the only threats I can foresee that 
could kill over a billion people.  
‒ Microsoft Corporation Chairman Bill Gates, 2011 
 
The real problems are setting up the delivery systems that can not only protect people from the 
diseases of today but the diseases of tomorrow. 
  ‒ World Bank Group President Dr. Jim Yong Kim, 2012 
 
Preparedness, including for potential pandemics, requires coordination and management of 
complex relationships across different sectors and between international, national, and local 
actors. We must work together in support of all societies as they prepare – in ways that reflect the 
interests of all people for whom preparations are being made. A community-based One Health 
approach is essential for reducing the risks to people that emerge at the interfaces between 
animals, humans, and ecosystems. 
 ‒ UN System Influenza Coordinator David Nabarro, 2013 
 
* * * * * 
 
                                                          
 
1This paper was prepared as a background paper to the World Development Report 2014 on Risk and Opportunity: 
Managing Risks for Development.  I thank Enis Baris, Dan Biller, Charles Blitzer, Milan Brahmbhatt, Siddharth 
Chandra, Alain Dehove, Tim Evans, Paul Forster, Marelize Gorgens, Cees de Haan, Jane Kirby-Zaki, John Lange, 
Piers Merrick, David Nabarro, Inci Otker-Robe, Maryse Pierre-Louis, John Pollner, Peter Sandman, Apurva Sanghi, 
Richard Seifman, Simon Strickland, Chadia Wannous, and Lucas Warford for their helpful comments.  All remaining 
errors and misunderstandings are mine. 
2Economic Adviser, Avian and Human Influenza Response Coordinator, World Bank; email: ojonas@worldbank.org. 
 ii 
 
This paper looks at pandemic risk, what it means for development, and how management of this 
risk could be improved, both in countries and internationally. The paper was motivated by the 
prevalence of pandemic myths. Widely held beliefs—that pandemics are inevitable and thus not 
worth worrying about, that the health sector is managing the risks, and that the pandemic risk is not 
a development issue—lead to underestimation of pandemic risk, scant preparedness, and 
inadequate prevention. Examining the reasons why these myths persist could help governments 
and international organizations improve management of the risks associated with pandemics.  
These risks are substantial.  A single severe flu pandemic could cost $3 trillion. It is hard to 
imagine a more severe threat to ending absolute poverty or to boosting shared prosperity in 
developing countries.  Indeed, OECD, among others, see a severe pandemic as a top global 
catastrophic risk, one that is higher than terrorism risk.  It would bring shared misery, economic 
decline, and societal disruptions on a global scale, with the poor and those in fragile states hit the 
hardest.  
Setting a goal to reduce pandemic risk should be the first step toward risk governance, 
complemented by mandates for international organizations to work toward the goal. Risk 
governance should ensure strengthening of public veterinary and human health systems in 
developing countries, and the bridges between them, to eliminate the weakest links in global 
defenses against pathogens. Reduction of pandemic risk is a public service that only governments, 
through their coordinated actions, can provide. Delivery of this service can benefit from systematic 
application of ‘science of delivery,’ notably by using One Health approaches for early effective 
control of contagion.  
All countries can build and operate systems that meet international standards; the annual spending 
required to reach that goal is not only modest but also ten times less than the expected annual cost 
of inaction. Advocacy and communications for prevention and preparedness are key public sector 
responsibilities at global, country, and community levels. The main beneficiaries of pandemic risk 
reduction will be our children and future generations because their lifetime odds of experiencing a 
pandemic are now high and growing; they face worse odds than present-day adults, including the 
political and business leaders who need to lead if this risk is to be reduced.  Preparedness for 
pandemics is low everywhere, but especially in developing countries, with potentially high-cost 
impacts on health, economies, and society. Whole-of-society planning for responses is a low-cost 
activity that will mitigate these impacts. 
 
 
 iii 
 
Contents 
Acronyms 
........................................................................................................................................................ iv 
Four pandemic myths 
....................................................................................................................................... 1 
Characteristics of pandemic risk ...................................................................................................................... 2 
Links to development and transmission of health risks into other types of risk .............................................. 6 
Economic impacts 
.......................................................................................................................................... 10 
Factors affecting systemic vulnerability ........................................................................................................ 11 
Ex post mitigation depends on systemic resilience to pandemic impact 
........................................................ 13 
Role of the international community ............................................................................................................. 16 
Global risk-management tools ....................................................................................................................... 18 
Select lessons from coping with pandemics .................................................................................................. 20 
Factors underlying mismanagement of pandemic risk................................................................................... 22 
Cost-effective, incentive-compatible policies to reduce pandemic risk 
......................................................... 26 
Select key points ............................................................................................................................................ 32 
Select references ............................................................................................................................................ 34 
 
Figures  
Figure 1.  Impacts of efforts to avoid infection dominate 
................................................................................ 3 
Figure 2.  Meat production, 1970-2050, million tons ...................................................................................... 4 
Figure 3.  Illustrative relationship  between time  of detection  of a zoonotic disease and total cost of 
outbreak.......................................................................................................................................... 5 
Figure 4.  The impact of animal-borne diseases .............................................................................................. 8 
Figure 5.  The poorest households would suffer larger income declines than wealthier households with        
a ban on backyard poultry sales ..................................................................................................... 9 
Figure 6.  Initial response to SARS:  sudden collapses in tourist arrivals ..................................................... 10 
Figure 7.  Disease burden could more than double 
........................................................................................ 14 
Figure 8.  Most of the impact is indirect, though also fully attributable to the animal disease outbreak 
....... 25 
Boxes 
Box 1.  Four pandemic myths .......................................................................................................................... 1 
Box 2.  Science of Delivery informs collaboration for service effectiveness and efficiency .......................... 6 
Box 3.  Characteristics of global public goods ................................................................................................ 7 
Box 4.  Possible demand and supply shocks associated with a flu pandemic .  
............................................. 11 
Box 5.  A whole-of-society approach is key to joint working of multiple interests ...................................... 15 
Box 6.  A very late pandemic warning  
.......................................................................................................... 21 
Box 7.  One Health approaches 
...................................................................................................................... 26 
Box 8.  Coordinating approaches and communications is important 
............................................................. 27 
Box 9.  Leaders to emphasize collaboration .................................................................................................. 30 
 
 Acronyms 
AIDS 
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome 
ASEAN 
Association of South East Asian Nations 
Cat DDO 
World Bank development policy loan with a deferred drawdown option for 
catastrophe risk  
FAO 
Food and Agriculture Organization (of the United Nations) 
CEO 
chief executive officer 
GDP 
gross domestic product 
H1N1 
influenza virus, also cause of the 2009 influenza pandemic 
H5N1 
a highly pathogenic avian influenza type 
IHR 
International Health Regulations 
MERS 
Middle East respiratory syndrome 
OECD 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
OIE 
World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE kept its historical acronym from Office 
International de Epizooties, established in 1924) 
PVS 
Performance of Veterinary Services assessment methodology 
SARS 
severe acute respiratory syndrome 
TASW 
Toward a Safer World initiative (on pandemic preparedness) 
UHC 
Universal Health Coverage 
UN 
United Nations 
UNSIC 
UN System Influenza Coordination 
WHO 
World Health Organization (of the United Nations) 
 
 Four pandemic myths 
Global concern about the pandemic threat escalated in 2005-2008. But then it dropped rapidly, 
especially when the 2009 H1N1 flu pandemic fortunately turned out to be less disruptive than 
many flu seasons.  The drop in concern reinforced four pandemic myths, creating a challenge (Box 
1), because when the public and policymakers accept the myths, reducing pandemic risk is 
difficult. Acknowledging these myths, and analyzing why they persist, could help governments 
and their international organizations improve management of the risks associated with pandemics. 
These global risks are large and growing. They threaten to rapidly unravel progress toward poverty 
elimination and boosting of shared prosperity. When prevention falls short, as is the case now, the 
occurrence of the next pandemic is not a question of ‘if’, but ‘when.’ In any year, the probability 
that contagion will start is not zero. Its severity is unknowable in advance, but it could be high. 
Thus, OECD, among others, see a severe pandemic as a top global catastrophic risk that would 
trigger shared misery, sharp economic decline, and societal disruptions and violence on a global 
scale, with the poor and those in fragile states hit the hardest. 
Box 1. Four pandemic myths 
 
Plausible… 
… but: 
Myth 1 
Nothing can be 
done to prevent 
pandemics. It’s 
just nature.  
Human activity helps or hinders the onset of contagion. Most pandemics start in animals, 
so human-managed livestock health makes a big difference. 
Robust public veterinary and human health systems can work to stop contagion early, so 
it does not become a pandemic. The science is clear; tools and effective disease control 
methods are well known in most cases. 
Myth 2 
We can deal with 
it when it comes. 
There is no risk. 
Do you want to 
scare people? 
Severity of pandemic impact would depend on human reactions, on the resilience of 
communities, 
and 
on 
whole-of-society 
preparedness, 
including 
for 
official 
communications. Preparedness for household, community, country, and international 
responses will reduce costs. Risk awareness is a necessary first step. 
Myth 3 
Health 
authorities will 
protect us from 
pandemics. 
Pandemic risk reduction is not a priority for the health sector, which is mainly 
concerned with existing patients, not potential ones. Since prevention brings few 
observable recognized rewards, it is often grossly neglected. 
Vaccines are no panacea and will not prevent a pandemic with current technologies.  
They may be available with delay after a pandemic starts, in limited quantities, and have 
low effectiveness.  There is still no AIDS vaccine, decades after the onset of the AIDS 
pandemic. Vaccines and antiviral medicines could protect the health of a fortunate 
minority with access to them, while possibly harming social cohesion if scarce vaccine is 
allocated arbitrarily. Mitigation of pandemic impacts requires measures in all sectors, 
not only health interventions.  
Myth 4 
Pandemic risk is 
not a 
development 
concern. 
This is mistaken, on at least three counts. First, a severe pandemic would impose 
widespread health, economic and social costs, setting back progress by years. The poor 
and vulnerable could be most affected. Second, pandemic prevention hinges on robust 
public health systems (veterinary and human) that collaborate to detect contagion 
early, respond rapidly, and stop it. These same systems are needed to prevent and control 
other diseases as well, especially the human diseases that are caused by 2.3 billion 
infections of animal origin every year. Third, pandemic preparedness, which supports 
resilience across the whole-of-society and business continuity in key sectors, will 
help developing countries reduce the impacts of other disasters, especially complex ones. 
 2 
 
Characteristics of pandemic risk 
Wide range of outcomes, with expected loss of some $30 billion annually.  Pandemic risk is the 
expected value of the impact of widespread infectious disease in humans on human health, 
economies, and communities. Pandemics are epidemics (occurrence of disease above an expected 
norm) that affect at least several countries on more than one continent. A salient characteristic of 
this risk is that it combines a low probability of occurring with high, potentially catastrophic, 
global impact. The most severe of the four flu pandemics in the last 100 years, the 1918 pandemic, 
killed 50 million-100 million people in a global population of less than 2 billion. In such a severe-
case scenario, economic losses could amount to 4.8 percent of global GDP, or more than $3 
trillion. 3  A moderate flu pandemic could have an impact of about half this amount; weak 
pandemics such as the 2009 H1N1 flu pandemic may have economic impacts of less than 0.5 
percent of GDP. Pandemic risk has an annual expected value of an order of magnitude of $30 
billion,4 which is equivalent to more than one fifth of the average annual losses from all disasters 
in the past decade. Respiratory infections like flu are often highly transmissible (it is easy for an 
infected person to transmit the pathogen to several other people in a short span of time) so they can 
spread fast; if they are also sufficiently virulent, they pose a formidable threat. A severe pandemic 
would resemble a global war in its sudden, profound, and widespread impact.5 Pandemics can 
fortunately also be moderate or weak, such as the 2009 H1N1 flu pandemic, and can develop 
slowly. For instance, the AIDS pandemic increased over decades because of the characteristics of 
the virus and its transmission. 
Man-made disaster. While infectious disease is a natural hazard, a pandemic is a disaster that is 
largely man-made. Once human effort to stop contagion early has proven inadequate and a 
pandemic starts, much of the disaster would arise from human behaviors that disrupt 
interconnected economic and social systems. This could entail massive international damage. A 
pandemic may appear to be primarily a health concern, but this is misleading.  Focusing on health 
impacts alone leads people and governments to underestimate the total risk and to neglect policies, 
prevention, and preparedness actions to increase resilience and enable business and household 
continuity. Substantial negative impacts will occur in economic sectors other than in the health 
sector, as well as in society more broadly. Reactions by governments, businesses and consumers to 
the 2003 SARS outbreak (which was arrested after 8,000 cases and 800 fatalities) gave rise to 
economic costs of $54 billion, confirming that impacts of contagion outside the health sector 
predominate, possibly by a very wide margin. Figure 1 shows a plausible distribution of total costs 
in a flu pandemic. Some 60 percent of the impact would be due to demand and supply shifts driven 
by people’s avoidance reactions. The other major driver of costs would be lost production due to 
high worker absenteeism, amounting to about 28 percent of total costs.  This kind of a distribution 
of impacts means that the health sector cannot be expected to undertake, on its own, an adequate 
level of pandemic risk management for influenza and similar highly-transmissible diseases. 
                                                          
 
3 World Bank (2008). The ‘severe’ case modeling was based on the atypically severe 1918 flu pandemic. On the other 
hand, yet more severe cases are possible and could occur in the future. As recovery would set in once the pandemic 
ends, the decline would be temporary.  
4 This calculation assumes a 1 percent probability of occurrence of a severe flu pandemic in any year, or that it is a 
once-in-a-hundred-years event. The same expected value obtains for a scenario with two less severe pandemics per 
century, with costs of 2.4 percent of GDP each, or four relatively benign pandemics per century, each costing 1.2 
percent of GDP. 
5 US Homeland Security Council (2006). 
 3 
 
Human actions are a factor in whether an epidemic 
escalates into a pandemic. Pandemics of infectious 
diseases have occurred throughout history.6 There have 
been four influenza pandemics since 1918, and the 
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) pandemic 
is ongoing. Some disease outbreaks are unlikely to 
become epidemics because the pathogen is not readily 
transmissible, a sufficiently large part of the population 
is immune thanks to vaccination or earlier exposure, or 
the pathogen is too deadly and kills the human host 
before others are infected (e.g., the Ebola virus). While 
the hazard – an infectious pathogen – is natural, human 
actions can substantially affect the chances that a disease 
outbreak becomes an epidemic. For instance, inadequate 
sanitation and access to clean water fuel food borne 
diseases and cholera epidemics, but these are unlikely to 
spread to nearby areas or other countries that have a 
robust sanitation infrastructure. Once a pandemic is 
underway, the impact will also depend in part on human 
actions. Though the toll on the health of the young, 
elderly, men, women, and different ethnicities may differ 
because of biology, the undernourished and already-ill may be hardest-hit. 7 Identification of 
vulnerable groups, and ways to mitigate impacts on them, is a key task for the public health 
authorities as they prepare contingency plans and during the course of a pandemic.  
Key role of information and communications. Much of the economic and other impacts of a flu 
pandemic are not directly due to death and illness. Even when up to 30-40 percent of the 
population would suffer from flu in a pandemic, most of the impact would be due to people’s 
reactions and avoidance behaviors and would be, moreover, aggravated by likely confusion 
triggered by incomplete or inaccurate information and other inadequacies in individual subjective 
risk assessments. As experience in the 1918 flu pandemic showed, individual and community 
responses would depend on communications by the authorities, private communications, public 
trust, public health measures, and preparedness and level of knowledge. Failures in these respects 
may result in cascading failures in the provision of public (security, health, education, etc.) and 
private (food, water, power, transport, banking, communications, etc.) goods and services at the 
local, national, and international levels. Notably, panic and its negative impacts are most likely in 
response to gaps in official candor, which often occurs, paradoxically, to allay panic. Officials’ 
fear of panic, which would be likely in the absence of adequate preparedness, is thus a potential 
source of risk that could aggravate pandemic impact. 
Health risk at the interface between animals and humans. Human exposure to pathogens from 
animals is a key determinant of pandemic risk. These pathogens cause disease in animals, 
including livestock. In some cases the animal pathogens may adapt to infect humans and transmit 
                                                          
 
6 Particularly devastating pandemics include: the Plague of Justinian, which started in 541 AD, killed some 40 percent 
of the population of the Byzantine Empire capital Constantinople and 25 percent of the population in the eastern 
Mediterranean region and, among other impacts, devastated agricultural production; the Black Death (plague), which 
started in the 14th century and killed one third of Europe’s population in just six years; and the 1918 flu pandemic. 
7 There have been exceptions, however. The AIDS pandemic has afflicted the educated, urban, and non-poor 
populations the most.  The 1918 flu pandemic had a disproportionately severe impact on healthy young adults. 
 4 
 
among them. An estimated 75 percent of pathogens capable of causing human disease are now of 
animal origin – they are “zoonotic.”8 All flu viruses are zoonotic. They are notable for frequent 
mutations, such that a novel flu virus, one to which humans have no immunity, is certain to emerge 
from among the many flu virus strains circulating in birds, poultry, and pigs. Other diseases of 
animal origin include the plague, tuberculosis, severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), Middle 
East respiratory syndrome (MERS), rabies, and AIDS. 
Poor veterinary services, encroachment 
on wildlife habitats. The ongoing rapid 
growth of production of poultry, pigs, 
and other livestock contributes to 
pandemic risk because most of this 
growth is in developing countries that do 
not have the resources to maintain good 
veterinary standards (Figure 2). Human 
and livestock populations also encroach 
more and more on wildlife habitats, 
increasing the opportunities for spillover 
of disease from wildlife to livestock and 
humans. The risks arise from both 
frequency of interactions, which give 
pathogens 
opportunities 
for 
transmission, and a lack of veterinary 
and human public health9 capacities to 
detect and diagnose contagion early 
enough to rapidly take effective control 
measures. 
Increased 
internal 
and 
international trade in livestock and 
related 
products, 
which 
generates 
substantial 
economic 
benefits, 
also 
provides growing opportunities for wide 
geographic spread of pathogens.  
Risk origin in zoonotic pathogens. Disease in animals is a key driver of the risk of pandemics (in 
humans) because it increases the probability of a pandemic occurring at all. Many pathogens 
infecting livestock are zoonotic, or also capable of causing illness in humans. Some pathogens first 
transmit from wildlife to livestock, which has much more frequent contact with humans than does 
wildlife. Some of these pathogens have, or can develop, transmissibility and virulence 
characteristics that give them a pandemic potential. Without good surveillance of livestock 
diseases and diagnosis, the extent and nature of these threats are uncertain.  
                                                          
 
8Of all known pathogens capable of causing disease in humans, 60 percent are zoonotic. Among pathogens that have 
emerged in recent decades, 75 percent are zoonotic. Among agents with bioterrorism potential, 80 percent are 
zoonotic. Source: OIE. 
9In this paper, “veterinary and human public health systems” is “veterinary public health system and human public 
health system”. These two systems are usually managed by separate public authorities or government ministries. 
Figure 2. 
Source: World Bank, AES. 
 5 
 
High cost of delays. Too often detection, diagnosis, and control of disease outbreaks 10 are 
attempted only with delay and after humans are infected. When public veterinary authorities are 
not prepared and equipped to control outbreaks, or to detect them in the first place, delays in 
control and eradication (when possible) are inevitable. When outbreak control fails because it is 
delayed, poorly designed, or poorly implemented, prevention of an epidemic (and a possible 
pandemic) becomes more difficult and, as contagion spreads, eventually impossible. Mitigation of 
an epidemic is then the only option, by preventing infections of individuals. The AIDS pandemic 
offers a stark reminder of the costs of delay in tackling an infectious disease. Poor coordination, 
inadequate communications, gaps in authority and funding, and weak oversight—these all cause 
slippages even in single-country efforts, and are more likely where coordination among multiple 
countries and international partners is required. Delays in detection and control are ultimately very 
costly because contagion and attendant mitigation costs grow exponentially (Figure 3).   
Weak public veterinary health systems hinder early warning about disease outbreak. When 
public veterinary systems are so weak that they do not detect the disease in animals, the left side of 
Figure 3 becomes invisible to public health authorities. Contagion is obscured because government 
did not build the requisite systems to detect and diagnose it early.  Early warning and ‘connecting 
the dots’ to inform disease control measures are impossible tasks when the most important 
‘dots’—those that signal the onset of contagion—are hidden. Thus, governments are not delivering 
an essential public service, leading to lower effectiveness and efficiency of disease control (Box 
2). If nothing or too little is known about zoonotic disease in livestock, little can be done to prevent 
human infections and wider spread. Such crucial weakness of public veterinary systems have 
                                                          
 
10 Disease “outbreak” refers to an event before a disease becomes an epidemic. Outbreaks are generally geographically 
limited and affect fewer animals and humans than epidemics (in humans) and epizootics (in animals). 
Figure 3.  Illustrative relationship between the time of detection of an 
emerging zoonotic disease and total cost of outbreak 
 6 
 
hindered control of H5N1 avian flu in many developing countries, where poultry disease was 
detected only after humans (typically children and women) fell ill. This kind of public health 
service delivery—only looking for a zoonotic disease in livestock after humans are infected—is 
both inefficient (because of the dramatically higher costs of late control) and inhumane.  Humans 
should not serve as sentinels for surveillance of livestock disease; they should not have to fall ill 
and die in order for public authorities to find a livestock disease.  
 
Box 2.  Science of Delivery informs collaboration for service effectiveness and efficiency 
Science of delivery for public health services points toward adjustments in approach when services are not 
delivered in an adequate way to safeguard population health, notably by protecting populations from impacts of 
contagion on health and livelihoods. The intermediate results that serve as inputs into the ultimate result of 
effective zoonotic outbreak control include early detection, correct diagnosis, identification and implementation 
of control measures, monitoring and evaluation.  The graph in Figure 3 suggests how crucial these tasks are. 
Assessments of systems that should perform these functions can inform investments and management changes in 
public veterinary and human health systems to increase their capacity for better delivery of the services.  One 
Health approaches (see Box 7) embody these adjustments because they reflect scientific knowledge about 
zoonotic disease epidemiology, evidence on delays and wrong diagnoses in the absence of One Health 
approaches, and evidence on the health and economic consequences of unchecked infectious disease spread.  For 
a review of evidence and quantification of the impacts of One Health approaches on the efficiency and 
effectiveness of delivery of disease control services, see World Bank (2012). 
 
Links to development and transmission of health risks into other types of risk  
Initial pandemic shock to labor and consumers, not to capital.  A pandemic will always impact 
human health and reduce the labor supply, as disease spreads and may come to affect a sizeable 
part of the population. AIDS, for example, disproportionately affects men and women in 
economically active age groups. Even if few people are actually infected, the labor-supply 
contraction due to workers’ reactions to news of spreading illness and a drop in aggregate demand 
due to loss of consumer and business confidence could be massive and relatively sudden because 
fear may travel faster than the pathogen itself (Box 3 below). In a flu pandemic, some 30-40 
percent of workers may be ill within several months. This would affect all labor-dependent 
activities.  Impacts would be felt in all regions with human populations.  Not only do the vast 
majority of people live in developing countries (six, out of a global population of seven, billion), 
but many of them could be especially vulnerable, for reasons that include malnutrition and pre-
existing medical conditions, low access to safety nets and medical care, low disaster preparedness 
at community and national levels, low knowledge, weak communication systems, crowded living 
and workplace conditions, dependence on incomes from activities involving face-to-face contact, 
and patchy human public health services. 
Vulnerabilities. Already-weak public authority and business climate in fragile and conflict-
affected states could be sharply eroded, worsening security and population welfare. Business 
continuity failures may put at risk vulnerable groups, including dependent refugee and prisoner 
populations. Since developing countries derive a larger part of their income from labor rather than 
from capital, a significant labor supply contraction could have a disproportionate negative impact 
 7 
 
on national incomes.11 Moreover, many developing countries depend on remittances, tourism, 
world capital markets, and foreign markets for their exports. The importance of these vulnerable 
links would differ across countries, and many developing countries could be especially susceptible 
to disruptions. Active promotion of whole-of-society resilience and pandemic preparedness can 
benefit countries by reducing not only pandemic impact, but also the costs of other disasters and 
major crises. 
Supply of a pure global public good. Pandemic risk management is particularly relevant to 
developing countries because many of them are positioned to be the main supplier of pandemic 
prevention, which is a pure global public good (Box 3). Many developing countries that 
increasingly take part in global trade and travel do not yet have the veterinary and human public 
health capacities to arrest contagion early. This capacity gap is a source of pandemic risk.  As co-
                                                          
 
11 Many countries have high unemployment, and the unemployed may be disproportionately vulnerable to disease in a 
pandemic. In that case, the impact on production would be lower than implied by overall infection (attack) rates. The 
impact might be mitigated by the ability of firms (and public services) to readily replace ill workers with healthy ones, 
including those who have recovered from illness. Such responses would require advance preparations. 
Box 3.  Characteristics of global public goods of pandemic prevention and pandemic mitigation 
Global public goods share two qualities.  First, their benefits are nonexcludable so that once a good is available, 
everyone in the world can enjoy it.  This is clearly the case for pandemic prevention, which increases the 
probability that contagion will be detected and arrested effectively, at the outset.  This benefits all countries and 
thus is a ‘pure’ global public good.  Second, consumption of global public goods is non-rivalrous because 
consumption by one person does not reduce the availability to others, across nations. This, too, holds without 
qualifications for prevention of pandemics and the resulting pandemic risk reduction.  This makes it a ‘pure’ 
global public good. Operationally, the supply of global public goods often depends critically on international 
collective action. “Global public goods concern all countries, rich and poor, and they can no longer be separated 
from national interests. The spread of communicable diseases […] clearly illustrates the urgency of concerted 
global action,” according to the World Bank, Global Public Goods: A Framework for the Role of the World 
Bank (DC2007-0020), September 2007. 
Pandemic mitigation occurs after a pandemic starts.  Its success depends on whole-of-society preparedness to 
take appropriate measures. Pandemic mitigation delivers both a global public good and a national public good.  
Global benefits (that are nonexcludable and non-rivalrous) are generated because successful mitigation in any 
one country will contribute to attenuation of the systemic shock that affects all countries.  This global benefit 
may be expected to be proportional to the size and degree of interconnectedness of the country implementing 
mitigation measures, for instance those that limit failure of critical infrastructure and reduce the drop in 
economic activity.  Vaccination is a pandemic mitigation measure that may be available about 6 months after a 
flu pandemic starts, and only in limited quantities; vaccination would have public (national and global) benefits 
because it reduces population-wide disease spread in the later stages of a pandemic, regardless of borders.  
Vaccination also produces private benefits by preventing individual infections. 
Pandemic risk reduction results from pandemic prevention (a pure global public good) and pandemic 
mitigation (a mix of global public, national public, and private goods).  The substantial public good content of 
pandemic risk reduction warrants consideration of pandemic risk reduction as a global public good as well. 
The International Task Force on Global Public Goods (2006) said that the very nature of global public goods 
means that demand will tend to outweigh supply ”due to issues of sovereignty, differing preferences and 
priorities, the ‘free rider’ problem (the incentive to wait for another party to provide the public good, then enjoy 
its consumption), the ‘weakest link’ problem (success can be eroded by a single act of non-compliance, as in the 
efforts to eradicate an infectious disease), and the ‘summation problem (the need to ensure compliance and 
sustain momentum with long term global initiatives).” Pandemic risk is high because these factors all constrain 
the provision of the public services required to reduce the risk, so the global public good of pandemic risk 
reduction is grossly undersupplied. 
 8 
 
benefits, these capacities would produce national public goods, the lack of which is an obstacle to 
development and poverty reduction. Investing in these capacities would substantially strengthen 
critical parts of the national and international systems for prevention of pandemics and thus 
increase the supply of the global public good of pandemic risk reduction. The benefits would 
accrue to all people and all firms in all countries. 
Animal disease worsens poverty. Those most affected by animal-borne diseases (called zoonoses) 
are the poor, often the poorest, livestock keepers in developing countries (Figure 4), with some 2.3 
billion infections in humans occurring year after year. Many of these diseases are so-called 
diseases of poverty, which are misdiagnosed, underdiagnosed, and rarely treated. Too often the 
fevers accompanying zoonotic diseases may be diagnosed as malaria, for instance, resulting in 
inappropriate treatment.12 These diseases deepen poverty because it is the poor who tend to live in 
close quarters, sometimes in the same room, with livestock. Taking care of poultry, cattle, and 
other animals is often the responsibility of children and of women, who are thus particularly 
vulnerable.  Poor households derive a relatively large share of their incomes from poultry (see 
example in Figure 5) so animal disease will reduce their incomes the most. Livestock, including 
poultry, is one of the poor’s most important assets. It embodies an accumulation of savings, and 
animals can be sold quickly to generate cash for family emergencies, such as a need for medical 
care. Livestock therefore provides a safety net, functioning as a self-insurance mechanism against 
idiosyncratic risks. Animal disease reduces the value of these assets and insurance mechanisms, 
                                                          
 
12 Okello, A.L. et al. (2011). 
Figure 4. The impact of animal-borne diseases 
 9 
 
Figure 5. The poorest households would suffer larger income declines than 
wealthier households with a ban on backyard poultry sales 
Source:  FAO case study in Vietnam 
harming the welfare and increasing the vulnerability of the poor. Animal disease also works like a 
tax on a key source of protein and nutrition, with deleterious consequences for child development, 
in particular. 
Hotspots. The data in Figure 4 can serve as a proxy indicator of where the origins of the next 
pandemic could be. The existing zoonotic disease outbreaks shown on the map are an outcome of 
geography, animal and human densities, and veterinary and human public health capacities. They 
are clearly evident in areas where poverty is pervasive, in low-income and middle-income 
countries in Africa, Middle East, and South and East Asia.13 The World Organization for Animal 
Health (OIE) has systematically assessed veterinary services capacity in more than a hundred and 
twenty five countries. Each essential veterinary public health function (critical competency) 
receives a score between 1 and 5 in the assessment, with 5 corresponding to full compliance with 
international standards on quality of veterinary services. At this time, only 19 countries have 
agreed to full public disclosure of their assessments.14 Greater disclosure would help increase 
awareness of the global public of the status of veterinary systems and its links to hotspots of 
pandemic risk. The World Health Organization (WHO) is assisting in carrying out assessments of 
country compliance with International Health Regulations (IHR). Though these assessments are 
not yet publicly disclosed, human public health systems are likely weakest in the countries with 
zoonotic disease outbreaks.  
Co-benefits. Reduction of livestock 
disease 
prevalence 
would 
help 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions, 
contributing to the global public 
good of mitigating climate change.  
There would also be important 
national 
co-benefits, 
including 
national public goods in many 
developing countries.  Reduction of 
zoonotic disease risks is thus both 
an intermediate goal (a means to 
reduce pandemic risk) and an 
important national objective in its 
own right. Though countries that 
engage in trade in livestock products 
are already required to have good 
veterinary systems, much trade is 
informal and enforcement may be 
uneven. Strengthening of veterinary 
systems would increase formal trade 
opportunities, with resulting higher 
incomes for producers, and reduce 
                                                          
 
13 See the study by Grace, D. et al (2012) and a report on this study by Gilbert, N. (2012). The study did not include 
data for countries in the Americas, where zoonotic disease outbreaks occur as well. See also Jones et al. (2008). 
14 The countries with Performance of Veterinary Services (PVS) assessments disclosed on the OIE website are Belize, 
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Central African Republic, Chile, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Israel, Namibia, Nigeria, 
Panama, Paraguay, Swaziland, Syria, Uruguay, and Vietnam (available at: http://www.oie.int/en/support-to-oie-
members/pvs-evaluations/oie-pvs-evaluation-reports/). An additional 65 PVS assessments have been disclosed to 
donors and partners. 
 10 
 
Figure 6. Initial response to SARS: sudden collapses in tourist arrivals 
the risks associated with informal trade. More broadly, improved public veterinary and human 
health systems would better control other human and livestock diseases, including the 2.3 billion 
zoonotic infections that burden poor people every year (Figure 4). This is because the disease 
surveillance, laboratory, diagnostic and other capacities that are capable of thwarting a novel 
coronavirus, avian flu, or antimicrobial resistance—all of which pose a pandemic threat—will also 
reduce other locally-relevant health threats such as cholera, rabies, foot and mouth disease, 
leptospirosis or brucellosis, to name a few.  Reduction of zoonotic disease risks would thus go 
hand-in-hand with reduction of other disease risks. National benefits would depend on the 
structure of livestock production and related activities; they would include poverty elimination, 
shared prosperity, reduced disease burden on the poor, nutrition, food security, food safety, 
reduced vulnerability, and higher incomes and trade. Strengthening of human public health 
capacities would bring yet other health benefits. For instance, success in promotion of hygiene 
would reduce human health risks due to both zoonotic and non-zoonotic factors. 
Economic impacts 
Systemic economic shock. If a disease is not controlled at its animal source and a sudden-onset 
pandemic occurs, people in all countries may experience both a contagion of disease and a sharp, 
possibly catastrophic, economic downturn associated with shifts in demand, supply shocks, and 
economic and social disruptions. Because countries are connected by, and depend on, travel, trade 
and capital movements, the shocks would propagate across interconnected economic and financial 
systems worldwide, possibly ahead of the contagion itself. These risks were evident in the SARS 
outbreak in 2003 (Figure 6) and should be anticipated, based on connectedness characteristics of 
each country (some will be more vulnerable than others). The evolution of a pandemic in any one 
country or community is largely unpredictable, not least because disease surveillance data become 
available with delay and only partially, and this is generally more so in countries with weak health 
information 
systems. 
For 
slow-onset pandemics like 
AIDS, which developed over 
decades, 
these 
economic 
impacts would be much 
smaller, however. 
A 
range 
of 
possible 
outcomes. Three cases can 
illustrate 
some 
of 
the 
possible 
outcomes 
in 
a 
rapid-onset 
pandemic: 
a 
mild case (as in the 1968 flu 
pandemic, 
cost 
of 
0.7 
percent of GDP), a moderate 
case (as in the 1958 flu 
pandemic, 
cost 
of 
3.1 
percent of GDP), and a 
severe case (as in the case of 
the 1918 pandemic, cost of 
 11 
 
4.8 percent of GDP).15 Planning for a severe case is better than no planning at all since it is 
generally easier to scale a response down rather than up. Box 4 presents the nature of some of the 
impacts that policymakers and businesses may decide to anticipate. 
Box 4. Possible demand and supply shocks associated with a flu pandemic 
Avoidance 
reactions 
and social 
distancing 
measures 
A. In an initial reaction to news of contagion, people tend to spontaneously try to reduce person-to-
person contact, to avoid being infected. This can give rise to rapid and significant negative 
demand shocks and supply disruptions. Avoidance reactions, based on fear, can occur even if 
the outbreak subsides instead of escalating into an epidemic. Services sectors such as tourism, 
retail trade, transport, and entertainment can be hardest hit (Figure 5 shows the speed and extent 
of impact on tourism). Public health measures for social distancing, such as a temporary shut-
down of non-essential activities, school closures, and market closures, as well as border 
screening or quarantines would be important to prevent illness, but they could have economic 
costs as well. The combined cost may account for more half of the total economic impact. 
Direct and 
indirect 
costs of 
disease 
B. The direct and indirect costs associated with human illness and death would arise from actual 
contagion. A minor part would be direct costs, such as for medication and hospitalization. 
Indirect costs, which would be far greater than direct costs, would include production losses as a 
result of the death and illness of workers and other absenteeism, for instance by workers staying 
home when their family members are ill. Absenteeism and illness of some 30-40 percent of the 
labor force within as little as 6 months would result in a severe supply shock. This could disrupt 
labor-intensive sectors the most (such as public order, transport, education, health care, retail 
commerce in food and non-food goods), and networked industries (such as banking, utilities, 
and communications). Production losses in agriculture, where a harvesting season may be 
impaired, may reduce food supplies for many months. 
Offsetting 
and 
cascading 
effects 
C. The above effects may offset each other. For example, avoidance behaviors may indeed reduce 
the rate of infection and thus reduce disease costs and supply shocks. Or the effects may 
combine to produce cascading impacts. For instance, absenteeism among police would reduce 
security and may enable looting of remaining food supplies in urban areas; disruptions of 
domestic and/or foreign banking services would disrupt the flow of workers’ remittances; 
transport failures would hinder commutes to work and so further reduce the labor supply. While 
communities, countries, and the global economy could experience systemic shocks, there would 
be less severe impacts in sectors, communities, and countries with preparedness and business 
continuity plans that had been informed by assessments of vulnerabilities across sectors. 
 
Factors affecting systemic vulnerability 
Globalization. Globalization–the growing international movement of goods, services, and people–
has complex links with pandemic risk. Local and national public health authorities are increasingly 
tasked with coordinating internationally, but this is often a challenge. Globalization has outstripped 
the capacities of public health systems in many countries. Not only is there a booming trade in 
livestock and livestock products, but human mobility is dramatically greater than a hundred years 
ago as more people than ever travel domestically and internationally. More people visit countries 
and regions with poor public health systems and travel between these countries and high-income 
                                                          
 
15The 1918 flu pandemic was atypically severe compared to the other three flu pandemics in the last 100 years. See 
World Bank (2008) for details on the assumptions behind the three cases cited here. Others have proposed economic 
costs of up to 10 percent of GDP in a severe case.  However, pandemics of still greater severity may occur.  No 
economic impact modeling appears to have been done for a flu pandemic with higher (e.g., 4 percent or 8 percent) case 
fatality ratios (deaths as a proportion of those infected).  In such catastrophic scenarios health impacts would be 
unambiguously worse; however, the economic impacts need not be proportionately greater. 
 12 
 
countries that have far stronger governance of veterinary and human public health. A pathogen 
originating in a poultry flock or a goat herd in a remote village in Africa or Asia can reach major 
cities on all continents within 36 hours. If the country of origin can detect such threats, diagnose 
them correctly, and control the disease, contagion is far less likely to cross borders and spread 
globally. Robust veterinary and human public health systems in the “country of origin” of a 
pathogen would greatly enhance security in “destination countries” because only such systems 
would make it less likely that dangerous pathogens board international flights (with human 
passengers) and ships or trucks (with livestock trade) in the first place.16 
Knowledge and communications about threats. Other aspects of globalization have been working 
to reduce pandemic risk. Advances in biological and related sciences in recent decades have 
yielded a dramatically better scientific understanding of pathogens, including how they can be 
detected and diagnosed early enough to enable effective disease control. Some of this research was 
supported by a network of advanced laboratories around the world (many of them part of the US 
military) that are working on zoonotic and other pathogens. Work on bioterrorism agents, of which 
80 percent are of animal origin, covers many pandemic-potential pathogens. Information and 
communications advances enable prompt and extensive collaboration among scientists and 
laboratories, as well as better surveillance. They have also helped improve governments’ 
compliance with mandatory notification of diseases and emerging events to the relevant 
international organizations, such as WHO for human diseases and OIE for animal diseases. Fast 
growth in access to global media, the internet and cell phones now allow people to access and 
share information on disease outbreaks, complementing official information and lessening the 
chances of a government successfully hiding disease outbreaks from their people and from other 
countries. In 2012 the UN System Influenza Coordinator has begun disseminating key information 
related to pandemic threats and health threats at the animal-human-environment interface by email 
as well as posting it online at www.un-influenza.org.  Blogs and networks such as ProMed Mail, 
Flu Trackers, Google Flu Trends, diseasemap.org, the Facebook group “One Health Approaches”, 
Crawford Kilian’s blog “H5N1”, and others have emerged since around 2004, in response to 
concern over H5N1 avian flu, and have come to effectively and rapidly share disease intelligence 
and other knowledge with the public, officials, and scientists. 
Interconnectedness. Modernization may make economies more vulnerable to pandemic impacts 
because of dependence on long supply chains, just-in-time deliveries, and a growing part of the 
economy consisting of networked industries. A failure of a weak link in such an interconnected 
system can create a gap with serious repercussions on households and firms that depend on that 
service for their operations. Similarly, urban areas, where more than half of the world’s population 
now lives, are vulnerable: their food, water, transport, power and other essential goods and 
services are only available thanks to complex arrangements where each stage depends on several 
providers each delivering their part. These arrangements are vulnerable if they are not able to 
withstand extended 30-40 percent labor absenteeism and other disruptions. A pandemic may 
expose gaps in interconnected systems where ‘last mile’ investments had not been made in 
                                                          
 
16 Extensive security systems are in place globally to thwart persons with explosives and weapons from boarding 
flights, to reduce the risk to crew, passengers, the aircraft, and other costs.  This risk could entail up to 400 tragic 
deaths but is reduced thanks to significant expenditure on the security system.  This risk reduction experience could be 
used to assess the adequacy of efforts to lower the likelihood that a person with a dangerous pathogen boards the same 
aircraft, and the contagion possibly quickly reaches megacities and ultimately endangers billions of people, as well as 
the global economy. Whereas passenger screening as such may be relatively ineffective and costly, the case for 
ensuring robust public health systems in all countries where travelers originate may become even stronger. 
 13 
 
business continuity planning. In contrast, traditional rural communities may be self-sufficient for at 
least several weeks and thus better able to cope than city dwellers. 
Poverty and gender. The poor would tend to be disproportionately vulnerable to impact. Their 
weaker physical condition and health may make them more prone to medical complications.  Their 
incomes would suffer during economic decline and disruptions, and they would be last in line 
during any food, health care, or other shortages. The proportion of populations living in poverty 
could rise substantially, making the attainment of the poverty elimination and shared prosperity 
goals less likely in most, if not all, developing countries. Though the gender impact of the disease 
itself is unknowable in advance, women tend to be caretakers of ill dependents. They may 
therefore bear multiple burdens, especially in developing countries where access to health care is 
limited and health care systems have little or no capacity to cope with sudden surges of illness. 
Refugee populations in camps in developing countries (estimated to be more than 15 million) and 
prison inmates (more than 10 million) would be vulnerable to starvation in the absence of adequate 
contingency plans for food delivery. 
Ex post mitigation depends on systemic resilience to pandemic impact 
Risk assessments and response plans.  When a pandemic begins, good pandemic risk management 
entails activating whole-of-society contingency plans to mitigate impacts on health, economies, 
and communities. Most developed countries address pandemic risk and some share their 
assessments with the public. The UK government, for instance, has been making its national risk 
assessment public, finding that pandemics are a substantial risk, which is higher than terrorism 
risk, for instance. Such methodical risk assessments are valuable not only to identify risks and 
ways of reducing them, but also to encourage preparedness. Whole-of society response plans that 
are integrated with national disaster risk management systems should have pre-defined response 
options for critical sectors. Periodic simulation exercises and reviews of exposures and response 
plans at firm, sector, community, sub-national, and national levels will improve resilience and 
reduce pandemic impact. Governments should also periodically estimate public liabilities in case 
of a pandemic and address them as part of their overall contingent liability management.  
Cross-border coordination of pandemic response plans. Countries can also benefit from 
coordination of their contingency plans internationally as warranted, for instance with neighboring 
countries, with countries in the same economic union or community, and with main trading 
partners. For example, ASEAN has begun supporting joint analysis by the member countries of 
interdependencies and vulnerability to pandemic risks. 
Accountable leadership. In 2012 the presidents of the US and Mexico and the Canadian prime 
minister launched, at the White House, a revised North American pandemic plan. Such high-level 
attention to whole-of-society preparedness sends an important signal. Government leadership 
between crises (and not just during crises) would make a country better prepared and thus more 
resilient. Similarly, preparedness in firms and public and private organizations will tend to occur 
only if there is concerted senior management commitment and directives from the CEO or the 
Board. Leadership is needed because incentives for preparedness are very weak. For other disasters 
with large externalities—and hence a need for public sector intervention that is prompt and 
effective—there are legal codes and regulations, or incentives in insurance contracts to encourage 
preparedness. For instance, some cities mandate regular fire drills, a building with fire 
extinguishers and sprinklers gets an insurance premium discount, and governments inspect 
 14 
 
buildings and otherwise enforce codes to reduce fire risk. No government would survive long if it 
dismantled its fire department only because it has been a while since the last fire (indeed, those 
responsible for such a decision could be liable for criminal prosecution). Diffuse accountability in 
governments and international organizations, however, makes possible analogous recklessness: a 
gross neglect of pandemic preparedness and disease control and prevention. Inadequate funding for 
prevention and preparedness when there is not (yet) an emergency increases the likelihood of 
contagion spreading and thus increases risks. Both prudent leadership and governance that 
introduces accountability toward the young and future generations are needed to offset this 
common tendency.17 
Individual resilience. Individuals would need knowledge to be less pandemic prone. This would 
include knowledge of hygiene and familiarity with their community and national disaster response 
plans. Where national and community disaster preparedness is weak, households with access to 
supplies of food and water would be able to cope better than those without such access. 
Limited scope for risk pooling and ex-post mitigation. 
Risk pooling among individuals or among countries is 
difficult because once a severe flu pandemic is 
underway, all would quickly face similar risks, with 
worldwide economic disruptions within a few weeks. 
Within communities health risks could be pooled ex 
post as the uninfected and the recovered care for the ill. 
On the other hand, members of large households, such 
as families, are at greater risk of infection than 
individuals living alone. Contagion of disease differs 
from other hazards in that risks rise when people draw 
together, for instance, to help each other as in the 
altruistic responses observed in the aftermath of 
earthquakes and other calamities. In a pandemic, instead 
of helping each other, they could spread disease among 
themselves and aggravate contagion. Contingency plans 
should provide for the staffing of essential services by 
those who recover from the disease since they would be 
immune to further infection. The scope for insurance 
(other than self-insurance) is limited.  Households can 
in principle mitigate risk through life insurance and 
medical insurance, where available. Firms may have 
business continuity insurance. But insurers will be hard-hit when many individuals and firms 
                                                          
 
17The health sector is not in a position to effectively lead on pandemic prevention and preparedness. Health sector 
resources are heavily concentrated on treatment of existing diseases.  Key concerns of health policy makers are about 
ensuring access and quality of care, financing of costs, and securing human resources and facilities, and incomes, for 
health care service providers. By low investment in the prevention of future diseases, health sector policy-makers 
heavily discount the future welfare of the young.  Health sector approaches (to the trade-off between diseases of today 
vs. diseases of tomorrow) diverge markedly from policy advice on climate change, where low-to-moderate discount 
rates are commonly applied to future impacts.  Myopia and a low weight of the welfare of future generations will lead 
to higher costs, because low spending on prevention will cause some preventable pandemics and other disease not 
being prevented.  Use of a high discount rate in the sector may thus result in a substantially larger-than-optimal, and 
costly, health care sector over time. Quantification of this impact in different countries may be a fruitful area for 
research and could serve to reduce systemic bias against prevention. 
Figure 7.  Disease burden could more than double 
 15 
 
present claims simultaneously, and so they may not be able to honor all claims. Vaccination may 
(or may not) be available in time to reduce individual and population-wide risks to health. A 
pandemic would compromise the attainment of universal health coverage (UHC) goals, as recently 
adopted by the United Nations, and progress toward the goals would be set back by the sheer 
increase of the burden of disease.  A severe flu pandemic could more than double the total global 
burden of disease (Figure 7). 
Preparedness. Whole-of-society preparedness is the best way to reduce pandemic impacts and 
help households, firms, communities, and governments cope (Box 5). This should involve periodic 
contingency planning and simulation exercises, covering all relevant hazards and engaging all key 
sectors. These plans, even if they are only rudimentary, will help communities, firms, and 
countries respond better than they could without such plans. Some measures involve vaccinating 
vulnerable populations and changing behaviors to reduce disease transmission, but many other 
response measures are the same for a pandemic as for other complex disasters and economic 
crises. Notably, non-pharmaceutical measures for reducing damaging impacts on communities and 
economies, such as response plans to maintain essential services and social distancing, are likely to 
be the only means to mitigate a flu pandemic for about six months, even in wealthy countries.  
Thereafter the vaccines may become available, in limited quantities and likely only in higher-
income countries. Non-pharmaceutical measures are effective if they are adequately prepared and 
managed. Communication of knowledge merits particular attention because of its large impact on 
people’s behaviors. Truthful, compete, and promptly disclosed information about contagion is 
important, because uncertainty, fear, and rumors will worsen economic impacts, especially if 
officials, people or firms panic based on faulty communication. Such plans for responses and risk 
communications may be usefully coordinated among countries (e.g., within a region) and globally. 
While WHO is well-placed to coordinate on human health matters and disease risk 
communications, global coordination mechanisms are not yet as well-defined for other sectors than 
span borders, such as transport, telecom, financial services, and tourism. Contingency planning is a 
low-cost activity, but one that requires leadership and political commitment. Still, it is often 
neglected. Most governments, organization, firms, and households are thus under-prepared. 
Box 5.  A whole-of-society approach is key to joint working of multiple interests 
Adopting the whole-of-society approach to sustain and mainstream pandemic preparedness and integrate it into the 
disaster risk reduction efforts should be on our priority list.  It is people-centered: where governments open up the 
process and remove boundaries, where people participate to identify and satisfy their needs and where people are 
well informed and motivated to proactively reduce the risks to their lives and livelihoods.  The whole-of-society 
approach will stimulate the joint working of multiple interests in pursuit of a common goal –ensuring the health and 
economic security for our children and future generations. 
 ‒ UN System Influenza Coordinator David Nabarro, 2013 
 
High cost of some ex-post mitigation measures, compared to prevention. Faced with a potential 
catastrophe, high-income country governments acquire large stockpiles of antiviral medications 
(though these may be of limited utility) and preorder pandemic vaccines. Pandemic vaccine 
research and development attract substantial government funding; for instance, in 2012 the US 
administration awarded $25 billion to three pharmaceutical companies. Such expenditures for ex 
post mitigation are justified from a national standpoint, but they point to a misallocation of 
resources from a global perspective. Because there is very little spending on early warning and 
disease control systems in developing countries, these systems are weak. As a result, pandemic risk 
 16 
 
is high. Thus, governments with resources seek to protect their own populations by spending large 
amounts on ex post measures such as vaccines and antivirals. At best, these measures can provide 
only partial protection, however, and only with delay.  Vaccines are unlikely to be available in the 
first six months of a flu pandemic and are not yet available for AIDS many years into the 
pandemic; flu vaccines may be in short supply later on in the pandemic and possibly have only low 
efficacy. Health security and economic security for the world, including for high-income countries, 
would increase if pandemics were prevented through control of contagion at the source of the 
threat. Prevention would render ex post measures less necessary, resulting in substantial savings. 
An expenditure of $3.4 billion annually would be required in developing countries for the world to 
acquire a robust pandemic prevention capability.18 
Role of the international community  
Risk management starts with awareness and goals. The most important contribution of the global 
community is to establish governance, risk management principles, and an effective expression of 
demand for the global public good of reduction of pandemic risk. While the need for pandemic risk 
reduction is dire as the risk is at least $30 billion per year, the apparent demand for reducing this 
figure is weak because of large externalities and gaps in governance. The international community 
needs to adopt a long term view, wherein recurrent emergencies, though infrequent, are understood 
to be manifestations of a substantial permanent threat to all.  This threat warrants a systemic 
response that is adequately prepared and sustainably financed. Effective management of pandemic 
risk will require setting international goals for risk reduction, assessing performance of country 
veterinary and human public health systems relative to established performance standards, and 
financing strengthening of the parts of the systems that are not operating to international standards. 
This will reduce pandemic risk through prevention.  To further reduce the risk through pandemic 
mitigation, the global community should encourage whole-of-society preparedness in all countries 
since badly managed responses to a pandemic in any one country may negatively impact other 
countries. 
Pathogens without borders. No country’s government can by itself manage pandemic risk. 
National authority generally stops at the border. Every country will find it in its own interest to 
prepare to mitigate a pandemic, but no country, or even a group of countries, can prevent a 
pandemic if the initial outbreaks are outside their borders. Only an international authority, 
anchored in an intergovernmental agreement, can consider pandemic risks adequately and 
coordinate a workable global system that detects pathogens early, diagnoses them correctly, and 
promptly thwarts their spread to prevent a pandemic. This characteristic of infectious diseases has 
long motivated international human public health cooperation, starting with conferences on 
commerce and quarantine more than a hundred years ago and now reflected in the WHO’s 
International Health Regulations (2005). Determination to control rinderpest, which decimated 
cattle herds for centuries, gave rise to the establishment of the World Organization for Animal 
Health (OIE) in 1924.19 Implementation of disease prevention and control across borders falls 
short, however, in part because of the weak capacity of countries to comply with the surveillance 
and reporting requirements. There are no enforcement provisions. And there are no mechanisms 
                                                          
 
18 World Bank (2012). 
19 As OIE was established before the UN, it is not a UN agency. The founding of WHO came twenty years after OIE’s. 
Since 2010, WHO and OIE, together with Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN (FAO) use One Health 
approaches to cooperate under a formal tripartite agreement on prevention and control of zoonotic diseases and other 
health risks at the animal-human-environment interface. 
 17 
 
that would systematically assist weak performers to raise their performance to international 
standards. Since there are no such financial and institutional mechanisms, weak performance 
persists in many countries. This reduces human and animal health security, economic security, and 
social stability everywhere, including in countries with robust systems. 
A coherent global system. Stopping contagion at its source is in the interest of all countries – and 
the capacities needed to succeed in this effort should be funded and managed accordingly, as a 
joint responsibility for essential public infrastructure. The initial disease outbreak may occur in any 
country, and that country and all other countries have an interest in the outbreak being contained as 
soon as possible and at the least cost, at the source. Such collective action can succeed only with 
robust veterinary and human public health systems that collaborate effectively in all countries and 
that together operate as a coherent global system.  Building and operating a coherent global system 
will require resources and technical assistance over the long term. Global institutions such as the 
international technical agencies (WHO, OIE) are needed to ensure technical coherence, while the 
World Bank, which operates globally as well, would be in a position to support the necessary 
investments and financing arrangements, raise risk awareness, and facilitate information sharing on 
the nature, causes, and consequences of the pandemic risk. 
Rules for inter-country cooperation. Because in most cases contagion starts locally, country 
systems are the first line of defense and need to have capacity to respond well. But international 
cooperation should facilitate other functions such as reporting, information sharing, and technical 
and other assistance. One problem, for example, is de facto penalties for timely reporting of 
livestock disease because other countries can retaliate through trade restrictions. Another example 
is the fragile framework for sharing of virus samples, which was exposed during the most intense 
period of the H5N1 avian flu crisis and in the early stages of the MERS outbreak in 2012-13 in 
Saudi Arabia. Sharing samples with international laboratories is important to analyze the pathogen, 
which in turn helps to assess the risk of contagion, and to develop pharmaceuticals to prevent and 
treat infections. Indonesia did not share H5N1 avian flu virus samples with WHO laboratories, 
arguing that they had inadequate access to the benefits that could arise from research on the 
samples, including vaccines. In effect, while a dangerous pathogen with pandemic potential is an 
immense global liability, from another perspective, it can become a country’s asset. Long 
negotiations to reduce ambiguities of sample sharing led to a framework to share viruses and 
access vaccines and other benefits, concluded in 2011. 20  Incentives to carry out adequate 
surveillance and share relevant information are weakened in many countries by the competing 
demands of other pressing development problems. The international policy framework could thus 
include positive incentives for compliance with reporting requirements, in addition to the existing 
negative ones (notably livestock trade restrictions). The issue of burden sharing to finance country 
system investments and operations can likely be readily resolved since such costs ($3.4 billion 
annually) are modest relative to the large benefits ($37 billion annually).21  
                                                          
 
20 See WHO (2011). http://www.who.int/influenza/pip/Framework_History_2011.pdf 
21 World Bank (2012). This benefit estimate includes the pandemic risk (annual expected value of $30 billion) and the 
average annual value of $7 billion due to the costs of major zoonotic disease outbreaks during the 12 year period 1997-
2009 ($80 billion). These outbreaks did not become pandemics. Such outbreaks can be expected in the future as well, 
in the absence of adequate prevention. Additional important co-benefits, not yet estimated, include those that would 
accrue to populations suffering from endemic zoonotic diseases, especially the poor (see Figure 4 above) and those 
already noted on pages 8-10 of this paper. Pandemic risk reduction alone is already a very large benefit that, by itself, 
more than justifies the $3.4 billion annual cost of robust veterinary and human public health systems in developing 
countries.  Clearly, the systems should be built if the decision were to be made on the basis of rate of return and cost-
 18 
 
Weak links are ‘last-mile’ investment opportunities. Countries with low national veterinary and 
human public health capacities are the weak links in the global system that should deliver 
pandemic prevention. Such countries expose their people and the people in all other countries to 
risk. The functions that need to be assured include early detection, prompt and complete reporting 
by communities to the national authorities and in turn to the international authorities, sharing of 
samples and diagnoses, determination of control measures, and rapid response including 
implementation of control measures (in animals, this includes culling). Farmer cooperation with 
detection, reporting, and control measures for animal diseases crucially depends on compensation 
payments that are prompt and adequate. Because these activities all deliver a substantial global 
public good of pandemic risk reduction (in addition to national public goods), the international 
community has a strong interest in the capacity of each and every national system delivering the 
‘last mile’ in pandemic prevention services. The returns on such investments are very high since an 
interconnected system such as that required for disease prevention and control is only as strong as 
its weakest link. Accordingly, the building and operations of the required systems (animal and 
human public health and cooperation between them) in the countries that now have inadequate 
capacity will need to be funded primarily by international sources on a long-term basis.22 
International community role in preparedness and coping assistance. International cooperation 
can provide knowledge and tools to help firms and countries cope once a pandemic develops. 
Responses to a pandemic in internationally networked sectors, such as finance, transport, and 
communications would benefit from ex ante international coordination by industry associations 
and relevant public authorities. The extent to which such plans exist is uncertain. There are, 
however, arrangements for coordination in the health sector and among select government 
authorities, especially among high-income countries. Since pandemic vaccines will likely be only 
available late and in limited quantities, the international community may consider establishing 
plans ex ante to donate vaccines to least-developed countries to facilitate their preparedness 
planning. When the 2009 H1N1 flu pandemic was underway, donations were arranged to vaccinate 
10 percent of the least developed countries’ populations. But donors made these arrangements 
once it was apparent that the pandemic was mild and vaccine shortages were thus unlikely. The 
vaccine donation program experience could nevertheless inform a future arrangement. 
Global risk-management tools 
Advocacy for risk reduction. Risk awareness is a necessary first step toward better risk 
management. International organizations should systematically monitor global risks, report on 
them, and relentlessly make the case for prevention and for preparedness. Some organizations do 
so for some risks, but most do not, and instead concentrate on traditional appeals for resources to 
mitigate failures of prevention (including financing for preventable disease care). The global 
community already contributes science and knowledge. It could do more to raise awareness about 
the global public good of pandemic risk reduction. With the rapid unwinding of the international 
response to the H5N1 avian flu, global communications about pandemic risks have nearly 
vanished, although the risk has persisted and may have increased. 23  Other pathogens with 
                                                                                                                                                                                              
 
effectiveness.  The annual  rate of return ranges from 50% to 123% per annum, far above other public investments, 
with very conservative assumptions about the expected frequency of pandemics (see World Bank, 2012) 
22 See World Bank, Public Health Policy Note. Connecting Sectors and Systems for Health Results, December 2012. 
23 A number of countries in Africa and Asia continue to struggle to control H5N1 avian flu and experience sporadic 
human infections. Global risks may be aggravated since the disease appears to have become enzootic in parts of a 
 19 
 
pandemic potential are certain to emerge or re-emerge. Global institutions that play a role in 
preventing pandemics and supporting emergency response activities should continue 
systematically their efforts to raise risk awareness and engage in communications and reporting 
about their programs in order to avoid perceptions of reduced risk globally, maintain advocacy for 
global preparedness, and prevent a slowdown of progress in strengthening systems for prevention 
of contagion in developing countries. Progress in this area is essential not only to reduce risks but 
also to safeguard sustainable attainment of global poverty elimination and shared prosperity goals.  
Public health is a key driver of progress toward both goals.  
Global delivery of advocacy services.  The UN and international agencies have a number of means 
at their disposal to help advocate for better management of pandemic risk. For instance, there is an 
annual AIDS Day, with wide communications outreach and high-level advocacy activities. A more 
effective and coherent approach would be an annual Pandemic Prevention and Response Day, with 
messages about the urgency of mitigating the high costs of an existing pandemic (i.e., AIDS) 
complemented and amplified by “never again” messages that highlight the imperative of 
preventing the next pandemic, whether it is “the next AIDS”, influenza, coronavirus, or other 
pathogen.  Media and civil society should be core constituents of such efforts, to enhance impact 
and responsiveness to specific needs of the poor. Likewise, the lifetime risk for children to 
experience a pandemic is much higher than for adults and the elderly.  For instance, for a 5-year 
old, the lifetime odds of experiencing a pandemic are ten times higher than for a 65-year old 
simply because the 5-year old is expected to live ten times longer.24 While calls to action to give 
children healthy starts should be heeded, the active advocacy campaigns could usefully include, for 
balance, calls to action to prevent the same children from facing pandemic risks and its devastating 
consequences. 
Comprehensive financing framework. Pandemic prevention requires permanent infrastructure of 
robust national veterinary and human public health systems that adequately address health risks at 
the interfaces between animals, humans, and environment. Relevant international authorities 
should periodically assess the performance of the national systems and help countries determine 
the investments needed to bring performance to recognized international standards. Such work has 
started already, using the WHO’s International Health Regulations (IHR 2005) and OIE’s 
Performance of Veterinary Services (PVS) pathway, for human and animal health, respectively. To 
perform well (both for national needs and as part of a coherent global system), the parts of the 
global system that are in developing countries will require financing from the international 
community. Such financing will need to be on a mandatory, adequate, and stable basis. A good 
case can be made that the bulk of such funding should come from development assistance budgets 
because it mainly provides a global public good that benefits the whole world. There is also a 
strong case for contributions that are proportional to country national incomes since the economic 
impacts of a pandemic would likely be approximately proportional to national incomes as well.  
Thus the strengthening of veterinary and human public health systems in developing countries 
would be financed mainly by developed countries, in line with the benefits that developed 
countries obtain from prevention of economic losses in a pandemic. Such an arrangement will 
                                                                                                                                                                                              
 
number of countries, including in Bangladesh, Cambodia, China, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Nepal, and Vietnam. When 
a disease is enzootic, reducing the risks of outbreaks becomes a costly protracted challenge. 
24 To illustrate, assume that the probability of occurrence of a pandemic is 1 percent in any year, and that these 
probabilities are independent and constant.  In that case, the probability of at least one pandemic occurring during any 
5-year period is 5 percent.  During a 80-year period, the probability of at least one pandemic occurring is 51 percent.  
Moreover, the probability of two or more pandemics occurring during these is not zero. 
 20 
 
require intergovernmental action to agree on governance of the global system and its financing. 
Another option is to adopt the single-best-effort model, whereby one or more globally leading 
countries provide nearly all the financing.25 Still another option would be a small dedicated tax to 
generate some of the required resources, with the tax chosen in a way to reduce the disease 
externalities and encourage improved veterinary standards.26 
Incentives to compliance, risk sharing, UN system preparedness. Intergovernmental action would 
also be useful to limit country ability to impose unjustified restrictions on movement of livestock 
and trade on disease grounds, which has been open to abuse and penalized prompt reporting of 
some disease outbreaks. A global financing framework could usefully include risk sharing 
mechanisms for payment of compensation for culling carried out to control promptly reported 
animal disease outbreaks, such as pooled multicountry contingency funds. International risk 
management tools such as contingency plans and funding would also be needed to ensure food and 
other safety nets for refugee populations. The global community and especially the poorest 
developing countries would benefit if UN agencies and programs such as the World Food Program 
and UN peacekeeping forces sustained adequate preparedness to deliver services during a 
pandemic. The international community should encourage whole-of-society preparedness for 
complex disasters as part of disaster risk management. It should also continue to work to 
encourage availability of contingent financing, conditioned on adequate disaster risk management 
programs, including for pandemics.  
Select lessons from coping with pandemics  
Delays caused by weak public health systems are costly. The ongoing AIDS pandemic is a 
reminder of the human and economic costs that result from inadequate public health systems.  The 
virus was infecting more and more people, undetected, for several decades in regions with poor 
public human health and veterinary services.  A twenty-year gap between formal documentation of 
fatal human cases and diagnosis followed (Box 6). By this time the disease was already 
widespread. Requirements to mitigate the pandemic are now $16-22 billion per year for the 
foreseeable future, with a likely prospect of many more years of coping and mitigation, despite the 
commitment of substantial resources and improvements in health care delivery.27 
Global emergency mobilization is possible. The response to H5N1 avian flu from 2005 onwards, 
which was the largest global public health emergency program to date, demonstrated that the 
international community can mobilize reasonably quickly to tackle a global disease threat. The 
highly pathogenic H5N1 avian flu virus had emerged in Asia, with extraordinarily high lethality 
for a flu virus. As the virus spread to birds and poultry in more than 60 countries in 2005-6, the 
World Health Organization (WHO), the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE), other 
international organizations, governments and scientists were acutely aware of the prospect that a 
virus mutation could lead to sustained and efficient human-to-human transmission and thus to a 
                                                          
 
25 See Barrett, Scott (2007) Why Cooperate? The Incentive to Supply Global Public Goods. In the response to avian 
and pandemic influenza in 2005-10, 36 donors contributed $2.6 billion as grant financing. Three donors contributed 88 
percent of this total: United States ($1.6 billion), Japan ($381 million) and the European Commission ($322 million). 
This avian flu response thus had characteristics of ‘single best effort.’ The World Bank provided $1.3 billion, largely 
as loans and credits. 
26 World Bank (2010). 
27 Kim et al (2013). 
 21 
 
pandemic, which could be severe. The international community mobilized $4 billion from 36 
donors to assist more than 100 developing countries.  
 
A joint approach was essential to reduce a complex multisectoral threat. Together with WHO, 
OIE, FAO and the UN, the World Bank helped frame a new multisectoral approach that brought to 
bear international expertise in human health, animal health, analytical and technical support, 
disaster preparedness, and development communications to underpin comprehensive, country-led 
responses. The World Bank, which is active in all the sectors (unlike any one of the international 
technical agencies) supported coordination among the sectors at both the international and country 
levels. It was also the largest financier of country responses, committing $1.3 billion for 72 
emergency projects in 60 countries. 
Political support and leadership sustained momentum. Five global ministerial conferences in 
2006-10 monitored the response and encouraged countries to control H5N1 avian flu and prepare 
for a possible pandemic. The United States and the European Commission provided political 
leadership for the international response, which also had support from most countries and the UN. 
Implementation performance was impressive, reflecting high political commitment from both 
developing countries and donors. Service delivery and disbursement rates exceeded those in other 
major emergency responses (for example, the Indian Ocean tsunami disaster). Crucially, the 
human health and veterinary services in more than 60 developing countries worked together to 
address the threat, sometimes for the first time ever. Representation at the ministerial conferences 
was also from both ministries of agriculture and of human health. Coordination among 
international, regional and national programs was tested and performed well, thanks to the impetus 
of high-profile emergency and substantial dedicated resources for coordination. Early on, the UN 
Secretary General appointed a senior UN System Influenza Coordinator (UNSIC) who effectively 
supported intergovernmental action and coordination across the disciplines and international 
organizations involved.28 The World Bank was responsible for monitoring financing and reporting 
on gaps and overlaps in the global program, in addition to providing financing, advice and 
coordination services for country programs. 
                                                          
 
28 These included WHO, OIE, FAO, UNDP, ILO, UNICEF, World Tourism Organization, other UN agencies, regional 
banks and organizations and the IMF. 
Box 6.  A very late pandemic warning 
Genetic research indicates that HIV originated in animals in west-central Africa during the early twentieth 
century.  AIDS was first recognized by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in 1981.  It took 
more than twenty years between the first documented cases in the late 1950s and diagnosis (1981). This long 
delay contributed to the disease spreading to more than 34 million infected people by 2010.  The delay was 
partly due to the interval of up to ten years between infection and symptoms; this hampered detection, as did the 
fact that this is a slow-onset pandemic. But poor public health capacities were also a key factor in the delay in 
detection and diagnosis.  The public health systems failed to deliver the core service (control of infectious 
disease) that populations rightly expect to receive from them. 
 
Only robust systems for veterinary public health and human public health can provide an early warning of 
disease emergence, and allow rapid and effective disease control and response at the source of the contagion. 
This is the only way to improve the chances of avoiding a costly pandemic like AIDS in the future. The world’s 
need to minimize the risks of another pandemic occurring at all is one of the main lessons from AIDS. 
 
 22 
 
Results were fragile and incomplete when emergency ended. While most developing countries 
did succeed in controlling H5N1 avian flu, in part thanks to assistance from the international 
community, the H5N1 virus is still circulating. In 2012-13, two other pathogens with pandemic 
potential were detected in humans (but most likely spread to humans from livestock): a novel 
coronavirus that causes severe disease named Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) and 
H7N9 avian flu in China. Either pathogen could mutate to transmit readily from person to person, 
resulting in contagion that could spread fast because these are respiratory diseases. These 
pathogens could also not mutate (like H5N1 to date) and thus not acquire characteristics that could 
cause a pandemic, or they could disappear and so cease being an active source of pandemic risk. 
Even so, other pathogens are certain to emerge or re-emerge. The capacities to address this threat 
and prevent pandemics that were created to respond to the H5N1 avian flu are increasingly not 
being maintained, so that they will degrade.  
Stalled transition as ’pandemic fatigue’ set in, undermining sustainability of risk reduction. The 
initial momentum of the response to H5N1 avian flu was quickly followed, starting in 2008, by 
sharply diminished funding for veterinary and human public health systems, waning political 
support, pandemic fatigue in the media, and pandemic amnesia in governments and organizations. 
In the face of dissipating support, finding a way to sustain at least some of the gains in pandemic 
prevention was warranted. The international community therefore adopted a strategy to promote 
One Health approaches, at the ministerial conference in 2008. These approaches were tested during 
the H5N1 avian flu response, focusing on collaboration between strengthened veterinary and 
human public health services. The strategy was prepared by WHO, OIE, FAO, UNSIC, UNICEF 
and the World Bank. Though the ministerial conference in 2010 urged implementation of this 
strategy to build systems that are capable of delivering veterinary public health and human public 
health, there is limited funding for the required country and international efforts. Pandemic 
preparedness, which was the other strand of the H5N1 avian flu response, became the “Towards a 
Safer World” (TASW) initiative, which is anchored by UNSIC. The initiative promotes whole-of-
society preparedness for complex disasters (including pandemics) and integration of whole-of-
society preparedness within disaster risk management. But TASW, too, receives only scant 
encouragement and support to date. 
Examples of successful precedents. The international community has thwarted pathogens in the 
past. Notably, two devastating scourges have been eradicated: smallpox in 1979 and rinderpest in 
2011. Smallpox killed as many as 500 million people in the twentieth century alone. Rinderpest 
(cattle plague), with its high fatality rate, decimated herds and economies for centuries. 
Intergovernmental cooperation, science-based disease control strategies, mass vaccination, and 
surveillance were among the elements behind these successful campaigns. Contagion risk was 
reduced to zero. The benefits are lasting and already outweigh the control costs many times over. 
Good international coordination and strong public health agencies made control of SARS possible 
in 2003. The contagion initially occurred because of failures of disclosing information, but after 
8,000 people were affected and 10 percent killed, the chain of transmission was broken and 
contagion stopped.  
Factors underlying mismanagement of pandemic risk  
Myopia. Pandemic risk is undermanaged for several reasons. First, it is rarely thought about 
because few people like to think about death and about their family, friends and communities 
being the source of infection risk. Each occurrence tends to be treated as a one-off surprise, as 
 23 
 
news with an outbreak narrative. Pandemic amnesia and collective myopia in governments and 
international organizations are pervasive. As the French writer Albert Camus said: “Everybody 
knows that pestilences have a way of recurring in the world; yet somehow we find it hard to 
believe in ones that crash down on our heads from a blue sky."29 Recent reports on risk financing 
and disaster risk management policies do not mention pandemic risks explicitly, focusing mainly 
on other natural hazards that have lower expected annual values of losses than a severe pandemic. 
Without active consideration of the risk in public discourse and policy-making, even tacit 
knowledge about pandemics eventually diminishes. Leaders in private and official circles may 
ignore pandemic risks, because they consider that nothing will (probably) happen on their watch, 
that alarming approaches will make them unpopular, and that tackling existing, visible, problems 
will provide greater exposure and better prospects. And the public will not know about the benefits 
it is receiving from a prevented disaster, such as a pandemic. The consequence is that such 
attitudes heavily discount the welfare of the young and of future generations and preparedness and 
prevention remain inadequate for today’s and future generations. 
Collective amnesia. Societies have a tendency to erase pandemics from memory. Bristow (2012) 
has suggested that since the European and American medical professionals were powerless in the 
face of the 1918 flu pandemic, they then omitted the episode from their professional discourse. It 
was incompatible with their new self-image that stressed scientific and medical progress and 
modernity. Many history textbooks with twenty pages on World War I have barely one paragraph 
on the 1918 flu pandemic, though it killed six times more people than the war and its impact was 
determined by human actions, not merely by virus mutations. Also, war memorials are a far more 
common sight in villages, towns, and cities, than public memorials for the victims of pandemics. 
Since pandemics were (and with scientific progress will increasingly be) at least in part due to a 
failure of governments to deliver basic public health services to protect populations, forgetting 
these failures may make their recurrence more likely. 
Health sector bias toward present diseases. The second reason for poor management of pandemic 
risk is the uneasy fit of preparedness and prevention in the human health sector. Reflexively, 
governments and other institutions classify pandemics as a human health issue. Pandemics are, 
however, a very low priority for the health care sector, which is mainly concerned with existing 
health burdens. Prevention of future disease gets relatively little attention, which is also apparent 
from the ongoing high prevalence of preventable diseases. Medications and equipment to treat 
existing illness are far better developed, better financed, and more profitable than preventive 
measures (such as vaccines, public health systems, veterinary services, and risk awareness 
efforts).30 Physicians, trained to treat and save the lives of patients who are already ill, dominate 
leadership, management, and policy-making. Compounding this bias against preventing future 
disease burdens, consideration of pandemic risk is sidelined by the ongoing certainties of existing 
disease. For instance, one preparedness measure within the health sector is to build in a degree of 
redundancy and flexibility in the health care system (spare hospital beds and reserve lists of nurses, 
for instance), to at least partly accommodate a surge of additional patients. But such contingent 
surge capacities are not feasible in many developing countries where health care systems cannot 
cope with already existing demand. Budgets for such contingent capacities and for preparedness 
more broadly are also the first to be cut even in high-income countries. The health sector has little 
incentive and scant means and authority to anticipate pandemic impacts on society and the 
economy, and to ensure preparedness in all sectors to mitigate such impacts. 
                                                          
 
29 Camus, Albert (1948). The Plague. 
30 These may include simple measures, such as closing the mouth when sneezing or coughing and washing hands. 
 24 
 
Large externalities. The third reason for mismanagement is the multisectorality and diffuseness of 
the impact of contagion. Figure 8 shows a schematic composition of the costs of an animal disease 
outbreak. The cost to the farmer and the veterinary services may typically account for about 30 
percent of the total impact. Since farmers suffer only a small part of the damage, they will tend to 
assume what are unduly large risks from a societal perspective. For instance, without considering 
externalities, the cost of an avian flu outbreak to the farmer and the veterinary services is $3 per 
chicken. But including impacts on the community and on neighboring communities and beyond, 
the value of the loss is more than $10 per chicken – and it would be higher still if pandemic risk 
were included. Farmers’ incentives to prevent diseases and to seek veterinary services to this end 
are limited by their own losses. The other vulnerable sectors (such those where demand is sensitive 
to disease risk perceptions—tourism, restaurants, and entertainment, and commerce more broadly) 
may be underestimating their own risks from animal disease outbreaks because they are not 
familiar with the farms and their disease risks. Since they have little or no concerns about animal 
diseases, they do not convey demand for reduction of this risk to the government. Thus, budgets of 
public veterinary and human health services will continue to be underfunded relative to the societal 
benefits they generate.  
Aggregate benefit unknown or poorly 
recognized.  The beneficiaries of disease 
prevention and control tend to be widely 
dispersed and not organized.  Most will not 
even realize that they benefited from 
prevention of disease.  The result is that the 
full extent of the demand for infectious 
disease prevention and control will not be 
effectively expressed. This holds for human 
infectious diseases—and it is even more so 
for animal diseases. These ‘market failures’ 
require government to aggregate the risks 
and bring public human health and 
veterinary system performance to a level 
that minimizes the overall expected losses 
to society (net of the cost of the systems). 
The problem of externalities also hampers 
management of risks that extend beyond a 
country’s borders. The country of origin of 
the contagion would not normally consider 
impacts beyond its borders, leading to an 
underestimation of risks by the authorities 
of that country. With many countries 
thinking along similar lines, the result is a 
global 
underestimation 
of 
risk 
and 
underfunding of prevention. 
Professional and institutional divides. Not only are risks assessed too low because of externalities 
(due to impacts in multiple sectors and across borders), but there are also divisions among the 
institutions and professions that are responsible for public animal health and public human health 
and are charged with reducing the risk of contagion so as to protect human and animal populations. 
Figure 8.  Most of the cost impact is indirect, though 
also fully attributable to the animal disease outbreak 
 
 25 
 
This is the fourth, and perhaps the most intractable, reason for mismanagement of health risks at 
the animal-human-environment interface. Necessary communications and collaboration do not 
occur readily in an emergency or routinely between emergencies, mainly because in too many 
countries veterinary services are far weaker and less well funded than human health departments. 
Authority, mandates, and scope for collaboration are sometimes ill-defined, and there is 
competition for budgets between the two ministries involved. Without explicit and sustained 
attention to the interactions between the functions of public veterinary and human health services, 
and adequate resourcing of the coordination between them, disease control failures are a certain 
prospect in both developed and developing countries. Each of the two sectors may consider that it 
is on its own adequately handling “its part” of the risk, but without close coordination with the 
other sector, this is not the case. Poor communications and cooperation between veterinary and 
human health services create risks of delays in diagnosis and disease control, which become highly 
costly when contagion spreads. One Health approaches are needed to remedy these gaps (Box 7).  
Box 7.  One Health approaches 
One Health means “the collaborative efforts of multiple disciplines working locally, nationally and globally to 
attain optimal health for people, animals and our environment” 
‒ American Veterinary Medical Association, 2008 
 
Recognized and practiced long before it was given the name, systematic collaboration between veterinary and 
human public health professionals and agencies was a fundamental aspect of medical training.  The German 
physician and pathologist Rudolf Virchow (who coined the term “zoonosis”) emphasized the importance of 
collaboration between human and veterinary medicine. But in the 20th century, ever greater specialization in both 
animal and human health professions has let the idea slip from curricula and professional practice. 
One Health is not all of health, but rather the intersections, or overlaps, between animal, human, and environmental 
health.  The approach gives deliberate attention to the interfaces between the domains and to bridges between the 
public veterinary and public human health services because the likely weak links (that lead to disease control 
failures) are at the interface, where too often ‘nobody is responsible.’ Equally important is concern with 
strengthening the systems responsible for core functions, on which the delivery of public health services depends, 
since weak systems will not collaborate well.  
Not only is disease control more effective when animal and human public health capacities are robust and work 
together, but One Health approaches will often be more efficient.  They will achieve results at lower cost when 
some equipment, personnel, databases, and other inputs are shared.  See World Bank (2012) on cost savings up to 
30-40 percent in developing countries and 26 percent in the Canadian Science Centre for Human and Animal 
Health in Winnipeg. 
 
One Health is a framework for enhanced collaboration in areas of common interests (intersections), with initial 
concentration on zoonotic diseases that will reduce risk, improve public health globally and support poverty 
alleviation and economic growth in developing countries.  This concept involves a better way to deal with risks at 
the animal-human-environment interface.  
 
‒ World Bank’s operational definition, presented to the Hanoi ministerial conference, 2010 
 
There are major gaps in preparedness that have widened in recent years as budgets have tightened. However, we 
could work together to fill these gaps through the long-term application of a One Health  approach with its focus 
on mitigating health risks, including pandemics, at the interfaces between animals and humans in different 
ecosystems. This focus on linkages is an increasing feature of policy dialogues everywhere - including 
intergovernmental efforts underway now to establish priorities for development and disaster risk reduction after 
2015. The well-being of individuals, households, societies, governments, nations, and cultures depends on good 
care of health at interfaces. 
‒ UN System Influenza Coordinator David Nabarro, 2013 
 
 26 
 
An example of opportunity for One Health approaches. Surveillance of flu viruses in swine is an 
example of how sectoral divides, which are a social and administrative construct, increase risks at 
the animal-human interface. Some types of swine flu are not reportable diseases and often do not 
make animals ill enough to appreciably affect production. One of the flu strains infecting swine 
may change and infect humans, spread from person to person, and cause a pandemic. But because 
there is relatively little surveillance for low pathogenic flu in swine, human public health 
authorities may not have access to potentially relevant animal flu information. Scientists repeatedly 
warn about new flu virus strains found in one-off studies of swine herds, and they repeatedly 
appeal for more flu surveillance in swine.31 Cost of surveillance and the arguments of elected 
politicians from swine-producing regions against additional burdens on farmers will usually 
prevail over the more abstract arguments of public health, especially when such an issue is tackled 
country-by-country without the benefit of encouragement from an international standard. 
Multisectoral coordination of communications. Coordination among sectors and institutions in 
whole-of-society pandemic response plans and responses is essential because of the wide range of 
impacts that a pandemic would bring. Mitigation of costs to firms and households is only possible 
on the basis of credible and truthful information. Good risk communications will reduce 
substantial costs due to unwarranted avoidance behaviors. Poor coordination before, during, and 
after a response leads to mixed messages and confusion, which can in turn lead to a loss of trust 
among the public for this and future outbreaks. Poor communications based on inadequate 
knowledge may have yet other effects on behaviors in response to disease outbreaks, such as 
individual and mob violence. Coordination among the agencies and firms involved in the outbreak 
response should be planned in advance because good coordination will not occur spontaneously in 
an emergency, especially if communications officers do not maintain a minimum of knowledge of 
the topic during peacetime, between outbreaks. Poor coordination can give rise to significant risks, 
which in a pandemic can have global implications. The relevant international organizations can act 
as sources of credible and authoritative knowledge, but they need to provide it quickly as required 
by the emergency circumstances. For instance, although WHO corrected the labeling of the 2009 
H1N1 flu to omit the term ‘swine’, the error persisted among some human health professionals and 
in the popular press. The initial lapse in communications, caused by poor intersectoral 
coordination, gave rise to substantial real costs (Box 8). 
Cost-effective, incentive-compatible policies to reduce pandemic risk  
Resignation to recurrent emergencies costs lives and money, which can be saved by proactive 
defenses. The international community faces a choice: continue to rely on emergency responses, 
with their high-impact/low-sustainability tradeoff and their huge human and economic losses, or 
commit to supporting systemic prevention efforts that will reduce pandemic risks and deliver 
substantial long-term health and economic benefits. All countries benefit if each undertakes 
adequate whole-of-society preparedness measures to increase resilience and capacity to respond to 
disasters and thus limit spillovers of negative impacts to other countries. Because greater 
preparedness and resilience will reduce the costs of humanitarian interventions following adverse 
shocks, the UN’s International Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC), which includes UN 
organizations, non-UN humanitarian partners, and the World Bank, have begun work to increase 
funding for preparedness. This is an important milestone since funding for preparedness activities 
                                                          
 
31 See, for instance, Butler (2012). 
 27 
 
has been historically inadequate and constituted only a very small part of official development 
assistance. Over time, not prioritizing financing for prevention and preparedness has helped ensure 
that more aid was needed to respond to larger disasters. Chronic underfunding of pandemic 
prevention and preparedness has even more serious implications because with rapid global spread 
of disease contagion, the aggregate stakes are far greater than for other natural hazards, which tend 
to be confined to relatively small geographical areas and affect a fraction of a country. 
 
Governance to raise risk awareness and assign responsibilities. The first essential step is for 
governments to recognize that knowledge about pandemic risk is too low and that even with 1 
percent probability, pandemic risk is some $30 billion every year. Next, systematic, continuous 
management of the risk should be an explicit task for international organizations and national 
governments, starting with periodic monitoring and reporting of the risk by national and 
international institutions, rather than responding only when the mass media report an outbreak. 
Moreover, systematic analysis of pandemic risks by global economic and financial institutions 
would likely generate media coverage, which would help people and firms better manage their 
risks. The stop-go pattern of capacity development and disease control that comes with repeated 
emergency responses is inefficient and ultimately too risky and should be replaced by sustained 
attention to the risks and systems to reduce them, so as to reduce risks globally—especially for the 
poor in developing countries.  
Sustained prevention efforts. While multisectoral disaster preparedness based on shared 
knowledge and strong political commitment is important for all countries individually and 
collectively, it is globally less efficient than prevention. The least-cost approach is preventing a 
pandemic from developing in the first place. To this end, public health and veterinary systems in 
each country need to be capable of detecting contagion early, diagnosing it accurately, 
implementing effective disease control measures, and fully collaborating with the relevant 
international authorities at each stage. But such systems will only succeed in preventing pandemics 
if they are financed and managed as essential permanent infrastructures, rather than temporarily 
Box 8.  Coordinating approaches and communications is important 
In an emergency, things can go very wrong because of poor risk communications. For instance, the Egyptian 
government killed all 300,000 of the country’s pigs in May 2009 without adequately compensating the owners, in a 
reported attempt to control the 2009 H1N1 pandemic flu, while WHO and other health authorities had publicly 
announced that they had stopped using the erroneous term “swine flu” and that culling of the pigs would do 
nothing to diminish the H1N1 flu threat. The incorrect perception that some of the infection risk originates in swine 
resulted in substantial hardship for the poor, marginalized community that raises pigs in Egypt. Moreover, there 
were additional costs: the trash that the pigs once consumed accumulated in massive piles. 
Other governments also based their responses on the ‘swine’ flu misnomer. More than twenty countries imposed 
restrictions on pork imports from Mexico and the US. In the US alone, losses in the pork sector exceeded $1 billion 
in April-October 2009, although there was apparently no flu infection risk from pork and related products. 
For zoonotic diseases, both human and veterinary health authorities need to be involved in naming and 
characterizing the disease to ensure that information is accurate and that they correctly convey risks to the public. 
 
The challenge now is how to bring intertwined fields of human, animal and ecosystems health to work together in 
synergy to achieve the ultimate goal of building resilient communities to all types of hazards and disasters, 
particularly in the face of resource scarcity.  Preparing for unpredictable threats that cross borders and affect the 
safety of all people, should be based on trust and mutual respect.  Bridging gaps in information and differences in 
approach between these sectors is an urgent first task.  
‒ UN System Influenza Coordinator David Nabarro, 2013 
 
 28 
 
funded only in emergencies. Sustained attention to, and funding for, the core public health and 
veterinary systems and their operation is the key tool for managing pandemic risk. Periodic 
assessment of the performance of these systems by international authorities (WHO and OIE) and 
peer reviews are two promising mechanisms to ensure that the global public good of disease 
control is, indeed, delivered. 
Country systems as core building blocks. The International Health Regulations (2005) of WHO 
and assessments of the Performance of Veterinary Services (PVS) of the OIE already provide a 
good basis for building these systems and for monitoring their performance regularly, including 
the bridges between them that are needed for One Health approaches to disease prevention and 
control. At present most developing countries have very weak veterinary and human health 
systems and some have next to none. Likewise, international cooperation among the national 
systems is still weak in theory and even more so in practice. Weak country systems are not capable 
of cooperating internationally or at the interface between animal health and human health. 
Therefore, to build an effective global system to thwart pathogens, the main focus needs to be on 
strengthening of country public human health and veterinary systems, the links between them, and 
the relevant subnational and community components. 
A global goal to guide agencies and country authorities. To make progress, the international 
community would be well-served to adopt pandemic risk reduction as a global goal. Based on this, 
concrete targets for strengthening of veterinary and public health systems, and their collaboration, 
should be set globally. For instance, the goal could be that at least half of all countries have 
systems complying with international standards by 2030 and that all countries would have them by 
2050. Within this framework, intermediate targets would underpin each country setting its own 
objectives and together with OIE and WHO, reviewing their progress. The international authorities 
should obtain adequate resources to carry out assessments and to monitor progress in the 
strengthening of systems, and to put in place regular reporting on the results of their assessments of 
progress in pandemic risk reduction to the UN Security Council (annually) and the General 
Assembly (every five years). 
Modest costs, substantial benefits. The spending required in all developing countries to build and 
operate systems for timely and effective disease control would be up to $2.9-$3.4 billion per year, 
depending on disease risk. This would not only address risks at the interface between animal and 
human health, but would also better equip the public veterinary and human health services to 
tackle nonzoonotic disease threats. The expected benefit of One Health systems to the global 
community is at least $37 billion per year, the bulk of which is due to reduced pandemic risk. Such 
an expenditure on prevention ($3.4 billion annually) thus pays off.32 If all financing were sourced 
in OECD countries, it amounts to just $3.40 per capita. The expected rate of economic return is in 
excess of 100 percent per annum, making One Health investments an extraordinarily attractive 
proposition for the international community.  
Governance and funding gaps. At present, there is no governance in place to encourage such 
investments. Following the response to H5N1 avian flu and H1N1 pandemic flu, when assistance 
to developing countries peaked at $1 billion per year, funding for pandemic prevention and 
preparedness dropped to less than $450 million annually. Moreover, further declines are 
anticipated because the bulk of the financing has been from development aid budgets, which are 
under pressure. In addition, there is no mechanism to compel the countries with the weakest 
                                                          
 
32 World Bank (2012). 
 29 
 
systems to make the investments required, nor is there a way for the international community to 
provide adequate, predictable, and long-term assistance to strengthen these weakest links of the 
global system. Results-based financing that countries obtain through mechanisms such as the 
World Bank’s program-for-results (PforR) instrument would be particularly suitable to improve 
governance of public health capacities, including the necessary collaboration between veterinary 
and human public health.  Results-based financing would encourage countries to make systemic 
improvements that would be regularly monitored and assessed by the relevant international 
authorities.   
International institutions needed to address a global issue. Neither OIE nor WHO and other UN 
agencies have the mandates or experience in financing large-scale long-term multisectoral 
investment programs such as those required for robust public veterinary and human health systems 
that employ One Health approaches. They could, however, provide technical assistance as well as 
inter-country linkages for information-sharing and for ensuring connectivity with existing global 
notification systems. They can also be a valuable source of analysis and emergency support. The 
World Bank, as an institution with a global reach and experience in supporting investments in 
country programs for public health, agriculture, and other sectors, could be tasked by the 
international community to coordinate mobilization of adequate resources and development and 
implementation of appropriate financing instruments. A virtual or actual fund would need to be 
established to mobilize and allocate resources so as to achieve over time the greatest systemic 
benefits in terms of pandemic risk reduction.  Based on the OIE and WHO assessments of country 
system performance and needs, the World Bank could work with countries to prioritize and 
implement investments. Country-level investments may be complemented by regional or global 
capacities, to make efficient use of resources. For instance, pooling funds for emergency disease 
control and compensation or establishing a contingent emergency lending facility for this purpose 
would likely be more efficient and equitable globally than individual country contingency funds.33  
Vulnerability in networked industries. There is an unmet need for pandemic preparedness by 
major globally-networked industries. Major firms and regulatory authorities in the financial sector 
have carried out pandemic response simulation exercises, and there are ongoing consultations on 
plans for possible responses. Work has also been done for the international tourism sector. This is 
not the case in other internationally interconnected sectors, however. The World Bank Group, with 
its multisectoral character, nearly universal membership, and engagement with both the private and 
public sectors, may be well-placed to encourage preparedness for responses in transport, 
communications, food, agriculture, energy, and other sectors with substantial cross-border scope.  
Political and business leaders will need to engage in this area (Box 9).  
Assistance to countries coping with a pandemic. The World Bank could also prepare to help 
countries cope once a pandemic is underway. While the progression and severity of a pandemic is 
unknowable in advance, less developed and more open economies may be more vulnerable if they 
depend on far-flung suppliers and markets, or, as is the case for many small developing countries, 
rely on tourism and remittances from abroad. Where such vulnerabilities are significant, countries 
should not only include multisectoral pandemic response planning in their overall disaster risk 
                                                          
 
33 The Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility, established in 2007, is a possible model for such risk-pooling 
among countries. The CCRIF operates as an independent legal entity controlled by a Board of Directors made of 
representatives of member countries, donors, and technical experts. After playing a facilitating role during the 
establishment of the Facility, the World Bank provides technical assistance and fiduciary control of the funding 
provided by donors and held in a trust fund. 
 30 
 
management, but also consider making advance arrangements for contingent external financing to 
enable a rapid and adequate response. The facilities of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
would be particularly relevant in this regard and may be sufficient. In case of need for more 
funding, an instrument that could prove helpful is the Cat DDO (development policy loan with a 
deferred draw-down option for catastrophic risk) offered by the World Bank. Advance 
arrangements would be all the more warranted because low and middle-income countries may well 
be confronted with reduced access to external financing in a severe pandemic, both because of 
financial sector disruptions and because financial institutions and investors tend to react to 
heightened uncertainty by a ‘flight to quality.’ 
Box 9.  Leaders to emphasize collaboration  
To reduce health risks, including pandemics, arising at the animal-human-ecosystem interface, communications 
among countries and synergy among different groups of actors have to be encouraged. This is essential to prepare for 
pandemics and other unpredictable cross-border threats.  All partners should develop a systematic One Health 
approach to prepare for, and respond to, these threats.  Political and business leaders should emphasize whole-of -
society and multisectoral collaboration for all critical sectors that might be affected by the threats or that can help to 
mitigate their impact. 
‒ UN System Influenza Coordinator David Nabarro, 2013 
 
 
 
 31 
 
 
 
 
 
Gerardo Bravo Garcia, Avian Flu Series, 2006, Oil & Gold Leaf on Canvas. Courtesy of the World Bank Art Program. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 32 
 
Select key points 
 
 The most severe of the four flu 
pandemics in the last 100 years 
killed 50 -100 million people in 
1918-19, 
out 
of 
a 
global 
population of less than 2 billion. 
Pandemic risk is a top global 
catastrophic risk and is rising. 
Developing 
countries, 
with 
most of the world’s population 
and labor-intensive economies, are vulnerable. 
 Pandemic risk combines a low probability (1-3 percent annually) with high impact 
(over $3 trillion in a severe case). The annual risk is at least $30 billion, but people, 
firms, and governments grossly underestimate it. No country is safe. In an 
interconnected world, a pathogen from a remote village can reach major cities on all 
continents in 36 hours.  
 While the hazard is natural (a pathogen), pandemic occurrence and impact would 
also depend on human action. Weak policies and institutions will enable a man-made 
disaster in a pandemic. Many impacts on economies and communities, as well as on 
health, are preventable. Measures to protect health are only one part of the required 
response. 
 Pandemic risk is mismanaged because of low risk awareness, myopia, diffuse 
accountability, multisectorality, externalities, and, crucially, no governance and 
funding of the supply of a global public good. Prevention effort is low, though the 
risk is high; thus the welfare of the young and future generations are heavily 
discounted. The poor are likely most vulnerable. 
 Pandemic prevention through control of contagion at its animal source has 
extraordinarily high economic returns and is the best approach. To succeed, 
pandemic prevention should be emphasized by leaders, set as a goal of governments 
and organizations, who need to deliver active advocacy. 
 Being prepared to cope and mitigate impacts ex post also has high returns. Policies 
and budgets should therefore systematically anticipate pandemics and assess the 
risks; most whole-of-society preparedness measures are the same as for other major 
complex disasters. 
 Weak veterinary public health and human public health systems in developing 
countries are a key driver of pandemic risk. The systems should detect pathogens 
early, diagnose them correctly, and control contagion before it spreads within the 
country and beyond. Much of the risk originates in livestock, which is under human 
control; wildlife may also infect livestock.  
 
 33 
 
 
 
Select key points (continued) 
 Controlling contagion at its animal source, so it does not spread and become a 
pandemic in humans, requires One Health approaches with systematic collaboration 
between capable veterinary and human public health authorities. The World Bank’s 
2012 public health policy note, Connecting Sectors and Systems for Health Results, 
recommends this approach, which served well in the response to avian flu. 
 Investments of $3.4 billion annually would bring developing countries’ capacities 
up to international standards.  The expected benefit is at least $37 billion annually 
from avoided pandemics and other major outbreaks. Major co-benefits will be 
generated, because capacities that can control one zoonotic disease or reduce 
antimicrobial resistance (AMR) will also thwart other diseases in animals, humans, 
or both. Co-benefits will be both national and global. Robust systems for pandemic 
prevention will also render repeated and costly emergency responses less necessary. 
 The international community needs to manage and finance a connected system of 
defenses against a pandemic as essential permanent infrastructure. Assessments of 
country systems by OIE and WHO warrant strong follow-up so all countries can 
operate systems that meet international standards, for the benefit of the whole world. 
Robust assessment tools will be available in 2014.  
 Defenses against pathogens are only as strong as the weakest link. Contagion can 
start anywhere, and spread fast across borders. Stopping it early is in the interest of 
all countries individually and collectively. Strengthening the weak links is a joint 
responsibility that needs financing from international sources.  
 A goal for 50 percent of all countries having systems that meet international 
standards by 2030 (followed by a goal of 100 percent coverage in 2050) would 
improve health, economic, and social security, especially for developing countries, 
those who are young today, and future generations. Without an agreed goal, and 
attendant oversight and monitoring, governments and partners cannot work together 
to reduce pandemic risk and the risk will remain high.  
 Reduction of pandemic risk requires engagement from numerous partners, anchored 
by the UN, WHO and OIE. The World Bank could contribute its global convening 
capacity and multisectoral character; its experience coordinating across sectors in 
countries; its financing; its experience providing solutions for operations of global 
and country systems; its capacity to deploy solutions in financing and resource 
mobilization, as well as its track record of support for emergency responses. 
 A single severe flu pandemic will not only kill tens of millions, sicken billions, and 
cost trillions of dollars, but it will also quickly unravel progress toward the 2030 
international goals of eliminating poverty and boosting shared prosperity.  It will 
increase poverty and replace shared prosperity with shared misery as it bankrupts 
health coverage schemes, governments, firms, and households.  
 34 
 
Select references 
Barry, J.M. (2004). The Great Influenza: The Epic Story of the Deadliest Plague in History. Viking Press. 
Brahmbhatt, M. and Dutta, A. (2008). “On SARS-type Economic Effects during Infectious Disease 
Outbreaks.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 4466. 
Brahmbhatt, M. (2009). The Role of Incentives in Global Pandemic Response. Wilton Park Conference on 
Global Pandemic Response: Improving International Coordination. Mimeo. 
Bristow, N.K. (2012). American Pandemic: The Lost Worlds of the 1918 Influenza Pandemic. Oxford 
University Press.  
Butler, D. (2012). Flu surveillance lacking, Nature 483(7391): 520–522 
Duffin, J. and Sweetman, A., eds. (2006). SARS in Context: Memory, History, Policy. McGill-Queens 
University Press. 
European Union (2010), Outcome and Impact Assessment of the Global Response to the Avian Influenza 
Crisis, 2005-2010.  
FAO, OIE, WHO, UN System Influenza Coordination, UNICEF, World Bank (2008). Contributing to One 
World, One Health- A strategic framework for reducing risks of infectious diseases at the animal- 
human- ecosystems interface. Strategic framework requested by the Ministerial Conference in New 
Delhi in December 2007, welcomed by the Ministerial Conference in Sharm El-Sheikh in October 
2008, and urged for implementation by the Ministerial Conference in Hanoi in April 2010. 
FAO, OIE, WHO (2010) - Sharing responsibilities and coordinating global activities to address health risks 
at the animal-human-ecosystems interfaces - A Tripartite Concept Note, April 2010. 
Fidler, D.P. and Gostin, L.O. “The WHO Pandemic Influenza Preparedness Framework A Milestone in 
Global Governance for Health.” Journal of the American Medical Association. 2011;306(2):200-201.  
Gilbert, Natasha (2012). “Cost of human-animal disease greatest for world's poor.” Nature, International 
Weekly Journal of Science. July 5, 2012. 
Grace, D., Mutua, F., Ochungo, P., Kruska, R., Jones, K., Brierley, L., Lapar, L., Said, M., Herrero, M., 
Phuc, P.M., Thao, N.B., Akuku, I., Ogutu, F. (2012). “Mapping of poverty and likely zoonoses 
hotspots.” International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI). July 2012.  
Humphreys, M. (2002). “No Safe Place: Disease and Panic in American History,”American Literary 
History 14:845-57. 
Institute of Medicine (IOM) (2009).  Sustaining global surveillance and response systems for emerging 
zoonotic diseases.  Washington, DC.  National Research Council.  
International Task Force on Global Public Goods (2006).  Meeting Global Challenges: International 
Cooperation in the National Interest, September 2006. 
Jones, K.E, Patel, N.G., Levy, M., Storeygard, A., Balk, D., Glitterman, J.L., and P. Daszak (2008). “Global 
Trends in Emerging Infectious Diseases.” Nature 451: 990-993. 
Kahn, L. (2012). The One Health Solution. Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, a short article available at 
http://thebulletin.org/web-edition/columnists/laura-h-kahn/the-one-health-solution 
Keller, John. U.S. government takes threat of bird flu pandemic seriously; spends $25 billion for medical 
countermeasures. Military and Aerospace Electronics, September 12, 2012, article available at 
http://www.militaryaerospace.com/blogs/aerospace-defense-blog/2012/09/u-s-government-takes-
threat-of-bird-flu-pandemic-seriously-spends-25-billion-for-medical-counterm.html. 
Kim, Jim Yong, MD, Paul Farmer, MD, Michael E. Porter, PhD (2013). “Redefining global health-care 
delivery.” The Lancet, 20 May 2013. 
 35 
 
MacDougal, H. (2008). “Fear, Flight, Frustration and Dedicated Service: A Brief History of International 
Disease Control Activities, 1918-2008.” Forum on Public Policy: A Journal of the Oxford Round 
Table. 
OECD (2011). Future Global Shocks: Improving Risk Governance. OECD Reviews of Risk Management 
Policies. 
Okello, A. L., E. P. J. Gibbs, A.Vandersmissen, S. C. Welburn (2011). One Health and the neglected 
zoonoses: turning rhetoric into reality. Veterinary Record (2011) 169, 281-285 
Quammen, D. (2012). Spillover: Animal Infections and the Next Human Pandemic. WW Norton & Co. 
Rosenberg, C. E. (1992). Explaining Epidemics and Other Studies in the History of Medicine. Cambridge 
University Press. 
Scoones, I., ed. (2010). Avian Influenza: Science, Policy and Politics. STEPS Centre, University of Sussex. 
Shah, N. (2001). Contagious Divides: Epidemics and Race in San Francisco’s Chinatown. Berkeley, CA: 
University of California Press. 
UN System and World Bank (2010). Animal and Pandemic Influenza: A Framework for Sustaining 
Momentum. Fifth Global Progress Report. Chapter 5: Overview of One Health; Chapter 6: The Way 
Forward. 
United States Homeland Security Council (2006). National Strategy for Pandemic Influenza. 
Implementation Plan. May 2006. 
WHO (2011). “Brief history of the development of the Framework on Sharing influenza viruses and access 
to vaccines and other benefits.” http://www.who.int/influenza/pip/Framework_History_2011.pdf 
Wolfe, N. (2012). The Viral Storm: The Dawn of a New Pandemic Age. St. Martin's Griffin. 
World Bank (2005). Program Framework Document for Proposed Loans/Credits/Grants in the Amount of 
US$500 million Equivalent for a Global Program for Avian Influenza Control and Human Pandemic 
Preparedness and Response (GPAI), Report No. 34388, December 5, 2005. 
World Bank (2007), Global Public Goods: A Framework for the Role of the World Bank, Report to the 
Development Committee (DC2007-0020), September 2007. 
World Bank (2008), Evaluating the Economic Consequences of Avian Influenza, by Andrew Burns, 
Dominique van der Mensbrugghe, and Hans Timmer, available at www.worldbank.org/flu. (Originally 
published in a slightly different form in the World Bank’s June 2006 edition of Global Development 
Finance, available at www.worldbank.org/gdf2006.) 
World Bank (2010). People, Pathogens and Our Planet, Volume 1: Towards a One Health Approach for 
Controlling Zoonotic Diseases. 
World Bank (2011). Towards One Health: Interim Lessons from the Global Program on Avian and Human 
Pandemic Influenza. Outcomes of a Workshop sponsored by ARD and HNP in Vietnam. 
World Bank (2012). People, Pathogens and Our Planet, Volume 2: The Economics of One Health. 
World Bank (2012). Managing Disaster Risks for a Resilient Future: The Sendai Report, prepared by the 
staff of the World Bank Group. 
World Bank (2012). Connecting Sectors and Systems for Health Results. Public Health Policy Note. 
December 2012. 
