 Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg., 95(2), 2016, pp. 440–443
doi:10.4269/ajtmh.16-0161
Copyright © 2016 by The American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene
Blood Group O–Dependent Cellular Responses to Cholera Toxin: Parallel Clinical
and Epidemiological Links to Severe Cholera
F. Matthew Kuhlmann,1 Srikanth Santhanam,2 Pardeep Kumar,1 Qingwei Luo,1 Matthew A. Ciorba,2,3 and James M. Fleckenstein1,3,4*
1Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri;
2Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri;
3Molecular Microbiology and Microbial Pathogenesis Program, Division of Biology and Biomedical Sciences, Washington University
School of Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri; 4Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Saint Louis, Missouri
Abstract.
Because O blood group has been associated with more severe cholera infections, it has been hypothesized
that cholera toxin (CT) may bind non-O blood group antigens of the intestinal mucosae, thereby preventing efficient
interaction with target GM1 gangliosides required for uptake of the toxin and activation of cyclic adenosine mono-
phosphate (cAMP) signaling in target epithelia. Herein, we show that after exposure to CT, human enteroids expressing
O blood group exhibited marked increase in cAMP relative to cells derived from blood group A individuals. Likewise,
using CRISPR/Cas9 engineering, a functional group O line (HT-29-A−/−) was generated from a parent group A HT-29
line. CT stimulated robust cAMP responses in HT-29-A−/− cells relative to HT-29 cells. These findings provide a direct
molecular link between blood group O expression and differential cellular responses to CT, recapitulating clinical and
epidemiologic observations.
Cholera is a leading cause of epidemic diarrhea worldwide
with estimates of 3–5 million cases occurring annually.1 The
voluminous watery diarrhea characteristic of cholera is caused
by cholera toxin (CT), the principal virulence determinant of
Vibrio cholerae. CT is an AB5 toxin consisting of an active A
subunit and a pentameric B subunit (CT-B), responsible for
binding to its cognate receptor, GM1 ganglioside, on the surface
of enterocytes. Endocytosis and eventual release of the A
subunit leads to adenosine diphosphate–ribosylation of the
intracellular guanine nucleotide protein, Gsα. Inhibition of
GTPase activity of Gsα promotes activation of adenylate
cyclase resulting in increase in intracellular cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP) levels. This increase in cAMP activates
protein kinase A–mediated phosphorylation of the cystic
fibrosis transmembrane receptor, enhancing chloride secretion
into the intestinal lumen while reducing sodium uptake by
inhibition of sodium/hydrogen ion exchange via NHE3.
Combined, the net electrolyte loss leads to profound secretory
diarrhea characteristic of cholera.2,3
Similar to other important enteric pathogens,4,5 blood group
antigens appear to be an important determinant of the out-
come of infections by V. cholerae. Blood group O individuals
tend to develop more severe disease after infection with
either classical or El Tor strains.6–8 Strengthening this obser-
vation, group O individuals are underrepresented in the
Ganges delta where cholera infections are highly endemic.8
However, the reasons for the association between blood
group O and severe illness have not been thoroughly elucidated.
Hypothetically, differential binding of CT to non-O blood group
gastrointestinal glycans may impair efficient interaction of
CT with cognate GM1 receptors.9,10 Indeed, CT has been
shown to bind blood group antigens.9,11,12 Although the affin-
ity of these interactions relative to CT binding to GM1 is rela-
tively weak,13,14 it has been suggested that more rapid
dissociation of CT from O-antigen glycans9 could permit accel-
erated binding to cognate GM1 gangliosides receptors in blood
group O individuals.
Human blood groups are determined by allelic variations in
a glycosyltransferase that in blood group B adds terminal galac-
tose residues to the core H (blood group O) antigen, whereas
the blood group A enzyme adds N-acetylgalactosamine
(GalNac). Blood group O is determined by a premature stop
codon within the glycosyltransferase gene yielding a trun-
cated allele, resulting in complete loss of enzymatic activity
and undecorated core H antigens.
To investigate the direct impact of blood group expression
on CT activation of target epithelia, we chose two novel
enteric model systems. First, we examined the ability of CT
to stimulate cAMP responses in enteroids derived from gas-
trointestinal stem cells obtained from individuals with either
blood group O or A. In addition, we compared the effect of CT
on transformed HT-29 gastrointestinal epithelial cells derived
from an individual with blood group A to CRISPR/Cas9
engineered cells in which the glycosyltransferase was disrupted
yielding isogenic HT-29-A−/− cells expressing the core H (blood
group O) antigen.
Enteroids can recapitulate many features of human intestinal
epithelium including generation of enterochromaffin cells,
goblet cells, and enterocytes.15 In addition, we found that
enteroids appropriately express blood group antigens on the sur-
face of enterocytes (Figure 1A). We therefore used enteroids
derived from ileal or colonic biopsies from individuals belong-
ing to different blood groups to examine CT-mediated activa-
tion of cAMP. Interestingly, intestinal cells derived from
blood group O individuals exhibited consistently higher levels
of cAMP (P value = 0.0096) relative to cells expressing the
blood group A (Figure 1B). Although cholera is thought to
be an ileal infection, we also found that cells derived from
colonic biopsies from blood group O individuals exhibited
more robust cAMP response on exposure to CT (P value =
0.016, Figure 1C). These data provide additional in vitro evi-
dence to support an association between O-blood group
expression and differential responses to CT.
Furthermore, to examine more directly the specific impact of
blood group expression on CT activation of target epithelia, we
compared the responses of parental HT-29 cells (blood group A)
to isogenic H-antigen expressing CRISPR/Cas9 engineered
HT-29-A−/− cells (effectively, blood group O; Figure 2A).
Although both the parental and mutant cell lines responded to
*Address correspondence to James M. Fleckenstein, Washington
University School of Medicine, 660 South Euclid Avenue, Saint Louis,
MO 63110. E-mail: jflecken@wustl.edu
440
 forskolin, a diterpene activator of adenylate cyclase (Figure 2B),
CT stimulation of cAMP production in HT-29-A−/− cells consis-
tently exceeded that observed in the parental A blood group–
expressing cells (range: 3.7- to 4.2-fold increase; Figure 2C).
Collectively, these in vitro data obtained using two different
enteric systems strongly suggest that blood group O expression
by gastrointestinal epithelia permits an accelerated response
to CT, the principal effector molecule of V. cholerae responsi-
ble for cholera diarrheal illness. Interestingly, the data
obtained using the enteroids derived from multiple individ-
uals expressing different blood groups offer striking parallels
to clinical and epidemiologic associations between O-blood
group and the risk for severe cholera. Our findings suggest
that O-blood group enterocytes respond vigorously to CT stim-
ulation, potentially providing a direct cellular link to disease
severity. Moreover, the enhanced responses to CT observed in
cells engineered to express only the core-H (blood group O)
antigen suggest that this phenomenon is not simply a genetic
association between O blood group factors that segregate by
blood type, but a direct effect of expression of the unmodified
core-H glycan.
These findings could not be explained by differences in
direct binding of CT to the respective epithelial cells as we did
not observe a strict association between overall CT binding to
epithelial cells and blood group. We were unable to detect signif-
icant differences in either the pattern (Supplemental Figure 1A)
FIGURE 1.
(A) Confocal immunofluorescence images of enteroids grown on transwells demonstrating the presence of H antigen (group O) in
ileal enteroids derived from a blood group O individual (top panel), or blood group A subject (bottom panel). (B) Cyclic adenosine mono-
phosphate (cAMP) production after overnight stimulation of ileal enteroids with cholera toxin (CT, 0.1 μg/mL). Data for both blood groups repre-
sent composite data from two different subjects (**P value = 0.0096) (C) cAMP production in colonic enteroids from two blood group A and two
blood group O subjects after CT stimulation as described in B (**P value = 0.016). Statistical calculations in B, C performed using two-tailed,
Mann–Whitney U comparisons.
441
BLOOD GROUP O–DEPENDENT CELLULAR RESPONSES TO CHOLERA TOXIN
 or the amount of CT bound to the surface of HT-29 and HT-
29-A−/− cells (Supplemental Figure 1B). Likewise, in both A
and O blood group–derived enteroids, we observed similar
colocalization of labeled CT-B subunit and the major secreted
mucin, MUC2 (Supplemental Figure 1C). The studies reported
here were limited by the lack of available cells from blood
group B individuals for comparison. Although we were unable
to discern a clear difference in binding of CT to cells express-
ing the different blood group antigens, our experiments were
not designed to detect a more rapid dissociation of CT from
blood group O glycans, which could accelerate binding to its
cognate GM1 ganglioside receptor.9 Nevertheless, they high-
light the advantages of these newly available tools in the dis-
section of clinically important pathogen–host interactions.
In summary, we have established the utility of two model
enteric systems, to study the effects of a major virulence
effector, CT. In particular, we are able to show that cellular
responses to CT are enhanced in cells that express the O blood
group, offering interesting parallels to the earlier epidemiologic
and clinical observations that have associated blood group O
with severe cholera.
Received February 29, 2016. Accepted for publication April 1, 2016.
Published online May 9, 2016.
Note: Supplemental information and figures appear at www.ajtmh.org.
Acknowledgments: We thank Kelly Monroe, Naomi Sonnek, and
Emily Vivio for their assistance in acquiring the enteroid cell lines
used in this study.
Financial support: This work was supported by funding from the Depart-
ment of Veterans Affairs(grant 5I01BX001469); grant R01AI89894
from the National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases (NIAID); CTSA grant UL1 TR000448 from
the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS) of
the National Institutes of Health (NIH), and the Digestive Diseases
Research Core Center at Washington University School of Medicine;
grant P30 DK52574 from the National Institute of Diabetes and Diges-
tive and Kidney Diseases. Matthew A. Ciorba was supported by grants
DK100737, DK089016, and DK109384 from the NIDDK, AI095776
from the NIAID, and a Crohn’s and Colitis Foundation Senior
Research Award.
Disclaimer: The contents of this work are solely the responsibility
of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official views of
the NIAID, NIDDK, NIH, or the VA.
Authors’ addresses: F. Matthew Kuhlmann, Pardeep Kumar, and
Qingwei Luo, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal
Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis,
MO, E-mails: fkuhlman@dom.wustl.edu, pradeepkumar.19@gmail.com,
and qluo@dom.wustl.edu. Srikanth Santhanam, Division of Gastro-
enterology, Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University
School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, E-mail: ssanthan@dom.wustl
.edu. Matthew A. Ciorba, Division of Gastroenterology, Department
of Internal Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine,
Saint Louis, MO, and Molecular Microbiology and Microbial Patho-
genesis Program, Division of Biology and Biomedical Sciences,
Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, E-mail:
mciorba@dom.wustl.edu. James M. Fleckenstein, Division of Infectious
Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University
School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, John Cochran Division, Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Saint Louis, MO, and Molecular Microbiology
and Microbial Pathogenesis Program, Division of Biology and Biomed-
ical Sciences, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis,
MO, E-mail: jflecken@dom.wustl.edu.
REFERENCES
1. Harris JB, LaRocque RC, Qadri F, Ryan ET, Calderwood SB,
2012. Cholera. Lancet 379: 2466–2476.
2. Fleckenstein JM, Hardwidge PR, Munson GP, Rasko DA,
Sommerfelt H, Steinsland H, 2010. Molecular mechanisms
of enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli infection. Microbes Infect
12: 89–98.
3. Kopic S, Geibel JP, 2010. Toxin mediated diarrhea in the 21 century:
the pathophysiology of intestinal ion transport in the course
of ETEC, V. cholerae and rotavirus infection. Toxins (Basel) 2:
2132–2157.
4. Anstee DJ, 2010. The relationship between blood groups and
disease. Blood 115: 4635–4643.
5. Boren T, Falk P, Roth KA, Larson G, Normark S, 1993. Attachment
of Helicobacter pylori to human gastric epithelium mediated by
blood group antigens. Science 262: 1892–1895.
6. Glass RI, Holmgren J, Haley CE, Khan MR, Svennerholm AM,
Stoll BJ, Belayet Hossain KM, Black RE, Yunus M, Barua D,
1985. Predisposition for cholera of individuals with O blood
group. Possible evolutionary significance. Am J Epidemiol 121:
791–796.
FIGURE 2.
(A) Confocal immunofluorescence images demonstrat-
ing the presence of group A antigen expressed on the surface of
parental HT-29 cells (first row), but not the CRISPR engineered HT-
29-A−/− cells which lack the α1-3-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase
required to form the A blood group (second row), but which retain
expression of the core H (blood group O) antigen (third row). (B)
Parental HT-29 (blue symbols), and the engineered HT-29-A−/− cells
(grey) exhibit similar response to the adenylate cyclase agonist
forskolin. (C) HT-29 A/A− cells exhibit enhanced cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP) responses to cholera toxin (CT) compared
with parent HT-29 cells. (**P = 0.002, two-tailed Mann–Whitney U
comparisons).
442
KUHLMANN AND OTHERS
 7. Harris JB, Khan AI, LaRocque RC, Dorer DJ, Chowdhury F,
Faruque AS, Sack DA, Ryan ET, Qadri F, Calderwood SB,
2005. Blood group, immunity, and risk of infection with Vibrio
cholerae in an area of endemicity. Infect Immun 73: 7422–7427.
8. Karlsson EK, Harris JB, Tabrizi S, Rahman A, Shlyakhter I,
Patterson N, O’Dushlaine C, Schaffner SF, Gupta S, Chowdhury
F, Sheikh A, Shin OS, Ellis C, Becker CE, Stuart LM,
Calderwood SB, Ryan ET, Qadri F, Sabeti PC, Larocque RC,
2013. Natural selection in a Bangladeshi population from the
cholera-endemic Ganges River Delta. Sci Transl Med 5: 192ra86.
9. Heggelund JE, Haugen E, Lygren B, Mackenzie A, Holmner A,
Vasile F, Reina JJ, Bernardi A, Krengel U, 2012. Both El Tor
and classical cholera toxin bind blood group determinants.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 418: 731–735.
10. Holmner A, Mackenzie A, Krengel U, 2010. Molecular basis of
cholera blood-group dependence and implications for a world
characterized by climate change. FEBS Lett 584: 2548–2555.
11. Holmner A, Lebens M, Teneberg S, Angstrom J, Okvist M,
Krengel U, 2004. Novel binding site identified in a hybrid
between cholera toxin and heat-labile enterotoxin: 1.9 A crystal
structure reveals the details. Structure 12: 1655–1667.
12. Vasile F, Reina JJ, Potenza D, Heggelund JE, Mackenzie A,
Krengel U, Bernardi A, 2014. Comprehensive analysis of blood
group antigen binding to classical and El Tor cholera toxin
B-pentamers by NMR. Glycobiology 24: 766–778.
13. Cuatrecasas P, 1973. Gangliosides and membrane receptors for
cholera toxin. Biochemistry 12: 3558–3566.
14. Hansson HA, Holmgren J, Svennerholm L, 1977. Ultrastructural
localization of cell membrane GM1 ganglioside by cholera
toxin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 74: 3782–3786.
15. VanDussen KL, Marinshaw JM, Shaikh N, Miyoshi H, Moon C,
Tarr PI, Ciorba MA, Stappenbeck TS, 2015. Development of
an enhanced human gastrointestinal epithelial culture system
to facilitate patient-based assays. Gut 64: 911–920.
16. Taki T, Kibayashi K, 2014. A simple ABO genotyping by PCR
using sequence-specific primers with mismatched nucleotides.
Leg Med (Tokyo) 16: 168–172.
17. Schindelin J, Arganda-Carreras I, Frise E, Kaynig V, Longair M,
Pietzsch T, Preibisch S, Rueden C, Saalfeld S, Schmid B,
Tinevez JY, White DJ, Hartenstein V, Eliceiri K, Tomancak P,
Cardona A, 2012. Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-
image analysis. Nat Methods 9: 676–682.
443
BLOOD GROUP O–DEPENDENT CELLULAR RESPONSES TO CHOLERA TOXIN
