 1842 
www.thelancet.com   Vol 391   May 5, 2018
Series
Preconception health 2
Origins of lifetime health around the time of conception: 
causes and consequences
Tom P Fleming, Adam J Watkins, Miguel A Velazquez, John C Mathers, Andrew M Prentice, Judith Stephenson, Mary Barker, Richard Saffery, 
Chittaranjan S Yajnik, Judith J Eckert, Mark A Hanson, Terrence Forrester, Peter D Gluckman, Keith M Godfrey
Parental environmental factors, including diet, body composition, metabolism, and stress, affect the health and chronic 
disease risk of people throughout their lives, as captured in the Developmental Origins of Health and Disease concept. 
Research across the epidemiological, clinical, and basic science fields has identified the period around conception as 
being crucial for the processes mediating parental influences on the health of the next generation. During this time, 
from the maturation of gametes through to early embryonic development, parental lifestyle can adversely influence long-
term risks of offspring cardiovascular, metabolic, immune, and neurological morbidities, often termed developmental 
programming. We review periconceptional induction of disease risk from four broad exposures: maternal overnutrition 
and obesity; maternal undernutrition; related paternal factors; and the use of assisted reproductive treatment. Studies in 
both humans and animal models have demonstrated the underlying biological mechanisms, including epigenetic, 
cellular, physiological, and metabolic processes. We also present a meta-analysis of mouse paternal and maternal protein 
undernutrition that suggests distinct parental periconceptional contributions to postnatal outcomes. We propose that the 
evidence for periconceptional effects on lifetime health is now so compelling that it calls for new guidance on parental 
preparation for pregnancy, beginning before conception, to protect the health of offspring.
Introduction
The notion that maternal physiology, body composition, 
diet, and lifestyle during pregnancy have profound and 
enduring effects on the long-term health of the offspring, 
and disease risk into adulthood, has received strong 
evidential support across the epidemiological, medical, 
and basic science fields.1–3 Thus, the Developmental 
Origins of Health and Disease concept has emerged,3 
suggesting that poor developmental experience can 
increase the risk of non-communicable diseases in later 
life, including cardiovascular and metabolic comorbidities 
(such as hypertension, obesity, and type 2 diabetes), 
atopic conditions, cancer, and neurological impairment. 
Research into the concept has focused on the time during 
pregnancy when the conceptus is most vulnerable to 
adverse influences, thereby informing targeted protection 
and possible intervention. Increasing evidence points to 
the importance of the time around conception, known as 
the periconceptional period.
This Series paper focuses on four broad periconceptional 
environmental exposures shown to adversely affect 
humans and animal models (figure 1), and discusses 
mechanistic causes and consequences. We also report a 
meta-analysis on the relative contributions of maternal 
and paternal factors on long-term periconceptional 
influences, in an established low protein diet model of 
parental undernutrition. 
Periconceptional developmental conditioning
The periconceptional period has been variously defined, 
but for the Developmental Origins of Health and Disease 
concept the key events broadly cover the complet 
ion 
of meiotic maturation of oocytes, differen 
tiation of 
spermatozoa, fertilisation, and resumption of mitotic 
cell cycles in the zygote, marking the transition from 
the parental to the embryonic genome,4 and the onset 
of morphogenesis up to implantation.5 This process 
represents a period of a few weeks, depending on the 
mammalian species, and is characterised by extensive 
change in morphology (emergence of distinct embryonic 
and placental cell lineages); genomic reorganisation 
(epigenetic modifi 
cations such as DNA methylation to 
regulate lineage-specific gene expression in the conceptus); 
and changes in metabolism (setting homoeostatic 
regulators for growth and energy supply; figure 2). It is, 
however, recognised that influences at every stage from 
Lancet 2018; 391: 1842–52
Published Online 
April 16, 2018 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(18)30312-X
This is the second in a Series of 
three papers about 
preconception health
Biological Sciences 
(Prof T P Fleming PhD), MRC 
Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit 
(M Barker PhD, 
Prof K M Godfrey PhD), and 
Institute of Developmental 
Sciences (J J Eckert PhD, 
Prof K M Godfrey, 
Prof M A Hanson DPhil), 
University of Southampton, 
Southampton, UK; School of 
Medicine, Division of Child 
Health, Obstetrics and 
Gynaecology, University of 
Nottingham, Nottingham, UK 
(A J Watkins PhD); School of 
Natural and Environmental 
Sciences (M A Velazquez PhD), 
and Human Nutrition Research 
Centre, Institute of Cellular 
Medicine and Newcastle 
University Institute for Ageing 
(Prof J C Mathers PhD), 
Newcastle University, 
Newcastle, UK; MRC Unit, 
Key messages
• 
Although evidence for developmental origins of later disease can be found throughout 
gestation and beyond, there is a growing consensus from both human and animal 
studies that conception marks a crucial period that merits attention.
• 
Preconception maternal overnutrition and obesity, maternal undernutrition, related 
paternal factors, and assisted reproductive treatments can change the phenotype and 
potential of gametes and early embryos, with enduring consequences across the lifespan.
• Our meta-analysis reveals that suboptimal maternal and paternal nutrition around 
conception have similar effects on offspring weight, but differing effects on 
offspring blood pressure.
• 
These crucial influences on lifetime health occurring so early in development might 
reflect perturbations or adaptations in epigenetic, cellular, metabolic, and physiological 
mechanisms. Defining these mechanisms, and the exposures that drive them, is essential 
for the development of more specific recommendations for preconception health.
• 
This emerging knowledge has substantial societal and medical implications, 
providing the basis for a new emphasis on preparation for conception and pregnancy, 
to safeguard public health and as a means of disease prevention.
 www.thelancet.com   Vol 391   May 5, 2018 
1843
Series
The Gambia and MRC 
International Nutrition Group, 
London School of Hygiene & 
Tropical Medicine, London, UK 
(Prof A M Prentice PhD); UCL 
EGA Institute for Women’s 
Health, Faculty of Population 
Health Sciences, University 
College London, London, UK 
(Prof J Stephenson FFPH); NIHR 
Southampton Biomedical 
Research Centre, University of 
Southampton & University 
Hospital Southampton NHS 
Foundation Trust, 
earliest childhood can shape pre 
conception health, and 
thereby influence eventual pregnancy and birth outcomes.
Adverse developmental processes around the time 
of conception have been demonstrated in human and 
animal models in response to diverse environmental 
situations. In vivo, the quality of the maternal diet, both 
overnutrition and obesity8 or undernutrition,9 and other 
aspects of her physiological status including hyper-
glycaemia or lipidaemia,10 can affect embryo potential with 
consequences for offspring disease risk over their lifetime. 
Paternal lifestyle and phenotype can similarly influence 
long-term offspring health, mediated either through the 
sperm or seminal plasma.11 Periconceptional parental 
influences could have particular and differing effects on 
male and female offspring.12 In addition, more babies are 
being born as a result of assisted reproductive treatments, 
some of which involve embryo culture and exposure to 
potentially inappropriate environmental factors that could 
alter offspring phenotype.12,13 Long-term outcomes are 
consistent with the Developmental Origins of Health and 
Disease concept, including cardiometabolic, immuno-
logical, and neurological non-communicable disorders.
To some, the concept of periconceptional origins of 
lifetime health might not be intuitive. Why should this 
Nutrients
Ovary
Fallopian tube
Embryo transfer
Blood vessels
Uterus
Maternal undernutrition
• Preimplantation embryo sensing of maternal nutrients
• Extra-embryonic (trophectoderm, primitive endoderm) 
compensatory responses
• Epigenetic and metabolic reprogramming
• Resetting fetal growth rate through regulating ribosome biogenesis
• Endocrine misregulation
• Postnatal cardiometabolic disease risk
• Adverse programming evident after embryo transfer
Assisted reproductive treatment
• Embryo epigenetic reprogramming
• Perinatal complications
• Altered birthweight
• Postnatal cardiometabolic disease risk
Maternal obesity and overnutrition
• Metabolite and lipid accumulation in follicles and eggs
• Mitochondrial damage
• Cellular and ER stress
• Epigenetic and metabolic reprogramming
• Postnatal cardiometabolic disease risk
• Adverse programming evident after embryo transfer
Paternal obesity and undernutrition
• Reduced sperm motility, increased DNA damage
• Altered sperm epigenome and RNA profile
• Altered seminal plasma composition
• Reduced embryo potential
• Epigenetic and reprogramming
• Endocrine misregulation
• Postnatal cardiometabolic disease risk
ICSI
Standard IVF
Embryo culture
Figure 1: Summary of periconceptional developmental conditioning from the four areas reviewed, with the main mechanisms highlighted in the progression of disease risk
ER=endoplasmic reticulum. ICSI=intracytoplasmic sperm injection. IVF=in-vitro fertilisation.
 1844 
www.thelancet.com   Vol 391   May 5, 2018
Series
short window at the very start of development have such 
profound consequences for the rest of our lives? Crucially, 
the essential steps in reproduction over this period 
occur when the few cells involved are fully exposed to 
environmental conditions. Therefore, the cells are vulner-
able to disturbance of epigenetic mechanisms, leading to 
an altered profile of embryonic gene expression that 
persists through subsequent cell cycles, and drives a 
modified developmental programme. Metabolic and 
cellular homoeostatic characteristics of the embryo, 
including mitochondrial activity, can also change in 
response to nutrient availability. Peri 
conceptional sensi-
tivity to environmental cues also raises the possibility that 
this window is one of opportunity, providing the embryo 
with capacity to respond to prevailing conditions and to 
optimise development to best suit survival and fitness.9 
Thus, periconceptional developmental plasticity (the in-
duction of different phenotypes from a single genotype) 
could facilitate the setting of suitable growth and metabolic 
parameters to match the perceived environment, but that, 
if environmental conditions change, could become 
maladaptive and lead to later disease.3
Periconceptional developmental conditioning 
through maternal overnutrition and obesity
The global rise in maternal obesity is associated with 
reduced female fertility and heightened risk of obesity 
in the offspring.2 The adverse effects of high maternal 
body-mass index (BMI) on the offspring could reflect 
elevated maternal glucose and insulin concentrations, 
which drive fetal growth and adiposity (resulting in 
increased birth and childhood weight), but might 
also include shared life-style factors within families.8 
Impaired metabolism in offspring might also be 
associated with increased risk of allergic and atopic 
conditions, revealing the complexity in phenotype.2 
Animal models have confirmed the link between 
maternal obesity, and cardiovascular and metabolic 
disease risk in offspring.8,14
Why might the periconceptional period be causal for 
obesity-related conditioning? Obese women have higher 
circulating concentrations of inflammatory cytokines, and 
hormones and metabolites,15 which accumulate within the 
ovarian follicular fluid and can adversely affect oocyte 
maturation and potential. Thus, maternal BMI is positively 
Gamete maturation
Fertilisation
Metaphase II 
oocyte
Eight-cell
compacted
Zygote
Two-cell
Four-cell
Eight-cell
Morula
Blastocyst
Cleavage
Compaction
Cavitation
Hatching
Implantation
Yolk sac
Placenta
Endometrium
Fetus
Epiblast lineage
Inner cell mass
Primitive endoderm lineage
Trophectoderm lineage
• Blastomeres totipotent
• Embryonic genome activation
• Epigenetic reprogramming of genome
• Global DNA demethylation except for imprinted genes
• Metabolism by pyruvate uptake 
• Pluripotency established
• Trophectoderm differentiation, 
blastocoel formation
• Specification of inner cell mass and 
trophectoderm
• Metabolism by glucose uptake and 
increased oxygen consumption
• Specification of epiblast  and 
primitive endoderm in inner cell mass
• Gradual lineage-specific 
remethylation of DNA
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
Figure 2: Biological events underpinning periconceptional conditioning
The periconceptional period (A–G) is one of extensive cellular change comprising the completion of meiotic maturation of oocytes (A), differentiation of 
spermatozoa (B), fertilisation (C), and resumption of mitotic cell cycles in the zygote (D), marking the transition from parental to embryonic genomes,4 and the 
onset of morphogenesis.5 Periconceptional biology is indeed busy—the morphological and cellular changes occurring during the switch from parental to 
embryonic generations leading to blastocyst formation (E), are driven by pronounced subcellular and molecular processes. These include global restructuring of 
the epigenome (mainly DNA methylation and histone modifications that control gene expression), such that expression from the new embryonic genome is 
distinct from the parental genomes.6 Epigenetic reorganisation allows the embryo to first exhibit totipotency, a naive cellular state conferring the ability to 
construct both true embryonic (future fetal) cell lineages and the extra-embryonic (placental) lineages that become evident in the blastocyst. Subsequently, 
epigenetic modifications underpin embryo pluripotency, the capacity to generate all three germ layers (ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm) once gastrulation 
has taken place. Morphogenesis of the blastocyst is followed by embryo hatching from the zona pellucida coat (F) and implantation (G), mediated through 
adhesion of the outer trophectoderm layer of the blastocyst to the uterine endometrium and subsequent invasion and decidualisation. Activation of the new 
embryonic genome before implantation not only permits de-novo gene expression distinct from parental genomes, but also involves establishment of the 
embryo’s metabolism that matures over time.7
Southampton, UK (M Barker, 
Prof M Godfrey, 
Prof M A Hanson); Cancer & 
Disease Epigenetics, Murdoch 
Children’s Research Institute 
and Department of Paediatrics, 
University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia 
(Prof R Saffery PhD); KEM 
Hospital Research Centre, Pune, 
India (Prof C S Yajnik MD); 
University of the West Indies 
Solutions for Developing 
Countries, The University of the 
West Indies, Mona, Jamaica 
(Prof T Forrester PhD); Liggins 
Institute, University of 
Auckland, Auckland, 
New Zealand 
(Prof P D Gluckman MD); and 
Singapore Institute for Clinical 
Sciences, Agency for Science, 
Technology and Research 
(A*STAR), Singapore, 
Singapore (Prof P D Gluckman)
Correspondence to: 
Prof Keith M Godfrey, University 
of Southampton and MRC 
Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit, 
University Hospital 
Southampton, Tremona Road, 
Southampton SO16 6YD, UK 
kmg@mrc.soton.ac.uk
 www.thelancet.com   Vol 391   May 5, 2018 
1845
Series
associated with increased follicular fluid insulin, lactate, 
triglycerides, leptin, and other metabolic regulators.16 In 
experimental models, this rich follicular fluid influences 
the developmental competence of exposed animal oocytes, 
thereby reducing embryo quality.17 Moreover, oocytes from 
obese women are smaller and produce blastocysts with 
increased triglycerides and reduced glucose consumption 
(markers of poorer potential), than do oocytes from 
women of healthy weight.18
In mice, maternal obesity causes defects in the 
mitochondrial phenotype of oocytes, including abnormal 
morphology and cristae structure, altered membrane 
potential and distribution,19 and increased mitochondrial 
DNA content;19,20 these phenotypes are markers of dis-
turbed mitochondrial function and energy homo 
eostasis. 
Oocytes from obese mice also exhibit increased oxidative 
stress, and spindle abnormalities, suggesting increased 
risk of aneuploidy.19,20
Mitochondrial defects in oocytes could derive from 
the elevated lipid content and inherent insulin res-
istance caused by high maternal adiposity. Oocyte 
hyper 
lipidaemia, in turn, leads to impaired metabolic 
regulation and endoplasmic reticulum stress in mice,17 
a condition that causes proteins to misfold during 
biosynthesis, contributing to metabolic and cardio-
vascular disease. Bovine and murine in-vitro oocyte 
maturation models demonstrate that elevated fatty acid 
concentrations perturb follicular physiology, reduce 
oocyte developmental competence (including altered 
transcriptome and epigenome profiles in blastocysts), 
and lead to early embryos with compromised metab-
olism and low developmental potential.13
The combination of metabolic, mitochondrial, and 
chromosomal alterations in oocytes and embryos 
from obese mothers has important implications for 
subsequent development. In mice, obese mothers have 
small fetuses and pups that develop overgrowth, 
adiposity, and glucose intolerance after birth.21 Transfer 
of mouse blastocysts from obese mothers to normal 
recipients produced similarly growth-restricted fetuses 
with associated malformations, despite the absence 
of gestational maternal obesity.19 Similarly, in sheep, 
female offspring from embryos of obese natural 
mothers transferred to non-obese mothers exhibited 
increased adiposity, with dysregulation in liver and 
muscle insulin signalling and hepatic fatty acid 
oxidation.22 These changes are associated with epigenetic 
perturbations in the liver, including upregulation of 
microRNAs regulating insulin signalling.22 Similarly, 
mouse embryos transferred from diabetic mothers to 
control recipients exhibited fetal growth retardation, 
and congenital anomalies resembling natural diabetic 
pregnancies;10 these structural changes are in keep-
ing with clinical practice, in which preconcept 
ional 
and periconceptional folic acid supplementation, 
and improved diabetes control, reduce the incidence 
of anomalies.
The periconceptional effects of maternal obesity are 
also apparent in pregnancies arising from assisted 
reproductive treatment. Fertility declines with increas 
-
ing BMI in women receiving donor oocytes, as in 
non-donated pregnancies, suggesting reduced uterine 
recept 
ivity.23 However, it has also been shown that 
recipient BMI has no effect on donor oocyte pregnancy 
success, whereas donor BMI is negatively associated,24 
indicating that preconception oocyte quality is influenced 
by maternal adiposity.
Periconceptional developmental conditioning 
through maternal undernutrition
Human studies
Poor nutrition in utero and low birthweight remain highly 
prevalent in low-income and middle-income countries, 
and are associated with increased risks of chronic diseases 
in later life across diverse human populations, particularly 
if followed by accelerated weight gain during infancy.1,3 
Similar human cardio 
metabolic and neurological conse-
quences arise from maternal exposure to famine, for 
example, the Dutch Hunger Winter of 1944–45. In human 
studies it is difficult to pinpoint gestational windows when 
heightened sensitivity to maternal undernutrition occurs, 
but the Dutch famine analyses suggest a poor prognosis 
for offspring conceived during the famine, rather than off-
spring experiencing famine later in gestation.25 Similarly, 
individuals exposed in utero, particularly during the first 
trimester, to the Chinese Great Famine (1959–61) had 
increased risk of hypertension in adulthood.26 Exposure to 
the Dutch famine during the periconceptional period 
caused epigenetic dysregulation, resulting in reduced 
DNA methylation of the imprinted growth-regulating 
IGF2 gene persisting into adulthood, and differential 
methylation in the regulatory regions of genes affecting 
growth and metabolism.25
In another important human study,27 dramatic seasonal 
variation in maternal nutrient consumption in The 
Gambia affected perinatal outcomes, including birth-
weight, adult health, and mortality. By studying genomic 
regions where methylation patterns are highly correlated 
across tissues derived from all three germ lines, it has 
been demonstrated that maternal nutrition at concept-
ion alters the epigenome prior to gastrulation, with the 
effects persisting well into childhood and adolescence 
at a minimum.28 This periconceptional legacy coincides 
with seasonal changes in maternal plasma methyl-donor 
biomarkers, which, along with BMI, are also predict-
ive of childhood methylation patterns.29 Substantial dev-
iations in the methylation patterns of loci predictive of 
immune function, tumour suppression,30 and obesity31 
have been observed.
Animal models
Animal models have been essential for investigating 
mechanisms involved in the multistep processes linking 
periconceptional maternal undernutrition with later-life 
 1846 
www.thelancet.com   Vol 391   May 5, 2018
Series
disease risk. In rodents fed a low protein diet (LPD)—
specifically during the periconceptional period, either 
exclusively during the final 3 days of oocyte maturation,32 
or the 3–4 day window of preimplantation embryo 
development (Emb-LPD),33,34 with normal nutrition at 
all other times—an altered growth trajectory and cardio-
vascular, metabolic, and neuro-behavioural dysfunction 
in adulthood were found. Such targeted dietary models 
commonly show hypertension in adult offspring coupled 
with increased adiposity.9,32–34 Similar findings have been 
reported in sheep.35
Rodent and sheep models of maternal periconceptional 
undernutrition suggest that impaired regulation of fetal 
development could underlie comorbidities. For example, 
studies in sheep have shown that the late gestation fetal 
cardiovascular response to hypoglycaemia is modified 
by prior undernutrition during the peri-implantation 
period.36 Moreover, maternal undernutrition during peri-
implantation and late gestation affects skeletal muscle 
development differentially in sheep fetuses,37 and maternal 
undernutrition in early gestation alters gestation length, 
and fetal and postnatal growth.38
Induction and response mechanisms
The mouse Emb-LPD model has helped to reveal how 
periconceptional maternal undernutrition might initiate 
adverse effects during early embryogenesis.9 Emb-LPD 
reduces the concentration of circulating maternal insulin 
and aminoacids, including branched-chain aminoacids 
within the uterine luminal fluid that bathes early embryos 
before implantation.39 Branched-chain aminoacids act as 
targets for embryo nutrient sensors, enabling nutrient 
status to be sensed by blastocysts via the mammalian 
target of rapamycin complex 1 growth-regulating signalling 
pathway, inducing an altered growth trajectory from before 
implantation,39 and shown by embryo transfer to be 
induced within the blastocyst.34 Altered induction by 
Emb-LPD in mice activates compensatory responses that 
are distinct between extraembryonic (trophectoderm, 
primitive endoderm) and embryonic (epiblast) lineages of 
the blastocyst (figure 2). As compared with embryonic 
development in mice fed a normal protein diet, the Emb-
LPD trophectoderm becomes more proliferative, adopts a 
more invasive migratory phenotype at implantation, and 
activates increased endocytosis of maternal uterine 
luminal fluid proteins as an alternative source of nutrients, 
leading to a placenta that is more efficient in nutrient 
transfer to the fetus.39–41 Similarly, the primitive endoderm 
activates compensatory responses to enhance nutrient 
delivery via the yolk sac placenta, mediated through 
epigenetic mechanisms.41,42
In response to Emb-LPD, changes in embryonic 
lineages could help set the embryonic and fetal growth 
trajectory to match prevailing nutrient availability. The 
embryonic lineages use preimplantation nutrient sensing 
to regulate growth across somatic organs (eg, liver and 
kidney) through adaptations in the rate of ribosome 
biogenesis.43 In essence, ribosomal RNA expression is 
suppressed during periods of maternal dietary restriction, 
but is increased, beyond that of the control rate, when the 
dietary challenge is removed. This mechanism modulates 
the level of DNA methylation at the ribosomal DNA 
promoter, thereby mediating the interaction of RNA 
polymerase I with the promoter to regulate ribosome 
biogenesis and growth.43,44 Ribosomal DNA has also been 
found to be a genomic target for growth regulation 
in models of maternal high-fat or obesogenic diets.44 
This exquisite lifetime mechanism, activated in the 
pre 
implantation embryo, is likely to be responsive to 
uterine luminal fluid nutrient concentrations, and appears 
to utilise a nutrient-sensing ribosome factor, Rrn3, to 
mediate ribosomal DNA responses.43 The growth-
regulating role of the embryonic lineage is crucial since 
perinatal weight associates with adult disease risk.34
Paternal origin of periconceptional 
developmental programming
Although the connection between a mother’s diet and 
the long-term health of her offspring has been studied in 
detail, understanding of how a father’s diet impacts his 
offspring remains limited. However, links are emerging 
between paternal lifestyle, sperm quality, and impaired 
offspring health.11 Here, both direct (sperm quality, 
epigenetic status, DNA integrity) and indirect (sem-
inal fluid composition) paternal mechanisms have 
been identified; in mice these mechanisms have been 
shown to affect offspring development across multiple 
generations.45
Mirroring female reproductive fitness, male fertility is 
closely linked to nutrition and body composition. In 
humans and rodents, elevated BMI is associated with 
reduced sperm motility,46 increased sperm abnormality,47 
increased levels of reactive oxygen species in sperm, 
reduced serum testosterone, and increased oestradiol 
concentrations.48 Consumption of a so-called western-
style diet, high in sugar, fat, and processed foods, is 
associated with reduced sperm motility in men.49 In 
addition, consumption of energy-dense diets in men 
and rodents is associated with poor sperm motility, 
morphology, and DNA integrity.50 Reduced sperm DNA 
integrity, as occurs in obesity and diabetes, correlates with 
reduced human embryonic development and decreased 
pregnancy rates.51 In men undergoing in-vitro fertilisation 
treatment, obesity is associated with reduced blastocyst 
development and reduced livebirth rates.52 In rodents, 
paternal obesity induced by a high-fat diet increases 
sperm DNA damage,53 reduces blastocyst development 
and implantation rates,54 and causes subfertility in male 
and female offspring for up to two generations.55 These 
negative effects on offspring development can be 
prevented through paternal dietary and exercise inter-
ventions in mice,56 indicating that sperm-mediated effects 
might be transient and even reversible. In rats, a paternal 
high-fat diet for 10 weeks before mating affected female 
 www.thelancet.com   Vol 391   May 5, 2018 
1847
Series
(but not male) offspring pancreatic β-cell function, 
increased bodyweight and glucose intolerance, and 
impaired insulin secretion.57 Offspring of male mice 
overnourished during neonatal life demonstrate glucose 
intolerance, 
fasting 
hyper 
glycaemia, 
and 
insulin 
resistance, mirroring the metabolic disturbance seen in 
their fathers.58
Similar to the impacts of paternal obesity, paternal LPD 
in mice induces the expression of genes involved in 
offspring hepatic lipid and cholesterol biosynthesis.59 
Analysis of offspring hepatic epigenetic status revealed 
genome-wide changes in DNA methylation, including the 
key lipid regulator PPARα. In adulthood, offspring from 
male mice fed LPD had high birthweight, a reduced male 
to female offspring ratio, increased adult adiposity, 
hypotension, glucose intolerance, and elevated serum 
tumour necrosis factor α levels.60 Furthermore, paternal 
LPD also affects blastocyst AMPK expression, placental 
size, fetal growth, and skeletal development.61
As for maternal periconceptional nutrition models, 
epigenetic mechanisms probably mediate the effects of 
paternal phenotype and exposures on offspring develop-
ment.62 Changes in patterns of sperm histone modifications 
(methylation, acetylation), DNA methyl 
ation, and RNA 
content, are prime candidates for such paternal peri-
conceptional programming. Sperm from infertile men 
display significant changes in histone populations,63 with 
enrichment of active histone markers (ie H3K27me3) at 
key developmental and pluripotency genes in both mice 
and humans.63 Sperm-derived histones are transferred into 
the oocyte and incorporate into zygotic chromatin 
following human fertilisation.64 However, whether any of 
the 2–15% of histones retained within the mammalian 
sperm contribute directly to zygotic gene expression 
regulation is unknown. Human sperm also contain several 
thousand coding RNA transcripts,65 and altered expression 
is linked with infertility.66 Levels of sperm transfer RNA-
derived small RNAs (tsRNAs) are altered by paternal diet 
in mice;67 offspring generated by injecting zygotes with 
sperm tsRNA taken from male mice fed a high-fat diet, 
showed impaired glucose tolerance and insulin secretion.67 
Although such studies highlight the role of RNA 
populations in intergenerational pro 
gramming,68 the 
significance of these sperm-derived RNA molecules 
remains to be elucidated.
Apart from sperm-specific mechanisms of develop-
mental programming, seminal plasma composition 
(eg granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor) 
can also influence the reproductive process, affecting 
embryonic, placental, and offspring development in 
mice,69 and initiating maternal reproductive tract immuno-
logical responses, essential during the establish 
ment 
and maintenance of human pregnancy.70 In mice, 
seminal fluid also impacts on the maternal uterine 
environment, altering blastocyst development, placental 
size, and adult offspring glucose tolerance, adiposity, and 
blood pressure.71
Defining the parental contribution to 
periconceptional developmental effects
Shared maternal and paternal dietary and lifestyle 
influences could potentially combine for greater impact on 
periconceptional development. However, most research 
models to date are uniparental in design, and the combined 
effects of both parents are unknown. Whether the impact 
of poor paternal diet on offspring development and 
wellbeing is of equivalent importance to that of poor 
maternal diet is also unknown. We did a meta-analysis of 
our mouse maternal and paternal LPD diet models, using 
published data for offspring weight at birth, adult systolic 
blood pressure, and adult heart to bodyweight ratio (a 
measure of heart capacity), including datasets covering 
maternal intervention restricted to the periods of oocyte 
maturation, preimplantation develop 
ment, or the entirety 
of gestation (panel and figure 3).32,34,60 The use of the same 
robust statistical random-effects regression analysis 
Panel: Analysis of parental contribution effect
• Data for offspring phenotype were taken from Watkins et al 2008a,32 2008b,34 and 
2014.60 Each study used the same normal protein diet (NPD) and low protein diet 
(LPD) formulation fed to either female or male mice for distinct periconceptional 
durations.
• 
The three studies employed the same rigorous random-effects regression analysis to 
account for the hierarchical nature of the studies in the statistical analyses.
• 
Raw data on individual offspring weight at birth, adult tail-cuff systolic blood pressure 
measurement, and adult heart to bodyweight ratio for all groups were used for 
the analyses.
• 
Raw mean differences between offspring in the experimental and study-specific 
control group (normalised to a value of 0) were calculated for birthweight, systolic 
blood pressure, and heart to bodyweight ratio.
• 
Weight (%) refers to the individual contribution (by number of animals) of each study 
to the total pooled estimate. Heterogeneity (ie, variation in outcomes between 
studies) was assessed using χ² test on Cochran’s Q statistic and by calculating I² 
(ie, percentage of variation across studies attributed to heterogeneity rather than 
chance). As heterogeneity was significant for all analyses, pooled estimates were 
calculated by the random effects (Mantel-Haenszel) method.
• 
The largest effect on offspring birthweight was in response to maternal 
preimplantation (Emb-LPD) diet (figure 3). Maternal LPD restricted to the terminal 
stages of oocyte maturation (Egg-LPD) also resulted in increased birthweight. 
However, maternal LPD throughout gestation had no impact on offspring 
birthweight, probably reflecting fetal growth regulation during gestation as 
previously discussed. Paternal LPD also had no effect. Overall, we observed a 
significant pooled estimate effect of parental LPD on offspring birthweight, 
representing an increase in LPD offspring weight of 7·8%.
• 
All maternal LPD groups had elevated systolic blood pressure (figure 3). By contrast, 
paternal LPD resulted in a non-significant decrease. The differential parental effect on 
offspring systolic blood pressure meant the pooled estimate showed no overall difference.
• 
All groups displayed either a negative impact or no effect on adult heart to 
bodyweight ratio (figure 3). The largest size effect was observed in response to 
maternal Emb-LPD, but this difference was not statistically significant. Only the 
paternal LPD offspring heart to bodyweight ratio reached significance. Overall, the 
pooled effects indicated a reduction in adult heart to bodyweight ratio following both 
maternal and paternal LPD.
 1848 
www.thelancet.com   Vol 391   May 5, 2018
Series
across each of these studies, strengthens our comparison 
of parental effects in the current analysis. However, 
such rigorous statistical approaches are rarely adopted, 
especially in animal model studies, and so we have 
restricted our analysis to data from these three studies 
alone. Offspring birthweight was increased in response to 
maternal LPD during the terminal stages of oocyte 
development (Egg-LPD), and Emb-LPD (figure 3). Overall, 
the pooled estimate demonstrated that parental LPD 
increased offspring birthweight. Our second analysis 
explored the impact of parental LPD on adult offspring 
systolic blood pressure (figure 3). All maternal challenges 
resulted in offspring hypertension, but paternal LPD 
resulted in a non-significant decrease in blood pressure in 
the adult offspring. Our final analysis examined the impact 
of parental diet on adult heart to bodyweight ratio (figure 3). 
Only paternal LPD had a significant effect, reducing 
offspring heart to bodyweight ratio. These data demonstrate 
differential effects from paternal and maternal peri-
conceptional developmental exposures on offspring 
phenotype. It is essential that further studies define the 
precise impacts and under 
lying mechanisms by which 
parental diet regimes affect offspring develop 
ment and 
wellbeing. Studies examining concurrent paternal and 
maternal inter 
ventions on shared offspring outcomes are 
also warranted.
Periconceptional developmental programming 
and assisted reproductive treatment
Direct evidence for human periconceptional effects comes 
from assisted reproductive treatments, during which 
mature gametes, and the preimplantation embryo, are 
exposed to precisely timed in-vitro manipulations. Several 
million, apparently healthy, children have now been born 
worldwide using assisted reproductive treatments, but 
relatively little is known about the possible impact of the 
technology-associated exposures during conception and 
very early development on their health status during 
childhood and later life. The spectrum of human 
demographic confounders (including parental infertility), 
changes and improve 
ments in assisted reproductive 
treatment techniques, and the relative sample sizes used, 
make analyses complex and the reported outcomes need 
to be interpreted with caution. Nevertheless, it is well 
established that singleton assisted reproductive treatment 
pregnancies have increased risk of low birthweight, 
congenital abnormalities, and increased mortality rate, 
although disentangling confounding by parental infertility 
is difficult.72 Human embryo culture media have changed 
over time, with the predominant current practice to use 
commercially sourced media of proprietary (unspecified) 
composition.13 Comparison of perinatal outcome following 
use of different commercial media, including a multicentre 
randomised controlled trial,73 has indicated that birthweight 
is significantly affected, with effects on growth still 
manifest at age 2 years.74
Compared with naturally conceived offspring, the 
cardiovascular phenotype of children and adolescents 
born as a result of in-vitro fertilisation reveals increased 
risk of high blood pressure,75,76 vascular dysfunction with 
abnormal blood flow and vessel thickness,77 and evidence 
Weight
(%)
p value
Mean difference, g 
(95% Cl)
Egg-LPD
Emb-LPD
LPD
Pat-LPD
Pooled estimate
0·09 (0·05 to 0·13) 
0·18 (0·11 to 0·24) 
0·04 (–0·02 to 0·08) 
0·03 (–0·01 to 0·06)
0·10 (0·07 to 0·13)
31
29
26
14
100
<0·0001
<0·0001
0·259
0·09
<0·0001
0·0
–0·1
0·1
0·2
0·3
Weight
(%)
p value
Mean difference,
mm Hg (95% Cl)
Egg-LPD
Emb-LPD
LPD
Pat-LPD
Pooled estimate
 6·92 (4·95 to 8·90) 
 5·60 (3·63 to 7·56) 
 5·54 (3·66 to 7·42) 
 –3·49 (–7·62 to 0·63)
 –0·36 (–1·75 to 1·02)
26
28
29
17
100
<0·0001
<0·0001
<0·0001
0·096
0·609
–5
–10
0
5
10
Weight
(%)
p value
Mean difference, g 
(95% Cl)
Egg-LPD
Emb-LPD
LPD
Pat-LPD
Pooled estimate
0·00 (–0·03 to 0·02) 
–0·05 (–0·10 to 0·01)
–0·02 (–0·07 to 0·03)
–0·03 (–0·07 to –0·01)
–0·03 (–0·05 to –0·01)
23
27
29
21
100
0·612
0·073
0·424
0·038
0·0035
–0·05
–0·10
0
0·05
0·10
Reduced weight
Increased weight
Reduced SBP
Increased SBP
Reduced ratio Increased ratio
A Offspring birthweight
B Adult offspring systolic 
blood pressure
C Adult offspring heart to 
bodyweight ratio
Figure 3: Influence of maternal and paternal factors during periconceptional 
conditioning in mice following parental low protein diet
The effect of parental low protein diet (LPD; 9% casein) on offspring weight at 
birth (A), adult offspring systolic blood pressure (B), and adult offspring heart 
to bodyweight ratio (C), compared with offspring from parents fed a normal 
protein diet (18% casein). Analysis of three studies involving female MF1 mice 
being fed LPD exclusively during the terminal stages of oocyte maturation 
(3·5 days prior to mating; Egg-LPD), exclusively during preimplantation 
embryo development (Emb-LPD) or throughout gestation (LPD). Forest plots 
also include offspring data in response to a paternal low protein diet (Pat-LPD) 
fed to C57BL6 males prior to mating. For Egg-NPD, n=44–95 males and 
69–94 females from 19 litters; Egg-LPD, n=30–89 males and 37–112 females 
from 19 litters; Emb-LPD, n=39–70 males and 39–64 females from 19 litters; 
NPD, n=36–60 males and 40–71 females from 19 litters; LPD, n=38–55 males 
and 47–61 females from 19 litters; Pat-NPD, n=34–44 males and 
36–41 females from 16 litters; and Pat-LPD, n=24–29 males and 41–44 females 
from 16 litters (litters were adjusted after being weighed at birth to a mean of 
three males and three females, therefore, number ranges reflect both total 
number of offspring at birth [A] as well as number of offspring 
post-adjustment [B, C]). (A) Plots present differences between means (95% CI) 
of birthweight (g) to study-specific NPD group. Between-study heterogeneity 
I²=33%. (B) Plots present differences between means (95% CI) of adult systolic 
blood pressure (mm Hg) to study specific NPD group. (C) Plots present 
differences between means (95% CI) of heart to bodyweight ratio to study 
specific NPD group. I²=61%. Data combining all LPD and all NPD treatment 
groups were used to determine the pooled estimate.
 www.thelancet.com   Vol 391   May 5, 2018 
1849
Series
of cardiovascular remodelling during development in 
utero, affecting heart shape and chamber size.76 Metabolic 
consequences include increased fasting glucose and 
peripheral insulin resistance,75,78 raised plasma lipids, and 
obesity.78 A systematic review79 found no difference in 
cognitive outcomes among children conceived with 
conventional in-vitro fertilisation and those conceived 
naturally, but did identify conflict 
ing findings that require 
clarification among studies of children conceived with 
intracytoplasmic sperm injection.
Collectively, the evidence suggests that assisted re-
productive treatment, like the in-vivo nutritional models 
discussed previously, could alter the development and 
growth trajectory of human embryos, and increase the 
risk of postnatal chronic cardiometabolic dysfunction. 
This legacy is unlikely to be due to parental infertility in 
isolation, since controls in some studies75,77 comprise 
naturally conceived offspring from subfertile parents. 
Moreover, animal models exposed to assisted repro 
ductive 
treatment demonstrate similar long-term consequences 
to human studies, despite normal parental fertility; in- 
vitro fertilisation embryo culture and transfer in mice 
resulted in offspring with altered growth trajectory, 
relative hypertension, cardiovascular abnormalities, and 
glucose and insulin dysfunction.80
Adverse effects on long-term health associated with 
assisted reproductive treatment appear to have an 
epigenetic origin induced during the periconceptional 
period. Children born as a result of assisted reproductive 
treatment have an increased risk of rare imprinting 
disorders associated with DNA methylation errors on 
imprinted genes;81 aberrant methylation of imprinted 
H19 gene has been reported in human cultured embryos.82 
In mouse models, embryo culture could cause imprinted 
genes to lose their allele-specific expression (particularly 
at the growth regulating H19/IGF2 locus), together with 
aberrant methylation patterning in embryos, placental, 
and fetal tissues.83 Assisted reproductive treatment-
induced aberrant epigenetic profiles might also be 
propagated during human pregnancy in fetal and 
placental tissues, and persist into childhood affecting 
genes regulat 
ing growth, such as the IGF2/H19 locus.84 
Media composition—particularly albumin or serum com-
ponents, or ammonium ion accumulation from amino-
acid catabolism—could contribute to altered mouse 
epigenetic status.85 Importantly, even a very limited 
culture period is sufficient to induce epigenetic changes.83 
Embryo culture exposure also modifies ex 
pression and 
methylation of non-imprinted genes in mice, and alters 
expression of DNA methyltransferases.86 For example, 
in mouse models assisted reproductive treatment 
affects the endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) gene, 
implicated in vascular dysfunction, however, modification 
of culture media composition might prevent this effect.87 
Although provocative, more studies in both animal 
models and humans are required to replicate findings 
to date.
Diversity and commonality in periconceptional 
effects
The evidence reviewed previously suggests that peri-
conceptional experience can induce lifelong changes 
in phenotype, affecting disease risk. Beyond these 
nutritional and assisted reproductive treatment con-
ditions, studies in rodents show broad examples of 
periconceptional effects, such as from maternal stress.88 
Moreover, maternal alcohol consumption exclusively 
around conception induced metabolic dysfunction in rat 
adult offspring with evidence of epigenetic disturbance.89 
Maternal systemic inflammation at conception in mouse 
models, although not affecting cardiometabolic health, 
suppressed innate immunity after challenge in adult 
offspring, possibly reflecting a self-protection mechanism 
in a predicted pathogenic postnatal environ 
ment.90 In 
addition, mouse embryo transfer experiments suggest 
that advanced maternal age might adversely affect 
offspring cardio 
metabolic health,91 but the mechanisms 
underlying this age-associated effect are unknown.
The diversity of periconceptional induction conditions 
identified across mammalian species, coupled with clear 
evidence of both maternal and paternal pathways, 
implicates an early window when environmental 
exposures, combined with an inherent capacity for 
developmental plasticity, might confer advantage when 
offspring are exposed to a similar environment post-
natally. During the periconceptional period there is rapid 
and radical molecular, cellular, and morphogenetic re-
structuring; the signalling pathways that control these 
processes are sensitive to multiple molecules and other 
factors within the cellular environment, and could 
provide a mechanistic underpinning for this concept.92 
However, the periconceptional setting of metabolic 
homoeostasis could become maladaptive if conditions 
change, or if nutrient levels induce perturbations in 
metabolism, generating the circumstances underlying 
adverse health risk. A consistent mechanism identified 
across conditions and species has been epigenetic 
variation, a plausible pathway for biological embedding 
of early life exposures, and transmission of pheno-
typic effects throughout life. This mechanism has 
been demonstrated directly through manipulation of 
maternal 
one-carbon 
metabolism 
during 
early 
embryogenesis, potentially reducing the availability of 
methyl donor groups necessary for DNA and his-
tone methylation;93 however, such epigenetic changes 
are not necessarily directly linked with changes in 
gene expression.94 In a sheep model, a periconcept-
ional maternal diet deficient in one-carbon metab-
olite substrates and cofactors (vitamin B12, folate, 
methionine) modified offspring DNA methylation, and 
led to adverse cardio 
metabolic and immune dys-
function.95 Similarly, addition of folate to rodent maternal 
LPD rescued normal expression and DNA methylation of 
metabolic regulators in offspring, possibly protecting 
against cardiovascular dysfunction.96 In mice, a paternal 
 1850 
www.thelancet.com   Vol 391   May 5, 2018
Series
low folate diet altered the profile of sperm DNA 
methylation, changed the placental transcriptome, and 
resulted in offspring with cranio 
facial and musculo-
skeletal malformations.97 Moreover, the negative impact 
of mouse paternal undernutrition on sperm quality, 
testicular oxidative stress, fertility, and offspring fat 
accumulation and dyslipidaemia, are reversed through 
vitamin and antioxidant supplemen 
tation.98 As with 
assisted repro 
ductive treatment, add 
itional studies are 
warranted to define the critical windows and pathways 
linking peri 
natal one-carbon metab 
olism, epigenetic 
variation, and programming of later offspring health.
Conclusion
We propose that there is sufficient evidence from human 
and animal research showing that the periconceptional 
period is a key window during which poor maternal and 
paternal physiology, body composition, metabolism, and 
diet can induce increased risk of chronic disease in 
offspring—a lifetime legacy and major driver of health 
burden in the 21st century. The evidence that similar 
consequences can result from assisted reproductive 
treatment practices sharpens the focus on this window. 
Environmental factors might perturb gametes or early 
embryos, affecting homoeostatic mechanisms, or might 
induce adaptations to developmental environmental 
signals with consequences persisting into adulthood.
This evidence calls for a major re-examination of 
public health policy to protect against future disease 
risk through societal advice on, and greater provision of, 
preconception care,99 as also promoted in the two 
accompanying reviews in this Series. Although a focus 
on parental risk factors during the preconception 
period, such as smoking and excess alcohol intake, is 
wise and well established, new drives to prepare 
nutritionally for pregnancy are crucial, including 
healthy body com 
position, physical activity, and diet for 
both parents.100 Further definition of the underlying 
epigenetic, cellular, metabolic, and physiological mech-
anisms, and the exposures that drive them, is an 
important research agenda that is pivotal to the 
characterisation of more specific recommendations for 
preconception health.
Contributors
TPF, AJW, MAV, and KMG drafted the manuscript. All authors provided 
input into the manuscript and approved the final version of the 
manuscript.
Declaration of interests
KMG reports speakers’ fees from Nestle Nutrition Institute and grants 
from Abbott Nutrition and Nestec. All other authors declare no 
competing interests.
Acknowledgments
The idea for this Series was conceived by JS and developed during a 
4-day symposium, led by MB and JS and funded by The Rank Prize 
Funds, on Developmental Programming for Human Disease: 
Preconception Nutrition and Lifelong Health in Grasmere, UK, in 
February, 2016. We are grateful for research funding from BBSRC 
(BB/1001840/1; BB/F007450/1), European Union FP7 (Epihealth, 278418; 
EpiHealthNet, 317146), and Rosetrees Trust to TPF. KMG is supported by 
the UK Medical Research Council (MC_UU_12011/4), the National 
Institute for Health Research (as an NIHR Senior Investigator 
(NF-SI-0515-10042), and through the NIHR Southampton Biomedical 
Research Centre and by the European Union’s Erasmus+ 
Capacity-Building ENeASEA Project and Seventh Framework Programme 
(FP7/2007-2013), projects EarlyNutrition and ODIN under grant 
agreement numbers 289346 and 613977
. AJW is supported by an Aston 
Research Centre for Healthy Ageing fellowship from Aston University. 
AMP is supported by the UK Medical Research Council (MRC; grant no 
MC-A760-5QX00) and the UK Department for International 
Development (DFID) under the MRC/DFID Concordat agreement. 
MAH is supported by the British Heart Foundation. RS is funded by a 
National Health and Medical Research Fellowship and the Victorian 
Government operational infrastructure support scheme (Australia). 
JCM is supported by the MRC and BBSRC through the Centre for 
Ageing & Vitality (MR/L016354/1).
References
1 
Barker DJ, Thornburg KL. The obstetric origins of health for a 
lifetime. Clin Obstet Gynecol 2013; 56: 511–19.
2 
Godfrey KM, Reynolds RM, Prescott SL, et al. Influence of maternal 
obesity on the long-term health of offspring. 
Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2017; 5: 53–64.
3 
Hanson MA, Gluckman PD. Early developmental conditioning of 
later health and disease: physiology or pathophysiology? Physiol Rev 
2014; 94: 1027–76.
4 
Li L, Lu X, Dean J. The maternal to zygotic transition in mammals. 
Mol Aspects Med 2013; 34: 919–38.
5 
Bedzhov I, Graham SJ, Leung CY, Zernicka-Goetz M. 
Developmental plasticity, cell fate specification and morphogenesis 
in the early mouse embryo. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2014; 
369: 20130538.
6 
Messerschmidt DM, Knowles BB, Solter D. DNA methylation 
dynamics during epigenetic reprogramming in the germline and 
preimplantation embryos. Genes Dev 2014; 28: 812–28.
7 
Gardner DK, Harvey AJ. Blastocyst metabolism. Reprod Fertil Dev 
2015; 27: 638–54.
8 
Nicholas LM, Morrison JL, Rattanatray L, Zhang S, Ozanne SE, 
McMillen IC. The early origins of obesity and insulin resistance: 
timing, programming and mechanisms. Int J Obes (Lond) 2016; 
40: 229–38.
9 
Fleming TP, Watkins AJ, Sun C, Velazquez MA, Smyth NR, 
Eckert JJ. Do little embryos make big decisions? How maternal 
dietary protein restriction can permanently change an embryo. 
Reprod Fertil Dev 2015; 27: 684–92.
10 
Wyman A, Pinto AB, Sheridan R, Moley KH. One-cell zygote 
transfer from diabetic to nondiabetic mouse results in congenital 
malformations and growth retardation in offspring. Endocrinology 
2008; 149: 466–69.
11 
Sinclair KD, Watkins AJ. Parental diet, pregnancy outcomes and 
offspring health: metabolic determinants in developing oocytes and 
embryos. Reprod Fertil Dev 2013; 26: 99–114.
12 
Hansen PJ, Dobbs KB, Denicol AC, Siqueira LG. Sex and the 
preimplantation embryo: implications of sexual dimorphism in the 
preimplantation period for maternal programming of embryonic 
development. Cell Tissue Res 2016; 363: 237–47
.
13 
Sunde A, Brison D, Dumoulin J, et al. Time to take human embryo 
culture seriously. Hum Reprod 2016; 31: 2174–82.
14 
Samuelsson AM, Matthews PA, Argenton M, et al. Diet-induced 
obesity in female mice leads to offspring hyperphagia, adiposity, 
hypertension, and insulin resistance: a novel murine model of 
developmental programming. Hypertension 2008; 51: 383–92.
15  Ruebel ML, Cotter M, Sims CR, et al. Obesity modulates 
inflammation and lipid metabolism oocyte gene expression: 
a single cell transcriptome perspective. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2017; 
102: 2029–38.
16 
Robker RL, Akison LK, Bennett BD, et al. Obese women exhibit 
differences in ovarian metabolites, hormones, and gene expression 
compared with moderate-weight women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
2009; 94: 1533–40.
17 
Yang X, Wu LL, Chura LR, et al. Exposure to lipid-rich follicular 
fluid is associated with endoplasmic reticulum stress and impaired 
oocyte maturation in cumulus-oocyte complexes. Fertil Steril 2012; 
97: 1438–43.
 www.thelancet.com   Vol 391   May 5, 2018 
1851
Series
18 
Leary C, Leese HJ, Sturmey RG. Human embryos from overweight 
and obese women display phenotypic and metabolic abnormalities. 
Hum Reprod 2015; 30: 122–32.
19 
Luzzo KM, Wang Q, Purcell SH, et al. High fat diet induced 
developmental defects in the mouse: oocyte meiotic aneuploidy 
and fetal growth retardation/brain defects. PLoS One 2012; 
7: e49217
.
20 Igosheva N, Abramov AY, Poston L, et al. Maternal diet-induced 
obesity alters mitochondrial activity and redox status in mouse 
oocytes and zygotes. PLoS One 2010; 5: e10074.
21 
Jungheim ES, Schoeller EL, Marquard KL, Louden ED, Schaffer JE, 
Moley KH. Diet-induced obesity model: abnormal oocytes and 
persistent growth abnormalities in the offspring. Endocrinology. 
2010; 151: 4039–46.
22 Nicholas LM, Rattanatray L, MacLaughlin SM, et al. Differential 
effects of maternal obesity and weight loss in the periconceptional 
period on the epigenetic regulation of hepatic insulin-signaling 
pathways in the offspring. FASEB J 2013; 27: 3786–96.
23 Bellver J, Pellicer A, Garcia-Velasco JA, Ballesteros A, Remohi J, 
Meseguer M. Obesity reduces uterine receptivity: clinical experience 
from 9,587 first cycles of ovum donation with normal weight 
donors. Fertil Steril 2013; 100: 1050–58.
24 
Cardozo ER, Karmon AE, Gold J, Petrozza JC, Styer AK. 
Reproductive outcomes in oocyte donation cycles are associated 
with donor BMI. Hum Reprod 2016; 31: 385–92.
25 Tobi EW, Goeman JJ, Monajemi R, et al. DNA methylation 
signatures link prenatal famine exposure to growth and metabolism. 
Nat Commun 2014; 5: 5592.
26 Wang PX, Wang JJ, Lei YX, Xiao L, Luo ZC. Impact of fetal and 
infant exposure to the Chinese Great Famine on the risk of 
hypertension in adulthood. PLoS One 2012; 7: e49720.
27 
Rayco-Solon P, Fulford AJ, Prentice AM. Differential effects of 
seasonality on preterm birth and intrauterine growth restriction in 
rural Africans. Am J Clin Nutr 2005; 81: 134–39.
28 Waterland RA, Kellermayer R, Laritsky E, et al. Season of 
conception in rural gambia affects DNA methylation at putative 
human metastable epialleles. PLoS Genet 2010; 6: e1001252.
29 Dominguez-Salas P, Moore SE, Baker MS, et al. Maternal nutrition 
at conception modulates DNA methylation of human metastable 
epialleles. Nat Commun 2014; 5: 3746.
30  Silver MJ, Kessler NJ, Hennig BJ, et al. Independent genomewide 
screens identify the tumor suppressor VTRNA2-1 as a human 
epiallele responsive to periconceptional environment. 
Genome Biol 2015; 16: 118.
31  Kühnen P, Handke D, Waterland RA, et al. Interindividual 
variation in dna methylation at a putative POMC metastable 
epiallele is associated with obesity. Cell Metab 2016; 24: 502–09.
32 Watkins AJ, Wilkins A, Cunningham C, et al. Low protein diet fed 
exclusively during mouse oocyte maturation leads to behavioural 
and cardiovascular abnormalities in offspring. J Physiol 2008; 
586: 2231–44.
33 Kwong WY, Wild AE, Roberts P, Willis AC, Fleming TP. 
Maternal undernutrition during the preimplantation period of rat 
development causes blastocyst abnormalities and programming of 
postnatal hypertension. Development 2000; 127: 4195–202.
34 
Watkins AJ, Ursell E, Panton R, et al. Adaptive responses by mouse 
early embryos to maternal diet protect fetal growth but predispose 
to adult onset disease. Biol Reprod 2008; 78: 299–306.
35 Torrens C, Snelling TH, Chau R, et al. Effects of pre- and 
periconceptional undernutrition on arterial function in adult 
female sheep are vascular bed dependent. Exp Physiol 2009; 
94: 1024–33.
36  Burrage D, Braddick L, Cleal J, et al. The late gestation fetal 
cardiovascular response to hypoglycaemia is modified by prior 
peri-implantation undernutrition in sheep. J Physiol 2009; 
587: 611–24.
37  Costello PM, Rowlerson A, Astaman NA, et al. Peri-implantation 
and late gestation maternal undernutrition differentially affect 
fetal sheep skeletal muscle development. J Physiol 2008; 
586: 2371–79.
38  Cleal JK, Poore KR, Newman JP, Noakes DE, Hanson MA, 
Green LR. The effect of maternal undernutrition in early gestation 
on gestation length and fetal and postnatal growth in sheep. 
Pediatr Res 2007; 62: 422–27
.
39 Eckert JJ, Porter R, Watkins AJ, et al. Metabolic induction and early 
responses of mouse blastocyst developmental programming 
following maternal low protein diet affecting life-long health. 
PLoS One 2012; 7: e52791.
40 
Watkins AJ, Lucas ES, Marfy-Smith S, Bates N, Kimber SJ, 
Fleming TP. Maternal nutrition modifies trophoblast giant cell 
phenotype and fetal growth in mice. Reproduction 2015; 149: 563–75.
41 
Sun C, Velazquez MA, Marfy-Smith S, et al. Mouse early 
extra-embryonic lineages activate compensatory endocytosis in 
response to poor maternal nutrition. Development 2014; 
141: 1140–50.
42 
Sun C, Denisenko O, Sheth B, et al. Epigenetic regulation of 
histone modifications and Gata6 gene expression induced by 
maternal diet in mouse embryoid bodies in a model of 
developmental programming. BMC Dev Biol 2015; 15: 3.
43 
Denisenko O, Lucas ES, Sun C, et al. Regulation of ribosomal RNA 
expression across the lifespan is fine-tuned by maternal diet before 
implantation. Biochim Biophys Acta 2016; 1859: 906–13.
44  Holland ML, Lowe R, Caton PW, et al. Early-life nutrition modulates 
the epigenetic state of specific rDNA genetic variants in mice. 
Science 2016; 353: 495–98.
45 
Cropley JE, Eaton SA, Aiken A, et al. Male-lineage transmission of 
an acquired metabolic phenotype induced by grand-paternal obesity. 
Mol Metab 2016; 5: 699–708.
46 
Hammoud AO, Gibson M, Stanford J, White G, Carrell DT, 
Peterson M. In vitro fertilization availability and utilization in the 
United States: a study of demographic, social, and economic 
factors. Fertil Steril 2009; 91: 1630–35.
47 
Kort HI, Massey JB, Elsner CW, et al. Impact of body mass index 
values on sperm quantity and quality. J Androl 2006; 27: 450–52.
48 
Tunc O, Bakos HW, Tremellen K. Impact of body mass index on 
seminal oxidative stress. Andrologia 2011; 43: 121–28.
49 
Gaskins AJ, Colaci DS, Mendiola J, Swan SH, Chavarro JE. 
Dietary patterns and semen quality in young men. Hum Reprod 
2012; 27: 2899–907
.
50 Agbaje IM, Rogers DA, McVicar CM, et al. Insulin dependant 
diabetes mellitus: implications for male reproductive function. 
Hum Reprod 2007; 22: 1871–77
.
51 
Seli E, Gardner DK, Schoolcraft WB, Moffatt O, Sakkas D. Extent of 
nuclear DNA damage in ejaculated spermatozoa impacts on 
blastocyst development after in vitro fertilization. Fertil Steril 2004; 
82: 378–83.
52 Bakos HW, Henshaw RC, Mitchell M, Lane M. Paternal body mass 
index is associated with decreased blastocyst development and 
reduced live birth rates following assisted reproductive technology. 
Fertil Steril 2011; 95: 1700–04.
53 Bakos HW, Mitchell M, Setchell BP, Lane M. The effect of paternal 
diet-induced obesity on sperm function and fertilization in a mouse 
model. Int J Androl 2011; 34: 402–10.
54 
Mitchell M, Bakos HW, Lane M. Paternal diet-induced obesity 
impairs embryo development and implantation in the mouse. 
Fertil Steril 2011; 95: 1349–53.
55 Fullston T, Ohlsson Teague EM, Palmer NO, et al. Paternal obesity 
initiates metabolic disturbances in two generations of mice with 
incomplete penetrance to the F2 generation and alters the 
transcriptional profile of testis and sperm microRNA content. 
FASEB J 2013; 27: 4226–43.
56 Palmer NO, Bakos HW, Owens JA, Setchell BP, Lane M. Diet and 
exercise in an obese mouse fed a high-fat diet improve metabolic 
health and reverse perturbed sperm function. 
Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2012; 302: E768–80.
57 
Ng SF, Lin RC, Laybutt DR, Barres R, Owens JA, Morris MJ. 
Chronic high-fat diet in fathers programs beta-cell dysfunction in 
female rat offspring. Nature 2010; 467: 963–66.
58 Pentinat T, Ramon-Krauel M, Cebria J, Diaz R, 
Jimenez-Chillaron JC. Transgenerational inheritance of glucose 
intolerance in a mouse model of neonatal overnutrition. 
Endocrinology 2010; 151: 5617–23.
59 Carone BR, Fauquier L, Habib N, et al. Paternally induced 
transgenerational environmental reprogramming of metabolic gene 
expression in mammals. Cell 2010; 143: 1084–96.
60 Watkins AJ, Sinclair KD. Paternal low protein diet affects adult 
offspring cardiovascular and metabolic function in mice. 
Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2014; 306: H1444–52.
 1852 
www.thelancet.com   Vol 391   May 5, 2018
Series
61 
Watkins AJ, Sirovica S, Stokes B, Isaacs M, Addison O, Martin RA. 
Paternal low protein diet programs preimplantation embryo gene 
expression, fetal growth and skeletal development in mice. 
Biochim Biophys Acta 2017; 1863: 1371–81.
62  Zeybel M, Hardy T, Wong YK, et al. Multigenerational epigenetic 
adaptation of the hepatic wound-healing response. Nat Med 2012; 
18: 1369–77
.
63 Hammoud SS, Nix DA, Hammoud AO, Gibson M, Cairns BR, 
Carrell DT. Genome-wide analysis identifies changes in histone 
retention and epigenetic modifications at developmental and 
imprinted gene loci in the sperm of infertile men. Hum Reprod 2011; 
26: 2558–69.
64 
van der Heijden GW, Ramos L, Baart EB, et al. Sperm-derived 
histones contribute to zygotic chromatin in humans. 
BMC Dev Biol 2008; 8: 34.
65 Ostermeier GC, Dix DJ, Miller D, Khatri P, Krawetz SA. 
Spermatozoal RNA profiles of normal fertile men. Lancet 2002; 
360: 772–77
.
66 Jodar M, Kalko S, Castillo J, Ballesca JL, Oliva R. Differential RNAs 
in the sperm cells of asthenozoospermic patients. Hum Reprod 2012; 
27: 1431–38.
67 
Chen Q, Yan M, Cao Z, et al. Sperm tsRNAs contribute to 
intergenerational inheritance of an acquired metabolic disorder. 
Science 2016; 351: 397–400.
68  Sharma U, Conine CC, Shea JM, et al. Biogenesis and function of 
tRNA fragments during sperm maturation and fertilization in 
mammals. Science 2016; 351: 391–96.
69 Sjoblom C, Roberts CT, Wikland M, Robertson SA. 
Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor alleviates adverse 
consequences of embryo culture on fetal growth trajectory and 
placental morphogenesis. Endocrinology 2005; 146: 2142–53.
70 
Sharkey DJ, Macpherson AM, Tremellen KP, Robertson SA. 
Seminal plasma differentially regulates inflammatory cytokine gene 
expression in human cervical and vaginal epithelial cells. 
Mol Hum Reprod 2007; 13: 491–501.
71 
Bromfield JJ, Schjenken JE, Chin PY, Care AS, Jasper MJ, 
Robertson SA. Maternal tract factors contribute to paternal seminal 
fluid impact on metabolic phenotype in offspring. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2014; 111: 2200–05.
72 
Qin JB, Sheng XQ, Wu D, et al. Worldwide prevalence of adverse 
pregnancy outcomes among singleton pregnancies after in vitro 
fertilization/intracytoplasmic sperm injection: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Arch Gynecol Obstet 2017; 295: 285–301.
73 
Kleijkers SH, Mantikou E, Slappendel E, et al. Influence of embryo 
culture medium (G5 and HTF) on pregnancy and perinatal outcome 
after IVF: a multicenter RCT. Hum Reprod 2016; 31: 2219–30.
74 
Kleijkers SH, van Montfoort AP, Smits LJ, et al. IVF culture 
medium affects post-natal weight in humans during the first 2 years 
of life. Hum Reprod 2014; 29: 661–69.
75 
Ceelen M, van Weissenbruch MM, Vermeiden JP, van Leeuwen FE, 
Delemarre-van de Waal HA. Cardiometabolic differences in children 
born after in vitro fertilization: follow-up study. 
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2008; 93: 1682–88.
76 
Valenzuela-Alcaraz B, Crispi F, Bijnens B, et al. Assisted 
reproductive technologies are associated with cardiovascular 
remodeling in utero that persists postnatally. Circulation 2013; 
128: 1442–50.
77 
Scherrer U, Rimoldi SF, Rexhaj E, et al. Systemic and pulmonary 
vascular dysfunction in children conceived by assisted reproductive 
technologies. Circulation 2012; 125: 1890–96.
78 
Gkourogianni A, Kosteria I, Telonis AG, et al. Plasma metabolomic 
profiling suggests early indications for predisposition to latent 
insulin resistance in children conceived by ICSI. PLoS One 2014; 
9: e94001.
79 
Rumbold AR, Moore VM, Whitrow MJ, et al. The impact of specific 
fertility treatments on cognitive development in childhood and 
adolescence: a systematic review. Hum Reprod 2017; 32: 1489–1507
.
80 Watkins AJ, Platt D, Papenbrock T, et al. Mouse embryo culture 
induces changes in postnatal phenotype including raised systolic 
blood pressure. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007; 104: 5449–54.
81 
Lazaraviciute G, Kauser M, Bhattacharya S, Haggarty P. A systematic 
review and meta-analysis of DNA methylation levels and imprinting 
disorders in children conceived by IVF/ICSI compared with children 
conceived spontaneously. Hum Reprod Update 2014; 20: 840–52.
82 Chen SL, Shi XY, Zheng HY, Wu FR, Luo C. Aberrant DNA 
methylation of imprinted H19 gene in human preimplantation 
embryos. Fertil Steril 2010; 94: 2356–58.
83 Rivera RM, Stein P, Weaver JR, Mager J, Schultz RM, 
Bartolomei MS. Manipulations of mouse embryos prior to 
implantation result in aberrant expression of imprinted genes on 
day 9.5 of development. Hum Mol Genet 2008; 17: 1–14.
84 
Turan N, Katari S, Gerson LF, et al. Inter- and intra-individual 
variation in allele-specific DNA methylation and gene expression 
in children conceived using assisted reproductive technology. 
PLoS Genet 2010; 6: e1001033.
85 Khosla S, Dean W, Brown D, Reik W, Feil R. Culture of 
preimplantation mouse embryos affects fetal development and 
the expression of imprinted genes. Biol Reprod 2001; 64: 918–26.
86 Horii T, Suetake I, Yanagisawa E, et al. The Dnmt3b splice variant 
is specifically expressed in in vitro-manipulated blastocysts and 
their derivative ES cells. J Reprod Dev 2011; 57: 579–85.
87 
Rexhaj E, Pireva A, Paoloni-Giacobino A, et al. Prevention of 
vascular dysfunction and arterial hypertension in mice generated 
by assisted reproductive technologies by addition of melatonin to 
culture media. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2015; 
309: H1151–56.
88  Prasad S, Tiwari M, Pandey AN, Shrivastav TG, Chaube SK. 
Impact of stress on oocyte quality and reproductive outcome. 
J Biomed Sci 2016; 23: 36.
89 Gårdebjer EM, Anderson ST, Pantaleon M, Wlodek ME, 
Moritz KM. Maternal alcohol intake around the time of 
conception causes glucose intolerance and insulin insensitivity in 
rat offspring, which is exacerbated by a postnatal high-fat diet. 
FASEB J 2015; 29: 2690–701.
90 Williams CL, Teeling JL, Perry VH, Fleming TP. Mouse maternal 
systemic inflammation at the zygote stage causes blunted 
cytokine responsiveness in lipopolysaccharide-challenged adult 
offspring. BMC Biol 2011; 9: 49.
91 
Velazquez MA, Smith CG, Smyth NR, Osmond C, Fleming TP. 
Advanced maternal age causes adverse programming of mouse 
blastocysts leading to altered growth and impaired 
cardiometabolic health in post-natal life. Hum Reprod 2016; 
31: 1970–80.
92  Basson MA. Signaling in cell differentiation and morphogenesis. 
Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2012; 4: 1–21.
93 Steegers-Theunissen RP, Twigt J, Pestinger V, Sinclair KD. 
The periconceptional period, reproduction and long-term health 
of offspring: the importance of one-carbon metabolism. 
Hum Reprod Update 2013; 19: 640–55.
94 
McKay JA, Adriaens M, Evelo CT, Ford D, Mathers JC. 
Gene promoter DNA methylation patterns have a limited role in 
orchestrating transcriptional changes in the fetal liver in response 
to maternal folate depletion during pregnancy. Mol Nutr Food Res 
2016; 60: 2031–42.
95 Sinclair KD, Allegrucci C, Singh R, et al. DNA methylation, 
insulin resistance, and blood pressure in offspring determined by 
maternal periconceptional B vitamin and methionine status. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007; 104: 19351–56.
96  Lillycrop KA, Phillips ES, Jackson AA, Hanson MA, Burdge GC. 
Dietary protein restriction of pregnant rats induces and folic acid 
supplementation prevents epigenetic modification of hepatic gene 
expression in the offspring. J Nutr 2005; 135: 1382–86.
97 
Lambrot R, Xu C, Saint-Phar S, et al. Low paternal dietary folate 
alters the mouse sperm epigenome and is associated with 
negative pregnancy outcomes. Nat Commun 2013; 4: 2889.
98 McPherson NO, Fullston T, Kang WX, et al. Paternal 
under-nutrition programs metabolic syndrome in offspring which 
can be reversed by antioxidant/vitamin food fortification in 
fathers. Sci Rep 2016; 6: 27010.
99 Barker D, Barker M, Fleming T, Lampl M. Developmental biology: 
support mothers to secure future public health. Nature 2013; 
504: 209–11.
100  Hanson M, Godfrey K, Poston L, Bustreo F, Stephenson J. 
Annual Report of the Chief Medical Officer, 2014 The Health of 
the 51%: Women, Chapter 5: Pre-conception health. 
December, 2015. http://www.appgcontinence.org.uk/cmo-
report-2014.pdf (accessed Jan 17, 2018).
