 REVIEW
published: 22 June 2017
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00433
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
1
June 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 433
Edited by:
Billy Sperlich,
University of Würzburg, Germany
Reviewed by:
Rodger Kram,
University of Colorado Boulder,
United States
Beat Knechtle,
University of Zurich, Switzerland
*Correspondence:
Jared R. Fletcher
jrfletch@ucalgary.ca
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Exercise Physiology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Physiology
Received: 04 April 2017
Accepted: 06 June 2017
Published: 22 June 2017
Citation:
Fletcher JR and MacIntosh BR (2017)
Running Economy from a Muscle
Energetics Perspective.
Front. Physiol. 8:433.
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00433
Running Economy from a Muscle
Energetics Perspective
Jared R. Fletcher* and Brian R. MacIntosh
Human Performance Laboratory, Faculty of Kinesiology, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada
The economy of running has traditionally been quantified from the mass-specific oxygen
uptake; however, because fuel substrate usage varies with exercise intensity, it is more
accurate to express running economy in units of metabolic energy. Fundamentally, the
understanding of the major factors that influence the energy cost of running (Erun) can be
obtained with this approach. Erun is determined by the energy needed for skeletal muscle
contraction. Here, we approach the study of Erun from that perspective. The amount
of energy needed for skeletal muscle contraction is dependent on the force, duration,
shortening, shortening velocity, and length of the muscle. These factors therefore dictate
the energy cost of running. It is understood that some determinants of the energy
cost of running are not trainable: environmental factors, surface characteristics, and
certain anthropometric features. Other factors affecting Erun are altered by training: other
anthropometric features, muscle and tendon properties, and running mechanics. Here,
the key features that dictate the energy cost during distance running are reviewed in the
context of skeletal muscle energetics.
Keywords: energy cost, muscle contraction, oxygen consumption, respiratory exchanges, training-induced
changes
INTRODUCTION
Importance of Erun to Distance Running Performance
Endurance running performance is determined by a combination of physiological, anthropometric,
and biomechanical factors. These factors include a high maximal oxygen uptake ( ˙
VO2max), the
ability to minimize disturbance to homeostasis while sustaining a higher fraction of ˙
VO2max and
a low energy cost to run (Erun) at that high fraction of ˙
VO2max. With few exceptions, world-class
male marathon running performances are achieved by runners who possess ˙
VO2max -values above
75 ml·kg−1·min−1 and the fraction of ˙
VO2max that can be sustained for the marathon distance is at
least 80% of ˙
VO2max (Foster and Lucia, 2007). Using the American College of Sports Medicine’s
metabolic equations for the energy cost of running over level ground, a mean ˙
VO2 of 71.9
ml·kg−1·min−1 is required to achieve the current marathon world-best time of 2:02:57. Assuming
this runner has a body mass of 56 kg and their respiratory exchange ratio is 0.95, this oxygen uptake
would equate to an Erun of 4.39 J·kg−1·m−1. Erun values this low are frequently reported (Foster and
Lucia, 2007; Fletcher et al., 2009; Shaw et al., 2013), but assuming the marathon distance could
be sustained at 85% ˙
VO2max, this runner would require a ˙
VO2max near 85 ml·kg−1·min−1. A
marathoner, with an excellent Erun of 3.77 J·kg−1·m−1 (Fletcher et al., 2009) would only require a
˙
VO2max of 77.5 ml·kg−1·min−1, so it is likely the runner who is going to break the sub-2 h marathon
will be one with extraordinary Erun. But how is an extraordinary Erun achieved?
 Fletcher and MacIntosh
Running Economy from a Muscle Energetics Perspective
It is known that Erun is likely influenced by a number of
physiological and biomechanical factors and several excellent
reviews have been written on the topic in the last 25 years
(Morgan et al., 1989; Morgan and Craib, 1992; Saunders et al.,
2004; McCann and Higginson, 2008; Lacour and Bourdin,
2015).None of these reviews has approached Erun from a muscle
energetics standpoint. Recently, we have estimated that the active
skeletal muscle energy cost represents the vast majority of the
total metabolic cost of running (Fletcher and MacIntosh, 2015).
Specifically, we have estimated that the energy cost of triceps
surae muscles contraction during the running stride of highly-
trained runners represents nearly 25% of the total metabolic cost
of running. This proportion increases to nearly 40% in lesser-
trained male and female runners (Figure 1). The energy cost
of other active muscles, of course, also contribute to the total
metabolic cost of running. Consequently, probing the specific
factors that dictate the muscle energy cost during running,
which include running speed, body mass, and muscle-tendon
mechanical and morphological properties (tendon stiffness,
fascicle length) should provide unique insight into the underlying
factors that determine Erun and may reveal the mechanisms
behind changes in Erun with training, disuse or disease.
Quantifying the Energetics of Running
ATP is resynthesized from ADP and Pi using the energy
released during oxidative phosphorylation. O2 is consumed
when it accepts electrons at the end of the electron transport
chain to form ATP via ATP synthase. Thus, ˙
VO2 reflects the
quantity of ATP used when aerobic metabolism can provide
all of the energy at a given running speed. This is only true:
(1) when sufficient time is given to achieve a physiological
steady-state and (2) when the speed is less than that which
results in accumulation of blood lactate. This latter point is
important because at speeds greater than the anaerobic threshold,
steady-state conditions are unlikely as a result of the ˙
VO2
slow component and non-aerobic metabolism contributes to
the energy cost. Understanding skeletal muscle energetics will
ultimately lead to a better understanding of Erun.
SKELETAL MUSCLE ENERGETICS
Without muscle contraction, running would be impossible. Here,
we review the general factors that influence the energy cost of
running, and try to put them into the context of understanding
the role that muscle contraction and muscle energetics plays in
contributing to variability in the Erun. Muscle energy cost in vivo
arises from cross-bridge turnover as well as the energy cost of
ion pumping, primarily from the Na+-K+ ATPase and the sarco-
endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ ATPase (SERCA) pumps (Barclay,
2015). The energy cost associated with Ca2+ re-uptake represents
the majority of the energy cost associated with ion pumping
(Homsher and Kean, 1978).
Combining the energy cost of SERCA and Na+-K+ ATPase
pumps accounts for 30–40% of the energy used during an
isometric contraction, where the energy associated with cross-
bridge cycling as a result of shortening is not considered
(Homsher et al., 1972; Barclay et al., 1993; Barclay, 1996). When
FIGURE 1 | Erun and muscle energy cost in male and female runners.
Whole-body energy cost per stride (top) estimated across three relative
running speeds expressed as % of speed at lactate threshold in three groups:
Elite males (EM), trained males (TM), and trained females (TF). Bottom: AT
energy release (solid bars) relative to the estimated muscle energy cost
(hatched bars) for each group and speed, respectively. EMc, TMc, and TFc
represent the energy cost for elite males, trained males, and trained females,
respectively. From Fletcher and MacIntosh (2015).
shortening occurs, the proportion of the energy cost attributed
to non-cross-bridge ATPases becomes less because shortening
considerably increases the cross-bridge turnover (Smith et al.,
2005). Considering this energy cost of shortening, a fixed-end
muscle contraction is more costly in the initial part of the
contraction when force is rising because the fascicles shorten
against the series elastic components of the muscle. During
locomotion, most muscle contractions are of short duration
(Novacheck, 1998), so this is a relevant aspect of the energy cost
of running.
Turnover of Cross-Bridges: Isometric
Contractions
During an isometric contraction, energy cost is elevated
compared to the resting state. Since, by definition no external
work is performed during an isometric contraction, the energy
cost must arise primarily from time-dependent cross-bridge
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
2
June 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 433
 Fletcher and MacIntosh
Running Economy from a Muscle Energetics Perspective
cycling. Barclay et al. (2010a) have previously estimated this
rate to be 1.5 ATP split·s−1 per cross-bridge in frog sartorius
muscle at 0◦C. In human quadriceps muscle at physiological
temperature, assuming the ATP turnover rate is 1 mmol·kg−1
wet wt·s−1 (Katz et al., 1986), each cross-bridge splits 5.6 ATP
·s−1. This assumes that the ATP splitting cycle requires 180 ms.
A cross-bridge duty cycle of 0.33 (Barclay et al., 2010a) would
require the cross-bridge be attached for 60 ms; the remaining
120 ms presumably being required for the cross-bridge to return
to a state from which it can attach again. This duty cycle
would be fiber-type specific; a smaller duty cycle is associated
with fast-twitch fibers. Thus, the energy required during an
isometric contraction is dependent solely on the required force
(which dictates the number of cross-bridges in parallel required
to generate that force) and the contraction duration. However,
recognizing that as force develops in a fixed-end contraction, the
tendon is stretched thereby requiring shortening of the muscle
fascicles, additional cross-bridge cycles will occur. Muscle length
must also be considered. Each sarcomere in series adds to the
energy needed for the muscle contraction because the same force
must be generated in each half-sarcomere.
Shortening Contractions
Shortening at a velocity that requires a faster turnover than the
isometric cross-bridge turnover rate can increase the rate of
turnover of individual cross-bridges. This velocity is dependent
on myosin isoform; fast-twitch myosin isoforms will reach
this velocity at a slower shortening velocity because their
isometric cross-bridge cycle is faster. This velocity beyond which
the shortening energy cost exceeds the isometric cost is the
equivalent of a cross-bridge sweep per isometric cross-bridge
cycle time for each half sarcomere of fiber length. At the optimal
velocity, that for which efficiency is maximal, the energy cost of
a shortening contraction is 2–3-fold greater than that expected
during an isometric contraction. This increase in energy demand
is referred to as shortening-induced increase in ATP turnover
(Woledge et al., 1988). The amount of ATP split, and therefore
energy use by the muscle is increased in proportion to the amount
of shortening within each half sarcomere and is dependent on
the working stroke (or cross-bridge sweep) of each cross-bridge.
Because the force per cross-bridge decreases with increasing
velocity (de Tombe and Ter Keurs, 1990), increased activation
is needed (more cross-bridges in parallel) to maintain the same
force during shortening. Therefore, the shortening energy cost
is also proportional to shortening velocity (Hill, 1938; Homsher
et al., 1972).
Energy Cost of Muscle Contraction
Running can be considered a series of voluntary muscle
contractions; the force of contraction being dictated by the
running speed and the controlled motion of the lower leg.
The required level of voluntary muscle activation is primarily
determined by the force-length-velocity relationships of the
muscle and the need for force or movement through a
specific angular displacement. The level of muscle activation,
a combination of motor unit recruitment and rate coding or
increased frequency of activation of already active motor units
(Fuglevand et al., 1993), dictates the energy cost since the rate
of energy use depends on the number of fibers activated, the
cross-bridge turnover rate, and the number of cross-bridge cycles
required. The muscle volume-specific rate of energy use is greater
in fast-twitch muscles during isometric contractions and slow
shortening because faster muscles have higher rates of time-
dependent cross-bridge cycling (Rall, 1985; Katz et al., 1986).
However, once the velocity of shortening achieves a rate of ATP
splitting that exceeds the isometric cross-bridge turnover rate for
slow-twitch myosin, the fiber-type difference disappears because
cross-bridges disengage as a result of fast shortening, not because
of fiber-type dependent cross-bridge turnover rate.
The energetic cost of generating force is also dependent on the
average length of the activated muscle fiber. For muscles having
similar fiber type compositions and operating under similar
levels of activation and shortening velocities (relative to length),
muscles with shorter fascicles (fewer sarcomeres in series) can
be expected to consume proportionally less ATP per unit force
generated compared to muscles with longer fascicles (Roberts
et al., 1998b). The volume of active muscle recruited to generate
the required force is the product of fascicle length and active
cross-sectional area. Consequently, a muscle with longer fascicles
will involve a greater active volume of muscle and therefore, a
greater amount of ATP will be consumed.
Force-Length Relationship
It has been known for decades that the isometric force a muscle
can produce depends on its average sarcomere length whereby
an optimal muscle length exists. Muscle contraction at longer or
shorter lengths than this optimal length results in less isometric
muscle force (Ramsey and Street, 1940; Gordon et al., 1966). As
it relates to Erun, for a given amount of muscle force required,
the necessary level of activation can be minimized if the muscle is
operating near optimal length. In keeping the level of activation
low, muscle energy cost, and therefore Erun can be reduced. At
lengths longer and shorter than optimal length, the energy cost
for ion transport is relatively higher.
When considering the energetics of muscle contraction, it
is also important to include the absolute length of the muscle
fascicles. The force of contraction is dictated by the number of
cross-bridges engaged in parallel. For each sarcomere in series,
the same number of cross-bridges must be engaged. Therefore,
the number of sarcomeres in series will affect the energy cost
in a proportional way. This cost of increased fascicle length for
isometric contractions is countered by the decrease in relative
velocity which is achieved with more sarcomeres in series for
dynamic contractions.
Force-Velocity Relationship
The relationships between mechanical work, efficiency and speed
of shortening were first demonstrated by AV Hill almost 100
years ago (Hill, 1922). Since the rate of mechanical work
(or power output) is the product of force and velocity, the
maximum power output that can be generated by a muscle, or
group of muscles, is defined and limited by their force-velocity
relationships. The force per cross-bridge apparently decreases
linearly with shortening velocity (ter Keurs and de Tombe,
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
3
June 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 433
 Fletcher and MacIntosh
Running Economy from a Muscle Energetics Perspective
FIGURE 2 | The effect of greater shortening velocity on muscle activation to
achieve a target force. The force-velocity relationship, scaled to maximal
isometric force (Po) and maximal velocity of shortening (Vmax) (Chow and
Darling, 1999). The short dashed and solid lines represent 50 and 85% of
maximal motor unit activation, respectively. The long dashed line represents
maximal activation. When force can be generated isometrically, target force (P)
can be achieved with minimal motor unit activation, as shown by the open
square. When shortening is permitted, additional motor unit activation is
required (filled square). Used with kind permission of Springer
Science+Business Media.
1993), so the hyperbolic shape of the force-velocity relationship
is dependent on decreasing numbers of cross-bridges bound
as velocity increases. As velocity increases, recruitment must
increase to maintain the required force. This has been extensively
described previously (Chow and Darling, 1999; MacIntosh and
Holash, 2000; Sargeant, 2007), and it is acknowledged that force,
not power is the determining factor for muscle activation during
running. For a given force requirement, the level of activation
and therefore the energy cost, can be minimized if the muscle
can operate at a slower shortening velocity (Figure 2).
Motor Unit Recruitment
The muscle’s in vivo force-length and force-velocity relationships
dictate the magnitude of activation required to achieve a given
force and velocity of shortening (Praagman et al., 2006) at a
given joint configuration (muscle length). The force-velocity
relationship dictates that force production for a given level
of activation is maximal when that force can be developed
isometrically (Fenn and Marsh, 1935; Roberts et al., 1997;
Biewener, 1998a) and decreases as shortening velocity increases.
Stainsby and Lambert (1979) suggest that the major determinant
of metabolic cost of muscle contraction in voluntary movement
should be motor unit recruitment. This notion is consistent
with the observation that there is a unique bicycling cadence
associated with the best efficiency (Coast and Welch, 1985)
and this cadence corresponds with the cadence with the lowest
magnitude of electromyographic (EMG) activity (MacIntosh
et al., 2000). Load, shortening, and velocity of shortening have
less impact on the magnitude of energy requirement (Stainsby
and Lambert, 1979). For submaximal contractions like those
exerted during distance running, the level of activation needed
to generate a given force can be minimized when the fascicles are
allowed to develop force isometrically.
Keeping the underlying factors dictating energy use in muscle
in mind (force, length, velocity, shortening, and activation), we
now turn our attention to the energy cost of running. The factors
that are not affected by training will be considered first. This
will be followed by an examination of those factors which can
be affected by training.
FACTORS NOT AFFECTED BY TRAINING
Erun can acutely change under the influence of factors other
than those related to training. These factors include: environment
(wind, temperature, altitude), surface features, footwear, and
anthropometry. Each of these factors will be presented in the
context of impact on the energy cost of running.
Environment
Wind
The energy required to overcome air-resistance is a function
of the runner’s frontal surface area and drag coefficient, the air
density (altitude, humidity, and pressure) and the relative speed
of movement of air past the runner. Pugh (1971) found that work
required to overcome air resistance was a linear function of the
sum of running speed plus wind velocity, squared. As such, when
running at speeds approaching the 2-h marathon barrier (5.8
m·s−1) under still wind conditions, the extra energy required to
overcome air resistance is ∼8% higher compared to running with
no air resistance (Pugh, 1970). Presumably the extra energy is
required due to the need to generate greater horizontal propelling
force. This would relate to the need for increased motor unit
recruitment in muscles contributing to the forward propulsion.
This extra energy can be nearly abolished by drafting behind
other runners, which saves 80% of the extra energy required to
overcome wind resistance (Pugh, 1971).
Temperature
High environmental temperatures lower a runner’s ability to
dissipate heat. Increasing heat storage impacts cross-bridge
turnover, potentially increasing the energy cost of muscle
contraction, and also results in sweating and potentially
dehydration.
Heat
exchange
between
the
body
and
the
environment is achieved by conduction, convection, radiation,
and heat loss is also achieved by evaporation (Cheuvront
and Haymes, 2001). Any imbalance between heat generated
by metabolism and net heat lost by these heat dissipating
mechanisms will result in change in heat storage (Bergeron,
2014). Wind serves a thermoregulatory function in that cooler
air crosses the skin during running, allowing greater heat loss
by convection. This accelerated heat loss will result in lower
heat storage for a given speed of running, but heat loss by
convection would be considerably less while drafting, so less
heat generated through a lower Erun will likely be the key feature
of a record-attempt at the sub 2-h marathon. A high ratio of
surface area to mass will also favor heat loss by conduction,
convection, radiation, and evaporation. A lower Erun for a given
environmental temperature and humidity will result in less heat
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
4
June 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 433
 Fletcher and MacIntosh
Running Economy from a Muscle Energetics Perspective
storage, and a longer exercise duration is permitted. Similarly, a
runner with a comparatively low Erun can run at a faster speed,
for the same rate of heat storage. Where less heat is generated,
less energy is consumed by the heart for peripheral circulation
of warmed blood from the core to the skin for cooling purposes
(Rowell et al., 1969; MacDougall et al., 1974).
Altitude
Measured at a common absolute speed (255 m·min−1),
overground sea-level oxygen cost of running is ∼4.5% greater
than that measured at an altitude of 2,300 m (Daniels et al.,
1977). On the treadmill at sea level, there is still 4% greater
oxygen cost of running at sea level, so most of the altitude
dependent difference is not related to overcoming air resistance.
Thus, the energy cost of overcoming air resistance must be only
0.5% of the total energy cost at this speed of running. The only
mechanism suggested for the apparent 4% lower oxygen cost at
altitude was the possibility of differences in the anaerobic energy
contribution at altitude (Daniels et al., 1977). The possibility
for anaerobic contribution at altitude when there was not at
sea level relates to the compromised maximal oxygen uptake
and the lower intensity associated with the anaerobic threshold
at altitude. Any contribution by anaerobic metabolism would
decrease the oxygen demand, even if the total energy cost was
not different.
When converting the oxygen cost to the energy cost, the
energy equivalent of the oxygen uptake increases at altitude
because of a greater reliance on carbohydrate. For the same
energy yield, oxygen uptake would be lower. When running the
same absolute speed at altitude as at sea level, this speed may
approach the compromised anaerobic threshold, even if it is not
exceeded, thus increasing the reliance on carbohydrate.
It was also hypothesized that the thinner air at altitude
presents less resistance to ventilation, and therefore a lower work
of breathing at altitude. However, Daniels et al. (1977) showed
that pulmonary ventilation at altitude was 15–20% greater
compared to at sea-level (110 L·min−1 vs. 96 L·min−1) and it was
concluded that there was not a lower energy cost of ventilation.
Estimating the energy cost of ventilation at sea-level (96 L·min−1)
and at altitude (110 L·min−1) according to Mazess (1968), yields
0.46 and 0.33 kJ·kg−1·km−1 at sea-level and altitude, respectively.
Thus, the lower work of ventilation at altitude requires 0.13
kJ·kg−1·km−1 less energy further contributing to the lower Erun
at altitude when Erun is presented as an energy equivalent. Taken
together, the differences between sea-level and altitude oxygen
cost may likely be explained by the lower work of ventilation
and increased energy per liter of oxygen uptake and possible
anaerobic contribution, for some of the female subjects, that was
not accounted for in the measurement of ˙
VO2 alone.
Surface Features
Surface Friction
Running straight ahead at a constant speed on a dry, smooth,
flat surface requires friction between shoe (or foot) and
surface (Frederick, 1986). When on a slippery or wet surface,
where the coefficient of friction is reduced, subjects tend to
modify their kinematics (and therefore use a less-than-optimal
movement pattern) to compensate for soft, energy-dissipating,
and uneven surfaces (Frederick, 1983). For example, a reduced
coefficient of friction probably involves greater muscle activation
prior to footstrike in order to stabilize posture in uncertain
circumstances. Presumably, this also elevates Erun, although
further research is required to determine the magnitude of this
increase in muscle activation and corresponding increase in
energy cost as a result of the less than optimal kinematics caused
by lower surface friction.
Surface Stiffness
Erun is also elevated on soft and uneven surfaces such as sand
compared to grass or concrete; (Zamparo et al., 1992; Lejeune
et al., 1998; Pinnington and Dawson, 2001). The elevated Erun
on sand has been attributed to a reduction in the re-utilization of
elastic energy and/or the energy lost due to backwards translation
of the foot during push-off. It has also been hypothesized
that an elevated muscle-tendon work while running on sand
contributes to the elevated Erun (Lejeune et al., 1998). In terms
of the muscle energetics presented earlier, these mechanisms
(foot slip, increased work and decreased tendon strain energy
release) translate to an increased muscle shortening and probably
increased motor unit recruitment. It would certainly require
increased muscle coactivation for stability when running on an
unstable surface. Both of these factors would increase the energy
cost of muscle contraction, contributing to increased Erun.
Footwear
The additional mass of footwear predictably increases Erun by
∼1% per 100 grams of added mass per shoe (Frederick et al.,
1984). This 1% increase in Erun is fairly consistent across a range
of running speeds (Franz et al., 2012) and also degrades running
performance (e.g., 3,000 m time-trial time) to a similar extent
(Hoogkamer et al., 2016). It has been suggested that a potential
mechanism by which footwear might reduce Erun is because
footwear serves to reduce some of the impact shock. A reduction
in Erun of 3% with well-cushioned shoes compared to poorly-
cushioned ones supports this notion (Frederick, 1986). These
authors developed a “cost of cushioning” hypothesis whereby a
portion of the measured Erun in well-cushioned shoes is reduced
because less muscle activation is required to brace for the force
of impact with the ground. To support this hypothesis, Erun was
compared between well-cushioned shod and unshod conditions.
The former condition would incur an estimated increase in Erun
as a result of the mass of the shoes. Despite the added mass
of the shoes, Erun was not different between shod and unshod
conditions.
Stearne et al. (2016) proposed that a portion of the metabolic
energy required during running could be saved by the arch
spring. These authors demonstrated that restricting foot arch
compression increased Erun by 6%. This elevated metabolic cost
was not seen during walking or incline running, due apparently
to the smaller role of elastic energy savings in these gaits. Their
results further support the notion that orthotic insoles and arch-
support footwear, which are often prescribed to runners, may
reduce the foot arch’s elastic energy storage and result in an
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
5
June 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 433
 Fletcher and MacIntosh
Running Economy from a Muscle Energetics Perspective
elevated Erun while wearing these types of orthotics or shoes (Berg
and Sady, 1985).
It has also been speculated that the design of footwear midsole
construction may enhance energy return, and therefore Erun.
Worobets et al. (2013) have shown a small (0.9–1.1%) but
significant difference in ˙
VO2 between an energy-return midsole
(Adidas BoostTM) and a conventional ethyl vinyl acetate midsole
in runners running below the anaerobic threshold. To eliminate
any confounding factors such as shoe construction, Tung et al.
(2014) isolated the effect of cushioning on Erun by attaching
the same cushioning foam to the belt of a treadmill. In so
doing, Erun was reduced by 1.6% when runners ran unshod on
the cushioned belt in comparison to running unshod without
the cushioning. Interestingly, Erun was not different between
shod and unshod conditions on a normal treadmill belt, likely
because the beneficial effects of cushioning were balanced by the
detrimental effects of added shoe mass. These results suggest (1)
shoe mass can have a meaningful influence on the measured
Erun and (2) there exists a trade-off between running in very
light running shoes at the expense of extra cushioning in order
to minimize Erun. Runners are also able to assess shoe comfort
reliably (Hennig et al., 1996) and it has been hypothesized
that comfort could relate to performance (Nigg, 2001). In fact,
oxygen cost was 0.7% lower in shoes deemed “most comfortable”
compared to those deemed “least comfortable” (Luo et al., 2009).
Further, studies into the specific mechanism for a lower Erun with
particular reference to muscle energetics associated with some
footwear design (kinematics, kinetics, muscle activity etc.) are
needed.
Anthropometry
Ankle and Foot Morphology
Erun is determined primarily by the energy needed for muscle
contraction of sufficient average force to support body weight
for the full stride duration (Kram and Taylor, 1990). Therefore,
average muscle force and thus muscle energy cost is related to
the average vertical force (Fz) during stance, as dictated by body
mass and the Fz moment arm and the moment arm of the Achilles
tendon (Ker et al., 1987; Carrier et al., 1994). The ratio of Fz
moment arm to that of the Achilles tendon is referred to as the
gear ratio. Often, the Fz moment arm length is interpolated from
known forefoot length. In this case, the ratio of forefoot length to
AT moment arm is referred to as the foot lever ratio (Kunimasa
et al., 2014). The Fz moment arm can be altered by changing ankle
joint kinematics during the stance phase. This has important
implications to Erun since changes in joint angle configuration
at touch-down result in changes in the Fz moment arm. The
relative change in the gear ratio for a given Fz will determine the
magnitude of the required muscle force. Reductions in the gear
ratio result in a reduction in muscle forces and this should be
reflected as lower energy cost.
During running, the ankle angle at touchdown is nearly 90◦,
and the excursion during stance in good runners is nearly 10◦
more than in elite runners (Cavanagh et al., 1977; Williams
and Cavanagh, 1987). A small excursion in the same amount
of time translates to lower angular velocity and a corresponding
slower velocity of muscle contraction of the ankle plantarflexors.
FIGURE 3 | The relationship between the rate of energy use to maintain a
given torque (HbO2·impulse−1) and magnitude of muscle fascicle shortening
(top) and fascicle shortening velocity (bottom). The open diamonds represent
measurements made during a fixed-end contraction (ISO). The filled squares
represent those measurements made when additional shortening was
permitted (KIN). From Fletcher et al. (2013a).
A slower velocity of contraction results in lower level of
activation needed to generate a given force and consequently
lower energy cost of muscle contraction for these muscles.
Using measurements of hemoglobin desaturation during blood
flow occluded plantarflexion exercise (which was assumed to be
proportional to energy use), Fletcher et al. (2013a) showed that
a faster muscle fascicle shortening and/or velocity of fascicle
shortening elevates energy use. The relationship between muscle
energy cost, shortening, and shortening velocity is shown in
Figure 3.
A shorter AT moment arm, measured at rest, has been
associated with a lower oxygen cost of running (Scholz et al.,
2008; Mooses et al., 2014). The advantage of a short AT moment
arm in reducing Erun has been attributed to increases in the elastic
energy storage/release from the AT during running since larger
AT forces for a given joint moment are required with a short AT
moment arm; more elastic strain energy is stored and released
in a tendon when AT forces are higher. To claim the benefit of
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
6
June 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 433
 Fletcher and MacIntosh
Running Economy from a Muscle Energetics Perspective
a short moment arm is dependent on the estimated extra elastic
energy storage ignores the fact that additional muscle energy cost
would be required to generate the additional force production of
the muscles. This extra muscle energy cost has been estimated
to be considerably higher than the extra energy stored in and
subsequently released from the tendon (Fletcher and MacIntosh,
2015).
Shorter moment arms also permit slower muscle shortening
velocity to achieve a given joint angular velocity (Nagano and
Komura, 2003) and require less shortening for a given joint
excursion. This slower velocity would permit a higher force
without much increase in activation. As previously suggested
however, the elevated AT force associated with a shorter moment
arm may also incur a substantial muscle energy cost (Fletcher and
MacIntosh, 2015) and as such, a longer AT moment arm may help
reduce Erun by reducing the required muscle force and level of
muscle activation to sustain a given joint moment. To support
this hypothesis, elite Kenyan long-distance runners, a population
known for their exceptionally-low Erun (Larsen, 2003; Wilber
and Pitsiladis, 2012), have longer AT moment arm lengths and
shorter forefoot lengths compared to similarly-trained Japanese
distance runners (Kunimasa et al., 2014). van Werkhoven and
Piazza (2017) recently found a significant relationship between
peak Achilles tendon force and heel length, suggesting subjects
with shorter heels experience larger Achilles tendon forces. These
larger forces, however, were not associated with a reduced oxygen
uptake measured at a common speed for all subjects. These
authors, and others contend that while larger Achilles tendon
forces should increase tendon stretch and strain energy storage,
larger forces also require higher muscle activation and elevated
metabolic cost (Perl et al., 2012; van Werkhoven and Piazza,
2017). It remains unclear why these authors did not find the same
negative correlation between oxygen uptake and heel length, as
has been reported previously (Scholz et al., 2008; Raichlen et al.,
2011; Mooses et al., 2014).
The ratio of forefoot to AT moment arm length is known as
the foot-lever or gear ratio; a low gear ratio is associated with
better Erun (Mooses et al., 2014). The gear ratio determines the
force and length change needed in the gastrocnemius muscle and
these factors will affect the energy cost of muscle contraction.
Reducing the gear ratio from 2 to 1.5, by reducing forefoot length
and keeping the AT moment arm constant reduces the estimated
triceps surae muscle energy cost by nearly 40% (Fletcher and
MacIntosh, 2015), assuming the same amount of shortening.
Less force is needed if the Fz moment arm is shorter. Similarly,
reducing the gear ratio by increasing the AT moment arm will
also reduce the required muscle force but also necessitates a
greater amount of shortening for a given angular displacement
so the energy savings would not be this large.
The length of the Fz moment arm is dictated by the footstrike
pattern and the length of the forefoot. Forefoot length is
another anatomical feature (along with presumably short or
long moment arm lengths) for which humans have evolved,
presumably to favor economical walking and running compared
to other primate species. In relation to body mass, humans
possess extremely short forefoot lengths (Rolian et al., 2009).
This evolutionary adaptation has long been assumed to benefit
bipedal locomotion since short toes require smaller plantarflexor
forces to balance the large dorsiflexion moments as a result of Fz
(Weidenreich, 1923; Mann and Hagy, 1979). Using kinematics,
force and plantar pressure measurements, this hypothesis was
tested in a sample of human subjects (Rolian et al., 2009). It was
demonstrated that subjects with relatively long forefoot lengths
had to generate more than four times the peak flexor force over a
single stance phase compared to short-forefoot individuals. The
authors suspected that such an increase in force output would
lead to at least a small increase in the metabolic cost of running.
This seems very likely given that the elevated muscle force would
result in a greater active muscle volume and a concomitant
increase in energy cost. Thus, it seems logical to suggest that it
is the ratio of Fz moment arm to AT moment arm length, rather
than the absolute AT moment arm length itself which dictates the
muscle energy cost.
Body Mass, Body Composition, and Mass
Distribution
Body composition and distribution of mass may be another
relevant feature in dictating muscle energy cost, and therefore
Erun. Active skeletal muscle is primarily responsible for the
energy use, so a body mass consisting of a high proportion of
skeletal muscle mass and low fat mass should be advantageous in
reducing the absolute energy cost of running over a fixed distance
(J·m−1). This lower absolute energy cost has advantages in less
heat generation, and lower relative muscle activation needed for
running at a given speed. Although stored fat contributes to the
provision of metabolic energy during running, it is considered
that in most cases much more than enough energy is available.
Transporting metabolically-inactive tissue like fat would come
at a metabolic cost. In fact, Kenyan boys have smaller calf
circumference than boys of similar age from other continents
(Larsen, 2003). This suggests that even lower muscle mass may
be advantageous, as long as sufficient muscle mass is available to
provide the required forces and support the metabolic rate.
It is estimated that the oxygen cost of running (measured as
˙
VO2, ml·kg−1·min−1) was elevated by 4.5% for every additional
kg of load carried distally on the legs (500 g distributed across
both legs) whereas the energy cost was only elevated by 1%
when that same mass was carried on the trunk (Jones et al.,
1986). Therefore, minimizing the mass of the swinging limbs,
by minimizing fat and unnecessary muscle mass in these areas
should reduce Erun, as long as the muscle mass necessary to
generate the forces and movements is maintained.
Since running involves rotation of the limbs, a substantial
portion of the limb’s mass should be located at a close proximity
to the joint center of rotation. This serves to minimize the limb
moment of inertia. Moving the limbs comprises a substantial
portion of the total metabolic cost of running; the joint moment
needed to impart an angular acceleration is proportional to the
moment of inertia (Fenn, 1930; Cavagna et al., 1964). Swinging
the limbs during running should come at a substantial energy
cost. Modica and Kram (2005) used a device that assisted the
forward swing of the leg, reducing the need of the muscles
to swing the leg directly. Their results revealed a reduction in
metabolic cost by 20%. This estimate was later refined to ∼7%
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
7
June 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 433
 Fletcher and MacIntosh
Running Economy from a Muscle Energetics Perspective
of the metabolic cost of running (Warddrip, 2007), the difference
likely a result of the device used by Modica and Kram also aiding
in forward propulsion (Arellano and Kram, 2014a).
The metabolic cost of arm swing has also been addressed
(Arellano and Kram, 2014b). Swinging the arms incurred a small
metabolic cost; however, the arm swing also serves to reduce the
amplitude of shoulder and torso rotation. Without arm swing,
shoulder and torso rotation must increase to counterbalance the
rotational angular momentum created by swinging of the legs.
Thus, running with a normal arm swing (i.e., arm carriage with a
bent elbow) incurs the lowest Erun since moment of inertia of the
upper limbs is lowest. The benefit of normal arm swing during
running relates to a reduced Erun of ∼3%. Hypothetically though,
Erun could be reduced by an even greater extent without the extra
mass of the arms, since the reduction in metabolic cost is nearly
proportional to the reduced mass (Arellano and Kram, 2014b).
Future investigations into the energy cost of elite Paralympic arm
amputee distance runners may help resolve this hypothesis.
Above, we have attempted to outline those factors not
affected by training which likely alter the energy cost of muscle
contraction, and therefore, serve as determinants of whole-body
Erun. There exist specific anthropometric (e.g., limb length) and
morphological (e.g., ankle and foot anatomy) characteristics that
influence the measured Erun.
FACTORS AFFECTING ERUN THAT ARE
ALTERED BY TRAINING
It is well-known that Erun is lower in trained distance runners
compared to lesser-trained runners (Pollock, 1977; Morgan et al.,
1989; Fletcher et al., 2009) thus it is clear that Erun is altered
by both short and long-term training protocols. These training
strategies have recently been reviewed (Barnes and Kilding,
2015). Below, we outline the various factors affecting Erun that
are altered by training and consider the influence of these factors
on muscle energy cost.
Anthropometry
Body Mass
Body mass may or not be a trainable feature. Long-distance
runners are shorter and lighter than middle-distance runners
(Cavanagh et al., 1977). Also, elite African runners appear
to be of lower body mass (Coetzer et al., 1993) and BMI
(Saltin et al., 1995) compared to their Caucasian counterparts.
These anthropometric differences appear to have persisted since
childhood (Larsen et al., 2004). However, body fat mass can
also be reduced through large volumes of aerobic and high-
intensity training, through increases in caloric expenditure.
Also, transporting metabolically-inactive tissue would elevate the
energy cost. While little research has examined why low body
mass confers an athletic advantage, several factors specifically
related to the energy cost of muscle contraction may explain this.
For example, it is well-established that Fz expressed relative to
body mass is increased as a function of running speed (Keller
et al., 1996). Thus, at a given running speed, the absolute Fz
is lower in lighter runners compared to heavier runners. As
such, there should be lower energy cost required by the active
muscles. Over a wide range of body mass, across different species,
Taylor et al. (1980) showed that Erun at a particular speed is
proportional to the force exerted by the muscles active during
stance. By manipulating the required muscle force by the addition
of extra weight it was shown that the increased energy cost was
proportional to the weight of the carried load.
Muscle Properties
Erun at a given speed, is determined by the total active muscle
volume and the rate at which that unit volume of muscle
transforms energy (Kram and Taylor, 1990; Roberts et al.,
1998a). The volume of active muscle is equal to the cross-
sectional area (CSA) and the muscle fascicle length of the active
motor units. The rate at which each unit volume of muscle
uses energy for isometric contractions is related to the muscle
fiber type; fast-twitch muscles have higher rates of energy use
related to the elevated cost of cross-bridge cycling and activation
costs (Rall, 1985; Barclay et al., 2010b). Erun increases as a
function of running speed since a higher force is developed
over a shorter period of time, requiring activation of additional
motor units. Faster running speed also requires a faster velocity
of shortening. When muscle shortens, additional recruitment
is required to maintain force according to the force-velocity
relationship. At some critical velocity of muscle shortening, the
time-dependent (fiber-type dependent) turnover of cross-bridges
becomes inconsequential and the turnover is dictated by the
velocity of shortening. This critical velocity will be faster with
fast-twitch muscle.
It is well-established that muscle cross-sectional area increases
after a period of resistance training which may (Kawakami et al.,
1995; Blazevich et al., 2003) or may not (Blazevich et al., 2007;
Seynnes et al., 2007) be accompanied by a concomitant decrease
in muscle fascicle length, at least in pennate muscle; changes in
fascicle length appearing prior to an increase in muscle CSA.
However, to run at a given submaximal speed, an increase in
absolute strength as a result of increased muscle CSA would result
in a lower relative intensity. This lower relative intensity may
not require the need to recruit higher threshold motor units,
where the muscle energy cost is higher. This may be one of the
explanations by which Erun is improved following a period of
strength training (Balsalobre-Fernandez et al., 2016; Berryman
et al., 2017). However, any additional muscle mass that is not
used during running results in essentially wasted energy, since
carrying that mass will cost energy. Chronic endurance training
may also result in a shift to a higher proportion of slow Type
I fibers (Rusko, 1992) further contributing to the reduction in
muscle energy cost at a given speed.
Tendon Stiffness
Strength training has also been shown to increase tendon stiffness
(Kubo et al., 2001a,b; Kubo et al., 2002) and increased Achilles
tendon stiffness has been proposed to be one of the main
mechanisms behind an improved Erun following plyometric
training (Saunders et al., 2006) despite the apparent reduction in
energy storage and return associated with a stiffer tendon.
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
8
June 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 433
 Fletcher and MacIntosh
Running Economy from a Muscle Energetics Perspective
It is known that the energy cost of contraction is related to the
level of motor unit activation and both the amount of shortening
and the shortening velocity (Stainsby and Lambert, 1979).
Tendon stiffness can influence the magnitude of shortening
and the shortening velocity of the muscle fascicles (Fletcher
et al., 2013a), but these parameters can also be affected by the
kinematics of the associated joint(s). Several papers reporting on
a variety of species and muscle functional tasks highlight the
fact that muscle shortening patterns during natural movement
are well-matched to take advantage of the muscle’s force-length-
velocity relationships (Lutz and Rome, 1994; Roberts et al., 1997;
Askew and Marsh, 1998). For example, Lutz and Rome (1994)
found that the semimembranosus muscle of the frog operated
at near-optimal sarcomere lengths and shortening velocities to
maximize power output during maximal jumping. This effect
would not be possible unless the tendon was perfectly tuned
(with respect to stiffness and proportion of muscle-tendon length
occupied) to allow the muscle to operate at the appropriate
length and velocity. This effect is also true for human running
(Kawakami et al., 1998; Ishikawa et al., 2007; Farris and Sawicki,
2012).
The tendon can also act in such a way as to minimize the
amount of shortening that is required by the muscle in order
to minimize the metabolic cost. At the same level of muscle
activation, when muscles shorten, they exert less force than when
they contract isometrically but have at least as high a metabolic
rate; thus, their economy of force generation is lower (Woledge
et al., 1985; Alexander, 1991). By minimizing the length change
during active muscle contraction, the tendon allows the muscle’s
force-length-velocity relationship to be optimized. In theory,
if the length change of the whole muscle-tendon unit can be
accommodated by the tendon alone, the muscle fibers can
operate isometrically, thus minimizing the level of muscle
activation required to produce the necessary force as a result
of the force-velocity relationship. To test this theory, Holt
et al. (2014) determined the cost of force production in frog
muscles acting isometrically, and have mechanical energy stored
and released by the tendon, compared to muscles undergoing
stretch-shortening cycles, as if there was no tendon in-series
with the muscle. These authors show that the energy cost of
shortening contractions was nearly triple the energy cost of
isometric force production. These results were obtained when the
energy cost was normalized for force during the contractions. In
actual fact, the shortening contraction had a much lower force
than the isometric contraction so considering the need to have
similar force production during running, additional motor unit
recruitment would be needed in the shortening condition as
suggested by the results of Fletcher et al. (2013a). This increased
motor unit recruitment would contribute to the energy cost
difference between isometric and shortening contractions.
The Achilles tendon also accommodates much of the muscle-
tendon unit length change during human running (Ishikawa
et al., 2007; Lichtwark et al., 2007) thus greatly reducing the
shortening-related muscle energy cost (Fletcher and MacIntosh,
2015). Presumably, the mechanical properties of the Achilles
tendon are “tuned” to accommodate the majority of muscle-
tendon unit length change. Any change in these mechanical
properties would affect the magnitude of length change of the
muscle fascicles, and energy cost would necessarily be higher if
the Achilles tendon cannot accommodate muscle-tendon unit
length change.
The relative shortening velocities in the ankle extensors of
running turkeys has recently been measured directly in which the
above hypothetical scenario has been shown to occur (Gabaldon
et al., 2008). During level running, the shortening velocity of the
lateral gastrocnemius was quite low (∼0.05 V/Vmax), supporting
the notion that force can be maximized and activation minimized
by low shortening velocities. Having to run up an incline required
slightly greater V/Vmax ratios (∼0.12 V/Vmax) and the volume of
active muscle that had to be recruited increased in accordance
with the muscle’s force-velocity properties in order to generate
the required force.
If the tendon is too stiff, then lengthening and shortening
is required by the fascicles and the volume of active muscle
recruitment increases. If the tendon is too compliant, much of
the energy for force generation will be consumed shortening
the fascicles even with negligible joint rotation. In the case
where higher forces need to be generated as running speed
increases, too compliant a tendon would require greater fascicle
shortening than that necessary for joint rotation, resulting in
higher velocity of muscle shortening. This suggests that there may
be an “optimal tendon compliance” with respect to minimizing
muscle shortening.
Does an “Optimal Stiffness” Exist to
Minimize the EC of Running?
It has previously been shown that in a group of trained distance
runners, the most economical runners displayed a higher Achilles
tendon stiffness compared to the less economical runners
(Arampatzis et al., 2006; Fletcher et al., 2010). The former study
demonstrated the opposite to be true in the patellar tendon—
that the most economical runners had a lower patellar tendon
stiffness compared to the less economical runners (Arampatzis
et al., 2006). This opposite result suggests that the roles of these
two muscles in minimizing the energy cost during running are
different. We contend that the role of the tendon in running is to
minimize the energy cost of muscle contraction. Is it possible that
energy cost is minimized in the quadriceps muscles by a more
compliant tendon, while a stiffer tendon reduces energy cost in
the triceps surae?
There are apparent advantages of stiff tendons in some cases,
and compliant tendons in other cases. The lengthening of a
tendon for energy storage is relevant in stretch-shortening cycles
where a substantial pre-stretch of the tendon occurs early in a
contraction. A compliant tendon allows more energy conversion
of either kinetic or gravitational energy to potential strain energy.
This energy can subsequently be released upon shortening. A
compliant tendon may also help by allowing the tendon to
lengthen during the stretch phase of the SSC and shorten during
the shortening phase, thereby keeping fascicle shortening velocity
low and reducing the necessary level of activation of motor
units required to generate the force. In situations where power
is important, optimal tendon compliance would allow muscle
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
9
June 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 433
 Fletcher and MacIntosh
Running Economy from a Muscle Energetics Perspective
fascicles to shorten at the velocity associated with peak-power
output (Askew and Marsh, 1998; Gabaldón et al., 2008) and
corresponding shortening of the tendon can contribute to the
power generation. This may be the case in the patellar tendon,
which would lend support to previous evidence suggesting a
more compliant patellar tendon might decrease Erun (Albracht
and Arampatzis, 2006; Arampatzis et al., 2006).
Conversely, a more compliant AT requires greater muscle
fascicle shortening and/or velocity of fascicle shortening for
a given joint movement. In the AT, a joint movement may
be favored over elastic energy storage and release. This is the
case because for a given amount and rate of muscle tendon
unit shortening, less muscle fascicle shortening is needed with
a stiff tendon compared to a compliant one. The additional
fascicle shortening is needed to accommodate tendon stretch
as force increases. We have recently estimated the tendon
strain energy release from the AT and compared that to the
estimated muscle energy cost in order for this strain energy
storage to occur (Fletcher and MacIntosh, 2015). These results
demonstrate that the storage and release of tendon strain
energy comes at a considerable muscle energy cost. Therefore,
reducing shortening-induced energy cost contributes to a
reduced Erun.
Running Mechanics
Stride Length and Stride Frequency
At speeds below the anaerobic threshold, where Erun is most
appropriately measured, the lowest Erun in humans is generally
thought to occur at stride frequencies of 83–91 strides per minute
(Hunter and Smith, 2007). The freely-chosen stride frequency
closely corresponds to the stride frequency associated with the
lowest energy cost (Högberg, 1952; Cavanagh and Williams,
1982; Hunter and Smith, 2007) particularly in trained runners. At
a given running speed, a change in stride frequency must result
in an opposite change in stride length; however, the naturally
chosen stride frequencies and stride lengths, both increase with
faster running speeds. There is a proportionally greater increase
in stride length compared to the increase in stride frequency, at
least at submaximal speeds where the measurement of Erun is
valid (Cavanagh and Kram, 1989).
Small animals use more energy (per kg of body mass) to
run a given distance than do large animals (Kram and Taylor,
1990) since small animals must take many strides to cover the
same distance a large animal can cover in one stride. The mass-
specific energy cost is highest in small animals since the muscle
fascicles of these animals must develop force and relax more
quickly, thus requiring greater rates of cross-bridge cycling and
Ca2+ pumping (Barany, 1967; Rome, 1992). Considering human
runners, those runners with longer legs, and thus longer stride
lengths should have a lower energy cost; they will take fewer
strides to cover a given distance than a runner with small strides.
However, the relationship between stride length (expressed either
in absolute terms or relative to height or leg length) and Erun in
human runners, unlike the relationship seen across a wide-range
of stride frequencies in animals, is moderate at best (Cavanagh
and Williams, 1982; Williams and Cavanagh, 1987; Cavanagh and
Kram, 1989).
Running is often considered a bouncing gait whereby humans
literally bounce along the ground (Cavagna et al., 1964), storing,
and recovering kinetic and potential energy as the center of
mass rises and falls with each stride, thus closely resembling
a simple spring. To address this, simple studies of humans
hopping have revealed optimal conditions for energy storage and
release. By having subjects hop at various speeds on a treadmill,
Farley et al. (1991) were able to deduce that a range of hopping
frequencies existed whereby the body behaved like a spring,
storing, and recovering elastic energy. However, at faster than
optimal frequencies, the time available to apply force to the
ground was necessarily shorter, and more contacts per unit time
would be required. At slightly slower than optimal frequency, the
body did not behave in a spring-like manner and the recovery of
elastic energy was reduced. Clearly there is a trade-off between
ground contact time, and the requirement to generate force
rapidly and the ability to sustain large forces over a relatively long
period during the stance phase, which serves to minimize Erun.
The fact that runners tend to choose a stride frequency slightly
lower than optimal frequency suggests a greater importance is
placed on maintaining ground contact time (and thus allowing a
lower recruitment of muscle fibers) over maximizing the storage
and release of elastic energy. The self-selected stride frequency
should be the one at which the metabolic cost of operating
the springs is the lowest (Farley et al., 1993) since muscle
metabolic energy is required in order to store and release elastic
strain energy from the tendons (Alexander, 1986; Fletcher and
MacIntosh, 2015). An interesting situation that avoids this issue is
that the horse has a vestigial “muscle,” with tendon but no muscle
fibers (Biewener, 1998b) that provides a pure energy storage and
return without the metabolic cost.
Ground Contact Time
Modeling
running
as
a
simple
spring-mass
system
can
characterize the mechanics of the body’s center of mass quite well
(McMahon and Cheng, 1990; Farley et al., 1993); however, it does
not adequately explain the energetics of running. Theoretically a
perfectly-elastic spring could supply all of the mechanical work
on the center of mass during running, and no net metabolic cost
would be required (Arellano and Kram, 2014a). A complement
to the spring-mass model hypothesis, the “cost of generating
force hypothesis” was proposed (Taylor et al., 1980).
By measuring the metabolic cost of carrying various loads,
these authors observed the metabolic cost increased in direct
proportion to the added load. Therefore, it was proposed that
the metabolic cost of running arose in association with the cost
of generating force over time, rather than generating mechanical
work. The metabolic cost is proportional to the average vertical
force applied to the ground and inversely proportional to the
ground contact time over which the force can be applied (Kram
and Taylor, 1990). The required peak vertical force must be
proportionally higher as speed increases, elevating the metabolic
cost since muscles must generate more force while shortening at a
faster velocity. To generate the higher force, while compensating
for the decreased force per motor unit due to the force-velocity
relationship, more motor units must be recruited (Roberts et al.,
1998b). In further support the cost of generating force hypothesis,
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
10
June 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 433
 Fletcher and MacIntosh
Running Economy from a Muscle Energetics Perspective
several authors have shown an inverse relationship between
Erun and ground contact time (Williams and Cavanagh, 1987;
Chapman et al., 2012; Di Michelle and Merni, 2014). These results
suggest the speed-associated increase in Erun is a result of the
elevated muscle energy cost associated with generating greater
peak forces over a shorter period of time.
Footstrike Pattern
It appears that a rearfoot strike pattern is more economical than
either a midfoot or forefoot strike pattern (Gruber et al., 2013;
Ogueta-Alday et al., 2014). Heelstrike reduces the plantarflexor
moment at the ankle because the center of pressure resides under
the heel of the foot during the first half of stance and this reduces
the length of the corresponding (Fz) moment arm (Cavanagh and
Lafortune, 1980; Williams and Cavanagh, 1987). Conversely, the
center of pressure during stance, a surrogate of the Fz moment
arm length, is centered under the ball of the support foot in the
forefoot landing pattern. Thus, heel strike pattern is associated
with a substantially reduced EMG of the lateral gastrocnemius
and soleus muscles compared to forefoot strike (Cunningham
et al., 2010). Williams and Cavanagh (1987) found the most
economical runners were those with a heelstrike pattern. Forefoot
striking may result in a longer Fz moment arm, resulting in
higher necessary TS force.
The main issue with examining differences in Erun between
forefoot and heel strike patterns is that many studies artificially
impose an unnatural gait on the subject. Thus, a lower Erun
measured under one condition may be the result of runners
being unfamiliar with the novel gait pattern. Gruber et al. (2013)
measured Erun in habitual forefoot and heelstrike runners and
found no difference in ˙
VO2 between groups when running with
their habitual footstrike pattern. Interestingly, at all running
speeds (3–4 m·s−1 was the range evaluated), runners habituated
to the heel strike pattern showed a higher ˙
VO2 when asked to
forefoot strike, which was not seen when the forefoot group
ran with a heel strike pattern. Only at high speeds was the heel
strike pattern less economical in the habitual forefoot runners.
When the muscle-tendon unit of the triceps surae was modeled
to assess the muscle mechanics and energetic differences between
foot strike patterns, it was shown that the forefoot strike pattern
resulted in a near-isometric contraction during stance. This
allows a lower muscle energy cost for a given force compared
to the heel strike pattern, where high contraction velocities
during stance were demonstrated. A significant difference in the
metabolic energy cost, however, could not be shown.
Flexibility
Despite the general belief among runners and coaches that
greater flexibility may result in improved Erun (Craib et al., 1996),
there is very little evidence to support this notion. A lower
flexibility (measured during a sit and reach test) is associated with
a lower Erun (Gleim et al., 1990; Craib et al., 1996; Trehearn and
Buresh, 2009). Various suggestions have been made by which a
lower flexibility may decrease Erun: (1) reducing the trunk muscle
energy cost to maintain stability (Craib et al., 1996) and/or (2)
increasing the storage and return of elastic energy (Jones, 2002).
The latter mechanism appears unlikely given that such a small
amount of mechanical energy is stored and released as elastic
energy. This mechanical energy represents only a small savings in
total metabolic energy (Ker et al., 1987; Fletcher and MacIntosh,
2015) and mechanically, a stiff AT stores less strain energy for
a given force compared to a more compliant tendon. It should
be pointed out that if muscle had been required to produce
the work done by the tendon, the energy cost would have been
4–5 times greater than the work accomplished by the tendon.
As we have previously suggested, an optimal tendon stiffness
exists and therefore, a delicate balance between the amount of
stretching training (with the intention that stretching training
will reduce AT stiffness Kubo et al., 2002; Morse et al., 2008)
and strength training [to increase tendon stiffness (Kubo et al.,
2001a,b) may result in less than optimal tendon mechanical
properties where optimal properties minimize muscle energy cost
(Fletcher et al., 2013a)]. Another possible mechanism for low
flexibility contributing to low Erun is that low flexibility may relate
to short muscle fascicles and shorter muscles should use less
energy when velocity of shortening is not important.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE
DIRECTIONS: MUSCLE ENERGETICS AND
ERUN
Erun has been extensively studied in the biomechanics and
exercise physiology literature and is known to be influenced
by a variety of factors. However, much of the interpretation
of Erun exists from the measurement of the steady-state ˙
VO2
at a given submaximal running speed, without calculation of
the energy equivalent. Although, this approach has been useful
in comparisons between conditions when RER is not much
different, it is difficult to conclude with confidence whether
previous results showing differences between groups of runners
and/conditions (e.g., male vs. female Erun, altitude vs. sea-level)
would still exist had Erun been expressed in terms of energy
cost to run a fixed distance at a given relative intensity rather
than an oxygen equivalent. We recently demonstrated that when
Erun is measured appropriately, that no sex-related differences
in Erun exist (Fletcher et al., 2013b; Black et al., 2017). It is
only recently that this expression of Erun has been encouraged.
In any circumstance, when the quantification of Erun relies on
measurement of ˙
VO2 the intensity must be below anaerobic
threshold. Although, we believe it is most appropriate to calculate
the energy equivalent of oxygen uptake, there is a considerable
body of literature available with valid conclusions where only
oxygen cost is presented.
Here, we have reviewed the biomechanical and physiological
factors which influence Erun from the perspective of muscle
energetics. This has allowed us to consider the relative
importance of the storage and release of elastic energy from
tendon impacting the energy cost, which we argue is relatively
minor compared to the muscle energy cost required for muscles
in series with the tendons that store the elastic strain energy.
Consideration has been given to the influence of biomechanics
(limb mass and length, AT, and vertical ground reaction force
etc.) and physiology (force-length-velocity properties of muscle)
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
11
June 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 433
 Fletcher and MacIntosh
Running Economy from a Muscle Energetics Perspective
in dictating the muscle energy cost, and therefore determining
Erun.
Future research in elite athletes should be aimed at the
effectiveness of different training interventions (e.g., strength,
stretching, or plyometric training) on Erun expressed in terms
of energy. Specifically, a greater understanding of the muscle
and tendon interactions during running is warranted; during
distance running, where does the muscle operate relative to
their submaximal force-length-velocity relationships? How is this
altered through training intervention (where muscle and tendon
properties may be changed)? What is the impact of fatigue
(mechanical or physiological) on the muscle energy cost, and on
Erun and what is the mechanism of this change?
Future directions should also include the measurement
of factors which dictate muscle energy cost across different
circumstances that may alter muscle function (aging, disease,
disuse) in order to best prescribe appropriate training and/or
rehabilitation programs. An interesting special circumstance
is consideration of elite Paralympic athletes who may have
compromised muscle and/or tendon function or for individuals
where exercise tolerance may be limited by an elevated energy
expenditure.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
JF and BM were responsible for conception of the review. JF
drafted the work. JF and BM revised it critically for important
intellectual content. JF and BM approved the final version of
the manuscript and both authors agree to be accountable for all
aspects of the work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
JF was supported by NSERC Canada, Mitacs, and Own the
Podium. The research programs of BM are supported by NSERC
Canada, MITACS, and Own the Podium.
REFERENCES
Albracht, K., and Arampatzis, A. (2006). Influence of the mechanical properties of
the muscle-tendon unit on force generation in runners with different running
economy. Biol. Cybern. 95, 87–96. doi: 10.1007/s00422-006-0070-z
Alexander, R. (1986). McN.(1988). Elastic Mechanisms in Animal Movement.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 141, 1989b.
Alexander, R. M. (1991). Energy-saving mechanisms in walking and running.
J. Exp. Biol. 160, 55–69.
Arampatzis, A., De Monte, G., Karamanidis, K., Morey-Klapsing, G., Stafilidis,
S., and Bruggemann, G. P. (2006). Influence of the muscle-tendon unit’s
mechanical and morphological properties on running economy. J. Exp. Biol.
209, 3345–3357. doi: 10.1242/jeb.02340
Arellano, C. J., and Kram, R. (2014a). Partitioning the metabolic cost of
human running: a task-by-task approach. Integr. Comp. Biol. 54, 1084–1098.
doi: 10.1093/icb/icu033
Arellano, C. J., and Kram, R. (2014b). The metabolic cost of human
running: is swinging the arms worth it? J. Exp. Biol. 217, 2456–2461.
doi: 10.1242/jeb.100420
Askew, G. N., and Marsh, R. L. (1998). Optimal shortening velocity (V/Vmax) of
skeletal muscle during cyclical contractions: length-force effects and velocity-
dependent activation and deactivation. J. Exp. Biol. 201, 1527–1540.
Balsalobre-Fernandez, C., Santos-Concejero, J., and Grivas, G. V. (2016). Effects of
strength training on running economy in highly trained runners: a systematic
review with meta-analysis of controlled trials. J. Strength Cond. Res. 30,
2361–2368. doi: 10.1519/JSC.0000000000001316
Barany, M. (1967). ATPase activity of myosin correlated with speed of muscle
shortening. J. Gen. Physiol. 50:197. doi: 10.1085/jgp.50.6.197
Barclay, C. J. (1996). Mechanical efficiency and fatigue of fast and slow muscles of
the mouse. J. Physiol. (Lond). 497:781. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1996.sp021809
Barclay, C. J. (2015). Energetics of contraction. Compr. Physiol. 5, 961–995.
doi: 10.1002/cphy.c140038
Barclay, C. J., Curtin, N. A., and Woledge, R. C. (1993). Changes in crossbridge
and non-crossbridge energetics during moderate fatigue of frog muscle fibres.
J. Physiol. (Lond). 468:543. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1993.sp019787
Barclay, C. J., Woledge, R. C., and Curtin, N. A. (2010a). Inferring crossbridge
properties from skeletal muscle energetics. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 102, 53–71.
doi: 10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2009.10.003
Barclay, C. J., Woledge, R. C., and Curtin, N. A. (2010b). Is the efficiency
of mammalian (mouse) skeletal muscle temperature dependent?. J. Physiol.
(Lond). 588, 3819–3831. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2010.192799
Barnes, K. R., and Kilding, A. E. (2015). Strategies to improve running economy.
Sport Med. 45, 37–56. doi: 10.1007/s40279-014-0246-y
Berg, K., and Sady, S. (1985). Oxygen cost of running at submaximal
speeds while wearing shoe inserts. Res. Q. Exerc. Sport
56, 86–89.
doi: 10.1080/02701367.1985.10608438
Bergeron, M. F. (2014). Heat stress and thermal strain challenges in running.
J. Orthop. Sports Phys. Ther. 44, 831–838. doi: 10.2519/jospt.2014.5500
Berryman, N., Mujika, I., Arvisais, D., Roubeix, M., Binet, C., and Bosquet, L.
(2017). Strength training for middle- and long-distance performance: a meta-
analysis. Int. J. Sports Physiol. Perform. doi: 10.1123/ijspp.2017-0032. [Epub
ahead of print].
Biewener, A. A. (1998a). Muscle-tendon stresses and elastic energy storage during
locomotion in the horse. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. Part B Biochem. Mol. Biol.
120, 73–87.
Biewener, A. A. (1998b). Muscle function in vivo: a comparison of muscles used
for elastic energy savings versus muscles used to generate mechanical power.
Integr. Comp. Biol. 38:703.
Black, M. I., Handsaker, J. C., Allen, S. J., Forrester, S. E., and Folland, J. P. (2017).
Is there an optimum speed for economical running? Int. J. Sport Nutr. Exerc.
Metab. doi: 10.1123/ijspp.2017-0015. [Epub ahead of print].
Blazevich, A. J., Cannavan, D., Coleman, D. R., and Horne, S. (2007). Influence
of concentric and eccentric resistance training on architectural adaptation
in human quadriceps muscles. J. Appl. Physiol. (1985) 103, 1565–1575.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00578.2007
Blazevich, A. J., Gill, N. D., Bronks, R., and Newton, R. U. (2003). Training-specific
muscle architecture adaptation after 5-wk training in athletes. Med. Sci. Sports
Exerc. 35, 2013–2022. doi: 10.1249/01.MSS.0000099092.83611.20
Carrier, D. R., Heglund, N. C., and Earls, K. D. (1994). Variable gearing during
locomotion in the human musculoskeletal system. Science 265, 651–653.
doi: 10.1126/science.8036513
Cavagna, G. A., Saibene, F. P., and Margaria, R. (1964). Mechanical work in
running. J. Appl. Physiol. 19, 249.
Cavanagh, P. R., and Kram, R. (1989). Stride length in distance running: velocity,
body dimensions, and added mass effects. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 21, 467–479.
doi: 10.1249/00005768-198908000-00020
Cavanagh, P. R., and Lafortune, M. A. (1980). Ground reaction forces in distance
running. J. Biomech. 13, 397–406. doi: 10.1016/0021-9290(80)90033-0
Cavanagh, P. R., and Williams, K. R. (1982). The effect of stride length variation
on oxygen uptake during distance running. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 14, 30–35.
doi: 10.1249/00005768-198201000-00006
Cavanagh, P. R., Pollock, M. L., and Landa, J. (1977). A biomechanical comparison
of elite and good distance runners. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 301, 328–345.
doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1977.tb38211.x
Chapman, R. F., Laymon, A. S., Wilhite, D. P., McKenzie, J. M., Tanner,
D. A., and Stager, J. M. (2012). Ground contact time as an indicator of
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
12
June 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 433
 Fletcher and MacIntosh
Running Economy from a Muscle Energetics Perspective
metabolic cost in elite distance runners. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 44, 917–925.
doi: 10.1249/MSS.0b013e3182400520
Cheuvront, S. N., and Haymes, E. M. (2001). Thermoregulation and marathon
running: biological and environmental influences. Sport. Med. 31, 743–762.
doi: 10.2165/00007256-200131100-00004
Chow, J. W., and Darling, W. G. (1999). The maximum shortening velocity of
muscle should be scaled with activation. J. Appl. Physiol. (1985) 86, 1025–1031.
Coast, J. R., and Welch, H. G. (1985). Linear increase in optimal pedal rate with
increased power output in cycle ergometry. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. Occup. Physiol.
53, 339–342. doi: 10.1007/BF00422850
Coetzer, P., Noakes, T. D., Sanders, B., Lambert, M. I., Bosch, A. N., Wiggins, T.,
et al. (1993). Superior fatigue resistance of elite black South African distance
runners. J. Appl. Physiol. (1985) 75, 1822–1827.
Craib, M. W., Mitchell, V. A., Fields, K. B., Cooper, T. R., Hopewell, R.,
and Morgan, D. W. (1996). The association between flexibility and running
economy in sub-elite male distance runners. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 28,
737–743. doi: 10.1097/00005768-199606000-00012
Cunningham, C. B., Schilling, N., Anders, C., and Carrier, D. R. (2010). The
influence of foot posture on the cost of transport in humans. J. Exp. Biol. 213,
790–797. doi: 10.1242/jeb.038984
Daniels, J., Foster, C., Daniels, S., and Krahenbuhl, G. (1977). “Altitude and human
performance with special consideration of the aerobic demands of running,”
in Proceedings of the NCPEAM/NAPECW National Conference (Orlando, FL),
61–67.
de Tombe, P. P., and Ter Keurs, H. E. (1990). Force and velocity of sarcomere
shortening in trabeculae from rat heart. Effects of temperature. Circ. Res.
66:1239. doi: 10.1161/01.RES.66.5.1239
Di Michelle, R., and Merni, F. (2014). The concurrent effects of strike pattern
and ground-contact time on running economy. J. Sci. Med. Sport 17, 414–418.
doi: 10.1016/jsams.2013.02.012
Farley, C. T., Blickhan, R., Saito, J., and Taylor, C. R. (1991). Hopping frequency
in humans: a test of how springs set stride frequency in bouncing gaits. J. Appl.
Physiol. 71, 2127–2132.
Farley, C. T., Glasheen, J., and McMahon, T. A. (1993). Running springs: speed and
animal size. J. Exp. Biol. 185, 71–86.
Farris, D. J., and Sawicki, G. S. (2012). Human medial gastrocnemius force-velocity
behavior shifts with locomotion speed and gait. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109,
977–982. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1107972109
Fenn, W. O. (1930). Work against gravity and work due to velocity changes in
running: movements of the center of gravity within the body and foot pressure
on the ground. Am. J. Physiol. 93:433.
Fenn, W. O., and Marsh, B. S. (1935). Muscular force at different speeds of
shortening. J. Physiol. (Lond). 85:277. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1935.sp003318
Fletcher, J. R., and MacIntosh, B. R. (2015). Achilles tendon strain energy in
distance running: consider the muscle energy cost. J. Appl. Physiol. 118,
193–199. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00732.2014
Fletcher, J. R., Esau, S. P., and Macintosh, B. R. (2009). Economy of running:
beyond the measurement of oxygen uptake. J. Appl. Physiol. 107, 1918–1922.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00307.2009
Fletcher, J. R., Esau, S. P., and MacIntosh, B. R. (2010). Changes in tendon stiffness
and running economy in highly trained distance runners. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol.
110, 1037–1046. doi: 10.1007/s00421-010-1582-8
Fletcher, J. R., Groves, E. M., Pfister, T. R., and MacIntosh, B. R. (2013a). Can
muscle shortening alone, explain the energy cost of muscle contraction in vivo?
Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 113, 2313–2322. doi: 10.1007/s00421-013-2665-0
Fletcher, J. R., Pfister, T. R., and Macintosh, B. R. (2013b). Energy cost of running
and Achilles tendon stiffness in man and woman trained runners. Physiol. Rep.
1, e00178. doi: 10.1002/phy2.178
Foster,
C.,
and
Lucia,
A.
(2007).
Running
economy:
the
forgotten
factor
in
elite
performance.
Sports
Med.
37,
316–319.
doi: 10.2165/00007256-200737040-00011
Franz, J. R., Wierzbinski, C. M., and Kram, R. (2012). Metabolic cost of running
barefoot versus shod: is lighter better. Med. Sci. Sport Exerc. 44, 1519–1525.
doi: 10.1249/MSS.0b013e3182514a88
Frederick, E. C. (1983). “Measuring the effects of shoes and surfaces on the
economy of locomotion,” in Biomechanical Aspects of Sport Shoes and Playing
Surfaces, eds B. M. Nigg and B. A. Kerr (Calgary, AB: University of Calgary),
93–106.
Frederick, E. C. (1986). Kinematically mediated effects of sport shoe design: a
review. J. Sports Sci. 4, 169–184. doi: 10.1080/02640418608732116
Frederick, E. C., Daniels, J. R., and Hayes, J. W. (1984). “The effect of shoe weight
on the aerobic demands of running,” in Current Topics in Sport Medicine,
Proceedings of the World Congress of Sport Medicine, eds N. Bachl, L. Prokop,
and R. Sucker (Vienna: Urban and Schwarzenberg), 616–625.
Fuglevand, A. J., Winter, D. A., and Patla, A. E. (1993). Models of recruitment and
rate coding organization in motor-unit pools. J. Neurophysiol. 70, 2470–2488.
Gabaldon, A. M., Nelson, F. E., and Roberts, T. J. (2008). Relative shortening
velocity in locomotor muscles: turkey ankle extensors operate at low
V/V(max).
Am.
J.
Physiol.
Integr.
Comp.
Physiol.
294,
R200–R210.
doi: 10.1152/ajpregu.00473.2007
Gabaldón, A. M., Nelson, F. E., and Roberts, T. J. (2008). Relative shortening
velocity in locomotor muscles: turkey ankle extensors operate at low V/Vmax.
Am. J. Physiol. 294, R200–R210. doi: 10.1152/ajpregu.00473.2007
Gleim, G. W., Stachenfeld, N. S., and Nicholas, J. A. (1990). The influence of
flexibility on the economy of walking and jogging. J. Orthop. Res. 8, 814–823.
doi: 10.1002/jor.1100080606
Gordon, A. M., Huxley, A. F., and Julian, F. J. (1966). The variation in isometric
tension with sarcomere length in vertebrate muscle fibres. J. Physiol. (Lond).
184, 170–192. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1966.sp007909
Gruber, A. H., Umberger, B. R., Braun, B., and Hamill, J. (2013). Economy and
rate of carbohydrate oxidation during running with rearfoot and forefoot strike
patterns. J. Appl. Physiol. 115, 194–201. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.01437.2012
Hennig, E. M., Valiant, G. A., and Liu, Q. (1996). Biomechanical variables and
the perception of cushioning for running in various types of footwear. J. Appl.
Biomech. 12, 143–150. doi: 10.1123/jab.12.2.143
Hill, A. V. (1938). The heat of shortening and the dynamic constants of muscle.
Proc. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. B Biol. Sci. 126, 136–195. doi: 10.1098/rspb.1938.0050
Hill, A. V. (1922). The maximum work and mechanical efficiency of human
muscles, and their most economical speed. J. Physiol. (Lond). 56, 19–41.
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1922.sp001989
Högberg, P. (1952). How do stride length and stride frequency influence the
energy-output during running? Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. Occup. Physiol. 14,
437–441. doi: 10.1007/BF00934423
Holt, N. C., Roberts, T. J., and Askew, G. N. (2014). The energetic benefits of
tendon springs in running: is the reduction of muscle work important? J. Exp.
Biol. 217, 4365–4371. doi: 10.1242/jeb.112813
Homsher, E., and Kean, C. J. (1978). Skeletal muscle energetics and metabolism.
Annu. Rev. Physiol. 40, 93–131. doi: 10.1146/annurev.ph.40.030178.000521
Homsher, E., Mommaerts, W., Ricchiuti, N. V., and Wallner, A. (1972). Activation
heat, activation metabolism and tension-related heat in frog semitendinosus
muscles. J. Physiol. (Lond). 220, 601–625. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1972.sp009725
Hoogkamer, W., Kipp, S., Spiering, B. A., and Kram, R. (2016). Altered running
economy directly translates to altered distance-running performance. Med. Sci.
Sports Exerc. 48, 2175–2180. doi: 10.1249/mss.0000000000001012
Hunter, I., and Smith, G. A. (2007). Preferred and optimal stride frequency,
stiffness and economy: changes with fatigue during a 1-h high-intensity run.
Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 100, 653–661. doi: 10.1007/s00421-007-0456-1
Ishikawa, M., Pakaslahti, J., and Komi, P. V. (2007). Medial gastrocnemius muscle
behavior during human running and walking. Gait Posture 25, 380–384.
doi: 10.1016/j.gaitpost.2006.05.002
Jones, A. M. (2002). Running economy is negatively related to sit-and-reach test
performance in international-standard distance runners. Int. J. Sports Med. 23,
40–43. doi: 10.1055/s-2002-19271
Jones, B. H., Knapik, J. J., Daniels, W. L., and Toner, M. M. (1986). The energy cost
of women walking and running in shoes and boots. Ergonomics 29, 439–443.
doi: 10.1080/00140138608968277
Katz, A., Sahlin, K., and Henriksson, J. (1986). Muscle ATP turnover rate during
isometric contraction in humans. J. Appl. Physiol. 60, 1839–1842.
Kawakami, Y., Abe, T., Kuno, S.-Y., and Fukunaga, T. (1995). Training-induced
changes in muscle architecture and specific tension. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. Occup.
Physiol. 72, 37–43. doi: 10.1007/BF00964112
Kawakami, Y., Ichinose, Y., and Fukunaga, T. (1998). Architectural and functional
features of human triceps surae muscles during contraction. J. Appl. Physiol. 85,
398–404.
Keller, T. S., Weisberger, A. M., Ray, J. L., Hasan, S. S., Shiavi, R. G., and
Spengler, D. M. (1996). Relationship between vertical ground reaction force and
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
13
June 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 433
 Fletcher and MacIntosh
Running Economy from a Muscle Energetics Perspective
speed during walking, slow jogging, and running. Clin. Biomech. 11, 253–259.
doi: 10.1016/0268-0033(95)00068-2
Ker, R. F., Bennett, M. B., Bibby, S. R., Kester, R. C., and Alexander, R. M.
(1987). The spring in the arch of the human foot. Nature 325, 147–149.
doi: 10.1038/325147a0
Kram, R., and Taylor, C. R. (1990). Energetics of running: a new perspective. Nature
346, 265–267. doi: 10.1038/346265a0
Kubo, K., Kanehisa, H., and Fukunaga, T. (2001a). Effects of different duration
isometric contractions on tendon elasticity in human quadriceps muscles. J.
Physiol. (Lond). 536, 649–655. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7793.2001.0649c.xd
Kubo, K., Kanehisa, H., and Fukunaga, T. (2002). Effects of resistance
and stretching training programmes on the viscoelastic properties of
human
tendon
structures
in
vivo.
J.
Physiol.
(Lond).
538,
219–226.
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2001.012703
Kubo, K., Kanehisa, H., Ito, M., and Fukunaga, T. (2001b). Effects of isometric
training on the elasticity of human tendon structures in vivo. J. Appl. Physiol.
(1985) 91, 26–32.
Kunimasa, Y., Sano, K., Oda, T., Nicol, C., Komi, P. V., Locatelli, E., et al. (2014).
Specific muscle-tendon architecture in elite Kenyan distance runners. Scand. J.
Med. Sci. Sport. 24, e269–e274. doi: 10.1111/sms.12161
Lacour, J. R., and Bourdin, M. (2015). Factors affecting the energy cost of
level running at submaximal speed. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 115, 651–673.
doi: 10.1007/s00421-015-3115-y
Larsen,
H.
B.
(2003).
Kenyan
dominance
in
distance
running.
Comp.
Biochem.
Physiol.
Part
A
Mol.
Integr.
Physiol.
136,
161–170.
doi: 10.1016/S1095-6433(03)00227-7
Larsen, H. B., Christensen, D. L., Nolan, T., and Søndergaard, H. (2004).
Body
dimensions,
exercise
capacity
and
physical
activity
level
of
adolescent Nandi boys in western Kenya. Ann. Hum. Biol. 31, 159–173.
doi: 10.1080/03014460410001663416
Lejeune, T. M., Willems, P. A., and Heglund, N. C. (1998). Mechanics and
energetics of human locomotion on sand. J. Exp. Biol. 201, 2071–2080.
Lichtwark, G. A., Bougoulias, K., and Wilson, A. M. (2007). Muscle fascicle
and series elastic element length changes along the length of the human
gastrocnemius during walking and running. J. Biomech. 40, 157–164.
doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2005.10.035
Luo, G., Stergiou, P., Worobets, J., Nigg, B., and Stefanyshyn, D. (2009). Improved
footwear comfort reduces oxygen consumption during running. Footwear Sci.
1, 25–29. doi: 10.1080/19424280902993001
Lutz, G. J., and Rome, L. C. (1994). Built for jumping: the design of
the frog muscular system. Science 263, 370–372. doi: 10.1126/science.
8278808
MacDougall, J. D., Reddan, W. G., Layton, C. R., and Dempsey, J. A. (1974). Effects
of metabolic hyperthermia on performance during heavy prolonged exercise. J.
Appl. Physiol. 36, 538–544.
MacIntosh, B. R., and Holash, R. J. (2000). “Power output and force-velocity
properties of muscle,” in Biomechanics and Biology of Movement, eds B.
Nigg, B. MacIntosh, and J. Mester (Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics),
193–210.
MacIntosh, B. R., Neptune, R. R., and Horton, J. F. (2000). Cadence, power,
and muscle activation in cycle ergometry. Med. Sci. Sport. Exerc. 32, 1281.
doi: 10.1097/00005768-200007000-00015
Mann,
R.
A.,
and
Hagy,
J.
L.
(1979).
The
function
of
the
toes
in
walking, jogging and running. Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res. 142, 24–29.
doi: 10.1097/00003086-197907000-00005
Mazess, R. B. (1968). The oxygen cost of breathing in man: effects of
altitude,
training,
and
race.
Am.
J.
Phys.
Anthropol.
29,
365–375.
doi: 10.1002/ajpa.1330290311
McCann,
D.
J.,
and
Higginson,
B.
K.
(2008).
Training
to
maximize
economy of motion in running gait. Curr. Sports Med. Rep. 7, 158–162.
doi: 10.1097/01.CSMR.0000319711.63793.84
McMahon, T. A., and Cheng, G. C. (1990). The mechanics of running:
how
does
stiffness
couple
with
speed?
J.
Biomech.
23,
65–78.
doi: 10.1016/0021-9290(90)90042-2
Modica, J. R., and Kram, R. (2005). Metabolic energy and muscular activity
required for leg swing in running. J. Appl. Physiol. (1985) 98, 2126–2131.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00511.2004
Mooses, M., Mooses, K., Haile, D. W., Durussel, J. J., Kaasik, P., and Pitsiladis, Y.
P. (2014). Dissociation between running economy and running performance in
elite Kenyan distance runners. J. Sports Sci. 414, 1–9.
Morgan, D. W., and Craib, M. (1992). Physiological aspects of running economy.
Med. Sci. Sport Exerc. 24, 456–461. doi: 10.1249/00005768-199204000-00011
Morgan,
D.
W.,
Martin,
P.
E.,
and
Krahenbuhl,
G.
S.
(1989).
Factors
affecting
running
economy.
Sports
Med.
7,
310–330.
doi: 10.2165/00007256-198907050-00003
Morse, C. I., Degens, H., Seynnes, O. R., Maganaris, C. N., and Jones, D.
A. (2008). The acute effect of stretching on the passive stiffness of the
human gastrocnemius muscle tendon unit. J. Physiol. (Lond). 586, 97–106.
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2007.140434
Nagano, A., and Komura, T. (2003). Longer moment arm results in smaller joint
moment development, power and work outputs in fast motions. J. Biomech. 36,
1675–1681. doi: 10.1016/S0021-9290(03)00171-4
Nigg, B. M. (2001). The role of impact forces and foot pronation: a new paradigm.
Clin. J. Sport Med. 11, 2–9. doi: 10.1097/00042752-200101000-00002
Novacheck, T. (1998). The biomechanics of running. Gait Posture 7, 77–95.
doi: 10.1016/S0966-6362(97)00038-6
Ogueta-Alday, A., Rodríguez-Marroyo, J. A., and García-López, J. (2014). Rearfoot
striking runners are more economical than midfoot strikers. Med. Sci. Sports
Exerc. 46, 580–585. doi: 10.1249/MSS.0000000000000139
Perl, D. P., Daoud, A. I., and Lieberman, D. E. (2012). Effects of footwear
and strike type on running economy. Med. Sci. Sport Exerc. 44, 1335–1343.
doi: 10.1249/MSS.0b013e318247989e
Pinnington, H. C., and Dawson, B. (2001). The energy cost of running on
grass compared to soft dry beach sand. J. Sci. Med. Sport 4, 416–430.
doi: 10.1016/S1440-2440(01)80051-7
Pollock, M. L. (1977). Submaximal and maximal working capacity of elite distance
runners. Part I: Cardiorespiratory aspects. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 301, 310–322.
doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1977.tb38209.x
Praagman, M., Chadwick, E. K., van der Helm, F. C., and Veeger, H.
E.
(2006).
The
relationship
between
two
different
mechanical
cost
functions and muscle oxygen consumption. J. Biomech. 39, 758–765.
doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2004.11.034
Pugh,
L.
(1970).
Oxygen
intake
in
track
and
treadmill
running
with
observations on the effect of air resistance. J. Physiol. (Lond). 207, 823–835.
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1970.sp009097
Pugh, L. (1971). The influence of wind resistance in running and walking and the
mechanical efficiency of work against horizontal or vertical forces. J. Physiol.
(Lond). 213, 255–276. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1971.sp009381
Raichlen, D. A., Armstrong, H., and Lieberman, D. E. (2011). Calcaneus
length determines running economy: implications for endurance running
performance in modern humans and Neandertals. J. Hum. Evol. 60, 299–308.
doi: 10.1016/j.jhevol.2010.11.002
Rall,
J.
A.
(1985).
Energetic
aspects
of
skeletal
muscle
contraction:
implications
of
fiber
types.
Exerc.
Sport
Sci.
Rev.
13,
33.
doi: 10.1249/00003677-198500130-00004
Ramsey, R. W., and Street, S. F. (1940). The isometric length-tension diagram of
isolated skeletal muscle fibers of the frog. J. Cell. Comp. Physiol. 15, 11–34.
doi: 10.1002/jcp.1030150103
Roberts, T. J., Chen, M. S., and Taylor, C. R. (1998a). Energetics of bipedal
running. II. Limb design and running mechanics. J. Exp. Biol. 201,
2753–2762.
Roberts, T. J., Kram, R., Weyand, P. G., and Taylor, C. R. (1998b). Energetics of
bipedal running. J. Exp. Biol. 201, 2745–2751.
Roberts, T. J., Marsh, R. L., Weyand, P. G., and Taylor, C. R. (1997). Muscular force
in running turkeys: the economy of minimizing work. Science 275, 1113–1115.
doi: 10.1126/science.275.5303.1113
Rolian, C., Lieberman, D. E., Hamill, J., Scott, J. W., and Werbel, W. (2009).
Walking, running and the evolution of short toes in humans. J. Exp. Biol. 212,
713–721. doi: 10.1242/jeb.019885
Rome, L. C. (1992). Scaling of muscle fibres and locomotion. J. Exp. Biol. 168,
243–252.
Rowell, L. B., Brengelmann, G. L., Murray, J. A., Kraning, K. K., and Kusumi, F.
(1969). Human metabolic responses to hyperthermia during mild to maximal
exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 26, 395–402.
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
14
June 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 433
 Fletcher and MacIntosh
Running Economy from a Muscle Energetics Perspective
Rusko, H. K. (1992). Development of aerobic power in relation to age and
training in cross-country skiers. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 24, 1040–1047.
doi: 10.1249/00005768-199209000-00014
Saltin, B., Larsen, H., Terrados, N., Bangsbo, J., Bak, T., Kim, C. K., et al. (1995).
Aerobic exercise capacity at sea level and at altitude in Kenyan boys, junior and
senior runners compared with Scandinavian runners. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports
5, 209–221. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0838.1995.tb00037.x
Sargeant, A. J. (2007). Structural and functional determinants of human muscle
power. Exp. Physiol. 92, 323–331. doi: 10.1113/expphysiol.2006.034322
Saunders, P. U., Pyne, D. B., Telford, R. D., and Hawley, J. A. (2004). Factors
affecting running economy in trained distance runners. Sports Med. 34,
465–485. doi: 10.2165/00007256-200434070-00005
Saunders, P. U., Telford, R. D., Pyne, D. B., Peltola, E. M., Cunningham, R. B., Gore,
C. J., et al. (2006). Short-term plyometric training improves running economy
in highly trained middle and long distance runners. J. Strength Cond. Res. 20,
947–954. doi: 10.1519/R-18235.1
Scholz, M. N., Bobbert, M. F., van Soest, A. J., Clark, J. R., and van Heerden, J.
(2008). Running biomechanics: shorter heels, better economy. J. Exp. Biol. 211,
3266–3271. doi: 10.1242/jeb.018812
Seynnes, O. R., de Boer, M., and Narici, M. V. (2007). Early skeletal
muscle
hypertrophy
and
architectural
changes
in
response
to
high-
intensity
resistance
training.
J.
Appl.
Physiol.
(1985)
102,
368–373.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00789.2006
Shaw, A. J., Ingham, S. A., Fudge, B. W., and Folland, J. P. (2013). The
reliability of running economy expressed as oxygen cost and energy cost
in trained distance runners. Appl. Physiol. Nutr. Metab. 38, 1268–1272.
doi: 10.1139/apnm-2013-0055
Smith, N. P., Barclay, C. J., and Loiselle, D. S. (2005). The efficiency
of
muscle
contraction.
Prog.
Biophys.
Mol.
Biol.
88,
1–58.
doi: 10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2003.11.014
Stainsby, W. N., and Lambert, C. R. (1979). Determination of oxygen
uptake
in
skeletal
muscle.
Exerc.
Sport
Sci.
Rev.
7,
125–151.
doi: 10.1249/00003677-197900070-00006
Stearne, S. M., McDonald, K. A., Alderson, J. A., North, I., Oxnard, C. E., and
Rubenson, J. (2016). The foot’s arch and the energetics of human locomotion.
Sci. Rep. 6:19403. doi: 10.1038/srep19403
Taylor, C. R., Heglund, N. C., McMahon, T. A., and Looney, T. R. (1980). Energetic
cost of generating muscular force during running: a comparison of large and
small animals. J. Exp. Biol. 86, 9–18.
ter Keurs, H. E., and de Tombe, P. P. (1993). Determinants of velocity of sarcomere
shortening in mammalian myocardium. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 332, 645–649.
doi: 10.1007/978-1-4615-2872-2_58
Trehearn, T. L., and Buresh, R. J. (2009). Sit-and-reach flexibility and running
economy of men and women collegiate distance runners. J. Strength Cond. Res.
23, 158–162. doi: 10.1519/JSC.0b013e31818eaf49
Tung, K. D., Franz, J. R., and Kram, R. (2014). A test of the metabolic cost of
cushioning hypothesis during unshod and shod running. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc.
46, 324–329. doi: 10.1249/MSS.0b013e3182a63b81
van Werkhoven, H., and Piazza, S. J. (2017). Does foot anthropometry predict
metabolic cost during running? J. Appl. Biomech. doi: 10.1123/jab.2016-0173.
[Epub ahead of print].
Warddrip, E. M. (2007). Disintegrating the Metabolic Cost of Human Running.
Graduate thesis, University of Colorado at Boulder.
Weidenreich, F. (1923). Evolution of the human foot. Am. J. Phys. Anthropol. 6,
1–10. doi: 10.1002/ajpa.1330060102
Wilber, R. L., and Pitsiladis, Y. P. (2012). Kenyan and Ethiopian distance
runners: what makes them so good? Int. J. Sports Physiol. Perform. 7, 92–102.
doi: 10.1123/ijspp.7.2.92
Williams, K. R., and Cavanagh, P. R. (1987). Relationship between distance
running mechanics, running economy, and performance. J. Appl. Physiol.
(1985) 63, 1236–1245.
Woledge, R. C., Curtin, N. A., and Homsher, E. (1985). Energetic aspects of muscle
contraction. Monogr. Physiol. Soc. 41, 1–357.
Woledge, R. C., Wilson, M. G., Howarth, J. V., Elzinga, G., and Kometani, K.
(1988). The energetics of work and heat production by single muscle fibres from
the frog. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 226, 677–688.
Worobets,
J.,
Tomaras,
E.,
William
Wannop,
J.,
and
Stefanyshyn,
D.
(2013).
Running
shoe
cushioning
properties
can
influence
oxygen
consumption.
Footwear
Sci.
5,
S75–S76.
doi:
10.1080/19424280.2013.
799566
Zamparo, P., Perini, R., Orizio, C., Sacher, M., and Ferretti, G. (1992). The energy
cost of walking or running on sand. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. Occup. Physiol. 65,
183–187. doi: 10.1007/BF00705078
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2017 Fletcher and MacIntosh. This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original
author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this journal
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
15
June 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 433
