 Using State and Provincial Surveillance Programs to Reduce 
Risk of Recurrence of Neural Tube Defects in the United States 
and Canada: A Missed Opportunity?
Timothy J. Flood1,*, Chelsea M. Rienks2, Alina L. Flores2, Cara T. Mai2, Barbara K. 
Frohnert3, Rachel E. Rutkowski4, Jane A. Evans5, and Russell S. Kirby4
1Arizona Birth Defects Monitoring Program, Phoenix, Arizona
2National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, U.S. Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia
3Birth Defects Monitoring and Analysis, Minnesota Department of Health, St. Paul, Minnesota
4College of Public Health, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida
5Department of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 
Canada
Abstract
Background—Once a woman has had a fetus or infant affected with a neural tube defect (NTD), 
the risk of recurrence is approximately 3%. This risk can be significantly reduced by folic acid 
supplement consumption during the periconceptional period; however, this requires women at risk 
to be adequately informed about the appropriate dosage and timing of supplement intake before 
planning another pregnancy. As birth defects surveillance programs are tasked with identifying 
and documenting NTD-affected pregnancies and births, they are in a unique position to support 
recurrence prevention activities.
Methods—In 2015, we surveyed state and provincial birth defects surveillance programs to 
assess their NTD recurrence prevention activities. The online survey was sent to programs in 52 
United States (U.S.) jurisdictions and all 13 provinces and territories in Canada. Findings were 
compared with a similar survey conducted in 2005 among U.S. programs.
Results—In 2015, of the 44 U.S. and Canadian surveillance programs that responded, only 9 
programs (7 U.S. and 2 Canadian) reported currently having activities specifically directed toward 
preventing NTD recurrence. Compared with a 2005 survey of U.S. programs, the number of U.S. 
programs working on NTD recurrence prevention decreased by almost 50% (from 13 to 7 
programs).
Conclusion—The number of birth defects surveillance programs with NTD recurrence 
prevention activities has decreased over the past decade due to a range of barriers, most notably a 
*Correspondence to: Tim Flood, Arizona Birth Defects Monitoring Program, Arizona Department of Health Services, 150 N 18th 
Avenue, Suite 550, Phoenix, AZ 85007. timothy.flood@azdhs.gov. 
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 
01.
Published in final edited form as:
Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2016 November ; 106(11): 875–880. doi:10.1002/bdra.23576.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 lack of resources. However, while some recurrence prevention activities require part-time staff, 
other activities could be accomplished using minimal resources.
Keywords
neural tube defect; recurrence; prevention; spina bifida; anencephaly; folic acid
Introduction
Consumption of supplemental folic acid has been shown to be effective in preventing the 
recurrence of neural tube defects (NTDs) (Grosse and Collins, 2007), especially those not 
part of a syndrome or other pattern of multiple anomalies. The most common forms of 
NTDs are anencephaly, spina bifida, and encephalocele, although rarer forms also occur. 
These birth defects arise during the first 28 days of gestation due to faulty closure of the 
embryonic neural tube (Sadler, 2012). NTDs that decline in frequency with increased 
consumption of folic acid, through food fortification or use of supplements that contain folic 
acid, are considered to be folate sensitive and thus potentially preventable. In 1991, the U.S. 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) issued guidelines for preventing the 
recurrence of NTD (CDC, 1991, 1992). These guidelines recommend that women with a 
previous affected pregnancy and planning a subsequent pregnancy speak with their doctors 
about consuming 4.0 milligrams of folic acid daily, beginning a minimum of 1 month before 
conception and continuing through the first 3 months of pregnancy. These guidelines are 
referenced by other U.S. public health and medical organizations (ACOG, 2003; USPSTF, 
2009; Toriello, 2011; Zolotor and Carlough, 2014).
Recommendations by the Society of Obstetricians and Gynecologists of Canada and Health 
Canada are similar, but advise that women begin consuming 4.0 milligrams folic acid at least 
3 months before conception (Van Allen et al., 2002; Wilson et al., 2015). For women at 
elevated risk but not planning a pregnancy, CDC (2002) recommends 0.4 mg of folic acid 
per day, and Health Canada (Van Allen et al., 2002) recommends 1.0 mg folic acid daily in a 
multivitamin-multimineral supplement. Previous studies reported that women with a history 
of a NTD-affected pregnancy were under-informed about the preventive role of folic acid 
(Rinsky-Eng and Miller, 2002). Furthermore, recent evidence shows that many women 
remain inadequately supplemented. This would indicate that many either remain unaware of 
the recommendations to take folic acid or fail to initiate usage at the appropriate time (Arth 
et al., 2015).
With few exceptions (Felkner et al., 2005; Bupp et al., 2015), the prevalence of recurrent 
NTD in the United States has not been well published or studied in the era after the initiation 
of folic acid fortification. The risk factors underlying the recurrence of NTD are only 
partially understood, and may differ from the factors associated with primary occurrence 
(Mitchell, 2005; Agopian et al., 2013). Recurrent cases may result from inadequate 
consumption of folic acid or are due to mechanisms unrelated to folic acid supplementation 
or fortification, for example, those where the NTD is one component of a chromosomal 
syndrome or a single gene disorder. Nonetheless, it has been shown that periconceptional 
folic acid consumption reduces the risk considerably, especially for isolated spina bifida. 
Flood et al.
Page 2
Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Felkner et al. (2005) detected no recurrent NTD among 130 women receiving folic acid 
supplementation, and Bupp et al. (2015) reported a 0.4% NTD recurrence risk among 
mothers who took folic acid, and an 8.5% recurrence risk among mothers not taking folic 
acid.
As part of their routine functions, birth defects surveillance programs not only record the 
occurrence of NTD-affected pregnancies, but some also record mothers’ contact 
information. These data could be used to identify mothers and families who could benefit 
from educational materials and messages. As such, surveillance programs might be well-
positioned to use their registries to educate high risk mothers about the role of folic acid in 
preventing the recurrence of an NTD.
In a 2005 survey of state birth defects surveillance programs, Collins et al. (2009) contacted 
34 states and Puerto Rico and identified 13 programs with current activities to prevent the 
recurrence of an NTD. In this study, we updated the 2005 survey concerning NTD 
recurrence prevention activities in both the United States and Canada to determine the 
number of surveillance programs in 2015 engaged in NTD recurrence prevention, the 
educational activities conducted, the resources dedicated to this prevention topic, and the 
obstacles identified in implementing NTD recurrence prevention activities.
Materials and Methods
In January 2015, the NTD Surveillance and Folic Acid Education Committee of the National 
Birth Defects Prevention Network (NBDPN) conducted a survey of state and provincial birth 
defects surveillance programs. Similar to the 2005 version, this current survey was created 
and conducted online using SurveyMonkey (SurveyMonkey.com; Portland, OR). The 
Committee invited the programs in the jurisdictions of all 50 U.S. states, the District of 
Columbia, Puerto Rico, and all 13 provinces and territories in Canada to participate in the 
survey. The Committee emailed an invitation to the birth defects surveillance point-of-
contact in each state, province, or territory. Email reminders were sent from February to 
April 2015.
As in 2005, the new survey asked programs to indicate the status of state/provincial activities 
related to NTD recurrence prevention (none, previously had or planning, current activity). If 
the initial point-of-contact was unable to provide this information, the Committee requested 
that they forward the survey to a knowledgeable respondent. For programs denoting current 
activities, the Committee considered the response valid if activities included one or more of 
the following activity components: (a) provided educational materials for NTD recurrence 
prevention at events, through community advocacy groups, or by means of social media; (b) 
conducted outreach to clinics that, in turn, offered recurrence prevention information to high 
risk women; or (c) used registry data to contact women who had an affected pregnancy, 
directly or indirectly (e.g., by means of a health care practitioner).
For programs with current activities, responses concerning activity components, including 
the proportion of families of NTD cases they contacted, whether families are contacted in 
cases of fetal death, assessment of the mothers’ understanding of NTD recurrence risk, the 
Flood et al.
Page 3
Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 interval from birth to contact, the method (e.g., in-person, mail, clinic) used for the contact, 
and whether the program devotes staff to recurrence prevention activities were assessed. For 
the programs that either never had activities or did not have current ones, the survey asked 
about the barriers they encountered in trying to conduct recurrence prevention activities. 
Analyses consisted of tabulations of categorical responses and review of open-ended text 
responses.
Results
A total of 35 (67.3%) U.S. jurisdictions and nine (69.2%) Canadian provinces or territories 
responded to the survey (Fig. 1). Current NTD recurrence prevention activities were reported 
from 15 programs in 12 U.S. states, Puerto Rico, and two Canadian provinces. Upon review 
of the 15 responses, six programs did not have targeted recurrence prevention components. 
For example, six programs reported that their activities consisted solely of disseminating 
general folic acid materials at a Birth Defects Prevention Month event held annually each 
January. As these materials were not recurrence specific, these six programs were removed 
from further evaluation. This left 38 programs for analysis, 29 respondents with no current 
program plus the 9 respondents with NTD recurrence prevention activities. Of the 29 
respondents with no current program, 14 programs either had activities in the past, including 
1 Canadian program, or reported planning future initiatives. The remaining 15 programs, 9 
in the United States and 6 in Canada, reported no recurrence prevention activities involving 
their birth defects surveillance systems. Overwhelmingly, these surveillance programs cited 
a lack of funds and staff as the reason for this lack of activity (Fig. 2). These programs 
without recurrence prevention activities also noted a lack of expertise, low priority, and 
concerns about privacy among the reasons for not implementing activities. These responses 
are similar to those reported in the previous 2005 survey.
CHARACTERISTICS OF CURRENT RECURRENCE PROGRAMS (N = 9)
The following results are restricted to the nine programs (seven U.S. and two Canadian) that 
reported specific recurrence prevention activities. Among the range of approaches used, 
seven programs provided educational materials for NTD recurrence prevention in one of the 
following ways: at events, through community advocacy groups, or by means of social 
media. Five programs conducted outreach to clinics that provide recurrence prevention 
information to high risk women. Three programs implemented other activities, specifically, 
conducting maternal interviews, providing continuing medical education and/or reproductive 
guidelines to health care providers, and using local health department staff to deliver the 
messages to mothers.
The survey sought information pertaining to NTD case ascertainment. Four of the nine 
programs used active case-finding methods (intense staff engagement in finding cases), one 
conducted only passive case-finding (program receives case information from data sources), 
and four combined active and passive ascertainment. Due to the variable number of births in 
their catchment areas, the range of NTD cases ascertained by these programs ranged from 
zero to 170. Of the current programs, eight could verify the NTD diagnosis with medical 
records review, and three of these also received physician confirmation. The one remaining 
Flood et al.
Page 4
Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 program did not verify the reported diagnosis. In cases of adoption, two programs attempted 
to contact the birth mother, but three programs excluded adoptions. The remaining 
respondents did not disclose how adoptions are handled within their program. Eight of the 
nine programs reported the ability to determine whether an ascertained NTD case can be 
classified as an NTD recurrence for that mother.
CONTACTING THE MOTHER
The nine current programs reported contacting, on average, 76% of case mothers (with 
contact ranging from 10% to 100%). While the programs focused on contacting women who 
delivered a live birth, four programs indicated that they also contacted women who had an 
affected pregnancy resulting in a non-live birth. Six of the nine programs used records from 
a confidential registry to contact case mothers directly, and two programs used local health 
departments to contact mothers. The various methods used to contact mothers with a child or 
pregnancy affected by an NTD are shown in Table 1, with in-person contact being the most 
common approach. With respect to the type of professional contacting the women, the most 
common option selected was a genetic counselor/social worker, or a nurse. The typical 
interval following birth in which contact was made ranged from immediately following 
hospital discharge to within 1 year of birth. On average, programs needed 4 months 
following delivery to reach the mothers, but some programs were unable to report the actual 
time.
EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS AND THEIR DISSEMINATION TO FAMILIES
Current programs used a variety of methods and educational materials to disseminate 
information about reducing the risk for NTD recurrence. Six of the programs used brochures 
and fact sheets developed by CDC or produced by the program itself. Brochures/fact sheets 
developed by the March of Dimes Foundation, the NBDPN, and the Spina Bifida 
Association of America were slightly less common, with three of the programs using 
materials from these groups. One program used materials from another source and one 
program used a video as the educational media. Programs most frequently disseminated 
educational materials by mail (five programs), in person (four programs), or at a clinic (four 
programs). Two programs used family or case physicians to distribute materials; one 
program disseminated materials at targeted gatherings and events for persons with spina 
bifida. All nine programs recommended that mothers take 4.0 mg of folic acid for NTD 
recurrence prevention. No program mentioned educating women about NTD risk factors 
unrelated to folic acid.
PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION COMPONENT
Two of the programs included a component targeting providers and health professionals for 
professional education. Both programs targeted the same groups: the mother’s health care 
professional, family practitioners, and midwives.
RESOURCES, EFFECTIVENESS, EVALUATION, AND BARRIERS
Only one of the nine programs devoted a portion of time from both a contractor and full-
time employees toward NTD recurrence prevention. The remaining programs dedicated 
Flood et al.
Page 5
Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 minimal staff time to the activities. While six programs (67%) identified their activities as 
being cost effective because their interventions were not resource intensive, one said their 
activities were not cost effective due to the high percentage of unplanned pregnancies (two 
programs did not respond). Most of the programs (78%) said they evaluated or were 
beginning to evaluate their activities. Of the nine current programs, five identified barriers or 
issues they have encountered. Two programs cited staffing limitations and one program each 
identified lack of funds, small numbers of cases for analysis, and challenges in obtaining the 
correct maternal contact information as barriers for conducting program evaluation.
Discussion
This survey inquired about NTD recurrence prevention activities since 2005, and expanded 
the focus from the United States to include Canadian programs. However, only 9 programs 
in 44 responding jurisdictions (7 in the United States, 2 in Canada) were conducting 
recurrence prevention activities in early 2015. Compared with the Collins et al. (2009) 
survey conducted in 2005, the number of programs conducting NTD recurrence prevention 
activities in the United States decreased by almost half (from 13 to 7 programs).
Survey response rates from the United States (67.3%) and Canada (69.2%) were similar, as 
were the proportions of programs that identified current activities (20.0% and 22.2%). 
Differences between U.S. and Canadian surveillance programs are apparent, with many U.S. 
jurisdictions having well established and long-standing birth defects registries. Few 
Canadian states or territories have such surveillance programs (Alberta being a notable 
exception), although there is an initiative under way to reestablish registries that had been 
discontinued or to implement new ones (Lowry and León, 2013).
The survey results identified opportunities to build and strengthen the core activities of birth 
defect surveillance programs. Our survey inquired about potential NTD recurrence 
prevention activities to reach mothers. All nine current programs used one or more of these 
activities. To expand the number of participating programs, these activities could serve as 
examples for other programs seeking to launch or expand recurrence activities.
The main barriers cited by both programs with and without recurrence prevention activities 
were inadequate funding and under-staffing. While more resources are needed for such 
initiatives, especially given their demonstrated cost-effectiveness (Grosse et al., 2008), it is 
acknowledged that many registries are being asked to do more with less. The following 
recurrence prevention activities are offered as suggestions for activities that might require 
only part-time staff or minimal resources: (a) Provide education about recurrence prevention 
at events attended by families of those affected by an NTD; (b) Partner with community 
groups (e.g., Spina Bifida Association) to deliver educational messages about recurrence 
prevention; (c) Include recurrence prevention messages in social media that specifically 
target mothers at high-risk; (d) Conduct outreach to high-risk women with information about 
recurrence prevention in a variety of clinical settings (e.g., obstetrics and gynecology, spina 
bifida clinic, genetics as well as family practice, general pediatrics); (e) Use information 
from the birth defects registry to contact families directly, such as via their healthcare 
provider or via a local health agency.
Flood et al.
Page 6
Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Efforts to use interventions are challenged also by the rarity of NTD recurrence. 
Surveillance programs should be able to present the magnitude of recurrent cases of NTD in 
their jurisdictions. Future surveys could ask about the ability of surveillance programs to 
publish their rate of recurrent NTD cases.
While our study shows that most birth defects surveillance programs are not engaged in 
recurrence prevention activities, opportunities for these programs to become engaged exist. 
First, there is a need for mothers with a history of NTD to be informed, educated, and 
empowered about the role of folic acid in preventing NTD in subsequent pregnancies. 
Because surveillance programs receive information about mothers who have had NTD-
affected pregnancies, they may be in a unique position to help educate these women about 
recurrence risk before a subsequent pregnancy. Programs can explore and collaborate with 
interested partners to target the education messages. Second, there is also a need to link 
these mothers to health care providers (physicians, nutritionists, nurses, and others) who can 
reinforce this important intervention about recurrence risk.
Of additional importance is for healthcare professionals to be adequately informed. Several 
studies document that many healthcare professionals are lacking detailed and accurate 
information concerning the 4.0 milligram prescription dosage and timing of folic acid 
supplementation (Hauser et al., 2004; Abu-Hammad et al., 2008; Aggarwal et al., 2010). Our 
survey documented little to no attempt by surveillance programs to provide education to 
health professionals and this appears to be a worthwhile initiative to consider in the future. 
Also, seeking mothers’ feedback concerning the recurrence prevention programs might add 
valuable perspective about the educational approaches.
With the emergence of interest in NTD risk factors other than folic acid, such as obesity and 
Hispanic ethnicity (Mitchell, 2005; Agopian et al., 2013), future surveys could assess 
whether jurisdictions are including these additional factors in their educational programs. 
Additional risk factors may be addressed by programs that promote optimal preconception 
health, healthy diet, exercise, and weight before and during pregnancy, and overall women’s 
health.
STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES
A strength of this study was that it included all U.S. programs and its extension to Canadian 
provinces and territories. Also, given the paucity of information on this topic, this study 
presented useful data to guide public health interventions to help reduce NTD recurrence 
risk.
The study had some weaknesses. Because the survey was self-administered, six programs 
misclassified their recurrence prevention effort and had to be removed from the analysis. 
Also, we were not able to collect information in those areas that did not return a survey 
(approximately 65% of those contacted responded). However, because several the 
nonrespondents were from states without a birth defects program, we would expect that most 
of them had no recurrence prevention activities. Finally, we assumed that the programs had 
knowledge of their own jurisdiction’s recurrence prevention activities or of similar activities 
conducted by other units in their jurisdiction.
Flood et al.
Page 7
Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Summary
Although the United States and Canada have been pioneers in the establishment of folic acid 
food fortification programs that have had a major impact on NTD occurrence in both 
countries (Mills and Signore, 2004; De Wals et al., 2007), women remain at risk either 
because of inadequate folic acid intake or other causes. In particular, women who had an 
affected pregnancy are at greatly increased risk of recurrence. However, the results of this 
survey indicate that birth defects surveillance programs have not progressed since 2005 in 
their promotion and dissemination of NTD recurrence prevention messages and that 
significant barriers remain in using these entities to assure the delivery of this crucial 
information to mothers with NTD-affected pregnancies and the health professionals who 
care for them. Individual programs need to determine the best and most efficient ways to 
ensure that accurate and timely information about folic acid supplementation in the 
periconceptional period is provided to mothers with a previously affected pregnancy.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank state, territorial, and provincial birth defects program staff who responded to the survey, as well 
as the Maternal and Child Health Section of the Public Health Agency of Canada for their input.
References
Abu-Hammad T, Dreiher J, Vardy DA, Cohen AD. Physicians’ knowledge and attitudes regarding 
periconceptional folic acid supplementation: a survey in Southern Israel. Med Sci Monit. 2008; 
14:CR262–CR267. [PubMed: 18443550] 
Agopian AJ, Tinker SC, Lupo PJ, et al. Proportion of neural tube defects attributable to known risk 
factors. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2013; 97:42–46. [PubMed: 23427344] 
Aggarwal A, Kumhar GD, Harit D, Faridi MM. Role of folic acid supplementation in prevention of 
neural tube defects: physicians yet unaware! J Prev Med Hyg. 2010; 51:131–132. [PubMed: 
21361119] 
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). ACOG practice bulletin. Washington, 
DC: ACOG; 2003. Neural tube defects. (Replaces Committee Opinion Number 252, March 2001) 
(Reaffirmed 2014)
Arth A, Tinker S, Moore C, et al. Supplement use and other characteristics among pregnant women 
with a previous pregnancy affected by a neural tube defect - United States, 1997–2009. MMWR 
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2015; 64:6–9. [PubMed: 25590679] 
Bupp CP, Sarasua SM, Dean JH, Stevenson RE. When folic acid fails: insights from 20 years of neural 
tube defect surveillance in South Carolina. Am J Med Genet. 2015; A167:2244–2250.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Use of folic acid for prevention of spina bifida and other 
neural tube defects – 1983–1991. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 1991; 40:513–516. [PubMed: 
2072886] 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Recommendations for the use of folic acid to reduce the 
number of cases of spina bifida and other neural tube defects. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 
1992; 41(RR-14):001.
Collins JS, Canfield MA, Pearson K, et al. Public health projects for preventing the recurrence of 
neural tube defects in the United States. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2009; 85:935–938. 
[PubMed: 19626670] 
De Wals P, Tairou F, Van Allen MI, et al. Reduction in neural-tube defects after folic acid fortification 
in Canada. N Engl J Med. 2007; 357:135–142. [PubMed: 17625125] 
Felkner M, Suarez L, Hendricks K, Larsen R. Implementation and outcomes of recommended folic 
acid supplementation in Mexican-American women with prior neural tube defect-affected 
pregnancies. Am J Prev Med. 2005; 40:867–871.
Flood et al.
Page 8
Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Grosse SD, Collins JS. Folic acid supplementation and neural tube defect recurrence prevention. Birth 
Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2007; 79:737–742. [PubMed: 17990333] 
Grosse SD, Ouyang L, Collins JS, et al. Economic evaluation of a neural tube defect recurrence-
prevention program. Am J Prev Med. 2008; 35:572–577. [PubMed: 18845415] 
Hauser KW, Lilly CM, Frías JL. Florida health care providers’ knowledge of folic acid for the 
prevention of neural tube defects. South Med J. 2004; 97:437–439. [PubMed: 15180016] 
Lowry, RB., León, JA. Congenital anomalies in Canada 2013: a perinatal health surveillance report. 
Ottawa: Public Health Agency of Canada; 2013. Congenital anomalies surveillance in Canada; p. 
6-10.Available at: http://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2014/aspc-phac/HP35-40-2013-
eng.pdf [Accessed October 5, 2016]
Mills JL, Signore C. Neural tube defect rates before and after food fortification with folic acid. Birth 
Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2004; 70:844–845. [PubMed: 15468072] 
Mitchell LE. Epidemiology of neural tube defects. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2005; 135C:
88–94. [PubMed: 15800877] 
Rinsky-Eng J, Miller L. Knowledge, use, and education regarding folic acid supplementation: 
continuation study of women in Colorado who had a pregnancy affected by a neural tube defect. 
Teratology. 2002; 66(Suppl 1):S29–S31. [PubMed: 12239741] 
Sadler, TW. Langman’s medical embryology. 12. Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins; 2012. p. 63-70.
Toriello HV for the Policy and Practice Guideline Committee of the American College of Medical 
Genetics. Policy statement on folic acid and neural tube defects. Genet Med. 2011; 13:593–596. 
[PubMed: 21552133] 
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF). Folic acid for the prevention of neural tube defects: 
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. Ann Intern Med. 2009; 
150:626–631. [PubMed: 19414842] 
Van Allen, MI., McCourt, C., Lee, NS. A resource document for health professionals, 2002. Ottawa, 
Ontario: Minister of Public Works and Government Services Canada; 2002. Preconception health: 
folic acid for the primary prevention of neural tube defects. (Cat. Number H39-607/2002E)
Wilson RD. for the Genetics Committee, Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada. Pre-
conception folic acid and multivitamin supplementation for the primary and secondary prevention 
of neural tube defects and other folic acid-sensitive congenital anomalies. sOGC Clinical Practice 
Guideline Number 324. J Obstet Gynaecol Canada. 2015; 37:534–549.
Zolotor AJ, Carlough MC. Update on prenatal care. Am Fam Physician. 2014; 89:199–208. [PubMed: 
24506122] 
Flood et al.
Page 9
Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 FIGURE 1. 
Survey respondents from United States (U.S.) and Canadian jurisdictions.
Flood et al.
Page 10
Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 FIGURE 2. 
Barriers cited for jurisdictions with no active neural tube defects recurrence prevention 
program (n = 29).
Flood et al.
Page 11
Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Flood et al.
Page 12
TABLE 1
Methods and Program Staff for Currently Active Recurrence Prevention Programs (n = 9) That Contacted 
Mothers Who Previously Had a Child or Pregnancy with a Neural Tube Defect
Program contact method
n
% of all programs
 In person
5
56
 Over the phone
4
44
 At a clinic
3
33
 In writing/by mail
3
33
 Through physician of case/family
2
22
 None
1
11
Type of program staff
 Genetic counselor/social worker
3
33
 Nurse
3
33
 Physician of case/family
2
22
 Public health worker or administrator
2
22
 Parent consultant
1
11
Respondents were permitted to select more than one option.
Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
