 Accepted Article
This article has been accepted for publication and undergone full peer review but has not 
been through the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process, which may 
lead to differences between this version and the Version of Record. Please cite this article as 
doi: 10.1111/jan.13164 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Received Date : 11-Dec-2015 
Revised Date   : 30-Aug-2016 
Accepted Date : 06-Sep-2016 
Article type      : Discussion Paper 
 
Title: The potential for nurses to contribute to and lead improvement science in 
healthcare 
 
Corresponding Author:  
Rachel FLYNN RN, MScN, PhD student 
Faculty of Nursing, University of Alberta,  
11405 87avenue, Edmonton, AB, Canada, T6G1C9 
Email: rachel.flynn@ualberta.ca  
Twitter: Rach_Flynn1  
 
Dr. Shannon D. SCOTT RN, MN, PhD 
Professor, Canada Research Chair for Knowledge Translation in Child Health 
Faculty of Nursing, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada 
 
Dr. Thomas ROTTER PhD, PhD, MPH, Dipl. Kfm. 
Chair in Health Quality Improvement Science 
College of Pharmacy and Nutrition, University of Saskatchewan, SK, Canada 
 
Dr. Dawn HARTFIELD MPH, MD, FRCPC 
Medical Director Quality, Integrated Quality Management, Edmonton Zone, Alberta Health 
Services; Associate Professor, Department of Pediatrics; Division of Pediatric Hospital 
Medicine 
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Alberta 
 
Conflict of interest 
The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 
Acknowledgements 
Ms. Flynn acknowledges Alberta Innovates Health Solutions (Clinician Fellowship), 
Knowledge Translation Canada (past Doctoral Trainee) and the Women and Children’s 
Health Research Institute for their support of her doctoral research.  Dr. Scott holds a Canada 
Research Chair (tier II) for knowledge translation in child health and a population 
investigator award from AHFMR. 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Funding Statement 
This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, 
or not-for-profit sectors 
 
Abstract 
Aim. A discussion of how nurses can contribute to and lead improvement science activities in 
healthcare. 
Background. Quality failures in healthcare have led to the urgent need for healthcare quality 
improvement. However, too often quality improvement interventions proceed to practice 
implementation without rigorous methods or sufficient empirical evidence. This lack of 
evidence for quality improvement has led to the development of improvement science, which 
embodies quality improvement research and quality improvement practice. This paper 
discusses how the discipline of nursing and the nursing profession possesses many strengths 
that enable nurses to lead and to play an integral role in improvement science activities. 
However, we also discuss that there are insufficiencies in nursing education that require 
attention for nurses to truly contribute to and lead improvement science in healthcare. 
Design. Discussion paper 
Data Sources. This paper builds on a collection of our previous work, a 12-month scoping 
review (March 2013-March 2014), baseline study on a quality improvement management 
system (Lean), interviews with nurses on quality improvement implementation and 
supporting literature.  
Implications for Nursing. This paper highlights how nurses have the philosophical, 
theoretical, political and ethical positioning to contribute to and lead improvement science 
activities. However up to now, the potential for nurses to lead improvement science activities 
has not been fully used. 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Conclusion. We suggest that one starting point is to include improvement science in nursing 
education curricula. Specifically, there needs to be increased focus on the nursing roles and 
skills needed to contribute to and lead healthcare improvement science activities.  
Keywords: improvement science, quality improvement, nursing, nursing education 
 
SUMMARY STATEMENT 
Why is this research or review needed? 
• Nurses have had limited opportunities for contributing to and leading improvement 
science in healthcare. 
• To raise awareness in nurses of the opportunities in improvement science as a valuable 
option for future career development. 
• To draw attention to the existing gap between nursing practice and nursing education in 
terms of improvement science. 
 
What are the key findings? 
• Nurses have the potential to significantly contribute to and to lead in the field of 
improvement science in healthcare. 
• Improvement science is not comprehensively reflected in undergraduate, graduate and 
continuing professional development for nurses. This is despite the increasing demand 
for nurses to engage in improvement science. 
 
 How should the findings be used to influence policy/practice/research/education?  
• There is the need for nursing education to incorporate patient safety and the principles of 
quality improvement. 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
• Nurses would benefit from the establishment of advanced nursing roles, such as clinician 
scientists in improvement science. 
• The establishment of nurse clinician scientist roles in improvement science is an 
important strategy to enable nurses to lead healthcare transformation and to sustain our 
healthcare system. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Healthcare is a highly complex field and faces many challenges. The demands on healthcare 
systems are growing and inadequacies have become widespread (Baker et al. 2004, Appleby 
et al. 2011, Murray et al. 2013, Bergman et al. 2015). The three critical factors responsible 
for these challenges are the:  
 
a. increase in the proportion of ageing and older people in our population and with multiple 
chronic conditions (Bergman et al. 2015); 
b. rapid advancements in technology, information access, medical innovations and costly 
treatments (Nelson et al. 1998);  
c. a high level of reporting on the inefficiencies of healthcare systems (World Health 
Organisation 2006, World Health Organisation 2007, Organisation for Economic 
Cooperation and Development 2010).  
 
Unfortunately, there are no ‘magic bullets’ to solve these problems (Shojania & Grimshaw 
2004). The need to improve healthcare quality has intensified within the past decade (Chassin 
& Galvin 1998, Burhans & Aligood 2010, Murray et al. 2013). Two seminal reports from the 
Institute of Medicine have led to healthcare quality improvement (QI) being widely 
recognized as a priority area of need. In 2000, the Institute of Medicine (IOM) published To 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Err Is Human: Building a Safer Healthcare System (IOM 2000). This report signaled the 
urgent need for improvement in patient safety and quality of care. Crossing the Quality 
Chasm: A New Health System for the 21st Century (IOM 2001), closely followed. This report 
outlined a vision for safe, high quality care that is evidence-based, patient-centered and 
systems-oriented.  These publications have had a great impact on the drive for QI across all 
disciplines in healthcare.  
 
Background 
QI in healthcare is an approach to achieving and sustaining changes that lead to better care 
and a better healthcare system. QI refers to the application of improvement practices using 
tools and methods to implement, test, improve and scale-up effective QI practices (Alexander 
&Herald, 2009).  There are challenges to QI in healthcare, with QI interventions failing to 
achieve or sustain their proposed outcomes (Solberg et al. 2000, Balasubramanian et al. 
2010). The QI domain has attracted concern that it lacks rigorous scientific evidence 
(Marshall 2011, Marshall et al. 2013) and QI approaches often proceed on the basis of 
intuition and anecdotal evidence (Shojania & Grimshaw 2005). Whilst it may be 
understandable that there is a belief that action over evidence leads to faster improvements in 
healthcare, the evidence has shown that QI interventions that appear to be based on anecdotal 
evidence and preliminary findings often result in no significant improvements and are 
minimal and local in scale (Auerbach et al. 2007).  
QI involves change, but not all changes lead to an improvement (Berwick 2008).  For 
healthcare to fully benefit from QI, we need to be sure that the changes are made 
systematically and incorporate both scientific knowledge and the best available research 
evidence (Batalden & Davidoff 2007).  A lack of rigorous evaluation studies of QI 
interventions results in the reasons for the success or failures of QI interventions being 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
unknown and the knowledge is lost (Batalden & Davidoff 2007, Davidoff et al. 2008). Such 
knowledge gaps have led to the development of improvement science.  
 
Improvement Science 
Improvement science is a new field of science, which attempts to provide a scientific 
evidence base for healthcare QI interventions (Crisp 2015) and incorporates QI research, the 
implementation of QI interventions and the scientific evaluation of QI interventions (Grol et 
al. 2002).  Improvement science involves a scientific process for identifying the most 
effective QI interventions to improve and sustain healthcare services and outcomes (The 
Health Foundation 2011). The overarching goal of improvement science is to ensure that QI 
efforts are scientifically -based akin to the scientifically-based practices we seek to 
implement (Shojania & Grimshaw 2005). From an improvement science stance, QI efforts 
should be based on sound evidence with rigorous assessment, implementation, adoption, 
evaluation, spread and sustainability.  
The aim of improvement science is to build an evidence base on how healthcare 
providers and systems can improve their work by translating this evidence into practice 
(Pearson, 2010). Stevens (2013) discusses how the shift in healthcare towards evidence-based 
practice and improvement requires nurses to gain new competencies to deliver improvement 
that is evidence based. From our collective experiences as a [professional positions and 
expertise anonymized for review purposes] we argue that nurses have the potential to 
contribute to and lead in this movement. However, we recognize and discuss in this paper 
that nursing education is falling short in improvement science.  
 
 
 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Purpose 
The purpose of this paper is to discuss how nurses can contribute to improvement science in 
healthcare. We pay particular attention to the philosophical, theoretical, political and ethical 
positions that underpin the nursing discipline and profession and how these positions either 
enable or hinder nurses’ ability to contribute to and lead improvement science. We discuss 
two areas that require change for nursing to fully contribute to and lead in improvement 
science: a. the inclusion of improvement science education in nursing programs; and b. the 
increase of advanced nursing roles, such as nurse clinician scientists in healthcare 
improvement science.  
  
Our paper defines nursing according to Parse (1999) that nursing is both a discipline 
and a profession. The purpose of the discipline of nursing is to advance the knowledge of 
nursing through philosophical paradigms, theoretical development and research (the science 
of nursing).  The purpose of the profession is to provide care to patients through the 
application and use of the art and science of nursing science. Our discussion refers to the term 
‘nurses’ as the personnel that make up the nursing profession and provide care to patients that 
is based on regulatory standards and education from the discipline of nursing (Parse 1999). 
 
The central questions to this discussion paper are:  
 
• Where does nursing ‘fit’ in improvement science?  
• Considering the tenets underpinning the nursing discipline and profession, do nurses 
have the potential to contribute to and lead improvement science in healthcare? 
 
 
 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Data sources 
This discussion paper is: 
 
• based on our previous work, a 12 month scoping review (March 2013-March 2014) 
and baseline study on Lean (Kinsman et al. 2014, Lawal et al. 2014) a quality 
improvement management system;  
• informed by descriptive interviews with nurses and other frontline healthcare 
providers regarding the implementation of QI interventions in their work place (Flynn 
& Hartfield 2016); 
• supported by a review of the literature on improvement science, quality improvement 
and nursing; and  
•  informed by the combined professional experiences of our authors as nursing 
researchers, an improvement science research chair, a nursing graduate student and a 
medical director for quality improvement.  
 
The collection of these research and professional experiences have led us to this discussion 
paper that nursing has the potential to lead improvement science but that potential is currently 
underused in nursing education curricula and healthcare.  
 
DISCUSSION 
The positions of nursing in contributing to and leading improvement science 
Nurses are the largest service provider in healthcare and is at the centre of patient care. As 
such, nurses are in the ideal position to contribute to and lead improvement science in 
healthcare. Nurses are hands on caregivers at the forefront of any healthcare system and are 
essential to any system of healthcare. Their work involves assessing, planning and evaluating 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
patient care needs, advocating for patients, assuring their care is safe and that patients are 
satisfied with the care they receive (Burhans & Aligold 2010).  
The work of nurses’ requires intellectual and organizational competence. The quality 
of care that nurses provide shapes patient safety, satisfaction, comfort and outcomes 
(Needleman & Hassmiller 2009). Nurses are ideally positioned in the healthcare system to 
examine and understand the environment, to identify the strengths and weaknesses of 
healthcare systems and to identify the key elements needed for improvement science in 
healthcare (Page 2004, Needleman & Hassmiller 2009, Sherwood 2010).  
Nursing roles have advanced, with the emergence of roles such as clinical nurse 
specialists, clinical nurse educators, advanced nurse practitioners and, more recently, nursing 
clinician scientists. All nurses are required to integrate research and clinical practice 
(Kirchhoff, 2004). Nursing as a profession has developed its own disciplinary way of 
thinking with its own body of knowledge, theory and research (Edwards 2001), equipping 
nurses with in-depth research skills across a broad range of research designs and methods.  
All of these factors mean that nurses have the potential to contribute to the advancement of 
improvement science in healthcare.  
There is trend towards frontline led evidence-based continuous quality improvement 
interventions in healthcare. Releasing Time to Care (RTC) is one example of an intervention 
for conducting continuous quality improvement. RTC is led by nurses. The aim of RTC is to 
increase the autonomy of nursing staff so as to continuously improve patient care (Hamilton 
et al. 2014). A qualitative evaluation of RTC implementation in Saskatchewan, Canada 
demonstrated that the implementation of a nurse-led and system wide QI intervention has the 
potential to empower nurses to lead continuous QI (Hamilton et al. 2014). An important 
dimension to the RTC is the capacity, such as allocated resources, for nurses to be able to 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
engage in continuous QI and the capability, such as training, for nurses to become 
knowledgeable and skilled in the area of continuous QI.  
In RTC however, the role of the nurse is to implement the intervention, the quality 
improvement work.  We argue that nurses have the ability to lead on-the-ground QI work and 
that nurses have the philosophical, theoretical, ethical and political underpinnings to 
potentially contribute to and lead improvement science activities.  
 
Philosophical and theoretical positions  
The philosophical positioning of nursing is such that there are multiple ways of knowing and 
explaining phenomena (Garrett & Cutting 2015). Carper (1978) developed the 
epistemological basis that there are four fundamental yet different ways of knowing in 
nursing, being the empirical, the ethical, the personal and the aesthetic. These patterns of 
knowing in nursing have the potential to: 
 
• advance improvement science, both complimenting and expanding the paradigm of 
evidence-based practice; 
• provide substantial empirical knowledge to improvement science; and to 
• add dimensions of ethical, personal and aesthetic knowledge, where the patient is central 
to improvement.  
 
Chinn & Kramer (2014) discuss emancipatory knowing, the capacity to critically assess 
the status quo of nursing, identify why it is that way and creates the way for change. This 
type of knowledge can be expressed through engagement in improvement science. Chinn and 
Kramer (2014) argue that there has been a lack of focus on emancipatory knowing in nursing 
in the past and describe that the process of emancipatory knowledge (praxis) when done 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
collectively in nursing can lead to substantial change. We relate this to improvement science 
in nursing and the potential of nurses to contribute to and lead substantial improvements in 
healthcare. This form of knowing identifies the need for action inclusive of the ways of 
knowing in nursing to influence and improve praxis.  
Theory development is an essential process to the development and advancement of 
improvement science. Theory can help to identify areas of poor quality in healthcare and 
enhance improvement science (Davidoff et al. 2015). Theory is also valuable in the 
evaluation of QI interventions. Theory-driven evaluations allow researchers to ask ‘how and 
in what contexts does the QI intervention work or can be amended to work?’  Framing the 
evaluation of QI interventions from this perspective is more useful for complex context 
sensitive QI interventions (Parry et al. 2013).  
Nursing, as a frontline caring profession, has the potential to contribute to the theoretical 
advancement of improvement science; incorporating the needs of patients. Nursing practice 
can be viewed as both a starting point for knowledge-theory development for improvement 
science and as an end point, where researchers can test these theoretical developments (Im & 
Chang 2012). Thus, during the course of practice nurses can assist researchers in the 
development and testing of theories in improvement science. In turn theoretical development 
and knowledge development in improvement science can advance and improve nursing 
practice. This could lead the way for the theoretical advancement of improvement science by 
bridging the gaps of research and practice and combining the ‘art and science’ of 
improvement.  
 
Ethical and political positions 
Nursing, as a profession, has ethics at its core, both in practice and in research (Park et al. 
2014). Nurses, at the centre of patient care, are ethically responsible for providing safe, 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
compassionate and competent care (CNA 2008) and thus have the potential to be a major 
force for improvement science. Nurses involved in the delivery of care have the potential to 
play a role in improvement science and, from an ethical standpoint nurses also need to be a 
part of it.  
Nurses who fail to engage and contribute to improvement science may jeopardize the 
incorporation of nursing into improvement changes. This could ultimately lead to the de-
professionalization of nursing (Needleman & Hassmiller 2009, Izumi 2012).  Many QI 
interventions and research studies focus on quantity, efficiency, waste reduction and cost and 
not incorporating the ethical values of nursing and, more importantly, the values of patients 
(Izumi 2012). Hence, to ensure that improvement science in healthcare aligns with nursing 
and patient values, nurses need to actively engage in improvement science.  
Nurses are strategically positioned to make significant improvements to healthcare 
and to lead policy development for healthcare improvement. Nurses often play a key role in 
resolving conflicts, they deal with a multitude of personalities and challenging behaviors on a 
daily basis. Nurses are team players, negotiators, problem solvers and communicators (Des 
Jardin 2001). Each of these skills establishes the nurse as a valuable member at the political 
table. A political role for nursing involves being knowledgeable about current healthcare 
issues, epidemics, costs, laws and health policy.  
 
The need for nursing perspectives and knowledge in the political arena has been a 
longstanding argument; however, the appointment of nurses to these roles, or the desire for 
nurses to want such roles, has been slow (Duncan et al. 2014). Despite the advancement of 
nursing leadership and management education, the enhancement of policy education in 
nursing has yet to keep pace (Spenceley et al. 2006).  
 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Implications for nursing 
 As the largest providers of direct patient care by numbers, nursing is in a position to be 
central to improvement science efforts (Bergerman et al.  2015). The philosophical, 
theoretical, ethical and political positions underpinning nursing equip nurses with the 
potential to contribute to and lead improvement science in healthcare. Nurses have an 
important voice in the need to improve the quality of patient care and to improve current 
healthcare systems. In 2011 the IOM released recommendations to expand opportunities for 
nurses to lead collaborative improvement efforts and identified the need to prepare and 
enable nurses to lead change to improve healthcare (Shalala et al. 2011).  
These acknowledgments of nurses are applauded, however, this paper discusses some 
areas of weakness for nurses to lead in improvement science. Within the current constraints 
and inefficiencies of many existing health systems it is a challenge for nurses to perform in 
the best way and to lead in the quest for high quality healthcare (Yoder-Wise 2014).  For 
example, as a practice-based profession, nurses receive limited opportunities to engage and 
receive the education, research training and practical skills necessary to improve the systems 
where they work. There is also the limited promotion of bedside nurses into political, 
administrative or different clinical roles where they are in the position to lead improvement 
science and bridge the science and practice of QI.  
 
We argue that there are two main areas that must change for nurses to fully contribute 
to and lead improvement science in healthcare, being: 
a. including improvement science education in nursing programs; and  
b. increasing advanced nursing roles, such as nurse clinician scientists in healthcare 
improvement science.  
 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Including improvement science education in nursing programs  
We argue that improvement science education for undergraduate and graduate nursing 
students is equally important as the actual quality improvement and patient safety practices of 
nurses working in healthcare systems.  The major drive for better quality and safety in 
healthcare systems lends urgency to a transform of undergraduate and graduate nursing 
curricula to one that matches the values and needs of practice (Maddox et al. 2001, Sherwood 
& Drenkard 2007).  Undergraduate nursing education needs to transform so that novice 
providers have the knowledge, skills and attitudes to be competent in improvement science 
and to provide high quality and safe care (IOM 2003). QI principles and skills should be a 
required and core component of the educational curriculum for undergraduate nurses (Jones 
et al. 2013, Flynn et al. 2015). Nurses need to be prepared and competent to work in complex 
environments, where they have responsibility to improve healthcare process and delivery. 
This is one responsibility of nursing education (Needleman & Hassmiller 2009).  
There are many resources available to provide guidance and support to establish 
quality and safety curricula for health care providers (undergraduate and postgraduate) from 
academic centers, quality and safety organizations, as well as health care organizations.  The 
Institute for Healthcare (IHI) Improvement Open School is a key resource for building a QI 
course for an undergraduate nursing curriculum. The IHI is a nonprofit organization that is a 
leading innovator, convener, partner and driver of results in health and health care 
improvement worldwide. The IHI offers a wide range of resources and teaching tools to help 
health care professionals lead effective improvement efforts. The IHI offers free online 
educational courses for students on quality, improvement capability, patient safety, safety, 
leadership, person and family centered care and other healthcare topics (IHI 2016). The 
World Health Organization (WHO) has a Multi-Professional Patient Safety Curriculum 
Guide that is another rich collection of resources that is available in six languages.  This 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
includes a list of recommended foundational topics, as well as accompanying teaching 
resources and tools for both quality improvement and patient safety (WHO 2011).  In 
addition, the Quality and Safety Education for Nurses (QSEN) developed six core 
competencies for undergraduate nursing curriculum: patient-centred care, teamwork and 
collaboration, evidence-based practice, quality improvement, safety and informatics (QSEN 
2009). The QSEN was developed to prepare nurses with the knowledge, skills and attitudes to 
continuously improve the health systems where they work. These core competencies have 
been piloted at 15 nursing schools across the United States of America. Murray et al. (2010) 
report the implementation of the QSEN competencies at one of the pilot schools. The QSEN 
initiative is a useful resource for future nursing schools looking to implement improvement 
science to their curriculum.  
Graduate nursing education needs to better understand health quality improvement 
sciences to identify, test and scale up effective QI approaches (Health Quality Ontario, 2014, 
The Health Foundation 2011). The introduction of improvement science to graduate nursing 
education will develop expertise in improvement science research, leadership and change 
management skills to lead improvement across systems. We argue that these changes cannot 
be successfully achieved in the traditional boundaries of ‘silo’ education. Quality and patient 
safety are important issues for all the health disciplines. Improvement science should be 
taught using a transdisciplinary approach where the health sciences learn as a team the 
principles, skills and knowledge of improvement science that can be implemented in practice 
using a collaborative interdisciplinary team approach. Despite the argument for patient safety 
and QI education to be embedded in healthcare education (IOM, 2003) and nursing education 
(Bargagliotti & Lancaster 2007, Milligan et al. 2007, Sherwood & Drenkard 2007, QSEN 
2009); QI education is not consistently offered across the spectrum of health sciences and 
does not appear to be valued as a major component to health professional trainee education. 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
For example, In the USA and Canada only 25% of medical schools incorporate instruction on 
these topics, the majority of which only include lectures and small-group discussion (Alper et 
al. 2009). This discrepancy places the education of healthcare professionals at odds with the 
current emphasis on QI and patient safety in clinical practice. 
From our own experiences at the University of Saskatchewan and University of 
Alberta at two provinces of Canada there are elements of improvement science across health 
sciences curricula but there is no dedicated improvement science course offered to the health 
sciences including nurses. This shortcoming led to the curriculum development of a quality 
improvement (QI) course for health sciences (nursing, medicine, pharmacy and nutrition, 
dentistry, allied health and public health) for undergraduate and graduate students at the 
University of Saskatchewan.  
The University of Saskatchewan’s’ QI curriculum has two levels, course level I 
tailored to the needs, skills and knowledge base of undergraduate students and course level II 
tailored to the needs, skills and knowledge base of graduate students.  Course level I for 
undergraduate health science students will have a strong focus on applied health quality 
improvement activities and interventions (e.g. Plan- Do- Study- Act, PDSA cycles) designed 
to improve patient safety and patient-oriented care (e.g. how to reduce central line infections 
among newborns). Course level II will be tailored towards the needs of graduate health 
science students and their research activities (e.g. conduct a systematic review to identify 
effective intervention to prevent pressure ulcers). The curriculum will cover important 
improvement science topics such as: The fundamentals for improvement, the life cycle of a 
QI project, patient safety, human factors and safety, team work and communication, root 
cause analysis, healthcare associate infections, leadership and QI, patient-centered care, 
quality cost and value, measuring for improvement and models for improvement. The 
curriculum will be implemented using a two-phase implementation strategy including a paper 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
based pilot implementation with lectures, videos, tutorials and QI activities in 2016. In phase 
two, courses will be offered as an online course with direction provided by a course 
coordinator. This QI curriculum will be funded by the University of Saskatchewan’s 
curriculum innovation fund. The Saskatchewan Health Regions will fund the level II 
continuous education course which will be offered as an online course. The curriculum 
development is in accordance with the relevant professional competency frameworks such as 
the Canadian physician competency framework (CanMEDS), the Canadian nurse practitioner 
framework, the professional competencies for Canadian pharmacists and the competency 
profile for physiotherapists in Canada. The transferability of this QI curriculum will also be 
tested across universities in Netherlands, Germany and Australia. 
At the University of Alberta, health science students formed a quality improvement 
student led group the Edmonton Healthcare Improvement Network (EHIN), as an Institute for 
Healthcare Improvement (IHI) Open School Chapter. The aim of the IHI Open School 
Chapter is to bring students from different health sciences with a shared interest in learning 
about quality improvement (Sundaram et al. 2015). EHIN was formed at the University of 
Alberta because of the recognized need and desire by our health science students to learn 
about and engage in QI. Currently improvement science is not a mandatory competency in 
our nursing education or healthcare systems. Reasons for this are unclear, but one may 
postulate this may be due to lack of space for new material in already crowded curricula; lack 
of expertise amongst faculty to develop and teach improvement science given these are 
relatively new concepts in health care and the lack of opportunity for interdisciplinary 
learning in our current educational system, which is key to learning and applying quality and 
safety concepts.  Since 2013 the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada has 
included QI and patient safety training as a competency requirement for specialty residents 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
(Wong et al. 2014). This competency framework is one that other health sciences and nursing 
could use for its own curriculum.  
Competency in improvement science and patient safety should be a requirement of 
both the regulatory bodies for nursing and those of other health care providers. This will 
require a focus on developing quality and safety competencies, a scholarly basis for 
improvement science and practice and a knowledge of the interventions that are effective for 
improving and transforming healthcare (Sherwood 2010). Nurses guided by improvement 
science have the potential to be a powerful force for evidence-based quality improvement in 
healthcare (Bergerman et al. 2015).  
 
Increase of advanced nursing roles in healthcare improvement science 
Nurses have begun to identify the knowledge, skills and attitudes necessary to work in the 
healthcare systems that are rooted in continuous quality improvement. These include 
teamwork, collaboration, patient-centered care, quality improvement, safety and informatics 
(Cronenwett et al. 2007, Cronenwett et al. 2009a, Cronenwett et al. 2009b). As healthcare 
shifts its focus to improvement science, the comprehensive knowledge held by nurses on how 
healthcare systems work and the needs of patients should be used more effectively (Tucker et 
al. 2008). One way to address this gap is the creation of nurse clinician scientist roles in 
improvement science.  
The development of such roles would enable the integration of improvement science 
and quality improvement work into the day-to-day operations and real-world practice of 
frontline healthcare providers. This would offer front line staff, such as nurses, the time and 
resources to participate in improvement science and improvement decision making 
(Needleman & Hassmiller 2009). The development of advanced roles of nurses in 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
improvement science provides professional extension of the scope of nursing and enables 
nurses to be key players in the movement to sustain our healthcare systems.  
To achieve changes valued by the patients, nurses need to be centrally involved in 
improvement activities such as research, practice and decision making (Fox et al. 2011). 
Improvement science should be a priority focus area for nursing research (Mensik 2013). 
Improvement research from the ontological and epistemological views of nursing would 
contribute to building a body of scientific knowledge based on understanding patient-
centered outcomes, contextual factors, ethical factors, the impact of QI on nursing values and 
the impact of nursing on QI outcomes (Needleman & Hassmiller 2009).  
As a practice-based profession, many nurses do not receive opportunities to conduct 
research and contribute to improvement science (Taylor et al. 2010). The engagement of 
bedside nurses in improvement science will prepare them for the use of QI tools, for seeking 
the best research evidence, for measuring care outcomes and in the use of empirical data to 
assess their current practice (Sherwood 2010).  Engaging research nurses in improvement 
science will assist in bridging the theory-practice gap by furthering collaborations between 
the clinical and academic environments (Fox et al. 2011). Bridging these two domains 
enables nurses to be collaborative leaders in improvement science, as a collaborative 
approach is a requirement for successful improvement work. Jones &Woodhead (2015) 
provide a learning report by The Health Foundation on the collaborative capability building 
improvement approaches taken by five health and social care trusts across the UK. The report 
provides evidence on how to create a collaborative capability and capacity building 
environment, which is conducive to driving and sustaining quality improvement. The case 
studies in this report demonstrate how critical bridging practice and educational training is for 
improvement capability capacity and sustainability.  
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Our previous research evaluating the function of a frontline improvement team 
established as part of health system reform (Flynn & Hartfield 2016) found that the majority 
of nurses did not have time to engage in, contribute to or lead improvement efforts.  
Historically, this had not been a part of their job description and typically most viewed 
improvement work as an extra task to be done ‘off the side of one’s desk’. In addition, most 
health systems only have funding to support a small number of quality improvement experts, 
who as individuals, are unable to reliably sustain large improvement efforts.   
To overcome the challenge of sustaining continuous quality improvement in a time of 
fiscal constraint, some health systems [health system name, National Health Services, 
Intermountain Health, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP) and others] educate 
practicing nurses (and other providers) in improvement methodologies to build the 
improvement science capability and capacity of teams.  The goal of educating nurses and 
other frontline providers is to establish a system where the quality lens is applied to everyday 
practice.   At CHOP, this was referred to as the ‘Innovation Unit’ model and applying 
rigorous education, with some initial support from improvement experts, resulted in 
successfully engaging staff in quality improvement work in a sustainable manner, with 
improved outcomes (Fieldston 2016).  QI work and improvement science needs to be 
collectively valued by healthcare systems, organizations and units so that a culture can 
develop where improvement is viewed as something nurses and other healthcare professions 
do every day.  All nurses have a responsibility to advance and progress the discipline and we 
share the viewpoint that improvement science education and the advancement of nursing 
roles in improvement science is a key approach to achieving this.  
 
 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Everyone in healthcare has two jobs when they come to work every day: to do their 
work and to improve it. (Batalden & Davidoff 2007, pg. 3.). 
 
CONCLUSION 
The key points in this paper demonstrate that the nursing profession is philosophically, 
theoretically, politically and ethically positioned to contribute to and lead improvement 
science activities in healthcare. We note some fundamental limitations needing to be 
addressed for nurses to reach their full potential as leaders of improvement science.  
By reforming nursing education to have a substantial focus on improvement science 
and research, leadership, business management and healthcare policy, these limitations can be 
addressed.  Such areas of education are vital for the next generation of nurses, facing the ever 
growing complex world of healthcare. There also needs to be a greater opportunity for nurse 
clinician scientist roles in improvement science, where nurses can attempt to close the 
practice-science gap of quality improvement, bridging the research and practice of QI in 
healthcare.   
 
Improvement science has the potential to reform healthcare systems around the globe. 
This is an opportunity for to nurses to take the lead in redesigning healthcare systems using 
their research skills, theoretical development and clinical expertise on patient values, needs 
and care. Nurses can be central to the movement of making health systems sustainable and 
this paper argues that education is the critical starting point for nurses to become leaders of 
improvement science. 
 
Author Contributions: 
All authors have agreed on the final version and meet at least one of the following criteria 
(recommended by the ICMJE*): 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
1) substantial contributions to conception and design, acquisition of data, or analysis and 
interpretation of data; 
2) drafting the article or revising it critically for important intellectual content. 
* http://www.icmje.org/recommendations/ 
 
References 
Alexander J. A. & Hearld L. R. (2009) What can we learn from quality improvement research? 
Medical Care Research and Review 66(3), 235-271. 
Alper E., Rosenberg E. I., O'Brien K. E., Fischer M. & Durning S. J. (2009) Patient safety education 
at U.S. and Canadian medical schools: results from the 2006 Clerkship Directors in Internal 
Medicine survey. Academic Medicine: Journal of the Association of American Medical 
Colleges 84(12), 1672-1676. doi:10.1097/ACM.0b013e3181bf98a4 
Appleby J., Raleigh V., Frosini F., Bevan G., Gao H. & Lyscom T. (2011) Variations in health care: 
the good, the bad and the inexplicable. The King’s Fund and Department of Health Available 
at:  http://www.kingsfund.org.uk/sites/files/kf/field/field_publication_file/Variations-in-
health-care-good-bad-inexplicable-report-The-Kings-Fund-April-2011.pdf (accessed 25 
August 2016). 
Auerbach A. D., Landefeld C. S. & Shojania K. G. (2007) The tension between needing to improve 
care and knowing how to do it. The New England Journal of Medicine 357(6), 608- 614. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMsb07073. 
Baker C., Norton P., Flintoft V., Blais R., Brown A., Cox J., Etchells E., Ghali W., Hébert P., 
Majumdar S., O' Beirne M., Palacios-Derflingher L., Reid R., Sheps S. & Tamblyn R. (2004) 
The Canadian Adverse Events Study: the incidence of adverse events among hospital patients 
in Canada. CMAJ: Canadian Medical Association Journal 170(11), 1678-1686. 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Balasubramanian B., Chase S., Nutting P., Cohen D., Strickland P., Crosson J. & Crabtree B. (2010) 
Using Learning Teams for Reflective Adaptation (ULTRA): insights from a team-based 
change management strategy in primary care. Annals of Family Medicine 8(5), 425-432. 
doi:10.1370/afm.1159.  
Bargagliotti L., & Lancaster J. (2007) Quality and safety education in nursing: more than new wine 
in old skins. Nursing Outlook 55(3), 156-158.  
Batalden P. B. & Davidoff F. (2007) What is ‘quality improvement’ and how can it transform 
healthcare? Quality and Safety in Health Care 16:2–3. doi:10.1136/qshc.2006.022046.  
Bergerman B., Hellström A., Lifvergren S. & Gustavsson S. (2015) An Emerging Science of 
Improvement in Health Care Quality Engineering 27: 17-34 
doi:10.1080/08982112.2015.968042. 
Berwick D. M. (2008) The science of improvement. JAMA: Journal of the American Medical 
Association 299(10), 1182-1184. 
Burhans L.M., & Alligood, M.R. (2010) Quality nursing care in the words of nurses. Journal of 
Advanced Nursing 66(8), 1689-1697 doi:10.1111/j.1365-2648.2010.05344.x. 
Carper B.A. (1978) Fundamental patterns of knowing in nursing. Advances in Nursing Science (1), 
13–24. 
Canadian Nurses Association (2008) Code of Ethics for Registered Nurses. Available at:  
https://www.cna-aiic.ca/en/on-the-issues/best-nursing/nursing-ethics (accessed 25 August 
2016). 
Chassin M., & Galvin R. (1998) The urgent need to improve health care quality. Institute of 
Medicine National Roundtable on Health Care Quality. JAMA 280(11), 1000-1005. 
Chinn P.L. & Kramer M.K. (2014). Knowledge Development in Nursing: Theory and Process. (9th 
Ed). Mosby/Elsevier, St. Louis, MO. 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Crisp H. (2015) Building the field of improvement science. The Lancet 385(1), S4-S5. 
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60320-8. 
Cronenwett L., Sherwood G., Barnsteiner J., Disch J., Johnson J., Mitchell P. & Warren J. (2007) 
Article: Quality and safety education for nurses. Nursing Outlook 55(3), 122-131 
doi:10.1016/j.outlook.2007.02.006.  
Cronenwett L., Sherwood G. & Gelmon S. B. (2009) Improving quality and safety education: The 
QSEN Learning Collaborative. Nursing Outlook 57(6), 304-312 
doi:10.1016/j.outlook.2009.09.004.  
Cronenwett L., Sherwood G., Pohl J., Barnsteiner J., Moore S., Sullivan D., & Warren, J. (2009) 
Quality and safety education for advanced nursing practice. Nursing Outlook 57(6), 338-348 
doi:10.1016/j.outlook.2009.07.009.  
Davidoff F., Batalden P., Stevens D., Ogrinc G. & Mooney S. (2008) Publication guidelines for 
quality improvement in health care: evolution of the SQUIRE project. Quality and Safety in 
Health Care 17(5), i3-i9 doi:10.1136/qshc.2008.029066. 
Davidoff F., Dixon-Woods M., Leviton L. & Michie S. (2015) Demystifying theory and its use in 
improvement. BMJ Quality & Safety 24(3), 228-238 doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2014-003627. 
Des Jardin, K. E. (2001) Political involvement in nursing—politics, ethics and strategic 
action. AORN Journal Online, 74(5), 613-626 doi:10.1016/S0001-2092(06)61760-2. 
Duncan S., Rodney P. A., & Thorne S. (2014) Forging a strong nursing future: insights from the 
Canadian context. Journal of Research in Nursing 19(7/8), 621-633 
doi:10.1177/1744987114559063. 
Edwards S. D. (2001) The nature of nursing (i): nursing as a science. In Philosophy of Nursing: An 
Introduction (Edwards S.D. ed.), Palgrave Macmillan, New York, pp. 136-156. 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Flynn R., Sundaram A., Bolstad J. & Pittman E. (2015) A call to action: quality improvement in 
healthcare should start at student education. University of Alberta Health Sciences Journal 
(UAHSJ) 11(1), 18-20. 
Flynn R. & Hartfield D. (2016) An evaluation of a frontline led quality improvement initiative: 
barriers and facilitators to its success as part of a new quality management framework. 
Leadership in Health Services (in-press). 
Fieldston E.S., Jonas J.A., Lederman V.A., Zahm A.J., Xiao R., DiMichele C.M., Tracy E., Kurbjun 
K., Tennery-Soeiro R., Gieger D.L., Hogan A. & Apkon M. (2016) Developing the capacity 
for rapid-cycle improvement at a large freestanding children’s hospital. Hospital Pediatrics 
6(8), 441-448. 
Fox J., Bagley L., Day S., Holleran R. & Handrahan D. (2011) Research and quality improvement 
experience and knowledge: a nursing survey. Journal of Nursing Management 19(5), 623-
631 doi:10.1111/j.1365-2834.2011.01236.x. 
Garrett B. M. & Cutting R. L. (2015) Ways of knowing: realism, non-realism, nominalism and a 
typology revisited with a counter perspective for nursing science. Nursing Inquiry 22(2), 95-
105 doi: 10.1111/nin.12070. 
Grol R., Baker R. & Moss F. (2002) Quality improvement research: understanding the science of 
change in health care. Quality & Safety in Health Care 11(2), 110-111. 
Hamilton J., Verrall T., Maben J., Griffiths P., Avis K., Baker G. R., & Teare G. (2014) One size 
does not fit all: a qualitative content analysis of the importance of existing quality 
improvement capacity in the implementation of Releasing Time to Care: the Productive 
Ward™ in Saskatchewan, Canada. BMC Health Services Research 14(1), 399-425. 
doi:10.1186/s12913-014-0642-x 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Health Quality Ontario (2014) Quality Improvement Science. Available at: 
http://www.hqontario.ca/portals/0/documents/qi/qi-science-primer-en.pdf (accessed 25 
August 2016). 
Im E. O. & Chang S. J. (2012) Current Trends in Nursing Theories. Journal of Nursing Scholarship 
44(2), 156–164.  doi:10.1111/j.1547-5069.2012.01440.x. 
Institute for Healthcare (2016) IHI Open School. Available at: 
http://www.ihi.org/education/ihiopenschool/Pages/default.aspx (accessed 25 August 2016). 
Institute of Medicine. (2000) To Err is Human: Building a Safer Health System. National Academies 
Press, Washington, DC. 
 Institute of Medicine. (2001) Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the 21st 
Century. National Academies Press, Washington, DC.  
Institute of Medicine. (2003) Health professions education: A bridge to quality. National Academies 
Press, Washington, DC. 
Izumi S. (2012) Quality Improvement in Nursing: Administrative Mandate or Professional 
Responsibility?. Nursing Forum 47(4), 260-267. doi:10.1111/j.1744-6198.2012.00283.x. 
Jones A., Williams A. & Carson-Stevens A. (2013) Integrating quality improvement into pre-
registration education. Nursing Standard 27(29), 44-48. 
Jones B., & Woodhead, T. (2015) Building the foundations for improvement. The Health 
Foundation. Available at: 
http://www.health.org.uk/sites/default/files/BuildingTheFoundationsForImprovement.pdf  
(accessed 25 August 2016). 
Kirchhoff K. (2004) State of the science of translational research: from demonstration projects to 
intervention testing. Worldviews on Evidence-Based Nursing 1(S1), S6-12. 
Kinsman L., Rotter T., Stevenson K., Bath B., Goodridge D., Harrison L., Dobson R., Sari N., 
Jeffery C., Bourassa C. & Westhorp G. (2014) The largest lean transformation in the world: 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
the implementation and evaluation of lean in Saskatchewan healthcare. Healthcare Quarterly 
17(2), 29-32. 
Lawal A., Rotter T., Kinsman L., Sari N., Harrison L., Jeffery C., Kutz M., Khan M.F. & Flynn R. 
(2014) Lean management in health care: definition, concepts, methodology and effects 
reported (systematic review protocol). Systematic Reviews 3(1), 103-108. 
Maddox P., Wakefield M., & Bull J. (2001) Patient safety and the need for professional and 
educational change. Nursing Outlook 49(1), 8-13. 
Marshall M. (2011) Seeing with new eyes: What can general practice learn from the science of 
improvement. British Journal of General Practice 61 (586), 352–355. 
Marshall M., Pronovost P., Dixon Woods M. (2013) Promotion of improvement as a science. Lancet 
381 (9864), 419-421 doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61850-9. 
Mensik J. S. (2013) Nursing's role and staffing in accountable care. Nursing Economics 31(5), 250-
253. 
Murray C., Richards M., Newton J., Fenton K. anderson H., Atkinson C.et al. (2013) UK health 
performance: findings of the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. The Lancet 381, 997-
1020. 
Murray M., Douglas S., Girdley D. & Jarzemsky P. (2010) Teaching quality improvement. Journal 
of Nursing Education 49(8), 466-469.  
Needleman J. & Hassmiller S. (2009) The role of nurses in improving hospital quality and 
efficiency: real-world results. Health Affairs 28(4), 625-633 doi:10.1377/hlthaff.28.4.w625. 
Nelson E., Batalden P., Mohr., J. & Plume S. (1998) Building a quality future. Frontiers of Health 
Services Management 15(1), 3-32. 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2010) Health care systems: getting more 
value for money. OECD Economics Department Policy Notes, No.2, Paris. Available at: 
http://www.oecd.org/eco/growth/46508904.pdf (accessed 25 August 2016). 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Page A. (2004) Keeping Patients Safe: Transforming the Work Environment of Nurses. National 
Academies Press, Washington, DC. 
Park M., Jeon S. H., Hong H. & Cho S. (2014) A comparison of ethical issues in nursing practice 
across nursing units. Nursing Ethics 21(5), 594-607 doi:10.1177/0969733013513212. 
 Parry G. J., Mate K., Perla R. J., Provost L (2013) Promotion of improvement as a science. The 
Lancet 38, 1901–1902.  
Parse R. (1999) Nursing: the discipline and the profession. Nursing Science Quarterly 12(4), 275-
276 2p. 
Pearson A. (2010) Improvement science: getting the evidence into practice. International Journal of 
Evidence-Based Healthcare 8(3), 109-109 1p. doi:10.1111/j.1744-1609.2010.00178.x 
Quality and Safety Education for Nurses. (2009). Project Overview. Available at: 
http://qsen.org/about-qsen/project-overview/ (accessed 25 August 2016). 
Shalala D.E., Bolton L.B., Bleich M.R., Brennan T.A., Campbell R.E., Devlin L., Dower C., 
Gonzalez-Guarda R., Goodman D., Hanson J., Harris C., Hinman A., Novell W., Orsolini-
Hain L., Partida Y., Reinschauer R., Rowe J. & Vladek B. (2011) The Future of Nursing 
Leading Change, Advancing Health. National Academies Press, Washington, DC. 
Sherwood G. & Drenkard K. (2007) Quality and safety curricula in nursing education: matching 
practice realities. Nursing Outlook 55(3), 151-155 5p. 
Sherwood G. (2010) New views of quality and safety offer new roles for nurses and 
midwives. Nursing & Health Sciences 12(3), 281-283 doi:10.1111/j.1442-
2018.2010.00539.x. 
Shojania K. G. & Grimshaw J. M. (2004) Still no magic bullets: Pursuing more rigorous research in 
quality improvement. American Journal of Medicine 116(11), 778–780. 
Shojania K., & Grimshaw J. (2005) Evidence-based quality improvement: the state of the 
science. Health Affairs 24(1), 138-150. 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Solberg L. I., Kottke T. E., Brekke M. L., Magnan S., Davidson G., Calomeni C. A. & Nelson A. F. 
(2000) Failure of a continuous quality improvement intervention to increase the delivery of 
preventive services. A randomized trial. Effective Clinical Practice: ECP 3(3), 105-115.  
Spenceley S., Reutter L. & Allen M. (2006) The road less traveled: nursing advocacy at the policy 
level. Policy, Politics & Nursing Practice 7(3), 180-194 doi: 10.1177/1527154406293683. 
Stevens K. R. (2013) The Impact of Evidence-Based Practice in Nursing and the Next Big 
Ideas. Online Journal of Issues in Nursing 18(2), 1-1 1p. 
doi:10.3912/OJIN.Vol18No02Man04 
Sundaram A., Flynn R. & Elkhalidy Y. (2015) Edmonton healthcare improvement network: 
engaging future healthcare professionals in quality improvement and patient safety initiatives. 
University of Alberta Health Sciences Journal (UAHSJ) 11(1), 38-40. 
Taylor J., Irvine F., Bradbury-Jones C. & McKenna H. (2010) On the precipice of great things: 
the current state of UK nurse education. Nurse Education Today 30(3), 239-244. 
The Health Foundation. (2011) Inspiring Improvement Report: Improvement Science.  Available at 
http://www.health.org.uk/sites/default/files/ImprovementScience.pdf (accessed 25 August 
2016). 
 
Tucker A. L., Singer S. J., Hayes J. E. & Falwell A. (2008) Front-line staff perspectives on 
opportunities for improving the safety and efficiency of hospital work systems. Health 
Services Research 43(5p2), 1807-1829 doi:10.1111/j.1475-6773.2008. 
 
Wong BM, Ackroyd-Stolarz S, Bukowskyj M, Calder L, Ginzburg A, Microys S, Stang A. & 
Wallace G. (2014) The CanMEDS 2015 Patient Safety and Quality Improvement Expert 
Working Group Report. Ottawa: The Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada. 
Available at: 
 Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
http://www.royalcollege.ca/portal/page/portal/rc/common/documents/canmeds/framework/pa
tient_safety_ewg_report_e.pdf (accessed 25 August 2016). 
World Health Organization (2006). Quality of care: a process for making strategic choices in health 
systems. Available at: 
http://www.who.int/management/quality/assurance/QualityCare_B.Def.pdf (accessed 25 
August 2016). 
World Health Organization (2007). Everybody business: strengthening health systems to improve 
health outcomes: WHOs framework for action. Available at: 
http://www.who.int/healthsystems/strategy/everybodys_business.pdf (accessed 25 August 
2016). 
World Health Organization (2011). Multi-professional Patient Safety Curriculum Guide. Available 
at: http://www.who.int/patientsafety/education/curriculum/tools-download/en/ (accessed 25 
August 2016). 
Yoder-Wise S.P. (2014) Leading and Managing in Nursing (6th edn). Elsevier Mosby, St. Louis, 
Missouri.  
 
 
 
