 INTRODUCTION
Suicide is a significant cause of mortality, 
leading to the death of >6000 people in the 
UK in 2014.1 Risk of suicide is increased in 
presence of an affective disorder, with up to 
90% of people affected being fully managed 
in primary care.2 The majority of people who 
die by suicide have consulted their GP in 
the preceding year and 47% in the previous 
month.3 However, recognising the high-risk 
patient is a complex task owing to multiple, 
often contradictory, risk factors and markers 
for suicide, such as frequent attendance, 
increasing attendance, and non-attendance 
patterns of health behaviour.4
Suicide is devastating for the loved 
ones of the deceased. It is estimated that 
every suicide can affect up to 50 people,5 
leaving them at risk of suicide themselves 
as well as psychosomatic, mental, and 
physical illness.6 Although a patient suicide 
is considered a rare event, considering 
the numbers in the UK (>6000) who die 
by suicide and the number affected, with 
the risk that those impacted by suicide 
might also die by suicide, it is highly likely 
that GPs will come into contact with those 
bereaved by suicide. GPs need to be in a 
position to recognise the needs of those 
bereaved by suicide and the need to look 
after themselves.
Despite the dramatic shift in attitude 
towards suicide over the past decades, 
there remains a social stigma which 
impacts on the bereaved.7 There is some 
evidence that there is a more negative view 
of families of suicide victims than for any 
other type of death.8 Parental bereavement 
has been recognised to be one of the most 
severe forms of grief, comprising complex 
patterns of guilt, feelings of loss of control, 
and anxiety.9
Families of the deceased often experience 
intense feelings of aggression and blame. 
This is often directed at services they 
perceive to have failed them, particularly 
doctors and police, and even the deceased 
themselves.7,10 This creates challenges 
for the clinicians who might support the 
bereaved parent.
Research has shown that the majority 
of families need help after a relative’s 
suicide.11,12 It is not clear what interventions 
are effective because evidence is currently 
limited13 but it is suggested that specialist 
bereavement counselling can be useful for 
those actively seeking it.14 Currently, the 
NHS does not provide national specialist 
support for people bereaved by suicide.15 
Health professionals often routinely refer 
people to voluntary organisations who 
specialise in suicide bereavement, rather 
E Foggin, MBChB, MPH, FY1 trainee, Oxford 
University Hospitals, Oxford. S McDonnell, PhD, 
principal investigator, Centre for Mental Health 
and Safety; L Cordingley, PhD, CPsychol, AFBPsS, 
senior lecturer in health psychology, Institute for 
Inflammation and Repair, School of Medicine, 
University of Manchester, Manchester. N Kapur, 
MMedSc, MD, FRCPsych, professor of psychiatry 
and population health, University of Manchester, 
Manchester, and honorary consultant in psychiatry, 
Manchester Mental Health and Social Care Trust, 
Manchester. J Shaw, MSc, PhD, professor of 
forensic psychiatry, University of Manchester, 
Manchester, and honorary consultant forensic 
psychiatrist, Lancashire Care NHS Foundation 
Trust, Preston. CA Chew-Graham, MD, FRCGP, 
professor of general practice research, Research 
Institute, Primary Care and Health Sciences, Keele 
University, Staffordshire, and Collaboration for 
Leadership in Applied Health Research and Care, 
West Midlands.
Address for correspondence
Sharon McDonnell, Principal Investigator, Centre 
for Mental Health and Safety, University of 
Manchester, M13 9PL, UK.
E-mail: sharon.j.mcdonnell@manchester.ac.uk
Submitted: 11 February 2016; Editor’s response: 
11 April 2016; final acceptance: 31 May 2016.
©British Journal of General Practice
This is the full-length article (published online  
16 Aug 2016) of an abridged version published 
in print. Cite this article as: Br J Gen Pract 2016;  
DOI: 10.3399/bjgp16X686605
GPs’ experiences of dealing with parents 
bereaved by suicide:
a qualitative study
Emily Foggin, Sharon McDonnell, Lis Cordingley, Navneet Kapur, Jenny Shaw 
and Carolyn A Chew-Graham
Research
Abstract
Background 
Suicide prevention is an NHS priority in England. 
Bereavement by suicide is a risk factor for 
suicide, but the needs of those bereaved by 
suicide have not been addressed, and little is 
known about how GPs support these patients, 
and how they deal with this aspect of their work.
Aim
This study explores the experiences of GPs 
dealing with parents bereaved by suicide. 
Design and setting
Qualitative study using interviews with 13 GPs in 
the UK.
Method
Parents, whose adult offspring had died by 
suicide between 2002 and 2012, were recruited 
and gave the name of their GP to be invited for 
interview. Semi-structured interviews were 
conducted. The topic guide explored experiences 
of dealing with suicide and bereavement. Data 
were analysed thematically using constant 
comparison techniques.
Results
GPs described mental health as ‘part and parcel’ 
of primary care, but disclosed low confidence 
in dealing with suicide and an unpreparedness 
to face parents bereaved by suicide. Some GPs 
described guilt surrounding the suicide, and a 
reluctance to initiate contact with the bereaved 
parents. GPs talked of their duty to care for the 
bereaved patients, but admitted difficulties in 
knowing what to do, particularly in the perceived 
absence of other services. GPs reflected on 
the impact of the suicide on themselves and 
described a lack of support or supervision.
Conclusion
GPs need to feel confident and competent to 
support parents bereaved by suicide. Although 
this may be facilitated through training initiatives, 
and accessible services to refer parents to, GPs 
also require formal support and supervision, 
particularly around significant events such 
as suicide. Results from this qualitative study 
have informed the development of evidence-
based suicide bereavement training for health 
professionals.
Keywords
bereavement; family practice; general practice; 
postvention; primary health care; suicide; 
supervision; training.
e737  British Journal of General Practice, October 2016
 than refer them to commissioned NHS 
services.15 Consequently, individuals are 
reliant on their GP or third-sector services 
for appropriate care at a time of intense 
need and high risk,15 even though ‘adverse’ 
outcomes are often within the remit of 
psychiatric services.6 Parents bereaved by 
suicide may less frequently access care 
compared with other bereaved parents. 
Health professionals should be aware of 
the potential vulnerabilities of the bereaved, 
and be proactive in approaching these 
patients because many report not receiving 
any contact from health professionals 
following their child’s death.15 The Suicide 
Prevention Strategy states that ‘GPs must 
be aware of the vulnerability of family 
members bereaved by suicide and that 
effective and timely support is essential.’16
It is known that therapists can have a 
personal reaction to the suicide of a patient17 
and the limited literature suggests that GPs 
experience similar grief reactions.18 It has 
been suggested that ‘few events in medical 
practice engender such a sense of failure 
and guilt as the suicide of a patient’.19 
Clinicians who had previously cared for 
the deceased report feelings of anxiety and 
vulnerability when meeting the bereaved 
family.15 Their grief reactions to suicide 
are influenced by many factors including 
the opportunity to talk to others about the 
event.20
Currently, GPs are reported to be at 
high risk of stress and ‘burnout’ due to 
numerous factors including: medical 
school training failing to prepare doctors to 
consider dealing with the stresses that they 
will encounter later in their careers;21 rising 
work pressures from increasing demand; 
complaints; continuous political change; 
low job control; and little social support.22 
GPs’ stress levels were recently reported 
to be at a 17-year high.23 Despite GPs’ 
exposure to patients’ distress, trauma, and 
loss, they do not receive the mandatory 
supervision and support that counsellors, 
psychotherapists, and social workers do.24
This study explores the perspectives 
of GPs dealing with parents bereaved by 
suicide, including recognition not only of 
the parents’ needs and the resources 
available, but also of the personal impact 
on GPs. Results from this qualitative study 
have informed the development of suicide 
bereavement training for primary care 
professionals.
METHOD
This study was conducted as part of a 
larger study funded by the National Institute 
for Health Research (NIHR) that builds on 
findings identified in a PhD thesis by one of 
the authors. This focused on the perceived 
experiences of parents whose adult 
offspring (aged between 18–35 years) died 
by suicide.15 In the larger study, interviews 
were conducted with parents bereaved by 
suicide and with the health professionals 
(GPs, mental health professionals, and 
ambulance staff) who came into contact with 
them during the early stages of their loss. 
The interviews explored their vulnerabilities 
and perceived needs (emotional and 
practical). Findings were used to develop 
evidence-based training to provide health 
professionals with knowledge, skills, and a 
framework in which to guide them on how 
to respond and care for parents bereaved 
by suicide — Postvention: Assisting Those 
Bereaved by Suicide (the PABBS training 
intervention).
Setting and participants
Parents, whose adult offspring (aged 
16–40 years) had died by suicide between 
2002–2012, were identified and recruited 
from the North of England and Wales using 
a number of methods: coroners’ reports, 
poster advertisements, newspaper articles, 
and suicide bereavement self-help groups. 
For inclusion in the study the cause of 
death determined by the coroner had to be 
suicide, open, or a narrative verdict. 
Parents were interviewed and then asked 
if their GP could be contacted to be invited 
to participate in an interview. Eleven GPs 
were recruited through this method. Two 
further GPs, not linked to an interviewed 
bereaved parent, were recruited separately.
Data collection
Semi-structured interviews with GPs were 
conducted by one of the authors (between 
2012–2014), with the aim of exploring GPs’ 
approaches to suicide bereavement, and 
any difficulties encountered. The topic 
How this fits in
It is recognised that those bereaved by 
suicide need support, but little is known 
about how GPs provide this. Research 
shows that there can be challenges for 
GPs preparing to initiate contact as well 
as knowing what support to provide and 
where to signpost patients. This study has 
contributed to the development of evidence-
based training for health professionals. 
Additionally, GPs can be personally 
affected by the suicide of a patient and the 
repercussions on their family, yet lack the 
formal supervision to deal with this.
British Journal of General Practice, October 2016  e738
 guide included questions that prompted 
exploration of GPs’ perceptions of 
dealing with parents bereaved by suicide; 
descriptions of their responses; what they 
had found difficult; what they might have 
done differently; and what they felt should 
be included in training for healthcare 
professionals. 
Analysis
Interviews were recorded with consent 
and the anonymised transcripts formed 
the data for analysis. Data were analysed 
using constant comparison techniques — 
analysis was iterative, and the topic guide 
was revised as the GP responders talked 
about considerable delays informing GPs 
of their patient’s death, thus this specific 
issue was explored in future interviews. 
Data collection continued until saturation 
was achieved.25 A thematic analysis of 
interviews was conducted.26
Interview 
transcripts 
were 
read, 
qualitatively 
coded, 
reviewed, 
and 
labeled.27 Qualitative coding ‘mean[t] 
naming segments of data with a label that 
simultaneously categorises, summarises, 
and accounts for each piece of data’.28 The 
initial stages of coding involved a process 
of labelling portions of text to identify and 
formulate ideas, themes, and issues.29 
Coding is the ‘pivotal link’ between data 
collection and interpreting the meaning of 
qualitative data.28 
Through ongoing immersion in the 
dataset, three of the authors advanced 
to ‘focused coding’, which utilised the 
prominent themes as the basis for more fine-
grained analyses.29 Throughout discussion 
and consensus, broad conceptual codes 
were gradually refined by these authors and 
then reviewed by the broader research team 
to ensure that the analytic categories were 
credible and ‘trustworthy’.30
RESULTS
Initially, it was intended to focus on a sample 
that would include parents whose deceased 
offspring were aged between 18–35 years. 
However, the age range had to be extended 
to 16–40 years as recruitment onto this 
study was extremely difficult. 
Twenty-nine parents (which includes six 
sets of parents married to each other) were 
interviewed in the initial study. Potentially 
23 GPs could have been recruited. Five 
parents (which includes two sets of parents) 
did not wish for their GP to be contacted, 
giving one of the following reasons: they did 
not want to upset them, their GP was due 
to retire, or they had disengaged from the 
practice due to the way they perceived the 
practice had responded to their son, prior 
to his death and their subsequent loss. 
Twenty-four parents (including four sets of 
parents) who reported varied experiences 
of contacts with their primary care team 
gave consent for their GP to be contacted. 
Twenty GPs who were matched to a parent 
in the study were invited to take part in the 
research. Seven GPs did not respond to the 
request and two declined, stating that they 
were too busy. In total 11 GPs matched to a 
parent in the study agreed to be interviewed. 
Seven GPs responsible for the care of eight 
parents (one set married to each other) had 
also been responsible for the care of their 
deceased child (three sons, four daughters).
When exploring GPs’ vulnerabilities, it 
was found that several had been personally 
bereaved by suicide. A decision was made 
to explore this issue further. An opportunity 
arose where the team were able to 
recruit two GPs who had been affected by 
suicide both professionally and personally. 
Although these two GPs were not matched 
with a parent in the study, the team felt that 
it was essential to obtain an insight into their 
experiences to advance the understanding 
of how GPs cope and support one another 
when affected by suicide, and to inform 
the development of suicide bereavement 
training for health professionals. 
In total 13 GPs were interviewed. Eleven 
were matched to a bereaved parent, and 
two were not but had been affected by 
suicide both professionally and personally. 
Eleven were interviewed individually and 
two interviewed together. Interviews varied 
from 13 to 80 minutes (Table 1).
The main themes identified were: mental 
health as integral to general practice; facing 
the bereaved parent; helping the bereaved 
parent; and GPs helping themselves.
Data are presented to illustrate the 
themes and are labelled with an identifier.
Mental health as integral to general 
practice
GPs described the importance of managing 
mental health problems in primary care as 
‘part and parcel’ of the job:
‘Primary care is where most mental health 
care is delivered isn’t it? … So it’s just you 
know it’s a core activity really … GPs accept 
that mental health is part of it. And I don’t 
think you can say, oh I don’t do mental 
health … it’s just part of general practice …
actually just core work. You know it’s like, 
it’s like coughs and colds.’ (GP03)
In contrast, GPs described suicide as 
uncommon and reflected on their lack of 
e739  British Journal of General Practice, October 2016
 exposure to, and unpreparedness to face, it:
‘… it doesn’t happen every week, it doesn’t 
happen every month, you know, it’s quite an 
infrequent event in a practice or a doctor’s 
life.’ (GP11)
A couple of the responders touched upon 
the concept of inevitability of suicide, an 
outcome that they cannot always have an 
influence over:
‘If the services have been involved, and, you 
know, they’ve committed suicide despite 
services … as we know if somebody really 
wants to, they will.’ (GP01)
Although most of the GPs seemed 
comfortable talking about mental health 
problems in technical terms, they were 
much less comfortable talking about 
suicide, commonly using euphemisms, 
such as ‘topped themselves’ (GP06), ‘this 
sort of incidence’ (GP08), or ‘died suddenly 
like that’ (GP08). 
One responder avoided the use of 
the word suicide throughout the entire 
interview.
Facing the bereaved parent
The need to be prepared to meet a patient 
bereaved by suicide was emphasised by all 
responders, and included the need to be 
informed in advance, prepare emotionally, 
and identify resources and/or support to 
offer to the patients.
GPs 
commented 
on 
the 
poor 
communication around deaths and many 
were particularly concerned about not 
being informed of the suicide prior to a 
consultation with the bereaved parent:
‘The embarrassment of not knowing when 
someone’s died if you’re dealing with a …
patient is … acute, you really don’t want that. 
So you need to know who’s died. (GP13)
Systems for being informed about patient 
deaths described by responders varied, 
but were commonly informal networks 
such as word of mouth (often through 
reception staff) or the local paper, and 
rarely communication from the coroner or 
the hospital:
‘… so it might well have been that this was, 
this was rumour, you know, we might have 
— somebody in the village might have said, 
oh I think such a body’s son’s died.’ (GP03)
In terms of personal preparedness, a 
few GPs described themselves as ready 
to help the parents; others disclosed fear 
and feeling ill-equipped for the encounter. 
Some responders described wanting to 
see the patient face-to-face and ‘smooth’ 
things over:
‘I think I’d be more nervous about writing 
a letter actually than going to see them … 
I’d want to see their reaction, if they … if 
they were cross with me or cross with the 
practice or … had issues or questions, I’d 
much rather know about it straight away.’ 
(GP08)
Most described feelings of anxiety about 
meeting the family, and some disclosed 
Table 1. GP responder demographics
GP ID
Sex
Age of GP, 
years
Type of 
practice
Size of 
practice
Full/part 
time
Years of 
practice
Training 
practice
Parent 
interviewed
Age of 
parent, 
years
Deceased
Age of 
deceased, 
years
Length of 
interview, 
mins
1
Female
58
Urban
16 500
Full
30
Yes
Mother
59
Son
32
13
2
Male
48
Urban
11 000
Full
20
Yes
Father
56
Son
24
18
3
Male
36
Semi-rural
8000
Full
8
Yes
Mother
46
Son
21
30
4
Female
44
Urban
19 000
Full
14
Yes
Mother
57
Son
30
20
5
Male
60
Urban
8000
Full
32
No
Father
57
Daughter
21
22
6
Male
55
Urban
14 000
Full
27
No
Mother
52
Daughter
16
60
7
Female
38
Urban
3700a
Part
10
No
Mother
71
Daughter
36
70
8
Male
40
Urban
11 000
Full
12
Yes
Mother/Father
49 & 50
Son
18
38
9
Male
56
Semi-rural
5000
Full
28
Yes
Mother
42
Son
19
60
10
Male
59
Urban
10 500
Full
30
Yes
Mother
64
Son
33
23
11
Male
58
Urban
15 000
Full
30
Yes
Father
47
Son
22
25
12b
Female
53
Semi-rural
11 000
Part
25
Yes
NA
NA
NA
NA
80
13b
Male
54
Urban
4500
Full
25
Yes
NA
NA
NA
NA
aFamily practice run by father and daughter. b12 and 13 interviewed together. NA = not applicable.
British Journal of General Practice, October 2016  e740
 feelings of guilt at having been the 
deceased’s GP:
‘Maybe I would be initially nervous, but I 
know, get through that first hurdle, face up 
to it, talk to them about it, be open about it … 
That gets over this anxiety about going; you 
go, and you confront your monster, because 
it might have been you that, er, was … you 
know, made the delay in the diagnosis, 
or something like that. So you go and you 
conf … you find out, and you talk to these 
relatives, and you can soon find out and 
sense whether they are not very pleased 
with you, or not.’ (GP10) 
Several GPs suggested that it was their 
responsibility to be proactive in these 
situations and to instigate contact with the 
bereaved parent:
‘If there are things that we can be doing 
proactively to help people in that situation, 
then I think that’s what we should be doing.’ 
(GP07)
Other GPs believed that the parent would 
contact them or the practice if they needed 
help, particularly if they were not well known 
to them. The majority of responders felt 
that knowledge of, and relationship with, 
the deceased or the parents would affect 
their ability to approach the parents. Those 
with had a good knowledge of the parents 
seemed more comfortable suggesting 
approaching the bereaved parents and felt 
confident about how to deal with them:
‘The most appropriate person in the 
situation. So, you know, in this case it was 
me because I had prior knowledge of [name 
of mother].’ (GP03)
Those who did not know their patients 
well described feeling worried. Concerned 
about intruding on private grief, they 
questioned how they could help someone 
they did not know:
‘In the immediate aftermath, a stranger 
coming in and talking to you, what good is 
that going to do?’ (GP02)
Helping the bereaved parent
Most of the GPs identified suicide 
bereavement as different from other types 
of bereavement, distinguished by the 
unexpectedness of the death. 
They also reflected on the possibility of 
parental guilt. Two GPs identified suicide 
of a child as the worst type of death to deal 
with:
‘You’ve heard that expression, what’s the 
worst thing that can happen? Well, that’s 
the worst thing that could happen, bloody 
hell, you know.’ (GP02)
The GPs recognised that the parents 
might need to talk about the suicide and 
guilt associated with it, and suggested that 
their role as a GP was to listen: 
‘First of all it’s … it’s just letting people talk 
… rather than us just jumping in. Just say, 
well how do you feel about it? … maybe feed 
back to them about how they’re feeling or 
… because it’s very hard for them to talk 
to family members because everybody’s 
equally upset.’ (GP01)
GPs also identified that parents may need 
to express anger or frustration about the 
situation whether towards the deceased or 
health professionals:
‘Sometimes you get a little bit of anger, but 
not necessarily directed at you, it’s perfectly 
rational sometimes.’ (GP08)
A few GPs recognised that they could offer 
advice about the practicalities following 
suicide, including: helping parents deal with 
coroners; talking about death certificates; 
stopping hospital correspondence to 
the deceased; fit note certification; and 
medication for the parents. However, most 
GPs described feeling that they could offer 
little to bereaved parents:
‘I haven’t really given … I mean, we … we 
recommend Cruse for bereavement, but 
that’s general bereavement’ (GP01)
They reported not being aware of the 
services to support parents, either because 
of changing availability or that they just did 
not know what would help these parents. 
A feeling of helplessness pervaded the 
narratives: 
‘All I could do was give her a hug, nothing 
else, but that’s all.’ (GP01)
Many of the GPs suggested that they 
do not have the resources to provide 
bereavement support themselves:
‘People have to try and work things through 
and then go into a full bereavement 
counselling situation if they’re not making 
any progress really, but GPs don’t have 
enough time.’ (GP04)
Many GPs recognised the need to 
e741  British Journal of General Practice, October 2016
 refer parents for some sort of support, 
but suggested that long waiting times are 
inappropriate for patients who have been 
bereaved and where intervention needs to 
be fast and responsive:
‘Typically if we refer to, uhm, traditional 
mental health services, then they’re not 
responsive enough … for this sort of 
problem.’ (GP03)
‘It’s left with the individual to secure their 
counselling … they have to go through a 
process of making phone calls, then going 
for assessments, then waiting for ages and 
ages … the system relies on drop out … it’s 
like overbooking your flights.’ (GP13)
Most of the GPs reported relying on third-
sector services, if available in the area. 
They identified them as more responsive 
compared with statutory services, and 
sometimes the only option to suggest to 
patients:
‘Voluntary organisations … have a big part 
to play, because the NHS can’t afford to do 
everything it wants to do.’ (GP04)
It is important to note that very few 
responders were able to name third-sector 
organisations that specifically supported 
those bereaved by suicide.
GPs helping themselves
Several of the GPs disclosed that they 
had either lost a family member and/or a 
colleague to suicide, ranging from a brother, 
to an uncle, to a colleague who was a 
GP in their practice. Participants explained 
that such personal losses could sometimes 
make it extremely difficult when they come 
into contact with patients who are feeling 
suicidal or who are bereaved by suicide. 
Many of the GPs disclosed concerns 
about how the suicide itself and dealing 
with bereaved parents had impacted upon 
them. A few referred to their own families 
so empathised with the parents, drawing 
on how they would feel if they lost their 
own child:
‘It was difficult … you know the patients, and 
yeah, you can just perceive their pain, and 
whilst I haven’t suffered the death of a child, 
I’ve got kids of my own and you just think, 
I don’t, I don’t know how I’d cope in those 
circumstances.’ (GP09)
Some GPs described the very personal 
pain of losing a patient they had been caring 
for through their mental illness:
‘I was terribly distressed. I felt like I’d been 
kicked in the stomach when I heard that 
he’d died.’ (GP12)
Several GPs described regret or guilt, 
reflecting on what went wrong, or what 
could have been done differently: 
‘There’s always going to be something that 
you feel you could have done more, or 
there’s something you could have changed, 
because that’s what human nature is, you 
look for things that … you could have … that 
could have altered the situation, don’t you? 
Hindsight is an awful thing actually but we 
all do it, don’t we?’ (GP03)
GPs recognised the need to find coping 
mechanisms in order to sustainably provide 
care for their patients:
‘I think I’m relatively good at distancing 
myself from patients, so I don’t get 
emotionally upset by it. You have to … 
Because if I sit here bursting into tears with 
her, it’s not really very productive.’ (GP06)
All the GPs interviewed said they were 
able to access informal support from 
colleagues. The majority of GPs described 
informal meetings as important, and often 
a necessity, for support, reassurance, and 
guidance on reflection: 
‘And we all go over things, could I have 
done … should we have done … could we 
have done something better? And I wouldn’t 
be able to deal with, well, I don’t think you 
should deal with that yourself, I think you 
need to share that really.’ (GP04)
Some GPs described personal barriers 
to accessing such support, such as pride 
or describing personality traits of high-
achieving independent workers, as well 
as the residual stigma of mental health in 
health professionals:
‘I suppose GPs like to be, they’re taught to be 
in control and equally they will think they’re 
probably the best at sorting themselves out, 
which is, which is, which is wrong. I think 
it’s difficult for a doctor to become a patient 
… a lot of doctors would rather be in denial 
over that. I think they’re, “oh, I’m too busy”, 
that’s an excuse.’ (GP09)
Implications for resource development
The topic guide allowed an exploration 
of perspectives of training needs around 
dealing with parents bereaved by suicide, 
and the analysis is summarised in Box 1.
British Journal of General Practice, October 2016  e742
 DISCUSSION
Summary
GP 
responders 
disclosed 
an 
unpreparedness 
to deal with suicide and its effects on 
bereaved parents, suggesting that they were 
uncertain how to approach parents who had 
been bereaved, particularly if they were not 
well known to them. GPs reported worries 
about not being informed of the death of 
a child prior to meeting with their parent 
and feeling let down by systems regarding 
information transfer around deaths, often 
relying on informal communications. 
Few GPs felt competent in preparing 
themselves for approaching the parent, 
particularly overcoming any guilt they felt 
over the deceased’s suicide. Some worried 
about intruding on private grief or facing 
Box 1. Implications for resource development
Theme
Implications for training resource
Supporting data
Resource 
Mental health as integral to 
general practice
• GPs need confidence in discussing suicide; 
increased exposure to the subject through 
training may help
• Suicide is considered uncommon in primary 
care so incentives to encourage time-
restricted clinicians to engage with training 
must be considered
• Most of the GPs mentioned that a resource to 
refer to would be useful, but would need to be 
compact and easy to access, like e-learning 
modules
‘… this isn’t a frequent event … so how much time and 
investment for their personal development plan or whatever 
do they put into something that may not happen, or may only 
happen once every 10 years or so?’ (GP09)
‘… you can do a bit at a time, you know, when you’ve got a 
spare 10 minutes … one of these … things that you can dip in 
and out of.’ (GP08)
Training must link in with 
current practice
Training needs to be 
brief and supported by 
e-learning
Facing the bereaved parent
• Need to support the clinician to prepare for 
approaching the bereaved parent:
• bereavement cards;
• communications training through role-play 
or videos; and
• access to experiences of bereaved parents 
and the experiences of GPs dealing with 
the parents and the suicide of a patient
• GPs need to feel as comfortable managing 
suicide bereavement as they do general 
bereavement. GPs described that not 
differentiating between types of bereavement 
reduces stigma and makes approaching the 
bereaved patient easier
‘I think if you, if you heard from bereaved patients, what not 
to say … so if a patient came in, one of your characters came 
in and said, I didn’t really want the doctor to say that, that 
just wasn’t helpful at all … What I would have liked him to 
have said was …’ (GP06)
‘If a patient of ours dies, if the next of kin is a patient of ours, 
we send them a bereavement card and we usually do a 
bereavement visit.’ (GP09)
Strategies for practices to 
be included in training
Demonstration of 
consultations and role-
play included in training
Helping the bereaved 
parent
• GPs recognise the needs of parents bereaved 
by suicide but do not always have access 
to the resources or skillset to fulfil them. A 
training resource needs to provide access 
to responsive and reliable services for these 
patients, most likely third sector, so GPs are 
able to signpost appropriately
‘I mean, you talked about some support group there — I 
never heard of it, so I think … you need some way of 
signposting.’ (GP10)
Training includes 
signposting of local 
resources and third-
sector services
GPs helping themselves
• GPs need to be emotionally prepared to see 
patients bereaved by suicide as they may be 
personally affected by the suicide
• GPs need to be supported in dealing with 
the complex needs of patients and their own 
emotions, as well as having a space to reflect 
upon experiences in order to look after their 
wellbeing and prevent burnout
• A training resource should help to alleviate 
some difficulties encountered by guiding 
GPs how to support bereaved parents 
appropriately, improving patient and clinician 
satisfaction, as well as signposting GPs to 
support for their own needs
‘I was terribly distressed. I felt like I’d been kicked in the 
stomach when I heard that he’d died.’ (GP12)
‘I don’t think you should deal with that yourself, I think you 
need to share that really.’ (GP04)
Training highlights to GPs 
the need to seek support 
and supervision — and 
suggests how this might 
be achieved
e743  British Journal of General Practice, October 2016
 unexpected emotions in the parents, such 
as anger or inconsolable distress, especially 
where no prior relationship existed with the 
bereaved parent. They described needing 
to be proactive and see the patient face-to-
face for such a sensitive encounter.
Most of the GPs interviewed recognised 
that parents bereaved by suicide are 
vulnerable and need support. They 
suggested that they were able to offer 
something to these patients yet many 
did not feel their input was adequate, 
mostly relying on third-sector services 
often intended for general bereavement. 
The majority of GPs believed it was their 
responsibility to deal with bereavement, but 
many felt they could not provide the time 
required by parents to talk, and felt let down 
by NHS mental health services.
GPs disclosed how they were emotionally 
affected by a suicide of a patient of theirs, 
often empathising with the family or 
experiencing feelings of guilt. Many felt they 
did not have the space to deal with their 
own grief or had to push aside feelings 
for the sake of their patients, potentially 
at the expense of their own wellbeing. 
Some responders felt these significant 
events impacted on the quality of care 
for subsequent patients. Some described 
mechanisms to protect themselves and the 
use of informal support from colleagues 
and family as an essential tool to give them 
the space to reflect and unburden feelings. 
Many GPs acknowledged the vulnerabilities 
of working in isolating and high-stress roles, 
most of them realising the importance of 
addressing these. However, they revealed 
(and confirmed) that there are no formal 
systems to protect them or alleviate the 
secondary impact on their patients. 
Strengths and limitations
This is the first study to explore the 
experiences of GPs in dealing with parents 
bereaved by suicide, revealing the emotional 
impact of this aspect of their work.
Limitations include potential participation 
bias; it is likely that the GPs most likely to 
agree to participate had a prior interest in 
suicide and mental health. This bias will have 
been reduced somewhat by recruitment via 
bereaved parents nominating their GP for 
the study. It is possible that GPs who felt 
uncomfortable about their experience with 
the bereaved parent may have been less 
likely to participate.
Most of the GPs interviewed were 
experienced, with an average of 22 years 
of practice (Table 1). They may not be 
representative of the majority of current GPs 
and practices, which are increasingly large 
modern practices with more fragmented 
care.31
Comparison with existing literature
GPs in this study acknowledged that it 
is their responsibility to support parents 
bereaved by suicide, which is consistent 
with findings from previous studies 
suggesting that bereaved parents need 
help from health professionals. 11,12,32 There 
is a residual stigma surrounding suicide 
alluded to by both the avoidance of health-
seeking behaviour in families post-suicide 
and the avoidance of use of the word suicide 
by GPs.33 GPs described parental reactions 
to suicide that were similar to those 
described in the literature, including anger, 
guilt, and questioning of meaning.9,10,34,35 
GPs’ descriptions of the severity of suicide 
bereavement and its comparison with 
other types of bereavement echo previous 
literature, particularly that it is a complex 
bereavement.36–38
GPs were unclear on what can be 
offered to those bereaved or the efficacy 
of available interventions, and the evidence 
in the literature is similarly unclear.13 One 
mentioned that they offered a hug to their 
patient, and others talked of the importance 
of face-to-face encounters. The literature 
suggests that ‘touch’ can be useful in 
certain clinical encounters to comfort and 
connect with patients.39
This study highlights the lack of skills and 
confidence clinicians have in dealing with 
these patients.40 This study explores the 
reasons for this and suggests that dealing 
with bereaved parents is more complex 
than simply knowing what to offer; it 
combines the difficulties of how to approach 
someone experiencing such intense grief 
and coping with personal emotions. The 
literature suggests that training may be 
helpful for professionals who come into 
contact with the bereaved.32
The emotional responses of GPs following 
the death of a patient by suicide are not well 
researched but the results are unsurprising 
given the literature on therapists’ very 
‘human’ reactions to the death of a patient. 
Professional carers commonly go through 
the same emotional experiences as the 
bereaved.19,41
Most of the GPs acknowledged the reality 
of emotional difficulties in their professions, 
and many described having informal support. 
Some GPs establish support networks or 
join Balint groups, a safe place to discuss 
patients or consultations and reflect on 
them.42 Formal support is far from available 
to all despite predominantly positive 
feedback.43,44 Many doctors accept stress as 
British Journal of General Practice, October 2016  e744
 a natural part of the job and some doctors 
described that burnout is inevitable.45 Few 
responders upheld this point of view but 
several GPs alluded to a stigma around 
help-seeking for mental health problems as 
a doctor, referring to ‘coping’ or ‘taking the 
pressure’, or using black humour to avoid 
discussing periods of ill health. Most GPs 
described burnout as preventable with the 
right systems in place. This study supports 
the view that there needs to be a cultural 
shift that actively encourages doctors to 
consider issues around ‘self-care’ to help 
enable them to cope more effectively with 
the inevitable pressures that they face in 
general practice.21
Implications for research and practice
This paper highlights the vulnerability of 
GPs caring for those bereaved by suicide. 
The majority feel unsupported, uncertain 
how to respond due to lack of training, 
and try to mask their vulnerabilities during 
consultations. In addition, several have 
also been personally bereaved by suicide. 
The need for greater support (practical, 
emotional, and training) for the GP workforce 
caring for this vulnerable high-risk 
population should not be underestimated, 
examples might include greater support for 
the GP workforce, especially for those who 
have been personally bereaved by suicide.
GPs may be personally affected by patient 
suicides; as such the need for improved 
support for GPs should be a priority. GPs 
are at particularly high risk of mental 
health problems and suicide,16 yet have no 
formal supervision unlike other high-risk 
health professionals. As an often-isolated 
profession, with poor recruitment and 
retention, better systems need to be in place 
to support GPs.
GPs need to feel confident in dealing 
with suicide bereavement and currently may 
lack not only the skills for approaching 
and supporting their patients, but also the 
knowledge of external services. 
Many GPs describe reliance on the third-
sector organisations but struggle to keep up 
to date with them; identifying, streamlining, 
and coordinating good-quality services is 
vital.
GPs need to be aware of local and national 
resources available in order to signpost 
bereaved families.
There is a need for evidence-based theory-
driven training for GPs and mental health 
professionals to increase their knowledge, 
confidence, and skills, and to provide a 
framework to support parents bereaved by 
suicide. The research team is currently in 
the process of developing such training.
Funding
This paper presents independent research 
funded by the National Institute for Health 
Research (NIHR) under its Research 
for Patient Benefit (RfPB) Programme 
(Grant Reference Number PB-PG-0110-
21047). The views expressed are those of 
the author(s) and not necessarily those of 
the NHS, the NIHR or the Department of 
Health.
Ethical approval
Ethical approval for the PABBS study 
was obtained from National Research 
Ethics Service Committee North West — 
Greater Manchester West. Research ethics 
committee reference: 11/NW/21047.
Provenance
Freely submitted; externally peer reviewed. 
Competing interests
Sharon McDonnell has been personally 
bereaved by suicide. Carolyn Chew-
Graham has also been bereaved by suicide. 
Navneet Kapur chaired the guideline 
development group for the 2012 NICE 
guidelines on self-harm: longer-term 
management, and currently chairs the 
guideline development group for the NICE 
depression in adults guideline. He is the 
topic expert member for the NICE suicide 
prevention guidelines and sits on the 
Suicide Prevention Advisory Group at the 
Department of Health (England). The views 
expressed in this publication are those of 
the authors and not necessarily those of 
NICE. All other authors have declared no 
competing interests.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Barry 
McGale from Suicide Bereavement UK and 
Shirley Smith Founder of If U Care Share 
Foundation and a mother bereaved by 
suicide. The authors thank all the GPs who 
took part in this study. 
Discuss this article
Contribute and read comments about this 
article: bjgp.org/letters
e745  British Journal of General Practice, October 2016
 REFERENCES
1. 
Office for National Statistics. Suicides in the United Kingdom: 
2014 registrations. London: ONS, 2016. http://www.ons.gov.uk/
peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/deaths/bulletins/
suicidesintheunitedkingdom/2014registrations (accessed 21 Jul 2016).
2. 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Common mental health 
disorders: identification and pathways to care. CG123. London: NICE, 2011. 
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/CG123 (accessed 21 Jul 2016).
3. 
Pearson A, Saini P, DaCruz D, et al. Primary care contact prior to suicide 
in individuals with mental illness. Br J Gen Pract 2009; DOI: 10.3399/
bjgp09X472881.
4. 
National Confidential Inquiry into Suicide and Homicide by People with Mental 
Illness (NCISH). Suicide in primary care in England. NCISH: Manchester, 2014. 
http://www.bbmh.manchester
.ac.uk/cmhs/research/centreforsuicideprevention/
nci/reports/SuicideinPrimaryCare2014.pdf (accessed 21 Jul 2016).
5. 
Berman AL. Estimating the population of survivors of suicide: seeking an 
evidence base. Suicide Life Threat Behav 2011; 41(1): 110–116.
6. 
Pitman A, Osborn D, King M, Erlangsen A. Effects of suicide bereavement on 
mental health and suicide risk. Lancet Psychiatry 2014; 1(1). DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/S2215-0366(14)70224-X. Epub 2014 Jun 4.
7. 
Sveen CA, Walby FA. Suicide survivors’ mental health and grief reactions: a 
systematic review of controlled studies. Suicide Life Threat Behav 2008; 38(1): 
13–29.
8. 
Cvinar JG. Do suicide survivors suffer social stigma: a review of the literature. 
Perspect Psychiatr Care 2005; 41(1): 14–21.
9. 
Wheeler I. Parental bereavement: the crisis of meaning. Death Stud 2001; 25(1): 
51–66.
10. 
Tekavcic-Grad O, Zavasnik A. Aggression as a natural part of suicide 
bereavement. Crisis 1992; 13(2): 65–69.
11. 
Van Dongen CJ. Survivors of a family member’s suicide: implications for practice. 
Nurse Pract 1991; 16(7): 31–35, 39.
12. 
Van Dongen CJ. Experiences of family members after a suicide. J Fam Pract 
1991; 33(4): 375–380.
13. 
McDaid C, Trowman R, Golder S, et al. Interventions for people bereaved through 
suicide: systematic review. Br J Psychiatry 2008; 193(6): 438–443.
14. 
de Groot M, de Keijser J, Neeleman J. Cognitive behaviour therapy to prevent 
complicated grief among relatives and spouses bereaved by suicide: cluster 
randomised control trial. BMJ 2007; 334(7601): 994.
15. 
McDonnell S. A study to identify the experiences of parents bereaved by 
suicide of undetermined death. (Unpublished thesis). University of Manchester, 
Manchester, 2006. Available at Joule Library: Theses (Th27810).
16. 
HM Government/Department of Health. Preventing suicide in England: a cross-
government outcomes strategy to save lives. London: HMG/DH, 2012. https://
www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/430720/
Preventing-Suicide-.pdf (accessed 21 Jul 2016).
17. 
Valente SM. Aftermath of a patient’s suicide: a case study. Perspect Psychiatr 
Care 2003; 39(1): 17–22.
18. 
Halligan P, Corcoran P
. The impact of patient suicide on rural general 
practitioners. Br J Gen Pract 2001; 51(465): 295–296.
19. 
Tekavcic-Grad O. Suicide: how to survive as a survivor
. Crisis 1996; 17(3): 136–
142.
20. 
Worden JW. Grief counseling and grief therapy. New York: Springer, 1991.
21. 
Styles WM. Stress in undergraduate medical education: ‘the mask of relaxed 
brilliance’. Br J Gen Pract 1993; 43(367): 46–47.
22. 
Calnan M, Wainwright D, Forsythe M, et al. Mental health and stress in the 
workplace: the case of general practice in the UK. Soc Sci Med 2001; 52(4): 
499–507.
23. 
Hann M, McDonald J, Checkland K, et al. Seventh national GP worklife 
survey. Manchester: University of Manchester, 2013. http://www.
population-health.manchester
.ac.uk/healtheconomics/research/reports/
FinalReportofthe7thNationalGPWorklifeSurvey.pdf (accessed 21 Jul 2016).
24. 
Carpenter J, Webb C, Bostock L, Coomber C. SCIE research briefing 43: effective 
supervision in social work and social care. Social Care Institute for Excellence, 
2012.
25. 
Boeije H. A purposeful approach to the constant comparative method in the 
analysis of qualitative interviews. Quality & Quantity 2002; 36: 391–409.
26. 
Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual Res Psychol 
2006; 3(2): 77–101.
27. 
Boyatzis RE. Transforming qualitative information: thematic analysis and code 
development. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 1998.
28. 
Charmaz K. Constructing grounded theory: a practical guide through qualitative 
analysis. London and Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2006.
29. 
Emerson RM, Fretz RI, Shaw LL. Writing ethnographic fieldnotes. 2nd edn. 
University of Chicago Press, 2011.
30. 
Shenton A. Strategies for ensuring trustworthiness in qualitative research 
projects. Education for Information 2004; 22: 63–75.
31. 
Royal College of General Practitioners. The 2022 GP: compendium of evidence. 
London: RCGP, 2013. http://www.rcgp.org.uk/~/media/Files/Policy/A-Z-policy/
The-2022-GP-Compendium-of-Evidence.ashx (accessed 21 Jul 2016).
32. 
Hawton K, Simkin S. Helping people bereaved by suicide. BMJ 2003; 327(7408): 
177–178.
33. 
Tal Young I, Iglewicz A, Glorioso D, et al. Suicide bereavement and complicated 
grief. Dialogues Clin Neurosci 2012; 14(2): 177–186.
34. 
Hazzard A, Weston J, Gutterres C. After a child’s death: factors related to 
parental bereavement. J Dev Behav Pediatr 1992; 13(1): 24–30.
35. 
Rando T. The unique issues and impact of the death of a child. In: Parental loss 
of a child. Champaign, IL: Research Press, 1986: 5–40.
36. 
Pritchard C. Suicide — the ultimate rejection? A psychosocial study. St 
Buckingham: Open University Press, 1995.
37. 
Cleiren M, Grad O, Zavasnik A, Diekstra RF
. Psychosocial impact of bereavement 
after suicide and fatal traffic accident: a comparative two-country study. Acta 
Psychiatr Scand 1996; 94(1): 37–44.
38. 
McIntosh J, Kelly LD. Survivors’ reactions: suicide vs. other causes. Crisis 1992; 
13(2): 82–93.
39. 
Cocksedge S, George B, Renwick S, Chew-Graham CA. Touch in primary care 
consultations: qualitative investigation of doctors’ and patients’ perceptions. Br J 
Gen Pract 2013; DOI: 10.3399/bjgp13X665251.
40. 
Department of Health, National Institute for Mental Health in England. National 
suicide prevention strategy for England: annual report. London: DH, 2002.
41. 
Farberow NL. The mental health professional as a suicide survivor
. Clin 
Neuropsych 2005; 2(1): 13–20.
42. 
Hopkins S. What is a Balint group? J Balint Society 1994; 22: 36–37.
43. 
Kjelmand D, Holström I. Balint groups as a means to increase job satisfaction 
and prevent burnout among general practitioners. Ann Fam Med 2008; 6(2): 
138–145.
44. 
Porteous D, Atkins S. Setting up supervision in general practice. BMJ Careers 
2014. http://careers.bmj.com/careers/advice/view-article.html?id=20016042 
(accessed 21 Jul 2016).
45. 
Jacques H. BMA must ‘act now’ on stress and burnout, says doctors. 
BMJ Careers 2013. http://careers.bmj.com/careers/advice/view-article.
html?id=20013164 (accessed 21 Jul 2016).
British Journal of General Practice, October 2016  e746
