 REVIEW
Anatomic Variation and Orgasm:
Could Variations in Anatomy Explain Differences
in Orgasmic Success?
E. EMHARDT,1 J. SIEGEL,2 AND L. HOFFMAN3*
1Class of 2016, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46220
2Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida 32224
3Department of Anatomy, Indiana University School of Medicine, Fort Wayne, Indiana 46805
Though the public consciousness is typically focused on factors such as psy-
chology, penis size, and the presence of the “G-spot,” there are other anatomi-
cal
and
neuro-anatomic
differences
that
could
play
an
equal,
or
more
important, role in the frequency and intensity of orgasms. Discovering these
variations could direct further medical or procedural management to improve
sexual satisfaction. The aim of this study is to review the available literature of
anatomical sexual variation and to explain why this variation may predispose
some patients toward a particular sexual experience. In this review, we
explored the available literature on sexual anatomy and neuro-anatomy. We
used PubMed and OVID Medline for search terms, including orgasm, penile size
variation, clitoral variation, Grafenberg spot, and benefits of orgasm. First we
review the basic anatomy and innervation of the reproductive organs. Then we
describe several anatomical variations that likely play a superior role to popular
known variation (penis size, presence of g-spot, etc). For males, the delicate
play between the parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous systems is vital to
achieve orgasm. For females, the autonomic component is more complex. The
clitoris is the primary anatomical feature for female orgasm, including its
migration toward the anterior vaginal wall. In conclusions, orgasms are com-
plex phenomena involving psychological, physiological, and anatomic variation.
While these variations predispose people to certain sexual function, future
research should explore how to surgically or medically alter these. Clin. Anat.
29:665–672, 2016.
V
C 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
Key words: anatomic variation; clitoris; G-spot; orgasm; penile erection; sex-
ual dysfunction; physiological
INTRODUCTION
Optimal sexual function can be defined by the
experiences of regular orgasms during sexual activ-
ities. Whereas differences in anatomy have been used
to explain sexual dysfunction (Kawanishi et al., 2008;
Bertolasi et al., 2009; Dai et al., 2015), the variation
of normal sexual anatomic structures may also explain
why some people have much better sexual experien-
ces than others and why some suffer from anorgasmia
in the absence of any identifiable cause. There are
many possible explanations for differences in sexual
experience beyond anatomy, including psychology,
*Correspondence to: Dr. Leslie Hoffman; Department of Anat-
omy, Indiana University School of Medicine, 2101 E. Coliseum
Blvd, Fort Wayne, IN 46805, 260-481-6730. E-mail: hoffmanl@
ipfw.edu
Disclosure: The authors of this manuscript have no conflicts of
interest to disclose. This paper has not been submitted or pub-
lished elsewhere.
Received
22
October
2015;
Revised
16
February
2016;
Accepted 16 February 2016
Published
online
4
April
2016
in
Wiley
Online
Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com). DOI: 10.1002/ca.22703
V
V
C 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
Clinical Anatomy 29:665–672 (2016)
 physiology,
pharmacology
and
surgical
sequelae
(ACOG, 2011). However, this review will only focus on
how variations in normal anatomy could provide a
functional
explanation
for
variability
in
sexual
experiences.
METHODS
We used PubMed and OVID Medline with the follow-
ing MESH keywords: anatomic variation, clitoris, G-
spot, orgasm, penile erection, and sexual dysfunction,
physiological. We used the limits of English language
and humans to further focus the search. With these
resources,
we
systematically
surveyed
male
and
female pelvic anatomy as it pertains to sex. Then we
used articles on pelvic anatomy variations to address
how these differences could explain differences in sex-
ual experience, specifically orgasmic success.
RESULTS
For men, it is clear that the balance between the
sympathetic and parasympathetic systems is key to
optimal erection and ejaculation (Zorba et al., 2012;
Harte, 2013). Furthermore, studies focusing on sexual
dysfunction, such as erectile dysfunction and prema-
ture ejaculation, highlight differences in anatomy that
may cause these unfavorable differences in sexual
experience (Lin et al., 2011; Liu et al., 2015). The
debate on the importance of penis size in the sexual
experience is controversial. Most of the research sur-
rounding whether bigger is in fact better is anecdotal
(Kamel et al., 2009; Costa et al., 2012). Additionally,
it
is
hard
to
distinguish
whether
any
perceived
increase in orgasms with a larger penis is due to the
psychological belief that bigger is tied to more mascu-
linity, or if the actual difference in anatomy is causing
an increase in orgasms due to the interaction between
the larger penis and the female sexual organs.
For women, many studies on sexual dysfunction
highlight the importance of one’s innate anatomy.
Women
with
vestibulodynia
and
vaginismus
have
increased nociception and levator ani hyperactivity,
respectively ((Bohm-Starke et al., 1999; Bertolasi
et al., 2009). Obesity seems to only affect partner–
partner sexual experiences, and not self-stimulation,
hinting that it may be a psychological, rather than
anatomical,
barrier
to
orgasm
(Costa
and
Brody,
2014). No studies have questioned whether clitoral
size affects orgasmic success. However, studies have
shown that the rostral migration of the clitoris during
development affects orgasmic success; the closer the
clitoris is to the urethral meatus, the higher frequency
of orgasm (Wallen and Lloyd, 2011). There has been
no study involving female genital plastic surgery and
frequency of orgasm to see if altering this distance
could provide better sexual experiences. The following
sections discuss the anatomy of orgasm in males and
females, and how studies of sexual dysfunction have
shed light on some of the anatomical and physiologi-
cal factors that influence orgasmic success and sexual
satisfaction.
ANATOMY OF ORGASM
For both males and females, the components of
orgasm are mediated by somatic (through the puden-
dal nerve), and sympathetic and parasympathetic
autonomic innervation.
For males, the sympathetic pathways can reach the
penis through three ways. The first starts with the
thoracolumbar
sympathetic
nerve
roots,
T11–L2.
These short preganglionic fibers relay on ganglionic
neurons in the hypogastric plexus, then pass through
the superior hypogastric plexus from the inferior mes-
enteric ganglion, and via the hypogastric nerve to the
pelvic plexus (inferior hypogastric plexus) located on
both sides of the bladder and rectum, then extend
through the cavernous nerve from the pelvic plexus to
the penis. The second route continues through the
paravertebral sympathetic chain, which connects via
the pelvic splanchnic nerve to the pelvic plexus and
then through the cavernous nerve to the penis. The
last route also continues through the paravertebral
sympathetic chain but leaves via the pudendal nerve
to the penis (Giuliano and Rampin, 2004; Yang and
Jiang, 2009; Everaert et al., 2010).
Some of these pathways are more classically para-
sympathetic
pathways,
but
recently
a
study
that
explored the nerve composition of the traditionally
sympathetic hypogastric nerve and parasympathetic
pelvic splanchnic nerve found that the pelvic splanch-
nic nerves were almost a third sympathetic nerve
fibers, likely from the sacral sympathetic trunk (Jang
et al., 2015). Multiple sympathetic pathways could
have clinical applications for patients with denervation
of one pathway, and may suggest the relative impor-
tance of the sympathetic system in the male orgasm.
The
preganglionic
parasympathetic
fibers
arise
from sacral nerve roots, S2–S4, as the pelvic splanch-
nic nerves and meet with the sympathetic fibers in
the pelvic plexus. The pelvic plexus is the site of the
parasympathetic synapse, creating the postganglionic
parasympathetics, which travel to the fascial capsule
of the prostate, creating the prostatic plexus. From
this plexus, the autonomic fibers to the penis form the
cavernous nerves and innervate the body of the
penis.
Male Erection
The two primary components of male orgasm are
erection and ejaculation. Erection is neurologically
divided into psychogenic and reflex erections. Psycho-
genic erections are centrally mediated and are initi-
ated by fantasy, nongenital erogenous areas, and
special senses (Everaert et al., 2010). Clinically, func-
tional MRI studies of the brain networks during view-
ing
of
erotic
movies
is
significantly
different
in
patients that experience psychogenic erectile dysfunc-
tion; specifically, patients that had erectile dysfunction
due to psychological factors showed decreased con-
nectivity among inferior parietal lobes, posterior cin-
gulated cortex, and medial prefrontal cortex (Cera
et al., 2014). The exact meaning of these differences
in brain activity is difficult to deduce, but these areas
are associated with higher cortical visual processing,
666
Emhardt et al.
 emotions, and motivation, and may have localization
value.
Reflex erections are facilitated by the pudendal
nerve, which conducts sensory afferents from the
penis (dorsal nerve of the penis) and the perineal skin
to the S2–S4 sacral spinal cord.
The efferent branches of both psychogenic and
reflex
erections
are
the
same.
Parasympathetic
impulses are increased and sympathetic impulses are
inhibited, resulting in a net parasympathetic gain,
which results in erection. In the filling stage of the
erection, postganglionic parasympathetic fibers from
the cavernous nerves release nitric oxide (NO) (Ever-
aert et al., 2010). The arterial compliance of the
smooth muscle in the fibrous trabeculae and coiled
helicine arteries increases 98% (Gillon and Barnea,
2002). There is a very rapid nine-fold increase in arte-
rial blood flow, which slowly tapers about 23% until
maximum corporal volume is met, specifically when
the arterial pressure equals the corporal pressure
(Borowitz and Barnea, 2000). In the second phase,
erection is maintained by the contraction of the ischio-
cavernosus and bulbospongiosus muscles, mediated
by the pudendal nerve. This contraction maintains
limited venous outflow, thus maintaining corpora vol-
ume and pressure. After ejaculation, the venous blood
flow returns to its pre-erection baseline and the penis
drains, returning to the arterial-venous steady state
(Borowitz and Barnea, 2000).
Male Ejaculation
The process of ejaculation is a complex series of
three reflex loops. The first is an urethrocavernosus
reflex in which the bulbospongiosus muscle contracts
in response to seminal fluid from the prostate in the
spongy urethra (Shafik et al., 2000). The nervous
pathways of this reflex have not been completely elu-
cidated, however the bulbous urethra and the bulbo-
spongiosus muscle are both innervated by branches of
the pudendal nerve, which suggests a spinal reflex
involving afferents coming either from the bulbous
urethra or from secondary stretching of the bulbo-
spongiosus muscle with efferents going to the bulbo-
spongiosus. This reflex facilitates, but is not necessary
for, ejaculation. If prostatectomy occurs, ejaculation
still exists (Everaert et al., 2010).
The second reflex begins with stimulation of the
penis, with afferents traveling to the spinal cord via
the dorsal nerve of the penis. This reflex is illustrated
by the ability of the patients with complete spinal cord
injuries to ejaculate by electrostimulating the dorsal
nerve (Everaert et al., 2010). The third reflex, involv-
ing a psychiatric component, is less understood and is
associated with nocturnal ejaculation.
The
efferent
limb
of both
of
these
latter
two
reflexes is the hypogastric nerve, which is necessary
for ejaculation. Patients with hypogastric nerve sec-
tion do not achieve orgasm by electrostimulation of
the dorsal nerve of the penis. However
, direct stimula-
tion of the hypogastric nerve produces ejaculation,
even in paralyzed patients with a damaged afferent
system (Brindley et al., 1989). The hypogastric nerve
sends innervation that causes emission of sperm and
semen,
as
well
as
closing
the
internal
urethral
sphincter
.
Male Ejaculation Versus Orgasm
Lastly, it is important to note that male ejaculation
and orgasm are not synonymous, but ejaculation is a
major component of orgasm (Alwaal et al., 2015).
While the neuronal and anatomical processes involved
in
ejaculation
are
clearly
elucidated
as
described
above, the physiologic process of orgasm is less
clearly defined (Alwaal et al., 2015). Orgasm is more
defined by the physiological changes, increased heart
rate, hyperventilation, and physical changes, ischioca-
vernous, and bulbospongiosus muscle contractions,
than by specific neuronal pathways like ejaculation is
(Alwaal et al., 2015). Nevertheless, the presence
or absence of ejaculation with orgasm can have seri-
ous
consequences
on
the
male’s
overall
sexual
experience.
While male sexual anatomy and orgasm centers on
erection and ejaculation, female sexual anatomy and
orgasm is less concrete. Female orgasm occurs in five
phases: flaccid, latent, tumescence, rigid, and detu-
mescence (Puppo, 2013). Through these changes, the
pelvic
vasculature
fills
with
blood,
becoming
engorged, and eventually there is tonic contraction of
the female perineal muscles, including the ischioca-
vernosus and bulbospongiosus (Puppo, 2013).
Innervation of the Female Sexual Organs
While the vital organ of orgasm in males is the
penis, in females there is the uterus, vagina, clitoris,
and hypothetical Grafenberg, or G-spot. Similar to the
penis, the uterus and vagina are innervated by a com-
bination of the autonomic and somatic sensory sys-
tems.
Only
the
distant
third
of
the
vagina
is
innervated by the somatic system via the deep peri-
neal nerve, a branch of the pudendal nerve (S2–S4),
and thus is sensitive to pain and temperature. The
afferent impulses travel through the pudendal nerve
and synapse in the contralateral spinal cord. The
superior 2/3 of the vagina and the uterus are inner-
vated as visceral organs by the autonomic system.
Unconscious reflex-type sensation travels retrogradely
along the parasympathetic pathways to the S2–S4
spinal sensory ganglia, as does pain sensation from
the subperitoneal uterus and vagina. Pain sensation
from the intraperitoneal uterus travels along the sym-
pathetic pathway to the inferiormost thoracic and
superior lumbar spinal ganglia (Shoja et al., 2013).
Up to 50% of women with spinal cord injuries,
including some who have an absolute loss of rectal
sensation, can retain the ability to orgasm if they
were able to prior to injury. Pelvic and pudendal activ-
ity in women with preserved sacral reflex arcs cause
hypogastric nerve activity which transmits to the sym-
pathetic chain, resulting in physiologic events (ele-
vated blood pressure and respiratory rate) associated
with
orgasm
(Alexander
and
Rosen,
2008).These
physiologic events can themselves enhance the sexual
Anatomic variation and orgasm
667
 experience and help lead to orgasm. The hypogastric
enters the spinal cord at T10–T12, thus a lesion below
this level would leave the distal structures impaired,
but orgasm intact.
The
parasympathetic
innervation
may
extend
beyond the pelvis and include the brainstem and the
vagus
nerve. Women with complete spinal
injury
about T10 have reported perceptual responses to the
cervical stimulation and even achieve orgasm (Komi-
saruk et al., 2004). The vagus nerve innervates the
abdominal viscera, supposedly ending at the splenic
flexure (Mirilas and Skandalakis, 2010). However,
when horseradish peroxidase (HRP) is injected into
the uterine horns and/or cervix of rats, there is retro-
grade transport into some cells of the vagal dorsal
motor nucleus (DMNX) and several cells of the nodose
ganglion (Ortega-Villalobos et al., 1990). The DMNX is
an efferent nucleus and could be involved in uterine
contractions during orgasm.
Functional MRI also indicates activity in vagal nuclei
during orgasm in women with complete spinal injury.
Specifically, in some women with lesions above T10,
fMRI shows stimulation of the solitary nucleus (affer-
ent vagus nucleus) when women perform cervical
self-stimulation (Komisaruk et al., 2004). These stud-
ies, even considering the inherent technical limitations
of fMRI, have refuted long-standing assertions that
vagus innervation ends at the splenic flexure, however
it is not clear whether the nerve in fact travels directly
to the female reproductive organs or if the nervous
impulses take another route. It could be argued that
this alternate route would have to bypass even the
hypogastric nerves as they enter the spinal cord below
some of the described lesions.
Clitoris
The clitoris is composed of erectile tissue, specifi-
cally the glans, the body, and the crura (Puppo,
2013). It may be the most important anatomical com-
ponent of female orgasm, but the neuronal networks
involved are not clearly understood (Pauls, 2015).
Bilateral
terminations
of
the
pudendal
nerve
are
responsible
for
clitoral
innervation
(Pauls,
2015).
From
clitoral
self-stimulation,
it
is
clear
that
the
pudendal sensitivity of the clitoral glans is crucial to
orgasm, as there may not be internal vaginal wall
stimulation during masturbation (King et al., 2011).
Grafenberg or G-Spot
The third consideration for female orgasm is the
proposed Grafenberg or G-spot. Although the eroge-
nous area in the anterior wall of the vagina has been
referenced since the 1st century, the contemporary
understanding of its existence is largely based on
anecdotal evidence from the 1950s (Pan et al., 2015).
Cadaveric dissections do not consistently support the
existence of the G-spot (Pan et al., 2015). However,
histological studies using anterior vaginal wall biopsies
in 32 female patients found richer small-nerve-fiber
innervation and microvessel density in the distal third
of the anterior vaginal wall (Li et al., 2014). During
sexual stimulation, the clitoris tucks down closer to
the anterior vaginal wall, which could explain why the
anterior vaginal wall, in close proximity to the nerve-
rich areas of the clitoris, becomes highly sensitive dur-
ing sex (Pan et al., 2015). It is clear that this “one
size fits all” explanation of female pelvic anatomy is
disputed (Hines and Kilchevsky, 2013). Perhaps every
woman has her own constellation of pudendal nerve
branching that creates her own, personal G spot
location.
Implications for Men
Studies of sexual dysfunction in men have eluci-
dated some of the anatomical and physiological fac-
tors that can affect sexual function. Examples of
recent studies focus on erectile dysfunction and pre-
mature ejaculation. A recent meta-analysis found a
significant correlation between a few polymorphisms
of nitric oxide synthase and an increased risk for erec-
tile dysfunction (Liu et al., 2015). For patients with
lifelong premature ejaculation, the sympathetic sys-
tem was hyperactive, and the parasympathetic sys-
tem was hypoactive (Zorba et al., 2012).
In studying erectile dysfunction, the percent area
of the cavernous smooth muscle layers could be the
key to erectile strength (Lin et al., 2011). Men with
erectile dysfunction have less cavernous smooth mus-
cle versus collagen (Lin et al., 2011). Intracavernous
injection of adipose-derived stem cells restored erec-
tile function in a rat model, shown through markedly
improved ratios of intracavernous pressure to mean
arterial pressure (Fandel et al., 2012). In addition, the
intracavernous
injections
improved
the
ratio
of
smooth muscle cells to collagen fibers and regenera-
tion of nitric oxide synthase nerves (Fandel et al.,
2012). Thus, in patients that suffer from erectile dys-
function, there may be potential targets for therapeu-
tic intervention.
Another
important
variable
in the
male sexual
experience is one that was highlighted earlier, the bal-
ance between sympathetic and parasympathetic sys-
tems.
A
recent
article
using
male
patients
that
reported adequate erections showed a correlation with
predominant
parasympathetic
tone,
measured
by
high-power resting heart rate variability, a frequency-
domain method of statistically evaluating heart rate
variability (Harte, 2013). Thus, male sexual perform-
ance centers on their innate balance between the
sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems.
Of note, the studies that showed disruption of this
parasympathetic and sympathetic balance did not
explore how this affected nonsexual autonomic func-
tion,
which
would
be
a
good
avenue
for
future
research (Zorba et al., 2012).
A third factor that may affect sexual experience is
penile size. One study of over 1000 men with and
without erectile dysfunction found that those with ED
had significantly shorter penis length, with no differ-
ence in girth (Kamel et al., 2009). However, penis size
may play more of a role in the satisfaction of the
female partner than in the male himself. Most studies
trying to assess the importance of penile size with
668
Emhardt et al.
 female orgasm have been anecdotal, relying upon
surveys of women that have had sex with multiple
partners to draw conclusions about size and orgasm
(Costa et al., 2012). Masters and Johnson, in their
famous book Human sexual response, proposed that
penile size is not as important as one may assume,
due to the elasticity of the vagina (Masters and John-
son, 1966). It has been proposed that women are
more likely to orgasm with men whom they find most
“attractive” from an evolutionary perspective (Puts
et al., 2012). Thus if penile size is associated with
male attractiveness (Mautz et al., 2013), one could
reason that bigger penile size could equate to more
female orgasms (Puts et al., 2012). However, there
are two key discrepancies in this deductive reasoning.
First, this has not been tested directly, as in a large
study population seeing if women have more frequent
orgasms with men with larger penises. Second, this
does not distinguish between the psychological impact
of a larger penis and the anatomical one; essentially,
a larger penis may not be anatomically necessary to
achieve
orgasmic
success
and
frequency,
but
if
women prefer it psychologically, it would be impossi-
ble to separate the two. Basically, if women believe
bigger is better
, then the sexual experience mirrors
that belief (Costa et al., 2012).
The final question in this debate on innate anatomy
shaping sexual experiences is one of purpose. If men
are predisposed to a certain sexual function, can any-
thing be done to alter innate anatomy? For penile
size, the fact that wider or longer penises create more
female orgasms anatomically has yet to be proven,
but psychologically, the notion that size matters still
persists. There are several nonsurgical and surgical
options available for size enhancement, but only sur-
gical means have proven to augment penile size
(Nugteren et al., 2010). In recent reviews of surgical
manipulation of penile size, patients do not report
long-term
satisfaction
consistently
(Vardi
et
al.,
2008). Furthermore, there are few if any studies that
examine partner satisfaction and frequency of orgasm
after penile implant. In fact, most studies regarding
female perspective on penile size suggest that women
are not as concerned about male size as men (Lever
et al., 2006). Research with a large, representative
population examining frequency of female orgasm
before and after penile surgery would help delineate
the success or necessity of these interventions.
Implications for Women
In
women,
studies
of
sexual
dysfunction
have
helped in developing potential clinical interventions for
those
predisposed
to
poorer
sexual
experiences.
Women with primary vestibulodynia have a signifi-
cantly lower pain threshold in the umbilical region,
consistent with the embryological origin of both of
these
tissues
from the
urogenital
sinus
(Burrows
et al., 2008). Women with secondary vestibulodynia
have increased intraepithelial innervation in the ves-
tibular mucosa, heavily concentrated with calcitonin-
gene-related
peptide,
a
nociception
neuropeptide
(Bohm-Starke et al., 1999). Using EMG in women with
refractory vaginismus, a study found that the levator
ani muscle showed hyperactivity at rest and reduced
inhibition to straining (Bertolasi et al., 2009). While
nothing can be done to correct an acute anorectal
angle as of yet, injecting botulism toxin in women
with levator ani hyperactivity at rest did significantly
improve
sexual
function
scores
(Bertolasi
et
al.,
2009).
Differences in sensory innervation play a large part
in female sexual dysfunction, so it seems that neuro-
modulation to optimize innervation could improve sex-
ual
experiences.
In
pudendal
neuralgia,
women
experience pain in the distribution of the pudendal
nerve as well as urinary hesitance, painful bowel
movements, and sexual dysfunction (Vancaillie et al.,
2012). It seems that if a condition can exist where the
pudendal nerve is hyperactive for a variety of reasons
including surgical manipulation, endometriosis or pro-
lapse, sexual satisfaction could rely on the exact sen-
sitivity of the pudendal nerve. This hypothesis has
been tested through the emerging use of pudendal
neuromodulation
for
sexual
dysfunction
(Peters,
2013). In this technique, an implantable pulse gener-
ator is placed along the course of the pudendal nerve
using an EMG guide (Peters, 2013). In fact, the impor-
tance of the pudendal nerve in sexual satisfaction and
desire was explored as early as 1903, in which a phy-
sician damaged the pudendal nerve after it passed
through its canal to try to treat nymphomania; this
operation had satisfactory results except that the
report hinted at possible nerve regrowth as symptoms
started to return after six months (Hamilton, 1903).
In studies of neurogenic bladder dysfunction, high
spatial density intrafascicular electrodes are used to
selectively record pudendal nerve activity and discern
which neural units are driven by bladder distention,
bladder filling, and genital stimulation (Mathews et al.,
2014). While this research is helping drive advances
in urology, the data involved in the portion of the
pudendal nerve that responds to genital stimuli could
help push the development of implantable devices to
increase sexual experiences by neuromodulating spe-
cific units of patients’ pudendal nerves.
With the rising obesity epidemic, obesity in relation
to sexual function should be explored. In a recent
study
exploring
orgasm
and
waist
circumference,
larger waist circumference was associated with lesser
frequency of vaginal orgasm, but no difference in self-
stimulating orgasm (Costa and Brody, 2014). The
mean waist circumference of those having no vaginal
orgasms in the test period was 77.44 cm, and the
same parameter for those having at least one vaginal
orgasm in the test period was 73.59 cm (Costa and
Brody,
2014).
Because
the
frequency
of
self-
stimulating orgasm was unaffected by waist circum-
ference, it seems reasonable to predict that the true
difference here is perhaps with partner–partner confi-
dence and less to do with anatomical changes from
obesity. The authors also speculated that fitness abil-
ity would more directly affect partner intercourse than
masturbation, and thus could account for these differ-
ences with obesity (Costa and Brody, 2014).
Some women seem to fall on the beneficial side of
the innate anatomy spectrum; they seem predisposed
Anatomic variation and orgasm
669
 to better sexual function rather than sexual dysfunc-
tion. If we explored penile size with men, it seems rea-
sonable to look into clitoral size. In actuality, clitoral
size varies much greater than flaccid, stretched penile
length (Lloyd et al., 2005). One study suggests that
clitoral length does not have the same evolutionary
“pressure” or selection on it as penile length does (Wal-
len and Lloyd, 2008). Another study refutes this and
claims that if there is greater variability in clitoral
length and greater variability in female orgasm fre-
quency than male orgasm frequency, this would imply
that clitoral length and frequency of orgasm are in fact
associated (Hosken, 2008). However, this study and
others do not specifically explore the frequency of
orgasm with the variation of clitoral size in an individual
case-by-case way. Similar to male penile length, it
would be helpful to secure a large sample size and see
if clitoral size is associated with frequency of orgasm.
Other studies suggest that prenatal exposure to
androgens could explain differences in orgasm suc-
cess
later
in
life
through
affecting
the
distance
between a woman’s clitoris and urethral meatus (Wal-
len and Lloyd, 2011). Greater exposure to prenatal
androgens produces greater rostral migration of the
genital tubercle, which eventually develops into the
clitoris (Wallen and Lloyd, 2011). Using specific meas-
uring criteria via two distinct methods, it is suggested
that 2.5 cm from clitoris to urethral meatus is the
demarcation in predicting whether or not a woman is
likely to have successful orgasms (Wallen and Lloyd,
2011). Of note, this difference in orgasm was not
seen in masturbation, which is congruent with the
hypothesis that the distance is only important when
the penis is involved (Wallen and Lloyd, 2011).
Another innate difference in women could be ana-
tomic sensitivities in the proposed G-spot region. MRI
studies of couples during intercourse are helpful in
showing the exact anatomy involved in intercourse. In
posterior entry coitus, studies show that the posterior
wall of the vagina is preferentially stimulated, and the
anterior wall is more stimulated in the anterior entry
(Faix et al., 2002). With this reasoning in mind, future
studies could focus on innate innervation of the vagi-
nal walls and whether this distribution could predict
sexual position preference and thus optimize orgasm
frequency.
If women are predisposed to good sexual function
or dysfunction, what can be done clinically to alter
this? While one’s innate innervation may seem perma-
nent, studies of female pelvic innervation, specifically
uterine innervation, highlight the plasticity involved in
pregnancy (Monica Brauer and Smith, 2015). Complex
molecular changes occur, often hormonally influenced
by estrogen and progesterone, to accommodate preg-
nancy, specifically a massive reduction in sympathetic
axon density to theoretically allow smooth muscle
relaxation and robust blood flow (Monica Brauer and
Smith, 2015). This level of neuronal plasticity sug-
gests that innate differences in innervation may not
be as fixed as once assumed.
If the clitoris and clitoral–urethral meatus distance
are the keys to increased orgasm, it seems reasona-
ble to explore the area of clitoroplasty to heighten
sexual function. The field of female genital plastic sur-
gery is controversial as the line between necessity
and cosmesis is often blurred (Goodman et al., 2010).
One multicenter study researched over 250 patients
in eight states who underwent various genital plastic
surgeries, including labiaplasty, reduction of the clito-
ral hood, and vaginoplasty (Goodman et al., 2010).
For
all
categories
of
surgery,
patients
reported
increased sexual satisfaction, but this was a qualita-
tive
retrospective
response,
not
a
quantitative
increase in orgasms (Goodman et al., 2010). How-
ever, as is common with studies of this nature, the
increase in sexual satisfaction could be more of a psy-
chological one rather than a direct result of surgical
alteration of the anatomy.
Pelvic floor exercises have often been proposed as
a way to augment one’s innate anatomy (Lara et al.,
2012). One study used a physical therapy protocol
that included pelvic floor muscle training in postmeno-
pausal continent women, followed by an assessment
of sexual satisfaction and mood after 3 months (Lara
et al., 2012). While the women reported less anxiety
about sexual intercourse, they did not report any
change in sexual satisfaction, despite an increase in
the strength of pelvic floor musculature, as measured
by standardized vaginal exam (Lara et al., 2012). This
study reinforces that sexual satisfaction is complex
and
often
cannot
be
altered
through
simple
manipulations.
DISCUSSION
Optimal sexual function, characterized by regular
and satisfactory orgasms, has important reproductive,
recreational, and even evolutionary implications.
For males, the anatomical focus is on the nervous
system with a balance of parasympathetic and sympa-
thetic function in order to achieve and maintain an
erection and to ejaculate. There may be some subjec-
tive improved quality based on physical anatomy of
the penis and cavernous smooth muscle, but overall,
the physical penile size has not been shown to have a
significant effect on either male or female sexual
experience.
For females, the experience of orgasm is more
complicated. The autonomic nervous system plays an
important role, including modulating brainstem func-
tion, but the stress may lie more heavily on the physi-
cal anatomy itself. Differences in levator ani activity,
clitoral migration, and angle of penile entry all play a
significant role.
Women with vaginismus have shown levator ani
hyperactivity at rest, while women with vestibulodynia
have increased nociception. Both of these conditions
have been treated by either blocking the neuromuscu-
lar junction, or by neuromodulation of the pudendal
nerve. The distance between the clitoris and the vagi-
nal lumen has also been found to affect orgasmic suc-
cess.
Women
with
anorgasmia
have
increased
distance between the clitoris and the vaginal lumen
(Bohm-Starke et al., 1999; Bertolasi et al., 2009;
Oakley et al., 2014), while women who experience
optimal sexual function have been found to have a
smaller clitoral-urethral meatus distance (Wallen and
670
Emhardt et al.
 Lloyd, 2011). In recent news, the FDA approved fli-
banserin, a neurotransmitter modifier, for the treat-
ment of hypoactive sexual desire disorder (Reviriego,
2014). Touted as the “female Viagra,” this medication
is attempting to fill the void in the market for treating
female sex issues. However, having a centrally acting
medication further supports this idea that female sex
is more tied to the mind than male sex is. It will be
interesting to study the effects of flibanserin in the
future as more women have access to the drug, and
to see whether this approach to some forms of female
sexual dysfunction is successful.
The real importance of exploring anatomic reasons
for different sexual experiences is twofold. First, for
patients, it is important to know that their anatomy
could be responsible for sexual inadequacies or sexual
success. As such, it is important to study and articu-
late what these differences could be so that the inter-
ventions can be proposed to assist with creating
optimal sexual function. Secondly, different health
indices are correlated with successful orgasm (Brody,
2010). In a thorough review, penile-vaginal inter-
course frequency and orgasm were associated with
greater satisfaction with mental health, less blood
pressure increase in response to stress, an indicator
of lower risk in developing hypertension, and even
greater life expectancy (Brody, 2010). Thus, studying
the anatomy of orgasm, innate differences in anat-
omy, and possible therapeutic interventions is impor-
tant for improving patient health.
CONCLUSIONS
Future research should explore how manipulations
to pelvic anatomy alter orgasmic frequency. For men,
intracavernous
injections
to
increase
the
ratio
of
smooth muscle to collagen could help men with ED,
and should be explored in a stepwise manner
. It would
be interesting to study partner satisfaction and fre-
quency of orgasm before and after penile implant or
augmentation
procedures.
However,
it
would
still
prove difficult to tease out whether any difference was
due to psychological or anatomical reasons.
For women, it would be productive to see if neuro-
modulation of the pudendal nerve could perfect sensi-
tivity in the pelvis for increased orgasms. Also, if
proximity of the clitoris to the urethral meatus is asso-
ciated with increased orgasms, one should study if
female genital plastic surgery could alter this distance
and improve orgasmic success. Lastly, in a less inva-
sive manner
, mapping of the anterior and posterior
walls of the vagina for pudendal nerve branching could
help guide which sexual positions would be most favor-
able for the patient with regards to orgasmic success.
If there are anatomical predispositions to have more
frequent orgasms throughout one’s sexual life, as pro-
posed above, this could be comforting or alarming to
patients. On one hand, it could be a relief to accept
that one’s orgasmic success is not necessarily in one’s
control. On the other hand, it could be devastating to
know that no matter how much love or affection exists
between two partners, or how many pelvic floor exer-
cises one does, the frequency and quality of one’s
orgasms may be predominately unchanged. In the
end, this topic is meaningful because it has vast conse-
quences on patients’ overall health and life experience,
and it should be treated with this level of importance.
REFERENCES
Alwaal A, Breyer BN, Lue TF
. 2015. Normal male sexual function:
Emphasis on orgasm and ejaculation. Fertil Steril 104:1051–
1060.
American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology (ACOG). 2011.
ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 119: Female sexual dysfunction.
Obstet Gynecol 117:996–1007.
Alexander M, Rosen RC. 2008. Spinal cord injuries and orgasm: A
review. J Sex Marital Ther 34:308–324.
Bertolasi L, Frasson E, Cappelletti JY, Vicentini S, Bordignon M,
Graziottin A. 2009. Botulinum neurotoxin type A injections for
vaginismus secondary to vulvar vestibulitis syndrome. Obstet
Gynecol 114:1008–1016.
Bohm-Starke N, Hilliges M, Falconer C, Rylander E. 1999. Neurochem-
ical characterization of the vestibular nerves in women with vulvar
vestibulitis syndrome. Gynecol Obstet Invest 48:270–275.
Borowitz E, Barnea O. 2000. Hemodynamic mechanisms of penile
erection. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 47:319–326.
Brindley GS, Sauerwein D, Hendry WF. 1989. Hypogastric plexus
stimulators for obtaining semen from paraplegic men. Br J Urol
64:72–77.
Brody S. 2010. The relative health benefits of different sexual activ-
ities. J Sex Med 7:1336–1361.
Burrows LJ, Klingman D, Pukall CF, Goldstein AT. 2008. Umbilical
hypersensitivity in women with primary vestibulodynia. J Reprod
Med 53:413–416.
Cera N, Di Pierro ED, Ferretti A, Tartaro A, Romani GL, Perrucci MG.
2014. Brain networks during free viewing of complex erotic
movie: New insights on psychogenic erectile dysfunction. PloS
One 9:e105336.
Costa RM, Brody S. 2014. Orgasm and women’s waist circumfer-
ence. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 182:118–122.
Costa RM, Miller GF, Brody S. 2012. Women who prefer longer
penises are more likely to have vaginal orgasms (but not clitoral
orgasms): Implications for an evolutionary theory of vaginal
orgasm. J Sex Med 9:3079–3088.
Dai F, Zhu L, Mi Y, Feng N. 2015. An updated meta-analysis of the
effects of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene G894T poly-
morphism and erectile dysfunction risk. Cell Biochem Biophys
[Epub ahead of print]. doi: 10.1007/s12013-015-0540-9
Everaert K, de Waard WI, Van Hoof T, Kiekens C, Mulliez T, D’Herde
C. 2010. Neuroanatomy and neurophysiology related to sexual
dysfunction in male neurogenic patients with lesions to the spinal
cord or peripheral nerves. Spinal cord 48:182–191.
Faix A, Lapray JF, Callede O, Maubon A, Lanfrey K. 2002. Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) of sexual intercourse: Second experi-
ence in missionary position and initial experience in posterior
position. J Sex Marital Ther 28 Suppl 1:63–76.
Fandel TM, Albersen M, Lin G, Qiu X, Ning H, Banie L, Lue TF, Lin CS.
2012. Recruitment of intracavernously injected adipose-derived
stem cells to the major pelvic ganglion improves erectile function
in a rat model of cavernous nerve injury. Eur Urol 61:201–210.
Gillon G, Barnea O. 2002. Erection mechanism of the penis: A model
based analysis. J Urol 168:2711–2715.
Giuliano F, Rampin O. 2004. Neural control of erection. Physiol
Behav 83:189–201.
Goodman MP, Placik OJ, Benson RH, Miklos JR, Moore RD, Jason RA,
Matlock DL, Simopoulos AF, Stern BH, Stanton RA, Kolb SE,
Gonzalez F. 2010. A large multicenter outcome study of female
genital plastic surgery. J Sex Med 7:1565–1577.
Hamilton JAG. 1903. Treatment of nymphomania by division of
branches of internal pudic and inferior pudendal nerves. Aus-
tralas Med Gazette 22:1.
Anatomic variation and orgasm
671
 Harte CB. 2013. The relationship between resting heart rate variabil-
ity and erectile tumescence among men with normal erectile
function. J Sex Med 10:1961–1968.
Hines T, Kilchevsky A. 2013. The G-spot discovered? Comments on
Ostrzenski’s article. J Sex Med 10:887–888.
Hosken DJ. 2008. Clitoral variation says nothing about female
orgasm. Evol Dev 10:393–395.
Jang HS, Cho KH, Hieda K, Kim JH, Murakami G, Abe S, Matsubara
A. 2015. Composite nerve fibers in the hypogastric and pelvic
splanchnic nerves: An immunohistochemical study using elderly
cadavers. Anat Cell Biol 48:114–123.
Kamel I, Gadalla A, Ghanem H, Oraby M. 2009. Comparing penile
measurements in normal and erectile dysfunction subjects. J Sex
Med 6:2305–2310.
Kawanishi Y, Muguruma H, Sugiyama H, Kagawa J, Tanimoto S,
Yamanaka M, Kojima K, Numata A, Kishimoto T, Nakanishi R,
Kanayama HO. 2008. Variations of the internal pudendal artery
as a congenital contributing factor to age at onset of erectile dys-
function in Japanese. BJU Int 101:581–587.
King R, Belsky J, Mah K, Binik Y. 2011. Are there different types of
female orgasm? Arch Sex Behav 40:865–875.
Komisaruk BR, Whipple B, Crawford A, Liu WC, Kalnin A, Mosier K.
2004.
Brain
activation
during
vaginocervical
self-stimulation
and
orgasm
in
women
with
complete
spinal
cord
injury:
fMRI evidence of mediation by the vagus nerves. Brain Res
1024:77–88.
Lara LA, Montenegro ML, Franco MM, Abreu DC, Rosa e Silva AC,
Ferreira CH. 2012. Is the sexual satisfaction of postmenopausal
women enhanced by physical exercise and pelvic floor muscle
training? J Sex Med 9:218–223.
Lever J, Frederick DA, Peplau LA. 2006. Does size matter? Men’s and
women’s views on penis size across the lifespan. Psychol Men
Masc 7:129–143.
Li T, Liao Q, Zhang H, Gao X, Li X, Zhang M. 2014. Anatomic distri-
bution of nerves and microvascular density in the human anterior
vaginal wall: Prospective study. PloS One 9:e110239.
Lin G, Qiu X, Fandel TM, Albersen M, Wang Z, Lue TF, Lin CS. 2011.
Improved penile histology by phalloidin stain: Circular and longi-
tudinal cavernous smooth muscles, dual-endothelium arteries,
and erectile dysfunction-associated changes. Urology 78:978–
970.
Liu C, Lu K, Tao T, Zhang L, Zhang X, Jiang L, Huang Y, Guan H,
Chen M, Xu B. 2015. Endothelial nitric oxide synthase polymor-
phisms and erectile dysfunction: A meta-analysis. J Sex Med 12:
1319–1328.
Lloyd J, Crouch NS, Minto CL, Liao LM, Creighton SM. 2005. Female
genital appearance: “Normality” unfolds. BJOG 112:643–646.
Masters WH, Johnson VE. 1966. Human Sexual Response. Bronx,
NY: Ishi Press International. p 1–366.
Mathews KS, Wark HA, Warren DJ, Christensen MB, Nolta NF,
Cartwright PC, Normann RA. 2014. Acute monitoring of genitou-
rinary function using intrafascicular electrodes: Selective puden-
dal
nerve
activity
corresponding
to
bladder
filling,
bladder
fullness, and genital stimulation. Urology 84:722–729.
Mautz BS, Wong BB, Peters RA, Jennions MD. 2013. Penis size inter-
acts with body shape and height to influence male attractive-
ness. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110:6925–6930.
Mirilas P, Skandalakis JE. 2010. Surgical anatomy of the retroperito-
neal spaces, Part IV: Retroperitoneal nerves. Am Surg 76:253–
262.
Monica Brauer M, Smith PG. 2015. Estrogen and female reproductive
tract innervation: Cellular and molecular mechanisms of auto-
nomic neuroplasticity. Auton Neurosci 187:1–17.
Nugteren HM, Balkema GT, Pascal AL, Schultz WC, Nijman JM, van
Driel MF
. 2010. Penile enlargement: From medication to surgery.
J Sex Marital Ther 36:118–123.
Oakley SH, Vaccaro CM, Crisp CC, Estanol MV, Fellner AN, Kleeman
SD, Pauls RN. 2014. Clitoral size and location in relation to sex-
ual function using pelvic MRI. J Sex Med 11:1013–1022.
Ortega-Villalobos M, Garcia-Bazan M, Solano-Flores LP, Ninomiya-
Alarcon JG, Guevara-Guzman R, Wayner MJ. 1990. Vagus nerve
afferent and efferent innervation of the rat uterus: An electro-
physiological and HRP study. Brain Res Bull 25:365–371.
Pan S, Leung C, Shah J, Kilchevsky A. 2015. Clinical anatomy of the
G-spot. Clin Anat 28:363–367.
Pauls RN. 2015. Anatomy of the clitoris and the female sexual
response. Clin Anat 28:376–384.
Peters KM. 2013. Pudendal neuromodulation for sexual dysfunction.
J Sex Med 10:908–911.
Puppo V. 2013. Anatomy and physiology of the clitoris, vestibular
bulbs, and labia minora with a review of the female orgasm and
the prevention of female sexual dysfunction. Clin Anat 26:134–
152.
Puts DA, Welling LM, Burriss RP, Dawood K. 2012. Men’s masculinity
and
attractiveness
predict
their
female
partners’
reported
orgasm frequency and timing. Evol Hum Behav 33:1–9.
Reviriego C. 2014. Flibanserin for female sexual dysfunction. Drugs
Today 50:549–556.
Shafik A, El-Sibai O, Simmons MN, Jones JS, Yang CC, Jiang X.
2000. Mechanism of ejection during ejaculation: Identification of
a urethrocavernosus reflex. Arch Androl 44:77–83.
Shoja MM, Sharma A, Mirzayan N, Groat C, Watanabe K, Loukas M,
Tubbs RS. 2013. Neuroanatomy of the female abdominopelvic
region: A review with application to pelvic pain syndromes. Clin
Anat 26:66–76.
Vancaillie T, Eggermont J, Armstrong G, Jarvis S, Liu J, Beg N. 2012.
Response to pudendal nerve block in women with pudendal neu-
ralgia. Pain Med 13:596–603.
Vardi Y, Har-Shai Y, Gil T, Gruenwald I. 2008. A critical analysis of
penile enhancement procedures for patients with normal penile
size: Surgical techniques, success, and complications. Eur Urol
54:1042–1050.
Wallen K, Lloyd EA. 2008. Clitoral variability compared with penile
variability supports nonadaptation of female orgasm. Evol Dev
10:1–2.
Wallen K, Lloyd EA. 2011. Female sexual arousal: Genital anatomy
and orgasm in intercourse. Horm Behav 59:780–792.
Yang CC, Jiang X. 2009. Clinical autonomic neurophysiology and the
male sexual response: An overview. J Sex Med 6 Suppl 3:221–
228.
Zorba OU, Cicek Y, Uzun H, Cetinkaya M, Onem K, Rifaioglu MM.
2012. Autonomic nervous system dysfunction in lifelong prema-
ture ejaculation: Analysis of heart rate variability. Urology 80:
1283–1286.
672
Emhardt et al.
