 J Neurosurg Volume 125 • September 2016
661
case report
J Neurosurg 125:661–666, 2016
I
n military settings, it is not uncommon for patients 
to present with implanted craniofacial munitions that 
require surgical removal. In cases of implanted small 
arms ammunition, it can often be difficult to tell the dif-
ference between simple ballistics and ballistics associ-
ated with unexploded ordnances (UXOs). Given the ris-
ing prevalence of suicide bombings, this differentiation 
takes on additional significance. A proper understanding 
of small variations in clinical presentation and radiologi-
cal features of munitions-associated injuries is useful in 
identifying projectiles with explosive potential.
Surgeons who remove implanted small arms ammuni-
tion associated with explosive ordnances are subjected to 
some degree of risk. Knowledge of the presence of these 
ordnances prior to surgery allows for additional prepara-
tions that help to decrease the risk of intraoperative deto-
nation. In the following report, we describe a case in which 
a patient presented with an implanted 12.7-mm munition 
(approximately 0.50 caliber) that required evaluation 
for explosive potential by Explosive Ordnance Disposal 
(EOD) Company prior to surgical removal. Salient clinical 
and radiological features for risk stratification in this set-
ting are discussed.
case report
History and Examination
A 23-year-old gravid female presented to the emergency 
department in considerable distress. On initial evaluation, 
she reported that a munition had ricocheted off a hardened 
abbreviatioNs ACH = advanced combat helmet; CJTH = Craig Joint Theater Hospital; EOD = Explosive Ordnance Disposal; IOTV = improved outer tactical vest; UXO 
= unexploded ordnance.
submitted April 5, 2015. accepted June 17, 2015.
iNclude wheN citiNg Published online February 2, 2016; DOI: 10.3171/2015.6.JNS15779.
Stratification of risk to the surgical team in removal of 
small arms ammunition implanted in the craniofacial 
region: case report
Jonathan a. Forbes, md,1 ian laughlin, bs,2 shane Newberry, md,3 michael ryhn, dds,4  
Jason pasley, do,5 and travis Newberry, md6
1Department of Neurological Surgery, David Grant Medical Center, Travis AFB, Davis, California; 2United States 47th OD CO 
(EOD), Fort Hood, Killeen, Texas; 3Department of Radiology, San Antonio Military Medical Center, Lackland AFB, San Antonio, 
Texas; 4Department of Oral Maxillofacial Surgery, Tripler Medical Center, Honolulu, Hawaii; 5Department of Surgery, University of 
Maryland, CSTARS-Baltimore RA Cowley Shock Trauma, Baltimore, Maryland; and 6Department of Otolaryngology, San Antonio 
Military Medical Center, Fort Sam Houston, San Antonio, Texas
In cases of penetrating injury with implantation of small arms ammunition, it can often be difficult to tell the difference 
between simple ballistics and ballistics associated with unexploded ordnances (UXOs). In the operative environment, 
where highly flammable substances are often close to the surgical site, detonation of UXOs could have catastrophic 
consequences for both the patient and surgical team. There is a paucity of information in the literature regarding how 
to evaluate whether an implanted munition contains explosive material. This report describes a patient who presented 
during Operation Enduring Freedom with an implanted munition suspicious for a UXO and the subsequent workup orga-
nized by Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD) Company prior to surgical removal. Clinical risk factors for UXOs include 
assassination attempts and/or wartime settings. Specific radiological features suggestive of a UXO include projectile size 
greater than 7.62-mm caliber, alterations in density of the tip, as well as radiological evidence of a hollowed-out core. If 
an implanted UXO is suspected, risks to the surgical and anesthesia teams can be minimized by notifying the nearest 
military installation with EOD capabilities and following clinical practice guidelines set forth by the Joint Theater Trauma 
System.
http://thejns.org/doi/abs/10.3171/2015.6.JNS15779
Key words small arms ammunition; unexploded ordnance; UXO; implanted projectile; traumatic brain injury
©AANS, 2016
 J. a. Forbes et al.
surface and struck her in the left cheek at her place of resi-
dence in a small nearby village in Afghanistan. Physical 
examination revealed stable vital signs. She had no vision 
in her left eye. Severe damage to the contents of her left 
orbit was noted. Aside from severe left ocular dysfunc-
tion, no other neurologic deficits were present. A small en-
trance wound present on her left cheek was suggestive of 
upward penetration into the maxillary sinus.
Imaging
Anteroposterior and lateral scout (preliminary) images 
were obtained (Fig. 1) and revealed an approximately 1.2 
× 5–cm metallic foreign body that appeared to have pen-
etrated upward, through the maxillary sinus, terminating 
approximately at the floor of the anterior skull base. Com-
puted tomography was performed, which confirmed pen-
etration through the cribriform plate (Fig. 2).
Surgical Preparation
Prior to surgery, an obstetrics consultation confirmed 
viability and health of the fetus. Risks, benefits, and alter-
natives of the procedure were discussed with the patient 
and her family, and informed consent was obtained.
While the radiological appearance of the implanted 
projectile appeared to be most consistent with that of a 
0.50-caliber bullet, the presentation was unusual (implan-
tation following ricochet). Additionally, the Taliban had 
recently advertised a new threat to the region in question, 
approximately 24 hours prior to the incident. These details 
raised suspicion for a potential UXO. The EOD team was 
notified and assisted with radiological stratification of risk 
prior to surgery. In concert with Craig Joint Theater Hos-
pital (CJTH) Radiology, EOD team conducted imaging 
of 4 known projectiles—2 of which whose implantation 
would have posed an immediate risk to the surgical team 
(Fig. 3). These images were reviewed by a radiologist, the 
surgical team, and EOD personnel to gain an appreciation 
of features important in risk stratification.
Scout anteroposterior CT imaging of 4 available types 
of ammunition were obtained (Fig. 4). This imaging study 
was used to divide the munitions into 2 groups. The first 
group posed an immediate risk to the surgical team and 
included projectiles filled with tracer (Fig. 4A) and high-
explosive (Fig. 4D) material. The second group posed no 
immediate risk (Fig. 4B and C).
The radiological evaluation by EOD Company did 
not reveal evidence of alteration in tip density or a hol-
lowed-out core; thus, the risk of a UXO was believed to 
be low. Despite this low risk of explosive potential, plans 
were made for the operating room team to be minimally 
manned. Additional precautions published by the Joint 
Theater Trauma System were reviewed at this time.12 Fol-
lowing the aforementioned workup, a decision was made 
to perform the surgery within the main hospital rather 
than to set up an ancillary surgical site. In the operating 
room, all team members were fitted with improved outer 
Fig. 1. Anteroposterior (a) and lateral (b) plain radiographs of the skull 
were obtained and revealed a 12.7 mm × 5–cm munition that had pen-
etrated upward through the maxillary sinus and had become lodged in 
the floor of the anterior skull base. Figure is available in color online only.
Fig. 2. Coronal reformats of CT images confirmed penetration through 
the cribriform plate.
Fig. 3. Photograph of 4 projectiles prior to CT scanning (left to right): 
armor-piercing tracer, full metal jacket, armor-piercing high explosive, 
and armor piercing. A block of C4 is in the middle. Figure is available in 
color online only.
J Neurosurg Volume 125 • September 2016
662
 risk stratification in removal of implanted munitions
tactical vests (IOTVs) as well as advanced combat helmets 
(ACHs) with ballistic eye protection.
Operation
During induction of anesthesia, minimal manipulation 
of the face was performed. After preoxygenation, anes-
thesia proceeded with rapid sequence induction to avoid 
mask ventilation and minimize the risk of aspiration. In-
tubation was performed using direct laryngoscopy. A low 
(20%–30%) fraction of inspired oxygen was used, given 
the potential flammable risk. While monopolar electro-
cautery was avoided during the procedure, the patient was 
electrically grounded to minimize accumulation of static 
electricity, which theoretically could trigger activation of 
an ordnance. Because of the need for wide exposure of the 
munition prior to removal, a gingivobuccal incision was 
chosen over enlargement through the site of entry. A full-
thickness mucoperiosteal incision was performed in the 
left maxillary vestibule to expose the comminuted ante-
rior maxillary sinus wall. Following debridement of bone 
fragments, there was excellent visualization of the inferior 
half of the projectile. A 30° Hopkins rod endoscope was 
used to better visualize all aspects of the projectile for 
purposes of classification by EOD Company. The projec-
tile (Fig. 5) was gently dislodged from the skull base by 
the primary surgeon (T.N.) and rotated out of the maxil-
lary sinus. Electrocautery was not used during access and 
removal of the object. Once the projectile was safely re-
moved from the patient, tactical vests and combat helmets 
were removed and attention was turned to repair of the 
skull base defect.
After removal of the projectile, significant skull base 
and dural defects were noted, with associated CSF leakage. 
The surrounding ethmoid bone fragments were removed 
to provide clear visualization of the defect. Several op-
tions for repair of the CSF leak were discussed, including 
acellular dermis, fat, turbinate mucosa, and a nasoseptal 
flap. To decrease fetal exposure to anesthesia, the decision 
was made to proceed with repair using acellular dermis. A 
piece of Gelfoam slightly larger than the skull base defect 
was fashioned and placed in the epidural space. The acel-
lular dermis was placed as an underlay graft and cessation 
of the CSF leak was confirmed. Another piece of acellu-
lar dermis was placed as an overlay graft and secured to 
the skull base with Surgicel (Ethicon) followed by Tisseel 
(Baxter Healthcare Corp.). Gelfoam was packed around 
the Tisseel and a Foley catheter was placed in the maxil-
lary sinus to provide pressure on the graft.
Postoperative Course
The patient was successfully extubated at the end of 
the surgical procedure. Her postoperative course was 
complicated by some nausea and vomiting for the initial 
48 hours. The Foley catheter was removed 72 hours after 
surgery. Throughout the remainder of her stay, the patient 
denied signs or symptoms of CSF leakage and no CSF 
rhinorrhea was identified on physical examination, includ-
ing transnasal endoscopic examination prior to discharge. 
Fig. 4. Anteroposterior scout CT scans of 4 projectiles. a: Armor-
piercing tracer projectile filled with tracer material; there is a cylindrical 
area of lucency in the base (arrow) that extends approximately one-third 
of the way toward the tip. This hollowed-out core is where the magne-
sium tracer resides. b: Full metal jacket projectile. c: Armor-piercing 
projectile. d: Armor-piercing high-explosive projectile filled with explo-
sive material; there is a pattern of alteration of density in the tip (arrow-
head) different from the other munitions that signifies the presence of 
explosive material. A block of C4 was placed in the middle to assess its 
appearance on CT.
Fig. 5. A 12.7-mm (0.50 caliber) copper-jacketed, tungsten carbide core 
projectile with no associated explosive material was removed from the 
patient. Figure is available in color online only.
J Neurosurg Volume 125 • September 2016
663
 J. a. Forbes et al.
The patient was discharged home on postoperative Day 
5. On routine follow-up 2 weeks after surgery, the patient 
reported unilateral facial pain but denied signs or symp-
toms of CSF leakage. A physical examination revealed a 
well-healed gingivobuccal incision with no evidence of 
CSF leakage. Absence of vision in the left eye remained 
unchanged.
discussion
Credit for invention of explosive ammunition is given 
to Captain Norton of the British Army, who first employed 
its use in 1822.6 Explosive ammunition fell out of favor 
following the St. Petersburg Declaration of 1868 and the 
Hague Convention of 1899, which in effect prohibited its 
use in times of war.11 However, the 1980s witnessed a re-
surgence in the use of exploding bullets. Perhaps the most 
famous incident involved the failed assassination attempt 
of President Ronald Reagan in 1981, in which the Devas-
tator bullet that lodged in the lung of the president failed 
to explode following impact. The surgeons who removed 
this bullet were initially unaware that explosive ammuni-
tion had been used.6 However, the same group of surgeons 
would later remove another bullet that failed to detonate 
from the neck of a police officer, this time with knowl-
edge of the explosive potential. Special precautions were 
taken during the latter surgery. Anecdotally, the bullet that 
struck White House press secretary James Brady during 
the shooting did, in fact, detonate inside his skull. The un-
stable nature of these munitions is illustrated by an event 
10 days following the assassination attempt, in which an 
FBI agent unintentionally detonated one of the explosive-
tipped projectiles while handling it with tweezers.1
The majority of present-day explosive projectiles are 
available for purchase on the civilian market, but they are 
significantly more expensive than other ammunition and 
represent a minute portion of overall sales. This is, in part, 
due to regulation by the US Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, 
Firearms, and Explosives, and the National Firearms Act.4 
Explosive-tipped projectiles are constructed similarly to 
hollow-point projectiles, with the exception that the hol-
low interior is filled with a pressure-sensitive explosive, 
such as lead azide. The force of impact detonates the ex-
plosive, which in turn expands “petals” constructed into 
the projectile. This “chemical” mechanism for expansion 
has a greater likelihood of failure than the “mechanical” 
mechanisms of hollow- and soft-tip projectiles.6
In cases in which implanted munitions are encountered, 
familiarity with patterns of traditional construction is use-
ful. A bullet can be divided into 3 main components: the 
projectile, the case, and the primer.5 The projectile is the 
most likely part to be found implanted in the human body, 
as it represents the terminal component propelled out of 
the barrel of the firearm. Small arms ammunition, as de-
fined by the US Military, consists of all calibers (sizes) of 
projectiles 30 mm (1.18 inches) and smaller. This designa-
tion encompasses more than 100 different calibers.2
Ammunition construction remains similar across vari-
ous projectile sizes. Knowledge of variations in pattern 
of construction and/or radiological appearance can help 
determine whether an implanted projectile contains explo-
sive material. The interior of the projectile is perhaps the 
most relevant to the topic of surgeon risk. It is here that 
explosive material is housed. The interior of the projectile 
is most often a lead/antimony mixture, but it can contain a 
variety of different components, including blended metal 
(powdered metal that is compressed), lead shot, plastic, 
tungsten or tungsten alloys, steel or steel alloys, and de-
pleted uranium.5 These components can potentially be 
combined with or replaced entirely by a tracer element, 
an incendiary element, or an explosive element. It is these 
last 3 that present a risk of detonation during removal. In 
the presence of highly flammable substances in the op-
erative environment, intraoperative detonation could have 
potentially catastrophic consequences for both patient and 
surgical team.
Clinical, radiological, and intraoperative evaluation all 
provide critical information that helps optimize patient 
care and minimize risk to the surgical team. This risk 
stratification process begins with initial evaluation of the 
victim. As with any patient who has suffered a penetrating 
injury, Advanced Trauma Life Support guidelines should 
be followed first, with assessment of airway, breathing, 
circulation, disability, and exposure. After any associated 
life-threatening injuries have been identified and man-
aged, a more thorough examination should be conducted 
in conjunction with appropriate imaging. If only 1 wound 
is found on the patient or an odd number of wounds are 
noted, concern should be raised for a retained bullet, 
which, in a wartime setting, should be considered a UXO 
until proven otherwise (with appropriate precautions tak-
en by the medical team).9 A history of the event should be 
ascertained from the patient or members of the transport 
team. Individual circumstances specific to the event will 
increase or decrease the likelihood that explosive muni-
tions were used. Generally speaking, the likelihood of 
encountering implanted explosive munitions in a civilian 
setting is low, although anecdotal reports exist.7 Histori-
cally, assassination attempts have been linked to use of 
explosive munitions.
After a detailed clinical history and examination has 
raised suspicion of an implanted munition, the next step 
is radiological assessment. The initial imaging modal-
ity of choice is radiography, which provides important 
structural information. Both radiography and ultrasound 
imaging have been deemed safe in the setting of UXOs.8 
Although the use of CT for imaging of implanted muni-
tions has never been formally studied, anecdotal experi-
ence suggests that this modality also poses minimal risk.3 
In the case presented above, CJTH radiology used plain 
films and CT scout preliminary imaging to evaluate the 
implanted munition. Reformatted CT imaging was useful 
in detailing neuroanatomical injury, but the large amount 
of metallic artifact made munition characterization diffi-
cult using this modality.
As reported above, radiographic imaging of the four 
0.50-caliber projectiles illustrated certain radiological 
characteristics that were suggestive of underlying explo-
sive/flammable potential. These characteristics include a 
hollowed-out core in the base of the projectile (Fig. 4A) 
or unusual patterns of hypodensity involving the tip (Fig. 
4D). Evaluation of munition size is also important in gaug-
J Neurosurg Volume 125 • September 2016
664
 risk stratification in removal of implanted munitions
ing UXO risk. All munitions greater than 7.62 mm in cali-
ber should be considered to have an explosive filler until 
proven otherwise. If, following initial clinical and radio-
logical survey by the medical team, there is concern for 
retained explosive munitions, US Military EOD personnel 
should be notified to assist with identification and appro-
priate measures (e.g., operative precautions, cordoning of 
perimeter) prior to attempted surgical removal. CT imag-
ing of the patient who presented with the implanted small 
arms ammunition in this case did not reveal any findings 
suggestive of an underlying explosive or flammable poten-
tial. Because of wartime conditions, EOD Company was 
notified. The munition was removed in the operating room 
without incident.
In the event that radiological characterization of the 
projectile is obscure, additional useful information can be 
obtained intraoperatively from gross visual inspection of 
the projectile. In particular, the presence of color bands is 
often associated with certain interior materials. The most 
common color associations of these bands are detailed be-
low.2
Black tips signify antimaterial (armor piercing) projec-
tiles. In the smaller calibers of ammunition, they are often 
a copper-jacketed tungsten steel alloy. Larger calibers may 
contain depleted uranium cores and are regularly marked 
with a black tip. These materials are extremely dense for 
their size and are adept at penetrating hardened targets. 
While there is no explosive risk, depleted uranium emits 
very low-level radiation and presents some biological haz-
ard during removal and handling. The US Nuclear Regu-
latory Commission sets standards/conditions and issues 
licenses for the safe use, storage, and possession of these 
materials. Radiological variations with armor-piercing 
projectiles are subtle (the projectiles shown in Figs. 4A, 
4C, and 4D contain armor-piercing material).
Tracer projectiles, which are often marked with a red 
tip, allow a shooter to visually track a projectile as it trav-
els downrange. The tracer projectiles are constructed with 
a hollow cavity in the rear of the projectile that is filled 
with a flammable material, such as magnesium (Fig. 4A). 
Energy from propellant detonation upon firing causes the 
magnesium to ignite while the projectile travels down-
range. These projectiles pose a flammable risk to near-
by objects, as illustrated by the historical utility of these 
weapons in combating hydrogen gas–filled German zep-
pelins during World War I.
Incendiary projectiles, usually marked by an orange 
tip, are those that contain an incendiary element in the 
nose, directly behind the sheathing. Incendiary projectiles 
work by the deformation of the sheathing and subsequent 
compression, with ignition of the incendiary element. The 
purpose of these projectiles is to light targets on fire, such 
as fuels. Originally, these projectiles contained phospho-
rus as the incendiary charge, which ignited on contact 
with oxygen. This component was changed to nitrocellu-
lose during the buildup to World War II and has continued 
to change as technology advances. These projectiles were 
also used against zeppelins, but truly found their calling 
in use against aircraft, as the incendiary element is able to 
ignite fuel lines, fuel tanks, and lightly cased ammunition.
Explosive projectiles are typically marked with yellow, 
brown, or other double-banded colors. Marking with 2 
bands that may consist of a variety of colors is sometimes 
used (red/white is the most common combination). These 
projectiles are designed to explode following impact. The 
act of explosion provides for more efficient transfer of ki-
netic energy to the end target and increases the presenting 
surface area and probability that vital structures are dam-
aged.10 The general design of these projectiles is a copper 
sheath with an interior chamber containing a pressure-sen-
sitive explosive material (Fig. 4D). Upon impact, the cop-
per sheath deforms, compressing the explosive inside until 
it detonates. The sensitive material may be explosive in 
nature or of incendiary composition. In the latter scenario, 
compression of the incendiary material is used to detonate 
adjacent explosive material. Occasionally, fuses are used, 
which are mechanisms that contain small amounts of 
highly sensitive explosives to set off larger amounts of less 
sensitive explosives. In general, the greater the amount of 
compressive force, the greater the risk of detonation/igni-
tion and the greater the danger.
Much of the information above is specific to workup 
following radiological identification of an implanted 12.7-
mm munition. However, the topic of prevention of acci-
dental UXO discharge can be extended to other forms of 
munitions (implanted mortars, rocket-propelled grenades, 
40-mm projectiles, etc.). In the event that a patient presents 
with an implanted UXO, there are basic rules to follow. 
Light, electricity, heat, and pressure are known to potenti-
ate discharge of UXOs; every attempt should be made to 
minimize these factors both prior to and during operative 
removal.12 EOD staff should be notified as soon as a UXO 
is suspected and will provide a professional opinion on 
probability of detonation. If helicopter travel to the hospi-
tal is contemplated, the patient should be grounded to pre-
vent accumulation of static electricity. During transit and 
workup, the position of the patient should be kept close to 
the position in which he or she was found, as unintentional 
pressure on the UXO can result in detonation. The area 
in which the patient is located should remain cordoned 
off and all nonessential personnel should be evacuated 
from this area. Essential personnel should be fitted with 
IOTVs as well as ACHs with ballistic eye protection. If 
there is high suspicion for a true UXO, surgical removal 
should be performed in an ancillary surgical site away 
from the main surgical facility. Electrocautery should be 
avoided during surgical removal. The unit commander 
and primary surgeon should attempt to limit the number 
of essential personnel to the absolute minimum. Surgeons 
should “gown and glove” over battle-protective equip-
ment. Following induction of anesthesia, the anesthesiolo-
gist should move away from the ancillary operating room 
during UXO removal. Every attempt should be made to 
limit supplemental oxygen, which might serve to magnify 
combustion in the event of detonation. If at all possible, the 
ordnance should be removed in a delicate manner before 
treating other injuries.
conclusions
The presence of specific clinical settings (e.g., wartime, 
assassination attempt) and radiological features (e.g., size 
J Neurosurg Volume 125 • September 2016
665
 J. a. Forbes et al.
greater than 7.62-mm caliber, alterations in density of the 
tip, hollowed-out core) should prompt suspicion for an im-
planted UXO. If a UXO is suspected, appropriate prepara-
tions should be made to minimize risk to the surgical and 
anesthesia team.
references
 1. Altman LK: The doctor’s world. New York Times. May 
25, 1982. (http://www.nytimes.com/1982/05/25/science/the-
doctor-s-world.html) [Accessed September 9, 2015]
 2. Fedoroff B, Sheffield O: Encyclopedia of Explosives and 
Related Items. Springfield, VA: US Army Armament 
Research and Development Command, Weapons Systems 
Laboratory, 1975, Vol. 7
 3. Hagan C: Military docs pluck live shell from soldier’s 
head. CNN. April 15, 2010. (http://www.cnn.com/2010/
HEALTH/04/15/unexploded.shell.head.afghanistan/) 
[Accessed September 9, 2015]
 4. Internal Revenue Code, 26 USC §5845 (http://www.gpo.gov/
fdsys/pkg/USCODE-2010-title26/pdf/USCODE-2010-title26-
subtitleE-chap53-subchapB-partI-sec5845.pdf) [Accessed 
September 9, 2015]
 5. Jandial R, Reichwage B, Levy M, Duenas V, Sturdivan L: 
Ballistics for the neurosurgeon. Neurosurgery 62:472–480, 
2008
 6. Knight B: Explosive bullets: a new hazard for doctors. Br 
Med J (Clin Res Ed) 284:768–769, 1982
 7. Knight M: Explosive Ordnance Disposal sergeant removes 
live grenade from man’s leg. WTKR News. October 16, 
2014. (http://wtkr.com/2014/10/16/explosive-ordnance-
disposal-sergeant-removes-live-grenade-from-mans-leg/) 
[Accessed September 9, 2015]
 8. Schlager D, Johnson T, McFall R: Safety of imaging 
exploding bullets with ultrasound. Ann Emerg Med 28:183–
187, 1996
 9. Spitz WU: Injury by gunfire: Part I. Gunshot wounds, in 
Spitz WU, Fisher RS (eds): Medicolegal Investigation of 
Death. Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas, 1993, pp 311–381
10. Swan KG, Swan RC: Wound ballistics for the civilian 
surgeon. Surg Annu 17:163–187, 1985
11. Swift B, Rutty GN: The exploding bullet. J Clin Pathol 
57:108, 2004
12. Unexploded Ordnance Management: Joint Theater Trauma 
System Clinical Practice Guidelines. United States Army 
Institute of Surgical Research. (http://usaisr.amedd.army.mil/
cpgs/Unexploded_Ordnance_Management_7_Mar_12.pdf) 
[Accessed September 9, 2015]
disclosures
The authors report no conflict of interest concerning the materi-
als or methods used in this study or the findings specified in this 
paper.
author contributions
Conception and design: Forbes. Acquisition of data: Forbes, 
Ryhn, T Newberry. Analysis and interpretation of data: Laughlin, 
S Newberry, Pasley, T Newberry. Drafting the article: Forbes, 
Pasley, T Newberry. Critically revising the article: Forbes. 
Reviewed submitted version of manuscript: Forbes. Approved the 
final version of the manuscript on behalf of all authors: Forbes. 
Administrative/technical/material support: Laughlin, T Newberry.
correspondence
Jonathan A. Forbes, Department of Neurological Surgery, David 
Grant Medical Center, Travis AFB, 32 Parkside Dr., Davis, CA 
95616. email: jonathan.a.forbes@gmail.com.
J Neurosurg Volume 125 • September 2016
666
