  
1 
What works to promote walking at the population level? A systematic review 
 
Charlie Foster, Paul Kelly, Hamish Reid, Nia Roberts, Elaine Murtagh, David K. 
Humphreys, Jenna Panter, Karen Milton 
 
Corresponding author: Charlie Foster 
Centre for Exercise Nutrition and Health Sciences, School 
for Policy Studies, Priory Road, University of Bristol, BS8 1TZ 
charlie.foster@bristol.ac.uk 
phone: +44 -1173310931 
 
Other authors: 
 
Paul Kelly: Physical Activity for Health Research Centre, Institute of Sport, Physical 
Education and Health Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK  
 
Hamish Reid: The Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and 
Musculoskeletal Sciences, Medical Sciences Division, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK 
 
Nia Roberts: Knowledge Centre, Nuffield Department of Population Health, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 
 
Elaine Murtagh: Department of Arts Education and Physical Education, Mary 
Immaculate College, Limerick, Ireland 
 
David K. Humphreys: Department of Social Policy and Intervention, University of 
Oxford, UK 
 
Jenna Panter: MRC Epidemiology Unit & CEDAR, University of Cambridge School of 
Clinical Medicine, Cambridge, UK 
 
  
2 
Karen Milton: Norwich Medical School, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK 
 
Key words: walking, public health, systematic review 
Word count: abstract 249, main text  (without tables and references) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
3 
What works to promote walking at the population level? A systematic 
review  
 
Charlie Foster, Paul Kelly, Hamish Reid, Nia Roberts, Elaine Murtagh, David 
Humphreys, Jenna Panter, Karen Milton 
 
Abstract 
 
Objective. Interventions to promote walking have focused on individual or group 
based approaches – often via the RCT design. Walking can also be promoted using 
population health approaches. We systematically reviewed the effectiveness of 
population approaches to promote walking among individuals and populations. 
 
Design. A systematic review  
 
Data Sources. 10 electronic databases searched from January 1990 to March 2017 
 
Eligibility Criteria. Pre and post or experiment studies of the effects of population 
interventions to change walking. Effects must have been compared with a “no 
intervention,” or comparison group/area/population, or variation in exposure; 
duration ≥12 months follow up; participants in free-living populations; English 
language articles. 
 
Results. 12 studies were identified from mostly urban high-income countries (one 
focusing on using a tax – incentivising the loss of parking spaces); one using policy 
only  (permitting off-leash dogs in city parks). Five studies used mass media with 
either environment (n=2) or community approaches (n=3). Four studies used 
environmental changes that were combined with policies. One study had scaled up 
school-based approaches to promote safe routes to schools. We found mass media, 
community initiatives and environmental change approaches increased walking 
(range from 9 to 75 mins/week). 
 
Summary. Delivering mass media, community initiatives and environmental change 
together appears to lead to more walking at the population level. There are 
insufficient data to comment on effectiveness of specific activities within population 
experimental studies.  
 
 
word count; 223 
 
 
 
  
4 
INTRODUCTION 
 
“Walking is the only sustained dynamic aerobic activity that is at all common in the 
population today, so it makes good sense to build on it” (p326). This observation by 
Morris and Hardman reflects the two key reasons for their conclusion, “walking is 
the nearest activity to perfect exercise” (p328).1 Walking consistently contributes the 
largest proportion to overall activity across age groups.2  Secondly walking can be 
promoted through interventions targeted towards individuals and whole populations 
via changes in physical environments.3  
 
The 2017 Bangkok Declaration for Physical Activity highlighted the contribution that 
walking and physical activity promotion can make across broad policy sectors via 
development and sustainability agendas as well as direct improvements to physical 
and mental health.4 Reviews of mechanistic trials report the direct impact of walking 
upon health parameters including improving aerobic capacity, physical functioning 
and reducing blood pressure, and improving metabolic and weight profiles.5 In 
England, if one in ten adults (aged 40-60 years) achieved ten minutes of brisk 
walking per day it would save £310 million per year.6 
 
Ogilvie and colleagues identified a range of key behavioural strategies to initiate and 
sustain walking, with the majority of interventions targeted towards individuals, 
assessed using randomised controlled trials (RCTs), rather than communities or 
populations.7 One potential problem with individual approaches is that they may be 
resource intensive and difficult to scale-up. Additionally they do not provide national 
and local policy makers with feasible actions that can be implemented.  
To increase physical activity at scale, requires population-based interventions that 
target entire populations. Population approaches to prevention aim to reduce key 
risk factors in the whole population, irrespective of individual level of risk. They 
achieve this by bringing about small changes in risk factor levels in the whole 
population, resulting in a shift in the population distribution of risk. 
Development of population approaches to promote physical activity have been slow 
compared to other health behaviours, reflecting both the challenge of identifying 
what population-based approaches are, how they can be implemented, and how 
best to evaluate their impact.8 The American Heart Association identified a range of 
population-based approaches for diet, smoking and physical activity using six broad 
domains of interventions: (1) media and educational campaigns; (2) labelling and 
consumer information; (3) taxation, subsidies, and other economic incentives; (4) 
school and workplace approaches; (5) local environmental changes; and (6) direct 
restrictions and mandates.9 They reported the majority of population approaches 
  
5 
were found within schools, workplaces and local environment interventions 
categories, with none within direct restrictions and mandates. Echoing Ogilvie et al’s 
previous findings, this suggests that the definition of a population-based approach 
for physical activity is a mix of what action and at what scale.7 
The challenges to evaluating population-based approaches have been partially 
addressed through the increased use of “natural experiments”.10 Here we bring 
together, for the first time, the global evidence for population-based approaches for 
walking, by extending our previous review of walking interventions.7 We aimed to 
review the effectiveness of population approaches to promote walking among 
individuals and populations We assessed whether any population interventions have 
had sustained effects assessed by longer-term follow-up to see whether changes 
were truly sustained at scale.3 
 
METHODS 
 
Registration 
This study is registered in PROSPERO as CRD42014013143. 
 
Data Search 
We included for consideration all studies from our earlier systematic review (1990-
2006).7 We ran an updated searches using 10 databases: Cochrane Database of 
Systematic Reviews, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, MEDLINE, 
PubMed, EMBASE, DARE, Science Citation Index, Social Science Citations, 
SPORTDiscus, PsycINFO. We use the same search terms as our previous review and 
searched using the timeframe March 2006- March 2017. We conducted a purposive 
search of three additional websites (Active Living Research, Sustrans (a UK based 
sustainable transport charity), Transport Research Laboratory), identified possible 
studies from systematic reviews, and snowballed potential studies from reference 
lists of included studies. We also contacted authors of included studies and asked 
them to identify any additional studies. The full strategy is presented as 
“Supplementary File”.  
 
Eligibility Criteria 
We selected studies based on the following inclusion criteria: randomised controlled 
trials and non-randomised controlled pre and post experimental, “natural” 
experiment or observational studies of the effects of any type of intervention which 
aimed to change walking. Walking was defined as commonly understood in everyday 
life, undertaken for any or all purposes including transport, leisure, sport, dog 
walking, exercise or fitness. We included studies where the outcome measures were 
  
6 
assessed at least 12 months after the start of the intervention and where the effects 
of the intervention were compared with those observed in a “no intervention,” 
“attention control,” or “minimal intervention” control or comparison group, area, or 
population, or where controlled comparisons were made (for example where 
variation in exposure was used as the basis for comparisons (e.g. based on distance). 
We excluded studies in which the ‘control’ condition consisted of an alternative 
intervention which was intended or likely to promote walking and which exceeded 
what we judged could reasonably be described as ‘standard’ or ‘usual’ care, 
treatment or practice. Studies had to include free-living populations (not part of any 
institutionalised community, e.g. prison population) within a community as defined 
by a geographical boundary. Participants in studies needed to be exposed to the 
intervention and not within a local small area (for example one park or street).11 We 
included English language articles published in peer-reviewed journals between 
January 1990 and March 2017. 
 
We defined population-based approaches to promote walking as approaches 
involving one or more of the following approaches; (1) mass media, social media and 
education campaigns – for example media campaigns with technological support; (2) 
taxation, subsidies, and other economic incentives - for example subsidised gym 
membership, financial incentives to cycle/ disincentives to drive; (3) regional or 
federal community, school and workplace approaches (must be at scale); (4) 
environmental changes – for example: bike trails, cycle parking, pedestrianised city 
centres, new parks, improvements to existing parks, closing streets; and (5) policies 
with direct restrictions and mandates – for example building regulations, speed 
restrictions on roads.  
 
Study Selection 
Titles and abstracts were screened by three authors (KM, PK, HR), with 10% sample 
of exclusion decisions (other than obviously irrelevant studies) being cross-checked 
by another reviewer (CF). Three authors (CF, KM, PK) independently screening for 
eligibility against the inclusion criteria with any disagreements resolved jointly 
against inclusion criteria. 
 
Data Extraction 
At least two from three authors (CF, KM, PK) extracted data independently for the 
characteristics of included studies with the lead author (CF) extracting data from all 
studies. The authors reviewed all undecided data in plenary session.  
 
Assessment of the risk of bias 
We assessed study validity using seven binary criteria identical to those used in our 
previous systematic review. These criteria are applicable across the range of 
included study designs rather than applying a metric from within one study design. 
  
7 
Indeed this approach is considered more appropriate to these types of reviews, 
which include a variety of study designs rather than using the assessment criteria for 
risk of bias within one study type.12 Two authors assessed these criteria 
independently for randomization, exposure, representativeness, comparability, 
attrition or sample size, period of assessment (period of time used for the 
measurement of walking), and whether the instrument used to assess walking was 
appropriate to the research question(s) of the study. 
 
Synthesis of results 
We categorised studies according to the main approach of the intervention studied. 
We summarised the walking outcomes for each study in terms of the net change in 
walking after adjustment for changes in the control group, using the most inclusive 
measure of walking available for each study, and tabulated the key characteristics 
and outcomes of the studies within each category in descending order of study 
validity. We examined the types of interventions, study designs, participants, and 
outcome metrics and the durations of follow-up. We repeated our previous analysis 
by plotting the relation between estimated effect size and sample size in descending 
order of study validity, using the common single metric across studies, net change in 
time spent walking (minutes/week).7 Given the heterogeneity of included studies we 
were unable to conduct a meta-analysis, nor a forest plot (i.e. intervention 
approaches and comparators). 
 
RESULTS 
 
Selection of Studies 
We search 10 electronic databases from 2006 -2017 to update our previous 
systematic review.7 Our search produced 28,074 records (Figure 1). Our screening 
identified 404 papers for potential inclusion plus the additional 48 papers from our 
previous review, and 11 papers/reports from web searches. We screened 463 full 
text papers against our inclusion criteria with 451 excluded primarily for having the 
wrong aim/design, i.e. not a population approach (176), not reporting walking as an 
outcome (148), having no comparison group or an ineligible comparison (113), not 
including follow-up at of at least 12 months (11), and not being at population scale 
(3). Twelve studies met our inclusion criteria, including five from our original review 
and seven conducted since 2007. 13-24 
 
INSERT FIGURE 1 
 
Study characteristics 
The characteristics of studies in terms of intervention approaches, intervention 
theory, population, demographics, location, study design, and types of walking 
outcome measure are shown in Table 1. Eleven studies were from High Income 
  
8 
Countries (6 – USA, 2 – UK, and one each from Canada, The Netherlands, Belgium), 
with only one study from an Upper Middle Income Country – Brazil (UN 2017). We 
found studies had utilised all five intervention approaches with only one focusing on 
using a taxation approaches only,13 and one policy only approaches.22 The majority 
of studies from pre 2007 had used mass media with either environment (2 studies), 
14 18 or community approaches (3 studies).15-17 Studies post 2007 used environmental 
changes plus policies.20 21 23 24 One study scaled up school-based approaches to 
promote safe routes to schools and this study was the only study to include direct 
measures of physical activity among children.19 McCormack et al (2016) made 
observations of park users and categorised them into child/teen or adult/older 
adult.22 Only two studies examined effects of the approaches at and beyond two 
years, with Goodman et al (2016) following up a longitudinal cohort at 24 months 
and De Cocker et al (2007) evaluating effects at 48 months. 21 19 
 
INSERT TABLE 1 
 
The mix of intervention approaches shows the influence of the social ecological 
framework with three studies reporting this as their theoretical approach.14 17 18 Two 
early mass media and community mobilization approaches were based more on 
individualized theories; the Theory of Planned Behaviour and the Transtheoretical 
Model.15 16 Goodman and colleagues developed a General Theoretical Model, 
derived from a number of social ecological and individual theories.20 Two studies did 
not report any established underpinning theory for their approaches.23 24 Droomers 
(2015) utilised Cozens’ Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design Theory, 
which is based on increasing citizen surveillance and improving environmental 
infrastructure, leading to reductions in feelings of vulnerability and the development 
of social networks.21 
 
Studies used designs which all attempted to present potential intervention effects 
against a comparison area or setting. Repeated cross sectional studies were used 
with independent samples or longitudinal follow up of a cohort. Most studies 
selected a comparison area, matched on demographic variables. Three studies 
analysed their outcome based on different degrees of exposure to the intervention 
(i.e. proximity to the new infrastructure or development).20 23 24 All three studies 
used transport network distance from home location to the nearest point of new 
infrastructure to define intervention exposure, making the comparisons between 
those who lived closer and those who lived further away from the infrastructure.  
 
Magnitude of effects on walking by population based approach 
We identified 8 studies with the common outcome metric of mins/week walking to 
estimate the magnitude of effects across a mix of population-based approaches, 
based on more robust studies (Table 2, Table 3). We found evidence from mass 
  
9 
media and environmental infrastructure or community events, and environmental 
change approaches that walking could be increased (range 9 to 75 mins/week) 
(Figure 2).  
 
INSERT FIGURE 2, TABLE 2, TABLE 3 
 
Mass media, social media and education campaigns - Five studies used mass media 
campaigns, underpinned by environmental changes, and/or community and 
individual initiatives (e.g. walking groups, individual materials/advice and 
pedometers), all reflecting their ecological and psychological frameworks 14-18 These 
studies assessed the impacts of their mix of approaches at the population level with 
only two reporting effects at 12 months follow up.16 18 
 
Taxation, subsidies, and other economic incentives – Only Shoup (1997) evaluated 
the direct effects of an incentive based approach to change workplace-parking by 
incentivising the loss of parking space and supporting other commuting modes, in 
eight Californian urban workplaces.13 With varying length of follow up between 12 to 
36 months, the proportion of walking as the new main mode of travel to work 
increased from 2.3% to 3.4% (P<0.01) compared with no change at a single control 
workplace. 
 
Regional or federal community, school and workplace approaches – Only Macdonald 
(2013) reported the effects of an at scale school approach.19 The study evaluated the 
Oregon Safe Routes to School program with education and environmental changes 
(sidewalks, crossings, covered bike parking), implemented across 14 schools in urban 
Eugene. The approach utilised education only and education plus environmental 
changes compared to comparison schools and reported positive increases in the 
proportion of children reporting walking trips to school between 5% (education only) 
and 20% (education plus environmental changes) per school. 
 
Environmental changes – The construction of new environmental infrastructure 
upon walking was evaluated by four recent studies.20 21 23 24 Goodman et al (2014) 
reported the effects of new cycle and walking infrastructure, with construction of 
traffic routes for walking and cycling (construction of traffic free bridge, riverside 
boardwalk) across three UK cities. They reported that mins per week of walking for 
transport and walking for recreation per km proximity to infrastructure at 12 months 
follow up did not increase, with only walking for transport significantly increasing at 
24 months follow up (8.8 mins/week - 95%CI 2.8, 14.8).20 Droomers et al 2015 
reported no differences in walking for leisure at least once a week for residents from 
24 of the most deprived neighbourhoods where parks or green space were 
improved, between intervention and control areas.21 Panter et al 2016 reported the 
impact of a new guided bus service and new walking and cycle routes on the 
  
10 
residents from the environs of Cambridge, UK.23 They reported a non-significant 
increase in mean walking for commuting for residents who increased walking mean 
73.4, (SD 66.6), RR 0.90 (0.69 to 1.19) with a graded exposure to busway. Pazin et al 
(2016) examined the impact of new environmental changes with construction of 
new walking and cycling infrastructure, including a new road, walking route and 
parking, on leisure time walking.24 They reported an increase of 32 mins/week of 
leisure time walking for residents living within 500m of the new infrastructure 
compared to residents living further away (501m – 1500m). 
 
Policies with direct restrictions and mandates – Only McCormack (2016) evaluated 
the direct impact of the implementation of a new policy permitting off-leash dogs in 
city parks.22 These parks had not had any environmental modifications so the only 
approach was the new rule allowing dogs to run free “off-leash”. The authors 
reported, based on observations of park users and their activities, that in parks 
operating the new policy the likelihood of walking did not change in intervention 
parks but did increase in the control park (OR 1.79 95%CI 1.13, 2.83).  
 
Risk of bias 
A summary of validity assessment scores is presented in Table 3 and shows a 
consistent issue in relation to randomisation. No studies reported randomisation as 
this is typically an approach to distribute bias at an individual level. Instead, as 
suggested by Craig et al (2011), authors deployed different designs, such as random 
sampling and adjustment for confounders to tackle potential bias.10 However nearly 
all studies, with one exception, attempted to tackle these issues with loss to follow 
up remaining a challenge, particularly in longitudinal designs. Nearly all studies used 
self-report instruments to assess walking which were capable of assessing the 
outcome and had demonstrated measurement metrics for reliability and validity in a 
published or pilot study. Only one study reported using a pedometer as an objective 
measure of walking (De Cocker 2007).18  
 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
Key findings 
Our evaluation of 12 population based approaches to promote walking identified 
examples across 5 types of public health mechanisms. Natural experiments that 
combined three approaches -- mass media, community initiatives and environmental 
change – increased people’s walking.  Walking could be increased (range 9 to 75 
mins/week) when experiments included both transport and recreation domains, but 
due to the heterogeneity of the small number of studies, we cannot comment on the 
effectiveness of specific activities within studies.  
 
  
11 
Only 4 studies evaluated impacts on walking beyond a 12-month follow-up. Although 
there were relatively few studies the quality of this evidence base was encouraging 
with robust and novel approaches adopted for sampling and data analysis.  
 
Few studies evaluated the impact of other types of population based approaches, 
particularly taxation, subsidies, and other economic incentives. There is great 
interest in using these levers in other population approaches to public health and 
examples include interventions to impact on car use (e.g. congestion charging 
schemes), nutrition (e.g. taxes on high sugar beverages) and alcohol (e.g. minimum 
pricing per units), with the most established research relating to taxation of tobacco 
products.  
 
Hou et al (2011) examined the associations between time-varying petrol prices and 
time varying levels of physical activity from 1992/3 to 2000/1.25 They reported that a 
25 cent increase in petrol price was significantly associated with a small (3% overall) 
increase in total physical activity levels, roughly equivalent to 17 mins/week walking. 
Green and colleagues evaluated the impact of a free bus scheme on the travel 
patterns of young people in London and reported an increase in use of buses but 
without significant reductions in walking trips and no evidence of changes in the 
distance walked.26 Such examples are less common in physical activity but the 
opportunity to evaluate both fiscal incentives and disincentives is possible and 
should be explored further. The advance of technology based commercial products 
and applications (e.g. wearable physical activity trackers/monitors) at scale also 
remain unevaluated. 
 
The challenges of evaluating large-scale population approaches to promoting 
walking reflect the practical and political issues needed to construct a robust 
research framework for a process where when implementation lies outside of 
scientific control. There were delays in the delivery of infrastructure changes, which 
in the case of one study delayed the timing of data collection and assessment of 
outcomes.20 23 As Baker et al (2015) suggest it would be helpful to have a greater 
number of measurement points spanning the pre delivery, delivery and follow up 
periods, which would also mitigate against any secular trends or regression to the 
mean.11 
 
The challenge of developing the effectiveness evidence base for population 
approaches is not new, and mirrors the historical development of the evidence base 
for individual approaches to changing behaviour. Hillsdon et al’s systematic review 
and meta-analysis of individual focused RCTs found that studies were often 
conducted without a priori theory, used short term follow up, and used low quality 
designs and analysis.27 This is likely to have restricted the implementation of this 
findings into practice. These issues were addressed with an increase in number, 
  
12 
quality (theoretical basis and methods) and follow up in the conduct of walking and 
physical activity trials.28  
 
The limited number of evaluations of the impact of population based approaches for 
walking and physical activity promotion compared to individual or group based 
interventions is an example of “the inverse evidence law” – the situation where “we 
know least about the effects of interventions most likely to influence the health of the 
largest number of people”.29-31 The use of socio-ecological theoretical frameworks 
was more evident in the more recent studies than at the time of our earlier 
systematic review, reflecting a shift to the use of integrated or system theories for 
community interventions. However socio-ecological model may give researchers a 
theoretical framework that is too generic and future research might also consider 
models that embrace systems and complexity.  
 
We were surprised that these approaches did not utilise aspects of the social 
environment as part of their intervention approaches. The social environment has 
been proposed as an important determinant of physical activity through different 
mechanisms, impacting via social support and social networks, socioeconomic 
position and income inequality, racial discrimination, social cohesion and social 
capital, and neighbourhood factors.32 We feel the potential for constructing 
evaluation frameworks for these approaches and rapidly improving the evidence 
base should be a priority for research funding. 
  
Strengths and limitations 
Our review is the first to identify the global evidence base of 12 studies investigating 
the long-term impact of population-based approaches to promote walking, across 
five public health mechanisms. This evidence base has developed slowly since our 
previous systematic review but we were inclusive towards study designs utilising, 
“natural experiments” and have also performed an appraisal of the quality of this 
evidence base that is pragmatic and sensitive. We have been able to characterise 
examples of approaches that have reported changes in walking, using three 
approaches of mass media, community initiatives and environmental change. One 
explanation for this could be that these types of population-based approaches are 
easier to plan and deliver and therefore more likely to appear in literature than less 
controllable interventions like large scale environmental or policy changes, that 
could be more prone to disruption (and less likely to be published).  
 
We report several limitations. The findings of our review are limited to higher 
income countries, as we did not find any approaches from low middle income or 
low-income countries. We only included studies published in the English language. 
We only included studies that had walking as part of their primary outcomes and this 
did limit the inclusion of a number of included studies that used physical activity as 
  
13 
their main outcome. We were unable to quantify effects of interventions in a meta-
analysis due to intervention and measurement heterogeneity. Study outcomes were 
largely derived from self-report measures, which are prone to reporting bias. 
However, studies used established and often validated measures.  As 
epidemiological evidence on the impact of walking speed and cadence on health is 
developed,33 future studies may seek more objective data by using pedometers or 
accelerometers, or commercial fitness monitoring devices.  
 
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 
 
Our evaluation of 12 population based approaches to promote walking identified 
examples across 5 types of public health mechanisms. For the first time we found 
evidence from studies utilising “natural experiments” for the overall effectiveness of 
approaches, particularly ones that combined three intervention approaches - mass 
media, community initiatives and environmental change. The precise combination of 
active and effective approaches within these studies will require further detailed 
process evaluation.  
 
Our review is relevant to outline plans of the new draft WHO Global Physical Activity 
Action Plan that stresses community and citywide approaches to promoting walking 
for transport and recreation via active environments and policy systems.34 The 
physical activity research community has a duty to serve the vision and legacy of 
Hardman and Morris. We must use “our good sense“ to build on this new evidence 
base for walking promotion, by conducting pragmatic, responsive and high quality 
evaluations of future population approaches.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
14 
SUMMARY BOX (3-4 bullet points) 
 
What is already known? 
 The promotion of walking produces consistent benefits for individual in terms 
of physical and mental health  
 But the evidence on how to promote walking has been focused on individual 
approaches.  
 Population approaches can reach across whole populations but the 
effectiveness of these is needed to identify what work, at scale? 
 
What are the new findings? 
 Our review identified a new and emerging evidence base for three 
population approaches to promote walking, mass media and environmental 
infrastructure or community events, and environmental change approaches.  
 The precise combination of active and effective approaches within these 
studies will require further detailed outcome and process evaluation. 
 
 
LEGENDS FOR IMAGES 
 
Figure 1 
Study selection flow chart 
 
Figure 2 
Estimated net increase in types of walking. Studies are ranked by 
validity (number of criteria met, see table 3), then baseline sample 
size  
 
Key Messages 
 
1. Walking is the near to perfect form of accessible, affordable and healthy type 
of physical activity. 
 
2. The evidence base for the effectiveness of intervention to promote walking 
has been focused on individualised approaches rather than population based 
interventions. 
 
3. Population based intervention to promote walking include aim to reduce key 
risk factors in the whole population, irrespective of individual level of risk.  
 
4. They use a mixture of approaches from (1) mass media, social media and 
education campaigns, (2) taxation, subsidies, and other economic incentives, 
(3) at scale regional or federal community, school and workplace approaches, 
  
15 
(4) environmental changes, and (5) policies with direct restrictions and 
mandates. 
 
5. Our review found only evidence from mass media and environmental 
infrastructure or community events, and environmental change approaches 
that walking could be increased (range from 9 to 75 mins/week), from 
high/middle income countries. 
 
6. Our review identifies that there is a new and emerging evidence base for 
population approaches to walking promotion but, at this stage, only limited 
conclusions can be drawn about effectiveness of specific activities within 
studies. 
 
Competing Interests: None 
 
Author Contributions; CF and DH conceived the idea for the study. NR, CF, KM, HR 
and PK conducted the review, data extraction and analysis.  CF, KM, PK, DH, EM, and 
JP drafted the manuscript. HR contributed to the writing of the manuscript. All 
authors contributed to revising the final draft of the manuscript. 
 
Acknowledgements: All the manuscript authors would like to acknowledge the 
intellectual support and fortitude of Dr David Ogilvie whose leadership and previous 
research has led the development of this manuscript.  
 
Funding: No external funding 
 
Ethics: No ethics needed 
 
Data sharing: Not required 
 
 
                                                        
1 Hardman AE, Morris JN. Walking to health. Br J Sports Med 1998;32(2):184-84. 
 
2 Roberts D, Townsend N, Foster C. Use of new guidance to profile ‘equivalent 
minutes’ of aerobic physical activity for adults in England reveals gender, 
geographical, and socio-economic inequalities in meeting public health guidance: A 
cross-sectional study. Preventive Medicine Reports, 2016, 4, 50-60. 
 
3 Reis RS, Salvo D, Ogilvie D, et al. Scaling up physical activity interventions 
worldwide: stepping up to larger and smarter approaches to get people moving. The 
Lancet 2016;388(10051):1337-48. 
 
  
16 
                                                                                                                                                              
 
4 International Society for Physical Activity and Health ISPAH. Br J Sports Med 
2017;0:1–3. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2017-098063 
 
5 Murtagh EM, Nichols L, Mohammed MA, et al. The effect of walking on risk factors 
for cardiovascular disease: An updated systematic review and meta-analysis of 
randomised control trials. Prev Med 2015;72:34-43. 
 
6 Brannan M, Varney J, Timpson C, Murphy M, Foster C. 10 minutes brisk walking 
each day in mid-life for health benefits and achievement of recommended activity 
levels- Evidence summary. Public Health England, London, 2017. 
 
7 Ogilvie D, Foster C, Rothnie H, Cavill N, Hamilton V, Fitzsimons CF, Mutrie N. 
Scottish Physical Activity Research Collaboration. Interventions to promote walking: 
systematic review. British Medical Journal 2007;334 (7605):1204. 
 
8 Humphreys D, Panter J, Sahlqvist S, Goodman A, Ogilivie D Changing the 
environment to improve population health: a framework for considering exposure in 
natural experimental studies. J Epidemiol Community Health 2016 Sep;70(9):941-6. 
 
9 Mozaffarian D, Afshin A, Benowitz NL, et al. Population approaches to improve diet, 
physical activity, and smoking habits: 
a scientific statement from the American 
Heart Association. Circulation 2012; 126: 1514–63. 
 
10 Craig P, Cooper C, Gunnell D, Haw S, Lawson K, Macintyre S, et al. Using natural 
experiments to evaluate population health interventions: new Medical Research 
Council guidance. J Epidemiol Community Health. 2012;66(12):1182–1186.  
 
11 Baker PRA, Francis DP, Soares J, Weightman AL, Foster C. Community wide 
interventions for increasing physical activity. Cochrane Database of Systematic 
Reviews 2015, Issue 1. Art. No.: CD008366. 
 
12 Humphreys D, Panter J, Ogilivie D. Questioning the application of risk of bias tools 
in appraising evidence from natural experimental studies: critical reflections on 
Benton et al., IJBNPA 2016. IJBNPA, 2017;14:49. 
 
13 Shoup D. Evaluating the effects of parking cash out: eight case studies. 
Sacramento: Air Resources Board Research Division, California Environmental 
Protection Agency, 1997. 
 
14 Brownson R, Baker E, Boyd R, Caito N, Duggan K, Housemann R, et al. A 
community-based approach to promoting walking in rural areas. Am J Prev Med 
2004;27:28- 34. 
 
15 Reger-Nash B, Bauman A, Booth-Butterfield S, Cooper L, Smith H, Chey T, et al. 
Wheeling Walks: evaluation of a media-based community intervention. Fam 
Community Health 2005;28:64-78. 
 
  
17 
                                                                                                                                                              
 
16 Reger-Nash B, Cooper L, Orren J, Cook D. Marketing used to promote walking in 
McDowell County. W V Med J 2005;101:106. 
 
17 Brownson R, Hagood L, Lovegreen S, Britton B, Caito N, Elliott M, et al. A multilevel 
ecological approach to promoting walking in rural communities. Prev Med 
2005;41:837–842. 
18 De Cocker KA, De Bourdeaudhuij IM, Brown WJ, Cardon GM. Effects of “10,000 
Steps Ghent”: a whole-community intervention. Am J Prev Med. 2007;33(6):455–
463. 
 
19 McDonad N, Yang Y, Abbott S, Bullock A. Impact of Safe Routes to School program 
on walking and biking: Eugene, Oregan Study. Transport Policy, 2013;29: 243-248. 
 
20 Goodman A, Sahlqvist S, Ogilvie D. New walking and cycling routes and increased 
physical activity: One- and 2-year findings from the UK iConnect study. Am J Public 
Health. 2014;104:e38–46. 
 
21 Droomers M, Harting J, Jongeneel-Grimen B, Rutten L, van Kats J, Stronks K. Area-
based interventions to ameliorate deprived Dutch neighborhoods in practice: does 
the Dutch District Approach address the social determinants of health to such an 
extent that future health impacts may be expected? Prev Med, 2014;61:122-127. 
 
22 McCormack G, Graham T, Swanson  K, Massolo A, Rock M. Changes in visitor 
profiles and activity patterns following dog supportive modifications to parks: a 
natural experiment on the health impact of an urban policy. SSM Popul 
Health 2016;2:237–43. 
 
23 Panter, J., Heinen, E., Mackett, R., Ogilvie, D.B., 2016. Impact of new transport 
infrastructure on walking, cycling and physical activity. Am. J. Prev. Med. 50 (2), e45–
e53.  
 
24 Pazin J, Garcia L, Florindo A, Peres M, de Azevedo Guimarães A, Borgatto A, da 
Silva Duarte F. Effects of a new walking and cycling route on leisure-time physical 
activity of Brazilian adults: a longitudinal quasi-experiment. Health Place, 39 (2016), 
pp. 18-25. 
 
25 Hou N, Popkin BM, Jacobs DR Jr, Song Y, Guilkey DK, He K, Lewis CE, Gordon-
Larsen P. Longitudinal trends in gasoline price and physical activity: the CARDIA 
study. Prev Med. 2011;52:365–369. 
 
26 Green J, Steinbach R, Jones A, Edwards P, Kelly C, Nellthorp J, et al. On the buses: a 
mixed-method evaluation of the impact of free bus travel for young people on the 
public health. Public Health Res 2014;2(1). 
 
  
18 
                                                                                                                                                              
 
27 Hillsdon M, Thorogood M, Foster C. Intervention for physical activity (Cochrane 
Review) In: The Cochrane Library, Issue 1, 2005. Oxford: Update Software. 
28 Foster C, Hillsdon M, Thorogood M. Interventions for physical activity (Cochrane 
Review) In: The Cochrane Library, Issue 1, 2008. Oxford: Update Software. 
 
29 Ogilvie D, Mitchell R, Mutrie N, Petticrew M, Platt S. Evaluating health effects of 
transport interventions: methodologic case study. Am J Prev Med 2006;31:118-26. 
 
30 Nutbeam D. How does evidence influence public health policy? Tackling health 
inequalities in England. Health Promot J Aust 2003;14:154-8. 
 
31 Whitehead M, Petticrew M, Graham H, Macintyre S, Bambra C, Egan M. Evidence 
for public health policy on inequalities: 2: Assembling the evidence jigsaw. J 
Epidemiol Community Health 2004;58:817-21. 
 
32 McNeill L, Subramanian S. Social Environment and Physical Activity: A review of 
concepts and evidence. Social Science & Medicine 2006;63:1011-22. 
 
33 Slaght J, Sénéchal M, Hrubeniuk T, Mayo A, Bouchard D. Walking Cadence to 
Exercise at Moderate Intensity for Adults: A Systematic Review. Journal of Sports 
Medicine, vol. 2017, Article ID 4641203. 
 
34 WHO Global Physical Activity Action Plan - draft 
http://www.who.int/ncds/governance/Global-action-plan-on-PA-DRAFT-2-Dec-
2017.pdf?ua=1  
accessed 20th December 2017. 
 
 
 
 
 
