 REVIEW
published: 04 July 2017
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00447
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
1
July 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 447
Edited by:
Kimberly Huey,
Drake University, United States
Reviewed by:
Kevin Andrew Murach,
University of Kentucky, United States
Sandra K. Hunter,
Marquette University, United States
*Correspondence:
Martino V. Franchi
Martino.Franchi@balgrist.ch
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Exercise Physiology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Physiology
Received: 27 February 2017
Accepted: 13 June 2017
Published: 04 July 2017
Citation:
Franchi MV, Reeves ND and Narici MV
(2017) Skeletal Muscle Remodeling in
Response to Eccentric vs. Concentric
Loading: Morphological, Molecular,
and Metabolic Adaptations.
Front. Physiol. 8:447.
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00447
Skeletal Muscle Remodeling in
Response to Eccentric vs.
Concentric Loading: Morphological,
Molecular, and Metabolic
Adaptations
Martino V. Franchi 1, 2*, Neil D. Reeves 3 and Marco V. Narici 1
1 MRC-ARUK Centre for Musculoskeletal Ageing Research, School of Medicine, University of Nottingham, Derby,
United Kingdom, 2 Laboratory for Muscle Plasticity, Department of Orthopaedics, Balgrist University Hospital, University of
Zurich, Zürich, Switzerland, 3 Faculty of Science and Engineering, School of Healthcare Science, Manchester Metropolitan
University, Manchester, United Kingdom
Skeletal muscle contracts either by shortening or lengthening (concentrically or
eccentrically, respectively); however, the two contractions substantially differ from one
another in terms of mechanisms of force generation, maximum force production
and energy cost. It is generally known that eccentric actions generate greater force
than isometric and concentric contractions and at a lower metabolic cost. Hence,
by virtue of the greater mechanical loading involved in active lengthening, eccentric
resistance training (ECC RT) is assumed to produce greater hypertrophy than concentric
resistance training (CON RT). Nonetheless, prevalence of either ECC RT or CON
RT in inducing gains in muscle mass is still an open issue, with some studies
reporting greater hypertrophy with eccentric, some with concentric and some with
similar hypertrophy within both training modes. Recent observations suggest that such
hypertrophic responses to lengthening vs. shortening contractions are achieved by
different adaptations in muscle architecture. Whilst the changes in muscle protein
synthesis in response to acute and chronic concentric and eccentric exercise bouts seem
very similar, the molecular mechanisms regulating the myogenic adaptations to the two
distinct loading stimuli are still incompletely understood.
Thus, the present review aims to, (a) critically discuss the literature on the contribution
of eccentric vs. concentric loading to muscular hypertrophy and structural remodeling,
and, (b) clarify the molecular mechanisms that may regulate such adaptations.
We conclude that, when matched for either maximum load or work, similar increase in
muscle size is found between ECC and CON RT. However, such hypertrophic changes
appear to be achieved through distinct structural adaptations, which may be regulated
by different myogenic and molecular responses observed between lengthening and
shortening contractions.
Keywords: eccentric exercise, concentric exercise, eccentric contraction, muscle architecture, muscle
remodeling, muscle hypertrophy, muscle signaling, mechanotransduction
 Franchi et al.
Muscle Remodeling to Eccentric vs. Concentric Loading
LENGTHENING VS. SHORTENING
CONTRACTIONS
It is known that skeletal muscle can contract either by shortening
or lengthening (concentrically or eccentrically, respectively).
During concentric contractions the muscle shortens and exerts
a force, which is transmitted via the tendon to the joint,
enables movement to occur and causes a change in joint angle.
Eccentric contractions occur in everyday motor activities and
usually are responsible for two important characteristics in
natural locomotion. Eccentric contractions allow the dissipation
of mechanical energy during body deceleration (Konow and
Roberts, 2015; e.g., descending stairs/walking downhill, in which
the quadriceps and plantar flexors muscles generate force while
lengthening, to exert a breaking action against downward
movement and to maintain balance), but they also allow the
conversion of kinetic energy into elastic energy of tendons
(Hoppeler, 2014). Such energy is then regained during limb
support, resulting in less muscle work and energy required in
locomotion.
Eccentric and concentric contractions fundamentally differ
one from the other from a mechanical, metabolic and neural
control point of view. Moreover, recent evidence obtained in
our laboratory shows that distinct differences in terms of muscle
morphological adaptations to resistive training exist between
eccentric and concentric contractions.
Eccentric Contractions Can Produce
Greater Force than Concentric
Contractions through Different
Mechanisms of Force Generation
The two contraction types involve different mechanisms of force
generation at the contractile protein level; this constitutes one of
the main reasons for the greater force production during active
lengthening compared to shortening. Muscle force development
is the result of the interaction between the contractile filaments.
Maximum force is produced when the overlap of the myosin and
actin filaments enables the formation of the maximum number
of cross-bridges, which occurs at the optimum sarcomere length
(Gordon et al., 1966; Huxley and Simmons, 1971). The force
developed by a muscle not only depends on sarcomere length and
cross-bridges formation, but also on the velocity of shortening
(Hill, 1938) or lengthening (Katz, 1939). During shortening
contractions in vitro, the force generated is always lower than in
isometric contractions (for the same level of muscle activation).
This occurs because, the quicker the movement, the lesser the
number of cross-bridges formed (Huxley, 1957) and higher rate
of cross-bridges detachment (Rome et al., 1999). The greater the
velocity of contraction, the shorter the time in which myosin can
bind to actin. Moreover, during fast movements, the S2 complex
of myosin molecule (i.e., the flexible fragment of the myosin
tail close to the globular head—Rayment et al., 1993; VanBuren
et al., 1994) will not be fully extended, resulting in compression
of the S2 complex and in a lower pulling force applied by the
thick filament on actin (Figure 1A). When velocity of movement
approaches 0, then, not only will a larger number of cross-bridges
FIGURE 1 | Schematic representation of myosin S1 and S2 segments
behavior during different contractions and at different respective portions of
the F-V curve. (A) During fast shortening muscle actions, S2 complex will not
fully stretch, hence myosin will apply lower pulling force onto actin (i.e., the
thinner straight line in the figure). (B) During slower shortening contractions, up
to when the shortening velocity would be equal to 0 (i.e., isometric
contractions), the S2 segment will be fully stretched and therefore myosin will
be able to apply greater pulling force onto the thin filament. (C) During
lengthening actions, myosin S2 complex will be able to stretch even further
(figure adapted from Jones et al., 2004).
be attached but also myosin S2 complexes will be fully stretched
and able to pull onto the actin filaments to produce bigger values
of force (Figure 1B; Huxley and Simmons, 1971; Jones et al.,
2004).
In vitro, with the increase of lengthening velocity, the force
developed rises until it reaches a plateau at a value close to
1.8 times the maximum isometric force (Katz, 1939; Lombardi
and Piazzesi, 1990). In vivo, the eccentric muscle force is lower
than the eccentric force obtained in vitro (about 1.2 times the
maximum isometric force) and this is probably due to neural
inhibition (Amiridis et al., 1996; Babault et al., 2001; Beltman
et al., 2004); nevertheless, it is still greater than the one generated
by either isometric or concentric contractions (Westing et al.,
1988; Aagaard et al., 2000). According to Huxley’s model, the
greater force produced during active lengthening could be due
to a further greater stretch of S2 portions of myosin, occurring
first at slow velocity of stretching (Figure 1C). As the lengthening
becomes faster, fewer myosin heads will be able to bind to actin,
but a good number of these will just remain in the attached
position; if these cross bridges are stretched even more, they
will inevitably be forced to detach. The proposed mechanism is
that these thick filament heads would be able to re-bind to the
thin filament very quickly, which maybe representing the reason
why muscles are able to develop high forces during lengthening
contractions and at lower energetic cost (Lombardi and Piazzesi,
1990; Jones et al., 2004).
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
2
July 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 447
 Franchi et al.
Muscle Remodeling to Eccentric vs. Concentric Loading
The observation that the force generated during active muscle
lengthening is substantially greater than the values obtained
during isometric and shortening contractions suggests a potential
contribution of some structural scaffold to the force developed
(as myofibrils would be forcibly lengthened beyond actin-myosin
optimal overlap zone; Herzog et al., 2008; Herzog, 2014). The
work by Nishikawa (Nishikawa et al., 2012) suggests that the giant
protein titin could be involved in muscle contraction mechanics,
acting as an internal spring able to store and release elastic
potential energy. It has been demonstrated that, during the cross-
bridges cycle, actin rotates as myosin translates (Morgan, 1977).
The theory proposes titin behaving as a “winding filament,” which
is activated by Ca++ release and winds upon the actin filament
when the latter is rotated by myosin translation in cross-bridges
(Monroy et al., 2012); thus, titin will “actively” participate to
the generation of force of a muscle through its stiffening when
winded up onto actin during active lengthening contractions
(please see Hessel et al., 2017 for further illustrations).
Eccentric Contractions Are More Efficient
Than Concentric Contractions
Fundamental differences exist between eccentric and concentric
contractions in terms of energy cost. Early observations by
Bigland-Ritchie and Woods (Bigland-Ritchie and Woods, 1976)
showed that for the same movement (cycling) speed, the energy
cost of positive work (shortening) is about six-fold greater than
that of negative work (lengthening). Thus, eccentric contractions
have been advocated as particularly suitable for recovering
muscle mass and strength in elderly and clinical populations
(Hoppeler, 2014; Mitchell et al., 2017). The features of metabolic
and energetic costs of ECC compared to CON contractions have
been recently reviewed by Professor Hoppeler (Hoppeler, 2016).
Eccentric Contractions Present Different
Neural Control Strategies Compared to
Concentric Contractions
Concentric and eccentric contractions seem to considerably
differ also in terms of neural drive (Duchateau and Enoka,
2008). EMG amplitude is typically greater during shortening
than during lengthening contractions (Tesch et al., 1990; Westing
et al., 1991; Amiridis et al., 1996; Kellis and Baltzopoulos, 1998;
Aagaard et al., 2000; Komi et al., 2000) and voluntary activation
can be lower during lengthening contractions (Amiridis et al.,
1996; Babault et al., 2001; Beltman et al., 2004). During maximal
voluntary contractions, it seems well established that there is a
deficit in voluntary activation in eccentric contractions. Indeed,
due to the greater force capacity of muscle during lengthening
contractions, fewer motor units are recruited and the discharge
rate is lower during lengthening contractions compared with
shortening contractions (Duchateau and Enoka, 2016). However,
the mechanisms responsible for the activation deficit of eccentric
contractions are only partly understood. While some authors
argue that this inhibition may originate from excessive tension
applied to the tendon complex due to excitation of the Golgi
tendon organ, leading to reduced motor neurone responsiveness
to incoming descending inputs (Westing et al., 1991; Aagaard
et al., 2000); a decline in output from the motor cortex or
an increase in presynaptic inhibition of facilitation from the
periphery are also likely to be involved (Duchateau and Enoka,
2016).
THE CONTRIBUTION OF CHRONIC
CONCENTRIC VS. ECCENTRIC LOADING
TO MUSCLE HYPERTROPHY
ECC resistance training, when performed at high intensities,
is associated with greater increases in both total and eccentric
strength compared to CON RT (Roig et al., 2009; Isner-
Horobeti et al., 2013; Baroni et al., 2015). However, while a
substantial wealth of literature exists on hypertrophic responses
to concentric and eccentric training (Jones and Rutherford, 1987;
Higbie et al., 1996; Seger et al., 1998; Blazevich et al., 2007; Reeves
et al., 2009; Moore et al., 2012), the mechanisms regulating these
changes have not yet been fully elucidated, especially in humans.
There
is
still
some
confusion
regarding
the
singular
contribution of both contractions to muscular hypertrophy.
Lengthening contractions have the potential to generate greater
muscle force than isometric and shortening ones (Katz, 1939;
Westing et al., 1991; Cook and McDonagh, 1995); for this reason
(i.e., the possibility to train with greater loads), the general
consensus is that eccentric exercise may have the potential to
promote larger increases in muscle size and strength compared
to concentric and isometric training (Roig et al., 2009). However,
other authors (Wernbom et al., 2007; Hyldahl and Hubal, 2013)
have suggested that if the two types of loading are performed at
same intensity and/or work volume, then it is difficult to establish
which is the best training mode, as significant hypertrophy is
reached in either case. The most relevant studies that compared
ECC vs. CON training and the correspondent increase in muscle
size are presented in the following subsections.
The investigations that have been included in this table are
those that compared eccentric only vs. concentric only loading
paradigms within a young population. Many investigations
differed one from the other on what has been considered/chosen
as index of muscle hypertrophic adaptations to RT. Therefore,
studies have been grouped in 6 different categories, depending
on the different index (and thus method of assessment) of
hypertrophy: muscle girth (Table 1.1), muscle anatomical cross-
sectional area (ACSA; obtained from either CT or MRI scans)
(Table 1.2), muscle thickness (obtained from ultrasound scans;
Table 1.3), muscle volume (obtained from MRI scans; Table 1.4),
fiber type II CSA (obtained from muscle biopsies and microscope
analysis; Table 1.5), and thigh muscle fat free mass/lean mass
(obtained by region of interest analyses from DXA; Table 1.6).
Muscle Girth
When
considering
muscle
girth
as
an
index
of
muscle
hypertrophy in response to ECC vs. CON RT, a total of
four studies have been identified. Two of these studies used
Isokinetic RT modality (one investigating elbow flexors—Komi
and Buskirk, 1972, the other focusing on knee extensors, Duncan
et al., 1989), while the other two utilized isotonic RT (one
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
3
July 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 447
 Franchi et al.
Muscle Remodeling to Eccentric vs. Concentric Loading
TABLE 1.1 | Studies investigating ECC only vs. CON only RT and the contribution to the increase in muscle girth within a young healthy population.
Studies
Population & muscle
group
Intensity/duration
Matching
Results
Interpretation
Komi and Buskirk, 1972
Young—Elbow Flexors
MVC—7 Wks
No
ECC only increase
Muscle Girth: ECC> CONC in 2
studies (elbow flexors, pectoralis
major). Similar responses in 2 out
of 4 studies using Isokinetic or
Isotonic loading
Duncan et al., 1989
Young
men—Quadriceps
MVC—6 Wks
No
No sig changes for
ECC and CON
Ben-Sira et al., 1995
Young
women—Quadriceps
65% 1RM CON—10 Wks
No
Similar ECC and CON
increase
Coratella and Schena,
2016 (*)
Young men—Pectoralis
Major
CON = 85% 1RM, ECC =
120% CON 1RM—6 wks
Matched for load and
training volume
ECC only increase
(*), Investigation performed on already trained subjects.
TABLE 1.2 | Studies investigating ECC only vs. CON only RT and the contribution to the increase in muscle ACSA within a young healthy population.
Studies
Population & muscle
group
Intensity/duration
Matching
Results
Interpretation
Jones and Rutherford,
1987
Young
men—Quadriceps
80% CON 1RM—12 Wks
No
Similar ECC and CON
increase
1- Muscle ACSA ECC> CONC:
clear differences in only 2
studies out of 10.
2- Similar
responses
in
8/10
studies
using
Isokinetic
or
Isotonic loading.
3- The two loading modalities
seem
to
promote
regional
hypertrophic responses.
4- When matched for work or
load: Similar ECC and CON
ACSA increase
Higbie et al., 1996
Young
women—Quadriceps
MVC—10 Wks
No
ECC > CON
Smith and Rutherford,
1995
Young
men—Quadriceps
ECC load = 35% grater
than CON load
∼ Load Match (ECC
overload)
Similar ECC and CON
increase distal ACSA
Seger et al., 1998
Young
men—Quadriceps
MVC—10 Wks
No
Similar ECC and CON
increase ACSA Mid,
Distal ACSA: ECC >
CON
Vikne et al., 2006
Young men—Elbow
Flexors
MVC—12 Wks
No
ECC only increase
Blazevich et al., 2007
Young
men—Quadriceps
MVC—10 Wks
No
Similar ECC and CON
increase
Moore et al., 2012
Young men—Elbow
Flexors
MVC—9 Wks
Total External Work
Similar ECC and CON
increase
Farup et al., 2014
Young
men—Quadriceps
%60-80 1RM CON, 120%
1RM CON for ECC
group—12 Wks
∼ Load Match (ECC
overload)
Similar ECC and CON
increase
Rahbek et al., 2014
Young
men—Quadriceps
1RM = training load
Progressive (please see
reference) 12 wks
No
ECC and CON similar
increase % ACSA,
greater increase in the
Whey supplement
group vs. control
Franchi et al., 2014
Young
men—Quadriceps
%80 1RM ECC and CON,
respective to the training
mode—10 Wks
Matched for max
relative load and
theoretical equivalent
neural activation
CON > ECC Mid
ACSA ECC > CON
distal ACSA Similar
proximal ACSA
TABLE 1.3 | Studies investigating ECC only vs. CON only RT and the contribution to the increase in muscle volume within a young healthy population.
Studies
Population & muscle
group
Intensity/duration
Matching
Results
Interpretation
Blazevich et al., 2007
Young
men—Quadriceps
MVC—10 Wks
No
Similar ECC and CON
increase in whole
Quadriceps and VL
and VM
Muscle Volume: Similar
responses between ECC and
CON to either Isokinetic or
Isotonic RET for whole
Quadriceps, VL and VM
Franchi et al., 2014
Young
men—Quadriceps
%80 1RM ECC and CON,
respective to the training
mode—10 Wks
Matched for max
relative load and
theoretical equivalent
neural activation
Similar ECC and CON
increase in VL Volume
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
4
July 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 447
 Franchi et al.
Muscle Remodeling to Eccentric vs. Concentric Loading
TABLE 1.4 | Studies investigating ECC only vs. CON only RT and the contribution to the increase in muscle thickness within a young healthy population.
Studies
Population & muscle
group
Intensity/duration
Matching
Result
Interpretation
Farthing and Chilibeck,
2003
Young men and
women—Elbow Flexors
MVC—8 Wks
No
ECC > CON (at
different sites and
velocities)
Muscle Thickness: ECC> CONC
in only one study (elbow flexors
and with different velocities), but
similar responses between ECC
and CON in 5 out of 6 studies
using Isokinetic or Isotonic
loading, investigating
quadriceps, VL, VM, BFLh and
supraspinatus muscles
Blazevich et al., 2007
Young
men—Quadriceps
MVC—10 Wks
No
Similar VL and VM
ECC and CON
increase
Cadore et al., 2014
Young
men—Quadriceps
MVC—6 Wks
No
Similar ECC and CON
increase
Franchi et al., 2015
Young
men—Quadriceps
%80 1RM ECC and CON,
respective to the training
mode—4 Wks
Matched for max
relative load and
theoretical equivalent
neural activation
Similar VL ECC and
CON increase
Timmins et al., 2016a
Young men—Biceps
Femoris
MVC—6 Wks
No
No significant changes
for ECC and CON
Kim et al., 2015
Young men and
women—
Supraspinatus
MVC—8 Wks
No
Similar ECC and CON
increase
TABLE 1.5 | Studies investigating ECC only vs. CON only RT and the contribution to the increase in fiber type II CSA within a young healthy population.
Studies
Population & muscle
group
Intensity/duration
Matching
Result
Interpretation
Mayhew et al., 1995
Young men and
women—Quadriceps
90% maximal CON
power—4 Wks
No
CON > ECC
Muscle fiber type II CSA: ECC>
CONC in 3 studies out of 5
Similar responses between ECC
and CON in 1 study and CON >
ECC in 1 study.
Hortobágyi et al., 1996
Young
women—Quadriceps
MVC—12 Wks
No
ECC > CON
Seger et al., 1998
Young
men—Quadriceps
MVC—10 Wks
No
No differences
between ECC and
CON
Hortobágyi et al., 2000
Young men and
women—Quadriceps
MVC—12 Wks
No
ECC > CON
Vikne et al., 2006
Young—Elbow Flexors
MVC—12 Wks
No
ECC only increase
TABLE 1.6 | Studies investigating ECC only vs. CON only RT and the contribution to the increase in lean mass/fat free mass within a young healthy population.
Studies
Population & muscle
group
Intensity/duration
Matching
Results
Interpretation
Nickols-Richardson et al.,
2007
Young Women—
Quadriceps/Biceps
fem—Elbow
flexors/extensors
MVC—20 Wks
No
No differences in fat
free mass for ECC and
CON
Muscle FFM/LM: Similar
responses between ECC and
CON to either Isokinetic or
Isotonic RET for thigh fat free
mass and lean mass.
Hawkins et al., 1999
Young
women—Quadriceps
MVC—18 Wks
No
Similar ECC and CON
increase in Lean Mass
English et al., 2014
Young
men—Quadriceps &
Triceps Surae
ECC performed at
0/33/66/100 or 138 % CON
load (5 training groups)—8
Wks
Only one ECC group
was load matched
(138% CON load)
Similar ECC and CON
increase in Lean Mass
Franchi et al., 2015
Young
men—Quadriceps
%80 1RM ECC and CON,
respective to the training—4
Wks
Matched for max
relative load and
theoretical equivalent
neural activation
Similar ECC and CON
increase in Lean Mass
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
5
July 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 447
 Franchi et al.
Muscle Remodeling to Eccentric vs. Concentric Loading
investigating the knee extensors—Ben-Sira et al., 1995–and
the other using a bench-press exercise, focusing on pectoralis
major girth—Coratella and Schena, 2016). The results are quite
conflicting, as only two out of four studies showed superiority
of ECC RT. It is noteworthy to mention that these two
studies focused on upper body muscles, whereas no significant
differences were found between ECC and CON RT in terms of
muscle girth increase in knee extensor muscles, irrespective of
the modality of exercises (i.e., Isokinetic or Isotonic) adopted.
Therefore, it is also important to acknowledge the possible
variation that exists among different muscle groups in the
responses to similar training modalities.
Muscle ACSA
When considering muscle ACSA as index of muscle hypertrophy
in response to ECC vs. CON RT, a total of ten studies have been
identified: eight investigated knee extensor muscles while just two
focused on the elbow flexors group. Only two studies (Higbie
et al., 1996; Vikne et al., 2006- on knee extensors and elbow
flexors, respectively) clearly support a superiority of ECC loading
in muscle hypertrophy, whereas the other eight investigations
presented inconclusive evidence of a superiority of one mode
over the other.
Seger et al. (1998) reported that ECC RT produced greater
increase in ACSA compared to CON RT, but this was only
found at the distal portion of the quadriceps while CON RT
resulted in greater increase of mid-belly CSA compared to ECC
loading (although this difference was not statistically significant,
see Figure 2). However, potentially, if the two sites had been
considered together as a sum of ACSA across consecutive axial
scans, (as in Higbie et al., 1996), the differences between ECC
and CON in terms of “whole” hypertrophic (and not regional)
response might have shown another outcome.
Nonetheless, other investigations underlined the importance
of regional growth (Narici et al., 1989; Smith and Rutherford,
1995; Blazevich et al., 2007). We previously showed that the
different contractile stimuli might lead to regional hypertrophy,
as presented in Figure 3 (taken from Franchi et al., 2014, where
an average of 5 CSA was taken from each vastus lateralis length
portion). From this study, it appears that ECC RT induces greater
changes in CSA toward the distal portion of the VL muscle,
whereas CON RT results in a greater mid-belly associated growth.
In conclusion, the results of the studies that used muscle
ACSA as hypertrophy index suggest that there is still not enough
evidence for ECC RT to lead to greater muscle growth than CON
RT: in addition, when the two training modes are performed
while matched either for work or load, changes in muscle size
are very similar.
Muscle Volume
When considering muscle volume as an index of muscle
hypertrophy in response to ECC vs. CON RT, a total of only
two studies were found. Neither of the investigations presented
significant differences between the loading typologies in the
increase of muscle volume after training. It is intriguing to
highlight that, in the study from our lab (Franchi et al., 2014),
even if different regional morphological patterns of muscle
FIGURE 2 | From Seger et al. (1998): preferential distal significant hypertrophy
after ECC RT. If the two sites had been considered together as a sum of ACSA
across consecutive axial scans, (as in Higbie et al., 1996), the differences
between ECC and CON in terms of “whole” hypertrophic (and not regional)
response might have shown a different outcome (ECC ∼ CON hypertrophy).
*P < 0.05.
FIGURE 3 | From Franchi et al. (2014): VL Regional hypertophic adaptations
to ECC vs. CON RT programs are shown, ECC resulting in greater distal
hypertrophy while CON presents larger mid muscle belly increase of CSA.
hypertrophy were reported between ECC vs. CON RT (distal
vs. mid-belly hypertrophy, respectively), these did not result in
significant differences in whole muscle volume. This implies
that, if only the peak of ACSA at mid-thigh (scientifically well
accepted) would have been used as index of hypertrophy (ECC
RT vs. CON RT mid ACSA increase = 7 vs. 11%), the study
in question would have potentially provided slight different
outcomes than the ones reported (ECC RT vs. CON RT whole
volume increase = 6 vs. 8%).
Muscle Thickness
When
considering
muscle
thickness
as
index
of
muscle
hypertrophy in response to ECC vs. CON RT, a total of six
studies were identified. Five out of the six examined studies failed
in finding significant differences between loading paradigms
on knee extensors, biceps femoris long head or supraspinatus
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
6
July 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 447
 Franchi et al.
Muscle Remodeling to Eccentric vs. Concentric Loading
muscles. One study (Farthing and Chilibeck, 2003) showed that,
for the elbow flexors, at the mid and distal site, high velocity ECC
RT resulted in higher increase of MT compared to high and slow
velocity CON RT. However, when slow velocity ECC RT was
compared to slow velocity CON RT, no differences were found
in MT change between exercise programs. Nonetheless, at the
proximal site, the study showed a substantial superiority of High
Velocity ECC RT in producing greater changes in MT.
In conclusion, the results of the studies that used MT increase
as hypertrophy index suggest that no clear differences could be
found between ECC and CON RT.
Muscle Fiber Type II CSA
When considering muscle fiber type II CSA as index of muscle
hypertrophy in response to ECC vs. CON RT, a total of five
studies were considered. Data on type II muscle fibers only have
been reported as it has been showed the preferential recruitment
(and consequent hypertrophy) of these fibers in eccentric actions
(Fridén et al., 1983; Hortobágyi et al., 1996). Indeed, it appears
that ECC loading may also favor the increase of type II fiber CSA,
as three studies out of five showed clear superiority of lengthening
contractions as stimulus for such adaptations. Furthermore, there
seems to be a close connection between ECC RT, performed
at higher intensities/velocities of movement, and fiber type II
increase in CSA (and percentage too). This connection was the
object of previous works, which investigated the effect of ECC
training, performed in isolated manner (Paddon-Jones et al.,
2001; Shepstone et al., 2005) or as overload phase in mixed-model
designs (Hather et al., 1991; Hortobágyi et al., 2000; Friedmann-
Bette et al., 2010). All studies found a significant increase in either
of CSA or distribution of type II fibers in human skeletal muscle
in response to ECC RT. Conversely, just one study (Mayhew et al.,
1995) have observed greater fiber type II CSA change after CON
compared to ECC RT (both contractions performed at 90% of
Max CON power).
Muscle Lean Mass/Fat Free Mass
When considering muscle lean mass/fat free mass as index of
muscle hypertrophy in response to ECC vs. CON RT, a total of
four studies were found. None of the investigations presented
significant differences between the loading typologies in the
increase of muscle volume after training.
Mixed Concentric/Eccentric Loading and
Muscle Hypertrophy
While the present review is specifically focused on ECC only vs.
CON only RT adaptations, it is important to briefly illustrate
the adaptations in muscle hypertrophy in response to modes
of RT that use a combination of concentric and eccentric
contractions. Previous studies have compared the increase in
muscle size (mainly in terms of type I and type II fiber CSA)
in response to CON only RT vs. the combination of CON/ECC
RT performed with isotonic (Hather et al., 1991) or isokinetic
devices (Colliander and Tesch, 1990; Hortobágyi et al., 2000). The
results are mixed, as no differences in type I CSA increase were
found between loading modes (Colliander and Tesch, 1990) but
the combination of CON/ECC RT resulted in greater type II fiber
CSA compared to CON only (Hather et al., 1991; Hortobágyi
et al., 2000). However, Friedmann-Bette et al. (2010) showed
that, when comparing two different CON/ECC RT programs
(group 1 = same load displaced between phases vs. group 2
= ECC overload, with ECC load ∼1.9 of CON one), only
CON/ECC overload RT program resulted in significant fiber
type II CSA increase. It therefore appears that, when combining
both contraction phases in an exercise regime, the best results
for muscle growth are obtained by training paradigms that
present some sort of ECC overload. In fact, the highest rate of
whole muscle hypertrophy increase in humans is observed after
flywheel training (Lundberg et al., 2013; Tesch et al., 2017), which
provides accommodate resistance in the full range of motion
of the CON phase, with ECC overload (Tesch et al., 2017).
Flywheel training has shown to lead to very early hypertrophic
and architectural adaptations (visible by MRI-assessed ACSA and
ultrasound-derived fascicle length from 21 days after the start
of the protocol; Seynnes et al., 2007). Although it is not within
the scope of this manuscript to further present mixed CON/ECC
loading strategies, it is intriguing to acknowledge that differences
exist between muscular adaptations to ECC only or CON only
and the combination of both types of contractions (with or
without ECC overload) in training regimes.
THE CONTRIBUTION OF CHRONIC
CONCENTRIC VS. ECCENTRIC LOADING
TO CHANGES IN MUSCLE
ARCHITECTURE
This review aimed to critically discuss the evidence for eccentric
and concentric training to lead to different morphological
adaptations. Perhaps, a significant difference between the
two training modes lies in the contraction-specific regional
hypertrophy that has been previously observed (Seger et al., 1998;
Franchi et al., 2014; Douglas et al., 2016), where greater eccentric-
associated distal growth is juxtaposed to a more pronounced
mid-belly hypertrophy after concentric training.
Nonetheless, while similar “whole muscle” growth is often
observed as a result of both types of RT, what really seems to
differ between ECC and CON loading are the mechanisms of
structural remodeling by which the hypertrophic responses are
achieved. Our lab has recently shown that different architectural
adaptations (measured by using B-mode ultrasound technique,
Figure 4) can be found between ECC vs. CON contractions:
ECC results in a markedly greater increase in fascicle length (Lf)
while CON promotes greater changes in pennation angle (PA),
likely reflecting the differential addition of sarcomeres either in
series or in parallel, respectively (Reeves et al., 2009; Franchi
et al., 2014, 2015) (Figures 5, 7). Therefore, muscle growth is
achieved with both loading modalities, but the mechanisms of
structural remodeling are contraction-specific (Franchi et al.,
2016a). Although, a good number of investigations have focused
on architectural responses to ECC RT only, so far, only five
studies have compared isolated CON vs. isolated ECC in terms
of structural remodeling. Those studies are presented in Table 2.
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
7
July 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 447
 Franchi et al.
Muscle Remodeling to Eccentric vs. Concentric Loading
FIGURE 4 | Ultrasound scan of VL muscle: Lf (fascicle length) and PA
(pennation angle) represent two of the major features of muscle architecture.
Thus, when considering the results reported in Table 2,
the
prevalent
observation
is
that
the
two
contractions
induce
distinct
structural
adaptations.
Since
changes
in
architecture can influence the functional properties of muscles
(Narici, 1999; Lieber and Fridén, 2000; Narici et al., 2016), a
thorough understanding of skeletal muscle remodeling during
hypertrophic states is then fundamental. Conventional (Narici
et al., 1996; Alegre et al., 2006), concentric and eccentric loading
can result in changes of Lf (Blazevich et al., 2007): however,
eccentric-only RT induces greater increase in Lf of the VL muscle
than conventional (Reeves et al., 2009) and concentric-only
RT (Franchi et al., 2014, 2015). Similar findings have been
observed in the biceps femoris muscle (Timmins et al., 2016a).
By contrast, Blazevich et al. (2007) found both contractions to
induce a similar and significant increase in Lf; however, in this
study, the two different loading paradigms were not matched for
work, relative load or neural drive. As previously discussed by
Reeves et al. (2009) during conventional RT (typically consisting
of consecutive concentric and eccentric phases), because the
same absolute load is displaced between CON and ECC phases,
motor units must be de-recruited to enable lowering of the
training load (eccentric phase). Hence in the eccentric phase
of conventional RT, muscle activation and relative loading, are
considerably lower than those achieved in the concentric phase
(Figure 6). Therefore, to guarantee that the ECC component
of resistance training would not result under-loaded, Reeves
et al. (2009) and Franchi et al. (2014) increased the eccentric
training load by about 20% in order to obtain the same level of
neural drive (EMG), to meet the fundamental requirement of
the force-velocity relation that each value of force and velocity
along this curve should belong to the same level of neural
activation (Bigland and Lippold, 1954). Such a controlled study
design allowed the authors to better compare the two loading
modalities.
In relation to the muscle morphological adaptations to
CON and ECC training, Blazevich and colleagues suggested
that training at greater than normal joint range of motion
may explain the similar structural remodeling in response to
the two loading modes, instead of the contraction type. This
FIGURE 5 | Adapted from Franchi et al. (2014). Contraction-dependent
muscle growth in response to eccentric and concentric resistive training in
young males. Similar hypertrophy is achieved through two different patterns of
structural re-assembly (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.001, ***P < 0.0001). Y = 1
represent the baseline value, data are normalized to pre-exercise values (Vol,
Volume; Lf, fascicle length; PA, pennation angle; MVC, maximum voluntary
contraction).
hypothesis seems supported by other studies (McMahon et al.,
2014; Guex et al., 2016), which found a greater increase in
fascicle length of VL when training at greater ROM of the knee
joint. Nonetheless, Noorkõiv et al. (2014) showed that isometric
training at longer muscle lengths (i.e., thus almost re-producing
an ECC contraction scenario) can induce a substantial increase in
Lf. Thus, regarding the findings from Blazevich’s study (2007) the
authors raise the point of whether more pronounced mechanical
stretch might have been applied to single sarcomeres (and thus
fascicles) during large ROM CON RT at higher joint knee angle
(counting the full leg extension as anatomical zero = 0 degrees)
and if this could have affected serial sarcomeres distribution
and ultimately the architectural adaptations presented by the
aforementioned studies.
There is a substantial bulk of literature showing Lf increases
after eccentric-only (Duclay et al., 2009; Potier et al., 2009;
Baroni et al., 2013) or isoinertial exercise (Seynnes et al., 2007),
reinforcing the concept that muscle longitudinal growth may
be intimately related to lengthening contractions. The changes
in Lf observed after these loading interventions theoretically
imply the addition of sarcomeres in series. It is known from
previous animal work that skeletal muscle responds to passive
and intermittent stretch by adding new sarcomeres in-series
(Williams and Goldspink, 1971; Holly et al., 1980; Goldspink,
1985; Williams et al., 1988; Williams, 1990), a trend observed
after exercise regimes/overload (Goldspink, 1999; Proske and
Morgan, 2001). Greater addition of serial sarcomeres was found
in rats after downhill compared to uphill running (Lynn and
Morgan, 1994; Butterfield et al., 2005): thus, it has been
suggested that more contractile material placed in series (i.e.,
reflecting the increase in Lf) can be regarded as a “protective”
mechanisms after eccentric exercise induced muscle damage
(Morgan and Talbot, 2002), also because of the increase of
maximal force produced at longer muscle lengths (Timmins et al.,
2016a).
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
8
July 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 447
 Franchi et al.
Muscle Remodeling to Eccentric vs. Concentric Loading
TABLE 2 | Summary of studies investigating the architectural adaptations to ECC only vs. CON only loading protocols.
Studies
Population & muscle
group
Intensity/duration
Matching
Results
Interpretation
Blazevich et al., 2007
Young
men—Quadriceps
MVC—10 Wks
No
Similar Lf, PA and CSA
increase in both
groups
Muscle Architecture: 4 studies
out of 5 show clear distinct
architectural adaptations in
reponse to either CON or ECC
training. CON RET induces a
greater increase of PA compared
to ECC RET, whereas ECC
loading is the predominant
stimulus to achieve greater
changes in Lf. Only 1 study
found ECC and CON to achieve
similar architectural remodeling
patterns (Blazevich et al., 2007)
Reeves et al., 2009
Older
men—Quadriceps
%80 5RM ECC and CON,
respective to ECC or
Conventional training
mode—14 Wks
Matched for max
relative load
ECC > CON on Lf
increase (20% vs.
8%); CON > ECC on
PA increase (35% vs.
5%); Similar increase
in MT (∼12%)
Franchi et al., 2014
Young
men—Quadriceps
%80 1RM ECC and CON,
respective to the training
mode—10 Wks
Matched for max
relative load and
theoretical equivalent
neural activation
ECC > CON on Lf
increase (12% vs.
5%); CON > ECC on
PA increase (30% vs.
5%); Similar increase
in VOL (∼7%)
Franchi et al., 2015
Young
men—Quadriceps
%80 1RM ECC and CON,
respective to the training
mode—4 Wks
Matched for max
relative load and
theoretical equivalent
neural activation
ECC > CON on Lf
increase (5% vs. 2%);
CON > ECC on PA
increase (7% vs. 3%);
Similar increase in MT
(∼8%)
Timmins et al., 2016a
Young men—Biceps
Femoris
MVC—6 Wks
No
ECC > CON on Lf
increase (16%
vs.—11%); CON >
ECC on PA increase
(20% vs.—7%); No
significant increase in
MT in both groups
Conversely, an increase of PA has been regarded as a strategy
for the muscle to pack more contractile material along the deep
tendinous aponeurosis (Gans, 1982; Kawakami et al., 1993): thus,
hypertrophy of pennate muscles can be often accompanied by
a substantial increase of PA (Ema et al., 2016). However, PA
appears to markedly increase after concentric and conventional
RT (in which the concentric contraction stimulus is the most
dominant, as the intensity is usually based on CON 1RM
%), whereas none/small and often non-significant changes are
observed in response to ECC loading programmes (Baroni et al.,
2015).
Taken together, these results strongly suggest that skeletal
muscle is able to respond to different mechanical stimuli by
following distinct remodeling patterns, reflecting divergent
strategies for the addition of new sarcomeric material in
its structural re-assembly (Narici et al., 2016) (Figure 7).
This also results in important implications in rehabilitation
settings, because different contractions can therefore influence
the shift of the optimum length-tension relationship, with
notable repercussions on performance and injury prevention
(Brughelli and Cronin, 2007; Timmins et al., 2016b). In
fact, the addition of serial sarcomeres appears to directly
impact
the
maximum
velocity
of
shortening
of
muscle
fibers (in cat semitendinosus muscle; Bodine et al., 1982):
thus,
eccentric
contractions,
while
favoring
the
increase
in Lf without presenting significant changes in PA, may
have profound influence on muscle performance (Hoppeler,
2014).
MOLECULAR AND METABOLIC
RESPONSES TO ACUTE AND CHRONIC
CONCENTRIC VS. ECCENTRIC LOADING
Skeletal muscle hypertrophy in response to exercise is the
result of the addition of new contractile material, regulated
by different molecular mechanisms, involving translational
enhancement of muscle protein synthesis (Hoppeler et al., 2011;
Atherton and Smith, 2012; Hoppeler, 2016). A small number
of studies investigated the molecular mechanisms of muscle
hypertrophy in response to concentric vs. eccentric exercise,
particularly in humans; the existing work focused on the acute
rather than on the chronic molecular responses, and only
few investigations reported architectural and morphological
adaptations
over
chronic
resistive
loading
interventions
(Blazevich et al., 2007; Franchi et al., 2014, 2015; Timmins et al.,
2016a).
For this reason, there is currently no clear consensus as to what
mechanisms regulate the structural remodeling of skeletal muscle
with ECC vs. CON RT.
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
9
July 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 447
 Franchi et al.
Muscle Remodeling to Eccentric vs. Concentric Loading
FIGURE 6 | From Reeves et al. (2009): conceptual diagram that illustrates
what could theoretically happen when displacing the same external load
(empty dots) between concentric and eccentric phases in Conventional RT. As
a consequence, the eccentric contraction belongs to a different force-velocity
curve of lower neural activation. Because a fundamental requirement of the
force-velocity relationship is that all the point of force and velocity should
belong to a curve of same neural activation, then the filled dot represent the
level of external load that should be adopted to meet such requirement:
something that is not occurring in conventional resistance training.
FIGURE 7 | Schematic diagram illustrating the distinct contraction-specific
hypertophic patterns in response to chronic ECC vs. CON RT in human vastus
lateralis (image acquired by using extended field of view ultrasound technique):
a similar increase in MT can indeed be reached either through a preferential
addition of sarcomeres in-parallel (usually occurring after CON RT) with an
increase in PA, or through a preferential addition of sarcomeres in-series
(usually occurring after ECC RT), which is represented by an increase in Lf
(Franchi et al., 2014, 2015). + + + = the preferential addition of either
sarcomeres in-series or in-parallel (dependent on the contraction mode used)
compared to + = likely to happen as a marginal response. The white lines
highlight the initial pre-training scenario, whereas the red dotted lines represent
a post-training hypertrophic state.
This
section
shall
examine
the
possible
molecular
mechanisms regulating the responses to ECC and CON
loading, from the animal and human data available up to
present date, with the objective to better clarify if specific
molecular alterations could explain such distinct structural
adaptations.
Muscle Protein Synthesis after Acute and
Chronic Concentric vs. Eccentric Loading
The distinct remodeling patterns of ECC vs. CON RT observed
in regional hypertrophy and muscle architecture point to a
contraction-specific muscle growth that may be regulated by
distinct whole and regional muscle anabolism. A total of
four human investigations were identified and none of them
found any notable differences in MPS between the two loading
modalities. Phillips et al. (1997) reported similar increase in
mixed protein synthesis at 3, 24, and 48 h after single CON
and ECC exercise bouts (not matched for work). Likewise,
Cuthbertson et al. (2006) found no differences in myofibrillar
fractional synthetic rates (FSR) following 12 min step up (CON)
or step down (ECC). When the loading paradigms were matched
for work, myofibrillar MPS presented greater increase at 4.5
h after ECC RT compared to CON RT, with no differences
found after 8.5 h (Moore et al., 2005). We recently explored
the potential differences in anabolic response between ECC and
CON loading and at different vastus lateralis muscle sites (at
the middle of the muscle belly—MID—and at the distal portion,
close to the knee myotendinous junction—MTJ; Franchi et al.,
2015). The rationale for these measurements being that different
architectural adaptations could be governed by contraction-
specific responses in MPS; in addition, in a previous study of
similar design, distinct patterns of regional hypertrophy were
found, as distal growth was associated to ECC RT whereas CON
RT seemed to favor increase of mid muscle ACSA (Franchi et al.,
2014). Not only ECC and CON (matched for relative maximum
load) did not differ in the quantity of myofibrillar FSR (measured
over 4 weeks period, using deuterium-oxide tracing technique),
but, surprisingly, no differences were observed between muscle
sites. Interestingly, Fujita et al. (2007) showed that de novo
sarcomere assembly in C2C12 myotubes can occur without
the requirement for newly synthesized proteins. Collectively,
these data suggest that, during muscle structural remodeling,
assembly of sarcomeres may be independent of the quantity of
new contractile material (i.e., proteins) synthesized. Hence, the
different structural adaptations in response to ECC and CON
cannot be determined merely through quantifying longer-term
MPS responses. In further support of this concept, previous
work by Garma et al. (2007) showed that, in rodent muscle,
under conditions of equivalent volumes of force integral, both
concentric and eccentric loading programmes (i.e., and isometric
too) presented near identical activation of processes leading to
anabolic response. Similar increase of total mRNA content, IGF-
1 mRNA and protocollagen 3 were observed, as well as a decrease
in myostatin mRNA. Lastly, in a more recent study on rats,
mTORC1 signaling was not modulated by the contraction mode,
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
10
July 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 447
 Franchi et al.
Muscle Remodeling to Eccentric vs. Concentric Loading
rather the key factor seemed to be the force-time integral (Ato
et al., 2016).
Exercise-Induced Muscle Damage (EIMD)
Some research suggests that EIMD may play an important role
in mediating muscle growth, speculating that the associated
inflammatory response and protein turnover could be critical
for increase in muscle size (Evans and Cannon, 1991). As
EIMD is found predominantly after ECC exercise bouts, but
not CON (Fridén et al., 1986; Faulkner and Brooks, 1993), this
has prompted researchers to postulate that ECC RT could lead
to higher hypertrophic responses: nevertheless, as showed in
Section The Contribution of Chronic Concentric vs. Eccentric
Loading to Muscle Hypertrophy of the present review, even
at high training intensities, many studies cannot clearly affirm
which training mode results in greater long-term hypertrophy.
Moreover, it is widely known that EIMD decreases since after
the first exercise bout (McHugh, 2003; i.e., the repeated bout
effect phenomenon) because of several factors, including neural
adaptations and structural remodeling of the extra-cellular
matrix (ECM; Hyldahl et al., 2017). Thus, the real contribution
of EIMD in distinct long-term hypertrophic adaptations to ECC
vs. CON RT remains to be determined.
Satellite Cells Activity after Acute and
Chronic Concentric vs. Eccentric Loading
If MPS and EIMD do not fully explain the contraction-specific
skeletal muscle remodeling patterns, further answers may be
found in the satellite cells activity in response to ECC vs.
CON RT.
During muscle repair following EIMD and during subsequent
hypertrophic adaptations, the role of satellite cells is central
for muscle growth (Fry et al., 2017). Satellite cells are stem
cell situated between the basal lamina and the sarcolemma of
skeletal muscle fibers (Mauro, 1961), which, upon activation,
can proliferate, and ultimately fuse with existing fibers, thus
leading to an increase in muscle fibers size (Harridge, 2007). It is
noteworthy to mention that greater satellite cells activity has been
observed after a single bout of ECC exercise (with consequent
EIMD showed) compared to load-intensity matched CON (with
no damage; Hyldahl et al., 2014). When we consider RT programs
overtime, chronic CON RT only has lead to an increase in satellite
cells pool, compared to chronic ECC RT (Farup et al., 2014).
Thus, these data suggest that distinct contractions can differently
modulate satellite cells activity over RT periods.
A recent study highlighted the very close relationship
between myogenic progenitor cells (MPCs) and the ECM that
surrounds muscle fibers in response to hypertrophic stimuli (Fry
et al., 2017). Fry and colleagues showed that when MPCs are
activated by mechanical overload, they proliferate and will release
exosomes containing different micro RNAs (miRNA) into the
ECM-niche. Such cross talk leads to a reduction of collagen
mRNA expression in the fibrogenic cell, and thus appears to
regulate ECM deposition during muscle structural remodeling.
Conversely, the absence of activated satellite cells results in
excessive ECM deposition and attenuated myofibre growth (Fry
et al., 2017). Furthermore, in a recent investigation, a reduced
cohort of satellite cells did not prevent serial sarcomeres addition
after chronic stretch in mice soleus, but resulted in significantly
altered muscle morphology (reduced fiber CSA with concomitant
fibrosis and ECM hypertrophy; Kinney et al., 2017). This proves
that satellite cells play a crucial role in controlling ECM and
muscle structural remodeling.
Evidences of Enhanced Extra-Cellular
Matrix Remodeling in Response to
Eccentric Contractions
The previous sub-section has pointed out that the cross-talk
between mechanical stimuli, satellite cells activation and ECM
remodeling could be differently modulated after ECC vs. CON
contractions.
A recent human study by Hyldahl et al. (2015) investigated
the ECM remodeling contribution to the repeated bout effect, the
physiological protective muscular adaptations that usually occurs
after a single bout of ECC RT.
The present study presented two major results. Firstly, a
global transcriptomic analysis showed that ECM gene networks
alteration following an ECC RT bout (compared to the non-
exercised leg) were related to early deadhesion (Tenascin C highly
activated 2 days post-exercise), force loss and muscle damage,
suggesting that these acute responses represented possible source
of muscular adaptations in the repeated bout effect process.
Furthermore, the ECM collagen genes, both fibrillar (type I
and III) and basal lamina (IV) types, showed a prolonged
response to one single bout of lengthening contractions, being
markedly expressed even after 27 days from the exercise session,
suggesting a possible delayed remodeling activity of ECM. In
addition, the TGF-β/Smad signaling pathway was found highly
activated at the same time point, supporting the above mentioned
gene expression data, as TGF-β is regarded as an up-regulator
of mechanical loading-derived collagen synthesis (Verrecchia
et al., 2001). The present data support the contention that ECM
may have a strong role in muscle remodeling and structural
assembly after lengthening contractions. However, in this study,
no responses to shortening contraction were investigated.
Nevertheless, in a previous study on rats (Heinemeier et al.,
2007), myostatin mRNA was found decreased the most after
ECC compared to CON exercise, together with a larger increase
of MGF (Mechano-Growth Factor), TGF-β-1 (transforming
Growth Factor β-1, a marker of collagen expression) and CTGF
(Connective Tissue Growth Factor) mRNA values in response to
ECC training. Collagen type I α1 also presented a larger increase
after ECC and Isometric exercise compared to CON; these data
suggest once again that extra-cellular matrix-related remodeling
could be one of the keys to interpret differences in muscle
structural re-assembly in response to lengthening vs. shortening
contractions (Mackey and Kjaer, 2016).
Different Gene Responses and Cellular
Signaling Pathways after Acute and
Chronic Concentric vs. Eccentric Loading
The only study that investigated the gene expression profile
of concentric vs. eccentric exercise (unilateral stepping up
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
11
July 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 447
 Franchi et al.
Muscle Remodeling to Eccentric vs. Concentric Loading
and down of a small jump box) (Kostek et al., 2007) found
that fifty-one genes were differently expressed after 3 h
from ECC vs. CON RT. These genes were mostly related
to protein turnover, cellular stress and sarcolemmal-structural
remodeling. Differences in single genes expression (FBXO32,
SIX1, CSRP3 and MUSTN1) were detected between the distinct
loading modalities utilized: the four genes targeted, uniquely
regulated by lengthening contractions, may play specific roles in
skeletal muscle as regulating protein turnover, being potentially
responsible for fiber-type change and involved in mechano-
transduction processes. Thus, these data seem to support the
idea that ECC and CON contractions/training modalities trigger
distinct and unique gene networks.
When focusing on skeletal muscle signaling, some interesting
findings are worth being reported on the cellular responses to
either ECC or CON contractions. Wretman et al. (2001) observed
that, in isolated rat muscle, greater increases in phosphorylation
of p38 and ERK 1/2 mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs)
were induced by ECC compared to CON stimulus. These results
were later confirmed by our lab on humans (Franchi et al.,
2014), as we observed a greater activation of p38, ERK ½
and p90RSK after 30 min of ECC RT compared to CON.
Intriguingly, ERK ½ expression was previously shown to regulate
CON vs. ECC growth pathways in cardiomyocytes, suggesting
MAPKs are involved in regulating architectural remodeling
processes in both cardiac and skeletal muscle (Kehat et al.,
2011). Thus, it is interesting to underline that the MAPKs
signaling pathways are indeed differently regulated by distinct
contractions.
Martineau and Gardiner (2001), observed that MAPKs
activation was quantitatively related to tension, with ECC
providing the greater stimulus compared to shortening muscle
actions. It is well established that mechanical tension is one
of the crucial factors influencing muscle growth (Goldberg
et al., 1975; Fry, 2004) and also that eccentric contractions are
associated with a greater development of tension compared to
concentric contractions (Katz, 1939). Interestingly, a successive
study, in which the force × time integral (FTI) was manipulated
by changing the force of contraction, demonstrated that p38
and FAK phosphorylation correlate with the FTI (Rahnert and
Burkholder, 2013) indicating a possible intimate relationship
between those targets and the nature of the mechanical stimulus
applied on to the muscle. This observation, lead us to investigate
the role of FAK activation (at the y-397 tyrosine site) between
different contractions (lengthening vs. shortening) and at distinct
muscle sites (mid muscle vs. MTJ): a preliminary data analysis
showed that y-397FAK activation was greater after a single ECC
RT session compared to CON (Franchi et al., 2016b). Moreover,
such activation appeared to be muscle site-dependent (MTJ >
MID), supporting the regionality/heterogeinity of hypertrophic
and structural remodeling adaptations to distinct loading
modes.
In conclusion, it appears that when both contraction types
are applied to the muscle with matched high intensity and
work, similar response in protein synthesis can be observed,
with a small potential difference only at very early time points
(4.5 h after an exercise bout- Moore et al., 2005). Nonetheless,
chronically assessed protein synthetic response (i.e., evaluated
within a period of 4 weeks) does not highlight any significant
differences between ECC vs. CON (Franchi et al., 2015).
Distinct satellite cells activity, ECM-related gene expression
and cellular signaling have been observed both in animals and
humans, suggesting that ECC may trigger greater connective
tissue/structural remodeling. Although, further research is
needed to clarify the link between morphological and molecular
adaptations, these phenomena could be linked/regulated to/by
a greater activation of the MAPK family and mechano-
transductors pathways (Wretman et al., 2001; Franchi et al., 2014,
2016b).
CONCLUSIONS
Although, ECC RT has been usually associated to greater
increases in muscle mass compared to CON RT, the present
review clearly illustrated that the findings presented in the
literature are too varied to clearly affirm which training mode
leads to greater long-term muscle growth. Furthermore, when
both exercises paradigms are matched for either maximum load
or work, the hypertrophic responses are very similar. What
appears to be different is how this increase in muscle size is
reached, as distinct contraction-specific adaptations in muscle
architecture are found. In addition, different molecular and
myogenic mechanisms have found distinctly activated after ECC
vs. CON exercise bouts, suggesting that these responses could
be underlying the structural remodeling patterns previously
described: further investigations are needed to establish the
strength of such potential micro-to-macro connections. At
present time, the aforementioned scenarios are clearly described
for a young population, whereas this is yet to be fully elucidated
in older individuals and in clinical settings.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
MF, NR, and MN contributed altogether to the conception and
writing up process of this manuscript.
FUNDING
This work was supported by the Biotechnology and Biological
Sciences Research Council [grant number BB/K019104/1].
REFERENCES
Aagaard, P., Simonsen, E. B., Andersen, J. L., Magnusson, S. P., Halkjaer-
Kristensen, J., and Dyhre-Poulsen, P. (2000). Neural inhibition during maximal
eccentric and concentric quadriceps contraction: effects of resistance training.
J. Appl. Physiol. 89, 2249–2257.
Alegre, L. M., Jiménez, F., Gonzalo-Orden, J. M., Martín-Acero, R., and Aguado,
X. (2006). Effects of dynamic resistance training on fascicle length and
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
12
July 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 447
 Franchi et al.
Muscle Remodeling to Eccentric vs. Concentric Loading
isometric strength. J. Sports Sci. 24, 501–508 doi: 10.1080/02640410500
189322
Amiridis, I. G., Martin, A., Morlon, B., Martin, L., Cometti, G., Pousson, M., et al.
(1996). Co-activation and tension-regulating phenomena during isokinetic
knee extension in sedentary and highly skilled humans. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol.
Occup. Physiol. 73, 149–156. doi: 10.1007/BF00262824
Atherton,
P.
J.,
and
Smith,
K.
(2012).
Muscle
protein
synthesis
in
response
to
nutrition
and
exercise.
J.
Physiol.
590,
1049–1057.
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2011.225003
Ato, S., Makanae, Y., Kido, K., and Fujita, S. (2016). Contraction mode itself does
not determine the level of mTORC1 activity in rat skeletal muscle. Physiol. Rep.
4:e12976. doi: 10.14814/phy2.12976
Babault, N., Pousson, M., Ballay, Y., and Van Hoecke, J. (2001). Activation
of human quadriceps femoris during isometric, concentric, and eccentric
contractions. J. Appl. Physiol. 91, 2628–2634.
Baroni, B. M., Geremia, J. M., Rodrigues, R., De Azevedo Franke, R.,
Karamanidis, K., and Vaz, M. A. (2013). Muscle architecture adaptations to
knee extensor eccentric training: rectus femoris vs. vastus lateralis. Muscle
Nerve 48, 498–506. doi: 10.1002/mus.23785
Baroni, B. M., Pinto, R. S., Herzog, W., and Vaz, M. A. (2015). Eccentric resistance
training of the knee extensor muscle: training programs and neuromuscular
adaptations. Isokinet. Exerc. Sci. 23, 183–198. doi: 10.3233/IES-150580
Beltman, J. G. M., Sargeant, A. J., van Mechelen, W., and de Haan, A.
(2004). Voluntary activation level and muscle fiber recruitment of human
quadriceps during lengthening contractions. J. Appl. Physiol. 97, 619–626.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.01202.2003
Ben-Sira, D., Ayalon, A., and Tavi, M. (1995). The effect of different types of
strength training on concentric strength in women. J. Strength Cond. Res. 9.
doi: 10.1519/1533-4287(1995)009<0143:TEODTO>2.3.CO;2
Bigland, B., and Lippold, O. (1954). The relation between force, velocity and
integrated electrical activity in human muscles. J. Physiol. 123, 214–224.
Bigland-Ritchie, B., and Woods, J. J. (1976). Integrated electromyogram and
oxygen uptake during positive and negative work. J. Physiol. 260, 267–277.
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1976.sp011515
Blazevich, A. J., Cannavan, D., Coleman, D. R., and Horne, S. (2007).
Influence of concentric and eccentric resistance training on architectural
adaptation in human quadriceps muscles. J. Appl. Physiol. 103, 1565–1575.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00578.2007
Bodine, S. C., Roy, R. R., Meadows, D. A., Zernicke, R. F., Sacks, R. D., Fournier, M.,
et al. (1982). Architectural, histochemical, and contractile characteristics of a
unique biarticular muscle: the cat semitendinosus. J. Neurophysiol. 48, 192–201.
Brughelli, M., and Cronin, J. (2007). Altering the length-tension relationship with
eccentric exercise : implications for performance and injury. Sports Med. 37,
807–826. doi: 10.2165/00007256-200737090-00004
Butterfield, T. A., Leonard, T. R., and Herzog, W. (2005). Differential
serial
sarcomere
number
adaptations
in
knee
extensor
muscles
of
rats
is
contraction
type
dependent.
J.
Appl.
Physiol.
99,
1352–1358
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00481.2005
Cadore, E. L., González-Izal, M., Pallarés, J. G., Rodriguez-Falces, J., Häkkinen,
K., Kraemer, W. J., et al. (2014). Muscle conduction velocity, strength, neural
activity, and morphological changes after eccentric and concentric training.
Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports 24, e343–e352. doi: 10.1111/sms.12186
Colliander, E. B., and Tesch, P. A. (1990). Effects of eccentric and concentric
muscle actions in resistance training. Acta Physiol. Scand. 140, 31–39.
doi: 10.1111/j.1748-1716.1990.tb08973.x
Cook, C. S., and McDonagh, M. J. (1995). Force responses to controlled stretches
of electrically stimulated human muscle-tendon complex. Exp. Physiol. 80,
477–490. doi: 10.1113/expphysiol.1995.sp003862
Coratella, G., and Schena, F. (2016). Eccentric resistance training increases and
retains maximal strength, muscle endurance, and hypertrophy in trained men.
Appl. Physiol. Nutr. Metab. 41, 1184–1189. doi: 10.1139/apnm-2016-0321
Cuthbertson, D. J., Babraj, J., Smith, K., Wilkes, E., Fedele, M. J., Esser, K., et al.
(2006). Anabolic signaling and protein synthesis in human skeletal muscle after
dynamic shortening or lengthening exercise. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab.
290, E731–E738. doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00415.2005
Douglas, J., Pearson, S., Ross, A., and McGuigan, M. (2016). Chronic
adaptations to eccentric training: a systematic review. Sport. Med. 47, 917–941.
doi: 10.1007/s40279-016-0628-4
Duchateau, J., and Enoka, R. M. (2008). Neural control of shortening and
lengthening contractions: influence of task constraints. J. Physiol. 586,
5853–5864. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2008.160747
Duchateau, J., and Enoka, R. M. (2016). Neural control of lengthening
contractions. J. Exp. Biol. 219, 197–204. doi: 10.1242/jeb.123158
Duclay, J., Martin, A., Duclay, A., Cometti, G., and Pousson, M. (2009).
Behavior of fascicles and the myotendinous junction of human medial
gastrocnemius following eccentric strength training. Muscle Nerve 39, 819–827.
doi: 10.1002/mus.21297
Duncan, P. W., Chandler, J. M., Cavanaugh, D. K., Johnson, K. R., and Buehler,
A. G. (1989). Mode and speed specificity of eccentric and concentric exercise
training. J. Orthop. Sports Phys. Ther. 11, 70–75.
English, K. L., Loehr, J. A., Lee, S. M. C., and Smith, S. M. (2014). Early-phase
musculoskeletal adaptations to different levels of eccentric resistance after 8
weeks of lower body training. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 114, 2263–2280. doi: 10.
1007/s00421-014-2951-5
Ema, R., Akagi, R., Wakahara, T., and Kawakami, Y. (2016). Training-induced
changes in architecture of human skeletal muscles: current evidence and
unresolved issues. J. Phys. Fit. Sport. Med. 5, 37–46. doi: 10.7600/jpfsm.5.37
Evans,
W.
J.,
and
Cannon,
J.
G.
(1991).
The
metabolic
effects
of
exercise-induced
muscle
damage.
Exerc.
Sport
Sci.
Rev.
19,
99–125.
doi: 10.1249/00003677-199101000-00003
Farthing, J. P., and Chilibeck, P. D. (2003). The effects of eccentric and concentric
training at different velocities on muscle hypertrophy. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 89,
578–586. doi: 10.1007/s00421-003-0842-2
Farup, J., Rahbek, S. K., Vendelbo, M. H., Matzon, A., Hindhede, J., Bejder, A., et al.
(2014). Whey protein hydrolysate augments tendon and muscle hypertrophy
independent of resistance exercise contraction mode. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports
24, 788–798. doi: 10.1111/sms.12083
Faulkner, J. A., Brooks, S. V, and Opiteck, J. A. (1993). Injury to skeletal muscle
fibers during contractions: conditions of occurrence and prevention. Phys.
Ther. 73, 911–921. doi: 10.1093/ptj/73.12.911
Franchi, M. V, Atherton, P. J., Reeves, N. D., Flück, M., Williams, J., Mitchell, W. K.,
et al. (2014). Architectural, functional, and molecular responses to concentric
and eccentric loading in human skeletal muscle. Acta Physiol. 210, 642–654.
doi: 10.1111/apha.12225
Franchi, M. V., Atherton, P. J., Maganaris, C. N., and Narici, M. V.
(2016a). Fascicle length does increase in response to longitudinal resistance
training and in a contraction-mode specific manner. Springerplus 5, 94.
doi: 10.1186/s40064-015-1548-8
Franchi, M. V., Ruoss, S., Quinlan, J. I., Atherton, P. J., Smith, K., Narici, M. V.,
et al. (2016b). “Load-induced tyrosine 397 phosphorylation of focal adhesion
kinase with resistance training is muscle region and contraction-type specific,”
in Abstract from the European College of Sports Science Conference 2016.
Franchi, M. V., Wilkinson, D. J., Quinlan, J. I., Mitchell, W. K., Lund,
J. N., Williams, J. P., et al. (2015). Early structural remodeling and
deuterium oxide-derived protein metabolic responses to eccentric and
concentric loading in human skeletal muscle. Physiol. Rep. 3, e12593–e12593.
doi: 10.14814/phy2.12593
Fridén, J., Sfakianos, P. N., and Hargens, A. R. (1986). Muscle soreness and
intramuscular fluid pressure: comparison between eccentric and concentric
load. J. Appl. Physiol. 61, 2175–2179.
Fridén,
J.,
Sjöström,
M.,
and
Ekblom,
B.
(1983).
Myofibrillar
damage
following intense eccentric exercise in man. Int. J. Sports Med. 4, 170–176.
doi: 10.1055/s-2008-1026030
Friedmann-Bette, B., Bauer, T., Kinscherf, R., Vorwald, S., Klute, K., Bischoff,
D., et al. (2010). Effects of strength training with eccentric overload on
muscle adaptation in male athletes. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 108, 821–836.
doi: 10.1007/s00421-009-1292-2
Fry, A. C. (2004). The role of resistance exercise intensity on muscle fibre
adaptations. Sports Med. 34, 663–679. doi: 10.2165/00007256-200434100-00004
Fry, C. S., Kirby, T. J., Kosmac, K., McCarthy, J. J., and Peterson, C. A.
(2017). Myogenic progenitor cells control extracellular matrix production
by fibroblasts during skeletal muscle hypertrophy. Cell Stem Cell 20, 56–69.
doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2016.09.010
Fujita, H., Nedachi, T., and Kanzaki, M. (2007). Accelerated de novo sarcomere
assembly by electric pulse stimulation in C2C12 myotubes. Exp. Cell Res. 313,
1853–1865. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2007.03.002
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
13
July 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 447
 Franchi et al.
Muscle Remodeling to Eccentric vs. Concentric Loading
Gans, C. (1982). Fiber architecture and muscle function. Exerc. Sport Sci. Rev. 10,
160–207. doi: 10.1249/00003677-198201000-00006
Garma, T., Kobayashi, C., Haddad, F., Adams, G. R., Bodell, P. W., and Baldwin,
K. M. (2007). Similar acute molecular responses to equivalent volumes of
isometric, lengthening, or shortening mode resistance exercise. J. Appl. Physiol.
102, 135–143. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00776.2006
Goldberg, A. L., Etlinger, J. D., Goldspink, D. F., and Jablecki, C. (1975).
Mechanism of work-induced hypertrophy of skeletal muscle. Med. Sci. Sports
7, 185–98.
Goldspink, G. (1985). Malleability of the motor system: a comparative approach. J.
Exp. Biol. 115, 375–91.
Goldspink,
G.
(1999).
Changes
in
muscle
mass
and
phenotype
and
the expression of autocrine and systemic growth factors by muscle
in
response
to
stretch
and
overload.
J.
Anat.
194(Pt
3),
323–334.
doi: 10.1046/j.1469-7580.1999.19430323.x
Gordon, A. M., Huxley, A. F., and Julian, F. J. (1966). The variation in isometric
tension with sarcomere length in vertebrate muscle fibres. J. Physiol. 184,
170–192. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1966.sp007909
Guex, K., Degache, F., Morisod, C., Sailly, M., and Millet, G. P. (2016). Hamstring
architectural and functional adaptations following long vs. short muscle length
eccentric training. Front. Physiol. 7:340. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2016.00340
Harridge, S. D. R. (2007). Plasticity of human skeletal muscle: gene expression to in
vivo function. Exp. Physiol. 92, 783–797. doi: 10.1113/expphysiol.2006.036525
Hather, B. M., Tesch, P. A., Buchanan, P., and Dudley, G. A. (1991). Influence
of eccentric actions on skeletal muscle adaptations to resistance training. Acta
Physiol. Scand. 143, 177–185. doi: 10.1111/j.1748-1716.1991.tb09219.x
Hawkins, S. A., Schroeder, E. T., Wiswell, R. A., Jaque, S. V., Marcell, T. J., and
Costa, K. (1999). Eccentric muscle action increases site-specific osteogenic
response. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 31, 1287–1292.
Heinemeier, K. M., Olesen, J. L., Haddad, F., Langberg, H., Kjaer, M., Baldwin, K.
M., et al. (2007). Expression of collagen and related growth factors in rat tendon
and skeletal muscle in response to specific contraction types. J. Physiol. 582(Pt
3), 1303–1316. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2007.127639
Herzog, W. (2014). Mechanisms of enhanced force production in lengthening
(eccentric)
muscle
contractions.
J.
Appl.
Physiol.
116,
1407–1417.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00069.2013
Herzog, W., Leonard, T. R., Joumaa, V., and Mehta, A. (2008). Mysteries of muscle
contraction. J. Appl. Biomech. 24, 1–13. doi: 10.1123/jab.24.1.1
Hessel, A. L., Lindstedt, S. L., and Nishikawa, K. C. (2017). Physiological
mechanisms of eccentric contraction and its applications: a role for the giant
titin protein. Front. Physiol. 8:70. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00070
Higbie, E. J., Cureton, K. J., Warren, G. L., and Prior, B. M. (1996). Effects of
concentric and eccentric training on muscle strength, cross-sectional area, and
neural activation. J. Appl. Physiol. 81, 2173–2181.
Hill, A. V (1938). The heat of shortening and the dynamic constants of muscle.
Proc. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 126, 136–195. doi: 10.1098/rspb.1938.0050
Holly, R. G., Barnett, J. G., Ashmore, C. R., Taylor, R. G., and Molé, P. A. (1980).
Stretch-induced growth in chicken wing muscles: a new model of stretch
hypertrophy. Am. J. Physiol. 238, C62–C71.
Hoppeler, H. (2014). Eccentric Exercise: Physiology and Application in Sport and
Rehabilitation. Taylor & Francis.
Hoppeler, H. (2016). Moderate load eccentric exercise; a distinct novel training
modality. Front. Physiol. 7:483. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2016.00483
Hoppeler, H., Baum, O., Lurman, G., and Mueller, M. (2011). Molecular
mechanisms of muscle plasticity with exercise. Compr. Physiol. 1, 1383–1412.
doi: 10.1002/cphy.c100042
Hortobágyi, T., Dempsey, L., Fraser, D., Zheng, D., Hamilton, G., Lambert, J., et al.
(2000). Changes in muscle strength, muscle fibre size and myofibrillar gene
expression after immobilization and retraining in humans. J. Physiol. 524(Pt
1), 293–304. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7793.2000.00293.x
Hortobágyi, T., Hill, J. P., Houmard, J. A., Fraser, D. D., Lambert, N. J., and Israel,
R. G. (1996). Adaptive responses to muscle lengthening and shortening in
humans. J. Appl. Physiol. 80, 765–772.
Huxley, A. F. (1957). Muscle structure and theories of contraction. Prog. Biophys.
Biophys. Chem. 7, 255–318.
Huxley, A. F., and Simmons, R. M. (1971). Proposed mechanism of force
generation in striated muscle. Nature 233, 533–538. doi: 10.1038/233533a0
Hyldahl, R. D., Chen, T. C., and Nosaka, K. (2017). Mechanisms and mediators
of the skeletal muscle repeated bout effect. Exerc. Sport Sci. Rev. 45, 24–33.
doi: 10.1249/JES.0000000000000095
Hyldahl, R. D., and Hubal, M. J. (2013). Lengthening our perspective:
morphological, cellular and molecular responses to eccentric exercise. Muscle
Nerve. 49, 155–170. doi: 10.1002/mus.24077
Hyldahl, R. D., Nelson, B., Xin, L., Welling, T., Groscost, L., Hubal, M. J., et al.
(2015). Extracellular matrix remodeling and its contribution to protective
adaptation following lengthening contractions in human muscle. FASEB J. 29,
2894–2904. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-266668
Hyldahl, R. D., Olson, T., Welling, T., Groscost, L., and Parcell, A. C. (2014).
Satellite cell activity is differentially affected by contraction mode in human
muscle following a work-matched bout of exercise. Front. Physiol. 5:485.
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2014.00485
Isner-Horobeti, M.-E., Dufour, S. P., Vautravers, P., Geny, B., Coudeyre, E.,
and Richard, R. (2013). Eccentric exercise training: modalities, applications
and
perspectives.
Sports
Med.
43,
483–512.
doi:
10.1007/s40279-013-
0052-y
Jones, D. A., Round, J. M., and de Haan, A. (2004). Skeletal Muscle from Molecules
to Movement: A Textbook of Muscle Physiotherapy for Sport, Exercise and
Physiotherapy. Churchill Livingstone.
Jones, D. A., and Rutherford, O. M. (1987). Human muscle strength training: the
effects of three different regimens and the nature of the resultant changes. J.
Physiol. 391, 1–11. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1987.sp016721
Katz, B. (1939). The relation between force and speed in muscular contraction. J.
Physiol. 45–64. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1939.sp003756
Kawakami, Y., Abe, T., and Fukunaga, T. (1993). Muscle-fiber pennation angles
are greater in hypertrophied than in normal muscles. J. Appl. Physiol. 74,
2740–2744.
Kehat, I., Davis, J., Tiburcy, M., Accornero, F., Saba-El-Leil, M. K., Maillet, M.,
et al. (2011). Extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 regulate the balance
between eccentric and concentric cardiac growth. Circ. Res. 108, 176–183.
doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.110.231514
Kellis, E., and Baltzopoulos, V. (1998). Muscle activation differences between
eccentric and concentric isokinetic exercise. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 30,
1616–1623. doi: 10.1097/00005768-199811000-00010
Kim, S. Y., Ko, J. B., Farthing, J. P., and Butcher, S. J. (2015). Investigation of
supraspinatus muscle architecture following concentric and eccentric training.
J. Sci. Med. Sport 18, 378–382. doi: 10.1016/j.jsams.2014.05.007
Kinney, M. C., Dayanidhi, S., Dykstra, P. B., McCarthy, J. J., Peterson, C. A., and
Lieber, R. L. (2017). Reduced skeletal muscle satellite cell number alters muscle
morphology after chronic stretch but allows limited serial sarcomere addition.
Muscle Nerve 55, 384–392. doi: 10.1002/mus.25227
Komi, P. V., and Buskirk, E. R. (1972). Effect of eccentric and concentric muscle
conditioning on tension and electrical activity of human muscle. Ergonomics
15, 417–434.
Komi, P. V, Linnamo, V., Silventoinen, P., and Sillanpää, M. (2000). Force and
EMG power spectrum during eccentric and concentric actions. Med. Sci. Sports
Exerc. 32, 1757–1762. doi: 10.1097/00005768-200010000-00015
Konow, N., and Roberts, T. J. (2015). The series elastic shock absorber: tendon
elasticity modulates energy dissipation by muscle during burst deceleration.
Proc. Biol. Sci. 282:20142800. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2014.2800
Kostek, M. C., Chen, Y.-W., Cuthbertson, D. J., Shi, R., Fedele, M. J.,
and Esser, K. A., et al. (2007). Gene expression responses over 24 h to
lengthening and shortening contractions in human muscle: major changes
in CSRP3, MUSTN1, SIX1, and FBXO32. Physiol. Genomics 31, 42–52.
doi: 10.1152/physiolgenomics.00151.2006
Lieber, R. L., and Fridén, J. (2000). Functional and clinical significance
of
skeletal
muscle
architecture.
Muscle
Nerve
23,
1647–1666.
doi: 10.1002/1097-4598(200011)23:11&lt;1647::AID-MUS1&gt;3.0.CO;2-M
Lombardi, V., and Piazzesi, G. (1990). The contractile response during steady
lengthening of stimulated frog muscle fibres. J. Physiol. 431, 141–171.
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1990.sp018324
Lundberg, T. R., Fernandez-Gonzalo, R., Gustafsson, T., and Tesch, P.
A. (2013). Aerobic exercise does not compromise muscle hypertrophy
response to short-term resistance training. J. Appl. Physiol. 114, 81–89.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.01013.2012
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
14
July 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 447
 Franchi et al.
Muscle Remodeling to Eccentric vs. Concentric Loading
Lynn, R., and Morgan, D. L. (1994). Decline running produces more sarcomeres in
rat vastus intermedius muscle fibers than does incline running. J. Appl. Physiol.
77, 1439–1444.
Mackey, A. L., and Kjaer, M. (2016). Connective tissue regeneration in skeletal
muscle after eccentric contraction-induced injury. J. Appl. Physiol. 122,
533–540. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00577.2016
Martineau, L. C., and Gardiner, P. F. (2001). Insight into skeletal muscle
mechanotransduction: MAPK activation is quantitatively related to tension. J.
Appl. Physiol. 91, 693–702.
Mauro, A. (1961). Satellite cell of skeletal muscle fibers. J. Biophys. Biochem. Cytol.
9, 493–495. doi: 10.1083/jcb.9.2.493
Mayhew, T. P., Rothstein, J. M., Finucane, S. D., and Lamb, R. L. (1995). Muscular
adaptation to concentric and eccentric exercise at equal power levels. Med. Sci.
Sports Exerc. 27, 868–873.
McHugh, M. P. (2003). Recent advances in the understanding of the
repeated bout effect: the protective effect against muscle damage from a
single bout of eccentric exercise. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports 13, 88–97.
doi: 10.1034/j.1600-0838.2003.02477.x
McMahon, G. E., Morse, C. I., Burden, A., Winwood, K., and Onambélé, G. L.
(2014). Impact of range of motion during ecologically valid resistance training
protocols on muscle size, subcutaneous fat, and strength. J. Strength Cond. Res.
28, 245–255. doi: 10.1519/JSC.0b013e318297143a
Mitchell, W. K., Taivassalo, T., Narici, M. V., and Franchi, M. V. (2017).
Eccentric Exercise and the Critically Ill Patient. Front. Physiol. 8:120.
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00120
Monroy, J. A., Powers, K. L., Gilmore, L. A., Uyeno, T. A., Lindstedt, S. L., and
Nishikawa, K. C. (2012). What is the role of titin in active muscle? Exerc. Sport
Sci. Rev. 40, 73–78. doi: 10.1097/JES.0b013e31824580c6
Moore, D. R., Phillips, S. M., Babraj, J. A., Smith, K., and Rennie, M. J. (2005).
Myofibrillar and collagen protein synthesis in human skeletal muscle in young
men after maximal shortening and lengthening contractions. Am. J. Physiol.
Endocrinol. Metab. 288, E1153–E1159. doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00387.2004
Moore, D. R., Young, M., and Phillips, S. M. (2012). Similar increases in muscle
size and strength in young men after training with maximal shortening or
lengthening contractions when matched for total work. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol.
112, 1587–1592. doi: 10.1007/s00421-011-2078-x
Morgan, D. L., and Talbot, J. A. (2002). The addition of sarcomeres in series is the
main protective mechanism following eccentric exercise. J. Mech. Med. Biol. 2,
421–431. doi: 10.1142/S0219519402000423
Morgan, R. S. (1977). Actin rotates as myosin translates. J. Theor. Biol. 67, 769–771.
doi: 10.1016/0022-5193(77)90261-2
Narici, M. (1999). Human skeletal muscle architecture studied in vivo by
non-invasive imaging techniques: functional significance and applications.
J. Electromyogr. Kinesiol. 9, 97–103. doi: 10.1016/s1050-6411(98)00041-8
Narici, M. V, Binzoni, T., Hiltbrand, E., Fasel, J., Terrier, F., and Cerretelli, P.
(1996). In vivo human gastrocnemius architecture with changing joint angle
at rest and during graded isometric contraction. 496(Pt 1), 287–297.
Narici, M. V, Roi, G. S., Landoni, L., Minetti, A. E., and Cerretelli, P. (1989).
Changes in force, cross-sectional area and neural activation during strength
training and detraining of the human quadriceps. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. Occup.
Physiol. 59, 310–319. doi: 10.1007/BF02388334
Narici, M., Franchi, M., and Maganaris, C. (2016). Muscle structural assembly and
functional consequences. J. Exp. Biol. 219, 276–284. doi: 10.1242/jeb.128017
Nickols-Richardson, S. M., Miller, L. E., Wootten, D. F., Ramp, W. K., and
Herbert, W. G. (2007). Concentric and eccentric isokinetic resistance training
similarly increases muscular strength, fat-free soft tissue mass, and specific
bone mineral measurements in young women. Osteoporos. Int. 18, 789–796.
doi: 10.1007/s00198-006-0305-9
Nishikawa, K. C., Monroy, J. A., Uyeno, T. E., Yeo, S. H., Pai, D. K., and Lindstedt,
S. L. (2012). Is titin a “winding filament”? A new twist on muscle contraction.
Proc. Biol. Sci. 279, 981–990. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2011.1304
Noorkõiv, M., Nosaka, K., and Blazevich, A. J. (2014). Neuromuscular adaptations
associated with knee joint angle-specific force change. Med. Sci. Sport. Exerc.
46, 1525–1537. doi: 10.1249/MSS.0000000000000269
Paddon-Jones,
D.,
Lonergan,
A.,
Abernethy,
P.,
and
Leveritt,
M.
(2001).
Adaptation
to
chronic
eccentric
exercise
in
humans:
the
influence of contraction velocity. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 85, 466–471.
doi: 10.1007/s004210100467
Phillips, S. M., Tipton, K. D., Aarsland, A., Wolf, S. E., and Wolfe, R. R. (1997).
Mixed muscle protein synthesis and breakdown after resistance exercise in
humans. Am. J. Physiol. 273, E99–E107.
Potier, T. G., Alexander, C. M., and Seynnes, O. R. (2009). Effects of eccentric
strength training on biceps femoris muscle architecture and knee joint range of
movement. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 105, 939–944. doi: 10.1007/s00421-008-0980-7
Proske, U., and Morgan, D. L. (2001). Muscle damage from eccentric exercise:
mechanism, mechanical signs, adaptation and clinical applications. J. Physiol.
537(Pt 2), 333–345. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7793.2001.00333.x
Rahbek, S. K., Farup, J., Møller, A. B., Vendelbo, M. H., Holm, L.,
Jessen, N., et al. (2014). Effects of divergent resistance exercise contraction
mode and dietary supplementation type on anabolic signalling, muscle
protein synthesis and muscle hypertrophy. Amino Acids 46, 2377–2392.
doi: 10.1007/s00726-014-1792-1
Rahnert, J. A., and Burkholder, T. J. (2013). High-frequency electrical stimulation
reveals a p38-mTOR signaling module correlated with force-time integral. J.
Exp. Biol. 216, 2619–2631. doi: 10.1242/jeb.080705
Rayment, I., Holden, H. M., Whittaker, M., Yohn, C. B., Lorenz, M., Holmes, K.
C., et al. (1993). Structure of the actin-myosin complex and its implications for
muscle contraction. Science 261, 58–65. doi: 10.1126/science.8316858
Reeves, N. D., Maganaris, C. N., Longo, S., and Narici, M. V (2009).
Differential adaptations to eccentric versus conventional resistance training
in older humans. Exp. Physiol. 94, 825–833. doi: 10.1113/expphysiol.2009.
046599
Roig, M., O’Brien, K., Kirk, G., Murray, R., McKinnon, P., Shadgan, B., et al. (2009).
The effects of eccentric versus concentric resistance training on muscle strength
and mass in healthy adults: a systematic review with meta-analysis. Br. J. Sports
Med. 43, 556–568. doi: 10.1136/bjsm.2008.051417
Rome, L. C., Cook, C., Syme, D. A., Connaughton, M. A., Ashley-Ross, M.,
Klimov, A., et al. (1999). Trading force for speed: why superfast crossbridge
kinetics leads to superlow forces. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 96, 5826–5831.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.96.10.5826
Seger, J. Y., Arvidsson, B., and Thorstensson, A. (1998). Specific effects of eccentric
and concentric training on muscle strength and morphology in humans. Eur. J.
Appl. Physiol. Occup. Physiol. 79, 49–57.
Seynnes, O. R., de Boer, M., and Narici, M. V (2007). Early skeletal muscle
hypertrophy and architectural changes in response to high-intensity resistance
training. J. Appl. Physiol. 102, 368–373. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.0078
9.2006
Shepstone, T. N., Tang, J. E., Dallaire, S., Schuenke, M. D., Staron, R. S., and
Phillips, S. M. (2005). Short-term high- vs. low-velocity isokinetic lengthening
training results in greater hypertrophy of the elbow flexors in young men. J.
Appl. Physiol. 98, 1768–1776. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.01027.2004
Smith, R. C., and Rutherford, O. M. (1995). The role of metabolites in strength
training. I. A comparison of eccentric and concentric contractions. Eur. J. Appl.
Physiol. Occup. Physiol. 71, 332–336. doi: 10.1007/BF00240413
Tesch, P. A., Fernandez-Gonzalo, R., and Lundberg, T. R. (2017). Clinical
applications of iso-inertial, eccentric-overload (YoYoTM) resistance exercise.
Front. Physiol. 8:241. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00241
Tesch, P. A., Thorsson, A., and Colliander, E. B. (1990). Effects of eccentric
and concentric resistance training on skeletal muscle substrates, enzyme
activities
and
capillary
supply.
Acta
Physiol.
Scand.
140,
575–580.
doi: 10.1111/j.1748-1716.1990.tb09035.x
Timmins, R. G., Ruddy, J. D., Presland, J., Maniar, N., Shield, A. J., Williams,
M. D., et al. (2016a). Architectural changes of the biceps femoris long head
after concentric or eccentric training. Med. Sci. Sport Exerc. 48, 499–508.
doi: 10.1249/MSS.0000000000000795
Timmins, R. G., Shield, A. J., Williams, M. D., Lorenzen, C., and Opar,
D. A. (2016b). Architectural adaptations of muscle to training and
injury: a narrative review outlining the contributions by fascicle length,
pennation angle and muscle thickness. Br. J. Sports Med. 50, 1467–1472.
doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2015-094881
VanBuren, P., Waller, G. S., Harris, D. E., Trybus, K. M., Warshaw, D. M., and
Lowey, S. (1994). The essential light chain is required for full force production
by skeletal muscle myosin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 91, 12403–12407.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.91.26.12403
Verrecchia, F., Chu, M.-L., and Mauviel, A. (2001). Identification of novel
TGF- /Smad gene targets in dermal fibroblasts using a combined cDNA
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
15
July 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 447
 Franchi et al.
Muscle Remodeling to Eccentric vs. Concentric Loading
microarray/promoter
transactivation
approach.
J.
Biol.
Chem.
276,
17058–17062. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M100754200
Vikne,
H.,
Refsnes,
P.
E.,
Ekmark,
M.,
Medbø,
J.
I.,
Gundersen,
V.,
and Gundersen, K. (2006). Muscular performance after concentric and
eccentric exercise in trained men. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 38, 1770–1781.
doi: 10.1249/01.mss.0000229568.17284.ab
Wernbom, M., Augustsson, J., and Thomeé, R. (2007). The influence of
frequency, intensity, volume and mode of strength training on whole
muscle
cross-sectional
area
in
humans.
Sports
Med.
37,
225–264.
doi: 10.2165/00007256-200737030-00004
Westing, S. H., Cresswell, A. G., and Thorstensson, A. (1991). Muscle
activation during maximal voluntary eccentric and concentric knee extension.
Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. Occup. Physiol. 62, 104–108. doi: 10.1007/BF006
26764
Westing, S. H., Seger, J. Y., Karlson, E., and Ekblom, B. (1988). Eccentric and
concentric torque-velocity characteristics of the quadriceps femoris in man.
Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. Occup. Physiol. 58, 100–104. doi: 10.1007/BF006
break36611
Williams, P. E. (1990). Use of intermittent stretch in the prevention of serial
sarcomere loss in immobilised muscle. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 49, 316–317.
doi: 10.1136/ard.49.5.316
Williams, P. E., Catanese, T., Lucey, E. G., and Goldspink, G. (1988). The
importance of stretch and contractile activity in the prevention of connective
tissue accumulation in muscle. J. Anat. 158, 109–114.
Williams, P. E., and Goldspink, G. (1971). Longitudinal growth of striated muscle
fibres. J. Cell Sci. 9, 751–767.
Wretman, C., Lionikas, A., Widegren, U., Lännergren, J., Westerblad, H.,
and Henriksson, J. (2001). Effects of concentric and eccentric contractions
on phosphorylation of MAPK(erk1/2) and MAPK(p38) in isolated rat
skeletal muscle. J. Physiol. 535, 155–164. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7793.2001.
00155.x
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2017 Franchi, Reeves and Narici. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this
journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution
or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
16
July 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 447
