 PRIMARY CARE & HEALTH SERVICES SECTION
Original Research Article
Patients’ Perspectives on Tapering of Chronic
Opioid Therapy: A Qualitative Study
Joseph W. Frank, MD, MPH,*,† Cari Levy, MD,
PhD,†,‡ Daniel D. Matlock, MD, MPH,*,§ Susan L.
Calcaterra, MD, MPH,*,¶ Shane R. Mueller,
MSW,*,k,kj Stephen Koester, PhD,kj,** and Ingrid A.
Binswanger, MD, MPH*,k
*Division of General Internal Medicine, University of
Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado;
†VA Eastern Colorado Health Care System, Denver,
Colorado; ‡Division of Health Care Policy and
Research, University of Colorado School of Medicine,
Aurora, Colorado; §Adult and Child Center for
Outcomes Research and Delivery Science
(ACCORDS), University of Colorado, Aurora,
Colorado; ¶Denver Health Medical Center, Denver,
Colorado; kInstitute for Health Research, Kaiser
Permanente, Denver, Colorado; kjDepartment of
Health and Behavioral Sciences, University of
Colorado Denver, Denver, Colorado; **Department of
Anthropology, University of Colorado Denver, Denver,
Colorado, USA
Correspondence to: Joseph W. Frank, MD, MPH,
Division of General Internal Medicine, University of
Colorado School of Medicine, 8th floor, Academic
Office 1, Mailstop B180, 12631 E. 17th Avenue,
Aurora, CO 80045, USA. Tel: 303-724-7909; Fax:
303-724-2270; E-mail: joseph.frank@ucdenver.edu.
Funding sources: This study was supported by the
Small Grants Program at the Division of General
Internal Medicine at the University of Colorado School
of Medicine, which was not involved in the design,
conduct, or reporting of the study, or in the decision
to submit the manuscript for publication. Dr. Joseph
W. Frank was supported by the Division of General
Internal Medicine at the University of Colorado School
of Medicine and by the VA Eastern Colorado Health
Care System. Dr. Binswanger was supported by the
National Institute on Drug Abuse of the National
Institutes of Health under Award Number
R34DA035952.
Conflicts of interest: The authors report no conflicts of
interest, including relevant financial interests, activi-
ties, relationships, and affiliations.
Disclosure: The content is solely the responsibility of
the authors and does not necessarily represent the of-
ficial views of the National Institutes of Health.
Abstract
Objective.
There is inadequate evidence of long-
term benefit and growing evidence of the risks of
chronic opioid therapy (COT). Opioid dose reduc-
tion, or opioid tapering, may reduce these risks but
may also worsen pain and quality of life. Our objec-
tive was to explore patients’ perspectives on opioid
tapering.
Design.
Qualitative study using in-person, semi-
structured interviews.
Setting and Patients.
English-speaking, adult pri-
mary care patients (N 5 24) in three Colorado health
care systems.
Methods.
Interviews were audio recorded, tran-
scribed, and analyzed in ATLAS.ti. We used a team-
based, mixed inductive and deductive approach
guided by the Health Belief Model. We iteratively re-
fined emergent themes with input from a multidisci-
plinary team.
Results.
Participants had a mean age of 52 years
old, were 46% male and 79% white. Six participants
(25%) were on COT and not tapering, 12 (50%) were
currently tapering COT, and 6 (25%) had discontin-
ued COT. Emergent themes were organized in four
domains: risks, barriers, facilitators, and benefits.
Patients perceived a low risk of overdose and priori-
tized the more immediate risk of increased pain
with opioid tapering. Barriers included a perceived
lack of effectiveness of nonopioid options and fear
V
C 2016 American Academy of Pain Medicine. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
1838
Pain Medicine 2016; 17: 1838–1847
doi: 10.1093/pm/pnw078
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/painmedicine/article-abstract/17/10/1838/2270351 by guest on 03 June 2019
 of opioid withdrawal. Among patients with opioid
tapering experience, social support and a trusted
health care provider facilitated opioid tapering.
These patients endorsed improved quality of life fol-
lowing tapering.
Conclusions.
Efforts to support opioid tapering
should elicit patients’ perceived barriers and seek
to build on relationships with family, peers, and pro-
viders to facilitate tapering. Future work should
identify patient-centered, feasible strategies to sup-
port tapering of COT.
Key Words. Chronic pain; Opioids; Primary care
Introduction
In the past decade, opioid prescribing has increased
more than six-fold in the United States [1]. Roughly
9 million Americans, 3% of the U.S. population, report
long-term medical use of opioid medications despite
a lack of evidence of their long-term effectiveness
[2,3]. Meanwhile, there is growing evidence of opioid-
related harms, and risks appear to increase in a dose-
dependent manner [4–6]. Prior observational studies
have shown a 92–363% increase in risk of opioid-related
overdose at doses above 50 mg morphine equivalent
dose (MED) [7–9].
In response, health care providers, health systems, and
public health officials have sought to identify and inter-
vene on high-risk opioid prescribing to prevent adverse
events. Opioid dose may be used as a surrogate for
risk, though there is not currently consensus on a defini-
tion of high-dose opioid prescribing. In Washington
state, an opioid dose threshold of 120 mg MED was es-
tablished in 2007 as a trigger for additional monitoring
by
providers
[10].
In
2013,
the
Veterans
Health
Administration launched the Opioid Safety Initiative, a
nationwide effort to promote safe, effective use of opioid
medications, which mandates a facility-level review of
the treatment plans of patients receiving opioid therapy
at a daily dose above 200 mg MED [11]. In addition to
opioid dose, use of risk assessment tools such as urine
drug testing and prescription drug monitoring program
data is increasingly common and will further identify
high-risk opioid prescribing [12].
Expert guidelines recommend dose reduction or discon-
tinuation when risks related to opioid medications out-
weigh benefits, but there is little evidence to guide this
recommendation [13,14]. Two systematic reviews have
included a total of five studies, and both noted insuffi-
cient evidence to draw conclusions [3,15]. A recent nar-
rative review of the evidence on opioid dose reduction,
or opioid tapering, identified multiple evidence gaps
[16]. In the absence of strong evidence, the authors of
this review proposed that patient engagement may be
more important than any specific tapering protocol.
However, little is known about patients’ perspectives on
opioid tapering. To advance our understanding of pa-
tients’ perspectives on opioid tapering, we conducted a
qualitative study to explore patients’ perspectives on
risks, barriers, facilitators, and potential benefits of opi-
oid tapering and to contrast perspectives of patients
with and without experience tapering chronic opioid
therapy (COT).
Methods
Study Design
We conducted a qualitative study using in-person, in-
depth, semistructured interviews with patients on or re-
cently discontinued from COT for chronic, noncancer
pain. A qualitative study design was chosen to facilitate
a detailed examination of patients’ perspectives. The
study
was
approved
by
the
Colorado
Multiple
Institutional Review Board at the University of Colorado.
Written informed consent was obtained from all study
participants.
Setting and Participants
We recruited participants from primary care clinics affili-
ated with three health systems in Denver, Colorado: 1)
an academic medical center, 2) an urban, safety-net
medical center, and 3) a Veterans Affairs medical cen-
ter. At the time of recruitment, all three health care sys-
tems were in the process of implementing programs to
support panel management and promote opioid risk as-
sessment by providers, but none had instituted system-
level mandatory opioid tapering programs. We used a
purposive sampling strategy to recruit patients repre-
senting three distinct phases of COT: 1) Currently on
opioid medications without tapering, 2) currently tapering
COT, and 3) discontinued COT within the past 3 years.
We defined COT as a self-reported duration of opioid
therapy of � 6 months consistent with prior qualitative
work in this content area [17] and defined opioid tapering
status by self-report. This purposive sampling strategy
also sought to achieve a diverse sample according to
gender and age. Patients were included if they were� 18
years old, English-speaking, and able to provide informed
consent. Patients were excluded if they had a primary
pain complaint related to a cancer diagnosis.
Patients were recruited using flyers posted in patient wait-
ing areas at each study site and through provider referral.
The study coordinator screened the eligibility of patients
by phone. Recruitment continued until thematic saturation
was reached, meaning additional interviews yielded no
substantial new information about themes [18].
Data Collection
We developed and iteratively refined the interview guide
to optimize the clarity of interview questions. Consistent
with study objectives and established qualitative research
methods, the interview guide was composed of broad,
open-ended questions to elicit personal thoughts and
Patients’ Perspectives on Opioid Tapering
1839
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/painmedicine/article-abstract/17/10/1838/2270351 by guest on 03 June 2019
 experiences regarding chronic pain management gener-
ally and tapering or discontinuation of COT specifically.
The interview guide explored constructs from several the-
oretical frameworks, including the Health Belief Model, a
commonly used framework in health education and
health behavior change, social cognitive theory, and the
transtheoretical model [19]. The Health Belief Model in-
cludes constructs such as perceived risk, perceived bar-
riers,
and
perceived
benefits
of
behavior
change
(Table 1). The interview guide also prompted discussion
of concepts including self-efficacy (social cognitive theory)
and readiness to change (transtheoretical model) [19].
Two experienced qualitative interviewers conducted in-per-
son, semistructured interviews in private settings lasting
30–90minutes from August 2014 through April 2015.
Interviews were digitally recorded,
professionally tran-
scribed verbatim, and entered into ATLAS.ti, version 7, for
coding (ATLAS.ti GmbH, Berlin, Germany). Participants
also completed a short survey with demographic ques-
tions and questions regarding current opioid medication
use. We calculated daily opioid dose in morphine equiva-
lents using an accepted algorithm [20]. Participants were
provided a $25 incentive in the form of a grocery gift card.
Qualitative Analysis
Data were analyzed using a mixed deductive and inductive
approach [21]. A deductive, or “top down,” approach was
used to interpret data in the context of our theoretical
frameworks, existing literature on related topics such as
COT and pain self-management, and on the study team’s
prior knowledge [17,22–25]. We used an inductive, or
“bottom up,” approach to identify new themes that
emerged from the data, including unanticipated relevant
findings. To develop an initial codebook, two study authors
(JWF, SRM) and an analyst coded a subset of three over-
lapping
interviews.
Using
an
iterative,
multidisciplinary
team-based approach throughout the study, we reviewed
the codes to ensure their completeness and contextual
validity. Open coding, concurrent with study team discus-
sion and data reimmersion, was followed by axial coding
and integration to establish emergent themes [26]. We
coded data for both manifest content meaning (surface
content; i.e., patients explicitly identified barriers) and latent
content meaning (underlying meaning; i.e., patients de-
scribed experiences that served as barriers) [21]. The
study team determined thematic saturation was reached
once additional interview data prompted no changes to
the codebook and no new themes emerged. In this manu-
script, we present emergent themes organized within do-
mains of the Health Belief Model (i.e., perceived risk,
barriers, facilitators, and benefits).
We used several strategies to assure qualitative rigor
and the trustworthiness of study findings [27,28]. To en-
sure credibility, we employed iterative questioning during
interviews, debriefed interviewers frequently during data
collection, and identified disconfirming cases for focused
analysis. To optimize transferability, we performed a de-
tailed literature review to inform our interview guide. We
interviewed participants both during and after COT and
across three health care systems to ensure we repre-
sented a broad range of perspectives. To ensure de-
pendability, an audit trail was kept throughout the
analytic process. Finally, to ensure confirmability, we
regularly triangulated our findings across a multidiscipli-
nary study team consisting of a primary care physician,
an addiction medicine physician, two palliative care phy-
sicians, and a medical anthropologist.
Results
We interviewed 24 patients with experience with COT
for chronic, noncancer pain. Participants had a mean
age of 52 and ranged from 31–73 years old. They were
46% male and 79% white (Table 2). Six patients were
taking opioid medications on an ongoing basis, 12 pa-
tients reported current opioid tapering, and six had dis-
continued COT. From this range of perspectives, we
identified emergent themes in four domains: perceived
risks, barriers, facilitators, and benefits. All participants
described their perceptions of the risks and barriers to
opioid tapering, while data on perceived facilitators and
benefits of opioid tapering were collected from patients
with opioid tapering experience.
Perceived Risks of Opioid Medications and of Opioid
Tapering
Low Perceived Risk of Overdose
When asked about specific concerns related to opioid
medications, patients were generally aware of opioid
Table 1
Sample questions from interview guide, organized by domains from the Health Belief Model
Domain of interest
Sample questions
Perceived risk
Tell me about the decision to start taking these medications. What factors were most impor-
tant to you?
Perceived barriers
and facilitators
What would need to change before you would consider decreasing your opioid dose? How
confident are you that you would be able to decrease your dose? Why?
Tell us about the time when you first discussed decreasing your opioid dose with your doc-
tor? How did this go? How could it have gone better?
Perceived benefits
How has your life been different since you began decreasing your opioid dose?
Frank et al.
1840
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/painmedicine/article-abstract/17/10/1838/2270351 by guest on 03 June 2019
 overdose as a potential complication but did not per-
ceive themselves to be at risk. The majority of patients
described a long history of opioid medication use without
prior overdose and cited this as evidence of their ability
to safely take opioid medications. Patients attributed
overdoses to others using opioids in risky ways or over-
dosing intentionally rather than accidentally.
52-year-old male, on opioid medication without ta-
pering: “Absolutely not. Overdose? No. I’m very
mature, very conscious, very intelligent as far as
adhering.”
53-year-old male, on opioid medication without ta-
pering: “The concern is that if they increase my opi-
oid dosage, I could stop breathing. It’s ridiculous.”
Among patients who were currently tapering or who
had discontinued opioid medications, none described
overdose
risk
as
a
primary
motivation
for
opioid
tapering.
Interviewer: “Did those other things like risk of over-
dose influence your decision to taper at all?”
54-year-old female, tapering opioid medications:
“No, not at all. I was so isolated ... I’ve lost all my
friends. I’ve a very small life now. With my beliefs and
everything, dying isn’t such a bad thing, you know?”
Pain in the Present Trumps Opioid Risks in the
Future
Patients interpreted the potential risks of opioid medica-
tions in the context of more immediate risks of pain it-
self. Patients were aware of potential adverse effects,
and many had experienced one or more side effects
such as constipation or drowsiness. Potential future ad-
verse effects were described as less salient than the
risk of increased pain with decreased opioid medication.
This trade-off was voiced by patients both with and
without tapering experience, and was most evident in
descriptions of initiating COT.
53-year-old female, discontinued opioid medications:
“I like to research everything, but the pain was so
severe I didn’t care about anything else .. . I don’t
think that people actually consider the side effects and
what not when it comes to something like that. I
think that they just want the pain to go away.”
46-year-old female, tapering opioid medications: “I
don’t think people in chronic pain think about long
term. We are basically, how do I get through to-
day? I just gotta get through today.”
54-year-old female, tapering opioid medications:
“[My provider] said you could die any time, and my
husband and I said, well, we realize that, but because
of the pain, you know, we were willing to take that
risk that I would die from the narcotic medication.”
Perceived Barriers to Opioid Tapering
Pessimism About Nonopioid Options to Manage
Pain
Patients described extensive experience with both opioid
and nonopioid pain therapies. Patients identified subopti-
mal effectiveness with previous trials of alternative methods
for pain control such as nonopioid medications, injections,
and surgery. This led to pessimism about their ability to
adequately manage pain without opioid medications.
73-year-old female, tapering opioid medications: “I
needed help desperately by the time [hydrocodone]
was prescribed for me ... I had taken ibuprofen,
Aleve, everything over the counter, and it did nothing
to help me at all. So I knew I needed more help,
stronger help.”
58-year-old male, on opioid medication without taper-
ing:
“Throughout
my
life,
the
doctors
have
done
Table 2
Characteristics of participants
Age (years), mean (SD)
52 (10)
Male sex, n (%)
11 (46%)
White race, n (%)
19 (79%)
Status of opioid therapy, n (%)
Ongoing
6 (25%)
Tapering
12 (50%)
Discontinued
6 (25%)
Study site, n (%)
Academic medical center
10 (42%)
Safety net hospital
7 (29%)
Veterans Affairs medical center
7 (29%)
Education, n (%)
High school or GED
5 (21%)
Some college
7 (29%)
College graduate
12 (50%)
Primary pain complaint, n (%)
Back or neck pain
15 (63%)
Other musculoskeletal pain
3 (13%)
Fibromyalgia
4 (17%)
Other
2 (8%)
Duration of pain (years)
Mean (SD)
11.3 (7.9)
Range
1–30
Duration of opioid therapy (years)
Mean (SD)
7.7 (5.9)
Range
0.5–21
Opioid dose (mg MED)*
Median (IQR)
70 (30–165)
Range
15–1845
MED ¼ Morphine equivalent dose. *Patients on opioid medica-
tions reported daily dose at time of interview, and patients
who had discontinued opioid medications reported daily dose
prior to opioid tapering.
Patients’ Perspectives on Opioid Tapering
1841
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/painmedicine/article-abstract/17/10/1838/2270351 by guest on 03 June 2019
 everything, trying to get me to exercise, to stretch,
things that shocked my muscles ... In the ‘70s, they
put some kind of body cast on me that I wore for
months
...
Gosh,
I’ve
had
everything.
I’ve
went
through all the minor ones like Tylenols and aspirins
and stuff, you know ... I’ve went through a few years
on Morphine. I’ve went to a time on Oxycodone and
OxyContin, Vicodin, Tramadol. Now I’m on Fentanyl
patches.”
Patients who were tapering or had discontinued opioid
medications described similar experiences with nonop-
ioid modalities, but still viewed them as essential to their
ability to undertake opioid tapering.
51-year-old male, tapering opioid medications: “I
have a tremendous fear in a doctor saying I want
you to taper off the methadone and get totally off
the methadone with no alternative whatsoever. I
think that would be an irrational decision by a doc-
tor, and I probably wouldn’t take that advice.”
Fear of Opioid Withdrawal
Past experiences of opioid withdrawal produced fear
and anxiety about future opioid tapering or discontinua-
tion. Of note, there were several disconfirming cases in
patients who described little or no opioid withdrawal
symptoms during tapering.
58-year-old male, on opioid medication without ta-
pering: “I don’t think they’re aware of how bad
withdrawals
are.
I
mean
there’s
vomiting
bile.
There’s stomach cramps, there’s the cold shakes
and fever . . . I mean it’s pretty bad.”
53-year-old female, tapering opioid medications: “I also
had lots of fears about let’s say there was an apoca-
lypse in our society, what would happen to me?
Where would I get my medication from? What was
going to happen, you know? I would get so sick not
having those drugs ‘cause I was physically dependent
on these drugs, you know. It’s a very insecure feeling.”
In contrast, there were several patients who described
little or no opioid withdrawal symptoms during tapering.
60-year-old male, discontinued opioid medications:
“I didn’t stop under doctor’s orders or discussion
or anything. I just got up one day and I’m done.
Instead of taking four, I took three and I did that
for a couple of weeks and then I took two and
then I took one. I never felt any discomfort or anxi-
ety or anything so . . . it worked for me.”
Perceived Facilitators of Opioid Tapering
The Importance of Social Support
Among patients who were currently tapering or had dis-
continued opioid medications, social support was de-
scribed as critical for initiating and sustaining a long,
difficult process. One woman described her husband’s
important role in helping her identify symptoms such as
poor self-care as side effects of her opioid medications.
53-year-old
female,
tapering
opioid
medications:
“The pills turned out horribly for me . . . I wasn’t
caring for myself. I wasn’t bathing. I was sleeping
all the time . . . Everything in my life was such a
mess, and my husband was, you know, really wor-
ried about me . . . My husband [told me] that this is
bad. This is really bad. You’re not doing well.”
Another patient described the support she received
from her family to manage the day-to-day decision-mak-
ing while tapering high-dose opioid therapy.
53-year-old female, discontinued opioid medications:
“It was very helpful ‘cause there were times when I
said I really wanted to go down, you know, like 2mg,
and my husband would say, ‘No, that’s not a good
idea . .. You’re at 10mg. Let’s not bump it to 8 after
just 2 days. Let’s wait and see what happens’. I
knew I wasn’t making good decisions [while on opioid
medications] so my family was instrumental [during
opioid tapering]. So, it wasn’t just, you know, me be-
ing a strong woman and doing this. It was partnering
with my provider, and my family being involved.”
Several patients identified the potential benefits of sup-
port from other patients who could share their experi-
ences
with
opioid
tapering.
One
participant
with
experience with a chronic pain support group noted:
62-year-old male, tapering opioid medications: “You
have to get people to people. On paper, [patients]
don’t care. They really don’t. They have to have
some one-on-one quality time with a real person
who talks about real issues . . . It’s almost like me
or you watching TV. You don’t know if that’s a real
person doing that or acting. You know, it’s gotta
be real. The doctors have got to really want to do
this with these people, and you have to really find
other patients that are willing to talk.”
Another patient described her interest in sharing her ex-
perience of an improved quality of life with other patients.
54-year-old
female,
tapering
opioid
medications:
“Like when a doctor tells them, get off these drugs,
taper off these drugs, they might think the doctor
just wants to do it to save money or save insurance
costs . . . Somebody who has been through it can
say it really, really is true. It really happened to me.
And maybe if I said, you know, I had these prob-
lems, maybe it would get them to open up. Maybe
they would say, ‘Yes, I had that problem too’.”
The Role of a Trusted Health Care Provider
Many patients who had experienced opioid tapering
identified a positive relationship with a trusted provider
as a key to their willingness to initiate and their ability to
Frank et al.
1842
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/painmedicine/article-abstract/17/10/1838/2270351 by guest on 03 June 2019
 sustain opioid tapering. Providers were praised for at-
tributes such as being supportive, nonjudgmental, flexi-
ble, and accessible. Of note, no patients who were
currently tapering or had discontinued opioid therapy
described changing providers in relation to a recom-
mendation to taper opioid medications.
53-year-old female, discontinued opioid medications:
“The best thing about it was that nobody acted like
I was a bad person because I was on these medi-
cations and was having to be going through this
really slow process of coming down off of them.”
59-year-old female, discontinued opioid medications:
“I did want to get off of them. I just didn’t want to
feel attacked with ‘Hey, this is going to happen.’ I
wanted to go down. I didn’t want to get off of it,
but I was willing to go down, and I just felt [my
health care provider] was there to help me, not to
take something from me and bite me.”
73-year-old female, tapering opioid medications: “My
doctor is very conscientious, and I respect her very
much
. . .
It
wasn’t
her
idea
to
take
me
off
OxyContin. I just quit cold turkey, which was difficult
. . . She was overjoyed. She thought it was just great
that I didn’t need [OxyContin] anymore and that the
steroid shots had helped me that much, so she was
glad and so was I. We both high-fived over it!”
Perceived Benefits of Opioid Tapering
Improved Quality of Life After Tapering
Among patients who had tapered or discontinued opioid
medications, many reported a meaningful improvement
in their quality of life. Patients often attributed this to the
resolution of problematic side effects with opioid taper-
ing. Several stressed that their pain level was largely
unchanged compared to before opioid tapering.
61-year-old female, discontinued opioid medications:
“It’s not much worse without the medication as it is
with it. After you’ve taken it for a while, it doesn’t do
any good. That’s what I’ve found. But that’s hard to
convince people of it. They look at me like I’m nuts,
but it’s true . . . I mean my pain is not any more se-
vere than it was when I was taking all that stuff.”
72-year-old female, discontinued opioid medications:
“I am more alert since I stopped taking [OxyContin],
and I need less sleep, which is a blessing. So I’m
able to do more things with my life.”
53-year-old
female,
tapering
opioid
medications:
“My family is really pleased too. Like, I’m more alert
now. They say I’m engaged more again and talking
to them. I don’t just sit there and zone out.”
These long-term positive outcomes contrast with the
short-term experience of opioid withdrawal described
above.
Additionally,
among
patients
who
were
not
currently tapering, patients did not view an improved qual-
ity of life without opioid medications as a realistic outcome.
58-year-old male, on opioid medication without ta-
pering: “I’ve been on opiates, you know, for most
of my adult life now, and I’m probably going to be
on them for the rest of my life. I mean you’re not
going to cure what’s wrong with me . . . so I’m al-
ways going to need something.”
Discussion
In this qualitative study of patients with a range of experi-
ences with tapering of COT, we identified important
themes around patients’ perceptions of the risks, benefits,
barriers to, and facilitators of opioid tapering and discontin-
uation. Overall, most patients described a difficult and of-
ten anxiety-provoking process to initiate and sustain opioid
tapering, consistent with a prior survey on patients’ views
on opioid discontinuation [29]. Patients perceived a low
risk of overdose and prioritized the more immediate risk of
increased pain with opioid tapering. Barriers to opioid ta-
pering included a perceived lack of effectiveness of nonop-
ioid options and fear of opioid withdrawal. Among patients
with opioid tapering experience, social support and a
trusted health care provider facilitated opioid tapering.
These patients endorsed improved quality of life following
tapering. These study findings can illuminate important
next steps for clinicians and researchers (Table 3).
Patients’ prioritization of the risks of COT should inform
future efforts to improve the safety of opioid medica-
tions. In response to rising rates of opioid-related over-
dose, health systems and public health officials have
taken action aimed at preventing overdose [10,30–32].
However, for patients who experienced a poor quality of
life and ability to function due to pain before initiating
COT, overdose may be perceived as a secondary con-
cern. Efforts to prevent overdose by tapering COT may
therefore be viewed as misguided or even offensive.
Such potential pitfalls in communication around chronic
pain have been documented previously [22,23]. In order
to better engage patients, patient educational materials
related to opioid safety should describe not only over-
dose but also more common adverse effects such as
functional or cognitive impairment that may negatively
affect patients’ quality of life [33].
In contrast to a low perceived risk of overdose, patients
on COT placed high importance on the more immedi-
ate, more tangible risk of worsened pain with opioid ta-
pering. In contrast, participants who had successfully
tapered
opioid
medications
described
an
improved
quality of life. The latter finding is consistent with a re-
cent narrative review, which included 8 studies of taper-
ing of COT involving more than 1500 patients. This
review reported stable or improved pain following opioid
tapering in these studies but noted the low quality of
these data [16]. Additional evidence is needed to help
providers predict patient outcomes in opioid tapering;
Patients’ Perspectives on Opioid Tapering
1843
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/painmedicine/article-abstract/17/10/1838/2270351 by guest on 03 June 2019
 such evidence will require prospective studies of opioid
tapering in real-world clinical settings among diverse pa-
tient populations [34]. In the meantime, providers can
discuss potential positive outcomes of opioid tapering
such as improved pain and function while acknowledg-
ing the limitations of current evidence. In these same
discussions,
providers must emphasize
an ongoing
commitment to patient-centered, multimodal, nonopioid
pain care during opioid tapering and should be pre-
pared to address patient concerns about modalities that
have not been effective previously [24].
Participants identified opioid withdrawal symptoms as
a source of significant anxiety and a barrier to opioid
tapering.
Opioid
withdrawal
symptoms
are
a
well-
characterized consequence of detoxification during opioid
use disorder treatment [35,36]. By comparison, the prev-
alence and optimal management of opioid withdrawal
symptoms during tapering of COT is not well known [16].
Additionally, to our knowledge, patients’ experience of
opioid withdrawal during tapering of COT has not previ-
ously been described. Our findings suggest that providers
should assess patients’ prior opioid withdrawal symptoms
and educate patients on available strategies to minimize
these symptoms. Such strategies might include individu-
alizing taper speed and prescribing medications for
symptomatic treatment of withdrawal symptoms. As there
is currently insufficient data to guide these strategies in
the context of tapering COT, additional study is needed.
Participants emphasized the critical role of support from
family, friends, and health care providers in promoting
successful opioid tapering, similar to findings from previ-
ous studies of patients’ experiences in chronic pain
management more broadly. Support from family mem-
bers has previously been identified as an important facil-
itator of successful self-management of pain [24,25].
Patient–provider interactions have been identified as
barriers but also as facilitators of positive patient out-
comes once trust is established [37,38]. These facil-
itators
highlight
the
importance
of
patient-centered
tapering plans that may include close follow-up with
providers, detailed instructions on medication changes,
and
engagement
with
other
psychosocial
support.
However, provider accessibility and flexibility, though
endorsed by participants, may be challenging given time
and resource constraints in primary care [17]. Further
study is needed to identify feasible and effective strate-
gies to provide opioid tapering support in primary care.
Additionally, patients’ descriptions of the important role
of a trusted health care provider suggests an opportu-
nity for physicians to build on this trust by assessing
and enhancing motivation to initiate a trial of opioid
tapering among patients on COT. Such efforts could
leverage trust between patients and providers and
employ
provider
skills
(i.e.,
motivational
enhance-
ment) that are already used in primary care in the con-
text of other substances such as tobacco or alcohol
[39,40].
Finally, participants identified a potential role for peer
support to support individuals considering or undertak-
ing opioid tapering, a role often referred to as “patient
navigation”
[41].
The
feasibility
of
a
peer
support
Table 3
Themes and potential implications for providers caring for patients on chronic opioid therapy
Domain
Themes
Potential implications for providers
Perceived risk
Low perceived personal risk of
opioid overdose
• Educate patients about the risk of overdose even
when medication is taken as prescribed
• Identify and emphasize outcomes that patients care
about
Risks of opioids trumped by im-
mediate risk of pain
• Acknowledge a commitment to manage pain during
and after opioid tapering
Perceived barriers
Pessimism about nonopioid
pain care after tapering
• Assess prior nonopioid modalities and barriers to re-
engagement
Past opioid withdrawal symp-
toms creates anxiety
• Assess patients’ experience with opioid withdrawal
symptoms
• Offer strategies to minimize symptoms
Perceived facilitators
Social support critical to initiat-
ing and sustaining opioid
tapering
• Identify social supports and facilitate engagement with
these individuals
• Encourage identification of potential peer mentors to
support opioid tapering
A trusted, accessible physician
integral to tapering success
• Advise patients of long-term goal to manage pain at
lowest opioid dose possible
• Assess patients’ readiness to taper opioid medications
• Provide detailed instructions during opioid tapering
Perceived benefits
Improved quality of life after
opioid tapering
• Emphasize goal of improved function and quality of life
with opioid tapering
Frank et al.
1844
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/painmedicine/article-abstract/17/10/1838/2270351 by guest on 03 June 2019
 intervention has recently been demonstrated in pain
self-management [42]. Similar approaches to facilitating
opioid tapering warrant further study.
Our findings should be interpreted in the context of the
potential limitations of our study. First, our qualitative
approach provides depth to our understanding of this
problem but may not be generalizable to all patients
and all clinical settings. We recruited patients from pri-
mary care settings in three unique health care systems
in a single metropolitan area. A majority of patients were
white and reported some college experience. Further
work should explore how these experiences vary across
racial/ethnic and socioeconomic groups. Second, all pa-
tients with experience tapering remained engaged with
their tapering provider or clinic. A risk of opioid tapering
is patient dropout [16]. Our sample therefore may not
be representative of patients who have undergone opi-
oid tapering that is nonelective (e.g., urgent discontinua-
tion in the setting of illicit substance use) or that results
in a change of provider. Third, in all qualitative studies,
findings may be influenced by the perspectives of the
investigators. We assembled a multidisciplinary team
and employed a team-based, iterative process to pro-
mote a rigorous, reflexive approach to our study ques-
tion [43]. Finally, participants provided retrospective
accounts of their experiences. Recall and social desir-
ability bias cannot be excluded.
Patient perspectives of dose reduction in COT, or opioid
tapering, describe a challenging experience requiring
substantial support, but also a process with the poten-
tial to positively impact pain, function, quality of life, and
patient–provider relationships. As providers increasingly
employ risk assessment strategies to identify high-risk
opioid prescribing and health systems increasingly scru-
tinize high-dose opioid prescribing, opioid tapering may
become an increasingly common patient experience. In
the absence of evidence on the risks and benefits of
opioid tapering, patient engagement, psychosocial sup-
port, and patient-centered care will be critical to achiev-
ing positive outcomes. Future work should seek to
understand how to optimize patient engagement and fea-
sibly support tapering of COT in primary care settings.
Authors’ Contributions
Study concept and design: all authors; data collection:
JWF, SRM; data analysis and interpretation: all authors;
drafting of the manuscript: JWF; critical revision of the
manuscript for important intellectual content: all au-
thors; approval of the final version to be published: all
authors.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge the valuable con-
tributions of all study participants. We would also like to
thank Karen Mellis for her contribution to data collection
and analysis during this project.
We presented an earlier version of the manuscript as an
oral presentation at the Society of General Internal Medicine
Annual Meeting on April 24, 2015, in Toronto, Canada.
References
1 Paulozzi L, Baldwin G, Franklin G, et al. CDC grand
rounds:
Prescription
drug
overdoses–a
U.S.
epidemic.
Centers
for
Disease
Control
and
Prevention Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
2012;61(1):10–13.
2 Boudreau D, Von Korff M, Rutter CM, et al. Trends
in long-term opioid therapy for chronic non-cancer
pain.
Pharmacoepidemiol
Drug
Saf
2009;18
(12):1166–75.
3 Chou R, Turner JA, Devine EB, et al. The effective-
ness and risks of long-term opioid therapy for
chronic pain: A systematic review for a National
Institutes
of
Health
Pathways
to
Prevention
Workshop. Ann Intern Med 2015;162(4):276–86.
4 Saunders
KW,
Dunn
KM,
Merrill
JO,
et
al.
Relationship of opioid use and dosage levels to frac-
tures in older chronic pain patients. J Gen Intern
Med 2010;25(4):310–5.
5 Edlund MJ, Martin BC, Russo JE, et al. The role of
opioid prescription in incident opioid abuse and de-
pendence among individuals with chronic noncancer
pain: The role of opioid prescription. Clin J Pain
2014;30(7):557–64.
6 Carman WJ, Su S, Cook SF, et al. Coronary heart
disease outcomes among chronic opioid and cyclo-
oxygenase-2 users compared with a general popu-
lation cohort. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2011;20
(7):754–62.
7 Dunn KM, Saunders KW, Rutter CM, et al. Opioid
prescriptions for chronic pain and overdose: A co-
hort study. Ann Intern Med 2010;152(2):85–92.
8 Bohnert
ASB,
Valenstein
M,
Bair
MJ,
et
al.
Association between opioid prescribing patterns and
opioid overdose-related deaths. JAMA 2011;305
(13):1315–21.
9 Gomes T, Mamdani MM, Dhalla IA, et al. Opioid
dose and drug-related mortality in patients with non-
malignant
pain.
Arch
Intern
Med
2011;171
(7):686–91.
10 Washington State Agency Medical Directors’ Group.
2015 Interagency guideline on prescribing opioids
for pain. Available at: http://www.agencymeddirec
tors.wa.gov/Files/2015AMDGOpioidGuideline.pdf
(accessed July 2015).
Patients’ Perspectives on Opioid Tapering
1845
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/painmedicine/article-abstract/17/10/1838/2270351 by guest on 03 June 2019
 11 Office of Public and Intergovernmental Affairs, U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs. VA initiative shows
early
promise
in
reducing
use
of
opioids
for
chronic pain. 2014. Available at: http://www.va.gov/
opa/pressrel/pressrelease.cfm?id¼2529
(accessed
July 2015).
12 Hwang CS, Turner LW, Kruszewski SP, et al.
Primary care physicians’ knowledge and attitudes
regarding prescription opioid abuse and diversion.
Clin J Pain 2016;32(4):279–84.
13 Chou R, Fanciullo GJ, Fine PG, et al. Clinical guide-
lines for the use of chronic opioid therapy in chronic
noncancer pain. J Pain 2009;10(2):113–30.
14 Veterans
Affairs/Department
of
Defense
Practice
Guideline for Management of Opioid Therapy for
Chronic
Pain.
Washington,
DC:
Department
of
Veterans Affairs, Department of Defense; 2010.
15 Windmill J, Fisher E, Eccleston C, et al. Interventions
for the reduction of prescribed opioid use in chronic
non-cancer pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013;
9:CD010323.
16 Berna C, Kulich RJ, Rathmell JP. Tapering long-
term opioid therapy in chronic noncancer pain:
Evidence and recommendations for everyday prac-
tice. Mayo Clin Proc 2015;90(6):828–42.
17 Krebs EE, Bergman AA, Coffing JM, et al. Barriers
to guideline-concordant opioid management in pri-
mary
care-a
qualitative
study.
J
Pain
2014;15
(11):1148–55.
18 Guest G, Bunce A, Johnson L. How many inter-
views are enough? An experiment with data satura-
tion and variability. Field Methods 2006;18(1):59–82.
19 Glanz K, Rimer BK, Viswanath K. Health Behavior
and
Health
Education:
Theory,
Research,
and
Practice. 4th edition. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-
Bass; 2008.
20 Washington State Agency Medical Directors’ Group.
Opioid dose calculator. Available at: http://agencymed
directors.wa.gov/mobile.html (accessed January 2016).
21 Cho
JY,
Lee
E-H.
Reducing
confusion
about
grounded theory and qualitative content analysis:
Similarities
and
differences.
Qual
Rep
2014;19
(32):1–20.
22 Matthias MS, Krebs EE, Collins LA, et al. “I’m not
abusing or anything”: Patient-physician communica-
tion about opioid treatment in chronic pain. Patient
Educ Couns 2013;93(2):197–202.
23 Matthias
MS,
Krebs
EE,
Bergman
AA,
et
al.
Communicating about opioids for chronic pain: A
qualitative study of patient attributions and the influ-
ence of the patient-physician relationship. Eur J Pain
2014;18(6):835–43.
24 Bair MJ, Matthias MS, Nyland KA, et al. Barriers
and facilitators to chronic pain self-management: A
qualitative study of primary care patients with co-
morbid musculoskeletal pain and depression. Pain
Med 2009;10(7):1280–90.
25 Matthias MS, Miech EJ, Myers LJ, et al. An ex-
panded view of self-management: Patients’ percep-
tions of education and support in an intervention for
chronic musculoskeletal pain. Pain Med 2012;13
(8):1018–28.
26 Glaser BG, Strauss AL. The Discovery of Grounded
Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research. New
Brunswick: Aldine Transaction; 2009.
27 Shenton A. Strategies for ensuring trustworthiness in
qualitative research projects. Educ Inform 2004;22:
63–75.
28 Letts L, Wilkins S, Law M, et al. Guidelines for critical
review form: Qualitative studies (Version 2.0). 2007.
Available at: https://www.canchild.ca/en/canchildresour
ces/resources/qualguide.pdf (accessed August 2015).
29 Hao J, Lucido D, Cruciani RA. Potential impact of
abrupt opioid therapy discontinuation in the man-
agement of chronic pain: A pilot study on patient
perspective. J Opioid Manag 2014;10(1):9–20.
30 Turner
JA,
Saunders
K,
Shortreed
SM,
et
al.
Chronic
opioid
therapy
risk
reduction
initiative:
Impact on urine drug testing rates and results.
J Gen Intern Med 2014;29(2):305–11.
31 Westanmo A, Marshall P, Jones E, et al. Opioid
dose reduction in a VA health care system-imple-
mentation of a primary care population-level initia-
tive. Pain Med 2015;16(5):1019–26.
32 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Injury
prevention & control: Prescription drug overdose.
2015.
Available
at:
http://www.cdc.gov/drugover
dose/ (accessed April 2015).
33 Sullivan MD, Von Korff M, Banta-Green C, et al.
Problems and concerns of patients receiving chronic
opioid therapy for chronic non-cancer pain. Pain
2010;149(2):345–53.
34 Tunis SR, Stryer DB, Clancy CM. Practical clinical
trials: Increasing the value of clinical research for
Frank et al.
1846
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/painmedicine/article-abstract/17/10/1838/2270351 by guest on 03 June 2019
 decision making in clinical and health policy. JAMA
2003;290(12):1624–32.
35 Mattick RP, Hall W. Are detoxification programmes
effective? Lancet 1996;347(8994):97–100.
36 Krantz MJ, Mehler PS. Treating opioid dependence.
Growing implications for primary care. Arch Intern
Med 2004;164(3):277–88.
37 Upshur CC, Bacigalupe G, Luckmann R. “They
don’t want anything to do with you”: Patient views
of primary care management of chronic pain. Pain
Med 2010;11(12):1791–8.
38 Bergman AA, Matthias MS, Coffing JM, Krebs EE.
Contrasting tensions between patients and pcps in
chronic pain management: A qualitative study. Pain
Med 2013;14(11):1689–97.
39 Fiore MC, Jae
´ n CR, Baker TB, et al. Treating
Tobacco
Use
and
Dependence:
2008
Update.
Clinical
Practice
Guideline.
Rockville,
MD:
U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services. Public
Health Service. 2008. Available at: http://www.ahrq.
gov/professionals/clinicians-providers/guidelines-rec
ommendations/tobacco/clinicians/update/treating_
tobacco_use08.pdf (Accessed July 2015).
40 Bertholet N, Daeppen JB, Wietlisbach V, et al.
Reduction of alcohol consumption by brief alcohol
intervention in primary care: Systematic review and
meta-analysis. Arch Intern Med 2005;165(9):986–95.
41 Paskett ED, Harrop JP, Wells KJ. Patient navigation:
An update on the state of the science. CA Cancer J
Clin 2011;61(4):237–49.
42 Matthias MS, McGuire AB, Kukla M, et al. A brief
peer support intervention for veterans with chronic
musculoskeletal pain: A pilot study of feasibility and
effectiveness. Pain Med 2015;16(1):81–7.
43 Ahern K. Ten tips for reflexive bracketing. Qual
Health Res 1999;9(3):407–11.
Patients’ Perspectives on Opioid Tapering
1847
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/painmedicine/article-abstract/17/10/1838/2270351 by guest on 03 June 2019
