 Carbon nanotube and asbestos exposures induce overlapping 
but distinct profiles of lung pathology in non-swiss Albino CF-1 
mice
Evan A. Frank1, Vinicius S. Carreira1, M. Eileen Birch2, and Jagjit S. Yadav1
1Division of Environmental Genetics and Molecular Toxicology, Department of Environmental 
Health, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio
2National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Cincinnati, Ohio
Abstract
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are emerging as important occupational and environmental toxicants 
owing to their increasing prevalence and potential to be inhaled as airborne particles. CNTs are a 
concern because of their similarities to asbestos, which include fibrous morphology, high aspect 
ratio, and biopersistence. Limitations in research models have made it difficult to experimentally 
ascertain the risk of CNT exposures to humans and whether these may lead to lung diseases 
classically associated with asbestos, such as mesothelioma and fibrosis. In this study we sought to 
comprehensively compare profiles of lung pathology in mice following repeated exposures to 
multi-wall CNTs or crocidolite asbestos (CA). We show that both exposures resulted in 
granulomatous inflammation and increased interstitial collagen, CA exposures caused 
predominantly bronchoalveolar hyperplasia whereas CNT exposures caused alveolar hyperplasia 
of type II pneumocytes (T2Ps). T2Ps isolated from CNT-exposed lungs were found to have 
upregulated proinflammatory genes, including IL-1ß, in contrast to those from CA-exposed. 
Immunostaining in tissue showed that while both toxicants increased IL-1ß protein expression in 
lung cells, T2P-specific IL-1ß increases were greater following CNT exposure. These results 
suggest related but distinct mechanisms of action by CNTs versus asbestos which may lead to 
different outcomes in the two exposure types.
Keywords
Carbon nanotubes; crocidolite asbestos; fiber toxicology; comparative pathology; lung; mouse
Introduction
Lung diseases in humans and their associated public health impacts are frequently linked to 
occupational and environmental exposures to inhaled particles (Donaldson et al, 2001, Pope 
III et al, 1995, Rom et al, 1987). Insoluble fiber particles are noted to be especially injurious 
due to their aspect ratio and biopersistence (Jones et al, 1997), the most notorious historical 
Corresponding author: Jagjit S. Yadav, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Kettering Laboratory Complex, 160 Panzeca 
Way, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA. Telephone: (513) 558-4806, Fax: (513) 558-4397, Jagjit.Yadav@uc.edu. 
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Toxicol Pathol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 02.
Published in final edited form as:
Toxicol Pathol. 2016 February ; 44(2): 211–225. doi:10.1177/0192623315620587.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 example being asbestos. Inhalational exposure to asbestos (particularly amphibole forms 
such as crocidolite) is known to cause a constellation of pathological features in the lung 
including granulomatous inflammation, alveolar septal fibrosis, epithelial hyperplasia, and 
carcinoma. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs), another class of fibrous particles, have extensive 
utility in developing modern technologies and applications (DeVolder et al, 2013). Due to 
their unique properties and wide range of applications, it is widely forecasted that CNTs will 
become ubiquitous in coming years. This has lead to dramatic increases in CNT 
manufacture and distribution, and the forecasted volume of supply makes occupational and 
environmental exposures likely. CNTs may become agitated into aerosols during 
manufacturing and sorting processes similarly to asbestos (Dahm et al, 2012, Han et al, 
2008). As these two materials share many properties, including high aspect ratio and 
biopersistence, it is speculated that they could act similarly as occupational and 
environmental lung toxicants. Aspect ratio and resistance to breakdown and clearance are 
known to be determinants in the disease-promoting potential of asbestos (Hesterberg et al, 
1996, Miller et al, 1999). Toxicological studies of CNTs have increased in recent years 
(Bonner, 2013, Porter et al, 2010, Sargent et al, 2014), but knowledge of their toxicology and 
mechanisms remains underdeveloped and the study of risk assessment of CNTs as lung 
toxicants comparable to asbestos is far from complete. Isolated studies (Poland et al, 2008, 
Takagi et al, 2008) have attempted to compare these materials in vivo, but studies of this 
kind are few and are often focused primarily on the possibility that CNTs may induce 
pleural mesothelioma similarly to asbestos. In addition, batch-to-batch variation of CNTs 
which frequently differ significantly in their physiochemical characteristics (i.e., fiber 
diameter, morphology, manufacturing vestiges such as metals) hampers consensus between 
independent projects and highlights the need for further work in assessment of CNT 
toxicology.
First-line pulmonary defenses in response to inhaled particle irritants include clearance and 
breakdown. Abiotic, insoluble particles which are resistant to breakdown are cleared by 
mucociliary transport in the conducting airways and by alveolar macrophages (AMs) in the 
bronchoalveolar regions (Oberdörster, 1988). Globular particulates such as dust and pollen 
are efficiently cleared by AMs but fiber particles which deposit in the distal airspaces are 
known to present a challenge to the clearance processes of phagocytic uptake and 
subsequent AM locomotion to the mucociliary-equipped regions of the airway (Lippman, 
1990). It is believed that the shape and aspect ratios of biopersistent fibers such as 
crocidolite asbestos cause harmful deformations of AMs attempting to take up the particles 
(Dörger et al, 2000, Nagai & Toyokuni, 2012) while the ends of fibers may puncture or 
damage cell membranes (frustrated phagocytosis). In addition to inducing mechanical strain, 
fiber particles have large surface areas which may affect cell and tissue environments with 
harmful surface reactivity such as the generation of oxidative free radicals (Shukla et al, 
2003).
Lung responses to non-biological particles which are not efficiently cleared or which irritate 
cells and surfaces include inflammation and remodeling of tissue (Oberdörster, 1995). The 
alveolar epithelium is functional in the role of gas exchange, which is possible because of 
diffusion through thin, delicate walls lined by type I pneumocytes (T1Ps). The alveolar 
epithelium is easily damaged due to the fragile nature of gas exchange areas, resulting in 
Frank et al.
Page 2
Toxicol Pathol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 acute phase inflammation. Leukocytes (chiefly neutrophils and monocytes) infiltrate 
airspaces during acute phase inflammation and may remain active beyond the resolution of 
exudative influx if insulting particles persist in the bronchoalveolar space. Acute 
inflammation gives way to fibroproliferative regeneration and reinforcing of alveolar 
structure during which type II pneumocytes (T2Ps) proliferate and differentiate into T1Ps to 
restore the integrity and functionality of gas exchange areas (Fehrenbach, 2001). In cases of 
persistent insult such as uncleared fiber particles, infiltrating leukocytes may aggregate into 
foci of granulomatous inflammation and T2Ps and other epithelial cell types may undergo 
adaptive changes to the detriment of the gas exchange capacity of alveolar lining (Snyder et 
al, 1990). In addition, inappropriate deposition of collagen may lead to fibrosis of the septal 
interstitium and reduced compliance of the alveolus. Septal interstitial fibrosis is one of the 
key clinical features in the diagnosis of asbestosis caused by chronic exposure to asbestos 
fibers (Wagner, 1997). Although descriptive in vivo studies have shown that CNT exposures 
may induce similar changes (Mercer et al, 2011, Ryman-Rasmussen et al, 2009), detailed 
studies comparing and contrasting subchronic parenchymal lung responses in CNT and 
asbestos exposures are lacking. In the present study our objective is to compare profiles of 
lung pathology induced by exposure to either CNTs or crocidolite asbestos in a mouse 
model of subchronic, repeated-dose exposure. We sought to test the hypothesis that CNT and 
asbestos exposures induce similar profiles of lung pathology, and that parallels in effector 
cell recruitment and induction of molecular mediators may account for this similarity. We 
tested the hypothesis by direct comparison of the histopathology observed in either exposure 
group, including specific endpoints for granulomatous inflammation, T2P hyperplasia, 
collagen deposition, and expression of molecular mediators in effector cells and tissues.
Methods
Chemicals and reagents
For routine work, phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), RPMI 1640, formalin, and histological 
alcohol were obtained through ThermoFisher (Pittsburgh, PA). For humane animal sacrifice, 
Euthasol was obtained from Butler-Schein (Dublin, OH). Fetal bovine serum (FBS) used 
was from Atlanta Biologicals (Flowery Branch, GA). Pluronic F127 was from Sigma 
(St.Louis, MO). Liberase TL and DNaseI were from Roche Diagnostics (Indianapolis, IN). 
Percoll was from Santa Cruz Biotech (Santa Cruz, CA). All reagents (antibodies and bead-
conjugated avidin) for magnet assisted cell sorting (MACS) were purchased from Miltenyi 
Biotech (Auburn, CA). The following antibodies were obtained from eBioscience (San 
Diego, CA): anti-CD16/32, anti-CD326-APC. The following antibodies were obtained from 
BioLegend (San Diego, CA): anti-CD45-Alexa Fluor 700, anti-Ki67, anti-IL-1ß, anti-rabbit 
IgG-DyLight 488, anti-hamster IgG-DyLight 594, and anti-rat IgG-DyLight 594. Anti-
proSPC was obtained from Millipore (Billerica, MA). TRI reagent was from Molecular 
Research Center (Cincinnati, OH). RNeasy columns were from Qiagen (Valencia, CA). qRT-
PCR was carried out using Brilliant III SYBR Green Master Mix (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA) 
and primers were synthesized by Integrated DNA Technologies (Coralville, IA).
Frank et al.
Page 3
Toxicol Pathol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Exposure materials and characterization
High-purity multi-wall CNTs were obtained from Baytubes, C150HP, lot E0006AAD08 
(Leverkusen, Germany) as a dry bulk powder form. Crocidolite asbestos (CA) was sourced 
from IITRI/NIOSH (Chicago, IL). Materials were characterized using transmission electron 
microscopy (TEM) and zeta potential. Briefly, either CNTs or CA were prepared for 
delivery by sonication for 30min intervals on ice in PBS with 1% Pluronic F127 until well-
dispersed suspensions were obtained as confirmed by brightfield microscopy. CNT 
suspensions were centrifuged at 3200rcf for 30min to pellet remaining aggregates. CA 
suspensions were not centrifuged (due to the incomplete solubility of the particles) so 
weight/volume of CA was matched to the measured concentration of centrifuged CNT stock 
suspension (as determined by weight and elemental carbon content as measured previously 
[Birch, 2004a, 2004b]). Zeta potential was measured in as-delivered suspensions using a 
Malvern Zetasizer Nano (Malvern, UK). CNTs used were further characterized for metal 
content, surface area, and thermogravimetric analysis as shown previously (Frank et al, 
2015).
Animals and Exposure
Animals were approved for use in this study by the University of Cincinnati Institutional 
Animal Care and Use Committee. Six-week old male Non-swiss Albino CF-1 mice were 
obtained from Harlan Labs (Haslett, MI) and housed for 1 week prior to exposure. 
Exposures were administered by oropharyngeal aspiration (Rao et al, 2003) under isoflurane 
anesthesia. Briefly, anesthetized animals were suspended supine and the tongue was gently 
restrained. A 50μL aliquot was placed at the back of the tongue and the nostrils were held 
until two full breaths were taken. Animals were exposed to 33μg/dose of CNT or CA in 
suspension. Exposures consisted of three doses/week (Mon, Wed, Fri) for three weeks for a 
total dose of 300μg. The control group received vehicle (PBS with 1% Pluronic F127) using 
the same dosing schedule. Animals (n=8/treatment group) rested for 5 weeks following 
exposure, allowing for a total exposure time of 8 weeks.
Sample Preparation
Animals were euthanized by i.p. Euthosol injection and exsanguinated. For animals intended 
for histology (n=8) the trachea was exposed and cannulated and the left lung was inflated 
with 10% neutral buffered formalin. The left lungs were then removed, placed into formalin, 
fixed for 24 hours, and paraffin embedded, sectioned, and stained at the Pathology Research 
Core at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center (CCHMC) in Cincinnati, OH. For 
animals intended for cell isolation (n=3), the lungs were perfused with 10mL of cold PBS 
via the right ventricle.
Lung Digestions and Cell Isolation
Digestion medium was formulated as follows: RPMI 1640 medium was supplemented with 
100U/I of penicillin/streptomycin (Thermo-Fisher), 500μg/mL DNaseI, and 250μg/mL of 
Liberase TL. Perfused lungs were inflated with 2mL of digestion medium. Then, 0.5mL of 
molten 1% low-melting agarose was immediately instilled and the chest cavity was cooled 
by ice for 2min. The lungs were excised, rinsed in PBS incubated in digestion medium for 
Frank et al.
Page 4
Toxicol Pathol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 80min at 37°C and 5% CO2 and disrupted with 100μm and 40μm mesh. Digestions were 
centrifuged for 20min at 400rcf through a discontinuous 20%/40%/70% Percoll gradient. 
The cells at the 20%/40% interphase, consisting of intact, viable T2Ps, were taken for 
MACS separations. Anti-CD45-biotin and anti-CD326(EpCam)-biotin primary antibodies 
were used to enrich for and isolate, respectively, T2Ps using anti-biotin microbeads on an 
autoMACS Pro Separator in the Research Flow Cytometry Core at CCHMC. Cells were 
40μm filtered immediately prior to each separation. Purity of T2Ps was monitored by flow 
cytometry using anti-CD45 (30-F11) and anti-CD326(EpCam, clone G8.8). Isolated cells 
were immediately pelleted and lysed in TRI reagent (Molecular Research Center, Cincinnati, 
OH) and stored at −80°C.
RNA Isolation and qRT-PCR
Total RNA from samples in TRI reagent was isolated by phase separation. The yields were 
cleaned up using RNeasy Plus columns (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). One-step qRT-PCR was 
carried out using Brilliant III SYBR Green Master Mix with 10ng of isolated RNA/reaction. 
Primers for IL-1ß, Cxcl1, Cxcl5, Ccl2, RNA polymerase II (Rbp1), hypoxanthine 
ribosyltransferase (Hprt), and glucuronidase ß (Gusß) were generated using Primer BLAST 
(www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/tools/primer-blast). qRT-PCR was performed on an ABI 7500 real-
time thermocycler with the following conditions: RT reaction for 10min at 50°C followed by 
PCR amplification using 3min at 95°C, 40 × (5s at 95°C, 33s at 60°C). Raw CT values were 
normalized using the geometric mean of three housekeeping genes (Rbp1, Hprt, Gusß). The 
▲▲CT method was used to arrive at the quantification of target gene transcripts in exposed 
samples relative to the vehicle control. The calculation for the method used the following 
formula:
Where fold change is a positive number more, less, or equal to 1,TG: Target gene, HKG: 
Housekeeping gene To represent relative increases or decreases, values of fold change (FC) 
were linearized by the following formula:
Histology, histochemistry, and immunofluorescent histochemistry (IHC)
Hematoxylin & eosin (H&E) and Masson’s trichrome stains were prepared at CCHMC 
Pathology Research Core. Further sections for IHC were also prepared by the Core. Slides 
were examined with a Zeiss Axio Scope.A1 microscope equipped with an AxioCam ICm1 
and Zeiss Zen software (Carl Zeiss Microscopy, Thornwood, NY). Slides stained with H&E 
were scored blind by a board-certified veterinary pathologist. Microscopic findings were 
scored with a severity grade of 1–4 based upon a characterization of minimal, mild, 
moderate, or marked, respectively, and present (‘present’ denotes the observation of 
Frank et al.
Page 5
Toxicol Pathol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 pigmented macrophages commonly observed in CNT-exposed lungs). Samples received 
severity scores on specific morphologies including granulomatous inflammation, lymphoid 
tissue hyperplasia, T2P hyperplasia, and bronchoalveolar (mixed-cell) hyperplasia. Slides 
stained with Masson’s trichrome were analyzed by quantitative microscopy. Images were 
taken using 40× objective at 5 regions of interest per lung. Five adjacent, non-overlapping 
images were captured at each region of interest for a total of 25 images per sample. Areas of 
high background collagen, such as conducting airways, were avoided. Images were analyzed 
quantitatively in ImageJ (http://rsbweb.nih.gov/ij/) using color thresholding. Briefly, images 
were threshold-masked to only display the blue collagen stain. Images were converted to 8-
bit form for intensity thresholding and the resulting images (representing high-collagen 
areas) were measured in terms of pixel intensity. Images were batch-analyzed (identically 
processed) in this way and the results were analyzed for mean pixel intensity across the 
whole image. Statistical analysis between groups used a one-way ANOVA with Tukey post-
hoc analysis. To obtain representative images from H&E and Masson’s trichrome stained 
sections, slides were digitally scanned by the CCHMC Pathology Research Core and images 
were extracted using Aperio ImageScope software.
For quantitative assessment of T2P proliferation, IHC was carried out using standard 
protocols for deparafinization, rehydration and sodium-citrate antigen retrieval. Sections 
were blocked with 1% BSA in PBS and stained with anti-proSPC for unambiguous 
identification of T2Ps and Ki67 to indicate active proliferation. DAPI was used as a 
counterstain. Appropriate secondary antibodies conjugated to DyLight 488 or DyLight 594 
were used to visualize staining. All IHC slides were imaged on a Nikon (Melville, NY) 
Eclipse 50i fluorescent microscope equipped with an EXFO X-Cite 120 lamp (Lumen 
Dynamics, Ontario, Canada) and Nikon DS-5M camera system. For fluorescent IHC, three-
color overlays were generated using Adobe Photoshop (www.adobe.com) and individual 
cells were scored as positive or negative for given stains. Cytoplasm of T2Ps exhibited 
robust staining for proSPC and number of proSPC+ cells was divided by the number of 
alveoli in the field to measure the average number of T2Ps per alveolus. About 60 alveoli 
total in regions of interest were measured blind per sample. To assess apoptosis in T2Ps, 
terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) assay was 
performed by the CCHMC Pathology Core. TUNEL staining, along with proSPC staining in 
serial sections to identify T2P cells, was visualized using DAB.
In further IHC work, sections were co-stained as above with anti-proSPC and anti-IL-1ß 
with DAPI counterstain. For counting of IL-1ß-positive total cells and T2Ps, positives were 
normalized to the number of alveoli in the field. Statistical significance of differences 
between vehicle, CNT-, and CA-exposed groups in these analyses were evaluated using one-
way ANOVA with Tukey post-hoc analysis.
Results
Physiochemical Characterization
CNTs prepared for instillation were present as tangled, loose agglomerates (Fig. 1) with 
occasional free single fibers. The average diameter of CNTs was 10.4nm, with a range of 
4.4–21.9nm. Entanglement prevented the accurate measurement of length but most fibers 
Frank et al.
Page 6
Toxicol Pathol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 appeared to be longer than 1μm. Agglomerates were roughly in the range of 200–400nm 
across. CA fibers were present as single fiber particles and splintered fibers. The average CA 
fiber diameter was 269nm with a range of 116–627nm. CA lengths ranged from 1.87–
16.55μm with an average of 6.48μm. Zeta potentials of suspensions were −0.17±0.6 for 
CNTs and −17.1±1.49 for CA. CNTs in this study exhibited negligible levels of metal 
contamination. Further characterization for CNTs is available as published previously (Frank 
et al, 2015).
Clinical and Gross Findings
Animals administered either particle exposure did not show any overt clinical symptoms 
during the exposure period. One animal (from the CA-treated group) was euthanized during 
the experiment due to injuries sustained from fighting, thus n=8 for CNT- and vehicle-
treated groups and n=7 for CA-treated for all histopathological analyses (except where 
noted). Repeated administrations via oropharyngeal aspirations modestly increased the 
prevalence of alveolar macrophages (AMs) in the bronchoalveolar space. The distal regions 
of the lung tissue exhibited more pronounced crowding of AMs in the alveoli, which were 
characterized by abundant foamy cytoplasm in the vehicle-treated animals as well as 
particle-exposed lungs. This finding is an expected alteration related to administration of 
amphiphilic Pluronic surfactant used in the vehicle suspension.
Histopathology
Pathology scores for observed histological features are presented in Fig. 2 and are discussed 
below. The general extent and distribution of lung pathologies resulting from exposure are 
shown at low magnification in Figs. 3 and 4. Vehicle treatments did not induce any 
widespread changes in lung architecture or tissue appearance beyond accumulation of 
alveolar foamy macrophages (AMs). Limited (scores of ‘1′) T2P hyperplasia (focal) was 
noted in 3 of 8 vehicle-treated animals. Animals exposed to CNTs or CA both featured mild 
to moderate multifocal alveolar accumulations of AMs, lymphocytes, and lesser numbers of 
neutrophils (granulomatous inflammatory foci), with multifocal nodular aggregates of 
inflammatory cells expanding the alveoli (microgranulomas). AMs in CNT- or CA-treated 
animals contained variable amounts of coarse pigmented material with the occasional 
presence of multinucleated AMs.
CNT-exposed animals had marked locally extensive T2P hyperplasia, characterized by 
plump epithelial cells lining the alveolar walls in areas proximal to CNT-laden AMs 
aggregates (Fig. 5). CNT-exposed lungs also had interstitial and perivascular foci of 
hyperplastic lymphoid tissue, comprising mostly of small lymphocytes. These irregular 
lymphoid expansions were observed both adjacent to airways (bronchial/ole associated 
lymphoid tissue, BALT) and proximal to the more severe areas of epithelial hyperplasia.
In contrast, CA exposures induced significantly less severe T2P hyperplasia and less 
lymphoid hyperplasia. Individual CA fibers were visible in association with epithelium and 
AMs. CA-exposed lungs featured bronchoalveolar hyperplasia predominantly at terminal 
bifurcations and alveolar ducts, which was minimal in CNT-exposed lungs. Neither CNT- 
nor CA-treated lungs had any appreciable microscopic findings in the pleura.
Frank et al.
Page 7
Toxicol Pathol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Masson’s trichrome stain analysis
Increased collagen staining was observed in either particle-exposed lungs and was more 
predominant in areas of alveolar inflammation and, especially, adjacent to epithelial 
hyperplastic lesions (Fig. 6). Quantitative microscopy analysis of sections stained with 
Masson’s trichrome and showed that both CNT and CA exposures increased collagen 
staining to a similar extent in lung tissue (the increases were statistically non-significant). 
One sample (CA-treated) was omitted due to faulty staining, thus n=6 for the CA-treated 
group in this analysis. Additionally, either toxicant induced distinct patterns of interstitial 
fibrosis, with CA inducing more extensive peribronchial and perivascular foci and CNTs 
inducing nodular fibrotic foci in alveolar regions.
Immunofluorescence Histochemistry for T2Ps
Both CNT and CA exposures significantly increased T2Ps/alveolus compared to vehicle 
(Fig. 7). CNT-exposed lungs exhibited significantly increased T2Ps compared to CA-
exposed. Characteristic hyperplastic epithelial lesions induced by CNT exposures were 
confirmed to be composed of T2Ps. Hyperplastic lesions associated with CA exposures were 
shown to be comprised of proSPC+ and proSPC− cells. No trends were observed in the 
number of alveoli/field. Nuclei of actively proliferating cells within the BALT stained 
positive for Ki67 and served as internal positive control. No Ki67+ staining was observed in 
T2Ps in any group. Collectively, the data show that CNT exposures induce T2P hyperplasia 
by increasing number of T2Ps and do so to a significantly greater extent than CA exposures. 
The absence of any observed Ki67 staining indicates that proliferation of T2Ps may not be 
actively occurring at the time of sampling. This suggests that, although active proliferation 
of T2Ps may have ceased within the 5 weeks following cessation of exposure, hyperplastic 
T2Ps remain the predominant cell type lining the alveoli at this time point.
TUNEL assay for apoptosis in T2Ps
Serial sections stained for proSPC and TUNEL, respectively, revealed minimal apoptosis in 
general (Fig. 8). Enumeration of apoptotic cells in three fields of T2P hyperplasia/sample 
showed a marginally increased, non-significant prevalence of apoptotic nuclei (not specific 
to cell type) in CNT- and CA-exposed lungs. Apoptotic cells were also noted to be 
somewhat more prevalent in regions of marked CA- or CNT-induced granulomatous lesions 
(not shown). No differences in the number of apoptotic T2Ps were observed, although it was 
not possible to confirm the identities of some apoptotic cells dependent on the degree of 
correlation between contiguous serial sections stained for either proSPC or TUNEL. The 
results here indicate that CNT and CA do not differ considerably in their capacity to induce 
apoptosis in T2Ps and suggest the differences in T2P hyperplasia are not due to increased 
cell death in CA-exposed T2Ps.
Gene expression in T2Ps
Gene expression of Cxcl1, Cxcl5, Ccl2, and IL-1ß were markedly increased in T2Ps isolated 
from CNT-exposed lungs compared to vehicle-treated (Fig. 9). CA exposures only modestly 
increased Cxcl1, Ccl2, and IL-1ß expression and modestly decreased Cxcl5 expression.
Frank et al.
Page 8
Toxicol Pathol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Immunofluorescent Histochemistry for IL-1ß
Anti-IL-1ß and anti-proSPC antibodies were used to quantify IL-1ß+ cells and co-identify 
these with T2Ps in co-stained sections (Fig. 10). The cytoplasm of IL-1ß-expressing cells 
were stained by anti-IL-1ß and counted manually. Total IL-1ß+ cells were normalized to the 
number of total cells as enumerated by DAPI-counterstained nuclei and increases were 
expressed as fold change over vehicle-treated. Three fields were counted blind per sample. 
Exposures to CNTs or CA both increased total IL-1ß+ cells, with CNT exposures causing a 
significant difference and CA causing a less significant increase. The number of total IL-1ß+ 
cells did not differ substantially between treatments. In the same images, cells double-
positive for proSPC and IL-1ß were counted and expressed as average number of IL-1ß+ 
T2Ps per field. No IL-1ß+ T2Ps were observed in the vehicle group, while they appeared 
modestly increased following CA exposure. Numbers of IL-1ß+ T2Ps were significantly 
increased in CNT-exposed lung and substantially higher than CA-exposed. This agrees with 
gene expression data showing increased IL-1ß expression in T2Ps isolated from CNT-
exposed lungs. The data collectively show that while both exposures tend to induce the 
mature IL-1ß protein in lung cells, CNT exposures do so more specifically in T2Ps.
Discussion
This study compares and contrasts profiles of lung toxicologic pathology following 
exposures to multi-wall CNTs or CA with results showing that CNTs reproducibly elicit 
distinct lesions relative to CA particularly with respect to alveolar T2Ps. Although CNT- and 
asbestos-exposed lung pathology in rodent models have been described individually, to our 
knowledge, this is the first comparison study to focus on side-by-side assessment of 
morphological and mechanistic endpoints. Our findings are consistent with and build upon 
previously published work using mice (Adamson et al, 1987, Bonner et al, 2013, Mercer et 
al, 2011). It is widely appreciated that the shared characteristics between CNTs and asbestos 
warrant concern and investigation into their toxicological similarities. Because no history of 
human exposure to CNTs yet exists, these investigations must use experimental models to 
gauge the extent to which asbestos and CNTs overlap in their toxicological actions. In vivo 
comparison studies of CNTs and asbestos often focus on effects in the pleural tissue and 
mesothelial lining, with the explicit goal of assessing carcinogenic potential as asbestos 
exposure is notoriously associated with mesothelioma and lung cancer. Two prominent 
studies (Poland et al, 2008, Takagi et al, 2008) compared the effects of asbestos and CNTs in 
the pleural lining of the intraperitoneal cavity in mice, agreeing that hyperplastic and 
neoplastic changes suggest that CNTs may induce preneoplastic lesions. However, such 
studies frequently exclude comparisons of basic lung pathology caused by either toxicant 
and appear focused on specific pleural endpoints at the expense of more comprehensive 
hypothesis-driven investigation of toxicologic pathology. Furthermore, asbestos exposures 
also cause detrimental effects apart from carcinogenesis, such as interstitial fibrosis and 
granulomatous inflammation (Wagner, 1997). These effects alone represent a public health 
burden by directly impacting lung function and complicating coexisting conditions.
Interpretations of experimental results intended to provide information relevant to human 
health must consider limitations in the ability to accurately model realistic exposure 
Frank et al.
Page 9
Toxicol Pathol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 situations. Although many studies take advantage of the lower background variability and 
specialized phenotypes offered by inbred mouse strains, we opted to use an out-bred mouse 
model for its more robust health and more realistic modeling of a heterogenous human 
population. The most relevant route of exposure to CNTs is expected to be inhalation, 
followed by skin contact. To model inhalation, the current work used oropharyngeal 
aspiration methods similar to those used in the majority of existing toxicological studies of 
CNTs. Shvedova et al (2008) showed lung responses to inhaled doses of single-walled CNTs 
in C57/Bl6 mice were more severe than those following comparable aspirated doses, 
suggesting the similar trend could be found for the case of multi-wall CNTs. Although 
inhalation-based studies are more environmentally realistic in nature, they are technically 
challenging and not feasible in many labs. Future studies should nonetheless consider using 
inhalational exposures where feasible, particularly where risk assessment and the derivation 
of safe exposure limits are goals. A further consideration concerns how doses given in 
animal models approximate actual exposure burdens expected in human occupational 
scenarios. The repeated doses of CNTs in this study reached a cumulative total of 300 μg/
animal. Recent monitoring in modern CNT production facilities reported a mean airborne 
CNT concentration of 42.6μg/m3 (Kuijpers et al, 2014). Assuming a human light-work 
breath volume of 1L at 20 breaths a minute, we may predict an inhaled dose of 70μg/8hr 
workday in a realistic scenario using the Multiple Path Particle Dosimetry model as utilized 
by Porter et al (2010). Scaling from a mouse alveolar epithelial surface area of .05m2 (Stone 
et al, 1992) to a human surface area of 102m2, we may predict our model reflects an 
occupational exposure dose which may be reached in 33.6 years given a 5-day workweek. 
The CNT exposure dose used here, although high relative to the mouse, therefore 
approximates exposure burdens humans may feasibly accumulate within a normal 
occupational lifetime. Nonetheless, as the objective of this study was to compare the relative 
effects of two toxicants and not to model or assess risk in human exposures, it should be 
noted that numerous uncertainty factors would need to be considered in extrapolating these 
results to a realistic occupational health context.
In this study, CA induced bronchoalveolar hyperplasia which was most prominent in 
alveolar ducts and terminal bifurcations. This is consistent with published reports that 
amphibole asbestos preferentially induces lesions in distal airways and alveolar ducts in 
rodents (Manning et al, 2002, Shannahan et al, 2012). Other exposures known to cause 
bronchoalveolar hyperplasia include silicon carbide whiskers (Akiyama et al, 2007) and 
repeated ozone (Hassett et al, 1985). In contrast, CNT-induced hyperplastic changes were 
prominent throughout the alveolar spaces and characterized by T2P hyperplasia. T2Ps 
isolated from CNT-exposed lungs displayed a proinflammatory phenotype compared to CA 
and expressed IL-1ß. Several factors may contribute to the differences in toxicological 
pathology observed here, including scale and fiber morphology differences. CNTs used in 
this study were thin (mean diameter: 10.4nm), non-rigid fibers forming 200–400nm 
agglomerates, whereas CA fibers were rigid fibers 269.2nm in average diameter and up to 
16μm long. Published work (Hesterberg et al, 1996, Lippmann, 1990, Nagai et al, 2011) 
robustly supports the role of size and morphology as possible pathogenic determinants in 
fiber-induced injury, thus different paradigms of fiber toxicology may be induced by thin, 
agglomerated CNT fibers versus thick, rigid CA fibers. It has been observed (Hirano et al, 
Frank et al.
Page 10
Toxicol Pathol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2008) that multi-wall CNTs in the diameter range of 60–80nm are rigid and exist as fibers 
comparable to CA as opposed to the fibrous particulates formed by the thinner CNTs used in 
the current study. T2Ps or T1Ps may be sensitive to CNTs based on these differences in 
dimension. Furthermore, CNTs may preferentially come to rest in alveoli in proximity to 
alveolar pneumocytes as a result of their morphology and/or size whereas CA fibers may 
accumulate in distal airways and ducts without readily contacting T1Ps and T2Ps. It was not 
possible to accurately monitor the deposition of CNTs or CA with regard to localization in 
this study.
Apart from size and morphology differences, CNTs and CA differed in their metal content. 
CNTs had negligible metal contamination and no detectable iron, whereas CA is known to 
contain iron oxides (Gulumian et al, 1993). We expect the presence of iron may play a role 
in the differences seen in lung pathology. On further note, CNTs in this study present a large 
surface area of 193.6 m2/g (Frank et al, 2015), compared to the ~8 m2/g normally observed 
in UICC crocidolite (Goodglick et al, 1990, Gulumian et al, 1993). The high surface area 
seen in CNTs may underpin qualitative differences in their toxicity versus CA (Hubbs et al, 
2011).
We show here that T2Ps are particularly more affected by CNT exposures relative to CA. 
This was most evident in histopathologically distinct T2P hyperplasia, increased T2P 
number which cannot be explained by differences in apoptosis, and expression of IL-1ß 
specific to T2Ps. T2P hyperplasia occurs as a reparative response of the alveolar epithelium 
in an attempt to reestablish alveolar wall integrity and function. In a classic model of 
experimental lung fibrosis, bleomycin induces hyperplasia of and apoptosis in T2Ps (Wang 
et al, 2000) as well as altered IL-1ß signaling and it is substantiated that these effects 
underlie bleomycin-driven fibrosis in the lung (Gasse et al, 2007). Both toxicant exposures 
increased collagen staining in the lung interstitium as assessed by Masson’s trichrome. 
Although CA is a classical pro-fibrotic agent, we did not observe extensive fibrosis 
following exposure to either toxicant despite using relatively high cumulative doses. We 
suggest that extensive fibrotic foci were not seen due firstly to the duration of exposure, as 
fibrotic responses may not be extensive at this time of sampling and are expected to continue 
to develop based on previous studies in rodents (Adamson et al, 1987, Cyphert et al, 2012, 
Davis et al, 1978). Second, we note that extensive fibrotic responses are commonly shown in 
inbred strains of mice known to be susceptible to fibrosis (e.g., C57Bl/6), whereas the 
outbred animals in this study may be relatively resistant to pulmonary fibrosis (Schrier et al, 
1983). In addition, inhalation routes may be more conducive to inducing fibrotic reactions 
(Shvedova et al, 2008). The present findings appear consistent with previous studies (Davis 
et al, 1978, Kamp et al, 1993, Wagner et al, 1974) of amphibole asbestos which used outbred 
rodent models of exposure.
Conclusion
In conclusion, we show that CNT toxicity appears to directly affect alveolar pneumocytes 
and T2Ps to produce features of lung pathology both common and distinct from asbestos. 
These differences may precede or be associated with different long-term outcomes in cases 
of CNT or asbestos exposure. Future work should address the extent to which this 
Frank et al.
Page 11
Toxicol Pathol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 observation is true using CNTs of different size and morphology and what role this may 
have in the mechanism of action of CNTs versus asbestos in their respective exposure-
related outcomes. Although research interests in the mechanisms of asbestos toxicity have 
historically been somewhat limited despite the notoriety of this toxicant, the rise of CNT 
materials underscores a critical need to conduct comprehensive hypothesis-based research 
into these materials both separately and in comparison.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health/National Institute for Environmental Health Sciences 
Center for Environmental Genetics (CEG) funds [2P30ES006096-16A1 to JSY], Gene-Environment Interactions 
Training Program (GEITP) fellowship [T32ES016646 to EAF], and National Institute of Occupational Safety and 
Health/Education and Research Center (ERC) funding [T42OH008432-07 to EAF], and the University of 
Cincinnati funds (to JSY).
Abbreviations
CNT
carbon nanotubes
CA
crocidolite asbestos
T2P
type II pneumocyte
T1P
type I pneumocyte
AM
alveolar macrophage
IL-1ß
interleukin 1ß
proSPC
pro-surfactant protein C
TEM
transmission electron microscopy
MACS
magnetically-assisted cell sorting
qRT-PCR
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
FBS
fetal bovine serum
References
Adamson IY, Bowden DH. Response of mouse lung to crocidolite asbestos. 2. Pulmonary fibrosis after 
long fibres. The Journal of pathology. 1987; 152(2):109–117. [PubMed: 3040951] 
Akiyama I, Ogami A, Oyabu T, Yamato H, Morimoto Y, Tanaka I. Pulmonary effects and 
biopersistence of deposited silicon carbide whisker after 1-year inhalation in rats. Inhalation 
toxicology. 2007; 19(2):141–147. [PubMed: 17169861] 
Birch, ME. Monitoring of diesel particulate exhaust in the workplace. In: Schlecht, PC.; O’Connor, 
PF., editors. NIOSH Manual of Analytical Methods (NMAM). 4th. Department of Health and 
Human Services, Public Health Service, Center for Disease Control and Prevention, National 
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. DHHS(NIOSH); 154, Cincinnati, Ohio: 2004a. Third 
Supplement to NMAM
Birch, ME. NIOSH Method 5040 update. In: Schlecht, PC.; O’Connor, PF., editors. NIOSH Manual of 
Analytical Methods (NMAM). 4th. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health 
Service, Center for Disease Control and Prevention, National Institute for Occupational Safety and 
Health. DHHS(NIOSH); 154, Cincinnati, Ohio: 2004b. Third Supplement to NMAM
Frank et al.
Page 12
Toxicol Pathol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Bonner JC, Silva RM, Taylor AJ, Brown JM, Hilderbrand SC, Castranova V, Porter D, Elder A, 
Oberdörster G, Harkema JR, Bramble LA, Kavanagh TJ, Botta D, Nei A, Pinkerton KE. 
Interlaboratory evaluation of rodent pulmonary responses to engineered nanomaterials: the NIEHS 
Nano GO Consortium. Environmental health perspectives. 2013; 121(6):676–682. [PubMed: 
23649427] 
Cyphert JM, Padilla-Carlin DJ, Schladweiler MC, Shannahan JH, Nyska A, Kodavanti UP, Gavett SH. 
Long-term response of rats to single intratracheal exposure of Libby amphibole or amosite. Journal 
of Toxicology and Environmental Health, Part A. 2012; 75(3):183–200. [PubMed: 22251266] 
Dahm MM, Evans DE, Schubauer-Berigan MK, Birch ME, Fernback JE. Occupational exposure 
assessment in carbon nanotube and nanofiber primary and secondary manufacturers. Ann Occup 
Hyg. 2012; 56(5):542–556. [PubMed: 22156567] 
Davis JM, Beckett ST, Bolton RE, Collings P, Middleton AP. Mass and number of fibres in the 
pathogenesis of asbestos-related lung disease in rats. British journal of cancer. 1978; 37(5):673. 
[PubMed: 656299] 
De Volder MF, Tawfick SH, Baughman RH, Hart AJ. Carbon nanotubes: present and future 
commercial applications. Science. 2013; 339(6119):535–539. [PubMed: 23372006] 
Donaldson K, Stone V, Clouter A, Renwick L, MacNee W. Ultrafine particles. Occupational and 
environmental medicine. 2001; 58(3):211–216. [PubMed: 11171936] 
Dörger M, Münzing S, Allmeling AM, Krombach F. Comparison of the phagocytic response of rat and 
hamster alveolar macrophages to man-made vitreous fibers in vitro. Human & experimental 
toxicology. 2000; 19(11):635–640. [PubMed: 11211242] 
Fehrenbach H. Alveolar epithelial type II cell: defender of the alveolus revisited. Respir Res. 2001; 
2(1):33–46. [PubMed: 11686863] 
Gasse P, Mary C, Guenon I, Noulin N, Charron S, Schnyder-Candrian S, Schnyder B, Akira S, 
Quesniaux VFJ, Ryffel B, Couillin I. IL-1R1/MyD88 signaling and the inflammasome are 
essential in pulmonary inflammation and fibrosis in mice. The Journal of clinical investigation. 
2007; 117(12):3786. [PubMed: 17992263] 
Goodglick LA, Kane AB. Cytotoxicity of long and short crocidolite asbestos fibers in vitro and in 
vivo. Cancer research. 1990; 50(16):5153–5163. [PubMed: 2165857] 
Gulumian M, Bhoolia DJ, Dutoit RSJ, Rendall REG, Pollak H, Vanwyk JA, Rhempula M. Activation 
of UICC crocidolite: the effect of conversion of some ferric ions to ferrous ions. Environmental 
research. 1993; 60(2):193–206. [PubMed: 8386081] 
Han JH, Lee EJ, Lee JH, So KP, Lee YH, Bae GN, Lee S, Ji JH, Cho MH, Yu IJ. Monitoring 
multiwalled carbon nanotube exposure in carbon nanotube research facility. Inhalation Toxicol. 
2008; 20(8):741–749.
Hassett C, Mustafa MG, Elashoff RM. Murine lung carcinogenesis following exposure to ambient 
ozone concentrations. Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 1985; 75(4):771–777. [PubMed: 
3862908] 
Hesterberg TW, Miiller WC, Musselman RP, Kamstrup O, Hamilton RD, Thevenaz P. Biopersistence 
of man-made vitreous fibers and crocidolite asbestos in the rat lung following inhalation. 
Toxicological Sciences. 1996; 29(2):267–279.
Hirano S, Kanno S, Furuyama A. Multi-walled carbon nanotubes injure the plasma membrane of 
macrophages. Toxicology and applied pharmacology. 2008; 232(2):244–251. [PubMed: 18655803] 
Hubbs AF, Mercer RR, Benkovic SA, Harkema J, Sriram K, Schwegler-Berry D, Goravanahally MP, 
Nurkiewicz TR, Castranova V, Sargent LM. Nanotoxicology—A pathologist’s perspective. 
Toxicologic pathology. 2011; 39(2):301–324. [PubMed: 21422259] 
Jones AD, Miller BG, Cullen RT, Searl A, Davis JMG, Buchanan D, Donaldson K, Soutar CA, Bolton 
RE. The colt fibre research programme: aspects of toxicological risk assessment. The Annals of 
Occupational Hygiene. 1997; 41:244–250.
Kamp DW, Israbian VA, Yeldandi AV, Panos RJ, Graceffa P, Weitzman SA. Phytic acid, an iron 
chelator, attenuates pulmonary inflammation and fibrosis in rats after intratracheal instillation of 
asbestos. Toxicologic pathology. 1995; 23(6):689–695. [PubMed: 8772254] 
Frank et al.
Page 13
Toxicol Pathol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Kuijpers E, Vermeulen R, Tromp P, Fransman W, Brouwer D, Godderis L, Vlaanderen J, Bekker C, 
Pronk A. 0195 Carbon nanotube exposure assessment for a study on early biological effects; the 
CANTES study. Occup Environ Med. 2014; 71(Suppl 1):A25–A25.
Lippmann M. Effects of fiber characteristics on lung deposition, retention, and disease. Environmental 
Health Perspectives. 1990; 88:311. [PubMed: 2272328] 
Manning CB, Cummins AB, Jung MW, Berlanger I, Timblin CR, Palmer C, Taatjes DJ, Hemenway D, 
Vacek P, Mossman BT. A mutant epidermal growth factor receptor targeted to lung epithelium 
inhibits asbestos-induced proliferation and proto-oncogene expression. Cancer research. 2002; 
62(15):4169–4175. [PubMed: 12154012] 
Mercer RR, Hubbs AF, Scabilloni JF, Wang L, Battelli LA, Friend S, Castranova V, Porter DW. 
Pulmonary fibrotic response to aspiration of multi-walled carbon nanotubes. Part Fibre Toxicol. 
2011; 8(1):21. [PubMed: 21781304] 
Miller BG, Searl A, Davis JM, Donaldson K, Cullen RT, Bolton RE, Buchanan D, Soutar CA. 
Influence of fibre length, dissolution and biopersistence on the production of mesothelioma in the 
rat peritoneal cavity. Annals of Occupational Hygiene. 1999; 43(3):155–166. [PubMed: 10366897] 
Nagai H, Okazaki Y, Chew SH, Misawa N, Yamashita Y, Akatsuka S, Ishihara T, Yamashita K, 
Yoshikawa Y, Yasui H, Jiang L, Ohara H, Takahashi T, Ichihara G, Kostarelos K, Miyata Y, 
Shinohara H, Toyokuni S. Diameter and rigidity of multiwalled carbon nanotubes are critical 
factors in mesothelial injury and carcinogenesis. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences. 2011; 108(49):E1330–E1338.
Nagai H, Toyokuni S. Differences and similarities between carbon nanotubes and asbestos fibers 
during mesothelial carcinogenesis: shedding light on fiber entry mechanism. Cancer science. 2012; 
103(8):1378–1390. [PubMed: 22568550] 
Oberdörster G. Lung clearance of inhaled insoluble and soluble particles. Journal of Aerosol Medicine. 
1988; 1(4):289–330.
Oberdörster G. Lung particle overload: implications for occupational exposures to particles. 
Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology. 1995; 21(1):123–135. [PubMed: 7784625] 
Poland CA, Duffin R, Kinloch I, Maynard A, Wallace WA, Seaton A, Stone V, Brown S, MacNee W, 
Donaldson K. Carbon nanotubes introduced into the abdominal cavity of mice show asbestos-like 
pathogenicity in a pilot study. Nature nanotechnology. 2008; 3(7):423–428.
Pope CA III, Thun MJ, Namboodiri MM, Dockery DW, Evans JS, Speizer FE, Heath CW Jr. 
Particulate air pollution as a predictor of mortality in a prospective study of US adults. American 
journal of respiratory and critical care medicine. 1995; 151(3_pt_1):669–674. [PubMed: 7881654] 
Porter DW, Hubbs AF, Mercer RR, Wu N, Wolfarth MG, Sriram K, Leonard S, Battelli L, Schwegler-
Berry D, Friend S, Andrew M, Chen BT, Tsuruoka S, Endo M, Castranova V. Mouse pulmonary 
dose-and time course-responses induced by exposure to multi-walled carbon nanotubes. 
Toxicology. 2010; 269(2):136–147. [PubMed: 19857541] 
Rao GVS, Tinkle S, Weissman D, Antonini J, Kashon M, Salmen R, Battelli L, Willard P, Hubbs A, 
Hoover M. Efficacy of a technique for exposing the mouse lung to particles aspirated from the 
pharynx. Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health Part A. 2003; 66(15–16):1441–1452. 
[PubMed: 12857634] 
Rom WN, Bitterman PB, Rennard SI, Cantin A, Crystal RG. Characterization of the lower respiratory 
tract inflammation of nonsmoking individuals with interstitial lung disease associated with chronic 
inhalation of inorganic dusts. American Review of Respiratory Disease. 1987; 136(6):1429–1434. 
[PubMed: 2825569] 
Ryman-Rasmussen JP, Tewksbury EW, Moss OR, Cesta MF, Wong BA, Bonner JC. Inhaled 
multiwalled carbon nanotubes potentiate airway fibrosis in murine allergic asthma. American 
journal of respiratory cell and molecular biology. 2009; 40(3):349–358. [PubMed: 18787175] 
Sargent LM, Porter DW, Staska LM, Hubbs AF, Lowry DT, Battelli L, Siegrist KJ, Kashon ML, 
Mercer RR, Bauer KB, Chen BT, Salisbury JL, Frazer D, McKinney W, Andrew M, Tsuruoka S, 
Endo M, Fluharty KL, Castranova V, Reynolds SH. Promotion of lung adenocarcinoma following 
inhalation exposure to multi-walled carbon nanotubes. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2014; 11(1):3. 
[PubMed: 24405760] 
Frank et al.
Page 14
Toxicol Pathol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Shannahan JH, Nyska A, Cesta M, Schladweiler MC, Vallant BD, Ward WO, Ghio AJ, Gavett SH, 
Kodavanti UP. Subchronic pulmonary pathology, iron overload, and transcriptional activity after 
Libby amphibole exposure in rat models of cardiovascular disease. Environmental health 
perspectives. 2012; 120(1):85. [PubMed: 21979745] 
Shvedova AA, Kisin E, Murray AR, Johnson VJ, Gorelik O, Arepalli S, Hubbs AF, Mercer RR, 
Keohavong P, Sussman N, Jin J, Yin J, Stone S, Chen BT, Deye G, Maynard A, Castranova V, 
Baron PA, Kagan VE. Inhalation vs. aspiration of single-walled carbon nanotubes in C57BL/6 
mice: inflammation, fibrosis, oxidative stress, and mutagenesis. American Journal of Physiology-
Lung Cellular and Molecular Physiology. 2008; 295(4):L552–L565. [PubMed: 18658273] 
Schrier DJ, Kunkel RG, Phan SH. The Role of Strain Variation in Murine Bleomycin-lnduced 
Pulmonary Fibrosis 1, 2. American Review of Respiratory Disease. 1983; 127(1):63–66. [PubMed: 
6185026] 
Shukla A, Gulumian M, Hei TK, Kamp D, Rahman Q, Mossman BT. Multiple roles of oxidants in the 
pathogenesis of asbestos-induced diseases. Free Radical Biology and Medicine. 2003; 34(9):1117–
1129. [PubMed: 12706492] 
Snyder LS, Hertz MI, Harmon KR, Bitterman PB. Failure of lung repair following acute lung injury. 
Regulation of the fibroproliferative response (Part 1). CHEST Journal. 1990; 98(3):733–738.
Stone KC, Mercer RR, Gehr P, Stockstill B, Crapo JD. Allometric relationships of cell numbers and 
size in the mammalian lung. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 1992; 6(2):235–243. [PubMed: 1540387] 
Takagi A, Hirose A, Nishimura T, Fukumori N, Ogata A, Ohashi N, Kitajima S, Kanno J. Induction of 
mesothelioma in p53+/− mouse by intraperitoneal application of multi-wall carbon nanotube. The 
Journal of toxicological sciences. 2008; 33(1):105–116. [PubMed: 18303189] 
Wagner GR. Asbestosis and silicosis. The Lancet. 1997; 349(9061):1311–1315.
Wagner JC, Berry G, Skidmore JW, Timbrell V. The effects of the inhalation of asbestos in rats. British 
journal of cancer. 1974; 29(3):252. [PubMed: 4364384] 
Wang R, Ibarra-Sunga O, Verlinski L, Pick R, Uhal BD. Abrogation of bleomycin-induced epithelial 
apoptosis and lung fibrosis by captopril or by a caspase inhibitor. American Journal of Physiology-
Lung Cellular and Molecular Physiology. 2000; 279(1):L143–L151. [PubMed: 10893213] 
Frank et al.
Page 15
Toxicol Pathol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 1. Morphology and size distribution of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and crocidolite asbestos 
(CA) materials used in this study
Left side: CNTs presented as loose tangled agglomerates with an average fiber diameter of 
10.4 nm. Right side: CA was composed mostly of individual fibers with average diameter of 
269.2 nm.
Frank et al.
Page 16
Toxicol Pathol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig 2. CNTs and crocidolite cause overlapping but distinct profiles of lung pathology
Vehicle-treated lungs exhibited little or no microscopic alterations. Both particle-treated 
groups showed granulomatous inflammation, composed chiefly of macrophages mixed with 
lymphocytes and low numbers of neutrophils. CNT-exposed lungs predominantly showed 
lymphoid tissue hyperplasia (interstitial and perivascular) and type II pneumocyte 
hyperplasia while crocidolite-treated lungs predominantly showed bronchoalveolar 
hyperplasia.
Frank et al.
Page 17
Toxicol Pathol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig 3. Extent and distribution of CA- or CNT-induced lung lesions
Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stains. Vehicle-treated lung, (A) 2× and (B) 4×, (C) CA-
exposed lung showed granulomatous inflammation and epithelial hyperplasia predominantly 
at terminal airways and alveolar ducts, (C) 2× and (D) 4×. CNT-exposed lung showed 
diffuse alveolar hyperplasia in addition to granulomatous inflammation, (E) 2× and (F) 4×.
Frank et al.
Page 18
Toxicol Pathol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig 4. Regions of interest in CA- or CNT-exposed lung
H&E stains, 10×. (A) Vehicle treated lungs showed no change in airway or alveolar 
structure. (B) CA exposures caused hyperplasia of terminal bronchioles and alveolar ducts. 
(C) CNT exposures caused hyperplasia of alveolar epithelium and BALT/lymphoid tissue. 
CNT-laden macrophages are visible as darkly pigmented bodies.
Frank et al.
Page 19
Toxicol Pathol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig 5. CA- or CNT-induced lung epithelial hyperplasia
H&E stains, 20×. Vehicle-treated lungs showed little or no type II pneumocyte (T2P) and 
bronchoalveolar hyperplasia (A & B, respectively). CA-exposed lung showed modest T2P 
hyperplasia (C) but prominent bronchoalveolar hyperplasia (D). CNT-exposed lung showed 
more diffuse and severe T2P hyperplasia (E), while showing relatively little bronchoalveolar 
hyperplasia and peribronchial changes (F) in contrast with what is seen in CA-exposed lung.
Frank et al.
Page 20
Toxicol Pathol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig 6. CA- or CNT-induced interstitial remodeling
Masson’s trichrome stain, 40×. Vehicle-treated lungs showed no or minimal interstitial 
collagen staining (A). CA-exposed (B) and CNT-exposed (C) lungs showed increased 
interstitial collagen staining. Graph: Images of left lung sections stained with Masson’s 
trichrome were taken in bronchoalveolar regions (25 per slide). Collagen-specific color was 
isolated using color thresholding in ImageJ and resulting images were measured by mean 
pixel intensity. Distinct patterns of interstitial fibrosis following exposure were observed 
where (D) CA induced prominent perivascular and peribronchial fibrotic foci while (E) 
Frank et al.
Page 21
Toxicol Pathol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 CNTs induced nodular fibrotic foci (arrows) in alveolar spaces following 8wk exposure to 
300μg of either material.
Frank et al.
Page 22
Toxicol Pathol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 7. ProSPC+ type II pneumocytes (T2Ps) are increased in hyperplastic lesions induced by 
CNT exposure
Green: proSPC, Red: Ki-67, with DAPI. Pro-SPC+ cells were minimal in vehicle-treated 
lungs (A), increased in CA-treated (B), and especially prevalent in CNT-treated (C). Graph: 
proSPC+ cells were counted manually in lung sections and divided by number of alveoli in 
the field. CNT-exposed lungs had greatest numbers of type II cells/alveolus, with lesser 
increase seen with crocidolite exposure. Ki-67+ T2Ps were not observed. **p<.01.
Frank et al.
Page 23
Toxicol Pathol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 8. Prevalence of apoptotic T2Ps does not differ between CNT- and CA-induced hyperplastic 
lesions
Left column: proSPC-stained sections, right column: TUNEL-stained sections, 40× 
(Hematoxylin counterstain in both sets). Cytoplasm of T2Ps stained dark brown using DAB 
visualization of proSPC in (A) vehicle-treated, (C) CA-exposed, and (E) CNT-exposed 
alveolar epithelial lesions. TUNEL staining resulted in purple apoptotic nuclei in serial 
sections of the lesions (B, E, F, respectively). In general, significant prevalence or increases 
of apoptotic cells were not observed in any group. Serial sectioning allowed for TUNEL+ 
nuclei to be co-identified (where possible) as proSPC+ cells (see arrows, C and D, which 
denote a TUNEL+/proSPC− cell). TUNEL+ T2P cells were uncommon and no trends were 
observed between exposure groups.
Frank et al.
Page 24
Toxicol Pathol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 9. CNT exposures more strongly induced pro-inflammatory mediators in type II 
pneumocytes (T2Ps) compared to crocidolite
RNA from isolated T2Ps was subjected to qRT-PCR. Values shown are the relative change 
from vehicle-treated samples.
Frank et al.
Page 25
Toxicol Pathol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 10. CNT and CA increase IL-1ß in lung cells, and CNT exposures induce more IL-1ß+ type 
II cells than CA
Green: proSPC, Red: IL-1ß, with DAPI. (A) Vehicle-treated lungs showed minimal IL-1ß 
staining. (B) CA-treated lungs showed IL-1ß increases which were not specific to T2Ps, 
whereas (C) CNT-treated lungs showed IL-1ß+ T2Ps. Upper graph: IL-1ß+ cells were 
counted manually and normalized to total number of nuclei. Changes between treatments are 
expressed as fold change over vehicle. Lower graph: Cells positive for both pro-SPC and 
IL-1ß were counted and normalized to total cells. Values are average number of double 
positive cells/field. *p<0.05, **P<0.01.
Frank et al.
Page 26
Toxicol Pathol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
