 Prefrontal cortical control of a brainstem social behavior circuit
Tamara B. Franklin1,2, Bianca A. Silva1, Zina Perova3,**, Livia Marrone1, Maria E. Masferrer1, 
Yang Zhan1,4, Angie Kaplan1, Louise Greetham1, Violaine Verrechia1, Andreas Halman1, 
Sara Pagella1, Alexei L. Vyssotski5, Anna Illarionova6, Valery Grinevich6, Tiago Branco3,**, 
and Cornelius T. Gross1,*
1Mouse Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), via Ramarini 32, 00015 
Monterotondo, Italy 2Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Dalhousie University, 1355 
Oxford Street, Halifax, Canada B3H 4R2 3MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick 
Avenue, Cambridge, CB2 0QH, UK 4Brain Cognition and Brain Disease Institute, Shenzhen 
Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China, 518055 
5Institute of Neuroinformatics, University of Zürich and Swiss Federal Institute of Technology 
(ETH), Winterthurerstr. 190, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland 6Schaller Research Group on 
Neuropeptides, German Cancer Research Center DKFZ, Cell Network Cluster of Excellence, 
University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 581, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
Summary
The prefrontal cortex plays a critical role in adjusting an organism's behavior to its environment. In 
particular, numerous studies have implicated the prefrontal cortex in the control of social behavior, 
but the neural circuits that mediate these effects remain unknown. Here we investigated behavioral 
adaptation to social defeat in mice and uncovered a critical contribution of neural projections from 
the medial prefrontal cortex to the dorsal periaqueductal grey, a brainstem area vital for defensive 
responses. Social defeat caused a weakening of functional connectivity between these two areas 
and selective inhibition of these projections mimicked the behavioral effects of social defeat. 
These findings define a specific neural projection by which the prefrontal cortex can control and 
adapt social behavior.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 
4.0 International license.
*Correspondence to: gross@embl.it.
**Current address: Sainsbury Wellcome Centre, University College London, UK
Author contributions
T.B.F. designed, performed and analyzed all experiments, except the retrograde tracer experiments that were designed, performed, and 
analyzed by L.M., the in vitro electrophysiology experiments that were designed, performed, and analyzed by Z.P. and T.B., the 
monosynaptic rabies experiment that was designed, performed, and analyzed by B.A.S., the evoked field potential experiments that 
were designed, performed, and analyzed by M.E.M., the Granger causality and power analyses that were carried out by Y.Z., and for 
some behavioral experiments and imaging that were performed and analyzed by A.K., V.V., L.G., A.H. and S.P. The AAV-
Syn::Venus-2A-HAhM4D virus was packaged and tested by V.G. and A.I. The wireless recording device was built by A.L.V. The 
project was conceived and the manuscript written by T.B.F and C.T.G with critical input from T.B.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Neurosci. 2017 February ; 20(2): 260–270. doi:10.1038/nn.4470.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Introduction
The medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) plays an important role in generating appropriate 
social responses by supporting behavioral flexibility, response inhibition, attention and 
emotion. It has been proposed that the mPFC evaluates and interprets information within the 
context of past experiences, and is thus critical for selecting suitable behavioral responses 
within a social environment1. For example, lesions and pharmacological manipulations of 
the rodent mPFC modify inter-male aggression2, are required for sex differences in social 
anxiety3, modulate social position within a hierarchy4, and support the learned behavioral 
response to social defeat5, 6, highlighting the importance of this structure in interpreting and 
modifying social behaviors in the context of past social experiences.
The mPFC projects to several brain areas that are known to influence sociability, including 
amygdala, nucleus accumbens, hippocampus, and brainstem7. However, although several of 
these projections have been shown to be critical for mPFC control of non-social behaviors8–
10, and mPFC projections to the raphe nucleus are able to interfere with the consolidation of 
adaptation to social defeat,6 until now the mPFC outputs that directly modulate social 
behavior have not been identified. Here we investigated whether projections from mPFC to 
the dorsal periaqueductal grey (PAG), a brainstem motor control area essential for defensive 
responses to social threats11–13, might play a role in the behavioral adaptation to social 
defeat. This adaptive response, occurring as a result of repeated exposure to threatening 
members of the same species, is characterized by a shift towards a more socially avoidant 
behavioral strategy14 that is presumably aimed at diminishing future harm and facilitating 
alternative routes to essential resources15. The adaptation to social defeat in animals may 
have clinical relevance because mood disorders, including major depression and social 
anxiety disorder, are thought to involve an extreme form of an adaptive coping strategy 
elicited by social adversity16, 17 18, 19.
We found that repeated social defeat resulted in increased social avoidance and impaired 
working memory, both phenotypes that were ameliorated by the antidepressant ketamine. 
Selective pharmacogenetic inhibition of mPFC projections to PAG mimicked the effect of 
social defeat, increasing social avoidance and disinhibiting PAG. Social defeat caused a 
reduction in functional connectivity between mPFC and PAG, resembling observations made 
in imaging studies of patients with affective disorders20. Cell-type specific rabies virus 
tracing and ex vivo channelrhodopsin-assisted circuit mapping demonstrated that layer 5 
mPFC projection neurons directly inhibit excitatory inputs to glutamatergic neurons in PAG 
and selective inhibition of these target neurons reduced social avoidance. These findings 
identify a specific projection by which the prefrontal cortex controls social behavior and 
demonstrates how these inputs can be modulated to adapt social behavior to the 
environment.
Results
Glutamatergic mPFC projections to dPAG
Anterograde and retrograde tracer studies have demonstrated prominent neural projections 
from the rat mPFC to the PAG21, 22. However, the precise location and cell identity of these 
Franklin et al.
Page 2
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 projections have not been described. Moreover, although mPFC projection neurons are 
thought to be primarily glutamatergic, at least one study has demonstrated that GABAergic 
mPFC neurons project to the nucleus accumbens (NAc) and are capable of inducing 
avoidance behavior in a place-preference task23. To determine the identity of mPFC neurons 
that project to dorsal PAG (dPAG; we use this term to refer to the entire dorsal half of the 
PAG, including the dorsal-medial, dorsal-lateral and lateral columns), we simultaneously 
injected differentially fluorescent cholera toxin B retrograde tracers into NAc and dPAG 
(Figure 1ab) and visualized retrograde-labeled mPFC neurons. Labeled neurons projecting 
to NAc were located primarily in layer 2/3 with some labeled cells seen in layer 5 (Figure 
1c). Labeled neurons projecting to dPAG, on the other hand, were exclusively located in 
layer 5 (Figure 1d), consistent with layer 5 harboring cortical projection neurons targeting 
brainstem motor areas21, 22. No overlap between NAc and dPAG projecting neurons was 
observed (0/791 and 0/594 neurons, respectively) arguing for a differential identity of these 
neurons in layer 5.
To identify the specific cell-types involved, we first repeated the retrograde labeling 
experiment in Thy1::GFP-M transgenic mice24 in which sparse GFP labeling facilitates the 
morphological identification of neurons. Layer 5 mPFC neurons projecting to dPAG could 
be overwhelmingly identified as pyramidal in morphology, consistent with a glutamatergic 
identity (Figure 1e). Second, the retrograde labeling experiment was repeated in Gad2:: 
tomato transgenic mice in which GABAergic neurons are fluorescently labeled. No overlap 
between mPFC neurons projecting to dPAG and the GABAergic marker was detected (0/583 
neurons; Figure 1f; Supplementary Table 1). These results suggest that, unlike the mPFC-
NAc pathway, the mPFC-dPAG pathway consists exclusively of layer 5 glutamatergic 
projection neurons.
Social defeat induces social avoidance
Chronic exposure of mice to an aggressor leads to social avoidance, but also causes more 
generalized changes in anxiety and depression-like behavior25 that might confound our 
search for plastic changes in the brain that drive behavioral adaptation to social threat. As a 
result, we sought to establish a sub-chronic social defeat paradigm associated with a 
selective adaptation of social behavior. Initially, we exposed male mice in their home cage 
once a day for five minutes to an aggressive conspecific confined behind a wire mesh barrier 
and then allowed them to freely interact for a further ten minutes, during which time the 
intruder repeatedly attacked the resident. Over seven days of social defeat, resident mice 
exhibited a gradual increase in upright submissive postures and freezing, and decrease in 
rearing during the direct encounter with the aggressor (Figure 2a-c). In addition, a gradual 
increase in social avoidance was observed during the anticipatory period in which the 
aggressor remained confined to the wire mesh barrier (Supplementary Figure 1a). 
Importantly, the number of attacks received by the resident did not differ across days 
(Supplementary Figure 1b) demonstrating that the changes in behavior elicited in the 
resident reflect a gradual adaptation to repeated social defeat. Because the behavioral 
adaptation of the resident tended to plateau after four days of social defeat we chose a three 
day defeat procedure for all further experiments to reduce potential generalization or 
habituation to the stress exposure.
Franklin et al.
Page 3
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 To determine whether the sub-chronic social defeat procedure induced a persistent change in 
social coping strategy we monitored the behavior of the resident mouse during the 
anticipatory period immediately prior to each defeat session (Day 1-3), as well as during a 
test session (Test) in which an aggressor was placed into the resident’s cage within a wire 
mesh barrier one week later (Figure 2d). Resident mice spent progressively less time 
investigating the intruder both during the social defeat procedure and one week later (Figure 
2e). Social defeat was accompanied by a progressive and persistent decrease in investigation 
bout duration (Figure 2f) as well as increase in the fraction of investigation bouts that were 
terminated by a rapid withdrawal movement, which we called “retreat,” (Figure 2g). Social 
defeat also elicited avoidance behavior when a female mouse, but not a novel object was 
placed into the wire mesh barrier on the test day, suggesting a selective adaptation of social 
behavior (Figure 2hi; Supplementary Figure 1c). In the Y-maze test, a short-term memory 
task known to depend on mPFC function26, defeated mice showed a significant increase in 
same arm returns, reflecting impaired working memory, but had normal latency to exit the 
arms and distance travelled, confirming unaltered exploratory behavior (Figure 2j-m). No 
significant changes in anxiety or stress-related behavior was seen in the elevated plus maze 
(Supplementary Figure 1d-f) or tail suspension test (Supplementary Figure 1g) confirming a 
selective impact of our defeat procedure on social behavior.
Reversal of social avoidance by antidepressant treatment
Major depression is associated with increased social withdrawal and deficits in working 
memory that can be reversed by antidepressant treatment27, 28. To test whether the 
behavioral effects of social defeat demonstrated here might share pharmacological substrates 
with clinical depression we tested the effect of the rapidly acting antidepressant ketamine, an 
NMDA receptor antagonist, in our social defeat paradigm. On the day following social 
defeat animals received a single systemic injection of either ketamine (2.5 or 5 mg/kg) or 
vehicle and social interaction with an aggressive intruder was investigated one week later 
(Supplementary Figure 2a). Ketamine treatment was associated with a dose-dependent 
increase of time spent investigating the intruder (Supplementary Figure 2b). Ketamine did 
not significantly increase the duration of investigation bouts (Supplementary Figure 2c), but 
was associated with a dose-dependent reversal of the increased retreats induced by social 
defeat (Supplementary Figure 2d). No difference in locomotor activity was detected between 
control and ketamine-treated mice (Supplementary Figure 2e) suggesting a selective effect 
of the drug on social behavior. Ketamine treatment also ameliorated defeat-induced deficits 
in working memory, but had no significant effect on latency to exit the arms or distance 
traveled (Supplementary Figure 2f-i). These findings demonstrate that the persistent changes 
in social and cognitive behavior induced by sub-chronic social defeat depend on neural 
substrates shared with antidepressant treatment.
Inhibition of mPFC-PAG projections mimics social defeat
To test whether mPFC-PAG projections might contribute to the behavioral effects of social 
defeat, we used a pharmacogenetic inhibition method to selectively suppress 
neurotransmission in mPFC-PAG projections. Mice were infected bilaterally in mPFC with 
adeno-associated virus (AAV) expressing the Venus fluorescent protein and HA-tagged 
hM4D (AAV-Syn::Venus-2A-HAhM4D)13, a designer Gαi-coupled receptor activated 
Franklin et al.
Page 4
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 exclusively by the otherwise inert agonist clozapine-N-oxide (CNO)29, implanted with a 
guide cannula above the dPAG, and subsequently subjected to social defeat or control 
conditions (Figure 3a, b). Several weeks after infection HA-immunopositive afferents could 
be observed in PAG (Figure 3c) confirming the presence of hM4D on direct mPFC 
projections to this structure. CNO or vehicle was administered locally to the dPAG five 
minutes prior to behavioral testing one week after social defeat (Figure 3d). CNO-treated 
control mice spent less time investigating the aggressor, displayed shorter investigation 
bouts, and retreated more when compared to vehicle-treated control animals (Figure 3e-g, 
left). CNO-treated control mice were indistinguishable from vehicle-treated and CNO-
treated defeated mice in time spent investigating the aggressor, duration of investigation 
bouts, and increase in retreats (Figure 3e-g), suggesting that mPFC promotes social 
interaction via direct projections to PAG. Additionally, social defeat may involve a 
weakening of mPFC-PAG projections, an interpretation that is consistent with the 
observation that CNO-treated defeated mice behaved similar to defeated mice administered 
vehicle (Figure 3e-g, right). CNO treatment did not affect overall locomotor activity arguing 
against a general role for these projections in exploratory behavior (Supplementary Figure 
3c). Lastly, we performed a mPFC projection inhibition experiment where CNO was 
delivered to the overlying superior colliculus (SC), rather than the dPAG. In this experiment, 
no change in social interaction behavior was detected (Supplementary Figure 3e-h) 
suggesting that CNO delivery in the brain is local and affects a relatively restricted area.
Following behavioral testing, animals were processed for cFos immunohistochemistry as an 
indirect measure of neural activity induced in dPAG by exposure to the aggressor (Figure 
3h-k)13, 30. Vehicle-treated defeated mice showed significantly more cFos immunopositive 
neurons than similarly treated control mice in dPAG (dmPAG and dlPAG) suggesting that 
enhanced activation of dPAG is a neural correlate of social defeat and consistent with a role 
for this structure in defensive responses to a conspecific aggressor11, 13 (Figure 3h-k and 
Supplementary Figure 3d). CNO-treated control mice, on the other hand, showed a similar 
increase in cFos immunostaining across PAG subdivisions as socially defeated mice when 
compared to vehicle-treated controls (Figure 3i-k) demonstrating an inhibitory effect of 
mPFC inputs on PAG activity and corroborating a role for PAG in social avoidance. No 
further increase in the number of cFos immunopositive cells was seen in CNO-treated 
animals that had been exposed to social defeat when compared to similar vehicle-treated 
mice (Figure 3i-k) supporting the hypothesis that the effects of mPFC-PAG inhibition are 
occluded in defeated animals (Figure 3e-g).
Social defeat weakens mPFC-dPAG functional connectivity
Deficient mPFC activity as well as reduced functional connectivity between mPFC and 
subcortical areas has been reported in persons experiencing major depression or social 
anxiety31–35 suggesting that mPFC-subcortical projections might be amenable to 
remodeling in response to social adversity. To determine whether social defeat might weaken 
mPFC-dPAG projections, we measured local field potential (LFP) coherence as a measure of 
functional connectivity between these structures in mice undergoing social defeat (Figure 
4a). Social defeat was associated with a significant decrease in LFP coherence between 
mPFC and dPAG in both the theta and beta frequency bands in resident mice measured close 
Franklin et al.
Page 5
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 to the intruder during the anticipatory period preceding social defeat when compared to 
control animals (Figure 4b, c). A similar trend was observed when the mice were far from 
the intruder (Supplementary Figure 4b, c). Moreover, Granger causality analysis of the LFP 
data revealed a shift in theta causality during defeat, with a significant increase in relative 
dPAG-mPFC causality found in defeated animals when compared to undefeated controls 
(Figure 4d, Supplementary Figure 4d). These results suggest a greater propensity for 
ascending information flow in this circuit following defeat. LFP spectral power in the theta 
band was decreased in defeated mice in both mPFC and dPAG relative to control animals 
(Figure 4e-h, Supplementary Figure 4e-h) suggesting that changes in oscillatory activity in 
one or both of these structures might underlie the altered functional connectivity in the theta 
frequency band. These findings are consistent with changes in LFP coherence in the theta 
frequency band reported between mPFC and both cortical and sub-cortical structures during 
cognitive and anxiety-related behaviors in mice that has been shown to reflect altered 
exchange or coordination of information between structures36, 37. Decreased coherence 
observed in defeated mice is not explained by any changes in oscillatory activity in either the 
mPFC or the dPAG (Figure 4f, h), suggesting a specific decrease in functional connectivity 
between these regions in this frequency band.
Alterations in functional connectivity between brain structures as measured by LFP 
coherence can result from changes in synaptic connectivity between the structures, changes 
in the neural activity of one or the other structure, or changes in neural activity in a third 
structure mutually connected to the recorded structures. To test the first possibility we 
recorded evoked field potentials in dPAG in response to electrical stimulation of the mPFC 
in mice undergoing social defeat (Figure 5a). Periodic stimulation of mPFC during the 
habituation and barrier phases each testing day elicited short latency, multimodal population 
responses in dPAG (Figure 5b and Supplementary Figure 5a). No significant effect of social 
defeat could be detected across the experimental days on short latency response amplitudes 
(Figure 5b), despite significant avoidance developing in defeated animals (Figure 5c). 
However, changes in synaptic strength can be encoded either as changes in postsynaptic 
response amplitude or presynaptic release probability. To examine possible changes in 
presynaptic release probability in the mPFC-dPAG pathway during social defeat, we 
repeated the evoked LFP experiments using a double pulse protocol that allows for 
measurement of paired-pulse facilitation (PPF), a measure dependent on neurotransmitter 
release probability (Figure 5d, e). Initial experiments found maximal PPF in this pathway to 
occur at 50 ms pulse intervals (Figure 5d) and this interval was used for subsequent PPF 
monitoring. No significant differences in PPF were detected across testing days and groups 
(Figure 5e) suggesting an absence of synaptic plasticity in the direct mPFC-dPAG pathway 
during social defeat.
Next, we tested the possibility that reduced LFP connectivity between mPFC and dPAG 
could be driven by changes in afferent synaptic strength in mPFC. The mPFC receives 
prominent inputs from the medial dorsal nucleus of the thalamus (MDT) and reductions in 
this pathway have been hypothesized to occur in major depression38. To examine potential 
changes in this afferent pathway that could underlie weakened mPFC-dPAG functional 
connectivity we measured evoked field potentials in mPFC to stimulation of MDT during 
social defeat (Figure 5f). Periodic stimulation of MDT during the habituation and barrier 
Franklin et al.
Page 6
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 phases each testing day elicited short latency, multimodal population responses in mPFC 
(Figure 5g and Supplementary Figure 5b). A significant reduction of short latency response 
amplitudes was detected across testing days in socially defeated mice when compared to 
control animals (Figure 5g), which paralleled the development of avoidance (Figure 5h). 
These findings demonstrate that weakening of mPFC afferent synaptic strength occurs 
during social defeat and suggests that changes in mPFC afferent input strength underlies the 
weakened functional connectivity observed between mPFC and dPAG (Figure 4b, c).
mPFC projections target glutamatergic dPAG cells
Our anatomical tract tracing (Figure 1) and pharmacogenetic projection inhibition (Figure 3) 
data argue that glutamatergic projections from mPFC act to inhibit dPAG function. To 
identify the local dPAG cell-types that mediate mPFC afferent control we performed cell 
type-specific monosynaptic circuit tracing using Cre-dependent pseudo-typed rabies virus39. 
Cre-dependent AAV expressing either the pseudo-typed rabies EnvA receptor TVA (AAV-
Ef1a::DIO-TVA-mCherry) or the rabies virus protein G (AAV-CAG::DIO-RabiesG) were 
simultaneously delivered to dPAG of mice carrying either the Vglut2::Cre or Gad2::Cre 
transgenes40, 41 followed by infection with a pseudo-typed G-deleted rabies virus (ΔG-
EnvA rabies-GFP; Figure 6a). Following rabies infection brains were processed to 
systematically identify and visualize retrograde infected neurons (GFP+, mCherry- cells) 
across the entire brain rostral to the infection site. A total of 3231 cells were identified 
following infection of Vglut2::Cre mice (Figure 6b-e; Supplementary Table 2). The number 
of input cells present in each mouse was weighted to the density of starter cells in the dPAG 
at the centre of the infection site, and then averaged (Figure 6e). From the weighted 
averages, we observed that 90% of input cells were found in hypothalamus and thalamus, 
consistent with the major inputs of PAG deriving from diencephalic structures42. Only 6% 
of retrograde infected neurons resided in cortex, of which 20/182 were found in mPFC. 
Overwhelmingly, labeled mPFC neurons had a pyramidal morphology (Figure 6c) consistent 
with a layer 5 projection neuron identity (Figure 1)43. Similarly, 85% of cells identified 
following infection of Gad2::Cre mice resided in hypothalamus or thalamus (Supplementary 
Figure 6a; Supplementary Table 3), but we were unable to identify any retrograde labeled 
cells in cortex of infected Gad2::Cre mice. The relatively low frequency of long distance 
retrograde labeling in this line (total = 14 cells) suggested that long-distance afferents onto 
this class of cells are rare. These findings demonstrate that glutamatergic Vglut2+ neurons in 
dPAG are the major target of mPFC afferents and suggest that this cell class mediates the 
inhibitory input of mPFC on dPAG-mediated defensive responses.
To test whether neural activity in Vglut2+ dPAG cells is selectively modulated by mPFC 
inputs as predicted by the rabies data, we performed ex vivo ChR2-mediated circuit 
mapping44. Following delivery of AAV-CAG:: ChR2-YFP to mPFC, acute slices were taken 
from dPAG and patch clamp recording was performed to examine light-evoked synaptic 
responses. Experiments were performed in either Vglut2::tomato or Vgat::tomato reporter 
mice to allow selective recording from identified glutamatergic and GABAergic neurons 
(Figure 6f, Supplementary Figure 6b)45. Short latency excitatory postsynaptic currents 
(Figure 6g-i) were identified in a small fraction (13%) of recorded Vglut2+ cells, but in none 
of the Vgat+ cells (Figure 6h). However, regardless of whether they received short latency 
Franklin et al.
Page 7
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 inputs or not, the majority of Vglut2+ cells showed a significant reduction in the frequency 
of spontaneous excitatory inputs following ChR2 activation that was absent in control slices 
from non-infected animals (Figure 6j-k). Vgat+ cells, on the other hand, did not show a 
significant change in spontaneous excitatory inputs following ChR2 activation (Figure 6k) 
arguing for a selective inhibition of glutamatergic target cell afferents. Given the long 
latency of the inhibitory effect and the fact that the experiments were conducted under 
conditions in which light delivery failed to elicit action potentials, these findings 
demonstrate that glutamatergic mPFC projections directly suppress excitatory inputs onto 
Vglut2+ dPAG neurons via a presynaptic neuromodulatory mechanisms.
Finally, we examined the functional contribution of Vglut2+ and Gad2+ neurons in dPAG to 
social avoidance behavior during social defeat. Selective pharmacogenetic inhibition of 
neurons in dPAG was carried out by local infection of Vglut2::Cre or Gad2::Cre mice with 
AAV-Syn::DIO-hM4D-mCherry and subsequent systemic delivery of CNO 45 minutes prior 
to behavioral testing on day 10 (Figure 7a, Supplementary Figure 7). For Vglut2+ neurons a 
significant increase in time spent investigating the aggressor was seen in Cre+ mice when 
compared to Cre– littermates regardless of whether they experienced social defeat or not 
(Figure 7b). Inhibition of Vglut2+ PAG neurons had no significant effect on the duration of 
investigation bouts or the number of retreats (Figure 7c, d). No significant difference in 
avoidance behavior between Cre+ and Cre– mice was seen during the three days of social 
defeat prior to CNO administration (Supplementary Figure 7a) ruling out a confounding 
effect of genotype in these results. These data demonstrate that Vglut2+ neurons in dPAG are 
responsible for promoting avoidance during social interaction with an aggressor, a finding 
that is in line with the optogenetic activation of these cells producing defensive behavior and 
analgesia46 and the non-specific pharmacogenetic inhibition of this structure blocking 
defensive responses to social threat13. On the other hand, selective pharmacogenetic 
inhibition of Gad2+ neurons elicited no significant change in time spent investigating the 
aggressor, nor duration of investigation bouts, although there was a decreased number of 
retreats in CNO treated mice when compared to vehicle treated littermates (Supplementary 
Figure 7d-f). These findings suggest that Gad2+ neurons in dPAG do not make a significant 
contribution to social approach behaviour, at least under the conditions used in our 
experiments, but they may promote some aspects of defensive behavior.
Discussion
Considerable data has implicated neural activity in mPFC in the direct modulation of social 
behavior4, 5, but until now the projections mediating this effect were unknown. Our data 
demonstrate that the modulation of social approach/avoidance behavior by mPFC is 
mediated via direct projections to PAG, a structure required for the expression of innate 
motivated behaviors including defense, aggression, sex, maternal care, hunting, and 
foraging47–51. Moreover, the existence of major mPFC projections to both dorsal, defense-
related, as well as lateral, approach-related, behavioral control columns in PAG (Figure 3c) 
suggests that these direct projections are likely to play important roles in the cortical 
modulation of behavioral adaptation under multiple environmental conditions, not just those 
described here. For example, firing of specific classes of neurons in mPFC has been shown 
to correlate with behavioral engagement and disengagement during foraging52 and mPFC is 
Franklin et al.
Page 8
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 proposed to play a general role in decision-making in the face of environmental uncertainty.
53–55
We used retrograde tracing, trans-synaptic rabies labeling, and ex vivo electrophysiology to 
show that layer 5 glutamatergic neurons in mPFC make monosynaptic excitatory 
connections onto glutamatergic neurons in dPAG and that, unlike mPFC projections to NAc, 
GABAergic neurons do not contribute to these afferents (Figure 1 and Figure 6). Our 
discovery that these neurons are exclusively layer 5 excitatory pyramidal neurons is 
consistent with the known projections from this cortical layer to brainstem motor control 
areas involved in triggering and modulating behavior21, 22. Moreover, simultaneous 
retrograde labeling from dPAG and NAc showed that these mPFC projection neurons are 
non-overlapping (Figure 1). NAc afferents arise primarily from mPFC neurons residing in 
layer 2/3 and include long-range GABAergic neurons. This distinction suggests that 
different neuronal firing information is provided by mPFC to dPAG and NAc, a structure 
implicated in reward and behavioral selection. ChR2-assisted circuit mapping showed that 
only a small fraction (~10%) of Vglut2+ neurons in dPAG receive direct excitatory mPFC 
inputs, but that the vast majority receive strong indirect inhibitory mPFC inputs via a 
presynaptic neuromodulatory mechanisms (Figure 6). These findings suggest that 
glutamatergic mPFC projection neurons exert an inhibitory effect on dPAG by suppressing 
excitatory PAG afferents, possibly including those from medial hypothalamic regions that 
promote defensive behavior. Our findings raise the possibility that the small fraction of 
dPAG neurons receiving direct mPFC excitatory inputs may represent a specialized subclass 
of Vglut2+ neurons (Figure 6). Our behavioral findings showing that selective 
pharmacogenetic inhibition of Vglut2+, but not Gad2+ cells in dPAG increase social 
approach are consistent with a selective inhibitory presynaptic effect on Vglut2+ neurons in 
dPAG (Figure 7 and Supplementary Figure 7).
We established a sub-chronic social defeat procedure that induces a long-lasting increase in 
avoidance of social stimuli, including aggressive males as well as females, but not non-
social stimuli, such as novel objects (Figure 2). Under these conditions, selective inhibition 
of mPFC-dPAG projections by pharmacogenetic hM4D-mediated projection inhibition 
caused a disinhibition of neural activity in dPAG and an increase in social avoidance (Figure 
3). The observation that projection inhibition was not effective in socially defeated mice 
(Figure 3) suggested that the pathway was weakened by social defeat. This hypothesis was 
corroborated by LFP coherence data demonstrating a reduction of mPFC-dPAG functional 
connectivity in defeated mice and a switch in direction of causality with dPAG driving 
mPFC more strongly in defeated mice (Figure 4). Follow-up experiments using evoked field 
potential recording in behaving mice found that weakened functional connectivity between 
mPFC and dPAG was driven by a decrease in synaptic strength of afferent inputs to mPFC in 
the absence of any change in presynaptic or postsynaptic strength in the direct mPFC-dPAG 
pathway (Figure 5).
Our data have several implications. First, they support a critical role for dPAG in social 
behavior. Extensive lesion, pharmacological, and imaging data implicate dPAG in defensive 
responses to predators56–59. However, recent data show that dPAG is also required for 
flight, freezing, and avoidance behavior following exposure of rodents to aggressive 
Franklin et al.
Page 9
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 conspecifics13, 30. Our findings extend this role to social avoidance in anticipation of threat 
(Figure 2). Such a role in modulating anticipatory avoidance is consistent with human 
imaging data demonstrating a rapid switch of BOLD signal activity from mPFC to dPAG in 
anticipation of predators12 or predator-like59 visual stimuli and suggests that dPAG may be 
involved in anxiety and as well as fear-related behaviors across species.
Second, our data demonstrate that functional connectivity between mPFC and dPAG can be 
moderated by social experience. Our in vivo evoked field potential experiments failed to find 
significant alterations in presynaptic or postsynaptic strength in the mPFC-dPAG pathway 
during defeat, but instead found a significant reduction in evoked responses in mPFC to 
thalamic stimulation (Figure 5). These data suggest that mPFC-dPAG functional 
connectivity is weakened by a reduction in upstream afferent drive during defeat. Numerous 
studies have found that dendrites of mPFC pyramidal neurons can atrophy in response to 
chronic stress60, 61, 54, 55 and reductions in the amplitude of excitatory inputs onto mPFC 
layer 5 pyramidal neurons were observed in subordinate mice and bidirectional manipulation 
of these receptors was sufficient to induce changes in stable hierarchies among cage mates4. 
Interestingly, one current theory of the physiological deficits underlying major depression 
proposes that reductions in thalamic inputs to mPFC are associated with a switch in mPFC 
processing from external to internal sensory information38.
While until now selective manipulation of mPFC outputs has not been shown to directly 
modulate social behavior,6, 62 Challis et al. (2014) has shown that mPFC-brainstem 
projections play a role in the induction of behavioral plasticity during social defeat. In this 
study, daily optogenetic activation or inhibition of mPFC terminals in the dorsal raphe 
nucleus immediately following social defeat blocked or precipitated social avoidance 
measured 24 hours after the last defeat experience. Because mPFC neurons provide 
excitatory input to local GABAergic neurons that tonically inhibit serotonin neuron firing in 
the raphe nucleus (and thus control serotonin release across the brain)6, mPFC projections 
may have a dual role in regulating global neuromodulatory tone (via dorsal raphe) and 
behavior (via dPAG) to achieve adaptation to social threats. It is, however, important to note 
that there are also key procedural differences between the current study and Challis et al. 
(2014). In our social defeat procedure, mice were tested for social avoidance in the same 
context as the aggression occurred, and thus our findings may be dependent to some degree 
on this aspect of classical contextual conditioning.
Both our cell-type specific retrograde rabies tracing and ex vivo electrophysiology 
experiments identified Vglut2+ neurons as the major target of mPFC projections in dPAG 
(Figure 6). Selective inhibition of Vglut2+ neurons in dPAG reduced social avoidance during 
presentation of the intruder (Figure 7) and recent studies have shown that optogenetic 
activation of this population of cells evokes defensive behaviors46. Our discovery that the 
vast majority of these cells receive presynaptic inhibitory inputs from mPFC provides a 
mechanism for the inhibitory effects of mPFC projections on cFos and social avoidance 
responses during exposure to an aggressor (Figure 3). The absence of either direct or 
presynaptic mPFC modulation of Vgat+ neurons (Figure 6 and Supplementary Figure 6) and 
the absence of a behavioral effect of pharmacogenetic inhibition of this class of dPAG 
Franklin et al.
Page 10
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 neurons was surprising, but suggests that cortical modulation of dPAG does not significantly 
depend on feedforward GABAergic inhibition.
Evidence from neuroimaging studies suggests that the mPFC-dPAG circuit we describe is 
likely relevant for understanding the prefrontal cortical control of human behavior. Direct 
projections between mPFC and dPAG have been described in primates63 and magnetic 
resonance imaging studies report a switch in brain activity from mPFC to dPAG during the 
pre-strike phase in a pseudo-predator video game situation59 suggesting that reciprocal 
activity in these structures may be involved in anticipatory fear in humans. While our study 
was limited to males due to its reliance on inter-male aggression, mPFC-dPAG projections 
are conserved across sexes and are likely to control instinctive behavioral outputs also in 
females. Electrical stimulation of human dPAG elicits the sensation of being chased, 
supporting its role in mediating avoidance responses to threat.64 Furthermore, our 
observation that the mPFC-dPAG-dependent social avoidance induced by social defeat can 
be reversed by treatment with a single dose of ketamine (Supplementary Figure 2), a potent 
antidepressant, suggests that this pathway may be a target of antidepressants that could serve 
as a neural substrate for the testing of antidepressant efficacy. Further work will be needed to 
identify the molecular mechanisms by which social experience remodels this pathway.
Online Methods
Animals
C57BL/6J and CD-1 mice were obtained from local EMBL or EMMA colonies, or Charles 
River Laboratories. CD-1 intruders were selected as aggressors if they attacked during the 
first 3 minutes after placement in the home cage of a novel C57BL/6J mouse across 3 
consecutive days, as previously described.65 These mice typically represented the most 
aggressive 15% of CD-1 mice tested. Vglut2::Cre40 and Gad2::Cre (JAX stock 019022) 
mice were used in a heterozygous state. Vglut2::Cre;RC::LSL-tomato (called 
Vglut2::tomato), Gad2::Cre;RC::LSL-tomato (called Gad2::tomato), and VGAT::Cre; 
RC::LSL-tomato (called VGat-tomato) mice were obtained by crossing either the 
Vglut2::Cre, Gad2::Cre line, or Vgat::Cre line with Rosa26-CAG::loxP-STOP-loxP-tomato 
(JAX stock 007914). Vglut2::Cre;RC::LSL-EYFP (called Vglut2-EYFP) mice were 
obtained by crossing VGlut2::Cre (Jax stock 016963) with Rosa26-LSL-EYFP (Jax stock 
006148). Thy1::GFP-M24 mice were used in a homozygous state. Mice were maintained in 
a temperature and humidity-controlled facility on a 12-hour light-dark cycle (lights on at 
7:00) with food and water ad libitum. All behavioral testing occurred during the animals’ 
light cycle. All mice were handled according to protocols approved by the Italian Ministry of 
Health (#137/2011-B, #231/2011-B, #541/2015-PR) and commensurate with NIH guidelines 
for the ethical treatment of animals, except in vitro electrophysiology experiments which 
were conducted in the United Kingdom and were licensed under the United 
KingdomAnimals (Scientific Procedures) Act of 1986 following local ethical approval 
(Project Licence 70.7652).
Franklin et al.
Page 11
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Social defeat
Singly-housed adult male mice (C57BL/6, 12-14 weeks old) were subjected to social defeat 
by placing an aggressive male CD-1 intruder mouse into the home cage of the experimental 
animal for 15 minutes each day. During the first 5 minutes the intruder was contained within 
a wire-mesh enclosure to prevent violent contact. Social approach and avoidance behavior, 
including number of investigations, investigation bout length, total time spent investigating, 
and number of retreats (sudden movement away from the intruder) was quantified during the 
first 3 minutes of this anticipatory period (Observer XT 11, Noldus) by an experimenter 
blind to the treatment group. For defeated mice, the wire-mesh enclosure was removed, after 
which the intruder invariably attacked the resident repeatedly. Submissive behaviors 
(freezing and upright defensive postures), and exploration (rearing) of the resident and 
aggressive attacks of the intruder were quantified during the ten-minute interaction period. 
Control animals were treated in the same manner, except that the wire mesh enclosure was 
not removed. This allowed control mice similar levels of visual, olfactory, and auditory 
contact with the aggressor as defeated mice.
Social avoidance test
Five to seven days after the last social defeat session, animals were subjected to a social 
interaction test in which an aggressive CD-1 intruder (or a novel female or object, where 
specified) was constrained within a wire-mesh enclosure placed into the home cage of the 
experimental animal. The animals were allowed to interact through the wire-mesh barrier for 
5 minutes, and approach and avoidance behaviors were scored in the same way as during the 
anticipatory period of social defeat. For mPFC-dPAG projection inhibition CNO was slowly 
infused via a single indwelling cannula (0.0015 mg, 0.15 μl, see below) immediately prior to 
testing. For Vglut2+ and Gad2+ dPAG inhibition, all mice were first tested under control 
conditions, and then tested under defeat condition. Seven days after the last control session, 
and seven days after the last defeat session, CNO (3 mg/kg i.p.) or vehicle was systemically 
administered 45-60 min prior to testing. Testing consisted of a habituation session during 
which the experimental animal was allowed free exploration of their home cage for 5 
minutes in the testing room, followed by the introduction of the intruder, behind a barrier, 
for a further 5 minutes.
Y-maze
The Y-maze consisted of three grey, opaque plastic arms arranged at 120° angles around a 
center area. Animals were placed in a counterbalanced manner into one arm of the Y-maze 
and allowed to explore all arms of the maze for 8 minutes. Following a 2-minute habituation 
period, the percentage of correct choices and same arm returns were assessed for 6 minutes. 
A correct choice was quantified as each time the mouse entered all three arms without 
returning to an arm previously entered. Same arm returns (SARs) counted the number of 
times that a mouse entered fully into the center area and then returned to the arm they had 
just exited. Latency to exit the start arm and total distance travelled during the test were also 
quantified. Control and defeated mice were tested in the Y-maze one to two weeks after the 
last defeat session. Following the defeat treatment, mice either remained undisturbed, or 
were injected with vehicle, 2.5 mg/kg ketamine, or 5 mg/kg ketamine one day after the last 
Franklin et al.
Page 12
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 defeat session. All injected mice tested in the Y-maze were also previously tested in the 
social avoidance test.
Elevated Plus Maze
Mice were placed for 10 minutes on a four-arm plus maze made of two open and two closed 
arms (grey PVC, 30 cm x 6 cm) raised 50 cm above the ground. Manual scoring was done to 
quantify rearing and stretch attends in protected (body in closed arm) versus unprotected 
(body in open arm) areas as a measure of risk assessment. All elevated plus maze data was 
collected from surgeried mice previously tested in the social avoidance test.
Tail Suspension Test
Mice were suspended by their tail from a hook (43 cm from floor) for 6 min. A plastic 
cylinder was placed around the tail to prevent tail climbing. All tail suspension data was 
collected from surgeried mice previously tested in the social avoidance test.
Stereotactic surgery
Prior to surgery, mice were anesthetized with ketamine (100 mg/kg, i.p.) and xylazine (10 
mg/kg, i.p.) and placed in a stereotactic frame (Kopf Instruments); isoflurane in oxygen was 
administered, as needed, to maintain anesthesia. For cholera toxin mediated retrograde 
tracing, the skull surface was exposed and mice were infused with 0.2 μl cholera toxin 
subunit B 0.5% (CTB647 and CTB555, Life Technologies) into dPAG (AP: -4.2; L: -1.18; 
DV: -2.36 from skull; angle: -26°) and into NAc (AP: +1.42 mm; L: -1.33 mm; DV: -3.5 mm 
from brain surface) using a glass capillary. In separate experiments Thy1::GFP (n = 8) or 
Gad2::Cre;RC::LSL-tomato (n = 1) mice were used. Serial coronal sections (250 μm, except 
Gad2::Cre;RC::LSL-tomato, 50 μm) were cut on a vibratome and visualized using confocal 
microscopy. For mPFC-dPAG or mPFC-SuColl projection inhibition, the skull surface was 
exposed and mice were infused bilaterally with 0.2 μl of an adeno-associated virus 
expressing Venus and hM4D (AAV-Syn::Venus-2A-HAhM4D-WPRE13) using a glass 
capillary filled with 1 μl of virus that was lowered unilaterally into the mPFC. After a 2-
minute delay, the capillary was retracted, and the contralateral mPFC was similarly infused. 
For local CNO delivery a single 26-gauge stainless steel guide cannula (PlasticsOne) was 
implanted after viral infection into dPAG (AP: -4.16 mm; L: -1.0 mm; DV: -1.98 mm, angle: 
-26°; 1.25 mm projection from the pedestal), or into SuColl (AP: -4.1 mm; L: -0.75 mm; 
DV: -1.85 mm, angle: -30°, .20 mm projection from the pedestal) and secured to the skull 
using dental cement. For LFP recordings, the skull surface was exposed and two stainless 
steel watch screws were fixed permanently into the posterior and anterior portions of the 
skull, to serve as a ground and a reference, respectively. Teflon-coated tungsten wire 
electrodes were implanted unilaterally into PrL or Cg66 (AP: +1.65 mm; L: -0.50, DV: -1.50 
mm from brain surface) and dPAG (AP: -4.16 mm; L: -1.32 mm, DV: -2.00 mm from brain 
surface, 26° lateral angle). Implanted electrodes were cemented directly to the skull with 
dental cement (DuraLay). For mPFC-dPAG and MDT-mPFC evoked potentials, animals 
were implanted unilaterally with bipolar stimulating electrodes into mPFC (AP: +1.72 mm, 
L: -0.40 mm, DV: -1.35 mm from brain surface) or MDT (AP: -1.2 mm, L: -0.40 mm, DV: 
-3.250 mm from brain surface) and a recording stereotrode into dPAG (AP: 4.1 mm, L: -1.3 
mm, DV: -2.35 mm from skull surface, 26° lateral angle) or mPFC (AP: +1.72 mm, L: -0.40 
Franklin et al.
Page 13
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 mm, DV: -1.35 mm from brain surface) respectively. Electrodes were made of 50 μm Teflon-
coated tungsten wires (Advent Research Materials) and were used for stimulation or 
recording purposes as needed. A 0.1 mm bare silver wire was affixed to a stainless steel 
watch screw fixed permanently in the skull as a ground. The wires were connected to two 
three pins sockets (Archer connectors-M52). The connectors were fixed directly to the skull 
using acrylic resin (DuraLay) and connected to the Plexon system using a home-made 
adaptor. For rabies-mediated retrograde tracing, Vglut2::Cre and Gad2::Cre mice were 
infused into dPAG as described above with 0.1 μl AAV helper viruses that provided Cre-
dependent expression of TVA and Rabies protein G (AAV-EF1a::DIO-TVA-mCherry-
WPRE, AAV-CAG::DIO-RabiesG-WPRE; UNC Vector Core) followed 2-3 weeks later by 
infusion of an EnvA pseudo-typed rabies virus in which the protein G gene is replaced by 
GFP (1 μl; Salk Institute Vector Core39). AAV and rabies were both targeted towards the 
midline, but injected unilaterally on opposite sides to avoid co-infection of the pipette tract. 
For cell-specific inhibition in dPAG Vglut2::Cre or Gad2::Cre mice were infused 14 days 
prior to testing with 0.2 μl of AAV expressed hM4D in a Cre-dependent manner (AAV-
Syn::DIO-hM4DmCherry-WPRE; UNC Vector Core). Serial coronal sections (70 μm) were 
cut on a vibratome and visualized under a microscope to verify placement of all electrodes, 
cannulas, and virus infections (Supplementary Figure 3a, 4a). Only mice with appropriate 
placements were included in the reported data. For in vitro electrophysiology, 
Vglut2::Cre;RC::LSL-tomato or Vgat::Cre;RC::LSL-tomato male mice were injected 
bilaterally into mPFC (AP: +1.7; ML: ±0.6; DV: -1.35) with 0.05 ul of AAV2-CamKIIa-
hChR2(H134R)-EYFP virus (UNC Vector Core) delivered via manual hydraulic pump 
(Narishige). Following injection mice were allowed at least 2 weeks for viral expression.
In vivo electrophysiology
All mice were allowed to recover for at least 7 days before testing and mice were habituated 
repeatedly for several days to the recording device by attaching a mock device of similar 
size and weight. LFP recordings were performed using a battery-powered custom wireless 
amplifier and recording device (23 x 15 x 13 mm, 3.7 g) located on the head of the 
animal67, 68. LFP signals from electrodes located in mPFC and dPAG were sampled at 
1600 Hz (bandpass filter 1-700 Hz) and stored in the on-board 1 GB memory chip at 1600 
Hz69. A built-in accelerometer registered the movements of the animal throughout the 
experiment and an infrared detector on the device was used to synchronize 
electrophysiological and video recordings. For evoked potential recordings, the neural signal 
was amplified (gain 1000x) and filtered (bandwidth of 0.1Hz-10 kHz) through a headstage 
and a differential pre-amplifier (Omniplex, Plexon). Signals were digitized at 40 kHz and 
continuous recordings were collected for offline analysis. Synaptic field potentials in dPAG 
were evoked using a pulse generator (CS-420, Cibertec) and electrical stimulator 
(ISU-200bip, Cibertec) during homecage exploration and while the intruder was present in 
the home cage behind a barrier using a single 100 μs, square, biphasic (negative-positive) 
pulse applied to mPFC at a rate of 0.1 Hz. For each animal, the stimulus intensity was 
40-50% of the intensity necessary for evoking a maximum fEPSP. Evoked potentials were 
monitored using an oscilloscope (Tektronix). At completion of the experiment, mice were 
anesthetized using 2.5% Avertin (400 mg/kg, i.p.; Sigma-Aldrich) and perfused 
transcardially (4.0% wt/vol paraformaldehyde, 0.1M phosphate buffer, pH 7.4). For LFP 
Franklin et al.
Page 14
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 recordings, a small electrolytic lesion was made around the tip of the electrode (0.4 mA, 3 s; 
Ugo Basile Lesion Making Device, Ugo Basile) before the animal was perfused. Serial 
coronal sections (40 or 70 μm) were cut on a vibratome and visualized under a microscope 
to verify all electrode placements (Supplementary Figure 3).
In vitro electrophysiology
Acute coronal slices (200 μm) containing the PAG were prepared from 11-13 week old mice. 
Animals were killed by decapitation following isoflurane anaesthesia. Coronal slices were 
cut at 4°C using a 7000smz-2 vibrating microtome (Campden, UK). Brain slices were 
incubated at 37°C for one hour before being kept at room temperature prior to experiments 
in artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF) containing: 125 mM NaCl2, 2.5 mM KCl, 26 mM 
NaHCO3, 1.25 mM NaH2PO4, 25 mM glucose, 2 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgCl2, 0.2% biocytin 
(pH 7.3 when bubbled with 95%O2 and 5%CO2). Boroscillicate glass micropipettes with a 
3-6MΩ resistance (Harvard Apparatus, UK) were filled with: 136 mM K-Gluconate, 4 mM 
KCl, 10 mM HEPES, 1 mM EGTA, 2 mM Na2ATP, 2 mM Mg2ATP, 0.5 mM Na2GTP, 
filtered (2 μm) prior to patching. Fluorescent cells were visualized on an upright Slicescope 
(Scientifica, UK) using a 60× objective and the relative coordinates of each neuron were 
recorded. Whole-cell patch clamp recordings were achieved at room temperature, using a 
HEKA 800 Amplifier (HEKA, Germany). Data was acquired at 25 kHz using custom 
software. Channelrhodopsin was activated with widefield 490 nm LED illumination 
(CoolLED; 1ms pulses). After electrophysiological recordings, slices were fixed in 4% 
paraformaldehyde for 15 minutes, incubated in blocking solution for 30 minutes containing 
5% normal goat serum and 0.3 Triton X 100 in PBS, followed by primary antibody at 4°C 
overnight. The slices were then washed with 0.3% Triton X 100 in PBS (PBS-T) for 3x10 
min, incubated with secondary antibody for 1h at room temperature, and after 2x10 min 
washes in PBS-T, they were incubated for 20 minutes in PBS-T with streptavidin to 
visualize biocytin-labelled neurons. After an additional 10 min wash in PBS, slices were 
mounted in Slow Fade mounting medium (Molecular Probes). All antibodies used were 
from Molecular Probes: chicken anti-GFP (1:1000), Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated goat anti-
chicken IgG (1:1000), Alexa Fluor 635-conjugated streptavidin (1:500). Recorded slices 
with biocytin-filled neurons were imaged with 10x and 40x objectives on a Leica SP8 
inverted confocal microscope (Leica). Deconvolution was performed using Huygens 
Software (Scientific Volume Imaging) and tiling of individual images was done in Fiji 
(Schindelin et. al., 2012).
Immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence
Immediately following social avoidance testing mice were returned to their housing room 
for 90 minutes, deeply anesthetized with Avertin (400 mg/kg, i.p.; Sigma-Aldrich), perfused 
transcardially (4.0% wt/vol paraformaldehyde, 0.1M phosphate buffer, pH 7.4) and the brain 
was removed and post-fixed overnight in 4.0% paraformaldehyde. The posterior half of the 
brain was cryoprotected (30% sucrose wt/vol, 0.1M PBS, pH 7.4) at 4°C overnight and flash 
frozen in isopentane. Coronal sections were taken with a sliding cryostat (40 μm; Leica 
Microsystems) and immunohistochemistry was performed. For cFos visualization floating 
sections were incubated with anti-cFos antibody (1:10,000, Ab-5; Calbiochem) for 72 hours 
at 4°C, after which the primary antiserum was localized using the avidin-biotin complex 
Franklin et al.
Page 15
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 system (Vector Laboratories). Sections were incubated for 90 minutes at room temperature 
in a solution of biotinylated goat anti-rabbit (PK-6101, Vector Laboratories) and then 
incubated in an avidin-biotin horseradish peroxidase complex solution (ABC Elite Kit, 
Vector Laboratories) for 90 minutes at room temperature. The peroxidase complex was 
visualized by incubating slices for 5 minutes with a chromogenic solution consisting of 
0.05% wt/vol 3,30-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich), 6 μg/ml glucose 
oxidase (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.4 mg/ml ammonium chloride in PBS, and then adding 2 mg/ml 
glucose to the solution. The reaction was stopped by extensive washing in PBS and sections 
were mounted, dehydrated and cover-slipped with quick mounting medium (Eukitt, Fluka 
Analytical). cFos immunopositive cells were counted using manual thresholding and 
automatic counting (ImageJ) in a section chosen randomly (Bregma -4.16) by an investigator 
blind to experimental treatment.
For visualization of HA-tagged hM4D, slices were mounted onto SuperPlus slides and 
allowed to dry. Slides were then boiled in citrate buffer (10 mM, pH 6.0) for 10 minutes and 
allowed to cool to room temperature, before being submerged in PBS containing 0.4% 
Triton-X (PBS-T) for 1 hour. They were then placed in blocking solution (1% BSA, 5% 
Normal Goat Serum in PBS-T) at room temperature for 1 hour, followed by incubation with 
a rabbit anti-HA mAb (C29F4, Catalog #3724, Cell Signaling) at 1:500 in blocking buffer. 
Slides were exposed to secondary antibody (Alexa Fluor 546-conjugated goat anti-rabbit 
IgG, Invitrogen) in blocking buffer at room temperature for 90 minutes. Slides were then 
exposed to 4', 6-diamidino-2-phylindole, dihydrochloride (DAPI, Molecular Probes) at 
1:1,000 in PBS at room temperature for 20 minutes. Slices were washed extensively with 
PBS between incubations and following DAPI staining.
Electrophysiology data analysis and code availability
LFP data were analyzed using Matlab (Mathworks) with the Chronux toolbox (coherencyc, 
http://chronux.org/70). To assess synchrony between LFP signals coherence was calculated 
with the multi-taper method, using a 200 ms window, time-bandwidth product (TW) of 5, 
and 9 tapers. The Granger causality used an order of 20 estimated by a bivariate 
autoregressive model. LFPs in the mPFC and dPAG were recorded on the 1st day and 3rd 
day of social defeat during the anticipatory period. fEPSP slopes were analyzed off-line 
using commercial computer programs (Spike2 and SIGAVG, Cambridge Electronic Design) 
using the same rate period.
Statistical analysis
Data analysis was performed using Statview (SAS) or Sigmaplot, except in vitro 
electrophysiology data, which was analyzed in Python 2.7 using custom written software. 
All data are reported as mean ± standard error. Sample sizes were not predetermined using 
statistical methods, however all sample sizes were similar to previously reported behavioral, 
molecular, and in vivo electrophysiological studies37, 71. To measure statistical significance 
for differences in behavior between control and defeated mice, two-way or repeated 
measures ANOVAs followed by Fisher's PLSD post-hoc testing when appropriate were 
performed. Two-tailed t-tests planned a priori were used to assess the effects of mPFC-dPAG 
inhibition separately in control and defeated mice. fEPSP data was analysed using a repeated 
Franklin et al.
Page 16
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 two-way ANOVA. For analysis of local field potential data we used non-parametric Mann-
Whitney U-tests as previously described to compare theta, beta, and low gamma coherence 
between control and defeated mice37.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
We thank F. Zonfrillo for animal husbandry, and P. Heppenstall (Mouse Biology Unit, EMBL) for providing the 
Vglut2::Cre mouse line. Funding was provided by EMBL (C.T.G., T.B.F.), the ERC Advanced Grant “Corefear” 
(C.T.G.), the Swiss National Science Foundation Advanced Fellows Program (T.B.F.), the Wellcome Trust/Royal 
Society Henry Dale Fellowship (098400/Z/12/Z) and Medical Research Council (MRC) grant MC-UP-1201/1 
(T.B.), a Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant no. 659842 (Z.P.), and One hundred Talents Program of CAS and funding 
from Shenzhen city government (JCYJ20140901003938992, KQCX2015033117354153) (Y.Z.).
References
1. Arnsten AF. Stress signalling pathways that impair prefrontal cortex structure and function. Nature 
reviews Neuroscience. 2009; 10:410–422. [PubMed: 19455173] 
2. Takahashi A, Nagayasu K, Nishitani N, Kaneko S, Koide T. Control of intermale aggression by 
medial prefrontal cortex activation in the mouse. PloS one. 2014; 9:e94657. [PubMed: 24740241] 
3. Carrier N, Kabbaj M. Sex differences in social interaction behaviors in rats are mediated by 
extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 expression in the medial prefrontal cortex. Neuroscience. 
2012; 212:86–92. [PubMed: 22521590] 
4. Wang F, et al. Bidirectional control of social hierarchy by synaptic efficacy in medial prefrontal 
cortex. Science. 2011; 334:693–697. [PubMed: 21960531] 
5. Covington HE 3rd, et al. Antidepressant effect of optogenetic stimulation of the medial prefrontal 
cortex. The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience. 2010; 
30:16082–16090. [PubMed: 21123555] 
6. Challis C, Beck SG, Berton O. Optogenetic modulation of descending prefrontocortical inputs to the 
dorsal raphe bidirectionally bias socioaffective choices after social defeat. Frontiers in behavioral 
neuroscience. 2014; 8:43. [PubMed: 24596546] 
7. Goodson JL. The vertebrate social behavior network: evolutionary themes and variations. Hormones 
and behavior. 2005; 48:11–22. [PubMed: 15885690] 
8. Warden MR, et al. A prefrontal cortex-brainstem neuronal projection that controls response to 
behavioural challenge. Nature. 2012; 492:428–432. [PubMed: 23160494] 
9. Bossert JM, et al. Role of projections from ventral medial prefrontal cortex to nucleus accumbens 
shell in context-induced reinstatement of heroin seeking. The Journal of neuroscience : the official 
journal of the Society for Neuroscience. 2012; 32:4982–4991. [PubMed: 22492053] 
10. Spencer SJ, Buller KM, Day TA. Medial prefrontal cortex control of the paraventricular 
hypothalamic nucleus response to psychological stress: possible role of the bed nucleus of the stria 
terminalis. The Journal of comparative neurology. 2005; 481:363–376. [PubMed: 15593338] 
11. Faturi CB, Rangel MJ Jr, Baldo MV, Canteras NS. Functional mapping of the circuits involved in 
the expression of contextual fear responses in socially defeated animals. Brain structure & 
function. 2014; 219:931–946. [PubMed: 23546547] 
12. Mobbs D, et al. From threat to fear: the neural organization of defensive fear systems in humans. 
The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience. 2009; 
29:12236–12243. [PubMed: 19793982] 
13. Silva BA, et al. Independent hypothalamic circuits for social and predator fear. Nature 
neuroscience. 2013; 16:1731–1733. [PubMed: 24212674] 
14. Berton O, et al. Essential role of BDNF in the mesolimbic dopamine pathway in social defeat 
stress. Science. 2006; 311:864–868. [PubMed: 16469931] 
Franklin et al.
Page 17
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 15. Price JS, Sloman L. The evolutionary model of psychiatric disorder. Archives of general 
psychiatry. 1984; 41:211.
16. Crow TJ. A Darwinian approach to the origins of psychosis. The British journal of psychiatry : the 
journal of mental science. 1995; 167:12–25. [PubMed: 7551604] 
17. Allen NB, Badcock PB. Darwinian models of depression: a review of evolutionary accounts of 
mood and mood disorders. Progress in neuro-psychopharmacology & biological psychiatry. 2006; 
30:815–826. [PubMed: 16647176] 
18. Ottenbreit ND, Dobson KS. Avoidance and depression: the construction of the cognitive-behavioral 
avoidance scale. Behaviour research and therapy. 2004; 42:293–313. [PubMed: 14975771] 
19. Southwick SM, Vythilingam M, Charney DS. The psychobiology of depression and resilience to 
stress: implications for prevention and treatment. Annual review of clinical psychology. 2005; 
1:255–291.
20. Anand A, et al. Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI 
study. Neuropsychopharmacology : official publication of the American College of 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2005; 30:1334–1344. [PubMed: 15856081] 
21. Gabbott PL, Warner TA, Jays PR, Salway P, Busby SJ. Prefrontal cortex in the rat: projections to 
subcortical autonomic, motor, and limbic centers. The Journal of comparative neurology. 2005; 
492:145–177. [PubMed: 16196030] 
22. Floyd NS, Price JL, Ferry AT, Keay KA, Bandler R. Orbitomedial prefrontal cortical projections to 
distinct longitudinal columns of the periaqueductal gray in the rat. The Journal of comparative 
neurology. 2000; 422:556–578. [PubMed: 10861526] 
23. Lee AT, Vogt D, Rubenstein JL, Sohal VS. A class of GABAergic neurons in the prefrontal cortex 
sends long-range projections to the nucleus accumbens and elicits acute avoidance behavior. The 
Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience. 2014; 34:11519–
11525. [PubMed: 25164650] 
24. Feng G, et al. Imaging neuronal subsets in transgenic mice expressing multiple spectral variants of 
GFP. Neuron. 2000; 28:41–51. [PubMed: 11086982] 
25. Krishnan V, et al. Molecular adaptations underlying susceptibility and resistance to social defeat in 
brain reward regions. Cell. 2007; 131:391–404. [PubMed: 17956738] 
26. Wei J, Bai W, Liu T, Tian X. Functional connectivity changes during a working memory task in rat 
via NMF analysis. Frontiers in behavioral neuroscience. 2015; 9:2. [PubMed: 25688192] 
27. Shiroma PR, et al. Neurocognitive performance and serial intravenous subanesthetic ketamine in 
treatment-resistant depression. The international journal of neuropsychopharmacology / official 
scientific journal of the Collegium Internationale Neuropsychopharmacologicum. 2014; 17:1805–
1813.
28. Vauterin C, Bazot M. A double-blind controlled trial of amineptine versus trimipramine in 
depression. Current medical research and opinion. 1979; 6:101–106. [PubMed: 380909] 
29. Armbruster BN, Li X, Pausch MH, Herlitze S, Roth BL. Evolving the lock to fit the key to create a 
family of G protein-coupled receptors potently activated by an inert ligand. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2007; 104:5163–5168. [PubMed: 
17360345] 
30. Motta SC, et al. Dissecting the brain's fear system reveals the hypothalamus is critical for 
responding in subordinate conspecific intruders. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
of the United States of America. 2009; 106:4870–4875. [PubMed: 19273843] 
31. Hahn A, et al. Reduced resting-state functional connectivity between amygdala and orbitofrontal 
cortex in social anxiety disorder. NeuroImage. 2011; 56:881–889. [PubMed: 21356318] 
32. Fitzgerald PB, Laird AR, Maller J, Daskalakis ZJ. A meta-analytic study of changes in brain 
activation in depression. Human brain mapping. 2008; 29:683–695. [PubMed: 17598168] 
33. Seminowicz DA, et al. Limbic-frontal circuitry in major depression: a path modeling metanalysis. 
NeuroImage. 2004; 22:409–418. [PubMed: 15110034] 
34. Mayberg HS, et al. Reciprocal limbic-cortical function and negative mood: converging PET 
findings in depression and normal sadness. The American journal of psychiatry. 1999; 156:675–
682. [PubMed: 10327898] 
Franklin et al.
Page 18
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 35. Mayberg HS, et al. Regional metabolic effects of fluoxetine in major depression: serial changes 
and relationship to clinical response. Biological psychiatry. 2000; 48:830–843. [PubMed: 
11063978] 
36. Adhikari A, Topiwala MA, Gordon JA. Synchronized activity between the ventral hippocampus 
and the medial prefrontal cortex during anxiety. Neuron. 2010; 65:257–269. [PubMed: 20152131] 
37. Likhtik E, Stujenske JM, M AT, Harris AZ, Gordon JA. Prefrontal entrainment of amygdala 
activity signals safety in learned fear and innate anxiety. Nature neuroscience. 2014; 17:106–113. 
[PubMed: 24241397] 
38. Northoff G, Sibille E. Why are cortical GABA neurons relevant to internal focus in depression? A 
cross-level model linking cellular, biochemical and neural network findings. Molecular psychiatry. 
2014; 19:966–977. [PubMed: 25048001] 
39. Wall NR, Wickersham IR, Cetin A, De La Parra M, Callaway EM. Monosynaptic circuit tracing in 
vivo through Cre-dependent targeting and complementation of modified rabies virus. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2010; 107:21848–21853. 
[PubMed: 21115815] 
40. Borgius L, Restrepo CE, Leao RN, Saleh N, Kiehn O. A transgenic mouse line for molecular 
genetic analysis of excitatory glutamatergic neurons. Molecular and cellular neurosciences. 2010; 
45:245–257. [PubMed: 20600924] 
41. Taniguchi H, et al. A resource of Cre driver lines for genetic targeting of GABAergic neurons in 
cerebral cortex. Neuron. 2011; 71:995–1013. [PubMed: 21943598] 
42. Vianna DM, Brandao ML. Anatomical connections of the periaqueductal gray: specific neural 
substrates for different kinds of fear. Brazilian journal of medical and biological research = Revista 
brasileira de pesquisas medicas e biologicas / Sociedade Brasileira de Biofisica … [et al]. 2003; 
36:557–566.
43. Spruston N. Pyramidal neurons: dendritic structure and synaptic integration. Nature reviews 
Neuroscience. 2008; 9:206–221. [PubMed: 18270515] 
44. Petreanu L, Huber D, Sobczyk A, Svoboda K. Channelrhodopsin-2-assisted circuit mapping of 
long-range callosal projections. Nature neuroscience. 2007; 10:663–668. [PubMed: 17435752] 
45. Haubensak W, et al. Genetic dissection of an amygdala microcircuit that gates conditioned fear. 
Nature. 2010; 468:270–276. [PubMed: 21068836] 
46. Tovote P, et al. Midbrain circuits for defensive behaviour. Nature. 2016
47. McCarthy MM, Pfaff DW, Schwartz-Giblin S. Midbrain central gray GABAA receptor activation 
enhances, and blockade reduces, sexual behavior in the female rat. Experimental brain research. 
1991; 86:108–116. [PubMed: 1661679] 
48. Mota-Ortiz SR, Sukikara MH, Felicio LF, Canteras NS. Afferent connections to the rostrolateral 
part of the periaqueductal gray: a critical region influencing the motivation drive to hunt and 
forage. Neural plasticity. 2009; 2009:612698. [PubMed: 19325910] 
49. Lonstein JS, Stern JM. Role of the midbrain periaqueductal gray in maternal nurturance and 
aggression: c-fos and electrolytic lesion studies in lactating rats. The Journal of neuroscience : the 
official journal of the Society for Neuroscience. 1997; 17:3364–3378. [PubMed: 9113892] 
50. Kim EJ, et al. Dorsal periaqueductal gray-amygdala pathway conveys both innate and learned fear 
responses in rats. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America. 2013; 110:14795–14800. [PubMed: 23959880] 
51. Sukikara MH, Mota-Ortiz SR, Baldo MV, Felicio LF, Canteras NS. A role for the periaqueductal 
gray in switching adaptive behavioral responses. The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal 
of the Society for Neuroscience. 2006; 26:2583–2589. [PubMed: 16510737] 
52. Kvitsiani D, et al. Distinct behavioural and network correlates of two interneuron types in 
prefrontal cortex. Nature. 2013; 498:363–366. [PubMed: 23708967] 
53. Karlsson MP, Tervo DG, Karpova AY. Network resets in medial prefrontal cortex mark the onset of 
behavioral uncertainty. Science. 2012; 338:135–139. [PubMed: 23042898] 
54. Behrens TE, Woolrich MW, Walton ME, Rushworth MF. Learning the value of information in an 
uncertain world. Nature neuroscience. 2007; 10:1214–1221. [PubMed: 17676057] 
55. Tervo DG, et al. Behavioral variability through stochastic choice and its gating by anterior 
cingulate cortex. Cell. 2014; 159:21–32. [PubMed: 25259917] 
Franklin et al.
Page 19
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 56. Lisboa SF, Camargo LH, Magesto AC, Resstel LB, Guimaraes FS. Cannabinoid modulation of 
predator fear: involvement of the dorsolateral periaqueductal gray. The international journal of 
neuropsychopharmacology / official scientific journal of the Collegium Internationale 
Neuropsychopharmacologicum. 2014; 17:1193–1206.
57. Dielenberg RA, Leman S, Carrive P. Effect of dorsal periaqueductal gray lesions on cardiovascular 
and behavioral responses to cat odor exposure in rats. Behavioural brain research. 2004; 153:487–
496. [PubMed: 15265647] 
58. Canteras NS, Goto M. Fos-like immunoreactivity in the periaqueductal gray of rats exposed to a 
natural predator. Neuroreport. 1999; 10:413–418. [PubMed: 10203345] 
59. Mobbs D, et al. When fear is near: threat imminence elicits prefrontal-periaqueductal gray shifts in 
humans. Science. 2007; 317:1079–1083. [PubMed: 17717184] 
60. Goldwater DS, et al. Structural and functional alterations to rat medial prefrontal cortex following 
chronic restraint stress and recovery. Neuroscience. 2009; 164:798–808. [PubMed: 19723561] 
61. Radley JJ, et al. Repeated stress induces dendritic spine loss in the rat medial prefrontal cortex. 
Cerebral cortex. 2006; 16:313–320. [PubMed: 15901656] 
62. Christoffel DJ, et al. Excitatory transmission at thalamo-striatal synapses mediates susceptibility to 
social stress. Nature neuroscience. 2015; 18:962–964. [PubMed: 26030846] 
63. An X, Bandler R, Ongur D, Price JL. Prefrontal cortical projections to longitudinal columns in the 
midbrain periaqueductal gray in macaque monkeys. The Journal of comparative neurology. 1998; 
401:455–479. [PubMed: 9826273] 
64. Amano K, et al. Endorphins and pain relief. Further observations on electrical stimulation of the 
lateral part of the periaqueductal gray matter during rostral mesencephalic reticulotomy for pain 
relief. Applied neurophysiology. 1982; 45:123–135. [PubMed: 6977314] 
65. Tsankova NM, et al. Sustained hippocampal chromatin regulation in a mouse model of depression 
and antidepressant action. Nature neuroscience. 2006; 9:519–525. [PubMed: 16501568] 
66. Paxinos, G., Franklin, KBJ. <<The>> mouse brain in stereotaxic coordinates. Academic Press; San 
Diego: 2001. 
67. Vyssotski AL, et al. EEG responses to visual landmarks in flying pigeons. Current biology : CB. 
2009; 19:1159–1166. [PubMed: 19559612] 
68. Vyssotski AL, et al. Miniature neurologgers for flying pigeons: multichannel EEG and action and 
field potentials in combination with GPS recording. Journal of neurophysiology. 2006; 95:1263–
1273. [PubMed: 16236777] 
69. Zhan Y, et al. Deficient neuron-microglia signaling results in impaired functional brain 
connectivity and social behavior. Nature neuroscience. 2014; 17:400–406. [PubMed: 24487234] 
70. Mitra, P., Bokil, H. Observed brain dynamics. Oxford University Press; Oxford; New York: 2008. 
71. Vialou V, et al. DeltaFosB in brain reward circuits mediates resilience to stress and antidepressant 
responses. Nature neuroscience. 2010; 13:745–752. [PubMed: 20473292] 
Franklin et al.
Page 20
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 1. Layer 5 excitatory neurons in mPFC make direct projections to dPAG.
(a-d) Mice were injected with retrograde tracers (CTB647, green) in dPAG (a) and (CTB 
555, red) in NAc (b). Low (c) and high (d) magnification images of retrogradely labeled 
CTB647 (dPAG projecting) and CTB555 (NAc projecting) neurons in layer 5 and layer 2/3, 
respectively, of mPFC. (e) Representative image of retrogradely labeled CTB647 (dPAG 
projecting) neurons in mPFC of a Thy1::GFP mouse. (f) Representative image of 
retrogradely labeled CTB647 (dPAG projecting) cells demonstrating that these cells are not 
Franklin et al.
Page 21
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 co-localized with GABAergic neurons in mPFC of Gad2::Cre;RC::LSL-Tomato mouse 
(scale bar = 500 μm in a-c, 100 μm in d, f; 50 μm in e). n=2.
Franklin et al.
Page 22
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 2. Induction of social avoidance by social defeat.
Defensive responses elicited in the resident mouse by exposure to an aggressive intruder 
were increased across social defeat sessions as measured by significantly increased (a) 
upright-defensive postures (day: F[6,7] = 3.8, P = 0.0042) and (b) freezing (day: F[6,7] = 4.2, 
P = 0.0022), and decreased exploration as measured by (c) rearing (day: F[6,7] = 3.2, P = 
0.012). (d) Social approach behavior was measured each day for three days during an 
anticipatory period in which the intruder was restrained behind a wire mesh barrier 
immediately prior to social defeat or the control condition, as well as one week later (Test). 
Franklin et al.
Page 23
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Defeated mice (e) spent less time investigating a novel aggressor (defeat: F[1,22]=16.1, P = 
0.006; day: F[3,22] = 2.8, P = 0.047; defeat x day: F[3,66] = 2.4, P = 0.079), (f) had shorter 
investigation bouts (defeat: F[1,22]=20.2, P=0.0002; day: F[3,22] = 2.6, P=0.063, defeat x day: 
F[3,66]=2.1, P=0.11), and (g) retreated from social investigation periods more than control 
mice (defeat: F[1,17] = 57.9, P < 0.0001; day: F[3,22]=1.9, P = 0.14; defeat x day: F[3,51] = 
8.7, P < 0.0001). All deficits persisted one week after the final defeat session. Defeated mice 
(h) spent less time (defeat: F[1,12] = 7.6, P=0.018, stimulus: F[2,12] = 12.4, P = 0.0002, defeat 
x stimulus: F[2,24] = 8.9, P=0.0013) and (i) exhibited shorter investigation bouts (defeat: 
F[1,12] = 7.5, P=0.018, stimulus: F[2,12]=5.0, P=0.016, defeat x stimulus: F[2,24] = 3.9, 
P=0.033) toward both male and female intruders, but not a novel object when compared to 
control mice. In the Y-maze, defeated mice showed (j) increased same-arm returns 
(t(14)=2.9, P=0.013) and (k) a trend for decreased spontaneous alternation (t(14)=1.9, 
P=0.081), but (l) no change in latency to exit the start arm or (m) overall distance 
travelled. +P<0.1; *P<0.05; *P<0.01; ***P<0.001). n=7-12.
Franklin et al.
Page 24
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 3. Inhibition of mPFC-dPAG projections mimics social defeat.
(a) Mice were infected bilaterally in mPFC with AAV expressing Venus fluorescent protein 
and HA-tagged hM4D (AAV-Syn::Venus-2A-HA-hM4D), implanted with a guide cannula 
over dPAG, subjected to social defeat or control conditions, and infused locally in dPAG 
with CNO or vehicle before testing for social interaction. (b) Representative image of Venus 
labeled infected cells in the mPFC. (c) HA immunostaining revealed expression of hM4D in 
mPFC projections in the PAG. (d) AAV-Syn::Venus-2A-HAhM4D-WPRE was infused into 
the mPFC four weeks prior to social defeats. Social approach behavior was measured one 
Franklin et al.
Page 25
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 week later (Test), immediately after intra-dPAG administration of CNO or vehicle. Control 
mice administered CNO prior to testing (e) spent less time investigating the aggressor 
(defeat: F[1,1]=3.54, P=0.067; CNO: F[1,1]=2.42, P=0.13; defeat x CNO: F[1,39]=2.32, 
P=0.14; t(19)=2.1, P=0.047) (f) exhibited shorter investigation bouts (defeat: F[1, 1]=2.23, 
P=0.14; CNO: F[1,1]=5.1, P=0.03; defeat x CNO: F[1, 38]=1.47, P=0.23; t(19)=2.9, 
p=0.0088) and (g) made more retreats (defeat: F[1, 1]=2.78, P=0.1; CNO: F[1,1]=0.54, 
P=0.47; defeat x CNO: F[1, 38]=2.5, P=0.12; t(19)=2.2, p=0.042), than vehicle treated control 
animals. Behavior of CNO-treated control animals was indistinguishable from vehicle-
treated defeated mice and no effect of CNO treatment was detected in defeated animals. (h) 
Representative images and (i-k) quantification of cFos immunopositive cells in (i) 
dorsomedial (dm), (j) dorsolateral (dl), and (k) lateral (l) PAG of mice described above. 
Vehicle-treated defeated mice showed a significant increase in cFos immunopositive cells in 
dmPAG and dlPAG when compared to vehicle-treated control animals. CNO-treatment of 
control mice resulted in a significant increased in cFos immunopositive cells in dmPAG 
when compared to vehicle-treated control mice, matching levels seen in defeated mice 
(dmPAG, defeat x drug: F[1,38]=6.74, P=0.013, dlPAG, defeat x drug: F[1,38]=6.5, P=0.015). 
No significant effect of CNO treatment was observed in defeated mice. n=10-12. *P<0.05.
Franklin et al.
Page 26
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 4. Social defeat weakens mPFC-dPAG functional connectivity.
(a) Placement of electrodes used to measure local field potential (LFP) activity in mPFC and 
dPAG. Functional connectivity between mPFC and dPAG was estimated by measuring 
coherence between LFP signals at the two electrodes during the anticipatory period on day 3 
compared to day 1 of social defeat. (b, c) Relative coherence (coherence differential) was 
significantly reduced in defeated mice compared to control animals (theta: U=9, p=0.048, 
beta: U=8, p=0.035). (d) Theta band causality between mPFC and dPAG was measured on 
day 3 compared to day 1 of social defeat. Relative causality (causality differential) was 
Franklin et al.
Page 27
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 significantly higher in the PAG->mPFC direction in defeated mice compared to control 
animals (U=12, p=0.038). (e-h) Power spectra differential between day 1 and day 3 in (e, f) 
mPFC and (g, h) PAG when control and defeated mice were proximal to the aggressor. 
Defeated mice had lower power in the theta band in the PAG compared to control mice 
(U=6, P=0.018). Power spectra were averaged across mice. Power in each frequency band 
was calculated as the sum of the power values. n=7-8, *P<0.05.
Franklin et al.
Page 28
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 5. Evolution of synaptic field potentials in sensory and defeated mice across testing days.
Location of recording and stimulating electrodes implanted chronically in the mPFC and 
dPAG (a)mPFC and MDT (f). (b) Similar mPFC-dPAG fEPSP amplitude in control and 
defeated mice but (g) significant difference in MDT-mPFC fEPSP amplitude in defeated 
mice compared to control (F[3,51]=5.58, p=0.0022). fEPSP amplitude is expressed as percent 
change in mean values (±SEM) during home cage exploration on the first day (baseline) for 
the N1-P2 interval during the social interaction (control: black circles; defeated group: red 
circles). Significant behavioral adaptation to social defeat in (c) mice with electrodes 
implanted in the mPFC and dPAG (F[1,10]=10.51, p=0.0088) (h) and mice with electrodes 
Franklin et al.
Page 29
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 implanted in the MDT and dPAG (F[3,57]=13.93, p<0.0001). (d) Paired-pulse facilitation 
(PPF) of fEPSP recorded in the dPAG after stimulation of mPFC. Expressed as percent 
amplitude change (± SE) of the second fEPSP of the first for the five interpulse intervals. (e) 
Evolution of the paired-pulse facilitation of fEPSP along the sessions recorded in the dPAG 
after stimulation of mPFC. PPF, n=4; mPFC-dPAG, n=7; MDT-mPFC, n=10-12.
Franklin et al.
Page 30
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 6. Cell-specific retrograde tracing identifies targets of PFC projections in PAG.
(a) Vglut2::Cre and Vgat::Cre mice were infected in dPAG with Cre-dependent AAV 
expressing TVA-mCherry and rabies protein G and subsequently infected with EnvA 
pseudo-typed G-deleted rabies-GFP virus whose infection is limited to cells expressing TVA 
and that can form viable virions only in cells expressing protein G. In this manner infection 
by rabies-GFP is limited to cells expressing Cre and trans-synaptic infection occurs only 
monosynaptically. AAV and rabies were injected unilaterally into dPAG from opposing 
angles to avoid co-infection of the pipette tract. (b) Cre-dependent targeting of TVA-
Franklin et al.
Page 31
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 mCherry (red) and rabies-GFP (green) to Vglut2+ neurons in dPAG. (c) Low (left) and high 
(right) magnification images of a retrograde labeled rabies-GFP infected layer V pyramidal 
cell in mPFC. (d) Summary of rabies-infected neurons (GFP+, mCherry-) in the forebrain of 
Vglut2::Cre animals (percentage of the average number of retrograde neurons weighted to 
the number of starter cells present in each animal). (e) Number and weighted average of 
rabies-infected neurons in mPFC and hypothalamic nuclei (VMH, LH, AH and PMD) of 
Vglut2::Cre animals (n = 8). (f) Example images showing dense ChR2+ axonal projections 
(green) from the PFC in the PAG, cell bodies of Vglut2+ neurons (red) and two neurons 
filled with biocytin and processed after whole-cell recording (cyan). Blue arrow points to a 
neuron with monosynaptic input from the PFC and white arrow indicates a neuron without 
PFC input. (g) Light-evoked monosynaptic EPSCs in a Vglut2+ neuron. Light red traces are 
individual trials and dark red is average. (h) Mean probability of detecting PFC inputs in 
Vglut2 and Vgat neurons. (i) Average EPSC onset latency across all cells (left, 3.6±0.14 
msec) and response peak amplitude (right, 23.1±4.5 pA). (j) Example traces of spontaneous 
EPSC recordings in a Vglut2+ neuron that did not receive direct PFC input, before and after 
20 trials of ChR2+ stimulation (20 pulses at 10 Hz) of PFC terminals, showing a decrease in 
sEPSC frequency. (k) Mean change in sEPSC frequency with PFC ChR2 stimulation for all 
Vglut2+ neurons (left, 58.5±6% or control, P<0.0001, n=25) and Vgat+ neurons (middle, 
91.4±8% of control, P=0.34, n=12). Right, light stimulation without ChR2 infection does not 
change sEPSC frequency. Lines show individual datapoints; in the left panel blue lines are 
cells with direct PFC input.
Franklin et al.
Page 32
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 7. PAG inhibition increases social approach.
(a-d) Selective hM4D-mediated inhibition of Vglut2+ neurons in dPAG. Vglut2::Cre mice 
were infected with AAV-Syn::DIO-hM4D-mCherry in the dPAG (a), subjected to control 
and social defeat, and treated with CNO before social interaction testing. Defeated mice (b) 
spent less time investigating the intruder (defeat: F[1,11]=26.77, P=0.0003), (c) had shorter 
investigation bouts (defeat: F[1, 11] = 6.72, P = 0.025), and (d) made more retreats (defeat: 
F[1,11] =22.28, P=0.0006) when compared to control animals. Systemic administration of 
CNO in Cre+ mice (b) increased time spent investigating the intruder (treatment: F[1,11] = 
13.12, P=0.004), but had no effect on (c) duration of investigation bouts or (d) retreats when 
compared to Cremice. n=6-7.
Franklin et al.
Page 33
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
