 Housing, Transportation, And Food: How ACOs Seek To Improve 
Population Health By Addressing Nonmedical Needs Of Patients
Taressa Fraze, Ph.D.,
The Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy and Clinical Practice, Geisel School of Medicine at 
Dartmouth, Lebanon, New Hampshire
Valerie A. Lewis, Ph.D.,
The Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy and Clinical Practice, Geisel School of Medicine at 
Dartmouth, Lebanon, New Hampshire
Hector P. Rodriguez, Ph.D., M.P.H., and
Center for Healthcare Organizational and Innovation Research, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, California; Division of Health Policy and Management, UC Berkeley School of Public 
Health, Berkeley, California
Elliott S. Fisher, M.D, M.P.H.
The Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy and Clinical Practice, Geisel School of Medicine at 
Dartmouth, Lebanon, New Hampshire
Abstract
Addressing non-medical needs is critical to advance population health, improve quality of care, 
and lower the costs of care. Accountable care organizations (ACOs) may be more likely to address 
these needs. We used qualitative interviews to examine how ACOs address non-medical patient 
needs. We developed a typology of medical and social services among ACOs that disentangles 
services and organizational integration. ACOs commonly addressed housing, transportation, and 
food insecurity needs. ACOs identified needs through processes as part of the primary care visit or 
existing care management programs. ACO approaches to meeting patients’ non-medical needs 
were characterized as either individualized solutions, developed on a patient-by-patient basis; or 
targeted approaches, programs developed to address specific needs. As policymakers continue to 
invest in programs to spur organizations to meet a broader spectrum of patients’ needs, these 
findings offer insights on how health care organizations integrate with non-medical organizations.
There is growing consensus that adequately addressing patients’ non-medical needs is a 
critical element to advance population health, improve quality and lower costs of medical 
care.(1–8) Estimates suggest that 40–90% of health outcomes are attributable to social, 
behavioral, and economic factors(5,9,10), these non-medical factors may also significantly 
affect health care utilization and outcomes.(11–15) For example, research has shown people 
with housing instability have increased rates of emergency department visits and inpatient 
hospitalizations.(16) Targeted studies demonstrate the benefits of addressing non-medical 
needs on health care outcomes.(11,17–22) For example, among chronically homeless adults 
with severe alcohol problems, a randomized trial showed that stable housing reduced 
medical costs by 53%(23). A broad array of policy initiatives may increase the capacity of 
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Health Aff (Millwood). 2016 November 01; 35(11): 2109–2115. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2016.0727.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 providers to address patients’ non-medical needs. Health policy initiatives, such as 
accountable care organizations (ACOs), bundled payments, and managed care, have focused 
on creating financial incentives for providers to improve outcomes and lower costs; while 
these policy initiatives do not explicitly address patients’ non-medical needs, some posit the 
initiatives may spur providers to more broadly address patient needs.(1–4,24,25)
Despite broad agreement on the importance of addressing patients’ non-medical needs, little 
is known about if and how health care organizations operating under new payment models 
have approached patients’ non-medical needs. Research on how providers address the non-
medical needs of patients has traditionally centered on specific interventions within a narrow 
range of settings such as clinics serving homeless individuals.(11–13,15,26,27) While 
valuable, this research provides little understanding of the broader approaches health care 
organizations use to address non-medical needs including the range of services directly 
provided, populations targeted, strategies for coordinated services, and organizational and 
financial models to integrate health care and social services. In an effort to spur innovation 
and test new models in this realm, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services recently 
announced accountable health communities, a $157 million initiative to implement and 
evaluate three approaches to addressing patients’ non-medical needs.
Early evidence on the approaches providers under payment and delivery reform are using to 
meet non-medical needs is needed to inform policy in this realm. To provide early insight in 
this area, we conducted qualitative interviews with ACOs to (1) describe which non-medical 
needs ACOs were trying to address; and (2) describe their approaches to address those 
needs. We defined ACOs as voluntary groups of providers who are contractually and 
collectively responsible for total cost and quality of care for a defined patient population.
(28–30) Given the significant impact of non-medical factors on health costs and patient 
outcomes, ACOs may address underlying non-medical factors to control costs and improve 
quality.(4,31) Further, ACO proponents hope the model will afford providers the flexibility 
and incentives necessary to address patient needs, including non-medical needs, through 
better coordination and integration of care.(1,32–35) To date, no research has examined if 
value-based payment models have spurred providers to address patients’ non-medical needs.
METHODS
We conducted qualitative research with ACOs to understand clinical transformation 
activities. We included two sets of data: a total of 58 semi-structured phone interviews with 
leaders at 32 ACOs; and in-depth site visits at three ACOs. We defined ACOs as voluntary 
groups of providers who were contractually and collectively responsible for total cost and 
quality of care for a defined patient population.(36)
We conducted 58 semi-structured phone interviews over the course of two years; a first set 
between June and December 2013, and a second set between July and August 2014. Of the 
32 interviewed ACOs, 14 were interviewed in both time periods. The 32 ACOs were 
selected from an ACO database maintained by our team.(36) ACOs were selected to ensure 
diversity on geography, composition, safety net participation, leadership, clinical 
transformation, and payer. We targeted ACO and clinic leadership as respondents. Interviews 
Fraze et al.
Page 2
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 typically lasted an hour and covered topics including ACO structure, ACO formation, 
leadership structure, motivations, care delivery, initiatives and capabilities, provider 
engagement, implementation challenges and strategies, and future plans. We specifically 
asked about ACOs’ strategies focused on socially disadvantaged patients and non-medical 
needs.
Following the 2014 phone interviews, we selected three ACOs for further in-depth study. 
ACOs were selected based on advanced clinical transformation and diversity in composition, 
structure, patients served, and geography. Three team members visited each site for three 
days. We interviewed a range of respondents at each site including participating providers, 
key committee or board members, ACO leadership, clinical leadership, and care 
coordination team members. We typically conducted at least 25 interviews per site and 
observed management, quality, or clinical meetings.
Interviews were recorded and professionally transcribed. All interviews and summaries were 
analyzed using QRS NVivo. We defined non-medical needs as any patient need that was not 
clinical in nature, but had the potential to impact health. We did not include behavioral 
health as a non-medical need; however, many patients with behavioral health diagnoses may 
also have non-medical needs (e.g., these patients may have transportation needs which 
would have been included in analyses). Our analytic approach was collaborative and highly 
iterative across team members. First, three transcripts were coded for ACO’s non-medical 
services by two team members. Once coding consistency was met, a single team member 
coded the remaining transcripts. We developed a memo based on initial coding that 
summarized proposed findings across ACOs and detailed all non-medical activities within 
each ACO.(37) Data were then coded again for proposed themes and findings were updated.
Study limitations
Our study has limitations. First, as a qualitative study, our results are not meant to be 
generalized to all ACOs; rather these findings provide insights into how some ACOs are 
addressing patients’ non-medical needs. Second, data are from 2013–2015 which may not 
fully represent how ACOs are currently addressing non-medical needs. Considering how 
little research there is on how providers address patients’ non-medical needs, qualitative 
research offers a formative understanding of how providers and organizations were 
addressing non-medical needs.
Third, data are primarily from the perspective of ACO leaders with less information from 
partner organizations, providers, or staff implementing programs. Interviews with ACO 
leaders gave us a broad understanding of a range of ACO activities.(32,38) Fourth, since our 
study describes the approaches and methods ACOs were actively using to address non-
medical needs, we do not have data on the effectiveness of these approaches. ACOs reported 
they believed addressing non-medical needs would yield cost savings for the ACO and 
would improve patient health; however, ACOs were unable to offer concrete data on the 
effectiveness of their efforts.
Fraze et al.
Page 3
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 RESULTS
We identified 16 ACOs addressing patients’ non-medical needs. We first present a typology 
of non-medical and medical care integration in ACOs (exhibit 1) We then present data on the 
non-medical needs ACOs addressed, and the methods and approaches ACOs used to meet 
patients’ non-medical needs.
Typology for organizational and services integration
Based on these analyses, we developed a typology that categorizes four approaches used to 
integrate patients’ non-medical needs with medical care (exhibit 1). We distinguished two 
types of integration: (1) organizational integration, such as governance, across distinct 
medical and non-medical services; and (2) service delivery integration, such as shared or 
coordinated programs, that provided patient services across provider types. ACOs that were 
addressing patients’ non-medical needs displayed varying levels of partnership and 
integration with other distinct types of organizations such as public health, community, 
social service, and government. Service delivery integration was defined as programs or 
processes with varying degrees of integration across organizations designed to meet patients’ 
non-medical needs.
Most ACOs, including those not addressing non-medical needs, fell into the non-coordinated 
category where neither services nor organizations were significantly integrated. One ACO 
was in the segmented category because the county owned and operated both health care and 
county social service organizations, but services remained distinct and were not integrated.
Among ACOs actively addressing non-medical needs, most were within or moving toward a 
referral category, where non-medical and medical services were coordinated in some way, 
but organizations remained fully independent and distinct. For example, one ACO created a 
formal process where medical providers referred patients to partner organizations when non-
medical needs were identified. Another ACO negotiated streamlined processes for patients 
to receive housing support from local agencies. Two organizations were moving toward the 
fully integrated category where services and organizations were integrated across medical 
and non-medical care in meaningful ways. In both cases, organizational integration did not 
involve organizations actually merging, but instead involved non-medical providers or 
agencies joining medical providers as voting members on the ACO board. In both cases, 
ACO formation served as a catalyst for the integration between medical and community.
Non-medical needs ACOs addressed
ACOs addressed a variety of non-medical needs with transportation, housing, and food 
insecurity the most common. ACOs believed these needs were common in their patient 
population, that these needs affected how patients engaged in medical care, and that ACOs 
had the potential to impact these needs.
Transportation needs—Transportation was viewed by many ACOs as a barrier for 
patients to receive timely, quality care. Approaches were varied, some ACOs collaborated 
with transportation companies, some utilized public transportation, and others designed new 
programs. How an ACO met transportation needs varied based on the geographic 
Fraze et al.
Page 4
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 characteristics and the area transit infrastructure. ACOs in areas with quality public transit 
typically relied on existing infrastructure. For example, ACOs sometimes provided 
transportation passes to patients in advance of appointments. One ACO provided monthly 
bus passes, which could be used for any transportation need, to all patients with four or more 
medical visits per month.
ACOs in suburban or rural areas experienced challenges meeting transportation needs 
because of poor infrastructure. One ACO invested heavily in a local community agency that 
provided medical transportation so the agency could expand services. Another rural ACO 
provided transportation services through an external, for-profit company. The transportation 
company was given a per-member-per-month rate that allowed for comprehensive services 
such as 24-hour service telephone line to arrange immediate transportation for unscheduled, 
emergent medical services. Finally, one ACO in an urban area with poor public 
transportation was considering a mobile device application that would allow patients to 
request transportation from local drivers.
Housing needs—ACOs reported that basic needs, such as stable housing, needed to be 
addressed before patients could effectively engage in medical care. ACOs most commonly 
developed relationships and partnerships with external housing agencies, sometimes 
community partners and oftentimes with public health agencies to provide emergency, short, 
and long-term support. ACOs served as an administrative resource by: (1) identifying 
housing options, (2) coordinating with housing agencies, (3) negotiating with housing 
resources, and (4) completing paperwork for the patient. These activities reduced patient 
burden for accessing housing services so they could more easily obtain support.
Some ACOs negotiated innovative solutions to address patient housing needs. For example, 
one ACO negotiated with a housing program to alter the substance use requirements so that 
ACO patients could first receive housing and then begin addiction treatment to maintain 
housing benefits. Another ACO reported high emergency department costs because patients 
were not discharged appropriately and negotiated designated beds with a housing agency 
which streamlined the discharge process.
Food insecurity—ACOs commonly reported nutrition and food insecurity were important 
issues for their patient populations. Some ACOs offered assistance for patients to access 
public programs, such as the supplemental nutrition assistance program, by determining 
patients’ eligibility and aiding in the enrollment process. Many ACOs partnered with local 
food banks since these organizations were already a common patient resource.
Two ACOs used unique approaches to meet food insecurity needs. One ACO partnered with 
a food bank and farmers to offer subsidized seasonal produce to patients. The ACO 
purchased local produce from farmers, with support from the food bank, and then offered 
“market” days in the parking lot of their community health center for patients at reduced 
prices. A second ACO used a food bank to prepare healthy meals for patients with a 
qualifying illness. The ACO observed many patients obtained food from one community 
partner whose donated food was often processed and unhealthy. The ACO provided financial 
resources for the food bank to prepare daily, fresh meals for patients.
Fraze et al.
Page 5
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Methods ACOs used to address non-medical patient needs
Identifying patients with non-medical needs—ACOs reported two common methods 
of identifying patients with non-medical needs: (1) patient screening processes; and (2) 
broader, existing clinical or care delivery efforts (exhibit 2). ACOs that used patient 
screening processes reported these were usually done at primary care visits either directly by 
a provider or with a health assessment. Patients identified with non-medical needs were 
subsequently referred into appropriate programs with specific staff available to help address 
those needs.
ACOs also identified patients’ with non-medical needs through existing care management or 
clinical improvement program aimed at improving quality or reducing costs of care. Several 
ACOs identified patients with non-medical needs by analyzing hospital utilization patterns. 
For example, some ACOs employed additional staff within the emergency department to 
discuss medical and non-medical needs and connect patients to appropriate resources. Other 
ACOs targeted conditions, such as chronic conditions, through quality improvement 
programs and identified non-medical needs during these improvement processes.
Allocating ACO resources to meet non-medical needs—ACOs reported using both 
internal and external resources for programs focused on non-medical needs (exhibit 2). 
Internal resources were used by relying on existing team-based care management programs 
with specific care teams assigned to assist with non-medical needs. Other ACOs designated 
staff members, such as social workers or care managers, to be consistently responsible for 
meeting specific non-medical needs.
ACOs utilized external resources, such as community partners, public health agencies, and 
purchased services, to meet non-medical needs. One ACO utilized local churches, even 
when patients were not members of the church, to meet non-medical needs. Another ACO 
partnered with public health agencies to streamline application and enrollment processes for 
program participation. ACOs commonly partnered with community agencies, such as food 
banks, fitness centers, nonprofits for substance abuse and housing needs, and community 
centers, to support patient needs. These agencies offered services, staffing, and financial 
support to meet ACO patients’ non-medical needs. A few ACOs purchased external services, 
such as contractual arrangements with companies, to provide transportation services or other 
common unmet needs.
Approaches to meeting non-medical needs—ACOs developed both individualized 
and targeted approaches for meeting non-medical needs (exhibit 2). Individualized 
approaches –solutions developed on a patient-by-patient basis – were sometimes well-
defined (e.g., via processes through care teams) and sometimes ad-hoc (e.g., as needs were 
observed). For example, as part of one ACO’s care pathway patients were given 
individualized assessments to identify medical and nonmedical needs. Needs, such as 
transportation and housing support, were identified during standard processes and then a 
plan was developed. ACOs with less well-defined approaches would observe a patient need 
via care management or during a clinical visit and attempt to find an appropriate resource 
(e.g., provide a single bus token when needed or locate housing resources as needed).
Fraze et al.
Page 6
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 In contrast, targeted approaches were well-defined, formalized solutions designed to meet a 
specific need (e.g., transportation) for a population, rather than an individual. For example, 
programs to provide transportation, solutions for housing such as a specified number of beds 
for ACO patients, and availability of nutrition programs were targeted approaches. ACOs 
often used a mix of individualized and targeted approaches depending on the volume 
patients’ need and organizational resources.
DISCUSSION
Population health management through integrated medical and non-medical services has 
garnered significant attention in the last few years(1,26,39–41); yet, there is little 
understanding of how to actually implement integrated services to improve population 
health. Reform initiatives, especially ACOs, hold the potential of expanding the base of 
responsibility from a reactive approach to a proactive approach which.(4,42) This paper 
offers early insights into how some ACOs assumed responsibility for patients by addressing 
non-medical needs.
We found ACOs most often addressed needs related to housing, transportation, and food 
insecurity. While there were a variety of specific approaches to meet needs, most were 
characterized as either individualized solutions developed on a patient-by-patient basis or 
targeted approaches with formalized solutions to a given need. Based on these findings, we 
developed a typology of medical and non-medical services integration in ACOs that 
classifies ACOs by organizational and service delivery integration. At the time of this study, 
we found a few advanced ACOs were moving towards the fully integrated category where 
both organizational activities and services were highly integrated. Based on these findings, 
more advanced ACOs had aspects of both organizational and service delivery integration. 
These ACOs believed that by partnering with other types of providers and services, such as 
public health, community health resources, and social service agencies, they provided better 
patient care.
Our research offers several implications. We found ACOs struggled with program 
scalability. ACOs described instances where a more general need was observed, but they 
were only able to provide solutions on an individualized basis. ACOs may experience 
several barriers to developing formalized programs to meet patient needs such as a financial 
resources, staffing capacity, and competing clinical priorities. ACOs reported their patients 
had substantial needs and that despite recognizing the importance of trying to meet those 
needs, ACOs did not think they had the capacity, expertise, or resources to fully address 
patients’ non-medical needs. Even ACOs with formalized programs to meet non-medical 
needs, such as the transportation brokerage program described, experienced significant 
implementation barriers. Programs were often developed for one segment of the patient 
population – such as nutrition assistance for those with specific conditions – yet, many other 
population segments would also benefit. Similarly, it is only those who are engaged in the 
medical system who have the opportunity to be involved in those programs. For example, a 
patient must first be diagnosed with diabetes, then be referred into the nutrition program for 
people with this condition. Thus, an ACO’s ability to comprehensively address any given 
need across a population (non-medical or medical) is limited.
Fraze et al.
Page 7
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Our study also offers insights and implications for policy initiatives such as accountable 
health communities.(24) Organizations participating in other policy initiatives may 
experience similar challenges around screening capabilities, scalability of programs, and 
comprehensively addressing needs. Future research should examine the effects of programs 
on community and patient outcomes related to both medical and social service utilization. 
The effects may be nuanced and heterogeneous; for example, participation in social services 
may increase while emergency department visits may decrease. It will be important to tease 
out varied effects to determine which activities can be most effective at addressing patient 
needs while reducing costs and improving quality of care.
References
1. Fisher ES, Corrigan J. Accountable Health Communities: Getting There from Here. JAMA. 2014 
Nov 26; 312(20):2093–4. [PubMed: 25423215] 
2. Hacker K, Walker DK. Achieving Population Health in Accountable Care Organizations. Am J 
Public Health. 2013 May 16; 103(7):1163–7. [PubMed: 23678910] 
3. Noble DJ, Casalino LP. Can Accountable Care Organizations Improve Population Health?: Should 
They Try? JAMA. 2013 Mar 20; 309(11):1119–20. [PubMed: 23512057] 
4. Shortell SM. Bridging the Divide Between Health and Health Care. JAMA. 2013 Mar 20; 309(11):
1121–2. [PubMed: 23512058] 
5. McGinnis JM, Williams-Russo P, Knickman JR. The Case For More Active Policy Attention To 
Health Promotion. Health Aff (Millwood). 2002 Mar 1; 21(2):78–93.
6. Eggleston EM, Finkelstein JA. Finding the Role of Health Care in Population Health. JAMA. 2014 
Feb 26; 311(8):797–8. [PubMed: 24457610] 
7. Lavizzo-Mourey R. Halfway there?. Health Reform Starts Now. JAMA. 2016 Apr 5; 315(13):1335–
6. [PubMed: 26940727] 
8. The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. Health Care’s Blind Side: The Overlooked Connection 
Between Social Needs and Good Health [Internet]. 2011 Dec. Available from: http://
www.rwjf.org/en/library/research/2011/12/health-care-s-blind-side.html
9. Booske, B., Athens, J., Kindig, D., Park, H., Remington, P. Different Perspectives for Assigning 
Weights to Determinants of Health. University of Wisconsin Population Health Institute; 2010. 
10. McGinnis J, Foege WH. Actual Causes of Death in the United States. JAMA. 1993 Nov 10; 
270(18):2207–12. [PubMed: 8411605] 
11. Beck AF, Henize AW, Kahn RS, Reiber KL, Young JJ, Klein MD. Forging a Pediatric Primary 
Care–Community Partnership to Support Food-Insecure Families. Pediatrics. 2014 Aug 1; 
134(2):e564–71. [PubMed: 25049345] 
12. Kushel MB, Gupta R, Gee L, Haas JS. Housing Instability and Food Insecurity as Barriers to 
Health Care Among Low-Income Americans. J Gen Intern Med. 2006 Jan; 21(1):71–7. [PubMed: 
16423128] 
13. Bradley EH, Canavan M, Rogan E, Talbert-Slagle K, Ndumele C, Taylor L, et al. Variation In 
Health Outcomes: The Role Of Spending On Social Services, Public Health, And Health Care, 
2000–09. Health Aff (Millwood). 2016 May 1; 35(5):760–8. [PubMed: 27140980] 
14. Acevedo-Garcia D, Osypuk TL, Werbel RE, Meara ER, Cutler DM, Berkman LF. Does Housing 
Mobility Policy Improve Health? Housing Policy Debate. 2004 Jan 1; 15(1):49–98.
15. Shier G, Ginsburg M, Howell J, Volland P, Golden R. Strong Social Support Services, Such As 
Transportation And Help For Caregivers, Can Lead To Lower Health Care Use And Costs. Health 
Aff (Millwood). 2013 Mar 1; 32(3):544–51. [PubMed: 23459734] 
16. Kushel MB, Gupta R, Gee L, Haas JS. Housing Instability and Food Insecurity as Barriers to 
Health Care Among Low-Income Americans. J Gen Intern Med. 2006 Jan; 21(1):71–7. [PubMed: 
16423128] 
Fraze et al.
Page 8
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 17. Burkhardt MC, Beck AF, Conway PH, Kahn RS, Klein MD. Enhancing Accurate Identification of 
Food Insecurity Using Quality-Improvement Techniques. Pediatrics. 2012 Feb; 129(2):e504–10. 
[PubMed: 22250022] 
18. Page-Reeves J, Kaufman W, Bleecker M, Norris J, McCalmont K, Ianakieva V, et al. Addressing 
Social Determinants of Health in a Clinic Setting: The WellRx Pilot in Albuquerque, New Mexico. 
J Am Board Fam Med. 2016 May 1; 29(3):414–8. [PubMed: 27170801] 
19. Bielaszka-DuVernay C. The “GRACE” Model: In-Home Assessments Lead To Better Care For 
Dual Eligibles. Health Aff (Millwood). 2011 Mar 1; 30(3):431–4. [PubMed: 21383359] 
20. Meyer H. A New Care Paradigm Slashes Hospital Use And Nursing Home Stays For The Elderly 
And The Physically And Mentally Disabled. Health Aff (Millwood). 2011 Mar 1; 30(3):412–5. 
[PubMed: 21383354] 
21. Counsell SR, Callahan CM, Clark DO, et al. Geriatric Care Management for Low-Income Seniors: 
A Randomized Controlled Trial. JAMA. 2007 Dec 12; 298(22):2623–33. [PubMed: 18073358] 
22. Sadowski LS, Kee RA, VanderWeele TJ, Buchanan D. Effect of a Housing and Case Management 
Program on Emergency Department Visits and Hospitalizations Among Chronically Ill Homeless 
Adults: A Randomized Trial. JAMA. 2009 May 6; 301(17):1771–8. [PubMed: 19417194] 
23. Larimer ME, Malone DK, Garner MD, et al. Health Care And Public Service Use And Costs 
Before And After Provision Of Housing For Chronically Homeless Persons with Severe Alcohol 
Problems. JAMA. 2009 Apr 1; 301(13):1349–57. [PubMed: 19336710] 
24. Alley DE, Asomugha CN, Conway PH, Sanghavi DM. Accountable Health Communities — 
Addressing Social Needs Through Medicare and Medicaid. N Engl J Med. 2016 Jan 7; 374(1):8–
11. [PubMed: 26731305] 
25. Lavizzo-Mourey, R. Halfway there? health reform starts now. JAMA [Internet]. 2016 Mar 3. [cited 
2016 Mar 10]; Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.2016.1732
26. Fisher MP, Elnitsky C. Health and Social Services Integration: A Review of Concepts and Models. 
Soc Work Public Health. 2012 Jul 23; 27(5):441–68. [PubMed: 22873935] 
27. Cook JT, Frank DA, Levenson SM, Neault NB, Heeren TC, Black MM, et al. Child Food 
Insecurity Increases Risks Posed by Household Food Insecurity to Young Children’s Health. J 
Nutr. 2006 Apr 1; 136(4):1073–6. [PubMed: 16549481] 
28. Lewis VA, Colla CH, Schoenherr KE, Shortell SM, Fisher ES. Innovation in the Safety Net: 
Integrating Community Health Centers Through Accountable Care. J Gen Intern Med. 2014; 
29(11):1484–90. [PubMed: 25008217] 
29. Colla CH, Lewis VA, Shortell SM, Fisher ES. First National Survey Of ACOs Finds That 
Physicians Are Playing Strong Leadership And Ownership Roles. Health Aff (Millwood). 2014 
Jun 1; 33(6):964–71. [PubMed: 24889945] 
30. Colla, CH., Lewis, VA., Kao, L., O’Malley, A., Chang, C., Fisher, ES. Association Between 
Medicare Accountable Care Organization Implementation And Spending Among Clinically 
Vulnerable Beneficiaries. JAMA Intern Med [Internet]. 2016 Jun 20. [cited 2016 Jul 29]; Available 
from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2016.2827
31. Zusman EE, Carr SJ, Robinson J, Kasirye O, Zell B, Miller WJ, et al. Moving toward 
implementation: The potential for accountable care organizations and private–public partnerships 
to advance active neighborhood design. Prev Med. 2014 Dec; 69(Supplement):S98–101. [PubMed: 
25117525] 
32. Lewis VA, Colla CH, Tierney K, Citters ADV, Fisher ES, Meara E. Few ACOs Pursue Innovative 
Models That Integrate Care For Mental Illness And Substance Abuse With Primary Care. Health 
Aff (Millwood). 2014 Oct 1; 33(10):1808–16. [PubMed: 25288427] 
33. Lewis VA, Larson BK, McClurg AB, Boswell RG, Fisher ES. The Promise And Peril Of 
Accountable Care For Vulnerable Populations: A Framework For Overcoming Obstacles. Health 
Aff (Millwood). 2012 Aug 1; 31(8):1777–85. [PubMed: 22869656] 
34. Shortell SM, Colla CH, Lewis VA, Fisher E, Kessell E, Ramsay P. Accountable Care 
Organizations: The National Landscape. J Health Polit Policy Law. 2015 Aug 1; 40(4):647–68. 
[PubMed: 26124295] 
Fraze et al.
Page 9
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 35. Shortell SM, Sehgal NJ, Bibi S, Ramsay PP, Neuhauser L, Colla CH, et al. An Early Assessment of 
Accountable Care Organizations’ Efforts to Engage Patients and Their Families. Med Care Res 
Rev. 2015 Jun.2:1077558715588874.
36. Editor, please insert appendix verbiage.
37. Miles, MBM., Huberman, AM. Qualitative data analysis: An expanded sourcebook. 3. Sage; 2014. 
38. Lewis VA, Colla CC, Schoenherr KE, Shortell SM, Fisher ES. Innovation in the Safety Net: 
Community Health Centers in Accountable Care Organizations. J Gen Intern Med. 2014
39. Auerbach J. Creating Incentives to Move Upstream: Developing a Diversified Portfolio of 
Population Health Measures Within Payment and Health Care Reform. Am J Public Health. 2015 
Jan 20; 105(3):427–31. [PubMed: 25602896] 
40. Mays GP, Scutchfield FD. Improving Public Health System Performance Through 
Multiorganizational Partnerships. Prev Chronic Dis [Internet]. 2010 Oct 15.7(6) [cited 2016 Mar 
7]. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2995603/. 
41. Mays GP, Scutchfield FD. Improving Population Health by Learning From Systems and Services. 
Am J Public Health. 2015 Feb 17; 105(S2):S145–7. [PubMed: 25689191] 
42. 3.0: A New Operating System for Public Health [Internet]. UCLA Public Health Magazine; 2012. 
Available from: http://ph.ucla.edu/news/magazine/2012/november/article/30-new-operating-
system-public-health
Fraze et al.
Page 10
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Fraze et al.
Page 11
Exhibit 1
Typology of non-medical and medical care integration
Service integration
High
Low
Organizational integration
High
Fully integrated: Meaningful organizational and 
service across non-medical and medical care
Segmented: Significant organizational 
integration, with distinct services
Low
Referral: Services integrated with independent 
organizations
Non-coordinated: Neither services nor 
organizations significantly integrated
Source/Notes: Analysis of data collected from ACOs.
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Fraze et al.
Page 12
Exhibit 2
ACO actions, methods, and approaches used to address non-medical patient needs
ACO actions used for non-medical 
needs
Methods used to meet non-medical needs
Specific approaches used to meet non-medical 
needs
Identified patients with non-medical 
needs
Processes in primary care visits used to identify 
needs
Provider identified needs
Health assessment identified needs
Patient self-identified needs
Care transformation programs
Programs to reduce utilization (e.g., ED 
navigators identified patient who needed housing 
support)
Patients identified via chronic condition 
management programs (e.g., a diabetic who 
needs a refrigerator)
Allocated resources to meet non-
medical needs
Internal resources
Designated staff allocated to meeting needs
External resources
Community partners
Purchased services
Public health agencies
Approaches aimed at meeting non-
medical needs
Individualized solutions developed on a patient-
by-patient basis
Formalized via well-defined processes or care 
pathways
Ad-hoc as needs were observed
Targeted approaches with well-defined solutions or 
programs to meet a specific need
For example, ACO programs that provided 
transportation to patients
Source/Notes: Analysis of data collected from ACOs.
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
