 Three-dimensional visualization and a deep-learning
model reveal complex fungal parasite networks in
behaviorally manipulated ants
Maridel A. Fredericksena, Yizhe Zhangb, Missy L. Hazenc, Raquel G. Loretoa,d, Colleen A. Mangoldd,e, Danny Z. Chenb,
and David P. Hughesa,d,f,1
aDepartment of Entomology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802; bDepartment of Computer Science and Engineering, University of
Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556; cHuck Institutes of the Life Sciences Microscopy and Cytometry Facility, Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
PA 16802; dCenter for Infectious Disease Dynamics, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802; eDepartment of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802; and fDepartment of Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802
Edited by Joan E. Strassmann, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, and approved October 16, 2017 (received for review June 29, 2017)
Some microbes possess the ability to adaptively manipulate host
behavior. To better understand how such microbial parasites control
animal behavior, we examine the cell-level interactions between the
species-specific fungal parasite Ophiocordyceps unilateralis sensu lato
and its carpenter ant host (Camponotus castaneus) at a crucial moment
in the parasite’s lifecycle: when the manipulated host fixes itself per-
manently to a substrate by its mandibles. The fungus is known to
secrete tissue-specific metabolites and cause changes in host gene ex-
pression as well as atrophy in the mandible muscles of its ant host, but
it is unknown how the fungus coordinates these effects to manipulate
its host’s behavior. In this study, we combine techniques in serial block-
face scanning-electron microscopy and deep-learning–based image seg-
mentation algorithms to visualize the distribution, abundance, and in-
teractions of this fungus inside the body of its manipulated host.
Fungal cells were found throughout the host body but not in the brain,
implying that behavioral control of the animal body by this microbe
occurs peripherally. Additionally, fungal cells invaded host muscle fibers
and joined together to form networks that encircled the muscles. These
networks may represent a collective foraging behavior of this parasite,
which may in turn facilitate host manipulation.
deep learning | fungal networks | extended phenotype |
behavioral manipulation | ants
S
ome parasitic microbes have evolved the ability to adaptively
manipulate the behavior of the animals they infect (1). Ex-
amples include: unicellular Trypanosomes (class Kinetoplastida)
that alter salivary composition and feeding behavior in tsetse
flies, thereby increasing the parasite’s transmission into mam-
malian hosts (2); fungi such as Pandora and Ophiocordyceps that
induce ants to bite vegetation and die in an elevated location
suitable for parasite dispersal (3–5); and the well-studied api-
complexan Toxoplasma gondii, which causes its rodent host to
lose its innate fear of cats, enabling the parasite to transmit to
the cat in which it reproduces (6). In each of these cases, the
altered host behavior is an extended phenotype (7) of a microbial
parasite’s genes being expressed through the body of an animal.
An important question to ask is how these microbes, which are
much smaller than their hosts, can control animal behavior to
produce such spectacular extended phenotypes. For example, an
individual T. gondii parasite is less than 5 μm in diameter (8),
whereas there are an estimated 4 million neurons in the mouse
brain (9). However, because T. gondii can form “tissue cysts”
containing the slowly multiplying stage, bradyzoite (8), successful
host manipulation may rely on a collective behavior among the
microbial parasites. One observation that supports this possibility
is a correlation between the amount of dopamine released and
the number of dopaminergic cells infected with T. gondii, which
is known to produce tyrosine hydroxylase, the rate-limiting en-
zyme in dopamine synthesis (10).
Although correlated changes in chemical activity (or gene
expression) between parasites and hosts are important, such evi-
dence alone is likely insufficient to determine what role, if any,
collective behavior among microbes plays during manipulation.
Because of the size asymmetry between microbes and the hosts
whose behavior they control, it is important to have a micrometer-
level view of the interface between the microbe and the host tissue
with which it interacts. Such an approach would complement
studies on the chemical cross-talk between parasite and host, and
it would allow us to better understand what role collective be-
havior among microbes may play during behavioral manipulation.
One promising model system for such detailed, micrometer-level
studies is the entomopathogenic fungal parasite Ophiocordyceps
unilateralis sensu lato (s.l.) and its ant host. The fungus O. unilateralis
s.l. is a complex of species that are all obligate parasites of ants from
the tribe Camponotini, notably Camponotus and Polyrhachis (5). A
distinct advantage of this system is that the ants can be infected in
the laboratory (11). As with other entomopathogenic fungi, species
in the unilateralis complex enter their hosts by penetrating the cu-
ticle to then proliferate and fill the ant’s body (12). As such, the
infection cycle begins when the parasite is a small free-floating cell
in the open circulatory system of its insect host. After the required
Significance
Microbial parasites may behave collectively to manipulate their
host’s behavior. We examine adaptations of a microbial para-
site in its natural environment: the body of its coevolved and
manipulated host. Electron microscopy and 3D reconstructions
of host and parasite tissues reveal that this fungus invades
muscle fibers throughout the ant’s body but leaves the brain
intact, and that the fungal cells connect to form extensive net-
works. The connections are likened to structures that aid in
transporting nutrients and organelles in several plant-associated
fungi. These findings alter the current view of parasite-extended
phenotypes by demonstrating that behavior control does not
require the parasite to physically invade the host brain and that
parasite cells may coordinate to change host behavior.
Author contributions: M.A.F. and D.P.H. designed research; M.A.F., Y.Z., R.G.L., C.A.M.,
D.Z.C., and D.P.H. performed research; Y.Z., M.L.H., and D.Z.C. contributed new reagents/
analytic tools; M.A.F., Y.Z., and D.P.H. analyzed data; and M.A.F., Y.Z., C.A.M., D.Z.C., and
D.P.H. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
This open access article is distributed under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
NoDerivatives License 4.0 (CC BY-NC-ND).
Data deposition: Data generated in this study are available on Pennsylvania State University
ScholarSphere, available at https://scholarsphere.psu.edu/concern/generic_works/6q524jn254.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: dhughes@psu.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1711673114/-/DCSupplemental.
12590–12595
|
PNAS
|
November 21, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 47
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1711673114
 16–25 d of growth, the aggregation of microbial cells has reached
the stage in which the fungus induces the ant to bite onto a plant in
a location that is optimal for the fungus to grow and disperse (5,
13). This conspicuous biting behavior is an unambiguous signal of
successful manipulation. Such modified behaviors that increase
parasite transmission are not restricted to species in the Ophio-
cordyceps genus. The ability to manipulate ants to bite onto a plant
in an elevated location has evolved in at least two other phyloge-
netically distant groups: the fungus Pandora formicae (phylum
Entomophthoromycota) and the trematode Dicrocoelium den-
driticum. Insights from the O. unilateralis s.l. system may therefore
set the stage for future research on the convergent evolution of
behavioral manipulation.
Previous work showed that O. unilateralis s.l. induces atrophy
in mandible muscles of the worker ants manipulated to bite leaves
(14), and this atrophy was suggested to play a role in the biting
behavior. Both ex vivo metabolomic (11) and in vivo transcriptomic
(13) studies suggested the fungus actively secretes small molecules
that affect the muscles and nervous tissue. Although these ap-
proaches are informative, they provide only indirect observations
of the parasite as it affects host muscles and ultimately host be-
havior, and they do not show how the individual cells of the
parasite coordinate the manipulation. Additionally, at the same
time when the muscles are atrophied, the brain seems to be pre-
served (13, 14), suggesting the parasite behaves differently toward
distinct tissues. This is in line with the observation that entomo-
pathogenic fungi secrete specific metabolites when cultured in the
presence of muscle tissue or brain tissue (15). Such indirect ap-
proaches where gene activity or secreted chemicals are measured
are useful, but direct observations of parasite and host cells would
allow us to more precisely characterize how this fungus interacts
with its ant host during manipulation.
In the present study, we directly observe fungal cells inside the
manipulated host by integrating serial block-face scanning-electron
microscopy (SEM) with automatic image segmentation and analy-
ses that use deep-learning algorithms to distinguish host and par-
asite tissue in serial stacks of images. This approach allows us to
examine the 3D structure and distribution of fungal cells in the
muscle of manipulated ants. Because the atrophy reported in
previous work (14) could be a general effect of fungal pathogen-
esis, we also infected ants with the generalist pathogen, Beauveria
bassiana, which belongs to the same fungal order (Hypocreales) as
O. unilateralis s.l. but does not manipulate its host as part of its
lifecycle (16–18). This fungus thus serves as an important positive
control, allowing us to begin to separate characteristics that are
specific to the specialized insect/fungus interaction of O. unilateralis
s.l. (typified by complex behavioral manipulation) from those ef-
fects on host tissue that result from general pathogenesis. We
specifically aimed to describe the distribution, abundance, and
interactions of O. unilateralis s.l. cells inside their host during ma-
nipulated biting behavior and to use these observations to hypoth-
esize which fungal characteristics may play a role in producing this
extended phenotype.
Results
The Fungus O. unilateralis s.l. Is Present Throughout the Body but
Does Not Enter the Brain. Our first goal was to establish whether
cells of the specialized fungus O. unilateralis s.l. were restricted to
one location within the host ants. Previous work found a large ag-
gregation of fungal cells in the head of manipulated ants, but other
parts of the body were not examined (14). In the present study, we
found O. unilateralis s.l. fungal cells in all three major body regions
(head, thorax, and gaster; the latter is the ant-specific term for the
terminal part of the abdomen) of the ant host (n = 8 O. unilateralis
s.l.-infected ants) (Fig. S1). These fungal cells included two distinct
forms: hyphal bodies, which are yeast-like cells that grow inside the
insect body and multiply by budding (19), and hyphae, which are
thin filamentous projections (collectively termed mycelia) that are
specialized for foraging in new environments and invading host
tissues (20, 21). In our study, hyphae grew exclusively from the ends
of hyphal bodies (see, for example, Fig. 3A). We also found fungal
cells in abundance inside the legs (n = 12 additional O. unilateralis
s.l.-infected ants) (Fig. S2). Taken together, our data demonstrate
that O. unilateralis s.l. is not restricted to the head of its host.
We also thoroughly examined the nervous tissue in the head
for O. unilateralis s.l. cells to determine whether the fungus en-
ters the brain of the ant it manipulates. Using fluorescence
confocal microscopy, we tested for the presence of fungal cells
within the host brain. In all samples [n = 3 per group (infected,
uninfected)], fungal cells were concentrated directly outside the
brain, but no fungal cells were observed inside the brain (Fig. 1).
Specialist and Generalist Fungal Pathogens Infiltrate Ant Muscle Tissue.
We next wanted to determine the extent to which O. unilateralis s.l.
invades the muscles of the ant it manipulates. Here we used the
generalist pathogen, B. bassiana, as a positive control for host
muscle responses during infection by a fungal pathogen. We used
a Zeiss Sigma serial block-face SEM with Gatan 3View technology
to examine 3D stacks of ant muscle. In these images, we observed
muscular atrophy in ants infected by both species of fungi. This
atrophy was characterized by large spaces between the muscle fi-
bers (cells of muscle tissue) compared with uninfected samples.
A
B
C
Fig. 1.
Assessment of fungal invasion of the brain. Confocal images demonstrating the restriction of fungal invasion into the brain. Host brain is identified by
immunofluorescence of neuronal synapses (green, anti-SYNORF1), while fungal cells and host tracheae are stained with calcofluor white (red, antichitin). All
images are represented as maximum projections of z-stacks. (A) Portion of the mushroom body (green) in the brain of an uninfected (control) ant, 156×
magnification. (Scale bar, 10 μm.) (B) Portion of the optic lobe (green) in the brain of an infected, behaviorally manipulated ant, 60× magnification. (Scale bar,
20 μm.) Arrows denote fungal hyphal bodies (red), identified by their short, rod-like structure and the presence of septa. Arrowheads denote tracheae (red),
located within the brain (green), and identified by their long, filamentous structure and lack of septa. Note the restriction of fungal cell bodies to outside of
the brain. (C) Zoom-in (96× magnification) of region of interest noted in B. (Scale bar, 20 μm.) While the presence of tracheae inside the brain is evident
(arrowheads), there is no detection of fungal hyphal bodies (arrows) inside the brain.
Fredericksen et al.
PNAS
|
November 21, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 47
|
12591
MICROBIOLOGY
 Fungal cells of both species were present between the muscle fi-
bers in both the head and leg regions (Fig. 2 A–F). We quantified
the relative abundance of fungal tissue within the mandible muscle
tissue using an image segmentation algorithm that we developed
using deep learning (22) (Materials and Methods). We trained the
algorithm to automatically distinguish between fungal and ant
tissue from sequential 2D micrographs, which allowed us to
quantify the volume of each tissue. We were then able to compare
the difference in abundance between the two fungal species in the
same ant species. Ants infected with O. unilateralis s.l. showed a
median fungal abundance (volume of fungal tissue divided by
combined volume of muscle and fungal tissue) of 10.06% (n =
8 ants, range = 4.09–38.19%) compared with a median of 2.09%
(n = 8 ants, range = 0.30–52.28%) for ants infected with
B. bassiana (Fig. 2 G–I). The distribution of abundances for these
two fungal species was not significantly different (Wilcoxon rank-
sum; W = 16, n1 = n2 = 8, P = 0.1049).
The Fungus O. unilateralis s.l. Forms Connections Between Hyphal
Bodies and Invades Muscle Fibers. After demonstrating that fun-
gal cells surround host muscle fibers (Fig. 2 B, C, E, F, H, and I),
we investigated whether the fungal cells interact with each other
and with the muscle fibers they surround. We discovered that
many hyphal bodies of the specialist parasite O. unilateralis s.l.
were connected to other hyphal bodies through short septated
tubes ∼1-μm long (Fig. 3B, arrows, Inset). In fungi, such tubes are
called conidial anastomosis tubes (CATs), which are specialized
hyphae that connect neighboring cells, allowing for transfer of
cell contents between two conidia (23). Based on 3D SEM im-
ages (99 million μm3 of ant tissue) and light micrographs (Fig.
S2), we determined that the formation of CATs was commonly
found in O. unilateralis s.l. in our study. However, we found no
evidence of CATs between B. bassiana cells.
We also used the 3D SEM images to quantify the connections
we observed in O. unilateralis s.l. When this specialist parasite first
enters its host, it exists as free-floating cells in the open circulatory
system. These cells then form connections via CATs, which implies
communication between cells that leads to contact and cell wall
fusion. We therefore wanted to determine how common CATs are
for the specialist parasite. We examined 1,014 hyphal bodies of
O. unilateralis s.l. and manually traced all connections between each
focal cell and other cells to determine that 59% of hyphal bodies
were connected to at least one other hyphal body (Fig. 3D). A
single hyphal body could be attached to as many as six other hyphal
bodies (mean connections per cell = 1.15, median = 1, n = 1,014,
SD = 1.16). Qualitatively, connection rates were similar between
the head and leg regions of the same ant (Fig. 3D).
Having established that hyphal bodies of O. unilateralis s.l.
form extensive connections, we also quantified interactions of
O. unilateralis s.l. fungal cells with the ant muscle fibers. Muscle
fibers in all ants had O. unilateralis s.l. hyphal bodies directly
touching their membrane, and in five of eight ants, hyphae had
penetrated the membrane and entered the muscle cells (Fig. 3 C
and E). The prevalence of this muscle fiber invasion varied
widely between samples, with three of eight samples showing no
invasion into any of the muscle cells examined (ants 6–8) (Fig.
2E). Muscle fiber invasion may have occurred in these ants, but
we did not observe it in 99.9 million μm3 of tissue.
Fungal Connections Create Extensive Networks. Because cellular
interactions occur across space, and spatial relationships cannot be
fully understood in two dimensions, we examined the 3D structure
of the fungus in relation to the muscle fibers. We manually traced
the edges of one muscle fiber and its neighboring hyphal bodies
across 1,000 sequential micrographs that each measured 50 nm in
depth. We discovered the cell–cell connections resulted in a 3D
network of hyphal bodies that surrounded the muscle fiber (Fig. 4
and Movie S1). Both the 2D view (Fig. 3) and the 3D view (Fig. 4)
show that some hyphal bodies do not touch host tissue, but they
may still be connected to host cells via the fungal network to which
they are attached. We quantified this and found 23% of the focal
hyphal bodies we studied (234 of 1,014) did not touch any portion
of the host muscle fiber directly. However, 75% of these cells
(175 of 234) were connected to other hyphal bodies and may
therefore have indirect contact to muscle fibers.
Discussion
This study reveals the distribution, abundance, and interactions
of the specialized fungal parasite O. unilateralis s.l. within its
natural habitat (the ant body) at a time in its lifecycle that is
critical for its fitness: namely, when it induces its ant host to bite
and die in a suitable microhabitat for the parasite’s growth and
dispersal (5, 24). By combining techniques in serial block-face
SEM and deep-learning–based image segmentation and analysis,
we directly observed and analyzed the 3D interactions between
parasite and host cells at this crucial moment. In so doing, we
revealed extensive connections among hyphal bodies as well as in-
vasion of muscle fibers by hyphae. The connections between the
hyphal bodies are called CATs, which are common among plant
pathogenic fungi and are known to be involved in transfer of ma-
terial between cells (23). By visualizing the fungal aggregation in
3D, we showed that hyphal bodies connected via CATs formed a
network around muscle fibers of the host. The generalist fungal
parasite B. bassiana did not form CATs and fungal networks inside
the same ant species, which suggests such networks do not represent
Head
Leg
O. unilateralis s.l.
B. bassiana
Uninfected
Abundance
B. bassiana O. unilateralis s.l.
A
B
C
D
E
F
H
I
G
50
40
30
20
10
0
Fig. 2.
Fungal abundance in muscle tissue. Serial block-face SEM images
from three different ants representing the three treatment groups in this study.
(A–C) Images from head samples (mandible adductor muscles); (D–F) images
from leg samples (coxal levator or depressor muscles). A and D represent the
control group (uninfected ants). Note that the muscle fibers are densely packed
together. B and E represent ants infected with B. bassiana. Fungal cells (dark
gray) are present between the muscle fibers. C and F represent ants infected
with O. unilateralis s.l. Again, fungal cells are present between the muscle fibers,
and some are connected via CATs (Inset). (Scale bars, 50 μm; Inset, 5 μm.) (G) The
percent of fungal tissue (compared with total muscle and fungal tissue) over a
volume of 100 serial block-face SEM slices. Each point represents one ant in-
fected with either B. bassiana or O. unilateralis s.l. Red lines indicate medians. (H
and I) Three-dimensional volume projections of two of the 100-image stacks
used to obtain the abundance data in G. These projections were generated from
the same samples as B and C, respectively.
12592
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1711673114
Fredericksen et al.
 a universal strategy of entomopathogenic fungi (though other
entomopathogenic fungi must be examined with this technique).
We suggest forming networks via CATs may be a specialized
strategy that allows O. unilateralis s.l. to exploit its specific habitat
(the body of its host) and continue its lifecycle.
Our first discovery was the apparent ubiquity of fungal cells
throughout the host but a distinct absence in the brain. To ma-
nipulate its host, O. unilateralis s.l. requires precise control of
mandible muscles, which are responsible for the final biting be-
havior (13, 14), so we expected fungal cells to be abundant in the
head region (Fig. 2). However, we also expected to find fungal
cells in the brain, which is presumably important for manipulation
of host behavior. Instead, we found no evidence of O. unilateralis s.l.
fungal cells in ant brains (Fig. 1), which supports suggestions from
previous work (14). The manipulated biting behavior that typifies
this system has convergently evolved in another fungus (4) and a
trematode (1). The African liver fluke, Dicrocoelium hospes (class
Trematoda), enters the ant’s antennal lobes, and the congeneric
species, D. dendriticum, enters the subesophageal ganglion, where
it abuts mandibular nerves (25). In both cases, the ants ascend
vegetation where they are eaten by ruminants, allowing the par-
asite to reproduce (1). But only with D. dendriticum are the ants
induced to bite plant tissue (grasses), which is the suggested rea-
son for the parasite to abut the mandibular nerves (25). The
Entomophthoralean fungus Pandora formicae also induces in-
fected ants to ascend and bite vegetation before death, but its
position relative to the host’s central nervous system during the
biting behavior is unknown. In the O. unilateralis s.l. system, the
absence of fungal cells in the brain implies the biting behavior
does not require direct contact with the brain. The species of
O. unilateralis s.l. studied here can dynamically alter the secondary
metabolite profile it secretes in the presence of brain versus
muscle tissue, and it also produces unique metabolites when it
encounters a brain it normally manipulates compared with a brain
from an ant species it does not control (11). Thus, the biting be-
havior may be driven by chemical means, and more work is
needed to understand the effect of this specialist parasite given
our observation that the brain is not invaded.
Although we found no evidence that O. unilateralis s.l. cells
enter the host brain (Fig. 1), the cells were abundant in the rest
of the head capsule and in other sections of the ant’s body (Fig.
S1), including the legs. This widespread distribution suggests that
the fungus does not target a particular area that may be espe-
cially suitable for inducing the biting behavior. This finding
contrasts with some other behavior-manipulating parasites, such
as Polypocephalus sp., tapeworms, and Dicrocoelium sp., trema-
todes, which invade specific regions in the central nervous system
of their hosts (shrimp and ants, respectively) (25, 26). The
nonrandom localization of some parasites inside their hosts
could be related to their ability to manipulate behavior (26).
A
n=60 n=60
n=60 n=60
n=60 n=60
n=60 n=60
n=115 n=74
n=60 n=60
n=60 n=45
n=60 n=60
n=30
n=29
n=30
n=30
n=30
n=30
n=30
n=30
Head Leg
HB
HB
HB
M
M
M
B
C
D
E
Invasions per muscle fiber
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Connec�ons per hyphal body
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
*
*
*
Ant ID
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
*
*
*
Ant ID
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Fig. 3.
Fungal interactions observed in O. unilateralis s.l.-infected ant muscles. (A) Serial block-face SEM image showing fungal hyphal bodies (HB) and
hyphae (arrowheads) occupying the spaces between ant mandible muscle fibers (M). Outlined boxes are shown larger in B and C. (Scale bar, 50 μm.)
(B) Connections between hyphal bodies (arrows). (Scale bar, 10 μm.) (Inset) Close-up of connected hyphal bodies. (Scale bar, 1 μm.) (C) Muscle fiber invasion:
hyphae have penetrated the membrane of this muscle fiber and are embedded within the muscle cell (arrows). (Scale bar, 10 μm.) (D) Connections per hyphal
body across leg and head regions for eight ants. Point sizes are proportional to number of occurrences. “n” refers to number of hyphal bodies sampled in each
ant. (E) Invasions per muscle fiber (head only) across eight ants (same ants as in D). “n” refers to the number of muscle fibers examined in each ant. Asterisks
(*) denote ants that were dead at the time of collection. Images from A–C were all taken from Ant #1.
Fig. 4.
Three-dimensional reconstructions of fungal networks surrounding
muscle fibers. (A) A single fiber of an ant mandible adductor muscle (red) sur-
rounded by 25 connected hyphal bodies (yellow). Connections between cells are
visible as short tubes, and many cells have hyphae growing from their ends.
Some of these hyphae have grown along and parallel to the muscle fiber (ar-
rowhead in Inset). This reconstruction was created using Avizo software. See also
Movie S1 and interactive 3D pdf (Fig. S3). (B) Two different projections of a 3D
reconstruction showing several muscle fibers (blue) and fungal hyphal bodies
(red) from the same area as seen in A. This reconstruction was created using a
method (developed here) that uses a U-Net deep-learning model.
Fredericksen et al.
PNAS
|
November 21, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 47
|
12593
MICROBIOLOGY
 However, it might also reflect an ability of some parasites, like
tapeworms and trematodes, to actively move inside the animal,
whereas others, like fungi, are moved around passively by the
open circulatory system.
In addition to being distributed throughout the host body,
fungal cells were present in the interstices between muscle fi-
bers (Fig. 2). Healthy muscle is normally a tightly packed system
of fibers with no spacing between the fibers (27). Previous work
demonstrated that the mandibular muscles of ants infected with
O. unilateralis s.l. exhibited a distinct atrophy that resulted in the
formation of such spaces (14). However, it was not known whether
this muscle atrophy and the high abundance of fungal cells between
the muscle fibers were the results of specific adaptations of
O. unilateralis s.l., and thus related to a lifecycle that requires ma-
nipulation, or whether these changes were general effects of ento-
mopathogens. In the present study, we therefore included the
fungus B. bassiana, which does not manipulate behavior, as a pos-
itive control. This was a useful addition because it showed that cells
of this generalist fungal pathogen also occupied the spaces between
muscle cells. We expected that if fungal abundance and the related
atrophy of host muscle were major factors in host manipulation, the
specialist O. unilateralis s.l. might have had a higher abundance than
B. bassiana. The finding that both fungal species were present and
similarly abundant between the fibers implies the formation of the
interstices is likely not a specific adaptation of the specialized
behavior-manipulating fungus. It also suggests a shared mechanism
of muscle degradation leading to separation of the fibers. Given the
large energy reserves that muscles contain (in the form of mito-
chondria), both generalist and specialist entomopathogens may
move into areas of high muscle density as part of their strategy to
grow and eventually kill the host (both species can only reproduce
from dead insects). Previous work showed a significant reduction in
mitochondrial density in muscles of manipulated ants (14). Mito-
chondria are considered the power generators of the cells, so the
myopathy we observed may be the result of fungal cells consuming
the energy reserves of the muscle fibers. The genus Ophiocordyceps
infects insects in 10 orders (including Hymenoptera, to which the
ants belong) (18, 24), and it would be instructive to study other
Ophiocordyceps species as well as generalist fungal parasites to de-
termine their effect on muscles of different insect hosts.
Not only did fungal cells enter muscle bundles, they also pene-
trated the muscle fibers themselves. Since the first step in colonizing
the host body is the hyphal body stage, the appearance of the cell-
invading mycelial phenotype implies a transition during which hy-
phae grow from one or both poles of the hyphal body (Fig. 2A,
arrowheads). In fungi, the mycelium is the vegetative growth stage
involved in foraging, resource acquisition, and accessing new envi-
ronments. Typified by the secretion of enzymes at the polar region
and subsequent cell wall synthesis localized to a surface of just a few
micrometers, growing hyphae can penetrate substances that hyphal
bodies cannot (28). An extreme example of such activity occurs in
rock-eating fungi (29), but fungi routinely degrade cellulose and
other recalcitrant biological material (30). We suggest the transition
to apical growth from hyphal bodies allows the fungal community to
access resources inside muscle cells, but other functions are also
possible. The penetration of muscle cells by hyphae also occurred,
albeit rarely, in ants infected by the generalist parasite, B. bassiana,
so muscle cell invasion may represent a general strategy that future
work should explore.
A fungal characteristic that we only observed in the specialist
pathogen O. unilateralis s.l. was the formation of complex 3D
networks surrounding the muscle fibers (Fig. 4, Fig. S3, and Movie
S1). The networks consisted of many hyphal bodies joined by
connections between the cell walls. The connections are known as
CATs, which have been observed in 73 species (21 genera) of
fungi (23). These fungal species in which CATs have been de-
scribed are pathogens of plants, and here we show similar con-
nections in a fungus infecting an animal. One possible function of
the connections and network formation is suggested by our 3D
reconstruction of 25 connected hyphal bodies surrounding a single
muscle fiber (Fig. 4, Fig. S3, and Movie S1). Visualizing the net-
work in this way allowed us to observe its size and shape. We
determined that many hyphal bodies (23%, 234 of 1,014) did not
directly touch the muscle fiber, but through their connections in
the network they could still interact indirectly with the muscle fi-
ber. One suggestion from these observations is that hyphae se-
quester resources from the muscles, and the connections between
hyphal bodies allow nutrients to be transported to cells not directly
touching the host. Studies on ectomycorrhizal fungal networks
show that carbon can be transferred from one tree to another
along extensive underground networks (31). Therefore, hyphal
body networks could allow the fungus to acquire resources from
muscles and distribute these resources to other fungal cells that
are in the network but distant from the muscles.
In summary, we have shown, through the use of serial block-
face SEM and automated image segmentation and analysis based
on a deep-learning model, the 3D structure of a microbial parasite
at the cellular level inside the body of its host. We demonstrated
that during the critical biting behavior of manipulated ants, the
specialist fungus O. unilateralis s.l. is present throughout the ant’s
body but not in the brain. The fungus takes the form of hyphal
bodies that connect to form fungal networks, and it is also present
as filamentous mycelia that invade ant muscle fibers. The con-
nections between hyphal bodies indicate that individual fungal
cells communicate with each other and suggest that collective
behavior may be an important strategy for this fungal parasite. We
speculate that the resulting networks may aid in nutrient transport
and formation of the structures that will later emerge from the
host’s body to continue the parasite’s lifecycle. Future work should
continue to examine fungal behavior at the cellular level over the
period of infection and across multiple areas within the ant’s body.
Materials and Methods
Infection and Sample Collection. Ant and fungal colonies were maintained in
the laboratory following procedures detailed in SI Materials and Methods.
Colonies of the ant Camponotus castaneus were collected in Abbeville
County, South Carolina (georeference: 34.375215, −82.346937) in July 2014.
Cultures of O. unilateralis s.l. (Strain SC09B, also collected in Abbeville
County) were grown from ascospores (sexually produced spores of Asco-
mycete fungi) since July 2014. Manipulated ants were collected following ar-
tificial infection with fungal material as described previously (11). Briefly, ants
were injected under one foreleg with 1 μL of a fungal suspension (either fresh
ascospores at 1 × 105 spores per milliliter or 1 cm2 of cultured fungal material
suspended in 500 μL of Grace’s medium) and kept at high humidity with access
to 10% sugar water ad libitum until collection (15–39 d after infection). It is
unknown how many spores enter the ant during a natural infection and
whether those spores are clonal or not. While our injection method may result
in a different disease progression than what occurs in nature, the relevant
outcome for our study is the induced biting behavior in the host, and this
occurs both in the field and in the laboratory. In total, 23 manipulated ants
(8 for histology and SEM, 3 for immunofluorescence, 12 for leg dissections)
were collected from three rounds of infection. Collected ants displayed a
characteristic biting behavior: they had been biting onto one of several
available substrates in the cage for at least 10 min (no more than 12 h) at the
time of collection. Control ants were not injected with fungus but were
housed with infected ants and exposed to the same laboratory conditions.
Ants infected with B. bassiana were surface-infected with 2 μL or 3 μL of spore
suspension (108 or 109 spores per milliliter). Eight infected ants from two
colonies were collected between 3 and 5 d after infection when ants were
moribund (32) or within 1 h after death. Collected ants were either dissected
immediately and fixed (for EM: 2.5% glutaraldehyde, 2% formaldehyde,
2 mM calcium chloride in 0.15 M cacodylate buffer, pH 7.4; for immunohis-
tochemistry: 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS) or flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen
and stored at −80 °C to be thawed, dissected, and fixed at a later date.
Immunofluorescence of Neural Tissue. Immunofluorescence assays were per-
formed similar to previously described work (33, 34). Briefly, fixed ant heads
were washed in PBS, cryoprotected (10/15/20% sucrose in PBS for 2 h each),
and embedded in O.C.T. Heads were cut into 50-μM sections along the
12594
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1711673114
Fredericksen et al.
 transverse plane using a cryostat (Leica Biosystems), and mounted slides were
postfixed briefly in 2% paraformaldehyde. Sections were rinsed with PBS,
blocked and permeabilized in 10% donkey serum (Jackson ImmunoResearch)
diluted in 0.1% Triton X-100/PBS. Slides were then incubated with primary
antibody (3C11 anti-SYNORF1, 1:50, DSHB) overnight at 4 °C, washed, and
then incubated in secondary antibody [Alexa Fluor 488 AffiniPure F(ab′)2
fragment donkey anti-mouse IgG (H+L), 1:200; Jackson ImmunoResearch] and
calcofluor white antichitin stain (1:100; Sigma-Aldrich). Sections were then
washed and mounted in ProLong Gold (ThermoFisher Scientific) and imaged
using a confocal laser scanning microscope (Olympus FluoView FV10i) and a
60× water immersion objective. All images are presented as maximum pro-
jections of z-stacks. Background subtraction was performed using the rolling
ball method (radius = 50) in ImageJ. Brightness and contrast were adjusted
equally for all images using PhotoShop (Adobe).
Serial Block-Face SEM. The right half of the head and one forecoxa from each
ant were prepared for serial block-face SEM according to the protocol of the
National Center for Microscopy and Imaging Research, University of Cal-
ifornia, San Diego (35). Pin-mounted samples were sectioned using a serial
block-face SEM (Gatan 3View on Zeiss SIGMA VP-FESEM) at 50- or 100-nm
thickness. Approximately 120 μm of tissue was sliced (1,200 or 2,400 slices)
from each O. unilateralis s.l. sample and 10 μm (100 slices) from B. bassiana
and control samples. Digital Micrograph (Gatan) software was used to align
image stacks and quantify interactions between cells (for details of quanti-
fication, see SI Materials and Methods). Image segmentation and 3D re-
construction were performed using a deep-learning model (see below) as
well as the programs Avizo and Amira (FEI). Model smoothing and 3D pdf
generation were performed with help from Thomas van de Kamp, Karlsruhe
Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany, as described previously (36).
Deep-Learning Model for Image Segmentation. The automated image seg-
mentation used to compute the relative abundance of fungus and muscle
tissue in each sample was performed using a model developed by Zhang et al.
(22). To perform quantitative analysis, our first step was to segment the
image data. In recent years, fully convolutional networks have shown highly
promising results in semantic segmentation (37). Our segmentation problem can
be viewed as a special case of general semantic segmentation. Compared with
natural scene images, the number of classes in our images is much smaller, but
the size of our training data is quite limited. Thus, our approach must be dif-
ferent from the original fully convolutional networks, which were designed for
general computer vision tasks. U-Net (38) is a specially designed fully convolu-
tional network for segmenting biomedical image data, and we applied this
model for automatic fungus and muscle segmentation. For each stack, we
manually labeled two sections to train the model and then applied the trained
model to the remaining sections. We stacked the segmentation results for all
sections to form the 3D segmentation. To calculate the segmentation accuracy,
we compared the model results with ground truth data (one section from each
stack marked by a human expert). For simpler stacks, the F1 score is over 96%,
and for harder stacks, the F1 score is over 93% (voxel level). Based on the seg-
mentation, we used a computer program to count voxels of fungi, muscles, and
other areas, and we calculated the volume ratios for each pair accordingly.
Data generated in this study are available on Pennsylvania State University
ScholarSphere (https://scholarsphere.psu.edu/concern/generic_works/6q524jn254).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Kim Fleming for inviting us to collect ants
and fungus on her land; Nina Jenkins (Pennsylvania State University) for
providing spores of Beauveria Bassiana; Greg Ning and John Cantolina (Pennsyl-
vania State University Microscopy and Cytometry Facility) for assistance with
microscopy and sample preparation; undergraduate assistant Saad Ahmad
(Pennsylvania State University) for digitizing histology slides; and the Huck Insti-
tutes of the Life Sciences for microscopy facilities and logistical support. The
SYNORF1 antibody, developed by Erich Buchner, was obtained from the Devel-
opmental Studies Hybridoma Bank, created by the National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development of the NIH and maintained at the University of
Iowa, Department of Biology. This work was supported in part by National
Science Foundation Grants IOS-1558062 (to D.P.H.), CCF-1217906 (to D.Z.C.),
CNS-1629914 (to D.Z.C.), and CCF-1617735 (to D.Z.C.); and NIH Grant R01
GM116927-02 (to D.P.H., D.C.Z., M.A.F., and Y.Z.). R.G.L. was funded by Comissao
de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nival Superior-Brazil (Project 6203-10-8).
C.A.M. was funded by the American Heart Association (16POST29920001).
1. Moore J (2002) Parasites and the Behavior of Animals (Oxford Univ Press, Oxford, UK).
2. Van Den Abbeele J, Caljon G, De Ridder K, De Baetselier P, Coosemans M (2010)
Trypanosoma brucei modifies the tsetse salivary composition, altering the fly feeding
behavior that favors parasite transmission. PLoS Pathog 6:e1000926.
3. Marikovsky PI (1962) On some features of behavior of the ants Formica rufa L. in-
fected with fungus disease. Insectes Soc 9:173–179.
4. Małagocka J, Grell MN, Lange L, Eilenberg J, Jensen AB (2015) Transcriptome of an
entomophthoralean fungus (Pandora formicae) shows molecular machinery adjusted
for successful host exploitation and transmission. J Invertebr Pathol 128:47–56.
5. Andersen SB, et al. (2009) The life of a dead ant: The expression of an adaptive ex-
tended phenotype. Am Nat 174:424–433.
6. Berdoy M, Webster JP, Macdonald DW (2000) Fatal attraction in rats infected with
Toxoplasma gondii. Proc Biol Sci 267:1591–1594.
7. Dawkins R (1982) The Extended Phenotype (Oxford Univ Press, Oxford, UK).
8. Dubey JP, Lindsay DS, Speer CA (1998) Structures of Toxoplasma gondii tachyzoites,
bradyzoites, and sporozoites and biology and development of tissue cysts. Clin
Microbiol Rev 11:267–299.
9. Roth G, Dicke U (2005) Evolution of the brain and intelligence. Trends Cogn Sci 9:
250–257.
10. Prandovszky E, et al. (2011) The neurotropic parasite Toxoplasma gondii increases
dopamine metabolism. PLoS One 6:e23866.
11. de Bekker C, et al. (2014) Species-specific ant brain manipulation by a specialized
fungal parasite. BMC Evol Biol 14:166.
12. Charnley AK (1989) Mechanisms of fungal pathogenesis in insects. Biotechnology of
Fungi for Improving Plant Growth, eds Whipps JM, Lumsen RD (Cambridge Univ Press,
Cambridge, UK), pp 85–125.
13. de Bekker C, et al. (2015) Gene expression during zombie ant biting behavior reflects the
complexity underlying fungal parasitic behavioral manipulation. BMC Genomics 16:620.
14. Hughes DP, et al. (2011) Behavioral mechanisms and morphological symptoms of
zombie ants dying from fungal infection. BMC Ecol 11:13.
15. de Bekker C, Smith PB, Patterson AD, Hughes DP (2013) Metabolomics reveals the
heterogeneous secretome of two entomopathogenic fungi to ex vivo cultured insect
tissues. PLoS One 8:e70609.
16. Roy HE, Steinkraus DC, Eilenberg J, Hajek AE, Pell JK (2006) Bizarre interactions and end-
games: Entomopathogenic fungi and their arthropod hosts. Annu Rev Entomol 51:331–357.
17. Humber RA (2008) Evolution of entomopathogenicity in fungi. J Invertebr Pathol 98:
262–266.
18. Araújo JPM, Hughes DP (2016) Diversity of entomopathogenic fungi: Which groups
conquered the insect body? Adv Genet 94:1–39.
19. Prasertphon S, Tanada Y (1968) Formation and circulation, in Galleria, of hyphal
bodies of entomophthoraceous fungi. J Invertebr Pathol 11:260–280.
20. Kirk P, Cannon P, Minter D, Stalpers J (2008) Ainsworth & Bisby’s Dictionary of the
Fungi (CAB International, Wallingford, UK), 10th Ed.
21. Boucias DG, Pendland JC (1998) General Properties of fungal pathogens. Principles of
Insect Pathology (Springer, New York), pp 259–286.
22. Zhang Y, et al. (2017) Deep adversarial networks for biomedical image segmentation
utilizing unannotated images. Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted
Intervention (Springer, Cham, Switzerland), pp 408–416.
23. Gabriela Roca M, Read ND, Wheals AE (2005) Conidial anastomosis tubes in fila-
mentous fungi. FEMS Microbiol Lett 249:191–198.
24. Hughes DP, et al. (2016) From so simple a beginning: The evolution of behavioral
manipulation by fungi. Adv Genet 94:437–469.
25. Romig T, Lucius R, Frank W (1980) Cerebral larvae in the second intermediate host of
Dicrocoelium dendriticum (Rudolphi, 1819) and Dicrocoelium hospes Looss, 1907
(Trematodes, Dicrocoeliidae). Z Parasitenkd 63:277–286.
26. Carreon N, Faulkes Z (2014) Position of larval tapeworms, Polypocephalus sp., in the
ganglia of shrimp, Litopenaeus setiferus. Integr Comp Biol 54:143–148.
27. Paul J (2001) Mandible movements in ants. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr
Physiol 131:7–20.
28. Read ND (2011) Exocytosis and growth do not occur only at hyphal tips. Mol Microbiol
81:4–7.
29. Jongmans AG, et al. (1997) Rock-eating fungi. Nature 389:682–683.
30. Cragg SM, et al. (2015) Lignocellulose degradation mechanisms across the Tree of
Life. Curr Opin Chem Biol 29:108–119.
31. Klein T, Siegwolf RTW, Körner C (2016) Belowground carbon trade among tall trees in
a temperate forest. Science 352:342–344.
32. Heinze J, Walter B (2010) Moribund ants leave their nests to die in social isolation.
Curr Biol 20:249–252.
33. Gao Q, Yuan B, Chess A (2000) Convergent projections of Drosophila olfactory neu-
rons to specific glomeruli in the antennal lobe. Nat Neurosci 3:780–785.
34. Vanguilder HD, Bixler GV, Sonntag WE, Freeman WM (2012) Hippocampal expression
of myelin-associated inhibitors is induced with age-related cognitive decline and
correlates with deficits of spatial learning and memory. J Neurochem 121:77–98.
35. Deerinck T, Bushong E, Thor A, Ellisman M (2010) NCMIR Methods for 3D EM: A New
Protocol for Preparation of Biological Specimens for Serial Block Face Scanning
Electron Microscopy (National Center for Microscopy and Imaging Research, La Jolla),
Version 7_01_10.
36. van de Kamp T, dos Santos Rolo T, Vagoviˇ
c P, Baumbach T, Riedel A (2014) Three-
dimensional reconstructions come to life—Interactive 3D PDF animations in func-
tional morphology. PLoS One 9:e102355.
37. Shelhamer E, Long J, Darrell T (2017) Fully convolutional networks for semantic
segmentation. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 39:640–651.
38. Ronneberger O, Fischer P, Brox T (2015) U-Net: Convolutional networks for bio-
medical image segmentation. MICCAI (Springer, Cham, Switzerland), pp 234–241.
Fredericksen et al.
PNAS
|
November 21, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 47
|
12595
MICROBIOLOGY
