 Copyright © by the Association of American Medical Colleges. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Academic Medicine, Vol. 91, No. 1 / January 2016
20
Commentary
Editor’s Note: A Commentary by J. Orlowski 
appears on pages 23–25.
As a member of both a university 
faculty and a state medical board, I have 
had ample opportunity to reflect on 
the postgraduate training requirements 
necessary to achieve competence as 
a clinician and those necessary to 
qualify for licensure as an independent 
practitioner. Ideally, these requirements 
should be identical. The fact that they 
are not has implications for health care 
quality and safety.
Evolution of Postgraduate 
Training
In 2003, with the intention of lessening 
trainee fatigue and promoting patient 
safety, the Accreditation Council for 
Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) 
imposed a set of mandates on residency 
programs.1 These mandates, which 
were revised in 2011, decreased the 
cumulative time residents were able 
to devote to patient care, prompting 
academic health centers to rethink 
their approach to graduate medical 
education.2,3 To accommodate residents’ 
changing schedules, implementation 
of night-float services, development of 
intricate cross-coverage arrangements, 
consolidation or elimination of rotations, 
and increased reliance on midlevel 
providers have become commonplace.4,5 
Structural changes to residency training 
have likewise occurred. For example, 
in surgical disciplines, the traditional 
paradigm of five years of general surgical 
instruction followed by subspecialty 
fellowship is being supplanted by early 
specialization models in which trainees 
focus exclusively on their field of 
interest after an abbreviated (i.e., 12- to 
24-month) exposure to general aspects 
of surgical care.6 Residency programs 
in nonsurgical disciplines have adopted 
similar strategies.7 As a result, residents 
have less intensive clinical exposure, are 
less experienced at any given point in 
their education, and are less well rounded 
as clinicians relative to those engaged in 
training before the ACGME mandates 
went into effect.
Having served as a faculty member for 
a number of years, I feel that residents 
in their early years of training are not 
sufficiently skilled, knowledgeable, 
or experienced to be qualified for 
independent practice. My impression 
is hardly surprising. No residency 
program has as its goal the production 
of an independent practitioner prior to 
completion of training, certainly not after 
as few as 12 months. However, most states 
will issue an unrestricted medical license 
to these individuals.8
Postgraduate Training 
Requirements for Board 
Certification and Licensure
Postgraduate training requirements to 
achieve board certification are established 
by the member boards of the American 
Board of Medical Specialties (ABMS) 
and are uniform throughout the United 
States.9 The minimum postgraduate 
training requirement for primary care 
disciplines is three years. For many 
other fields (e.g., invasive cardiology), 
the duration of postgraduate training is 
much longer.
In contrast, minimum postgraduate 
training requirements necessary for 
licensure as an independent practitioner 
are established by state medical boards 
and vary greatly.8 For example, the 
licensing board of South Dakota requires 
completion of a residency as a condition 
Abstract
Approaches to postgraduate medical 
training have evolved substantially in 
recent years, reflecting the complexity 
of the educational mission. Residency 
programs seek to produce clinicians 
who achieve board certification as 
an attestation of their competency. 
Certification criteria are established by the 
American Board of Medical Specialties, 
are consistent from state to state, and 
include periods of supervised instruction 
ranging from as few as three years (for 
primary care specialties) to much longer 
for selected disciplines. In contrast, 
minimum postgraduate training criteria 
necessary for licensure as an independent 
practitioner are established by state 
medical boards and vary significantly 
among and within jurisdictions. In 
most states, licenses can be granted to 
individuals who have completed as little 
as one year of postgraduate training. 
The discrepancy between the minimum 
time commitment necessary to become 
a competent physician and that to be 
licensed as an independent practitioner 
has implications for health care quality and 
safety. Data are lacking as to the number 
of licenses issued nationally to individuals 
who have only partially completed 
residency training and the nature of 
practices they pursue. Extrapolating from 
available evidence, these individuals may 
very well provide care inferior to those 
who have satisfied training requirements 
for certification eligibility and be more 
prone to problematic behavior resulting 
in disciplinary action. Efforts to establish 
more rigorous licensure criteria will require 
dialog between members of the academic 
community, professional organizations, 
state medical boards, and legislatures. 
The recently proposed Interstate Medical 
Licensure Compact may serve as a 
prototype for achieving this goal.
Acad Med. 2016;91:20–22.
First published online October 5, 2015
doi: 10.1097/ACM.0000000000000881
B.D. Freeman is professor of surgery, Department 
of Surgery, Washington University School of 
Medicine in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri.
Correspondence should be addressed to Bradley 
D. Freeman, Department of Surgery, Washington 
University School of Medicine in St. Louis, 660 S. 
Euclid Ave., Box 8109, St. Louis, MO 63110; e-mail: 
freemanb@wustl.edu.
Is It Time to Rethink Postgraduate Training 
Requirements for Licensure?
Bradley D. Freeman, MD
 Copyright © by the Association of American Medical Colleges. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Commentary
Academic Medicine, Vol. 91, No. 1 / January 2016
21
for granting licensure, whereas the Maine 
allopathic board and the allopathic and 
osteopathic boards in Nevada require 
three years of postgraduate graduate 
training to qualify for licensure. Boards 
in 15 states require at least two years 
of postgraduate training for licensure 
eligibility. Boards in the remaining states 
and territories require only one year of 
postgraduate training for licensure. In 
five states, boards providing oversight of 
allopathic physicians require more years 
of postgraduate training than boards 
overseeing osteopaths. For the remaining 
states with independent osteopathic and 
allopathic boards, training requirements 
for licensure are identical for osteopathic 
and allopathic graduates.8
Many states’ training requirements were 
established decades ago, when it was 
common for individuals to enter the 
labor force as a “general practitioner” 
after completing a rotating internship 
which provided brief exposure to core 
disciplines. With the proliferation of 
medical knowledge, rapid advance of 
technology, and evolution of medical 
and surgical specialties including those 
dedicated to primary care, the concept 
of the general practitioner has become 
antiquated if not obsolete.
Should We Maintain the  
Status Quo?
Between 2011 and 2014, 60% of licenses 
issued in Missouri were granted to 
individuals who completed only one 
year of postgraduate training.10 Recently 
enacted legislation which eliminates 
postgraduate training requirements 
altogether may increase the number of 
licenses issued to those who have not 
completed residency.11 Whereas 76% 
of currently licensed U.S. physicians 
have been certified by ABMS,12 data 
are lacking as to the number of licenses 
granted nationally to individuals who 
have only partially completed residency 
training, the nature of practices they 
pursue, and the quality of care they 
deliver. Extrapolating from a growing 
body of literature that supports a 
positive relationship between board 
certification, health care quality,13–16 and 
professionalism,17–19 one might argue 
that individuals obtaining licensure who 
have not satisfied training requirements 
for board certification eligibility might 
very well provide care that is inferior 
to the care provided by those who have 
successfully achieved this benchmark, and 
be more prone to problematic behavior 
resulting in disciplinary action.
One argument put forth in favor 
of maintaining the status quo is 
the opportunity for trainees to 
“moonlight”—that is, to work 
independently outside the residency 
program structure. Moonlighting is 
considered by many as a means of 
gaining valuable exposure to independent 
practice. However, this argument 
runs counter to the logic of residency 
programs which are designed to provide 
graded autonomy based on experience 
level, cognitive ability as judged by 
performance on standardized testing, 
and frequent assessment and feedback 
by supervising faculty.20 The notion 
that residents are competent to practice 
prior to completion of this program of 
instruction suggests that at least some 
of this training is superfluous. Further, 
moonlighting is not embraced as a 
core component or requirement of any 
accrediting body. Similarly, to the extent 
that time devoted to moonlighting is 
in addition to that necessary to fulfill 
residency obligations, there is potential 
to exceed weekly duty hours limitations, 
thus circumventing the intent of 
ACGME mandates designed to minimize 
fatigue.1 Finally, individuals may be 
moonlighting in situations where they 
lack expertise (e.g., an internal medicine 
resident moonlighting in an emergency 
department where he or she may be 
called on to provide care to a pediatric 
or traumatized patient). A trainee 
physician should not be practicing in an 
unsupervised setting beyond his/her level 
of confirmed competence.
A second argument favoring the 
status quo of licensing physicians after 
minimal postgraduate training is that 
advanced practice nurses (and other 
midlevel providers) currently engage 
in independent practice though they 
possess comparatively less education 
and experience. However, advanced 
practice nurses are certified in one 
of several roles (e.g., as specialists or 
midwives) after completion of master’s 
or doctoral-level training in highly 
structured and accredited programs.21 
Their scope of practice is defined in 
all 50 states, many of which require 
collaborative arrangements with 
supervising physicians. Accumulating 
evidence suggests that midlevel providers 
deliver high-quality, cost-effective care.22 
Thus, whereas license might be granted 
to inadequately trained physicians to 
practice in settings in which they have 
little expertise, midlevel providers are 
specifically educated and credentialed in a 
narrowly defined focus.
Finally, access to health care is limited 
in many parts of the United States, 
particularly in rural areas and among the 
underinsured.23 Another argument in 
favor of the status quo is that physicians 
who have not completed residency 
training may provide a significant 
proportion of the care in these contexts, 
thus bridging significant gaps in the 
health care safety net. More stringent 
licensure requirements may have the 
effect of further impeding care delivery 
to vulnerable populations. This prospect 
may represent a powerful disincentive 
to legislators in considering statutory 
changes intended to enhance the 
competency of the health care workforce.
Medicine today is more complex and 
challenging than at any time in its history. 
Approaches to medical education have 
continuously evolved to reflect this 
reality while state medical boards have 
remained largely static in their training 
requirements for practice entry. This 
disconnect has resulted in an ever-
widening discrepancy between the 
minimum time commitment necessary to 
become a competent physician and that 
to qualify for licensure. Correcting this 
discrepancy will require dialog between 
members of the academic community, 
professional organizations (e.g., medical 
associations and the Federation of State 
Medical Boards), licensing entities, and 
legislatures. Achieving consistency in 
licensing criteria nationally may prove 
challenging, given that oversight of 
the medical profession is under state 
purview. However, the recently proposed 
Interstate Medical Licensure Compact 
may serve as a prototype for doing so.24 
The Compact, which is designed to 
streamline the licensure process among 
participating states, would require 
applicants to have successfully completed 
graduate medical education and 
specialty certification.24 To avoid creating 
multiple tiers of physician qualifications 
(and, by inference, competency), 
participating medical boards might 
find the rationale of extending these 
criteria to all individuals applying for 
independent licensure appealing. Finally, 
 Copyright © by the Association of American Medical Colleges. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Commentary
Academic Medicine, Vol. 91, No. 1 / January 2016
22
the potential for more rigorous licensure 
requirements to disrupt care delivery to 
at-risk populations cannot be ignored. 
Forethought must be given to strategies 
for minimizing such disruptions (e.g., 
expanded role for midlevel providers, 
application of distance-enabling 
technologies) as part of this broader 
effort intended to enhance health care 
quality and safety.
Funding/Support: None reported.
Other disclosures: None reported.
Ethical approval: Reported as not applicable.
Disclaimer: The opinions expressed are 
exclusively those of the author and do not reflect 
the views of Washington University School of 
Medicine in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, or the 
Missouri Board of Registration for the Healing 
Arts, Jefferson City, Missouri.
References
 1 Philibert I, Friedmann P, Williams WT; 
ACGME Work Group on Resident Duty Hours. 
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical 
Education. New requirements for resident duty 
hours. JAMA. 2002;288:1112–1114.
 2 Nasca TJ, Day SH, Amis ES Jr; ACGME Duty 
Hour Task Force. The new recommendations 
on duty hours from the ACGME Task Force. 
N Engl J Med. 2010;363:e3.
 3 Drazen JM, Epstein AM. Rethinking medical 
training—the critical work ahead. N Engl J 
Med. 2002;347:1271–1272.
 4 Sachdeva AK, Bell RH Jr, Britt LD, Tarpley 
JL, Blair PG, Tarpley MJ. National efforts to 
reform residency education in surgery. Acad 
Med. 2007;82:1200–1210.
 5 Moote M, Krsek C, Kleinpell R, Todd B. 
Physician assistant and nurse practitioner 
utilization in academic medical centers. Am J 
Med Qual. 2011;26:452–460.
 6 Grant SB, Dixon JL, Glass NE, Sakran JV. 
Early surgical subspecialization: A new 
paradigm? Part I. Bull Am Coll Surg. 
2013;98:38–42.
 7 McMahon GT, Katz JT, Thorndike ME, Levy 
BD, Loscalzo J. Evaluation of a redesign 
initiative in an internal-medicine residency. 
N Engl J Med. 2010;362:1304–1311.
 8 American Medical Assocation. State Medical 
Licensure Requirements and Statistics. 
Chicago, Ill: American Medical Association; 
2014:29–30.
 9 American Board of Medical Specialties. 
ABMS Member Board Requirements for 
General Certification. Chicago, Ill: American 
Board of Medical Specialities; 2012.
 10 Clarkston C. Executive director, Missouri 
State Board for the Healing Arts, Jefferson 
City, Mo. Personal communication with B. 
Freeman, March 18, 2014.
 11 Beck M. Missouri to allow med-school grads 
to work as assistant physicians. Wall St J. 
July 16, 2014. http://www.wsj.com/articles/
missouri-to-allow-med-school-grads-to-
work-as-assistant-physicians-1405547613. 
Accessed July 7, 2015.
 12 Young A, Chaudhry HJ, Thomas JV, Dugan 
M. A census of actively licensed physicians 
in the United States, 2012. J Med Regul. 
2013;99:11–24.
 
13 Reid RO, Friedberg MW, Adams JL, 
McGlynn EA, Mehrotra A. Associations 
between physician characteristics 
and quality of care. Arch Intern Med. 
2010;170:1442–1449.
 14 Brennan TA, Horwitz RI, Duffy FD, Cassel 
CK, Goode LD, Lipner RS. The role of 
physician specialty board certification 
status in the quality movement. JAMA. 
2004;292:1038–1043.
 15 Norcini JJ, Kimball HR, Lipner RS. 
Certification and specialization: Do they 
matter in the outcome of acute myocardial 
infarction? Acad Med. 2000;75:1193–1198.
 16 Sharp LK, Bashook PG, Lipsky MS, Horowitz 
SD, Miller SH. Specialty board certification 
and clinical outcomes: The missing link. Acad 
Med. 2002;77:534–542.
 17 Morrison J, Wickersham P. Physicians 
disciplined by a state medical board. JAMA. 
1998;279:1889–1893.
 18 Kohatsu ND, Gould D, Ross LK, Fox PJ. 
Characteristics associated with physician 
discipline: A case–control study. Arch Intern 
Med. 2004;164:653–658.
 19 Khaliq AA, Dimassi H, Huang CY, Narine 
L, Smego RA Jr. Disciplinary action against 
physicians: Who is likely to get disciplined? 
Am J Med. 2005;118:773–777.
 20 Schumacher DJ, Bria C, Frohna JG. The quest 
toward unsupervised practice: Promoting 
autonomy, not independence. JAMA. 
2013;310:2613–2614.
 21 Institute of Medicine. The Future of 
Nursing: Leading Change; Advancing Health. 
Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 
2013.
 22 Mundinger MO, Kane RL, Lenz ER, et al. 
Primary care outcomes in patients treated 
by nurse practitioners or physicians: A 
randomized trial. JAMA. 2000;283:59–68.
 23 U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services, Health Resources and Services 
Administration, Bureau of Health Professions. 
The Physician Workforce: Projections and 
Research Into Current Issues Affecting Supply 
and Demand. Washington, DC: Department 
of Health and Human Services; 2008. http://
bhpr.hrsa.gov/healthworkforce/reports/
physwfissues.pdf. Accessed July 7, 2015.
 24 Steinbrook R. Interstate medical licensure: 
Major reform of licensing to encourage 
medical practice in multiple states. JAMA. 
2014;312:695–696.
