 By Eric B. French, Jeremy McCauley, Maria Aragon, Pieter Bakx, Martin Chalkley, Stacey H. Chen,
Bent J. Christensen, Hongwei Chuang, Aurelie Côté-Sergent, Mariacristina De Nardi, Elliott Fan,
Damien Échevin, Pierre-Yves Geoffard, Christelle Gastaldi-Ménager, Mette Gørtz, Yoko Ibuka,
John B. Jones, Malene Kallestrup-Lamb, Martin Karlsson, Tobias J. Klein, Grégoire de Lagasnerie,
Pierre-Carl Michaud, Owen O’Donnell, Nigel Rice, Jonathan S. Skinner, Eddy van Doorslaer,
Nicolas R. Ziebarth, and Elaine Kelly
End-Of-Life Medical Spending In
Last Twelve Months Of Life Is
Lower Than Previously Reported
ABSTRACT Although end-of-life medical spending is often viewed as a
major component of aggregate medical expenditure, accurate measures of
this type of medical spending are scarce. We used detailed health care
data for the period 2009–11 from Denmark, England, France, Germany,
Japan, the Netherlands, Taiwan, the United States, and the Canadian
province of Quebec to measure the composition and magnitude of
medical spending in the three years before death. In all nine countries,
medical spending at the end of life was high relative to spending at other
ages. Spending during the last twelve months of life made up a modest
share of aggregate spending, ranging from 8.5 percent in the United
States to 11.2 percent in Taiwan, but spending in the last three calendar
years of life reached 24.5 percent in Taiwan. This suggests that high
aggregate medical spending is due not to last-ditch efforts to save lives
but to spending on people with chronic conditions, which are associated
with shorter life expectancies.
T
he high medical expenses that peo-
ple incur close to death have at-
tracted considerable interest from
academics and policy makers over
the past thirty years, particularly in
the United States. Many consider unnecessary
end-of-life care to be a major source of wasteful
medical spending.1 Despite this interest, evi-
dence on medical spending shortly before death
is relatively scarce and often based on incom-
plete measures of expenditure. More than two
decades
ago
Ezekiel
Emanuel
and
Linda
Emanuel calculated that only about 10–12 per-
cent of total US medical spending occurred dur-
ing the year of death.1 Not much follow-up evi-
dence has emerged since then. Melissa Aldridge
and Amy Kelley estimated a slightly higher end-
of-life spending fraction, 13 percent, but relied
extensively on imputations.2 Gerald Riley and
James Lubitz found that Medicare spending
during the last year of life was one-quarter of
total Medicare spending, a fraction essentially
unchanged from thirty years before.3 However,
becauseMedicarecovers the expensesonlyof the
elderly and disabled and does not pay for long-
term care and other services, Riley and Lubitz’s
results might not be representative of health
spending as a whole.
Cross-country comparison of end-of-life medi-
cal spending has been difficult because most
studies examine just one country, and each of
those studies uses a different measure of medical
spending. This is unfortunate; there is much to
be learned by comparing end-of-life spending
across countries with different mechanisms for
the funding and provision of health care. Johan
Polder and coauthors estimate that medical
spending at the end of life constitutes 11 percent
of total medical spending in the Netherlands,
and they speculate that it may be higher in the
doi:
10.1377/hlthaff.2017.0174
HEALTH AFFAIRS 36,
NO. 7 (2017): 1211–1217
©2017 Project HOPE—
The People-to-People Health
Foundation, Inc.
Eric B. French is a professor
of economics at University
College London; codirector of
the ESRC Centre for the
Microeconomic Analysis of
Public Policy, Institute for
Fiscal Studies; and Research
Fellow at the Centre for
Economic Policy Research, all
in the United Kingdom.
Jeremy McCauley is a PhD
student at University College
London.
Maria Aragon is a research
fellow in the Centre for
Health Economics, University
of York, in the United
Kingdom.
Pieter Bakx is an assistant
professor in the Institute of
Health Policy and
Management, Erasmus
University Rotterdam, in the
Netherlands.
Martin Chalkley is a professor
in the Centre for Health
Economics, University of York.
Stacey H. Chen is an
associate professor in the
National Graduate Institute
for Policy Studies, in Tokyo,
Japan.
Bent J. Christensen is
director of the Dale T.
Mortensen Center and a
professor in the Department
of Economics and Business
Economics, Aarhus University,
in Denmark.
Hongwei Chuang is an
associate professor in the
Graduate School of Economics
and Management at Tohoku
University, in Sendai, Japan.
July 2017
36:7
Health Affairs
1211
International Experience
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 02, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 United States.4 Recently, Justin Bekelman and
coauthors compared end-of-life spending on
hospital treatment forcancer patients across sev-
en countries.5 They found the United States to
have just above the median hospital spending
per decedent and to have the lowest fraction of
decedents who died in the hospital. It is not clear
whether these results extend to more compre-
hensive measures of health expenditure, which
include long-term care spending and end-of-life
spending due to all causes of death.
We addressed these gaps in the evidence by
estimating end-of-life spending in Canada (Que-
bec only), Denmark, England, France, Germany,
Japan, the Netherlands, Taiwan, and the United
States, using consistent methods and a compre-
hensive measure that includes spending on both
health care and long-term care. We estimated
spending over the last twelve months and the
last three calendar years of life, which allowed
us to assess the rate at which medical expendi-
tures accrue and change in composition as pa-
tients approach death.We found that spending at
the end of life is modest relative to overall spend-
ing and that the ratio of end-of-life to overall
spending is relatively similar across very differ-
ent health care systems.
Study Data And Methods
Data Our analysis was based on individual-level
medical spending, using data sets from nine
countries. Comparing these countries revealed
that there is no one-to-one mapping between
how a country’s health care services are funded
and how they are provided, nor between the
funding (and provision) of health care and that
of long-term care. In the United States, most
health care costs for people under age sixty-five
are funded through private health insurance,
although many poor and disabled people receive
government-provided insurance. Medicare pro-
vides public health insurance to almost everyone
ages sixty-five and older. But while Medicare
pays for most expenses related to short-term
hospital stays, doctor visits, and pharmaceuti-
cals, in general it does not pay for nonrehabili-
tation long-term nursing-home stays. These
costs are paid for out of pocket or by Medicaid,
a means-tested public program.
Denmark and England both have health care
systems primarily funded through taxation and
dominated by public-sector provision of care.
Long-term careis largely paid forby public sourc-
es in Denmark but is mainly privately funded and
provided in England. In the Canadian province
of Quebec, health care is funded through taxa-
tion, but providers are in the private sector.
The remaining countries in our study—France,
Germany, Japan, the Netherlands, and Taiwan—
finance health care through mandatory insur-
ance. Public-sector involvement in the provision
of insurance and health services varies across
these countries. For example, in the Netherlands
all hospitals are private, whereas most hospitals
in France are publicly owned.
Most of the countries that we studied provide
nationally representative end-of-life data. The
exceptions are Germany and Japan, each of
which rely on data from a single insurance com-
pany. The data for these two countries are there-
fore not fully representative, but they are highly
accurate and include many types of care. The US
data we used accurately measure medical spend-
ing, but only for the population ages sixty-five
and older—whose members account for 73 per-
cent of all deaths in the United States. For the
United States, we assumed that average end-of-
life medical spending for people younger than
sixty-five is the same as end-of-life spending for
older people. The online Appendix provides evi-
dence that this is a reasonable assumption; it
also contains a detailed description of our data
sources, including more information on the fi-
nancing and provision of both health care and
long-term care in each country.6
Methods To estimate the fraction of aggregate
annual medical spending that occurs in the final
years of life, we used two measures: spending in
the last twelve months of life and spending in the
last three calendar years of life. For ease of com-
parison, we restricted all samples to people who
died in 2011. Medical spending in the last three
calendar years of life was the sum of medical
spending in calendar years 2009–11.
Because the data we used are collected annu-
ally, the data for 2011 mix together those who
died in January 2011 (and so had only one month
of spending in the calendar year of death) and
those who died in December 2011 (and so had
twelve months of spending in that year), along
with those dying in other months. For some
countries (Denmark, England, Germany, and
Taiwan) we measured exact total medical spend-
ing over the twelve months before death, using
data from both 2011 and 2010. For the remaining
countries, the data were from 2011 only and
therefore did not directly measure medical
spending in the last twelve months of life. We
followed the approach of Donald Hoover and
coauthors7 and regressed medical spending for
calendar year 2011 on the number of months
between the start of 2011 and the month of death
of each decedent. To allow a flexible fit to the
data, we also included the square of the number
of months and its square root in the regression.
We used the resulting regression estimates to
predict medical spending over the last twelve
Aurelie Côté-Sergent is a
research professional at the
Center for Interuniversity
Research and Analysis of
Organizations (CIRANO), in
Montreal, Quebec.
Mariacristina De Nardi is a
professor of economics at
University College London; a
senior economist and research
advisor at the Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago, in
Illinois; a research fellow at
the Centre for Economic
Policy Research, in Paris,
France; an international
research fellow at the
Institute for Fiscal Studies, in
London; and a faculty
research fellow at the
National Bureau of Economic
Research, in Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
Elliott Fan is an assistant
professor in the Department
of Economics at National
Taiwan University, in Taipei.
Damien Échevin is a research
professor at the Université de
Sherbrooke, in Quebec.
Pierre-Yves Geoffard is a
professor at the Paris School
of Economics (CNRS), and a
research fellow at the Centre
for Economic Policy Research.
Christelle Gastaldi-Ménager is
deputy head of the
Department of Studies on
Patients and Diseases,
National Health Insurance
Fund for Salaried Workers, in
Paris.
Mette Gørtz is an associate
professor in the Department
of Economics, University of
Copenhagen, in Denmark.
Yoko Ibuka is an associate
professor in the Department
of Economics and
Management, Tohoku
University
John B. Jones is a senior
economist and research
advisor at the Federal
Reserve Bank of Richmond, in
Virginia.
Malene Kallestrup-Lamb is an
assistant professor in the
Department of Economics and
Business Economics, Aarhus
University.
International Experience
1212
Health Affairs
July 2017
36:7
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 02, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 months of life. The Appendix provides more de-
tails about this technique and presents spending
measures for the last three and six months of life
and the last calendar year of life.6
Our microdata measured personal health care
expenditures, defined as total expenditures less
such expenditures as those for research and de-
velopment. Although the data are high quality,
in many countries the way in which these data
are recorded causes the microdata averages not
to match aggregate spending statistics. We ad-
justed our estimates to account for known sourc-
es of under- or overrecording so that the mean
per capita medical spending in our microdata
matched the national aggregate. We describe
and justify these adjustments in the Appendix.6
Limitations There were several limitations to
our analysis. First, we did not have complete data
on spending on all types of care for all countries.
Yet for the most commonly observed measure—
spending on hospital care—similar patterns of
end-of-life
spending
were
apparent
across
countries.
Second, we did not adjust for the level of health
and the causes of death across countries. Having
a higher fraction of decedents with dementia, for
example, could lead to higher end-of-life spend-
ing in a given country.8
Third, we were not able to judge the quality
of care among decedents across countries. For
these reasons, we could not judge which coun-
try’s rate or composition of end-of-life spending
is the “right” one.
Finally, because the organization and funding
of health care occurs at the provincial level in
Canada, we used data from the province of Que-
bec, the country’s second-most-populous prov-
ince. However, with the exception of language,
Quebec is largely representative of Canada as
a whole.
Study Results
Mean per capita medical spending in the last
twelve
months
of
life
is
high,
reaching
$80,000 in the United States, over $60,000 in
Denmark
and
the
Netherlands,
and
over
$50,000 for Germany (Exhibit 1). Medical
spending is high also during the last three calen-
dar years of life (Exhibit 2). The composition of
the spending changes across periods, however,
at least in the countries for which we had com-
plete data. Hospital spending typically repre-
sents a greater percentage of spending in the last
twelve months of life than in the last three cal-
endar years of life. For example, in the United
States hospital spending accounts for 44.2 per-
cent of spending in the last twelve months, com-
pared to 36.3 percent in the last three years. The
share of hospital spending is even higher in the
final three months of life (57.6 percent for the
United States), the results for which are shown
in the Appendix.6 Compared to the last twelve
months of life, in the last three years of life the
share of spending on long-term care, which in-
cludes nursing home care, is higher. Finally,
hospital spending, the one measure we observed
in all data sets, varied greatly across countries.
Although dying is expensive in all of the coun-
tries we studied, the fraction of each country’s
population that dies in a given year is small.
Medical spending in the last twelve months of
life accounted for approximately 8–11 percent of
aggregate medical spending in most countries,
with the United States spending the least
(8.5 percent) and Taiwan the most (11.2 percent)
(Exhibit 3). There was no strong association be-
tween this percentage and the type of health care
system in a given country. Medical spending in
the last three calendar years of life accounted for
approximately twice the percentage of aggregate
medical spending as spending in the last twelve
months of life did, ranging from 16.7 percent in
the United States to 24.5 percent in Taiwan.
The greatest variation across countries in
spending by category was in hospital spending.
That spending ranged from 8.2 percent in Japan
to 22.7 percent in Quebec in the last twelve
months of life, and from 13.5 percent in Japan
to 34.9 percent in Taiwan in the last three calen-
dar years of life (Exhibit 3). The United States is
toward the bottom of the range for both periods.
The potential implications are twofold. First, the
larger variation in hospital spending relative to
the variation in total spending is consistent with
health care systems’ using differing combina-
tions of services to provide care for people at
the end of life. Second, previous work that has
focused on hospital spending may have overes-
timated the variation in total end-of-life spend-
ing across countries.5
As is well known, health care spending ac-
counts for a much larger share of the gross do-
mestic product (GDP) in the United States than
in any other developed country. Exhibit 4 shows
that even though the United States devotes a
smaller fraction of its health care spending to
people at the end of life, compared to most of
the other countries examined here, it still de-
votes a similar if not larger fraction of its GDP
to end-of-life care.
Discussion
At least since Anne Scitovsky’s pioneering study
on end-of-life health spending,9 analysts have
noted the high cost of dying, with some suggest-
ing that these costs are central to understanding
Martin Karlsson is a
professor of economics at the
University of Duisburg-Essen,
Germany.
Tobias J. Klein is an associate
professor in the Department
of Econometrics and
Operations Research, Tilburg
University, in the Netherlands.
Grégoire de Lagasnerie is a
health economist at the
National Health Insurance
Fund for Salaried Workers.
Pierre-Carl Michaud is a
professor in the Department
of Applied Economics, HEC
Montreal.
Owen O’Donnell is a professor
in the Erasmus School of
Economics, Erasmus
University Rotterdam, and at
the University of Macedonia,
in Thessaloniki, Greece.
Nigel Rice is a professor in
the Centre for Health
Economics and Department of
Economics and Related
Studies, University of York.
Jonathan S. Skinner is the
James O. Freedman
Presidential Professor of
Economics in the Department
of Economics at Dartmouth
and a professor in the
Department of Family and
Community Medicine, Geisel
School of Medicine, and at the
Dartmouth Institute for Health
Policy and Clinical Practice, all
in Hanover, New Hampshire.
Eddy van Doorslaer is a
professor in the Institute of
Health Policy and
Management, Erasmus School
of Economics, Erasmus
University Rotterdam.
Nicolas R. Ziebarth is an
assistant professor in the
Department of Policy Analysis
and Management, Cornell
University, in Ithaca, New
York.
Elaine Kelly (e.kelly@ifs
.org.uk) is a senior research
economist at the Institute for
Fiscal Studies, in London.
July 2017
36:7
Health Affairs
1213
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 02, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 why health care spending rises with age.10 None-
theless, comparisons of end-of-life spending
across countries remain relatively scarce. We
used high-quality data from eight countries
and the Canadian province of Quebec to examine
medical spending in the last three years of life.
We found, as others have done,1 that end-of-life
care is expensive, but not necessarily as concen-
trated in the last twelve months of life as is often
claimed. In fact, the share of health care expen-
ditures devoted to care in the last twelve months
of life is relatively modest, ranging from 8.5 per-
cent to 11.2 percent.
The United States is a clear outlier in total
medical spending as a share of GDP, but the
share of US health care spending that goes to
people in the last twelve months of life is toward
the bottom of the range of estimates for the nine
countries that we studied. And while spending in
dollar terms is still higher in the United States—
because the country spends so much per capita
on health care—the exceptionalism of US health
care spending does not translate into a higher
share for end-of-life care.11 While our findings
may appear to be inconsistent with those of
Bekelman and coauthors,5 who found end-of-life
spending in the United States to be in the middle
of spending for seven countries, their study used
a “purchasing power parity” approach that ad-
justed away the higher prices charged in the
United States, compared to European coun-
tries.12 By contrast, we included any price differ-
ences across countries in our comparisons.13
The composition of end-of-life spending varies
greatly, with some countries spending consider-
ably more on long-term care and less on acute
care.While our sample of countries is small, our
findings also suggest that countries with stron-
ger long-term care sectors tend to have less acute
care spending, which might indicate some sub-
stitution of services across the two sectors. For
example, in the Netherlands, approximately half
of spending at the end of life is attributable to
long-term care, while hospital spending is rela-
tively modest. One possibility is that nursing
homes in the Netherlands are more likely than
other countries to have medical care on site,
which means that residents are able to receive
medical care without a stay in the hospital. In
such a case, it is unclear whether costs have been
reduced overall or just shifted from one category
to another.
Our results thus suggest that while some ter-
minal illnesses generate short periods of concen-
trated expenditure, many are the culmination of
chronic conditions. Using US administrative da-
ta to plot medical spending trajectories near the
end of life, Matthew Davis and coauthors
reached similar conclusions.14 They found that
while 49 percent of decedents had “high persis-
tent spending,” only 12 percent had “late rise
spending.”
Policy Implications
Since the 1980s there have been many proposals
to reform end-of-life care, including using pa-
tient directives that stipulate preferences for
end-of-life care in advance of life-threatening
conditions, greater use of hospice and home care
in place of medical treatment, and hospital
guidelines for the identification and reduction
of futile care. Although these proposals have
been motivated in large part by a desire to im-
prove care quality, their advocates have often
argued that the measures would also reduce
wasteful spending.1,8 The success of these ap-
Exhibit 1
Mean per capita medical spending (in 2014 US dollars) in 9 countries in the last 12 months
of life, by category of spending
SOURCE Authors’ analysis of administrative or insurance data for each region. The Appendix provides
a full description of country- or province-specific data sources (see Note 6 in text). NOTES The year of
death is 2011 except for Denmark and France, for which the years of death are 2012 and 2013,
respectively. Hospital spending refers to both inpatient and outpatient care except in England,
France, and Quebec, for which it refers to inpatient care only. The Japanese data include only hos-
pitals, dentists (counted as professional services), and pharmaceuticals. Long-term care includes
home help for Taiwan. The German data include all spending except for home help and therefore
may not be directly comparable to data for the other countries with complete data.
International Experience
1214
Health Affairs
July 2017
36:7
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 02, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 proaches in reducing costs has been decidedly
mixed.15–17
Efforts to reform end-of-life care have often
proved highly controversial. The Affordable Care
Act in the United States initially included provi-
sions to pay physicians to counsel patients about
advance directives and end-of-life decisions. Po-
litical opponents decried these as “death pan-
els,” and the relevant provisions were ultimately
removed from the legislation.18 However,a Medi-
care provision was subsequently included that
reimbursed physicians for advance care plan-
ning discussions with patients.18 In the United
Kingdom, decisions by the National Institute for
Health and Care Excellence to deny National
Health Service patients access to expensive,
but not cost-effective, cancer drugs have some-
times been difficult to implement in the face of
public pressure.19
Achieving the appropriate balance between
spending on long-term care for the chronically
ill, nursing care for the terminally ill, and hospi-
tal care for the acutely ill is a major challenge for
health systems under pressure from the costs of
an aging population. It is interesting to note that
the Netherlands has relatively low hospital ex-
penditures at the end of life, but high spending
on long-term care. In England, austerity mea-
sures designed to improve public finances re-
sulted in large cuts to social care and long-term
care, while funding for health care was pro-
tected. The impact of these measures on the qual-
ity and quantity of long-term care provided to the
elderly and the consequent increased pressures
on public hospitals have sparkeda fierce political
debate. Partly in response, England’s Better Care
Fund was established in 2013 to improve the
coordination of health care and social care ser-
vices, which are provided by separate public in-
stitutions. This has resulted in the voluntary
transfer of money by the National Health Ser-
vice, which provides health care, to publicly
funded long-term care, which is provided by lo-
cal governments.
US efforts to increase the share of end-of-life
spending accounted for by hospice care have
been successful, as shown by rising rates of hos-
pice care. Yet this paradigm shift has not been
accompanied by a reduction in end-of-life costs,
since hospice care is also expensive and inpa-
tient care costs have not fallen commensu-
rately.20
Our finding that end-of-life costs account for a
modest fraction of total medical spending sug-
gests that none of these measures is likely to have
a large impact on aggregate health care cost
growth. For example, since spending in the last
twelve months of life in the United States is only
8.5 percent of total health expenditure, a funda-
mental reorganization of end-of-life care that
results in a 10 percent cut in such spending
would translate to a 0.85 percent reduction in
overall spending—a scaling back that would be
swamped by normal growth in health care costs.
The fact that, compared to spending in the last
twelve months of life, spending in the last three
years of life is a much greater share of overall
spending—accounting for as much as 24.5 per-
cent (in Taiwan) of overall costs—points to the
greater importance of cost reduction in the treat-
ment of high-risk patients with chronic condi-
tions.21
The high fraction of Medicare spending that
takes place near the end of life is sometimes
viewed as a reason why US health careis uniquely
expensive among developed countries. Our re-
sults do not support this conjecture. First, we
found that US health spending near the end of
life was less than one-tenth of total US health
care spending and thus cannot be the primary
cause of why US health care is so much more
expensive than care in other countries. Second,
the fraction of medical spending devoted to end-
of-life care is lower in the United States than in
other countries, many of which have far lower
Exhibit 2
Mean per capita medical expenditure (in 2014 US dollars) in 9 countries in the last 3
calendar years of life, by category
SOURCE Authors’ analysis of administrative or insurance data for each region. The Appendix provides
a full description of country- or province-specific data sources (see Note 6 in text). NOTE For
explanatory and descriptive notes, see Exhibit 1.
July 2017
36:7
Health Affairs
1215
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 02, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 total spending—which suggests that high medi-
cal spending shortly before death is common to
all health care systems.
Our finding that restraining end-of-life spend-
ing would only modestly restrain total medical
spending is in no way an argument against re-
form. Exhibit 4 shows that a country’s medical
spending in the last three years of life usually
exceeds 2 percent of its GDP. The potential cost
savings may be large. Perhaps an even stronger
argument for focusing on end-of-life care is to
improve the quality of care for the growing el-
derly population, who face the risk of expensive
and painful therapy at the end of life.1 Examples
of these low-quality treatments include regular
treatments instead of early palliative care for
metastatic lung cancer,22 burdensome transi-
tions for patients near death,23 and the use of
feeding tubes in patients with dementia.23–25
We hope that health systems can learn from both
successful and unsuccessful approaches around
the world in treating patients at high risk
of dying.
Conclusion
The idea that reducing wasteful spending just
before death can make the growth in health care
costs sustainable is not supported by this study.
Spending in the last twelve months of life ac-
counted for 8.5–11.2 percent of overall spending
in eight countries and Quebec, with the United
States at the bottom of that ranking. Reducing
this spending would thus have only a modest
effect on total medical spending. In contrast,
spending in the last three years of life accounted
for as much as 24.5 percent of overall costs,
which suggests that the focus should be on re-
ducing the costs of caring for people with chron-
ic conditions—many of whom are approaching
death. The task of containing or reducing end-
of-life spending likely requires a multifaceted
approach by policy makers and clinicians. For
people near death, an appropriate mix of long-
term care, hospice, and home care would ensure
that only those patients who wanted and needed
to be in hospitals weretreated there. The primary
payoff would be better quality care, along with
modestly lower costs. ▪
Exhibit 3
Spending on people in 9 countries at the end of life as a percentage of overall spending,
by category of spending
All medical care
Including long-
term care
Excluding long-
term care
Long-term
care
Hospital
care
Spending on people in the last 12 months of life
Denmark
10.95%
9.97%
21.74%
10.01%
England
—a
—a
—a
14.59
France
—a
8.50
—a
15.00
Germany
10.96
10.59
14.89
21.17
Japan
—a
5.93
—a
8.21
Netherlands
10.01
7.32
22.12
8.85
Quebec
—a
—a
—a
22.73
Taiwan
11.20
10.10
23.08
15.53
United States
8.45
7.11
18.12
9.91
Spending on people in the last 3 calendar years of life
Denmark
22.16%
19.23%
54.24%
18.65%
England
—a
—a
—a
29.78
France
—a
14.10
—a
22.08
Germany
21.40
19.85
36.59
29.87
Japan
—a
10.36
—a
13.50
Netherlands
19.40
14.28
44.86
15.12
Quebec
—a
—a
—a
25.65
Taiwan
24.48
22.07
54.92
34.88
United States
16.70
12.77
44.92
16.27
SOURCE Authors’ analysis of administrative or insurance data for each region. The Appendix provides
a full description of country- or province-specific data sources (see Note 6 in text). NOTE For
explanatory and descriptive notes, see Exhibit 1. aNot available.
Exhibit 4
Health care spending in 9 countries as a percentage of GDP overall and for the last 3
calendar years and last 12 months of life
SOURCE Authors’ analysis of administrative or insurance data for each region from sources that are
provided in the online Appendix (see Note 6 in text). NOTES All spending is for 2011 from the OECD
item except for Taiwan (2012). The percentages of gross domestic product (GDP) come from multi-
plying the percentages in Exhibit 3 by health care spending as a percentage of GDP. This could be
calculated only for the group of countries for which we had a percentage for “All medical care, in-
cluding long-term care” in Exhibit 3. Values for England and Quebec were unavailable, so values for
the United Kingdom and Canada are displayed instead. Spending categories are mutually exclusive.
International Experience
1216
Health Affairs
July 2017
36:7
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 02, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 The authors acknowledge support for
their research from the following
sources. From Denmark: funding from
the Danish National Research
Foundation, Helsefonden, the Danish
Social Science Research Council, and the
Carlsberg Foundation. From England:
Maria Aragon and Nigel Rice
acknowledge funding as part of the
Economics of Social and Health Care
Research Unit based at the University
of York and funding from the Policy
Research Programme in the UK
Department of Health. Elaine Kelly
acknowledges financial support from the
Economic and Social Research Council
(Grant Nos. ES/K009060/1 and ES/
H021221/1). From Japan: funding from
Tohoku University Center for Equal
Opportunity for funding, with assistance
from Nobuyuki Izumida and Yui Ohtsu in
obtaining and analyzing data. From the
Netherlands: funding from Netspar and
the Health Cloud Project. From Taiwan:
funding from Academia Sinica and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of
Taiwan. From the United States: the
European Research Council, Michigan
Retirement Center, UK Economic and
Social Research Council, US National
Institute on Aging, and the US National
Institutes of Health Common Fund. The
views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the funders; the Federal
Reserve Banks of Chicago or Richmond
or the Federal Reserve System; the
National Bureau of Economic Research;
the Centre for Economic Policy
Research; or the Institute for Fiscal
Studies.
NOTES
1 Emanuel EJ, Emanuel LL. The eco-
nomics of dying. The illusion of cost
savings at the end of life. N Engl J
Med. 1994;330(8):540–4.
2 Aldridge MD, Kelley AS. The myth
regarding the high cost of end-of-life
care. Am J Public Health. 2015;
105(12):2411–5.
3 Riley GF, Lubitz JD. Long-term
trends in Medicare payments in the
last year of life. Health Serv Res.
2010;45(2):565–76.
4 Polder JJ, Barendregt JJ, van Oers H.
Health care costs in the last year of
life—the Dutch experience. Soc Sci
Med. 2006;63(7):1720–31.
5 Bekelman JE, Halpern SD, Blankart
CR, Bynum JP, Cohen J, Fowler R,
et al. Comparison of site of death,
health care utilization, and hospital
expenditures for patients dying with
cancer in 7 developed countries.
JAMA. 2016;315(3):272–83.
6 To access the Appendix, click on the
Appendix link in the box to the right
of the article online.
7 Hoover DR, Crystal S, Kumar R,
Sambamoorthi U, Cantor JC. Medi-
cal expenditures during the last year
of life: findings from the 1992–1996
Medicare Current Beneficiary Sur-
vey. Health Serv Res. 2002;37(6):
1625–42.
8 Kelley AS, McGarry K, Gorges R,
Skinner JS. The burden of health
care costs for patients with dementia
in the last 5 years of life. Ann Intern
Med. 2015;163(10):729–36.
9 Scitovsky AA. “The high cost of dy-
ing”: what do the data show? Mil-
bank Mem Fund Q Health Soc. 1984;
62(4):591–608.
10 Zweifel P, Felder S, Meiers M. Age-
ing of population and health care
expenditure: a red herring? Health
Econ. 1999;8(6):485–96.
11 Garber AM, Skinner J. Is American
health care uniquely inefficient? J
Econ Perspect. 2008;22(4):27–50.
12 Koechlin F, Konijn P, Lorenzoni L,
Schreyer P. Comparing hospital and
health prices and volumes interna-
tionally: results of a Eurostat/OECD
project [Internet]. Paris: Organiza-
tion for Economic Cooperation and
Development; 2014 Aug 26 [cited
2017 Jun 8]. (OECD Health Working
Paper No. 75). Available for down-
load from: http://www.oecd-ilibrary
.org/social-issues-migration-health/
comparing-hospital-and-health-
prices-and-volumes-internationally_
5jxznwrj32mp-en
13 Anderson GF, Reinhardt UE, Hussey
PS, Petrosyan V. It’s the prices, stu-
pid: why the United States is so dif-
ferent from other countries. Health
Aff (Millwood). 2003;22(3):89–105.
14 Davis MA, Nallamothu BK, Banerjee
M, Bynum JP. Identification of four
unique spending patterns among
older adults in the last year of life
challenges standard assumptions.
Health Aff (Millwood). 2016;35(7):
1316–23.
15 Teno J, Lynn J, Wenger N, Phillips
RS, Murphy DP, Connors AF Jr.
Advance directives for seriously ill
hospitalized patients: effectiveness
with the Patient Self-Determination
Act and the SUPPORT intervention.
SUPPORT investigators. Study to
Understand Prognoses and Prefer-
ences for Outcomes and Risks of
Treatment. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1997;
45(4):500–7.
16 Teno JM, Gozalo PL, Bynum JP,
Leland NE, Miller SC, Morden NE,
et al. Change in end-of-life care for
Medicare beneficiaries: site of death,
place of care, and health care tran-
sitions in 2000, 2005, and 2009.
JAMA. 2013;309(5):470–7.
17 Teno JM, Gruneir A, Schwartz Z,
Nanda A, Wetle T. Association be-
tween advance directives and quality
of end-of-life care: a national study. J
Am Geriatr Soc. 2007;55(2):189–94.
18 Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation.
10 FAQs: Medicare’s role in end-of-
life care [Internet]. Menlo Park
(CA): KFF; 2016 Sep 26 [cited 2017
Jun 5]. Available from: http://
kff.org/medicare/fact-sheet/10-faqs-
medicares-role-in-end-of-life-care/
19 Donnelly L, Walton G. 25 cancer
drugs to be denied on NHS. Tele-
graph [serial on the Internet]. 2015
Jan 12 [cited 2017 Jun 5]. Available
from: http://www.telegraph.co.uk/
news/politics/11340860/25-cancer-
drugs-to-be-denied-on-NHS.html
20 Gozalo P, Plotzke M, Mor V, Miller
SC, Teno JM. Changes in Medicare
costs with the growth of hospice care
in nursing homes. N Engl J Med.
2015;372(19):1823–31.
21 Wiley JA, Rittenhouse DR, Shortell
SM, Casalino LP, Ramsay PP, Bibi S,
et al. Managing chronic illness:
physician practices increased the use
of care management and medical
home processes. Health Aff (Mill-
wood). 2015;34(1):78–86.
22 Temel JS, Greer JA, Muzikansky A,
Gallagher ER, Admane S, Jackson
VA, et al. Early palliative care for
patients with metastatic non-small-
cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med.
2010;363(8):733–42.
23 Gozalo P, Teno JM, Mitchell SL,
Skinner J, Bynum J, Tyler D, et al.
End-of-life transitions among nurs-
ing home residents with cognitive
issues. N Engl J Med. 2011;365(13):
1212–21.
24 Mitchell SL, Mor V, Gozalo PL,
Servadio JL, Teno JM. Tube feeding
in US nursing home residents with
advanced dementia, 2000–2014.
JAMA. 2016;316(7):769–70.
25 Mitchell SL, Teno JM, Roy J,
Kabumoto G, Mor V. Clinical and
organizational factors associated
with feeding tube use among nurs-
ing home residents with advanced
cognitive impairment. JAMA.
2003;290(1):73–80.
July 2017
36:7
Health Affairs
1217
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 02, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
