 ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Can Communicating Personalised Disease Risk Promote Healthy
Behaviour Change? A Systematic Review of Systematic Reviews
David P French, PhD1 & Elaine Cameron, PhD1 & Jack S Benton, MSc1 &
Christi Deaton, PhD2 & Michelle Harvie, PhD3
Published online: 13 March 2017
# The Author(s) 2017. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract
Background The assessment and communication of disease
risk that is personalised to the individual is widespread in
healthcare contexts. Despite several systematic reviews of
RCTs, it is unclear under what circumstances that personalised
risk estimates promotes change in four key health-related be-
haviours: smoking, physical activity, diet and alcohol
consumption.
Purpose The present research aims to systematically identify,
evaluate and synthesise the findings of existing systematic
reviews.
Methods This systematic review of systematic reviews
followed published guidance. A search of four databases and
two-stage screening procedure with good reliability identified
nine eligible systematic reviews.
Results The nine reviews each included between three and 15
primary studies, containing 36 unique studies. Methods of
personalising risk feedback included imaging/visual feedback,
genetic testing, and numerical estimation from risk algorithms.
The reviews were generally high quality. For a broad range of
methods of estimating and communicating risk, the reviews
found no evidence that risk information had strong or consistent
effects on health-related behaviours. The most promising effects
came from interventions using visual or imaging techniques and
with smoking cessation and dietary behaviour as outcomes, but
with inconsistent results. Few interventions explicitly used the-
ory, few targeted self-efficacy or response efficacy, and a limited
range of Behaviour Change Techniques were used.
Conclusions Presenting risk information on its own, even
when highly personalised, does not produce strong effects
on health-related behaviours or changes which are sustained.
Future research in this area should build on the existing
knowledge base about increasing the effects of risk commu-
nication on behaviour.
Keywords Systematic review . Risk communication .
Behaviour change . Behaviour
The global burden of disease is increasingly due to non-
communicable diseases such as cardiovascular disease, diabe-
tes, and cancer at least partly caused by health-related behav-
iours e.g. smoking and lack of physical activity [1]. Two com-
monly used approaches to preventing such diseases both in-
volve the estimation of personalised disease risk. First,
personalised risk scores are generated to triage prevention
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article
(doi:10.1007/s12160-017-9895-z) contains supplementary material,
which is available to authorized users.
* David P French
david.french@manchester.ac.uk
Elaine Cameron
elaine.cameron@manchester.ac.uk
Jack S Benton
jsbentonuk@gmail.com
Christi Deaton
cd531@medschl.cam.ac.uk
Michelle Harvie
michelle.harvie@manchester.ac.uk
1
Manchester Centre of Health Psychology, School of Health Sciences,
University of Manchester, Coupland 1 Building, Manchester M13
9PL, England
2
School of Clinical Medicine, Forvie Site, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 0SR, England
3
Nightingale Centre, University Hospital South Manchester,
Manchester M23 9LT, England
ann. behav. med. (2017) 51:718–729
DOI 10.1007/s12160-017-9895-z
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/abm/article-abstract/51/5/718/4648590 by guest on 04 June 2019
 therapies to groups with optimal risk benefit ratios, e.g. statins
for individuals identified with 10 year risk of cardio-vascular
disease greater than 10% [2] and tamoxifen or raloxifene for
women with 10 year risk of breast cancer greater than 5% [3].
Second, personalised risk scores are communicated to patients
with the expectation that telling people that they are at high
risk will motivate them to engage in health-related behaviour
changes to reduce their risk [4].
For both of these reasons, the assessment and communica-
tion of personalised disease risk is currently happening on a
large scale. Examples include risk of cardio-vascular disease
based largely on physiological markers and family history, e.g.
QRisk [5], breast cancer risk estimates derived mainly from
family history assessments, hormonal risk factors and weight
[6], and coronary artery calcification using non-invasive visu-
al imaging techniques [7]. The assessment and communica-
tion of personalised risk estimates is likely to increase with the
proliferation of inexpensive DNA-based tests for common ge-
netic variants that contribute to many non-communicable mul-
tifactorial diseases. Accordingly, it is important to evaluate the
extent to which these risk estimation and communication
programmes produce changes in health-related behaviours,
and to determine which approaches to communicating risk
are most likely to bring about this behaviour change.
The current state of knowledge is good in terms of com-
municating risk information that is not personalised to the
individual, e.g. that smoking is generally harmful [8–10]. A
recent systematic review of risk communication studies found
that where interventions produced a significant increase in risk
appraisal relative to control participants, there was a mean
increase of d=0.23 on subsequent behaviour, across 93 studies
[9]. Further, in line with theory [11], effect sizes of subsequent
behaviour were much larger (d=0.45) when response efficacy
and self-efficacy were also increased. Response efficacy refers
to a person’s belief that changing their behaviour (e.g. increas-
ing physical activity) will reduce risk, and self-efficacy refers
to a person’s belief that they are capable of changing the rel-
evant behaviour. There is also good evidence on the most
effective means of increasing self-efficacy, at least for some
behaviours such as physical activity [12].
Despite this good state of knowledge regarding the most
effective ways of communicating information about non-
personalised risk to change behaviour, it is unclear to what
extent self-efficacy and response efficacy have been targeted
in interventions involving personalising risk information.
Further, it is not clear which behaviour change techniques to
address risk appraisals and efficacy appraisals have been used
in such interventions [13]. More generally it is not clear about
the extent to which explicit theory has been used, e.g. to select
intervention contents, constructs that interventions target, or
measures of these constructs, or to inform further theorising
about how best to change these health-related behaviours in
light of study findings.
Research in the area of personalised risk communication is
less developed than research on communicating information
on general disease risk information that is not personalised to
the individual, but growing rapidly. Consequently, it is diffi-
cult for decision makers to maintain familiarity with all rele-
vant findings regarding how best to communicate personalised
risk information to bring about behaviour change. This is in-
creasingly a typical state of affairs in science, which has re-
sulted in an increase in the conduct of systematic reviews [14].
Previous systematic reviews of personalised risk commu-
nication have overlapped in terms of the condition for which
risk is being communicated, the behaviour to reduce this risk,
and the nature and source of the personalised risk information.
Given the growth in systematic reviews, more recently sys-
tematic reviews of systematic reviews have been increasingly
employed to compare and synthesise reviews and provide up-
to-date summaries of the state of knowledge within specific
areas [15]. Such reviews can generate broad overviews not
provided by more focussed systematic reviews, highlighting
differences as well as commonalities to identify particularly
promising approaches. Following this reasoning, the present
systematic review of systematic reviews summarised and ap-
praised recent reviews of the effects of communicating
personalised disease risk information on individual health-
related behaviours.
Our overall aim was to provide an overview of current
knowledge from systematic reviews of randomised and non-
randomised trials, on the extent to which communicating
personalised risk information to adult individuals results in
changes in four key health-related behaviours (smoking, alco-
hol consumption, physical activity and diet) compared to no
personalised risk information. One secondary aim was to as-
sess the extent to which this varies by (a) the nature and source
of risk information provided, e.g. genetic tests, imaging, etc.,
(b) the nature of the behaviour that may change, e.g. smoking,
physical activity, etc., and (c) the condition for which behav-
iour may affect risk, e.g. various cancers, diabetes, etc. A
further secondary aim was to describe the primary literature
on personalised risk communication in relation to factors that
have been found to be important for studies of non-
personalised disease risk communication, namely (a) use of
self-efficacy and response efficacy in interventions and mea-
sures, (b) behaviour change techniques used in the interven-
tions, and (c) the explicit use of theory to inform and develop
interventions.
Methods
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria
Systematic reviews had to report on primary studies involving
adult participants, who did not already have the condition for
ann. behav. med. (2017) 51:718–729
719
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/abm/article-abstract/51/5/718/4648590 by guest on 04 June 2019
 which their personalised risk was estimated and were not se-
lected on the basis of another clinical condition, to ensure that
the results related to primary prevention.
Included primary studies had to report on the effects of
communicating personalised disease risk information about
common multifactorial conditions that are reliably linked to
health-related behaviour, e.g. cardio-vascular disease, diabe-
tes, cancer, and dementia. Personalised disease risk had to be
either (a) an estimate of personal susceptibility typically com-
municated as a score, percentage or category such as ‘low’
‘medium’ or ‘high’, or (b) feedback on current physiological
status that indicates the precursor to clinical disease, e.g. im-
ages showing atherosclerosis. Note that participants in inter-
vention studies may have received other interventions, e.g.
education or counselling as well as risk estimates. We did
not include risk estimates that were based purely on current
health-related behaviours, e.g. smoking status, or analogue
studies where participants were asked to consider their reac-
tions to hypothetical risk, nor studies where participants re-
ceived information about actual disease status rather than risk.
People who were allocated to comparison groups in prima-
ry studies must not have received personalised risk informa-
tion (e.g. usual care, no intervention, general disease risk in-
formation, or other non-personalised intervention). Eligible
study designs were randomised controlled trials (RCTs) and
non-randomised controlled trials (NRCTs).
Only studies examining effects on smoking, alcohol con-
sumption, physical activity and diet were included. We did not
include studies reporting only the health or physiological out-
comes associated with these behaviours, such as change in
body weight or blood pressure. Studies of the impact of risk
communication on other health behaviours, i.e. (a) risky sex-
ual behaviour, (b) use of tanning booths or sunscreen use, or
(c) uptake of screening were not included, as they related to (a)
communicable diseases, (b) diseases with one predominant
cause rather than being multifactorial, and (c) detection rather
than prevention of disease.
The reviews themselves had to employ systematic
methods, involving a minimum of conducting online electron-
ic literature searches, and applying suitable inclusion and ex-
clusion criteria for primary studies. We included only system-
atic reviews that had the explicit aim of investigating the ef-
fects of risk communication, to avoid the necessity of
searching through reviews that included all interventions,
not just those concerned with risk communication. Further,
the systematic reviews had to provide sufficient results of
primary studies that were RCTs or NCRTs rather than report
results solely in combination with studies that were not eligi-
ble such as before and after studies. The results of the system-
atic review must have been presented in a quantitative format,
e.g. as effect sizes or significance levels.
Only systematic reviews published in English were includ-
ed. We included systematic reviews published from 2008
onwards, to avoid inclusion of redundant older reviews along-
side newer reviews in the same area. For example, [16] covers
highly similar ground to the later review [17].
Search Strategy
Medline, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews,
CINAHL Plus and PsycInfo were searched in January 2016.
Search terms were adapted from previous reviews [18, 19],
and were initially developed for use in Medline (presented in
Appendix One). The search strategy was then modified for use
with the other three databases. We searched for additional
reviews using backward and forward citation searching from
included reviews and other relevant articles.
The titles and abstracts of all papers initially retrieved were
screened by two authors (EC and MH), with 99.7%
(2735/2742) agreement. Those selected were subjected to full
text assessment by three authors (DF, MH and CD), with mean
75% agreement, and consensus on inclusion reached through
discussion.
Quality Assessment
The quality of included systematic reviews were scored by
two authors using the Amstar scoring system [20].
Agreement on Amstar scores (± 1 point) was 56%, and differ-
ences in scores were resolved through discussion.
Coding of Primary Studies
Primary studies were coded, in relation to six characteristics:
(a) what was the nature and source of the risk information
communicated, e.g. spirometry, genetic testing, etc.; (b) which
of the four behaviours were examined; (c) to which medical
condition the risk information communicated was related; (d)
the extent to which self-efficacy and response efficacy were
described as being targeted and measured post-intervention;
(e) use of behaviour change techniques, assessed using a
standardised taxonomy [13]; (f) the theoretical grounding of
intervention and study, coded using a shortened version of a
standardised coding scheme [21].
Evidence Synthesis
In line with recommendations for systematic reviews of sys-
tematic reviews [15], our analysis was mainly descriptive. We
described (a) the scope of the included systematic reviews, (b)
the quality of the reviews, (c) overlap between studies includ-
ed in multiple reviews, and then (d) summarised the findings
and conclusions of each systematic review. The commentary
summarising the findings of the systematic reviews was main-
ly concerned with the evidence regarding whether communi-
cating personalised risk information result in changes in
720
ann. behav. med. (2017) 51:718–729
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/abm/article-abstract/51/5/718/4648590 by guest on 04 June 2019
 health-related behaviours. These findings were discussed: (i)
overall evidence of effectiveness (ii) in relation to different
sources of risk information, (iii) in relation to different
health-related behaviours, and (iv) in relation to different med-
ical conditions.
A summary is then presented of characteristics of the indi-
vidual studies contained within the systematic reviews identi-
fied, with a particular focus on (a) whether self-efficacy and
response efficacy were targeted by the interventions; (b)
which behaviour change techniques were included in inter-
ventions; and (c) use of theory in these primary studies.
Given that some primary studies were reported in multiple
reviews (quantified below), it was not appropriate to quanti-
tatively combine findings across the reviews [15]. It should
also be noted that the reporting of results in several primary
studies included in these systematic reviews was not done
sufficiently well to allow aggregation across primary studies.
Results
An electronic literature search conducted in January 2016
identified 2718 unique abstracts, and 24 more were identified
through backward and forward citation searching. Following a
two-stage screening process, nine systematic reviews were
deemed eligible for inclusion (see Table 1 and Fig. 1). The
19 papers excluded at the full-text screening stage are reported
in Electronic Supplementary Material 1.
Quality of Included Reviews
The nine included systematic reviews were generally good
quality according to the AMSTAR system [20]. Scores for
the eleven AMSTAR criteria are presented in Electronic
Supplementary Material 2. Total scores for the nine reviews
ranged from seven [22] to 11 [19]. The most common limita-
tions of the reviews were not providing lists of included and
excluded studies (six reviews failed to do this) and publication
bias not being assessed (six reviews failed to do this).
Overlap between Reviews
The reviews varied in number of studies included, from only
three primary studies [23] to 15 primary studies [15], with a
median of five studies included. However, there was consid-
erable overlap in the studies included in the reviews, with only
36 unique studies being covered by the nine reviews. The
majority of the primary studies were included in one review
only (n=25), but the remainder were included in two reviews
(n=3), three reviews (n=4) or four reviews (n=4).
Does Communicating Personalised Risk Information
Result in Changes in Health-Related Behaviours?
(a) Overall. The main results of each review were
summarised in Table 2, along with the review main
conclusions and a summary of assessments of risk of
bias, and heterogeneity and sensitivity analyses. The
clear overall picture that emerges from consideration of
review conclusions is that none of the nine reviews
concluded that effects on behaviour were strong or con-
sistent. Specifically, the majority of the reviews indicat-
ed that there was little, limited or no evidence of effects
on the behaviours studied [17, 19, 22–24]. Other re-
views did not comment on the effects on behaviour
[22], indicated that there may be effects in the short-
term but not long-term [25], that results were “mixed”
[26] or that personalised risk information may be effec-
tive, but should be judged on an individual basis and
not assumed as a general principle [27].
The limitations of the current evidence base were
highlighted by a number of authors, in terms of number
of studies but also study quality. Most reviews
highlighted problems with high risk of bias in included
primary studies [17, 19, 22, 24, 25], although two re-
views indicated that this was not a major problem [27,
28]. Heterogeneity of study outcomes was noted in sev-
eral reviews (17,19[for smoking outcomes],23,24), but a
lack of heterogeneity was also reported in two reviews
(19[for diet and physical activity outcomes],25).
(b) By Nature and Source of Risk Information.
Two reviews examined the effects of communicating numerical
risk information and both found little support for the idea that
this results in changes in the behaviours examined [22, 23].
In the review with the largest number of primary
studies, several different types of risk communication
interventions were examined, but the majority of the
interventions employed carbon monoxide testing or spi-
rometry. Overall in this review only two out of 15 pri-
mary studies examining effects on smoking were statis-
tically significant [17]. There were three groups of stud-
ies deemed by the authors to be sufficiently similar to
statistically pool results, and only the studies examining
the effects of communicating spirometry incorporating
information about lung age were statistically significant
overall (RR=2.12, 95%CI 1.24 to 3.62).
Three reviews were concerned with evaluating the
effects of genetic testing [19, 24, 25]. There was total
overlap in the primary studies included in two of these
reviews [24, 25] which included the same five primary
studies. Further, these five studies were also all included
in a further genetic testing review [19], which included
two further primary studies. Somewhat surprisingly
ann. behav. med. (2017) 51:718–729
721
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/abm/article-abstract/51/5/718/4648590 by guest on 04 June 2019
 Table 1
Summary table indicating the scope of included reviews in the current systematic review of reviews
Author (date)
Intervention
Outcome and participants
Search strategy
Number of studies included
Total N
Bize (2012)
[17]
Biomedical risk assessment
(various methods)
Smoking cessation in primary prevention
patients
4 databases (August 2012): Cochrane, MEDLINE,
EMBASE, PsycINFO. Search strategy provided
15 trials [16 interventions]: 4 carbon
monoxide testing only; 4 carbon
monoxide testing + spirometry; 3
spirometry only; 2 carotid ultrasound; 3
genetic susceptibility
6673
DeViron (2012)
[25]
Genetic testing for smoking
related disease risk
Smoking cessation in general population
6 databases (August 2011): PubMed, EMBASE,
Scopus, Web of Science, PsycINFO, Toxnet).
No language restriction, forward citation
searching, published studies only, search
strategy provided
5 trials (3 RCTs and 2 non-RCT, involving
sequential allocation): 4 genetic testing
only; 1 genetic testing + carbon monoxide
testing
2304
Hackam (2012)
[28]
Non-invasive cardiovascular
imaging (various methods)
Behaviours (smoking [n=4], diet [n=1],
physical activity [n=1])
11 databases searched (November 2010): including
Cochrane, MEDLINE, EMBASE, Web of
Science. Language restrictions unclear, forward
citation searching, grey literature included,
search strategy not provided
4 trials: 3 coronary calcification, 1 carotid
atherosclerosis
709
Hollands (2010)
[27]
Feedback of medical imaging
results (various methods)
Health-related behaviours (smoking
[n=3], diet [=1], physical activity
[n=1]) to reduce risk (NB several
studies excluded from present analyses
as behaviours not relevant)
7 sources searched (September 2009): Cochrane,
MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL, PsycINFO,
metaRegister of RCTs, ProQuest. Language
restrictions unclear, forward citation searching,
grey literature included, search strategy
provided
4 trials (2 ultrasound, 2 computed
tomography feedback)
684
Marteau (2010)
[19]
Communicating DNA-based
risk estimates
Health-related behaviours (smoking
[n=5], diet [=2], physical activity
[n=2])
5 sources searched (April 2010): Cochrane,
MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL, PsycINFO.
No language restrictions, forward citation
searching, grey literature included, search
strategy provided
7 trials: 6 genetic testing only; 1 genetic
testing + carbon monoxide testing
2762
Author (date)
Intervention
Outcome and participants
Search strategy
Number of studies included
Total N
Rodondi (2011)
[26]
Feedback of noninvasive
atherosclerosis screening
Health-related behaviours (smoking
[n=7], diet [=6], physical activity
[n=5]) to reduce risk in people without
pre-existing CVD
2 sources searched (September 2009): Cochrane
and MEDLINE. All languages, backward
citation searching, no grey literature included,
no search terms provided
9 trials (3 RCTs, 6 non-RCTs) – 6 computed
tomography, 2 carotid ultrasound, 1 total
body scan
3340 (n=659 from
RCTs, n= 2681
from
non-RCTs)
Sheridan (2010)
[22]
Providing CHD risk estimation
(including counselling/
education)
Health-related behaviours (smoking
[n=6], diet [=3], physical activity
[n=5]) for primary prevention in
people without CHD
4 databases searched (Cochrane, PsycINFO,
CINAHL, Medline) in Dec 2008. English
language only, backward citation searching, no
grey literature, no search terms provided
7 trials– based on risk calculators [6]
including Framingham [3] based scores,
and one where no formal calculator was
used.
18,057
Smerecnik
(2012)
[24]
providing genetic testing for
cancer risk
Smoking cessation in general population
8 databases searched (PubMed, EMBASE, ERIC,
PsycINFO, PsychArticles, CiNAHL,
socINDEX, Google Scholar) – unclear when.
English language only, backward citation
searching, no grey literature, search terms partly
provided
5 RCTs (same studies as in DeViron, 2012)
2274
Usher-Smith
(2015)
[23]
Effects of providing
cardiovascular risk estimates
only
Health-related behaviours (smoking
[n=3], diet [n=1], physical activity
[n=1], alcohol consumption [n=2]) for
primary prevention in people without
CHD
2 databases searched (Medline and PubMed) in
Jun 2013. No language restrictions, backward
citation searching, published studies only, search
strategy provided
3 RCTs, each using different CVD risk
calculator
2784
722
ann. behav. med. (2017) 51:718–729
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/abm/article-abstract/51/5/718/4648590 by guest on 04 June 2019
 given this overlap, the reviews came to rather different
conclusions in relation to short-term smoking cessation.
One review [25] noted a significant effect between two
and six months (RR=1.55, 95%CI 1.09 to 2.21) and
another [24] noted a significant effect up to six months
(OR=1.87, 95%CI 1.20 to 2.92). By contrast, the third
[19] did not find a significant effect up to six months
(OR=1.35, 95%CI 0.76 to 2.39). None of the reviews
found effects beyond 6 months, and agreed on a lack of
sustained quitting, with no effects on last follow-up [25] :
(RR=1.03, 95%CI 0.64 to 1.65), or effects after six
months [19, 27]: (OR=1.07, 95%CI 0.64 to 1.78 and
OR=0.68, 0.57 to 1.30).
The most promising method of communicating risk in-
formation appears to be those that employed imaging or
visual techniques such as tomography or ultrasound,
which were considered by three reviews [26–28]. In one
review [27], the three trials that reported effects of visual
imaging on smoking cessation were overall statistically
significant (OR=2.81, 95%CI 1.23 to 6.41). However, an-
other review found only one of seven studies to yield
significant effects on smoking cessation [26]. By contrast,
this latter review identified four statistically significant
studies and two null studies reporting effects on diet
[26]. The other review found little evidence of an effect
on behaviour.
(c) By Behaviour Targeted in Review. All nine systematic
reviews included studies on smoking. Taken as a whole, the
results provided some evidence of effects of communicating
personalised disease on this behaviour, with some reviews
suggesting effects on cessation at least in the short-term [24,
25, 27] but other reviews finding no such support [17, 19,
22–24, 26]. There was no support for long-term smoking ces-
sation in any review.
Six of the nine systematic reviews included studies on di-
etary outcomes. Taken as a whole, the results provided the
best evidence of effects of communicating disease-related
risks on any behavioural outcome. A review of the effects of
atherosclerosis imaging feedback [26] identified four statisti-
cally significant studies and two null studies, a review of the
effects of genetic testing [19] found an overall significant
effect on dietary outcomes in two studies (OR=2.24,
95%CI 1.17 to 4.27) and a review of the effects of nu-
merical coronary heart disease risk estimation [22] report-
ed “mixed” findings in the three studies they included. By
contrast, the other three reviews included only one prima-
ry study that found no significant effect of interventions
on dietary outcomes [23, 27, 28] this was the same study
in two of these reviews.
Six of the nine systematic reviews included studies
examining physical activity. The results provided little
evidence of effects on this outcome. The strongest evi-
dence of an effect on physical activity came from a
review of the effects of atherosclerosis imaging [26] that
identified one statistically significant study and four sta-
tistically non-significant studies and a review of the ef-
fects of numerical coronary heart disease risk estimation
24 records identified through hand 
searching (e.g. references, citations) 
3402 records identified through 
database searching 
2714 records excluded 
28 full-text articles assessed for 
eligibility 
 9 studies included in review 
19 full-text articles excluded (see 
Appendix Two) 
Intervention not personalized risk 
information: (n=6) 
Results not quantified: (n=5) 
Outcomes not behavioural: (n=3) 
Included studies not RCTs: (n=2) 
Not systematic review: (n=1) 
Superseded by updated review: (n=1)
Comparison not personalized risk 
information vs no personalized risk 
information: (n=1)
2742 records screened by title and 
abstract 
2742 records after duplicates 
removed 
Fig. 1 PRISMA flowchart of
paper selection process
ann. behav. med. (2017) 51:718–729
723
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/abm/article-abstract/51/5/718/4648590 by guest on 04 June 2019
 Table 2
Summary of main results from each systematic review, including effect size estimates, assessment of bias, and conclusions drawn
Author (date)
Outcome (effect size)
Results of bias assessment/ Heterogeneity/ Sensitivity
analyses
Conclusion
Bize (2012)
[17]
Carbon monoxide testing only RR 1.06 (95%CI 0.85 to 1.32).
Spirometry only RR 1.18 (95%CI 0.77 to 1.81)
Spirometry + lung age RR 2.12 (95%CI 1.24 to 3.62)
Carbon monoxide + spirometry – four non-significant trials – not pooled
Genetic susceptibility – three non-significant trials – not pooled
Carotid ultrasound – two studies, one non-significant, one significant –
not pooled
13/15 trials judged to be at high or unclear risk of bias.
“Only two pairs of trials were similar enough in terms of
recruitment, setting and intervention to allow pooling of
data for meta-analysis” (both I2 = 0)
No sensitivity analysis
“Little evidence about the effects of most types of
biomedical tests for risk assessment on smoking
cessation”
Only 2/15 studies showed a significant effect of the
intervention on smoking cessation.
“Mixed quality evidence does not support the
hypothesis that other types of biomedical risk
assessment increase smoking cessation in
comparison to standard treatment”
DeViron (2012)
[25]
Genetic notification (last follow-up) RR 1.03
(95%CI 0.64 to 1.65)
Genetic notification (2 to 6 month follow up) RR 1.55 (95%CI 1.09 to
2.21)
Risk of bias apparent – only one study where patients and
staff blind to intervention allocation; abstinence assessed
using a variety of self-report measures.
Egger’s test for publication bias non-significant (p=0.11 and
p=0.76 for two follow-up periods).
“No heterogeneity observed” in last follow up analysis. For 2
to 6 month follow up analysis, I2 = 0
“Sensitivity analysis did not identify influential studies”
Genetic notification increased smoking cessation in
short term follow-up, but no evidence of long term
effect.
Hackam (2012)
[28]
Imaging on smoking OR 2.24 (95%CI 0.97 to 5.19).
Imaging on dietary improvement OR 0.78 (95%CI 0.22 to 2.85)
Imaging on physical activity (p=0.23)
“Most studies scored well on the methodological quality
indicators”, i.e. randomization, allocation concealment,
blinding, loss to follow up.
For smoking analysis, I2 = 0
“We found limited evidence suggesting that
noninvasive cardiovascular imaging alters primary
prevention efforts.”
Results imprecise – more research needed.
Hollands (2010)
[27]
Imaging on smoking OR 2.81 (95%CI 1.23 to 6.41).
Imaging on fibre consumption OR 0.36 (95%CI 0.08 to 1.53)
Imaging on fat intake 1.84 (95%CI 0.51 to 6.71)
Imaging on physical activity SMD 0.10 (95%CI -0.04 to 0.24)
All trials had low risk of bias.
For smoking analysis, I2 = 0
Smoking result still significantly significant if remove one
study that looked at a range of behaviours related to
smoking cessation rather than cessation per se
“Due to the limited nature of the available evidence and
the mixed results that were found, no strong
statements can be made about the effectiveness of
communicating medical imaging to change health
behaviour.”
“Interventions may be effective, but that this should be
considered on an intervention by intervention basis,
and not assumed as a general principle.”
Marteau (2010)
[19]
Feedback on smoking (<6 months) OR 1.35 (95%CI 0.76 to 2.39).
Feedback on smoking (>6 months) OR 1.07 (95%CI 0.64 to 1.78).
Feedback on diet OR 2.24 (95%CI 1.17 to 4.27).
Feedback on physical activity OR 1.03 (95%CI 0.59 to 1.80).
“Only a minority of studies could be considered to have a low
risk of bias.”
For smoking analysis (<6 months), I2 = 45%, (>6 months), I2
= 62%
For diet analysis, I2 = 0%. For physical activity analysis, I2 =
0%
Sensitivity analysis excluding one study that had incomplete
reporting of missing data had little effects on overall
smoking results.
“Claims that receiving DNA-based test results motivate
people to change their behaviour are not supported
by evidence.”
“Weak evidence based on a small number of studies of
limited quality.”
Rodondi (2011)
[26]
No statistical aggregation of findings due to heterogeneity
Feedback on smoking – 1 significant, 6 non-significant
Feedback on diet – 4 significant, 2 non-significant
Feedback on physical activity – 1 significant, 4 non-significant
Study quality assessed by design, methods of randomization
and reporting of losses to follow-up – not blinding.
Data not statistically aggregated
“Available evidence limited, with mixed results on
cardiovascular risk factor control”
Sheridan (2010)
[22]
No statistical aggregation of findings
Risk estimates on varied smoking outcomes – 2 significant, 4
non-significant
Risk estimates on diet – “mixed results”
2 trials judged to be good quality, 5 judged to be fair quality
Data not statistically aggregated.
One good quality RCT highlighted for each of three
behaviours examined.
Behaviour findings reported in web-only content with
little commentary. Throughout, the lack of clarity
about varied education or counselling accompanying
risk estimates was highlighted.
724
ann. behav. med. (2017) 51:718–729
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/abm/article-abstract/51/5/718/4648590 by guest on 04 June 2019
 [22] which reported “mixed” findings in the three stud-
ies they included. Three reviews included only one prima-
ry study each that found no significant effects on physical
activity outcomes [23, 27, 28]. In line with this, a review of
the effects of genetic testing [19] found an overall null effect
on physical activity in two studies (OR=1.03, 95%CI 0.59 to
1.80) that was homogeneous (I2 = 0).
Only one systematic review included studies on alco-
hol consumption [23]. This review reported two studies,
which both reported null effects of risk communications
on alcohol consumption.
(d) By Medical Condition for Which Risk Information
Presented. Of the nine reviews, four focussed on risk of
cardio-vascular disease and specifically coronary heart dis-
ease, by investigating communication of the results of athero-
sclerosis imaging [26, 28], or numerical coronary heart dis-
ease risk estimates [22, 23]. One review focussed on genetic
testing for cancer [24]. The other four reviews did not have a
clear disease focus. There was no clear pattern of effectiveness
of interventions according to which medical condition the
review focussed on.
Characteristics of Primary Studies Included
in the Systematic Reviews
Characteristics of the 36 primary studies are summarised in
Table 3. Details are provided for each study in Electronic
Supplementary Material 3, and characteristics of primary stud-
ies included in each included systematic review are provided
in Electronic Supplementary Material 4. The overall pattern of
characteristics was as follows:
(a) Addressing Self-Efficacy and Response Efficacy. Of
the 36 primary studies, only three explicitly stated that the
disease risk communication interventions were targeting
self-efficacy, and only one explicitly stated that the interven-
tions were targeting response efficacy (see Table 3). Similarly,
only 8 reported assessing self-efficacy and only three reported
assessing response efficacy.
(b) Behaviour Change Techniques Included in the
Disease Risk Communication Interventions. The 36 pri-
mary studies included a limited number of behaviour
change techniques (see Table 3), with only ten unique
behaviour change techniques found to be present out of
93 contained in the taxonomy used for coding [13]. The
most commonly used behaviour change techniques were
“provide information on consequences of the behaviour
to the individual” (k=33) and “provide information on
consequences of the behaviour in general” (k=17). The
next most frequently used were “goal setting (behav-
iour)” (k=8) and “fear arousal (k=6).
(c) Use of Theory in Studies. Theory was not used much
in the studies included (see Table 3). Only 10 of 36 studies
Table 2 (continued)
Author (date)
Outcome (effect size)
Results of bias assessment/ Heterogeneity/ Sensitivity
analyses
Conclusion
Risk estimates on physical activity – “mixed results”
Smerecnik (2012)
[24]
Genetic notification (overall analysis) OR 1.16 (95%CI 0.77 to 1.76)
Genetic notification (<6 months) OR 1.87 (95%CI 1.20 to 2.92)
Genetic notification (>6 months) OR 0.68 (95%CI 0.57 to 1.30)
Overall, “fair methodologies”, “somewhat questionable
statistical quality”, and “poor reliability and validity”. No
indication from funnel plot of publication bias.
Substantial heterogeneity, I2 = 61% of main analysis –
justifying case for analysing by short-term and long-term
effects.
“Does not provide solid evidence for the proposed
beneficial effects of genetic testing for
smoking-related diseases on smoking cessation”.
Usher-Smith (2015)
[23]
All three RCTs showed no significant effect on smoking outcomes.
No statistically significant changes in the percentage who increased fruit
and vegetable or fibre consumption or reduced fat at five months.
No significant difference in mean accelerometer counts at one month
(p=0.559)
Two RCTs showed no difference in self-reported alcohol consumption.
Studies low, medium, and medium-high quality.
Data not statistically aggregated.
Differences in effect sizes “are more likely to reflect
between-study heterogeneity” than variations in study
quality.
“No current evidence” that providing patients with risk
information changes behaviour, but “small
reductions in cholesterol, blood pressure and
modelled CVD are seen consistently”.
ann. behav. med. (2017) 51:718–729
725
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/abm/article-abstract/51/5/718/4648590 by guest on 04 June 2019
 explicitly mentioned a theory or model of behaviour.
Similarly, only nine studies measured theory-relevant
constructs or predictors, and only two studies discussed the
study findings in relation to theory.
Table 3
Frequencies of primary studies according to: (a) behaviours examined; (b) medical condition; (c) theoretical grounding of intervention; (d) use
of self-efficacy and response-efficacy; (e) nature and source of risk information; and (f) behaviour change techniques
Category
Sub-category
Frequency
(a) Nature and source of risk information
Imaging/visual feedback
10
Numerical risk estimate i
9
Carbon monoxide testing
8
Genetic testing
7
Spirometry
7
(b) Behaviours examined
Smoking
34
Diet
17
Physical activity
16
Alcohol
5
(c) Medical conditionii
Coronary heart diseaseiii
19
No condition specified/Multiple conditions specified
8
Cancer
5
Respiratory diseases
3
Alzheimer’s disease
1
Familial hypercholesterolemia
1
(d) Theoretical grounding of intervention
Theory/model of behaviour mentionediv
10
Targeted construct mentioned as predictor of behaviour
11
Theory/predictors used to: select recipients for the intervention, develop intervention
techniques, or tailor intervention techniques to recipients
12
Theory-relevant constructs/predictors are measured
9
At least one of the intervention techniques are explicitly linked to at least one theory-relevant
construct/predictor
8
Analysis of construct/s/predictors
8
Results discussed in relation to theory
2
(e) Use of response-efficacy and self-efficacy Targeted self-efficacy
3
Targeted response-efficacy
1
Reported self-efficacy
8
Reported response-efficacy
3
(f) Behaviour change techniquesv
Provide information on consequences of behaviour to the individual
33
Provide information on consequences of behaviour in general
17
Goal setting (behaviour)
8
Fear arousal
6
Motivational interviewing
4
Stress management/Emotional control training
3
Barrier identification/Problem solving
2
Goal setting (outcome)
2
Relapse prevention/ Coping planning
2
Prompt self-monitoring of behaviour
1
i One study (OXCHECK 1995) only reported information on the health check (they measured height, blood pressure and cholesterol, rather than
providing overall numerical risk estimates)
ii Shahab (2011) focused on cardiovascular disease and respiratory diseases
iii Includes coronary heart disease and atherosclerosis
iv Studies were coded as ‘no’ if theory was only explained to participants in the methods, rather than mentioning the theory and the relations among
variables
V In one study (Jamrozik, 1984), the health visitor intervention group was excluded as this is not relevant to risk information studies
726
ann. behav. med. (2017) 51:718–729
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/abm/article-abstract/51/5/718/4648590 by guest on 04 June 2019
 Discussion
Across a broad range of methods of assessing and communi-
cating risk information, the present review of reviews found
little evidence that personalised risk information had strong or
consistent effects on health-related behaviours. The most prom-
ising effects came from reviews of imaging/visual risk feedback
and effects on smoking and dietary behaviours, although with
little evidence of sustained change and with more null findings
than significant ones. Effects of providing numerical risk infor-
mation and effects on physical activity were particularly un-
promising. The primary studies included in these interventions
appeared to be mainly atheoretical, with little targeting of re-
sponse efficacy or self-efficacy, factors that are known to aug-
ment the impact of risk information on behaviour.
Overall, the effects of personalised risk information on the
four behaviours examined were not consistent and where
changes were observed, they were not maintained. The quality
of the reviews was judged to be good, although most of the
review authors criticised the quality of many of the primary
studies they included. Most reviews noted that the primary
literature they covered was limited not only in quality of stud-
ies, but also in number of primary studies, making it difficult
to draw definitive conclusions.
The forms of risk provision that were most promising were
those that used visual/imaging approaches to communicate risk
information [26–28]. By contrast, studies involving the provi-
sion of numerical risk information were least promising [22,
23]. These findings are consistent with the broader literature
on risk communication [29], which highlights the importance
of how imagery can be more strongly associated with behaviour
as it can more strongly influence automatic processes compared
to numerical statements that are difficult to evaluate [30].
Most primary studies were concerned with smoking, and
significant effects on behaviour were found for studies that
provided medical imaging [27], spirometry plus information
about lung age [17], and possibly genetic testing, but only in
the short term [19, 24, 25]. By contrast, there was little evidence
of smoking cessation brought about by other methods of
personalised risk communication [17, 22, 23, 26, 28]. Further,
all studies of genetic testing agreed there were limited effects of
genetic testing on smoking behaviour in the longer term. Taking
all these findings into account, a reasonable conclusion would
be that although some forms of communicating personalised
disease-related risks may influence smoking behaviours, there
is no evidence that these effects are strong or consistent.
There was also some evidence of the effects of the commu-
nicating disease-related risks on dietary outcomes, with three of
the reviews finding support or mixed support for effects on
dietary outcomes, and the other three reviews finding no sup-
port based on only two studies. This pattern contrasts with
studies of physical activity with two reviews finding mixed
support for effects on this outcome and the other four reviews
finding no support. One possible explanation for this discrep-
ancy may be that people’s mental models may find it more
sensible to address physiological markers such as artery athero-
sclerosis through reducing dietary fat than through increasing
physical activity. Such an observation has been made in the
context of diabetes, where patients more easily see the benefits
of changing diet to tackle blood glucose than increasing phys-
ical activity [31]. Another explanation for this discrepancy is
that objective measures of physical activity are far easier to use
than those for diet, and that self-report measures of physical
activity are more valid than those of diet [32, 33]. Hence, given
the lack of blinding in many primary studies, the results may be
more likely to be biased away from the null for dietary out-
comes, which were assessed using unvalidated self-report mea-
sures in the primary studies included.
These overall findings fit well with the broader literature on
disease risk communication, which suggested an overall small
effect (d=0.23) on behaviour when risk appraisals are increased
[9]. Personalised risk communication might be expected to lead
to greater understanding than general non personal risk com-
munication [18]. Further, personalised risk communications
should lead to greater acceptance of the message regarding risk
[34]. Together, these two processes might suggest that
personalised risk communications should be successful at in-
creasing risk appraisals and thereby behaviour [34]. Despite
this, there was no good evidence from these reviews that effects
on behaviour were any stronger than non-personalised commu-
nications. One plausible reason for the generally limited
effects of these personalised risk communications is that
they did not generally target self-efficacy and response
efficacy, which would be likely to increase the impact of
risk information on health-related behaviours [8–10].
The present systematic review of reviews has many
strengths. First it follows an established method of conducting
such a systematic review of systematic reviews, with explicit
procedures for the selection, appraisal and synthesis of indi-
vidual systematic reviews [15]. Second, it brings together a
diverse set of systematic reviews and thereby allows the com-
monalities and differences in the findings of these reviews to
be highlighted. In particular, although there are some areas
that appear promising, the present review has shown that
across a range of different methods of personalised risk com-
munication, it seems highly unlikely that providing
personalised risk information will have strong or consistent
effects on health-related behaviour. Further, by quantifying
aspects of primary studies, such as use of theory and behav-
iour change technique content of interventions, we have
shown that a plausible reason for the lack of effectiveness of
the personalised risk interventions is that they do not utilise
knowledge from the wider literature on risk communication.
The nine systematic reviews that are included in the present
systematic review of reviews were generally well-conducted,
with AMSTAR scores of 9 or ten out of eleven for most of the
ann. behav. med. (2017) 51:718–729
727
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/abm/article-abstract/51/5/718/4648590 by guest on 04 June 2019
 reviews. This review quality is encouraging, given that a re-
cent systematic survey of systematic reviews found many ex-
amples of poor quality, including at least a third omitting de-
scriptions of search strategies or methods of quality appraisal
[35]. By contrast, the quality of the primary studies included in
these systematic reviews were often judged to be poor, a find-
ing that was raised in the main conclusions of the systematic
reviews (and extracted into Table 2).
The main implication for practice of the findings presented
is that one can now be reasonably confident that communicat-
ing personalised risk information on its own is unlikely to lead
to much sustained behaviour change, irrespective of the nature
and source of information. Greater targeting of response effi-
cacy and self-efficacy than was evident in the studies included
in these systematic reviews may result in greater changes in
these health-related behaviours. It is important to note howev-
er, that there is now strong evidence that failure to change
health-related behaviour is often not due to insufficient moti-
vation. Instead, failure to change behaviour is more often due
to motivated people lacking the skills to self-regulate their
own behaviour [36]. Successful behaviour change interven-
tions are therefore likely to involve behaviour change tech-
niques promoting more effective self-regulation e.g. planning
and self-monitoring on behaviour for which there is a stronger
evidence base than for risk communications [12]. These be-
haviour change techniques were not included in the primary
studies included in the systematic reviews that we considered.
In terms of future research, there is a need for more primary
studies of better quality, and particularly with better measures of
diet and physical activity. Given that the most promising studies
have used imaging techniques, it would seem sensible for eval-
uations of these sources of risk estimation to be prioritised.
Future studies should aim to look at maintenance of behaviour
change as well as behaviour initiation. More comparisons of
personalised versus non-personalised risk communications
would be useful, given the dearth of such studies. These studies
could also usefully compare the effects of personalised risk com-
munication to the effects on non-personalised risk communica-
tion, when both are used in conjunction with more evidence-
based intervention behaviour change techniques, to promote
changes in self-efficacy, response efficacy and self-regulation.
It may be that personalised risk communications may be
best suited to motivating people to engage in effective behav-
iour change programmes, by motivating attempts to change
behaviour [30]. Given this, it would be useful to compare
these risk communication strategies in terms of whether they
promote uptake of evidence-based behaviour change
programmes, since it appears unlikely that sustained behav-
iour change will be brought about solely by communicating
personalised risk.
We believe that the present systematic review of systematic
reviews has provided a clearer picture of the effects of com-
municating personalised risk information on health-related
behaviour, with two key messages. Firstly, that the literature
on personalised risk communication would benefit from great-
er consideration of the theoretical and empirical literatures on
general risk communication. Secondly, presenting risk infor-
mation on its own, even when highly personalised, does not
produce strong effects on lifestyle behaviours or changes
which are sustained. Future research should therefore consider
how best to use personalised risk information to engage peo-
ple in behaviour change programmes that are more likely to be
effective in producing changes in behaviour.
Acknowledgements
The present research was funded partly by
Research Capability Funding from NIHR CLAHRC Greater
Manchester and the charity Prevent Breast Cancer.
Compliance with Ethical Standards
This manuscript reports a sys-
tematic review that involved no primary data collection and hence does
not require ethical approval.
Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare that they have no conflicts of
interest.
Appendix 1
Search terms used for MEDLINE database
1
exp. Risk/
2
exp. Disease Susceptibility/.
3
((tailor* or personal* or individual*) adj2 (counsel* or
message* or material* or intervention*)).tw.
4
(tailored or tailoring or individuali*ed or peronali*ed).tw.
5
(risk* or susceptib*).tw.
6
or/1–5.
7
communication/.
8
persuasive communication/.
9
counselling/.
10
genetic counselling/.
11
health promotion/.
12
health education/.
13
Patient Education as Topic/.
14
Health Knowledge, Attitudes, Practice/.
15
attitude to health/.
16
patient acceptance of healthcare/.
17
or/7–16.
18
6 and 17.
19
(risk* adj3 (notif* or inform* or communicat* or coun-
sel* or apprais* or assess* or perception* or
perceiv*)).tw.
20
18 or 19.
21
(diet* or smok* or tobacco or alcohol or weight or “phys-
ical* activ*” or exerci* or lifestyle*).tw.
22
20 and 21.
23
limit 22 to (english language and humans and yr.=“2008 -
Current” and systematic reviews)
728
ann. behav. med. (2017) 51:718–729
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/abm/article-abstract/51/5/718/4648590 by guest on 04 June 2019
 Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link
to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
References
1.
Lim SS, Vos T, Flaxman AD, et al. A comparative risk assessment
of burden of disease and injury attributable to 67 risk factors and
risk factor clusters in 21 regions, 1990-2010: a systematic analysis
for the global burden of disease study 2010. Lancet. 2013;
380(9859): 2224–2260.
2.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Cardiovascular
disease prevention. NICE public health guidelines 25. Manchester,
UK: NICE; 2010.
3.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Familial breast
cancer: classification and care of people at risk of familial breast
cancer and management of breast cancer and related risks in people
with a family history of breast cancer. NICE clinical guideline 164.
Manchester, UK: NICE; 2013.
4.
Collins FS, Green ED, Guttmacher AE, Guyer MS. Avision for the
future of genomics research: a blueprint for the genomic future.
Nature. 2003; 422: 835–847.
5.
Hippisley-Cox J, Coupland C, Vinogradova Y, et al. Predicting
cardiovascular risk in England and Wales: prospective derivation
and validation of QRISK2. BMJ. 2008; 336: a332.
6.
Tyrer J, Duffy SW, Cuzick J. A breast cancer prediction model
incorporating familial and personal risk factors. Stat Med. 2004;
23(7): 1111–1130.
7.
Polonsky TS, McClelland RL, Jorgensen NW, et al. Coronary ar-
tery calcium score and risk classification for coronary heart disease
prediction. JAMA. 2010; 303: 1610–1616.
8.
Peters GJ, Ruiter RA, Kok G. Threatening communication: a
critical re-analysis and a revised meta-analytic test of fear
appeal theory. Health Psychol Rev 2013; 7(Suppl 1): S8-
S31.
9.
Sheeran P, Harris PR, Epton T. Does heightening risk appraisals
change people's intentions and behavior? A meta-analysis of exper-
imental studies. Psychol Bull. 2014; 140(2): 511–543.
10.
Tannenbaum MB, Hepler J, Zimmerman RS, et al. Appealing to
fear: a meta-analysis of fear appeal effectiveness and theories.
Psychol Bull. 2015; 141(6): 1178–1204.
11.
Maddux JE, Rogers RW. Protection motivation theory and self-
efficacy: a revised theory of fear appeals and attitude change. J
Exp Soc Psychol. 1983; 19: 469–479.
12.
French DP, Olander E, Chisholm A Mc Sharry J. Which behavior
change techniques are most effective at increasing older adults’self-
efficacy and physical activity behavior? A systematic review. Ann
Behav Med. 2014; 48: 225–234.
13.
Michie S, Richardson M, Johnston M, et al. The behavior change
technique taxonomy (v1) of 93 hierarchically clustered techniques:
building an international consensus for the reporting of behavior
change interventions. Ann Behav Med. 2013; 46: 81–95.
14.
Bastian H, Glasziou P, Chalmers I. Seventy-five trials and eleven
systematic reviews a day: how will we ever keep up. PLoS Med.
2010; 7: 9.
15.
Smith V, Devane D, Begley CM, Clarke M. Methodology in
conducting a systematic review of systematic reviews of healthcare
interventions. BMC Med Res Methodol. 2011; 11: 15.
16.
McClure JB. Are biomarkers useful treatment aids for promoting
health behavior change? An empirical review. Am J Prev Med.
2002; 22(3): 200–207.
17.
Bize R, Burnand B, Mueller Y, Rege-Walther M, Camain JY,
Cornuz J. Biomedical risk assessment as an aid for smoking cessa-
tion. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012; 12: CD004705.
18.
Edwards AGK, Naik G, Ahmed H. et al. Personalised risk commu-
nication for informed decision making about taking screening tests.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013; 2: CD001865.pub3.
19.
Marteau TM, French DP, Griffin SJ, et al. Effects of communicating
DNA-based disease risk estimates on risk-reducing behaviours.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010; 10: CD007275.
20.
Shea BJ, Grimshaw JM, Wells GA et al. Development of
AMSTAR: a measuremetn tool to assess the methodological qual-
ity of systematic reviews. BMC Med Res Methodol. 2007; 7: 10.
21.
Michie S, Prestwich A. Are interventions theory-based? Development
of a theory coding scheme. Health Psychol. 2010; 29: 1–8.
22.
Sheridan SL, Viera AJ, Krantz MJ et al. The effect of giving global
coronary risk information to adults. Arch Intern Med. 2010; 170(3):
230–239.
23.
Usher-Smith JA, Silarova B, Schuit E, Moons KGM, Griffin SJ.
Impact of provision of cardiovascular risk estimates to healthcare
professionals and patients: a systematic review. BMJ Open. 2015; 5:
e008717.
24.
Smerecnik C, Grispen JE, Quaak M. Effectiveness of testing for
genetic susceptibility to smoking-related diseases on smoking ces-
sation outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Tob
Control. 2012; 21(3): 347–354.
25.
de Viron S, Van der Heyden J, Ambrosino E, Arbyn M, Brand A, Van
Oyen H. Impact of genetic notification on smoking cessation: sys-
tematic review and pooled-analysis. PLoS One. 2012; 7(7): e40230.
26.
Rodondi N, Auer R, de Bosset Sulzer V, Ghali WA, Cornuz J.
Atherosclerosis screening by noninvasive imaging for cardiovascu-
lar prevention: a systematic review. J Gen Intern Med. 2011; 27(2):
220–231.
27.
Hollands GJ, Hankins M, Marteau TM. Visual feedback of individ-
uals' medical imaging results for changing health behaviour.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010; 1: CD007434.
28.
Hackam DG, Shojania KG, Spence D et al. Influence of noninva-
sive cardiovascular imaging in primary prevention. Arch Intern
Med. 2011; 171(11): 977–982.
29.
Cameron L. Illness risk representations and motivations to engage
in protective behaviour: the case of skin cancer risk. Psychol
Health. 2008; 23(1): 91–112.
30.
French DP, Marteau TM. Communicating risk. In: Ayers S, Baum
A, McManus C, et al. eds. Cambridge Handbook of Psychology,
Health and Medicine, 2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press; 2007: 431–435.
31.
French DP, Wade AN, Farmer AJ. Predicting self-care behaviours
of patients with type 2 diabetes: the importance of beliefs about
behaviour, not just beliefs about illness. J Psychosom Res 2013;
74: 327–333.
32.
Bingham SA. Limitations of the various methods for collecting
dietary intake data. Ann Nutr Metab 1991; 35(3): 117–127.
33.
Hill RJ, Davies PS. The validity of self-reported energy intake as
determined using the doubly labelled water technique. Br J Nutr
2001; 85(4): 415–430.
34.
Chen S, Chaiken S. The heuristic-systematic model in its broader
context. In: Chaiken S, Trope Y, eds. Dual process theories in social
psychology. Guildford Press; 1999: 73–96.
35.
Page MJ, Shamseer L, Altman DG et al. Epidemiology and
reporting characteristics of systematic reviews of biomedical re-
search: a cross-sectional study. PLoS Med. 2016; 13(5): e1002028.
36.
Orbell S, Sheeran P. ‘inclined abstainers’: a problem for predicting
health-related behaviour. Brit J Soc Psychol. 1998; 37(2): 151–165.
ann. behav. med. (2017) 51:718–729
729
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/abm/article-abstract/51/5/718/4648590 by guest on 04 June 2019
