 Key Provisions of the Patient Protection
and Affordable Care Act (ACA):
A Systematic Review and Presentation of
Early Research Findings
Michael T. French, Jenny Homer, Gulcin Gumus, and
Lucas Hickling
Objectives. To conduct a systematic literature review of selected major provisions of
the Affordable Care Act (ACA) pertaining to expanded health insurance coverage. We
present and synthesize research findings from the last 5 years regarding both the imme-
diate and long-term effects of the ACA. We conclude with a summary and offer a
research agenda for future studies.
Study Design. We identified relevant articles from peer-reviewed scholarly journals
by performing a comprehensive search of major electronic databases. We also identi-
fied reports in the “gray literature” disseminated by government agencies and other
organizations.
Principal Findings. Overall, research shows that the ACA has substantially
decreased the number of uninsured individuals through the dependent coverage provi-
sion, Medicaid expansion, health insurance exchanges, availability of subsidies, and
other policy changes. Affordability of health insurance continues to be a concern for
many people and disparities persist by geography, race/ethnicity, and income. Early
evidence also indicates improvements in access to and affordability of health care. All
of these changes are certain to ultimately impact state and federal budgets.
Conclusions. The ACA will either directly or indirectly affect almost all Americans.
As new and comprehensive data become available, more rigorous evaluations will pro-
vide further insights as to whether the ACA has been successful in achieving its goals.
Key Words. Affordable Care Act (ACA), health insurance, health care, systematic
review
On March 23, 2010, following a long and controversial political and legislative
process, President Obama signed the Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act (ACA) into law, ushering in the most significant changes to the U.S. health
care system since the passage of Medicare and Medicaid in 1965. The ACA
© Health Research and Educational Trust
DOI: 10.1111/1475-6773.12511
POLICY-MANAGERIAL IMPACTARTICLE
1735
Health Services Research
 includes a series of ambitious reforms that build upon the existing system of
employer-sponsored insurance (ESI) and creates new requirements for indi-
viduals, employers, health care providers, and insurance companies. It is
intended to address three main areas: access to health insurance, health care
costs, and the delivery of care (Blumenthal, Abrams, and Nuzum 2015). Cer-
tain elements of the law became active soon after its passage in 2010, but most
provisions took effect in 2014 (see Table 1 for the ACA timeline).1
The ACA includes multiple strategies to target different groups and
increase overall insurance coverage. Young adults are now able to remain on
their parents’ insurance plans as dependents until age 26 (dependent coverage
provision). Larger employers are required to offer affordable, comprehensive
health insurance to full-time employees (employer mandate). Individuals who
do not have ESI must purchase insurance on their own or pay a penalty (indi-
vidual mandate), and premium tax credits are available to some. These indi-
viduals and small businesses can purchase plans through state-level exchanges
or the federal marketplace. To assist low-income individuals, the ACA
expands Medicaid eligibility to all individuals under age 65 (nonelderly) with
annual incomes up to 133 percent of the federal poverty level, but not all states
have agreed to participate. These provisions aim not only to expand insurance
coverage but also to improve the affordability of insurance plans.
The ACA also imposes new regulations on insurance companies and
their policies. For example, insurance companies can no longer charge higher
premiums or deny coverage due to preexisting conditions, and insurance poli-
cies have to provide a minimum amount of preventive services without any
cost-sharing. The ACA calls for changes in various taxes pertaining to insur-
ance policies and overall financing. Other provisions focus on improving the
delivery of care by streamlining services, incorporating health information
technology, strengthening the health care workforce, reducing fraud and
waste, and altering payments in a way that incentivizes providers to contain
costs while improving the quality of care.2
Assessing the full and lasting impacts of the ACA is challenging because
the provisions are multifaceted and the potential outcomes extend to
Address correspondence to Michael T. French, Ph.D., Departments of Sociology, Health Sector
Management and Policy, Economics, and Public Health Sciences, University of Miami, 5202
University Drive, Merrick Building, Room 121F, P.O. Box 248162, Coral Gables, FL 33124-
2030; e-mail: mfrench@miami.edu. Jenny Homer, M.P.A., M.P.H., and Lucas Hickling, B.A., are
with the Health Economics Research Group, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL. Gulcin
Gumus, Ph.D., is with the Department of Management Programs, Florida Atlantic University,
Boca Raton, FL; IZA, Bonn, Germany.
1736
HSR: Health Services Research 51:5 (October 2016)
 Table 1:
Timeline for Implementation of Major Provisions of the ACA
2010
Employers are provided funding to cover individuals retiring between the ages of 55
and 65
Federal government offers tax credits to cover a portion of the employer’s contribution
for small businesses with less than 25 employees†
Establishes a new Patient’s Bill of Rights‡
Requires all plans to include certain preventive services without cost-sharing‡
Insurance companies cannot deny coverage to children under age 19 with preexisting
conditions‡
Creates a new process to monitor premium rate increases and report the minimum
medical loss ratio†
*Young adults are covered by their parent’s health insurance until age 26 (dependent
coverage provision)‡
Provides financial incentives to PCPs, nurses, and physician assistants, and increases
payments to PCPs in rural communities, underserved areas, and community health
centers§
2011
Provides a 10% bonus payment from Medicare to PCPs for 5 years
2012
Imposes new annual fees on the pharmaceutical manufacturing sector†
Creates a Medicare Value-Based Purchasing program¶
2013
*Initial open enrollment in the individual health insurance marketplace begins¶
The Bundled Payments for Care Improvement Initiative begins to test models for
reimbursement
*Increases Medicaid reimbursement rates for primary care services provided by PCPs
to 100% of the Medicare rates for 2013 and 2014
Increases Medicare Part A tax rate from 1.45% to 2.35% on individuals earning over
$200,000 and couples earning $250,000, as well as a 3.8% tax on unearned income
for high-income tax payers
Imposes 2.3% excise tax on the sale of any taxable medical device
Modifies tax treatment of health savings and flexible spending accounts
2014
Insurance companies cannot deny coverage based on preexisting conditions and can
only vary rates based on rating area, family size, tobacco use, and age (but not on health
status, previous claims history, or gender)
Risk adjustment, reinsurance, and risk corridor programs go into effect to help stabilize
premiums and reduce adverse selection
*Increases small business tax credits for those participating in the state insurance
exchanges†
*Provides tax credits to individuals or families earning between 100% and 400% of the
federal poverty level who purchase their health insurance through the exchanges
All health insurance plans must provide an “essential health benefits package”
*Expands federally funded Medicaid coverage to cover individuals earning up to 133%
of the federal poverty level in certain states
Initial enrollment in the Small Business Health Options Program (SHOP) begins on
November 15
Imposes annual fees on the health insurance sector†
*U.S. citizens without health insurance pay a tax penalty (individual mandate)†
2015
*Employers with 100 or more full-time employees pay a penalty if they fail to offer health
insurance coverage (employer mandate)
Continued
The ACA’s Key Provisions: A Systematic Review
1737
 taxpayers, patients, health care providers, insurance companies, and govern-
ments. Preimplementation projections of the ACA’s effects were largely based
on simulation models of earlier Medicaid enrollment or the Massachusetts
health insurance expansion (e.g., Gruber 2011a). In 2010, the Congressional
Budget Office (CBO 2010) projected that by 2019, 32 million people would
gain health insurance coverage, ESI coverage would decline slightly, and signif-
icant increases in federal spending due to the ACAwould be offset by increased
revenue. Making precise predictions is daunting, however, as many factors
affect successful implementation of the ACA, such as enrollment levels, insurer
participation, and providers’ willingness to accept Medicaid patients.
While the ACA is comprised of 10 titles and hundreds of sections, this
review focuses on key provisions related to expansion of health insurance cov-
erage through dependent coverage provisions and ESI, health insurance
exchanges, employer and individual mandates, and Medicaid expansion.
Unlike other summaries of the existing literature (e.g., Hall and Lord 2014;
Blumenthal, Abrams, and Nuzum 2015), we conduct a structured and system-
atic review of research findings regarding the effects of the ACA since 2010
and focus on the key provisions listed above. Besides a summary and synthesis
of current findings, we also offer suggestions for future research.
METHODS
Literature Search
We used three methods to identify relevant studies for our analysis. First, we
performed structured and systematic searches using the Thomson Reuters’
Table 1. Continued
2016
*Employers with 50 or more full-time employees pay a penalty if they fail to offer health
insurance coverage (employer mandate)
2018
Excise tax of 40% imposed on employer-sponsored private health insurance plans above
a certain value (“Cadillac tax”)
Notes. Provisions went into effect on January 1, unless noted otherwise. The provisions discussed
in this review are marked with an asterisk (*). PCP stands for primary care physician.
†Assessed annually.
‡Effective for plans beginning on or after September 23, 2010.
§Effective dates vary.
¶Effective October 1.
Source: Compiled by the authors using information from the US Department of Health and
Human Services (http://www.hhs.gov/healthcare/facts/timeline/timeline-text.html) and Kaiser
Family Foundation (http://kff.org/health-reform/fact-sheet/summary-of-the-affordable-care-act/)
websites.
1738
HSR: Health Services Research 51:5 (October 2016)
 Web of Science, the National Library of Medicine’s Medline (PubMed), and
the American Economic Association’s EconLit. We searched for the phrase
“Affordable Care Act” in titles, abstracts, or topics without any additional key-
words to avoid inadvertently excluding relevant studies. These searches
yielded a total of 1,375 studies from Web of Science, 1,656 studies from Med-
line, and 97 studies from EconLit. We focused on published articles in the Eng-
lish language that appeared in peer-reviewed scholarly journals as well as
reports that appeared in the “gray literature.” Second, we augmented our sys-
tematic searches to include relevant reports from various research organiza-
tions and government agencies. Third, we browsed the reference sections of
the retrieved articles. The entire search process was conducted from July to
September 2015, and it was limited to studies appearing since 2010.
Inclusion Criteria and Screening
Our inclusion criteria are essentially based on whether the study provides a
systematic evaluation of one or more elements of the ACA’s implementation.
Given the vast number of studies on this topic, we focus on those provisions
related to the expansion of health insurance coverage. Both quantitative and
qualitative studies were included, but we excluded studies that merely
describe the legislation or examine data from prior to the implementation
(i.e., to establish a baseline). We also eliminated any studies that simply use
projections or extrapolations based on data prior to implementation of the
ACA. Finally, we excluded studies pertaining to ethical, legal, or political
aspects of the ACA.
During the first round of screening, two coauthors independently
screened the title and abstract of each study to identify those that poten-
tially met the inclusion criteria. After a comparison of the two sets of rat-
ings,
any
inconsistencies
were
resolved
through
discussions.
When
necessary, a third coauthor was asked to render a judgment. As a result, we
obtained 162 full-text articles for a final examination pertaining to rele-
vance and to eliminate any inappropriate items such as opinion pieces.
Ultimately, we selected a total of 72 studies through our elaborate screening
process. These were augmented by 24 reports and articles found in the gray
literature. While Table 2 lists the final set of 96 studies together with brief
descriptions, given space limitations, we do not cover all in the results sec-
tion. The discussion below includes only those studies that were deemed
most relevant or provide more recent evidence, and they are organized by
groupings of key ACA provisions.
The ACA’s Key Provisions: A Systematic Review
1739
 Table 2:
Summary of Selected Research Studies
Research Study
Data/Methods
Brief Description
Abraham,
Feldman, and
Simon (2014)*
National Association of Insurance Commissioners; CPS;
KFF; Descriptive statistics to describe each state’s insurance
market and to test the differences in attributes between
exchange participants and nonparticipants; Multivariate
regression analysis with an incumbent insurer’s decision to
participate in the exchanges as the outcome measure
Insurer participation in exchanges is related to presence in the region and
size of the insurer.
Akosa Antwi,
Moriya, and
Simon (2013)*
SIPP; DD with insurance coverage and labor market
outcomes as outcome measures
Dependent coverage provision is associated with increases in coverage
and parental coverage among young adults relative to comparison
group.
Akosa Antwi et al.
(2015)*
National Emergency Department Sample; DD with ED visits
as the outcome measure
Dependent coverage provision is associated with modest decline in ED
visits for young adults relative to comparison group.
Akosa Antwi,
Moriya, and
Simon (2015)*
Nationwide Inpatient Sample, Healthcare Cost and
Utilization Project; DD with number and sources of
inpatient admissions, fraction of admissions insured, and the
intensity of treatment as outcome measures
Dependent coverage provision is associated with increases in mental
health visits and inpatient visits by young adults relative to comparison
group.
Angier et al.
(2015)*
Longitudinal study of coverage status for adult encounters in
community health centers (CHCs); multivariate regression
analysis of CHC visits by insurance and Medicaid
expansion status
The proportion of uninsured visits decreased and Medicaid-covered
visits increased in Medicaid expansion states in 2014 compared to 2013.
Artiga, Rudowitz,
and Ranji (2015)*
Focus groups with either previously uninsured adults who
enrolled in the ACA Medicaid expansion (Ohio and
Arkansas) or those who would be eligible if their state had
expanded Medicaid (Missouri)
States’ decision whether to expand Medicaid or how they went about the
expansion implementation affected experiences of low-income adults,
including their access to care as well as their ability to work.
Artiga, Stephens,
and Damico
(2015)*
CPS; Descriptive statistics on the uninsured and those who
fall within the “coverage gap” after imputing eligibility for
ACA subsidies, unauthorized immigrant status, and ESI
offer status
Estimate there are 3.7 million adults in the coverage gap in 22 states that
have not expanded Medicaid as of March 2015.
Bachrach,
Boozang, and
Glanz (2015)*
Interviews with state officials; estimates of the budgetary
impact of Medicaid expansion in a sample of eight states
Medicaid expansion allows states to realize savings (through reductions
in spending on programs for the uninsured) and revenue gains (through
existing insurer or provider taxes).
Continued
1740
HSR: Health Services Research 51:5 (October 2016)
 Table 2. Continued
Research Study
Data/Methods
Brief Description
Barbaresco,
Courtemanche,
and Qi (2015)*
BRFSS; DD with outcomes related to health care access,
preventive care utilization, risky behaviors, and self-
assessed health
Dependent coverage provision is associated with some improvements in
health care access and health-related outcomes among young adults
relative to comparison group. Report large gains for men and college
graduates.
Barcellos
et al. (2014)*
American Life Panel; multivariate regression analysis with
knowledge about ACA, health insurance literacy, and
expectations for changes in health care as outcomes
Knowledge of the ACA and health literacy is low overall, especially
among low-income individuals.
Barker
et al. (2014a)*
Area Health Resource File; descriptive statistics on
geographic variation in marketplace premiums
Premiums for exchange plans are higher in less densely populated areas.
Barker
et al. (2014b)*
Healthcare.gov and state agencies; overview of important
factors that influence the differences in marketplace plans
across geographic areas (urban vs. rural)
Urban counties, on average, have more plans and plans with higher
actuarial values available on their exchanges.
Blavin
et al. (2015)*
Health Reform Monitoring Survey; multivariate regression
analysis with employer offer rates, employee take-up rates,
and ESI coverage as outcomes
Offer, take-up, and coverage rates for ESI have remained the same under
the ACA.
Blumberg and
Rifkin (2014)*
Case study using stakeholder interviews in eight states
Identify reasons for SHOP’s slow start and areas for improvement.
Blumenthal and
Collins (2014)*
Overview and assessment of existing findings
Provide a progress report on ACA as of mid-2014.
Blumenthal,
Abrams, and
Nuzum (2015)*
Overview and assessment of existing findings
Review various effects of the ACA at the 5-year mark.
Brandon and
Carnes (2014)*
Case studies of marketplace launches in Kentucky and North
Carolina
Describe elements of successful exchanges.
Brooks (2014)*
Description and discussion of the “family glitch”
Many dependents face challenges with “affordable” care and will remain
uninsured if the family glitch is not fixed. Low-income families and those
who live in Medicaid nonexpansion states have been disproportionately
affected.
Busch,
Golberstein, and
Meara (2014)*
MEPS; DD with insurance coverage and out-of-pocket
medical expenditures as outcome measures
Dependent coverage provision is associated with a decrease in the
proportion of young adults with high out-of-pocket medical expenses
relative to comparison group.
Continued
The ACA’s Key Provisions: A Systematic Review
1741
 Table 2. Continued
Research Study
Data/Methods
Brief Description
Cantor
et al. (2012)*
CPS; DD with insurance coverage by source as outcome
measure
Estimate rapid and substantial increase in the number of young adults
who gained parental coverage by 2011.
Carlson
et al. (2014)*
CPS; DD with self-rated health as outcome measure
Dependent coverage provision is associated with improvements in self-
reported health among young adults relative to comparison group.
CMS (2014)*
CMS press release of data on marketplaces
Reports that more issuers and health plans are available through
exchanges in 2015 than in 2014.
Chandra, Holmes,
and Skinner
(2013)*
Various sources; overview of trends in health care spending
and the contributing factors
As of 2013, cost-saving features of the ACAwere not yet fully
implemented, so they could not explain the slowdown in health care
expenditures that began in 2006.
Chua and
Sommers (2014)*
MEPS; DD with insurance coverage, selected measures of
health care utilization, and self-reported health as outcome
measures
The dependent coverage provision is associated with improvements in
self-reported health status and protection against medical expenditures
among young adults aged 19–25 years.
Claxton et al.
(2012)
KFF/HRET Survey of Employer Health Benefits;
Descriptive statistics on ESI coverage, premiums, and
parental coverage for young adults
Examine trends in ESI coverage, premiums, and parental coverage for
young adults.
Claxton
et al. (2014a)*
KFF/HRET Employer Health Benefit Survey; descriptive
statistics on ESI offers, enrollment, premiums, cost-sharing,
and worker contributions
The ESI market has experienced little change since the passage of the
ACA.
Cohen and
Martinez (2015)*
Early release of NHIS estimates for health insurance
coverage and the overtime trends
Provide estimates of health insurance coverage for 2014 by age, race/
ethnicity, geography, type of insurance, and poverty level.
Collins
et al. (2012)
CF Health Insurance Tracking Survey; descriptive statistics
on insurance coverage and burden of medical bills and debt
The health and monetary consequences of uninsurance are significant for
young adults, particularly those who are poor.
Collins
et al. (2013a)*
CF Health Insurance Tracking Survey; descriptive statistics
on uninsurance and enrollment under parents’ policy
among the young adults
Report increase in the number of young adults on a parents’ policy
between 2011 and 2013, in particular among those with low incomes.
Collins
et al. (2013b)
CF ACA Tracking Survey; descriptive statistics on
consumers’ experiences in marketplace at the end of the first
month
Majority of potentially eligible adults are aware of the marketplace as a
source of coverage but few reported visiting it at this point in time.
Some individuals who visited but did not enroll yet reported technical
problems with marketplace websites.
Continued
1742
HSR: Health Services Research 51:5 (October 2016)
 Table 2. Continued
Research Study
Data/Methods
Brief Description
Collins et al.
(2014a)*
MEPS; descriptive statistics on the national trends in ESI
coverage, premiums, cost-sharing, and worker
contributions
ESI premiums, deductibles, and employee contributions increased
between 2003 and 2013 but at a slower rate after 2010.
Collins et al.
(2014b)
CF ACATracking Survey; descriptive statistics on
consumers’ experiences in marketplace at the end of the first
3 months
Consumers’ ability to compare benefits and premiums in the
marketplace has improved since the rollout, but many reported
difficulties with plan selection.
Collins et al.
(2015a)*
CF Biennial Health Insurance Survey; descriptive statistics
on health insurance coverage, affordability, burden of
medical bills and debt, access to routine health care
Report results of survey showing improvements in coverage and
affordability.
Collins et al.
(2015b)*
CF ACATracking Survey; descriptive statistics on
consumers’ experiences with marketplace and Medicaid
coverage
Report results of survey showing satisfaction with health plans and
improvements in coverage and access.
CBO (2014)*
Various sources; estimates of the number of uninsured
subject to ACA-related penalties
Estimates 4 million out of 30 million uninsured will be subject to
penalties in 2016.
CBO (2015a)*
Various sources; estimates the budgetary and economic
consequences that would arise from repealing the ACA
Provides estimated effects of repeal on health insurance coverage and the
federal budget both in the short and long term, with a warning that they
are subject to substantial uncertainty.
CBO (2015b)*
Various sources; federal budget projections for 2015–2025
The appendix provides estimated budgetary effects of the insurance
coverage provisions of the ACA.
Cox et al. (2014)*
Marketplace enrollment data from seven states; calculate
state-specific measures of market competition for individual
plan markets and the exchanges
There are some instances in which insurers’ market shares have changed
significantly under the ACA, with some notable examples due to new
entrants.
Cox et al. (2015)*
Health insurer rate filings in 10 state departments and
Washington, DC; descriptive statistics on marketplace
premiums and insurer participation
Insurer participation in 2016 is similar to 2015. Average increase in
premiums for silver plans between 2015 and 2016 is 4.4%.
Cunningham,
Garfield, and
Rudowitz (2015)*
Ascension Health data on discharges and hospital finances;
pre-post descriptive statistics on discharge volumes,
uncompensated care, and hospital finances
Evaluate changes in hospital discharges and financial outcomes for
Ascension Health system in Medicaid expansion and nonexpansion
states immediately before and after the ACA implementation.
Depew and Bailey
(2015)*
MEPS; DD with total premiums and employee contributions
for family or single plans as outcomes
Premiums for family health plans increased by 2.5–2.8% due to the
dependent coverage provision.
Continued
The ACA’s Key Provisions: A Systematic Review
1743
 Table 2. Continued
Research Study
Data/Methods
Brief Description
Dickstein et al.
(2015)*
Healthcare.gov; U.S. Census; Multivariate regression
analysis with number of insurers and health insurance
premiums as outcomes
Examine whether the definition of the coverage region affects market
outcomes in the ACA insurance exchanges.
Doty, Rasmussen,
and Collins
(2014)*
CF ACA Tracking Survey; descriptive statistics on insurance
coverage and marketplace experiences among Latinos
Uninsured rate among Latinos decreased in states expanding Medicaid.
Overall rate of uninsured adults decreased from 20% in 2013 to 15%
in 2014.
Gabel et al.
(2013)*
Survey of private firms with 3–50 employees; descriptive
statistics on insurance plans in the small-group market and
small employers’ experiences with SHOP exchanges
Both small firms that decided to offer health insurance benefits and those
that did not rated most features of SHOP exchanges highly. These
decisions were very price sensitive.
Geyman (2015)
Overview and assessment of existing findings
Assesses the ACA’s first 5 years and presents arguments for replacing it
with single-payer national health insurance.
GAO (2014a)*
CMS and state data; descriptive statistics on the number and
types of issuers participating in exchanges and prior to the
exchanges
Most state exchanges had multiple issuers in 2014, with variation across
states.
GAO (2014b)*
CMS, state data, and interviews with stakeholders;
descriptive statistics and stakeholders’ views regarding
SHOP characteristics
Discusses factors contributing to lower than expected enrollment in the
SHOP.
GAO (2015)*
Various sources; structured literature search; stakeholder
interviews; descriptive statistics on premiums
Examines the effects of tax credits and the availability of affordable
health plans. Reviews the variations in premium costs by income, age,
and geography.
Giovannelli,
Lucia, and
Corlette (2015)*
Review of state-specific provider network adequacy
standards for marketplace plans in the 50 states and
Washington, DC
State regulators seek to enhance network transparency for consumers
and to monitor compliance.
Golberstein
et al. (2015)*
National inpatient samples; California state data; DD with
inpatient admissions and ED visits for psychiatric diagnoses
as outcomes
ACA’s dependent coverage provision is associated with increased
inpatient admissions and decreased ED visits for 19- to 25-year olds,
relative to comparison group.
Graetz et al.
(2014)*
Premium data from all marketplaces; descriptive statistics on
affordability of premiums (by age, income, geographic area)
Many people with incomes just above threshold for subsidies will not
have affordable coverage, and hence will be exempt from the individual
mandate.
Continued
1744
HSR: Health Services Research 51:5 (October 2016)
 Table 2. Continued
Research Study
Data/Methods
Brief Description
Haeder and
Weimer (2013)*
Various sources; qualitative analyses to identify the common
themes in insurance early exchange implementation;
multivariate regression analysis of timely exchange
establishment
Many state commissioners of insurance have played constructive roles in
exchange planning despite strong political opposition to the ACA from
state governors and legislatures.
Hall and Moore
(2012)
State data; descriptive statistics on the Preexisting Condition
Insurance Plan enrollment and costs
Examine the experience with the temporary Preexisting Condition
Insurance Plan.
Hall and Swartz
(2012)
Case studies of Maryland, California, and Colorado
Document the differences across states in terms of their initial approaches
and experiences with establishing and designing exchanges.
Hall and Lord
(2014)*
Overview and assessment of existing findings
Insurance industry’s profitability does not seem to be hurt, individual
insurance premiums have been lower than expected, and government
costs have been less than initially projected.
Hamel et al.
(2014)*
KFF Survey of Nongroup Health Insurance Enrollees;
descriptive statistics on the views and experience of
nongroup enrollees
Majority with exchange coverage is previously uninsured and satisfied
with coverage.
Hernandez-
Boussard
et al. (2014)*
State Inpatient and Emergency Department Databases from
California, Florida, New York; DD with ED visits (by
various individual characteristics) as the outcome measure
Rate of ED visits increased after ACA’s dependent coverage provision
implementation but at a slower rate for young adults relative to
comparison group.
Holahan,
Buettgens, and
Dorn (2013)*
Urban Institute’s Health Insurance Policy Simulation Model;
national and state-level projections of cost and coverage
under the ACA Medicaid expansion for the period 2013–
2022
The states that had not expanded Medicaid as of July 2013 generally are
the ones that would potentially benefit the most from this provision.
Howard and
Shearer (2013)
Description and discussion of various state policies and
programs to reduce churning and promote continuity of
coverage/care
There are various approaches by states to limit the program eligibility
changes and/or the impact those changes have on individual
consumers.
Jacobs and
Callaghan
(2013)*
Qualitative and quantitative analysis to explain the variations
in relative state progress in implementing Medicaid
expansion
Examine how economic conditions, past policies, politics, and
administrative capacity influence states’ Medicaid expansion decision.
Continued
The ACA’s Key Provisions: A Systematic Review
1745
 Table 2. Continued
Research Study
Data/Methods
Brief Description
KFF and CF (2015)
*
KFF/CF 2015 National Survey of Primary Care Providers;
descriptive statistics on the impact of the ACA on patient
population, providers’ practice capacity, and their opinions
about the ACA’s impact on medical practice
Majority of primary care providers surveyed saw increase in uninsured
or Medicaid patients (in expansion states) without reducing quality of
care.
Karpman, Weiss,
and Long (2015)*
Urban Institute Health Reform Monitoring Survey;
descriptive statistics
The proportion of middle- and high-income adults reporting access
problems decreased in 2014 compared to 2013. Disparities persist for
certain age, income, and ethnic groups, and 40% of adults reported
various provider access problems.
Kaufman
et al. (2015)*
Encounter data from Quest Diagnostics; descriptive statistics
on the number of newly identified diabetes patients in 2013
versus 2014
Number of Medicaid patients with new diabetes diagnoses increased,
particularly in Medicaid expansion states.
Keehan et al.
(2015)*
Data from various sources including CMS, Bureau of
Economic Analysis, U.S. Census; projections based on
actuarial and econometric modeling methods
Provide various projections for national health expenditures (by
spending categories, per enrollee, by sponsor type, etc.) for 2014–2024.
Kirzinger,
Cohen, and
Gindi (2013)*
NHIS; descriptive statistics on the trends in insurance
coverage and source of coverage among young adults
After the dependent coverage provision of the ACA took effect, private
health insurance coverage among young adults aged 19–25 increased
relative to a comparison group, while coverage in their own name has
decreased.
Kotagal et al.
(2014)*
BRFSS, NHIS; DD with health status, presence of a usual
source of care and ability to afford medications, dental care,
or physician visits as outcome measures
Find increase in coverage for young adults of 19–25 years old relative to
a comparison group, but more limited changes in access to care and
health status.
Kowalski (2014)*
National Association of Insurance Commissioners data; state-
specific seasonally adjusted trend regressions of health
insurance coverage, premiums, and costs
Suggests that state policies toward the ACA have differential effects on
welfare of market participants.
Lau et al. (2014)*
MEPS; pre-post design using multivariate regression analysis
of health care use including routine examination in the past
year, blood pressure/cholesterol screenings, influenza
vaccination, and annual dental visit
ACA’s dependent coverage provision has increased insurance coverage
and the use of some preventive services among young adults.
Levitt, Cox, and
Claxton (2015)*
Health Coverage Portal data on insurance company filings;
descriptive statistics on marketplace enrollments (by state)
Discuss individual market coverage in 2014. About 85% of those with
marketplace plans were eligible for subsidies.
Continued
1746
HSR: Health Services Research 51:5 (October 2016)
 Table 2. Continued
Research Study
Data/Methods
Brief Description
Lipton and
Decker (2015)*
NHIS; DD with likelihood of HPV vaccine initiation,
completion and awareness as outcome measures
ACA’s dependent coverage provision is associated with an increase in
HPV vaccination rates for young adults relative to comparison group.
Martinez, Ward,
and Adams
(2015)*
NHIS; descriptive statistics on changes in health insurance
coverage and selected measures of health care access and
utilization
Document disparities in access to care, coverage, and health care
utilization.
McCue and
Hall (2013)
Insurer data from the Department of Health and Human
Services; descriptive statistics on premium increases for
individual and small-group plans as well as the contributing
factors including the ACA
Insurers attributed three-quarters or more of the larger rate increases to
factors such as trends in medical expenses. They attributed only a very
small portion of these changes to the ACA.
McCue and
Hall (2015)*
Insurer data from the Department of Health and Human
Services; descriptive statistics on premium increases for
individual and small-group plans as well as the contributing
factors including the ACA
Insurers attributed the great portion of larger rate increases to factors
such as trends in medical expenses, and most of them did not attribute
these changes to the ACA.
McMorrow
et al. (2015)*
NHIS; descriptive statistics on the trends in insurance
coverage and source of coverage among young adults
The dependent coverage provision reduced uninsurance mainly among
high-income young adults, while the later ACA provisions reduced
uninsurance mainly among low- and moderate-income young adults,
particularly in Medicaid expansion states.
Mulcahy
et al. (2013)*
IMS Health Charge Data Master database; DD with
nondiscretionary ED visits (by type of insurance coverage
and reason for visit) as the outcome measure
ACA’s dependent coverage provision is associated with an increase in the
privately covered proportion of young adult ED visits (and a decrease
in uninsured young adult ED visits) relative to comparison group.
O’Hara and
Brault (2013)*
ACS; DD with uninsurance and private health insurance
coverage rates as the outcome measures
Estimate insurance rates by state, gender, race, ethnicity, English
speaking, and citizenship status. Disparities by gender narrowed, but
those by race and ethnicity persist.
Olson (2015)
Case study of Pennsylvania in terms of its existing Medicaid
program and how it has been affected by the ACA
Examine financial and other considerations in policy makers’ Medicaid
expansion decision.
Polsky et al.
(2014)*
Data on all plans offered in the marketplaces from the Health
Insurance Exchanges (HIX) 2.0 dataset; descriptive
statistics on silver plans
Compare insurer competition, plan characteristics, and premiums in
health insurance exchanges for rural and urban areas.
Polsky et al.
(2015)*
Simulated patient study of primary care practices in 10 states;
descriptive statistics on the availability of appointments and
waiting times for appointments for new patients by state and
insurance type
Availability of primary care appointments for Medicaid patients
increased following an increase in Medicaid reimbursements while no
changes were observed for the private insurance group.
Continued
The ACA’s Key Provisions: A Systematic Review
1747
 Table 2. Continued
Research Study
Data/Methods
Brief Description
Rasmussen
et al. (2014)*
CF ACA Tracking Survey; descriptive statistics on premiums,
out-of-pocket costs, people’s ability to compare plans and
their experiences in terms of finding out about their
eligibility for financial assistance or Medicaid
Most adults with marketplace coverage are satisfied with their plans.
Those with low or moderate incomes report having premiums and
deductibles similar to those with ESI.
Rasmussen
et al. (2015)
CF Biennial Health Insurance Survey; descriptive statistics
on health insurance coverage, cost-related problems getting
needed care, and medical debt in California, Florida, New
York, and Texas
California and New York have their own exchanges and expanded
Medicaid. Uninsured rates in these states are lower and affordability is
better than in Florida and Texas, which rely on the federal exchange
and did not expand Medicaid.
Rosenbaum
et al. (2014)*
Review plan-to-plan transition policies implemented in 16
states and Washington, DC, to mitigate the effects of
churning and to ensure continuity of care.
There are various strategies to mitigate the effects of churning across
Medicaid, CHIP, and publicly subsidized private coverage, but they are
rather complex and may take time to implement and to yield the
desired results.
Saloner and Le
Cook (2014)*
National Survey of Drug Use and Health; DD with selected
measures of mental health and substance abuse treatment as
outcomes
ACA’s dependent coverage provision is associated with increased use of
mental health treatment among young adults relative to comparison
group. No significant changes were observed in substance use
treatment.
Schoen, Radley,
and Collins
(2015)*
MEPS, CPS; descriptive statistics on ESI plan trends
regarding their premiums, affordability, worker
contributions, and out-of-pocket costs
Report that the cost of ESI premiums rose faster than median incomes
during 2003–2013. A slowdown in the growth rate of premiums was
observed over the last 3 years following the ACA implementation.
Scott et al. (2015)*
National Trauma Data Bank; DD with uninsurance status and
clinical outcomes for trauma patients as outcome measures
Dependent coverage provision is associated with a significant decrease in
the rate of uninsured trauma patients ages 19–25, but there are no
significant changes in clinical trauma outcomes.
Shane and
Ayyagari (2014)*
MEPS; DD with insurance coverage by race, income, marital
status, and policy holder status as the outcome measures
While the dependent coverage provision increased insurance coverage
among all racial and ethnic groups, it did not reduce overall disparities.
Disparities may have widened among low-income individuals.
Skopec and
Kronick (2013)*
Various sources including MEPS and marketplace insurance
premiums from selected states; descriptive comparisons of
the premiums in the individual and small-group markets to
earlier CBO estimates
Premiums for silver plans in 2014 are lower than CBO estimates and
appear to be affordable for the most part.
Sommers and
Kronick (2012)*
CPS; DD with insurance coverage and type as well as policy
holder status as outcomes
Dependent coverage provision led to increases in insurance coverage for
young adults, especially among minorities.
Continued
1748
HSR: Health Services Research 51:5 (October 2016)
 Table 2. Continued
Research Study
Data/Methods
Brief Description
Sommers
et al. (2013)*
NHIS, CPS; DD with insurance coverage and access to care
as outcome measures
Dependent coverage provision is associated with significant increases in
private health insurance and access to care for young adults relative to
comparison group.
Sommers,
Kenney, and
Epstein (2014)*
Administrative records on Medicaid enrollment in four
states, ACS; DD with coverage through Medicaid, private
health insurance coverage, and uninsurance as outcome
measures
Find steady increase in Medicaid enrollment in four Medicaid expansion
states, especially among those with health-related limitations.
Sommers et al.
(2014a)*
Gallup-Healthways, Well-Being Index, and CMS data;
multivariate regression analysis with insurance coverage
and access to care as outcome measures
Report that 7.3 to 17.2 million adults gained coverage by mid-2014.
Sommers et al.
(2015)*
Gallup-Healthways Well-Being Index; multivariate
regression analysis and DD with self-reported coverage,
access to care, and health as outcome measures
Self-reported insurance coverage, access to primary care and
medications, affordability, and health improved significantly after the
first 2 years under the ACA.
Swartz, Hall, and
Jost (2015)*
Various sources including interviews; case study of Arkansas,
California, Connecticut, Maryland, Montana, and Texas
Describe various competitive strategies adopted by insurance carriers
during the first year of the ACA marketplaces. These competitive
strategies vary by state.
Vujicic,
Yarbrough, and
Nasseh (2014)*
NHIS, 2008–2012; DD with private dental benefits coverage,
dental care utilization, and financial barriers to obtaining
needed dental care as outcome measures
Dependent coverage provision is associated with “spillover” increases in
dental coverage, dental care utilization, and affordability for young
adults relative to comparison group.
Wallace and
Sommers (2015)*
BRFSS; DD with insurance coverage, self-reported health,
and access to health care as outcome measures
Dependent coverage provision is associated with better self-reported
health and access to health care among young adults relative to
comparison group.
Wilensky and
Gray (2013)
Review of Medicaid policies in all 50 states and Washington,
DC
Evaluate coverage of ACA-required preventive services under Medicaid
in different states.
Notes. Studies that are marked with an asterisk (*) were deemed most relevant or provide more recent evidence and are discussed in this review.
ACA, Affordable Care Act; ACS, American Community Survey; BRFSS, Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System; CBO, Congressional Budget
Office; CF, Commonwealth Fund; CMS, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services; CPS, Current Population Survey; DD, difference-in-differences
analysis; ED, emergency department; ESI, employer-sponsored insurance; HRET, Health Research and Educational Trust; KFF, Kaiser Family Foun-
dation; MEPS, Medical Expenditure Panel Survey; NHIS, National Health Interview Survey; SIPP, Survey of Income and Program Participation.
The ACA’s Key Provisions: A Systematic Review
1749
 RESULTS
Dependent Coverage Provision
Under the so-called young adult mandate, individuals between the ages of 19–
25 years are allowed to remain on their parents’ health insurance plans. Since
this mandate took effect in 2010, many researchers have already examined the
impact of the law on this population. Most of this literature uses a quasi-experi-
mental difference-in-differences approach to compare young adults aged
19–25 to slightly older individuals before and after 2010. Although magni-
tudes vary, all studies show a rapid increase in insurance coverage among
young adults after this provision took effect (Cantor et al. 2012; Sommers and
Kronick 2012; Akosa Antwi, Moriya, and Simon 2013; Kirzinger, Cohen, and
Gindi 2013; O’Hara and Brault 2013; Chua and Sommers 2014; Kotagal et al.
2014). Collins et al. (2013a) reported that in 2013 an estimated 15 million
young adults were on a parent’s policy in the past 12 months, an increase of
1.3 million since 2011. Approximately half of these were full-time students
(Collins et al. 2013a). These estimates are in line with other studies suggesting
that 1–3 million uninsured young adults gained coverage under the ACA
(Akosa Antwi, Moriya, and Simon 2013; O’Hara and Brault 2013; Blumen-
thal, Abrams, and Nuzum 2015; McMorrow et al. 2015).
The gains in coverage are especially pronounced for men, unmarried
individuals,
and
nonstudents
(Sommers et al. 2013).
Consistent
with
adverse selection, young adults in worse health acquired coverage sooner
and with greater frequency than others (Sommers et al. 2013). This man-
date primarily benefitted those with relatively high incomes, while Medi-
caid expansion and marketplace reforms implemented in 2014 targeted
lower income young adults (McMorrow et al. 2015). Overall, the rate of
uninsured young adults decreased from 30 percent in 2009 to 19 percent
in 2014, which translates to about 6 million of them remaining uninsured
in 2014 (McMorrow et al. 2015). Disparities persist by race, ethnicity, and
income (O’Hara and Brault 2013; Shane and Ayyagari 2014). Most studies
report that gains in insurance coverage are associated with better access to
health care for young adults (Sommers et al. 2013; Wallace and Sommers
2015), especially among men and college graduates (Barbaresco, Courte-
manche, and Qi 2015). Others find that the ACA is associated with
improvements in self-reported health status among young adults (Carlson
et al. 2014; Chua and Sommers 2014; Barbaresco, Courtemanche, and Qi
2015; Wallace and Sommers 2015).
1750
HSR: Health Services Research 51:5 (October 2016)
 Studies have examined the effect of expanded dependent coverage on
the utilization of emergency department (ED) care (Mulcahy et al. 2013;
Hernandez-Boussard et al. 2014; Akosa Antwi et al. 2015), preventive ser-
vices (Lau et al. 2014; Barbaresco, Courtemanche, and Qi 2015; Lipton and
Decker 2015), dental care (Vujicic, Yarbrough, and Nasseh 2014), and mental
health treatment (Saloner and Le Cook 2014; Golberstein et al. 2015). Akosa
Antwi, Moriya, and Simon (2015) found that inpatient hospital visits increased
3.5 percent and mental health visits increased 9 percent among young adults,
without significant differences in hospital length of stay or charges. ED visits
actually decreased among young adults (Hernandez-Boussard et al. 2014;
Akosa Antwi et al. 2015).
Besides the changes in insurance coverage and health care utilization
among this group, the proportion of young adults reporting high out-of-pocket
spending for health care decreased significantly following passage of the ACA
(Busch, Golberstein, and Meara 2014; Chua and Sommers 2014). Compared
to individual plans, premiums for plans covering children have increased
2.5–2.8 percent more due to the dependent coverage provision, but employ-
ers absorbed much of this increase (Depew and Bailey 2015). The amount of
uncompensated care for young adults decreased as a greater proportion of
ED, trauma center, and psychiatric inpatient utilization being covered by pri-
vate insurance (Mulcahy et al. 2013; Akosa Antwi, Moriya, and Simon 2015;
Golberstein et al. 2015; Scott et al. 2015).
Overall Health Insurance Coverage, Access, and Affordability
Preliminary data suggest that the law has substantially decreased the number
of uninsured Americans (Sommers et al. 2014a, 2015; Cohen and Martinez
2015; Collins et al. 2015a,b). Figure 1 shows recent trends and projections
for various sources of health insurance coverage and uninsurance rates (Kee-
han et al. 2015). The rate of uninsured adults decreased from 20 percent in
2013 to 15 percent in 2014 (Doty, Rasmussen, and Collins 2014), with further
declines expected in coming years (Keehan et al. 2015). According to Blu-
menthal, Abrams, and Nuzum (2015), an estimated 7–16 million uninsured
people acquired coverage since 2010, with young adults, low-income indi-
viduals, and minorities experiencing large gains. Similarly, the CBO (2015a)
estimates that 17 million more people would have been uninsured in 2015
without the ACA. In the first 5 years of the ACA, 11.7 million purchased
new plans from the marketplace, 10.8 million more have Medicaid coverage,
and 3 million young adults are on their parents’ policies (Blumenthal,
Abrams, and Nuzum 2015).
The ACA’s Key Provisions: A Systematic Review
1751
 The majority of new enrollees are satisfied with their plans and feel more
financially secure, although paying the premiums is still a challenge for some
(Hamel et al. 2014; Collins et al. 2015b). The 2014 Commonwealth Fund
Biennial Health Insurance Survey was the first since 2003 to show a decline in
the number of adults reporting problems affording needed medical care
(Collins et al. 2015b). Sommers et al. (2015) found significant improvements
in access to primary care services and medications, affordability of care, and
self-reported health after the first 2 years of the ACA. Analyses indicate that
expanded coverage has led to better access to a physician (Sommers et al.
2014a; Collins et al. 2015b) among all income groups (Karpman, Weiss, and
Long 2015). Although the proportion without a regular source of care
decreased from 29.8 percent in 2013 to 26 percent in 2014, almost 40 percent
of respondents still had at least one access problem (Karpman, Weiss, and
Long 2015). Disparities in access measures persist for different racial/ethnic
0.00
15.00
30.00
45.00
60.00
75.00
2007
2012
2013
2014*
2015*
2018*
% of total population
Year
Figure 1:
Health Insurance Coverage in the United States before and after
the ACA
Notes. *Indicates projections. Estimated percentages in a given year do not sum to 100% due to
rounding and because individuals can have multiple sources of health insurance coverage.
Source: Keehan et al. (2015).
1752
HSR: Health Services Research 51:5 (October 2016)
 and income groups (Cohen and Martinez 2015; Karpman, Weiss, and Long
2015; Martinez, Ward, and Adams 2015).
Over the 2016–2025 period, the CBO (2015b) projects that the ACAwill
reduce the number of uninsured by 24–25 million people relative to what
would have occurred otherwise. However, about 26–29 million nonelderly
are still expected to lack coverage, including unauthorized immigrants, those
who live in non-Medicaid expansion states, individuals affected by the “family
glitch” (discussed below), and those who choose not to enroll in Medicaid or
purchase insurance (CBO 2015b). The uninsured are more likely to be young,
low-income, and Hispanic (Collins et al. 2015b).
Health Insurance Exchanges, Tax Credits, and the Individual Mandate
Impact of Marketplace Design and Implementation. Political factors along with
administrative capabilities influenced whether a state established its own
exchange or relied on the federal marketplace (Haeder and Weimer 2013;
Brandon and Carnes 2014). The type of exchange established and malfunctions
in implementation can have significant implications for market participants
(Kowalski 2014). According to Brandon and Carnes (2014), commodification of
insurance plans (i.e., making them transparent and accessible to consumers),
competition, and communication are three elements of successful exchanges.
Blumenthal, Abrams, and Nuzum (2015) discussed several problems that
occurred during ACA implementation including cancelation notices for non-
compliant plans (which were later allowed to be renewed), narrow provider
networks, and plans with very high deductibles. Furthermore, the public had a
limited understanding and awareness of the ACA provisions (Collins et al.
2013a; Barcellos et al. 2014; KFF and CF 2015). Some survey results show that
premiums and deductibles for plans purchased through the marketplace are
comparable to ESI for those with similar incomes (Rasmussen et al. 2014).
Premiums for marketplace plans are generally lower in areas that are more den-
sely populated and in states with state-based exchanges (Barker et al. 2014a).
Use of Marketplace Subsidies. Levitt, Cox, and Claxton (2015) estimate that
plans purchased in the marketplace accounted for 43 percent of all individu-
ally purchased plans in 2014, and 85 percent of those enrolling in marketplace
plans qualified for tax credits. A Government Accountability Office (GAO
2015) analysis suggests that the premium tax credit has contributed to higher
rates of insurance coverage—in contrast to the employer tax credit, which had
The ACA’s Key Provisions: A Systematic Review
1753
 a more limited impact. In 2014, tax credits reduced marketplace premiums by
an average of 76 percent (GAO 2015). As incomes rise and subsidies decline,
however, premiums may increase sharply, making it increasingly difficult for
those at the subsidy threshold (300–400 percent of the FPL) to afford health
insurance (Graetz et al. 2014).
Although almost anyone can purchase insurance through the market-
place (undocumented immigrants is a key exception), those who have access
to ESI may not be eligible for tax credits, even if they meet the income
requirements (HHS, 2014).3 Employees are not eligible if they and/or their
spouses are offered “affordable” ESI coverage. When assessing affordability,
however, the provision is unclear whether to consider the cost of individual
coverage for the employee alone or the cost of family coverage. The Internal
Revenue Service interprets the statute on the basis of individual coverage,
which is much cheaper than family coverage. Due to this so-called fam-
ily glitch, a significant number of low- to moderate-income individuals—2–
4 million according to various estimates—may be denied financial assistance
(Brooks 2014).
Effect of the Individual Mandate. The individual mandate is intended to attract
new enrollees, increase the number of insured, diversify risk pools, and lower
premiums (Gruber 2011b). The CBO (2014) estimates that 4 million people
will be penalized for violating the individual mandate in 2016 and about
$4 billion will be collected in penalties. Sheils and Haught (2011) predict that
nongroup premiums would increase by 12.6 percent and 7.8 million people
would not have coverage without this mandate.
Participation and Competition in the Exchanges. Several studies focus on partici-
pation of (Abraham, Feldman, and Simon 2014; CMS 2014; GAO 2014a) and
competition among (Cox et al. 2014; Swartz, Hall, and Jost 2015) insurers in
the exchanges. Among the incumbent insurers in 2012, 10 percent partici-
pated in the marketplace in 2014—depending on presence in the region, size,
and whether the insurer had prior experience in the group market (Abraham,
Feldman, and Simon 2014). As the ACA matures, participation may increase
further—25 percent more insurance companies joined the marketplace in
2015 than in 2014 (CMS 2014).
Competition in state-sponsored exchanges varies considerably both
within and across states (Cox et al. 2014; GAO 2014a; Kowalski 2014; Polsky
1754
HSR: Health Services Research 51:5 (October 2016)
 et al. 2014; Dickstein et al. 2015; Swartz, Hall, and Jost 2015). Dickstein et al.
(2015) reported that states can alter competition and market outcomes by how
they define their coverage regions. In 2014, almost all state exchanges had
multiple issuers, most included a mix of large and small companies, and more
populous states usually had a wider selection of plans (GAO 2014a). An aver-
age of 37.3 plans were available through exchanges in urban counties com-
pared to 25.7 plans in rural counties (Barker et al. 2014b). As the ACA
restricts the ability of insurance companies to alter their risk pool, they com-
pete instead by offering different cost-sharing arrangements, benefits, and pro-
vider networks (Swartz, Hall, and Jost 2015). Furthermore, incentives may
remain to restrict or ration care for some higher cost patients (McGuire et al.
2014). To protect consumers from the risks associated with “narrow network
plans,” 27 states established quantitative standards for network adequacy and
governmental oversight is expected to increase over time (Giovannelli, Lucia,
and Corlette 2015).
Employer Mandate and the ESI System
One of the overarching questions about the ACA is how it will impact ESI,
and whether the vast majority of workers will continue to obtain health insur-
ance via their workplace. Recent studies indicate an absence of major changes
in ESI since the ACA has gone into effect (Claxton et al. 2014a; Blavin et al.
2015). In 2014, the proportion of employers offering ESI (55 percent) and the
average annual premium for individual coverage therein ($6,025) were simi-
lar to those in 2013 (Claxton et al. 2014a). Since 2003, premiums, deductibles,
and employee contributions for ESI have gradually increased, but at a slower
rate starting in 2010 (Collins et al. 2014a; Schoen, Radley, and Collins 2015).
Note that these preliminary findings are based on partial implementation of
the employer mandate. Thus, additional research is needed to evaluate
whether these trends persist as the employer mandate and associated penalties
go into full effect in 2016.
The Small Business Health Options Program (SHOP). As of June 2014, 18 state-
based SHOP marketplaces enrolled 76,000 individuals from 12,000 small
employers, and premiums for SHOP plans were similar to those for other
small-group plans (GAO 2014b). Gabel et al. (2013) surveyed small firms and
found the majority favored several SHOP features. However, participation in
SHOP is lower than expected due to a number of challenges (GAO 2014b).
The ACA’s Key Provisions: A Systematic Review
1755
 Some employers believe the small business tax credit, intended as an incentive
to use SHOP, is too limited in its scope and requires a complex application
process (Blumberg and Rifkin 2014; GAO 2014b). Initial participation in
SHOP was also hampered by technical problems with the website, lack of
awareness about the program, and limited involvement by brokers (Blumberg
and Rifkin 2014; GAO 2014b). Moving forward, it is unclear whether small
businesses will embrace this feature of the ACA, especially as some employers
consider other options to provide coverage, such as private insurance
exchanges or continued reliance on grandfathered, noncompliant plans
(Blumberg and Rifkin 2014).
Medicaid Expansion
Although provisions for full Medicaid expansion did not take effect until
2014, California, Connecticut, Minnesota, and Washington, DC began early
enrollment in 2010. Sommers, Kenney, and Epstein (2014) found a steady
increase in Medicaid enrollment in these states, with the highest take-up
among those with health limitations. Potential Medicaid beneficiaries are gen-
erally healthier than those who are already enrolled, but those with chronic
conditions are less likely than existing enrollees to have the disease(s) under
control (Decker et al. 2013). As of September 2015, 30 states and Washington,
DC had implemented Medicaid expansion and 20 chose not to participate
(KFF 2015). Expansion decision is heavily influenced by political factors as
well as state economic conditions, administrative capabilities, and prior poli-
cies toward low-income residents and the uninsured (Jacobs and Callaghan
2013). An estimated 3.7 million adults in nonexpansion states are in the “cov-
erage gap,” with low-income blacks disproportionately affected (Artiga, Ste-
phens, and Damico 2015). This means they earn too much to qualify for
Medicaid, but not enough to be eligible for premium tax credits in the market-
place.
The availability of coverage affects access and health outcomes of Medi-
caid beneficiaries (Artiga, Rudowitz, and Ranji 2015; Kaufman et al. 2015;
Sommers et al. 2015). According to the 2014 Commonwealth Fund Biennial
Health Insurance Survey (Collins et al. 2015b), 78 percent of adults who have
used their newly gained Medicaid coverage to obtain care said “they would
not have been able to access or afford this care before.” Another study found
that new coverage led to increases in the number of diabetes diagnoses for
Medicaid patients (Kaufman et al. 2015). Sommers et al. (2015) found the pro-
portion of low-income adults with difficulties accessing a physician and
1756
HSR: Health Services Research 51:5 (October 2016)
 medication decreased more in Medicaid expansion states than in nonexpan-
sion states.
Frequent eligibility changes or “churning” is an ongoing concern in all
states as individuals’ incomes vary and they transition to and from Medicaid,
the marketplace, possibly ESI, and no coverage (Rosenbaum et al. 2014;
Sommers et al. 2014b). Low-income adults in nonexpansion states are particu-
larly vulnerable to being uninsured (Collins et al. 2015b) or incurring high
out-of-pocket costs in the marketplace (Hill 2015). Eventually, states will need
to address churning, which has implications for tax credits, continuity of care,
and health outcomes (Rosenbaum et al. 2014).
A group of studies have focused on providers’ experiences with expand-
ing Medicaid (Angier et al. 2015; Cunningham, Garfield, and Rudowitz 2015;
KFF and CF 2015). Ascension Health, the largest nonprofit health system in
the United States, had more Medicaid discharges and revenues, and lower cost
of care for the poor in expansion states. In other states, however, they experi-
enced only a small increase in Medicaid discharges, a decrease in Medicaid
revenue, and higher cost of care for the poor (Cunningham, Garfield, and
Rudowitz 2015). Provider participation in public insurance programs has been
an ongoing concern as some physicians are reluctant to accept Medicaid bene-
ficiaries due to low reimbursement rates (Polsky et al. 2015). Following a tem-
porary increase in Medicaid payments to providers during 2013–2014, the
availability of primary care appointments increased for Medicaid enrollees,
while wait times for new appointments remained the same (Polsky et al.
2015). A survey of primary care providers shows that the proportion accepting
new Medicaid patients in 2015 is similar to that in 2011–2012 (KFF and CF
2015). A majority of providers surveyed, however, saw an increase in unin-
sured or Medicaid patients in expansion states without negatively affecting the
quality of care (KFF and CF 2015).
Insurance Premiums, Health Care Expenditures, and Government Budgets
Health Insurance Premiums. Premiums continue to increase faster than median
family income, leading more individuals to opt for high–deductible plans
(Collins et al. 2014a; Schoen, Radley, and Collins 2015). While certain provi-
sions of the ACA are likely to increase premiums (e.g., expansion of depen-
dent coverage, extended benefits, ban on charging more for preexisting
conditions), other features (e.g., restrictions on administrative costs and profits
for insurance companies, risk-sharing programs, individual mandate, compe-
tition in the marketplace) are expected to have the opposite effect (Blumenthal
The ACA’s Key Provisions: A Systematic Review
1757
 and Collins 2014; Collins et al. 2014a; Cox et al. 2015; Schoen, Radley, and
Collins 2015). Overall, average premiums and spending by private health
insurers in 2014 were lower than projected (Skopec and Kronick 2013). Aver-
age annual growth in premiums per enrollee for all private health insurance
was 2.1 percent in 2013 and is projected to be 5.4 percent in 2014 and 2.8 per-
cent in 2015 (Keehan et al. 2015). Insurers requesting large rate increases pri-
marily attributed the change to higher prices for services and certain ACA
requirements such as new taxes (McCue and Hall 2015). Even if premiums
continue to gradually increase, most individuals are expected to receive
expanded insurance benefits, and out-of-pocket costs may actually decline for
those who are eligible for tax credits (Hill 2012; Keehan et al. 2015).
Health Care Expenditures. In recent years, national health care spending slo-
wed from the relatively high growth rates experienced during the 1990s and
early 2000s, averaging 4.0 percent annually over the 2008–2013 period
(Chandra, Holmes, and Skinner 2013; Dranove, Garthwaite, and Ody 2014;
Keehan et al. 2015). Nevertheless, the portion of GDP spent on health care is
expected to increase from 17.4 percent in 2013 to 19.6 percent in 2024 (Keehan
et al. 2015). Health care spending is projected to grow at an average annual
rate of 5.8 percent over the period of 2014–2024, and much of this increase
may be driven by the ACA’s coverage expansions as well as higher prescrip-
tion drug spending, a stronger economy, and an aging population (Keehan
et al. 2015).
The expansion of insurance coverage under the ACA is expected to
increase utilization of primary care and other services (Dall et al. 2013). The
ACA includes a number of different approaches that have the potential to con-
trol rising health care expenditures, such as reducing medical errors, creating
exchanges, taxing high cost insurance plans, and adjusting provider reim-
bursements (Gruber 2011a). It is too soon, however, to fully evaluate whether
or to what extent these cost control measures will impact prices and utilization
(Chandra, Holmes, and Skinner 2013; Blumenthal, Abrams, and Nuzum
2015). Blumenthal, Abrams, and Nuzum (2015) asserted that the ACA may be
contributing to slower health care spending growth and, at a minimum, has
not led to a rapid increase in spending.
Budgetary Effects of the ACA. As individuals with chronic diseases enroll in
Medicaid and gain access to health services, overall health care utilization and
1758
HSR: Health Services Research 51:5 (October 2016)
 spending will likely increase, creating challenges for state budgets. The latest
estimates indicate that Medicaid spending increased 12 percent and enroll-
ment increased 12.9 percent in 2014 (Keehan et al. 2015). Federal contribu-
tions cover all expansion costs during the first 3 years, which will benefit
providers and generate economic activity (Holahan, Buettgens, and Dorn
2013). State budgets may be more strained later on, when they are required to
fund more of the expansion. Even so, decreases in uncompensated care are
expected to offset some of spending increases associated with Medicaid
expansion. Overall, studies present evidence that expanding Medicaid is
financially prudent for most states (Holahan, Buettgens, and Dorn 2013;
Bachrach, Boozang, and Glanz 2015).
Due to its major role in Medicaid expansion and the establishment of
health insurance exchanges, the federal government will end up financing a
larger proportion of health care than before the ACA (Keehan et al. 2015).
The actual estimate depends on the number of states participating in Medicaid
expansion and a number of other factors. Changes in ESI also need to be
taken into account as reductions in ESI coverage could increase federal tax
receipts. However, this revenue increase could be offset by higher wages,
which generate tax revenues but also lead to higher social security spending.
Overall, the CBO (2015a) estimates that federal deficits will grow to $137 bil-
lion from 2016 to 2025 if the ACAwere repealed.
DISCUSSION AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR FUTURE
RESEARCH
Opportunities abound for researchers to study the most sweeping health care
legislation in recent U.S. history. Results from this current systematic review
highlight gaps in the existing literature and can serve as a resource for
researchers considering where additional work is needed. Studies so far
clearly show that the ACA has led to expansions in insurance coverage and
improved access to care, especially among young adults, the relatively poor,
less healthy populations, and minorities. With the exception of the dependent
coverage provision, most investigations of the ACA so far are descriptive in
nature, and rigorous study designs are needed to provide more convincing
empirical evidence. In addition, further research is required to demonstrate
the full impact of the ACA on health care prices, utilization, and perhaps most
important, health outcomes.
The ACA’s Key Provisions: A Systematic Review
1759
 The findings so far clearly establish areas for future investigation. For
example, given that young adults have different health behaviors and health
care needs than older adults, it is unknown whether the results for young
adults are generalizable to the rest of the nonelderly population. Our review
also identified a number of studies related to delivery reforms, workforce
issues, and insurance company regulations, but due to the preliminary stage of
these inquiries, we chose to exclude them from our analysis.
Augmenting and improving the existing studies will provide a deeper
understanding of insurance expansions such as the composition of risk pools,
the type of health care (e.g., acute, chronic, preventive, emergency, hospital,
diagnostic services) some of the newly insured receive, and the quality of care
therein. Going forward, out-of-pocket costs associated with the new plans pur-
chased in marketplaces will need to be tracked. How will narrow provider net-
works affect consumer satisfaction and outcomes? In the aggregate, health
care expenditures have moderated recently, but is this a temporary trend and
to what extent it can be attributed to the ACA? More rigorous analyses and
study designs, rather than simply reporting descriptive statistics, are needed to
control for factors such as economic trends and geographic variation, which
will permit further investigation of mechanisms underlying changes and
trends in prices, utilization, and cost.
Other questions require better data and longer follow-up periods. What
happens to ESI as employer penalties go into full effect? What will the labor
market implications be? How do eventual changes in premiums and health
care expenditures compare to initial projections? How will federal and state
health care expenditures change if more states expand Medicaid? Lastly, the
legislative process has largely stalled when it comes to identifying and fixing
inefficiencies in the ACA (e.g., family glitch). How will the political process
evolve after the 2016 election year?
Studies in the gray literature often present results from surveys of speci-
fic populations (e.g., low-income adults, women) or longitudinal surveys that
track changes in coverage, costs, and attitudes toward reforms (e.g., Doty, Ras-
mussen, and Collins 2014; Hamel et al. 2014; Collins et al. 2015b). Analyses
of large and nationally representative datasets will be necessary to substantiate
findings from earlier preliminary studies. Both private and federal surveys as
well as administrative data sources have limitations, so it is encouraging that
several new initiatives are underway to collect better data pertaining to the
ACA (Claxton et al. 2014b). An example is the Commonwealth Fund’s joint
program with the University of Chicago to track premiums, deductibles, and
other features of health insurance plans (Whitmore et al. 2014). Such
1760
HSR: Health Services Research 51:5 (October 2016)
 initiatives are critical as many of the compelling research questions related to
the long-term effects of the ACA require better data, rigorous research
designs, and more time. Although many questions about the ACA remain
unanswered, especially regarding costs and outcomes, it is clear that the ACA
has accomplished two of its main goals—decreasing the number of uninsured
and improving access to care.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Joint Acknowledgment/Disclosure Statement: We gratefully acknowledge two
anonymous referees and Theodore Ganiats, M.D., for their constructive com-
ments and suggestions on earlier versions of the paper. We also thank Joanna
Faley for research assistance and Carmen Martinez for administrative support.
Disclosures: None.
Disclaimers: None.
NOTES
1. A more comprehensive and detailed description of the ACA’s provisions is available
from the Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF) and the Commonwealth Fund (CF).
2. While not the focus here, the provisions related to improving the delivery of health
care are important components of the ACA and have the potential to significantly
influence both the cost and quality of care. See Blumenthal, Abrams, and Nuzum
(2015) for a progress report on the ACA’s health care delivery reforms.
3. Eligibility for tax credits depends on whether the employer coverage meets two
tests: (1) Is it affordable (i.e., the individual employee premium for the least expen-
sive plan offered must be less than 9.5 percent of family income)? (2) Does it meet
the minimum value (i.e., is it designed to pay 60 percent of total medical costs for a
population)? (HHS 2014).
REFERENCES
Abraham, J. M., R. Feldman, and K. Simon. 2014. “Did They Come to the Dance?
Insurer Participation in Exchanges.” American Journal of Managed Care 20 (12):
1022–30.
Akosa Antwi, Y., A. S. Moriya, and K. I. Simon. 2013. “Effects of Federal Policy to
Insure Young Adults: Evidence from the 2010 Affordable Care Act’s Depen-
dent-Coverage Mandate.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5 (4): 1–28.
The ACA’s Key Provisions: A Systematic Review
1761
 —
—
—
—
—
—
—. 2015. “Access to Health Insurance and the Use of Inpatient Medical Care: Evi-
dence from the Affordable Care Act Young Adult Mandate.” Journal of Health
Economics 39: 171–87.
Akosa Antwi, Y., A. S. Moriya, K. Simon, and B. D. Sommers. 2015. “Changes in
Emergency Department Use among Young Adults after the Patient Protection
and Affordable Care Act’s Dependent Coverage Provision.” Annals of Emergency
Medicine 65 (6): 664–72.
Angier, H., M. Hoopes, R. Gold, S. R. Bailey, E. K. Cottrell, J. Heintzman, M. Marino,
and J. E. DeV
oe. 2015. “An Early Look at Rates of Uninsured Safety Net Clinic
Visits after the Affordable Care Act.” The Annals of Family Medicine 13 (1): 10–6.
Artiga, S., R. Rudowitz, and U. Ranji. 2015. How Have State Medicaid Expansion Decisions
Affected the Experiences of Low-Income Adults? Perspectives from Ohio, Arkansas, and Mis-
souri. Kaiser Family Foundation Issue Brief [accessed on March 1, 2016].
Available at http://kff.org/medicaid/issue-brief/how-have-state-medicaid-expan-
sion-decisions-affected-the-experiences-of-low-income-adults-perspectives-from-ohio
-arkansas-and-missouri/
Artiga, S., J. Stephens, and A. Damico. 2015. The Impact of the Coverage Gap in States Not
Expanding Medicaid by Race and Ethnicity. Kaiser Family Foundation Issue Brief
[accessed on October 8, 2015]. Available at http://kff.org/disparities-policy
/issue-brief/the-impact-of-the-coverage-gap-in-states-not-expanding-medicaid-by-
race-and-ethnicity/
Bachrach, D., P. Boozang, and D. Glanz. 2015. States Expanding Medicaid See Significant
Budget Savings and Revenue Gains. Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Issue Brief
[accessed March 1, 2016]. Available at http://www.rwjf.org/en/library/research/
2015/04/states-expanding-medicaid-see-significant-budget-savings-and-rev.html
Barbaresco, S., C. J. Courtemanche, and Y. Qi. 2015. “Impacts of the Affordable Care
Act Dependent Coverage Provision on Health-Related Outcomes of Young
Adults.” Journal of Health Economics 40: 54–68.
Barcellos, S. H., A. C. Wuppermann, K. G. Carman, S. Bauhoff, D. L. McFadden, A.
Kapteyn, J. K. Winter, and D. Goldman. 2014. “Preparedness of Americans for
the Affordable Care Act.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 (15):
5497–502.
Barker, A. R., T. D. McBride, L. M. Kemper, and K. Mueller. 2014a. Geographic Varia-
tion in Premiums in Health Insurance Marketplaces. RUPRI Center for Rural Health
Policy Analysis. Rural Policy Brief no. 2014-10 [accessed on October 8, 2015].
Available
at
http://www.public-health.uiowa.edu/rupri/publications/policy-
briefs/2014/Geographic%20Variation%20in%20Premiums%20in%20Health%
20Insurance%20Marketplaces.pdf
—
—
—
—
—
—
—. 2014b. A Guide to Understanding the Variation in Premiums in Rural Health Insurance
Marketplaces. RUPRI Center for Rural Health Policy Analysis. Rural Policy Brief
no. 2014-5 [accessed on October 8, 2015]. Available at http://cph.uiowa.edu/
rupri/publications/policybriefs/2014/Rural%20HIM.pdf
Blavin, F., A. Shartzer, S. K. Long, and J. Holahan. 2015. “An Early Look at Changes in
Employer-Sponsored Insurance under the Affordable Care Act.” Health Affairs
34 (1): 170–7.
1762
HSR: Health Services Research 51:5 (October 2016)
 Blumberg, L. J., and S. Rifkin. 2014. Early 2014 Stakeholder Experiences with Small-Busi-
ness Marketplaces in Eight States. The Urban Institute [accessed on October 8,
2015]. Available at http://www.urban.org/sites/default/files/alfresco/publica
tion-pdfs/413204-Early-Stakeholder-Experiences-with-Small-Business-Market-
places-in-Eight-States.PDF
Blumenthal, D., M. Abrams, and R. Nuzum. 2015. “The Affordable Care Act at 5
Years.” New England Journal of Medicine 372 (25): 2451–8.
Blumenthal, D., and S. R. Collins. 2014. “Health Care Coverage under the Affordable
Care Act—A Progress Report.” New England Journal of Medicine 371 (3): 275–81.
Brandon, W. P., and K. Carnes. 2014. “Federal Health Insurance Reform and
‘Exchanges’: Recent History.” Journal of Health Care for the Poor and Underserved 25
(1): xxxii–lvii.
Brooks, T. 2014. “Health Policy Brief: The Family Glitch.” Health Affairs [accessed on
December 10, 2014]. Available at http://healthaffairs.org/healthpolicybriefs/
brief_pdfs/healthpolicybrief_129.pdf
Busch, S. H., E. Golberstein, and E. Meara. 2014. “ACA Dependent Coverage Provi-
sion Reduced High Out-of-Pocket Health Care Spending for Young Adults.”
Health Affairs 33 (8): 1361–6.
Cantor, J. C., A. C. Monheit, D. DeLia, and K. Lloyd. 2012. “Early Impact of the
Affordable Care Act on Health Insurance Coverage of Young Adults.” Health
Services Research 47 (5): 1773–90.
Carlson, D. L., B. Lennox Kail, J. L. Lynch, and M. Dreher. 2014. “The Affordable
Care Act, Dependent Health Insurance Coverage, and Young Adults’ Health.”
Sociological Inquiry 84 (2): 191–209.
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services [CMS]. 2014. “CMS Releases New Data
Demonstrating Increased Choice, Competition in the Health Insurance Market-
place in 2015” [accessed October 8, 2015]. Available at http://www.cms.gov/
Newsroom/MediaReleaseDatabase/Press-releases/2014-Press-releases-items/
2014-11-14.html
Chandra, A., J. Holmes, and J. Skinner. 2013. “Is This Time Different? The Slowdown
in Health Care Spending.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2013 (2): 261–
323.
Chua, K. P., and B. D. Sommers. 2014. “Changes in Health and Medical Spending
among Young Adults under Health Reform.” Journal of the American Medical Asso-
ciation 311 (23): 2437–9.
Claxton, G., M. Rae, N. Panchal, A. Damico, H. Whitmore, K. Kenward, and A. Osei-
Anto. 2012. “Health Benefits in 2012: Moderate Premium Increases for
Employer-Sponsored Plans; Young Adults Gained Coverage under ACA.”
Health Affairs 31 (10): 2324–33.
Claxton, G., M. Rae, N. Panchal, H. Whitmore, A. Damico, and K. Kenward. 2014a.
“Health Benefits in 2014: Stability in Premiums and Coverage for Employer-
Sponsored Plans.” Health Affairs 33 (10): 1851–60.
Claxton, G., L. Levitt, M. Brodie, R. Garfield, and A. Damico. 2014b. Measuring
Changes in Insurance Coverage under the Affordable Care Act. Kaiser Family Founda-
tion Issue Brief [accessed on March 1, 2016]. Available at http://kff.org/health-
The ACA’s Key Provisions: A Systematic Review
1763
 reform/issue-brief/measuring-changes-in-insurance-coverage-under-the-afford-
able-care-act/
Cohen, R. A., and M. E. Martinez. 2015. Health Insurance Coverage: Early Release of Esti-
mates from the National Health Interview Survey, 2014. Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention [accessed on October 22, 2015]. Available at http://www.cdc.-
gov/nchs/data/nhis/earlyrelease/insur201506.pdf
Collins, S. R., R. Robertson, T. Garber, and M. M. Doty. 2012. Young, Uninsured, and in
Debt: Why Young Adults Lack Health Insurance and how the Affordable Care Act Is Help-
ing: Findings from the Commonwealth Fund Health Insurance Tracking Survey of Young
Adults, 2011. Commonwealth Fund Issue Brief [accessed on October 8, 2015].
Available at http://www.commonwealthfund.org/~/media/files/publications/
issue-brief/2012/jun/1604_collins_young_uninsured_in_debt_v4.pdf
Collins, S. R., P. W. Rasmussen, T. Garber, and M. M. Doty. 2013a. Covering Young
Adults under the Affordable Care Act: The Importance of Outreach and Medicaid Expan-
sion: Findings from the Commonwealth Fund Health Insurance Tracking Survey of
Young Adults, 2013. Commonwealth Fund Issue Brief [accessed on October 8,
2015]. Available at http://www.commonwealthfund.org/~/media/Files/Publi
cations/Issue%20Brief/2013/Aug/1701_Collins_covering_young_adults_tracking
_brief_final_v4.pdf
Collins, S. R., P. W. Rasmussen, M. M. Doty, T. Garber, and D. Blumenthal. 2013b.
Americans’ Experiences in the Health Insurance Marketplaces: Results from the First Month.
Commonwealth Fund Issue Brief [accessed on October 8, 2015]. Available at
http://www.commonwealthfund.org/~/media/files/publications/data-brief/2013/
nov/1714_collins_americans_experience_hlt_ins_market_first_month_tracking_
survey.pdf
Collins, S. R., D. C. Radley, C. Schoen, and S. Beutel. 2014a. National Trends in the Cost
of Employer Health Insurance Coverage, 2003–2013. Commonwealth Fund Issue
Brief [accessed October 8, 2015]. Available at http://www.commonwealth-
fund.org/~/media/files/publications/issue-brief/2014/dec/1793_collins_nat_ pre-
mium_trends_2003_2013.pdf
Collins, S. R., P. W. Rasmussen, M. M. Doty, T. Garber, and D. Blumenthal. 2014b.
Americans’ Experiences in the Health Insurance Marketplaces: Results from the First Three
Months. Commonwealth Fund Issue Brief [accessed on October 8, 2015]. Avail-
able at http://www.commonwealthfund.org/~/media/files/publications/data-
brief/2014/jan/1724_collins_americans_experiences_hlt_ins_marketplaces_
three_months_tracking_survey.pdf
Collins, S. R., P. W. Rasmussen, M. M. Doty, and S. Beutel. 2015a. Americans’ Experiences
with Marketplace and Medicaid Coverage—Findings from the Commonwealth Fund Afford-
able Care Act Tracking Survey, March–May 2015. Commonwealth Fund Issue Brief
[accessed on October 8, 2015]. Available at http://www.commonwealthfund.org/
publications/issue-briefs/2015/jun/experiences-marketplace-and-medicaid
—
—
—
—
—
—
—. 2015b. The Rise in Health Care Coverage and Affordability Since Health Reform T
ook
Effect. Commonwealth Fund Issue Brief [accessed on October 8, 2015]. Available at
http://www.commonwealthfund.org/publications/issue-briefs/2015/jan/biennial-
health-insurance-survey
1764
HSR: Health Services Research 51:5 (October 2016)
 Congressional Budget Office [CBO]. 2010. “H.R. 4872, Reconciliation Act of 2010.”
Letter to the Honorable Nancy Pelosi (March 20) [accessed on March 1, 2016].
Available at https://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/111th-congress-2009-2010/
costestimate/amendreconprop.pdf
Congressional Budget Office [CBO]. 2014. “Payments of Penalties for Being Unin-
sured under the ACA: 2014 Update” [accessed on October 21, 2015]. Available
at https://www.cbo.gov/publication/45397
Congressional Budget Office [CBO]. 2015a. “Budgetary and Economic Effects of
Repealing the Affordable Care Act” [accessed on October 24, 2015]. Available at
https://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/114th-congress-2015-2016/reports/502
52-Effects_of_ACA_Repeal.pdf
Congressional Budget Office [CBO]. 2015b. “Updated Budget Projections: 2015-2025”
[accessed on October 21, 2015]. Available at https://www.cbo.gov/sites/de
fault/files/114th-congress-2015-2016/reports/49973-UpdatedBudgetProjections
_0.pdf
Cox, C., R. Ma, G. Claxton, and L. Levitt. 2014. Sizing Up Exchange Market Competition.
Kaiser Family Foundation Issue Brief [accessed on October 8, 2015]. Available at
http://kff.org/health-reform/issue-brief/sizing-up-exchange-market-competition/
—
—
—
—
—
—
—. 2015. Analysis of 2016 Premium Changes and Insurer Participation in the ACA’s
Health Insurance Marketplaces. Kaiser Family Foundation Issue Brief [accessed on
October 8, 2015]. Available at http://kff.org/health-reform/issue-brief/analysis-
of-2016-premium-changes-and-insurer-participation-in-the-affordable-care-acts-
health-insurance-marketplaces/
Cunningham, P., R. Garfield, and R. Rudowitz. 2015. How Are Hospitals Faring Under the
ACA? Early Experiences from Ascension Health. Kaiser Family Foundation Issue
Brief [accessed on October 8, 2015]. Available at http://kff.org/health-reform/
issue-brief/how-are-hospitals-faring-under-the-affordable-care-act-early-experi-
ences-from-ascension-health/
Dall, T. M., P. D. Gallo, R. Chakrabarti, T. West, A. P. Semilla, and M. V. Storm.
2013. “An Aging Population and Growing Disease Burden Will Require a
Large and Specialized Health Care Workforce by 2025.” Health Affairs 32
(11): 2013–20.
Decker, S. L., D. Kostova, G. M. Kenney, and S. K. Long. 2013. “Health Status, Risk
Factors, and Medical Conditions among Persons Enrolled in Medicaid vs Unin-
sured Low-Income Adults Potentially Eligible for Medicaid under the Afford-
able Care Act.” Journal of the American Medical Association 309 (24): 2579.
Department of Health and Human Services [HHS]. 2014. “People with Coverage
through a Job: Options If You Have Job-Based Insurance” [accessed on October
8, 2015]. Available at https://www.healthcare.gov/have-job-based-coverage/
Depew, B., and J. Bailey. 2015. “Did the Affordable Care Act’s Dependent Coverage
Mandate Increase Premiums?” Journal of Health Economics 41: 1–14.
Dickstein, M. J., M. Duggan, J. Orsini, and P. Tebaldi. 2015. “The Impact of Market
Size and Composition on Health Insurance Premiums: Evidence from the First
Year of the Affordable Care Act.” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings
105 (5): 120–5.
The ACA’s Key Provisions: A Systematic Review
1765
 Doty, M. M., P. W. Rasmussen, and S. R. Collins. 2014. Catching up: Latino Health Cover-
age Gains and Challenges under the Affordable Care Act Results from the Commonwealth
Fund Affordable Care Act Tracking Survey. Commonwealth Fund Issue Brief [ac-
cessed on October 8, 2015]. Available at http://www.commonwealthfund.org/
~/media/files/publications/issue-brief/2014/sep/1775_doty_catching_up_latino
_hlt_coverage_aca_tb_v3.pdf
Dranove, D., C. Garthwaite, and C. Ody. 2014. “Health Spending Slowdown Is Mostly
Due to Economic Factors, Not Structural Change in the Health Care Sector.”
Health Affairs 33 (8): 1399–406.
Gabel, J. R., H. Whitmore, J. Pickreign, J. L. Satorius, and S. Stromberg. 2013. “Small
Employer Perspectives on the Affordable Care Act’s Premiums, SHOP
Exchanges, and Self-Insurance.” Health Affairs 32 (11): 2032–9.
Geyman, J. P. 2015. “A Five-Year Assessment of the Affordable Care Act: Market
Forces Still Trump the Common Good in U.S. Health Care.” International Journal
of Health Services 45 (2): 209–25.
Giovannelli, J., K. W. Lucia, and S. Corlette. 2015. Implementing the Affordable Care Act:
State Regulation of Marketplace Plan Provider Networks. Commonwealth Fund Issue
Brief [accessed on October 8, 2015]. Available at http://www.commonwealth-
fund.org/~/media/files/publications/issue-brief/2015/may/1814_giovannelli_
implementing_aca_state_reg_provider_networks_rb_v2.pdf
Golberstein, E., S. H. Busch, R. Zaha, S. F. Greenfield, W. R. Beardslee, and E. Meara.
2015. “Effect of the Affordable Care Act’s Young Adult Insurance Expansions
on Hospital-Based Mental Health Care.” American Journal of Psychiatry 172 (2):
182–9.
Government Accountability Office [GAO]. 2014a. “Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act: Largest Issuers of Health Coverage Participated in Most Exchanges,
and Number of Plans Available Varied” [accessed October 8, 2015]. Available at
http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-14-657
Government Accountability Office [GAO]. 2014b. “Small Business Health Insurance
Exchanges: Low Initial Enrollment Likely due to Multiple, Evolving Factors”
[accessed on October 21, 2015]. Available at http://www.gao.gov/products/
GAO-15-58
Government Accountability Office [GAO]. 2015. “Private Health Insurance: Early Evi-
dence Finds Premium Tax Credit Likely Contributed to Expanded Coverage,
but Some Lack Access to Affordable Plans” [accessed on October 8, 2015]. Avail-
able at http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-15-312
Graetz, I., C. M. Kaplan, E. K. Kaplan, J. E. Bailey, and T. M. Waters. 2014. “The U.S.
Health Insurance Marketplace: Are Premiums Truly Affordable?” Annals of Inter-
nal Medicine 161 (8): 599.
Gruber, J. 2011a. “The Impacts of the Affordable Care Act: How Reasonable Are the
Projections?” National Tax Journal 64 (3): 893–908.
—
—
—
—
—
—
—. 2011b. Health Care Reform without the Individual Mandate. Center for American
Progress. [accessed on October 8, 2015]. Available at https://www.american-
progress.org/wp-content/uploads/issues/2011/02/pdf/gruber_mandate.pdf
1766
HSR: Health Services Research 51:5 (October 2016)
 Haeder, S. F., and D. L. Weimer. 2013. “You Can’t Make Me Do It: State Implementa-
tion of Insurance Exchanges under the Affordable Care Act.” Public Administra-
tion Review 73 (S1): S34–47.
Hall, M. A., and R. Lord. 2014. “Obamacare: What the Affordable Care Act Means for
Patients and Physicians.” British Medical Journal 349: g5376–g5376.
Hall, J. P., and J. M. Moore. 2012. The Affordable Care Act’s Pre-Existing Condition Insur-
ance Plan: Enrollment, Costs, and Lessons for Reform. Commonwealth Fund Issue
Brief [accessed on October 8, 2015]. Available at http://www.commonwealth-
fund.org/~/media/files/publications/issue-brief/2012/sep/1627_hall_pcip_enroll
ment_costs_lessons_rb.pdf
Hall, M. A., and K. Swartz. 2012. Establishing Health Insurance Exchanges: Three States’ Pro-
gress. Commonwealth Fund Issue Brief [accessed on October 8, 2015]. Available
at
http://www.commonwealthfund.org/~/media/files/publications/issue-brief/
2012/jul/1611_hall_establishing_hlt_ins_exchanges_three_states_progress.pdf
Hamel, L., M. Norton, L. Levitt, G. Claxton, C. Cox, K. Pollitz, and M. Brodie. 2014.
Survey of Non-Group Health Insurance Enrollees. Kaiser Family Foundation
[accessed on October 8, 2015]. Available at http://kff.org/health-reform/report/
survey-of-non-group-health-insurance-enrollees/
Hernandez-Boussard, T., C. S. Burns, N. E. Wang, L. C. Baker, and B. A. Goldstein.
2014. “The Affordable Care Act Reduces Emergency Department Use by Young
Adults: Evidence from Three States.” Health Affairs 33 (9): 1648–54.
Hill, S. C. 2012. “Individual Insurance Benefits to Be Available under Health Reform
Would Have Cut Out-of-Pocket Spending in 2001-08.” Health Affairs 31 (6):
1349–56.
—
—
—
—
—
—
—. 2015. “Medicaid Expansion in Opt-Out States Would Produce Consumer Sav-
ings and Less Financial Burden than Exchange Coverage.” Health Affairs 34 (2):
340–9.
Holahan, J., M. Buettgens, and S. Dorn. 2013. The Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the
Uninsured: The Cost of Not Expanding Medicaid. Kaiser Family Foundation
[accessed on October 8, 2015]. Available at http://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.-
wordpress.com/2013/07/8457-the-cost-of-not-expanding-medicaid4.pdf
Howard, H., and C. Shearer. 2013. “State Efforts to Promote Continuity of Coverage
and Care under the Affordable Care Act.” Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law
38 (6): 1173–81.
Jacobs, L. R., and T. Callaghan. 2013. “Why States Expand Medicaid: Party,
Resources, and History.” Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law 38 (5): 1023–50.
Kaiser Family Foundation [KFF]. 2015. “Status of State Action on the Medicaid
Expansion Decision” [accessed on October 8, 2015]. Available at http://kff.org/
health-reform/state-indicator/state-activity-around-expanding-medicaid-under-
the-affordable-care-act/
Kaiser Family Foundation and the Commonwealth Fund. 2015. Experiences and Attitudes
of Primary Care Providers under the First Year of ACA Coverage Expansion: Findings
from the Kaiser Family Foundation/Commonwealth Fund 2015 National Survey of
Primary Care Providers. Commonwealth Fund Issue Brief [accessed on October 8,
2015].
Available
at
http://www.commonwealthfund.org/~/media/files/
The ACA’s Key Provisions: A Systematic Review
1767
 publications/issue-brief/2015/jun/1823_kaiser_commonwealth_primary_-
care_survey_ib.pdf
Karpman, M., A. Weiss, and S. K. Long. 2015. QuickTake: Access to Health Care Providers
Improved between September 2013 and September 2014. Health Reform Monitoring
Survey [accessed on March 1, 2016]. Available at http://hrms.urban.org/quick-
takes/Access-to-Health-Care-Providers-Improved.html
Kaufman, H. W., Z. Chen, V. A. Fonseca, and M. J. McPhaul. 2015. “Surge in Newly
Identified Diabetes among Medicaid Patients in 2014 within Medicaid Expan-
sion States under the Affordable Care Act.” Diabetes Care 38 (5): 833–7.
Keehan, S. P., G. A. Cuckler, A. M. Sisko, A. J. Madison, S. D. Smith, D. A. Stone, J. A.
Poisal, C. J. Wolfe, and J. M. Lizonitz. 2015. “National Health Expenditure Pro-
jections, 2014-2024: Spending Growth Faster Than Recent Trends.” Health
Affairs 34 (8): 1407–17.
Kirzinger, W. K., R. A. Cohen, and R. M. Gindi. 2013. Trends in Insurance Coverage and
Source of Private Coverage among Y
oung Adults aged 19–25: United States, 2008–2012.
National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) Data Brief, no 137 [accessed on
October 8, 2015]. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/databriefs/db137
.pdf
Kotagal, M., A. C. Carle, L. G. Kessler, and D. R. Flum. 2014. “Limited Impact on
Health and Access to Care for 19- to 25-Year-Olds Following the Patient Protec-
tion and Affordable Care Act.” Journal of the American Medical Association Pediatrics
168 (11): 1023.
Kowalski, A. E. 2014. “The Early Impact of the Affordable Care Act, State by State.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2014 (2): 277–355.
Lau, J. S., S. H. Adams, M. J. Park, W. J. Boscardin, and C. E. Irwin. 2014. “Improve-
ment in Preventive Care of Young Adults after the Affordable Care Act.” Journal
of the American Medical Association Pediatrics 168 (12): 1101.
Levitt, L., C. Cox, and G. Claxton. 2015. Data Note: How Has the Individual Insurance
Market Grown Under the ACA?. Kaiser Family Foundation [accessed October 24,
2015]. Available at http://kff.org/health-reform/issue-brief/data-note-how-has-
the-individual-insurance-market-grown-under-the-affordable-care-act/
Lipton, B. J., and S. L. Decker. 2015. “ACA Provisions Associated with Increase in Per-
centage of Young Adult Women Initiating and Completing the HPV Vaccine.”
Health Affairs 34 (5): 757–64.
Martinez, M. E., B. W. Ward, and P. F. Adams. 2015. Health Care Access and Utilization
among Adults Aged 18–64, by Race and Hispanic Origin: United States, 2013 and 2014.
NCHS Data Brief. No. 208 [accessed on October 8, 2015]. Available at http://
www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/databriefs/db208.pdf
McCue, M. J., and M. A. Hall. 2013. What’s behind Health Insurance Rate Increases? An
Examination of what Insurers Reported to the Federal Government in 2012–2013. Com-
monwealth Fund Issue Brief [accessed on October 8, 2015]. Available at http://
www.commonwealthfund.org/~/media/Files/Publications/Issue%20Brief/2013/
Dec/1721_McCue_whats_behind_hlt_ins_rate_increases_ib.pdf
—
—
—
—
—
—
—. 2015. What’s behind Health Insurance Rate Increases? An Examination of what
Insurers Reported to the Federal Government in 2013–2014. Commonwealth Fund
Issue
Brief
[accessed
on
October
8,
2015].
Available
at
http://
1768
HSR: Health Services Research 51:5 (October 2016)
 www.commonwealthfund.org/~/media/files/publications/issue-brief/2015/
jan/1801_mccue_whats_
behind_hlt_ins_rate_increases_ib.pdf
McGuire, T. G., J. P. Newhouse, S. Normand, J. Shi, and S. Zuvekas. 2014. “Assessing
Incentives for Service-Level Selection in Private Health Insurance Exchanges.”
Journal of Health Economics 35: 47–63.
McMorrow, S., G. M. Kenney, S. K. Long, and N. Anderson. 2015. “Uninsurance
among Young Adults Continues to Decline, Particularly in Medicaid Expansion
States.” Health Affairs 34 (4): 616–20.
Mulcahy, A., K. Harris, K. Finegold, A. Kellermann, L. Edelman, and B. D. Sommers.
2013. “Insurance Coverage of Emergency Care for Young Adults under Health
Reform.” New England Journal of Medicine 368 (22): 2105–12.
O’Hara, B., and M. W. Brault. 2013. “The Disparate Impact of the ACA-Dependent
Expansion across Population Subgroups.” Health Services Research 48 (5): 1581–
92.
Olson, L. K. 2015. “The ACA Medicaid Expansion Waiver in the Keystone State: Do
the Medically Uninsured ‘Got a Friend in Pennsylvania’?” Journal of Health Poli-
tics, Policy and Law 40 (3): 599–611.
Polsky, D., J. Weiner, R. Nathenson, N. Becker, and M. Kanneganti. 2014. How Did
Rural Residents Fare on the Health Insurance Marketplaces?. Leonard Davis Institute
of Health Economics [accessed on October 8, 2014]. Available at http://
www.rwjf.org/en/library/research/2014/08/how-did-rural-residents-fare-on-the
-health-insurance-marketplace.html
Polsky, D., M. Richards, S. Basseyn, D. Wissoker, G. M. Kenney, S. Zuckerman, and
K. V. Rhodes. 2015. “Appointment Availability after Increases in Medicaid Pay-
ments for Primary Care.” New England Journal of Medicine 372 (6): 537–45.
Rasmussen, P. W., S. R. Collins, M. M. Doty, and S. Beutel. 2014. Are Americans Finding
Affordable Coverage in the Health Insurance Marketplaces? Results from the Common-
wealth Fund Affordable Care Act Tracking Survey. Commonwealth Fund Issue Brief
[accessed on October 8, 2015]. Available at http://www.commonwealth-
fund.org/~/media/files/publications/issue-brief/2014/sep/1774_rasmussen_are_
americans_finding_affordable_coverage_tb.pdf
—
—
—
—
—
—
—. 2015. Health Care Coverage and Access in the Nation’s Four Largest States. Results from
the Commonwealth Fund Biennial Health Insurance Survey, 2014. Commonwealth
Fund Issue Brief. [accessed on October 8, 2015]. Available at http://www.com-
monwealthfund.org/~/media/files/publications/issue-brief/2015/apr/1810_ras-
mussen_hlt_coverage_four_largest_states_ib_v2.pdf
Rosenbaum, S., N. Lopez, M. Dorley, J. Teitelbaum, T. Burke, and J. Miller. 2014.
Mitigating the Effects of Churning under the Affordable Care Act: Lessons from Medi-
caid. Commonwealth Fund Issue Brief [accessed on October 8, 2015]. Available
at http://www.commonwealthfund.org/~/media/files/publications/issue-brief/
2014/jun/1754_rosenbaum_mitigating_effects_churning_aca_rb_v2.pdf
Saloner, B., and B. Le Cook. 2014. “An ACA Provision Increased Treatment for Young
Adults with Possible Mental Illnesses Relative to Comparison Group.” Health
Affairs 33 (8): 1425–34.
The ACA’s Key Provisions: A Systematic Review
1769
 Schoen, C., D. Radley, and S. R. Collins. 2015. State Trends in the Cost of Employer
Health Insurance Coverage, 2003–2013. Commonwealth Fund Issue Brief [ac-
cessed on October 8, 2015]. Available at http://www.commonwealthfund.org/
~/media/files/publications/issue-brief/2015/jan/1798_schoen_state_trends_2003
_2013.pdf
Scott, J. W., B. D. Sommers, T. C. Tsai, K. W. Scott, A. L. Schwartz, and Z. Song. 2015.
“Dependent Coverage Provision Led to Uneven Insurance Gains and
Unchanged Mortality Rates in Young Adult Trauma Patients.” Health Affairs 34
(1): 125–33.
Shane, D. M., and P. Ayyagari. 2014. “Will Health Care Reform Reduce Disparities in
Insurance Coverage?” Medical Care 52 (6): 528–34.
Sheils, J. F., and R. Haught. 2011. “Without the Individual Mandate, the Affordable
Care Act Would Still Cover 23 Million; Premiums Would Rise Less Than Pre-
dicted.” Health Affairs 30 (11): 2177–85.
Skopec, L., and R. Kronick. 2013. Market Competition Works: Proposed Silver Premiums in
the 2014 Individual and Small Group Markets are Nearly 20% Lower Than Expected.
ASPE Issue Brief [accessed on October 8, 2015]. Available at http://aspe.hhs.
gov/sites/default/files/pdf/76696/rb_premiums.pdf
Sommers, B. D., G. M. Kenney, and A. M. Epstein. 2014. “New Evidence on the
Affordable Care Act: Coverage Impacts of Early Medicaid Expansions.” Health
Affairs 33 (1): 78–87.
Sommers, B. D., and R. Kronick. 2012. “The Affordable Care Act and Insurance
Coverage for Young Adults.” Journal of the American Medical Association 307 (9):
913–4.
Sommers, B. D., T. Buchmueller, S. L. Decker, C. Carey, and R. Kronick. 2013. “The
Affordable Care Act Has Led to Significant Gains in Health Insurance and
Access to Care for Young Adults.” Health Affairs 32 (1): 165–74.
Sommers, B. D., T. Musco, K. Finegold, M. Z. Gunja, A. Burke, and A. M. McDowell.
2014a. “Health Reform and Changes in Health Insurance Coverage in 2014.”
New England Journal of Medicine 371 (9): 867–74.
Sommers, B. D., J. A. Graves, K. Swartz, and S. Rosenbaum. 2014b. “Medicaid and
Marketplace Eligibility Changes Will Occur Often in All States; Policy Options
Can Ease Impact.” Health Affairs 33 (4): 700–7.
Sommers, B. D., M. Z. Gunja, K. Finegold, and T. Musco. 2015. “Changes in Self-
Reported Insurance Coverage, Access to Care, and Health under the Affordable
Care Act.” Journal of the American Medical Association 314 (4): 366–74.
Swartz, K., M. A. Hall, and T. S. Jost. 2015. How Insurers Competed in the Affordable Care
Act’s First Year. Commonwealth Fund Issue Brief [accessed on October 8, 2015].
Available at http://www.commonwealthfund.org/~/media/files/publications/
issue-brief/2015/jun/1824_swartz_how_insurers_competed_aca_first_year_rb_
v4.pdf
Vujicic, M., C. Yarbrough, and K. Nasseh. 2014. “The Effect of the Affordable Care
Act’s Expanded Coverage Policy on Access to Dental Care.” Medical Care 52 (8):
715–9.
1770
HSR: Health Services Research 51:5 (October 2016)
 Wallace, J., and B. D. Sommers. 2015. “Effect of Dependent Coverage Expansion of
the Affordable Care Act on Health and Access to Care for Young Adults.” Journal
of the American Medical Association Pediatrics 169 (5): 495–7.
Whitmore, H., J. R. Gabel, S. Stromberg, M. Green, and D. S. Weinstein. 2014. Modest
Premium Changes Ahead in Health Insurance Marketplaces in Washington State and
Maryland. Commonwealth Fund [accessed on October 21, 2015]. Available at
http://www.commonwealthfund.org/publications/blog/2014/oct/modest-premium
-changes-ahead
Wilensky, S. E., and E. A. Gray. 2013. “Existing Medicaid Beneficiaries Left off the
Affordable Care Act’s Prevention Bandwagon.” Health Affairs 32 (7): 1188–95.
SUPPORTING INFORMATION
Additional supporting information may be found in the online version of this
article:
Appendix SA1: Author Matrix.
The ACA’s Key Provisions: A Systematic Review
1771
