 Sleep deprivation and false confessions
Steven J. Frendaa, Shari R. Berkowitzb, Elizabeth F. Loftusc,d,e,f,1, and Kimberly M. Fenng
aDepartment of Psychology, The New School for Social Research, New York, NY 10011; bCollege of Business Administration & Public Policy, California State
University, Dominguez Hills, Carson, CA 90747; cDepartment of Psychology & Social Behavior, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697; dDepartment of
Criminology, Law & Society, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697; eDepartment of Cognitive Sciences, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697; fSchool
of Law, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697; and gDepartment of Psychology, College of Social Sciences, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI
48824
Contributed by Elizabeth F. Loftus, December 30, 2015 (sent for review November 2, 2015; reviewed by Michael W. L. Chee and Saul Kassin)
False confession is a major contributor to the problem of wrongful
convictions in the United States. Here, we provide direct evidence
linking sleep deprivation and false confessions. In a procedure adapted
from Kassin and Kiechel [(1996) Psychol Sci 7(3):125–128], participants
completed computer tasks across multiple sessions and repeatedly re-
ceived warnings that pressing the “Escape” key on their keyboard
would cause the loss of study data. In their final session, participants
either slept all night in laboratory bedrooms or remained awake all
night. In the morning, all participants were asked to sign a state-
ment, which summarized their activities in the laboratory and
falsely alleged that they pressed the Escape key during an earlier
session. After a single request, the odds of signing were 4.5 times
higher for the sleep-deprived participants than for the rested par-
ticipants. These findings have important implications and highlight
the need for further research on factors affecting true and
false confessions.
false confession | sleep deprivation | sleep
I
n the United States, an alarming number of people are con-
victed of crimes they did not commit (1). Although it has
proven exceedingly difficult to measure the scope of this prob-
lem, a recent investigation suggested that at least 4% of people
who have been sentenced to death in the United States were
actually innocent (2). Studies of known wrongful convictions
reveal that false confessions are a substantial contributor to this
problem, implicated in 15–25% of cases (1, 3). A false confession
occurs when an innocent person makes a false admission of guilt
and subsequently produces a postadmission narrative, which in-
cludes details about how or why the crime was committed (4).
Confessions are extremely powerful forms of evidence. An ad-
mission of guilt alone, even without a postadmission narrative,
will have serious consequences for an innocent suspect who is the
target of a criminal investigation, as will confessions that are
later recanted (5). Surprisingly, even when jurors understand
that a confession has been coerced, it nonetheless inflates their
perception of the defendant’s guilt and influences their construal
of other, unrelated evidence (5, 6).
False confessions can clearly have dire consequences and it might
seem that they would only arise after some form of physical co-
ercion. However, interrogators more often capitalize on psycho-
logically coercive interrogation strategies, which are known to
increase the risk of false confession in innocent suspects (3, 4, 7–
10). As such, the use of these strategies contribute to an in-
ordinately stressful and mentally taxing experience for an innocent
suspect (11), who must rely on a number of complex cognitions
and decision making skills to protect their interests and avoid self-
incrimination during a potentially lengthy interrogation.
A robust literature reveals that sleep deprivation impairs many
of the cognitive skills that may be crucial in resisting this type of
coercive environment. In addition to disrupting mood and
impairing a whole host of cognitive operations (12, 13), there is
evidence suggesting that sleep deprivation reduces inhibitory
control, leading people to make riskier decisions (14–16), and
interferes with their ability to anticipate and measure the con-
sequences of their actions (17). Finally, recent research has
linked sleep deprivation with false and distorted memories of
past events (18), suggesting that sleep-deprived people may be
especially vulnerable to suggestive influences.
These findings are cause for serious concern; studies have
shown that as many as 17% of interrogations occur during typical
sleep hours (between midnight and 8:00 AM) (19). Studies of
known false confessions have found that a majority occurred
following interrogations that lasted more than 12 h, with many
lasting for longer than 24 consecutive hours (20). Moreover, as
the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence recently revealed,
the Central Intelligence Agency routinely used sleep deprivation
for up to 1 wk to assist in their hardline interrogations of de-
tainees, some of whom were later revealed to be wrongfully held
(21). It is increasingly evident that the interrogation of unrested,
possibly sleep-deprived, suspects is not out of the ordinary and
may even be commonplace.
In the present research, we capitalized on available laboratory
techniques for examining false confession processes (22) and com-
pared the tendency of rested and sleep-deprived participants
to falsely admit to wrongdoing that never occurred. Specifically,
participants completed computer-based tasks, writing exercises,
and questionnaires during three separate laboratory sessions (see
Figs. S1–S3). Throughout their time in the laboratory, partici-
pants were repeatedly warned to never press the Escape key on
their computer keyboards because doing so, they were told,
would result in the loss of important study data. Importantly, the
location of the Escape key on a standard PC keyboard made it
highly unlikely that participants would have pressed this key
accidentally during the course of the experiment.
Significance
False confessions occur surprisingly frequently in the context of
interrogations and criminal investigations. Indeed, false confes-
sions are thought to account for approximately 15–25% of
wrongful convictions in the United States. Here we demonstrate
that sleep deprivation increases the likelihood that a person will
falsely confess to wrongdoing that never occurred. Furthermore,
our data suggest that it may be possible to identify certain in-
dividuals who are especially likely to falsely confess while sleep
deprived. The present research is a crucial step toward un-
derstanding the role of sleep deprivation in the problem of false
confession and, in turn, raises complex questions about the use
of sleep deprivation in the interrogation of innocent and guilty
suspects.
Author contributions: S.J.F., S.R.B., E.F.L., and K.M.F. designed research; S.J.F. and K.M.F.
performed research; S.J.F. and K.M.F. analyzed data; and S.J.F., S.R.B., E.F.L., and K.M.F.
wrote the paper.
Reviewers: M.W.L.C., Duke NUS Graduate Medical School; and S.K., John Jay College of
Criminal Justice.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: eloftus@uci.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1521518113/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1521518113
PNAS
|
February 23, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 8
|
2047–2050
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
 Following session 2, participants either slept for 8 h in labora-
tory bedrooms or remained awake throughout the night, carefully
monitored by research staff (see Table S1). The morning following
either their night of sleep or sleep deprivation, all participants
were shown a personalized statement describing their time in the
laboratory, purportedly written by a member of the research staff.
Critically, the statement falsely alleged that the participant pressed
the Escape key during their first visit to the laboratory, thereby
compromising the study data. Participants were asked to read the
statement and type their name beneath it to confirm its accuracy.
If participants refused to sign their name to the statement, they
were immediately shown the statement a second time and again
encouraged to type their name (Fig. S3).
Our results indicate that after the initial request, 8 of the 44
rested participants (18%) signed the statement, as did 22 (50%)
of the 44 sleep-deprived participants. As shown in Table 1, nine
of the additional rested participants (for a total of 39%) signed
after the second request, as did eight additional sleep-deprived
participants (for a total of 68%). The odds of signing the state-
ment were significantly greater for sleep-deprived participants
than for the rested participants after the initial request, odds
ratio (OR) (95% C.I.) = 4.5 (1.7, 11.8), and after both requests,
OR = 3.4 (1.4, 8.2). It should be noted that despite the robust
effect of sleep deprivation on false confession, participants’ false
admissions did not include a detailed postadmission narrative,
which is commonly obtained in a criminal confession.
During the initial session (1 wk before the overnight session),
we assessed participants’ tendency to adopt an impulsive prob-
lem-solving strategy by using the Cognitive Reflection Task
(CRT; ref. 23; see Fig. S2). As predicted, the effect of sleep
deprivation on the likelihood of false confession was markedly
increased among participants who showed higher impulsive
responding, as shown in Fig. 1. In a logistic regression analysis,
with false admission (yes or no) entered as the dependent vari-
able, the main effect of CRT score approached significance, OR =
1.5 (1.0, 2.3), and there was a significant interaction between study
condition (sleep-deprived or rested) and intuitive response rates,
OR = 3.0 (1.1, 8.0), suggesting that individuals with an impulsive
cognitive style were more vulnerable to the effects of sleep dep-
rivation on false confessions.
Sleep-deprived participants reported increased sleepiness, and
decreased positive and negative affect compared with rested
participants (see Fig. S4 for further analyses). Of note, participants
who signed the statement containing the false allegation showed
no difference in positive affect, t(86) = 1.47, P = 0.14, or negative
affect, t(86) = 0.75, P = 0.45, relative to participants who did not
sign the statement. This finding suggests that changes in affect as a
result of sleep-deprivation did not account for elevated rates of
false confession. However, high ratings of sleepiness (i.e., 6 or a 7
on the 7-point scale) strongly predicted the likelihood of false
confession, as shown in Fig. 2. An implication of this finding is that
a suspect’s self-reported sleepiness may be a powerful indicator of
risk. Regardless of experimental condition, the odds of confessing
were 4.5 times higher for participants who reported high levels of
sleepiness, relative to participants who reported low-to-medium
levels of sleepiness.
We considered the possibility that sleep-deprived participants
were less able (or willing) to read and comprehend the statement
containing the false allegation. As detailed in Materials and
Methods below, we gave all participants a comprehension check
in the morning. Two participants (one rested, one sleep-deprived)
failed to demonstrate that they were reading and comprehending
our materials, and excluding these subjects from our analyses had
no effect on any results reported here. Relatedly, it is worth noting
that in the context of a criminal investigation, an innocent suspect
who signs a confession statement (even if they did not read or
comprehend it) may face serious consequences as a result.
These findings are a crucial step in better understanding the role
of sleep deprivation in false confessions as they unfold in the
context of a police interrogation. We propose that sleep depriva-
tion sets the stage for a false confession by impairing complex
decision making abilities—specifically, the ability to anticipate risks
and consequences, inhibit behavioral impulses, and resist suggestive
influences.
Despite the strength of our findings, the present study has a few
limitations. Although we found evidence suggesting that sleep
deprivation may increase the risk of false confessions, our study
sheds no light on the impact of sleep deprivation on true confes-
sions. Sleep deprivation may increase confession rates of both in-
nocent and guilty suspects. If sleep deprivation increases both true
and false confessions, then law enforcement and military personnel
may want to carefully weigh the costs and benefits of sleep depri-
vation in an interrogation, particularly when collecting intelligence
that could prevent the loss of innocent lives. Future research would
do well to examine the role of sleep deprivation on both true and
false confessions.
Additionally, the consequences of signing the statement were
ambiguous and unknown to the participants. We recognize that
this scenario may differ in important ways from the situation a
suspect may face in an interrogation room. Although obtaining
more ecologically valid interrogation conditions are bound to
present significant challenges for laboratory researchers because
Table 1.
Percentages (and raw numbers) of rested and sleep-deprived (TSD) participants who
signed the statement containing a false admission of wrongdoing after the first request (left
side) and both requests (right side)
False admission
(first request)?
Rested
TSD
False admission
(both requests)?
Rested
TSD
Yes
18% (8)
50% (22)
Yes
38.6% (17)
68.2% (30)
Refused
82% (36)
50% (22)
Refused
61.4% (27)
31.8% (14)
Total
100% (44)
100% (44)
Total
100% (44)
100% (44)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Low
Medium
High
% Signed Statement
Impulsive Cognitive Style
Rested
Sleep-deprived
Fig. 1.
Percentage of participants that signed the statement following both
requests as a function of scores on the CRT.
2048
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1521518113
Frenda et al.
 of ethical constraints, further research might profitably investigate
whether the severity of the purported wrongdoing and its per-
ceived consequences moderate the effects of sleep deprivation.
Finally, the extent to which cultural and/or demographic factors
(e.g., age, education) moderate the effect of sleep deprivation on
confessions remains an open question.
Nonetheless, to the extent that the same psychological processes
are implicated both by laboratory studies and real-life interrogations,
our findings have important implications for policies and proce-
dures related to interrogations, particularly those involving innocent
suspects. Depriving a suspect of sleep—whether intentionally as
part of an interrogation strategy or incidentally as the result of a
lengthy interrogation—may compromise the reliability of evidence
obtained from an innocent suspect in an interrogation and put in-
nocent suspects at increased risk. To this end, our findings provide
an additional justification for the importance of videotaping all in-
terrogations, thus providing judges, attorneys, experts, and jurors
with additional opportunities to evaluate the probative value of any
confession that is obtained.
Furthermore, we recommend that interrogators assess sus-
pects’ sleep habits for the days preceding the interrogation and
measure suspects’ sleepiness by using validated self-report
scales (24, 25) before entering the interrogation room and over
the course of the interrogation. It is worth noting that in our
sample, participants who indicated a high degree of sleepiness
on the single-item Stanford Sleepiness Scale were significantly
more likely to sign off on the false allegation compared with
participants who reported less severe sleepiness, irrespective of
condition. This scale takes only seconds to administer, yet here
it proved to be a reliable indicator of heightened risk for
innocent suspects.
A false admission of wrongdoing can have disastrous conse-
quences in a legal system already fraught with miscarriages of
justice. We are hopeful that researchers will continue to uncover
the sleep-related factors that influence processes related to
false confession.
Materials and Methods
Participants were 88 undergraduates from Michigan State University who
enrolled in the study in exchange for course credit. Their mean age was 19.3
(SD = 1.3; range = 18–23) and just under half were female (49%). Partici-
pants reported their race/ethnicity as Native American (2.3%), Asian (4.6%),
Black (5.7%), Latino (1.1%), Middle Eastern (2.3%), and White (84.1%).
Several additional participants began the study but did not complete it and
were excluded from all subsequent procedures and analyses. These partici-
pants either: napped on the day of the experiment (n = 1), consumed alcohol
on the night of the experiment (n = 1), became ill during the deprivation
night (n = 1), or chose to leave in the middle of the deprivation night be-
cause they had completed their credit requirement (n = 1). One additional
participant chose to leave when the condition was revealed; this individual
was assigned to the sleep condition but wanted to be in the deprivation
condition to study for an examination the following day. All participants
gave informed consent for experimental procedures before completing any
experimental tasks. Furthermore, the experiment and informed consent
procedures were approved by the Institutional Review Board at Michigan
State University.
As shown in Fig. S1, the 88 participants who completed the study attended
three laboratory sessions. In session 1, participants provided demographic in-
formation and received the first of several warnings not to press the Escape
key during the study procedures. Specifically, they were shown a screen with
the word “WARNING” at the top, followed by an instruction that read as
follows: “Please remember: it’s very important that while you work on the
computer today that you do NOT press the ‘escape key,’ located at the top left
corner of the keyboard, for any reason—this could cause the computer to lose
valuable data. If you have any questions about today’s study procedures or
questionnaires, please be sure to raise your hand and a member of our re-
search staff will quietly escort you out of the room so as not to disturb the
other participants.” Participants were asked to click a button to indicate that
they understood the warning. To dissuade participants who may have been
tempted to press the forbidden Escape key, a member of the research staff
watched as participants completed the computer tasks.
Measures relevant to the present research questions were the Pittsburg
Sleep Quality Index, a measure of general sleep quality (26) and the CRT (23)
(Table S2 and Fig. S2). The CRT measures a person’s “cognitive impulsive-
ness,” or their tendency to hastily arrive at intuitive—yet incorrect—answers
to a series of logic puzzles. For instance, one question reads, “A bat and a
ball cost $1.10 in total. The bat costs $1.00 more than the ball. How much
does the ball cost?” The correct answer to this question is $0.05, but the
more intuitive (yet incorrect) response is $0.10. People who give intuitive
answers to the puzzles are thought to prefer an impulsive thinking and
problem-solving style. We measured cognitive impulsiveness by totaling the
number of intuitive responses that each participant gave (out of three). We
designated participants as “high” in cognitive impulsiveness if they gave
intuitive responses to all of the puzzles on the CRT, “medium” if they gave
intuitive responses to two puzzles, and “low” if they gave intuitive re-
sponses to either zero or one puzzle.
Session 2 took place on an evening ∼7 d later. Participants returned to the
laboratory at 10:00 PM and were first shown the Escape key warning, which
was identical to the warning they received in session 1. Then, participants
completed baseline measures of positive and negative affect [Positive and
Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS); ref. 27] and sleepiness (Stanford Sleepi-
ness Scale; ref. 25), and a series of filler computer tasks not relevant to the
present study.
Half of the participants then slept for 8 h in laboratory bedrooms (n = 44, 21
female) and half remained awake throughout the night in the laboratory
while being monitored by research staff (n = 44, 22 female) (Table S1). Par-
ticipants were quasi-randomly assigned to condition. We used quasi-random
assignment to ensure that the time interval between sessions 1 and 2 was
equal across conditions. Specifically, participants’ first session was roughly 1 wk
before their overnight [mean (M) = 7.26 d, SD = 1.0]. Importantly, the interval
between session 1 and session 2 was similar for the sleep (M = 7.2, SD = 1.1,
range = 6–10) and the deprivation (M = 7.3, SD = 0.9) groups t(86) = 0.58, P =
0.55. When they arrived to the first session, before completing any computer
tasks, participants selected their overnight session. This procedure was
designed so that if a participant could not attend any of the available eve-
nings, we could reschedule their first session to maintain an average of 7
d between session 1 and the overnight. Although the experimenter knew
which nights would be deprivation nights and which would be sleep nights,
the participants remained blind to condition until after the computer tasks on
the evening of their overnight session. Put simply, the participants were blind
to condition until the last possible moment (e.g., ∼11:00 PM, which is when we
had to start setting sleep participants up for polysomnography).
Session 3 took place the next morning, after the night of sleep or sleep
deprivation. Each participant began the morning procedure by reading, once
again, the Escape key warning, completing measures of affect and sleepiness,
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Low/Medium
High
% Signed Statement
Sleepiness
Fig. 2.
Percentage of participants (collapsed across conditions) that signed
the statement as a function of self-reported sleepiness by using the Stanford
Sleepiness Scale. Participants who selected a 6 or 7 on the 7-point Stanford
Sleepiness scale (25) were categorized as high in sleepiness, whereas par-
ticipants who selected a rating of less than 6 were categorized as low/medium
sleepiness. OR (95% C.I.) = 4.5 (1.5, 13.5).
Frenda et al.
PNAS
|
February 23, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 8
|
2049
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
 and filler tasks and questionnaires. Next, participants completed a compre-
hension check. In this task, we asked them to indicate whether they com-
pleted certain activities in the laboratory. Hidden among a list of events
that actually occurred (e.g., “You filled out computer questionnaires”)
were foil events that could not possibly have occurred (e.g., “You drank a
beer in the lab”). Only two participants (one rested, one sleep-deprived)
failed to successfully complete the task, and when these participants were
excluded from our analyses, all results and patterns of significance remained
identical.
The critical outcome of interest was the participants’ response to the false
allegation. Before leaving the laboratory, each participant was shown a
personalized statement, purportedly written by a member of the research
staff. The statement described the participant’s activities in the laboratory
over the course of the week, and falsely alleged that the participant pressed
the Escape key during their first visit to the laboratory (the prior week when
no participants had been sleep deprived), thereby compromising the study
data. Participants were asked to read the statement, check a box confirming
its accuracy, and type their name beneath the statement. If participants
refused to confirm the accuracy of the statement, they were shown the
statement a second time and again encouraged to sign it (Fig. S3). Partici-
pants who refused to sign the statement were asked which parts of the
statement they believed were inaccurate and given an opportunity to freely
respond. After signing their name (or refusing both requests, whichever
came first), they were fully debriefed.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Nicholas Nicoletti and Joseph O’Connor
for their invaluable assistance in coordinating and running this study and
two reviewers for insightful comments on an earlier draft of this manuscript.
1. Gross SR, Shaffer M (2012) Exonerations in the United States 1989 through 2012 (Natl.
Registry Exonerations Report). Available at www.law.umich.edu/special/exoneration/
Documents/exonerations_us_1989_2012_full_report.pdf. Accessed October 30, 2015.
2. Gross SR, O’Brien B, Hu C, Kennedy EH (2014) Rate of false conviction of criminal
defendants who are sentenced to death. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111(20):7230–7235.
3. Garrett BL (2011) Convicting the Innocent: Where Criminal Prosecutions Go Wrong
(Harvard Univ Press, Cambridge, MA).
4. Leo RA (2009) False confessions: Causes, consequences, and implications. J Am Acad
Psychiatry Law 37(3):332–343.
5. Kassin SM, Sukel H (1997) Coerced confessions and the jury: An experimental test of
the “Harmless Error” rule. Law Hum Behav 21(1):27–46.
6. Hasel LE, Kassin SM (2009) On the presumption of evidentiary independence: Can
confessions corrupt eyewitness identifications? Psychol Sci 20(1):122–126.
7. Kassin SM (2008) Confession evidence: Commonsense myths and misconceptions. Crim
Justice Behav 35(10):1309–1322.
8. Kassin SM, Gudjonsson GH (2004) The psychology of confession evidence: A review of
the literature and issues. Psychol Sci Public Interest 5(2):33–67.
9. Kassin SM, McNall K (1991) Police interrogations and confessions: Communicating
promises and threats by pragmatic implications. Law Hum Behav 15(3):233–251.
10. Narchet FM, Meissner CA, Russano MB (2011) Modeling the influence of investigator
bias on the elicitation of true and false confessions. Law Hum Behav 35(6):452–465.
11. Kassin SM, et al. (2010) Police-induced confessions: Risk factors and recommenda-
tions. Law Hum Behav 34(1):3–38.
12. Ratcliff R, Van Dongen HPA (2009) Sleep deprivation affects multiple distinct cogni-
tive processes. Psychon Bull Rev 16(4):742–751.
13. Pilcher JJ, Huffcutt AI (1996) Effects of sleep deprivation on performance: A meta-
analysis. Sleep 19(4):318–326.
14. Killgore WD, Balkin TJ, Wesensten NJ (2006) Impaired decision making following 49 h
of sleep deprivation. J Sleep Res 15(1):7–13.
15. Chuah YML, Venkatraman V, Dinges DF, Chee MWL (2006) The neural basis of in-
terindividual variability in inhibitory efficiency after sleep deprivation. J Neurosci
26(27):7156–7162.
16. Drummond SP, Paulus MP, Tapert SF (2006) Effects of two nights sleep deprivation
and two nights recovery sleep on response inhibition. J Sleep Res 15(3):261–265.
17. Harrison Y, Horne JA (2000) The impact of sleep deprivation on decision making:
A review. J Exp Psychol Appl 6(3):236–249.
18. Frenda SJ, Patihis L, Loftus EF, Lewis HC, Fenn KM (2014) Sleep deprivation and false
memories. Psychol Sci 25(9):1674–1681.
19. Kassin SM, et al. (2007) Police interviewing and interrogation: A self-report survey of
police practices and beliefs. Law Hum Behav 31(4):381–400.
20. Drizin S, Leo R (2004) The problem of false confessions in the post-DNA world. North
Carol Law Rev 82:891–1007.
21. U.S. Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (2014) Committee Study of the Central
Intelligence Agency’s Detention and Interrogation Program. Available at: www.intelligence.
senate.gov/press/committee-releases-study-cias-detention-and-interrogation-program.
Accessed October 30, 2015.
22. Kassin SM, Kiechel K (1996) The social psychology of false confessions: Compliance,
internalization, and confabulation. Psychol Sci 7(3):125–128.
23. Frederick S (2005) Cognitive reflection and decision making. J Econ Perspect 19(4):
25–42.
24. Johns MW (1991) A new method for measuring daytime sleepiness: The Epworth
sleepiness scale. Sleep 14(6):540–545.
25. Hoddes E, Zarcone V, Smythe H, Phillips R, Dement WC (1973) Quantification of
sleepiness: A new approach. Psychophysiology 10(4):431–436.
26. Buysse DJ, Reynolds CF, Monk TH, Berman SR, Kupfer DJ (1989) The Pittsburgh Sleep
Quality Index: A new instrument for psychiatric practice and research. Psychiatry Res
28(2):193–213.
27. Watson D, Clark LA, Tellegen A (1988) Development and validation of brief measures
of positive and negative affect: The PANAS scales. J Pers Soc Psychol 54(6):1063–1070.
2050
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1521518113
Frenda et al.
