 Vessel co-option mediates resistance to anti-angiogenic therapy 
in liver metastases
Sophia Frentzas#1,2, Eve Simoneau#3, Victoria L. Bridgeman#1, Peter B. Vermeulen#1,4, 
Shane Foo1, Eleftherios Kostaras1, Mark Nathan1, Andrew Wotherspoon2, Zu-hua Gao3, Yu 
Shi3, Gert Van den Eynden4, Frances Daley5, Clare Peckitt2, Xianming Tan6, Ayat Salman3, 
Anthoula Lazaris3, Patrycja Gazinska7, Tracy J. Berg1, Zak Eltahir2, Laila Ritsma8, Jacco 
Van Rheenen8, Alla Khashper3, Gina Brown2, Hanna Nystrom9, Malin Sund9, Steven Van 
Laere4, Evelyne Loyer10, Luc Dirix4, David Cunningham2,12, Peter Metrakos3,12, and Andrew 
R. Reynolds1,12
1Tumour Biology Team, The Breast Cancer Now Toby Robins Research Centre, The Institute of 
Cancer Research, London, UK 2The Royal Marsden, London, UK 3McGill University Health 
Centre, Royal Victoria Hospital - Glen Site, Montreal, Quebec, Canada 4Translational Cancer 
Research Unit, Gasthuis Zusters Antwerpen Hospitals St. Augustinus, Antwerp, Belgium 5Breast 
Cancer Now Histopathology Core Facility, The Royal Marsden, London, UK 6Lineberger 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA 7Breast 
Cancer Now Unit, Guy's Hospital, King's College London School of Medicine, London, UK 
8Cancer Genomics Center-Hubrecht Institute-Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences 
& University Medical Centre Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8, Utrecht 3584CT, Netherlands 9Department 
of Surgical and Perioperative Sciences, Umeå University, Umea, Sweden 10The University of 
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA
# These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
The efficacy of angiogenesis inhibitors in cancer is limited by resistance mechanisms that are 
poorly understood. Notably, instead of inducing angiogenesis, some cancers vascularize by the 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Lead correspondong author: Andrew Reynolds, andrew.reynolds@icr.ac.uk. Co-corresponding authors: Peter Metrakos, 
peter.metrakos@mcgill.ca, David Cunningham, David.Cunningham@rmh.nhs.uk.
12Co-senior authors.
Author contributions
S.F., E.S., V.L.B. and P.B.V performed experiments, collected data, analysed data, provided input on the study design and assisted 
with interpretation of the data; P.B.V., A.W., Z.G., Y.S. and G.V.D.E. performed histopathological analysis of tissue specimens; S.F., 
E.K., M.N., F.D., P.G., T.J.B. and Z.E. provided essential technical assistance with experiments; C.P. and X.T. performed statistical 
analysis on clinical data; A.S. and A.L. assisted with the retrieval of tissue specimens and the associated clinical data; L.R., J.V.R. and 
S.V.L. shared unpublished data that were critical to the successful execution of the study and provided critical comments on the 
manuscript; A.K., G.B., E.L., H.N. and M.S. provided expert assistance with the analysis of clinical data and critical comments on the 
manuscript; L.D., D.C. and P.M. provided tissue specimens for the study and critical comments on the manuscript; A.R.R. conceived 
of and designed the study, supervised the research and wrote the manuscript.
Competing finanical interests
None of the authors declared any competing financial interests.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Med. 2016 November ; 22(11): 1294–1302. doi:10.1038/nm.4197.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 non-angiogenic mechanism of vessel co-option. Here we show that vessel co-option is associated 
with a poor response to the anti-angiogenic agent bevacizumab in patients with colorectal cancer 
liver metastases. Moreover, we find that vessel co-option prevails in human breast cancer liver 
metastases, a setting where results with anti-angiogenic therapy have been disappointing. In our 
preclinical mechanistic studies, we show that cancer cell motility mediated by the Arp2/3 complex 
is required for vessel co-option in liver metastases in vivo and that combined inhibition of 
angiogenesis and vessel co-option is more effective than inhibiting angiogenesis alone in this 
setting. Vessel co-option is therefore a clinically relevant mechanism of resistance to anti-
angiogenic therapy and combined inhibition of angiogenesis and vessel co-option may be a 
warranted therapeutic strategy.
Introduction
Metastases can vascularize through sprouting angiogenesis that is stimulated by vascular 
endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A). This prompted the clinical development of anti-
angiogenic agents, including the VEGF-A targeted antibody, bevacizumab1,2. Bevacizumab 
combined with chemotherapy (bev-chemo) can extend progression-free and / or overall 
survival in several indications, including metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC)3,4. Indeed, bev-
chemo is now an approved treatment for many different cancer types, including metastatic 
CRC. Despite this fact, the survival benefit achieved with the addition of bevacizumab to 
chemotherapy is modest, measured only in terms of months. Moreover, in other indications, 
including metastatic breast cancer, anti-angiogenic therapy has yet to demonstrate a survival 
benefit in patients5,6. The mechanisms that limit the therapeutic efficacy of anti-angiogenic 
therapy in patients are still poorly understood.
However, it now emerges that some metastases can also vascularize by the non-angiogenic 
mechanism of vessel co-option, a process whereby cancer cells incorporate pre-existing 
vessels from surrounding tissue instead of inducing new vessel growth7–10. Notably, 
although anti-angiogenic agents (including bevacizumab) were designed to target sprouting 
angiogenesis, they were not designed to target the process of vessel co-option. Because of 
this, vessel co-option has been suggested as a potential mechanism of resistance to anti-
angiogenic therapy6,10,11. In the current study, we provide the first evidence that vessel co-
option is a clinically relevant mechanism of resistance to anti-angiogenic therapy in liver 
metastases and that combined inhibition of angiogenesis and vessel co-option is more 
effective than targeting angiogenesis alone.
Results
Replacement growth pattern liver metastases respond poorly to bevacizumab
The liver is the most common site of involvement in metastatic CRC, and surgical removal 
of CRC liver metastases (CRCLMs) is now recommended practice for eligible patients12. 
Careful histopathological examination of human CRCLMs has shown that these tumors can 
present with three different histopathological growth patterns (HGPs): the desmoplastic 
HGP, the pushing HGP or the replacement HGP (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Fig. 1)8,13. 
These growth patterns have distinct histopathological features and utilise different 
Frentzas et al.
Page 2
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 mechanisms to obtain a vascular supply. In the desmoplastic HGP, the cancer cells are 
seperated from the normal liver parenchyma by a capsule of desmoplastic stroma. In the 
pushing HGP, there is no desmoplastic capsule but the cancer cells push the normal liver 
parenchyma away. Both of these growth patterns utilise angiogenesis to obtain a vascular 
supply. However, in metastases with a replacement HGP, the cancer cells infiltrate the liver 
parenchyma and co-opt pre-existing sinusoidal vessels instead of promoting 
angiogenesis8,13,14. Although bevacizumab was not designed to target vessel co-option, no 
study has addressed whether the replacement growth pattern (where vessel co-option occurs) 
is associated with resistance to bevacizumab in liver metastases.
To address this question, we took advantage of the fact that some patients with metastatic 
CRC receive preoperative therapy with bev-chemo in the months that precede surgical 
removal of CRCLMs15–17. We evaluated the HGPs and the pathological response to 
therapy in 59 CRCLMs resected from 33 patients that were treated preoperatively with bev-
chemo at The Royal Marsden (RM) by examining haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained 
liver resection specimens (Fig. 1b) (for patient details see Supplementary Fig. 2 and 
Supplementary Table 1). Since CRCLMs can present with a mixture of HGPs13, the 
percentage of desmoplastic, pushing and replacement HGP was quantified in each lesion. To 
measure response to therapy, the pathological response in each lesion was scored in quartiles 
(>75%, 50–75%, 25–49% or <25% viable tumor). Lesions with <25% viable tumor were 
considered good responders, whilst lesions with ≥25% viable tumor were considered poor 
responders.
Notably, lesions having a substantial (≥50%) replacement component were significantly 
enriched in the group of lesions classified as poor responders when compared to the group of 
lesions classified as good responders (Fig. 1b, P<0.001). In contrast, lesions having a 
substantial (≥50%) desmoplastic component were significantly enriched in the group of 
lesions classified as good responders when compared to the group of lesions classified as 
poor responders (Fig. 1b, P<0.001). Similar results were obtained when the same analysis 
was repeated using only the single largest lesion from each patient (Supplementary Fig. 3). 
In a univariate analysis of other clinical variables, only the HGP showed a statistically 
significant association with pathological response (Supplementary Table 2).
Some examples of the lesions examined for this analysis are shown in Fig. 1c–e. In Fig. 1c, a 
lesion scored as >75% viable with HGP score of 100% replacement is shown. Note the close 
contact between tumor cells and liver parenchyma in the infiltrative replacement growth 
pattern (arrows). In Fig. 1d, a lesion scored as <25% viable with HGP score of 100% 
desmoplastic is shown. Note the entire circumference of the tumor is desmoplastic and well 
encapsulated (arrowheads). A large central area of infarct-like necrosis (ILN), indicative of a 
strong treatment response, is labeled (asterisks). In Fig. 1e, a lesion scored as >25% viable 
that has a mixed growth pattern (79% desmoplastic, 19% replacement, 2% pushing) is 
shown. Note the presence of a desmoplastic rim at the periphery of the tumour (arrowheads) 
which surrounds a large central area of ILN (asterisks). However, at the periphery of the 
tumour, two viable nodules with a replacement HGP can be seen (arrows).
Frentzas et al.
Page 3
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 To validate the association between the HGPs and pathological response to therapy, we then 
examined a larger series of 128 CRCLMs from 59 patients that were treated preoperatively 
with bev-chemo at McGill University Health Centre (MUHC) (for patient details see 
Supplementary Fig. 4 and Supplementary Table 3). Again, lesions with ≥50% replacement 
HGP were significantly enriched in the poorly responding group of lesions (Fig. 1f, P 
>0.001), whilst lesions with ≥50% desmoplastic HGP were significantly enriched in the 
group of lesions classified as good responders (Fig. 1f, P>0.001). Similar results were 
obtained when the same analysis was repeated using only the single largest lesion from each 
patient (Supplementary Fig. 5). In a univariate analysis, the HGP was the strongest predictor 
of pathological response (Supplementary Table 4).
Included in these analyses were both patients that presented with a solitary liver metastasis 
and patients that presented with multiple liver metastases. To control for this, we also 
examined the subset of patients that presented with a single lesion only (pooled from RM 
and MUHC). The HGP also correlated with pathological response in this subset of patients 
(Supplementary Fig. 6). A univariate and multivariate analyses of 181 lesions from 90 
patients (pooled from RM and MUHC) was also performed to determine clinical 
characteristics associated with a good pathological response (Supplementary Table 5). Only 
the HGPs showed a statistically significant association with pathological response. The 
replacement HGP was associated with a lower probability of obtaining a good pathological 
response (OR=0.07, 95% CI 0.03–0.16, P<0.0001 in univariate and OR=0.06, 95% CI 0.03– 
0.15, P<0.0001 in multivariate). In contrast, the desmoplastic HGP was associated with a 
higher probability of obtaining a good pathological response (OR=15.06, 95% CI 6.32–
35.87, P<0.0001 in univariate and OR=15.92, 95% CI 6.76–37.51, P<0.0001 in 
multivariate). Taken together, these data demonstrate that the replacement HGP is associated 
with a poor pathological response to bev-chemo in CRCLMs.
To provide an alternative measure of treatment response, we also evaluated radiological 
response in the cohort of lesions from the RM patients. Recently published guidelines 
recommend that response to bev-chemo should be evaluated from computed tomography 
(CT) scans using novel morphological response criteria which correlate better with outcome 
than RECIST-based criteria12,18,19. Lesions with ≥50% replacement HGP were 
significantly enriched in the poor response group according to morphological response 
criteria (Fig. 2; P=0.006). Similar results were obtained when the same analysis was 
repeated using only the single largest lesion from each patient (Supplementary Fig. 7). These 
data provide independent verification that CRCLMs with a replacement HGP respond poorly 
to bevacizumab. However, notably, no correlation between the HGP and response to therapy 
was observed when using RECIST-based criteria as a measure of response (Supplementary 
Fig. 8).
Cancer cells infiltrate the hepatic plates and co-opt sinusoidal blood vessels in the 
replacement growth pattern
We then investigated the mechanism of tumor vascularization in replacement HGP CRCLMs 
by examining, in detail, the relationship between cancer cells and the normal liver in this 
growth pattern. In normal liver, staining for hepatocyte specific antigen (HSA) identified 
Frentzas et al.
Page 4
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 hepatocytes within the hepatic plates, whilst collagen-3 staining identified the intervening 
sinusoidal blood vessels (SV; Fig. 3a). In the replacement HGP, co-staining for cancer cells 
(pan-cytokeratin) and hepatocytes (HSA) demonstrated that invading cancer cells line-up 
neatly with hepatocytes within the hepatic plates at the tumor-liver interface (Fig. 3b). 
Replacement of hepatocytes by invading cancer cells was clearly observed (Fig. 3c). Behind 
the invasive tumor front, near complete replacement of hepatocytes by cancer cells was 
evident and flattened displaced hepatocytes were frequently observed at the edge of cancer 
cell nests (Fig. 3d). However, cancer cells clearly respected the spaces occupied by SV (Fig. 
3b–d). Therefore, in the replacement growth pattern of liver metastasis, cancer cells (a) 
invade the liver parenchyma, (b) replace hepatocytes and (c) co-opt SV.
Further evidence for vessel co-option was obtained by staining for the endothelial marker 
CD31. In the replacement HGP, SV were frequently observed where one end of the vessel 
was physically located in the normal liver (arrows in Fig. 3e–g), whilst the other end was 
embedded in the tumor (arrowheads in Fig. 3e–g), showing that these tumors co-opt SV as 
they infiltrate the liver parenchyma (see also Supplementary Fig. 9a,b). However, this was 
not observed in the desmoplastic or pushing HGPs (Supplementary Fig. 9c–f). In addition, 
co-staining of tumors for CD31 and HSA demonstrated that tumor vessels at the periphery 
of replacement HGP metastases were often still physically associated with hepatocytes, 
providing additional evidence that these vessels are co-opted sinusoidal vessels and that they 
are not newly formed vessels (Supplementary Fig. 10a,b). However, this was not observed in 
the desmoplastic or pushing HGPs (Supplementary Fig. 10c,d). Therefore, whilst 
replacement HGP CRCLMs co-opt pre-existing sinusoidal vessels, the desmoplastic and 
pushing CRCLMs do not.
Prevalence of the replacement growth pattern in disease that progresses following 
bevacizumab treatment
Unfortunately, patients can progress following treatment with bev-chemo by developing new 
CRCLMs20. Here we define new CRCLMs as lesions that presented in the liver after the 
initiation of bev-chemo treatment that were not evident on pre-treatment scans. In our 
analyses of treatment response described above (Fig. 1) we only examined resected 
CRCLMs that were detected on pre-treatment scans prior to treatment initiation and we 
specifically excluded any new CRCLMs, even if they were resected. Given that these new 
CRCLMs represent progressive disease that is clearly resistant to bev-chemo, we identified 
these new CRCLMs and examined their HGP. In the MUHC case series, 35 new CRCLMs 
from 13 patients were available for assessment (for patient details see Supplementary Table 
6). We compared the HGPs in these new CRCLMs with two control groups from MUHC: 
pre-existing CRCLMs, i.e. lesions that were resected from bev-chemo treated patients that 
were detected on pre-treatment scans prior to treatment initiation (128 CRCLMs from 59 
patients; for patient details see Supplementary Table 3) and untreated CRCLMs, i.e. lesions 
resected from MUHC patients that did not receive any pre-operative therapy (32 CRCLMs 
from 19 patients; for patient details see Supplementary Table 7). The percentage of tumor 
scored as having a replacement HGP was significantly increased in new CRCLMs compared 
to the CRCLMs in both control groups (P<0.001, Fig. 4a). This was mirrored by a 
concomitant significant decrease in the desmoplastic HGP in new CRCLMs compared to 
Frentzas et al.
Page 5
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 both control groups (P<0.001, Fig. 4a). These data provide evidence for an increased 
prevalence of the replacement HGP in patients that progress following treatment with bev-
chemo.
Patients with replacement growth pattern liver metastases achieve less clinical benefit 
from bevacizumab
We then examined whether the HGPs of liver metastasis could impact on the clinical benefit 
achieved with anti-angiogenic therapy in terms of patient survival (Fig. 4b-f). Kaplan-Meier 
estimates of overall survival (OS) were calculated for a cohort of 62 patients from MUHC 
that were treated preoperatively with bev-chemo between 2008 and 2014 and for a cohort of 
29 patients from MUHC that were treated preoperatively with chemotherapy alone during 
the same period. Patients were stratified into groups based on their liver metastasis growth 
pattern: predominant replacement HGP, predominant desmoplastic HGP or predominant 
pushing HGP (see Online Methods for details of how these groups were defined).
In the bev-chemo cohort, the predominant desmoplastic HGP patients had a significantly 
better OS when compared to the predominant replacement HGP patients (HR=3.50, 95%CI 
1.49–8.20, P=0.0022; Fig. 4b). These data suggest that patients with replacement HGP liver 
metastases achieve less clinical benefit from treatment with bevacizumab than patients with 
desmoplastic HGP liver metastases. The HGP was the only variable that showed a 
statistically significant association with OS in univariate and multivariate analyses 
(Supplementary Table 8). In addition, both 3-year and 5-year OS were longer for 
desmoplastic HGP patients compared to replacement HGP patients in the bev-chemo cohort 
(Fig. 4f). However, in the cohort treated with chemotherapy only, no significant difference in 
OS was observed between the desmoplastic HGP and replacement HGP patients (HR=0.90, 
95%CI 0.31–2.61, P=0.846; Fig. 4c).
Additional analyses were also performed as follows. Using the same data set, we examined 
for a difference in OS between desmoplastic HGP patients that received chemotherapy alone 
and desmoplastic HGP patients that received bev-chemo. The difference in OS was not 
statistically significant (HR=2.49, 95%CI 0.93–6.67, P=0.0605; Fig. 4d). We also examined 
for a difference in OS between replacement HGP patients that received chemotherapy alone 
and replacement HGP patients that received bev-chemo. Again, the difference in OS was not 
significant (HR=0.69, 95%CI 0.27–1.77, P=0.433; Fig. 4e). A comparison of the 
replacement group with the desmoplastic group showed that the patients were similar in 
terms of their clinical characteristics (Supplementary Table 9). However, the interval 
between last dose of therapy and resection tended to be longer in the replacement group 
compared to the desmoplastic group (median of 83 days interval for replacement patients 
versus 62 days for desmoplastic patients, P=0.030). We also examined for differences in 
clinical characteristics between the bev-chemo treated cohort and the cohort treated with 
chemotherapy alone (Supplementary Table 10). The cohorts were similar except for a larger 
proportion of patients receiving irinotecan-based chemotherapy in the bev-chemo cohort 
compared to the chemotherapy alone cohort (19% of bev-chemo patients received irinotecan 
versus 10.3% of chemotherapy alone patients, P=0.019).
Frentzas et al.
Page 6
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 When stratifying patients based on their liver metastasis HGPs, only two patients were 
designated in the predominant pushing group (one patient treated with bev-chemo and one 
patient treated with chemotherapy alone). Due to this fact, these patients were not included 
in the Kaplan-Meier analysis. However, both of these patients had a poor outcome because 
they died within 2 years of diagnosis of liver metastasis. This is consistent with the findings 
of a previous study, which showed that the pushing HGP is an independent predictor of poor 
overall survival at 2 years of follow-up21. It is therefore possible that the pushing HGP of 
CRCLMs is associated with a poor outcome regardless of the treatment modality utilized.
The replacement HGP is prevalent in breast cancer liver metastases
Thus far, disappointing results have been obtained with anti-angiogenic therapy in metastatic 
breast cancer5,6. Therefore, we also examined the HGPs in breast cancer liver metastasis 
samples, obtained from 17 patients, by examining H&E-stained tissue sections (for patient 
details see Supplementary Table 11). The replacement HGP was predominant in 16 of 17 
cases examined, with only one case presenting with a predominant desmoplastic HGP (Fig. 
5a). Further histopathological characterization of replacement HGP BCLMs is presented in 
Fig. 5b–g. Breast cancer cells colonized the liver by replacing resident hepatocytes (Fig. 5d) 
with no desmoplastic stroma present at the tumor-liver interface (Fig. 5e). The vascular 
architecture of the adjacent liver was preserved at the tumor-liver interface (Fig. 5f) and the 
co-option of sinusoidal vessels was observed (Fig. 5g). These data show that the replacement 
HGP, which vascularizes by vessel co-option, predominates in breast cancer liver metastases.
Combined inhibition of vessel co-option and angiogenesis is more effective than inhibition 
of angiogenesis alone
Vessel co-option in the liver requires the infiltration of cancer cells into the normal liver 
parenchyma (for example see Fig. 3). We therefore reasoned that cancer cell motility may be 
required for vessel co-option. The Actin Related Proteins 2/3 complex (Arp2/3 complex) 
mediates the nucleation of actin filaments at the leading edge of cells to drive cell 
movement, and has been previously implicated in the motility and invasion of both breast 
cancer cells and colorectal cancer cells22–24. In order to confirm expression of the Arp2/3 
complex in human liver metastases, we performed staining for the Arp2/3 subunit ARPC3 
using a well-validated antibody. ARPC3 was expressed in cancer cells in all human 
specimens we examined. Moreover, ARPC3 expression was significantly higher in 
replacement HGP metastases when compared to desmoplastic HGP metastases 
(Supplementary Fig. 11).
To then address whether cancer cell motility mediated by Arp2/3 could play a functional role 
in the process of vessel co-option in vivo, we utilized a preclinical orthotopic model of 
advanced liver metastasis where HT29 colorectal cancer cells are directly injected into 
mouse liver (Supplementary Fig. 12). This model is commonly used to replicate the 
advanced stage of CRCLMs where patients are treated in the metastatic setting25–27. The 
CRCLMs generated in this model had a mixed HGP, being mainly composed of replacement 
HGP areas (Fig. 6a) and, to a lesser extent, desmoplastic HGP areas (Fig. 6b), thus 
recapitulating the two prevalent HGPs observed in human CRCLMs. We then attempted to 
knock-down ARPC3 expression in HT29 cells using three different ARPC3-targeting 
Frentzas et al.
Page 7
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 shRNA oligonucleotides. Two of these oligonucleotides (shARPC3-2 and shARPC3-3) 
significantly reduced ARPC3 expression in cells, whereas the third oligonucleotide 
(shARPC3-1), and a control non-targeting oligonucleotide (control shRNA), did not reduce 
ARPC3 expression in cells (Fig. 6c). In addition, knockdown of ARPC3 significantly 
suppressed the migration of HT29 cells (Fig. 6d) without any confounding effect on cell 
proliferation (Supplementary Fig. 13). Notably, knockdown of ARPC3 significantly 
decreased the replacement HGP in vivo, whilst significantly increasing the desmoplastic 
HGP (Fig. 6e). These data confirm that suppression of Arp2/3-mediated cancer cell motility 
inhibits the replacement HGP within this in vivo model and therefore also blocks the ability 
of these tumors to co-opt pre-existing liver vessels in vivo.
We then evaluated whether combined inhibition of vessel co-option and angiogenesis is 
more effective at limiting tumor growth when compared to angiogenesis inhibition alone. 
Mice with established control- or ARPC3-knockdown tumors were treated with the VEGF-
A inhibitory antibody B20-4.1.128 combined with capecitabine (Fig. 6f–h). In control 
tumors, which have a predominantly replacement HGP (Fig. 6f), no significant inhibition of 
tumor burden was observed in response to treatment when compared to vehicle control (Fig. 
6g). However, in ARPC3 knockdown tumors, which have a predominantly desmoplastic 
HGP (Fig. 6f), tumor burden was significantly suppressed by treatment (Fig. 6g). In 
addition, although treatment with B20-4.1.1 led to a reduced tumor vessel density in both 
control- and ARPC3 knockdown-tumors, this effect was more pronounced when vessel co-
option was suppressed by knockdown of ARPC3 (Fig. 6h, Supplementary Fig. 14). The 
administration of capecitabine alone did not significantly suppress tumor burden or tumor 
vessel density in either control- or ARPC3-knockdown tumors (Supplementary Fig. 15). 
These data suggest that simultaneous inhibition of angiogenesis and vessel co-option may be 
a more effective strategy for the treatment of advanced liver metastases than current 
strategies which target angiogenesis alone.
Discussion
When cancers metastasize to highly vascular organs (including the liver) they can sometimes 
utilize vessel co-option, instead of angiogenesis, as a mechanism to obtain a vascular 
supply10. Here we addressed whether vessel co-option could be a significant mechanism of 
resistance to anti-angiogenic therapy in patients with colorectal cancer liver metastases. We 
found that: (a) vessel co-option was the predominant mechanism of vascularization in 
approximately 40% of the lesions we examined, (b) metastases that utilized vessel co-option 
responded poorly to bev-chemo, (c) vessel co-option was prevalent in patients that 
progressed following treatment with bev-chemo, and (d) patients with metastases that 
utilized vessel co-option obtained less clinical benefit from bev-chemo in terms of overall 
survival. These observations strongly suggest that vessel co-option can blunt the therapeutic 
benefit achieved with anti-angiogenic therapy in metastatic colorectal cancer.
Our findings also have relevance for breast cancer. Phase 3 trials of bevacizumab combined 
with chemotherapy in metastatic breast cancer have consistently failed to demonstrate a 
survival benefit for the addition of bevacizumab29–33. Here we found that the majority of 
breast cancer liver metastases utilize vessel co-option. In addition, vessel co-option occurs in 
Frentzas et al.
Page 8
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 breast cancer metastases to the lymph nodes34,35, skin36, lungs7,37,38 and brain39–41. 
The prevalence of vessel co-option in breast cancer may explain, at least in part, why anti-
angiogenic therapy has been a disappointing therapeutic approach in metastatic breast 
cancer.
Biomarkers that are predictive of response to anti-angiogenic therapy in patients remain 
elusive6,11,42. Our data suggest that patients who present with desmoplastic HGP liver 
metastases may derive more benefit from bevacizumab than patients who present with 
replacement HGP liver metastases, which identifies the HGPs as potential biomarkers for 
anti-angiogenic therapy. There are some characteristics that are present on magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) of the liver, or CT imaging of the liver, that might be exploited to 
determine the HGPs of liver metastases prior to treatment. By using imaging to identify liver 
metastasis HGPs in this way, it may eventually be possible to select-out the patients with 
desmoplastic HGP liver metastases who are more likely to benefit from anti-angiogenic 
therapy.
However, in the longer term, we believe that therapeutic strategies which can block vessel 
co-option in tumors should also be developed. In this regard, here we show that knockdown 
of Arp2/3-mediated cancer cell motility suppresses vessel co-option in a preclinical model 
of advanced liver metastasis. Moreover, Kuczynski et al recently showed that acquired 
resistance to the anti-angiogenic drug sorafenib in hepatocellular carcinoma occurs due to 
increased cancer cell invasion in the liver which mediates co-option of pre-existing liver 
vessels43. Taken together, these and other data44–51, suggest a key role for cancer cell 
motility and cancer cell invasion in the process of vessel co-option and that targeting cancer 
cell movement might, therefore, be an effective means to block vessel co-option in tumors.
In the current manuscript, we also present preclinical evidence that combined inhibition of 
angiogenesis and vessel co-option is more effective at controlling tumor burden than 
targeting angiogenesis alone. We propose therefore that therapies which are designed to 
inhibit both angiogenesis and vessel co-option should be explored in patients, as these may 
yield greater therapeutic benefit than current therapies that are designed to target 
angiogenesis alone.
Online Methods
Human samples
Specimens were obtained from patients treated at The Royal Marsden (RM) in London, at 
McGill University Health Centre (MUHC) in Montreal and at Gasthuis Zusters Antwerpen 
(GZA) Hospitals St Augustinus in Antwerp. Informed consent was obtained from all 
patients. Ethical approval was granted by the local Research Ethics Committee at The Royal 
Marsden, the McGill University Health Centre Research Ethics Board and by the local 
Research Ethics Committee of the GZA Hospitals St. Augustinus.
We identified all cases of CRC liver metastases (CRCLMs) resected from patients treated 
preoperatively with a combination of bevacizumab and chemotherapy (bev-chemo) at RM 
from 2006-2012 (101 metastases from 47 patients). Of these, 59 liver metastases from 33 
Frentzas et al.
Page 9
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 patients were eligible for our study correlating HGP with pathological response. A consort 
diagram illustrates how these 59 cases were selected for inclusion (Supplementary Fig. 2). 
For patient characteristics see Supplementary Table 1. For correlating HGP with 
morphological response on imaging, 52 lesions from 31 patients were eligible for inclusion 
(Supplementary Fig. 2). For correlating HGP with response by RECIST criteria all 59 liver 
metastases from 33 patients were eligible for inclusion.
We identified all CRCLMs resected from patients treated preoperatively with bev-chemo at 
MUHC from 2008–2014 (191 CRC liver metastases from 65 patients). Of these, 128 liver 
metastases from 59 patients were eligible for correlating HGP with pathological response 
(Supplementary Fig. 4). For patient characteristics see Supplementary Table 3. For the 
analysis of new CRCLMs (i.e. lesions that only presented after the initiation of bev-chemo 
but were not present on baseline scans) we identified 35 resected lesions from 13 patients 
treated preoperatively with bev-chemo at MUHC (Supplementary Fig. 4). For patient 
characteristics see Supplementary Table 6. A total of 148 liver metastases from 62 patients 
treated preoperatively with bev-chemo were eligible for correlating HGP with overall 
survival. For the analysis of CRC liver metastases from patients that did not receive pre-
operative therapy, we identified 32 lesions from 19 patients at MUHC. For patient 
characteristics see Supplementary Table 7. For the analysis of CRCLMs from patients 
treated with chemotherapy alone we identified all cases of CRCLMs resected from patients 
treated preoperatively with chemotherapy at MUHC from 2008–2014 (81 metastases 
resected from 30 patients) and from this group a total of 76 liver metastases from 29 patients 
were eligible for our study correlating HGP with overall survival.
For breast cancer, all breast cancer liver metastasis cases obtained via resection or autopsy at 
GZA Hospitals St. Augustinus from 2004–2015 were examined (17 patients). For patient 
characteristics see Supplementary Table 11.
Therapy administration
Patients receiving treatment with bevacizumab in combination with chemotherapy were 
treated with one the following regimens.
CAPOX plus bevacizumab: 21 day treatment cycle consisting of 15 minute intravenous 
infusion of bevacizumab (7.5 mg per kg) and 2 hour intravenous infusion of oxaliplatin (130 
mg per m2) on day one, followed by daily oral capecitabine (1700 mg per m2) in two divided 
doses from days 1 to 14.
FOLFOX plus bevacizumab: 14 day treatment cycle consisting of 10 minute intravenous 
infusion of bevacizumab (5 mg per kg), 2 hour intravenous infusion of oxaliplatin (85 mg 
per m2), 2 hour intravenous infusion of folinic acid (400 mg per m2) with a bolus dose of 5-
FU (400 mg per m2) on day one, followed by 48 hour continuous intravenous infusion of 5-
FU (1200 mg per m2 per day).
FOLFIRI plus bevacizumab: 14 day treatment cycle consisting of 10 minute intravenous 
infusion of bevacizumab (5 mg per kg), 1 hour intravenous infusion of irinotecan (180 mg 
per m2), 1 hour intravenous infusion of folinic acid (400 mg per m2) with a bolus dose of 5-
Frentzas et al.
Page 10
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 FU (400 mg per m2) on day one, followed by 48 hour continuous intravenous infusion of 5-
FU (1200 mg per m2 per day).
For patients that received chemotherapy alone, most patients received either FOLFOX or 
FOLFIRI administered as described above without the addition of bevacizumab. However, a 
minority of patients that received chemotherapy alone received one of the following 
regimens instead.
FOLFIRINOX: 14 day treatment cycle consisting of oxaliplatin (85 mg per m2), irinotecan 
(180 mg per m2), leucovorin (400 mg per m2), and 5-FU (400 mg per m2) followed by a 48 
hour continuous intravenous infusion of 5-FU (1200 mg per m2 per day).
5-FU: 14 day treatment cycle consisting of leucovorin (400 mg per m2) and 5-FU (400 mg 
per m2) followed by 48 hour continuous intravenous infusion of 5-FU (1200 mg per m2 per 
day).
The decision to administer therapy, the type of therapy and the number of cycles were based 
on the recommendation of the local multidisciplinary team. Patients received oxaliplatin- or 
irinotecan-based regimens with the addition of bevacizumab preferentially, as long as there 
were no contraindications to administer bevacizumab, such as uncontrolled hypertension, 
history of gastrointestinal perforation, history of arterial or venous thromboembolic events, 
history of significant bleeding, recent surgery or nephrotic syndrome. In the case that the 
patient was deemed unsuitable for administration of bevacizumab, the patient received 
chemotherapy alone.
Scoring HGPs
Sections (5 μm thickness) were prepared from formalin fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) 
liver resection specimens, stained with H&E and then scored for HGP by two pathologists 
with extensive experience of scoring the HGPs. In brief, the tumor-liver interface was 
categorized as being desmoplastic, pushing or replacement HGP according to the following 
criteria. Desmoplastic HGP: there was no direct contact between cancer cells and liver 
parenchyma and the cancer cells were separated from the liver parenchyma by a layer of 
desmoplastic stroma. Pushing HGP: close contact between cancer cells and normal liver 
tissue was observed, without an intervening desmoplastic stroma. The normal liver was 
compressed by the tumor and no invasion of cancer cells into the hepatic plates was 
observed. Replacement HGP: close contact between cancer cells and liver parenchyma was 
observed, without an intervening desmoplastic stroma. The cancer cells invaded into the 
hepatic plates and replaced the hepatocytes without destroying the vascular architecture of 
the liver at the tumor-liver interface.
Given that some lesions present with a mixture of different HGPs, the percentage of the 
tumor-liver interface with a desmoplastic, pushing or replacement HGP was scored in 
intervals of 5% in all available tissue blocks. Where multiple blocks were available, the 
mean average score was calculated to produce a single score for % desmoplastic, % pushing 
and % replacement for each lesion.
Frentzas et al.
Page 11
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 In some cases, invasion of cancer cells into the hepatic plates (which is a defining feature of 
the replacement HGP and required for vessel co-option) was also accompanied by 
compression of the liver parenchyma. These cases were scored as replacement HGP and not 
pushing HGP. This subtle but important refinement to the criteria for scoring the HGPs helps 
to explain why, in the current study, the incidence of the replacement HGP in CRC 
metastases is higher than in some previous studies.
Agreement of HGP scores
The level of intra-observer and inter-observer agreement for scoring the HGPs was tested 
independently. In brief, two pathologists (observers A and B) scored the HGP (% 
replacement, % desmoplastic and % pushing) in 150 tissue sections of resected CRCLM 
without conferring. After a break of several weeks, the two pathologists scored the same set 
of 150 tissue sections again without conferring and without reference to their previous 
scores. The % replacement scores from each round of scoring were then used to test the level 
of intra- and inter-observer agreement. The difference between scores is plotted in 
Supplementary Fig. 16.
The correlation between scores was calculated using Pearson’s correlation co-efficient. We 
also analyzed the data using Bland-Altman plots (Supplementary Fig. 17) from which we 
determined the mean difference between the scores and the limits of agreement (2 standard 
deviations from the mean difference)52. The results are tabulated in Supplementary Table 
12.
There was a strong correlation (r > 0.98) between the scores recorded by the same observer 
(intra-observer agreement), and also a strong correlation (r > 0.96) between the scores 
recorded by the two different observers (inter-observer agreement). The Bland-Altman plots 
showed that the mean difference between the scores recorded by the same observer was 
small (0.033 and −0.633 and that the mean difference between the scores recorded by the 
two different observers was also small (−1.500 and −2.167). Taken together, these data 
indicate that there is a good level of inter- and intra-observer agreement between observers 
for scoring the HGPs.
Despite this fact, the limits of agreement for the inter-observer agreement are quite wide 
(−22.88 to 19.88 and −25.287 to 20.953). This occurred due to the presence of some cases 
which have a ‘mixed’ growth pattern that can be more difficult to score and led to some 
divergent scores. However, in the main study, in any cases having a ‘mixed’ growth pattern 
where there was a significant disagreement between observers, the two observers were 
always able to reconcile their differences in order to produce a single consensus score for the 
lesion.
Scoring of pathological response to therapy
For scoring of the pathological response to bev-chemo from H&E-stained specimens, the 
extent of viable carcinoma was assessed semi-quantitatively as a percentage relative to the 
total tumor surface area. Each lesion was assigned as belonging to one of four categories: 
>75%, 50–75%, 25–49% or <25% viable carcinoma53, with areas of ‘usual necrosis’ being 
considered part of the viable tumor fraction, whilst areas of ‘infarct-like necrosis’ were 
Frentzas et al.
Page 12
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 considered to be non-viable54. Pathological response was scored independently by three 
experienced pathologists using these criteria. Any difference in score that occurred between 
pathologists was resolved by consensus to produce a single score for each lesion.
Scoring of morphological response to therapy
Pre- and post-treatment contrast-enhanced CT scans of suitable quality were available for 52 
lesions from 31 patients for this analysis (see consort diagram, Supplementary Fig. 2) and 
the response to therapy was evaluated using a method based on previously published 
morphological response criteria18,20 as described below.
The appearance of each lesion on both the pre- and post-treatment scan was scored as 
belonging to one of three morphology groups (group-1, group-2 or group-3). A 
homogeneous, low attenuation lesion with a thin, sharply defined tumor-liver interface was 
defined as group-1. A lesion having heterogeneous attenuation and a thick, poorly defined 
tumor-liver interface was defined as group-3. A lesion that was intermediate between 
group-1 and group-3, having a moderate degree of heterogeneous attenuation and a 
moderately defined tumor-liver interface, was defined as group-2.
Morphological response was defined as an optimal response (OR) if the lesion changed from 
a group-3 or group-2 to a group-1 following treatment; a partial response (PR) if the lesion 
changed from group-3 to group-2 following treatment; and an absent response (AR) if the 
metastasis either did not change group, or went from group-2 to group-3, following 
treatment. Morphological response was scored independently by two observers. Any 
difference in scores was resolved by consensus to produce a single score for each lesion. 
Lesions scored as AR were considered to be poor responders, whilst lesions scored as PR or 
OR were considered to be good responders. Scorers were blinded as to the HGP and 
pathological response data.
Scoring of response by RECIST
Change in lesion size was determined from MRI scan data, by calculating the change in 
lesion diameter that occurred between the pre- and post-treatment scans. The lesion size 
measurements were obtained from the patient records and were therefore blinded, because 
the original reporting radiologist had no prior knowledge of our retrospective HGP and 
pathological response data. For this analysis, MRI scans of suitable quality were available 
for 59 lesions from 33 patients. Lesions were classified as partial response (PR), stable 
disease (SD) or progressive disease (PD) according to the following criteria: PR (lesion 
underwent ≥30% decrease in size between pre- and post-treatment scan), SD (lesion 
underwent <30% decrease in size and <20% increase in size between pre- and post-
treatment scan) and PD (lesion underwent ≥20% increase in size between pre- and post-
treatment scan).
Kaplan-Meier estimates of overall survival
Patients were allocated to one of three groups: predominant replacement, predominant 
desmoplastic or predominant pushing. To allocate patients to each group, the mean 
percentage of replacement, desmoplastic and pushing HGP was calculated for each patient 
Frentzas et al.
Page 13
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 using the data available from all lesions. Patients with a mean replacement HGP of >50% 
were allocated to the predominant replacement group, patients with a mean desmoplastic 
HGP of >50% were allocated to the predominant desmoplastic group and patients with a 
mean pushing HGP of >50% were allocated to the predominant pushing group. This method 
allowed unambiguous allocation of patients to the three groups (i.e. there were no patients 
scored as having a 50:50 score for two growth patterns). Overall survival estimates were 
calculated from the date of diagnosis of liver metastases to the date of death or to the date of 
last follow-up.
Immunohistochemistry
Sections of 5 μm thickness were prepared from FFPE blocks, de-paraffinized and rehydrated 
by standard protocols. Depending on the antibodies used, antigen retrieval was performed 
either at pH 6 in a pressure cooker (Menapath Access Retrieval Unit, Menarini Diagnostics) 
or at pH 9 in a microwave. Sections were incubated in blocking buffer (1% BSA in PBS-T) 
for 1 hour followed by incubation with primary antibodies in blocking buffer for 2 hours, all 
at room temperature. Primary antibodies used were: mouse anti-ARPC3 (Millipore, 
MABT95; dilution 1:2500), mouse anti-human CD31 (Dako, M0823; dilution 1:30), rabbit 
anti-mouse CD31 (Dianova, DIA310; dilution 1:75), rabbit anti-collagen-3 (Abcam, ab7778; 
dilution 1:200), mouse anti-cytokeratin-19 (Dako, M0888; dilution 1:100), mouse anti-
cytokeratin-20 (Dako, M7019; dilution 1:50), mouse anti-estrogen receptor alpha (ER) 
(Dako, M3643, dilution 1:80), mouse anti-hepatocyte specific antigen (Santa Cruz 
Biotechnology, sc-58693; dilution 1:400), mouse anti-pan-cytokeratin (Dako, M3515, 
dilution 1:75), rabbit anti-pan-cytokeratin (Dako, Z0622; dilution 1:400), mouse anti-Ki67 
(Dako, M7240; dilution 1:300), mouse anti-progesterone receptor (PgR) (Dako, M3643; 
dilution 1:200) and rabbit anti-αSMA (Abcam, ab5694; dilution 1:500). Antibody validation 
is provided on the manufacturers’ websites. For immunofluorescence, primary antibodies 
were detected with Alexa-488 or Alexa-555 fluorescently-conjugated secondary antibodies 
(Invitrogen) diluted in blocking buffer supplemented with DAPI for 30 mins at room 
temperature, followed by mounting under glass coverslips in MOWIOL mountant 
supplemented with anti-fade (0.1% w/v 1,4-diazabicyclo[2.2.2]octane) (Sigma). For DAB 
and TMB staining, primary antibodies were detected with Envision Flex system (K8002, 
Dako), followed by a light counterstain with hematoxylin before mounting under glass 
coverslips in DPEX mountant. For HER2 we used the HercepTest kit (SK001, Dako). 
Images were captured using a confocal laser-scanning microscope (Leica) or a light 
microscope (Olympus), as appropriate.
Scoring subtypes of breast cancer
Cases of breast cancer liver metastasis were characterized for intrinsic molecular subtype as 
per published guidelines55. In brief, FFPE sections were stained for ER, PgR, HER2 or 
Ki67 and scored by a pathologist. For both ER and PgR, positive staining in ≥1% of tumor 
cell nuclei was required in order for the case to be considered receptor positive56. For 
HER2, the following system was utilized: 0 or 1+ (HER2 negative), 2+ (HER2 borderline), 
or 3+ (HER2 positive)57. HER2 borderline cases underwent additional testing using HER2 
CISH pharmDx kit (SK109, Dako) to test for HER2 amplification. The presence of HER2 
amplification was considered to indicate that the case was HER2 positive. Cases were 
Frentzas et al.
Page 14
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 deemed Ki67 ‘low’ if <14% of nuclei were Ki67 positive, otherwise they were considered to 
be Ki67 ‘high.’ The results of the ER, PgR, HER2 and Ki67 analysis were then used to 
assign each case to an intrinsic molecular subtype according to the criteria recommended by 
Goldhirsch et al 55 as detailed in Supplementary Table 13.
Cell culture
Luciferase-tagged HT29 cells (HT-29-luc2 from Caliper Life Sciences) were authenticated 
by STR typing and regularly tested for mycoplasma and shown to be contamination free. 
They were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FCS, L-glutamine and penicillin/
streptomycin at 37°C in an atmosphere of 5% CO2.
shRNA knockdown
HT29 cells were stably transduced with shRNA oligonucleotides using lentiviral particles. 
We utilized three different shRNA oligonucleotides designed to target ARPC3 (shARPC3-1, 
shARPC3-1, shARPC3-1) and a control oligonucleotide with a validated non-targeting 
sequence (control shRNA) as follows:
shARPC3-1 (5’CACCCGCTTAATAAGAATAAGTACGAATACTTATTCTTATTAAGCG3’)
shARPC3-2 
(5’CACCGAAATGTATACGCTGGGAATCCGAAGATTCCCAGCGTATACATTTC3’)
shARPC3-3 
(5’CACCGCCAAGGTGAGAAAGAAATGTCGAAACATTTCTTTCTCACCTTGGC3’)
control shRNA (5’CACCTAAGGCTATGAAGAGATACCG 
AAGTATCTCTTCATAGCCTTA3’)
Oligonucleotides were ligated into the pENTR/U6 Gateway system entry vector (Invitrogen) 
according to the manufacturer's instructions. Oligonucleotide sequences were verified by 
sequencing and then transferred, together with the U6 promoter, into the Gateway-modified 
pSEW lentiviral vector (this vector also contains the EGFP gene under the control of an 
independent SFFV promoter). Viral supernatants were generated by lipofectamine-2000 co-
transfection of this expression vector and two packaging vectors (psPAX2 and pMD2.G) 
into HEK293T cells. Viral supernatants were collected and stored at -80°C until use. 
Adherent HT29 cells were infected with viral supernatant for 24 hours. Following this, the 
infecting medium was aspirated and replaced by DMEM complete. At 3–5 days after 
infection, HT29 cells were trypsinized and sorted for GFP expression by flow cytometry on 
a FACS ARIA instrument (BD Biosciences).
Western blotting
Western blotting was performed as described58. In brief, cell lysates were separated on 10% 
SDS-PAGE gels at 150 V for 1 hour. Transfer to nitrocellulose membranes was performed at 
100 V for 1 hour. Membranes were blocked using blocking buffer (TBS-T supplemented 
with 5% milk) and then probed with anti-ARPC3 antibodies (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, 
sc-136020; dilution 1:200) or anti-HSC70 antibodies (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc-7298; 
Frentzas et al.
Page 15
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 dilution 1:20,000). After incubation with HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies in blocking 
buffer, membranes were incubated with chemiluminescence substrate and exposed to films. 
Densitometry was performed using ImageJ software on three independent western blots. 
Expression levels of ARPC3 were normalized to the expression level of HSC-70. Antibody 
validation is provided on the manufacturer’s website.
Cell motility assay
Cells were plated at a density of 50,000 cells per well in a 6-well plate. After 24 hours, the 
media was refreshed and the plates were transferred to the stage of an inverted Leica IX-70 
time-lapse microscope at 37°C in an atmosphere containing 5% CO2. Images were captured 
through a 20X phase contrast objective every 30 minutes for 48 hours. To measure cell 
migration, random cells were tracked in time-lapse videos for 30 hours using the manual 
tracking plugin in ImageJ. For the purposes of quantification, 30 cells from each 
experimental group were analyzed from across two independent experiments. Results were 
expressed in terms of cell velocity (μm per minute).
Cell proliferation assay
To assess the proliferation kinetics of cells, 2000 HT29 cells were seeded (in quadruplicate 
wells) on to four different 96-well plates (plates 1 to 4). Cell viability was measured from 
plates 1, 2, 3 and 4 at 24, 48, 72 and 96 hours, respectively, using the CellTitre-Glo reagent 
(Promega) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The quantity of viable cells was 
expressed relative to the signal at 24 hours from three independent experiments.
Preclinical model of advanced liver metastasis
The Institute of Cancer Research Animal Ethics Committee granted approval for animal 
work. Procedures were performed in accordance with United Kingdom Home Office 
regulations. We used female CB17 SCID mice (CB17/lcr-Prkdcscid/lcrlcoCrl) at 12–16 
weeks of age (obtained from Charles River UK). Parental HT29 cells, or HT29 cells stably 
transduced with shRNA constructs, were resuspended in growth factor-reduced Matrigel 
(Invitrogen) at a concentration of 1x107 cells per ml. Cells were introduced into the liver by 
laparotomy performed under general anesthesia (inhaled isofluorane). A midline incision 
was made through the peritoneum and the left main lobe of the liver was exteriorized. This 
lobe was injected with 4x105 cells in a volume of 40 μL using a 29-gauge needle and then 
returned to the peritoneal cavity, followed by closure of the wound. In order to assess the 
effect of ARPC3 knockdown on the HGP (Fig. 6e) mice were culled 21 days post-injection 
of cancer cells. The tumor-bearing liver lobe was harvested, fixed in formalin and embedded 
in paraffin.
For experiments where treatment was administered (Fig. 6f–h and Supplementary Fig. 15), 
we waited for 10 days post- injection to allow for tumor establishment. At 10 days, mice 
were injected subcutaneously with 75 mg per kg D-luciferin (Caliper Life Sciences), 
anesthetized with isofluorane and then imaged in an Lumina II™ IVIS (In Vivo Imaging 
System) instrument (Caliper Life Sciences). Quantification of liver bioluminescence was 
performed using Living Image™ software (Caliper Life Sciences) according to 
Frentzas et al.
Page 16
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 manufacturer’s instructions. The bioluminescence measurement was used to ensure that 
subjects of equivalent tumor burden were allocated to each experimental group.
Capecitabine powder (LC Laboratories) was dissolved in vehicle for oral administration (40 
mM citrate buffer pH 6, 5% gum Arabic). B20-4.1.1 (Genentech), an antibody that blocks 
both mouse and human VEGF-A28, was formulated in sterile PBS for intraperitoneal 
administration. One cycle of therapy consisted of the following: mice received 500 mg per 
kg capecitabine or vehicle by oral gavage every day for 5 days, followed 2 days treatment 
break, with intraperitoneal injection of 2.5 mg per kg B20-4.1.1 or vehicle on the first and 
fifth day of the cycle. In mice that received capecitabine alone, the same protocol was 
followed but without the administration of B20-4.1.1. Mice were administered two cycles of 
therapy and then culled at 24 days post-injection of cancer cells. The tumor-bearing liver 
lobe was harvested, fixed in formalin and embedded in paraffin.
For quantification of tumor burden, H&E-stained sections were prepared. Sections were 
digitally scanned (Nanozoomer, Hamamatsu) and imported into NDPI viewer software 
(Hamamatsu). The marquee tool was used freehand to create regions of interest (ROIs) 
around areas of tumor in the section and tumor burden measurement was calculated in terms 
of area in mm2. For quantification of vessel density, sections were co-stained for CD31 
(detected with TMB) and CK20 (detected with DAB). Tumor vessels were manually counted 
and expressed in terms of vessels per mm2 of tumor area. H&E-stained sections were scored 
for HGP according to the same criteria used for human samples of liver metastasis. The 
scoring of tumor burden, vessel density and HGPs was performed in a blinded fashion. The 
number of mice per group was selected based on prior experience regarding the minimum 
number of animals necessary to detect a statistically significant difference between 
experimental groups. No randomization method was used.
ARPC3 staining
HT29 cells stably transfected with the control shRNA or shARPC3-3 were grown to 
confluency, washed in PBS, harvested by trypsinization and then pelleted by centrifugation. 
Pelleted cells (approximately 1x107 cells per pellet) were then resuspended in formalin and 
fixed for 15 minutes followed by pelleting again and embedding in paraffin. Tissue sections 
were prepared and then stained using anti-ARPC3 antibody (Millipore, MABT95; dilution 
1:2500) as described above (see Immunohistochemistry) with antigen retrieval performed in 
pH 6 citrate buffer with heating in a microwave for 18 minutes.
The same staining protocol was used to stain for ARPC3 in FFPE tissue sections of human 
liver metastasis specimens. Positive staining for ARPC3 was observed in cancer cells and in 
some stromal cell types (including immune cells and Kuppfer cells), but only cancer cell 
staining was scored. The scoring of ARPC3 staining intensity in cancer cells was performed 
semi-quantitatively by a pathologist. For each case examined, the percentage of cancer cells 
having 1+ (weak), 2+ (moderate) or 3+ (strong) staining intensity was scored. The result for 
each case was expressed as an H-score as calculated by the formula: (% area of weak 
staining) + (2 x % area of moderate staining) + (3 x % area of strong staining). This 
generated a score between 0 - 300 for each case.
Frentzas et al.
Page 17
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Statistical analysis
The univariate analysis of clinical data reported in Figs. 1 and 2, in Supplementary Figs. 3, 
5, 6, 7 and 8, and in Supplementary Tables 2, 4, 9 and 10 was performed using the two-tailed 
χ2 test. A univariate and multivariate analysis on 181 lesions from 90 patients was 
performed to determine clinical characteristics significantly associated with a good 
pathological response. Given that some lesions came from the same patient, a generalized 
estimating equation (GEE) approach was used to account for the within-patient covariance 
(exchangeable working correlation structure was used to specify the correlation among 
lesions clustered within the same patient). A total of 12 different clinical variables were 
included in the univariate analysis. Only 5 variables which met a pre-defined threshold for 
association with pathological response in the univariate GEE analysis (P-value <0.25) were 
then included in the subsequent multivariate GEE analysis. The results of the analysis are 
reported in Supplementary Table 5.
For the overall survival data, the Log-Rank test was used to determine the statistical 
signficance and Cox proportional hazards regression was used to determine hazard ratios 
(Fig. 4b–e). A univariate and multivariate analysis to determine clinical characteristics 
associated with overall survival was performed using the Cox proportional hazards 
regression model. A total of 12 different clinical variables were included in the univariate 
analysis. Only 2 variables which met a pre-defined threshold for association with overall 
survival in the univariate analysis (P-value <0.25) were then included in the subsequent 
multivariate analysis. The results of the analysis are reported in Supplementary Table 8. The 
proportional hazards assumption for the Cox regression models was tested based on 
weighted Schoenfeld residuals59: for the overall survival analyses (Fig. 4b–e) the P-values 
calculated ranged from 0.09 to 0.69, for the univariate analyses the P-values calculated 
ranged from 0.08 to 0.99 (depending on the variable), whilst the global P-value calculated 
for the multivariate analysis was 0.85, indicating that the proportional hazards ratio 
assumption was not rejected in any instance.
Where appropriate, the Kolmogorov-Smirnov normality test was used to determine the 
normality of the data and the F-test equality of variances test was used to determine whether 
the variance between groups was similar. For normally distributed data, we used two-tailed 
unpaired Student’s t-test (with Welch’s correction applied if the variance between groups 
was not similar) to compare experimental groups (Fig. 6g,h and Supplementary Figs. 11h 
and 15b,c). For non-normally distributed data we used Kruskal-Wallis test (Fig. 4a) or 
Mann-Whitney U-test (Fig. 6d-f and Supplementary Fig. 15a) to compare experimental 
groups. For data where the sample number was too small (n = 3 independent experiments) to 
determine normality, but where the variance between groups was similar, we used two-tailed 
unpaired Student’s t-test to compare experimental groups (Fig. 6c and Supplementary Fig. 
13). Intra- and inter-observer agreement for scoring the HGPs was analyzed using Pearson’s 
correlation co-efficient and Bland-Altman plots (Supplementary Fig. 17). For all statistical 
analyses, P-values below 0.05 were considered statistically significant.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Frentzas et al.
Page 18
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Acknowledgments
The study was supported by Breakthrough Breast Cancer (which recently merged with Breast Cancer Campaign 
forming Breast Cancer Now), NHS funding to the NIHR Biomedical Research Centre at RM / ICR (London), the 
Liver Disease Biobank (Montreal) and De Stichting tegen Kanker (Antwerp). We thank I. Hart, K. Hodivala-Dilke, 
C. Isacke, R. Kerbel, A. Tutt and the members of the Liver Metastasis Research Network for critical comments on 
the work. We thank Genentech for providing B20-4.1.1, Stephanie Petrillo for assistance with the Liver Disease 
Biobank, James Campbell for advice on statistical analysis and Mat Balazsi for assistance with digital pathology. 
For their technical assistance, we thank the staff of the ICR Biological Services Unit and the staff of the Breast 
Cancer Now Histopathology Core Facility.
References
1. Ferrara N, Hillan KJ, Gerber HP, Novotny W. Discovery and development of bevacizumab, an anti-
VEGF antibody for treating cancer. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2004; 3:391–400. [PubMed: 15136787] 
2. Kerbel RS. Tumor angiogenesis. N Engl J Med. 2008; 358:2039–2049. [PubMed: 18463380] 
3. Hurwitz H, et al. Bevacizumab plus irinotecan, fluorouracil, and leucovorin for metastatic colorectal 
cancer. The New England journal of medicine. 2004; 350:2335–2342. [PubMed: 15175435] 
4. Cunningham D, et al. Bevacizumab plus capecitabine versus capecitabine alone in elderly patients 
with previously untreated metastatic colorectal cancer (AVEX): an open-label, randomised phase 3 
trial. Lancet Oncol. 2013; 14:1077–1085. [PubMed: 24028813] 
5. Ebos JM, Kerbel RS. Antiangiogenic therapy: impact on invasion, disease progression, and 
metastasis. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2011; 8:210–221. [PubMed: 21364524] 
6. Vasudev NS, Reynolds AR. Anti-angiogenic therapy for cancer: current progress, unresolved 
questions and future directions. Angiogenesis. 2014; 17:471–494. [PubMed: 24482243] 
7. Pezzella F, et al. Angiogenesis in primary lung cancer and lung secondaries. Eur J Cancer. 1996; 
32A:2494–2500. [PubMed: 9059338] 
8. Vermeulen PB, et al. Liver metastases from colorectal adenocarcinomas grow in three patterns with 
different angiogenesis and desmoplasia. The Journal of pathology. 2001; 195:336–342. [PubMed: 
11673831] 
9. Dome B, Hendrix MJ, Paku S, Tovari J, Timar J. Alternative vascularization mechanisms in cancer: 
Pathology and therapeutic implications. Am J Pathol. 2007; 170:1–15. [PubMed: 17200177] 
10. Donnem T, et al. Vessel co-option in primary human tumors and metastases: an obstacle to 
effective anti-angiogenic treatment? Cancer Med. 2013; 2:427–436. [PubMed: 24156015] 
11. Jayson GC, Kerbel R, Ellis LM, Harris AL. Antiangiogenic therapy in oncology: current status and 
future directions. Lancet. 2016
12. Adams RB, et al. Selection for hepatic resection of colorectal liver metastases: expert consensus 
statement. HPB (Oxford). 2013; 15:91–103. [PubMed: 23297719] 
13. Van den Eynden GG, et al. The multifaceted role of the microenvironment in liver metastasis: 
biology and clinical implications. Cancer research. 2013; 73:2031–2043. [PubMed: 23536564] 
14. Stessels F, et al. Breast adenocarcinoma liver metastases, in contrast to colorectal cancer liver 
metastases, display a non-angiogenic growth pattern that preserves the stroma and lacks hypoxia. 
Br J Cancer. 2004; 90:1429–1436. [PubMed: 15054467] 
15. Gruenberger B, et al. Bevacizumab, capecitabine, and oxaliplatin as neoadjuvant therapy for 
patients with potentially curable metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2008; 26:1830–1835. 
[PubMed: 18398148] 
16. Chaudhury P, et al. Perioperative chemotherapy with bevacizumab and liver resection for colorectal 
cancer liver metastasis. HPB. 2010; 12:37–42. [PubMed: 20495643] 
17. Wong R, et al. A multicentre study of capecitabine, oxaliplatin plus bevacizumab as perioperative 
treatment of patients with poor-risk colorectal liver-only metastases not selected for upfront 
resection. Ann Oncol. 2011; 22:2042–2048. [PubMed: 21285134] 
18. Chun YS, et al. Association of computed tomography morphologic criteria with pathologic 
response and survival in patients treated with bevacizumab for colorectal liver metastases. JAMA. 
2009; 302:2338–2344. [PubMed: 19952320] 
Frentzas et al.
Page 19
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 19. Shindoh J, et al. Optimal morphologic response to preoperative chemotherapy: an alternate 
outcome end point before resection of hepatic colorectal metastases. J Clin Oncol. 2012; 30:4566–
4572. [PubMed: 23150701] 
20. Boonsirikamchai P, et al. CT findings of response and recurrence, independent of change in tumor 
size, in colorectal liver metastasis treated with bevacizumab. AJR American journal of 
roentgenology. 2011; 197:W1060–1066. [PubMed: 22109320] 
21. Van den Eynden GG, et al. The histological growth pattern of colorectal cancer liver metastases has 
prognostic value. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2012; 29:541–549. [PubMed: 22476470] 
22. Nurnberg A, Kitzing T, Grosse R. Nucleating actin for invasion. Nature reviews. 2011; 11:177–
187.
23. Otsubo T, et al. Involvement of Arp2/3 complex in the process of colorectal carcinogenesis. 
Modern pathology : an official journal of the United States and Canadian Academy of Pathology 
Inc. 2004; 17:461–467.
24. Iwaya K, et al. Correlation between liver metastasis of the colocalization of actin-related protein 2 
and 3 complex and WAVE2 in colorectal carcinoma. Cancer science. 2007; 98:992–999. [PubMed: 
17459058] 
25. Kopetz S, et al. Synergistic activity of the SRC family kinase inhibitor dasatinib and oxaliplatin in 
colon carcinoma cells is mediated by oxidative stress. Cancer research. 2009; 69:3842–3849. 
[PubMed: 19383922] 
26. Nyati MK, et al. The potential of 5-fluorocytosine/cytosine deaminase enzyme prodrug gene 
therapy in an intrahepatic colon cancer model. Gene therapy. 2002; 9:844–849. [PubMed: 
12080378] 
27. Gray MJ, et al. Therapeutic targeting of Id2 reduces growth of human colorectal carcinoma in the 
murine liver. Oncogene. 2008; 27:7192–7200. [PubMed: 18806828] 
28. Liang WC, et al. Cross-species vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-blocking antibodies 
completely inhibit the growth of human tumor xenografts and measure the contribution of stromal 
VEGF. J Biol Chem. 2006; 281:951–961. [PubMed: 16278208] 
29. Miller KD, et al. Randomized phase III trial of capecitabine compared with bevacizumab plus 
capecitabine in patients with previously treated metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2005; 
23:792–799. [PubMed: 15681523] 
30. Miller K, et al. Paclitaxel plus bevacizumab versus paclitaxel alone for metastatic breast cancer. 
The New England journal of medicine. 2007; 357:2666–2676. [PubMed: 18160686] 
31. Miles DW, et al. Phase III study of bevacizumab plus docetaxel compared with placebo plus 
docetaxel for the first-line treatment of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative 
metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2010; 28:3239–3247. [PubMed: 20498403] 
32. Robert NJ, et al. RIBBON-1: randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase III trial of 
chemotherapy with or without bevacizumab for first-line treatment of human epidermal growth 
factor receptor 2-negative, locally recurrent or metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2011; 
29:1252–1260. [PubMed: 21383283] 
33. Brufsky AM, et al. RIBBON-2: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase III trial 
evaluating the efficacy and safety of bevacizumab in combination with chemotherapy for second-
line treatment of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative metastatic breast cancer. J 
Clin Oncol. 2011; 29:4286–4293. [PubMed: 21990397] 
34. Naresh KN, Nerurkar AY, Borges AM. Angiogenesis is redundant for tumour growth in lymph 
node metastases. Histopathology. 2001; 38:466–470. [PubMed: 11422485] 
35. Jeong HS, et al. Investigation of the Lack of Angiogenesis in the Formation of Lymph Node 
Metastases. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2015; 107
36. Colpaert CG, et al. Cutaneous breast cancer deposits show distinct growth patterns with different 
degrees of angiogenesis, hypoxia and fibrin deposition. Histopathology. 2003; 42:530–540. 
[PubMed: 12786888] 
37. Breast-Cancer-Progression-Working-Party. Evidence for novel non-angiogenic pathway in breast-
cancer metastasis. Lancet. 2000; 355:1787–1788. [PubMed: 10832831] 
38. Szabo V, et al. Mechanism of tumour vascularization in experimental lung metastases. The Journal 
of pathology. 2015; 235:384–396. [PubMed: 25319725] 
Frentzas et al.
Page 20
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 39. Carbonell WS, Ansorge O, Sibson N, Muschel R. The vascular basement membrane as “soil” in 
brain metastasis. PLoS One. 2009; 4:e5857. [PubMed: 19516901] 
40. Bugyik E, et al. Lack of angiogenesis in experimental brain metastases. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 
2011; 70:979–991. [PubMed: 22002424] 
41. Valiente M, et al. Serpins promote cancer cell survival and vascular co-option in brain metastasis. 
Cell. 2014; 156:1002–1016. [PubMed: 24581498] 
42. Jain RK, et al. Biomarkers of response and resistance to antiangiogenic therapy. Nat Rev Clin 
Oncol. 2009; 6:327–338. [PubMed: 19483739] 
43. Kuczynski EA, et al. Co-option of Liver Vessels and Not Sprouting Angiogenesis Drives Acquired 
Sorafenib Resistance in Hepatocellular Carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2016; 108
44. Rubenstein JL, et al. Anti-VEGF antibody treatment of glioblastoma prolongs survival but results 
in increased vascular cooption. Neoplasia. 2000; 2:306–314. [PubMed: 11005565] 
45. Kusters B, et al. Vascular endothelial growth factor-A(165) induces progression of melanoma brain 
metastases without induction of sprouting angiogenesis. Cancer research. 2002; 62:341–345. 
[PubMed: 11809675] 
46. Leenders WP, et al. Antiangiogenic therapy of cerebral melanoma metastases results in sustained 
tumor progression via vessel co-option. Clin Cancer Res. 2004; 10:6222–6230. [PubMed: 
15448011] 
47. Paez-Ribes M, et al. Antiangiogenic therapy elicits malignant progression of tumors to increased 
local invasion and distant metastasis. Cancer Cell. 2009; 15:220–231. [PubMed: 19249680] 
48. de Groot JF, et al. Tumor invasion after treatment of glioblastoma with bevacizumab: radiographic 
and pathologic correlation in humans and mice. Neuro Oncol. 2010; 12:233–242. [PubMed: 
20167811] 
49. Lu KV, et al. VEGF Inhibits Tumor Cell Invasion and Mesenchymal Transition through a MET/
VEGFR2 Complex. Cancer Cell. 2012; 22:21–35. [PubMed: 22789536] 
50. Sennino B, et al. Suppression of Tumor Invasion and Metastasis by Concurrent Inhibition of c-Met 
and VEGF Signaling in Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors. Cancer Discov. 2012; 2:270–287. 
[PubMed: 22585997] 
51. Depner C, et al. EphrinB2 repression through ZEB2 mediates tumour invasion and anti-angiogenic 
resistance. Nature communications. 2016; 7:12329.
52. Bland JM, Altman DG. Statistical methods for assessing agreement between two methods of 
clinical measurement. Lancet. 1986; 1:307–310. [PubMed: 2868172] 
53. Ribero D, et al. Bevacizumab improves pathologic response and protects against hepatic injury in 
patients treated with oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy for colorectal liver metastases. Cancer. 2007; 
110:2761–2767. [PubMed: 17960603] 
54. Chang HH, Leeper WR, Chan G, Quan D, Driman DK. Infarct-like necrosis: a distinct form of 
necrosis seen in colorectal carcinoma liver metastases treated with perioperative chemotherapy. 
The American journal of surgical pathology. 2012; 36:570–576. [PubMed: 22301494] 
55. Goldhirsch A, et al. Personalizing the treatment of women with early breast cancer: highlights of 
the St Gallen International Expert Consensus on the Primary Therapy of Early Breast Cancer 
2013. Ann Oncol. 2013; 24:2206–2223. [PubMed: 23917950] 
56. Hammond ME, et al. American Society of Clinical Oncology/College of American Pathologists 
guideline recommendations for immunohistochemical testing of estrogen and progesterone 
receptors in breast cancer (unabridged version). Archives of pathology & laboratory medicine. 
2010; 134:e48–72. [PubMed: 20586616] 
57. Wolff AC, et al. Recommendations for human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 testing in breast 
cancer: American Society of Clinical Oncology/College of American Pathologists clinical practice 
guideline update. J Clin Oncol. 2013; 31:3997–4013. [PubMed: 24101045] 
58. Gourlaouen M, Welti JC, Vasudev NS, Reynolds AR. Essential role for endocytosis in the growth 
factor-stimulated activation of ERK1/2 in endothelial cells. J Biol Chem. 2013; 288:7467–7480. 
[PubMed: 23341459] 
59. Grambsch PM, Therneau TM. Proportional Hazards Tests and Diagnostics Based on Weighted 
Residuals. Biometrika. 1994; 81:515–526.
Frentzas et al.
Page 21
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 1. Correlation between HGP and pathological response in patients treated preoperatively 
with bevacizumab
a. Diagrams illustrating the morphology of the normal liver or the morphology of the tumor-
liver interface in liver metastases with a desmoplastic, pushing or replacement HGP. b. The 
HGPs and the pathological response to bev-chemo were scored in 59 CRCLMs from 33 
patients treated preoperatively with bev-chemo at RM. Graph shows % HGP (replacement, 
desmoplastic, pushing) scored in each individual lesion and the data are grouped by 
pathological response score: >75%, 50–75%, 25–49% or <25% viable tumor. Median 
Frentzas et al.
Page 22
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 number of lesions examined per patient was 1 (range = 1 to 4 lesions per patient). c–e. 
Examples of H&E-stained lesions from the RM cohort are shown. Arrows point to examples 
of replacement HGP areas. Arrowheads point to examples of desmoplastic HGP areas. 
Asterisks indicate areas of infarct-like necrosis. f. The HGPs and the pathological response 
to bev-chemo were scored in 128 CRCLMs from 59 patients treated with bev-chemo at 
MUHC. Graph shows % HGP (replacement, desmoplastic, pushing) scored in each 
individual lesion and the data are grouped by pathological response score: >75%, 50–75%, 
25–49% or <25% viable tumor. Median number of lesions examined per patient was 2 
(range = 1 to 12 lesions per patient). The χ2-test was used to determine statistical 
significance (see 2 x 2 contingency tables in panels b and f). Scale bars, 1 mm.
Frentzas et al.
Page 23
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 2. Correlation between HGP and morphological response on CT in patients treated 
preoperatively with bevacizumab
a–f. CT scans of patients treated preoperatively with bev-chemo. Examples of optimal (OR), 
partial (PR) or absent (AR) morphological response are shown.
a,b. OR; in the pre-treatment image a lesion in liver segment VII (arrowhead) is scored as 
group-3 (a); the same lesion imaged after 4 cycles of bevacizumab in combination with 
CAPOX is now scored as group-1 (b).
Frentzas et al.
Page 24
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 c,d. PR; in the pre-treatment image a lesion in liver segment II (arrowhead) is scored as 
group-3 (c); the same lesion imaged after 4 cycles of bevacizumab in combination with 
CAPOX is now scored as group-2 (d).
e,f. AR; in the pre-treatment image a lesion in liver segment VI (arrowhead) is scored as 
group-3 (e); the same lesion imaged after 6 cycles of bevacizumab in combination with 
FOLFIRI is still scored as group-3 (f).
g. Morphological response and HGP were scored in 52 liver metastases from 31 patients 
treated preoperatively with bev-chemo at RM. Graph shows the % HGP scored in each 
individual lesion (replacement, desmoplastic, pushing). Lesions are grouped according to 
response: AR, PR or OR. Lesions scored as AR were classed as poor responders, whilst 
those scored as PR or OR were classed as good responders. Median number of lesions 
examined per patient was 1 (range = 1 to 4 lesions per patient). The χ2 test was used to 
determine statistical significance (see 2 x 2 contingency table in panel g).
Frentzas et al.
Page 25
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 3. Cancer cells infiltrate the hepatic plates and co-opt sinusoidal blood vessels in the 
replacement HGP
a. An area of normal liver is shown. Staining is for hepatocyte specific antigen (HSA, green) 
to detect hepatocytes and collagen-3 (col-3, red) to detect liver sinusoidal blood vessels 
(SV). b–d. Staining for cancer cells (CK, red) and hepatocytes (HSA, green) at the tumor-
liver interface (b,c) and within the tumor mass (d) in a replacement HGP liver metastasis of 
colorectal cancer. Examples of displaced hepatocytes are marked (arrowheads). e–g. 
Staining for cytokeratin 20 (CK20, brown) to identify cancer cells and CD31 to identify 
Frentzas et al.
Page 26
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 blood vessels (blue) in replacement HGP liver metastases of colorectal cancer. Arrows and 
arrowheads indicate examples of liver sinusoidal blood vessels where one end of the vessel 
is physically located in the liver parenchyma (arrows), whilst the other end is surrounded by 
cancer cells (arrowheads). Asterisk, tumor. Lv, normal liver. SV, sinusoidal blood vessel. 
Scale bars, 25 μM.
Frentzas et al.
Page 27
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 4. The replacement HGP occurs in progressive disease and is associated with a poor 
outcome in patients treated with bevacizumab
a. Left: HGPs in untreated CRCLMs (n = 32 lesions from 19 MUHC patients). Middle: 
HGPs in pre-existing CRCLMs (n = 128 lesions from 59 MUHC patients). Right: HGPs in 
new CRCLMs (n = 35 lesions from 13 MUHC patients). Graphs show % replacement (R), 
% desmoplastic (D) and % pushing (P) HGP per lesion ± SEM. b. Kaplan-Meier estimates 
of OS for 62 MUHC patients treated preoperatively with bev-chemo stratified into two 
groups: predominant replacement HGP (26 patients) or predominant desmoplastic HGP (35 
Frentzas et al.
Page 28
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 patients). c. Kaplan-Meier estimates of OS for 29 MUHC patients treated preoperatively 
with chemotherapy alone stratified into two groups: predominant replacement HGP (12 
patients) or predominant desmoplastic HGP (16 patients). d. Kaplan-Meier estimates of OS 
for 51 MUHC patients with a predominant desmoplastic HGP stratified into two groups: 
desmoplastic HGP treated with bev-chemo (35 patients) or desmoplastic HGP treated with 
chemotherapy alone (16 patients). e. Kaplan-Meier estimates of OS for 38 MUHC patients 
with a predominant replacement HGP stratified into two groups: replacement HGP treated 
with bev-chemo (26 patients) or replacement HGP treated with chemotherapy alone (12 
patients). Kruskall-Walls test (a) or the Log-Rank test (b–e) were used to determine 
statistical significance. Hazard ratios were calculated using Cox-regression. * P<0.001.
Frentzas et al.
Page 29
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 5. The replacement HGP predominates in breast cancer liver metastases
a. The HGPs were examined in breast cancer liver metastases (BCLMs) from 17 patients. 
Graph shows the % HGP (replacement, desmoplastic, pushing) scored in each case. The 
cases are grouped by intrinsic subtype of breast cancer. Lum A, luminal A. Lum B (HER2-), 
luminal B HER2 negative. Lum B (HER2+), luminal B HER2 positive. TN, triple negative.
b–g. Morphology of the replacement growth pattern of BCLMs.Diagram of the tumor-liver 
interface in the replacement HGP (b). H&E-stained human BCLM sample illustrating the 
tumor-liver interface (c). Co-staining for hepatocyte specific antigen (HSA) to label 
Frentzas et al.
Page 30
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 hepatocytes and pan-cytokeratin (CK) to label cancer cells confirms that breast cancer cells 
infiltrate the liver parenchyma and replace hepatocytes in BCLM (d). Co-staining for alpha 
smooth muscle actin (αSMA) to label fibroblasts and CK to label cancer cells confirms the 
absence of a desmoplastic stroma at the tumor-liver interface in BCLM (e). Co-staining for 
collagen-3 (col-3) to label sinusoidal vessels and CK to label cancer cells shows that the 
vascular architecture of the adjacent liver is preserved at the tumor-liver interface in BCLM 
(f). Co-staining for CD31 to label blood vessels and cytokeratin 19 (CK19) to label cancer 
cells confirms the infiltrative pattern of tumor growth that facilitates vessel co-option in 
BCLM (g). Asterisk, cancer cells; Lv, normal liver. Scale bars, 50 μM.
Frentzas et al.
Page 31
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 6. Inhibition of vessel co-option and angiogenesis is more effective than targeting 
angiogenesis alone
a,b. Areas of replacement (a) and desmoplastic (b) HGP are shown in a preclinical (HT29 
cell line) orthotopic model of advanced liver metastasis. Staining shown is for: H&E, CK 
and HSA, CK and col-3, CK and αSMA or cytokeratin 20 (CK20) and CD31, as indicated. 
c,d. Characterization of parental HT29 cells (parent) and HT29 cells transduced with control 
non-targeting shRNA (control shRNA) or ARPC3-targeting shRNAs (shARPC3-1, 
shARPC3-2 or shARPC3-3). In c, ARPC3 expression was determined by western blotting 
Frentzas et al.
Page 32
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 (see also Supplementary Data Set 1). Graph shows ARPC3 expression relative to parental 
HT29 cells ± SEM (n = 3 independent western blots). In d, cell motility was measured by 
time-lapse microscopy. Graph shows cell velocity (μm per minute) relative to parental HT29 
cells ± SEM (n = 30 tracked cells per group pooled from 2 independent experiments). e. 
Quantification of the HGPs in control- and ARPC3-knockdown tumors. Graph shows the % 
replacement (R), % desmoplastic (D) and % pushing (P) HGP per group ± SEM (n = 6 mice 
per group). f–h. Tumors with normal ARPC3 levels (control shRNA) or ARPC3 knockdown 
(shARPC3-3) were established in the livers of mice, followed by treatment with B20-4.1.1 
plus capecitabine (BC) or vehicle alone (Vh) for two weeks followed by histopathological 
analysis. Graph in f shows the % HGP per group ± SEM (n = 8 mice per group). Graph in g 
shows liver tumor burden expressed in terms of lesion area ± SEM (n = 8 mice per group). 
Graph in h shows tumor vessel density in terms of vessels per mm2 ± SEM (n = 8 mice per 
group). For statistical analysis, Student’s t-test (panels c,g,h) or Mann Whitney U-test 
(panels d,e,f) were used. *P<0.05, **P<0.01 ***P<0.001, ****P<0.0001. n.s., no significant 
difference. Asterisk, cancer cells; DS, desmoplastic stroma; Lv, normal liver. Scale bars, 50 
μM.
Frentzas et al.
Page 33
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
