 Senescent cells expose and secrete an oxidized form of
membrane-bound vimentin as revealed by a natural
polyreactive antibody
David Frescasa,1, Christelle M. Rouxa, Semra Aygun-Sunara, Anatoli S. Gleibermana, Peter Krasnova, Oleg V. Kurnasovb,
Evguenia Stroma, Lauren P. Virtuosoa, Michelle Wrobela, Andrei L. Ostermanb, Marina P. Antochc, Vadim Metta,
Olga B. Chernovaa,1, and Andrei V. Gudkova,d,1
aEveron Biosciences, Inc., Buffalo, NY 14263; bInfectious and Inflammatory Disease Center, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037;
cDepartment of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY 14263; and dDepartment of Cell Stress Biology, Roswell Park
Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY 14263
Edited by Ruslan Medzhitov, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, and approved January 24, 2017 (received for review September 1, 2016)
Studying the phenomenon of cellular senescence has been hindered
by the lack of senescence-specific markers. As such, detection of
proteins informally associated with senescence accompanies the use
of senescence-associated β-galactosidase as a collection of semise-
lective markers to monitor the presence of senescent cells. To iden-
tify novel biomarkers of senescence, we immunized BALB/c mice
with senescent mouse lung fibroblasts and screened for antibodies
that recognized senescence-associated cell-surface antigens by FACS
analysis and a newly developed cell-based ELISA. The majority of
antibodies that we isolated, cloned, and sequenced belonged to the
IgM isotype of the innate immune system. In-depth characterization
of one of these monoclonal, polyreactive natural antibodies, the
IgM clone 9H4, revealed its ability to recognize the intermediate
filament vimentin. By using 9H4, we observed that senescent pri-
mary human fibroblasts express vimentin on their cell surface, and
MS analysis revealed a posttranslational modification on cysteine
328 (C328) by the oxidative adduct malondialdehyde (MDA). More-
over, elevated levels of secreted MDA-modified vimentin were de-
tected in the plasma of aged senescence-accelerated mouse prone 8
mice, which are known to have deregulated reactive oxygen species
metabolism and accelerated aging. Based on these findings, we
hypothesize that humoral innate immunity may recognize senes-
cent cells by the presence of membrane-bound MDA-vimentin, pre-
sumably as part of a senescence eradication mechanism that may
become impaired with age and result in senescent cell accumulation.
aging | oxidative posttranslational modifications | biomarker | SAMP8 |
malondialdehyde
C
ellular senescence is a multistep process that halts the pro-
liferation of damaged or dysfunctional cells to restrict the
progression of malignancy (1–3). Although senescence serves to
constrain aberrant proliferation to counteract cellular trans-
formation, the accumulation of senescent cells over time may
play an equally adverse role (4). Secreted proteins produced by
senescent cells are collectively referred to as senescence-associ-
ated secretory phenotype (SASP) factors (5). These factors in-
clude proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines, as well as
various growth factors, proteases, extracellular matrix proteins
and others (4–6). The accumulation of senescent cells and the
accompanied production of SASP have been implicated in tissue
dysfunction and overall loss of the regenerative potential of tis-
sues, both of which are observed with aging (7–9). Moreover, the
presence of SASP factors has also been shown to induce an
epithelial–mesenchyme transition and angiogenesis that supports
cancer cell invasiveness (5). Although senescent cells are thought
to naturally accumulate in various tissues and organs with age,
the mechanisms by which this occurs is not yet fully understood.
Evidence that senescent cells are targets of the immune system
suggests that the efficiency by which senescent cells are cleared
may play a key role in their accumulation (10, 11).
The shortage of markers needed to identify senescent cells and
to quantitate their numbers is a major hindrance to studying se-
nescence in vivo and in vitro (12). Currently, the detection of
proteins described to be associated with senescence, such as p16,
p21, IL-6, γ-H2AX, phosphorylated p38 MAPK, and most recently
GATA4, accompanies the use of senescence-associated β-galacto-
sidase (SA-β-Gal) as an assortment of semiselective senescence
markers, many of which are additionally involved in many senes-
cence-independent cellular processes (13, 14). Here, we describe
our efforts to identify senescence-specific markers (antibodies and
their corresponding antigens) by immunizing mice with senescent
cells. In this way, we set out to challenge the murine immune
system to respond to naturally occurring antigenic substrates: that
is, cell-surface immune ligands that can mediate recognition by the
immune system (15). Among the dozens of antibody clones that we
isolated and screened for immunoreactivity toward senescent cells,
many were of the IgM isotype. Germ-line–type IgMs, also termed
“natural antibodies,” are part of the innate immune system and are
the most evolutionarily conserved antibody isotype (16–18). As the
earliest isotype to be expressed during immune development, IgMs
are thought to have been selected during the evolution of immunity
for their contribution to critical immunoregulatory and house-
keeping functions, which include clearance of apoptotic cells to
prevent inflammation and autoimmunity (19, 20). Intriguingly,
Significance
Understanding the mechanisms underlying the development of
senescence and the consequences related to the accumulation of
senescent cells is a major focus of ongoing research. Our report
shows that senescent cells express a form of oxidized vimentin on
their cell surface and that oxidized vimentin is secreted into the
blood of senescence-prone senescence-accelerated mouse prone 8
mice. Given the growing evidence that oxidized proteins are in-
volved in the development of human diseases, the detection and
monitoring of secreted proteins like malondialdehyde-modified
vimentin is certain to become a vital and noninvasive biomarker
for studying senescence and monitoring age-related illnesses.
Author contributions: D.F., A.S.G., A.L.O., M.P.A., V.M., O.B.C., and A.V.G. designed re-
search; D.F., C.M.R., S.A.-S., A.S.G., P.K., O.V.K., E.S., L.P.V., M.W., M.P.A., and V.M. per-
formed research; D.F., C.M.R., S.A.-S., A.S.G., P.K., E.S., A.L.O., M.P.A., O.B.C., and A.V.G.
analyzed data; and D.F., A.S.G., V.M., and A.V.G. wrote the paper.
Conflict of interest statement: O.B.C. and A.V.G. are cofounders and shareholders of Everon
Biosciences, a biotech company that funded this work and owns related intellectual
property.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
1To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: dfrescas@tartiscorp.com, ochernova@
tartiscorp.com, or andrei.gudkov@roswellpark.org.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1614661114/-/DCSupplemental.
E1668–E1677
|
PNAS
|
Published online February 13, 2017
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1614661114
 other components of the innate immune system, including natural
killer (NK) cells, neutrophils, dendritic cells, and macrophages,
functionally contribute to elimination of senescent cells (11, 15,
21). NK cells, for example, have been shown to recognize and
eliminate senescent cells after expression of NK receptor ligands,
adhesion molecules (intercellular adhesion molecule-1), and death
receptors (TRAIL-R and FAS), respectively (10, 11, 15). More-
over, natural IgMs have been shown to play a significant role in the
clearance of senescent red blood cells (22).
Ongoing efforts to determine the antigenic targets of our se-
nescence-associated antibodies resulted in the discovery of vimentin
on the surface of senescent cells. Vimentin is characteristically
known as a cytosolic protein that plays a major role in intermediate
filament assembly and function. Nonetheless, vimentin has also
been shown to interact with the nucleus and the membranes of cells
(23). Using our IgM clone 9H4, we show that vimentin accumulates
on the surface of senescent cells, and we demonstrate that senes-
cence-associated cell-surface vimentin is modified by the oxidative
adduct malondialdehyde (MDA). These observations are in
agreement with previous studies showing that one of the major
antigens of natural IgMs are oxidation-associated neo-epitopes,
which become distinctively exposed on the cell surface of dysfunc-
tional cells to allow recognition by the immune system (16, 24). MS
analysis confirmed the presence of MDA on senescence-associated
cell-surface vimentin and identified an oxidation-associated neo-
epitope on cysteine 328 (C328). Because the detection of senes-
cence-specific epitopes may support the development of non-
invasive clinical tools to identify and monitor age-related diseases
linked to the accumulation of senescent cells, we developed a
sandwich ELISA using 9H4 to measure secreted modified vimentin
in the plasma of the senescence-accelerated mouse prone 8
(SAMP8) mouse model, resulting in the detection of elevated
MDA-vimentin levels in SAMP8 mice compared with C57BL/6
mice. Taking these data together, we propose the detection of se-
creted MDA-modified vimentin as a readout of senescent cells.
Results
Generation of Antibodies Against Senescent Cells. Tissue culture cells
have previously been used to immunize mice to generate anti-
bodies to cell-surface antigens (25, 26). To generate antibodies
with immunoreactivity toward senescent cells, BALB/c mice were
immunized intraperitoneally with syngeneic bleomycin-treated,
senescent mouse lung fibroblasts (mLFs) (Fig. S1 A and B). The
induction of antibodies was evaluated via FACS analysis of un-
treated and bleomycin-treated mLFs following their incubation
with serum collected from immunized mice (Fig. S1C). Hybrid-
omas were then produced by fusion of splenocytes from selected
immunized mice with murine myeloma Sp2/0 cells, and a primary
screen of antibodies to compare binding between untreated and
senescent mLFs was performed again by FACS (Fig. S1D). An-
tibody clones that showed selective immunoreactivity toward se-
nescent cells were chosen, produced in large scale, isotyped, and
their light- and heavy-chain variable regions were sequenced.
Isotyping and sequencing showed that the majority of these anti-
body clones were germ-line–type IgMs (Fig. S2). IgMs, which are
often referred to as natural antibodies, are part of the innate
immune system (18, 27).
A senescence-associated cell-based ELISA (SACE) assay was
developed as a secondary screen to identify those antibodies with
highest affinity toward the cell surface of live senescent cells. To
generate senescent cells for SACE analysis, normal human pri-
mary dermal fibroblasts (NDFs) were treated with 10-Gy irradi-
ation (IR), plated on tissue culture dishes, and allowed to senesce
over the course of 2–3 wk (Fig. S3 A and B). Importantly, cellular
viability and cell size (as determined by FACS analysis) of these
IR-treated cells was comparable to that of untreated cells (Fig. S3
A and C). By applying our SACE assay, we observed that several
of our IgM antibodies, a subset which are shown in Fig. 1A, were
capable of discriminating between untreated and IR-treated cells.
Notably, the 9H4 antibody clone was particularly proficient at
recognizing senescent cells (Fig. 1A). Therefore, based on these
data, 9H4 was among those chosen for further characterization.
Although natural antibodies like the IgM E06 [an anti-phos-
phorylcholine (PC) antibody] have been shown to recognize
apoptotic cells (28–32), 9H4 failed to recognize Annexin V+
NDFs undergoing apoptosis following staurosporine treatment
(Fig. 1B and Fig. S3D). Moreover, we found that recognition of
senescent cells by the 9H4 antibody was dependent upon the
onset of senescence, as observed via a 3-wk-long time-course
experiment following IR, and by the antibody concentration used
in the SACE assay (Fig. 1 C and D). Levels of fibroblast surface
protein (FSP), a fibroblast surface antigen that was detected
using a commercial monoclonal IgM antibody (33), did not show
significant differences between untreated and IR-treated cells
(Fig. 1C). These data substantiate the method of isolating se-
nescence-associated antibodies following immunization with se-
nescent cells, which we independently validated by performing a
secondary screen using a modified cell-based ELISA. Further-
more, these efforts led to the identification of the IgM antibody
9H4 as a putative biomarker for recognizing senescent cells.
9H4 Recognizes Vimentin and Oxidative Posttranslational Modifications.
To begin to determine the antigenic targets of our 9H4 IgM clone,
we performed indirect immunofluorescence and observed that 9H4
colocalized predominantly with the intermediate filament vimentin
in PFA-fixed and Triton X-100 permeabilized untreated and IR-
treated NDF cells (Fig. 2A and Fig. S4A). As part of the type III
intermediate filament protein family, vimentin is a widely expressed
and highly conserved protein that supports cellular integrity and
provides resistance against mechanical stress (23). Immunoblotting
of whole-cell lysates (WCE) from untreated, bleomycin-treated, and
IR-treated NDF cells showed that 9H4 recognized a major band at
∼57 kDa, which slightly increased in the lysates of senescent cells
(Fig. 2B). A less-intense secondary band was also detected at
45 kDa (Fig. 2B). Consistent with these data, the molecular mass of
vimentin is ∼57 kDa, and the levels of vimentin have been shown to
increase during senescence in fibroblasts (34). To further confirm
that 9H4 recognized vimentin, we performed Western blot analysis
using vimentin produced in Escherichia coli and observed that 9H4
was capable of detecting the recombinant version of vimentin (Fig.
2C). 9H4 was also capable of detecting recombinant vimentin in a
sandwich ELISA using a commercial chicken polyclonal anti-
vimentin capture antibody (Fig. 2D).
IgMs are capable of forming polymers (mostly pentamers with 10
antigen-binding sites) through covalent linkage of disulfide bonds.
Consequently, naturally occurring IgMs are inherently polyreactive
and among the diverse antigens of natural antibodies are synthetic
haptens, nucleotides, polysaccharides, oxidized lipids, and advanced
glycation end products (AGEs) (17, 35, 36). To determine if 9H4
exhibited polyreactivity, we performed direct ELISAs using a series
of haptens and antigens previously used to characterize IgMs (35).
We also included the oxidation-specific adducts MDA and PC, as
well as the AGE-associated modification carboxymethyl lysine
(CML) conjugated to BSA in this analysis. 9H4 showed immuno-
reactivity against more than one antigen in the test group, sug-
gesting our IgM clone was indeed polyreactive (Fig. 2E and Fig.
S4B). Interestingly, of the naturally occurring antigens, 9H4 was
capable of binding to BSA-conjugated MDA, single-stranded DNA
(ssDNA), and to a lesser extent BSA-conjugated CML (Fig. 2E and
Fig. S4B). Unlike the E06 antibody, 9H4 failed to recognize PC-
BSA or double-stranded DNA (dsDNA), respectively (Fig. 2E and
Fig. S4 B and C). Taken together, these data show that the in-
termediate filament vimentin and the oxidative posttranslational
modifications MDA and CML are antigenic targets of 9H4.
Frescas et al.
PNAS
|
Published online February 13, 2017
|
E1669
IMMUNOLOGY AND
INFLAMMATION
PNAS PLUS
 Enrichment of Vimentin on the Surface of Senescent Cells. In addi-
tion to playing a fundamental role as an intermediate filament in
cytoskeletal assemblies, vimentin has been shown to associate
with the nucleus and cell membranes of various cell types (37–
43). Because 9H4 recognizes senescent cells by SACE analysis,
which is an assay that requires robust antibody interactions with
cell-surface antigens, we performed a cellular fractionation ex-
periment to determine if vimentin was enriched on the surface
of senescent NDFs. Immunoblotting of subcellular fractions
showed vimentin, as detected by 9H4, resided predominantly in
the cytoskeletal fraction of untreated NDFs (Fig. 3A). Quanti-
fication by band densitometry analysis of immunoblots showed
that ∼50% of vimentin is associated with the cytoskeleton (Fig.
3B). In senescent cells, however, vimentin was observed to sub-
stantially increase in the membrane fraction by at least 20%,
which coincided with an equivalent decrease in signal from the
cytoskeletal fraction (Fig. 3 A and B). Notably, the percentage of
vimentin associated with the cytoplasm or nucleus did not appear
to change between the two conditions (Fig. 3 A and B).
To further confirm that vimentin was enriched on the mem-
branes of senescent cells, we fractionated cells and performed a
pull-down assay with 9H4. Coomassie staining of immunopreci-
pitated proteins revealed a band at 45 kDa, a band at 57 kDa,
and a band between 70 and 100 kDa (Fig. 3C). Of these bands,
only the 57-kDa band was immunoreactive with both 9H4 and a
commercial polyclonal antivimentin antibody (Fig. 3C). SACE
analysis using this commercial antivimentin antibody confirmed
enrichment of vimentin on the surface of senescent cells (Fig.
S5A). Importantly, fixation and permeabilization of cells with
methanol before SACE analysis resulted in the loss of assay
specificity, presumably because of intracellular vimentin accessibility
by the antibodies (Fig. S5B). Next, we performed an ELISA to
measure vimentin amounts in membrane lysates and determined that
vimentin was ∼four times more abundant on the surface of senescent
cells (Fig. S5C). The levels of FSP, as anticipated, did not change
between conditions (Fig. S5C). Finally, we performed indirect im-
munofluorescence on cells fixed by PFA (not permeabilized), and
observed that 9H4 also colocalized predominantly with the in-
termediate filament vimentin on the cell surface of untreated and IR-
treated NDF cells (Fig. 3D). Notably, dot-like arrangements of
vimentin were observed in untreated NDFs, resembling a pattern
previously published (40), the vimentin detected in senescent cells
appeared to occupy a larger and more prominent swath of the cell
surface (Fig. 3D). Enrichment of cell-surface vimentin was corre-
spondingly observed in bleomycin-treated mLFs immunostained with
9H4 (Fig. S5D). Taken together, these data demonstrate the en-
richment of vimentin on the surface of senescent cells.
Senescence-Associated Cell-Surface Vimentin Is Modified by MDA.
Vimentin was previously found to be modified by MDA in the
human brain cortex of Alzheimer’s patients and by CML in skin
fibroblasts isolated from elderly donors and exposed to UV light
(44, 45). Given that vimentin is the target of various post-
translational modifications that include oxidation (46, 47), we thus
examined whether these oxidative adducts were associated with
vimentin exposed on the surface of senescent cells. To that end,
we performed a combinatorial vimentin IP and time-course ex-
periment. NDF cells were irradiated, allowed to senesce, and
harvested at different time points over 21 d, and a commercial
polyclonal vimentin antibody was used to nondiscriminately isolate
Fig. 1.
Generation and isolation of antibodies against senescent cells. (A) SACE analysis using IgM clones to detect immunoreactivity toward live senescent NDF
cells. An HRP-conjugated IgM-specific secondary antibody was used in conjunction with TMB substrate for colorimetric ELISA reading at an absorbance of 450 nm
to detect binding of IgMs to the surface of cells. DNA was stained with cell permeable Hoechst to normalize TMB absorbance values. Values (arbitrary units) and
SDs were calculated from triplicates. An unpaired Student’s t test was used for statistical analysis. (B) SACE analysis (as in A) using whole-molecule mouse IgM
(negative control) or the IgM antibodies 9H4 and E06 to detect immunoreactivity toward live untreated, senescent, or staurosporine-treated (0.1 μM for 16 h) NDF
cells. Values (arbitrary units) and SDs were calculated from triplicates. An unpaired Student’s t test was used for statistical analysis. (C) SACE analysis (as in A) using
whole-molecule mouse IgM (negative control) or the IgM antibodies 9H4 and anti-FSP to detect immunoreactivity toward live senescent NDF cells. Values (ar-
bitrary units) and SDs were calculated from triplicates. An unpaired Student’s t test was used for statistical analysis. (D) SACE analysis (as in A) using whole-
molecule mouse IgM (negative control) or the IgM antibodies 9H4 and anti-FSP to detect antibody dose-dependency and immunoreactivity toward live senescent
NDF cells. Values (arbitrary units) and SDs were calculated from triplicates. An unpaired Student’s t test was used for statistical analysis.
E1670
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1614661114
Frescas et al.
 all membrane-bound forms of vimentin (i.e., with or without
modifications). We observed that MDA-modified vimentin was
present in low amounts in untreated NDFs, as detected with an anti-
MDA antibody (Fig. 4A). Following IR-treatment to induce senes-
cence, we detected a significant increase in the levels of MDA ad-
duction on vimentin (Fig. 4A). Moreover, vimentin isolated from
senescent cells also appeared to be modified by CML, albeit to a
lesser extent, whereas vimentin did not appear to be modified by PC
(Fig. S6A). Importantly, we also observed MDA-modified vimentin
in NDFs transduced with HRas G12V (oncogene-induced senescent
cells) (Fig. 4B and Fig. S6B) and late-passage NDFs (containing a
majority of replicatively senescent cells) (Fig. 4C and Fig. S6C).
To identify amino acids potentially modified on vimentin, we
generated protein extracts from the plasma membranes of IR-
treated NDFs through a sucrose gradient centrifugation procedure
and performed an immunoprecipitation (IP) using the same
commercial polyclonal antivimentin antibody used in Fig. 4A.
Coomassie staining of immunoprecipitated proteins revealed
bands at 45 kDa and at ∼57 kDa (Fig. 4D). Tryptic digestion of the
57-kDa band was performed, and LC-MS/MS analysis was con-
ducted. MS analysis identified 43 peptide sequences of high con-
fidence, all of which matched the human vimentin amino acid
sequence and spanned 71% of the protein (Fig. 4D). Vimentin
peptides were unbiasedly analyzed for all posttranslational modi-
fications and specifically for MDA, CML, and PC adducts.
Vimentin from senescent NDF cells was found to be modified by
MDA at its single cysteine residue (C328), as indicated by a mass
change of +54.0105 Da (Fig. 4E). C328 is located at the C-terminal
end of the protein and is evolutionarily conserved (Fig. 4 F and G
and Fig. S6D). Interestingly, C328 has been shown to be required
for proper function of vimentin in human cells under normal and
oxidative conditions (48). The oxidative adduct aldehyde 4-
hydroxynonenal (HNE) has been previously shown to modify
vimentin at C328 (49); however, an HNE modification at C328 was
not identified in our proteomic screen. Moreover, despite detecting
CML adducts on senescence-associated cell-surface vimentin via IP-
Western (Fig. S6A), our proteomic screen failed to identify the
location of CML modifications. As anticipated based on pull-down
assays, PC modifications on vimentin were not identified.
Senescence-Associated Cell-Surface Vimentin Is Secreted into the
Extracellular Environment. Inflammation is considered to be a
major consequence of SASP, which proposes that senescent fi-
broblasts are primed to become proinflammatory cells. Despite
Fig. 2.
IgM 9H4 clone recognizes the intermediate filament vimentin. (A) Immunofluorescence staining of 2% PFA fixed and Triton X-100 permeabilized untreated
NDF cells stained with IgM 9H4 clone (red) and an antivimentin antibody (green). DNA was stained with DAPI (blue). (Scale bar, 5 μm.) (B) Immunoblot of WCE from
untreated, IR-treated, or bleomycin-treated NDFs using IgM 9H4, as indicated. GAPDH is used as loading control. (C) Immunoblot of WCE from untreated or IR-treated
NDFs and recombinant human vimentin using IgM 9H4, as indicated. GAPDH is used as loading control. (D) Sandwich ELISA measuring increasing levels of recombinant
human vimentin. A polyclonal antivimentin (chicken) antibody was used as a capture antibody and IgM 9H4 was used to detect vimentin. (E) Polyreactivity of IgM 9H4
or whole-molecule IgM was measured by direct ELISA. Binding value was assessed for each antibody by testing their binding to BSA or the indicated BSA-conjugated
haptens. Values (arbitrary units) and SDs were calculated from triplicates. An unpaired Student’s t test was used for statistical analysis.
Frescas et al.
PNAS
|
Published online February 13, 2017
|
E1671
IMMUNOLOGY AND
INFLAMMATION
PNAS PLUS
 lacking a secretory signal sequence, vimentin is externalized on
the cell surface and secreted in various physiological conditions
that involve induction of proinflammatory signals, suggesting a
possible phenotypic connection to SASP (42, 43, 50, 51). We
therefore sought to measure secreted vimentin using our poly-
reactive 9H4 antibody as a potential readout of senescent cells in
vitro and in vivo. To that end, we developed a sandwich ELISA
using a recombinant IgG version of our mouse IgM 9H4 anti-
body. This recombinant rabbit IgG 9H4 antibody was proficient
in recognizing vimentin by Western blot analysis and via sand-
wich ELISA, and continued to be polyreactive toward BSA-
conjugated MDA and to a lesser extent BSA-conjugated CML
(Fig. S7 A–C). To determine if senescent cells secrete vimentin,
we filtered and concentrated conditioned medium from untreated
and IR-treated NDF cells and performed our 9H4–vimentin sand-
wich ELISA. Vimentin levels were detected to be more than two
times higher in the conditioned media collected from IR-treated cells
than from control NDFs (Fig. S8A). Next, we applied our sandwich
ELISA to measure the levels of secreted vimentin in vivo by col-
lecting plasma from mice. For these studies, we used the SAMP8
mouse, which is a naturally occurring accelerated aging model that
has been extensively used to study a wide range of age-associated
degenerative disorders, including immune dysfunction, osteoporosis
and characteristic learning, memory deficits, and brain atrophy (52–
59). SAMP8 mice suffer from an increase in cellular oxidative
damage and excessive production of reactive oxygen species that
results in the progression of cellular senescence (as monitored via an
increase in SA-β-Gal positivity) and elevated levels of MDA with age
(52, 53). Applying our 9H4-vimentin ELISA, we detected vimentin in
the plasma of 35-wk-old SAMP8 mice (Fig. S8B). Importantly, a
sandwich ELISA designed to directly detect MDA-modified vimentin
(using a commercially available anti-MDA antibody for detection)
showed a comparable readout pattern compared with the levels of
vimentin (as detected with 9H4), suggesting 9H4 was detecting
MDA-modified vimentin (Fig. S8C). To determine the amount of
MDA-modified vimentin in the plasma of SAMP8 mice (in com-
parison with total vimentin), we immunodepleted MDA-bound
proteins from plasma samples using an anti-MDA antibody and
performed an immunoblot with remaining plasma proteins. Immu-
nodepletion of MDA-bound proteins resulted in the elimination of
all detectable vimentin, suggesting the majority of vimentin in the
plasma of SAMP8 is modified by MDA (Fig. S8D). Based on these
data, we propose the detection of secreted MDA-modified vimentin
is a readout of senescent cells.
MDA-Vimentin Levels Inversely Correlate with IgM Levels Against
MDA and Vimentin. To determine if the levels of MDA-modified
vimentin change with age in SAMP8 mice compared with C57BL6
Fig. 3.
Oxidized cell-surface vimentin in senescent cells. (A) Immunoblot of WCE and cellular fractions (as indicated) from untreated or IR-treated NDFs using IgM
9H4. GAPDH is used as loading control. (B) Densitometry analysis of immunoblots (as in A) using ImageJ software. Averages are from three independent experiments
and SDs were calculated from an unpaired Student’s t test. (C) Isolated membrane lysates from IR-treated NDFs were immunoprecipitated with IgM 9H4. Immu-
nocomplexes were probed for vimentin using an antivimentin antibody and 9H4. (D) Immunofluorescence staining of 2% PFA fixed untreated (Left) or IR-treated
(Right) NDF cells stained with IgM 9H4 clone (red) and an antivimentin antibody (green). DNA was stained with live-cell permeable Hoechst (blue). (Scale bar, 5 μm.)
E1672
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1614661114
Frescas et al.
 (a commonly used inbred, wild-type laboratory mouse strain), we
collected plasma from age-matched, 35- and 54-wk-old SAMP8
and C57BL6 mice, respectively, and performed our 9H4-vimentin
ELISA. Elevated levels of MDA-vimentin in the plasma of
SAMP8 mice were detected to be higher at 35 and 54 wk of age
compared with age-matched C57BL/6 animals (Fig. 5A). These
findings are in agreement with the observation of elevated levels
of oxidative stress markers, including MDA, detected in the
plasma of aged SAMP8 mice (53, 55). Several studies have shown
associations between the levels of IgMs against oxidized LDL, the
presence of oxidized LDL, and diseased states, including cardio-
vascular disease (60–65); thus, we measured the levels of total
IgMs and IgMs against vimentin and MDA in our aged cohorts of
SAMP8 and C57BL/6 mice. The levels of IgMs in the plasma of
35- and 54-wk-old C57BL/6 mice slightly increased with age (Fig.
S9A), as reported for this strain (66), whereas IgMs against
vimentin and MDA remained statistically similar in the different
age groups (Fig. S9 B and C). Plasma IgM levels were similarly
observed to increase with age in SAMP8 mice (Fig. 5B); however,
the levels of IgMs against vimentin and MDA decreased with age
in these mice (Fig. 5 C and D). These data suggest that the pro-
ficiency by which senescent cells are recognized and eradicated by
the innate immune system: that is, via the presence of IgMs
against oxidized proteins like MDA-vimentin, may play a crucial
role in their accumulation with age.
Discussion
Understanding the mechanisms underlying the development of
senescence and the consequences related to the accumulation of
senescent cells continues to be a major focus of ongoing research.
One of the most challenging aspects of studying such a diverse and
multistep process is the lack of clear senescence-specific markers
that could be used to identify senescent cells directly or to detect
the presence of senescence cells in vivo. To that end, one major
goal of our work was the generation of antibodies against senescent
cells. This was accomplished by immunizing mice with senescent
mLFs. Previous attempts to use cultured cells to immunize mice
have been effective in generating antibodies to cell-surface anti-
gens. For example, immunization of mice using cultured malignant
prostate cells resulted in the isolation of the PR-1 antibody, which
recognizes an antigen present on adenocarcinomas of the prostate
(25). Similarly, the FSP antibody that was used throughout this
study was derived from mice that were immunized with human
thymic fibroblasts (67).
Among the antibody clones that were screened by FACS and
then by SACE for immunoreactivity toward senescent cells, a
majority emerged as germ-line–encoded, monoclonal IgMs. No-
tably, the PR-1 and FSP antibodies isolated following immuniza-
tion with cultured cells are also IgMs (25, 67). Germ-line–encoded
IgM antibodies or natural antibodies are part of the innate im-
mune system and appear without immunogenic challenge. A
phenotypically distinct subset of B cells (B-1 cells) are responsible
for producing natural IgMs in mice, and emerging data suggest the
existence of a similar human B-cell counterpart (17, 68, 69). In
addition to IgMs recognizing a wide range of microbial and viral
components, natural antibodies contribute to immune homeosta-
sis and perform housekeeping functions that include the recog-
nition and removal of apoptotic cells (70). Future studies will need
to be conducted to determine if the innate immune system plays a
major role in the targeting and clearance of senescent cells.
A major function of the innate immune system is the clearance
of apoptotic and damaged cells (10, 11, 21, 71–74). As such,
apoptotic cells have been shown to preferentially express or ex-
pose novel cell-surface antigens (neo-epitopes or “eat me” sig-
nals) that can be recognized by IgMs to initiate phagocytosis by
macrophages. The most widely characterized naturally occurring
antibody E06 (also known as T15) has the capacity to recognize
PC-containing antigens, such as oxidized LDL, which serve as an
Fig. 4.
C328 in vimentin is modified by MDA. (A) Isolated membrane lysates from untreated and IR-treated NDFs (3, 7, 14, and 21 d post-IR, respectively) were
immunoprecipitated with antivimentin antibody. Immunocomplexes were probed using antibodies against vimentin and MDA (as indicated). (B) Isolated
membrane lysates from NDF cells transduced with Tet-inducible HRas G12V in the presence or absence of doxycycline (14-d postinduction) were immuno-
precipitated with a commercial antivimentin antibody. Immunocomplexes were probed with indicated antibodies, respectively. (C) Isolated membrane lysates
from early (8 PD) and late (64 PD) passage NDFs were immunoprecipitated with a commercial antivimentin antibody. Immunocomplexes were probed for
vimentin and MDA, respectively. (D) Plasma membrane lysates from IR-treated NDFs were immunoprecipitated with an antivimentin antibody for MS analysis.
Immunocomplexes were highlighted using Coomassie gel staining. An asterisk indicates vimentin at ∼57 kDa. (E) Summary of human vimentin peptides
identified by nanoCL-electrospray ioniuzation (ESI) MS/MS analysis. (F) Type and location of oxidized posttranslational modifications identified on human
vimentin by nanoCL-ESI-MS/MS analysis. (G) Schematic of human vimentin with major structural components. Location of C328 in the Coil 2B region is shown.
Frescas et al.
PNAS
|
Published online February 13, 2017
|
E1673
IMMUNOLOGY AND
INFLAMMATION
PNAS PLUS
 “eat me” signal on the surface of apoptotic cells (29, 61). In our
studies, E06 failed to recognize senescent cells, reinforcing the
notion of a distinct phenotypic difference between apoptotic and
senescent cells. Unlike E06, one of the antibodies that we isolated
in our screen, the IgM 9H4, exhibited robust immunoreactivity
toward senescent cells and uncovered the presence of the in-
termediate filament vimentin on the surface of senescent cells.
Intriguingly, a number of neo-epitopes are modified intracellular
proteins that become exposed on the cell surface, as shown here
with vimentin in the context of cellular senescence. The increased
presence of MDA-modified vimentin on the surface of senescent
cells may indeed serve as an “eat me” signal to immunocytes, as
vimentin has been detected on the surface of apoptotic neutro-
phils (43, 75) and T cells (76), which ultimately leads to phago-
cytosis by macrophages. Moreover, another study has suggested
that cell-surface vimentin present on neighboring cells may in-
teract with radiation induced O-GlcNAc–modified proteins from
apoptotic cells to initiate their engulfment by macrophages (77).
Given that germ-line–encoded IgMs have been demonstrated
to be polyreactive and may recognize oxidation-associated epi-
topes (30, 78), we tested 9H4 for reactivity toward synthetic and
natural antigens, and we determined that 9H4 recognized MDA
alongside vimentin. Interestingly, up to 80% of natural anti-
bodies are thought to be polyreactive; however, the innate ability
of these IgMs to recognize multiple, distinct antigens is not clear
(35). One hypothesis is that certain ligands may position differ-
ently in subsites within the antibody combining site, whereas
another possibility is that cross-reacting antigens might share
similar epitopes that are capable of recognizing one particular
antibody. Notably, unique gene combinations are unlikely to
account for IgM polyreactivity (79). Moreover, although 9H4 is
proficient in recognizing MDA linked to BSA when tested via
ELISA, 9H4 appeared to have greater avidity for vimentin
compared with other MDA-linked molecules when denatured
proteins are probed via Western blot. A similar result is observed
with E06, which recognizes the phosphocholine head-group of
oxidized phospholipids that are present in oxidized LDL and
BSA-conjugated PC (29, 61). Nevertheless, when E06 is used for
Western blot analysis, the antibody recognizes a band of oxidized
LDL without highlighting other PC-modified proteins (80).
To determine if vimentin was modified by MDA oxidation, we
performed IP-Western studies and demonstrated the presence of
MDA on senescence-associated cell-surface vimentin, and LC-
MS/MS analysis revealed the addition of MDA on C328. C328 in
human vimentin has been shown to be the target of electrophilic
lipids that include cyclopentenone prostaglandins (cyPG), which
are reactive lipids that are generated under conditions of in-
flammation and oxidative stress (49, 81, 82). C328 is also subject
to covalent addition of the reactive aldehyde HNE, which is
similar to MDA (48). CML was previously shown to modify ly-
sines in the exposed linker regions of vimentin after UV treat-
ment (44), and although we detected CML-modified vimentin by
IP-Western, our proteomic screen failed to identify the location
of these modifications. Importantly, at the cellular level, the
modification of vimentin by these oxidation-associated modifi-
cations (cyPG, HNE, and CML) has been shown to result in the
disruption of the intermediate filament network and the gener-
ation of intracellular aggresomes (44, 48, 82).
Detection of vimentin is currently being explored as a bio-
marker in cancer (41, 83–85), and ongoing studies are currently
being conducted to correlate the presence of oxidized proteins,
like oxidized LDL to aging and organismal frailty (86, 87). Here,
we have developed a sandwich ELISA to detect secreted MDA-
modified vimentin using our 9H4 antibody in the context of pro-
filing cellular senescence in vitro and in vivo. Several studies have
used the senescence associated mouse SAMP8 to study and mon-
itor aging phenotypes related to elevated levels of oxidative stress,
including Alzheimer’s disease (52). Whole-exome sequencing of
SAMP8 mice revealed deleterious mutations in the disease-causing
genes Ogg1 and Mbd4 (88). OGG1 (8-oxoguanine glycosylase) is a
DNA glycosylate that repairs 8-hydroxyguanine (oh8Gua), a highly
mutagenic oxidative DNA damage (89–91), and methyl-CpG
binding domain 4 (Mbd4) is a DNA glycosylate involved in DNA
demethylation via the pathway (92, 93). BubR1-insufficient mice
have similarly been used to study accelerated aging and senescence
that results from chronic DNA damage signaling (94, 95).
We applied our 9H4 vimentin-based ELISA to measure
vimentin in the plasma of SAMP8 mice and showed SAMP8 mice
have elevated MDA-modified vimentin compared with a com-
monly used mouse model (C57BL/6). We also showed that the
levels of MDA-modified vimentin increased as SAMP8 mice age,
and this increase was coupled to a decrease in IgMs against
vimentin and MDA. Athough MDA-modified vimentin was pre-
viously identified in the brain cortex of Alzheimer’s patients via a
proteomic screen of MDA-oxidized proteins (45), astrocytes in the
brain demonstrate age-related changes that resemble those of the
SASP, including expression of several cytokines, accumulation of
proteotoxic aggregates, and elevated levels of vimentin (96).
Nonetheless, the accumulation of MDA-modified vimentin de-
tected in SAMP8 mice may also reflect senescence-independent
cellular changes in response to DNA-damage signaling constitu-
tively occurring in this mouse strain (97). Based on these data, we
propose the detection of secreted MDA-modified vimentin as a
product and readout of senescent cells. Given the growing evi-
dence that oxidized proteins are involved in the development of
human disease, the detection and monitoring of secreted proteins
like oxidized vimentin is certain to become a vital and noninvasive
biomarker for monitoring age-related illnesses (36, 86, 87, 98, 99).
Fig. 5.
SAMP8 mice have elevated levels of oxidized vimentin. (A) Levels of
vimentin from the plasma of 35- and 54-wk-old SAMP8 and C57BL/6 mice
were measured using a vimentin-9H4 sandwich ELISA. Sandwich ELISA was
developed by using a polyclonal antivimentin (chicken) antibody as a cap-
ture antibody and a recombinant IgG 9H4 (rabbit) to detect vimentin. Mean
and SEM is shown. An unpaired Student’s t test was used for statistical
analysis. (B) Total IgM concentrations collected from the plasma of SAMP8
mice at 35 and 54 wk. Bars represent the median value for each group.
(C) Levels of IgMs against vimentin in 35- and 54-wk-old SAMP8 mice were
determined by ELISA. Bars represent the median value for each group.
(D) Levels of IgMs against MDA in 35- and 54-wk-old SAMP8 mice were
determined by ELISA. Bars represent the median value for each group.
E1674
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1614661114
Frescas et al.
 Materials and Methods
Animals. BALB/c (National Cancer Institute–Frederick Cancer Research and
Development Center, Frederick, MD), C57BL/6J (Jackson Laboratories), and
SAMP8 (Envigo) mice were provided a commercial rodent diet (5% 7012
Teklad LM-485 Mouse/Rat Sterilized Diet, Harlan) and sterile drinking water
ad libitum. All of the animals were confined to a limited-access facility with
environmentally controlled housing conditions maintained at 18–26 °C, 30–
70% air humidity, 12-h light/dark cycle. The animals were housed in micro-
isolation cages under pathogen-free conditions. Animal use in these exper-
iments was approved under Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at
the Roswell Park Cancer Institute.
Cultured Primary Cells. Primary mLFs were isolated based on previously
published protocols (100–104). For bleomycin treatment to induce senes-
cence, mLFs were plated at a density of 1.5 × 105 per 10-cm plate and cul-
tured for 72–96 h. Then, 5 mL of medium [DMEM supplemented with 10%
(vol/vol) FBS and 10 U/mL Benzonase] was removed and replaced with an
equal volume of fresh medium supplemented with a 2× concentration of
bleomycin for a final concentration of 5 μg/mL for 72 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2.
Bleomycin-containing medium was removed and replaced with 10 mL of
fresh medium and the plates were returned to the incubator for at least 10-d
posttreatment before the collection of senescent cells. The percentage of
senescent mLFs was determined by SA-β-Gal assay. Senescent mLFs were
collected from the plates using TrypLE Express (ThermoFisher Scientific).
Human NDFs were purchased from AllCells and maintained in DMEM sup-
plemented with 10% (vol/vol) FBS serum, 100 units/mL of penicillin, 100 μg/mL
of streptomycin, and 2 mM L-Glutamine. NDFs were cultured at 37 °C in a 5%
CO2 incubator. To propagate NDF cells, cells were washed once with PBS and
trypsin/EDTA was added to detach cells from the tissue-culture dish surface.
To stop the Trypsin/EDTA reaction, culture medium was added and cells
were resuspended. Resuspended cells were counted and the viability mea-
sured using the automated cell counter NC-3000 and Via1 cassettes (Che-
mometec) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. To induce senescence
by IR, NDFs were grown to confluence and serum-starved for 48 h before
being subjected to 10 Gy IR, as previously reported (105). IR-treated cells
were plated and allowed to senesce for 2–3 wk, depending on experimental
plans. To induce senescence by bleomycin, bleomycin (15 μg/mL) was added
to NDF cells for 48 h, and bleomycin-treated cells were harvested for analysis
14 d posttreatment, as previously reported (106). Overexpression of HRas
612V was previously reported to induce oncogenic cellular senescence (ci-
tation). Thus, we introduced a doxycycline-regulated mutant H-Ras G12V
into NDF cells. A Lenti-X TET-inducible system was used for inducible ex-
pression of V5-tagged HRas G12V (Clontech). To transduce NDFs, cells were
incubated in complete medium containing lentivirus and 8 μg/mL polybrene
for 6 h. Lentivirus-containing medium was replaced with fresh medium, and
the next day, transduced NDFs were selected with 1 μg/mL of puromycin and
600 μg/mL geneticin. To induce expression of HRas G12V, 1 μg/mL of doxy-
cycline was added to these cells for 14 d, and the percentage of senescent
cells was determined by SA-β-Gal assay. To harvest proliferating and senes-
cent cells for experimental analysis, TrypLE Express was used to detach cells
from the tissue-culture dishes to prevent disruption of cell-surface proteins.
Annexin V assay was performed using the NC-3000 instrument according to
the manufacturer protocol (Chemometec, Application note 3017).
Generation of Antibodies. Six-week-old BALB/c female mice were immunized
intraperitoneally with 1.0 × 106 syngeneic bleomycin-induced senescent
mLFs. Two weeks after immunization, two subsequent booster injections
were given at 3-wk intervals. Induction of senescent cell-specific antibodies
was evaluated through FACS analysis of proliferating cells versus senescent
cells following their incubation with serum collected from immunized mice.
To obtain the preimmune control serum, mice were bled from the retro-
orbital plexus before immunization. Splenocytes were collected from im-
munized mice and fused with Sp2/0 mouse myeloma cells (cultured in
DMEM/F-12) supplemented with 10% (vol/vol) FBS, 1 mM sodium pyruvate,
10 mM Hepes buffer, 1× nonessential amino acids, 1× glutamax, 1× 2-mer-
captoethanol, and 100 U/mL penicillin/streptomycin to generate antibody-
producing hybridomas. Ten to 14 d after fusion, supernatants from 96-well
plates containing hybridoma colonies were removed and applied to primary
screening by FACS analysis. Hybridoma supernatants were incubated with
Balb/C mLFs (proliferating or senescent) at 4 °C for 30 min. Samples were
washed with 3 mL of Phosphate Azide Buffer (PBS with 0.5% BSA and 0.05%
sodium azide) and then centrifuged at 500 × g for 5 min. Cell pellets were
resuspended in 100 μL of buffer and incubated with goat anti-mouse IgG, F
(ab′)2-PE at 4 °C for 30 min. Notably, anti-IgG, F(ab′)2 antibodies react with
the F(ab′)2/Fab portion of IgG (i.e., the light chain) and are thus not specific
for IgG. As a result, anti-IgG, F(ab′)2 antibodies react with other Ig classes (IgA,
IgM, IgD, and IgE) sharing the same light chains. After washing and centrifu-
gation, pellets were resuspended in 120 μL of buffer and analyzed by
LSRFortessa Cytometer at RPCI Flow Cytometry Resource Facility. Hybridomas
were adapted to serum-free medium (supplemented with 1× glutamax, 1×
NEEA, 1× AA, 1× Na pyruvate, and 10 mM Hepes; Gibco) and cultured in two-
compartment Bioreactor CELLine flasks for large-scale production. Antibody
containing medium was harvested on days 14 and 21 and following the cen-
trifugation of the supernatant, and monoclonal IgMs were purified on affinity
column chromatography using a HiTrap IgM Purification HP column (GE
Healthcare) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Buffer used to elute
antibody was exchanged using Zeba Spin Desalting column (ThermoFisher
Scientific), and the concentration of the antibodies were determined using a
Pierce BCA protein assay kit (ThermoFisher Scientific).
SACE. A 96-well plate was coated with 0.1% gelatin (ThermoFisher Scientific) in
PBS for 2 h before cell seeding. NDFs were lifted using TrypLE Express, counted
and 75,000 cells (untreated and IR-treated NDFs) were seeded per well in a
100 μL volume. The next day, cells were carefully washed with PBS containing
1 mM CaCl2 and 1 mM MgCl2. Cells were incubated with blocking buffer (2%
heat-inactivated goat serum in PBS) for 30 min on ice. After incubation,
blocking solution was removed. Primary antibodies were diluted in blocking
solution and added to each well in triplicate, and mouse IgM whole molecule
(Rockland) served as a negative control. Additional control wells were filled
with blocking solution minus primary antibodies. After a 60-min incubation on
ice, solutions containing primary antibodies were removed and replaced with
PBS to wash. Goat anti-mouse μ-specific IgM secondary antibody (HRP-conju-
gated; ThermoFisher Scientific) or a goat anti-rabbit IgA+IgG (H+L) (HRP-
conjugated) secondary antibody were diluted in blocking solution and added
to each well. After a 60-min incubation on ice, solution was removed and
replaced with PBS to wash. PBS containing Hoechst was added for 5–10 min to
label DNA. Cells were washed twice, and Hoechst signal was read with an
Infinite M1000 PRO microplate reader (Tecan). Signal from Hoechst staining
was used to detect cell numbers and to normalize 3,3′,5,5′-Tetrame-
thylbenzidine (TMB) values. Next, 1-Step Ultra TMB-ELISA Substrate Solution
(Fisher Scientific) was added to cells and plate was read over a 30-min time
period. To assay specificity, fixation and permeabilization of cells with meth-
anol was performed before SACE analysis (107). Prism 6 (GraphPad) and Excel
(Microsoft) were used to process and graph data.
Antibody Binding to Haptens and DNA by ELISA. BSA-conjugated antigens
[DNP-BSA (2,4-dinitrophenyl), Fluorescein-BSA, NIP-BSA (4-hydroxy-3-iodo-5-
nitrophenylacetyl), NP-BSA (Ratio > 20) (4-hydroxy-3-nitrophenylacetyl), PC-
BSA (phosphorylcholine), and TNP-BSA (2,4,6-trinitrophenyl) (Biosearch
Technologies); CML-BSA (carboxymethyl lysine), and MDA-BSA (malonalde-
hyde) (MyBiosource)] were serially diluted from 1 μg/mL in PBS to 0.0039 μg/mL.
Nunc Maxisorp 96-well plates were coated with 50 μL of each concentration
and incubated overnight at 4 °C. Nunc Maxisorp plates coated with ssDNA
(Sigma) or dsDNA (Sigma) from calf thymus were incubated overnight at
37 °C. After three washes with PBS containing 0.05% Tween-20, plates were
incubated for 1 h at room temperature with 80 μL PBS and 1% BSA as a
blocking reagent. In the meantime, antibodies were diluted to a final con-
centration of 10 μg/mL in PBS with 1% BSA. After three washes, 50 μL of
each antibody was added to wells and incubated for 2 h at room temper-
ature. The same volume of HRP-conjugated anti-IgM (1:3,000) or -IgG
(1:1,500) antibodies was added after three washes and incubated for 1 h.
After five washes, colorimetric substrate TMB was added and absorbance
was read at 650 nm after 30 min. Prism 6 (GraphPad) and Excel (Microsoft)
were used to process and graph data.
Sandwich ELISA for Detection of Vimentin. Nunc Maxisorp Black 96-well plates
(Thermo Scientific) were coated with 1.5 μg/mL of chicken polyclonal anti-
vimentin (Biolegend) and incubated overnight at 4 °C. Plates were washed
twice with Wash Buffer (PBS with 0.05% Tween-20) and blocked for 1 h at
room temperature with PBS plus 1% BSA (Blocker BSA in PBS, Fisher Scien-
tific). For the vimentin standard, human recombinant vimentin (Abcam,
ab73843) was serially diluted from 1 μg/mL in PBS to 0.0039 μg/mL, added to
the plate, and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. Blood was collected
from the saphenous vein (50 μL) of mice into heparinized collection vials
(Sarstedt), and plasma was obtained following centrifugation at 10,000 × g
for 7 min at 4 °C. Experimental samples were serially diluted and added to
the assay plate. After a 1-h incubation at room temperature, plates were
washed twice with Wash Buffer (PBS with 0.05% Tween-20) and primary
antibodies were added in blocking buffer for 1 h at room temperature
(mouse IgM 9H4; rabbit IgG 9H4; rabbit anti-MDA antibody; Abcam,
Frescas et al.
PNAS
|
Published online February 13, 2017
|
E1675
IMMUNOLOGY AND
INFLAMMATION
PNAS PLUS
 ab6463). Plates were washed twice with Wash Buffer (PBS with 0.05% Tween-
20) and the secondary antibodies Goat anti-mouse μ-specific IgM secondary
antibody (HRP-conjugated; ThermoFisher Scientific) (for IgM 9H4) or peroxi-
dase-conjugated AffiniPure Goat Anti-Rabbit IgG (Rockland) were added in
blocking buffer for 1 h at room temperature. Plates were then washed five
times and peroxidase fluorogenic substrate (Quanta Blu, ThermoFisher Scien-
tific) was added and fluorescence (excitation 320 nm, emission 420 nm) was
read every 10 min for 40 min. To measure secreted vimentin in conditioned
media, complete media containing 10% FBS from untreated or IR-treated
(14-d post-IR) NDF cells was removed and cells were washed twice with PBS.
Serum-free DMEM containing 100 units/mL of penicillin, 100 μg/mL of strep-
tomycin, and 2 mM L-glutamine was added to cells, and NDFs were cultured at
37 °C in a 5% CO2 incubator for 72 h, as described previously (108). After 72 h,
conditioned media was collected, filtered (0.22 μm; EMD Millipore) and con-
centrated using Amicon Ultra centrifugal filters with a 3-kDa molecular weight
cut-off (Merck Millipore). Prism 6 (GraphPad), and Excel (Microsoft) were used
to process and graph data.
Immunodepletion of MDA-Vimentin from SAMP8 Plasma. Plasma from SAMP8
mice was collected and incubated with a rabbit polyclonal anti-MDA antibody
(Abcam, ab6463) for 1 h at 4 °C. Protein G Sepharose beads (ThermoFisher
Scientific) were added for 1 h at 4 °C to pull-down MDA-bound proteins.
Sepharose beads were pelleted by centrifugation, and the MDA-immunode-
pleted supernatant was collected and resuspended in sample buffer. Samples
were loaded on a Mini-Protean TGX 4–12% Gradient SDS/PAGE gel (Bio-Rad)
and electrophoresed at 100 V. The proteins were then transferred to nitro-
cellulose membranes in transfer buffer (25 mM Tris, 0.192 M glycine, and 20%
methanol) using Trans-Blot Turbo transfer system (Bio-Rad). After blocking for
30 min at room temperature with 5% nonfat dry milk in TBS-T (TBS containing
0.1% Tween 20), membranes were incubated in TBS-T for 1 h at room tem-
perature with a rabbit polyclonal antivimentin antibody (Abcam, ab45939). A
goat anti-rabbit IgA+IgG (H+L) HRP-conjugated antibody (ThermoFisher Sci-
entific) was used to detect rabbit-derived antibodies. Following incubation
with secondary antibodies, blots were washed thoroughly with TBS-T, in-
cubated with SuperSignal West Dura chemiluminescent peroxidase substrate
(Thermo Scientific) and exposed using FluorChem E System: Protein Simple.
Determination of IgM Titers in Plasma Samples. Antibody titers from plasma
samples were determined by a sandwich ELISA. Nunc Maxisorp black plates
were coated with Affinipure goat anti-mouse IgM diluted 1:1,000 in PBS.
After an overnight incubation at 4 °C, the plates were washed three times
with PBS-T (PBS + 0.05% Tween-20). Plates were then blocked with assay
buffer (PBS-T + 10% FBS) for 1 h at room temperature and washed once.
Plasma samples were serially diluted in assay buffer and added in duplicate
and incubated for 2 h at room temperature. Following three washes, per-
oxidase-conjugated rabbit anti-mouse IgM antibodies were added and in-
cubated for 1 h at room temperature. Plates were washed five times and
peroxidase fluorogenic substrate (Quanta Blu) was added and fluorescence
(excitation 320 nm, emission 420 nm) was read after 40 min with an Infinite
M1000 PRO microplate reader (Tecan). IgM titers were calculated from the
standard curve generated with using IgM whole molecule (Rockland). Prism
6 (GraphPad) and Excel (Microsoft) were used to process and graph data.
Determination of IgM Titers to Vimentin and MDA. Nunc Maxisorp black plates
were coated with human recombinant vimentin (Abcam, ab73843) or BSA-
conjugated antigens (PC-BSA and CML-BSA and MDA-BSA; MyBiosource)
diluted in PBS, and incubated overnight at 4 °C. After three washes with PBS
with 0.05% Tween-20, plates were incubated for 1 h at room temperature
and 1% BSA as a blocking reagent. After three washes, the plasma samples
were diluted to 1:500 and each sample was added to wells and incubated for
2 h at room temperature. HRP-conjugated anti-IgM antibody was added
after three washes and incubated for 1 h. Following five washes, fluorogenic
substrate was added and fluorescence was read after 30 min with an Infinite
M1000 PRO microplate reader (Tecan). Prism 6 (GraphPad) and Excel
(Microsoft) were used to process and graph data.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Alexandre Rosa Campos at The Sanford-
Burnham Medical Research Institute for assistance in performing mass spectrom-
etry analysis; Brandon Hall for thought-provoking discussions and critical reading
of the manuscript; and Vitaly Balan for providing valuable research materials.
This work was partially funded by a research contract from Everon Biosciences to
Roswell Park Cancer Institute (A.V.G. Principle Investigator).
1. Hayflick L, Moorhead PS (1961) The serial cultivation of human diploid cell strains.
Exp Cell Res 25:585–621.
2. Bodnar AG, et al. (1998) Extension of life-span by introduction of telomerase into
normal human cells. Science 279(5349):349–352.
3. Serrano M, Lin AW, McCurrach ME, Beach D, Lowe SW (1997) Oncogenic ras provokes pre-
mature cell senescence associated with accumulation of p53 and p16INK4a. Cell 88(5):593–602.
4. Rodier F, et al. (2009) Persistent DNA damage signalling triggers senescence-associ-
ated inflammatory cytokine secretion. Nat Cell Biol 11(8):973–979.
5. Coppé JP, et al. (2008) Senescence-associated secretory phenotypes reveal cell-nonautonomous
functions of oncogenic RAS and the p53 tumor suppressor. PLoS Biol 6(12):2853–2868.
6. Kuilman T, Peeper DS (2009) Senescence-messaging secretome: SMS-ing cellular
stress. Nat Rev Cancer 9(2):81–94.
7. Brack AS, et al. (2007) Increased Wnt signaling during aging alters muscle stem cell
fate and increases fibrosis. Science 317(5839):807–810.
8. Krtolica A, et al. (2011) GROα regulates human embryonic stem cell self-renewal or
adoption of a neuronal fate. Differentiation 81(4):222–232.
9. Pricola KL, Kuhn NZ, Haleem-Smith H, Song Y, Tuan RS (2009) Interleukin-6 maintains
bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cell stemness by an ERK1/2-dependent
mechanism. J Cell Biochem 108(3):577–588.
10. Krizhanovsky V, et al. (2008) Senescence of activated stellate cells limits liver fibrosis.
Cell 134(4):657–667.
11. Xue W, et al. (2007) Senescence and tumour clearance is triggered by p53 restoration
in murine liver carcinomas. Nature 445(7128):656–660.
12. Lawless C, et al. (2010) Quantitative assessment of markers for cell senescence. Exp
Gerontol 45(10):772–778.
13. van Deursen JM (2014) The role of senescent cells in ageing. Nature 509(7501):439–446.
14. Kang C, et al. (2015) The DNA damage response induces inflammation and senes-
cence by inhibiting autophagy of GATA4. Science 349(6255):aaa5612.
15. Sagiv A, Krizhanovsky V (2013) Immunosurveillance of senescent cells: The bright
side of the senescence program. Biogerontology 14(6):617–628.
16. Grönwall C, Vas J, Silverman GJ (2012) Protective roles of natural IgM antibodies.
Front Immunol 3:66.
17. Vas J, Grönwall C, Silverman GJ (2013) Fundamental roles of the innate-like reper-
toire of natural antibodies in immune homeostasis. Front Immunol 4:4.
18. Panda S, Ding JL (2015) Natural antibodies bridge innate and adaptive immunity.
J Immunol 194(1):13–20.
19. Lutz HU, Binder CJ, Kaveri S (2009) Naturally occurring auto-antibodies in homeo-
stasis and disease. Trends Immunol 30(1):43–51.
20. Grönwall C, et al. (2012) IgM autoantibodies to distinct apoptosis-associated anti-
gens correlate with protection from cardiovascular events and renal disease in pa-
tients with SLE. Clin Immunol 142(3):390–398.
21. Lujambio A, et al. (2013) Non-cell-autonomous tumor suppression by p53. Cell
153(2):449–460.
22. Shimizu S, Sugai S, Konda S, Yamanaka Y, Setoyama M (1986) A monoclonal surface
immunoglobulin (IgM/D-L) with specificity for surface antigen of ox red blood cells in
a patient with leukemic lymphosarcoma. J Clin Immunol 6(5):397–401.
23. Satelli A, Li S (2011) Vimentin in cancer and its potential as a molecular target for
cancer therapy. Cell Mol Life Sci 68(18):3033–3046.
24. Binder CJ (2012) Naturally occurring IgM antibodies to oxidation-specific epitopes.
Adv Exp Med Biol 750:2–13.
25. Pastan I, et al. (1993) PR1—A monoclonal antibody that reacts with an antigen on the
surface of normal and malignant prostate cells. J Natl Cancer Inst 85(14):1149–1154.
26. Inagaki T, et al. (1993) [Effective removal of the contaminating host fibroblasts for
establishment of human-tumor cultured lines]. Hum Cell 6(2):137–142. Japanese.
27. Tsiantoulas D, Diehl CJ, Witztum JL, Binder CJ (2014) B cells and humoral immunity in
atherosclerosis. Circ Res 114(11):1743–1756.
28. Belmokhtar CA, Hillion J, Ségal-Bendirdjian E (2001) Staurosporine induces apoptosis through
both caspase-dependent and caspase-independent mechanisms. Oncogene 20(26):3354–3362.
29. Shaw PX, et al. (2000) Natural antibodies with the T15 idiotype may act in atherosclerosis,
apoptotic clearance, and protective immunity. J Clin Invest 105(12):1731–1740.
30. Chou MY, et al. (2009) Oxidation-specific epitopes are dominant targets of innate
natural antibodies in mice and humans. J Clin Invest 119(5):1335–1349.
31. Amir S, et al. (2012) Peptide mimotopes of malondialdehyde epitopes for clinical
applications in cardiovascular disease. J Lipid Res 53(7):1316–1326.
32. Tuominen A, et al. (2006) A natural antibody to oxidized cardiolipin binds to oxi-
dized
low-density
lipoprotein,
apoptotic
cells,
and
atherosclerotic
lesions.
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 26(9):2096–2102.
33. Esterre P, Melin M, Serrar M, Grimaud JA (1992) New specific markers of human and
mouse fibroblasts. Cell Mol Biol 38(3):297–301.
34. Nishio K, Inoue A, Qiao S, Kondo H, Mimura A (2001) Senescence and cytoskeleton:
Overproduction of vimentin induces senescent-like morphology in human fibro-
blasts. Histochem Cell Biol 116(4):321–327.
35. Chen C, Stenzel-Poore MP, Rittenberg MB (1991) Natural auto- and polyreactive antibodies
differing from antigen-induced antibodies in the H chain CDR3. J Immunol 147(7):2359–2367.
36. Tsiantoulas D, et al. (2015) Circulating microparticles carry oxidation-specific epi-
topes and are recognized by natural IgM antibodies. J Lipid Res 56(2):440–448.
37. Horkovics-Kovats S, Traub P (1990) Specific interaction of the intermediate filament protein
vimentin and its isolated N-terminus with negatively charged phospholipids as determined by
vesicle aggregation, fusion, and leakage measurements. Biochemistry 29(37):8652–8657.
38. Perides G, Harter C, Traub P (1987) Electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions of the
intermediate filament protein vimentin and its amino terminus with lipid bilayers.
J Biol Chem 262(28):13742–13749.
E1676
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1614661114
Frescas et al.
 39. Bilalic S, et al. (2012) Lymphocyte activation induces cell surface expression of an
immunogenic vimentin isoform. Transpl Immunol 27(2-3):101–106.
40. Huet D, et al. (2006) SC5 mAb represents a unique tool for the detection of extra-
cellular vimentin as a specific marker of Sezary cells. J Immunol 176(1):652–659.
41. Mitra A, et al. (2015) Cell-surface vimentin: A mislocalized protein for isolating
csVimentin(+) CD133(-) novel stem-like hepatocellular carcinoma cells expressing
EMT markers. Int J Cancer 137(2):491–496.
42. Mor-Vaknin N, Punturieri A, Sitwala K, Markovitz DM (2003) Vimentin is secreted by
activated macrophages. Nat Cell Biol 5(1):59–63.
43. Moisan E, Girard D (2006) Cell surface expression of intermediate filament proteins vimentin
and lamin B1 in human neutrophil spontaneous apoptosis. J Leukoc Biol 79(3):489–498.
44. Kueper T, et al. (2007) Vimentin is the specific target in skin glycation. Structural prerequisites,
functional consequences, and role in skin aging. J Biol Chem 282(32):23427–23436.
45. Pamplona R, et al. (2005) Proteins in human brain cortex are modified by oxidation,
glycoxidation, and lipoxidation. Effects of Alzheimer disease and identification of
lipoxidation targets. J Biol Chem 280(22):21522–21530.
46. Spurny R, et al. (2007) Oxidation and nitrosylation of cysteines proximal to the in-
termediate filament (IF)-binding site of plectin: Effects on structure and vimentin
binding and involvement in IF collapse. J Biol Chem 282(11):8175–8187.
47. Rogers KR, Morris CJ, Blake DR (1991) Oxidation of thiol in the vimentin cytoskele-
ton. Biochem J 275(Pt 3):789–791.
48. Pérez-Sala D, et al. (2015) Vimentin filament organization and stress sensing depend
on its single cysteine residue and zinc binding. Nat Commun 6:7287.
49. Garzón B, Oeste CL, Díez-Dacal B, Pérez-Sala D (2011) Proteomic studies on protein
modification by cyclopentenone prostaglandins: Expanding our view on electrophile
actions. J Proteomics 74(11):2243–2263.
50. Traub P, Perides G, Kühn S, Scherbarth A (1987) Efficient interaction of nonpolar
lipids with intermediate filaments of the vimentin type. Eur J Cell Biol 43(1):55–64.
51. Bhattacharya R, et al. (2009) Recruitment of vimentin to the cell surface by beta3
integrin and plectin mediates adhesion strength. J Cell Sci 122(Pt 9):1390–1400.
52. Morley JE, Farr SA, Kumar VB, Armbrecht HJ (2012) The SAMP8 mouse: A model to de-
velop therapeutic interventions for Alzheimer’s disease. Curr Pharm Des 18(8):1123–1130.
53. He XL, Zhou WQ, Bi MG, Du GH (2010) Neuroprotective effects of icariin on memory
impairment and neurochemical deficits in senescence-accelerated mouse prone 8
(SAMP8) mice. Brain Res 1334:73–83.
54. Akbor MM, et al. (2013) Possible involvement of Hcn1 ion channel in learning and
memory dysfunction in SAMP8 mice. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 441(1):25–30.
55. Nomura Y, Okuma Y (1999) Age-related defects in lifespan and learning ability in
SAMP8 mice. Neurobiol Aging 20(2):111–115.
56. Tomobe K, Nomura Y (2009) Neurochemistry, neuropathology, and heredity in
SAMP8: A mouse model of senescence. Neurochem Res 34(4):660–669.
57. Tomobe K, Shinozuka T, Kawashima T, Kawashima-Ohya Y, Nomura Y (2013) Age-
related changes of forkhead transcription factor FOXO1 in the liver of senescence-
accelerated mouse SAMP8. Arch Gerontol Geriatr 57(3):417–422.
58. Tomobe K, Shinozuka T, Kuroiwa M, Nomura Y (2012) Age-related changes of Nrf2
and phosphorylated GSK-3β in a mouse model of accelerated aging (SAMP8). Arch
Gerontol Geriatr 54(2):e1–e7.
59. Cuesta S, et al. (2010) Melatonin improves inflammation processes in liver of se-
nescence-accelerated prone male mice (SAMP8). Exp Gerontol 45(12):950–956.
60. Crisby M, Henareh L, Agewall S (2014) Relationship between oxidized LDL, IgM, and
IgG autoantibodies to ox-LDL levels with recurrent cardiovascular events in Swedish
patients with previous myocardial infarction. Angiology 65(10):932–936.
61. van Leeuwen M, et al. (2009) The IgM response to modified LDL in experimental
atherosclerosis: hypochlorite-modified LDL IgM antibodies versus classical natural
T15 IgM antibodies. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1173:274–279.
62. Su J, et al. (2006) Antibodies of IgM subclass to phosphorylcholine and oxidized LDL are pro-
tective factors for atherosclerosis in patients with hypertension. Atherosclerosis 188(1):160–166.
63. Ravandi A, et al. (2011) Relationship of IgG and IgM autoantibodies and immune com-
plexes to oxidized LDL with markers of oxidation and inflammation and cardiovascular
events: Results from the EPIC-Norfolk Study. J Lipid Res 52(10):1829–1836.
64. Garrido-Sánchez L, Chinchurreta P, García-Fuentes E, Mora M, Tinahones FJ (2010) A
higher level of IgM anti-oxidized LDL antibodies is associated with a lower severity
of coronary atherosclerosis in patients on statins. Int J Cardiol 145(2):263–264.
65. de Faire U, et al. (2010) Low levels of IgM antibodies to phosphorylcholine predict
cardiovascular disease in 60-year old men: Effects on uptake of oxidized LDL in
macrophages as a potential mechanism. J Autoimmun 34(2):73–79.
66. Klein-Schneegans AS, Kuntz L, Trembleau S, Fonteneau P, Loor F (1990) Serum
concentrations of IgM, IgG1, IgG2b, IgG3 and IgA in C57BL/6 mice and their con-
genics at the nu(nude)locus. Thymus 16(1):45–54.
67. Singer KH, et al. (1989) Removal of fibroblasts from human epithelial cell cultures
with use of a complement fixing monoclonal antibody reactive with human fibro-
blasts and monocytes/macrophages. J Invest Dermatol 92(2):166–170.
68. Jackson KJ, et al. (2012) Divergent human populations show extensive shared IGK
rearrangements in peripheral blood B cells. Immunogenetics 64(1):3–14.
69. Hardy RR (2006) B-1 B cell development. J Immunol 177(5):2749–2754.
70. Ochsenbein AF, et al. (1999) Control of early viral and bacterial distribution and
disease by natural antibodies. Science 286(5447):2156–2159.
71. deCathelineau AM, Henson PM (2003) The final step in programmed cell death:
Phagocytes carry apoptotic cells to the grave. Essays Biochem 39:105–117.
72. Shaw PX, Goodyear CS, Chang MK, Witztum JL, Silverman GJ (2003) The autor-
eactivity of anti-phosphorylcholine antibodies for atherosclerosis-associated neo-
antigens and apoptotic cells. J Immunol 170(12):6151–6157.
73. Litvack ML, et al. (2010) Natural IgM and innate immune collectin SP-D bind to late apoptotic
cells and enhance their clearance by alveolar macrophages in vivo. Mol Immunol 48(1-3):37–47.
74. Litvack ML, Post M, Palaniyar N (2011) IgM promotes the clearance of small particles
and apoptotic microparticles by macrophages. PLoS One 6(3):e17223.
75. Starr AE, Bellac CL, Dufour A, Goebeler V, Overall CM (2012) Biochemical charac-
terization and N-terminomics analysis of leukolysin, the membrane-type 6 matrix
metalloprotease (MMP25): Chemokine and vimentin cleavages enhance cell migra-
tion and macrophage phagocytic activities. J Biol Chem 287(16):13382–13395.
76. Boilard E, Bourgoin SG, Bernatchez C, Surette ME (2003) Identification of an auto-
antigen on the surface of apoptotic human T cells as a new protein interacting with
inflammatory group IIA phospholipase A2. Blood 102(8):2901–2909.
77. Ise H, Goto M, Komura K, Akaike T (2012) Engulfment and clearance of apoptotic cells based
on a GlcNAc-binding lectin-like property of surface vimentin. Glycobiology 22(6):788–805.
78. Chen Y, Park YB, Patel E, Silverman GJ (2009) IgM antibodies to apoptosis-associated
determinants recruit C1q and enhance dendritic cell phagocytosis of apoptotic cells.
J Immunol 182(10):6031–6043.
79. Kofler R, Dixon FJ, Theofilopoulos AN (1987) The genetic origin of autoantibodies.
Immunol Today 8(12):374–380.
80. Leibundgut G, et al. (2012) Oxidized phospholipids are present on plasminogen, affect fibri-
nolysis, and increase following acute myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol 59(16):1426–1437.
81. Oeste CL, Pérez-Sala D (2014) Modification of cysteine residues by cyclopentenone
prostaglandins: Interplay with redox regulation of protein function. Mass Spectrom
Rev 33(2):110–125.
82. Gharbi S, Garzón B, Gayarre J, Timms J, Pérez-Sala D (2007) Study of protein targets
for covalent modification by the antitumoral and anti-inflammatory prostaglandin
PGA1: Focus on vimentin. J Mass Spectrom 42(11):1474–1484.
83. Hong SH, et al. (2006) Identification of a specific vimentin isoform that induces an
antibody response in pancreatic cancer. Biomark Insights 1:175–183.
84. Satelli A, Brownlee Z, Mitra A, Meng QH, Li S (2015) Circulating tumor cell enumeration
with a combination of epithelial cell adhesion molecule- and cell-surface vimentin-based
methods for monitoring breast cancer therapeutic response. Clin Chem 61(1):259–266.
85. Satelli A, et al. (2014) Universal marker and detection tool for human sarcoma cir-
culating tumor cells. Cancer Res 74(6):1645–1650.
86. Darvin K, et al. (2014) Plasma protein biomarkers of the geriatric syndrome of frailty.
J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 69(2):182–186.
87. Shamsi KS, et al. (2012) Proteomic screening of glycoproteins in human plasma for
frailty biomarkers. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 67(8):853–864.
88. Tanisawa K, et al. (2013) Exome sequencing of senescence-accelerated mice (SAM) reveals
deleterious mutations in degenerative disease-causing genes. BMC Genomics 14:248.
89. Smith CG, et al. (2013) Role of the oxidative DNA damage repair gene OGG1 in
colorectal tumorigenesis. J Natl Cancer Inst 105(16):1249–1253.
90. Smith TB, et al. (2013) The presence of a truncated base excision repair pathway in
human spermatozoa that is mediated by OGG1. J Cell Sci 126(Pt 6):1488–1497.
91. Choi JY, et al. (1999) Thermolabile 8-hydroxyguanine DNA glycosylase with low
activity in senescence-accelerated mice due to a single-base mutation. Free Radic
Biol Med 27(7-8):848–854.
92. Zhu JK (2009) Active DNA demethylation mediated by DNA glycosylases. Annu Rev
Genet 43:143–166.
93. Krokan HE, et al. (2014) Error-free versus mutagenic processing of genomic uracil—
Relevance to cancer. DNA Repair (Amst) 19:38–47.
94. Baker DJ, et al. (2004) BubR1 insufficiency causes early onset of aging-associated
phenotypes and infertility in mice. Nat Genet 36(7):744–749.
95. Kapanidou M, Lee S, Bolanos-Garcia VM (2015) BubR1 kinase: Protection against
aneuploidy and premature aging. Trends Mol Med 21(6):364–372.
96. Salminen A, et al. (2011) Astrocytes in the aging brain express characteristics of se-
nescence-associated secretory phenotype. Eur J Neurosci 34(1):3–11.
97. Gan W, et al. (2012) Age-dependent increases in the oxidative damage of DNA, RNA, and
their metabolites in normal and senescence-accelerated mice analyzed by LC-MS/MS: Urinary
8-oxoguanosine as a novel biomarker of aging. Free Radic Biol Med 52(9):1700–1707.
98. Miller YI, Tsimikas S (2013) Oxidation-specific epitopes as targets for biotheranostic
applications in humans: Biomarkers, molecular imaging and therapeutics. Curr Opin
Lipidol 24(5):426–437.
99. Fruhwirth GO, Loidl A, Hermetter A (2007) Oxidized phospholipids: From molecular
properties to disease. Biochim Biophys Acta 1772(7):718–736.
100. Holt PG, et al. (1985) Preparation of interstitial lung cells by enzymatic digestion of
tissue slices: Preliminary characterization by morphology and performance in func-
tional assays. Immunology 54(1):139–147.
101. Lyadova I, et al. (1998) An ex vivo study of T lymphocytes recovered from the lungs
of I/St mice infected with and susceptible to Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Infect
Immun 66(10):4981–4988.
102. Baglole CJ, et al. (2005) Isolation and phenotypic characterization of lung fibro-
blasts. Methods Mol Med 117:115–127.
103. Seluanov A, Vaidya A, Gorbunova V (2010) Establishing primary adult fibroblast
cultures from rodents. J Vis Exp (44):2033.
104. Kapina MA, Rubakova EI, Majorov KB, Logunova NN, Apt AS (2013) Capacity of lung
stroma to educate dendritic cells inhibiting mycobacteria-specific T-cell response
depends upon genetic susceptibility to tuberculosis. PLoS One 8(8):e72773.
105. Di Leonardo A, Linke SP, Clarkin K, Wahl GM (1994) DNA damage triggers a pro-
longed p53-dependent G1 arrest and long-term induction of Cip1 in normal human
fibroblasts. Genes Dev 8(21):2540–2551.
106. Aoshiba K, Tsuji T, Nagai A (2003) Bleomycin induces cellular senescence in alveolar
epithelial cells. Eur Respir J 22(3):436–443.
107. Frescas D, Guardavaccaro D, Bassermann F, Koyama-Nasu R, Pagano M (2007)
JHDM1B/FBXL10 is a nucleolar protein that represses transcription of ribosomal RNA
genes. Nature 450(7167):309–313.
108. Xu B, et al. (2004) The endothelial cell-specific antibody PAL-E identifies a secreted
form of vimentin in the blood vasculature. Mol Cell Biol 24(20):9198–9206.
Frescas et al.
PNAS
|
Published online February 13, 2017
|
E1677
IMMUNOLOGY AND
INFLAMMATION
PNAS PLUS
