 foods
Review
Mushroom Polysaccharides: Chemistry and
Antiobesity, Antidiabetes, Anticancer, and Antibiotic
Properties in Cells, Rodents, and Humans
Mendel Friedman
Western Regional Research Center, Agricultural Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture,
800 Buchanan Street, Albany, CA 94710, USA; mendel.friedman@ars.usda.gov; Tel.: +1-510-559-5615
Academic Editor: Charles Brennan
Received: 7 October 2016; Accepted: 22 November 2016; Published: 29 November 2016
Abstract: More than 2000 species of edible and/or medicinal mushrooms have been identified to date,
many of which are widely consumed, stimulating much research on their health-promoting properties.
These properties are associated with bioactive compounds produced by the mushrooms, including
polysaccharides. Although β-glucans (homopolysaccharides) are believed to be the major bioactive
polysaccharides of mushrooms, other types of mushroom polysaccharides (heteropolysaccharides)
also possess biological properties.
Here we survey the chemistry of such health-promoting
polysaccharides and their reported antiobesity and antidiabetic properties as well as selected
anticarcinogenic, antimicrobial, and antiviral effects that demonstrate their multiple health-promoting
potential. The associated antioxidative, anti-inflammatory, and immunomodulating activities in
fat cells, rodents, and humans are also discussed. The mechanisms of action involve the gut
microbiota, meaning the polysaccharides act as prebiotics in the digestive system. Also covered
here are the nutritional, functional food, clinical, and epidemiological studies designed to assess
the health-promoting properties of polysaccharides, individually and as blended mixtures, against
obesity, diabetes, cancer, and infectious diseases, and suggestions for further research. The collated
information and suggested research needs might guide further studies needed for a better
understanding of the health-promoting properties of mushroom polysaccharides and enhance their
use to help prevent and treat human chronic diseases.
Keywords: bioactivity; biomarkers; polysaccharides; mushrooms; chemistry; antibiotics; obesity;
diabetes; cancer; health-promoting food additives; functional food; research needs
1. Introduction
Mushrooms
are
a
widely
consumed,
low-calorie,
low-cholesterol,
and
low-sodium
health-promoting food. Some of these health-promoting properties have been attributed to the
polysaccharides produced by different varieties mushrooms, as discussed in this review. Figure 1
shows that China dominates over other countries in the global production of mushrooms and Figure 2
shows that the protein, fat, ash (mineral), sugar, and fiber content varies widely among five widely
consumed edible mushrooms.
Aida, et al. [1] reviewed the prospect of mushrooms as a source of prebiotics that have the
potential to promote human health; prebiotics are defined as selectively fermented food ingredients
that induce changes in the composition and activity of the gastrointestinal tract microbiota that confer
nutritional and health benefits to the host. Such compounds include mushroom polysaccharides,
most of which are β-glucan polymers, with the main chain consisting of β-(1→3) linkages with some
β-(1→6) branches as well as chitin, mannans, galactans, and xylans. Digestive enzymes secreted by
the pancreas cannot hydrolyze the β-glucosidic bond, which means the non-digestible mushroom
Foods 2016, 5, 80; doi:10.3390/foods5040080
www.mdpi.com/journal/foods
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
2 of 40
carbohydrates can act as prebiotics in the digestive tract. Non-digestible oligosaccharides consist
of two to three monosaccharides without nutritional value. For prebiotics from foods to have their
beneficial effects they should not be structurally changed by food-processing conditions, such as heat
and microwaves. Mushrooms and mushroom-derived polysaccharides, illustrated in Figures 3–5, have
been shown to have therapeutic properties against metabolic syndrome, which is characterized by
obesity, hyperglycemia associated with diabetes, hypercholesterolemia, and hypertension [2–4].
Foods 2016, 5, 80  
2 of 39 
carbohydrates can act as prebiotics in the digestive tract. Non-digestible oligosaccharides consist of 
two to three monosaccharides without nutritional value. For prebiotics from foods to have their 
beneficial effects they should not be structurally changed by food-processing conditions, such as heat 
and microwaves. Mushrooms and mushroom-derived polysaccharides, illustrated in Figures 3–5, 
have been shown to have therapeutic properties against metabolic syndrome, which is characterized 
by obesity, hyperglycemia associated with diabetes, hypercholesterolemia, and hypertension [2–4]. 
 
 
Figure 1. Worldwide production of mushrooms and truffles, average from 2004 to 2014 [5]. 
 
Figure 2. Nutrient content of five select mushrooms as reported by the National Nutrient Database 
for Standard Reference, Release 28 [6]. 
 
Figure 1. Worldwide production of mushrooms and truffles, average from 2004 to 2014 [5].
Foods 2016, 5, 80  
2 of 39 
carbohydrates can act as prebiotics in the digestive tract. Non-digestible oligosaccharides consist of 
two to three monosaccharides without nutritional value. For prebiotics from foods to have their 
beneficial effects they should not be structurally changed by food-processing conditions, such as heat 
and microwaves. Mushrooms and mushroom-derived polysaccharides, illustrated in Figures 3–5, 
have been shown to have therapeutic properties against metabolic syndrome, which is characterized 
by obesity, hyperglycemia associated with diabetes, hypercholesterolemia, and hypertension [2–4]. 
 
 
Figure 1. Worldwide production of mushrooms and truffles, average from 2004 to 2014 [5]. 
 
Figure 2. Nutrient content of five select mushrooms as reported by the National Nutrient Database 
for Standard Reference, Release 28 [6]. 
 
Figure 2. Nutrient content of five select mushrooms as reported by the National Nutrient Database for
Standard Reference, Release 28 [6].
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
3 of 40
Foods 2016, 5, 80  
3 of 39 
 
Figure 3. Mushrooms containing β-(1→3)-glucans with β-(1→6) branching). 
 
Figure 4. Basic structure of a typical mushroom polysaccharide. Variations include 1→4 linkages, α-
glucan moieties, and alternate sugars. 
 
Figure 5. β-Glucan/protein complex isolated from Trametes versicolor (Turkey Tail mushroom) 
containing 25%–38% protein. 94 kDa macromolecule. β-1→4-glucan backbone with 1→3/1→6 
branching β-glucan. The protein consists of 28% acidic amino acids [7–9]. 
 
Figure 3. Mushrooms containing β-(1→3)-glucans with β-(1→6) branching).
Foods 2016, 5, 80  
3 of 39 
 
Figure 3. Mushrooms containing β-(1→3)-glucans with β-(1→6) branching). 
 
Figure 4. Basic structure of a typical mushroom polysaccharide. Variations include 1→4 linkages, α-
glucan moieties, and alternate sugars. 
 
Figure 5. β-Glucan/protein complex isolated from Trametes versicolor (Turkey Tail mushroom) 
containing 25%–38% protein. 94 kDa macromolecule. β-1→4-glucan backbone with 1→3/1→6 
branching β-glucan. The protein consists of 28% acidic amino acids [7–9]. 
 
Figure 4. Basic structure of a typical mushroom polysaccharide. Variations include 1→4 linkages,
α-glucan moieties, and alternate sugars.
Foods 2016, 5, 80  
3 of 39 
 
Figure 3. Mushrooms containing β-(1→3)-glucans with β-(1→6) branching). 
 
Figure 4. Basic structure of a typical mushroom polysaccharide. Variations include 1→4 linkages, α-
glucan moieties, and alternate sugars. 
 
Figure 5. β-Glucan/protein complex isolated from Trametes versicolor (Turkey Tail mushroom) 
containing 25%–38% protein. 94 kDa macromolecule. β-1→4-glucan backbone with 1→3/1→6 
branching β-glucan. The protein consists of 28% acidic amino acids [7–9]. 
 
Figure 5.
β-Glucan/protein complex isolated from Trametes versicolor (Turkey Tail mushroom)
containing 25%–38% protein. 94 kDa macromolecule. β-1→4-glucan backbone with 1→3/1→6
branching β-glucan. The protein consists of 28% acidic amino acids [7–9].
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
4 of 40
Obesity is a widespread problem; indeed, in the United States it is estimated that more than one
third of adults (about 80 million individuals) are obese [10,11]. There also seems to be substantial
educational disparity in obesity among United State adults; those with higher education are on average
less obese. As, reviewed elsewhere [12,13], obesity and being overweight are consequences of excessive
adipogenesis. Fat molecules (triglycerides) consist of three molecules of fatty acids linked as esters to
glycerol that coalesce into droplets in the cytosol, accounting for most of the volume of fat cells, called
adipocytes, that are the cells specialized for fat storage in adipose tissue. Adipogenesis—the generation
of adipocytes—is regulated by adipogenic transcription factors, including peroxisome proliferator
activated receptor-γ (PPARγ), sterol regulatory element-binding protein 1c (SREBP-1c), and the
CCAAT (cytosine-cytosine-adenosine-adenosine-thymidine)-enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) family.
It seems that PPARγ is induced during adipogenesis and is necessary for this process. Adipogenesis
and insulin sensitivity in obesity are also reported to be regulated by retinoid-related orphan receptor γ
(RORγ) through its target gene MMP3 (matrix metalloproteinase-3 gene), which controls adipocyte size
and insulin resistance in obesity. In addition, chemerin (an adipocyte-secreted protein), the angiotensin
system, and estrogen receptors are reported to be involved in adipogenesis in vivo. Each of these
factors has the potential to serve as a target that might protect against obesity and related metabolic
syndromes such as overlapping obesity-associated insulin resistance (diabetes).
Diabetes is a disease characterized by hyperglycemia resulting from defects in insulin metabolism.
Insulin is a hormone secreted by β-cells in pancreatic islets that primarily stimulates cells to take up
glucose, although it also affects metabolism of all carbohydrates, fats, and protein. Type 2 diabetes
(TD2) is caused by acquired resistance to insulin-stimulated glucose uptake by cells combined with
inadequate compensatory insulin production to overcome the resistance. Type 1 diabetes (TD1) is
caused by insufficient insulin production by the pancreas β-cells [14,15]. As shown in Figure 6, TD2 is
related to obesity and may be substantially prevented or managed by changes in lifestyle.
Foods 2016, 5, 80  
4 of 39 
Obesity is a widespread problem; indeed, in the United States it is estimated that more than one 
third of adults (about 80 million individuals) are obese [10,11]. There also seems to be substantial 
educational disparity in obesity among United State adults; those with higher education are on 
average less obese. As, reviewed elsewhere [12,13], obesity and being overweight are consequences 
of excessive adipogenesis. Fat molecules (triglycerides) consist of three molecules of fatty acids linked 
as esters to glycerol that coalesce into droplets in the cytosol, accounting for most of the volume of 
fat cells, called adipocytes, that are the cells specialized for fat storage in adipose tissue. 
Adipogenesis—the generation of adipocytes—is regulated by adipogenic transcription factors, 
including peroxisome proliferator activated receptor-γ (PPARγ), sterol regulatory element-binding 
protein 1c (SREBP-1c), and the CCAAT (cytosine-cytosine-adenosine-adenosine-thymidine)-
enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) family. It seems that PPARγ is induced during adipogenesis and 
is necessary for this process. Adipogenesis and insulin sensitivity in obesity are also reported to be 
regulated by retinoid-related orphan receptor γ (RORγ) through its target gene MMP3 (matrix 
metalloproteinase-3 gene), which controls adipocyte size and insulin resistance in obesity. In 
addition, chemerin (an adipocyte-secreted protein), the angiotensin system, and estrogen receptors 
are reported to be involved in adipogenesis in vivo. Each of these factors has the potential to serve as 
a target that might protect against obesity and related metabolic syndromes such as overlapping 
obesity-associated insulin resistance (diabetes). 
Diabetes is a disease characterized by hyperglycemia resulting from defects in insulin 
metabolism. Insulin is a hormone secreted by β-cells in pancreatic islets that primarily stimulates cells 
to take up glucose, although it also affects metabolism of all carbohydrates, fats, and protein. Type 2 
diabetes (TD2) is caused by acquired resistance to insulin-stimulated glucose uptake by cells 
combined with inadequate compensatory insulin production to overcome the resistance. Type 1 
diabetes (TD1) is caused by insufficient insulin production by the pancreas β-cells [14,15]. As shown 
in Figure 6, TD2 is related to obesity and may be substantially prevented or managed by changes in 
lifestyle. 
 
Figure 6. Age-adjusted percentage of US adults aged 18 years or older with diagnosed diabetes who 
were obese or overweight. Adapted from United States Centers for Disease Control, Diabetes Public 
Health Resource Statistics [16]. 
The lack of insulin leads to abnormalities in the metabolism of essential nutrients, including 
carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins. Data from the American Diabetes Association [17] on the 
prevalence of diabetes show that in 2012, 29.1 million American, or 9.3% of the population, had TD2 
and about one million, TD1. The worldwide incidence of type 2 diabetes is expected to increase to 
300 million individuals by the year 2025 [18]. Socioeconomic factors seem to be responsible for 
reported differences in the incidence among ethnic/racial groups [19]. 
To help overcome the so-called metabolic syndrome that includes obesity and diabetes using 
dietary modifications, this paper: (a) describes methods used to isolate, characterize, and analyze 
 
Figure 6. Age-adjusted percentage of US adults aged 18 years or older with diagnosed diabetes who
were obese or overweight. Adapted from United States Centers for Disease Control, Diabetes Public
Health Resource Statistics [16].
The lack of insulin leads to abnormalities in the metabolism of essential nutrients, including
carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins.
Data from the American Diabetes Association [17] on the
prevalence of diabetes show that in 2012, 29.1 million American, or 9.3% of the population, had TD2
and about one million, TD1. The worldwide incidence of type 2 diabetes is expected to increase to
300 million individuals by the year 2025 [18]. Socioeconomic factors seem to be responsible for reported
differences in the incidence among ethnic/racial groups [19].
To help overcome the so-called metabolic syndrome that includes obesity and diabetes using
dietary modifications, this paper: (a) describes methods used to isolate, characterize, and analyze
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
5 of 40
polysaccharides from selected mushroom cultivars; (b) outlines approaches used to measure
antiobesity, antidiabetic, anticancer, and antibiotic properties of mushroom polysaccharides and
selected mushroom cultivars in cells, rodents, and humans; (c) describes mechanisms involving
microbiota and immunostimulatory and other biomarkers and biological signalling pathways that
might govern these properties; and (d) suggests research needs to further enhance the health benefits
of mushroom polysaccharides. Unless otherwise indicated, the mentioned suggested significance of
the results is that of the authors of the cited papers.
2. Isolation and Characterization of Mushroom Polysaccharides
Mushroom β-glucan polysaccharides are fibers that have numerous reported biological
functions [20]. The submerged cultivation of mushrooms seems to be a promising, and possibly
more efficient, alternative method to that of conventionally grown mushrooms for the production of
mushroom mycelia and bioactive metabolites, including polysaccharides [21]. Polysaccharides from
Hericium erinaceus, known as the Lion’s Mane mushroom, have been of particular interest because
of the bioactivities that have been attributed to them [22]. Here, we offer capsule summaries of the
chemical and analytical methods that have been use to isolate and characterize polysaccharides from
selected mushroom cultivars.
Wu, et al. [23] used a range of methods—colorimetry with iodine and KI, high performance
size exclusion chromatography coupled with multi angle laser light scattering and refractive
index detection (HPSEC-MALLS-rid analysis), gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS)
analysis, and saccharide mapping based on carbohydrate gel electrophoresis (PACE)—to identify
polysaccharides isolated from H. erinaceus fruiting bodies collected from different parts of China.
The results from the different techniques show similarity in their profiles, including molecular
weights, the composition of monosaccharides, and the glycosidic linkages in the polysaccharides,
suggesting that the described experimental approach could be used for the quality control of
polysaccharides in edible and medicinal mushrooms, as well as in commercial mushroom products.
Related studies by several investigators include the following multifaceted observations:
(a) During growth and maturation of the fruiting bodies, total polysaccharide levels increased and
protein content decreased [24]; (b) Polysaccharides collected from fruiting bodies of different regions
of China had similar molecular weights, monosaccharide compositions, and glycosidic linkages [23];
(c) Polysaccharides from eight species exhibited strong antioxidant activity in the DPPH radical
scavenging assay as well as strong inhibitory properties in the proliferation of tumor cells [25];
(d) A bismuth-polysaccharide complex inhibited the growth of Helicobacter pylori bacteria reported
to contribute to the cause of human ulcers [26]; (e) H. erinaceus and other mushroom varieties are
reported to be a useful source of lignocellulose-degrading (ligninolytic) carboxymethyl cellulase and
laccase enzymes, suggesting that mushrooms can provide enzymes for use in the development of
bioenergy [27].
Using high-performance size exclusion chromatography (HPSEC) to establish the degree of
homogeneity and molecular weights, Malinowska, et al. [28] evaluated several factors that govern
mycelial growth in a submerged culture of H. erinaceus and production of intracellular polysaccharides
(IPS) and exopolysaccharides (EPS). They found that the kinetics of EPS biosynthesis in a bioreactor
proceeded until depletion of the carbon source in the medium on day 14 of cultivation, suggesting the
value of the method for large-scale production of bioactive polysaccharides from H. erinaceus.
Zhu, et al. [29] describe the use of an enzyme-mixture (cellulase, pectinase, and tryptinase)
assisted extraction of polysaccharides from the fruiting bodies of H. erinaceus mushrooms using
response surface methodology and the Box-Behnken design based on single-factor and orthogonal
experiments to optimize the extraction conditions (pH 5.7, 52.0 ◦C, and 33.8 min). The optimal
extraction produces a high yield (13.5%) corresponding to an increase of 67.7% compared to hot water
extraction. The functional groups of the two extracted polysaccharides seemed to be identical but
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
6 of 40
differed in their conformations. The authors suggest that the method might be useful for extracting
polysaccharides from other mushroom species.
The repeating basic units of β-glucan polysaccharides derived from edible shiitake (Lentinus edodes)
mushrooms consist of five linearly linked (1→3)-β-glucose residues and two 1-6-β-glucopyranoside
branches [30]. To determine the β-glucan content of shiitake mushrooms, these authors used a
mushroom specific β-glucan kit on different sections of fruiting bodies and mycelia of ten shiitake
mushroom cultivars. This involved hydrolysis of the shiitake samples with 37% HCl for 45 min at 30 ◦C
followed by workup of the reaction mixture. The β-glucan content was determined by subtracting the
α-glucan value, determined by an enzymatic method, from the total value. The measured β-glucan
values ranged (in %) from 20.06 to 44.21 in the pileus sections and from 29.74 to 56.47 in the stipe
section, showing that β-glucan content varies significantly among cultivars and is higher in the stipe
of the fruiting bodies than in the pileus. The authors mention related analyses by other investigators.
The detailed description of analytical methods used in this study for the shiitake mushrooms should
be applicable to other cultivars. See also Kim, et al. [31] for a detailed description of the isolation
and determination of the composition of a polysaccharide from a bioprocessed liquid culture of
Lentinus edodes mushrooms that might be helpful in studies with other mushroom cultivars.
Silveira, et al. [32] describe the chemical structure of an exopolysaccharide isolated from
Pleurotus sajor-caju mushrooms. After extraction, the polysaccharide was purified by freeze-thawing
and dialysis and its structure was then characterized by GC/MS and NMR spectroscopy to
show that the polymer was a mannogalactan with a minimum chain length of (1→6)-linked
α-D-Galp and 3-O-methyl-α-D Galp units composed of mannose (37.0%), galactose (39.7%),
and O-methyl-galactose (23.3%).
In an investigation of the relationship between structure and the reported antihyperglycemic
effect of polysaccharides from Catathelasma ventricosum mushrooms, Liu et al. [18,33,34], describe their
isolation and characterization. The freeze-dried powdered mushrooms (200 g) were defatted and
decolorized with 95% ethanol and the suspension was centrifuged. The supernatant was discarded
and the residue was extracted thrice with distilled water (4 L, 85 ◦C, 3 h). The combined extracts were
concentrated in a rotary evaporator. After removal of protein, the extract was dialyzed in a DEAE
cellulose dialysis bag against distilled water for 2 days to remove low molecular weight compounds.
The high-molecular weight polysaccharide that was retained in the dialysis bag was further purified by
the addition of 3-fold volumes of ethanol (48 h, 4 ◦C) and collection of the precipitate by centrifugation
(5000 rpm, 10 min). The precipitate was then lyophilized to a mixture of polysaccharides (32.77 g).
The resulting powder contained more than 99% polysaccharides, was negative in the Bradford test for
proteins, and showed no absorption at 280 and 260 nm in the UV spectrum, indicating the absence
of proteins and nucleic acids. Analysis by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) and other
analytical methods revealed the presence of six main peaks with average molecular weights ranging
from 3.7 × 103 to 1.7 × 107 Da using dextran-T as a standard. A hydrolyzed and acetylated sample
was then subjected to GC analysis that showed the presence of glucose with an α-D-glucopyranose
conformation (93.5%), fucose (0.7%), mannose (1.4%), and galactose (4.3%). The described methodology
should be useful for the structural elucidation of polysaccharides from other mushroom cultivars.
The vast literature (more than 1600 citations in the PubMed) on the isolation, structural elucidation,
and bioactivities of mushroom polysaccharides includes reports on the following additional mushroom
cultivars: Agaricus blazei [35], Agaricus brasiliensis [36], Amanita ponderosa [37], oyster mushroom [38],
Auricularia polytricha [39], Boletus edulis [40], Cookeina tricholoma [41], Cordyceps militaris [42], Entoloma
lividoalbum [43], Gleoestereum incarnatum [44], Ganoderma lucidum [45], Grifola frondosa [46,47],
Hohenbuehelia serotina [48], Hypsizygus marmoreus [49], Iliodiction cibarium [50,51], Lactarius deliciosus [52],
Lentinus edodes [31,53], Macrolepiota dolichaula [54], Phellinus igniarius [55], Phellinus linteus [56], Phellinus
pini [57], Pholiota adiposa [58], Pholiota nameko [59], Pleurotus eryngii [60], Pleurotus ostreatus [55,61],
Termitomyces heimii [62], Tricholoma matsutake [63–65], Tricholoma mongolicum [66]. A journal reviewer
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
7 of 40
noted that it is, however, important to determine if the isolated polysaccharides contain polyphenolic
or other bioactive compounds that might affect their activities.
2.1. Enhanced Biosynthesis of Mushroom Polysaccharides
In principle, it might be possible to increase the polysaccharide content of mushrooms
by amplifying the genes that govern their biosynthesis using molecular engineering techniques.
The following recent studies describe successful approaches that show that this is indeed the case.
(a) Chai, et al. [67] achieved the overproduction of β-glucans in Pleurotus ostreatus mushrooms by
promoter engineering in which the promoter for the 1,3-β-glucan synthase gene was replaced
by the promoter of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase gene of Aspergillus nidulans.
The transformation produced 32% to 131% higher yield of β-glucans than the wild type;
(b) Ji, et al. [68] improved polysaccharide production by engineering the biosynthetic pathway in
Ganoderma lucidum through the overexpression of the homologous UDP glucose phosphoglucomutase
gene. The intracellular and extracellular polysaccharides were higher by 42% and 36% than those
of the wild type strain; (c) Meng, et al. [69] used the expression of the Viteoscilla hemoglobin gene to
increase the production of both extracellular and intracellular polysaccharides in Ganoderma lucidum
by 30.5% and 88.2%, respectively; and (d) UDP-glucose phosphorylase seems to be a key enzyme that
is involved in polysaccharide biosynthesis [70], suggesting that amplification of the genes that govern
the formation of enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of polysaccharides might induce the formation
of high-polysaccharide mushrooms [71]. These pioneering studies demonstrate the potential of gene
manipulation to enhance the production of polysaccharides.
2.2. Effect of γ-Radiation on Fractionation of Polysaccharides
Khan, et al. [72] examined the potential of γ-irradiation to increase the percentage of the soluble
fraction as well as the effect on structural, functional, and antioxidant properties of the resulting
smaller size molecules. The results show that irradiation with 50 kGy doses that are much higher than
those used with mice mentioned below (4 to 8 Gy) induced a significant reduction in molecular weights
due to bond cleavage, enhanced antioxidant activity, and increased functional properties associated
with reduced viscosity, high solubility, and bile acid binding capacity, suggesting that γ-irradiation
might facilitate the use of mushroom β-glucans in various food formulations.
3. Antioxidative, Immunostimulating, and Anti-Inflammatory Properties
The beneficial effect of antioxidants is due to their ability to destroy reactive oxygen species (ROS)
that damage DNA and essential proteins. Antioxidative activities of polysaccharides in vivo are usually
accompanied by increased activities in liver oxidative enzymes (catalase, glutathione peroxidase,
superoxide dismutase) and increased glutathione and malondialdehyde levels [73,74]. The following
selected studies show that antioxidative and concurrent immunostimulating properties of mushroom
polysaccharides contribute to their bioactivities: (a) Antioxidative and immunostimulating properties
of a polysaccharide isolated from Cordiceps militaris mushrooms seem to be responsible for the
suppression of in vivo growth of melanoma in an mouse model [75,76]; (b) Antioxidative properties
of a crude polysaccharide from Inonotus oblique mushrooms, widely used as a folk medicine in
Russia, seem to contribute to the medicinal and nutritional properties of this mushroom [77];
(c) A polysaccharide from Hericium erinaceus mushrooms had strong in vitro antioxidant activity and
protected mice against liver damage induced by carbon tetrachloride [78]; (d) A fucogalactan isolated
from the edible mushroom Macrolepiota dolichaula exhibited antioxidant and immunostimulating
(macrophage, splenocyte, and thymocyte activation) properties in vitro [54], (similar results were
observes with a β-glucan isolated from the edible mushroom Russula albonigra) [79]; (e) A purified
polysaccharide from Pleurotus nebrodensis improved immunity and coordinated innate immunity
and inflammatory responses by activating macrophages [80,81]; (f) An exopolysaccharide from
the medicinal mushroom Clitocybe maxima enhanced the immune response and inhibited tumor
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
8 of 40
cells in mice [82]; (g) A polysaccharide from Hericium erinaceus exhibited both antioxidant and
neuroprotective effects on Aβ-induced neurotoxicity in neurons [83]; (h) A polysaccharide from
Agaricus brasiliensis induced immunostimulation in mice (increased spleen and thymus indexes) and
increased RAW 264.7 cell proliferation in vitro [84]; (i) A related study found that the polysaccharide
from this mushroom showed strong in vitro free radical scavenging activity [85]; (j) Polysaccharides
extracted from the edible mushroom Tricholoma mongolicum exhibited in vitro antioxidant activities
in a dose-dependent manner [66]; (k) Ultrasonically extracted Ganoderma β-D-glucans have higher
molecular weights and optimal degree of branching, and better in vitro antioxidant activity in
comparison with conventional extraction methods [86]; (l) A water-soluble β-glucan isolated from hot
water extract of the fruit bodies of the edible mushroom Entoloma lividoalbum stimulated the production
of macrophages, splenocytes, and thymocytes and exhibited hydroxyl and superoxide radical
scavenging activities and reducing properties [43]; (m) A fucogalactomannan from Tylopilus ballouii
mushroom inhibited superoxide and hydroxyl radicals with IC50 values of 1.25 and 1.6 mg/mL,
respectively, and reduced edema by up to 56% in an anti-inflammatory assay [87].
The following additional immunomodulating observations deserve special mention. The polar
fraction the β-glucan-rich mushroom preparation AndoSan™ that consists of a mixture of an extract
of Agaricus blazei Murill (82.4%), Hericium erinaceus (14.7%), and Grifola frondosa (2.9%) significantly
inhibited the activity of the tumor associated protease, legumain, in RAW 264.7 macrophage cells [88].
It seems that the immunomodulating polysaccharides (β-glucans) may contribute to the observed
anti-allergic/-asthma anti-infection, and antitumor properties in mice, and anti-inflammatory effects in
inflammatory bowel disease [89]. These beneficial effects seem to be mediated through the stimulation
of innate immune cells, including monocytes, natural killer (NK) cells, and dendritic cells and to
changes in the T-helper cell (Th1/Th2) ratio (balance) and inflammation. Surprisingly, administration
of AndoSan™ to 40 patients with multiple myeloma scheduled to undergo high dose chemotherapy
for seven weeks did not result in statistically significant differences in treatment response and
overall survival [90]. It is also noteworthy that (a) an Agaricus blazei extract enhanced the immune
response elicited by DNA vaccine against foot-and-mouth disease [91]; (b) Hericium erinaceus extracts
protected mice against Salmonella Typhimurium mortality [92]; and (c) a polysaccharide isolated
from liquid culture of Lentinus edodes mushroom mycelia containing black rice bran protected mice
against both Salmonella-induced endotoxemia and salmonellosis through upregulation of the immune
reaction [31,93].
Although mushrooms are a potential source of anti-inflammatory compounds [94–96], it is not
possible to know for certain to what extent polysaccharides contribute to their biological functionalities.
Moreover, only limited information seems to be available on the chemical basis of the numerous
bioactivities of mushroom polysaccharides [6]. Although the biological activities of polysaccharides
seem to be related to their structure or conformation properties [97], a journal reviewer noted that the
abilities of polysaccharides to bind amino acids, peptides, proteins, polyphenols, steroids, etc. might
also affect their biological activities. Nevertheless, the cited studies suggest the potential value of
polysaccharides as antioxidative, immunostimulatory, and anti-inflammatory food additives.
4. Role of Gut Microbiota in Obesity and Diabetes
The beneficial impact of dietary mushroom polysaccharides on gut microbiota is currently an
active area of research [10,98–101]. Here, we briefly mention the proposed impact of mushrooms and
their polysaccharides on gut microbiota in relation to obesity and diabetes. The apparent association
of obesity with the systemic immune inflammatory index [102] will not be covered here.
4.1. Definitions and Significance of Prebiotics, Probiotics, and Synbiotics
The following definitions and brief mention of their significance that are relevant to theme of this
review have been adapted from the literature [103–111].
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
9 of 40
•
Prebiotics are post-ingestion fermentable food ingredients such as non-digestible polysaccharides
(β-glucans) and fibers that induce changes in the gastrointestinal microbiota that result
in improved nutritional and health benefits to the host. Prebiotics of low-molecular-mass
oligosaccharides are more rapidly and selectively fermented by Bifidobacteria and lactobacilli
than higher molecular weight polysaccharides [110]. Prebiotics including polyphenol-rich
apple and grape pomace polyphenols [112–114], can beneficially affect disorders of the
digestive and immune systems, hypertension, appetite and obesity. Commercial prebiotics
include the following non-digestible oligosaccharides: inulin, fructo-oligosaccharides (FOS),
and galacto-oligosaccharides (GOS). The fermentation of non-digestible long-chain β-glucans
from mushrooms to form short chain fatty acids (SCFAs) provides a potential source of new
prebiotics [110]. Because Ganoderma lucidum reduces obesity in mice by modulating microbiota,
Delzenne and Bindels [99] suggest that extracts of this mushroom might be considered a new
prebiotic to treat obesity.
•
Probiotics are preparations containing safe live gut microorganisms, usually Bifidobacteria and
Lactobacilli, that are tolerant to the action of gastric and bile actions and which can alter the
microflora of the digestive tract resulting in beneficial health effects to the host. Probiotics such as
yogurt are reported to ameliorate adverse health syndromes (allergy, asthma, cancer, anxiety, and
depression). Multifunctional prebiotics and probiotics have the potential to control obesity by
helping regulate gut microbiota, food intake, and body weight. They therefore might be useful in
the treatment of obesity, hyperglycemia, and dyslipidemia [115].
•
Synbiotics are products containing both prebiotics and probiotics and refer specifically to the
utilization of prebiotics by probiotic bacteria that form fermentation products that are more
effective in ameliorating adverse health effects via modulation of the intestinal flora than are
placebos [116].
4.2. Modulation of Gut Microbiota by Prebiotic Mushroom Polysaccharides
Obesity arises from the consumption of energy-rich foods that adversely affect the energy
homeostasis of the host, whereby energy intake and energy expenditure are out of balance. Reducing
energy density of the diet can help control obesity. In humans, weight loss induces changes in gut
microflora. Dietary ingredients such as indigestible carbohydrates that are fermented in the gut to
short-chain fatty acids can provide a new source of energy that helps restore the energy balance,
thus ameliorating obesity [103]. Gut microbiota are also reported to affect obesity by helping to
balance immunity and the nutritional status of the host [105]. The fat-lowering antiobesity potential of
probiotics seems to be due to their ability to beneficially influence the ratio of two major classes of gut
bacteria, Bacteroides and Firmicutes.
Murphy, et al. [111] suggest that the mechanism of the impact of high-fat diet (HFD) on gut
microbiota is more complex than just the influence on energy balance. They showed that HFD-induced
changes in gut microbiota leads to a decrease in Bacteroides and an increase in Firmicute bacteria, and
the mechanism of this effect is associated with improved energy harvest and storage and enhanced
gut inflammation and permeability. They concluded that a better understanding of the mechanism
might facilitate the regulation of dysbiosis and the enhancement of antiobesity effects. The overall
mechanism seems more complex in view of the observation that gut microbiota are also reported to
reduce the expression of two genes coding for fat-suppressing neuropeptides that may have an adverse
effect on body fat reduction [117].
Studies with other food groups also provide support for such a mechanism. Results from
studies by Seo, et al. [118] on the alleviation of obesity in mice by fermented green tea extract
seem to reinforce this mechanism. In addition to the antiobesity effects, the extract restored the
beneficial gut microbiota composition (Firmicutes/Bacteroides and Bacteroides/Prevotella ratios), the
balance of which, as mentioned, is related to HFD-induced development of obesity and insulin
resistance. Related mechanistic aspects of changes in gut microbial population and are reported by
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
10 of 40
Han, et al. [119]. These authors found that pyrosequencing of fecal microbiota and microarray analyses
of blood samples showed that fresh and fermented kimchi interventions induced differential effects on
the obesity-related clinical parameters. Consumption of ginseng also induced weight loss in obese
Korean women that seems to be related to changes in the gut microbiota [120].
In relevant observations, Dutton and Turnbaugh [106], suggest that a metagenomic view of
human nutrition ranging from the biotransformation of food to digestion and utilization, including
microbial metabolism, might facilitate an exploitation of nutritional and health benefits of different
food categories. Nieuwdorp, et al. [121] suggest that controlled studies involving perturbation of
microbial communities in animal and human models may help identify therapeutic targets in the
microbiota. Modulating microbiota with the use of antibiotics, prebiotics, and probiotics may also
improve glucose metabolism and insulin resistance associated with type 2 diabetes; note that the
mechanism that seems to govern the association of specific gut microbiota and metabolic disease
include improved utilization dietary energy and changes in host-gene expression and gut permeability.
Relevant studies by Huang et al. [122,123] show that polysaccharides from Pleurotus tuber-regium
mushrooms exhibited antihyperglycemic properties and attenuated oxidative stress in diabetic rats on
a high fat diet. Holmes [124], and Chang, et al. [98] showed that Ganoderma lucidum mushrooms reduce
obesity in mice by modulating the composition of the gut microbiota. It is not known if polysaccharides
contribute to this effect. These considerations suggest the need to better define the possible roles of gut
microbiota in the polysaccharide-induced attenuation of obesity and hyperglycemia.
5. Antiobesity Effects
5.1. In Cells and Rodents
Obesity adversely affects immune, inflammatory, and platelet biomarkers [102]. Several studies
have investigated the antiobesity effect of mushroom polysaccharides from different sources on either
cells or rodents, and examples follow below.
5.1.1. Coriolus Versicolor
Mao, et al. [47] found that polysaccharide from the medicinal mushroom Coriolus versicolor
activated mouse splenocytes through the MAPK and NF-κB signaling pathways, suggesting binding
to immunoregulators that induces an immunopotentiating effect.
5.1.2. Tremella Fuciformis
Jeong, et al. [125] found that a polysaccharide from Hinmogi (Tremella fuciformis) edible
mushrooms inhibited the differentiation of 3T3-L1 adipocytes by reducing the mRNA expression in
the cells of PPARγ, C/EBPα, and the leptin hormone in a dose-dependent manner, suggesting the
potential value of the polysaccharide as an antiobesity prebiotic.
5.1.3. Ganoderma Lucidum
The treatment of adipocytes (fat cells) with the dietary supplement of Ganoderma lucidum
mushrooms known as ReishiMax suppressed the expression of adipogenic transcription factors
PPAR-γ, sterol regulatory binding element protein-1c (SREBBP-1c) and CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein-α (C/EBP-α), as well as the following enzymes and proteins associated with lipid synthesis,
transport, and storage: fatty acid synthase (FAS), acyl-CoA synthetase-1 (ACS1, fatty binding protein-4
(FABP4, fatty acid transport protein-1 (FATP1), and perilipin [126]. The mushroom supplements
also induced AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and increased glucose uptake by the adipocytes.
It seems that the Ganoderma lucidum formulation has multiple beneficial effects on transcription factors
and genes that induce adipocyte differentiation, synthesis, transport, and storage of lipids associated
with obesity and diabetes.
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
11 of 40
Other observations of the beneficial properties of Ganoderma lucidum suggest that the properties
might be largely associated with polysaccharide components.
For example, Chang, et al. [98]
showed that a water extract of the Chinese medicinal mushroom Ganoderma lucidum mycelia reduced
body weight, inflammation, and insulin resistance in mice fed a high-fat diet. The mechanism of
the beneficial effects seems to involve reversal of HFD-induced gut dysbiosis as indicated by the
Firmicutes/Bacteroides ratio and endotoxin-containing Proteobacteria levels in the gut, maintenance of
intestinal barrier integrity, reduced endotoxemia, reduced expression of genes involved in fatty acid
synthesis, and insulin resistance and signalling pathways affecting resistance. Similar antiobesity
and microbiota-modulating effects were observed with isolated high-molecular weight (>300 kDa;
47.5% mannose, 26.3% glucose, and 16.9% galactose) polysaccharides, suggesting that the antiobesity
effect of the extract might be largely associated with the polysaccharide. This comprehensive study
also implies that the extract and isolated polysaccharide might serve as prebiotics to reduce obesity,
inflammation, and insulin resistance in humans.
A purified polysaccharide isolated from an aqueous extract of Ganoderma lucidum mushroom
(also known as Lingzhi or Reishi medicinal mushrooms) fruit bodies was injected into mice to assess its
safety [127]. The results showed that the injection mixture improved antifatigue symptoms of the mice
and was not allergic in a guinea pig test, suggesting a novel approach to studies of health-promoting
properties of this and possibly other polysaccharides.
5.1.4. Pleurotus Tuber-Regium
Because obesity and hyperglycemia are closely linked syndromes associated with increased
serum cholesterol and triglyceride levels, it was of interest to determine if mushroom polysaccharides
can ameliorate both syndromes. This seems to be the case for Pleurotus tuber-regium because oral
administration (20 mg/kg body weight/8 weeks) of extracted exo-polysaccharides preparations with
different molecular weights from submerged culture media of the edible mushroom to obese-diabetic
rats ameliorated both obesity and hyperglycemia [122,123]. The beneficial effects were accompanied by
the following changes in associated biomarkers: (a) attenuation of fatty acid component n-6/n-3 ratio
in liver and plasma; (b) controlled serum total cholesterol, triglycerides, and low-density lipoprotein
(LDL) and decreased high-density lipoprotein (HDL) levels; and (c) restored decreased fasting insulin,
monounsaturated to polyunsaturated (MUFA/PUFA) and monounsaturated to saturated (MUFA/SFA)
fatty acid ratios, and adiponectin levels. The mechanism of the anti-lipidemic effect seems to be
associated with the up-regulation of lipid metabolism by the liver peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-alpha (PPAR-α) and m-RNA expression. These polysaccharides have the potential to be
used as a dietary supplement to treat HFD-induced metabolic syndrome. Surprisingly, the cited
studies show that only a few mushroom polysaccharides have been evaluated for their potential to
ameliorate obesity.
The following additional selected studies provide a starting point for further reading on
the antiobesity properties of mushroom polysaccharides and mushrooms: Mizutani, et al. [128];
Handayani, et al. [129]; Inoue, et al. [130]; Kanagasabapathy, et al. [131]; Vincent, et al. [132];
Handayani, et al. [133]; Park, et al. [134]; Zheng, et al. [135]; Iuchi, et al. [136]; Mori, et al. [137];
and Reza, et al. [138].
In relation to this, there is extensive literature on the antiobesity properties of cereal β-glucans
(for example, from barley, oats, rice, wheat) in rodents and humans that may be concurrently
consumed with corresponding mushroom β-glucans: for example, Aoe, et al. [139]; Arena, et al. [140];
Chang, et al. [141]; El Khoury, et al. [142]; and Tabesh, et al. [143].
5.2. In Humans
So far, there are relatively few studies that report on the antiobesity properties of mushrooms in
humans that may be associated with their content of polysaccharides.
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
12 of 40
A short-term 4-day clinical human trial with men and women with obesity or type-2 diabetes was
designed to determine the effect of replacing 20% of high-energy lean ground beef in the diet with
20% of low-energy ground white button mushrooms (Agaricus bisporus) [11,144]. Figure 7 shows that
substituting meat with lower energy mushroom-containing lunches with energy values of 783 and
339 kcal, respectively, reduced daily energy and fat intake and did not negatively affect palatability,
appetite, and satiety.
Foods 2016, 5, 80  
12 of 39 
 
Figure 7. A mushroom-containing reduced calorie meal served over 4 days did not negatively affect 
satiety. Adapted from Cheskin, et al. [144]. 
A more extensive long-term 1-year clinical human trial with overweight men and women 
showed that individuals consuming an isocaloric mushroom diet, relative to a meat diet, lost weight, 
had lower blood pressure and plasma lipid (total and LDL cholesterol, triglycerides), fasting glucose 
levels, and reduced levels of the inflammation biomarker hs-CRP associated with obesity (Figure 8) 
[11]. 
 
Figure 8. Weight loss diet substituting white button mushrooms for beef with no change in caloric 
content. Based on data from Poddar, et al. [11]. 
 
Figure 7. A mushroom-containing reduced calorie meal served over 4 days did not negatively affect
satiety. Adapted from Cheskin, et al. [144].
A more extensive long-term 1-year clinical human trial with overweight men and women showed
that individuals consuming an isocaloric mushroom diet, relative to a meat diet, lost weight, had lower
blood pressure and plasma lipid (total and LDL cholesterol, triglycerides), fasting glucose levels, and
reduced levels of the inflammation biomarker hs-CRP associated with obesity (Figure 8) [11].
Foods 2016, 5, 80  
12 of 39 
 
Figure 7. A mushroom-containing reduced calorie meal served over 4 days did not negatively affect 
satiety. Adapted from Cheskin, et al. [144]. 
A more extensive long-term 1-year clinical human trial with overweight men and women 
showed that individuals consuming an isocaloric mushroom diet, relative to a meat diet, lost weight, 
had lower blood pressure and plasma lipid (total and LDL cholesterol, triglycerides), fasting glucose 
levels, and reduced levels of the inflammation biomarker hs-CRP associated with obesity (Figure 8) 
[11]. 
 
Figure 8. Weight loss diet substituting white button mushrooms for beef with no change in caloric 
content. Based on data from Poddar, et al. [11]. 
 
Figure 8. Weight loss diet substituting white button mushrooms for beef with no change in caloric
content. Based on data from Poddar, et al. [11].
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
13 of 40
In addition, participants consuming the mushroom diet had lower BMI (basal metabolic index),
lower calorie (energy) and fat intakes, reduced waist circumferences, high satiety without affecting
palatability than those on the meat diet. The authors suggest that simply substituting one food
for another may be more appealing to dieters than more restrictive changes in dietary behavior.
These studies merit extension to other mushroom varieties, especially to the highly bioactive and
health-promoting Hericium erinaceus (Lion’s mane) and Lentinus edodes (shiitake) varieties [22,31].
Will mushroom polysaccharides induce similar beneficial effects in humans?
A related study found that adding crimini or white mushrooms (Agaricus bisporus) into a beef taco
blend enhanced the flavor of the reduced salt version of the tacos, suggesting that the flavor-enhancing
umami principles of mushrooms can be used as a health substitute for meat that also mitigates sodium
reduction without loss of overall flavor [145]. It is also noteworthy that the addition of 4% β-glucan-rich
fractions from Pleurotus eryngii mushrooms to wheat flour improved the quality of wheat pasta and
resulted in hardness similar to those of semolina pasta [146], suggesting that consumers might favor
such pastas for both quality and health benefits. Moreover, an assessment of the relationships of
dietary patterns to the risk of obesity shows that the so-called ‘Healthy’ pattern is characterized by a
high intake of mushrooms, potatoes, seaweeds, fish, shellfish, and soy products [147].
6. Antidiabetic Properties
6.1. Historical Perspective on the Cause and Treatment of Diabetes
Roberts [148], offers a fascinating historical account of the evolution of our understanding of
the cause and treatment of diabetes that includes the following aspects: (a) At around 1550 years
Before the Christian Era (BCE), the first recorded unsuccessful treatment for ‘excessive urination’
now associated with diabetes appeared in the Egyptian Ebers Papyrus, a medical papyrus; (b) About
1500 years later, the Greek physician Aretaeus coined the term diabetes (siphon) in the first century
CE to describe excess siphoning of water into the urine; (c) In 1776, the English physician Thomas
Willis rediscovered the connection between diabetes and sweetness of the urine, now known to be
due to the presence of glucose, and renamed the disease ‘diabetes mellitus’ (like honey); (d) In 1889,
the physiologist Oskar Minkowski at the University of Strasbourg was the first to associate the pancreas
with diabetes, following his discovery that a dog developed diabetes after he removed the pancreas;
and (e) In 1921, the Canadian physician Frederick Banting and his assistant Charles Best isolated the
protein insulin from the pancreas of a dog and successfully used it to treat the 14-old diabetes patient
Leonard Thompson, thus continuing the still elusive search for a complete cure.
6.2. Antidiabetic Activities of Mushroom Polysaccharides
High-fat diets (HFD) increase plasma glucose levels and decrease insulin secretion in healthy
individuals (Figure 9) [149,150]. A major feature of insulin resistance that accompanies diabetes
includes dyslipidemia, characterized by high triglyceride, low high-density lipoprotein (HDL),
and high low-density lipoprotein (LDL) serum levels [151,152]. Biomarkers (Figure 10) in the serum
liver, gut and pancreas that may be associated with the mechanisms of antidiabetic agents include:
control of serum glucose and lipoproteins; beneficial effects on immunity; increase in antioxidative
enzyme activities in serum; increase in serum insulin; influence on gut microbiota; changes in liver
PPAR-α expression and protein levels; and structural changes in pancreatic β-cells. Mushroom
polysaccharides are reported to lessen the symptoms of medical conditions associated with metabolic
syndrome, including diabetes [153]. Polysaccharides that have been reported to have antidiabetic
properties in diabetic and/or obese rodents include those from the following mushroom varieties:
Agaricus brasiliensis [154]; Agrocybe chaxingu [155]; Catathelasma ventricosum [18]; Grifola frondosa [156];
Phellinus linteus; [56]; Pleurotus abalonus [157]; Pleurotus eryngii [158]; Pleurotus florida [159]; Pleurotus
sajor-caju [160]; Tremella fuciformis [151]; Ganoderma lucidum [161]; Lentinus strigosus [162]; Pleurotus
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
14 of 40
tuber-regium [123]; Sparassis crispa [163]; and Tremella aurantialba [164–166]. Several of these studies will
be elaborated on further below.
Foods 2016, 5, 80  
14 of 39 
 
Figure 9. Orally administered dried and powdered Oyster mushrooms (50 mg/kg BW/day) for 2 
weeks improved glucose control in type-2 diabetic humans. Adapted from Jayasuriya, et al. [167]. 
 
Figure 10. Addition of Pleurotus tuber-regium polysaccharide extract to a high fat diet in 
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats improved blood parameters and was accompanied by reduced 
hepatic lipid peroxidation and increased hepatic superoxide dismutase and glutathione peroxidase 
activity and peroxisome proliferator activated receptor (PPAR)-α expression. Adapted from Huang, 
et al. [122]. 
6.3. Mechanisms of Bioactivities of Polysaccharides against Diabetes 
Macrophages in the mucus lining of the intestine bind β-glucans through β-glucan receptors 
[20,168]. These cells are then activated and move back to the lymph nodes (Payer’s Patch) that then 
release cytokines and induce immune activation. β-Glucans also prevent absorption of cholesterol 
from food in the digestive tract, thus lowering serum cholesterol. It seems that a β-glucan-containing 
fraction from Agaricus blazei was more effective in reducing plasma sugar levels in rats than pure β-
glucan from barley. Lei, et al. [169] discovered that an α-glucan from Grifola frondosa protected murine 
pancreatic cells against oxidative damage.  
A polysaccharide from oyster mushrooms at a concentration of 0.4 mg/mL inhibited the enzyme 
α-glucosidase with an IC50 value of 0.424 mg/mL [38]. Because α-glycosidase enzymes are known to 
 
Figure 9. Orally administered dried and powdered Oyster mushrooms (50 mg/kg BW/day) for
2 weeks improved glucose control in type-2 diabetic humans. Adapted from Jayasuriya, et al. [167].
Foods 2016, 5, 80  
14 of 39 
 
Figure 9. Orally administered dried and powdered Oyster mushrooms (50 mg/kg BW/day) for 2 
weeks improved glucose control in type-2 diabetic humans. Adapted from Jayasuriya, et al. [167]. 
 
Figure 10. Addition of Pleurotus tuber-regium polysaccharide extract to a high fat diet in 
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats improved blood parameters and was accompanied by reduced 
hepatic lipid peroxidation and increased hepatic superoxide dismutase and glutathione peroxidase 
activity and peroxisome proliferator activated receptor (PPAR)-α expression. Adapted from Huang, 
et al. [122]. 
6.3. Mechanisms of Bioactivities of Polysaccharides against Diabetes 
Macrophages in the mucus lining of the intestine bind β-glucans through β-glucan receptors 
[20,168]. These cells are then activated and move back to the lymph nodes (Payer’s Patch) that then 
release cytokines and induce immune activation. β-Glucans also prevent absorption of cholesterol 
from food in the digestive tract, thus lowering serum cholesterol. It seems that a β-glucan-containing 
fraction from Agaricus blazei was more effective in reducing plasma sugar levels in rats than pure β-
glucan from barley. Lei, et al. [169] discovered that an α-glucan from Grifola frondosa protected murine 
pancreatic cells against oxidative damage.  
A polysaccharide from oyster mushrooms at a concentration of 0.4 mg/mL inhibited the enzyme 
α-glucosidase with an IC50 value of 0.424 mg/mL [38]. Because α-glycosidase enzymes are known to 
 
Figure 10.
Addition of Pleurotus tuber-regium polysaccharide extract to a high fat diet in
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats improved blood parameters and was accompanied by reduced
hepatic lipid peroxidation and increased hepatic superoxide dismutase and glutathione peroxidase
activity and peroxisome proliferator activated receptor (PPAR)-α expression. Adapted from
Huang, et al. [122].
6.3. Mechanisms of Bioactivities of Polysaccharides against Diabetes
Macrophages in the mucus lining of the intestine bind β-glucans through β-glucan
receptors [20,168]. These cells are then activated and move back to the lymph nodes (Payer’s Patch) that
then release cytokines and induce immune activation. β-Glucans also prevent absorption of cholesterol
from food in the digestive tract, thus lowering serum cholesterol. It seems that a β-glucan-containing
fraction from Agaricus blazei was more effective in reducing plasma sugar levels in rats than pure
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
15 of 40
β-glucan from barley. Lei, et al. [169] discovered that an α-glucan from Grifola frondosa protected
murine pancreatic cells against oxidative damage.
A polysaccharide from oyster mushrooms at a concentration of 0.4 mg/mL inhibited the enzyme
α-glucosidase with an IC50 value of 0.424 mg/mL [38]. Because α-glycosidase enzymes are known to
induce postprandial hyperglycemia and other maladies, this result suggests that glycosidase-inhibiting
mushroom polysaccharides might be of value in therapy for diabetes.
The oral administration of extracellular polysaccharides (20 mg/kg body weight/8 weeks) from
three strains of Pleurotus tuber-regium mushrooms to obese diabetic rats attenuated both obesity, by
maintaining a stable fatty acid composition, and hyperglycemia. The hypolipidemic properties
were accompanied with up-regulated liver PPAR-α mRNA expression and protein levels [123].
The polysaccharides seem to act as PPAR-α agonists that result in decreased serum triglyceride and
increased HDL levels by increasing lipid uptake, activation, and catabolism via transcriptional changes
of genes that control these events. Duobin, et al. [170] observed similar hypolipidemic properties of
exopolysaccharides produced by Pleurotus geesteranus fermented mushrooms in diabetic mice.
Detailed studies by Kanagasabapathy et al. [132,160,171] showed that polysaccharide-rich
β-glucans (240 mg/kg body weight) from Pleurotus sajor-caju mushrooms prevented the occurrence of
hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia/insulin resistance in mice fed a high fat diet by upregulating
the expression of insulin-response glucose-transporter (GLUT-4) and the antidiabetic, antiatherogenic
hormone adiponectin genes and down-regulating the expression of nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) that
controls the regulation of genes that encode proteins involved in immune and inflammatory responses,
including interleukin-6 (IL-6). The amelioration of insulin resistance was similar to that observed with
the antidiabetic drug metformin.
These authors also discuss the factors that might govern the mechanisms of causes and prevention
of diabetes at the molecular–genetic levels, including the following events.
Diabetes causes a
reduction in the production of anti-inflammatory adiponectin and an increase in the production of
pro-inflammatory cytokines. The inflamed state leads to the release of cytokines in adipose tissues that
are not usually secreted by adipose cells. Thus, the expression of inflammation tumor necrosis factor-α
(TNF-α) and IL-6 amplifies insulin resistance in the adipose tissues of HFD animals. This suggestion
is supported by the results, where the HFD groups had higher expression of the pro-inflammatory
biomarkers compared to the polysaccharide-treated groups. By contrast, the expression of NF-κB in the
HFD groups treated with polysaccharide and metformin was significantly downregulated; the levels
were lower than those of the untreated HFD group [171].
Studies of mechanistic interest showed that the same exopolysaccharide induces lipogenesis in
differentiating 3T3-L1 cells and in lipolysis in 3T3L-1 adipocytes [160]. This mechanism seems to
depend in part on the ability of the exopolysaccharide to upregulate the gene expression of adiponectin
and leptin hormones produced by adipose tissues and of GLUT-4, and downregulate the inflammatory
biomarkers through activation of the AMPK-signalling pathway. These events, associated with a novel
AMPK activator that acts as a regulator of glucose and lipid homeostasis in adipocytes, might help
formulate functional food for the prevention and treatment of diabetes.
Treatment of diabetic mice with α-glucan (150 or 450 mg/kg) from Grifola frondosa mushrooms
decreased body weight, plasma glucose, glycosylated serum protein, serum insulin, triglycerides,
cholesterol, free fatty acids, and malondialdehyde levels in livers [172]. The treatment also increased
the content of hepatic glycogen, reduced glutathione, and the activities superoxide dismutase,
and glutathione peroxidase enzymes, suggesting that the multiple beneficial biochemical changes
might be due to the effect of the α-glucan on insulin receptors that results in increased insulin sensitivity
and ameliorated insulin resistance of peripheral target tissues.
A related study [156], reported that the antidiabetic effect of an α-glucan (100 or 300 mg/kg
body weight) from the fruit body of Grifola frondosa mushrooms on mice on a high-fat diet was
associated with improved (adjusted) immune function and its effect of decreasing the levels of factors
that destroy β-pancreatic cells. Indeed, the treatment decreased the levels of fasting plasma glucose,
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
16 of 40
triglycerides, cholesterol, free fatty acids, and NO production by the macrophages, effectors that
cause immune disruption. It also increased serum insulin level and beneficially affected production
of immunocytokines by splenocytes that play a key role in immune responses, and ameliorated
ultrastructural changes in pancreatic β-cells, suggesting that the observed hypoglycemic and
hypolipidemic effects on the diabetic mice might be related to parallel beneficial effects on immune
reactions involved in pathogenesis of diabetes mellitus.
Two protein-bound exopolysaccharides isolated from mycelial cultures of Phellinus baumii
(consisting of mannose, 56.1%; xylose, 21.7%; and fucose, 19.6%; and carbohydrate and protein
proportions of 71.0% and 29.0%, respectively) and Tremella fuciformis mushrooms (consisting of 87.5%
mannose, and 7.0% galactose in the carbohydrate chain), widely used as folk medicines, significantly
reduced fasting blood glucose levels and improved glucose tolerance without affecting body weight
gain of ob/ob (obese) mice [151]. The observed activation (increase) of PPAR-γ transcription messenger
expression in response to the treatment seems to be related to the regulation of hyperglycemia and
dyslipidemia, possibly via the regulation of lipid metabolism.
Treatment of diabetic rats for 7 days with a crude exopolysaccharide (50–150 mg/kg body
weight) from a submerged mycelial culture of the edible Lentinus strigosus mushroom induced a
dose-dependent, up to 21.1% reduction in the serum glucose level, hypoglycemia, and regeneration
in the pancreatic islets of Langerhans and amelioration of the destruction of microvasculature of the
islets [162].
Because abnormal lipid metabolism and increased oxidative stress are major complications
of diabetes, Zhang, et al. [164] evaluated the potential of a saponin-containing broth extract and
polysaccharides from Tremella aurantialba mycelia to alleviate these conditions in diabetic rats.
The extract was more effective than the polysaccharides in decreasing blood glucose, cholesterol,
phospholipids, and triglyceride serum levels.
The extract was also more effective in inducing
increase in superoxide dismutase, catalase, glutathione peroxidase and reductase levels that are
associated with oxidative stress, suggesting that the metabolic profile (mechanism) that regulates
the action of mushroom saponins seems to differ from that of the polysaccharides. It would
be interesting to determine if the combination of the two bioactive mushroom formulations
(saponins and polysaccharides), as well as terpenoid- and sterol-rich constituents of an extract
of Inonotus obliquus medicinal mushrooms with hypoglycemic activity [173], act additively or
synergistically against diabetes.
An investigation by Lee, et al. [155] showed that a polysaccharide from Agrocybe chaxingu
mushrooms prevented the destruction of pancreatic β-cells in mice.
The beneficial effect was
accompanied by reduced plasma glucose and nitric oxide (NO) production and inducible nitric
oxide synthase (iNOS) expression in the cells in a dose-dependent manner, suggesting the value of the
polysaccharide to treat diabetes mellitus.
A 120-kDA polysaccharide isolated from the fruiting bodies of Pleurotus abalonus (composed of
glucose, rhamnose, glucuronic acid, xylose, galactose, and arabinose in the molar ratio of
26.3:2.7:1.1:1.4:1.8:1.2) exhibited hypoglycemic activity in diabetic mice and inhibited MCF7
breast cancer cells with an IC50 of 3.76 µM and HIV-1 reverse transcriptase with an IC50 of
8.7 × 10−2 µM [157]. These observations suggest that this polysaccharide might alleviate diabetes,
cancer, and HIV infections in humans.
Huang et al. [122,123] found that the administration of Pleurotus tuber-regium mushroom
polysaccharides to diabetic rats on a high-fat diet resulted in reduced fasting blood glucose and
glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) levels and restored serum insulin levels, and restoration of total
cholesterol, triglycerides, LDL and HDL levels. The polysaccharides inhibited the lipid peroxidation
index (malondialdehyde) and restored oxidative enzymes (superoxide dismutase and glutathione
peroxidase) activities in the liver.
The authors suggest that the antioxidative property of the
polysaccharides might enhance the antioxidant system that attenuates oxidative stress, indicating
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
17 of 40
that the polysaccharides might be an alternative medicine to treat hyperglycemia and oxidative stress
associated with diabetes.
Homogeneous water- and alkali-extracted polysaccharides from Pleurotus tuber-regium
mushrooms exhibited strong antioxidative properties in multiple antioxidative chemical and cell
assays (oxygen and hydroxyl radical and DPPH scavenging activities; inhibition on liver peroxidation,
liver mitochondria swelling, and red blood cell hemolysis) [174]. The water-extracted polysaccharide
was more effective than the alkali-extracted one. As mentioned earlier, another study found that
oral administration of extracellular polysaccharides (20 mg/kg body weights/8 weeks) from three
different strains of Pleurotus tuber-regium mushrooms to obese-diabetic rats alleviated molecular and
cellular biomarkers associated with both obesity and diabetes [123]. The cited studies imply that the
polysaccharides are potent natural antioxidant that might alleviate oxidative damage in food and
oxidative stress in vivo associated with diabetes, obesity, and other diseases.
The administration of a mixture of polysaccharides from Catathelasma ventricosum mushrooms,
a traditional Chinese medicine, to diabetic mice for 30 days results in reduced blood glucose, total
cholesterol, triglycerides, and LDL-cholesterol, and an increase in HDL cholesterol and antioxidant
enzymes [18]. The beneficial properties also seem to be related to potent antioxidative activities of the
polysaccharides. Because pathologic morphologies of the liver, kidney, and pancreas of treated diabetic
mice were similar to those of normal mice, it also seems that the polysaccharides are safe compounds.
It is relevant to note that selenium-enriched mycelia of this mushroom exhibited antihyperglycemic
and antioxidant properties that seem to be caused by a selenium-containing protein with the amino
acids selenocysteine and selenomethionine [33].
A polysaccharide isolated from the medicinal mushroom Phellinus linteus mycelia grown in
submerged culture was mainly a branched-type glycan with both β- and α-linkages and a pyranoid
sugar conformation, as determined by FT-IR and NMR spectroscopies [56]. The polysaccharide was
isolated under the following optimum conditions: 90 ◦C with a 1:50 ratio of mycelia to hot water and a
precipitation time of 2 h. Oral administration of the polysaccharide (100 mg/kg body weight/day)
to diabetic mice significantly reduced the blood glucose level by 35.6%, suggesting the value of this
mushroom compound as a functional food additive and a hypoglycemic agent.
A heteropolysaccharide isolated from Pleurotus eryngii mushrooms consisted of the following
monosaccharides (in mole %): D-glucose (62.8), D-galactose (24.4), and D-mannose (9.8). Administration
of the polysaccharide to mice at 400 and 800 mg/kg body weight significantly reduced the serum
fasting glucose and insulin levels and lipid deposition in high-fat mice [175]. It also induced reduction
of liver lipid peroxidation and the elevation of the hepatic antioxidant system. The histopathological
examination of the liver further confirmed the hepatoprotective effect. The authors suggest that the
polysaccharide has the potential to mitigate insulin resistance, oxidative stress, and liver dysfunction.
The results of a related study on the effect of an extract of the same mushroom injected into diabetic
mice suggested the action of the extract on glycemic metabolism occurs via increasing glycogen and
insulin levels, reducing free radical damage, and recovering injured pancreatic β-cells [158].
A polysaccharide isolated from the culinary–medicinal Pleurotus florida mushrooms was found
to be nontoxic to mice up to 4000 mg/kg body weight [159]. The treatment of diabetic mice with the
polysaccharide (200 and 400 mg/kg) resulted in significant reduction of the plasma glucose, serum
cholesterol, triglycerides, malondialdehyde, nitric oxide, and urine glucose and ketones concentrations.
By contrast, the concentrations in the liver of superoxide dismutase, catalase, and reduced glutathione
were restored to normal levels, suggesting that the polysaccharide might ameliorate hyperglycemia
and hypocholesteremia associated with diabetes.
In
a
further
analysis
of
the
mechanism
of
action
of
polysaccharides
in
diabetes,
Karumuthil-Melethil, et al. [176] reported that immune cells recognize β-glucans through a cell
surface pathogen recognition receptor called dectin-1, suggesting that the observed innate immune
response induced by low-dose β-glucan is regulatory in nature that can be used to modulate T cell
response to pancreatic β-cells for inducing protection from type 1 diabetes (T1D), where the pancreas
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
18 of 40
does not produce any insulin. For additional details on the relationship of β-glucans to the dectin-1
signalling pathway, see the review by Lee and Kim [177].
The following observations do not directly involve the use of polysaccharides, but are relevant
to the theme of the review. A submerged culture of mycelia and broth of the medicinal mushroom
Grifola frondosa alleviated type 2 diabetes by decreasing cell-mediated immunity in normal rats and
improved hyperglycemia in diabetes-induced innate immunities [178]. Administration of a 70% ethanol
extract of the medicinal mushroom Auricularia auricula-judae to obese mice reduced the risk of hepatic
steatosis by modulating plasma lipids via the regulation of adipogenic and lipogenic transcriptional
factors, suggesting the value of the extract to improve plasma lipids and liver enzymes [138].
A retrospective study of 37 human subjects indicates that dietary consumption of Agaricus bisporus
mushrooms reduces diabetes risk factors, suggesting that the mushrooms contain compounds
with potential anti-inflammatory and antioxidant health benefits that can occur over time in
adults predisposed to type-2 diabetes [179]. Related observation show that the Agaricus bisporus
mushroom had both hypoglycemic and hypolipidemic activity in rats [180], and that Agaricus bisporus
lectins (glycoproteins) regenerated pancreatic β-cells in mice following 70% partial pancreatectomy,
suggesting that induction of islet β-cell proliferation has therapeutic potential for diabetes [181].
6.4. Polysaccharides Accelerate Wound Healing in Diabetic Rats
Wound healing is delayed and impaired in diabetic individuals. To help overcome this problem,
two studies have described the benefits of polysaccharide-containing mushrooms. Cheng, et al. [161]
found that topical application of an aqueous extract of Ganoderma lucidum mushrooms containing
25.1% polysaccharides incorporated into a cream was effective in healing diabetic rats wounded in the
posterior neck region. Additional observations showed that the antioxidant activity in the serum of
treated rats was higher, the oxidative damaged lipid and protein content of the serum was significantly
lower, and the collagen matrix with newly formed capillaries of the wounds was higher than those of
the controls, suggesting the potential value of the mushroom formulation in wound management that
could avoid the need to amputate affected organs of diabetic individuals. A related study reported
that oral administration of the medicinal mushroom Sparassis crispa, with a β-glucan content of 40.5%,
accelerated skin wound closure of diabetic rats [163]. The improvement in healing seems to involve
migration of macrophages, fibroblasts, and β-glucan that leads to increases in the synthesis of type I
collagen. The cited observations merit confirmation with wounds of diabetic humans.
6.5. Human Clinical Studies on the Efficacy of Mushrooms against Diabetes
Only a limited number of studies have been conducted in humans on the beneficial properties of
mushroom polysaccharides.
An evaluation of the effect of the culinary Pleurotus ostreatus and P. cystidiosus mushrooms
(consumed as freeze-dried powders at a dose of 50 mg/kg/body weight) in healthy human volunteers
and type 2 diabetic patients showed: (a) a reduction in fasting and postprandial serum glucose levels
of healthy volunteers; and (b) a reduction in postprandial serum glucose levels and increased serum
insulin levels of type 2 diabetic patients [167]. The mechanism of the hypoglycemic activity seems to
be associated with increased glucokinase activity and promotion of insulin secretion by the pancreas,
thus increasing the utilization of glucose by peripheral tissues, inhibiting glycogen synthase kinase
activity, and promoting glycogen synthesis. It is also worth noting that evidence from a limited number
of trials does not support the use of Ganoderma lucidum mushrooms for the treatment of risk factors
of cardiovascular disease (blood glucose level, blood lipid profile, blood pressure) in individuals
with type 2 diabetes [182]. A journal reviewer suggested that if experiments were conducted with
impure polysaccharides or mushroom extracts, it is likely that other bioactive compounds could have
contributed to the antidiabetic activities.
Because diabetes is often accompanied by symptoms of depression [183], Nanri [184], carried
out an epidemiological study over a 5-year period with 55,000 Japanese men and women aged 45
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
19 of 40
to 75 years designed to help define the role of the diet in influencing the incidence of both diabetes
and depression symptoms. The results suggest that type-2 diabetes increased with rice intake among
women and physically inactive men and decreased with consumption of seafood among men and
with soy products among overweight and postmenopausal women. With respect to accompanying
depression, the results revealed an inverse association with serum folate and vitamin D levels and
intake of fruits, vegetables, isoflavone-containing soy products, and mushrooms, suggesting that
diet affects the development of both diabetes and depression and that consumption of commercially
available high-vitamin D mushrooms might ameliorate the incidence of depression. Although this is a
more general study on diet, diabetes, and depression that does not directly involve polysaccharides,
it gives an indication of how dietary supplementation can alleviate such associated conditions.
7. Anticancer Effects
Biochemical and cellular biomarkers associated with diabetes and obesity are also operative
against different types of cancers and infections, suggesting the possibility that mushrooms and their
polysaccharides might concurrently protect against multiple human diseases. Such biomarkers include
antiradical, antioxidant, anti-glycation [185], anti-inflammatory [168], and anti-α-glucosidase [38,186],
activities and enhancement of the immune system [47,177]. To stimulate interest in this possibility, here
we will briefly mention selected studies on the anticarcinogenic and antibiotic properties of mushrooms.
A seminal study describes the development in Japan of three different polysaccharide agents [187].
This paper includes illustrations of a three-dimensional molecular model of the right-handed triple
spiral helix of an active β-D-glucan. A meta-analysis of 8009 patients from randomized controlled
trials revealed that addition of the immunopotentiator polysaccharide K (PSK) from Coriolus versicolor
mushrooms to standard chemotherapy increased the survival of patients after curative gastric cancer
resection over chemotherapy alone [188,189]. This study confirms the ability of polysaccharides to
induce apoptosis and other forms of cancer cell death through immunological mechanisms [190]. It is
also noteworthy that daily consumption of Lentinula edodes improved immunity in healthy young
adults and that oral consumption of soluble β-glucans was safe in elderly healthy adults and seemed
to induce an increase in the number of circulating β-cells [191].
Cell, animal, and human studies indicate that blended (combination of extracts from three different
mushrooms) extracts exhibit significantly stronger cytotoxic effects on human tumor cell lines than
single extracts [192,193].
A journal reviewer noted that maybe the best solution in practical use would be blended
mushroom liquid extracts that contain active antitumor polysaccharides and a large number of
other bioactive compounds such as flavonoids and triterpenes. For example, Hericium erinaceus
mushrooms contain about 50 characterized secondary metabolites [22]. As noted above, it might be
possible to increase the biosynthesis of polysaccharides by genetic engineering methods. It might also
be worthwhile to determine the bioactivities of three different polysaccharides present in a hybrid
mushroom obtained through backcross mating of a somatic hybrid mushroom through protoplast
fusion [194], as well as the contribution to bioactivity of the extracted polysaccharides and the
non-extracted part that contains bioactive compounds.
The efficacy of mushrooms and their bioactive components against cancer are reviewed in
Ren, et al. [51] and briefly outlined here:
1.
Dietary supplementation of Agaricus silvaticus mushrooms reduced glycaemia levels of
post-surgery cancer patients [195];
2.
Oral administration of a polysaccharide from Grifola frondosa stimulated the immune system of
breast cancer patients [196];
3.
Dietary supplementation with Agaricus silvaticus provided metabolic and blood pressure benefits
to postsurgical colorectal cancer patients [197];
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
20 of 40
4.
Several Japanese studies reported that orally administered Lentinula edodes mycelia extracts
improved the course of cancer in Japanese patients undergoing chemotherapy [198–202];
5.
The mushroom β-glucan lentinan prolonged the survival of patients with advanced gastric
cancer [203];
6.
Dietary administration of Agaricus silvaticus mushrooms improved nutritional status and
reduced abnormal bowel functions and nausea in patients undergoing chemotherapy for breast
cancer [204];
7.
A meta-analysis suggests that dietary mushroom intake seemed to be inversely associated with
risk of breast cancer [205];
8.
Oral
consumption
of
mushrooms
glucans
seems
to
be
an
efficient
treatment
to
prevent colitis-associated cancer through modification of mucosal inflammation and cell
proliferation [206];
9.
Consumption of an Agaricus bisporus mushroom powder by prostate cancer patients beneficially
impacted prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels and modulated the biology of recurrent prostate
cancer by decreasing immunosuppressive factors [207].
The following additional observations further highlight the efficacy of polysaccharides to
contribute to the prevention and therapy of cancer. Combination therapy using a β-glucan fraction
from Grifola frondosa and cytosine-phosphate guanine oligodeoxynucleotide was highly effective,
both as an adjuvant for dendrite cell vaccination and by direct administration, against a murine
tumor, suggesting that the combination has potential as an immunotherapeutic approach against
cancer [208]. A related study by Pan, et al. [209] showed that a polysaccharide from the medicinal
mushroom Amauroderma rude inhibited tumor growth in mice via regulation of the immune
system at the molecular and cellular levels. Encapsulation of polysaccharides from the medicinal
mushroom Antrodia camphorata in chitosan-silica or silica nanoparticles enhanced anti-tumor efficacy
of HepG2 liver cancer cells [210]. Polysaccharide-containing Hericium erinaceus mushroom extracts
prevented migration of cancer cells of implanted colon tumors in mice to the lung via targeting their
upstream signalling molecules for mediating the expression of the extracellular matrix-degrading
proteinases [211].
It is also noteworthy that daily consumption of Lentinula edodes improved immunity in healthy
young adults and that oral consumption of soluble β-glucans was safe in elderly healthy adults
and seemed to induce an increase in the number of circulating β-cells [191]. Relevant studies by
Meng, et al. [69] and Yan, et al. [70] discuss in detail the relationship between structural features of
mushroom polysaccharides and antitumor properties Schwartz and Hadar [206] discuss possible
mechanisms of action of orally administered (but poorly bioavailable) mushroom β-glucans against
human cancer associated with inflammatory bowel disease, suggesting the need for clinical evidence
on the beneficial anticarcinogenic activities of mushrooms and their polysaccharides in humans [212].
7.1. Anti-Aromatase Activity against Breast Cancer
Santen, et al. [213] hypothesized that by catalyzing the conversion of androgens to cancer-causing
estrogens, the enzyme aromatase seems to contribute to the cause of breast cancer and that aromatase
inhibitors would inhibit the process of tumor promotion by lowering tissue levels of estradiol and thus
blocking cell proliferation. Studies with mushrooms support this possibility. Thus, Grube, et al. [214]
found that Agaricus bisporus phytochemicals modulate aromatase activity and have the potential
to chemoprevent breast cancer in postmenopausal women by reducing the in-situ production of
estrogen. Phytochemicals in white button mushrooms suppressed aromatase activity in the MCF-7
breast cancer cell line in vitro and in hamsters resulting in both decreased tumor cell proliferation and
tumor weight [215]. It is not known if polysaccharides contribute to these beneficial effects.
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
21 of 40
7.2. Crohn’s Disease Therapy
Crohn’s disease is an incurable chronic inflammatory human disease that affects the distal
ileum and colon and other parts of the GI tract causing chronic diarrhea and abdominal pain [14].
Male patients show an increased risk of development of colo-rectal cancer and all cancers compared
with controls [216]. Treatments include the use of immunomodulators. Norwegian scientists reported
that ingestion of an Agaricus blazei mushroom extract AndoSan™ improved symptoms in patients
suffering from Crohn’s disease and the related malady ulcerative colitis [217,218]. The authors suggest
that because the treatment did not seem to cause any adverse effects, the mushroom preparation has
the potential to be used as a safe supplement to conventional medication. Additional studies revealed
that the effect of the treatment on reduction in systemic cytokine levels was limited, suggesting that
the mechanisms that might govern the clinical anti-inflammatory effect as well as the possible role of
polysaccharides [219,220] merit further study.
8. Antimicrobial Activities
The following selected observations indicate that mushroom polysaccharides and derivatives
exhibited strong antibiotic properties against pathogenic bacteria and viruses.
8.1. Antibiotic Effects
Supplementation with the β-glucan from Pleurotus ostreatus might protect athletes against
infections of the respiratory tract [221]. Silver nanoparticles prepared using glucan isolated from
Pleurotus florida blue variant mushrooms inhibited the multiple antibiotic-resistant (MAR) bacterium
Klebsiella pneumoniae in a dose-dependent manner and acted synergistically with four medicinal
antibiotics to inhibit nearly all bacterial growth, suggesting that the combinations might control
the MAR bacteria that cause pneumonia [222]. A related study by Manna, et al. [62] reported that
nanoparticles synthesized using a hetero polysaccharide isolated from Lentinus squarrosulus mushrooms
exhibited antibacterial activity against MAR E. coli bacteria and exhibited synergistic effects with four
antibiotics to inhibit all bacterial growth. It seems that the nanoparticles are more effective than
normal-sized particles in penetrating and destroying bacteria and viruses.
The Lentinus edodes polysaccharide protected mice against a Salmonella lipopolysaccharide-induced
endotoxemia (septic shock), an often-fatal human disease [31]. The same polysaccharide and a
Hericium erinaceus mushroom extract protected mice against infections by the lethal foodborne pathogen
Salmonella Typhimurium via stimulation of the immune system [92,93]. A purified Lentinus edodes
extract exhibited antimicrobial properties against oral bacterial pathogens, suggesting their value in
the improvement of oral hygiene [223]. A crude polysaccharide from Auricularia auricula-judae showed
in vitro activities against the foodborne pathogens Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus [224].
A sulphated polysaccharide from Pleurotus eryngii (oyster) mushrooms inhibited the foodborne E. coli
and Staphylococcus aureus pathogenic bacteria [225].
8.2. Anti-Quorum Sensing Mushroom Compounds
Biofilm is a slimy layer that can surround (occlude) bacteria and confer resistance to
phagocytosis and antibiotics [14]. De Carvalho, et al. [226] isolated the compound coprinuslactone
[(3R,4S)-2-methylene-3,4-dihydroxypentanoic acid 1,4-lactone] from the edible mushroom Coprinus
comatus that interfered with quorum sensing and dispersed biofilms of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, where
it also reduced the formation of pathogenicity factors pyocyanin and rhamnolipid B. In addition,
coprinuslactone also damaged Staphylococcus aureus cells in biofilms at subtoxic levels and inhibited
UDP-acetyl glucosamine enolpyruvyl transferase that is essential for cell wall synthesis. Related studies
showed that extracts of Agaricus mushroom species inhibited the biofilm forming ability of
P. aeruginosa [227], and that extracts of Ganoderma lucidum and Phellinus ignarius inhibited quorum
sensing in Chromobacterium violaceum [228]. These observations suggest that mushroom produce
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
22 of 40
compounds that can serve as a source of antimicrobial and anti-quorum sensing agents. Will mushroom
anti-quorum sensing compounds inactivate pathogens in vivo via stimulation of the immune system,
as did a bioprocessed mushroom formulation [229]?
8.3. Antiviral Activities
A pioneering study [230], discovered that nonsulphated and sulphated polysaccharides nearly
completely inhibited cell-to-cell infection of human immunodeficiency viruses HIV-1 and HIV-2 and a
human T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1). The following capsule summaries show that native
and chemically modified mushroom polysaccharides exhibit antiviral activities against pathogenic
viruses. A 120 kDa polysaccharide from the fruiting body of the Pleurotus abalonus mushrooms inhibited
the HIV virus [157]. The melanin-glucan complex obtained from Fomes fomentarius mushrooms showed
higher anti-HIV activity in comparison with the drug zidovudine in vitro and in rats and also exhibited
antimicrobial properties against Helicobacter pylori (associated with human ulcers) with a greater efficacy
than medicinal antibiotics [231]. The polysaccharide from Agaricus brasiliensis [232], and its sulphated
derivative exhibited strong anti-herpes simplex virus activities [233,234]. A polysaccharide and extracts
from the widely consumed Lentinula edodes (shiitake) mushrooms showed viricidal activity against
both the bovine herpes simplex type 1 and poliovirus type 1 viruses [235]. Aqueous extracts from
several mushroom varieties protected mice against lethality induced by the Herpes simplex type-2
virus [236], and a mushroom lentinan and its sulphated product protected tobacco seedlings against
viral infection by the tobacco mosaic virus [237].
The cited observations indicate that mushroom polysaccharides and some of their chemically
sulphated forms might protect against viral diseases that affect plants, animals, and humans.
9. Additional Health Benefits
Here we will briefly mention three additional health-promoting properties: protection against
allergic asthma, adverse effect of γ-radiation, and enhancement of vitamin D content of mushroom by
UV-B radiation.
9.1. Protection of Mice against Allergic Asthma
Because mushrooms can break down complex plant materials into smaller, more digestible and
bioactive compounds, Kim, et al. [238] investigated the efficacy of a bioprocessed (fermented) liquid
mycelium culture against allergic asthma in chicken egg ovalbumin-sensitized/challenged asthmatic
mice. The observed inhibitory activity against ovalbumin-specific IgE secretion in bronchoalveolar
lavage fluid and additional observations with several allergic asthma-associated biomarker levels
suggested the production of new bioactive compounds by the mushroom mycelia that may be involved
in enhancing the observed antiasthmatic properties. It seems that the elm tree (Ulmus parvifolia) bark
bioprocessed with mycelia of shiitake (Lentinus edodes) mushrooms has the potential to prevent and/or
treat allergic asthma. We do not know if mycelia polysaccharides contribute to the antiasthmatic
properties of the bioprocessed formulation. In a related study, Kim, et al. [229] also discovered that
turmeric bioprocessed with Shiitake mushroom mycelia protected mice against salmonellosis via
stimulation of the immune system.
9.2. Protection of Mice against Adverse Effects of γ-Radiation
Because ionizing radiation damages cells by creating an imbalance in their prooxidant to
antioxidant ratio, it was of interest to find out if antioxidative polysaccharides might protect
against radiation-induced adverse effects. This seems to be the case as illustrated by the following
observations: (a) Joseph, et al. [239] found that a polysaccharide-protein complex from Phellinus rimosus
mushrooms administered intraperitoneally to mice exposed to γ-radiation resulted in enhanced levels
of antioxidants in liver and brain tissues and in an increased survival of the animals; (b) A related
study by Li, et al. [240] found that a polysaccharide from Hohenbuehelia serotina mushrooms induced an
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
23 of 40
increase in the quantity of bone marrow, reduced the rates of chromosome aberrations and micronuclei
in bone marrow, and blocked the apoptotic pathway of splenocytes in mice exposed to γ-radiation;
and (c) A β-glucan from the mushroom Ganoderma lucidum extended the survival of mice exposed to a
lethal dose of γ-radiation after 30 days by 66% post-irradiation compared to 83% observed with the
anti-radiation drug amifostine [241].
These results with mice imply that the mentioned polysaccharides might protect humans against
allergic asthma and radiation injuries. Will these and possibly other mushroom polysaccharides
mitigate adverse side effects of radiation used to treat cancer patients [242]?
9.3. Effect of UV-B and on Vitamin D2 Content of Mushrooms
To facilitate industrial application of the known increase in vitamin D2 content by post-harvest
exposure to ultraviolet B (UV-B) light, Roberts, et al. [243] carried out in this laboratory a detailed
study of the effect of UV-B radiation on the formation and stability of the vitamin in Agaricus bisporus
(Portabella) mushrooms. The following conditions were found to be optimal for practical commercial
production of the mushrooms with a vitamin content of 3.75 µg/g: light intensity, 1.0 mW; dose,
0.5 J/cm; time of exposure, 8 min. The vitamin D2 content of the treated mushroom was, however,
degraded during long-term storage with a rate constant of 0.025 h-1. Pulsed UV light (PUV) [244] and
γ-radiation also increased the content of vitamin D2 in Agaricus bisporus mushrooms [245,246].
In related studies, (a) Sławi´
nska, et al. [247] reported that after 1.5 year storage of dried
Agaricus bisporus UV-B mushrooms, the vitamin D2 content was decreased by 48.32% of the initial
level; (b) Mehrotra, et al. [248] describe unanticipated losses of D2 during cooking from fresh UV-B
mushrooms; and (c) Calvo, et al. [249], Chen, et al. [250], and Simon, et al. [251] found that the vitamin
D in mushrooms, produced by exposure to UV light, seemed to be bioavailable and safe.
A largely unanswered question is whether exposure of mushrooms to UV-B light might also
affect different mushroom components, as illustrated by the following observation. A compositional
study on the effect of UV-B radiation reports that exposure of the medicinal mushroom Cordyceps
militaris to UV-B light for 2 hours resulted in an increase in vitamin D2 from 0–0.03 to 0.22–1.11 mg/g,
a decrease in the vitamin D2 precursor ergosterol from 1.36 to 2.50 mg/g, an increase in the amount of
adenosine, cordyceptin, and ergothioneine by 32-128% and in flavonoid content from 10 to 56%, and a
36% decrease in the polysaccharide levels of the fruiting bodies [252]. Whether UV-B radiation also
adversely affects mushroom polysaccharides merits study.
10. Conclusions
The relationship between dietary content and disease is a major concern for human
health.
We anticipate that the findings described here on the beneficial health properties of
individual mushroom polysaccharides and polysaccharide-containing mushrooms will contribute
to improvements in nutrition, food safety, and human health. In view of an increased interest in the
multiple bioactive components of mushrooms—for example, we reported that the Hericium erinaceus
mushroom cultivars contain more than 50 characterized organic compounds many of which are
bioactive [22]—there is a need to define further our current knowledge about the beneficial
health-promoting properties and the active constituents, including the polysaccharides that have
attracted widespread interest. In addition to research needs mentioned earlier, finding answers to
unresolved aspects of mushroom polysaccharides is expected to benefit human health further. We are
challenged to address the following research needs:
•
Determine whether the antiobesity and antidiabetic properties of pure polysaccharides vary
depending on whether they are tested or consumed in their free state or as part of a food.
•
Determine the relationship between consumption of mushroom polysaccharides and lower risks
of obesity and diabetes.
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
24 of 40
•
Determine whether mushroom polysaccharide metabolites formed in the digestive tract and after
absorption into the circulation possess antiobesity and antidiabetic properties.
•
Determine whether the polysaccharide content of mushrooms can predict antiobesity and
antidiabetic activities.
•
Determine additive and synergistic antiobesity properties of combinations of mushroom
polysaccharides and the antiobesity amino acid arginine [253,254].
•
Define mitigating effects of conditions associated with the metabolic syndrome of combinations
of mushroom polysaccharides with other bioactive natural products and compounds,
including apples [255], bioactive potato and eggplant (aubergine) glycoalkaloids and potato
calystegine alkaloids [256,257], tomatoes and tomato compounds [256,258–262], rice hull smoke
extract [152,263–265], bioactive compounds from essential oils and spices [266], bioactive
rice bran compounds [267], bioactive tea compounds [268,269], and red wine and winery
byproducts [270–272].
•
Determine bioactivities of mixtures of structurally different polysaccharides isolated from different
mushroom species.
•
Determine additive and synergistic health properties of combinations of dietary β-glucans derived
from mushrooms and cereals.
•
Determine additive and synergistic properties of mushroom polysaccharides in combination with
antiobesity and antidiabetes drugs.
•
Because mushrooms can break down complex plant materials into smaller compounds to produce
additional bioactive compounds during bioprocessing (fermentation), determine if this novel
approach can be extended to other combinations of mushrooms with polymeric materials present
in tree barks and plant cell walls, a largely unexplored area of mushroom research [238].
•
Explore the potential of dietary mushrooms to improve meat quality of poultry and beef products
by decreasing lipid peroxidation [273,274].
•
Because the preparation of low-sodium meat with improved flavor properties might help reduce
hypertension [275], evaluate flavor-enhancing properties of mushrooms added to low-sodium
meat-based food [146]. Develop flavor- and health- enhancing mushroom seasonings (powders)
that can be added to food [276].
•
Because diet-induced obesity in male mice and possibly also in male humans might be associated
with reduced fertility caused by acrylamide-induced reproductive toxicity [277–279], determine if
mushroom-induced reduction in human obesity will concurrently mitigate acrylamide-induced
male infertility.
•
Because growth hormone receptor deficiency in about 100 Ecuadorian adults seems to be
associated with essentially no incidences of lifetime cancers and diabetes among these dwarfs,
it might be worthwhile to find out the possible effect of polysaccharides on the growth hormone
in the general population [280,281].
•
Determine if mushroom polysaccharide-induced stimulation of the human immune system
would help protect against susceptible and antibiotic-resistant foodborne (E. coli, Listeria,
Salmonella) and medical (Clostridium difficile, Klebsiella, Streptococci) pathogenic bacteria and
endotoxemia [31,92,93,282].
•
Evaluate antibiotic properties of mushroom polysaccharides against food- and insect-borne
viruses that cause human illness, including norovirus and Zika virus [283,284].
•
Explore the inactivation of microbial and plant toxins by mushroom products [285,286], and
•
Encourage researchers to create high-polysaccharide mushrooms using plant molecular biology
methods and mushroom growers to produce mushrooms with a high content of polysaccharides.
In summary, because edible mushrooms and bioactive polysaccharides are considered to be
generally accepted as safe, the cited and proposed studies could provide numerous benefits. Mushroom
polysaccharides individually, added to food, and in combination with medicinal drugs could be used
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
25 of 40
therapeutically to help prevent and protect against, at low cost, the adverse effects of some of the major
diseases that afflict humans.
It
would
be
interesting
to
find
out
whether
the
dietary
polysaccharides
and
polysaccharide-containing mushroom extracts and powders might concurrently ameliorate
multiple human disease syndromes associated with allergy, cancer, diabetes, infections, and obesity
with common inflammatory and other underlying inflammatory, immune, and oxidative molecular
and cellular biomarkers. Understanding of the overlapping chemical and pharmacological aspects
of mushroom polysaccharides will provide valuable insights into their potential to prevent and
treat chronic diseases as well as bacterial and viral infections. Moreover, because some mushroom
polysaccharides might compensate for vitamin D and calcium deficiencies and the D vitamin of
mushrooms can be increased by exposure to UVB light, dietary mushrooms can play a significant role
in bone and cartilage health. The payoff would be the availability of inexpensive natural and safe
functional foods and healthier humans. A next step is for physicians and other biomedical scientists to
apply the available knowledge to help overcome such diseases.
Acknowledgments: I am most grateful to S.-H. Nam and colleagues for excellent scientific collaboration and to
Carol E. Levin for her assistance in researching the topic, for creating the figures and preparing the manuscript,
and for her helpful comments.
Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflict of interest.
References
1.
Aida, F.M.N.A.; Shuhaimi, M.; Yazid, M.; Maaruf, A.G. Mushroom as a potential source of prebiotics:
A review. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 2009, 20, 567–575. [CrossRef]
2.
Kundakovi´
c, T.; Kolundži´
c, M. Therapeutic properties of mushrooms in managing adverse effects in the
metabolic syndrome. Curr. Top. Med. Chem. 2013, 13, 2734–2744. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.
Wasser, S.P. Medicinal mushroom science: Current perspectives, advances, evidences, and challenges.
Biomed. J. 2014, 37, 345–356. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.
Su, C.H.; Lai, M.N.; Lin, C.C.; Ng, L.T. Comparative characterization of physicochemical properties and
bioactivities of polysaccharides from selected medicinal mushrooms. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2016, 100,
4385–4393. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Statistics Division (FAOSTAT). Crops Production.
Available online: http://faostat.fao.org (accessed on 5 May 2016).
6.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. USDA National Nutrient Database for
Standard Reference, Release 28. Available online: http://www.ars.usda.gov/ba/bhnrc/ndl (accessed on
28 April 2016).
7.
Ooi, V.E.C.; Liu, F. Immunomodulation and anti-cancer activity of polysaccharide-protein complexes.
Curr. Med. Chem. 2000, 7, 715–729. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8.
Tsukagoshi, S.; Hashimoto, Y.; Fujii, G.; Kobayashi, H.; Nomoto, K.; Orita, K. Krestin (PSK). Cancer Treat. Rev.
1984, 11, 131–155. [CrossRef]
9.
Maehara, Y.; Tsujitani, S.; Saeki, H.; Oki, E.; Yoshinaga, K.; Emi, Y.; Morita, M.; Kohnoe, S.; Kakeji, Y.;
Yano, T.; et al. Biological mechanism and clinical effect of protein-bound polysaccharide K (KRESTIN®):
Review of development and future perspectives. Surg. Today 2012, 42, 8–28. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10.
Feeney, M.J.; Dwyer, J.; Hasler-Lewis, C.M.; Milner, J.A.; Noakes, M.; Rowe, S.; Wach, M.; Beelman, R.B.;
Caldwell, J.; Cantorna, M.T.; et al. Mushrooms and health summit proceedings. J. Nutr. 2014, 144,
1128S–1136S. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11.
Poddar, K.H.; Ames, M.; Hsin-Jen, C.; Feeney, M.J.; Wang, Y.; Cheskin, L.J. Positive effect of mushrooms
substituted for meat on body weight, body composition, and health parameters. A 1-year randomized
clinical trial. Appetite 2013, 71, 379–387. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.
Li, W.; Zhou, W.; Lee, D.S.; Shim, S.H.; Kim, Y.C.; Kim, Y.H. Hericirine, a novel anti-inflammatory alkaloid
from Hericium erinaceum. Tetrahedron Lett. 2014, 55, 4086–4090. [CrossRef]
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
26 of 40
13.
Li, W.; Zhou, W.; Kim, E.J.; Shim, S.H.; Kang, H.K.; Kim, Y.H. Isolation and identification of aromatic
compounds in Lion’s Mane mushroom and their anticancer activities. Food Chem. 2015, 170, 336–342.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.
Beers, M.H. The Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy, 18th ed.; Merck Research Laboratories: Whitehouse
Station, NJ, USA, 2006.
15.
Gavin, J.R.; Alberti, K.G.M.M.; Davidson, M.B.; DeFronzo, R.A.; Drash, A.; Gabbe, S.G.; Genuth, S.;
Harris, M.I.; Kahn, R.; Keen, H.; et al. Report of the expert committee on the diagnosis and classification of
diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care 2003, 26, S5–S20.
16.
CDC. Diabetes Public Health Resource: Self-Reported Risk Factors for Complications. Available online:
http://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/statistics/comp/index.htm (accessed on 7 March 2016).
17.
American Diabetes Foundation. Available online: http://www.diabetes.org (accessed on 9 February 2016).
18.
Liu, Y.; Sun, J.; Rao, S.; Su, Y.; Yang, Y. Antihyperglycemic, antihyperlipidemic and antioxidant activities of
polysaccharides from Catathelasma ventricosum in streptozotocin-induced diabetic mice. Food Chem. Toxicol.
2013, 57, 39–45. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19.
Piccolo, R.S.; Pearce, N.; Araujo, A.B.; McKinlay, J.B. The contribution of biogeographical ancestry and
socioeconomic status to racial/ethnic disparities in type 2 diabetes mellitus: Results from the Boston Area
Community Health Survey. Ann. Epidemiol. 2014, 24, 648–654. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20.
Rahar, S.; Swami, G.; Nagpal, N.; Nagpal, M.A.; Singh, G.S. Preparation, characterization, and biological
properties of β-glucans. J. Adv. Pharm. Technol. Res. 2011, 2, 94–103. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21.
Elisashvili, V. Submerged cultivation of medicinal mushrooms: Bioprocesses and products (review). Int. J.
Med. Mushrooms 2012, 14, 211–239. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22.
Friedman, M. Chemistry, nutrition, and health-promoting properties of Hericium erinaceus (Lion’s Mane)
mushroom fruiting bodies and mycelia and their bioactive compounds. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2015, 63,
7108–7123. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.
Wu, D.T.; Li, W.Z.; Chen, J.; Zhong, Q.X.; Ju, Y.J.; Zhao, J.; Bzhelyansky, A.; Li, S.P. An evaluation system
for characterization of polysaccharides from the fruiting body of Hericium erinaceus and identification of its
commercial product. Carbohydr. Polym. 2015, 124, 201–207. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.
Li, Q.Z.; Wu, D.; Chen, X.; Zhou, S.; Liu, Y.; Yang, Y.; Cui, F. Chemical compositions and macrophage
activation of polysaccharides from Lion’s Mane culinary-medicinal mushroom Hericium erinaceus
(higher Basidiomycetes) in different maturation stages. Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2015, 17, 443–452. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
25.
Chen, P.; Yong, Y.; Gu, Y.; Wang, Z.; Zhang, S.; Lu, L. Comparison of antioxidant and antiproliferation
activities of polysaccharides from eight species of medicinal mushrooms. Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2015, 17,
287–295. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26.
Zhu, Y.; Chen, Y.; Li, Q.; Zhao, T.; Zhang, M.; Feng, W.; Takase, M.; Wu, X.; Zhou, Z.; Yang, L.; et al.
Preparation, characterization, and anti-Helicobacter pylori activity of Bi3+-Hericium erinaceus polysaccharide
complex. Carbohydr. Polym. 2014, 110, 231–237. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.
Fen, L.; Xuwei, Z.; Nanyi, L.; Puyu, Z.; Shuang, Z.; Xue, Z.; Pengju, L.; Qichao, Z.; Haiping, L. Screening
of lignocellulose-degrading superior mushroom strains and determination of their CMCase and laccase
activity. Sci. World J. 2014, 2014, 763108. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28.
Malinowska, E.; Krzyczkowski, W.; Łapienis, G.; Herold, F. Improved simultaneous production of mycelial
biomass and polysaccharides by submerged culture of Hericium erinaceum: Optimization using a central
composite rotatable design (CCRD). J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2009, 36, 1513–1527. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29.
Zhu, Y.; Li, Q.; Mao, G.; Zou, Y.; Feng, W.; Zheng, D.; Wang, W.; Zhou, L.; Zhang, T.; Yang, J.; et al.
Optimization of enzyme-assisted extraction and characterization of polysaccharides from Hericium erinaceus.
Carbohydr. Polym. 2014, 101, 606–613. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30.
Bak, W.C.; Park, J.H.; Park, Y.A.; Ka, K.H. Determination of glucan contents in the fruiting bodies and
mycelia of Lentinula edodes cultivars. Mycobiology 2014, 42, 301–304. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31.
Kim, S.P.; Park, S.O.; Lee, S.J.; Nam, S.H.; Friedman, M. A polysaccharide isolated from the liquid culture of
Lentinus edodes (Shiitake) mushroom mycelia containing black rice bran protects mice against a Salmonella
lipopolysaccharide-induced endotoxemia. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2013, 61, 10987–10994. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
27 of 40
32.
Silveira, M.L.L.; Smiderle, F.R.; Agostini, F.; Pereira, E.M.; Bonatti-Chaves, M.; Wisbeck, E.; Ruthes, A.C.;
Sassaki, G.L.; Cipriani, T.R.; Furlan, S.A.; et al.
Exopolysaccharide produced by Pleurotus sajor-caju:
Its chemical structure and anti-inflammatory activity. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2015, 75, 90–96. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
33.
Liu, Y.; Li, C.; Luo, X.; Han, G.; Xu, S.; Niu, F.; Hu, X.; Wu, H.; Zhang, H. Characterization of
selenium-enriched mycelia of Catathelasma ventricosum and their antihyperglycemic and antioxidant
properties. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2015, 63, 562–568. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34.
Liu, Y.; Chen, D.; You, Y.; Zeng, S.; Hu, Y.; Duan, X.; Liu, A.; Chen, H.; Hu, X.; Chen, S.; et al.
Structural characterization and antidiabetic activity of a glucopyranose-rich heteropolysaccharide from
Catathelasma ventricosum. Carbohydr. Polym. 2016, 149, 399–407. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.
Wu, S.; Li, F.; Jia, S.; Ren, H.; Gong, G.; Wang, Y.; Lv, Z.; Liu, Y. Drying effects on the antioxidant properties
of polysaccharides obtained from Agaricus blazei Murrill. Carbohydr. Polym. 2014, 103, 414–417. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
36.
Mao, G.; Feng, W.; Xiao, H.; Zhao, T.; Li, F.; Zou, Y.; Ren, Y.; Zhu, Y.; Yang, L.; Wu, X. Purification,
characterization, and antioxidant activities of selenium-containing proteins and polysaccharides in royal
sun mushroom, Agaricus brasiliensis (higher Basidiomycetes). Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2014, 16, 463–475.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
37.
Salvador, C.; Martins, M.R.; Caldeira, A.T. Microanalysis characterization of bioactive protein-bound
polysaccharides produced by Amanita ponderosa cultures. Microsc. Microanal. 2015, 21, 84–90. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
38.
Zhu, Z.Y.; Zhang, J.Y.; Chen, L.J.; Liu, X.C.; Liu, Y.; Wang, W.X.; Zhang, Y.M. Comparative evaluation
of polysaccharides isolated from Astragalus, oyster mushroom, and yacon as inhibitors of α-glucosidase.
Chin. J. Nat. Med. 2014, 12, 290–293. [CrossRef]
39.
Zhao, S.; Rong, C.; Liu, Y.; Xu, F.; Wang, S.; Duan, C.; Chen, J.; Wu, X. Extraction of a soluble polysaccharide
from Auricularia polytricha and evaluation of its anti-hypercholesterolemic effect in rats. Carbohydr. Polym.
2015, 122, 39–45. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
40.
Wang, D.; Sun, S.Q.; Wu, W.Z.; Yang, S.L.; Tan, J.M. Characterization of a water-soluble polysaccharide from
Boletus edulis and its antitumor and immunomodulatory activities on renal cancer in mice. Carbohydr. Polym.
2014, 105, 127–134. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41.
Moreno, R.B.; Ruthes, A.C.; Baggio, C.H.; Vilaplana, F.; Komura, D.L.; Iacomini, M. Structure and
antinociceptive effects of β-D-glucans from Cookeina tricholoma. Carbohydr. Polym. 2016, 141, 220–228.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
42.
Jing, Y.; Zhu, J.; Liu, T.; Bi, S.; Hu, X.; Chen, Z.; Song, L.; Lv, W.; Yu, R. Structural characterization and
biological activities of a novel polysaccharide from cultured Cordyceps militaris and its sulfated derivative.
J. Agric. Food Chem. 2015, 63, 3464–3471. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43.
Maity, P.; Sen, I.K.; Maji, P.K.; Paloi, S.; Devi, K.S.P.; Acharya, K.; Maiti, T.K.; Islam, S.S. Structural,
immunological, and antioxidant studies of β-glucan from edible mushroom Entoloma lividoalbum.
Carbohydr. Polym. 2015, 123, 350–358. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44.
Zhang, Z.F.; Lv, G.Y.; Jiang, X.; Cheng, J.H.; Fan, L.F. Extraction optimization and biological properties of
a polysaccharide isolated from Gleoestereum incarnatum. Carbohydr. Polym. 2015, 117, 185–191. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
45.
Zhou, H.; Liu, G.; Huang, F.; Wu, X.; Yang, H. Improved production, purification and bioactivity of a
polysaccharide from submerged cultured Ganoderma lucidum. Arch. Pharm. Res. 2014, 37, 1530–1537.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
46.
Ma, X.; Zhou, F.; Chen, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Hou, L.; Cao, X.; Wang, C. A polysaccharide from Grifola frondosa
relieves insulin resistance of HepG2 cell by Akt-GSK-3 pathway. Glycoconj. J. 2014, 31, 355–363. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
47.
Mao, G.H.; Ren, Y.; Feng, W.W.; Li, Q.; Wu, H.Y.; Jin, D.; Zhao, T.; Xu, C.Q.; Yang, L.Q.; Wu, X.Y. Antitumor
and immunomodulatory activity of a water-soluble polysaccharide from Grifola frondosa. Carbohydr. Polym.
2015, 134, 406–412. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48.
Li, X.; Wang, L. Effect of extraction method on structure and antioxidant activity of Hohenbuehelia serotina
polysaccharides. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2016, 83, 270–276. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
28 of 40
49.
Yan, P.S.;
Cao, L.X.;
Zhang, B.Z. Efficient purification of antiproliferative polysaccharides from
Hypsizigus marmoreus with radial flow chromatography. Biotechnol. Prog. 2014, 30, 872–878. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
50.
Ren, L.; Edwards, P.J.; Perera, C.O.; Hemar, Y. Structural features of a novel polysaccharide isolated from a
New Zealand Maori mushroom Iliodiction cibarium. Carbohydr. Res. 2015, 406, 19–26. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
51.
Ren, L.; Perera, C.; Hemar, Y. Antitumor activity of mushroom polysaccharides: A review. Food Funct. 2012,
3, 1118–1130. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52.
Villares, A. Isolation and characterization of a glucan-type polysaccharide from the red pine mushroom,
Lactarius deliciosus (higher Basidiomycetes). Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2013, 15, 583–589. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53.
Wang, L.; Wang, C.; Gao, X.; Xu, N.; Lin, L.; Zhao, H.; Jia, S.; Jia, L. Purification, characterization and
anti-aging capacity of mycelia zinc polysaccharide by Lentinus edodes SD-08. BMC Complement. Altern. Med.
2015, 15, 111. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54.
Samanta, S.; Nandi, A.K.; Sen, I.K.; Maity, P.; Pattanayak, M.; Devi, K.S.P.; Khatua, S.; Maiti, T.K.;
Acharya, K.; Islam, S.S. Studies on antioxidative and immunostimulating fucogalactan of the edible
mushroom Macrolepiota dolichaula. Carbohydr. Res. 2015, 413, 22–29. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55.
Cao, X.Y.; Liu, J.L.; Yang, W.; Hou, X.; Li, Q.J. Antitumor activity of polysaccharide extracted from
Pleurotus ostreatus mycelia against gastric cancer in vitro and in vivo. Mol. Med. Rep. 2015, 12, 2383–2389.
[PubMed]
56.
Zhao, C.; Liao, Z.; Wu, X.; Liu, Y.; Liu, X.; Lin, Z.; Huang, Y.; Liu, B. Isolation, purification, and structural
features of a polysaccharide from Phellinus linteus and its hypoglycemic effect in alloxan-induced diabetic
mice. J. Food Sci. 2014, 79, H1002–H1010. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57.
Yang, K.; Jin, Y.; Xing, C.; Hu, J.; Wang, R.; Sun, P. Chemical characterization and in vitro antioxidant
activity evaluation of polysaccharides from the fruiting bodies of the red heart mushroom Phellinus pini
(higher Basidiomycetes). Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2015, 17, 297–307. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58.
Hu, Q.; Wang, H.; Ng, T.B. Isolation and purification of polysaccharides with anti-tumor activity from
Pholiota adiposa (Batsch) P. Kumm. (higher Basidiomycetes). Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2012, 14, 271–284.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
59.
Zhang, J.; Xu, N.; Wang, G.; Zhao, H.; Lin, L.; Jia, M.; Jia, L. In vitro and in vivo antioxidant effects of
polysaccharides from Nameko medicinal mushroom, Pholiota nameko SW-01 (higher Basidiomycetes). Int. J.
Med. Mushrooms 2015, 17, 671–680. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
60.
Ma, G.; Yang, W.; Mariga, A.M.; Fang, Y.; Ma, N.; Pei, F.; Hu, Q. Purification, characterization and antitumor
activity of polysaccharides from Pleurotus eryngii residue. Carbohydr. Polym. 2014, 114, 297–305. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
61.
Zhang, Y.; Hu, T.; Zhou, H.; Zhang, Y.; Jin, G.; Yang, Y. Antidiabetic effect of polysaccharides from
Pleurotus ostreatus in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2016, 83, 126–132. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
62.
Manna, D.K.; Nandi, A.K.; Pattanayak, M.; Maity, P.; Tripathy, S.; Mandal, A.K.; Roy, S.; Tripathy, S.S.;
Gupta, N.; Islam, S.S. A water soluble β-glucan of an edible mushroom Termitomyces heimii: Structural and
biological investigation. Carbohydr. Polym. 2015, 134, 375–384. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63.
Cheng, H.; Jia, Y.; Wang, L.; Liu, X.; Liu, G.; Li, L.; He, C. Isolation and structural elucidation of a novel
homogenous polysaccharide from Tricholoma matsutake. Nat. Prod. Res. 2016, 30, 58–64. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64.
You, Q.; Yin, X.; Zhao, Y.; Jiang, Z. Extraction and purification of polysaccharides from pine medicinal
mushroom, Tricholoma matsutake (higher Basidiomycetes) fruit bodies. Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2014, 16,
149–160. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65.
Yin, X.; You, Q.; Su, X. A comparison study on extraction of polysaccharides from Tricholoma matsutake by
response surface methodology. Carbohydr. Polym. 2014, 102, 419–422. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
66.
Zhao, Y.M.; Song, J.H.; Wang, J.; Yang, J.M.; Wang, Z.B.; Liu, Y.H. Optimization of cellulase-assisted extraction
process and antioxidant activities of polysaccharides from Tricholoma mongolicum Imai. J. Sci. Food Agric.
2016. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67.
Chai, R.; Qiu, C.; Liu, D.; Qi, Y.; Gao, Y.; Shen, J.; Qiu, L. β-Glucan synthase gene overexpression and
β-glucans overproduction in Pleurotus ostreatus using promoter swapping. PLoS ONE 2013, 8, e61693.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
29 of 40
68.
Ji, S.L.; Liu, R.; Ren, M.F.; Li, H.J.; Xu, J.W. Enhanced production of polysaccharide through the overexpression
of homologous uridine diphosphate glucose pyrophosphorylase gene in a submerged culture of Lingzhi or
Reishi medicinal mushroom, Ganoderma lucidum (Higher Basidiomycetes). Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2015, 17,
435–442. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
69.
Meng, X.; Liang, H.; Luo, L. Antitumor polysaccharides from mushrooms: A review on the structural
characteristics, antitumor mechanisms and immunomodulating activities. Carbohydr. Res. 2016, 424, 30–41.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
70.
Yan, J.K.; Pei, J.J.; Ma, H.L.; Wang, Z.B.; Liu, Y.S. Advances in antitumor polysaccharides from Phellinus sensu
lato: Production, isolation, structure, antitumor activity, and mechanisms. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2015.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
71.
Guerrero-Torres, J.V.; Mata, G.; Martinez-Carrera, D.; Garibay-Orijel, C.; Garibay-Orijel, R. Primers for
(1,3)-β-glucan synthase gene amplification and partial characterization of the enzyme in Ganoderma lucidum.
Rev. Iberoam. Micol. 2013, 30, 267–270. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
72.
Khan, A.A.; Gani, A.; Shah, A.; Masoodi, F.A.; Hussain, P.R.; Wani, I.A.; Khanday, F.A. Effect of
γ-irradiation on structural, functional and antioxidant properties of β-glucan extracted from button
mushroom (Agaricus bisporus). Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2015, 31, 123–130. [CrossRef]
73.
Xiao, J.H.; Xiao, D.M.; Chen, D.X.; Xiao, Y.; Liang, Z.Q.; Zhong, J.J. Polysaccharides from the medicinal
mushroom Cordyceps taii show antioxidant and immunoenhancing activities in a D-galactose-induced aging
mouse model. Evid. Based Complement. Altern. Med. 2012, 2012, 273435. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
74.
Kozarski, M.; Klaus, A.; Jakovljevic, D.; Todorovic, N.; Vunduk, J.; Petrovic, P.; Niksic, M.; Vrvic, M.M.;
van Griensven, L. Antioxidants of edible mushrooms. Molecules 2015, 20, 19489–19525. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
75.
Lee, J.S.; Hong, E.K. Immunostimulating activity of the polysaccharides isolated from Cordyceps militaris.
Int. Immunopharmacol. 2011, 11, 1226–1233. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
76.
Zhu, L.; Tang, Q.; Zhou, S.; Liu, Y.; Zhang, Z.; Gao, X.; Wang, S.; Wang, Z. Isolation and purification of a
polysaccharide from the caterpillar medicinal mushroom Cordyceps militaris (Ascomycetes) fruit bodies and
its immunomodulation of RAW 264.7 macrophages. Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2014, 16, 247–257. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
77.
Mu, H.; Zhang, A.; Zhang, W.; Cui, G.; Wang, S.; Duan, J. Antioxidative properties of crude polysaccharides
from Inonotus obliquus. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2012, 13, 9194–9206. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
78.
Zhang, Z.; Lv, G.; Pan, H.; Pandey, A.; He, W.; Fan, L. Antioxidant and hepatoprotective potential of
endo-polysaccharides from Hericium erinaceus grown on tofu whey. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2012, 51, 1140–1146.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
79.
Nandi, A.K.; Samanta, S.; Maity, S.; Sen, I.K.; Khatua, S.; Devi, K.S.; Acharya, K.; Maiti, T.K.; Islam, S.S.
Antioxidant and immunostimulant β-glucan from edible mushroom Russula albonigra (Krombh.)
Fr.
Carbohydr. Polym. 2014, 99, 774–782. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
80.
Wang, X.M.; Zhang, J.; Wu, L.H.; Zhao, Y.L.; Li, T.; Li, J.Q.; Wang, Y.Z.; Liu, H.G. A mini-review of chemical
composition and nutritional value of edible wild-grown mushroom from China. Food Chem. 2014, 151,
279–285. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
81.
Cui, H.Y.; Wang, C.L.; Wang, Y.R.; Li, Z.J.; Chen, M.H.; Li, F.J.; Sun, Y.P. Pleurotus nebrodensis polysaccharide
(PN-S) enhances the immunity of immunosuppressed mice. Chin. J. Nat. Med. 2015, 13, 760–766. [CrossRef]
82.
Hu, S.H.; Cheung, P.C.; Hung, R.P.; Chen, Y.K.; Wang, J.C.; Chang, S.J. Antitumor and immunomodulating
activities of exopolysaccharide produced by Big Cup culinary-medicinal mushroom Clitocybe maxima
(Higher Basidiomycetes) in liquid submerged culture. Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2015, 17, 891–901. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
83.
Cheng, J.H.; Tsai, C.L.; Lien, Y.Y.; Lee, M.S.; Sheu, S.C. High molecular weight of polysaccharides from
Hericium erinaceus against amyloid β-induced neurotoxicity. BMC Complement. Altern. Med. 2016, 16, 170.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
84.
Fang, L.; Zhang, Y.; Xie, J.; Wang, L.; Zhang, H.; Wei, W.; Li, Y. Royal Sun medicinal mushroom,
Agaricus brasiliensis (Agaricomycetidae), derived polysaccharides rxert immunomodulatory activities in vitro
and in vivo. Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2016, 18, 123–132. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
85.
Yin, X.; You, Q.; Zhou, X. Complex enzyme-assisted extraction, purification, and antioxidant activity
of polysaccharides from the Button Mushroom, Agaricus bisporus (Higher Basidiomycetes).
Int.
J.
Med. Mushrooms 2015, 17, 987–996. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
30 of 40
86.
Alzorqi, I.; Sudheer, S.; Lu, T.J.; Manickam, S. Ultrasonically extracted β-D-glucan from artificially cultivated
mushroom, characteristic properties and antioxidant activity. Ultrason. Sonochem. 2016. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
87.
Lima, A.T.; Santos, M.N.; de Souza, L.A.; Pinheiro, T.S.; Paiva, A.A.; Dore, C.M.; Costa, M.S.; Santos, N.D.;
Baseia, Y.G.; Araujo, R.M.; et al. Chemical characteristics of a heteropolysaccharide from Tylopilus ballouii
mushroom and its antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activities. Carbohydr. Polym. 2016, 144, 400–409.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
88.
Berven, L.; Karppinen, P.; Hetland, G.; Samuelsen, A.B. The polar high molecular weight fraction of the
Agaricus blazei Murill extract, AndoSan, reduces the activity of the tumor-associated protease, legumain,
in RAW 264.7 cells. J. Med. Food 2015, 18, 429–438. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
89.
Hetland, G.; Johnson, E.; Lyberg, T.; Kvalheim, G. The mushroom Agaricus blazei Murill elicits medicinal
effects on tumor, infection, allergy, and inflammation through Its modulation of innate immunity and
amelioration of Th1/Th2 imbalance and inflammation. Adv. Pharmacol. Sci. 2011, 2011, 157015. [PubMed]
90.
Tangen, J.M.; Tierens, A.; Caers, J.; Binsfeld, M.; Olstad, O.K.; Troseid, A.M.; Wang, J.; Tjonnfjord, G.E.;
Hetland, G. Immunomodulatory effects of the Agaricus blazei Murrill-based mushroom extract AndoSan
in patients with multiple myeloma undergoing high dose chemotherapy and autologous stem cell
transplantation: A randomized, double blinded clinical study. BioMed Res. Int. 2015, 2015, 718539. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
91.
Chen, L.; Shao, H. Extract from Agaricus blazei Murill can enhance immune responses elicited by DNA vaccine
against foot-and-mouth disease. Vet. Immunol. Immunopathol. 2006, 109, 177–182. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
92.
Kim, S.P.; Moon, E.; Nam, S.H.; Friedman, M. Hericium erinaceus mushroom extracts protect infected mice
against Salmonella Typhimurium-induced liver damage and mortality by stimulation of innate immune cells.
J. Agric. Food Chem. 2012, 60, 5590–5596. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
93.
Kim, S.P.; Park, S.O.; Lee, S.J.; Nam, S.H.; Friedman, M. A polysaccharide isolated from the liquid culture of
Lentinus edodes (Shiitake) mushroom mycelia containing black rice bran protects mice against salmonellosis
through up-regulation of the Th1 immune reaction. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2014, 62, 2384–2391. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
94.
Chan, P.M.; Tan, Y.S.; Chua, K.H.; Sabaratnam, V.; Kuppusamy, U.R. Attenuation of inflammatory mediators
(TNF-α and nitric oxide) and up-regulation of IL-10 by wild and domesticated basidiocarps of Amauroderma
rugosum (Blume & T. Nees) Torrend in LPS-stimulated RAW264.7 cells. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, e0139593.
95.
Elsayed, E.A.; El Enshasy, H.; Wadaan, M.A.; Aziz, R. Mushrooms: A potential natural source of
anti-inflammatory compounds for medical applications. Mediat. Inflamm. 2014, 2014, 805841. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
96.
Mishra, S.K.; Kang, J.H.; Kim, D.K.; Oh, S.H.; Kim, M.K. Orally administered aqueous extract of
Inonotus obliquus ameliorates acute inflammation in dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced colitis in mice.
J. Ethnopharmacol. 2012, 143, 524–532. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
97.
Huang, X.; Nie, S. The structure of mushroom polysaccharides and their beneficial role in health. Food Funct.
2015, 6, 3205–3217. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
98.
Chang, C.J.; Lin, C.S.; Lu, C.C.; Martel, J.; Ko, Y.F.; Ojcius, D.M.; Tseng, S.F.; Wu, T.R.; Chen, Y.Y.M.;
Young, J.D.; et al. Ganoderma lucidum reduces obesity in mice by modulating the composition of the gut
microbiota. Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 7489. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
99.
Delzenne, N.M.; Bindels, L.B. Gut microbiota: Ganoderma lucidum, a new prebiotic agent to treat obesity?
Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2015, 12, 553–554. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
100. Xu, X.; Yang, J.; Ning, Z.; Zhang, X. Lentinula edodes-derived polysaccharide rejuvenates mice in terms of
immune responses and gut microbiota. Food Funct. 2015, 6, 2653–2663. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
101. Du, B.; Lin, C.; Bian, Z.; Xu, B. An insight into anti-inflammatory effects of fungal beta-glucans. Trends Food
Sci. Technol. 2015, 41, 49–59. [CrossRef]
102. Furuncuo˘
glu, Y.; Tulgar, S.; Dogan, A.N.; Cakar, S.; Tulgar, Y.K.; Cakiroglu, B. How obesity affects the
neutrophil/lymphocyte and platelet/lymphocyte ratio, systemic immune-inflammatory index and platelet
indices: A retrospective study. Eur. Rev. Med. Pharmacol. Sci. 2016, 20, 1300–1306. [PubMed]
103. Arora, T.; Sharma, R. Fermentation potential of the gut microbiome: Implications for energy homeostasis
and weight management. Nutr. Rev. 2011, 69, 99–106. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
31 of 40
104. Cani, P.D.; Possemiers, S.; van de Wiele, T.; Guiot, Y.; Everard, A.; Rottier, O.; Geurts, L.; Naslain, D.;
Neyrinck, A.; Lambert, D.M.; et al. Changes in gut microbiota control inflammation in obese mice through a
mechanism involving GLP-2-driven improvement of gut permeability. Gut 2009, 58, 1091–1103. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
105. Delzenne, N.M.; Cani, P.D. Interaction between obesity and the gut microbiota: Relevance in nutrition.
Annu. Rev. Nutr. 2011, 31, 15–31. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
106. Dutton, R.J.; Turnbaugh, P.J. Taking a metagenomic view of human nutrition. Curr. Opin. Clin. Nutr.
Metab. Care 2012, 15, 448–454. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
107. Gerritsen, J.; Smidt, H.; Rijkers, G.T.; De Vos, W.M. Intestinal microbiota in human health and disease:
The impact of probiotics. Genes Nutr. 2011, 6, 209–240. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
108. Han, J.L.; Lin, H.L. Intestinal microbiota and type 2 diabetes: From mechanism insights to therapeutic
perspective. World J. Gastroenterol. 2014, 20, 17737–17745. [PubMed]
109. Kim, H.; Kim, D.H.; Seo, K.H.; Chon, J.W.; Nah, S.Y.; Bartley, G.E.; Arvik, T.; Lipson, R.; Yokoyama, W.
Modulation of the intestinal microbiota is associated with lower plasma cholesterol and weight gain in
hamsters fed chardonnay grape seed flour. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2015, 63, 1460–1467. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
110. Lam, K.L.;
Chi-Keung Cheung, P. Non-digestible long chain beta-glucans as novel prebiotics.
Bioact. Carbohydr. Diet. Fibre 2013, 2, 45–64. [CrossRef]
111. Murphy, E.A.; Velazquez, K.T.; Herbert, K.M. Influence of high-fat diet on gut microbiota: A driving force
for chronic disease risk. Curr. Opin. Clin. Nutr. Metab. Care 2015, 18, 515–520. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
112. Espley, R.V.; Butts, C.A.; Laing, W.A.; Martell, S.; Smith, H.; McGhie, T.K.; Zhang, J.; Paturi, G.; Hedderley, D.;
Bovy, A.; et al. Dietary flavonoids from modified apple reduce inflammation markers and modulate gut
microbiota in mice. J. Nutr. 2014, 144, 146–154. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
113. Hervert-Hernández, D.; Goñi, I. Dietary polyphenols and human gut microbiota: A review. Food Rev. Int.
2011, 27, 154–169. [CrossRef]
114. Hervert-Hernández, D.; Pintado, C.; Rotger, R.; Goñi, I. Stimulatory role of grape pomace polyphenols on
Lactobacillus acidophilus growth. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2009, 136, 119–122. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
115. Sanchez, M.; Panahi, S.; Tremblay, A. Childhood obesity: A role for gut microbiota? Int. J. Environ. Res.
Public Health 2015, 12, 162–175. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
116. Patel, R.; Dupont, H.L. New approaches for bacteriotherapy: Prebiotics, new-generation probiotics, and
synbiotics. Clin. Infect. Dis. 2015, 60, S108–S121. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
117. Schéle, E.; Grahnemo, L.; Anesten, F.; Halle´
n, A.; Ba¨
ckhed, F.; Jansson, J.O. The gut microbiota reduces
leptin sensitivity and the expression of the obesity-suppressing neuropeptides proglucagon (Gcg) and
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (Bdnf) in the central nervous system. Endocrinology 2013, 154, 3643–3651.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
118. Seo, D.B.; Jeong, H.W.; Cho, D.; Lee, B.J.; Lee, J.H.; Choi, J.Y.; Bae, I.H.; Lee, S.J. Fermented green tea extract
alleviates obesity and related complications and alters gut microbiota composition in diet-induced obese
mice. J. Med. Food 2015, 18, 549–556. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
119. Han, K.; Bose, S.; Wang, J.H.; Kim, B.S.; Kim, M.J.; Kim, E.J.; Kim, H.D. Contrasting effects of fresh and
fermented kimchi consumption on gut microbiota composition and gene expression related to metabolic
syndrome in obese Korean women. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2015, 59, 1004–1008. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
120. Song, M.Y.; Kim, B.S.; Kim, H. Influence of Panax ginseng on obesity and gut microbiota in obese middle-aged
Korean women. J. Ginseng Res. 2014, 38, 106–115. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
121. Nieuwdorp, M.; Gilijamse, P.W.; Pai, N.; Kaplan, L.M. Role of the microbiome in energy regulation and
metabolism. Gastroenterology 2014, 146, 1525–1533. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
122. Huang, H.Y.; Korivi, M.; Chaing, Y.Y.; Chien, T.Y.; Tsai, Y.C. Pleurotus tuber-regium polysaccharides attenuate
hyperglycemia and oxidative stress in experimental diabetic rats. Evid. Based Complement. Altern. Med. 2012,
2012, 856381. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
123. Huang, H.Y.; Korivi, M.; Yang, H.T.; Huang, C.C.; Chaing, Y.Y.; Tsai, Y.C. Effect of Pleurotus tuber-regium
polysaccharides supplementation on the progression of diabetes complications in obese-diabetic rats.
Chin. J. Physiol. 2014, 57, 198–208. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
124. Holmes, D. Obesity: Medicinal mushroom reduces obesity by modulating microbiota. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol.
2015, 11, 504. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
32 of 40
125. Jeong, H.J.; Yoon, S.J.; Pyun, Y.R. Polysaccharides from edible mushroom Hinmogi (Tremella fuciformis)
inhibit differentiation of 3T3-L1 adipocytes by reducing mRNA expression of PPARγ, C/EBPα, and leptin.
Food Sci. Biotechnol. 2008, 17, 267–273.
126. Thyagarajan-Sahu, A.; Lane, B.; Sliva, D. ReishiMax, mushroom based dietary supplement, inhibits adipocyte
differentiation, stimulates glucose uptake and activates AMPK. BMC Complement. Altern. Med. 2011, 11, 74.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
127. Jiang, Y.; He, A.; Liu, Y.; Xie, B.; Li, Y.; Deng, Y.; Liu, X.; Liu, Q. Development of Lingzhi or Reishi medicinal
mushroom, Ganoderma lucidum (higher Basidiomycetes) polysaccharides injection formulation. Int. J.
Med. Mushrooms 2014, 16, 411–419. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
128. Mizutani, T.; Inatomi, S.; Inazu, A.; Kawahara, E. Hypolipidemic effect of Pleurotus eryngii extract in
fat-loaded mice. J. Nutr. Sci. Vitaminol. 2010, 56, 48–53. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
129. Handayani, D.; Chen, J.; Meyer, B.J.; Huang, X.F. Dietary Shiitake mushroom (Lentinus edodes) prevents
fat deposition and lowers triglyceride in rats fed a high-fat diet. J. Obes. 2011, 2011, 258051. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
130. Inoue, N.; Inafuku, M.; Shirouchi, B.; Nagao, K.; Yanagita, T. Effect of Mukitake mushroom (Panellus serotinus)
on the pathogenesis of lipid abnormalities in obese, diabetic ob/ob mice. Lipids Health Dis. 2013, 12.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
131. Kanagasabapathy, G.; Malek, S.N.; Mahmood, A.A.; Chua, K.H.; Vikineswary, S.; Kuppusamy, U.R.
Beta-Glucan-rich extract from Pleurotus sajor-caju (Fr.) Singer prevents obesity and oxidative stress in
C57BL/6J mice fed on a high-fat diet. Evid. Based Complement. Alterna Med. 2013, 2013, 185259. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
132. Vincent, M.; Philippe, E.; Everard, A.; Kassis, N.; Rouch, C.; Denom, J.; Takeda, Y.; Uchiyama, S.;
Delzenne, N.M.; Cani, P.D.; et al. Dietary supplementation with Agaricus blazei murill extract prevents
diet-induced obesity and insulin resistance in rats. Obesity 2013, 21, 553–561. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
133. Handayani, D.; Meyer, B.J.; Chen, J.; Brown, S.H.; Mitchell, T.W.; Huang, X.F. A high-dose Shiitake mushroom
increases hepatic accumulation of triacylglycerol in rats fed a high-fat diet: Underlying mechanism. Nutrients
2014, 6, 650–662. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
134. Park, H.J.; Yun, J.; Jang, S.H.; Kang, S.N.; Jeon, B.S.; Ko, Y.G.; Kim, H.D.; Won, C.K.; Kim, G.S.; Cho, J.H.
Coprinus comatus cap inhibits adipocyte differentiation via regulation of PPARγ and akt signaling pathway.
PLoS ONE 2014, 9, e105809. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
135. Zheng, L.; Zhai, G.; Zhang, J.; Wang, L.; Ma, Z.; Jia, M.; Jia, L. Antihyperlipidemic and hepatoprotective
activities of mycelia zinc polysaccharide from Pholiota nameko SW-02. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2014, 70, 523–529.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
136. Iuchi, T.; Hosaka, T.; Shiroishi, M.; Ono, H.; Inukai, K.; Sumita, T.; Sakai, G.; Katayama, S.; Awata, T.
Influence of treatment with extracts of Hypsyzigus marmoreus mushroom on body composition during obesity
development in KK-A(y) mice. J. Nutr. Sci. Vitaminol. 2015, 61, 96–100. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
137. Mori, K.; Ouchi, K.; Hirasawa, N. The anti-inflammatory effects of Lion’s Mane culinary-medicinal
mushroom, Hericium erinaceus (higher Basidiomycetes) in a coculture system of 3T3-L1 adipocytes and
RAW264 macrophages. Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2015, 17, 609–618. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
138. Reza, M.A.; Hossain, M.A.; Damte, D.; Jo, W.S.; Hsu, W.H.; Park, S.C. Hypolipidemic and hepatic steatosis
preventing activities of the wood ear medicinal mushroom Auricularia auricula-judae (higher Basidiomycetes)
ethanol extract in vivo and in vitro. Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2015, 17, 723–734. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
139. Aoe, S.; Ikenaga, T.; Noguchi, H.; Kohashi, C.; Kakumoto, K.; Kohda, N. Effect of cooked white rice with
high β-glucan barley on appetite and energy intake in healthy Japanese subjects: A randomized controlled
trial. Plant Foods Hum. Nutr. 2014, 69, 325–330. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
140. Arena, M.P.; Caggianiello, G.; Fiocco, D.; Russo, P.; Torelli, M.; Spano, G.; Capozzi, V. Barley
β-glucans-containing food enhances probiotic performances of beneficial bacteria. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2014, 15,
3025–3039. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
141. Chang, H.C.; Huang, C.N.; Yeh, D.M.; Wang, S.J.; Peng, C.H.; Wang, C.J. Oat prevents obesity and abdominal
fat distribution, and improves liver function in humans. Plant Foods Hum. Nutr. 2013, 68, 18–23. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
142. El Khoury, D.; Cuda, C.; Luhovyy, B.L.; Anderson, G.H. Beta glucan: Health benefits in obesity and metabolic
syndrome. J. Nutr. Metab. 2012, 2012, 851362. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
33 of 40
143. Tabesh, F.; Sanei, H.; Jahangiri, M.; Momenizadeh, A.; Tabesh, E.; Pourmohammadi, K.; Sadeghi, M.
The effects of beta-glucan rich oat bread on serum nitric oxide and vascular endothelial function in patients
with hypercholesterolemia. BioMed Res. Int. 2014, 2014, 481904. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
144. Cheskin, L.J.; Davis, L.M.; Lipsky, L.M.; Mitola, A.H.; Lycan, T.; Mitchell, V.; Mickle, B.; Adkins, E. Lack of
energy compensation over 4 days when white button mushrooms are substituted for beef. Appetite 2008, 51,
50–57. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
145. Myrdal Miller, A.; Mills, K.; Wong, T.; Drescher, G.; Lee, S.M.; Sirimuangmoon, C.; Schaefer, S.; Langstaff, S.;
Minor, B.; Guinard, J.X. Flavor-enhancing properties of mushrooms in meat-based dishes in which sodium
has been reduced and meat has been partially substituted with mushrooms. J. Food Sci. 2014, 79, S1795–S1804.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
146. Kim, S.; Lee, J.W.; Heo, Y.; Moon, B. Effect of Pleurotus eryngii mushroom beta-glucan on quality characteristics
of common wheat pasta. J. Food Sci. 2016, 81, C835–C840. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
147. Okubo, H.; Sasaki, S.; Murakami, K.; Kim, M.K.; Takahashi, Y.; Hosoi, Y.; Itabashi, M. Three major dietary
patterns are all independently related to the risk of obesity among 3760 Japanese women aged 18–20 years.
Int. J. Obes. 2008, 32, 541–549. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
148. Roberts, J. Sickening Sweet—Relics from a lab hint at centuries spent trying to solve diabetes. Distill. Mag.
2015, 1, 12–15.
149. Numao, S.; Kawano, H.; Endo, N.; Yamada, Y.; Konishi, M.; Takahashi, M.; Sakamoto, S. Short-term low
carbohydrate/high-fat diet intake increases postprandial plasma glucose and glucagon-like peptide-1 levels
during an oral glucose tolerance test in healthy men. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 2012, 66, 926–931. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
150. Numao, S.; Kawano, H.; Endo, N.; Yamada, Y.; Konishi, M.; Takahashi, M.; Sakamoto, S. Effects of a single
bout of aerobic exercise on short-term low-carbohydrate/high-fat intake-induced postprandial glucose
metabolism during an oral glucose tolerance test. Metabolism 2013, 62, 1406–1415. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
151. Cho, E.J.; Hwang, H.J.; Kim, S.W.; Oh, J.Y.; Baek, Y.M.; Choi, J.W.; Bae, S.H.; Yun, J.W. Hypoglycemic effects
of exopolysaccharides produced by mycelial cultures of two different mushrooms Tremella fuciformis and
Phellinus baumii in ob/ob mice. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2007, 75, 1257–1265. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
152. Yang, J.Y.; Moon, E.; Nam, S.H.; Friedman, M. Antidiabetic effects of rice hull smoke extract on
glucose-regulating mechanism in type 2 diabetic mice. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2012, 60, 7442–7449. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
153. Lo, H.C.; Wasser, S.P. Medicinal mushrooms for glycemic control in diabetes mellitus: History, current status,
future perspectives, and unsolved problems (review). Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2011, 13, 401–426. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
154. Yu, H.; Han, C.; Sun, Y.; Qi, X.; Shi, Y.; Gao, X.; Zhang, C. The agaricoglyceride of royal sun medicinal
mushroom, Agaricus brasiliensis (higher Basidiomycetes) is anti-inflammatory and reverses diabetic glycemia
in the liver of mice. Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2013, 15, 357–364. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
155. Lee, B.R.; Lee, Y.P.; Kim, D.W.; Song, H.Y.; Yoo, K.Y.; Won, M.H.; Kang, T.C.; Lee, K.J.; Kim, K.H.;
Joo, J.H.; et al. Amelioration of streptozotocin-induced diabetes by Agrocybe chaxingu polysaccharide.
Mol. Cells 2010, 29, 349–354. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
156. Lei, H.; Guo, S.; Han, J.; Wang, Q.; Zhang, X.; Wu, W. Hypoglycemic and hypolipidemic activities of
MT-α-glucan and its effect on immune function of diabetic mice. Carbohydr. Polym. 2012, 89, 245–250.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
157. Wang, C.R.; Ng, T.B.; Li, L.; Fang, J.C.; Jiang, Y.; Wen, T.Y.; Qiao, W.T.; Li, N.; Liu, F. Isolation of a
polysaccharide with antiproliferative, hypoglycemic, antioxidant and HIV-1 reverse transcriptase inhibitory
activities from the fruiting bodies of the abalone mushroom Pleurotus abalonus. J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 2011, 63,
825–832. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
158. Li, J.P.; Lei, Y.L.; Zhan, H. The effects of the king oyster mushroom Pleurotus eryngii (higher Basidiomycetes)
on glycemic control in alloxan-induced diabetic mice. Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2014, 16, 219–225. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
159. Ganeshpurkar, A.; Kohli, S.; Rai, G. Antidiabetic potential of polysaccharides from the white oyster
culinary-medicinal mushroom Pleurotus florida (higher Basidiomycetes). Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2014,
16, 207–217. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
34 of 40
160. Kanagasabapathy, G.; Chua, K.H.; Malek, S.N.; Vikineswary, S.; Kuppusamy, U.R. AMP-activated protein
kinase mediates insulin-like and lipo-mobilising effects of β-glucan-rich polysaccharides isolated from
Pleurotus sajor-caju (Fr.), Singer mushroom, in 3T3-L1 cells. Food Chem. 2014, 145, 198–204. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
161. Cheng, P.G.;
Phan, C.W.;
Sabaratnam, V.;
Abdullah, N.;
Abdulla, M.A.;
Kuppusamy, U.R.
Polysaccharides-rich extract of Ganoderma lucidum (M.A. Curtis:Fr.) P. Karst accelerates wound healing in
Streptozotocin-Induced diabetic rats. Evid. Based Complement. Altern. Med. 2013, 2013, 671252. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
162. Yamac, M.; Kanbak, G.; Zeytinoglu, M.; Bayramoglu, G.; Senturk, H.; Uyanoglu, M. Hypoglycemic effect of
Lentinus strigosus (Schwein.) Fr. crude exopolysaccharide in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. J. Med. Food
2008, 11, 513–517. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
163. Kwon, A.H.; Qiu, Z.; Hashimoto, M.; Yamamoto, K.; Kimura, T. Effects of medicinal mushroom
(Sparassis crispa) on wound healing in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Am. J. Surg. 2009, 197, 503–509.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
164. Zhang, Z.C.; Lian, B.; Huang, D.M.; Cui, F.J. Compare activities on regulating lipid-metabolism and reducing
oxidative stress of diabetic rats of Tremella aurantialba broth’s extract (TBE) with its mycelia polysaccharides
(TMP). J. Food Sci. 2009, 74, H15–H21. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
165. Du, X.; Zhang, J.; Lv, Z.; Ye, L.; Yang, Y.; Tang, Q. Chemical modification of an acidic polysaccharide (TAPA1)
from Tremella aurantialba and potential biological activities. Food Chem. 2014, 143, 336–340. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
166. Zhou, S.; Tang, Q.J.; Zhang, Z.; Li, C.H.; Cao, H.; Yang, Y.; Zhang, J.S. Nutritional composition of three
domesticated culinary-medicinal mushrooms: Oudemansiella sudmusida, Lentinus squarrosulus, and Tremella
aurantialba. Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2015, 17, 43–49. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
167. Jayasuriya, W.J.; Wanigatunge, C.A.; Fernando, G.H.; Abeytunga, D.T.; Suresh, T.S. Hypoglycaemic activity
of culinary Pleurotus ostreatus and P. cystidiosus mushrooms in healthy volunteers and type 2 diabetic patients
on diet control and the possible mechanisms of action. Phytother. Res. 2015, 29, 303–309. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
168. O’Callaghan, Y.C.; O’Brien, N.M.; Kenny, O.; Harrington, T.; Brunton, N.; Smyth, T.J. Anti-inflammatory
effects of wild Irish mushroom extracts in RAW264.7 mouse macrophage cells. J. Med. Food 2015, 18, 202–207.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
169. Lei, H.; Zhang, M.; Wang, Q.; Guo, S.; Han, J.; Sun, H.; Wu, W. MT-α-glucan from the fruit body of the maitake
medicinal mushroom Grifola frondosa (higher Basidiomyetes) shows protective effects for hypoglycemic
pancreatic β-cells. Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2013, 15, 373–381. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
170. Duobin, M.; Yuping, M.; Lujing, G.; Aijing, Z.; Jianqiang, Z.; Chunping, X. Fermentation characteristics in
stirred-tank reactor of exopolysaccharides with hypolipidemic activity produced by Pleurotus geesteranus 5#.
An. Acad. Bras. Cienc. 2013, 85, 1473–1481. [PubMed]
171. Kanagasabapathy, G.; Kuppusamy, U.R.; Abd Malek, S.N.; Abdulla, M.A.; Chua, K.H.; Sabaratnam, V.
Glucan-rich polysaccharides from Pleurotus sajor-caju (Fr.) Singer prevents glucose intolerance, insulin
resistance and inflammation in C57BL/6J mice fed a high-fat diet. BMC Complement. Altern. Med. 2012,
12, 261. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
172. Hong, L.; Xun, M.; Wutong, W. Anti-diabetic effect of an alpha-glucan from fruit body of maitake
(Grifola frondosa) on KK-Ay mice. J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 2007, 59, 575–582. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
173. Lu, X.; Chen, H.; Dong, P.; Fu, L.; Zhang, X. Phytochemical characteristics and hypoglycaemic activity of
fraction from mushroom Inonotus obliquus. J. Sci. Food Agric. 2010, 90, 276–280. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
174. Wu, G.H.; Hu, T.; Li, Z.Y.; Huang, Z.L.; Jiang, J.G. In vitro antioxidant activities of the polysaccharides from
Pleurotus tuber-regium (Fr.) Sing. Food Chem. 2014, 148, 351–356. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
175. Ren, D.; Zhao, Y.; Nie, Y.; Lu, X.; Sun, Y.; Yang, X. Chemical composition of Pleurotus eryngii polysaccharides
and their inhibitory effects on high-fructose diet-induced insulin resistance and oxidative stress in mice.
Food Funct. 2014, 5, 2609–2620. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
176. Karumuthil-Melethil, S.; Gudi, R.; Johnson, B.M.; Perez, N.; Vasu, C. Fungal β-glucan, a Dectin-1 ligand,
promotes protection from type 1 diabetes by inducing regulatory innate immune response. J. Immunol. 2014,
193, 3308–3321. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
177. Lee, D.H.; Kim, H.W. Innate immunity induced by fungal β-glucans via dectin-1 signaling pathway. Int. J.
Med. Mushrooms 2014, 16, 1–16. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
35 of 40
178. Chen, Y.H.; Lee, C.H.; Hsu, T.H.; Lo, H.C. Submerged-culture mycelia and broth of the maitake medicinal
mushroom Grifola frondosa (Higher basidiomycetes) alleviate type 2 diabetes-induced alterations in
immunocytic function. Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2015, 17, 541–556. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
179. Calvo, M.S.; Mehrotra, A.; Beelman, R.B.; Nadkarni, G.; Wang, L.; Cai, W.; Goh, B.C.; Kalaras, M.D.; Uribarri, J.
A retrospective study in adults with metabolic syndrome: Diabetic risk factor response to daily consumption
of Agaricus bisporus (white button mushrooms). Plant Foods Hum. Nutr. 2016, 71, 245–251. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
180. Jeong, S.C.; Jeong, Y.T.; Yang, B.K.; Islam, R.; Koyyalamudi, S.R.; Pang, G.; Cho, K.Y.; Song, C.H.
White button mushroom (Agaricus bisporus) lowers blood glucose and cholesterol levels in diabetic and
hypercholesterolemic rats. Nutr. Res. 2010, 30, 49–56. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
181. Wang, Y.; Liu, Y.; Wang, H.; Li, C.; Qi, P.; Bao, J. Agaricus bisporus lectins mediates islet beta-cell proliferation
through regulation of cell cycle proteins. Exp. Biol. Med. 2012, 237, 287–296. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
182. Klupp, N.L.; Chang, D.; Hawke, F.; Kiat, H.; Grant, S.J.; Bensoussan, A. Ganoderma lucidum for the treatment
of cardiovascular risk factors. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2008, 2008, CD007259.
183. Kahl, K.G.; Schweiger, U.; Correll, C.; Müller, C.; Busch, M.L.; Bauer, M.; Schwarz, P. Depression, anxiety
disorders, and metabolic syndrome in a population at risk for type 2 diabetes mellitus. Brain Behav. 2015,
5, 7. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
184. Nanri, A. Nutritional epidemiology of type 2 diabetes and depressive symptoms. J. Epidemiol. 2013, 23,
243–250. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
185. Yan, C.; Kong, F.; Zhang, D.; Cui, J. Anti-glycated and antiradical activities in vitro of polysaccharides from
Ganoderma capense. Pharmacogn. Mag. 2013, 9, 23–27. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
186. Shen, K.P.; Su, C.H.; Lu, T.M.; Lai, M.N.; Ng, L.T. Effects of Grifola frondosa non-polar bioactive components on
high-fat diet fed and streptozotocin-induced hyperglycemic mice. Pharm. Biol. 2015, 53, 705–709. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
187. Mizuno, T. The extraction and development of antitumor-active polysaccharides from medicinal mushrooms
in Japan (review). Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 1999, 1, 9–29. [CrossRef]
188. Oba, K.; Teramukai, S.; Kobayashi, M.; Matsui, T.; Kodera, Y.; Sakamoto, J. Efficacy of adjuvant
immunochemotherapy with polysaccharide K for patients with curative resections of gastric cancer.
Cancer Immunol. Immunother. 2007, 56, 905–911. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
189. Oba, K.; Kobayashi, M.; Matsui, T.; Kodera, Y.; Sakamoto, J. Individual patient based meta-analysis of
lentinan for unresectable/recurrent gastric cancer. Anticancer Res. 2009, 29, 2739–2745. [PubMed]
190. Wang, K.P.; Zhang, Q.L.; Liu, Y.; Wang, J.; Cheng, Y.; Zhang, Y. Structure and inducing tumor cell apoptosis
activity of polysaccharides isolated from Lentinus edodes. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2013, 61, 9849–9858. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
191. Gaullier, J.M.; Sleboda, J.; Øfjord, E.S.; Ulvestad, E.; Nurminiemi, M.; Moe, C.; Tor, A.; Gudmundsen, O.
Supplementation with a soluble-glucan exported from Shiitake medicinal mushroom, Lentinus edodes (Berk.)
singer mycelium: A crossover, placebo-controlled study in healthy elderly. Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2011, 13,
319–326. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
192. Durgo, K.; Koncar, M.; Komes, D.; Belscak-Cvitanovic, A.; Franekic, J.; Jakopovich, I.; Jakopovich, N.;
Jakopovich, B. Cytotoxicity of blended versus single medicinal mushroom extracts on human cancer cell
lines: contribution of polyphenol and polysaccharide content. Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2013, 15, 435–448.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
193. Jakopovich, I. New dietary supplements from medicinal mushrooms: Dr Myko San—A registration report.
Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2011, 13, 307–313. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
194. Nandan, C.K.; Sarkar, R.; Bhanja, S.K.; Sikdar, S.R.; Islam, S.S. Isolation and characterization of
polysaccharides of a hybrid mushroom (backcross mating between PfloVv12 and Volvariella volvacea).
Carbohydr. Res. 2011, 346, 2451–2456. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
195. Fortes, R.C.; Recôva, V.L.; Melo, A.L.; Novaes, M.R.C.G. Effects of dietary supplementation with medicinal
fungus in fasting glycemia levels of patients with colorectal cancer:
A randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled clinical study. Nutr. Hosp. 2008, 23, 591–598. [PubMed]
196. Deng, G.; Lin, H.; Seidman, A.; Fornier, M.; D’Andrea, G.; Wesa, K.; Yeung, S.; Cunningham-Rundles, S.;
Vickers, A.J.;
Cassileth, B. A phase I/II trial of a polysaccharide extract from Grifola frondosa
(Maitake mushroom) in breast cancer patients: Immunological effects. J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 2009, 135,
1215–1221. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
36 of 40
197. Costa Fortes, R.; Carvalho Garbi Novaes, M.R. The effects of Agaricus sylvaticus fungi dietary supplementation
on the metabolism and blood pressure of patients with colorectal cancer during post surgical phase.
Nutr. Hosp. 2011, 26, 176–186. [PubMed]
198. Okuno, K.; Uno, K. Efficacy of orally administered Lentinula edodes mycelia extract for advanced
gastrointestinal cancer patients undergoing cancer chemotherapy: A pilot study. Asian Pac. J. Cancer Prev.
2011, 12, 1671–1674. [PubMed]
199. Tanigawa, K.; Ito, Y.; Sakai, M.; Kobayashi, Y. Evaluation of quality of life and immune function in cancer
patients receiving combined immunotherapy and oral administration of Lentinula edodes mycelia extract.
Gan Kagaku Ryoho 2012, 39, 1779–1781.
200. Yamaguchi, Y.; Miyahara, E.; Hihara, J. Efficacy and safety of orally administered Lentinula edodes mycelia
extract for patients undergoing cancer chemotherapy: A pilot study. Am. J. Chin. Med. 2011, 39, 451–459.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
201. Suzuki, N.; Takimoto, Y.; Suzuki, R.; Arai, T.; Uebaba, K.; Nakai, M.; Strong, J.M.; Tokuda, H. Efficacy of
oral administration of Lentinula eododes mycelia extract for breast cancer patients undergoing postoperative
hormone therapy. Asian Pac. J. Cancer Prev. 2013, 14, 3469–3472. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
202. Nagashima, Y.; Maeda, N.; Yamamoto, S.; Yoshino, S.; Oka, M. Evaluation of host quality of life and
immune function in breast cancer patients treated with combination of adjuvant chemotherapy and oral
administration of Lentinula edodes mycelia extract. Onco Targets Ther. 2013, 6, 853–859. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
203. Ina, K.; Kataoka, T.; Ando, T. The use of lentinan for treating gastric cancer. Anticancer Agents Med. Chem.
2013, 13, 681–688. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
204. Valadares, F.; Novaes, M.R.C.G.; Cañete, R. Effect of Agaricus sylvaticus supplementation on nutritional status
and adverse events of chemotherapy of breast cancer: A randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind
clinical trial. Indian J. Pharmacol. 2013, 45, 217–222. [PubMed]
205. Li, J.; Zou, L.; Chen, W.; Zhu, B.; Shen, N.; Ke, J.; Lou, J.; Song, R.; Zhong, R.; Miao, X. Dietary mushroom
intake may reduce the risk of breast cancer: Evidence from a meta-analysis of observational studies.
PLoS ONE 2014, 9, e93437. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
206. Schwartz, B.; Hadar, Y. Possible mechanisms of action of mushroom-derived glucans on inflammatory bowel
disease and associated cancer. Ann. Transl. Med. 2014, 2, 19. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
207. Twardowski, P.; Kanaya, N.; Frankel, P.; Synold, T.; Ruel, C.; Pal, S.K.; Junqueira, M.; Prajapati, M.; Moore, T.;
Tryon, P.; et al. A phase I trial of mushroom powder in patients with biochemically recurrent prostate cancer:
Roles of cytokines and myeloid-derived suppressor cells for Agaricus bisporus-induced prostate-specific
antigen responses. Cancer 2015, 121, 2942–2950. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
208. Masuda, Y.; Nawa, D.; Nakayama, Y.; Konishi, M.; Nanba, H. Soluble β-glucan from Grifola frondosa induces
tumor regression in synergy with TLR9 agonist via dendritic cell-mediated immunity. J. Leukoc. Biol. 2015,
98, 1015–1025. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
209. Pan, H.; Han, Y.; Huang, J.; Yu, X.; Jiao, C.; Yang, X.; Dhaliwal, P.; Xie, Y.; Yang, B.B. Purification and
identification of a polysaccharide from medicinal mushroom Amauroderma rude with immunomodulatory
activity and inhibitory effect on tumor growth. Oncotarget 2015, 6, 17777–17791. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
210. Chang, J.S.; Kuo, H.P.; Chang, K.L.; Kong, Z.L. Apoptosis of hepatocellular carcinoma cells induced by
nanoencapsulated polysaccharides extracted from Antrodia camphorata. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, e0136782.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
211. Kim, S.P.; Nam, S.H.; Friedman, M. Hericium erinaceus (Lion’s Mane) mushroom extracts inhibit metastasis of
cancer cells to the lung in CT-26 colon cancer-transplanted mice. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2013, 61, 4898–4904.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
212. Li, Y.H.; Niu, Y.B.; Sun, Y.; Zhang, F.; Liu, C.X.; Fan, L.; Mei, Q.B. Role of phytochemicals in colorectal cancer
prevention. World J. Gastroenterol. 2015, 21, 9262–9272. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
213. Santen, R.J.; Yue, W.; Naftolin, F.; Mor, G.; Berstein, L. The potential of aromatase inhibitors in breast cancer
prevention. Endocr. Relat. Cancer 1999, 6, 235–243. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
214. Grube, B.J.; Eng, E.T.; Kao, Y.C.; Kwon, A.; Chen, S. White button mushroom phytochemicals inhibit
aromatase activity and breast cancer cell proliferation. J. Nutr. 2001, 131, 3288–3293. [PubMed]
215. Chen, S.; Oh, S.R.; Phung, S.; Hur, G.; Ye, J.J.; Kwok, S.L.; Shrode, G.E.; Belury, M.; Adams, L.S.; Williams, D.
Anti-aromatase activity of phytochemicals in white button mushrooms (Agaricus bisporus). Cancer Res. 2006,
66, 12026–12034. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
37 of 40
216. Hovde, Ø.; Høivik, M.L.; Henriksen, M.; Solberg, I.C.; Småstuen, M.C.; Moum, B.A. Malignancies in
patients with inflammatory bowel disease: Results from 20 years of follow-up in the IBSEN study.
J. Crohns Colitis 2016. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
217. Therkelsen, S.P.; Hetland, G.; Lyberg, T.; Lygren, I.; Johnson, E. Cytokine levels after consumption of a
medicinal Agaricus blazei Murill-based mushroom extract, AndoSan™, in patients with Crohn’s disease
and ulcerative colitis in a randomized single-blinded placebo controlled study. Scand. J. Immunol. 2016.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
218. Førland, D.T.; Johnson, E.; Sætre, L.; Lyberg, T.; Lygren, I.; Hetland, G. Effect of an extract based on the
medicinal mushroom Agaricus blazei Murill on expression of cytokines and calprotectin in patients with
ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease. Scand. J. Immunol. 2011, 73, 66–75. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
219. Niu, Y.C.; Liu, J.C.; Zhao, X.M.; Su, F.Q.; Cui, H.X. Immunostimulatory activities of a low molecular
weight antitumoral polysaccharide isolated from Agaricus blazei Murill (LMPAB) in Sarcoma 180 ascitic
tumor-bearing mice. Pharmazie 2009, 64, 472–476. [PubMed]
220. Cui, L.; Sun, Y.; Xu, H.; Xu, H.; Cong, H.; Liu, J. A polysaccharide isolated from Agaricus blazei Murill
(ABP-AW1) as a potential Th1 immunity-stimulating adjuvant. Oncol. Lett. 2013, 6, 1039–1044. [PubMed]
221. Bergendiova, K.; Tibenska, E.; Majtan, J. Pleuran (β-glucan from Pleurotus ostreatus) supplementation, cellular
immune response and respiratory tract infections in athletes. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 2011, 111, 2033–2040.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
222. Sen, I.K.; Mandal, A.K.; Chakraborti, S.; Dey, B.; Chakraborty, R.; Islam, S.S. Green synthesis of silver
nanoparticles using glucan from mushroom and study of antibacterial activity. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2013,
62, 439–449. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
223. Signoretto, C.; Marchi, A.; Bertoncelli, A.; Burlacchini, G.; Papetti, A.; Pruzzo, C.; Zaura, E.; Lingström, P.;
Ofek, I.; Pratten, J.; et al. The anti-adhesive mode of action of a purified mushroom (Lentinus edodes) extract
with anticaries and antigingivitis properties in two oral bacterial phatogens. BMC Complement. Altern. Med.
2014, 14, 75. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
224. Cai, M.; Lin, Y.; Luo, Y.L.; Liang, H.H.; Sun, P.L. Extraction, antimicrobial, and antioxidant activities of crude
polysaccharides from the Wood Ear medicinal mushroom Auricularia auricula-judae (higher Basidiomycetes).
Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2015, 17, 591–600. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
225. Li, S.; Shah, N.P. Antioxidant and antibacterial activities of sulphated polysaccharides from Pleurotus eryngii
and Streptococcus thermophilus ASCC 1275. Food Chem. 2014, 165, 262–270. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
226. De Carvalho, M.P.; Gulotta, G.; do Amaral, M.W.; Lunsdorf, H.; Sasse, F.; Abraham, W.R. Coprinuslactone
protects the edible mushroom Coprinus comatus against biofilm infections by blocking both quorum-sensing
and MurA. Environ. Microbiol. 2016. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
227. Sokovi´
c, M.; ´
Ciri´
c, A.; Glamoˇ
clija, J.; Nikoli´
c, M.; van Griensven, L. Agaricus blazei hot water extract shows
anti quorum sensing activity in the nosocomial human pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Molecules 2014, 19,
4189–4199. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
228. Zhu, H.; Liu, W.; Tian, B.; Liu, H.; Ning, S. Inhibition of quorum sensing in the opportunistic pathogenic
bacterium Chromobacterium violaceum by an extract from fruiting bodies of Lingzhi or Reishi medicinal
mushroom, Ganoderma lucidum (W.Curt.:Fr.) P. Karst. (higher Basidiomycetes). Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2011,
13, 559–564. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
229. Kim, S.-P.; Lee, S.-J.; Nam, S.-H.; Friedman, M. Turmeric (Curcuma longa) bioprocessed with mycelia of
shiitake (Lentinus edodes) mushrooms: Composition and mechanism of protection against salmonellosis in
mice. Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2016. submitted.
230. Tochikura, T.S.; Nakashima, H.; Yamamoto, N. Antiviral agents with activity against human retro viruses.
JAIDS J. Acquir. Immune Defic. Syndr. 1989, 2, 441–447.
231. Seniuk, O.F.; Gorovoj, L.F.; Beketova, G.V.; Savichuk, H.O.; Rytik, P.G.; Kucherov, I.I.; Prilutskay, A.B.;
Prilutsky, A.I. Anti-infective properties of the melanin-glucan complex obtained from medicinal tinder
bracket mushroom, Fomes fomentarius (L.: Fr.) Fr. (Aphyllophoromycetideae). Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2011,
13, 7–18. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
232. Minari, M.C.; Rincão, V.P.; Soares, S.A.; Ricardo, N.M.P.S.; Nozawa, C.; Linhares, R.E.C. Antiviral properties
of polysaccharides from Agaricus brasiliensis in the replication of bovine herpesvirus 1. Acta Virol. 2011, 55,
255–259. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
38 of 40
233. Cardozo, F.T.; Camelini, C.M.; Leal, P.C.; Kratz, J.M.; Nunes, R.J.; Mendonca, M.M.; Simoes, C.M. Antiherpetic
mechanism of a sulfated derivative of Agaricus brasiliensis fruiting bodies polysaccharide. Intervirology 2014,
57, 375–383. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
234. Yamamoto, K.A.; Galhardi, L.C.F.; Rincão, V.P.; Soares, S.D.A.; Vieira, T.G.P.; Ricardo, N.M.P.S.; Nozawa, C.;
Linhares, R.E.C. Antiherpetic activity of an Agaricus brasiliensis polysaccharide, its sulfated derivative and
fractions. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2013, 52, 9–13. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
235. Rincão, V.P.; Yamamoto, K.A.; Ricardo, N.M.; Soares, S.A.; Meirelles, L.D.; Nozawa, C.; Linhares, R.E.
Polysaccharide and extracts from Lentinula edodes: Structural features and antiviral activity. Virol. J. 2012,
9, 37. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
236. Razumov, I.A.; Kazachinskaia, E.I.; Puchkova, L.I.; Kosogorova, T.A.; Gorbunova, I.A.; Loktev, V.B.;
Tepliakova, T.V. Protective activity of aqueous extracts from higher mushrooms against Herpes simplex
virus type-2 on albino mice model. Antibiot. Khimioter. 2013, 58, 8–12. [PubMed]
237. Wang, J.; Yu, G.; Li, Y.; Shen, L.; Qian, Y.; Yang, J.; Wang, F. Inhibitory effects of sulfated lentinan with
different degree of sulfation against tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) in tobacco seedlings. Pestic. Biochem. Physiol.
2015, 122, 38–43. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
238. Kim, S.-P.; Lee, S.-J.; Nam, S.-H.; Friedman, M. Elm tree (Ulmus parvifolia) bark bioprocessed with mycelia of
Shiitake (Lentinus edodes) mushrooms in liquid culture: Composition and mechanism of protection against
allergic asthma in mice. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2016, 64, 773–784. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
239. Joseph, J.; Panicker, S.N.; Janardhanan, K.K. Protective effect of polysaccharide-protein complex from a
polypore mushroom, Phellinus rimosus against radiation-induced oxidative stress. Redox Rep. 2012, 17, 22–27.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
240. Li, X.; Wang, L.; Wang, Z. Radioprotective activity of neutral polysaccharides isolated from the fruiting
bodies of Hohenbuehelia serotina. Phys. Med. 2015, 31, 352–359. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
241. Pillai, T.G.; Uma Devi, P. Mushroom beta glucan: Potential candidate for post irradiation protection.
Mutat. Res. 2013, 751, 109–115. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
242. Fritz, H.; Kennedy, D.A.; Ishii, M.; Fergusson, D.; Fernandes, R.; Cooley, K.; Seely, D. Polysaccharide K and
Coriolus versicolor Extracts for Lung Cancer: A Systematic Review. Integr. Cancer Ther. 2015, 14, 201–211.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
243. Roberts, J.S.; Teichert, A.; McHugh, T.H. Vitamin D2 formation from post-harvest UV-B treatment of
mushrooms (Agaricus bisporus) and retention during storage. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2008, 56, 4541–4544.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
244. Kalaras, M.D.; Beelman, R.B.; Elias, R.J. Effects of postharvest pulsed UV light treatment of white button
mushrooms (Agaricus bisporus) on vitamin D2 content and quality attributes. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2012, 60,
220–225. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
245. Tsai, S.Y.; Mau, J.L.; Huang, S.J. Enhancement of antioxidant properties and increase of content of vitamin
D2 and non-volatile components in fresh button mushroom, Agaricus bisporus (higher Basidiomycetes) by
γ-irradiation. Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2014, 16, 137–147. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
246. Fernandes, Â.; Antonio, A.L.; Oliveira, M.B.P.P.; Martins, A.; Ferreira, I.C.F.R. Effect of gamma and electron
beam irradiation on the physico-chemical and nutritional properties of mushrooms: A review. Food Chem.
2012, 135, 641–650. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
247. Sławi´
nska, A.; Fornal, E.; Radzki, W.; Skrzypczak, K.; Zalewska-Korona, M.; Michalak-Majewska, M.;
Parfieniuk, E.; Stachniuk, A. Study on Vitamin D2 stability in dried mushrooms during drying and storage.
Food Chem. 2016, 199, 203–209. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
248. Mehrotra, A.; Calvo, M.S.; Beelman, R.B.; Levy, E.; Siuty, J.; Kalaras, M.D.; Uribarri, J. Bioavailability of
vitamin D2 from enriched mushrooms in prediabetic adults: A randomized controlled trial. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr.
2014, 68, 1154–1160. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
249. Calvo, M.S.; Babu, U.S.; Garthoff, L.H.; Woods, T.O.; Dreher, M.; Hill, G.; Nagaraja, S. Vitamin D2
from light-exposed edible mushrooms is safe, bioavailable and effectively supports bone growth in rats.
Osteoporosis Int. 2013, 24, 197–207. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
250. Chen, S.Y.; Yu, H.T.; Kao, J.P.; Yang, C.C.; Chiang, S.S.; Mishchuk, D.O.; Mau, J.L.; Slupsky, C.M. Consumption
of vitamin D2 enhanced mushrooms is associated with improved bone health. J. Nutr. Biochem. 2015, 26,
696–703. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
39 of 40
251. Simon, R.R.; Borzelleca, J.F.; DeLuca, H.F.; Weaver, C.M. Safety assessment of the post-harvest treatment
of button mushrooms (Agaricus bisporus) using ultraviolet light. Food Chem. Toxicol. 2013, 56, 278–289.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
252. Huang, S.J.; Lin, C.P.; Mau, J.L.; Li, Y.S.; Tsai, S.Y. Effect of UV-B irradiation on physiologically active substance
content and antioxidant properties of the medicinal caterpillar fungus Cordyceps militaris (Ascomycetes).
Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2015, 17, 241–253. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
253. Rajapakse, N.W.; Karim, F.; Straznicky, N.E.; Fernandez, S.; Evans, R.G.; Head, G.A.; Kaye, D.M. Augmented
endothelial-specific L-arginine transport prevents obesity-induced hypertension. Acta Physiol. 2014, 212,
39–48. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
254. Niu, Y.C.; Feng, R.N.; Hou, Y.; Li, K.; Kang, Z.; Wang, J.; Sun, C.H.; Li, Y. Histidine and arginine are associated
with inflammation and oxidative stress in obese women. Br. J. Nutr. 2012, 108, 57–61. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
255. O'Neil, C.E.; Nicklas, T.A.; Fulgoni, V.L. Consumption of apples is associated with a better diet quality
and reduced risk of obesity in children: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES)
2003–2010. Nutr. J. 2015, 14, 48. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
256. Friedman, M. Chemistry and anticarcinogenic mechanisms of glycoalkaloids produced by eggplants,
potatoes, and tomatoes. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2015, 63, 3323–3337. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
257. Friedman, M.; Levin, C.E. Glycoalkaloids and calystegine alkaloids in potatoes. In Advances in Potato
Chemistry and Technology, 2nd ed.; Singh, J., Kaur, L., Eds.; Elsevier: Oxford, UK, 2016; pp. 167–194.
258. Shao, D.; Bartley, G.E.; Yokoyama, W.; Pan, Z.; Zhang, H.; Zhang, A. Plasma and hepatic cholesterol-lowering
effects of tomato pomace, tomato seed oil and defatted tomato seed in hamsters fed with high-fat diets.
Food Chem. 2013, 139, 589–596. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
259. Ghavipour, M.; Saedisomeolia, A.; Djalali, M.; Sotoudeh, G.; Eshraghyan, M.R.; Moghadam, A.M.; Wood, L.G.
Tomato juice consumption reduces systemic inflammation in overweight and obese females. Br. J. Nutr. 2013,
109, 2031–2035. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
260. Ghavipour, M.; Sotoudeh, G.; Ghorbani, M. Tomato juice consumption improves blood antioxidative
biomarkers in overweight and obese females. Clin. Nutr. 2015, 34, 805–809. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
261. Vinha, A.F.;
Barreira, S.V.P.;
Costa, A.S.G.;
Alves, R.C.;
Oliveira, M.B.P.P. Pre-meal tomato
(Lycopersicon esculentum) intake can have anti-obesity effects in young women? Int. J. Food Sci. Nutr.
2014, 65, 1019–1026. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
262. Friedman, M. Anticarcinogenic, cardioprotective, and other health benefits of tomato compounds lycopene,
α-tomatine, and tomatidine in pure form and in fresh and processed tomatoes. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2013, 61,
9534–9550. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
263. Kim, S.P.; Nam, S.H.; Friedman, M. Rice hull smoke extract protects mice against a Salmonella
lipopolysaccharide-induced endotoxemia. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2014, 62, 7753–7759. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
264. Kim, S.P.; Yang, J.Y.; Kang, M.Y.; Park, J.C.; Nam, S.H.; Friedman, M. Composition of liquid rice hull smoke
and anti-inflammatory effects in mice. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2011, 59, 4570–4581. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
265. Yang, J.Y.; Kang, M.Y.; Nam, S.H.; Friedman, M. Antidiabetic effects of rice hull smoke extract in
alloxan-induced diabetic mice. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2012, 60, 87–94. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
266. Friedman, M. Chemistry and multi-beneficial bioactivities of carvacrol (4-isopropyl-2-methylphenol), a
component of essential oils produced by aromatic plants and spices. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2014, 62, 7652–7670.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
267. Friedman, M. Rice brans, rice bran oils, and rice hulls: Composition, food and industrial uses, and
bioactivities in humans, animals, and cells. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2013, 61, 10626–10641. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
268. Friedman, M.; Mackey, B.E.; Kim, H.-J.; Lee, I.-S.; Lee, K.-R.; Lee, S.-U.; Kozukue, E.; Kozukue, N.
Structure-activity relationships of tea compounds against human cancer cells. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2007, 55,
243–253. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
269. Friedman, M. Overview of antibacterial, antitoxin, antiviral, and antifungal activities of tea flavonoids and
teas. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2007, 51, 116–134. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
270. Friedman, M. Antibacterial, antiviral, and antifungal properties of wines and winery byproducts in relation
to their flavonoid content. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2014, 62, 6025–6042. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Foods 2016, 5, 80
40 of 40
271. Kim, H.; Bartley, G.E.; Arvik, T.; Lipson, R.; Nah, S.Y.; Seo, K.; Yokoyama, W. Dietary supplementation of
chardonnay grape seed flour reduces plasma cholesterol concentration, hepatic steatosis, and abdominal
fat content in high-fat diet-induced obese hamsters. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2014, 62, 1919–1925. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
272. Tresserra-Rimbau, A.; Medina-Remón, A.; Lamuela-Raventós, R.M.; Bulló, M.; Salas-Salvadó, J.; Corella, D.;
Fitó, M.; Gea, A.; Gómez-Gracia, E.; Lapetra, J.; et al. Moderate red wine consumption is associated with a
lower prevalence of the metabolic syndrome in the PREDIMED population. Br. J. Nutr. 2015, 113, S121–S130.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
273. Lee, T.T.; Ciou, J.Y.; Chiang, C.J.; Chao, Y.P.; Yu, B. Effect of Pleurotus eryngii stalk residue on the oxidative
status and meat quality of broiler chickens. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2012, 60, 11157–11163. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
274. Santos, M.P.; Marcante, R.C.; Santana, T.T.; Tanaka, H.S.; Funari, P., Jr.; Alberton, L.R.; Faria, E.V.; Valle, J.S.;
Colauto, N.B.; Linde, G.A. Oyster culinary-medicinal mushroom, Pleurotus ostreatus (higher Basidiomycetes),
growth in grain-based diet improves broiler chicken production. Int. J. Med. Mushrooms 2015, 17, 169–178.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
275. Juneja, V.K.; Altuntas, E.G.; Ayhan, K.; Hwang, C.-A.; Sheen, S.; Friedman, M. Predictive model for the
reduction of heat resistance of Listeria monocytogenes in ground beef by the combined effect of sodium
chloride and apple polyphenols. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2013, 164, 54–59. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
276. Grosshauser, S.; Schieberle, P. Characterization of the key odorants in pan-fried white mushrooms
(Agaricus bisporus L.) by means of molecular sensory science: Comparison with the raw mushroom tissue.
J. Agric. Food Chem. 2013, 61, 3804–3813. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
277. Ghanayem, B.I.; Bai, R.; Kissling, G.E.; Travlos, G.; Hoffler, U. Diet-induced obesity in male mice is associated
with reduced fertility and potentiation of acrylamide-induced reproductive toxicity. Biol. Reprod. 2010, 82,
96–104. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
278. Chambers, T.J.; Richard, R.A. The impact of obesity on male fertility. Hormones (Athens) 2015, 14, 563–568.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
279. Friedman, M. Acrylamide: Inhibition of formation in processed food and mitigation of toxicity in cells,
animals, and humans. Food Funct. 2015, 6, 1752–1772. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
280. Guevara-Aguirre, J.; Rosenbloom, A.L. Obesity, diabetes and cancer: Insight into the relationship from a
cohort with growth hormone receptor deficiency. Diabetologia 2015, 58, 37–42. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
281. Guevara-Aguirre, J.; Rosenbloom, A.L.; Balasubramanian, P.; Teran, E.; Guevara-Aguirre, M.; Guevara, C.;
Procel, P.; Alfaras, I.; de Cabo, R.; di Biase, S.; et al. GH receptor deficiency in Ecuadorian adults is associated
with obesity and enhanced insulin sensitivity. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2015, 100, 2589–2596. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
282. Friedman, M. Antibiotic-resistant bacteria: prevalence in food and inactivation by food-compatible
compounds and plant extracts. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2015, 63, 3805–3822. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
283. Hennechart-Collette, C.; Martin-Latil, S.; Guillier, L.; Perelle, S. Determination of which virus to use as a
process control when testing for the presence of hepatitis A virus and norovirus in food and water. Int. J.
Food Microbiol. 2015, 202, 57–65. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
284. Petersen, E.E.; Staples, J.E.; Meaney-Delman, D.; Fischer, M.; Ellington, S.R.; Callaghan, W.M.; Jamieson, D.J.
Interim guidelines for pregnant women during a Zika virus outbreak—United States, 2016. MMWR Morb.
Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 2016, 65, 30–33. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
285. Friedman, M.; Rasooly, R. Review of the inhibition of biological activities of food-related selected toxins by
natural compounds. Toxins 2013, 5, 743–775. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
286. Das, A.; Bhattacharya, S.; Palaniswamy, M.; Angayarkanni, J. Biodegradation of aflatoxin B1 in contaminated
rice straw by Pleurotus ostreatus MTCC 142 and Pleurotus ostreatus GHBBF10 in the presence of metal salts
and surfactants. World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2014, 30, 2315–2324. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
© 2016 by the author; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC-BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
