 REVIEW ARTICLE
OPEN
Fatigue in Parkinson’s disease: report from a multidisciplinary
symposium
Joseph H Friedman1,2, James C Beck3, Kelvin L Chou4,5, Gracia Clark3, Christopher P Fagundes6,7, Christopher G Goetz8,
Karen Herlofson9, Benzi Kluger10, Lauren B Krupp11, Anthony E Lang12, Jao-Shin Lou13, Laura Marsh14,15, Anne Newbould3 and
Daniel Weintraub16
Fatigue is a severe problem for many people living with Parkinson’s disease (PD). Best estimates suggest that more than 50% of
patients experience this debilitating symptom. Little is known about its etiology or treatment, making the understanding of fatigue
a true unmet need. As part of the Parkinson’s Disease Foundation Community Choice Research Program, patients, caregivers, and
scientists attended a symposium on fatigue on 16 and 17 October 2014. We present a summary of that meeting, reviewing what is
known about the diagnosis and treatment of fatigue, its physiology, and what we might learn from multiple sclerosis (MS),
depression, and cancer—disorders in which fatigue figures prominently too. We conclude with focused recommendations to
enhance our understanding and treatment of this prominent problem in PD.
npj Parkinson's Disease (2016) 2, 15025; doi:10.1038/npjparkd.2015.25; published online 14 January 2016
INTRODUCTION
Fatigue: The patient perspective
Anne Newbould (care partner): My husband of almost 40 years,
James, has Parkinson's disease, and fatigue is his most severe
and debilitating symptom. At first I thought he had depression.
I attempted to get him interested in the things that we so
loved to do, but it seemed that he lost his zeal for life. When I
asked him about it, he told me that he was extremely tired and
it almost hurt to try to get up out of bed or his chair.
I started researching all I could on Parkinson's and fatigue, but
there was very little information. I felt lost and unbelievably
helpless. We went from being participants to spectators in life.
With James' fatigue, we have had to alter our lifestyle to
conform to his level of energy. We go to baseball games
instead of fly-fishing. We cruise on the local Southern Bell
riverboat instead of racing sailboats. We go to the beach and
watch the ocean instead of teaching scuba diving. That is why
James and I were ecstatic to have the opportunity to raise this
issue through the Parkinson's Disease Foundation’s Community
Choice Research Awards.
Gracia
Clark
(patient):
Fatigue
was
the
first
Parkinson's
symptom I noticed; it is still my most debilitating one. Feeling
fatigued
is
different
from
feeling
sleepy,
depressed
or
apathetic. As an anthropologist who has worked in West
Africa, I am reminded of the fatigue I suffered after coming
down with malaria. When fighting malaria, I faced an
overwhelming need to lie down. But unlike fatigue from
malaria, Parkinson’s fatigue doesn’t go away after taking a few
malaria pills. Finding treatment for Parkinson’s fatigue can be a
huge challenge. Medications approved for other diseases—
such as narcolepsy—may provide some benefit, but their
efficacy
in
Parkinson’s
is
under
studied,
and
insurance
companies can decline to cover such off-label uses. Further-
more, because many diseases can cause fatigue, receiving an
accurate diagnosis can be difficult, as it was in my case. I have
heard many people with Parkinson’s say fatigue is one of their
most debilitating symptoms, and yet the symptom is not well
understood. There is an urgent need for increased research to
better understand fatigue and find ways to treat it.
Fatigue is a common symptom in almost all medical, neurologic,
and psychiatric disorders as well as in the otherwise healthy
general population.1 We considered fatigue a subjective symptom,
different from muscle fatigue, which is a physiologically defined
entity. There are a number of definitions used to describe
subjective fatigue,2 and all focus on the concept of an abnormal
and excessive lack of energy that interferes with normal function.
Although the recognition of the importance of fatigue in
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is relatively new, it should be noted that
Parkinson-related fatigue had been recognized in the nineteenth
century by some of the major clinical neurologists of their time.3
1Movement Disorders Program, Butler Hospital, Province, RI, USA; 2Department of Neurology, Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence, RI, USA; 3Parkinson’s Disease
Foundation, New York, NY, USA; 4Department of Neurology, University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, MI, USA; 5Department of Neurosurgery, University of Michigan
Health System, Ann Arbor, MI, USA; 6Department of Psychology, Rice University, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA; 7Department of Health Disparities, Houston, TX,
USA; 8Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA; 9Department of Neurology, Sorlandet Hospital, Arendal, Norway; 10Department of
Neurology, University of Colorado Anschutz Campus, Aurora, CO, USA; 11Department of Neurology, Stony Brook University Medical Center, Stony Brook, NY, USA; 12Toronto
Western Hospital, Morton and Gloria Shulman Movement Disorders Clinic and Edmond J Safra Program in Parkinson’s Disease, Toronto, ON, Canada; 13University of North Dakota
School of Medicine and Health Services, Sanford Health, Grand Forks, ND, USA;
14Department of Psychiatry, Baylor College of Medicine, Mental Health Care Line,
Michael E. DeBakey Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Houston, TX, USA; 15Department of Neurology, Baylor College of Medicine, Mental Health Care Line, Michael E. DeBakey
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Houston, TX, USA and 16Department of Psychiatry, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
Correspondence: JH Friedman (Joseph_friedman@brown.edu)
Received 23 May 2015; revised 28 September 2015; accepted 25 October 2015
www.nature.com/npjparkd
All rights reserved 2373-8057/16
© 2016 Parkinson's Disease Foundation/Macmillan Publishers Limited
 DEFINING FATIGUE
There are several difficulties in defining fatigue. Fatigue may occur
in more than one domain4,5 and different scales include different
domains. Defining the point at which normal fatigue crosses into
pathological fatigue is also challenging. Operationally, fatigue
becomes pathological when it is abnormally severe, restricts
activities independently of other constraints induced by PD, and is
associated with psychological distress; however, it remains difficult
to define an exact diagnostic threshold.6 Fatigue may be
associated
or
due
to
other
behavioral
disorders
such
as
depression, anxiety, and apathy, which are themselves intrinsic to
PD.7 In addition, there may be confusion between fatigue, a
feeling present at rest, and fatigability, a problem induced by
activity.5 Although PD fatigue has traditionally been considered a
symptom, it may be better considered as a syndrome. Therefore,
we propose to define PD fatigue as a sense of exhaustion
unexplained by drug effects, other medical, or psychiatric disorders,
present for a defined period, and associated with other fatigue-
related symptoms, such as reduced motivation and nonrestorative
rest, or constraints on activities.6 Such a syndromic definition may
provide several benefits for clinical research by improving
comparability across studies but might also inhibit recruitment if
the definition is too narrow or inflexible. However, this definition
remains quite subjective, and until objective measures are
discovered, which reflect the sensation of exhaustion, we will
continue
to
be
limited
in
our
ability
to
understand
the
pathophysiology of this disorder.
CLINICAL REVIEW OF FATIGUE IN PD
Motor fatigue
Most studies of PD fatigue have focused on physical, or motor,
fatigue. Case–control studies8,9 and community-based studies10
show fatigue to be both common and severe, with the prevalence
ranging between 33 and 70%.11 This broad range probably
reflects different patient populations and different evaluation
methodologies. This prevalence makes it one of the most
common nonmotor PD problems,12 even in the early stages of
the disease. It is clearly a ''pre-motor'' feature as well, appearing
well before motor symptoms.13,14 A UK study spanning 16 years,
involving 8,166 patients with PD and 46,755 controls, found that
the presence of fatigue 5 years before the diagnosis of PD in-
creased the relative risk of developing the disease to 1.56 (ref. 15).
Patients describe their fatigue as different from what they had
experienced previously.16 Unlike fatigue in the general population,
PD fatigue often improves with exercise.16,17 Two studies evaluat-
ing fatigue in newly diagnosed, untreated patients reported it to
be a clinically relevant problem3,6,10,14 even when motor sym-
ptoms were minimal. Over 50% of patients consider fatigue
among their three most disabling symptoms.8 In spite of this
prominent concern by patients, fatigue is often not recognized by
the treating neurologist.18
The evolution of fatigue has not been well studied. Limited data
indicate that, once present, fatigue typically persists and usually
worsens over time.19,20
Studies of PD-related fatigue are discordant regarding the
correlation
between
fatigue
and
motor
symptom
severity,
disease stage, or duration.2,14 These conflicting results may be
explained by different populations as well as different assessment
tools. Multiple, but not all, studies in PD show a significant
correlation between depression and fatigue.8 Anxiety and apathy
also correlate with fatigue21,22 but many fatigued patients are not
depressed, anxious, or apathetic.8 Several studies suggest that
cognitive performance, frontal lobe activity, and self-reported
cognitive impairment are associated with fatigue.23,24 However,
fatigability on cognitive tasks may not correlate with subjective
fatigue.25 Similar to depression, fatigue is frequently associated
with daytime sleepiness and sleep disorders, but can be dis-
tinguished from them by the absence of sleep being restorative,
and may occur in patients with normal sleep patterns.8,9,26 Finally,
objectively measured autonomic dysfunction has been associated
with fatigue in PD.27,28
Cognitive fatigue
Cognitive fatigue refers to the subjective experience of feeling
weary or exhausted during an intellectually challenging task,
along with a decreased capacity to initiate or sustain cognitively
challenging activities. Cognitive fatigue is sometimes referred to
as ''central fatigue.'' Patients have reduced attention and may
have deficits on formal neuropsychological testing in cognitive
areas of memory, learning, attention, and information process.29 A
limited number of studies have examined cognitive fatigue in
PD.30 In some patients, cognitive performance is unimpaired;
however, the increased mental effort required to maintain a
normal level of performance results in fatigue and distress.
Conversely, cognitive impairment, especially executive dysfunc-
tion, may be associated with cognitive fatigue, as the patient is
less able to maintain concentration or think about complex
matters. For example, a longitudinal decline in Mini-Mental State
Examination score over 8 years was associated with a concurrent
increase in fatigue symptoms.19 In addition, reduced performance
on the Wisconsin Card Sorting Task, reduced frontal lobe
perfusion, and depression were all correlated with fatigue.23 The
development and experience of fatigue is also context-dependent;
cognitive fatigue emerges as task complexity increases and
attentional demands are greater. Even in healthy controls,
increased task complexity during a walking exercise affects gait
speed; however, the impact on physical fatigue and gait slowness
is greater in patients with PD.31
INSIGHTS INTO FATIGUE FROM OTHER DISORDERS
Although perceived fatigue is probably similar among different
illnesses,32
there
may
be
disease-specific
differences.
Both
similarities and differences may provide insights into fatigue
pathophysiology. Similarities in fatigue would be compatible with
a hypothesis of shared mechanisms, and thus the possibility of
similar interventions. The high prevalence of fatigue in medical
and psychiatric disorders points either to some very generalized
mechanisms or a limitation in the brain’s ability to distinguish
perceptions. We limited our review of other disorders with
prominent fatigue, but excluded chronic fatigue syndrome
because of its frequent association with psychiatric disorders such
as personality disorders and post-traumatic stress disorder that
might confound physiological interpretations.
CANCER
Fatigue has been most studied in oncology. Cancer specialists
have developed a disease-specific definition for ''cancer-related
fatigue'' as a syndrome that is included in the ICD 10.6 The goal of
such a definition was to accelerate the ''development of a research
agenda.'' ''Fatigue is the most common symptom experienced by
adults and children with cancer'' (ibid). The criteria look much like
typical criteria used in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual V,33
the guide for psychiatric diagnoses, with a requirement for
''significant fatigue'' plus 5 symptoms from a list of 10, with
symptoms present daily or almost daily for a 2-week period in the
previous month.
Cancer, of course, is not a single disease. Many of the links
found between certain cancers and fatigue have not been
evaluated in other cancers. Cytokines, released during inflamma-
tion, have been correlated with fatigue in cancer.34,35
Fatigue in Parkinson’s disease
JH Friedman et al
2
npj Parkinson's Disease (2016) 15025
© 2016 Parkinson's Disease Foundation/Macmillan Publishers Limited
 Hypothalamic–pituitary axis alterations have been implicated.36
Changes in circadian rhythm37 have been associated with fatigue
as has a genetic predisposition.36 Psychosocial factors also have a
high correlation with fatigue.38
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
The estimated prevalence of fatigue in multiple sclerosis (MS) is
~ 80%. ''Chronic persistent fatigue'' is defined for MS as significant
fatigue present for more than 50% of each day for a minimum of
6 weeks.39 There are some facets of fatigue that distinguish MS
fatigue from fatigue associated with other disorders. Unlike PD,
fatigue in MS does not decrease with exercise.17 Heat worsens
fatigue in MS, an unusual but consistent observation compared
with other disorders.40 This has not been studied in PD but
anecdotal experience indicates that PD patients routinely prefer
warm to cold climates, suggesting that heat is unlikely to worsen
fatigue.
Fatigue severity in MS is linked to disease type (chronic
progressive more likely to be affected), but, not clearly linked to
disability or disease duration.39 It is closely related to concurrent
depression, and the presence of depression or anxiety predicts the
later occurrence of fatigue. Similarly, the presence of fatigue is a
risk factor for later development of depression and anxiety. Sleep
disorders are increased in MS subjects with fatigue. Lower levels of
education are associated with worse fatigue. As in PD,41 the
sensation of fatigue does not correlate with motor fatigue, the loss
of strength with repeated effort (see below). Fatigue has been
associated with a variety of gray matter changes in MS as well as
functional magnetic resonance imaging changes during tasks.40
There may be associations between fatigue and neuroendocrine,
autonomic, or neuroimmune markers.
DEPRESSION
Although fatigue is one of the symptoms used to diagnose major
depression in the general population,33 it is often unrelieved when
depression improves.42–44 Thus, even when the fatigued PD
patient has depression, treatment of the latter may not improve
the former, thus implying that fatigue may not always simply
result from depression.
The data on cancer and MS fatigue are instructive in terms of
identifying areas of research that have not been adequately
explored in PD. These areas include pain, socioeconomic and
educational status, a variety of psychosocial measures, markers of
inflammation and immune function, deconditioning, and auto-
nomic dysfunction; none of these observations in other disorders
have resulted in clear benefit to patients. A study comparing
consecutive people with MS to those with PD, both groups
attending similar academic subspecialty neurology clinics, found
that the spectrum of symptoms endorsed in the Fatigue Severity
Scale (FSS) were not identical.17 In addition, patients with PD
generally reported that fatigue improved with exercise, whereas
those with MS reported the opposite. Whether this counter-
intuitive observation about exercise is unique to PD fatigue
remains to be seen.
CLINICAL MEASURES OF FATIGUE IN PD
A systematic critique of rating scales for diagnosis and severity of
PD fatigue used pre-determined criteria for Recommended,
Suggested, or Listed, depending on the quality of data.45 The
FSS met the necessary criteria to be recommended for both
diagnostic screening and severity measurement.2,46 The Multi-
dimensional Fatigue Inventory (MFI)4 was designated as recom-
mended for rating fatigue severity, and may be more sensitive
to change with interventions than the FSS.46 For diagnostic
screening only, two other scales were recommended: Functional
Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy—Fatigue Scale (FACIT-F)47
and Parkinson Fatigue Scale (PFS or PFS-16).16 Since the MDS
review article, the Modified Fatigue Impact Scale has been
validated in a study involving 100 PD patients.48 This scale
involves evaluation of cognitive as well as physical and social
functioning.
The above scales measure subjective fatigue in PD. Objective
motor fatigue can also be measured in PD with performance
changes during sustained muscle contractions, repetitive move-
ments, or timed activities. PD studies generally show heightened
motor
fatigability,
which
does
not
typically
correlate
with
subjective fatigue.49 Objective measures of cognitive fatigability
focus on performance change during a continuous mental task or
performance change in another target task after a cognitive
challenge.50,51 Performance variability over time may be a
sensitive metric of fatigability that correlates with fatigue com-
plaints.51 A study using the Borg Perceived Exertion Rating52
measuring perceived effort documented heightened perception
in PD in comparison with controls, despite similar levels of
performance.53
Physiology and biomarkers for fatigue in PD
The physiology underlying fatigue symptoms in PD is unknown,
whereas much is known about the mechanisms of motor
fatigability. The only published study of physiological differences
between
fatigued
and
nonfatigued
PD
patients
found
no
measurable differences in oxygen utilization during exercise,54
but some studies have suggested that exercising improves
fatigue.15,17,55,56 Whether fatigue fluctuates with motor fluctua-
tions was looked at in one study.57 Subjects were assessed during
their off, whereas all other studies used the subjects’ experience
over a preceding time interval of weeks. Eighty-eight percent of
their subjects were fatigued, and fatigue increased with motor
''off.'' Too few subjects were nonfatigued to determine how often
fatigue occurred only during motor ''off.'' The physiological
implications are unclear, as many other nonmotor symptoms also
increased during the ''off'' period.
Increased motor fatigability in PD is associated with increased
cortical excitability. Motor fatigability is defined as the rate of force
deterioration in an exercise paradigm. Cortical excitability may be
measured by transcranial magnetic stimulation applied to the
motor cortex with the compound muscle action potentials
recorded from the muscles of interest such as the abductor pollis
brevis or the first dorsal interosseous muscle. Cortical excitability is
increased when the motor-evoked potential amplitude increases
while transcranial magnetic stimuli are held constant. The cortical
excitability is markedly increased in PD at rest, and during
intermittent exercise that correlates negatively with the severity of
motor fatigue—the higher the cortical excitability, the less motor
fatigability.58 The increase in cortical excitability is partially
normalized by a small dose of levodopa that also reduces motor
fatigability;58,59 however, neither cortical excitability nor motor
fatigability correlated with subjective fatigue complaints. Thus,
cortical excitability can serve as a biomarker for motor fatigability
in PD but not for subjective fatigue.
BIOMARKERS
Inflammatory markers such as C-reactive protein and cytokines are
potential biomarkers for subjective fatigue. In a study comparing
87 PD subjects to 33 controls, several markers of inflammation
were assessed in the cerebrospinal fluid and correlated with a
variety of nonmotor symptoms. Elevated C-reactive protein and
monocyte chemotactic protein-1 were significantly correlated with
fatigue, but this association requires confirmation before being
considered clinically relevant.60 How serum markers relate to brain
Fatigue in Parkinson’s disease
JH Friedman et al
3
© 2016 Parkinson's Disease Foundation/Macmillan Publishers Limited
npj Parkinson's Disease (2016) 15025
 changes in PD is speculative; however, they may relate to auto-
nomic changes outside the central nervous system.
Imaging of fatigue in PD
Motor symptoms in PD result from nigrostriatal dopaminergic
denervation, but dopaminergic dysfunction does not appear to be
related to fatigue in PD. In the ELLDOPA cohort, 49 levodopa-naive
PD patients with fatigue had similar [123I]-β-CIT striatal dopamine
transporter uptake as 82 PD patients without fatigue.14 Another
study showed no difference in
18F-dopa uptake between 10
fatigued PD subjects and 10 nonfatigued PD subjects.2,61
Serotonin transporter uptake has been reported to be reduced
in chronic fatigue syndrome,3,61 suggesting that nondopaminergic
pathways may be involved in PD fatigue. Pavese et al.62 compared
serotonergic transporter uptake (using the positron emission
tomography (PET) ligand 11C-DASB) in seven PD subjects with
fatigue
and
eight
PD
subjects
without
fatigue.
Serotonin
transporter binding in the caudate, putamen, ventral striatum,
insula, and thalamus was decreased in the fatigued patients. The
relationship of the cholinergic system to PD fatigue has not been
investigated. The autonomic nervous system may also be involved
in PD fatigue. One study found that pressor responses in
norepinephrine and dobutamine infusion tests were greater and
MIBG cardiac uptake was decreased in PD subjects with fatigue
compared with those without fatigue.4,27
CURRENT TREATMENT APPROACHES
There are no evidence-based guidelines for treating fatigue in PD.
A recent review63 found only 14 published randomized, controlled
trials using validated fatigue measures in PD. No study of
nonpharmacological treatments had showed benefit for fatigue.
Only one study showed a clinically and statistically significant
improvement with stimulants;64 however, when data from other
stimulant trials were pooled, no effect was seen. Statistically but
clinically insignificant benefits were found in post hoc analyses of
rasagaline,65 and small benefits were seen for levodopa and other
drugs when fatigue was one of several nonmotor symptoms as-
sessed in randomized, placebo-controlled trials, where nonmotor
symptoms were not the primary end points of the study.
Nonpharmacologic approaches to treat cognitive fatigue include
exercise, daily scheduling, planned rests, and pacing daily
activities, similar to what has been tried in treating motor fatigue.
The Table 1 summarizes interventions reported upon.
Given the limited evidence regarding treatment of PD fatigue,66
a commonsense approach to treat fatigue is recommended, and it
will vary with the treating clinician. When counseling patients, it is
important to acknowledge fatigue as an important and common
symptom in PD, and not necessarily a reflection of depression.
Many patients will have other potential contributors to fatigue,
including
depression,
anxiety,
apathy,
sleep
disorders
and
concomitant medical problems, and medications. These disorders
are not always treatable. Although exercise has not been
demonstrated in rigorous trials to reduce fatigue in PD, an
interesting and repeated counterintuitive observation is that PD
patients often report that they feel energized after exercising.16,17
As exercise is generally considered an important therapy for most
aspects of PD and most medical disorders, we think exercise
should always be suggested as there is no drawback.
CURRENT/FUTURE RESEARCH
Current research on PD-related fatigue is focused on identification
of biological markers and correlates of fatigue that may provide
insights into the development of effective treatments. The
Parkinson Progression Marker Initiative (PPMI) study (www.ppmi-
info.org) is a biomarker-rich study focused on the course of early
PD including ~ 425 newly diagnosed PD patients and ~ 200
matched health controls who undergo detailed assessments at
baseline and annually (out to 5 years). Fatigue and its severity, as
derived from the MDS-UPDRS fatigue item, will be evaluated for
correlations with other measures including the following: serial
dopamine transporter imaging, blood drawn for genotyping and
assessment of plasma proteins, cerebrospinal fluid, serial magnetic
resonance imaging brain imaging (structural and diffusion tensor
imaging), and nonmotor phenomena, such as cognitive function-
ing, depression, anxiety, and daytime sleepiness.
Two additional ongoing studies on fatigue in PD personal
communication) are using PET to examine neurophysiological
correlates of fatigue. Preliminary results from FDG PET suggest
a role for anterior cingulate, insular, superior temporal, and
precuneus regions in PD fatigue (Strafella et al., unpublished
results). In a separate large PET study, the microglial ligand
phenoxyanilide ([18[F]-FEPPA) is being used to examine the role of
neuroinflammation in PD relative to fatigue severity based on
the FSS.
Areas for future work include identification of which neuro-
transmitter systems or neural circuits, if any, are salient to the
pathophysiology of fatigue in PD. Imaging of brain activity and
other physiological measures will likely be utilized.
Comparing voxel-based morphometry data in PD patients with
fatigue as well as older adults without fatigue may delineate brain
structures associated with PD-related fatigue and whether these
associations are similar to those seen in fatigue in older adults
without PD.
Functional magnetic resonance imaging should be performed
in fatigued and nonfatigued PD patients as free of confounding
problems as possible (e.g., free of psychiatric or medical problems
or medications associated with fatigue).
Several nonpharmacologic strategies have shown evidence for
improving fatigue in MS but have not been tested in PD, including
exercise, energy management strategies, and mindfulness-based
stress reduction.67
Conclusions
Further research is required to better understand fatigue in PD.
The lack of progress in understanding the pathophysiology of
fatigue, or its treatment, in more intensively studied disorders and
the absence of any effective therapy for fatigue in any of them
argues strongly for a greater effort. We believe that research to
better understand the syndrome and treatment trials based on
rational
hypotheses
of
pathophysiology
should
proceed
in
parallel.
Table 1.
Published trials of treatments for fatigue
Modafinil
Methylphenidate
Pergolide
Bromocriptine
Pramipexole
Doxepin
Rasagaline
L-Dopa
Memantine
Caffeine
Behavioral interventions
Exercise
Amantadine
(from 60)
Fatigue in Parkinson’s disease
JH Friedman et al
4
npj Parkinson's Disease (2016) 15025
© 2016 Parkinson's Disease Foundation/Macmillan Publishers Limited
 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the Parkinson’s community for their inspiration in addressing this
debilitating unmet need. We thank the Parkinson’s Disease Foundation for their
generous financial and logistical support for our gathering to discuss this issue.
CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors contributed intellectual material, and all edited the final manuscript. JHF,
KLC, GC, CGG, KH, AEL, JSL, LM, AN DW wrote sections of the manuscript.
COMPETING INTERESTS
JHF: Teva, Auspex, Osmotica, Acadia, Lundbeck, Avid, Medscape, Theravance. KLC has
received research support from the NIH (NS44504-08, NS091856-01) and the Michael
J. Fox Foundation, has participated as a site-PI in clinical trials sponsored by the
Huntington Study Group (2CARE) and Osmotica, receives royalties from UpToDate
and Demos Health and serves as a consultant for Medtronic and Accordant. CGG:
Consulting or Advisory Board Membership with honoraria from Acadia (Deborah
Wood Associates), AstraZeneca, Avanir, Boston Scientific, Clearview, Health Advances,
Chelsea Pharmaceuticals (Link Medical Communications), ICON Pricespective LLC,
MED-IQ Educational Services, Neurocrine, Pfizer, Teva, and WPP Group Kantor Health
LLC. He recieves funding from NIH and Michael J Fox Foundation. CGG directs the
Rush Parkinson’s Disease Research Center that receives support from the Parkinson’s
Disease Foundation. He directs the translation program for the MDS-UPDRS and
UDysRS and receives funds from the International Parkinson and Movement Disorder
Society (IPMDS) for this effort. He receives honoraria from the University of California,
University of Luxembourg, University of Rochester, World Parkinson Coalition. He has
Royalties of Oxford University Press, Elsevier Publishers, Wolters Kluwer Health-
Lippincott, and Wilkins and Wilkins, and receives salary from the Rush University
Medical Center. KH: Allergan, Abbvie, Novartis. LBK: Johnson and Johnson; Bristol
Myers Squibb. AEL has served as an advisor for Abbvie, Allon Therapeutics, Avanir
Pharmaceuticals, Biogen Idec, Boerhinger-Ingelheim, Bristol Myers Squibb, Ceregene,
Cipla, Intekrin, Lilly, Medtronic, Merck, Novartis, NeuroPhage Pharmaceuticals, Teva,
and UCB; received honoraria from Medtronic, Teva, UCB, and AbbVie; received grants
from Brain Canada, Canadian Institutes of Health Research, Edmond J Safra
Philanthropic Foundation, Michael J. Fox Foundation, the Ontario Brain Institute,
National Parkinson Foundation, Parkinson Society Canada, Physicians Services
Incorporated (PSI), Tourette Syndrome Association, and W. Garfield Weston
Foundation; received publishing royalties from Saunders, Wiley-Blackwell, Johns
Hopkins Press, and Cambridge University Press; and has served as an expert witness
in cases related to the welding industry. DW: receives research funding or support
from Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research, National Institutes of Health,
Novartis
Pharmaceuticals,
Department
of
Veterans
Affairs,
Avid
Radiopharmaceuticals, and Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study; honoraria from
AbbVie, Biotie, Teva Pharmaceuticals, Otsuka, UCB, Clintrex LLC, and the CHDI
Foundation; license-fee payments from the University of Pennsylvania for the QUIP
and QUIP-RS; royalties from Wolters Kluweland; and fees for legal consultation for
lawsuit related to antipsychotic prescribing in a patient with Parkinson’s disease. The
remaining authors declare no conflict of interest.
REFERENCES
1. Wright, J. & O’Connor, K. M. Fatigue. Med. Clin. N. Am. 98, 597–608 (2014).
2. Friedman, J. H. et al. Fatigue in Parkinson's disease: a review. Mov. Disord. 22,
297–308 (2007).
3. Garcia-Ruiz, P. J., Chaudhuri, K. R. & Martinez-Marin, P. Non-motor symptoms of
Parkinson’s disease: a review from the past. J. Neurol. 338, 30–33 (2014).
4. Smets, E. M. A., Garssen, B., Bonke, B. & de Haes, J. C. J. M. The Multidimensional
Fatigue Inventory (MFI): psychometric qualities of an instrument to assess fatigue.
J. Psychosom. Res. 39, 312–325 (1995).
5. Alexander, N. B. et al. Bedside-to-bench conference: research agenda for idio-
pathic fatigue and aging. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 58, 967–975 (2010).
6. Barsevick, A. M. et al. Recommendations for high-priority research on cancer-
related fatigue in children and adults. J. Natl Cancer Inst. 105, 1432–1440 (2013).
7. Weintraub, D. & Burn, D. M. Parkinson’s disease: the quintessential neu-
ropsychiatric disorder. Mov. Disord. 26, 1022–1031 (2011).
8. Friedman, J. & Friedman, H. Fatigue in Parkinson's disease. Neurology 43,
2016–2018 (1993).
9. van Hilten, J. J. et al. Sleep, excessive daytime sleepiness and fatigue in Parkin-
son's disease. J. Neural. Transm. Park. Dis. Dement. Sect. 5, 235–244 (1993).
10. Herlofson, K., Ongre, S. O., Enger, L. K., Tysnes, O. B. & Larsen, J. P. Fatigue in early
Parkinson's disease. Minor inconvenience or major distress? Eur. J. Neurol. 19,
963–968 (2012).
11. Friedman, J. H., Abrantes, A. & Sweet, L. H. Fatigue in Parkinson's disease. Exp.
Opin. Pharmacother. 12, 1999–2007 (2011).
12. Barone, P. et al. The PRIAMO study: a multicenter assessment of nonmotor
symptoms and their impact on quality of life in Parkinson's disease. Mov. Disord.
24, 1641–1649 (2009).
13. Post-Sunyer, C. et al. The onset of nonmotor symptoms in Parkinson’s disease
(the ONSET PD study). Mov. Disord. 30, 229–237 (2015).
14. Schifitto, G. et al. Fatigue in levodopa-naive subjects with Parkinson disease.
Neurology 71, 481–485 (2008).
15. Schrag A. et al. Pre diagnostic presentations of Parkinson’s disease in primary
care: a case control study. Lancet Neurol. 14, 57–64 (2015).
16. Brown, R. G., Dittner, A., Findley, L. & Wessely, S. C. The Parkinson fatigue scale.
Parkinsonism Relat. Disord. 11, 49–55 (2005).
17. Cochrane G. S. et al. Fatigue and apathy in patients with either Parkinson’s
disease or multiple sclerosis. Parkinsonism Relat. Disord. 21, 1093–1095 (2015).
18. Shulman, L. M., Taback, L., Rabinstein, A. A. & Weiner, W. J. Non-recognition of
depression and other non-motor symptoms of Parkinson’s disease. Parkinsonism
Relat. Disord. 8, 193–197 (2002).
19. Alves, G., Wentzel-Larsen, T. & Larsen, J. P. Is fatigue an independent and per-
sistent
symptom
in
patients
with
Parkinson
disease?
Neurology
63,
1908–1911 (2004).
20. Friedman, J. H. & Friedman, H. Fatigue in Parkinson's disease: a nine-year fol-
low-up. Mov. Disord. 16, 1120–1122 (2001).
21. Shulman, L. M., Taback, R. L., Bean, J. & Weiner, W. J. Comorbidity of the nonmotor
symptoms of Parkinson's disease. Mov. Disord. 16, 507–510 (2001).
22. Skorvanek, M. et al. The associations between fatigue, apathy, and depression in
Parkinson's disease. Acta Neurol. Scand. 131, 80–87 (2014).
23. Abe, K., Takanashi, M. & Yanagihara, T. Fatigue in patients with Parkinson's dis-
ease. Behav. Neurol. 12, 103–106 (2000).
24. Goldman, J. G., Stebbins, G. T., Leung, V., Tilley, B. C. & Goetz, C. G. Relationships
among cognitive impairment, sleep, and fatigue in Parkinson's disease using the
MDS-UPDRS. Parkinsonism Relat. Disord. 20, 1135–1139 (2014).
25. Lou, J. S. Physical and mental fatigue in Parkinson's disease: epidemiology,
pathophysiology and treatment. Drugs Aging 26, 195–208 (2009).
26. Stocchi, F. et al. Prevalence of fatigue in Parkinson disease and its clinical cor-
relates. Neurology 83, 215–220 (2014).
27. Nakamura, T. et al. Does cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction contribute to
fatigue in Parkinson's disease? Mov. Disord. 26, 1869–1874 (2011).
28. Jain, S. et al. Pupillary unrest correlates with arousal symptoms and motor signs in
Parkinson disease. Mov. Disord. 26, 1344–1347 (2011).
29. Chaudhuri, A. & Behan, P. O. Fatigue in neurological disorders. Lancet 363,
978–988 (2004).
30. Dashtipour, K. et al. Effects of exercise on motor and non-motor symptoms of
Parkinson’s disease. Parkinsons Dis. 2015, 586378 (2015).
31. Rochester, L. et al. Attending to the task: interference effects of functional tasks
on walking in Parkinson’s disease and the roles of cognition, depression, fatigue
and balance. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 85, 1578–1585 (2004).
32. Jones, D. E. J., Gray, J. C. & Newton, J. Perceived fatigue is comparable between
different disease groups. Q. J. Med. 102, 617–624 (2009).
33. American Psychiatric Association Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 5th (edn).
American Psychiatric Press, 2014.
34. Schubert, C., Hong, S., Natarajan, L., Mills, P. J. & Dimsdale, J. E. The association
between
fatigue
and
inflammatory
marker
levels
in
cancer
patients:
a
quatitative review. Brain Behav. Immun. 21, 413–427 (2007).
35. Seruga, B., Zhang, H., Bernstein, L. J. & Tannock, I. F. Cytokines and their rela-
tionship to the symptoms and outcome of cancer. Nat. Rev. Cancer 8,
887–899 (2008).
36. Ryan, J. L. et al.
Mechanisms of
cancer-related
fatigue.
Oncologist 12,
22–34 (2007).
37. Hrushesky, W. J. et al. Circadian clock manipulation for cancer prevention
and control and the relief of cancer symptoms. Integr. Cancer Ther. 8,
387–397 (2009).
38. Aouizerat, B. E. et al. Preliminary evidence of a genetic association between
tumor necrosis factor alpha and the severity of sleep disturbance and morning
fatigue. Biol. Res. Nurs. 11, 27–41 (2009).
39. Jaremka, L. M. et al. Loneliness predicts pain depression and fatigue: under-
standing the role of immune dysregulation. Psychoneuroendocrinology 38,
1310–1317 (2013).
40. Multiple Sclerosis Council for Clinical Practice Guidelines. Fatigue and Multiple
Sclerosis: Evidence-based Management Strategies for Fatigue in Multiple Sclerosis.
Paralyzed Veterans Assoc of America,1998.
41. Krupp, L. B., Serafin, D. J. & Christodoulou, C. Multiple sclerosis associated fatigue.
Exp. Rev. Neurother. 10, 1437–1447 (2010).
42. Robinson R. L.et al. The importance of unresolved Fatigue in Depression: Costs
and Comorbidities. Psychosom 2015; 56: 274–285.
Fatigue in Parkinson’s disease
JH Friedman et al
5
© 2016 Parkinson's Disease Foundation/Macmillan Publishers Limited
npj Parkinson's Disease (2016) 15025
 43. Nierenberg, A. A. et al. Residual symptoms after remission in major depressive
disorder with citalopram and risk of relapse: a STAR*D report. Psychol. Med. 40,
41–50 (2010).
44. Fava, M. et al. A cross sectional study of the prevalence of cognitive and physical
symptoms during long term antidepressant treatment. J. Clin. Psychiatr. 67,
1754–1759 (2006).
45. Friedman, J. H. et al. Fatigue rating scales critique and recommendations by the
Movement Disorders Society task force on rating scales for Parkinson’s disease.
Mov. Disord. 25, 805–822 (2010).
46. Krupp, L. B., LaRocca, N. G., Muir-Nash, J. & Steinberg, A. D. The Fatigue Severity
Scale. Application to patients with multiple sclerosis and systemic lupus
erythematosus. Arch. Neurol. 46, 1121–1123 (1989).
47. Cella, D. et al. Validation of the Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness
Therapy-Fatigue (FACIT-F) Scale relative to other instrumentation in patients with
rheumatoid arthritis. J. Rhematol. 32, 811–819 (2005).
48. Schiehser, D. M. et al. Validation of the Modified Fatigue Impact Scale in
Parkinson's disease. Parkinsonism Relat. Disord. 19, 335–338 (2013).
49. Lou, J. S. et al. Levodopa improves physical fatigue in Parkinson's disease: a double-
blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study. Mov. Disord. 18, 1108–1114 (2003).
50. Kluger, B. M., Krupp, L. B. & Enoka, R. M. Fatigue and fatigability in neurologic
illnesses: proposal for a unified taxonomy. Neurology 80, 409–416 (2013).
51. Wang, C., Ding, M. & Kluger, B. M. Change in intraindividual variability over time
as a key metric for defining performance-based cognitive fatigability. Brain Cogn.
85, 251–258 (2014).
52. Borg, G. Borg's Perceived Exertion and Pain Scales. Human Kinetics, 1988.
53. Solomon, N. P. & Robin, D. A. Perceptions of effort during handgrip and tongue
elevation in Parkinson's disease. Parkinsonism Relat. Disord. 11, 353–361 (2005).
54. Garber, C. E. & Friedman, J. H. Effects of fatigue on physical activity and function
in patients with Parkinson’s disease. Neurology 60, 1119–1124 (2003).
55. Kelly, N. A. et al. Novel, high intensity exercise prescription improves muscle
mass, mitochondrial function and physical capacity in individuals with Parkin-
son’s disease. J. Appl. Physiol. 116, 582–592 (2014).
56. Cugusi L.et al. Effects of an adapted physical activity program on motor and non-
motor functions and quality of life in patient with Parkinson’s disease. NeuroR-
ehabil 2014; 35: 789–794.
57. Storch A. et al. Non motor fluctuations in Parkinson’s disease: severity and cor-
relation with fatigue motor symptoms. Neurology 80, 300–809 (2013).
58. Lou, J. S., Benice, T., Sexton, G. & Nutt, J. Levodopa normalizes exercise related
cortico-motoneuron excitability abnormalities in Parkinson’s disease. Clin. Neu-
rophysiol. 114, 930–937 (2003a).
59. Lou, J. S. et al. Levodopa improves physical fatigue in Parkinson’s disease—a
double-blind,
placebo-controlled
crossover
study.
Mov.
Disord.
18,
1108–1114 (2003b).
60. Lindqvist, D. et al. Cerebrospinal fluid inflammatory markers in Parkinson's dis-
ease--associations with depression, fatigue, and cognitive impairment. Brain
Behav. Immun. 33, 183–189 (2013).
61. Yamamoto, S. et al. Reduction of serotonin transporters of patients with chronic
fatigue syndrome. Neuroreport 15, 2571–2574 (2004).
62. Pavese, N., Metta, V., Bose, S. K., Chaudhuri, K. R. & Brooks, D. J. Fatigue in
Parkinson's disease is linked to striatal and limbic serotonergic dysfunction. Brain
133, 3434–3443 (2010).
63. Franssen, M., Winward, C., Collett, J., Wade, D. & Dawes, H. Interventions for
fatigue in Parkinson’s disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Mov. Disord.
29, 1675–1678 (2014).
64. Mendonca, D. A., Menezes, K. & Jog, M. S. Methylphenidate improves fatigue
scores in Parkinson’s disease: a randomized controlled trial. Mov. Disord. 22,
2070–2076 (2007).
65. Smith, K. M., Eyal, E. & Weintraub, D. ADAGIO Investigators. Combined rasagaline
and antidepressant use in Parkinson’s disease in the ADAGIO study: effects on
nonmotor sympotms and tolerability. JAMA Neurol. 72, 88–95 (2015).
66. Lamotte, G., Rafferty, M. R., Prodoehl, J. et al. Effects of endurance exercise
training on the motor and non-motor features of Parkinson's disease: a review. J.
Parkinson Dis 5, 21–41 (2015).
67. Pachman, D. R., Price, K. A. & Carey, E. C. Non-pharmacological approach to
fatigue in cancer. Cancer J. 20, 313–8 (2014).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated
otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons
license, users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the
material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0/
Fatigue in Parkinson’s disease
JH Friedman et al
6
npj Parkinson's Disease (2016) 15025
© 2016 Parkinson's Disease Foundation/Macmillan Publishers Limited
