 Listener evaluations of new and Old Italian violins
Claudia Fritza,1, Joseph Curtinb, Jacques Poitevineaua, and Fan-Chia Taoc
aLutheries–Acoustique–Musique Team, Institut Jean Le Rond d’Alembert UMR 7190, Université Pierre et Marie Curie Univ Paris 06, CNRS, Sorbonne
Universités, 75005 Paris, France; bJoseph Curtin Studios, Ann Arbor, MI 48103; and cResearch & Development, D’Addario & Company, Farmingdale, NY 11735
Edited by Dale Purves, Duke University, Durham, NC, and approved March 24, 2017 (received for review November 24, 2016)
Old Italian violins are routinely credited with playing qualities
supposedly unobtainable in new instruments. These qualities in-
clude the ability to project their sound more effectively in a concert
hall—despite seeming relatively quiet under the ear of the player—
compared with new violins. Although researchers have long tried
to explain the “mystery” of Stradivari’s sound, it is only recently
that studies have addressed the fundamental assumption of tonal
superiority. Results from two studies show that, under blind con-
ditions, experienced violinists tend to prefer playing new violins
over Old Italians. Moreover, they are unable to tell new from old
at better than chance levels. This study explores the relative mer-
its of Stradivari and new violins from the perspective of listeners
in a hall. Projection and preference are taken as the two broadest
criteria by which listeners might meaningfully compare violins.
Which violins are heard better, and which are preferred? In two
separate experiments, three new violins were compared with
three by Stradivari. Projection was tested both with and without
orchestral accompaniment. Projection and preference were judged
simultaneously by dividing listeners into two groups. Results are
unambiguous. The new violins projected better than the Stradi-
varis whether tested with orchestra or without, the new violins
were generally preferred by the listeners, and the listeners could
not reliably distinguish new from old. The single best-projecting
violin was considered the loudest under the ear by players, and on
average, violins that were quieter under the ear were found to
project less well.
perception | listener | violin | Stradivari
V
iolinists generally agree that individual violins vary consid-
erably in their ability to project—projection referring to how
well an instrument can be heard at a distance, especially over a
background of competing musical sound. The paradigmatic test
for projection is the violin concerto, where a soloist is expected
to carry over a full orchestra, often in a very large hall. Old
Italian instruments are commonly believed to have the advantage
over new ones in this regard. “What made the old instruments
great was their power in a hall,” wrote the distinguished violinist
Earl Carlyss (1) in response to a 2010 blind study (2). Somewhat
paradoxically, Old Italian violins are also commonly described as
being relatively quiet under the ear of the player compared with
new instruments. According to concertmaster Frank Almond
(who plays a Stradivarius), “a peculiar (and sublime) aspect of
great old Italian instruments is that the sound somehow expands
and gains more complexity from a distance, especially in a concert
hall.” He contrasts this with many modern instruments, which
seem to have a large sound under the ear but may not “carry past
the sixth row” (www.insidethearts.com/nondivisi/they-blinded-me-
with-science/, accessed April 10, 2017). Similarly, renowned cellist
Steven Isserlis (who plays a Stradivarius cello) wrote “[a] famous
(and curious) feature of Stradivarius instruments is that their tone
seems to increase with distance. As a rule, if my tone sounds small
to me, it means that it is travelling out into the hall. . .” (3).
Most celebrated violinists since the early 1800s have played
instruments by Stradivari or Guarneri del Gesu, and this his-
torical fact is often taken as evidence that these violins possess
some combination of playing qualities not found in newer in-
struments. Over the past two centuries, numerous informal
playing and listening tests have challenged the notion (4–6).
More recently, a pair of well-controlled studies invited players to
blind test new violins against those by Stradivari and other Old
Italian makers (2, 7). In both studies, the most preferred violin
was new, and there was a general preference for new instruments
over old. Moreover, players seemed unable to reliably distinguish
between new and old.
These studies focused on judgments made by violinists while
playing. Because projection must by definition be judged by listeners
at a distance, many questions remained unanswered. Do Stradivari
violins, in fact, outproject high-quality new instruments? Are better-
projecting instruments typically quieter under the player’s ear? Are
the instruments that soloists prefer to play the ones that are found to
project best in a hall? Can listeners tell whether a soloist is
playing an Old Italian violin rather than a new one?
To answer these questions, we ran two experiments in which
neither players nor listeners knew the identity of the test in-
struments. Projection and preference were taken as the broadest
criteria by which listeners might meaningfully separate two vio-
lins in a hall: which violin is heard better, and which is preferred?
The first study was held in 2012 in a small concert hall near Paris,
France immediately after the above-cited preference test (7).
The second was held in 2013 in a larger hall in New York City.
These studies, referred to here as the Paris and New York ex-
periments, involved 55 and 82 listeners, respectively. In each
case, three new violins were tested against three by Stradivari. In
Paris, the violins were tested with and without orchestral ac-
companiment. In New York, all tests were unaccompanied.
Materials and Methods
General Methodology. In each experiment, a group of listeners was presented
with a series of pairwise comparisons. Each pair consisted of a new violin and
a Stradivarius (the selection of the instruments is detailed below) and was
played by a soloist behind an acoustically transparent screen. Players used
Significance
Old Italian violins are widely believed to have playing qualities
unobtainable in new violins, including the ability to project
their sound more effectively in a hall. Because Old Italian in-
struments are now priced beyond the reach of the vast ma-
jority of players, it seems important to test the fundamental
assumption of their tonal superiority. A recent study found
that, under blind conditions, violin soloists generally prefer
new violins and are unable to distinguish between new and
old at better than chance levels. This paper extends the results
to listeners in a hall. We find that they generally prefer new
violins over Stradivaris, consider them better-projecting, and
are no better than players at telling new and old apart.
Author contributions: C.F., J.C., J.P., and F.-C.T. designed research; C.F., J.C., and F.-C.T. performed
research; C.F., J.C., and J.P. analyzed data; and C.F., J.C., J.P., and F.-C.T. wrote the paper.
Conflict of interest statement: The authors note J.C. is owner of Joseph Curtin Studios,
which builds violins and violas. F.-C.T. is an employee of D’Addario & Company, which
manufactures orchestral strings.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: claudia.fritz@upmc.fr.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1619443114/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1619443114
PNAS
|
May 23, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 21
|
5395–5400
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
ENGINEERING
 their own bows, which they typically would when evaluating instruments in
real life. Modified welders’ goggles together with much-reduced ambient
lighting made it impossible for players to identify instruments by eye.
The Paris experiment was conducted in the 300-seat concert hall A coeur de
ville in Vincennes (a hall well-regarded for its acoustics), and the New York
experiment was conducted in the 860-seat Great Hall at the Cooper Union
building. Listeners were free to sit anywhere in the halls, although in Paris,
the first five rows were excluded.
Seven internationally renowned soloists (named soloists 1–7 in Table S1)
took part in the Paris experiment, six of whom participated in the player
preference experiment (7) conducted in the preceding 2 days. In New York,
one soloist from the Paris experiment was joined by another distinguished
violinist (Table S1). In both tests, the number of soloists who normally per-
formed on an Old Italian instrument was about equal to the number nor-
mally performing on a new one (Table S1).
In Paris, we invited experienced listeners, by which we mean listeners with
expertize relevant to our subject; they included violin makers, players, mu-
sicians, audiophiles, music critics, composers, and acousticians. The New York
experiment was a public event within Mondomusica (an international ex-
hibition of handcrafted musical instruments); listeners were people who saw
the advertisement and were interested in the topic. In both experiments,
listeners who returned incomplete evaluation sheets were omitted from the
analysis. The distribution of the remaining listeners (55 for Paris and 82 for
New York) is provided in Table S2. At the beginning of the experiment,
listeners were informed orally that participation was voluntary and that all
answers would be anonymized. Under these conditions, CNRS (the employer
of C.F.) does not require any formal approval from a licensing committee
before the experiment.
Detailed Procedure for the Paris Experiment. This experiment was divided into
three parts: parts 1 and 2 were concerned with the relative projection of old
and new violins; part 3 tested whether listeners could tell if the violins being
played were new or old. The full score sheet given to the participants is
available in Dataset S1.
Part 1.
Testing projection. Relative projection was tested by a series of pairwise
comparisons structured as follows. A soloist played a short excerpt on each
violin of a pair and then did the same thing again. This so-called ABAB format
ensured that listeners could hear each violin both before and after the other.
The whole sequence was done twice for each pair, first using a solo excerpt
and second, using a concerto excerpt accompanied by the orchestra (details
about the orchestra can be found in SI Materials and Methods). It was made
clear to listeners that the same pair was being played throughout. To test
each of the Stradivari violins against each of the new violins, nine new/old
pairs were formed. These pairs were played in random order by player 1;
then, after a short break, they were played by player 2 but with the order of
the violins within the pairs reversed and the order of the pairs modified.
Note that, in choosing soloists for this test, we selected player 1 as one who
regularly plays a new violin (soloist 1) (Table S1) and player 2 as one who
regularly plays an old violin (soloist 2).
To facilitate testing, a researcher placed each pair of violins in turn on a
table. A large sign (legible even in the relative darkness) placed in front of
each instrument indicated to the soloist whether it was violin A or violin B. To
help listeners keep track, a large video screen indicated which violin of which
pair was being played (e.g., pair 5, violin A).
Musical excerpts were selected from the standard repertoire and well-
known to all soloists. The unaccompanied excerpts were chosen to cover a
good deal of the instrument’s range within about 10 s. Soloist 1 played the
opening solo (bars 23–27) from the first movement of the Tchaikovsky Violin
Concerto opus number (op.) 35. Soloist 2 played the opening solo (bars 90–
94) from the first movement of the Brahms Violin Concerto in D major, op.
77. The accompanied excerpts were a bit longer (∼20 s) and passages in
which the solo violin might easily be “covered” by the orchestra: soloist
1 played bars 187–202 from the third movement of the Brahms Concerto,
and soloist 2 played bars 41–43 from the second movement of the Sibelius
Violin Concerto, op. 47.
Although projection is presumed to be an intrinsic quality of an in-
strument, it may well be affected by how good a “fit” a particular instrument
is for a particular player. An experimental design allowing separation of
these two factors would, however, require the audience to rate nine pairs of
violins twice. The resulting 36 repetitions of the same excerpt would, we
believe, have been an unreasonable challenge to listener concentration. To
help avoid boredom and fatigue, the second soloist was, therefore, given a
different excerpt. This tradeoff between experimental design and the ca-
pacities of the listeners made it impossible to later decouple the intrinsic
qualities of the violins from the influence of individual players.
Table 1.
Data used in the selection of three new and three old
violins for the listening experiment
Violin
Times chosen
as favorite
Rank by overall
preference score
within old/new
category
Rank by acoustical
output within old/new
category
N5
4
1
1
N10
1
2
3
N11
0
3
2
N9
1
3
4
O1
3
1
3
O4
1
3
2
O8
0
2
4
O6
0
4
1
Fig. 1.
Relative projection of the nine new/old pairs tested in Paris. (Left) Results for unaccompanied violin. (Right) Results for violin with orchestra. Listeners
scored projection on a continuous scale between zero and one. The charts show the average of their scores for each of two players—P1 in red and P2 in blue.
Error bars correspond to the SEM. The two players were asked to choose one of the following for each pair: (i) violin A projects best (indicated by a mark at
the left edge of the graph, (ii) violin B projects best (mark at right edge), or (iii) the two violins project equally well (mark at center line). P1’s judgements are
shown in red, and P2’s judgements are shown in blue.
5396
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1619443114
Fritz et al.
 For each pair of violins, listeners were required to answer the following
question: “which violin projects best?” The meaning of projection was left
undefined, but a questionnaire on the subject (SI Materials and Methods)
was sent to participants after the experiment.† Listeners recorded their
evaluations by placing a mark at the position of their choice along a con-
tinuous scale, where one end indicated that violin A was far superior to B in
terms of projection. A mark at the opposite end indicated the converse, and
a mark at the midpoint indicated that the two projected equally well
(Dataset S1). Although it was impossible for the soloists to evaluate violins in
this way while playing them, they did indicate (to C.F.) which instrument of
each pair that they believed projected better or that the two were equal.
Selection of test violins. In the Paris preference tests (7), 10 soloists were
presented with 6 new and 6 Old Italian violins (including 5 by Stradivari), which
had themselves been preselected from a pool of 9 Old Italian and 15 new
violins made available by dealers, collectors, players, and makers (ref. 7 has
details of the preselection process). Over the course of two 75-min individual
testing sessions, the soloists were asked to (i) eliminate any instruments that
they found unsuitable, (ii) choose from the remaining their four favorites and
then rank these four in terms of overall preference, and (iii) select the single
violin that would best replace their own violin for an upcoming concert tour.
Time limits restricted the number of violins that could be tested for projection
to three new and three old. The following factors were considered in selecting
these from six old and six new violins that the soloists had evaluated.
i) The number of times an instrument was the top choice of a soloist. Five
violins were chosen by at least one soloist. Three were new (N5, N10,
and N9), and two were by Stradivari (O1 and O4).
ii) Overall preference score based on soloists’ choices of favorite violins.
The three top-scoring new violins were, in descending order, N5, N10,
and N11. The three top-rated old violins were O1, O8, and O4.
iii) Measured acoustical output. Acoustical measurements were made of all
instruments (SI Materials and Methods and Fig. S1). Preliminary results
were used for a quick measure of the relative sound output of each
instrument per unit force at the bridge. The three new violins with
the highest output were (in descending order) N5, N11, and N10. The
three old violins were O6, O4, and O1.
Based on the data in Table 1, we chose the following violins: N5, N10, N11,
O1, O4, and O6. The inclusion of O6 needs justification, because it was not
chosen by any soloist and was rated 9 of 12 for preference. It was selected
mainly on the basis of its acoustical output, which was the highest of all
of the old violins. Moreover, unlike the well-liked O8 (also a strong con-
tender), it was a Stradivarius and therefore, of most direct relevance to our
hypothesis.
Part 2. Would the violins most frequently chosen by soloists in preference tests
outproject those that the soloists most often rejected? We had listeners
compare the two most frequently chosen violins (N5 and O1) with the two
most often rejected (N2 and O12). The resulting four new/old pairs were
tested as in part 1, with players and listeners being asked the same questions.
The solo excerpts were as above, but to increase musical variety, different
orchestral excerpts were used: player 1 (soloist 3) (Table S1) played a 20-s
excerpt from the second movement of the Brahms concerto (bars 93–98),
and player 2 (soloist 4) played a 16-s excerpt from the third movement of the
Sibelius concerto (bars 254–262).
Part 3. To test whether listeners could distinguish old violins from new violins,
they were presented with a succession of seven concerto excerpts, each
played (with orchestra) by a different soloist (soloists 1–7) (Table S1). Un-
beknown to listeners, the soloists played their own personal violins, thus
forestalling concerns that they might be insufficiently acquainted with the
test instruments to fully exploit their individual qualities. Each soloist had
prepared a three-minute excerpt from the Mendelssohn, Sibelius, or Beet-
hoven concerto. After each performance, listeners were asked the following
questions. “Do you think the violin is old or new? Why?”
Detailed Procedure of the New York Experiment.
Testing projection and preference. The New York experiment tested how well
the listeners’ judgments of projection correlated with judgments of prefer-
ence. It was structured in much the same way as part 1 of the Paris experi-
ment, with three Stradivari and three new violins yielding nine new/old
pairs. Listeners were not asked to judge projection and preference at the
same time: such a task would be cognitively challenging; moreover, the
answer to the first question might influence the answer to the second,
creating artificial correlations. Instead, listeners were randomly divided in
two groups: group 1 was asked first which violin of a pair they preferred and
why, and group 2 was asked which violin projected better. After player 1
(soloist 8) (Table S1) had played the nine pairs, the questions were switched
for player 2 (soloist 9), so that the first group now judged projection and the
second group judged preference. Both projection and preference were
reported on continuous scale as in Paris. Unlike Paris, listeners were asked to
define what projection meant to them by means of a multiple choice
questionnaire (Dataset S2). As in Paris, the soloists were asked to estimate
projection on a simpler scale: A, B, or equal. All tests were done without
orchestral accompaniment.
Selection of test violins. We would have liked to use the same old and new test
violins as in Paris, but just two of them were available: the new violin N5 and
the Stradivari O6. Two additional new violins were chosen by a preselection
process (SI Materials and Methods) from 15 violins submitted by violin
makers. The two additional Stradivari were the only ones made available to
us at the time.
O1,O4,O6
O1,O4,O6
O1,O4,O6
O1
O4
O6
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Player 1
Player 2
N5
N10
N11
N5,N10,N11
N5,N10,N11
N5,N10,N11
same
new violins project more
old violins project more
Fig. 2.
Differences in projection between each new violin and all three old
violins (top three rows) and between each old violin and all three new violins
(bottom three rows) tested in Paris. Results are averaged for all listeners with
and without orchestra. Error bars correspond to the SEM.
N2
O12
N2
O12
1
0.75
0.5
0.25
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
Audience for P1
Audience for P2
P1
P2
O1
O1
N5
N5
rejected violins project more
favored violins project more
same
Fig. 3.
Difference in projection between the two most preferred violins and
the two most rejected violins. Error bars correspond to the SEM. The players’
evaluations are single points at either zero or one (left or right) with the
same color code as for the audience. Because the soloists gave the same
answer with and without orchestra, there is no distinction between the two
conditions as in Fig. 1.
†A psycholinguistic analysis of the questionnaire answers can be found in Dubois D, et al.
[Dubois D, Fritz C (2017) La projection du violon: Analyse sémantique. Le Violon en France
du XIXe Siècle à Nos Jours, eds Fritz C, Moraly S (Collegium Musicae, Paris), in press].
Fritz et al.
PNAS
|
May 23, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 21
|
5397
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
ENGINEERING
 Results
In this study, some Bayesian statistical procedures supplement tra-
ditional frequentist inferences using LePAC software (8, 9). They
assume an uninformative prior distribution (i.e., no information is
used other than that contained in the data, and no particular hy-
pothesis is favored a priori). Hereafter, Bayesian statements are
notated Pr*. They are naturally conditional on the data at hand, but
conditional notation is omitted for the sake of brevity.
Paris Experiment.
Relative projection of three new violins and three Stradivarius (part 1).
Fig. 1 shows the relative projection of the nine new/old pairs tested
in Paris. Fig. 1, Left shows results for unaccompanied violin, and Fig.
1, Right shows violin with orchestra. N10 was about equal to O1 and
O4 in terms of projection, but in all other pairings, the new violins
outprojected the old. The spaces between the blue and red error bars
in Fig. 1 (which are especially wide for N11) suggest that projection
depends somewhat on the player. However, no firm conclusions can
be drawn, because the two players used different excerpts.
Do violins that project well when played alone also project
well over an orchestra? We find a striking consistency across the
two conditions. Averaging the evaluations of all listeners and
both players, the observed effect is −0.002 [solo − orchestra;
t(52) = −0.25; P = 0.40]. Furthermore, we can state that
Pr*(jtrue effectj < 0.02) = 0.95 (on a 0–2 scale): given these data,
there is a 95% probability that the true effect (i.e., the effect in
the whole population of experienced listeners) is between −
0.02 and 0.02. Although nonnull, the zero to one scale means that
its value is very small, and a conclusion of negligibility can be
drawn. In other words, very similar results are obtained whether
testing projection with or without orchestra.
Do listeners from different professional backgrounds evaluate
projection differently? By design, the entire audience consisted
of experienced listeners, but they came from various professional
backgrounds and included musicians, violin makers, and acous-
ticians. All groups produced rather similar results. The observed
rms of the differences between groups is 0.04 [F(2,52) = 1.75;
P = 0.18; Pr*(jtrue effectj < 0.08) = 0.95 (on a 0–2 scale)].
Given the consistencies described above, we felt justified in
averaging the data from all listeners with and without orchestra.
Fig. 2 shows the differences in projection between each new vi-
olin and all three old violins and then, between each old violin
and all three new violins. Again, we see a large new/old effect,
with new violins judged to project better than old. The observed
difference in projection is 0.19 [t(52) = 15.14; P < 10−4; 95%
confidence interval (95% CI): (0.16; 0.21)]. Pr*(true effect >
0) > 1–10−4, and Pr*(true effect > 0.17) = 0.95 (on a 0–1 scale).
The apparent effect of the player is moderate (0.13) but clear as
t(52) = −5.82, P < 10−4, and 95% CI: (0.09; 0.18). [In this case of
a 1-df comparison with exactly the same assumptions as in the
frequentist theory, the frequentist 95% CI and the standard
Bayesian 95% CI coincide, so that we can state Pr*(0.09 < true
effect < 0.18) = 0.95. Therefore, for similar cases in the following,
we report only the 95% CI limits.] Again, we cannot know whether
this is because of the player or the use of different excerpts.
Relative projection of two preferred and two rejected violins (part 2). In
part 2 of the Paris experiment, the two most preferred violins
(N5 and O1) were compared with the two least preferred
(N2 and O12). Fig. 3 shows that N5 clearly outprojected N2 and
O12 and that O1 was about equal in projection to N2 and O12.
There is good agreement between player and listener evaluations.
Comparison between soloist and listener evaluations of projection. Vio-
linists generally believe that loudness under the ear is not directly
related to projection and that a violin’s projection cannot be
reliably estimated simply by playing it. During individual sessions
that took place before the experiment (7), we asked each soloist
to estimate projection and loudness under ear for three violins: their
own, their favorite, and their next favorite of the opposite new/old
category. This task was done in a rehearsal room and again in the
concert hall (Table 2). Because of the selection method, only a few
violins—N5, O1, and N10—were rated by five or more soloists.
Although the soloists gave their own violins (seven of which
were old) a slightly higher rating for projection than for loudness
(8.2 vs. 7.9), when it came to the test instruments, the old got the
same averaged rating (7.9) for both loudness and projection as
the new (8.6). Because the new violins did, in fact, outproject the
old, loudness under ear may be more closely related to actual
projection than is generally believed.
Table 3 shows the averaged projection and loudness ratings for
the three most preferred violins: N5, O1, and N10. The pro-
jection estimates wrongly suggest that O1 projects better than
N10. The loudness ratings, however, at least get the ordering
correct: N5, N10, and O1 (in order of decreasing projection).
The spread between projection and loudness seen in O1’s ratings
(8.8 vs. 7.6) can be attributed to the four players who chose it as
their favorite. Their ratings were (for projection and loudness)
10 and 6, 9 and 7, 9 and 8, and 9.5 and 9, respectively. By con-
trast, the two soloists for whom O1 was not the favorite violin
rated it very similarly for the two criteria (8 and 8; 7.5 and 7).
Given the small sample size, no firm conclusion can be drawn,
although the data does suggest that the widely held belief that a
Stradivari can project well despite sounding quiet under the ear
may lead some players to overestimate projection for instruments
that they like to play but find relatively quiet under the ear. There
is indeed considerable anecdotal evidence that players and makers
consider projection and loudness as two well-separated concepts.
The distinction between projection and loudness is illustrated in
the analysis of the questionnaires filled in by participants in the
New York experiment (73% of whom were makers and musi-
cians). They were asked to select which of seven possible defini-
tions best captured what projection meant to them (Dataset S2).
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Number of correct guesses
0
2
4
6
8
10
Number of listeners
Fig. 4.
Distribution of correct guesses about the age of seven violins by
39 subjects.
Table 2.
Mean (SD) of the loudness and projection ratings for
soloists’ own, old, and new violins averaged across the two
conditions—rehearsal room and concert hall
Violin
Projection
Loudness under ear
Soloists’ own
8.2 (1.2)
7.9 (1.2)
Old
7.9 (1.3)
7.9 (1.2)
New
8.6 (1.3)
8.6 (1.2)
Table 3.
Averaged estimates for projection and loudness under
ear for three violins rated by at least five soloists during their
private sessions in the Paris experiment
Violin
Averaged estimated
projection
Average loudness
under ear
No. of estimates
N5
9.4
9.2
11
O1
8.8
7.6
6
N10
7.5
8.4
5
5398
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1619443114
Fritz et al.
 Table 4 summarizes the results. The question referring to loudness
was selected far less often than all but one of the others. More
research is needed to investigate whether listeners do indeed
evaluate projection and loudness differently and if so, what the
underlying acoustical parameters for each might be.
Distinguishing old from new (part 3). We asked listeners to guess
whether each of seven violins was old or new; 39 of 46 subjects
made a guess about all seven violins. (Incomplete evaluation
sheets were discarded from the analysis.) The distribution of
their correct guesses is shown in Fig. 4. It shows a unimodal dis-
tribution centered between three and four. In all, just 122 of 273
(or 44.7%) of the guesses were correct.
It is interesting to see how the correct guesses were distributed
among violins. For all but two instruments (one old and one
new), the 95% CIs (SI Results) include 50%, and therefore, the
chance hypothesis cannot be ruled out. For the other two violins,
there is a systematic error: listeners guessed that the old violin
was new and that the new one was old. A supplementary analysis
built on the hypothesis that the guesses were entirely governed
by chance is available in SI Results.
New York Experiment. The Paris experiment left at least one im-
portant question unanswered. How do listeners’ evaluations of
projection relate to their evaluations of preference? It is easy to
imagine, for example, that violin A is found to project better than
violin B but that violin B is preferred for its tone quality.
Exploring the relationship between projection and preference
was the principal objective of the New York experiment.
Fig. 5 shows relative projection (Fig. 5, Left) and preference (Fig.
5, Right) for each of nine new/old pairs. Looking first at projection,
results are very similar to those of the Paris experiment. New violins
are found to project better than old, although in this case, the dif-
ference happens to be even larger: observed difference = 0.27;
t(80) = 14.55; P < 10−6; 95% CI: (0.23; 0.31); Pr*(true effect > 0) >
1–10−6; and Pr*(true effect > 0.24) = 0.95 (on a 0–1 scale). The
better projection of the new compared with the old, therefore,
seems robust across a change in halls, listeners, players, and violins.
The observed effect of the player/order/excerpt is 0.03 (on a
0–2 scale), thus smaller than the effect of the player/excerpt in Paris
(0.13 on a 0–2 scale). However, little can be inferred about the
player effect, because it cannot be separated from the effect of the
excerpt (in Paris and New York) and the order (in New York only).
Looking at preference (Fig. 5, Right), listeners clearly pre-
ferred new violins over old: observed difference = 0.27; t(80) =
14.67; P < 10−6; 95% CI: (0.23; 0.30); Pr*(true effect > 0) >
1–10−6; and Pr*(true effect > 0.24) = 0.95 (0–1 scale). Fig. 5
shows slightly different results for the two players, but we cannot
conclude that there is a player effect, because it is inseparable
from the possible effects of different excerpts and testing order
(i.e., testing preference first rather than projection first). We can,
however, conclude that, if there is a player/order/excerpt effect on
preference, it is rather limited: the observed value is 0.07; t(80) =
1.87; P = 0.07; and Pr*(jtrue effectj < 0.13) = 0.95 (on a 0–2 scale).
There is an almost 90% agreement between soloists and listeners
about preference, at least when testing them together in a hall. Con-
sider that player/listener agreement was just 70% when the soloists
were asked to estimate projection under similar conditions in Paris.
Given that listeners generally preferred new violins over old
and found them better-projecting, one may ask whether the new
violins were preferred precisely because they projected better.
Because the listeners were asked to explain their preference
choices, we look to the explanations for insight; 58 of 82 listeners
used words related to projection in at least one case (SI Results).
meaning that just 158 of the total of 548 collected statements
refer to projection. (Listeners evaluated nine pairs, but many
listeners did not provide any explanations or else provided them
Table 4.
Number of times each possible definition of projection
was chosen during the New York experiment
Possible definition of “which violin
projects better?”
No. of times that
it was chosen
Which violin has the best carrying power?
29
Which sounds loudest?
14
Which sounds most full?
30
Which seems most “present” to your ears?
30
Which seems to fill the hall best?
30
Which comes through to your ears more clearly?
22
Which comes through to your ears more easily?
10
Fig. 5.
(Left) Relative projection and (Right) preference for each of nine new/old pairs tested in New York. Listener scores are on a continuous zero to one
scale. The charts show the average of their scores for each of two players—P1 in red and P2 in blue. Error bars correspond to the SEM. The two players were
asked to choose one of the following for each pair: (i) I prefer violin A (x at the left edge of the graph), (ii) I prefer violin B (x at right edge), or (iii) I like them
equally (x at center line). P1’s judgements are shown in red, and P2’s judgements are shown in blue.
Fritz et al.
PNAS
|
May 23, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 21
|
5399
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
ENGINEERING
 for just a few of the pairs.) Among these 158 statements, some
were of the kind “I preferred violin A because of its tone quality,
despite it being less loud/projecting than violin B” rather than “I
preferred violin A, because it projects better.” Consider, too, the
extra definitions of projection given by two participants: “Doesn’t
always mean the best sound but one that cuts through noise, fills a
room, and allows the musician to be heard” and “full and loud, but
not necessarily beautiful; sometimes harsh.” All of which to say,
listener explanations do not suggest any obvious link between
preference and projection.
Conclusions and Discussion
This study compares Stradivari and new violins principally from the
listener’s perspective. Projection and preference are taken as the
broadest criteria by which listeners might meaningfully separate vi-
olins in a hall. Which violins are heard better, and which are pre-
ferred? Also explored is the relationship between evaluations made
by listeners and those made by players. Two separate experiments
were conducted: one in the suburbs of Paris and the other in New
York City. In Paris, violins were played with and without an or-
chestra by blindfolded soloists behind an acoustically transparent
screen. The same was done in New York but without an orchestra.
The results are unambiguous: listeners found that new violins
projected significantly better than those by Stradivari. Moreover,
listeners preferred new violins over old by a significant margin.
Although the listeners came from various professional back-
grounds (they included musicians, violin makers, and acousti-
cians), very similar results were obtained from all backgrounds.
We find a strong correlation between projection with and
without an orchestra. This correlation seems fortunate for both
players and researchers, in that an orchestra is evidently not
required to meaningfully test projection.
Projection estimates made by players during private sessions (7) did
not agree very well with judgments made later by listeners in the hall.
When playing for an audience in a hall, however, about 70% of player
estimates of projection agreed with listener judgments. Put another
way, players were wrong about 30% of the time, confirming the wis-
dom of bringing a trusted listener along when trying out instruments.
However, when players in the New York experiment were asked, after
playing each new/old pair, which violin they preferred, their prefer-
ences were in strong agreement with those of the audience.
During private sessions in Paris (7), 4 of 10 soloists chose a
Stradivari as the instrument “best suited to replace their own
violin for an upcoming tour.” We find here that these four so-
loists chose violins with significantly less projection than the two
best-projecting new instruments. The most preferred Stradivari
barely outprojected the least preferred Stradivari and the least
preferred new violin. The New York results suggest that the most
preferred Stradivari in Paris would also be less preferred by lis-
teners than the better-projecting new violins.
The most preferred new violin in the Paris experiment was
considered louder under the ear than the most preferred old
violin—and indeed, than every other violin that was rated for
loudness. Soloists who chose a Stradivari may have preferred a
violin that was less loud under the ear, at the same time believing
that it would project well, because the three players who chose
the most preferred Stradivari rated it notably higher for pro-
jection than loudness.
Previous studies (2, 7) indicate that, under blind conditions,
violinists readily separate violins that they like from those that
they do not but are unable to reliably distinguish new from old.
We show here that listeners (including violin makers and musicians)
are no better at telling whether a soloist’s violin is new or old.
The test violins were necessarily few in number, and there is
no way of knowing how representative they are of the larger
population. Although there is every reason to believe that there
are Stradivari violins with outstanding projection, we find little
reason to suppose that players would find them quiet under the
ear. Violins (old or new) that (i) are relatively quiet under the
ear and (ii) outproject apparently louder violins would be worthy
subjects for future research. To date, we have found no evidence
for their existence.
A player’s requirements for projection are clearly dependent
on musical context. Even a relatively quiet violin will be heard
when played unaccompanied in a small hall, and a good con-
ductor will do everything possible to ensure that a soloist with a
relatively quiet violin can still be heard over an orchestra. In
auditions and playing competitions, however, jurors listen to one
player after another, making apparent the relative projection of
their instruments. Although it is common for gifted young
players to borrow Old Italian violins for such occasions, our re-
sults suggest that they would be better served by good new violins—
at least so long as the identity of the instruments remains unknown
to those judging.
Note that this study relied on soloists, whose primary need is to
be heard over an ensemble. The vast majority of violinists, how-
ever, are required to blend into ensembles. Research is needed to
clarify the relationship between projection and “blendability.”
Less projecting violins could have the advantage in this regard.
A belief in the near-miraculous qualities of Old Italian violins
has preoccupied the violin world for centuries. It may be that
recent generations of violin makers have closed the gap between
old and new, or it may be that the gap was never so wide as
commonly believed. Either way, the debate about old vs. new can
perhaps be laid aside now in favor of potentially more fruitful
questions. What, for example, are the physical parameters de-
termining the playing qualities of any violin, regardless of its age
or country of origin?
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank all dealers, makers, players, and collectors
for their kindness and trust in making available these valuable instruments.
Special thanks to the soloists for their participation and enthusiasm and the
numerous audience members for their dedication and patience. Special
thanks as well to the Sorbonne Universités student orchestra players, their
conductor Vincent Barthe, and their administrators Agnès Puissilieux and
Lucie Paladino for their kindness and professionalism. We thank Philip De
La Croix and Stéphane Agasse for the use of the Vincennes auditorium and
their logistical help and Kojiro Yamada and Nippon H ¯
os ¯
o Ky ¯
okai (Japan’s
national public broadcasting organization) for their amazing support in New
York. We also thank the Lutheries–Acoustique–Musique team (particularly
Indiana Wollman and Laurent Quartier), the Borsarello family, David Grie-
singer, Stefan Avalos, and Suzanne Ortmeier for their kindness and help
throughout the Paris experiment. Also, we thank the CNRS and Université
Pierre et Marie Curie for funding this experiment and the Violin Society of
America for additional financial support.
1. Wade N (January 2, 2012) In classic vs. modern violins, beauty is in the ear of the
beholder. NY Times. Available at http://www.nytimes.com/2012/01/03/science/in-
play-off-between-old-and-new-violins-stradivarius-lags.html. Accessed April 10,
2017.
2. Fritz C, Curtin J, Poitevineau J, Morrel-Samuels P, Tao F-C (2012) Player preferences
among new and old violins. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109:760–763.
3. Isserlis S (January 3, 2012) Stradivarius v modern violins: Why this latest study
strikes a discordant note. The Guardian. Available at https://www.theguardian.
com/music/musicblog/2012/jan/03/stradivarius-v-modern-violins-study. Accessed April
10, 2017.
4. Moya H, Piper T (1916) Violin Tone and Violin Makers (Chatto & Windus,
London).
5. Windust E (2009) From the archive: 100 years ago, a Paris competition sets out to
compare old and new violins. The Strad 120:95.
6. Coggins A (2007) Blind faith. The Strad 118:52–55.
7. Fritz C, et al. (2014) Soloist evaluations of six Old Italian and six new violins. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 111:7224–7229.
8. Lecoutre B, Poitevineau J (2005) Le logiciel “Le PAC” dédié aux procédures bayésiennes.
La Revue de Modulad 33. Available at https://www.rocq.inria.fr/axis/modulad/logiciels.
htm#lepac. Accessed April 10, 2017.
9. Lecoutre B, Poitevineau J (2014) The Significance Test Controversy Revisited. The
Fiducial Bayesian Alternative (Springer, New York).
10. Curtin J (2009) Measuring violin sound using an impact hammer. J Violin Soc Am: VSA
Papers XXII:186–209.
5400
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1619443114
Fritz et al.
