 The Circadian Clock in White and Brown Adipose
Tissue: Mechanistic, Endocrine, and Clinical Aspects
Oren Froy1 and Marta Garaulet2,3
1Institute of Biochemistry, Food Science and Nutrition, The Robert H. Smith Faculty of Agriculture, Food and
Environment, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 7610001 Rehovot, Israel; 2Department of Physiology,
University of Murcia, 30001 Murcia, Spain; and 3Instituto Murciano de Investigaci´
on Biosanitaria (IMIB),
Campus de Ciencias de la Salud, 30120 Murcia, Spain
ABSTRACT Obesity is a major risk factor for the development of illnesses, such as insulin resistance and hypertension, and has become
a serious public health problem. Mammals have developed a circadian clock located in the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) that
responds to the environmental light-dark cycle. Clocks similar to the one located in the SCN are found in peripheral tissues, such as the
kidney, liver, and adipose tissue. The circadian clock regulates metabolism and energy homeostasis in peripheral tissues by mediating
activity and/or expression of key metabolic enzymes and transport systems. Knockouts or mutations in clock genes that lead to
disruption of cellular rhythmicity have provided evidence to the tight link between the circadian clock and metabolism. In addition, key
proteins play a dual role in regulating the core clock mechanism, as well as adipose tissue metabolism, and link circadian rhythms with
lipogenesis and lipolysis. Adipose tissues are distinguished as white, brown, and beige (or brite), each with unique metabolic
characteristics. Recently, the role of the circadian clock in regulating the differentiation into the different adipose tissues has been
investigated. In this review, the role of clock proteins and the downstream signaling pathways in white, brown, and brite adipose tissue
function and differentiation will be reviewed. In addition, chronodisruption and metabolic disorders and clinical aspects of circadian
adiposity will be addressed. (Endocrine Reviews 39: 261 – 273, 2018)
Circadian Rhythms and the Circadian Clock
O
rganisms on our planet developed an en-
dogenous circadian clock, entrained, or syn-
chronized, by light to exactly  hours (). By the
prediction of the day-night cycles, the clock imparts
a survival advantage as physiological processes are
performed at the appropriate time to find food or
mating partners or to avoid predators (–). The clock
is self-sustained but, in the absence of light, the en-
dogenous clock free-runs, generating cycles of either
slightly longer or slightly shorter than  hours; hence
the term circadian (circadian: circa = about, dies =
day). The circadian clock controls numerous cellular,
physiological, metabolic, endocrine, and behavioral
systems (, ). Disruption of this control results in
fatigue, disorientation, insomnia, altered hormone
profile, and high morbidity, seriously influencing
overall health (, –). Obesity, which is characterized
by the excess of fat accumulation in white adipose
tissue (WAT), has been related to irregular sleep/
wake schedules, high snacking frequency, or social
“jet lag,” known to disrupt the circadian clock (,
). Bright light at night has also been associated with
obesity, as was shown in , women of the
Breakthrough Generations Study (). All of these
studies as a whole strongly suggest that impairment
of the circadian system is involved in the etiology of
several illnesses ().
The central circadian clock is located in the anterior
hypothalamus and is confined to the suprachiasmatic
nuclei (SCN). Photic information perceived by the
retina and transmitted via the retinohypothalamic tract
synchronizes SCN neurons to coordinate circadian
outputs (–). Clocks, similar to those found in SCN
neurons, are found in peripheral tissues, such as the
liver, intestine, heart, adipose tissue, and retina, and in
various brain regions (, –). Five percent to % of
tissue-specific genes are estimated to exhibit an oscil-
latory expression profile, emphasizing the circadian
ISSN Print: 0163-769X
ISSN Online: 1945-7189
Printed: in USA
Copyright © 2018
Endocrine Society
Received: 24 July 2017
Accepted: 22 February 2018
First Published Online:
27 February 2018
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00193
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
261
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/3/261/4912380 by guest on 03 June 2019
 control over the function of peripheral tissues (–).
The SCN clock regulates peripheral rhythms by neu-
ronal connections or secretion of humoral factors
(–) or indirectly, by driving rhythmic feeding, lo-
comotor activity, and/or body temperature, which in
turn, coordinate rhythmic gene expression.
The molecular clock in SCN neurons and pe-
ripheral cells is an intracellular mechanism composed
of transcription-translation feedback loops (). The
transcription factor circadian locomotor output cycles
kaput (CLOCK) dimerizes with brain and muscle aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator–like pro-
tein  (BMAL), and together, the CLOCK:BMAL
heterodimer activates transcription by binding to
E-box (9-CACGTG-9) and E-box-like promoter
sequences (). Among the regulatory targets of
CLOCK:BMAL are the Period  and  (Per, Per)
and Cryptochrome  and  (Cry and Cry) genes.
Oligomerization
and
nuclear
translocation
of
periods/cryptochromes (PERs:CRYs) lead to the
inhibition of CLOCK:BMAL-mediated transcription
(, ) (Fig. ). The nuclear receptor reverse ERB
(REV-ERB) a negatively regulates Bmal expression
(), whereas retinoic acid receptor–related orphan
receptor (ROR) a (RORa) and RORg () (Fig. )
positively regulate its expression via ROR response
elements (). All clock genes exhibit  hour os-
cillation in peripheral tissues ().
White, Brown, and Beige (or Brite)
Adipose Tissue
Classically, adipose tissue has been regarded as a
passive reservoir for energy storage, but this tradi-
tional point of view is no longer valid. In ,
adipose tissue was identified as the major site for
metabolism of sex steroids (). Several years later, in
, the discovery of the cytokine-like factor leptin
() entirely changed our perspectives on adipose
tissue. This was a revolution in the study of obesity, as
for the first time, it was shown that adipose tissue was
able to secrete hormones or “adipocytokines,” capable
of communicating information from the periphery to
the central nervous system. Adipose tissue was no
longer considered a passive reservoir of energy; it was
an endocrine organ. Adipocytokines or adipokines,
such as adiponectin, resistin, tumor necrosis factor a,
visfatin, and obestatin, have autoendocrine, para-
crine, and endocrine functions. Thus, adipose tissue
regulates energy storage and expenditure and in-
fluences systemic metabolic homeostasis through
production of adipokines ().
In mammals, at least two types of adipose tissue
have been described, WAT and the brown adipose
tissue (BAT). WAT and BAT originate from different
stem cells, and they have different distribution, gene
expression, and function () (Fig. ). Adipocytes with
features similar to BAT, found within white adipose
depots, are termed beige or brite (brown in white)
adipose tissue (). Nowadays, it is known that the
development of obesity depends not only on the
balance between food intake and energy expenditure
but also on the balance among WAT, BAT, and brite
adipose tissue.
WAT
This is the most abundant type of adipose tissue in
mammals—and the main energy reservoir. It stores
dietary energy as triacylglycerides (TAGs) in uniloc-
ular lipid droplets and secretes a huge number of
hormones and cytokines that regulate metabolism and
insulin resistance (, ). After meals, WAT uptakes
dietary fats and carbohydrates from the circulation
and, through lipogenesis, converts them to TAGs ().
During fasting or physical activity, lipolysis ensues, and
TAGs are broken down into free fatty acids (FFAs) and
glycerol that are released to the circulation to supply
the needs of other tissues ().
BAT
This tissue contains multilocular lipid droplets and
high mitochondrial density and is able to convert
chemical energy into heat (). Cold stimulation leads
to the release of norepinephrine at innervated sites
within the BAT, which leads to lipolysis of TAGs and
an increase in cellular FFAs. FFAs are subsequently
transported to the mitochondria and serve as sub-
strates for b-oxidation. Heat is generated using
uncoupling protein  (UCP), a protein that is lo-
calized on the inner membrane of mitochondria
and uncouples electron transport from adenosine
ESSENTIAL POINTS
· The circadian clock controls energy homeostasis by regulating circadian expression and/or activity of enzymes, hormones,
and transport systems involved in metabolism
· Disruption of circadian rhythms leads to obesity and metabolic disorders
· The circadian clock regulates the function of and differentiation into white and brown adipose tissue
· Key proteins play a dual role in regulating the core clock mechanism as well as adipose tissue metabolism, and link
circadian rhythms with lipogenesis, lipolysis, and differentiation
262
Froy and Garaulet
The Circadian Clock in Adipose Tissue
Endocrine Reviews, June 2018, 39(3):261–273
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/3/261/4912380 by guest on 03 June 2019
 triphosphate production (). The resulting energy
derived from substrate oxidation is dissipated as heat.
In addition to its key role in maintaining body tem-
perature under cold stress, the metabolic function of
BAT is important for global energy balance, insulin
sensitivity, and lipid metabolism (–). Develop-
mentally, BAT is typified by the activation of myo-
genic factor  and early paired box  expression (, ),
which encode two transcription factors that mark
myogenic precursor cells. Late paired box  expression
marks cells that are predominantly restricted to the
skeletal muscle lineage (, ).
Brite (beige) adipose tissue
Unlike WAT, which is characterized by the presence of
few mitochondria that are devoid of UCP, beige
adipocytes, found within WAT, express UCP and
are mitochondrial rich. These adipocytes are distinct
from BAT but still have a thermogenic capacity by
responding to cold exposure to dissipate heat through
UCP ().
The Circadian Clock and Metabolism
The robust and coordinated expression of clock genes
in peripheral tissues, such as liver and adipose tissue,
mediates the activity of nuclear receptors, enzymes,
hormones, and transporters involved in carbohy-
drate, lipid, and protein metabolism (, , –).
In turn, animal studies have shown that a high-fat
diet may contribute to the development of obesity
and insulin resistance via alterations in the circadian
period of locomotor activity rhythms and changes in
the oscillation of clock genes in adipose and liver
tissue (–). In humans, results suggest that the
modulation of the dietary fat and carbohydrate
content alters the function of the central and pe-
ripheral circadian clocks in humans (). The mutual
influence of the clock and metabolic regulation is
achieved as a result of the participation of key cat-
abolic, anabolic, and lipid metabolic factors in the
core clock mechanism (Fig. ).
REV-ERBs and RORs
Two important families that link the core clock
mechanism with lipid metabolism are REV-ERBs and
RORs. These factors are vital for adipocyte differen-
tiation (), lipogenesis, and lipid storage and exhibit
striking circadian rhythms (, ). In addition to their
metabolic role, REV-ERBs are the negative and RORs
the positive regulators of Bmal expression (, , ,
) (Fig. ). In turn, the CLOCK:BMAL heterodimer
regulates the expression of Rev-erbs and Rors (, ,
). Diet-induced obese mice, treated with a REV-ERB
agonist, showed reduced fat mass and improved
dyslipidemia and hyperglycemia (). In addition,
a REV-ERB agonist suppressed mouse orexinergic
gene expression, whereas REV-ERBb-deficient mice had
increased orexinergic transcripts (). In this line, mice
deficient of Rev-erba develop higher adiposity on regular
chow and a high-fat diet, supposedly as a result of in-
creased fat uptake by adipose tissue (). Nevertheless, in
BAT, Rev-erba seems to have an opposite role on ad-
iposity, as deletion of Rev-erba markedly improved the
thermogenic response to cold, and physiological in-
duction of UCP by cold temperatures is preceded by
rapid downregulation of Rev-erba (). As REV-ERBs
negatively regulate Bmal expression, the role of BMAL
in WAT and BAT function merits further study.
Peroxisome proliferator–activated receptors
Peroxisome proliferator–activated receptors (PPARs)
are a nuclear receptor family consisting of three
isoforms in mammals (a, b/d, and g), which are
differentially expressed among tissues (). PPARs
play a key role in the transcription of genes invol-
ved in lipid and glucose metabolism upon binding of
endogenous FFAs (, ). PPARa is abundant in
the liver, BAT, heart, and kidney, whereas PPARg
is expressed in the adipose tissue and PPARb/d
throughout the body (). PPARa agonists, such as
Adipose tissue
metabolism
BMAL1
CLOCK
Catabolic factors:
AMPK, PGC1, SIRT1
Clock negative feedback loop
PER1, PER2, CRY1
Anabolic factor:
mTOR
Lipid metabolism factors:
REV-ERBs
Lipid metabolism factors:
PPARs, RORs
© 2018 Endocrine Reviews
ENDOCRINE SOCIETY
Figure 1. The relationship between the core clock mechanism and metabolic factors. CLOCK and
BMAL1 mediate the expression of clock- and clock-controlled genes regulating metabolism. PER1,
PER2, and CRY1 serve as the negative-feedback loop that inhibits CLOCK:BMAL1-mediated expression.
The catabolic factors SIRT1, PGC1, and AMPK, when activated under low cellular energy levels, relieve
the inhibition mediated by the negative-feedback loop. BMAL1 expression is positively regulated by
RORs and PPARs and negatively regulated by reverse ERBs (REV-ERBs). mTOR, an anabolic factor,
interacts with BMAL1 and suppresses the activity of the catabolic factors. The green arrows and red
lines denote possible pathways that activate or inhibit adipocyte metabolism, respectively.
263
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00193
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/3/261/4912380 by guest on 03 June 2019
 fibrates, are clinically proven lipid-lowering drugs,
whereas PPARg ligands, such as thiazolidinediones,
improve glycemic control via insulin sensitiza-
tion in patients with type  diabetes (). PPARs
are connected to the core clock mechanism, as
their expression is mediated by the CLOCK:BMAL
heterodimer. In turn, PPARa activates Bmal
expression (Fig. ) by binding to the peroxisome-
proliferator response element (PPRE) (–).
The role of PPARs in the circadian regulation
has been demonstrated through experiments per-
formed with PPARa agonists that showed advanced
locomotor activity and feeding daily rhythms in
mice (), whereas experiments in PPARg deletion
showed dampened behavioral and cellular circadian
rhythms ().
PPARg coactivator 1
The PPARg coactivator  (PGC) is a family of
transcriptional coactivators that induce mitochon-
drial oxidative metabolism. Indeed, PGC-a is
a catabolic factor whose expression is induced in the
liver during starvation, in BAT during cold exposure,
and in skeletal muscle during physical exercise ().
PGC-a null mice show abnormal diurnal rhythms
of body temperature, activity, and metabolic rate, as
a result of disrupted clock and metabolic gene ex-
pression (). Moreover, PGC family members
exhibit circadian expression, and in turn, PGCa
stimulates the expression of Bmal, Clock, Per, and
Rev-erba through coactivation of the ROR family
(, ).
Adenosine 59-monophosphate–activated
protein kinase
Adenosine 9-monophosphate–activated protein ki-
nase (AMPK) is a sensor of the energy status within
cells whose phosphorylation activates cellular catab-
olism (, ). When activated, AMPK phosphorylates
and hence, activates casein kinase I «, which leads to
PER degradation (). AMPK also phosphorylates and
as a result, destabilizes CRY in mouse fibroblasts ()
(Fig. ). PER and CRY degradation relieves CLOCK:
BMAL inhibition, leading to a phase advance in the
circadian expression in some tissues (). Indeed,
metformin, an indirect AMPK activator, leads to al-
terations of the circadian phase in a tissue-specific
manner ().
Sirtuin 1
Sirtuin  (SIRT), a nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NAD+)-dependent histone deacetylase, is a catabolic
factor involved in transcriptional silencing (, ).
SIRT is connected to the core clock mechanism by
interacting with CLOCK to deacetylate BMAL and
PER (, ). Deacetylated PER is further phos-
phorylated and degraded, relieving CLOCK:BMAL
inhibition (Fig. ). Hepatic circadian transcriptome
analyses revealed that differently from SIRT, SIRT
interacts with CLOCK:BMAL and controls their
recruitment to gene promoters. In addition, SIRT
controls circadian chromatin recruitment of sterol
regulatory element-binding protein , resulting in the
cyclic regulation of genes involved in fatty acid and
cholesterol metabolism (). It turns out that the
Mesenchymal precursors
Myf5+
Myf5–
White
UCP1–
Brite (beige)
UCP1+
Brown
UCP1+
BAT precursor
WAT precursor
Mature adipocytes
© 2018 Endocrine Reviews
ENDOCRINE SOCIETY
Mitochondrion
Mitochondrion
Nucleus
Lipid droplet
Lipid droplet
Nucleus
Figure 2. Lineage of white, brown, and “brite/beige” adipocytes from mesenchymal stem cells and their cellular and molecular markers.
Myf5, myogenic factor 5.
264
Froy and Garaulet
The Circadian Clock in Adipose Tissue
Endocrine Reviews, June 2018, 39(3):261–273
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/3/261/4912380 by guest on 03 June 2019
 CLOCK:BMAL heterodimer, as well as SIRT, reg-
ulate the circadian expression of nicotinamide phos-
phoribosyltransferase, a rate-limiting enzyme in the
NAD+ salvage pathway, therefore enabling circadian
synthesis of the coenzyme required for SIRT activity
(, ). SIRT activity is also enhanced by AMPK,
which increases cellular NAD+ levels (). High
levels of NAD+ inhibit DNA binding of CLOCK:
BMAL ().
Mammalian target of rapamycin
Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is an ana-
bolic factor involved in protein synthesis; integrates
the input from multiple upstream pathways, including
insulin, growth factors, and mitogens; and functions as
a sensor of cellular nutrient and energy levels ().
The mTOR pathway is regulated by light in the SCN
(). One of the key factors in the mTOR pathway,
protein  S kinase , rhythmically phosphory-
lates BMAL, allowing it to both associate with the
translational machinery and stimulate circadian os-
cillations of protein synthesis () (Fig. ). Thus, the
mTOR signaling pathway, in addition to its role in
protein translation, is linked to the circadian clock
mechanism.
Chronodisruption and Metabolic Disorders
Chronodisruption is defined as the chronic desynch-
ronization of the -hour rhythms, resulting in
adverse health effects (). More specifically,
chronodisruption occurs when the synchroniza-
tion between external environmental cues and
internal physiological processes is lost. This can
either result in a total loss of rhythmicity, a re-
duction in rhythm amplitudes, or phase differences
between the SCN and peripheral clocks (). The
inter-relations between the key metabolic factors
mentioned previously and the core clock mecha-
nism may explain why metabolic chronodisruption is
detrimental.
Clock gene mutants and knockouts demonstrate
the most compelling linkage between metabolic dis-
orders and the circadian clock (see Table ). Mice with
a mutated Clock gene (ClockD mice) have a damp-
ened diurnal feeding rhythm and are obese, and they
develop a metabolic syndrome of hyperleptinemia,
hyperlipidemia, hepatic steatosis, and hyperglycemia
(). A combination of the ClockD mutation with
the leptin knockout (ob/ob) leads to significantly
heavier mice than the ob/ob phenotype (), re-
iterating the contribution of clock disruption to the
obese phenotype (, , ). Similarly, compared
with wild-type mice, Per2/2 mice fed a high-fat diet
developed substantial obesity ().
Bmal2/2 knockout mice exhibit suppressed di-
urnal changes in triglycerides and glucose levels, as
well as no gluconeogenesis (). Hyperinsulinemic-
euglycemic clamps showed that Bmal2/2 mice ex-
hibit no circadian rhythm in insulin action ().
Adipocyte-specific deletion of Bmal resulted in
obesity in mice. As adipocytes signal the levels of
stored energy to the brain, Bmal deletion led to
changes in the expression of hypothalamic neuro-
peptides that regulate appetite, emphasizing the role of
the adipocyte clock in the temporal organization of
energy regulation ().
In mouse studies, circadian changes in hepatic
Cry/ expression were sufficient to modulate glu-
coneogenesis (), emphasizing the important role
that CRY proteins play in regulating hepatic glucose
output (). In addition, Cry/2/2 mice had an
increased vulnerability to high-fat diet–induced
Table 1. Clock Gene Mutations in Mice and Genetic Variants in Humans and Their Effect on Metabolism
Clock Gene Mutant Mice
Metabolic Alterations in Mutant Mice Human Genetic Variant
Metabolic Alterations in Humans
CLOCK
ClockD19 (109)
Hyperphagic and obese, develop
a metabolic syndrome of
hyperleptinemia, hyperlipidemia,
hepatic steatosis, and hyperglycemia
CLOCK SNPs [rs3749474, rs4580704,
and rs1801260 (3111 T . C)]
(123–129)
Obesity, metabolic syndrome, higher energy
and fat intake, higher risk of developing
diabetes and hypertension, alterations in
the autonomic nervous system
BMAL1
Bmal12/2 (113)
Suppressed diurnal variations in glucose
and triglycerides and abolished
gluconeogenesis
BMAL2 rs7958822 (131)
High risk of type 2 diabetes development in
obese patients
CRYs
Cry1/2(2/2) (116–120)
Increased insulin secretion and lipid
storage in adipose tissue, elevation of
proinflammatory cytokines
CRY1 rs2287161 (135)
Increased insulin resistance in carriers of the
risk variant who have high intake of
carbohydrates
PER2
Per22/2 (112)
On high-fat diet, eat as much during the
light period as the dark period, and
develop substantial obesity
PER2 SNPs (rs2304672 C . G and
rs4663302C . T) (130)
Abdominal obesity, several obesogenic
behaviors
REV-ERBa
Rev-erba2/2 (133)
Reduced spontaneous locomotor
activity
REV-ERBa rs2314339 (132–134)
Obesity resulting from decreased physical
activity
265
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00193
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/3/261/4912380 by guest on 03 June 2019
 obesity that correlated with increased insulin secre-
tion and lipid storage in adipose tissue (, ) and
constitutive elevation of proinflammatory cytokines
(). SCN mutant mice showed a substantial
number of rhythmic transcripts (). Thus, although
it is known that the SCN clock regulates lipolytic and
lipogenic processes (), recent findings in tissue-
specific knockouts indicate that peripheral clocks play
a crucial role in regulation of whole-body energy
homeostasis.
Consistent with these findings, genetic poly-
morphisms in human clock genes have been associ-
ated with metabolic alteration (Table ). Although
mutations are rare in humans, it is rather common to
have a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) that
underlies differences in our vulnerability to disease.
CLOCK
It was first demonstrated that several variants at
CLOCK were associated with obesity, especially ab-
dominal obesity (). Later that year, it was con-
firmed that CLOCK could play a relevant role in the
development of the metabolic syndrome, type  di-
abetes, and cardiovascular disease (). Subsequently,
we demonstrated that several genetic variants in clock
genes were related to obesity and related diseases, such
as metabolic syndrome. For example, CLOCK SNPs
[rs, rs, and rs ( T . C)]
were associated with obesity and insulin resistance-
related variables (). Systolic and diastolic blood
pressure values were also strongly associated with SNP
rs (). Furthermore, these genetic variants
were associated with energy intake (). Minor alleles
ate more, specifically fat, and were more obese,
whereas minor allele carriers (A) of CLOCK rs
showed decreased risk of developing diabetes (%
lower) and hypertension (% lower) than noncarriers
(). Some of these associations were functionally
explained by the presence of a polymorphism in-
volving a change in the structure of the mRNA leading
to a change in gene expression (). In addition,
people carrying CLOCK  C (risk C carriers: in-
cluding TC and CC) are more likely to be obese and
exhibit greater difficulties in losing weight. Further
studies performed to understand the connections
between CLOCK rs ( T . C) and re-
sistance to weight loss showed that risk carriers
(C) displayed substantial abnormalities at the daily
rhythms of wrist temperature and activity. These
abnormalities included the following: () lower am-
plitude, () greater rhythm fragmentation, () less
stable patterns, and () significantly decreased circa-
dian function. C carriers were also less active, started
their activities later in the morning, and were sleepier
during the day, showing a delayed acrophase (maxi-
mum expression) that characterizes “evening-type”
subjects (). Moreover, C carriers have higher
parasympathetic activity during daytime (when it is
supposed to be low) than TT carriers and reduced
daily rhythms of autonomic nervous system function
(). These changes correlated with weight-loss re-
sistance, as low sympathetic activity and high para-
sympathetic activity reduce energy expenditure and
predispose onset of obesity (Mona Lisa theory) ().
PER2
PER SNPs (rs C . G and rs C . T)
have been associated with abdominal obesity (). In
particular, PER rs C . G minor allele carriers
G (% of the population) displayed several obesogenic
behaviors, such as an increased attrition of the weight-
loss treatment, increased frequency of snacking, stress
while dieting, eating while bored, and skipping
breakfast, when compared with noncarriers ().
BMAL2
BMAL SNPs have also been associated with a high
risk of developing type  diabetes in obese patients.
The AG and AA genotypes of BMAL rs
showed significantly higher odds ratios for type 
diabetes than the GG genotype among obese men and
women. There were no substantial associations be-
tween BMAL rs or rs genotypes
and type  diabetes ().
REV-ERBa
REVERBa rs has been associated with obe-
sity in two independent populations: Mediterranean
and North American. However, as opposed to other
clock gene variants, which are associated with obe-
sity through changes in dietary intake, REVERBa
rs is associated with obesity through a de-
crease in physical activity (). These findings were
consistent with those obtained in experimental ani-
mals showing that Rev-erba2/2 mice showed a sig-
nificantly lower spontaneous locomotor activity than
their wild-type littermates (). However, mice
lacking Rev-erba displayed marked hyperactivity and
impaired response habituation when introduced to
a new environment ().
CRY1
Genetic variants at CRY have been connected to
glucose metabolism. Meta-analysis performed in two
independent populations (Mediterranean and Euro-
pean-origin North American) indicated that an in-
crease in carbohydrate intake was associated with
a substantial increase in homeostasis model assess-
ment of insulin resistance, fasting insulin, and a de-
crease in quantitative insulin sensitivity check index,
only among individuals homozygous for the minor C
allele at CRY rs. These findings support the
notion that there is a strong link between the circadian
system and glucose metabolism and suggest the im-
portance of this CRY locus for insulin resistance and
diabetes risk ().
266
Froy and Garaulet
The Circadian Clock in Adipose Tissue
Endocrine Reviews, June 2018, 39(3):261–273
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/3/261/4912380 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Meal Timing, Chronodisruption, and
Metabolic Alterations
Several behaviors also help to explain the connections
between chronodisruption and metabolic alterations.
Meal timing, such as restricting food to a particular
time of day, defined as time-restricting feeding, has
profound effects on the behavior and physiology of
animals. Two to  hours before the meal, the animals
display food anticipatory behavior, which is demon-
strated by an increase in locomotor activity, body
temperature, corticosterone secretion, gastrointestinal
motility, and activity of digestive enzymes (–),
all known output systems of the biological clock.
Moreover, the changing of the time of food intake to
unusual times, as happens when nocturnal mice are
fed a high-fat diet, only during the -hour sleep
(light) phase, is associated with an increase in weight
gain (). In humans, unusual feeding time produces
a disruption of the circadian system, which might
produce unhealthy consequences (). The timing of
food intake may have an important role in obesity
(), as well as in weight loss and glucose metabolism
(). For example, mice with adipocyte-specific de-
letion of Bmal fed a high-fat diet during the light
period gained significantly more weight compared
with mice fed during the dark period. Thus, disruption
of the adipocyte clock leads to obesity without an
overall increase in daily caloric intake when mice are
fed during the inactive phase (). In humans, late
eating has been shown to be predictive of weight
loss difficulties during a -week dietary intervention
conducted in  obese and overweight individuals
(). The effect was independent of the total -hour
caloric intake (). In addition, insulin sensitivity was
lower in late eaters compared with early eaters.
Moreover, a -week clinical study showed that those
subjects assigned to high caloric intake during dinner
lost significantly less weight than those assigned to
high caloric intake during breakfast. Interestingly,
there were no substantial differences in the total
amount of food or in energy expenditure, as assayed by
a physical activity questionnaire ().
The physiological explanation for the metabolic al-
terations related to late eating is that when feeding patterns
are changed, for example, during shift work in humans or
by means of restricted access to chow in rodents, this has
profound effects on peripheral oscillator regulation,
whereas SCN rhythms remain largely unaltered (, ).
Indeed, in animal models, it has been demonstrated that
temporal feeding restriction can change the phase of
circadian gene expression in peripheral cell types by up to
 hours, while leaving the phase of cyclic gene expression
in the SCN unaffected (). Likewise, a recent in-
laboratory study has demonstrated that a -hour delay
in meals leads to a .-hour delay in the circadian rhythm
of the clock gene PER in adipose tissue, whereas no
significant changes were found in the central clock ().
Circadian Regulation of Adipose Tissue in
Health and Disease
As all peripheral tissues, the adipocyte clock mechanism
regulates cellular functions (). More importantly, these
circadian rhythms persist in the absence of the SCN, for
example, in adipose tissue explant cultures (). To
ensure proper nutrient/energy flux and substrate use by
the organism, the circulating levels of secreted adipo-
kines, such as leptin and adiponectin—key players in the
regulation of energy metabolism—display an oscillatory
profile with a -hour period () (Fig. ). Indeed, it
was shown that BAT glucose uptake in mice and
humans reveals a diurnal rhythm that could, in part, be
generated by signals from plasma hormones (, ).
Alterations of this timing may have important detri-
mental, metabolic consequences. Interestingly, the cir-
cadian rhythms of adipokine expression/secretion differ,
depending on the location of the adipose tissue, as
substantial differences were found both in their relative
acrophase and amplitude between subcutaneous and
visceral adipose tissues (). Analyses of various genes
implicated in metabolic processes, such as energy
intake and expenditure, insulin resistance, adipocyte
differentiation, dyslipidemia, and body fat distribu-
tion, indicated that circadian rhythmicity followed
a predictable physiological pattern, particularly for
subcutaneous depots (, ). Visceral depots also
show a higher amplitude for all glucocorticoid-related
Figure 3. Temporal expression of adipocytokines in rodents and humans. The peak expression of
each adipokine is depicted. Representation of the acrophase or timing of the maximum levels of
adipokine expression in human adipose tissue: comparison with human circulating levels and with
rodent adipose tissue mRNA levels. Data are represented as the 5 hours of active and resting phase
in both humans and rodents, as this is the timing when most adipokines peak. IL-6, interleukin 6;
PAI-1, plasminogen activator inhibitor 1; PPAR, peroxisome proliferator–activated receptor.
267
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00193
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/3/261/4912380 by guest on 03 June 2019
 genes, and () it secretes more proinflammatory
factors than subcutaneous adipose tissue (). How-
ever, induction of lipolysis is easier in visceral fat
depots, as a result of the increased sensitivity to
catecholamines ().
Leptin
The adipocyte-derived leptin, which acts at specific
receptors in the hypothalamus to suppress appetite and
increase metabolism, is extremely important in obesity.
Plasma leptin levels are circadian, with leptin peaking
early in the nonactive phase, i.e., during the early dark
phase in diurnal animals, such as monkeys and humans
(, ), and during the early-to-midlight phase in
nocturnal animals, such as rats and mice (, ) (Fig.
). SCN ablation was shown to eliminate leptin cir-
cadian rhythmicity in rodents, suggesting that the
central circadian clock regulates leptin expression ().
In obese subjects, leptin retains diurnal variation in
release but with lower amplitude (), suggesting that
blunted circadian variation may play a role in leptin
resistance and obesity (). If exogenous leptin was
continuously applied, then desynchronized feeding
during the light phase failed to cause excessive weight
gain in ob/ob mice, but if it was applied in a timed pulse
during the light phase, then obesity ensued (). Thus,
desynchronized feeding can affect the endogenous
rhythm of leptin to influence metabolic signals that lead
to weight gain.
Adiponectin
In human adipose tissue, the expression of adiponectin
achieved its zenith (maximum) during the morn-
ing, which could be implicated in the maximal with-
drawal of fatty acids and the improvement in glucose
tolerance at that time of the day (). As adiponectin
promotes insulin sensitivity, its acrophase should precede
insulin sensitivity, which reaches its maximum level at
noon (, , ). PPARg, which participates both in
the clock mechanism (Fig. ) and adiponectin expression,
could also be related to adiponectin circadian expression.
In fact, the high expression of PPARg during the morning
is consistent with results obtained in nocturnal mammals
() and could be influencing the further increase in
adiponectin expression and the increase in insulin sen-
sitivity during this time of the day.
Corticosteroids
It has been described that in all species, the maximum
of circulating corticosteroid rhythms occurs just before
or at the onset of activity (, ). Over the course of
the day, they fall, reaching low or undetectable levels 
hour or  hours before bedtime. In human adipose
tissue, the antiphase relationship between leptin and
glucocorticoids receptors (Fig. ) () is reasonable,
considering that both hormones are strongly inter-
related and they exert opposite functions in food-intake
regulation. Whereas leptin displays an anorexigenic
role, glucocorticoids increase appetite (orexigenic
function). Indeed, plasma leptin ultradian pulses
were inversely correlated with those of adrenocor-
ticotropic hormone and cortisol ().
Insulin
Adipose tissue lipogenesis is highly regulated by insulin.
Intake of sugars, such as glucose, leads to elevated insulin
concentrations in the blood, which in turn, increases
glucose uptake by upregulating glucose transporter 
expression on adipocyte membranes (). This process
increases the substrate for glycolysis and consequently,
fatty acid biosynthesis in adipocytes (). As mentioned
previously, insulin sensitivity varies according to time of
day, with decreased values in the evening and at night in
humans. Indeed, it was demonstrated that insulin sen-
sitivity in human subcutaneous adipose tissue displays
a circadian rhythm and that it reaches its maximum
(acrophase) around noon, with sensitivity % higher
than during midnight (Fig. ). In contrast, no circa-
dian rhythms in insulin sensitivity were detected in
visceral adipose tissue (). Mechanisms responsible for
the diurnal variation in insulin sensitivity warrant
further study.
Role of the Circadian Clock in Adipose
Tissue Differentiation
Currently, it is known that key clock proteins not only
regulate the “time-specific” functions in adipose tissue,
but they also play a direct role in adipogenesis in both
WAT and BAT. However, some of the reported results
are still contradictory.
WAT adipogenesis
PER, a negative regulator of BMAL expression, was
found to interact with PPARg and repress its proa-
dipogenic activity () (Fig. ). Indeed, PER-
deficient mice display an altered lipid metabolism
with drastic reduction of total TAG and nonesterified
fatty acids. PER exerts its inhibitory function by
blocking PPARg recruitment to target promoters and
thereby inhibiting transcriptional activation (). As
mentioned previously, PPARg expression is positively
regulated by the CLOCK:BMAL heterodimer, and it
positively regulates Bmal gene expression. Indeed,
as mentioned previously, an agonist for REV-ERB,
which negatively regulates Bmal expression, sup-
pressed mouse orexinergic gene expression, whereas
REV-ERBb-deficient mice had increased orexinergic
transcripts (). In addition, cell-based studies dem-
onstrate that activation of REV-ERBa with either
synthetic or natural (heme) ligands is required for adi-
pocyte differentiation (). Thus, PPARg repression by
PER and activation of REV-ERB, which lead to BMAL
downregulation, would be expected to attenuate adipo-
genesis. However, surprisingly, knockdown of BMAL led
268
Froy and Garaulet
The Circadian Clock in Adipose Tissue
Endocrine Reviews, June 2018, 39(3):261–273
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/3/261/4912380 by guest on 03 June 2019
 to increased adipogenesis, adipocyte hypertrophy, and
obesity in mice and promoted adipogenic differentiation
in preadipocyte and mesenchymal stem cells (, ,
) (Fig. ). This was achieved by downregulation of
genes in the canonical Wnt pathway, an evolution-
arily conserved pathway that regulates crucial aspects
of cell-fate determination (). The Wnt pathway is
also known to suppress adipogenesis, as BMAL
binds to the promoter of genes at the Wnt pathway to
increase their transcription. These contradictory re-
sults could stem from a change in the levels of the
involved proteins throughout the adipogenic process.
Further studies are needed to delineate the role of
BMAL in adipogenesis and how other clock regu-
lators fit into this mechanism.
BAT adipogenesis
BMAL inhibits adipogenesis and thermogenic ca-
pacity (). Global ablation of BMAL in mice and
adipocyte-selective inactivation increase brown fat
mass and cold tolerance. BMAL inhibits brown
adipogenesis through direct transcriptional control of
key components of the cellular differentiation sig-
naling pathways of transforming growth factor b
(TGFb) and bone morphogenetic protein (BMP);
activation of TGFb/Smad or blockade of BMP
pathways suppresses enhanced differentiation in
BMAL-deficient brown adipocytes (). REV-
ERBa, the negative regulator of BMAL expression,
promotes BAT development and adipogenesis. As
opposed to BMAL, REV-ERBa represses key
components of the TGFb signaling pathway (), an
inhibitory pathway of brown fat development (,
). Thus, in WAT, BMAL primarily regulates the
canonical Wnt cascade, whereas in BAT, regulation
of the TGFb pathway is predominant (Fig. ).
Whether the effects of BMAL and REV-ERBa are
pleotropic or demonstrate the physiological signifi-
cance of the clock in BAT thermogenesis remain to
be determined.
Future Perspectives
Research during the last years has focused on the
characterization of the molecular mechanisms by
which circadian clocks impact adipose tissue phys-
iology. Synchronization of the molecular clocks in
the different types of adipose tissues with the rest of
the body still merits further investigation. The
connections of circadian genetic variants and obe-
sity now help to understand the importance of
the circadian system in adipose-related illnesses,
such as obesity. More importantly, they may help
to design individual therapies to obesity, based on
the circadian system, to increase the effectiveness
of the treatments. Identification of certain com-
pounds, capable of manipulating clock function at
the cellular level, is critical to reprogram adipose
tissue physiology.
Despite the immense knowledge achieved in the
relevance of the internal clock in health and disease,
there is still a big gap between this molecular
knowledge and clinical practice. As explained pre-
viously, a big effort has been made in the last years to
connect the results observed in experimental models
(animals, tissues, cells) to humans. Currently, large-
scale epidemiological studies are repeatedly demon-
strating that the alteration of the circadian system has
an impact on health and is associated with several
adipose tissue-related metabolic illnesses, such as
obesity, metabolic syndrome, or diabetes. Neverthe-
less, the success in translating this knowledge to the
clinical practice is still limited.
To achieve this goal, it is necessary to: () increase
the understanding of the importance of the circadian
regulation of the endocrine system in medical practice;
() develop new tools that help to assess the circadian
system performance in clinical practice; and () design
new therapies based on the regulation of the circadian
system to increase the effectiveness of treatments of
adipose tissue-related pathologies. Salivary samples,
which may be noninvasively collected at several time
points throughout the day, are useful to determine
the daily pattern of hormones that connect the
Figure 4. The relationship between the core clock mechanism and differentiation signaling
pathways in BAT and WAT. BMAL1 activates the transcription of PPARg and PER2. PER2 inhibits
BMAL1 activity, and PPARg increases BMAL1 expression. Wnt signaling represses WAT
adipogenesis, whereas TGFb/Smad3 signaling represses BAT formation. BMP signaling induces BAT
formation. Reduced levels of BMAL1 lead to increased WAT and BAT formation.
269
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00193
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/3/261/4912380 by guest on 03 June 2019
 circadian system and adipose tissue. In addition,
chronodisruption scores to assess the metabolic syn-
drome in the clinical practice () or the use of
devices that allow continuous measurement of activity,
body or wrist skin temperature, or heart rates may help
to assess daily patterns in the habitual life of the
patient (, ) and as a result, the circadian system
performance.
In conclusion, timing is a crucial aspect in adipose
tissue metabolism to ensure the correct accumu-
lation of fat during periods of excess energy or
TAG mobilization when energy requirements are
not achieved. Therefore, different adipokines have
to be secreted at the correct time to confer the
proper endocrine, paracrine, or autocrine function.
The current knowledge of the presence of an in-
ternal clock in the different adipose tissue types—
white, brown, and beige—and its connection with
key elements in metabolism may help us to
achieve a better understanding of adipose tissue
function and to design novel strategies to combat
obesity.
References
1.
Panda S, Hogenesch JB, Kay SA. Circadian rhythms
from flies to human. Nature. 2002;417(6886):
329–335.
2.
Reppert SM, Weaver DR. Coordination of circadian
timing
in
mammals.
Nature.
2002;418(6901):
935–941.
3.
Schibler U, Ripperger J, Brown SA. Peripheral cir-
cadian oscillators in mammals: time and food. J Biol
Rhythms. 2003;18(3):250–260.
4.
Bass J, Lazar MA. Circadian time signatures of fitness
and disease. Science. 2016;354(6315):994–999.
5.
Takahashi JS. Transcriptional architecture of the
mammalian circadian clock. Nat Rev Genet. 2017;
18(3):164–179.
6.
Gibson EM, Williams WP III, Kriegsfeld LJ. Aging in
the circadian system: considerations for health,
disease prevention and longevity. Exp Gerontol.
2009;44(1-2):51–56.
7.
Fu L, Pelicano H, Liu J, Huang P, Lee C. The circadian
gene Period2 plays an important role in tumor
suppression and DNA damage response in vivo. Cell.
2002;111(1):41–50.
8.
Filipski E, King VM, Li X, Granda TG, Mormont MC,
Claustrat B, Hastings MH, L´
evi F. Disruption of cir-
cadian coordination accelerates malignant growth in
mice. Pathol Biol (Paris). 2003;51(4):216–219.
9.
Davis S, Mirick DK. Circadian disruption, shift work
and the risk of cancer: a summary of the evidence
and studies in Seattle. Cancer Causes Control. 2006;
17(4):539–545.
10.
Montagnana M, Salvagno GL, Lippi G. Circadian
variation within hemostasis: an underrecognized
link between biology and disease? Semin Thromb
Hemost. 2009;35(1):23–33.
11.
Anea CB, Zhang M, Stepp DW, Simkins GB, Reed G,
Fulton DJ, Rudic RD. Vascular disease in mice with
a dysfunctional circadian clock. Circulation. 2009;
119(11):1510–1517.
12.
Jung-Hynes B, Reiter RJ, Ahmad N. Sirtuins, mela-
tonin and circadian rhythms: building a bridge
between aging and cancer. J Pineal Res. 2010;48(1):
9–19.
13.
Foster RG, Peirson SN, Wulff K, Winnebeck E, Vetter
C, Roenneberg T. Sleep and circadian rhythm dis-
ruption in social jetlag and mental illness. Prog Mol
Biol Transl Sci. 2013;119:325–346.
14.
Touitou
Y.
Adolescent
sleep
misalignment:
a chronic jet lag and a matter of public health.
J Physiol Paris. 2013;107(4):323–326.
15.
McFadden E, Jones ME, Schoemaker MJ, Ashworth
A, Swerdlow AJ. The relationship between obesity
and exposure to light at night: cross-sectional an-
alyses of over 100,000 women in the Breakthrough
Generations Study. Am J Epidemiol. 2014;180(3):
245–250.
16.
Garaulet M, Ordov´
as JM, Madrid JA. The chrono-
biology, etiology and pathophysiology of obesity. Int
J Obes. 2010;34(12):1667–1683.
17.
Welsh DK, Logothetis DE, Meister M, Reppert SM.
Individual neurons dissociated from rat supra-
chiasmatic nucleus express independently phased
circadian
firing
rhythms.
Neuron.
1995;14(4):
697–706.
18.
Liu C, Weaver DR, Strogatz SH, Reppert SM. Cellular
construction of a circadian clock: period de-
termination in the suprachiasmatic nuclei. Cell.
1997;91(6):855–860.
19.
Herzog ED, Takahashi JS, Block GD. Clock controls
circadian period in isolated suprachiasmatic nucleus
neurons. Nat Neurosci. 1998;1(8):708–713.
20.
Reppert SM, Weaver DR. Molecular analysis of
mammalian circadian rhythms. Annu Rev Physiol.
2001;63(1):647–676.
21.
Lee C, Etchegaray JP, Cagampang FR, Loudon AS,
Reppert SM. Posttranslational mechanisms regulate
the mammalian circadian clock. Cell. 2001;107(7):
855–867.
22.
Froy O, Chapnik N. Circadian oscillation of innate
immunity components in mouse small intestine.
Mol Immunol. 2007;44(8):1954–1960.
23.
Young ME. The circadian clock within the heart:
potential influence on myocardial gene expression,
metabolism, and function. Am J Physiol Heart Circ
Physiol. 2006;290(1):H1–H16.
24.
Kornmann B, Preitner N, Rifat D, Fleury-Olela F, Schibler
U. Analysis of circadian liver gene expression by ADDER,
a highly sensitive method for the display of differentially
expressed mRNAs. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001;29(11):E51.
25.
Akhtar RA, Reddy AB, Maywood ES, Clayton JD,
King VM, Smith AG, Gant TW, Hastings MH,
Kyriacou CP. Circadian cycling of the mouse liver
transcriptome, as revealed by cDNA microarray, is
driven by the suprachiasmatic nucleus. Curr Biol.
2002;12(7):540–550.
26.
Duffield GE, Best JD, Meurers BH, Bittner A, Loros JJ,
Dunlap JC. Circadian programs of transcriptional
activation, signaling, and protein turnover revealed
by microarray analysis of mammalian cells. Curr Biol.
2002;12(7):551–557.
27.
Panda S, Antoch MP, Miller BH, Su AI, Schook AB,
Straume M, Schultz PG, Kay SA, Takahashi JS,
Hogenesch JB. Coordinated transcription of key
pathways in the mouse by the circadian clock. Cell.
2002;109(3):307–320.
28.
Storch KF, Lipan O, Leykin I, Viswanathan N, Davis
FC, Wong WH, Weitz CJ. Extensive and divergent
circadian gene expression in liver and heart. Nature.
2002;417(6884):78–83.
29.
Kita Y, Shiozawa M, Jin W, Majewski RR, Besharse JC,
Greene AS, Jacob HJ. Implications of circadian gene
expression in kidney, liver and the effects of fasting
on pharmacogenomic studies. Pharmacogenetics.
2002;12(1):55–65.
30.
Zvonic S, Ptitsyn AA, Conrad SA, Scott LK, Floyd ZE,
Kilroy G, Wu X, Goh BC, Mynatt RL, Gimble JM.
Characterization of peripheral circadian clocks in
adipose tissues. Diabetes. 2006;55(4):962–970.
31.
Reddy AB, Karp NA, Maywood ES, Sage EA, Deery M,
O’Neill JS, Wong GK, Chesham J, Odell M, Lilley KS,
Kyriacou CP, Hastings MH. Circadian orchestration
of the hepatic proteome. Curr Biol. 2006;16(11):
1107–1115.
32.
McCarthy JJ, Andrews JL, McDearmon EL, Campbell
KS, Barber BK, Miller BH, Walker JR, Hogenesch JB,
Takahashi JS, Esser KA. Identification of the circadian
transcriptome in adult mouse skeletal muscle.
Physiol Genomics. 2007;31(1):86–95.
33.
Kramer A, Yang FC, Snodgrass P, Li X, Scammell TE,
Davis FC, Weitz CJ. Regulation of daily locomotor
activity and sleep by hypothalamic EGF receptor
signaling. Science. 2001;294(5551):2511–2515.
34.
Cheng MY, Bullock CM, Li C, Lee AG, Bermak
JC, Belluzzi J, Weaver DR, Leslie FM, Zhou QY.
Prokineticin 2 transmits the behavioural circadian
rhythm of the suprachiasmatic nucleus. Nature.
2002;417(6887):405–410.
35.
Kraves S, Weitz CJ. A role for cardiotrophin-like
cytokine in the circadian control of mammalian
locomotor
activity.
Nat
Neurosci.
2006;9(2):
212–219.
36.
Froy O, Chang DC, Reppert SM. Redox potential:
differential roles in dCRY and mCRY1 functions.
Curr Biol. 2002;12(2):147–152.
37.
Preitner N, Damiola F, Lopez-Molina L, Zakany J,
Duboule D, Albrecht U, Schibler U. The orphan
nuclear receptor REV-ERBalpha controls circadian
transcription within the positive limb of the
mammalian circadian oscillator. Cell. 2002;110(2):
251–260.
38.
Sato TK, Panda S, Miraglia LJ, Reyes TM, Rudic RD,
McNamara P, Naik KA, FitzGerald GA, Kay SA,
Hogenesch JB. A functional genomics strategy re-
veals Rora as a component of the mammalian
circadian clock. Neuron. 2004;43(4):527–537.
39.
Ueda HR, Hayashi S, Chen W, Sano M, Machida M,
Shigeyoshi Y, Iino M, Hashimoto S. System-level
identification of transcriptional circuits underlying
mammalian circadian clocks. Nat Genet. 2005;37(2):
187–192.
270
Froy and Garaulet
The Circadian Clock in Adipose Tissue
Endocrine Reviews, June 2018, 39(3):261–273
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/3/261/4912380 by guest on 03 June 2019
 40.
Dunlap JC. Molecular bases for circadian clocks. Cell.
1999;96(2):271–290.
41.
Siiteri PK. Adipose tissue as a source of hormones.
Am J Clin Nutr. 1987; 45(1, Suppl)277–282.
42.
Zhang Y, Proenca R, Maffei M, Barone M, Leopold L,
Friedman JM. Positional cloning of the mouse obese
gene and its human homologue. Nature. 1994;
372(6505):425–432.
43.
Aldhahi W, Hamdy O. Adipokines, inflammation,
and the endothelium in diabetes. Curr Diab Rep.
2003;3(4):293–298.
44.
Chen Y, Pan R, Pfeifer A. Fat tissues, the brite
and the dark sides. Pflugers Arch. 2016;468(11-12):
1803–1807.
45.
Vitali A, Murano I, Zingaretti MC, Frontini A, Ric-
quier D, Cinti S. The adipose organ of obesity-prone
C57BL/6J mice is composed of mixed white and
brown adipocytes. J Lipid Res. 2012;53(4):619–629.
46.
Lafontan M. Advances in adipose tissue meta-
bolism. Int J Obes. 2008;32(Suppl 7)S39–S51.
47.
Cannon B, Nedergaard J. Brown adipose tissue:
function and physiological significance. Physiol Rev.
2004;84(1):277–359.
48.
Yoneshiro T, Aita S, Matsushita M, Kayahara T,
Kameya T, Kawai Y, Iwanaga T, Saito M. Recruited
brown adipose tissue as an antiobesity agent in
humans. J Clin Invest. 2013;123(8):3404–3408.
49.
Stanford KI, Middelbeek RJ, Townsend KL, An D,
Nygaard EB, Hitchcox KM, Markan KR, Nakano K,
Hirshman MF, Tseng YH, Goodyear LJ. Brown ad-
ipose tissue regulates glucose homeostasis and
insulin sensitivity. J Clin Invest. 2013;123(1):215–223.
50.
Bartelt A, Bruns OT, Reimer R, Hohenberg H, Ittrich
H, Peldschus K, Kaul MG, Tromsdorf UI, Weller H,
Waurisch C, Eychm¨
uller A, Gordts PL, Rinninger F,
Bruegelmann K, Freund B, Nielsen P, Merkel M,
Heeren J. Brown adipose tissue activity controls
triglyceride clearance. Nat Med. 2011;17(2):200–205.
51.
Seale P, Bjork B, Yang W, Kajimura S, Chin S, Kuang
S, Scim`
e A, Devarakonda S, Conroe HM, Erdjument-
Bromage H, Tempst P, Rudnicki MA, Beier DR,
Spiegelman BM. PRDM16 controls a brown fat/
skeletal muscle switch. Nature. 2008;454(7207):
961–967.
52.
Lepper C, Fan CM. Inducible lineage tracing of Pax7-
descendant cells reveals embryonic origin of adult
satellite cells. Genesis. 2010;48(7):424–436.
53.
Wang W, Seale P. Control of brown and beige fat
development. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2016;17(11):
691–702.
54.
Wu J, Bostr¨
om P, Sparks LM, Ye L, Choi JH, Giang
AH, Khandekar M, Virtanen KA, Nuutila P, Schaart
G, Huang K, Tu H, van Marken Lichtenbelt WD,
Hoeks J, Enerb¨
ack S, Schrauwen P, Spiegelman BM.
Beige adipocytes are a distinct type of thermogenic
fat cell in mouse and human. Cell. 2012;150(2):
366–376.
55.
Froy O. Metabolism and circadian rhythms–im-
plications for obesity. Endocr Rev. 2010;31(1):1–24.
56.
Yang X, Downes M, Yu RT, Bookout AL, He W,
Straume M, Mangelsdorf DJ, Evans RM. Nuclear
receptor expression links the circadian clock to
metabolism. Cell. 2006;126(4):801–810.
57.
Garaulet M, Madrid JA. Chronobiological aspects of
nutrition, metabolic syndrome and obesity. Adv
Drug Deliv Rev. 2010;62(9-10):967–978.
58.
La Fleur SE, Kalsbeek A, Wortel J, Buijs RM. A
suprachiasmatic nucleus generated rhythm in basal
glucose concentrations. J Neuroendocrinol. 1999;
11(8):643–652.
59.
La Fleur SE. Daily rhythms in glucose metabolism:
suprachiasmatic nucleus output to peripheral tis-
sue. J Neuroendocrinol. 2003;15(3):315–322.
60.
Davidson AJ, Castañ´
on-Cervantes O, Stephan FK.
Daily oscillations in liver function: diurnal vs cir-
cadian rhythmicity. Liver Int. 2004;24(3):179–186.
61.
Ramsey KM, Marcheva B, Kohsaka A, Bass J. The
clockwork of metabolism. Annu Rev Nutr. 2007;
27(1):219–240.
62.
Pendergast JS, Branecky KL, Yang W, Ellacott KL,
Niswender KD, Yamazaki S. High-fat diet acutely
affects circadian organisation and eating behavior.
Eur J Neurosci. 2013;37(8):1350–1356.
63.
Barnea M, Madar Z, Froy O. High-fat diet delays and
fasting advances the circadian expression of adi-
ponectin signaling components in mouse liver.
Endocrinology. 2009;150(1):161–168.
64.
Barnea M, Madar Z, Froy O. High-fat diet followed
by fasting disrupts circadian expression of adipo-
nectin signaling pathway in muscle and adipose
tissue. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2010;18(2):230–238.
65.
Kohsaka A, Laposky AD, Ramsey KM, Estrada C,
Joshu C, Kobayashi Y, Turek FW, Bass J. High-fat diet
disrupts
behavioral
and
molecular
circadian
rhythms in mice. Cell Metab. 2007;6(5):414–421.
66.
Pivovarova O, J¨
urchott K, Rudovich N, Hornemann
S, Ye L, M¨
ockel S, Murahovschi V, Kessler K, Seltmann
AC, Maser-Gluth C, Mazuch J, Kruse M, Busjahn A,
Kramer A, Pfeiffer AF. Changes of dietary fat and
carbohydrate content alter central and periph-
eral clock in humans. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015;
100(6):2291–2302.
67.
Chawla A, Lazar MA. Induction of Rev-ErbA alpha,
an orphan receptor encoded on the opposite
strand of the alpha-thyroid hormone receptor gene,
during adipocyte differentiation. J Biol Chem. 1993;
268(22):16265–16269.
68.
Bray MS, Young ME. Circadian rhythms in the
development of obesity: potential role for the
circadian clock within the adipocyte. Obes Rev.
2007;8(2):169–181.
69.
Torra IP, Tsibulsky V, Delaunay F, Saladin R, Laudet
V, Fruchart JC, Kosykh V, Staels B. Circadian and
glucocorticoid regulation of Rev-erbalpha expres-
sion in liver. Endocrinology. 2000;141(10):3799–3806.
70.
Cho H, Zhao X, Hatori M, Yu RT, Barish GD, Lam
MT, Chong LW, DiTacchio L, Atkins AR, Glass CK,
Liddle C, Auwerx J, Downes M, Panda S, Evans RM.
Regulation of circadian behaviour and metabolism
by REV-ERB-a and REV-ERB-b. Nature. 2012;
485(7396):123–127.
71.
Lau P, Nixon SJ, Parton RG, Muscat GE. RORalpha
regulates the expression of genes involved in lipid
homeostasis in skeletal muscle cells: caveolin-3 and
CPT-1 are direct targets of ROR. J Biol Chem. 2004;
279(35):36828–36840.
72.
Ueda HR, Chen W, Adachi A, Wakamatsu H,
Hayashi S, Takasugi T, Nagano M, Nakahama K,
Suzuki Y, Sugano S, Iino M, Shigeyoshi Y, Hashimoto
S. A transcription factor response element for gene
expression during circadian night. Nature. 2002;
418(6897):534–539.
73.
Solt LA, Wang Y, Banerjee S, Hughes T, Kojetin DJ,
Lundasen T, Shin Y, Liu J, Cameron MD, Noel R, Yoo
SH, Takahashi JS, Butler AA, Kamenecka TM, Burris
TP. Regulation of circadian behaviour and meta-
bolism by synthetic REV-ERB agonists. Nature. 2012;
485(7396):62–68.
74.
Amador A, Wang Y, Banerjee S, Kameneka TM, Solt
LA, Burris TP. Pharmacological and genetic mod-
ulation of REV-ERB activity and expression affects
orexigenic gene expression [published correction
appears in PLos One. 2016;11(5):e0156367]. PLoS
One. 2016;11(3):e0151014.
75.
Delezie J, Dumont S, Dardente H, Oudart H,
Gr´
echez-Cassiau A, Klosen P, Teboul M, Delaunay F,
P´
evet P, Challet E. The nuclear receptor REV-ERBa is
required for the daily balance of carbohydrate and
lipid metabolism. FASEB J. 2012;26(8):3321–3335.
76.
Gerhart-Hines Z, Feng D, Emmett MJ, Everett LJ,
Loro E, Briggs ER, Bugge A, Hou C, Ferrara C, Seale P,
Pryma DA, Khurana TS, Lazar MA. The nuclear
receptor Rev-erba controls circadian thermogenic
plasticity. Nature. 2013;503(7476):410–413.
77.
Desvergne B, Wahli W. Peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptors: nuclear control of meta-
bolism. Endocr Rev. 1999;20(5):649–688.
78.
Kersten S, Desvergne B, Wahli W. Roles of PPARs
in health and disease. Nature. 2000;405(6785):
421–424.
79.
Lefebvre P, Chinetti G, Fruchart JC, Staels B. Sorting
out the roles of PPAR alpha in energy metabolism
and vascular homeostasis. J Clin Invest. 2006;116(3):
571–580.
80.
Braissant O, Foufelle F, Scotto C, Dauça M, Wahli W.
Differential expression of peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptors (PPARs): tissue distribution of
PPAR-alpha, -beta, and -gamma in the adult rat.
Endocrinology. 1996;137(1):354–366.
81.
Chen L, Yang G. PPARs integrate the mammalian
clock and energy metabolism. PPAR Res. 2014;2014:
653017.
82.
Oishi K, Shirai H, Ishida N. CLOCK is involved in the
circadian transactivation of peroxisome-proliferator-
activated receptor alpha (PPARalpha) in mice. Bio-
chem J. 2005;386(3):575–581.
83.
Inoue I, Shinoda Y, Ikeda M, Hayashi K, Kanazawa K,
Nomura M, Matsunaga T, Xu H, Kawai S, Awata T,
Komoda T, Katayama S. CLOCK/BMAL1 is involved
in lipid metabolism via transactivation of the
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)
response element. J Atheroscler Thromb. 2005;12(3):
169–174.
84.
Canaple L, Rambaud J, Dkhissi-Benyahya O, Rayet B,
Tan NS, Michalik L, Delaunay F, Wahli W, Laudet V.
Reciprocal regulation of brain and muscle Arnt-like
protein 1 and peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor alpha defines a novel positive feedback
loop in the rodent liver circadian clock. Mol
Endocrinol. 2006;20(8):1715–1727.
85.
Gutman R, Barnea M, Haviv L, Chapnik N, Froy O.
Peroxisome
proliferator-activated
receptor
a
(PPARa) activation advances locomotor activity
and feeding daily rhythms in mice. Int J Obes. 2012;
36(8):1131–1134.
86.
Yang G, Jia Z, Aoyagi T, McClain D, Mortensen RM,
Yang T. Systemic PPARg deletion impairs circadian
rhythms of behavior and metabolism. PLoS One.
2012;7(8):e38117.
87.
Li S, Lin JD. Transcriptional control of circadian
metabolic rhythms in the liver. Diabetes Obes
Metab. 2015;17(Suppl 1):33–38.
88.
Liu C, Li S, Liu T, Borjigin J, Lin JD. Transcriptional
coactivator PGC-1alpha integrates the mammalian
clock
and
energy
metabolism.
Nature.
2007;
447(7143):477–481.
89.
Grimaldi B, Sassone-Corsi P. Circadian rhythms:
metabolic clockwork. Nature. 2007;447(7143):
386–387.
90.
Carling D. AMP-activated protein kinase: balancing
the scales. Biochimie. 2005;87(1):87–91.
91.
Hardie DG, Hawley SA, Scott JW. AMP-activated
protein kinase–development of the energy sensor
concept. J Physiol. 2006;574(1):7–15.
92.
Um JH, Yang S, Yamazaki S, Kang H, Viollet B, Foretz
M, Chung JH. Activation of 59-AMP-activated ki-
nase with diabetes drug metformin induces casein
kinase Iepsilon (CKIepsilon)-dependent degrada-
tion of clock protein mPer2. J Biol Chem. 2007;
282(29):20794–20798.
271
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00193
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/3/261/4912380 by guest on 03 June 2019
 93.
Lamia KA, Sachdeva UM, DiTacchio L, Williams EC,
Alvarez JG, Egan DF, Vasquez DS, Juguilon H, Panda
S, Shaw RJ, Thompson CB, Evans RM. AMPK
regulates the circadian clock by cryptochrome
phosphorylation and degradation. Science. 2009;
326(5951):437–440.
94.
Barnea M, Haviv L, Gutman R, Chapnik N, Madar Z,
Froy O. Metformin affects the circadian clock
and metabolic rhythms in a tissue-specific manner.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012;1822:1796–1806.
95.
Haigis MC, Guarente LP. Mammalian sirtuins–
emerging roles in physiology, aging, and calorie
restriction. Genes Dev. 2006;20(21):2913–2921.
96.
Cant´
o C, Auwerx J. Caloric restriction, SIRT1 and
longevity. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2009;20(7):
325–331.
97.
Asher G, Gatfield D, Stratmann M, Reinke H, Dibner
C, Kreppel F, Mostoslavsky R, Alt FW, Schibler U.
SIRT1 regulates circadian clock gene expression
through PER2 deacetylation. Cell. 2008;134(2):
317–328.
98.
Nakahata Y, Kaluzova M, Grimaldi B, Sahar S,
Hirayama J, Chen D, Guarente LP, Sassone-Corsi P.
The NAD+-dependent deacetylase SIRT1 modu-
lates CLOCK-mediated chromatin remodeling and
circadian control. Cell. 2008;134(2):329–340.
99.
Masri S, Rigor P, Cervantes M, Ceglia N, Sebastian C,
Xiao C, Roqueta-Rivera M, Deng C, Osborne TF,
Mostoslavsky R, Baldi P, Sassone-Corsi P. Parti-
tioning circadian transcription by SIRT6 leads to
segregated control of cellular metabolism. Cell. 2014;
158(3):659–672.
100. Nakahata Y, Sahar S, Astarita G, Kaluzova M, Sassone-
Corsi P. Circadian control of the NAD+ salvage
pathway by CLOCK-SIRT1. Science. 2009;324(5927):
654–657.
101. Peek CB, Affinati AH, Ramsey KM, Kuo HY, Yu W,
Sena LA, Ilkayeva O, Marcheva B, Kobayashi Y,
Omura C, Levine DC, Bacsik DJ, Gius D, Newgard CB,
Goetzman E, Chandel NS, Denu JM, Mrksich M, Bass
J. Circadian clock NAD+ cycle drives mitochondrial
oxidative
metabolism
in
mice.
Science.
2013;
342(6158):1243417.
102. Cant´
o C, Gerhart-Hines Z, Feige JN, Lagouge M,
Noriega L, Milne JC, Elliott PJ, Puigserver P, Auwerx J.
AMPK regulates energy expenditure by modulating
NAD+ metabolism and SIRT1 activity. Nature. 2009;
458(7241):1056–1060.
103. Rutter J, Reick M, Wu LC, McKnight SL. Regulation
of clock and NPAS2 DNA binding by the redox
state of NAD cofactors. Science. 2001;293(5529):
510–514.
104. Li F, Yin Y, Tan B, Kong X, Wu G. Leucine nutrition in
animals and humans: mTOR signaling and beyond.
Amino Acids. 2011;41(5):1185–1193.
105. Cao R, Lee B, Cho HY, Saklayen S, Obrietan K. Photic
regulation of the mTOR signaling pathway in the
suprachiasmatic circadian clock. Mol Cell Neurosci.
2008;38(3):312–324.
106. Lipton JO, Yuan ED, Boyle LM, Ebrahimi-Fakhari D,
Kwiatkowski E, Nathan A, G¨
uttler T, Davis F, Asara
JM, Sahin M. The circadian protein BMAL1 regu-
lates translation in response to S6K1-mediated
phosphorylation. Cell. 2015;161(5):1138–1151.
107. Erren TC, Reiter RJ. Defining chronodisruption.
J Pineal Res. 2009;46(3):245–247.
108. Laermans J, Depoortere I. Chronobesity: role of the
circadian system in the obesity epidemic. Obes Rev.
2016;17(2):108–125.
109. Turek FW, Joshu C, Kohsaka A, Lin E, Ivanova G,
McDearmon E, Laposky A, Losee-Olson S, Easton A,
Jensen DR, Eckel RH, Takahashi JS, Bass J. Obesity
and metabolic syndrome in circadian Clock mutant
mice. Science. 2005;308(5724):1043–1045.
110. Oishi K, Ohkura N, Wakabayashi M, Shirai H, Sato K,
Matsuda J, Atsumi G, Ishida N. CLOCK is involved
in obesity-induced disordered fibrinolysis in ob/ob
mice by regulating PAI-1 gene expression. J Thromb
Haemost. 2006;4(8):1774–1780.
111. Green CB, Takahashi JS, Bass J. The meter of
metabolism. Cell. 2008;134(5):728–742.
112. Yang S, Liu A, Weidenhammer A, Cooksey RC,
McClain D, Kim MK, Aguilera G, Abel ED, Chung JH.
The role of mPer2 clock gene in glucocorticoid
and feeding rhythms. Endocrinology. 2009;150(5):
2153–2160.
113. Rudic RD, McNamara P, Curtis AM, Boston RC,
Panda S, Hogenesch JB, Fitzgerald GA. BMAL1 and
CLOCK, two essential components of the circadian
clock, are involved in glucose homeostasis. PLoS Biol.
2004;2(11):e377.
114. Shi SQ, Ansari TS, McGuinness OP, Wasserman DH,
Johnson CH. Circadian disruption leads to insulin
resistance
and
obesity.
Curr
Biol.
2013;23(5):
372–381.
115. Paschos GK, Ibrahim S, Song WL, Kunieda T, Grant
G, Reyes TM, Bradfield CA, Vaughan CH, Eiden M,
Masoodi M, Griffin JL, Wang F, Lawson JA, Fitzgerald
GA. Obesity in mice with adipocyte-specific de-
letion of clock component Arntl. Nat Med. 2012;
18(12):1768–1777.
116. Zhang EE, Liu Y, Dentin R, Pongsawakul PY, Liu AC,
Hirota T, Nusinow DA, Sun X, Landais S, Kodama Y,
Brenner DA, Montminy M, Kay SA. Cryptochrome
mediates circadian regulation of cAMP signaling
and hepatic gluconeogenesis. Nat Med. 2010;16(10):
1152–1156.
117. Hatori M, Panda S. CRY links the circadian clock and
CREB-mediated gluconeogenesis. Cell Res. 2010;
20(12):1285–1288.
118. Barclay JL, Shostak A, Leliavski A, Tsang AH, J¨
ohren
O, M¨
uller-Fielitz H, Landgraf D, Naujokat N, van der
Horst GT, Oster H. High-fat diet-induced hyper-
insulinemia and tissue-specific insulin resistance in
Cry-deficient mice. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab.
2013;304(10):E1053–E1063.
119. Froy O. A CRY for help to fight fat. Am J Physiol
Endocrinol Metab. 2013;304(11):E1129–E1130.
120. Narasimamurthy R, Hatori M, Nayak SK, Liu F,
Panda S, Verma IM. Circadian clock protein cryp-
tochrome regulates the expression of proin-
flammatory cytokines. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2012;
109(31):12662–12667.
121. Kolbe I, Husse J, Salinas G, Lingner T, Astiz M, Oster
H. The SCN clock governs circadian transcription
rhythms in murine epididymal white adipose tissue.
J Biol Rhythms. 2016;31(6):577–587.
122. Shostak A, Husse J, Oster H. Circadian regulation of
adipose function. Adipocyte. 2013;2(4):201–206.
123. Sookoian S, Gemma C, Gianotti TF, Burgueño A,
Castaño G, Pirola CJ. Genetic variants of Clock
transcription factor are associated with individual
susceptibility to obesity. Am J Clin Nutr. 2008;87(6):
1606–1615.
124. Scott EM, Carter AM, Grant PJ. Association be-
tween polymorphisms in the Clock gene, obesity
and the metabolic syndrome in man. Int J Obes.
2008;32(4):658–662.
125. Garaulet M, Lee YC, Shen J, Parnell LD, Arnett DK,
Tsai MY, Lai CQ, Ordovas JM. CLOCK genetic
variation and metabolic syndrome risk: modulation
by monounsaturated fatty acids. Am J Clin Nutr.
2009;90(6):1466–1475.
126. Garaulet M, Corbal´
an MD, Madrid JA, Morales E,
Baraza JC, Lee YC, Ordovas JM. CLOCK gene is
implicated in weight reduction in obese patients
participating in a dietary programme based on the
Mediterranean diet. Int J Obes. 2010;34(3):516–523.
127. Garaulet M, Lee YC, Shen J, Parnell LD, Arnett DK,
Tsai MY, Lai CQ, Ordovas JM. Genetic variants in
human CLOCK associate with total energy intake
and cytokine sleep factors in overweight subjects
(GOLDN population). Eur J Hum Genet. 2010;18(3):
364–369.
128. Band´
ın C, Martinez-Nicolas A, Ordov´
as JM, Ros
Lucas JA, Castell P, Silvente T, Madrid JA, Garaulet
M. Differences in circadian rhythmicity in CLOCK
3111T/C genetic variants in moderate obese
women as assessed by thermometry, actimetry and
body position. Int J Obes. 2013;37(8):1044–1050.
129. Lo MT, Bandin C, Yang HW, Scheer FA, Hu K,
Garaulet M. CLOCK 3111T/C genetic variant in-
fluences the daily rhythm of autonomic nervous
function: relevance to body weight control. Int J
Obes (Lond). 2018;42(2):190–197.
130. Garaulet M, Corbal´
an-Tutau MD, Madrid JA, Baraza
JC, Parnell LD, Lee YC, Ordovas JM. PERIOD2 var-
iants are associated with abdominal obesity,
psycho-behavioral factors, and attrition in the di-
etary treatment of obesity. J Am Diet Assoc. 2010;
110(6):917–921.
131. Yamaguchi M, Uemura H, Arisawa K, Katsuura-
Kamano S, Hamajima N, Hishida A, Suma S, Oze I,
Nakamura K, Takashima N, Suzuki S, Ibusuki R,
Mikami H, Ohnaka K, Kuriyama N, Kubo M, Tanaka
H; Japan Multi-institutional Collaborative Cohort
(J-MICC) Study Group. Association between brain-
muscle-ARNT-like protein-2 (BMAL2) gene poly-
morphism and type 2 diabetes mellitus in obese
Japanese individuals: a cross-sectional analysis of the
Japan
Multi-institutional
Collaborative
Cohort
Study. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2015;110(3):301–308.
132. Garaulet M, Smith CE, Gomez-Abell´
an P, Ordov´
as-
Montañ´
es M, Lee YC, Parnell LD, Arnett DK,
Ordov´
as JM. REV-ERB-alpha circadian gene variant
associates with obesity in two independent pop-
ulations: Mediterranean and North American. Mol
Nutr Food Res. 2014;58(4):821–829.
133. Woldt E, Sebti Y, Solt LA, Duhem C, Lancel S,
Eeckhoute J, Hesselink MK, Paquet C, Delhaye S,
Shin Y, Kamenecka TM, Schaart G, Lefebvre P,
Nevi`
ere R, Burris TP, Schrauwen P, Staels B, Duez H.
Rev-erb-a modulates skeletal muscle oxidative
capacity by regulating mitochondrial biogenesis
and autophagy. Nat Med. 2013;19(8):1039–1046.
134. Jager J, O’Brien WT, Manlove J, Krizman EN, Fang B,
Gerhart-Hines Z, Robinson MB, Klein PS, Lazar MA.
Behavioral changes and dopaminergic dysregula-
tion in mice lacking the nuclear receptor Rev-erba.
Mol Endocrinol. 2014;28(4):490–498.
135. Dashti HS, Smith CE, Lee YC, Parnell LD, Lai CQ,
Arnett DK, Ordov´
as JM, Garaulet M. CRY1 circadian
gene variant interacts with carbohydrate intake for
insulin resistance in two independent populations:
Mediterranean and North American. Chronobiol Int.
2014;31(5):660–667.
136. Messina G, De Luca V, Viggiano A, Ascione A,
Iannaccone T, Chieffi S, Monda M. Autonomic
nervous system in the control of energy balance
and body weight: personal contributions. Neurol Res
Int. 2013;2013:639280.
137. Saito M, Murakami E, Suda M. Circadian rhythms in
disaccharidases of rat small intestine and its relation
to food intake. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1976;421(1):
177–179.
138. Honma KI, Honma S, Hiroshige T. Critical role of
food amount for prefeeding corticosterone peak in
rats. Am J Physiol. 1983;245(3):R339–R344.
139. Comperatore CA, Stephan FK. Entrainment of
duodenal activity to periodic feeding. J Biol Rhythms.
1987;2(3):227–242.
272
Froy and Garaulet
The Circadian Clock in Adipose Tissue
Endocrine Reviews, June 2018, 39(3):261–273
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/3/261/4912380 by guest on 03 June 2019
 140. Stephan FK. The “other” circadian system: food as
a Zeitgeber. J Biol Rhythms. 2002;17(4):284–292.
141. Arble DM, Bass J, Laposky AD, Vitaterna MH, Turek
FW. Circadian timing of food intake contributes to
weight gain. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2009;17(11):
2100–2102.
142. Morris CJ, Yang JN, Garcia JI, Myers S, Bozzi I, Wang
W, Buxton OM, Shea SA, Scheer FA. Endogenous
circadian system and circadian misalignment im-
pact glucose tolerance via separate mechanisms in
humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2015;112(17):
E2225–E2234.
143. Garaulet M, G´
omez-Abell´
an P. Timing of food in-
take and obesity: a novel association. Physiol Behav.
2014;134:44–50.
144. Garaulet M, G´
omez-Abell´
an P, Alburquerque-B´
ejar
JJ, Lee YC, Ordov´
as JM, Scheer FA. Timing of food
intake predicts weight loss effectiveness [published
correction appears in Int J Obes (Lond). 2013;37(4):
624]. Int J Obes (Lond). 2013;37(4):604–611.
145. Jakubowicz D, Barnea M, Wainstein J, Froy O. High
caloric intake at breakfast vs. dinner differentially in-
fluences weight loss of overweight and obese women.
Obesity (Silver Spring). 2013;21(12):2504–2512.
146. Damiola F, Le Minh N, Preitner N, Kornmann B,
Fleury-Olela F, Schibler U. Restricted feeding un-
couples circadian oscillators in peripheral tissues
from the central pacemaker in the suprachiasmatic
nucleus. Genes Dev. 2000;14(23):2950–2961.
147. Stokkan KA, Yamazaki S, Tei H, Sakaki Y, Menaker
M. Entrainment of the circadian clock in the liver by
feeding. Science. 2001;291(5503):490–493.
148. Wehrens SM, Christou S, Isherwood C, Middleton B,
Gibbs MA, Archer SN, Skene DJ, Johnston JD. Meal
timing regulates the human circadian system. Curr
Biol. 2017;27(12):1768–1775.e3.
149. G´
omez-Santos C, G´
omez-Abell´
an P, Madrid JA,
Hern´
andez-Morante JJ, Lujan JA, Ordovas JM,
Garaulet M. Circadian rhythm of clock genes in
human adipose explants. Obesity (Silver Spring).
2009;17(8):1481–1485.
150. van der Veen DR, Shao J, Chapman S, Leevy WM,
Duffield GE. A diurnal rhythm in glucose uptake
in brown adipose tissue revealed by in vivo
PET-FDG imaging. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2012;20(7):
1527–1529.
151. Lee P, Bova R, Schofield L, Bryant W, Dieckmann W,
Slattery A, Govendir MA, Emmett L, Greenfield JR.
Brown adipose tissue exhibits a glucose-responsive
thermogenic biorhythm in humans. Cell Metab.
2016;23(4):602–609.
152. Garaulet
M,
Ordov´
as
JM,
G´
omez-Abell´
an
P,
Mart´
ınez JA, Madrid JA. An approximation to the
temporal order in endogenous circadian rhythms of
genes implicated in human adipose tissue meta-
bolism. J Cell Physiol. 2011;226(8):2075–2080.
153. Hamdy O, Porramatikul S, Al-Ozairi E. Metabolic
obesity: the paradox between visceral and sub-
cutaneous fat. Curr Diabetes Rev. 2006;2(4):367–373.
154. Arner P. Differences in lipolysis between human
subcutaneous and omental adipose tissues. Ann
Med. 1995;27(4):435–438.
155. Kalra SP, Bagnasco M, Otukonyong EE, Dube MG,
Kalra PS. Rhythmic, reciprocal ghrelin and leptin
signaling: new insight in the development of
obesity. Regul Pept. 2003;111(1-3):1–11.
156. Downs
JL,
Urbanski
HF.
Aging-related
sex-
dependent loss of the circulating leptin 24-h
rhythm in the rhesus monkey. J Endocrinol. 2006;
190(1):117–127.
157. Kalsbeek A, Fliers E, Romijn JA, La Fleur SE, Wortel J,
Bakker O, Endert E, Buijs RM. The suprachiasmatic
nucleus generates the diurnal changes in plasma
leptin levels. Endocrinology. 2001;142(6):2677–2685.
158. Sukumaran S, Almon RR, DuBois DC, Jusko WJ.
Circadian rhythms in gene expression: relationship
to physiology, disease, drug disposition and drug
action. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2010;62(9–10):904–917.
159. Licinio J. Longitudinally sampled human plasma
leptin and cortisol concentrations are inversely
correlated. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1998;83(3):1042.
160. Heptulla R, Smitten A, Teague B, Tamborlane WV,
Ma YZ, Caprio S. Temporal patterns of circulating
leptin levels in lean and obese adolescents: re-
lationships to insulin, growth hormone, and free
fatty acids rhythmicity. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2001;86(1):90–96.
161. Arble DM, Vitaterna MH, Turek FW. Rhythmic
leptin is required for weight gain from circadian
desynchronized feeding in the mouse. PLoS One.
2011;6(9):e25079.
162. G´
omez-Abell´
an P, G´
omez-Santos C, Madrid JA,
Milagro FI, Campion J, Mart´
ınez JA, Ordov´
as JM,
Garaulet M. Circadian expression of adiponectin
and its receptors in human adipose tissue. Endo-
crinology. 2010;151(1):115–122.
163. Carrasco-Benso MP, Rivero-Gutierrez B, Lopez-
Minguez J, Anzola A, Diez-Noguera A, Madrid JA,
Lujan JA, Mart´
ınez-Augustin O, Scheer FA, Garaulet
M. Human adipose tissue expresses intrinsic cir-
cadian rhythm in insulin sensitivity. FASEB J. 2016;
30(9):3117–3123.
164. Gavrila A, Peng CK, Chan JL, Mietus JE, Goldberger
AL, Mantzoros CS. Diurnal and ultradian dynamics
of serum adiponectin in healthy men: comparison
with leptin, circulating soluble leptin receptor, and
cortisol patterns. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003;88(6):
2838–2843.
165. Peterson RE. Plasma corticosterone and hydrocor-
tisone levels in man. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1957;
17(10):1150–1157.
166. Garc´
ıa-Prieto MD, T´
ebar FJ, Nicol´
as F, Larqu´
e E,
Zamora S, Garaulet M. Cortisol secretary pattern
and glucocorticoid feedback sensitivity in women
from a Mediterranean area: relationship with an-
thropometric characteristics, dietary intake and
plasma fatty acid profile. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2007;
66(2):185–191.
167. Kiehn JT, Tsang AH, Heyde I, Leinweber B, Kolbe I,
Leliavski A, Oster H. Circadian rhythms in adipose
tissue physiology. Compr Physiol. 2017;7(2):383–427.
168. Bryant NJ, Govers R, James DE. Regulated transport
of the glucose transporter GLUT4. Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol. 2002;3(4):267–277.
169. Grimaldi B, Bellet MM, Katada S, Astarita G,
Hirayama J, Amin RH, Granneman JG, Piomelli D,
Leff T, Sassone-Corsi P. PER2 controls lipid meta-
bolism by direct regulation of PPARg. Cell Metab.
2010;12(5):509–520.
170. Guo B, Chatterjee S, Li L, Kim JM, Lee J, Yechoor VK,
Minze LJ, Hsueh W, Ma K. The clock gene, brain and
muscle Arnt-like 1, regulates adipogenesis via Wnt
signaling pathway. FASEB J. 2012;26(8):3453–3463.
171. Shimba S, Ogawa T, Hitosugi S, Ichihashi Y, Nakadaira
Y, Kobayashi M, Tezuka M, Kosuge Y, Ishige K,
Ito Y, Komiyama K, Okamatsu-Ogura Y, Kimura K,
Saito M. Deficient of a clock gene, brain and
muscle Arnt-like protein-1 (BMAL1), induces
dyslipidemia and ectopic fat formation. PLoS One.
2011;6(9):e25231.
172. Komiya Y, Habas R. Wnt signal transduction
pathways. Organogenesis. 2008;4(2):68–75.
173. Nam D, Guo B, Chatterjee S, Chen MH, Nelson D,
Yechoor VK, Ma K. The adipocyte clock controls
brown adipogenesis through the TGF-b and BMP
signaling pathways. J Cell Sci. 2015;128(9):1835–1847.
174. Nam D, Chatterjee S, Yin H, Liu R, Lee J, Yechoor VK,
Ma K. Novel function of Rev-erba in promoting
brown adipogenesis. Sci Rep. 2015;5(1):11239.
175. Koncarevic A, Kajimura S, Cornwall-Brady M,
Andreucci A, Pullen A, Sako D, Kumar R, Grinberg
AV, Liharska K, Ucran JA, Howard E, Spiegelman BM,
Seehra J, Lachey J. A novel therapeutic approach to
treating obesity through modulation of TGFb
signaling. Endocrinology. 2012;153(7):3133–3146.
176. Yadav H, Quijano C, Kamaraju AK, Gavrilova O,
Malek R, Chen W, Zerfas P, Zhigang D, Wright EC,
Stuelten C, Sun P, Lonning S, Skarulis M, Sumner AE,
Finkel T, Rane SG. Protection from obesity and
diabetes by blockade of TGF-b/Smad3 signaling.
Cell Metab. 2011;14(1):67–79.
177. Corbal´
an-Tutau MD, G´
omez-Abell´
an P, Madrid JA,
Canteras M, Ordov´
as JM, Garaulet M. Toward
a chronobiological characterization of obesity and
metabolic syndrome in clinical practice. Clin Nutr.
2015;34(3):477–483.
178. Martinez-Nicolas A, Ortiz-Tudela E, Rol MA, Madrid
JA. Uncovering different masking factors on wrist
skin temperature rhythm in free-living subjects.
PLoS One. 2013;8(4):e61142.
179. Ortiz-Tudela E, Martinez-Nicolas A, Campos M, Rol
MA, Madrid JA. A new integrated variable based on
thermometry, actimetry and body position (TAP)
to evaluate circadian system status in humans. PLOS
Comput Biol. 2010;6(11):e1000996.
Acknowledgments
Financial Support:
This work was supported in part by the
Spanish Government of Investigation, Development and
Innovation (SAF2018-84135-R), including Fondo Europeo de
Desarrollo Regional co-funding, and by National Institute
of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases Grant
R01DK105072 (to M.G.).
Correspondence and Reprint Requests:
Oren Froy,
PhD, Institute of Biochemistry, Food Science and Nutrition,
The Robert H. Smith Faculty of Agriculture, Food and En-
vironment, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, P.O. Box 12,
7610001 Rehovot, Israel. E-mail: oren.froy@mail.huji.ac.il; or
Marta Garaulet, PhD, Department of Physiology, University of
Murcia, Campus of Espinardo, 30001 Murcia, Spain. E-mail:
garaulet@um.es.
Disclosure Summary:
The authors have nothing to
disclose.
Abbreviations
AMPK, adenosine 59-monophosphate–activated protein
kinase; BAT, brown adipose tissue; BMAL1, brain and muscle
aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator–like protein
1; BMP, bone morphogenetic protein; CLOCK, circadian
locomotor output cycles kaput; CRY, cryptochrome; FFA, free
fatty acid; mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin; NAD,
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; PER, period; PER1, period
1; PER2, period 2; PGC1, peroxisome proliferator–activated
receptor g coactivator 1; PPAR, peroxisome proliferator–
activated receptor; REV-ERB, reverse ERB; ROR, retinoic acid
receptor–related orphan receptor; SCN, suprachiasmatic
nuclei; SIRT1, sirtuin 1; SNP, single nucleotide polymorphism;
TAG, triacylglyceride; TGFb, transforming growth factor b;
UCP1, uncoupling protein 1; WAT, white adipose tissue.
273
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00193
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/3/261/4912380 by guest on 03 June 2019
