 Nature Contact and Human Health: A Research Agenda
Howard Frumkin,1 Gregory N. Bratman,2,3,4 Sara Jo Breslow,3 Bobby Cochran,5 Peter H. Kahn Jr,4,6 Joshua J. Lawler,3,4
Phillip S. Levin,4,7 Pooja S. Tandon,1,8,9 Usha Varanasi,10,11 Kathleen L. Wolf,4,12 and Spencer A. Wood3,4,13
1Department of Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences, School of Public Health, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA
2Center for Conservation Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA
3Center for Creative Conservation, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA
4School of Environmental and Forest Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA
5Willamette Partnership, Portland, Oregon, USA
6Department of Psychology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA
7The Nature Conservancy, Seattle, Washington, USA
8Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington, USA
9Seattle Children’s Hospital, Seattle, Washington, USA
10School of Aquatic and Fishery Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA
11Department of Chemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA
12 Pacific Northwest Research Station, USDA Forest Service, Seattle, Washington, USA
13The Natural Capital Project, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA
BACKGROUND: At a time of increasing disconnectedness from nature, scientific interest in the potential health benefits of nature contact has grown.
Research in recent decades has yielded substantial evidence, but large gaps remain in our understanding.
OBJECTIVES: We propose a research agenda on nature contact and health, identifying principal domains of research and key questions that, if
answered, would provide the basis for evidence-based public health interventions.
DISCUSSION: We identify research questions in seven domains: a) mechanistic biomedical studies; b) exposure science; c) epidemiology of health ben-
efits; d) diversity and equity considerations; e) technological nature; f) economic and policy studies; and g) implementation science.
CONCLUSIONS: Nature contact may offer a range of human health benefits. Although much evidence is already available, much remains unknown. A
robust research effort, guided by a focus on key unanswered questions, has the potential to yield high-impact, consequential public health insights.
https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP1663
Introduction
Humans are increasingly disconnected from nature. Most people—
over half globally, and approximately four in five Americans—live
in urban areas, where nature contact is typically limited (United
Nations 2015). Surveys reveal that Americans spend >90% of
their time indoors: most of that time is spent in buildings, and a
smaller portion in vehicles (Klepeis et al. 2001). Screen time has
reached daily averages of 1 h 55 min for children younger than 8 y
old (Rideout 2013) and 7 h 38 min for those between 8 and 18 y old
(Rideout et al. 2010). In 2016, the average “total media consump-
tion” was 10 h 39 min per day among adults and was rising
(Nielsen 2016). Park visitation, hunting, fishing, camping, and
children’s outdoor play have all declined substantially over recent
decades (Clements 2004; Frost 2010; Pergams and Zaradic 2008).
In this context, recent years have seen a blossoming of scien-
tific interest in the benefits of nature contact for human health
and well-being. Several recent reviews have summarized and
evaluated the growing evidence base (Bowler et al. 2010; Hartig
et al. 2014; James et al. 2015; Lee and Maheswaran 2011;
Martens and Bauer 2013; Russell et al. 2013; Seymour 2016).
This literature reveals an extraordinarily broad range of benefits,
albeit with varying levels of evidentiary support (Table 1).
Despite this considerable body of evidence, key questions
remain unresolved (Frumkin 2013). In this paper, we propose a
research agenda on nature contact and health, with the aim of
systematically identifying key questions that merit research
attention.
Definitions and Scope
A necessary starting point is the definition of nature contact. In
general, by “nature” we mean “areas containing elements of liv-
ing systems that include plants and nonhuman animals across a
range of scales and degrees of human management, from a small
urban park through to relatively ‘pristine wilderness’” (Bratman
et al. 2012), together with abiotic elements such as sunset or
mountain views. We acknowledge that multiple definitions of na-
ture are appropriate, varying with the form of nature contact
being studied and the ways in which people relate to nature. We
note the far-reaching discourse on nature as a social construct
(Cronon 1996), which is beyond the scope of this paper.
Similarly, there is a philosophical argument that humans are a
part of nature, a view that calls into question any distinction
between humans and nature, and hence the very possibility of “nature
deficit” (Fletcher 2016). This argument is beyond the scope of this
paper. The important category of animal contact, the subject of a
large body of literature (Barker and Wolen 2008; Kamioka et al.
2014; Matchock 2015), is beyond the scope of this paper, as are the
health benefits of the food and materials resulting from harvesting
activities such as foraging, fishing, and hunting.
Address correspondence to H. Frumkin, Dept. of Environmental and
Occupational Health Sciences, University of Washington School of Public
Health, Box 354695, Seattle, WA 98195-4695 USA; Telephone: 206-897-
1723; Email: frumkin@uw.edu
H.F. served on the Boards of the Children and Nature Network and the
Seattle Parks Foundation (uncompensated). P.H.K. Jr. serves as Editor-in-
Chief of the journal Ecopsychology and receives some financial compensation
for this work from the publisher. J.J.L. serves on the Board of The Nature
Conservancy, Washington chapter (uncompensated). P.S.L. has grants from
Pew Charitable Trusts, the David and Lucille Packard foundation, the Gordon
and Betty Moore Foundation, and the Lenfest Foundation. P.S.T. serves on
the Board of Islandwood, a nature education center (uncompensated).
All other authors declare they have no actual or potential competing
financial interests.
Received 26 January 2017; Revised 12 May 2017; Accepted 25 May 2017;
Published 31 July 2017.
Note to readers with disabilities: EHP strives to ensure that all journal
content is accessible to all readers. However, some figures and Supplemental
Material published in EHP articles may not conform to 508 standards due to
the complexity of the information being presented. If you need assistance
accessing journal content, please contact ehponline@niehs.nih.gov. Our staff
will work with you to assess and meet your accessibility needs within
3 working days.
Environmental Health Perspectives
075001-1
A Section 508–conformant HTML version of this article
is available at https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP1663.
Commentary
 There are many forms of nature contact, varying by spatial
scale, proximity, the sensory pathway through which nature is
experienced (visual, auditory, etc.), the individual’s activities and
level of awareness while in a natural setting, and other factors.
Figure 1 displays various examples of nature contact along just
two of these two scales, spatial and temporal. Much contempo-
rary research focuses on greenspace as the exposure of interest,
perhaps because of ease of measurement, but we take a broader
approach, ranging from plants in a room to views through win-
dows to camping trips to virtual reality imagery. Researchers
must define and operationalize the specific form of nature contact
they are studying. We return to this point below in our discussion
of exposure assessment.
With regard to outcomes, we take a broad definition of
health, including physical and mental health, social well-being,
academic and job performance, and happiness. The effects of
nature contact on proenvironmental knowledge, attitudes, and
behavior are the subject of an extensive body of literature
(Collado et al. 2015; Wells and Lekies 2006) but are beyond the
scope of this paper. Similarly, the outcomes we consider are
limited to those affecting humans, excluding impacts of human–
nature contact on other species or on natural systems more
generally.
Methods
We assembled a multidisciplinary group at the University of
Washington including expertise in epidemiology, environmental
health, clinical medicine, psychology, ecology, landscape architecture,
urban studies, public policy, and anthropology. The group stud-
ied published reviews of the nature–health connection, as well as
primary research reports, and discussed research needs with end-
users ranging from conservationists to nature preschool adminis-
trators to parks officials. Through iterative discussion and con-
sensus formation, we sought to identify domains in which
important questions remain unanswered, and in which research
would advance the field. Within each domain, we identified spe-
cific research priorities.
Several principles guided the formulation of this research
agenda. First, we recognized the value of diverse disciplines and
professions. Second, we recognized the need to balance linear,
reductionist approaches to research with complex, systems-based
approaches, as advocated in other relevant domains of research
(Dooris 2006; Liu et al. 2007), and we entertained research topics
and strategies reflecting both approaches. Third, we recognized
the need to integrate quantitative and qualitative data, and we
entertained research topics that would draw on both kinds of
data. Fourth, we emphasized research topics that are relevant and
useful for decision makers and affected communities so that
research results might have the greatest likelihood of being
applied and benefiting people. Fifth, we emphasized research
topics that, when appropriate, could engage affected populations
both in defining research questions and methods and in conduct-
ing the research. For example, community-based participatory
research, a well-established set of methods that improve the qual-
ity and relevance of research (Blumenthal et al. 2013; Jason and
Table 1. Summary of evidence-based health benefits of nature contact.
No.
Health/well-being benefits
References
1
Reduced stress
Berto 2014; Fan et al. 2011; Nielsen and Hansen 2007; Stigsdotter et al. 2010; van den
Berg and Custers 2011; van den Berg et al. 2010; Ward Thompson et al. 2016
2
Better sleep
Astell-Burt et al. 2013; Grigsby-Toussaint et al. 2015; Morita et al. 2011
3
Improved mental health:
Reduced depression
Astell-Burt et al. 2014c; Beyer et al. 2014; Cohen-Cline et al. 2015; Gascon et al. 2015;
Kim et al. 2009; Maas et al. 2009b; McEachan et al. 2016; Nutsford et al. 2013; Sturm
and Cohen 2014; Taylor et al. 2015; White et al. 2013
Reduced anxiety
Beyer et al. 2014; Bratman et al. 2015a; Maas et al. 2009b; Nutsford et al. 2013; Song
et al. 2013; Song et al. 2015
4
Greater happiness, well-being, life satisfaction
Ambrey 2016; Fleming et al. 2016; Larson et al. 2016; MacKerron and Mourato 2013;
Van Herzele and de Vries 2012; White et al. 2013
5
Reduced aggression
Bogar and Beyer 2016; Branas et al. 2011; Kuo and Sullivan 2001a, b; Troy et al. 2012;
Younan et al. 2016
6
Reduced ADHD symptoms
Amoly et al. 2014; Faber Taylor et al. 2001; Faber Taylor and Kuo 2009; Faber Taylor
and Kuo 2011; Kuo and Faber Taylor 2004; Markevych et al. 2014b; van den Berg and
van den Berg 2011
7
Increased prosocial behavior and social connectedness
Broyles et al. 2011; Dadvand et al. 2016; de Vries et al. 2013; Fan et al. 2011; Holtan
et al. 2015; Home et al. 2012; Piff et al. 2015; Sullivan et al. 2004
8
Lower blood pressure
Duncan et al. 2014; Markevych et al. 2014a; Shanahan et al. 2016
9
Improved postoperative recovery
Park and Mattson 2008; Park and Mattson 2009; Ulrich 1984
10
Improved birth outcomes
Reviewed by Dzhambov et al. 2014
11
Improved congestive heart failure
Mao et al. 2017
12
Improved child development (cognitive and motor)
Fjørtoft 2001; Kellert 2005
13
Improved pain control
Acutely (Diette et al. 2003; Lechtzin et al. 2010) and chronically (Han et al. 2016)
14
Reduced obesity
Bell et al. 2008; Cleland et al. 2008; P. Dadvand et al. 2014a; Lachowycz and Jones
2011; Sanders et al. 2015; Stark et al. 2014
15
Reduced diabetes
Astell-Burt et al. 2014a; Bodicoat et al. 2014; Brown et al. 2016; Thiering et al. 2016
16
Better eyesight
French et al. 2013; Guggenheim et al. 2012; He et al. 2015
17
Improved immune function
Li et al. 2006; Li et al. 2008a; Li et al. 2008b; Li et al. 2010; Li and Kawada 2011
18
Improved general health:
Adults
Brown et al. 2016; de Vries et al. 2003; Kardan et al. 2015; Maas et al. 2006; Maas et al.
2009b; Stigsdotter et al. 2010; Wheeler et al. 2015
Cancer survivors
Ray and Jakubec 2014
Children
Kim et al. 2016
19
Reduced mortality
Coutts et al. 2010; Gascon et al. 2016b; Hu et al. 2008; James et al. 2016; Takano et al.
2002; Villeneuve et al. 2012
20
Asthma and/or allergies (studies show both improvements
and exacerbations)
Andrusaityte et al. 2016; Dadvand et al. 2014a; Fuertes et al. 2014; Fuertes et al. 2016;
Lovasi et al. 2013; Lovasi et al. 2008; Ruokolainen et al. 2015
Note: ADHD, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. The references in Table 1 are illustrative rather than exhaustive; they include both recent reviews and research reports and older,
widely cited publications.
Environmental Health Perspectives
075001-2
 Glenwick 2016), has been applied to the study of nature contact
(Bijker and Sijtsma 2017).
We identified seven domains of research on nature contact
and health, as shown in Table 2. We considered ranking topics
within each domain in order of importance but elected not to do
so, mindful that in this highly interdisciplinary and context-
dependent field, different investigators and decision makers likely
differ in their scientific perspectives and information needs.
However, we did identify top-level research questions based on
scientific importance, tractability, and potential public health
impact; these questions are designated with bold-face type in the
listings that follow.
Domain 1: Mechanistic Biomedical Studies
A central aspect of health research is identifying the mechanisms
that account for observed health effects: for example, the compo-
nents of cigarette smoke that are carcinogenic and the immuno-
logic pathways by which the smallpox vaccine confers protection.
With respect to nature contact and health, the diversity of benefits
suggests a broad, nonspecific physiological pathway of action, a
multiplicity of pathways, or a combination of these. These path-
ways may have an evolutionary origin, as proposed by the bio-
philia hypothesis (Kellert and Wilson 1993; Wilson 1984). The
mechanisms are only partially understood, and authors are unani-
mous in noting the need for deeper understanding (Dadvand et al.
2016; de Vries et al. 2013; Groenewegen et al. 2012; Hartig et al.
2014; Keniger et al. 2013; Lachowycz and Jones 2013; Shanahan
et al. 2015b; Sullivan and Kaplan 2016). Such understanding
would be invaluable in designing and testing strategies for deliver-
ing beneficial nature contact.
Several mechanisms have been hypothesized: psychological
pathways, enhanced immune function, physical activity, social
contact, and improved air quality. Each of these is considered
below.
Psychological Pathways
Two complementary theoretical frameworks, both invoking
psychological mechanisms, have been identified (Berto 2014).
Stress Recovery Theory (SRT) emphasizes the role of nature in
relieving physiological stress, whereas Attention Restoration
Theory (ART) emphasizes the role of nature in relieving mental
fatigue.
Stress reduction is both a health benefit in and of itself and a
potential mechanism for other health benefits (Lovallo 2015).
Some research has focused on short-term indicators: for example,
experiments that expose subjects to stressful stimuli with and
without nature contact and measure acute responses such as skin
conductance and salivary cortisol levels (Parsons et al. 1998;
Ulrich et al. 1991; van den Berg and Custers 2011). Other
research has focused on a longer time frame: for example, com-
paring people living in more- and less-green neighborhoods with
regard to subjective levels of stress (Nielsen and Hansen 2007;
Stigsdotter et al. 2010; Ward Thompson et al. 2016) or ability to
cope with stressful life events (van den Berg et al. 2010; Ward
Thompson et al. 2016). The results consistently show that nature
contact reduces stress; the relative importance of this direct path-
way, and mediation through social contact, physical activity, and/
or other factors, is less clear (Ward Thompson et al. 2016).
Attention restoration was proposed as a mechanism by Kaplan
and Kaplan (Kaplan and Kaplan 1989; Kaplan 1995). This theory
holds that excessive concentration can lead to “directed attention
fatigue,” and that contact with nature—specifically with sufficient
extent to feel immersed, and in ways that confer a sense of being
away, that capture attention effortlessly (“soft fascination”), and
that are compatible with personal preferences—engages a less
taxing, indirect form of attention, thereby facilitating recovery
Table 2. Nature contact and health research domains.
Domain
1. Mechanistic biomedical studies
2. Exposure science
3. Epidemiology of health benefits
4. Diversity and equity considerations
5. Technological nature
6. Economic and policy studies
7. Implementation science
Figure 1. A spectrum of forms of nature contact.
Environmental Health Perspectives
075001-3
 of directed attention capacity. Empirical support has come from
studies of attention deficit disorder (Faber Taylor and Kuo
2009, 2011; van den Berg and van den Berg 2011) and from
diverse settings and populations (Brunson et al. 2001; Evensen
et al. 2015; Li and Sullivan 2016). There is some evidence that the
two mechanisms—stress reduction and attention restoration—may
operate concurrently, yielding cognitive and affective benefits in-
dependently or through an interaction of the psychological proc-
esses involved (Li and Sullivan 2016).
Additional psychological mechanisms might interact with (or
be independent of) stress reduction, attention restoration, or both.
What is the role of awe—the sense of wonder, amazement, and
smallness that may occur in response to perceptually vast stimuli
(Keltner and Haidt 2003; Piff et al. 2015; Rudd et al. 2012;
Shiota et al. 2007)? What is the role of mystery—the allure of
seeing and knowing more by entering more deeply into a setting
(Herzog and Bryce 2007; Szolosi et al. 2014)? How does nature
contact influence the regulation of emotions (in adaptive and/or
maladaptive ways) (Bratman et al. 2015a)? How might personal-
ity structure mediate the benefits of nature contact (Ambrey and
Cartlidge 2017)? How might stress reduction and attention resto-
ration operate differently in different groups, based on such fac-
tors as cultural background and socioeconomic position (Russell
et al. 2013)?
Each of these constructs—stress reduction, attention restora-
tion, awe, mystery—is based in theory. With increasing use of
more precise psychophysiological measures in both laboratory
and field settings, it is likely that they will evolve toward opera-
tionally defined constructs grounded in specific neural pathways.
Enhanced Immune Function
In a recent review, Kuo (Kuo 2015) argued that improved
immune function accounts for many of the health benefits of na-
ture, based on meeting three criteria: accounting for the magni-
tude of observed health benefits; accounting for the specific
health outcomes observed; and subsuming other possible path-
ways. Nature contact may enhance immune function in at least
two ways on very different time scales. First, consistent with the
“hygiene hypothesis,” contact with microbial and other antigens
in natural settings during particular developmental windows may
modify immune function over the lifespan (Hanski et al. 2012;
Kondrashova et al. 2013; Nicolaou et al. 2005; Rook 2013;
Ruokolainen et al. 2015; Stiemsma et al. 2015), perhaps operat-
ing through effects on the microbiome (Lee and Mazmanian
2010). Second, short-term exposures to some natural substances
(such as phytoncides from trees) have been associated with
improved natural killer (NK) cell activity (Li et al. 2006, 2008a,
2008b, 2010; Li and Kawada 2011). Stress recovery and immune
function mechanisms may not be distinct because of reciprocal
relationships between these two physiologic systems (Irwin and
Cole 2011; Nusslock and Miller 2016).
Increased Physical Activity
Physical activity confers a broad range of health benefits, includ-
ing prevention and/or amelioration of obesity, cardiovascular dis-
ease, some cancers, diabetes, some mental illness, osteoporosis,
gall bladder disease, and other conditions (Bauman et al. 2016;
Lee et al. 2012; WHO 2010). Natural surroundings such as vege-
tated streetscapes, parks, and schoolyards are generally associ-
ated with higher levels of physical activity in both children and
adults, a plausible mechanism for many of the observed health
benefits of nature contact (Bancroft et al. 2015; Bingham et al.
2016; Calogiuri and Chroni 2014; Fraser and Lock 2011; Gray
et al. 2015; Hunter et al. 2015; Kaczynski and Henderson 2007;
Koohsari et al. 2015; Lee et al. 2015; O'Donoghue et al. 2016;
Shanahan et al. 2016; Sugiyama et al. 2014). The mechanisms by
which green surroundings might facilitate physical activity are not
well understood; aesthetic preference may play a role (Shanahan
et al. 2016). In children, evidence suggests that play in natural envi-
ronments is associated with the development of motor skills such as
balance and coordination, which in turn enable and predict physical
activity (Fjørtoft 2001; Fjørtoft 2004). The dynamic and irregular
characteristics of natural play spaces may explain this observation.
Some studies have demonstrated a benefit from green neighbor-
hoods independent of physical activity (Cohen-Cline et al. 2015;
Fan et al. 2011; Feda et al. 2015; Nielsen and Hansen 2007), and
some studies have found weak or no association between nature
contact and physical activity (Gubbels et al. 2016; Hillsdon et al.
2006; Witten et al. 2008), suggesting that physical activity only par-
tially accounts for health benefits. A challenge in interpreting these
results is the possibility of reverse causation: people inclined to be
physically active may seek recreation in green, outdoor settings.
Moreover, the nature ! physical activity ! health pathway may
vary across subpopulations, settings, levels of access, programming,
and other factors.
A promising line of research regarding physical activity in
natural settings pertains to “green exercise.” There is some evi-
dence that physical activity in outdoor, natural settings confers
more benefits than equivalent exertion in indoor or constructed
settings (Barton et al. 2016; Coon et al. 2011). A better under-
standing of this phenomenon might help clarify the mechanisms
by which nature contact benefits health.
Social Connectedness
Social connectedness is strongly associated with health (Kawachi
et al. 2008). To the extent that nature contact promotes social
connections, this may be a mechanism for associated health bene-
fits (Maas et al. 2009a).
Support for this pathway comes from studies of prosocial
behavior and of social capital (networks of social relationships
and the norms of trust and reciprocity). With regard to prosocial
behavior and attitudes, observational studies of residential green-
ness (Dadvand et al. 2016; Kweon et al. 1998; Sullivan et al.
2004) and of nearby parks (Fan et al. 2011) and experimental
studies of brief nature exposures (Piff et al. 2015; Zelenski et al.
2015) have found an association between nature contact and pro-
social outcomes. [One exception was a study of children in
Kaunas, Lithuania, which found the opposite result (Balseviciene
et al. 2014)]. With regard to social capital, studies have found
that living in greener neighborhoods (de Vries et al. 2013; Holtan
et al. 2015; Kemperman and Timmermans 2014) and using parks
(Broyles et al. 2011; Home et al. 2012; Ka�
zmierczak 2013) are
associated with greater social cohesion, with the strength and
extent of social networks, or with both. Further research could
clarify the ways in which natural features promote social connect-
edness and how this pathway interacts with other possible mecha-
nisms of benefit.
Improved Air Quality
Air quality in rural or wilderness settings is generally superior to
that in urban settings. In urban settings, tree canopy may reduce
ambient levels of particulate matter and gaseous air pollutants,
although most studies find this air-quality improvement to be
slight (Nowak et al. 2013; Nowak et al. 2014). Moreover, any
benefits must be weighed against potential disbenefits. Trees can
in some cases worsen asthma (Andrusaityte et al. 2016; Dadvand
et al. 2014a; Kimes et al. 2004; Lovasi et al. 2013), a likely result
of pollen, soil fungi, other vegetation-associated allergens, the
Environmental Health Perspectives
075001-4
 production of hydrocarbons (ozone precursors), or a combination
of these factors (Grote et al. 2016). Trees can also impede air cir-
culation, reducing the dispersion of air pollutants in urban can-
yons (Vos et al. 2013). To the extent that vegetation improves air
quality, nature contact may offer protection against respiratory
and cardiovascular disease.
Other Benefits of Nearby Nature
There are myriad other benefits of nearby nature that extend
beyond these psychological and physical health mechanisms
(Bolund and Hunhammar 1999; Livesley et al. 2016; Tzoulas
et al. 2007). For example, urban vegetation, particularly trees,
can reduce and filter storm-water runoff (Berland et al. 2017);
regulate local temperatures, resulting in attenuated heat island
effects (Bowler et al. 2010) and reduced energy demand (Nowak
et al. 2017); provide pollination services (Hall et al. 2017;
Threlfall et al. 2015) and wildlife habitat (Alvey 2006; Murgui
and Hedblom 2017); reduce urban noise (Margaritis and Kang
2017); and sequester and store carbon (Davies et al. 2011).
Larger natural areas outside of cities can contribute even more to
carbon sequestration and storage, water filtration, and timber and
game production.
Proposed research priorities
1.1. To what extent does stress reduction mediate observed
health benefits of nature contact?
1.1a. Both short-term and long-term
1.1b. Which natural elements are most associated with
stress reduction?
1.1c. Which markers of stress reduction are most useful
in studying this effect?
1.2. To what extent does improved immune function
mediate observed health benefits of nature contact?
1.2a. Both short-term and long-term
1.2b. Which natural elements are most associated with
improved immune function?
1.2c. Which markers of immune function are most useful
in studying this effect?
1.2d. What is the role of the human microbiome in medi-
ating this effect?
1.3. To what extent does social connectedness account for,
or mediate, observed health benefits of nature contact?
1.3a. Both short-term and long-term
1.3b. Which social arrangements or activities best opti-
mize the benefits of nature contact through this
pathway?
1.4. Does nature-based physical activity confer benefits
above and beyond equivalent physical activity in
nature-free settings?
1.4a. If so, which natural elements best account for the
additional benefits?
1.5. For each of these potential mechanisms, how do other
factors—demographic, social, biomedical, and ecolog-
ical—affect the associations between nature contact
and health?
Domain 2: Exposure Science
Exposure science (or exposure assessment) is: “the process of
estimating or measuring the magnitude, frequency, and duration
of exposure to an agent, along with the number and characteris-
tics of the population exposed. Ideally, it describes the sources,
pathways, routes, and the uncertainties in the assessment”
(Zartarian et al. 2005). This discipline is a sine qua non of
research on environmental impacts on people, whether the
research focus is on pathogens, medications, toxic chemicals,
social circumstances, or salutary exposures such as nature
(Armstrong et al. 2008; Lioy and Weisel 2014; Nieuwenhuijsen
2003). Despite the centrality of exposure assessment in epidemio-
logic research, there is little agreement on how best to define na-
ture contact for research purposes (Hunter and Luck 2015; Taylor
and Hochuli 2017), let alone how to measure it (Mitchell et al.
2011; Wheeler et al. 2015). Various approaches have been used.
In some research, quantitative measures of natural elements
serve as metrics of nature contact. Most recent research has meas-
ured greenspace; as noted above, greenspace is a more limited
construct than nature contact. Two main kinds of exposure met-
rics are typically used: “cumulative opportunity” and distance
(Ekkel and de Vries 2017). Cumulative opportunity refers to the
total amount of nearby greenness (on the assumption that nature
contact is proportional to this parameter). The most frequently
used measure is the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index
(NDVI), which assesses the density of photosynthetically active
biomass based on satellite imagery (Gascon et al. 2016a; Rhew
et al. 2011). Related metrics include the Enhanced Vegetation
Index (EVI) (Huete et al. 2002), the Leaf Area Index (LAI) (Hu
et al. 2014), the Building Proximity to Green Spaces Index
(BGPI) (Li et al. 2014), and Object-Based Image Analysis
(OBIA) using light detection and ranging (LiDAR), a laser-based
imaging technology (MacFaden et al. 2012). To date, most stud-
ies have defined exposure to these quantitative measures based
on the residential environment, an approach limited by spatial re-
solution and subject to misclassification (if people spend highly
variable amounts of time at home). However, such data can be
combined with Global Positioning System (GPS) tracking using
devices such as smartphones to characterize individual exposure
patterns as people move about during defined periods of observa-
tion (Chaix et al. 2013). The second quantitative approach, dis-
tance to greenspace, such as distance from home to a park, uses
geospatial information. Few studies have compared cumulative
opportunity and distance as exposure assessment strategies, but
in studies that used both (Amoly et al. 2014; Coutts et al. 2010;
Dadvand et al. 2014b; Jonker et al. 2014; Triguero-Mas et al.
2015), cumulative opportunity was a better predictor of health
outcomes (Ekkel and de Vries 2017) [with at least one exception
(Grazuleviciene et al. 2015)].
Semiquantitative measures of nature contact are also used.
Examples include the presence or absence of plants in a class-
room (Han 2009), the presence or absence of a tree view from a
window (Ulrich 1984), the proportion of aquatic elements in a
picture (White et al. 2010), or the density of fish in an aquarium
(Cracknell et al. 2016). At a larger spatial scale, land-use or land-
cover maps are often used. These maps classify landscape ele-
ments as “dense urban,” “forest,” “cropland,” and so on. An
extensive listing of such databases is available for the United
States at the U.S. Geological Survey Land Cover Institute web
site (https://landcover.usgs.gov/) and for the United Kingdom at the
U.K. Office for National Statistics Generalised Land Use Database
(https://data.gov.uk/dataset/land_use_statistics_generalised_land_use_
database). “Exposure” is approximated by integrating the time spent
in each setting. Innovative technology permits more complex charac-
terizations. For example, Google Street View can be used to assess
the degree of nature encountered by a person at street level (Li et al.
2016). Similarly, social media data can help quantify visits to natural
areas and behavior patterns within those areas (Sessions et al. 2016;
Wood et al. 2013).
Standard approaches to exposure measurement share at least
five limitations. First, they fail to capture variations in how peo-
ple experience nature, nuances that may be highly relevant to
Environmental Health Perspectives
075001-5
 health benefits (Kahn 2010). Suppose that one person sits in a car
atop a seaside bluff and admires the view of the beach (while
checking e-mail on a smartphone), a second person walks bare-
foot along the shore, enjoying not only the view but the feel of
the sea breeze and the lapping waves, and a third person plunges
in for a swim. The designation “beach contact” or a measure of
“time at the beach” would fall far short of capturing the variation
in their experiences. Among the relevant variables are the specific
sensory modalities involved. Most research assumes that people’s
contact with nature is visual, but other modes, such as auditory
(Conniff and Craig 2016; Feld 2015), tactile, and olfactory, likely
play a role. Specific forms of nature contact (Step 4 in Figure 2)
need to be identified and measured.
Second, commonly used exposure measures have low repro-
ducibility. Several studies have assessed the concordance among
various measures of greenspace or tree canopy. These measures
include direct observation; the use of Google Street View,
Google Earth, or similar technologies; and the use of secondary
sources such as land-cover data sets (Ben-Joseph et al. 2013;
Charreire et al. 2014; Clarke et al. 2010; Pliakas et al. 2017;
Rundle et al. 2011; Taylor et al. 2011). These measures have gen-
erally shown poor to fair agreement among the different
approaches, suggesting a pervasive problem with measuring
greenspace exposure (much less nature contact).
Third, commonly used exposure measures cannot quantify the
“dose,” that is to say, what a person experiences during an epi-
sode of nature contact. If two people—one observant and highly
attuned to nature, the other oblivious or distracted—both walk
down the same forest path, they are likely to “absorb” differing
levels of nature. “Nature connectedness” and/or awareness may
be important (and highly culture-specific) mediators of “dose,”
and through it of health benefits (Cervinka et al. 2012; Lin et al.
2014; Perrin and Benassi 2009). Even among people who are
highly attuned to nature, perceptions may vary substantially
(Beaudreau et al. 2011; Stier et al. 2017). Qualitative measures
may have a role in addressing such limitations. Indeed, subjective
ratings of vegetation or scenery (Hoyle et al. 2017; Seresinhe
et al. 2015) may approximate “dose” as well as, or better than,
objective measures. Emerging technologies such as smartphone
apps that allow people to describe their surroundings may play
an important role here (Schootman et al. 2016). Such crowd-
sourced data need to be evaluated in terms of validity and
generalizability.
Fourth, standard exposure measures typically focus more on
physical than on temporal attributes. As in pharmacology and
toxicology, the duration and frequency of exposure are important
components of dose. If two people live in the same neighborhood
with a certain amount of tree canopy, but one has lived there for
20 y and takes a 30-min walk each day, whereas the other just
moved there a year ago and only ventures outside twice a month
for 10 min each time, the two people have substantially different
exposure profiles, a difference not captured by measures of their
neighborhood street canopy.
Fifth, standard exposure measures are not grounded in the ec-
ological elements most relevant to human health and well-being.
What is it about a walk in the forest that confers benefits? Is it the
vegetation type (Wheeler et al. 2015)? The level of biodiversity
(Dallimer et al. 2012; Lovell et al. 2014; Rook 2013)? Does it
matter if the trees are in leaf, or is a wintertime walk equally
effective? Is wildness required, or does an orderly tree farm or ag-
ricultural field suffice? Precisely which elements of exposure
need to be measured?
Figure 2. A proposed framework for studying the health benefits of nature contact (adapted from Shanahan et al. 2015b).
Environmental Health Perspectives
075001-6
 The choice of exposure metrics is consequential; there is evi-
dence that research findings may vary with the exposure metrics
used. For example, a study of green space exposure in relation to
general health (Akpinar et al. 2016) found that “aggregated green
space” performed differently from “forest,” and that urban green
space performed differently from rural green space, in predicting
mental health complaints.
Research is needed across all metrics of nature exposure to
identify the metrics that are most accurate and precise and that
best predict human responses of interest. The resulting insights,
coupled with better knowledge of mechanisms of benefit, are
needed to guide the provision of “the best dose of the best
exposures.”
Proposed research priorities
2.1. Which metrics of nature best predict various health
benefits?
2.2. For each such metric, what is its accuracy? What is
its precision?
2.3. What is the role of subjective assessments, and of “nature
connectedness,” in measuring nature contact?
2.4. How do exposure metrics vary in their performance by
population and other factors?
2.5. What are the roles of duration and frequency of exposure
in predicting health benefits?
Domain 3: Epidemiology of Health Benefits
The State of Research
Although recent research has identified many associations
between nature contact and health, much remains to be learned.
The body of epidemiologic research consists principally of three
categories of study: true experiments, “natural experiments,” and
observational studies, with observational studies accounting for
the preponderance of the literature.
True experiments are the gold standard in science. In the na-
ture and health domain, examples include clinical trials of nature
imagery for pain relief during medical procedures (Diette et al.
2003; Lechtzin et al. 2010), of nature adventure therapy in the
treatment of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in veterans
(Gelkopf et al. 2013), of horticultural therapy in pain manage-
ment (Verra et al. 2012), and of park walks in workplace stress
management (de Bloom et al. 2017). The challenges of such
experiments include their cost and the difficulty of assessing
long-term outcomes; indeed, most reported trials have been lim-
ited to relatively short-term outcomes. Opportunities include the
emergence of innovative techniques for measuring outcomes that
can be readily applied in experimental settings (see below).
Natural experiments are study opportunities that resemble
experiments but that arise through circumstances outside the
investigator’s control (Dunning 2012). In the nature and health
domain, examples include a comparison of surgical outcomes in
patients with and without views of trees through their hospital
room windows (Ulrich 1984); a comparison of women’s health in
counties with and without tree loss resulting from emerald ash
borer infestation (Donovan et al. 2015); a comparison of self-
discipline in children living in public housing with and without
nearby trees (Taylor et al. 2002); and a study of crime and stress
in relation to the greening of neglected vacant lots, comparing
blocks already treated with blocks not yet treated (Branas et al.
2011). In each instance, the strength of the study depends on the
extent to which the two groups compared do not differ in ways
other than the exposure of interest. Natural experiments have im-
portant advantages: they are opportunities to study realistic
exposures in realistic settings, they can study long-term outcomes
more readily than true experiments, and they can be far less
expensive than true experiments. They can yield powerful
insights, as illustrated by John Snow’s classic study of water
sources during the 1854 cholera epidemic in London (Snow
1855). However, natural experiments pose several challenges for
researchers. Practically, they require a nimble and rapid response
once a study opportunity is recognized, often exceeding the
capacity of funders, ethics committees, and other institutional
structures. The more thorny challenge is conceptual: natural
experiments are highly susceptible to bias, that is to say, to the
tendency for exposure to vary across a study population by fac-
tors that are also associated with outcomes (Craig et al. 2012;
Rutter 2007). Confounding and reverse causation can be difficult
to exclude. For example, if people who walk in natural settings
evince lower levels of stress than those who do not, is that
because the nature contact has a salutary effect, or is it because
people who are better at managing their stress choose to take
more nature walks?
Finally, retrospective observational studies comprise the bulk
of the literature on nature contact and health. Examples include
the many recent studies of various health outcomes according to
the greenness of residential neighborhoods. These studies have
several advantages. They are practical. They can be conducted
more rapidly than prospective studies. They can readily address
long-term health outcomes. By using data collected for other pur-
poses, they reduce costs. However, they also face the consider-
able challenges of controlling bias and confounding as well as
the potential limits of data not designed specifically for testing
nature–health hypotheses.
Directions for Future Research
Potential enhancements in epidemiologic research on the na-
ture–health connection include innovative data sources, more
diverse study settings, improved exposure assessment (dis-
cussed above), innovative outcome measures, and improved an-
alytical approaches.
With respect to data sources, one option is tapping into large,
ongoing cohort studies. For example, a recent analysis of the
Nurses’ Health Study (NHS) examined the association between
residential greenness and causes of death (James et al. 2016).
This analysis benefited from the well-established, high-quality
exposure and outcome data in an ongoing study. A related option
is adding measures of nature contact to ongoing studies. For
instance, both the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System
(BRFSS) and the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS)
inquire about physical activity, but until now, neither has inquired
about whether that activity takes place outdoors.
Improved computing capabilities offer the possibility of
acquiring and analyzing “big data” from innovative sources.
Examples include administrative data from health care systems
(Birkhead et al. 2015; Mazzali and Duca 2015), mobile health
data (Chen et al. 2012; Hayden 2016), environmental sources
such as Google Street View and webcams (Schootman et al.
2016), and social media sources such as Twitter (Hamad et al.
2016). For instance, with smartphone apps such as Mappiness
(http://www.mappiness.org.uk/), Track Your Happiness (https://
www.trackyourhappiness.org/), and Urban Mind (https://www.
urbanmind.info/), users record their emotions. These responses
are geolocated, permitting the study of minute-to-minute associa-
tions between proximity to nature and emotional states. The same
is true for disease-specific apps such as Share the Journey, devel-
oped to study breast cancer (http://sharethejourneyapp.org/).
With regard to study settings, most studies of nature contact
and health have been carried out in cool, temperate climates,
Environmental Health Perspectives
075001-7
 generally in high-income countries. Relatively little research has
evaluated desert, mountainous, or shoreline landscapes—places
where major population centers are located. Similarly, little
research has been based in low- and middle-income settings, with
their distinct profiles of environmental conditions and health vul-
nerabilities. Epidemiologic research in such settings will extend
knowledge considerably.
Innovative outcome measures offer great promise when
applied to health research on nature exposure (Haluza et al.
2014). These measures include stress indicators such as cortisol,
amylase, and skin conductance (Beil and Hanes 2013; Jiang et al.
2014; JJ Roe et al. 2013); measures of brain activity including
novel EEG methods (Aspinall et al. 2015; J Roe et al. 2013;
Tilley et al. 2017) and functional brain imaging (Bratman et al.
2015b); genetic markers such as leukocyte basal gene expression
profiles (Fredrickson et al. 2013); and telomere shortening (Woo
et al. 2009). The use of physiological measurements may help
elucidate mechanisms of action, as discussed above.
Finally, because nature contact invariably operates as part of
a complex web of health determinants, statistical analysis must
address this complexity. Analytical techniques including multile-
vel analysis (Diez-Roux 2000), complex causal process diagrams
(Joffe and Mindell 2006), path analysis and structural equations,
and the use of counterfactuals (Berzuini et al. 2012; Pearl 2009;
Pearl et al. 2016) may all be useful in controlling bias and con-
founding; in disentangling multivariate, multilevel, bidirectional
associations; and in clarifying causal pathways.
Advancing epidemiologic research requires both the improved
methods described above as well as confirmation and clarification
of specific associations. Figure 2 (based on Shanahan et al. 2015b)
shows a model for this research. In this figure, a natural element
such as tree canopy is identified and associated with defined
functions (such as casting a shadow) that have direct or indirect
effects on people (such as reducing UV radiation exposure) that
in turn affect health (such as reducing skin cancer risk). The asso-
ciation between ecosystem functions and human effects may be
subject to mediation and effect modification by a range of fac-
tors; these are encompassed by the term “moderating factors” in
Figure 2.
Of the innumerable potential associations between nature con-
tact and health, which are the most important to study? Although
priorities will vary from setting to setting, the most common
exposures (for example, urban greenspace, given the preponder-
ance of people who live in cities) and the most common and/or
high-consequence outcomes (such as conditions that account for
a high burden of suffering) should be research priorities.
Research should also focus on characterizing associations in
ways that are relevant to practice, such as by defining dose–
response relationships. Additionally, as discussed below, research
should focus on subpopulations at particular risk or on those that
could benefit disproportionately from nature contact, such as chil-
dren, the elderly, and deprived groups.
Proposed research priorities
3.1. How is nature contact associated with specific health
outcomes of public health importance, such as cardio-
vascular disease, cancer, depression, anxiety, well-
being, and happiness?
3.a.
How do these associations vary across different
populations, life stages, and other factors?
3.b.
Which forms of nature contact are most beneficial?
3.2. What “dose” and duration of exposure are needed to
yield a benefit? How long does the beneficial effect last?
Can habituation occur, with attenuated benefit over time?
3.3. If people born and raised in one setting relocate to a set-
ting with different natural features, do the benefits of na-
ture contact still operate?
3.4. Are there particular benefits from contact with landscapes
or ecosystems that align with human evolutionary origins
and/or with conservation priorities?
3.5. What are the adverse effects, if any, of nature contact?
Domain 4: Diversity and Equity—The Role of
Nature Contact
At least four major strands of research are needed with respect to
diversity and equity: a) patterns of disproportionate exposure; b)
cultural and contextual factors that affect nature preferences and
the experience of nature; c) differing patterns of benefit across
different populations; and d) the possibility that improved access
to nature may have unintended negative consequences on vulner-
able populations.
With respect to disparities in access to nature, there is consider-
able evidence that disadvantaged urban populations are relatively
deprived of access to nature and greenspace (Astell-Burt et al.
2014b; Boone et al. 2009; Dahmann et al. 2010; Heynen et al.
2006; Jennings and Gaither 2015; Jennings et al. 2016; Li et al. 2016;
Pedlowski et al. 2002; Schwarz et al. 2015; Wolch et al. 2014).
Much of this research centers on park access in urban settings. In
some circumstances, studies have shown disadvantaged popula-
tions to have equal or greater proximity to parks and tree canopy
(Barbosa et al. 2007; Cutts et al. 2009; Rigolon 2016; Schwarz
et al. 2015; Vaughan et al. 2013; Wen et al. 2013), but typically
in these situations, the quality of the parks, the level of program-
ming, and/or park access remain significant barriers to park use.
There is also evidence that nature preferences vary across eth-
nic, cultural, and racial backgrounds. Tragically, the legacy of
forced labor, lynchings, and other violence may evoke deeply dis-
turbing associations with trees, fields, and forests among some
African Americans (Johnson et al. 1997; Johnson and Bowker
2004). Diverse populations also express diverse preferences with
respect to greenspace: a baseball diamond for some, a soccer field
for others, picnic facilities for still others (Gobster 2002; Ho et al.
2005; Payne et al. 2002; Smiley et al. 2016). Similarly, the pre-
ferred forms of nature contact may vary: a group activity for
some, solitary hikes for others. Such differences are deeply rooted
in historical and geographic context (Buijs et al. 2009; Byrne and
Wolch 2009). Livelihood may play an important role: a rural
farmer likely has quite different preferences regarding nature
from those of an urban computer programmer. These cultural and
other filters may help determine whether, and how, nature contact
confers health benefits. (There are limits to this approach: people
may not fully recognize and report their own preferences, and
attention restoration or other mechanisms could operate inde-
pendently of preference or even awareness.) Research is needed
to clarify the origin and durability of such preferences and their
effects on health benefits. In practical terms, research on how
best to engage communities in planning parks and greenspace
will likely yield the best-performing facilities in terms of park
use, health, and well-being.
There is evidence that contact with nature and greenspace may
disproportionately benefit disadvantaged populations, attenuating
the toxic effects of poverty and reducing health disparities—the
so-called “equigenic” effect (Lachowycz and Jones 2014; Maas
et al. 2006; Mitchell and Popham 2007, 2008; Mitchell et al.
2015). This effect needs to be confirmed and clarified in different
settings, using a variety of study designs. If nature contact can
help mitigate the toxic effects of poverty, this information could
help guide interventions both to achieve both social justice goals
Environmental Health Perspectives
075001-8
 and to realize the greatest return on investment in terms of human
well-being.
Finally, improvements in access to greenspace may lead to
“green gentrification,” an increase in property values that displa-
ces low-income residents from their neighborhoods (Anguelovski
2017; Lewis and Gould 2017; Miller 2016; Wolch et al. 2014).
This process needs to be studied and understood so that its
adverse effects can be prevented.
Research on these dimensions of equity with respect to nature
contact will permit both understanding the interplay of social dis-
advantage and nature contact and designing and targeting the
most effective strategies for improving health and well-being for
all (Rutt and Gulsrud 2016; Smiley et al. 2016).
Potential research priorities
4.1. How does access to nature vary by socioeconomic sta-
tus, ethnicity, cultural background, and other social
factors, in specific settings?
4.2. How do preferences and perceptions of nature vary
by socioeconomic status, ethnicity, and other demo-
graphic factors, in specific settings, and how do these
differences affect choices regarding time in nature?
4.3. What are the obstacles, both subjective and objective, to
increasing the frequency of nature contact for disadvan-
taged communities?
4.4. How do the benefits of nature contact vary by socioe-
conomic status, ethnicity, and other demographic fac-
tors, in specific settings?
4.5. What unintended negative consequences flow from
“green gentrification,” and what policies and practices
help avoid those consequences?
Domain 5: Technological Nature
Modern information and communication technology that lever-
ages digital computation is becoming exponentially more sophis-
ticated and pervasive and may profoundly alter the human
relationship with nature (Kahn 2011; Kurzweil 2005). Increasing
use of technology—as exemplified by growing “screen time,”
particularly among children—can compete with such activities as
play in natural settings (Radesky and Christakis 2016; Vanderloo
2014) enough to have prompted the American Academy of
Pediatrics to recommend limits on children’s screen time
(Council on Communications and Media 2016).
However, technology does not only interfere with nature con-
tact. “Technological nature” refers to technologies that mediate,
simulate, promote, and/or augment the human experience of na-
ture (Kahn 2011). Examples include real-time digital screen rep-
resentations of local nature (digital nature “windows”), robot
pets, and tele-robot-operated gardens. Virtual reality applications
may simulate nature-based experiences (Guttentag 2010; Schutte
et al. 2017), and the Pokémon Go game, during a peak in popu-
larity in 2016, may have triggered outdoor activity (although the
quality of the resulting nature interaction is unknown) (Althoff
et al. 2016; Dorward et al. 2017; Howe et al. 2016). Other smart-
phone apps may facilitate or inform a connection with nature;
examples include apps that assist with identifying trees, birds, or
constellations.
Studies of people interacting with technological nature have
begun to suggest that such interaction is better for people than no
exposure to nature, but not as beneficial as genuine nature expo-
sure (Kahn Jr et al. 2008; Kahn 2011; Melson et al. 2009).
However, whether this initial trend generalizes across a wide
range of human metrics, and if so, whether it will persist with
increasing
fidelity
of
technological
nature,
remain
open
questions. Research could also focus on the ways in which tech-
nological nature could broaden and even change the human expe-
rience of nature. One near-future example is linking apps with
networked artificial intelligence conversational systems. Virtual
reality is also a near-future pervasive form of interaction in social
media and beyond, including in contact with the natural world
(Guttentag 2010). Because of the growing role of technology in
human–nature interactions, it is important to understand how best
to harness technology to maximize health benefits.
Technological nature may be useful in another way: laboratory-
based controlled experiments utilizing technology may help tease
apart which aspects of the nature experience have which effects on
people and how these effects are moderated according to individual
differences. Here again, attention would need to be paid to how the
technological nature experience compares to the actual nature
experience.
Proposed research priorities
5.1. How can specific forms of technological nature increase
and deepen the human experience of nature?
5.2. Where, how, and why does technological nature fall short
in conferring human benefits relative to the actual experi-
ence of nature?
5.3. What forms of technological nature contact provide
health benefits, and what are those benefits?
5.4. How do these findings vary by technology, context, and
across age groups and other demographic factors?
5.5. What insights can virtual nature contact provide into the
causal mechanisms of psychological benefits, and how
ecologically valid will these insights be?
Domain 6: Economic and Policy Studies,
Including Cobenefits
The benefits of nature contact need to be studied and tested not
only as scientific hypotheses but also as policy propositions; this
requires quantitative estimates of the value of these benefits. The
principal intellectual framework for this approach comes from
the field of ecological economics (Costanza 2015; Farley and
Daly 2011; Stagl and Common 2005), and more particularly
from the analysis and valuation of ecosystem services (Hester
and Harrison 2010; Ninan and Costanza 2014; Ruckelshaus et al.
2015). Both civil society (Harnik and Welle 2009; NRPA 2015)
and academic researchers (Naidoo et al. 2006; Roy et al. 2012;
Shoup 2010) characterize the ecosystem services provided by
parks and greenspace, tree canopy, open land, and other natural
assets. However, these analyses generally focus on biophysical
processes such as storm water management, air quality, and ero-
sion control, omitting explicit consideration of human health and
well-being. Key reports often fail even to mention human health,
much less to quantify it as an ecosystem service (Fisher et al.
2009; Posner et al. 2016; Seppelt et al. 2011)—an omission that
is likely to lead to incorrect conclusions and suboptimal policies.
Fortunately, recent publications have begun to integrate
human health into ecosystem services analyses (Bayles et al.
2016; Breslow et al. 2016; Ford et al. 2015; Lindgren and
Elmqvist 2017; Salmond et al. 2016; Sandifer et al. 2015; Willis
and Petrokofsky 2017) and even to propose quantitative metrics
(Jackson et al. 2013; Smith et al. 2013). In some cases, research
identifies and quantifies the health cobenefits of green infrastruc-
ture and/or conservation efforts, providing a more complete pic-
ture than would otherwise be available (Coutts and Hahn 2015;
Larsen et al. 2012; Wolf and Robbins 2015). Health economics
research can help value both health gains and relatively intangible
benefits such as aesthetic enjoyment and happiness, as well as
Environmental Health Perspectives
075001-9
 help quantify avoided health care costs, attributable to nature
contact. Although precise estimates may be elusive and uncer-
tainty must be acknowledged, in many cases, health benefits will
be large enough to rival other ecosystem services in value.
Importantly, this work needs to take a life course approach;
although average medical costs during childhood are low, invest-
ments in nature contact early in life may yield substantial health
improvements, and avoided medical costs, later in life (Wolf
et al. 2015). Moreover, analysis needs to account for disbenefits
of nature contact, such as allergic reactions and excessive sun-
light exposure. Much more research and analysis are needed to
address these issues.
Cost–benefit analyses need to estimate how much benefit will
flow from specific kinds of investments in nature contact and to
make comparisons among policy alternatives, a key consideration
for city officials, park managers, and other decision makers con-
fronting the reality of limited resources (Ruckelshaus et al.
2015). This research requires mechanistic models that can predict
a mix of monetary and nonmonetary ecosystem services. Teams
of scientists and policy makers need to be highly multidiscipli-
nary to perform “full benefit accounting” that considers both
health benefits and nonhealth benefits (ranging from storm water
management to biodiversity protection to enhanced property
value) of nature’s services.
As noted above, policy research needs to include a strong
focus on equity issues—from documenting disparities in nature
access to testing solutions to preventing gentrification and other
unintended consequences of interventions.
Proposed research priorities
6.1. What are the best methods for valuing the health benefits
of nature?
6.2. What is the health-related value of various forms of
nature contact?
6.2a. Cost–benefit analyses
6.2b. Cost-effectiveness analyses
6.2c. Long-term analyses across the life span
6.2d. Integration with other ecosystem services assessments
6.3. What are the optimal methods of combining both
health and nonhealth cobenefits of various forms of
nature contact?
Domain 7: Implementation Science—Studies of
What Works
Research findings do not necessarily translate into action.
According to one leading researcher, “[d]issemination and imple-
mentation of research findings into practice are necessary to
achieve a return on investment in our research enterprise and to
apply research findings to improve outcomes in the broader com-
munity” (Colditz 2012). This is the motivation for implementa-
tion science—research that “supports movement of evidence-
based effective health care and prevention strategies or programs
from the clinical or public health knowledge base into routine
use” (Colditz 2012). Although descriptive studies can identify
and quantify health benefits of nature contact, intervention stud-
ies are needed to determine what works in practice (Kondo et al.
2015).
Like translational research in medicine, designed to bring
research findings “from the bench to the bedside” to improve
patient outcomes, studies of the nature–health association can be
designed with real-world application in mind. Such studies might
be structured as true experiments, consistent with clinical trials
used routinely in biomedical research. They might also take the
form of program evaluations following a wide range of
interventions. Integrated quantitative and qualitative research
may provide the most comprehensive understanding of health
impacts, from individual to community scales. Important prod-
ucts of such work are predictive models and decision tools for
use by planners and decision makers. For example, some cities
use tools such as the U.S. Forest Service’s i-Tree software (http://
www.itreetools.org/) to analyze environmental services associ-
ated with tree planting. Might further development of such tools
incorporate additional mental and physical health benefits?
Proposed research priorities
(Examples only; research topics in this domain will vary by par-
ticular circumstances)
7.1. With respect to specific interventions designed to pro-
mote health and well-being through nature contact, how
are they implemented (legal and administrative arrange-
ments, partnerships, costs, and financial mechanisms),
and how do they work (in terms of attracting people and
yielding desired outcomes)? Examples of potential high-
impact research include the following:
7.1a. Which trail and park designs perform best in pro-
moting physical activity (Qviström 2016)?
7.1b. How should children’s play spaces be designed to
optimize nature contact (Gundersen et al. 2016)?
7.1c. Which configurations of children’s outdoor schools
optimize health, social relationships, and learning
(Roe and Aspinall 2011; Söderström et al. 2013)?
7.1d. Which design features in natural settings (such as
sweeping views, known as “prospect,” and safe
places to hide, known as “refuge”) make them
most restorative (Gatersleben and Andrews 2013)?
7.1e. What dose of nature is needed to optimize benefits
(Hunter and Askarinejad 2015; Shanahan et al.
2015a, 2016)? How is that dose most effectively
delivered? Are programs such as Park Prescriptions,
in which health care providers direct their patients
to spend time in natural settings, effective (Coffey
and Gauderer 2016)?
7.1f. Which outdoor programs most effectively treat
post-traumatic stress disorder in veterans (Poulsen
et al. 2015)?
7.1g. What is the efficacy of horticultural therapy in
treating dementia, anxiety, stress, and other condi-
tions in the institutionalized and noninstitutional-
ized elderly (Detweiler et al. 2012)?
Conclusions
According to the best available evidence, nature contact offers
considerable promise in addressing a range of health challenges,
including many, such as obesity, cardiovascular disease, depres-
sion, and anxiety, that are public health priorities. Nature contact
offers promise both as prevention and as treatment across the life
course. Potential advantages include low costs relative to conven-
tional medical interventions, safety, practicality, not requiring
dispensing by highly trained professionals, and multiple cobene-
fits. Few medications can boast these attributes.
However, many questions regarding the health benefits of na-
ture contact remain unanswered. A robust program of scientific
research is needed to generate evidence-based answers to these
questions. This paper has identified seven domains of research
that, together, frame an agenda for needed research: mechanistic
biomedical studies, exposure science, epidemiologic studies,
studies focusing on diversity and equity, studies of technological
nature, economic and policy studies, and implementation science.
Environmental Health Perspectives
075001-10
 Although particular challenges exist in such areas as exposure
assessment, innovative data sources and analytical techniques
represent exciting opportunities. The results of such research will
guide interventions across a wide range of settings, populations,
spatial scales, and forms of nature. Health professionals, ecolo-
gists, landscape architects, parks staff, educators, and many
others will in turn be able to apply these results to improve health
and well-being on a large scale.
Acknowledgments
This research agenda was facilitated by the Center for Creative
Conservation at the University of Washington, which receives
partial support from REI. Support for K.L.W. was provided by
the Pacific Northwest Research Station, U.S. Department of
Agriculture Forest Service. Support for G.N.B. was provided by
the Wallenberg Foundation.
References
Akpinar A, Barbosa-Leiker C, Brooks KR. 2016. Does green space matter?
Exploring relationships between green space type and health indicators. Urb
Forestry Urb Greening 20:407–418, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ufug.2016.10.013.
Althoff T, White RW, Horvitz E. 2016. Influence of Pokémon Go on physical activity:
Study and implications. J Med Internet Res 18:e315, PMID: 27923778, https://doi.org/
10.2196/jmir.6759.
Alvey AA. 2006. Promoting and preserving biodiversity in the urban forest. Urb
Forestry Urb Greening 5:195–201, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ufug.2006.09.003.
Ambrey CL, Cartlidge N. 2017. Do the psychological benefits of greenspace depend
on one's personality?. Pers Individ Dif 116:233–239, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
paid.2017.05.001.
Ambrey CL. 2016. An investigation into the synergistic wellbeing benefits of green-
space and physical activity: moving beyond the mean. Urb Forestry Urb
Greening 19:7–12, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ufug.2016.06.020.
Amoly E, Dadvand P, Forns J, Lopez-Vicente M, Basagana X, Julvez J, et al. 2014.
Green and blue spaces and behavioral development in Barcelona schoolchil-
dren: The BREATHE project. Environ Health Perspect 122(12):1351–1358, PMID:
25204008, https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1408215.
Andrusaityte
S,
Grazuleviciene
R,
Kudzyte
J,
Bernotiene
A,
Dedele
A,
Nieuwenhuijsen MJ. 2016. Associations between neighbourhood greenness
and asthma in preschool children in Kaunas, Lithuania: a case–control study.
BMJ Open 6(4):e010341, PMID: 27067890, https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2015-
010341.
Anguelovski I. 2017. Urban greening as the ultimate urban environmental justice trag-
edy?. Planning Theory 16(1):NP2–NP23, https://doi.org/10.1177/1473095216654448.
Armstrong BK, Saracci R, White E. 2008. Principles of Exposure Measurement in
Epidemiology: Collecting, Evaluating, and Improving Measures of Disease Risk
Factors. 2nd ed. Oxford, UK:Oxford University Press.
Aspinall P, Mavros P, Coyne R, Roe J. 2015. The urban brain: analysing outdoor
physical activity with mobile EEG. Br J Sports Med 49(4):272–276, PMID:
23467965, https://doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2012-091877.
Astell-Burt T, Feng X, Kolt GS. 2013. Does access to neighbourhood green space
promote a healthy duration of sleep? Novel findings from a cross-sectional
study of 259 319 Australians. BMJ Open 3(8):e003094, https://doi.org/10.1136/
bmjopen-2013-003094.
Astell-Burt T, Feng X, Kolt GS. 2014a. Is neighborhood green space associated
with a lower risk of type 2 diabetes? Evidence from 267,072 Australians.
Diabetes Care 37:197–201, PMID: 24026544, https://doi.org/10.2337/dc13-1325.
Astell-Burt T, Feng X, Mavoa S, Badland HM, Giles-Corti B. 2014b. Do low-income
neighbourhoods have the least green space? a cross-sectional study of
Australia's most populous cities. BMC Public Health 14:292, PMID: 24678610,
https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-14-292.
Astell-Burt T, Mitchell R, Hartig T. 2014c. The association between green space
and mental health varies across the lifecourse. A longitudinal study. J
Epidemiol Community Health 68:578–583, https://doi.org/10.1136/jech-2013-
203767.
Balseviciene B, Sinkariova L, Grazuleviciene R, Andrusaityte S, Uzdanaviciute I,
Dedele A, et al. 2014. Impact of residential greenness on preschool children’s
emotional and behavioral problems. Int J Environ Res Public Health 11(7):6757–
6770, PMID: 24978880, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph110706757.
Bancroft C, Joshi S, Rundle A, Hutson M, Chong C, Weiss CC, et al. 2015.
Association of proximity and density of parks and objectively measured physical
activity in the united states: a systematic review. Soc Sci Med 138:22–30, PMID:
26043433, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2015.05.034.
Barbosa O, Tratalos JA, Armsworth PR, Davies RG, Fuller RA, Johnson P, et al.
2007. Who benefits from access to green space? A case study from Sheffield,
UK. Landscape and Urban Planning 83(2–3):187–195, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
landurbplan.2007.04.004.
Barker SB, Wolen AR. 2008. The benefits of human-companion animal interaction:
a review. J Vet Med Educ 35(4):487–495, PMID: 19228898, https://doi.org/10.
3138/jvme.35.4.487.
Barton J, Bragg R, Wood C, Pretty J, eds. 2016. Green Exercise: Linking Nature,
Health and Well-Being. Abingdon, UK:Earthscan/Routledge.
Bauman A, Merom D, Bull FC, Buchner DM, Fiatarone Singh MA. 2016. Updating
the evidence for physical activity: Summative reviews of the epidemiologi-
cal evidence, prevalence, and interventions to promote “active aging”.
Gerontologist 56(suppl2):S268–S280, https://doi.org/10.1093/geront/gnw031.
Bayles BR, Brauman KA, Adkins JN, Allan BF, Ellis Am, Goldberg TL, et al. 2016.
Ecosystem services connect environmental change to human health outcomes.
EcoHealth 13(3):443–449, PMID: 27357081, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10393-016-
1137-5.
Beaudreau AH, Levin PS, Norman KC. 2011. Using folk taxonomies to understand
stakeholder perceptions for species conservation. Conserv Lett 4(6):451–463,
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1755-263X.2011.00199.x.
Beil K, Hanes D. 2013. The influence of urban natural and built environments on
physiological and psychological measures of stress- a pilot study. Int J
Environ Res Public Health 10(4):1250–1267, PMID: 23531491, https://doi.org/10.
3390/ijerph10041250.
Bell JF, Wilson JS, Liu GC. 2008. Neighborhood greenness and 2-year changes in
body mass index of children and youth. Am J Prev Med 35(6):547–553, PMID:
19000844, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2008.07.006.
Ben-Joseph E, Lee JS, Cromley EK, Laden F, Troped PJ. 2013. Virtual and actual:
Relative accuracy of on-site and web-based instruments in auditing the envi-
ronment for physical activity. Health Place 19:138–150, PMID: 23247423,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.healthplace.2012.11.001.
Berland A, Shiflett SA, Shuster WD, Garmestani AS, Goddard HC, Herrmann DL,
et al. 2017. The role of trees in urban stormwater management. Landsc Urban
Plan 162:167–177, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2017.02.017.
Berto R. 2014. The role of nature in coping with psycho-physiological stress: A litera-
ture review on restorativeness. Behav Sci (Basel) 4(4):394–409, https://doi.org/
10.3390/bs4040394.
Berzuini C, Dawid P, Bernardinelli L, Berzuini C. 2012. Causality: Statistical
Perspectives and Applications. Hoboken, NJ:Wiley.
Beyer KMM, Kaltenbach A, Szabo A, Bogar S, Nieto FJ, Malecki KM. 2014.
Exposure to neighborhood green space and mental health: Evidence from the
survey of the health of Wisconsin. Int J Environ Res Public Health 11(3):3453–
3472, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph110303453.
Bijker RA, Sijtsma FJ. 2017. A portfolio of natural places: using a participatory GIS
tool to compare the appreciation and use of green spaces inside and outside
urban areas by urban residents. Landsc Urban Plan 158:155–165, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.landurbplan.2016.10.004.
Bingham DD, Costa S, Hinkley T, Shire KA, Clemes SA, Barber SE. 2016. Physical
activity during the early years: a systematic review of correlates and determi-
nants. Am J Prev Med 51(3):384–402, PMID: 27378255, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
amepre.2016.04.022.
Birkhead GS, Klompas M, Shah NR. 2015. Uses of electronic health records for
public health surveillance to advance public health. Annu Rev Public Health
36:345–359, PMID: 25581157, https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-publhealth-031914-
122747.
Blumenthal DS, Diclemente RJ, Braithwaite R, Smith SA. 2013. Community-Based
Participatory Health Research: Issues, Methods, and Translation to Practice.
2nd ed. New York, NY:Springer.
Bodicoat DH, O'Donovan G, Dalton AM, Gray LJ, Yates T, Edwardson C, et al. 2014. The
association between neighbourhood greenspace and type 2 diabetes in a large
cross-sectional study. BMJ Open 4:e006076, https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2014-
006076.
Bogar S, Beyer KM. 2016. Green space, violence, and crime. Trauma Violence
Abuse 17(2):160–171, PMID: 25824659, https://doi.org/10.1177/1524838015576412.
Bolund P, Hunhammar S. 1999. Ecosystem services in urban areas. Ecol Econ
29(2):293–301, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0921-8009(99)00013-0.
Boone CG, Buckley GL, Grove JM, Sister C. 2009. Parks and people: an environ-
mental justice inquiry in Baltimore, Maryland. Ann Assoc Am Geogr 99(4):767–
787, https://doi.org/10.1080/00045600903102949.
Bowler DE, Buyung-Ali L, Knight TM, Pullin AS. 2010. Urban greening to cool towns
and cities: a systematic review of the empirical evidence. Landsc Urban Plan
97:147–155, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2010.05.006.
Bowler DE, Buyung-Ali LM, Knight TM, Pullin AS. 2010. A systematic review of
evidence for the added benefits to health of exposure to natural environ-
ments. BMC Public Health 10:456, PMID: 20684754, https://doi.org/10.1186/
1471-2458-10-456.
Environmental Health Perspectives
075001-11
 Branas CC, Cheney RA, MacDonald JM, Tam VW, Jackson TD, Ten Have TR. 2011.
A difference-in-differences analysis of health, safety, and greening vacant
urban space. Am J Epidemiol 174(11):1296–1306, PMID: 22079788, https://doi.org/
10.1093/aje/kwr273.
Bratman GN, Daily GC, Levy BJ, Gross JJ. 2015a. The benefits of nature experi-
ence:
improved
affect
and
cognition.
Landsc
Urban
Plan
138:41–50,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2015.02.005.
Bratman GN, Hamilton JP, Daily GC. 2012. The impacts of nature experience on
human cognitive function and mental health. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1249:118–136,
PMID: 22320203, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.2011.06400.x.
Bratman GN, Hamilton JP, Hahn KS, Daily GC, Gross JJ. 2015b. Nature experience
reduces rumination and subgenual prefrontal cortex activation. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 112(28):8567–8572.
Breslow SJ, Sojka B, Barnea R, Basurto X, Carothers C, Charnley S, et al. 2016.
Conceptualizing and operationalizing human wellbeing for ecosystem assessment
and management. Environ Sci Policy 66:250–259, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2016.
06.023.
Brown SC, Lombard J, Wang K, Byrne MM, Toro M, Plater-Zyberk E, et al. 2016.
Neighborhood greenness and chronic health conditions in medicare beneficia-
ries. Am J Prev Med 51(1):78–89, PMID: 27061891, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.
2016.02.008.
Broyles ST, Mowen AJ, Theall KP, Gustat J, Rung AL. 2011. Integrating social capi-
tal into a park-use and active-living framework. Am J Prev Med 40(5):522–529,
PMID: 21496751, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2010.12.028.
Brunson L, Kuo FE, Sullivan WC. 2001. Resident appropriation of defensible space
in public housing: implications for safety and community. Environ Behav
33(5):626–652, https://doi.org/10.1177/00139160121973160.
Buijs AE, Elands BHM, Langers F. 2009. No wilderness for immigrants: cultural dif-
ferences in images of nature and landscape preferences. Landsc Urban Plan
91:113–123, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2008.12.003.
Byrne J, Wolch J. 2009. Nature, race, and parks: past research and future direc-
tions for geographic research. Prog Hum Geogr 33(6):743–765, https://doi.org/
10.1177/0309132509103156.
Calogiuri G, Chroni S. 2014. The impact of the natural environment on the promo-
tion of active living: an integrative systematic review. BMC Public Health
14:873, PMID: 25150711, https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-14-873.
Cervinka R, Röderer K, Hefler E. 2012. Are nature lovers happy? On various indica-
tors of well-being and connectedness with nature. J Health Psychol 17(3):379–
388, PMID: 21859800, https://doi.org/10.1177/1359105311416873.
Chaix B, Meline J, Duncan S, Merrien C, Karusisi N, Perchoux C, et al. 2013. GPS
tracking in neighborhood and health studies: a step forward for environmental
exposure assessment, a step backward for causal inference?. Health Place
21:46–51, PMID: 23425661, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.healthplace.2013.01.003.
Charreire H, Mackenbach JD, Ouasti M, Lakerveld J, Compernolle S, Ben-Rebah
M, et al. 2014. Using remote sensing to define environmental characteristics
related to physical activity and dietary behaviours: a systematic review (The
Spotlight Project). Health Place 25:1–9, PMID: 24211730, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.healthplace.2013.09.017.
Chen C, Haddad D, Selsky J, Hoffman JE, Kravitz RL, Estrin DE, et al. 2012. Making
sense of mobile health data: an open architecture to improve individual- and
population-level health. J Med Internet Res 14(4):e112, https://doi.org/10.2196/
jmir.2152.
Clarke P, Ailshire J, Melendez R, Bader M, Morenoff J. 2010. Using Google Earth to
conduct a neighborhood audit: reliability of a virtual audit instrument. Health
Place 16(6):1224–1229, PMID: 20797897, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.healthplace.
2010.08.007.
Cleland V, Crawford D, Baur LA, Hume C, Timperio A, Salmon J. 2008. A prospec-
tive examination of children's time spent outdoors, objectively measured physi-
cal activity and overweight. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 32:1685–1693,
https://doi.org/10.1038/ijo.2008.171.
Clements R. 2004. An investigation of the status of outdoor play. Contemp Iss Early
Child 5(1):68–80, https://doi.org/10.2304/ciec.2004.5.1.10.
Coffey JS, Gauderer L. 2016. When pediatric primary care providers prescribe na-
ture engagement at a state park, do children “fill” the prescription?.
Ecopsychology 8(4):207–214, https://doi.org/10.1089/eco.2016.0019.
Cohen-Cline H, Turkheimer E, Duncan GE. 2015. Access to green space, physical
activity and mental health: a twin study. J Epidemiol Community Health
69(6):523–529, PMID: 25631858, https://doi.org/10.1136/jech-2014-204667.
Colditz GA. 2012. The promise and challenges of dissemination and implementation
research. In: Dissemination and Implementation Research in Health: Translating
Science into Practice. Brownson RC, Colditz GA, Proctor EK, eds. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press, 3–22.
Collado S, Corraliza JA, Staats H, Ruiz M. 2015. Effect of frequency and mode of
contact with nature on children's self-reported ecological behaviors. J Environ
Psychol 41:65–73, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2014.11.001.
Conniff A, Craig T. 2016. A methodological approach to understanding the well-
being and restorative benefits associated with greenspace. Urban For Urban
Green 19:103–109, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ufug.2016.06.019.
Coon JT, Boddy K, Stein K, Whear R, Barton J, Depledge MH. 2011. Does partici-
pating in physical activity in outdoor natural environments have a greater
effect on physical and mental wellbeing than physical activity indoors? A sys-
tematic review. Environ Sci Technol 45(5):1761–1772, https://doi.org/10.1021/
es102947t.
Costanza R. 2015. An Introduction to Ecological Economics. 2nd ed. Boca Raton,
FL:CRC Press.
Council on Communications and Media. 2016. Media use in school-aged children
and adolescents. Pediatrics 138(5):e20162592.
Coutts C, Hahn M. 2015. Green infrastructure, ecosystem services, and human
health. Int J Environ Res Public Health 12(8):9768–9798, PMID: 26295249,
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph120809768.
Coutts C, Horner M, Chapin T. 2010. Using geographical information system to
model the effects of green space accessibility on mortality in florida. Geocarto
Int 25(6):471–484, https://doi.org/10.1080/10106049.2010.505302.
Cracknell D, White MP, Pahl S, Nichols WJ, Depledge MH. 2016. Marine biota and
psychological well-being: A preliminary examination of dose–response effects
in an aquarium setting. Environ Behav 48(10):1242–1269, https://doi.org/10.1177/
0013916515597512.
Craig P, Cooper C, Gunnell D, Haw S, Lawson K, Macintyre S, et al. 2012. Using nat-
ural experiments to evaluate population health interventions: New Medical
Research Council guidance. J Epidemiol Community Health 66(12):1182–1186,
PMID: 22577181, https://doi.org/10.1136/jech-2011-200375.
Cronon W. 1996. Uncommon Ground: Rethinking the Human Place in Nature. New
York, NY:W.W. Norton & Co.
Cutts BB, Darby KJ, Boone CG, Brewis A. 2009. City structure, obesity, and environ-
mental justice: an integrated analysis of physical and social barriers to walk-
able streets and park access. Soc Sci Med 69(9):1314–1322, https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.socscimed.2009.08.020.
Dadvand P, Villanueva CM, Font-Ribera L, Martinez D, Basagana X, Belmonte J,
et al. 2014a. Risks and benefits of green spaces for children: a cross-sectional
study of associations with sedentary behavior, obesity, asthma, and allergy. Environ
Health Perspect 122(12):1329–1335, PMID: 25157960, https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.
1308038.
Dadvand P, Wright J, Martinez D, Basagaña X, McEachan RRC, Cirach M, et al.
2014b. Inequality, green spaces, and pregnant women: roles of ethnicity and
individual and neighbourhood socioeconomic status. Environ Int 71:101–108,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2014.06.010.
Dadvand P, Bartoll X, Basagaña X, Dalmau-Bueno A, Martinez D, Ambros A, et al.
2016. Green spaces and general health: roles of mental health status, social
support, and physical activity. Environ Int 91:161–167, PMID: 26949869,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2016.02.029.
Dahmann N, Wolch J, Joassart-Marcelli P, Reynolds K, Jerrett M. 2010. The active
city? Disparities in provision of urban public recreation resources. Health
Place 16(3):431–445, PMID: 20056472, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.healthplace.2009.
11.005.
Dallimer M, Irvine KN, Skinner AMJ, Davies ZG, Rouquette JR, Maltby LL, et al.
2012. Biodiversity and the feel-good factor: understanding associations
between self-reported human well-being and species richness. BioScience
62(1):47–55, https://doi.org/10.1525/bio.2012.62.1.9.
Davies ZG, Edmondson JL, Heinemeyer A, Leake JR, Gaston KJ. 2011. Mapping an
urban ecosystem service: Quantifying above-ground carbon storage at a city-
wide scale. J Appl Ecol 48(5):1125–1134, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2664.
2011.02021.x.
de Bloom J, Sianoja M, Korpela K, Tuomisto M, Lilja A, Geurts S, et al. 2017. Effects
of park walks and relaxation exercises during lunch breaks on recovery from
job stress: two randomized controlled trials. J Environ Psychol 51:14–30,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2017.03.006.
de Vries S, van Dillen SM, Groenewegen PP, Spreeuwenberg P. 2013. Streetscape
greenery and health: Stress, social cohesion and physical activity as mediators.
Soc Sci Med 94:26–33, PMID: 23931942, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2013.
06.030.
de Vries S, Verheij RA, Groenewegen PP, Spreeuwenberg P. 2003. Natural
environments—healthy environments? An exploratory analysis of the rela-
tionship between greenspace and health. Environ Plann A 35(10):1717–1731,
https://doi.org/10.1068/a35111.
Detweiler MB, Sharma T, Detweiler JG, Murphy PF, Lane S, Carman J, et al. 2012.
What is the evidence to support the use of therapeutic gardens for the el-
derly?. Psychiatry Investig 9(2):100–110, https://doi.org/10.4306/pi.2012.9.2.100.
Diette GB, Lechtzin N, Haponik E, Devrotes A, Rubin HR. 2003. Distraction therapy
with nature sights and sounds reduces pain during flexible bronchoscopy.
Chest 123(3):941–948, https://doi.org/10.1378/chest.123.3.941.
Environmental Health Perspectives
075001-12
 Diez-Roux AV. 2000. Multilevel analysis in public health research. Annu Rev Public
Health 21:171–192, PMID: 10884951, https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.publhealth.
21.1.171.
Donovan GH, Michael YL, Gatziolis D, Prestemon JP, Whitsel EA. 2015. Is tree loss
associated with cardiovascular-disease risk in the Women's Health Initiative?
A natural experiment. Health Place 36:1–7, PMID: 26335885, https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.healthplace.2015.08.007.
Dooris M. 2006. Healthy settings: Challenges to generating evidence of effective-
ness. Health Promot Int 21(1):55–65, PMID: 16339774, https://doi.org/10.1093/
heapro/dai030.
Dorward LJ, Mittermeier JC, Sandbrook C, Spooner F. 2017. Pokémon Go: Benefits,
costs, and lessons for the conservation movement. Conservation Letters
10(1):160–165, https://doi.org/10.1111/conl.12326.
Duncan M, Clarke N, Birch S, Tallis J, Hankey J, Bryant E, et al. 2014. The effect of
green exercise on blood pressure, heart rate and mood state in primary school
children. Int J Environ Res Public Health 11(4):3678–3688, https://doi.org/10.
3390/ijerph110403678.
Dunning T. 2012. Natural Experiments in the Social Sciences: A Design-Based
Approach. Cambridge, UK:Cambridge University Press.
Dzhambov AM, Dimitrova DD, Dimitrakova ED. 2014. Association between residen-
tial greenness and birth weight: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Urb
Forestry Urb Greening 13(4):621–629, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ufug.2014.09.004.
Ekkel ED, de Vries S. 2017. Nearby green space and human health: Evaluating
accessibility metrics. Landsc Urban Plan 157:214–220, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
landurbplan.2016.06.008.
Evensen KH, Raanaas RK, Hagerhall CM, Johansson M, Patil GG. 2015. Restorative
elements at the computer workstation: A comparison of live plants and inani-
mate objects with and without window view. Environ Behav 47(3):288–303,
https://doi.org/10.1177/0013916513499584.
Faber Taylor A, Kuo F, Sullivan W. 2001. Coping with ADD: the surprising connec-
tion to green play settings. Environ Behav 33(1):54–77, https://doi.org/10.1177/
00139160121972864.
Faber Taylor A, Kuo F. 2009. Children with attention deficits concentrate better af-
ter walk in the park. J Atten Disord 12(5):402–409, https://doi.org/10.1177/
1087054708323000.
Faber Taylor A, Kuo FEM. 2011. Could exposure to everyday green spaces help
treat ADHD? Evidence from children's play settings. Appl Psychol Health Well
Being 3(3):281–303, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1758-0854.2011.01052.x.
Fan Y, Das KV, Chen Q. 2011. Neighborhood green, social support, physical activity,
and stress: Assessing the cumulative impact. Health Place 17(6):1202–1211,
PMID: 21920795, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.healthplace.2011.08.008.
Farley JC, Daly HE. 2011. Ecological Economics: Principles and Applications. 2nd
ed. Washington, DC:Island Press.
Feda DM, Seelbinder A, Baek S, Raja S, Yin L, Roemmich JN. 2015. Neighbourhood
parks and reduction in stress among adolescents: Results from Buffalo, New
York. Indoor Built Environ 24(5):631–639, https://doi.org/10.1177/1420326X14535791.
Feld S. 2015. Acoustemology. In: Keywords in Sound. Novak D, Sakakeeny M, eds.
Durham, NC:Duke University Press, 12–21.
Fisher B, Turner RK, Morling P. 2009. Defining and classifying ecosystem services for deci-
sion making. Ecol Econ 68(3):643–653, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2008.09.014.
Fjørtoft I. 2001. The natural environment as a playground for children: the impact of
outdoor play activities in pre-primary school children. Early Child Educ J
29(2):111–117, https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1012576913074.
Fjørtoft I. 2004. Landscape as playscape: The effects of natural environments on
children's play and motor development. Children Youth Environ 14(2):21–44.
Fleming CM, Manning M, Ambrey CL. 2016. Crime, greenspace and life satisfaction:
An evaluation of the New Zealand experience. Landsc Urban Plan 149:1–10,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2015.12.014.
Fletcher R. 2016. Connection with nature is an oxymoron: a political ecology of “na-
ture-deficit disorder.” J Environ Educ, https://doi.org/10.1080/00958964.2016.
1139534.
Ford AES, Graham H, White PCL. 2015. Integrating human and ecosystem health
through ecosystem services frameworks. EcoHealth 12(4):660–671, PMID:
26403794, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10393-015-1041-4.
Fraser SD, Lock K. 2011. Cycling for transport and public health: A systematic
review of the effect of the environment on cycling. Eur J Public Health
21(6):738–743, PMID: 20929903, https://doi.org/10.1093/eurpub/ckq145.
Fredrickson BL, Grewen KM, Coffey KA, Algoe SB, Firestine AM, Arevalo JM, et al.
2013. A functional genomic perspective on human well-being. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 110(33):13684–13689, PMID: 23898182, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.
1305419110.
French AN, Ashby RS, Morgan IG, Rose KA. 2013. Time outdoors and the preven-
tion of myopia. Exp Eye Res 114:58–68, PMID: 23644222, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.exer.2013.04.018.
Frost JL. 2010. A History of Children's Play and Play Environments: Toward a
Contemporary Child-Saving Movement. New York, NY:Routledge.
Frumkin H. 2013. The evidence of nature and the nature of evidence. Am J Prev
Med 44(2):196–197, PMID: 23332341, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2012.10.016.
Fuertes E, Markevych I, von Berg A, Bauer CP, Berdel D, Koletzko S, et al. 2014.
Greenness and allergies: evidence of differential associations in two areas in
Germany. J Epidemiol Community Health 68:787–790, https://doi.org/10.1136/
jech-2014-203903.
Fuertes E, Markevych I, Bowatte G, Gruzieva O, Gehring U, Becker A, et al. 2016.
Residential greenness is differentially associated with childhood allergic rhini-
tis and aeroallergen sensitization in seven birth cohorts. Allergy 71(10):1461–
1471, PMID: 27087129, https://doi.org/10.1111/all.12915.
Gascon M, Triguero-Mas M, Martinez D, Dadvand P, Forns J, Plasencia A, et al.
2015. Mental health benefits of long-term exposure to residential green and
blue spaces: a systematic review. Int J Environ Res Public Health 12(4):4354–
4379, PMID: 25913182, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph120404354.
Gascon M, Triguero-Mas M, Martínez D, Dadvand P, Rojas-Rueda D, Plasència A,
et al. 2016a. Normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) as a marker of sur-
rounding greenness in epidemiological studies: the case of Barcelona City.
Urb Forestry Urb Greening 19:88–94.
Gascon M, Triguero-Mas M, Martínez D, Dadvand P, Rojas-Rueda D, Plasència A,
et al. 2016b. Residential green spaces and mortality: a systematic review.
Environ Int 86:60–67.
Gatersleben B, Andrews M. 2013. When walking in nature is not restorative-the
role of prospect and refuge. Health Place 20:91–101, PMID: 23399852,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.healthplace.2013.01.001.
Gelkopf M, Hasson-Ohayon I, Bikman M, Kravetz S. 2013. Nature adventure rehabili-
tation for combat-related posttraumatic chronic stress disorder: A randomized
control trial. Psychiatry Res 209(3):485–493, PMID: 23541513, https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.psychres.2013.01.026.
Gobster PH. 2002. Managing urban parks for a racially and ethnically diverse clien-
tele. Leis Sci 24(2):143–159, https://doi.org/10.1080/01490400252900121.
Gray C, Gibbons R, Larouche R, Sandseter EB, Bienenstock A, Brussoni M, et al.
2015. What is the relationship between outdoor time and physical activity, sed-
entary behaviour, and physical fitness in children? A systematic review. Int J
Environ Res Public Health 12(6):6455–6474, PMID: 26062039, https://doi.org/10.
3390/ijerph120606455.
Grazuleviciene R, Danileviciute A, Dedele A, Vencloviene J, Andrusaityte S,
Uzdanaviciute I, et al. 2015. Surrounding greenness, proximity to city parks and
pregnancy outcomes in Kaunas Cohort Study. Int J Hyg Environ Health
218(3):358–365, PMID: 25757723, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2015.02.004.
Grigsby-Toussaint DS, Turi KN, Krupa M, Williams NJ, Pandi-Perumal SR, Jean-
Louis G. 2015. Sleep insufficiency and the natural environment: Results from
the US Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System Survey. Prev Med 78:78–84,
PMID: 26193624, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ypmed.2015.07.011.
Groenewegen PP, van den Berg AE, Maas J, Verheij RA, de Vries S. 2012. Is a
green residential environment better for health? If so, why?. Ann Assoc Am
Geogr 102(5):996–1003, https://doi.org/10.1080/00045608.2012.674899.
Grote R, Samson R, Alonso R, Amorim JH, Cariñanos P, Churkina G, et al. 2016.
Functional traits of urban trees: air pollution mitigation potential. Front Ecol
Environ 14(10):543–550, https://doi.org/10.1002/fee.1426.
Gubbels JS, Kremers SPJ, Droomers M, Hoefnagels C, Stronks K, Hosman C, et al.
2016. The impact of greenery on physical activity and mental health of adoles-
cent and adult residents of deprived neighborhoods: a longitudinal study.
Health Place 40:153–160, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.healthplace.2016.06.002.
Guggenheim JA, Northstone K, McMahon G, Ness AR, Deere K, Mattocks C, et al.
2012. Time outdoors and physical activity as predictors of incident myopia in
childhood: A prospective cohort study. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 53(6):2856–
2865, PMID: 22491403, https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.11-9091.
Gundersen V, Skår M, O'Brien L, Wold LC, Follo G. 2016. Children and nearby na-
ture: a nationwide parental survey from norway. Urban Forestry & Urban
Greening 17:116–125, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ufug.2016.04.002.
Guttentag DA. 2010. Virtual reality: Applications and implications for tourism. Tour
Manag 31(5):637–651, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tourman.2009.07.003.
Hall DM, Camilo GR, Tonietto RK, Ollerton J, Ahrné K, Arduser M, et al. 2017. The
city as a refuge for insect pollinators. Conserv Biol 31(1):24–29, PMID:
27624925, https://doi.org/10.1111/cobi.12840.
Haluza D, Schönbauer R, Cervinka R. 2014. Green perspectives for public health: A
narrative review on the physiological effects of experiencing outdoor nature. Int
J Environ Res Public Health 11(5):5445–5461, PMID: 24852391, https://doi.org/10.
3390/ijerph110505445.
Hamad EO, Savundranayagam MY, Holmes JD, Kinsella EA, Johnson AM. 2016.
Toward a mixed-methods research approach to content analysis in the digital
age: The combined content-analysis model and its applications to health care
twitter feeds. J Med Internet Res 18(3):e60, https://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.5391.
Han J-W, Choi H, Jeon Y-H, Yoon C-H, Woo J-M, Kim W. 2016. The effects of forest
therapy on coping with chronic widespread pain: Physiological and psycholog-
ical differences between participants in a forest therapy program and a
Environmental Health Perspectives
075001-13
 control group. Int J Environ Res Public Health 13(3):255, https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph13030255.
Han K-T. 2009. Influence of limitedly visible leafy indoor plants on the psychology,
behavior, and health of students at a junior high school in Taiwan. Environ
Behav 41(5):658–692, https://doi.org/10.1177/0013916508314476.
Hanski I, von Hertzen L, Fyhrquist N, Koskinen K, Torppa K, Laatikainen T, et al.
2012. Environmental biodiversity, human microbiota, and allergy are interre-
lated. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA U S A 109(21):8334–8339, PMID: 22566627,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1205624109.
Harnik P, Welle B. 2009. Measuring the economic value of a city park system.
Trust for Public Land. http://cloud.tpl.org/pubs/ccpe-econvalueparks-rpt.pdf
[accessed 5 July 2017].
Hartig T, Mitchell R, de Vries S, Frumkin H. 2014. Nature and health. Annu Rev
Public Health 35:207–228, PMID: 24387090, https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-
publhealth-032013-182443.
Hayden EC. 2016. Mobile-phone health apps deliver data bounty. Nature
531(7595):422–423, https://doi.org/10.1038/531422a.
He M, Xiang F, Zeng Y, Mai J, Chen Q, Zhang J, et al. 2015. Effect of time spent
outdoors at school on the development of myopia among children in china:
A randomized clinical trial. JAMA 314(11):1142–1148, PMID: 26372583,
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2015.10803.
Herzog TR, Bryce AG. 2007. Mystery and preference in within-forest settings.
Environ Behav 39(6):779–796, https://doi.org/10.1177/0013916506298796.
Hester RE, Harrison RM. 2010. Ecosystem Services. Cambridge, UK: Royal Society
of Chemistry.
Heynen N, Perkins HA, Roy P. 2006. The political ecology of uneven urban green space:
The impact of political economy on race and ethnicity in producing environmental
inequality in Milwaukee. Urban Affairs Review 42(1):3–25, https://doi.org/10.1177/
1078087406290729.
Hillsdon M, Panter J, Foster C, Jones A. 2006. The relationship between access
and quality of urban green space with population physical activity. Public
Health 120(12):1127– 1132, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.puhe.2006.10.007.
Ho C-h, Sasidharan V, Elmendorf W, Willits FK, Graefe A, Godbey G. 2005. Gender
and ethnic variations in urban park preferences, visitation, and perceived ben-
efits. J Leis Res 37(3):281–306.
Holtan MT, Dieterlen SL, Sullivan WC. 2015. Social life under cover: tree canopy and
social capital in Baltimore, Maryland. Environment and Behavior 47(5):502–525,
https://doi.org/10.1177/0013916513518064.
Home R, Hunziker M, Bauer N. 2012. Psychosocial outcomes as motivations for vis-
iting nearby urban green spaces. Leis Sci 34(4):350–365, https://doi.org/10.1080/
01490400.2012.687644.
Howe KB, Suharlim C, Ueda P, Howe D, Kawachi I, Rimm EB. 2016. Gotta catch’em
all! Pokémon Go and physical activity among young adults: difference in differ-
ences study. BMJ 355:i6270.
Hoyle H, Hitchmough J, Jorgensen A. 2017. All about the ‘wow factor’? The rela-
tionships between aesthetics, restorative effect and perceived biodiversity in
designed urban planting. Landsc Urban Plan 164:109–123, https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.landurbplan.2017.03.011.
Hu R, Yan G, Mu X, Luo J. 2014. Indirect measurement of leaf area index on the basis
of path length distribution. Remote Sens Environ 155:239–247, https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.rse.2014.08.032.
Hu Z, Liebens J, Rao KR. 2008. Linking stroke mortality with air pollution, income,
and greenness in northwest florida: An ecological geographical study. Int J
Health Geogr 7:20, PMID: 18452609, https://doi.org/10.1186/1476-072X-7-20.
Huete A, Didan K, Miura T, Rodriguez EP, Gao X, Ferreira LG. 2002. Overview of the
radiometric and biophysical performance of the MODIS vegetation indices.
Remote Sens Environ 83(1–2):195–213, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0034-4257(02)
00096-2.
Hunter AJ, Luck GW. 2015. Defining and measuring the social-ecological quality of
urban greenspace: a semi-systematic review. Urban Ecosyst 18(4):1139–1163,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11252-015-0456-6.
Hunter MR, Askarinejad A. 2015. Designer’s approach for scene selection in tests
of preference and restoration along a continuum of natural to manmade envi-
ronments. Front Psychol 6:1228, PMID: 26347691, https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.
2015.01228.
Hunter RF, Christian H, Veitch J, Astell-Burt T, Hipp JA, Schipperijn J. 2015. The
impact of interventions to promote physical activity in urban green space: A
systematic review and recommendations for future research. Soc Sci Med
124:246–256, PMID: 25462429, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2014.11.
051.
Irwin MR, Cole SW. 2011. Reciprocal regulation of the neural and innate immune
systems. Nat Rev Immunol 11(9):625–632, PMID: 21818124, https://doi.org/10.
1038/nri3042.
Jackson LE, Daniel J, McCorkle B, Sears A, Bush KF. 2013. Linking ecosystem
services and human health: The eco-health relationship browser. Int J Public
Health 58(5):747–755, PMID: 23877533, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00038-013-0482-1.
James P, Banay RF, Hart JE, Laden F. 2015. A review of the health benefits of
greenness. Curr Epidemiol Rep 2(2):131–142, PMID: 26185745, https://doi.org/10.
1007/s40471-015-0043-7.
James P, Hart JE, Banay RF, Laden F. 2016. Exposure to greenness and mortality in
a nationwide prospective cohort study of women. Environ Health Perspect
124(9): 1344–1352, PMID: 27074702, https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1510363.
Jason L, Glenwick D. 2016. Handbook of Methodological Approaches to
Community-Based Research: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods.
New York, NY:Oxford University Press.
Jennings V, Gaither CJ. 2015. Approaching environmental health disparities and
green spaces: an ecosystem services perspective. Int J Environ Res Public
Health 12(2):1952–1968, PMID: 25674782, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph120201952.
Jennings V, Larson L, Yun J. 2016. Advancing sustainability through urban green
space: Cultural ecosystem services, equity, and social determinants of health.
Int J Environ Res Public Health 13(2):196, PMID: 26861365, https://doi.org/10.
3390/ijerph13020196.
Jiang B, Chang C-Y, Sullivan WC. 2014. A dose of nature: Tree cover, stress reduc-
tion, and gender differences. Landsc Urban Plan 132:26–36, https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.landurbplan.2014.08.005.
Joffe M, Mindell J. 2006. Complex causal process diagrams for analyzing the
health impacts of policy interventions. Am J Public Health 96(3):473–479, PMID:
16449586, https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2005.063693.
Johnson CY, Bowker JM. 2004. African-American wildland memories. Environ
Ethics 26(1):57–75, https://doi.org/10.5840/enviroethics200426141.
Johnson CY, Horan PM, Pepper W. 1997. Race, rural residence, and wildland visi-
tation: Examining the influence of sociocultural meaning. Rural Sociology
62(1):89–110, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1549-0831.1997.tb00646.x.
Jonker MF, van Lenthe FJ, Donkers B, Mackenbach JP, Burdorf A. 2014. The effect
of urban green on small-area (healthy) life expectancy. J Epidemiol
Community Health 68(10):999–1002, PMID: 25053616, https://doi.org/10.1136/
jech-2014-203847.
Kaczynski A, Henderson K. 2007. Environmental correlates of physical activity: a
review of evidence about parks and recreation. Leisure Sci 29(4):315–354,
https://doi.org/10.1080/01490400701394865.
Kahn PH Jr, Friedman B, Gill B, Hagman J, Severson RL, Freier NG, et al. 2008. A
plasma display window?—The shifting baseline problem in a technologically
mediated natural world. J Environ Psychol 28(2):192–199, https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jenvp.2007.10.008.
Kahn PH Jr. 2010. a nature language: an agenda to catalog, save, and recover pat-
terns of human-nature interaction. Ecopsychology 2(2):59–66, https://doi.org/10.
1089/eco.2009.0047.
Kahn PH. 2011. Technological Nature: Adaptation and the Future of Human Life.
Cambridge, MA:MIT Press.
Kamioka H, Okada S, Tsutani K, Park H, Okuizumi H, Handa S, et al. 2014.
Effectiveness of animal-assisted therapy: A systematic review of randomized
controlled trials. Complement Ther Med 22(2):371–390, PMID: 24731910,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ctim.2013.12.016.
Kaplan R, Kaplan S. 1989. The Experience of Nature: A Psychological Perspective.
New York, NY:Cambridge University Press.
Kaplan S. 1995. The restorative benefits of nature: Toward an integrative frame-
work. J Environ Psychol 15(3):169–182, https://doi.org/10.1016/0272-4944(95)
90001-2.
Kardan O, Gozdyra P, Misic B, Moola F, Palmer LJ, Paus T, et al. 2015.
Neighborhood greenspace and health in a large urban center. Sci Rep 5:11610,
PMID: 26158911, https://doi.org/10.1038/srep11610.
Kawachi I, Subramanian SV, Kim D, eds. 2008. Social Capital and Health. New
York, NY:Springer.
Ka�
zmierczak A. 2013. The contribution of local parks to neighbourhood social ties.
Landscape and Urban Planning 109(1):31–44, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.
2012.05.007.
Kellert SR, Wilson EO. 1993. The Biophilia Hypothesis. Washington, DC:Island
Press.
Kellert SR. 2005. Nature and childhood development. In: Building for Life:
Designing and Understanding the Human-Nature Connection. Kellert SR, ed.
Washington, DC:Island Press, 63–89.
Keltner D, Haidt J. 2003. Approaching awe, a moral, spiritual, and aesthetic emo-
tion. Cogn Emot 17(2):297–314, https://doi.org/10.1080/02699930302297.
Kemperman A, Timmermans H. 2014. Green spaces in the direct living environment
and social contacts of the aging population. Landsc Urban Plan 129:44–54,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2014.05.003.
Keniger LE, Gaston KJ, Irvine KN, Fuller RA. 2013. What are the benefits of interact-
ing with nature?. Int J Environ Res Public Health 10(3):913–935, PMID:
23466828, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph10030913.
Kim JH, Lee C, Sohn W. 2016. Urban natural environments, obesity, and health-
related quality of life among Hispanic children living in inner-city neighbor-
hoods. Int J Environ Res Public Health 13(1):E121.
Environmental Health Perspectives
075001-14
 Kim W, Lim SK, Chung EJ, Woo JM. 2009. The effect of cognitive behavior therapy-
based psychotherapy applied in a forest environment on physiological
changes and remission of major depressive disorder. Psychiatry Investig
6(4):245–254, https://doi.org/10.4306/pi.2009.6.4.245.
Kimes D, Ullah A, Levine E, Nelson R, Timmins S, Weiss S, et al. 2004.
Relationships between pediatric asthma and socioeconomic/urban variables
in
Baltimore,
Maryland.
Health
Place
10(2):141–152,
PMID:
15019908,
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1353-8292(03)00054-6.
Klepeis NE, Nelson WC, Ott WR, Robinson JP, Tsang AM, Switzer P, et al. 2001.
The National Human Activity Pattern Survey (NHAPS): A resource for assess-
ing exposure to environmental pollutants. J Expo Anal Environ Epidemiol
11(3):231–252, PMID: 11477521, https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.jea.7500165.
Kondo MC, South EC, Branas CC. 2015. Nature-based strategies for improving
urban health and safety. J Urban Health 92(5):800–814, PMID: 26275455,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11524-015-9983-y.
Kondrashova A, Seiskari T, Ilonen J, Knip M, Hyöty H. 2013. The 'hygiene hypothe-
sis' and the sharp gradient in the incidence of autoimmune and allergic dis-
eases between Russian Karelia and Finland. APMIS 121(6):478–493, PMID:
23127244, https://doi.org/10.1111/apm.12023.
Koohsari MJ, Sugiyama T, Sahlqvist S, Mavoa S, Hadgraft N, Owen N. 2015.
Neighborhood environmental attributes and adults' sedentary behaviors: review
and research agenda. Prev Med 77:141–149, PMID: 26051198, https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ypmed.2015.05.027.
Kuo F, Faber Taylor A. 2004. A potential natural treatment for attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder: Evidence from a national study. Am J Public Health
94(9):1580–1586, https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.94.9.1580.
Kuo FE, Sullivan WC. 2001a. Environment and crime in the inner city: does vegeta-
tion reduce crime? Environ Behav 33(3):343–367.
Kuo FE, Sullivan WC. 2001b. Aggression and violence in the inner city: Effects of
environment via mental fatigue. Environ Behav 33(4):543–571.
Kuo M. 2015. How might contact with nature promote human health? Promising
mechanisms
and
a
possible
central
pathway.
Front
Psychol
6:1093,
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01093.
Kurzweil R. 2005. The Singularity is Near: When Humans Transcend Biology. New
York, NY:Viking.
Kweon B-S, Sullivan WC, Wiley AR. 1998. Green common spaces and the social inte-
gration of inner-city older adults. Environ Behav 30(6):832–858, https://doi.org/10.
1177/001391659803000605.
Lachowycz K, Jones AP. 2011. Greenspace and obesity: A systematic review of the
evidence. Obes Rev 12(5):e183–e189, PMID: 21348919, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.
1467-789X.2010.00827.x.
Lachowycz K, Jones AP. 2013. Towards a better understanding of the relationship
between greenspace and health: Development of a theoretical framework.
Landsc Urban Plan 118:62–69, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2012.10.012.
Lachowycz K, Jones AP. 2014. Does walking explain associations between access
to greenspace and lower mortality?. Soc Sci Med 107:9–17, PMID: 24602966,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2014.02.023.
Larsen FW, Turner WR, Brooks TM. 2012. Conserving critical sites for biodiversity
provides disproportionate benefits to people. PLoS One 7(5):e36971, PMID:
22666337, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0036971.
Larson LR, Jennings V, Cloutier SA. 2016. Public parks and wellbeing in urban
areas of the United States. PLoS One 11(4):e0153211, PMID: 27054887,
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0153211.
Lechtzin N, Busse AM, Smith MT, Grossman S, Nesbit S, Diette GB. 2010. A
randomized trial of nature scenery and sounds versus urban scenery and
sounds to reduce pain in adults undergoing bone marrow aspirate and biopsy.
J Altern Complement Med 16(9):965–972, PMID: 20799901, https://doi.org/10.
1089/acm.2009.0531.
Lee AC, Jordan HC, Horsley J. 2015. Value of urban green spaces in promoting
healthy living and wellbeing: prospects for planning. Risk Manag Healthc
Policy 8:131–137, PMID: 26347082, https://doi.org/10.2147/RMHP.S61654.
Lee ACK, Maheswaran R. 2011. The health benefits of urban green spaces: a
review of the evidence. J Public Health (Oxf) 33(2):212–222, PMID: 20833671,
https://doi.org/10.1093/pubmed/fdq068.
Lee IM, Shiroma EJ, Lobelo F, Puska P, Blair SN, Katzmarzyk PT. 2012. Effect of
physical inactivity on major non-communicable diseases worldwide: an analy-
sis of burden of disease and life expectancy. Lancet 380(9838):219–229, PMID:
22818936, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61031-9.
Lee YK, Mazmanian SK. 2010. Has the microbiota played a critical role in the evolu-
tion of the adaptive immune system?. Science 330(6012):1768–1773, PMID:
21205662, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1195568.
Lewis TL, Gould KA. 2017. Green Gentrification: Urban Sustainability and the
Struggle for Environmental Justice. Abingdon, UK:Routledge.
Li D, Sullivan WC. 2016. Impact of views to school landscapes on recovery from
stress and mental fatigue. Landsc Urban Plan 148:149–158, https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.landurbplan.2015.12.015.
Li Q, Nakadai A, Matsushima H, Miyazaki Y, Krensky AM, Kawada T, et al. 2006.
Phytoncides (wood essential oils) induce human natural killer cell activity.
Immunopharmacol Immunotoxicol 28(2):319–333, PMID: 16873099, https://doi.org/
10.1080/08923970600809439.
Li Q, Morimoto K, Kobayashi M, Inagaki H, Katsumata M, Hirata Y, et al. 2008a. A
forest bathing trip increases human natural killer activity and expression of
anti-cancer proteins in female subjects. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents 22(1):45–
55, PMID: 18394317.
Li Q, Morimoto K, Kobayashi M, Inagaki H, Katsumata M, Hirata Y, et al. 2008b.
Visiting a forest, but not a city, increases human natural killer activity and
expression of anti-cancer proteins. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol 21(1):117–
127, PMID: 18336737, https://doi.org/10.1177/039463200802100113.
Li Q, Kobayashi M, Inagaki H, Hirata Y, Li YJ, Hirata K, et al. 2010. A day trip to a
forest park increases human natural killer activity and the expression of anti-
cancer proteins in male subjects. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents 24(2):157–165.
Li Q, Kawada T. 2011. Effect of forest environments on human natural killer (NK)
activity. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol 24(1suppl):39S–44S, PMID: 21329564.
Li X, Meng Q, Li W, Zhang C, Jancso T, Mavromatis S. 2014. An explorative study
on the proximity of buildings to green spaces in urban areas using remotely
sensed imagery. Ann GIS 20(3):193–203, https://doi.org/10.1080/19475683.2014.
945482.
Li X, Zhang C, Li W, Kuzovkina YA. 2016. Environmental inequities in terms of differ-
ent types of urban greenery in Hartford, Connecticut. Urb Forestry Urb
Greening 18:163–172, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ufug.2016.06.002.
Lin YH, Tsai CC, Sullivan WC, Chang PJ, Chang CY. 2014. Does awareness effect
the restorative function and perception of street trees?. Front Psychol 5:906,
PMID: 25177309, https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00906.
Lindgren E, Elmqvist T. 2017. Ecosystem services and human health. In: Oxford
Research Encyclopedia, Environmental Science. Oxford, UK:Oxford University
Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/acrefore/9780199389414.013.86.
Lioy P, Weisel C. 2014. Exposure Science: Basic Principles and Applications.
London, UK:Academic Press.
Liu J, Dietz T, Carpenter SR, Alberti M, Folke C, Moran E, et al. 2007. Complexity of
coupled human and natural systems. Science 317(5844):1513–1516, PMID:
17872436, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1144004.
Livesley SJ, McPherson GM, Calfapietra C. 2016. The urban forest and ecosystem
services: Impacts on urban water, heat, and pollution cycles at the tree, street,
and city scale. J Environ Qual 45(1):119–124, PMID: 26828167, https://doi.org/10.
2134/jeq2015.11.0567.
Lovallo WR. 2015. Stress and Health: Biological and Psychological Interactions. 3rd
ed. Thousand Oaks, CA:Sage.
Lovasi GS, O'Neil-Dunne JP, Lu JW, Sheehan D, Perzanowski MS, Macfaden SW,
et al. 2013. Urban tree canopy and asthma, wheeze, rhinitis, and allergic sensi-
tization to tree pollen in a New York City birth cohort. Environ Health Perspect
121(4):494–500, PMID: 23322788, https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1205513.
Lovasi GS, Quinn JW, Neckerman KM, Perzanowski MS, Rundle A. 2008. Children
living in areas with more street trees have lower prevalence of asthma. J
Epidemiol Community Health 62(7):647–649, PMID: 18450765, https://doi.org/10.
1136/jech.2007.071894.
Lovell R, Wheeler BW, Higgins SL, Irvine KN, Depledge MH. 2014. A systematic
review of the health and well-being benefits of biodiverse environments. J
Toxicol Environ Health B Crit Rev 17(1):1–20, PMID: 24597907, https://doi.org/10.
1080/10937404.2013.856361.
Maas J, van Dillen SME, Verheij RA, Groenewegen PP. 2009a. Social contacts as a
possible mechanism behind the relation between green space and health.
Health Place 15(2):586–595.
Maas J, Verheij R, Groenewegen P, de Vries S, Spreeuwenberg P. 2006. Green
space, urbanity, and health: how strong is the relation?. J Epidemiol
Community Health 60(7):587–592, PMID: 16790830, https://doi.org/10.1136/jech.
2005.043125.
Maas J, Verheij RA, de Vries S, Spreeuwenberg P, Schellevis FG, Groenewegen
PP. 2009b. Morbidity is related to a green living environment. J Epidemiol
Community Health 63(12):967–973, PMID: 19833605, https://doi.org/10.1136/jech.
2008.079038.
MacFaden SW, O'Neil-Dunne JPM, Royar AR, Lu JWT, Rundle AG. 2012. High-re-
solution tree canopy mapping for new york city using LIDAR and object-based
image analysis. J Appl Remote Sens 6(1):063567, https://doi.org/10.1117/1.JRS.
6.063567.
MacKerron G, Mourato S. 2013. Happiness is greater in natural environments.
Global Environmental Change 23(5):992–1000, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.
2013.03.010.
Mao G, Cao Y, Wang B, Wang S, Chen Z, Wang J, et al. 2017. The salutary influ-
ence of forest bathing on elderly patients with chronic heart failure. Int J
Environ Res Public Health 14(4):368, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph14040368.
Margaritis E, Kang J. 2017. Relationship between green space-related morphology and
noise pollution. Ecol Indic 72:921–933, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2016.09.032.
Environmental Health Perspectives
075001-15
 Markevych I, Thiering E, Fuertes E, Sugiri D, Berdel D, Koletzko S, et al. 2014a. A
cross-sectional analysis of the effects of residential greenness on blood pres-
sure in 10-year old children: results from the GINIplus and LISAplus studies.
BMC Public Health 14:477, PMID: 24886243, https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-
14-477.
Markevych I, Tiesler CMT, Fuertes E, Romanos M, Dadvand P, Nieuwenhuijsen
MJ, et al. 2014b. Access to urban green spaces and behavioural problems in
children: results from the GINIplus and LISAplus studies. Environ Int 71:29–35,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2014.06.002.
Martens D, Bauer N. 2013. Natural environments: a resource for public health and well-
being? A literature review. In: Psychology of Well-Being: Theory, Perspectives and
Practice. Noehammer E, ed. Hauppauge, NY:Nova Science Publishers, 173–217.
Matchock RL. 2015. Pet ownership and physical health. Curr Opin Psychiatry
28(5):386–392, PMID: 26164613, https://doi.org/10.1097/YCO.0000000000000183.
Mazzali C, Duca P. 2015. Use of administrative data in healthcare research. Intern
Emerg Med 10(4):517–524, PMID: 25711312, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11739-015-
1213-9.
McEachan RR, Prady SL, Smith G, Fairley L, Cabieses B, Gidlow C, et al. 2016. The
association between green space and depressive symptoms in pregnant
women: Moderating roles of socioeconomic status and physical activity. J
Epidemiol Community Health 70(3):253–259, PMID: 26560759, https://doi.org/10.
1136/jech-2015-205954.
Melson GF, Kahn PH Jr, Beck A, Friedman B, Roberts T, Garrett E, et al. 2009.
Children's behavior toward and understanding of robotic and living dogs.
Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology 30(2):92–102, https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.appdev.2008.10.011.
Miller JT. 2016. Is urban greening for everyone? Social inclusion and exclusion
along the Gowanus Canal. Urban For Urban Green 19:285–294, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ufug.2016.03.004.
Mitchell R, Astell-Burt T, Richardson EA. 2011. A comparison of green space indi-
cators for epidemiological research. J Epidemiol Community Health 65(10):853–
858, PMID: 21296907, https://doi.org/10.1136/jech.2010.119172.
Mitchell R, Popham F. 2007. Greenspace, urbanity and health: relationships in England. J
Epidemiol Community Health 61(8):681–683, PMID: 17630365, https://doi.org/10.1136/
jech.2006.053553.
Mitchell R, Popham F. 2008. Effect of exposure to natural environment on health
inequalities: An observational population study. Lancet 372(9650):1655–1660,
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61689-X.
Mitchell RJ, Richardson EA, Shortt NK, Pearce JR. 2015. Neighborhood environ-
ments and socioeconomic inequalities in mental well-being. Am J Prev Med
49(1):80–84, PMID: 25911270, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2015.01.017.
Morita E, Imai M, Okawa M, Miyaura T, Miyazaki S. 2011. A before and after com-
parison of the effects of forest walking on the sleep of a community-based
sample of people with sleep complaints. Biopsychosoc Med 5:13, PMID:
21999605, https://doi.org/10.1186/1751-0759-5-13.
Murgui E, Hedblom M. 2017. Ecology and Conservation of Birds in Urban
Environments. Cham, Switzerland:Springer.
Naidoo R, Balmford A, Ferraro PJ, Polasky S, Ricketts TH, Rouget M. 2006.
Integrating economic costs into conservation planning. Trends Ecol Evol
21(12):681–687, PMID: 17050033, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2006.10.003.
Nicolaou N, Siddique N, Custovic A. 2005. Allergic disease in urban and rural popu-
lations: increasing prevalence with increasing urbanization. Allergy 60(11):1357–
1360, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1398-9995.2005.00961.x.
Nielsen TS, Hansen KB. 2007. Do green areas affect health? Results from a Danish
survey on the use of green areas and health indicators. Health Place
13(4):839–850, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.healthplace.2007.02.001.
Nielsen. 2016. The Nielsen Total Audience Report: Q1, 2016. http://www.nielsen.
com/us/en/insights/reports/2016/the-total-audience-report-q1-2016.html [accessed
5 July 2017].
Nieuwenhuijsen MJ, ed. 2003. Exposure Assessment in Occupational and
Environmental Epidemiology. New York, NY:Oxford University Press.
Ninan KN, Costanza R. 2014. Valuing Ecosystem Services: Methodological Issues
and Case Studies. Cheltenham, UK:Edward Elgar Publishing Limited.
Nowak DJ, Appleton N, Ellis A, Greenfield E. 2017. Residential building energy con-
servation and avoided power plant emissions by urban and community trees in
the United States. Urb Forestry Urb Greening 21:158–165, https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ufug.2016.12.004.
Nowak DJ, Hirabayashi S, Bodine A, Greenfield E. 2014. Tree and forest effects on
air quality and human health in the United States. Environ Pollut 193:119–129,
PMID: 25016465, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2014.05.028.
Nowak DJ, Hirabayashi S, Bodine A, Hoehn R. 2013. Modeled PM2.5 removal by
trees in ten U.S. cities and associated health effects. Environ Pollut 178:395–
402, PMID: 23624337, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2013.03.050.
NRPA (National Recreation and Parks Association). 2015. The economic impact of
local parks: An examination of the economic impacts of operations and capital
spending on the United States economy. Ashburn, VA:National Recreation and
Parks Association. http://www.nrpa.org/publications-research/research-papers/
the-economic-impact-of-local-parks/ [accessed 5 July 2017].
Nusslock R, Miller GE. 2016. Early-life adversity and physical and emotional health
across the lifespan: A neuroimmune network hypothesis. Biol Psychiatry
80(1):23–32, PMID: 26166230, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2015.05.017.
Nutsford D, Pearson AL, Kingham S. 2013. An ecological study investigating the
association between access to urban green space and mental health. Public
Health 127(11):1005–1011, PMID: 24262442, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.puhe.2013.
08.016.
O'Donoghue G, Perchoux C, Mensah K, Lakerveld J, van der Ploeg H, Bernaards C,
et al. 2016. A systematic review of correlates of sedentary behaviour in adults
aged 18-65 years: A socio-ecological approach. BMC Public Health 16(1):163.
Park S-H, Mattson RH. 2008. Effects of flowering and foliage plants in hospital rooms
on patients recovering from abdominal surgery. HortTechnology 18(4):563–568.
Park SH, Mattson RH. 2009. Ornamental indoor plants in hospital rooms enhanced
health outcomes of patients recovering from surgery. J Altern Complement
Med 15(9):975–980, PMID: 19715461, https://doi.org/10.1089/acm.2009.0075.
Parsons R, Tassinary LG, Ulrich RS, Hebl MR, Grossman-Alexander M. 1998. The
view from the road: Implications for stress recovery and immunization. J
Environ Psychol 18(2):113–140, https://doi.org/10.1006/jevp.1998.0086.
Payne LL, Mowen AJ, Orsega-Smith E. 2002. An examination of park preferences
and behaviors among urban residents: The role of residential location, race,
and age. Leis Sci 24(2):181–198, https://doi.org/10.1080/01490400252900149.
Pearl J, Glymour M, Jewell NP. 2016. Causal Inference in Statistics: A Primer.
Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Pearl J. 2009. Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference. 2nd ed. Cambridge,
UK:Cambridge University Press.
Pedlowski MA, Da Silva VAC, Adell JJC, Heynen NC. 2002. Urban forest and envi-
ronmental inequality in Campos dos Goytacazes, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Urban
Ecosyst 6(1–2):9–20, https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1025910528583.
Pergams OR, Zaradic PA. 2008. Evidence for a fundamental and pervasive shift
away from nature-based recreation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105(7):2295–
2300, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0709893105.
Perrin JL, Benassi VA. 2009. The connectedness to nature scale: A measure of emo-
tional connection to nature?. J Environ Psychol 29(4):434–440, https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jenvp.2009.03.003.
Piff PK, Dietze P, Feinberg M, Stancato DM, Keltner D. 2015. Awe, the small self,
and prosocial behavior. J Pers Soc Psychol 108(6):883–899, PMID: 25984788,
https://doi.org/10.1037/pspi0000018.
Pliakas T, Hawkesworth S, Silverwood RJ, Nanchahal K, Grundy C, Armstrong B,
et al. 2017. Optimising measurement of health-related characteristics of the
built environment: Comparing data collected by foot-based street audits, virtual
street audits and routine secondary data sources. Health Place 43:75–84,
PMID: 27902960, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.healthplace.2016.10.001.
Posner SM, McKenzie E, Ricketts TH. 2016. Policy impacts of ecosystem services
knowledge. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 113(7):1760–1765, PMID: 26831101,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1502452113.
Poulsen DV, Stigsdotter UK, Refshage AD. 2015. Whatever happened to the sol-
diers? Nature-assisted therapies for veterans diagnosed with post-traumatic
stress disorder: A literature review. Urb Forestry Urb Greening 14(2):438–445,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ufug.2015.03.009.
Qviström M. 2016. The nature of running: on embedded landscape ideals in leisure
planning. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening 17:202–210, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ufug.2016.04.012.
Radesky JS, Christakis DA. 2016. Increased screen time: implications for early
childhood development and behavior. Pediatr Clin North Am 63(5):827–839,
PMID: 27565361, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pcl.2016.06.006.
Ray H, Jakubec SL. 2014. Nature-based experiences and health of cancer survivors.
Complement Ther Clin Pract 20(4):188–192, PMID: 25160991, https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ctcp.2014.07.005.
Rhew IC, Vander Stoep A, Kearney A, Smith NL, Dunbar MD. 2011. Validation of
the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index as a measure of neighborhood
greenness. Ann Epidemiol 21(12):946–952, PMID: 21982129, https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.annepidem.2011.09.001.
Rideout VJ, Foehr UG, Roberts DF. 2010. Generation M2: Media in the lives of 8- to 18-
year-olds. Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. http://www.kff.org/other/report/
generation-m2-media-in-the-lives-of-8-to-18-year-olds/ [accessed 5 July 2017].
Rideout VJ. 2013. Zero to eight: children's media use in America 2013. Common
Sense
Media.
https://www.commonsensemedia.org/research/zero-to-eight-
childrens-media-use-in-america-2013 [accessed 5 July 2017].
Rigolon A. 2016. A complex landscape of inequity in access to urban parks: A litera-
ture review. Landsc Urban Plan 153:160–169, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.
2016.05.017.
Roe J, Aspinall P. 2011. The restorative outcomes of forest school and conven-
tional school in young people with good and poor behaviour. Urb Forestry Urb
Greening 10(3):205–212, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ufug.2011.03.003.
Environmental Health Perspectives
075001-16
 Roe J, Aspinall PA, Mavros P, Coyne R. 2013. Engaging the brain: The impact of
natural versus urban scenes using novel EEG methods in an experimental set-
ting. Environ Sci 1(2):93–104, https://doi.org/10.12988/es.2013.3109.
Roe JJ, Thompson CW, Aspinall PA, Brewer MJ, Duff EI, Miller D, et al. 2013.
Green space and stress: Evidence from cortisol measures in deprived urban
communities. Int J Environ Res Public Health 10(9):4086–4103, PMID: 24002726,
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph10094086.
Rook GA. 2013. Regulation of the immune system by biodiversity from the natural
environment: An ecosystem service essential to health. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
110(46):18360–18367, PMID: 24154724, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1313731110.
Roy S, Byrne J, Pickering C. 2012. A systematic quantitative review of urban tree
benefits, costs, and assessment methods across cities in different climatic
zones. Urb Forestry Urb Greening 11(4):351–363, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ufug.
2012.06.006.
Ruckelshaus M, McKenzie E, Tallis H, Guerry A, Daily G, Kareiva P, et al. 2015.
Notes from the field: lessons learned from using ecosystem service approaches
to inform real-world decisions. Ecol Econ 115:11–21, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ecolecon.2013.07.009.
Rudd M, Vohs KD, Aaker J. 2012. Awe expands people's perception of time, alters
decision making, and enhances well-being. Psychol Sci 23(10):1130–1136,
PMID: 22886132, https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797612438731.
Rundle AG, Bader MDM, Richards CA, Neckerman KM, Teitler JO. 2011. Using
Google Street View to audit neighborhood environments. Amn J Prev Med
40(1):94–100, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2010.09.034.
Ruokolainen L, von Hertzen L, Fyhrquist N, Laatikainen T, Lehtomaki J, Auvinen P,
et al. 2015. Green areas around homes reduce atopic sensitization in children.
Allergy 70(2):195–202, PMID: 25388016, https://doi.org/10.1111/all.12545.
Russell R, Guerry AD, Balvanera P, Gould RK, Basurto X, Chan KMA, et al. 2013.
Humans and nature: how knowing and experiencing nature affect well-being.
Annu Rev Environ Resour 38:473–502, https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-environ-
012312-110838.
Rutt RL, Gulsrud NM. 2016. Green justice in the city: a new agenda for urban green
space research in europe. Urb Forestry Urb Greening 19:123–127, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ufug.2016.07.004.
Rutter M. 2007. Proceeding from observed correlation to causal inference: the use
of natural experiments. Perspect Psychol Sci 2(4):377–395, https://doi.org/10.
1111/j.1745-6916.2007.00050.x.
Salmond JA, Tadaki M, Vardoulakis S, Arbuthnott K, Coutts A, Demuzere M, et al.
2016. Health and climate related ecosystem services provided by street trees
in the urban environment. Environ Health 15(suppl 1):S36, https://doi.org/10.
1186/s12940-016-0103-6.
Sanders T, Feng X, Fahey PP, Lonsdale C, Astell-Burt T. 2015. Greener neighbour-
hoods, slimmer children? Evidence from 4423 participants aged 6 to 13 years in
the Longitudinal Study of Australian Children. Int J Obes (Lond) 39(8):1224–
1229, PMID: 25916908, https://doi.org/10.1038/ijo.2015.69.
Sandifer PA, Sutton-Grier AE, Ward BP. 2015. Exploring connections among nature,
biodiversity,
ecosystem
services,
and
human
health
and
well-being:
Opportunities to enhance health and biodiversity conservation. Ecosyst Serv
12:1–15, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoser.2014.12.007.
Schootman M, Nelson EJ, Werner K, Shacham E, Elliott M, Ratnapradipa K, et al.
2016. Emerging technologies to measure neighborhood conditions in public
health: implications for interventions and next steps. Int J Health Geogr
15(1):20, PMID: 27339260, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12942-016-0050-z.
Schutte NS, Bhullar N, Stilinovic
´ EJ, Richardson K. 2017. The impact of virtual envi-
ronments on restorativeness and affect. Ecopsychology 9(1):1–7, https://doi.org/
10.1089/eco.2016.0042.
Schwarz K, Fragkias M, Boone CG, Zhou W, McHale M, Grove JM, et al. 2015.
Trees grow on money: urban tree canopy cover and environmental justice.
PLoS One 10(4):e0122051, PMID: 25830303, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0122051.
Seppelt R, Dormann CF, Eppink FV, Lautenbach S, Schmidt S. 2011. A quantita-
tive review of ecosystem service studies: approaches, shortcomings and
the road ahead. J Appl Ecol 48(3):630–636, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2664.
2010.01952.x.
Seresinhe CI, Preis T, Moat HS. 2015. Quantifying the impact of scenic environ-
ments on health. Sci Rep 5:16899, PMID: 26603464, https://doi.org/10.1038/
srep16899.
Sessions C, Wood SA, Rabotyagov S, Fisher DM. 2016. Measuring recreational visi-
tation at U.S. National Parks with crowd-sourced photographs. J Environ
Manage 183(Part 3):703–711, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2016.09.018.
Seymour V. 2016. The human–nature relationship and its impact on health: A criti-
cal review. Front Public Health 4:260, https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2016.00260.
Shanahan DF, Fuller RA, Bush R, Lin BB, Gaston KJ. 2015a. The health benefits of
urban nature: how much do we need? BioScience 65(5):476–485, https://doi.org/
10.1093/biosci/biv032.
Shanahan DF, Lin BB, Bush R, Gaston KJ, Dean JH, Barber E, et al. 2015b.
Toward improved public health outcomes from urban nature. Am J Public
Health 105(3):470–477, PMID: 25602866, https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2014.
302324.
Shanahan DF, Bush R, Gaston KJ, Lin BB, Dean J, Barber E, et al. 2016. Health ben-
efits from nature experiences depend on dose. Sci Rep 6:28551, PMID:
27334040, https://doi.org/10.1038/srep28551.
Shanahan DF, Franco L, Lin BB, Gaston KJ, Fuller RA. 2016. The benefits of natural
environments for physical activity. Sports Med 46(7):989–995.
Shiota MN, Keltner D, Mossman A. 2007. The nature of awe: elicitors, appraisals,
and effects on self-concept. Cogn Emot 21(5):944–963, https://doi.org/10.1080/
02699930600923668.
Shoup L, Ewing R. 2010. The economic benefits of open space, recreation facilities
and walkable community design. Princeton NJ and San Diego CA:Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation, Active Living Research Program. http://activelivingresearch.
org/economic-benefits-open-space-recreation-facilities-and-walkable-community-
design [accessed 5 July 2017].
Smiley KT, Sharma T, Steinberg A, Hodges-Copple S, Jacobson E, Matveeva L.
2016. More inclusive parks planning: Park quality and preferences for park
access and amenities. Environ Justice 9(1):1–7, https://doi.org/10.1089/env.
2015.0030.
Smith LM, Case JL, Smith HM, Harwell LC, Summers JK. 2013. Relating ecoystem
services to domains of human well-being: Foundation for a U.S. index. Ecol Ind
28:79–90, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2012.02.032.
Snow J. 1855. On the Mode of Communication of Cholera. London, UK:John
Churchill.
Söderström M, Boldemann C, Sahlin U, Mårtensson F, Raustorp A, Blennow M.
2013. The quality of the outdoor environment influences childrens health – a
cross-sectional study of preschools. Acta Paediatr 102(1):83–91, PMID:
23035750, https://doi.org/10.1111/apa.12047.
Song C, Joung D, Ikei H, Igarashi M, Aga M, Park BJ, et al. 2013. Physiological and
psychological effects of walking on young males in urban parks in winter. J
Physiol Anthropol 32:18, https://doi.org/10.1186/1880-6805-32-18.
Song C, Ikei H, Igarashi M, Takagaki M, Miyazaki Y. 2015. Physiological and psycho-
logical effects of a walk in urban parks in fall. Int J Environ Res Public Health
12(11):14216–14228, PMID: 26569271, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph121114216.
Stagl S, Common MS. 2005. Ecological Economics: An Introduction. Cambridge,
UK:Cambridge University Press.
Stark JH, Neckerman K, Lovasi GS, Quinn J, Weiss CC, Bader MDM, et al. 2014.
The impact of neighborhood park access and quality on body mass index
among adults in New York City. Prev Med 64:63–68, PMID: 24704504,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ypmed.2014.03.026.
Stiemsma LT, Reynolds LA, Turvey SE, Finlay BB. 2015. The hygiene hypothesis:
Current perspectives and future therapies. ImmunoTargets Ther 4:143–157,
PMID: 27471720, https://doi.org/10.2147/ITT.S61528.
Stier AC, Samhouri JF, Gray S, Martone RG, Mach ME, Halpern BS, et al. 2017.
Integrating expert perceptions into food web conservation and management.
Conservation Letters 10(1):67–76, https://doi.org/10.1111/conl.12245.
Stigsdotter UK, Ekholm O, Schipperijn J, Toftager M, Kamper-Jørgensen F,
Randrup TB. 2010. Health promoting outdoor environments - associations
between green space, and health, health-related quality of life and stress
based on a Danish national representative survey. Scand J Public Health
38(4):411–417, PMID: 20413584, https://doi.org/10.1177/1403494810367468.
Sturm R, Cohen D. 2014. Proximity to urban parks and mental health. J Ment Health
Policy Econ 17(1):19–24, PMID: 24864118.
Sugiyama T, Cerin E, Owen N, Oyeyemi AL, Conway TL, Van Dyck D, et al. 2014.
Perceived neighbourhood environmental attributes associated with adults rec-
reational walking: IPEN adult study in 12 countries. Health Place 28:22–30,
PMID: 24721737, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.healthplace.2014.03.003.
Sullivan WC, Kaplan R. 2016. Nature! Small steps that can make a big difference.
HERD 9(2):6–10, PMID: 26698884, https://doi.org/10.1177/1937586715623664.
Sullivan WC, Kuo FE, DePooter SF. 2004. The fruit of urban nature: vital neighborhood
spaces. Environ Behav 36(5):678–700, https://doi.org/10.1177/0193841X04264945.
Szolosi AM, Watson JM, Ruddell EJ. 2014. The benefits of mystery in nature on
attention: assessing the impacts of presentation duration. Front Psychol
5:1360, https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01360.
Takano T, Nakamura K, Watanabe M. 2002. Urban residential environments and
senior citizens’ longevity in megacity areas: the importance of walkable green
spaces. J Epidemiol Community Health 56(12):913–918, PMID: 12461111.
Taylor AF, Kuo FE, Sullivan WC. 2002. Views of nature and self-discipline: evidence
from inner city children. J Environ Psychol 22(1–2):49–63, https://doi.org/10.
1006/jevp.2001.0241.
Taylor BT, Fernando P, Bauman AE, Williamson A, Craig JC, Redman S. 2011.
Measuring the quality of public open space using Google Earth. Am J Prev Med
40(2):105–112, PMID: 21238857, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2010.10.024.
Environmental Health Perspectives
075001-17
 Taylor L, Hochuli DF. 2017. Defining greenspace: multiple uses across multiple dis-
ciplines. Landsc Urban Plan 158:25–38, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.
2016.09.024.
Taylor MS, Wheeler BW, White MP, Economou T, Osborne NJ. 2015. Research
note: urban street tree density and antidepressant prescription rates—a
cross-sectional study in London, UK. Landscape and Urban Planning 136:174–
179, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2014.12.005.
Thiering E, Markevych I, Bruske I, Fuertes E, Kratzsch J, Sugiri D, et al. 2016.
Associations of residential long-term air pollution exposures and satellite-derived
greenness with insulin resistance in German adolescents. Environ Health
Perspect 124(8):1291–1298, PMID: 26863688, https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1509967.
Threlfall CG, Walker K, Williams NSG, Hahs AK, Mata L, Stork N, et al. 2015. The
conservation value of urban green space habitats for australian native bee
communities. Biological Conservation 187:240–248, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biocon.2015.05.003.
Tilley S, Neale C, Patuano A, Cinderby S. 2017. Older people's experiences of mo-
bility and mood in an urban environment: a mixed methods approach using
electroencephalography (EEG) and interviews. Int J Environ Res Public Health
14(2):151, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph14020151.
Triguero-Mas M, Dadvand P, Cirach M, Martínez D, Medina A, Mompart A, et al.
2015. Natural outdoor environments and mental and physical health: relation-
ships and mechanisms. Environ Int 77:35–41, PMID: 25638643, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.envint.2015.01.012.
Troy A, Morgan Grove J, O’Neil-Dunne J. 2012. The relationship between tree canopy
and crime rates across an urban–rural gradient in the greater Baltimore region.
Landsc Urban Plan 106(3):262–270, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2012.03.010.
Tzoulas K, Korpela K, Venn S, Yli-Pelkonen V, Ka�
zmierczak A, Niemela J, et al.
2007. Promoting ecosystem and human health in urban areas using green
infrastructure: a literature review. Landscape and Urban Planning 81(3):167–
178, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2007.02.001.
Ulrich RS, Simons RF, Losito BD, Fiorito E, Miles MA, Zelson M. 1991. Stress recov-
ery during exposure to natural and urban environments. J Environ Psychol
11(3):201–230, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0272-4944(05)80184-7.
Ulrich RS. 1984. View through a window may influence recovery from surgery.
Science 224(4647):420–421, PMID: 6143402.
United Nations, Population Division. 2015. World Urbanization Prospects. The
2014 revision. New York, NY:United Nations. https://esa.un.org/unpd/wup/
[accessed 5 July 2017].
van den Berg A, Custers M. 2011. Gardening promotes neuroendocrine and affec-
tive restoration from stress. J Health Psychol 16(1):3–11, PMID: 20522508,
https://doi.org/10.1177/1359105310365577.
van den Berg AE, Maas J, Verheij RA, Groenewegen PP. 2010. Green space as a
buffer between stressful life events and health. Soc Sci Med 70(8):1203–1210,
PMID: 20163905, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2010.01.002.
van den Berg AE, van den Berg CG. 2011. A comparison of children with ADHD in a
natural and built setting. Child Care Health Dev 37(3):430–439, PMID: 21143265,
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2214.2010.01172.x.
Van Herzele A, de Vries S. 2012. Linking green space to health: A comparative
study of two urban neighbourhoods in Ghent, Belgium. Popul Environ
34(2):171–193, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11111-011-0153-1.
Vanderloo LM. 2014. Screen-viewing among preschoolers in childcare: A system-
atic review. BMC Pediatr 14:205, PMID: 25129567, https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-
2431-14-205.
Vaughan KB, Kaczynski AT, Wilhelm Stanis SA, Besenyi GM, Bergstrom R,
Heinrich KM. 2013. Exploring the distribution of park availability, features, and
quality across Kansas City, Missouri by income and race/ethnicity: An environ-
mental justice investigation. Ann Behav Med 45(suppl 1):28–38, https://doi.org/
10.1007/s12160-012-9425-y.
Verra ML, Angst F, Beck T, Lehmann S, Brioschi R, Schneiter R, et al. 2012.
Horticultural therapy for patients with chronic musculoskeletal pain: results of
a pilot study. Altern Ther Health Med 18(2):44–50, PMID: 22516884.
Villeneuve PJ, Jerrett M, G. Su J, Burnett RT, Chen H, Wheeler AJ, et al. 2012. A
cohort study relating urban green space with mortality in Ontario, Canada.
Environ Res 115:51–58, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2012.03.003.
Vos PE, Maiheu B, Vankerkom J, Janssen S. 2013. Improving local air quality in
cities: to tree or not to tree?. Environ Pollut 183:113–122, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.envpol.2012.10.021.
Ward Thompson C, Aspinall P, Roe J, Robertson L, Miller D. 2016. Mitigating stress
and supporting health in deprived urban communities: The importance of green
space and the social environment. Int J Environ Res Public Health 13(4):440,
PMID: 27110803, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph13040440.
Wells NM, Lekies KS. 2006. Nature and the life course: Pathways from child-
hood nature experiences to adult environmentalism. Child Youth Environ
16(1):1–24.
Wen M, Zhang X, Harris CD, Holt JB, Croft JB. 2013. Spatial disparities in the distri-
bution of parks and green spaces in the USA. Ann Behav Med 45(suppl 1):18–
27, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12160-012-9426-x.
Wheeler BW, Lovell R, Higgins SL, White MP, Alcock I, Osborne NJ, et al. 2015.
Beyond greenspace: an ecological study of population general health and indi-
cators of natural environment type and quality. Int J Health Geogr 14:17,
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12942-015-0009-5.
White M, Smith A, Humphryes K, Pahl S, Snelling D, Depledge M. 2010. Blue space:
the importance of water for preference, affect, and restorativeness ratings of
natural and built scenes. J Environ Psychol 30(4):482–493, https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jenvp.2010.04.004.
White MP, Alcock I, Wheeler BW, Depledge MH. 2013. Would you be happier living
in a greener urban area? A fixed-effects analysis of panel data. Psychol Sci
24(6):920–928, https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797612464659.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2010. Global Recommendations on Physical
Activity for Health. Geneva:World Health Organization.
Willis KJ, Petrokofsky G. 2017. The natural capital of city trees. Science
356(6336):374–376, PMID: 28450596, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aam9724.
Wilson EO. 1984. Biophilia. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.
Witten K, Hiscock R, Pearce J, Blakely T. 2008. Neighbourhood access to open
spaces and the physical activity of residents: A national study. Prev Med
47(3):299–303, PMID: 18533242, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ypmed.2008.04.010.
Wolch JR, Byrne J, Newell JP. 2014. Urban green space, public health, and
environmental justice: The challenge of making cities ‘just green enough.’
Landsc Urban Plan 125:234–244, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2014.
01.017.
Wolf KL, Measells MK, Grado SC, Robbins AST. 2015. Economic values of metro
nature health benefits: A life course approach. Urb Forestry Urb Greening
14(3):694–701, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ufug.2015.06.009.
Wolf KL, Robbins AS. 2015. Metro nature, environmental health, and economic
value. Environ Health Perspect 123(5):390–398, PMID: 25626137, https://doi.org/
10.1289/ehp.1408216.
Woo J, Tang N, Suen E, Leung J, Wong M. 2009. Green space, psychological resto-
ration, and telomere length. Lancet 373(9660):299–300, PMID: 19167568,
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(09)60094-5.
Wood SA, Guerry AD, Silver JM, Lacayo M. 2013. Using social media to quantify
nature-based tourism and recreation. Sci Rep 3:2976, PMID: 24131963,
https://doi.org/10.1038/srep02976.
Younan D, Tuvblad C, Li L, Wu J, Lurmann F, Franklin M, et al. 2016. Environmental
determinants of aggression in adolescents: Role of urban neighborhood green-
space. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 55(7):591–601, PMID: 27343886,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaac.2016.05.002.
Zartarian V, Bahadori T, McKone T. 2005. Adoption of an official ISEA glossary. J
Expo Anal Environ Epidemiol 15(1):1–5, PMID: 15562291, https://doi.org/10.1038/
sj.jea.7500411.
Zelenski JM, Dopko RL, Capaldi CA. 2015. Cooperation is in our nature: Nature ex-
posure may promote cooperative and environmentally sustainable behavior. J
Environ Psychol 42:24–31, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2015.01.005.
Environmental Health Perspectives
075001-18
