 Women’s experiences seeking abortion care shortly after the 
closure of clinics due to a restrictive law in Texas☆,,☆☆
☆☆
Liza Fuentesa,b,*, Sharon Lebenkoffa,b, Kari Whitea,c, Caitlin Gerdtsa,b, Kristine Hopkinsa,d, 
Joseph E. Pottera,d, and Daniel Grossmana,e
aTexas Policy Evaluation Project, 305 E. 23rd Street, Stop G1800, Austin, TX, 78712, USA
bIbis Reproductive Health, 1330 Broadway Suite 1100, Oakland, CA, 94612, USA
cDepartment of Health Care Organization and Policy, School of Public Health, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, 1665 University Boulevard, Birmingham, AL, 35294, USA
dPopulation Research Center and the Department of Sociology, University of Texas at Austin, 305 
E. 23rd Street, Stop G1800, Austin, TX, 78712, USA
eAdvancing New Standards in Reproductive Health, Bixby Center for Global Reproductive Health, 
Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, University of California, San 
Francisco, 1330 Broadway Suite 1100, Oakland, CA, 94612, USA
Abstract
Objective—In 2013, Texas passed legislation restricting abortion services. Almost half of the 
state’s clinics had closed by April 2014, and there was a 13% decline in abortions in the 6 months 
after the first portions of the law went into effect, compared to the same period 1 year prior. We 
aimed to describe women’s experiences seeking abortion care shortly after clinics closed and 
document pregnancy outcomes of women affected by these closures.
Study design—Between November 2013 and November 2014, we recruited women who sought 
abortion care at Texas clinics that were no longer providing services. Some participants had 
appointments scheduled at clinics that stopped offering care when the law went into effect; others 
called seeking care at clinics that had closed. Texas resident women seeking abortion in 
Albuquerque, New Mexico, were also recruited.
Results—We conducted 23 in-depth interviews and performed a thematic analysis. As a result of 
clinic closures, women experienced confusion about where to go for abortion services, and most 
reported increased cost and travel time to obtain care. Having to travel farther for care also 
compromised their privacy. Eight women were delayed more than 1 week, two did not receive care 
until they were more than 12 weeks pregnant and two did not obtain their desired abortion at all. 
Five women considered self-inducing the abortion, but none attempted this.
☆Conflicts of interest: None.
☆☆Role of the funding source: This project was supported by a grant from the Susan Thompson Buffett Foundation and a center grant 
from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (5 R24 HD042849) awarded to the 
Population Research Center at the University of Texas at Austin. These funders played no role in study design; in the collection, 
analysis and interpretation of data; in the writing of the report; and in the decision to submit the article for publication.
*Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-510-986-8926; fax: +1-510-986-8960. ; Email: lfuentes@ibisreproductivehealth.org (L. Fuentes). 
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Contraception. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 07.
Published in final edited form as:
Contraception. 2016 April ; 93(4): 292–297. doi:10.1016/j.contraception.2015.12.017.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Conclusions—The clinic closures resulted in multiple barriers to care, leading to delayed 
abortion care for some and preventing others from having the abortion they wanted.
Implications—The restrictions on abortion facilities that resulted in the closure of clinics in 
Texas created significant burdens on women that prevented them from having desired abortions. 
These laws may also adversely affect public health by moving women who would have had 
abortions in the first trimester to having second-trimester procedures.
Keywords
Abortion; Policy evaluation; Abortion restrictions; Qualitative; Texas
1. Introduction
In 2013, Texas passed one of the most restrictive abortion laws in the US, House Bill 2 
(HB2), that included four abortion restrictions: requiring physicians performing abortion to 
have admitting privileges at a nearby hospital, requiring the provision of medical abortion to 
follow the outdated labeling approved by the Food and Drug Administration, banning most 
abortions after 20 weeks “postfertilization” and requiring that all abortion facilities meet the 
standards of an ambulatory surgical center (ASC). The first three provisions of HB2 went 
into effect by November 1, 2013, resulting in the immediate closure of 11 of the 33 open 
abortion facilities1 [1]. The ASC requirement was enforced briefly in October 2014, 
resulting in more clinic closures, until the US Supreme Court issued a ruling that allowed 
clinics to reopen while the case continued through the appellate process2.
Understanding the impact of state-level restrictions on women in need of abortion services is 
critical to assess the range of consequences of such laws. While our previous research 
documented the effect of HB2 on abortion services statewide [1], little is known about 
women’s experiences with service disruptions in the wake of clinic closures across the state. 
In this study, we report on the results of qualitative interviews conducted with women who 
sought care in the periods shortly after the enforcement of HB2 at clinics that were no longer 
providing abortion services.
2. Methods
2.1. Participant recruitment
Between November 2013 and June 2014 and again in October–November 2014, we 
conducted semistructured, qualitative interviews with English- or Spanish-speaking women 
1In April 2013, before the introduction of HB2, there were 41 facilities providing abortion care in Texas. During the period between 
May 1 and October 31, 2013, during which HB2 was debated and passed, 8 facilities closed. Several factors contributed to these 
closures, including clinic owners anticipating that HB2 would be too onerous to be able to comply with when enforcement began. 
When the admitting privileges provision of HB2 went into effect late on October 31, 2013, 11 clinics closed, leaving 22 open facilities. 
Between November 2013 and the end of September 2014, there were 10 closures of clinics at various time points when physicians lost 
admitting privileges, when physicians stopped working at certain facilities or due to other reasons. During that same period, 7 facilities 
were able to reopen when physicians obtained admitting privileges or physicians with admitting privileges began working at clinics. In 
addition, the clinic in McAllen reopened for a brief period in September 2014, after a district court enjoined enforcement of the ASC 
and admitting privileges requirements throughout the state. This left 19 open facilities by the end of September 2014.
2When the ASC provision was enforced in October 2014, 9 facilities closed. When the US Supreme Court issued an order blocking 
this portion of the law later that month, 8 clinics were able to reopen, leaving 18 open facilities by November 2014.
Fuentes et al.
Page 2
Contraception. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 aged 18 years and over whose abortion appointments were canceled or who sought 
appointments at clinics that stopped providing abortion services due to enforcement of HB2. 
In addition, we interviewed Texas residents who traveled to Albuquerque, New Mexico, to 
obtain an abortion procedure. The Albuquerque clinics were the closest large-volume 
abortion facilities for some women living in West Texas, and some of these facilities 
provided abortion after 20 weeks gestation.
Women whose appointments were canceled or who called closed clinics up to 2 months after 
the closure were contacted by clinic staff at 9 facilities, who used a standard script to invite 
them to participate in the study. When the ASC requirement was briefly enforced, we only 
recruited participants for the time that clinics were closed.
Those interested in participating provided their name (or a pseudonym) and a phone number. 
If we did not reach a woman on the first phone call, we called back and left a voicemail 
when possible, up to four times before removing her from the pool of potential participants. 
Texas resident women traveling to clinics in Albuquerque were provided with study flyers, 
and those interested contacted the study coordinator.
2.2. Data collection and analysis
We adapted the interview guide from a previous study on abortion clients [2]. We developed 
further interview topics and the analytical approach with the objective of describing 
women’s experiences with abortion services after clinic closures using a health care access 
framework, focusing on several dimensions of access, including distance to services, 
timeliness of care, type of procedure and out-of-pocket costs [3]. We asked participants to 
recount their story of looking for abortion services, starting with the first call they made to a 
clinic. We also asked about their preferred type of abortion (medical or surgical), travel to 
the clinic and associated costs and whether and at what gestational age they ultimately 
obtained an abortion. After several interviews, the guide was revised to include a question on 
whether women had considered ways to induce an abortion on their own. Interviews were 
conducted by telephone and lasted 20–40 min. With participant consent, interviews were 
recorded and transcribed. Participants received a US$30 gift card for their time.
We coded transcripts using Atlas.ti 8.1 (Berlin, Germany) and conducted a thematic analysis 
[4]. First, we developed a priori codes based on the interview guide. During coding, we 
added codes to capture emerging domains, such as women’s recovery from the abortion and 
their desire for privacy. To increase intercoder reliability, two coders independently coded 
two interviews and then compared their application of codes. Discussion between coders 
provided consensus in cases of coding differences, to add or collapse codes and refine code 
definitions. The remaining transcripts were then coded independently. We summarized codes 
in analytic memos interpreting main themes, including cases that countered our initial 
interpretation of a theme. We present quotes that highlight the main themes. The study was 
approved by the institutional review board at the University of Texas at Austin.
Fuentes et al.
Page 3
Contraception. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 3. Results
Six facilities provided contact information for 122 women (1–30 from each clinic). Of these, 
23 completed interviews, 74 did not respond and 25 declined or were ineligible. We were 
unable to collect information about the number of women invited to the study by clinic staff, 
and we did not collect information about women who declined participation. Five 
participants had appointments that were canceled at clinics that ceased providing services 
after HB2 first went into effect, and twelve sought an abortion at clinics after they had 
closed. Three interviews were with women who sought appointments at clinics that closed 
after the ASC provision briefly went into effect, and three were with Texas residents 
recruited from clinics in Albuquerque. Participant characteristics are presented in the Table 
1, and the main themes of the interviews are described below.
3.1. Confusion about open clinics
After having appointments canceled or being turned away from closed clinics, more than 
half of women reported being confused about where they could go for abortion services and 
frustrated with the lack of clarity about which clinics remained open. Some expressed fear 
that they would not be able to obtain an abortion at all. Many women called several clinics in 
an effort to find a provider that they were able to travel to and afford. A 24-year-old woman 
from El Paso described her emotions when she found out that a clinic in that city was no 
longer providing abortion services:
“My heart dropped because I was like, ‘what am I going to do now,’ you know? I 
don’t know why I just…assumed that was the only clinic. You know, I didn’t know 
that there were a lot of clinics. So I was calling around and every call I made, ‘oh, 
we’re closed, we don’t do that anymore,’…and I started getting scared.”
Five women reported receiving incomplete information from closed clinics about where to 
go for abortion services, and sometimes, they were even referred to a more distant clinic 
when closer facilities were open. Women whose abortion appointments were canceled at the 
last minute were especially fearful. For example, a 22-year-old woman from Austin 
explained:
“Everything was pretty simple in the beginning. It was supposed to be on…a 
Thursday, but I got a call Wednesday night that said it was canceled; to not come 
in…it was pretty scary. They said that they would give me the number to the Dallas 
location that I could go to, but, I mean, Dallas is 4 h away, so I just knew it was 
going to be a little bit more difficult for me…is that clinic going to be booked up? 
Was I going to get in, in time? How was I going to pay to get there? How was I 
going to get there?”
3.2. Increased cost and travel time
Most women, especially those in West Texas and the Lower Rio Grande Valley (LRGV), 
spent more money and time than they would have before HB2 to obtain an abortion after 
their local clinics closed. For example, after the clinics closed in Harlingen and McAllen, 
four women in the LRGV had to drive nearly 4 h each way to San Antonio to obtain care, 
and they reported spending an average of US$75 on gas. Because appointments were 
Fuentes et al.
Page 4
Contraception. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 generally scheduled early in the morning, four women tried to avoid the cost of a hotel by 
starting their journey around 3:00 a.m. and driving home directly after the procedure. Six 
women reported spending between US$60 and US$200 on hotel stays because the trip was 
too far to make in 1 day.
Women also described being uncomfortable, lonely and feeling sick while traveling far from 
home. One of these women, a 24-year-old from the LRGV, explained that her reason for 
staying overnight was to avoid dealing with cramping, bleeding and other side effects during 
the drive home:
“We didn’t know how long it was going to take, ’cause we can drive 4 h over there, 
do the procedure and then drive 4 h back, but we didn’t know how I was going 
feel…we didn’t want to be on the road and then I start — I keep bleeding… you 
know?…before you could just go to McAllen. It wasn’t so far away, and you could 
come back to your home and be comfortable…but having to go all the way there 
and not even feel comfortable, not even be where you’re naturally from and being 
in a hotel afterwards…that’s the only experience I didn’t like, the whole traveling 
and then having to stay somewhere we didn’t want to stay, but since we lived so far 
away that we didn’t have a choice.”
Women also reported that they needed to ask for more help than they would have if there had 
been a local provider, and in the process, they had to reveal their abortion decision to people 
they might not have told otherwise. Some discussed needing to borrow a vehicle or ask 
someone to drive them to their appointments, and others mentioned that they had to borrow 
money from friends to help pay for the abortion and travel costs. A few women 
compromised their desire for privacy in order to make arrangements to obtain an abortion. 
For example, an 18-year-old woman from the LRGV who lived with her parents explained 
that she did not want them to know about the abortion; however, it was difficult to be 
discreet while figuring out how to travel to San Antonio on her own. She ended up telling 
her parents about the abortion appointment:
“Well, [my father] wasn’t going to find out. Like I wanted to do this on my 
own ’cause it was my fault that this happened… and I didn’t want them to find 
out ’cause they’re not really with me on this. They’re kind of against abortion too 
but I told them that it happened…that’s when they told me that, ‘well, we’ll take 
you. Like what if something happens to you on the bus or something?’ So he’s 
decided to take me.”
3.3. Delayed and forgone abortion care
After being turned away from closed clinics or having appointments canceled, one woman 
was able to schedule another appointment the same day; however, women who had to 
arrange transportation or could not take time off of work on the day of the next available 
appointment were delayed even further. Eight women described having to wait more than an 
additional week before obtaining an abortion, two of whom had sought care early but were 
unable to obtain an abortion until after 12 weeks gestation.
Fuentes et al.
Page 5
Contraception. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 One woman who was delayed was a 22-year-old woman from El Paso who looked online to 
find other options after being turned away from a closed clinic. She found an open abortion 
facility nearby that cost US$80 more than the closed clinic and another provider almost 4 h 
away in New Mexico, where she would have had to stay in a hotel. Faced with two costly 
options, she kept looking but ultimately decided to go to the closer provider because she was 
offered a job and could not take time off to travel to New Mexico. By the time she obtained 
an abortion — 3 weeks after she initially sought care — she was just over 12 weeks 
pregnant, and the price of the procedure had increased by more than US$200. To cover the 
added cost, she took out a loan.
Two women who wanted an abortion did not obtain one despite attempting to schedule an 
appointment. Insufficient information, time and money led these women to the decision to 
carry their pregnancies to term. Both women had initially strongly preferred medical 
abortion and recognized the pregnancy early enough to be eligible, but they could not locate 
a facility within their reach. One of them, a 23-year-old married woman from Waco with two 
children, made appointments at two different clinics, anticipating keeping the appointment 
that was most affordable, but both of them were canceled when the clinics closed due to 
HB2.
“I called Dallas, I called San Antonio. I think in Austin and here in Waco they 
weren’t doing nothing, and they said they didn’t have a surgeon or a doctor for that 
here. They used to have one. I don’t know what happened but they didn’t have one 
at the time. I also did look at ways that I could do it myself at home but it was like 
either you do it, you might hurt yourself or you might, you know, hurt the baby. I 
called back, and I think they told me that they weren’t doing [medical or surgical 
procedures], that the government had put a stop or something…I was pretty upset, 
but I just decided that I guess I’ll have to just ride it out. I didn’t know what else to 
do, who else to call.”
The other participant who decided to continue her pregnancy was a 24-year-old college 
student and divorced mother of two children in the LRGV. She was working part time, and 
her job did not provide paid sick leave or health insurance. When she found out that the 
nearest place to obtain an abortion was a 4-h drive from her home, she felt it was impossible 
for her to travel:
“I wanted to get the medication procedure but they said I couldn’t because it 
requires at least two visits to go back to the doctor and I wouldn’t be able to travel 
back to San Antonio… because I work and I wouldn’t be able to have so many days 
off to go…I just kind of, you know, forgot about having that done…like I really 
wanted to get it done, but it was real expensive and then I would have to travel a 
long time, for like, I think it’s like a 4-h drive or a 6-h drive.”
She expressed that she felt unable to manage the added costs of child care, more time off 
work, and traveling farther to obtain an abortion after her local clinic closed.
Fuentes et al.
Page 6
Contraception. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 3.4. Women considered self-induction
When women were asked if they considered trying to end the pregnancy on their own 
without medical assistance, most said that they never thought about this. However, five 
women said they considered abortion self-induction. All five turned to the internet for 
information about self-induction methods, and two said that they also asked a family 
member.
In the end, all five women decided against self-induction because of safety concerns or fear 
that it would not be effective. An 18-year-old woman from the LRGV discovered she was 
pregnant after leaving college mid-semester to get away from an abusive boyfriend. Her 
local clinic had closed after HB2 enforcement, and she lived more than a 3-h drive from the 
nearest provider. She was unsure if she could cover the cost of the procedure and travel 
expenses, which led her to consider self-induction:
“Well me and my sister were talking about this…she was the only one that could be 
there for me. So I told her, ‘this is a lot of money and…is there any other way?’ 
She’s like, ‘Well, in Mexico they have this pill’ and then [we] researched that and 
they said that, something that — it harms the woman.”
4. Discussion
The experiences of women in our study help to explain the decline in the number of 
abortions and increase in the proportion of second-trimester abortions observed in Texas in 
the period after HB2 was enforced and add to the limited qualitative literature describing 
patient experiences with abortion restrictions [1,5,6]. In the period after clinics closed due to 
enforcement of HB2, women faced added informational, geographic and financial obstacles 
to abortion care.
These barriers were costly in multiple ways. Women endured confusion, fear and frustration 
and had to compromise their privacy in the process of obtaining an abortion after clinic 
closures. Some women traveled long distances or out of state to obtain care, but two women 
in this sample never obtained the abortion they wanted. A growing body of evidence 
indicates that women who are denied an abortion have worse health and social outcomes 
compared to those who obtain wanted abortions [7,8,9]. While our data cannot quantify how 
commonly women could not access desired abortion care in Texas during this period (or 
after), these stories put a human face on the decline in the number of abortions performed in 
Texas that we observed over the 6 months following the implementation of HB2 [1].
Prior research documented a small but significant increase in second-trimester abortion in 
Texas in the 6 months after HB2 went into effect [1]. Our results contextualize those 
findings. After experiencing an appointment cancelation or discovering a clinic closure, 
most women in our study were able to obtain an abortion within 1 week. However, several 
were delayed longer, and two experienced significant delays that resulted in obtaining 
abortions in the second trimester when their initial attempt to access care would have 
allowed for a first-trimester procedure. Although second-trimester abortion is very safe, it is 
Fuentes et al.
Page 7
Contraception. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 associated with a higher risk of complications and death compared to first-trimester abortion 
[10]; later abortion is also more expensive [11].
None of the participants reported attempting to self-induce abortion, although some did 
consider it. Other research from Texas suggests that barriers to clinic-based care are an 
important reason why some women attempt to end a pregnancy on their own [12,13].
This study has several limitations. The response rate was low despite systematic efforts to 
contact women several times. We were also unable to include minors, since it would have 
been logistically difficult for the clinic staff to obtain parental consent for us to perform the 
interview. We know that there are important experiences, such as those of minors and non-
English-speaking and undocumented immigrant women that are not included here. 
Additionally, for some themes, we did not reach saturation due to our limited recruitment 
period and low response rate; for example, we interviewed just four women who traveled out 
of state to obtain an abortion. In addition, it is possible that as time passed and people 
became aware of which clinics were open and closed, informational barriers to care 
diminished. However, other barriers such as travel distance to open clinics or wait times for 
abortion appointments remained or even worsened over time [14].
This is the first study to our knowledge to describe women’s experiences shortly after 
abortion clinic closures due to a restrictive abortion law. Previous research suggests that 
some restrictions do prevent women from obtaining abortions, especially when they force 
women to travel farther to obtain services [1,15,16,17]; however, none has documented the 
experiences of women unable to obtain their desired abortion. We collaborated with 
providers to implement a novel recruitment strategy and were able to conduct interviews 
with women from this difficult-to-study group.
Results from this study give insight into the ways that abortion restrictions affect women in 
the early phase of implementation through the sudden closure of a large number of clinics. If 
the ASC requirement of HB2 is enforced, which would further reduce the number of 
facilities providing abortion care in Texas to 10, the barriers described here would likely be 
compounded by limited capacity of the remaining clinics to absorb the demand for services 
[14], resulting in an even more disrupted service environment. Further research is needed to 
explore the longer-term effects of the reduction in abortion access in Texas, including 
studying whether these policies result in an increase in unwanted births, second-trimester 
procedures and abortion self-induction.
Acknowledgements
We thank Sarah Baum for her helpful comments on the analysis. This work was presented at the annual meeting of 
the American Public Health Association, New Orleans, LA, November 17, 2014.
References
[1]. Grossman D, Baum S, Fuentes L, White K, Hopkins K, Stevenson A, et al. Change in abortion 
services after implementation of a restrictive law in Texas. Contraception. 2014; 90:496–501. 
[PubMed: 25128413] 
Fuentes et al.
Page 8
Contraception. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 [2]. Texas Policy Evaluation Project. [Accessed December 20, 2015] Impact of Abortion Restrictions 
in Texas. Available at http://www.utexas.edu/cola/txpep/_files/pdf/TxPEP-ResearchBrief-
ImpactofAbortionRestrictions.pdf
[3]. Penchansky T, Thomas W. The concept of access: definition and relationship to consumer 
satisfaction. Med Care. 1981; 19:127–40. [PubMed: 7206846] 
[4]. Fereday J, Muir-Cochrane E. Demonstrating rigor using thematic analysis: a hybrid approach of 
inductive and deductive coding and theme development. Int J Qual Methods. 2006; 5:80–92.
[5]. Kimport K, Preskill F, Cockrill K, Weitz TA. Women’s perspectives on ultrasound viewing in the 
abortion care context. Womens Health Issues. 2012; 22:e513–7. [PubMed: 23040800] 
[6]. Kavanagh EK, Hasselbacher LA, Betham B, Tristan S, Gilliam ML. Abortion-seeking minors’ 
views on the Illinois parental notification law: a qualitative study. Perspect Sex Reprod Health. 
2012; 44:159–66. [PubMed: 22958660] 
[7]. Gerdts C, Dobkin L, Foster DG, Schwarz EB. Side effects, physical health consequences, and 
mortality associated with abortion and birth after an unwanted pregnancy. Womens Health Issues. 
2015; 26:55–9. [PubMed: 26576470] 
[8]. Upadhyay UD, Biggs MA, Foster DG. The effect of abortion on having and achieving aspirational 
one-year plans. BMC Womens Health. 2015; 15:102. [PubMed: 26559911] 
[9]. Roberts SC, Biggs MA, Chibber KS, Gould H, Rocca CH, Foster DG. Risk of violence from the 
man involved in the pregnancy after receiving or being denied an abortion. BMC Med. 2014; 
12:144. [PubMed: 25262880] 
[10]. Zane S, Creanga AA, Berg CJ, Pazol K, Suchdev DB, Jamieson DJ, et al. Abortion-related 
mortality in the United States: 1998-2010. Obstet Gynecol. 2015; 126:258–65. [PubMed: 
26241413] 
[11]. Jerman J, Jones RK. Secondary measures of access to abortion services in the United States, 2011 
and 2012: gestational age limits, cost, and harassment. Womens Health Issues. 2014; 24:e419–24. 
[PubMed: 24981401] 
[12]. Grossman D, Holt K, Peña M, Lara D, Veatch M, Córdova D, et al. Self-induction of abortion 
among women in the United States. Reprod Health Matters. 2010; 18:136–46. [PubMed: 
21111358] 
[13]. Texas Policy Evaluation Project. [Accessed January 21, 2016] Texas women’s experiences 
attempting self-induced abortion in the face of dwindling options. Available at http://
www.utexas.edu/cola/txpep/_files/pdf/TxPEP-Research-Brief-WomensExperiences.pdf
[14]. Texas Policy Evaluation Project. [Accessed January 21, 2016] Abortion Wait Times in Texas: The 
Shrinking Capacity of Facilities and the Potential Impact of Closing Non-ASC Clinics. Available 
at http://sites.utexas.edu/txpep/files/2016/01/Abortion_Wait_Time_Brief.pdf
[15]. Colman S, Joyce T. Regulating abortion: impact on patients and providers in Texas. J Policy Anal 
Manage. 2011; 4:775–97.
[16]. Dennis, A.; Henshaw, SK.; Joyce, TJ.; Finer, LB.; Blanchard, K. The impact of laws requiring 
parental involvement for abortion: a literature review. Guttmacher; New York: 2009. 
[17]. Joyce, TJ.; Henshaw, SK.; Dennis, A.; Finer, LB.; Blanchard, K. The impact of state mandatory 
counseling and waiting period laws on abortion: a literature review. Guttmacher Institute; New 
York: 2009. 
Fuentes et al.
Page 9
Contraception. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Fuentes et al.
Page 10
Table 1
Participant characteristics
N (%)
Age (years)
 18–25
15 (65)
 > 25
8 (35)
Children
 0
12 (52)
 1
3 (13)
 2
5 (22)
 3
3 (13)
Previous abortion
6 (26)
Race/ethnicity
 Latina
15 (65)
 White
4 (17)
 Chinese
1 (4)
 Black
1 (4)
 Mixed race/ethnicity
2 (9)
Cohabiting or married
4 (17)
Employed
12 (52)
Student
10 (43)
Education
 Middle school
1 (4)
 Some high school
2 (9)
 Completed high school or general educational development
7 (30)
 Some college or technical school
7 (30)
 Completed bachelor’s, associate’s, technical school or higher
6 (26)
Region of residence in Texas
 LRGV
6 (26)
 Central
6 (26)
 West
4 (17)
 East
3 (13)
 North
2 (9)
 Panhandle
1 (4)
 Othera
1 (4)
aOne woman lived in southeastern New Mexico and sought care at a closed clinic in El Paso, Texas.
Contraception. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 07.
