 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 4 3 0
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 12   December 2016
Introduction
Gut microbiota affect the host’s energy balance, glucose and lipid 
metabolism, and the immune response (1). Obesity, type 2 diabetes, 
and metabolic syndrome are all associated with changes in intestinal 
microbial communities and reduced bacterial diversity (2). Causal 
effects of the microbiota have been suggested by experiments show-
ing that colonization of germ-free (GF) mice with gut microbiota 
from obese mice (3) or humans (4) can result in increased fat mass 
in the recipients. Likewise, changes in gut microbiota induced by 
antibiotics (5, 6), cohousing animals (7), or changing the breeding/
rearing environment (8) can affect the response to high-fat diet–
induced (HFD-induced) obesity and insulin resistance. The effect of 
the microbiome on metabolism is also modified by the genetics of 
the host (8) and by environmental factors such as dietary intake (9). 
Exactly how gut microbiota interact with host genetics and affect the 
metabolic phenotype is still incompletely defined. Multiple mech-
anisms have been suggested including the effects of bacterially 
released LPSs (10), the metabolism of short-chain fatty acids and 
bile acids (11, 12), and the effects on the host’s immune system (13).
Among strains of mice and individual humans, a wide range 
of responses is observed in the development of obesity and insulin 
resistance with exposure to high-calorie or high-fat diets (14, 15). 
For example, C57BL/6J (B6J) mice from The Jackson Laboratory 
and 129S6/SvEvTac (129T) mice from Taconic Farms are obesity 
prone, whereas a genetically related 129 substrain from The Jack-
son Laboratory (129S1/SvImJ, abbreviated herein as 129J) is obesi-
ty resistant. The difference between the 129 substrains from these 
2 vendors is due, at least in part, to differences in gut microbiota, 
as housing these mice in a common environment ameliorates their 
propensity to develop obesity and glucose intolerance (8). Adipose 
tissue and systemic inflammation are observed in many disorders 
associated with insulin resistance including obesity, type 2 diabe-
tes, and metabolic syndrome (16, 17), and targeting inflammation 
has been explored as a treatment for metabolic disorders (18). 
While there is evidence for some interplay between the gut micro-
biota and obesity-induced inflammation (8, 19, 20), the molecular 
links between these processes and the role of host genetics have 
not been fully elucidated.
The aim of this study was to dissect the molecular links 
between gut microbiota, insulin resistance, and glucose metab-
olism using inbred mouse strains that differ in their propensity 
to develop metabolic syndrome. To this end, we challenged B6J, 
129T, and 129J mice with an HFD, while simultaneously treating 
some animals with vancomycin, a nonabsorbed antibiotic that tar-
gets gram-positive bacteria, or metronidazole, an absorbed antibi-
otic that targets anaerobic bacteria. Though all 3 strains showed 
Interactions of diet, gut microbiota, and host genetics play important roles in the development of obesity and insulin 
resistance. Here, we have investigated the molecular links between gut microbiota, insulin resistance, and glucose 
metabolism in 3 inbred mouse strains with differing susceptibilities to metabolic syndrome using diet and antibiotic 
treatment. Antibiotic treatment altered intestinal microbiota, decreased tissue inflammation, improved insulin signaling in 
basal and stimulated states, and improved glucose metabolism in obesity- and diabetes-prone C57BL/6J mice on a high-
fat diet (HFD). Many of these changes were reproduced by the transfer of gut microbiota from antibiotic-treated donors to 
germ-free or germ-depleted mice. These physiological changes closely correlated with changes in serum bile acids and levels 
of the antiinflammatory bile acid receptor Takeda G protein–coupled receptor 5 (TGR5) and were partially recapitulated by 
treatment with a TGR5 agonist. In contrast, antibiotic treatment of HFD-fed, obesity-resistant 129S1 and obesity-prone 129S6 
mice did not improve metabolism, despite changes in microbiota and bile acids. These mice also failed to show a reduction 
in inflammatory gene expression in response to the TGR5 agonist. Thus, changes in bile acid and inflammatory signaling, 
insulin resistance, and glucose metabolism driven by an HFD can be modified by antibiotic-induced changes in gut microbiota; 
however, these effects depend on important interactions with the host’s genetic background and inflammatory potential.
Antibiotic effects on gut microbiota and metabolism 
are host dependent 
Shiho Fujisaka,1 Siegfried Ussar,1,2 Clary Clish,3 Suzanne Devkota,4 Jonathan M. Dreyfuss,5,6 Masaji Sakaguchi,1 Marion Soto,1 
Masahiro Konishi,1 Samir Softic,1,7 Emrah Altindis,1 Ning Li,8 Georg Gerber,8 Lynn Bry,8 and C. Ronald Kahn1
1Section of Integrative Physiology and Metabolism, Joslin Diabetes Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 2Institute for Diabetes and Obesity, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 
Neuherberg, Germany; German Center for Diabetes Research (DZD), Munich, Germany. 3Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. 4Section of Pathophysiology and Molecular 
Pharmacology, Joslin Diabetes Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 5Bioinformatics Core, Joslin Diabetes Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 
6Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 7Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 8Center for Clinical and Translational Metagenomics, 
Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Submitted: January 22, 2016; Accepted: September 15, 2016.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2016;126(12):4430–4443. doi:10.1172/JCI86674.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 4 3 1
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 12   December 2016
the metabolic response to HFD-induced obesity, 7-week-old male 
inbred B6J, 129T, and 129J mice were challenged with an HFD 
(60% of calories from fat). As previously described (8), while all 3 
strains of mice had similar food intake, by 2 weeks into the study, 
B6J and 129T mice had gained significantly more weight than did 
129J mice on the same diet (Figure 1A). The response to weight 
gain, however, was different between B6J and 129T mice. B6J 
mice developed hyperglycemia, hyperinsulinemia, and marked 
insulin resistance as measured by homeostatic model assessment 
of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) (Figures 1, B and C), whereas, 
despite comparable weight gains, 129T mice had lower blood glu-
cose and HOMA-IR levels that were similar to those of 129J mice, 
which remained relatively lean and insulin sensitive (Figure 1, B 
and C). This higher level of insulin sensitivity of 129T and 129J 
mice on an HFD correlated with lower expression levels of Tnfa 
in the liver compared with levels detected in B6J mice (Figure 1D).
We have previously shown that the different metabolic 
responses to an HFD in these 3 strains of mice are in part due to 
dramatic changes in their gut microbial communities following 
antibiotic treatment, only the obesity-prone B6J mice had a reduc-
tion in inflammatory markers as well as improved insulin signaling 
and glucose metabolism when given antibiotics. These improve-
ments were associated with changes in serum bile acids, especially 
deoxycholic acid (DCA) and taurodeoxycholic acid (TDCA), and 
restoration of levels of the bile acid receptor Takeda G protein–
coupled receptor 5 (TGR5) in the liver, which was decreased by an 
HFD. Likewise, treatment with a TGR5 agonist reduced inflamma-
tory gene expression and response to LPS only in B6J mice. Thus, 
the effects of antibiotics on improved insulin signaling and the 
metabolic state depend on an interaction of the gut microbiome, 
bile acid metabolism, and the systemic inflammatory response, all 
of which are dependent on host genetics.
Results
Effects of gut microbiota on adiposity and glucose metabolism in dif-
ferent inbred mouse strains. To assess the effect of host genetics on 
Figure 1. Microbiota affect adiposity 
and glucose metabolism depending 
on the host genetics. (A) Weight gain 
of B6J (circles), 129T (squares), and 
129J (triangles) mice on an HFD. 
 #P < 0.05 (129T vs. 129J); *P <0.05 
and **P < 0.01 (B6J vs. 129J), by 
ANOVA, followed by Tukey-Kramer 
post-hoc. (B) Blood glucose levels in 
the random fed state at 11 weeks of 
age (n = 4 per group). (C) Calculated 
HOMA-IR for B6J, 129T, and 129J mice 
after 8 weeks on an HFD (n = 8  
per group). (D) Tnfa mRNA in liver 
from mice fed an HFD for 9 weeks 
as determined by qPCR (n = 8 per 
group). (E) PCA of fecal 16S rRNA 
sequencing data for HFD-fed mice of 
the 3 strains at 16 weeks of age (n = 8 
per group). PC1, principle coordinate 
1; PC2, principle coordinate 2. (F–H) 
Graphs show weight gain of HFD-fed 
B6J (F), 129T (G), and 129J (H) mice 10 
weeks after undergoing transfer of 
cecal bacteria from B6J, 129T, and 129J 
mice (n = 6 per group). Graphs show 
blood glucose levels (fed) of recipient 
B6J (F), 129T (G), and 129J (H) mice 
measured 1 week after bacterial 
transfer. *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01, by 
ANOVA, followed by Tukey-Kramer 
post-hoc. (I) Weight gain and (J) OGTT 
for HFD-fed, GF B6J mice colonized 
with cecal bacteria from B6J (circle), 
129T (square), and 129J (triangle) mice 
measured 2 weeks after transfer  
(n = 7–10). #P < 0.05 (129T vs. 129J); 
*P < 0.05 (B6J vs. 129J), by ANOVA, 
followed by Tukey-Kramer post-hoc.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 4 3 2
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 12   December 2016
lenged them with an HFD for 10 weeks. On the 129T genetic back-
ground, mice receiving microbiota from B6J donors gained even 
more weight than did mice receiving microbiota from 129T donors, 
whereas mice that received bacteria from 129J mice gained signifi-
cantly less weight than did those receiving bacteria from 129T mice 
(Figure 1G). This difference in weight gain was not observed when 
the recipient mice were either of the B6J strain (Figure 1F) or the 
129J strain (Figure 1H), further indicating the importance of the 
host in the response to the microbiome. It is also worth noting that 
B6J mice gained more weight and showed higher glucose levels, 
differences in their gut microbiota (8). Indeed, principal compo-
nent analysis (PCA) of gut microbiota, as assessed by 16S rRNA 
sequencing of the V4 region, showed clear differences in the micro-
bial communities of these mice (Figure 1E). To determine whether 
the metabolic differences among the strains were related to these 
differences, we transferred cecal bacteria from mice of each of the 
3 different strains into B6J (Figure 1F), 129T (Figure 1G), and 129J 
(Figure 1H) mice, whose endogenous gut microbes were markedly 
reduced by a 3-day treatment with an antibiotic cocktail consisting 
of ampicillin, vancomycin, neomycin, and metronidazole and chal-
Figure 2. Antibiotic treatment decreases biomass of the gut bacteria and dramatically modulates microbiota composition. (A) Schematic overview of 
the study design for antibiotic modification of the gut microbiota using 3 strains of mice. (B) DNA levels isolated from fecal samples and (C) eubacteria 
DNA levels measured by qPCR normalized by fecal weight after 1 week of antibiotic treatment (n = 8 per group). (D) Energy content measured by bomb 
calorimetry of fecal samples from B6J mice after 5 weeks of antibiotic treatment (n = 8). P, placebo; V, vancomycin; M, metronidazole. (E) Representation 
of bacterial phyla in the fecal microbiota of mice from each group (n = 8) at 14 weeks of age after 8 weeks of antibiotic treatment. *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01 
by ANOVA, followed by Tukey-Kramer post-hoc.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 4 3 3
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 12   December 2016
cecal contents from the 3 strains of donor mice was performed. The 
colonized mice were continuously fed the same HFD for 8 more 
weeks. Mice on the B6J background that received bacteria from 
HFD-fed B6J mice again gained more weight than did mice that 
received bacteria from either 129J or 129T mice, however, this did 
not quite reach statistical significance (P = 0.15) (Figure 1I). More 
important, the B6J recipients colonized with bacteria from both 
B6J and 129T mice had worse glucose tolerance than did those 
colonized with bacteria from 129J mice (Figure 1J). These results 
suggest that 129T mice are prone to obesity, in part, because of 
their gut microbiota but remain glucose tolerant because they are 
genetically insulin sensitive. However, if their microbiome was 
transferred into diabetes-prone, HFD-fed B6J mice, the recipi-
regardless of the bacterial donors, consistent with this being the 
most obesity- and diabetes-prone mouse of these 3 strains. Ran-
dom fed blood glucose levels in mice from each recipient group 
were not different in any of the strains, suggesting that the failure 
of 129T mice to develop hyperglycemia despite high weight gain in 
response to an HFD is due to the effects of the genetic background, 
whereas differences in the tendency toward obesity are more close-
ly linked to differences in the gut microbiota.
To further explore the role of the host’s genetic background  in 
the response to changing gut microbiota, we also performed cecal 
bacterial transfer from mice of each strain into GF B6J mice and 
challenged the latter with an HFD. Five-week-old male GF mice 
were started on an irradiated HFD. After 1 week, transfer of the 
Figure 3. Antibiotic modification of the gut microbiota improves glucose metabolism with improved insulin signaling in HFD-fed B6J mice. (A) Total fat 
and lean mass were assessed by DEXA for HFD-fed B6J, 129T, and 129J mice treated with placebo, vancomycin, or metronidazole for 7 weeks (n = 16). (B) 
Blood glucose levels of HFD-fed B6J mice in the fed (7 weeks old) or 4-hour–fasted state (15 weeks old) (n = 8). (C) AUC of blood glucose levels during an 
OGTT of 19-week-old HFD-fed B6J mice treated with placebo, vancomycin, or metronidazole (12 weeks on the HFD diet; 13 weeks on antibiotics) (n = 6). (D) 
ITT of 12-week-old HFD-fed B6J mice treated with placebo, vancomycin, or metronidazole (7 weeks on the HFD; 8 weeks on antibiotics) (n = 16). (E) Western 
blots for insulin signaling in liver extracts from 16-week-old B6J mice treated with 5 U insulin via the vena cava (9 weeks on the HFD; 10 weeks on antibiot-
ics) n=3. (F–H) Quantitation of AKT phosphorylation (p-AKT) normalized by total AKT in liver (F), muscle (G), and adipose tissue (H) extracts from B6J mice 
treated with placebo, vancomycin, or metronidazole) (n = 3). *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01, by ANOVA, followed by Tukey-Kramer post-hoc.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 4 3 4
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 12   December 2016
and resulted in improved insulin sensitivity as assessed by an i.p. 
insulin tolerance test (ITT) (Figure 3D). This was due to improved 
insulin signaling in target tissues of the antibiotic-treated mice (Fig-
ure 3, E–H, and Supplemental Figure 3, A and B), with no change 
in serum insulin levels (Supplemental Figure 3, G and H). Indeed, 
in both liver and muscle, vancomycin treatment enhanced basal 
phosphorylation of the insulin receptor (IR), AKT (Ser473), and 
ERK, even in animals that received no exogenous insulin. Metro-
nidazole also increased AKT phosphorylation, but only in response 
to insulin (Figure 3, E–G, and Supplemental Figure 3B). Enhanced 
insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of IR and AKT in vancomycin- 
and metronidazole-treated mice was also observed in epididymal 
adipose tissue, but in this tissue, there were no changes in basal 
phosphorylation (Figure 3H and Supplemental Figure 3A). By con-
trast, in 129T and 129J mice, antibiotic treatment did not change 
glucose levels, insulin levels, or insulin sensitivity (Supplemental 
Figure 3, C–F, and Supplemental Figure 3, G and H). Thus, metro-
nidazole and vancomycin treatment improved glucose metabolism 
and insulin signaling only in HFD-fed B6J mice.
Transplantation of gut bacteria transfers improved insulin signal-
ing and glucose metabolism. To determine whether the improved 
metabolic phenotype observed in antibiotic-treated B6J mice 
was secondary to changes in gut microbiota, we performed cecal 
microbiota transfer from vancomycin- or metronidazole-treat-
ed donor mice into microbiota-depleted B6J recipient mice as 
described above (Supplemental Figure 4A). During the subse-
quent 12 days, the BW of recipient mice was stable and did not 
differ between control mice and those that received microbiota 
from antibiotic-treated animals (Supplemental Figure 4B). How-
ever, the recipient mice that received metronidazole-treated 
cecal content had significantly improved glucose levels 7 days 
after transfer, and this trend continued for the remainder of the 
experiment (Figure 4A). The mice that received microbiota from 
vancomycin-treated mice also had lower glucose levels, but these 
did not reach statistical significance. OGTT also showed improved 
glucose tolerance in the groups that received microbiota from the 
antibiotic-treated groups compared with pre-transfer levels in 
the same animals (Figure 4, B–D). A similar effect was observed 
during an i.p. glucose tolerance test (GTT), indicating that this 
was a systemic effect rather than an effect localized to the gas-
trointestinal tract (Supplemental Figure 4, C–E). More important, 
like mice directly treated with antibiotics, mice that received the 
microbiota from antibiotic-treated animals also showed improved 
insulin-stimulated IR and AKT phosphorylation in liver and mus-
cle (Figure 4, E and F).
To further investigate these phenomena, we performed a sec-
ond bacterial transfer experiment in HFD-fed, GF B6J mice (Sup-
plemental Figure 4F). Again, we observed significant improve-
ment in AKT phosphorylation (p-AKT) in the livers of mice that 
received gut bacteria from vancomycin-treated mice (Figure 4G). 
OGTT showed improved glucose tolerance in recipient mice 
with vancomycin- or metronidazole-treated donors (Figure 4H). 
Thus, antibiotic modification of gut microbiota improved glucose 
metabolism and insulin signaling in HFD-fed B6J mice, but not in 
129T or 129J mice, and these effects were in large part transferable 
to both GF mice and mice whose endogenous microbiota were 
markedly reduced by prior antibiotic treatment.
ent mice showed signs of glucose intolerance, again indicating an 
interaction of gut bacteria with host genetics that affects adiposity 
and glucose metabolism.
Antibiotic treatment dramatically modulates gut microbiota com-
position. To dissect the relationship between gut microbiota and 
the host’s metabolism, we challenged B6J, 129T, and 129J mice 
with an HFD, while modifying the microbiome by treatment with 
either vancomycin or metronidazole (Figure 2A). Vancomycin is a 
nonabsorbable antibiotic that kills primarily gram-positive organ-
isms, whereas metronidazole targets anaerobic organisms and is 
absorbable. These are the 2 antibiotics also used most frequently 
in patients with Clostridium difficile infection. Quantitative PCR 
(qPCR) analysis showed that antibiotic treatment reduced total 
and eubacteria DNA levels in the feces by 70% to 90% in all 3 
strains of mice (Figure 2, B and C), and this was associated with an 
increase in the total amount of energy in the feces as measured by 
bomb calorimetry (P = 0.005) (Figure 2D).
16S rRNA sequencing analysis of fecal samples was performed 
to determine the bacterial composition of each mouse strain after 
7 weeks on an HFD, with or without antibiotic treatment. Despite 
their different genetic backgrounds and breeding sites, the gut 
microbiota of both B6J and 129T mice on an HFD were dominat-
ed by Firmicutes (74% in B6J and 72% in 129T mice), whereas in 
129J mice, Verrucomicrobia accounted for 66% of the bacterial 
sequences. Vancomycin treatment reduced the relative abun-
dance of Firmicutes in B6J mice to 37% (P = 0.009) and in 129T 
mice to 50% of the untreated HFD levels (P = 0.003), and in both 
cases, this was associated with an increase in the relative abun-
dance of Proteobacteria (Figure 2E). Interestingly, despite the 
difference in initial bacterial composition in 129J mice, metroni-
dazole and vancomycin markedly reduced Verrucomicrobia from 
66% to 0% (P = 0.002) and 23% (P = 0.007), respectively, leaving 
only Proteobacteria and Firmicutes (Figure 2E and Supplemental 
Figure 1A; supplemental material available online with this arti-
cle; doi:10.1172/JCI86674DS1). PCA showed that, despite initial 
differences in microbiota among these 3 strains, the major deter-
minant of the microbial landscape was antibiotic treatment (Sup-
plemental Figure 1B). Nonetheless, even on the same HFD and the 
same antibiotic, each strain had unique microbiotial communities.
Modification of gut microbiota by antibiotics improves glucose 
metabolism and insulin signaling in B6J mice. In the obesity-prone 
B6J mice on an HFD, the vancomycin-treated mice gained sig-
nificantly more weight than did the metronidazole-treated ani-
mals, while placebo-treated mice had weight gains intermediate 
to those of the 2 groups (Supplemental Figures 2A). Vancomy-
cin-treated B6J mice exhibited a significant increase in lean mass 
(22.8 ± 0.33 g to 24.1 ± 0.27 g; P = 0.002), with no change in fat 
mass as assessed by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) 
(Figure 3A). By comparison, there were no significant differenc-
es in weight gain in either the 129T or 129J mice during antibiotic 
treatment, although there was a small increase in lean mass in the 
129T mice on vancomycin (Supplemental Figure 2, B and C, and 
Figure 3A). Food intake was not altered by antibiotic treatment in 
mice of any of the strains (Supplemental Figures 2, D and F).
Both vancomycin and metronidazole lowered blood glucose 
levels (Figure 3B) and improved glucose tolerance during an oral 
glucose tolerance test (OGTT) (Figure 3C) in B6J mice on an HFD 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 4 3 5
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 12   December 2016
Figure 4. Improvement of glucose metabolism by antibiotic-modified bacteria is transferable. (A) Differences between 4-hour fasting blood glucose 
levels measured at 1 pm in an HFD-fed B6J mice before and after bacterial transfer (days 7, 9, and 11) from donor HFD-fed B6J mice treated with placebo, 
vancomycin, or metronidazole for 1 week (n = 6 per group). (B–D) OGTT of the HF-fed B6J recipient mice performed before (white circles) and after (solid 
circles) bacterial transfer (day 11) from mice treated with placebo (B), vancomycin (C), or metronidazole (D) (n = 6). *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01, by unpaired, 
2-tailed t test. (E and F) Western blots for insulin signaling in liver (E) and muscle (F) of the recipient mice. (G) Western blots for insulin signaling in the 
liver of HFD-fed, GF B6J mice colonized with cecal bacteria from HFD-fed B6J mice treated with placebo, vancomycin, or metronidazole, measured 2 weeks 
after transfer. Graph shows quantitation of p-AKT protein normalized by actin (n = 4–6). (H) OGTT of HFD-fed, GF B6J mice colonized with cecal bacteria 
from HFD-fed B6J mice treated with placebo (circles), vancomycin (squares), or metronidazole (triangles) (n = 7–9). *P < 0.05, for placebo versus vancomy-
cin; #P < 0.05 and ##P < 0.01, for placebo versus metronidazole, by ANOVA, followed by Tukey-Kramer post-hoc.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 4 3 6
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 12   December 2016
Antibiotic treatment ameliorates HFD-induced inflammation in 
B6J mice. Low-grade inflammation in visceral adipose tissue and liv-
er is one component of the pathophysiology of insulin resistance in 
obesity. In HFD-fed B6J mice, treatment with vancomycin or met-
ronidazole dramatically decreased their elevated serum TNF-α lev-
els. This decrease in TNF-α levels was also observed in GF B6J mice 
colonized with cecal bacteria from antibiotic-treated mice. By con-
trast, in the insulin-sensitive 129 substrains, TNF-α levels were low 
even on an HFD, and antibiotic treatment had no effect (Figure 5A).
Flow cytometric analysis of cells isolated from the lamina pro-
pria of the colon showed high levels of CD11c+CD11b+F4/80+ mac-
rophages in B6J mice compared with levels in both 129 substrains 
Figure 5. Gut microbiota modification by antibiotics ameliorates diet-induced inflammation in B6J mice. (A) Serum TNF-α levels of HFD-fed mice treat-
ed with placebo, vancomycin, or metronidazole for 9 weeks and of HFD-fed, GF mice colonized with bacteria from placebo-, vancomycin-, or metronida-
zole-treated (n = 8) mice. (B) Percentage of F4/80+ macrophages in CD11b+CD11c+ cells in lamina propria (n = 5). (C and D) qPCR analysis of inflammatory 
markers (C) and ER stress markers (D) in the liver (n = 8; 10 weeks of antibiotic treatment). (E) Representative flow cytometric results for Gr-1+ cells in the 
liver of 8-week-old chow-fed mice and 26-week-old HFD-fed B6J mice (n = 3) (20 weeks on the HFD; 1 week of antibiotic treatment). SSC, side scatter. (F) 
Percentage of Gr-1+ macrophages in CD11b+F4/80+ Kupffer cells in the liver. (G) qPCR analysis of sorted Kupffer cells (n = 3) and (H) FITC levels in serum of 
B6J mice after gavage administration of FITC-dextran (n = 3–4). *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01, by ANOVA, followed by Tukey-Kramer post-hoc.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 4 3 7
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 12   December 2016
bile acid metabolism, all of which have been linked to insulin resis-
tance or inflammation. Mice fed an HFD had higher serum levels 
of FITC after FITC-dextran gavage, and these were restored to 
normal levels by either vancomycin or metronidazole treatment, 
suggesting that an HFD increased gut permeability and that this 
was reversed by antibiotic treatment (Figure 5H). In contrast, 
neither vancomycin nor metronidazole treatment affected the 
expression of genes encoding tight-junction proteins in the colon, 
plasma endotoxin levels, or expression of LPS-binding protein 
(Lbp) in the liver, nor were there any changes in liver TG content 
(Supplemental Figure 8, D–G).
However, an HFD and antibiotic treatment had major effects 
on the levels of plasma bile acid metabolites (Figure 6A). Plasma 
bile acid profiles in B6J mice revealed that an HFD increased the 
proportion of cholic acid (CA) and DCA and decreased chenode-
oxycholic acid (CDCA). Both vancomycin and metronidazole, on 
the other hand, reduced the proportion of DCA to very low levels, 
and metronidazole also reduced CA to chow diet levels (Figure 6A). 
On a chow diet, 129T mice had a higher proportion of CA than did 
B6J mice, while 129J mice had a higher proportion of muricholic 
acid (MCA). Vancomycin and metronidazole also increased the 
proportion of MCA in 129T mice, whereas in 129J mice, vancomy-
cin increased CA, while metronidazole decreased it (Figure 6A). 
Compared with 129T mice, 129J mice also showed higher levels 
of MCA, CA, CDCA, lithocholic acid (LCA), and hyodeoxycholic/
ursodeoxycholic acid (HDCA/UDCA) (Supplemental Figure 9).
The inflammatory bile acids TDCA and DCA (21, 22) are pro-
duced by 7-α-dehydroxylation of taurocholic acid (TCA) and CA by 
intestinal bacteria, primarily Clostridium XI and Clostridium XIVa, 
which express the bacterial enzyme baiE (23) Analysis of both cecal 
and plasma bile acids revealed that antibiotic treatment of mice of 
all 3 strains greatly decreased TDCA and DCA levels (Figures 6, B 
and C, and Supplemental Figure 9). This was probably secondary 
to decreases of more than 99% in these Clostridial clusters in both 
vancomycin- and metronidazole-treated mice (Figure 6D), result-
ing in a marked decrease in baiE gene levels detectable in the feces 
(Figure 6E and Supplemental Figure 10A). To determine whether 
these changes in TDCA might be linked to changes in the inflam-
matory response, B6J mice were fed either normal chow or chow 
supplemented with TDCA (0.4% wt/wt), after which peritoneal 
macrophages were isolated and stimulated in vitro with bacterial 
LPS. Indeed, macrophages from mice fed the TDCA-supplement-
ed diet showed 3- to 4-fold higher responses of Tnfa, Il6, and Il1b 
mRNA in response to LPS stimulation compared with what was 
observed in macrophages from control mice (Figure 7A). Taken 
together, these data indicate that antibiotic treatment decreas-
es the levels of bile acid–modifying bacteria, including the major 
bacterial bile acid dehydroxylase, thereby reducing serum levels of 
the proinflammatory bile acids TDCA and DCA and resulting in a 
decreased inflammatory response in B6J mice.
The role of the bile acid receptor TGR5 in antibiotic effects on 
inflammatory response. Bile acids exert their effects through the 
nuclear receptor FXR and the G protein–coupled membrane 
receptor TGR5 (also known as GPBAR1 [G protein–coupled bile 
acid receptor 1]; M-BAR [membrane-type receptor for bile acids]; 
or GPR131 [G protein–coupled receptor 131]) (24). Several studies 
have demonstrated that TGR5 is highly expressed in immune cells 
(Figure 5B). CD11c+CD11b+F4/80– dendritic cells in the mesenter-
ic lymph node (MLN) were also higher in B6J mice, whereas the 
CD4+ cell population in MLNs was lower in B6J mice compared 
with that detected in both 129 strains (Supplemental Figure 4, G 
and  H). In B6J mice, the macrophage population in lamina propria 
was further elevated in response to an HFD, and this increase was 
markedly blunted by antibiotic treatment. Again, these effects 
were not observed in mice of the 129J or 129T strains, which had 
lower proportions of these cells. Thus, the CD11c+CD11b+F4/80+ 
macrophage population in lamina propria is influenced by both 
diet and antibiotics in mice prone to metabolic syndrome and may 
play an important role in regulating diet-induced inflammation, 
but these effects were not observed in mice that appeared to be 
genetically resistant to developing metabolic syndrome.
The decreased tissue inflammation in the antibiotic-treated 
mice was also indicated by decreased expression of Il6 and Il1b 
in mesenteric adipose tissue in response to metronidazole treat-
ment (Supplemental Figure 5A), with a similar trend for inflam-
matory marker gene expression in epididymal adipose tissue 
(Supplemental Figure 5B). We also observed a decreased number 
of crown-like structures in epididymal adipose tissue in the anti-
biotic-treated, HFD-fed B6J mice (Supplemental Figure 5C), and 
qPCR assessment revealed reduced expression of inflammatory 
genes in the colons of mice from the antibiotic-treated groups 
(Supplemental Figure 5D).
Another site of reduction in inflammatory gene expression in 
HFD-fed mice treated with antibiotics was the liver, with decreas-
es of 30% to 50% in Tnfa, Il6, Gpf480 (encoding F4/80), and Tlr4 
expression levels (Figure 5C). In addition, markers of ER stress, 
including CHOP10, Gadd34, Ire1, Perk, Atf6, and Bip, were sig-
nificantly reduced in the livers of the antibiotic-treated, HFD-fed 
B6J mice (Figure 5D). The major population of immunoregulatory 
cells in the liver is Kupffer cells. Flow cytometric analysis revealed 
that the proportion of inflammation-activated Gr-1–positive 
Kupffer cells was greatly increased by an HFD, and this was also 
decreased by antibiotic treatment (Figures 5, E and F). In addition, 
FACS-isolated Kupffer cells showed significantly increased levels 
of Tnfa, Il6, and Il1b expression in HFD-fed mice as assessed by 
qPCR, and these levels were dramatically decreased in both van-
comycin- and metronidazole-treated groups (Figure 5G). The 
effects of antibiotics on lowering inflammatory gene expression 
was most rapid in the liver, where these effects could be observed 
as early as 4 weeks into the HFD period (Supplemental Figure 8, A 
and B), a point at which no significant differences were observed 
in adipose tissue (Supplemental Figure 8C). Again, in both 129T 
and 129J mice, antibiotic treatment had no effect on reducing 
inflammatory gene expression and, in some cases, paradoxically 
upregulated the expression of inflammatory genes in fat, liver, and 
colon (Supplemental Figures 6 and 7). Thus, antibiotic modifica-
tion of the gut microbiome improved insulin signaling and glucose 
metabolism only in obesity- and diabetes-prone B6J mice, which 
was correlated with an improvement in inflammation in multiple 
tissues, especially liver.
Antibiotics decrease plasma bile acid metabolites. To further 
define the mechanisms of improved insulin sensitivity and 
decreased inflammation, we assessed the effect of antibiotics on 
gut epithelial permeability, liver triglyceride (TG) content, and 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 4 3 8
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 12   December 2016
decrease of more than 60% in TGR5 protein levels in the livers 
of mice of all 3 strains in response to an HFD (Figure 7B and Sup-
plemental Figure 10B). Likewise, when Kupffer cells, which are 
the major cells in liver-expressing TGR5 (26), were isolated by cell 
and has an important role in regulating inflammation (25, 26). We 
hypothesized that the changes in bile acid composition by an HFD 
or antibiotic modification of gut microbiota may have an impact 
on TGR5 in the liver. Indeed, Western blot extracts revealed a 
Figure 6. Antibiotics decrease plasma bile acid metabolites. (A) Total bile acid composition in the plasma of chow plus placebo–, HFD plus placebo–, 
HFD plus vancomycin–, and HFD plus metronidazole–treated B6J, 129T, and 129J mice (n = 4) after 4 weeks of treatment. (B and C) Relative abundance of 
plasma tauro-conjugated bile acids (B) and cecum total bile acids (C) of individual mice from each treatment group. (D) Number of reads for Clostridium XI 
and Clostridium XIVa clusters (n = 8). (E) qPCR analysis for the baiE gene in feces collected from B6J mice treated for 8 weeks (n = 8). *P < 0.05, by ANOVA, 
followed by Tukey-Kramer post-hoc.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 4 3 9
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 12   December 2016
Il6, and Il1b in the livers of B6J mice (Figure 7F). Peritoneal macro-
phages collected from TGR5 agonist–treated B6J mice also showed 
lower TNF-α expression in both the basal and LPS-stimulated states 
(Figure 7G). By contrast, no effect on inflammatory gene expression 
in liver was observed in response to the TGR5 agonist in either 129 
strain (Figure 7F). Likewise, the TGR5 agonist had no effect on Tnfa 
expression in LPS-stimulated peritoneal macrophages in 129T mice 
and tended to increase Tnfa expression in 129J mice (Figure 7G). 
Thus, an HFD decreased bile acid receptor TGR5 levels in the liver, 
which were restored by antibiotic modification of the gut microbio-
ta. Antiinflammatory signaling through this increased level of TGR5 
was specific to B6J mice, thus contributing to the decreased inflam-
mation that was unique to mice of the B6J strain.
sorting, they showed a reduction of approximately 70% in Tgr5 
mRNA in mice on an HFD (Figure 7C). In HFD-fed B6J mice, this 
decrease in TGR5 in the liver was partially restored by vancomycin 
and completely restored by metronidazole treatment (Figure 7D). 
Furthermore, when the gut microbiota of vancomycin- or metro-
nidazole-treated mice were transferred to HFD-fed, GF B6J mice, 
a restoration of TGR5 levels was also observed (Figure 7E).
To understand the potential role of TGR5 activation in the meta-
bolic responses, B6J, 129T, and 129J mice were treated with RG-239, 
a TGR5 receptor agonist (27). This resulted in a reduction in blood 
glucose levels in B6J mice, without any change in BW (Supplemen-
tal Figure 10, C and D). Mechanistically, this was associated with 
significant decreases in expression of the inflammatory genes Tnfa, 
Figure 7. Modification of the gut 
microbiota by antibiotics restores 
bile acid receptor, TGR5 level in the 
liver. (A) qPCR for Tnfa, Il6, and Il1b 
mRNA in peritoneal macrophages 
collected from mice with or without 
TDCA treatment (0.4%) for 3 weeks. 
Cells were stimulated with PBS or LPS 
(10 ng/ml) for 6 hours. Graph shows 
the fold change of relative expression 
levels after the stimulation (n = 5). 
(B) Western blots for TGR5 in the liver 
of B6J mice on chow or an HFD for 22 
weeks and quantitation of TGR5 protein 
normalized to actin (n = 4 per group). 
(C) qPCR for Tgr5 expression in Kupffer 
cells from mice fed chow or an HFD for 4 
to 7 months (n = 8–9). (D) Western blots 
for TGR5 in the liver of 11-week-old B6J 
mice on chow or an HFD, with or with-
out antibiotic treatment. Quantitation 
of TGR5 normalized to actin (n = 4 per 
group; 4 weeks on the HFD; 5 weeks on 
antibiotics). (E) Western blots for TGR5 
in the liver of HFD-fed, GF B6J mice 
that received bacterial transfer from 
placebo-, vancomycin-, or metronida-
zole-treated mice and quantitation  
of TGR5 protein normalized to actin  
(n = 5–12 per group; 19-week-old mice; 
10 weeks on the HFD; 2 weeks after 
colonization). (F) qPCR for Tnfa, Il6, and 
Il1b expression levels in the liver of mice 
treated with or without RG-239 (10 mg/
kg/d) for 2 weeks (n = 3–5). (G) qPCR for 
Tnfa expression of peritoneal macro-
phages collected from mice treated 
with or without RG-239 and stimulated 
in vitro with or without 10 ng/ml LPS for 
6 hours (n = 4–6). *P < 0.05 and  
**P < 0.01, by unpaired, 2-tailed t test 
for (A–C and E–G) and by ANOVA, fol-
lowed by Tukey-Kramer post-hoc for (D).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 4 4 0
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 12   December 2016
protein kinase Cδ (PKCδ) in the liver is 2-fold higher in B6 mice 
than in 129 mice in the basal state and is further increased in B6J 
mice, but not 129 mice, in response to an HFD (30). PKCδ, like 
other novel PKCs, can serine phosphorylate IRS-1 and the IR and 
promote insulin resistance. Third, and important in the context of 
this study, the inflammatory response to an HFD in adipose tis-
sue is higher in B6J mice than in 129 mice (8, 31). Indeed, in the 
present study, we demonstrate that the insulin resistance–prone 
B6J mice have higher levels of inflammatory markers, not only in 
adipose tissue but also in the liver and in the intestinal lamina pro-
pria, when compared with both 129 strains. Antibiotic treatment 
greatly reduced inflammatory gene expression in B6J mice in all 
of these tissues, consistent with this being a significant factor in 
the changing response to an HFD and the changing microbiome. 
Indeed, the improvement in inflammation with antibiotic treat-
ment was observed in the liver as early as 4 weeks after beginning 
an HFD, even at a point when no significant differences were 
observed in adipose tissue.
Multiple mechanisms appear to link gut microbiota to changes 
in metabolism and inflammation, including effects on gut devel-
opment and permeability, metabolism of indigestible components 
of the diet, protection from colonization by pathogenic bacteria, 
and direct modulation of immune cell development and homeo-
stasis (32). The most direct of these effects of gut microbiota are 
changes in gut permeability and the generation of endotoxins (33). 
In the present study, an HFD tended to increase gut permeability, 
which was reversed by antibiotic treatment, suggesting that gut 
permeability may play a role in the antibiotic response. Howev-
er, antibiotics improved insulin sensitivity in HFD-fed B6J mice, 
without producing any differences in expression of the genes for 
tight-junction–related proteins, changes in plasma endotoxin lev-
els, or changes in expression levels of LBP in the liver, suggesting 
that other mechanisms may be more important in the observed 
decrease in systemic inflammation.
Recent studies have demonstrated that the gut microbiota 
can affect the metabolism of a large number of substances, espe-
cially bile acids, which can secondarily affect the immune system 
and the physiological response to an HFD (34). As part of normal 
physiology, hepatocytes produce CA and CDCA from cholesterol. 
These lipid-soluble bile acids are conjugated to glycine or taurine 
molecules to form water-soluble primary bile acids, which are 
stored in the gall bladder and released during digestion into the 
duodenum. In the lower small intestine and colon, bacteria dehy-
droxylate the primary bile salts to form secondary bile salts, which 
are actively reabsorbed along the proximal and distal ileum into 
the hepatic portal circulation. Bacteria can also deconjugate some 
of the primary and secondary conjugated bile salts back to lip-
id-soluble bile acids, which are passively absorbed into the hepatic 
portal circulation. In all, 95% of the bile acids that are delivered to 
the duodenum are recycled by this enterohepatic circulation.
In the present study, we found that an HFD significantly 
increased the proportions of both CA and DCA and decreased the 
levels of CDCA in the circulation of the host animals, while anti-
biotic treatment reduced both DCA and TDCA levels. DCA and 
TDCA are produced in the intestine from CA and TCA primar-
ily by 2 bacterial clusters, Clostridium XI and Clostridium XIVa 
(23). Treatment with either vancomycin or metronidazole causes 
 
Discussion
Multiple studies have established an important role of gut micro-
biota in the pathogenesis of a variety of diseases, including inflam-
matory bowel diseases, obesity, and type 2 diabetes. Exactly how 
gut microbiota modify disease risk in each of these cases involves 
important interactions with the host’s genetic background (8, 14). 
We have recently shown that the development of metabolic pheno-
types, such as weight gain, insulin resistance, and glucose intoler-
ance, in response to an HFD is very different among inbred strains 
of mice and that this depends on a combination of factors including 
host genetics, response of gut microbiota to the dietary challenge, 
and other environmental factors including the site of rearing of the 
mice (8, 14). For example, B6J mice are prone to developing insulin 
resistance and metabolic syndrome when challenged with an HFD, 
whereas 129J mice from the same commercial breeder are resistant 
to insulin resistance and obesity under the same conditions (8). On 
the other hand, the mice of the genetically related 129T substrain 
from another commercial breeder develop obesity and hepatoste-
atosis on an HFD but retain relative insulin sensitivity and have nor-
mal glucose tolerance (8). In the 129T substrain, reprogramming 
of the gut microbiome by raising the mice in a new environment 
changed the response to an HFD, such that these mice became 
obesity resistant and had improved glucose tolerance, more close-
ly resembling the 129J mice. However, for B6J mice, changing the 
environment was not sufficient to change the response to an HFD, 
despite significant changes in the gut microbiome.
The aim of the present study was to further dissect the inter-
actions between the host and the microbiome and begin to identi-
fy the mechanisms underlying the microbiome effects on insulin 
sensitivity and metabolic responses by analyzing how antibiot-
ics, which cause dramatic remodeling of the microbiome, affect 
the response to an HFD in mice with differing genetic propen-
sities for developing metabolic syndrome. For this purpose, we 
used 2 antibiotics that are also commonly used in patients with 
inflammatory bowel disease: vancomycin, a nonabsorbed anti-
biotic that targets gram-positive bacteria, and metronidazole, an 
absorbed broad-spectrum antibiotic that reduces anaerobic and 
facultative bacterial species.
In B6J mice, treatment with both antibiotics improved insu-
lin signaling, insulin sensitivity, and glucose metabolism. This 
was associated with decreased systemic inflammation; decreased 
serum TNF-α levels; reduced markers of inflammation in adipose 
tissue, liver/Kupffer cells, and colon; and decreased macrophage 
infiltration into adipose tissue and the lamina propria of the colon. 
This appeared to be mediated, at least in part, through changes in 
bile acid metabolism and an upregulation of the bile acid receptor 
TGR5, which mediates antiinflammatory effects. The important 
role of host genetics in these responses is evidenced by the fact 
that these improvements were observed only in B6J mice and not 
in either 129 strain, despite similar effects of antibiotic treatment 
on the gut microbiome and bile acid metabolism.
We have previously shown that there are at least 3 factors that 
impact the different metabolic responses of B6J and 129 mice to 
an HFD. First, 129 mice have more brown/beige adipose tissue 
and more brown/beige adipocyte precursors than do B6J mice 
(28, 29). This results in an increased basal energy expenditure 
in 129 mice that protects against obesity. Second, expression of 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 4 4 1
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 12   December 2016
protein levels in the liver. Consistent with previous studies (26), 
we found that in liver, TGR5 receptors were expressed primarily 
on Kupffer cells. We also found that the TGR5-selective agonist 
RG-239 could produce an antiinflammatory effect. Interestingly, 
however, although hepatic TGR5 levels were similar in all 3 mouse 
strains, the antiinflammatory effect of RG-239 was observed only 
in B6J mice, again indicating the important role of the host’s genet-
ic background and the inflammatory potential in the interactions 
between the gut microbiome and metabolism. In future studies, it 
would be of interest to determine the effects of inactivation of the 
Tgr5 gene in each of these mouse strains.
At a molecular level, one of the most striking findings of this 
study was the improvement in insulin signaling in liver, fat, and 
muscle of the antibiotic-treated animals. Vancomycin enhanced 
the phosphorylation of AKT, ERK, and the IR in B6J mice, even 
in the basal state, while metronidazole increased AKT phosphor-
ylation only in response to insulin. Some of these changes in sig-
naling were reproduced by fecal transplantation, suggesting that 
they were due to changes in gut microbiota. While it is possible 
that the enhanced insulin response was due to a lower level of 
systemic inflammation created by the beneficial microbial com-
munity, the mechanism underlying the increase in basal insulin 
signaling remains unknown, as this was not observed in the micro-
biota transfer experiment. It is possible that the enhanced basal 
signaling was due to some direct metabolic product of the altered 
microbial community or that it required a host-microbiome inter-
action that was not reproduced in the microbiome transfer. Alter-
ations of the gut microbiome by vancomycin have been reported 
to enhance GLP-1 secretion in B6J mice (6), however, we did not 
observe any significant difference in serum GLP-1 levels (data not 
shown) or any difference in serum insulin levels in the mice treat-
ed with antibiotics, suggesting that the altered insulin signaling 
was not simply due to increased basal insulin levels.
In addition to our study showing a reduction of inflammatory 
 
bacterial metabolites with antibiotic treatment, others have 
shown that, under some circumstances, antibiotic treatment can 
also decrease HFD-induced endotoxemia in obese mice, which 
may have beneficial effects on glucose metabolism (44). However, 
long-term antibiotic treatment would probably not be an accept-
able approach to treating obesity-associated insulin resistance and 
metabolic syndrome (45). In fact, low-dose antibiotic treatment in 
humans in early life may actually increase the risk of metabolic 
dysfunction in adulthood (46). Likewise, short-term treatment of 
obese humans with metabolic syndrome with vancomycin appears 
to decrease, rather than increase, systemic insulin sensitivity (47). 
This is consistent with our findings that the interaction between 
the gut microbiome and insulin sensitivity is very complex and 
depends on multiple host factors as well as the environment.
In summary, antibiotic treatment has profound effects on the 
gut microbiome that result in changes in bile acid metabolism, 
inflammatory and insulin signaling, and glucose homeostasis. The 
exact composition of the resulting bacterial community and bile 
acid metabolites as well as the downstream responses vary greatly, 
however, depending on host genetics and inflammatory potential. 
In inflammation-prone hosts, antibiotics can reduce inflammatory 
metabolites, such as DCA and TDCA, and increase antiinflamma-
tory TGR5 signaling. This is associated with improved insulin sig-
a decrease of more than 99% in the levels of bacteria in these 
clusters. This is accompanied by a parallel decrease in expres-
sion levels of the bacterial gene baiE, which encodes the gene 
responsible for 7α-dehydroxylation, which is required for the pro-
duction of these bile acids. Parallel decreases in DCA and TDCA 
in the intestinal lumen occur as well. Although, in all 3 strains of 
mice, antibiotics reduced the numbers of these bacteria and the 
levels of baiE gene expression and vancomycin and metronida-
zole decreased their TDCA levels, it is important to note that the 
serum bile acid composition is very different in these 3 strains of 
mice, as B6J mice have lower plasma levels of total CA, MCA and 
CDCA compared with 129J mice, while 129J mice have higher lev-
els of total lithocholic acid (LCA).
Previous studies have reported that DCA can promote intes-
tinal inflammation by inducing reactive oxygen and nitrogen spe-
cies and activating NF-κB signaling in intestinal epithelial cells 
(22). This bile acid has an important effect on the inflammatory 
response in B6J mice as demonstrated by the finding that mac-
rophages from the mice fed a TDCA-supplemented diet show a 
greater response of TNF-α to LPS treatment. An increase in DCA 
in response to an HFD has also been suggested to play a role in the 
development of liver cancer (35). We found that, while all 3 strains 
of mice had between 2.6% and 5.5 % of plasma bile acids in the 
form of DCA conjugates on a chow diet, only B6J mice showed an 
increase in the proinflammatory bile acid DCA on an HFD, and 
this increase was completely blocked by antibiotic treatment. 
Thus, at least one component of the antibiotic effect to decrease 
inflammation in B6J mice is that of decreasing the bile acid mod-
ifying bacteria responsible for the production of DCA and its con-
jugates. Both vancomycin and metronidazole are currently used 
for C. difficile–associated diseases such as pseudomembranous 
colitis. This reduction in DCA and TDCA might, at least a part, be 
another mechanism of these treatments.
There are 2 major receptors of bile acids: the nuclear receptor 
FXR and the cell membrane receptor TGR5 (36). Whereas FXR 
signaling is known to regulate bile acid (37) and lipid metabo-
lism (38), the role of TGR5 is less clear. TGR5 activation has been 
shown to induce energy expenditure in brown adipose tissue (39) 
and glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) secretion in the intestine (40). 
TGR5 is also highly expressed on immune cells (25, 26) and has 
been suggested to have antiinflammatory effects (41). Indeed, 
recent studies have shown that obese mice lacking TGR5 in mac-
rophages exhibit enhanced adipose inflammation and enhanced 
insulin resistance compared with control obese animals, while 
pharmacological activation of TGR5 can decrease LPS-induced 
chemokine expression in macrophages (42).
In the present study, the change of inflammation in B6J mice 
appeared to be, at least in part, the response to bile acids acting 
through the TGR5 receptor; however, this response was also part-
ly dependent on the host’s genetic background. Thus, there was 
a marked reduction in TGR5 levels in the liver in all 3 strains of 
mice when challenged with an HFD. This was reversed by anti-
biotic treatment, especially metronidazole, and was coincident 
with a significant reduction in intraintestinal and circulating lev-
els of TDCA and DCA. Since secondary bile acids like DCA have 
a high affinity for TGR5 (43), the effect of antibiotics to decrease 
DCA and TDCA levels may contribute to the restoration of TGR5 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 4 4 2
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 12   December 2016
tered into operational taxonomic units (OTUs). A total of 5,606,228 
sequence reads were generated, corresponding to an average of 72,109 
(range, 30,087–161,983) reads per sample. Differences in microbial 
community structure were visualized using phylogenetic methods. 
The number of OTUs per sample was then scaled so that each sam-
ple had the same mean, filtered to only include OTUs that were pres-
ent at 0.1% of the total counts in at least 6 samples, log transformed 
using log2(count + 0.5), and plotted in PCA space using R software. 16S 
rRNA data sets were deposited in the NCBI’s Sequence Read Archive 
(SRA) database (accession no. SRP080944).
Statistics. Statistical significance was evaluated using ANOVA, 
followed by a Tukey-Kramer post-hoc, Bonferroni’s post-hoc, or 
unpaired, 2-tailed t test where appropriate. A P value of less than 0.05 
was considered significant. Results are presented as the mean ± SEM.
Study approval. All experiments complied with regulations and 
ethics guidelines of the National Institute of Health and were approved 
by the IACUC of the Joslin Diabetes Center (no. 97-05) and Harvard 
Medical School (no. 05131).
Author contributions
SF designed and performed experiments and wrote the manu-
script. SU, M Sakaguchi, and SS contributed to discussions. CC 
performed bile acids analysis. SD, MK, EA, and M Soto performed 
experiments. JMD performed data analysis. NL, GG, and LB con-
ducted the microbiome analyses. CRK designed experiments and 
wrote the manuscript. CRK is the guarantor of this work and, as 
such, had full access to all the data and takes responsibility for the 
integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis.
Acknowledgments
We thank Christie Penniman, Vladimir Yeliseyev, Luxue Deng, 
and Hui Pan for their technical assistance. This work was support-
ed by grants from the NIH (R01DK031036 and R01DK033201, 
to CRK); a Mary K. Iacocca Professorship (to CRK); and K-12-
HD000850 from NICHD (to SS). SF was supported by a Sunstar 
Foundation Postdoctoral Fellowship. SU was supported by iMed, 
the Helmholtz Initiative on Personalized Medicine, and the Ger-
man Center for Diabetes Research (DZD). The authors also thank 
the Joslin DRC Bioinformatics Core (NIH grant P30DK036836); 
as the Joslin Animal Physiology Core; the Joslin Flow Cytometry 
Core; the Joslin Specialized Assay Core; and the Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital, Harvard Digestive Diseases Center for Clini-
cal and Translational Metagenomics (NIH grant P30DK034854) 
for their core support.
Address correspondence to: C. Ronald Kahn, Joslin Diabetes Cen-
ter, One Joslin Place, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA. Phone: 
617.309.2635; E-mail: C.Ronald.Kahn@joslin.harvard.edu.
naling and improved glucose metabolism in these animals. How-
ever, the effects of bacterial modification depend on the mouse 
strain and the host’s genetic inflammatory potential. Understand-
ing the important interactions and the molecular pathways that 
link the gut microbiome and host genetics is critical to dissecting 
the role of the microbiome in determining the metabolic response.
Methods
Additional details are provided in the Supplemental Methods.
Mouse Procedures. B6J and 129J mice were purchased from The 
Jackson Laboratory, and 129T mice were purchased from Taconic 
Farms. Mice were maintained on either a normal chow diet containing 
22% of calories from fat, 23% from protein, and 55% from carbohy-
drates (Mouse Diet 9F 5020; PharmaServ) or an HFD (Open Source 
Diet, D12492; Research Diets) containing 60% of calories from fat, 
20% from protein, and 20% from carbohydrates. For antibiotic treat-
ment, 6-week-old mice were treated with either placebo, vancomycin 
(1 g/l), or metronidazole (1 g/l) (Sigma-Aldrich) in the drinking water, 
then started on an HFD from age 7 to 16 weeks (Figure 2A). For bac-
terial transfer experiments, recipient mice were pretreated with a 
mixture of ampicillin (1 g/l), vancomycin (0.5 g/l), neomycin (1 g/l), 
and metronidazole (1 g/l) via the drinking water for 3 days prior to the 
transfer. Cecal contents were collected from donor mice immediately 
after euthanasia, suspended with PBS, and filtered through a 40-μm 
cell strainer. Bacterial transfer was performed by gastric gavage with 
200 μl of diluted cecal contents. RG-239 was purchased from Sigma- 
Aldrich and used to supplement the chow diet (10 mg/kg/d).
GF B6J mice were obtained from the gnotobiotic core facility of 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital. Bacterial transfer was performed as 
described in the Supplemental Methods.
Flow cytometric analysis. For flow cytometry, cells were isolated 
from lamina propria as described in the Supplemental Methods and 
analyzed by flow cytometry using a BD LSR II Flow Cytometer (BD 
Biosciences). Flow cytometry for Kupffer cell sorting was performed as 
previously described (48) using a FACSAria cell sorter (BD Biosciences).
Bile acids analysis. Bile acids were analyzed using a Nexera X2 
U-HPLC system (Shimadzu Scientific Instruments) coupled to a Q 
Exactive Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 
Mass spectrometric analyses were carried out using electrospray 
ionization in the negative ion mode with full-scan analysis over m/z 
200–550 at 70,000 resolution and a 3-Hz data acquisition rate. Tar-
geted processing was conducted using TraceFinder software, version 
3.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
16S rRNA sequencing analysis. DNA was extracted from mouse 
feces using a MO BIO Fecal DNA Extraction Kit (MO BIO Laborato-
ries Inc.). A multiplexed amplicon library covering the 16S rDNA gene 
V4 region was generated from DNA-extracted samples. Reads were 
generated on a MiSeq instrument from the amplicon library and clus-
 1. Velagapudi VR, et al. The gut microbiota modu-
lates host energy and lipid metabolism in mice.  
J Lipid Res. 2010;51(5):1101–1112.
 2. Le Chatelier E, et al. Richness of human gut 
microbiome correlates with metabolic markers. 
Nature. 2013;500(7464):541–546.
 3. Turnbaugh PJ, Ley RE, Mahowald MA, Magrini V, 
Mardis ER, Gordon JI. An obesity-associated gut 
microbiome with increased capacity for energy 
harvest. Nature. 2006;444(7122):1027–1031.
 4. Ridaura VK, et al. Gut microbiota from twins 
discordant for obesity modulate metabolism in 
mice. Science. 2013;341(6150):1241214.
 5. Cho I, et al. Antibiotics in early life alter the 
murine colonic microbiome and adiposity. 
Nature. 2012;488(7413):621–626.
 6. Hwang I, et al. Alteration of gut microbiota by 
vancomycin and bacitracin improves insulin 
resistance via glucagon-like peptide 1 in diet- 
induced obesity. FASEB J. 2015;29(6):2397–2411.
 
7. Henao-Mejia J, et al. Inflammasome-mediated 
dysbiosis regulates progression of NAFLD and 
obesity. Nature. 2012;482(7384):179–185.
 8. Ussar S, et al. Interactions between gut microbi-
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 4 4 3
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 12   December 2016
ota, host genetics and diet modulate the predis-
position to obesity and metabolic syndrome. Cell 
Metab. 2015;22(3):516–530.
 9. Carmody RN, et al. Diet dominates host genotype 
in shaping the murine gut microbiota. Cell Host 
Microbe. 2015;17(1):72–84.
 10. Cani PD, et al. Changes in gut microbiota control 
metabolic endotoxemia-induced inflammation 
in high-fat diet-induced obesity and diabetes in 
mice. Diabetes. 2008;57(6):1470–1481.
 11. Canfora EE, Jocken JW, Blaak EE. Short-chain fatty 
acids in control of body weight and insulin sensi-
tivity. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2015;11(10):577–591.
 12. Joyce SA, et al. Regulation of host weight gain 
and lipid metabolism by bacterial bile acid 
modification in the gut. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2014;111(20):7421–7426.
 13. Rescigno M. Intestinal microbiota and its 
effects on the immune system. Cell Microbiol. 
2014;16(7):1004–1013.
 14. Parks BW, et al. Genetic control of obesity and 
gut microbiota composition in response to 
high-fat, high-sucrose diet in mice. Cell Metab. 
2013;17(1):141–152.
 15. Bouchard C, et al. The response to long-term 
overfeeding in identical twins. N Engl J Med. 
1990;322(21):1477–1482.
 16. Hotamisligil GS. Inflammation and metabolic 
disorders. Nature. 2006;444(7121):860–867.
 17. Osborn O, Olefsky JM. The cellular and signaling 
networks linking the immune system and metab-
olism in disease. Nat Med. 2012;18(3):363–374.
 18. Goldfine AB, et al. Use of salsalate to target 
inflammation in the treatment of insulin 
resistance and type 2 diabetes. Clin Transl Sci. 
2008;1(1):36–43.
 19. Cotillard A, et al. Dietary intervention impact 
on gut microbial gene richness. Nature. 
2013;500(7464):585–588.
 20. Huang EY, Leone VA, Devkota S, Wang Y, Brady 
MJ, Chang EB. Composition of dietary fat 
source shapes gut microbiota architecture and 
alters host inflammatory mediators in mouse 
adipose tissue. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 
2013;37(6):746–754.
 21. Mühlbauer M, et al. Differential effects of deoxy-
cholic acid and taurodeoxycholic acid on NF-kap-
pa B signal transduction and IL-8 gene expression 
in colonic epithelial cells. Am J Physiol Gastrointest 
Liver Physiol. 2004;286(6):G1000–G1008.
 22. Payne CM, et al. Deoxycholate induces 
mitochondrial oxidative stress and activates 
NF-kappaB through multiple mechanisms in 
HCT-116 colon epithelial cells. Carcinogenesis. 
2007;28(1):215–222.
 23. Ridlon JM, Kang DJ, Hylemon PB. Bile salt bio-
transformations by human intestinal bacteria.  
J Lipid Res. 2006;47(2):241–259.
 24. Thomas C, Pellicciari R, Pruzanski M, Auwerx 
J, Schoonjans K. Targeting bile-acid signalling 
for metabolic diseases. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 
2008;7(8):678–693.
 25. Pols TW, et al. TGR5 activation inhibits athero-
sclerosis by reducing macrophage inflammation 
and lipid loading. Cell Metab. 2011;14(6):747–757.
 26. Keitel V, Donner M, Winandy S, Kubitz R, 
Häussinger D. Expression and function of the 
bile acid receptor TGR5 in Kupffer cells. Biochem 
Biophys Res Commun. 2008;372(1):78–84.
 27. Genet C, et al. Structure-activity relationship 
study of betulinic acid, a novel and selective 
TGR5 agonist, and its synthetic derivatives: 
potential impact in diabetes. J Med Chem. 
2010;53(1):178–190.
 28. Almind K, Manieri M, Sivitz WI, Cinti S, Kahn 
CR. Ectopic brown adipose tissue in muscle 
provides a mechanism for differences in risk of 
metabolic syndrome in mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci  
U S A. 2007;104(7):2366–2371.
 29. Schulz TJ, et al. Identification of inducible 
brown adipocyte progenitors residing in skeletal 
muscle and white fat. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2011;108(1):143–148.
 30. Bezy O, et al. PKCδ regulates hepatic insulin sen-
sitivity and hepatosteatosis in mice and humans. 
J Clin Invest. 2011;121(6):2504–2517.
 31. Mori MA, et al. A systems biology approach 
identifies inflammatory abnormalities between 
mouse strains prior to development of metabolic 
disease. Diabetes. 2010;59(11):2960–2971.
 32. Sommer F, Bäckhed F. The gut microbiota— 
masters of host development and physiology. Nat 
Rev Microbiol. 2013;11(4):227–238.
 33. Luche E, et al. Metabolic endotoxemia directly 
increases the proliferation of adipocyte precur-
sors at the onset of metabolic diseases through 
a CD14-dependent mechanism. Mol Metab. 
2013;2(3):281–291.
 34. Wikoff WR, et al. Metabolomics analysis reveals 
large effects of gut microflora on mammalian 
blood metabolites. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2009;106(10):3698–3703.
 35. Yoshimoto S, et al. Obesity-induced gut microbial 
metabolite promotes liver cancer through senes-
cence secretome. Nature. 2013;499(7456):97–101.
 36. Kuipers F, Bloks VW, Groen AK. Beyond intesti-
nal soap--bile acids in metabolic control. Nat Rev 
Endocrinol. 2014;10(8):488–498.
 37. Lu TT, et al. Molecular basis for feedback regu-
lation of bile acid synthesis by nuclear receptors. 
Mol Cell. 2000;6(3):507–515.
 38. Jiang C, et al. Intestinal farnesoid X receptor sig-
naling promotes nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. 
J Clin Invest. 2015;125(1):386–402.
 39. Watanabe M, et al. Bile acids induce ener-
gy expenditure by promoting intracellu-
lar thyroid hormone activation. Nature. 
2006;439(7075):484–489.
 40. Thomas C, et al. TGR5-mediated bile acid sens-
ing controls glucose homeostasis. Cell Metab. 
2009;10(3):167–177.
 41. Perino A, Schoonjans K. TGR5 and immuno-
metabolism: Insights from physiology 
and pharmacology. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 
2015;36(12):847–857.
 42. Perino A, Pols TW, Nomura M, Stein S, Pellicciari 
R, Schoonjans K. TGR5 reduces macrophage 
migration through mTOR-induced  
C/EBPβ differential translation. J Clin Invest. 
2014;124(12):5424–5436.
 43. Kawamata Y, et al. A G protein-coupled 
receptor responsive to bile acids. J Biol Chem. 
2003;278(11):9435–9440.
 44. Carvalho BM, et al. Modulation of gut 
microbiota by antibiotics improves insulin 
signalling in high-fat fed mice. Diabetologia. 
2012;55(10):2823–2834.
 45. Keeney KM, Yurist-Doutsch S, Arrieta MC, Finlay 
BB. Effects of antibiotics on human microbiota 
and subsequent disease. Annu Rev Microbiol. 
2014;68:217–235.
 46. Cox LM, et al. Altering the intestinal microbi-
ota during a critical developmental window 
has lasting metabolic consequences. Cell. 
2014;158(4):705–721.
 47. Vrieze A, et al. Impact of oral vancomycin on gut 
microbiota, bile acid metabolism, and insulin 
sensitivity. J Hepatol. 2014;60(4):824–831.
 48. Kohli R, et al. High-fructose, medium chain trans 
fat diet induces liver fibrosis and elevates plasma 
coenzyme Q9 in a novel murine model of obesity 
and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Hepatology. 
2010;52(3):934–944.
