 DOI: 10.1530/JOE-16-0382
http://joe.endocrinology-journals.org 
© 2017 Society for Endocrinology
Printed in Great Britain
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
Journal of Endocrinology
F1–F6
t fullston and others
Paternal fertility and 
offspring health
Focused Review
234:2
The most common vices of men can 
damage fertility and the health of the 
next generation
Tod Fullston1,2,3, Nicole O McPherson1,2,3, Deirdre Zander-Fox1,3 and Michelle Lane1,2,3
1Discipline of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, Adelaide Medical School, Robinson Research Institute, 
The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia
2Freemason’s Foundation Centre for Men’s Health, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia
3Monash IVF Group, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
Abstract
Animal and human studies demonstrate that acquired paternal traits can impair both a 
male’s fertility and the health of his offspring, including advanced age, smoking, stress, 
trauma, under-nutrition, infection, toxin exposure, and obesity. Many of these factors lead 
to similar changes to neurological, behavioural, and/or metabolic functioning in offspring. 
The molecular mechanisms that both respond to the paternal environment and act to 
transmit traits to offspring are beginning to emerge. This review focuses on three vices of 
men (alcohol consumption, overweight/obesity, and tobacco smoking) that damage fertility 
and pose risks to offspring health. These vices are not only the three most prevalent but 
are also leading risk factors for death and disability adjusted life years (DALYs) worldwide. 
Moreover, given that these vices are predominantly self-inflicted, interventions aimed at 
mitigating their consequences are readily identified.
Introduction
There is growing evidence from animal and human studies 
that demonstrate that acquired paternal traits can impair 
both a male’s fertility and the health of his offspring, 
including advanced age, smoking, stress, trauma, 
under-nutrition, infection, toxin exposure and obesity. 
Curiously, many of these factors manifest as impaired 
neurological, behavioural and/or metabolic functioning 
in offspring. The underlying molecular mechanisms that 
respond to the paternal environment and act as vectors of 
intergenerational transmission are beginning to emerge. 
This review focuses on three vices of men (alcohol 
consumption, overweight/obesity and tobacco smoking) 
that damage fertility and pose risks to offspring health. 
These vices are not only the three most prevalent but are 
also leading risk factors for death and disability adjusted 
life years (DALYs) worldwide.
Clearly, any epigenetic/genetic alterations induced 
by the paternal exposures responsible for transmission 
need to escape/bypass the substantial post-fertilisation 
reprogramming that occurs during embryo development. 
For example, paternal obesity alters the molecular 
composition of sperm, alters the developmental trajectory 
of resultant embryos and increases the incidence of 
obesity and metabolic disorders in offspring. Mechanistic 
candidates of paternal programming include changes to 
the sperm epigenome (e.g. DNA methylation, histone/
protamine modifications, and sperm borne small non-
coding RNAs), increased sperm DNA damage, aberrant 
Correspondence 
should be addressed 
to T Fullston 
Email 
tod.fullston@adelaide.edu.au
Key Words
 
f male fertility
 
f paternal programming
 
f sperm epigenetics
 
f environmental exposure
Journal of Endocrinology  
(2017) 234, F1–F6
Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 06/02/2019 10:01:43PM
via free access
 Focused Review
F2
Paternal fertility and 
offspring health
DOI: 10.1530/JOE-16-0382
Journal of Endocrinology
t fullston and others
http://joe.endocrinology-journals.org 
© 2017 Society for Endocrinology
Printed in Great Britain
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
234:2
sperm DNA chromatin structure and components of 
seminal plasma. Understanding the molecular mechanisms 
underpinning paternal programming may lead to the 
development of interventions designed to reduce the 
disease burden in future generations, who were born to 
fathers exposed to these initiating factors. Given that these 
vices are predominantly self-inflicted, interventions aimed 
at mitigating their consequences are readily identified.
Paternal factors that impair sperm function 
or molecular composition and diminish 
offspring health
Overweight and obesity
Worldwide, more than 2.7 (~37.5%) billion people 
are either overweight (~2.1 billion, 28.4%) or obese 
 
(~0.7 billion, 9.1%), with ~2/3 of adults being overweight/
obese in most westernised societies (Ng et al. 2014). As 
the prevalence of obesity is continually increasing so is 
its contribution to the burden of health, ranked 5th/10th 
as a risk factor for causing death/DALYs worldwide, 
respectively 
(http://www.who.int/healthinfo/global_
burden_disease/GlobalHealthRisks_report_full.pdf). 
Of 
concern, there is increasing evidence that paternal obesity 
in humans is not only associated with reduced fertility 
but also compromises the health of the next generation. 
For example, a study that spanned three generations of 
a Northern Sweden population (Överkalix), an excess 
of grandpaternal food was associated with reduced 
survivability and an increased risk of diabetes in their 
grandchildren (Kaati et al. 2002). Furthermore, an 
elevated paternal BMI is associated with increased BMI in 
his children, but in humans, this phenomenon cannot 
be separated from shared genetic predispositions and/or a 
common ‘obesogenic’ environment.
Animal models can circumvent many factors that 
confound human studies. Animal models of diet induced 
obesity that induce paternal programming have provided 
more direct evidence of impairment to the health of both 
first and second generation of offspring, manifesting as 
an increased risk of metabolic syndrome and subfertility 
(Fullston et al. 2013).
Smoking
A significant proportion of men worldwide to smoke 
tobacco, with ~22.7% of men at prime reproductive age 
continuing to smoke (http://apps.who.int/gho/data/
node.sdg.3-a-viz?lang=en) and smoking ranks as the 
2nd/6th risk factor contributing to cause of death/DALYs 
globally, respectively (http://www.who.int/healthinfo/
global_burden_disease/GlobalHealthRisks_report_full.
pdf). This is despite a broad understanding that cigarette 
smoke containing a vast array of toxic and mutagenic 
compounds, which besides damaging organs, also have 
deleterious effects on sperm. A recent meta-analysis of 
5864 participants of 20 studies concluded that smoking 
is associated with reduced sperm count, motility and 
morphology with a magnified effect in moderate-to-heavy 
smokers compared to mild smokers (Sharma et al. 2016).
In addition, smoking also alters sperm microRNA 
content, 
greatly 
increases 
the 
abundance 
of 
reactive 
oxygen 
species (ROS) in the seminal plasma, increases sperm DNA 
fragmentation and increases oxidative DNA damage in 
sperm; as measured by 8-hydroxy-2′-deoxyguanosine 
(8-OHdG) lesions. Smokers are at increased risk of sperm 
defects such as partially or fully inactive mitochondria 
and non-intact acrosomes, in addition to changes to 
the proteome of their seminal plasma (Antoniassi et al. 
2016). These changes to DNA and seminal plasma are 
hypothesised to further contribute to the increased 
childhood cancer risk seen in children born to male 
smokers, beyond the contribution of paternal smoking to 
the increased mutation load in both the father’s germline 
and transmitted to his children (Linschooten et al. 2013).
Animal models replicate the findings from these 
human studies, whilst controlling for other paternal 
lifestyle factors. Smoking clearly has an impact on both 
male’s fertility and the health of any children he fathers 
and likely acts through damage to the genome and 
epigenome of sperm.
Alcohol consumption
Surprisingly, given that >50% of men regularly drink alcohol 
(http://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/
healthandsocialcare/drugusealcoholandsmoking/datasets/
adultdrinkinghabits), the impact of alcohol consumption 
on male fertility is not as well understood, and it ranks 
as the 8th/3rd worldwide risk factor as a cause of death/
DALYs, 
respectively 
(http://www.who.int/healthinfo/
global_burden_disease/GlobalHealthRisks_report_full.pdf). 
Human studies are often confounded by the participants 
also being smokers and/or overweight/obese or not being 
controlled 
for 
the 
amount 
or 
duration 
of 
alcohol 
consumption. 
A recent study of 8344 men assessed the impact of alcohol 
consumption (via self-reported questionnaire) in the week 
 
Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 06/02/2019 10:01:43PM
via free access
 F3
Focused Review
t fullston and others
Paternal fertility and 
offspring health
DOI: 10.1530/JOE-16-0382
Journal of Endocrinology
http://joe.endocrinology-journals.org 
© 2017 Society for Endocrinology
Printed in Great Britain
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
234:2
prior to semen analysis on standard semen parameters 
and serum reproductive hormones, concluding that no 
correlation existed between alcohol consumption and 
any semen variable (count, motility or morphology). 
However, they reported a linear association between 
total alcohol consumption and total or free testosterone, 
possibly reflecting the impact that alcohol has on liver 
metabolism. It must be noted that the average self-
reported alcohol consumption in this cohort was low to 
moderate (median of 8 units intake per week), and the 
study did not take into account other lifestyle factors or 
the alcohol consumption in the months prior (Jensen et al. 
2014). Regardless, human cohort studies have associated 
paternal alcohol consumption with a range of neurological, 
learning, behavioural and growth anomalies in children 
(Finegersh et al. 2015).
Despite the lack of a consistent and reproducible 
offspring phenotype across the animal models of 
paternal alcohol exposure used to date, many of the 
phenotypes observed in children are recapitulated by 
animal models, and it also has been demonstrated to 
induce hypomethylation and oxidative stress in sperm 
(Finegersh et al. 2015).
Therefore, given the prevalence of paternal alcohol 
consumption further research is required to assess 
the impact of excessive, chronic or binge alcohol 
consumption on sperm genetics/epigenetics, semen 
quality, reproductive hormones, fertility and child health. 
Ideally, this would be undertaken in the absence of/or 
controlling for confounding factors to ensure that we 
understand the true impact of alcohol consumption on 
male fertility and child health.
OH
 
Exit the 
epididymis 
Testis 
Seminiferous
tubules 
Epididymis 
Enter the 
epididymis 
Paternal environmental exposure 
• Overweight/Obesity 
• Smoking 
• Alcohol 
Exposure modulates the micro-environment 
in the testes/epididymis and alters sperm 
development/maturation 
Alters the genetic and epigenetic 
makeup of sperm – transferred to 
the oocyte at fertilisation 
Molecular
the zygote is altered 
Delayed embryo and fetal growth 
Compromised offspring health 
Figure 1
Overview of how the paternal environment might program offspring health as a result of three most common vices of men. The environment that a 
male is exposed to modulates the micro-environment within the testes/epididymis, which in turn alters the development/maturation of sperm – as a 
result sperm can harbour altered genetic/epigenetic material (increased DNA damage – oxidative an strand breaks and alterations to DNA methylation, 
small non-coding RNA content, and histone modifications) that is transferred to the oocyte at fertilisation. This subsequently alters the molecular 
makeup of the early embryo that leads to a delay in embryo/foetal development and the potential to impair offspring health.
Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 06/02/2019 10:01:43PM
via free access
 Focused Review
F4
Paternal fertility and 
offspring health
DOI: 10.1530/JOE-16-0382
Journal of Endocrinology
t fullston and others
http://joe.endocrinology-journals.org 
© 2017 Society for Endocrinology
Printed in Great Britain
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
234:2
Mechanisms of non-genetic paternal  
transmission to offspring
Prime 
candidate 
mechanisms 
that 
see 
paternal 
environmental cues passed to the next generation are 
non-genetic alterations within sperm such as small 
non-coding RNAs, DNA damage, DNA methylation and 
histone modifications. Although it must be noted that 
in the case of smoking, genetic damage in male gametes 
and offspring has been demonstrated (Linschooten et al. 
2013) and any non-genetic transmission would likely act 
in concert to exacerbate genetic effects.
Sperm borne small non-coding RNAs
Mature sperm contain RNA, including a significant 
amount of small non-coding RNAs (sncRNAs), which 
are transferred to the oocyte upon fertilisation where 
they alter gene expression in the early embryo. One 
such subset of sncRNA is microRNAs, which are short, 
endogenous, single-stranded non-coding RNAs that 
can alter gene/protein expression by binding specific 
target sequences via either mRNA decay or translational 
repression. MicroRNAs may modulate other epigenetic 
regulators such as DNA methyltransferases and histone 
deacetylases and conversely be targets of epigenetic 
regulation themselves.
Sperm-borne microRNAs have been demonstrated 
to be important for embryo development as evidenced 
by embryonic arrest in embryos deficient of sperm 
derived microRNA, paternal microRNA-34c being critical 
for the first cleavage event and the microinjection 
of microRNA from 10 sperm resulting in embryonic 
lethality (Chen et al. 2016). The microinjection of 
multiple sncRNA or microRNA species are sufficient to 
recapitulate complex phenotypes including offspring 
behavioural and metabolic defects induced by a father’s 
chronic stress (9 microRNAs), behavioural and metabolic 
defects induced by a father’s early life trauma (entire 
sperm sncRNA content), or an offspring acquired 
metabolic disorder caused by a father’s over-nutrition 
(entire sperm tsRNA fraction). The microinjection of 9 
microRNAs changed in sperm by a father’s chronic stress 
caused targeted degradation of stored maternal mRNAs 
and induced a cascade of molecular events in the early 
embryo that precede the adult offspring phenotype 
(Rodgers et al. 2015). Furthermore, the microinjection at 
supra-physiological concentrations of one microRNA into 
very early-stage embryos demonstrates that alterations 
to embryonic abundance of a single microRNA can alter 
phenotypes in adult offspring, including metabolic 
syndrome caused the microinjection of microRNA-19b 
(Grandjean et al. 2015).
Although sperm microRNA content has been 
demonstrated to be altered by obesity and smoking 
it has not been demonstrated as a result of alcohol 
consumption to date, but alterations in microRNA profile 
have been observed in other cells types due to alcohol 
exposure (Finegersh et al. 2015). Therefore, the sncRNA 
content of sperm is capable of being modulated by the 
environment that a male is exposed to, alter the molecular 
makeup in the early embryo and induce phenotypes in 
resultant offspring; making them candidate agents for 
paternal programming.
Oxidative DNA damage
ROS can cause DNA strand breaks and oxidative damage 
to DNA (which can result in mutagenesis), peroxidation 
of unsaturated lipids and disruption to mitochondrial 
function. Sperm are highly susceptible to oxidative 
damage due to the lack of cytoplasmic scavenging enzymes 
and high concentrations of polyunsaturated fatty acids 
found in their plasma membranes. While physiological 
concentrations of ROS are vital for spermatogenesis and 
post ejaculation maturation, including capacitation and 
hyperactivation, these processes become impaired if the 
cells enter a state of oxidative stress (i.e. excessive ROS). 
Sperm DNA is partially protected from oxidative damage 
via the replacement of histones with protamines during 
spermatogenesis that form a terraform structure of tightly 
packed DNA. However, the protamination of sperm DNA 
is incomplete, with ~15% histone retention in human 
sperm. Therefore, while protamine bound DNA might 
be protected, the loci associated with retained histones 
remain more vulnerable to oxidative attack.
These 
histone-bound 
areas 
are 
not 
randomly 
distributed and are enriched at developmental important 
loci, including genes key to early embryo development. 
The 8-OHdG oxidative lesion, the most characterised in 
sperm, co-localises to the nuclear matrix and histone-
bound DNA (Noblanc et al. 2013). Sperm cannot repair 
8-OHdG lesions as they only contain the first enzyme in 
the base excision repair pathway (OGG1) and subsequently 
rely on the oocyte’s enzymes required to complete this 
process after fertilisation (Smith et al. 2013), which if 
overwhelmed by the abundance of 8-OHdG lesions could 
theoretically lead to the incorporation of mismatched 
Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 06/02/2019 10:01:43PM
via free access
 F5
Focused Review
t fullston and others
Paternal fertility and 
offspring health
DOI: 10.1530/JOE-16-0382
Journal of Endocrinology
http://joe.endocrinology-journals.org 
© 2017 Society for Endocrinology
Printed in Great Britain
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
234:2
bases and an increased mutation load in the resutlant 
embryo/offspring.
An imbalance in ROS towards oxidative stress in sperm 
occurs as a result of the three most prevalent male exposures 
(male obesity, smoking and alcohol consumption), all of 
which also increase offspring susceptibility to disease, 
potentially in part via the mechanisms outlined above.
Other epigenetic mechanisms
The prime example of paternal influence on offspring 
phenotype via epigenetics is imprinting. Paternal 
imprinting 
disorders 
arise 
when 
the 
paternally 
inherited imprinted allele is expressed, at the expense 
of the maternal allele by mechanisms controlled by 
methylation, presumably transmitted via sperm DNA. 
How the three main vices of men alter sperm DNA 
methylation is not understood, but obesity is associated 
with hypomethylation of DNA from testes and late 
elongated spermatids (Fullston et al. 2013). Sperm DNA 
hypomethylation is also associated with alcohol exposure 
(Finegersh et al. 2015) and smoking (Kim et al. 2015). If 
this hypomethylation can persist into the embryo post-
fertilisation it can alter the reprogramming of the male 
pronucleus in response to environmental exposures and 
lead to the onset of disease in offspring.
Although sperm protamines are replaced with 
maternal 
histones 
at 
fertilisation, 
paternal-bound 
histone segments are not replaced by the oocyte and 
therefore any modifications to these areas (i.e. from 
oxidative damage) are likely inherited unchanged into 
the embryo (Brykczynska et al. 2010). All three of these 
male exposures have also been demonstrated to alter 
histone modifications. Thus, sperm histone modifications 
due to these exposures hold the potential to alter gene 
expression in the early embryo and subsequently the 
growth of the developing embryo/foetus, ultimately 
effecting offspring health.
Notably, any casuistic transgenerational epigenetic 
signals must persist or be applied during two rounds of 
epigenetic reprogramming within the embryo/foetus. 
Epigenetic reprogramming ensures embryo totipotency 
and the incomplete removal of epi-mutations to prevent 
the transmission of disease to offspring. The epigenome 
of 
the 
pre-implantation 
embryo 
is 
incompletely 
reprogrammed during development, whereby DNA 
methylation is re-established (except for imprinted genes). 
Then, the primordial germ cells in the foetus undergo 
a second round of epigenetic reprogramming where 
epigenetic marks are re-acquired in a sex, cell and tissue-
specific manner that might lead to epigenetic inheritance 
into the next generation of offspring.
Concluding remarks
The 
most 
common 
vices 
of 
men 
influence 
sperm 
by 
creating 
genetic alterations, epigenetic marks and extracellular 
signals, which in turn affect offspring phenotype. Many 
non-genetic mechanisms might act in concert (and in 
conjunction with any genetic damage) as the agents of 
paternal transmission due to these exposures with the 
most widely recognised, but not limited to, alterations 
to sperm sncRNA (including microRNAs) content that 
modifies embryonic gene expression, oxidative damage 
to sperm DNA, methylation changes of (imprinted) 
genes maintained into the embryo, modifications (e.g. 
acetylation and methylation) of histones retained in 
sperm transmitted unaltered from sperm to embryo 
and seminal fluid composition influencing the response 
of the female reproductive tract prior to implantation. 
All these mechanisms are predicted to alter the 
molecular constitution of the developing embryo that 
subsequently induces pathologies in offspring. The study 
of the mechanisms potentially underpinning paternal 
programming identifies the pathways involved in the 
paternal transmission of disease to offspring (summarised 
in Fig. 1). Further investigation is required to understand 
how these molecular alterations result from the paternal 
exposure 
presumably 
during 
spermatogenesis 
and 
how reprogramming during embryo development is 
influenced, to lead to the onset of disease in offspring. 
Furthermore, relatively simple interventions (e.g. dietary 
intake, physical activity, cessation of alcohol/tobacco 
use) have demonstrated promising results for improving 
both sperm quality and offspring health. When fully 
understood, the non-genetic markers that cause paternal 
programming could be used to determine the potential 
programming load caused by paternal risk factors 
prior to transmission to offspring or as readouts of the 
effectiveness of any pre-conception interventions. Their 
mitigation might then ultimately act as a circuit breaker 
for the transgenerational transmission of obesity, thus 
improving the health and fertility of future generations.
Declaration of interest
The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest that could be 
perceived as prejudicing the impartiality of this review.
Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 06/02/2019 10:01:43PM
via free access
 Focused Review
F6
Paternal fertility and 
offspring health
DOI: 10.1530/JOE-16-0382
Journal of Endocrinology
t fullston and others
http://joe.endocrinology-journals.org 
© 2017 Society for Endocrinology
Printed in Great Britain
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
234:2
Funding
This work was supported by the Australian National Health & Medical 
Research Council (NHMRC) as fellowships awarded to N O M (Early 
Career Fellowship – APP1088964) and M L (Senior Research Fellowship – 
APP1042089); the 2016 Robinson Research Institute’s Career Development 
Fellowship awarded to T F.
References
Antoniassi MP, Intasqui Lopes P, Camargo M, Zylbersztejn DS,  
Carvalho VM, Cardozo KH & Bertolla RP 2016 Analysis of the sperm 
functional aspects and seminal plasma proteomic profile from male 
smokers. BJU International 118 814–822. (doi:10.1111/bju.13539)
Brykczynska U, Hisano M, Erkek S, Ramos L, Oakeley EJ, Roloff TC,  
Beisel C, Schubeler D, Stadler MB & Peters AH 2010 Repressive and 
active histone methylation mark distinct promoters in human 
and mouse spermatozoa. Nature Structural and Molecular Biology 17 
679–687. (doi:10.1038/nsmb.1821)
Chen Q, Yan M, Cao Z, Li X, Zhang Y, Shi J, Feng GH, Peng H, Zhang X, 
Zhang Y, et al. 2016 Sperm tsRNAs contribute to intergenerational 
inheritance of an acquired metabolic disorder. Science 351 397–400. 
(doi:10.1126/science.aad7977)
Finegersh A, Rompala GR, Martin DI & Homanics GE 2015 Drinking 
beyond a lifetime: New and emerging insights into paternal 
alcohol exposure on subsequent generations. Alcohol 49 461–570. 
(doi:10.1016/j.alcohol.2015.02.008)
Fullston T, Ohlsson Teague EM, Palmer NO, DeBlasio MJ, Mitchell M, 
Corbett M, Print CG, Owens JA & Lane M 2013 Paternal obesity 
initiates metabolic disturbances in two generations of mice 
with incomplete penetrance to the F2 generation and alters the 
transcriptional profile of testis and sperm microRNA content. FASEB 
Journal 27 4226–4243. (doi:10.1096/fj.12-224048)
Grandjean V, Fourre S, De Abreu DA, Derieppe MA, Remy JJ & 
Rassoulzadegan M 2015 RNA-mediated paternal heredity of diet-
induced obesity and metabolic disorders. Scientific Reports 5 18193. 
(doi:10.1038/srep18193)
Jensen TK, Swan S, Jorgensen N, Toppari J, Redmon B, Punab M,  
Drobnis EZ, Haugen TB, Zilaitiene B, Sparks AE, et al. 2014 Alcohol 
and male reproductive health: a cross-sectional study of 8344 healthy 
men from Europe and the USA. Human Reprodution 29 1801–1809. 
(doi:10.1093/humrep/deu118)
Kaati G, Bygren LO & Edvinsson S 2002 Cardiovascular and diabetes 
mortality determined by nutrition during parents’ and grandparents’ 
slow growth period. European Journal of Human Genetics 10 682–688. 
(doi:10.1038/sj.ejhg.5200859)
Kim SK, Jee BC & Kim SH 2015 Histone methylation and acetylation in 
ejaculated human sperm: effects of swim-up and smoking. Fertility 
and Sterility 103 1425–1431. (doi:10.1016/j.fertnstert.2015.03.007)
Linschooten JO, Verhofstad N, Gutzkow K, Olsen AK, Yauk C,  
Oligschläger Y, Brunborg G, van Schooten FJ & Godschalk RW 2013 
Paternal lifestyle as a potential source of germline mutations transmitted 
to offspring. FASEB Journal 27 2873–2879. (doi:10.1096/fj.13-227694)
Ng M, Fleming T, Robinson M, Thomson B, Graetz N, Margono C, 
Mullany EC, Biryukov S, Abbafati C, Abera SF, et al. 2014 Global, 
regional, and national prevalence of overweight and obesity in 
children and adults during 1980–2013: a systematic analysis for 
the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013. Lancet 384 766–781. 
(doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(14)60460-8)
Noblanc A, Damon-Soubeyrand C, Karrich B, Henry-Berger J, Cadet R, 
Saez F, Guiton R, Janny L, Pons-Rejraji H, Alvarez JG, et al. 2013 DNA 
oxidative damage in mammalian spermatozoa: where and why is the 
male nucleus affected? Free Radical Biology and Medicine 65 719–723. 
(doi:10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2013.07.044)
Rodgers AB, Morgan CP, Leu NA & Bale TL 2015 Transgenerational 
epigenetic programming via sperm microRNA recapitulates effects of 
paternal stress. PNAS 112 13699–13704. (doi:10.1073/pnas.1508347112)
Sharma R, Harlev A, Agarwal A & Esteves SC 2016 Cigarette smoking and 
semen quality: a new meta-analysis examining the effect of the 2010 
World Health Organization laboratory methods for the examination 
of human semen. European Urology [in press].
Smith TB, Dun MD, Smith ND, Curry BJ, Connaughton HS & Aitken RJ 
2013 The presence of a truncated base excision repair pathway in 
human spermatozoa that is mediated by OGG1. Journal of Cell Science 
126 1488–1497. (doi:10.1242/jcs.121657)
Received in final form 2 May 2017
Accepted 12 May 2017
Accepted Preprint published online 12 May 2017
Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 06/02/2019 10:01:43PM
via free access
