 BRIEF REPORT • OFID • 1
Open Forum Infectious Diseases
B R I E F  R E P O R T
Plasma Cell–Free DNA Next-
Generation Sequencing to Diagnose 
and Monitor Infections in Allogeneic 
Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant 
Patients
Monica Fung,1 Simona Zompi,2 Hon Seng,2 Desiree Hollemon,2  
Adama Parham,2 David K. Hong,2 Sivan Bercovici,2 Estelle Dolan,3  
Kathy Lien,1 Justin Teraoka,1 Aaron C. Logan,4 and Peter Chin-Hong1
1Division of Infectious Diseases, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, 
California; 2Karius, Inc., Redwood City, California; 3School of Medicine, University of 
California Davis, Sacramento, California; 4Division of Hematology and Blood and Marrow 
Transplantation, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California
Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant patients are at 
risk for common and atypical infections. Superior diagnostics 
can decrease infection-related morbidity and mortality. A novel 
plasma cell–free DNA next-generation sequencing test detected 
an uncommon presentation of Chlamydia trachomatis and 
recurrent and metastatic complications of Staphylococcus aur-
eus bacteremia before standard microbiology.
Keywords. immunocompromised; molecular diagnostics; 
next-generation sequencing; stem cell transplant.
 
Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (allo-
HSCT) is a life-saving treatment for patients with hematologic 
malignancy. However, it increases the risk of infections, which 
cause significant morbidity and mortality in this population [1]. 
Diagnosing infections in allo-HSCT patients is challenging due 
to uncommon causative pathogens and atypical clinical pres-
entations of disease.
Next-generation sequencing (NGS) holds promise as an 
infectious disease diagnostic that can quickly and accur-
ately detect a wide range of pathogens to help guide therapy 
and monitor response [2]. Karius, Inc., has developed a novel 
plasma NGS platform that provides rapid and unbiased identifi-
cation of >1000 pathogens [3]. We present a series of allo-HSCT 
cases where plasma NGS detected pathogens or complications 
of infection before standard microbiology.
METHODS
Adult patients undergoing allo-HSCT for hematologic malig-
nancy at the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) 
were consented and enrolled in the Diagnosis of Infection in 
Stem Cell Transplant Patients OVER Time (DISCOVER) trial 
(NCT02804464). The protocol was approved by the UCSF 
Institutional Review Board (IRB#1518026). Patients were free of 
known active infections at initiation of their transplant condi-
tioning. Patients underwent plasma sampling before condition-
ing, at the time of graft infusion, and at standard weekly intervals 
post-transplant, with additional sampling during acute illness.
Samples were transferred to the Karius CLIA/CAP 
Laboratory (Redwood City, CA) for processing. Cell-free 
DNA was extracted from plasma, NGS libraries were pre-
pared, and sequencing was performed on an Illumina NextSeq 
500 (Figure 1A). Sequencing reads identified as human were 
removed, and the remaining sequences were aligned to a 
curated pathogen database. Validated organisms found to be 
present above a predefined statistical threshold were reported 
as previously described [3–5]. The process from sample receipt 
to result typically takes 28 hours.
Cases were selected from the first 20 subjects (70 total) 
enrolled in the DISCOVER trial. Research study results were 
not made available to the clinical providers in real time and 
were not applied in clinical decision-making. For details, see 
the Supplementary Data.
CASE REPORTS
Case 1
A 21-year-old man with acute myelogenous leukemia and 
horseshoe kidney underwent human leukocyte antigen–
matched unrelated donor myeloablative allo-HSCT. He was 
admitted on post-transplant days 40–44 for flank pain, hema-
turia, and low-grade fever (Figure 1B). History was negative 
for sexual activity in the prior 6 months. Work-up was nota-
ble for urinalysis showing hemoglobin and leukocyte esterase, 
urine culture without growth, and negative urine and serum BK 
virus polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Computed tomography 
(CT) of the abdomen and pelvis demonstrated a 3-mm non-
obstructive stone in the superior pole of the right kidney and 
dilated right calyx with layering stones without hydronephrosis. 
Urology considered nephrolithiasis the most likely explanation 
for the patient’s symptoms, and he was discharged on alpha-1 
antagonist treatment.
Open Forum Infectious Diseases®
© The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Infectious Diseases 
Society of America. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits 
unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work 
is properly cited.
DOI: 10.1093/ofid/ofy301
Received 12 September 2018; editorial decision 5 November 2018; accepted 12 November 
2018.
Correspondence: M. Fung, MD, MPH, 513 Parnassus Avenue, S-380, San Francisco, CA 
94143 (monica.fung@ucsf.edu). 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/5/12/ofy301/5184895 by guest on 03 June 2019
 2 • OFID • BRIEF REPORT
Case 3: 56 year-old woman with JAK2 V617F+ post-polycythemia vera myelofibrosis
Case 3
Case 1
Case 1: 21-year-old man with acute myeloid leukemia
Plasma NGS test positive for Chlamydia trachomatis
1 month before to standard microbiology
Case 2
Cell-free DNA
extraction from
plasma
Day 32
Plasma NGS
+C. trachomatis 
Days –8 to 24   
Admitted for MUD
allo-HSCT with
Flu/Bu/ATG prep 
3 mm nonobstuctive stone
in the superior pole of the
right kidney and dilated right
clayx with layering stones,
without hydronephrosis
Day 40
Re-admitted for
flank pain, hematuria,
proteinuria, low-grade
fever
Day 42
Urine & serum BK PCR
negative
Urine culture no growth
CT with layering stones
detected in dilated renal
calyx  
Day 44
Discharged,
symptoms
attributed to
kidney stones
Day 53
Re-admitted
for dysuria,
hematuria,
and mild AKI
Day 43
Plasma NGS
+C. trachomatis 
Sample
Processing
and
Sequencing
Analysis
Day 56
Ureteroscopy
with stent
placement
Ceftriaxone ×1
Urine GC/CT
NAAT sent and
+ C. trachomatis
Day 62
Discharged,
etiology of
symptoms unclear
Day 74
Resolution
of urinary
symptoms
Day 63
Started
doxycycline
×14 days
Report
ACTTGCT
ADMISSION #1
ADMISSION #2
ADMISSION #3
ADMISSION #1
ADMISSION #2
A
B
C
D
Plasma NGS test persistently positive for Staphylococcus
aureus, suggesting recurrent bacteremia
Day 27
Plasma NGS
+ S. aureus
Day 21
Plasma NGS
+ S. aureus
Day 35
Plasma NGS
+ S. aureus
Day 42
Plasma NGS
+ S aureus
Day 49
Plasma NGS
+ S aureus
ADMISSION
Day –8
Admitted for
transplant
Day 0
Intermediate intensity
mismatched MUD 
allo-HSCT with
Flu/Mei/ATG prep
Failed engraftment
C. difcile infection
Day 10
ICU transfer for hypoxemic
respiratory failure
Presumed veno-occl usive
disease
Acute renal failure
requiring continuous renal
replacement therapy
Day 22
MRSA
bacteremia
Started
vancomycin
Day 23
Bacteremia
clears
Day 39 
Completed 
vancomycin
Day 49
Recurrent
MRSA
bacteremia
Decision
made not to
escalate care
Plasma NGS positive for Staphylococcus aureus after
completing antibiotics, suggesting metastatic MRSA infection
Day 110
Plasma NGS
+ S. aureus
Day 139
Plasma NGS
+ S. aureus
Day –8 to 46
Admitted for RIC
MUD allo-SCT with
Flu/Bu/ATG prep
Neutropenic fever
with C. difcile colitis
Day 77
Vancomycin
changed to
daptomycin
Day 82
Discharged
Day 99
Completed
daptomycin
Day 118
Right chest wall
mass noted
Day 135
Abscess
culture
+S. epi
Day 153
Improved
chest wall
tenderness
Day 137
Culture corrected from
S. epi to MRSA
Started doxycycline
×14 days
Day 71
Hickman
removed
Blood cultures
cleared
TTE without
endocarditis
MRI without
osteomyelitis
Day 70
Admitted for
neutropenic
fever
MRSA
bacteremia
(3/3 blood
cultures
positive)
Started
vancomycin
Case 2: 69-year-old woman with myelodysplastic syndrome/myeloproliferative neoplasm
Case 3: 56-year-old woman with JAK2 V617F+ postpolycythemia vera myelofibrosis
US: soft tissue
thickening/hypere
mia surrounding
fluid collection
Day 134
US and CT: small
abscess in anterior
right chest wall
US-guided drainage
CT: stranding
and soft tissue
swelling
Figure 1. A, Workflow of Karius diagnostic test for infectious disease using NGS of plasma cell-free DNA. B, Timeline of events for Case 1. C, Timeline of events for Case 
2. D, Timeline of events for Case 3. For the plasma NGS test, the day of plasma collection is shown. Abbreviations: AKI, acute kidney injury; allo-HSCT, allogeneic hemato-
poietic stem cell transplant; ATG, antithymocyte globulin; BK PCR, BK virus polymerase chain reaction test; Bu, busulfan; CT, computed tomography; Flu, fludarabine; GC/
CT NAAT, gonorrhea and chlamydia nucleic acid amplification test; ICU, intensive care unit; Mel, melphalan; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; MRSA, methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus; MUD, matched unrelated donor; NGS, next-generation sequencing; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; RIC, reduced intensity conditioning; TTE, tran-
sthoracic echocardiogram; US, ultrasound.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/5/12/ofy301/5184895 by guest on 03 June 2019
 BRIEF REPORT • OFID • 3
The patient was readmitted on post-transplant days 53–62 
for ongoing dysuria and hematuria (Figure 1B). Labwork was 
notable for mild acute kidney injury; urinalysis showing hemo-
globin, protein, and leukocyte esterase; urine culture without 
growth; and negative urine and serum BK virus PCRs. Renal 
ultrasound revealed a dilated right calyx with small stone frag-
ments without hydronephrosis. Ureteroscopy was performed 
and revealed diffuse bladder inflammation with mild to mod-
erate dilation of the intrarenal collecting system. Placement of 
a right-sided ureteral stent did not improve the patient’s symp-
toms, so it was removed 48 hours later. On discharge, the eti-
ology of the patient’s symptoms remained unclear, so a urine 
gonorrhea/chlamydia nucleic acid amplification test was sent, 
returning positive for Chlamydia trachomatis. At outpatient fol-
low-up 2 days postdischarge, the patient was started on a 14-day 
course of doxycycline with resolution of his urinary symptoms.
Plasma NGS was positive for Chlamydia trachomatis 7 days 
before initial symptoms and 30 days before standard microbio-
logic diagnosis (post-transplant day 32), as well as a day before 
discharge from the first admission (post-transplant day 43).
Case 2
A 69-year-old woman with myelodysplastic syndrome/mye-
loproliferative neoplasm underwent intermediate-intensity 
mismatched unrelated donor allo-HSCT. Her post-transplant 
course was complicated by engraftment failure, Clostridium 
difficile infection, veno-occlusive disease, renal failure, and res-
piratory failure, requiring a prolonged course of intensive care 
(Figure 1C).
On post-transplant day 22, the patient developed methicil-
lin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) bacteremia. After 
starting intravenous (IV) vancomycin, blood cultures cleared 
within 1 day (post-transplant day 23), and she received a 2-week 
course that ended on post-transplant day 39. On post-trans-
plant day 49, blood cultures drawn for worsening hemody-
namic instability showed recurrent MRSA bacteremia. Given 
poor oncologic prognosis, the patient was transitioned to com-
fort-focused care and died.
Plasma NGS testing was positive for S. aureus the day before 
initial MRSA bacteremia (post-transplant day 21), throughout 
the vancomycin course (post-transplant days 27 and 35), after 
stopping vancomycin (post-transplant day 42), and on the same 
day as recurrent MRSA bacteremia.
Case 3
A 56-year-old woman with JAK2 V617F+ postpolycythemia 
vera myelofibrosis underwent reduced-intensity conditioning 
unrelated donor allo-HSCT, with her immediate post-transplant 
course complicated by neutropenic fever and C. difficile colitis 
(Figure 1D). On post-transplant days 70–82, the patient was 
readmitted for neutropenic fever and found to have MRSA bac-
teremia. After starting IV vancomycin, blood cultures cleared 
within 48 hours. The patient’s Hickman catheter was removed, 
and transthoracic echocardiogram and magnetic resonance 
imaging of the spine showed no endocarditis or osteomyelitis/
discitis. Due to subtherapeutic serum levels, vancomycin was 
changed to daptomycin, and the patient completed a 4-week 
course of antibiotic therapy (through post-transplant day 99).
On post-transplant day 118, the patient presented to clinic 
reporting a right chest wall mass. On post-transplant day 134, 
ultrasound showed soft tissue thickening/hyperemia surround-
ing a 2.6 × 0.7 × 2.7-cm fluid collection, and chest CT demon-
strated stranding and soft tissue swelling of the right anterior 
chest wall. Bacterial culture from same-day ultrasound-guided 
aspiration preliminarily identified Staphylococcus epidermidis. 
On post-transplant day 137, speciation was corrected to MRSA, 
and the patient was started on a 14-day course of oral doxycyc-
line with improvement in chest wall tenderness.
Plasma NGS remained positive for S. aureus after completion 
of daptomycin for bacteremia (post-transplant day 110) and 
preceding the clinical and microbiological diagnosis of chest 
wall abscess (post-transplant day 139), becoming negative after 
drainage and antibiotics for abscess.
DISCUSSION
Among allo-HSCT recipients, infections are often severe 
but lack classic symptoms such as fever and leukocytosis [1]. 
Current laboratory methods are frequently unable to establish 
a microbiologic diagnosis [1, 6]. We describe 3 cases where 
plasma NGS could have facilitated early identification of an 
uncommon presentation of Chlamydia trachomatis and indi-
cated persistent MRSA infection before microbiologic diagno-
sis of recurrent bacteremia and metastatic infection.
In Case 1, given the patient’s atypical presentation, directed 
chlamydia testing was not sent until the end of his second 
admission. Although urethritis with dysuria and leukocyturia is 
the most common presentation of chlamydia infection in men, 
hematuria and proteinuria have been described in pediatric and 
adolescent males with chlamydia urethritis [7, 8]. Plasma NGS 
testing was positive 19 and 30 days before standard microbiol-
ogy and could have potentially prevented a 10-day hospitaliza-
tion with invasive ureteroscopy with stent placement.
In Case 2, plasma NGS remained positive for S. aureus after 
completion of therapy for MRSA bacteremia and before identi-
fication of recurrent bacteremia by standard culture. The inci-
dence of bacteremia among allo-HSCT patients is estimated 
to be as high as 39% [9]. S. aureus bacteremia, in particular, is 
associated with significant morbidity and mortality, with recur-
rence occurring in 2%–17% of cases, especially among patients 
with MRSA [10]. Among allo-HSCT recipients, risk factors 
for recurrent S. aureus bacteremia include graft-vs-host dis-
ease, corticosteroid treatment, liver dysfunction, and prolonged 
hospitalization [11]. As plasma NGS may detect pathogens 
2–5 days before bacteremia and remains positive on average 
3 days longer than blood culture, plasma NGS results could 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/5/12/ofy301/5184895 by guest on 03 June 2019
 4 • OFID • BRIEF REPORT
have provided an early indication of recurrent or relapsed bac-
teremia [12, 13].
In Case 3, plasma NGS remained positive after treatment 
for MRSA bacteremia and before clinical diagnosis of chest 
wall abscess. Metastatic infection is a common complication 
of S. aureus bacteremia, occurring in up to 39% of patients 
[14, 15]. This immunocompromised patient exhibited limited 
symptoms, and the causative organism was initially erroneously 
identified as S. epidermidis, contributing to delayed treatment. 
Persistent positive plasma NGS testing for S. aureus despite 
completion of antibiotics could have indicated persistent occult 
infection.
Beyond the detection of active infection, plasma NGS testing 
reports other relevant pathogens for allo-HSCT monitoring. In 
Case 1, routine plasma NGS was positive for cytomegalovirus 
(CMV) on post-transplant days 14–32, coinciding with stand-
ard CMV PCR. In Case 2, plasma NGS detected human herpes 
virus 6B, Pneumocystis jirovecii, and CMV on post-transplant 
day 42. Due to a decision not to escalate care, standard micro-
biology tests were not obtained. In Case 3, plasma NGS showed 
CMV on post-transplant days 35–64 and Epstein-Barr virus 
(EBV) on post-transplant day 42, corresponding to standard 
CMV and EBV PCRs, respectively.
In summary, plasma NGS is a rapid, noninvasive, and unbi-
ased test that detects a broad range of pathogens from a single 
plasma sample [3–5]. Here, we describe cases where plasma 
NGS not only identified compartmentalized non-bloodstream 
infections, but also detected persistent pathogen DNA after bac-
teremia that could have served as early indications of recurrent 
or occult infection. In immunocompromised patients such as 
allo-HSCT recipients, plasma NGS may aid in the diagnosis of 
infections caused by uncommon pathogens and in situations of 
atypical clinical presentations, potentially allowing for early tar-
geted therapy to improve clinical outcomes and decrease anti-
microbial resistance and drug toxicity. Further study is needed 
to fully define the test characteristics of plasma NGS.
Supplementary Data
Supplementary materials are available at Open Forum Infectious 
Diseases online. Consisting of data provided by the authors to benefit the 
reader, the posted materials are not copyedited and are the sole responsi-
bility of the authors, so questions or comments should be addressed to the 
corresponding author.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Sumedha Sinha for assistance in prepa-
ration of the manuscript.
Financial support. This work was supported by Karius, Inc.
Potential conflicts of interest. M.F., E.D., K.L., J.T., and A.C.L. have 
no relevant conflicts of interest. S.Z., H.S., D.H., A.P., D.K.H., and S.B. are 
employees of Karius, Inc. P.C.H. receives research funding from Karius, Inc. 
All authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential 
Conflicts of Interest. Conflicts that the editors consider relevant to the con-
tent of the manuscript have been disclosed.
References
1. Wingard JR, Hsu J, Hiemenz JW. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation: an 
overview of infection risks and epidemiology. Infect Dis Clin North Am 2010; 
24:257–72.
2. Simner PJ, Miller S, Carroll KC. Understanding the promises and hurdles of 
metagenomic next-generation sequencing as a diagnostic tool for infectious dis-
eases. Clin Infect Dis 2018; 66:778–88.
3. Blauwkamp TA, Thair S, Rosen MJ, et al. Analytical and clinical validation of a 
microbial cell-free DNA sequencing test for infectious disease. Nat Microbiol. In 
press.
4. Hong DK, Blauwkamp TA, Kertesz M, Bercovici S, Truong C, Banaei N. Liquid 
biopsy for infectious diseases: sequencing of cell-free plasma to detect pathogen 
DNA in patients with invasive fungal disease. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 2018; 
92(3):210–3.
5. Abril MK, Barnett AS, Wegermann K, et al. Diagnosis of Capnocytophaga can-
imorsus sepsis by whole-genome next-generation sequencing. Open Forum Infect 
Dis 2016; 3:1–4.
6. Serody JS, Berrey MM, Albritton K, et al. Utility of obtaining blood cultures in 
febrile neutropenic patients undergoing bone marrow transplantation. Bone 
Marrow Transplant 2000; 26:533–8.
7. Megli A, Bojan HH. Chlamydial infection of the urinary tract in children and 
adolescents with hematuria. Pediatr Nephrol 2000; 15:132–133.
8. Taube OM. Chlamydia trachomatis urethritis presenting as hematuria in an ado-
lescent male. J Adolesc Health Care 1988; 9:505–6.
9. Dandoy CE, Ardura MI, Papanicolaou GA, Auletta JJ. Bacterial bloodstream 
infections in the allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplant patient: new considera-
tions for a persistent nemesis. Bone Marrow Transplant 2017; 52:1091–106.
10. Kreisel K, Boyd K, Langenberg P, Roghmann MC. Risk factors for recurrence in 
patients with Staphylococcus aureus infections complicated by bacteremia. Diagn 
Microbiol Infect Dis 2006; 55:179–84.
11. Mihu CN, Schaub J, Kesh S, et al. Risk factors for late Staphylococcus aureus bacter-
emia after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation: a single-institution, 
nested case-controlled study. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 2008; 14:1429–33.
12. Wanda L, Ruffin F, Jonathan Hill-Rorie J, et al. Direct detection and quantification 
of bacterial cell-free DNA in patients with bloodstream infection (BSI) using the 
karius plasma next generation sequencing (NGS) test. Open Forum Infect Dis 
2017; 4:S613.
13. Goggin K, Inaba Y, Gonzalez-Pena V, et al. Prediction of bloodstream infection 
prior to onset of symptoms by plasma metagenomic sequencing in pediatric 
patients with relapsed or refractory malignancy (PREDSEQ). Abstract #1756 pre-
sented at: IDWeek; October 3–7, 2018; San Francisco, CA. 
14. Horino T, Sato F, Hosaka Y, et al. Predictive factors for metastatic infection in 
patients with bacteremia caused by methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus. 
Am J Med Sci 2015; 349:24–8.
15. Cuijpers ML, Vos FJ, Bleeker-Rovers CP, et al. Complicating infectious foci in 
patients with Staphylococcus aureus or Streptococcus species bacteraemia. Eur J 
Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2007; 26:105–13.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/5/12/ofy301/5184895 by guest on 03 June 2019
