 fgene-09-00362
September 6, 2018
Time: 19:32
# 1
REVIEW
published: 10 September 2018
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2018.00362
Edited by:
Blanka Rogina,
University of Connecticut Health
Center, United States
Reviewed by:
Sangkyu Kim,
Tulane University, United States
Ranveer Singh Jayani,
University of California, San Diego,
United States
*Correspondence:
Tamàs Fülöp
Tamas.Fulop@Usherbrooke.ca
Annelise E. Barron
aebarron@stanford.edu
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Genetics of Aging,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Genetics
Received: 19 April 2018
Accepted: 21 August 2018
Published: 10 September 2018
Citation:
Fülöp T, Itzhaki RF, Balin BJ,
Miklossy J and Barron AE (2018) Role
of Microbes in the Development
of Alzheimer’s Disease: State of the
Art – An International Symposium
Presented at the 2017 IAGG
Congress in San Francisco.
Front. Genet. 9:362.
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2018.00362
Role of Microbes in the Development
of Alzheimer’s Disease: State of the
Art – An International Symposium
Presented at the 2017 IAGG
Congress in San Francisco
Tamàs Fülöp1*, Ruth F. Itzhaki2, Brian J. Balin3, Judith Miklossy4 and
Annelise E. Barron5*
1 Department of Medicine, Division of Geriatrics, Research Center on Aging, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC,
Canada, 2 Nuffi
eld Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3 Department
of Bio-Medical Sciences, Center for Chronic Disorders of Aging, Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine, Philadelphia,
PA, United States, 4 International Alzheimer Research Centre, Prevention Alzheimer International Foundation, Martigny-Croix,
Switzerland, 5 Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States
This article reviews research results and ideas presented at a special symposium at
the International Association of Gerontology and Geriatrics (IAGG) Congress held in
July 2017 in San Francisco. Five researchers presented their results related to infection
and Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Prof. Itzhaki presented her work on the role of viruses,
specifi
cally HSV-1, in the pathogenesis of AD. She maintains that although it is true
that most people harbor HSV-1 infection, either latent or active, nonetheless aspects
of herpes infection can play a role in the pathogenesis of AD, based on extensive
experimental evidence from AD brains and infected cell cultures. Dr. Miklossy presented
research on the high prevalence of bacterial infections that correlate with AD, specifi
cally
spirochete infections, which have been known for a century to be a signifi
cant cause
of dementia (e.g., in syphilis). She demonstrated how spirochetes drive senile plaque
formation, which are in fact biofi
lms. Prof. Balin then described the involvement of brain
tissue infection by the Chlamydia pneumoniae bacterium, with its potential to use the
innate immune system in its spread, and its initiation of tissue damage characteristic
of AD. Prof. Fülöp described the role of AD-associated amyloid beta (Aβ) peptide as
an antibacterial, antifungal and antiviral innate immune effector produced in reaction to
microorganisms that attack the brain. Prof. Barron put forward the novel hypothesis
that, according to her experiments, there is strong sequence-specifi
c binding between
the AD-associated Aβ and another ubiquitous and important human innate immune
effector, the cathelicidin peptide LL-37. Given this binding, LL-37 expression in the brain
will decrease Aβ deposition via formation of non-toxic, soluble Aβ/LL-37 complexes.
Therefore, a chronic underexpression of LL-37 could be the factor that simultaneously
permits chronic infections in brain tissue and allows for pathological accumulation of
Aβ. This fi
rst-of-its-kind symposium opened the way for a paradigm shift in studying the
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
1
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 362
 fgene-09-00362
September 6, 2018
Time: 19:32
# 2
Fülöp et al.
Role of Microbes in the Development of Alzheimer’s Disease
pathogenesis of AD, from the “amyloid cascade hypothesis,” which so far has been
quite unsuccessful, to a new “infection hypothesis,” or perhaps more broadly, “innate
immune system dysregulation hypothesis,” which may well permit and lead to the
discovery of new treatments for AD patients.
Keywords: Alzheimer’s disease, infections, innate immunity, HSV-1, spirochetes, Chlamydia pneumoniae,
amyloid beta, LL-37
INTRODUCTION
Since the 1907 publication of Alois Alzheimer’
s observations of
pathological changes in the brain of a woman in her late fifties,
these senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles have become
the hallmarks of what is called today Alzheimer’
s disease (AD)
(Alzheimer, 1907; Alzheimer et al., 1995; Hanger et al., 2014; Sun
et al., 2015). Late onset AD, in particular, is the major cause of
dementia, and links neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation
(Rogers et al., 1992; McGeer and McGeer, 2013; Bolós et al.,
2017). The most prominent early symptoms are recent memory
loss and language problems (Castellani et al., 2010). For decades,
the most strongly prevailing hypothesis for the mechanism
of AD has been the so-called ‘
amyloid cascade’hypothesis,
which states that pathologically produced amyloid beta (Aβ) is
the main cause of the disease (Beyreuther and Masters, 1991;
Hardy and Allsop, 1991; Karran and De Strooper, 2016), to
the extent that AD has also been termed a ‘
proteopathy’(a
disease caused by pathological proteins). The ‘
amyloid cascade’
postulates that Aβ fibrils and plaques accumulate leading
to synaptotoxicity and neuronal death (neurodegeneration),
causing
inflammation
because
they
abnormally
stimulate
microglia (neuroinflammation). Yet, around 400 clinical trials
that were predicated on the amyloid cascade hypothesis have
failed over the past 14 years; no new AD drugs were approved
in that time (Alzheimer’
s Association, 2017). One hundred and
eleven years since Dr. Alois Alzheimer’
s observations, it seems
clear that an alternative approach is needed. A hypothesis that
can reliably and fully explain the pathogenesis of AD must be
found, one that will lead to discoveries of therapies that will be
effective for treatment, or even better, for prevention of AD.
For the first time, a new symposium entitled “
Role of microbes
in the development of Alzheimer’
s Disease: state of the art”
was held
at the International Association of Gerontology and Geriatrics
(IAGG) in San Francisco, on the 24th of July 2017. Hundreds of
scientists attended the Symposium and questioned speakers after
the lectures.
The
symposium
provided
an
alternative
approach
to
understanding the etiopathogenesis of AD, namely potential
microbial infection and innate immune origins for the disease.
AD is a complex disease and microbial infection may not be the
sole cause of AD, although the studies discussed herein provide
compelling evidence of its (infection) important contributions.
This hypothesis has slowly gained popularity since the 1970s,
despite ongoing strong denial of the idea that microbial infection
might play a role in AD. Yet, there is now growing interest
and increasing research being done in this field. A number of
laboratories have provided strong evidence of the presence of
infectious microbes in the brain, from viruses through bacteria
to fungi (Balin et al., 1998, 2008; Miklossy, 2011a,b; Itzhaki,
2016; Miklossy, 2016; Pisa et al., 2016, 2017; Alonso et al., 2017;
Carter, 2017). The five presenters at the symposium approached
this hypothesis from different aspects, but, considering all the
experimental data on the development of AD, all came to the
conclusion of a possible infectious/innate immune origin for
the disease. This can account for the fact that AD develops over
decades before clinical symptoms appear (McManus and Heneka,
2017). Clinically, an ongoing redefinition of AD recognizes this
by its evolving, changing preclinical symptoms (McKhann
et al., 2011; Reiman et al., 2011; Blennow and Zetterberg, 2018;
Ghidoni et al., 2018).
A multi-author editorial article on the involvement of
microorganisms in AD by Itzhaki et al. (2016) represented a
significant event in the field. Additionally, a new book Miklossy
(2017) with the participation of more than 30 authors from
around the world working on aspects of this topic, appeared in
March from IOS Press, the result of a remarkable collaboration in
this field.
THE ROLE OF HERPES SIMPLEX VIRUS
TYPE 1 (HSV1) in ALZHEIMER’S
DISEASE (AD)
In the 2017 IAGG symposium held in San Francisco, the
first speaker was Professor Ruth Itzhaki from the Universities
of Oxford and Manchester, and her talk was entitled, “The
role of herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV1) in Alzheimer’s
disease (AD).”
Dr. Itzhaki’
s laboratory first discovered in 1991 that HSV1
DNA is present in a high proportion of the brains of both
AD patients and elderly normal subjects (Jamieson et al., 1991).
Subsequently, six other groups detected HSV1 in human brain
(see review Wozniak and Itzhaki, 2010). The fact that HSV1 is
present in elderly normal people as well as AD patients does not
preclude a viral role. Most viruses infect far more people than
they affect: genetic factors can determine who is asymptomatic
and who suffers disease. Indeed, Itzhaki et al. (1997) found
that HSV1 DNA in the brains of carriers of an apolipoprotein
E-ε4 (APOE-ε4) allele confers a high risk of developing AD.
A study by another group (Itabashi et al., 1997) confirmed the
HSV1-APOE-ε4 association in AD, and work on HSV1-infected
APOE-transgenic mice has shown that APOE-ε4 animals display
a greater viral load, and a greater potential for viral damage (see
review Wozniak and Itzhaki, 2010). Significantly, APOE-ε4 is a
risk also for cold sores (Itzhaki et al., 1997; Koelle et al., 2010),
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
2
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 362
 fgene-09-00362
September 6, 2018
Time: 19:32
# 3
Fülöp et al.
Role of Microbes in the Development of Alzheimer’s Disease
which are usually caused by HSV1 in the peripheral nervous
system, suggesting that the damage caused by HSV1 is greater,
or that repair is lesser, in APOE-ε4 carriers.
Subsequently, the Itzhaki lab detected intrathecal antibodies
to HSV in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of a high proportion
of AD patients and healthy elderly people [NB., anti-HSV
antibodies found in CSF are known to be long-lived after herpes
simplex encephalitis (HSE)]. This indicated that HSV1 can
actively replicate in brain, causing damage both directly and via
inflammatory processes (Wozniak et al., 2005). It was proposed
that reactivation of HSV infection in brain is possibly recurrent,
so that damage accumulates, leading eventually to the gradual
development of AD.
The next discoveries revealed direct links between HSV1
damage in cell culture, and the damage seen in AD brain. The
Itzhaki lab and several other groups found that Aβ and P-tau
(Wozniak et al., 2007; Zambrano et al., 2008) and the relevant
enzymes that produce them increase greatly in HSV1-infected
cell cultures (Ill-Raga et al., 2011 and see review, Itzhaki, 2016).
Further, it was found that Aβ deposition occurs in the brains
of HSV1-infected mice. They next investigated the proximity of
HSV1 DNA to amyloid plaques in human brain, and found a
striking co-localisation (Wozniak et al., 2009): 90% of plaques
contained HSV1 DNA, and in AD brains, 72% of the viral DNA
was associated with plaques (only 24% in elderly normal brains,
perhaps reflecting reduced Aβ production or greater clearance).
These findings, taken together with Aβ accumulation after
infection, suggest that HSV1 causes the formation of toxic Aβ
species and plaques, and support a causal role for HSV1 in AD.
The HSV1-induced increase in Aβ suggests that at least
initially, the peptide at low levels might act as part of the innate
immune system’
s response to HSV1, perhaps protectively as a
“
bioflocculant,”i.e., binding neurotoxic agents (Robinson and
Bishop, 2002), or as an antimicrobial peptide (Wozniak et al.,
2005), although, in the latter study, its toxicity precluded accurate
assessment of any antiviral activity. However, in view of recent
positive findings (Bourgade et al., 2015; Kumar et al., 2016), it
seems likely that the extent of Aβ’
s antiviral activity is determined
by both its preparation method and its aggregation state. In any
case, though, Aβ eventually becomes toxic, presumably when
overproduced, and when oligomerization occurs.
Another important discovery was that HSV1 infection reduces
expression of presynaptic proteins synapsin-1 and synaptophysin
and decreases synaptic transmission; these inhibitory effects on
synaptic function were dependent on GSK-3 activation and
subsequent intraneuronal accumulation of Aβ (Piacentini et al.,
2015).
Now, following almost three decades of disregard of, or
opposition to, the role of HSV1 in AD, there are well over 130
publications using diverse approaches—genetic, immunological
and virological—that support this concept, as well as Dr. Itzhaki’
s
proposal that AD could be treated with antiviral agents (see
below).
Reactivation of HSV1 in brain is an essential part of the
concept that the virus is a major risk for AD. However,
reactivation of virus in HSV1-infected mice was previously found
to be much rarer in brain than in the trigeminal ganglia (TG)
and was considered to be rare also in humans. Nonetheless,
many case studies have provided evidence of “
mild” and
repeated reactivation in humans (Klapper et al., 1984), recovery
from which was almost complete. In fact, there are probably
many instances where mild reactivation occurs, but is either
undetected, or underdiagnosed, because clinically the person is
non-symptomatic.
More direct evidence of HSV1 reactivation in brain was shown
in a study of several thousand CSF samples (Peter and Sevall,
2001). The proportion of the samples positive (8 × 10−3) for
HSV1 was very much higher than expected from HSE prevalence
in the population (∼2 × 10−6), which is especially surprising
as HSV1 DNA persists in CSF for only about a week after
HSE (in contrast to long-lived intrathecal HSV1-antibodies),
and interestingly, there was a particular bias to females aged
over 70 years considering the preponderance of females with
AD. These data suggest that HSV1 reactivation in brain might
be fairly frequent in the elderly because of their impaired
immunity (just as its impairment during aging might lead to
entry of HSV1 into the brain). The finding is consistent with an
early study which found that HSV DNA was detectable in post
mortem brain from subjects who had been immunosuppressed
and were HSV-seropositive, but not in seronegative nor non-
immunosuppressed subjects (Saldanha et al., 1986). Consistently
also in mice, Ramakrishna et al. (2015) showed that in HSV1-
infected immunodeficient mice, HSV1 is easily reactivated in
brain as well as in TG. Yao et al. (2014) examined HSV1-infected
mice during latency using a modified ex vivo reactivation assay
dissociating the CNS explant into single cells. In contrast to
earlier results, they found in brain more copies of the viral
genome, and also more frequent reactivation, than in the TG.
They attributed this to the previous usage of dissociation and
mincing of tissue, resulting in greater damage to brain cells than
TG cells, with consequent underestimation of reactivation in
brain.
Other evidence of reactivation comes from epidemiological
investigations of anti-HSV1 IgG and IgM antibodies in serum
from AD patients, and measurement of IgG avidity index as an
indicator of reactivation. The results show an association between
systemic infections and cognitive decline, with HSV1 particularly
implicated (see review, Itzhaki, 2016).
Other relevant findings include the following: induction
of toll-like receptors in HSV1-infected astrocyte cultures,
which has been linked to the likely effects of reactivation of
the virus in brain, and dynamic interactions between HSV1
and amyloid precursor protein (APP). APP was found to
be present in large numbers, about a thousand or more
molecules, in isolated HSV1 particles (Satpute-Krishnan et al.,
2003). These virus-APP particles travel together within cells,
and in HSV1-infected cells APP distribution is abnormal
(Cheng et al., 2011). Nascent HSV1 alters cell membrane
organization and anterograde transport, which are essential
processes for neuronal function and survival; thus, chronic
infection would have a greater impact on these processes (Bearer,
2012).
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have linked
various AD pathways to those of HSV1 infection (Carter, 2008;
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
3
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 362
 fgene-09-00362
September 6, 2018
Time: 19:32
# 4
Fülöp et al.
Role of Microbes in the Development of Alzheimer’s Disease
Licastro et al., 2015). Although any single gene or SNP effect
is very weak (each OR value for AD being less than 2, apart
from APOE), a few specific genes, when combined, are strongly
associated with AD. These genes might code for proteins that
interact in various processes, leading to a synergistic effect on
AD development. Environmental factors might trigger certain
genes, which then affect other genes, with secondary effects via
apoptosis, immune responses, etc. Microbes, especially herpes
viruses, were suggested as the possible link for all SNPs with
which GWAS have been shown to be associated.
All the above data suggest that antivirals might be used for
treating AD (at least in APOE-ε4 carriers). Studies on HSV1-
infected Vero cells in culture (Figure 1) showed that the main
anti-HSV antiviral, acyclovir (ACV), inhibits HSV1-induced
accumulation of Aβ and P-tau (Wozniak et al., 2011). ACV acts
by inhibiting viral DNA replication, so it would inhibit Aβ and
P-tau only if their formation depends on viral DNA replication.
In fact, ACV and other antivirals did indeed reduce both Aβ
and P-tau accumulation (as well as, obviously, HSV1 level); P-tau
but not Aβ accumulation was found to depend on HSV1 DNA
replication, thus it was directly affected by ACV, while the Aβ
decrease was attributed to reduced formation of new viruses,
hence reducing viral spread. These results support the treatment
of AD by antivirals.
ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE AND
SPIROCHETES – A CAUSAL
RELATIONSHIP
The second speaker was Dr. Judith Miklossy, Director of
the
Prevention
Alzheimer
International
Foundation
and
International Alzheimer Research Center in Switzerland. Her
talk was entitled “
Alzheimer’s disease and spirochetes – A
causal relationship.”
The work presented was a summary of three decades of
research based on the generally accepted historical evidence that
chronic bacterial infection can cause dementia. Indeed, syphilitic
dementia is caused by a peculiar bacterium, a spirochete, called
Treponema pallidum. In chronic syphilitic infection, particularly
in the longstanding atrophic form of general paresis, the
most characteristic clinical symptom is dementia and the most
characteristic pathology is brain atrophy. Spirochetes accumulate
in gray matter areas of the brain, particularly in the cerebral
cortex (Merritt et al., 1946; Miklossy, 2008). Hundreds of
scientists during the past century have reported and illustrated
the accumulation of Treponema pallidum colonies in the cerebral
cortex (Miklossy, 2015). The formation of cortical spirochetal
“
masses,” “
balls” or “
plaques” cannot be distinguished from
senile plaques. In a similar way, individual spirochetes cannot
be discerned from the pathological filaments called neuropil
threads or curly fibers in AD, which diffusely disseminate
along the cerebral cortex. Intra-cytoplasmic spirochetes in
neurons produce lesions identical to neurofibrillary tangles and
granulovacuolar degeneration. The plaque-like structures were
frequently in contact with blood vessels, and with the cortical
capillary network (Sweeney et al., 2018). These historical data
FIGURE 1 | Quantifi
cation of (A) HSV1 proteins, (B) β-amyloid and (C)
abnormal tau phosphorylation in HSV1-infected cells after acyclovir treatment
(Wozniak et al., 2011).
were collected and compared with the characteristic Alzheimer’
s-
type changes in a recent review (Miklossy, 2015). The results
clearly show that Treponema pallidum is able to reproduce all the
clinical, pathological and biological hallmarks of AD.
Alzheimer’
s disease is the most frequent cause of dementia
and, following the example of syphilitic dementia, where the
cause of dementia is a chronic bacterial infection, the possibility
that other types of spirochetes might play a role in the etiology of
this devastating neurodegenerative disorder must be considered.
Several scientists, from various countries, over the last three
decades have undertaken research in this direction. The human
body harbors various types of spirochetes. More than 60 different
Treponema species are found within the oral cavity (Dewhirst
et al., 2000; Paster and Dewhirst, 2000), which are present in a
large part of the population. Seven of them were shown to be both
invasive and predominant periodontal pathogens (Riviere et al.,
1991). Six of them were found in the brain in AD (Riviere et al.,
2002). These oral spirochetes can reach the brain directly through
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
4
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 362
 fgene-09-00362
September 6, 2018
Time: 19:32
# 5
Fülöp et al.
Role of Microbes in the Development of Alzheimer’s Disease
the olfactory pathway, but also through hematogen dissemination
and/or through the lymphatic system. Other spirochetes found
in the human body include intestinal spirochetes and various
entirely neglected urogenital spirochetes. Treponema spirochetes
are difficult to cultivate and maintain in pure culture. Still
today, Treponema pallidum cannot be cultivated and maintained
in synthetic medium in vitro (Miklossy, 2008). By contrast,
another spirochete, Borrelia burgdorferi, the etiologic agent of
Lyme disease (LD), transmitted by infected ticks and discovered
about 30 years ago (Burgdorfer et al., 1982) can be cultivated
in BSK or in a modified BSK-II medium, which allowed for
more intensive research on the characteristics of this spirochetal
infection. Research on Lyme disease gained more attention,
because of the increasing number of affected patients worldwide.
MacDonald and Miranda (1987) first reported the presence
of Borrelia burgdorferi in the brain of a patient suffering from
AD in 1987, which was later confirmed by the same and
other authors (MacDonald, 1988; Miklossy, 1993; Riviere et al.,
2002; Miklossy et al., 2004; Meer-Scherrer et al., 2006; Allen
et al., 2016). However, all those authors who investigated the
role of Borrelia burgdorferi alone in AD, failed to show an
association between Lyme disease and AD (Gutacker et al.,
1998; Marques et al., 2000; Galbussera et al., 2008; O’
Day and
Catalano, 2014). The lack of correlation between the incidence
of Lyme disease and deaths due to AD cannot reflect the lack
of involvement of Borrelia burgdorferi in Alzheimer’
s dementia
(Refer to Letters to the Editor, the 13th of August 2014, Journal
of Alzheimer’
s Disease)1. AD caused by other spirochetes that
are more prevalent in the human body (Miklossy, 2011b) can
overlap with the small proportion of AD cases caused by Borrelia
burgdorferi alone. Additionally, in the study by O’
Day and
Catalano (2014), evidence was not provided on whether the
analyzed AD patients had a positive serology for LD or not,
whether the LD patients had dementia or not, or whether those
that died due to AD were neuropathologically confirmed to have
suffered from definite AD. It seems evident that investigating the
role of Borrelia burgdorferi in Alzheimer’
s patients who have no
Lyme disease will never succeed. In a similar way, despite the
generally accepted knowledge that Treponema pallidum can cause
dementia, studying thousands of patients with dementia without
syphilitic infection would never show the involvement of this
spirochete in dementia. Future research on the role of spirochetes
in AD should always include various types of spirochetes, which
are involved in the disease. The use of negative controls without
any Alzheimer’
s type changes is also primordial as the process
of the longstanding spirochetal infection starts years, frequently
decades, before the diagnosis of dementia is made.
Those who have considered that various types of spirochetes
may be involved in AD have observed spirochetes in the brains
of all Alzheimer’
s cases analyzed. Spirochetes were also present in
cases with fewer Alzheimer’
s type changes (Miklossy et al., 1996;
Miklossy, 1998), but their number was lower. In these studies,
all control cases used were without dementia and without any
Alzheimer’
s type changes. When analyzed, these controls were all
free of spirochetes (Miklossy, 1993, 1998; Miklossy et al., 1995,
1https://www.j-alz.com/ltte
1996). In these studies, detecting all types of spirochetes using
neutral techniques, in 114 brains, 83 Alzheimer’
s brains, and 31
control brains, a total number of 680 brain and blood samples
were analyzed. In AD, more than 91.1% (451/495) of the samples
analyzed were positive, while strikingly, the 185 control samples
were all negative (Miklossy, 2011a).
The statistical analysis of all data related to the detection
of spirochetes in the brain in AD, including all positive
and negative results, further confirmed a strong statistically
significant association and a high-risk factor between spirochetes
and AD. In the 214 Alzheimer’
s brains analyzed for all types of
spirochetes, 102 of 143 showed the presence of spirochetes and
only six out of 71 of the controls were positive (AD and mild AD
and controls, N = 214, AD 102/143, CTRL 6/71, P = 1.5 × 10−19,
OR = 26, 95% CI = 10–
80 Miklossy, 2011a). Whether this strong
association between spirochetes and AD satisfies Hill’
s criteria
for causality was also analyzed. All nine criteria of Hill’
s were
fulfilled indicating a causal relationship between spirochetes and
AD. Thus, prompt action is needed to support this line of research
(Miklossy, 2011a).
Besides
using
numerous
techniques,
such
as
in
situ
hybridization, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and cultivation
of spirochetes from affected brain tissue, in order to detect
spirochetes in the brain, several other investigations were
also performed, which are discussed below. In order to show
that
spirochetes
reproduce
the
characteristic
pathological
and biological features of AD, primary cell and organotypic
cell cultures were infected by spirochetes (Miklossy et al.,
2006).
In
infected
cultures,
structures
similar
to
senile
plaques, neurofibrillary tangles, and neuropil threads and
even granulovacuolar degeneration were all observed, which
were not found in uninfected control cultures. Amyloid β
precursor protein (APP), beta amyloid and phosphorylated tau
were all induced by spirochetes in the infected cultures (Miklossy
et al., 2006). These results further demonstrated the causal
relationship between spirochetal infection and AD.
It has long been known that spirochetes form clumps or
micro-colonies in vitro and in vivo (Steiner, 1940). Cortical
spirochetal colonies in syphilitic dementia were considered as
reproductive centers for spirochetes (Steiner, 1940). Spirochetes,
including Borrelia burgdorferi are able to form biofilms in vitro
(Sapi et al., 2012). Senile plaques are also reported to contain
elements of biofilm constituents (Allen et al., 2016).
Previous work has shown that senile plaques in AD can be
produced by spirochetes (Miklossy, 1993; Miklossy et al., 2006). It
was shown that APP and/or an APP-like amyloidogenic protein
is an integral part of spirochetes indicating that bacterial amyloid
contributes to senile plaque formation (Miklossy, 1993). It was
anticipated that APP and Aβ, the main components of senile
plaques, would also occur in pure spirochetal biofilms, and that
bacterial DNA and bacterial amyloid are important components
of biofilms in senile plaques.
Histochemical,
immunohistochemical
and
in
situ
hybridization techniques demonstrated that Aβ and DNA
are indeed key components of both pure spirochetal biofilms and
senile plaques and further confirmed the biofilm nature of senile
plaques (Figure 2) (Miklossy, 2016). Extracellularly located DNA
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
5
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 362
 fgene-09-00362
September 6, 2018
Time: 19:32
# 6
Fülöp et al.
Role of Microbes in the Development of Alzheimer’s Disease
FIGURE 2 | Senile plaques contain spirochete-specifi
c DNA.
Photomicrographs of spirochetal colonies or biofi
lms in an AD case with
confi
rmed Lyme neuroborreliosis where B. burgdorferi spirochetes were
cultivated from the brain. (A) Positive Aβ immunoreaction of senile plaque.
(B) Senile plaque of the same AD case, as in (A), exhibiting strong
immunoreaction for bacterial peptidoglycan. (C,D) Photomicrographs
showing B. burgdorferi antigens in senile plaques immunostained with a
polyclonal anti-B. burgdorferi antibody (C) and with a monoclonal anti-OspA
antibody (D). (E) B. burgdorferi specifi
c DNA detected by in situ hybridization
in senile plaque of an AD patient where ADB1 strain was cultivated.
(F) Cortical section of a control case immunostained with a monoclonal
anti-OspA antibody showing no immunoreaction. Scale bar A–E: 40 µm, F:
25 µm. Reprinted from Miklossy (2016), with permission from IOS Press.
fragmentation in senile plaques demonstrated by the TUNEL
assay further confirmed that senile plaques are made up by
spirochetes and provided biochemical evidence for spirochetal
cell death (Miklossy, 2016). Spirochetes evade host defenses,
locate extra- and intracellularly, and establish more resistant
atypical forms, most notably biofilms, which sustain chronic
infection and inflammation and explain the slowly progressive
course of dementia in AD.
A review on the involvement of various pathogens related to
AD refers to the works of pioneering researchers who have shown
the involvement of Chlamydophila (Chlamydia pneumoniae),
Porphyromonas gingivalis and various other microbes in AD
(Jamieson et al., 1991; Kornhuber, 1996; Balin et al., 1998, 2008;
Itzhaki and Wozniak, 2008; Miklossy, 2011a,b). Consideration
that multi-species biofilms may result in a higher resistance to
treatments and a more severe dementia is therefore important. It
is noteworthy that co-infecting bacteria, viruses and even fungi
frequently occurred in syphilis as well (Miklossy, 2011a).
Other scientists who have participated in this IAGG
symposium and presented their three decades of continuous
work, along with other more recent observations that Aβ
peptide can function as an antimicrobial and antiviral peptide
to inactivate invading pathogens and thus is part of the innate
immune system, demonstrate that Aβ is not the cause of AD but
a consequence of a defense reaction against infection. Thus, it is
critical to include an infectious origin of AD in our current view,
and to emphasize future research in this direction.
THINKING OUTSIDE THE BOX IN
ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE: COULD
INFECTION BE THE ANSWER?
The third speaker was Professor Brian Balin from the Center
for Chronic Disorders of Aging at the Philadelphia College
of Osteopathic Medicine, and his talk was entitled “
Thinking
outside the box in Alzheimer’s Disease: Could infection be the
answer?”
Dr. Balin’
s talk focused on how infection with the bacterium
Chlamydia pneumoniae could be a trigger for late-onset AD.
In 1998, the Balin group first published on the association
of Chlamydia pneumoniae in AD brain tissues (Balin et al.,
1998). In this report, his team identified this organism in 17
of 19 AD brain tissues using a variety of techniques including:
immunohistochemistry, immunoelectron microscopy, electron
microscopy, PCR, RT-PCR and in vitro cell culturing. Only
1 of 19 control non-AD brains was positive using the same
techniques. In evaluating the human brains and the localization
of the infection, brain areas that were found to be infected
included those connected to olfaction such as the amygdala
and entorhinal cortex, as well as the hippocampus proper,
and temporal and frontal cortices. All cell types including glia
(microglia and astroglia), neurons, and endothelia were infected
to some extent. Entry of the organism into the human brain is
thought to occur from two potential routes following exposure
in the respiratory tract; the first entails following intracellular
infection of the olfactory neuroepithelia in the upper nasal airway
and then infection traveling to the olfactory bulbs and then
deeper into brain structures, and the second route would be
following uptake in the lung by monocytes, which survey for
infection in lung tissue. The monocytes traffic the organism back
into the vasculature from where they can enter the brain through
the blood–
brain barrier.
Upon finding infection in the AD brains and evaluating by
reverse transcriptase PCR, transcripts for Chlamydia pneumoniae
were obtained from frozen tissue samples. Given these results, it
may be possible for some organisms found in frozen tissue to be
cultured in vitro. To determine if this was possible, homogenates
of human brain tissues were cultured with human THP1
monocytes with positive results (Balin et al., 1998). The organism
was confirmed to be present and preserved in frozen brain
tissues by this method. That the organism propagated in vitro
intracellularly in the monocytes was confirmed using antibodies
specific to Chlamydia pneumoniae and by PCR. Propagation in
this manner was required as this bacterial organism is an obligate
intracellular pathogen that will only grow in an intracellular
environment.
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
6
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 362
 fgene-09-00362
September 6, 2018
Time: 19:32
# 7
Fülöp et al.
Role of Microbes in the Development of Alzheimer’s Disease
The general workflow that Dr. Balin’
s lab used in the discovery
process was presented to highlight the different steps required
to prove how infection is being correlated with the pathogenesis
of AD. In this regard, following the identification of Chlamydia
pneumoniae in the AD brain, animal models (rodents) and
cell culture models have been adopted to determine how the
organism enters the brain through olfaction, and how cells
respond to the organism. Microscopic and culture techniques are
routinely used to evaluate infection as it relates to where in the
cell the infection resides and how different pathways such as those
involving autophagy, apoptosis and inflammasome activation are
being activated. Protein (ELISA) and nucleic acid (PCR, RT-PCR)
analyses are used to correlate the infection to specific cellular
molecular changes.
Upon introduction of isolated Chlamydia pneumoniae into the
nares (or nostrils) of normal non-transgenic laboratory strains
of mice (BALB/c or C57BL/6), AD-like amyloid plaques, which
labeled with Aβ amyloid 1–
42 antibodies, were evident in the
brain within 1–
3 months post-inoculation (Figure 3) (Little
et al., 2004, 2014). Aβ amyloid 1–
42 immunoreactive plaques
were present in peri-rhinal and hippocampal regions. Evidence
of the organism in the olfactory neuroepithelia and olfactory
bulbs of the animals was obtained by immunohistochemistry
and electron microscopy, respectively. Additionally, astrocyte
activation was evident following immunolabeling of brain
sections with glial fibrillary acidic protein. These studies
demonstrated that infection with Chlamydia pneumoniae may
involve two pathways, the direct olfactory neuroepithelia –
olfactory bulbs – entorhinal cortex pathway, and the systemic
inhalation –lung –monocyte infection –blood-borne pathway.
Interestingly, Dr. Balin pointed out that studies support olfactory
impairment with early cognitive change and cited one study by
Devanand et al., 2000 in which these authors state “
the findings
suggest that the inability to recognize smells, combined with a
lack of awareness of impaired odor perception, may be a sign of
impending Alzheimer’
s.”
Additional studies in mice have demonstrated that Chlamydia
pneumoniae can be recovered from the olfactory bulbs and brain
tissues of infected mice following infection up to 4 months
post-infection (Little et al., 2005). The recovery is dependent
on the infectious dose used for infection with a higher dose
5 × 105 as compared to 5 × 104 IFU being more easily detected.
Furthermore, upon consideration of the age of the animals, 20-
month-old animals maintained a higher titer of organism after 14
and 28 days post-infection as compared to 6-month-old animals,
suggesting that older aged animals did not clear the infection
as easily as younger animals. Aging and immunosenescence
may contribute to persistent infection. Intriguingly, age is the
number one risk factor for AD, but why this is the case
has always been questioned. Thus, these data suggest that old
animals infected with Chlamydia pneumoniae may develop a
long-term chronic or persistent infection as compared to young
animals.
In vitro studies of cellular mechanisms following Chlamydia
pneumoniae infection are also informative as to the nature of
how the organism may traffic through the blood–
brain barrier,
disrupt pathways such as apoptosis, autophagy and calcium
FIGURE 3 | Aβ42 deposits in the CNS at 2 months post-infection following
intranasal infection with Chlamydia pneumoniae. Brains were examined by
light microscopy for the presence of Aβ42 using a specifi
c anti-Aβ 1–42
antibody. Mag bars = 20 µm (Little et al., 2014).
regulation as well as influence the inflammatory response by
activating inflammasome complexes. In this regard, infected
monocytes placed on a layer of human brain microvascular
endothelial cells in a model of the blood–
brain barrier
transmigrated beyond the barrier to a sub-endothelial chamber
(MacIntyre et al., 2002, 2003). The endothelial cells had a
transient change in tight junctional proteins as well as increased
expression of surface adhesion molecules, ICAM and VCAM.
The monocytes increased expression of their integrin surface
molecules, LFA1, VLA-4, and MAC-1, suggesting that infection
promoted cellular changes that allowed increased interaction
of monocytes with brain microvascular endothelial cells to
facilitate transmigration through the in vitro blood–
brain
barrier.
Chlamydia pneumoniae infection of neuroblastoma cells
blocked the apoptotic process (Appelt et al., 2008) as well as
activated autophagy and calcium dysregulation. Intriguingly,
following infection of monocytes, inflammasome activation was
apparent and mRNA and cytokine expression reflecting this
inflammatory response was measurable (Lim et al., 2014). All of
these features that have been identified with regards to infection
with this particular organism previously have been ascribed to
AD pathogenesis. A summary of these and a comparison are
noted in Table 1.
Furthermore, links between Chlamydia pneumoniae infection
and other risk factors for AD are evident. For example, infection
is linked to ApoE-ε4 expression (Gerard et al., 2005, 2008),
atherosclerosis (Filardo et al., 2015), diabetes type 2 (Miklossy
and McGeer, 2016), and neurotrauma (as this would affect
the blood–
brain barrier). These features that correlate with
Chlamydia pneumoniae infection and AD have led to an infection
paradigm, wherein infection with this organism in the brain
should be considered a triggering or causative agent in the
initiation and perpetuation of AD pathogenesis.
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
7
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 362
 fgene-09-00362
September 6, 2018
Time: 19:32
# 8
Fülöp et al.
Role of Microbes in the Development of Alzheimer’s Disease
TABLE 1 | Comparison between characteristics of Alzheimer’s disease and
C. pneumoniae infection.
Alzheimer’s disease
aspect
Chlamydia pneumoniae infection
Olfactory dysfunction
Organism entry
Amyloid deposition
Promotes processing
CNS inflammation
Initiates IL-1β – pro-inflammatory
Cerebral apoptosis
Initiates and inhibits
Mitochondrial dysfunction
ATP sink; ROS target/initiation
Autophagy
Incomplete process
Calcium dysregulation
Increases influx
Neuronal loss
Amyloid fi
bril deposition
Kynurenine/Quinolinic acid
imbalance
Activates IFNγ; shifts to damaging
quinolinic acid
Iron dysregulation
Iron sink; deposition
BBB leakage
Increases permeability
Dr. Balin concluded his presentation with the following quote
assigned to Albert Szent Gyorgyi “
Discovery consists of seeing
what everybody has seen and thinking what nobody has thought.”
AMYLOID BETA PEPTIDES AS
ANTIMICROBIAL PEPTIDES:
RELEVANCE FOR ALZHEIMER’S
DISEASE?
The fourth speaker was Professor Tamás Fülöp from the
Universitéde Sherbrooke and his talk was entitled “
Amyloid beta
peptides as antimicrobial peptides: Relevance for Alzheimer’s
disease?”
He started by stating that if AD is of infectious origin, for
which a case was elegantly built by the three first speakers, then
perhaps the role of Aβ should be reconsidered. Indeed, some
years ago in the field of infection, bacterial amyloid production
was considered as antibacterial. Microcin E492 (also called
Mcc), for example, is a potent, amyloid-forming, antibacterial
bacteriocin produced by Klebsiella pneumoniae (Hammer et al.,
2008). It can be perhaps speculated that the physiologically
produced and circulating Aβ may have such functions. As the
microbiota gains importance, it can be hypothesized that amyloid
peptides secreted by certain types of bacteria help to maintain the
pathological bacteria as well as fungi under control.
The seminal work of the Moir research group shed light on this
new concept concerning amyloid peptides as they published data
demonstrating both the antibacterial and antifungal properties of
Aβ (Soscia et al., 2010). They showed that this peptide is capable
of reducing the proliferation of several types of bacteria as well
as that of the fungus Candida albicans. They hypothesized that
Aβ may be a natural antimicrobial peptide (AMP), having an
important role in the natural host defense of the organism against
different microbes. In this way of thinking they compared Aβ’
s
effects to another well-known AMP, the cathelicidin peptide LL-
37, which is the theme of the last presentation of the symposium
by Professor Annelise Barron of Stanford University. Soscia et al.
(2010) found that Aβ has somehow more powerful antimicrobial
effects than LL-37.
The Dr. Fülöp group became interested in Aβ after this
2010 publication and asked whether this peptide may also have
antiviral properties. They started to work on the HSV-1 virus, as
it had been shown to be present in AD brain by the first speaker,
Professor Ruth Itzhaki. In the meantime, White et al. (2014)
published a paper showing that Aβ sufficiently decreased the
infectivity of the influenza virus. However, they did not provide
details of a convincing mechanism as to how this could happen.
The Dr. Fülöp laboratory set out to demonstrate that Aβ
efficiently decreases the intracellular replication of HSV-1 when
added before or at the same time as the virus. This seemed to
indicate that once the virus is inside of the cells, Aβ has no effect.
This led to the hypothesis that Aβ may act extracellularly, which
was confirmed by several experiments (Bourgade et al., 2015).
Indeed, through confocal microscopy studies, an extracellular
interaction was confirmed between HSV-1 and Aβ. Interestingly,
influenza virus from the White study and HSV-1 from the
Dr. Fülöp study were both enveloped viruses. This led to the
hypothesis that Aβ may be effective only against viruses that
possess an envelope. In fact, when adenovirus, which does not
have an envelope, was used, the Aβ peptide had no effect when
added to culture (Bourgade et al., 2015).
To be closer to physiological conditions, Dr. Fülöp’
s laboratory
established an in vitro co-culture of microglial cells and neurons.
The aim was to study the effect, if any, of HSV-1 infection of
neurons on Aβ production (Bourgade et al., 2016b). Indeed,
the neurons infected by HSV-1 produced Aβ (Figure 4). This
confirmed that a viral infection can induce detectable Aβ
production. The next step was to study whether β-secretase
(BACE) activation is the origin of this increased Aβ production.
The experiments showed that BACE was activated in neurons
and that inhibition by common BACE inhibitors decreased
production of Aβ. Concomitantly, the infectivity of HSV-1
increased as almost no Aβ was produced. Thus, not only was
Aβ secretion stimulated by the increased activation of BACE,
but also it provided antiviral activity. To confirm that neurons
were stimulated by HSV-1, Dr. Fülöp applied the supernatant
to neurons before de novo HSV-1 infection. Notably, this
conditioned media was able to inhibit HSV-1-driven infection
of the neurons almost completely. To confirm that this was the
effect of secreted Aβ from neurons, Dr. Fülöp neutralized IFNα/β
and Aβ, but only the latter resulted in increased infections. So
it was not the IFNα/β that acted as an antiviral agent but the
Aβ peptide. This again confirmed the specific role of Aβ in vitro
as a powerful AMP secreted by neurons during acute infection,
which renders the neighboring cells resistant to infection. In a
microglia/neuron co-culture Dr. Fülöp demonstrated that the
microglia phagocytose at least in part the Aβ produced by the
neurons, trying to extract a potentially harmful substance like
Aβ from the environment. However, it was also found that this
phagocytosis process caused the microglia to become activated.
The last part was devoted to better understanding the
mechanism of Aβ’
s antiviral activities and give a broader sense
to this mechanism as well as to the antiviral AMP activity of Aβ
(Bourgade et al., 2016a). It was shown that the Aβ and the gB
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
8
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 362
 fgene-09-00362
September 6, 2018
Time: 19:32
# 9
Fülöp et al.
Role of Microbes in the Development of Alzheimer’s Disease
FIGURE 4 | HSV-1-dependent Aβ production in H4 neuroglioma and U118-MG glial cells. (A) H4 neuroglioma cells were cultured in the absence (–) or presence (+)
of HSV-1 for 24 h and production of Aβ42 and Aβ40 was quantitated by ELISA assays. (B) Time-course production of Aβ42 and Aβ40 by H4 neuroglioma cells
cultured in the presence of HSV-1. (C) Time course of BACE-1 activity in H4 neuroglioma cells exposed to HSV-1 expressed in relative fluorescence units (RFU).
(D) Aβ42 and Aβ40 production by U118-MG glioblastoma cells exposed to HSV-1 for 24 h, as determined by ELISA assays. Data are shown as the mean ± SEM of
four to fi
ve experiments performed in duplicate. ∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01, ∗∗∗p < 0.001, ∗∗∗∗p < 0.0001. Reprinted from Bourgade et al. (2016b), with permission
from IOS Press.
binding protein on the envelope surface of the virus HSV-1 have
structure homology which might explain partly its mechanism of
action. This interaction occurs in the extracellular space and has
two possibilities. The first possibility is a mechanism of binding
directly to the binding site of mHSV-1, subsequently inhibiting its
entry into the cells. There are some FRET data indicating a very
close physical interaction between Aβ and viruses (unpublished
data). The second possibility, which does not totally exclude the
first, is that Aβ may be a membrane-disruptive peptide or it
crosses membranes causing internal damage. There are limited
experimental data on artificial membranes showing that this
possibility may exist (Arispe et al., 2007). Whatever its exact
mechanism of action, the Aβ peptide is able to significantly
decrease infectivity of HSV-1 and other viruses, which is highly
significant.
Together these data may be integrated into a common
hypothesis in which production of Aβ may initially be beneficial
at the beginning of an infection, as an AMP helps to contain
the original pathogen (Bourgade et al., 2016a; Le Page et al.,
2017). In the decades preceding the full clinical manifestation
of AD, there may be repeated reactivation of the chronic
latent infections, constantly producing new Aβ peptides in
response, which cannot be cleared by microglia, progressively
leading to neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation. Clinical
AD then becomes apparent when the threshold for these
pathological changes is exceeded. This vision allows us to also
better understand the roles of different risk factors for AD.
Furthermore, new targets for treatment could be developed from
this approach of AD.
EVIDENCE THAT THE HUMAN LL-37
MAY BE A BINDING PARTNER OF Aβ
AND INHIBITOR OF FIBRIL ASSEMBLY
The last speaker was Professor Annelise Barron from Stanford
University, and her talk was entitled “
Evidence that the human
LL-37 may be a binding partner of Aβ and inhibitor of fibril
assembly.”
This last talk was relevant to all of the previous four talks,
as it was focused on a potential direct binding interaction
between the well-known Alzheimer’
s-associated Aβ peptide, and
the abovementioned, ubiquitous human host defense peptide, the
human cathelicidin peptide LL-37, as a possible mechanism that
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
9
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 362
 fgene-09-00362
September 6, 2018
Time: 19:32
# 10
Fülöp et al.
Role of Microbes in the Development of Alzheimer’s Disease
could prevent pathological over-accumulation of Aβ plaques. It
connects Aβ accumulation with an inadequate innate immune
host defense to infections (given that LL-37 is a critical
antimicrobial peptide).
Dr. Barron’
s talk was relevant to the concept that infections
of brain tissue, whether of viral or bacterial origin, will engender
an innate immune response, which in the case of Alzheimer’
s
patients, may be ineffective or somehow misregulated, resulting
in pathological overaccumulation of amyloid, as well as
progressive neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation. Indeed,
throughout the past 111 years since the first report of AD, the
natural physiological function of the Aβ peptide has remained
mysterious. Yet recent results of the Moir and Fülöp groups, in
just the last decade, now make a convincing argument that Aβ
is a key element of human innate immunity, which in addition
to being capable of directly inactivating viruses such as HSV-1
(Bourgade et al., 2015, 2016a) and some types of bacteria (Soscia
et al., 2010), can also serve to sequester pathogens of either
viral or bacterial origin within amyloid plaques, where these
pathogens or their remains have been consistently identified, as
was discussed by the first three speakers.
Dr. Barron introduced the idea, first proposed in a paper
published in July 2017 (the same month that the IAGG
symposium was held), that the Aβ peptide and LL-37 peptide
may in fact be co-regulated, interacting host defense peptides,
which are able to bind to and inactivate each other (De
Lorenzi et al., 2017); and that further, if these two peptides are
misregulated with regard to their expression, this misregulation
might contribute to development of AD.
The identification of physiologically relevant binding partners
of Aβ that can modulate or prevent in vivo Aβ fibril and plaque
formation is important, as this could yield new insights into
AD etiology, and moreover may suggest new therapeutic or
prevention strategies. The binding partner of Aβ peptide that
Dr. Barron and collaborators have identified is the cathelicidin
peptide, LL-37, which is an antiviral, antibacterial, antifungal
innate immune effector and modulator, ubiquitous in human
tissues and expressed in myriad cell types.
Dr. Barron presented the first in vitro experimental evidence
supporting the hypothesis that LL-37 binds to Aβ peptide and
modulates or prevents fibril formation. Her results showed that
LL-37 and Aβ bind to each other strongly and form a complex,
such that the normal effects of both peptides are ameliorated, i.e.,
the complex is virtually non-toxic; and also, soluble.
Key collaborators on the project included Dr. Marcella Chiari,
Dr. Ersilia De Lorenzi, Dr. Carlo Morasso, and Dr. Renzo Vanna,
all from Italy; and Dr. Patrick McGeer from British Columbia.
Previous work of Dr. Barron with Dr. McGeer, published in 2015
(Lee et al., 2015) had shown that LL-37 peptide can be detected
by Western blots in many different human tissues (indeed, all
tissues that were tested), but is most highly expressed in the
human gut and brain. Moreover, strong upregulation of LL-37
in a human cadaver with infection (in the lungs of a person
who had died of pneumonia) was confirmed; and upregulation
of LL-37 in the brain of a patient who died of AD was found.
More work needs to be done, with larger numbers of human
brains, to verify these findings. In cell culture studies, it was
shown that similarly to Aβ peptide, LL-37 peptide can induce
neuroinflammation; specifically, it can induce human microglia
to release inflammatory cytokines TNF-α and IL-6 (Lee et al.,
2015).
Dr. Barron described a series of in vitro studies that proved a
binding interaction between these host defense peptides, which
happen to have almost identical molecular weights (LL-37 is 37
amino acids long, while the Aβ peptide is 40−42 amino acids
long), and which are opposite in charge at physiological pH (LL-
37 has +6 charge, while Aβ has −3 charge), favoring binding. The
two peptides have other sequence complementarities, and further
studies of their interactions are being done by Dr. Barron and
collaborators (De Lorenzi et al., 2017).
Surface Plasmon Resonance imaging (SPRi) showed strong
sequence-specific binding interactions between LL-37 and Aβ
(Figure 5), with binding being quantitatively assessed with Aβ
in different aggregation states (small oligomers, larger oligomers,
and mature fibrils, as assessed by capillary electrophoresis
analysis). SPRi showed binding specificity between LL-37
and Aβ, that is, Aβ did not bind to an unrelated peptide
nor to a scrambled-sequence version of LL-37. The binding
constants are of the same order of magnitude expected for
specific protein–
protein binding interactions. Interestingly, LL-
37 peptide binds more strongly (as measured by equilibrium
dissociation constants, Kd) to Aβ oligomers than to mature Aβ
fibrils, which means that the presence of LL-37 tends to prevent
the formation of Aβ fibrils. Indeed, TEM analyses also showed
that LL-37 inhibits Aβ42 fibril formation, particularly Aβ’
s ability
to form long, straight fibrils characteristic of AD. Circular
dichroism studies of the two peptides in solution, separately and
in equimolar amounts, revealed that the presence of LL-37 can
entirely prevent Aβ42 from adopting β-type secondary structure,
which is prerequisite to its formation of oligomers and fibrils (De
Lorenzi et al., 2017).
Respective cytotoxicities of LL-37 and Aβ42 and their
complexes were evaluated in primary human microglia as well
as neuroblastoma cell lines (SH-SY5Y), cultured in different
experimental conditions (alone or in co-culture). It was found
that microglia-mediated toxicities of LL-37 and Aβ42 to neurons
in co-cultures (i.e., their tendency to release proinflammatory
cytokines) were greatly attenuated when the peptides were co-
incubated before addition and allowed to bind. Indeed, the
complex of Aβ42 and LL-37 was found to be both soluble, and
virtually non-toxic and non-inflammatory (De Lorenzi et al.,
2017).
Previous reports indicate that biophysical activities and
signaling functions of Aβ and LL-37, which is the only
cathelicidin-derived innate immune system peptide found in
humans, are connected with each other in vivo. For example, the
vitamin D receptor (VDR) and retinoid X receptor (RXR) are
both relevant to the progression of AD, as well as with expression
levels of Aβ and LL-37. Vitamin D3 treatment has been shown
to reduce intracerebral amyloid accumulation and to improve
cognition in a mouse model of AD (Durk et al., 2014), while RXR
activation reduced neurodegeneration and improved cognition
in an aggressive mouse model of AD (Mariani et al., 2017).
Expression levels of the CAMP gene that encodes hCAP-18, the
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
10
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 362
 fgene-09-00362
September 6, 2018
Time: 19:32
# 11
Fülöp et al.
Role of Microbes in the Development of Alzheimer’s Disease
FIGURE 5 | Binding studies performed by SPRi. The SPRi-chip was functionalized with Aβ40 (t = 0 days) (A,D); Aβ42 (t = 0 days) (B,E) and Aβ42 (t = 24 days) (C,
F). All the Aβ peptides were immobilized in replicate (n = 8) on the same SPRi chip at the same concentration (20 µM). SPRi reference-corrected responses related
to LL-37 (10 µM) (black) and ovalbumin (10 µM) (gray) (negative control) flowed on the SPRi-chip functionalized with different Aβ forms (A–C). The three SPRi
sensograms show the injection of running buffer (baseline) (1), the injection of the analyte (association phase) (2) and the subsequent injection of buffer (dissociation
phase) (3). Calibration curve of LL-37 flowed onto different Aβ forms immobilized on the SPRi-chip Aβ40 (t = 0 days, D) Aβ42 (t = 0 days, E), Aβ42 (t = 24 days, F).
The equilibrium binding constants (KA and Kd) values were calculated using a non-linear curve fi
t of the SPRi response at equilibrium. Reprinted from De Lorenzi
et al. (2017), with permission from IOS Press.
precursor for LL-37 (Burton and Steel, 2009), are upregulated
by activation of the VDR pathway (Gombart et al., 2005), with
an obligate involvement of the RXR receptor as well (Cederlund
et al., 2014).
Other literature reports suggest that the biophysical activities
and signaling functions of Aβ peptides and LL-37 are related
in vivo. For instance, the Formyl-like Peptide Receptor 1 (FPRL1)
is activated by both Aβ (Le et al., 2001) and LL-37 (Yang et al.,
2000). This receptor is reportedly involved in inflammatory
aspects of AD (Cui et al., 2002) via its effects on phagocyte
responses (Iribarren et al., 2005); and a decreased phagocyte
clearance of CNS β-amyloid is a hallmark of AD (Mawuenyega
et al., 2010). LL-37 itself is involved in monocyte and macrophage
autophagy; its expression, stimulated by vitamin D3 (Gombart
et al., 2005), engenders enhanced autophagy (Yuk et al., 2009).
Thus, a dearth of LL-37 generally will reduce phagocytic activity.
Treatments with phenylbutyrate and vitamin D3 have both been
shown to be neuroprotective in AD mouse models (Cuadrado-
Tejedor et al., 2013; Durk et al., 2014), and these same two
compounds are known to be strong inducers of cathelicidin
expression (Steinmann et al., 2009). Finally, as discussed above,
there is mounting evidence that innate immunity plays a larger
role in AD than previously thought, and that Aβ’
s normal
function may be as an antimicrobial and antiviral peptide
(Soscia et al., 2010; Bourgade et al., 2015; Kumar and Moir,
2017). Kumar et al. (2016) showed that Aβ expression protects
against fungal and bacterial infections in mouse, nematode, and
cell culture models of AD. And, part of the body’
s natural
response to infection is, of course, to upregulate expression
of cathelicidin peptide LL-37, if possible (Burton and Steel,
2009).
To date, most approaches to studying AD rely on the
supposition
that
pathological
overexpression
or
hindered
degradation of Aβ lays the foundation for disease. Certainly,
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
11
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 362
 fgene-09-00362
September 6, 2018
Time: 19:32
# 12
Fülöp et al.
Role of Microbes in the Development of Alzheimer’s Disease
TABLE 2 | Summary of key fi
ndings.
Title
Author
Highlights
The role of herpes simplex virus type 1
(HSV1) in Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
Ruth Itzhaki
• HSV1 DNA resides latently in brain of many elderly and can reactivate; damage is probably
limited and localized.
• HSV1 DNA in brain and ApoE-ε4 confer a strong risk of AD; ApoE-ε4 is a risk for cold sores.
• HSV1 infection of human brain cells and of mouse brain causes AD-like changes.
• HSV1 DNA is located precisely within amyloid plaques in AD brains.
• Antiviral treatment reduces greatly Aβ and P-tau production.
• Vaccination of mice prevents HSV1 latency in brain.
• ApoE determines severity of damage (or susceptibility to infection) by diverse pathogens.
Alzheimer’s disease and spirochetes –
A causal relationship
Judith Miklossy
• Chronic bacterial infections can cause dementia (e.g., the spirochete Treponema pallidum
causing syphilitic dementia).
• Spirochete colonies in brain can produce plaque-like structures indistinguishable from senile
plaques.
• 451/495 AD blood and brain samples had spirochetes detected compared to none found in
185 controls.
• APP
, Aβ, P-tau induced by spirochetes in infected cultures.
• Aβ and DNA are key components of pure spirochetal biofi
lms and senile plaques.
• Hill’s criteria support a causal relationship between spirochetes and AD.
• Pathological process begins long before diagnosis of dementia; appropriate antibiotic treatment
may result in regression and, if started early, prevention of dementia.
Thinking outside the box in Alzheimer’s
disease: Could infection be the answer?
Brian Balin
• Chlamydia pneumoniae (Cpn) found in abundance in AD brains (17/19) compared to controls
(1/19).
• Viable Cpn can be isolated from AD brains and propagated in human THP1 monocyte cell
cultures.
• Cpn introduced into nostrils of healthy BALB/c mice results in AD-like amyloid plaques in brain.
• Infection occurring through direct olfactory neuroepithelia pathway or systemic inhalation
pathway.
• Cpn infection shares similar risk factors and characteristics with AD (Table 1).
Amyloid beta peptides as antimicrobial
peptides: Relevance for Alzheimer’s
disease?
Tamàs Fülöp
• Aβ exhibits antiviral activity against enveloped viruses.
• Neurons produce Aβ peptides in response to HSV1 infection that is time dependent and
requires β-secretase activity.
• Most likely mechanism of action of Aβ against HSV1 is disruption of viral insertion into external
membrane, interfering with its ability to infect host cells.
• Aβ42 induces activation of microglia in response to reactivation of HSV1.
• Overproduction of Aβ42 could cause sustained neuroinflammation, which, over a long term,
would manifest as AD symptoms.
• Aβ may be at fi
rst benefi
cial in its response to infection, but later becomes detrimental.
Evidence that the human LL-37 may be
a binding partner of Aβ and inhibitor of
fi
bril assembly
Annelise Barron
• Aβ and human innate immune peptide, LL-37, may be co-regulated; misregulation may
contribute to AD development.
• LL-37 is present in many human tissues, most notably brain and gut; strongly upregulated in an
AD patient’s brain.
• SPRi shows strong sequence-specifi
c binding between LL-37 and Aβ; stronger binding to Aβ
oligomers than fi
brils.
• TEM demonstrates LL-37 can inhibit Aβ fi
bril formation.
• Microglia-mediated toxicities of LL-37 and Aβ to neurons in co-cultures is greatly reduced when
peptides are co-incubated prior to addition.
• Biophysical activities and signaling functions of the two peptides may be linked in vivo.
• Underexpression of LL-37 may lead to accumulation of Aβ and development of AD.
overexpression of Aβ, given that it has been proven by the
Moir and Fülöp groups to have both antibacterial and antiviral
capabilities, is to be expected in the case of tissue response to an
infection by pathogens such as HSV-1, spirochetes, or Chlamydia
pneumoniae, all shown by the other speakers to be relevant
to AD.
Dr. Barron raised the novel question here: what if a chronic
underexpression of another host defense peptide, LL-37, which
normally opposes Aβ fibril and plaque formation, plays a key
role in the etiopathogenesis of AD? Underexpression of LL-37,
which might result from (for instance) insufficient vitamin D3
(i.e., insufficient exposure to sunlight, or intake of fish oil in a
northern climate), insufficient dietary retinoids (vitamin A), or
other factors, resulting in a low expression of cathelicidin peptide
LL-37, would reduce a patient’
s ability to fight brain infection.
Hence, all of the concepts appear to be connected in a clear way.
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
12
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 362
 fgene-09-00362
September 6, 2018
Time: 19:32
# 13
Fülöp et al.
Role of Microbes in the Development of Alzheimer’s Disease
Dr. Barron and her collaborators have proposed that LL-37
and Aβ42 are natural innate immune binding partners, which
implies that their balanced spatiotemporal expression could
modulate AD initiation and progression. If spatiotemporally
balanced expression of LL-37 and Aβ is not achieved, for
instance because of dietary or lifestyle factors, then it would be
expected that the Aβ fibrils could pathologically accumulate, as
occurs in AD.
If this hypothesis is correct, then rather than ‘
pathological
overexpression’
of Aβ, chronic underexpression of LL-37 (which
would also create an ineffective response to infection) is the
problem that leads to AD pathology. It seems to be a rather simple
explanation. If it is true, how could it be explained that it took
111 years to discover this? It is difficult for researchers to identify
a systemic element that should be present, or perhaps should be
better regulated, but is not. It is natural to study what is present,
rather than what is not.
Finally, Dr. Barron stated that she is now conducting
an in vivo study of this hypothesis, and has identified,
with collaborator Dr. Mehrdad Shamloo at Stanford, an oral
polytherapy of compounds that given together can strongly
induce the expression of the endogenous cathelicidin (murine
cathelicidin—highly similar to LL-37—is called CRAMP). Early
results of an extended feeding study using both wild-type and
the 5XFAD Alzheimer’
s mouse model indicate that these two
peptides also interact and can neutralize each other’
s biophysical
and biological activities in vivo, as was found in vitro. If Dr.
Barron’
s hypothesis is correct, stimulation of the key human
antimicrobial and antiviral peptide LL-37, together with antiviral
drug treatment, might help prevent or treat AD in patients who
suffer from viral or bacterial infections of their brain tissue. Early
treatment would be key. Additionally, further studies are required
to establish the exact role of such associations in AD.
CONCLUSION
In summary, the five speakers provided strong evidence
supporting the role of chronic infections in the development
of AD, as well as a potential misregulation of the human
innate immune response to these infections, as a plausible route
for new investigations of the etiology and pathophysiology of
AD (Table 2). Investigations along these lines are warranted,
given the inadequacy of the amyloid cascade hypothesis, which
still remains the dominant framework for studying AD. This
new paradigm may provide novel targets for the prevention
and treatment of this devastating disease of the elderly. Much
more work is needed in this field of research, but the hope
is that many scientists will join this endeavor for the benefit
of AD patients around the world; and indeed, to potentially
achieve early diagnosis of various infections, viral, fungal and
bacterial, which can predispose certain patients to the initiation
and progression of AD decades prior to the disastrous clinical
manifestations.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
RI, JM, BB, TF, and AB have written their respective parts,
reviewed, and commented on the entire article.
FUNDING
This work was supported by grants from Canadian Institutes of
Health Research (CIHR) (No. 106634), the Sociétédes médecins
de l’
Universitéde Sherbrooke and the Research Center on Aging
of the CIUSSS-CHUS, Sherbrooke (Fülöp), by the Prevention
Alzheimer International Foundation, Switzerland (Miklossy), by
the Center for Chronic Disorders of Aging at Philadelphia
College of Osteopathic Medicine (Balin), and by Stanford
University Schools of Medicine and of Engineering (Barron).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Dr. Jennifer Lin (Stanford
University) for her comments and assistance in revising this
manuscript.
REFERENCES
Allen, H. B., Morales, D., Jones, K., and Joshi, S. (2016). Alzheimer’
s
disease:
a
novel
hypothesis
integrating
spirochetes,
biofilm,
and
the
immune
system.
J.
Neuroinfect
Dis.
7:1.
doi:
10.4172/2314-7326.10
00200
Alonso, R., Pisa, D., Aguado, B., and Carrasco, L. (2017). Identification of fungal
species in brain tissue from Alzheimer’
s disease by next-generation sequencing.
J. Alzheimers. Dis. 58, 55–
67. doi: 10.3233/JAD-170058
Alzheimer, A. (1907). Über eine eigenartige erkrankung der hirnrinde. Allgem. Z.
Psychiatrie Psychisch-Gerichtliche Med. 64, 146–
148.
Alzheimer, A., Stelzmann, R. A., Schnitzlein, H. N., and Murtagh, F. R. (1995).
An english translation of Alzheimer’
s 1907 paper, “
Uber eine eigenartige
Erkankung der Hirnrinde”
. Clin. Anat. 8, 429–
431. doi: 10.1002/ca.9800
80612
Alzheimer’
s Association (2017). Alzheimer’
s disease facts and figures. Alzheimer’
s
Dementia 13, 325–
373. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2017.02.001
Appelt, D. M., Roupas, M., Hammond, C. J., Little, C. S., and Balin, B. J. (2008).
Apoptotic effects of Chlamydophila pneumoniae following infection of neuronal
cells. BMC Neurosci. 9:13–
23. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-9-13
Arispe, N., Diaz, J. C., and Simakova, O. (2007). Aβ ion channel. Prospects for
treating Alzheimer’
s disease with Aβ channel blockers. Biochim. Biophys. Acta
1768, 1952–
1965. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2007.03.014
Balin, B. J., Gérard, H. C., Arking, E. J., Appelt, D. M., Branigan, P. J., Abrams,
J. T., et al. (1998). Identification and localization of Chlamydia pneumoniae
in the Alzheimer’
s brain. Med. Microbiol. Immunol. 187, 23–
42. doi: 10.1007/
s004300050071
Balin, B. J., Little, C. S., Hammond, C. J., Appelt, D. M., Whittum-Hudson, J. A.,
Gérard, H. C., et al. (2008). Chlamydophila pneumoniae and the etiology of late-
onset Alzheimer’
s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis. 13, 371–
380. doi: 10.3233/JAD-
2008-13403
Bearer, E. (2012). HSV, axonal transport and Alzheimer’
s disease: in vitro and
in vivo evidence for causal relationships. Future Virol. 7, 885–
899. doi: 10.2217/
fvl.12.81
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
13
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 362
 fgene-09-00362
September 6, 2018
Time: 19:32
# 14
Fülöp et al.
Role of Microbes in the Development of Alzheimer’s Disease
Beyreuther, K., and Masters, C. L. (1991). Amyloid precursor protein (APP) and
beta A4 amyloid in the etiology of Alzheimer’
s disease: precursor-product
relationships in the derangement of neuronal function. Brain Pathol. 1, 241–
251. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.1991.tb00667.x
Blennow, K., and Zetterberg, H. (2018). The past and the future of Alzheimer’
s
disease fluid biomarkers. J. Alzheimers Dis. 62, 1125–
1140. doi: 10.3233/JAD-
170773
Bolós, M., Perea, J. R., and Avila, J. (2017). Alzheimer’
s disease as an inflammatory
disease. Biomol. Concepts 8, 37–
43. doi: 10.1515/bmc-2016-0029
Bourgade, K., Dupuis, G., Frost, E. H., and Fülöp, T. (2016a). Anti-viral properties
of amyloid-β peptides. J. Alzheimers Dis. 54, 859–
878. doi: 10.3233/JAD-160517
Bourgade, K., Le Page, A., Bocti, C., Witkowski, J. M., Dupuis, G., Frost, E. H., et al.
(2016b). Protective effect of amyloid-β peptides against herpes simplex virus-
1 infection in a neuronal cell culture model. J. Alzheimers Dis. 50, 1227–
1241.
doi: 10.3233/JAD-150652
Itzhaki, R. F., Lathe, R., Balin, B. J., Ball, M. J., Bearer, E. L., Braak, H., et al.
(2016). Microbes and Alzheimer’
s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis. 51, 979–
984.
doi: 10.3233/JAD-160152
Bourgade, K., Garneau, H., Giroux, G., Le Page, A. Y., Bocti, C., Dupuis, G.,
et al. (2015). β-Amyloid peptides display protective activity against the human
Alzheimer’
s disease-associated herpes simplex virus-1. Biogerontology 16,
85–
98. doi: 10.1007/s10522-014-9538-8
Burgdorfer, W., Barbour, A. G., Hayes, S. F., Benach, J. L., Grunwaldt, E., and Davis,
J. P. (1982). Lyme disease-a tick-borne spirochetosis? Science 216, 1317–
1319.
Burton, M. F., and Steel, P. G. (2009). The chemistry and biology of LL-37. Nat.
Prod. Rep. 26, 1572–
1584. doi: 10.1039/b912533g
Carter, C. J. (2008). Interactions between the products of the Herpes simplex
genome and Alzheimer’
s disease susceptibility genes: relevance to pathological-
signalling cascades. Neurochem. Int. 52, 920–
934. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2007.
11.003
Carter, C. J. (2017). Genetic, transcriptome, proteomic and epidemiological
evidence for blood-brain barrier disruption and polymicrobial brain invasion
as determinant factors in Alzheimer’
s disease. J. Alz. Dis. Rep. 125–
157.
doi: 10.3233/ADR-170017
Castellani, R. J., Rolston, R. K., and Smith, M. A. (2010). Alzheimer disease. Dis.
Mon. 56, 484–
546. doi: 10.1016/j.disamonth.2010.06.001
Cederlund, A., Nylen, F., Miraglia, E., Bergman, P., Gudmundsson, G. H., and
Agerberth, B. (2014). Label-free quantitative mass spectrometry reveals novel
pathways involved in LL-37 expression. J. Innate Immun. 6, 365–
376. doi:
10.1159/000355931
Cheng, S. B., Ferland, P., Webster, P., and Bearer, E. L. (2011). Herpes simplex
virus dances with amyloid precursor protein while exiting the cell. PLoS One
6:e17966. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017966
Cuadrado-Tejedor,
M.,
Ricobaraza,
A.
L.,
Torrijo,
R.,
Franco,
R.,
and
Garcia-Osta, A. (2013). Phenylbutyrate is a multifaceted drug that exerts
neuroprotective effects and reverses the Alzheimer’
s Disease-like phenotype
of a commonly used mouse model. Curr. Pharm. Des. 19, 5076–
5084.
doi: 10.2174/1381612811319280006
Cui, Y. H., Le, Y. Y., Yazawa, H., Gong, W. H., and Wang, J. M. (2002). Potential
role of the formyl peptide receptor-like 1 (FPRL1) in inflammatory aspects of
Alzheimer’
s disease. J. Leukoc. Biol. 72, 628–
635.
De Lorenzi, E.,Chiari, M., Colombo, R., Cretich, M., Sola, L., Vanna, R., et al. (2017)
Evidence that the human innate immune Peptide LL-37 may be a binding
Partner of amyloid-β and inhibitor of fibril assembly, J. Alzheimer’
s Dis. 59,
1213–
1226. doi: 10.3233/JAD-170223
Devanand, D. P., Michaels-Marston, K. S., Liu, X., Pelton, G. H., Padilla, M.,
Marder, K., et al. (2000). Olfactory deficits in patients with mild cognitive
impairment predict Alzheimer’
s disease at follow-up. Am. J. Psychiatry 157,
1399–
1405. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.157.9.1399
Dewhirst, F. E, Tamer, M.A., Ericson, R.E., Lau, C. N., Levanos, V. A., Boches, S. K.,
et al. (2000). The diversity of periodontal spirochetes by 16S rRNA analysis.
Oral Microbiol. Immunol. 15, 196–
202. doi: 10.1034/j.1399-302x.2000.15
0308.x
Durk, M. R., Han, K., Chow, E. C. Y., Ahrens, R., Henderson, J. T., Fraser, P. E.,
et al. (2014). 1 alpha,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D-3 reduces cerebral amyloid-beta
accumulation and improves cognition in mouse models of Alzheimer’
s
disease.
J.
Neurosci.
34,
7091–
7101.
doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2711-
13.2014
Filardo, S., Di Pietro, M., Farcomeni, A., Schiavoni, G., and Sessa, R. (2015).
Chlamydia pneumoniae-mediated inflammation in atherosclerosis: a meta-
analysis. Mediators Inflamm. 2015:378658. doi: 10.1155/2015/378658
Galbussera, A., Tremolizzo, L., Isella, V., Gelosa, G., Vezzo, R., Vigorè
, L.,
et al. (2008). Lack of evidence for Borrelia burgdorferi seropositivity in
Alzheimer disease. Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Disord. 22:308. doi: 10.1097/WAD.
0b013e31816ba95d
Gerard, H. C., Fomicheva, E., Whittum-Hudson, J. A., and Hudson, A. P.
(2008). Apolipoprotein E4 enhances attachment of Chlamydophila (Chlamydia)
pneumoniae elementary bodies to host cells. Microb. Pathogen. 44, 279–
285.
doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2007.10.002
Gerard, H. C., Wildt, K. L., Whittum-Hudson, J. A., Lai, Z., Ager, J., and Hudson,
A. P. (2005). The load of Chlamydia pneumoniae in the Alzheimer’
s brain varies
with APOE genotype. Microb. Pathog. 39, 19–
26. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2005.
05.002
Ghidoni, R., Squitti, R., Siotto, M., and Benussi, L. (2018). Innovative Biomarkers
for Alzheimer’
s disease: focus on the hidden disease biomarkers. J. Alzheimers.
Dis. 2018:28. doi: 10.3233/JAD-170953
Gombart, A. F., Borregaard, N., and Koeffler, H. P. (2005). Human cathelicidin
antimicrobial peptide (CAMP) gene is a direct target of the vitamin D receptor
and is strongly up-regulated in myeloid cells by 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D-3.
FASEB J. 19, 1067–
1077. doi: 10.4172/2314-7326.1000200
Gutacker, M., Valsangiacomo, C., Balmelli, T., Bernasconi, M. V., Bouras, C.,
and Piffaretti, J. C. (1998). Arguments against the involvement of Borrelia
burgdorferi sensu lato in Alzheimer’
s disease. Res. Microbiol. 149, 31–
35.
doi: 10.3233/JAD-170058
Hammer, N. D., Wang, X., McGuffie, B. A., and Chapman, M. R. (2008). Amyloids:
friend or foe? J. Alzheimers Dis. 13, 407–
419.
Hanger, D. P., Lau, D. H., Phillips, E. C., Bondulich, M. K., Guo, T.,
Woodward, B. W., et al. (2014). Intracellular and extracellular roles for
tau in neurodegenerative disease. J. Alzheimers Dis. 40(Suppl. 1), S37–
S45.
doi: 10.3233/JAD-132054
Hardy, J., and Allsop, D. (1991). Amyloid deposition as the central event in
the aetiology of Alzheimer’
s disease. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 12, 383–
388.
doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-9-13
Ill-Raga, G., Palomer, E., Wozniak, M. A., Ramos-Fernández, E., Bosch-Morató,
M., Tajes, M., et al. (2011). Activation of PKR causes amyloid ß-peptide
accumulation via de-repression of BACE1 expression. PLoS One 6:e21456.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021456
Iribarren, P., Zhou, Y., Hu, J. Y., Le, Y. Y., and Wang, J. M. (2005). Role of formyl
peptide receptor-like 1 (FPRL1/FPR2) in mononuclear phagocyte responses
in Alzheimer disease. Immunol. Res. 31, 165–
176. doi: 10.1007/s0043000
50071
Itabashi, S., Arai, H., Matsui, T., Higuchi, S., and Sasaki, H. (1997). Herpes simplex
virus and risk of Alzheimer’
s disease. Lancet 349:1102. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2008-
13403
Itzhaki, R. F. (2016). Herpes and Alzheimer’
s disease: subversion in the central
nervous system and how it might be halted. J. Alzheimers Dis. 54, 1273–
1281.
doi: 10.2217/fvl.12.81
Itzhaki, R. F., Lin, W. R., Shang, D., Wilcock, G. K., Faragher, B., and Jamieson,
G. A. (1997). Herpes simplex virus type 1 in brain and risk of Alzheimer’
s
disease. Lancet 349, 241–
244. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.1991.tb00667.x
Itzhaki, R. F., and Wozniak, M. A. (2008). Herpes simplex virus type 1 in
Alzheimer’
s disease: the enemy within. J. Alzheimers Dis. 13, 393–
405. doi:
10.3233/JAD-170773
Jamieson, G. A., Maitland, N. J., Wilcock, G. K., Craske, J., and Itzhaki, R. F. (1991).
Latent herpes simplex virus type 1 in normal and Alzheimer’
s disease brains.
J. Med. Virol. 33, 224–
227. doi: 10.1515/bmc-2016-0029
Karran, E., and De Strooper, B. (2016). The amyloid cascade hypothesis: are we
poised for success or failure? J. Neurochem. 139(Suppl. 2), 237–
252. doi: 10.
1111/jnc.13632
Klapper, P. E., Cleator, G. M., and Longson, M. (1984). Mild forms of herpes
encephalitis. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 47, 1247–
1250. doi: 10.3233/JAD-
150652
Koelle, D. M., Magaret, A., Warren, T., Schellenberg, G. D., and Wald, A. (2010).
APOE genotype is associated with oral herpetic lesions but not genital or oral
herpes simplex virus shedding. Sex Transm. Infect 86, 202–
206. doi: 10.1136/sti.
2009.039735
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
14
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 362
 fgene-09-00362
September 6, 2018
Time: 19:32
# 15
Fülöp et al.
Role of Microbes in the Development of Alzheimer’s Disease
Kornhuber, H. H. (1996). Propionibacterium acnes in the cortex of patients with
Alzheimer’
s disease. Eur. Arch. Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 246, 108–
109. doi:
10.1007/s10522-014-9538-8
Kumar, D. K. V., Choi, S. H., Washicosky, K. J., Eimer, W. A., Tucker, S.,
Ghofrani, J., et al. (2016). Amyloid- peptide protects against microbial infection
in mouse and worm models of Alzheimers disease. Science Transl. Med. 8:ra72–
ra340. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaf1059
Kumar, D. K. V., and Moir, R. D. (2017). The emerging role of innate immunity
in Alzheimer’
s disease. Neuropsychopharmacology 42, 362–
363. doi: 10.1039/
b912533g
Le, Y. Y., Gong, W. H., Tiffany, H. L., Tumanov, A., Nedospasov, S., Shen, W. P.,
et al. (2001). Amyloid beta(42) activates a G-protein-coupled chemoattractant
receptor,
FPR-Like-1.
J.
Neurosci.
21:5.
doi:
10.1016/j.neuint.2007.
11.003
Le Page, A., Dupuis, G., Frost, E. H., Larbi, A., Pawelec, G., Witkowski, J. M., et al.
(2017). Role of the peripheral innate immune system in the development of
Alzheimer’
s disease. Exp. Gerontol. 2017:21. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2017
Lee, M., Barron, A. E., McGeer, E., and McGeer, P. L. (2015). Human antimicrobial
peptide LL-37 induces glial-mediated neuroinflammation. Biochem. Pharmacol.
94, 130–
141. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2015.02.003
Licastro, F., Raschi, E., Carbone, I., and Porcellini, E. (2015). Variants in antiviral
genes are risk factors for cognitive decline and dementia. J. Alzheimers Dis. 46,
655–
663. doi: 10.3233/JAD-142718
Lim, C., Hammond, C. J., Hingley, S. T., and Balin, B. J. (2014). Chlamydia
pneumoniae infection of monocytes in vitro stimulates innate and adaptive
immune responses relevant to those in Alzheimer’
s disease. J. Neuroinflamm.
11:217. doi: 10.1186/s12974-014-0217-0
Little, C. S., Bowe, A., Lin, R., Litsky, J., Fogel, R. M., Balin, B. J., et al. (2005).
Age alterations in extent and severity of experimental intranasal infection with
Chlamydophila pneumoniae in BALB/c mice. Infect. Immun. 73, 1723–
1734.
doi: 10.3233/JAD-170223
Little, C. S., Hammond, C. J., MacIntyre, A., Balin, B. J., and Appelt, D. M.
(2004). Chlamydia pneumoniae induces Alzheimer-like amyloid plaques in
brains of BALB/c mice. Neurobiol. Aging 25, 419–
429. doi: 10.1016/S0197-
4580(03)00127-1
Little, C. S., Joyce, T. A., Hammond, C. J., Matta, H., Cahn, D., Appelt, D. M., et al.
(2014). Detection of bacterial antigens and Alzheimer’
s disease-like pathology in
the central nervous system of BALB/c mice following intranasal infection with
a laboratory isolate of Chlamydia pneumoniae. Front. Aging Neurosci. 6:304.
doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2014.00304
MacDonald, A. B. (1988). Concurrent neocortical borreliosis and Alzheimer’
s
disease. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 539, 468–
470. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.157.9.1399
MacDonald, A. B., and Miranda, J. M. (1987). Concurrent neocortical borreliosis
and Alzheimer’
s disease. Hum. Pathol. 18:759761. doi: 10.1034/j.1399-302x.
2000.150308.x
MacIntyre, A., Abramov, R., Hammond, C. J., Hudson, A. P., Arking, E. J.,
Little, C. S., et al. (2003). Chlamydia pneumoniae infection promotes
the transmigration of monocytes through human brain endothelial cells.
J. Neurosci. Res. 71, 740–
750. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2711-13.2014
MacIntyre, A., Hammond, C. J., Little, C. S., Appelt, D. M., and Balin, B. J.
(2002). Chlamydia pneumoniae infection alters the junctional complex proteins
of human brain microvascular endothelial cells. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 217,
167–
172. doi: 10.1155/2015/378658
Mariani, M. M., Malm, T., Lamb, R., Jay, T. R., Neilson, L., Casali, B., et al. (2017).
Neuronally-directed effects of RXR activation in a mouse model of Alzheimer’
s
disease. Sci. Rep. 7:42270. doi: 10.1038/srep42270
Marques, A. R., Weir, S. C., Fahle, G. A., and Fischer, S. H. (2000). Lack of evidence
of borrelia involvement in Alzheimer’
s disease. J. Infect. Dis. 182, 1006–
1007.
doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2007.10.002
Mawuenyega, K. G., Sigurdson, W., Ovod, V., Munsell, L., Kasten, T., Morris, J. C.,
et al. (2010). Decreased clearance of CNS beta-amyloid in Alzheimer’
s disease.
Science 330, 1774–
1774. doi: 10.1126/science.1197623
McGeer, P. L., and McGeer, E. G. (2013). The amyloid cascade-inflammatory
hypothesis of Alzheimer disease: implications for therapy. Acta Neuropathol.
126, 479–
497. doi: 10.1007/s00401-013-1177-7
McKhann, G. M., Knopman, D. S., Chertkow, H., Hyman, B. T., Jack, C. R. Jr.,
Kawas, C. H., et al. (2011). The diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer’
s
disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’
s
Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’
s disease.
Alzheimers Dement 7, 263–
269. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2011.03.005
McManus, R. M., and Heneka, M. T. (2017). Role of neuroinflammation in
neurodegeneration: new insights. Alzheimer’
s Res. Ther. 9:14. doi: 10.1186/
s13195-017-0241-2
Meer-Scherrer, L., Chang Loa, C., Adelson, M. E., Mordechai, E., Lobrinus, J. A.,
Fallon, B. A., et al. (2006). Lyme disease associated with Alzheimer’
s disease.
Curr. Microbiol. 52, 330–
332.
Merritt, H. H., Adams, R. D., and Solomon, H. C. (1946). Neurosyphilis. London:
Oxford University Press. doi: 10.1097/00001756-199307000-00002
Miklossy, J. (1993). Alzheimer’
s disease –A spirochetosis? Neuroreport 4, 841–
848.
Miklossy, J. (1998). Chronic inflammation and amyloidogenesis in Alzheimer’
s
disease: putative role of bacterial peptidoglycan, a potent inflammatory and
amyloidogenic factor. Alzheimer’
s Rev. 3, 45–
51.
Miklossy, J. (2011a). Alzheimer’
s disease –A neurospirochetosis. Analysis of the
evidence following Koch’
s and Hill’
s criteria. J. Neuroinflamm. 8:90. doi: 10.
1186/1742-2094-8-90
Miklossy, J. (2011b). Emerging roles of pathogens in Alzheimer disease. Exp. Rev.
Mol. Med. 13:e30. doi: 10.1017/S1462399411002006
Miklossy, J. (2015). Historic evidence to support a causal relationship between
spirochetal infections and Alzheimer’
s disease. Front. Aging Neurosci. 7:46.
doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2015.00046
Miklossy, J. (2016). Bacterial amyloid and DNA are important constituents of senile
plaques: further evidence of the spirochetal and biofilm nature of senile plaques.
J. Alzheimers. Dis. 53, 1459–
1473. doi: 10.3233/JAD-160451
Miklossy, J., Darekar, P., Gern, L., Janzer, R. C., and Bosman, F. T. (1996). Bacterial
peptidoglycan in neuritic plaques in Alzheimer’
s disease. Alzheimer’
s Res. 2,
95–
100.
Miklossy, J., Gern, L., Darekar, P., Janzer, R. C., Van der, and Loos, H. (1995).
Senile plaques, neurofibrillary tangles and neuropil threads contain DNA?
J. Spirochetal Tick-borne Dis. (JSTD). 2, 1–
5.
Miklossy, J., Khalili, K., Gern, L., Ericson, R. L., Darekar, P., Bolle, L., et al. (2004).
Borrelia burgdorferi persists in the brain in chronic Lyme neuroborreliosis
and may be associated with Alzheimer disease. J. Alzheimer’
s Dis. 6, 1–
11.
doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2005.01.018
Miklossy, J., Kis, A., Radenovic, A., Miller, L., Forro, L., Martins, R., et al. (2006).
Beta-amyloid deposition and Alzheimer’
s type changes induced by Borrelia
spirochetes. Neurobiol. Aging 27, 228–
236. doi: 10.18632/aging.100921
Miklossy, J., and McGeer, P. L. (2016). Common mechanisms involved in
Alzheimer’
s disease and type 2 diabetes: a key role of chronic bacterial infection
and inflammation. Aging (Albany NY) 8, 575–
588. doi: 10.18632/aging.100921
Miklossy, J. (2017). Handbook of Infection and Alzheimer’
s Disease. Amsterdam:
IOS Press, 420. doi: 10.1002/ca.980080612
Miklossy, J. (2008) “
Biology and neuropathology of dementia in syphilis and Lyme
disease,”in Dementias, eds C. Duyckaerts and I. Litvan (London: Elsevier),
825–
844. doi: 10.1016/S0072-9752(07)01272-9
O’
Day, D. H., and Catalano, A. (2014). A lack of correlation between the incidence
of Lyme disease and deaths due to Alzheimer’
s disease. J. Alzheimers. Dis. 42,
115–
118. doi: 10.3233/JAD-140552
Paster, B. J., and Dewhirst, F. E. (2000). Phylogenetic foundation of spirochetes.
J. Mol. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2, 341–
344.
Peter, J. B., and Sevall, J. S. (2001). Review of 3200 serially received CSF samples
submitted for type-specific HSV detection by PCR in the reference laboratory
setting. Mol. Cell. Probes 15, 177–
182. doi: 10.1006/mcpr.2001.0356
Piacentini, R., Li Puma, D. D., Ripoli, C., Marcocci, M. E., De Chiara, G., Garaci, E.,
et al. (2015). Herpes simplex virus type-1 infection induces synaptic dysfunction
in cultured cortical neurons via GSK-3 activation and intraneuronal
amyloid-beta protein accumulation. Sci. Rep. 5:15444. doi: 10.1038/srep
15444
Pisa, D., Alonso, R., Fernández-Fernández, A. M., Rábano, A., and Carrasco, L.
(2017). Polymicrobial infections in brain tissue from Alzheimer’
s disease
patients. Sci. Rep. 7:5559. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-05903-y
Pisa, D., Alonso, R., Rábano, A., Horst, M. N., and Carrasco, L. (2016).
Fungal enolase, β-tubulin, and chitin are detected in brain tissue from
Alzheimer’
s disease patients. Front. Microbiol. 7:1772. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.
01772
Ramakrishna, C., Ferraioli, A., Calle, A., Nguyen, T. K., Openshaw, H., Lundberg,
P. S., et al. (2015). Establishment of HSV1 latency in immunodeficient mice
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
15
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 362
 fgene-09-00362
September 6, 2018
Time: 19:32
# 16
Fülöp et al.
Role of Microbes in the Development of Alzheimer’s Disease
facilitates efficient in vivo reactivation. PLoS Pathog. 11:e1004730. doi: 10.1371/
journal.ppat.1004730
Reiman, E. M., McKhann, G. M., Albert, M. S., Sperling, R. A., Petersen, R. C., and
Blacker, D. (2011). Alzheimer’
s disease: implications of the updated diagnostic
and research criteria. J. Clin. Psychiatry 72, 1190–
1196. doi: 10.4088/JCP.
10087co1c
Riviere, G. R., Riviere, K. H., and Smith, K. S. (2002). Molecular and immunological
evidence of oral Treponema in the human brain and their association with
Alzheimer’
s disease. Oral Microbiol. Immunol. 17, 113–
118. doi: 10.1046/j.0902-
0055.2001.00100.x
Riviere, G. R., Weisz, K. S., Adams, D. F., and Thomas, D. D. (1991). Pathogen-
related oral spirochetes from dental plaque are invasive. Infect. Immun. 59,
3377–
3380.
Robinson, S. R., and Bishop, G. M. (2002). Abeta as a bioflocculant: implications for
the amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’
s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 23, 1051–
1072.
doi: 10.1016/S0197-4580(01)00342-6
Rogers, J., Cooper, N. R., Webster, S., Schultz, J., McGeer, P. L., Styren, S. D., et al.
(1992). Complement activation by beta-amyloid in Alzheimer disease. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 89, 10016–
10020. doi: 10.1073/pnas.89.21.10016
Saldanha, J., Sutton, R. N., Gannicliffe, A., Farragher, B., and Itzhaki, R. F.
(1986). Detection of HSV1 DNA by in situ hybridisation in human brain after
immunosuppression. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 49, 613–
619. doi: 10.1136/
jnnp.49.6.613
Sapi, E., Bastian, S. L., Mpoy, C. M., Scott, S., Rattelle, A., Pabbati, N., et al. (2012).
Characterization of biofilm formation by Borrelia burgdorferi in vitro. PLoS One
7:e48277. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048277
Satpute-Krishnan, P., DeGiorgis, J. A., and Bearer, E. L. (2003). Fast anterograde
transport of herpes simplex virus: role for the amyloid precursor protein
of Alzheimer’
s disease. Aging Cell 2, 305–
318. doi: 10.1046/j.1474-9728.2003.
00069.x
Soscia, S. J., Kirby, J. E., Washicosky, K. J., Tucker, S. M., Ingelsson, M., Hyman, B.,
et al. (2010). The Alzheimer’
s disease-associated amyloid beta-protein is an
antimicrobial peptide. PLoS One 5:e9505. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009505
Steiner, G. (1940). Morphologic appearances of spirochetal reproduction in tissues.
Arch. Pathol. 5, 189–
199.
Steinmann, J., Halldorsson, S., Agerberth, B., and Gudmundsson, G. H. (2009).
Phenylbutyrate induces antimicrobial peptide expression. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 53, 5127–
5133. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00818-09
Sun, X., Chen, W. D., and Wang, Y. D. (2015). β-Amyloid: the key peptide in
the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’
s disease. Front. Pharmacol. 6:221. doi: 10.3389/
fphar.2015.00221
Sweeney, M. D., Sagare, A. P., and Zlokovic, B. V. (2018). Blood-brain barrier
breakdown in Alzheimer disease and other neurodegenerative disorders. Nat.
Rev. Neurol. 14, 133–
150. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2017.188
White, M. R., Kandel, R., Tripathi, S., Condon, D., Qi, L., Taubenberger, J.,
et al. (2014). Alzheimer’
s associated β-amyloid protein inhibits influenza A
virus and modulates viral interactions with phagocytes. PLoS One 9:e101364.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101364
Wozniak, M. A., Frost, A. L., Preston, C. M., and Itzhaki, R. F. (2011). Antivirals
reduce the formation of key Alzheimer’
s disease molecules in cell cultures
acutely infected with herpes simplex virus type 1. PLoS One 6:e25152.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025152
Wozniak, M. A., and Itzhaki, R. F. (2010). Antiviral agents in Alzheimer’
s disease:
hope for the future? Ther. Adv. Neurol. Disord. 3, 141–
152. doi: 10.1177/
1756285610370069
Wozniak, M. A., Itzhaki, R. F., Shipley, S. J., and Dobson, C. B. (2007). Herpes
simplex virus infection causes cellular beta-amyloid accumulation and secretase
upregulation. Neurosci. Lett. 429, 95–
100. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2007.09.077
Wozniak, M. A., Mee, A. P., and Itzhaki, R. F. (2009). Herpes simplex virus type
1 DNA is located within Alzheimer’
s disease amyloid plaques. J. Pathol. 217,
131–
138. doi: 10.1002/path.2449
Wozniak, M. A., Shipley, S. J., Combrinck, M., Wilcock, G. K., and Itzhaki, R. F.
(2005). Productive herpes simplex virus in brain of elderly normal subjects
and Alzheimer’
s disease patients. J. Med. Virol. 75, 300–
306. doi: 10.1002/jmv.
20271
Yang, D., Chen, Q., Schmidt, A. P., Anderson, G. M., Wang, J. M., Wooters, J., et al.
(2000). LL-37, the neutrophil granule- and epithelial cell-derived cathelicidin,
utilizes formyl peptide receptor-like 1 (FPRL1) as a receptor to chemoattract
human peripheral blood neutrophils, monocytes, and T cells. J. Exp. Med. 192,
1069–
1074. doi: 10.1084/jem.192.7.1069
Yao, H.-W., Ling, P., Tung, Y.-Y., Hsu, S.-M., and Chen, S.-H. (2014). In vivo
reactivation of latent herpes simplex virus 1 in mice can occur in the brain
before occurring in the trigeminal ganglion. J. Virol. 88, 11264–
11270. doi:
10.1128/JVI.01616-14
Yuk, J. M., Shin, D. M., Lee, H. M., Yang, C. S., Jin, H. S., Kim, K. K., et al.
(2009). Vitamin D3 induces autophagy in human monocytes/macrophages
via cathelicidin. Cell Host Microbe 6, 231–
243. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2009.
08.004
Zambrano, A., Solis, L., Salvadores, N., Cortés, M., Lerchundi, R., and Otth, C.
(2008). Neuronal cytoskeletal dynamic modification and neurodegeneration
induced by infection with herpes simplex virus type 1. J. Alzheimers. Dis. 14,
259–
269. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2008-14301
Conflict of Interest Statement: TF is a consultant for Eisai.
The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2018 Fülöp, Itzhaki, Balin, Miklossy and Barron. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License
(CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided
the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these
terms.
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
16
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 362
