 Article
Neuro-immune Interactions Drive Tissue
Programming in Intestinal Macrophages
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
d Gut lamina propria and muscularis macrophages show
unique intra-tissue adaptation
d Muscularis macrophages express a tissue-protective gene
profile
d Gut extrinsic sympathetic innervation is activated upon
distal bacterial infection
d b2 adrenergic receptor signaling mediates MM polarization
upon bacterial infection
Authors
Ilana Gabanyi, Paul A. Muller,
Linda Feighery, Thiago Y. Oliveira,
Frederico A. Costa-Pinto, Daniel Mucida
Correspondence
mucida@rockefeller.edu
In Brief
Tissue macrophages occupying different
regions of the gut exhibit a high degree of
specialization and are influenced by a
high density of neuronal processes in the
muscularis layer, where norepinephrine
released from extrinsic sympathetic
innervation induces rapid tissue-
protective responses to distal
perturbations.
Accession Numbers
GSE74131
Gabanyi et al., 2016, Cell 164, 378–391
January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.12.023
 Article
Neuro-immune Interactions Drive Tissue
Programming in Intestinal Macrophages
Ilana Gabanyi,1,3,4 Paul A. Muller,1,4 Linda Feighery,1 Thiago Y. Oliveira,2 Frederico A. Costa-Pinto,1,3 and Daniel Mucida1,*
1Laboratory of Mucosal Immunology
2Laboratory of Molecular Immunology
The Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA
3Department of Pathology, School of Veterinary Medicine, Avenue Prof. Orlando Marques de Paiva 87, Cidade Universita
´ ria,
University of Sa
˜ o Paulo, 05508 270 Sa
˜ o Paulo, Brazil
4Co-first author
*Correspondence: mucida@rockefeller.edu
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.12.023
SUMMARY
Proper adaptation to environmental perturbations
is essential for tissue homeostasis. In the intestine,
diverse environmental cues can be sensed by im-
mune cells, which must balance resistance to micro-
organisms with tolerance, avoiding excess tissue
damage. By applying imaging and transcriptional
profiling tools, we interrogated how distinct microen-
vironments in the gut regulate resident macrophages.
We discovered that macrophages exhibit a high
degree of gene-expression specialization dependent
on their proximity to the gut lumen. Lamina propria
macrophages (LpMs) preferentially expressed a
pro-inflammatory phenotype when compared to
muscularis macrophages (MMs), which displayed a
tissue-protective phenotype. Upon luminal bacterial
infection, MMs further enhanced tissue-protective
programs, and this was attributed to swift activation
of extrinsic sympathetic neurons innervating the gut
muscularis and norepinephrine signaling to b2 adren-
ergic receptors on MMs. Our results reveal unique
intra-tissue macrophage specialization and identify
neuro-immune communication between enteric neu-
rons and macrophages that induces rapid tissue-pro-
tective responses to distal perturbations.
INTRODUCTION
Intestinal tissue is continuously exposed to numerous microbe-
and food-derived antigens. In order to deal with either harmless
or potentially pathogenic stimulation, efficient protective re-
sponses (resistance) need to be coupled with tissue tolerance,
i.e., the ability to limit disease severity induced by a given path-
ogen burden or inflammatory response (Ra
˚ berg et al., 2007).
Accordingly, while failure in innate or adaptive immunity leads
to recurrent infections, deficient tolerance, or tissue repair,
mechanisms result in immunopathology (Medzhitov et al.,
2012; Soares et al., 2014). At the mucosal surfaces, microbial
sensing mechanisms regulate tissue repair at steady state, but
in the context of infection, resistance mechanisms may lead
to excessive inflammation and permanent tissue damage.
Although the role of environmental cues in the adaptation of im-
mune cells to these conditions has been increasingly appreci-
ated, the nature of these signals and the mechanisms by which
they influence immune cells are still unclear (Ayres et al., 2012;
Rakoff-Nahoum et al., 2004).
Tissue-resident macrophages represent a highly heteroge-
neous cell population able to sense and quickly adapt to environ-
mental cues (Hashimoto et al., 2013; Lavin et al., 2014; Nguyen
et al., 2011; Okabe and Medzhitov, 2014; Wang et al., 2012,
2015). A vast network of macrophages populates intestinal tis-
sue, playing either protective or tolerogenic roles, depending
on the context (Bogunovic et al., 2009; Denning et al., 2007; Par-
khurst et al., 2013; Zigmond et al., 2014). Mucosal, or lamina
propria macrophages (LpMs), are located underneath the
epithelial layer and are in close proximity to the gut lumen (Far-
ache et al., 2013; Mazzini et al., 2014; Zigmond et al., 2014).
Muscularis macrophages (MMs), on the other hand, are located
underneath the submucosal region between circular and longitu-
dinal muscle layers, comparatively distant from luminal stimula-
tion (Bogunovic et al., 2009). Early studies suggested that LpMs
play an important role by sampling luminal bacteria and initiating
adaptive immune responses to clear pathogenic bacteria (Niess
et al., 2005). Additionally, LpMs are thought to initiate a cascade
of events involved in tolerance to dietary antigens (Hadis et al.,
2011; Mazzini et al., 2014). In contrast, a recent study indicated
that MMs regulate the activity of enteric neurons and peristalsis,
although this macrophage population remains largely uncharac-
terized (Muller et al., 2014). It also remains to be defined how
distinct programs in a specific cell lineage can arise within
different compartments of the same tissue.
Using live multi-photon microscopy and tissue-clearing imag-
ing techniques, we observed distinct cell dynamics and morpho-
logical features between LpMs and MMs. Unique intra-tissue
specialization of these two macrophage populations was
confirmed by transcriptional profiling tools, which showed that
LpMs preferentially expressed a pro-inflammatory phenotype
while MMs displayed a tissue-protective gene-expression profile
at steady state. Following luminal infection, gut macrophages
exhibited distinct responses according to their location, further
378
Cell 164, 378–391, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
 reinforcing their steady state tissue signature. This divergent
transcriptional profile was in part dependent on norepinephrine
signaling via b2 adrenergic receptors (b2ARs), which are highly
expressed on MMs. Correspondingly, using a gene reporter
and transcriptional profiling we observed that luminal infection
activates tyrosine hydroxylase-expressing neurons in the sym-
pathetic ganglia innervating the intestine. This work identifies a
mechanism by which interaction between intestinal neurons
and macrophages can mediate intra-tissue adaptation in
response to distal environmental perturbations, forming a
cellular network possibly involved in maintaining the balance
between resistance and tolerance.
RESULTS
Distinct Morphological Features and Cell Dynamics
Inherent to Lamina Propria and Muscularis
Macrophages
To obtain a deep-tissue, 3D view of gut-resident macrophage
distribution within the intact intestinal tissue, we performed
whole-mount immunolabeling, utilizing a tool referred to as im-
munolabeling-enabled three-dimensional imaging of solvent-
cleared organs (iDISCO) (Renier et al., 2014). Small intestine
sections from Cx3cr1GFP/+ macrophage reporter mice (Niess
et al., 2005) were stained with anti-GFP antibodies and visual-
ized using light-sheet microscopy. Resulting images revealed
dense macrophage networks throughout the tissue layers and
particularly concentrated in the lamina propria (LpMs) and mus-
cularis (MMs) regions, suggesting compartmentalization of gut
macrophage populations (Figure 1A; Movie S1A). To gain insight
into cell dynamics in these two distinct layers of the intestinal
wall of live animals, we utilized intravital multi-photon micro-
scopy (IVM) (Farache et al., 2013). We analyzed ItgaxeYFP
(CD11ceYFP) and Cx3cr1GFP/+ reporter mice side-by-side, which
allow the visualization of intestinal antigen-presenting cells
(APCs) and macrophage populations, respectively (Farache
et al., 2013; Niess et al., 2005). Comparison between macro-
phages (CD11c+ and/or CX3CR1+) residing in the lamina propria
and muscularis compartments revealed distinct morphologies
inherent to these populations, including varied displacement
and dendrite extension patterns. LpMs exhibited slow displace-
ment, while MMs were primarily static, and MMs possessed
greater dendrite ramifications than LpMs but reduced dendritic
extension movements (Figures 1B and 1C; Movies S1B and
S1C). Among the MM population, we observed at least two
morphologically distinct sub-populations: bipolar and stellate
cells (Phillips and Powley, 2012) (Figure 1D; Movies S1D and
S1E). In general, bipolar cells produced small pseudopodia
along the length of the cell body, �0.2–0.8 mm in size. Stellate
cells also exhibited these pseudopodia, but they also displayed
constant extensions and retractions of their dendritiform pro-
cesses. These observations suggest that macrophages within
distinct compartments of the gut display different morphologies
and cellular dynamics.
Since, in addition to macrophages, the gut wall also contains
several DC subpopulations (Bogunovic et al., 2009; Schreiber
et al., 2013), we complemented this cell surface marker-
based lineage classification with complementary ontogeny stra-
tegies. We targeted the macrophage/monocyte lineage using
Lyz2Cre x Csf1rlsl-DTR (Lyz2csf1r-DTR) and the pre-DC-derived line-
age using Zbtb46DTR (zDCDTR) mice (Schreiber et al., 2013).
Administration of diphtheria toxin (DT) to Lyz2Csf1r-DTR mice leads
to broad, rapid depletion of monocytes, monocyte- and yolk
sac-derived tissue macrophages and inflammatory DCs that
lasts for at least 36 hr. Complementarily, DT-injected zDCDTR
mice show rapid and virtually complete loss of classical DCs
(cDCs) (Schreiber et al., 2013). We generated bone marrow chi-
meras (BMC) from Cx3cr1GFP/+ reporter mice crossed to
Lyz2csf1r-DTR, zDCDTR or wild-type (WT) controls to allow
CX3CR1+ APCs not targeted by DT to be visualized by the
expression of GFP. At 12 hr post-final DT injection, we observed
a drastic reduction in GFP+ cells in the muscularis and lamina
propria of Lyz2csf1r-DTR when compared to WT controls or
zDCDTR mice, indicating that the great majority of CX3CR1+ cells
in these layers belongs to the monocyte/macrophage lineage
(Figure 1E). In contrast, DT administration
to CD11ceYF-
PLyz2csf1r-DTR BMC resulted in a drastic reduction in YFP+ cells
in the muscularis, but only mild reduction in YFP+ in the lamina
propria (Figure S1). These data indicate that CX3CR1-based
strategies faithfully label macrophages throughout the gut tissue,
while CD11c also labels non-monocyte/macrophages in the
lamina propria and can therefore only be used to visualize MMs.
By combining methods to visualize deep-tissue structures
with intersectional genetics and live imaging, these experiments
establish tissue segregation, distinct morphology, and cell dy-
namics of macrophages residing within distinct microenviron-
ments in the intestinal tissue.
Intra-tissue Specialization of Lamina Propria and
Muscularis Macrophages
To address whether the morphological and cell dynamics
characteristics of gut macrophages correspond to divergent
tissue-specific adaptation, we analyzed the transcriptomes of
LpMs and MMs. RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis of sorted
(live, CD45+Lineage–MHCII+CD11b+CD11c+CD103–) cells at
steady state revealed significant differences between LpM
and MM cells in genes related to immune and metabolic pro-
cesses (Figures 2A, 2E, and S2; Table S1). MM preferentially
expressed tissue-protective and wound healing genes, such
as Retnla (encoding Fizz1), Mrc1, Cd163, and Il10 and
increased levels of the co-stimulatory molecule CD86 when
compared to macrophages isolated from the lamina propria
(Figures 2A–2C and 2E), and overall resemble alternatively
activated
(M2)
macrophages
(Van
Dyken
and
Locksley,
2013). Analysis of the ImmGen database (Gautier et al.,
2012), as well as flow cytometry and qPCR further confirmed
this trend, also indicating that LpMs preferentially expressed
pro-inflammatory, or M1, genes with increased oxidative burst
and increased CD80 expression when compared to MMs (Fig-
ures 2B and 2C).
The above data demonstrate an intra-tissue specialization
among intestinal macrophages with potential for modified re-
sponses in specific microenvironments. To determine whether
the basal differences between intestinal macrophages are main-
tained during responses to a pathogen, we sorted LpMs and
MMs 2 hr post-intra-gastric exposure to mutant strains of
Cell 164, 378–391, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
379
 Salmonella typhimurium, Spib, and invA, which exhibit impaired
proliferation or invasiveness, respectively, due to mutations in
the type-III secretion system (Tsolis et al., 1999). We chose to
study non-pathogenic or non-invasive bacteria strains since
WT Salmonella Typhimurium quickly invades and damages the
intestinal epithelium, hindering our objective to compare macro-
phages located in different regions of intact intestinal tissue. A
2 hr time-point was chosen to represent the earliest detection
point for immediate early gene (IEG) responses in macrophages
(Ghisletti et al., 2010). Following gavage with the Spib mutant,
A
D
B
C
E
Figure 1. MMs Differ from LpMs in Morphology and Cell Dynamics
(A) Whole-mount imaging (iDISCO) of gut macrophages in the duodenum section isolated from Cx3cr1GFP/+ reporter mouse and stained with anti-GFP. Left: still
image from a 3D reconstruction (see Movie S1A). Right: Imaris-generated orthogonal slice. Image is representative of two similar experiments with sections
obtained from duodenum, jejunum, and ileum.
(B) Images from IVM of the ileum muscularis (left) and lamina propria (right) of live CD11ceYFP (upper panels) and Cx3cr1GFP/+ (lower panels) mice. Insets depict
different morphological features of APCs in each region (see also Movies S1B and S1C). Images are representative of at least five similar experiments.
(C) Images from IVM of the ileum muscularis (upper panels) and lamina propria (lower panels) of live Cx3cr1GFP/+ mice. White arrows indicate morphologic
changes over 15–20 min. Images are representative of at least five similar experiments.
(D) Images from IVM from the ileum muscularis isolated from CD11ceYFP mice depicting different morphological features of MMs: bipolar cell (left) and stellate cell
(right) (see also Movies S1D and S1E). Images are representative of at least five similar experiments.
(E) Multi-photon microscopy images of freshly isolated ileum lamina propria (left column) and muscularis (right column) of Cx3cr1GFP/+ (middle row), zDCDTR
Cx3cr1GFP/+ (upper row), and Lyz2csf1r-DTRCx3cr1GFP/+ (lower row) mice 12 hr post-final DT administration. Images are representative of three similar experiments.
See also Figure S1 and Movie S1.
380
Cell 164, 378–391, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
 we observed significant further upregulation in some M2-associ-
ated genes in MMs, particularly Arg1 and Chi3I3 (encoding
YM1). While Cd163 and Hmox1 were downregulated, they
were still expressed at higher or similar levels than in LpMs,
respectively (Figures 2D–2F; Table S1). Of note, whereas we
observed variability in the expression of some IEG’s, particularly
Arg1, among different animals, MMs from non-infected mice
consistently did not express these genes (Figure 2F). In contrast,
very few changes in gene expression were observed in LpMs
upon intragastric exposure to Spib, and these changes were
mostly restricted to M1-associated genes, including Nos2 and
Il6 (Figures 2E and 2G).
To corroborate observed changes in MM gene expression
profile using an independent approach, we conducted cell
type-specific ribosomal profiling. This approach eliminates the
need for cell sorting to purify sub-populations, thus reducing
processing time and variability. We chose to specifically focus
on actively translated mRNAs by interbreeding mice expressing
Cre under the Lyz2 promoter with mice carrying a targeted
knockin into the ribosomal protein L22 gene (RiboTag). Cre-
mediated activation in this system creates an HA-tagged
ribosomal protein, enabling affinity-tagged purification and
identification of actively translated ribosome-bound mRNAs in
macrophages from intact tissues (Sanz et al., 2009). Analysis
of intestinal muscularis from Lyz2RiboTag mice confirmed high
levels of active translation of M2-related genes in steady state
in MMs, particularly Retnla. Importantly, intragastric inoculation
of mice with Spib rapidly led to upregulation of Arg1 as well as
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Figure 2. MMs and LpMs Exhibit Distinct Gene Expression Signatures
(A–G) MMs and LpMs were isolated from the small intestine muscularis externa and mucosal layers, respectively, of WT mice and sorted as live (Aqua–)
CD45+Lin–MHCII+F4/80+CD11b+ CD11c+CD103–. (A) Annotated gene ontology (GO) biological processes were assigned to genes differentially expressed by
MMs when compared to LpMs, determined by RNA-seq. n = 2 per condition. (B) Flow cytometry analysis of CD80 and CD86 expression and oxidative burst by
MMs and LpMs. Data are representative of at least two independent experiments, n = 4. (C) Expression of mRNA for Il1b, Il12b, Retnla, and Il10 by MMs and LpMs
determined by qPCR, presented relative to housekeeping gene Rpl32 expression. n = 6–12, pooled data. (D) Annotated GO biological processes were assigned
to genes differentially expressed by MMs 2 hr post-intragastric exposure to Spib when compared to MMs isolated from naive mice, determined by RNA-seq. n = 2
per condition. (E) Heat map of representative M1- and M2-related gene were assigned to genes differentially expressed by MMs and LpMs 2 hr post-intragastric
exposure to Spib, determined by RNA-seq. n = 2 per condition. (F and G) Expression of mRNA for various genes by (F) MMs and (G) LpMs 2 hr post-intragastric
exposure to Spib or invA Salmonella Typhimurium mutant strains determined by qPCR, presented relative to Rpl32 expression. (F and G) n = 4–13; pooled data.
(H) Expression of polysome-associated mRNA from small intestine muscularis of Lyz2RiboTag mice 2 hr post-intragastric exposure to Spib determined by qPCR,
presented relative to Gapdh. n = 3 per condition. Data were analyzed by unpaired t test and are shown as average ± SD; *p % 0.05.
See also Figure S2 and Table S1, worksheets a–c.
Cell 164, 378–391, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
381
 RetnIa (Figure 2H). These results suggest that unique microen-
vironmental cues influence the specialization of gut-resident
macrophages and that this specialization is reinforced upon
infection.
b2AR-Positive Muscularis Macrophages Reside in Close
Proximity to Firing Neurons
We next asked whether specific environmental signals, particu-
larly soluble factors, were responsible for the distinct gene
expression profiles and responses to luminal insults by LpM
and MM populations. Gene expression profiling of LpM and
MM cells indicated that pro- or anti-inflammatory cytokine-,
TLR-, or FcR-mediated signaling did not segregate these popu-
lations, especially considering the canonical M1 (IFN-gR, IFN-
aR, IL-1R, TLR4) or M2 (FcgRIIb, IL-4Ra, IL-10Ra, ST2 [encoded
by Il1rl1]) polarizing receptors (Figure S2B) (Gautier et al., 2012).
Given their distinct locations near the lumen (LpM) or near
neuronal networks (MM) (Kinoshita et al., 2007; Muller et al.,
2014; Phillips and Powley, 2012), we next asked whether these
macrophage populations differentially expressed neurotrans-
mitter or neuropeptide receptors. MMs expressed high levels
of Adrb2 (encoding b2 adrenergic receptors [AR]), and this was
also among the most significantly differentially-expressed genes
between MM and LpM populations in the ImmGen database
(Figure 3A) (Gautier et al., 2012). We confirmed these results
by performing qPCR on sorted cells isolated from WT mice
and on HA-bound polysomes of intestinal muscularis tissue iso-
lated from Lyz2RiboTag mice (Figures 3B and 3C). Furthermore,
flow-cytometric analysis of LpMs and MMs isolated from the
small intestine of WT mice revealed high levels of membrane
b2AR expression in MMs and lower, albeit detectable, expres-
sion of b2ARs by LpMs (Figure 3D).
The near immediate gene-expression response of MMs to
distal luminal stimuli, along with their selective expression of
neurotransmitter receptors, suggested that their specific loca-
tion in close proximity to neuronal networks could be influencing
their activity. We therefore chose to characterize this neuron-
rich microenvironment and how it interacts with gut macro-
phages. To that end, we developed multiple genetic labeling
tools, allowing for concomitant and dynamic visualization
of these cell types. To gain insight into neuron-macrophage
interactions in live animals, we first generated a more spe-
cific enteric neuronal-associated reporter by interbreeding
Rosa26lsl-tdTomato with Hand2Cre (Hand2Tomato) mice (Hender-
shot et al., 2007). These mice express Cre recombinase under
the promoter of Hand2, a helix-loop-helix transcription factor
with an established role in development of the enteric-associ-
ated neurons (EAN) (Barron et al., 2011). Cre-mediated removal
of the stop cassette generated bright red fluorescence that al-
lowed the visualization and tracking of Hand2-expressing cells,
mostly restricted to EAN (Figure 4A). These mice were crossed
with Cx3cr1GFP/+ reporter mice for tracking intestinal macro-
phages, and the resulting offspring were used for concomitant
EAN-macrophage visualization. We observed that most of the
CX3CR1+ cells in the muscular region were in close proximity
to neuronal cell bodies or processes of the myenteric ganglia
(Figure 4B; Movie S2A). We distinguished four layers of muscu-
laris macrophages: serosal/longitudinal, myenteric plexus, cir-
cular muscle, and deep muscular plexus (Figures 4C and 4D).
Serosal macrophages do not appear to be associated with
enteric neurons and tend to be larger in size when compared
to the other layers (Figure 4D). Myenteric plexus MMs are in
close proximity to neuronal cell bodies and some nerve fibers,
while MMs within the circular muscle and deep muscular plexus
have their cell bodies running in parallel to the nerve fibers
(Figure 4D).
To complement our cell dynamics analysis, we assessed
neuronal activation in areas where MMs were co-localized
with EAN utilizing a mouse strain containing a genetically-
encoded,
Cre-dependent
calcium
indicator
(GCaMP3)
(Zariwala et al., 2012). Analysis of Hand2Cre x Rosa26lsl-GCaMP3
(Hand2GCaMP3) x CD11ceYFP mice revealed neuronal activity in
very close proximity to MMs in the myenteric plexus (Figure 4E;
Movie S2B). Taken together, these data indicate that MMs
that express b2AR reside in close proximity to active neurons
in the intestine.
A
B
C
D
Figure 3. MMs Preferentially Express b2ARs
(A) Heat map of genes for neurotransmitter receptors expressed by sorted small intestine MMs and LpMs isolated from naive WT mice under steady state
conditions, determined by RNA-seq. n = 2 per condition.
(B) Expression of mRNA for Adrb2 by sorted small intestine MMs and LpMs isolated from naive WT mice, determined by qPCR, presented relative to Rpl32
expression. Data are representative of two independent experiments, n = 3.
(C) Expression of polysome-associated mRNA from small intestine muscularis of Lyz2RiboTag mice, determined by qPCR, presented relative to Gapdh expression.
Input, n = 3, bound, n = 4.
(D) Representative flow cytometry histogram for b2AR expression by small intestine MMs, LpMs, and peripheral T cells isolated from naive WT mice. Histograms
are representative of two independent experiments, n = 3. Data were analyzed by unpaired t test and are shown as average ± SD; *p % 0.05.
See also Figure S2.
382
Cell 164, 378–391, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
 Rapid Activation of Catecholaminergic Neurons Occurs
upon Luminal Infection
We next sought to characterize the specific neurochemical
pathway involved in the activation of b2AR+ MMs by defining
the source of norepinephrine (NE) in the gut muscularis. Although
neurons are the most studied sources for catecholamines,
recent studies have shown that myeloid cells, including macro-
phages, can also produce these neurotransmitters. Specifically,
alternatively-activated macrophages involved in the regulation of
thermogenesis were shown to express tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)
and produce NE (Nguyen et al., 2011). To better characterize
possible neuronal and non-neuronal sources for NE in the gut,
we first interbred Rosa26lsl-tdTomato with ThCre mice (ThTomato)
as a fate-mapping strategy to visualize cells that express TH at
A
B
C
D
E
Myenteric Plexus
Villi
Sumucosal Plexus
Serosal/Longitudinal Muscle
Deep Muscular Plexus
Myenteric Plexus
Muscularis
Figure 4. MMs Are Closely Associated with Active Neurons
(A) Confocal images from the myenteric plexus (upper panels), villi (middle panels) and submucosal plexus (lower panels) isolated from naive Hand2Cre
Rosa26lsl-tdTomato (Hand2Tomato) mice and stained using anti-ELAVL4 (HuC/D) and anti-TUJ1 (bIII tubulin) antibodies. Images are representative of 2 similar
experiments with sections obtained from duodenum, jejunum, and ileum.
(B) Image from IVM of the ileum muscularis of live Hand2TomatoCx3cr1GFP/+ mice (see Movie S2A). Image is representative of at least ten similar experiments.
(C and D) Confocal images from the ileum isolated from naive WT mice stained using anti-TUJ1 (bIII tubulin) and anti-MHCII antibodies. (C, upper panel)
Schematic of layers of different small intestine muscularis. (C, lower panel) Four layers of muscularis orthogonal slices are depicted according to the color
scheme. (D) Images depict macrophages occupying each of the four layers: serosal/longitudinal muscle, myenteric plexus, circular muscle, and deep muscular
plexus. Images are representative of at least three independent experiments.
(E) Images from IVM of the ileum muscularis of live Hand2GCaMP3CD11ceYFP mice over 3 min. White arrows indicate neurons labeled with GCaMP3, and colored
regions of interest (ROI) highlight neural activity (see also Movie S2B). Corresponding colored traces plot changes in fluorescence (DF) of ROI per time frame (in
seconds), with an increase in fluorescence indicative of Ca2+ influx and depolarization (right). Images are representative of at least three independent
experiments.
See also Movie S2.
Cell 164, 378–391, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
383
 any point during development. Immunofluorescence micro-
scopy analysis of ThTomato mice suggested that neurons, not
myeloid cells, were the main source of NE within intestinal tissue,
as revealed by extensive Tomato co-localization with the pan-
neuronal marker ELAVL4 in the muscularis and absence of To-
mato expression by myeloid cells (Figure 5A), data confirmed
by flow cytometric analysis (data not shown). To visualize cells
actively expressing TH, we also performed ex vivo staining for
TH and additional neuronal or myeloid markers. Again, TH stain-
ing was restricted to the neuronal compartment, particularly the
fibers near MMs (Figure 5B). To visualize the catecholaminergic
innervation throughout the intestinal tissue and how it permeates
gut macrophages, we performed iDISCO in small intestinal sec-
tions from Cx3cr1GFP/+ reporter mice, co-stained with anti-GFP
and anti-TH antibodies. Light-sheet microscopy analysis re-
vealed intense TH+ innervation in the gut muscularis, but sparse
labeling in the lamina propria (Figures 5C and 5D; Movies S3A
and S3B). We also observed TH+ processes extending from
the muscularis region (Figures 5C and 5E; Movie S3C), suggest-
ing an extrinsic nature for this innervation.
After defining catecholaminergic innervation as the probable
source of NE in the MM microenvironment, we next characterized
the intrinsic (cell bodies that lie within the intestinal tissue) versus
extrinsic (cell bodies that lie outside of the intestinal tissue) nature
oftheseneuronalprocesses(Furnessetal.,1999).Inordertoiden-
tify and visualize the sympathetic innervation of the intestine,
we developed general fate-mapping strategies by crossing
Rosa26lsl-tdTomato with Snap25Cre (pan-neuronal) mice (Harris
et al., 2014) or with Wnt1Cre (neural crest-derived) (Danielian
et al., 1998) mice, respectively, which revealed the superior
mesenteric-celiac ganglia (SMG-CG) (Figure 5F and data not
shown). Immunolabeling of the SMG-CG showed a dense
network of ELAVL4 and TH+ neurons extending processes toward
the gut (Figures 5G and 5H; Movie S3D). Consistent with this,
staining for dopamine b-hydroxylase (DBH), which converts
dopamine
into
norepinephrine,
revealed
punctate
labeling
restricted to ganglia and nerve fibers in the myenteric and submu-
cosal plexuses, while extrinsic sympathetic neurons displayed
signal in their cytoplasm (Figure S3). This observation indicates
that at least part of the TH staining observed in the muscularis
wasofanextrinsicnature,aspreviouslysuggested(Liet al.,2010).
To address whether intrinsic innervation also contributed to
the catecholaminergic response in the muscle, we generated a
broad neuronal RiboTag strain by crossing Rpl22lsl-HA with
Snap25Cre (Snap25RiboTag) mice. Analysis of HA-bound fractions
from the muscularis and the SMG-CG revealed high expression
of both Th and Dbh by SMG-CG but a lack of expression in the
myenteric plexus (Figure 6A). We therefore concluded that a
majority of the NE release in the gut muscularis microenviron-
ment is derived from extrinsic sympathetic innervation.
One of the consequences of NE in the muscularis region is the
relaxation of intestinal smooth muscle (Pullinger et al., 2010).
Consistent with this effect, we observed a significant impairment
of gastrointestinal motility following oral gavage with Salmonella
Typhimurium mutant Spib (Figure 6B). Additionally, quantifica-
tion of NE in the cecal contents also indicated increased NE
release in the intestinal tissue upon Spib infection (Figure S4).
Finally, to confirm catecholaminergic neuronal activation after
luminal infection, we measured c-Fos activation using FosGFP re-
porter mice. Oral administration of Spib resulted in pronounced
activation of SMG-CG ganglia neurons and undetectable (or
non-neuronal) c-Fos expression in the intestinal muscularis (Fig-
ures 6C, 6D, and S4). Collectively, these data suggest that
enteric infections activate gut extrinsic sympathetic innervation
resulting in NE release within the muscular region and signaling
through b2ARs in MMs.
b2AR-Mediates Alternative Activation of Intestinal
Macrophages
To investigate whether interaction with neurons is sufficient to
directly modulate gene expression in macrophages, we first
developed an in vitro co-culture system using neurosphere-
derived primary enteric-associated neurons and either perito-
neal macrophages or a macrophage cell line (RAW 264). Co-cul-
ture of RAW 264 macrophages or peritoneal macrophages
with primary EANs resulted in increased levels of Arg1 and
Chi3l3 expression with no change in Nos2 or Tnf expression (Fig-
ures 7A–7C). The supernatant of macrophage-EAN co-cultures
(conditioned media), but not EAN or macrophage media alone,
was also able to induce Arg1 in macrophages, indicating that,
at least under these conditions, EANs may require cell-extrinsic
signals in order to release soluble factors responsible for macro-
phage polarization (Figure 7D). Aptly, both NE and Salbutamol, a
specific b2AR agonist, directly induced Arg1 upregulation but did
not change Tnf expression in peritoneal macrophages (Fig-
ure 7E). Furthermore, addition of butaxamine, a selective b2AR
blocker, prevented Arg1 upregulation in macrophages co-
cultured with EANs (Figure 7F). In these settings, however, we
were unable to detect gene changes in additional M2-genes
associated with the MM profile (data not shown). These findings
reveal that enteric neurons and b2AR ligands can induce macro-
phage polarization in vitro resembling MMs.
We next asked whether b2AR-mediated signaling contributes
to in vivo MM polarization after intestinal infection. Previous
studies
have
reported
anti-inflammatory
effects
of
b2AR
signaling on macrophages, possibly mediated by upregulation
of M2-related genes upon exposure to b2AR agonists (Spengler
et al., 1994). In vivo administration of butaxamine significantly
impaired upregulation of Arg1 and Chi3I3 (Figure 7G). To further
address the role of b2ARs in this pathway, we also analyzed
beta-adrenergic
receptor
null
mice.
MMs
isolated
from
Adrb1+/– Adrb2–/– exhibited markedly reduced expression of
Arg1 and Chi3I3 relative to MMs isolated from Adrb1/2+/– litter-
mate controls upon Spib infection (Figure 7H). The above data
provide evidence that enteric infection triggers changes in MM
gene
expression
via
neuron-derived
adrenergic
signaling.
Altogether, our results reveal communication between enteric-
associated
neurons
and
macrophages
in
the
muscularis
microenvironment that serves to induce a tissue-protective
gene-expression program in resident macrophages.
DISCUSSION
Dynamics of Enteric Neuron-Macrophage Interaction
Tissue-resident macrophages adapt to distinct niches to
perform protective, reparative, or pro-inflammatory functions
384
Cell 164, 378–391, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
 (legend on next page)
Cell 164, 378–391, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
385
 depending on their environmental cues and epigenetic state
(Lavin et al., 2014; Okabe and Medzhitov, 2014). In the intestinal
tissue, tissue macrophages are constantly exposed to both
exogenous stimuli, such as bacteria and viruses and endoge-
nous stimuli, which can be membrane-bound or secreted stress
molecules from diverse neighboring hematopoietic and stromal
cells (Diehl et al., 2013; Farache et al., 2013). Several lines of ev-
Figure 5. Catecholaminergic Innervation of the Intestinal Muscularis
(A) Confocal images from the duodenum (upper panels), jejunum (middle panels) and ileum (lower panels) isolated from naive ThCreRosa26lsl-tdTomato (ThTomato)
mice and stained using anti-ELAVL4 (HuC/D) antibodies. Images are representative of at least two independent experiments with sections obtained from du-
odenum, jejunum, and ileum.
(B) Confocal images from the myenteric (upper panels) and submucosal plexuses (lower panels) isolated from naive WT mice and stained using anti-MHCII, anti-
SNAP25 and anti-TH antibodies. Images are representative of at least two independent experiments with sections obtained from duodenum, jejunum, and ileum.
(C) Whole-mount imaging (iDISCO) from the ileum isolated from naive WT mouse stained using anti-TH (white) antibodies (see also Movie S3A). Images are
representative of at least two independent experiments with sections obtained from duodenum, jejunum, and ileum.
(D and E) iDISCO from the ileum isolated from Cx3cr1GFP/+ reporter mouse stained using anti-GFP (red) and anti-TH (white) antibodies. (D) Arrows indicate TH+
processes in the myenteric (light blue) and submucosal (green) plexuses (see also Movie S3B). (E) Light blue arrow indicates TH+ processes innervating
the myenteric plexus (see also Movie S3C). Images are representative of at least two independent experiments with sections obtained from duodenum, jejunum,
and ileum.
(F) Epifluorescent imaging from the celiac (CG) and superior mesenteric ganglia (SMG) of Wnt1CreRosa26lsl-tdTomato (Wnt1Tomato) mice. Images are representative
of at least two independent experiments with sections obtained from duodenum, jejunum, and ileum.
(G) Confocal images from the CG isolated from naive WT mice and stained using anti-TH antibodies. Left: TH+ cell bodies. Right: TH+ cell bodies and processes.
Images are representative of at least two independent experiments.
(H) iDISCO from the CG isolated from WT mouse stained using anti-ELAVL4 antibody, showing the ganglion and the surrounding fat tissue (see also Movie S3D).
Image is representative of at least 14 independent experiments.
See also Figure S3 and Movie S3.
A
B
D
C
Figure 6. Extrinsic Sympathetic Innervation
Is Activated during Enteric Infection
(A) Expression of polysome-associated mRNA from
small intestine muscularis and SMG-CG of naive
Snap25RiboTag mice determined by qPCR, pre-
sented relative to Hprt. Pooled data shown are from
three independent experiments, n = 3.
(B) Total GI transit time (time required to expel feces
containing carmine red dye) in mice 30 min post-
intragastric exposure to Spib or PBS (control).
Pooled data shown are from four independent ex-
periments, n = 18.
(C) Confocal images from the SMG-CG isolated
from FosGFP mice 2 hr post-Spib intragastric
exposure
and
stained
using
anti-GFP
(upper
panels) and anti-ELAVL4 (middle panels) anti-
bodies. Images are representative of two inde-
pendent experiments, n = 6.
(D) Quantification of the number of GFP+ nuclei
among ELAVL4+-TH+ neurons within SMG-CG.
Pooled data shown are from two independent ex-
periments, n = 6 (each dot represents one image of
sympathetic
ganglion
neurons).
Data
were
analyzed by unpaired t test and are shown as
average ± SD; *p % 0.05,***p % 0.001.
See also Figure S4.
idence suggest that the enteric nervous
system can directly communicate with
MMs. Electron microscopy and immune
staining-based studies have suggested
that MMs form synapses with enteric neu-
rons (Kinoshita et al., 2007; Phillips and
Powley, 2012). Recent work by Muller et al. (2014) has indicated
that MMs directly regulate the activity of enteric neurons and
peristalsis via secretion of BMP-2 in a microbiota-dependent
manner. We provide evidence for reciprocal neuron-dependent
macrophage adaptation to environmental perturbations in the in-
testinal muscularis, where macrophages represent the main he-
matopoietic lineage (Bogunovic et al., 2009) and share a niche
386
Cell 164, 378–391, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
 with a dense network of neurons. Our analyses of the in vivo
dynamics of neuron-macrophage ‘‘structural coupling’’ under
inflammatory conditions provides insights into this complex
interaction, with possible implications for disease tolerance
(Medzhitov et al., 2012).
While lamina propria macrophages are motile and can directly
sense signals derived from invading bacteria or epithelial cell
stress responses (Diehl et al., 2013; Farache et al., 2013; Maz-
zini et al., 2014), macrophages residing in the submucosal layer,
and in particular the intestinal muscularis, are less likely to
directly sense perturbations from the lumen. At the same time,
gastrointestinal infections may lead to long-lasting tissue dam-
age induced by inflammatory cells (Rakoff-Nahoum et al., 2004).
Hence, mechanisms that induce tissue-protective functions
in resident macrophages are an essential component of re-
sponses to pathogens (Medzhitov et al., 2012). This might be
of particular importance to tissues that include cells with
reduced proliferative or regenerative capacity, such as neurons.
The static position of MMs, primarily alongside neuronal cell
bodies and nerve fibers, provides an optimal interface for
such interaction. It is curious to note that the cell dynamics of
the bipolar and stellate cells appear to match the structure to
which they are most closely associated. For instance, bipolar
cells, running parallel to nerve fibers, extend in only two direc-
tions and have small pseudopodial protrusions. Stellate MMs,
which surround ganglia and neuronal cell bodies, can presum-
ably completely embrace their surrounding area. These features
suggest that MMs below the serosa are involved in the moni-
toring of neuronal status either through detection of electrical
activity or secreted factors, such as CSF-1 (Muller et al.,
2014). In these ways, the b2ARs-mediated MM response may
represent an analogous activity to that described for microglia
in the CNS; protecting closely associated neuronal processes
from infection- or inflammation-induced tissue damage (Dava-
los et al., 2005; El Khoury et al., 2007; Nimmerjahn et al.,
2005; Wang et al., 2015). Several of the genes modulated by
the b2AR pathway are known to be involved in tissue-protective
functions. For instance, Arginase 1 has been implicated in the
development of the nervous system, axogenesis, and neuro-
regeneration, as well as anti-apoptotic effects on neurons (Cai
et al., 2002; Este
´ vez et al., 2006). Thereby, overt inflammation
coupled with disruption of this pathway may lead to tissue dam-
age. Indeed, clinical observations indicate that �10% of irritable
bowel syndrome (IBS) patients developed symptoms after
episodes of gastrointestinal infection (GI) (Ohman and Simre
´ n,
2010). It seems plausible that severe or prolonged GI infection
could overrun normal safeguards, such as the MM anti-inflam-
matory program, and damage EAN networks, permanently
impacting GI physiology.
Sensing of Intestinal Insults at Luminal Sites
We observed that bacterial infection leads to activation of
extrinsic sympathetic ganglia innervating the intestine. How
do intrinsic or extrinsic neuronal pathways sense luminal
A
C
F
B
D
E
G
H
Figure 7. b2ARs Mediate Polarization of
Macrophages
(A–F)
WT
mice
neuro-sphere-derived
primary
enteric-associated
neurons
(EANs)
were
co-
cultured with RAW (RM) or peritoneal macro-
phages (PM). (A and B) Expression of mRNA
for Arg1, Nos2, Tnf, and Chi3l3 by sorted (A)
RM or (B) PM 24 hr post-co-culture with EANs.
(C) Representative flow cytometry histogram for
YFP expression by sorted PM isolated from
Arg1YFP mice
cultured
with
EANs
as in (A).
(D) Expression of mRNA for Arg1 by sorted RM
24 hr post-exposure to conditioned media from
RM, EANs, or RM-EANs co-cultures (CC). (E)
Expression of mRNA for Arg1 and Tnf by sorted
PM 1 hr post-exposure to NE or Salbutamol (b2AR
agonists).
(F)
Expression
of
mRNA
for
Arg1
by sorted RM 24 hr post-co-culture with EANs
with
or
without
butaxamine
(b2AR-selective
blocker). Pooled data of at least two indepen-
dent experiments. (A) n = 3–7; (B–D) n = 3–4; (E)
n = 2–4; (F) n = 3–4). Data were analyzed by
unpaired t test and are shown as average ± SD;
*p % 0.05.
(G) Expression of mRNA for Arg1 and Chi3l3 by
sorted small intestine MMs isolated 2 hr post-in-
tragastric exposure to Spib in mice treated with
vehicle or butaxamine.
(H) Expression of mRNA for Arg1 and Chi3l3 by
sorted small intestine MMs isolated from Adr-
b1+/–Adrb2–/–,
and
Adrb1+/–Adrb2+/–
littermate
control mice 2 hr post-intragastric exposure to Spib. qPCR results are presented relative to Rpl32 expression. Pooled data of at least two independent
experiments (n = 4–11). Data were analyzed by unpaired t test and are shown as average ± SD; *p % 0.05.
See also Figure S2.
Cell 164, 378–391, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
387
 bacteria? Attenuated strains (Tsolis et al., 1999), which already
exhibit a reduced capacity to invade even with streptomycin pre-
treatment, are expected to have limited interaction with the
epithelium. Many different pathways could operate in an epithe-
lial-neuronal sensing mechanism. For instance, Wilson et al.
(2013) have shown that epithelial cell-derived cytokine thymic
stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP), upregulated during allergic re-
sponses, is sensed by afferent neurons to trigger itch behavior.
In the intestine, where epithelial cells are the source of more
than 50% of the body’s dopamine and 90% of the body’s sero-
tonin, it is very likely that enteroendocrine epithelial cells play an
important role in communicating luminal perturbations to
neuronal processes (Gershon and Tack, 2007). A recent report
by Boho
´ rquez et al. (2015) indicated that intestinal enteroendo-
crine cells directly connect with neurons innervating the small in-
testine and colon, possibly providing signals received from the
lumen. An alternative, albeit non-mutually exclusive, possibility
is that neuronal processes reaching the intestinal villi directly
sense microbial or stress signals, as recently shown in worms.
Meisel et al. (2014) described a chemosensory mechanism
used by Caenorhabditis elegans to detect bacterial metabolites
and induce avoidance behavior. This pathway involves direct
neuronal sensing of pathogenic stimuli, which in turn activates
adjacent neurons (Meisel et al., 2014). In mammals, Chiu et al.
(2013) showed that sensory neurons could directly respond to
bacterial-derived N-formylated peptides or toxins, inducing
pain. In this study, ablation of nociceptors resulted in increased
inflammatory infiltrate, suggesting an anti-inflammatory role for
this pathway during bacterial infection (Chiu et al., 2013). An
analogous pathway could be operational in the intestine, where
potentially similar metabolites from commensal or invading bac-
teria would directly activate enteric neurons. Indeed, studies
have suggested that enteric neurons express PRRs, such as
TLR2 or TLR4 (Anitha et al., 2012) that can contribute to activa-
tion of nociceptive-associated channels in neurons such as
TRPV1. Alternatively, TLR ligands may be able to directly acti-
vate these channels independent of TLRs (Meseguer et al.,
2014). However, this sensing circuit still requires further studies
specifically targeting PRR pathways or other potential direct
sensing channels or receptors in EAN.
Regulation of Inflammatory Responses by the
Catecholamine-b2AR Pathway
In addition to the well-described anti-inflammatory reflex, the
involvement of catecholaminergic neurons in anti-inflammatory
responses has many equivalents in the immune system (Tracey,
2009). However, catecholamines are also linked to enhanced in-
flammatory responses. It is thought that a-adrenergic signaling
boosts inflammation while b-adrenergic signaling suppresses
both innate and adaptive immunity (Guereschi et al., 2013; Nakai
et al., 2014). Some of the broad anti-inflammatory effects of this
pathway are attributed to widespread sympathetic innervation in
peripheral lymph nodes associated with expression of b2AR in
immune cells (del Rey and Besedovsky, 2008). The high expres-
sion of these receptors by MMs might represent a mechanism
by which heavy norepinephrine innervation in the muscularis
could preferentially target these cells, mitigating the pro-inflam-
matory state induced in LpMs close to the lumen. Plausibly, deep
muscular and myenteric macrophages are in a privileged posi-
tion to respond to neuronal signals, including NE, due to their
contact with neuronal fibers, as opposed to their serosa-longitu-
dinal muscle counterparts. Alternatively, lack of b2AR on neurons
or another cell population may lead to a decrease in a necessary
support factor in these areas. Similarly, subpopulations of B
cells, macrophages and neutrophils preferentially express
b2AR when compared to T cells (del Rey and Besedovsky,
2008), which could also explain how NE might regulate inflam-
matory responses without leading to immune suppression. Addi-
tionally, circulating levels of NE, as opposed to much higher con-
centrations around catecholaminergic nerve terminals comprise
an additional layer of control of this MM-EAN-associated NE-
b2AR axis (del Rey and Besedovsky, 2008). Although we found
TH+ immunoreactivity within the intestinal muscularis as well
as in the SMG-CG, we only observed activation of extrinsic
innervation upon bacterial challenge. This is consistent with pre-
vious reports suggesting that the CG and SMG are the main
sources of NE in the stomach and intestine (Li et al., 2010).
Nevertheless, we cannot rule out the possibility that intrinsic
innervation is also involved in this process since extrinsic inner-
vation synapses directly onto EAN, and this could also be
involved in sensing mechanisms (McVey Neufeld et al., 2015).
The hardwiring of lymphoid and non-lymphoid tissues with
neuronal processes allows for immediate regulation of closely-
associated cells, and this could potentially synchronize immune
responses in areas not directly in contact with the stimuli. We
have uncovered a neuro-immune axis that reinforces a tissue-
protective program in macrophages in response to a potentially
pathogenic insult. Future studies are needed to dissect the exact
(afferent and efferent) roles played by EAN in this process. Addi-
tionally, it remains unclear how luminal signals reach intrinsic or
extrinsic innervation. Exploring these questions are the next
steps to understanding how neuronal hardwiring in the intestine
and other immune-rich tissues can modulate immune responses
and how immune cells may prevent or cause neuronal damage.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Animals
ArgYFP(Arg1tm1Lky/J),
Adrb1tm1BkkAdrb2tm1Bkk,
C57BL/6J,
Cx3cr1GFP
(Cx3cr1tm1Litt/LittJ),
Rosa26lsl-GCaMP3(Gt(ROSA)26Sortm38(CAG-GCaMP3)
Hze), Rosa26lsl-tomato(Gt(ROSA)26Sortm9(CAG-tdTomato)Hze), Itgax(CD11c)eYFP,
Lyz2Cre/Cre(Lyz2tm1(cre)Ifo/J),
FosGFP(B6.Cg-Tg(Fos/EGFP)1-3Brth/J),
Snap25Cre
(Snap25tm2.1(cre)Hze), Rpl22tm1.1Psam/J, Wnt1Cre(Tg(Wnt1-cre)2Sor), and zDCDTR
(Zbtb46DTR) mice were purchased from the Jackson Laboratories and main-
tained in our facilities. Hand2Cre(Tg(Hand2-cre)7-1Clou) and ThCre(Tg(Th-cre)
1Tmd), mice were generously provided by D. Clouthier (UC Denver) and
J. Friedman (RU), respectively. These lines were interbred in our facilities to
obtain the final strains described in the text. Genotyping was performed ac-
cording to the protocols established for the respective strains by Jackson
Laboratories. Mice were maintained at the Rockefeller University animal facil-
ities under specific pathogen-free conditions. Mice were used at 7–12 weeks
of age for most experiments. Animal care and experimentation were consistent
with the NIH guidelines and were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committee at the Rockefeller University.
iDISCO
The iDISCO protocol was followed as detailed on the continuously-updated
website: http://idisco.info. For more detailed information, please see the Sup-
plemental Experimental Procedures.
388
Cell 164, 378–391, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
 Intravital Two-Photon Imaging
Images were acquired as previously described (Farache et al., 2013). For
more detailed information, please see the Supplemental Experimental
Procedures.
RiboTag
Isolation of HA-tagged polysomes was performed as previously described
(Sanz et al., 2009). For more detailed information, please see the Supplemental
Experimental Procedures.
Single Cell Suspension of Intestinal Macrophages
After cleaning and washing in HBSS, the small intestine tissue was cut in two
and the muscularis region was carefully dissected from the underlying mu-
cosa. For more detailed information, please see the Supplemental Experi-
mental Procedures.
Salmonella Typhimurium Infections
Mice were intragastrically exposed to 109 of either mutant strain of Salmonella
Typhimurium, Spib, or invA. For more detailed information, please see the
Supplemental Experimental Procedures.
Statistics
Statistical analyses were performed in GraphPad Prism software. Data were
analyzed by applying one-way ANOVA or unpaired Student’s t test where
appropriate. A p value < 0.05 was considered significant.
For additional detailed information, please see the Supplemental Experi-
mental Procedures.
ACCESSION NUMBERS
The accession number for all RNA-seq data reported in this paper is NCBI
Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO): GSE74131.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures,
four figures, one table, and three movies and can be found with this article
online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.12.023.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
D.M. conceived and supervised this study. I.G., P.A.M., F.A.C.-P., and D.M.
designed experiments. I.G., P.A.M., L.F., and F. A.C.-P. performed experi-
ments. I.G. and P.A.M. prepared figures and helped with manuscript prepara-
tion. T.Y.O. analyzed RNA-seq and helped with figure preparation. D.M. wrote
the paper.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are indebted to K. Velinzon and N. Thomas for sorting cells, P. Ariel and the
Rockefeller University Bio-Imaging Resource Center (BIRC) for their invaluable
help with IVM and light sheet microscopy, N. Renier and R. Azevedo for their
help with the iDISCO, D. Esterha
´ zy for kindly providing Lyz2csfr1-DTRCD11ceYFP
mice, M. Bogunovic and M. Merad (Mount Sinai) for their insightful discussions
and help with the isolation of MMs and LpMs, J. Farache, G. Shakhar (Weiz-
mann), and G. Victora (Whitehead, MIT) for their help in establishing live multi-
photon microscopy of the gut, members of the Nussenzweig lab and The Rock-
efeller University employees for continuous assistance. We thank S. Tavazoie,
V. Ruta, M. Nussenzweig (RU) and members of our laboratory, particularly V.
Pedicord for discussions and critical reading and editing of the manuscript.
D.M. is supported by a Kenneth Rainin Foundation Breakthrough Award, a
National Institutes of Health NIH 5R21AI105047 grant. D.M. and P.A.M. are
supported by the Leona M. and Harry B. Helmsley Charitable Trust. L.F. was
supported by Crohn’s and Colitis Foundation of America. I.G. and F.A.C.-P.
were supported by FAPESP and CNPq (Brazil). The BIRC is supported by the
Empire State Stem Cell Fund through NYSDOH C023046.
Received: October 19, 2015
Revised: November 24, 2015
Accepted: December 4, 2015
Published: January 14, 2016
REFERENCES
Anitha, M., Vijay-Kumar, M., Sitaraman, S.V., Gewirtz, A.T., and Srinivasan, S.
(2012). Gut microbial products regulate murine gastrointestinal motility via
Toll-like receptor 4 signaling. Gastroenterology 143, 1006–1016.
Ayres, J.S., Trinidad, N.J., and Vance, R.E. (2012). Lethal inflammasome acti-
vation by a multidrug-resistant pathobiont upon antibiotic disruption of the mi-
crobiota. Nat. Med. 18, 799–806.
Barron, F., Woods, C., Kuhn, K., Bishop, J., Howard, M.J., and Clouthier, D.E.
(2011). Downregulation of Dlx5 and Dlx6 expression by Hand2 is essential for
initiation of tongue morphogenesis. Development 138, 2249–2259.
Bogunovic, M., Ginhoux, F., Helft, J., Shang, L., Hashimoto, D., Greter, M., Liu,
K., Jakubzick, C., Ingersoll, M.A., Leboeuf, M., et al. (2009). Origin of the lamina
propria dendritic cell network. Immunity 31, 513–525.
Boho
´ rquez, D.V., Shahid, R.A., Erdmann, A., Kreger, A.M., Wang, Y., Calakos,
N., Wang, F., and Liddle, R.A. (2015). Neuroepithelial circuit formed by inner-
vation of sensory enteroendocrine cells. J. Clin. Invest. 125, 782–786.
Cai, D., Deng, K., Mellado, W., Lee, J., Ratan, R.R., and Filbin, M.T. (2002).
Arginase I and polyamines act downstream from cyclic AMP in overcoming in-
hibition of axonal growth MAG and myelin in vitro. Neuron 35, 711–719.
Chiu, I.M., Heesters, B.A., Ghasemlou, N., Von Hehn, C.A., Zhao, F., Tran, J.,
Wainger, B., Strominger, A., Muralidharan, S., Horswill, A.R., et al. (2013). Bac-
teria activate sensory neurons that modulate pain and inflammation. Nature
501, 52–57.
Danielian, P.S., Muccino, D., Rowitch, D.H., Michael, S.K., and McMahon, A.P.
(1998). Modification of gene activity in mouse embryos in utero by a tamoxifen-
inducible form of Cre recombinase. Curr. Biol. 8, 1323–1326.
Davalos, D., Grutzendler, J., Yang, G., Kim, J.V., Zuo, Y., Jung, S., Littman,
D.R., Dustin, M.L., and Gan, W.B. (2005). ATP mediates rapid microglial
response to local brain injury in vivo. Nat. Neurosci. 8, 752–758.
del Rey, A., and Besedovsky, H.O. (2008). Sympathetic nervous system-im-
mune interactions in autoimmune lymphoproliferative diseases. Neuroimmu-
nomodulation 15, 29–36.
Denning, T.L., Wang, Y.C., Patel, S.R., Williams, I.R., and Pulendran, B. (2007).
Lamina propria macrophages and dendritic cells differentially induce regulato-
ry and interleukin 17-producing T cell responses. Nat. Immunol. 8, 1086–1094.
Diehl, G.E., Longman, R.S., Zhang, J.X., Breart, B., Galan, C., Cuesta, A.,
Schwab, S.R., and Littman, D.R. (2013). Microbiota restricts trafficking of bac-
teria to mesenteric lymph nodes by CX(3)CR1(hi) cells. Nature 494, 116–120.
El Khoury, J., Toft, M., Hickman, S.E., Means, T.K., Terada, K., Geula, C., and
Luster, A.D. (2007). Ccr2 deficiency impairs microglial accumulation and ac-
celerates progression of Alzheimer-like disease. Nat. Med. 13, 432–438.
Este
´ vez, A.G., Sahawneh, M.A., Lange, P.S., Bae, N., Egea, M., and Ratan,
R.R. (2006). Arginase 1 regulation of nitric oxide production is key to survival
of trophic factor-deprived motor neurons. J. Neurosci. 26, 8512–8516.
Farache, J., Koren, I., Milo, I., Gurevich, I., Kim, K.W., Zigmond, E., Furtado,
G.C., Lira, S.A., and Shakhar, G. (2013). Luminal bacteria recruit CD103+ den-
dritic cells into the intestinal epithelium to sample bacterial antigens for pre-
sentation. Immunity 38, 581–595.
Furness, J.B., Kunze, W.A., and Clerc, N. (1999). Nutrient tasting and signaling
mechanisms in the gut. II. The intestine as a sensory organ: neural, endocrine,
and immune responses. Am. J. Physiol. 277, G922–G928.
Gautier, E.L., Shay, T., Miller, J., Greter, M., Jakubzick, C., Ivanov, S., Helft, J.,
Chow, A., Elpek, K.G., Gordonov, S., et al.; Immunological Genome Con-
sortium (2012). Gene-expression profiles and transcriptional regulatory path-
ways that underlie the identity and diversity of mouse tissue macrophages.
Nat. Immunol. 13, 1118–1128.
Cell 164, 378–391, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
389
 Gershon, M.D., and Tack, J. (2007). The serotonin signaling system: from basic
understanding to drug development for functional GI disorders. Gastroenter-
ology 132, 397–414.
Ghisletti, S., Barozzi, I., Mietton, F., Polletti, S., De Santa, F., Venturini, E.,
Gregory, L., Lonie, L., Chew, A., Wei, C.L., et al. (2010). Identification and char-
acterization of enhancers controlling the inflammatory gene expression pro-
gram in macrophages. Immunity 32, 317–328.
Guereschi, M.G., Araujo, L.P., Maricato, J.T., Takenaka, M.C., Nascimento,
V.M., Vivanco, B.C., Reis, V.O., Keller, A.C., Brum, P.C., and Basso, A.S.
(2013). Beta2-adrenergic receptor signaling in CD4+ Foxp3+ regulatory
T cells enhances their suppressive function in a PKA-dependent manner.
Eur. J. Immunol. 43, 1001–1012.
Hadis, U., Wahl, B., Schulz, O., Hardtke-Wolenski, M., Schippers, A., Wagner,
N., Mu
¨ ller, W., Sparwasser, T., Fo
¨ rster, R., and Pabst, O. (2011). Intestinal
tolerance requires gut homing and expansion of FoxP3+ regulatory T cells in
the lamina propria. Immunity 34, 237–246.
Harris, J.A., Hirokawa, K.E., Sorensen, S.A., Gu, H., Mills, M., Ng, L.L., Bohn,
P., Mortrud, M., Ouellette, B., Kidney, J., et al. (2014). Anatomical characteriza-
tion of Cre driver mice for neural circuit mapping and manipulation. Front. Neu-
ral Circuits 8, 76.
Hashimoto, D., Chow, A., Noizat, C., Teo, P., Beasley, M.B., Leboeuf, M.,
Becker, C.D., See, P., Price, J., Lucas, D., et al. (2013). Tissue-resident mac-
rophages self-maintain locally throughout adult life with minimal contribution
from circulating monocytes. Immunity 38, 792–804.
Hendershot, T.J., Liu, H., Sarkar, A.A., Giovannucci, D.R., Clouthier, D.E., Abe,
M., and Howard, M.J. (2007). Expression of Hand2 is sufficient for neurogen-
esis and cell type-specific gene expression in the enteric nervous system. Dev.
Dyn. 236, 93–105.
Kinoshita, K., Horiguchi, K., Fujisawa, M., Kobirumaki, F., Yamato, S., Hori, M.,
and Ozaki, H. (2007). Possible involvement of muscularis resident macro-
phages in impairment of interstitial cells of Cajal and myenteric nerve systems
in rat models of TNBS-induced colitis. Histochem. Cell Biol. 127, 41–53.
Lavin, Y., Winter, D., Blecher-Gonen, R., David, E., Keren-Shaul, H., Merad,
M., Jung, S., and Amit, I. (2014). Tissue-resident macrophage enhancer land-
scapes are shaped by the local microenvironment. Cell 159, 1312–1326.
Li, Z., Caron, M.G., Blakely, R.D., Margolis, K.G., and Gershon, M.D. (2010).
Dependence of serotonergic and other nonadrenergic enteric neurons on
norepinephrine transporter expression. J. Neurosci. 30, 16730–16740.
Mazzini, E., Massimiliano, L., Penna, G., and Rescigno, M. (2014). Oral toler-
ance can be established via gap junction transfer of fed antigens from
CX3CR1+ macrophages to CD103+ dendritic cells. Immunity 40, 248–261.
McVey Neufeld, K.A., Perez-Burgos, A., Mao, Y.K., Bienenstock, J., and
Kunze, W.A. (2015). The gut microbiome restores intrinsic and extrinsic nerve
function in germ-free mice accompanied by changes in calbindin. Neurogas-
troenterol. Motil. 27, 627–636.
Medzhitov, R., Schneider, D.S., and Soares, M.P. (2012). Disease tolerance as
a defense strategy. Science 335, 936–941.
Meisel, J.D., Panda, O., Mahanti, P., Schroeder, F.C., and Kim, D.H. (2014).
Chemosensation of bacterial secondary metabolites modulates neuroendo-
crine signaling and behavior of C. elegans. Cell 159, 267–280.
Meseguer, V., Alpizar, Y.A., Luis, E., Tajada, S., Denlinger, B., Fajardo, O.,
Manenschijn, J.A., Ferna
´ ndez-Pen
˜ a, C., Talavera, A., Kichko, T., et al.
(2014). TRPA1 channels mediate acute neurogenic inflammation and pain pro-
duced by bacterial endotoxins. Nat. Commun. 5, 3125.
Muller, P.A., Koscso
´ , B., Rajani, G.M., Stevanovic, K., Berres, M.L., Hashi-
moto, D., Mortha, A., Leboeuf, M., Li, X.M., Mucida, D., et al. (2014). Crosstalk
between muscularis macrophages and enteric neurons regulates gastrointes-
tinal motility. Cell 158, 300–313.
Nakai, A., Hayano, Y., Furuta, F., Noda, M., and Suzuki, K. (2014). Control of
lymphocyte egress from lymph nodes through b2-adrenergic receptors.
J. Exp. Med. 211, 2583–2598.
Nguyen, K.D., Qiu, Y., Cui, X., Goh, Y.P., Mwangi, J., David, T., Mukundan, L.,
Brombacher, F., Locksley, R.M., and Chawla, A. (2011). Alternatively activated
macrophages produce catecholamines to sustain adaptive thermogenesis.
Nature 480, 104–108.
Niess, J.H., Brand, S., Gu, X., Landsman, L., Jung, S., McCormick, B.A., Vyas,
J.M., Boes, M., Ploegh, H.L., Fox, J.G., et al. (2005). CX3CR1-mediated den-
dritic cell access to the intestinal lumen and bacterial clearance. Science 307,
254–258.
Nimmerjahn, A., Kirchhoff, F., and Helmchen, F. (2005). Resting microglial cells
are highly dynamic surveillants of brain parenchyma in vivo. Science 308,
1314–1318.
Ohman, L., and Simre
´ n, M. (2010). Pathogenesis of IBS: role of inflammation,
immunity and neuroimmune interactions. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 7,
163–173.
Okabe, Y., and Medzhitov, R. (2014). Tissue-specific signals control reversible
program of localization and functional polarization of macrophages. Cell 157,
832–844.
Parkhurst, C.N., Yang, G., Ninan, I., Savas, J.N., Yates, J.R., 3rd, Lafaille, J.J.,
Hempstead, B.L., Littman, D.R., and Gan, W.B. (2013). Microglia promote
learning-dependent synapse formation through brain-derived neurotrophic
factor. Cell 155, 1596–1609.
Phillips, R.J., and Powley, T.L. (2012). Macrophages associated with the
intrinsic and extrinsic autonomic innervation of the rat gastrointestinal tract.
Auton. Neurosci. 169, 12–27.
Pullinger, G.D., van Diemen, P.M., Carnell, S.C., Davies, H., Lyte, M., and Ste-
vens, M.P. (2010). 6-hydroxydopamine-mediated release of norepinephrine in-
creases faecal excretion of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium in pigs.
Vet. Res. 41, 68.
Ra
˚ berg, L., Sim, D., and Read, A.F. (2007). Disentangling genetic variation for
resistance and tolerance to infectious diseases in animals. Science 318,
812–814.
Rakoff-Nahoum, S., Paglino, J., Eslami-Varzaneh, F., Edberg, S., and Medzhi-
tov, R. (2004). Recognition of commensal microflora by toll-like receptors is
required for intestinal homeostasis. Cell 118, 229–241.
Renier, N., Wu, Z., Simon, D.J., Yang, J., Ariel, P., and Tessier-Lavigne, M.
(2014). iDISCO: a simple, rapid method to immunolabel large tissue samples
for volume imaging. Cell 159, 896–910.
Sanz, E., Yang, L., Su, T., Morris, D.R., McKnight, G.S., and Amieux, P.S.
(2009). Cell-type-specific isolation of ribosome-associated mRNA from com-
plex tissues. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 13939–13944.
Schreiber, H.A., Loschko, J., Karssemeijer, R.A., Escolano, A., Meredith,
M.M., Mucida, D., Guermonprez, P., and Nussenzweig, M.C. (2013). Intestinal
monocytes and macrophages are required for T cell polarization in response to
Citrobacter rodentium. J. Exp. Med. 210, 2025–2039.
Soares, M.P., Gozzelino, R., and Weis, S. (2014). Tissue damage control in dis-
ease tolerance. Trends Immunol. 35, 483–494.
Spengler, R.N., Chensue, S.W., Giacherio, D.A., Blenk, N., and Kunkel, S.L.
(1994). Endogenous norepinephrine regulates tumor necrosis factor-alpha
production from macrophages in vitro. J. Immunol. 152, 3024–3031.
Tracey, K.J. (2009). Reflex control of immunity. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 9, 418–428.
Tsolis, R.M., Townsend, S.M., Miao, E.A., Miller, S.I., Ficht, T.A., Adams, L.G.,
and Ba
¨ umler, A.J. (1999). Identification of a putative Salmonella enterica sero-
type typhimurium host range factor with homology to IpaH and YopM by signa-
ture-tagged mutagenesis. Infect. Immun. 67, 6385–6393.
Van Dyken, S.J., and Locksley, R.M. (2013). Interleukin-4- and interleukin-13-
mediated alternatively activated macrophages: roles in homeostasis and dis-
ease. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 31, 317–343.
Wang, Y., Szretter, K.J., Vermi, W., Gilfillan, S., Rossini, C., Cella, M., Barrow,
A.D., Diamond, M.S., and Colonna, M. (2012). IL-34 is a tissue-restricted ligand
of CSF1R required for the development of Langerhans cells and microglia. Nat.
Immunol. 13, 753–760.
Wang, Y., Cella, M., Mallinson, K., Ulrich, J.D., Young, K.L., Robinette, M.L.,
Gilfillan, S., Krishnan, G.M., Sudhakar, S., Zinselmeyer, B.H., et al. (2015).
TREM2 lipid sensing sustains the microglial response in an Alzheimer’s dis-
ease model. Cell 160, 1061–1071.
390
Cell 164, 378–391, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
 Wilson, S.R., The
´ , L., Batia, L.M., Beattie, K., Katibah, G.E., McClain, S.P.,
Pellegrino, M., Estandian, D.M., and Bautista, D.M. (2013). The epithelial
cell-derived atopic dermatitis cytokine TSLP activates neurons to induce
itch. Cell 155, 285–295.
Zariwala, H.A., Borghuis, B.G., Hoogland, T.M., Madisen, L., Tian, L., De
Zeeuw, C.I., Zeng, H., Looger, L.L., Svoboda, K., and Chen, T.W. (2012). A
Cre-dependent GCaMP3 reporter mouse for neuronal imaging in vivo.
J. Neurosci. 32, 3131–3141.
Zigmond, E., Bernshtein, B., Friedlander, G., Walker, C.R., Yona, S., Kim,
K.W., Brenner, O., Krauthgamer, R., Varol, C., Mu
¨ ller, W., and Jung, S.
(2014). Macrophage-restricted interleukin-10 receptor deficiency, but not
IL-10 deficiency, causes severe spontaneous colitis. Immunity 40, 720–733.
Cell 164, 378–391, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
391
