 S2-50
BRIEF REVIEW
International Journal of Sports Physiology and Performance, 2017
, 12, S2-50 
 
-S2-54
© 2017 Human Kinetics, Inc.
Gabbett is the Inst for Resilient Regions, University of Southern 
Queensland, Ipswich, Australia. Whiteley is with Aspetar Orthopedic and 
Sports Medicine Hospital, Doha, Qatar. Address author correspondence to 
Rod Whiteley at Rodney.whiteley@aspetar.com.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1123/ijspp.2016-0321 
Two Training-Load Paradoxes: Can We Work Harder and Smarter, 
Can Physical Preparation and Medical Be Teammates?
Tim J. Gabbett and Rod Whiteley
The authors have observed that in professional sporting organizations the staff responsible for physical preparation and medical 
care typically practice in relative isolation and display tension as regards their attitudes toward training-load prescription (much 
more and much less training, respectively). Recent evidence shows that relatively high chronic training loads, when they are 
appropriately reached, are associated with reduced injury risk and better performance. Understanding this link between perfor-
mance and training loads removes this tension but requires a better understanding of the relationship between the acute:chronic 
workload ratio (ACWR) and its association with performance and injury. However, there remain many questions in the area of 
ACWR, and we are likely at an early stage of our understanding of these parameters and their interrelationships. This opinion 
paper explores these themes and makes recommendations for improving performance through better synergies in support-staff 
approaches. Furthermore, aspects of the ACWR that remain to be clarified—the role of shared decision making, risk:benefit 
estimation, and clearer accountability—are discussed.
Keywords: shared decision making, acute:chronic workload ratio, injury, performance
Training loads determine physical performance ability, albeit 
in a complex nonlinear manner, subject to individual variations in 
response. In large, it is suggested that physically appropriate, higher 
training loads are associated with more positive performance adapta-
tions up to some point—this point being the creation of an overuse 
injury. Indeed it has recently been suggested that an overuse injury 
is, by definition, a training load prescription error.1 Given that over-
use injury can form the great majority of injury seen in some sports, 
it could be argued that the majority of injury burden is driven by 
incorrect training practice. Viewed through this simplistic prism, in 
the context of many professional sporting environments, the physi-
cal preparation and medical staff are at odds advocating higher and 
lower training loads respectively. This superficial understanding of 
the relationships between training load, injury, and performance 
have led to a dichotomizing of approaches wherein if low injury 
rates are the primary aim, training loads should be minimized and 
alternately training loads should be maximized where physical 
preparation is the principal driver.
More recently a model has been developed suggesting that the 
absolute training load at any point in time is a less useful predictor 
of injury than considering the individual’s current training load, and 
training load history. Initially it was observed that the week-on-week 
changes in training load are more predictive of injury risk than the 
absolute training load at any given point in time2 questioning the 
more simplistic approaches outlined above.
Subsequently Banister’s suggested performance model investi-
gating the balance between “fitness” (chronic training load, typically 
4-wk rolling average) and “fatigue” (acute training load, typically 1 
wk)3 has proven a useful starting point for examination of training 
injury rates. The acute:chronic workload ratio (ACWR), an index 
of the workload performed, relative to the workload the athlete has 
been prepared for, is more strongly associated with injury rates than 
absolute workload in isolation.4,5
This information has been synthesized into a working model2 
wherein the ultimate aim is higher absolute training loads (as 
these will confer the greatest performance gains) being achieved 
through staged increases in weekly training loads. Specifically it 
is suggested that weekly increases in loading be capped, depend-
ing on the appetite for risk of injury, at somewhere between 10% 
and 50%.2
By Definition, Preparing for the Average 
Demands Means Underpreparation  
Half of the Time.
The aim of physical preparation is to adequately prepare the ath-
lete for the demands of competition. Accordingly a knowledge 
of these demands is critical for accurate prescription. We suggest 
that some errors may have been inadvertently introduced where 
athletes have been prepared for the average match demands. By 
definition, if an athlete is only capable of tolerating the average 
demands of a match, then they are underprepared for half of the 
competition they will endure. Accordingly we suggest that a key 
aim of preparation is to ready an athlete for any match demands 
within reason. Clearly these will be higher than average demands, 
and are typically higher than usual training loads.6 By consider-
ing these aims in the context of safe weekly increases in loads, 
athletes can scale these heights through safe steps while accruing 
higher chronic training loads. Such higher training loads appear 
to also be associated with lower injury levels likely through 
higher performance ability rendering typical match demands 
as being relatively lower for any given individual. This protec-
tive effect of high training loads has recently been documented 
in the particularly problematic situation of periods of relative 
 
match congestion.7
 IJSPP Vol. 12, Suppl 2, 2017
Can Physical Preparation and Medical Be Teammates?  S2-51
We Need to Interlink Those Responsible 
for Training Loads, Injury,  
and Performance.
Currently, those responsible for performance, preparation, and medi-
cal care typically work in silos despite routinely paying lip service to 
such terms as multidisciplinary and athlete-centered. Coupled with 
the commonly held inappropriately simplistic beliefs surrounding 
training load and injury outlined earlier, we believe that this has 
resulted in these different, apparent teammates (coach, preparation, 
and medical staff), working as competitors who have different 
motivations (win games, have the largest training volumes, have the 
lowest injury rates, respectively) who attempt to reach these goals 
by typically different means (any means necessary, more training, 
less training, respectively).
Consider Match Performance as a Primary 
Goal, and This Competition Disappears.
If both the weight of focus of a program is primarily on injury 
prevention (as opposed to performance) and high loads are equated 
with injury, then players will constantly be managed away from their 
threshold. Certainly this will result in never pushing players to a 
level that will result in increased injury risk, but equally they will 
never develop physical qualities which allow optimal performance.2
Similarly, when the focus is purely on filling every hour of 
every day with heavy training loads irrespective of the athlete’s 
loading and injury history, then the inevitable consequence is 
injury, and performance and coaching staff are managing at least 
some of their athletes away from performance via injury (Figure 
1). On-field performance clearly suffers in the short and long 
term when players are unable to complete their planned training.8 
Once the nexus between appropriate loading—with the goal of 
ultimately high chronic loads—and performance is understood 
within a program, the competition between preparation and medi-
cal disappears, and a truly cohesive athlete-centered approach can 
be realized. However, the converse is seen much more commonly 
in practice whenever these 2 team members fail to appreciate these 
links, and each member of the team pulls the athlete in opposite 
directions.
When preparation staff optimize training loads—we suggest via 
appropriate use of the ACWR—to create high chronic training loads 
in their athletes, well in excess of the average demands of competi-
tion, performance will be maximized, and injury minimized. When 
each of the members of the support staff understands and adopts 
this approach to their care, the conflict outlined earlier disappears. 
Alternately if considered through the prism of “what would make 
my athletes’ performance improve?” then each member should 
similarly arrive at the conclusion that appropriately high chronic 
training loads achieved through staged monitored increases will 
be the answer.
Figure 1 — Depiction of how an inadequate understanding of the links between training loads, injury risk, and performance can inadvertently give rise 
to increased injury risk and the “chronic rehabber” in a team. By forcing low training loads on a player, either deliberately through a policy of “protect-
ing” from overuse injury through reduced training load or indirectly when an overuse injury forces a reduction in training load, the player gets into a 
cycle where this reduced training load increases injury risk when the player is exposed to game loads, or “normal” training loads. Typically, medical 
staff are at fault for incorrectly reducing training loads, and physical preparation staff are at fault for inappropriately working players too hard when 
incomplete understanding of the “train smarter and harder” approach is present.
Downloaded by on 06/02/19
 IJSPP Vol. 12, Suppl 2, 2017
S2-52  Gabbett and Whiteley
The Athlete’s Role in Training Loads  
Must Be Considered, and Athletes  
Must Be Accountable.
Athletes rightly take credit for great performances, and will bear 
the brunt of perceived failure in competition. We believe that this 
accountability should be extended beyond competition periods. 
Some sports (eg, American football, Premier League soccer) man-
date that athletes have extended periods away from formal training 
with no supervision of workloads permissible by the organizations. 
If athletes fail to understand the relationships between periods of 
reduced activity and the associated reductions in chronic loading 
that creates elevated injury risk, then it is understandable that they 
would take this opportunity to “rest and recuperate.” If their primary 
aim is maximizing performance and minimizing injury risk, then a 
better understanding of the relation between training loads, injury, 
and performance will ensure that athletes independently continue 
their preparation during these “down times.” It is incumbent on those 
with knowledge of safe training practices to inform the athletes of 
this, and to provide athletes with suggestions for continued training. 
Athletes should also be aware that they should be held accountable 
for any subsequent poor performance or injury that can be directly 
traced to inadequate preparation in which they have knowingly 
contributed.
Your Sport Still Needs to Describe the 
Correct Training and Performance Metrics.
To this point we have deliberately used the generic descriptors of 
“appropriate training loads.” What constitutes the exact parameters 
of these training loads, and how are they best measured? Here again 
we likely have much to discover.
Despite both athletes being required to run and throw, high 
speed running meters is a meaningless metric for baseball pitchers, 
as is total throws for a football goalkeeper. Appropriate metrics 
will be associated with performance as well as injury risk. In all 
likelihood, the optimal measures for each sport, and perhaps each 
individual, have not yet been described.
It needs to be recalled that the demands of the match will be spe-
cific to individual tissues and energy systems for any given athlete’s 
role within any given sport. The rate-limiting tissue and/or energy 
systems need to be targeted first and foremost both during prepara-
tion and monitoring. High chronic training loads on an exercise bike 
are not the same as high chronic overground sprinting loads as they 
will induce different changes in the musculature of the thigh. If the 
ultimate aim of the sport is repeated-sprint ability, then accrual of 
high chronic cycling loads (at the expense of high-speed running) 
are likely detrimental to performance and injury risk.
We are at an early stage in our understanding of the specifics 
of the relationships between training load, performance, and injury 
risk, and many questions remain incompletely answered. The fol-
lowing is a limited set of such questions and our current thinking 
on these.
Why 1 Week:4 Weeks for the Acute: 
Chronic Workload Ratio?
We do not know if different acute and chronic workload timing 
parameters will give better results, and we need to explore this 
further. Current work has largely been limited to describing associa-
tions between training load and observed injury. Future work needs 
to validate these approaches in larger data sets to establish their 
predictive veracity. Speculatively in sports that require significant 
physiological adaptation to determine performance, (eg, triathlon, 
marathon, road cycling) a longer chronic duration may be appro-
priate, whereas competitions with congested fixture schedules (eg, 
National Basketball Association, English Premier League) may use 
shorter acute loading periods.
What About Different Tissues and Their Response 
to Load (Time Course)?
We know that different tissues have different responses to different 
loading, with different time courses for adaptation and remodel-
ing. For example, the repeated bout effect suggests that one or two 
relatively high-load and -volume sessions of eccentric exercise may 
protect individuals from eccentric induced delayed-onset muscle 
soreness for up to 6 months (in the same muscle group performing 
the exercise).9 Tendons, however, are seen to respond acutely to high 
volumes of running with variation in their creation and destruction 
of collagen and associated building blocks across a relatively short 
time period (days) with differences in the time course for creation 
and turnover of collagen and response to a period of training.10,11 
This may have implications for upper limits of loading in terms of 
time between exercise insults that can be safely tolerated. Specu-
latively we can use this information to our advantage to optimize 
positive adaptation of tissue through loading, however much more 
work needs to be done to describe all the parameters surrounding 
this information.
What About Other Modifiers of Response Such  
as Athlete Age and Different Body Tissues?
Most likely an athlete’s age is an important influencing factor on 
their response to training, and its ability to both enhance perfor-
mance and mitigate injury risk. For example, recent data suggests 
that younger players are more resistant to injury when having 
adverse strength and architectural properties of the hamstring 
muscles in the context of prevention of hamstring injury.12 Similarly 
an athlete’s anabolic response to hypertrophy training varies across 
their lifespan13 which should alter an individual athlete’s ability to 
adapt positively to loading.
Adolescent athletes are susceptible to certain injuries at their 
maturing physeal (cartilaginous) growth plates14 and require dif-
ferent approaches to loading. In particular it would seem that 
these growth plates respond differently to compressive and tensile 
forces,15 and it should be recalled that in many activities, a single 
growth plate may be under both types of load in different parts.
These different growth plates mature at different ages. For 
example the calcaneal physis in the heel is seen to mature earlier 
than the tibial physis at the knee, and accordingly the peak inci-
dence of Sever’s disease16 of the calcaneal apophysis is younger 
than that of Osgood-Schlatter’s disease17 of the knee. It should be 
recalled that the different growth plates mature from as early as 10 
(calcaneal apophysis in the heel) to as late as 25 years old (pubic 
apophysis in the pelvis/groin18) and that there is marked interindi-
vidual variability in this.
Finally, different tissues and structures are seen to be more 
at risk across an athlete’s life span. Based on the results from 
cricket,19 it is likely that different tissue types will respond differ-
ently to different loads. For example, bone stress and tendon injuries 
have been shown to increase in response to high acute workloads, 
Downloaded by on 06/02/19
 IJSPP Vol. 12, Suppl 2, 2017
Can Physical Preparation and Medical Be Teammates?  S2-53
while joint injuries occur in response to high career workloads. 
Conversely, higher chronic workloads have been shown to protect 
against muscle injuries.
Is Session RPE Less Useful Than a GPS Metric?
Notwithstanding discussions regarding the differences between 
planned and actual training loads, session RPE is most likely the 
simplest loading metric to apply to athletes across team and indi-
vidual sports. Increasingly advanced technological solutions are 
becoming available at an astonishing rate, with many claims being 
made regarding the veracity of standard and novel measurements. 
When considering the purpose of these metrics, we need to return 
to the primary aims of describing appropriate loads to maximize 
physical improvement while simultaneously minimizing injury risk. 
In many situations (eg, in subelite populations), it would appear 
that the added accuracy provided by the more complex measures 
are clinically insignificant, and we would suggest not worth the 
additional investments. As technology continues to improve, this 
statement will almost certainly need revision, but we would sug-
gest that before investing in expensive technology, performance 
and medical staff should consider the demands of the sport, and 
whether the technology can measure the critical “metrics” for the 
sport in question.
What About “Shock Blocks”?
While we suggest that steady careful increases in load provides the 
optimal method of shifting an athlete toward high chronic training 
loads, occasionally logistical or other demands may call for brief 
periods of markedly elevated loading. We suggest that there could 
be some very useful physical and psychological gains that can be 
had through a few days of very heavy training at the end of a very 
good preseason program, but almost certainly not the week before 
a final. The difficulty then lies not in the ability to program very 
high intensity workloads, but to accurately know when these are 
appropriate, and this means a careful consideration of the risks and 
benefits associated with these approaches with all stakeholders 
before embarking on this strategy.
Equally important is the opposite to a shock block and know-
ing when it is suitable to temporarily drop training loads. Examples 
would include identification of signs of nonfunctional overreach-
ing20 or tapering before an important event.21
Training, and Changing Training, Is Not 
Risk-Free—Risk–Benefit Needs to Be 
Considered at All Stages.
Understanding training loads involves embracing the uncertainty 
associated with these risks and rewards. An event that is 90% likely 
to happen will not happen 10% of the time. Considering this risk 
in its context, as well as communicating and discussing these risks 
is key to truly having an athlete-centered program. Attempting to 
quantify the risk is the important first step, and here we suggest 
that understanding the ACWR is central. Equally important is then 
understanding all the associated risk modifiers which are just as 
crucial in making a final decision regarding loading. Consider an 
example where 2 athletes have known risk of serious injury of 5% 
and 95% respectively, if they play in a game. Cursory examination 
would suggest that we would be more likely to subject the player 
with the lower risk to loading (eg, a match). Consider now the fol-
lowing modifiers: The low-risk athlete is 19 years old and considered 
as the likely future captain of the national team, and the loading we 
are considering is a preseason intrasquad friendly. Our high-risk 
player, by contrast, is aiming to play the final professional game 
of his career, the national league final, at 34. The coaching staff 
believe that the only chance of victory in this game is if he plays, 
and there is the chance that if he plays successfully, he may have his 
career extended with another year’s contract in a foreign country. 
We would argue that the young player should almost definitely not 
play, while the veteran almost certainly should. We would surely 
argue that these factors should be considered by all parties before 
making the decisions to play or not, and carry the consequences 
equally among all decision makers.
Quantifying risks and benefits presents 1 further difficulty. It 
is practically impossible to count injuries that did not happen, and 
poor performances that did not occur. The approach required is 
minimizing risk, and in doing so, this necessarily involves quanti-
fying the apparent risk (injury, poor performance) in terms of the 
training loads, and then sharing the decisions about these risks with 
all stakeholders (coach, strength and conditioning, medical, athlete, 
manager). Clear lines and decision trees need to be established a 
priori, with appropriate mechanisms in place to ensure these are 
being adhered to once agreed upon. These procedures should be 
reviewed in light of their apparent success or failure after the fact, 
and adjusted accordingly in an iterative process.
How Does Your System Hold Up  
Under This Scrutiny?
An entire system, including all its components needs to be con-
sidered as an organic whole. From the micro level of the athlete 
“putting in” over the last 5 m of the last repetition of a session of 
repeated 400-m sprints to the macro level of a sport which enforces 
a break from training and outlaws any monitoring of athlete behavior 
during this time, and everything in between. Each of these factors is 
contributing to wins and losses, and to a certain extent injuries, to a 
differing degree, and represents opportunities for global improve-
ment in a program.
References
 1. Drew MK, Purdam C. Time to bin the term ‘overuse’ injury: is ‘training 
load error’ a more accurate term? Br J Sports Med. 2016; doi:10.1136/
bjsports-2015-095543.
 2. Gabbett TJ. The training-injury prevention paradox: should athletes 
be training smarter and harder? Br J Sports Med. 2016;50:273–280 
doi:10.1136/bjsports-2015-095788. PubMed
 3. Banister EW, Calvert TW, Savage MV, Bach T. A systems model of 
training for athletic performance. Austr J Sports Med. 1975;7:57–61.
 4. Hulin BT, Gabbett TJ, Blanch P, et al. Spikes in acute workload are 
associated with increased injury risk in elite cricket fast bowlers. Br 
J Sports Med. 2014;48:708–712 doi:10.1136/bjsports-2013-092524. 
PubMed
 5. Hulin BT, Gabbett TJ, Lawson DW, Caputi P, Sampson JA. The 
acute:chronic workload ratio predicts injury: high chronic workload 
may decrease injury risk in elite rugby league players. Br J Sports 
Med. 2016;50:231–236 doi:10.1136/bjsports-2015-094817. PubMed
 6. Gabbett TJ, Jenkins DG, Abernethy B. Physical demands of profes-
sional rugby league training and competition using microtechnology. 
J Sci Med Sport. 2012;15:80–86 doi:10.1016/j.jsams.2011.07.004. 
PubMed
Downloaded by on 06/02/19
 IJSPP Vol. 12, Suppl 2, 2017
S2-54  Gabbett and Whiteley
 7. Hulin BT, Gabbett TJ, Caputi P, Lawson DW, Sampson JA. Low 
chronic workload and the acute:chronic workload ratio are more 
predictive of injury than between-match recovery time: a two-season 
prospective cohort study in elite rugby league players. Br J Sports 
Med. 2016; 10.1136/bjsports-2015-095364. PubMed
 8. Raysmith BP, Drew MK. Performance success or failure is influenced 
by weeks lost to injury and illness in elite Australian track and field ath-
letes: a 5-year prospective study. J Sci Med Sport. 2016; doi:10.1016/j.
jsams.2015.12.515. PubMed
 9. Nosaka K, Sakamoto K, Newton M, Sacco P. How long does the 
protective effect on eccentric exercise-induced muscle damage last? 
Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2001;33:1490–1495. PubMed doi:10.1097/ 
00005768-200109000-00011
 10. Langberg H, Rosendal L, Kjaer M. Training-induced changes 
in peritendinous type I collagen turnover determined by micro-
dialysis in humans. J Physiol. 2001;534:297–302. PubMed 
doi:10.1111/j.1469-7793.2001.00297.x
 11. Langberg H, Skovgaard D, Petersen LJ, Bulow J, Kjaer M. Type I 
collagen synthesis and degradation in peritendinous tissue after exer-
cise determined by microdialysis in humans. J Physiol. 1999;521(Pt 
1):299–306. PubMed doi:10.1111/j.1469-7793.1999.00299.x
 12. Timmins RG, Shield AJ, Williams MD, Lorenzen C, Opar DA. 
Architectural adaptations of muscle to training and injury: a narra-
tive review outlining the contributions by fascicle length, pennation 
angle and muscle thickness. Br J Sports Med. 2016; doi:10.1136/
bjsports-2015-094881. PubMed
 13. Walker S, Santolamazza F, Kraemer W, Hakkinen K. Effects of pro-
longed hypertrophic resistance training on acute endocrine responses 
in young and older men. J Aging Phys Act. 2015;23:230–236 
doi:10.1123/japa.2013-0029. PubMed
 14. Sailly M, Whiteley R, Johnson A. Doppler ultrasound and tibial tuber-
osity maturation status predicts pain in adolescent male athletes with 
Osgood-Schlatter’s disease: a case series with comparison group and 
clinical interpretation. Br J Sports Med. 2013;47:93–97 doi:10.1136/
bjsports-2012-091471. PubMed
 15. Stokes IA, Clark KC, Farnum CE, Aronsson DD. Alterations in 
the growth plate associated with growth modulation by sustained 
compression or distraction. Bone. 2007;41:197–205 doi:10.1016/j.
bone.2007.04.180. PubMed
 16. Scharfbillig RW, Jones S, Scutter SD. Sever’s disease: what does the 
literature really tell us? J Am Podiatr Med Assoc. 2008;98:212–223. 
PubMed doi:10.7547/0980212
 17. Krause BL, Williams JP, Catterall A. Natural history of Osgood-
Schlatter disease. J Pediatr Orthop. 1990;10:65–68. PubMed 
doi:10.1097/01241398-199001000-00012
 18. Sailly M, Whiteley R, Read JW, et al. Pubic apophysitis: a previously 
undescribed clinical entity of groin pain in athletes. Br J Sports Med. 
2015;49:828–834 doi:10.1136/bjsports-2014-094436. PubMed
 19. Orchard JW, Blanch P, Paoloni J, et al. Cricket fast bowling workload 
patterns as risk factors for tendon, muscle, bone and joint injuries. Br 
J Sports Med. 2015;49:1064–1068 doi:10.1136/bjsports-2014-093683. 
PubMed
 20. Schmikli SL, Brink MS, de Vries WR, Backx FJ. Can we detect non-
functional overreaching in young elite soccer players and middle-long 
distance runners using field performance tests? Br J Sports Med. 
2011;45:631–636 doi:10.1136/bjsm.2009.067462. PubMed
 21. Mujika I, Goya A, Ruiz E, et al. Physiological and performance 
responses to a 6-day taper in middle-distance runners: influence of 
training frequency. Int J Sports Med. 2002;23:367–373 doi:10.1055/ 
s-2002-33146. PubMed
Downloaded by on 06/02/19
