  
1
Gadie A, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e014920. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014920
Open Access 
AbstrAct
Objectives To examine age-related differences in self-
reported sleep quality and their associations with health 
outcomes across four domains: physical health, cognitive 
health, mental health and neural health.
setting Cambridge Centre for Ageing and Neuroscience 
(Cam-CAN) is a cohort study in East Anglia/England, 
which collected self-reported health and lifestyle 
questions as well as a range of objective measures from 
healthy adults.
Participants 2406 healthy adults (age 18–98) answered 
questions about their sleep quality (Pittsburgh Sleep 
Quality Index (PSQI)) and measures of physical, cognitive, 
mental and neural health. A subset of 641 individuals 
provided measures of brain structure.
Main outcome measures PSQI scores of sleep and 
scores across tests within the four domains of health. 
Latent class analysis (LCA) is used to identify sleep types 
across the lifespan. Bayesian regressions quantify the 
presence, and absence, of relationships between sleep 
quality and health measures.
results Better self-reported sleep is generally associated 
with better health outcomes, strongly so for mental health, 
moderately for cognitive and physical health, but not for 
sleep quality and neural health. LCA identified four sleep 
types: ‘good sleepers’ (68.1%, most frequent in middle 
age), ‘inefficient sleepers’ (14.01%, most frequent in old 
age), ‘delayed sleepers’ (9.28%, most frequent in young 
adults) and ‘poor sleepers’ (8.5%, most frequent in old 
age). There is little evidence for interactions between sleep 
quality and age on health outcomes. Finally, we observe 
U-shaped associations between sleep duration and mental 
health (depression and anxiety) as well as self-reported 
general health, such that both short and long sleep were 
associated with poorer outcomes.
conclusions Lifespan changes in sleep quality are 
multifaceted and not captured well by summary measures, 
but instead should be viewed as as partially independent 
symptoms that vary in prevalence across the lifespan. 
Better self-reported sleep is associated with better health 
outcomes, and the strength of these associations differs 
across health domains. Notably, we do not observe 
associations between self-reported sleep quality and white 
matter.
bAckgrOund
Sleep is a fundamental human behaviour, 
with humans spending almost a third of their 
lives asleep. Regular and sufficient sleep 
has been shown to benefit human physi-
ology through a number of different routes, 
ranging from consolidation of memories1 
to removal of free radicals2 and neurotoxic 
waste.3 Sleep patterns are known to change 
across the lifespan in various ways, including 
decreases in quantity and quality of sleep,4 
with up to 50% of older adults report diffi-
culties initiating and/or maintaining sleep.5 
A meta-analysis of over 65 studies reflecting 
3577 subjects across the lifespan reported a 
complex pattern of changes, including an 
increase of stage 1 but a decrease of stage 2 
sleep in old age, as well as a decrease in rapid 
eye movement (REM) sleep.6 An epidemio-
logical investigation of self-reported sleep in 
older adults observed marked sex differences 
in age-related sleep changes, with females 
more likely to report disturbed sleep onset 
but men more likely to report night-time 
awakenings.7 Other findings are age-related 
physiological changes in the alignment 
of homeostatic and circadian rhythms,8 
How are age-related differences in sleep 
quality associated with health 
outcomes? An epidemiological 
investigation in a UK cohort of 
2406 adults
Andrew Gadie,1 Meredith Shafto,2 Yue Leng,3 Cam-CAN, Rogier A Kievit4
To cite: Gadie A, Shafto M, 
Leng Y, et al.  How are age-
related differences in sleep 
quality associated with health 
outcomes? An epidemiological 
investigation in a UK cohort 
of 2406 adults. BMJ Open 
2017;7:e014920. doi:10.1136/
bmjopen-2016-014920
 
► Prepublication history and 
additional material for this 
paper are available online. To 
view these files please visit the 
journal online (http:// 
dx. 
doi. 
org/ 
10. 
1136/ 
bmjopen- 
2016- 
014920).
Received 26 October 2016
Revised 7 March 2017
Accepted 8 March 2017
1MRC Cognition and Brain 
Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK
2Department of Psychology, 
University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, UK
3Department of Psychiatry, 
University of California, San 
Francisco, California, USA
4Cambridge Centre for Ageing 
and Neuroscience (Cam-CAN), 
University of Cambridge and 
MRC Cognition and Brain 
Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK
correspondence to
Dr Rogier A Kievit;  
 
rogier. 
kievit@ 
mrc- 
cbu. 
cam. 
ac. 
uk
Research
strengths and limitations of this study
 
► Broad phenotypic assessment of healthy ageing 
across multiple health domains.
 
► Advanced analytic techniques (ie, latent class 
analysis regression) allows new insights.
 
► A uniquely large neuroimaging sample combined 
with Bayesian inference allows for quantification of 
evidence for the null hypothesis.
 
► Subjective sleep measures may have drawbacks in 
older samples.
 
► Cross-sectional data precludes modelling of within 
subject changes.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014920 on 31 July 2017. Downloaded from 
 2
Gadie A, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e014920. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014920
Open Access 
decreases in sleep efficiency,9 the amount of slow-wave 
sleep and an increase in daytime napping.10 Importantly, 
interruption and loss of sleep have been shown to have 
wide-ranging adverse effects on health,11 leaving open the 
possibility that age-related changes in sleep patterns and 
quality may contribute to well-documented age-related 
declines in various health domains.
In the current study, we examine self-reported sleep 
habits in a large, population-based cohort Cambridge 
Centre for Ageing and Neuroscience (Cam-CAN12). We 
relate sleep measures to measures of health across four 
health domains: cognitive, brain health, physical and 
mental health. Our goal is to quantify and compare the 
associations between typical age-related changes in sleep 
quality and a range of measures of health measures that 
commonly decline in later life. We assess sleep using a 
self-reported measure of sleep quality, the Pittsburgh Sleep 
Quality Index (PSQI).13 The PSQI has good psychometric 
properties14 and has been shown to correlate reliably with 
diseases of ageing and mortality.15–17 Although polysom-
nography18 is commonly considered the gold standard 
of sleep quality measurement, it is often prohibitively 
challenging to employ in large samples. A recent direct 
comparison of sleep measures19 suggests that although 
subjective sleep measures (such as PSQI) may have 
certain drawbacks in older samples, they also capture 
complementary aspects of sleep quality not fully captured 
by polysomnography. Moreover, collecting self-report 
sleep quality data in a large, deeply phenotyped cohort 
offers several additional benefits.
By using a population cohort of healthy adults and 
studying a range of health outcomes in the same popu-
lation, we can circumvent challenges associated with 
studying clinical populations and provide new insights. 
First and foremost, by investigating associations between 
sleep and outcomes across multiple health domains in 
the same sample, we can make direct comparisons of 
the relative magnitude of these effects. Second, larger 
samples allow us to generate precise effect size estimates, 
as well as adduce evidence in favour of the null hypoth-
esis. Third, we investigate the associations between sleep 
quality and neural health in a uniquely large healthy 
population. Previous investigations of the consequences 
of poor sleep, especially on neural health, generally 
focused on clinical populations such as those suffering 
from insomnia.20 21 Although such studies are crucial for 
understanding pathology, the demographic idiosyncra-
sies and often modest sample sizes of these approaches 
make it hard to generalise to healthy, community-dwelling 
lifespan populations. Moreover, most studies that study 
age-related changes or differences focus on (very) old 
age, while far less is known about young and middle-aged 
adults.6 For these reasons, our focus on a healthy, multi-
modal lifespan cohort is likely to yield novel insights into 
the subtle changes in sleep quality across the lifespan.
We will focus on three questions within each health 
domain. First, is there a relationship between sleep quality 
and health? Second, does the strength and nature of this 
relationship change when age is included as a covariate? 
Third, does the strength and nature of the relationship 
change across the lifespan? We will examine these ques-
tions across each of the four health domains.
MethOds
Sample
A cohort of 254412 was recruited as part of the popu-
lation-based Cam-CAN cohort (www. 
cam- 
can. 
com), 
drawn from the general population via Primary Care 
Trust’s (PCT) lists within the Cambridge City (UK) 
area; 10 520 invitation letters were sent between 2010 
and 2012, and willing participants were invited to have 
an interview conducted in their home, with questions 
on health, lifestyle demographics and core cognitive 
assessments. Sample size was chosen to allow for 100 
participants per decile in further acquisition stages, 
giving sufficient power to separate age-related change 
from other sources of individual variation. For addi-
tional details of the project protocol, see Shafto et al12 
and Taylor et al22 and for further details of the Cam-CAN 
dataset visit http://www. 
mrc- 
cbu. 
cam. 
ac. 
uk/ 
datasets/ 
camcan/. A further subset of participants who were 
MRI compatible with no serious cognitive impairment 
participated in a neuroimaging session22 between 2011 
and 2013. Participants included were native English 
speakers, had normal or corrected to normal vision and 
hearing, and scored 25 or higher on the Mini-Mental 
State Examination (MMSE).23 Note that other, more 
stringent cut-offs are sometimes employed to screen for 
premorbid dementia, such as a score of 88 or higher 
in the Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination Revised 
(ACE-R).24 For the sake of comprehensiveness, we 
repeated our analyses using this more stringent cut-off 
(ACE-R >88), but observed no noteworthy differences 
in our findings, so we only report the findings based 
on the MMSE exclusion criteria. Ethical approval for 
the study was obtained from the Cambridgeshire 2 (now 
East of England-Cambridge Central) Research Ethics 
Committee (reference: 10/H0308/50). Participants 
gave written informed consent. The raw data and anal-
ysis code are available on signing a data sharing request 
form (see http://www. 
mrc- 
cbu. 
cam. 
ac. 
uk/ 
datasets/ 
camcan/ for more detail).
Variables
Sleep measures
Sleep quality was assessed using the PSQI, a well-validated 
self-report questionnaire13 19 designed to assist in the 
diagnosis of sleep disorders. The questions concern sleep 
patterns, habits and lifestyle questions, grouped into 
seven components, each yielding a score ranging from 0 
(good sleep/no problems) to 3 (poor sleep/severe prob-
lems), that are commonly summed to a PSQI total score 
ranging between 0 and 21, with higher scores reflecting 
poorer sleep quality.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014920 on 31 July 2017. Downloaded from 
  
3
Gadie A, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e014920. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014920
Open Access
Health measures
Cognitive health
A number of studies have found associations between 
poor sleep and cognitive decline, including in elderly 
populations. Poor sleep affects cognitive abilities such 
as executive functions25 and learning and memory 
processes,26 whereas short-term pharmaceutical inter-
ventions such as administration of melatonin improve 
both sleep quality and cognitive performance.27 28 Recent 
work29 concluded that ‘maintaining good sleep quality, 
at least in young, adulthood and middle age, promotes 
better cognitive functioning and serves to protect against 
age-related cognitive declines’. As sleep may affect various 
aspects of cognition differently,30 we include measures 
that cover a range of cognitive domains including 
memory, reasoning, response speed and verbal fluency, 
as well a measure of general cognition (see table 1 and 
Shafto et al12 for more details).
Neural health
Previous research suggests that individuals with a severe 
disruption of sleep are significantly more likely to exhibit 
signs of poor neural health.20 31 Specifically, previous 
studies have observed decreased white matter health in 
clinical populations suffering from conditions such as 
chronic insomnia,21 obstructive sleep apnoea,32 33 exces-
sively long sleep in patients with diabetes34 and REM 
sleep behaviour disorder.35 Many of these studies focus 
on white matter hyperintensities (WMHs), a measure of 
the total volume or number of regions showing low-level 
neural pathology (although some study grey matter, eg, 
Macey et al36 and Sexton et al37). WMHs are often used 
as a clinical marker, as longitudinal increases in WMHs 
are associated with increased risk of stroke, dementia and 
death38 and are more prevalent in patients with patho-
logical sleep problems.33 34 However, use of this metric in 
clinical cohorts largely leaves open the question of the 
impact of sleep quality on neural (white matter) health 
in non-clinical, healthy populations. To address this ques-
tion, we use a more general indicator of white matter 
neural health; fractional anisotropy (FA). FA is associated 
with white matter integrity and myelination.39 40 We use 
FA as recent evidence suggests that WMHs represent the 
extremes (foci) of white matter damage and that FA is 
able to capture the full continuum of white matter integ-
rity.41 For more information regarding the precise white 
matter pipeline, see Shafto et al12, Taylor et al22 and Kievit 
et al.42
Physical health
Sleep quality is also an important marker for phys-
ical health, with poorer sleep being associated with 
conditions such as obesity, diabetes mellitus,43 overall 
health11 44 and increased all-cause mortality.45 46 We 
focus on a set of variables that capture three types of 
health domains commonly associated with poor sleep: 
cardiovascular health measured by pulse, systolic and 
diastolic blood pressure,47 self-reported health, both in 
general and for the past 12 months48 and body mass 
index.49
Mental health
Previous work has found that disruptions of sleep quality 
are a central symptom of forms of psychopathology such 
as major depressive disorder, including both hypersomnia 
and insomnia,44 50 and earlier episodes of insomnia greatly 
increased the risk of later episodes of major depression.51 
Kaneita et al52 found a U-shaped association between sleep 
and depression, such that individuals regularly sleeping 
less than 6 hours, or more than 8 hours, were more likely 
to be depressed. Both depression53 and anxiety54 55 are 
commonly associated with sleep problems. To capture 
these dimensions, we used both scales of the Hospital 
Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS),56 a widely used 
and standardised questionnaire that captures self-re-
ported frequency and intensity of anxiety and depression 
symptoms.
stAtisticAl AnAlyses
We examined whether self-reported sleep patterns 
change across the lifespan, both for the PSQI sum score 
and for each of the seven PSQI components. We then 
examined the relationships between the sleep quality 
and the four health domains in three ways. First, simple 
regression of the health outcome on sleep variables to 
determine evidence for association between poor sleep 
quality and poor health outcomes. Second, we included 
age as a covariate. Finally, we included a (standard 
normal rescaled) continuous interaction term to examine 
whether there is evidence for a changing relationship 
between sleep and outcomes across the lifespan.
For all regressions, we used a default Bayesian 
approach advocated by Liang et al57, Rouder and Morey,58 
Wagenmakers59 and Wetzels et al60 which avoids several 
well-documented issues with p-values,59 allows for quanti-
fication of null effects and decreases the risk of multiple 
comparison problems.61 Bayesian regressions allows us to 
symmetrically quantify evidence in favour of, or against, 
some substantive model as compared with a baseline (eg, 
null) model. This evidential strength is expressed as a 
Bayes factor,62 which can be interpreted as the relative 
likelihood of one model versus another given the data 
and a certain prior expectation. A Bayes factor of, for 
example, 7 in favour of a simple linear regression model 
suggests that the data are seven times more likely under that 
model than an intercept only model for a given prior (for 
an empirical comparison of p-values and Bayes factors, 
see Wetzels et al60). A heuristic summary of evidential 
interpretation can be seen in figure 1.
We report log Bayes factors for (very) large effects and 
regular Bayes factors for smaller effects. To compute 
Bayes factors, we used default Bayes factor approach for 
model selection57 58 in the package BayesFactor63 using 
the open source software package R.64 As previous papers 
report associations between sleep and outcomes ranging 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014920 on 31 July 2017. Downloaded from 
 4
Gadie A, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e014920. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014920
Open Access 
Table 1 Description of health variables across each of four domains (cognitive, neural, physical, mental)
Health domain Task and description
Variable
Descriptives
References
Cognitive
Story Recall Immediate:
participants hear a short story and are asked to recall as 
accurately as possible.
Recall manually scored for similarity and 
precision (min=0, max=24)
n=2379, M=13.14, SD=4.66, 
range=0–24
92
Cognitive
Story Recall Delayed:
same as above but recall after 30 
min delay
Recall manually scored for similarity and 
precision (min=0, max=24)
n=2366, M=11.47, SD=4.92, 
range=0–24
92
Cognitive
Letter Fluency (phonemic fluency):
participants have 1 
min to generate as many words as 
possible beginning with the letter ‘p’.
Total words generated (min=0,max=30)
n=2360, M=25.38, SD=3.96, 
range=0–30
92
Cognitive
Animal Fluency (semantic fluency):
participants have 1 
min to generate as many words as 
possible in the category ‘animals’.
Total words generated (min=0,max=30)
n=2346, M=25.85, SD=4.47, 
range=0–30
92
Cognitive
Cattell Culture Fair:
test of fluid reasoning using four subtests (series 
completions, odd one out, matrices and topology)
Total correct summed across four subtests 
(min=0, max=46)
n=658, M=31.8, SD=6.79, 
range=11–44
93
Cognitive
Simple reaction time:
speed in a simple reaction time task
1/response time in seconds
n=657, M=0.37, SD=0.08, 
range=0.24–0.93
12
Cognitive
Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination, Revised:
screening test for dementia using seven subtests (orientation, 
attention and concentration, memory, fluency, language, 
visuospatial abilities, perceptual abilities)
Performance on multiple tests converted to 
min=0, max=100 range
n=2406, M=89.25, SD=13.4, 
range=0–100
24
Neural
White matter health:
measure of tract integrity using fractional anisotropy
Fractional anisotropy (min=0, max=1, 
averaged across 10 tracts)
n=641, M=0.5, SD=0.03, 
range=0.3–0.56
73
Physical
Self-reported health, in general:
participants use a four-point scale to respond to the prompt 
“Would you say for someone of your age, your own health in 
general is…”
Score from 1=excellent to 4=poor
n=2404, M=2.02, SD=0.79, 
range=1–31–3
94
Physical
Self-reported health, last 12 
months:
participants use a three-point scale to respond to the prompt 
“Over the last twelve months would you say your health has 
on the whole been…”
Score from 1=good to 3=poor
n=2398, M=1.46, SD=0.71, 
range=1–31–3
94
Physical
Systolic blood pressure
Mean systolic blood pressure in mm 
Hg, averaged across three consecutive 
measurements
n=577, M=120.11, SD=17, 
range=78.5–186
Physical
Diastolic blood pressure
Mean diastolic blood pressure in mm 
Hg, averaged across three consecutive 
measurements
n=577, M=73.14, SD=10.48, 
range=49–115.5
Physical
Resting pulse
Mean pulse in beats per minute, averaged 
across three consecutive measurements
n=578, M=65.69, SD=10.5, 
range=40–110.5
Continued
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014920 on 31 July 2017. Downloaded from 
  
5
Gadie A, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e014920. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014920
Open Access
Health domain Task and description
Variable
Descriptives
References
Physical
Body Mass Index (BMI)
(weight in kg)/(height in m2)
n=584, M=25.77, SD=4.59, 
range=16.75–48.32
95
Mental health
Anxiety Subscale (Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale 
(HADS)):
participant’s response to seven questions about anxiety-
related behaviours
Seven questions rated on 0–3 scale (‘often’ 
to ‘very seldom’) (min=0, max=21)
n=2391, M=5.13, SD=3.31, 
range=0–17
56
Mental health
Depression Subscale (HADS): participant’s response to seven 
questions about depression-related behaviours
Seven questions rated on 0–3 scale (‘often’ 
to ‘very seldom’) (min=0, max=21)
n=2373, M=3.32, SD=2.91, 
range=0–14
For each variable, details are given including a description of the task it is derived from, relevant citations, a brief definition and descriptive statistics.
Table 1 Continued 
Figure 1 Descriptive interpretation of Bayes factors.
from absent to considerable in size, we used the default, 
symmetric Cauchy prior with width 
√
2
2  which translates 
to a 50% confidence that the true effect will lie between 
−0.707 and 0.707. Prior to further analysis, scores on all 
outcomes were transformed to a standard normal distri-
bution, and any scores exceeding a z-score of 4 or −4 
were recoded as missing (aggregate percentage outliers 
across the four health domains: cognitive, 0.41%; mental, 
0.16%; neural, 0.37%; physical, 0.031%).
results
Age-related differences in sleep quality
First, we examined sleep changes across the lifespan by 
examining age-related differences in the PSQI sum score 
(n=2178, M=5.16, SD=3.35, range=0–19). Regressing the 
PSQI global score on age (see online supplementary 
figure 1) showed evidence for a positive relationship 
across the lifespan (logBF10=10.45). This suggests that 
on the whole, sleep quality decreases across the lifespan 
(note that higher PSQI scores correspond to worse sleep). 
Although we observed strong statistical evidence for an 
age-related difference (‘extreme’ according to Jeffreys62), 
age explained only 1.23% of the variance in the PSQI total 
score. Next, we regressed each of the seven components 
on age in the same manner. In online supplementary 
figure 2, we see that age has varying and specific effects 
on different aspects of sleep quality and did not worsen 
uniformly across the lifespan. For example, we observed 
moderate evidence that sleep latency did not change 
across the lifespan (sleep latency, BF01=9.25, in favour 
of the null), sleep quality showed no evidence for either 
change or stasis (BF10=1.63) and one sleep component, 
daytime dysfunction, improved slightly across the lifespan 
(BF10=7.03). The strongest age-related decline is that of 
efficiency, showing an r-squared of 6.6%.
Finally, we entered all seven components into a 
Bayesian multiple regression simultaneously to examine 
to what extent they could, together, predict age. The best 
model included every component except sleep latency 
(logBF10=142.71). Interestingly, this model explained 
13.66% of the variance in age, compared with 1.23% for 
the PSQI total score and 6.6% for the strongest single 
component (efficiency). This shows that lifespan changes 
in self-reported sleep are heterogeneous and partially 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014920 on 31 July 2017. Downloaded from 
 6
Gadie A, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e014920. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014920
Open Access 
Figure 2 Latent class analysis. Panel (A) shows the sleep 
quality profiles for each of the four classes. Panel (B) shows 
the conditional probability of belonging to each class across 
the lifespan.
independent and that specific patterns and components 
need to be taken into account simultaneously to fully 
understand age-related differences in sleep quality. These 
findings show that neither the PSQI sum score nor the 
sleep components in isolation fully capture differences in 
sleep quality across the lifespan.
The analysis above suggests that conceptualising ‘poor 
sleep’ as a single dimension does not reflect the subtle-
ties in lifespan changes—an often computed sumscore 
changes little across the lifespan, whereas the totality 
of sleep symptoms shows far stronger, and more subtle, 
patterns. To better elucidate individual differences in 
sleep quality, we next use latent class analysis (LCA).65 
This technique will allow us examine individual differ-
ences in sleep quality across the lifespan in more detail 
than afforded by simple linear regressions: rather than 
examining continuous variation in sleep components, 
LCA classifies individuals into different sleep types, each 
associated with a distinct profile of ‘sleep symptoms’. If 
there are specific constellations of sleep problems across 
individuals, we can quantify and visualise such sleep types.
To analyse the data in this manner, we binarised the 
responses on each component into ‘good’ (0 or 1) or 
‘poor’ (2 or 3). Our measures of PSQI symptoms straddle 
the border between continuous and categorical—
although some are fully continuous (eg, sleep latency) 
others are less so. For instance, although scored on a 
range of four several of the scales (such as Subjective 
Sleep quality) have implicitly binary response options of 
‘very good’ and ‘fairly good’ on the one hand and ‘fairly 
bad’ and ‘very bad’ on the other. As analytical work in 
psychometrics66 suggests that Likert-like graded scales 
can be treated as continuous only from five ordinal cate-
gories upwards, by fitting an LCA we are erring on the 
side of caution (although a latent profile analysis would 
likely give similar results). Note that although our anal-
ysis divides individuals into discrete classes with specific 
profiles, it is still possible to examine the conditional 
response likelihood of responding ‘yes’ to each symptom 
as a continuous metric (between 0 and 1) that reflects 
the nature of the association between the class and the 
outcome. By modelling sleep ‘types’, we hope to illustrate 
the complex patterns in a more intelligible manner—
notably, doing so allows us to examine whether the 
likelihood of belonging to any sleep ‘type’ changes as a 
function of age.
Next, we examined evidence for distinct sleep types 
using a set of possible models (varying from 2 to 6 sleep 
types). We found that the four-class solution gives the best 
solution, according to the Bayesian Information Crite-
rion67 (BIC for four classes=11 825.65, lowest BIC for 
other solutions=11 884.92 (five classes) (with 50 repeti-
tions per class, at 5000 maximum iterations)). Next, we 
inspected the nature of the sleep types, the prevalence of 
each ‘sleep type’ in the population and whether the like-
lihood of belonging to a certain sleep type changes across 
the lifespan. See figure 2 for the component profiles of 
the four sleep types identified.
Class 1, ‘good sleepers’, makes up 68.1% of partici-
pants. Their sleep profile is shown in figure 2A, top left, 
and is characterised by a low probability of responding 
‘poor’ to any of the sleep components. Class 2, ‘ineffi-
cient sleepers’, makes up 14.01% of the participants and 
is characterised by poor sleep efficiency: members of this 
group uniformly (100%) report poor sleep efficiency, 
despite relatively low prevalence of other sleep problems, 
as seen in figure 2A, top right. Class 3, ‘delayed sleepers’ 
seen in the bottom left of figure 2A, makes up 9.28% of 
the participants: characterised by modestly poor sleep 
across the board, but a relatively high probability of poor 
scores on sleep latency (59%), sleep quality (51%) and 
sleep disturbance (31%). Finally, class 4, ‘poor sleepers’, 
makes up 8.5% of the participants, shown bottom right 
in figure 2A. Their responses to any of the seven sleep 
components are likely to be ‘poor’ or ‘very poor’, almost 
universally so for ‘sleep quality’ (94%) and ‘sleep effi-
ciency’ (97.7%).
Next, we included age as a covariate (simultaneously 
including a covariate is known as latent class regression or 
concomitant-variable latent class models).68 This analysis, 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014920 on 31 July 2017. Downloaded from 
  
7
Gadie A, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e014920. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014920
Open Access
Figure 3 Multiple regressions between sleep components 
and cognitive health. The strength of the effect is colour 
coded by Bayes factor and the effect size is shown as 
r-squared (as a percentage out of 100). Sample varies across 
components and measures due to varying missingness. 
Cattell and reaction time were measured only in the imaging 
cohort: mean N=648, N=11.11. Sample sizes for five other 
domains are similar (mean n=2300.25, SD=65.57). ACE-R, 
Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination Revised.
visualised in figure 2B, shows that the probability of 
membership of each classes compared with the refer-
ence class (good sleepers) changes significantly across 
the lifespan for each of the classes (class 2 vs class 1: 
beta/SE=0.05/0.00681, t=7.611; class 3 vs class 1: beta/
SE=−0.01948/0.0055, t=−3.54; class 4 vs class 1: beta/SE 
0.01269/0.00478, t=2.655), for more details on gener-
alised logit coefficients, see Linzer and Lewis.65 The 
frequency of class 1 (good sleepers) peaks in middle to 
late adulthood, dropping increasingly quickly after age 50. 
Class 2 (inefficient sleepers) are relatively rare in younger 
individuals, but the prevalence increases rapidly in indi-
viduals over age 50. On the other hand, class 3 (delayed 
sleepers) shows a steady decrease in the probability of 
an individual showing this profile across the lifespan, 
suggesting that this specific pattern of poor sleep is more 
commonly associated with younger adults. Finally, the 
proportion of class 4 (poor sleepers) members increases 
only slightly across the lifespan. Together, the LCA 
provides additional evidence that the PSQI sum score as 
an indicator of sleep quality does not fully capture the 
subtleties of age-related differences. Age-related changes 
in sleep patterns are characterised by specific, clustered 
patterns of sleep problems that cannot be adequately 
characterised by summation of the component scores. 
The above analyses show how both a summary measure 
and individual measures of sleep quality change across the 
lifespan. Next, we examined the relationships between 
sleep quality measures (seven components and the global 
PSQI score) and health variables (specific variables across 
four domains, as shown in table 1).
sleep, health domains and age
Cognitive health
First, we examined the relationships between sleep quality 
and seven measures of cognitive health (see table 1 for 
details). We visualise our findings using tileplots.69 Each 
cell shows the numeric effect size (r-squared, 0–100) of 
the bivariate association between a sleep component and 
a health outcome, colour coded by the statistical evidence 
for a relationship using the Bayes factor. If the parameter 
estimate is positive, the r-squared value has the symbol ‘+’ 
added (note the interpretation depends on the nature of 
the variable, cf. table 1).
As can be seen in online supplementary figure 3, several 
relationships exist between measures of cognitive health 
and measures of sleep quality. However, these results 
attenuate in a multiple regression model including age as 
shown in figure 3.
The cognitive abilities most strongly associated with 
poor sleep are a measure of general cognitive health, 
ACE-R and a test of verbal phonemic fluency. Two 
patterns emerged. First, the strongest predictor across 
the simple and multiple regressions was for the PSQI total 
score. Tentatively, this suggests that a cumulative index 
of sleep problems, rather than any specific pattern of 
poor sleep, is the biggest risk factor for poorer cognitive 
performance. Second, after controlling for age, the most 
strongly affected cognitive measure is phonemic fluency, 
the ability to generate name as many different words as 
possible starting with a given letter within a minute. Verbal 
fluency is commonly used as a neuropsychological test.70 
Previous work suggests that it depends on both the ability 
to cluster (generating words within a semantic cluster) 
and to switch (switching between categories) and is espe-
cially vulnerable to frontal and temporal lobe damage 
(with specific regions dependant on either a semantic 
or phonemic task71). Although modest in size, our find-
ings suggests this task, dependent on multiple executive 
processes, is particularly affected by poor sleep quality.72 
The second strongest association was with the ACE-R, a 
general cognitive test battery similar in style and content 
to the MMSE. Little evidence for interactions with age was 
observed (mean logBF10=−2.08, see online supplemen-
tary figure 4), suggesting that the negative associations 
between sleep and cognitive performance are a constant 
feature across the lifespan, rather than specifically in 
elderly individuals. Together, this suggests that poor sleep 
quality is modestly but consistently associated with poorer 
general cognitive performance across the lifespan, most 
strongly with semantic fluency.
Neural health
Using diffusion tensor imaging, we estimated a general 
index of white matter integrity in 10 tracts73 (shown in 
online Supplementary figure 5), by taking the average FA 
in each white matter region of interest (ROI) (see Kievit 
et al42 for more information). We used the data from a 
subsample of 641 individuals (age M=54.87, range 18.48–
88.96) who were scanned in a 3T MRI scanner (for more 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014920 on 31 July 2017. Downloaded from 
 8
Gadie A, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e014920. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014920
Open Access 
Figure 5 Physical health and sleep quality. Numbers 
represent r-squared. Strong associations between general 
indices of health and sleep quality are found, and several 
modest relationships with BMI and sleep quality. Self-
reported health (12 months and general) were measured 
in the full cohort (mean=2315.37, SD=66.29), the other 
indicators were measured in the imaging cohort only 
(mean=569.87, SD=11.16). BMI, body mass index.
Figure 4 Multiple regressions between sleep components 
and neural health. Each cell represents the relationship 
between a sleep component and the mean neural health in 
a given tract as index by fractional anisotrophy. Numbers 
represented in r-squared. White matter tracts abbreviations: 
uncinate fasciculus (UNC), superior longitudinal fasciculus 
(SLF), inferior longitudinal fasciculus (ILF), inferior fronto-
occipital fasciculus (IFOF), forceps minor (FMin), forceps 
major (FMaj), cerebrospinal tract (CST), the ventral cingulate 
gyrus (CINGHipp), the dorsal cingulate gyrus (CING) and the 
anterior thalamic radiations (ATR). N varies slightly across 
components due to varying missingness (N mean=631.325, 
SD=10.32).
details regarding the pipeline, sequence and processing 
steps, see Taylor et al22 and Kievit et al42). Regressing 
neural white matter ROI’s on sleep quality, we find several 
small effects, with the strongest associations between 
sleep efficiency and neural health (see online supple-
mentary figure 6). All effects are such that poorer sleep is 
associated with poorer neural health, apart from a small 
effect in the opposite direction for uncinate and daytime 
dysfunction (BF10=6.20). However, when age is included 
as a covariate, the negative associations between sleep 
quality and white matter health are attenuated virtually to 
zero (figure 4, mean/median BF10=0.18/.10), with Bayes 
factors providing strong evidence for the lack of associ-
ations between sleep quality and white matter integrity. 
One exception was observed: the use of sleep medication 
is associated with better neural health in the corticospinal 
tract, a region previously found to be affected by patho-
logical sleep problems such as sleep apnoea.33 However, 
this effect is very small (BF10=3.24) given the magnitude 
of the sample and the range of comparisons, so should be 
interpreted with caution.
Finally, we tested for any interactions by including a 
mean-scaled interaction term (sleep*age, see online 
supplementary figure 7). This analysis found evidence for a 
significant interaction, between the superior longitudinal 
fasciculus (SLF) and sleep medication (BF10=13.77), such 
that better neural health in the SLF was associated with 
the use of sleep medication more strongly in older adults. 
Together, these findings suggest that in general, once age 
is taken into account, self-reported sleep problems in a 
non-clinical sample are not associated with poorer neural 
health, although there is some evidence for a modest asso-
ciations between better neural health in specific tracts and 
the use of sleep medication in the elderly.
Physical health
Next, we examined whether sleep quality is associated 
with physical health. Figure 5 shows the simple regres-
sions between sleep quality and physical health. Strong 
associations were found between poor overall sleep 
(PSQI sum score) and poor self-reported health, both 
in general (logBF10=77.51) and even more strongly for 
health in the past 12 months (logBF10=91.25). This may 
be because poorer sleep, across all components, directly 
affects general physical health43 74 or because people 
subjectively experience sleep quality as a fundamental 
part of overall general health. A second association was 
between BMI and poor sleep quality, most strongly poor 
duration (logBF10=4.69).
 This not only replicates previous findings but is in line 
with an increasing body of evidence that suggests that 
short sleep duration causes metabolic changes, which 
in turn increases the risk of both diabetes mellitus and 
obesity.43 75 76 Next, we examined whether these effects 
were attenuated once age was included. We show that 
although the relationships are slightly weaker, the overall 
pattern remains (see online supplementary figure 8), 
suggesting that these associations are not merely co-oc-
currences across the lifespan. Our findings suggest 
self-reported sleep quality, especially sleep duration, is 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014920 on 31 July 2017. Downloaded from 
  
9
Gadie A, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e014920. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014920
Open Access
Figure 6 Interaction between sleep quality and anxiety in 
the youngest third (n=723, age 18.48–46.2) compared with 
the oldest third of participants (n=724, age 71.79–98.88). 
HADS, Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale; PSQI, 
Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index.
related to differences in physical health outcomes in a 
healthy sample.
Finally, there was evidence of a single interaction with 
age (see online supplementary figure 9). Although poor 
sleep duration was associated with higher diastolic blood 
pressure in younger adults, it was associated with lower 
diastolic blood pressure in older individuals (BF10=8.53). 
This may reflect the fact that diastolic blood pressure is 
related to cardiovascular health in a different way across 
the lifespan, although given the small effect size it should 
be interpreted with caution.
Mental health
Finally, we examined the relationship between sleep 
quality and mental health, as measured by the HADS.56 
One benefit of the HADS in this context is that, unlike 
some other definitions (eg, the Diagnostic and Statis-
tical Manual of Mental Disorders-V), sleep quality is not 
an integral (scored) symptom of these dimensions. As 
shown in online supplementary figure 10, there are very 
strong relationships between all aspects of sleep quality 
and measures of both anxiety and depression. The 
strongest predictors of depression are daytime dysfunc-
tion (logBF10=245.9, r2=19.26%), followed by the overall 
sleep score (logBF10=170.5, r2=14.92%) and sleep quality 
(logBF10=106.8, r2=8.9%). The effects size for anxiety was 
comparable but slightly smaller in magnitude. When age 
is included as a covariate, the relationships remained 
virtually unchanged (see online supplementary figure 
11), suggesting that these relationships are present 
throughout across the lifespan. These findings replicate 
and extend previous work, suggesting that sleep quality 
is strongly associated with both anxiety and depression 
across the lifespan.
Finally, we examined a model with an interaction 
term (see online supplementary figure 12). Most promi-
nently, we found interactions with age in the relationship 
between HADS anxiety and the PSQI total, such that for 
the relationship between anxiety and overall sleep quality 
is stronger in younger adults (BF10=4.6, see figure 6). 
Together, our findings show that poor sleep quality is 
consistently, strongly and stably associated with poorer 
mental health across the adult lifespan.
non-linear associations between sleep and health outcomes
In the above analyses, we focused on linear associations 
between symptoms and health outcomes. However, for 
one aspect of sleep, namely, sleep duration (in hours), 
evidence exists that these associations are likely to be 
non-linear, such that both shorter and longer than 
average sleep are associated with poorer health outcomes 
(eg, Grandner and Drummond,77 Kaneita et al78 and 
Grandner et al79). This is echoed in clinical criteria for 
depression, which commonly include both hypersomnia 
and hyposomnia as ‘sleep disruption’ symptoms. In other 
words, both too much and too little sleep are suboptimal. 
To examine whether we observe evidence for non-lineari-
ties, we examined the relationship between raw scores on 
sleep duration (in hours, not transformed to PSQI norms) 
and health outcomes across the four domains. If the asso-
ciation between sleep and outcomes is indeed U-shaped 
(or inverted U, depending on the scale), then a Bayesian 
regression would prefer the less parsimonious model that 
includes the quadratic term. We observed no non-linear 
associations between any neural or cognitive health vari-
ables. We found strong evidence for a quadratic (subscript 
q) over a linear (subscript l) associations between sleep 
duration and HADS anxiety (logBFql=19.98), even 
more strongly so with HADS depression (logBFql=26.41, 
figure 7A shows the strongest curvilinear association, 
namely with depression). We found a similar U-shaped 
curve with general health (BFql=277.81) and self-reported 
health over the last 12 months (BFql=887.6), the former 
shown in figure 7B. Together, these analyses support 
previous conclusions that some (although not all) poorer 
health outcomes can be associated with both too much 
and too little sleep.
discussiOn
In this study, we report on the associations between age-re-
lated differences in sleep quality and health outcomes 
in a large, age-heterogeneous sample of communi-
ty-dwelling adults of the Cam-CAN cohort. We found that 
sleep quality generally decreases across the lifespan, most 
strongly for sleep efficiency. However age-related changes 
in sleep patterns are complex and multifaceted, so we 
used LCA to identify ‘sleep types’ associated with specific 
sleep quality profiles. We found that younger adults are 
more likely than older adults to display a pattern of sleep 
problems characterised by poor sleep quality and longer 
sleep latency, whereas older adults are more likely to 
display inefficient sleeping, characterised by long periods 
spent in bed while not asleep. Moreover, the probability 
of being a ‘good’ sleeper, unaffected by any adverse 
sleep symptoms, decreases considerably after age 50. 
Notably, closer investigation of the sleep classes reveals 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014920 on 31 July 2017. Downloaded from 
 10
Gadie A, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e014920. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014920
Open Access 
Figure 7 Curvilinear associations between sleep duration in hours and (A) Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) 
depression and (B) general health (self-reported). For visual clarity, a small amount of random jitter was added to the data 
points.
likely further complexities of age-related differences. The 
category ‘poor sleepers’, most prevalent in older adults, 
shows high conditional likelihood of ‘poor sleep’ across 
all symptoms except ‘daytime dysfunction’. One possible 
explanation is that almost all individuals in this group are 
beyond retirement age. For this reason, they likely have 
greater flexibility in tailoring their day-to-day activities to 
their energy levels (as opposed to individuals working full 
time) and are therefore less likely to consider themselves 
‘disrupted’ even in the presence of suboptimal sleep. 
Although more detailed, interview-based investigations 
would be necessary to examine the precise nature of 
these findings, it stands to reason that certain symptoms 
change not just in prevalence but also in meaning across 
the lifespan.
One key strength of our broad phenotypic assessment 
is that it allows for direct comparison of the different 
measures of sleep quality and four key health domains. 
We found strongest associations between sleep quality 
and mental health, moderate relations between sleep 
quality and physical health and cognitive health and 
sleep, virtually all such that poorer sleep is associated 
with poorer health outcomes. We did not find evidence 
for associations between self-reported sleep and neural 
health. Notably, the relationships we observed are mostly 
stable across the lifespan, affecting younger and older 
individuals alike. A notable exception to these effects is 
the absence of any strong relation (after controlling for 
age) between sleep quality and neural health as indexed 
by tract-based average fractional anisotropy. Perhaps 
surprisingly, given the strong relationships in the same 
sample between sleep and other outcomes (eg, mental 
health, online supplementary figure 10), we found that 
self-reported sleep problems in a non-clinical sample 
are not associated with fractional anisotropy above and 
beyond old age. This is despite the fact that previous 
work within the same cohort observed moderate to strong 
associations between white matter and various cognitive 
outcomes.42 80 81 However, although notable, our finding 
does not rule out that such associations do exist with 
other white matter metrics, that they would be observed 
with objective measures of sleep such as polysomnog-
raphy, or that the co-occurrence of age-related declines in 
sleep quality and white matter share an underlying causal 
association that cannot be teased apart in a cross-sectional 
sample.
One strength of our study is the assessment of neuro-
imaging metrics, namely, fractional anisotropy, in a 
large, community-dwelling healthy population. Frac-
tional anisotropy is often used in studies of ageing (eg, 
Madden)82 is relatively reliable83 and is sensitive to clin-
ical anomalies such as WMHs. However, the relationship 
between FA and white matter health is indirect40 84 and 
drawbacks include its inability to distinguish crossing 
fibres (eg, Jones et al40 and Wandell84) and vulnera-
bility to movement and the fact that it likely reflects a 
combination of underlying physiological properties. 
Various alternative white matter metrics exist, including 
summary measures of diffusivity (eg, axial/radial/mean 
diffusivity), volumetric measures of white matter hyper-
intensity and various innovative measures currently 
in development, but assessment of their physiological 
validity is ongoing.84 85
While there are limitations of self-report measures 
including in older cohorts,19 including the fact that they 
likely reflect different aspects of sleep health than poly-
somnography (sleep in the lab), our results suggest that 
there are considerable advantages in using self-reported 
sleep measures: first, obtaining sleep quality data in 
a large and broadly phenotyped sample is feasible and 
second, our results demonstrated clear and consistent 
associations across multiple domains for both subjective 
(eg, self-reported health) and objective measures (eg, 
memory tests, BMI), which both replicate and extend 
previous lab-based sleep findings. Future work should 
ideally simultaneously measure polysomnography and 
self-report in longitudinal, large-scale cohorts to fully 
capture the range of overlapping and complementary 
relations between different aspects of sleep quality and 
health outcomes.19
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014920 on 31 July 2017. Downloaded from 
  
11
Gadie A, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e014920. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014920
Open Access
For both self-report and objective measures of sleep 
quality, an open question is that of causality: does poor 
sleep affect health outcomes, do health problems affect 
sleep, are they both markers of some third problem or 
do causal influences go both ways? Most likely, all these 
patterns occur to varying degrees. Previous studies have 
shown that sleep quality causally affects health outcomes 
such as diabetes43 and memory consolidation,1 while 
other evidence suggests that depression directly affects 
sleep quality86 87 and that damage to neural structures 
may affect sleep regulation.88 Although our findings are 
in keeping with previous findings, our cross-sectional 
sample cannot tease apart the causal direction of the 
observed associations, so more work remains to be done 
to disentangle these complex causal pathways.
In our paper, we focus on a healthy, age-heterogeneous 
community-dwelling sample. This allows us to study the 
associations between healthy ageing and self-reported 
sleep quality, but comes with two key limitations of the 
interpretations of our findings. First and foremost, our 
findings are cross-sectional, not longitudinal. This means 
that we can make inferences about age-related differ-
ences, but not necessarily age-related changes.89 90 One 
reason why cross-sectional and longitudinal estimates may 
diverge is that older adults can be thought of as cohorts 
that differ from the younger adults in more ways than 
age alone. For example, our age range includes individ-
uals born in the twenties and thirties of the 20th century. 
Compared with someone born in the 21st century, these 
individuals will likely have experienced various differ-
ences during early life development (eg, less broadly 
accessible education, lower quality of healthcare, poorer 
nutrition and similar patterns). For some of our measures, 
these are inherent limitations—truly longitudinal study 
of neural ageing is inherently impossible as scanner 
technology has not been around sufficiently long. This 
means our findings likely reflect a combination of effects 
attributable to age-related changes as well as baseline 
differences between subpopulations that may affect both 
mean differences and developmental trajectories.
Second, our sample reflects an atypical population in 
the sense that they are willing and able to visit the labo-
ratory on multiple occasions for testing sessions. This 
subsample is likely a more healthy subset of the full 
population, which will mean the range of (poor) sleep 
quality as well as (poorer) health outcomes will likely be 
less extreme than in the full population. However, this 
challenge is not specific to our sample. In fact, as the 
Cam-CAN cohort was developed using stratified sampling 
based on primary healthcare providers, our sample is 
likely as population representative as is feasible for a 
cohort of this magnitude and phenotypic breadth (see 
Shafto et al12 for further details). Nonetheless, a healthier 
subsample may lead to restriction of range,91 that is, an 
attenuation of the strength of the associations observed 
between sleep quality and health outcomes. Practically, 
this means that our results likely generalise to comparable, 
healthy community-dwelling adults, but not necessarily to 
populations that include those affected by either clinical 
sleep deprivation or other serious health conditions.
cOnclusiOns
Taken together, our study allows several conclusions. First, 
although we replicate the age-related deterioration in 
some aspects of sleep quality, other aspects remain stable 
or even improve. Second, we show that the profile of sleep 
quality changes across the lifespan. This is important 
methodologically, as it suggests that PSQI sum scores 
do not capture the full picture, especially in age-het-
erogeneous samples. Moreover, it is important from a 
psychological standpoint: we show that ‘sleep quality’ is 
a multidimensional construct and should be treated as 
such if we wish to understand the complex effects and 
consequences of sleep quality across the lifespan. Third, 
moderate to strong relations exist between sleep quality 
and cognitive, physical and mental health, and these rela-
tions largely remain stable across the lifespan. In contrast, 
we show evidence that in non-clinical populations, poorer 
self-reported sleep is not reliably associated with poorer 
neural health. Finally, we find that for absolute sleep 
duration, we replicate previous findings that both longer 
and shorter than average amounts of sleep are in associa-
tion with poorer self-reported general health and higher 
levels of depression and anxiety.
Together with previous experimental and longitudinal 
evidence, our findings suggest that at least some age-re-
lated decreases in health outcomes may be due to poorer 
sleep quality. We show that self-reported sleep quality 
can be an important indicator of other aspects of healthy 
functioning throughout the lifespan, especially for 
mental and general physical health. Our findings suggest 
that accurate understanding of sleep quality is essential 
in understanding and supporting healthy ageing across 
the lifespan.
correction notice This article has been corrected since it was published online. 
Author comments, erroneously inserted in the PDF, have been removed. 
twitter @rogierK
Acknowledgements We would like to thank Richard Morey and Eric-Jan 
Wagenmakers for valuable suggestions regarding the use of the BayesFactor 
package. We are grateful to the Cambridge Centre for Ageing and Neuroscience 
respondents and their primary care teams in Cambridge for their participation in 
this study. We also thank colleagues at the MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit 
MEG and MRI facilities for their assistance.
collaborators The Cam-CAN corporate author consists of the project principal 
personnel: Lorraine K Tyler, Carol Brayne, Edward T Bullmore, Andrew C Calder, 
Rhodri Cusack, Tim Dalgleish, John Duncan, Richard N Henson, Fiona E Matthews, 
William D Marslen-Wilson, James B Rowe; Research Associates: Karen Campbell, 
Teresa Cheung, Simon Davis, Linda Geerligs, Anna McCarrey, Abdur Mustafa, 
Darren Price, David Samu, Jason R Taylor, Matthias Treder, Kamen Tsvetanov, Janna 
van Belle, Nitin Williams; Research Assistants: Lauren Bates, Tina Emery, Sharon 
ErzinÃ§lioglu, Sofia Gerbase, Stanimira Georgieva, Claire Hanley, Beth Parkin, David 
Troy; Affiliated Personnel: Tibor Auer, Marta Correia, Lu Gao, Emma Green, Rafael 
Henriques; Research Interviewers: Jodie Allen, Gillian Amery, Liana Amunts, Anne 
Barcroft, Amanda Castle, Cheryl Dias, Jonathan Dowrick, Melissa Fair, Hayley Fisher, 
Anna Goulding, Adarsh Grewal, Geoff Hale, Andrew Hilton, Frances Johnson, Patricia 
Johnston, Thea Kavanagh-Williamson, Magdalena Kwasniewska, Alison McMinn, 
Kim Norman, Jessica Penrose, Fiona Roby, Diane Rowland, John Sargeant, Maggie 
Squire, Beth Stevens, Aldabra Stoddart, Cheryl Stone, Tracy Thompson, Ozlem 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014920 on 31 July 2017. Downloaded from 
 12
Gadie A, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e014920. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014920
Open Access 
Yazlik; administrative staff: Dan Barnes, Marie Dixon, Jaya Hillman, Joanne Mitchell, 
Laura Villis.
contributors AG, RK and MS designed the study. AG and RAK performed the 
analyses. CC organised and conducted the data collection. AG, MS and RAK wrote 
the manuscript. YL provided considerable expertise on sleep and poor sleep 
outcomes. All authors approved the final manuscript.
Funding The Cambridge Centre for Ageing and Neuroscience (Cam-CAN) research 
was supported by the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council 
(grant number BB/H008217/1). RAK is supported by the Sir Henry Wellcome 
Trust (grant number 107392/Z/15/Z) and by the UK Medical Research Council 
Programme (MC-A060-5PR60).
competing interests None declared.
ethics approval Ethical approval for the study was obtained from the Cambridgeshire 
2 (now East of England-Cambridge Central) Research Ethics Committee (reference: 
10/H0308/50).
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
data sharing statement The raw data and analysis code are available upon 
signing a data sharing request form (see http://www. 
mrc- 
cbu. 
cam. 
ac. 
uk/ 
datasets/ 
camcan/ for more detail).
Open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the 
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY 4.0) license, which permits 
others to distribute, remix, adapt and build upon this work, for commercial use, 
provided the original work is properly cited. See: http:// 
creativecommons. 
org/ 
licenses/ 
by/ 
4. 
0/
© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of the 
article) 2017. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise 
expressly granted.
reFerences
 1. Stickgold R. Sleep-dependent memory consolidation. Nature 
2005;437:1272–8.
 2. Inoué S, Honda K, Komoda Y. Sleep as neuronal detoxification and 
restitution. Behav Brain Res 1995;69(1-2):91–6.
 3. Xie L, Kang H, Xu Q, et al. Sleep drives metabolite clearance from the 
adult brain. Science 2013;342:373–7.
 4. D’Ambrosio C, Redline S. Impact of Sleep and Sleep Disturbances 
on Obesity and Cancer. Redline S, Berger NA, editors. New York, NY: 
Springer New York, 2014.
 5. Crowley K. Sleep and sleep disorders in older adults. Neuropsychol 
Rev 2011;21:41–53.
 6. Ohayon MM, Carskadon MA, Guilleminault C, et al. Meta-analysis of 
quantitative sleep parameters from childhood to old age in healthy 
individuals: developing normative sleep values across the human 
lifespan. Sleep 2004;27:1255–73.
 7. Middelkoop HA, Smilde-van den Doel DA, Neven AK, et al. 
Subjective sleep characteristics of 1,485 males and females aged 
50-93: effects of sex and age, and factors related to self-evaluated 
quality of sleep. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 1996;51:M108–M115.
 8. Schmidt C, Peigneux P
, Cajochen C. Age-related changes in sleep 
and circadian rhythms: impact on cognitive performance and 
underlying neuroanatomical networks. Front Neurol 2012;3.
 9. Leng Y, Wainwright NW, Cappuccio FP
, et al. Self-reported sleep 
patterns in a British population cohort. Sleep Med 2014;15:295–302.
 
10. Stanley N. The physiology of sleep and the impact of ageing. Euro 
Urol Suppl 2005;3:17–23.
 
11. Briones B, Adams N, Strauss M, et al. Relationship between 
sleepiness and general health status. Sleep 1996;19:583–8.
 
12. Shafto MA, Tyler LK, Dixon M, et al. The Cambridge Centre for 
Ageing and Neuroscience (Cam-CAN) study protocol: a cross-
sectional, lifespan, multidisciplinary examination of healthy cognitive 
ageing. BMC Neurol 2014;14:204.
 
13. Buysse D, Reynolds C, Monk T, Berman S, Kupfer D. the Pittsburgh 
Sleep Quality Index: a new instrument for Psychiatric Practise and 
Research, 1988:193–213. pdf.
 
14. Carpenter JS, Andrykowski MA. Psychometric evaluation of the 
Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index. J Psychosom Res 1998;45:5–13.
 
15. Kang SH, Yoon IY, Lee SD, et al. The impact of sleep apnoea 
syndrome on nocturia according to age in men. BJU Int 
2012;110:E851-6:E851–E856.
 
16. Lou P
, Qin Y, Zhang P
, et al. Association of sleep quality and quality 
of life in type 2 diabetes mellitus: a cross-sectional study in China. 
Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2015;107:69–76.
 
17. Mellor A, Waters F
, Olaithe M, et al. Sleep and aging: examining 
the effect of psychological symptoms and risk of sleep-disordered 
breathing. Behav Sleep Med 2014;12:222–34.
 
18. Kushida CA, Littner MR, Morgenthaler T, et al. Practice parameters 
for the indications for PSG—AASM Practice Parameters for the 
indications for polysomnography and related procedures: an update 
for 2005. Sleep 2005;28.
 
19. Landry GJ, Best JR, Liu-Ambrose T. Measuring sleep quality in older 
adults: a comparison using subjective and objective methods. front 
aging neurosci. Frontiers 2015;77.
 
20. Altena E, Vrenken H, Van Der Werf YD, et al. Reduced orbitofrontal 
and parietal gray matter in chronic insomnia: a voxel-based 
morphometric study. Biol Psychiatry 2010;67:182–5.
 
21. Spiegelhalder K, Regen W, Prem M, et al. Reduced anterior internal 
capsule white matter integrity in primary insomnia. Hum Brain Mapp 
2014;35:3431–8.
 
22. Taylor JR, Williams N, Cusack R, et al. The Cambridge Centre for 
Ageing and Neuroscience (Cam-CAN) data repository: structural and 
functional MRI, MEG, and cognitive data from a cross-sectional adult 
lifespan sample. Neuroimage 2017;144.
 
23. Folstein MF
, Folstein SE, McHugh PR. "Mini-mental state". A 
practical method for grading the cognitive state of patients for the 
clinician. J Psychiatr Res 1975;12:189–98.
 
24. Mioshi E, Dawson K, Mitchell J, et al. The Addenbrooke's 
Cognitive Examination Revised (ACE-R): a brief cognitive 
test battery for dementia screening. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 
2006;21:1078–85.
 
25. Regestein QR, Friebely J, Shifren JL, et al. Self-reported sleep in 
postmenopausal women. Menopause 2004;11:198–207.
 
26. Curcio G, Ferrara M, De Gennaro L, loss S. Sleep loss, 
learning capacity and academic performance. Sleep Med Rev 
2006;10:323–37.
 
27. Ferracioli-Oda E, Qawasmi A, Bloch MH, et al. Meta-analysis: 
melatonin for the treatment of primary sleep disorders. PLoS One 
2013;8:e63773.
 
28. Jean-Louis G, von Gizycki H, Zizi F
. Melatonin effects on sleep, 
mood, and cognition in elderly with mild cognitive impairment. J 
Pineal Res 1998;25:177–83.
 
29. Scullin MK, Bliwise DL, Sleep BDL. Sleep, cognition, and normal 
aging: integrating a half century of multidisciplinary research. 
Perspect Psychol Sci 2015;10:97–137.
 
30. Nebes RD, Buysse DJ, Halligan EM, et al. Self-reported sleep quality 
predicts poor cognitive performance in healthy older adults. J 
Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci 2009;64:180–7.
 
31. Kamba M, Inoue Y, Higami S, et al. Cerebral metabolic impairment in 
patients with obstructive sleep apnoea: an independent association 
of obstructive sleep apnoea with white matter change. J Neurol 
Neurosurg Psychiatry 2001;71:334–9.
 
32. Harbison J, Gibson GJ, Birchall D, et al. White matter disease 
and sleep-disordered breathing after acute stroke. Neurology 
2003;61:959–63.
 
33. Macey PM, Kumar R, Woo MA, et al. Brain structural changes in 
obstructive sleep apnea. Sleep 2008;31:967–77.
 
34. Ramos AR, Dong C, Rundek T, et al. Sleep duration is associated 
with white matter hyperintensity volume in older adults: the Northern 
Manhattan Study. J Sleep Res 2014;23:524–30.
 
35. Unger MM, Belke M, Menzler K, et al. Diffusion tensor imaging in 
idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder reveals microstructural 
changes in the brainstem, substantia nigra, olfactory region, 
and other brain regions. Sleep 2010;33:767–73. /pmc/
articles//?report=abstract.
 
36. Macey PM, Henderson LA, Macey KE, et al. Brain morphology 
associated with obstructive sleep apnea. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 
American Thoracic Society 2002;166:1382–7.
 
37. Sexton CE, Storsve AB, Walhovd KB, et al. Poor sleep quality is 
associated with increased cortical atrophy in community-dwelling 
adults. Neurology 2014;83:967–73.
 
38. Debette S, Markus HS. The clinical importance of white matter 
hyperintensities on brain magnetic resonance imaging: systematic 
review and meta-analysis. BMJ 2010;341:c3666.
 
39. Mädler B, Drabycz SA, Kolind SH, et al. Is diffusion anisotropy an 
accurate monitor of myelination? correlation of multicomponent T2 
relaxation and diffusion tensor anisotropy in human brain. Magn 
Reson Imaging 2008;26:874–88. Sep26(7).
 
40. Jones DK, Knösche TR, Turner R, et al. Fiber count, and other 
fallacies: the do’s and don’ts of diffusion MRI. Vol. 73. NeuroImage 
2013:239–54.
 
41. Maillard P
, Fletcher E, Harvey D, et al. White matter hyperintensity 
penumbra. Stroke 2011;42:1917–22.
 
42. Kievit RA, Davis SW, Griffiths J, et al. A watershed model of individual 
differences in fluid intelligence. Neuropsychologia 2016;91:186–98.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014920 on 31 July 2017. Downloaded from 
  
13
Gadie A, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e014920. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014920
Open Access
 
43. Spiegel K, Tasali E, Leproult R, et al. Effects of poor and short 
sleep on glucose metabolism and obesity risk. Nat Rev Endocrinol 
2009;5:253–61. Nature Publishing Group;May5(5).
 
44. Grandner MA, Jackson NJ, Izci-Balserak B, et al. Social and 
behavioral determinants of perceived insufficient sleep. Front Neurol 
2015;56:112.
 
45. Leng Y, Wainwright NW, Cappuccio FP
, et al. Daytime napping and 
the risk of all-cause and cause-specific mortality: a 13-year follow-up 
of a British population. Am J Epidemiol 2014;179:1115–24.
 
46. Leng Y, Cappuccio FP
, Wainwright NW, et al. Sleep duration and risk 
of fatal and nonfatal stroke: a prospective study and meta-analysis. 
Neurology 2015;84:1072–9.
 
47. Hoevenaar-Blom MP
, Spijkerman AM, Kromhout D, et al. Sleep 
duration and sleep quality in relation to 12-year cardiovascular 
disease incidence: the MORGEN study. Sleep 2011;34:1487–92. 
Nov34(11).
 
48. Strine TW, Chapman DP
. Associations of frequent sleep insufficiency 
with health-related quality of life and health behaviors. Sleep Med 
2005;6:23–7.
 
49. Taheri S, Lin L, Austin D, et al. Short sleep duration is associated with 
reduced leptin, elevated ghrelin, and increased body mass index. 
PLoS Med 2004;1:e62.
 
50. Roberts RE, Shema SJ, Kaplan GA, et al. Sleep complaints and 
depression in an aging cohort: a prospective perspective. Am J 
Psychiatry 2000;157:81–8.
 
51. Breslau N, Roth T, Rosenthal L, et al. Sleep disturbance and 
psychiatric disorders: a longitudinal epidemiological study of young 
adults. Biol Psychiatry 1996;39:411–8. Mar39(6).
 
52. Kaneita Y, Ohida T, Uchiyama M, et al. The relationship between 
depression and sleep disturbances: a japanese nationwide general 
population survey. J Clin Psychiatry 2006;67:196–203.
 
53. Fried EI, Nesse RM. Depression sum-scores don't add up: why 
analyzing specific depression symptoms is essential. BMC Med 
2015;13:72.
 
54. Novati A, Hulshof HJ, Koolhaas JM, et al. Chronic sleep restriction 
causes a decrease in hippocampal volume in adolescent rats, which 
is not explained by changes in glucocorticoid levels or neurogenesis. 
Neuroscience 2011;190:145–55.
 
55. Ramsawh HJ, Stein MB, Belik SL, et al. Relationship of anxiety 
disorders, sleep quality, and functional impairment in a community 
sample. J Psychiatr Res 2009;43:926–33. Jul43(10).
 
56. Zigmond AS, Snaith RP
. The hospital anxiety and depression scale. 
Acta Psychiatr Scand 1983;67:361–70.
 
57. Liang F
, Paulo R, Molina G, et al. Mixtures of g priors for 
Bayesian Variable selection. J am stat assoc. Taylor & Francis 
2008;1103:410–23.
 
58. Rouder JN, Morey RD. Default Bayes factors for model selection in 
regression. Multivariate Behav Res 2012;47:877–903.
 
59. Wagenmakers EJ. A practical solution to the pervasive problems of p 
values. Psychon Bull Rev 2007;14:779–804.
 
60. Wetzels R, Matzke D, Lee MD, et al. Statistical evidence in 
experimental psychology: an empirical comparison using 855 t tests. 
Perspect Psychol Sci 2011;6:291–8.
 
61. Gelman A, Hill J, Yajima M, et al. Why we usually don’t have to worry 
about multiple comparisons. J Res Educ Eff 2012;5:189–211.
 
62. Jeffreys H. A theory of probability. Oxford University Press: Oxford, 
1961.
 
63. Morey RD, Rouder JN. BayesFactor CRAN, 2015.
 
64. Team RD . R: a language and environment for statistical computing. 
Vienna 2013.
 
65. Linzer DA, Lewis JB. poLCA : an R package for polytomous variable 
latent class analysis. J Stat Softw 2011;42:10.
 
66. Rhemtulla M, Brosseau-Liard PÉ, Savalei V. When can categorical 
variables be treated as continuous? A comparison of robust 
continuous and categorical SEM estimation methods under 
suboptimal conditions. Psychol Methods 2012;17:354–73.
 
67. Schwarz G. Estimating the dimension of a Model. The Annals of 
Statistics 1978;6:461–4.
 
68. Dayton CM, Macready GB. Concomitant-variable latent-class 
models. J Am Stat Assoc 1988;83:173–8 http://www. 
tandfonline. 
com/ 
doi/ 
abs/ 
10. 
1080/ 
01621459. 
1988. 
10478584.
 
69. Wickham H. ggplot2: elegant graphics for data analysis. Springer 
Science & Business Media 2009:221 p https:// 
books. 
google. 
com/ 
books? 
hl= 
en& 
lr=& 
id= 
bes- 
AAAAQBAJ& 
pgis= 
1.
 
70. Miller E. Verbal fluency as a function of a measure of verbal 
intelligence and in relation to different types of cerebral pathology. Br 
J Clin Psychol 1984;23 (Pt 1:53–7.
 
71. Biesbroek JM, van Zandvoort MJ, Kappelle LJ, et al. Shared and 
distinct anatomical correlates of semantic and phonemic fluency 
revealed by lesion-symptom mapping in patients with ischemic 
stroke. Brain Struct Funct 2016;221:2123–34.
 
72. Troyer AK, Moscovitch M, Winocur G. Clustering and switching as 
two components of verbal fluency: evidence from younger and older 
healthy adults. Neuropsychology 1997;11:138–46.
 
73. Hua K, Zhang J, Wakana S, et al. Tract probability maps in 
stereotaxic spaces: analyses of white matter anatomy and tract-
specific quantification. Neuroimage 2008;39:336–47.
 
74. Briones B, Adams N, Strauss M, et al. Relationship between 
sleepiness and general health status. Sleep 1996;19:583–8. 
Sep19(7).
 
75. Cizza G, Skarulis M, Mignot E. A link between short sleep and 
obesity: building the evidence for causation. Sleep 2005;28:1217–20.
 
76. Gangwisch JE, Malaspina D, Boden-Albala B, et al. Inadequate 
sleep as a risk factor for obesity: analyses of the NHANES I. Sleep 
2005;28:1289–96. Oct28(10).
 
77. Grandner MA, Drummond SP
. Who are the long sleepers? Towards 
an understanding of the mortality relationship. Sleep Med Rev 
2007;11:341–60.
 
78. Kaneita Y, Uchiyama M, Yoshiike N, et al. Associations of usual 
sleep duration with serum lipid and lipoprotein levels. Sleep 
2008;31:645–52.
 
79. Grandner MA, Hale L, Moore M, et al. Mortality associated with short 
sleep duration: the evidence, the possible mechanisms, and the 
future. Sleep Med Rev 2010;14:191–203.
 
80. Kievit RA, Davis SW, Mitchell DJ, et al. Distinct aspects of frontal 
lobe structure mediate age-related differences in fluid intelligence 
and multitasking. Nat Commun 2014;5:5658.
 
81. Henson RN, Campbell KL, Davis SW, et al. Multiple determinants of 
lifespan memory differences. Sci Rep 2016;6:32527.
 
82. Madden DJ, Bennett IJ, Song AW. Cerebral white matter integrity 
and cognitive aging: contributions from diffusion tensor imaging. 
Neuropsychol Rev 2009;19:415–35.
 
83. Fox RJ, Sakaie K, Lee JC, et al. A validation study of multicenter 
diffusion tensor imaging: reliability of fractional anisotropy and 
diffusivity values. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2012;33:695–700.
 
84. Wandell BA. Clarifying Human White matter. Annu Rev Neurosci 
2016;39:103–28.
 
85. Tournier JD, Mori S, Leemans A. Diffusion Tensor imaging and 
beyond. Magn Reson Med 2011;65:1532–56.
 
86. Lustberg L, Reynolds CF
, . Depression and insomnia: questions of 
cause and effect. Sleep Med Rev 2000;4:253–62.
 
87. Sbarra DA, Allen JJB. Decomposing depression: on the prospective 
and reciprocal dynamics of mood and sleep disturbances.
 
88. Lim AS, Ellison BA, Wang JL, et al. Sleep is related to neuron 
numbers in the ventrolateral preoptic/intermediate nucleus 
in older adults with and without Alzheimer's disease. Brain 
2014;137:2847–61.
 
89. Raz N, Lindenberger U. Only time will tell: cross-sectional studies 
offer no solution to the age–brain–cognition triangle: Comment on 
Salthouse. 2011.
 
90. Schaie KW. The course of adult intellectual development. Am 
Psychol;49:304–13.
 
91. Wiberg M, Sundstrom A. A comparison of two approaches to 
correction of restriction of range in correlation analysis Practical 
Assessment Research and Evaluation 14 . 2009 http:// 
pareonline. 
net.
 
92. Wechsler CJ. Wechsler memory scale. 3rd edn. London: Harcourt 
Assessment, 1999.
 
93. Cattell RB. Abilities: their structure, growth, and action Boston 
Houghton-Mifflin, 1971.
 
94. McGee DL, Liao Y, Cao G, et al. Self-reported health status and 
mortality in a multiethnic US cohort. Am J Epidemiol 1999;149:41–6.
 
95. Deurenberg P
, Weststrate JA, Seidell JC. Body mass index as a 
measure of body fatness: age- and sex-specific prediction formulas. 
Br J Nutr 1991;65:105.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014920 on 31 July 2017. Downloaded from 
