 Inhaler adherence in severe asthma: is
there an electronic solution?
Mina Gaga, Konstantinos Samitas and Eleftherios Zervas
Affiliation: Respiratory Medicine Dept and Asthma Center, Athens Chest Hospital “Sotiria”, Athens, Greece.
Correspondence: Mina Gaga, 7th Respiratory Medicine Dept and Asthma Center, Athens Chest Hospital
“Sotiria”, 152 Mesogeion Ave, Athens 115 27, Greece. E-mail: minagaga@yahoo.com
@ERSpublications
Combining electronic devices with traditional methods, a good patient–doctor relationship, and
mutual, informed decisions about treatment might provide the best inhaler adherence in severe
asthma http://ow.ly/Ra8630gDQm3
Cite this article as: Gaga M, Samitas K, Zervas E. Inhaler adherence in severe asthma: is there an electronic
solution?. Eur Respir J 2018; 51: 1702219 [https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02219-2017].
The management of severe asthma in daily clinical practice is challenging. It requires meticulous
characterisation and close monitoring of the patients, and high-dose treatment with inhaled corticosteroids
(ICS)/long-acting β2-agnoists and add-on medications. Severe asthma add-on treatments include systemic
steroids that have side-effects and increased long-term risk, and/or biologicals that are effective in specific
phenotypes but should be used in a targeted manner and have high cost. Therefore, these medications
should be prescribed after careful selection of the patients and close follow-up over at least a few months.
Moreover, before resorting to add-on treatments for severe uncontrolled asthma, it is important to
examine exposure to triggers such as allergens or irritants, comorbidities, and importantly, adherence to
treatment and proper use of inhaler devices [1, 2], as adherence to ICS regimens is a pivotal factor in
achieving optimal asthma control.
Poor adherence is a clear unmet need, and better ways to assess and address it must be found. Real-world
studies report that adherence levels rarely exceed 50% of asthmatic patients, depending on the chosen tools
and measurements applied [3]. Distinguishing between nonadherent, difficult-to-treat and true severe
asthma is often complex. This is because poor adherence is related to poorer asthma-related health
outcomes, such as oral corticosteroid bursts, hospitalisations and emergency department visits [3, 4]. Even
in specialised centres, dealing with severe asthmatics, asthma adherence and control is still a major issue.
Previous studies have unravelled this problem [5], and have also shown that interventions may lead to
clinically significant improvements in adherence and control, which are nevertheless on a modest scale [6].
In this issue of the European Respiratory Journal, SULAIMAN et al. [7] from Richard Costello’s group present
the findings of a prospective multicentre randomised clinical trial that examines adherence in patients with
severe unstable asthma using a special inhaler compliance assessment (INCA) device that provides
objective assessment of both when and how the inhaler was used. Patients were divided into two groups:
one (control) group that received intensive education/training and a second group that received the same
intervention/training plus biofeedback from the device. At baseline, the majority of patients in both groups
were uncontrolled according to the Global Initiative for Asthma criteria. The authors report that after
3 months of repeated feedback, inhaler adherence significantly improved in both groups, while the
biofeedback group was significantly more adherent that the control group. Asthma control was
significantly increased in both groups at the end of the study, and control or partial control rates were
Received: Oct 28 2017 | Accepted: Nov 15 2017
Conflict of interest: None declared.
Copyright ©ERS 2018
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02219-2017
Eur Respir J 2018; 51: 1702219
|
EDITORIAL
ASTHMA
 achieved to the same degree in both groups. However, many of the patients that remained poorly
controlled during the study continued to show low adherence despite both intensive training and
biofeedback. This study shows that biofeedback devices may help to some degree but the percentage of
patients who are more adherent in the biofeedback group versus the intensive education group is rather
small (∼10%). Moreover, the groups achieve similar rates of control, whether in the education group or
the education plus biofeedback group. So what are the important issues in adherence and severe asthma
management?
In general, there are two important domains that have been shown to affect health outcomes. The first is
the level of education of the patient, which affects their lifestyle. BOSSUYT et al. [8] showed that at 20 years
of age, people with basic education have, on average, another 25 years of healthy life; patients with
secondary school education have around 40 years of healthy life expectancy; and people with university/
higher education, 45.8 years. This is because education and higher socioeconomic status are linked to
healthier lifestyles including eating habits, nonsmoking and exercise. This is clearly a domain that can only
be improved through state policies on education and public health rather than the individual healthcare
providers.
The second is a structured health plan for asthma as was shown in Finland with the 10-year asthma plan
[9]. There, a structured state-wide programme on asthma, based on education and training of healthcare
providers in the community, lead to better control of asthma, fewer disability pensions, fewer
hospitalisations and reduced cost [9]. This is different to what happens in unstructured settings; in a
recent study from Denmark examining the diagnostic workup in severe asthma patients in a real-life
setting, inhalation technique and adherence were assessed by treating physicians in only 20% and 30% of
patients, respectively [10]. There are several reasons why this might occur, such as having a busy practice,
lacking specialised nurses and overestimating patients’ ability to master their devices [11]. Again, a
state-wide structured setting has to do with public health; however, a structured practice approach can be
achieved on an individual basis.
Our aim is to control asthma. Avoidance of triggers, understanding of the disease and the way medications
work, a targeted, personalised prescription, and adherence to medication are important means of reaching
this goal. Education, therefore, is pivotal; we need to find ways to provide effective education, and further
help our patients understand and act. In uncontrolled asthma, we also need to objectively assess our
patients’ adherence. Conventional ways to assess adherence and technique issues include regular follow-up
visits during which the pharmacist reports and/or prescriptions are checked, blister and inhaler counters
are recorded, and inhaler technique is re-assessed using common errors checklists and questionnaires [12].
Such assessment tools provide only a snapshot of the patients’ inhaler technique during the visit and a
subjective estimation of adherence, based on patient self-reports. A more objective way would be to use
specific markers but serum ICS concentration or cortisol levels [13] are restricted to specific medication
(corticosteroids) and cannot address inhaler technique issues. New technologies, such as internet-based
home telemonitoring [14, 15], and electronic devices connected to an inhaler and/or a peak flow meter,
have also been tried over the last few years in order to objectively assess asthma control and compliance
[16, 17]. An important advantage of the INCA device used in the study by SULAIMAN et al. [7] is that it
provided objective information on both when and how the inhaler was used, therefore assessing both
adherence and inhaler technique at the same time. So far, few other devices have been developed and
tested to assess both adherence and technique, and a total of four, including INCA, have received US Food
and Drug Administration approval [18]. INCA provides feedback on all essential inhaler steps; however, it
is currently limited only to the Diskus inhaler (GlaxoSmithKline, London, UK), which is an important
limitation. Another limitation of such devices is that resources have to be allocated in the form of extra
visits where the doctor will collect and interpret data that will be communicated to the patient at a later
time. Such devices nevertheless have the potential to improve patient inhaler technique in the home
environment provided that they are portable, affordable, and give feedback to the patient in a user friendly
and understandable manner. This type of feedback may be helpful to patients when starting treatment or
switching to a new device, especially in severe asthma where adherence and inhaler technique are very
important.
The problem of adherence in severe, difficult-to-treat asthmatics is pivotal and remains an unmet goal;
many nonadherent patients unfortunately move, unnecessarily, to systemic steroids, biologicals or other
add-on therapies in the real-life clinical setting. Checking adherence is important but other further
important issues include choosing the device that fits the patient, and matching the device and treatment
plan to the specific patient [19]. Patient preferences are important. Although there is no perfect inhaler,
new devices are emerging and a few of them are already “smart” in the sense that they provide patients
with audio and/or visual feedback, such as the Genuair (AstraZeneca, Södertälje, Sweden) and Nexthaler
(Chiesi, Parma, Italy) devices. An individualised approach is necessary to accomplish the goal of
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02219-2017
2
ASTHMA | M. GAGA ET AL.
 improving adherence and inhaler technique. Patient’s preferences and needs must be taken into account,
and this requires a good patient–doctor relationship as well as allocating time with the patient. A standard
operating procedure including examination of inhaling technique and adherence is also important. The
study by SULAIMAN et al. [7] provides a new tool to use in our effort to adequately assess adherence and
inhaler technique; however, combining electronic devices with older traditional methods, a good patient–
doctor relationship, and mutual and informed decisions about treatment might provide the best solution
in the long term.
References
1
Reddel HK, Bateman ED, Becker A, et al. A summary of the new GINA strategy: a roadmap to asthma control.
Eur Respir J 2015; 46: 622–639.
2
Chung KF, Wenzel SE, Brozek JL, et al. International ERS/ATS guidelines on definition, evaluation and treatment
of severe asthma. Eur Respir J 2014; 43: 343–373.
3
Bourdin A, Halimi L, Vachier I, et al. Adherence in severe asthma. Clin Exp Allergy 2012; 42: 1566–1574.
4
Kandane-Rathnayake RK, Matheson MC, Simpson JA, et al. Adherence to asthma management guidelines by
middle-aged adults with current asthma. Thorax 2009; 64: 1025–1031.
5
Gaga M, Papageorgiou N, Zervas E, et al. Control of asthma under specialist care: is it achieved? Chest 2005; 128:
78–84.
6
Lavoie KL, Moullec G, Lemiere C, et al. Efficacy of brief motivational interviewing to improve adherence to
inhaled corticosteroids among adult asthmatics: results from a randomized controlled pilot feasibility trial. Patient
Prefer Adherence 2014; 8: 1555–1569.
7
Sulaiman I, Greene G, MacHale E, et al. A randomised clinical trial of feedback on inhaler adherence and
technique in patients with severe uncontrolled asthma. Eur Respir J 2018; 51: 1701126.
8
Bossuyt N, Gadeyne S, Deboosere P, et al. Socio-economic inequalities in health expectancy in Belgium. Public
Health 2004; 118: 3–10.
9
Haahtela T, Tuomisto LE, Pietinalho A, et al. A 10 year asthma programme in Finland: major change for the
better. Thorax 2006; 61: 663–670.
10
von Bülow A, Backer V, Bodtger U, et al. The level of diagnostic assessment in severe asthma: a nationwide
real-life study. Respir Med 2017; 124: 21–29.
11
Vennera MC, Picado C, Herraez L, et al. Factors associated with severe uncontrolled asthma and the perception of
control by physicians and patients. Arch Bronconeumol 2014; 50: 384–391.
12
Engelkes M, Janssens HM, de Jongste JC, et al. Medication adherence and the risk of severe asthma exacerbations:
a systematic review. Eur Respir J 2015; 45: 396–407.
13
George KE, Ryan DM, Keevil B, et al. A pilot study to investigate the use of serum inhaled corticosteroid
concentration as a potential marker of treatment adherence in severe asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2017; 139:
1037–1039.
14
Deschildre A, Beghin L, Salleron J, et al. Home telemonitoring (forced expiratory volume in 1 s) in children with
severe asthma does not reduce exacerbations. Eur Respir J 2012; 39: 290–296.
15
van der Meer V, van Stel HF, Bakker MJ, et al. Weekly self-monitoring and treatment adjustment benefit patients
with partly controlled and uncontrolled asthma: an analysis of the SMASHING study. Respir Res 2010; 11: 74.
16
Chan AH, Stewart AW, Harrison J, et al. The effect of an electronic monitoring device with audiovisual reminder
function on adherence to inhaled corticosteroids and school attendance in children with asthma: a randomised
controlled trial. Lancet Respir Med 2015; 3: 210–219.
17
Kenyon CC, Chang J, Wynter SA, et al. Electronic adherence monitoring in a high-utilizing pediatric asthma
cohort: a feasibility study. JMIR Res Protoc 2016; 5: e132.
18
Carpenter DM, Roberts CA, Sage AJ, et al. A review of electronic devices to assess inhaler technique. Curr Allergy
Asthma Rep 2017; 17: 17.
19
Papi A, Haughney J, Virchow JC, et al. Inhaler devices for asthma: a call for action in a neglected field. Eur Respir
J 2011; 37: 982–985.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02219-2017
3
ASTHMA | M. GAGA ET AL.
