 Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=iada20
The American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse
Encompassing All Addictive Disorders
ISSN: 0095-2990 (Print) 1097-9891 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/iada20
An initial fMRI study on neural correlates of prayer
in members of Alcoholics Anonymous
Marc Galanter, Zoran Josipovic, Helen Dermatis, Jochen Weber & Mary Alice
Millard
To cite this article: Marc Galanter, Zoran Josipovic, Helen Dermatis, Jochen Weber &
Mary Alice Millard (2017) An initial fMRI study on neural correlates of prayer in members of
Alcoholics Anonymous, The American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 43:1, 44-54, DOI:
10.3109/00952990.2016.1141912
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.3109/00952990.2016.1141912
© 2017 Marc Galanter, Zoran Josipovic,
Helen Dermatis, Jochen Weber, and Mary
Alice Millard
View supplementary material 
Published online: 25 Mar 2016.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 5203
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 4 View citing articles 
 ORIGINAL ARTICLE
An initial fMRI study on neural correlates of prayer in members of Alcoholics
Anonymous
Marc Galanter, MDa, Zoran Josipovic, PhDb, Helen Dermatis, PhDa, Jochen Weberc, and Mary Alice Millarda
aDepartment of Psychiatry, Division of Alcoholism and Drug Abuse, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA;
bDepartment of Psychology, New York University, New York, NY, USA; cDepartment of Psychology, Social Cognitive Neuroscience Lab,
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
ABSTRACT
Background: Many individuals with alcohol-use disorders who had experienced alcohol craving before
joining Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) report little or no craving after becoming long-term members.
Their use of AA prayers may contribute to this. Neural mechanisms underlying this process have not
been delineated. Objective: To define experiential and neural correlates of diminished alcohol craving
following AA prayers among members with long-term abstinence. Methods: Twenty AA members with
long-term abstinence participated. Self-report measures and functional magnetic resonance imaging
of differential neural response to alcohol-craving-inducing images were obtained in three conditions:
after reading of AA prayers, after reading irrelevant news, and with passive viewing. Random-effects
robust regressions were computed for the main effect (prayer > passive + news) and for estimating
the correlations between the main effect and the self-report measures. Results: Compared to the other
two conditions, the prayer condition was characterized by: less self-reported craving; increased
activation in left-anterior middle frontal gyrus, left superior parietal lobule, bilateral precuneus, and
bilateral posterior middle temporal gyrus. Craving following prayer was inversely correlated with
activation in brain areas associated with self-referential processing and the default mode network, and
with characteristics reflecting AA program involvement. Conclusion: AA members’ prayer was asso-
ciated with a relative reduction in self-reported craving and with concomitant engagement of neural
mechanisms that reflect control of attention and emotion. These findings suggest neural processes
underlying the apparent effectiveness of AA prayer.
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 1 April 2015
Revised 7 January 2016
Accepted 8 January 2016
KEYWORDS
Alcoholics Anonymous;
craving; fMRI; neural
correlates; prayer
Introduction
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) is an abstinence-oriented
fellowship with over 1.2 million members in the United
States, of which 73% report over 1 year of abstinence,
and attend an average of 2.6 meetings weekly (1).
Narcotics Anonymous also employs the Twelve Step
approach, and meeting attendees report an average of
6.1 years of abstinence (2).
The majority of long-term Twelve Step members
who we have surveyed report no alcohol or drug crav-
ing; for AA, 70% reported no craving for alcohol (3,4),
and for NA, 49% reported no craving for alcohol or
drugs (2). This is notable, since people joining and
persisting in attending these fellowship meetings are
among the more severely addicted, having suffered
from considerable craving for their principal substances
of use. In fact, “craving, or a strong desire to use
alcohol (or another drug)” is one of the formal criteria
for diagnosing an addiction in the diagnostic manual of
the American Psychiatric Association (5). Unlike other
criteria, it is listed as potentially persisting, even in an
addicted person in remission. In light of this, a frame-
work based on recent neural findings can be con-
structed to encompass the impact of the Twelve Step
experience on the recovery process (6). The diminution
of craving in long-term Twelve Step members therefore
merits investigation to ascertain the nature of craving,
an important aspect of persistent remission.
Craving
Assessments of cue reactivity and craving have typically
been conducted on subjects who are either non-treat-
ment seeking, in a detoxification unit, or in treatment,
as reflected in a recent review of 28 such studies (7).
Findings in these studies illustrate how craving is
CONTACT Marc Galanter, MD
marcgalanter@nyu.edu
Department of Psychiatry, Division of Alcoholism and Drug Abuse, New York University
School of Medicine, 550 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.
Supplemental data for this article can be accessed on the publisher’s website.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in the article can be found online at www.tandfonline.com/iada
THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE
2017, VOL. 43, NO. 1, 44–54
http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/00952990.2016.1141912
© 2017 Marc Galanter, Zoran Josipovic, Helen Dermatis, Jochen Weber, and Mary Alice Millard
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/),
which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, and is not altered, transformed, or built upon in any way.
 triggered in association with enhanced dopamine sig-
naling in subjects with deficits in dopamine activity and
acquired prefrontal and striatal reward dysregulation
(8). This mechanism also impacts on a clinical level,
individuals
with
alcohol-use
disorders
who
have
entered treatment. Their self-reports of temptation to
drink
were
predictive
of
subsequent
relapse
(9).
Similarly, on a neurophysiological level, the degree of
activation
in
the
ventromedial
prefrontal
cortex
(vmPFC) was correlated with the induced craving dur-
ing neutral-relaxing trials, and was also predictive of
subsequent relapse (10).
Nonetheless, there is evidence that both self- and
therapist-initiated interventions can alter the relationship
between cue exposure and craving. Smokers can be taught
cognitive strategies to control craving, resulting in activa-
tion in prefrontal areas reflecting active control, with
diminished activation in limbic areas associated with use
of the drug (11). Similarly, for individuals with alcohol-
use disorders expression of change talk following motiva-
tional interviewing can result in inhibition in brain
regions that respond to the alcohol cues (12).
Prayer and craving
The practice of prayer is quite common in the United
States; 57% of Americans report that they pray every
day (13). Among AA members surveyed, the figure
was even higher, 73% (14). Effects of prayer on brain
functioning have been studied in circumstances unre-
lated to drinking, demonstrating how, on imaging,
participants’ experience of communicating with God
taps into areas associated with interpersonal commu-
nication (15). Overlap in specific brain regions that
are activated during prayer to God and while speak-
ing to a loved one among religious Christian subjects
have been associated with Theory of Mind, including
medial prefrontal cortex, the posterior cingulate cor-
tex, and the parietal lobe at the temporo-parietal
junction (15).
Consideration of whether prayer can serve acutely as
a means of avoiding alcohol-craving has not been
addressed empirically. There are, however, studies
which may shed light on this. Regarding alcoholism,
Kaskutas et al. (16) reported that the experience of a
spiritual awakening among individuals with alcohol-use
disorders was associated with diminished alcohol use
following treatment. In another study, participants who
were assigned to engage in prayer (unrelated to drink-
ing) every day for four weeks drank about half as much
as those who were not (17).
Top-down and bottom-up control
The management of responses to external and inter-
nal stimuli occurs either in a top-down voluntary or
bottom-up involuntary fashion. The dorso-lateral pre-
frontal cortex, intra-parietal sulcus and frontal eye
field areas are involved in the slower more effortful
top-down voluntary cognitive processes, such as con-
scious decision making, goal maintenance and volun-
tary attention; while bilateral insular cortex, anterior
cingulate cortex, ventromedial prefrontal and orbito-
frontal cortex, inferior frontal gyrus and inferior par-
ietal
lobule,
are
involved
in
a
more
automatic
bottom-up involuntary processes, such as salience
detection,
interoception,
conflict
monitoring
and
resolution, reward valuation, and involuntary atten-
tion (18–20). Control of emotion in the brain is like-
wise thought to occur via two such different groups
of areas, the dorsal voluntary and the ventral invo-
luntary one. They are commonly seen as forming two
distinct networks in the brain (21).
Addiction is thought to dysregulate both groups of
the above-mentioned areas, biasing excessively the bot-
tom-up salience areas toward processing of substance
related cues, and impairing emotion regulation, while
causing a hypofunction of cognitive control areas,
except during the acute stages of craving and seeking
when these areas become mobilized with the objective
of obtaining the drug of choice (22). Increased activa-
tion of the ventral striatum in response to alcohol-
related triggers is regarded as one of the main indica-
tors of dysfunctional bottom-up processing among
individuals with alcohol-use disorders (7,23).
Ex-smokers (24) and smokers actively suppressing
their craving responses (11) have been shown to manifest
top-down responses to smoking triggers, presumably
reflecting an active process. In contrast, mindfulness-
based intervention reduced the cue-induced craving in
smokers in a “bottom-up” fashion, relying on a change in
salience detection and decision making, due to training
(25). In research conducted with established AA members
(26), participants indicated that they employ AA prayers
to cope emotionally with the experience of drinking trig-
gers. However, it is not known which of these two
mechanisms plays a more prominent role in long-term
recovery. To explore this issue, we designed a functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study to assess the
impact of AA prayer on neurophysiological and subjec-
tive craving in the presence of alcohol cues to determine
whether prayer resulted in greater activation of brain
areas associated with top-down or bottom-up emotional
control and attention.
THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE
45
 Methods
Participants
For this within-subject design pilot study, a sample of
20 AA members were recruited as in our previous
studies, through our established ties with AA-mem-
ber-networks. Inclusion criteria were as follows: 1 –
current abstinence from alcohol and other illicit
drugs, 2 – at least two years of uninterrupted, 3 –
regular AA meeting attendance, and 4 – having had a
spiritual awakening as described in AA tradition.
Exclusion criteria were as follows: 1 – history of mental
illness, 2 – current use of psychiatric medication, and 3
– standard MRI safety concerns. Information collected
during the initial screening to determine eligibility also
included the following: years in AA, frequency of
attending meetings, years of alcohol abuse prior to
entering the AA program, other types of spiritual prac-
tice and frequency, weight (for the purpose of MRI
calibration), age, sex, ethnicity, and education. All par-
ticipants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and
provided written informed consent. The present study
was conducted in accordance with the safety guidelines
for fMRI research, and approved by the Institutional
Review Board of the New York University School of
Medicine.
Procedure
Upon arriving for the scan, participants first completed
a questionnaire designed to assess depth and nature of
their spiritual experience and involvement in AA (3).
This was followed by a short practice time for partici-
pants to familiarize themselves with experimental pro-
cedures, in order to minimize any learning effects, and
the actual scan. During scanning, participants were
exposed to images of alcohol-craving-inducing stimuli
and asked to rate their craving on a scale of 1 – not at
all, to 5 – very much. Upon successfully completing the
scan, participants were given a short questionnaire to
assess their experience during scanning.
Measures
The instruments and measures administered included
items assessing demographics, substance abuse history,
addiction treatment, and experience in AA adapted
from our previous research (3). Craving for alcohol as
experienced in the past week was assessed by responses on
a 10-point visual analog scale. To assess the strength of
members’ social affiliative ties, two scales applied in our
previous studies of AA members were included in the
questionnaire (3,27). One scale reflects the level of affilia-
tion with 10 AA members known best to respondents,
and the other measure reflects the strength of affiliative
ties with 10 individuals known best to respondents who
are not AA members. Respondents’ spiritual and religious
orientation was assessed by items employed in surveys of
US national probability samples (28–30).
Alcohol cue task
As in previous studies (11), participants viewed still
photos of alcohol-craving-inducing images. Images
were selected from the Normative Appetitive Picture
System (31), and supplemented with alcohol-related
pictures from the web. In total 90 images were used
(30 per condition). Stimuli were presented via an LCD
projector and custom optics onto a rear-projection
screen in the bore of the MRI scanner. Participants
were supine and viewed the projected stimuli through
an angled mirror. An infrared, video eye-tracker (ASL
R- LRO-6, Bedford, MA, or EyeLink 1000, SR Research,
Mississauga, ON, Canada) was used to visually monitor
whether fixation was maintained and if the eyes were
kept open, but the eye-position measurements were not
recorded. Stimuli were shown under three experimental
conditions: (a) “prayer” – following the reading of AA
prayers that are related to promoting abstinence, (b)
“passive” – following reading of instruction to view
stimuli passively, and (c) “news” – following reading
of unrelated information. For the “prayer” condition,
the subjects read the standard AA prayer from Step 3
and the Serenity prayer, adjusted for length (32) (see
SI). They were asked to keep in mind the intent of the
prayer while viewing the images. For the “passive”
viewing condition, subjects read the instruction to
view stimuli passively and allow their reaction to be
as it was, without attempting to suppress it. And, for
the “news” condition they were asked to read and keep
in mind the content of the news passage. A degree of
self-reported craving was collected via a button box
pressed in response to each stimulus, on a 5-point
scale. Each condition was followed by a “washout”
period during which participants saw a rapid series of
single-digit numbers and were asked to press a key
corresponding to the number displayed as quickly as
they could.
fMRI protocol
The fMRI protocol with still images was designed using
E-Prime 2.0 Professional (Psychology Software Tools),
and consisted of the following: for each condition par-
ticipants first saw a fixation cross of jittered duration
46
M. GALANTER ET AL.
 ~4 s, followed by an instruction for the condition for 40
s, followed by 10 images (4 s each). After each image
display, a fixation cross of jittered duration ~2.5 s was
displayed, followed by a question asking participants to
provide a rating of their craving for 3 s, and then again
a fixation cross jittered ~3.5 s. After 10 images for one
condition, there was a washout period of 20 s while
participants pressed a corresponding key for each
rapidly
displayed
number
(see
Figure
S1
in
Supplementary Information). Each condition repeated
three times for the total of 90 images, and the order of
conditions was pseudo-randomized.
fMRI data acquisition and preprocessing
MR images were acquired at the NYU Center for Brain
Imaging, using a Siemens Allegra 3T head-only scanner
equipped with a 8-channel head coil (Nova Medical,
Wakefield, MA). Blood oxygenation level-dependent
(BOLD) contrast was obtained using a T2-sensitive
echo planar imaging (EPI) pulse sequence (TR = 2000
ms, TE = 30 ms, 36 axial slices, 3 × 3 × 3 mm, 64 × 64
matrix in a 192 × 192 mm FOV). In addition to func-
tional images, a high-resolution, T1-weighted anatomi-
cal volume of images was acquired for each participant,
using an MPRAGE sequence (TR = 2500 ms, TE = 3.93
ms, TI = 900 ms, flip angle = 8°, 176 sagittal slices, 1 × 1
× 1 mm, 256 × 256 matrix in a 256 mm FOV).
fMRI
data
were
preprocessed
using
SPM8
(Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology; (33),
as scripted in NeuroElf 1.0 (http://neuroelf.net/, JW) in
MATLAB (MathWorks, Natick, MA). Standard prepro-
cessing steps were used to perform slice-time correc-
tion, 3D motion correction using rigid-body alignment,
and spatial normalization to the ICBM standard tem-
plate space by applying the Unified Segmentation pro-
cess implemented in SPM8 to the high-resolution
anatomical images and subsequently warping the func-
tional images into template space using the parameters
determined during the segmentation with an output
resolution of 3 × 3 × 3 mm. Finally, data were spatially
smoothed using a 6 mm Gaussian kernel (FWHM).
fMRI statistical analysis
For the images task, a first-level robust (iteratively re-
weighted least squares), multiple linear regression was
performed, in which each condition, i.e., separate
instruction and image-viewing periods as well as rating
periods, was modeled as a separate regressor, created by
convolving a box-car function with the canonical HRF.
Robust regression was used to automatically down-
weigh (up to fully reject) outliers in the fMRI time-
series on a voxel-by-voxel basis. In addition to the
conditions themselves, motion parameters and low-fre-
quency regressors were added as confounds to account
for non-BOLD-related signal variability.
On the second (group) level, random-effects (RFX)
robust regressions were computed for the main effect of
the critical difference of prayer vs. other (passive and
news) conditions, as well as for estimating the correla-
tions between this difference and the self-report mea-
sures. To ensure that the main effect was specific for
prayer over either of the other two conditions, an
additional conjunction analysis with prayer vs. passive
and prayer vs. news was conducted, which revealed that
indeed prayer was different from each of the other
conditions. Given that this was merely a confirmatory
step, the findings from the combined contrast (prayer
vs. other) are reported in the tables and figures.
The significance of clusters was assessed using a
combined height (uncorrected statistical) and required
cluster size threshold, where the cluster size was deter-
mined using the Alphasim procedure as implemented
in NeuroElf. The method automatically uses the esti-
mated smoothness of the residual of the appropriate
regression, taking the inherent correlation in the data
into account which could lead to false positive clusters.
We chose an uncorrected threshold of (two-tailed) p <
0.02 (equaling a t-score of 2.56, df = 17), which given
the estimated smoothness of 8.0 mm led to a cluster
size estimate of k = 104 (3 × 3 × 3 mm) voxels required
to reach an FWE-corrected threshold of p < 0.05.
Unless otherwise noted, all areas mentioned as signifi-
cantly activated/correlated survived the whole-brain
correction procedure.
Additionally, a targeted, a-priori-informed region of
interest (ROI) analysis of ventral striatum (the nucleus
accumbens, tested for both left and right hemispheric
regions, defined by applying a 6-mm sphere around the
peak
of
the
nucleus-accumbens
term
map
from
NeuroSynth, http://neurosynth.org/) was performed
for the main effect of condition (prayer over other)
and for the correlation of the parameter estimates
with the average of self-report ratings. To further elu-
cidate the contributions of the individual (contrast
component) conditions, we also computed correlations
between the estimated betas for the prayer condition
with the in-scanner craving ratings during the prayer
condition, and likewise for the other two conditions, as
well as, between the non-AA affiliation scores and each
of the conditions separately.
To reduce the influence of signal components
unrelated to BOLD contrast changes, the following
regressors of no interest (nuisance covariates) were
added during first-level robust regressions: (1) a
THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE
47
 discrete-cosine-transform (DCT) basis function set
with a cutoff of 240 s to account for temporal drifts,
(2) the six rigid-motion parameters estimated during
the realignment preprocessing step, and (3) the first
six principle components estimated from a combined
white-matter-and-CSF mask following the CompCor
procedure (34). In short, following this procedure we
first extracted the time courses from white-matter
and CSF voxels which typically do
not
exhibit
BOLD-related variability, and can therefore be used
to estimate noise components. This was followed by
applying a principle component analysis (PCA) to the
matrix of extracted time courses to determine those
regressors explaining the most overall variance in all
nuisance voxels. Finally, these regressors were then
added to the first-level design matrices, allowing to
account for variance that is not related to BOLD
signals across the brain.
Results
Sample characteristics
Data from 20 participants were collected. Data from
two participants were excluded from the analysis, due
to falling asleep or moving more than a voxel size of
3 mm while in the scanner.
Description of AA member sample
As shown in Table 1, most of the participants were
middle-aged, male, and employed, with a history of
both drug and alcohol use. Although 38.9% reported
prior substance-use treatment, the majority (61.1%)
had received treatment for general psychological pro-
blems. Participants’ first encounter with AA, on aver-
age, dates back as far as nearly two decades prior to
study entry. All reported being currently abstinent
from substances, with a mean duration of 14.4 (SD
11.9) years. Reflecting their commitment in terms of
both fellowship and spirituality aspects of AA pro-
gram participation, all participants had had a spon-
sor, and most served as a sponsor of other AA
members,
with
one-half
having
sponsored
more
than five other members. All reported performing
service for the fellowship (e.g., greeting meeting
attendees, making coffee at meetings) and were fre-
quent meeting attenders in the past year. The levels
of AA member affiliation and acceptance of Twelve
Step beliefs were similar to that obtained in our prior
research on long-term AA members (3,27). Most
(72.2%) of the participants reported that they felt
God’s presence at least most days and prayed on a
daily basis.
Behavioral analysis
A repeated-measures MANOVA was performed to
determine whether the 18 participants varied in their
self-report ratings of alcohol craving in the prayer,
passive, and news conditions, There was an overall
effect for type of condition (Wilks’ Lambda, F =
8.589, df = (2, 16), p < 01). Post-hoc tests at the .01
level showed that participants’ ratings in the prayer
condition (mean = 1.310, SD = .366) were significantly
lower than their ratings in both the passive (mean =
1.945, SD = .783), and news (mean = 1.898, SD = .788)
conditions.
Table 1. Relationship of subject characteristics to self-reported craving in the prayer condition during fMRI scan (n = 18).
N (%) or mean (SD, range)
Statistic
Demographics/prior treatment
Age
52.39 (13.75, 23–82)
r = −.520, p < .05
Male
10 (55.60%)
NS
Employed
14 (77.80%)
NS
Problem with alcohol and drugs
11 (61.1%)
NS
Prior substance treatment
7 (38.9%)
NS
No. of years since last used alcohol or drugs per self-report
14.41 (11.19)
r = −.506, p < .05
Involvement in AA
No. of years since first attended AA
19.44 (10.99)
NS
No. of years since spiritual awakening
16.72 (10.74)
r = −.474, p < .05
No. of AA meetings attended in past 12 months
214.33 (146.20)
NS
Now has a sponsor
16 (88.9%)
Insufficient variability
Has sponsored others
15 (83%)
Insufficient variability
Acceptance of 12-Step beliefs
37.22 (3.04)
r = −.465, trend p < .06
Spirituality/Religiosity
Feel God’s presence at least most days
13 (72.2%)
NS
Attend church at least monthly
8 (44.4%)
NS
Pray on a daily basis
13 (72.2%)
NS
Social Affiliation
AA members
35.71 (3.70)
NS
Non-AA members
30.06 (5.25)
NS
48
M. GALANTER ET AL.
 Relationship of subject characteristics to self-
reported craving during fMRI scan
A series of correlational tests were conducted to
assess the relationship between demographic, sub-
stance use, AA program, and emotional-distress-
related characteristics to self-reported craving in the
prayer condition. Over one-third (38.9%) of the sam-
ple craved alcohol during the week prior to study
entry. Prior craving in the previous week was posi-
tively correlated with craving ratings during the
prayer condition (r = .681, p < .01). As shown
in Table 1, the older the participant and the greater
the
duration
of
abstinence,
the
lower
the
level
of craving during the prayer condition (r = −.520,
p < .05 and r = −.506, p < .05, respectively).
Involvement in AA as represented by the number
of years since participants’ first spiritual awakening
was more strongly associated with lower craving dur-
ing the prayer condition than acceptance of Twelve
Step beliefs (r = −.474, p < .05 and r = −.465, p < .06,
respectively)
with
the
latter
indicating
a
trend.
Neither affiliation to AA members nor affiliation to
non-AA members was associated with craving in the
prayer condition. A similar set of analyses were con-
ducted with respect to the passive and news condi-
tions as shown in Table 1. In contrast to the prayer
condition, age was unrelated to level of craving in
both the passive and news conditions. As found in
the prayer condition, both duration of abstinence and
the number of years since the subjects’ first spiritual
awakening were associated with less craving in the
passive (r = −.588, p < .01; r = −.474, p < .05,
respectively) and news conditions (r = −.632, p <
.05; r = −.627, p < .01, respectively).
fMRI results
Viewing appetitive images during the “prayer” condi-
tion, as compared to “other” conditions (average of
“passive” and “news” conditions with equal weighting),
increased the activity in the left-anterior middle frontal
gyrus (BA 10), left superior parietal lobule and bilateral
precuneus (BA 7), and bilateral posterior middle tem-
poral gyrus (BA 39) (Figures 1 and 2, and Table 2).
During reading of the instructions, prayer compared to
other conditions resulted in the increase of signal in the
areas of right intraparietal sulcus (BA 7) and the bilat-
eral lingual gyrus (BA 18).
There was no significant difference in activation in
the ventral striatum in any of the three conditions
tested, applying the whole-brain analysis thresholds
(for further details, see Figure S2 and Table S1 in
Supplementary
Information).
Subsequent,
targeted,
a-priori-informed ROI analysis of the ventral striatum
(the nucleus accumbens, tested for both left and right
hemispheric regions) confirmed this and revealed
neither a main effect of condition (prayer over other)
nor a correlation of the parameter estimates with the
average rating (all p’s > 0.05). A re-analysis of data,
using principal component analysis (PCA) methods to
Figure 1. Brain areas activated for main contrast (prayer > passive + news). The left-anterior middle frontal gyrus (l-MFG; BA 10),
left-superior parietal lobule (l-SPL; BA 7), bilateral precuneus (BA 7), and bilateral posterior middle temporal gyrus (MTG, BA 39). Two-
tail t-test (df 17) = 2.56, FWE alphasim p < 0.05 corrected, k = 104. The brain is displayed in neurological convention (right = right).
THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE
49
 reject nuisance covariates, also did not reveal a signifi-
cant change in the activation of the ventral striatum
either for the main contrast of interest, prayer > other,
or for any of the three conditions compared to the
baseline. However, it did reveal new areas of increased
activation in the prayer condition compared to the
non-prayer states: left caudate nucleus, right insula
(BA 13), the right-inferior prefrontal gyrus (BA 47),
and the right supramarginal gyrus (BA 40) (two-tailed
t(17) = 6.06, p < 0.05 FWE, k = 59), (see Table S2 in
Supplementary Information).
For illustration purposes, the following are results
comparing each of the three experimental conditions to
baseline (see Figure S2 and Table S1 in Supplementary
Information). During passive viewing of alcohol-related
cues, as compared to baseline (FWE alphasim p < 0.05
corrected, k = 213), increased activation was observed
in bilateral occipital lobe (BA 17, 18, 19), accompanied
by deactivation in the bilateral precuneus and posterior
cingulate gyrus (BA 7, 31), bilateral medial prefrontal
gyrus and anterior cingulate sulcus (BA 32, 24), and the
right-posterior superior temporal gyrus (BA 22, 39).
The News condition as compared to baseline (FWE
alphasim p < 0.05 corrected, k = 240) resulted in activa-
tion in the bilateral occipital lobe (BA 17,18,19) and
deactivation in bilateral precuneus/posterior cingulate
gyrus (BA 7, 31). The Prayer condition as compared to
baseline (FWE alphasim p < 0.05 corrected, k = 318)
resulted in activation in the bilateral occipital lobes (BA
17,18,19), left pre-central and inferior prefrontal gyri
including insula (BA 6,44,13), and left pre-central
gyrus/frontal eye-field (BA 6,8).
Table 2. Regions of interest (ROI) activations for prayer > other.
All coordinates are in MNI space.
Condition and ROI
1/r1
BA2
x3
y3
z3
k4
Peak
voxel5
(A) Images: Prayer >
(Passive + News)6
Middle frontal gyrus
1
10
−39
54
9
186
6.56
Middle temporal gyrus
1
39
−57 −48
6
132
7.23
Middle temporal gyrus
r
39
42 −72 30
130
6.5
Bilateral precuneus
1
7
−3 −48 45
118
5.5
Superior parietal lobule
1
7
−15 −57 63
114
5.71
(B) Instruction: Prayer >
(Passive + News)7
Bilateral lingual gyrus
r
18
3 −75
3 107*
5.86
Intra-parietal sulcus
r
7
30 −69 48
309
4.27
1 1/r - left/right location of the peak voxel.
2 BA- Brodmann areas covered by the entire cluster.
3 x,y,z- MNI coordinates of the peak voxel.
4 k- cluster size in voxels.
5 Peak voxel – maximum t-test value at the peak voxel.
6 (A) Brain areas with increased or decreased activation for Prayer compared
to (Passive + News conditions) during alcohol related images.
7 (B) Brain areas with increased or decreased activation for Prayer compared
to (Passive + News conditions) during reading of instructions.
* Marginally significant.
Whole brain FWE corrected.
Figure 2. General linear model (GLM) beta plots for the main contrast regions of interest (ROIs). See Table 2 for details. Green –
Passive; Red – News; Blue – Prayer. x-axis: conditions, y-axis: percent BOLD signal change. The left-anterior middle frontal gyrus (l-
MFG; BA 10), left-superior parietal lobule (l-SPL; BA 7), left- and right-posterior middle temporal gyrus (l/r-MTG, BA 39), and bilateral
precuneus (BA 7).
50
M. GALANTER ET AL.
 Relationship of fMRI signal change and self-
reported measures
Difference in activation for prayer vs. other (news plus
passive) was inversely correlated with self-reported rat-
ings of alcohol craving in the prayer condition (com-
pared to the averaged rating for passive plus news
conditions) in the bilateral posterior cingulate gyrus
(BA 23), bilateral supramarginal gyrus (BA39), the
right-anterior middle prefrontal gyrus (BA 10), and
the right medial frontal gyrus (BA 9) (for table see
Supplementary Information). Likewise, affiliation to
non-AA members was inversely correlated with the
difference in activation during prayer condition com-
pared to other in bilateral precuneus (BA 7), bilateral
posterior cingulate cortex (BA 31) and left-posterior
superior temporal sulcus (BA 39) (see Table 3S in
Supplementary Information). None of the individual
component correlations (e.g., of the first-level prayer
beta maps with the in-scanner craving ratings during
the prayer condition) yielded significant results (at
whole-brain corrected levels).
Discussion
In order to better understand the neural mechanisms
underlying diminished alcohol craving among long-
term sober AA members, we used an fMRI paradigm
that compared behavioral and neuronal-activity-depen-
dent responses to alcohol-related cues following AA
prayer, during passive viewing, and following the read-
ing of irrelevant news. While interpreting the meaning
of fMRI activations is limited by the issue of reverse
inference, we interpret our findings as follows:
Our finding was that for AA members with long-
term abstinence, praying to regulate the subjectively
perceived experience of craving in presence of alco-
hol-related cues increased activation in the following
areas of the cortex: 1 – prefrontal and parietal areas
related to endogenous attention, goal maintenance, and
voluntary control of emotions (21,35,36); 2 – posterior
temporal areas related to semantic reappraisal of emo-
tion (37), and 3 – medial parietal areas related to visuo-
spatial processing and self-related cognition (38,39). In
contrast, reading of the instructions, prayer compared
to passive and news resulted only in the increase of
activation in the attention-related area of the right
intra-parietal sulcus, and the primary visual area of
the lingual gyrus, possibly indicating heightened per-
ception due to attentional feedback.
Due to complexity of neuronal activity contributing
to BOLD signal, our analysis (GLM) does not allow us
to make definitive interpretations about absence of
activation in specific areas of the brain (40). We there-
fore re-analyzed the data using PCA (see the section
“Methods” to this paper), and, as previously, did not
find any activations or deactivations in the ventral
striatum, either for the main contrast or when compar-
ing each condition to baseline. However, we did find
additional areas of activation for the main contrast
(prayer > other) in the right lateralized areas of insula,
the inferior prefrontal cortex and the temporoparietal
junction – areas known to be involved in bottom-up
control, empathizing and theory of mind (18,19,38) –
as well as, in an area of the left caudate nucleus. The
caudate area of the dorsal striatum is involved in motor
functions and in learning outcomes that support com-
plex goal-directed actions (41). In addition, it is
involved both in acquiring addictive habits and in con-
trolling them (42).
While comparing a condition to baseline in fMRI
experiments does not yield definitive results due to viola-
tion of pure insertion, we have included them for the
purpose of illustration (43). Passive viewing of alcohol-
related images/cues, compared to the baseline, elicited
neural responses characteristic of visual stimulus proces-
sing, with increased activation in the areas of occipital
and lateral parietal lobes, accompanied by characteristic
decreases in the areas involved in self-referential cogni-
tion: medial prefrontal cortex, precuneus, posterior cin-
gulate gyrus, and the right temporoparietal junction. The
news condition compared to baseline elicited similar
neural responses and was not significantly different
from passive viewing. Viewing images in the prayer con-
dition compared to the baseline had a different pattern of
neural responses. In addition to an expected increase of
activity in the occipital areas for visual processing, activ-
ity increases were observed bi-laterally in the inferior
prefrontal gyrus, involved in the language processing
(left) and response inhibition (right); in the bilateral
insula involved in interoception; in the left dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex involved in working memory and deci-
sion making; in the left pre-central gyrus and left frontal
eye-field involved in motor and visual attention control;
and in the left dorsal anterior cingulate gyrus involved in
conflict monitoring and resolution.
Thus, AA prayer resulted in subsequent differential
modulation of a number of areas in the brain involved in
regulation of experience reflective of reliance on both top-
down and bottom-up processing and semantic control. In
particular, the activation in the rostral middle prefrontal
gyrus has been found to increase with decreased craving
(11), and to be involved, together with precuneus, in cog-
nitive control related to recovery (44). Somewhat surpris-
ingly, we did not find activations in only one of the control
systems. Instead, we found a co-activation of the areas
THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE
51
 associated both with the endogenous voluntary attention,
such as the frontal eye-fields and the dorso-lateral prefron-
tal cortex, and those associated with bottom-up control,
such as the right insula and the right-inferior prefrontal
gyrus. This finding arguably points to a more integrated
functioning of top-down and bottom-up control systems
during AA prayer condition. Such integrated functioning
may provide a more optimal control, and bears similarity
to what has been found with other spiritual practices (45).
Relationship between main fMRI finding and self-
report measures
An inverse correlation between the subjectively per-
ceived difference in craving during prayer and the
main fMRI contrast for prayer compared to other, in
a number of areas of the default mode network usually
associated with self-referential processing (see Table S3
in Supplementary Information), could be interpreted to
indicate that for participants who experienced prayer to
reduce their perceived craving, the self-related aspects
of experience did not need to be suppressed as much.
This may be indicative of a shift in subjects’ self-schema
to being a person who is not tempted by alcohol cues
(see below). An inverse correlation was also found
between the affiliation to non-AA members and the
difference in signal for the main contrast in the poster-
ior areas of the default network: bilateral precuneus and
posterior cingulate gyrus, and the left-posterior super-
ior temporal sulcus, indicating that AA prayer had less
effect in those brain areas for those members with
stronger ties to non-AA members. Given the lack of
significant findings for the correlations or behavioral
scores with the individual condition beta maps, we
were unable to elucidate the exact nature of the con-
tribution to the observed (and reported) correlation
with the Prayer > Other contrast. Replications and
future extensions of this work should address this
question.
Notably, self-reported craving was inversely related
to variables that can be understood to reflect a greater
involvement in AA itself across all study conditions.
These were duration of abstinence and the number of
years since first experiencing spiritual awakening.
Long-term
abstinence
may
entail
acquisition
of
enhanced functional capacities as reflected in dimin-
ished alcohol cue responsivity.
The superordinate impact of long-term membership
The concept of schemas, originally posited by Piaget
(46), relates to how multiple stimuli and responses are
integrated
in
establishing
complex
thought
and
behavior patterns. One manifestation of schema devel-
opment may lie in the integration of the many issues
and components that go into the way people (indivi-
duals with alcohol-use disorders, in this case) perceive
themselves.
Indeed,
young-adult
substance-abusers
have been found to be characterized by maladaptive
schemas (47). Although the data collected in this
study did not address self-schemas directly, the poten-
tial role of self-schema in relation to disposition of
long-term individuals with alcohol-use disorders in
AA toward diminished craving has been discussed pre-
viously (6). The alteration in cue responsivity among
long-term AA members, like our subjects, may reflect
experiences that have led to transformation in their
self-schemas, their perception of themselves.
This may be reflected in neural functions which have
recently been studied regarding the following: mem-
bers’ exposure to the interpersonal context of AA can
be affected by their capacity to mentalize and relate to
others empathically in AA encounters (48), but these
encounters can be transformative relative to the impact
of their identification with in-group members (49) and
consequent integration of input from them into long-
term memory (50). Indeed, the malleability in a per-
son’s relation to substances has long been considered
(51). The aforesaid processes can thereby be under-
stood to yield changes in how an alcoholic sees himself
from one who is a responder to drinking-cues to one
who
understands
himself
to
be
less
responsive.
Ultimately, this may modify an alcoholic’s reactivity
to such cues.
Limitations
The following limitations relating to the nature of the
sample and the research study design bear upon the
interpretation and generalizability of our findings. Due
to the small sample size, all correlational findings and
their interpretations must be considered preliminary
and will require independent replication or otherwise
corroboration. Although small, our subject pool had a
considerable diversity, which reflects the realistic makeup
of AA membership. The characteristics in our current
sample related to commitment to the program are similar
to other AA member samples we have studied with stable
abstinence, not only those with 10 or more years of
abstinence. Therefore, our findings may be suggestive of
the larger population of members with stable abstinence.
Nevertheless, a larger subject sample would have allowed
us to explore individual difference factors in more depth.
An objection could be raised that our experimental design
may not have been sensitive enough to detect changes in
the ventral striatum in the presence of alcohol-related
52
M. GALANTER ET AL.
 images. A more complex factorial design could have
allowed us to explore potential causal mechanisms; how-
ever, adding more variables would have also reduced the
power of the design. Measures of smoking behavior,
which may have influence on findings, were not assessed.
Finally, there was no control group and comparisons to
AA members in early abstinence or in non-abstinence
states constitute an important area for further investiga-
tion particularly as they relate to striatal response in the
context of alcohol triggers. Significance and conclusions
The findings of this study help put the reports of
long-term AA members regarding diminished alcohol
craving in perspective. We were not able to study the
neural correlates of long-term members’ reports of
ongoing diminished craving with subjects in their nat-
uralistic setting. We were, however, able to use the
responses of a sample of convenience of such members
to the ritual of AA praying as a proxy for this.
The merit of this approach is supported by reports
from long-term members in both our clinical encounters
and interviews that they often prayed to avoid craving
and potential relapse when confronted with alcohol-
related triggers. It is further supported by the positive
relationship between subjects’ self-reported level of crav-
ing in the prayer state while in the scanner, and their self-
reports of craving during the past week. We can therefore
consider neural correlates of decreased craving following
prayer as a potential proxy for craving management in
naturalistic settings. Further investigation into neural
mechanisms underlying such methods may be useful in
improving the treatment outcomes for chronic indivi-
duals with alcohol-use disorders.
Acknowledgements
The authors express appreciation to Drs. Hedy Kober, John T.
Cacioppo, and Stephen G. Post for consultation on this project.
Declaration of interest
The authors declare no conflicting interests.
References
1. AA World Services. A.A. fact file. New York, NY: AA
World Services; 1956. Available at: http://www.aa.org/
assets/en_US/m-24_aafactfile.pdf [last accessed 10 Jun
2014].
2. Galanter
M,
Dermatis
H,
Post
S,
Santucci
C.
Abstinence from drugs of abuse in community-based
members of Narcotics Anonymous. J Stud Alcohol
Drugs 2013;74:349–352.
3. Galanter M, Dermatis H, Santucci C. Young people
in Alcoholics Anonymous: the role of spiritual orien-
tation and AA member affiliation. J Addict Dis
2012;31:173–182.
4. Galanter M, Dermatis H, Stanievich J, Santucci C.
Physicians in long-term recovery who are members of
Alcoholics Anonymous. Am J Addict 2013;22:323–328.
5. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statis-
tical manual of mental disorders. 5th ed. Washington,
DC: American Psychiatric Publishing; 2013.
6. Galanter M. Alcoholics Anonymous and twelve-step
recovery: a model based on social and cognitive neu-
roscience. Am J Addict 2014;23:300–307.
7. Schacht JP, Anton RF, Myrick, H. Functional neuroi-
maging studies of alcohol cue reactivity: a quantitative
meta-analysis
and
systematic
review.
Addict
Biol
2013;18:121–133.
8. Koob GF, Volkow ND. Neurocircuitry of addiction.
Neuropsychopharmacol
Off
Publ
Am
College
Neuropsychopharmacol 2009;35:217–238.
9. Witkiewitz K. Temptation to drink as a predictor of
drinking outcomes following psychosocial treatment
for
alcohol
dependence.
Alcohol
Clin
Exp
Res
2013;37:529–537.
10. Seo D, Lacadie CM, Tuit K, Hong KI, Constable RT,
Sinha R. Disrupted ventromedial prefrontal function,
alcohol craving, and subsequent relapse risk. JAMA
Psychiatry 2013;70:727–739.
11. Kober H, Mende-Siedlecki P, Kross EF, Weber J,
Mischel W, Hart CL, Ochsner KN. Prefrontal–striatal
pathway underlies cognitive regulation of craving. Proc
Natl Acad Sci 2010;107:14811–14816.
12. Feldstein Ewing SW, Filbey FM, Sabbineni A, Chandler
LD, Hutchison KE. How psychosocial alcohol interven-
tions work: a preliminary look at what fMRI can tell us.
Alcohol: Clin Exp Res 2011;35:643–651.
13. National Opinion Research Center. General social sur-
vey 2010 cross-section and panel combined: frequency
of prayer (Pie chart). The Association of Religion Data
Archives; 2010. Available at: http://www.thearda.com/
quickstats/qs_104.asp [last accessed 13 Jun 2014].
14. Young LB. Characteristics and practices of sponsored
members of Alcoholics Anonymous. J Groups Addict
Recov 2013;8:149–164.
15. Neubauer RL. Prayer as an interpersonal relationship: a
neuroimaging study. Relig Brain Behav 2013;4:92–103.
16. Kaskutas LA, Turk N, Bond J, Weisner C. The role of
religion, spirituality and Alcoholics Anonymous in sus-
tained sobriety. Alcohol Treat Quart 2003;21:1–16.
17. Lambert NM, Fincham FD, Marks LD, Stillman TF.
Invocations and intoxication: does prayer decrease
alcohol
consumption?
Psychol
Addict
Behav
2010;24:209–219.
18. Menon V, Uddin LQ. Saliency, switching, attention
and control: a network model of insula function.
Brain Struct Funct 2010;214:655–667.
19. Corbetta M, Shulman GL. Control of goal-directed and
stimulus-driven
attention
in
the
brain.
Nat
Rev
Neurosci 2002;3:201–215.
20. Spreng RN, Sepulcre J, Turner GR, Stevens WD,
Schacter DL. Intrinsic architecture underlying the rela-
tions
among
the
default,
dorsal
attention,
and
THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE
53
 frontoparietal control networks of the human brain. J
Cogn Neurosci 2012;25:74–86.
21. Phillips ML, Ladouceur CD, Drevets WC. A neural
model of voluntary and automatic emotion regulation:
implications for understanding the pathophysiology
and
neurodevelopment
of
bipolar
disorder.
Mol
Psychiatry 2008;13:833–857.
22. Goldstein RZ, Volkow ND. Dysfunction of the prefrontal
cortex in addiction: neuroimaging findings and clinical
implications. Nat Rev Neurosci 2011;12:652–669.
23. Volkow
ND,
Wang
G-J,
Fowler
JS,
Tomasi
D.
Addiction circuitry in the human brain. Annu Rev
Pharmacol Toxicol 2012;52:321–336.
24. Nestor L, McCabe E, Jones J, Clancy L, Garavan H.
Differences in “bottom-up” and “top-down” neural
activity in current and former cigarette smokers: evi-
dence for neural substrates which may promote nico-
tine abstinence through increased cognitive control.
NeuroImage 2011;56:2258–2275.
25. Westbrook C, Creswell JD, Tabibnia G, Julson E,
Kober H, Tindle HA. Mindful attention reduces neural
and self-reported cue-induced craving in smokers. Soc
Cogn Affect Neurosci 2013;8:73–84.
26. Galanter M, Dermatis H, Sampson C. Spiritual awa-
kening in Alcoholics Anonymous: empirical findings.
Alcohol Treat Quart 2014;32:319–334.
27. Galanter M, Talbott D, Gallegos K, Rubenstone E.
Combined Alcoholics Anonymous and professional
care
for
addicted
physicians.
Am
J
Psychiatry
1990;147:64–68.
28. Davis JA, Smith TW, Marsden PV. General social sur-
veys,
1972–2008:
cumulative
codebook.
Principal
Investigator, Davis JA; Director and Co-Principal
Investigator,
Smith
TW.
Chicago,
IL:
National
Opinion
Research
Center,
2009
(National
Data
Program for the Social Sciences Series, no. 18).
29. Beliefnet.com
(Internet).
Newsweek/Beliefnet
Poll
Results; 2005. Available at: http://www.beliefnet.com/
News/2005/08/Newsweekbeliefnet-Poll Results.aspx
[last accessed 6 Jun 2011].
30. Kosmin B, Keysar A. American religious identification
survey (ARIS 2008). Hartford, CT: Trinity College; 2009.
31. Stritzke
WG,
Breiner
MJ,
Curtin
JJ,
Lang
AR.
Assessment of substance cue reactivity: advances in
reliability, specificity, and validity. Psychol Addict
Behav 2004;18:148–159.
32. Alcoholics Anonymous. Twelve steps and twelve tradi-
tions. New York, NY: A.A. World Services; 1953.
33. Friston KJ, Ashburner J, Kiebel SJ, Nichols TE, Penny
WD, editors. Statistical parametric mapping: the analysis
of functional brain images. New York, NY: Academic
Press; 2007.
34. Behzadi Y, Restom K, Liau J, Liu TT. A component
based noise correction method (CompCor) for BOLD
and perfusion based fMRI. Neuroimage 2007;37:90–
101. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.04.042
35. Ochsner KN, Gross JJ. Cognitive emotion regulation:
insights from social cognitive and affective neu-
roscience. Curr Direct Psychol Sci 2008;17:153–158.
36. Vincent JL, Kahn I, Snyder AZ, Raichle ME, Buckner
RL. Evidence for a frontoparietal control system
revealed
by
intrinsic
functional
connectivity.
J
Neurophysiol 2008;100:3328–3342.
37. Buhle J, Silvers J, Wager TD, Lopez R, Onyemekwu C,
Kober H, Weber J, et al. Cognitive reappraisal of emo-
tion: a meta-analysis of human neuroimaging studies.
Cereb Cort 2014;24:2981–2990.
38. Andrews-Hanna JR, Reidler JS, Sepulcre J, Poulin R,
Buckner RL. Functional-anatomic fractionation of the
brain’s default network. Neuron 2010;65:550–562.
39. Margulies DS, Vincent JL, Kelly C, Lohmann G,
Uddin
LQ,
Biswal
BB,
Virlinger
A,
et
al.
Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture
in
humans
and
monkeys.
Proc
Natl
Acad
Sci
2009;106:20069–20074.
40. Xu J, Calhoun VD, Potenza MN. The absence of task-
related increases in BOLD signal does not equate to
absence of task-related brain activation. J Neurosci
Methods 2014;240:125–127.
41. Grahn JA, Parkinson JA, Owen AM. The cognitive
functions of the caudate nucleus. Prog Neurobiol
2008;86:141–155.
42. Kalivas PW. Addiction as a pathology in prefrontal
cortical regulation of corticostriatal habit circuitry.
Neurotoxic Res 2008;14:185–189.
43. Poldrack RA. Can cognitive processes be inferred
from
neuroimaging
data?
Trends
Cogn
Sci
2006;10:59–63.
44. Konova AB, Moeller SJ, Goldstein RZ. Common and
distinct neural targets of treatment: changing brain
function in substance addiction. Neurosci Biobehav
Rev 2013;37:2806–2817.
45. Vago DR, Silbersweig DA. Self-awareness, self-regula-
tion, and self-transcendence (S-ART): a framework for
understanding the neurobiological
mechanisms of
mindfulness. Front Hum Neurosci 2012;6:296.
46. Piaget J, Kegan P. The child’s conception of the world.
London: Routledge; 1929.
47. Shorey RC, Stuart GL, Anderson S. Differences in
early maladaptive schemas between a sample of
young adult female substance abusers and a non-
clinical comparison group. Clin Psychol Psychother
2014;21:21–28.
48. Lombardo
MV,
Chakrabarti
B,
Bullmore
ET,
Wheelwright SJ, Sadek SA, Suckling J, MRC AIMS
Consortium, et al. Shared neural circuits for mentaliz-
ing about the self and others. J Cogn Neurosci
2009;22:1623–1635.
49. Morrison S, Decety J, Molenberghs P. The neu-
roscience of group membership. Neuropsychologia
2012;50:2114–2120.
50. Spreng RN, Mar RA. I remember you: a role for
memory in social cognition and the functional neu-
roanatomy
of
their
interaction.
Brain
Res
2012;1428:43–50.
51. Zinberg NE. Drug, set, and setting: the basis for con-
trolled intoxicant use. New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press; 1984.
54
M. GALANTER ET AL.
