 rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org
Research
Cite this article: Galen SC, Borner J,
Martinsen ES, Schaer J, Austin CC, West CJ,
Perkins SL. 2018 The polyphyly of Plasmodium:
comprehensive phylogenetic analyses of the
malaria parasites (order Haemosporida) reveal
widespread taxonomic conflict. R.Soc.open
sci. 5: 171780.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsos.171780
Received: 1 November 2017
Accepted: 20 April 2018
Subject Category:
Biology (whole organism)
Subject Areas:
evolution/taxonomy and systematics/genetics
Keywords:
Plasmodium, malaria, phylogeny,
base composition bias, polyphyly
Authors for correspondence:
Spencer C. Galen
e-mail: spgalen@gmail.com
Susan L. Perkins
e-mail: perkins@amnh.org
Electronic supplementary material is available
online
at
https://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.
figshare.c.4091723.
The polyphyly of
Plasmodium:
comprehensive
phylogenetic analyses of
the malaria parasites (order
Haemosporida) reveal
widespread taxonomic
conflict
Spencer C.Galen1,2,Janus Borner3,EllenS.Martinsen4,
Juliane Schaer5, Christopher C. Austin6, Christopher
J. West7 and Susan L. Perkins1
1Sackler Institute for Comparative Genomics, and 2Richard Gilder Graduate School,
American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 79th St., New York,
NY 10024, USA
3Institute of Zoology, Biocenter Grindel, University of Hamburg,
Martin-Luther-King-Platz 3, D-20146 Hamburg, Germany
4Center for Conservation Genomics, Smithsonian Conservation Biology Institute,
National Zoological Park, PO Box 37012, MRC5503, Washington, DC 20013-7012, USA
5Department of Biology, Humboldt University, 10115, Berlin, Germany
6Department of Biological Sciences, Museum of Natural Science, Louisiana State
University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA
7Wildlife Program, Yurok Tribe, Klamath, CA 95548, USA
SCG, 0000-0003-0209-1535
The
evolutionary
relationships
among
the
apicomplexan
blood pathogens known as the malaria parasites (order
Haemosporida), some of which infect nearly 200 million
humans each year, has remained a vexing phylogenetic
problem due to limitations in taxon sampling, character
sampling and the extreme nucleotide base composition biases
that are characteristic of this clade. Previous phylogenetic
work on the malaria parasites has often lacked sufficient
representation of the broad taxonomic diversity within the
Haemosporida or the multi-locus sequence data needed
2018 The Authors. Published by the Royal Society under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/, which permits unrestricted
use, provided the original author and source are credited.
 2
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org R.Soc. opensci. 5: 171780
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
to resolve deep evolutionary relationships, rendering our understanding of haemosporidian life-
history evolution and the origin of the human malaria parasites incomplete. Here we present
the most comprehensive phylogenetic analysis of the malaria parasites conducted to date, using
samples from a broad diversity of vertebrate hosts that includes numerous enigmatic and poorly
known haemosporidian lineages in addition to genome-wide multi-locus sequence data. We find
that if base composition differences were corrected for during phylogenetic analysis, we recovered
a well-supported topology indicating that the evolutionary history of the malaria parasites was
characterized by a complex series of transitions in life-history strategies and host usage. Notably we
find that Plasmodium, the malaria parasite genus that includes the species of human medical concern,
is polyphyletic with the life-history traits characteristic of this genus having evolved in a dynamic
manner across the phylogeny. We find support for multiple instances of gain and loss of asexual
proliferation in host blood cells and production of haemozoin pigment, two traits that have been
used for taxonomic classification as well as considered to be important factors for parasite virulence
and used as drug targets. Lastly, our analysis illustrates the need for a widespread reassessment of
malaria parasite taxonomy.
1. Introduction
A complete understanding of human pathogenic diseases is dependent on robust phylogenetic
hypotheses to determine the evolutionary origins of the parasitic organisms that cause them [1–4].
Informative phylogenies are dependent on thorough taxon sampling for not only accurate phylogenetic
inference [5–7], but also accurate reconstruction of trait evolution [8], and in the case of parasites, dense
taxon sampling is critical for reconstructing histories of transitions among host groups that led to the
origin of disease [9–11]. Complicating this matter is the observation that many parasite groups are often
rare, difficult to sample and may be challenging to generate large sequence datasets for [12], resulting in
an ambiguous understanding of the origins of many parasitic diseases.
The malaria parasites (order Haemosporida) are well known for being a devastating scourge of
human health with five species known to infect humans, though broadly the order consists of over
500 described species from at least 15 genera that infect mammals, birds, chelonians and squamates
throughout the world and are transmitted by several clades of blood-feeding dipteran insects [13,14].
Both the taxonomic classifications and hypotheses of evolutionary relationships among the major
lineages within the Haemosporida have been controversial and fluid along the entire history of work on
this group [13]. Once molecular data from the parasites became more readily available for phylogenetic
analyses, widely different scenarios have been presented, all highly inconsistent and dependent on taxon
sampling, type of molecular characters included, and the analytical approach used [14]. As a result, the
evolution of key life-history characters and transitions among host groups remain poorly understood.
For instance, recent molecular phylogenies have suggested opposing histories for such traits as asexual
reproduction in the host bloodstream, a character that is thought to contribute to malaria virulence [15],
as well as the number of switches that have occurred among sauropsid and mammalian hosts [16–18].
A long-standing problem for broad systematic analyses of malaria parasites has been the difficulty of
achieving a balance between obtaining representative taxonomic coverage from across this diverse and
often difficult to sample order and generating enough characters for robust phylogenetic estimation [14].
Early molecular phylogenies generated gene trees and focused almost exclusively on the genus
of human medical concern, Plasmodium [19–23]. Later studies incorporated samples from multiple
genera within the Haemosporida [16,24,25], eventually expanding taxon sampling to include poorly
studied and enigmatic haemosporidian genera such as Haemocystidium, Hepatocystis, Polychromophilus
and Nycteria [18,26–30]. Although these studies benefited from expanded taxon sampling across the
order, character sampling still largely remained limited to organellar (mitochondrial and apicoplast)
sequence data with each of the aforementioned analyses sequencing no more than a single nuclear
locus. Furthermore, the topologies produced by these studies vary widely and thus appear to be highly
sensitive to using different taxon sets and analytical approaches.
The instability of the phylogenetic hypotheses for the Haemosporida has resulted in various
conclusions concerning the rooting of the haemosporidian tree. When rooted with other apicomplexan
taxa, such as Babesia or Theileria, the earliest diverging haemosporidian lineage has usually been the
avian-infecting genus Leucocytozoon [24,31]. However, other analyses that implemented outgroup-free
methods instead recovered topologies showing haemosporidians divided into two major clades, one
 3
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org R.Soc. opensci. 5: 171780
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
containing avian and saurian-infecting parasites and some bat-infecting genera, and the other containing
all other mammalian parasites, including all species that infect humans [17,29]. The large variation
observed across haemosporidian topologies has also resulted in uncertainty regarding the monophyly
of several genera, particularly the genus Plasmodium. Plasmodium has been found to be paraphyletic [16]
or polyphyletic [18,28] across different studies, demonstrating a clear need for a comprehensive analysis
that combines broad taxon and character sampling.
The question of how many times haemosporidians may have switched from birds to mammals has
also been contentious. The earliest broad phylogeny suggested that there was just one switch each into
sauropsids and mammals, with all sauropsid and mammalian parasites forming divergent clades [24].
However, recent studies that incorporated much more rigorous sampling of malaria parasites from bats
and ungulates have complicated estimates of the number of host-switching events. Several studies have
recovered parasites from bats as closely related to avian-infecting Plasmodium species, implying that there
were at least two transitions to mammals [32,33]. Yet subsequent analyses that used broad sampling of
bat haemosporidians have failed to recover this pattern, finding further evidence for single switches
to sauropsid and mammalian hosts [18,28]. In three recent studies that focused on ungulate malaria
parasites, the authors recovered inconsistent patterns of host-switching among studies despite similar
taxon and gene sampling [29,30,34].
Despite the clear need for genome-wide data, generating large sequence datasets for non-model
haemosporidian species has proven challenging [35,36], and as a result phylogenomic analyses of the
malaria parasites have largely remained taxonomically restricted to the genus Plasmodium ([37–39],
though see [31] and [40]). Large, multi-locus studies of the malaria parasites are also hindered by the
problem of conflicting phylogenetic signal produced by heterogeneous base composition biases [41,42].
Malaria parasite genomes are characterized by extreme but heterogeneous base compositions. For
instance, the genome of the virulent human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum has a GC content of
approximately 19% [43], though GC content can be as high as 42% in another human-infecting species,
Plasmodium vivax [44,45]. Base composition bias has the potential to mislead phylogenetic inference when
composition has converged in evolutionarily distant clades [46–49], which can be compounded when the
outgroup differs in compositional bias from all or part of the ingroup [50,51]. Base composition bias is
also strongly associated with codon usage and amino acid composition [52–54], which can potentially
mislead phylogenetic inference due to convergence within protein-coding genes [55–57].
Systematists have long recognized that the difficulties of estimating the phylogeny of the
Haemosporida will only be ameliorated by analyses that incorporate broad taxon sampling and genome-
wide multi-locus datasets [14,35]. Here, we improve upon previous analyses by incorporating numerous
taxa that have been poorly represented in previous analyses or have never been analysed within a
phylogenetic framework before, including four different genera of parasites that infect bats, parasites
from ungulates and an array of malaria parasite taxa from sauropsid hosts. We also included all
species that infect humans, using data from the recent releases of both the Plasmodium malariae and the
Plasmodium ovale genomes [58]. We interrogate genome-wide multi-locus data using a broad array of
data subsets and analytical (supermatrix concatenation and species tree) approaches, testing the extent
to which convergence in base composition can mislead phylogeny. In total, we present here the most
comprehensive phylogeny of the malaria parasites estimated to date.
2. Material and methods
2.1. Sample acquisition, DNA sequencing and sequence alignment
We generated novel sequence data for 34 haemosporidian taxa (electronic supplementary material,
table S1). Samples in the form of dried blood spots, buffered blood or tissues were collected by the
authors or donated. We extracted DNA using either the DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit (Qiagen) or the
Mag-Attract High-Molecular-Weight DNA Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s protocols. For
each sample that we determined to be positive for haemosporidian infection by microscopic examination,
we attempted to amplify 21 nuclear protein-coding genes (electronic supplementary material, table S2).
We chose to sequence exclusively nuclear loci due to the unusual characteristics of haemosporidian
mitochondrial genomes that may influence their utility for phylogenetic analysis, namely the linearly
concatenated structure that has been hypothesized to result in concerted evolution of this genome [59,60]
and the recent finding of large rearrangements and gene losses in some lineages [61]. Using the primers
previously described in [31] with 1 µl template DNA, 10 µl TopTaq Master Mix (Qiagen), 6 µl H2O and
 4
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org R.Soc. opensci. 5: 171780
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1 µl each primer (10 mM). Each gene was amplified using a nested approach, with both outer and inner
reactions consisting of an initial 30 s at 94°C, followed by 35 cycles of 94°C for 30 s, 47°C for 30 s and
62°C for 45 s, with a final 90 s extension at 62°C. We used 1 µl of PCR product from the outer reaction as
template for the inner reaction. All inner primers incorporated CAG (5�-CAGTCGGGCGTCATCA-3�) or
M13R (5�-GGAAACAGCTATGACCAT-3�) tags, which were used for Big Dye (Life Technologies, Foster
City, CA) cycle sequencing on an ABI 3730 DNA Analyzer. We generated contigs and edited sequences
in Geneious v. 8.05.
We combined these sequence data with previously published sequences for eight haemosporidian
taxa from [31], as well as 16 additional species in the genus Plasmodium from the PlasmoDB database [62].
Orthologues were identified by reciprocal BLAST hits with an e-value cut-off of 10−10. Based on the
finding of [31] that haemosporidian phylogeny is robust to the choice of apicomplexan outgroup, we
used Theileria annulata from Piroplasmida, the sister group to the Haemosporida, as the outgroup [63]. In
sum, this dataset includes 58 ingroup taxa from 7 currently named haemosporidian genera. We aligned
nucleotide and translated amino acid sequences for each gene individually using the L-INS-i algorithm
implemented in MAFFT [64]. We modified the MAFFT nucleotide alignments for further analysis using
TranslatorX [65] to generate codon alignments guided by the amino acid translation that maintains the
reading frame for all loci.
2.2. Base composition and codon usage bias
We calculated base composition summary statistics in R [66] using the package seqinR [67]. To
characterize codon usage bias across the haemosporidian phylogeny, we calculated relative synonymous
codon usage (RSCU) using seqinR and the effective number of codons (ENCs) used with the program
CodonW [68] for each taxon. RSCU calculates how over- or under-used an individual codon is relative
to random expectations, and varies from zero (codon not used) to six (one codon is used exclusively for
a sixfold degenerate amino acid; [69]). Similarly, ENC measures departures from equal usage across
all synonymous codons, and varies from 20 (only one codon is used for each amino acid) to 61
(alternative synonymous codons are equally likely; [70]). We plotted variation in codon usage using
principal components analysis implemented in R, and visualized the evolution of base composition
across phylogenies using the maximum-likelihood ancestral state estimator contMap function in the
phytools package [71]. We tested the fit of the evolution of base composition to an Ornstein–Uhlenbeck
(OU) process, and evaluated whether there is evidence for shifts in the OU process across the phylogeny
using the OUshifts function in the phylolm package [72]. Compositional heterogeneity in nucleotide
alignments was measured using the relative composition frequency variability (RCFV) statistic [73],
which measures the deviation from the mean for amino acids and nucleotides and sums these values
across taxa, with higher values indicating increased compositional heterogeneity in a given partition. We
used phylogenetic ANOVA implemented in the R package geiger [74] to test for differences in GC content
among clades.
2.3. Phylogenetic methods and analytical approach
We analysed both codon and amino acid alignments using a Bayesian approach implemented in
BEAST v. 1.8 [75] and ML implemented in RAxML v. 8 [76]. We analysed these datasets using
fully concatenated supermatrices (i.e. all genes and sites evolving according to the same model) and
partitioned supermatrices to determine whether partitioning altered the effects of base composition bias.
All analyses were repeated using codon alignments and amino acid alignments in both Bayesian and ML
frameworks. We tested for a global molecular clock using likelihood ratio tests for each individual gene.
Best fit models of evolution were estimated using PartitionFinder v. 2.1.1 ([77]; electronic supplementary
material, table S3). RAxML analyses were run using 100 bootstrap replicates. BEAST analyses were run
through the CIPRES portal [78] using a Yule tree prior, and analyses were repeated using both strict and
lognormal relaxed molecular clocks (see electronic supplementary material, table S4 for all phylogenetic
analyses performed). For all Bayesian analyses we used Tracer v. 1.6 [79] to assess convergence, determine
that all ESS values were greater than 200, and identify the appropriate burn-in. To test the effect of
missing data, we ran a partitioned analysis in BEAST using amino acid data and a relaxed molecular
clock but with a reduced taxon set of 21 species that included only the most complete (number of
sequenced loci) samples for each lineage.
We also analysed codon and amino acid datasets using a species tree approach. Species tree methods
typically assume that gene tree discordance is due to incomplete lineage sorting, though it is possible for
 5
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org R.Soc. opensci. 5: 171780
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Table 1. Summary data for nucleotide and amino acid datasets used in this study.
dataset
taxa
aligned length
% gaps
% missing data
codon alignment
59
19 851 bp
12.2
31.7
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
codon Position (1 + 2)
59
13 234 bp
12.2
31.7
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
amino acid
59
6747 aa
14.4
30.5
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
systematic error to occur in the estimation of gene trees due to base composition bias. To test the impact
of base composition on species tree inference, we estimated phylogenies using a species tree approach
implemented in ASTRAL-II [80]. ASTRAL-II contrasts with supermatrix methods by accounting for
incomplete lineage sorting under the multispecies coalescent model using unrooted gene trees and was
chosen for its ability to handle missing data and its accuracy in simulations [80,81]. For this analysis, we
estimated individual gene trees for codon and amino acid alignments for all ASTRAL-II analyses using
the same parameters described above in RAxML v. 8.
3. Results
3.1. Base composition and codon usage bias
The complete phylogenetic dataset consisted of 21 loci for 58 ingroup taxa and one outgroup, with codon
and amino acid alignments consisting of 19 851 and 6747 aligned sites, respectively (table 1). Dataset
completeness was uneven across samples and genera, varying from an average of 8 loci per sample
in Polychromophilus (range: 5–11) to 17.5 loci per sample in Plasmodium (range: 6–21). However, with
the exception of Polychromophilus and Nycteria all genera were represented by at least one sample with
sequence data for 15 genes. All sequences generated by this study have been deposited in GenBank
(see electronic supplementary material, table S2 for accession numbers). Base composition was highly
variable among taxa in our dataset (figure 1; electronic supplementary material, figure S1), with mean
GC content across loci ranging from 24.5% (Plasmodium mackerrasae) to 43.7% (P. vivax). Variation in GC
content of third codon positions (GC3) was even more extreme, varying from just 4.5% (Haemocystidium
(Simondia) metchnikovi) to 49.5% (P. vivax). Just six ingroup species, all members of a clade of Plasmodium
that infect primarily macaques (P. vivax, P. inui, P. cynomolgi, P. knowlesi, P. coatneyi and P. fragile; hereafter
‘macaque Plasmodium’), had GC3 content greater than 27%. The mean GC3 content for the macaque
Plasmodium clade was 41.2%, similar to the GC3 content of the outgroup Theileria (39.9%). Mean GC
and GC3 were significantly higher in the macaque Plasmodium clade than the rest of the Haemosporida
(phylogenetic ANOVA: GC content F1,56 = 160.9, p < 0.001; GC3 content F1,56 = 179.64, p < 0.001). The
divergent base composition profile in the macaque Plasmodium clade was supported by the OUshifts
analysis that identified two shifts in GC content across the phylogeny, one on the branch at the base of
the macaque Plasmodium clade and another on the terminal branch of P. vivax (figure 1). The RCFV value
for the entire dataset (0.071) was more than an order of magnitude greater than for any individual taxon
(0.005), indicating that base composition heterogeneity occurred among taxa rather than among genes
within taxa.
Consistent with trends observed in base composition, we found codon usage to be heavily biased
towards AT-rich codons across all haemosporidians with the exception of the macaque Plasmodium clade
and the outgroup Theileria (figure 1). The average ENCs used (with 20 indicating extremely biased codon
usage and 61 indicating even codon usage) was 49.9 within the macaque Plasmodium clade, in contrast
to 33.6 for the rest of the malaria parasites. The average ENC for Theileria was 48.0, and multivariate
analyses showed that the RSCU profile of the macaque Plasmodium was more similar to that of the
outgroup Theileria than to other haemosporidians (figure 1). ENC was significantly higher in the macaque
Plasmodium clade than the rest of the Haemosporida (phylogenetic ANOVA: F1,56 = 140.3, p < 0.001).
3.2. Topological consistencies across phylogenetic analyses
We found strongest and most consistent support (12 different analyses) for a clade consisting of
Leucocytozoon, Haemoproteus and Parahaemoproteus as the root taxon sister to the rest of the Haemosporida,
though four different analyses recovered only Leucocytozoon at this position (figure 2; electronic
 6
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org R.Soc. opensci. 5: 171780
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
0.437
0.245
GC content
Theileria
Leucocytozoon
Haemoproteus
Parahaemoproteus
Haemocystidium
Haemoproteus catharti
Polychromophilus
Plasmodium odocoilei
Plasmodium (sauropsid) 
Nycteria
Plasmodium (Plasmodium)
Plasmodium (Laverania)
Plasmodium (Vinckeia)
Hepatocystis
(a)
*
–2.5
0
2.5
5.0
0
10
20
PC1 (66.3% explained var.)
PC2 (5.9% explained var.)
(b)
relative synonymous codon usage
macaque Plasmodium clade + Theileria
rest of Haemosporida
*
Figure 1. The order Haemosporida is characterized by extremely heterogeneous base composition and codon usage. (a) The evolution
of GC content is shown optimized across the haemosporidian phylogeny using the contMap function in phytools. Note that the macaque
Plasmodium clade has evolved a GC content that is significantly higher than the rest of the ingroup. Branches where significant shifts in
GC content occurred as determined by the OUshifts analysis are denoted by asterisks. (b) Principle components analysis of RSCU across
the Haemosporida. The macaque Plasmodium clade groups with the outgroup Theileria to the exclusion of the other malaria parasites,
indicating similar usage of synonymous codons within degenerate amino acids.
supplementary material, table S4). The genus Haemocystidium, which has at times been hypothesized to
be a subgenus of Haemoproteus [26], was found in all analyses to be distinct from avian Haemoproteus and
Parahaemoproteus, forming a divergent clade at the base of the mammalian haemosporidian radiation.
In nearly all analyses Haemocystidium was either closely allied with or sister to a parasite isolated from
a turkey vulture, identified as H. catharti [82]. Haemoproteus catharti was consistently recovered outside
of the primary Haemoproteus + Parahaemoproteus clade, rendering Haemoproteus polyphyletic (figure 2;
electronic supplementary material, table S4). We tested whether H. catharti is a member of the same
lineage as Haemoproteus antigonis, a divergent avian malaria parasite recently isolated from cranes that
has been hypothesized to represent a novel haemosporidian genus [83]. Using cytochrome b data for a
 7
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org R.Soc. opensci. 5: 171780
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
0.2
Plasmodium inui
Plasmodium vivax
Plasmodium cynomolgi
Plasmodium knowlesi
Plasmodium coatneyi
Plasmodium fragile
Plasmodium ovale
Plasmodium malariae
Plasmodium berghei
Plasmodium cyclopsi
Plasmodium yoelii
Plasmodium vinckei
Plasmodium chabaudi
Hepatocystis epomophori
Plasmodium falciparum
Plasmodium reichenowi
Plasmodium gaboni
Plasmodium (Plasmodium; macaque) 
Plasmodium koreafense
Plasmodium minuoviride
Plasmodium azurophilum
Plasmodium leucocytica
Plasmodium lacertiliae
Plasmodium sp.
Plasmodium giganteum
Plasmodium gemini
Plasmodium chiricahuae
Plasmodium mexicanum
Plasmodium floridense
Plasmodium sp.
Plasmodium gallinaceum
Plasmodium relictum
Plasmodium juxtanucleare
Nycteria sp.
Polychromophilus sp.
Polychromophilus sp.
Plasmodium odocoilei
Haemocystidium mesnilium
Plasmodium mackerrasae
Simondia metchnikovi
Simondia peltocephali
Haemocystidium ptyodactylii
Haemoproteus catharti
Parahaemoproteus coatneyi
Parahaemoproteus passeris
Parahaemoproteus vireonis
Parahaemoproteus sp.
Parahaemoproteus vireonis
Parahaemoproteus sp.
Parahaemoproteus sanguinis
Parahaemoproteus sp.
Parahaemoproteus ilanpapernai
Haemoproteus columbae
Leucocytozoon dubreuili
Leucocytozoon sp.
Leucocytozoon majoris
Leucocytozoon fringillinarum
Leucocytozoon simondi
Leucocytozoon sp.
Plasmodium (Vinckeia; rodent/bat) 
Plasmodium (Laverania; ape) 
Hepatocystis
Nycteria
Plasmodium (sauropsid) 
Polychromophilus
Plasmodium odocoilei
Haemocystidium 
Plasmodium mackerrasae
Haemoproteus catharti
Haemoproteus columbae
Parahaemoproteus
Leucocytozoon
id)
ape)
= 1.0 PP
= >0.99 PP
E
D
C
B
F
A
Figure 2. The favoured haemosporidian phylogeny. The haemosporidian parasite phylogeny recovered from BEAST using the fully
partitionedaminoaciddatasetandlognormalrelaxedmolecularclock.TheoutgroupTheileriaisnotshownforeaseofviewingtheingroup
topology. Shown as silhouettes are representatives of the vertebrate host group for each haemosporidian lineage. Clades denoted with
the letters A–F are referred to in the Discussion.
subset of avian malaria parasites included in this study in addition to the cytochrome b data from Bertram
et al. [83] (GenBank accession numbers: KX223839–KX223844), we estimated a gene tree using RAxML
with the aforementioned parameters and partitioning by codon position. We found that H. catharti and
H. antigonis are not monophyletic, with all H. antigonis samples forming a clade to the exclusion of all
other haemosporidian genera and H. catharti grouping with Haemocystidium (electronic supplementary
material, figure S2).
We found that the genus Plasmodium was polyphyletic in all analyses (electronic supplementary
material, table S4). Species or clades previously classified as Plasmodium were found to be more closely
related to other haemosporidian genera in four instances: (1) Plasmodium mackerrasae was nested within
Haemocystidium in all analyses; (2) Plasmodium odocoilei, the parasite from North American white-tailed
deer, was recovered outside of the primary mammal Plasmodium clade in all analyses as sister to the
bat-infecting genus Polychromophilus; (3) the rodent and bat Plasmodium clade was sister to Hepatocystis
in all analyses; and (4) Nycteria was recovered as either sister to the primary mammal Plasmodium clade
(containing ape, rodent and bat Plasmodium in addition to Hepatocystis) or sister to sauropsid Plasmodium
(electronic supplementary material, table S4). We found support for Nycteria as sister to the mammalian
Plasmodium + Hepatocystis clade almost exclusively in amino acid analyses; tests of a global molecular
clock were rejected for all loci, and we found that using a lognormal relaxed molecular clock favoured
the recovery of Nycteria as sister to the mammal Plasmodium clade (electronic supplementary material,
table S4).
As two recent studies based on mitochondrial sequence data have also recovered haemosporidian
parasites of ungulates as more closely related to Polychromophilus than to other mammal-infecting
Plasmodium [29,34], we sought to test whether the P. odocoilei isolate included in this study is a member
of the same clade as the previously studied ungulate malaria parasites. To do so we used the cytochrome
b sequence data of malaria parasites isolated from ungulates from [29] and [34] (GenBank accession
numbers: LC090214, LC090215, KT367830, KT367841 and KT367842) in addition to cytochrome b data
from P. odocoilei and all major haemosporidian lineages included in this study to estimate a cytochrome b
 8
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org R.Soc. opensci. 5: 171780
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
0.3
(a)
(b)
Plasmodium (Plasmodium)
Hepatocystis
Plasmodium (Vinckeia)
Plasmodium (Laverania)
Nycteria
Plasmodium (sauropsid) 
Plasmodium odocoilei
Polychromophilus
Haemocystidium
Haemoproteus catharti
Leucocytozoon
Haemoproteus
Parahaemoproteus
Theileria
2.0
Plasmodium (Plasmodium)
Hepatocystis
Plasmodium (Vinckeia)
Plasmodium (Laverania)
Nycteria
Plasmodium (sauropsid) 
Plasmodium odocoilei
Polychromophilus
Haemocystidium
Haemoproteus catharti
Leucocytozoon
Haemoproteus
Parahaemoproteus
Theileria
>0.95
>0.70
<0.70
RAxML concatenated (codon alignment) 
ASTRAL-II species tree (codon alignments)
>95 BS
>70 BS
<70 BS
Figure 3. The ‘
mammal-first’topology is likely driven by base composition convergence between the macaque Plasmodium clade and
the outgroup Theileria. Two analyses recovered the ‘
mammal-first’topology: (a) the ASTRAL-II species tree analysis using gene trees
generated from nucleotide codon alignments, and (b) RAxML supermatrix analysis of the unpartitioned codon alignment. This topology
contrasts dramatically withthe topologiesrecovered fromanalysesthatcorrectfor the base compositionconvergence effect, suggesting
the ‘
mammal-first’
topology is an artefact.
gene tree using RAxML with the aforementioned input parameters and partitioning by codon position.
This analysis recovered P. odocoilei nested within a clade containing all other haemosporidians previously
recovered from ungulates, indicating that the Plasmodium parasites that infect ungulates represent an
unnamed divergent haemosporidian lineage (electronic supplementary material, figure S3).
3.3. Testing the effect of base composition bias on supermatrix and species tree analyses
We observed that two analyses, the unpartitioned analysis using the codon alignment and the
ASTRAL-II species tree analysis using gene trees generated from codon alignments, produced topologies
that differed dramatically from the topologies we recovered in all other analyses (figure 3). The
 9
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org R.Soc. opensci. 5: 171780
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
aforementioned analyses using codon alignments generated similar topologies that we will refer
to as the ‘mammal-first’ topology, which recovered the macaque Plasmodium clade at the root of
the phylogeny as sister to the rest of the Haemosporida. As the ‘mammal-first’ topology deviated
significantly from all other analyses, which universally recovered the avian malaria parasite genera
Leucocytozoon, Haemoproteus and Parahaemoproteus at the root of the tree, we sought to test the robustness
of the ‘mammal-first’ phylogenetic hypothesis and determine whether it may be an artefact of non-
phylogenetic signal caused by base composition heterogeneity. We hypothesized that the ‘mammal-first’
topology may have been driven by base composition convergence between the macaque Plasmodium
clade and the outgroup Theileria, resulting in ‘GC attraction’ driving this clade of Plasmodium towards
the root. We tested this hypothesis by running three additional phylogenetic analyses that sought to
correct for the base composition attraction effect: (1) an unpartitioned analysis using the codon alignment
with the macaque Plasmodium clade removed, (2) an unpartitioned analysis using the full taxon set but
with the highly GC-heterogeneous third codon positions removed, and (3) an outgroup-free (T. annulata
removed) relaxed molecular clock analysis in BEAST following [17], who recovered a topology similar to
the ‘mammal-first’ tree using an outgroup-free approach. We found that none of the additional analyses
recovered the ‘mammal-first’ topology; rather, in each case the analyses recovered topologies with the
mammalian malaria parasites derived from sauropsid-infecting ancestors (electronic supplementary
material, table S4). The observation that the ‘mammal-first’ topology was generally poorly supported
and is only recovered in analyses that provide no correction for base composition bias and include both
the macaque Plasmodium clade and the outgroup strongly suggests that this topology is an artefact due
to base composition convergence.
As we also observed the divergent ‘mammal-first’ topology in ASTRAL-II species tree analyses using
gene trees generated from codon alignments (electronic supplementary material, figure S4), we sought
to test the artefactual nature of this topology in a similar manner to that described above for supermatrix
analyses. To test the hypothesis that error in gene tree estimation due to base composition bias was
responsible for the ‘mammal-first’ topology in species tree analyses, we generated gene trees using
amino acid datasets. We found that support for the ‘mammal-first’ topology disappeared when using
amino acid derived gene trees; while codon alignments resulted in 10 gene trees that produced the
macaque Plasmodium clade as sister to the rest of the Haemosporida, amino acid alignments resulted in
just one gene tree with this topology. The species trees generated using amino acid data recovered a large
sauropsid haemosporidian clade at the root that included Haemocystidium in addition to Leucocytozoon,
Haemoproteus and Parahaemoproteus, though this tree was weakly supported (electronic supplementary
material, figure S4).
4. Discussion
4.1. The phylogeny of the order Haemosporida
Our comprehensive phylogenetic analyses recovered strong support for a novel view of malaria
parasite evolution that provides a framework for understanding haemosporidian life-history
traits, host-switching, diversification and the origin of the malaria parasites that infect humans.
These analyses resolve several historically controversial relationships among the major genus-level
lineages within the Haemosporida, though they also challenge many of the current taxonomic
classifications.
The genus Plasmodium has consistently been found to be non-monophyletic in all molecular
phylogenies with broad haemosporidian taxon sampling [16–18,24,28,30], with various analyses
recovering the genus as either paraphyletic or polyphyletic. The present analyses confirm the polyphyly
of Plasmodium with high support on all relevant nodes as species currently classified as Plasmodium were
found to be more closely related to other haemosporidian genera in four instances. The first instance of
polyphyly involves the position of the Australian lizard malaria parasite, Plasmodium mackerrasae, within
the clade of Haemocystidium parasites. In two previous analyses using the same sample [16,24] this species
also did not group with other lizard Plasmodium species; however, those analyses did not include any
members of Haemocystidium. The species as originally described [84] clearly showed schizonts in blood
cells, whereas Haemocystidium species do not. Though it remains possible that this sample contained a
mixed infection with Haemocystidium, we observed no signs of a mixed infection such as ‘multiple peaks’
in sequence chromatograms and this sample grouped with Haemocystidium in all gene trees for which we
had sequence. Although this finding suggests that P. mackerrasae is incorrectly classified, we were unable
 10
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org R.Soc. opensci. 5: 171780
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
to study the morphology of this sample and so we do not recommend any taxonomic changes for this
species until new and verified material can be obtained.
With the exception of P. odocoilei (which we discuss below), the status of the rest of the taxa currently
ascribed to the genus Plasmodium presents a vexing taxonomic problem and we are forced to confront
several possible solutions, none of which is particularly straightforward. A major complication is the
finding that the genera Hepatocystis and Nycteria are nested within a large clade of species that are
currently classified as Plasmodium that infect lizards and birds as well as primates, rodents and bats
(Clade B, figure 2). The position of Hepatocystis nested within the mammalian Plasmodium (Clade C,
figure 2) presents a particularly challenging problem, as this genus lacks several diagnostic traits that
are characteristic of Plasmodium such as erythrocytic schizogony [85,86] and Hepatocystis is vectored by
ceratopogonid midges of the genus Culicoides rather than mosquitoes [87]. Given that our analyses are
not the first to find this grouping of Hepatocystis with the mammalian Plasmodium species [23,24,88], and
with the expanded data analysed here, this relationship seems increasingly solid. One possible solution
to deal with the position of Hepatocystis would be to revise the taxonomy of this clade substantially to
enforce that both Hepatocystis and Plasmodium are monophyletic. As P. malariae is the type species of the
genus Plasmodium, this change would require that the clade of ape malaria parasites (Clade D, figure 2)
that includes P. falciparum be changed to Laverania (re-elevated from subgenus to genus; [89]) and the
clade of rodent malaria parasites (Clade E, figure 2), which are widely used as model systems would
likewise need to be changed to Vinckeia, their current subgeneric classifier. Both of these changes would
undoubtedly be extremely unpopular and thus probably ignored. A second alternative is to lump the
genus Hepatocystis within Plasmodium. This solution would prevent complicated name changes, which is
advantageous; however, it would also mean that the defining characters of the genus Plasmodium would
need to be revised to the point where they are so broad that they are not useful in delineating the genus.
For instance, if Hepatocystis parasites were to be reclassified as Plasmodium the resulting genus would
include parasites that are vectored by either ceratopogonid midges or mosquitoes, and would remove
erythrocytic schizogony as a defining trait of the group.
A similar conflict is produced by the position of Nycteria as the sister group to the mammalian
Plasmodium + Hepatocystis clade to the exclusion of the clade of sauropsid-infecting Plasmodium (Clade F,
figure 2). The genus Nycteria was originally erected because these parasites of bats did not consistently
show characteristics of Plasmodium, Hepatocystis or Polychromophilus, with only gametocytes present in
the blood and with liver stages similar to those seen in P. falciparum [90]. The taxonomy of Nycteria poses
a similar problem to that posed by Hepatocystis: lumping Nycteria within Plasmodium would eliminate
the diagnostic traits of Plasmodium, while the retention of Nycteria at the genus level would require the
elevation of a new genus for the sauropsid Plasmodium clade. There is, in fact, a different generic name
with precedence for the saurian and avian parasites—Haemamoeba—so the most straightforward path
to take would be to resurrect this genus and use it for the lizard and bird parasites currently called
Plasmodium. We suspect that this would also be unpopular and largely ignored by those working on
these groups, however, which will ultimately create more confusion in the field.
A potentially unifying solution to the taxonomic conflict observed here is to encourage the use of the
subgeneric names for these clades as much as possible, to reflect that they are distinct lineages and to
take into consideration the evolutionary relationships. The issues of changing the name of Plasmodium,
particularly with respect to P. falciparum, was remarked upon by Garnham [13] who noted that it was seen
as ‘unwelcome’—even when the ICZN had sanctioned via a special ruling for Laverania in its place. As a
consolation, though, the historic use of subgenera within the Haemosporida has been common to reflect
the distinctiveness of certain taxa and groups [13,14]. Interestingly, we note that the taxonomic challenge
posed by the Haemosporida strikingly parallels that faced by entomologists working out the systematics
of Drosophila. The type species of the genus, Drosophila funebris, belongs to a different clade than the
very well-known model organism, Drosophila melanogaster, which alternatively has been classified in the
genus Sophophora [91,92]. Rather than dramatically alter the taxonomy of a model organism, these authors
favoured using evolutionary relationships as opposed to strict taxonomy for referring to species and
groups. O’Grady & Markow [92] favoured this scenario as it would cause the least amount of disruption
and confusion, with all commonly studied species retaining their current generic name and leaving open
the ability to make changes in the future when new data become available. Thus, we argue here that
the ‘evolutionary taxonomic’ approach to dealing with the polyphyly of Plasmodium is probably the best
solution to the present conflict. We recognize fully that with the vast number of researchers working
on P. falciparum, the rodent malaria model species, as well as the globally widely studied avian malaria
parasites—not to mention the voluminous literature that already exists that uses the genus Plasmodium
for these species—it is highly impractical to change their generic designation at this point. However, it
 11
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org R.Soc. opensci. 5: 171780
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
is also important to acknowledge the many differences in life histories, morphology and vector usage
by Hepatocystis, Nycteria, Polychromophilus and several of the sauropsid haemosporidian parasites that
use phlebotomine sandflies as vectors (P. mexicanum), or lack haemozoin pigment (e.g. P. azurophilum, P.
leucocytica).
The final instance of polyphyly that we observed in Plasmodium dealt with P. odocoilei and other
ungulate malaria parasites, which we recovered as sister to Polychromophilus. One possible taxonomic
solution is to further extend the generic boundary of Plasmodium to include all of what is Clade A
(figure 2), so as not to alter the taxonomic name of this lineage and to treat Polychromophilus as an
evolutionarily distinct lineage within Plasmodium similar to Hepatocystis and Nycteria. The other is to give
a new generic name for the ungulate malaria, for which there is not any clear precedent. Our analysis
based on cytochrome b indicates that all recently sequenced ungulate malaria parasites are monophyletic
(electronic supplementary material, figure S3), though we recommend that additional multi-locus data
are collected from other species within this clade before formal names (e.g. Plasmodium bubalis and
Plasmodium caprae) are changed.
Our analyses also shed light on other questions of the evolutionary history of the haemosporidians,
particularly their origin. The earliest divergence within the malaria parasites has recently generated
controversy, with studies supporting either early diversification among malaria parasites that infect
birds [16,31] or a deep split between mammal and sauropsid-infecting malaria parasite clades [17]. We
found that after correcting for base composition biases there was uniform support for the avian malaria
parasites Leucocytozoon, Haemoproteus and Parahaemoproteus as the earliest diverging lineages within the
Haemosporida, indicating that avian hosts were probably ancestral. The majority of our analyses (12
of 17 analyses that were not misled by base composition) supported an avian malaria clade containing
Leucocytozoon, Haemoproteus and Parahaemoproteus as sister to the rest of the malaria parasites, though in a
minority of analyses (4 of 17) we found just Leucocytozoon at this position. It is notable that another recent
study of haemosporidian phylogeny based on complete mtDNA genomes [93] recovered strong support
for Leucocytozoon as sister to the rest of Haemosporida. As the pattern of divergence among Leucocytozoon,
Haemoproteus and Parahaemoproteus was not consistent across the analyses conducted here and in other
recent studies, we anticipate that expanded genomic sampling will be required to definitively resolve
this relationship.
This study supports Haemoproteus, Parahaemoproteus and Haemocystidium as distinct and evolutionarily
divergent genera. While Haemoproteus and Parahaemoproteus have been previously considered by some
authors to be subgenera within the same genus [15], we consistently found a deep divergence
between the two lineages indicative of a long history of evolutionary independence. Furthermore,
several of our analyses did not recover Haemoproteus and Parahaemoproteus as sister lineages. The
evolutionary distinctiveness of Haemoproteus and Parahaemoproteus has now been recovered from
multiple studies [16,31] and is supported by the observation that these lineages use different vectors:
Haemoproteus is transmitted by louse flies in the family Hippoboscidae, while Parahaemoproteus is
transmitted by biting midges in the family Ceratopogonidae [15]. The genus Haemocystidium, a
malaria parasite of squamates and chelonians that shares numerous traits with Haemoproteus and
Parahaemoproteus [26], was similarly found to be highly divergent from the avian parasites as the basal
lineage to the clade containing all mammal malaria. The distinctiveness of Haemocystidium has been
found previously using primarily mitochondrial data [26,94], though our study is the first to confirm
this with multi-locus nuclear sequences.
Our analyses also support the distinctiveness of a parasite collected from a New World vulture (family
Cathartidae) in California. Though initially identified as H. catharti [82], both the two-gene analysis by
Yabsley et al. [95] and our multi-locus sequencing here found these parasites to be a divergent lineage and
not part of Haemoproteus or Parahaemoproteus. Similarly, a recent study recovered Haemoproteus antigonis,
a parasite of cranes (Gruidae) in North America, as a divergent genus-level lineage distantly related
to the Haemoproteus and Parahaemoproteus parasites of other birds [83]. However, we found that based
on cytochrome b sequences H. antigonis is not closely related to the turkey vulture parasite studied here.
Taken together, these findings suggest that although several clades of avian malaria parasites may appear
similar to Haemoproteus, there are deeply divergent yet cryptic lineages of malaria parasites that may be
more common than previously appreciated.
Finally, it should be pointed out that these analyses also call into question the status of the
family-level classifications in this order. Fallis & Bennett [96], Garnham [13] and Valki¯
unas [15]
have all advocated for the separation of these parasites into Plasmodiidae, Haemoproteiidae and
Leucocytozoodiae based primarily on the specific combination of presence or absence of two primary
characters—erythrocytic schizogony and haemozoin pigment. Our most commonly recovered topology
 12
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org R.Soc. opensci. 5: 171780
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Leucocytozoon
Haemoproteus
Parahaemoproteus
Haemoproteus catharti
Haemocystidium
Polychromophilus
Plasmodium odocoilei
Plasmodium (sauropsids) 
Nycteria
Plasmodium (apes) 
Hepatocystis
Plasmodium (mammals) 
Leucocytozoon
Haemoproteus
Parahaemoproteus
Haemoproteus catharti
Haemocystidium
Polychromophilus
Plasmodium odocoilei
Plasmodium (sauropsids) 
Nycteria
Plasmodium (apes) 
Hepatocystis
Plasmodium (mammals) 
(a)
(b)
= switch to mammalian hosts
= switch to sauropsid hosts
?
= loss of blood schizogony, vector switch, and transition to bats as vertebrate hosts 
= gain of blood schizogony and gain of Culicidae (mosquito) vectors
Figure 4. The phylogenetic hypothesis presented here alters our understanding of malaria parasite host-switching and life-history
evolution. (a) All topologies that we recovered from across phylogenetic analyses that were corrected for base composition bias suggest
asingleswitchtomammalianhostsfromsauropsid-infectingancestors,followedbyoneadditionalswitchbacktosauropsidhostsinthe
Plasmodium lineage. (b) This topology suggests two alternative scenarios for the evolution of blood schizogony (asexual reproduction in
the host bloodstream) and vector use. One scenario (left) posits a single gain of blood schizogony and a switch to mosquito (Culicidae)
vectors in the lineage leading to all mammalian malaria parasites, followed by loss of blood schizogony and a vector switch in three
lineages: Polychromophilus, Hepatocystis and Nycteria. Alternatively (right), the four lineages of Plasmodium identified in our analysis
could have evolved blood schizogony and switched to mosquito vectors independently.
could be roughly divided into three distinct families, but the family Plasmodiidae would be inconsistent
with the simple scheme first envisioned as some species have sexual stages in dipterans other than
mosquitoes, some do not typically show any erythrocytic schizogony, and some taxa do not have
pigment. Garnham [13] advocated for using subgeneric names to reflect the observed differences in these
groups of haemosporidians; now five decades later and after collecting copious DNA sequence data, we
find ourselves with this same basic conclusion.
4.2. Host-switching and the evolution of life-history traits
Our confirmation of an avian origin for the malaria parasites has broad implications for our
understanding of host-switching within the Haemosporida and the origin of the mammalian malaria
parasites (figure 4). The phylogenetic framework supported here suggests just a single origin of
mammalian malaria leading to the evolution of the genera Polychromophilus, Nycteria, Hepatocystis and
Plasmodium from a sauropsid-infecting ancestor. The transition to infecting mammals was followed by a
secondary switch back to sauropsid hosts in the Plasmodium parasites that infect birds and squamates.
The phylogenetic hypothesis produced here also reaffirms the role of bats (order Chiroptera) as major
drivers of malaria diversification [18,28]. Malaria parasites appear to have undergone a complex history
of divergence following switches to or from bats; our favoured phylogenetic hypothesis suggests either
an initial wide radiation of malaria parasites in bats followed by at least four transitions to other
host groups (ungulates, primates, rodents and sauropsids) or at least four separate colonizations of
bats as hosts (in Polychromophilus, Nycteria, Hepatocystis and mammal Plasmodium). The importance of
bats in malaria diversification also points to the importance of Asia and Africa as cradles of malaria
diversification, as the bat malarias are most diverse and prevalent in these regions [97].
Our analyses also support the finding of [16] that the diversification of major haemosporidian
lineages was precipitated by transitions among vectors within the insect order Diptera (true flies).
Our understanding of the history of vector transitions is, however, hindered by a lack of basic natural
history knowledge as we still are not aware of the vectors for Haemocystidium and Nycteria (though the
Haemocystidium subgenus Simondia is known to be vectored by horseflies in the genus Tabanidae, [14]).
Our favoured hypothesis (figure 4) suggests the possibility that a single switch to mosquito (Culicidae)
vectors occurred in parallel with the switch to mammalian hosts, followed by at least two vector
transitions in the genera Polychromophilus (to nycterbiid batflies) and Hepatocystis (to ceratopogonid
biting midges) and possibly a third in Nycteria (though the vector for this genus is currently unknown).
Lastly, the topology presented here provides a novel understanding of the evolution of asexual
reproduction in host blood (exoerythrocytic schizogony). Blood schizogony is exclusive to the genus
Plasmodium, and has been considered a primary factor contributing to the virulence of this genus [15]. The
finding that Plasmodium is polyphyletic suggests a dynamic history of gain and loss of blood schizogony.
The most parsimonious reconstruction of this trait suggests a gain of schizogony at the transition to
mammalian hosts and three independent losses in the lineages leading to Polychromophilus, Nycteria and
Hepatocystis, though the causes for the loss of blood schizogony remain unclear. It is worth noting that
 13
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org R.Soc. opensci. 5: 171780
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
the loss of blood schizogony appears to have paralleled transitions in vector hosts as well as the primary
or exclusive use of bats as vertebrate hosts in Polychromophilus, Hepatocystis and Nycteria, though the
biological significance of this correlation is unknown.
4.3. The effects of base composition bias and heterogeneity on phylogenetic accuracy
This study provides empirical support to show that the two currently popular approaches for analysing
phylogenomic datasets—supermatrix concatenation and species tree methods—are vulnerable to being
misled by base composition convergence in distantly related lineages if this bias is not corrected for
during analysis. We show here that an incorrect malaria parasite phylogeny that would dramatically
alter our understanding of malaria evolution is estimated from both approaches when using nucleotide
alignments that have not been corrected for base composition heterogeneity. Supermatrix approaches
have previously been justified based on their ability to detect ‘hidden support’ that is not contained in
any individual partition [98,99], though we show here that strong support for the wrong topology can
be recovered due to the overwhelming effect of non-phylogenetic signal produced by non-stationary
nucleotide alignments. Similarly, we show that the assumptions of species tree methods, namely
that gene trees are estimated accurately and that gene tree discordance is due to incomplete lineage
sorting [100], can also be violated when the effect of base composition bias and convergence is strong.
Here we found that not only can base composition bias and convergence mislead malaria parasite
phylogeny using traditional concatenation methods, but also base composition convergence can mislead
species tree methods by biasing the gene trees used under the multispecies coalescent model.
Both cases appear to be caused by ‘base composition attraction’ between the macaque Plasmodium
clade and the piroplasmid outgroup T. annulata, and this effect could be expected to occur wherever
distantly related clades have converged on similar base compositions that contrast with the background
base composition of the group under study. It has been suggested that the problem of non-stationarity can
be addressed by simply removing the offending sites from an alignment [101], though it is important to
note that in many systems, such as the malaria parasites, non-stationarity is pervasive across virtually all
genes and sites. Future phylogenomic studies of clades that are characterized by strong base composition
heterogeneity will benefit by testing and correcting for the effect of base composition attraction acting
at all scales from supermatrices to individual gene trees, and correcting for this heterogeneity across
alignments.
4.4. Moving forward
Using a large protein-coding sequence dataset that includes the broadest genus-level sampling of any
malaria phylogeny to date, we present a novel view of the evolutionary history of the Haemosporida. We
provide an empirical example of the misleading effect of base composition convergence on phylogenetic
methods, and demonstrate that correction for this effect results in a topology that recovers the genus
Plasmodium as polyphyletic with evidence for just a single invasion of malaria parasites into mammals
following a single switch from sauropsid-infecting ancestors. Our analysis demonstrates that the
evolution of malaria life- and natural-history traits has been more dynamic than previously appreciated,
and will probably necessitate further attention as novel malaria parasite diversity continues to be
discovered.
Though the present study represents the most comprehensive phylogenetic treatment of the order
Haemosporida, there are still important gaps that need to be filled before a true understanding of
the evolutionary relationships of this group and their traits can be assessed. Hepatocystis kochi, the
type species of the genus/subgenus and a parasite that infects primates, not bats, should be a high
priority for inclusion in future analyses. The genus Akiba, sometimes referred to as a subgenus of
Leucocytozoon, but probably distinct as it uses midges and not simuliids as its vector [102], should
also be a taxon of focus. We also did not include samples from several poorly known genera of lizard
malaria parasites, such as Saurocytozoon, Garnia and Fallisia. Certainly, the marriage of morphologically
identified samples of parasites with new molecular data should be continued in every case, so as to
allow for taxonomic revisions that correspond to previously described species. As several genomic
and transcriptomic datasets from avian haemosporidians have recently been published [40,103,104], we
anticipate that these resources will be of high utility for future studies of haemosporidian phylogeny
using genome-wide data.
Ethics. Samples used in this study were collected according to the following IACUC protocols: Louisiana State
University 11-094, Humboldt State University 08/09.W.89.A, Bucknell University DMR-16, National Zoological
 14
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org R.Soc. opensci. 5: 171780
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Park 09–22, and American Museum of Natural History AMNH06042014. Samples used in this study were
collected according to the following permits: Federal Bird Banding Permit #09379, Liberian Forest Development
Authority Permit no. AMD/030/053-11, South Sudanese Ministry for Wildlife Conservation and Tourism Permit
MWC&T/RSS/J/18/1, Saba Permit 257–2016, and Papua New Guinea export permits 010306 and 014090.
Data accessibility. All
sequence
data
generated
by
this
study
have
been
deposited
in
GenBank
(accession
numbers: MF508246–MF508317, MF508319–MF508519, MF775737–MF775893). The electronic supplementary material
accompanying this article contains details of samples used in this study, models of sequence evolution used in
phylogenetic analyses, and results of phylogenetic analyses. Sequence alignments and phylogenetic trees have been
deposited in the Dryad repository (http://dx.doi.org/10.5061/dryad.kk628dt) [105].
Authors’contributions. S.C.G. and S.L.P. designed the study, performed molecular laboratory work, participated in data
analysis and drafted the manuscript. J.B. and S.L.P. contributed materials and reagents. S.L.P., E.S.M., J.S., C.C.A. and
C.J.W. contributed samples. All authors read and provided comments on the manuscript and gave final approval.
Competing interests. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Funding. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation grant NSF-DEB-1145984 to S.L.P. and NSF-
DEB-1146033 to C.C.A.
Acknowledgements. We thank DeeAnn M. Reeder for providing the Nycteria sample. We thank Michael Yabsley for
valuable input on the manuscript and discussion of the turkey vulture parasite.
References
1.
Souto RP, Fernandes O, Macedo AM, Campbell DA,
Zingales B. 1996 DNA markers define two major
phylogenetic lineages of Trypanosomacruzi. Mol.
Biochem.Parasitol. 83, 141–152. (doi:10.1016/
S0166-6851(96)02755-7)
2.
Suzuki Y, Gojobori T. 1997 The origin and evolution
of Ebola and Marburg viruses. Mol.Biol.Evol. 14,
800–806. (doi:10.1093/oxfordjournals.molbev.
a025820)
3.
Gao F etal. 1999 Origin of HIV-1 in the chimpanzee
Pantroglodytestroglodytes. Nature 397, 436–441.
(doi:10.1038/17130)
4.
Rambaut A, Robertson DL, Pybus OG, Peeters M,
Holmes EC. 2001 Human immunodeficiency virus:
phylogeny and the origin of HIV-1. Nature 410,
1047–1048. (doi:10.1038/35074179)
5.
Zwickl DJ, Hillis DM. 2002 Increased taxon
sampling greatly reduces phylogenetic error. Sys.
Biol. 51, 588–598. (doi:10.1080/1063515029010
2339)
6.
Hedtke SM, Townsend TM, Hillis DM. 2006
Resolution of phylogenetic conflict in large data
sets by increased taxon sampling. Sys.Biol. 55,
522–529. (doi:10.1080/10635150600697358)
7.
Heath TA, Hedtke SM, Hillis DM. 2008 Taxon
sampling and the accuracy of phylogenetic
analyses. J.Sys.Evol. 46, 239–257. (doi:10.3724/
SP.J.1002.2008.08016)
8.
Schoch CL etal. 2009 The Ascomycota tree of life: a
phylum-wide phylogeny clarifies the origin and
evolution of fundamental reproductive and
ecological traits. Sys.Biol. 58, 224–239.
(doi:10.1093/sysbio/syp020)
9.
Krief S etal. 2010 On the diversity of malaria
parasites in African apes and the origin of
Plasmodiumfalciparum from bonobos. PLoS
Pathog. 6, e1000765. (doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.
1000765)
10.
Liu W etal. 2010 Origin of the human malaria
parasite Plasmodiumfalciparum in gorillas. Nature
467, 420–425. (doi:10.1038/nature09442)
11.
Prugnolle Fetal. 2013 Diversity, host switching and
evolution of Plasmodiumvivax infecting African
great apes. Proc.NatlAcad.Sci.USA 110,
8123–8128. (doi:10.1073/pnas.1306004110)
12.
Talavera-López C, Andersson B. 2017 Parasite
genomics: time to think bigger. PLoSNeg.Trop.Dis.
11, e0005463. (doi:10.1371/journal.pntd.
0005463)
13.
Garnham PCC. 1966 Malariaparasitesandother
Haemosporidia. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Scientific
Publications Ltd.
14.
Perkins SL. 2014 Malaria’
s many mates: past,
present, and future of the systematics of the order
Haemosporida. J.Parasitol. 100, 11–25.
(doi:10.1645/13-362.1)
15.
Valki¯
unas G. 2004 Avianmalariaparasitesand
otherhaemosporidia. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
16.
Martinsen ES, Perkins SL, Schall JJ. 2008 A
three-genome phylogeny of malaria parasites
(Plasmodium and closely related genera):
evolution of life-history traits and host switches.
Mol.Phylogenet.Evol. 47, 261–273. (doi:10.1016/
j.ympev.2007.11.012)
17.
Outlaw DC, Ricklefs RE. 2011 Rerooting the
evolutionary tree of malaria parasites. Proc.Natl
Acad.Sci.USA 108, 13 183–13 187. (doi:10.1073/
pnas.1109153108)
18.
Schaer J, Perkins SL, Decher J, Leendertz FH, Fahr J,
Weber N, Matuschewski K. 2013 High diversity of
West African bat malaria parasites and a tight link
with rodent Plasmodium taxa. Proc.NatlAcad.Sci.
USA 110, 17 415–17 419. (doi:10.1073/pnas.
1311016110)
19.
Escalante AA, Ayala FJ. 1994 Phylogeny of the
malarial genus Plasmodium, derived from rRNA
gene sequences. Proc.NatlAcad.Sci.USA 91,
11 373–11 377. (doi:10.1073/pnas.91.24.11373)
20.
Escalante AA, Barrio E, Ayala FJ. 1995 Evolutionary
origin of human and primate malarias: evidence
from the circumsporozoite protein gene. Mol.Biol.
Evol. 12, 616–626. (doi:10.1093/oxfordjournals.
molbev.a040241)
21.
Qari SH, Shi YP, Pieniazek NJ, Collins WE, Lal AA.
1996 Phylogenetic relationship among the malaria
parasites based on small subunit rRNA gene
sequences: monophyletic nature of the human
malaria parasite, Plasmodiumfalciparum. Mol.
Phylogenet.Evol. 6, 157–165. (doi:10.1006/
mpev.1996.0068)
22.
McCutchan TF, Kissinger JC, Touray MG, Rogers MJ,
Li J, Sullivan M, Braga EM, Krettli AU, Miller LH.
1996 Comparison of circumsporozoite proteins
from avian and mammalian malarias: biological
and phylogenetic implications. Proc.NatlAcad.Sci.
USA 93, 11 889–11 894. (doi:10.1073/pnas.93.
21.11889)
23.
Escalante AA, Freeland DE, Collins WE, Lal AA. 1998
The evolution of primate malaria parasites based
on the gene encoding cytochrome b from the
linear mitochondrial genome. Proc.NatlAcad.Sci.
USA 95, 8124–8129. (doi:10.1073/pnas.95.14.8124)
24.
Perkins SL, Schall JJ. 2002 A molecular phylogeny
of malarial parasites recovered from cytochrome b
gene sequences. J.Parasitol. 88, 972–978.
(doi:10.1645/0022-3395(2002)088[0972:AMPOMP]
2.0.CO;2)
25.
Hagner SC, Misof B, Maier WA, Kampen H. 2007
Bayesian analysis of new and old malaria parasite
DNA sequence data demonstrates the need for
more phylogenetic signal to clarify the descent of
Plasmodiumfalciparum. Parasitol.Res. 101,
493–503. (doi:10.1007/s00436-007-0499-6)
26.
Pineda-Catalan O, Perkins SL, Peirce MA,
Engstrand R, Garcia-Davila C, Pinedo-Vasquez M,
Aguirre AA. 2013 Revision of hemoproteid genera
and description and redescription of two species of
chelonian hemoproteid parasites. J.Parasitol. 99,
1089–1098. (doi:10.1645/13-296.1)
27.
Schaer J, Reeder DM, Vodzak ME, Olival KJ, Weber
N, Mayer F, Matuschewski K, Perkins SL. 2015
Nycteria parasites of Afrotropical insectivorous
bats. Int.J.Parasitol. 45, 375–384. (doi:10.1016/
j.ijpara.2015.01.008)
28.
Lutz HL, Patterson BD, Kerbis Peterhans JC, Stanley
WT, Webala PW, Gnoske TP, Hackett SJ, Stanhope
MJ. 2016 Diverse sampling of East African
haemosporidians reveals chiropteran origin of
malaria parasites in primates and rodents. Mol.
Phylogenet.Evol. 99, 7–15. (doi:10.1016/j.ympev.
2016.03.004)
29.
Boundenga L etal. 2016 Haemosporidian parasites
of antelopes and other vertebrates from Gabon,
Central Africa. PLoSONE 11, e0148958.
(doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0148958)
 15
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org R.Soc. opensci. 5: 171780
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30.
Martinsen ES etal. 2016 Hidden in plain sight:
cryptic and endemic malaria parasites in North
American white-tailed deer (Odocoileus
virginianus). Sci.Adv. 2, e1501486. (doi:10.1126/
sciadv.1501486)
31.
Borner J etal. 2016 Phylogeny of haemosporidian
blood parasites revealed by a multi-gene
approach. Mol.Phylogenet.Evol. 94, 221–231.
(doi:10.1016/j.ympev.2015.09.003)
32.
Duval L, Robert V, Csorba G, Hassanin A,
Randrianarivelojosia M, Walston J, Nhim T,
Goodman SM, Ariey F. 2007 Multiple
host-switching of haemosporidia parasites in bats.
Malar.J. 6, 157. (doi:10.1186/1475-2875-6-157)
33.
Witsenburg F, Salamin N, Christe P. 2012 The
evolutionary host switches of Polychromophilus: a
multi-gene phylogeny of the bat malaria genus
suggests a second invasion of mammals by a
haemosporidian parasite. Malar.J. 11, 53.
(doi:10.1186/1475-2875-11-53)
34.
Templeton TJ, Martinsen E, Kaewthamasorn M,
Kaneko O. 2016 The rediscovery of malaria
parasites of ungulates. Parasitology 143,
1501–1508. (doi:10.1017/S0031182016001141)
35.
Martinsen, ES, Perkins SL. 2013 The diversity of
Plasmodium and other haemosporidians: the
intersection of taxonomy, phylogenetics, and
genomics. In Malariaparasites:comparative
genomics,evolution,andmolecularbiology
(eds JM Carlton, SL Perkins, KW Deitsch), pp. 1–15.
Poole, UK: Caister Academic Press.
36.
Palinauskas V, Križanauskien˙
e A, Iezhova TA,
Bolshakov CV, Jönsson J, Bensch S, Valki¯
unas G.
2013 A new method for isolation of purified
genomic DNA from haemosporidian parasites
inhabiting nucleated red blood cells. Exp.Parasitol.
133, 275–280. (doi:10.1016/j.exppara.2012.
12.003)
37.
Dávalos LM, Perkins SL. 2008 Saturation and base
composition bias explain phylogenomic conflict in
Plasmodium. Genomics 91, 433–442. (doi:10.1016/
j.ygeno.2008.01.006)
38.
Pick C, Ebersberger I, Spielmann T, Bruchhaus I,
Burmester T. 2011 Phylogenomic analyses of
malaria parasites and evolution of their exported
proteins. BMCEvol.Biol. 11, 167. (doi:10.1186/1471-
2148-11-167)
39.
Silva JC, Egan A, Arze C, Spouge JL, Harris DG. 2015
A new method for estimating species age supports
the coexistence of malaria parasites and their
mammalian hosts. Mol.Biol.Evol. 32, 1354–1364.
(doi:10.1093/molbev/msv005)
40.
Bensch S, Canback B, DeBarry JD, Johansson T,
Hellgren O, Kissinger JC, Palinauskas V, Videvall E,
Valki¯
unas G. 2016 The genome of Haemoproteus
tartakovskyi and its relationship to human malaria
parasites. GenomeBiol.Evol. 8, 1361–1373.
(doi:10.1093/gbe/evw081)
41.
Foster PG, Hickey DA. 1999 Compositional bias may
affect both DNA-based and protein-based
phylogenetic reconstructions. J.Mol.Evol. 48,
284–290. (doi:10.1007/PL00006471)
42.
Mooers A, Holmes EC. 2000 The evolution of base
composition and phylogenetic inference. Trends
Ecol.Evol. 15, 365–369. (doi:10.1016/S0169-
5347(00)01934-0)
43.
Gardner MJ etal. 2002 Genome sequence of the
human malaria parasite Plasmodiumfalciparum.
Nature 419, 498–511. (doi:10.1038/nature01097)
44.
Nygaard S etal. 2010 Long- and short-term
selective forces on malaria parasite genomes. PLoS
Genet. 6, e1001099. (doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.
1001099)
45.
Nikbakht H, Xia X, Hickey DA. 2015 The evolution of
genomic GC content undergoes a rapid reversal
within the genus Plasmodium. Genome 57,
507–511. (doi/10.1139/gen-2014-0158.)
46.
Lockhart PJ, Howe CJ, Bryant DA, Beanland TJ,
Larkum AW. 1992 Substitutional bias confounds
inference of cyanelle origins from sequence data.
J.Mol.Evol. 34, 153–162. (doi:10.1007/BF00182392)
47.
Chang BS, Campbell DL. 2000 Bias in phylogenetic
reconstruction of vertebrate rhodopsin sequences.
Mol.Biol.Evol. 17, 1220–1231. (doi:10.1093/oxford
journals.molbev.a026405)
48.
Jermiin L, Ho SY, Ababneh F, Robinson J, Larkum
AW. 2004 The biasing effect of compositional
heterogeneity on phylogenetic estimates may be
underestimated. Syst.Biol. 53, 638–643.
(doi:10.1080/10635150490468648)
49.
Gruber KF, Voss RS, Jansa SA. 2007
Base-compositional heterogeneity in the RAG1
locus among didelphid marsupials: implications
for phylogenetic inference and the evolution of GC
content. Syst.Biol. 56, 83–96. (doi:10.1080/
10635150601182939)
50.
Tarrío R, Rodríguez-Trelles F, Ayala FJ. 2000 Tree
rooting with outgroups when they differ in their
nucleotide composition from the ingroup: the
Drosophilasaltans and willistoni groups, a case
study. Mol.Phylogenet.Evol. 16, 344–349.
(doi:10.1006/mpev.2000.0813)
51.
Li C, Matthes-Rosana KA, Garcia M, Naylor GJP.
2012 Phylogenetics of Chondrichthyes and the
problem of rooting phylogenies with distant
outgroups. Mol.Phylogenet.Evol. 63, 365–373.
(doi:10.1016/j.ympev.2012.01.013)
52.
Singer GA, Hickey DA. 2000 Nucleotide bias causes
a genomewide bias in the amino acid composition
of proteins. Mol.Biol.Evol. 17, 1581–1588.
(doi:10.1093/oxfordjournals.molbev.a026257)
53.
Sharp PM, Emery LR, Zeng K. 2010 Forces that
influence the evolution of codon bias. Phil.Trans.
R.Soc.B 365, 1203–1212. (doi:10.1098/rstb.
2009.0305)
54.
Plotkin JB, Kudla G. 2011 Synonymous but not the
same: the causes and consequences of codon bias.
Nat.Rev.Genet. 12, 32–42. (doi:10.1038/nrg2899)
55.
Inagaki Y, Simpson A, Dacks J, Roger A. 2004
Phylogenetic artifacts can be caused by leucine,
serine, and arginine codon usage heterogeneity:
dinoflagellate plastid origins as a case study. Syst.
Biol. 53, 582–593. (doi:10.1080/10635150490
468756)
56.
Rota-Stabelli O, Lartillot N, Philippe H, Pisani D.
2013 Serine codon-usage bias in deep
phylogenomics: pancrustacean relationships as a
case study. Syst.Biol. 62, 121–133. (doi:10.1093/
sysbio/sys077)
57.
Liu Y, Cox CJ, Wang W, Goffinet B. 2014
Mitochondrial phylogenomics of early land plants:
mitigating the effects of saturation, compositional
heterogeneity, and codon-usage bias. Syst.Biol.
63, 862–878. (doi:10.1093/sysbio/syu049)
58.
Rutledge G etal. 2017 Plasmodiummalariae and P.
ovale genomes provide insights into malaria
parasite evolution. Nature 542, 101–104.
(doi:10.1038/nature21038)
59.
Feagin JE. 1994 The extrachromosomal DNAs of
apicomplexan parasites. Ann.Rev.Microbiol. 48,
81–104. (doi:10.1146/annurev.mi.48.100194.
000501)
60.
McIntosh MT. 1998 Divergent evolutionary
constraints on mitochondrial and nuclear
genomes of malaria parasites. Mol.Biochem.
Parasitol. 95, 69–80. (doi:10.1016/S0166-6851(98)
00093-0)
61.
Karadjian G, Hassanin A, Saintpierre B, Gembu
Tungaluna G-C, Ariey F, Ayala FJ, Landau I, Duval L.
2016 Highly rearranged mitochondrial genome in
Nycteria parasites (Haemosporidia) from bats.
Proc.NatlAcad.Sci.USA 113, 9834–9839.
(doi:10.1073/pnas.1610643113)
62.
Aurrecoechea C etal. 2009 PlasmoDB: a functional
genomic database for malaria parasites. Nucleic
AcidsRes. 37, D539–D543. (doi:10.1093/nar/
gkn814)
63.
Kuo CH, Kissinger JC. 2008 Consistent and
contrasting properties of lineage-specific genes in
the apicomplexan parasites Plasmodium and
Theileria. BMCEvol.Biol. 8, 108. (doi:10.1186/1471-
2148-8-108)
64.
Katoh K, Standley DM. 2013 MAFFT multiple
sequence alignment software version 7:
improvements in performance and usability. Mol.
Biol.Evol. 30, 772–780. (doi:10.1093/molbev/
mst010)
65.
Abascal F, Zardoya R, Telford MJ. 2010 TranslatorX:
multiple alignment of nucleotide sequences
guided by amino acid translations. NucleicAcids
Res. 38, 7–13. (doi:10.1093/nar/gkq291)
66.
R Core Team. 2014 R:Alanguageandenvironment
forstatisticalcomputing. Vienna, Austria: R
Foundation for Statistical Computing. See http://
www.R-project.org/.
67.
Charif D, Lobry JR. 2007 seqinR 1.0-2: a contributed
package to the R project for statistical computing
devoted to biological sequences retrieval and
analysis. In Structuralapproachestosequence
evolution (eds U Bastolla, PDM Porto, HE Roman,
M Vendruscolo), pp. 207–232. Berlin, Germany:
Springer.
68.
Peden J. 1997 CodonW. Dublin, Republic of Ireland:
Trinity College.
69.
Sharp PM, Tuohy TM, Mosurski KR. 1986 Codon
usage in yeast: cluster analysis clearly
differentiates highly and lowly expressed genes.
NucleicAcidsRes. 14, 5125–5143. (doi:10.1093/
nar/14.13.5125)
70.
Wright F. 1990 The effective number of codons
used in a gene. Gene 87, 23–29. (doi:10.1016/
0378-1119(90)90491-9)
71.
Revell LJ. 2012 Phytools: an R package for
phylogenetic comparative biology (and other
things). MethodsEcol.Evol. 3, 217–223.
(doi:10.1111/j.2041-210X.2011.00169.x)
72.
Ho LT, Ané C. 2014 A linear-time algorithm for
Gaussian and non-Gaussian trait evolution
models. Syst.Biol. 63, 397–408. (doi:10.1093/
sysbio/syu005)
73.
Zhong M, Hansen B, Nesnidal M, Golombek A,
Halanych KM, Struck TH. 2011 Detecting the
symplesiomorphy trap: a multigene phylogenetic
analysis of terebelliform annelids. BMCEvol.Biol.
11, 369. (doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-369)
74.
Harmon LJ, Weir JT, Brock CD, Glor RE, Challenger
W. 2008 GEIGER: investigating evolutionary
 16
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org R.Soc. opensci. 5: 171780
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
radiations. Bioinformatics 24, 129–131.
(doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btm538)
75.
Drummond AJ, Suchard MA, Xie D, Rambaut A.
2012 Bayesian phylogenetics with BEAUti and the
BEAST 1.7. Mol.Biol.Evol. 29, 1969–1973.
(doi:10.1093/molbev/mss075)
76.
Stamatakis A. 2014 RAxML version 8: a tool for
phylogenetic analysis and post-analysis of large
phylogenies. Bioinformatics 30, 1312–1313.
(doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btu033)
77.
Lanfear R, Frandsen PB, Wright AM, Senfeld T,
Calcott B. 2016 PartitionFinder 2: New methods for
selecting partitioned models of evolution for
molecular and morphological phylogenetic
analyses. Mol.Biol.Evol. 34, 772–773.
(doi:10.1093/molbev/msw260)
78.
Miller MA, Pfeiffer W, Schwartz T. 2010 Creating
the CIPRES Science Gateway for inference of large
phylogenetic trees. In Proc.GatewayComputing
EnvironmentsWorkshop (GCE), NewOrleans,LA,
14November, pp. 1–8.
79.
Rambaut A, Drummond AJ. 2014 Tracer v1.5. See
http://beast.bio.ed.ac.uk/Tracer.
80.
Mirarab S, Warnow T. 2015 ASTRAL-II:
coalescent-based species tree estimation with
many hundreds of taxa and thousands of genes.
Bioinformatics 31, i44–i52. (doi:10.1093/
bioinformatics/btv234)
81.
Mirarab S, Reaz R, Bayzid MS, Zimmermann T,
Swenson MS, Warnow T. 2014 ASTRAL:
genome-scale coalescent-based species tree
estimation. Bioinformatics 30, i541–i548.
(doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/
btu462)
82.
Greiner EC, Fedynich AM, Webb SL, DeVault TL,
Rhodes Jr OE. 2011 Hematozoa and a new
haemoproteid species from Cathartidae (New
World vulture) in South Carolina. J.Parasitol. 97,
1137–1139. (doi:10.1645/GE-2332.1)
83.
Bertram, MR, Hamer SA, Hartup BK, Snowden KF,
Medeiros MC, Outlaw DC, Hamer GL. 2017 A novel
haemosporida clade at the rank of genus in North
American cranes (Aves:Gruiformes). Mol.
Phylogenet.Evol. 109, 73–79. (doi:/10.1016/
j.ympev.2016.12.025)
84.
Telford Jr SR. 1979 A malarial parasite of Australian
skinks, Plasmodium mackerrasae sp. n. J.Parasitol.
65, 409–413. (doi:10.2307/3280285)
85.
Garnham PCC. 1948 The developmental cycle of
Hepatocystes (Plasmodium) kochi in the monkey
host. Trans.R.Soc.Trop.Med.Hyg. 41, 601–616.
(doi:10.1016/S0035-9203(48)90418-0)
86.
Garnham, PCC. 1951 An attempt to find the vector
of Hepatocystis (=Plasmodium) kochi (Levaditi
and Schoen). Expl.Parasit. 1, 94–107.
(doi:10.1016/0014-4894(51)90010-0)
87.
Garnham PCC, Heisch RB, Minter DM. 1961 The
vector of Hepatocystis (=Plasmodium) kochi: the
successful conclusion of observations in many
partsoftropicalAfrica.Trans.R.Soc.Trop.Med.Hyg.
55, 497–502. (doi:10.1016/0035-9203(61)90071-2)
88.
Schaer J, Perkins SL, Ejotre I, Vodzak ME,
Matuschewski K, Reeder DM. 2017 Epauletted fruit
bats display exceptionally high infections with a
Hepatocystis complex in South Sudan. Sci.Rep. 7,
6928. (doi:10.1038/s41598-017-07093-z)
89.
Bray, RS. 1958 Studies on malaria in chimpanzees.
Am.J.Trop.Med.Hyg. 7, 20–24. (doi:10.4269/
ajtmh.1958.7.20)
90.
Garnham PCC, Heisch RB. 1953 On a new blood
parasite of insectivorous bats. Trans.R.Soc.Trop.
Med.Hyg. 47, 357–363. (doi:10.1016/S0035-
9203(53)80016-7)
91.
O’
Grady P, Desalle R. 2008 Out of Hawaii: the
origin and biogeography of the genus Scaptomyza
(Diptera: Drosophilidae). Biol.Lett. 4, 195–199.
(doi:10.1098/rsbl.2007.0575)
92.
O’
Grady PM, Markow TA. 2009 Phylogenetic
taxonomy in Drosophila: problems and prospects.
Fly 3, 10–14. (doi:10.4161/fly.3.1.7748)
93.
Pacheco MA etal. 2017 Mode and rate of evolution
of haemosporidian mitochondrial genomes:
timing the radiation of avian parasites. Mol.Biol.
Evol. 35, 383–403. (doi:10.1093/molbev/msx285)
94.
Maia JP, Harris DJ, Carranza S. 2016 Reconstruction
of the evolutionary history of Haemosporida
(Apicomplexa) based on the cyt b gene with
characterization of Haemocystidium in geckos
(Squamata: Gekkota) from Oman. Parasitol.Int.
65, 5–11. (doi:10.1016/j.parint.2015.09.003)
95.
Yabsley MJ etal. 2018 Parasitemia data and
molecular characterization of Haemoproteus
catharti from New World vultures (Cathartidae)
reveals a novel clade of Haemosporida. MalariaJ.
17, 12. (doi:10.1186/s12936-017-2165-5)
96.
Fallis AM, Bennett GF. 1961 Sporogony of
Leucocytozoon and Haemoproteus in simuliids and
certapogonids and a revised classification of the
Haemosporidiida. Can.J.Zool. 39, 215–228.
(doi:10.1139/z61-026)
97.
Perkins SL, Schaer J. 2016 A modern menagerie of
mammalian malaria. TrendsParasitol. 32, 772–782.
(doi:10.1016/j.pt.2016.06.001)
98.
de Queiroz A, Gatesy J. 2007 The supermatrix
approach to systematics. TrendsEcol.Evol. 22,
34–41. (doi:10.1016/j.tree.2006.10.002)
99.
Salichos L, Rokas A. 2013 Inferring ancient
divergences requires genes with strong
phylogenetic signals. Nature 497, 327–331.
(doi:10.1038/nature12130)
100. Huang H, He Q, Kubatko LS, Knowles LL. 2010
Sources of error inherent in species-tree
estimation: impact of mutational and coalescent
effects on accuracy and implications for choosing
among different methods. Syst.Biol. 59, 573–583.
(doi:10.1093/sysbio/syq047)
101. Philippe H, Vienne DMD, Ranwez V, Roure B,
Baurain D, Delsuc F. 2017 Pitfalls in supermatrix
phylogenomics. Eur.J.Tax. 283, 1–25.
(doi:10.5852/ejt.2017.283)
102. Bennett GF, Garnham PCC, Fallis AM. 1965 On the
status of the genera Leucocytozoon Ziemann 1898
and Haemoproteus Kruse 1890 (Haemosporidia:
Leucocytozoidae and Haemoproteidae). Can.J.
Zool. 43, 927–932. (doi/10.1139/z65-096)
103. Videvall E, Cornwallis CK, Ahren D, Palinauskas V,
Valkiunas G, Hellgren O. 2017 The transcriptome of
the avian malaria parasite Plasmodiumashfordi
displays host-specific gene expression. Mol.Ecol.
26, 2939–2958. (doi:10.1111/mec.14085)
104. Bohme U etal. 2018 Complete avian malaria
parasite genomes reveal features associated with
lineage specific evolution in birds and mammals.
GenomeRes. 28, 547–560. (doi:10.1101/
gr.218123.116)
105. Galen SC, Borner J, Martinsen ES, Schaer J,
Austin CC, West CJ, Perkins SL. 2018 Data from: The
polyphyly of Plasmodium: comprehensive
phylogenetic analyses of the malaria parasites
(order Haemosporida) reveal widespread
taxonomic conflict. Dryad Digital Repository.
(doi:10.5061/dryad.kk628dt)
