 Clinical Infectious Diseases
I D S A G U I D E L I N E
2016 Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA)
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Treatment of
Coccidioidomycosis
John N. Galgiani,1 Neil M. Ampel,2 Janis E. Blair,3 Antonino Catanzaro,4 Francesca Geertsma,5 Susan E. Hoover,6 Royce H. Johnson,7 Shimon Kusne,3
Jeffrey Lisse,8 Joel D. MacDonald,9 Shari L. Meyerson,10 Patricia B. Raksin,11 John Siever,12 David A. Stevens,13 Rebecca Sunenshine,14,15 and
Nicholas Theodore16
1Valley Fever Center for Excellence, and 2Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Arizona, Tucson, and 3Division of Infectious Diseases, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, Arizona; 4Division of Pulmonary
and Critical Care, University of California, San Diego, and 5Department of Pediatrics, Infectious Diseases, Stanford University School of Medicine, California; 6Division of Sanford Health, Sioux Falls,
South Dakota; 7David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Department of Medicine, Kern Medical Center, Bakersfield, California; 8Department of Rheumatology, University of Arizona, Tucson;
9Department of Neurosurgery School of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City; 10Division of Thoracic Surgery, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of Medicine, and 11Division of
Neurosurgery, John H. Stroger Jr Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois; 12Arizona Pulmonary Specialists, Ltd, Phoenix; 13Division of Infectious Diseases, Stanford University School of Medicine,
California; 14Career Epidemiology Field Officer Program, Division of State and Local Readiness, Office of Public Health Preparedness and Response, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention;
15Maricopa County Department of Public Health, and 16Department of Neurosurgery, Barrow Neurological Institute, Phoenix, Arizona
It is important to realize that guidelines cannot always account for individual variation among patients. They are not intended to
supplant physician judgment with respect to particular patients or special clinical situations. Infectious Diseases Society of America
considers adherence to these guidelines to be voluntary, with the ultimate determination regarding their application to be made by
the physician in the light of each patient’s individual circumstances.
Coccidioidomycosis, also known as San Joaquin Valley fever, is a systemic infection endemic to parts of the southwestern United
States and elsewhere in the Western Hemisphere. Residence in and recent travel to these areas are critical elements for the accurate
recognition of patients who develop this infection. In this practice guideline, we have organized our recommendations to address
actionable questions concerning the entire spectrum of clinical syndromes. These can range from initial pulmonary infection, which
eventually resolves whether or not antifungal therapy is administered, to a variety of pulmonary and extrapulmonary complications.
Additional recommendations address management of coccidioidomycosis occurring for special at-risk populations. Finally, preemp-
tive management strategies are outlined in certain at-risk populations and after unintentional laboratory exposure.
Keywords.
coccidioidomycosis; antifungal treatment; community acquired pneumonia; travel history; immunocompromised
patients.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
In these revised guidelines, we expanded recommendations for
diagnosing and managing early coccidioidal infections, which
are more common clinical presentations than the various pul-
monary and extrapulmonary complications. We also expanded
the management of coccidioidal meningitis (CM) as a sequence
of actionable recommendations. In this revision, recommenda-
tions were made regarding both cardiothoracic surgical and
neurosurgical approach for complications that benefit from sur-
gical support. Management of coccidioidomycosis in specific
at-risk groups such as those with human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV)/AIDS, solid organ transplants, and pregnancy are
addressed specifically. Finally, there is a section that provides
guidance on managing laboratory accidents. The panel followed
a process used in the development of other Infectious Diseases
Society of America (IDSA) guidelines, which included a system-
atic weighting of the strength of recommendation and quality
of evidence using the GRADE (Grading of Recommendations
Assessment, Development and Evaluation) system (Figure 1)
[1–4]. A detailed description of the methods, background, and
evidence summaries that support each of the recommendations
can be found in the full text of the guidelines.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR MANAGEMENT OF
COCCIDIOIDOMYCOSIS IN PATIENTS WITHOUT
OVERT IMMUNOSUPPRESSING CONDITIONS
I. In Which Patients With Newly Diagnosed, Uncomplicated
Coccidioidal Pneumonia Should Antifungal Drug Therapy Be Started?
Recommendations
1. We recommend patient education, close observation, and
supportive measures such as reconditioning physical therapy
for patients who appear to have mild or nondebilitating
symptoms, or who have substantially improved or resolved
their clinical illness by the time of diagnosis (strong, low).
Received 25 May 2016; accepted 26 May 2016; published online 27 July 2016.
Correspondence: J. N. Galgiani, University of Arizona College of Medicine, Valley Fever Cen-
ter for Excellence, PO Box 245215, Tucson, AZ 85724 (spherule@u.arizona.edu).
Clinical Infectious Diseases®
2016;63(6):e112–46
© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious Diseases Society
of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail journals.permissions@oup.com.
DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciw360
e112 • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • Galgiani et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 2. We recommend initiating antifungal treatment for patients
who, at the time of diagnosis, have significantly debilitating
illness (strong, low).
3. For patients at the time of diagnosis with extensive pulmo-
nary involvement, with concurrent diabetes, or who are oth-
erwise frail because of age or comorbidities, we recommend
initiating antifungal treatment. Some experts would also in-
clude African or Filipino ancestry as indications for treat-
ment (strong, low).
4. If treatment is begun in nonpregnant adults, the treatment
should be an orally absorbed azole antifungal (eg, flucona-
zole) at a daily dose of ≥400 mg (strong, low).
II. In Patients With Newly Diagnosed, Uncomplicated Coccidioidal
Pneumonia, How Should Health Education and Physical Therapy
Reconditioning Programs Be Incorporated Into the Management
Program of Uncomplicated Coccidioidal Pneumonia?
Recommendation
5. Patients with uncomplicated pulmonary coccidioidomyco-
sis should have a management plan that incorporates regular
medical follow-up, health education, and a plan for physical
reconditioning (strong, low).
III. For Patients With Primary Pulmonary Coccidioidomycosis With an
Asymptomatic Pulmonary Nodule, and No Overt Immunosuppressing
Conditions, Which Treatment Strategy Is Preferred: Antifungal Treatment
With Oral Azole, or Observation Without Antifungal Treatment?
Recommendation
6. Once there is confirmation that a pulmonary nodule is due
to coccidioidomycosis, we recommend no antifungal treat-
ment for an asymptomatic pulmonary nodule due to coccid-
ioidomycosis (strong, very low).
IV. For Patients Who Have an Asymptomatic Coccidioidal Cavity and
Without an Immunosuppressing Condition, Should an Antifungal Drug
Be Used?
Recommendation
7. We recommend against the use of antifungal therapy for pa-
tients with an asymptomatic cavity (strong, low).
V. For Patients With Symptomatic Chronic Cavitary Coccidioidal
Pneumonia, Should an Oral Azole Such as Fluconazole or Intravenous
Amphotericin B (AmB) Be Used?
Recommendation
8. We recommend that patients with symptomatic chronic
cavitary coccidioidal pneumonia be treated with an
Figure 1.
Approach and implications to rating the quality of evidence and strength of recommendations using the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development
and Evaluation (GRADE) methodology (unrestricted use of the figure granted by the US GRADE Network).
Coccidioidomycosis Treatment Guidelines • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • e113
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 oral agent such as fluconazole or itraconazole (strong,
moderate).
VI. In Patients With Symptomatic Cavitary Coccidioidal Pneumonia,
Should the Infection Be Removed Surgically?
Recommendation
9. We recommend that surgical options be explored when the
cavities are persistently symptomatic despite antifungal treat-
ment. We recommend that surgical options be considered
when cavities have been present for more than 2 years and
if symptoms recur whenever antifungal treatment is stopped
(strong, very low).
VII. In Patients for Whom Cavitary Coccidioidal Pneumonia Is Going to
Be Surgically Managed, Should This Be Done by Video-Assisted
Thoracoscopic Surgery or Open Thoracotomy?
Recommendation
10. We recommend that when surgical management of cavi-
tary coccidioidal pneumonia is undertaken, a video-assisted
thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) approach be attempted if the
surgeon has significant expertise in VATS (strong, low).
VIII. In Patients With a Ruptured Coccidioidal Cavity, Should This Be
Managed With Chest Tubes or With Surgical Excision of the Ruptured
Cavity?
Recommendation
11. For patients with ruptured coccidioidal cavity, we recom-
mend prompt decortication and resection of the cavity, if
possible (strong, very low). If the pleural space is massively
contaminated, decortications combined with prolonged
chest tube drainage may be more appropriate (weak, very
low).
IX. For Patients With Ruptured Coccidioidal Cavities, Is an Oral Azole or
Intravenous AmB the Preferred Method of Antifungal Treatment?
Recommendation
12. For patients with ruptured coccidioidal cavities, oral azole
therapy is recommended. For patients who do not tolerate
oral azole therapy or patients whose disease requires 2 or
more surgical procedures for control, intravenous AmB is
recommended (strong, very low).
X. For Patients With Extrapulmonary Soft Tissue Coccidioidomycosis,
Not Associated With Bone Infection, Is Antifungal Therapy Indicated?
Recommendations
13. We recommend antifungal therapy in all cases of extrapul-
monary soft tissue coccidioidomycosis (strong, moderate).
14. We recommend oral azoles, in particular fluconazole or
itraconazole, for first-line therapy of extrapulmonary soft tis-
sue coccidioidomycosis (strong, moderate).
15. We recommend intravenous AmB in cases of azole failure,
particularly in coccidioidal synovitis (strong, moderate).
XI. For Patients With Bone and/or Joint Coccidioidomycosis, Which
Therapy Is Preferred: Intravenous AmB or an Oral Azole?
Recommendations
16. We recommend azole therapy for bone and joint coccidi-
oidomycosis, unless the patient has extensive or limb-
threatening skeletal or vertebral disease causing imminent
cord compromise (strong, low).
17. For severe osseous disease, we recommend AmB as initial
therapy, with eventual change to azole therapy for the long
term (strong, low).
XII. In Patients With Vertebral Coccidioidomycosis, Should Lesions Be
Managed With Surgery?
Recommendations
18. We recommend surgical consultation for all patients with
vertebral coccidioidal infection to assist in assessing the need
for surgical intervention (strong, low).
19. Surgical procedures are recommended in addition to
antifungal drugs for patients with bony lesions that produce
spinal instability, spinal cord or nerve root compression, or
significant sequestered paraspinal abscess [5] (strong, low).
20. We recommend that surgical consultation be obtained
periodically during the course of medical treatment (strong,
low).
XIII. In Patients With Newly Diagnosed Coccidioidal Infection, Should a
Lumbar Puncture Be Performed?
Recommendation
21. In patients with recently diagnosed coccidioidal infection,
we recommend lumbar puncture with cerebrospinal fluid
analysis only in patients with unusual, worsening, or persis-
tent headache, with altered mental status, unexplained nau-
sea or vomiting, or new focal neurologic deficit after
adequate imaging of the central nervous system (CNS)
(strong, moderate).
XIV. For Patients With Newly Diagnosed CM, What Is the Primary
Treatment?
Recommendation
22. For CM, we recommend fluconazole 400–1200 mg orally
daily as initial therapy for most patients with normal renal
function (strong, moderate). There is no role for a dose
<400 mg daily in the adult patient without substantial renal
impairment. Some experts prefer to use itraconazole 200 mg
2–4 times daily, but this requires closer monitoring to assure
adequate absorption, and there are more drug–drug interac-
tions than with fluconazole.
e114 • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • Galgiani et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 XV. For Patients With CM Who Improve or Become Asymptomatic on
Initial Therapy, When Can Treatment be Stopped?
Recommendation
23. For CM, we recommend azole treatment for life (strong,
moderate).
XVI. In Patients With CM Who Do Not Have a Satisfactory
Response to Initial Antifungal Therapy, What Modifications
Can Be Considered?
Recommendation
24. In patients who clinically fail initial therapy with flu-
conazole, higher doses are a first option (strong, moderate).
Alternative options are to change therapy to another
orally administered azole, or to initiate intrathecal AmB
therapy.
XVII. For Patients Who Develop Hydrocephalus, Which Patients Should
Be Referred for Neurosurgical Procedures to Relieve Intracranial
Pressure (ICP)?
Recommendations
25. For patients with increased ICP at the time of diagnosis, we
recommend medical therapy and repeated lumbar punctures
as initial management (strong, low).
26. Because most patients who develop ICP will not resolve
this problem without placement of a permanent shunt,
we recommend early magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
of the brain and neurosurgical consultation (strong,
moderate).
XVIII. In Patients With CM and in Whom a Ventriculoperitoneal
Shunt Has Been Placed, Should Shunt Malfunction or
Superinfection Be Managed With a Single- or Double-Staged
Surgical Revision?
Recommendation
27. We recommend that patients with ventriculoperitoneal
shunt malfunction have the revision performed in a
single procedure (strong, low). When the shunt has devel-
oped a bacterial or other superinfection, we recommend
that the infected shunt be removed and a replacement
be placed at a subsequent time as a second procedure
(strong, low).
XIX. In Patients With CM Who Initially Respond to a Treatment Plan
and While on Therapy Develop Acute or Chronic Neurologic
Changes, What Assessments Are Needed to Reevaluate and
Modify Therapy?
Recommendation
28. We recommend that repeat MRI of the brain and possibly
the spinal cord, with and without contrast, as well as spinal
fluid analysis be obtained either from a lumbar or cisternal
aspiration (strong, low).
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR MANAGEMENT OF
PATIENTS WITH COCCIDIOIDOMYCOSIS IN SPECIAL
AT-RISK POPULATIONS
XX. For Allogeneic or Autologous Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant
(HSCT) or Solid Organ Transplant Recipients With Active
Coccidioidomycosis, Which Initial Treatment Strategy Is Preferred: Oral
Azole or Intravenous AmB?
Recommendations
29. For the treatment of autologous or allogeneic HSCT or
solid organ transplant recipients with acute or chronic pul-
monary coccidioidomycosis who are clinically stable and
have normal renal function, we recommend initiating treat-
ment with fluconazole 400 mg daily or the equivalent dose
based upon renal function (strong, low).
30. For the treatment of patients with very severe and/or
rapidly progressing acute pulmonary or disseminated
coccidioidomycosis, we recommend the use of AmB
until the patient has stabilized, followed by fluconazole
(strong, low).
31. For autologous or allogeneic HSCT or solid organ trans-
plant recipients with extrapulmonary coccidioidomycosis,
we recommend the same treatment as for non–transplant re-
cipients (strong, very low).
XXI. In Such Patients, Should Antirejection Treatment Be Modified or
Continued Without Change?
Recommendation
32. For allogeneic HSCT or solid organ transplant recipients
with severe or rapidly progressing coccidioidomycosis, we
recommend reduction of immunosuppression (without risk-
ing graft-vs-host disease or organ rejection, respectively,
whenever possible) until the infection has begun to improve
(strong, very low).
XXII. In HSCT or Solid Organ Transplant Recipients With Active
Coccidioidomycosis, Should Antifungal Treatment Be Modified
Following Initial Treatment?
Recommendation
33. Following initial treatment of active coccidioidomycosis,
we recommend that suppressive treatment be continued to
prevent relapsed infection (strong, very low).
XXIII. For Recipients of Biological Response Modifiers With Active
Coccidioidomycosis, Which Treatment Is Preferred: Oral Azole or
Intravenous AmB?
Recommendation
34. We recommend oral azole therapy for these patients unless
their coccidioidomycosis is severe enough that intravenous
AmB would otherwise be recommended (refer to sections
on pneumonia, soft tissue dissemination, skeletal dissemina-
tion, and meningitis) (strong, low).
Coccidioidomycosis Treatment Guidelines • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • e115
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 XXIV. What Is the Preferred Method for Management of Pregnant
Women With Coccidioidomycosis and Their Neonates?
Recommendations During Pregnancy
35. The development of symptomatic coccidioidomycosis dur-
ing pregnancy should prompt consideration of starting ad-
ministration of antifungal therapy (strong, moderate). For
women who develop initial nonmeningeal coccidioidal infec-
tion during pregnancy, their management depends on fetal
maturity.
36. For women who develop initial nonmeningeal coccidioidal
infection during their first trimester of pregnancy, intra-
venous AmB is recommended (strong, moderate). Other op-
tions include no therapy with close monitoring (weak, low),
or an azole antifungal after educating the mother regarding
potential teratogenicity (weak, low). After the first trimester
of pregnancy, an azole antifungal, such fluconazole or itraco-
nazole, can be considered (strong, low). A final alternative
would be to administer intravenous AmB throughout preg-
nancy (weak, moderate).
37. For women who develop CM during the first trimester of
pregnancy, intrathecal AmB is recommended (strong, moder-
ate). After the first trimester and in cases where disease is di-
agnosed after the first trimester, an azole antifungal, such as
fluconazole or itraconazole, can be prescribed (strong, low).
38. Among women with a history of prior coccidioidomycosis
who are not currently on therapy, the risk of reactivation is
low and antifungal therapy is not recommended (strong,
moderate). For such women, close follow-up, including ob-
taining coccidioidal serologic testing at the initial visit and
every 6–12 weeks throughout pregnancy, should be per-
formed (strong, moderate).
39. For women with nonmeningeal coccidioidomycosis on an-
tifungal therapy who become pregnant while infection is in
remission, azole antifungal therapy may be discontinued
with clinical and serological monitoring every 4–6 weeks to
assess for reactivation (weak, low). An alternative to this,
especially if the coccidioidal infection is not clearly in remis-
sion, is to stop azole antifungal therapy and start intravenous
AmB during the first trimester, changing back to an azole an-
tifungal after the first trimester (strong, low).
40. For the pregnant woman with CM who is on azole antifun-
gal therapy at the time of pregnancy, azole therapy should be
stopped for the first trimester to avoid the risk of teratogenic-
ity (strong, moderate). During this period, one approach is to
initiate intrathecal AmB, especially if meningeal signs and
symptoms are present (strong, moderate). Azole antifungal
therapy may then be restarted during the second trimester
(weak, low) or intrathecal AmB continued throughout gesta-
tion (weak, low). An alternative is to continue azole antifun-
gal therapy throughout gestation provided that the mother
agrees to this approach after being educated regarding the
risks and benefits of this strategy (weak, low). A final
alternative for the pregnant woman with CM is to stop the
azole antifungal, monitor the patient closely during the
first trimester, and restart azole antifungal therapy during
the second or third trimester (weak, very low). Because of
the risk of relapse with this approach, some experts do not
recommend it.
41. The development of a febrile pulmonary illness during
pregnancy in a woman residing in the coccidioidal endemic
region or with an appropriate travel history should be evalu-
ated for active coccidioidomycosis, including obtaining a
chest radiograph and coccidioidal serology and cultures
(strong, moderate).
Recommendations for Neonates
42. We recommend against coccidioidal serologic tests for in-
fants during the first 3 months of life. Positive tests should be
interpreted with caution during the first year of life (strong,
moderate).
43. Empiric therapy with fluconazole at 6–12 mg/kg daily is
recommended for infants suspected of having coccidioido-
mycosis and should be continued until the diagnosis has
been ruled out (strong, low).
44. Breastfeeding is not recommended for mothers on azole
antifungals other than fluconazole (strong, moderate).
XXV. What Is the Best Way to Manage Coccidioidomycosis in Patients
Infected With HIV?
Recommendations
45. Antifungal prophylaxis is not recommended to prevent
coccidioidomycosis in patients infected with HIV living in
coccidioidal-endemic regions (strong, moderate).
46. Antifungal therapy is recommended for all patients with
HIV infection with clinical evidence of coccidioidomycosis
and a peripheral blood CD4+ T-lymphocyte count <250
cells/µL (strong, moderate).
47. Antifungal therapy should be continued as long as the pe-
ripheral CD4+ T-lymphocyte count remains <250 cells/µL
(strong, low).
48. For patients with peripheral CD4+ T-lymphocyte counts
≥250 cells/µL, clinical management of coccidioidomycosis
should occur in the same manner as for patients without
HIV infection, including discontinuing antifungal therapy
in appropriate situations (strong, moderate).
49. Within coccidioidal-endemic regions, patients should re-
ceive yearly serologic screening and chest radiography for
coccidioidomycosis (strong, low).
50. Outside coccidioidal-endemic regions, serologic screening
is not recommended (strong, moderate).
51. Although data are lacking, pediatric patients with HIV in-
fection and coccidioidomycosis should be managed in a
manner similar to adult patients (strong, very low).
e116 • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • Galgiani et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 52. Initiation of potent antiretroviral therapy (ART) should
not be delayed because of the concern about coccidioidal im-
mune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (strong, low).
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PREEMPTIVE
STRATEGIES FOR COCCIDIOIDOMYCOSIS IN
SPECIAL AT-RISK POPULATIONS
XXVI. For Organ Transplant Recipients Without Active
Coccidioidomycosis, Which Primary Prevention Strategy Is Preferred:
Observation or Oral Azole?
Recommendation
53. For all patients undergoing organ transplantation in the
endemic area without active coccidioidomycosis, we re-
commend the use of an oral azole (eg, fluconazole 200 mg)
for 6–12 months (strong, low).
XXVII. For Recipients of Biological Response Modifiers Without Active
Coccidioidomycosis, Which Primary Prevention Strategy Is Preferred:
Observation or Prophylactic Antifungal Therapy?
Recommendation
54. For patients in the endemic area, we recommend screening
with Coccidioides serology prior to initiation of biologic re-
sponse modifier therapy, as well as regular clinical follow-
up for new signs and symptoms (strong, very low). We do
not recommend regular serologic screening or antifungal
prophylaxis in asymptomatic patients taking biologic re-
sponse modifiers (BRMs) (strong, very low).
INTRODUCTION
Coccidioidomycosis is a systemic fungal infection caused
by Coccidioides immitis or Coccidioides posadasii. These
species reside in the soil of certain parts of central and southern
California, the low deserts of Arizona, southeastern New Mexico,
western Texas, and several other areas of the southwestern United
States, Mexico, Central America, and South America. Without
residence in or travel to these endemic regions, persons almost
never acquire coccidioidomycosis. Recently unexpected endem-
ic pockets have been found in southeastern Washington State
[6], indicating that exposure may occasionally also occur else-
where in the Western United States. However, for patients
with recent endemic exposure, coccidioidomycosis often should
be included as a possible cause of a newly developed commu-
nity-acquired pneumonia and several other syndromes. We em-
phasize that obtaining a history of residence or travel to an
endemic area is critical to early diagnosis of this infection. Ap-
proximate annual statistics for the clinical spectrum of illness
following coccidioidal infection in the United States are repre-
sented in Figure 2. Of the estimated 150 000 infections that
occur annually, 50 000 likely produce an illness warranting
medical attention, 10 000–20 000 of these are diagnosed and
reported, 2000–3000 produce pulmonary sequelae, 600–1000
spread hematogenously from the lungs to other parts of the
body (disseminated infection), and 160 result in death [7].
From 1998 to 2011, cases reported from endemic states have
risen 10-fold as a result of several factors [8]. In addition to
this overall trend there is considerable year-to-year variation
due to climatic conditions [9].
The most common syndrome to come to medical attention is
a community-acquired pneumonia (CAP), often associated
with a variety of rheumatologic, cutaneous, or systemic com-
plaints [10]. Because similar presentations occur with many
other diseases, identifying Coccidioides infection as the etiology
is critically dependent upon laboratory confirmation. For this
reason, we have included in this document recommendations
for use of the currently available diagnostic methods with esti-
mates of their strengths and limitations. Also, with such a broad
spectrum of disease severity, these treatment guidelines have
been arranged to propose management in the context of each
of several clinical presentations.
Differences in disease severity are thought to be predomi-
nantly the consequence of differences in the immunologic re-
sponses to infection among individuals. This is very clear
when coccidioidal infection occurs in patients who also have
diseases or therapies that suppress cellular immunity [11–14].
Recently, a small number of patients have been identified with
specific gene mutations that alter immunologic responses in-
volving interferon-γ, interleukin 12 (IL-12), and other cellular
immune pathways that appear to be responsible for their pro-
gressive coccidioidal infections [15–18]. In such patients, the
risk of disseminated infection can be as high as 75% [11], a
striking increase from what would ordinarily be approximately
a 1% risk. Also, coccidioidomycosis first diagnosed during
Figure 2.
Estimated numbers of infections and their clinical manifestations.
Coccidioidomycosis Treatment Guidelines • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • e117
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 pregnancy raises specific issues that do not exist in other situa-
tions [19]. In these guidelines, we have developed separate sec-
tions for managing patients in these special groups. Other
factors thought to somewhat increase risk of disseminated infec-
tion include ancestry (especially African and Filipino) and male
sex. Diabetic patients appear more prone to pulmonary compli-
cations. Although thought to be significant, male sex, ancestry,
and diabetes do not carry nearly the same degree of heightened
risk, only modestly should influence management decisions,
and have not been handled separately in these guidelines.
With these considerations in mind, we have organized this
treatment guideline for the management of coccidioidomycosis
as follows:
•
Information about selecting patients for coccidioidal test-
ing and if the diagnosis is established evaluating patients further
for the extent of disease. We have included this section as a con-
venience for those readers whose normal practices do not com-
monly encounter coccidioidomycosis. There are no explicit
recommendations in this section.
•
Management of patients with coccidioidomycosis and
without overt immunosuppressing conditions.
•
Management of patients with coccidioidomycosis in spe-
cial at-risk populations.
•
Preemptive strategies for coccidioidomycosis in special at-
risk populations.
•
Management of laboratory exposures. This section is an
updated summary of previously published recommendations
[20] and contains no explicit recommendations other than
the text itself.
The following clinical questions are addressed:
I. In which patients with newly diagnosed, uncomplicated coc-
cidioidal pneumonia should antifungal drug therapy be
started?
II. In patients with newly diagnosed, uncomplicated coccidioi-
dal pneumonia, how should health education and physical
therapy reconditioning programs be incorporated into the
management program of uncomplicated coccidioidal
pneumonia?
III. For patients with primary pulmonary coccidioidomycosis
with an asymptomatic pulmonary nodule, and no overt im-
munosuppressing conditions, which treatment strategy is
preferred: antifungal treatment with oral azole, or observa-
tion without antifungal treatment?
IV. For patients who have an asymptomatic coccidioidal cavity
and without an immunosuppressing condition, should an
antifungal drug be used?
V. For patients with symptomatic chronic cavitary coccidioidal
pneumonia, should an oral azole such as fluconazole or in-
travenous AmB be used?
VI. In patients with symptomatic cavitary coccidioidal pneu-
monia, should the infection be removed surgically?
VII. In patients for whom cavitary coccidioidal pneumonia is
going to be surgically managed, should this be done by VATS
or open thoracotomy?
VIII. In patients with a ruptured coccidioidal cavity, should
this be managed with chest tubes or with surgical excision
of the ruptured cavity?
IX. For patients with ruptured coccidioidal cavities, is an oral
azole or intravenous AmB the preferred method of antifungal
treatment?
X. For patients with extrapulmonary soft tissue coccidioido-
mycosis, not associated with bone infection, is antifungal
therapy indicated?
XI. For patients with bone and/or joint coccidioidomycosis,
which therapy is preferred: intravenous AmB or an oral
azole?
XII. In patients with vertebral coccidioidomycosis, should le-
sions be managed with surgery?
XIII. In patients with newly diagnosed coccidioidal infection,
should a lumbar puncture be performed?
XIV. For patients with newly diagnosed CM, what is the pri-
mary treatment?
XV. For patients with CM who improve or become
asymptomatic on initial therapy, when can treatment be
stopped?
XVI. In patients with CM who do not have a satisfactory re-
sponse to initial antifungal therapy, what modifications can
be considered?
XVII. For patients who develop hydrocephalus, which patients
should be referred for neurosurgical procedures to relieve in-
tracranial pressure?
XVIII. In patients with CM and in whom a ventriculoperito-
neal shunt has been placed, should shunt malfunction or
superinfection be managed with a single- or double-staged
surgical revision?
XIX. In patients with CM who initially respond to a treatment
plan and while on therapy develop acute or chronic neuro-
logic changes, what assessments are needed to reevaluate
and modify therapy?
XX. For allogeneic or autologous hematopoietic stem cell
transplant or solid organ transplant recipients with active
coccidioidomycosis, which initial treatment strategy is pre-
ferred: oral azole or intravenous AmB?
XXI. In such patients, should antirejection treatment be mod-
ified or continued without change?
XXII. In HSCT or solid organ transplant recipients with active
coccidioidomycosis, should antifungal treatment be modi-
fied following initial treatment?
XXIII. For recipients of biological response modifiers with ac-
tive coccidioidomycosis, which treatment is preferred: oral
azole or intravenous AmB?
e118 • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • Galgiani et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 XXIV. What is the preferred method for management of preg-
nant women with coccidioidomycosis and their neonates?
XXV. What is the best way to manage coccidioidomycosis in
patients infected with HIV?
XXVI. For organ transplant recipients without active coccidi-
oidomycosis, which primary prevention strategy is preferred:
observation or oral azole?
XXVII. For recipients of biological response modifiers without
active coccidioidomycosis, which primary prevention strat-
egy is preferred: observation or prophylactic antifungal
therapy?
METHODS
Practice Guidelines
“Practice guidelines are systematically developed statements to
assist practitioners and patients in making decisions about ap-
propriate health care for specific clinical circumstances” [21].
Attributes of good guidelines include validity, reliability, re-
producibility, clinical applicability, clinical flexibility, clarity,
multidisciplinary process, review of evidence, and documenta-
tion [21].
Panel Composition
The IDSA Standards and Practice Guidelines Committee
(SPGC) collaborated with partner organizations and con-
vened a panel of 16 experts. The panel represented diverse
geographic areas (but predominantly from within the south-
western United States), pediatric and adult practitioners, and
several specialties and organizations including the Interna-
tional Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation (ISHLT)
and the American Association of Neurological Surgeons
and Congress of Neurological Surgeons.
Process Overview, Literature Selection, and Consensus Development
Based on Evidence
Coccidioidomycosis is an orphan disease. Although very com-
mon in certain regional areas, its overall impact nationally and
internationally is limited. As a consequence, the medical litera-
ture that specifically addresses management of coccidioidal
infections is limited and to a large extent relies on the observa-
tions and uncontrolled experience of clinicians who practice in
the regions endemic for the illness.
The panel first developed an overall guideline structure to
address informational questions, management of patients with-
out special circumstances, management of special at-risk pa-
tients,
and
special
situations
in
which
preemptive
management is advised. Within this structure, a series of spe-
cific actionable questions were composed and each was as-
signed to a primary and secondary author to prepare initial
drafts of recommendations and the basis for the recommenda-
tion. The literature review for the initial draft was the respon-
sibility of the primary and secondary authors for each section,
and eventual literature review was the responsibility of the
entire panel. The evidence evaluation process was based on
the IDSA Handbook on Clinical Practice Guideline Develop-
ment, which involves a systematic weighting of the quality of
evidence and the grade of recommendation using the
GRADE system (Figure 1) [1–4, 22].
Drafts were circulated within the panel for commentary and
discussed on 7 occasions prior to January 2014 by teleconfer-
ence and once at an in-person meeting. Two drafts of the result-
ing document were recirculated to the panel and subsequent
revisions were made. Formal feedback from 3 external peer re-
viewers and endorsing organizations was obtained and used to
modify the document. The guideline was endorsed by the
ISHLT. The guideline was also reviewed and approved by the
IDSA SPGC and the IDSA Board of Directors.
Guidelines and Conflicts of Interest
All panel members complied with IDSA policy on conflicts of
interest, which requires disclosure of any financial or other in-
terest that might be construed as constituting an actual, poten-
tial, or apparent conflict. They were provided IDSA’s conflicts
of interest disclosure statement and asked to identify ties to
companies developing products that might be affected by pro-
mulgation of the guideline. Information was requested regard-
ing employment, consultancies, stock ownership, honoraria,
research funding, expert testimony, and membership on com-
pany advisory committees. The panel decided on a case-by-
case basis whether conflict should limit member participation.
Potential conflicts are listed in the Notes section at the end of
the text.
Revision Dates
At annual intervals, the panel chair, SPGC liaison advisor, and
SPGC chair will determine the need for guideline revisions by
reviewing current literature. If necessary, the entire panel will be
reconvened. When appropriate, the panel will recommend revi-
sions to the IDSA SPGC, Board of Directors, and other collab-
orating organizations for review and approval.
BACKGROUND INFORMATION ABOUT
COCCIDIOIDOMYCOSIS
What Signs and Symptoms Are Commonly Found With Early
Coccidioidal Infection Limited to the Lungs?
Coccidioides species are dimorphic fungi that are the cause of
coccidioidomycosis. In the environment, they grow as mycelia
and produce single-cell arthroconidia. After mammalian infec-
tion, arthroconidia transform into spherules. If infected materi-
al is cultured, spherules revert back to mycelial growth.
Virtually all coccidioidal infections are initiated by inhalation
of an arthroconidium, the airborne single-cell spore arising
from mycelial growth in an endemic area, and the most com-
mon initial syndrome is that of a respiratory illness [23]. Two
small prospective studies from separate urban areas within en-
demic regions of Arizona together demonstrated that
Coccidioidomycosis Treatment Guidelines • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • e119
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 coccidioidal infection accounted for 24% of newly diagnosed
CAP in ambulatory patients [24, 25]. Signs and symptoms of
coccidioidal CAP were similar to those experienced by patients
with other causes of pneumonia. Presumably, travelers who
develop CAP within a month of visiting an endemic
region would have the same likelihood that the illness was
coccidioidomycosis.
In some patients with early coccidioidal infection, dermato-
logic or rheumatologic complaints may dominate their illness.
Both erythema nodosum and erythema multiforme occur in
coccidioidomycosis. Rheumatologic complaints are typically ar-
thralgias of multiple joints, generally symmetrical, more of the
distal lower extremities, and almost never associated with de-
tectable joint effusions. As with CAP, these syndromes should
be evaluated for coccidioidal infection in patients who develop
such complaints within a month of endemic exposure.
In addition to respiratory, dermatologic, and rheumatologic
signs and symptoms, patients with recently acquired coccidioi-
dal infection may experience fever, drenching night sweats, and
weight loss. Often the most striking systemic symptom is that of
extreme fatigue that frequently interferes with or prevents a
normal work schedule and activities of daily living. Fatigue
may be the last complaint to resolve and results in many
weeks to many months of convalescence.
What Signs and Symptoms Are Commonly Found With Hematogenous
Infection Beyond the Lungs (Disseminated Infection)?
Although patients with deficiencies in cellular immunity are es-
pecially susceptible to severe coccidioidomycosis including dis-
semination [11–14], most patients with coccidioidal lesions
outside of the lungs have no identified immune deficiencies. Ev-
idence for this is found in numerous clinical trials where a large
majority of subjects with disseminated infection were not immu-
nosuppressed [26–34]. Typically, extrapulmonary lesions are
focal areas of tissue destruction that result from the acute inflam-
matory response engendered by actively rupturing spherules [35,
36]. These lesions are distinct from the skin rashes and joint
manifestations of the early infection that do not contain viable
fungal elements and do not cause permanent tissue damage.
The signs and symptoms of disseminated coccidioidal lesions
vary widely depending upon their location. Importantly, pulmo-
nary symptoms or radiographic abnormalities may be minimal
or completely absent. Chronic skin ulceration or subcutaneous
abscesses are the consequence of cutaneous and soft tissue dis-
semination. Headache and focal skeletal pain are common with
CM or osteomyelitis, respectively. Although such lesions may
wax and wane over many months and even years, they usually
are progressive and seldom resolve completely without medical
intervention. Tissue-destructive lesions are nearly always readily
evident from focal signs and symptoms in patients with dissem-
inated infection, and their absence is strong evidence that dissem-
inated infection is not present.
What Time Frame for Endemic Exposure Is Most Appropriate to Consider
Coccidioidomycosis in the Differential Diagnosis?
The usual incubation period for early coccidioidal syndromes is
from 1 week to 4 weeks. Patients with CAP, dermatologic syn-
dromes, or rheumatologic syndromes described above and who
have endemic exposure within the previous 1–2 months should
be evaluated for coccidioidomycosis as a possible etiology.
Hematogenous spread beyond the lungs normally occurs
within weeks to several months following infection. Exceptions
to this estimate are immunosuppressed patients with more re-
mote prior exposure [37] or patients who have previously been
treated with an antifungal drug for primary pulmonary infec-
tion in whom relapses occurred up to 4 years after treatment
had been stopped [38, 39].
In Attempting to Diagnose an Early Coccidioidal Infection, What Is the
Value of Serologic Testing or Fungal Cultures?
Serologic tests for anticoccidioidal antibodies are generally
available from clinical laboratories throughout the United
States and nearly all coccidioidal infections are identified by
their use. Enzyme immunoassays (EIAs) for anticoccidioidal
immunoglobulin M (IgM) and immunoglobulin G (IgG) are
commercially available. Past studies suggested that EIA tests
are approximately twice as sensitive in detecting early cocci-
dioidal infections as standard immunodiffusion-based tests
for traditional tube precipitin (IDTP) or complement-fixing
(IDCF) anticoccidioidal antibodies [40, 41]. For this reason,
EIA testing is often used for initial screening. A recent multi-
center investigation using EIA to test specimens from individ-
uals with documented coccidioidomycosis and controls
without the disease in multiple laboratories demonstrated
varying sensitivities and specificities of the EIA test, depend-
ing on the test kit brand and the laboratory performing the test
[42]. Most sera that are positive by either IDTP or IDCF will
also be positive by EIAs, but sera that are EIA positive are not
always confirmed by the standard tests, even in patients who
do have early coccidioidal infections [43]. A positive EIA
IgM test, when it is the only positive serologic test result, is
the least compelling diagnostic evidence and in some patients
may be a false-positive finding [44]. Repeated testing for anti-
coccidioidal antibodies over subsequent weeks often resolves
these discrepancies and improves the certainty of a coccidioi-
dal diagnosis.
Any positive test result for anticoccidioidal antibodies is usu-
ally associated with a recent or active coccidioidal infection.
This is true for tests that detect either IgG and IgM antibodies
as in most patients these tests return to negative as the infection
resolves [45, 46]. This interpretation differs from that of sero-
logic tests for many other types of infection where diagnostic
IgG antibodies often are detectable for life. In contrast, an im-
portant limitation of all coccidioidal serologic tests is that they
may be negative and even persistently negative despite an early
coccidioidal infection being present.
e120 • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • Galgiani et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 An alternative approach to diagnosing early coccidioidal
infection is to isolate the fungus in culture. In many patients
with early infection, a positive culture may be the only means
of establishing a diagnosis as serologic evidence may take
weeks and even months to develop. However, in patients
sufficiently ill to warrant hospitalization and those in whom
serologic diagnosis cannot be obtained, culture of sputum
or bronchoscopic specimens may provide a more rapid or
sometimes the only means of diagnosis. Polymerase chain
reaction for coccidioidal DNA and detection of coccidioidal
antigen are other but less frequently utilized approaches
[47–49]. Coccidioidal antigen in urine or serum is typically
only positive in patients with extensive infections. Recent
studies of coccidioidal antigen in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
suggest it may be a very sensitive biomarker in patients with
CM [50].Previously, handling and control of coccidioidal cul-
tures was regulated by the Centers for Diseases Control and
Prevention as a select agent, but since December 2012 that
is no longer the case [51].
In Attempting to Diagnose Disseminated Infection, What Is the Value of
Serologic Testing or Fungal Cultures?
Patients who have already developed extrapulmonary coccidioi-
dal lesions nearly always exhibit anticoccidioidal antibodies in
their serum, regardless of whether tested by EIA for IgG or
by IDCF [45].Significant exceptions to this rule occur in immu-
nosuppressed patients [12]. Groups of patients with disseminat-
ed infection have generally higher titers of complement-fixing
(CF) antibodies than do those with infection confined to the
lungs. However, this relationship does not hold for all patients
with disseminated infection, and patients without disseminated
infection, particularly those with pleural involvement, occasion-
ally exhibit unexpectedly high CF antibody titers. Because of
this variability, the diagnosis or lack of diagnosis of disseminat-
ed coccidioidal infection that is based solely on CF antibody ti-
ters is tenuous at best.
The
diagnosis
of
disseminated
coccidioidomycosis
should usually rely on the histopathologic identification in
or fungal isolation from an extrapulmonary lesion. Needle as-
piration has been a very valuable approach. One common ex-
ception is the diagnosis of CM as discussed later (see section
XIII). Another possible exception is if the risks of obtaining
tissue for histology or culture from a destructive extrapulmo-
nary lesion are prohibitive. However, in most cases, direct
sampling of 1 or more extrapulmonary lesions is justified be-
cause of the implications that this diagnosis has for future
management.
In a Patient With Newly Diagnosed Pulmonary Coccidioidal Infection,
What Additional Laboratory or Imaging Evaluation Is Warranted to
Complete an Assessment of Extent of Disease?
When extrapulmonary dissemination of infection occurs, fun-
gal proliferation at the site produces local inflammation that
results in signs and symptoms referable to that site. A careful
review of systems and physical examination is essential. If
these do not identify focal extrapulmonary problems, routine
screening imaging studies, such as bone surveys, radionuclide
bone scans, or whole-body computed tomography (CT) or
MRI, are usually unnecessary to fully assess extent of disease.
In particular, lumbar punctures are unnecessary in most pa-
tients without signs or symptoms of CNS involvement [52].
In contrast, if history or physical examination identifies 1 or
more specific anatomic areas of potential concern, further im-
aging studies appropriate for that area are warranted.
What Host Factors Identify Patients as Especially at Risk of
Complications?
Several host circumstances may increase the risk of severe or
extrapulmonary coccidioidal illness, and therefore warrant an-
tifungal therapy. These situations include concurrent immuno-
suppression such as high-dose corticosteroids (eg, prednisone
doses of ≥20 mg/day for 2 or more weeks), antirejection treat-
ment for organ transplantation, or inhibitors of tumor necrosis
factors (TNFs), and HIV infection or other comorbid illnesses
that impair cellular immunity [11–14]. Pregnancy, especially
the third trimester, has also been identified as a risk [19] (See
section XXIV).
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR MANAGEMENT OF
COCCIDIOIDOMYCOSIS IN PATIENTS WITHOUT
OVERT IMMUNOSUPPRESSING CONDITIONS
I. In Which Patients With Newly Diagnosed, Uncomplicated
Coccidioidal Pneumonia Should Antifungal Drug Therapy Be Started?
Recommendations
1. We recommend patient education, close observation, and
supportive measures such as reconditioning physical therapy
for patients who appear to have mild or nondebilitating
symptoms, or who have substantially improved or resolved
their clinical illness by the time of diagnosis (strong, low).
2. We recommend initiating antifungal treatment for patients
who, at the time of diagnosis, have significantly debilitating
illness (strong, low).
3. For patients at the time of diagnosis with extensive pulmo-
nary involvement, with concurrent diabetes, or who are oth-
erwise frail because of age or comorbidities, we recommend
initiating antifungal treatment. Some experts would also in-
clude African or Filipino ancestry as indications for treat-
ment (strong, low).
4. If treatment is begun in nonpregnant adults, the treatment
should be an orally absorbed azole antifungal (eg, flucona-
zole) at a daily dose of ≥400 mg (strong, low).
Evidence Summary
Most patients with coccidioidal pneumonia who are not immu-
nosuppressed will resolve their illness without antifungal ther-
apy. This observation was quantified in 1938 when a survey of
Coccidioidomycosis Treatment Guidelines • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • e121
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 125 physicians practicing in the San Joaquin Valley of
California was conducted. Seventy-five physicians responded
and provided information on 354 patients with “Valley fever”
(primary pulmonary coccidioidomycosis). Among the 354 pa-
tients, 325 (92%) recovered without complication. Twenty-eight
had no outcome specified, and 1 had fatal CM [53].At that time,
no effective antifungal treatment was available. Expert practi-
tioners over the course of decades have indicated good out-
comes for the vast majority of patients with uncomplicated
coccidioidal pneumonia who did not receive antifungal treat-
ment [54, 55] and have thus recommended no antifungal for
such patients [56–61].
When AmB was found to be useful for the treatment of
chronic or extra pulmonary coccidioidomycosis, its adverse ef-
fects were considered too great for the treatment of all but the
severe primary coccidioidal infections [57,58,62].Therefore, for
years prior to the discovery of oral azole antifungal treatment,
the standard approach to primary coccidioidomycosis re-
mained observation alone. The azoles represented the first effec-
tive antifungal treatment to be orally available and well
tolerated, and were found to be effective in chronic pulmonary
and disseminated coccidioidomycosis [62]. Because of the rela-
tive safety, ease of use, and efficacy of azole drugs in treating pa-
tients who clearly benefited from antifungal treatment, medical
practitioners within the endemic regions have gradually
incorporated azole use in the management of primary coccidi-
oidomycosis, despite the absence of any clinical trials assessing
their value. It should be emphasized that no randomized trials
exist to assess whether antifungal treatment either shortens the
illness of early uncomplicated coccidioidal infections or pre-
vents later complications. If in fact azole antifungals are useful
in the management of uncomplicated coccidioidal infection, the
optimal dose or duration of such treatment has not been
established.
An observational study at a single university-affiliated Vet-
erans Administration medical center compared the outcome
of 105 patients with early coccidioidal infections when treated
(n = 54) or not treated (n = 51) with fluconazole [38]. The 2
groups appeared to have equivalent profiles of concurrent co-
morbidities (such as diabetes, chronic lung disease, congestive
heart failure, and renal dysfunction), but the groups differed in
that those who received treatment had more signs and symp-
toms of active infection than the untreated group. The time to
at least 50% symptom improvement was not different for those
with adequate prospective follow-up (95 days in the treated
group vs 98 days in the untreated group; P = .899). None of
the 50 untreated patients had progressive, recurrent, or dis-
seminated infection, whereas among the 54 treated patients,
8 had documented recurrence of pulmonary symptoms, or
extrapulmonary complications after antifungal treatment was
discontinued. In 1 patient, meningitis developed 2 years after
discontinuation of fluconazole, suggesting that antifungal
treatment does not prevent dissemination. A second prospec-
tive observational study of coccidioidal symptoms was con-
ducted in otherwise healthy adults with mild to moderate
primary pulmonary coccidioidomycosis. Twenty of 36 (56%)
received antifungal treatment and 16 of 36 (44%) received
no antifungal treatment; all were closely observed. The treated
group had a higher symptom score at enrollment than the
untreated group. The treated group did not reach primary
(50% drop in symptom score) or secondary endpoints
(time to symptom and fatigue resolution, and resumption of
normal activities and full-time work) faster than the untreated
group [63].
In a recent report, patients with an anticoccidioidal IgM re-
sponse as detected by an immunodiffusion assay but without a
subsequent immunodiffusion IgG response were significantly
more likely to have been treated early (within 2 weeks of
onset of symptoms) than patients who did develop an IgG re-
sponse [64]. These observations raise speculation that early
treatment of coccidioidal infection might alter the normal pro-
tective immune response characteristic of untreated coccidioi-
dal infection. Given these uncertainties, the decision whether
to initiate antifungal drug therapy for uncomplicated coccidioi-
dal pneumonia is highly individualized, and may depend on the
severity of coccidioidal illness and the presence of certain host
factors.
One factor that influences the decision to treat primary pul-
monary coccidioidomycosis is the severity of the infection. The
distinction of mild vs moderate infection is not well defined. An
illness requiring hospitalization [65, 66] (whether due to severe
coccidioidal symptoms or the exacerbation of other comorbid-
ities due to active coccidioidal infection) is sufficient evidence of
severity to warrant treatment (expert opinion). In ambulatory
patients, experts presume that the more signs and symptoms
of active fungal proliferation, the more likely treatment with
drugs whose effect is to inhibit fungal proliferation may be of
benefit to the patient. Although expert opinion varies as to
the most relevant factors to judge severity, commonly used in-
dicators include the presence of any 1 of the following: weight
loss of >10%, intense night sweats persisting for >3 weeks, infil-
trates involving more than half of 1 lung or portions of both
lungs, prominent or persistent hilar adenopathy, anticoccidioi-
dal CF antibody titers in excess of 1:16, inability to work, or
symptoms that persist for >2 months [60]. Such criteria for
treatment have not been subjected to scientific study, and
some practitioners in the endemic area treat with antifungal
agents in patients with less severe disease. Although the dura-
tion is not certain, most experts would recommend treatment
from 3 to 6 months or longer, depending on the clinical
response.
For patients with concurrent diabetes [67] or who are other-
wise frail because of age or comorbidities [65, 68, 69], we also
recommend initiating antifungal treatment. Some experts
e122 • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • Galgiani et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 would also include African or Filipino ancestry as indications
for treatment [70].
Antifungal Treatment Options
Of the several commercially available oral azole antifungal
drugs, fluconazole has become the most frequently prescribed
for uncomplicated coccidioidal pneumonia because it is pre-
dictably well absorbed, has fewer drug interactions, and is
least expensive when compared to other azole options. No clin-
ical studies exist to guide the optimal dose or duration of flucon-
azole or other antifungal therapy for persons with primary
pulmonary coccidioidomycosis.
If treatment of early uncomplicated coccidioidal infection is
instituted, the usual dose for adults is 400 mg daily. Some ex-
perts would recommend 800 mg daily. The duration is not cer-
tain, although many experts would recommend a treatment
duration ranging from 3 to 6 months or longer, depending on
the clinical response. Treatment can be discontinued when the
patient’s signs, symptoms, and inflammatory markers have re-
solved, and serologies and radiographs have stabilized. Com-
plete serological resolution is not necessary to discontinue
medications. Whether or not antifungal therapy is initiated,
all patients will benefit from other elements of a management
plan as discussed next.
II. In Patients With Newly Diagnosed, Uncomplicated Coccidioidal
Pneumonia, How Should Health Education and Physical Therapy
Reconditioning Programs Be Incorporated Into the Management
Program of Uncomplicated Coccidioidal Pneumonia?
Recommendation
5. Patients with uncomplicated pulmonary coccidioidomyco-
sis should have a management plan that incorporates regular
medical follow-up, health education, and a plan for physical
reconditioning (strong, low).
Evidence Summary
There is no published evidence that periodic reassessment, pa-
tient education, or physical reconditioning improves patient
outcomes. Nonetheless, the authors believe that establishing
an etiologic diagnosis of primary coccidioidal infection is of
great help to the patient because it clearly identifies the nature
of the illness and allows the practitioner the opportunity to ex-
plain what may happen in the future. A general review of acqui-
sition, the typical symptoms, and the need or lack of need for
antifungal treatment may be helpful to put the patient’s experi-
ence in a more general and knowledgeable context. Patients
should understand that they cannot transmit the infection to
others, that the illness improves at different rates in different pa-
tients, and that the overall prognosis is good, even in those with
slow resolution. This conversation helps patients align their ex-
pectations with the natural history of the illness. Although the
prognosis is generally favorable for most patients, it is im-
portant to explain some of the infrequent but possible compli-
cations, both pulmonary and extrapulmonary. Worsening
respiratory symptoms should prompt reevaluation, and new
focal symptoms outside of the chest should be noted and, if
they persist, be brought to medical attention.
Regular follow-up over several months following diagnosis is
an important component in the management of uncomplicated
coccidioidal infection. The purpose of follow-up is to confirm
that the illness remains uncomplicated and that more specific
interventions are unnecessary. Additionally, residual pulmo-
nary abnormalities may remain, which should be documented
for future reference so that a patient with residual radiographic
abnormalities is not unnecessarily evaluated in the future. In
rare instances, coccidioidal infections and lung neoplasms
have coexisted and this should be considered during the fol-
low-up period.
The interval between medical visits varies according to the
severity of the symptoms and the course of infection up to
the point of diagnosis. If the symptoms of an untreated patient
are still worsening, frequent follow-up visits or telephone con-
tact on a weekly basis might be appropriate as continued wors-
ening may prompt reconsideration for instituting antifungal
therapy. On the other hand, if there is clear evidence of im-
provement, then a return visit might be appropriate in 2–4
weeks. After the initial 2 or 3 visits, the intervals between visits
typically range from 1 month to several months. By 2 years, pa-
tients who received no antifungal therapy for their uncompli-
cated coccidioidal infection can be considered resolved [54,
55]. However, in some patients who have received oral azole
treatment, extrapulmonary lesions have first become apparent
several years after treatment was discontinued.
Several clinical and laboratory findings are helpful to assess
the course of infection. Generally, systemic signs of fever,
night sweats, and weight loss are the first to abate as a coccidioi-
dal infection improves [63]. Respiratory symptoms of chest
pain, cough, and sputum production may be more protracted
[63]. Periodically, fatigue and an inability to resume normal ac-
tivities are some of the last symptoms to resolve [63]. Because
this is commonly a chronic process, patients may fail to see
changes in these symptoms from day to day, and only when
asked to compare their current state with 1 week or 1 month
earlier do they become cognizant of their improved course. A
symptom journal may help patients recognize their progress.
Laboratory studies are helpful in providing objective evidence
of improvement. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate, often elevated
with early coccidioidal infections, is an inexpensive measure of
systemic inflammation and can be used to monitor improve-
ment [54, 55]. Typically, this assay would not be measured
any more frequently than weekly. In contrast, procalcitonin lev-
els are typically not elevated in primary coccidioidal pneumonia
[71]. Also, the CF or quantitative IDCF antibody concentration
is expected to decrease as a coccidioidal infection resolves, and it
is important to demonstrate this. Changes in titer are especially
helpful if the previous specimen is rerun concurrently with a
Coccidioidomycosis Treatment Guidelines • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • e123
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 new specimen. If these results do not normalize as expected,
then concern should be raised that complications may be devel-
oping and possibly further diagnostic studies would be in order.
Repeated serologic testing should seldom be any more frequent
than every 2 weeks and usually ranges from 1 month to several
months between tests.
Chest radiographs should be repeated to demonstrate either
resolution of all pulmonary abnormalities or to document what
residual abnormalities persist. Early in the course of infection, the
interval may be as frequent as several days until symptoms or ra-
diographic findings demonstrate abnormalities to be stable or im-
proving. Subsequent chest radiographs should be obtained every
several weeks to every several months. Often 2 views of the chest
are sufficient to monitor progress, and the increased sensitivity of
CT scans is not usually needed as the patient improves.
Protracted fatigue is a frequent symptom of primary cocci-
dioidal infection and often persists for many patients as their
major complaint long after all evidence of active infection is
gone. In patients who are normally healthy and unfamiliar to
chronic debility, the fatigue they experience frequently is exac-
erbated by frustration and even depression about their inability
to conduct their normal activities of daily living. In such situa-
tions, medical release from work, school, or other patient obli-
gations is justified.
At some point, fatigue, initially a direct symptom of the in-
fection, becomes a deconditioned state that remains after the ac-
tive infection has resolved. In such patients, referral to a
physical therapist for assessment and treatment for the diagno-
sis of “generalized weakness secondary to primary coccidioidal
pneumonia” can have a very positive therapeutic effect. By in-
volving a physical therapist, patients are able to transfer their
uncertainty about how to make themselves better to a profes-
sional trained in reconditioning protocols. In addition, this
structured program, with periodic assessment of progress, pro-
vides patients with tangible signs of improvement. Normally,
reconditioning programs are useful if continued for several
weeks or months, depending upon how long the deconditioned
state had been sustained.
III. For Patients With Primary Pulmonary Coccidioidomycosis With an
Asymptomatic Pulmonary Nodule, and No Overt Immunosuppressing
Conditions, Which Treatment Strategy Is Preferred: Antifungal
Treatment With Oral Azole, or Observation Without Antifungal
Treatment?
Recommendation
6. Once there is confirmation that a pulmonary nodule is due
to coccidioidomycosis, we recommend no antifungal treat-
ment for an asymptomatic pulmonary nodule due to coccid-
ioidomycosis (strong, very low).
Evidence Summary
The primary goal must be to exclude the diagnosis of malignan-
cy, in an asymptomatic patient with a solitary, noncalcified,
pulmonary nodule [72]. It cannot be assumed that a pulmonary
nodule is due to coccidioidomycosis without proof. A pulmo-
nary nodule can be diagnosed as due to coccidioidomycosis
if it develops from a pulmonary infiltrate that has been demon-
strated as coccidioidal pneumonia or when a biopsy has demon-
strated granuloma with spherules. In most cases, a solitary
pulmonary nodule due to coccidioidomycosis represents a stable
granulomatous scar and does not represent an active infectious
process. Typically, the patient will have no symptoms of clinical
illness related to such a nodule, and there is only a remote chance
of progression to an active lesion that would cause symptoms.
There is no benefit to treating a patient with such a lesion [73],
and there is a potential risk of toxicity from the medication. Ob-
servation without antifungal therapy is recommended for an
asymptomatic solitary pulmonary nodule, due to coccidioidomy-
cosis, in a patient with no known immunosuppressing conditions.
In developing the differential diagnosis of such a nodule, con-
sideration should be given to the patient’s age, smoking history,
and history of residence in or travel to areas endemic for coccid-
ioidomycosis. Comparison to prior chest radiography or CT scans
when available is extremely helpful in assessing whether a nodule
is new or old, and whether it is stable, enlarging, or regressing.
A noncalcified solitary pulmonary nodule that cannot be prov-
en to be stable for at least 2 years, or diminishing in size, should
be considered to be a potential malignant lesion [74].A full med-
ical history should be obtained, with social history to include his-
tory of smoking, occupational history, and prior residence and
travel history. If not already done, a CT scan is helpful to assess
for additional pulmonary lesions or abnormal intrathoracic
lymphadenopathy. If the nodule is at least 8–10 mm in diameter,
a positron emission tomography (PET) scan is often used to as-
sess for increased metabolic activity in the nodule [72, 75–77].
Importantly, there may be considerable overlap in terms of met-
abolic activity, between a malignant pulmonary nodule and a
granuloma due to coccidioidomycosis [78, 79]. It is not unusual
to find a new pulmonary nodule, with increased metabolic activ-
ity on PET scan, due to coccidioidomycosis, yet with no clinical
history of any recent respiratory infection or coccidioidal illness.
Serologic testing for coccidioidomycosis is not usually helpful
in the evaluation of an asymptomatic solitary pulmonary nod-
ule. A negative serology does not rule out coccidioidomycosis as
the cause for the nodule [73, 80]. Although highly suggestive
that the nodule may be the result of a coccidioidal infection, a
positive serology is not sufficient proof regarding the etiology of
the nodule. A reagent is now available that allows skin testing
for coccidioidomycosis [81]. A positive skin test will confirm
that a patient has had coccidioidal infection in the past. How-
ever, similar to serologic testing, a positive skin test cannot be
considered proof that a pulmonary nodule is due to coccidioi-
domycosis, and a negative skin test does not rule this out.
The final decision is whether to observe the nodule without
histologic confirmation or whether to obtain tissue. This
e124 • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • Galgiani et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 decision needs to factor in all of the preceding information—
namely, risk factors for malignancy, age, and general health sta-
tus, and findings on CT and/or PET scan. A solitary pulmonary
nodule with little or no increase in metabolic activity on PET
scan, in a patient with low risk of malignancy, may be followed
with careful serial imaging to document stability for a period of
at least 2 years [72, 75]. Similarly, a solitary nodule in a patient
with low risk of malignancy, in association with a positive serol-
ogy and an antecedent history of a respiratory illness consistent
with a recent coccidioidal infection, might also be followed.
These approaches are particularly common for individuals re-
siding in areas endemic for coccidioidomycosis, and are less
likely to be acceptable in other regions where coccidioidomyco-
sis does not occur.
Many solitary pulmonary nodules are accessible to CT-guided
percutaneous needle biopsy [72,75,76].This technique has gen-
erally been found to have excellent yield in terms of providing a
specific diagnosis [72, 75, 82, 83]. The spherule form of cocci-
dioidal organisms can often be identified on histologic exami-
nation of the specimen [82, 83]. A pathologic interpretation of a
needle biopsy showing a granulomatous response without
spherules should not be considered a conclusive diagnosis
of coccidioidomycosis. Including fungal cultures of biopsy ma-
terial increases the diagnostic yield of needle biopsies. In the
event of a nondiagnostic needle biopsy, it may be necessary to
proceed to surgical excisional biopsy; this can typically be done
with VATS [72, 75]. The present guidelines would apply to a
patient whose biopsy leads to a conclusive diagnosis of
coccidioidomycosis.
There are patients who appear to have a solitary pulmonary
nodule, but further evaluation reveals a slightly more complex sit-
uation. The chest CT scan may show the presence of several or
multiple, tiny satellite nodules, or parenchymal granulomatous
infiltrate in a limited area around the primary nodule. PET
scan may show an area of increased metabolic activity larger
than the visible, discrete nodule. Histologic examination of a nee-
dle biopsy or surgical excisional biopsy specimen may show a
fine, granulomatous infiltrate in the vicinity of the known,
more discrete nodule. These findings suggest that the nodule is
not yet a simple granulomatous scar, and that the patient is
still earlier in the natural history of acute coccidioidal pneumonia.
These patients should be followed closely for signs of active coc-
cidioidomycosis. In such patients, serologic testing for coccidioi-
domycosis is appropriate, for staging and to establish a baseline
for follow-up, as discussed elsewhere in this guideline.
IV. For Patients Who Have an Asymptomatic Coccidioidal Cavity and
Without an Immunosuppressing Condition, Should an Antifungal Drug
Be Used?
Recommendation
7. We recommend against the use of antifungal therapy for pa-
tients with an asymptomatic cavity (strong, low).
Evidence Summary
Coccidioidal pneumonia is relatively unique in that as part of
the pulmonary infection there is occasionally a complete shell-
ing out of the infected tissue and a thin-walled cavity remains as
a residuum in 5% of cases by some estimates [84, 85]. Most
commonly, a coccidioidal cavity is just a few centimeters in
diameter; however, occasionally they can be quite large. These
cavities are often multiple; even when one is dominant, others
may be visible on chest imaging. In a patient who is asymp-
tomatic and not immunosuppressed, there is little rationale
to support medical treatment. By definition, if the patient is
asymptomatic there is no opportunity for clinical improvement.
One rationale could be that if antifungal treatment is adminis-
tered early, a cavity may close. Unfortunately, there is no evi-
dence in the literature that this is the case, and clinicians who
have used antifungal treatment in this setting do not report
much success. As a result, we recommend that no medical treat-
ment be given in such cases.
The existence of a coccidioidal cavity may predispose to sec-
ondary problems, and periodic follow-up observation is recom-
mended. Usually, periodic plain radiographs of the chest are
adequate for monitoring asymptomatic patients. If these cavities
are very large or are adjacent to the pleura, they may rupture,
but this complication is surprisingly infrequent and there is
no evidence that antifungal treatment would prevent this. Rup-
ture of cavities is a greater concern when the cavitation is part of
an acute necrotizing pneumonia, but at the later stage of an
asymptomatic thin-walled cavity, rupture is very rare. Other
complications include superinfection with bacteria or other
fungi.
V. For Patients With Symptomatic Chronic Cavitary Coccidioidal
Pneumonia, Should an Oral Azole Such as Fluconazole or Intravenous
AmB Be Used?
Recommendation
8. We recommend that patients with symptomatic chronic
cavitary coccidioidal pneumonia be treated with an oral
agent such as fluconazole or itraconazole (strong, moderate).
Evidence Summary
Chronic coccidioidal pneumonia is also known as chronic fibro-
nodular pneumonia or fibrocavitary pneumonia depending on
the amount of fibrosis and/or cavitation present. It usually in-
cludes at least some cavitation. Clinical trials have defined this
complication in infections that are of at least 3 months’
duration.
Current therapies do not eradicate Coccidioides species from
the lesions of chronic coccidioidal pneumonia, and, in that
sense, they are not curative. However, symptoms usually wax
and wane. As a result, these patients are often chronically ill
with sputum production, chest discomfort, and occasional epi-
sodes of intermittent hemoptysis. They often have some system-
ic symptoms as well, including weight loss, fatigue, and other
Coccidioidomycosis Treatment Guidelines • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • e125
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 vague symptoms. When cavities are present, they also have an
increased risk of complications such as superinfection with bac-
teria or fungi, which can form fungus balls (mycetoma) within
the cavity. Mycetoma can be the result of superinfection with
other fungi such as Aspergillus species. However, in some
cases fungus balls are due to Coccidioides species [86].
In a randomized double-blinded comparison of fluconazole
400 mg daily to itraconazole 200 mg twice daily, the clinical re-
sponse after 8 months of treatment was approximately 55%
[27].Although not adequately powered to assess superiority, re-
sponse rates between the 2 regimens for chronic pulmonary in-
fections were comparable and were similar to results in earlier
phase 2 trials of both drugs [28, 32]. Some experts recommend
higher doses of fluconazole; however, there is no evidence that
higher doses are more effective. Treatment courses should be
continued for at least 1 year and, in some cases, longer. Even
with such protracted durations of treatment, experience from
all of the studies suggests that symptoms recur in approximately
30% of patients upon discontinuation of this treatment.
Because AmB is administered intravenously and is often ac-
companied by significant side effects, we recommend that AmB
be reserved for patients who do not respond to azoles or in pa-
tients whose illness is so severe that it requires management in
an intensive care unit. Because of the possibility of bacterial
superinfection, some patients who do not respond to antifungal
treatment may also benefit from antibacterial therapy.
Not addressed in the above discussion is a published descrip-
tion of a newly identified presentation of coccidioidal infection
as a progressive infiltrative process with virtually no cavitation
in 2 young women with STAT1 mutations [15]. The infiltrate
progresses extensively into both lungs over a period of years de-
spite very aggressive and appropriate antifungal therapy. Man-
agement of this very unusual clinical presentation should
include referral for genetic evaluation.
VI. In Patients With Symptomatic Cavitary Coccidioidal Pneumonia,
Should the Infection Be Removed Surgically?
Recommendation
9. We recommend that surgical options be explored when the
cavities are persistently symptomatic despite antifungal treat-
ment. We recommend that surgical options be considered
when cavities have been present for more than 2 years and
if symptoms recur whenever antifungal treatment is stopped
(strong, very low).
Evidence Summary
Early literature indicates that approximately half of coccidioidal
cavities close within 2 years of the initial infection [84]. It is
therefore recommended that surgical resection be avoided for
this period. After a cavity has been documented to be present
for >2 years, surgical options seem more appropriate with per-
sistent or recurrent symptoms. The question of surgical options
usually arises when cavities are large, near the pleural surface,
and cause pleuritic pain, chronic symptomatic infection, or fre-
quent or severe hemoptysis. When cavities are seen as part of an
acute necrotizing pneumonia and are near the pleura, they may
rupture, causing empyema. However, cavities in the setting of
chronic coccidioidal pneumonia are quite different. In a setting
of chronic pneumonia, the parietal and visceral pleura often
fuse, preventing pneumothorax. Fear of rupture should not be
a major consideration in chronic cases. If hemoptysis does not
respond to medical treatment or is severe, treatment by bron-
chial artery embolization can be considered a temporizing mea-
sure. This procedure has risks including necrosis and spinal
ischemia; however, tuberculosis can cause similar tissue de-
struction with hemoptysis. Published literature about emboli-
zation for that condition indicates a significant risk of
recurrent hemoptysis after bronchial embolization. There is
no literature on bronchial artery embolization in this popula-
tion; however, the risk of rebleeding can be extrapolated from
the tuberculosis literature which creates similar lung destruc-
tion. In those patients, the risk of rebleeding is approximately
40%, with half occurring in the first month and the remainder
up to 1 year later [87].
VII. In Patients for Whom Cavitary Coccidioidal Pneumonia Is Going to
Be Surgically Managed, Should This Be Done by VATS or Open
Thoracotomy?
Recommendation
10. We recommend that when surgical management of
cavitary coccidioidal pneumonia is undertaken, a VATS ap-
proach be attempted if the surgeon has significant expertise
in VATS (strong, low).
Evidence Summary
From a technical standpoint, starting with a VATS approach on
any thoracic procedure poses very limited risks [88]. However,
the surgeon must understand the special implications of co-
ccidioidal lung infections. Coccidioidal produces a dense in-
flammatory response, especially in the acute phase, making
dissection near the hilum difficult and occasionally dangerous.
The surgeon should recognize if the hilar lymph nodes are
densely adherent to the vascular structures in the hilum and,
in that case, convert the VATS procedure to a thoracotomy in
a controlled fashion to reduce the risk of a major vascular inju-
ry. Wedge resection can be technically difficult due to the thick-
ness of the lung surrounding the cavity, which is often more
pronounced than it appears on radiographic imaging. There
may be satellite nodules fibrosis and scarring of the affected
lobe into the hilum, which may mandate anatomic resection
(lobectomy).
Large cavities or those with extensive surrounding inflamma-
tion create a very dense pulmonary parenchyma and are likely
to be too bulky to be removed through a small VATS incision. If
that is the case, it may be more appropriate to start with a
thoracotomy.
e126 • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • Galgiani et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 VIII. In Patients With Ruptured Coccidioidal Cavity, Should This
Be Managed With Chest Tubes or With Surgical Excision of the
Ruptured Cavity?
Recommendation
11. For patients with ruptured coccidioidal cavity, we recom-
mend prompt decortication and resection of the cavity, if
possible (strong, very low). If the pleural space is massively
contaminated, decortications combined with prolonged
chest tube drainage may be more appropriate (weak, very
low).
Evidence Summary
Literature on management of ruptured coccidioidal cavities
consists of isolated case reports and small series [84, 89–98].
If the pleural space is not massively contaminated, removal of
the ruptured cavity is recommended. This will require at least
a wedge resection. Approximately one-third of ruptured cocci-
dioidal cavities present with simple spontaneous pneumotho-
rax, with the remainder having hydropneumothorax or frank
empyema [97, 98]. Wedge resection can be technically difficult
due to the thickness of the lung surrounding the cavity, which is
often more pronounced than it appears on radiographic imag-
ing. There are often satellite nodules, fibrosis, and scarring of
the affected lobe into the hilum. Cunningham and Einstein
[92] reported the largest series of ruptured cavities in the liter-
ature; 8 of the 21 patients required lobectomy due to either the
size of the cavity or the intense surrounding inflammation. For
the experienced VATS surgeon it is reasonable to attempt resec-
tion via VATS, with an understanding of the limitations of the
procedure. The majority of the literature, with the exception of
the 3 most recent publications [96–98], is from an era prior to
the common use of VATS for complex procedures; even for
these newer publications, VATS was a relatively recent innova-
tion and indications for utilizing VATS were in flux. Therefore,
there is little evidence either for or against the use of VATS.
From a technical standpoint, there is very little disadvantage
to starting with a VATS approach on any thoracic procedure;
however, the surgeon should be ready to convert to thoracoto-
my when technical difficulties related to inflammation are
encountered.
In patients with delayed presentation and significant pleural
contamination, resection of the cavity may not be technically
possible. In that situation, extensive decortication should be
performed to allow maximal reexpansion of the remaining
lung. This may be achieved by VATS, but if the lung cannot
be fully expanded, the procedure should be converted to a tho-
racotomy. Regardless, multiple chest tubes are often needed for
chronic drainage [92]. The cavity and empyema generally re-
solve over time with extended pleural drainage and antifungal
therapy. Sometimes if a dominant cavity is resected using a pa-
renchyma-sparing strategy, one of the daughter cavities enlarges
and becomes as large as the one resected.
IX. For Patients With Ruptured Coccidioidal Cavities, Is Oral Azole or
Intravenous AmB the Preferred Method of Antifungal Treatment?
Recommendation
12. For patients with ruptured coccidioidal cavities, oral azole
therapy is recommended. For patients who do not tolerate
oral azole therapy or patients whose disease requires 2 or
more surgical procedures for control, intravenous AmB is
recommended (strong, very low).
Evidence Summary
The largest series of patients with ruptured coccidioidal cavities
was published in 1982 [92]. In that report, patients treated early
in the disease course with only spontaneous pneumothorax or
minimal pleural contamination had excellent clinical results
without any antifungal therapy. Those with more complex
pleural disease and risk factors such as delayed presentation,
diabetes, other medical problems, and inability to completely
resect the gross disease were treated with AmB, usually 0.5–
1.0 mg/kg/day. In the recent literature, nearly all patients with
ruptured cavitary disease received oral azole therapy, most com-
monly fluconazole, at least 400 mg/day [97, 98]. There is no ob-
jective evidence defining appropriate dose or duration of
therapy following surgery. Common practice is for patients
with an apparently successful postoperative course to receive
1–3 months of oral azole therapy and those with more compli-
cated postoperative courses to receive a year or longer [98].
X. For Patients With Extrapulmonary Soft Tissue Coccidioidomycosis,
Not Associated With Bone Infection, Is Antifungal Therapy Indicated?
Recommendations
13. We recommend antifungal therapy in all cases of extrapul-
monary soft tissue coccidioidomycosis (strong, moderate).
14. We recommend oral azoles, in particular fluconazole or
itraconazole, for first-line therapy of extrapulmonary soft tis-
sue coccidioidomycosis (strong, moderate).
15. We recommend intravenous AmB in cases of azole failure,
particularly in coccidioidal synovitis (strong, moderate).
Evidence Summary
Soft tissue coccidioidomycosis can be divided into skin lesions,
subcutaneous abscesses, and distant soft tissue sites. Cutaneous
granulomatous lesions represent the most benign form of coc-
cidioidal dissemination. Subcutaneous soft tissue abscesses are
rare but can occur. Osteomyelitis often masquerades as a soft
tissue abscess. Generally, needle aspiration is used as both a di-
agnostic and therapeutic modality. Incision and drainage is usu-
ally unnecessary except in very large lesions. Other soft tissue
sites such as extrathoracic lymph nodes, peritonitis, epididymi-
tis, and prostatitis are usually treated in a similar fashion to cu-
taneous and subcutaneous abscesses.
There are no trials comparing AmB with oral azole
therapy. AmB is effective and has been recommended for
patients with widespread, rapidly progressive lesions or
Coccidioidomycosis Treatment Guidelines • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • e127
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 immunocompromised states [60, 99]. For most patients, oral
azoles have become the treatment of choice due to lower toxicity
and convenience of administration. Prospective trials of azole
therapy for skin and soft tissue coccidioidomycosis report re-
sponse rates ranging from 25% to 91%. Relapse rates ranging
from 60% after 45 days of therapy, to 11% after 12 months,
have been reported [100]. In a retrospective series, relapse oc-
curred in 6 of 17 patients with skin disease treated with flucon-
azole or itraconazole, the majority of whom had concomitant
pulmonary coccidioidomycosis [39]. Fewer data exist to evalu-
ate newer azoles. Posaconazole has been used successfully in
cases of disseminated nonmeningeal coccidioidomycosis that
previously failed to respond to other azoles, AmB, or both
[101, 102], as well as a few cases with minimal prior treatment
[26]. Voriconazole has been reported to be successful in some
patients who failed to respond to fluconazole [103]. Due to
high relapse rates, at least 6–12 months of therapy is recom-
mended regardless of the treatment chosen.
The recommended dose of fluconazole is 400 mg daily [30],
although some panel members would use up to 800 mg
daily. The recommended dose of itraconazole is 200 mg twice
daily [30].
XI. For Patients With Bone and/or Joint Coccidioidomycosis, Which
Therapy Is Preferred: Intravenous AmB or an Oral Azole?
Recommendations
16. We recommend azole therapy for bone and joint cocci-
dioidomycosis, unless the patient has extensive or limb-
threatening skeletal or vertebral disease causing imminent
cord compromise (strong, low).
17. For severe osseous disease, we recommend AmB as initial
therapy, with eventual change to azole therapy for the long
term (strong, low).
Evidence Summary
The joints most commonly infected by Coccidioides species in-
clude knee, wrist, and ankle. Bone infection most frequently in-
volves the vertebral column, sometimes with extension to the
adjoining soft tissues in the form of paraspinal or epidural
abscess [104].
There are no trials comparing AmB with oral azole therapy.
Patients with vertebral disease in older published series were
mostly treated with AmB, sometimes with an azole concurrent-
ly or subsequently (Table 1). A review of published trials of
azole therapy alone for coccidioidomycosis found success
rates of 52%–85% in patients with skeletal infections [109].
Most of the included studies did not specify the number of pa-
tients with bone vs joint infection, or the location of the bone
disease. Some of the patients had also been treated with AmB.
AmB has been recommended, based on expert opinion, for le-
sions located in critical areas such as the vertebral column
[60]. In a more recent retrospective series including 28 pa-
tients with skeletal disease, AmB was used as initial therapy
in 17 patients, only 1 of whom was judged to have clinical fail-
ure. Eight patients were treated initially with azoles, with 3
judged to have poor clinical response and switched to AmB.
Of the 8 patients with vertebral involvement, only 1 patient
was treated with an azole alone, with success [39]. In the
most recent series of patients with vertebral disease, only 20
of 39 received AmB, but limited data on outcomes and relaps-
es were available [5].
A randomized double-blind trial of 400 mg fluconazole daily
compared with 200 mg itraconazole twice daily for nonmenin-
geal disseminated coccidioidomycosis demonstrated that nei-
ther agent was superior to the other overall. However, a
subgroup analysis showed slightly greater efficacy of itracona-
zole for patients with skeletal infection [27]. This possible ad-
vantage of itraconazole must be weighed against its reduced
absorption in the setting of gastric acid suppression, and the po-
tential for drug interactions. Fluconazole has also been shown
to be effective for skeletal disease [28].There are no comparative
studies of fluconazole at doses >400 mg per day. A few cases of
successful treatment of skeletal disease with posaconazole [26,
101–103] or voriconazole [103] have been reported.
In practice, most panel members use an AmB product initial-
ly in severe disease that threatens patient function. If AmB is
Table 1.
Selected Retrospective Studies of Bone and Vertebral Coccidioidomycosis
Year [Reference]
No. of Patients
No. With Vertebral Disease
AmB ± Azole
Azole Only
Surgery
1986 [105]
24
4
12
12 (ketoconazole)
10
1996 [106]
25
6
22
2a
24
1997 [107]
16
16
16
NR
13
2001 [108]
23
23
8
5b
20
2004 [39]
28
8
17
8c
NR
2012 [5]
39
39
20
39
26
Abbreviations: AmB, amphotericin B; NR, not reported.
a One patient received no pharmacologic treatment.
b Complete details of pharmacologic treatment were not given for all patients.
c Pharmacologic treatment was completely or partially unknown for 3 patients.
e128 • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • Galgiani et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 used, it is usually for a relatively brief time (≤3 months). It is
commonly given daily initially, particularly in the hospital set-
ting. Subsequent outpatient therapy is usually thrice weekly.
Most patients are then treated with an azole for a protracted pe-
riod of 3 years to lifetime depending on the severity of disease
and the immunocompetence of the host. The recommended
minimum dose of fluconazole is 800 mg daily (based upon its
apparent inferiority to itraconazole at 400 mg daily [27]). The
recommended dose of itraconazole is 200 mg twice daily.
XII. In Patients With Vertebral Coccidioidomycosis, Should Lesions Be
Managed With Surgery?
Recommendations
18. We recommend surgical consultation for all patients with
vertebral coccidioidal infection to assist in assessing the need
for surgical intervention (strong, low).
19. Surgical procedures are recommended in addition to anti-
fungal drugs for patients with bony lesions that produce spi-
nal instability, spinal cord or nerve root compression, or
significant sequestered paraspinal abscess [5] (strong, low).
20. We recommend that surgical consultation be obtained pe-
riodically during the course of medical treatment (strong,
low).
Evidence Summary
Disseminated coccidioidomycosis infection can sometimes lead
to focal infections of the vertebral column or its associated
structures [110–113]. These tend to occur in patients who
have had protracted delays in diagnosis or who have active
disease that is failing to respond to medical therapy. All seg-
ments of the spine are vulnerable and can produce a variety
of symptoms, including pain and neurological dysfunction
[114, 115]. Patients with axial pain, tenderness, paravertebral
muscle spasm, radiculopathy, or myelopathy in the context of
a coccidioidomycosis infection should be evaluated for spinal
involvement.
Indications for Surgical Intervention
When vertebral or paravertebral involvement is identified in the
context of medically refractory coccidioidal disease, a consulta-
tion from a spine surgeon should be obtained. There are 4 typ-
ical reasons to seek a surgical opinion:
1. Bony destruction without instability: Surgical treatment may
be necessary to debride necrotic or damaged tissue in order
to optimize the impact of medical therapy. This may prevent
progression of bony destruction and avert future surgery for
stabilization.
2. Bony destruction with instability: Mechanical failure of
the structure of the spine may place the spinal cord or
nerve roots at risk and therefore may necessitate surgical
stabilization.
3. Spinal cord or nerve root compression: Early or evolving
signs of compression of the neural elements should be
considered a surgical emergency. The role of surgical decom-
pression for established deficits is unclear, particularly if pre-
sent for more than a few hours.
4. Significant sequestered paraspinal abscess: It may be impos-
sible to regain medical control of an infection when a large
abscess is present without surgical or interventional radio-
logic intervention.
Timing of Surgical Intervention
Back pain is intense and precedes neurological symptoms by
several days or weeks. In the early stages, intervention is usually
elective at the discretion of the surgeon. Urgent intervention is
indicated for signs of nerve root or spinal cord dysfunction, es-
pecially if the symptoms are progressing rapidly [104].
Selection of Surgical Procedures
There are several treatment options that can be valuable in the
management of vertebral coccidioidomycosis of the spine. The
choice of treatment strategy must consider the nature and extent
of the infection, the symptoms, the patient’s comorbidities, and
the experience of the surgeon.
1. Immobilization: Discitis and paravertebral spasm tend to be
extremely painful problems that are exacerbated by all man-
ners of movement. External brace immobilization with a cer-
vical collar for the neck or a thoracolumbosacral orthosis
brace for the thoracolumbar spine can be helpful to diminish
pain and immobilize the involved segment during concur-
rent medical therapy. This option can be used in patients
with isolated discitis and pain only. Imaging surveillance
and close clinical observation are necessary at frequent inter-
vals (perhaps weekly MRI) to ensure that any disease pro-
gression is detected early.
2. Minimally invasive: Coccidioidal abscesses in the muscle
and epidural space tend to be more liquid than their bacterial
counterpart. For this reason, they are often amenable to
image-guided needle aspiration. Needle aspiration is rarely
needed to establish a diagnosis but can be therapeutic if ad-
equate aspiration is achieved.
3. Surgical debridement: A range of surgical approaches can be
used to accomplish debridement of the spine. The optimal
approach depends on the specific segment of the spine, the
structures involved, and the comfort level of the surgeon. In-
traoperative findings’ correlation to preoperative imaging is
important to avoid retained infected bone or soft tissue.
The operative microscope may be useful to inspect the surgi-
cal bed following debridement. Aggressive surgical debride-
ment is essential. Although coccidioidal infections are
similar to bacterial infections, the antifungal therapy options
are generally less effective for coccidioidomycosis than anti-
biotics are for a bacterial infection. To optimize medical ther-
apy, surgical debridement should be extensive as safely
possible while maintaining spinal neurologic and structural
integrity to optimize medical therapy.
Coccidioidomycosis Treatment Guidelines • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • e129
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 4. Anterior surgical approach: An anterior approach is appro-
priate when confronting an infection confined to the disc
space or vertebral body. The anterior approach is familiar
to most spine surgeons and poses less morbidity to the pa-
tient in terms of muscle manipulation and wound healing.
Most patients tolerate anterior cervical surgery and retroper-
itoneal lumbar spine surgery extremely well. The entire disc
and surrounding bones should be removed even if complete
corpectomy is required.
5. Lateral surgical approach: Access to the vertebral column
from T3 to L3 can usually be obtained through a lateral ap-
proach. A traditional thoracotomy or VATS can expose the
T3 through L2 segment from either side. A lateral retroper-
itoneal approach can be used to access L1 through L4. There
are anatomical challenges when approaching from both the
left and the right that the surgeon should consider. If com-
plete vertebral destruction is present, a corpectomy should be
performed and the ventral epidural space and thecal sac
should be exposed.
6. Posterior surgical approach: A posterior approach can be
used for any segment of the spine and would usually be em-
ployed to decompress an epidural abscess. Decompression of
a ventral epidural abscess in either the cervical or thoracic
spine via a posterior approach alone should be performed
with great caution. It is unlikely that a laminectomy would
result in destabilization of the spine unless substantial verte-
bral body destruction coexists. Posterior approaches are typ-
ically more painful due to muscle dissection and have a
higher risk of poor wound healing and wound infection. Pos-
terior approaches typically require transgression of large
muscle groups and therefore, require longer recovery. Dorsal
incisions are also prone to infection and poor wound healing
in patients who must remain recumbent after surgery, due to
direct pressure on the wound and less effective wound care.
7. Posterolateral surgical approach: The utility of a posterolat-
eral approach is limited to the midthoracic region (T3–T8).
A variety of modifications to this approach may offer subtle
advantages but, in general, the vertebral body, lateral verte-
bral elements, and the ventral, lateral, and posterior epidural
space can be accessed. As with posterior approaches, muscle
dissection and longer incision length contribute to postoper-
ative morbidity.
8. Surgical stabilization: The destructive nature of a coccidioi-
dal infection and the subsequent surgical debridement of the
infection can render the spine structurally unstable. While
instability is unlikely to occur in the thoracic spine, the cer-
vical and lumbar segments are particularly vulnerable. Cervi-
cal instability poses a risk to the spinal cord while lumbar
instability threatens the lumbosacral nerve roots and bowel
and bladder function.
9. Stabilization by fusion substrate: The goal of surgical stabi-
lization is to reestablish the structural integrity of the spine.
A mature bony fusion provides a durable and physiologically
dynamic support system that both protects the neural struc-
tures and decreases mechanical pain.
Autologous bone can be harvested from the iliac crest
or the ribs to be used as graft material. The use of the
patient’s own tissue is probably the best option whenever
possible. Collateral medical illness, however, can impact
the quality of the bone. The patient’s general medical con-
dition can also affect the duration of the fusion maturation
process.
Cadaveric allograft is an acceptable substitute for autolo-
gous graft. This tissue is devoid of living cells and is com-
prised of the mineral structure of bone. Premanufactured
allograft implants are available in a variety of shapes and di-
mensions. They often combine both cortical and cancellous
elements. Because they are fairly rigid, cadaveric manufac-
tured grafts may be more likely to subside than other im-
plants.
There are numerous artificial implant devices for sup-
plementation of fusion in degenerative or traumatic spinal
instability. They are constructed from a wide array of non-
biological substances such as metal, carbon graphite, silicon
nitride, coral, ceramic, poly ethyl ketone, and others. The
long-term implications of their use in the setting of a chron-
ic disseminated coccidioidal infection are unknown. Be-
cause they are nonbiological in nature, they likely act as a
foreign body immunologically and may provide a nidus
for ongoing infection if seeded during the implantation
process or thereafter.
Several substances that promote bone growth are avail-
able to supplement the fusion process. There are no specific
contraindications to the use of tricalcium phosphate deriv-
atives or bone morphogenic protein. These substances have
been used in the presence of bacterial spondylitis without
adverse consequences.
10. Stabilization with instrumentation: Metallic hardware in-
strumentation is a common adjuvant to spinal fusion sur-
gery. Spinal fixation with hardware establishes immediate
internal orthosis and thus, immediate protection of the neu-
ral elements. There are no known specific contraindications
to the use of hardware implants in the setting of a coccidioi-
dal infection. Complete sterilization prior to hardware im-
plant is desirable but not a practical expectation.
Based on the variety of hardware devices available, titanium
constructs are probably the best option. Titanium offers a bio-
logically inert option that is ultra–structurally smooth so as not
to provide a surface for adherence by organisms.
Imaging Surveillance
Imaging evaluation is an essential part of all phases of the peri-
operative management of coccidioidomycosis of the vertebral
e130 • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • Galgiani et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 column [111, 116, 117].Accurate imaging data support both the
surgical decision making, and long-term surveillance [104].
1. CT of the spine provides the best information regarding
bone involvement. Visualization of the extent of bone de-
struction is needed to plan the surgical approach and to op-
timize placement of hardware fixation. CT also provides the
best assessment of postoperative fusion progress and integri-
ty, taking into account limitations induced by implanted
hardware.
2. MRI is the best modality to evaluate the associated soft tis-
sues of the vertebral structures [118]. The disc spaces and ab-
scess collections are best seen with MRI.
3. Plain radiographic images are useful to access the stability
of the spine both before and after surgery. They are also help-
ful to evaluate the hardware construct and spinal alignment
during the healing process. Plain films alone are often insuf-
ficient to determine the integrity of a bony fusion, particularly
adjacent to hardware components.
XIII. In Patients With Newly Diagnosed Coccidioidal Infection, Should a
Lumbar Puncture Be Performed?
Recommendation
21. In patients with recently diagnosed coccidioidal infection,
we recommend lumbar puncture with CSF analysis only in
patients with unusual, worsening, or persistent headache
with altered mental status, unexplained nausea or vomiting,
or new focal neurologic deficits (strong, moderate).
Evidence Summary
Lymphohematogenous spread to the leptomeninges almost al-
ways occurs within weeks to months following the initial un-
treated lower respiratory infection and frequently involves
areas of the basilar, sylvian, and interhemispheric cisterns
[119]. Because untreated meningitis is nearly always fatal
[120–122],early diagnosis and initiation of therapy is important
to prevent death and many of the complications that ongoing
meningeal inflammation produces. Headache is nearly always
produced by CM, but it is also a common (21%) symptom in
uncomplicated primary coccidioidal pneumonic disease [123].
This creates the conundrum of when to perform a lumbar
puncture. If the headache is modest in severity and dissipates
in approximately a week, a lumbar puncture is not required.
If the headache is the predominant symptom or is consistent,
persistent, and progressive, lumbar puncture is required. In
contrast, unless signs or symptoms of CNS involvement are pre-
sent, even in patients with other identified sites of dissemina-
tion, routine analysis of CSF is unnecessary [52]. Other
common presenting symptoms in patients with CM are altered
mental status and unexplained vomiting [120].In the absence of
symptoms, CM is unlikely [52].
Coccidioidal diagnosis requires laboratory analysis of CSF.
Abnormal CSF is the hallmark of all meningitis, and normal
findings from analysis of lumbar fluid in a patient with neu-
rologic complaints essentially eliminates meningitis as the
cause. The CSF appearance and laboratory findings for CM
are characteristic of other chronic CNS meningitides (eg, tuber-
culosis and cryptococcosis). The opening pressure should al-
ways be measured if technically feasible. The CSF should be
submitted for differential analysis of the cells, glucose, protein,
fungal culture, coccidioidal antibodies by immunodiffusion
and/or complement fixation, and coccidioidal antigen [50]
(as well as studies for other differential diagnoses such as cryp-
tococcal and tubercular disease) [124, 125].
It is possible in individuals with a relatively short illness prior
to presentation and a constellation of relatively normal glucose
and protein on CSF analysis to confuse chronic meningitis with
aseptic (viral) diagnoses.
Typically, the pleocytosis is in the range of double digits
to hundreds, but occasionally thousands. The differential usual-
ly shows a lymphocytic predominance, but may have a neutro-
philic predominance, especially early in the course of the illness
[120]. Eosinophils, while not commonly present, are an impor-
tant clue to diagnosis, though not specific to coccidioidal infec-
tion [126]. The protein may be normal or moderately elevated,
but is commonly >150 mg/dL. The glucose may be normal, but
is commonly depressed to less than one-half to two-thirds of
the fasting blood sugar value (nondiabetic). A positive CSF cul-
ture if positive for Coccidioides species is diagnostic. However,
the sensitivity in adults is low (approximately 25%). In children,
when the clinical presentation is unexplained hydrocephalus,
initial ventricular cultures are commonly positive [127]. The
presence of immunodiffusion or CF IgG antibody performed
in an experienced laboratory is nearly as specific, but again,
lacks sensitivity; only 30%–60% are positive initially. The diag-
nosis is most commonly made by the presence of the above-
mentioned clinical and CSF parameters and the presence of
IgG antibody by immunodiffusion or complement fixation in
the serum.
The diagnosis may be further supported by neuroimaging,
preferably by gadolinium-enhanced MRI. At the time of initial
diagnosis, approximately 50% of patients with CM may have a
discernible abnormality including hydrocephalus, basilar in-
flammation, basilar vasculitic infarction, or, more rarely, abscess
or mass lesion. A negative CT or MRI result does not exclude
CM [119, 124, 128, 129].
To reemphasize, patients with CM, as with other sites of ex-
trapulmonary infection, may develop with few or no signs and
symptoms of a respiratory illness. Therefore, in patients with
recent endemic exposure who develop the symptoms de-
scribed above, the possibility of CM should always be
considered.
In patients with CM, especially if there has been a protracted
delay in diagnosis, several neurologic findings may develop. For
example,
cranial
neuropathies
and
focal
neurologic
Coccidioidomycosis Treatment Guidelines • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • e131
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 abnormalities may develop. Difficulties with balance and tan-
dem gait are commonly seen [129]. Also, arachnoiditis with
or without syringomyelia along the spinal cord may develop.
This may result in spinal pain, myelopathy, incontinence, neu-
rogenic bladder, or erectile dysfunction. The preferred evalua-
tion for these abnormalities is contrast-enhanced MRI of the
appropriate portion of the spine [129]. Although it is possible
that most individuals with CM have inflammation of the cervi-
cal, thoracic, and lumbar arachnoid, neuroimaging of the spinal
meninges is seldom performed unless clinical symptoms of
arachnoiditis are present.
XIV. For Patients With Newly Diagnosed CM, What Is the Primary
Treatment?
Recommendation
22. For CM, we recommend fluconazole 400–1200 mg orally
daily as initial therapy for most patients with normal renal
function [125, 129] (strong, moderate). There is no role for
a dose <400 mg daily in the adult patient without substantial
renal impairment. Some experts prefer to use itraconazole
200 mg 2–4 times daily, but this requires closer monitoring
to assure adequate absorption, and there are more drug–drug
interactions than with fluconazole.
Evidence Summary
Only 2 classes of available drugs have demonstrable efficacy in
the treatment of CM: polyenes and azoles. With the introduc-
tion of the oral azoles, fluconazole has become the most com-
monly utilized primary therapy. In one report, doses of 400 mg
daily (the maximum dose per package insert) were utilized.
During the course of this study, failures were noted [31]. Sub-
sequent experience has suggested that higher doses may de-
crease the failure rate. Opinion varies on whether to give an
initial daily dose of 400 mg or doses of 800–1200 mg every 24
hours.
Itraconazole has also been used as primary therapy for
CM, usually as 200 mg every 12 hours, with fatty food and
an acidic beverage to increase absorption [34]. Direct
comparison in an animal model of CM indicated modest
superiority of equal doses of itraconazole compared with
fluconazole [130].
Intravenous AmB deoxycholate was not shown to be effica-
cious in treatment of CNS coccidioidal infection. The lipid
preparations of AmB administered intravenously have been ef-
fective in the treatment of CM in animal models [131–133].Oc-
casionally, human cases have been reported to be responsive,
but utility in treatment of clinical cases is presently unclear.
Use of AmB is currently reserved for treatment of refractory
cases.
Intrathecal AmB deoxycholate was the original gold standard
of therapy and can be administered by a variety of techniques.
Direct lumbar and cisternal injection as well as lumbar, cister-
nal, and ventricular reservoirs have been utilized. Currently,
intrathecal AmB is commonly utilized as rescue therapy in
azole failures. It is usually given in centers with special expertise
because of the toxicity associated with this form of therapy [134,
135].Therapy is often initiated with low doses that are gradually
increased unless untoward symptoms and signs of toxicity are
encountered. If the disease begins to remit, de-escalation can
be attempted [135].
XV. For Patients With CM Who Improve or Become Asymptomatic
on Initial Therapy, When Can Treatment Be Stopped?
Recommendation
23. For CM, we recommend azole treatment for life (strong,
moderate).
Evidence Summary
It must be noted that azole therapy alone appears to suppress
rather than cure coccidioidomycosis meningeal disease, even
in patients who are clinically well and may have normalized
their CSF parameters on azole therapy. The evidence for this
is the extremely high relapse rate when azoles are reduced in
dose or discontinued in such patients. This has led to a recom-
mendation to continue azole therapy for life in patients with
CM who achieve remission and do not deteriorate on treatment
[129, 136].
XVI. In Patients With CM Who Do Not Have a Satisfactory
Response to Initial Antifungal Therapy, What Modifications Can Be
Considered?
Recommendation
24. In patients who clinically fail initial therapy with flucona-
zole, higher doses are a first option (strong, moderate). Alter-
native options are to change therapy to another orally
administered azole, or to initiate intrathecal AmB therapy
(strong, moderate).
Evidence Summary
A combination of clinical, CSF, and potential radiographic pa-
rameters obtained on a regular basis should be used to define
antifungal treatment success and failure. CSF parameters are
the most important variable.
The best definitions of treatment success and failure available
are those promulgated by the Mycosis Study Group [31], which
has evaluated response to treatment in patients with CM. The
definition of response was a decrease in baseline score by 40%
without relapse while treatment was continued. Essentially, one
should achieve near-normal clinical and CSF results. This is un-
achievable in a reasonable time period for a significant minority
of patients. In this circumstance, clinicians should consider al-
ternative therapy.
If low-dose fluconazole (400 mg orally daily) was the original
treatment option, increasing the dose to 800–1200 mg daily
should be considered [31]. The largest experience for a drug
other than fluconazole is with itraconazole [34]. Recently, vor-
iconazole in varying doses has been tried in primary treatment
e132 • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • Galgiani et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 failures. Doses of 200 mg or 4 mg/kg every 12 hours with no
food 1 hour pre- and postdose have been utilized [137, 138].
The liquid formulation of posaconazole (400 mg orally every
12 hours) has been recommended as a possible treatment op-
tion in fluconazole failure [139]. A newer tablet formulation
of posaconazole appears to have greater and more reliable ab-
sorption [140, 141] but as of this writing, has had no reports
in the treatment of CNS disease.
It is advisable to monitor antifungal drug levels in all pa-
tients with CM, but particularly if itraconazole, voriconazole,
or posaconazole are used. This is largely to assure therapeutic
serum levels, but voriconazole is also associated with in-
creased risk of neurologic and hepatic toxicity at high
serum concentrations. It is very important to monitor pa-
tients’ medication for drug interactions. All azoles have sig-
nificant potential drug interactions that can lead to toxic
blood levels of many other drugs, or can depress the levels
of the azoles to a subtherapeutic range. The azoles themselves
have some side effects and allergies that can be problematic.
The package inserts should be consulted prior to initiation of
therapy, particularly for the drugs to be avoided or dose-
modified.
Itraconazole occasionally causes significant sodium reten-
tion and has a “black box” warning for negative inotropic ef-
fect. Voriconazole can produce visual and other neurologic
side effects, periostitis, and—more importantly—severe pho-
todermatitis and possibly related cutaneous malignancy in-
cluding melanoma. It is essential for patients to avoid the
sun, wear sun-protective clothing, and use sunscreen formu-
lated for superior ultraviolet A and ultraviolet B blockage.
QTc prolongation by voriconazole and posaconazole is a
problem in patients with low potassium, calcium, or magne-
sium and may result in tachyarrhythmias. These electrolyte
abnormalities should be corrected before starting these
antifungals.
If the patient fails to respond to one of the azoles in situations
with threatening neurologic signs, a rescue regimen of intrathe-
cal AmB as described previously (section XVI) is the regimen of
choice. If failure occurs as unresponsive CSF parameters of the
infection or minor neurologic signs, raising the azole dose or
switching to another azole may be attempted [53].
XVII. For Patients Who Develop Hydrocephalus, Which Patients Should
Be Referred for Neurosurgical Procedures to Relieve ICP?
Recommendations
25. For patients with increased ICP at the time of diagnosis, we
recommend medical therapy and repeated lumbar punctures
as initial management (strong, low).
26. Because most patients who develop increased ICP will not
resolve this problem without placement of a permanent
shunt, we recommend early MRI of the brain and neurosur-
gical consultation (strong, moderate).
Evidence Summary
Increased ICP may be present early during the course of disease.
Pressures of 180–250 mm H2O are concerning, but do not re-
quire specific intervention. Pressures ≥250 mm H2O define the
need for urgent or emergent intervention [123, 135]. It should
be noted that there may be few or no radiographic changes as-
sociated with acute increased ICP.
Acute, increased, and potentially reversible hydrocephalus is
unusual in patients with CM, and there are no trials or reports
on how to manage this problem in the coccidioidal literature.
However, management of this problem is well described in
the cryptococcal literature [142] and our recommendations fol-
low that experience. The pressure should be lowered by removal
of CSF in a volume sufficient to reduce the pressure to 50% of
the opening pressure or 200 mm of H2O, whichever is greater.
This should be repeated at least daily for 4 days until the pres-
sure stabilizes to <250 mm H2O. If medical therapy with azole
antifungals and repeated lumbar punctures fail to stabilize the
pressure, lumboperitoneal or other shunting procedures need
be explored with neurosurgery.
Hydrocephalus is the most common complication of CNS
coccidioidal infection. Approximately 40% of individuals will
have this complication at presentation or will acquire it during
the course of their disease. The symptoms of hydrocephalus
overlap with those of meningitis, thus creating confusion of
the one entity as it relates to the other. Typically, headache, al-
teration in sensorium, gait abnormality, urinary incontinence,
and nausea and vomiting are seen in some combination.
A contrast-enhanced MRI should be undertaken in all patients
with CM at presentation or shortly thereafter, in part to evaluate
for the presence of hydrocephalus. Any change in mental status,
nausea and vomiting, cranial neuropathy, incontinence, or gait
disturbance would prompt a repeat neuroimaging study. Ventri-
culomegaly (not the result of cerebral atrophy) and transependy-
mal edema are hallmarks of acute hydrocephalus. Imaging also
helps to distinguish communicating from noncommunicating
hydrocephalus [119, 125, 128, 129, 143, 144]. Lumbar puncture
may be suggestive of the diagnosis of hydrocephalus by virtue
of the increased opening pressure.
It should be noted that ventricular fluid pressure may be nor-
mal in CM and this finding alone should not be used to exclude
the diagnosis of meningitis. Given the low risk of a lumbar
puncture when hydrocephalus is present, this evaluation should
be undertaken as part of the collaboration with neurosurgical
consultation.
Hydrocephalus can be the presenting manifestation of the
disease as well as a late complication [125]. This is not surpris-
ing considering that it is the most common complication of
CM, with a high incidence of up to 40% [128, 143]. After dis-
semination of Coccidioides species to the meninges, a granulo-
matous and suppurative inflammation causes fibrosis of the
subarachnoid space to a varying degree in some areas, which
Coccidioidomycosis Treatment Guidelines • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • e133
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 may result in the obstruction of CSF flow and ventricular dila-
tation [145]. Thus, hydrocephalus may be complication of past
active meningeal infection even though current therapy is effec-
tive in arresting ongoing inflammation, or it may be a sign of
treatment failure, especially when present as a late-onset com-
plication [125]. A communicating hydrocephalus commonly
develops following fibrosis of the basilar cisterns, and additional
scarring of the outlet foramina of the fourth [146]. These com-
plications are nearly always irreversible and are not helped by
changing antifungal drug treatments.
In an asymptomatic patient with CM who has radiologic
evidence of hydrocephalus, medical treatment alone should
be continued with serial imaging obtained every 3–6 months
until stability has been determined. However, in the presence
of typical symptoms that reflect increased ICP, placement of
a ventriculoperitoneal shunt is very likely to be necessary.
Furthermore, symptomatic hydrocephalus may cause worsen-
ing of chronic meningitis symptoms or new symptoms asso-
ciated with increased ICPs (eg, nausea, vomiting, headaches,
confusion, neurological deficits, and papilledema). In the
presence of such symptoms, the physician should suspect hy-
drocephalus and should proceed aggressively as this may
carry as high as a 12.5-fold increased mortality in patients
with CM [128].
Symptomatic hydrocephalus associated with CM is a compli-
cation that merits prompt intervention. Not only is early treat-
ment important for alleviating the symptoms accompanying
increased ICP, but it is also vital for decreasing the aforemen-
tioned substantial mortality associated with hydrocephalus.
Placement of an external ventricular drain (EVD) should be con-
sidered as a temporizing measure to control elevated pressure. An
EVD provides a means to measure ICP, obtain CSF for serial
analysis, and drain CSF to decrease ICP. It is unlikely that the typ-
ical patient with CM would achieve CSF sterility with an EVD.
There are a variety of shunt systems that can be used to definitive-
ly divert CSF, including both set pressure valves and adjustable
valves. There is no evidence in the literature to suggest superiority
of one type of system over the other. Some neurosurgeons are re-
luctant to perform shunting when the CSF is actively infected.
Although there may be some theoretical validity to this concern,
there is no real evidence that expeditious shunting imposes
undue risks. The dangerous effects of prolonged increased ICP
greatly exceed the theoretical potential of an infectious nidus at
the end of the catheter.
XVIII. In Patients With CM and in Whom a Ventriculoperitoneal
Shunt Has Been Placed, Should Shunt Malfunction or
Superinfection Be Managed With a Single- or Double-Staged
Surgical Revision?
Recommendation
27. We recommend that patients with ventriculoperitoneal
shunt malfunction be replaced in a single procedure. When
the shunt has developed a bacterial or other superinfection,
we recommend that the infected shunt be removed and a re-
placement placed at a subsequent time as a second procedure
(strong, low).
Evidence Summary
Patients with CM and a ventriculoperitoneal shunt who exhib-
it new or changed mental status alteration, nausea and vomit-
ing, or gait abnormality need to be evaluated for shunt failure,
which may or may not be associated with superinfection by
bacteria or other microorganisms. A rational approach in a pa-
tient who is hemodynamically stable is to perform lumbar
puncture to assess for CM or other bacterial infection and
measure opening pressure to indirectly assess shunt function.
A shunt tap to sample the CSF for infection as well as to eval-
uate the patency and function of the shunt apparatus can be
considered, taking into account the possibility of introducing
a shunt infection or causing a malfunction with this interven-
tion. In most cases, bacterial shunt infections should be treated
with shunt removal and placement of an EVD until CSF has
been sterilized. Thereafter a new shunt can then be placed.
With organisms of low pathogenicity or if Coccidioides species
is the only organism involved, a single-stage approach (remov-
al of the shunt with simultaneous reimplantation with a new
shunt) can be considered [147, 148]. Exploration of the non-
functioning shunt is done by evaluating proximal and distal
flow intraoperatively so that revision can be tailored to the par-
ticular area of failure. In some instances, the shunt can be
completely replaced if the failure is due to clogging secondary
to highly proteinaceous fluid.
A rare complication of Coccidioides species is an isolated
fourth ventricle, which may result from recurring shunt infec-
tions or chronic shunting of the lateral ventricles in the setting
of fungal hydrocephalus. Endoscopic aqueductoplasty, stenting
of the cerebral aqueduct, or placement of a dedicated fourth
ventricular as part of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt system may
be considered an appropriate intervention should this relatively
rare complication arise [149].
XIX. In Patients With CM Who Initially Respond to a Treatment Plan
and While on Therapy Develop Acute or Chronic Neurologic
Changes, What Assessments Are Needed to Reevaluate and Modify
Therapy?
Recommendation
28. We recommend that repeat MRI of the brain and possibly
the spinal cord, with and without contrast, as well as reanal-
ysis of spinal fluid be obtained either from a lumbar or cis-
ternal aspiration (strong, low).
Evidence Summary
Occasionally, patients develop new neurologic problems while
on a management regimen that initially had resulted in im-
provement. New neurologic problems may be due to drug fail-
ure, in which case the CSF findings demonstrate increased
leukocyte count and lower glucose and the MRI may or may
e134 • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • Galgiani et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 not have worsened in the degree of abnormality. Ventricular
fluid is not useful for this evaluation because it is frequently
less representative of disease activity [150]. Frequently, however,
neurologic worsening is the result of other processes. One com-
mon complication is spinal fluid shunt malfunction. Manage-
ment of this problem is addressed in the sections above.
Another type of complication is cerebral vasculitis. The inci-
dence of vasculitic infarction has not been systematically stud-
ied. Clinical presentations are clearly less common. At least 2
pathologic etiologies are described. Clinically, these present as
a stroke syndrome. The diagnosis rests on the clinical presenta-
tion and radiologic confirmation [151–153]. Some authorities
recommend dexamethasone 20 mg daily for 7 days followed
by a 4-mg taper every other day (total 16 days). Others recom-
mend supportive care and reevaluation of the meningitis treat-
ment plan [151, 152]. The evidence for the management of
vasculitic infarction is anecdotal. The concern over the use of
glucocorticoids is largely that they might decrease the host
response.
Another possible complication is a cranial neuropathy. This
could be due to progressive inflammatory destruction of a cra-
nial nerve as indicated by persistent or worsening CSF abnor-
malities or, alternatively, due to pressure from fibrosis that
results from prior inflammation. The primary approach is to
gain control of the disease through medical management. The
treatment of cranial neuropathy with corticosteroids is anecdot-
al. Such use of glucocorticoids is patterned after treatment of
tubercular meningitis [154–156].
A third type of complication is that of arachnoiditis and the
development of a syrinx. The evaluation of arachnoiditis and sy-
rinx is by contrast-enhanced MRI. There are no clear studies on
how to manage coccidioidal arachnoiditis or syrinx. If preven-
tion fails, the best treatment of arachnoiditis and its sequelae are
prevention through early diagnosis and aggressive antifungal
therapy to control the infectious process. When appropriate,
pain management may be required. Intrathecal AmB (with or
without attendant glucocorticoids) may provide faster relief
than oral azoles. Intrathecal AmB may be technically impossible
or ineffective in advanced arachnoiditis [135]. A CSF flow study
is always required when initiating intrathecal therapy to be sure
drug reaches blocked subarachnoid areas. To control disease, it
may be necessary to instill drug above and below areas of block-
age. Low-dose short term oral glucocorticoids may provide pain
relief. The treatment of syrinx may include surgery including
shunting to relieve local pressure.
A very uncommon but well-recognized complication is the
development of a brain abscess [157]. Because of its rarity,
there is no consensus on the best management of coccidioidal
brain abscess. As these lesions are not within the meninges, in-
trathecal AmB would be expected to be ineffective, and possibly
intravenous AmB would be more useful [124]. There is very lit-
tle information on the value of fluconazole or other azoles. Also,
the role of surgery is conjectural, but by extrapolation from
knowledge about treatment of other fungal CNS abscesses, it
would appear to have a useful role, particularly in larger lesions.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR MANAGEMENT OF
PATIENTS WITH COCCIDIOIDOMYCOSIS FOR
SPECIAL AT-RISK POPULATIONS
XX. For Allogeneic or Autologous HSCT or Solid Organ Transplant
Recipients With Active Coccidioidomycosis, Which Initial Treatment
Strategy Is Preferred: Oral Azole or Intravenous AmB?
Recommendations
29. For the treatment of autologous or allogeneic HSCT, or
solid organ transplant recipients with acute or chronic pul-
monary coccidioidomycosis who are clinically stable and
have normal renal function, we recommend initiating treat-
ment with fluconazole 400 mg daily or the equivalent dose
based upon renal function (strong, low).
30. For the treatment of such patients with very severe and/or
rapidly progressing acute pulmonary or disseminated coccid-
ioidomycosis, we recommend the use of AmB until the pa-
tient has stabilized, followed by fluconazole (strong, low).
31. For autologous or allogeneic HSCT or solid organ trans-
plant recipients with extrapulmonary coccidioidomycosis,
we recommend the same treatment as for non–transplant re-
cipients (strong, very low).
Evidence Summary
No randomized controlled studies exist for the treatment of coc-
cidioidomycosis in organ transplant recipients. Currently, 83
cases of coccidioidomycosis in the setting of renal, liver,
heart, lung, and small bowel transplant have been published,
consisting of single case reports and small case series, spanning
>50 years (1960–2012) [158–171]. Of these cases, 79 contain
sufficient details of treatment and outcome (Table 2). Caution
must be taken in its interpretation, because the table does not
stratify for disease severity, presence and location of dissemina-
tion, net state of immunosuppression, comorbidities, and other
factors that impact treatment outcome.
In the absence of comparative clinical trials, 2 primary anti-
fungal treatment strategies have emerged. The first is the initia-
tion of AmB (or lipid-associated AmB) with concurrent or
sequential use of an azole, resulting in survival of 34% and
83%, respectively. The concurrent use of AmB and azole may
be pursued either when the infection is severe or when toxicities
of treatment limit consistent dosing of AmB. Alternately, the
azole may be initiated when the infection is stabilized to limit
long-term AmB-related toxicity.
The other antifungal treatment strategy is the use of azoles
alone, which among 21 reported cases has a cumulative report-
ed survival of 87% (Table 2). AmB has numerous toxicities,
and lipid formulations of AmB have been widely accepted to
minimize renal toxicities, especially in the renal transplant
Coccidioidomycosis Treatment Guidelines • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • e135
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 population. No trials comparing AmB and lipid-associated
AmB have been conducted for the treatment of coccidioido-
mycosis in transplant recipients. Because AmB has been re-
served by some experts for severe or rapidly progressing
infection [60], the poorer survival outcomes tabulated in
Table 2 reflect the bias of more severe illness rather than less
effective treatment. Conversely, azoles are associated with less
overall toxicity, but all azoles interfere with the clearance of
calcineurin inhibitors, and the latter require dosage adjust-
ments when initiating azoles to avoid renal toxicity (see
below). The available information regarding the optimal use
of antifungal treatment in the transplant population is com-
plex for many reasons: (1) Immunosuppression regimens
have changed since the introduction of organ transplantation
decades ago; (2) there is marked variability in the net state of
immunosuppression of the patient at the time of disease pre-
sentation; (3) patients had multiple comorbidities and treat-
ments, all of which are uncontrolled; (4) no consistent
information regarding the withdrawal or lowered dose of im-
munosuppression is provided; (5) a spectrum of coccidioidal
illnesses are represented, ranging from fulminant and life-
threatening infections to minimally symptomatic disease,
which likely influenced the choice of treatment; (6) the dura-
tion and doses of treatment are not standardized and some
died early in treatment course; (7) the follow-up time is not
standardized; (8) the influence of antifungal medication toxic-
ity on outcome is not specified; (9) the introduction and incor-
poration of azoles in the antifungal treatment armamentarium
occurred in the absence of controlled trials; (10) publication
bias is likely present; and (11) there are no randomized
comparisons.
There are fewer studies or publications for the treatment of
coccidioidomycosis in autologous or allogeneic HSCT; to date,
among allogeneic HSCT recipients, 15 cases have been pub-
lished [172–174]. This paucity of published cases may be
explained in part by standard receipt of variable, but often pro-
longed antifungal prophylaxis. Four of 15 allogeneic HSCT re-
cipients had disseminated coccidioidomycosis, one of which
was diagnosed postmortem. Nine of the 15 cases were fatal.
Four of 5 were treated with AmB as a single antifungal agent
and only the patient with pulmonary coccidioidomycosis sur-
vived following a cumulative dose of 1 g AmB deoxycholate.
Two other patients received combined AmB and voriconazole
(1 of 2 died) and another received sequential AmB and vori-
conazole (died). Two of 6 patients treated with azoles alone
died.
All azoles inhibit cytochrome P 450 3A4 (CYP3A4), the en-
zyme responsible for the metabolism of many common antire-
jection medications including the calcineurin inhibitors
(cyclosporine and tacrolimus) and sirolimus [175]. Among
the azoles, fluconazole is the weakest CYP3A4 inhibitor.
Azole-inhibited CYP3A4 function appears to be dose depen-
dent and more pronounced at fluconazole doses of ≥200 mg
daily [176]. Cyclosporine, tacrolimus, and sirolimus are all sub-
strates of CYP3A4 and substrates and inhibitors of the active
transporter p-glycoprotein, resulting in potentially complex
drug interactions in transplant recipients. The addition of azoles
to cyclosporine, tacrolimus, or sirolimus commonly leads to el-
evated serum levels of the antirejection medication; the amount
of interaction is influenced by the particular medication used
and individual patient variability [175]. Therefore, close thera-
peutic drug monitoring is a useful adjunctive test to inform the
decisions regarding antirejection medication doses. Suggested
antirejection dosage reductions in concomitant azole therapies
have been published [175].
XXI. In Such Patients, Should Antirejection Treatment Be Modified or
Continued Without Change?
Recommendation
32. For allogeneic HSCT or solid organ transplant recipients
with severe or rapidly progressing coccidioidomycosis, we
recommend reduction of immunosuppression (without risk-
ing graft-vs-host disease or organ rejection, respectively,
whenever possible) until the infection has begun to improve
(strong, very low).
Evidence Summary
The primary goal of immunosuppression in organ transplanta-
tion recipients is the avoidance of allograft rejection, which re-
sults from a complex process that includes both cell-mediated
and humoral-mediated immunity. Current antirejection treat-
ment achieves immunosuppression by depleting lymphocytes,
diverting lymphocyte traffic, or blocking lymphocyte pathways
[170]. The amount of immunosuppression given to prevent
rejection declines over time after transplantation, and mainte-
nance doses are used. Increasingly potent immunosuppression
combinations have reduced the incidence of allograft rejection,
but the susceptibility to opportunistic fungal and other
Table 2.
Antifungal Treatment and Outcome of 71 Solid Organ Transplant
Recipients With Coccidioidomycosis
Antifungal Treatment Strategy
No.
Treated
No.
Survived
%
Survival
No treatment
8
2
25
AmB alone
17
5
29
AmB with concurrent azole
9
3
34
Amphotericin followed by azole
12
10
83
AmB plus azole, either sequential or
concurrent (not specified)
5
5
100
Azole alone
15
13
87
Echinocandin alone
1
0
0
Multiple sequential agents including
AmB and azoles
3
3
100
Surgical excision alone
1
1
100
Total
71
42
59
Abbreviation: AmB, amphotericin B.
e136 • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • Galgiani et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 infections remains high due to these specific and nonspecific
immune impairments [177, 178]. The control of active coccidi-
oidomycosis relies on the induction of Th1-associated immune
responses, which include processing and presentation of critical
antigens by dendritic cells and macrophages, inducing T lym-
phocytes to produce interferon-γ and other cytokines, which
subsequently signal, recruit, and activate effector cells [179,
180]. These complex activities are blocked by antirejection
therapies [181]. Transplant recipients are thus at increased
risk for extrapulmonary dissemination and mortality [158,
182]. There is one case report of a kidney transplant recipient
with severe coccidioidomycosis who did not achieve control
of his infection with antifungal agents (eg, AmB) alone, but
did improve clinically upon withdrawal of immunosuppression
[183]. Impaired lymphocyte responses were documented prior
to withdrawal of immunosuppression; complete withdrawal of
immunosuppression in conjunction with continued AmB re-
sulted in improved lymphocyte responses and an adequate clin-
ical response [183]. It is the uncontrolled observation of one
author that transplant recipients who have severe coccidioido-
mycosis and who are not responding to antifungal therapy
alone may benefit from reduction (without complete withdraw-
al) of immunosuppression to obtain a favorable outcome of the
infection [182].
In the allogeneic HSCT recipients, the goal of immunosup-
pression is the avoidance or treatment of graft-vs-host disease.
There is no information in the literature regarding the experi-
ence or efficacy of decreasing the dosage of immunosuppressive
agents in these patients when infected with coccidioidomycosis.
However, in the absence of such information, for an allogeneic
HSCT recipient whose coccidioidomycosis has not responded
to antifungal agents, the risks and potential benefits of a reduc-
tion in the immunosuppression should be considered.
XXII. In HSCT or Solid Organ Transplant Recipients With Active
Coccidioidomycosis, Should Antifungal Treatment Be Modified
Following Initial Treatment?
Recommendation
33. Following initial treatment of active coccidioidomycosis,
we recommend that suppressive oral azole treatment be con-
tinued to prevent relapsed infection (strong, very low).
Evidence Summary
Several authors have published case reports or small case series
of relapsed or reactivated coccidioidomycosis (often with ex-
trapulmonary dissemination) after the discontinuation of anti-
fungal treatment [159, 184–187]. Although the risk of relapse is
not known, in these reports, 2 of 9 [188],2 of 4 [27],1 of 4 [184],
and 4 of 4 [185] patients stopped antifungal agents after the res-
olution of their infection; 6 of the 9 who stopped their prophy-
laxis relapsed with coccidioidomycosis. Because of this apparent
risk of relapse, treatment should be continued indefinitely or
until withdrawal of all antirejection medications. Following
complete clinical, radiographic, and serological resolution of
uncomplicated pulmonary infection, some authors have contin-
ued the suppressive treatment with a lower azole dose [189] (eg,
fluconazole 200 mg daily), which has successfully prevented
such relapse in this limited group of patients [159, 182, 186,
188]. That said, some members of the guideline committee
were strongly opposed to a fluconazole dosage reduction
<400 mg daily under any circumstances. There are no data to
guide the choice of ongoing suppressive treatment, and medica-
tion efficacy, cost, and the patient’s tolerance of the medication
will need to be considered. For many patients requiring ongoing
suppressive treatment, fluconazole is acceptable.
Among allogeneic HSCT recipients, only 7 of 15 published
cases survived initial treatment of coccidioidomycosis [174].
One patient received a cumulative dose of 1 g AmB deoxycho-
late for pulmonary coccidioidomycosis, and survived. No fur-
ther suppressive treatment was provided, and no relapsed
coccidioidal illness was observed [190]. In contrast, 4 of 5 sur-
vivors in a series of 11 HSCT recipients received coccidioidomy-
cosis long-term suppressive antifungal treatment; none of the 5
had a relapse of coccidioidomycosis [174].
XXIII. For Recipients of Biological Response Modifiers With Active
Coccidioidomycosis, Which Treatment Is Preferred: Oral Azole or
Intravenous AmB?
Recommendation
34. We recommend oral azole therapy for these patients unless
their coccidioidomycosis is severe enough that intravenous
AmB would otherwise be recommended (refer to sections
on pneumonia, soft tissue dissemination, skeletal dissemina-
tion, and meningitis) (strong, low).
Evidence Summary
BRMs are agents derived from biologic production systems that
target and modify key components of the immune system.
These include TNF antagonists (infliximab, adalimumab),
anti–B-cell therapy (rituximab), interleukin (IL) 1 receptor an-
tagonists (anakinra) and antibodies (canakinumab), IL-6 anti-
body (tocilizumab), IL-12/IL-23 antibody (ustekinumab), and
soluble inhibitors of T-cell activation such as abatacept. Inflix-
imab and adalimumab have been shown not only to inhibit
TNF-α, but also to cause apoptosis and cell death of T cells
and monocytes [191]. Treatment with BRMs is beneficial in
rheumatologic and other autoimmune diseases but is associated
with an increased risk of infection including endemic fungal in-
fection. Three retrospective studies reviewed coccidioidomyco-
sis in patients with inflammatory arthritis [192, 193]. In the first
cohort, 11 of 985 (1%) patients developed symptomatic coccidi-
oidomycosis; the risk of symptomatic coccidioidomycosis in pa-
tients treated with infliximab was higher compared to those
without infliximab (relative risk, 5.23 [95% confidence interval,
1.54–17.71]; P < .01) [192]. In the second cohort, 16 of 854
(1.9%) patients developed symptomatic coccidioidomycosis; of
Coccidioidomycosis Treatment Guidelines • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • e137
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 121 patients treated with infliximab, the incidence of coccidioido-
mycosis was 2% and 12% at 1 year and 5 years, respectively [193].
A third cohort included 44 patients who developed coccidioi-
domycosis while taking disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs
(methotrexate, azathioprine, or leflunomide) and/or BRM (inflix-
imab, etanercept, adalimumab, or abatacept) for rheumatologic
disease. Twenty-nine patients had pulmonary coccidioidomyco-
sis, 9 had disseminated disease, and 6 had positive serologic tests
but no symptoms. Most patients had their immunosuppressive
medication discontinued at least temporarily, and almost all
were treated with antifungal therapy, most commonly flucona-
zole 400 mg daily, for a median of 12 months. After a median
of 30 months of follow-up, 33 (75%) patients had continued or
resumed their immunosuppressive therapy, and half of them
were no longer taking antifungal therapy. There were no cases
of subsequent dissemination or development of severe coccidioi-
domycosis [192]. Additional evidence is needed on the manage-
ment of coccidioidomycosis in this population, particularly
patients who are asymptomatic with positive serologies. For pa-
tients with severe disease who would be candidates for AmB ther-
apy, there is no evidence to suggest the management should be
different in this population than in other hosts.
XXIV. What Is the Preferred Method for Management of Pregnant
Women With Coccidioidomycosis and Their Neonates?
Recommendations During Pregnancy
35. The development of symptomatic coccidioidomycosis dur-
ing pregnancy should prompt consideration of starting ad-
ministration of antifungal therapy (strong, moderate). For
women who develop initial nonmeningeal coccidioidal infec-
tion during pregnancy, their management depends on fetal
maturity.
36. For women who develop initial nonmeningeal coccidioidal
infection during their first trimester of pregnancy, intrave-
nous AmB is recommended (strong, moderate). Other op-
tions include no therapy with close monitoring (weak,
low), or an azole antifungal after educating the mother re-
garding potential teratogenicity (weak, low). After the first
trimester of pregnancy, an azole antifungal, such fluconazole
or itraconazole, can be considered (strong, low). A final alter-
native would be to administer intravenous AmB throughout
pregnancy (weak, moderate).
37. For women who develop CM during the first trimester
of pregnancy, intrathecal AmB is recommended (strong,
moderate). After the first trimester and in cases where disease
is diagnosed after the first trimester, an azole antifungal,
such as fluconazole or itraconazole, can be prescribed
(strong, low).
38. Among women with a history of prior coccidioidomycosis
who are not currently on therapy, the risk of reactivation is
low and antifungal therapy is not recommended (strong,
moderate). For such women, close follow-up, including
obtaining coccidioidal serologic testing at the initial visit
and every 6–12 weeks throughout pregnancy, should be per-
formed (strong, moderate).
39. For women with nonmeningeal coccidioidomycosis on an-
tifungal therapy who become pregnant while infection is in
remission, azole antifungal therapy may be discontinued
with clinical and serological monitoring every 4–6 weeks
to assess for reactivation (weak, low). An alternative to this,
especially if the coccidioidal infection is not clearly in re-
mission, is to stop azole antifungal therapy and start intrave-
nous AmB during the first trimester, changing back to an
azole antifungal after the first trimester (strong, low).
40. For the pregnant woman with CM who is on azole anti-
fungal therapy at the time of pregnancy, azole therapy
should be stopped for the first trimester to avoid the risk
of teratogenicity (strong, moderate). During this period,
one approach is to initiate intrathecal AmB, especially if
meningeal signs and symptoms are present (strong, moder-
ate). Azole antifungal therapy may then be restarted during
the second trimester (weak, low) or intrathecal AmB con-
tinued throughout gestation (weak, low). An alternative ap-
proach is to continue azole antifungal therapy throughout,
provided that the mother agrees to this approach after being
educated regarding the risks and benefits of this strategy
(weak, low). A final alternative for the pregnant woman
with CM is to stop the azole antifungal, monitor the patient
closely during the first trimester, and restart azole antifun-
gal therapy during the second or third trimester (weak, very
low). Because of the risk of relapse with this approach, some
experts do not recommend it.
41. The development of a febrile pulmonary illness during
pregnancy in a woman residing in the coccidioidal endemic
region or with an appropriate travel history should be evalu-
ated for active coccidioidomycosis, including obtaining a
chest radiograph and coccidioidal serology and cultures
(strong, moderate).
Recommendations for Neonates
42. We recommend against coccidioidal serologic tests for in-
fants during the first 3 months of life. Positive tests should be
interpreted with caution during the first year of life (strong,
moderate).
43. Empiric therapy with fluconazole at 6–12 mg/kg daily is
recommended for infants suspected of coccidioidomycosis
and should be continued until the diagnosis has been ruled
out (strong, low).
44. Breastfeeding is not recommended for mothers on azole
antifungals other than fluconazole (strong, moderate).
Evidence Summary
The issues surrounding coccidioidomycosis during pregnancy
have recently been reviewed [19]. Pregnancy has been found
to be a major risk factor for the development of symptomatic
e138 • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • Galgiani et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 and severe coccidioidomycosis. The risk is highest later in preg-
nancy, particularly the third trimester and immediately
postpartum.
The treatment of coccidioidomycosis during pregnancy is
complicated by the observation that azole antifungal therapy
appears to have been teratogenic in a small number of cases.
At least 5 instances of congenital craniosynostosis and skeletal
abnormalities have been observed in infants born to mothers
receiving high-dose fluconazole early in pregnancy [194]. The
US Food and Drug Administration issued a warning in August
2011 that long-term, high doses (400–800 mg/day) of flucona-
zole could be associated with birth defects in infants whose
mothers were treated during the first trimester of pregnancy.
The warning does not mention concern for treatment beyond
the first trimester. Animal data indicate that these abnormalities
may occur with all azole antifungals, particularly voriconazole,
and appear during early gestation [195], so that azole antifungal
therapy after the first trimester is likely safe. AmB has been
shown to be safe and effective for coccidioidomycosis during
pregnancy [196], but its use is limited by its restriction to intra-
venous administration and significant toxicity.
Recent studies indicate that there is little or no risk for pre-
maturity or fetal wastage among pregnant mothers with coccid-
ioidomycosis [197]. There are numerous reports of placental
infiltration with coccidioidal spherules without subsequent neo-
natal infection, suggesting that transplacental infection is rare.
However, neonates have developed active pulmonary coccidioi-
domycosis soon after birth. Aspiration of infected amniotic
fluid or vaginal secretions is the presumed mechanism of trans-
mission. The development of severe unexplained lower respira-
tory tract disease or distress in an infant born to a mother who
has a diagnosis of active coccidioidomycosis could suggest coc-
cidioidomycosis in the newborn. Positive coccidioidal serology
in newborns occurs passively, may not indicate active infection,
and may persist up to the first year of life [198]. The American
Academy of Pediatrics has indicated that breastfeeding while re-
ceiving fluconazole, but not other currently approved azole an-
tifungals, is likely safe for the newborn [199].
XXV. What Is the Best Way to Manage Coccidioidomycosis in Patients
Infected With HIV Infection?
Recommendations
45. Antifungal prophylaxis is not recommended to prevent
coccidioidomycosis in patients infected with HIV living in
coccidioidal endemic regions (strong, moderate).
46. Antifungal therapy is recommended for all patients with
HIV infection with clinical evidence of coccidioidomycosis
and a peripheral blood CD4+ T-lymphocyte count <250
cells/µL (strong, moderate).
47. Antifungal therapy should be continued as long as the pe-
ripheral CD4+ T-lymphocyte count remains <250 cells/µL
(strong, low).
48. For patients with peripheral CD4+ T-lymphocyte counts
≥250 cells/µL, clinical management of coccidioidomycosis
should occur in the same manner as for patients without
HIV infection, including discontinuing antifungal therapy
in appropriate situations (strong, moderate).
49. Within coccidioidal-endemic regions, patients should re-
ceive yearly serologic screening and chest radiography for
coccidioidomycosis (strong, low).
50. Outside coccidioidal-endemic regions, serologic screening
is not recommended (strong, moderate).
51. Although data are lacking, pediatric patients with HIV in-
fection and coccidioidomycosis should be managed in a
manner similar to adult patients (strong, very low).
52. Initiation of potent ART should not be delayed because of
the concern about coccidioidal immune reconstitution in-
flammatory syndrome (IRIS) (strong, low).
All the above recommendations are based on the assumption
that the patient has been prescribed potent ART, which is
strongly encouraged.
Evidence Summary
Early in the HIV epidemic, coccidioidomycosis was found to be
a major opportunistic infection in the areas of coccidioidal en-
demicity [200].Since the advent of potent ART, the incidence of
clinically apparent coccidioidal infection and the severity of dis-
ease encountered decreased dramatically. This appears to be due
directly to immune reconstitution consequent to potent ART
[201]. Prevention of coccidioidomycosis in HIV-infected pa-
tients by prophylactic antifungal agents is of little benefit
[202]. A peripheral blood CD4+ T-lymphocyte count of <250
cells/µL is associated with a lack of coccidioidal cellular immune
response and has been associated with a worse outcome, as has
a lack of suppression of HIV infection [200, 203]. Use of potent
ART is a critical therapeutic element in the management of
HIV-infected patients with coccidioidomycosis. All the azole
antifungals have the potential for complex, and possibly bidirec-
tional, interactions with certain antiretroviral agents. Guidance
regarding these interactions is provided elsewhere [204].
Screening for active coccidioidomycosis among patients with
HIV infection living in the coccidioidal-endemic region is ap-
propriate on a yearly basis using serology and chest radiogra-
phy. A positive tube-precipitin or complement-fixation
serologic test suggests true infection. For those with a positive
serologic test, secondary prophylaxis with antifungal therapy
should be considered even in the absence of clinical illness if
the peripheral blood CD4+ T-lymphocyte count is <250 cells/
µL [205]. Because of the low incidence of coccidioidomycosis
outside the endemic region, such screening is not likely to be
fruitful.
There is no consensus regarding the management of HIV-in-
fected pediatric patients who live in the coccidioidal-endemic re-
gion. The recommended management is based on data derived
Coccidioidomycosis Treatment Guidelines • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • e139
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 from adults [206]. IRIS appears to be rare among HIV-
infected patients with coccidioidomycosis [207–209] and should
not change the approach to managing a patient with concurrent
HIV infection, including deferring the initiation of potent ART.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PREEMPTIVE
STRATEGIES FOR COCCIDIOIDOMYCOSIS IN
SPECIAL AT-RISK POPULATIONS
XXVI. For Organ Transplant Recipients Without Active
Coccidioidomycosis, Which Primary Prevention Strategy Is Preferred:
Observation or Oral Azole?
Recommendation
53. For all patients undergoing organ transplantation in the
endemic area without active coccidioidomycosis, we recom-
mend the use of an oral azole (such as fluconazole 200 mg)
for 6–12 months (strong, low).
Evidence Summary
It has been well established that a history of coccidioidomycosis
pretransplantation is associated with a risk of recrudescent dis-
ease following organ transplantation [185]. The risk of de novo
acquisition of coccidioidomycosis for previously uninfected
transplant recipients residing in the endemic area was initially
estimated to be low, with only 1 case identified in a series of 72
liver transplant recipients in the endemic area (1.4%) [210],and
6 cases among 205 kidney transplant recipients (3%) [161]. In a
more recent report from the same center, 12 of 391 (3%) liver
transplant recipients who were residents of the endemic area
(but had no history or serologic evidence of coccidioidomyco-
sis) developed disease after transplantation. In all these series,
seronegative patients with no history of coccidioidomycosis
did not receive any antifungal prophylaxis. Analysis of numer-
ous patient and transplant characteristics such as nature of im-
munosuppression, presence of rejection, comorbidities, and
other infections failed to identify risk factors for de novo acqui-
sition of coccidioidomycosis posttransplantation. The authors
thus concluded that in the absence of a good way to identify vul-
nerable patients, posttransplant prophylaxis with fluconazole
for programs within the endemic region was justified [211].
The dosage of oral fluconazole used for the current prophylaxis
of seronegative patients is 200 mg daily. This dose is in contrast
to the prophylaxis of seropositive (ie, infected) patients under-
going transplantation, where a 400-mg daily dosage is used. The
duration of 6–12 months posttransplant was recommended
based on the observation that 8 of the 12 cases occurred during
the first posttransplant year. No studies have yet reported on the
effectiveness of such a strategy.
At the conclusion of the 6- to 12-month posttransplantation
prophylaxis period, fluconazole can be stopped. However, be-
cause fluconazole administration increases serum levels of cal-
cineurin inhibitors [175], the levels of calcineurin inhibitors will
likely drop when fluconazole is discontinued. Therefore, we
recommend close monitoring of such levels and dosage adjust-
ment of antirejection medication following the discontinuation
of fluconazole.
XXVII. For Recipients of Biological Response Modifiers Without Active
Coccidioidomycosis, Which Primary Prevention Strategy Is Preferred:
Observation or Prophylactic Antifungal Therapy?
Recommendation
54. For patients in the endemic area, we recommend screening
with Coccidioides serology prior to initiation of biologic re-
sponse monitor therapy, as well as regular clinical follow-up
for new signs and symptoms (strong, very low). We do not rec-
ommend regular serologic screening or antifungal prophylaxis
in asymptomatic patients taking BRM (strong, very low).
Evidence Summary
BRMs such as inhibitors of TNF-α seem to increase the risk of
coccidioidomycosis and particularly of disseminated disease
[13, 185, 193]. However, no studies of primary prevention
using azoles or other antifungal therapy have been published.
Some rheumatologists in the endemic area obtain Coccidioides
serologies regularly on patients taking BRM, but the value of
this approach has not been formally evaluated. There is some
evidence that patients with asymptomatic positive serologies
do well, as discussed above [192].
MANAGEMENT OF LABORATORY EXPOSURES
Accidental laboratory exposures make Coccidioides the major
cause of clinical laboratory-acquired fungal infections [212].
These infections may occur in laboratories outside endemic
areas where the etiologic agent is unexpected in submitted spec-
imens. We emphasize here prevention and an approach to a lab-
oratory accident to minimize the risk of exposure to laboratory
staff and staff in adjacent areas.
Prevention
There are no randomized trials comparing different procedures
that could be undertaken after laboratory exposure. The recom-
mendations that follow are based on expert opinion and con-
sensus, as well as the available literature describing accidental
laboratory exposures and relevant animal experiments [20].
The most important step is preventing such exposures. The
primary principle is that no culture of an unknown mold should
be opened outside a biological safety cabinet appropriate for
containing spore-forming fungi. Coccidioides growth may be
visible in 48 hours as gray-white wisps on culture media and
later as white- to buff-colored colonies with aerial hyphae. For-
mation of alternating barrel-shaped arthroconidia can begin as
early as within 4 days of initial culture [213]. Healthcare provid-
ers who suspect a Coccidioides diagnosis should alert the labo-
ratory to increase the likelihood that proper containment
precautions are followed. This is especially important in non
e140 • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • Galgiani et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Coccidioides-endemic areas where laboratory staff may not sus-
pect the organism.
Risk Assessment
Exposures to Coccidioides range over a continuum of risk. For
example, lifting the lid momentarily of a Petri dish of a young
coccidioidal culture with a single colony of immature hyphae
represents a much smaller risk to exposed personnel than
breaking a vessel containing a confluent culture with mature ar-
throconidia. Risk from a specific exposure is on this spectrum,
and can be estimated by examination of the culture near the
time of the exposure. This examination may have already oc-
curred before the exposure, or may take place after the exposure
if the specimen is available and not obliterated with wet towel-
ing. The development of mature arthroconidia, which pose the
highest risk of disarticulation and aerosol formation, takes a few
days (dependent on the culture temperature and conditions) of
mycelial development. If few such structures are visible micro-
scopically on immature hyphae, the risk of the exposure leading
to clinically relevant disease is considerably lower. Large num-
bers of mature arthroconidia usually develop by 7–10 days of
culture. At this stage, the arthroconidia are readily dispersed
by air currents as gentle as those generated when removing
the lid of a Petri dish [6]. Thus, Coccidioides cultures that
have incubated for >7–10 days present the highest risk to labo-
ratory workers after exposure.
Initial Steps After an Exposure
If an exposure occurs, personnel should be evacuated immediate-
ly to avoid further exposure of additional laboratory personnel to
Coccidioides. The laboratory’s designated biosafety officer must
be notified, and that individual should notify the appropriate
public health and governmental officials. If the laboratory is lo-
cated within a healthcare facility, the infection preventionist for
the facility should be notified immediately as well. Doors to the
laboratory should be closed and the exposed room set at negative
pressure with respect to adjacent rooms or corridors, if that capa-
bility exists. If the air system for the laboratory room results in
positive pressure with respect to common hallways or other lab-
oratory areas, the system should be shut down immediately.
Any open windows should be closed. If there is a possibility
of an air leak from incompletely sealed windows, their margins
can be temporarily sealed with tape, preferably from the outside,
if possible. Similarly, if there is a possibility of an air leak sur-
rounding doors, their margins can be temporarily sealed with
tape from the outside.
If any fans in the room were on, they should be turned off. If
the exposure occurred as a result of a spill or breakage, any liq-
uids, broken glass, other solids, or open containers can be cov-
ered with towels and flooded with the laboratory’s approved
sporicidal detergent [214]. These measures are to allow suffi-
cient time for most airborne arthroconidia to settle; it is best
to be cautious and wait 1–2 hours before proceeding with
cleanup after the initial evacuation. Signs should be posted to
alert personnel that this is a contaminated area they should
not enter.
Epidemiological Investigation and Recommendations
The laboratory Biosafety Officer should work with the appro-
priate public health authorities (and the facility infection pre-
ventionist if the laboratory is located within a healthcare
facility) to create a line list of individuals exposed. This list
should include names, demographic information, contact infor-
mation, and the type and duration of exposure (according to the
information provided in the Risk Assessment section above) for
each person exposed [215, 216].
All exposed persons should undergo baseline testing for coc-
cidioidal antibodies and dermal hypersensitivity to coccidioidal
antigens (Spherusol, Nielsen Biosciences, San Diego, Califor-
nia) [217]. A positive result from either test will indicate prior
infection, therefore indicating there is very little or no risk of
illness from the current exposure.
Management of Exposed Personnel
We recommend that exposed persons have baseline sera ob-
tained promptly and stored for eventual testing for coccidioidal
antibody by an experienced laboratory. Currently available
commercial coccidioidal skin tests should also be applied
[81]. These results will identify persons with prior exposure
and these persons will have a lesser risk.
Some experts recommend that all nonpregnant persons
deemed to be exposed should be given a therapeutic dose of ei-
ther itraconazole or fluconazole (400 mg orally daily, for adults)
for 6 weeks, as prophylaxis [20]. This recommendation to give
prophylaxis in the setting of a laboratory exposure relates to the
risks of inhaling, at a short distance from a point source, a pos-
sibly artificially large inoculum. The benefits of such a prophy-
lactic approach have not been proven. The risks of a short
course of azoles are minimal and the expenses are not great.
An exposed pregnant female laboratory worker represents a
special case, in that azoles are teratogenic and pregnancy is a
high-risk situation for coccidioidomycosis. As always, azole
treatment needs to take into account potential drug interactions.
Follow-up of Exposed Persons
Individuals exposed to Coccidioides species in the laboratory
should be followed for a minimum of 6 weeks (which includes
the incubation period for coccidioidal infection; 1–4 weeks),
and consider extended follow-up for several months thereafter
depending on the circumstance (eg, immunosuppression or un-
derlying lung disease in the exposed person). Individuals who
develop symptoms consistent with coccidioidomycosis should
be evaluated by a clinician and the clinician should be made
aware of the possible coccidioidal exposure. This ensures coc-
cidioidomycosis is considered in the differential diagnosis and
appropriate diagnostic testing is performed.
Coccidioidomycosis Treatment Guidelines • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • e141
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 At the end of the 6-week period following exposure (or lon-
ger if deemed appropriate), if no illness suspicious for coccidi-
oidomycosis has developed and if baseline coccidioidal IgG and
IgM antibody tests and coccidioidal skin tests were negative,
these test should be repeated and compared with baseline test-
ing. If there is no evidence of serologic or skin test conversion,
prophylaxis can be discontinued with follow-up as appropriate.
Environmental Remediation
All surfaces in the room and the outside of objects that are need-
ed for continued use should be thoroughly cleaned with the
sporicidal detergent: bleach at a 1:10 dilution of the undiluted
commercial product in water, or hydrogen peroxide (≥6%)
[214]. As with all disinfectants, wetting the affected areas and
time of exposure are critical to achieve optimal killing; ≥20
minutes is recommended, though disinfecting can be extended
to sterilization and spore-killing if the time of exposure is
extended to 6–10 hours. The personnel performing envi-
ronmental remediation should wear N95 or other appropriate
respirators [218]. These personnel should also wear other ap-
propriate personal protective equipment per facility infection
control guidelines. Culture materials and other items present
in the laboratory at the time of the exposure should be wetted
with sporicide, bagged or placed in a covered bucket, auto-
claved, and discarded whenever possible. The same procedure
should be used for disposing of cleaning materials when possi-
ble. Objects (eg, laboratory materials, mop heads) that can be
autoclaved and reused should be bagged or placed in a covered
bucket, and autoclaved. If an accident occurred in (or near) a
biological safety cabinet, it should be set at negative pressure
to the room, and the interior decontaminated using paraformal-
dehyde fumes [219].
Extensive Exposures Potentially Involving the Entire Laboratory
Coccidioidal arthroconidia are quite hardy and can survive on
inanimate surfaces for a long time. If the exposure incident re-
sulted in a major release of arthroconidia into the laboratory
outside of a biological safety cabinet, full decontamination of
the (sealed) laboratory may be required using paraformalde-
hyde or hydrogen peroxide fumes. The primary advantage of
hydrogen peroxide is that the residual end product (water),
after the vapors dissipate, is nontoxic. Heating paraformalde-
hyde (optimally at 60%–80% humidity) results in gaseous
formaldehyde. With paraformaldehyde, 0.3 g per cubic foot
of room air is recommended. Chlorine dioxide gas is available
to some centers; it is sporicidal as is chlorine, but does not
form toxic chloramines. It is generated from a column, in
the room, but is light-sensitive. If formaldehyde or parafor-
maldehyde has been vaporized, the room should remain sealed
for at least 3 hours, and then ventilated for 24 hours before the
staff returns.
A review with occupational health, building maintenance
personnel, and the infection preventionist (if in a healthcare
facility) should be pursued to evaluate the likelihood of expo-
sure to persons not present in the room where the exposure oc-
curred. This evaluation should take into account airflow
patterns that may not exhaust directly to the exterior of the
building. After a coccidioidal exposure occurs, it is desirable
to perform a review of the events, and to review laboratory safe-
ty training to prevent future occurrences. A periodic drill to re-
view what each person is to do in case of an exposure is
important.
The Postexposure Period
During the 6 weeks (which includes the incubation period for
coccidioidal infection), and probably for some months thereaf-
ter, if the persons given prophylaxis develop fever or cough, they
should be evaluated by a clinician who is aware of the possible
coccidioidal exposure, so that coccidioidomycosis is considered
in the differential diagnosis and to ensure that appropriate di-
agnostic testing is performed.
At the end of the 6-week period after the exposure, if no ill-
nesses suspicious for coccidioidomycosis have developed, test-
ing for coccidioidal IgG and IgM antibody should again be
performed, concurrently with some of the baseline serum, for
comparative purposes. If there is no seroconversion, prophylax-
is can be stopped.
Notes
Acknowledgments.
The expert panel expresses its gratitude for thought-
ful reviews of an earlier version by Drs Joshua Fierer, Laura Proia, and
George Thompson. The panel thanks Vita Washington for her administra-
tive organization, guidance, and preparation of the manuscript.
Financial support.
Support for these guidelines was provided by the In-
fectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA).
Potential conflicts of interest.
The following list is a reflection of what
has been reported to the IDSA. To provide thorough transparency, the IDSA
requires full disclosure of all relationships, regardless of relevancy to the
guideline topic. Evaluation of such relationships as potential conflicts of in-
terest (COI) is determined by a review process which includes assessment by
the Standards and Practice Guidelines Committee (SPGC) Chair, the SPGC
liaison to the development panel and the Board of Directors’ liaison to the
SPGC, and if necessary, the COI Task Force of the Board. This assessment of
disclosed relationships for possible COI will be based on the relative weight
of the financial relationship (ie, monetary amount) and the relevance of the
relationship (ie, the degree to which an association might reasonably be in-
terpreted by an independent observer as related to the topic or recommen-
dation of consideration). The reader of these guidelines should be mindful of
this when the list of disclosures is reviewed. J. N. G. has received research
grants from Valley Fever Solutions, P. B. R. has received research grants
from BHR Pharmaceuticals LLC. All other authors report no potential con-
flicts. All authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Poten-
tial Conflicts of Interest. Conflicts that the editors consider relevant to the
content of the manuscript have been disclosed.
References
1. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, et al. Going from evidence to recommenda-
tions. BMJ 2008; 336:1049–51.
2. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, Vist GE, Falck-Ytter Y, Schunemann HJ. What
is “quality of evidence” and why is it important to clinicians? BMJ 2008;
336:995–8.
3. Jaeschke R, Guyatt GH, Dellinger P, et al. Use of GRADE grid to reach decisions
on clinical practice guidelines when consensus is elusive. BMJ 2008; 337:a744.
e142 • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • Galgiani et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 4. Guyatt GH; US GRADE Network. Approach and implications to rating the qual-
ity of evidence and strength of recommendations using the GRADE methodol-
ogy. Available at: http://www.gradeworkinggroup.org/. Accessed 15 July 2015.
5. Szeyko LA, Taljanovic MS, Dzioba RB, Rapiejko JL, Adam RD. Vertebral coccid-
ioidomycosis: presentation and multidisciplinary management. Am J Med 2012;
125:304–14.
6. Litvintseva AP, Marsden-Haug N, Hurst S, et al. Valley fever: finding new places
for an old disease: Coccidioides immitis found in Washington State soil associated
with recent human infection. Clin Infect Dis 2014; 60:e1–3.
7. Huang JY, Bristow B, Shafir S, Sorvillo F. Coccidioidomycosis-associated deaths,
United States, 1990–2008. Emerg Infect Dis 2012; 18:1723–8.
8. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Increase in reported coccidioidomy-
cosis—United States, 1998–2011. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2013;
62:217–21.
9. Tamerius JD, Comrie AC. Coccidioidomycosis incidence in Arizona predicted by
seasonal precipitation. PLoS One 2011; 6:e21009.
10. Tsang CA, Anderson SM, Imholte SB, et al. Enhanced surveillance of coccidioi-
domycosis, Arizona, USA, 2007–2008. Emerg Infect Dis 2010; 16:1738–44.
11. Cohen IM, Galgiani JN, Potter D, Ogden DA. Coccidioidomycosis in renal re-
placement therapy. Arch Intern Med 1982; 142:489–94.
12. Fish DG, Ampel NM, Galgiani JN, et al. Coccidioidomycosis during human im-
munodeficiency virus infection. A review of 77 patients. Medicine (Baltimore)
1990; 69:384–91.
13. Bergstrom L, Yocum DE, Ampel NM, et al. Increased risk of coccidioidomycosis
in patients treated with tumor necrosis factor alpha antagonists. Arthritis Rheum
2004; 50:1959–66.
14. Deresinski SC, Stevens DA. Coccidioidomycosis in compromised hosts. Experi-
ence at Stanford University Hospital. Medicine (Baltimore) 1974; 54:377–95.
15. Sampaio EP, Hsu AP, Pechacek J, et al. Signal transducer and activator of tran-
scription 1 (STAT1) gain-of-function mutations and disseminated coccidioido-
mycosis and histoplasmosis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013; 131:1624–34.
16. Vinh DC, Schwartz B, Hsu AP, et al. Interleukin-12 receptor beta1 deficiency pre-
disposing to disseminated coccidioidomycosis. Clin Infect Dis 2011; 52:e99–102.
17. Vinh DC, Masannat F, Dzioba RB, Galgiani JN, Holland SM. Refractory dissem-
inated coccidioidomycosis and mycobacteriosis in interferon-gamma receptor 1
deficiency. Clin Infect Dis 2009; 49:e62–e5.
18. Powers AE, Bender JM, Kumanovics A, et al. Coccidioides immitis meningitis
in a patient with hyperimmunoglobulin E syndrome due to a novel mutation
in signal transducer and activator of transcription. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2009;
28:664–6.
19. Bercovitch RS, Catanzaro A, Schwartz BS, Pappagianis D, Watts DH, Ampel NM.
Coccidioidomycosis during pregnancy: a review and recommendations for man-
agement. Clin Infect Dis 2011; 53:363–8.
20. Stevens DA, Clemons KV, Levine HB, et al. Expert opinion: what to do
when there is Coccidioides exposure in a laboratory. Clin Infect Dis 2009;
49:919–23.
21. Field MJ, Lohr KN; Institute of Medicine committee to advise the Public Health
Service on clinical practice guidelines (1990). Clinical practice guidelines: direc-
tions for a new program. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 1990:52–77.
22. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, et al. GRADE: an emerging consensus on rat-
ing quality of evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ 2008; 336:924–6.
23. Nguyen C, Barker BM, Hoover S, et al. Recent advances in our understanding of
the environmental, epidemiological, immunological, and clinical dimensions of
coccidioidomycosis. Clin Microbiol Rev 2013; 26:505–25.
24. Kim MM, Blair JE, Carey EJ, Wu Q, Smilack JD. Coccidioidal pneumonia, Phoe-
nix, Arizona, USA, 2000–2004. Emerg Infect Dis 2009; 15:397–401.
25. Valdivia L, Nix D, Wright M, et al. Coccidioidomycosis as a common cause of
community-acquired pneumonia. Emerg Infect Dis 2006; 12:958–62.
26. Catanzaro A, Cloud GA, Stevens DA, et al. Safety, tolerance, and efficacy of pos-
aconazole therapy in patients with nonmeningeal disseminated or chronic pul-
monary coccidioidomycosis. Clin Infect Dis 2007; 45:562–8.
27. Galgiani JN, Catanzaro A, Cloud GA, et al. Comparison of oral fluconazole and
itraconazole for progressive, nonmeningeal coccidioidomycosis. A randomized,
double-blind trial. Mycoses Study Group. Ann Intern Med 2000; 133:676–86.
28. Catanzaro A, Galgiani JN, Levine BE, et al. Fluconazole in the treatment of
chronic pulmonary and nonmeningeal disseminated coccidioidomycosis. Am J
Med 1995; 98:249–56.
29. Hostetler JS, Catanzaro A, Stevens DA, et al. Treatment of coccidioidomycosis
with SCH 39304. J Med Vet Mycol 1994; 32:105–14.
30. Denning DW, Lee JY, Hostetler JS, et al. NIAID Mycoses Study Group multicenter
trial of oral itraconazole therapy for invasive aspergillosis. Am J Med 1994; 97:135–44.
31. Galgiani JN, Catanzaro A, Cloud GA, et al. Fluconazole therapy for coccidioidal
meningitis. The NIAID-Mycoses Study Group. Ann Intern Med 1993;
119:28–35.
32. Graybill JR, Stevens DA, Galgiani JN, Dismukes WE, Cloud GA; NAIAD Myco-
ses Study Group. Itraconazole treatment of coccidioidomycosis. Am J Med 1990;
89:282–90.
33. Tucker RM, Denning DW, Arathoon EG, Rinaldi MG, Stevens DA. Itraconazole
therapy for nonmeningeal coccidioidomycosis: clinical and laboratory observa-
tions. J Am Acad Dermatol 1990; 23(suppl):593–601.
34. Tucker RM, Denning DW, Dupont B, Stevens DA. Itraconazole therapy for
chronic coccidioidal meningitis. Ann Intern Med 1990; 112:108–12.
35. Huntington R Jr. Diagnostic and biologic implications of the histopathology of
coccidioidomycosis. PHS Pub. No. 575. In: ProcSymposium on Coccidioidomy-
cosis, Phoenix, AZ, 1957:36–46.
36. Echols RM, Palmer DL, Long GW. Tissue eosinophilia in human coccidioidomy-
cosis. Rev Infect Dis 1982; 4:656–64.
37. Hernandez JL, Echevarria S, Garcia-Valtuille A, Mazorra F, Salesa R. Atypical
coccidioidomycosis in an AIDS patient successfully treated with fluconazole.
Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 1997; 16:592–4.
38. Ampel NM, Giblin A, Mourani JP, Galgiani JN. Factors and outcomes associated
with the decision to treat primary pulmonary coccidioidomycosis. Clin Infect Dis
2009; 48:172–8.
39. Crum NF, Lederman ER, Stafford CM, Parrish JS, Wallace MR. Coccidioidomy-
cosis: a descriptive survey of a reemerging disease. Clinical characteristics and
current controversies. Medicine (Baltimore) 2004; 83:149–75.
40. Wieden MA, Lundergan LL, Blum J, et al. Detection of coccidioidal antibodies by
33-kDa spherule antigen, Coccidioides EIA, and standard serologic tests in sera
from patients evaluated for coccidioidomycosis. J Infect Dis 1996; 173:1273–7.
41. Hector RF, Rutherford GW, Tsang CA, et al. Public health impact of coccidioi-
domycosis in California and Arizona. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2011;
8:1150–73.
42. Khan S, Sunenshine RH, Saubolle M. Multi-center laboratory investigation of
coccidioidomycosis EIA reproducibility in patients with confirmed disease and
controls [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 58th Annual Coccidioidomycosis
Study Group, Phoenix, AZ, 2014:44.
43. Blair JE, Currier JT. Significance of isolated positive IgM serologic results by en-
zyme immunoassay for coccidioidomycosis. Mycopathologia 2008; 166:77–82.
44. Kuberski T, Herrig J, Pappagianis D. False-positive IgM serology in coccidioido-
mycosis. J Clin Microbiol 2010; 48:2047–9.
45. Pappagianis D, Zimmer BL. Serology of coccidioidomycosis. Clin Microbiol Rev
1990; 3:247–68.
46. Saubolle MA, McKellar PP, Sussland D. Epidemiologic, clinical, and diagnostic
aspects of coccidioidomycosis. J Clin Microbiol 2007; 45:26–30.
47. Vucicevic D, Blair JE, Binnicker MJ, et al. The utility of Coccidioides polymerase
chain reaction testing in the clinical setting. Mycopathologia 2010; 170:345–51.
48. Durkin M, Estok L, Hospenthal D, et al. Detection of Coccidioides antigenemia
following dissociation of immune complexes. Clin Vaccine Immunol 2009;
16:1453–6.
49. Moran A, Pillay K, Becker DJ, Acerini CL. Management of cystic fibrosis-related
diabetes in children and adolescents. Pediatr Diabetes 2014; 15(suppl 20):65–76.
50. Kassis C, Zaidi S, Kuberski T, et al. Role of Coccidioides antigen testing in the
cerebrospinal fluid for the diagnosis of coccidioidal meningitis. Clin Infect Dis
2015; 61:1521–6.
51. Possession, use, and transfer of select agents and toxins; biennial review. Final
rule. Fed Regist 2012; 77:61083–15.
52. Thompson G III, Wang S, Bercovitch R, et al. Routine CSF analysis in coccidioi-
domycosis is not required. PLoS One 2013; 8:e64249.
53. Dickson EC, Gifford MA. Coccidioides infection (coccidioidomycosis). II. The
primary type of infection. Arch Intern Med 1938; 62:853–71.
54. Willett FM, Weiss A. Coccidioidomycosis in southern California; report of a new
endemic area with a review of 100 cases. Ann Intern Med 1945; 23:349–75.
55. Goldstein DM, McDonald JB. Primary pulmonary coccidioidomycosis; follow-
up of 75 cases, with 10 more cases from a new endemic area. JAMA 1944;
124:557–61.
56. Smith CE. Coccidioidomycosis. Med Clin North Am 1943; 27:790–807.
57. Drutz DJ, Catanzaro A. Coccidioidomycosis. Part II. Am Rev Respir Dis 1978;
117:727–71.
58. Einstein HE, Johnson RH. Coccidioidomycosis: new aspects of epidemiology and
therapy. Clin Infect Dis 1993; 16:349–56.
59. Stevens DA. Current concepts: coccidioidomycosis. N Engl J Med 1995;
332:1077–82.
60. Galgiani JN, Ampel NM, Blair JE, et al. Coccidioidomycosis. Clin Infect Dis
2005; 41:1217–23.
61. Kerrick SS, Lundergan LL, Galgiani JN. Coccidioidomycosis at a university health
service. Am Rev Respir Dis 1985; 131:100–2.
62. Galgiani JN. Coccidioidomycosis: changing perceptions and creating opportuni-
ties for its control. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2007; 1111:1–18.
Coccidioidomycosis Treatment Guidelines • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • e143
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 63. Blair JE, Chang YH, Cheng MR, et al. Characteristics of patients with mild to
moderate primary pulmonary coccidioidomycosis. Emerg Infect Dis 2014;
20:983–90.
64. Thompson GR III, Lunetta JM, Johnson SM, et al. Early treatment with flucon-
azole may abrogate the development of IgG antibodies in coccidioidomycosis.
Clin Infect Dis 2011; 53:e20–4.
65. Rosenstein NE, Emery KW, Werner SB, et al. Risk factors for severe pulmonary
and disseminated coccidioidomycosis: Kern County, California, 1995–1996. Clin
Infect Dis 2001; 32:708–15.
66. Flaherman VJ, Hector R, Rutherford GW. Estimating severe coccidioidomycosis
in California. Emerg Infect Dis 2007; 13:1087–90.
67. Santelli AC, Blair JE, Roust LR. Coccidioidomycosis in patients with diabetes
mellitus. Am J Med 2006; 119:964–9.
68. Gray GC, Fogle EF, Albright KL. Risk factors for primary pulmonary coccidioi-
domycosis hospitalizations among United States Navy and Marine Corps per-
sonnel, 1981–1994. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1998; 58:309–12.
69. Blair JE, Mayer AP, Currier J, Files JA, Wu Q. Coccidioidomycosis in elderly per-
sons. Clin Infect Dis 2008; 47:1513–8.
70. Ruddy BE, Mayer AP, Ko MG, et al. Coccidioidomycosis in African Americans.
Mayo Clin Proc 2011; 86:63–9.
71. Sakata KK, Grys TE, Chang YH, Vikram HR, Blair JE. Serum procalcitonin levels
in patients with primary pulmonary coccidioidomycosis. Ann Am Thorac Soc
2014; 11:1239–43.
72. Ost DE, Gould MK. Decision making in patients with pulmonary nodules. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 2012; 185:363–72.
73. Smith CE, Beard RR, Whiting EG, Rosenberger HG. Varieties of coccidioidal in-
fection in relation to the epidemiology and control of the disease. Am J Public
Health 1946; 36:1394–402.
74. Khan A. ACR appropriateness criteria on solitary pulmonary nodule. J Am Coll
Radiol 2007; 4:152–5.
75. Gould MK, Fletcher J, Iannettoni MD, et al. Evaluation of patients with pulmo-
nary nodules: when is it lung cancer? ACCP evidence-based clinical practice
guidelines (2nd edition). Chest 2007; 132(3 suppl): 108S–30S.
76. Libby DM, Henschke CI, Yankelevitz DF. The solitary pulmonary nodule: update
1995. Am J Med 1995; 99:491–6.
77. Vansteenkiste JF, Stroobants SS. PET scan in lung cancer: current recommenda-
tions and innovation. J Thorac Oncol 2006; 1:71–3.
78. Deppen S, Putnam JB Jr, Andrade G, et al. Accuracy of FDG-PET to diagnose
lung cancer in a region of endemic granulomatous disease. The Ann Thorac
Surg 2011; 92:428–32; discussion 33.
79. Sebro R, Aparici CM, Hernandez-Pampaloni M. FDG PET/CT evaluation of
pathologically proven pulmonary lesions in an area of high endemic granuloma-
tous disease. Ann Nucl Med 2013; 27:400–5.
80. Forseth J, Rohwedder JJ, Levine BE, Saubolle MA. Experience with needle biopsy
for coccidioidal lung nodules. Arch Intern Med 1986; 146:319–20.
81. Wack EE, Ampel NM, Sunenshine RH, Galgiani JN. The return of delayed-type
hypersensitivity skin testing for coccidioidomycosis. Clin Infect Dis 2015;
61:787–91.
82. Freedman SI, Ang EP, Haley RS. Identification of coccidioidomycosis of the lung
by fine needle aspiration biopsy. Acta Cytol 1986; 30:420–4.
83. Raab SS, Silverman JF, Zimmerman KG. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy of pulmo-
nary coccidioidomycosis. Am J Clin Pathol 1993; 99:582–7.
84. Smith CE, Beard RR, Saito MT. Pathogenesis of coccidioidomycosis with special
reference to pulmonary cavitation. Ann Intern Med 1948; 29:623–55.
85. Birsner JW. The roentgen aspects of five hundred cases of pulmonary coccidioi-
domycosis. Am J Roentgenol Rad Ther 1954; 72:556–73.
86. Winn RE, Johnson R, Galgiani JN, Butler C, Pluss J. Cavitary coccidioidomycosis
with fungus ball formation: diagnosis by fiberoptic bronchoscopy with coexis-
tence of hyphae and spherules. Chest 1994; 105:412–6.
87. Hwang HG, Lee HS, Choi JS, Seo KH, Kim YH, Na JO. Risk factors influencing
rebleeding after bronchial artery embolization on the management of hemoptysis
associated with pulmonary tuberculosis. Tuberc Respir Dis 2013; 74:111–9.
88. Ashfaq A, Vikram HR, Blair JE, Jaroszewski DE. Video-assisted thoracoscopic
surgery for patients with pulmonary coccidioidomycosis. J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg 2014; 148:1217–23.
89. Hyde L, Holman DC. Coccidioidal spontaneous pneumothorax. Ann Intern Med
1957; 47:1234–42.
90. Haber K, Freundlich IM. Spontaneous pneumothorax with unusual manifesta-
tions. Chest 1974; 65:675–6.
91. Bayer AS, Yoshikawa TT, Galpin JE, Guze LB. Unusual syndromes of coccidioi-
domycosis: diagnostic and therapeutic considerations. Medicine 1976;
55:131–52.
92. Cunningham RT, Einstein H. Coccidioidal pulmonary cavities with rupture. J
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1982; 84:172–7.
93. Dolan MJ, Lattuada CP, Melcher GP, et al. Coccidioides immitis presenting as a
mycelial pathogen with empyema and hydropneumothorax. J Med Vet Mycol
1992; 30:249–55.
94. Utley JR. Completion pneumonectomy and thoracoplasty for bronchopleural fis-
tula and fungal empyema. Ann Thorac Surg 1993; 55:672–6.
95. Takamura M, Stark P. Diagnostic case study: coccidioidomycosis: pleural in-
volvement. Semin Respir Infect 2001; 16:280–5.
96. Youssef SS, Ramu V, Sarubbi FA. Unusual case of pyopneumothorax in Tennes-
see. South Med J 2005; 98:1139–41.
97. Crum-Cianflone NF, Truett AA, Teneza-Mora N, et al. Unusual presentations of
coccidioidomycosis: a case series and review of the literature. Medicine (Balti-
more) 2006; 85:263–77.
98. Jaroszewski DE, Halabi WJ, Blair JE, et al. Surgery for pulmonary coccidioido-
mycosis: a 10-year experience. Ann Thorac Surg 2009; 88:1765–72.
99. Limper AH, Knox KS, Sarosi GA, et al. An official American Thoracic Society
statement: treatment of fungal infections in adult pulmonary and critical care pa-
tients. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2011; 183:96–128.
100. Blair JE. State-of-the-art treatment of coccidioidomycosis: skin and soft-tissue in-
fections. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2007; 1111:411–21.
101. Anstead GM, Corcoran G, Lewis J, Berg D, Graybill JR. Refractory coccidioido-
mycosis treated with posaconazole. Clin Infect Dis 2005; 40:1770–6.
102. Stevens DA, Rendon A, Gaona-Flores V, et al. Posaconazole therapy for chronic
refractory coccidioidomycosis. Chest 2007; 132:952–8.
103. Kim MM, Vikram HR, Kusne S, Seville MT, Blair JE. Treatment of refractory coc-
cidioidomycosis with voriconazole or posaconazole. Clin Infect Dis 2011;
53:1060–6.
104. Martirosyan NL, Skoch JM, Zaninovich O, Zoccali C, Galgiani JN, Baaj AA. A
paradigm for the evaluation and management of spinal coccidioidomycosis.
Surg Neurol Int 2015; 6:9.
105. Bried JM, Galgiani JN. Coccidioides immitis infections in bones and joints. Clin
Orthop Relat Res 1986; 211:235–43.
106. Kushwaha VP, Shaw BA, Gerardi JA, Oppenheim WL. Musculoskeletal coccidi-
oidomycosis: a review of 25 cases. Clin Orthop 1996; 332:190–9.
107. Herron LD, Kissel P, Smilovitz D. Treatment of coccidioidal spinal infection: ex-
perience in 16 cases. J Spinal Disord 1997; 10:215–22.
108. Wrobel CJ, Chappell ET, Taylor W. Clinical presentation, radiological findings,
and treatment results of coccidioidomycosis involving the spine: report on 23
cases. J Neurosurg 2001; 95(1 suppl): 33–9.
109. Blair JE. State-of-the-art treatment of coccidioidomycosis: skeletal infections.
Ann N Y Acad Sci 2007; 1111:422–33.
110. Eller JL, Siebert PE. Sclerotic vertebral bodies: an unusual manifestation of dis-
seminated coccidioidomycosis. Radiology 1969; 93:1099–100.
111. Dalinka MK, Dinnenberg S, Greendyk WH, Hopkins R. Roentgenographic fea-
tures of osseous coccidioidomycosis and differential diagnosis. J Bone Joint Surg
Am 1971; 53:1157–64.
112. Winter WG Jr, Larson RK, Zettas JP, Libke R. Coccidioidal spondylitis. J Bone
Joint Surg Am 1978; 60:240–4.
113. de Clercq LD, Chole RA. Retropharyngeal abscess in the adult. Otolaryngol Head
Neck Surg (1979) 1980; 88:684–9.
114. Jackson FE, Kent D, Clare F. Quadriplegia caused by involvement of cervical
spine with Coccidioides immitis. Symptomatic cure after operation and ampho-
tericin-B treatment. J Neurosurg 1964; 21:512–5.
115. Delaney P, Niemann B. Spinal cord compression by Coccidioides immitis abscess.
Arch Neurol 1982; 39:255–6.
116. Dalinka MK, Greendyke WH. The spinal manifestations of coccidioidomycosis. J
Can Assoc Radiol 1971; 22:93–9.
117. Zeppa MA, Laorr A, Greenspan A, McGahan JP, Steinbach LS. Skeletal coccid-
ioidomycosis: imaging findings in 19 patients. Skeletal Radiol 1996; 25:337–43.
118. Olson EM, Duberg AC, Herron LD, Kissel P, Smilovitz D. Coccidioidal spondy-
litis: MR findings in 15 patients. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1998; 171:785–9.
119. Wrobel CJ, Meyer S, Johnson RH, Hesselink JR. MR findings in acute and chron-
ic coccidioidomycosis meningitis. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 1992; 13:1241–5.
120. Vincent T, Galgiani JN, Huppert M, Salkin D. The natural history of coccidioidal
meningitis: VA–Armed Forces cooperative studies, 1955–1958. Clin Infect Dis
1993; 16:247–54.
121. Einstein HE, Holeman CW Jr, Sandidge LL, Holden DH. Coccidioidal meningi-
tis. The use of amphotericin B in treatment. Calif Med 1961; 94:339–43.
122. Winn WA. The treatment of coccidioidal meningitis. The use of amphotericin B
in a group of 25 patients. Calif Med 1964; 101:78–89.
123. Johnson RH, Brown JF Jr, Holeman CW, Helvie SJ, Einstein HE. Coccidioidal
meningitis: a 25-year experience with 194 patients. In: Einstein HE, Catanzaro
A, eds. In: Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Coccidioidomy-
cosis.
Washington
DC:
National
Foundation
for
Infectous
Diseases,
1985:411–21.
e144 • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • Galgiani et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 124. Drake KW, Adam RD. Coccidioidal meningitis and brain abscesses: analysis of 71
cases at a referral center. Neurology 2009; 73:1780–6.
125. Johnson RH, Einstein HE. Coccidioidal meningitis. Clin Infect Dis 2006;
42:103–7.
126. Ragland AS, Arsura EL, Ismail Y, Johnson R. Eosinophilic pleocytosis in cocci-
dioidal meningitis: frequency and significance. Am J Med 1993; 95:154–7.
127. Harrison HR, Galgiani JN, Reynolds AF Jr, Sprunger LW, Friedman AD. Am-
photericin B and imidazole therapy for coccidoidal meningitis in children. Pe-
diatr Infect Dis 1983; 2:216–21.
128. Arsura EL, Johnson R, Penrose J, et al. Neuroimaging as a guide to predict out-
comes for patients with coccidioidal meningitis. Clin Infect Dis 2005; 40:624–7.
129. Mathisen G, Shelub A, Truong J, Wigen C. Coccidioidal meningitis: clinical pre-
sentation and management in the fluconazole era. Medicine (Baltimore) 2010;
89:251–84.
130. Kamberi P, Sobel RA, Clemons KV, et al. Comparison of itraconazole and flucon-
azole treatments in a murine model of coccidioidal meningitis. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother 2007; 51:998–1003.
131. Allendoerfer R, Yates RR, Sun SH, Graybill JR. Comparison of amphotericin B
lipid complex with amphotericin B and SCH 39304 in the treatment of murine
coccidioidal meningitis. J Med Vet Mycol 1992; 30:377–84.
132. Clemons KV, Sobel RA, Williams PL, Pappagianis D, Stevens DA. Efficacy of in-
travenous liposomal amphotericin B (AmBisome) against coccidioidal meningi-
tis in rabbits. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2002; 46:2420–6.
133. Clemons KV, Capilla J, Sobel RA, Martinez M, Tong AJ, Stevens DA. Compar-
ative efficacies of lipid-complexed amphotericin B and liposomal amphotericin B
against coccidioidal meningitis in rabbits. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2009;
53:1858–62.
134. Berry CD, Stevens DA, Hassid EI, Pappagianis D, Happs EL, Sahrakar K. A new
method for the treatment of chronic fungal meningitis: continuous infusion into
the cerebrospinal fluid for coccidioidal meningitis. Am J Med Sci 2009; 338:79–82.
135. Stevens DA, Shatsky SA. Intrathecal amphotericin in the management of cocci-
dioidal meningitis. Semin Respir Infect 2001; 16:263–9.
136. Dewsnup DH, Galgiani JN, Graybill JR, et al. Is it ever safe to stop azole therapy
for Coccidioides immitis meningitis? Ann Intern Med 1996; 124:305–10.
137. Cortez KJ, Walsh TJ, Bennett JE. Successful treatment of coccidioidal meningitis
with voriconazole. Clin Infect Dis 2003; 36:1619–22.
138. Proia LA, Tenorio AR. Successful use of voriconazole for treatment of Cocci-
dioides meningitis. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2004; 48:2341.
139. Schein R, Homans J, Larsen RA, Neely M. Posaconazole for chronic refractory
coccidioidal meningitis. Clin Infect Dis 2011; 53:1252–4.
140. Kraft WK, Chang PS, van Iersel ML, Waskin H, Krishna G, Kersemaekers WM.
Posaconazole tablet pharmacokinetics: lack of effect of concomitant medications
altering gastric pH and gastric motility in healthy subjects. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 2014; 58:4020–5.
141. Krishna G, Ma L, Martinho M, O’Mara E. Single-dose phase I study to
evaluate the pharmacokinetics of posaconazole in new tablet and capsule formu-
lations relative to oral suspension. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2012;
56:4196–201.
142. Perfect JR, Dismukes WE, Dromer F, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the
management of cryptococcal disease: 2010 update by the Infectious Diseases So-
ciety of America. Clin Infect Dis 2010; 50:291–322.
143. Romeo JH, Rice LB, McQuarrie IG. Hydrocephalus in coccidioidal meningitis:
case report and review of the literature. Neurosurgery 2000; 47:773–7.
144. Dublin AB, Phillips HE. Computed tomography of disseminated cerebral coccid-
ioidomycosis. Radiology 1980; 135:361–8.
145. Mischel PS, Vinters HV. Coccidioidomycosis of the central nervous system: neu-
ropathological and vasculopathic manifestations and clinical correlates. Clin In-
fect Dis 1995; 20:400–5.
146. Bouza E, Dreyer JS, Hewitt WL, Meyer RD. Coccidioidal meningitis. An analysis
of thirty-one cases and review of the literature. Medicine 1981; 60:139–72.
147. James HE, Walsh JW, Wilson HD, Connor JD, Bean JR, Tibbs PA. Prospective
randomized study of therapy in cerebrospinal fluid shunt infection. Neurosurgery
1980; 7:459–63.
148. Hardesty DA, Ramey W, Afrasiabi M, et al. Patient outcomes and surgical com-
plications in coccidioidomycosis-related hydrocephalus: an institutional review. J
Neurosurg 2014; 121:1–5.
149. Little AS, Zabramski JM, Nakaji P. Simplified aqueductal stenting for isolated
fourth ventricle using a small-caliber flexible endoscope in a patient with neuro-
coccidiomycosis: technical case report. Neurosurgery 2010; 66(6 suppl opera-
tive): 373–4.
150. Goldstein E, Winship MJ, Pappagianis D. Ventricular fluid and the management
of coccidioidal meningitis. Ann Intern Med 1972; 77:243–6.
151. Williams PL. Vasculitic complications associated with coccidioidal meningitis.
Semin Respir Infect 2001; 16:270–9.
152. Williams PL, Johnson R, Pappagianis D, et al. Vasculitic and encephalitic com-
plications associated with Coccidioides immitis infection of the central nervous
system in humans: report of 10 cases and review. Clin Infect Dis 1992; 14:673–82.
153. Williams PL, Sobel RA, Sorensen KN, et al. A model of coccidioidal meningoen-
cephalitis and cerebrospinal vasculitis in the rabbit. J Infect Dis 1998;
178:1217–21.
154. Prasad K, Singh MB. Corticosteroids for managing tuberculous meningitis. Co-
chrane Database Syst Rev 2008; 1:CD002244.
155. Molavi A, LeFrock JL. Tuberculous meningitis. Med Clin North Am 1985;
69:315–31.
156. Thwaites GE, Nguyen DB, Nguyen HD, et al. Dexamethasone for the treatment
of tuberculous meningitis in adolescents and adults. N Engl J Med 2004;
351:1741–51.
157. Banuelos AF, Williams PL, Johnson RH, et al. Central nervous system abscesses
due to Coccidioides species. Clin Infect Dis 1996; 22:240–50.
158. Blair JE, Logan JL. Coccidioidomycosis in solid organ transplantation. Clin Infect
Dis 2001; 33:1536–44.
159. Blair JE. Coccidioidal pneumonia, arthritis, and soft-tissue infection after kidney
transplantation. Transpl Infect Dis 2004; 6:74–6.
160. Blair JE, Douglas DD. Coccidioidomycosis in liver transplant recipients relocat-
ing to an endemic area. Dig Dis Sci 2004; 49:1981–5.
161. Braddy CM, Heilman RL, Blair JE. Coccidioidomycosis after renal transplanta-
tion in an endemic area. Am J Transplant 2006; 6:340–5.
162. Antony S. Use of the echinocandins (caspofungin) in the treatment of dissemi-
nated coccidioidomycosis in a renal transplant recipient. Clin Infect Dis 2004;
39:879–80.
163. Assi MA, Binnicker MJ, Wengenack NL, Deziel PJ, Badley AD. Disseminated
coccidioidomycosis in a liver transplant recipient with negative serology: use of
polymerase chain reaction. Liver Transpl 2006; 12:1290–2.
164. Tripathy U, Yung GL, Kriett JM, Thistlethwaite PA, Kapelanski DP, Jamieson
SW. Donor transfer of pulmonary coccidioidomycosis in lung transplantation.
Ann Thorac Surg 2002; 73:306–8.
165. Kotton CN, Marconi VC, Fishman JA, Chung RT, Elias N, Hertl M. Coccidioidal
meningitis after liver transplantation in a nonendemic region: a case report.
Transplantation 2006; 81:132–4.
166. Carvalho C, Ferreira I, Gaiao S, et al. Cerebral coccidioidomycosis after renal
transplantation in a non-endemic area. Transpl Infect Dis 2010; 12:151–4.
167. Brugiere O, Forget E, Biondi G, et al. Coccidioidomycosis in a lung transplant
recipient acquired from the donor graft in France. Transplantation 2009;
88:1319–20.
168. Miller MB, Hendren R, Gilligan PH. Posttransplantation disseminated coccidioi-
domycosis acquired from donor lungs. J Clin Microbiol 2004; 42:2347–9.
169. Meyer RD, Hanberg F, Inman M, Johnson BL Jr. An orthotopic heart transplant
recipient with subacute meningitis. Rev Infect Dis 1991; 13:513–20.
170. Blodget E, Geiseler PJ, Larsen RA, Stapfer M, Qazi Y, Petrovic LM. Donor-de-
rived Coccidioides immitis fungemia in solid organ transplant recipients. Transpl
Infect Dis 2012; 14:305–10.
171. Dierberg KL, Marr KA, Subramanian A, et al. Donor-derived organ transplant
transmission of coccidioidomycosis. Transpl Infect Dis 2012; 14:300–4.
172. Riley DK, Pavia AT, Beatty PG, et al. The prophylactic use of low-dose ampho-
tericin B in bone marrow transplant patients. Am J Med 1994; 97:509–14.
173. Glenn TJ, Blair JE, Adams RH. Coccidioidomycosis in hematopoietic stem cell
transplant recipients. Med Mycol 2005; 43:705–10.
174. Mendoza N, Noel P, Blair JE. Diagnosis, treatment, and outcomes of coccidioi-
domycosis in allogeneic stem cell transplantation. Transpl Infect Dis 2015;
17:380–8.
175. Saad AH, DePestel DD, Carver PL. Factors influencing the magnitude and clin-
ical significance of drug interactions between azole antifungals and select immu-
nosuppressants. Pharmacotherapy 2006; 26:1730–44.
176. Canafax DM, Graves NM, Hilligoss DM, Carleton BC, Gardner MJ, Matas AJ.
Interaction between cyclosporine and fluconazole in renal allograft recipients.
Transplantation 1991; 51:1014–8.
177. Fishman JA, Rubin RH. Infection in organ-transplant recipients. N Engl J Med
1998; 338:1741–51.
178. Silveira FP, Husain S. Fungal infections in solid organ transplantation. Med
Mycol 2007; 45:305–20.
179. Cox RA, Magee DM. Coccidioidomycosis: host response and vaccine develop-
ment. Clin Microbiol Rev 2004; 17:804–39.
180. Ampel NM. The complex immunology of human coccidioidomycosis. Ann N Y
Acad Sci 2007; 1111:245–58.
181. Logan JL, Blair JE, Galgiani JN. Coccidioidomycosis complicating solid organ
transplantation. Semin Respir Infect 2001; 16:251–6.
182. Blair JE. Coccidioidomycosis in patients who have undergone transplantation.
Ann N Y Acad Sci 2007; 1111:365–76.
Coccidioidomycosis Treatment Guidelines • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • e145
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
 183. Kaplan JE, Zoschke D, Kisch AL. Withdrawal of immunosuppressive agents in
the treatment of disseminated coccidioidomycosis. Am J Med 1980; 68:624–8.
184. Holt CD, Winston DJ, Kubak B, et al. Coccidioidomycosis in liver transplant pa-
tients. Clin Infect Dis 1997; 24:216–21.
185. Blair JE, Kusne S, Carey EJ, Heilman RL. The prevention of recrudescent coccid-
ioidomycosis after solid organ transplantation. Transplantation 2007; 83:1182–7.
186. Serota AE, Einstein HE, Catanzaro A. The efficacy of fluconazole in the preven-
tions of coccidioidomycosis following renal transplantation. In: Catanzaro AE,
Einstein HE, eds. In: Coccidioidomycosis Proceedings of the Fifth International
Conference on Coccidioidomycosis, National Foundation for Infectious Diseases,
1996:248–54.
187. Winn BA, Ajello L. Coccidioidal meningitis: a follow-up report. In: Ajello L, ed.
Coccidioidomycosis Symposium on Coccidioidomycosis. Tucson: University of
Arizona Press, 1965.
188. Hall KA, Sethi GK, Rosado LJ, Martinez JD, Huston CL, Copeland JG. Coccid-
ioidomycosis and heart transplantation. J Heart Lung Transplant 1993; 12:525–6.
189. Blair JE. Coccidioidomycosis in liver transplantation. Liver Transpl 2006;
12:31–9.
190. Riley DK, Galgiani JN, O’Donnell MR, Ito JI, Beatty PG, Evans TG. Coccidioido-
mycosis in bone marrow transplant recipients. Transplantation 1993; 56:1531–3.
191. Lugering A, Lebiedz P, Koch S, Kucharzik T. Apoptosis as a therapeutic tool in
IBD? Ann N Y Acad Sci 2006; 1072:62–77.
192. Taroumian S, Knowles SL, Lisse JR, et al. Management of coccidioidomycosis in
patients receiving biologic response modifiers or disease-modifying antirheumat-
ic drugs. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) 2012; 64:1903–9.
193. Mertz LE, Blair JE. Coccidioidomycosis in rheumatology patients: incidence and
potential risk factors. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2007; 1111:343–57.
194. Lopez-Rangel E, Van Allen MI. Prenatal exposure to fluconazole: an identifiable
dysmorphic phenotype. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 2005; 73:919–23.
195. Tiboni GM, Giampietro F. Murine teratology of fluconazole: evaluation of devel-
opmental phase specificity and dose dependence. Pediatr Res 2005; 58:94–9.
196. Peterson CM, Schuppert K, Kelly PC, Pappagianis D. Coccidioidomycosis and
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Surv 1993; 48:149–56.
197. Wack EE, Ampel NM, Galgiani JN, Bronnimann DA. Coccidioidomycosis dur-
ing pregnancy. An analysis of ten cases among 47,120 pregnancies. Chest 1988;
94:376–9.
198. Katragkou A, Roilides E. Best practice in treating infants and children with prov-
en, probable or suspected invasive fungal infections. Curr Opin Infect Dis 2011;
24:225–9.
199. American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Drugs. Transfer of drugs and
other chemicals into human milk. Pediatrics 2001; 108:776–89.
200. Ampel NM, Dols CL, Galgiani JN. Coccidioidomycosis during human immuno-
deficiency virus infection. Results of a prospective study in a coccidioidal endem-
ic area. Am J Med 1993; 94:235–40.
201. Masannat FY, Ampel NM. Coccidioidomycosis in patients with HIV-1 infection
in the era of potent antiretroviral therapy. Clin Infect Dis 2010; 50:1–7.
202. Woods CW, McRill C, Plikaytis BD, et al. Coccidioidomycosis in human immu-
nodeficiency virus-infected persons in Arizona, 1994–1997: incidence, risk fac-
tors, and prevention. J Infect Dis 2000; 181:1428–34.
203. Ampel NM. Delayed-type hypersensitivity, in vitro T-cell responsiveness and risk
of active coccidioidomycosis among HIV-infected patients living in the cocci-
dioidal endemic area. Med Mycol 1999; 37:245–50.
204. Kaplan JE, Benson C, Holmes KK, et al. Guidelines for prevention and treatment
of opportunistic infections in HIV-infected adults and adolescents: recommen-
dations from CDC, the National Institutes of Health, and the HIV Medicine As-
sociation of the Infectious Diseases Society of America. MMWR Recomm Rep
2009; 58(RR-4):1–207; quiz CE1-4.
205. Arguinchona HL, Ampel NM, Dols CL, Galgiani JN, Mohler MJ, Fish DG. Per-
sistent coccidioidal seropositivity without clinical evidence of active coccidioido-
mycosis in patients infected with human immunodeficiency virus. Clin Infect Dis
1995; 20:1281–5.
206. Mofenson LM, Brady MT, Danner SP, et al. Guidelines for the prevention and
treatment of opportunistic infections among HIV-exposed and HIV-infected
children: recommendations from CDC, the National Institutes of Health, the
HIV Medicine Association of the Infectious Diseases Society of America, the Pe-
diatric Infectious Diseases Society, and the American Academy of Pediatrics.
MMWR Recomm Rep 2009; 58(RR-11):1–166.
207. D’Avino A, Di GS, Fabbiani M, Farina S. Coccidioidomycosis of cervical lymph
nodes in an HIV-infected patient with immunologic reconstitution on potent
HAART: a rare observation in a nonendemic area. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis
2012; 72:185–7.
208. Mortimer RB, Libke R, Eghbalieh B, Bilello JF. Immune reconstitution inflamma-
tory syndrome presenting as superior vena cava syndrome secondary to Cocci-
dioides lymphadenopathy in an HIV-infected patient. J Int Assoc Physicians
AIDS Care (Chic) 2008; 7:283–5.
209. Trible R, Edgerton N, Hayek S, Winkel D, Anderson AM. Antiretroviral
therapy-associated coccidioidal meningitis. Emerg Infect Dis 2013; 19:
163–5.
210. Blair JE, Balan V, Douglas DD, Hentz JG. Incidence and prevalence of coccidi-
oidomycosis in patients with end-stage liver disease. Liver Transpl 2003;
9:843–50.
211. Vucicevic D, Carey EJ, Blair JE. Coccidioidomycosis in liver transplant recipients
in an endemic area. Am J Transplant 2011; 11:111–9.
212. Baron EJ, Miller JM. Bacterial and fungal infections among diagnostic
laboratory workers: evaluating the risks. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 2008;
60:241–6.
213. Huppert M. Mycological diagnosis of coccidioidomycosis. New York: Plenum
Press, 1980.
214. Hall L, Otter JA, Chewins J, Wengenack NL. Deactivation of the dimorphic fungi
Histoplasma capsulatum, Blastomyces dermatitidis and Coccidioides immitis
using hydrogen peroxide vapor. Med Mycol 2008; 46:189–91.
215. Rhame F. The inanimate environment. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippencott-Raven,
1998.
216. Sehulster L, Chinn RY. Guidelines for environmental infection control in health-
care facilities. Recommendations of CDC and the Healthcare Infection Control
Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR Recomm Rep 2003; 52(RR-
10):1–42.
217. Pappagianis D, Johnson SM. Revision and return of a coccidioidal skin test re-
agent. Mycopathologia 2012; 174:351–2.
218. National Institutes of Health. Biosafety in Microbiological and biomedical labo-
ratories. 5th ed. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 2007.
219. Fink R, Liberman DF, Murphy K, Lupo D, Israeli E. Biological safety cabinets,
decontamination or sterilization with paraformaldehyde. Am Ind Hyg Assoc J
1988; 49:277–9.
e146 • CID 2016:63 (15 September) • Galgiani et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/6/e112/2389093 by guest on 03 June 2019
