 Guidelines for the Content of Statistical Analysis Plans
in Clinical Trials
Carrol Gamble, PhD; Ashma Krishan, BSc; Deborah Stocken, PhD; Steff Lewis, PhD; Edmund Juszczak, MSc;
Caroline Doré, BSc; Paula R. Williamson, PhD; Douglas G. Altman, DSc; Alan Montgomery, PhD; Pilar Lim, PhD;
Jesse Berlin, ScD; Stephen Senn, PhD; Simon Day, PhD; Yolanda Barbachano, PhD; Elizabeth Loder, MD, MPH
IMPORTANCE While guidance on statistical principles for clinical trials exists, there is
an absence of guidance covering the required content of statistical analysis plans (SAPs)
to support transparency and reproducibility.
OBJECTIVE To develop recommendations for a minimum set of items that should be
addressed in SAPs for clinical trials, developed with input from statisticians, previous
guideline authors, journal editors, regulators, and funders.
DESIGN Funders and regulators (n = 39) of randomized trials were contacted and the
literature was searched to identify existing guidance; a survey of current practice was
conducted across the network of UK Clinical Research Collaboration–registered trial units
(n = 46, 1 unit had 2 responders) and a Delphi survey (n = 73 invited participants) was
conducted to establish consensus on SAPs. The Delphi survey was sent to statisticians in trial
units who completed the survey of current practice (n = 46), CONSORT (Consolidated
Standards of Reporting Trials) and SPIRIT (Standard Protocol Items: Recommendations for
Interventional Trials) guideline authors (n = 16), pharmaceutical industry statisticians (n = 3),
journal editors (n = 9), and regulators (n = 2) (3 participants were included in 2 groups each),
culminating in a consensus meeting attended by experts (N = 12) with representatives from
each group. The guidance subsequently underwent critical review by statisticians from the
surveyed trial units and members of the expert panel of the consensus meeting (N = 51),
followed by piloting of the guidance document in the SAPs of 5 trials.
FINDINGS No existing guidance was identified. The registered trials unit survey
(46 responses) highlighted diversity in current practice and confirmed support for
developing guidance. The Delphi survey (54 of 73, 74% participants completing both
rounds) reached consensus on 42% (n = 46) of 110 items. The expert panel (N = 12) agreed
that 63 items should be included in the guidance, with an additional 17 items identified as
important but may be referenced elsewhere. Following critical review and piloting, some
overlapping items were combined, leaving 55 items.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE Recommendations are provided for a minimum set of items
that should be addressed and included in SAPs for clinical trials. Trial registration, protocols,
and statistical analysis plans are critically important in ensuring appropriate reporting
of clinical trials.
JAMA. 2017;318(23):2337-2343. doi:10.1001/jama.2017.18556
Editorial page 2301
Supplemental content
CME Quiz at
jamanetwork.com/learning
and CME Questions page
2348
Author Affiliations: Author
affiliations are listed at the end of this
article.
Corresponding Author: Carrol
Gamble, PhD, Biostatistics
Department, Block F Waterhouse
Building, 1-5 Brownlow St, University
of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 3GL,
England (c.gamble@liverpool.ac.uk).
Clinical Review & Education
JAMA | Special Communication
(Reprinted)
2337
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 T
ransparencyhasbeendescribedasafundamentalvalueof
society and initiatives to increase transparency in relation
to clinical trial data have been launched.1 Given the influ-
ence of statistical decisions on trial conclusions, well-documented
andtransparentstatisticalconductisessential.Thisisrelevantgiven
concerns regarding research reproducibility.2
The contribution of the statistician to the design and analysis
of clinical trials is acknowledged to be essential.3 Guidance on sta-
tistical principles for clinical trials (International Conference for Har-
monisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for
Human Use [ICH] E9)4 state that “the principal features of the
eventual statistical analysis of the data should be described in the
statistical section of the protocol.”However, ICH E94 and SPIRIT
(Standard Protocol Items: Recommendations for Interventional
Trials)5 guidelines refer to a separate statistical analysis plan (SAP).
The level of detail appropriate for a SAP exceeds that of a protocol.
According to ICH E9,4 a SAP “contains a more technical and
detailed elaboration of the principal features of the analysis
described in the protocol, and includes detailed procedures for
executing the statistical analysis of the primary and secondary vari-
ables and other data.”While guidance exists on the content of clini-
cal trial protocols5 and reporting standards for clinical trials,6 both
of which require a summary of the statistical analyses, there is no
guidance on SAP content. Consequently, there is marked variation
in practice.
This Special Communication provides recommendations for
a minimum set of items that should be addressed and describes
the methods used to develop this list. The recommendations are
intended to aid the drafting of SAPs for clinical trials and improve
their completeness.
Methods
The need to develop guidance on SAPs was raised during discus-
sion by statisticians attending a UK Clinical Research Collaboration
(UKCRC) Registered CTU (Clinical Trials Unit) Statisticians’Opera-
tional Group meeting in November 2012. This group included 46
senior statisticians, each representing their CTU within the net-
work. This wider group was engaged throughout the development
process as well as user-testing and piloting. The members of the
CTU network, based in the United Kingdom, conduct clinical trials
funded by governmental agencies, foundations, and pharmaceuti-
cal companies under the remit of the European Medicines Agency,
the UK Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(MHRA), and the US Food and Drug Administration. An application
for funding was developed and submitted to the Medical Research
Council Network of Hubs for Trials Methodology Research in
December 2013 and the project started in May 2014. The SAP guid-
ance document was developed with the primary intention of being
applicable to the final analyses of later-phase randomized clini-
cal trials addressing the minimum recommended content of a SAP
within the context of the following assumptions:
1. The SAP is not a standalone document and should be read in
conjunction with the clinical trial protocol;
2. The clinical trial protocol should be consistent with the prin-
ciples of the SPIRIT 2013 Statement5; and
3. TheSAPistobeappliedtoacleanorvalidateddatasetforanalysis.
This guidance document summarizes the findings of a compre-
hensive search to identify existing SAP guidance; a survey of cur-
rent practice of statisticians within UKCRC-registered CTUs; and a
Delphi survey to establish consensus. Consistent with advice
received from the Central Office of Research Ethics, the UK Health
Research Authority Decision Tool7 indicated ethical approval was
not required for the surveys and consent to take part was indicated
by survey participation.
Identification of Guidance
Major randomized clinical trial funding bodies and regulators were
identified from responses to a previous survey,8 which had gener-
ated a list of funders actively supporting clinical trials across at
least 2 CTUs within the last 5 years. The full list is contained in
eTable 1 in the Supplement and includes the European and Devel-
oping Countries Clinical Trials Partnership, FP7 Health Research,
Medical Council of Canada, National Cancer Institute of Canada
Clinical Trials Group, European Organisation for Research and Treat-
ment for Cancer, National Institutes of Health, and the National
Institute for Health Research. The list, which was reviewed by
the project team (May 2014), was extended to include regulators
(US Food and Drug Administration, European Medicines Agency,
and MHRA).
Allfundersandregulatorswerecontactedbyemail(June2014).
Ifaresponsewasnotreceived,upto2furtherreminderemailswere
sent. If no response was received, the organization was contacted
bytelephoneandthestudyteamdiscussedwhetheralternativecon-
tacts within the organization could be approached to participate.
Journals were contacted in parallel to funders and regulators,
and included JAMA, BMJ, the New England Journal of Medicine, and
the Lancet as the leading medical journals publishing clinical trials.
Journals identified via a PubMed search (June 2014) publishing
SAPs as standalone publications were also contacted (Trials, Critical
Care and Resuscitation, and International Journal of Stroke). The
goal was to identify whether the journals had any internal guidance
or recommendations on SAPs, if they followed any externally avail-
able guidance on SAPs, whether and how they used SAPs within
the peer-review process, and any policies on the publications of
SAPs. Each journal website was searched for information relating to
SAPs within their support for authors and reviewers prior to con-
tacting a journal editor.
Survey of Current Practice
The aim of the survey was to identify current practice and opin-
ions about SAPs. A list of the 45 registered CTUs was accessed
from the UKCRC website (June 2014). One CTU reported being
split across 2 sites, with each using separate standard operating
procedures, and requested that each site complete the survey
separately. The survey was developed by A.K., C.G., and D.S. and
adapted in response to comments from the project team. To
reduce the number of survey questions, copies of standard
operational procedures for SAPs and templates or examples of
SAPs were also requested. In addition, the survey was piloted
during July 2014 by statisticians from the CTUs of the study proj-
ect team prior to distribution.
A senior statistician at each CTU, identified as the network’
s
nominated statistics contact, was asked to complete the survey to
reflect practices and majority opinion within the statistician’
s CTU
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
Guidelines for the Content of Statistical Analysis Plans in Clinical Trials
2338
JAMA
December 19, 2017
Volume 318, Number 23
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 (August 2014). For networks in which there was no nominated
statistics contact, the survey was sent to the CTU director who was
asked to delegate completion on behalf of the unit. Two reminder
emails were sent to encourage responses. Survey completion was
highlighted at network events at which nonresponders were ap-
proached to discuss completion. A copy of the survey and the par-
ticipating CTUs is provided in eAppendix 1 in the Supplement.
The Delphi Survey
Participants
The aim of the Delphi survey was to establish consensus among a
broad range of stakeholders. The initial list of participants was sent
to the project team for review and amendment (January 2015). The
UKCRC-registered CTU participants were identified from the sur-
vey of current practice (n = 46). CONSORT and SPIRIT guideline
authors were identified from relevant publications and websites
(n = 16). Pharmaceutical industry contributors were selected from
recommendations from the project team and aimed to have both
industry and academic experience (n = 5). The journal editors con-
tacted to identify existing guidance were also contacted to partici-
pate in the Delphi survey (n = 7). Regulators from the European
Medicines Agency and the MHRA were included (n = 2). Contacts
with the US Food and Drug Administration were unsuccessful in
identifying a participant for the Delphi survey.
Delphi Contents
Acomprehensivelistofitemsthatshouldorcouldbeincludedwithin
a SAP was derived after reviewing suggested guidance identified
fromcontactingfundersandregulators,consideringtheresponses
to the survey of current practice, and reviewing copies of standard
operationalproceduresforSAPsandexamplesofSAPsprovidedwith
thesurveyresponsesoridentifiedintheliteraturesearch.Itemswere
listed individually but grouped under relevant domains.
The list was reviewed by the project team for completeness,
comprehension,andsuitabilityofthedomains(January2015).The
DelphisurveywascompletedduringFebruary2015,witheachround
lasting 2 weeks. During round 1, Delphi participants could suggest
additional items for inclusion in round 2. Round 2 included all items
from round 1 as well as the additional items suggested by partici-
pants.Suggestionswerereviewedbytheprojectteamandchecked
for duplication prior to inclusion in round 2.
Scoring Process
Participants were asked to score the importance of each item when
writing, following, or reviewing a SAP. The scale was presented with
1 to 3 labeled “not important,”4 to 6 labeled “important but not
critical,”and 7 to 9 labeled “
critical.”
9
Allindividualparticipantswhocompletedround1wereemailed
and asked to complete round 2. In round 2, for each item, partici-
pants were presented with the number and percentage of partici-
pants who chose each score. Participants were shown their score
from round 1 and provided with an option to revise their score for
each of the items or keep it the same as their score in round 1.
Consensus Meeting
The definition of consensus was predefined and is presented
in eTable 2 in the Supplement. Items were determined to be in
(consensus-in)if70%ormoreofparticipantsscoredtheitemascriti-
cal and less than 15% of participants scored the item as not impor-
tant.Itemsweredeleted(consensus-out)if70%ormoreofpartici-
pants scored it as not important and less than 15% of participants
scored it as critical.
Following round 2 of the Delphi process, a consensus meeting
washeld(March2015)withexpertrepresentationfromeachgroup:
CTUseniorstatisticians,regulators(MHRA),statisticiansinthephar-
maceutical industry, and journal editors. The 12 expert panel mem-
bers are listed in eTable 3 in the Supplement.
AllitemsincludedintheDelphisurveywerereviewedatthecon-
sensusmeeting.Itemsonwhichconsensushadbeenreachedwere
highlighted but not discussed further. The expert panel members
were asked to discuss each item for which consensus had not been
reached and, following discussion, to make a recommendation re-
garding its inclusion with consensus-in items within the minimum
setofitemsthatshouldbeaddressedandincludedinSAPsforclini-
cal trials.
Critical Review and Piloting
The aim of the critical review and piloting was to ensure the guid-
anceproducedwasfitforpurpose,appropriatetotheneedsofstat-
isticiansauthoringandimplementingSAPs,andtoidentifyanyitems
requiringclarification.Thefirstdraftoftheguidanceunderwentcriti-
cal review by attendees at the UKCRC Registered CTU Statisticians’
Operational Group meeting in April 2015. Meeting attendees were
able to provide additional comments based on further discussions
withthestatisticsteamwithintheirCTUuntilSeptember2015.Fol-
lowingincorporationofcomments,theguidancewassenttotheex-
pert panel involved in the Delphi consensus meeting prior to being
piloted by senior statisticians across 5 trials in January 2016.
Results
Of the 39 funding bodies or regulators that were contacted and
asked about their requirements or guidance for SAPs, 28
responded (72%). Four responders referred to ICH E9,4 3 to the UK
Medical Research Council website or ICH Good Clinical Practice
guidance,3 and 21 indicated an absence of guidance or recommen-
dations relevant to SAPs. A comprehensive search of the literature
and references of published SAPs did not identify any publications
relevant to the content of SAPs.
Thesurveytoestablishcurrentpracticewasdistributedbyemail
to each of the 45 UKCRC-registered CTUs (46 respondents), with a
100% response rate. Responses demonstrated variability in cur-
rentpracticearoundtheprocessesofproducingSAPsandtheircon-
tent.TheproductionofguidanceonSAPcontentwassupportedby
85% (n = 39) of responders.
Of the 73 invited participants in the Delphi process, 56 (77%)
completed round 1 and 54 (73%), round 2. Those completing round
2 included CTU statisticians (40/46; 87%), editors (3/7; 43%),
guideline authors (8/16; 50%), industry (5/5; 100%), and a regula-
tor (1/2; 50%) (3 responders contributed to 2 groups each). Thirty
percent of the responders were from outside the United Kingdom
and included Canada, Germany, Ireland, Denmark, Australia, and
the United States.
Round 1 contained 89 items, consensus for items to remain
in was reached on 28 items, and an additional 21 items were
Guidelines for the Content of Statistical Analysis Plans in Clinical Trials
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
December 19, 2017
Volume 318, Number 23
2339
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Table. SAP Guidance Document: Recommended Items to Address in a Clinical Trial SAPa
Section/Item
Index
Description
Section 1: Administrative Information
Title and trial registration
1a
Descriptive title that matches the protocol, with SAP either as a forerunner or subtitle,
and trial acronym (if applicable)
1b
Trial registration number
SAP version
2
SAP version number with dates
Protocol version
3
Reference to version of protocol being used
SAP revisions
4a
SAP revision history
4b
Justification for each SAP revision
4c
Timing of SAP revisions in relation to interim analyses, etc
Roles and responsibility
5
Names, affiliations, and roles of SAP contributors
Signatures of:
6a
Person writing the SAP
6b
Senior statistician responsible
6c
Chief investigator/clinical lead
Section 2: Introduction
Background and rationale
7
Synopsis of trial background and rationale including a brief description of research question
and brief justification for undertaking the trial
Objectives
8
Description of specific objectives or hypotheses
Section 3: Study Methods
Trial design
9
Brief description of trial design including type of trial (eg, parallel group, multiarm, crossover, factorial)
and allocation ratio and may include brief description of interventions
Randomization
10
Randomization details, eg, whether any minimization or stratification occurred (including stratifying
factors used or the location of that information if it is not held within the SAP)
Sample size
11
Full sample size calculation or reference to sample size calculation in protocol
(instead of replication in SAP)
Framework
12
Superiority, equivalence, or noninferiority hypothesis testing framework, including which comparisons
will be presented on this basis
Statistical interim analyses
and stopping guidance
13a
Information on interim analyses specifying what interim analyses will be carried out
and listing of time points
13b
Any planned adjustment of the significance level due to interim analysis
13c
Details of guidelines for stopping the trial early
Timing of final analysis
14
Timing of final analysis, eg, all outcomes analyzed collectively or timing stratified
by planned length of follow-up
Timing of outcome assessments
15
Time points at which the outcomes are measured including visit “windows”
Section 4: Statistical Principles
Confidence intervals and P values
16
Level of statistical significance
17
Description and rationale for any adjustment for multiplicity and, if so, detailing how the type 1 error
is to be controlled
18
Confidence intervals to be reported
Adherence and protocol deviations
19a
Definition of adherence to the intervention and how this is assessed including extent
of exposure
19b
Description of how adherence to the intervention will be presented
19c
Definition of protocol deviations for the trial
19d
Description of which protocol deviations will be summarized
Analysis populations
20
Definition of analysis populations, eg, intention to treat, per protocol,
complete case, safety
Section 5: Trial Population
Screening data
21
Reporting of screening data (if collected) to describe representativeness
of trial sample
Eligibility
22
Summary of eligibility criteria
Recruitment
23
Information to be included in the CONSORT flow diagram
Withdrawal/follow-up
24a
Level of withdrawal, eg, from intervention and/or from follow-up
24b
Timing of withdrawal/lost to follow-up data
24c
Reasons and details of how withdrawal/lost to follow-up data will be presented
Baseline patient characteristics
25a
List of baseline characteristics to be summarized
25b
Details of how baseline characteristics will be descriptively summarized
(continued)
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
Guidelines for the Content of Statistical Analysis Plans in Clinical Trials
2340
JAMA
December 19, 2017
Volume 318, Number 23
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 suggested by responders. Round 2 contained 110 items (89 pre-
populated items from round 1 and the 21 suggested items) and at
theendofround2,consensuswasreachedthat46itemsshouldre-
main in with 1 item deleted (consensus-out).
At the end of the consensus meeting, there were 63 items in
(consensus-in),30itemsdeleted(consensus-out),and17itemsthat
the expert panel felt are important but do not necessarily need to
be included (eTable 4 in the Supplement). These 17 items may be
found in other trial documents but the SAP should incorporate ref-
erences to where details of these items can be found.
The critical review meeting, held in London, was attended by
51 statisticians from 37 CTUs (April 2015). Participants were asked
to consider the ordering and clarity of the descriptions of each of
the 63 items and to highlight any concerns. To ensure discussion
and complete coverage of the items within the meeting, attend-
ees were split into groups, with each group allocated 1 of the 6
sections to review and provide feedback on as a priority. Meeting
attendees were also encouraged to discuss the draft guidance
with other statisticians within their CTUs and return any addi-
tional collective responses. Additional responses were received
from 8 CTUs.
Two issues were raised: the first was whether the sample size
calculation should be replicated from the protocol in full or refer-
enced and the second was concerning the use of a 2-stage analysis
in which the assumptions of the analysis approach are tested and
then the analysis determined by whether the assumptions are met
or not. The sample size statement was amended to support an indi-
vidual statistician’
s preference to replicate or reference the proto-
col. The issue surrounding the 2-stage analysis was more contro-
versial and in response to discussions, the guidance was amended
to ensure that this was highlighted in the discussion of that item.
During critical review of the 63 items, some items were found to
overlap and were combined, leaving 55. The Table displays the
essential items and their subitems. There are 6 sections: Title and
Trial Registration (11 items/subitems); Introduction (2 items); Study
Methods (9 items/subitems); Statistical Principles (8 items/
subitems); Trial Population (8 items/subitems); and Analysis
(17 items/subitems).
An open request for 5 volunteers to undertake piloting of the
recommendationsintheguidancedocumentwasmadeatthecriti-
cal review meeting. Twelve statisticians expressed an interest and
wereinvitedtoparticipate;5wereselectedtocoverCTUswithvary-
ing experience in Wales, England, and Scotland, each of whom ap-
pliedtheguidancedocumenttotrialsinadultsandchildren,andin-
cluded pharmaceutical and nonpharmaceutical interventions
including devices and physiotherapy. The piloting feedback did not
requireanychangestotheguidanceandthecommentsreceivedsup-
ported its content and usability.
An elaboration and explanation of each item is included within
eAppendix 2 in the Supplement. Examples are provided to illus-
trate each item, along with an explanation of the rationale and
detailed description of the issues to be addressed. Examples
for each item are based on real SAPs either published in journals,
provided by responders to the CTU survey, or contained within
National Institute for Health Research’
s Health Technology Assess-
ment monographs.
Table. SAP Guidance Document: Recommended Items to Address in a Clinical Trial SAPa (continued)
Section/Item
Index
Description
Section 6: Analysis
Outcome definitions
List and describe each primary and secondary outcome including details of:
26a
specification of outcomes and timings. If applicable include the order of importance of primary
or key secondary end points (eg, order in which they will be tested)
26b
specific measurement and units (eg, glucose control, hbA1c [mmol/mol or %])
26c
any calculation or transformation used to derive the outcome (eg, change from baseline, QoL score,
time to event, logarithm, etc)
Analysis methods
27a
what analysis method will be used and how the treatment effects will be presented
27b
any adjustment for covariates
27c
methods used for assumptions to be checked for statistical methods
27d
details of alternative methods to be used if distributional assumptions do not hold, eg, normality,
proportional hazards, etc
27e
any planned sensitivity analyses for each outcome where applicable
27f
any planned subgroup analyses for each outcome including how subgroups are defined
Missing data
28
Reporting and assumptions/statistical methods to handle missing data (eg, multiple imputation)
Additional analyses
29
Details of any additional statistical analyses required, eg, complier-average causal effect10 analysis
Harms
30
Sufficient detail on summarizing safety data, eg, information on severity, expectedness, and causality;
details of how adverse events are coded or categorized; how adverse event data will be analyzed,
ie, grade 3/4 only, incidence case analysis, intervention emergent analysis
Statistical software
31
Details of statistical packages to be used to carry out analyses
References
32a
References to be provided for nonstandard statistical methods
32b
Reference to Data Management Plan
32c
Reference to the Trial Master File and Statistical Master File
32d
Reference to other standard operating procedures or documents to be adhered to
Abbreviations: CONSORT, Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials; hbA1c, hemoglobin A1c; QoL, quality of life; SAP, statistical analysis plan.
a Reproduced with permission from the authors.
Guidelines for the Content of Statistical Analysis Plans in Clinical Trials
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
December 19, 2017
Volume 318, Number 23
2341
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Discussion
It is important that every clinical trial has a clear and comprehen-
sive SAP to support reproducibility. Leading organizations and
funding bodies openly support data sharing as best practice
forclinicaltrials.11Suchsupportwillundoubtedlyincreasetheavail-
ability of data from original research, resulting in an increase
of attempts to replicate results. To support the reproducibility
of research and allay concerns of misconduct and fraud in clinical
research, a clear comprehensive and transparent account of pre-
plannedstatisticalanalysesmustbeavailable.12Theaimofthisguid-
ance is to establish the minimum set of essential items required
for a SAP for a clinical trial. It is intended to lead to improvements in
theintegrityoftrialconductandreportingbyfacilitatingcriticalap-
praisal, execution, replication, and identification of any deviations
from the prespecified methods.
This SAP guidance was developed following established trans-
parent methods and involving a diverse range of stakeholders in-
volved in the design, funding, conduct, review, and publication of
clinicaltrials.Althoughtheguidancewasdevelopedwithafocuson
the regulatory requirements of trials of medicinal products, and in
particular later-phase trials, many aspects are transferable to stud-
ies of other types of interventions, phases, and designs.
This guidance document does not cover when a SAP should be
written,butearlyauthoringofSAPs—beforeanydatahavebeencol-
lected or analyzed—is the best approach. The final opportunity to
amendtheSAPshouldbeinresponsetoblindreview,definedasthe
checking and assessment of data during the period between trial
completion and the breaking of the blind, the act of unveiling each
participant’
s random allocation.4 Following this point, deviations
from the SAP and additional analyses should be clearly indicated as
suchwithinallreportsandpublications.4IntheUnitedKingdom,the
Health Research Authority has developed a protocol template13 to
improveconsistencyinthewaythattheitemscoveredbySPIRITare
included within a protocol and a similar template may be beneficial
for SAPs.
This guidance assumes that the SAP is not a standalone docu-
ment, and therefore, it is not necessary to replicate large portions
of the protocol, which should instead be clearly referenced. The
SAP should contain a statement that it is consistent with the princi-
pal features of the statistical methods described in the protocol or a
section detailing which analyses are different to those planned in
the protocol and why. Any abbreviations used should be spelled
out in full.
SAPs should be made publicly available.14 A major step toward
public availability of SAPs is the requirements of the US National
Institutes of Health Final Rule for Clinical Trials Registration and
Results Information Submission,15 which in addition to posting of
results within ClinicalTrials.gov also requires posting of the SAP if
not contained within the protocol. In the discussion of public com-
ments relating to the Final Rule,15 it was noted that many of the
benefits of the protocol that were cited by commenters were
derived from the information regarding the statistical analyses. This
represents acknowledgment that SAPs have an important role in
reducing the occurrence of, and facilitating the detection of, bias
particularly in relation to selective analysis and reporting.16,17 Some
journals, including JAMA, require the SAP to be submitted along-
side the report of a clinical trial for use within the peer-review pro-
cess. The SAP may be made available as supplementary material or
published as a standalone article. While this is encouraging, and
increases public availability of SAPs, there is no guidance on how
the SAP should be used or evaluated. Similar to protocols, the abil-
ity of a SAP to provide transparency is dependent on its content.
Anyguidanceneedstoberesponsivetorelevantinformationfrom
future projects and initiatives, as well as changes in legislation. Key
initiatives that may influence SAP content include the addendum to
ICH E9 on estimands and sensitivity analyses,18 data-sharing
initiatives,19andmandatoryrequirementstopostclinicaltrialresults
in the European Clinical Trials Database and ClinicalTrials.gov.15,20,21
Futurerevisionsofthisdocumentwillbemadeavailableperiodically
and extensions to other study designs, including observational
studies22 and studies with adaptive designs and Bayesian analyses,
should be considered.
Conclusions
Recommendations are provided for a minimum set of items that
shouldbeaddressedandincludedinSAPsforclinicaltrials.Trialreg-
istration, protocols, and statistical analysis plans are critically im-
portant in ensuring appropriate reporting of clinical trials.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: November 7, 2017.
Author Affiliations: Biostatistics Department,
University of Liverpool, Liverpool, England
(Gamble, Williamson); Clinical Trials Research
Centre, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, England
(Krishan); Newcastle University, Newcastle,
England (Stocken); Currently with Leeds Institute of
Clinical Trials Research, University of Leeds, Leeds,
England (Stocken); Edinburgh University,
Edinburgh, Scotland (Lewis); University of Oxford,
Oxford, England (Juszczak); UCL Comprehensive
Clinical Trials Unit, London, England (Doré); Centre
for Statistics in Medicine, University of Oxford,
Oxford, England (Altman); University of
Nottingham, Nottingham, England (Montgomery);
Janssen Research & Development LLC, Raritan,
New Jersey (Lim); Johnson & Johnson, Titusville,
New Jersey (Berlin); Luxembourg Institute of
Health, Strassen, Luxembourg (Senn); Clinical Trials
Consulting & Training Limited, Buckingham,
England (Day); Medicines and Healthcare Products
Regulatory Agency, London, England (Barbachano);
BMJ, London, England (Loder).
Author Contributions: Dr Gamble and Ms Krishan
had full access to all of the data in the study and
take responsibility for the integrity of the data and
the accuracy of the data analysis.
Concept and design: Gamble, Stocken, Lewis, Dore,
Williamson, Montgomery, Lim, Berlin, Senn.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data:
Gamble, Krishan, Stocken, Juszczak, Dore,
Williamson, Altman, Montgomery, Lim, Day,
Barbachano, Loder.
Drafting of the manuscript: Gamble, Krishan,
Stocken, Dore, Altman, Lim.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: Gamble, Stocken, Lewis,
Juszczak, Dore, Williamson, Montgomery, Lim,
Berlin, Senn, Day, Barbachano, Loder.
Statistical analysis: Gamble, Krishan, Stocken,
Williamson, Senn.
Obtained funding: Gamble, Stocken, Lewis,
Juszczak, Dore, Williamson, Montgomery.
Administrative, technical, or material support:
Williamson, Lim.
Supervision: Gamble, Stocken.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors have
completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest.
Dr Berlin is a full-time employee of Johnson &
Johnson. Dr Loder is head of research for BMJ.
No other disclosures were reported.
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
Guidelines for the Content of Statistical Analysis Plans in Clinical Trials
2342
JAMA
December 19, 2017
Volume 318, Number 23
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Funding/Support: This work was funded by grant
MR/L004933/1-R44 from the UK Medical Research
Council Network of Hubs for Trials Methodology
Research and supported and endorsed by the UK
Clinical Research Collaboration Registered Clinical
Trials Unit Network.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The funders/
sponsors had no role in the design and conduct of
the study; collection, management, analysis and
interpretation of the data; preparation review, or
approval of the manuscript; and decision to submit
the manuscript for publication.
REFERENCES
1. Bonini S, Eichler HG, Wathion N, Rasi G.
Transparency and the European Medicines Agency:
sharing of clinical trial data. N Engl J Med. 2014;371
(26):2452-2455.
2. Baker M. Is there a reproducibility crisis?
a Nature survey lifts the lid on how researchers
view the crisis rocking science and what they think
will help. Nature. 2016;533(7604):452-455.
3. International Council for Harmonisation
of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for
Human Use. ICH Harmonised Guideline: Integrated
addendum to ICH E6(R1): Guideline for Good Clinical
Practice E6(R2). London, England: European
Medicines Agency; 2016.
4. International Conference on Harmonisation
of Technical Requirements for Registration of
Pharmaceuticals for Human Use. ICH Harmonised
Tripartite Guideline: Statistical Principles for Clinical
Trials E9. London, England: European Medicines
Agency; 1998.
5. Chan A-W, Tetzlaff JM, Gøtzsche PC, et al.
SPIRIT 2013 explanation and elaboration:
guidance for protocols of clinical trials. BMJ. 2013;
346:e7586.
6. Moher D, Hopewell S, Schulz KF, et al;
Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials Group.
CONSORT 2010 explanation and elaboration:
updated guidelines for reporting parallel
group randomised trials. J Clin Epidemiol. 2010;63
(8):e1-e37.
7. UK Health Research Authority. HRA decision
tool. http://www.hra.nhs.uk/research-community
/before-you-apply/determine-whether-your-study
-is-research/. Accessed November 6, 2017.
8. Conroy EJ, Harman NL, Lane JA, et al. Trial
steering committees in randomised controlled
trials: a survey of registered clinical trials units to
establish current practice and experiences. Clin Trials.
2015;12(6):664-676.
9. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, et al. GRADE
guidelines, 2: framing the question and deciding on
important outcomes. J Clin Epidemiol. 2011;64(4):
395-400.
10. Dunn G, Maracy M, Tomenson B. Estimating
treatment effects from randomized clinical trials
with noncompliance and loss to follow-up: the role
of instrumental variable methods. Stat Methods
Med Res. 2005;14(4):369-395.
11. Taichman DB, Sahni P, Pinborg A, et al. Data
Sharing statements for clinical trials: a requirement
of the International Committee of Medical Journal
Editors. secondary data sharing statements for
clinical trials. http://www.icmje.org/news-and
-editorials/data_sharing_june_2017.pdf. Published
June 6, 2017. Accessed November 11, 2017.
12. Herson J. Strategies for dealing with fraud in
clinical trials. Int J Clin Oncol. 2016;21(1):22-27.
13. Health Research Authority. Protocol guidance
and template for use in a Clinical Trial of an
Investigational Medicinal Product (CTIMP):
secondary protocol guidance and template for use
in a Clinical Trial of an Investigational Medicinal
Product (CTIMP) 2015. http://www.hra.nhs.uk
/about-the-hra/consultations-calls/closed
-consultations/protocol-guidance-template-use
-clinical-trial-investigational-medicinal-product
-ctimp-consultation-use/. Accessed
October 13, 2017.
14. Finfer S, Bellomo R. Why publish statistical
analysis plans? Crit Care Resusc. 2009;11(1):5-6.
15. National Institutes of Health, Department of
Health and Human Services. Final rule for clinical
trials registration and results information
submission: 42 CFR Part 11. https://www
.federalregister.gov/documents/2016/09/21/2016
-22129/clinical-trials-registration-and-results
-information-submission. Published September 21,
2016. Accessed October 13, 2017.
16. Dwan K, Altman DG, Clarke M, et al. Evidence
for the selective reporting of analyses and
discrepancies in clinical trials: a systematic review
of cohort studies of clinical trials. PLoS Med. 2014;11
(6):e1001666.
17. Kirkham JJ, Dwan KM, Altman DG, et al.
The impact of outcome reporting bias in
randomised controlled trials on a cohort of
systematic reviews. BMJ. 2010;340:c365.
18. International Conference on Harmonisation of
Technical Requirements for Registration of
Pharmaceuticals for Human Use. Final concept
paper: E9(R1): addendum to statistical principles for
clinical trials on choosing appropriate estimands
and defining sensitivity analyses in clinical trials.
http://www.ich.org/fileadmin/Public_Web_Site/ICH
_Products/Guidelines/Efficacy/E9/E9__R1__Final
_Concept_Paper_October_23_2014.pdf. Accessed
October 13, 2017.
19. Smith CT, Hopkins C, Sydes M, et al. How
should individual participant data (IPD) from
publicly funded clinical trials be shared? BMC Med.
2015;13(1):1.
20. European Commission. Commission guideline:
guidance on posting and publication of
result-related information on clinical trials in
relation to the implementation of article 57(2) of
regulation (EC) No. 726/2004 and article 41(2) of
regulation (EC) No. 1901/2006. http://ec.europa.eu
/health/files/eudralex/vol-10/2012_302-03/2012
_302-03_en.pdf. Accessed October 13, 2017.
21. European Commission. Technical guidance on
the format of the data fields of result-related
information on clinical trials submitted in
accordance with article 57(2) of regulation
(EC) No. 726/2004 and article 41(2) of regulation
(EC) No. 1901/2006. http://ec.europa.eu/health
/files/eudralex/vol-10/2013_01_22_tg_en.pdf.
Accessed October 13, 2017.
22. Thomas L, Peterson ED. The value of statistical
analysis plans in observational research: defining
high-quality research from the start. JAMA. 2012;
308(8):773-774.
Guidelines for the Content of Statistical Analysis Plans in Clinical Trials
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
December 19, 2017
Volume 318, Number 23
2343
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
