 Gandhi TK, et al. BMJ Qual Saf 2018;27:1019–1026. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2017-007756
 
 1019
Narrative review
1Institute for Healthcare 
Improvement, Boston, MA, USA
2Virginia Mason Health System, 
Seattle, Washington, USA
3Harvard University T H Chan 
School of Public Health, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA
4John D Stoeckle Center for 
Primary Care Innovation, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, MA, USA
5Harvard Business School, 
Harvard University, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA
6Partners Healthcare, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA
7George Washington University 
Milken Institute of Public 
Health, Washington, District of 
Columbia, USA
8California Hospital Quality 
Institute, Sacramento, California, 
USA
9Experimental Psychology, 
University of Oxford, London, 
Oxfordshire, UK
10Medicine, University of 
California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California, USA
Correspondence to
Dr Tejal K Gandhi, , Institute 
for Healthcare Improvement, 
Boston, MA 02109, USA;  
 
tgandhi@ 
ihi. 
org
Received 20 December 2017
Revised 4 June 2018
Accepted 21 June 2018
Published Online First 
17 July 2018
To cite: Gandhi TK, 
Kaplan GS, Leape L, et al. 
BMJ Qual Saf 
2018;27:1019–1026.
Transforming concepts in patient 
safety: a progress report
tejal K Gandhi,1 Gary S Kaplan,2 Lucian Leape,3 Donald M Berwick,1 
Susan edgman-Levitan,4 amy edmondson,5 Gregg S Meyer,6 
David Michaels,7 Julianne M Morath,8 Charles vincent,9 
robert wachter10
© Author(s) (or their 
employer(s)) 2018. Re-use 
permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights 
and permissions. Published by 
BMJ.
AbstrAct
In 2009, the National Patient Safety Foundation’s Lucian 
Leape Institute (LLI) published a paper identifying five 
areas of healthcare that require system-level attention 
and action to advance patient safety.The authors 
argued that to truly transform the safety of healthcare, 
there was a need to address medical education reform; 
care integration; restoring joy and meaning in work 
and ensuring the safety of the healthcare workforce; 
consumer engagement in healthcare and transparency 
across the continuum of care. In the ensuing years, the 
LLI convened a series of expert roundtables to address 
each concept, look at obstacles to implementation, 
assess potential for improvement, identify potential 
implementation partners and issue recommendations 
for action. Reports of these activities were published 
between 2010 and 2015. While all five areas have 
seen encouraging developments, multiple challenges 
remain. In this paper, the current members of the LLI 
(now based at the Institute for Healthcare Improvement) 
assess progress made in the USA since 2009 and identify 
ongoing challenges.
IntroductIon
The National Patient Safety Founda-
tion (NPSF) created the Lucian Leape 
Institute (LLI) in 2007 to provide a stra-
tegic vision for improving patient safety. 
Composed of national leaders with a 
common interest and expertise in safety, 
the LLI was charged with identifying 
new approaches to improving patient 
safety; inspiring innovation necessary to 
expedite the work; creating significant, 
sustainable improvements in culture, 
process and outcomes and encouraging 
key stakeholders to assume significant 
roles in advancing patient safety.
At the time, the major challenge of 
improving patient safety was not a tech-
nical issue of devising new systems, but 
a cultural issue of creating an environ-
ment in which such systems could take 
root. The founding members set an aspi-
rational vision for transformation in a 
paper that identified five major concepts 
for system-level action: (1) medical 
education must be redesigned to prepare 
new physicians and other health profes-
sionals to function in these new cultures; 
(2) care must be delivered by multidisci-
plinary teams working in integrated care 
platforms; (3) healthcare workers need to 
work in safe environments and find joy 
and meaning in their work; (4) patients 
must become full partners in all aspects of 
designing and delivering healthcare and 
(5) transparency must be a practiced value 
in everything we do.1
The LLI recognised that articulating 
these transforming concepts was not 
enough. Healthcare leaders needed to be 
persuaded to implement them. In 2009, 
the LLI began to convene expert round-
tables to address each concept and engage 
stakeholders. Results were disseminated 
in reports published between 2010 and 
2015, and the major recommendations 
are summarised in this paper. While 
multiple challenges remain, encouraging 
progress has emerged in each of these 
areas.
MedIcAl educAtIon reforM
Equipping doctors to improve the safety 
of healthcare systems is the task of medical 
education, not just in medical schools, but 
across the continuum of training and prac-
tice. Unmet Needs: Teaching Physicians 
to Provide Safe Patient Care2 examines 
the need for education reform, describes 
the changes required and makes specific 
recommendations directed at medical 
schools, teaching hospitals and accred-
iting bodies (table 1). While it is essential 
for all members of the team to develop 
these skills, this report focused on physi-
cians as the starting point.
Progress
In recent years, medical school curricula 
have increasingly included patient safety 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/
BMJ Qual Saf: first published as 10.1136/bmjqs-2017-007756 on 17 July 2018. Downloaded from 
 1020
Gandhi TK, et al. BMJ Qual Saf 2018;27:1019–1026. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2017-007756
Narrative review
Table 1 Key recommendations from Unmet Needs: Teaching Physicians to Provide Safe Patient Care
Target of recommendation
Recommendation
Medical school and hospital 
leaders
Place highest priority on creating a learning culture that emphasises patient safety, professionalism, transparency and 
valuing the individual learner.
Eliminate hierarchical and authority gradients.
Emphasise that professionalism includes demonstrating mutual respect and non-tolerance of abusive or demeaning 
behaviour.
Declare and enforce a zero-tolerance policy for confirmed egregious disrespectful behaviour by faculty, staff or residents.
Promote the development of interpersonal skills, leadership, teamwork and collaboration among faculty and staff.
Provide incentives and resources to enhance faculty capabilities to teach and practice patient safety and to be effective 
role models.
The selection process for admission to medical schools should emphasise attributes that reflect professionalism and 
orientation to patient safety, such as compassion, empathy and collaboration.
Medical schools
Treat patient safety as a science that encompasses human factors, systems theory and open communication.
Emphasise the shaping of desired skills, attitudes and behaviours as set forth in the core competencies defined by the 
IOM, the American Board of Medical Specialties and the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education.
The educational experience should be coherent, continuing and flexible throughout undergraduate medical education, 
residency and fellowship training and lifelong continuing education.
Accrediting bodies
Amend medical school accreditation requirements and residency programme requirements to include expectations for the 
creation of learning cultures and the development of patient safety-related behavioural traits.
Survey medical schools to evaluate education priorities for patient safety and the creation of school and hospital cultures 
that support patient safety.
EHR, electronic health record, IOM, Institute of Medicine.
and safety science, and these concepts have also become 
more common in education for other clinicians and 
frontline staff. For example, the American Medical 
Association’s Accelerating Change in Medical Educa-
tion Consortium brought medical schools together to 
innovate, develop curricula and share best practices, 
including those addressing quality and safety. The 
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Educa-
tion Clinical Learning Environment Review (ACGME 
CLER) programme requires medical resident partic-
ipation in quality and safety learning. Recently, the 
Association of American Medical Colleges initiated 
a programme to create a shared understanding of 
Quality Improvement and Patient Safety competen-
cies across the full continuum from medical school to 
continuing practice.
Other clinical disciplines, particularly nursing, have 
often pioneered educational pathways, and a concerted 
effort is underway to emphasise the importance of 
interprofessional teams. The Quality and Safety Educa-
tion for Nurses programme has focused on enhancing 
education around safety science in nursing schools 
for more than a decade. More recently, the National 
Collaborative for Improving the Clinical Learning 
Environment highlighted the ‘patient safety gap’ in the 
education and training of all clinicians and provided 
clear recommendations for improvement.3
To assist healthcare students and professionals in 
building core skills in improvement, safety and lead-
ership, the Institute for Healthcare Improvement 
(IHI) developed a web-based interactive educational 
programme called the Open School. More than 
650 
000 learners have enrolled in the Open School 
since it opened its virtual doors in 2008. To address the 
need for training in postgraduate medical education, in 
2012 the NPSF created a course in patient safety and 
safety science that more than 7000 learners of diverse 
disciplines have used. Several universities have devel-
oped graduate education and fellowships in quality 
and safety, and clinicians, risk managers, pharmacists, 
executives and others have pursued these as well as 
certificate programmes and professional certification 
in patient safety.4
remaining challenges
Still, opportunity lies ahead for greater consistency in 
how health professionals learn about patient safety. 
A 2016 report from ACGME CLER reveals gaps in 
areas such as feedback on safety reporting and expe-
riential learning, lack of awareness of the range of 
patient safety issues and shortage of opportunities for 
interprofessional system-based improvement efforts.5 
Contributing to this learning gap is a shortage of 
academic faculty with safety and quality improvement 
expertise.6
Continuing education requirements for attending 
physicians are highly variable. While some medical 
specialties require continuing education in patient 
safety, the American Board of Internal Medicine 
recently removed it as a requirement from Main-
tenance of Certification.7 Healthcare organisations 
would benefit from encouraging study of safety science 
by all team members, including board members, and 
operationalising ways to achieve continuous learning 
as safety science expands.
As these and other activities gain momentum, the 
core agenda remains consistent, clear and urgent: to 
mainstream the preparation of health professionals’ 
awareness, skills, commitment and practical training 
about the scientific pursuit of safer care. Embracing 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/
BMJ Qual Saf: first published as 10.1136/bmjqs-2017-007756 on 17 July 2018. Downloaded from 
 1021
Gandhi TK, et al. BMJ Qual Saf 2018;27:1019–1026. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2017-007756
Narrative review
Table 2 Key recommendations from Order from Chaos: Accelerating Care Integration
Target of recommendation
Recommendation
All stakeholders: federal and state 
governmental agencies, consumer 
groups
Create mechanisms for developing a shared understanding among public and private stakeholders regarding the 
link between care integration and patient safety.
Use working groups and public forums, best practices and patient stories to be catalogued and disseminated.
Healthcare leaders and practitioners, 
public
Patients and families must become active participants in process improvement and design and redesign efforts and 
review organisational performance.
Regulatory and accrediting bodies
Create methods of measuring care integration, along with robust assessment and evaluation metrics and 
incorporate these measures into public reporting systems.
Medical schools, professional 
societies, non-profits
Provide education and training for executives, boards, clinicians and medical students that focuses on patient safety 
and care integration.
Researchers, industry
Develop the technology and infrastructure to allow for national spread of organisational and operational expertise 
to support care integration.
the science of safety in medical education is crucial to 
the future health and well-being of patients, families 
and communities.
cAre IntegrAtIon
Order from Chaos: Accelerating Care Integration8 
concludes that poor care integration is linked to 
adverse events, and improvements in this area should 
be among the top priorities for achieving a more 
consistently safe, effective and efficient healthcare 
system. The report noted the need for establishing a 
shared understanding among public and private stake-
holders, including the media and consumer advocacy 
groups, regarding the link between care integration 
and patient safety. Best practices for improving care 
integration need to be developed and widely dissemi-
nated (table 2).
Progress
With an increased call for improved coordination 
of care and focus on patient safety across the care 
continuum, methods for improving handoffs and 
communication among teams, providers and patients 
are gaining traction.9 Today the focus on population 
health and market-specific shifts in payment models 
serve as incentives for greater care integration and 
coordination.
Progress has been made to develop systems and 
structures to encourage and incentivise care integra-
tion. Accountable Care Organisations (ACOs) have 
brought together groups of health providers to incen-
tivise better quality care at a lower cost. Likewise, the 
development of the patient-centred medical home 
aims to reorganise and reinvigorate primary care, and 
early evidence shows promise in achieving lower costs, 
improved patient experience and better care quality.10
Other encouraging examples of improved care 
integration include Project Re-Engineered Discharge 
(Project RED), the Patient-Centered Outcomes 
Research Institute (PCORI)-funded Project ACHIEVE 
(Achieving Patient-Centered Care and Optimized 
Health In Care Transitions by Evaluating the Value 
of Evidence) and the Johns Hopkins School of 
Nursing–led Community Aging in Place: Advancing 
Better Living for Elders (CAPABLE). For example, 
Project RED developed strategies to improve the 
hospital discharge process to promote patient safety 
and has been proven to reduce rehospitalisations and 
yield high rates of patient satisfaction.11
Finally, the increase in employed physicians and 
continued refinement of the electronic health record 
have accelerated care integration. Improving interop-
erability of health information technology has been a 
major initiative at the federal level to improve infor-
mation flow across the entire care continuum.12
remaining challenges
Despite incremental improvement, coordination and 
integration of care remains difficult, particularly for 
patients with multiple chronic conditions.13 Even with 
a national push towards more integrated care models 
(perhaps most focused on the development of ACOs), 
so far results towards safer, more coordinated care 
have been mixed. Furthermore, care integration issues 
are compounded for older adults. One study found 
that the average Medicare beneficiary spent about 17 
days in contact with the healthcare system through an 
average of 3.4 different clinicians. Only 55% of these 
individuals coordinated their care principally with a 
single primary care physician.14
Structural changes alone will not ensure optimal care 
integration. Strong clinician leadership and patient 
engagement will be required to further improve care 
coordination. Involving patients and families in the 
codesign of care, especially around coordination and 
care delivered in the home, will help identify unmet 
needs and educational deficits.
Care integration remains perhaps the most chal-
lenging of the transforming concepts because of the 
fragmentation of the US healthcare system. When 
Americans are asked to reflect on the integration of 
care from their own experiences, some refer to the 
term ‘healthcare system’ as an oxymoron.15 Individuals 
responsible for coordinating care and helping patients 
navigate the care system include primary care physi-
cians, specialists, nurses, pharmacists, social workers 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/
BMJ Qual Saf: first published as 10.1136/bmjqs-2017-007756 on 17 July 2018. Downloaded from 
 1022
Gandhi TK, et al. BMJ Qual Saf 2018;27:1019–1026. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2017-007756
Narrative review
Table 3 Key recommendations from Through the Eyes of the Workforce: Creating Joy, Meaning, and Safer Health Care
Target of recommendation
Recommendation
Hospital and healthcare leaders, 
professionals, board members
Develop and embody shared core values of mutual respect and civility; transparency and truth telling; safety of 
all workers and patients and alignment and accountability from the boardroom through the front lines.
Hospital and healthcare leaders, 
professionals, board members
Adopt the explicit aim to eliminate harm to workforce and patients.
Recognise and celebrate the work and accomplishments of the work force, regularly and with high visibility.
Hospital and healthcare leaders, board 
members, managers
Commit to creating a HRO and demonstrate the discipline to achieve highly reliable performance. This will 
require creating a learning and improvement system and adopting evidence-based management skills for 
reliability.
Hospital and healthcare leaders
Establish data capture, database and performance metrics for improvement and accountability.
Government and non-profit funders
Support industry-wide research to explore issues and conditions in healthcare that are harming our workforce 
and patients.
HRO, high-reliability organisation.
and care managers as well as health plan and delivery 
system personnel. As care becomes more complex 
and shared among more providers, it is essential to 
improve both processes (eg, teamwork, communica-
tion and patient engagement) and technologies (eg, 
EHRs) for patients and providers.
Joy And MeAnIng In work And workforce 
sAfety
The mission-driven work of healthcare professionals, 
who serve others during their most vulnerable 
moments, should rightly bring joy and meaning to the 
lives of our workforce. Through the Eyes of the Work-
force: Creating Joy, Meaning, and Safer Health Care16 
looks at how to improve workforce safety and joy in 
work.
The risk of physical harm to healthcare workers 
is much higher than for workers in other industries 
and includes injury resulting from preventable envi-
ronmental risks such as falls, musculoskeletal injuries, 
needle sticks and workplace violence.17 Emotional 
harm is also pervasive, with regular reports of disre-
spect, blaming and a punitive environment. Produc-
tion pressures cause caregiver fatigue, and many are 
exposed to team-preventive behaviour, such as criti-
cism, bullying and even physical harm. The damaging 
effects of disrespectful cultures in healthcare18 and the 
extent and effects of burnout are being increasingly 
recognised.19 However, action to remedy these effects 
remains slow, and the report made the recommenda-
tions outlined in table 3.
Progress
Multiple initiatives are underway to increase aware-
ness of the importance of joy and meaning in work 
and workforce safety. The National Academy of Medi-
cine and several healthcare professional groups and 
insurers, such as the American Association of Crit-
ical-Care Nurses, the American Nurses Association 
(ANA Enterprise), the American Medical Associa-
tion and the Harvard Risk Management Foundation 
are addressing the issue of resilience and burnout.20 
IHI has developed a framework for increasing joy in 
work that recommends domains such as reward and 
recognition, choice and autonomy, camaraderie and 
teamwork and physical and psychological safety.21 
Some have observed that the widely accepted goals of 
the Triple Aim22 should be expanded to include work-
force safety and joy and meaning in work—the Quad-
ruple Aim.23 24
Regarding healthcare workforce physical safety, 
noteworthy efforts are proceeding. With the support of 
the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS), 
the US Occupational Safety and Health Administration 
recently launched an initiative to encourage hospi-
tals and healthcare facilities to implement safety and 
health management systems to prevent injuries among 
their workforce and patients.17 Similarly, The Joint 
Commission has provided detailed reports and tools 
for improving workforce safety and reducing work-
place violence.25
remaining challenges
Despite these efforts, according to one recent 
study, more than half of US physicians suffer from 
burnout.26 Among critical care nurses, 25%–33% 
have symptoms of severe burnout syndrome.27 Physi-
cians do have higher rates of burnout than the general 
public and they also suffer higher rates of depression 
and suicide.28 The effects of psychological, emotional 
and physical harm to the workforce surface in the 
form of litigation, lost work hours, employee turn-
over and inability to attract newcomers to caring 
professions. With healthcare reform, pay-for-perfor-
mance, the introduction of electronic health records 
and other innovations, healthcare workers spend less 
time directly caring for patients—further draining 
energy, meaning and joy.
Compounding the issue, a recent survey found that 
only 23% of hospital boards review workplace safety 
dashboards.29 Our healthcare workforce is endan-
gered, and without a healthy, engaged and supported 
workforce, safer patient care will remain elusive.
PAtIent And fAMIly engAgeMent
Despite evidence that partnering with patients and 
families yields improved outcomes and patient expe-
rience as well as a safer and more productive work 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/
BMJ Qual Saf: first published as 10.1136/bmjqs-2017-007756 on 17 July 2018. Downloaded from 
 1023
Gandhi TK, et al. BMJ Qual Saf 2018;27:1019–1026. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2017-007756
Narrative review
Table 4 Key recommendations from Safety Is Personal: Partnering with Patients and Families for the Safest Care
Target of recommendation Recommendation
Leaders of health systems
Establish patient and family engagement as a core value by involving patients and families as equal partners in all 
organisational activities. Educate and train clinicians and staff to be effective partners and partner with patient advocacy 
groups and community organisations to increase public awareness and engagement.
Healthcare clinicians and staff Support patients and families to engage effectively in their own care by providing the information, training and tools they 
need to manage their health conditions according to their expressed wishes.
Engage patients as equal partners in safety improvements and care design.
Support patients and families when things go wrong.
Healthcare policy makers
Involve patients in all policy-making committees and programmes.
Develop, implement and report safety metrics that foster accountability and transparency.
Engage patients in setting and implementing the research agenda.
Patients and families and the 
public
Ask questions about their care and understand their medicines and care plans. They should also be instructed in basic 
safety steps: repeating back instructions and information to clinicians in their own words; bringing a friend or family 
member to all appointments and understanding who is in charge of their care.
environment for healthcare professionals, organisa-
tions still struggle with achieving meaningful, lasting 
patient and family engagement. Safety Is Personal: 
Partnering with Patients and Families for the Safest 
Care30 looks at barriers including fragmentation within 
the healthcare system, the persistence of a paternalistic 
professional culture, poor process design and infre-
quent involvement of patients and families in codesign 
efforts. It notes the lack of training in key communi-
cation strategies such as eliciting what matters most 
to patients for shared decision making, plain language 
communication and disclosure and apology (table 4).
Progress
With the increasing use of decision aids, patient portals, 
OpenNotes, care engagement plans and the spread of 
Patient and Family Advisory Councils (PFACs), health-
care leaders and clinicians are beginning to understand 
the power of engaging patients and families as inte-
gral partners. The OpenNotes programme has demon-
strated that patients can contribute to preventing or 
mitigating errors.31 32 Patient experience data are being 
used more widely and effectively. Mandates from CMS, 
the National Committee for Quality Assurance and 
other payers for use and improvement of Consumer 
Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems 
patient experience survey data are linked to improved 
performance and outcomes. Healthcare systems, 
hospitals and ambulatory practices are also beginning 
to incorporate patient preferences into care design by 
including patients and their families as active partici-
pants in codesign and research studies funded by the 
PCORI. The internationally observed ‘What Matters 
to You? Day’ aims to encourage meaningful conversa-
tions between patients, families and providers.
Patient and family perspectives are valuable in 
many arenas, from design of the physical environ-
ment and care coordination plans to reporting safety 
concerns and participation in root cause analyses. 
Patient engagement should be authentic and take place 
across the continuum of care from the bedside to the 
boardroom to national policy committees. The newly 
established Patient Experience Policy Forum affiliated 
with the Beryl Institute is advocating for patient and 
family partnerships in codesign and policy-making 
nationally.
remaining challenges
While some exemplary organisations are fully engaging 
patients in the care process, ample opportunities for 
improvement remain. Many organisations lack effec-
tive PFACs and have not devoted resources to train 
staff in shared decision-making practices or to offer 
evidence-based decision aids. The current fee-for-ser-
vice payment system does not encourage clinicians to 
spend the time needed to communicate with patients 
nor to elicit their preferences. Many organisations 
still lack process improvement skills to support inte-
grating better communication into clinical workflows. 
As care shifts from inpatient to ambulatory and home 
care settings, patients and families are becoming more 
responsible for delivering their own care. However, 
they may not be well equipped to manage complicated 
medication regimens, activities of daily living, medical 
devices or infection control procedures.33
Overwhelming evidence indicates that collecting 
patient feedback and including patients as equal part-
ners in their care support improvement in both patient 
experience of care and clinical outcomes.34 Oppor-
tunities remain to partner with patients, families and 
communities to accelerate improvement in education, 
patient satisfaction and quality of care.
trAnsPArency
Shining a Light: Safer Health Care Through T
ranspar-
ency35 defines four domains of transparency: between 
clinicians and patients, among clinicians, among 
healthcare organisations and public reporting. The 
report holds that transparency is ethically correct and 
leads to improved outcomes, fewer errors, more satis-
fied patients and lower costs. The report made recom-
mendations for improving transparency in all four 
domains (table 5).
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/
BMJ Qual Saf: first published as 10.1136/bmjqs-2017-007756 on 17 July 2018. Downloaded from 
 1024
Gandhi TK, et al. BMJ Qual Saf 2018;27:1019–1026. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2017-007756
Narrative review
Table 5 Key recommendations from Shining a Light: Safer Health Care Through Transparency
Target of recommendation Recommendation
All stakeholders
Ensure disclosure of conflicts of interest and provide patients with reliable information in a form that is useful to them.
Create organisational cultures that support transparency, shared learning and core competencies regarding 
communication with patients and families, other clinicians and the public.
Leaders and boards
Prioritise transparency and safety and frequently review comprehensive safety performance data.
Link hiring, firing, promotion and compensation to results in cultural transformation and transparency.
Governmental agencies
Develop data sources for collection of safety data, improve standards and training materials for core competencies and 
develop an all-payer database and robust medical device registries.
Clinicians
Inform patients of clinician’s experience, conflicts of interest and role in care and provide patients with a full description of 
all the alternatives for tests and treatments and the pros and cons for each.
Provide patients with full information about all planned tests and treatments.
Hospitals and health systems
Provide patients with full access to their medical records and include patients and family members in interdisciplinary 
bedside rounds.
Hospitals and health systems, 
health professionals
Provide patients and families with full information about any harm resulting from treatment, followed by apology and fair 
resolution.
Provide patients and clinicians support when they are involved in an incident. Include patients/family members in event 
reporting and in root cause analysis.
Hospital and health leaders
Create a safe, supportive culture for caregivers to be transparent and accountable to each other.
Create multidisciplinary processes and forms for reporting, analysing and sharing data.
Create processes to hold individuals accountable for risky or disruptive behaviour.
Healthcare organisations, 
hospital associations, PSOs
Have clear mechanisms for sharing and adopting best practices, for example, by participating in state and regional 
collaboratives.
Hospitals and healthcare 
organisations
Report and publicly display measures used to monitor quality and safety and clearly communicate to the public about 
performance.
PSOs, patient safety organisations. 
Progress
Today, the call for greater transparency in healthcare 
is growing louder. Consumers have begun to post 
reviews of their physicians, care teams and health-
care organisations on online review platforms. More-
over, some healthcare systems are now collecting and 
posting information from patient experience surveys at 
the service or physician level. Recently, several health 
systems have begun to provide forums for free-re-
sponse comments online, often with positive results.36
The 2005 Patient Safety and Quality Improvement 
Act and the rise of patient safety organisations have 
facilitated increased transparency among clinicians 
and healthcare organisations. Additionally, collabo-
ratives like Solutions for Patient Safety, a network of 
more than 130 children’s hospitals working together 
to eliminate serious harm, have shown compelling 
evidence that sharing data, successes and failures can 
markedly accelerate learning and improvement.37
Healthcare is also seeing greater transparency 
between patients and clinicians in the aftermath of 
adverse events. A growing number of Communication 
and Resolution Programmes have been established, 
fuelled by growing evidence that prompt disclosure, 
honesty and apology following patient injury can 
decrease medical malpractice liability and improve the 
satisfaction of all parties.38 Toolkits are now available 
to promote such programmes.39
remaining challenges
Many challenges to achieving full transparency remain.40 
A recent survey found that less than 40% of quality 
and safety leaders rated their board’s understanding of 
disclosure and apology as ‘high’, and even fewer felt 
their boards had a comprehensive understanding of 
safety concepts related to transparency about error and 
harm.29 Transparency within organisations and between 
providers requires creating an environment of trust as 
well as improving technology and processes to ensure 
they are efficient, effective and promote regular open 
and honest communication and data sharing.
Transparency with the public is equally challenging. 
Hospital and clinician concerns about litigation; 
reputational costs and the accuracy, interpretability 
and comprehensiveness of safety metrics need to be 
addressed. Additionally, national rating systems and 
websites, including Leapfrog and US News & World 
Report, share few common scores and often generate 
more confusion than clarity. For example, as of 2015, 
no hospital was rated as a high performer by all four 
major national US rating systems.41 In the future, 
data must be understandable and actionable for both 
patients and provider organisations.
As more organisations publicly share their quality, 
safety and patient experience data, transparency will be 
increasingly demanded by all stakeholders. To benefit 
patients as well as care providers, organisations will 
need to prepare their boards, clinicians and staff for a 
more transparent healthcare system. Transparency at 
these levels will eventually facilitate decision making 
about where to receive care and where to work, but 
a long road lies ahead to make this comparable and 
uniform across all health entities.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/
BMJ Qual Saf: first published as 10.1136/bmjqs-2017-007756 on 17 July 2018. Downloaded from 
 1025
Gandhi TK, et al. BMJ Qual Saf 2018;27:1019–1026. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2017-007756
Narrative review
next stePs
Reports about the five transforming concepts provide 
guidance healthcare organisations need to achieve safe 
care. While treated separately in the reports, the trans-
forming concepts are interrelated. For example, health-
care professionals experiencing burnout are more 
prone to commit diagnostic and patient safety errors 
and less likely to engage patients and colleagues.42–44
Medical education reform, joy and meaning in 
work, care integration and patient and family engage-
ment are also interrelated. For patients with chronic 
illness, effective intervention often relies on integrated 
care received across the continuum, where patient 
engagement is key. Physicians and other providers with 
training and experience in communication strategies 
that support teamwork and shared decision making 
are better prepared to provide coordinated, cross-con-
tinuum care for these complex patients.
Each report calls for leadership commitment and 
recognition of safety as an integral component of 
operational culture to enable lasting improvement in 
both patient and workforce safety.
The LLI has already begun to partner with profes-
sional organisations to expand and facilitate their 
safety programmes, focusing on the importance of 
leadership, effective and engaged boards and a strong 
safety culture.45 In addition, plans are underway to 
improve how organisations measure the safety of their 
patients and workforce and the reliability of their 
system. Healthcare needs more and better ways to 
identify and measure risks and hazards in real time, or 
proactively, to potentially intervene before an adverse 
event occurs.
Further research around each of the transforming 
concepts is warranted. With medical education 
reform, for example, ACGME has sought to monitor 
and measure the effectiveness of residency training 
programmes. For care integration, better research is 
needed around the effectiveness of new models of 
care. From confidential sharing of data among organ-
isations to the involvement of patients in root cause 
analyses, each approach to increased transparency 
should undergo rigorous research to better understand 
its benefits and harms. While more leaders, policy 
makers and regulators are embracing these concepts, 
much remains to be learnt about how best to engage 
all leaders, which practices are most effective and how 
best to implement them.
Finally, while this assessment has focused primarily 
on the US healthcare system, the LLI looks forward 
to the opportunity to reflect on the five transforming 
concepts in systems worldwide, sharing perspectives, 
best practices and greater opportunity for learning and 
improvement.
conclusIon
The five transforming concepts were meant to high-
light important gaps in safety and to serve as new 
directions to accelerate progress in patient safety. 
These concepts are overlapping and synergistic, with 
common themes including the need for leaders who 
can build a safety culture to create the right environ-
ment to advance these concepts, for clear and mean-
ingful measurement, and for research to advance 
understanding and improvement capability in these 
areas. It is essential that national professional organisa-
tions, foundations and the government support these 
efforts to change how clinicians are educated, create 
safe learning environments, integrate care across the 
continuum, create joy and meaning and safety for the 
healthcare workforce, engage patients and families 
at all levels of care and promote transparency. These 
strategies are as critical now as when first described 
and are key to advancing the LLI’s mission to have a 
world where patients and those who care for them are 
free from harm.
Acknowledgements The authors wish to acknowledge Erin 
Hartman, MS; Joellen Huebner, BA; Patricia McTiernan, MS; 
Jane Roessner, PhD; and Elma Sanders, PhD, for assistance in 
drafting and editing portions of the text and Anita Spielman, 
BA, CPPS, for research assistance.
Funding This study was funded by Medtronic (grant number 
#6981).
Competing interests None declared.
Patient consent Not required.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; internally 
peer reviewed.
Open access This is an open access article distributed in 
accordance with the Creative Commons Attribution Non 
Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which permits others 
to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-
commercially, and license their derivative works on different 
terms, provided the original work is properly cited, appropriate 
credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the use is non-
commercial. See: http:// 
creativecommons. 
org/ 
licenses/ 
by- 
nc/ 
4. 
0/.
references
 1 Leape L, Berwick D, Clancy C, et al. Transforming 
healthcare: a safety imperative. Qual Saf Health Care 
2009;18:424–8.
 2 Lucian Leape Institute. Unmet needs: teaching physicians to 
provide safe patient care. Boston, MA: National Patient Safety 
Foundation, 2010.
 3 Disch J, Kilo CM, Passiment M, et al. The role of clinical 
learning environments in preparing new clinicians to engage 
in patient safety: National Collaborative for Improving the 
Clinical Learning Environment, 2017.
 4 Karasick AS, Nash DB. Training in quality and safety: the 
current landscape. Am J Med Qual 2015;30:526–38.
 5 Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education. CLER 
national report of findings 2016: executive summary. Chicago, 
IL: Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education, 
2016.
 6 Baron RB, Davis NL, Davis DA, et al. Teaching for quality: 
where do we go from here? Am J Med Qual 2014;29:256–8.
 7 American Board of Internal Medicine. MOC requirements. 
http://www. 
abim. 
org/ 
maintenance- 
of- 
certification/ 
moc- 
requirements/ 
general. 
aspx
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/
BMJ Qual Saf: first published as 10.1136/bmjqs-2017-007756 on 17 July 2018. Downloaded from 
 1026
Gandhi TK, et al. BMJ Qual Saf 2018;27:1019–1026. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2017-007756
Narrative review
 8 Lucian Leape Institute. Order from chaos: accelerating care 
integration. Boston, MA: National Patient Safety Foundation, 
2012.
 9 Starmer AJ, Spector ND, Srivastava R, et al. I-PASS Study 
Group. Changes in medical errors after implementation of a 
handoff program. N Engl J Med 2014;371:1803–12.
 
10 Zutshi A, Peikes D, Smith K, et al. The medical home: what do 
we know, what do we need to know? Rockville, MD: Agency 
for Healthcare Research and Quality, 2014.
 
11 Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Re-Engineered 
Discharge (RED) Toolkit: Tool 1 Overview. Rockville, MD: 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 2013.
 
12 Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information 
Technology. 2016 report to congress on health IT progress: 
examining the hitech era and the future of health IT. 
Washington, DC: Office of the National Coordinator for 
Health Information Technology, 2016.
 
13 Penm J, MacKinnon NJ, Strakowski SM, et al. Minding the 
Gap: Factors Associated With Primary Care Coordination of 
Adults in 11 Countries. Ann Fam Med 2017;15:113–9.
 
14 Bynum JP
, Meara E, Chiang-Hua C, et al. Our parents, 
ourselves: health care for an aging population. Lebanon, NH: 
Dartmouth Institute of Health Policy and Clinical Practice, 
2016.
 
15 American Hospital Association and the Picker Institute. Eye on 
Patients: a report from the American Hospital Association and 
the Picker Institute: American Hospital Association, 1997.
 
16 Lucian Leape Institute. Through the eyes of the workforce: 
creating joy, meaning, and safer health care. Boston, MA: 
National Patient Safety Foundation, 2013.
 
17 United States Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration. Worker safety in hospitals. https://
www. 
osha. 
gov/ 
dsg/ 
hospitals/
 
18 Leape LL, Shore MF, Dienstag JL, et al. Perspective: a culture 
of respect, part 2: creating a culture of respect. Acad Med 
2012;87:853–8.
 
19 Shin A, Gandhi T, Herzig S. Make the clinician burnout 
epidemic a national priority: Health Affairs Blog, 2016.
 
20 National Academy of Medicine. Action collaborative on 
clinician well-being and resilience. https:// 
nam. 
edu/ 
initiatives/ 
clinician- 
resilience- 
and- 
well- 
being/.
 
21 Perlo J, Balik B, Swensen S, et al. IHI framework for improving 
joy in work. Cambridge, MA: Institute for Healthcare 
Improvement, 2017.
 
22 Berwick DM, Nolan TW
, Whittington J. The triple aim: care, 
health, and cost. Health Aff 2008;27:759–69.
 
23 Bodenheimer T, Sinsky C. From triple to quadruple aim: care 
of the patient requires care of the provider. Ann Fam Med 
2014;12:573–6.
 
24 Sikka R, Morath JM, Leape L. The Quadruple Aim: 
care, health, cost and meaning in work. BMJ Qual Saf 
2015;24:608–10.
 
25 The Joint Commission. Improving patient and worker safety: 
opportunities for synergy, collaboration and innovation. 
Oakbrook Terrace, IL: The Joint Commission, 2012.
 
26 Shanafelt TD, Hasan O, Dyrbye LN, et al. Changes in burnout 
and satisfaction with work-life balance in physicians and the 
general us working population between 2011 and 2014. Mayo 
Clin Proc 2015;90:1600–13.
 
27 Moss M, Good VS, Gozal D, et al. An official critical care 
societies collaborative statement—burnout syndrome in critical 
care health-care professionals. Chest 2016;150:17–26.
 
28 Schernhammer ES, Colditz GA. Suicide rates among 
physicians: a quantitative and gender assessment (meta-
analysis). Am J Psychiatry 2004;161:2295–302.
 
29 McGaffigan PA, Ullem BD, Gandhi TK. Closing the Gap and 
Raising the Bar: Assessing Board Competency in Quality and 
Safety. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf 2017;43:267–74.
 
30 National Patient Safety Foundation’s Lucian Leape Institute. 
Safety is personal: partnering with patients and families for the 
safest care. Boston, MA: National Patient Safety Foundation, 
2014.
 
31 Bell SK, Gerard M, Fossa A, et al. A patient feedback reporting 
tool for OpenNotes: implications for patient-clinician safety 
and quality partnerships. BMJ Qual Saf 2017;26:312–22.
 
32 Bell SK, Mejilla R, Anselmo M, et al. When doctors share 
visit notes with patients: a study of patient and doctor 
perceptions of documentation errors, safety opportunities 
and the patient-doctor relationship. BMJ Qual Saf 
2017;26:262–70.
 
33 Carpenter D, Famolaro T, Hassell S, et al. Patient safety in 
the home: assessment of issues, challenges, and opportunities. 
Cambridge, MA: Institute for Healthcare Improvement, 2017.
 
34 Anhang Price R, Elliott MN, Zaslavsky AM, et al. Examining 
the role of patient experience surveys in measuring health care 
quality. Med Care Res Rev 2014;71:522–54.
 
35 National Patient Safety Foundation’s Lucian Leape Institute. 
Shining a light: safer health care through transparency. Boston, 
MA: National Patient Safety Foundation, 2015.
 
36 Lee V
. Transparency and Trust - Online Patient Reviews of 
Physicians. N Engl J Med 2017;376:197–9.
 
37 Childrens’ Hospitals Solutions for Patient Safety. Our Results. 
http://www. 
solu 
tion 
sfor 
pati 
ents 
afety. 
org/ 
our- 
results/
 
38 Boothman RC, Blackwell AC, Campbell DA, et al. A better 
approach to medical malpractice claims? The University of 
Michigan experience. J Health Life Sci Law 2009;2:125–59.
 
39 Lambert BL, Centomani NM, Smith KM, et al. The "Seven 
Pillars" Response to Patient Safety Incidents: Effects on 
Medical Liability Processes and Outcomes. Health Serv Res 
2016;51(Suppl 3):2491–515.
 
40 Wu AW
, McCay L, Levinson W
, et al. Disclosing Adverse 
Events to Patients: International Norms and Trends. J Patient 
Saf 2017;13:43–9.
 
41 Austin JM, Jha AK, Romano PS, et al. National hospital ratings 
systems share few common scores and may generate confusion 
instead of clarity. Health Aff 2015;34:423–30.
 
42 Wallace JE, Lemaire JB, Ghali WA. Physician wellness: a 
missing quality indicator. Lancet 2009;374:1714–21.
 
43 Shanafelt TD, Balch CM, Bechamps G, et al. Burnout 
and medical errors among American surgeons. Ann Surg 
2010;251:995–1000.
 
44 Salyers MP
, Flanagan ME, Firmin R, et al. Clinicians' 
perceptions of how burnout affects their work. Psychiatr Serv 
2015;66:204–7.
 
45 American College of Healthcare Executives and NPSF Lucian 
Leape Institute. Leading a Culture of Safety: A Blueprint 
for Success. Chicago, IL: American College of Healthcare 
Executives, 2017.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/
BMJ Qual Saf: first published as 10.1136/bmjqs-2017-007756 on 17 July 2018. Downloaded from 
