 CLINICAL ARTICLE
J Neurosurg 128:1653–1660, 2018
ABBREVIATIONS AUC = area under the curve; CPP = cerebral perfusion pressure; EVD = external ventricular drainage; I-ICP = invasive intracranial pressure; ICU = 
intensive care unit; IPM = intraparenchymal monitor; NI-ICP = noninvasive ICP; ONSD = optic nerve sheath diameter; ROC = receiver operating characteristic; TBI = trau-
matic brain injury. 
SUBMITTED September 27, 2015. ACCEPTED November 17, 2016.
INCLUDE WHEN CITING Published online August 8, 2017; DOI: 10.3171/2016.11.JNS152268.
Evaluation of a novel noninvasive ICP monitoring 
device in patients undergoing invasive ICP monitoring: 
preliminary results
Oliver Ganslandt, MD,1 Stylianos Mourtzoukos, MD,1 Andreas Stadlbauer, PhD,2  
Björn Sommer, MD,2 and Rudolf Rammensee, MD2
1Department of Neurosurgery, Klinikum Stuttgart; and 2Department of Neurosurgery, University of Erlangen, Germany
OBJECTIVE There is no established method of noninvasive intracranial pressure (NI-ICP) monitoring that can serve 
as an alternative to the gold standards of invasive monitoring with external ventricular drainage or intraparenchymal 
monitoring. In this study a new method of NI-ICP monitoring performed using algorithms to determine ICP based on 
acoustic properties of the brain was applied in patients undergoing invasive ICP (I-ICP) monitoring, and the results were 
analyzed.
METHODS In patients with traumatic brain injury and subarachnoid hemorrhage who were undergoing treatment in a 
neurocritical intensive care unit, the authors recorded ICP using the gold standard method of invasive external ventricu-
lar drainage or intraparenchymal monitoring. In addition, the authors simultaneously measured the ICP noninvasively 
with a device (the HS-1000) that uses advanced signal analysis algorithms for acoustic signals propagating through the 
cranium. To assess the accuracy of the NI-ICP method, data obtained using both I-ICP and NI-ICP monitoring methods 
were analyzed with MATLAB to determine the statistical significance of the differences between the ICP measurements 
obtained using NI-ICP and I-ICP monitoring.
RESULTS Data were collected in 14 patients, yielding 2543 data points of continuous parallel ICP values in recordings 
obtained from I-ICP and NI-ICP. Each of the 2 methods yielded the same number of data points. For measurements at 
the ≥ 17–mm Hg cutoff, which was arbitrarily chosen for this preliminary analysis, the sensitivity and specificity for the 
NI-ICP monitoring were found to be 0.7541 and 0.8887, respectively. Linear regression analysis indicated that there was 
a strong positive relationship between the measurements. Differential pressure between NI-ICP and I-ICP was within ± 
3 mm Hg in 63% of data-paired readings and within ± 5 mm Hg in 85% of data-paired readings. The receiver operating 
characteristic–area under the curve analysis revealed that the area under the curve was 0.895, corresponding to the 
overall performance of NI-ICP monitoring in comparison with I-ICP monitoring.
CONCLUSIONS This study provides the first clinical data on the accuracy of the HS-1000 NI-ICP monitor, which uses 
advanced signal analysis algorithms to evaluate properties of acoustic signals traveling through the brain in patients un-
dergoing I-ICP monitoring. The findings of this study highlight the capability of this NI-ICP device to accurately measure 
ICP noninvasively. Further studies should focus on clinical validation for elevated ICP values.
https://thejns.org/doi/abs/10.3171/2016.11.JNS152268
KEY WORDS intracranial pressure monitoring; diagnostic technique; traumatic brain injury
R
ecoRding and interpretation of intracranial pressure 
(ICP) is one of the most important diagnostic tools 
in neurosurgery and neurology.9 There is growing 
evidence that ICP monitoring and protocol-driven thera-
py help to improve clinical outcome in a number of pa-
thologies such as traumatic brain injury (TBI), brain infec-
tions such as meningitis, and brain tumors.22 To date, ICP 
monitoring is still an invasive procedure in which a burr 
hole is used to introduce a transducer-coupled probe into 
the brain parenchyma or into the ventricles. Invasive ICP 
J Neurosurg Volume 128 • June 2018
1653
©AANS 2018, except where prohibited by US copyright law
 O. Ganslandt et al.
J Neurosurg Volume 128 • June 2018
1654
monitoring coupled with the use of external ventricular 
drainage (EVD) is still considered the gold standard of 
ICP monitoring and is part of the standard patient man-
agement in the intensive care unit (ICU).3,8,18,20,31,34 The 
invasive nature of this method and the methodology itself 
makes invasive ICP (I-ICP) monitoring both a potentially 
harmful and technically difficult technique.17,23 The main 
concerns with using EVD include an associated high in-
fection rate, which ranges from 3.4% to 32.2%;7 the rate 
of malplacement of the ventricular catheter, which in one 
study was as high as 12.3%;28 and the problem of techni-
cally inaccurate recordings due to calibration errors.24 
When considering the disadvantages of I-ICP moni-
toring, it is understandable that efforts have been made 
to introduce an alternative measure that would allow for 
noninvasive ICP (NI-ICP) monitoring performed using 
surrogate parameters that correspond to the ICP but can 
be recorded from the outside of the skull. Of these tech-
niques, transcranial Doppler ultrasonography,32 tympanic 
membrane displacement,12 and optic nerve sheath diam-
eter (ONSD)19 have been investigated. However, all meth-
ods have distinctive limitations that have prevented them 
from being used as replacements for invasive monitoring. 
Raboel et al. stated that NI-ICP monitoring techniques are 
inaccurate and cannot be used as an alternative to invasive 
techniques.24
In this study we investigated a new approach to NI-ICP 
monitoring. The NI-ICP monitor used in our study con-
sists of a device (HS-1000; HeadSense Medical, Ltd.) that 
generates an acoustic signal that propagates through the 
cranium. The modulations of the signal in different physi-
ological and pathophysiological conditions are processed 
using advanced signal analysis. The device displays the re-
corded ICP as quantitative data (in mm Hg) but is capable 
of analyzing a multitude of other parameters through eval-
uation of the respiratory and cardiac cycles and intracra-
nial vessel properties, along with other parameters. In this 
study we focused on a correlative investigation in which 
ICP measurements obtained using the NI-ICP monitor 
were compared with those obtained using invasive EVD 
and intraparenchymal monitoring techniques.
Methods
Patients and/or next of kin consented to participation 
in this study. In most cases consent was given by next of 
kin and was later affirmed by the patient if possible. This 
was in congruence with the local ethics committee require-
ments. The study was approved by the local ethics commit-
tees of our institutions. The study design was a prospective 
parallel comparison of I-ICP and NI-ICP values. The I-ICP 
measurements were obtained with one of 2 methods, the 
EVD I-ICP monitor (Spiegelberg GmbH & Co. KG) or the 
intraparenchymal ICP monitor (IPM) (Codman ICP Mi-
croSensor; Codman, Johnson & Johnson), and data from 
the 2 methods were combined. The NI-ICP values were 
obtained with the HS-1000 (HeadSense Medical, Ltd.). 
The study was performed at the Departments of Neu-
rosurgery at the University Hospital of Erlangen and 
Klinikum Stuttgart. Fourteen patients were enrolled, all 
of whom were undergoing continuous I-ICP monitoring 
in a neurocritical ICU because of either TBI or subarach-
noid hemorrhage. Data were collected and stored for fur-
ther retrospective analysis of the pseudonymized digital 
recordings. Some of the patients were treated with EVD; 
continuous I-ICP monitoring was performed in conjunc-
tion with the EVD system as part of the standard ICU 
management. We also included patients in whom an IPM 
was used for I-ICP monitoring. All patients underwent NI-
ICP monitoring. Exclusion criteria included ear disease or 
ear trauma, rhinorrhea or otorrhea, skull defect, pregnan-
cy, and severe open head trauma, as well as age younger 
than 18 years. Throughout all parallel ICP monitoring ses-
sions, each patient was positioned supine with the head 
placed at a 30° angle.
Invasive ICP Monitoring
The intraparenchymal monitoring involved intraparen-
chymal placement of a catheter. The pressure value, which 
was measured in mm Hg, was relayed electronically via 
a strain-gauge microchip located at the tip of the cath-
eter, which was mounted in a titanium case at the tip of 
a 100-cm flexible nylon tube.16 Ventricular ICP monitor-
ing (performed with EVD) is considered a gold standard 
for ICP monitoring and has been described previously.30 
The EVD system is based on a probe, which is inserted 
via Kocher’s point into the lateral ventricle and is used 
for both drainage of CSF and pressure monitoring. The 
EVD system diverts CSF by using a combination of grav-
ity and intracerebral pressure. The drainage rate depends 
on the height at which the EVD system is placed relative 
to the patient’s anatomy. When the EVD valve is closed, 
the ICP measurement is attainable. Continuous ICP moni-
toring cannot be performed during CSF drainage; when 
the EVD valve is open, the ICP value is not accurate and 
no measurements should be taken. In the present study, 
if the ventricular catheter was open for drainage, the line 
was closed and the system was allowed to equilibrate for 2 
minutes before a reading was taken.
Noninvasive ICP Monitoring
For NI-ICP monitoring we used the HS-1000 device 
(HeadSense Medical Ltd.). This device uses advanced sig-
nal analysis algorithms that evaluate an acoustic signal. 
This signal includes a short beep at 66 dB for approxi-
mately 6 seconds, which is emitted from the ipsilateral ear. 
It then propagates through the cranium and is detected to-
gether with other physiological sounds from the brain by 
the receiving sensor located in the contralateral ear. The 
HS-1000 data are continuously recorded in 6-second ep-
ochs on the corresponding device’s monitor. At the end 
of signal transmission, the HS-1000 device’s monitor is 
programmed to automatically take a snapshot of the I-
ICP monitor screen or the patient’s monitor (including 
date and time, ICP value in mm Hg, and blood pressure). 
These values are saved in a database for future compara-
tive evaluations. Each NI-ICP monitoring session was ap-
proximately 30–60 minutes long, as the patient’s clinical 
condition permitted. The limiting factor for the length of 
the monitoring session was the patient’s ability to toler-
ate closure of the EVD valve throughout the monitoring 
 Noninvasive intracranial pressure monitoring
J Neurosurg Volume 128 • June 2018
1655
session. In cases in which the patient’s condition did not 
allow continuous recording (e.g., when the patient’s CSF 
had to be drained or the patient’s management required 
some form of intervention), the recording was stopped. It 
was resumed only when the patient’s state allowed proper 
recording conditions (lying in a supine position without 
any movement or intervention from the clinicians). Once 
all recordings were complete, the ICP values from the I-
ICP monitor were saved in the study’s database. For pur-
poses of analysis, ranges of I-ICP were formulated and the 
data pairs of I-ICP and NI-ICP were randomly sampled 
to accrue the number of values needed for analysis and to 
calculate sensitivity and specificity (Fig. 1).
Parallel ICP Monitoring
Each parallel monitoring interval in which both the NI-
ICP and I-ICP methods were used consisted of between 
30 minutes and 6 hours of aggregate recording performed 
either continuously or in separate recording sessions as the 
patient’s condition allowed, which was repeated 3 times 
per day for up to 48 hours. There were a minimum of 3 to 
as many as 8640 data points per patient. Both EVD and 
intraparenchymal monitoring were assumed to be gold 
standards; we recorded in parallel from both of the I-ICP 
monitors and the NI-ICP monitor and compared the val-
ues. The raw data on acoustic signals collected by the HS-
1000 (generated signal and accompanying physiological 
signals) were analyzed for approximately 5 seconds, and 
the NI-ICP value was calculated using a proprietary sig-
nal-processing algorithm and displayed to the user in mm 
Hg. Each NI-ICP monitoring cycle lasted approximately 
15 seconds (including 6 seconds for the signal to be trans-
mitted and received, approximately 5 seconds for snap-
shots to be taken, and 4 seconds for calculation of the ICP 
value). This translates to approximately 4 measurements 
per minute. We defined the “mean ICP” independent score 
as the corresponding I-ICP value that is determined ev-
ery consecutive period of approximately 11 seconds as the 
sum of sample values divided by the number of samples. 
This is an acceptable time window compared with current 
state-of-the-art methodologies that range between 5 and 
15 seconds in duration. During the test, no manipulations 
to change the ICP were done, and nothing was changed in 
the usual patient management protocols.
Statistical Analysis
Data were analyzed using MATLAB. Pearson correla-
tion analysis of the I-ICP and NI-ICP values was complet-
ed to compare the ICP values from all devices. For 95% 
confidence, a p value ≤ 0.05 was considered statistically 
significant. The difference between the NI-ICP and I-ICP 
monitoring results was plotted against the mean of the 2 
measures (I-ICP and NI-ICP). Receiver operating charac-
teristics (ROCs) with the area under the curve (AUC) were 
calculated to present the tradeoff between sensitivity and 
specificity for all measurements at the ≥ 15 mm Hg cutoff. 
The AUC was calculated for all data points to provide an 
estimator for the cumulative measurements. Differential 
pressure (in mm Hg) was defined as the difference be-
tween I-ICP and NI-ICP per data point. The Bland-Altman 
method was used to examine the percentages of total data 
points below the 6–mm Hg and 5–mm Hg differential 
pressure. The relationship of the paired data points was 
assessed using linear regression analysis, which showed 
the relationship between NI-ICP measurements and those 
obtained using the I-ICP. The slope of the line of best fit 
was used to examine the predictability of I-ICP from NI-
ICP measurements.
Results
Parallel ICP Monitoring
Fourteen patients met the study’s inclusion criteria (Ta-
ble 1); 1 patient was excluded because of a skull defect. 
The data from each patient were collected over a session 
of approximately 30 minutes to 1 hour. Throughout the 
study, no adverse effects were observed. ICP data were 
collected from all enrolled patients, yielding 2543 data 
points of continuous parallel ICP values in recordings ob-
tained using I-ICP and NI-ICP devices. The I-ICP results 
reported are a combination of data obtained with the EVD 
(12 patients) and IPM (2 patients) I-ICP methods. Differ-
ences between I-ICP and NI-ICP readings (i.e., differen-
tial pressure of direct readings) were obtained. Differen-
tial pressures within ± 3 mm Hg were observed in 1606 
(63%) readings, and differential pressures within ± 5 mm 
Hg were observed in 2154 (85%) readings. The numbers 
of measurements for each patient varied, but the mean ICP 
values were 10 ± 6.1 mm Hg (with a range of 0–26 mm 
Hg) and 9.5 ± 4.7 mm Hg (with a range of 0–21 mm Hg) 
for the I-ICP and NI-ICP measures, respectively.
The ICP values from an I-ICP session were plotted 
against the NI-ICP values (Fig. 2). The trend plot revealed 
a Pearson r correlation of 0.82 between the measurements 
and a 95% CI for r of 0.81–0.83 (p < 0.0001).
A Bland-Altman plot, in which the difference between 
ICP readings obtained using the I-ICP and NI-ICP were 
plotted against the ICP as the average of the 2 methods, 
showed an average bias of 0.54 mm Hg, with 95% limits 
of agreement of -6.3 mm Hg and 7.38 mm Hg (Fig. 3).
Linear regression analysis yields a line of best fit with 
the following equation: y = 0.6357*x + 3.123 (Fig. 4). This 
FIG. 1. Photograph showing the HS-1000 device during a recording ses-
sion. Figure is available in color online only.
 O. Ganslandt et al.
J Neurosurg Volume 128 • June 2018
1656
equation best predicts the NI-ICP results from the I-ICP 
results. It also shows that there is a strong positive relation-
ship between the measurements obtained with the NI-ICP 
and I-ICP devices.
As presented in Fig. 5, ROC curve analysis revealed 
an AUC of 0.895, corresponding to overall performance 
of the NI-ICP to correctly identify I-ICP values. For mea-
surements at the ≥ 17–mm Hg cutoff, which was arbitrari-
ly chosen for this preliminary analysis, the sensitivity and 
specificity for the NI-ICP monitoring were found to be 
0.7541 and 0.8887, respectively.
Discussion
This study provides the first clinical data on the accura-
cy of the HS-1000 device (an NI-ICP monitor) in patients 
undergoing an I-ICP monitoring procedure for various 
clinical conditions resulting from TBI and/or SAH. The 
data points of continuous parallel recordings of ICP val-
ues were obtained from I-ICP and NI-ICP simultaneously. 
The overall findings showed that there was a good correla-
tion between the measurements obtained with these 2 mo-
dalities (r = 0.82; p < 0.0001), revealing the potential of the 
noninvasive HS-1000 monitor for measurement of quanti-
tative ICP. The average ICP readings for the I-ICP and NI-
ICP methods were 10 ± 6.1 mm Hg and 9.5 ± 4.7 mm Hg, 
respectively. For measurements at the ≥ 17–mm Hg cutoff, 
sensitivity and specificity for the NI-ICP monitoring were 
0.7541 and 0.8887, respectively. Bias and agreement analy-
sis performed using the Bland-Altman plot showed good 
concordance between the 2 measures. We have demon-
strated a systematic way to incorporate NI-ICP monitor-
ing via use of the HS-1000 device in a neurocritical ICU 
environment.
Currently, I-ICP monitoring is a fundamental tool that 
provides primary surveillance management of patients in 
neurocritical ICUs. For the I-ICP measurement modality, 
probes are inserted into the brain parenchyma or ven-
tricles. The predominant methods of invasive continuous 
ICP monitoring are performed via intraparenchymal or 
intraventricular probes. Arguably, the latter is considered 
the gold standard for ICP monitoring. The EVD system 
allows therapeutic CSF drainage and clearance of intra-
ventricular blood.2,14,27 More importantly, an elevated ICP 
is considered a medical emergency and can be managed 
medically via placement of an EVD system. The funda-
mental indication for management of elevated ICP is to 
prevent secondary ischemia due to the decrease in cere-
bral perfusion, which may lead to brain herniation.3 The 
methodology of ICP monitoring via an EVD system is 
meant to allow continuous monitoring as well as drainage, 
but not to perform both simultaneously. The standard of 
care is to drain by opening the EVD valve (transducer) 
only for elevations at or above the 20 mm Hg threshold 
(ICP ≥ 20 mm Hg) and to relieve elevated ICP. In clinical 
practice, the EVD valve is kept closed for ICP measure-
ments and to assess the continued need for CSF drainage. 
The inability of IPMs to allow drainage does not impede 
their usefulness in ICP monitoring, yet the accuracy level 
may be compromised when subjected to varying degrees 
of zero drift during the monitoring, due to the inherent in-
ability to recalibrate the sensor in situ.4,15
As for the indications, the ICP threshold at which her-
niation may occur is not absolute, and may vary between 
patients in regard to interindividual heterogeneity and the 
location of the intracranial mass lesion.1 Cerebral perfu-
sion can be monitored indirectly by measuring cerebral 
perfusion pressure (CPP), which is equal to the difference 
between mean arterial pressure and ICP. The CPP can be 
evaluated and managed by manipulation of arterial pres-
sure, and is derived from ICP-monitored patients.15
The above-mentioned threshold of 20 mm Hg is not a 
clear cutoff, yet it is considered a clinical target for ICP 
management for the treatment of severe TBI. Evidently, 
research supports ICP thresholds of 20–25 mm Hg to pro-
mote investigation and treatment of elevated ICP.5 Never-
theless, in a meta-analysis investigating ICP monitoring 
in patients with TBI, the authors concluded that it is still 
essential to identify the optimal threshold value of ICP-
directed treatment, even in recent reviews of ICP monitor-
FIG. 2. Trend plot showing 2348 continuous parallel recordings of ICP 
values obtained from I-ICP compared with NI-ICP. Pearson r = 0.824, 
and 95% CI for r: 0.81–0.83 (p < 0.0001). Figure is available in color 
online only.
TABLE 1. Baseline characteristics of 14 patients enrolled in the 
ICP monitoring study
Variable
No. of Patients (%)*
Sex
 Male
11 (79)
 Female
4 (29)
Age range in yrs
 40–49
2 (14)
 50–59
3 (21)
 60–69
6 (43)
 70–79
4 (29)
Diagnosis
 Subarachnoid hemorrhage
6 (43)
 Acute subdural hematoma
1 (7)
 Intracranial hemorrhage
6 (43)
 Malignant MCA infarction
1 (7)
MCA = middle cerebral artery.
* The totals for sex and age add up to 15, but 1 patient was excluded from 
monitoring because of a skull defect.
 Noninvasive intracranial pressure monitoring
J Neurosurg Volume 128 • June 2018
1657
ing.33 We introduced a new method for continuous NI-ICP 
monitoring and compared it to the main state-of-the-art 
methods currently available in neurocritical ICUs.
Although, for reasons described below, we consider our 
NI-ICP modality to be highly accurate, our comparison 
was confined to protocol-driven management for elevated 
ICP, and therefore we were unable to compare data points 
when the patient’s condition did not allow continuous re-
cording. During this study, data collection was possible 
only when the EVD valve was closed, unless the patient’s 
management protocol required some form of intervention 
(based on a diagnosis of elevated ICP). Therefore, we were 
FIG. 3. Bland-Altman plot showing a good concordance between I-ICP and NI-ICP values. Figure is available in color online only.
FIG. 4. Linear regression analysis showing a strong positive relationship between the NI-ICP and I-ICP values. Figure is available 
in color online only.
 O. Ganslandt et al.
J Neurosurg Volume 128 • June 2018
1658
able to obtain measurements within a range of 0–26 mm 
Hg (mean ICP 10 ± 6.1 mm Hg) or 0–21 mm Hg (mean 
ICP 9.5 ± 4.7 mm Hg) for the I-ICP and NI-ICP measures, 
respectively.
Continuous ICP monitoring is of paramount importance 
for the treatment of elevated ICP; it is essential for main-
taining a satisfactory CPP and to avoid inadequate oxy-
gen delivery that may lead to secondary injury. Although 
ICP measurement is widely accepted as a core parameter 
in most neurocritical ICUs worldwide, invasive modali-
ties have a number of drawbacks. The main challenge is 
that both intraparenchymal and intraventricular catheters 
have risks of complications; i.e., infection or postopera-
tive hemorrhage. Moreover, invasive monitoring requires 
constant management and continuous monitoring, which 
may be burdensome to the ICU staff and in some cases 
may limit ICP monitoring.21 The EVD system presents 
some clear advantages over intraparenchymal monitoring 
because it allows CSF drainage, which may significantly 
decrease the need for surgical decompression.15 However, 
it is associated with a higher risk of infection compared 
with intraparenchymal monitoring.26 As mentioned above, 
drainage requires opening the EVD valve (i.e., the mount-
ed transducer) and exposing it to atmospheric pressure. 
Furthermore, drainage requires completing a zeroing pro-
cedure to obtain the zero reference point, which hinders 
the integrity of the sterile closed drainage system. This 
limits the accuracy of ICP reading to periods in which it is 
clinically possible to close the mounted transducer.29 The 
accuracy of ICP readings via the EVD system is also de-
pendent on maintaining the patient in a constant position 
where the transducer is fixed at the level of the foramen 
of Monro. This is done by creating an imaginary point of 
intersection between the ipsilateral medial canthus of the 
orbit and the tragus of the ear.14 All of these considerations 
present significant drawbacks and limit the accuracy of the 
EVD system’s ICP monitors. However, EVD devices are 
considered the most accurate, reliable, and cost-effective 
ICP monitoring methodology today,2,15 with functional ac-
curacy of 87%.14
To overcome these obstacles, a variety of NI-ICP moni-
toring modalities have been explored in recent years, but 
according to several comparative analyses, none are as ac-
curate as the invasive modalities.24,27 Yet, as the results of 
these analyses indicate, some noninvasive modalities may 
yield more clinically useful results in the presence of el-
evated ICP: these include ultrasound and color Doppler ul-
trasonography. Ultrasound measures of the ONSD present 
a unique noninvasive tool for detecting ICP hypertension. 
Research suggests ONSD as a possible indicator of elevated 
ICP. The underlying principle states that an increase in ICP 
results in distension of the ONSD (millimetric increase) 
within seconds. The accepted consensus for an elevated 
ICP is ONSD above a threshold of 0.5 cm.11,25 Rajajee et 
al.25 conducted a comparison between ONSD and I-ICP 
measurements, EVD, and intraparenchymal monitoring, 
indicating that the optimal ONSD for detection of ICP ≥ 
20 mm Hg was ≥ 0.48 cm (sensitivity 96% and specificity 
94%). Spearman’s correlation coefficient of an ONSD of 
0.52 cm for detection of ICP ≥ 20 mm Hg was 0.73.25 The 
main limitation of this method is that the measurement ac-
curacy corresponds to the operator’s experience and equip-
ment, as well as the fact that the ONSD criterion (i.e., cutoff 
for ICP hypertension) is not well established.13,25 All of the 
aforementioned drawbacks can be counterproductive to 
the implementation of this method and its effectiveness in 
ICUs.
In this study, differences between data-paired readings 
were also calculated for each patient recording. Major dif-
ferences in the mean ICP were first observed by Fernandes 
et al., who demonstrated sudden shifts in the mean ICP 
while simultaneously using 2 separate IPMs (1 Codman 
microsensor and 1 Camino fiberoptic device).10 In our 
study, the differential pressure between NI-ICP and I-ICP 
was within ± 3 mm Hg in 63% of data-paired readings and 
within ± 5 mm Hg in 85% of data-paired readings. We be-
lieve these findings to be particularly interesting because 
similar differences have been reported for studies compar-
ing 2 invasive modalities, intraventricular and intraparen-
chymal ICP. Chambers et al. reported similar results (79%) 
that were within ± 5 mm Hg for simultaneously compari-
sons of readings from the Spiegelberg transducer and the 
EVD system.6 With the HS-1000, the mean difference be-
tween ICP readings obtained using the I-ICP and NI-ICP 
is plotted against the ICP as the average of the 2 methods, 
and shows an average bias of 0.54 mm Hg, with 95% limits 
of agreement of -6.3 mm Hg and 7.38 mm Hg. Similarly, 
reported comparisons between the EVD system and in-
traparenchymal monitoring measurements obtained using 
different modalities were consistent with the results of the 
mean ICP differences in our study. Lescot et al. found a 
bias of -0.6 mm Hg with 95% limits of agreement of -8.1 
mm Hg and 6.9 mm Hg between the Pressio IPM and the 
EVD system, and 0.3 mm Hg and limits of agreement of 
-6.6 and 7.1 mm Hg between the Codman IPM and the 
EVD system.17
FIG. 5. The ROC curve for all measurements. The AUC was 0.895. Thd 
= threshold. Figure is available in color online only.
 Noninvasive intracranial pressure monitoring
J Neurosurg Volume 128 • June 2018
1659
Conclusions
Further investigation of the HS-1000 ICP monitor 
should focus on the accuracy of elevated ICP values. The 
findings of this study highlight the capability of the HS-
1000 to provide information about normal and elevated 
ICP levels in a clinical setting. The HS-1000 could be 
extremely beneficial as an adjunct modality by assisting 
clinicians in deciding if a patient requires an I-ICP moni-
tor. It may also serve as a unique tool for continuous ICP 
monitoring, especially in third-world ICUs, in which the 
sanitation level and general care are not comparable to 
those in first-world, Western hospitals. The use of this NI-
ICP monitoring device may help avoid the immediate risk 
of infection and/or hemorrhage associated with the use of 
I-ICP methods and reduce the morbidity and mortality 
rates in neurocritical ICUs.
References
 1. Andrews BT, Chiles BW III, Olsen WL, Pitts LH: The effect 
of intracerebral hematoma location on the risk of brain-stem 
compression and on clinical outcome. J Neurosurg 69:518–
522, 1988
 2. Berlin T, Murray-Krezan C, Yonas H: Comparison of 
parenchymal and ventricular intracranial pressure readings 
utilizing a novel multi-parameter intracranial access system. 
Springerplus 4:10, 2015
 3. Bhatia A, Gupta AK: Neuromonitoring in the intensive 
care unit. I. Intracranial pressure and cerebral blood flow 
monitoring. Intensive Care Med 33:1263–1271, 2007
 4. Bratton SL, Chestnut RM, Ghajar J, McConnell Hammond 
FF, Harris OA, Hartl R, et al: Guidelines for the management 
of severe traumatic brain injury. VII. Intracranial pressure 
monitoring technology. J Neurotrauma 24 (Suppl 1):S45–
S54, 2007 (Erratum in J Neurotrauma 25:276–278, 2008)
 5. Bratton SL, Chestnut RM, Ghajar J, McConnell Hammond 
FF, Harris OA, Hartl R, et al: Guidelines for the management 
of severe traumatic brain injury. VIII. Intracranial pressure 
thresholds. J Neurotrauma 24 (Suppl 1):S55–S58, 2007 
(Erratum in J Neurotrauma 25:276–278, 2008)
 6. Chambers IR, Siddique MS, Banister K, Mendelow AD: 
Clinical comparison of the Spiegelberg parenchymal 
transducer and ventricular fluid pressure. J Neurol 
Neurosurg Psychiatry 71:383–385, 2001
 7. Collins CD, Hartley JC, Chakraborty A, Thompson DN: 
Long subcutaneous tunnelling reduces infection rates in 
paediatric external ventricular drains. Childs Nerv Syst 
30:1671–1678, 2014
 8. Cremer OL: Does ICP monitoring make a difference in 
neurocritical care? Eur J Anaesthesiol Suppl 42:87–93, 
2008
 9. Czosnyka M, Pickard JD: Monitoring and interpretation 
of intracranial pressure. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 
75:813–821, 2004
10. Fernandes HM, Bingham K, Chambers IR, Mendelow AD: 
Clinical evaluation of the Codman microsensor intracranial 
pressure monitoring system. Acta Neurochir Suppl 71:44–
46, 1998
11. Galetta S, Byrne SF, Smith JL: Echographic correlation of 
optic nerve sheath size and cerebrospinal fluid pressure. J 
Clin Neuroophthalmol 9:79–82, 1989
12. Gwer S, Sheward V, Birch A, Marchbanks R, Idro R, Newton 
CR, et al: The tympanic membrane displacement analyser for 
monitoring intracranial pressure in children. Childs Nerv 
Syst 29:927–933, 2013
13. Hightower S, Chin EJ, Heiner JD: Detection of increased 
intracranial pressure by ultrasound. J Spec Oper Med 
12:19–22, 2012
14. Kakarla UK, Kim LJ, Chang SW, Theodore N, Spetzler RF: 
Safety and accuracy of bedside external ventricular drain 
placement. Neurosurgery 63 (1 Suppl 1):ONS162–ONS167, 
2008
15. Kasotakis G, Michailidou M, Bramos A, Chang Y, Velmahos 
G, Alam H, et al: Intraparenchymal vs extracranial 
ventricular drain intracranial pressure monitors in traumatic 
brain injury: less is more? J Am Coll Surg 214:950–957, 
2012
16. Koskinen LO, Olivecrona M: Intracranial pressure 
monitoring using the Codman MicroSensor. Neurosurgery 
67:221, 2010 (Letter)
17. Lescot T, Reina V, Le Manach Y, Boroli F, Chauvet D, 
Boch AL, et al: In vivo accuracy of two intraparenchymal 
intracranial pressure monitors. Intensive Care Med 37:875–
879, 2011
18. Lozier AP, Sciacca RR, Romagnoli MF, Connolly ES Jr: 
Ventriculostomy-related infections: a critical review of the 
literature. Neurosurgery 51:170–182, 2002
19. Maissan IM, Dirven PJ, Haitsma IK, Hoeks SE, Gommers D, 
Stolker RJ: Ultrasonographic measured optic nerve sheath 
diameter as an accurate and quick monitor for changes in 
intracranial pressure. J Neurosurg 123:743–747, 2015
20. March K: Intracranial pressure monitoring: why monitor? 
AACN Clin Issues 16:456–475, 2005
21. McKeating EG, Andrews PJ, Tocher JI, Menon DK: 
The intensive care of severe head injury: a survey of 
non-neurosurgical centres in the United Kingdom. Br J 
Neurosurg 12:7–14, 1998
22. Padayachy LC, Figaji AA, Bullock MR: Intracranial pressure 
monitoring for traumatic brain injury in the modern era. 
Childs Nerv Syst 26:441–452, 2010
23. Pople IK, Muhlbauer MS, Sanford RA, Kirk E: Results and 
complications of intracranial pressure monitoring in 303 
children. Pediatr Neurosurg 23:64–67, 1995
24. Raboel PH, Bartek J Jr, Andresen M, Bellander BM, 
Romner B: Intracranial pressure monitoring: invasive versus 
non-invasive methods—a review. Crit Care Res Pract 
2012:950393, 2012
25. Rajajee V, Vanaman M, Fletcher JJ, Jacobs TL: Optic nerve 
ultrasound for the detection of raised intracranial pressure. 
Neurocrit Care 15:506–515, 2011
26. Rebuck JA, Murry KR, Rhoney DH, Michael DB, Coplin 
WM: Infection related to intracranial pressure monitors in 
adults: analysis of risk factors and antibiotic prophylaxis. J 
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 69:381–384, 2000
27. Rosenberg JB, Shiloh AL, Savel RH, Eisen LA: Non-invasive 
methods of estimating intracranial pressure. Neurocrit Care 
15:599–608, 2011
28. Saladino A, White JB, Wijdicks EF, Lanzino G: Malplace-
ment of ventricular catheters by neurosurgeons: a single insti-
tution experience. Neurocrit Care 10:248–252, 2009
29. Schimpf MM: Diagnosing increased intracranial pressure. J 
Trauma Nurs 19:160–167, 2012
30. Smith M: Monitoring intracranial pressure in traumatic brain 
injury. Anesth Analg 106:240–248, 2008
31. Steiner LA, Andrews PJ: Monitoring the injured brain: ICP 
and CBF. Br J Anaesth 97:26–38, 2006
32. Wakerley BR, Kusuma Y, Yeo LL, Liang S, Kumar K, 
Sharma AK, et al: Usefulness of transcranial Doppler-
derived cerebral hemodynamic parameters in the noninvasive 
assessment of intracranial pressure. J Neuroimaging 25:111–
116, 2015
33. Yuan Q, Wu X, Sun Y, Yu J, Li Z, Du Z, et al: Impact of 
intracranial pressure monitoring on mortality in patients 
with traumatic brain injury: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. J Neurosurg 122:574–587, 2015
 O. Ganslandt et al.
J Neurosurg Volume 128 • June 2018
1660
34. Zhong J, Dujovny M, Park HK, Perez E, Perlin AR, Diaz 
FG: Advances in ICP monitoring techniques. Neurol Res 
25:339–350, 2003
Disclosures
The authors report no conflict of interest concerning the materi-
als or methods used in this study or the findings specified in this 
paper.
Author Contributions
Conception and design: Ganslandt. Acquisition of data: 
Ganslandt, Mourtzoukos, Sommer, Rammensee. Analysis and 
interpretation of data: all authors. Drafting the article: Ganslandt, 
Stadlbauer, Sommer, Rammensee. Critically revising the article: 
Ganslandt, Stadlbauer, Rammensee. Reviewed submitted ver-
sion of manuscript: Ganslandt. Approved the final version of the 
manuscript on behalf of all authors: Ganslandt. Study supervision: 
Ganslandt.
Correspondence
Oliver Ganslandt, Klinikum Stuttgart, Katharinenhospital, Kriegs-
bergstrasse 60, Stuttgart 70174, Germany. email: o.ganslandt@
klinikum-stuttgart.de.
