 Punctuated Copy Number Evolution and Clonal Stasis in Triple-
Negative Breast Cancer
Ruli Gao1, Alexander Davis1,2, Thomas O. McDonald3,4, Emi Sei1, Xiuqing Shi5, Yong 
Wang1, Pei-Ching Tsai1, Anna Casasent1,2, Jill Waters1, Hong Zhang6, Funda Meric-
Bernstam7, Franziska Michor3,4, and Nicholas E. Navin1,2,8,*
1Department of Genetics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 
USA
2Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX, USA
3Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, 
MA, USA
4Department of Biostatistics, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA
5Peking Union Medical College, Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Hospital & Institute, 
Chinese Academy Of Medical Sciences, Beijing, 100021, China
6Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 
USA
7Department of Surgical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX, USA
8Department of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA
Abstract
Aneuploidy is a hallmark of breast cancer; however, our knowledge of how these complex 
genomic rearrangements evolve during tumorigenesis is limited. In this study we developed a 
highly multiplexed single-nucleus-sequencing method to investigate copy number evolution in 
triple-negative breast cancer patients. We sequenced 1000 single cells from 12 patients and 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
*corresponding author: Nicholas E. Navin, Ph.D., MD Anderson Cancer Center, nnavin@mdanderson.org. 
Accession Codes
All data from this study has been deposited to the Sequence Read Archive (SRA) under accession number: SRP064210 for tumors 
T1–T10, SRA018951 for tumors T11 and T12.
Author Contributions
RG analyzed the data and wrote the manuscript. AD analyzed the data. TM and FM performed mathematical modeling and wrote the 
manuscript. ES, XS, PT and JL performed experiments. AC and YW analyzed the data. HZ and FMB provided tumor samples and 
interpreted the data. NN analyzed the data, led the project and wrote the manuscript.
Competing Interests
The authors have no competing interests to declare.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 15.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Genet. 2016 October ; 48(10): 1119–1130. doi:10.1038/ng.3641.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 identified 1–3 major clonal subpopulations in each tumor that shared a common evolutionary 
lineage. We also identified a minor subpopulation of non-clonal cells that were classified as: 1) 
metastable, 2) pseudo-diploid, or 3) chromazemic. Phylogenetic analysis and mathematical 
modeling suggest that these data are unlikely to be explained by the gradual accumulation of copy 
number events over time. In contrast, our data challenge the paradigm of gradual evolution, 
showing that the majority of copy number aberrations are acquired at the earliest stages of tumor 
evolution, in short punctuated bursts, followed by stable clonal expansions that form the tumor 
mass.
Introduction
Aneuploidy is pervasive in human cancers1 and is frequently (>90%) detected in breast 
cancer patients2,3. DNA copy number aberrations (CNAs) often lead to gene dosage effects 
that promote tumor growth through the overexpression of oncogenes or down-regulation of 
tumor suppressor genes. However most genomic studies have analyzed a single time-point 
sample (biopsy or surgery) making it difficult to study the natural progression of 
chromosome evolution during tumorigenesis. Currently, the prevailing model for copy 
number evolution posits that CNAs are acquired gradually and sequentially over extended 
periods of time, leading to successively more malignant stages of cancer4,5. An alternative 
model is punctuated copy number evolution (PCNE), in which CNAs are acquired in short 
bursts of crisis, followed by stable clonal expansions that form the tumor mass 
(Supplementary Fig. 1). Previous work has implicated a punctuated model to explain 
localized chromosome rearrangements, including chromothripsis6, chromoplexy7 and 
firestorms8. However, there has been limited data showing that genome-wide aneuploidy 
arises in a short punctuated burst, at the earliest stages of tumor evolution.
Intratumor heterogeneity provides a window into time, by representing a permanent record 
of the mutations that occurred during tumor progression. By assuming that mutational 
complexity increases over time, it is possible to reconstruct the evolutionary history of a 
tumor9,10 and investigate PCNE. However, most tumors consist of complex mixtures of 
single cells with different genotypes, complicating such studies. To address this problem, we 
previously developed a single cell DNA sequencing method called Single-Nucleus-
Sequencing (SNS)11,12. We applied this method to sequence single tumor cells from two 
breast cancer patients, which provided initial evidence for PCNE12. However, these data 
were limited to two patients, mainly due to the high costs and low throughput associated 
with SNS. To address this problem, we developed a highly multiplexed single-nucleus-
sequencing (HM-SNS) method that can profile 48–96 single cells in parallel.
In this study we applied HM-SNS to investigate the clonal substructure and evolution of 
CNAs in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients. TNBCs are a subtype of breast 
cancer that is characterized by a lack of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) 
and Her2 amplification13. TNBC patients show poor survival and frequently develop 
resistance to chemotherapy14. The majority of TNBC patients harbor TP53 mutations3 and 
show complex aneuploid rearrangements2,15. Genomic studies have shown that TNBC 
patients display a large amount of inter-patient heterogeneity in somatic mutations3, in 
Gao et al.
Page 2
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 addition to extensive intra-tumor heterogeneity within the tumor mass16–19. However, most 
studies of TNBC patients have been limited to bulk tumor analysis, and thus we investigated 
the clonal substructure of 12 treatment-naïve TNBC patients at single cell genomic 
resolution (Supplementary Table 1).
RESULTS
Highly-Multiplexed Single-Cell Copy Number Profiling
To profile genome-wide copy number in single cells we developed HM-SNS and applied it 
to sequence 1000 single cells from 12 TNBC patients (Fig. 1a). Nuclear suspensions were 
prepared from large (0.6–1cm3) frozen tumor specimens and stained with DAPI for flow-
sorting. Single nuclei were gated by ploidy and deposited into individual wells on a 96-well 
plate for whole-genome-amplification (WGA) using degenerative-oligonucleotide-PCR 
(DOP-PCR)11,12. After WGA, barcoded libraries were prepared for each single cell and 48–
96 libraries were pooled (Online Methods). The pooled libraries were sequenced on the 
Illumina platform at 76 single-end cycles. Single nuclei were sequenced at sparse coverage 
depth and copy number profiles were calculated from sequence read depth at 220kb 
resolution (Online Methods). On average 83 single cells (range 48–120) were sequenced 
from each TNBC patient (Supplementary Table 2). In each patient we observed a 2N diploid 
peak (D) and one or more aneuploid peaks that ranged from 1.8 – 4.1N in the flow-sorting 
histograms (Fig. 1b). Single nuclei were isolated from the aneuploid (A) and diploid (D) 
peaks, in addition to broadly gating nuclei from all ploidy distributions using universal (U) 
gates for a subset of tumors.
Clonal Substructure and Diversity During Tumor Growth
To delineate the clonal substructure of each tumor, we performed 1-dimensional hierarchical 
clustering of the aneuploid single cell copy number profiles. Clustered heatmaps identified 
1–3 major subpopulations of clones (A, B, C) in each tumor (Fig. 2). Within each 
subpopulation, the single cells shared highly similar copy number profiles (mean pairwise r 
= 0.87), representing stable clonal expansions that occurred during tumor growth. A similar 
population substructure was also observed by clustering all of the aneuploid and diploid 
cells from each TNBC patient, where the diploid cells formed another independent cluster 
(Supplementary Fig. 2). To quantitatively determine the optimal number of clusters in each 
tumor, we applied PAMK-medoids clustering20 (Supplementary Fig. 3). The PAMK results 
were consistent with the hierarchical clustering results in most TNBC patients. Principle 
component analysis (PCA) was also consistent with the clustering results, by showing that 
1–3 major clusters were present in each tumor (Fig. 3a). We quantified the genotype 
frequencies of the subpopulations, which revealed that some clones achieved higher 
frequencies in the tumor mass (Fig. 3b). To calculate a global metric of clonal diversity, we 
computed Shannon diversity indices for each TNBC patient (Online Methods). The diversity 
indices showed a broad range across the TNBC patient cohort, and corresponded to the 
number of clonal subpopulations that were present in each tumor (Fig. 3c). These data 
suggest that most TNBC tumors consisted of 1–3 major clonal subpopulations, and that 
complex aneuploid tumor profiles were highly stable (clonal stasis) during tumor growth.
Gao et al.
Page 3
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Divergent Subpopulations in Polyclonal Tumors
Polyclonal tumors shared most CNAs between the subpopulations, but also differed by a few 
discrete subclonal events that emerged in the later stages of tumor evolution. The subclonal 
CNAs distinguished the clones and often resulted in the amplification of oncogenes and 
deletion of tumor suppressors. In several cases, the subclonal CNAs were associated with 
increased genotype frequencies of the clones in the tumor mass, suggesting that they may 
have provided a fitness advantage. To further investigate this possibility, we calculated clonal 
frequencies (cf) in the polyclonal tumors (Online Methods, Supplementary Table 3). For 
instance, in tumor T3, two major clonal subpopulations (A, B) were identified, in which 
clone A acquired additional amplifications of chromosome 10p and 12q (Fig. 4a). The 10p 
amplification increased the copy number of GATA3, while the 12q amplification increased 
the copy number of MDM2 in addition to several other genes. These amplifications were 
associated with an increased frequency of clone A (cf = 0.85) compared to clone B (cf = 
0.15). In another polygenomic tumor (T2) we identified two major clonal subpopulations (A, 
B) that differed by a broad amplification on chromosome 5 that encompassed 14 cancer 
genes, including MAP3K1, ERBB2IP and PIK3R1 (Fig. 4b). This amplification was 
associated with an increased frequency of clone A (cf=0.87) relative to clone B (cf=0.13). 
Similar subclonal CNAs were found in other TNBC patients (T5 and T8) and often were 
associated with increased genotype frequencies in the clones that harbored the new CNAs 
(Supplementary Fig. 4). These data show that in addition to stable clonal expansions, TNBC 
patients can continue to acquire single CNAs in the later stages of tumor progression, and 
that these events are associated with the increased prevalence of new subpopulations.
Non-Clonal Copy Number Profiles in Tumors
While most cancer cells clustered into 1–3 major clonal subpopulations, we also identified a 
minor fraction (<10%) of non-clonal single cell copy number profiles in each tumor. On 
average the non-clonal copy number profiles occurred at 7.4 ± 0.8% (SEM) in the aneuploid 
fractions, 7.9 ± 1.4% (SEM) in the diploid fractions and 5.9 ± 1.0% (SEM) in the adjacent 
normal tissue cells (Fig. 5a–d, Supplementary Table 4). Based on the patterns of the CNA 
profiles, we identified three major classes of non-clonal cells: 1) metastable tumor cells, 2) 
pseudodiploid cells, and 3) chromazemic cells (Fig. 5e–h).
Metastable tumor cells are aneuploid cancer cells that share highly similar copy number 
profiles with the major subpopulations, but have evolved additional gains or losses of single 
chromosomes or arms (Fig. 5e). In tumor T3 we identified 53 single aneuploid tumor cells 
that shared a common copy number profile, and 6 unique metastable tumor cells with non-
clonal amplifications and deletions. One metastable tumor cell from T3 showed an 
additional amplification of chromosome 5p compared to the major aneuploid tumor cells 
(Fig. 5e–h, left panel). In tumor T6 we identified 79 single tumor cells that shared a common 
copy number profile and 6 unique metastable tumor cells with non-clonal CNAs. One 
metastable tumor cell with an additional amplification of chromosome 18p is shown in 
comparison to the major aneuploid tumor subpopulation (Fig. 5e, right panel). Metastable 
tumor cells acquired single CNAs in the later stages of tumor evolution, but represent 
evolutionary ‘dead-ends’ that did not undergo further expansion to achieve prevalence in the 
tumor mass.
Gao et al.
Page 4
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Pseudodiploid cells are single cells with flat 2N copy number profiles that have acquired 
additional gains or losses of single chromosomes or arms at random genomic locations (Fig. 
5f–g). While most CNAs were randomly distributed, one exception was a frequent (23%) 
loss of the X chromosome in multiple cells from different patients (p<0.0001, one-tailed t-
test) (Supplementary Table 5). To determine if non-clonal diploid cells were due to a tumor 
field effect, we also profiled normal breast tissues and found that 5.9% of cells also had non-
clonal profiles (Fig. 5d, Fig. 5g). These data suggest that random copy number gains and 
losses occur during normal mitosis, and are unlikely to be associated with a tumorigenic 
field effect (Supplementary Table 6).
Chromazemic cells (-zemia = ‘damage’ or ‘loss’) are non-clonal cells with large 
homozygous deletions of whole chromosomes or chromosome arms that occur at random 
locations in the genome (Fig. 5h). These cells are unlikely to be viable, due to the large 
homozygous deletions of chromosomes. Chromazemic cells may be the byproduct of 
asymmetric cell divisions or possibly dying cells and are found in diploid fractions, normal 
tissues and aneuploid fractions.
Punctuated Copy Number Evolution
To trace tumor evolution, we constructed phylogenetic trees from the single cell copy 
number data. Intratumor heterogeneity provides a permanent record of the mutations that 
occurred during tumor growth, enabling lineages to be reconstructed by assuming that 
mutational complexity increases with time9,10. Copy number segmentation was performed 
using a multi-sample breakpoint algorithm21 to identify common chromosome breakpoints 
that occur across single cells within each tumor. We then calculated a trinary event matrix to 
treat all large and small CNA events equally for phylogenetic analysis using maximum 
parsimony (MP) (Online Methods). The resulting MP trees show that each tumor evolved a 
long root branch of founder (‘truncal’) CNAs that were acquired concurrently in the early 
stages of tumor evolution and maintained stably in the clones during tumor growth (Fig. 6a–
c). Evidence of gradual intermediate branching was not observed as cells progressed from 
diploid to aneuploid genomes. Although some TNBC tumors showed clear evidence of 
divergent subclones in the later stages of tumor evolution, these clones typically only 
diverged by a few (N=1–3) CNAs, compared to the many (N=24–132) CNAs that were 
acquired in early punctuated bursts. Another important characteristic of the phylogenetic 
trees is that they show that all cancer cells share a common evolutionary origin in each 
tumor, suggesting that they evolved from a single normal cell in the breast tissue, not 
multiple initiating cells.
To further investigate whether the single cell data was consistent with PCNE we performed 
linear (gradual) and multi-step (punctuated) fitting of the sorted CNA count data from the 
single cells in each tumor (Online Methods). The 1-step fit resulted in higher correlation 
values (adj R2 = 0.977) compared to the linear fitting (adj R2 = 0.704) and was statistically 
significant (p = 2.125e-9, one-tailed t-test) (Fig. 6d, Supplementary Fig. 5). Similarly, better 
BIC and AIC values were obtained for all tumors when step-fitting was applied. These data 
support PCNE, by showing that a large number of CNA events increased drastically within a 
short period of time during tumor evolution.
Gao et al.
Page 5
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Absence of Gradual Intermediate Cells in Ungated Fractions
One possible explanation for the absence of gradual intermediate copy number profiles in 
the tumor mass is that the gating of ploidy distributions by FACS was too narrow and 
therefore may have missed intermediate cells that occur in between the ploidy peaks (Fig. 
1b). To investigate this possibility, we performed universal gating (U) to sample broadly 
across all of the ploidy distributions in 4/12 TNBC patients and flow-sorted additional single 
nuclei for HM-SNS. Hierarchical clustering was performed using the narrowly gated and 
universally gated nuclei data and heatmaps were constructed to compare the clonal 
substructure (Supplementary Fig. 6). Clustering analyses showed similar population 
substructure in the universal (U) and ploidy-gated (A, D) populations of tumor cells from 
each patient, with no evidence of additional intermediate copy number profiles in the 
universal gates, suggesting that if intermediate profiles exist and persist in the tumor mass, 
they are very rare. These data are consistent with the cell counts in the FACS histograms, 
which show no evidence of intermediate density between the aneuploid and diploid 
populations, with the exception of minor S-phase populations (Fig. 1b).
Mathematical Modeling of Gradual and Punctuated Evolution
To further investigate alternative scenarios such as punctuated and gradual evolution in 
silico, we developed a multi-type stochastic branching process model of tumor growth. In 
this model, during each time-step a cell can divide to produce: 1) two daughter cells that are 
identical to the mother cell, 2) no cells (death), or 3) one daughter identical to the mother 
cell and one daughter with a new CNA whose fitness advantage is selected from a 
mutational fitness distribution22. In the gradual model, each cell division event may lead to 
the accumulation of a new CNA at a constant rate (Fig. 7a) corresponding to the baseline 
mutation rate for single copy number changes (Fig. 7c). In the punctuated model (Fig. 7b), 
each cell division event may either result in the accumulation of a single CNA or, at a 
different rate, a burst of multiple somatic CNAs whose number is chosen from a Poisson 
distribution (Fig. 7d). We implemented both models as exact stochastic computer 
simulations initiating with a single diploid ancestral tumor cell and continued each 
instantiation of the model until the total number of cells was equivalent to the total number 
of cells in each TNBC patient. From each simulation, we sampled 100 single cells at random 
and constructed phylogenetic trees (Supplementary Fig. 7). We then performed AMOVA23 
to investigate the topologies of the resulting phylogenies. Permutation testing was applied to 
obtain p-values for each sample based on the gradual (Fig. 7e) and the punctuated model 
(Fig. 7f) and to test whether these models were able to recapitulate the tree topologies 
obtained from the TNBC patient data (Online Methods). We investigated a wide range of 
parameter values by searching through a total of 162 combinations of parameters. In the 
trees resulting from the gradual model, we found evidence of many intermediate 
subpopulations, suggesting that selective sweeps are unlikely to occur in later stages of 
tumor evolution, even when clones with high fitness values emerge (Fig. 7g, Supplementary 
Fig. 7b). In contrast, the punctuated simulations resulted in tree structures with long root 
nodes between the ancestral diploid and aneuploid subpopulations, which are consistent with 
our single cell data (Fig. 7h, Supplementary Fig. 7a). We then investigated alternative 
scenarios for gradual simulations (epistasis, cancer stem cells, increasing mutation rates, 
fixed fitness distributions and mutation rate from a distributions) to test their ability to 
Gao et al.
Page 6
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 recapitulate the data (Supplementary Notes, Online Methods). In total, we investigated these 
alternative scenarios for a total of 2,097 parameter combinations. However, under all of 
these scenarios, the resulting trees sampled from 100 single cells displayed evidence of 
many intermediate branching clones (Supplementary Fig. 7b). Collectively, these modeling 
data support PCNE and suggest that selective sweeps occurring in later stages of tumor 
growth are unlikely to explain the presence of highly clonal subpopulations.
Inter-tumor Heterogeneity Between TNBC Patients
In addition to investigating intra-tumor heterogeneity we also compared copy number 
differences between TNBC patients. Consensus profiles were calculated to represent the 
bulk tumor populations from each TNBC patient by aggregating the single cell aneuploid 
copy number profiles (Online Methods). Frequency plots were calculated using all TNBC 
patients to identify common amplifications and deletions that are recurrent in the patient 
cohort (Fig. 8a). This analysis identified frequent amplifications on chromosome 1q 
(MDM4), 3q (PIK3CA), 6p (CCND3), 8q (MYC) and 18 (BCL2, SMAD4), while frequent 
deletions included chromosome 4p (FGFR3), 5q (PIK3R1), 8p (DBC2), 9p (NR4A3), 12 
(MDM2) and 22 (CHEK2). These genomic regions and oncogenes are consistent with 
previous microarray CGH studies on TNBC patients15. In addition to the frequent CNAs, we 
also identified many unique high-level focal amplifications (< 10 mb) that occurred 
exclusively in individual patients (Supplementary Fig. 8). These focal amplifications are 
consistent with previous reports in TNBC patients15,24. We further investigated inter-patient 
tumor heterogeneity by integrating single cell data from all of the TNBC patients. 
Dimensionality reduction was performed using t-SNE25, which shows that single cells 
cluster according to the patient from which they were isolated (Fig. 8b). Similarly, 
hierarchical clustering grouped single cells according to patients (Fig. 8c). These data show 
that single cells from each TNBC patient are genetically more related to each other than to 
other tumors, suggesting that they share a common ancestral lineage and evolved from a 
single normal cell in the breast tissue.
Discussion
Collectively, our data support a punctuated model of copy number evolution, in which a 
large number of CNAs are acquired early in tumor evolution, in a short period of crisis, and 
remain highly stable as the tumor mass clonally expands (clonal stasis). Despite profiling 
hundreds of single cells from many spatial regions, we did not detect any gradual 
intermediate copy number profiles, as the tumor cells evolved from diploid to aneuploid 
genomes. These data challenge the dogma of gradual tumor evolution4,5 by showing that 
cancer cells with gradual intermediate copy number profiles are not common during tumor 
growth. These findings also challenge reports of extensive intratumor genomic heterogeneity 
in breast cancer16,17,19,26 by showing that CNAs are remarkably stable throughout the tumor 
mass. However, previous studies focused mainly on point mutations, which may represent 
different molecular clocks during tumorigenesis18. PCNE is consistent with a ‘big bang’ 
model for tumor growth27,28,29 in which clonal diversification occurs at the earliest stages of 
tumor progression, leading to the stable expansion of one or more clones.
Gao et al.
Page 7
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 An analogous model called ‘Punctuated Equilibrium’ was originally proposed by Gould and 
Eldredge in 1972 to explain species evolution30,31. This model was mainly supported by 
evidence in the fossil record and challenged Darwinian gradualism. Several interesting 
parallels can be drawn between these models: 1) stasis, 2) the lack of gradual intermediates 
and 3) short bursts of rapid evolution. However, it is important to note that the mechanisms 
underlying Punctuated Equilibrium in species evolution (e.g. allopatric speciation) are likely 
to be very different from PCNE in human tumors.
Punctuated copy number evolution and clonal stasis have important implications for tumor 
evolution, diagnostics and therapy. These data suggest that individual tumor cells may be 
hard-wired at the earliest stages of tumor growth and intrinsically pre-programmed to 
become invasive, metastatic or resistant to chemotherapy27,32. This deterministic 
characteristic may allow oncologists to profile CNAs in early-stage breast cancers (eg. 
DCIS) to predict whether the tumors should be treated aggressively, or alternatively not at all 
(‘watchful waiting’). Our single cell data also have important implications for clinical 
diagnostics, by showing that multi-region sampling may not be necessary for assessing 
CNAs as biomarkers in TNBC patients, since they are highly stable throughout the tumor 
mass.
Although most copy number profiles in the TNBC patients were found to be highly clonal, 
we also identified a minor (< 10%) fraction of cells with non-clonal copy number profiles. 
These cells were not intermediates in the tumor lineage, but instead showed random 
chromosome gains or losses. To determine if these cells were due to a tumor-specific field 
effect, we also profiled cells from normal breast tissue, which showed similar percentages of 
non-clonal cells (5.9%) to tumors. These data are consistent with recent single cell genomic 
data on tissue mosaicism, which have reported 1–5% non-clonal aneuploid cells in different 
normal tissues, including liver, brain and skin33. Because the majority of the non-clonal 
events involve a single chromosome gain or loss, we speculate that they are due to lagging 
chromosomes that occur during asymmetric mitoses34. While such events are unlikely to 
lead to further proliferation in normal tissues, it may provide tumors with additional ‘fuel for 
evolution’, occasionally leading to the emergence of new tumor subpopulations in the later 
stages of tumor evolution, as we observed in several polyclonal tumors.
Our study has addressed several key questions regarding copy number evolution in TNBC 
patients, but it has also raised several new lines of inquiry. How can genome instability be 
turned on and off at the earliest stages of tumor evolution in a reversible manner? One 
possibility for a reversible switch is telomere inactivation and reactivation, which could lead 
to complex aneuploid rearrangements in just a few cell divisions, in manner that can be 
reversed by telomerase reactivation. This mechanism has previously been described as 
‘episodic telomere crisis’ and was demonstrated using experimental systems35–37. However 
we speculate that telomerase inactivation alone is insufficient to cause punctuated evolution, 
since TP53 inactivation and genome duplication are also requirements for PCNE. Indeed 
previous work using in vivo systems has shown that TP53 and telomere loss can cooperate to 
drive tumorigenesis35. Another important question is how tumor cells with complex 
aneuploid rearrangements can undergo symmetric cell divisions and stable clonal expansions 
(clonal stasis). For tumor cells to undergo symmetric cell divisions with supernumerary 
Gao et al.
Page 8
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 chromosomes, we speculate that aneuploid cells must cluster multiple centrioles together to 
align chromosomes equally along the metaphase plate38,39. Addressing these interesting 
questions will require future work and should be performed using in vitro and in vivo 
systems.
We also investigated whether we sequenced a sufficiently large number of cells in each 
TNBC patient to detect the major tumor subpopulations. To answer this question, we 
calculated posterior saturation curves with multinomial distributions (Supplementary Fig. 9). 
The resulting data suggest that 20–40 single cells were necessary to detect the major 
subpopulations with 95% power, suggesting that our sample size was sufficient (mean = 83). 
Another question we considered is whether an alternative model to PCNE could explain the 
observed single cell data, in which evolution is gradual until a clone with high fitness 
emerges at the later stages of progression, leading to a ‘selective sweep’. Despite extensive 
testing with mathematical modeling, we found that selective sweeps were highly uncommon 
during gradual evolution even when clones with high fitness emerged. Furthermore, a clonal 
sweep is inconsistent with studies that support early clonal diversification and selection27–29.
In summary, our single cell copy number data and mathematical modeling suggest that 
clonal stasis and PCNE are common in TNBC patients. This process leads to complex 
aneuploidy copy number profiles that are remarkably stable during tumor growth and 
ubiquitous throughout the tumor mass. Our preliminary data in other tumors (colon, prostate, 
liver, lung) suggest that PCNE may not be restricted to breast cancer, and is also likely to be 
operating in other human cancers. This model has important implications for our 
evolutionary understanding of cancer dynamics and for the clinical treatment of TNBC 
patients.
Online Methods
Triple Negative Breast Cancer Samples
Frozen tumors from 12 triple-negative breast cancer patients were selected with poorly 
differentiated and high grade (III) invasive ductal carcinomas as determined by the Bloom-
Richardson score. The triple-negative status of the tumor samples was determined by IHC 
for estrogen receptor (<1%) and progesterone receptor (<1%), and FISH analysis of the 
Her2 amplification using the CEP-17 centromere control probe (ratio of Her2/CEP17 < 2.2). 
The frozen tumor samples and matched normal breast tissues were obtained from the UT 
MD Anderson Cancer Center Breast Tissue Bank. Two frozen tumor samples (T11 and T12) 
were obtained from the cooperative human tissue network (CHTN). This study was 
approved by the Internal Review Board (IRB) at the University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center.
Highly Multiplexed Single Nucleus Sequencing
Nuclei from frozen tumors were isolated using a NST/DAPI buffer (800 mL of NST [146 
mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris base at pH 7.8, 1 mM CaCl2, 21 mM MgCl2, 0.05% BSA, 0.2% 
Nonidet P-40]), 200 mL of 106 mM MgCl2, 10 mg of DAPI, and 5mM EDTA. The frozen 
tumors were dissociated into nuclear suspensions by mincing with no.11 surgical scalpels in 
Gao et al.
Page 9
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 1ml of NST-DAPI cytoplasmic lysis buffer at 4°C using ice blocks in a plastic Petri dish. 
Nuclear suspensions were filtered through 37-μm plastic mesh prior to flow-sorting into a 5-
ml polystyrene tube (Falcon). Single nuclei were flow-sorted into 96-well plates by FACS 
using the Aria II flow cytometer (BD Biosciences). Ploidy distributions were gated by 
differences in their total genomic DNA content as determined by DAPI intensity. To 
establish the fluorescence DAPI intensity corresponding to diploid (2N) a lymphoblast 
control cell line (REFM) was first flow-sorted to establish gates. Prior to flow-sorting single 
nuclei, a few thousand cells were first sorted to establish the DNA content distributions for 
gating by Ploidy. Single nuclei were collected from both diploid and aneuploid gated 
fractions. Additionally, nuclei were collected from each tumor by gating broadly across all 
ploidy distributions. Single nuclei were deposited into individual wells on a 96-well plate 
with 10ul of lysis solution in each well from the Sigma-Aldrich GenomePlex© WGA4 kit, 
along with negative control reactions, in which no nuclei were deposited.
Whole-Genome-Amplification & Barcoded Library Construction
Whole genome amplification (WGA) was performed on single flow-sorted nuclei using 
degenerative-oligonucleotide-PCR (DOP-PCR) as described in the Sigma- Aldrich 
GenomePlex WGA4 kit (cat # WGA4-50RXN) protocol. For QC of WGA performance the 
DNA concentration was measured (ThermoFisher Scientific, Qubit 2.0 Fluorometer) and 
reactions were run out using gel electrophoresis to determine size distributions. To prepare 
sequencing libraries by TA ligation cloning, 500ng of DNA were acoustically sonicated to 
200bp using the Sonicator S220 (Covaris). Fragmented WGA products underwent end repair 
(New England Biolabs (NEB), #E6050L) and were purified with the DNA Clean & 
Concentrator-5 Kit (Genesee, #11-303 or 11-306). Libraries were constructed using 
NEBNext® DNA library Prep enzymes (NEB, #E6050L, E6053L, E6056L/M0202L, and 
M0541L) for end-repair, 3′ adenylation, ligation and PCR amplification according to 
manufacturer’s instructions, but using different P7 adapters to barcode each single cell 
library with a unique 8bp identifier and common P5 adapters for sample multiplexing. The 
96 unique P7 indexes are NEXTflex-96 barcodes that were purchased from Bio scientific. 
Following the ligation, DNA underwent a negative and positive selection with Ampure XP 
beads (Beckman Coulter, #A63881), 0.7× and 0.15× respectively, prior to PCR 
amplification. Final library concentrations were measured using the Qubit 2.0 Fluorometer 
and 48–96 single cell libraries were pooled together in equimolar concentrations. Final 
concentration of the pooled libraries was measured by quantitative PCR using KAPA 
Library Quantification Kit (KAPA Biosystems, KK4835) and ABI PRISM real-time 
machine (Applied Biosystem 7900HT), as well as 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent).
Multiplexed Illumina Next-Generation Sequencing
Pooled libraries containing 48–96 barcoded single cell libraries were sequenced at 76 single-
end cycles on the HiSeq2000 system (Illumina) in Sequencing Core Facility of Genetics 
Department at MD Anderson Cancer Center to obtain a target coverage depth of 0.1× per 
single cell library. Data was processed using the CASAVA 1.8.1 pipeline (Illumina Inc.) and 
sequence reads were converted to a master FASTQ files. Sequencing reads from each single 
cell were demultiplexed using an in-house perl script (demultiplex.pl) into 48–96 
independent FASTQ files, where each file represented the sequencing reads from one cell.
Gao et al.
Page 10
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Sequence Alignment and Data Processing
After barcodes and sequencing adaptors were trimmed, sequence reads in FASTQ format 
were mapped to the human assembly US National Center for Biotechnology Information 
(NCBI) build 37 (HG19/NCBI37) using Bowtie2 alignment software40 with default 
parameters to generate SAM files. Samtools (0.1.19) was used to convert SAM files to 
compressed BAM files and sort the BAM files by chromosome coordinates41. To eliminate 
PCR duplicates, Samtools was used to remove sequence reads with identical start 
coordinates. Sequence reads with low mapping quality (MQ<40) were also filtered using 
Samtools.
Integer Copy Number Calculation from Single Cell Data
The sequencing data was counted in 11,927 genomic bins with variable start and stop 
coordinates, using the ‘variable binning’ method as previously described11,12. The median 
genomic length spanned by each bin is 220kb. This variable binning approach reduces 
mappability errors and false deletion events when compared to scaffolds using uniform 
length-fixed bins. A blacklist of ‘aberrant bins’ was filtered to remove false-positive 
amplifications in the centromeric and telomeric regions. The ‘aberrant bins’ are defined as 
bins where 5% to 95% percentile of ratios are distant from the ground states (|difference of 
ratio| > 0.5) in at least 2/3 normal single cell populations or the bins with systematic artifacts 
where the ratios are extremely high (ratio >10) or low (ratio < 0.001) across all single cells. 
Only single cells with median reads/bin greater than or equal to 50 were included for 
downstream copy number analysis. We then applied Loess normalization to correct for GC 
bias11. The copy number profiles were segmented using the Circular Binary Segmentation 
(CBS)42 followed by MergeLevels43 to join adjacent segments with non-significant 
differences in segmented ratios. The parameters used for CBS segmentation is alpha=0.0001 
and undo.prune=0.05 respectively. Default parameters were used for performing 
MergeLevels, which successfully joined false positive detections of erroneous breakpoints. 
The exp.mad was calculated as the median distance between the log2 transformed ratio and 
segmented values. Only segmentations having at least 1.48 times exp.mad deviation were 
retained as copy number aberrations. Finally, the integer copy number was calculated by 
scaling segmented ratios with average DNA ploidy determined by flow-sorting indexes and 
rounding to the closest integer values. When DNA ploidy information was unavailable for 
universally gated single cells, the least-square rounding method was applied to obtain the 
optimum scaling factor that has least sum of deviations from the closet integers after 
rounding44. Lastly, we filtered diploid single cells with variant coefficients of bin counts 
larger than 0.4 or having ‘mean_resid’ values bigger than 0.03. We calculated the 
‘mean_resid’ as the average deviation of scaled ratios from the true ground state integer 
values, i.e. 2, since they are 2N diploid cells. We filtered aneuploid single cells with MAD of 
genome-wide ratios bigger than 0.62 or autocorrelation values of neighboring data points 
less than 0.53. Autocorrelation values were calculated as moving windows using a 10-bin 
interval size across the 11,927 bins in the human genome scaffold. This window results in 
low correlation values in regions where adjacent data points have random values. These 
steps remove single cells with poor WGA performance for the subsequent multivariate data 
analysis.
Gao et al.
Page 11
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Cancer Gene Annotations
Amplifications and deletions identified in the single cell copy number profiles were 
annotated for known cancer genes, which was consisted of 413 genes that were compiled 
from multiple databases, including the Cancer Gene Census45, The Cancer Gene Atlas 
Project (TCGA) and the NCI cancer gene index (Sophic Systems Alliance Inc., Biomax 
Informatics A.G). BEDtools46 was used with the IntersectBED function to find the 
intersection of the known cancer gene BED file and regions of chromosome amplifications 
and deletions that were detected in the single cell sequencing datasets.
Clustering for Single Cell Copy Number Profiles
To construct the clustering heatmaps, the Euclidean distances were calculated from copy 
number data matrix where each column represents one single cell and each row contains the 
log2(ratio+0.1) transformed data of each segment. The one-dimensional hierarchical 
clustering was performed in R using the heatmap.2 function from the ‘gplots’ package 
available on CRAN47. Each column representing one single cell are hierarchically clustered 
using ‘ward’ linkage based on pairwise Euclidean distances, and the X-axis is ordered by 
genome positions. To estimate optimal numbers of clustering for each patient, we performed 
partition around medoids clustering with optimum Calinski-Harabasz index48 or average 
silhouette width using the pamk49 function from the ‘fpc’ package. Clusters with singleton 
cells were collapsed and penalized on pamk criteria to minimize technical artifacts. The K-
medoids clustering was performed on a range from K=1 to K=20 clusters.
High-Dimensional Data Analysis Methods
For each individual tumor, the numeric matrix containing integer copy numbers was used to 
perform principle component analysis (PCA) using ‘prcomp’ function in R47. The columns 
in the numeric matrix are segmented bins and each row is an individual single cell. The first 
two principle components were plotted in x and y-axis respectively. Each dot on the PCA 
plots represented single cell copy number profiles and are colored according to cells that 
clustered together into subpopulations that were identified by the hierarchical clustering 
analysis. To determine the genomic relationship of all aneuploid tumor cells from the 12 
TNBC patients, the t-distribution Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE)50 method was 
applied based on the pairwise Euclidean distances of the ratio data. The t-SNE method is an 
improved nonlinear dimensionality reduction and visualization method, with which both 
local and global structures in high-dimensions can be visualized in low-dimensional plots, 
while avoiding dramatic masking of very similar data points seen in PCA plots.
Calculation of the Subclonal Diversity Index
To calculate the subpopulation diversity index for each tumor, we performed hierarchical 
clustering of copy number data to cluster the aneuploid tumor cells into 1–3 major groups 
(‘species’) based on Euclidean distances. Cells within each subpopulations were defined as 
highly correlated with mean R2 >0.8. We then calculated the proportion (p) of cells that 
belong to each distinct group. The subpopulation diversity index is then calculated as 
Shannon Index: Dc = −Σi(pi×lnpi), where larger values representing higher subclonal 
diversity within the tumor.
Gao et al.
Page 12
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Clonal Frequency of Subpopulations
To calculate the clonal frequencies of each clonal subpopulation, we first identified clusters 
of genotypes by hierarchical clustering and the optimal clustering results were selected 
based on Calinski-Harabasz index48 or average silhouette width. We then counted the 
number of cells that were classified into each sub-clusters. The relative clonal frequencies 
were calculated as the number cells that fell into each specific sub-clusters divided by the 
total number of clonal aneuploid cells. The singleton cells that formed the only one member 
of a sub-cluster were defined as non-clonal and were extruded from this calculation.
Copy Number Aberration Frequency Calculation and Plots
Consensus copy number integer profiles for each tumor were calculated using the median 
integer copy number segment values of all aneuploid single cells from each tumor. To 
calculate the frequency plot of the 12 TNBC samples, the mean copy number values across 
the genomic bins of each cell were treated as the ground state copy number and 1.5 times the 
standard deviation (SD) across the genome as deviation cutoff values. If a copy number was 
higher than mean+1.5×SD, then a significant amplification was designated, while for the 
copy number lower than mean−1.5×SD, a significant deletion was designated. The 
amplification and deletion frequencies across all tumors were calculated by first counting the 
total number of consensus tumor profiles that having significant amplifications or deletions 
in each of the 11,927 bins across the genome and then dividing the counts by the total 
number of consensus profiles.
Multi-Cell Segmentation and Event Matrix Construction
To detect common chromosome breakpoints and segments that are shared between single 
cell samples, we applied a multi-sample population segmentation algorithm using 
bioconductor R package (“copynumber”)21, with regularization parameter γ=40 (default). 
Segments smaller than 20 bins were removed, and their flanking segments joined, or 
separated at the center of the removed segment if they differed significantly (Wilcoxon test, 
Hommel-adjusted p-value < 0.05 in at least 2 cells)51. The ground state of each cell was 
calculated by rounding its expected ploidy to the nearest integer44. For each tumor, a median 
matrix M was constructed, in which M is the median of the ith segment in the jth cell. From 
this median matrix, an event matrix E was calculated as follows: Let gi be the ground state of 
the jth cell. Eij = 1 (amplification) if Mij − gi > 0.6, Eij = −1 (deletion) if Mij − gi < − 0.6, and 
Eij = 0 (neutral) if |Mij − gi | < 0.4. If 0.4 ≤ |Mij − gi |≤ 0.6, Eij was treated as missing with 
systematic artifact. Segments that have missing values systematically across all cells were 
removed if they satisfied the following criterion:
where u is the probability density function (p.d.f.) of a uniform distribution on (0, 1), C0.2 is 
the cardioid p.d.f. 52 with concentration parameter ρ=0.2, and {Mij} is the fractional part of 
Mij. This formula is a Bayes factor for comparing a model in which ploidy-scaled segment 
Gao et al.
Page 13
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 medians do not cluster around integer values to one in which they do, and the chosen cutoff 
represents 99% certainty of the first model assuming equal prior probabilities.
Phylogenetic Tree Construction using Maximum Parsimony
Maximum parsimony trees were calculated from event matrices using the parsimony ratchet 
algorithm with R package “phangorn”53. Amplification, neutral and deletion were treated as 
characters, and missing values as ambiguous sites. Events occurring on sex chromosomes 
were ignored. Metastable cells were removed from each tumor for phylogenetic analyses, 
since they do not share CNAs in the main tumor lineages. Cells were also removed if at least 
one third of events were missing values. Branch lengths and ancestral character probability 
distributions were inferred using the Acctran algorithm53. Altered sites on each edge were 
estimated as the sites such that:
where A and B are the ancestral sequences estimated at each node and c is a character.
Phylogenic tree visualization
Phylogenic trees were exported in Newick format from R-studio and plotted as square trees 
using Matlab (MathWorks Inc). The trees were re-rooted by the top node of diploid cells. 
Each individual single cell was represented as tips of the tree and the nodes were colored 
based on the sub-clonal populations. Single cells from the same subpopulations were flipped 
to physically nearby with each other to favor visualization.
Mathematical Modeling of Gradual and Punctuated Evolution
Please see ‘Supplementary Notes’ for details on mathematical modeling of gradual and 
punctuated tumor growth.
Statistical Fitting of Copy Number Aberrations
We first counted the total number of CNA events within each single cell from the collapsed 
trinary event matrix. To minimize technical noise, singleton CNAs that existed in only one 
cell or CNA events with missing values in > 50% cells, or cells with > 40% missing values 
were excluded from analysis. Subsequently, single cells were sorted based on the total 
number of CNA events within each cell. For the gradual linear model, we assume tumor 
cells evolved through intermediate genomes and therefore the total CNAs increased 
gradually over time. We therefore fit a linear model of total segments with a slope: 
CNAs=Time + Error. For the punctuated model, we assumed tumor cells lack gradual 
intermediate species and therefore the total CNAs changed over one or more critical 
evolutionary steps reflected in the jumping of events. The punctual model is CNAs=Step + 
Error, with no slope, where the fitted values are simply the average numbers of CNAs per 
cell within each step. Models were fit using the lm function in R47. The Bayesian 
Information Criteria (BIC), Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) and adjusted R2 values were 
calculated to measure the best fit of each model for the tumor datasets.
Gao et al.
Page 14
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Saturation Analysis to Estimate Required Sample Sizes
A post hoc saturation analysis was performed to determine whether we sequenced sufficient 
cells for the purpose of this study. We first obtained the total number of subpopulations and 
the fractions of each subpopulation within each tumor by hierarchical clustering single cell 
with copy number data as described above. We then calculated the accumulative probability 
of observing at least 3 single cells in each subpopulation given numbers of sequenced cells, 
by assuming the number of observed cells following a binomial distribution for bi-clonal 
tumors and multinomial distribution for tri-clonal tumors. The two monogenomic tumors 
were excluded from this analysis. The cumulative probabilities were calculated in R47.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a grant from the Lefkofsky Family Foundation. N.N. is a Nadia’s Gift Foundation 
Damon Runyon-Rachleff Innovator (DRR-25-13). This work is also supported by a grant to N.N. from NCI 
(1RO1CA169244-01) and from the American Cancer Society (129098-RSG-16-092-01-TBG). N.N. is a T.C. Hsu 
Endowed Scholar, AAAS Wachtel Scholar and an Andrew Sabin Family Fellow. The study is also supported by the 
Moonshot Knowledge Gap Award and the Center for Genetics & Genomics. This study was supported by the MD 
Anderson Sequencing Core Facility Grant (no. CA016672) and the Flow Cytometry Facility grant from NIH (no. 
CA016672). Additional funding support includes the Rosalie B. Hite Fellowship (A.C.); Center for Genetics & 
Genomics Postdoctoral Fellowship (R.G.); NIH UL1 TR000371 (F.M.B.); Nellie B Connally Breast Cancer 
Research Endowment (F.M.B), Susan Komen SAC10006 (F.M.B.), CPRIT RP110584 (F.M.B), and the MD 
Anderson Cancer Center Support grant (NIH/NCI P30 CA016672). F.M. gratefully acknowledges support from the 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Physical Science Oncology Center (U54CA193461-01). We thank Mary Edgerton, 
Jude Kendall, Michael Wigler and James Hicks for their support and discussions. We are also very grateful to the 
breast cancer patients at MD Anderson for generously donating their tumor tissues to our research studies.
References
1. Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation. Cell. 2011; 144:646–74. 
[PubMed: 21376230] 
2. Hicks J, et al. Novel patterns of genome rearrangement and their association with survival in breast 
cancer. Genome Res. 2006; 16:1465–79. [PubMed: 17142309] 
3. Cancer Genome Atlas N. Comprehensive molecular portraits of human breast tumours. Nature. 
2012; 490:61–70. [PubMed: 23000897] 
4. Fearon ER, Vogelstein B. A genetic model for colorectal tumorigenesis. Cell. 1990; 61:759–67. 
[PubMed: 2188735] 
5. Hoglund M, Gisselsson D, Hansen GB, Sall T, Mitelman F. Multivariate analysis of chromosomal 
imbalances in breast cancer delineates cytogenetic pathways and reveals complex relationships 
among imbalances. Cancer Res. 2002; 62:2675–80. [PubMed: 11980667] 
6. Stephens PJ, et al. Massive genomic rearrangement acquired in a single catastrophic event during 
cancer development. Cell. 2011; 144:27–40. [PubMed: 21215367] 
7. Baca SC, et al. Punctuated evolution of prostate cancer genomes. Cell. 2013; 153:666–77. [PubMed: 
23622249] 
8. Hicks J, et al. Novel patterns of genome rearrangement and their association with survival in breast 
cancer. Genome Res. 2006; 16:1465–1479. [PubMed: 17142309] 
9. Navin N, et al. Inferring tumor progression from genomic heterogeneity. Genome Res. 2010; 20:68–
80. [PubMed: 19903760] 
10. Navin NE, Hicks J. Tracing the tumor lineage. Mol Oncol. 2010; 4:267–83. [PubMed: 20537601] 
Gao et al.
Page 15
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 11. Baslan T, et al. Genome-wide copy number analysis of single cells. Nat Protoc. 2012; 7:1024–41. 
[PubMed: 22555242] 
12. Navin N, et al. Tumour evolution inferred by single-cell sequencing. Nature. 2011; 472:90–4. 
[PubMed: 21399628] 
13. Rakha EA, Reis-Filho JS, Ellis IO. Basal-like breast cancer: a critical review. J Clin Oncol. 2008; 
26:2568–81. [PubMed: 18487574] 
14. Foulkes WD, Smith IE, Reis-Filho JS. Triple-negative breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2010; 
363:1938–48. [PubMed: 21067385] 
15. Turner N, et al. Integrative molecular profiling of triple negative breast cancers identifies amplicon 
drivers and potential therapeutic targets. Oncogene. 2010; 29:2013–23. [PubMed: 20101236] 
16. Shah SP, et al. The clonal and mutational evolution spectrum of primary triple-negative breast 
cancers. Nature. 2012; 486:395–399. [PubMed: 22495314] 
17. Almendro V, et al. Inference of tumor evolution during chemotherapy by computational modeling 
and in situ analysis of genetic and phenotypic cellular diversity. Cell Rep. 2014; 6:514–27. 
[PubMed: 24462293] 
18. Wang Y, et al. Clonal evolution in breast cancer revealed by single nucleus genome sequencing. 
Nature. 2014; 512:155–160. [PubMed: 25079324] 
19. Yates LR, et al. Subclonal diversification of primary breast cancer revealed by multiregion 
sequencing. Nat Med. 2015; 21:751–9. [PubMed: 26099045] 
20. Reynolds APRG, Iglesia B, Rayward-Smith. Clustering Rules: Comparison of Partitioning and 
Hierarchical Clustering Algorithms. Journal of Mathmatical Modeling and Algorithms. 2006; 
5:475–504.
21. Nilsen G, et al. Copynumber: Efficient algorithms for single- and multi-track copy number 
segmentation. BMC Genomics. 2012; 13:591. [PubMed: 23442169] 
22. Foo J, et al. An Evolutionary Approach for Identifying Driver Mutations in Colorectal Cancer. 
PLoS Comput Biol. 2015; 11:e1004350. [PubMed: 26379039] 
23. Excoffier L, Smouse PE, Quattro JM. Analysis of molecular variance inferred from metric 
distances among DNA haplotypes: application to human mitochondrial DNA restriction data. 
Genetics. 1992; 131:479–91. [PubMed: 1644282] 
24. Lips EH, et al. Next generation sequencing of triple negative breast cancer to find predictors for 
chemotherapy response. Breast Cancer Res. 2015; 17:134. [PubMed: 26433948] 
25. Bushati N, Smith J, Briscoe J, Watkins C. An intuitive graphical visualization technique for the 
interrogation of transcriptome data. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011; 39:7380–9. [PubMed: 21690098] 
26. Park SY, Gonen M, Kim HJ, Michor F, Polyak K. Cellular and genetic diversity in the progression 
of in situ human breast carcinomas to an invasive phenotype. J Clin Invest. 2010; 120:636–44. 
[PubMed: 20101094] 
27. Sottoriva A, et al. A Big Bang model of human colorectal tumor growth. Nat Genet. 2015; 47:209–
16. [PubMed: 25665006] 
28. Ling S, et al. Extremely high genetic diversity in a single tumor points to prevalence of non-
Darwinian cell evolution. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015; 112:E6496–505. [PubMed: 26561581] 
29. Williams MJ, Werner B, Barnes CP, Graham TA, Sottoriva A. Identification of neutral tumor 
evolution across cancer types. Nat Genet. 2016; 48:238–44. [PubMed: 26780609] 
30. Gould SJ, Eldredge N. Punctuated equilibrium comes of age. Nature. 1993; 366:223–7. [PubMed: 
8232582] 
31. Eldredge N, Gould SJ. Punctuated equilibria: an alternative to phyletic gradualism. Models in 
Paleobiology. 1972:82–115.
32. DePinho RA, Polyak K. Cancer chromosomes in crisis. Nature Genetics. 2004; 36:932–934. 
[PubMed: 15340427] 
33. Knouse KA, Wu J, Whittaker CA, Amon A. Single cell sequencing reveals low levels of 
aneuploidy across mammalian tissues. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014; 111:13409–14. [PubMed: 
25197050] 
34. Bakhoum SF, Compton DA. Chromosomal instability and cancer: a complex relationship with 
therapeutic potential. J Clin Invest. 2012; 122:1138–43. [PubMed: 22466654] 
Gao et al.
Page 16
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 35. Chin L, et al. p53 deficiency rescues the adverse effects of telomere loss and cooperates with 
telomere dysfunction to accelerate carcinogenesis. Cell. 1999; 97:527–38. [PubMed: 10338216] 
36. Artandi SE, DePinho RA. A critical role for telomeres in suppressing and facilitating 
carcinogenesis. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2000; 10:39–46. [PubMed: 10679392] 
37. Chin K, et al. In situ analyses of genome instability in breast cancer. Nat Genet. 2004; 36:984–8. 
[PubMed: 15300252] 
38. Leber B, et al. Proteins required for centrosome clustering in cancer cells. Sci Transl Med. 2010; 
2:33ra38.
39. Kwon M, et al. Mechanisms to suppress multipolar divisions in cancer cells with extra 
centrosomes. Genes Dev. 2008; 22:2189–203. [PubMed: 18662975] 
40. Langmead B, Salzberg SL. Fast gapped-read alignment with Bowtie 2. Nat Methods. 2012; 9:357–
9. [PubMed: 22388286] 
41. Li H, et al. The Sequence Alignment/Map format and SAMtools. Bioinformatics. 2009; 25:2078–
9. [PubMed: 19505943] 
42. Olshen AB, Venkatraman ES, Lucito R, Wigler M. Circular binary segmentation for the analysis of 
array-based DNA copy number data. Biostatistics. 2004; 5:557–72. [PubMed: 15475419] 
43. Willenbrock H, Fridlyand J. A comparison study: applying segmentation to array CGH data for 
downstream analyses. Bioinformatics. 2005; 21:4084–91. [PubMed: 16159913] 
44. Garvin T, et al. Interactive analysis and assessment of single-cell copy-number variations. Nat 
Methods. 2015
45. Forbes SA, et al. COSMIC: exploring the world’s knowledge of somatic mutations in human 
cancer. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015; 43:D805–11. [PubMed: 25355519] 
46. Quinlan AR, Hall IM. BEDTools: a flexible suite of utilities for comparing genomic features. 
Bioinformatics. 2010; 26:841–2. [PubMed: 20110278] 
47. Team, R.C. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical 
Computing; Vienna, Austria: 2016. 
48. Calinski RB, Harabasz J. A Dendrite Method for Cluster Analysis. Communications in Statistics. 
1974; 3:27.
49. Kaufman, L.; Rousseeuw, PJ. Finding groups in data: an introduction to cluster analysis. Vol. xiv. 
Wiley; Hoboken, N.J: 2005. p. 342
50. Maaten, LJPvd; Hinton, GE. Visualizing High-Dimensional Data Using t-SNE. Journal of Machine 
Learning Research. 2008; 9:27.
51. Hommel G. A Stagewise Rejective Multiple Test Procedure Based on a Modified Bonferroni Test. 
Biometrika. 1988; 75:383–386.
52. Pewsey, A.; Neuhäuser, M.; Ruxton, GD. Circular statistics in R. Vol. xiv. Oxford University Press; 
Oxford; New York: 2013. p. 183
53. Schliep KP. phangorn: phylogenetic analysis in R. Bioinformatics. 2011; 27:592–3. [PubMed: 
21169378] 
Gao et al.
Page 17
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Highly-multiplexed single nucleus sequencing of TNBC patients
(a) Highly-multiplexed single nucleus sequencing method. Tumor tissues are dissociated 
into nuclear suspensions and stained with DAPI for flow-sorting by DNA ploidy. Single 
nuclei are deposited into 96-well plates and whole-genome-amplified by DOP-PCR. Single 
cell libraries are barcoded with unique 8bp identifier and 48–96 libraries are pooled together 
for sparse next-generation sequencing. The sequence reads are demultiplexed using the cell 
barcodes after sequencing is completed for copy number profile calculations. (b) FACS plots 
of DAPI intensity showing ploidy distributions for each TNBC patient. Single cells were 
isolated from different distributions of ploidy that were gated as: D (diploid), A 
(aneuploidy), or U (universal).
Gao et al.
Page 18
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Clonal subpopulations identified by clustering aneuploid cells
Hierarchical 1-dimensional clustering of the single cell aneuploidy copy number profiles 
from each TNBC patient. The clonal subpopulations (A, B, C) are colored in orange, teal or 
purple. Single cells are plotted on the Y-axis, while copy number aberrations are plotted in 
genomic order on the X-axis.
Gao et al.
Page 19
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Clonal composition and diversity of TNBC tumors
(a) Principal Component Analysis of single cell copy number profiles sequenced from each 
TNBC tumor. Copy number profiles are colored by hierarchical clustering analysis and 
labeled as follows: diploid (D) or aneuploid tumor subpopulations (A, B, C). (b) Percentage 
of subclone genotypes in each tumor. (c) Shannon diversity index of copy number profiles 
from each tumor, with dotted lines indicating low, intermediate and high diversity groups.
Gao et al.
Page 20
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Divergent subpopulations in polyclonal tumors
Clustered heatmaps of single cell aneuploid copy number profiles in polyclonal tumors. (a) 
Tumor T3 heatmap with two subpopulations (A, B) identified. Subpopulation A (orange 
cluster) diverged from subpopulation B (teal cluster) by acquiring additional amplifications 
on chromosomes 10p and 12q, resulting in the amplification of GATA3 and MDM2 in 
addition to many other genes. (b) Tumor T2 heatmap with two subpopulations (A, B) 
identified. Subpopulation A (orange) diverged from the B subpopulation (teal) by the 
amplification of chromosome 5, containing many cancer genes including MAP3K1, 
ERBB2IP and PIK3R1.
Gao et al.
Page 21
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Non-clonal copy number profiles in tumors and normal breast tissues
(a) Percentage of non-clonal cells in each tumor. (b) Percentage of non-clonal metastable 
aneuploid cells in the aneuploid fractions of each tumor. (c) Percentage of non-clonal 
pseudo-diploid cells in the diploid fractions of each tumor (d) Percentage of pseudodiploid 
cells in matched normal breast tissues from four TNBC patients (T3, T5, T8 and T10). (e) 
Examples of two metastable aneuploid cells (upper panels) compared to the copy number 
profiles of the major aneuploid subpopulations (lower panels). (f) Example of a pseudo-
diploid cell isolated from diploid fractions of tumors. (g) Example of a pseudo-diploid cell 
Gao et al.
Page 22
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 isolated from matched normal breast tissues. (h) Examples of four chromazemic cells with 
large homozygous deletions of whole chromosomes or chromosome arms.
Gao et al.
Page 23
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Punctuated copy number evolution and phylogenetic trees
(a–c) Multi-cell segmentation (upper panels), trinary event matrices (lower panels), where 
white = 0, red = 1, and blue = −1 and maximum parsimony trees (right panels) from 3 
TNBC patients: (a) T1, (b) T3 and (c) T8. Maximum parsimony trees are rooted by the 
diploid cells and non-clonal profiles were excluded from the analysis. Copy number events 
with non-integer values were filtered from all cells prior to tree construction and are shown 
in grey. (d) Linear and step fitting of sorted single cell CNA count data from 6 TNBC 
patients. Adj R2, BIC and AIC metric are also displayed for each fit.
Gao et al.
Page 24
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. Mathematical modeling of punctuated and gradual tumor evolution
(a) Gradual model of multi-type stochastic birth-death-mutation process. (b) Punctuated 
model of multi-type stochastic birth-death-mutation process with a Poisson mutation burst 
probability distribution. (c) Fitness distributions with varying shape parameter values (alpha) 
that are used for sampling as new clones emerge during the binary branching process in the 
gradual or punctuated models. (d) Poisson probability distribution for multiple CNA events 
occurring in the punctuated model with a single atom (i.e. point mass) at 1 for single CNA 
events. (e) Heatmap of AMOVA analysis for different fitness distributions and mutation rates 
in the gradual model. (f) Heatmap of AMOVA analysis for different burst and mutation 
probabilities in the punctuated model. Colors indicate the proportion of simulations passing 
the ‘minimal punctuated criteria’, with p-values < 0.05 in AMOVA permutation and > 90% 
samples having root nodes with at least 5 CNAs to construct a tree. (g) Tree constructed 
from sampling 100 random single cells from simulated data generated from the gradual 
model. (h) Tree constructed from random sampling of 100 single cells from the simulated 
data from the punctuated model.
Gao et al.
Page 25
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 8. Inter-tumor heterogeneity and focal amplifications in TNBCs
(a) Frequency plot of CNAs across 12 TNBC patients with amplifications in red and 
deletions in blue. (b) t-SNE plot was calculated using all single aneuploid tumor cells from 
the 12 TNBC patients. Single cells were colored by individual patients. (c) Hierarchical 
clustering tree using ward linkage was constructed using pairwise Euclidean distances of all 
aneuploid tumor cells from the 12 TNBC patients.
Gao et al.
Page 26
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
