 Myocardial Tissue Engineering With Cells Derived from Human 
Induced-Pluripotent Stem Cells and a Native-Like, High-
Resolution, 3-Dimensionally Printed Scaffold
Ling Gao1, Molly E. Kupfer2, Jangwook P. Jung2, Libang Yang2, Patrick Zhang2, Yong Da 
Sie3, Quyen Tran3, Visar Ajeti3, Brian T. Freeman2, Vladimir G. Fast1, Paul J. Campagnola3, 
Brenda M. Ogle2,*, and Jianyi Zhang1,*
1Department of Biomedical Engineering, School of Medicine, School of Engineering, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham
2Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Minnesota – Twin Cities
3Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Wisconsin – Madison, Madison
Abstract
Rationale—Conventional three-dimensional (3D) printing techniques cannot produce structures 
of the size at which individual cells interact.
Objective—Here, we used multiphoton-excited, 3-dimensional printing (MPE-3DP) to generate 
a native-like, extracellular matrix (ECM) scaffold with submicron resolution, and then seeded the 
scaffold with cardiomyocytes (CMs), smooth-muscle cells (SMCs), and endothelial cells (ECs) 
that had been differentiated from human induced-pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) to generate a 
human, iPSC-derived cardiac muscle patch (hCMP), which was subsequently evaluated in a 
murine model of myocardial infarction (MI).
Methods and Results—The scaffold was seeded with ~50,000 human, iPSC-derived CMs, 
SMCs, and ECs (in a 2:1:1 ratio) to generate the hCMP, which began generating calcium transients 
and beating synchronously within 1 day of seeding; the speeds of contraction and relaxation and 
the peak amplitudes of the calcium transients increased significantly over the next 7 days. When 
tested in mice with surgically induced MI, measurements of cardiac function, infarct size, 
apoptosis, both vascular and arteriole density, and cell proliferation at week 4 after treatment were 
significantly better in animals treated with the hCMPs than in animals treated with cell-free 
scaffolds, and the rate of cell engraftment in hCMP-treated animals was 24.5% at week 1 and 
11.2% at week 4.
Addresses correspondence to: Dr. Jianyi Zhang, Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 
jayzhang@uab.edu. Dr. Brenda M. Ogle, Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Minnesota – Twin Cities, 
ogle@umn.edu.
B.M.O. and J.Z. are both corresponding authors.
DISCLOSURES
None.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 14.
Published in final edited form as:
Circ Res. 2017 April 14; 120(8): 1318–1325. doi:10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.116.310277.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Conclusions—Thus, the novel MPE-3DP technique produces ECM-based scaffolds with 
exceptional resolution and fidelity, and hCMPs fabricated with these scaffolds may significantly 
improve recovery from ischemic myocardial injury.
Keywords
Heart; myocardial infarction; tissue engineering
Subject Terms
Myocardial Infarction; Cell Therapy; Stem Cells
INTRODUCTION
Although recent large-animal studies have shown that recovery from myocardial injury can 
be improved by injecting cardiac cells that have been differentiated from human induced-
pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs), the structural support and synchronized contractile activity 
of a transplanted myocardial tissue equivalent (MTE) could provide additional benefits. 
Tissue engineers are beginning to improve the effectiveness of MTE engineering for 
regenerative myocardial therapies1–3 by developing techniques that can enhance the 
engraftment, improve the MTE maturation4, 5 and long-term functional benefits.6, 7 These 
efforts may be aided by incorporating some of the more complex features of the myocardial 
extracellular matrix (ECM) into the tissue’s design. This level of complexity cannot be 
reproducibly achieved with established manufacturing technologies, but a newer modality, 
3D printing, has been successfully used to build structures with defined geometries from 
heterogeneous materials8 and, consequently, may be used for generating scaffolds that 
mimic the ECM of native cardiovascular tissues. However, key structural features of the 
native ECM need to be identified and incorporated (with adequate resolution and reliability) 
into a scaffold to promote cell function and limit detrimental effects. In addition, from the 
potential clinical application perspective, a high level of quality control of the scaffold 
product is required, which can only be achieved by a computer controlled 3D printing 
technology.
The position of crosslinks within a matrix of photoactive biological polymers can be 
controlled with high resolution. Printers that utilize single-photon excitation coupled to a 
sequence of photomasks can achieve approximately 30 micron resolution in x, y and 
approximately 50 micron resolution in z. A more advanced technique, multiphoton excited 
(MPE) photochemistry, can restrict excitation (and, consequently, the photochemical 
reaction) in three dimensions via a method that is analogous to multi-photon laser scanning 
microscopy (MPLSM).9–14 Notably, the resolution of the features (<1 μm) is determined by 
the MPE point spread function and can therefore approximate the feature size of components 
of the extracellular matrix.15 The technique can also be combined with rapid prototyping 
and computer-aided design16 to fabricate essentially any 3D structure that can be drawn.
For the experiments described in this report, we used our novel technique, multiphoton-
excited three-dimensional printing (MPE-3DP), to generate a scaffold with a native-like 
Gao et al.
Page 2
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cardiac ECM architecture from a solution of a photoactive gelatin polymer and then seeded 
the scaffold with cardiac cells (cardiomyocytes [CMs], endothelial cells [ECs], and smooth 
muscle cells [SMCs]) that had been differentiated from human, cardiac-lineage, induced-
pluripotent stem cells (hciPSCs)17 to generate an hciPSC-derived cardiac muscle patch 
(hCMP). The hCMP was subsequently characterized via a series of in vitro analyses and 
then tested in a murine model of ischemic myocardial injury.
METHODS
A detailed description of the experimental procedures used in this investigation is provided 
in the online Data Supplement.
RESULTS
Fabrication of an ECM scaffold based on templates derived from optical image stacks of 
murine myocardium
Our approach can be summarized in two steps: first, native, murine, adult myocardial tissue 
was examined to determine the size and distribution of various ECM features, which were 
incorporated into a 3D template; then, the template was scanned and used to map the 
positions of crosslinks in a solution of a photoactive polymer (Figure 1A). Importantly, our 
scanning technique, modulated raster scanning, maps the template directly to the scaffold by 
monitoring the brightness of each point in the image, and it is accurate to resolutions of less 
than 1 μm. To our knowledge, this is the first time modulated raster scanning has ever been 
successfully used to control the fabrication of a tissue-engineered scaffold and, 
consequently, our results are particularly relevant for applications that require the fibrillar 
and mesh-like structures present in cardiac tissue.18
We chose to base our template on the distribution of fibronectin in murine myocardium 
(Figure 1B and 1C). Fibronectin is uniformly distributed around each CM, so it can be used 
to determine the dimensions of each individual cell compartment to form a grid (here 
termed, Adult Simulate). The scaffold was generated from a solution of gelatin 
methacrylate, which can be crosslinked into complex structures with high efficiency, allows 
creation of complex structures with thickness of approximately 100 μm (Online Video I, II 
and III), is biologically inert when both crosslinked and degraded, and the denatured 
collagen exposes cell binding sites (including Arg-Gly-Asp, RGD), which should readily 
adhere to the seeded cells and support biochemical signaling via focal adhesions.19 Analysis 
of the native myocardium suggested that CMs reside in channels that are approximately 15 
μm by 100 μm which, when incorporated in the hCMP scaffold (Figure 1D and 1E), yielded 
a robust structure with high reproducibility and exceptional fidelity in both coverage area 
(≥95%) and intensity variation (≥85%).
Integration of hciPSC-derived cardiac cells in hCMPs
The hciPSCs were reprogrammed from human cardiac fibroblasts and differentiated into 
hciPSC-CMs, hciPSC-SMCs, and hciPSC-ECs; then, the differentiated cells were 
characterized via the expression of lineage-specific markers (Online Figure I), and the 
hCMP was formed by seeding ~50,000 cells (in a 2:1:1 ratio of hciPSC-CMs, hciPSC-
Gao et al.
Page 3
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 SMCs, and hciPSC-ECs, respectively) into the fabricated scaffold, where they quickly 
became assimilated and occupied most of the free space (Figure 1D). The hciPSC-CMs 
began generating calcium transients (Figure 2A) and beat synchronously across the entire 
hCMP within one day of seeding (Online Video IV and V). Over the next seven days, the 
speeds of contraction and relaxation, the peak amplitude of the calcium transients (Figure 
2B and 2C), and the expression of several genes required for contractile function (cTnT, 
cTnI, and αMHC) and for generating calcium transients (SERCA2α, RYR2, CASQ2) 
increased significantly (Online Figure II). Contractile and calcium-transient gene expression 
was also greater in the hCMPs than in monolayers grown from equivalent populations of 
hiPSC-derived cardiac cells on day 7. Optical mapping of transmembrane potentials (Figure 
2D and 2E) revealed macroscopically continuous action potential propagation in hCMPs, 
showing an excellent functional electrophysiological communications between cells. 
Conduction velocity in hCMPs increased linearly with the increase of pacing cycle length 
(CL), reaching 18.8±0.8 cm/s at 800 ms pacing CL (Figure 2F). Action potential durations, 
APD50 and APD80, were about 214±10.4 and 270±12.7 ms at 800 ms pacing CL, separately, 
and also showed significant correlation with pacing rate (Figure 2G). Autofluorescence 
images obtained via 2-photon microscopy on day 7 (Figure 2H) indicated that the cells had 
aligned with the channels of the fabricated scaffold (Figure 2I) to form multinucleate cells 
with an aspect ratio (i.e., cell length:width) of approximately 5.5:1 (Figure 2J), which is 
close to the characteristic ratio observed in native CMs (7:1). Analysis of hCMPs stained for 
expression of the CM protein cTnI, α-smooth muscle actin (αSMA), and the endothelial 
marker CD31 (Figure 2K) indicated that the original 2:1:1 ratio of hciPSC-CMs, -SMCs, 
and -ECs was largely retained (Figure 2L), with CMs comprising ~45% of the remaining 
cells. The 7-day survival rate of hciPSC-CMs in the hCMP was similar to that observed 
when cells were maintained on Matrigel-coated plates and significantly greater than the rate 
achieved by culturing the cells with bovine pericardium or polyethylene glycol (Figure 2M).
In vivo evaluations of hCMP transplantation in a murine model of myocardial infarction
In vivo assessments of the hCMPs were performed in a murine model of myocardial 
infarction (MI). MI was surgically induced as described previously,20 then, animals in the 
MI+hCMP group were treated with two hCMPs, animals in the MI+Scaffold group were 
treated with two patches of scaffold material without cells, and animals in the MI group 
received neither the hCMP nor the cell-free scaffold. The hCMPs and scaffolds were 
positioned over the site of infarction (Figure 3A) and held in place by covering them with a 
piece of decellularized bovine pericardium that was sutured to the heart to avoid movement 
of hCMPs off the heart. The decellularized bovine pericardium above the hCMP has 
beneficial effect of preventing the adhesion between the heart/hCMP and the chest. The 
Sham group underwent all surgical procedures for MI induction except the ligation step and 
recovered without either experimental treatment. Quantitative PCR measurements for 
expression of the human Y chromosome indicated that 24.5±2.6% of the transplanted cells 
remained engrafted in the hearts of MI+hCMP animals for at least one week after 
transplantation (Figure 3B). By week 4, the engraftment rate had declined to 11.2±2.3%, 
which is still much higher than the rate reported in previous studies of cell-based myocardial 
therapy.21, 22 In order to assess the engraftment rate by counting the grafted human cells as 
evidenced by human-specific nuclear antigen (HNA) positivity, we also used histologic 
Gao et al.
Page 4
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 assessment of consecutive sections of the heart that spans the entire area covered by the 
engrafted patch, and counting the grafted human cells as evidenced by HNA positivity.17, 23 
The engraftment rate of the 7 hearts studied using the histology method is 13.6 ± 2.2%, 
which is in agreement with the quantitative PCR (11.2 ± 2.3%). The ratio of the hciPSC-tri 
lineage cardiac cells at week 1 and 4 was also examined. The engrafted hciPSC-CMs were 
identified by the expression of both green fluorescent protein (GFP) and cTnI, engrafted 
hiPSC-ECs were identified by expression of human specific CD31 (hCD31), and engrafted 
hiPSC-SMCs were identified by the expression of both GFP and αSMA. At week 1 post 
transplantation the ratio of hciPSC-CMs, hciPSC-SMCs, and hciPSC-ECs was 1.42: 0.93: 1; 
at week 4 the ratio was 0.67: 0.86: 1 for hciPSC-CMs, hciPSC-SMCs, and hciPSC-ECs, 
respectively. Hematoxylin and Eosin (HE) staining (Figure 3C), and immunofluorescence 
analysis of HNA, GFP, cTnI, αSMA, and hCD31 expression (Figure 3C and 3D) showed 
evidence of all three transplanted cell lineages in the treated region
Cardiac function was evaluated on day 28 after injury via echocardiographic assessments 
(Figure 4A) of left-ventricular ejection fraction and fractional shortening; both parameters 
were significantly greater for animals in the MI+hCMP group than in MI+Scaffold or MI 
animals (Figure 4B and 4C), while measurements in the MI+Scaffold and MI groups were 
similar. Infarcts were also significantly smaller, while the thickness of the infarcted region of 
the myocardial wall was significantly greater, in MI+hCMP hearts than in MI or MI
+Scaffold hearts (Figure 4D–4F), and analyses of TUNEL-stained sections (Online Figure 
IIIA and IIIB) and sections stained for the presence of CD31 and αSMA (Online Figure 
IIIC–IIIE) indicated that apoptotic cells were significantly less common, while vascular 
structures (including arterioles) were significantly more common, at the border of the 
infarcted region in hCMP-treated animals than in the corresponding regions of hearts from 
animals in the MI+Scaffold or MI groups. hCMP treatment was also associated with 
significant increases in the number of cells that expressed the proliferation marker Ki67 
(Online Figure IV). Thus, the transplanted hCMPs appeared to improve recovery from 
myocardial injury by, at least in part, reducing apoptosis, promoting angiogenesis, and 
increasing cell proliferation.
DISCUSSION
The fate specification of progenitor cells in the developing heart is critically dependent on 
the spatial and temporal factors of the ECM where the progenitor cells reside. In human 
pluripotent stem cell differentiation to endothelial cells, the rate and quality of derived 
endothelial cells are critically influenced by the temporal factors in 3D ECM. 24 The 
myocardial ECM provides substrates for cell adhesion, sequesters soluble factors, and serves 
as a conduit for mechanical signaling. Our recent efforts to characterize the ECM of the 
developing heart have provided us with an extensive body of knowledge regarding the 
nanoscale distribution of the ECM,25 and by combining this knowledge with MPE-3DP, we 
were able to generate a scaffold that is structurally native-like.16 The technique couples 
MPE with modulated raster scanning to induce crosslinks in a solution of a photoactive 
gelatin polymer, thereby creating an ECM scaffold with exceptionally high resolution. 
Notably, construction was guided by a template composed of features that had been 
identified in the ECM of a native adult murine heart, which suggests that the technique may 
Gao et al.
Page 5
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 be able to replicate the unique architecture of the myocardial ECM in each individual. 
Furthermore, when hCMPs were generated by seeding the scaffolds with hciPSC-derived 
cardiac cells and transplanted into infarcted mouse hearts, the treatment was associated with 
significant improvements in cardiac function, infarct size, apoptosis, vascular density, and 
cell proliferation. Thus, the hCMPs produced for this report may represent an important step 
toward the clinical use of 3D-printing technology.
Our novel technique is the first to achieve a resolution of 1 μm or less and, consequently, can 
reliably control the thickness of the walls that separate adjacent channels. Channel-wall 
thickness may be a particularly important parameter for myocardial tissues, because 
contractions in adjacent fibers must be synchronized by signaling mechanisms that traverse 
the wall. Notably, the seeded cells quickly settled into the engineered channels of the 
scaffolds generated for this report, and synchronized beating was observed as early as one 
day after cell seeding, which suggests that individual cells interacted with the features of the 
scaffold, and that inter-channel coupling mechanisms were quickly established.
The functional improvement associated with hCMP transplantation in the murine MI model 
suggests that this goal may have been at least partially achieved. Thus, in future 
investigations we will use optical mapping technology to determine whether transplanted 
hCMPs are electromechanically coupled to native myocardial tissues.26
In conclusion, we have developed a method by which the principles of 3D printing and 
photochemistry can be combined to generate an ECM scaffold with unprecedented 
resolution from a template based on the architecture of native myocardial ECM. When 
hCMPs were generated by seeding the scaffolds with hciPSC-derived cardiac cells, the 
scaffold promoted cell viability and electromechanical coupling in vitro, and the hCMPs 
were associated with high levels of cell engraftment, as well as significant improvements in 
cardiac function, infarct size, apoptosis, vascularity, and cell proliferation in a murine MI 
model. Subsequent investigations will focus on methods for creating hCMPs of sufficient 
size for large-animal studies and means to improve effectiveness of the hCMPs by 
incorporating mixtures of ECM proteins into the scaffold.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
SOURCES OF FUNDING
This work was supported by the following funding sources: National Science Foundation, Award CBET-1445650; 
Lillehei Heart Institute, UMN, High Risk High Reward; Institute for Engineering and Medicine, UMN, Pilot Grant, 
and NIH RO1 HL 99507, HL114120, HL 131017, UO1 134764.
Nonstandard Abbreviations and Acronyms
hiPSCs
human induced-pluripotent stem cells
3D
three-dimensional
Gao et al.
Page 6
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ECM
myocardial extracellular matrix
MPLSM
multi-photon laser scanning microscopy
MPE-3DP
multiphoton-excited three-dimensional printing
CMs
cardiomyocytes
ECs
endothelial cells
SMCs
smooth muscle cells
hCMP
hiPSC-derived cardiac muscle patch
CL
cycle length
αSMA
α-smooth muscle actin
MI
myocardial infarction
HNA
human-specific nuclear antigen
GFP
green fluorescent protein
hCD31
human specific CD31
BP
bovine pericardium
References
1. Liu J, Hu Q, Wang Z, Xu C, Wang X, Gong G, Mansoor A, Lee J, Hou M, Zeng L, Zhang JR, 
Jerosch-Herold M, Guo T, Bache RJ, Zhang J. Autologous stem cell transplantation for myocardial 
repair. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2004; 287:H501–11. [PubMed: 15277194] 
2. Chavakis E, Koyanagi M, Dimmeler S. Enhancing the outcome of cell therapy for cardiac repair: 
progress from bench to bedside and back. Circulation. 2010; 121:325–35. [PubMed: 20083719] 
3. Parsa H, Ronaldson K, Vunjak-Novakovic G. Bioengineering methods for myocardial regeneration. 
Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2016; 96:195–202. [PubMed: 26150344] 
4. Ruan JL, Tulloch NL, Razumova MV, Saiget M, Muskheli V, Pabon L, Reinecke H, Regnier M, 
Murry CE. Mechanical Stress Conditioning and Electrical Stimulation Promote Contractility and 
Force Maturation of Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Human Cardiac Tissue. Circulation. 
2016
5. Jackman CP, Carlson AL, Bursac N. Dynamic culture yields engineered myocardium with near-
adult functional output. Biomaterials. 2016; 111:66–79. [PubMed: 27723557] 
6. Zimmermann WH, Melnychenko I, Wasmeier G, Didie M, Naito H, Nixdorff U, Hess A, Budinsky 
L, Brune K, Michaelis B, Dhein S, Schwoerer A, Ehmke H, Eschenhagen T. Engineered heart tissue 
grafts improve systolic and diastolic function in infarcted rat hearts. Nat Med. 2006; 12:452–8. 
[PubMed: 16582915] 
7. Riegler J, Tiburcy M, Ebert A, Tzatzalos E, Raaz U, Abilez OJ, Shen Q, Kooreman NG, Neofytou 
E, Chen VC, Wang M, Meyer T, Tsao PS, Connolly AJ, Couture LA, Gold JD, Zimmermann WH, 
Wu JC. Human Engineered Heart Muscles Engraft and Survive Long Term in a Rodent Myocardial 
Infarction Model. Circ Res. 2015; 117:720–30. [PubMed: 26291556] 
8. Gaetani R, Feyen DA, Verhage V, Slaats R, Messina E, Christman KL, Giacomello A, Doevendans 
PA, Sluijter JP. Epicardial application of cardiac progenitor cells in a 3D-printed gelatin/hyaluronic 
acid patch preserves cardiac function after myocardial infarction. Biomaterials. 2015; 61:339–48. 
[PubMed: 26043062] 
Gao et al.
Page 7
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 9. Maruo S, Nakamura O, Kawata S. Three-dimensional microfabrication with two-photon-absorbed 
photopolymerization. Opt Lett. 1997; 22:132–4. [PubMed: 18183126] 
10. LaFratta CN, Baldacchini T, Farrer RA, Fourkas JT, Teich MC, Saleh BEA, Naughton MJ. 
Replication of two-photon-polymerized structures with extremely high aspect ratios and large 
overhangs. J Phys Chem B. 2004; 108:11256–11258.
11. Allen R, Nielson R, Wise DD, Shear JB. Catalytic three-dimensional protein architectures. Anal 
Chem. 2005; 77:5089–95. [PubMed: 16097743] 
12. Hoffmann JC, West JL. Three-dimensional photolithographic patterning of multiple bioactive 
ligands in poly(ethylene glycol) hydrogels. Soft Matter. 2010; 6:5056–5063.
13. Tayalia P, Mazur E, Mooney DJ. Controlled architectural and chemotactic studies of 3D cell 
migration. Biomaterials. 2011; 32:2634–41. [PubMed: 21237507] 
14. Wylie RG, Ahsan S, Aizawa Y, Maxwell KL, Morshead CM, Shoichet MS. Spatially controlled 
simultaneous patterning of multiple growth factors in three-dimensional hydrogels. Nat Mater. 
2011; 10:799–806. [PubMed: 21874004] 
15. Murphy SV, Atala A. 3D bioprinting of tissues and organs. Nat Biotechnol. 2014; 32:773–85. 
[PubMed: 25093879] 
16. Cunningham LP, Veilleux MP, Campagnola PJ. Freeform multiphoton excited microfabrication for 
biological applications using a rapid prototyping CAD-based approach. Opt Express. 2006; 
14:8613–21. [PubMed: 19529241] 
17. Zhang L, Guo J, Zhang P, Xiong Q, Wu SC, Xia L, Roy SS, Tolar J, O’Connell TD, Kyba M, Liao 
K, Zhang J. Derivation and high engraftment of patient-specific cardiomyocyte sheet using 
induced pluripotent stem cells generated from adult cardiac fibroblast. Circ Heart Fail. 2015; 
8:156–66. [PubMed: 25420485] 
18. Ajeti V, Lien CH, Chen SJ, Su PJ, Squirrell JM, Molinarolo KH, Lyons GE, Eliceiri KW, Ogle 
BM, Campagnola PJ. Image-inspired 3D multiphoton excited fabrication of extracellular matrix 
structures by modulated raster scanning. Opt Express. 2013; 21:25346–55. [PubMed: 24150376] 
19. Nichol JW, Koshy ST, Bae H, Hwang CM, Yamanlar S, Khademhosseini A. Cell-laden 
microengineered gelatin methacrylate hydrogels. Biomaterials. 2010; 31:5536–44. [PubMed: 
20417964] 
20. Nakamura Y, Yasuda T, Weisel RD, Li RK. Enhanced cell transplantation: preventing apoptosis 
increases cell survival and ventricular function. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2006; 
291:H939–47. [PubMed: 16582022] 
21. Nguyen PK, Riegler J, Wu JC. Stem cell imaging: from bench to bedside. Cell Stem Cell. 2014; 
14:431–44. [PubMed: 24702995] 
22. Xiong Q, Ye L, Zhang P, Lepley M, Swingen C, Zhang L, Kaufman DS, Zhang J. Bioenergetic and 
functional consequences of cellular therapy: activation of endogenous cardiovascular progenitor 
cells. Circ Res. 2012; 111:455–68. [PubMed: 22723295] 
23. Nakamura Y, Wang X, Xu C, Asakura A, Yoshiyama M, From AH, Zhang J. Xenotransplantation 
of Long Term Cultured Swine Bone Marrow-Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells. Stem Cells. 2006
24. Zhang S, Dutton JR, Su L, Zhang J, Ye L. The influence of a spatiotemporal 3D environment on 
endothelial cell differentiation of human induced pluripotent stem cells. Biomaterials. 2014; 
35:3786–93. [PubMed: 24485793] 
25. Hanson KP, Jung JP, Tran QA, Hsu SP, Iida R, Ajeti V, Campagnola PJ, Eliceiri KW, Squirrell JM, 
Lyons GE, Ogle BM. Spatial and temporal analysis of extracellular matrix proteins in the 
developing murine heart: a blueprint for regeneration. Tissue Eng Part A. 2013; 19:1132–43. 
[PubMed: 23273220] 
26. Matiukas A, Pertsov AM, Kothari P, Cram A, Tolkacheva EG. Optical mapping of electrical 
heterogeneities in the heart during global ischemia. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2009; 
2009:6321–4. [PubMed: 19964152] 
Gao et al.
Page 8
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 NOVELTY AND SIGNIFICANCE
What Is Known?
•
Cellular therapy for myocardial repair has shown some benefit in preclinical 
and clinical settings, but limited cell retention and associated lack of robust 
electromechanical coupling remain the major problems.
•
Greater benefits may be achieved if the transplanted cardiac cells are provided 
with structural support such that synchronized contractile activity of the graft 
can be integrated to recipient heart.
•
One approach to generate a structural support is 3D printing, which has 
recently advanced to include the printing of biological materials such cells 
and extracellular matrix proteins (ECM).
What New Information Does This Article Contribute?
•
The article describes the implementation of multiphoton-excited three-
dimensional printing (MPE-3DP) to generate a scaffold with native-like 
cardiac ECM architecture. The scaffold can effectively harbor stem cell-
derived cardiac cell types and can be handled for effective transfer to the 
damaged heart.
•
The cell-seeded scaffold (termed human cardiac muscle patch, hCMP) beats 
synchronously in a culture dish prior to transplant and with extended culture 
time beats with increased speed and calcium handling suggesting 
cardiomyocyte maturation. In vivo, measurements of cardiac function and 
infarct size were significantly better in infarcted hearts treated with the 
hCMPs than in hearts treated with cell-free scaffolds.
•
The mechanisms for therapeutic improvement include improved cell 
engraftment, increased cellular proliferation and vascular supply with 
decreased apoptosis.
We demonstrate multiphoton-excited, 3D printing to generate a human cardiac muscle 
patch (hCMP) that could be effectively populated with cardiac cell types because it 
mimics the structural dimensions and protein composition of the native myocardium. In a 
mouse model of myocardial infarction, hCMP transplantation results in higher levels of 
cell engraftment, cell proliferation and myocardial vascular density, which are 
accompanied by a significant reduction of infarct size and improvement of left ventricular 
function. This work pushes the technical limits of 3D printing for cardiac tissue 
equivalents such that cells and extracellular matrix proteins could be manufactured 
precisely as designed.
Gao et al.
Page 9
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. hCMP fabrication via 3D-MPE
(A) The ECM and associated crosslinking solution are passed through the optical 
interrogation path while the laser power and dwell time are modulated to deposit ECM at 
each x, y location in each z plane. The submicron-scale features produced in the ECM 
scaffold are displayed in the inset (scale bar = 1 μm). Three-dimensional structures can be 
generated by combining multiple layers with the same or different ECM pattern. (B) 
Sections from the heart of an adult mouse were immunofluorescently stained for the 
presence of fibronectin and scanned via MPE (scale bar = 200 μm); then, (C) the distribution 
of fibronectin in the native tissue was simulated in a template. The simulated channels 
(green, 100 μm × 15 μm) are shown overlaying the fibronectin pattern of the native tissue 
(red) in the inset (scale bar = 100 μm). (D–E) The simulated template was used to determine 
the position of crosslinks in a solution of gelatin methacrylate, thereby producing a native-
like ECM scaffold (D); then, the scaffold was seeded with hiPSC-derived CMs, ECs, and 
SMCs to generate the hCMPs (E). The complete hCMP is shown in the larger image (scale 
bar = 400 μm), while the individual channels and incorporated cells are visible in the inset 
(scale bar = 50 μm).
Gao et al.
Page 10
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Gao et al.
Page 11
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. In vitro assessments of the hCMP
(A) Calcium transients were recorded in hCMPs on day 1, 3, and 7 after cell seeding, and 
used to calculate the (B) peak amplitude (F/F0; n ≥ 50 cells per time point). (C) Videos of 
the beating hCMPs were taken on day 1, 3, and 7 and evaluated with motion vector analysis 
software to calculate the speeds of contraction and relaxation (n=4 hCMPs per time point). 
(D–G) Action potential propagation in hCMP was measured on day 7 (n=4). (D) 
Representative isochronal map of activation spread and (E) selected optical Vm traces 
recorded during pacing with cycle length (CL) of 800 and 300 ms. AT, activation time; 
Dependence of (F) conduction velocity (CV) and (G) action potential duration (APD50 and 
APD80) on pacing CL. (H) hCMPs were stained with DAPI on day 7; then, autofluorescence 
images were obtained via 2-photon microscopy (scale bar = 20 μm) and used to calculate the 
cells’ (I) angle of alignment relative to the long axis of the engineered channel and (J) 
aspect ratio. (K) On day 7, ECs, SMCs, and CMs were identified in the hCMPs via 
immunofluorescence staining for the presence of CD31, α-smooth-muscle actin (αSMA), 
and cardiac troponin I (cTnI), respectively; then (L) the proportion of each cell type was 
calculated (5 fields per hCMP and 4 hCMPs). (M) Known quantities of hiPSC-CMs were 
seeded into Matrigel, polyethylene glycol (PEG), decellularized bovine pericardium, or the 
engineered scaffold and cultured for 7 days; then, the cells were immunofluorescently 
Gao et al.
Page 12
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 stained for cTnI expression, and cell survival was quantified as the ratio of the number of 
cTnI+ cells observed to the number of seeded cells. **P<0.01.
Gao et al.
Page 13
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. hCMP engraft and survive after transplantation into the hearts of mice with MI
Myocardial infarction was surgically induced in mice. Animals in the MI+hCMP group were 
treated with two hCMPs (0.1 million cells total). (A) The representative image showed two 
transplanted hCMPs on the mouse heart. (B) The engraftment rate was determined in 
animals from the MI+hCMP group at week 1 and 4 after injury via quantitative PCR 
measurements of the human Y chromosome (n=4 hearts per time point). (C) The 
representative HE staining image and human specific nuclear antigen (HNA) 
immunostaining image showed engrafted hCMP on the epicardial surface of the heart at 
week 4 after transplantation. BP=bovine pericardium. (D) Sections taken from the region of 
patch in MI+hCMP animals at week 4 were immufluorescently stained for the presence of 
HNA, cTnI, green fluorescent protein (GFP), αSMA, and the human isoform of the 
endothelial marker CD31 (hCD31); nuclei were counterstained with DAPI (scale bar = 50 
μm). (i–ii) Engrafted hciPSC-CMs were identified by the expression of both HNA and cTnI 
(i) or both GFP and cTnI (ii); (iii) engrafted hiPSC-SMCs were identified by the expression 
of both GFP and αSMA; (iv) engrafted hiPSC-ECs were identified by the expression of 
hCD31.
Gao et al.
Page 14
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. hCMP transplantation improves cardiac function and reduces infarct size after MI
(A–C) Cardiac function was evaluated at week 1 and 4 via (A) echocardiographic 
assessments of (B) left-venticular ejection fraction and (C) fractional shortening. (D–F) 
Sections of hearts from animals in different groups were (D) Masson’s trichrome–stained for 
histological assessments of (E) infarct size and (F) infarct wall thickness. Infarct size was 
calculated as a percentage of the circumflexion length of the left ventricular free wall, and 
infarct wall thickness was calculated as a percentage of the thickness of the septal wall. 
*p<0.05. BP=bovine pericardium.
Gao et al.
Page 15
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
