 ORIGINAL ARTICLE – BREAST ONCOLOGY
The Value of a Second Opinion for Breast Cancer Patients
Referred to a National Cancer Institute (NCI)-Designated Cancer
Center with a Multidisciplinary Breast Tumor Board
Denise Garcia, MD, MEd1, Laura S. Spruill, MD, PhD2, Abid Irshad, MD3, Jennifer Wood, RN, BSN, CBCN4,
Denise Kepecs, RN, BSN, CBCN4, and Nancy Klauber-DeMore, MD, FACS1,4
1Department of Surgery, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC; 2Department of Pathology, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC; 3Department of Radiology, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, SC; 4Hollings Cancer Center, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC
ABSTRACT
Background. This study aimed to investigate the changes
in diagnosis after a second opinion for breast cancer
patients from a multi-disciplinary tumor board (MTB)
review at an National Cancer Institute (NCI)-designated
cancer center.
Methods. A retrospective study analyzed patients with a
breast cancer diagnosed at an outside institution who pre-
sented for a second opinion from August 2015 to March
2016 at the Medical University of South Carolina (MUSC).
Radiology, pathology, and genetic testing reports from
outside institutions were compared with reports generated
after an MTB review and subsequent workup at MUSC.
The second-opinion cases were categorized based on
whether diagnostic variations were present or not.
Results. The review included 70 patients seeking second
opinions, and 33 (47.1%) of these patients had additional
radiologic images. A total of 30 additional biopsies were
performed for 25 patients, with new cancers identified in 16
patients. Overall, 16 (22.8%) of the 70 of patients had
additional cancers diagnosed. For 14 (20%) of the 70
patients, a second opinion led to a change in pathology
interpretation. Genetic testing was performed for 11
patients (15.7%) who met the National Comprehensive
Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines for genetic testing, but
none showed a mutation other than a variant of unknown
significance. After a complete workup, 30 (42.8%) of the
70 patients had a change in diagnosis as a result of the
MTB review.
Conclusion. A review by an MTB at an NCI-designated
cancer center changed the diagnosis for 43% of the patients
who presented for a second opinion for breast cancer. The
study findings support the conclusion that referral for a
second opinion is beneficial and has a diagnostic impact for
many patients.
Surgical second-opinion programs were developed in
the 1970s, and since that time have been assessed for cost
efficiency and improvement of patient care.1 The popu-
larity of second-opinion programs increased into the
1980s.2 Several programs demonstrated a cost efficacy
benefit, especially in avoidance of unnecessary proce-
dures.3 One early study of second-opinion programs that
focused on prostate cancer patients showed that these
programs could save money by preventing unnecessary
surgeries as a result of pathology found to be benign at a
second-opinion review.4 These early second-opinion pro-
grams came into question during the 1990s due to
recognition that no definitive way existed to assess which
proposed surgical treatment was correct.5
One major flaw in second-opinion studies is that no
‘‘gold standard’’ exists for pathology to assess whether the
first or second opinion is correct. Additionally, should a
difference in pathology from benign to malignant be
ascertained on a second opinion, the increase in cost for
further evaluation and management still would be benefi-
cial and warranted.6
Despite some critiques, studies have continued to be
published with results that support the benefit of second
opinions in surgery. One paper reviewing prostate cancer
� The Author(s) 2018
First Received: 23 April 2018;
Published Online: 3 July 2018
N. Klauber-DeMore, MD, FACS
e-mail: demore@musc.edu
Ann Surg Oncol (2018) 25:2953–2957
https://doi.org/10.1245/s10434-018-6599-y
 assessed 535 cases and found that even with a small
number of changes in diagnosis (1.3%), thousands of dol-
lars were saved by preventing needless operations.4 More
recently, a study from the University of Iowa found a 2.3%
rate for ‘‘major diagnostic disagreements’’ on second-
opinion review of surgical pathology.6
In the past few decades, tertiary care centers have started
implementing multi-disciplinary tumor boards (MTBs) to
evaluate cancer cases. One of the earliest studies investi-
gating the efficacy of MTBs was from the University of
Pennsylvania, which had a high percentage (43%) of cases
in which their MTB disagreed with the management
planned by the outside provider. Additionally, 31% of the
patients reviewed by the MTB underwent further workup.7
As they have gained popularity, MTBs have been
implemented nationwide and are becoming the standard of
care in cancer centers. Regardless of widespread accep-
tance, studies and reviews assessing the efficacy and utility
of MTBs continue to warrant investigation. A recent study
reviewed 200 cases, finding new cancers detected in 5% of
patients.8 Additionally, in 4% of the cases, they reported
avoidance of biopsies deemed unnecessary. Findings have
shown MTBs to be efficacious in identifying additional
cancers and also preventing unnecessary harm. Studies
specifically addressing MTBs’ evaluation of second opin-
ions also have resulted in changes in diagnoses and patient
management.8
Multi-disciplinary tumor boards have been developed
internationally and are becoming the standard of care in
cancer centers. Typically, they involve meetings between
specialists within a specific cancer field such as breast
cancer and can include radiation oncologists, surgical
oncologists, medical oncologists, pathologists, and radiol-
ogists.9 One large review of 5629 MTB second-opinion
cases involved several cancers during a 3-year period. Only
a small percentage (2.3%) of the cases resulted in major
diagnostic
disagreements,
defined
as
those
requiring
changes in clinical management. Interestingly, in this
study, none of the major diagnostic disagreements involved
breast cancer management.6
Another more recent study by Charara et al.10 in 2017
focused more on the decision-making process involved in
an MTB. However, of 503 cases presented, only 12
resulted in a change in radiology findings, and only 6 cases
had a change in pathology. Although this study did not
focus on second opinions, it was noted in the paper that
half of the patients in each of the radiology and pathology
change groups had second opinions.10
Despite the documented benefit of MTB review, many
patients with breast cancer receive care without tumor
board review at non–NCI-designated cancer centers. This
study evaluated the change in radiology and pathology
diagnosis and referral for genetic counseling as a result of
this intervention.
METHODS
The Institutional Review Board at the Medical Univer-
sity of South Carolina (MUSC) approved this study. We
performed a retrospective observational analysis of patients
who presented to the MUSC Hollings Cancer Center for
evaluation from August 2015 to March 2016 with a diag-
nosis of stages 0–3 breast cancer. This review included
only patients with a diagnosis determined outside MUSC
who were referred or self-referred for a second opinion.
All second-opinion patients had pathology slides and
radiologic imaging reviewed by fellowship-trained breast
radiologists and pathologists and were presented at an
MTB. The breast cancer MTB at MUSC is a weekly col-
laborative
meeting
of
surgical
oncologists,
medical
oncologists, radiation oncologists, radiologists, patholo-
gists,
genetic
counselor,
and
nurse
navigators.
The
physician to whom the patient was referred, typically the
surgical oncologist, presents the patient.
Zip codes were obtained, and using the Health Resour-
ces & Services Administration database,11 we were able to
stratify our patient population into the lowest and highest
health care-funded counties in South Carolina. The radi-
ology reports were reviewed to ascertain whether the first
opinion was obtained at an academic medical center (a
hospital affiliated with a medical school).
We compared the outside radiology reports with the
reports generated by MUSC radiologists. Changes in
diagnosis as a result of additional assessment or imaging
were noted. This included additional imaging recom-
mended, additional biopsies recommended, and additional
new cancer diagnosed in the ipsilateral or contralateral
breast or axillary lymph node. Change in pathologic
diagnosis was assessed by comparing the outside pathology
report with the MUSC pathology report. The recommen-
dation for genetic counseling was obtained from the
outside physicians’ notes and compared with the review at
our MTB to determine whether the patient met the NCCN
guidelines for genetic testing or not.
Radiology Review
Outside films were reviewed in a radiology consensus
conference at MUSC that consisted of board-certified
radiologists, all of whom had completed fellowship train-
ing in breast radiology. When necessary, additional views
were recommended and ordered, including mammograms,
breast or axillary ultrasound, or breast magnetic resonance
2954
D. Garcia et al.
 imaging (MRI). Based on this review, some patients were
scheduled to undergo stereotactic core biopsy, ultrasound-
guided core biopsy of the breast or axilla, or MRI-guided
biopsy (of either the ipsilateral or contralateral breast). The
parameters analyzed for radiology were change in tumor
size, new lesion, new calcifications, additional views rec-
ommended
(mammogram,
breast
ultrasound,
axillary
ultrasound, breast MRI), additional biopsy performed
(stereotactic, breast ultrasound, axillary ultrasound, or
MRI-guided biopsy), additional cancer diagnosed in the
ipsilateral breast, additional contralateral breast cancer
diagnoses, and new axillary metastases identified.
Pathology Review
Pathology was reviewed by board-certified pathologists
with specialization in breast cancer. Hormone receptors for
estrogen, progesterone, and human epidermal growth factor
2 (HER2)neu were evaluated but not routinely repeated
unless the internal control was negative or unless HER2neu
was equivocal. The data for pathology were assessed for
change in histology, change in tumor grade, change in
tumor size, and change in ER, PR or HER2/neu status.
Genetic Testing Review
All the patients were reviewed by the tumor board to
determine whether a referral for genetic counseling was
indicated. We identified the number of patients who met
the NCCN guidelines for genetic testing but did not have
this offered at the initial institution. Patients who saw the
genetic counselor at MUSC and met the NCCN guidelines
for genetic testing were offered genetic testing.
RESULTS
The review of charts from August 2015 to March 2016
found that 70 (31%) of the 295 patients had their diagnosis
determined outside MUSC and presented for a second
opinion. Additional radiology recommendations for addi-
tional imaging or biopsy were made to 43 patients (61.4%)
after MTB radiology assessment. The pathology second-
opinion review showed a change in diagnosis for 14 (20%)
of the 70 patients. According to the review, 11 (15.7%) of
the 70 patients were referred for genetic testing at MUSC
based on the NCCN guidelines, but genetic testing was not
recommended at the outside institution.
Using the Health Resources & Services Administration
database, we identified that 33% of all the patients pre-
senting for a second opinion came from medically
underserved areas. Only 6 of the 70 patients had their first
opinion from another academic medical center (3 from
South Carolina and 3 from other states).
Radiology
After the MTB review, 43 (61%) of the 70 second-
opinion patients had additional calcifications or lesions
found, additional images obtained, or additional breast or
axillary biopsies recommended. Of those 43 patients with
extra imaging, 16 had an additional ipsilateral, contralat-
eral, or axillary lymph node metastases found. This
population represented 22.9% of all the second-opinion
patients (Table 1).
Additional forms of imaging were obtained by 33 sec-
ond-opinion patients after the MTB review, and several had
more than one imaging method used. Of the 33 patients, 11
(33.3%) underwent a supplementary breast MRI, 13
(39.4%) had an additional breast ultrasound, 12 (36.4%)
had an additional axillary ultrasound, and 8 (24.2%)
underwent additional mammography (Table 2).
The review showed 30 additional biopsies for 25
patients. Of the 25 patients who had additional biopsies, 16
(64%) resulted in discovery of an additional cancer, which
accounted for about 23% of the 70 patients presenting for a
second opinion (Table 3).
Pathology
Changes in pathology represented a smaller number of
variations
(14/70,
20%)
within
the
second
opinions
(Table 4). The most frequent variation was a change in
histology
(10%).
The
pathologic
variations
included
changes from invasive to noninvasive cancer and, in one
instance, a change from sarcoma to malignant phyllodes
tumor. No changes were observed in the review of slides
for ER, PR, or HER2neu staining.
TABLE 1 Details of the changes made after multi-disciplinary
tumor board radiology review
Category
Patients n (%)
Additional imaging
33/70 (47)
Additional biopsy
30/70 (43)
Any additional breast cancer diagnosed
16/70 (23)
New lymph node metastasis diagnosed
5/70 (7)
Additional calcifications identified
8/70 (11)
Change in radiographic tumor size
11/70 (16)
Second Opinion for Breast Cancer Patients
2955
 Genetics
Of the 70 patients seeking a second opinion, 11 (15.7%)
met the NCCN guidelines for genetic testing but had not
been offered testing before their second opinion. Of these
11 patients, 2 were found to have variants of unknown
significance (VUS), which did not change the management
of their disease. The one patient had a VUS in MSH6, and
the other patient had a VUS in BMPR1A.
DISCUSSION
Additional imaging and biopsies resulted in 23% of the
patients receiving a diagnosis of either a new ipsilateral or
contralateral cancer or axillary metastasis. The net number
of patients in our study who experienced a change in new
cancers or a pathology change in diagnosis, excluding
overlapping patients, was 30 (43%) of the 70 patients. The
results of this observational study suggest that an MTB-
assessed second opinion in a breast cancer case at an NCI-
designated facility is valuable for a thorough workup for
breast cancer patients.
Other reports evaluating a change in diagnosis for
patients with breast cancer who sought a second opinion
showed a lower percentage of diagnostic changes than our
studies. In the reported literature, the rate of changes in
diagnosis ranges from 0 to 13% depending on the cancer
and the institution.4,6–8 Three of these four studies occurred
in states with multiple tertiary care centers, including
Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, Michigan, and Maryland.
Compared with these studies, our study found that 23% of
the patients had additional cancers diagnosed based on
radiologic evaluation by MTB alone.
One possible explanation for the higher percentage of
patients with a change in diagnosis is that the MUSC serves
as the only NCI-designated cancer center in the state of
South Carolina and only one of three academic medical
centers in the state. Only 6 of the 70 patients seen had their
first opinion at an academic medical center. Additionally,
MUSC has the only radiology residency program in the
state of South Carolina. As the main tertiary care center in
the area, MUSC has a large catchment area from small
rural communities lacking in resources and personnel for
implementing an MTB.
Using the Health Resources & Services Administration
database, we were able to stratify our patient population
into lowest and highest health care-funded counties in
South Carolina. The state of South Carolina itself is one of
the lower-funded states according to this database. Addi-
tionally, about 33% of our patient population came from
lower-funded counties.11 As such, this may mean that
implementing MTBs in relatively isolated tertiary care
centers that pull from a large population of medically
underserved areas has an even more substantial impact on
patient
care
than
implementing
an
MTB
in
large
metropolitan areas with multiple cancer center options.
The most striking finding in this study was that 23% of
the patients had an additional cancer found as a result of a
second opinion. Of the additional cancers, 14% were in the
ipsilateral breast, 1% in the contralateral breast, and 7% in
an axillary lymph node. Of the 25 patients who had an
additional biopsy, 64% had positive results.
Axillary lymph node status remains an important prog-
nostic factor for patients with breast cancer. Axillary
ultrasound is an important tool in the workup for patients
with newly diagnosed breast cancer, yet 12 (17%) of the 70
patients presenting for a second opinion had not undergone
an axillary ultrasound. By performing axillary ultrasound,
we found that 5 (7%) of the 70 patients were node positive.
TABLE 2 Type of additional imaging obtained
Types of additional imaging
Patients
Percentage of patients
having additional
imaging (n = 33)
Breast MRI
11
33.3
Breast ultrasound
13
39.4
Axillary ultrasound
12
36.4
Mammogram
8
24.2
MRI magnetic resonance imaging
TABLE 3 Percentage of additional biopsies that resulted in cancer
Additional biopsies
No. of biopsies
Patients positive
for cancer n (%)
Ipsilateral breast
18
10/70 (14)
Contralateral breast
5
1/70 (1)
Axillary node
7
5/70 (7)
Total
30
16/70(23)
TABLE 4 Changes in pathologic diagnosis
Patients with a
change in pathology
n (%)
Change in tumor grade
4/70 (6)
Change in histology
7/70 (10)
Invasive to in situ carcinoma
1/70 (1)
Change in tumor size
2/70 (3)
Total pathology variations
14/70 (20)
2956
D. Garcia et al.
 The other 15% of the additional cancers diagnosed were a
result of ordering breast ultrasound, MRI, and/or a diag-
nostic mammogram.
The most important changes in diagnoses found in the
pathology review were a change from invasive carcinoma
to ductal carcinoma in situ and a change from a breast
sarcoma to a malignant phyllodes tumor. Although the
pathologists at MUSC are fellowship trained and special-
ized in breast cancer, one limitation with any change in
pathology diagnosis is that tumor behavior clinically is the
only way to demonstrate which read is more accurate.
Unfortunately, assessment of the clinical course of indi-
vidual tumors in relation to their pathologic diagnosis fell
outside the scope of this review.
Another limitation of this study was that we did not
assess whether change in diagnosis resulted in change in
management (e.g., breast conservation therapy vs. mas-
tectomy, axillary node dissection vs. sentinel node biopsy,
or neoadjuvant vs. adjuvant chemotherapy). We chose not
to evaluate change in management because many of the
outside records did not clearly state the outside physicians’
plan. In contrast, we could very accurately capture data
from the notes of the outside radiologists and pathologists,
and could review the record to determine whether genetic
counseling had been discussed. Therefore, these were the
parameters we chose to compare in our analysis.
CONCLUSION
Of the patients presenting for a second opinion reviewed
by the MTB in our study, 43% had a change in diagnosis.
Most of these changes were a result of additional radiologic
recommendations, particularly biopsies. This suggests that
review by breast fellowship-trained radiologists on an
MTB is one of the areas in which the most benefit can be
gained in breast cancer second opinions. The percentage of
change
in
diagnosis resulting from
second
opinions
reviewed at MUSC is higher than in other reported studies.
This could be attributed to the high number in our patient
population presenting from rural areas, and to the fact that
our institution is the only NCI-designated cancer center in
the state. Our data provide support for a second opinion by
MTBs for patients with breast cancer.
OPEN ACCESS
This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://crea
tivecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a
link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were
made.
REFERENCES
1. McCarthy EG, Finkel ML, Ruchlin HS. Second opinions on
elective surgery. The Cornell/New York Hospital study. Lancet.
1981;1:1352–4.
2. Martin SG, Shwartz M, Bernadette J, et al. Impact of a mandatory
second opinion program on Medicaid surgery rates. Med Care.
1982;20:21–45.
3. Ruchlin HS, Finkel ML, McCarthy EG. The efficacy of second-
opinion consultation programs: a cost-benefit perspective. Med
Care. 1982;20:3–21.
4. Epstein JI, Walsh PC, Sanfilippo, F. Clinical and cost impact of
second-opinion pathology: review of prostate biopsies prior to
radical prostatectomy. Am J Surg Pathol. 1996;20:851–7.
5. Finkel ML, McCarthy EG, Ruchlin HS. The current status of
surgical
second
opinion
programs.
Surg
Clin
North
Am.
1982;62:705–19.
6. Manion E, Cohen MB, Weydert J. Mandatory second opinion in
surgical pathology referral material: clinical consequences of
major disagreements. Am Surg Pathol. 2008;32:732–7.
7. Chang JH, Vines E, Bertsch H, et al. The impact of a multidis-
ciplinary breast cancer center on recommendations for patient
management. The University of Pennsylvania Experience. Am
Cancer Soc. 2001;91:1231–7.
8. Coffey K, D’Alessio D, Keating DM, et al. Second-opinion
review of breast cancer imaging at a cancer center: is it worth-
while? AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2017;208:1386–91.
9. El Saghir NS, Keating NL, Carlson RW, et al. Tumor boards:
optimizing the structure and improving efficiency of multdisci-
plinary management of patients with cancer worldwide. Am Soc
Clin Oncol Educ Book. 2014:e461–6.
10. Charara RN, Kreidieh FY, Farhat RA, et al. Practice and impact
of multidisciplinary tumor boards on patient management: a
prospective study. Am Soc Clin Oncol. 2017;3:242–9.
11. Shortage Areas. Health Resources & Services Administration
Data Warehouse. U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices. 2018. Retrieved 1 June 2018 at https://datawarehouse.h
rsa.gov/topics/shortageareas.aspx.
Second Opinion for Breast Cancer Patients
2957
