 Review
Interventions to reduce social isolation and loneliness among older people:
an integrative review
Clare Gardiner PhD BSc (Hons)1, Gideon Geldenhuys BNurs2 and Merryn Gott PhD MA (Oxon)2
1School of Nursing & Midwifery, The University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK and 2School of Nursing, University of
Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand
Accepted for publication 9 June 2016
Correspondence
Clare Gardiner
School of Nursing & Midwifery
The University of Sheffield
Barber House Annexe, 3a
Clarkehouse Road
Sheffield S10 2TN, UK
E-mail:c.gardiner@sheffield.ac.uk
What is known about this topic
• Loneliness and social isolation are
major health problems for older
adults.
• A growing range of interventions
have been developed to tackle
social isolation and loneliness.
• Little is known about the range
and scope of effective
interventions, and what aspects of
interventions contribute to their
success.
What this paper adds
• A range of interventions were
described which relied on differing
mechanism for reducing social
isolation and loneliness.
• Common features of successful
interventions included adaptability,
a community development
approach and productive
engagement.
Abstract
Loneliness and social isolation are major problems for older adults.
Interventions and activities aimed at reducing social isolation and
loneliness are widely advocated as a solution to this growing problem.
The aim of this study was to conduct an integrative review to identify
the range and scope of interventions that target social isolation and
loneliness among older people, to gain insight into why interventions are
successful and to determine the effectiveness of those interventions. Six
electronic databases were searched from 2003 until January 2016 for
literature relating to interventions with a primary or secondary outcome
of reducing or preventing social isolation and/or loneliness among older
people. Data evaluation followed Evidence for Policy and Practice
Information and Co-ordinating Centre guidelines and data analysis was
conducted using a descriptive thematic method for synthesising data. The
review identified 38 studies. A range of interventions were described
which relied on differing mechanisms for reducing social isolation and
loneliness. The majority of interventions reported some success in
reducing social isolation and loneliness, but the quality of evidence was
generally weak. Factors which were associated with the most effective
interventions included adaptability, a community development approach,
and productive engagement. A wide range of interventions have been
developed to tackle social isolation and loneliness among older people.
However, the quality of the evidence base is weak and further research is
required to provide more robust data on the effectiveness of
interventions. Furthermore, there is an urgent need to further develop
theoretical understandings of how successful interventions mediate social
isolation and loneliness.
Keywords: interventions, loneliness, older people, social isolation
• Contrary to previous review
findings, our review did not find
group-based activities to be more
effective than one-to-one or
solitary activities.
Background
Loneliness and social isolation are major problems for older adults and
are associated with adverse mental and physical health consequences
(Luanaigh & Lawlor 2008). A recent review identified a wide range of
health outcomes associated with loneliness and social isolation including
depression, cardiovascular disease, quality of life, general health, biologi-
cal markers of health, cognitive function and mortality (Courtin & Knapp
2015). Chronically lonely older people also report less exercise, more
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
147
Health and Social Care in the Community (2018) 26(2), 147–157
doi: 10.1111/hsc.12367
 tobacco use, a greater number of chronic illnesses,
higher depression scores and greater average number
of nursing home stays than those who are not lonely
(Theeke 2010). The mechanisms by which social isola-
tion and loneliness impact on health are not well
understood, but are thought to include influences on
health behaviours, sleep, vital exhaustion and social
connectedness (Courtin & Knapp 2015). Older people
are particularly vulnerable to loneliness and social
isolation due to deteriorating physical health, the
death of spouses and partners, being more likely to
live alone and having fewer confiding relationships
(Victor & Bowling 2012).
The terms social isolation and loneliness are inter-
related but describe different concepts. Social isola-
tion refers to the objective absence or paucity of
contacts and interactions between a person and a
social network (Gardner et al. 1999), whereas loneli-
ness refers to a subjective feeling state of being alone,
separated or apart from others, and has been concep-
tualised as an imbalance between desired social con-
tacts and actual social contacts (Weiss 1973, Ernst &
Cacioppo 1999). Despite these variable definitions,
evidence suggests significant overlap between social
isolation and loneliness (Golden et al. 2009), and the
terms are often used interchangeably. Crucially, both
concepts result in negative self-assessment of health
and well-being in older people (Golden et al. 2009).
National and international health and social care
policies and campaigns are increasingly recognising
the importance of tackling social isolation and loneli-
ness among older people. For example, in the UK The
Campaign to End Loneliness was established in 2011 as
a network of national, regional and local organisa-
tions working together to ensure that loneliness is
acted upon as a public health priority at national and
local levels (Campaign to End Loneliness 2011). Simi-
larly, the New Zealand government has committed to
a vision of positive ageing principles which promote
community participation and prevent social isolation
(MSD 2001). Interventions and activities aimed at
alleviating social isolation and loneliness are central
to such policies and initiatives, yet little is known
about the range and scope of available interventions,
their effectiveness, and factors which contribute to
their success (Cattan et al. 2005).
A number of systematic reviews of quantitative
outcome studies have been conducted over recent
years, which have attempted to evaluate the effective-
ness of social isolation and loneliness interventions
for older people (Cattan & White 1998, Findlay 2003,
Cattan et al. 2005, Dickens et al. 2011, Hagan et al.
2014, Cohen-Mansfield & Perach 2015). However,
thus far, they have been unable to provide conclusive
evidence, and findings are often contradictory. For
example, a 2005 systematic review reported that the
majority of effective interventions were group activi-
ties, and the majority of ineffective interventions pro-
vided one-to-one social support (Cattan et al. 2005).
In contradiction, in their 2015 review, Cohen-Mans-
field and Perach (2015) noted that group interven-
tions were less often evaluated as effective compared
with one-on-one interventions. Important to note is
that reviews to date have focused solely on quantita-
tive outcome studies, and have failed to take account
of other forms of evidence. Concerns are increasingly
being raised that reviews of quantitative evidence fail
to adequately capture depth and breadth of research
activity, and varied perspectives on a phenomena
(Torraco 2005, Whittemore & Knafl 2005). This con-
cern is reflected in recent guidance which calls for
greater integration of qualitative research methods in
interventional designs, in order to better understand
implementation, receipt, and setting of interventions
and interpretation of outcomes (Oakley et al. 2006,
Lewin et al. 2009). Finally, despite the existence of a
number of reviews in this area, there is still a wide-
spread recognition of a need for further research into
‘what works in tackling loneliness’ (Campaign to End
Loneliness 2011). Hence, we sought to update the evi-
dence base by conducting an integrative review of lit-
erature
drawing
evidence
from
diverse
methodologies, to provide a more complete overview
of the range and scope of interventions, gain insight
into why interventions are successful and explore
effectiveness where feasible.
Methods
The aim of this study was to conduct an integrative
review of literature on interventions that target social
isolation and/or loneliness in older people. The inte-
grative review method is an approach that allows for
the inclusion of diverse methodologies, and has the
potential to allow for diverse primary research meth-
ods to inform evidence-based practice (Whittemore &
Knafl 2005). This method was chosen so that multiple
methods could contribute to the generation of new
insights. For example, quantitative research could
provide insights into effectiveness and qualitative
research could provide insights into the experiential
impact of interventions and mechanisms of action of
interventions.
A systematic search strategy was devised by the
authors with input from a specialist subject librarian.
The strategy included the following MeSH headings
and keywords relevant to the research aim: lonel*,
social isolat*, prevent*, reduc*, minimi*, less*. While
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
148
C. Gardiner et al.
 social isolation and loneliness are recognised as dis-
tinct concepts, the terms are interrelated and are often
used interchangeably. Understanding of intervention
effects can be enhanced through the inclusion of stud-
ies reporting on outcomes known to be associated
with both social isolation and loneliness (Dickens
et al. 2011), therefore both terms were included as
search terms. This approach is consistent with several
previous reviews (Cattan & White 1998, Cattan et al.
2005, Dickens et al. 2011). Six electronic databases
(PubMed, Medline, CINAHL, PsychInfo, ScienceDir-
ect, EMBASE) were searched from 2003 until January
2016. The earliest of the previous reviews included
literature up to 2003 (Findlay 2003), therefore only lit-
erature published after this date was included in our
review. Reference lists of included studies were also
hand-searched. Grey literature searches were under-
taken drawing on a range of materials published by
organisations selected on the basis of their relevance
to the research topic (e.g. Age UK, HelpAge Interna-
tional). The journal Ageing and Society was also
hand-searched as the most frequently cited journal in
this area.
Following removal of duplicates, G.G. screened
titles and abstracts of all returned publications to
identify those which met the study inclusion criteria.
Study inclusion criteria are listed in Box 1. While the
review was limited to primary empirical research, in
keeping with integrative review methods, all method-
ologies were included. As the term ‘older adult’ is
inconsistently defined in the literature, the term was
determined by the criteria set out in the identified
studies. Full texts of all included articles, and any
where there was disagreement, were further indepen-
dently screened by G.G. and C.G. Where there was
lack of agreement, M.G. acted as a third independent
reviewer and decisions were made by consensus.
Details of included studies were extracted into prede-
fined tables.
Evaluating the quality of literature with diverse
methodologies is a recognised complexity of integra-
tive reviews. In a review with diverse empirical
sources, it is recommended that sources are evaluated
and scored according to key criteria relevant to the
review rather than using method-specific approaches
(Whittemore & Knafl 2005). In this instance, Evidence
for Policy and Practice Information and Co-ordinating
Centre (EPPI) criteria were used to guide quality
assessment (EPPI Centre 2010). This approach allows
for evaluation of different study designs and provides
a review-specific assessment of quality (EPPI Centre
2010).
Studies
were
assessed
according
to
three
criteria:
1 Methodological quality and the trustworthiness of
the results.
2 Methodological relevance defined as the appropri-
ateness of the study design for answering the
review question.
3 Topic relevance defined as the appropriateness of
the topic in relation to the review question.
Methodological quality was evaluated by examin-
ing the quality of each study using the hierarchy of
evidence as a guide (Evans 2003), and its execution
thereof. Methodological relevance was evaluated by
assessing the appropriateness of each study’s design
for addressing its research question. Topic relevance
assessed how well matched each study was to the
focus of our review in terms of topic (Gough et al.
2012). A score out of three was given for each
domain (1 = poor, 2 = acceptable, 3 = good) and a
combined total score out of nine was generated, any
study with a score of ≤3 was excluded due to insuffi-
cient quality.
Strategies for data analysis developed for mixed
method or qualitative reviews are particularly appli-
cable to the integrative review method as they allow
for iterative comparisons across data sources. As
such, data analysis was conducted using a descriptive
thematic method for synthesising data (Health Devel-
opment Agency 2004). This method was chosen as it
allows clear identification of prominent themes and
provides an organised and structured way of dealing
with data from diverse methodologies. Studies were
classified by intervention category and a data-driven
approach was used to identify other major or recur-
rent themes relating to the research aim; a process of
constant comparison was used to compare coded cat-
egories and enhance rigour (Glaser & Strauss 1967,
Health Development Agency 2004).
Results
Search results are summarised in the adapted Pre-
ferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) flow chart in Figure 1. A
total of 2420 studies were identified, of which 39 met
Box 1 Inclusion criteria
Literature relating to interventions with a primary or secondary
outcome of reducing or preventing social isolation and/or
loneliness
Literature relating to older adults
Empirical research articles reporting primary research,
published in full, including all research methodologies (but
excluding reviews)
English language articles
Published since 2003
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
149
Interventions to reduce social isolation and loneliness
 our
inclusion
criteria
(see
supporting
material
Table S1). Of these, 6 were randomised controlled tri-
als (RCT), 21 were other quantitative designs, 10 were
qualitative studies and 2 were mixed method studies.
Quality of evidence
All studies achieved a score ≥3 on quality appraisal
and therefore no studies were excluded on the basis
of quality. However, overall the included studies
showed inconsistent levels of quality and consistency.
Only three of the 39 included studies merited the top
score of 9 on quality appraisal with studies assessing
‘psychological
therapies’
generally
of
the
highest
quality (see Table S1 supporting material for further
details on study design and quality). The inconsistent
quality of the included articles indicates the findings
from this review should be accepted with caution
and generalisability may not be appropriate. Quality
appraisal scores are noted in Box 2. Included studies
provided variable definitions of social isolation and
loneliness. The measures used to evaluate loneliness
and social isolation outcomes showed some consis-
tency. The majority of quantitative studies used vali-
dated tools, commonly the UCLA loneliness scale (or
modified version thereof) (Russell et al. 1980), the De
Jong Gierveld scale (de Jong Gierveld & Kamphuis
1985) or the Lubben Social Network scale (Lubben
1998). Some studies used single-item indicators which
may undermine the validity of results; however,
research has indicated that single-item measures can
correlate strongly with more complex measures (Vic-
tor et al. 2005). Inconsistencies in definition and mea-
surement across the 39 studies mean the practice and
policy relevance of findings may be limited.
Categories of intervention
There was significant heterogeneity in the interven-
tions identified and the majority comprised multiple
and interacting components. Thematic analysis identi-
fied six categories of intervention based on their pur-
pose, their mechanisms of action and their intended
outcomes (see supporting material Table S1). The cate-
gories were social facilitation interventions, psycholog-
ical therapies, health and social care provision, animal
interventions, befriending interventions and leisure/
skill development. While many interventions utilised
mechanisms from more than one category, the majority
had a primary focus in one of these six areas.
Social facilitation interventions
This
was
the
most
prominent
category
which
described interventions with the primary purpose of
facilitating social interaction with peers, or others
who may be lonely. Social facilitation interventions
generally presumed a degree of reciprocity, and
strived to provide mutual benefit to all participants
involved.
Many
of
these
interventions
involved
group-based activities, for example charity-funded
friendship clubs (Hemingway & Jack 2013), shared
interest topic groups (Cohen-Mansfield et al. 2007),
day care centres (Iecovich & Biderman 2012) and
friendship enrichment programmes (Martina & Ste-
vens 2006, Stevens et al. 2006, Alaviani et al. 2015).
One intervention focused on the specific role of Irish
cultural identity in social facilitation (Cant & Taket
2005). Two interventions proposed innovative tech-
nology-based solutions to aiding socialisation using
videoconferencing and social networking (Ballantyne
et al. 2010, Tsai et al. 2010).
Initial search results = 2420
Duplicates removed = 1473
Titles/abstracts reviewed = 947
Failed to meet inclusion criteria = 867
Full texts reviewed = 80
Failed to meet inclusion criteria = 45
Articles identified from reference list screening = 2
Articles identified from grey literature and other 
sources = 2
Articles included = 35
Articles for final inclusion = 39
Figure 1 PRISMA flow chart for search results. [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
150
C. Gardiner et al.
 All but two of the social facilitation interventions
reported some success in reducing social isolation or
loneliness (Cant & Taket 2005, Tse & Howie 2005, Ste-
vens et al. 2006, Cohen-Mansfield et al. 2007, Ballan-
tyne et al. 2010, Tsai et al. 2010, Hemingway & Jack
2013, Alaviani et al. 2015). For example, Tsai et al.
(2010) evaluated a videoconference programme which
aimed to facilitate contact between an older person
and their family. They reported lower levels of loneli-
ness (as measured by the UCLA scale) among those
using the videoconference. Qualitative studies were
useful in identifying factors which supported the
success of interventions and included a supportive
environment (Ballantyne et al. 2010), a sense of com-
panionship and keeping occupied (Tse & Howie 2005),
and creating a sense of belonging (Cant & Taket 2005).
Two studies, evaluating day care centres for frail older
people and a friendship enrichment programme, were
unable to demonstrate any impact on loneliness (Mar-
tina & Stevens 2006, Iecovich & Biderman 2012).
Psychological therapies
This category of intervention utilised recognised ther-
apeutic approaches delivered by trained therapists or
health professionals. The review identified this cate-
gory of intervention as having the most robust evalu-
ation to date. Humour therapy (Tse et al. 2010),
mindfulness
and
stress
reduction
(Creswell
et al.
2012), reminiscence group therapy (Liu et al. 2007),
and cognitive and social support interventions (Saito
et al. 2012) were all successful in significantly reduc-
ing loneliness and had a positive impact on a range
of other outcomes including social support, happiness
and life satisfaction. A common feature of these
interventions was that they all involved facilitated
group-based activities. However, as most involved a
therapeutic approach in addition to some sort of
group interaction, the individual factors contributing
to the success of the interventions were not always
clear. Two studies failed to show a significant reduc-
tion on social isolation or loneliness. A quasi-experi-
mental evaluation of cognitive enhancement therapy
did not demonstrate a significant reduction in loneli-
ness, but did note a significant increase in loneliness
in the control group over time, perhaps indicating a
maintenance effect of the intervention (Winningham
& Pike 2007). An RCT of a psychological group reha-
bilitation intervention also failed to demonstrate a
Box 2 Common characteristics of interventions which demonstrate a positive impact on social isolation and/or loneliness
Adaptability
National interventions funded by governments or other larger organisations may have set criteria for
implementation and execution of an intervention; however, a frequently observed criticism was a lack of
being able to adapt interventions for the specific needs of a local population (Wylie 2012).
Project co-ordinators from a national befriending service commented that more local control was need to
respond to the community and to enhance the service (Kime et al. 2012).
Local control conducive to meaningful friendship, especially when attendees control the activities and the
activities are relevant to their interests (Hemingway & Jack 2013).
The need for adaptability may be driven by differences in population demographics.
Flexibility can also mean services and support can meet the individual needs of older people (Cattan &
Ingold 2003).
Community development
approach
Older people wish to have an opportunity to be involved in project development and delivery, and to be
supported to contribute to such activities (Cattan & Ingold 2003).
Interventions that involved users in the design and implementation were more successful (Bartlett
et al. 2013).
Interventions that aimed to preserve service user autonomy by allowing participants to decide the
activities to be undertaken also seemed to be more effective (Hemingway & Jack 2013).
Activities were more likely to be effective if older people were involved in the planning, developing and
execution of activities (Wylie 2012).
Older people sometimes found the activities organised by others patronising (Pettigrew & Roberts 2008).
Building partnerships may also lead to interventions still being implemented after professional services
have withdrawn engagement (Cant & Taket 2005, Cohen-Mansfield et al. 2007).
Productive engagement
Interventions focussing on productive engagement seemed to be more effective than those which
involved passive activities (Pettigrew & Roberts 2008).
Productive activities include group interventions focussed on socialisation or creating opportunities for
socialisation and forming new social networks.
In addition, productive engagement may also include solitary activities.
‘Doing’ things accumulates more social contacts than watching or listening to things. Doing things refers
to productivity and involves action and creativeness and is often directed towards a (common) goal
(Toepoel 2013).
Activities that presented a challenge were suggested as being most appropriate (Howat et al. 2004).
Adult day groups supporting productive activities led to participants reporting lower levels of loneliness
through keeping occupied (Tse & Howie 2005)
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
151
Interventions to reduce social isolation and loneliness
 reduction in loneliness, but did show an increased
number of friendships in the intervention group
(Routasalo et al. 2009).
Health and social care provision
This
category
described
interventions
involving
health, allied health and/or social care professionals
supporting older people. These interventions were
characterised by the involvement of health and social
care professionals and enrolment in a formal pro-
gramme of care, either in a nursing home (Bergman-
Evans 2004, Loek et al. 2012) or community setting
(Bartsch et al. 2013, Nicholson & Shellman 2013,
Ollonqvist et al. 2008). A diverse range of models
were identified including a community network of
trained gatekeepers (Bartsch & Rogers 2009) and geri-
atric rehabilitation run by clinical and allied health
staff (Ollonqvist et al. 2008). Nicholson and Shellman
(2013)
evaluated
the
CARELINK
programme,
a
university–community
partnership,
where
nursing
students visited older people to aid socialisation. A
post-test only study revealed that those receiving the
intervention were 12 times less likely to report social
isolation than those in a control group. Only one
study in this category failed to demonstrate a signifi-
cant reduction in either loneliness or social isolation.
Bergman-Evans (2004) undertook a quasi-experimen-
tal evaluation of the Eden alternative model, a resi-
dential care model aiming to create a more ‘human
habitat’ in residential care. While they were unable to
demonstrate any significant reduction in loneliness as
measured by the UCLA scale, they did report signifi-
cantly lower levels of boredom and helplessness in
the intervention group.
Animal interventions
Three studies described and evaluated canine or
feline animal interventions, which focussed mainly on
animal-assisted therapy. In a cross-sectional study,
Krause-Parello
(2012)
interviewed
pet-owning
women, and concluded that pet attachment could
alleviate loneliness by acting as a coping mechanism,
possibly by providing social support and companion-
ship. An RCT by Banks and Banks (2005) attempted
to determine whether it is the animal–human connec-
tion or a subsequent human–human connection that
is responsible for a reduction in loneliness. They con-
cluded that animal-assisted therapy was more effec-
tive in the individual setting, and therefore the
human–animal interaction is most responsible for
reducing loneliness. Banks et al. (2008) compared a
living dog with a robotic dog and found that while a
higher level of attachment was found with the living
animal, both groups showed a significant reduction
in loneliness and there was no significant difference
in loneliness between groups.
Befriending interventions
Befriending interventions are defined as a form of
social facilitation with the aim of formulating new
friendships. Befriending interventions were usually
one-to-one and often involved volunteers. They differ
from social facilitation interventions in that the pri-
mary aim is to support the lonely individual, rather
than to promote a mutually beneficial relationship
(although this may be an important secondary conse-
quence). Examples included a Senior Companion Pro-
gramme
(Butler
2006)
and
the
‘Call
in
Time’
programme (Cattan et al. 2011, Kime et al. 2012), a
national pilot of telephone befriending projects across
the UK. A mixed methods evaluation found that tele-
phone projects were successful in alleviating loneli-
ness through making life worth living, generating a
sense of belonging and ‘knowing there’s a friend out
there’ (Cattan et al. 2011). However, qualitative find-
ings from befriending projects also identified a range
of challenges to be overcome including volunteer
recruitment, local rather than national control of pro-
jects, and promotion and publicity issues (Kime et al.
2012).
Leisure/skill development interventions
A final category of intervention focused on leisure
activities and/or skill development. Activities were
varied and included gardening programmes, com-
puter/Internet use, voluntary work, holidays and
sports (Brown et al. 2004, Pettigrew & Roberts 2008,
Tse 2010, Toepoel 2013, Heo et al. 2015). Solitary com-
puter-based interventions appeared the most effective
and well evaluated. A 3-week computer training
course and a computer/Internet loan scheme were
both effective in reducing some aspects of loneliness
(Fokkema & Knipscheer 2007, Blazun et al. 2012).
Higher use of the Internet was also found to be a pre-
dictor
of
higher
levels
of
social
support
and
decreased loneliness (Heo et al. 2015). Two well-
designed studies evaluated indoor gardening pro-
grammes for nursing home residents (Brown et al.
2004, Tse 2010). However, findings were mixed, with
one study reporting a significant effect on loneliness
(Tse 2010) and the other reporting no effect (Brown
et al. 2004). Evidence from a qualitative study was
useful for identifying how leisure activities reduced
loneliness, for example by maintaining social contacts,
spending time constructively and having interaction
with others (Pettigrew & Roberts 2008). Toepoel
(2013) distinguished between productive activities
which were associated with a reduction in loneliness
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
152
C. Gardiner et al.
 (e.g. reading or engaging in hobbies) and passive
consumptive
activities
which
were
not
(such
as
watching TV or listening to radio).
Factors contributing to the success of interventions
Most interventions were complex and many relied on
more than one mechanism for reducing social isola-
tion and loneliness; therefore, it was often unclear
which specific aspects of an intervention contributed
most strongly to its success. For example, mindful-
ness-based stress reduction was found to significantly
decrease loneliness (Creswell et al. 2012), but as this
intervention was delivered in a group setting, it was
not possible to assess the unique contribution of the
mindfulness element as opposed to the group interac-
tion element. Qualitative studies were particularly
useful for understanding the mechanisms underlying
successful interventions due to the ability of qualita-
tive data to provide a more nuanced understanding
of the interacting elements of interventions and their
contexts. Three key common characteristics of effec-
tive interventions were identified and are presented
in Box 2. Adaptability of an intervention to a local
context was seen as key for ensuring its success, par-
ticularly where interventions have been implemented
by national organisations (Cattan & Ingold 2003,
Hemingway & Jack 2013, Kime et al. 2012, Wylie
2012). A community development approach, where
service users are involved in the design and imple-
mentation of interventions, was often associated with
more successful interventions (Cattan & Ingold 2003,
Findlay 2003, Cattan et al. 2005, Pettigrew & Roberts
2008, Wylie 2012, Bartlett et al. 2013, Hemingway &
Jack 2013). Finally, activities or interventions which
supported productive engagement seemed to be more
successful in alleviating social isolation than those
involving passive activities or those with no explicit
goal or purpose (Howat et al. 2004, Pettigrew &
Roberts 2008, Toepoel 2013). While it would have
been useful to explore whether differences were
apparent between social isolation and loneliness in
response to different interventions, unfortunately the
quality of data was insufficient to support such anal-
yses. It should also be noted that as the factors con-
tributing to the success of interventions were largely
derived
from
qualitative
research,
generalisability
may not be appropriate and these findings should be
accepted with caution.
Discussion
This study is the first of its kind to review empiri-
cal
literature
from
diverse
methodologies
on
interventions to reduce loneliness and social isolation
in older people. The findings identified a wide range
of interventions developed to reduce social isolation
and loneliness among older people. Significant diver-
sity and heterogeneity were evident in intervention
design and implementation, with evidence suggesting
the scope and purpose of interventions varies widely.
While study quality was variable, studies reporting
evaluations of interventions indicated that the major-
ity of activities are at least moderately successful in
reducing
social
isolation
and/or
loneliness.
Our
review extends the findings from previous reviews
(Cattan et al. 2005, Dickens et al. 2011, Findlay 2003,
Hagan et al. 2014); however, the use of an integrative
methodology provides some interesting additional
insights into this growing area of research. The inclu-
sion of diverse methodologies has allowed us to
provide a more complete picture of the range and
scope of interventions available, and importantly to
gain insight into the factors which influence an inter-
ventions success.
Interventions
in
our
review
were
categorised
according
to
the
mechanisms
by
which
they
attempted to target social isolation and loneliness.
This categorisation is important when faced with
growing diversity in intervention types and is a nec-
essary pre-requisite to identifying which elements of
interventions influence their effectiveness. A number
of theories have been proposed to explain the cause
of loneliness (e.g. the existential, the cognitive, the
psychodynamic and the interactionist) (Donaldson &
Watson 1996). While there is no theoretical consensus
regarding cause, these different theoretical perspec-
tives illustrate the varying ways in which the study
of loneliness has been approached (Victor et al. 2000).
Similarly, the notion of social isolation is one that has
been understood and defined in a number of different
ways. Approaches to measuring social isolation vary
but often involve recording levels of social contact,
enumerating
social
participation
and
quantifying
social networks. The nature of a person’s social net-
work has been identified as key to the level of social
isolation that they experience (Victor et al. 2000). The-
oretical perspectives on the concepts of loneliness and
social isolation continue to develop and advance.
Theoretical understandings of the way in which inter-
ventions mediate social isolation and loneliness also
require further research attention to better understand
the processes involved in implementing a successful
intervention.
Interestingly, and in contrast to findings from two
previous reviews (Cattan et al. 2005, Dickens et al.
2011), our study did not report group interventions
as being more effective than solitary or one-to-one
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
153
Interventions to reduce social isolation and loneliness
 interventions. Our review found that solitary pet
interventions (Banks & Banks 2005, Banks et al. 2008,
Krause-Parello
2012)
and
solitary
interventions
involving technology such as videoconference and
computer/Internet use (Tsai et al. 2010, Blazun et al.
2012) were successful in reducing the experience of
loneliness. Furthermore, one study using an RCT
design to evaluate animal-assisted therapy reported
that the therapy was more effective in the individual
rather than the group setting (Banks & Banks 2005).
These findings suggest that contrary to the majority
of previous research evidence, effective interventions
are not restricted to those offered in group settings.
Indeed, qualitative data from this review indicate that
productive engagement activities, which may be soli-
tary, are a feature of many successful interventions.
These findings are significant when considering the
growing number of older people who are house-
bound and unable to easily participate in group activ-
ities. Housebound older adults are known to be at
greater risk of loneliness and social isolation and
health and social care problems when compared with
the general population (Qiu et al. 2010, Wenger &
Burholt 2013). Innovative interventions promoting
solitary activities may offer solutions for hard to
reach groups of older adults such as these. While soli-
tary activities may also appear attractive from the
perspective of policy makers due to their perceived
low cost, it should be noted that solitary interven-
tions
in
this
review
are
well-resourced
activities
which require financial investment (e.g. purchase of
pet, feeding costs, cost of computer hardware and
Internet). Many of these activities, while undertaken
alone, also actively involve others (e.g. a pet, or an
animal-visiting programme, a family to contact by
Skype, or an online community) and this should be
considered when planning interventions.
The use of an integrative review methodology
incorporating literature with diverse methods includ-
ing qualitative studies and mixed method designs
has allowed for a broader and more comprehensive
understanding of social isolation and loneliness inter-
ventions
(Whittemore
&
Knafl
2005).
This
has
enabled some novel insights into the factors which
contribute to the success of such interventions, many
of
which
emerged
through
qualitative
enquiry.
Adaptability to a local context was seen to be impor-
tant in influencing the effectiveness and success of
interventions.
While
many
interventions
may
be
developed and funded by national organisations,
some local control is necessary in order to respond
to local contextual factors. The need for adaptability
is particularly important in the context of increasing
diversity in population demographics internationally
(Office for National Statistics 2011). A community
development
approach,
where
interventions
are
designed and implemented with input from service
users, was also noted as an important feature and
has previously been associated with successful social
isolation and loneliness interventions (Joseph Rown-
tree Foundation 1998, Findlay 2003, Cattan et al.
2005). The service user or public and patient involve-
ment movement has gained momentum over recent
years, particularly in areas such as health service
development and research design. The main reasons
for public involvement in research are political man-
date and the pursuit of ‘better’ research (Oliver et al.
2008).
However,
our
findings
suggest
that
this
approach may also have the benefit of developing
interventions which better meet the needs of the
people they are intended to support. Finally, produc-
tive engagement activities may be associated with
better outcomes than passive activities. This finding
is in line with the review by Dickens et al. (2011)
which reported participatory interventions were most
likely to be beneficial. This finding may be particu-
larly useful when designing non-group or solitary
activities, and may help inform the design of solitary
interventions.
Limitations
While care was taken to ensure the search strategy
returned the most inclusive result, it is possible that
some studies may not have been indexed or may for
other reason be missing from the data. As the review
employed an integrative review methodology, it was
not the intention to combine results statistically; how-
ever, as a result our findings on effectiveness should
be interpreted with caution.
Conclusion
A wide range of interventions have been developed to
tackle social isolation and loneliness among older peo-
ple. The majority of interventions reported some suc-
cess in reducing social isolation and loneliness, but
there was significant heterogeneity between interven-
tions. Common features of successful interventions
include adaptability, community participation and
activities involving productive engagement. However,
it is important to note that our conclusions are based
on combined evidence from studies using a range of
methods, and are not based on meta-analysis. There-
fore, conclusions regarding effectiveness cannot be
confirmed
statistically.
Further
research
is
now
required to enhance theoretical understandings of how
successful interventions mediate social isolation and
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
154
C. Gardiner et al.
 loneliness, and provide more robust data on effective-
ness. Research exploring the cost-effectiveness of dif-
ferent approaches is also urgently required in order to
further support the development of interventions
which address the growing issue of social isolation and
loneliness in our expanding older populations.
Funding
This research was funded by the Hope Foundation,
New Zealand.
Conflict of interest
None declared.
References
Alaviani M., Khosravan S., Alami A. & Moshki M. (2015) The
effect of a multi-strategy program on developing social
behaviors based on Pender’s health promotion model to
prevent loneliness of old women referred to Gonabad Urban
Health Centers. International Journal of Community Based
Nursing & Midwifery 3 (2), 132–140.
Ballantyne A., Trenwith L., Zubrinich S. & Corlis M. (2010)
‘I feel less lonely’: what older people say about participat-
ing in a social networking website. Quality in Ageing &
Older Adults 11 (3), 25–35.
Banks M.R. & Banks W.A. (2005) The effects of group and
individual animal-assisted therapy on loneliness in residents
of long-term care facilities. Anthrozoos 18 (4), 396–408.
Banks M.R., Willoughby L.M. & Banks W.A. (2008) Animal-
assisted therapy and loneliness in nursing homes: use of
robotic versus living dogs. Journal of the American Medical
Directors Association 9 (3), 173–177.
Bartlett H., Warburton J., Lui C.-W., Peach L. & Carroll M.
(2013) Preventing social isolation in later life: findings and
insights from a pilot Queensland intervention study. Age-
ing & Society 33 (7), 1167–1189.
Bartsch D.A. & Rodgers V.K. (2009) Senior reach outcomes
in comparison with the Spokane Gatekeeper program.
Care Management Journals 10 (3), 82–88.
Bartsch D.A., Rodgers V.K. & Strong D. (2013) Outcomes of
senior reach gatekeeper referrals: comparison of the Spo-
kane gatekeeper program, Colorado senior reach, and
mid-Kansas senior outreach. Care Management Journals
14 (1), 11–20.
Bergman-Evans B. (2004) Beyond the basics: effects of the
Eden Alternative Model on quality of life issues. Journal of
Gerontological Nursing 30 (6), 27–34.
Blazun H., Saranto K. & Rissanen S. (2012) Impact of com-
puter training courses on reduction of loneliness of older
people in Finland and Slovenia. Computers in Human
Behavior 28 (4), 1202–1212.
Brown V.M., Allen A.C., Dwozan M., Mercer I. & Warren
K. (2004) Indoor gardening and older adults: effects on
socialization, activities of daily living, and loneliness. Jour-
nal of Gerontological Nursing 30 (10), 34–42.
Butler S.S. (2006) Evaluating the Senior Companion Pro-
gram: a mixed-method approach. Journal of Gerontological
Social Work 47 (1–2), 45–70.
Campaign to End Loneliness (2011) Safeguarding the Con-
voy: A call to action from the Campaign to End Loneli-
ness. Available at: http://www.campaigntoendloneliness.
org/ (accessed on 19/1/2016).
Cant B. & Taket A. (2005) Promoting social support and
social networks among Irish pensioners in South London,
UK. Diversity in Health & Social Care 2 (4), 263–270.
Cattan M. & Ingold K. (2003) Implementing change: the
alleviation of social isolation and loneliness among older
people in Leeds. Journal of Mental Health Promotion 2 (3),
12–19.
Cattan M. & White M. (1998) Developing evidence based
health promotion for older people: a systematic review
and survey of health promotion interventions targeting
social isolation and loneliness among older people. Inter-
net Journal of Health Promotion 13, 1–9.
Cattan M., White M., Bond J. & Learmouth A. (2005)
Preventing social isolation and loneliness among older
people: a systematic review of health promotion interven-
tions. Ageing & Society 25, 41–67.
Cattan M., Kime N. & Bagnall A.-M. (2011) The use of tele-
phone befriending in low level support for socially iso-
lated older people – an evaluation. Health & Social Care in
the Community 19 (2), 198–206.
Cohen-Mansfield J. & Perach R. (2015) Interventions for alle-
viating loneliness among older persons: a critical review.
American Journal of Health Promotion 29 (3), e109–e125.
Cohen-Mansfield J., Parpura-Gill A., Kotler M., Vass J.,
MacLennan B. & Rosenberg F. (2007) Shared interest
groups (SHIGs) in low income independent living facili-
ties. Clinical Gerontologist 31 (1), 101–112.
Courtin E. & Knapp M. (2015) Social isolation, loneliness
and health in old age: a scoping review. Health and Social
Care in the Community doi:10.1111/hsc.12311.
Creswell J.D., Irwin M.R., Burklund L.J. et al. (2012) Mind-
fulness-Based Stress Reduction training reduces loneliness
and pro-inflammatory gene expression in older adults: a
small randomized controlled trial. Brain, Behavior, and
Immunity 26 (7), 1095–1101.
Dickens A., Richards S., Greaves C. & Campbell J. (2011)
Interventions targeting social isolation in older people: a
systematic review. BMC Public Health 11 (1), 647.
Donaldson J.M. & Watson R. (1996) Loneliness in elderly
people: an important area for nursing research. Journal of
Advanced Nursing 24, 952–959.
EPPI Centre (2010) EPPI-Centre Methods for Conducting Sys-
tematic Reviews. Evidence of Policy and Practice Informa-
tion and Co-ordinating (EPPI) Centre, London.
Ernst J.M. & Cacioppo J.T. (1999) Lonely hearts: psychologi-
cal perspectives on loneliness. Applied and Preventive Psy-
chology 8 (1), 1–22.
Evans D. (2003) Hierarchy of evidence: a framework for
ranking
evidence
evaluating
healthcare
interventions.
Journal of Clinical Nursing 12 (1), 77–84.
Findlay R.A. (2003) Interventions to reduce social isolation
amongst older people: where is the evidence? Ageing &
Society 23 (5), 647–658.
Fokkema T. & Knipscheer K. (2007) Escape loneliness by
going digital: a quantitative and qualitative evaluation of
a Dutch experiment in using ECT to overcome loneliness
among older adults. Aging and Mental Health 11 (5),
496–504.
Gardner I., Brooke E., Ozanne E. & Kendig H. (1999)
Improving Social Networks, a Research Report: Improving
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
155
Interventions to reduce social isolation and loneliness
 Health and Social Isolation in the Australian Veteran Commu-
nity. Lincoln Gerontology Centre, La Trobe University,
Melbourne.
Glaser B.G. & Strauss A.L. (1967) The Discovery of Grounded
Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research. Aldine DeGruy-
ter, New York.
Golden J., Conroy R.M., Bruce I. et al. (2009) Loneliness,
social supports, mood and wellbeing in community-
dwelling elderly. International Journal of Geriatric Psychaia-
try 24, 694–700.
Gough D., Olivier S. & Thomas J. (2012) An Introduction to
Systematic Reviews. Sage Publications Ltd, London, UK.
Hagan R., Manktelow R., Taylor B.J. & Mallett J. (2014) Reduc-
ing loneliness amongst older people: a systematic search
and narrative review. Aging & Mental Health 18 (6), 683–693.
Health Development Agency (2004) Integrative Approaches to
Qualitative and Quantitative Evidence. NHS Health Devel-
opment Agency, London, UK.
Hemingway A. & Jack E. (2013) Reducing social isolation
and promoting well being in older people. Quality in Age-
ing & Older Adults 14 (1), 25–35.
Heo J., Chun S., Lee S., Lee K.H. & Kim J. (2015) Internet
use and well-being in older adults. Cyberpsychology, Behav-
ior and Social Networking 18 (5), 268–272.
Howat P., Iredell H., Grenade L., Nedwetzky A. & Collins
J. (2004) Reducing social isolation amongst older people –
implications for health professionals. Geriaction 22 (1),
13–20.
Iecovich E. & Biderman A. (2012) Attendance in adult day
care centers and its relation to loneliness among frail
older adults. International Psychogeriatrics 24 (3), 439–448.
de Jong Gierveld J. & Kamphuis F.H. (1985) The develop-
ment of a Rasch-type loneliness-scale. Applied Psychological
Measurement 9 (3), 289–299.
Joseph Rowntree Foundation (1998) The Role and Impact of
Befriending. Joseph Rowntree Foundation, York, UK.
Kime N., Cattan M. & Bagnall A.-M. (2012) The delivery
and management of telephone befriending services –
whose needs are being met? Quality in Ageing & Older
Adults 13 (3), 231–240.
Krause-Parello C.A. (2012) Pet ownership and older women:
the relationships among loneliness, pet attachment sup-
port,
human
social
support,
and
depressed
mood.
Geriatric Nursing 33 (3), 194–203.
Lewin S., Glenton C. & Oxman A.D. (2009) Use of qualita-
tive methods alongside randomised controlled trials of
complex healthcare interventions: methodological study.
BMJ 339, b3496.
Liu S.J., Lin C.J., Chen Y.M. & Huang X.Y. (2007) The
effects of reminiscence group therapy on self-esteem,
depression, loneliness and life satisfaction of elderly peo-
ple living alone. Mid-Taiwan Journal of Medicine 12 (3),
133–142.
Loek A.H., Willems C.G., Spreeuwenberg M.D. & Rietman
J. (2012) Implementation of CareTV in care for the elderly:
the effects on feelings of loneliness and safety and future
challenges. Technology & Disability 24 (4), 283–291.
Luanaigh C.O. & Lawlor B.A. (2008) Loneliness and the
health of older people. International Journal of Geriatric Psy-
chiatry 23 (12), 1213–1221.
Lubben J.E. (1998) Assessing social networks among elderly
populations. Family Community Health 11, 42–52.
Martina C.M. & Stevens N.L. (2006) Breaking the cycle of
loneliness?
Psychological
effects
of
a
friendship
enrichment program for older women. Aging & Mental
Health 10 (5), 467–475.
MSD (2001) New Zealand Positive Ageing Strategy. Ministry
of Social Development, Wellington, New Zealand.
Nicholson N.R. & Shellman J. (2013) Decreasing social isola-
tion in older adults: effects of an empowerment interven-
tion offered through the CARELINK program. Research in
Gerontological Nursing 6 (2), 89–97.
Oakley A., Strange V., Bonell C., Allen E., Stephenson J. & RIP-
PLE Study Team (2006) Process evaluation in randomised
controlled trials of complex interventions. BMJ 332, 413–416.
Office for National Statistics (2011) Ethnicity and National
Identity in England and Wales 2011. Part of 2011 Census,
Key Statistics for Local Authorities in England and Wales
Release. Office for National Statistics, London.
Oliver S.R., Rees R.W., Clarke-Jones L. et al. (2008) A multi-
dimensional conceptual framework for analysing public
involvement in health services research. Health Expecta-
tions 11, 72–84.
Ollonqvist K., Palkeinen H., Aaltonen T. et al. (2008) Allevi-
ating loneliness among frail older people – findings from
a randomised controlled trial. International Journal of Men-
tal Health Promotion 10 (2), 26–34.
Pettigrew S. & Roberts M. (2008) Addressing loneliness in
later life. Aging and Mental Health 12 (3), 302–309.
Qiu W.Q., Dean M., Liu T., George L., Gann M., Cohen J. &
Bruce M.L. (2010) Physical and mental health of home-
bound older adults: an overlooked population. Journal of
the American Geriatrics Society 58 (12), 2423–2428.
Routasalo P.E., Tilvis R.S., Kautiainen H. & Pitkala K.H.
(2009) Effects of psychosocial group rehabilitation on
social functioning, loneliness and well-being of lonely,
older
people:
randomized
controlled
trial.
Journal
of
Advanced Nursing 65 (2), 297–305.
Russell D., Peplau L.A. & Cutrona C.E. (1980) The revised
UCLA
Loneliness
Scale:
concurrent
and
discriminant
validity evidence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy 39, 472–480.
Saito T., Kai I. & Takizawa A. (2012) Effects of a program
to prevent social isolation on loneliness, depression, and
subjective well-being of older adults: a randomized trial
among older migrants in Japan. Archives of Gerontology
and Geriatrics 55 (3), 539–547.
Stevens N.L., Martina C.M. & Westerhof G.J. (2006) Meeting
the need to belong: predicting effects of a friendship
enrichment program for older women. Gerontologist 46
(4), 495–502.
Theeke L.A. (2010) Sociodemographic and health-related
risks for loneliness and outcome differences by loneliness
status in a sample of U.S. older adults. Research in Geron-
tological Nursing 3 (2), 113–125.
Toepoel V. (2013) Ageing, leisure, and social connectedness:
how could leisure help reduce social isolation of older
people? Social Indicators Research 113 (1), 355–372.
Torraco R.J. (2005) Writing integrative literature reviews:
guidelines and examples. Human Resource Development
Review 4, 356.
Tsai H.H., Tsai Y.F., Wang H.H., Chang Y.C. & Chu H.H.
(2010) Videoconference program enhances social support,
loneliness, and depressive status of elderly nursing home
residents. Aging & Mental Health 14 (8), 947–954.
Tse M. (2010) Therapeutic effects of an indoor gardening
programme for older people living in nursing homes.
Journal of Clinical Nursing 19 (7–8), 949–958.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
156
C. Gardiner et al.
 Tse M. & Howie L. (2005) Adult day groups: addressing
older people’s needs for activity and companionship. Aus-
tralasian Journal on Ageing 24 (3), 134–140.
Tse M., Lo A., Cheng T., Chan E., Chan A. & Chung H.
(2010) Humor therapy: relieving chronic pain and enhanc-
ing happiness for older adults. Journal of Aging Research
34, 35–74.
Victor C.R. & Bowling A. (2012) A longitudinal analysis of
loneliness among older people in Great Britain. The Jour-
nal of Psychology 146 (3), 313–331.
Victor C., Scambler S., Bond J. & Bowling A. (2000) Being
alone in later life: loneliness, social isolation and living
alone. Reviews in Clinical Gerontology 10, 407–417.
Victor C., Grenade L. & Boldy D. (2005) Measuring loneli-
ness in later life: a comparison of differing measures.
Reviews in Clinical Gerontology 15 (1), 63–70.
Weiss R.S. (1973) Loneliness: The Experience of Emotional and
Social Isolation. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Wenger G.C. & Burholt V. (2013) Changes in levels of social
isolation and loneliness among older people in a rural
area: a twenty-year longitudinal study. Canadian Journal
on Aging 23 (2), 115–127.
Whittemore R. & Knafl K. (2005) The integrative review: update
methodology. Journal of Advanced Nursing 52 (5), 546–553.
Winningham R.G. & Pike N.L. (2007) A cognitive interven-
tion to enhance institutionalized older adults’ social sup-
port networks and decrease loneliness. Aging & Mental
Health 11 (6), 716–721.
Wylie S. (2012) Social Isolation and Older People in Canterbury.
Age Concern Canterbury, New Zealand. Available at:
http://ageconcerncan.org.nz/resources/ (accessed on 21/
8/2014).
Supporting Information
Additional supporting information may be found in
the online version of this article at the publisher’s
web-ite.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
157
Interventions to reduce social isolation and loneliness
