 The Brain Adapts to Dishonesty
Neil Garrett1,*, Stephanie C. Lazzaro1, Dan Ariely2, and Tali Sharot1,*
1Affective Brain Lab, Department of Experimental Psychology, University College London, United 
Kingdom
2Fuqua School of Business, Duke University, North Carolina, United States of America
Abstract
Dishonesty is an integral part of our social world, influencing domains ranging from finance and 
politics to personal relationships. Anecdotally, digressions from a moral code are often described 
as a series of small breaches that grow over time. Here, we provide empirical evidence for a 
gradual escalation of self-serving dishonesty and reveal a neural mechanism supporting it. 
Behaviorally, we show that the extent to which participants engage in self-serving dishonesty 
increases with repetition. Using fMRI we show that signal reduction in the amygdala is sensitive to 
the history of dishonest behavior, consistent with adaptation. Critically, the extent of amygdala 
BOLD reduction to dishonesty on a present decision relative to the last, predicts the magnitude of 
escalation of self-serving dishonesty on the next decision. The findings uncover a biological 
mechanism that supports a “slippery slope”: what begins as small acts of dishonesty can escalate 
into larger instances.
Many dishonest acts are speculatively traced back to a sequence of smaller transgressions 
that gradually escalated. From financial fraud, to plagiarism, online scams and scientific 
misconduct, deceivers retrospectively describe how minor dishonest decisions snowballed 
into significant ones over time1–4. Despite the dramatic impact of these acts on 
economics5,6, policy7 and education8, we do not have a clear understanding of how and 
why small transgressions may gradually lead to larger ones. Here, we set out to empirically 
demonstrate dishonesty escalation in a controlled laboratory setting and examine the 
underlying mechanism.
People often perceive self-serving dishonesty as morally wrong9 and report uneasiness when 
engaging in such behavior10. Consistent with these reports, physiological11 and 
neurological12 measures of emotional arousal are observed when people deceive. Blocking 
such signals pharmacologically results in significant increases in dishonesty. For example, in 
one study students who had taken and responded to a mild sympatholytic agent were twice 
as likely to cheat on an exam than those who took a placebo13. Thus, in the absence of an 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
*Correspondence to: ngarrett@princeton.edu or t.sharot@ucl.ac.uk. 
Author Contributions: T.S. conceived the study. N.G., .S.C.L., D.A. & T.S. designed the study. N.G. collected behavioral and fMRI 
data. N.G. & T.S. analyzed the data. N.G. & T.S. wrote the manuscript with edits from S.C.L.
Competing Financial Interests: The authors declare no financial competing interests.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 24.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Neurosci. 2016 December ; 19(12): 1727–1732. doi:10.1038/nn.4426.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 affective signal that can help curb dishonesty, people may engage in more frequent and 
severe acts.
A large body of research demonstrates that the response to an emotion evoking stimulus 
weakens with repeated exposure14,15. For example, both affective ratings of negative 
images and amygdala activation have been shown to decrease with each subsequent 
presentation of those images16. It is thus possible that the affective signal that accompanies 
self-serving dishonesty also diminishes with repetition. If indeed signals that may help curb 
dishonesty are diminished over time, dishonest acts could increase. Thus, what begins as 
small deviations from a moral code could escalate to large deviations with potentially 
harmful consequences.
To test for dishonesty escalation and its underlying neurological mechanism, we combined 
brain imaging with a behavioral task in which individuals were given repeated opportunities 
to act dishonestly. We used Neurosynth, a platform for large-scale automated synthesis of 
thousands of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies17, to identify voxels 
within the brain that have been previously associated with emotion. Unsurprisingly, this map 
predominantly, but not exclusively, identified the amygdala. The amygdala responds to 
various emotion-eliciting situations, with stronger activity related to a more potent 
experience (e.g.18–22) and research in non-human animals also demonstrates that the 
amygdala is critical for emotion (e.g.23). Our goal was to examine whether dishonesty 
escalates over time, whether response to dishonesty in the region identified above decreases 
over time, and whether the extent of decrease in the latter predicts the extent of escalation of 
the former.
Testing realistic deception in a brain-imaging scanner is notoriously difficult, as participants 
need to repeatedly, deliberately and voluntarily act dishonestly in a social context without 
being required to admit to their dishonesty. Our paradigm enables participants to do just that, 
whilst also allowing us to quantify deception on a trial-by-trial basis. Specifically, we 
adapted a two party task used previously to elicit and measure dishonesty24. Participants 
advised a second participant played by a confederate, about the amount of money in a glass 
jar filled with pennies (Figure 1a). We changed the incentive structure over the course of two 
experiments such that dishonesty about the amount of money in the jar would either benefit 
the participant at the expense of their partner (“Self-Serving-Other-Harming” condition, 
Experiment 1), benefit both (“Self-Serving-Other-Serving” condition, Experiment 1), benefit 
the partner at the expense of the participant (“Self-Harming-Other-Serving” condition, 
Experiment 1), benefit the participant only without affecting the partner (Self-Serving 
condition, Experiment 2), or benefit the partner only without affecting the participant 
(Other-Serving condition, Experiment 2). Importantly, the participants believed that their 
partner was not aware of this incentive structure, but thought that they were working 
together at all times to provide the most accurate estimate, which would benefit them both 
equally. A “Baseline condition” enabled us to infer the amount of dishonesty on each trial 
without the participant being instructed to, or admitting to, dishonesty. Specifically, in this 
condition, neither the participant nor the partner would benefit from the participant’s 
dishonesty. Here, honest, accurate, advice was the best policy to maximize rewards for all 
(see Online Methods for details). Because the different jars were repeated under all 
Garrett et al.
Page 2
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 conditions, the Baseline condition enabled us to estimate how much money the participant 
thought there was in a specific jar and thus the approximate amount by which a participant 
was dishonest in the other conditions.
We designed an incentive structure such that adaptation to dishonesty could not be explained 
by adaptation to reward. Specifically, participants were told that the available reward would 
vary on each trial. Thus, while on a specific trial a larger magnitude of dishonesty was more 
likely to result in greater gains, greater dishonesty on that trial relative to the previous one 
would not necessarily correspond to greater returns (see Online Methods). Moreover, neither 
the amount available, nor the outcome of the trial, would be disclosed at any point during the 
experiment. In other words, the participants were informed in advance that no feedback 
would be provided. In addition, participants were told that rewards would not accumulate, 
but rather one trial would be selected at random at the end of the experiment and the 
participant would be paid according to that trial. We went to great length to explain the 
reward structure to the participants and to ensure their comprehension by using a quiz with 
example trials prior to the beginning of each block of trials.
Results
Self-Serving Dishonesty Escalates
We observed clear evidence of escalation in self-serving dishonesty, such that the magnitude 
of dishonesty got larger and larger over the course of a block. For each participant (N=55) 
we regressed dishonesty on trial number and examined standardized regression coefficients 
at the group level. Entering these scores into a repeated measures ANCOVA (controlling for 
initial levels of dishonesty and whether the participant was completing the study inside or 
outside the scanner) revealed a significant effect of condition (F2,49 = 4.65, p = 0.014, Figure 
1b). This was due to dishonesty increasing over time if it was self-serving (Self-Serving-
Other-Harming: t52 = 3.38, p = 0.001; Self-Serving-Other-Serving: t52 = 2.25, p = 0.03), but 
not otherwise (Self-Harming-Other-Serving: t52 = -0.27, p=0.79). Escalation was 
significantly greater when dishonesty was self-serving than self-harming (Self-Serving-
Other-Harming compared to Self-Harming-Other-Serving: F1,51 = 8.80, p = 0.005; Self-
Serving-Other-Serving compared to Self-Harming-Other-Serving: F1,51 = 4.61, p = 0.037).
We further demonstrate this escalation by averaging the amount of dishonesty on each trial 
(N=60) across participants (N=55) and correlating with trial number. This correlated 
positively when dishonesty was self-serving (Self-Serving-Other-Harming condition: r58 = 
0.66, p<0.001, Figure 1c; Self-Serving-Other-Serving condition: r58 = 0.83, p<0.001, Figure 
1d). In contrast, when dishonesty was self-harming and accuracy was in fact the self-serving 
choice, a trend in the opposite direction was observed over the course of trials (Self-
Harming-Other-Serving: r58 = -0.23, p=0.08, Figure 1e), which was significantly smaller 
than the escalations of self-serving dishonesty (compared to Self-Serving-Other-Harming: z 
= 4.83, p<0.001; compared to Self-Serving-Other-Serving: z = 7.13, p<0.001).
Garrett et al.
Page 3
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Dishonesty Magnitude
While the focus of this investigation is escalation of dishonesty over time rather than its 
average magnitude, for completeness we report the latter here. Entering participants’ 
dishonesty magnitude into a one way repeated measures ANOVA (controlling for study) 
revealed a significant effect of condition (F2,52 = 24.17, p=0.0001, Supplementary Figure 
1a). Participants’ dishonesty was greater when dishonesty was self-serving (mean Self-
Serving-Other-Harming = 7.11, s.d. = 9.61; mean Self-Serving-Other-Serving condition = 
12.84, s.d. = 15.46) than when it was self-harming (mean Self-Harming-Other-Serving 
condition = -0.16, s.d. = 2.99, respective comparisons: F1,53 = 26.44, p<0.001; F1,53 = 39.67 
p<0.0001). Dishonesty magnitude was also greater when dishonesty served the self and the 
other relative to when it only served the self (F1,53 = 7.72, p=0.008). Entering participants’ 
starting dishonesty into a one way repeated measures ANOVA (controlling for study) 
revealed a significant effect of condition (F2,52 = 12.11, p<0.001, Supplementary Figure 1b). 
Participants’ starting dishonesty was greater when dishonesty was self-serving than when it 
was self-harming (Self-Serving-Other-Harming vs Self-Harming-Other-Serving condition: 
F1,53 = 7.74, p=0.007; Self-Serving-Other-Serving vs Self-Harming-Other-Serving 
condition: F1,53 = 21.99, p<0.001). Starting dishonesty was also greater when dishonesty 
served the self and the other compared to when it only served the self (F1,53 = 8.84, 
p=0.004). In all conditions, participants’ average estimates (Self-Serving-Other-Harming: t54 
= -43.91, p<0.001; Self-Serving-Other-Serving: t54 = -24.54, p<0.001; Self-Harming-Other-
Serving t54 = -158.97, p<0.001, one sample ttests) and last estimates (Self-Serving-Other-
Harming: t54 = -37.58, p<0.001; Self-Serving-Other-Serving: t54 = -21.37, p<0.001; Self-
Harming-Other-Serving t54 = -120.34, p<0.001, one sample ttests) were significantly lower 
than ceiling. Thus, participants always had an opportunity to lie more than they actually did 
if they wanted to.
Dishonesty, but not its escalation, is evident when it benefits the partner without affecting 
the self
In the Self-Harming-Other-Serving condition, participants on average did not act 
dishonestly, presumably because dishonesty in this condition would hurt their pay. It is thus 
feasible that escalation is not evident in this condition simply because dishonesty is 
nonexistent. To examine this possibility and tease apart the contribution of self-interest and 
other-interest in escalating dishonesty, we conducted a follow up study (N=25) in which we 
had two new conditions in addition to the baseline condition. In the condition of interest, 
dishonesty only benefitted the self without affecting the other participant (Self-Serving); in 
the comparison condition dishonesty would only benefit the partner without benefiting or 
hurting the self (Other-Serving). Each of these two conditions were run twice in two 
separate blocks, thus creating four counterbalanced blocks in total: in one block over-
estimating the amount of money in the jar would benefit the participant only, in another it 
would benefit the partner only, in a third block underestimating the amount of money would 
benefit the participant only, and in a fourth the partner only. We added the “underestimation” 
blocks in this follow up study so that the results could be generalized beyond one specific set 
of instructions.
Garrett et al.
Page 4
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 While initial levels of dishonesty did not differ between conditions (F1,24 = 1.24, p = 0.28, 
Figure 2a), escalation of dishonesty did (Figure 2c). Specifically, entering escalation betas 
into a 2 (condition: Self-Serving/Other-Serving) by 2 (underestimation/overestimation) 
ANCOVA (controlling for starting dishonesty) revealed a main effect of condition (F1,20 = 
7.55, p=0.01) which was characterized by the presence of escalation in the Self-Serving 
condition (overestimate: t23 = 2.66, p=0.01; underestimate: t23 = 2.66, p=0.01) but not the 
Other-Serving condition (overestimate: t23 =0.85, p=0.40; underestimate: t23 = 0.56, 
p=0.58). There was no main effect of overestimating/underestimating (F1,20 = 0.08, p=0.78), 
nor an interaction (F1,20 = 0.26, p=0.62). Mean dishonesty tended to be larger in the self-
serving condition than the other-serving condition (F1,24 = 3.50, p=0.07, Figure 2b). 
Escalation of self-serving dishonesty was also significantly greater than of other-serving 
dishonesty when mean dishonesty was added as a covariate to the ANCOVA described 
above (main effect of condition; F1,16 = 5.47, p=0.01).
These results suggest that the rate at which dishonesty escalates is best explained by self-
interest. Furthermore, escalation of dishonesty cannot be attributed to factors such as 
reduced/enhanced attention or tiredness over the course of the block, nor to a simple 
tendency to give larger estimates (i.e. to overestimate) over time, or smaller estimates (i.e. to 
underestimate) over time, as we do not see an escalation of dishonesty when dishonesty 
benefits only the partner. While 45% of participants reported in the debriefing questionnaire 
that they believed the aim of the study was to examine dishonesty/trust (Supplementary 
Table 1), there were no differences in behavior between these participants and the rest in 
mean dishonesty (Experiment 1: Self-Serving-Other-Harming: t53 = 0.41, p=0.69; Self-
Serving-Other-Serving: t53 = 1.02, p=0.31; Self-Harming-Other-Serving: t53 = -1.07, 
p=0.29, independent sample ttest; Experiment 2: Self-Serving: t23 = 0.76, p=0.46; Other-
Serving: t23 = 1.71, p=0.10, independent sample ttest) or dishonesty escalation (Experiment 
1:Self-Serving-Other-Harming: t53 = -0.65, p=0.52; Self-Serving-Other-Serving: t53 = 0.61, 
p=0.54; Self-Harming-Other-Serving: t53 = 0.91, p=0.37, independent sample ttest; 
Experiment 2: Self Serving: t23 = 1.68, p=0.11; t23 = 0.93, p=0.36, independent sample 
ttest). No participant reported they believed the aim was to examine escalation of dishonesty.
Amygdala Sensitivity and Escalation of Self-Serving Dishonesty
Our behavioral findings reveal that self-serving dishonesty escalates over the course of the 
block. Next, we turned to our fMRI data to ask (1) whether the amygdala’s response to 
dishonesty diminishes over time and (2) whether the extent of this reduction predicts, on a 
trial by trial basis, subsequent escalation of dishonesty.
1. Amygdala response to dishonesty is reduced over time
Past studies of adaptation examined BOLD reduction in response to a repeated constant 
variable such as an angry face14,15. In contrast, here we examine adaptation in response to 
an escalating noisy variable, analogous to a face that tends to get angrier over time. Thus a 
signature of adaptation would not simply index reduced brain activity over time. Rather, it 
should scale simultaneously with trial number and dishonesty magnitude. The intuition here 
is that the same amount of dishonesty should generate a larger BOLD response if it occurs 
early in the block than when it occurs late (i.e. after adaptation has taken place). Thus, we 
Garrett et al.
Page 5
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 constructed a time weighted dishonesty regressor that modulated BOLD signal when 
participants were presented with the jar. Note, that we use the word “time” to refer to 
number of past trials in a block, not absolute time elapsed. This regressor scaled dishonesty 
by how far through the block participants were such that dishonesty early on in the block 
received a larger weight relative to if it occurred later on. We controlled for the independent 
effects of time and dishonesty by entering them as two separate parametric regressors in the 
model (see Online Methods).
As the behavioral results demonstrate that dishonesty is driven both by considerations for 
self and other, but its escalation is driven only by whether dishonesty benefits or hurts the 
self, we focused our fMRI analysis on the two cases where the benefit of dishonesty was 
confined to either the self or the other (i.e. Self-Serving-Other-Harming condition and the 
Self-Harming-Other-Serving condition). Our ROI was defined by generating a map in 
Neurosynth, a meta-analysis based on 11,406 studies, reflecting P(Emotion|Activation) 
thresholded at z = 5 (note that the results are robust and observed for maps generated by 
using different thresholds). This map corresponds to the likelihood that the term “emotion” 
is used in a study given the presence of reported activation in a particular voxel. The map 
reflects the relative selectivity with which voxels activate in relation to the term “emotion” 
using a comparison between all the studies in the database that contain the term “emotion” 
and all those that do not (for method details see17). The ROI generated was predominately, 
but not exclusively, confined to bilateral amygdala (Figure 3a). Parameter estimates (N=25) 
of time-weighted-dishonesty were then averaged across all voxels in this ROI. This revealed 
a significant positive effect when dishonesty was self-serving (t24 = 2.36, p = 0.027, one 
sample ttest vs 0), but not when it was self-harming (trend in opposite direction: t24 = -1.93, 
p=0.066, one sample ttest vs 0) with the former parameter betas significantly larger than the 
latter (t24 = 2.96, p=0.007, paired sample ttest). (Figure 3b). Repeating this analysis only on 
those ROI voxels that were anatomically within the amygdala also generated significant 
positive results (self-serving: t24 = 2.68, p=0.01; self-harming: t24 = -0.9, p=0.38; self-
serving vs self-harming: t24 = 2.60, p=0.02, Supplementary Figure 2a). Note, that simply 
looking at average BOLD signal within the ROI over all trials (without taking into account 
the effect of time weighted dishonesty) did not reveal positive effects in either of the 
conditions anywhere in the ROI.
The effects were not due to BOLD signal simply decreasing over time since the model 
controls for the independent effect of time by including this as the first regressor in the 
model. Furthermore, examining the effects of the time regressor (rather than time-weighted-
dishonesty) did not reveal significant effects in the ROI (self-serving: t24 = 0.08, p=0.94, one 
sample ttest vs 0; self-harming: t24 = 1.31, p = 0.20, one sample ttest vs 0; self-serving vs 
self-harming: t24 = -0.85, p=0.40, paired sample ttest). The fact that BOLD signal in the ROI 
did not simply decrease over time, as well as the fact that our effects remains significant 
after controlling for time, suggests that the findings are unlikely to be explained by a 
reduction of attention/engagement over time. Together, these results show BOLD response 
consistent with adaptation to self-serving dishonesty in regions that have been previously 
associated with emotion.
Garrett et al.
Page 6
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 2. Amygdala BOLD Reduction to Self-Serving Dishonesty Predicts its Escalation
Next, we ask whether reduction in the neural response to dishonesty in our ROI predicts the 
escalation of dishonesty. More precisely, whether the reduction of response in the ROI to 
one “unit” of dishonesty on a present trial relative to the last predicts escalation of dishonest 
behavior on the following trial (Figure 4a).
To that end, we first computed BOLD signal per £1 of dishonesty (BOLD/dishonesty) for 
each subject and trial. We then calculated the reduction of this term on trial (t) relative to the 
previous trial (t-1), (i.e., BOLDt-1/dishonestyt-1 - BOLDt/dishonestyt). We then separately 
calculated the increase in behavioral dishonesty on the subsequent trial (t+1) relative to trial 
t. For each subject we then used BOLD signal reduction per one unit of dishonesty on trial t 
as a predictor of escalation of dishonesty on trial t+1 in a general linear regression (Figure 
4b shows an example subject).
Across participants (N=25), these betas revealed a significant positive effect when 
dishonesty was self-serving (t24 = 2.48, p=0.021, one sample ttest vs 0), but not when it was 
self-harming (t24 = -1.53, p=0.14, one sample ttest vs 0) with the former betas larger than the 
latter (t24 = 2.82, p=0.01, paired sample ttest), Figure 4c. In other words, the greater the 
reduction in BOLD response to one unit of self-serving dishonesty on a current trial relative 
to the last, the greater a participant’s next self-serving lie. When repeating this analysis only 
on those voxels that are also in the anatomically defined amygdala, the results are very 
similar (self-serving: t24 = 2.30, p=0.03; self-harming: trend in opposite direction t24 = 
-1.77, p=0.09; self-serving vs self-harming: t24 = 3.05, p=0.01, Supplementary Figure 2b).
Permutation Test
As a check for the robustness of this result we reran this analysis 1000 times, each time 
mismatching one participant’s fMRI data with another participant’s behavioral data. Over 
95% of these iterations failed to generate a main effect of self-serving dishonesty, a main 
effect of other-serving dishonesty or a significant difference between self-serving and self-
harming dishonesty. This suggests that BOLD reduction to dishonesty in a particular subject 
selectively predicts the escalation of dishonesty in that subject and not another subject.
Other Brain Regions
Finally, we tested whether the pattern of results observed above generalize to additional 
brain regions that play a role in other aspects of deception. This was done post hoc. First we 
looked at the Nucleus Accumbens (NA), which is the region most strongly implicated in 
response to positive stimuli17,25,26. As detailed in Supplementary Table 2 there was no 
evidence for NA BOLD adaptation to self-serving dishonesty in this task. Next, we 
examined the Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex (DLPFC), which is thought to be associated 
with cognitive control27,28 and has previously been observed in dishonesty tasks29,30. 
Again, no evidence for BOLD adaptation to self-serving dishonesty was observed (see 
Supplementary Table 2). Finally, we examined the Anterior Insula (AI), which is suggested 
to play a role in dishonesty31,32 and negative affect33, though less consistently and robustly 
than the amygdala17. As detailed in Supplementary Table 2 there was indication of BOLD 
signal adaption to dishonesty in the AI, although not as robust and consistent as that 
Garrett et al.
Page 7
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 observed in the amygdala. Finally, exploratory analysis in regions outside the ROIs 
(threshold at FWE<0.05, K>5) did not reveal additional effects of time weighted dishonesty.
Discussion
Dishonesty significantly impacts our personal lives9 and public institutions34. Here, we 
provide empirical evidence that dishonesty gradually increases with repetition when all else 
is held constant (see35 for dishonesty escalation in response to escalating rewards). This 
experimental result is consistent with anecdotal observations of small digressions gradually 
snowballing into larger ones1–4,36. Our results also offer a mechanistic account of how 
dishonesty escalates, showing that it is supported by BOLD signal reduction in brain regions 
previously associated with emotion, predominantly the amygdala. Across individuals the 
extent of BOLD signal reduction per “one unit” of dishonesty on a present decision relative 
to the last, predicted escalation of dishonesty on the next decision. This result ties together 
diminished amygdala sensitivity to dishonest choices and dishonesty escalation, with the 
former preceding the latter.
We focused our investigation a-priori on brain regions previously associated with emotion 
by utilizing Neurosynth17. The map generated predominantly identified the amygdala, 
consistent with studies in non-human animals, as well as human patients with damage to the 
amygdala, which have shown this region to play a key role in signaling, processing and 
assessing arousal and emotion17,37,38. With deference to the caution necessary when 
making reverse inference39, we speculate that the blunted response to repeated acts of 
dishonesty may reflect a reduction in the emotional response to these decisions or their 
affective assessment and saliency. While the amygdala can also signal positive emotion, this 
interpretation is less likely as the region most associated with positive affect, the nucleus 
accumbens, did not reveal a similar pattern of results. The current interpretation is in accord 
with a previous suggestion that the amygdala signals the rate of averseness to immoral 
acts40.
Our results also suggest that dishonesty escalation is contingent on the motivation for the 
dishonest act. Specifically, while the magnitude of dishonesty was driven both by 
considerations of benefit to the self and benefit to the other, the escalation of dishonesty, as 
well as the amygdala’s response to it over time, was best accounted for by whether 
dishonesty was self-serving. When participants were dishonest for the benefit of someone 
else, dishonesty at a constant rate was observed. This is consistent with the suggestion that 
the motivation for acting dishonestly contributes to its affective assessment, such that when a 
person engages in dishonesty purely for the benefit of another it may be perceived as 
morally acceptable41. Thus, the simple act of repeated dishonesty is not enough for 
escalation to take place, but a self-interest motive need be present.
While here we observe escalation of decisions that involve self-serving dishonesty, we 
hypothesize that diminished amygdala response may have important behavioral 
consequences extending to other domains of decision-making. These may include, for 
example, escalations in risk taking or violent behavior. Our results highlight the importance 
Garrett et al.
Page 8
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 of considering the temporal evolution of both behavior and brain response in studies that 
involve repeated decisions.
As we were specifically interested in the effect of repeated dishonesty on its magnitude, we 
varied whether dishonesty was beneficial/detrimental to the participant and to the target of 
their deceit (the partner), but held everything else constant. For example, in our design no 
feedback, such as external punishment for dishonesty or praise for honesty, was provided or 
expected. In the real world, however, other factors will likely facilitate dishonesty escalation 
or halt it, including feedback, opportunity and altering rewards and punishment 42,35,43.
Taken together, we reveal a biological mechanism that underlies the escalation of dishonesty, 
providing new insight into this integral part of human behavior. The results show the 
possible dangers of regular engagement in small acts of dishonesty, perils that are frequently 
observed in domains ranging from business to politics and law enforcement3,34. These 
insights can have implication for policy makers in designing deterrents to halt deceit. 
Despite being small at the outset, engagement in dishonest acts may trigger a process that 
leads to larger acts of dishonesty further down the line.
Data Availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author 
upon request.
Online Methods
Participants (Experiment 1)
58 individuals aged 18 to 65 (mean age (s.d.) = 22.95 (3.55), n female = 36), participated in 
the study, recruited from University College London (UCL) psychology subject pool. A 
subset of these (n=28) undertook the experiment in an MRI scanner and the rest undertook 
the experiment in testing cubicles. 3 MRI participants were subsequently excluded from 
analysis; 1 because their structural scan showed a suspected brain abnormality; 1 because 
they repeatedly (≥ 4 occasions) failed a test to check they understood the instructions; 1 
because comments to the experimenter revealed they suspected the Estimator was a 
confederate (final n = 55, n female = 34, mean age (s.d.) = 23.02 (3.59)). The study was 
approved by the UCL Psychology Ethics Committee. Written informed consent was 
obtained from all participants and they were paid for participation.
Stimuli
Stimuli consisted of 30 pictures of transparent glass jars containing differing quantities of 
United Kingdom one penny coins (range: 1,500 to 3,500). Each picture was presented twice 
in each block to participants in a randomized order, resulting in 60 trials per block.
Procedure and Paradigm
The paradigm was adapted from a previous study24 that examined self-serving dishonesty. 
At the start of the study, each participant met the experimenter and a confederate, who they 
were led to believe was a second participant. The participant was then assigned the role of an 
Garrett et al.
Page 9
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 “Advisor”. In this role they would view large, high resolution pictures of each jar for 3 
seconds. They would then send advice (via what they were led to believe were connected 
computers) to the confederate, indicating how much money they thought was in each jar. 
The confederate was designated the role of the “Estimator”. The participant was led to 
believe the following; the Estimator would view a smaller picture of the same jar for a 
shorter period of time (1 second) and would receive advice from the Advisor regarding how 
much they thought was in the jar. After receipt of this advice, the Estimator would then 
submit estimates of how much money was in each jar on behalf of both participants. At the 
end of the experiment, one trial would be selected at random and both parties would be paid 
according to how accurate the Estimator had been on that trial.
After these instructions, the Advisor and the Estimator were invited to undertake training in 
separate cubicles. Following training, the Advisor (participant) was privately informed that 
the range in the jar would always be between £15 and £35 and that the Estimator was not 
aware of this. They were also told that the Advisor and the Estimator would not always be 
paid according to how accurate the Estimator was (as they had earlier been told). However, 
the Estimator would always believe that both parties would be paid according to their 
accuracy.
On each trial a photo of a glass jar containing one penny coins was presented on screen for 
3s. Then participants were instructed to enter their advice of how much money was in the jar 
to the nearest pound. Participants had up to 4s to do so using a button box with five digits in 
each hand. If the participant failed to respond, then that trial was excluded from analysis 
(mean trials with no response over the 4 blocks = 2.45, s.d. = 3.74). Next, the words 
“Estimator Submitting Estimate” appeared on screen for 2-4s. Finally, a fixation cross 
appeared for 3.5–7.5s (jittered). See Figure 1a.
Participants who completed the study outside the scanner followed the same task except: (1) 
the jar screen and response screen were combined; participants had up to 10 seconds to view 
the jar and enter their advice; (2) A subset of these participants (n=15) were asked 
immediately after the Self-Serving-Other-Harming condition to estimate by how much they 
lied on average during the block and on the last trial (Supplementary Figure 3). Note that an 
additional 15 participants were also asked by how much they lied during the session. 
However, we subsequently realized the question was underspecified, with some subjects 
entering the sum of their lies throughout the session, while others the average amount or the 
amount on the last trial. Thus we revised the question asking two specific questions instead, 
and only analyzed answers of the participants who received the revised version of the 
question. There was no differences in behavior between participants who completed the 
study outside the scanner (N=30) and inside the scanner (N=25) on either dishonesty 
escalation (Self-Serving-Other-Harming: t53 = 0.79, p=0.44; Self-Serving-Other-Serving: t53 
= 0.10, p=0.93; Self-Harming-Other-Serving: t53 = -0.71, p=0.48, independent sample ttests) 
nor dishonesty magnitude (Self-Serving-Other-Harming: t53 = -1.11, p=0.27; Self-Serving-
Other-Serving: t53 = -0.58, p=0.56; Self-Harming-Other-Serving: t53 = -1.40, p=0.17, 
independent sample ttests).
Garrett et al.
Page 10
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 The experiment was divided into 4 blocks, consisting of 60 trials each. Before commencing 
each block, the new reward structure was explained (over an intercom system if the 
participant was in an MRI scanner). To ensure that the participant fully understood the new 
reward structure, participants were given different scenarios and required to calculate 
possible rewards given those scenarios. If participants had difficulty answering these 
questions, further instruction was provided. They were reminded that the Estimator always 
believes rewards are contingent on accuracy.
Incentive Structure
Participants were told that on each trial the available reward would be a randomly generated 
amount. Neither the range of available rewards nor the reward available on each specific trial 
was disclosed. Making available reward an unknown quantity that fluctuated on each trial 
meant that the same amount of dishonesty, in the same block, could lead to differing rewards 
depending on the reward available on that trial. Thus, increasing dishonesty from one trial to 
the next would not necessarily increase returns on the subsequent trial. This was done so that 
escalation of dishonesty could not be accounted for by adaptation to reward. Furthermore, 
participants were told that rewards would not be accumulating, but rather they will be paid 
according to the outcome on one trial that was selected randomly at the end of the 
experiment. Participants were led to believe that the reward gained depended on the 
incentive structure and the Estimator’s estimate. However, as there was no estimator in 
reality, they were all paid a fixed amount at the end of the study.
The reward structure varied in each block (blocks counterbalanced across participants) as 
follows:
1. Baseline - the participant was instructed that if a trial was selected from this block for 
payment at the end of the experiment, both s/he (the Advisor) and the Estimator would each 
be rewarded according to how accurate the Estimator was (i.e. how close to the actual 
amount in the jar they were). The more accurate the estimate, the greater the reward, with 
the maximum available reward determined randomly on each trial. Thus, the participant is 
incentivized to send accurate advice about the amount of money in the jar.
2. Self-Serving-Other-Harming - the participant was instructed that s/he (the Advisor) 
would be rewarded according to how much the Estimator overestimated the amount in the 
jar, while the Estimator would be rewarded according to how accurate his/her estimate was. 
Thus, for the participant, the greater the overestimation, the greater the reward up to a 
certain amount that will be determined randomly on each trial. In this condition, dishonesty 
(sending high estimates about money in the jar) benefits the participant (Advisor) only and 
comes at a detrimental cost to the Estimator.
3. Self-Serving-Other-Serving - the participant was instructed that if a trial was selected 
from this block for payment, both s/he (the Advisor) and the Estimator would each be 
rewarded according to how much the Estimator overestimated the amount in the jar. The 
greater the overestimation, the greater the reward up to a certain amount that will be 
determined randomly on each trial. In this condition, dishonesty (sending high estimates 
regarding money in the jar) benefits both parties.
Garrett et al.
Page 11
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 4. Self-Harming-Other-Serving - the participant was instructed that if a trial is selected 
from this block for payment, s/he (the Advisor) would be rewarded according to how 
accurate the Estimator’s estimate was. The Estimator however would be rewarded according 
to how much the Estimator overestimated the amount in the jar. Thus for the participant, the 
more accurate the estimate, the greater the reward, with the maximum available reward 
determined randomly on each trial. Hence in this condition, falsely sending high estimates 
regarding money in the jar benefits the Estimator only and comes at a cost to the participant 
(Advisor).
Experiment 2: We ran a follow up study to extend and replicate our findings to a situation 
where dishonesty only serves the self vs only serves another. In addition to the baseline 
condition, where dishonesty does not serve anyone, we also had a condition where 
dishonesty would only benefit the self without affecting the other participant (Self-Serving) 
and a comparison condition where dishonesty benefitted the other participant without 
benefiting or hurting the self (Other-Serving). There were 2 separate blocks for each 
condition – one in which dishonesty constituted overestimating the amount of money in the 
jar and another in which dishonesty constituted underestimating the amount of money in the 
jar. This was done so that the results could generalize to different instructions. Each of these 
conditions was run twice in two separate blocks (once with overestimation and another with 
underestimation benefiting the participant/partner).
Self-Serving - the participant was instructed that s/he (the Advisor) would be rewarded 
according to how much the Estimator overestimated the amount in the jar (in the 
underestimated condition we simply exchanged the word “over” for “under”), while the 
Estimator would be rewarded the same amount regardless of their estimate. In this condition, 
dishonesty benefits the participant (Advisor) only and does not impact the Estimator.
Other-Serving - the participant was instructed that if a trial is selected from this block for 
payment, s/he (the Advisor) would be rewarded the same amount regardless of the 
Estimator’s estimate. The Estimator however would be rewarded according to how much the 
Estimator overestimated the amount in the jar (in the underestimated condition we simply 
exchanged the word “over” for “under”). Thus for the participant, dishonesty benefits the 
other party with no cost/benefit imposed on themselves.
Participants (Experiment 2): 35 participants were tested at UCL on the task using the same 
behavioral procedure described above. In this study we employed a strict exclusion 
procedure; in addition to asking participants if they had any reservations regarding the 
estimator (the procedure used for exclusion in Experiment I), to which only 3 replied yes 
(and of these 3, only 2 indicated they suspected that the partner was not a real participant in 
a follow up question). We also explicitly told participants at the end of the study that the 
estimator was a confederate and asked them if they suspected as much before. Ten 
participants replied yes and thus were excluded from analysis (final n = 25, n female = 18, 
mean age (s.d.) = 20.76 (1.90)).
Garrett et al.
Page 12
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Behavioral Analysis
Dishonesty Scores—In each condition dishonesty was estimated on a trial by trial basis 
by subtracting baseline condition advice for each specific jar from advice sent to the 
Estimator upon presentation of the same jar (since each jar was presented twice the mean 
advice for each jar in the baseline condition was used). Thus for each trial:
Dishonesty = Advice (for jar j) – Advice (for jar j in Baseline condition)
For blocks in Experiment II in which dishonesty involved sending low advice, dishonesty 
was calculated as the reverse, i.e.:
Dishonesty = Advice (for jar j in Baseline condition) - Advice (for jar j)
This meant that high numbers always indicate greater dishonesty in each block in each 
study.
Dishonesty Escalation—We were interested in the temporal development of dishonesty. 
To investigate this, for each participant dishonesty was regressed on trial number in each 
condition and the resulting standardized regression coefficients were entered into an 
ANCOVA with condition (Self-Serving-Other-Harming, Self-Serving-Other-Serving, Self-
Harming-Other-Serving), controlling for starting dishonesty and study (in scanner/outside 
scanner). To test whether escalation between 2 specific conditions was significantly different 
from each other, the same ANCOVA was carried out as above on 2 levels for the repeat 
factor. Simple effects were examined vs 0 in a linear model, controlling for starting 
dishonesty and whether the study took place inside/outside the scanner. In addition, we 
calculated mean dishonesty per trial number over all participants, resulting in 60 values per 
block and correlated these values with their trial number (1-60). Correlations were compared 
against each other using Steigers Z.
Dishonesty Magnitude—To examine dishonesty magnitude, dishonesty scores were 
averaged for each participant in each condition and entered into a 3 way repeat measures 
ANOVA controlling for study. To test whether dishonesty magnitude between 2 specific 
conditions was significantly different from each other, the same ANOVA as above was 
conducted with those specific factors. This was followed by one sample t-tests. Starting 
dishonesty was examined in the same way (with starting dishonesty entered in place of 
dishonesty magnitude). To test for ceiling effects, one sample ttests were conducted for each 
condition for average dishonesty and dishonesty on the last trial against a test value of 64 
(maximum advice participants could enter [£99] minus maximum amount of pennies that a 
jar could contain [£35]).
Accuracy in Baseline Condition—To examine how accurate participants were in the 
baseline condition we calculated the absolute difference between participants’ advice on 
each trial and the actual amount of money in the jar displayed (i.e. error). We also regressed 
error rate over the 60 trials on trial number for each participant and compared coefficients at 
the group level (see Supplementary Figure 4).
Garrett et al.
Page 13
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Reaction Time Analysis—Mean reaction time was calculated for each participant for 
each condition and compared between conditions. In addition we correlated reaction time 
with trial number for each participant for each condition and compared standardized 
coefficients at the group level to examine temporal changes in RT. Supplementary Figure 5.
Image acquisition
Scanning was performed at Birkbeck-UCL Centre Neuroimaging, London using a 1.5T 
Siemens Avanto scanner with a 32-channel Siemens head coil. To correct for inhomogeneity 
of the static magnetic field we acquired field maps to be used in the unwarping stage of data 
preprocessing. Anatomical images were acquired using MPRage, which comprised 1mm 
thick axial slices parallel to the AC-PC plane. Functional images were acquired as echo-
planar (EPI) T2*-weighted images. Time of repetition (TR) = 3.40 sec, time of echo (TE) = 
30 ms, flip angle (FA) = 90, matrix = 64 X 64, field of view (FOV) = 192 mm, slice 
thickness = 2 mm. A total of 40 axial slices (-45° tilt) were sampled, in-plane resolution = 
3mm x 3mm. Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM8, Wellcome Trust Centre for 
Neuroimaging) was used for image analysis. After discarding the first five dummy volumes, 
images were realigned to the sixth volume and unwrapped using 7th degree B-spline 
interpolation. Movement plots were studied to ensure scan-to-scan translations greater than 
one-half of a voxel (1.5mm) or rotations greater than 1 degree did not cause artifacts in the 
corresponding scans. Structural images were reregistered to mean EPI images and 
segmented into gray and white matter. These segmentation parameters were then used to 
normalize and bias correct the functional images. Normalization was to a standard EPI 
template based on the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) reference brain using a non 
linear (7th degree B-spline) interpolation. Normalized images were smoothed using a 
Gaussian kernel of 8 mm full-width at half-maximum. Low frequency artifacts were 
removed using a 1/128 Hz high-pass filter and temporal autocorrelation intrinsic to the fMRI 
time series was corrected using an AR(1) process.
fMRI analysis
ROI: Our ROI was defined by generating a map in Neurosynth, a meta-analysis based on 
11,406 studies, reflecting P(Emotion|Activation) thresholded at z = 5 using xjView (note that 
the results are robust and observed for maps generated using different thresholds). This map 
corresponds to the likelihood that the term “emotion” is used in a study given the presence 
of reported activation in a particular voxel17. The map reflects the relative selectivity with 
which voxels activate in relation to the term “emotion” using a comparison between all the 
studies in the database that contain the term “emotion” and all those that do not (for method 
details see17). This ROI predominantly, but not exclusively, occupied the amygdala (Figure 
3a). We also reran every analysis using a 2nd ROI which was a conjunction of the ROI above 
and the anatomically defined amygdala. The amygdala was defined using the SPM Anatomy 
Toolbox, which provides probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps44,45.
Time Weighted Dishonesty—For each participant, a design-matrix was created with 
event onsets time-locked to the temporal positions of jar presentation and presentation of 
estimator screen. Events were modeled as delta functions and convolved with a canonical 
hemodynamic response function to create regressors of interest. 6 motion correction 
Garrett et al.
Page 14
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 regressors estimated from the realignment procedure were entered as covariates of no 
interest. The onset regressor for jar presentation was modulated by the three parametric 
regressors: (i) Time, was entered to indicate the number of trials left in the block, so 60 for 
the first trial, 59 for second trial, and so on up to 1 for the last trial. These numbers were all 
divided by 100 for normalization purposes (ii) Dishonesty on each trial (calculated as 
described in behavioral analysis section); (iii) Time weighted dishonesty, calculated as the 
product of the two regressors above. Time weighted dishonesty weights dishonesty 
according to how far in the block participants are such that a small amount of dishonesty 
early on in the block is equivalent to a greater amount later on in the block (and vice versa), 
all else held constant. In this model, time weighted dishonesty is orthoganalized with respect 
to dishonesty and time; and dishonesty is orthogonalized with respect to time by the SPM8 
software.
Average parameter estimates for time weighted dishonesty for each participant were 
extracted for Self-Serving-Other-Harming and Self-Harming-Other-Serving conditions using 
MarsBar. These conditions were compared against each other using paired sample ttests. 
One sample ttests against a test value of 0 were used to test the significance of specific 
conditions.
Whole Brain Analyses—Whole brain exploratory analysis was conducted for regions 
outside the ROIs (threshold p<0.001, FWE P < 0.05, cluster size (K) > 5).
Prediction Analysis—For each participant we created a design-matrix in which each jar 
presentation (60 per condition) was modeled as a separate event (without parametric 
regressors attached to any of these events). Such a procedure has been used many times in 
the past (e.g.46,47). Estimator onset was entered as an additional event. Events were 
modeled as delta functions and convolved with a canonical hemodynamic response function 
to create regressors of interest. 6 motion correction regressors estimated from the 
realignment procedure were entered as covariates of no interest. We then used this model to 
extract the average BOLD signal on each trial in our ROI using the “spm_summarise.m” 
function. BOLD activity on each trial generated by this model was then divided by 
dishonesty on each trial to compute BOLD signal per unit of dishonesty for each subject and 
trial:
BOLD per unit dishonestyt = Boldt/dishonestyt
Trials which were missed or in which dishonesty was 0 were excluded as this division leads 
to infinity (mean number excluded trials Self-Serving-Other-Harming: 3.04; Self-Serving-
Other-Serving: 1.24; Self-Harming-Other-Serving: 6.12).
We then calculated the reduction of this term on trial (t) relative to the previous trial (t-1):
BOLD per unit dishonestyt-1 - BOLD per unit dishonesty t
Hence positive numbers indicate a decrease in BOLD per unit dishonesty. Separately we 
calculated dishonesty escalation observed in participants’ behavior, as the increase in 
dishonesty on the subsequent trial (t+1) relative to trial t:
Garrett et al.
Page 15
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Dishonesty Escalationt+1 = Dishonestyt+1 - Dishonestyt
Hence positive numbers indicate an increase in dishonesty (i.e. dishonesty escalation). For 
each subject we then used BOLD signal reduction per unit dishonesty on trial t as a predictor 
of escalation of behavioral dishonesty on trial t+1 in a general linear regression:
Dishonesty Escalationt+1 = b0 + b1*BOLD signal reduction per unit dishonestyt
This analysis is therefore independent from our parametric model above as it explores 
whether change in BOLD predicts dishonesty on the subsequent trial (see Figure 4a) 
whereas the parametric model is used to identify correlates of time weighted dishonesty on 
the current trial. We ran the regression for each participant for the Self-Serving-Other-
Harming condition and separately ran it for the condition in which dishonesty was Self-
Harming-Other-Serving. The resulting standardized regression coefficients were compared 
against each other using paired sample ttests and followed up with one sample ttests against 
a test value of 0.
To check the robustness of the results, we repeated this analysis 1000 times. On each 
occasion fMRI data of each subject was used to predict dishonesty escalation of an alternate 
subject (randomly selected without replacement) for each of the 25 subjects in the sample. 
We then examined the number of occasions (in the 1000 iterations) a set of betas was 
significant for either condition and conditions were significantly different from one another.
Post hoc ROIs—To examine if the results observed could generalize to other regions that 
are involved in different aspects of deception we run the analysis described above in the NA, 
AI and DLPFC (see Supplementary Table 2). The NA was anatomically defined by creating 
two 8mm spheres around MNI coordinates +/- 10, 8, -5 (as done previously48) using 
Marsbar region of interest toolbox for SPM (http://marsbar.sourceforge.net). These 2 spheres 
were then combined to create one ROI of bilateral NA. The DLPFC was anatomically 
defined using WFU-Pickatlas49 (Broadman Areas 9 and 46). AI was anatomically defined 
according to the WFU-Pickatlas tool49 by dividing the insula at its midpoint (y=0) which 
approximately demarcates dysgranualar and granular sectors (as done previously50).As for 
NA above, we created a bilateral ROI of DLPFC and a bilateral ROI for the AI..
Debriefing—After the experiment participants were given a debriefing questionnaire. First, 
they were asked what they thought the goal of the experiment was (see Supplementary Table 
1 for results) Second, their thoughts regarding the estimator were examined (see 
Supplementary Table 3 for results). Finally, participants were asked to report the strategy 
they used in the conditions when dishonesty was self-serving. In Experiment 1, 0% of 
participants indicated that they attempted to gradually increase overestimations (see 
Supplementary Table 4 for results). In Experiment 2, 12% of participants indicated gradual 
change in dishonesty as a strategy in the Self-Serving condition and 4% in Other-Serving 
condition (all numbers were averaged over the “overestimate” and “underestimate” 
conditions). We then gave participants a closed question where subjects picked one strategy 
from 6 different options which included escalation as one of the options (options were: (1) 
Underestimate/Overestimate by a little, (2) Underestimate/overestimate by a lot, (3) 
Garrett et al.
Page 16
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Gradually increase underestimation /overestimation (4) Gradually decrease underestimation/
overestimation, (5) Overestimate/Underestimate, (6) Other (none of the above). 8% of 
subjects picked escalation as a strategy in the self-serving condition and 4% in the other 
serving condition. For Self-Serving condition 20% picked the option of over/underestimate 
by a little and 64% picked over/underestimate by a lot. For Other-Serving the numbers were 
12% and 56%, respectively. Finally, we gave subjects the opportunity to pick as many 
strategies as they wanted from the 6 available; 44% picked the escalation option as one of 
their choices in the self-serving condition and 28% of participants did so in the other-serving 
condition.
Statistics—A within-subject design was used. Thus, experimental group randomization or 
blinding is not applicable. We followed standard procedures in the field and statistical 
procedures in line with previously published studies. All Student’s t tests are two-tailed; F 
tests in ANOVAs were one-tailed, as is standard for such comparisons. Data distribution was 
assumed to be normal, but not formally tested. Sample sizes are based on a behavioral pilot 
study we administered using this paradigm.
Code Availability
Custom MATLAB scripts were used to relate neural adaptation to dishonesty escalation. 
These are available upon request.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank D.Prelec, B. Baharami, U.Hertz, J.Navajas, D.Bang for helpful discussion; T.Yarkoni, C.Frith and 
W.Penny for helpful pointers; R.Rutledge, C.Summerfield, M.Cikara, M.Edelson, R.Köster, A.Kappes, 
C.Charpentier, S.Suarez, L.Coutrot, L.Wittkuhn and P.Czech for helpful comments on previous versions of this 
manuscript; T.Srirangarajan, R.Anjum, S.Hadden, G.Montinola and M.Wilner for assistance with data collection 
and scanning; T.Sharot is supported by a Wellcome Trust Career Development Fellowship, N.Garrett by a UCL 
Impact Award, the research was also supported by funding from the Institute for Advance Hindsight.
References
1. Maremont M. Anatomy of a Fraud. Bus Week. 1996; 16:90–94.
2. Kirchner, B. The Bernard Madoff Investment Scam. FT Press; 2010. 
3. McLean, B., Elkind, P. The Smartest Guys in the Room: The Amazing Rise and Scandalous Fall of 
Enron. Penguin; 2013. 
4. Stapel, D. Ontsporing. Prometheus Amsterdam; 2012. 
5. Graham C, Litan RE, Sukhtankar S. The Bigger They Are The Harder They Fall: An Estimate of the 
Costs of the Crisis in Corporate Governance. The Brookings Institution. 2002 Available at: http://
www.brookings.edu/research/papers/2002/07/22corporategovernance-graham. 
6. Mauro P. Corruption and growth. Q J Econ. 1995:681–712.
7. Tanzi, V., Davoodi, H. Corruption, public investment, and growth. Springer; 2012. 
8. Heyneman SP, Anderson KH, Nuraliyeva N. The cost of corruption in higher education. Comp Educ 
Rev. 2008; 52:1–25.
9. Peterson C. Deception in Intimate Relationships. Int J Psychol. 1996; 31:279–288.
Garrett et al.
Page 17
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 10. DePaulo BM, Kashy DA, Kirkendol SE, Wyer MM, Epstein JA. Lying in everyday life. J Pers Soc 
Psychol. 1996; 70:979–995. [PubMed: 8656340] 
11. Gamer M, Rill H-G, Vossel G, Gödert HW. Psychophysiological and vocal measures in the 
detection of guilty knowledge. Int J Psychophysiol. 2006; 60:76–87. [PubMed: 16005091] 
12. Abe N, Suzuki M, Mori E, Itoh M, Fujii T. Deceiving Others: Distinct Neural Responses of the 
Prefrontal Cortex and Amygdala in Simple Fabrication and Deception with Social Interactions. J 
Cogn Neurosci. 2007; 19:287–295. [PubMed: 17280517] 
13. Schachter, S., Latané, B. Crime, cognition, and the autonomic nervous system. Nebr Symp Motiv. 
Levine, D., editor. Vol. 12. 1964. p. 221-275.
14. Breiter HC, et al. Response and habituation of the human amygdala during visual processing of 
facial expression. Neuron. 1996; 17:875–887. [PubMed: 8938120] 
15. Ishai A, Pessoa L, Bikle PC, Ungerleider LG. Repetition suppression of faces is modulated by 
emotion. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2004; 101:9827–9832. [PubMed: 15210952] 
16. Denny BT, et al. Insula-amygdala functional connectivity is correlated with habituation to repeated 
negative images. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci. 2014; 9:1660–1667. [PubMed: 24170933] 
17. Yarkoni T, Poldrack RA, Nichols TE, Van Essen DC, Wager TD. Large-scale automated synthesis 
of human functional neuroimaging data. Nat Methods. 2011; 8:665–670. [PubMed: 21706013] 
18. Lane RD, et al. Neuroanatomical correlates of pleasant and unpleasant emotion. Neuropsychologia. 
1997; 35:1437–1444. [PubMed: 9352521] 
19. Zald DH, Pardo JV. Emotion, olfaction, and the human amygdala: Amygdala activation during 
aversive olfactory stimulation. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 1997; 94:4119–4124. [PubMed: 9108115] 
20. Schneider F, et al. Differential amygdala activation in schizophrenia during sadness. Schizophr 
Res. 1998; 34:133–142. [PubMed: 9850979] 
21. Ketter TA, Andreason PJ, George MS, et al. Anterior paralimbic mediation of procaine-induced 
emotional and psychosensory experiences. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1996; 53:59–69. [PubMed: 
8540778] 
22. Irwin W, et al. Human amygdala activation detected with echo-planar functional magnetic 
resonance imaging. Neuroreport. 1996; 7:1765–1769. [PubMed: 8905660] 
23. Ledoux, J. The Emotional Brain: The Mysterious Underpinnings of Emotional Life. Simon & 
Schuster; 1998. 
24. Cain DM, Loewenstein G, Moore DA. The dirt on coming clean: perverse effects of disclosing 
conflicts of interest. J Leg Stud. 2005; 34:1–25.
25. Costa VD, Lang PJ, Sabatinelli D, Versace F, Bradley MM. Emotional imagery: assessing pleasure 
and arousal in the brain’s reward circuitry. Hum Brain Mapp. 2010; 31:1446–1457. [PubMed: 
20127869] 
26. Knutson B, Adams CM, Fong GW, Hommer D. Anticipation of increasing monetary reward 
selectively recruits nucleus accumbens. J Neurosci. 2001; 21:RC159. [PubMed: 11459880] 
27. MacDonald AW, Cohen JD, Stenger VA, Carter CS. Dissociating the role of the dorsolateral 
prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortex in cognitive control. Science. 2000; 288:1835–1838. 
[PubMed: 10846167] 
28. Miller EK, Cohen JD. An Integrative Theory of Prefrontal Cortex Function. Annu Rev Neurosci. 
2001; 24:167–202. [PubMed: 11283309] 
29. Greene JD, Paxton JM. Patterns of neural activity associated with honest and dishonest moral 
decisions. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2009; 106:12506–12511. [PubMed: 19622733] 
30. Zhu L, et al. Damage to dorsolateral prefrontal cortex affects tradeoffs between honesty and self-
interest. Nat Neurosci. 2014; 17:1319–1321. [PubMed: 25174003] 
31. Langleben DD, et al. Telling truth from lie in individual subjects with fast event-related fMRI. 
Hum Brain Mapp. 2005; 26:262–272. [PubMed: 16161128] 
32. Mohamed FB, et al. Brain Mapping of Deception and Truth Telling about an Ecologically Valid 
Situation: Functional MR Imaging and Polygraph Investigation—Initial Experience 1. Radiology. 
2006; 238:679–688. [PubMed: 16436822] 
33. Chang LJ, Gianaros PJ, Manuck SB, Krishnan A, Wager TD. A Sensitive and Specific Neural 
Signature for Picture-Induced Negative Affect. PLoS Biol. 2015; 13
Garrett et al.
Page 18
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 34. Winnett, R., Rayner, G. No Expenses Spared. Bantam Press; 2009. 
35. Welsh DT, Ordóñez LD, Snyder DG, Christian MS. The slippery slope: How small ethical 
transgressions pave the way for larger future transgressions. J Appl Psychol. 2015; 100:114–127. 
[PubMed: 24865577] 
36. Schrand CM, Zechman SLC. Executive overconfidence and the slippery slope to financial 
misreporting. J Account Econ. 2012; 53:311–329.
37. LeDoux JE. Emotion circuits in the brain. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2000; 23:155–184. [PubMed: 
10845062] 
38. Phelps EA. Emotion and Cognition: Insights from Studies of the Human Amygdala. Annu Rev 
Psychol. 2006; 57:27–53. [PubMed: 16318588] 
39. Poldrack RA. Can cognitive processes be inferred from neuroimaging data? Trends Cogn Sci. 
2006; 10:59–63. [PubMed: 16406760] 
40. Shenhav A, Greene JD. Integrative Moral Judgment: Dissociating the Roles of the Amygdala and 
Ventromedial Prefrontal Cortex. J Neurosci. 2014; 34:4741–4749. [PubMed: 24672018] 
41. Wu D, Loke IC, Xu F, Lee K. Neural correlates of evaluations of lying and truth-telling in different 
social contexts. Brain Res. 2011; 1389:115–124. [PubMed: 21382353] 
42. Mazar N, Amir O, Ariely D. The dishonesty of honest people: A theory of self-concept 
maintenance. J Mark Res. 2008; 45:633–644.
43. Effron DA, Bryan CJ, Murnighan JK. Cheating at the end to avoid regret. J Pers Soc Psychol. 
2015; 109:395–414. [PubMed: 26030056] 
44. Eickhoff SB, et al. A new SPM toolbox for combining probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps and 
functional imaging data. Neuroimage. 2005; 25:1325–1335. [PubMed: 15850749] 
45. Eickhoff SB, Heim S, Zilles K, Amunts K. Testing anatomically specified hypotheses in functional 
imaging using cytoarchitectonic maps. Neuroimage. 2006; 32:570–582. [PubMed: 16781166] 
46. Charpentier CJ, Moutsiana C, Garrett N, Sharot T. The Brain’s Temporal Dynamics from a 
Collective Decision to Individual Action. J Neurosci. 2014; 34:5816–5823. [PubMed: 24760841] 
47. Edelson MG, Dudai Y, Dolan RJ, Sharot T. Brain Substrates of Recovery from Misleading 
Influence. J Neurosci. 2014; 34:7744–7753. [PubMed: 24899698] 
48. Drueke B, et al. Neural correlates of positive and negative performance feedback in younger and 
older adults. Behav Brain Funct. 2015; 11:1. [PubMed: 25595193] 
49. Maldjian JA, Laurienti PJ, Kraft RA, Burdette JH. An automated method for neuroanatomic and 
cytoarchitectonic atlas-based interrogation of fMRI data sets. NeuroImage. 2003; 19:1233–1239. 
[PubMed: 12880848] 
50. Slavich GM, Way BM, Eisenberger NI, Taylor SE. Neural sensitivity to social rejection is 
associated with inflammatory responses to social stress. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010; 
107:14817–14822. [PubMed: 20679216] 
Garrett et al.
Page 19
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 1. Procedure and dishonesty escalation
(a) Participants were presented with different pictures of glass jars containing one penny 
coins and entered their advice regarding how much money is in the jar. They were led to 
believe this advice was relayed to the Estimator via connected computers. (b) The 
magnitude of dishonesty increased over the course of the block when it benefited the self but 
not otherwise. This was evident when regressing dishonesty on trial number for each 
participant (N = 55) for each condition and then entering these escalation betas in a linear 
model across participants controlling for starting dishonesty and study (Self-Serving-Other-
Harming: t52 = 3.38, p = 0.001; Self-Serving-Other-Serving: t52 = 2.25, p = 0.03; Self-
Harming-Other-Serving: t52 = -0.27, p=0.79). Dishonesty escalation was greater when it 
benefited the self than not (Self-Serving-Other-Harming vs Self-Harming-Other-Serving: 
F1,51 = 8.80, p = 0.005; Self-Serving-Other-Serving vs Self-Harming-Other-Serving: F1,51 = 
4.61, p = 0.037; Self-Serving-Other-Harming vs Self-Serving-Other-Serving: F1,51 = 0.183, 
p = 0.670 - statistics reported for ANCOVAs on regression coefficients with condition as a 2 
level repeated factor, controlling for initial levels of dishonesty and study). (c-e) Averaging 
mean dishonesty across participants on every trial and correlating with trial number (60 
trials) in each condition also revealed significant escalation when dishonesty was self-
serving but not otherwise (Self-Serving-Other-Harming: r58 = 0.66, p<0.001; Self-Serving-
Other-Serving: r58 = 0.83, p<0.001; Self-Harming-Other-Serving: r58 = -0.23, p=0.08).
Error bars represent standard error of the mean.
Garrett et al.
Page 20
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 n.s. = non-significant. *p<0.05
Garrett et al.
Page 21
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 2. Replication and extension study
(a) Initial level of dishonesty across participants (N=25) was greater than zero when Other 
Serving (t24 = 3.11, p=0.01, one sample ttest vs 0) but not when Self-Serving (t24 = 0.92, 
p=0.37, one sample ttest vs 0) and did not differ between conditions (F1,24 = 1.24, p = 0.28, 
repeated measures ANOVA). (b) Mean dishonesty over the course of the block was greater 
than zero when Other Serving (t24 = 2.11, p=0.046, one sample ttest vs 0) and when Self-
Serving (t24 = 3.78, p=0.001, one sample ttest vs 0) and did not differ across conditions 
(F1,24 = 3.50, p=0.07, repeated measures ANCOVA). (c) Escalation of dishonesty was 
significant when Self Serving (analysis conducted as in Figure 1b, t23 = 4.53, p<0.001), but 
not when Other-Serving (t23 = 1.62, p=0.12) and greater in the former condition than the 
latter (F1,20 = 7.55, p=0.01, repeated measures ANCOVA controlling for starting 
dishonesty).
Error bars represent standard error of the mean.
*p<0.05, n.s. = non-significant, n.s.t = non-significant trend
Garrett et al.
Page 22
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 3. Reduction of BOLD sensitivity to dishonesty over time
Parameter estimates of time-weighted-dishonesty were averaged across all voxels in (a) an 
ROI generated from Neurosynth based on a meta-analysis of 11,406 studies, reflecting 
P(Emotion|Activation). Higher Z scores (lighter colors) indicate higher likelihood that the 
term “emotion” is used in a study given that a voxel is activated (see17 for method details), 
suggesting stronger selective association between that region and emotion17. As seen, the 
ROI predominantly consists of bilateral amygdala. (b) A significant positive effect of time-
weighted-dishonesty was revealed when dishonesty was Self-Serving-Other-Harming (t24 = 
2.36, p = 0.027, one sample ttest vs 0) but not when it was Self-Harming-Other-Serving 
(trend in opposite direction: t24 = -1.93, p=0.066, one sample ttest vs 0), with the former 
significantly larger than the latter (t24 = 2.96, p=0.007, paired sample ttest). Repeating this 
analysis restricting the ROI to voxels in the anatomically defined amygdala revealed the 
same pattern of results (Supplementary Figure 2a). N=25.
Error bars represent standard error of the mean.
*p<0.05, n.s. = non-significant
Garrett et al.
Page 23
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 4. Reduction in Bold Response to Dishonesty Predicts its Escalation
(a) For each participant, in each condition, reduction in BOLD response to one unit of 
dishonesty on a current trial relative to the last (extracted across the ROI displayed in Figure 
3a) is related to escalation in dishonesty on the next trial relative to the current trial. (b) 
Example participant shown for dishonesty in the Self-Serving-Other-Harming condition. (c) 
Across participants these betas revealed a significant positive effect when dishonesty was 
self-serving-other-harming (t24 = 2.48, p=0.021, one sample ttest vs 0), but not when it was 
self-harming-other-serving (t24 = -1.53, p=0.14, one sample ttest vs 0) with the former betas 
larger than the latter (t24 = 2.82, p=0.01, paired sample ttest). Repeating this analysis 
restricting this ROI to voxels in the anatomically defined amygdala revealed the same 
pattern of results (Supplementary Figure 2b). N=25.
Error bars represent standard error of the mean.
*p<0.05, n.s. = non-significant
Garrett et al.
Page 24
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
