 Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication
Driving a Wedge Between Evidence and Beliefs:
How Online Ideological News Exposure Promotes
Political Misperceptions
R. Kelly Garrett
School of Communication, Ohio State University, 3016 Derby Hall, 154 N. Oval Mall, Columbus, OH 43210
Brian E. Weeks
Department of Communication Studies and Center for Political Studies, University of Michigan, 5432 North
Quad, 105 S State St, Ann Arbor, MI 48109
Rachel L. Neo
School of Communications, University of Hawaii at Manoa, 2550 Campus Road, Crawford Hall 320, Honolulu,
HI 96822
This article has 2 goals: to provide additional evidence that exposure to ideological online news media
contributes to political misperceptions, and to test 3 forms this media-effect might take. Analyses
are based on representative survey data collected during the 2012 U.S. presidential election (N =
1,004). Panel data offer persuasive evidence that biased news site use promotes inaccurate beliefs,
while cross-sectional data provide insight into the nature of these effects. There is no evidence that
exposure to ideological media reduces awareness of politically unfavorable evidence, though in some
circumstances biased media do promote misunderstandings of it. The strongest and most consistent
influence of ideological media exposure is to encourage inaccurate beliefs regardless of what con-
sumers know of the evidence.
Keywords: Misperceptions, Media Effects, Online News, Belief Gap, Information Deficit.
doi:10.1111/jcc4.12164
The emergence of the Internet as a primary source of political information has transformed many Amer-
icans’experience of the news, giving voice to previously marginalized political factions and creating
outlets for explicitly ideological reporting (Stroud, 2011; C. Sunstein, 2001). This transformation has
been accompanied by numerous high-profile misperceptions, such as erroneous beliefs about weapons
of mass destruction in Iraq and about the birthplace of President Obama (World Public Opinion, 2006;
YouGov Staff, 2014). The possibility that these phenomena are related is troubling, but evidence for
Editorial Record: First manuscript received on September 14, 2015. Revisions received on January 17, 2016 and April 4,
2016. Accepted by Jennifer Stromer-Galley on June 13, 2016. Final manuscript received on June 17, 2016. First published
online on August 4, 2016.
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 21 (2016) 331–348 © 2016 International Communication Association
331
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article-abstract/21/5/331/4161786 by guest on 02 June 2019
 the relationship is limited and the processes by which it might occur are not well understood. This
article further substantiates the idea that ideologically slanted online news use promotes mispercep-
tions. It also offers a theoretical argument, and preliminary evidence, suggesting that this does not occur
because partisan outlets shield news consumers from more accurate (but less politically favorable) infor-
mation; instead, a key way in which exposure to biased news shapes people’
s beliefs is unrelated to their
knowledge about relevant evidence. This has important implications for the accuracy of political knowl-
edge in the online news environment.
Misperceptions pose a fundamental challenge to democracy. A democratic state cannot ensure
well-informed decision making when citizens are unable to agree about the political realities to which
they must respond (Delli Carpini & Keeter, 1996). This problem is especially pressing today, as disputes
over the facts are often most acute across party lines, resulting in partisan belief gaps (Hindman, 2009).
There are some indications that the accuracy of Americans’beliefs about the political world vary by
their use of partisan news media (Meirick, 2013; PublicMind Poll, 2012), though evidence of a causal
relationship is modest (but, see Feldman, Myers, Hmielowski, & Leiserowitz, 2014). The specific effects
of exposure to online ideological outlets on misperceptions merit more careful scrutiny.
Contemporary explanations for the Internet’
s role in promoting misperceptions tend to fall into two
camps. Some scholars suggest that online news facilitates politically biased news consumption, leaving
partisan audiences with knowledge deficits that promote inaccurate beliefs (e.g., C. R. Sunstein, 2009).
On this view, misperceptions reflect individual-level information deficits stemming from insular online
news habits. This explanation implies that factual disputes might vanish if citizens were only more aware
of evidence for their political opponents’beliefs.
Such predictions are grounded in inaccurate assumptions about how individuals use the Internet
to get information. The presumption is that given the vast range of viewpoints available, online news
users will almost invariably be insulated from perspectives that differ from their own, either by virtue
of their decision to avoid sources that present other viewpoints (C. Sunstein, 2001) or the automatic
exclusion of attitude discrepant sources by search engines and recommender systems (Pariser, 2011).
Empirical evidence, however, shows that most online consumption is far more diverse than these argu-
ments would predict. For instance, U.S. Internet use scores a 7.5 on a 101-point isolation index, where
100 corresponds to perfect segregation and 0 means no segregation (Gentzkow & Shapiro, 2011). Nor
has social media-based filtering eliminated diversity: Between 20% and 30% of the news stories that
Facebook users select come from sources that do not share their political ideology (Bakshy, Messing, &
Adamic, 2015).
Other scholars argue that misperceptions are the result of the psychological processes through which
information is interpreted, and perceptions formed. This perspective is more compatible with what we
know about contemporary online news practices, as it does not presume that individuals must be insu-
lated from other viewpoints in order to hold misperceptions. This explanation is sometimes offered as
a complement to knowledge deficit-based explanations (e.g., Nyhan & Reifler, 2010, p. 307), while at
other times it is offered as an alternative (Kahan, Jenkins-Smith, & Braman, 2011, p. 166). We argue
that exposure to ideological news websites promotes misperceptions by altering both what users know
about relevant evidence and whether their personal beliefs are consistent with that knowledge. We are,
however, skeptical of the claim that biased news use will leave citizens unaware of the evidence.
Empirically, this study uses a unique set of survey data collected during the 2012 U.S. presiden-
tial election to test a series of relationships between exposure to ideological online news media and
political misperceptions. Three-wave panel data provide compelling evidence that ideological media do
stimulate misperceptions among their audience, while cross-sectional analyses suggest that use of ide-
ologically oriented websites increases belief in outlet-favored misperceptions even after accounting for
the accuracy of individuals’knowledge of the evidence. Biased online media’
s ability to undermine the
332
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 21 (2016) 331–348 © 2016 International Communication Association
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article-abstract/21/5/331/4161786 by guest on 02 June 2019
 beneficial effect of evidentiary knowledge may help to explain the prevalence of misperceptions today,
and it raises important questions about the prospect of a more accurately informed electorate. The next
section provides the theoretical background for these claims, setting the stage for the empirical work
that follows.
Promoting misperceptions online
We begin with a few definitions. For our purposes, political misperceptions are beliefs about politics
that are inconsistent with the best available evidence (Kuklinski, Quirk, Jerit, Schwieder, & Rich, 2000).
This definition allows us to distinguish between accurate and inaccurate claims in the face of incom-
plete evidence. Claims that are compatible with publicly held information, such as relevant evidence
and conclusions of experts, are considered correct; all other claims are incorrect.1 Importantly, this con-
ceptualization allows us to discriminate between whether an individual has an accurate understanding of
evidence relevant to a contentious claim and whether the individual’
s beliefs about that claim are accurate.
We will return to this distinction shortly.
Ideologically oriented news sites are those that offer coverage consistently favoring one political
perspective over others. The most obvious examples include websites that explicitly embrace their polit-
ical leaning. For example, the Cybercast News Service’
s (http://www.cnsnews.com/) tagline promises to
deliver “The Right news. Right now.” while the DailyKos (http://www.dailykos.com/) proclaims itself
to be a “Democratic blog, a partisan blog.” Often the political leaning of a news outlet is more sub-
tle. Bias can be evident in the topics covered, as when an outlet provides disproportionate coverage of
news unfavorable to an opposed party (Baum & Groeling, 2008); or it can show up in the sources of
information that journalists rely on, more often turning to individuals affiliated with one ideology than
another (Groseclose & Milyo, 2005).2 As should be clear from these examples, news sites that fall under
the biased-outlet umbrella do not form a monolithic whole; the extent of bias and how it is expressed
varies greatly. Nevertheless, there is value in examining whether use of this high-profile type of online
news is contributing to the current political environment.
The focus here is not on consumers’exclusive reliance on outlets that affirm their beliefs—as so
often presumed in discussions of online echo chambers (C. Sunstein, 2001) or filter bubbles (Pariser,
2011)—because most Americans use a wide range of online outlets (Gentzkow & Shapiro, 2011). Instead,
the emphasis is on the influence of exposure to biased outlets, regardless of what other information
sources are consumed. Many online news users do use sources biased in favor of their ideological pre-
dispositions, even if they do not avoid other perspectives (Garrett, Carnahan, & Lynch, 2013). Thanks
in large part to the ease with which individuals can create online content (Bruns, 2008), one can find
support for almost any belief on the web, from antivaccination activism to 9/11 conspiracy theories (Sil-
verman, 2015). Although inaccurate information may be most visible on low-credibility websites, in
some instances well established news organizations have promoted misperceptions through their cover-
age (e.g., see Feldman, Maibach, Roser-Renouf, & Leiserowitz, 2012).
The first question is whether the mere presence of more politically skewed online outlets in a con-
sumer’
s news diet can help to explain people’
s misperceptions about the political world. Extant literature
suggests that the answer is yes. Scholars argue that biased news media may promote outlet-favored
misperceptions, misperceptions that benefit an outlet-allied party, candidate, or issue or that harm the
opposition (e.g., Jamieson & Cappella, 2008; C. R. Sunstein, 2009), and there is growing evidence that
exposure to these distortions shapes consumers’beliefs (Feldman, et al., 2014; Hindman, 2009; Meirick,
2013). Thus we begin by proposing two confirmatory hypotheses: use of ideologically oriented websites
will increase outlet-favored misperceptions (H1a) and reduce outlet-opposed misperceptions (H1b).
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 21 (2016) 331–348 © 2016 International Communication Association
333
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article-abstract/21/5/331/4161786 by guest on 02 June 2019
 The central question here, though, is how consuming news from these outlets influences beliefs.
To answer this question, we return to the distinction between beliefs about an issue and knowledge
of the evidence related to that issue. An example helps to illustrate the difference. Consider Americans’
acceptance of the heliocentric model. Perhaps surprisingly, only three in four (74.6%) Americans believe
that the Earth orbits the sun.3 The rest, by our definition, hold a misperception. Most of these individuals
are simply unaware of the evidence: More than one in three (36.8%) say they are not sure where science
stands on the issue. Many more who endorse this inaccurate belief misunderstand the evidence: About a
quarter (25.1%) believe that scientists think the sun revolves around the earth, and another one in eight
(12.1%) say that scientists’views are evenly divided. Factual misperceptions, however, can persist among
those who hold information consistent with a more accurate conclusion. In this case, fully a quarter
(25.9%) of those endorsing an incorrect view (that the sun revolves around the earth) correctly identified
scientists’conclusions (that the earth revolves around the sun). Our point is simple: Misperceptions are
not due solely to ignorance or misunderstandings of the evidence; individuals sometimes hold beliefs
that contradict their own knowledge of the evidence.
With this distinction in mind, we next consider three different ways that using ideological online
news outlets could contribute to misperceptions: (1) by reducing awareness of relevant evidence, (2) by
misrepresenting that evidence, and (3) by encouraging users to adopt outlet-favored views regardless of
the evidence. We examine the theoretical bases for each of these possible outcomes in more detail before
turning to the empirical tests.
Lack of familiarity with evidence
Scholars have speculated that reliance on ideological news might leave individuals less aware of unpalat-
able evidence (e.g., Hindman, 2009; C. R. Sunstein, 2009). This has not been tested, and it is in our
view unconvincing. Use of ideological news sites is unlikely to promote ignorance about political issues.
Despite indications that news outlets’topic coverage varies by their political orientation (Baum & Groel-
ing, 2008), lies of omission are unlikely in a competitive news environment. The risk of detection, and
the reputation cost this would entail for the outlet, are both high (Gentzkow & Shapiro, 2006). Even if
an individual’
s use of a biased source yielded little knowledge of evidence related to outlet-favored mis-
perceptions, use of other, less biased outlets would likely fill in the gaps. Given the contradictory views
on this subject, though, we propose a research question: Does use of ideologically oriented websites reduce
familiarity with evidence about outlet-favored misperceptions (RQ1)?
Misunderstanding the evidence
It is more plausible that ideological news site use promotes misunderstandings of evidence. Factual dis-
tortion, like omission, is a risky strategy for a news organization because biased coverage can exact a
high price if detected (Gentzkow & Shapiro, 2006). Nevertheless, there is considerable evidence that
it occurs (Feldman, et al., 2012; Jamieson & Cappella, 2008; Sobieraj & Berry, 2011). This could be a
product of the fierce competition for attention among online news sources. Sensational, if misleading,
headlines can drive site traffic and promote reader engagement (Silverman, 2015). Furthermore, in the
face of declining budgets, journalists and bloggers may disavow responsibility for the claims they cir-
culate, using hedging words (“purported,” “believed to be,” etc.) and linking to other sources rather
than engaging in independent verification (Silverman, 2015). Superficial attention to online informa-
tion only exacerbates this problem: One web-tracking company found that one in three users visiting an
online news article spent less than 15 seconds looking at it (Haile, 2014). It could also be because ideo-
logical news outlets often distinguish between hard news programming and editorial or entertainment
content, holding the latter categories to a lower accuracy standard (Patterson, 2000). This distinction
334
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 21 (2016) 331–348 © 2016 International Communication Association
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article-abstract/21/5/331/4161786 by guest on 02 June 2019
 affords news organizations plausible deniability, allowing them to claim impartiality in their news cov-
erage while simultaneously endorsing politically expedient falsehoods via other content. This could be
very effective, as opinion-laden reporting is often as persuasive as straight news (Feldman, 2011).
Whatever the source, consumers exposed to deceptive content are more likely to misunderstand
pertinent evidence. The debate over climate change provides a vivid example: television networks differ
with regard to how they present scientific agreement on the issue, and this influences audience members’
perceptions of the issue (Feldman, et al., 2012). Ideologically oriented outlets can also reinforce audience
members’attachment to their political identity (Levendusky, 2013), which itself influences perceptions
of evidence (Jerit & Barabas, 2012; Kahan, et al., 2011). To be clear, misunderstanding evidence is quite
different than lacking awareness of it: individuals in the former category use inaccurate information to
inform their decision making, while those in the latter category acknowledge that they lack information.
This culminates in our hypothesis that use of ideologically oriented websites will promote misunderstand-
ings of evidence related to outlet-favored misperceptions (H2).
The inverse approach—using more extensive and thorough fact checking to expand coverage of mis-
perceptions that hurt an allied party, candidate, or issue—is even more probable. Whereas self-interested
omissions are likely to generate criticism, neither news consumers nor media critics are likely to fault
news organizations for providing accurate information, even if the corrections serve the outlet’
s politi-
cal interests. Presenting corrective information tends to yield modest improvements in belief accuracy
(Lewandowsky, Ecker, Seifert, Schwarz, & Cook, 2012). We therefore anticipate that use of ideologically
oriented websites will increase familiarity with evidence about outlet-opposed misperceptions (H3), and
will increase understanding of this evidence (H4).
Misperceptions despite knowing the evidence
The distinction between what an individual knows of the evidence about a politically charged issue and
what that individual believes is subtle, but critically important. Knowing what has been reported by the
media is not the same as believing it; individuals frequently reject claims to which they are exposed
(Kahan, 2013; Nyhan & Reifler, 2010). We aim to demonstrate that ideological online news sites play an
important role in this process, promoting outlet-favored beliefs regardless of the evidence with which
the consumer is familiar.
Ideologically oriented news sites engage in a variety of practices that could contribute to their audi-
ences adopting evidence-inconsistent beliefs. First, politically slanted outlets often try to cast doubt on
the trustworthiness of the opposition and the legitimacy of their conclusions (Jamieson & Cappella, 2008;
Sobieraj & Berry, 2011). This is consistent with the observation that consuming conservative news has
been shown to reduce trust in climate scientists, which is in turn associated with doubts about climate
change (Hmielowski, Feldman, Myers, Leiserowitz, & Maibach, 2014). Second, ideologically oriented
outlets could help citizens identify party elites’positions, which has been shown to shape their beliefs.
For example, between 2002 and 2010 Congressional Republicans’opposition to environmental bills did
more to drive down public concern about the threat posed by global climate change than media reports
describing relevant scientific evidence did to drive concern up (Brulle, Carmichael, & Jenkins, 2012).
This is not simply a product of heightened issue awareness; instead, it is common for individuals to
alter their stated beliefs to better align with their preferred party’
s positions (Lenz, 2009). These parti-
san shifts are not limited to policy preferences and issue stances, but extend to factual beliefs as well.
Indeed, citizens will often reject assessment by experts in favor of the claims made by likeminded par-
tisans (Darmofal, 2005). All of this is consistent with Kahan’
s (2013) argument that statements of belief
serve an important identity-expressive function: Embracing a party-favored belief conflicting with well
established fact may be a form of identity self-defense (408).
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 21 (2016) 331–348 © 2016 International Communication Association
335
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article-abstract/21/5/331/4161786 by guest on 02 June 2019
 This list of strategies is not exhaustive; rather, we argue that these well documented tactics are a suf-
ficient basis on which to offer our prediction that using ideological outlets will promote outlet-favored
beliefs independent of what consumers know about the evidence. In other words, even after
accounting for accuracy of knowledge about relevant evidence, use of ideologically oriented websites
will increase outlet-favored misperceptions (H5a), and reduce outlet-opposed misperceptions (H5b).
Methods
The data we use to test our predictions come from a three-wave panel study conducted during the 2012
U.S. Presidential election by the survey company GfK. The sample includes adult Americans drawn
from the KnowledgePanel, a probability-based panel with dual-frame composition designed to be rep-
resentative of the U.S. population. (For more information about GfK’
s sampling procedures, see the
Supporting Information). Data for the first wave were collected between 13 July and 6 August 2012
and included 1,004 respondents. 783 participants completed Wave 2 (77.8% retention rate), which was
collected between 31 August 2012 and 3 October 2012. Wave 3 data were gathered between 2 and 19
November 2012 and included 652 completed surveys—a 64.9% retention rate between the first and
third waves and an 83.4% retention rate from Wave 2. The mean age for the sample at Wave 1 was 49.7
(SD = 16.4) and 47.7% of the sample was male. 74.7% of respondents were White, 8.5% were Black,
and 10.6% were Hispanic. There is no indication that panel attrition was dependent on demograph-
ics: primary characteristics of the sample displayed no significant differences across waves. Importantly,
there were no differences in attrition between Republicans, Democrats, and Independents across waves,
x2(4) = 1.06, p = .90. In addition, mean levels of liberal or conservative online media use did not differ
across waves (Fs < .7).
Measures
Over the past decade there have been several prominent misperceptions on a range of contentious politi-
cal topics. In this study we choose to focus on four, two reflecting more favorably on Republican positions
and two with positive implications for Democrats. Selecting this diverse set of misperceptions helps to
ensure that the effects detected are not bound to a particular topic or the wording of a specific item.
The well-documented falsehoods that favor Republicans were the claims that President Obama was
not born in the United States, and that there were weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) in Iraq. The
Democrat-favored misperceptions parallel these. One claim was critical of the 2012 Republican pres-
idential candidate, suggesting that Mitt Romney actively managed Bain Capital when the firm started
investing in companies that outsourced work abroad. The other claim concerned an assertion support-
ing a widely held Democratic policy position, namely that there was an immediate drop in marine
life diversity in the Gulf of Mexico following the BP oil spill. (More information about the selection
of these issues can be found in the Supporting Information.) Comparable results across these four issues
provide good evidence of the robustness of the effects. Differing results, when they occur, are more
difficult to interpret. We consider the comparability of these items at greater length in the discussion
section.
Familiarity with evidence
Familiarity with evidence about these four disputed claims was assessed by asking participants to indicate
what the purportedly knowledgeable individuals featured in the news media—journalists, members of
the U.S.-led fact-finding mission in Iraq, fact checkers, and scientists, respectively—had concluded at
the time of the study. Questions about Obama’
s birthplace were asked in all three waves, questions about
336
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 21 (2016) 331–348 © 2016 International Communication Association
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article-abstract/21/5/331/4161786 by guest on 02 June 2019
 WMDs were asked in the first wave, and questions about Romney and the BP oil spill were included in
the third wave.
These measures were embedded within a larger political-knowledge battery. There were four stan-
dard political knowledge questions, followed by the four evidence-related items in random order. For
each claim, respondents indicated what they believed the media had reported about the topic by choos-
ing among four response options. Options included both accurate (e.g. most journalists believe President
Obama was born in the US) and inaccurate responses (e.g. most journalists believe President Obama was
not born in the US; journalists are evenly divided about where the President was born; and “unsure”).
(See Supporting Information for introductory text and exact statement wording.)
To assess whether individuals are unfamiliar with evidence about the claims, we constructed four
dichotomous variables, one for each issue, coding respondents who indicated that they were “unsure”
about the evidence high, and collapsing the other three response options (e.g. Obama born in the US;
Obama not born in US; and journalists evenly divided) into the low code (Obama: M = 0.15, SD = 0.36;
WMD: M = 0.24, SD = 0.43; Romney: M = 0.43, SD = 0.50; BP: M = 0.27, SD = 0.45).
Accurate knowledge about evidence
The evidence-related items were also used to create a series of dichotomous variables to assess whether
individuals had an accurate understanding of the evidence. Individuals answering the questions cor-
rectly were coded high, and all others—including those unfamiliar with the evidence—were coded
low (Obama: M = 0.56, SD = 0.70; WMD: M = 0.48, SD = 0.50; Romney: M = 0.16, SD = 0.37; BP claim:
M = 0.12, SD = 0.33).4
Belief accuracy
After answering the knowledge questions, respondents were asked what they themselves believe about
each of the four topics. These items were presented as 5-point semantic differentials, with contrasting
statements serving as the anchors. (See Supporting Information for exact statement wording.) Respon-
dents placed a mark closer to the statement that best described their beliefs, locating it in the exact middle
if they were unsure of the truth. All questions were coded so that higher values were more accurate.
Mean scores suggest a range in accuracy of personal beliefs across the issues (Obama: M = 3.7, SD = 1.5;
WMDs: M = 3.4, SD = 1.4; Romney: M = 2.7, SD = 1.2; BP: M = 2.4, SD = 1.2). Placing these items after
the knowledge battery does make it more likely that respondents would state beliefs consistent with the
evidence, but this only makes confirming our hypotheses more difficult.
Liberal and conservative online media use
The survey also measured the extent to which respondents used both liberal and conservative online
media. Each question described below measured partisan online media use on a 5-point scale with
response options anchored by “Never” and “Every day or almost every day.” Items were coded so that
higher values correspond to greater use. The measures were intended to capture outlets both large and
small at both ends of the ideological spectrum. Liberal online media use (Wave 1: M = 1.5, SD = 0.9;
Wave 3: M = 1.6, SD = 0.9) was assessed by combining responses to two questions that asked how often
respondents used “the website of a major national news organization that is frequently characterized
as favoring liberal positions or Democratic candidates, such as The New York Times or MSNBC” and
“the website of a politically liberal online news organization or blog, such as The Huffington Post,
ThinkProgress or the Daily Kos.” Conservative online media (Wave 1: M = 1.5, SD = 0.8; Wave 3:
M = 1.5, SD = 0.9) combined use of “the website of a major national news organization that is frequently
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 21 (2016) 331–348 © 2016 International Communication Association
337
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article-abstract/21/5/331/4161786 by guest on 02 June 2019
 characterized as favoring conservative positions or Republican candidates, such as The Wall Street
Journal or FOX News” and “the website of a politically conservative online news organization or blog,
such as Drudge Report, TownHall or the Cybercast News Service (CNS News).” Biased news site usage
is generally low: Just over half the sample report no use of partisan sites, and another one in five use
them only infrequently. Detailed usage frequencies are presented in the online Supporting Information
(Table S1).5
Political party affiliation
Party affiliation was measured on a 7-point scale ranging from Strong Democrat to Strong Republi-
can. Dummy variables were created by combining respondents who identified as either Republican or
Republican-leaning (33.5%), or as Democrat or Democrat-leaning (44.8%), with pure Independents
serving as the reference category (15.6%).
Control variables
Several control variables were included in all models, including the use of nonpartisan websites, political
interest, education, and political knowledge. Wording and descriptives for these items are available in
the online Supporting Information.
Results
Our first hypotheses, H1a and H1b, concern the causal link between ideologically oriented website use
and political misperceptions. Our multiwave panel provides a stronger test of causality then is afforded
by cross-sectional design because it allows us to identify the effect of changes in news consumption on
beliefs, holding the individual fixed. Cross-sectional designs, in contrast, compare across individuals,
which means that observed relationships may be due to unobserved individual differences.
In our first test of this relationship, we use a cross-lagged regression model to show that media use
predicts individuals’inaccurate beliefs, not the other way around. The model is autoregressive, premised
on the idea that past behavior is the best predictor of present behavior, and it attempts to use other
variables to explain any remaining variance. Specifically, the model tests the relationships between ideo-
logically oriented outlet exposure and accurate beliefs about President Obama’
s birthplace. That is, does
website use predict belief accuracy? Or does accuracy predict website use? If media consumption is a
causal force, as we hypothesize, then it should have significant predictive power after controlling for
beliefs in prior waves. Furthermore, this effect should be greater than the alternative relationship, in
which changing misperceptions lead to greater ideological media exposure. (Note that this approach is
premised on a strong assumption, which we address after describing the model results).
The results provide modest support for the anticipated influence of ideologically oriented news
use on misperceptions, though they suggest a more nuanced relationship than initially hypothesized.
The cross-lagged model coefficients, which were estimated using Mplus, are shown in Figure 1. First,
we note that the fit of the model is good, easily exceeding the thresholds commonly recommended
when constructing structural equation models: 𝜒2 is nonsignificant (𝜒2 = 9.99, p = .44); the TLI is high
(TLI = 1.0); and both RMSEA and SRMR are near zero (RMSEA 90% CI [0.00 – 0.04]; SRMR = .01)
(Geiser, 2012). As expected, both liberal and conservative news use predicts outlet-congruent changes
in beliefs over time, albeit intermittently. Specifically, conservative outlet use in the second wave predicts
a subsequent reduction in belief accuracy about Obama’
s birthplace, a misperception favored among
conservatives, in the third wave. Liberal websites have the opposite effect: Liberal outlets use in the first
wave promotes accuracy on this issue in the second wave.
338
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 21 (2016) 331–348 © 2016 International Communication Association
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article-abstract/21/5/331/4161786 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Figure 1 Cross-lagged model of ideologically oriented website use and political misperception.
Note. 𝜒2 = 9.99, p = .44; TLI = 1.0; RMSEA 90% CI [0.00 – 0.04]; SRMR = .01. Significant coefficients
shown; correlated residuals omitted for clarity.
Unanticipated by our theorizing, however, is the fact that the direction of the causal arrow varies
over time, with belief accuracy predicting partisan media use in alternate waves. It would be more apt to
describe the pattern observed in the cross-lagged model as a feedback loop or reinforcing spiral (Slater,
2007). Conservative ideological news use promotes misperception, while liberal news use constrains it,
but the resulting (mis)perceptions subsequently promote use of outlets expected to favor these beliefs.
This bidirectional pattern is consistent with recent work demonstrating the reciprocal influence of con-
servative media and climate change beliefs (Feldman, et al., 2014). Theoretically, reversals of the causal
arrow could result from selective exposure: Individuals are often attracted to sources that affirm their
beliefs (Stroud, 2011).
A significant limitation of this cross-lagged approach, however, is its assumption that changes in
news consumption are “
as-if”randomly assigned. Exposure is rarely random. To verify the robustness of
these results, we constructed a mixed-effect model, with observations nested within respondent, predict-
ing belief accuracy in the current wave by ideologically oriented website use in the prior wave, and con-
trolling for demographics (see Table S2 in the Supporting Information). Results affirm the cross-lagged
regression results: Both liberal and conservative website use promotes ideologically consistent beliefs.
Nevertheless, H1a and H1b are only partially supported.
No evidence that ideological media reduce awareness of evidence
Next, we consider the means by which ideologically oriented news outlets might promote mis-
perceptions, relying on cross-sectional analyses to test three different mechanisms. We begin by
assessing whether using these outlets makes audience members less aware of expert conclusions about
website-favored misperceptions (RQ1). Although this mechanism is intuitively appealing, it remains
untested and we have identified several reasons to think that it might be wrong. We find no evidence
in these data that using biased outlets promotes politically beneficial naiveté; instead, there is modest
evidence that the opposite sometimes occurs. To test the relationship, we estimated a series of logistic
regression models predicting whether individuals claim ignorance of what experts say about each the
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 21 (2016) 331–348 © 2016 International Communication Association
339
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article-abstract/21/5/331/4161786 by guest on 02 June 2019
 four false claims (for a complete list of coefficients for all four models, see Table S3 in the Supporting
Information). According to these models, ideological media had no discernable influence on users’
awareness of expert conclusions. This is indicated by nonsignificant coefficients on conservative outlet
use for claims about Obama’
s birthplace and WMDs in Iraq, and on liberal outlet use for claims about
the BP oil spill and about Romney’
s role at Bain Capital when the company outsourced work abroad.
Instead, the only significant relationship indicates that heavy users of liberal news were more likely
than lighter users to claim familiarity with, not ignorance of, fact checkers’conclusions about Romney’
s
role at Bain Capital (OR = 0.70, p < .05).6 This inaccurate claim would have benefitted the Democratic
Presidential candidate if it had been true, yet a typical citizen who did not use liberal sites had a 47%
probability of being “unsure” of what fact-checkers had concluded, while a comparable heavy user of
liberal sites had only an 18% chance. Thus, the answer to our first research question (RQ1) is no: We
find no evidence that ideological media promote ignorance of inopportune evidence.
We also predicted that ideological news exposure would make users more aware of expert con-
clusions that undermine outlet-opposed false claims (H3; we consider H2 alongside H4, in the next
section). Although we expected this effect to be small, we were nonetheless surprised to see no evidence
of the predicted relationship. Reviewing the previously described logistic model, we find that all relevant
model coefficients are nonsignificant. Conservative media was not associated with a significant increase
in exposure to the facts surrounding liberal-favored misperceptions, or vice versa. We conclude that H3
is unsupported.
Ideological media promote misunderstanding of some evidence
Although we cannot infer that ideologically oriented websites make people less aware of factual evidence
surrounding these issues, they could still undermine accurate knowledge by giving their audience false
impressions of that evidence. Here we consider whether using biased news websites influences the accu-
racy of users’knowledge about the conclusions reported in the news media (H2 and H4). For example,
does use of right-leaning outlets promote errors in assessing what knowledgeable individuals featured
in the media say about misperceptions favored by conservatives and/or reduce errors about mispercep-
tions favored by liberals? The evidence for this pair of hypothesis is mixed. We start by looking at some
suggestive descriptive statistics (computed using sample weights): at the time of this study, 15.1% of
Republicans wrongly believed that most journalists think President Obama was born outside the US,
while only 2.8% of Democrats made this error. Provocative as this is, it is a poor test of the hypothesis
because it does not directly assess the influence of news media use—falsely equating party affiliation
with news outlet exposure—and because it fails to control for several likely confounds.
A more rigorous test of the hypotheses estimates logistic regression models predicting whether indi-
viduals hold accurate knowledge about expert conclusions based on their use of these news sites (see
Supporting Information Table S4 for full models).7 These models complement those predicting a lack of
knowledge, reported in the previous section. Our goal here is to distinguish between factors that reduce
awareness of the evidence (the subject of the previous analyses) from factors that promote an inaccurate
understanding of the evidence. For this reason, we excluded respondents who said they were “unsure”
of the evidence from these analyses. We find that ideological outlet use does influence the accuracy of
users’knowledge about evidence in the expected directions for the two liberal-favorable misperceptions.
Liberal website use is associated with a reduction in accuracy about what scientists said regarding the
BP oil spill (OR = 0.61, p < .05) and what fact checkers said about Romney’
s role in Bain Capital’
s out-
sourcing efforts (OR = 0.55, p < .01). To put these results in context, those who do not use liberal news
sites had an 18% chance of accurately identifying what scientists said about the BP oil spill, and a 35%
chance of knowing what fact checkers said about Romney. Heavy liberal website users’performance was
340
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 21 (2016) 331–348 © 2016 International Communication Association
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article-abstract/21/5/331/4161786 by guest on 02 June 2019
 considerably worse: They had only a 3% and a 5% chance, respectively, of correctly describing the evi-
dence. Conservative website use, in contrast, is associated with correct identification of fact checkers’
conclusions about Romney (OR = 1.25, p < .05).8 The results for misperceptions favored by liberals are
consistent with H2 and H4. There was, however, no corresponding effect for misperceptions more preva-
lent among conservatives: Partisan news site use was not associated with significant changes in accuracy
when describing evidence about the President’
s birthplace or the presence of WMDs in Iraq. Overall
support for the two hypotheses is therefore mixed. We consider these differences, which we believe may
reflect the issues selected, in the discussion.9
Rejecting evidence
Summarizing the results so far, data are consistent with the assertion that ideologically oriented websites
do shape users’understanding of evidence surrounding some contested political facts, but the effect is
modest in magnitude and limited in scope. That leaves one last effect of biased outlet exposure that could
promote ideologically favorable misperceptions. Recall our prediction that ideologically oriented web-
sites would influence users’beliefs above and beyond their knowledge of the evidence (H5a and H5b).
Here again descriptive data are compelling: 90.3% of Democrats who know what journalists believe about
President Obama’
s birthplace have reached this conclusion themselves, while only 66.7% of Republi-
cans who accurately perceive journalists’positions do the same. A more careful test, however, models
beliefs as a product of media use after accounting for whether the individual holds accurate knowledge of
the evidence. We do this using two types of analysis, one compatible with mediation testing within the
framework of linear structural equation modeling, and the other using the counterfactual framework.
In the first, we include the mediating factor as a predictor so that we can see how much of the outlets’
effect on personal beliefs is not mediated by its effect on an accurate understanding the evidence (Hayes,
2013). The second analysis uses the approach described by (Imai, Keele, & Tingley, 2010) to decompose
the total effect of media use into average direct and indirect effects.
The results of the first approach are unambiguous: Use of ideological media is consistently associ-
ated with holding misperceptions after accounting for the accuracy of audience members’issue-relevant
knowledge. That is, use of these news sites is associated with holding outlet-favored beliefs even if users
know that their beliefs are inconsistent with claims made by journalists, fact checkers, scientists, etc. This test
takes the form of an ordered logistic regression model predicting how accurate an individual’
s beliefs are
after statistically controlling for accurate knowledge about the conclusions reported in the news media
(see Table 1). The residual variance after including this factor corresponds to the media’
s influence on
beliefs holding the individual’
s familiarity with the evidence constant. Holding constant what users know
about the topics, we find that conservative outlet use is associated with greater accuracy about the BP oil
spill and Romney’
s role at Bain, and with less accuracy about Obama’
s birthplace and WMDs in Iraq. In
contrast, liberal outlets are linked to more accuracy about Obama and Iraq, and less accuracy about the
oil spill in the Gulf and about Romney’
s responsibility for outsourcing U.S. jobs overseas. These results
are consistent with H5a and H5b.
To illustrate the magnitude of these effects we use results of the regression model reported above
to estimate the predicted probability of holding a party-favored inaccurate belief with high confidence
despite knowing what the evidence suggests as a product of ideological site use (see Supporting Infor-
mation Table S6). The differences are striking. A Republican who knows the facts but does not visit
conservative news sites has only a 3% chance of incorrectly answering questions about Obama’
s birth-
place or WMDs. An otherwise identical heavy conservative site user, however, has an almost one-in-three
(31% and 33%, respectively) chance of holding a misperception. Similarly, a Democrat familiar with
fact checkers’conclusions about Romney who does not visit liberal sites is almost certain to answer the
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 21 (2016) 331–348 © 2016 International Communication Association
341
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article-abstract/21/5/331/4161786 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Table 1 Ordered logistic regression predicting accuracy of belief by ideological media use, controlling
for accurate knowledge about evidence.
Obama’
s
Birthplacea
WMDs in
Iraqa
BP Oil
Spillb
Romney &
Outsourcingb
Accurate knowledge of evidence
12.87∗∗∗
7.78∗∗∗
16.37∗∗∗
33.80∗∗∗
Conservative online news use
0.52∗∗∗
0.51∗∗∗
1.52∗∗∗
1.40∗∗
Liberal online news use
1.56∗∗
1.40∗∗
0.71∗∗
0.61∗∗∗
Nonpartisan online news use
1.27
1.34∗
1.00
1.07
Republican or R. leaning
0.47∗∗∗
0.59∗∗
1.32
1.98∗∗
Democrat or D. leaning
4.07∗∗∗
1.90∗∗∗
0.87
0.65∗
Political interest
0.88
0.93
1.18
0.87
Political knowledge
1.03
1.32∗∗
0.94
0.72∗∗∗
Education
1.14∗∗
0.98
0.99
1.01
N
955
950
614
621
Log-likelihood
−995.79
−1195.47
−709.65
−727.76
df
9
9
9
9
𝜒2
692.72∗∗∗
447.59∗∗∗
181.89∗∗∗
318.60∗∗∗
Notes. Exponentiated coefficients; Coefficients greater than one denote higher likelihood of holding
beliefs consistent with available evidence; a. Measured in wave 1; b. Measured in wave 3;
∗p < 0.05,
∗∗p < 0.01,
∗∗∗p < 0.001.
question correctly (3% answer incorrectly); however, about one in ten (10%) Democrats who frequently
use liberal sites are expected to answer incorrectly, contrary to their knowledge of the evidence.
A more conservative approach to estimating the influence of website use on beliefs unmediated by
individuals’evidentiary knowledge is based on the counterfactual framework, a formal framework for
assessing causal inferences (Imai, et al., 2010 and see Acharya, Blackwell, & Sen, 2015). This approach
uses Monte Carlo simulation to estimate model parameters for both outcome and mediator variables,
and then computes a confidence interval for the average direct effect (ADE) and average causal mediation
effect (ACME) based on the simulated data (for a more detailed description of this approach, see Imai,
et al., 2010). To conduct these analyses, we rely on a Stata implementation of the algorithm (Hicks &
Tingley, 2011). One thousand simulations are sufficient to produce reliable estimates of these simple
models. One notable requirement of this approach is that the predictor of interest be expressed as a
dichotomous variable indicating whether the case corresponds to a “
control”or “treatment”condition.
For these estimates, we consider respondents with little or no use of ideological sites (scores less than or
equal to two, “rarely”use) to be the control; all others are classified as being in the treatment condition.
Results using the counterfactual approach are generally comparable to those derived from the SEM
framework, reported above, although two tests in this more conservative approach fall short of signif-
icance (see Supporting Information Table S7). Conservative media use significantly influences beliefs
about all four issues after accounting for its influence via accurate knowledge. As with the first test, it is
associated with lower accuracy about conservative-favored misperceptions, and higher accuracy about
those favored by liberals. Liberal media use, however, is only significantly associated with lower accuracy
about liberal-favored misperceptions. Taken as a whole, this pattern of results offers strong support for
H5a and H5b.
342
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 21 (2016) 331–348 © 2016 International Communication Association
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article-abstract/21/5/331/4161786 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Discussion
Panel data offer additional evidence that biased websites’contribute to false beliefs, and cross-section
data offer insight into three different types of media effects that could help explain this apparent rela-
tionship. We consider whether evidence is consistent with the predictions that use of biased websites
is promoting ignorance of expert conclusions about outlet-favored misperceptions, promoting mis-
perceptions of these same expert conclusions, and/or promoting misperceptions regardless of users’
knowledge of the evidence. Examining these distinct influences allows us to move beyond the simple
website exposure-misperception link, helping us to better understand theoretically the ways in which
ideologically oriented outlets shape beliefs.
Data are consistent with the prediction that use of politically slanted news sites shapes individuals’
perceptions of reality, by (sometimes) altering their understanding of experts’conclusions, and, more
importantly, by shaping their beliefs above and beyond what known evidence indicates that they should
believe. In other words, citizens’beliefs can deviate from what they know about the evidence as reported
in the media, and this deviation appears to be significantly impacted by their use of ideological websites.
Those using conservative (liberal) news outlets are more likely to believe falsehoods that favor conser-
vatives (liberals), even if they know that experts, such as journalists, fact checkers, or scientists, disagree
with them.
There is little evidence that ideologically oriented websites leave their audiences less aware of relevant
facts. Rather than contributing to unawareness, use of biased online news outlets is associated with seeing
evidence in ways that are less threatening to the outlets’interests. Partisan media’
s apparent ability to
promote misperceptions in spite of exposure to more accurate information may help to explain how
these misperceptions continue to flourish despite the diversity that characterizes most Americans’online
news diet.
An important open question concerns why some effects differed across issues. Specifically, we found
that news media exposure had more influence on misunderstandings of evidence for liberal-favored
misperceptions than for conservative-favored misperceptions. We suspect that this reflects differences
in issues selected for this study, and not differences in the outlets or audience members. Misperceptions
about both WMDs in Iraq and Obama’
s birthplace received extensive media coverage, including exhaus-
tive fact checking efforts, for years leading up to this study. Experts’conclusions about these issues are
unambiguous and stable, so it is unsurprising that contemporary media exposure had relatively little
influence on citizens’knowledge about these conclusions. Regardless of where you get your news or
what you believe, you know what experts say about these topics. News about the BP oil spill and about
Romney’
s responsibility for outsourcing U.S. jobs abroad, in contrast, was more recent, the facts were
relatively unfamiliar to most Americans, and there was considerably more ambiguity. Thus, news outlets
had a much greater opportunity to shape audiences’perceptions of what experts thought. These expla-
nations are, however, speculative and reflect a limitation of these data. Future studies would do well to
identify items that exhibit greater comparability.
Nevertheless, the consistency of results is striking: Across four misperceptions, which represented a
range of topics (military, environmental, economic, and personal), media profiles, and ideological biases,
use of ideological oriented websites appeared to have a reliably strong influence on audience members’
beliefs, above and beyond what those individuals knew about the evidence. Perhaps media’
s influence
on misunderstandings of the evidence would have been stronger and more consistent with a different
set of issues, but even for issues where those effects were large (e.g., misperceptions about the BP oil
spill) the influence of the media was only partially explained by its effect on consumers’knowledge of
the evidence.
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 21 (2016) 331–348 © 2016 International Communication Association
343
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article-abstract/21/5/331/4161786 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Our reliance on self-reported data is an obvious limitation. It is likely that our media exposure mea-
sures overestimate actual news consumption (Prior, 2013). The news exposure patterns observed in this
dataset are consistent with many other types of data, including experiments and behavioral data, but val-
idation using other types of data would be worthwhile. The reliance on cross-sectional data for most tests
is another important limitation. It is possible, for example, that people’
s evidentiary knowledge drives
their media exposure. Even the lagged model can be criticized in this regard: Perhaps the approach-
ing election motivated both heightened media use and more inaccurate beliefs. Additional research is
merited.
Finally, a valuable complement to this work would be content analyses of ideologically oriented news
websites. It would be useful to better understand how exactly news organizations are able to promote
these different types of misperceptions.
Conclusion
Political misperceptions pose a challenge to democracy, where citizens are expected to make decisions
based on accurate (if not complete) information (Delli Carpini & Keeter, 1996). The Internet is sup-
posed to help by providing citizens with easier access to relevant information, thereby increasing political
understanding. This research reminds us that when people seek political news, what they learn depends
on the news outlets they use. Although Internet users do not systematically shield themselves from
information that could undermine their existing beliefs, some do include ideologically oriented sources
in their information diet. In the month leading up to the election, a quarter of Americans said they
used biased news sites several times or more. Reliance on these websites appears to produce a distorted
understanding of evidence, potentially promoting inaccurate beliefs even when evidence is understood
correctly. It is sobering to recognize that online news may contribute to misperceptions even when con-
sumers encounter a range of outlets and have been exposed to more accurate political information.
Acknowledgments
Many thanks to Andrew Hayes, Talia Stroud, Associate Editor Jenny Stromer-Galley, and the anonymous
reviewers for thoughtful feedback and useful advice on prior versions of this paper. This material is based
upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. IIS-1149599. Any opinions,
findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation
Notes
1 This approach also allows us to avoid epistemological debates over whether truth is knowable, and to
discount conspiracy theories founded on the premise that the media, government, and other
stakeholders are intentionally deceiving the public (see Lewandowsky, Gignac, & Oberauer, 2013).
2 Bias has also been estimated based on the language used to describe an issue, as when an outlet
selects more negative terminology for the opposition (Holtzman, Schott, Jones, Balota, & Yarkoni,
2011). News outlets’political orientation have also been estimated based on editorial content
(Stroud, 2011) and on the political predispositions of their audiences (Gentzkow & Shapiro, 2011).
3 The statistics reported in this section are based on a GfK KnowledgePanel survey of 1,004 adult
Americans conducted between July 14 and August 7, 2012 and are computed excluding refusals and
using weighted data to estimate population parameters. A team of researchers that included the
344
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 21 (2016) 331–348 © 2016 International Communication Association
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article-abstract/21/5/331/4161786 by guest on 02 June 2019
 authors designed the survey, and its results are consistent with those reported elsewhere (National
Science Board, 2014). Also note that other variables from this dataset are used in subsequent
analyses.
4 We also created an alternative version of this measure, treating accuracy as an ordinal variable coded
as accurate (3), evenly divided (2), and inaccurate (1). Model results, which are reported in the
Supporting Information (Table S5), are comparable throughout.
5 Although the large national news organizations identified in these questions are less biased than
those with a more explicit political bent, research suggests that even mainstream outlets on the left
and right differ both in their content (Baum & Groeling, 2008; Gentzkow & Shapiro, 2006;
Groseclose & Milyo, 2005; Holtzman, et al., 2011) and their audience (Gentzkow & Shapiro, 2011).
The relatively modest bias exhibited by these outlets may reduce the effect of any single exposure,
making the predicted effects harder to detect, but their broad reach leads us to include them in this
measure. To ensure that our results were not driven by our inclusion of these widely used outlets, we
reran all analyses using only the explicitly partisan websites. The direction, magnitude, and
significance of the coefficients on these alternative models are generally comparable. We note the few
exceptions as they arise.
6 This coefficient is not significant when mainstream outlets are excluded from ideological outlet
measures.
7 As noted above, the model was also tested using an ordered logistic regression and the ordinal
measure of accuracy. Results for this model specification, which are substantively unchanged, are
included in Table S5.
8 When using only explicitly partisan sites in the model, conservative news use is also associated with
more accurate beliefs about the BP oil spill (OR = 1.41, p < 0.05).
9 Although not a central concern of this article, readers may be interested to know that none of the
reported effects are dependent on users’party affiliation or ideology. Use of biased outlets influences
liberals and conservatives in comparable ways. This is not entirely surprising: direct persuasion
effects of partisan media have been demonstrated elsewhere (Feldman, 2011).
References
Acharya, A., Blackwell, M., & Sen, M. (2015). Explaining causal findings without bias: Detecting and
assessing direct effects, from http://web.stanford.edu/˜avidit/directeffects.pdf
Bakshy, E., Messing, S., & Adamic, L. (2015). Exposure to ideologically diverse news and opinion on
Facebook. Science, 348(6239), 1130–1132. doi: 10.1126/science.aaa1160
Baum, M. A., & Groeling, T. (2008). New media and the polarization of American political discourse.
Political Communication, 25(4), 345–365. doi: 10.1080/10584600802426965
Brulle, R., Carmichael, J., & Jenkins, J. C. (2012). Shifting public opinion on climate change: An
empirical assessment of factors influencing concern over climate change in the U.S., 2002–2010.
Climatic Change, 1–20. doi: 10.1007/s10584-012-0403-y
Bruns, A. (2008). Blogs, Wikipedia, Second life, and beyond: From production to produsage. New York:
Peter Lang.
Darmofal, D. (2005). Elite cues and citizen disagreement with expert opinion. Political Research
Quarterly, 58(3), 381–395. doi: 10.1177/106591290505800302
Delli Carpini, M. X., & Keeter, S. (1996). What Americans know about politics and why it matters. New
Haven: Yale University Press.
Feldman, L. (2011). The opinion factor: The effects of opinionated news on information processing and
attitude change. Political Communication, 28(2), 163–181. doi: 10.1080/10584609.2011.565014
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 21 (2016) 331–348 © 2016 International Communication Association
345
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article-abstract/21/5/331/4161786 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Feldman, L., Maibach, E. W., Roser-Renouf, C., & Leiserowitz, A. (2012). Climate on cable: The nature
and impact of global warming coverage on Fox News, CNN, and MSNBC. The International
Journal of Press/Politics, 17(1), 3–31. doi: 10.1177/1940161211425410
Feldman, L., Myers, T. A., Hmielowski, J. D., & Leiserowitz, A. (2014). The mutual reinforcement of
media selectivity and effects: Testing the reinforcing spirals framework in the context of global
warming. Journal of Communication, 590–611. doi: 10.1111/jcom.12108
Garrett, R. K., Carnahan, D., & Lynch, E. K. (2013). A turn toward avoidance? Selective exposure to
online political information, 2004–2008. Political Behavior, 35(1), 113–134. doi:
10.1007/s11109-011-9185-6
Geiser, C. (2012). Data analysis with mplus: Guilford Publications.
Gentzkow, M., & Shapiro, J. M. (2006). Media bias and reputation. Journal of Political Economy, 114,
280–316. doi: 10.1086/499414
Gentzkow, M., & Shapiro, J. M. (2011). Ideological segregation online and offline. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 126(4), 1799–1839. doi: 10.1093/qje/qjr044
Groseclose, T., & Milyo, J. (2005). A measure of media bias. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(4),
1191–1237. doi: doi:10.1162/003355305775097542
Haile, T. (2014). What you think you know about the web is wrong. Time Magazine. Retrieved from
http://time.com/12933/what-you-think-you-knowabout-the-web-is-wrong
Hayes, A. F. (2013). Introduction to mediation, moderation, and conditional process analysis: A
regression-based approach: Guilford Press.
Hicks, R., & Tingley, D. (2011). Causal mediation analysis. Stata Journal, 11(4), 605–619.
Hindman, D. B. (2009). Mass media flow and differential distribution of politically disputed beliefs:
The belief gap hypothesis. Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly, 86(4), 790–808. doi:
10.1177/107769900908600405
Hmielowski, J. D., Feldman, L., Myers, T. A., Leiserowitz, A., & Maibach, E. (2014). An attack on
science? Media use, trust in scientists, and perceptions of global warming. Public Understanding of
Science, 23(7), 866–883. doi: 10.1177/0963662513480091
Holtzman, N., Schott, J., Jones, M., Balota, D., & Yarkoni, T. (2011). Exploring media bias with
semantic analysis tools: Validation of the Contrast Analysis of Semantic Similarity (CASS).
Behavior Research Methods, 43(1), 193–200. doi: 10.3758/s13428-010-0026-z
Imai, K., Keele, L., & Tingley, D. (2010). A general approach to causal mediation analysis. Psychological
Methods, 15(4), 309–334. doi: 10.1037/a0020761
Jamieson, K. H., & Cappella, J. N. (2008). Echo chamber: Rush Limbaugh and the conservative media
establishment. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Jerit, J., & Barabas, J. (2012). Partisan perceptual bias and the information environment. The Journal of
Politics, 74(03), 672–684. doi: 10.1017/S0022381612000187
Kahan, D. M. (2013). Ideology, motivated reasoning, and cognitive reflection: An experimental study.
Judgment and Decision Making, 8, 407–424.
Kahan, D. M., Jenkins-Smith, H., & Braman, D. (2011). Cultural cognition of scientific consensus.
Journal of Risk Research, 14(2), 147–174. doi: 10.1080/13669877.2010.511246
Kuklinski, J. H., Quirk, P. J., Jerit, J., Schwieder, D., & Rich, R. F. (2000). Misinformation and the
currency of democratic citizenship. The Journal of Politics, 62(03), 790–816. doi:
10.1111/0022-3816.00033
Lenz, G. S. (2009). Learning and opinion change, not priming: Reconsidering the priming hypothesis.
American Journal of Political Science, 53(4), 821–837. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-5907.2009.00403.x
Levendusky, M. (2013). Partisan media exposure and attitudes toward the opposition. Political
Communication, 30(4), 565–581. doi: 10.1080/10584609.2012.737435
346
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 21 (2016) 331–348 © 2016 International Communication Association
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article-abstract/21/5/331/4161786 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Lewandowsky, S., Ecker, U. K. H., Seifert, C. M., Schwarz, N., & Cook, J. (2012). Misinformation and
its correction: Continued influence and successful debiasing. Psychological Science in the Public
Interest, 13(3), 106–131. doi: 10.1177/1529100612451018
Lewandowsky, S., Gignac, G. E., & Oberauer, K. (2013). The role of conspiracist ideation and
worldviews in predicting rejection of science. PLoS ONE, 8(10), e75637. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0075637
Meirick, P. C. (2013). Motivated misperception? Party, education, partisan news, and belief in “
death
panels.”Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly. doi: 10.1177/1077699012468696
National Science Board. (2014, February). Science and Engineering Indicators 2014. (NSB 14–01).
National Science Foundation, Arlington, VA.
Nyhan, B., & Reifler, J. (2010). When corrections fail: The persistence of political misperceptions.
Political Behavior, 32(2), 303–330. doi: 10.1007/s11109-010-9112-2
Pariser, E. (2011). The filter bubble: What the Internet is hiding from you. New York: Penguin Press.
Patterson, T. E. (2000). Doing well and doing good: How soft news and critical journalism are shrinking
the news audience and weakening democracy--and what news outlets can do about it. (Faculty
Research Working Paper Series, RWP01-001). Cambrige, MA.
Prior, M. (2013). Media and political polarization. Annual Review of Political Science, 16(1), 101–127.
doi: 10.1146/annurev-polisci-100711-135242
PublicMind Poll. (2012). What you know depends on what you watch: Current events knowledge across
popular news sources. Madison, NJ: Fairleigh Dickinson University.
Silverman, C. (2015). Lies, damn lies, and viral content: How news websites spread (and debunk)
online rumors, unverified claims, and misinformation. A Tow/Knight Report: Tow Center for
Digital Journalism.
Slater, M. D. (2007). Reinforcing spirals: The mutual influence of media selectivity and media effects
and their impact on individual behavior and social identity. Communication Theory, 17(3),
281–303. doi: doi:10.1111/j.1468-2885.2007.00296.x
Sobieraj, S., & Berry, J. M. (2011). From incivility to outrage: Political discourse in blogs, talk radio,
and cable news. Political Communication, 28(1), 19–41. doi: 10.1080/10584609.2010.542360
Stroud, N. J. (2011). Niche news: The politics of news choice. New York: Oxford University Press.
Sunstein, C. (2001). Republic.com. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Sunstein, C. R. (2009). On rumors: How falsehoods spread, why we believe them, what can be done. New
York, NY: Farrar, Strauss and Giroux.
World Public Opinion. (2006). Percentage of Americans believing Iraq had WMD rises. Washington,
DC: World Public Opinion: Global Public Opinion on International Affairs.
YouGov Staff. (2014). 15% ’
Know for sure’Obama was not born in the U.S. Economist/YouGov poll.
Retrieved April 28, 2014, from https://today.yougov.com/news/2014/02/12/know-for-sure/
Supporting Information
Additional supporting information may be found in the online version of this article:
Appendix S1: Additional survey and analysis details
About the Authors
Kelly Garrett (http://rkellygarrett.com/) is an Associate Professor in the School of Communication at
the Ohio State University. His research interests include the study of online political communication,
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 21 (2016) 331–348 © 2016 International Communication Association
347
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article-abstract/21/5/331/4161786 by guest on 02 June 2019
 online news, and contentious political topics. Address: 3016 Derby Hall, 154 N. Oval Mall, Columbus,
OH 43210, email: garrett.258@osu.edu
Brian Weeks is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Communication Studies and a Faculty Asso-
ciate in the Center for Political Studies at the University of Michigan. His research interests include
political misinformation and misperceptions, emotional responses to political content, and political
information sharing online.
Rachel Neo is an Assistant Professor at the School of Communications, University of Hawaii at Manoa.
Her research focuses on examining the persuasive effects of social media cues such as network homo-
geneity and online ratings on political outcomes.
348
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 21 (2016) 331–348 © 2016 International Communication Association
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article-abstract/21/5/331/4161786 by guest on 02 June 2019
