 Parental understanding and self-blame
following sudden infant death:
a mixed-methods study of bereaved
parents’ and professionals’ experiences
Joanna Garstang,1,2 Frances Griffiths,3 Peter Sidebotham1
To cite: Garstang J,
Griffiths F, Sidebotham P.
Parental understanding and
self-blame following sudden
infant death:
a mixed-methods study of
bereaved parents’ and
professionals’ experiences.
BMJ Open 2016;6:e011323.
doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-
011323
▸ Prepublication history for
this paper is available online.
To view these files please
visit the journal online
(http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/
bmjopen-2016-011323).
Received 5 February 2016
Revised 22 March 2016
Accepted 8 April 2016
For numbered affiliations see
end of article.
Correspondence to
Dr Joanna Garstang; Joanna.
J.Garstang@warwick.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
Objectives: Improvements in our understanding of
the role of modifiable risk factors for sudden infant
death syndrome (SIDS) mean that previous
reassurance to parents that these deaths were
unpreventable may no longer be appropriate. This
study aimed to learn of bereaved parents’ and
healthcare professionals’ experiences of understanding
causes of death following detailed sudden unexpected
death in infancy (SUDI) investigations. The research
questions were: How do bereaved parents understand
the cause of death and risk factors identified during
detailed investigation following a sudden unexpected
infant death? What is the association between bereaved
parents’ mental health and this understanding? What
are healthcare professionals’ experiences of sharing
such information with families?
Design: This was a mixed-methods study using a
Framework Approach.
Setting: Specialist paediatric services.
Participants: Bereaved parents were recruited
following detailed multiagency SUDI investigations;
21/113 eligible families and 27 professionals
participated giving theoretical saturation of data.
Data collection: We analysed case records from all
agencies, interviewed professionals and invited parents
to complete the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale
(HADS) and questionnaires or in-depth interviews.
Results: Nearly all bereaved parents were able to
understand the cause of death and several SIDS
parents had a good understanding of the relevant
modifiable risk factors even when these related directly
to their actions. Paediatricians worried that discussing
risk factors with parents would result in parental
self-blame and some deliberately avoided these
discussions. Over half the families did not mention
blame or blamed no one. The cause of death of the
infants of these families varied. 3/21 mothers
expressed overwhelming feelings of self-blame and had
clinically significant scores on HADS.
Conclusions: Bereaved parents want detailed
information about their child’s death. Our study
suggests parents want health professionals to explain
the role of risk factors in SIDS. We found no evidence
that sharing this information is a direct cause of
parental self-blame.
INTRODUCTION
The sudden death of an infant is one of the
most devastating events that can happen to
parents and the pain is still felt many years
later.1 Only a minority of sudden unexpected
death in infancy (SUDI) cases have a com-
plete medical explanation for death; most
remain unexplained and are often labelled
as sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS),
which is a diagnostic term used when despite
detailed investigation no cause for death can
be
determined.2
Bereaved
parents
often
blame themselves and feel guilty for these
deaths due to the lack of explanation for
them3–6 but self-blame is also a common
feature of grief.7 Prior to our current under-
standing of SIDS, recommended practice for
healthcare professionals was to reassure SIDS
parents that their actions played no role in
the death as SIDS was neither predictable
nor preventable; it was perceived this would
help alleviate the parents’ feelings of self-
blame.8 9 SIDS, however, can be understood
as a complex interplay between intrinsic vul-
nerability, a critical period of homoeostatic
development, and exogenous stressors.10 11
Strengths and limitations of this study
▪ This is a unique study because it looks at
parents’ explanations of causes of death within the
context of new, detailed child death investigations.
▪ This study allowed for a detailed understanding of
cases due to the triangulation of data from parental
interviews, professional interviews, questionnaires
and case records.
▪ The use of a validated mental health screening tool
(Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale, HADS)
enabled the role of anxiety and depression to be
considered in relation to parental self-blame.
▪ The study was limited by low recruitment, but
despite this, a wide diversity of parental and pro-
fessional experiences were captured.
Garstang J, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011323. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011323
1
Open Access
Research
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011323 on 19 May 2016. Downloaded from 
 The exact pathophysiological pathways leading to SIDS
and how identified exogenous stressors lead to death
remain unknown, but there is extremely strong epi-
demiological evidence around these stressors. A recent
review12 highlighted the major modifiable risk factors
for SIDS as non-supine sleeping, parental smoking, head
covering, use of soft bedding and co-sleeping on a sofa
or with parents who have consumed alcohol or smoke.
With this knowledge, SIDS could be considered to be
partly related to parental actions and choices; therefore,
the previous explanations and reassurances given to
parents may no longer be appropriate.
In many countries, including the UK, there are now
detailed
investigations
following
unexpected
child
deaths aiming to learn the full cause, including modifi-
able risk factors, for all deaths.13 In the UK, this is
known as the joint agency approach ( JAA) or ‘rapid
response’. As part of this approach, healthcare profes-
sionals are expected to share all information about the
death with bereaved families.14 Previous research has
shown the importance for parents of understanding the
reasons why their child died after a sudden child
death,15 but there has been only very limited research
on how parents understand modifiable risk factors after
a SIDS death. One study of SIDS in families with sub-
stance abuse highlighted that modifiable risk factors can
be interpreted as causal mechanisms increasing parental
feelings of guilt.16 Given that previous practice was to
reassure parents to prevent self-blame, there is the possi-
bility that sharing detailed information with parents
could be harmful, potentially inducing self-blame and
guilt which are associated with more severe and pro-
longed grief reactions.7 17
We studied bereaved parents’ understanding of why
their infant died and their reactions to this, along with
professionals’ experiences, as part of a mixed-methods
evaluation of the new UK JAA to investigating SUDI.
This enabled us to learn of parents’ and professionals’
experiences in the new context of sharing information
for SIDS as well as for medical causes of SUDI.
The research questions were:
How do bereaved parents understand the cause of
death and risk factors identified during detailed investi-
gation following a sudden unexpected infant death?
What is the association between bereaved parents’
mental health and their understanding of cause of
death and risk factors following a sudden unexpected
infant death?
What
are
healthcare
professionals’
experiences
of
sharing such information with families?
METHODS
Inclusion and exclusion criteria
SUDI is defined as the death of an infant which was not
anticipated as a significant possibility 24 h before the
death or where there was a similarly unexpected collapse
leading to or precipitating the events which led to the
death.18 Parents of SUDI cases were eligible for the
study regardless of the final cause of death providing
that infants had lived and died in the counties of
Herefordshire, Shropshire, Staffordshire, Warwickshire,
West Midlands and Worcestershire; were aged between
1 week
and
1 year
at
death;
and
died
between
1
September 2010 and 31 August 2013. The JAA investiga-
tion had to be completed prior to contacting parents;
cases with ongoing criminal investigations were excluded.
Identification and recruitment of cases
We were notified of all eligible SUDI cases by the depart-
ments of pathology at Birmingham Women’s Hospital
and Birmingham Children’s Hospital; all SUDI post-
mortem examinations for the region are performed at
these centres. We then contacted the local paediatrician
responsible for managing the JAA investigation for
each case and asked them to inform families of the
study, or to inform us of the reasons if this was not pos-
sible. This took place during follow-up appointments
after the JAA investigations had concluded and was
usually 6–12 months after the death. Interested parents
agreed for their contact details to be passed to the lead
author who telephoned them with further information.
Data collection
In-depth parental interviews and questionnaires
Our original intention had been to conduct a survey of
parents’ experiences of JAA investigations following
SUDI by means of a face-to-face structured interview,
and seek parents’ permission for us to access case
records from all agencies relating to their JAA. The
survey results were to be used for purposive sampling for
in-depth
interviews
with
parents
and
professionals.
However, due to difficulties with recruitment, and many
parents’ desire to give full accounts of their experiences,
10 months into the study we revised this method and
offered all subsequent parents a choice of having an
initial in-depth interview or completing a postal ques-
tionnaire, in addition to case record analysis. We asked
all parents who had completed an interview or question-
naire to take part in a follow-up interview around 2 years
after the death; due to time constraints, this was only
possible for cases dying in the first 2 years of the study.
The lead author visited parents at home (or location
of their choice) to conduct the in-depth interview or
structured questionnaire-based interviews; these lasted
between 1 and 4 h. The lead author was a female
paediatrician experienced in JAA investigations and a
PhD student, this was explained to participants. In-depth
interviews were audio-recorded and transcribed in full,
field notes were made for all interviews. The field notes
detailed parents’ demeanour, the location of the inter-
view, aspects of the interview parents found difficult to
answer, and presence of other family members. Both
in-depth
interviews
and
questionnaires
covered
the
parents’ experiences of the JAA investigation from the
time they found their lifeless baby until the final contact
2
Garstang J, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011323. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011323
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011323 on 19 May 2016. Downloaded from 
 with professionals concerning the death. Parents were
asked to describe the events leading up to the death; to
explain their understanding of why their baby died, this
included a description of the cause of death as well as
whether parents thought that they had understood this
cause; how the cause of death had been explained to
them; and their health after the death. Parents were not
specifically asked about risk factors but these often arose
as part of the conversation concerning the cause of
death. The follow-up interview covered the same issues,
and parents were asked if they had had any further
thoughts about the death or the JAA since the first inter-
view. The postal questionnaire covered an identical
range of topics as the questionnaire-based interview, but
parents gave less detailed answers.
The interviewer had no knowledge of any details per-
taining to cases prior to interviewing parents, so she
could learn of parents’ accounts and their explanation
of the cause of death without preconceptions. However,
by the time of follow-up interviews, the interviewer had
studied case records, so was aware of causes and risk
factors for deaths and could sensitively probe parents
about these if necessary. Parents were not specifically
asked about issues of blame, but this topic frequently
arose spontaneously during both initial and follow-up
interviews particularly when parents explained about
sleep situations, causes of death and explanations of risk
factors by professionals.
Assessment of parental mental health
As mental health problems are common following the
death of an infant,19 potentially affecting the parents’
perception of events, and negative experiences of investi-
gations following child death may be associated with sub-
sequent mental health problems, we asked all parents to
complete the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale
(HADS). This consists of seven questions relating to
depression and seven to anxiety. In both domains, a
score of 8–10 is of borderline significance and a score of
more than 11 is considered clinically significant; the
maximum score is 21.20
In-depth professional interviews
For the cases where parents had initial in-depth inter-
views, the lead author aimed to interview the police offi-
cers, paediatricians, specialist nurses and social workers
who had taken part in the JAA investigation; these were
conducted after the parental interviews. The profes-
sional interviews took place either in person or by tele-
phone; they were audio-recorded and transcribed in full.
Interviews lasted between 20 min and 1 h. Professionals
had access to the case records, so they did not have to
rely on recall alone but usually they reported that they
vividly remembered the case. Professionals were asked
about their experiences of JAA investigations and about
discussions regarding cause or risk factors for death
relating both to the recruited case and more generally.
Case records
We studied the coroner’s inquisition, postmortem exam-
ination report, JAA final case discussion (FCD) notes
and a summary of the Child Death Overview Panel
review (form C) for each case for details of cause of
death and for any mention of risk factors for SIDS cases.
Data were extracted from these using standard profor-
mae to ensure the same information was collected in
each case.
Social deprivation scores
We obtained the Income Deprivation Affecting Children
Index (IDACI)21 scores and ranks for all SUDI cases
regardless or recruitment status; these were provided for
us by the pathology department without disclosing any
patient identifying information. This allowed us to
compare social deprivation between recruited and non-
recruited cases, so that we could assess if the recruited
sample was representative of SUDI cases more generally.
Data analysis
We split the cases into two different groups: one for
medically explained deaths and the other for SIDS; this
allowed us to compare parental understanding and
other themes between the two groups.
Questionnaire and interview data analysis
The qualitative data consisted of free-text comments
from questionnaires, in-depth interview transcripts and
field notes; we analysed these data using a Framework
Approach22
with
NVIVO
10
software.
Framework
Approach was developed for policy evaluations; it is
grounded in the original accounts of the participants of
research, is a systematic process and allows for within-
case and between-case analyses. We checked all tran-
scripts for accuracy with the audio-recording. We then
coded all in-depth interview data, field notes and free-
text comments from questionnaires. The codes were not
determined in advanced but developed as transcripts
were coded. After coding 10 parental interviews, the
codes were summarised and discussed with the whole
research team (all authors of this paper) and refined or
merged when needed. The coding was also reviewed
with the project steering group consisting of SUDI pro-
fessionals from all agencies and bereaved parents. The
coding structure was then applied to the professional
interviews. Data analysis started while data collection was
ongoing.
The codes were finally inductively categorised into
three main themes: understanding the cause of death,
experiences of the JAA and well-being (the latter two
are reported elsewhere). Within the theme understand-
ing the cause of death, there were four subthemes:
needing answers, cause of death, understanding risk
factors and blame. Data relating to parental blame was
categorised
as
self-blame,
blaming
others,
feeling
blamed and blaming no-one. We returned to the data to
look at parental interview transcripts as a whole for any
Garstang J, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011323. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011323
3
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011323 on 19 May 2016. Downloaded from 
 themes that were present throughout each interview. We
identified parental interviews where overwhelming par-
ental self-blame was apparent.
We managed the data from follow-up interviews identi-
cally to the data from initial interviews. The parents’
description of causes for death and risk factors was very
similar at both time points, and no additional codes
were needed when analysing the data from follow-up
interviews.
Statistical analysis
Using SPSS, we performed independent t tests compar-
ing IDACI scores and ranks for recruited and non-
recruited cases. We also performed independent t tests
comparing HADS between parents who expressed high
levels of self-blame for the death and those who did not.
Integration of data
We created a framework matrix using NVIVO for each
case with data for each code relating to understanding
the cause of death from the parental interview or ques-
tionnaire, professionals’ interviews, case records, and
with the HADS. The parents’ descriptions of the cause
of death were compared with the cause of death as
given by the JAA FCD. We took the cause of death from
the FCD to be the most comprehensive as it is the con-
sensus of professional opinion taking into account find-
ings from reviewing the scene of death, infant medical
and social histories, and postmortem examinations. We
categorised any death remaining unexplained at FCD as
SIDS.
Ethical issues
We had safeguards in place to protect the bereaved fam-
ilies from feeling pressured to participate. The initial
contact was made through local paediatricians. If parents
agreed to be contacted about the study, there was a
2-week ‘cooling-off’ period before the research team tele-
phoned. Similarly, interview dates were arranged at least
2 weeks ahead to avoid rushing parents into decisions
about participation.
At the start of interviews, parents were told that they
could stop the interview or withdraw from the study at
any point during the interview or subsequently. At the
end of the interview, parents were given an information
sheet with details of the Lullaby Trust, a support organ-
isation for bereaved parents, so they could access these
services if needed. In some instances, parents appeared
to have significant mental health issues; in these cases,
parents were encouraged to contact their general practi-
tioner. As part of the informed consent process, parents
were told that if they disclosed information that could
lead to concerns about child abuse further action would
need to be taken including possibly referring the matter
to police and social care. Such action was taken with one
family.
RESULTS
Recruitment and participants
There were 113 SUDI cases, 9 were excluded due to
ongoing investigations leaving 104 eligible SUDI cases of
which 23 (22%) were recruited to the study. In 32
(28%) cases, paediatricians did not inform parents of
the study; the reasons for this are largely unknown due
to these paediatricians not responding to our emails or
telephone calls, but some expressed worries about dis-
tressing families further by mentioning the study. In 29
(26%) cases, parents were asked but declined to partici-
pate, and in 20 (18%) cases, parents did not attend
follow-up appointments with paediatricians. There was
no significant difference in social deprivation between
recruited and non-recruited cases using the IDACI21
(data were only available for 88/90 non-recruited cases);
these are shown in table 1.
The results in this paper are based on the 21/23
recruited families having interviews or completing ques-
tionnaires; those opting for case note analysis alone were
excluded from this part of the study. The details of their
participation are shown in table 2.
Interviews took place a mean of 27 weeks (range 20–
44 weeks)
after
the
death
for
structured
interviews,
50 weeks (range 36–80 weeks) for in-depth interviews and
26 months (range 24–28 months) for follow-up interviews.
In-depth interviews with professionals were held in
12/14 cases that had initial in-depth interviews; these
involved 14 police officers, 10 paediatricians, two special-
ist nurses and two social workers. (One police officer
and two paediatricians were interviewed twice about two
separate cases.) In the remaining two cases, no relevant
professional could be traced due to retirements and
relocations.
We obtained theoretical saturation of data meaning
that no new data were emerging during interviews that
were relevant to the issues under investigation;23 these
Table 1
Comparison of Income Deprivation Affecting Children Index (IDACI) scores and ranks between recruited and
non-recruited sudden unexpected death in infancy cases
Recruited cases
N=23
Non-recruited cases
N=88
Independent t test
Mean (95% CI) IDACI score
0.314 (0.232 to 0.395)
0.367 (0.328 to 0.406)
t (109)=−1.21 p=0.229
Median IDACI rank
6702
5134
t (109)=0.654 p=0.514
Mean (95% CI) IDACI rank
9206 (5617 to 12 796)
8012 (6419 to 9605)
4
Garstang J, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011323. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011323
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011323 on 19 May 2016. Downloaded from 
 issues were of self-blame and parents needing to know
the cause of death. These themes were not identified in
advance but emerged during the data analysis as topics of
importance to the parents. Three further families were
interviewed after theoretical saturation was obtained; no
new themes emerged from these interviews.
The term ‘parents’ is used for either mothers or
fathers. Within couples, parents tended to have similar
explanations for the death and understanding of risk
factors, but where findings are gender-specific, the
terms ‘mother’ or ‘father’ are used instead. Quotes are
not attributed to individual cases to preserve anonymity.
Description of cases
The mean age at death of recruited cases was 100 days
(95% CI 69 to 131 days). In 14 cases, the death
remained unexplained and was categorised as SIDS.
Seven deaths were due to fully explained medical causes
such as previously undetected congenital heart disease
or overwhelming infection.
Risk factors
Multiple modifiable risk factors were recorded in case
records for all but one SIDS death; the frequency of the
most common risk factors identified is shown in figure 1.
Five SIDS infants were recorded as being intrinsically
vulnerable due to multiple birth, prematurity, family
history or congenital anomalies.
KEY FINDINGS
Parents have a strong need to know the cause of death
The parents’ need to understand why their baby died
came across very strongly in most interviews despite
parents not being asked specifically about this. This was
the case for explained deaths and SIDS (quote 3.1). There
was usually a wait of at least 4 months for the postmortem
examination results due to histology and metabolic tests;
parents often became increasingly anxious about the cause
of death during this time (quote 3.2). Parents were
relieved if there was a medical explanation for the death
and professionals commented on the comfort and benefit
this brought to parents (quote 3.3). Conversely, some SIDS
parents felt cheated by the lack of complete explanation
for their infants’ deaths increasing their distress (quote
3.4). Example quotes are shown in table 3.
Parents’ explanation for medical causes of death
Parents of six infants with medical causes for death felt
they understood the cause and gave descriptions which
closely matched the causes of death in the FCD docu-
ments. One mother said that she did not understand the
cause of death at all and did not attempt to describe it.
Parents’ explanation for SIDS
Parents of eight SIDS infants gave accounts that showed
that they grasped the concept that deaths could be fully
investigated but no cause of death established (quote 4.1).
Some parents also described vividly how they thought their
babies had died (quote 4.2); these lay accounts fit well with
Table 2
Details of participating families
SIDS
Medically
explained
deaths
Total SUDI
cases
Mothers and fathers
participating jointly
Mothers
participating
alone*
Initial in-depth interview only
8
3
11
6
5†
Structured questionnaire-based
interview only
2
1
3
2
1
Postal questionnaire only
0
1
1
1
0
Structured questionnaire-based
interview and in-depth follow-up
interview
3
1
4
3
1
Initial and follow-up in-depth
interviews
1
1
2
1
1
Total
14
7
21
13
8
*No fathers participated alone.
†One mother was supported by her own mother and one by a friend for the interview.
SIDS, sudden infant death syndrome; SUDI, sudden unexpected death in infancy.
Figure 1
Frequency of risk factors in sudden infant death
syndrome infants.
Garstang J, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011323. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011323
5
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011323 on 19 May 2016. Downloaded from 
 current physiological understandings of SIDS.24 Others
still questioned how SIDS could be a natural process
(quote 4.3) despite having received detailed explanations
of SIDS from paediatricians. Two SIDS families had some
comprehension of the concept of unexplained deaths but
struggled with the idea that there could be pathological
findings which were insufficient to explain the death
(quote 4.4). Parents of the four remaining SIDS infants
felt they had understood the cause of death; however, their
explanations differed significantly from those in the FCD
documents. One mother explained that her baby had died
of ‘bronchitis’ when the cause from FCD was of SIDS with
minor lung pathology. The three other cases overlap sig-
nificantly with understanding modifiable risk factors as
these parents made no mention of unsafe sleep environ-
ments in their explanations; these cases will be described
in the next section. Example quotes are shown in table 4.
SIDS parents’ understanding of modifiable risk factors
The parents of six SIDS infants appeared to understand
the relevance of risk factors for their infants’ deaths.
These parents talked openly about the unsafe sleep
environments or parental smoking that their babies had
been exposed to (quote 5.1) or had discussed these with
health professionals (quote 5.2). One parent even
described their child’s death using the triple risk hypoth-
esis10 (quote 5.3). For other parents, it was clear that the
original discussion of risk factors with the paediatrician
had been difficult, and it was similarly difficult for them
to discuss these during the interview. The dilemma for
parents is that by acknowledging modifiable risk factors
for the death, parents are acknowledging that, had they
made different choices, their babies may not have died;
thus, this understanding may increase the parents’ pain
(quote 5.4). Some parents’ description of the role of
Table 3
Parental quotes on understanding the cause of death
Theme
Reference
number
Quote
Needing to know cause of
death
3.1
Yes, I suppose I felt it was quite important really to hear what the findings
were really because it was unexpected, she was such a healthy girl and it
was such a shock…I really wanted to know and that was all really I guess.
(father, SIDS case)
Anxiety while waiting for
results
3.2
That’s what you…you turn it on yourself when you don’t hear anything, then
you make things up in your head. ‘It must have been this, it must have been
this, it must have been this’…because you don’t know anything…Which
leaves me to sit there wondering what it was and thinking ‘we don’t know
anything about the toxicology’ and I’m thinking ‘how could you possibly have
poisoned…how have you poisoned him?’ Well you don’t know, until that
comes back, you don’t know, and that was weeks. (mother, SIDS case)
Comfort from knowing the
cause of death
3.3
…for me that was amazing, seeing her [the mother] the week after
[explaining the cause of death] because she was just a totally different
woman. This was a woman that didn’t go outside, never smiled and she was
up, she was dressed, she was, you know, smiling…a totally, totally different
woman from when we first saw her, it was just amazing, just the results of
that just changed her completely. (nurse, medically explained death)
Distress at no explanation
for the death
3.4
It’s just, not having an answer; I don’t think it’s fair like…why? (mother, SIDS
case)
SIDS, sudden infant death syndrome.
Table 4
Quotes concerning parental understanding of cause and risk factors for death
Theme
Reference
number
Quote
Understanding SIDS
4.1
…that was one of the things I asked the paediatrician, I said ‘what is it?’ and
she said ‘that’s the whole point, we don’t know’. (mother, SIDS case)
4.2
…something in his brain…he’d stopped breathing and his brain wasn’t
developed enough to sort of say…‘baby, you’re not breathing, breathe son’.
(father, SIDS case)
How can SIDS be
natural?
4.3
I know they are saying natural causes but what’s natural about a healthy
person dying? (mother, SIDS case)
Incomplete explanations
for death
4.4
The paediatrician said that the baby had had some bleeding and not just at the
time of death,…she’d had previous bleeding that had resolved itself…And yet
he said the people who did the autopsy couldn’t see how that would have
caused her to die. (mother, SIDS case)
SIDS, sudden infant death syndrome.
6
Garstang J, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011323. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011323
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011323 on 19 May 2016. Downloaded from 
 risk factors varied throughout the interview; at times
accepting risk factors as relevant and at others downplay-
ing them by portraying deaths as inevitable, deeming
risk factors irrelevant (quote 5.5). This fluctuation in
acceptance could be seen as a way of coping with the
pain of realising that the death may have been prevent-
able. The parents of three SIDS infants made no
mention of relevant risk factors despite evidence of dis-
cussions about these between them and paediatricians.
For example, a parent said that their baby had died of
‘straightforward SIDS’ which was not further elaborated
although the case records and professional interviews
detailed their explanations to the parent of the role that
alcohol, drug consumption and co-sleeping may have
played in the death. It was not clear from the interviews
whether the parents were minimising the significance of
the risk factors, denying them completely to protect
themselves from the reality of the knowledge, or that
they simply did not understand despite the explanations
given to them. These parents only had initial interviews,
so the interviewer had no access to case records before-
hand, so was unable to discuss with the parent how they
had reached their own explanations.
Paediatricians and specialist nurses were asked during
their interviews about their explanation of risk factors to
parents. Five paediatricians and one specialist nurse
commented that they found this very difficult and
worried that it would lead to the parents self-blaming.
Two paediatricians said that they avoiding discussing risk
factors because of the risk of self-blame (quote 5.6) or
that these discussions should be left until the next preg-
nancy and managed by specialist services for families
with infants born following SIDS. Example quotes for
this theme are in table 5.
Blame
Parents were not asked specifically about blame during
interviews, but this topic often came up spontaneously.
We identified four different categories of blame relating
to parents: self-blame, blaming others, feeling blamed
and blaming no-one. The category of blame seemed
unrelated to cause of death (medically explained or
SIDS) and of SIDS parents’ understanding of modifiable
risk factors. Many parents expressed more than one cat-
egory of blame. Parents concurred with their expressions
of blame with the notable exception of self-blame which
occurred nearly always in mothers.
Six mothers and one father (relating to six cases) said
that they blamed themselves for the death either par-
tially or completely; all six mothers described feeling
Table 5
Quotes concerning understanding risk factors
Theme
Reference
number
Quote
Understanding risk factors
5.1
If they say that nine out of ten cot deaths are in families where family
members smoke, whether you do it around the baby or not…But I was
thinking to myself ‘I can’t see how that makes any difference’ and I
mean, I fell asleep with him by accident that night when it happened
but the amount of times I’d put him in bed with me…(mother, SIDS
case)
5.2
She clearly understands and I mean she did say to me when she was
pregnant with the [next] baby…she said ‘I’m going to be really, really,
really clear this time, that this baby will be sleeping in their own crib
and that as much as I might be tempted, I will not be co-sleeping’.
(nurse, SIDS case)
5.3
Basically that…pretty much what that Prof Kinney says, he must have
been a vulnerable baby put into an unsafe environment. (mother,
SIDS case)
Pain of acknowledging actions
5.4
Yes because my wife sort of listened to it [the paediatrician talking
about risk factors] and thought ‘well he was in our bed at the time
when he died and should I have put him in there…had I put him in his
cot, would things have turned out differently?’ (father, SIDS case)
Understanding and downplaying
5.5
In a way it’s made me open my eyes a lot more as well because you
don’t realise what it could do like with co-sleeping but I weren’t
actually right next to him like I usually…I can understand what they
are saying about it…obviously he didn’t want me to wake up next to
him, he knew [he was going to die]. That’s how I’ve got to look at it.
(mother, SIDS case)[baby found in co-sleeping situation in corner of
small sofa with head covered by bedding, baby normally slept next to
mother on this sofa]
Fear of parents self-blaming when
risk factors discussed
5.6
…So once the death has happened, we don’t…I don’t think we dwell
on the risk factors because I think, that’s right, we’re not trying…we
don’t want to apportion blame to parents. (paediatrician, SIDS case)
SIDS, sudden infant death syndrome.
Garstang J, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011323. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011323
7
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011323 on 19 May 2016. Downloaded from 
 guilty because their baby had died; they had failed in
their role as a mother (quote 7.1); these feelings of guilt
did not relate to the cause of death (quote 7.2). Three
of these cases were of SIDS in unsafe sleep environ-
ments, and three were medically explained deaths which
were unpreventable.
Three mothers said they blamed themselves com-
pletely for the death and had feelings of overwhelming
guilt; two of the infants died of medical causes and one
of SIDS. Notably, all three mothers scored highly for
anxiety and depression on HADS with all scores in the
clinically significant range; none of the other mothers
had clinically significant scores, these are shown in table 6.
In three cases (two SIDS, one medical death), the
parents felt blamed by the professionals for the death.
Regarding the SIDS cases, one mother felt very blamed
by the paediatrician who explained about the unsafe
sleep situation in which the infant had died. However, at
a follow-up interview 2 years later, the mother no longer
felt blamed and could barely recall her animosity
towards the paediatrician. Another SIDS mother felt
blamed by the police while she was in the emergency
department; maternal alcohol consumption and illicit
drug use may have been implicated in the death but the
mother did not refer to this. The parents of an infant
dying of a medical condition felt blamed by the doctors
in the emergency department; analysis of their account
suggests that poor communication may have been the
cause for this.
The parents of five infants (two SIDS, three medical
deaths) blamed other people for the deaths; for some,
this may have been a deflection from acknowledging
their own actions. For example, one couple spoke at
length about a perceived lack of care from their general
practitioner a few days prior to the death (an examin-
ation of the case record did not suggest any lack of
care) but in the same interview also described their own
inaction in the face of the baby’s deteriorating condi-
tion. However, in other cases, parental blame seems justi-
fied to some extent; for example, one infant died shortly
after discharge home from hospital despite having had a
witnessed unexplained respiratory arrest only a few days
previously. Conversely, other parents did not seek to
blame others when they could have had good reason to
do so; these parents recalled inappropriate advice given
to them by healthcare staff which may have been a
factor in the death (quote 7.3).
In six cases, parents made no mention of blame at all,
and in six other cases, parents explained that they
blamed no-one for the death; again there was no rela-
tionship with the cause of death or parental understand-
ing of modifiable risk factors. Some mothers had
initially blamed themselves for the death, but as time
passed no longer did so. In other cases where modifi-
able risk factors were relevant, parents accepted respon-
sibility for their choice of actions but not blame; viewing
this as a negative option (quote 7.4). However, other
SIDS parents suggested that despite the presence of
modifiable risk factors, death could not have been pre-
vented or that their actions did not have a bearing on
the death; they interpreted the label of SIDS as an abso-
lution, so that there could be no blame attributed
(quote 7.5). In these cases, a lack of self-blame may be
part of a self-protection mechanism and could almost be
a denial of the issues surrounding the death. Example
quotes for blame are in table 7.
DISCUSSION
Our results suggest that most parents really want to
know why their baby died; not knowing why their baby
died may cause further distress to parents, whether this
is due to long waits for the results of postmortem exami-
nations or because deaths remain unexplained. An
unexplained death by its nature is an unpredictable
event rendering the parents powerless to prevent future
tragedies, thus increasing the anxiety and grief;25 having
as much information as possible should help parents to
emotionally accept and make sense of the death to
themselves. In this study, most SIDS parents seemed to
understand the concept that these deaths remain unex-
plained after full investigations and that modifiable risk
factors may play a role; however, paediatricians were
sometimes reluctant to share this information with
parents, fearing it will lead them to blame themselves.
Self-blame was common in mothers following both med-
ically explained deaths and SIDS; however, when over-
whelming, it appeared to be associated with clinically
significant anxiety and depression. Self-blame was not
associated with the cause of death, presence of modifi-
able risk factors or parental understanding of these.
This study allowed for a detailed understanding of
cases due to the triangulation of data within each case
from
parental
interviews,
professional
interviews,
Table 6
Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) scores of self-blaming and non-self-blaming mothers
Mean (95% CI) HADS
anxiety score
Independent t test for
HADS anxiety score
Mean (95% CI) HADS
depression score
Independent t test
for HADS
depression score
Overwhelming
self-blame (n=3)
17.0 (14.5 to 19.5)
t (19)=−3.91, p<0.001
18.3 (15.5 to 21.2)
t (19)=−3.68, p<0.002
Moderate or no
self-blame (n=18)
9.9 (8.4 to 11.5)
8.8 (6.6 to 11.0)
8
Garstang J, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011323. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011323
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011323 on 19 May 2016. Downloaded from 
 questionnaires and case records from every agency. This
was vital to our study of SIDS parents’ understanding of
risk factors. For example, some SIDS parents made no
mention of risk factors at interview, and without access
to these other data sources, we would not have known
whether professionals had discussed risk factors with
them or not. We obtained more detailed data from
in-depth interviews compared with questionnaires par-
ticularly concerning issues of blame, but the parents’
need to know why their baby died and their understand-
ing of the cause of death came across strongly in ques-
tionnaires and in-depth interviews. As with all qualitative
research, limitations include that few people participate,
results may be highly subjective, and therefore difficult
to generalise. We did indeed struggle to recruit bereaved
families. However, despite the limited recruitment, we
captured a wide diversity of parental and professional
experiences, and the recruited cases were from socially
diverse backgrounds with similar levels of social depriv-
ation when compared with all SUDI cases in the region.
Given the diversity of experiences, theoretical saturation
of data and a rigorous approach to data analysis, the
findings of this study are likely to be relevant to the man-
agement of sudden infant deaths in other locations with
similar detailed investigative processes and cultural back-
grounds. Although the HADS scores were significantly
different between mothers exhibiting overwhelming self-
blame and mothers who did not, the sample size was
small, thus limiting the reliability of this finding which
will need confirmation from a larger study. We inter-
viewed many parents together as couples; these parents
did not have the opportunity to give their own individual
account. It is possible that some parents (particularly
fathers) may not have fully shared their feelings with us
trying to protect their partners from further distress or
that only the dominant parent’s view was voiced.
This is a unique study because it looks at parents’
explanations of causes of death within the context of
new, detailed child death investigations and sharing of
information about modifiable factors in deaths with
parents. Although there have been other evaluations of
these child death investigations,26 27 to date there has
been only limited research on parental experiences of
these; a recent US study found that following detailed
medicolegal infant death investigations, 29% of families
never received any information on the cause of death,
and for most of those who did so, this was by telephone
only.28 Previous studies of parental guilt following infant
death were conducted prior to knowledge of risk factors
for SIDS when professional practice was typically to
inform parents that their actions played no role in the
death;5 6 17 these findings may be less valid with current
understanding of SIDS. Our findings that parents want
full information about the death concur with a recent
systematic review of bereaved parents’ wishes.15
Ideally, SIDS parents should be informed of and
helped
to
understand
the
relevant
modifiable
risk
factors; without this, their explanation for the death is
incomplete. As our understanding of SIDS has changed,
we
should
consider
changing
our
explanations
to
parents; the view that we should keep potentially upset-
ting information from parents to avoid them self-
blaming may risk greater harm. Parents may find out
this information for themselves and have no supportive
professional to discuss it with; or they may not learn of
modifiable risk factors at all and expose subsequently
born children to the same risks. Arguably, these discus-
sions could be left for specialist support services for sub-
sequently born infants; however, not all families will
choose to partake in such services, and in the UK Care
of Next Infant (CONI) scheme, there have been several
deaths in unsafe sleep environments reported.29
Sharing such information on extrinsic risk factors for
SIDS is based on the assumption that these are modifi-
able but this is not necessarily so. Parental actions such
as alcohol consumption or smoking are often rooted in
Table 7
Parental quotes on blame
Theme
Reference
number
Quote
Maternal blame
7.1
At this point I didn’t have any idea how long I’d been asleep and then feeling this
overwhelming guilt…I’ve slept for hours and she’s just died. (mother, medically
explained death)
7.2
I blame myself, if I hadn’t have gone back to work, he’d be fine. (mother, medically
explained death)
Not blaming others
7.3
We’re not trying to put fault on anybody, it could be anything still but they should
have clear guidelines, shouldn’t they? (father, SIDS case)
Responsibility not
blame
7.4
And I could choose to let myself feel very guilty and that in a sense would kill your
spirit…I’m happy to accept that I have some responsibility in his death and that’s a
different thing to being guilty. (mother, SIDS case)
Absolution of SIDS
7.5
We’ve both always said we were quite glad when it came back that it was Sudden
Infant Death…because it’s been Sudden Infant Death, we sort of go ‘well we
couldn’t have done anything, if it was going to happen, it was going to happen…
(father, SIDS case)
SIDS, sudden infant death syndrome.
Garstang J, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011323. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011323
9
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011323 on 19 May 2016. Downloaded from 
 social deprivation so are less amenable to change; as illu-
strated by data from New Zealand where SIDS rates
remains much higher in the socially deprived Māori
population than in those of European descent despite
public health campaigns.30 Parental behaviours such as
co-sleeping are often based on long-standing cultural
practices, facilitating breast feeding as well as enhancing
parental and infant sleep; co-sleeping may in some cases
be an entrenched behaviour and not easily change-
able.31 Given that SIDS is a rare event, mothers may
accept the risks of unsafe sleep, if this results in better
quality sleep for themselves and their babies.32 In our
study, some mothers unintentionally co-slept on sofas;
these deaths could be seen as avoidable parenting errors
or the inevitable consequence of exhausted, unsupported
mothers. We should acknowledge that risk factors may not
be easily modifiable, but this should not stop us sharing
the information with parents, to help them understand
more about why their child died and to assist them in
making informed choices with subsequent infants.
Although we would aim to share full information on
potentially
modifiable
risk
factors
for
SIDS
with
bereaved parents, we do not want them to blame them-
selves; the parents’ actions were carried out with no
intention of causing harm. Some self-blame may occur
with detailed understanding of deaths; this is unsurpris-
ing given that public perception is that most accidents
are preventable.33 Overwhelming maternal self-blame in
this study did not appear to be related to the cause of
death or understanding of risk factors but may have
been related instead to symptomatic anxiety and depres-
sion. Self-blame can be a normal part of grieving after
infant death: by blaming oneself for the death, it stops
being a random, unexplained event, and can be con-
trolled, giving a sense of order; this situation may be
easier to live with.25 In contrast, when blaming other
persons, this is more of a value judgement: either follow-
ing a logical stepwise process34 or following constant
re-evaluations in the light of new evidence.35 A high
level of self-blame in bereaved adults is associated with
higher levels of depression, more severe grief reactions
and slower recovery from grief.7 A similar association
between self-blame, anxiety and depression has also
been seen in mothers of stillborn infants.36 Self-blame
and increased intensity of grieving following perinatal
death also relate to some extent to pre-existing personal-
ity traits.37 38 Our results suggest that parents want to
know why their infants died and that they can under-
stand the role of risk factors in SIDS. Our findings
should provide reassurance that sharing of detailed
information by healthcare professionals is what parents
want. We found no evidence that sharing this informa-
tion is a direct cause of parental self-blame.
Author affiliations
1Division of Mental Health and Wellbeing, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK
2Coventry and Warwickshire Partnership NHS Trust, Coventry, UK
3Division of Health Science, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK
Contributors The study was designed by all the authors. JG collected all data,
conducted the analyses and wrote the initial report. FG and PS advised on
study progress and data analysis. All authors commented on and approved
the final version of the manuscript, have a copy of the manuscript and share
responsibility for the results.
Funding This study forms part of JG’s doctoral thesis and was funded by the
National Institute of Health Research (NIHR) as a NIHR Doctoral Fellowship
(DRF—2010-03-045).
Competing interests JG had financial support from NIHR for the submitted
work.
Ethics approval The study received ethical approval from Solihull NHS
Research Ethics Committee 12/WM/0211 and 10/H/1206/30.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Data sharing statement No additional data are available.
Open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY 4.0) license, which
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt and build upon this work, for
commercial use, provided the original work is properly cited. See: http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
REFERENCES
1.
Dyregrov A, Dyregrov K. Long-term impact of sudden infant death:
a 12- to 15-year follow-up. Death Stud 1999;23:635–61.
2.
Krous HF, Beckwith JB, Byard RW, et al. Sudden infant death
syndrome and unclassified sudden infant deaths: a definitional and
diagnostic approach. Pediatrics 2004;114:234–8.
3.
Limerick S. Family and health-professional interactions. Ann N Y
Acad Sci 1988;533:145–54.
4.
Carlson JA. The psychologic effects of sudden infant death
syndrome on parents. J Pediatr Health Care 1993;7:77–81.
5.
Dyregrov A. Parental reactions to the loss of an infant child: a
review. Scand J Psychol 1990;31:266–80.
6.
Ostfeld BM, Ryan T, Hiatt M, et al. Maternal grief after sudden infant
death syndrome. J Dev Behav Pediatr 1993;14:156–62.
7.
Stroebe M, Stroebe W, Schoot RV, et al. Guilt in bereavement: the
role of self-blame and regret in coping with loss. PLoS ONE 2014;9:
e96606.
8.
Kotsubo CZ. Helping families survive S.I.D.S. Nursing
1983;13:94–6.
9.
McClain ME, Shaefer SJ. Supporting families after sudden infant
death. J Psychosoc Nurs Ment Health Serv 1996;34:30–4.
10.
Filiano JJ, Kinney HC. A perspective on neuropathologic findings in
victims of the sudden infant death syndrome: the triple-risk model.
Biol Neonate 1994;65:194–7.
11.
Kinney HC, Thach BT. The sudden infant death syndrome. N Engl J
Med 2009;361:795–805.
12.
Horne RS, Hauck FR, Moon RY. Sudden infant death syndrome and
advice for safe sleeping. BMJ 2015;350:h1989.
13.
Fraser J, Sidebotham P, Frederick J, et al. Learning from child death
review in the USA, England, Australia, and New Zealand. Lancet
2014;384:894–903.
14.
HM Government. Working together to safeguard children. London:
Department for Education, 2015.
15.
Garstang J, Griffiths F, Sidebotham P. What do bereaved parents
want from professionals after the sudden death of their child: a
systematic review of the literature. BMC Pediatr 2014;14:269.
16.
Gaines J, Kandall SR. Counseling issues related to maternal
substance abuse and subsequent sudden infant death syndrome in
offspring. Clin Soc Work J 1992;20:169–77.
17.
Downey G, Silver RC, Wortman CB. Reconsidering the
attribution-adjustment relation following a major negative event:
coping with the loss of a child. J Pers Soc Psychol
1990;59:925–40.
18.
Fleming P, Blair P, Bacon CJ, et al. Sudden unexpected deaths in
infancy: the CESDI SUDI studies 1993–1996. London: The
Stationery Office, 2000.
19.
Boyle FM, Vance JC, Najman JM, et al. The mental health impact of
stillbirth, neonatal death or SIDS: prevalence and patterns of distress
among mothers. Soc Sci Med 1996;43:1273–82.
20.
Zigmond AS, Snaith RP. The hospital anxiety and depression scale.
Acta Psychiatr Scand 1983;67:361–70.
21.
Department for Education. Education and skills in your area. 2014.
www.education.gov.uk/cgi-bin/inyourarea/idaci-pl?postcode
(accessed 3 Oct 2014).
10
Garstang J, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011323. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011323
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011323 on 19 May 2016. Downloaded from 
 22.
Bryman A, Burgess RG, eds. Analyzing qualitative data. London:
Routledge, 1994.
23.
Holloway I. Qualitative research in nursing and healthcare. 3rd edn.
Chichester: Wiley, 2013.
24.
Garcia AJ III, Koschnitzky JE, Ramirez JM. The physiological
determinants of sudden infant death syndrome. Respir Physiol
Neurobiol 2013;189:288–300.
25.
Murray-Parkes C. Bereavement: studies of grief in adult life. 3rd edn.
London: Routledge, 1996.
26.
Sidebotham P, Blair PS, Evason-Coombe C, et al. Responding to
unexpected infant deaths: experience in one English region. Arch
Dis Child 2010;95:291–5.
27.
Garstang J, Debelle G, Aukett A. Investigating unexpected child
deaths: an audit of the new joint agency approach. Child Abuse Rev
2015;24:378–84.
28.
Rudd RA, Marain LC, Crandall L. To hold or not to hold: medicolegal
death investigation practices during unexpected child death
investigations and the experiences of next of kin. Am J Forensic
Med Pathol 2014;35:132–9.
29.
Waite AJ, Coombs RC, McKenzie A, et al. Mortality of babies
enrolled in a community-based support programme: CONI PLUS
(Care of Next Infant Plus). Arch Dis Child 2015;100:637–42.
30.
McManus V, Abel S, McCreanor T, et al. Narratives of deprivation:
women’s life stories around Maori sudden infant death syndrome.
Soc Sci Med 2010;71:643–9.
31.
Ball HL, Volpe LE. Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS) risk
reduction and infant sleep location—moving the discussion forward.
Soc Sci Med 2013;79:84–91.
32.
Volpe LE, Ball HL, McKenna JJ. Nighttime parenting strategies
and sleep-related risks to infants. Soc Sci Med 2013;79:
92–100.
33.
Girasek DC. How members of the public interpret the word accident.
Inj Prev 1999;5:19–25.
34.
Malle BF, Guglielmo S, Monroe AE. A theory of blame. Psychol Inq
2014;25:147–86.
35.
Alicke MD. Culpable control and the psychology of blame. Psychol
Bull 2000;126:556–74.
36.
Cacciatore J, Frøen JF, Killian M. Condemning self, condemning
other: blame and mental health in women suffering stillbirth. J Ment
Health Couns 2013;35:342–59.
37.
Barr P, Cacciatore J. Problematic emotions and maternal grief.
Omega 2007–2008;56:331–48.
38.
Barr P. Guilt- and shame-proneness and the grief of perinatal
bereavement. Psychol Psychother 2004;77:493–510.
Garstang J, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011323. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011323
11
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011323 on 19 May 2016. Downloaded from 
