 Accepted Manuscript
“How the other half live”: Lay perspectives on health inequalities in an age of austerity
Dr. Kayleigh Ann Garthwaite, Clare Bambra, Professor
PII:
S0277-9536(17)30315-5
DOI:
10.1016/j.socscimed.2017.05.021
Reference:
SSM 11233
To appear in:
Social Science & Medicine
Received Date: 7 December 2016
Revised Date:
4 May 2017
Accepted Date: 8 May 2017
Please cite this article as: Garthwaite, K.A., Bambra, C., “How the other half live”: Lay perspectives
on health inequalities in an age of austerity, Social Science & Medicine (2017), doi: 10.1016/
j.socscimed.2017.05.021.
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to
our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo
copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please
note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all
legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Social Science & Medicine manuscript number: SSM-D-16-03712 
Article title: "How the other half live": lay perspectives on health inequalities in an age of austerity 
Corresponding Author:  
Dr. Kayleigh Ann Garthwaite 
Institute of Health & Society 
Newcastle University 
Baddiley-Clark Building 
Richardson Road 
NE2 4AX 
United Kingdom 
kayleigh.garthwaite@newcastle.ac.uk 
 
Second Author: 
 
Professor Clare Bambra 
Institute of Health & Society 
Newcastle University 
Baddiley-Clark Building 
Richardson Road 
NE2 4AX 
United Kingdom 
 
Order of Authors: Kayleigh Ann Garthwaite, Ph.D.; Clare Bambra, PhD 
Acknowledgements: 
Thank you to all of the participants in the study who gave up their time to take part in the research. 
This project was funded by a Leverhulme Trust RL-2012-006 Research Leadership Award held by 
Professor Clare Bambra (award reference RL-2012-006). The views expressed are those of the 
authors and not necessarily those of the funder. CB is a Senior Investigator of Fuse, the Centre for 
Translational Research in Public Health. Funding for Fuse comes from the British Heart Foundation, 
Cancer Research UK, Economic and Social Research Council, Medical Research Council, the National 
Institute for Health Research, under the auspices of the UK Clinical Research Collaboration, and is 
gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed in this paper do not necessarily represent those of the 
funders or UKCRC. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to 
publish, or preparation of the manuscript. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
1 
Abstract 
This paper examines how people living in two socially contrasting areas of Stockton on Tees, North 
East England experience, explain, and understand the stark health inequalities in their town. 
Participants displayed opinions that fluctuated between a variety of converging and contrasting 
explanations. Three years of ethnographic observation in both areas (2014-2017) generated 
explanations which initially focused closely on behavioural and individualised factors, whilst 118 
qualitative interviews subsequently revealed more nuanced justifications, which prioritised more 
structural, material and psychosocial influences. Findings indicate that inequalities in healthcare, 
including access, the importance of judgemental attitudes, and perceived place stigma, would then 
be offered as explanations for the stark gap in spatial inequalities in the area. Notions of fatalism, 
linked to (a lack of) choice, control, and fear of the future, were common reasons given for 
inequalities across all participants. We conclude by arguing for a prioritisation of listening to, and 
working to understand, the experiences of communities experiencing the brunt of health 
inequalities; especially important at a time of austerity. 
Key Words: United Kingdom; Health inequalities; Lay perspectives; Fatalism; Ethnography; Austerity; 
Behaviour  
Introduction 
Considerable research attention has been paid to identify and explain how health and place 
interrelate, and the resultant impact upon health inequalities (Bambra, 2016; Bernard et al. 2007; 
Curtis and Rees Jones 1998; Macintyre et al. 2002; Sloggett and Joshi 1994; amongst others). 
Geographical research has been dominated by the debate between compositional (population 
characteristics of people living in particular areas including demographic, health behaviours and 
individual-level socio-economic status) and contextual (area-level factors including the social, 
economic and physical environment) explanations. This academic debate - about the causes and 
complexities of geographical inequalities in health – could benefit from lay perspectives on health 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
2 
and place and the causes of health inequalities particularly from people living in the most and least 
deprived communities.  
To date, research by Popay et al. (2003), Macintyre et al. (2005) and Davidson et al. (2006; 2008) has 
examined lay perspectives in socio-economically contrasting areas of cities across northern England 
and Scotland. Other studies (such as Blaxter, 1983, 1997; Parry et al, 2007; Mackenzie, 2016) have 
examined the perspectives of people living in the most deprived areas. These studies have employed 
mixed methodologies, including surveys, focus groups, and in-depth interviews; ethnographic 
research which explores the everyday lived realities of health inequalities is notably absent. 
Davidson et al. (2008: 168) have recognised this gap in the literature, and noted how “even fewer 
studies have specifically focused on the relationships between the types of place people reside in, 
and their experiences of, and attitudes to, health inequalities”. Mackenzie et al (2016) evidence not 
only material factors, but also explanations of the interplay between power and politics, with an 
explicit focus on how behavioural explanations can be integrated into such explanations.  
This paper, in keeping with Popay (Popay et al. 2003), Macintyre (Macintyre et al., 2005), and 
Davidson (2006; 2008), directly explores the lived experience of- and perspectives on- geographical 
inequalities in health of people from socio-economically contrasting areas. Following Backett (1992: 
257) in her research into lay health moralities in middle class families, the key purpose of this study 
was to “develop understandings of how beliefs and behaviours which may have implications for 
health are part of the fabric of daily life”. In particular, this study focused upon people’s everyday 
awareness and understanding of living in a place with severe health inequalities, and to question 
how this might be affected at a time of austerity. As such, it is one of the first studies to examine lay 
perspectives on health inequalities during austerity. 
Geographical inequalities in health  
Neighbourhoods that are the most deprived have worse health than those that are less deprived – 
and this follows a spatial gradient with each increase in deprivation resulting in a decrease in 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
3 
average health. In England, the gap between the most and least deprived areas is 9 years average 
life expectancy for men and around 7 years for women. As noted earlier, geographical research has 
tried to explain these differences through looking at compositional and contextual factors – and 
their interaction (Cummins et al., 2007). 
The compositional explanation asserts that the health of a given area is the result of the 
characteristics of the people who live there in terms of demographic [age, sex and ethnicity], health-
related behaviours [smoking, alcohol, physical activity, diet, drugs] and socio-economic [income, 
education, occupation]) factors. There is an extensive literature linking socio-economic status to 
health: people with higher occupational status (e.g. professionals such as teachers or lawyers), 
education or income have better health outcomes than non-professional workers (e.g. manual 
workers), or those with lower levels of education or income. Health follows a social gradient – the 
higher the social position, the better the health. Health inequality is therefore not an issue just of 
poverty, but is related to economic inequality more widely (Wilkinson and Pickett 2010). 
The literature suggests that there are several interacting pathways linking individual-level socio-
economic status and health: behavioural, material, psychosocial, and life course (Bartley, 2004). The 
‘materialist’ explanation argues that it is income-levels and what a decent or high income enables 
compared to a lower one such as access to health-benefitting goods and services (e.g. health care 
access, schools, transport, social care) and limiting exposures to particular material risk factors (e.g. 
poor housing, inadequate diet, physical hazards at work, environmental exposures). The 
‘behavioural-cultural’ theory asserts that the causal mechanisms are higher rates of health-
damaging behaviours in lower socio-economic groups – which may be more culturally acceptable 
amongst lower socio-economic groups. The ‘psychosocial’ explanation focuses on the adverse 
biological consequences of psychological and social domination and subordination, superiority and 
inferiority. The ‘life course’ approach combines aspects of the other explanations, thereby allowing 
different causal mechanisms and processes to explain the social gradient in different diseases. It also 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
4 
highlights the role of the accumulation of disadvantage over the ‘life course’ – combining the 
amount of time different people have spent in more/less disadvantaged circumstances.  
The contextual approach instead focuses on the health effects of the economic, social, physical and 
political environment of a place, arguing that regardless of individual factors, where you live also 
matters (Bambra, 2016). Health promoting environments are more likely to be found in affluent as 
compared to deprived areas. Area-economic factors that influence health include area poverty rates, 
unemployment rates, wages, and types of employment in the area. Social place-based factors 
include opportunity structures and collective social functioning and practices - the services provided 
(publicly or privately) to support people in their daily lives as well as the reputation and history of an 
area as well as local cultures (Macintyre et al., 2002). In terms of the physical environment, there is a 
sizeable literature, for instance, on the positive health effects of access to green space (Mitchell and 
Popham, 2007), as well as the negative health effects of brownfield or contaminated land (Bambra 
et al., 2014) as well as air pollution (Stafford and McCarthy, 2006) or neighbourhood regeneration 
(Egan et al. 2015). Compositional and contextual factors though are not separate phenomena: they 
interact and shape one another (Cummins et al., 2007). 
This paper examines whether and how lay perspectives reflect these contextual and compositional 
theories of geographical inequalities in health.  
Austerity and health inequalities 
Although spatial inequalities in health within the UK have been much discussed, there is less 
empirical assessment of the effects of the current programme of austerity on these inequalities 
(Pearce 2013) - manifested as large-scale cuts to central and local government budgets, as well as an 
NHS funding freeze and cuts to welfare services and benefits (Bambra and Garthwaite 2015). 
However, recent (primarily quantitative) research has indicated that austerity and welfare reforms 
are having adverse effects on the most vulnerable in society. In their study on self-harm, Barnes et 
al. (2016:1) reported that “economic hardships resulting from the recession and austerity measures 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
5 
accumulated or acted as a ‘final straw’ to trigger self-harm”. They emphasised that “changes in 
welfare benefits may have contributed” to this rise (2016: 132). Niedzwiedz et al. (2016) found that 
reductions in spending levels or increased conditionality may adversely affect the mental health of 
disadvantaged social groups. Highest levels of foodbank use have occurred where there have been 
the highest rates of benefit sanctioning, unemployment, and cuts in central welfare spending 
(Loopstra et al. 2015).  
 
Accompanying austerity measures and ongoing reforms to the social security system is a dominant 
narrative that characterises people living on a low income as ‘feckless’, lacking in aspiration, and 
engaging in poor lifestyle choices (Garthwaite 2016a), which can lead to stigma, a worsening of 
already poor mental health and the risk of widening health inequalities (Hatzenbuehler et al. 2013; 
Scambler 2006). Pearce (2013: 1922) has emphasised an (arguably surprising) lack of attention on 
this issue from a geographical perspective: 
“whilst there is a voluminous literature evaluating the role of various forms of discrimination 
in understanding health and inequalities, geographical accounts of discrimination have been 
thin on the ground.” 
Pearce observes how austerity measures evident in the UK, as well as other European countries, will 
undoubtedly have implications for health inequalities which are yet to be experienced or 
documented. Making a link between this process and stigma production, Pearce argues that “one of 
the likely implications of reducing investment into communities with a multitude of social problems 
is that such places will become increasingly stigmatised, which is likely to be detrimental to the 
health of local residents” (2013: 1924). This research project is situated at this nexus, and the 
findings reported here will draw attention to the relationship between place, health inequalities, 
and austerity through the lay perspectives of those living in the most and least deprived areas of 
Stockton-on-Tees, the North East town with the largest health inequalities in England. This paper will 
therefore add to the health inequalities literature in terms of strengthening our understanding of lay 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
6 
perspectives and their relationship with existing theories, whilst being one of the first studies to 
examine lay perspectives in a period of austerity.   
Lay perspectives 
The importance of lay knowledge has emerged as being central to knowledge and understanding 
surrounding health inequalities (Backett-Millburn et al. 2003; Blaxter 1997; Davidson et al. 2006; 
2008; Elliot et al. 2015; Macintyre et al. 2005; Popay et al. 1998; 2003 amongst others). As Davidson 
et al. (2008: 1368) and others (Blaxter, 1997; Backett-Milburn et al., 2003; Macintyre et al., 2005) 
have recognised, very few studies have directly explored lay understandings of the causes of health 
inequalities in general. Further, there has been even less attention dedicated to exploring the 
relationships between where people live, and their experiences of - and attitudes towards - health 
inequalities, with a focus on lay understandings of health inequalities at a time of austerity being 
relatively absent (see Mackenzie et al. 2016 for a notable exception). Ethnographic methods have 
also been underutilised in this regard.  
Using both quantitative and qualitative methodology, Popay et al (2003) studied the views of people 
living in cities in the North West of England. The survey findings showed how people living in 
disadvantaged areas offered explanations which included both individualistic and structural factors, 
including an emphasis on the importance of ‘place’. In contrast, findings from their qualitative 
interviews found people living in disadvantaged areas were reluctant to accept the notion of health 
inequalities between areas and social groups (Popay et al. 2003: 1). Macintyre et al. (2005: 314) 
reported similar findings from analysis of a longitudinal postal survey in the West of Scotland. The 
studies by Blaxter (1983, 1997) also found that people living in deprived areas were less likely to 
acknowledge the links between health and place and less likely to view the causes as material or 
environmental.  Davidson et al. (2008) though found a greater acceptance of the existence of health 
inequalities. In terms of pathways, a recent review of 25 studies of lay understandings of area-level 
deprivation and health (Smith, 2017) found that there is evidence of behavioural, material, and 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
7 
psychosocial factors in lay understandings of health and place.  Several studies in this review found a 
clear understanding of the links between income, unemployment and health; other studies found 
that participants privileged behavioural factors (particularly smoking and alcohol) or environmental 
ones such as housing, crime, transport or services. The review though concluded that psychosocial 
pathways were the most prominent explanations linking area-level deprivation to mental health 
particularly social cohesion and local pride.  
Study design and methods  
This article draws on data from ‘Health Inequalities in an Age of Austerity: the Stockton-on-Tees 
study’, a five year, mixed methods project examining localised health inequalities in an era of 
austerity in the town of Stockton-on-Tees, North East England. Stockton-on-Tees, has the highest 
geographical health inequalities within a single local authority in England both for men (at a 17.3 
year difference in life expectancy at birth) and for women (11.4 year gap in life expectancy) (Public 
Health England, 2015). Stockton-on-Tees has a population of 191,600 residents (Census 2011) and 
features high levels of social inequality, with some areas of the local authority having low levels of 
deprivation (e.g. Hartburn; Ingleby Barwick; Yarm) and others nearby characterised by high levels of 
deprivation (e.g. Town Centre; Hardwick; Port Clarence). 
This article uses ethnographic methods and qualitative interviews. Studying health inequalities 
through ethnography allows people’s lived experiences to be studied in everyday contexts, following 
a flexible research design, with participant observation and relatively informal conversations forming 
a central part of the research process. Undertaking participant observation of a particular place 
involves the researcher walking or driving through local places to observe social environments and 
happenings (Pink et al., 2010: 3). As such, routine daily activities across the two field sites were 
observed in public places that made seeking informed consent unfeasible. The researcher’s casual 
conversations with residents in local places were included as non-verbatim data in observation 
notes.  
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
8 
The Town Centre ward is the most deprived in the borough, and is the 17th most deprived ward in 
England. The ward particularly experiences health, disability, and employment deprivation. 27.1% of 
economically active people are unemployed, and 10.2% are receiving out of work benefits. Only 22% 
of residents own a house; this is significantly lower than the borough average of 69%. The majority 
(53%) live in socially rented accommodation and 23% live in private rented accommodation. In the 
2011 Census, 12% of people reported that they were in bad or very bad health, much higher than 
the borough average of 6.3%. 26.5% of people have a long-term health problem or disability, this is 
higher than the borough average of 19.0%. Poor quality housing, takeaway shops, convenience 
stores selling low quality food, betting and pawn shops, and a pub where all drinks cost £1, are all 
plentiful in the most deprived area. There has, however, been a recent £38 million regeneration of 
the High Street, which has been much discussed by participants throughout the research. Fieldwork 
in the Town Centre ward began in November 2013, with participant observation and interviews 
carried out in a Trussell Trust foodbank (Garthwaite 2016a), Citizen’s Advice Bureau, children and 
family centres, community centres, gardening clubs, cafes, and coffee mornings, alongside 
engagement with charities, events and services in the area. 
From March 2014, participant observation began in Hartburn, the third least deprived out of the 26 
in the borough, and one of the least deprived wards in England. The unemployment rate here is 
5.1%, lower than the average for England and Wales of 7.6%, and the Stockton-on-Tees average of 
9.6%. Only 1.2% of people in the Hartburn ward are receiving out of work benefits. 92% of residents 
own a house outright or are buying it with a mortgage; only 1% live in socially rented 
accommodation and 6% live in private rented accommodation, both are much lower than the 
borough averages of 17% and 13% respectively. 4.3% of people reported that they were in bad or 
very bad health, this is lower than the borough average of 6.3%, and 19.2% of people have a long-
term health problem or disability. The area is characterised by manicured green space, flower beds, 
attractive period houses and independent businesses such as a delicatessen, a dog grooming 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
9 
parlour, and a florists.  Observations and interviews here took place at coffee mornings, yoga 
classes, cafes, churches, mother and toddler meetings, a credit union, and community centres. 
118 qualitative interviews were completed across both areas between 2014 and 2017, alongside 
detailed participant observation, field notes, documentary research, and photographic data. To 
ensure a varied sample, in-depth interview participants were sampled across these locations to 
include variation in age, gender, occupation, marital status. Participants were recruited by a mix of 
approaches – they were asked following ethnographic observation, and sometimes acted as 
gatekeepers with snowballing approaches used to recruit others. Topics covered during the in-depth 
interviews included (but were not limited to): area perceptions; health and health inequalities; 
austerity and welfare reform; social networks; community; employment; and social security benefits 
receipt. Interviews that were arranged to take place in people's homes were recorded and 
transcribed verbatim. The age range of the overall sample varied from 16 to 78 years old, and was 
almost equally split in terms of men and women. Ethnographic observations captured a wider age 
range.  
Participation was voluntary, confidential, and secured by either verbal or written informed consent 
where possible. Interviews were transcribed verbatim and the transcripts produced included 
references to both field notes made and photographs taken. Data were fully anonymised before 
transcripts were analysed thematically, using open coding to identify initial categories. Data was 
then further broken down into sub-themes, allowing us to compare and contrast data in a detailed 
manner. In this way, thematic content analysis was used to analyse the data and extract relevant 
relationships between study ethnographic observation and interview results. In this way 
participants’ verbal accounts and non-verbal behaviours could be analysed and coded in one dataset 
to give a fuller picture. NVivo 10 software was used to facilitate and organise the analysis. The 
research was approved in advance by the Durham University Department of Geography Ethics 
Committee. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
10 
 
 
Findings  
Converging and contrasting explanations  
Conversations and observations in both the most and least deprived areas generated explanations 
which initially focused closely on behaviour and individualised factors, suggesting smoking, alcohol, 
and the consumption of unhealthy food were root causes of the gap in life expectancy within their 
area. In-depth interviews revealed more nuanced justifications, for both groups, which prioritised 
altogether more structural, material and psychosocial factors, such as income, housing, happiness, 
and community networks. These categories were neither separate nor distinct, and participants 
often displayed opinions that fluctuated between a variety of explanations. Following Macintyre 
(1997: 728), participants distinguished between ‘hard’ explanations for inequalities – in other words, 
differences were completely accounted for by health damaging behaviours (smoking, poor diet, 
inappropriate use of health services etc.) – and ‘soft’ explanations, which believe certain health 
damaging behaviours have a social class gradient which contributes to the gradient in ill health and 
early death. 
Explanations that centred on behaviour and education were mostly found in the perspectives of 
people in the least deprived area, and particularly during ethnographic observation. This tended to 
be linked to the transmission of generational family values. Katie, 41, worked in marketing and lived 
in the more affluent suburb with her husband and two children. Katie placed an emphasis on the 
importance of cultural values and aspirations of education, but also accepts that the “odds are 
stacked against you” if you’re living in one of the most deprived areas: 
“You’re talking a lot about [a] third generation of people who’ve never had a job. You learn 
from your parents, you learn your principles and values and everything. Everyone’s looking 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
11 
for the fast and easy way round everything, it’s just not realistic and they just forget about 
education. It goes right back to even at the beginning, if you’re in a shit school and there’s 
people with all different needs, the odds are stacked against you, and then if you’re feeding 
your kids crap right at the beginning, it’s like what’s going on? So I can see why people aren’t 
living longer, and like the smoking thing, I mean I've smoked and as soon as I found out I was 
pregnant I stopped, and now I wouldn’t dream of it. But I suppose if you live where 
everybody is smoking around you, it’s just what you do, isn’t it?” 
The following field notes extract identifies how fieldwork observations and conversations tended to 
centre on ‘hard’ (Macintyre) behavioural explanations: 
Field Notes 
9th June 2015 
It’s my first day of the credit union that’s been set up by some of the people I’ve come to 
know in Hartburn. Heather invited me into the back room for a coffee and offered to 
introduce me to the others who I don’t know, who are looking fairly suspicious of me to be 
honest. I get sat next to a serious looking woman, Jennifer, and Kathyrn comes to join us and 
starts explaining about the project. Jennifer looked at me as if I was stupid and simply said: 
‘Well it’s all about behaviour, isn’t it?’ She seemed horrified that a £1 million grant was 
being used to investigate something that she believed could be explained away by faulty 
behaviour. I said obviously behaviour is part of the whole story, but actually isn’t the major 
factor in the gap in life expectancy according to our survey findings – income, education, 
housing and quite frankly money are more important. She doesn’t look convinced: ‘I would 
imagine behaviour is the most important’ she said, and turned around to talk to someone 
else. 
In contrast to findings from Popay et al. (2003) and Macintyre et al. (2005) though, participants in 
this study living in the most deprived areas also recognised that income, housing, and stress were all 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
12 
factors in explaining the severe health inequalities in Stockton-on-Tees. Glen, a chef working on a 
zero hours’ contract, lived in a deprived area a couple of miles outside of the Town Centre. He 
believed the gap in life expectancy was linked to lower stress and higher income levels in the more 
affluent areas of town. Despite this, he also linked the difference to the behaviour and lifestyles of 
people living in the most deprived areas:  
“I think it’s cos them in Hartburn have jobs and they have loads of money. They’ve got good 
work and they’ve got good living. And I think some of these in the Town Centre they just go 
around getting drunk, being homeless. It’s a lifestyle choice, it gets them out of it for a 
couple of days, y’know?” 
Participants from the more-deprived areas in Davidson et al’s (2008) study discussed how 
deprivation was ‘written in the body’ in terms of premature ageing. Our findings show that 
participants across both the most and least deprived areas recognised how poverty can impact upon 
peoples’ health and bodies, physically and mentally. In an in-depth interview with Steph, 42, a 
welfare rights adviser who lived in one of the least deprived areas, she expressed her “shock” at how 
the combination of multiple traumatic incidences, such as bereavement, sexual abuse, domestic 
violence, and ill health, can impact upon people physically:  
“I suppose you know anecdotally which areas have more concentrations of poor health but 
sometimes it shocks me how much it ages people. I think they look old, you can see it in 
their faces the way they are and I think that’s sad. They tell me their date of birth and I think 
‘God you’re my age’, or a few years older and I think what is it that’s so different about us, 
that we look so different? But then a lot of people I deal with, they’ve had not just one kind 
of traumatic thing happen to them, they might have had 2 or 3 things that would be almost 
kind of nobody I know in my friendship circle has had that happen to them, but that person 
has had like multiple”. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
13 
Living in the least deprived area, Catherine, 65, initially spoke during ethnographic encounters of 
how smoking and obesity were key factors in explaining the large gap in life expectancy, but during 
an in-depth interview she also identified how psychosocial factors can play a role in explaining the 
health inequalities within the area: 
“Smoking, obesity...but the overriding thing is that they don’t seem happy. I really would say 
that the most notable thing is they’re not going round with big smiles on their face, happy 
jolly people. They’re miserable. So that would come back to the mental health issues, 
wouldn’t it?  It would wear you down”. 
The impact of these cumulative traumas can then further widen pre-existing health inequalities, and 
perhaps go some way to understanding ideas of fatalism, choice and hope that participants felt 
helped to explain the gap in life expectancy in Stockton-on-Tees.  
Fatalism, choice and opportunity in a time of austerity  
Notions of fatalism, linked to (a lack of) choice, control, and opportunity, were common reasons 
given for inequalities across all participants, but more often from those living in the least deprived 
areas. Heather, 72, a trustee of various mental health and addiction charities, felt fatalism was key 
to explaining the gap in life expectancy within the borough:  
“People feel stuck, don’t they? People don’t feel that any effort they make is going to make 
a difference where out there in the affluent areas we know that efforts we make will make a 
difference. There’s an element...it isn’t so much confidence, well it is confidence but it’s also 
a bit fatalistic, ‘Well whatever I’m doing doesn’t matter’, and I think that’s why people don’t 
bother with healthy living ‘Well do I want to be here?’ y’know if you’ve developed lots and 
lots of poor health, what’s the joy of living to 100? And I guess, but I don’t know, I guess it’s 
a sense of ‘Well whatever I do won’t make a difference’ for myself or anyone else. It’s about 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
14 
drive isn’t it, and have they ever had drive in the Town Centre? Because people who have 
drive have got out.”  
Heather strongly associated this sense of fatalism with the geographical boundaries of the Town 
Centre and the perceived culture amongst people living there that combined to create an overall 
sense of hopelessness or lack of control. Carol, 68, was a former health visitor who worked within 
deprived communities nearby for over 40 years. Living in the least deprived area, Carol agreed that 
difficulties in thinking about the future may lead to “impulsive behaviour” which she defined as drug 
taking and smoking: 
“When you’ve got this impulsive behaviour, not thinking about tomorrow then you don’t 
care very much about the future of your health, either. You’re thinking about today. And a 
lot of these people who I worked with, who aren’t going to live very long, actually just 
getting through today, and they don’t care about 20 years’ time or 10 years’ time. 
Sometimes today is so awful for them”. 
Here, Carol recognises that everyday life can be filled with multiple and complex issues, making it 
impossible to plan and even imagine a future. Carol, and others across both in-depth interviews and 
ethnographic observation, regularly referred to the notion of ‘luck’ for helping to explain the 
differences between their situation and those living in the most deprived area. “We’re kind of a 
lucky generation really, I think” was often offered as a justification, generally from the older 
participants who were now retired. Luck was also used as an explanation for the good health that 
people in the least deprived area experienced.  
Everyday worry and hardship was a common theme found in the experiences of people living 
through austerity in the most deprived area. Simon, 52, was a volunteer at the foodbank after using 
it three times himself. Currently unemployed, he described the daily struggles he had in making his 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
15 
Employment and Support Allowance of £146.20 per fortnight cover his bills, debt, and food 
expenditure: 
“I get a bit bag of spuds for £2.75 and that lasts for two weeks, if you’ve got potatoes you 
can always have chips. Beans, tomatoes is a good one, buy spices every week then you can 
mix things together. I've had pasta and beans before with spices, mix it in, it’s not the best of 
things to be eating but at least it’s a meal. Porridge is good cos with porridge you don’t need 
milk, milk is a luxury. Things like that, just things that’ll spread.” 
Lauren, 33, received Carer’s Allowance for her two sons. She described the difficulty in being able to 
plan for the future when receiving social security benefits, and how this was influenced by austerity-
led welfare reform:  
“It’s pretty miserable really, I try not to think about the future cos when you get benefits...I 
sit and watch every Budget in a panic, I get upset the night before, I read all these reports 
and I think ‘What they gonna take next?’ My whole life is in the balance of the decisions that 
politicians make, and it’s scary and I know it’s sort of like that for everybody but it really 
does feel like that in a big way for us”. 
For people living in the least deprived area, conversations would focus on the regular trips to the 
theatre, language courses, horse riding, ukulele classes, dining out, and frequent holidays. In 
contrast, people living in the most deprived area often tried to find free things to do, such as go for a 
walk with their children in the local park, or sit in the High Street on a sunny day, watching the water 
fountains that had recently been installed as part of a £38 million regeneration of the Town Centre. 
People across the least deprived area made full use of the local groups and activities that were often 
free to access, including ones specifically aimed at people who lived in the most deprived areas, such 
as Sure Start. Heather, speaking about the weekly coffee morning she helps to run, recognised this 
as being a particular factor in explaining the gap in life expectancy in the area:  
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
16 
“I think people, well you know the people come here, particularly as helpers, they’re very 
active, y’know, walking groups, the community choir, volunteering, the gym. And there are 
things like cycling groups and walking groups that are provided by the council, but they tend 
to be taken up by folk like us. We fill them up.” 
Ethnographic observations were carried out across various clubs, groups and initiatives aimed at 
improving the health and wellbeing of people living in the most deprived areas. Due to cuts to local 
authority budgets, several services and clubs that the researcher became involved with had to be 
closed due to funding constraints – for instance, a weekly walking group was forced to cease a few 
months after the researcher joined. Often, such groups would be poorly attended; a notable 
example being a credit union set up by those living in the least deprived area, but situated within a 
church on one of the most deprived streets in the town. To date, only members of the congregation 
had signed up to use it, and there was a sense of frustration and incomprehension as to why people 
living on the doorstep were not engaging with it. But in spending time in the most deprived area, it 
became clear that one possible explanation for the reluctance to engage with services such as the 
credit union was a perceived sense of being subject to judgement and stigma.   
The importance of judgement and attitude  
Participants in the most deprived areas described a hardening of attitudes towards people living in 
low income areas. Living in the most deprived area, Lauren, 33, identified the struggles she had with 
judgemental attitudes, and the effect this could have upon accessing support: 
“I think for me it’s people’s attitudes when you go and seek help. I think if you’ve never 
experienced it, someone looking down their nose at you because you don’t work, or you’ve 
got depression whatever if may be, because you need something from society, you know 
financially or medically. You’d think nurses and doctors and receptionists, you’d think they’d 
be nice to you but what I found, and I would say...I would assume that people who are on 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
17 
the bad end of the health gap may feel the same, is that people’s attitudes towards you are 
awful, it makes you not want to ask for help. All the time this message is that you’re bad, it’s 
on the telly, you’re not a worthy person so at what point do you not access things because 
you feel it yourself?” 
For Lauren, these attitudes were strongly linked to so-called ‘poverty porn’ television programmes 
which depict a certain lifestyle of benefits receipt or living on a low income. 'Poverty porn' has ‘been 
used to critique documentary television in post-recession Britain which focuses on people in poverty 
as a-political diversionary entertainment’ (Jensen 2014: 2.6). This genre of television depicts people 
as lazy, criminal, violent, undisciplined and shameless, playing into the media and government 
rhetoric around people living on a low income. The impact of ‘poverty porn’ is particularly relevant 
given the second series of Love Productions’ Benefits Street was set on Kingston Road in the 
deprived Portrack and Tilery ward, next to the Town Centre. The significance of “not speaking the 
same cultural language” as patients and the potential resultant impact on health inequalities was 
reinforced by the Town Centre GP Dr Harrison who spoke of the importance of the health service:  
“I can give you the example of doctors, you know you’ve come into a fancy building here, 
which is intimidating for people. I speak with a posh voice, I’m wearing a tie which puts a 
certain barrier up. But also many doctors live in the wealthier parts of town. So they live in 
this very precious enclave, they drive in in a car, [they’re] protected sealed in with air 
conditioning, they’re listening to Radio 4, they’re parking it, coming into their own safety 
environment which is very different to the environment people live in, they’re seeing 
people, then they’re going home. Occasionally they might do a home visit but they’re not 
using...they’re not really understanding where people are coming from, they will never 
really understand the financial constraints on people and it isn’t just doctors, it’s nurses, its 
health visitors, it’s midwives, it’s the whole health infrastructure, it’s receptionists as well 
and they can often act as a barrier. We might say ‘How on earth do they still continue to 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
18 
smoke? Don’t they know it’s bad for them? I’ve invited them three times to come and they 
haven’t come’ so you get these kind of...these attitudes, and then of course you get 
organisational culture where people talk about it in the tearoom and it reinforces those 
attitudes and you then get a kind of ‘them’ and ‘us’, patient blaming culture and it widens 
health inequalities.” 
The attitudes described by Dr Harrison have become progressively more noticeable amidst ongoing 
austerity and reforms to the social security system, he felt, and it was clear in the perspectives of 
those living in the most deprived area that they agreed with this. Naomi, 36, a recovering heroin 
addict, had a range of physical and mental health problems, including gastrointestinal issues, 
depression and anxiety. Naomi identified a stigmatising and judgemental attitude attached to her 
accessing the local pharmacy for her methadone:    
“Every day I go to the chemist and it’s supervised, I have to drink it. In the Stockton area 
everyone knows what you’re going in for, no matter how well you’re dressed, they still know 
what you’re going in for so you get the funny looks. People look at you up and down and you 
know what they’re thinking and that gets you down”. 
The health implications are clear, with such attitudes possibly impacting upon mental health and 
wellbeing, as Naomi suggests.  
Discussion and Conclusion  
This study has outlined lay perspectives on the experiences, understandings and explanations of 
health inequalities in two geographically close but socio-economically distant areas of a post-
industrial town in the North East of England. In terms of explanations, it has found that inequalities 
in healthcare, including access, the importance of judgemental attitudes, and perceived place 
stigma, were the most prominent. Researching lay perspectives on health inequalities 
ethnographically allowed for an understanding of the nuanced and flexible explanations offered for 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
19 
gaps in health and life expectancy. In a review of the data surrounding lay knowledge and 
perspectives, Blaxter (1997: 750) recognised the complexities and fluidity in seeking lay 
understandings of health inequalities:  
“Throughout the research evidence, lay respondents tend rather to move back and forwards 
between concepts of cause which seem opposed, but which individuals can keep in 
equilibrium - belief in responsibility about health behaviour and the importance of healthy 
mental attitudes on the one hand, and concepts of chance, luck, and inevitability on the 
other.” 
In keeping with findings from Popay et al. (2003) and Macintyre et al. (2005), our results found that 
explanations for health inequalities varied depending on which method was employed. Findings 
demonstrate both converging and contrasting explanations for variation in health inequalities. 
Davidson et al. (2008: 178) found that higher income groups were more likely to question rather 
than accept statistics on area inequalities in health, and to view faulty health behaviours as the 
result of lack of education or an irresponsible attitude.  In this study, people living across the most 
and least deprived areas adhered to this perspective, at times, but were also able to attribute health 
inequalities to material and psychosocial factors. Ethnographic observation generated explanations 
which initially focused closely on behaviour and individualised factors – ’hard’ explanations 
(Macintyre et al. 1997), whilst qualitative interviews revealed more nuanced justifications, for both 
groups, which prioritised altogether more structural, material and psychosocial influences – the 
‘soft’ explanations as put forward by Macintyre (1997). Inequalities in healthcare, including access, 
the importance of judgemental attitudes, and perceived stigma, were then offered as explanations 
for the stark gap in spatial inequalities in the area. These lay perspectives link to the wider academic 
literature on health and place with compositional factors privileged over contextual ones.  
A notable difference between the previous work by Popay et al. (2003), Macintyre et al. (2005) and 
Davidson et al (2008) and this study is the context of austerity measures and cuts to the social 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
20 
security safety net which do not affect all groups or neighbourhoods equally. The importance of this 
context is evident when we consider the deeply divisive rhetoric between ‘shirkers’, ‘skivers’, 
‘workers’ and ‘scroungers’ being applied to people living on a low income (Garthwaite 2011) and the 
emergence of a ‘new welfare commonsense’ as identified by Jensen (2014). The idea of 
‘commonsense’ relies heavily on the welfare dependent and deceptive benefit ‘scrounger’ who is 
then portrayed as a figure of social disgust by politicians and the media. This thereby enables the 
state to retreat from providing basic levels of welfare support with reliance on charity becoming the 
norm for many in the most deprived neighbourhoods (Garthwaite 2016b). As our findings have 
shown, the resultant judgemental attitudes towards people living in low income areas can then 
impact negatively upon people’s (often already poor) mental health, with the ensuing stigma 
preventing them from seeking further help and support. Lay accounts of health inequalities across 
both areas were shaped by oft-repeated stereotypes that focused on individual behaviour and 
lifestyle choice (hard explanations), which at times obscured material and psychosocial explanations 
(and their political determinants, such as austerity) for wider societal inequality and in a way let 
those living in less deprived areas “off the hook” in terms of any shared responsibility. 
In both in-depth interviews and ethnographic observations, fatalism, control and opportunity were 
discussed by participants across both neighbourhoods, but particularly in the least deprived area. 
This advances the lay perspectives literature as whilst it is in keeping with the importance of 
psychosocial factors as identified by Smith (2017), it locates a new specific psychosocial pathway 
expressed by participants. Within the health inequalities literature, the concept of fatalism has been 
used to explain the supposed unhealthy lifestyles of people living in the most deprived groups 
(Bolam et al. 2004, Marmot and Wilkinson 2001). In a study of perspectives on health in middle class 
families, Backett (1987, cited in Backett 1992: 264) found respondents were not only more openly 
fatalistic about health matters but also regularly focused on the wider socio-economic and political 
factors which they described as constraining an individual's possibilities to 'achieve'. The recurrent 
phrase 'we're very lucky’ was also evident in Backett’s research.  
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
21 
Fatalism has been conceptualized by Savage et al. (2013: 1217) in three different ways - low control 
over health improvement; low control over lifestyle change; and a fear of change and the 
unexpected. The most relevant to the findings presented here is low control over health 
improvement, which was linked by participants to the negative effects that living a life affected by 
multiple and complex issues; for instance, food and fuel poverty, debt, bereavement, relationship 
breakdown, and sexual/domestic abuse. The accumulation of these factors then makes it difficult for 
people living in the most deprived areas to dedicate time and resources to protecting and managing 
their health.  
That is not to say people are without the desire to make such changes; rather and as Elliott et al. 
(2015: 227) have commented, “what some professionals and/or researchers see as fatalism or a low 
locus of control are revealed as realistic assessments of the limited opportunities people have to 
control their lives”. Perhaps what is needed, then, is the approach of ‘empathetic ethnographers’ as 
suggested in findings from Garthwaite et al. (2016). In considering potential directions for future 
investigation, their participants were clear that health inequalities researchers need to interrogate 
what such inequalities mean in people’s social worlds, as suggested by Scambler (2012: 144). This 
included prioritising listening to, and working to understand, the experiences of communities 
experiencing the brunt of health inequalities; again, especially important at a time of austerity.  
References  
Backett, K. (1992) The construction of health knowledge in middle class families. Health Education 
Research, 7, 4, pp. 497-507. 
Backett, K. (1987) The Achievement of Health: the middle classes discuss health in families. Working 
Paper No. 13. Edinburgh: Research Unit in Health and Behavioural Change. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
22 
Backett-Milburn, K., Cunningham-Burley, S. and Davis, J. (2003) Contrasting lives, contrasting views? 
Understandings of health inequalities from children in differing social circumstances. Social Science 
& Medicine, 57, 4, pp. 613-623. 
Bambra, C. (2016) Health Divides: Where you live can kill you. Bristol: Policy Press. 
Bambra, C. and Garthwaite, K. (2015) Austerity, welfare reform and the English health divide. Area, 
47, 3, pp. 341-343. 
Bambra, C., Robertson, S., Kasim, A., Smith, J., Cairns-Nagi, J.M., Copeland, A., Finlay, N. and 
Johnson, K. (2014) Healthy land? An examination of the area-level association between brownfield 
land and morbidity and mortality in England. Environment and Planning A, 46, 2, pp.433-454. 
Bartley, M. (2004) Health inequality: An introduction to theories, concepts and methods. Cambridge: 
Polity Press. 
Blaxter, M. (1983) The causes of disease - women talking. Social Science & Medicine, 17, 2, pp. 59-69. 
Blaxter, M. (1997) Whose fault is it? People's own conceptions of the reasons for health inequalities. 
Social Science & Medicine, 44, 6, 747-756. 
Bolam, B., Murphy, S. and Gleeson, K. (2004) Individualisation and inequalities in health: a 
qualitative study of class identity and health. Social Science & Medicine, 59, 7, pp. 1355-1365.  
Cummins, S., Curtis, S., Diez-Roux, A. V., et al. (2007) Understanding and representing 'place' in 
health research: A relational approach. Social Science & Medicine, 65, pp. 1825 -1835. 
Curtis, S. and Rees Jones, I. (1998) Is there a place for geography in the analysis of health inequality? 
Sociology of Health & Illness, 20, 5, pp. 645-672. 
Davidson, R., Mitchell, R. and Hunt, K. (2008) Location, location, location: The role of experience of 
disadvantage in lay perceptions of area inequalities in health. Health & Place, 14, 2, pp. 167-181. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
23 
Davidson, R., Kitzinger, J. and Hunt, K. (2006) The wealthy get healthy, the poor get poorly? Lay 
perceptions of health inequalities. Social Science & Medicine, 62, 9, pp. 2171-2182. 
Egan, M., Lawson, L., Kearns, A., Conway, E. and Neary, J. (2015) Neighbourhood demolition, 
relocation and health. A qualitative longitudinal study of housing-led urban regeneration in Glasgow, 
UK. Health & place, 33, pp.101-108. 
Elliott, E., Popay, J. and Williams, G. ‘Knowledge of the everyday: Confronting the causes of health 
inequalities’, pp. 222-237. In: (eds.) K. Smith, S. Hill and C. Bambra (2015) Health Inequalities: Critical 
Perspectives. Oxford: Oxford University Press.  
Garthwaite, K. (2016a) Hunger Pains: life inside foodbank Britain. Bristol: Policy Press. 
Garthwaite, K. (2016b) “I feel I’m giving something back to society”: constructing the ‘active citizen’ 
and responsibilising food bank use. Social Policy & Society, 12, 4, 611–24. 
Garthwaite, K. (2011) ‘The language of shirkers and scroungers?’ Talking about illness, disability and 
coalition welfare reform. Disability & Society, 26, 3, pp.369-372. 
Hatzenbuehler, M.L., Phelan, J.C. and Link, B.G. (2013) Stigma as a fundamental cause of population 
health inequalities. American journal of public health, 103, 5, pp.813-821. 
Jensen, T. (2014) Welfare commonsense, poverty porn and doxosophy. Sociological Research Online, 
19, 3, p.3. 
Loopstra, R. Reeves, A. Taylor-Robinson, D. Barr, B. McKee, M. and Stuckler, D. (2015) Austerity, 
sanctions, and the rise of food banks in the UK. British Medical Journal (350).  
Macintyre, S. (1997) The black report and beyond: what are the issues? Social science & medicine, 
44, 6, pp.723-745. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
24 
Macintyre, S., McKay, L., and Ellaway, A. (2005) Are rich people or poor people more likely to be ill? 
Lay perceptions, by social class and neighbourhood, of inequalities in health. Social Science & 
Medicine, 60, 2, pp. 313-317.  
Macintyre, S., Ellaway, A. and Cummins, S. (2002) Place effects on health: How can we 
conceptualise, operationalise and measure them? Social Science & Medicine, 55, 1, pp. 125-139. 
Mackenzie, M., Collins, C. E., Connolly, J., Doyle, M. and McCartney, G. (2016) Working-class 
discourses of politics, policy and health: ‘I don’t smoke; I don’t drink. The only thing wrong with me 
is my health’. Policy & Politics, 45, 2, pp.231-249. 
Mitchell, R. and Popham, F. (2007) Greenspace, urbanity and health: Relationships in England. 
Journal of Epidemiology & Community Health, 61, 8, pp. 681-683 
Niedzwiedz, C. L. Mitchell, R. J. Shortt, N. K. and Pearce, J. R. (2016) Social protection spending and 
inequalities in depressive symptoms across Europe. Social psychiatry and psychiatric epidemiology, 
pp. 1-10. 
Parry, J., Mathers, J., Laburn-Peart, C., Orford, J. and Dalton, S. (2007) Improving health in deprived 
communities: What can residents teach us? Critical Public Health, 17, 2, pp. 123-136. 
Pearce, J. (2013) The ‘blemish of place’: stigma, geography and health inequalities. A commentary on 
Tabuchi, Fukuhara & Iso. Social Science & Medicine, 75, 11, pp. 1921-1924. 
Pink, S., Hubbard, P., O’Neill, M., and Radley, A. (2010) Walking across disciplines: from ethnography 
to arts practice. Visual Studies, 25, 1,1–7. 
Popay, J., Bennett, S., Thomas, C., Williams, G., Gatrell, A. and Bostock, L. (2003) Beyond ‘beer, fags, 
egg and chips’? Exploring lay understandings of social inequalities in health. Sociology of Health & 
Illness, 25, 1, pp. 1-23. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
25 
Popay, J., Williams, G., Thomas, C. and Gatrell, T. (1998) Theorising inequalities in health: the place 
of lay knowledge. Sociology of Health & Illness, 20, 5, pp. 619-644.  
Savage, M., Dumas, A. and Stuart, S.A. (2013) Fatalism and short-termism as cultural barriers to 
cardiac rehabilitation among underprivileged men. Sociology of Health & Illness, 35, 8, pp. 1211-
1226. 
Scambler, G. (2012) Review article: health inequalities. Sociology of Health & Illness, 34, 1, 130–46. 
Scambler, G. (2006) Sociology, social structure and health-related stigma. Psychology, Health & 
Medicine, 11, 3, pp.288-295. 
Sloggett, A. and Joshi, H. (1994) Higher mortality in deprived areas: community or personal 
disadvantage? British Medical Journal, 309, 6967, pp. 1470-1474. 
Smith, K. (2017, forthcoming) In their own words: What does qualitative research tell us about how 
people in the UK understand the impacts of socioeconomic disadvantage on their mental health and 
risk factors for suicide? A review of available research; Sociology of Health and Illness. 
Stafford, M. and McCarthy, M. (2006) ‘Neighbourhoods, housing and health’. In: Marmot, M & 
Wilkinson, R (eds.) Social determinants of health Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 78-96. 
Wilkinson, R. and Pickett, K. (2010) The spirit level: why equality is better for everyone. Penguin UK. 
 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
• 
Unique insights into how people in socially contrasting areas understand health inequalities 
 
• 
Uses detailed ethnographic methodologies over a three-year period 
 
• 
Reveals how judgemental attitudes can impact on health  
 
• 
Argues for a deeper understanding of complexity in communities  
 
 
 
 
 
 
