 Technical note
Selection of a potential diagnostic biomarker for HIV infection from a
random library of non-biological synthetic peptoid oligomers
Tricia L. Gearhart a, Ronald C. Montelaro a, Mark E. Schurdak b, Chris D. Pilcher c, Charles R. Rinaldo d,
Thomas Kodadek e, Yongseok Park d, Kazi Islam f, Raymond Yurko f,
Ernesto T.A. Marques Jr a,d, Donald S. Burke a,d,⁎
a Center for Vaccine Research, University of Pittsburgh, 3501 Fifth Ave, Pittsburgh, PA, 15261, United States
b Drug Discovery Institute, University of Pittsburgh, 3501 Fifth Ave, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, United States
c Center for AIDS Research, University of California, 1001 Potrero Ave, SFGH 80, San Francisco, CA 94110, United States
d Graduate School of Public Health, University of Pittsburgh, 130 DeSoto Street, Pittsburgh, PA, United States
e The Scripps Research Institute, 130 Scripps Way, Jupiter, FL 33458, United States
f Peptide Synthesis Facility, University of Pittsburgh, 300 Technology Drive, Pittsburgh, PA 15219, United States
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 18 December 2015
Received in revised form 10 April 2016
Accepted 2 May 2016
Available online 12 May 2016
Non-biological synthetic oligomers can serve as ligands for antibodies. We hypothesized that a random combina-
torial library of synthetic poly-N-substituted glycine oligomers, or peptoids, could represent a random “shape li-
brary” in antigen space, and that some of these peptoids would be recognized by the antigen-binding pocket of
disease-specific antibodies. We synthesized and screened a one bead one compound combinatorial library of
peptoids, in which each bead displayed an 8-mer peptoid with ten possible different amines at each position
(108 theoretical variants). By screening one million peptoid/beads we found 112 (approximately 1 in 10,000)
that preferentially bound immunoglobulins from human sera known to be positive for anti-HIV antibodies. Reac-
tive peptoids were then re-synthesized and rigorously evaluated in plate-based ELISAs. Four peptoids showed
very good, and one showed excellent, properties for establishing a sero-diagnosis of HIV. These results demon-
strate the feasibility of constructing sero-diagnostic assays for infectious diseases from libraries of random molec-
ular shapes. In this study we sought a proof-of-principle that we could identify a potential diagnostic antibody
ligand biomarker for an infectious disease in a random combinatorial library of 100 million peptoids. We believe
that this is the first evidence that it is possible to develop sero-diagnostic assays – for any infectious disease –
based on screening random libraries of non-biological molecular shapes.
© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Keywords:
HIV
Diagnostic
Biomarker
Peptoid
Infectious disease
ELISA
1. Introduction
Non-biological synthetic oligomers can serve as ligands for antibod-
ies (Reddy et al., 2011; Raveendra et al., 2013). Poly-N-substituted gly-
cines, in which side chains of differing composition are linked to an
oligomeric backbone by nitrogen atoms, rather than alpha-carbons,
are peptide-like but non-biological. Such “peptoid” oligomers are easy
to synthesize, inexpensive, and chemically stable to conventional enzy-
matic degradation and temperature, making them attractive candidates
for use in diagnostic assays. We hypothesized that a random combinato-
rial library of synthetic poly-N-substituted glycine oligomers could rep-
resent a random “shape library” in antigen space, and that some of these
peptoids would be recognized by the antigen-binding pocket of disease-
specific antibodies. If the combinatorial library of oligomers is designed
to be random and not engineered to be similar to any known antigen or
antigens, the shape library could encompass a wide range of linear and
non-linear conformational epitopes, post-translationally modified anti-
gens, and other novel antigens. We reasoned that if this approach could
be used to identify a diagnostic biomarker for any one infectious disease,
it may be possible to do so for all infectious diseases. HIV was selected as
our target disease for identification of a peptoid-based diagnostic bio-
marker. HIV, the etiological agent causing the epidemic of Acquired Im-
munodeficiency Syndrome – AIDS, has infected at least 70 million
people world-wide and caused N25 million deaths. Diagnostic assays
for detection of antibodies to HIV are well standardized and widely
used. However, all current antibody-based diagnostic assays for HIV
are based on virus-derived antigens. The experiments described here
present a radical departure in that we sought synthetic oligomer anti-
gens that are not derived from HIV proteins. We applied an “antigenical-
ly agnostic” screening approach to the search for HIV-1 specific
Journal of Immunological Methods 435 (2016) 85–89
⁎ Corresponding author at: Center for Vaccine Research, University of Pittsburgh, 9014
Biomedical Science Tower-3, 3501 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, United States.
E-mail address: donburke@pitt.edu (D.S. Burke).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jim.2016.05.001
0022-1759/© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Immunological Methods
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jim
 diagnostic biomarkers. This approach has previously been used to iden-
tify antibody ligand biomarkers for autoimmune diseases such as
Alzheimer's disease and other chronic diseases not thought to be of in-
fectious origin and where no antigen targets were known (Reddy et al.,
2011; Raveendra et al., 2013).
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Peptoid library construction
The construction of the random one bead one compound peptoid li-
brary has been previously described (Lam et al., 1991; Figliozzi et al.,
1996; Alluri et al., 2003; Raveendra et al., 2013). We used an Nlys-
Nlys-Nleu invariant linker in library construction. Our library consisted
of 8 monomer peptoids that were randomly generated from a series of
10 monomers. These 10 monomers were Nlys (1,4-Diaminobutane),
Nleu (Isobutylamine), Ntyr (4-Methoxybenzylamine), Nmba (R-(+)-
alphaMethylbenzylamine), Nchma (Cyclohexanemethylamine), Naea
(N-(2-Aminoethyl)acetamide),
Napp
(N-(3-Aminopropyl)-2-
pyrrolidinone), Nala (Beta Alanine), Npip (Piperonylamine), and Neth
(2-Ethoxyethaneamine). The best diagnostic peptoid (HIV-DxP-1) iden-
tified through screening and extensive validation had the sequence of
Npip
(Piperonylamine)-
Nala
(Beta
Alanine)-
Naea
(N-(2-
Aminoethyl)acetamide)- Nmba (R-(+)-alphaMethylbenzylamine)-
Neth (2-Ethoxyethaneamine)- Npip (Piperonylamine)- Nlys (1,4-
Diaminobutane)- Npip (Piperonylamine).
2.2. Serum sample panels
For library screening and initial ELISA testing, we used seronegative
serum purchased from MP Biomedicals (#823183), in addition to panels
of plasma samples from the Consortium for the Evaluation and Perfor-
mance of HIV Incidence Assays (CEPHIA). This panel included 202 plas-
ma samples where 9 were HIV seronegative, and the remaining samples
were HIV seropositive from various well-defined times post-serocon-
version. The panel also included samples from individuals undergoing
antiretroviral therapy.
The samples for testing of the best diagnostic candidate (36 HIV pos-
itive and 36 HIV negative individual serum samples) and the blinded
serum panel (162 HIV positive and 49 HIV negative individual serum
samples) used for confirmation testing in the peptoid ELISA was assem-
bled by Dr. Charles Rinaldo of the University of Pittsburgh, and founder
of the Multicenter AIDS Cohort Study (MACS) site in Pittsburgh, PA
(Kaslow et al., 1987). This serum panel has been extensively studied. In-
cluded in both of these panels were samples from individuals undergo-
ing antiretroviral therapy.
A protocol (PRO12110514 dated 7 Jan, 2013) for this work was
reviewed and approved by the University of Pittsburgh Institutional Re-
view Board. Based on the information provided to the IRB, it was deter-
mined that the investigator conducting research would not obtain
information about research subjects via an interaction with them, nor
obtain identifiable private information.
2.3. Peptoid library screening and sequencing
The library screening procedure has been previously described
(Raveendra et al., 2013). Briefly, the library was first screened with com-
mercially available, seronegative serum; any peptoid/beads that bound
antibodies present in normal serum were removed. We then screened
the remaining beads with serum pools of 4 individual HIV negative
serum samples from CEPHIA to completely denude the peptoid/bead li-
brary of any seronegative serum binding peptoids. The remaining li-
brary was screened with HIV positive serum pools of 4 individual
samples from individuals 0–4 months post-seroconversion. Peptoid/
beads that positively reacted were removed and saved for future
study. This same process was repeated with the remaining peptoid/
bead library with samples from 5 to 8 months post-seroconversion, 9–
12 months post-seroconversion, 13–18 months post-seroconversion,
19–24 months post-seroconversion, and lastly long-term, antiretrovi-
ral-treated samples. All HIV positive samples in this panel were infected
with Clade B. Human antibody binding to the peptoid/beads in these
screening steps was determined by secondary binding of fluorescently
labeled anti-human IgG, and visual screening by fluorescence microsco-
py. Any peptoid/beads that reacted positively with HIV positive serum
were saved and retested in both pools and individual samples from
the initial screening pool. Peptoid/beads that continued to react posi-
tively were sequenced as previously described using MS/MS mass spec-
trometry (Raveendra et al., 2013).
2.4. Peptoid ELISA
The ELISA assay that was used to quantitatively determine the
seroreactivity of our potential peptoid biomarkers has been previ-
ously described (Ball et al., 1994). Briefly, we cross-linked the
peptoids to the polystyrene plate surface of 96-well ELISA plates
using poly-L-lysine as the anchor protein, and glutaraldehyde to
covalently link the peptoids to the poly-L-lysine. 50 μg peptoid/well
was immobilized on the plate surface. Wells were blocked in two
steps, first with 1 M glycine, and then with 2.5% milk/0.5% gelatin
(Sigma G2500). Primary human serum was added in the wells at a
1:50 dilution followed by washing the wells with 1× phosphate
buffered saline (PBS). Wells were then incubated in anti-human
secondary antibody (Sigma A8792-2ML), washed again with 1×
PBS, and then reactivity was determined using TMBlue (Sigma
T0440-1L) developing solution.
3. Results
We employed a one bead one peptoid compound library synthesis
technique (Lam et al., 1991; Alluri et al., 2003; Raveendra et al., 2013).
The peptoids contained eight variable positions, after an invariant
three-residue linker. Ten different amines (selected to represent a
range of chemical properties for size, hydrophobicity, and charge at
each site) were used in a combinatorial synthesis approach, resulting
in ten possible monomers at each of eight positions, for a theoretical di-
versity of 108 distinct oligomers.
To identify peptoids that bind anti-HIV antibodies, the peptoid/bead
library was screened with a step-wise series of well-characterized
known HIV antibody-negative and HIV antibody-positive serum sam-
ples (Fig. 1a). Presence or absence of HIV antibody in these serum sam-
ples had previously been defined by testing with licensed HIV
diagnostic assays. 50,000 beads were screened in each set, and a total
of 1 million beads were screened. The library was first depleted of
peptoid/beads that bound antibodies present in seronegative serum
pools and known pre-infection HIV negative serum. Approximately 5%
of the total peptoid/beads showed some measure of reactivity with se-
ronegative and HIV negative human sera. The remaining peptoid/
beads were incubated with pools of HIV positive serum from four to
five individual patients. This Panel 1 of HIV positive serum samples in-
cluded samples from individuals with both recent and long-standing in-
fections, and individuals undergoing antiretroviral therapy. Any
peptoid/beads that bound antibodies in these pools were removed
and saved. For identification of peptoids, bound antibodies were eluted
with SDS from the initially reactive peptoid/beads, and the candidate
beads re-tested with each of the individual specimens of the HIV posi-
tive sera that had composed that positive pool. Through this iterative
process, 112 peptoid/beads were detected that specifically and consis-
tently bound antibodies present in all HIV positive serum but not sero-
negative human nor negative sera from persons who were known to
later become infected by and sero-convert to HIV. Consistently reactive
peptoids were cleaved from the beads and the peptoid sequences were
determined using MS/MS mass spectrometry. Although the quantity of
86
T.L. Gearhart et al. / Journal of Immunological Methods 435 (2016) 85–89
 peptoid harvested from a single bead was sometimes insufficient for se-
quencing from some beads, and ambiguous sequences were obtained
from others, a definitive sequence was obtained for a majority of the
consistently reactive peptoids.
A total of 59 consistently reactive peptoids were re-synthesized in
larger quantities for further testing. Synthesis was again done on
beads, but unlike earlier steps in which every bead featured a unique
combinatorial sequence, in this step all beads in each synthesis run
shared the same sequence. Peptoids were cleaved and purified using
HPLC. All 59 re-synthesized candidate peptoids were next tested in a
plate ELISA format against the same set of individual serum samples
that had been used to initially screen the bead/peptoid library (Panel
1, 189 HIV positive and 9 HIV negative sera; Fig. 1b). This 96-well micro-
plate ELISA assay was modified from our previously published peptide
ELISA protocol (Ball et al., 1994). In preliminary tests, simple adherence
of the peptoids directly to the plate surface performed poorly, so we
cross-linked the peptoids to the polystyrene plate surface using poly-
L-lysine as the anchor protein, and glutaraldehyde to covalently link
the peptoids to the poly-L-lysine. This procedure has been shown to sig-
nificantly increase sensitivity as compared to ELISA assays where pep-
tides were passively coated to the plates (Ball et al., 1994). In this
assay, we demonstrated that the majority of the peptoids showed the
expected reactivity patterns, with the quantitative optical density re-
sults in the plate ELISA format reproducing the qualitative results ob-
tained in the visual bead screening format. Interestingly, different
peptoids showed varying patterns and degrees of reactivity to various
groups of serum samples. For the purpose of this study, we selected
the peptoids that had the best diagnostic properties and reacted with
all HIV positive serum in the ELISA format for more detailed study.
The antibody binding properties of these four diagnostic candidate
peptoids were examined using a second, independent panel of serum
samples from patients in the Multicenter AIDS Cohort Study (Kaslow
et al., 1987). This Panel 2 consisted of well-characterized serum samples
from 36 HIV positive and 36 seronegative volunteers, all from the same
epidemiological cohort (Fig. 2). While all four peptoids distinguished
between HIV positive and seronegative samples (p b 0.001, Student's
t-test), HIV-DxP-1 (Fig. 2a) showed the greatest separation between
HIV positive and seronegative samples and was selected as the lead
diagnostic candidate peptoid. We then tested HIV-DxP-1 (Fig. 3a)
against a third set of unique serum samples. Panel 3 included 162
HIV positive and 49 seronegative volunteers from the Multicenter
AIDS Cohort Study. Samples were coded and tested blindly. The
unblinded results (Fig. 3b) demonstrated that the HIV-DxP-1
peptoid ELISA reliably distinguished between HIV positive sera and
HIV negative sera (p b 0.0001, Student's t-test). The receiver operat-
ing characteristic (ROC) curve of the results (Fig. 3c) showed
sensitivity and specificity values of approximately 90% or greater
over a range of cut-off values. Because we have not yet fully
optimized the HIV-DxP-1 ELISA assay conditions, we do not report
precise sensitivity and specificity values here, but will do so as we
further develop the assay.
4. Discussion
These results demonstrate that diagnostic antibody ligands for HIV
were present in a random library of non-biological synthetic oligomers.
Furthermore, we only had to screen 1 million peptoids in a library of 100
million theoretical variants to find at least one that showed excellent
sensitivity and specificity properties. We believe that this is the first ev-
idence that it is possible to develop diagnostic assays – for any infectious
disease – based on screening random libraries of non-biological molec-
ular shapes. There is no a priori reason to believe that our first peptoid
library was especially tailored to generate HIV antibody ligands, so it is
possible that other infectious diseases could be diagnosed with assays
based on this or similar platforms. Additionally, future experiments
are being conducted in order to explore the ability of peptoids to distin-
guish between recent and long-term HIV infections, an advance that
would be important in the public health field.
One limitation of this approach is that we do not know the identity
of the presumed natural ligand that corresponds to the non-natural
Fig. 1. Peptoid Screening and Evaluation Flowcharts. a. Flowchart of peptoid library screening. b. Flowchart of reactive peptoid evaluation and diagnostic peptoid selection.
87
T.L. Gearhart et al. / Journal of Immunological Methods 435 (2016) 85–89
 HIV-DxP-1 peptoid. It could be a native HIV molecule, a denatured HIV
molecule, or even a host-derived molecule. A technique for the determi-
nation of an unknown antigen and its corresponding antibody has
previously been accomplished using a Type 1 Diabetes model (Doran
et al., 2015). The natural ligand corresponding to HIV-DxP-1 will be de-
termined in future studies.
Fig. 2. Diagnostic candidate peptoids can distinguish between individual HIV positive and HIV negative serum samples. a–d. Each point represents the average optical density of duplicate
samples of an individual serum sample in the standard peptoid ELISA. Horizontal and vertical lines represent the mean and standard deviation respectively. With all four candidate
peptoids in a–d, optical density values obtained were greater on assays using known HIV positive sera than with known HIV negative sera (p b 0.001, Student' t-test).
Fig. 3. Analysis of potential diagnostic biomarker peptoid HIV-DxP-1: a. chemical structure and sequence of HIV-DxP-1 (see methods for chemical names of peptoid residues). b. Peptoid
ELISA analysis of HIV-DxP-1 against 162 HIV positive and 49 HIV negative individual serum samples. Each symbol represents the average optical density of duplicate runs on an individual
serum sample. Horizontal and vertical lines represent the means and standard deviations, respectively. Optical density values obtained were greater on assays using known HIV positive
sera than with known HIV negative sera (p b 0.0001, Student' t-test). c. Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve of peptoid ELISA data showing sensitivity versus (100-specificity) for
varying cut-off values.
88
T.L. Gearhart et al. / Journal of Immunological Methods 435 (2016) 85–89
 Lastly, biologically inspired but non-natural antibody ligands such as
HIV-DxP-1 may have value as immunogens. Here we screened our li-
brary for peptoids with “yes/no” diagnostic properties. By instead
screening the library for ligands of neutralizing antibodies, or neutraliz-
ing monoclonal antibodies, it may be possible to discover protective
immunogens.
5. Conclusions
In this work, we identified a novel potential biomarker for HIV-1 in-
fection by screening a combinatorial library of synthetic, peptide-like,
but nonbiological molecules called “peptoids”. This potential peptoid
biomarker was able to distinguish between HIV-1 infect individuals
and non-infected controls from the same cohort with high specificity
and sensitivity. To our knowledge, this is the first evidence that peptoids
can be used as biomarkers for diagnosing an infectious disease.
Role of the funding source
The funder of the study had no role in study design, data collection,
data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report.
Declaration of interests
There are no conflicts of interest with this work.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
grant #OPP1068374. We thank the Consortium for the Evaluation and
Performance of HIV Incidence Assays (CEPHIA) and the Multicenter
AIDS Cohort Study (MACS) for providing serum samples. We also
thank Michael Castigliano for help during the initial library screening
process.
References
Alluri, P.G., Reddy, M.M., Bachhawat-Sikder, K., Olivos, H.J., Kodadek, T., 2003. Isolation of
protein ligands from large peptoid libraries. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 125 (46),
13995–14004.
Ball, J.M., Henry, N.L., Montelaro, R.C., Newman, M.J., 1994. A versatile synthetic peptide-
based ELISA for identifying antibody epitopes. J. Immunol. Methods 171 (1), 37–44.
Doran, T.M., Simanski, S., Kodadek, T., 2015. Discovery of native autoantigens via antigen
surrogate technology: application to type 1 diabetes. ACS Chem. Biol. 10 (2),
401–412.
Figliozzi, G.M., Goldsmith, R., Ng, S.C., Banville, S.C., Zuckermann, R.N., 1996. Synthesis of
N-substituted glycine peptoid libraries. Methods Enzymol. 267, 437–447.
Kaslow, R.A., Ostrow, D.G., Detels, R., Phair, J.P., Polk, B.F., Rinaldo Jr., C.R., 1987. The mul-
ticenter AIDS cohort study: rationale, organization, and selected characteristics of the
participants. Am. J. Epidemiol. 126 (2), 310–318.
Lam, K.S., Salmon, S.E., Hersh, E.M., Hruby, V.J., Kazmierski, W.M., Knapp, R.J., 1991. A new
type of synthetic peptide library for identifying ligand-binding activity. Nature 354
(6348), 82–84.
Raveendra, B., Hao, W., Baccala, R., Reddy, M.M., Schilke, J., Bennett, J.L., Theofiliopolous,
A.N., Kodadek, T., 2013. Discovery of peptoid ligands for anti-aquaporin 4 antibodies.
Chem. Biol. 20, 350–359.
Reddy, M.M., Wilson, R., Wilson, J., Connell, S., Gocke, A., Hynan, L., German, D., Kodadek,
T., 2011. Identification of candidate IgG biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease via com-
binatorial library screening. Cell 144 (1), 132–142.
89
T.L. Gearhart et al. / Journal of Immunological Methods 435 (2016) 85–89
