 Page 1 
This is a post-peer-review, pre-copy edited version of an article published in Social Science & 
Medicine. The definitive publisher-authenticated version of ‘Can alcohol make you happy? A 
subjective wellbeing approach (Baumberg Geiger & MacKerron 2016, Social Science & Medicine, 
156(May):184-191) is available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2016.03.034 
 
 
 
 
 Page 2 
CAN ALCOHOL MAKE YOU HAPPY?  A SUBJECTIVE WELLBEING 
APPROACH 
Abstract 
There are surprisingly few discussions of the link between wellbeing and alcohol, and few empirical 
studies to underpin them.  Policymakers have therefore typically considered negative wellbeing 
impacts while ignoring positive ones, used gross overestimates of positive impacts via a naïve 
‘consumer surplus’ approach, or ignored wellbeing completely.  We examine an alternative subjective 
wellbeing method for investigating alcohol and wellbeing, using fixed effects analyses of the 
associations between drinking and wellbeing within two different types of data. Study 1 examines 
wave-to-wave changes in life satisfaction and past-week alcohol consumption/alcohol problems 
(CAGE) from a representative cohort of people born in Britain in 1970, utilising responses at ages 30, 
34 and 42 (a sample size of 29,145 observations from 10,107 individuals).   Study 2 examines 
moment-to-moment changes in happiness and drinking from an iPhone-based data set in Britain 2010-
13, which is innovative and large (2,049,120 observations from 31,302 individuals) but 
unrepresentative.  In Study 1 we find no significant relationship between changing drinking levels and 
changing life satisfaction (p=0.20), but a negative association with developing drinking problems (-
0.18 points on a 0-10 scale; p=0.003). In contrast, Study 2 shows a strong and consistent moment-to-
moment relationship between happiness and drinking events (+3.88 points on a 0-100 scale; p<0.001), 
although associations beyond the moment in question are smaller and more inconsistent.  In 
conclusion, while iPhone users are happier at the moment of drinking, there are only small overspills 
to other moments, and among the wider population, changing drinking levels across several years are 
not associated with changing life satisfaction.  Furthermore, drinking problems are associated with 
lower life satisfaction.  Simple accounts of the wellbeing impacts of alcohol policies are therefore 
likely to be misleading.  Policymakers must consider the complexity of different policy impacts on 
different conceptions of ‘wellbeing’, over different time periods, and among different types of 
drinkers.  
Keywords 
 Page 3 
subjective wellbeing, happiness, policy evaluation, longitudinal analysis; Britain 
 Page 4 
Introduction 
While alcohol can lower wellbeing – globally, alcohol is the fifth biggest risk factor for premature 
death and disability (Lim et al, 2012), as well as having a contributing role to a range of social 
problems and economic costs (ANONYMOUS 2006) – it is also clearly a source of pleasure.  
However, there are few empirical studies of  links between wellbeing and alcohol (see below), and 
almost no academic discussion of the implications for policy (rare exceptions being Keane, 2009; 
Room, 2000).   
This lack of evidence is an obstacle to developing evidence-based alcohol policies.  The main existing 
approach for looking at the wellbeing impacts of drinking is the ‘consumer surplus’ approach – but 
the naïve form that has sometimes been used by policymakers is based on flawed assumptions that 
produce large overestimates of the positive wellbeing impacts of drinking while largely ignoring 
negative wellbeing impacts (see below).  For example, in relation to recent UK Department of Health 
proposals to introduce minimum unit pricing, the Treasury conducted an impact assessment using this 
approach, and found that the costs of minimum pricing (via a loss of positive wellbeing) outweighed 
its benefits, temporarily halting the policy until a critical note was received from outside experts.  
Conversely, other studies estimate the negative wellbeing impacts of drinking while ignoring any 
positive impacts.  Recent studies have found new ways to value negative wellbeing impacts of 
alcohol, including wellbeing-related ‘harms to others’ (Johansson et al., 2006; Laslett et al., 2010), 
and reduced health-related quality-of-life among people with an alcohol use disorder (Johansson et al., 
2006). However, positive wellbeing impacts are barely mentioned.  For example, the leading ex ante 
impact assessment of alcohol policies, the Sheffield Alcohol Policy Model, estimates that a 50p 
minimum price in Britain would lead to wellbeing benefits worth more than £2bn over 10 years 
(Purshouse et al., 2009, p112), while ignoring positive wellbeing impacts.  
A new direction is necessary to contribute to evidence-informed policy.  This paper therefore outlines 
an alternative ‘empirical wellbeing’ approach to looking at the link between alcohol and wellbeing, 
 Page 5 
and presents the results of the approach applied to a nationally representative cohort study (Study 1) 
and an innovative smartphone-based data set (Study 2).   
Methods for estimating wellbeing impacts
Methods for estimating wellbeing impacts 
Consumer surplus method 
To the extent that previous studies have estimated anything beyond purely negative wellbeing impacts 
of alcohol, they have used a naïve version of ‘consumer surplus’ (Aslam et al., 2003; cebr, 2009).  
This starts from the assumption that consumers receive benefits to their individual welfare – ‘utility’ – 
from drinking that are at least as large as the money they spend.  Crucially, they also receive a 
‘surplus’ of utility beyond what they pay – i.e. the money that they would have been willing to pay for 
that drink if the price was raised – which has been argued to be a measure of the ‘pleasure of 
drinking’ (Aslam et al., 2003:35). 
The implication is that involuntary (policy-induced) reductions in alcohol consumption will reduce 
wellbeing, in two ways: 
1. 
Extra spending: people pay a higher price for the drinks that they continue to consume, so the 
surplus beyond the price they pay will be reduced. 
2. 
Reduced drinking: people will stop consuming some drinks, for which they previously 
received a utility surplus.   
Using this logic, the economic consultants NERA in a report for the Greater London Authority 
estimated that the pleasure of drinking was worth over £2bn in London (Aslam et al., 2003), while the 
economic consultants cebr in a report for SAB Miller estimated that a 5% reduction in the 
consumption of moderate drinkers in the UK would cost £600m/pa (cebr, 2009).   
However, the general assumptions on which these estimates are based – perfect rationality, perfect 
information and perfect foresight – are naïve compared to those made by contemporary welfare 
 Page 6 
economists in the light of evidence from behavioural economics (Cawley & Ruhm, 2011).  The 
assumptions are even more challenging when applied to alcohol.  While dependence has been shown 
to be potentially ‘rational’ in the terms of Becker and Murphy’s theory, it seems unlikely that addicts 
consistently make consumption decisions that maximise their own welfare (e.g. Bernheim & Rangel, 
2004).  Non-addicted drinkers can also less easily be assumed to be optimising their welfare as they 
become more intoxicated.  Given that the majority of all drinks in the UK are consumed beyond the 
Government’s recommended weekly or daily limits (AUTHOR 2009), policymakers’ use of naïve 
consumer surplus estimates is difficult to justify.   
This does not mean that the consumer surplus approach to cost-benefit analysis is fundamentally 
invalid.  Modern welfare economists have produced extensions of the standard model to deal with 
imperfect information, present-biased preferences, temptation, addiction (Bernheim & Rangel, 2004; 
Cawley & Ruhm, 2011), and ‘suspect’ choices in general (Bernheim & Rangel, 2007).  The challenge, 
however, is calibrating these models with reliable evidence on which choices are suspect.  To the 
extent that alcohol studies have taken account of ‘suspect’ choices, they have made implausible 
adjustments, e.g. assuming that policies have no wellbeing impacts on heavy drinkers whatsoever 
(cebr, 2009, p46).  More sophisticated revisions to the consumer surplus approach have been 
suggested for tobacco and gambling.  The Australian Productivity Commission (1999:5.20-5.21) 
assumed that in the absence of addiction, gambling addicts would behave like non-addicted regular 
users. While defensible for gambling, this is still fundamentally arbitrary, and considers only 
addiction rather than intoxication.  A more sophisticated recent study (Ashley et al., In Press) uses a 
series of assumptions to estimate how much people would smoke if they were non-addicted and fully 
took account of smoking-attributable reduced life expectancy. However, this method only presently 
exists for tobacco, and further work will be needed to see if it can be convincingly applied to the more 
complex consequences of drinking. 
Subjective wellbeing method 
The main alternative to the consumer surplus approach is the subjective wellbeing approach, which 
investigates how far drinking makes people describe themselves as (un)happier.  Using people’s self-
 Page 7 
reported wellbeing has proved a contentious idea (MacKerron, 2012a), primarily because it is unlikely 
to be a perfect measure of actual wellbeing.  Not only are there questions about how far we have 
insight into our own levels of happiness, but different people are likely to interpret survey questions 
on wellbeing differently and even to construct ‘happiness’ differently, confounding attempts to 
understand reported wellbeing through differences in people’s lives (Wilkinson, 2007).  
However, many of these problems can be minimised through better research design, such as focusing 
on changes within a culture – or even within a single individual, as we do below – which are likely to 
have greater validity (MacKerron, 2012a).  We believe that subjective wellbeing approaches are one 
valuable perspective on wellbeing, a view shared by bodies such as the UK Treasury (Fujiwara & 
Campbell, 2011), and reflected in the burgeoning field of ‘happiness studies’.   
Wellbeing is a multidimensional construct, including (but not limited to) both emotional wellbeing at 
a particular moment — “the frequency and intensity of experiences of joy, fascination, anxiety, 
sadness, anger, and affection that make one’s life pleasant or unpleasant” (Kahneman & Deaton, 
2010:16489) — and a person’s wider satisfaction with their life, a cognitive reflection beyond 
individual moments.  It cannot be assumed that any cause has identical impacts on each conception of 
wellbeing (Kahneman & Deaton, 2010).   
This may be particularly true for alcohol because short-term pleasures and pains may overspill beyond 
the moment of drinking.  There are negative short-term overspills via hangovers, and overspills on 
multiple timescales via health/social harms.  More positively, it is often suggested that alcohol 
improves sociability, with real-world interactions reported to be more agreeable with alcohol (aan het 
Rot et al., 2008), laboratory studies showing a reduction in social anxiety (Battista et al., 2010), and 
qualitative research describing ‘anticipatory pleasures’ and ‘retrospective bonding’ around drinking 
(Brown & Gregg, 2012).  However, the scale, dose-response and timing of some of these overspill 
effects is unclear.  
A further issue is that average impacts are likely to conceal considerable heterogeneity.  Partly this is 
because the response to alcohol is ‘biphasic’, with different effects in the ascending and descending 
 Page 8 
limbs of the blood alcohol curve – stimulant effects seem to be restricted to increasing intoxication, 
whereas sedative effects predominate during decreasing intoxication (Martin et al., 1993) – and with 
different impacts at different doses.  There has been a temptation to suggest that all of the pleasures of 
drinking come with ‘moderate’ consumption rather than intoxication, but the strong form of this claim 
has been subject to critique (Keane, 2009; Room, 2000).  Instead, heavier drinkers report greater 
stimulant and lower sedative effects (King et al., 2011), and people expect greater levels of both 
happiness and misery at higher levels of consumption (Adey et al., 2010).  
Heterogeneity is also likely because the pleasures (and pains) of drinking are often due to our own 
expectations and the reactions of people around us (Room, 2000).  This not only means that drinkers’ 
expectations may influence wellbeing, but that the relationship between alcohol and wellbeing will 
vary considerably across different cultures (Peele & Grant, 1999), particularly for the social 
consequences that are most closely bound up with expectations.  Alcohol may therefore have different 
impacts on different concepts of wellbeing, when measured over different time periods, or for 
different population groups.  While we return to this in the Discussion, we primarily focus directly on 
ways of considering the average effects of drinking on subjective wellbeing. 
Empirical studies of alcohol and wellbeing 
There are no reviews of the impact of alcohol on wellbeing (unlike for depression; see Boden & 
Fergusson, 2011, which suggests a non-linear causal impact of drinking). A number of individual 
studies exist, but these are primarily cross-sectional studies where the direction of causality is unclear.  
Two types of longitudinal study have been conducted: 
- 
The first looks at the lagged impact of drinking on later wellbeing.  Among adolescents, 
alcohol use either has no significant effect (Mason & Spoth, 2011) or is associated with lower 
later wellbeing (Newcomb et al., 1986); while among young adults, studies variously find that 
greater levels of drinking are associated with higher later wellbeing (net of the effect of 
adverse consequences; Molnar et al., 2009); lower later wellbeing (controlling for genetic 
factors; Koivumaa-Honkanen et al., 2012); or no effect (Bogart et al., 2007).  However, while 
 Page 9 
this approach captures slowly-acting effects, it seems unlikely to capture shorter-term 
pleasures of drinking.   
- 
The second type of study looks at the immediate association of drinking with wellbeing, but 
further controls for time-invariant unobserved factors using fixed effects (‘FE’) modelling 
(see below).  Only two such studies have been conducted, both using the Russian 
Longitudinal Monitoring Survey (Graham et al., 2004; Massin & Kopp, 2014); Massin & 
Kopp’s more robust study finds no relationship between alcohol consumption and wellbeing 
among women, but that heavier drinking men have lower life satisfaction.   
However, there are few longitudinal studies of adults, and even these face challenges of causal 
inference due to the lengthy lags between waves.  Moreover, we would expect cross-cultural variation 
in the cultural associations of alcohol and pleasure, but the only FE studies are from Russia.  The 
remainder of the paper therefore presents two studies using FE analyses of UK data, providing 
longitudinal data on the short-term relationship between alcohol and wellbeing in Britain for the first 
time. 
Study 1: Cohort data 
Methods
Methods 
Design 
To investigate the association between drinking and wellbeing, the analysis uses FE models that 
examine how far within-person changes in drinking are associated with within-person changes in 
wellbeing.  The strength of FE models is that they remove unobserved, time-invariant confounding, 
and as a result have been recommended for studying both the impacts of alcohol (French & Popovici, 
2011) and influences on wellbeing (Ferrer-i-Carbonell & Frijters, 2004).  In Study 1, we use FE 
analyses of a conventional cohort dataset with gaps of several years between waves. 
 Page 10 
Participants 
The most suitable British study is the British Cohort Study 1970 (‘BCS70’), a cohort study based on 
17,000 babies born in the UK in a week in 1970, who barring emigration, death, non-contact or non-
response, have been followed-up at regular intervals.  For this analysis we focus on three face-to-face 
waves, 1999-2000 (age 30), 2004 (age 34) and 2012 (age 42), available from the UK Data Service 
(Study Numbers 5558, 5585 and 7473). 
Data analysis 
We assume the underlying model: 
 
𝐿𝑆𝑖𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽AlcALCit + 𝛽𝑥𝑥𝑖𝑡
′ + 𝑢𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡  
 
 
 
(1) 
where 𝐿𝑆𝑖𝑡 is life satisfaction for person i at time t, Alcit is a measure of alcohol consumption, 𝑥𝑖𝑡
′  is a 
vector of time-varying control variables, 𝑢𝑖 are unobserved individual fixed effects, 𝜀𝑖𝑡 is an error 
term uncorrelated with ALCit or 𝑥𝑖𝑡
′  , and 𝛼 and 𝛽 are parameters to estimate.   
The conventional cross-sectional OLS estimator of 𝛽Alc cannot estimate the unobserved person effect 
𝑢𝑖, which results in a bias to the extent that there are stable characteristics of respondents that 
influence both drinking and life satisfaction but are not observed in 𝑋𝑖𝑡
′  (e.g. personality traits).  
Longitudinal data offers us the potential to overcome this by using the fixed effects estimator, which 
looks at the within–person differences in each term: 
(𝐿𝑆𝑖𝑡 − 𝐿𝑆
̅̅̅𝑖) = 𝛽Alc(ALCit − ALC
̅̅̅̅̅𝑖) + 𝛽𝑥(𝑥𝑖𝑡 − 𝑥̅𝑖)′ + (𝜀𝑖𝑡 − 𝜀̅𝑖) 
  
(2)  
where 𝐿𝑆
̅̅̅𝑖 is the within-person average of life satisfaction, ALC
̅̅̅̅̅𝑖 is the within-person average of 
alcohol consumption, and 𝑥̅𝑖
′ is the within-person averages of each of a vector of control variables.  
The time-invariant term drops out of equation (2), with 𝛽Alc therefore being unaffected by any 
unobserved, stable individual characteristics.  Given that time-varying confounding is still possible, 
however, the analysis below also controls for a number of time-varying likely influences on 
wellbeing.  All analyses were conducted using Stata version 12 using the command XTREG.  
 Page 11 
Measures 
Life satisfaction is obtained via self-completion using the question “Here is a scale from 0-10 where 
'0' means that you are completely dissatisfied and '10' means that you are completely satisfied. Please 
enter the number which corresponds with how satisfied or dissatisfied you are about the way you life 
has turned out so far.”  Some economists have argued that such measures are the best available proxy 
for ‘utility’ (Fujiwara & Campbell, 2011), and we take this to be an adequate measure of wellbeing.  
Following standard practice, this is treated as a continuous rather than ordinal outcome variable 
(Ferrer-i-Carbonell & Frijters, 2004). 
Drinking is measured through the question, "In the last seven days, that is not counting today but 
starting from last [day], how much [drink] have you had?" , repeated for beer, wine, spirits, fortified 
wines and alcopops.  Our main analyses use a consistent conversion of drinks into units of alcohol, 
while a sensitivity analysis uses a changing unit conversion over time to account for changes in drink 
size and strength (see Web Appendix S1).  Main analyses use categories of  past-week alcohol 
consumption (following the same gender-specific categories as Purshouse et al., 2009) alongside a 
dummy term for longer-term non-drinkers (those who say they never drink); sensitivity analyses also 
variously use quadratic drinking terms, drinking frequency and alcohol problems (the CAGE scale, 
‘CAGE’ referring to the questions used in this screening questionnaire; see Web Appendix). Further 
details of these alcohol variables are given in Web Appendix S1. 
The analysis further controls for a number of time-varying factors that influence wellbeing (Fujiwara 
& Campbell, 2011), including marital status, children, economic status, travel-to-work time, work 
hours, longstanding illness, tenure, religiosity, income, smoking, pregnancy, and survey wave; 
derivation/descriptive statistics are given in Web Appendix S1.  The resulting estimates are therefore 
net of any impact of drinking on longstanding illness or smoking.   
 Page 12 
Results
Results 
The results are shown in Table 1 below.  Looking first at the OLS results without adjustment for 
controls (Column 2), life satisfaction peaks among light drinkers, where it is 0.29 points (p<0.001) 
greater than among non-abstainers who drank nothing in the past week.  With adjustment (Column 3), 
life satisfaction peaks among heavier drinkers, when it is 0.14 points (p=0.02) greater than zero-
drinkers.  In both cases, however, life satisfaction in the heaviest drinking group drops markedly. 
When we control for time-invariant unobserved characteristics, however, the results change.  In the 
unadjusted FE model, increases in drinking beyond 1 unit/wk are associated with reduced life 
satisfaction (significantly so from 14(female)/21(male) units), reaching a 0.26 point fall in the 
heaviest-drinking group (p=0.002).  In the final models that control for both unobserved time-
invariant (via fixed effects) and observed time-varying factors (via controls), we see a similar pattern, 
but this is weaker and not statistically significant (heaviest drinking group p=0.15, joint p=0.20).   
Despite covering the UK rather than Russia, the pattern of OLS and FE results are similar to Massin 
& Kopp (2014:Figure 1). Their OLS models also showed a significant curvilinear relationship, but 
their FE models only showed a statistically significant finding for the top-quartile of male drinkers 
(>29 units/wk), who had 0.05 points lower life satisfaction on a five-point scale compared to 
abstainers, similar to the 0.13 points on an eleven-point scale here.  
[Table 1 about here] 
 
Table 2 shows parallel models for alternate measures of alcohol consumption.  Frequency of drinking 
does not have a relationship with wellbeing in the FE models, but developing alcohol problems (only 
available at ages 30 and 34) is associated with reduced wellbeing (p=0.003 in FE model), mirroring 
Binder & Coad (2013).  
[Table 2 about here] 
 
 Page 13 
Several sensitivity analyses were conducted.  When splitting by gender, the impact of alcohol in the 
FE analyses is concentrated among men, as found by Massin & Kopp (2014).  However, the effect in 
men does not reach significance (p=0.23); the patterns in general are similar between genders; and 
when directly testing the differences between men and women, these are far from statistical 
significance.  None of the further sensitivity analyses substantively influence the results: effectively 
identical results are found when we use quadratic alcohol consumption; when we use different 
assumptions for the unit content of alcoholic drinks; or when including additional controls (poor 
health and social support) only available in certain waves.  Details of these sensitivity analyses are 
given in Web Appendix S3.   
Study 2: Event-level data 
Methods
Methods 
Design 
Study 1 found no significant relationship between changes in drinking levels/frequency and changes 
in life satisfaction, but that developing alcohol problems is associated with lower life satisfaction.  
However, we know that drinking may have different impacts on different aspects of wellbeing over 
different timescales, and this requires a different type of data.  We therefore make use of a unique 
smartphone-based dataset – ‘Mappiness’– that enables us to examine the association of drinking with 
happiness at a given moment, compared to other moments.   
Procedures 
The ‘Mappiness’ data uses the Experience Sampling Method (ESM) , one of several techniques used 
to obtain ongoing reports of everyday experience (Hektner et al., 2007).  Rather than the traditional 
method of recruiting a sample and providing them with a diary or computer, Mappiness uses a sample 
of existing iPhone users who chose to download the Mappiness app.  Users are then beeped at regular 
but random moments (the default is twice/day between 08:00-22:00), giving them a brief 
questionnaire about how happy they are, who they are with, and what they were doing just prior to 
 Page 14 
their response (see Web Appendix S4  the full questionnaire).  Because the device is already 
integrated into users’ daily lives, the additional burden on respondents is minimal, enabling a sample 
orders of magnitude larger than conventional ESM studies.   
Responses were treated as valid if they were begun within an hour of the beep being sent and 
completed within five minutes. Validity is therefore dependent on whether respondents had the device 
with them, were in an area with data reception, were able to hear the signal, and were able and willing 
to respond.  The valid response rate to signals was 48.4% amongst active participants (MacKerron, 
2012b, p170), which is lower than those usually reported for diary methods. However, this is partly be 
because we reject delayed and therefore unreliable responses that are reconstructed from memory at a 
later point — a serious problem in diary-based studies (Stone & Shiffman, 2002).   
Participants 
Unlike conventional ESM studies, the Mappiness sampling is opportunistic – it relies on iPhone users 
voluntarily downloading the Mappiness app.  The main spike in downloads was associated with 
Mappiness being featured in the UK App Store for two weeks.  Recruitment was also facilitated by 
media coverage of the app, including TV/radio (e.g. BBC1) and in newspapers (e.g. The 
Independent’s “50 best apps”), as well as through social media (for further details, see MacKerron, 
2012b).   
After excluding non-UK responses, the total sample here contains 2 million individual responses, 
collected from 31,302 individual users across 2010-2013, which MacKerron & Mourato (2013:59) 
believe to be “the largest ever achieved by an ESM study”. Given the self-selection into the sample 
and the restriction to iPhone users, it is unsurprising that the sample is unrepresentative of the UK 
population: participants are more likely to be young (two-thirds are under 35) and wealthy (median 
income is £48,000, almost twice the UK median) (MacKerron, 2012b:167).  
 Page 15 
Data analysis 
Our analysis again uses FE models, as above.  The short gap between responses also allows us to test 
for reverse causation where people respond 2+ times in the same day.  For these cases we model the 
relationship between drinking and wellbeing after 6pm, controlling for their earlier happiness: 
 (𝐻𝑖𝑡 − 𝐻
̅𝑖) = 𝛽Alc(DRKit − DRK
̅̅̅̅̅̅𝑖) + 𝛽𝐻(LHit − LH
̅
̅
̅
̅𝑖) + 𝛽𝑥(𝑥𝑖𝑡 − 𝑥̅𝑖)′ + (𝜀𝑖𝑡 − 𝜀̅𝑖) 
(3)  
where 𝐻
̅𝑖 is the within-person average of happiness, DRK
̅̅̅̅̅̅𝑖 is the within-person average of the 
drinking dummies, LH
̅
̅
̅
̅𝑖 is the average of happiness earlier in the day, and the other terms are as in 
equation 2.  We here use the cluster-robust sandwich estimator to calculate standard errors, which is 
robust to moment-to-moment correlations in the error term.  While dynamic (lagged) FE models 
violate the assumption that the error is uncorrelated with the regressors, this bias becomes ignorable 
where the number of time periods is moderately large (Roodman, 2009); a sensitivity analysis restricts 
the sample to those providing>=20 relevant observations.   
Measures 
Wellbeing is measured by the question, “do you feel… happy?”, which respondents complete using a 
slider from 0 (‘not at all’) to 100 (‘extremely’).  Drinking is measured by the question, “Just now, 
what were you doing?”, listing 41 different activities including ‘drinking alcohol’, and allowing 
respondents to select as many activities as apply.  Drinking was reported in 5.0% of responses (giving 
103,036 drinking episodes), in 91.0% of which they reported doing other activities in parallel, 
primarily ‘Talking, chatting, socialising’ (49.2% of all drinking episodes), ‘Watching TV/film’ 
(31.2%), and ‘Eating, snacking’ (27.9%); see Web Appendix S4 for further details.  Given the broad 
focus of Mappiness and the need to keep the questionnaire short, no data is available on drinking 
behaviour within each occasion.   
Aside from controlling for all time-invariant factors using FE models, we control for a variety of 
moment-specific factors, including: what people were doing (40 activities), who they were doing it 
with (7 types), time of day (three-hour blocks split by weekday vs. weekend/bank holiday), location 
 Page 16 
(inside/outside/in vehicle and home/work/other), and how many responses the participant has 
previously given. OLS estimates also include time-invariant controls for gender, employment status, 
marital and relationship status, household income, general health, children, single parent status, 
region, age and age squared at baseline. Derivations/descriptive statistics are given in Web Appendix 
S5. 
Results
Results 
The moment-to-moment association of alcohol and wellbeing in this unrepresentative panel of iPhone 
users is shown in Table 3.  Looking first at the OLS results (Columns 2-3), we can see that drinking 
alcohol is associated with considerably greater happiness at that moment – 10.79 points on a 0-100 
scale in the unadjusted model (p<0.001), and 3.65 points in the adjusted model (p<0.001).  Looking at 
the FE results (Columns 4-5), there is a similar decline between the unadjusted and adjusted models; it 
is unsurprising that part of the raised happiness when drinking is because it comes alongside other 
factors that are happiness-inducing.  Still, in the final (adjusted FE) model, drinking alcohol is 
associated with a happiness gain of nearly 4 points (p<0.001), compared to the same people when 
they are not drinking.   
[Table 3 about here] 
 
We can also see whether this association is partly explained by reverse causation, by controlling for 
happiness earlier in the same day (comparing Column 7 to Column 6, which is estimated on the same 
evening-only subsample).  Earlier happiness does predict drinking (see Table S13 in Web Appendix 
S6), and in Table 3 we can see that the impact of drinking declines slightly from 3.64 to 3.30 points 
when controlling for this – but is still moderately large and statistically significant (p<0.001).  
(Similar results are found if we restrict the sample to people providing 20+ observations).  In general 
this suggests that the effect is robust to reverse causation, at least on this timescale. 
 Page 17 
We also tested whether the same results were found for different subgroups on different occasions, by 
interacting drinking simultaneously with person and occasion characteristics.  Perhaps surprisingly, 
there were only relatively small differences in the happiness-inducing effect of alcohol between men 
and women, or when looking at different times of day, on weekdays vs. weekends, or with different 
people (see Web Appendix S6).  However, there were greater differences according to what people 
were doing while drinking: drinking had the greatest impact when it came alongside otherwise 
unenjoyable activities (traveling/commuting, waiting), and only increased the happiness of already-
enjoyable activities by smaller amounts (socialising, making love).  The greatest differences, though, 
were by age: drinking made most difference to the happiness of younger people (averaging across 
different types of drinking occasions, alcohol raised their happiness by 7.3 points), and least happiness 
to the oldest (3.0 points).  This may reflect heterogeneity in the wellbeing impact of drinking by level 
of intoxication, drinking expectations, and/or peer responses (discussed above). 
Overspills from the moment of drinking 
In contrast to the null association of drinking levels/frequency with life satisfaction from BCS70, 
these results suggest that people are happier when they are drinking.  It is unclear if this is solely 
because of people’s raised happiness at the moment of drinking, or whether there is a wellbeing 
‘overspill’ from the moment of drinking to other moments.  To test this, we changed the data structure 
from moments into periods by (i) averaging the moment-to-moment responses over weeks/months; 
then (ii) using FE models to see if people were happier in the weeks/months in which they drank more 
often.   
We must bear in mind that these estimates are more subject to time-varying confounding than the 
other models – the available Mappiness controls are focused on moment-to-moment rather than 
month-to-month influences on happiness.  Weeks/months in which people drank more frequently also 
have greater enjoyable tasks (e.g. socialising) and fewer unenjoyable activities (e.g. working), with a 
few exceptions (see Web Appendix S6), which may indicate that there are other characteristics of 
these periods that explain the apparent overspill.  It is also difficult to construct the appropriate 
 Page 18 
counterfactual for periods without alcohol; people are likely to replace drinking with a different 
leisure activity, but it is difficult to predict what this would be.   
Bearing this in mind, average happiness was higher in the weeks/months in which people drank more 
often (models M1/M3 in Table S17 in Web Appendix S6).However, the more interesting results are in 
models M2/M4, which look at average happiness excluding the moments of drinking.  These show a 
slight overspill, with people reporting greater levels of happiness in weeks/months in which they drink 
more often.  However, the size of these effects is relatively small (a peak effect of <½ point on a 0-
100 scale; p=0.02 by week and p=0.01 by month); and moreover the effects are non-linear, such that 
there is little difference between the 2nd and 5th quintiles of drinking frequency (among drinkers).  
This non-linearity may be because alcohol has a primarily positive effect on wellbeing at the moment 
of drinking, but more mixed overspills onto wellbeing at other moments.  For example, this could 
indicate hangover effects, although in a further sensitivity analysis, we found no impact of the 
previous night’s drinking on happiness (albeit a moderate impact on awakeness; see Web Appendix 
S6).   
Discussion 
There has been a surprising inattention to wellbeing issues in the academic literature on alcohol.  
Previous studies have either estimated certain negative wellbeing impacts and been unable to estimate 
positive ones (Johansson et al., 2006; Purshouse et al., 2009), or used a naive form of the ‘consumer 
surplus’ approach that makes assumptions that are difficult to defend (Aslam et al., 2003; cebr, 2009).  
It has not yet been demonstrated whether more sophisticated consumer surplus estimates can be 
convincingly applied to alcohol.   
In this paper, we present two new fixed effects (FE) estimates using an alternative ‘subjective 
wellbeing’ approach: 
 
Study 1 examined the relationship between drinking and life satisfaction across multiple-year 
transitions in the 1970 British Cohort Study (‘BCS70’).  The main specifications suggested 
 Page 19 
that there is no relationship between drinking level/frequency and life satisfaction, but a 
wellbeing penalty for those with alcohol problems.  This is similar to the only previous such 
study, which uses Russian data (Massin & Kopp, 2014).   
 
Study 2 examined the moment-to-moment relationship between drinking and happiness, using 
innovative smartphone-based data (‘Mappiness’) among an innovative and large but 
unrepresentative sample of iPhone users.  This suggested that people are noticeably happier at 
the moment they are drinking, agreeing with previous laboratory studies that show a positive 
impact of alcohol on mood (Martin et al., 1993). However, people are only slightly happier at 
non-drinking moments in the weeks/months in which they drink more often.  
Various explanations for these results are possible.  It may be that the results of Study 1 are less 
biased than Study 2, because the analysis of overspill effects in Study 2 is particularly vulnerable to 
confounding (the Mappiness data were not designed for analysis on this time frame).  More 
fundamentally, alcohol may have different impacts on happiness (Study 2) vs. life satisfaction (Study 
1), or on unrepresentative, relatively advantaged iPhone users (Study 2) vs. a nationally representative 
cohort of 30-42 year olds (Study 1).   
The simplest interpretation of these results, though, is that alcohol has a noticeable impact on 
subjective wellbeing at the moment of drinking, but relatively little overspill to other moments, and a 
negative impact on those that develop alcohol problems.  This also fits with our understanding of the 
plausible relationship between alcohol and wellbeing from the existing literature.  In considering the 
implications of these findings for policy, it is necessary to begin with their limitations.   
Limitations 
Study 1 adds to a sparse literature on the relationship between life satisfaction and alcohol, and Study 
2 is the first to look at moment-to-moment fluctuations in drinking and happiness.  Nevertheless, 
uncertainties remain.  It is unclear whether the smartphone-based findings would be replicated if the 
study were repeated on a more representative sample. FE estimates have the strengths of accounting 
for unobserved, stable characteristics, and of overcoming between-person differences in the 
 Page 20 
interpretation of wellbeing measures.  Yet they are still biased if there are unobserved time-varying 
factors that influence both drinking and wellbeing (e.g. traumatic life events), or if wellbeing 
conversely influences drinking (as in Boden & Fergusson, 2011).  The BCS70 adjusted FE results 
may further be biased to the extent that they over-control for certain consequences of drinking, such 
as marital break-up and unemployment. 
It is nevertheless unclear that alternate methods would produce more unbiased estimates.  
Instrumental variable analyses are theoretically unbiased, but it appears unlikely that there are any 
convincing instruments available for alcohol (French & Popovici, 2011).  Another alternative is to 
look at policy variation over time or between states/regions (e.g. Gruber & Mullainathan, 2005), but 
state taxes are more likely to indicate anti-alcohol sentiment than to approximate a natural experiment 
(French & Popovici, 2011). Moreover, interpreting findings would be further complicated by the 
likely non-linear impact of alcohol. For example, Yörük & Yörük (2012) use a regression 
discontinuity design to investigate students’ wellbeing as they reach the minimum legal drinking age 
– but their null finding could either indicate no effect, or it could conceal light-drinking students 
becoming happier and heavier-drinking students simultaneously becoming less happy.  The most 
useful further contributions to knowledge would seem to be from event-level data that contains more 
detail on the nature of consumption within each drinking occasion, but even here, uncertainties are 
likely to remain.  
Guidance for policymakers 
The most plausible explanation of our results is that alcohol leads to gains in happiness at the moment 
of drinking, but little overspill to other moments, and reduced life satisfaction among those who 
develop alcohol problems.  It should also be noted that we have focused on the impacts of alcohol on 
the wellbeing of the drinker, but a full account of the wellbeing impacts of alcohol policies must also 
consider considerable harms to others (Johansson et al., 2006; Laslett et al., 2010). Rather than trying 
to meet policymakers’ requests for a single number, a better approach may be an evidence-informed 
narrative as to the possible impacts of alcohol policies on different measures of wellbeing for different 
 Page 21 
groups (as we recommended in (AUTHOR 2012), and as Room (2000) has argued).  It is primarily 
policymakers’ responsibility to trade these off against one another, which is no easy task.   
In principle, this narrative could include estimates of the average wellbeing impacts of alcohol 
policies according to different wellbeing measures.  For example, the state of the art in ex ante policy 
assessment, the Sheffield Alcohol Policy Model (Purshouse et al., 2009), combines estimates of the 
link between alcohol consumption and key outcomes (such as the present study) with estimates of the 
impact of policies on levels/patterns of alcohol consumption.  However, Study 2 does not provide the 
type of risk functions (based either on binge-drinking or average consumption) used in the Sheffield 
model.  It would take a further study with considerably greater event-level detail, combined with re-
structuring of the Sheffield model to accommodate event-level data, to produce estimates of net 
wellbeing impacts of different policies  – and this may be more than researchers are able to provide, at 
least in the short-term. 
A further difficulty is the likely heterogeneity in the wellbeing impacts of alcohol policies.  Some 
drinking decisions will follow the classical economic assumptions of rationality and will be 
wellbeing-enhancing, while others – particularly those taken under addiction or intoxication – may be 
less so, and different policies will act differentially on these.  We could speculate that a wellbeing-
focused alcohol policy could ‘nudge’ intoxicated individuals into ‘better’ decisions, for example by 
encouraging smaller serving sizes and lower-strength drinks (requiring a greater number of deliberate 
decisions to become more intoxicated), or extra restrictions/charges for venues with high sound levels 
(which inhibit conversations and encourage faster drinking; Guéguen et al., 2008). Pre-commitment 
devices may also be possible, such as allowing individuals at the start of the evening to place 
spending limits on their bar tab, parallel to similar (if not necessarily effective; Ladouceur et al., 2012)  
policies for gambling.  However, these are mere speculations, and further research and policy 
development is needed to consider their desirability and feasibility, particularly robust evaluations of 
real-world trials.  Still, population-wide policies such as alcohol taxation may also improve wellbeing, 
following Gruber & Mullainathan’s (2005) finding that likely-smokers were happier with higher 
cigarette taxes.   
 Page 22 
Finally, the relationship of alcohol and wellbeing is not a given, but rather is partly culturally-
determined (see above).  Among other factors, marketing not only influences the pleasure of drinking 
– e.g. the perceived price of wine influences the pleasure of drinking (Plassmann et al., 2008) – but 
may also effect the anticipation and memory of consumption; as Adey et al (2010:662) put it, 
“consumers do not buy ethanol… they buy the anticipated effects of alcohol”.  To the extent that 
policymakers can also control these expectations, then this may enable policies that e.g. reduce per-
occasion alcohol consumption while maintaining an existing level of sociability and perceived 
pleasure.  There is some evidence that it is possible to influence alcohol-related cognitions through 
individual-level interventions (Wiers et al., 2005).  However, government attempts to engineer 
widespread ‘cultural change’ through policies ranging from content-based marketing restrictions to 
licensing changes have generally been less successful. 
The role of wellbeing in alcohol policy 
Some readers may accept the analysis thus far, but fundamentally question the relevance of wellbeing 
to public health policy.   It is difficult to argue that societies should simply aim to maximise the 
momentary pleasure gained by individual consumption decisions.  Moreover, people’s subjective 
views do not always map well onto those aspects of life that most people would hold to be important; 
Lelkes suggests that we should focus on ‘minimising misery’ rather than ‘maximising happiness’, 
given that unhappiness/dissatisfaction is more strongly related to objective circumstances (Lelkes, 
2013).  It is therefore quite possible to argue that subjective wellbeing should not be an explicit goal 
of policymaking – either on the grounds that we should focus more broadly on human needs 
(‘eudaimonic’ rather than hedonic wellbeing), or that ‘wellbeing’ is not sufficient grounds for the state 
to intervene in people’s lives.   
All of these are valid points to be debated – and indeed, we share many of these concerns.  
Nevertheless, the inattention to alcohol and wellbeing is becoming problematic. Policymakers 
currently have a choice between overestimating the wellbeing gains of alcohol policies (by valuing 
alcohol’s negative wellbeing impacts and ignoring positive impacts), underestimating them (by using 
implausibly naïve versions of the consumer surplus approach), or ignoring them altogether.  Yet 
 Page 23 
policymakers and the public are often concerned about the wellbeing impacts of alcohol policies – and 
in the absence of any considered debate from academic researchers, they will be left clutching at the 
naïve approaches used by those outside of academia.  Our hope is that this paper will spur at least a 
little further research and thought in order to provide a surer basis for these debates. 
 
 Page 24 
References 
aan het Rot, M., Russell, J.J., Moskowitz, D.S., & Young, S.N. (2008). Alcohol in a Social Context: 
Findings From Event-Contingent Recording Studies of Everyday Social Interactions. 
Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 32, 459-471. 
Adey, G.E., Moore, S.C., & Chestnutt, I.G. (2010). Dose–response expectancies for alcohol: 
Validation and implications for brief interventions. Drug and Alcohol Review, 29, 662-668. 
Ashley, E.M., Nardinelli, C., & Lavaty, R.A. (In Press). Estimating the benefits of public health 
policies that reduce harmful consumption. Health Economics. 
Aslam, S., Barham, L., Bramley-Harker, E., Dodgson, J., & Spackman, M. (2003). Alcohol in 
London: a cost-benefit analysis. London, UK: A Final Report for the Greater London 
Authority Prepared by NERA. 
Battista, S.R., Stewart, S.H., & Ham, L.S. (2010). A Critical Review of Laboratory-Based Studies 
Examining the Relationships of Social Anxiety and Alcohol Intake. Current Drug Abuse 
Reviews, 3, 3-22. 
Bernheim, B.D., & Rangel, A. (2004). Addiction and Cue-Triggered Decision Processes. American 
Economic Review, 94, 1558-1590. 
Bernheim, B.D., & Rangel, A. (2007). Toward Choice-Theoretic Foundations for Behavioral Welfare 
Economics. American Economic Review, 97, 464-470. 
Binder, M., & Coad, A. (2013). “I'm afraid I have bad news for you…” Estimating the impact of 
different health impairments on subjective well-being. Social Science & Medicine, 87, 155-
167. 
Boden, J.M., & Fergusson, D.M. (2011). Alcohol and depression. Addiction, 106, 906-914. 
Bogart, L.M., Collins, R.L., Ellickson, P.L., & Klein, D.J. (2007). Are Adolescent Substance Users 
Less Satisfied with Life as Young Adults and if so, Why? Social Indicators Research, 81, 
149-169. 
Brown, R., & Gregg, M. (2012). The pedagogy of regret: Facebook, binge drinking and young 
women. Continuum: Journal of Media & Cultural Studies, 26, 357-369. 
Cawley, J., & Ruhm, C. (2011). The economics of risky health behaviors.  NBER Working Paper No. 
17081: National Bureau of Economic Research. 
cebr. (2009). Minimum Alcohol Pricing: a targeted measure? London: centre for economics and 
business research ltd for SAB Miller plc. 
Ferrer-i-Carbonell, A., & Frijters, P. (2004). How Important Is Methodology for the Estimates of the 
Determinants of Happiness? The Economic Journal, 114, 641-659. 
French, M.T., & Popovici, I. (2011). That instrument is lousy! In search of agreement when using 
instrumental variables estimation in substance use research. Health Economics, 20, 127-146. 
Fujiwara, D., & Campbell, R. (2011). Valuation Techniques for Social Cost-Benefit Analysis: Stated 
Preference, Revealed Preference and Subjective Well-Being Approaches. A Discussion of the 
Current Issues. London: HM Treasury and Department for Work and Pensions. 
Graham, C., Eggers, A., & Sukhtankar, S. (2004). Does happiness pay?: An exploration based on 
panel data from Russia. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 55, 319-342. 
Gruber, J.H., & Mullainathan, S. (2005). Do Cigarette Taxes Make Smokers Happier. The B.E. 
Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 5, 1-43. 
Guéguen, N., Jacob, C., Guellec, H.L., Morineau, T., & Lourel, M. (2008). Sound Level of 
Environmental Music and Drinking Behavior: A Field Experiment With Beer Drinkers. 
Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 32, 1795-1798. 
Hektner, J.M., Schmidt, J.A., & Csíkszentmihályi, M. (2007). Experience Sampling Method: 
Measuring the Quality of Everyday Life. London: Sage. 
Johansson, P., Jarl, J., Eriksson, A., Eriksson, M., Gerdtham, U.-G., Hemstrom, O., et al. (2006). The 
social costs of alcohol in Sweden 2002.  SoRAD Rapportserie, nr 36. Stockholm: Stockholms 
Universitet, SoRAD. 
Kahneman, D., & Deaton, A. (2010). High income improves evaluation of life but not emotional well-
being. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107, 16489-16493. 
 Page 25 
Keane, H. (2009). Intoxication, harm and pleasure: an analysis of the Australian National Alcohol 
Strategy. Critical Public Health, 19, 135-142. 
King, A.C., de Wit, H., McNamara, P.J., & Cao, D. (2011). Rewarding, stimulant, and sedative 
alcohol responses and relationship to future binge drinking. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
68, 389-399. 
Koivumaa-Honkanen, H., Kaprio, J., Korhonen, T., Honkanen, R.J., Heikkilä, K., & Koskenvuo, M. 
(2012). Self-reported Life Satisfaction and Alcohol use: A 15-year follow-up of Healthy 
Adult Twins. Alcohol and Alcoholism, 47, 160-168. 
Ladouceur, R., Blaszczynski, A., & Lalande, D.R. (2012). Pre-commitment in gambling: a review of 
the empirical evidence. International Gambling Studies, 12, 215-230. 
Laslett, A.-M., Catalano, P., Chikritzhs, T., Dale, C., Doran, C., Ferris, J., et al. (2010). The range and 
magnitude of alcohol's harm to others. Deakin West, ACT: Alcohol Education and 
Rehabilitation Foundation. 
Lelkes, O. (2013). Minimising Misery: A New Strategy for Public Policies Instead of Maximising 
Happiness? Social Indicators Research, 114, 121-137. 
Lim et al (2012). A comparative risk assessment of burden of disease and injury attributable to 67 risk 
factors and risk factor clusters in 21 regions, 1990—2010: a systematic analysis for the 
Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. The Lancet, 380, 2224 - 2260. 
MacKerron, G. (2012a). Hapiness economics from 35 000 feet. Journal of Economic Surveys, 26, 
705–735. 
MacKerron, G. (2012b). Happiness and Environmental Quality.  PhD thesis. London: London School 
of Economics and Politics Science. 
MacKerron, G., & Mourato, S. (2013). Happiness is greater in natural environments. Global 
Environmental Change, 23, 992-1000. 
Martin, C.S., Earleywine, M., Musty, R.E., Perrine, M.W., & Swift, R.M. (1993). Development and 
Validation of the Biphasic Alcohol Effects Scale. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental 
Research, 17, 140-146. 
Mason, A.W., & Spoth, R.L. (2011). Longitudinal Associations of Alcohol Involvement with 
Subjective Well-Being in Adolescence and Prediction to Alcohol Problems in Early 
Adulthood. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 40, 1215-1224. 
Massin, S., & Kopp, P. (2014). Is life satisfaction hump-shaped with alcohol consumption? Evidence 
from Russian panel data. Addictive Behaviors, 39, 803-810. 
Molnar, D.S., Busseri, M.A., Perrier, C.P.K., & Sadava, S.W. (2009). A Longitudinal Examination of 
Alcohol Use and Subjective Well-Being in an Undergraduate Sample. Journal of Studies on 
Alcohol and Drugs, 70, 704-713. 
Newcomb, M.D., Bentler, P.M., & Collins, C. (1986). Alcohol use and dissatisfaction with self and 
life: A longitudinal analysis of young adults. Journal of Drug Issues, 16, 479-494. 
Peele, S., & Grant, M. (Eds.) (1999). Alcohol and pleasure: a health perspective. Philadelphia, PA: 
Taylor & Francis. 
Plassmann, H., O'Doherty, J., Shiv, B., & Rangel, A. (2008). Marketing actions can modulate neural 
representations of experienced pleasantness. PNAS, 105, 1050-1054. 
Productivity Commission. (1999). Australia's Gambling Industries.  Report No 10. Canberra: AusInfo. 
Purshouse, R., Brennan, A., Latimer, N., Meng, Y., Rafia, R., Jackson, R., et al. (2009). Modelling to 
assess the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of public health related strategies and 
interventions to reduce alcohol attributable harm in England using the Sheffield Alcohol 
Policy Model version 2.0. Sheffield: Report to the NICE Public Health Programme 
Development Group. 
Roodman, D. (2009). How to do xtabond2: An introduction to difference and system GMM in Stata. 
Stata Journal, 9, 86-136. 
Room, R. (2000). The more drinking, the more fun; but is there a calculus of fun, and should it drive 
policy? Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 60, 249-250. 
Stone, A., & Shiffman, S. (2002). Capturing momentary, self-report data: A proposal for reporting 
guidelines. Annals of Behavioral Medicine,, 24, 236-243. 
 Page 26 
Wiers, R.W., Van De Luitgaarden, J., Van Den Wildenberg, E., & Smulders, F.T.Y. (2005). 
Challenging implicit and explicit alcohol-related cognitions in young heavy drinkers. 
Addiction, 100, 806-819. 
Wilkinson, W. (2007). In Pursuit of Happiness Research: Is It Reliable? What Does It Imply for 
Policy?  Policy Analysis No. 590. Washington, DC: Cato Institute. 
Yörük, E.C., & Yörük, B.K. (2012). The impact of drinking on psychological well-being: Evidence 
from minimum drinking age laws in the United States. Social Science & Medicine, 75, 1844-
1854. 
 
 
 
 Page 27 
Table 1: Regression of life satisfaction (0-10 scale) on alcohol consumption 
  
OLS 
OLS 
FE 
FE 
  
Unadjusted 
Adjusted 
Unadjusted 
Adjusted 
Past 7 days’ consumption 
 
 
 
 
Zero consumption (ref group) 
(ref) 
(ref) 
(ref) 
(ref) 
<1 unit/wk 
0.25** 
0.06 
0.03 
0.03 
1-10 (male) / 1-7 (female) units 
0.29** 
0.12** 
0.01 
0.06 
10-21 (male) / 7-14 (female) units 
0.21** 
0.13** 
-0.05 
0.03 
21-35 (male) / 14-21 (female) units 
0.15** 
0.13** 
-0.11* 
-0.03 
35-50 (male) / 21-35 (female) units 
0.06 
0.14* 
-0.18** 
-0.05 
50+ (male) / 35+ (female) units 
-0.38** 
-0.00 
-0.26** 
-0.13 
Joint significance of terms 
** 
** 
** 
ns 
Never drink 
-0.23** 
-0.14* 
-0.023 
0.013 
n (person-waves) 
29145 
25920 
29145 
25920 
n (persons) 
10107 
9469 
10107 
9469 
Significance: **=p<0.01; *=p<0.05; +=p<0.10.  See Web Appendix S2 for coefficients on controls. 
 
 
 Page 28 
Table 2: Regression of life satisfaction (0-10 scale) on other drinking measures 
  
OLS 
FE 
OLS 
FE 
  
Adjusted 
Adjusted 
Adjusted 
Adjusted 
Usual drinking frequency 
 
 
 
 
Never nowadays (ref group) 
(ref) 
(ref) 
 
  
Monthly or less 
0.10 
-0.04 
 
  
Several times a month 
0.23** 
0.04 
 
  
2-3 times/wk 
0.27** 
0.05 
 
  
Most days 
0.30** 
0.00 
 
  
Joint significance of terms 
** 
ns   
  
Alcohol problems (CAGE) 
  
  
-0.36** 
-0.18** 
n (person-waves) 
25920 
25920 
19830 
19830 
n (persons) 
9469 
9469 
8377 
8377 
Significance: **=p<0.01; *=p<0.05; +=p<0.10.  See text for control variables. 
 
 
 
 Page 29 
Table 3: Regression of happiness (0-100 scale) on drinking alcohol at that moment 
  
OLS 
OLS 
FE 
FE 
FE 
FE 
  
Unadjusted 
Adjusted 
Unadjusted 
Adjusted 
Evening-only 
subsample 
Controlling for 
earlier happiness 
Drinking alcohol 
10.79** 
3.65** 
10.28** 
3.88** 
3.64** 
3.30** 
n (person-waves) 
2,049,120 
1,811,089 
2,049,120 
2,049,120 
418,919 
418,919 
n (persons) 
31,302 
26,886 
31,302 
31,302 
24,437 
24,437 
Significance: **=p<0.01; *=p<0.05.  Control variables are given in the text, and coefficients in Web 
Appendix S6. 
 
 
