  
  
 
Aalborg Universitet
No superior adaptations to carbohydrate periodization in elite endurance athletes
Gejl, Kasper Degn; Thams, Line; Hansen, Mette; Rokkedal-Lausch, Torben; Plomgaard,
Peter; Nybo, Lars; Larsen, Filip J.; Cardinale, Daniele A.; Jensen, Kurt; Holmberg, Hans-
Christer; Vissing, Kristian; Ørtenblad, Niels
Published in:
Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise
DOI (link to publication from Publisher):
10.1249/MSS.0000000000001377
Publication date:
2017
Document Version
Accepted author manuscript, peer reviewed version
Link to publication from Aalborg University
Citation for published version (APA):
Gejl, K. D., Thams, L., Hansen, M., Rokkedal-Lausch, T., Plomgaard, P., Nybo, L., ... Ørtenblad, N. (2017). No
superior adaptations to carbohydrate periodization in elite endurance athletes. Medicine and Science in Sports
and Exercise, 49(12), 2486-2497. https://doi.org/10.1249/MSS.0000000000001377
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
            ? Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
            ? You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
            ? You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal ?
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at vbn@aub.aau.dk providing details, and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate your claim.
  
. . . Published ahead of Print 
 
 
 
Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise® Published ahead of Print contains articles in unedited 
manuscript form that have been peer reviewed and accepted for publication. This manuscript will undergo 
copyediting, page composition, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. 
Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered that could affect the content. 
 
Copyright © 2017 American College of Sports Medicine 
No Superior Adaptations to Carbohydrate Periodization 
in Elite Endurance Athletes 
 
 
Kasper Degn Gejl1, Line Thams1, Mette Hansen2, Torben Rokkedal-Lausch3, 
Peter Plomgaard4,5, Lars Nybo6, Filip J Larsen7,8, Daniele A Cardinale8,9, Kurt Jensen1, 
Hans-Christer Holmberg10,11, Kristian Vissing2, Niels Ørtenblad1,10 
 
1Department of Sports Science and Clinical Biomechanics, University of Southern Denmark, 
Odense, Denmark; 2Section for Sport Science, Department of Public Health, Aarhus 
University, Aarhus, Denmark; 3SMI, Department of Health Science and Technology, Faculty 
of Medicine, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark; 4Department of Clinical Biochemistry, 
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark; 5Department of Infectious Diseases, Center for 
Physical Activity Research, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark; 6Department of Nutrition, Exercise and Sports, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen Denmark; 7Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institute, 
Stockholm, Sweden; 8Swedish School of Sport and Health Sciences, Stockholm, Sweden; 
9Elite Performance Centre, Swedish Sports Confederation, Stockholm, Sweden; 10Swedish 
Winter Sports Research Centre, Department of Health Sciences, Mid Sweden University, 
Östersund, Sweden; 11Swedish Olympic Committee, Stockholm, Sweden 
 
 
 
 
Accepted for Publication: 10 July 2017 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
No Superior Adaptations to Carbohydrate Periodization  
in Elite Endurance Athletes 
 
Kasper Degn Gejl1, Line Thams1, Mette Hansen2, Torben Rokkedal-Lausch3,  
Peter Plomgaard4,5, Lars Nybo6, Filip J Larsen7,8, Daniele A Cardinale8,9, Kurt Jensen1,  
Hans-Christer Holmberg10,11, Kristian Vissing2, Niels Ørtenblad1,10 
 
1Department of Sports Science and Clinical Biomechanics, University of Southern Denmark, 
Odense, Denmark; 2Section for Sport Science, Department of Public Health, Aarhus University, 
Aarhus, Denmark; 3SMI, Department of Health Science and Technology, Faculty of Medicine, 
Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark; 4Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Rigshospitalet, 
Copenhagen, Denmark; 5Department of Infectious Diseases, Center for Physical Activity 
Research, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; 6Department of 
Nutrition, Exercise and Sports, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen Denmark; 7Department 
of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden; 8Swedish School of 
Sport and Health Sciences, Stockholm, Sweden; 9Elite Performance Centre, Swedish Sports 
Confederation, Stockholm, Sweden; 10Swedish Winter Sports Research Centre, Department of 
Health Sciences, Mid Sweden University, Östersund, Sweden; 11Swedish Olympic Committee, 
Stockholm, Sweden 
 
 
Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise, Publish Ahead of Print
DOI: 10.1249/MSS.0000000000001377
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Address for correspondence 
Kasper Gejl 
Department of Sports Science and Clinical Biomechanics 
University of Southern Denmark 
Campusvej 55 
5230 Odense M  
Denmark 
kgejl@health.sdu.dk 
+45 29284155 
 
 
This study was supported financially by Team Danmark, The Danish Ministry of Culture and The 
Swedish National Centre for Research in Sports. The authors report no conflict of interest and the results 
of the present study do not constitute endorsement by ACSM. We declare that the results of the study are 
presented clearly, honestly and without fabrication, falsification, or inappropriate data manipulation. 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Abstract  
Purpose: The present study investigated the effects of periodic CHO restriction on endurance 
performance and metabolic markers in elite endurance athletes. Methods: Twenty-six male elite 
endurance athletes (VO2max: 65.0 ml O2∙kg-1∙min-1) completed 4 weeks of regular endurance 
training, while matched and randomized into two groups training with (Low) or without (High) 
carbohydrate (CHO) manipulation three days a week. The CHO manipulation days consisted of a 
1-hr high intensity bike session in the morning, recovery for 7 hrs while consuming isocaloric 
diets containing either high CHO (414±2.4 g) or low CHO (79.5±1.0 g), and a 2-hr moderate 
bike session in the afternoon with or without CHO. VO2max, maximal fat oxidation and power 
output during a 30-min time trial (TT) were determined before and after the training period. The 
TT was undertaken after 90 mins of intermittent exercise with CHO provision before the training 
period and both CHO and placebo after the training period. Muscle biopsies were analyzed for 
glycogen, citrate synthase (CS) and β-hydroxyacyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase (HAD) activity, 
carnitine palmitoyltransferase (CPT1b) and phosphorylated acetyl-CoA carboxylase (pACC). 
Results: The training effects were similar in both groups for all parameters. On average, VO2max 
and power output during the 30-min TT increased by 5 ± 1% (P<0.05) and TT performance was 
similar after CHO and placebo during the preload phase. Training promoted overall increases in 
glycogen content (18 ± 5%), CS activity (11 ± 5%) and pACC (38 ± 19%) (P<0.05) with no 
differences between groups. HAD activity and CPT1b protein content remained unchanged. 
Conclusion: Superimposing periodic CHO restriction to 4 weeks of regular endurance training 
had no superior effects on performance and muscle adaptations in elite endurance athletes.  
Keywords:  diet manipulation, glycogen, enzyme activity, triathletes, endurance performance 
 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Introduction 
The availability of muscle glycogen and other forms of carbohydrate (CHO) exerts an impact on 
performance during prolonged submaximal or high-intensity intermittent exercise (19,27). 
Accordingly, nutritionists have focused on various dietary manipulation strategies designed to 
maximize pre-exercise carbohydrate availability and post-exercise glycogen resynthesis. At the 
same time, the availability of CHO and glycogen may be involved in the regulation of muscle 
cell metabolism, including central cell signaling pathways (29). Thus, research developments 
indicate that periodic restriction of CHO availability during or following exercise (“train-low”) 
by endurance athletes may result in acute improvements of parameters associated with muscle 
oxidative capacity, mitochondrial biogenesis and lipid oxidation (9,23,30,37).  
The translation of these “train-low” adaptations into persistent alterations in performance have 
been investigated by different strategies, involving training in a fasting state (8.11,36), training 
twice a day (10,18,22,25,38) and high intensity training in the evening followed by overnight 
fasting and training in the morning (“sleep-low”) (8,24). Training studies lasting three weeks or 
more have reported superior effects of “train-low” on muscle cell adaptations related to 
mitochondrial function and lipid oxidation (4,18,22,25,36,38). However, in endurance trained 
individuals, the translation of cellular adaptations into performance enhancement is crucial and 
unfortunately, performance improvements have generally been lacking or have been marginal, 
despite the promising findings on the muscle cell level (8,22,38). Yet, a recent 3-week study by 
Marquet and colleagues (24) in moderately trained triathletes did reveal superior effects on 
endurance performance by using the “sleep-low” strategy. Nevertheless, it has to be clarified 
whether these positive results are related to low CHO availability or the combination of low 
energy and low CHO availability. By using a variety of “train-low” strategies involving both 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
CHO and overall energy restriction in elite race walkers, Burke and colleagues showed that 
performance was enhanced by 5.3%, and to the same extent as a high CHO diet (8), thus 
indicating that persistent effects of the “train-low” are dependent on the training status. Although 
elite athletes anecdotally use “train-low” strategies, little is known about the real effects of this 
training strategy (33). Only a small number of training studies have evaluated “train-low” 
strategies in highly trained endurance athletes (8, 22) and to construct future recommendations 
there is a need for further research of both regulatory events and performance effects induced by 
periodic CHO restriction.  
Since the superior acute regulatory effects of CHO restriction are particularly important to 
endurance performance, one explanation for the lack of persistent performance benefits after 
using “train-low” strategies in highly trained athletes may be the use of relatively short 
performance test protocols (≤ 1 hr) (8,10,18,25,36). Only three “train-low” training studies have 
evaluated endurance performance by tests lasting more than 75 mins (22,24,38). However, these 
studies either involved moderately trained individuals (24), group differences in training 
intensity induced by different glycogen levels (38), or have determined endurance performance 
in a fasting state (22). Also, unintentional losses of body mass and deviations from customary 
training routines have been some of the consequences in previous “train-low” studies (8,24,38). 
Conversely, the long-term effects of periodic “train-low” on endurance performance are not well 
described in elite endurance athletes under conditions with optimal nutrition and applicable 
training volumes, durations and intensities. In order to determine potential performance-
enhancing effects of CHO restriction in elite athletes, it should logically be investigated in a 
matched and controlled design that properly reflects customary training routines and circumvent 
detrimental effects of glycogen depletion on training quality. Thus, a practical approach, 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
combining the best of high-intensity exercise and CHO restriction, would be to commence the 
high intensity training sessions with ample glycogen available, but then with periodic CHO 
restriction during some of the less intense training sessions.  
Elite athletes anecdotally use “train-low” strategies although only few studies have investigated 
the effect of “train-low”-strategies under “real-life” conditions and despite a lack of scientific 
evidence of performance benefits in elite endurance athletes. Accordingly, in order to help 
formulate evidence-based guidelines for highly trained endurance athletes, the purpose of the 
present study was to determine the effects of 4 weeks of routine endurance training, 
supplemented with periodic CHO restriction on performance, oxidative capacity and metabolism 
of elite endurance athletes. In order to understand the role of carbohydrate availability per se, the 
athletes consumed isocaloric meals at the same time of the experimental training days. We 
hypothesized that periodic CHO restriction would improve oxidative capacity and endurance 
performance to a greater extent than ingestion of a high CHO diet in endurance athletes 
performing identical training interventions.  
 
Methods 
Subjects, matching and ethical approval 
Twenty-six highly trained male triathletes (n = 22) and road cyclists (n = 4) were enrolled in the 
study (Table 1). The subjects trained at least 10 hours per week, demonstrated a VO2max greater 
than 60 ml ∙ kg -1 ∙ min-1 and had at least 2 years of experience in their discipline. Among the 
triathletes, eight were current members of the Danish National Team competing at international 
Olympic and sprint distances (Olympic Games, World Triathlon Series, World Cups and 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Continental Cups), 10 participated in national elite competitions (Olympic, ½ ironman and 
ironman distances), while the remaining four competed at a lower level (½ ironman and ironman 
distances). All four cyclists had A-licenses and competed at the national elite level. 
The participants were fully informed of any potential risk associated with the experiments before 
verbal and written consents were obtained. The Ethics Committee of Southern Denmark 
approved the study protocol (Project-ID S-20150034) and the experiments adhered to the 
standards of the Declaration of Helsinki.  
 
Experimental Overview 
In order to obtain equivalent groups for comparison of the effects of periodic CHO restriction, 
the participants were paired off on the basis of their main sport discipline (road cycling, 
Olympic-distance triathlon or long-distance triathlon), training history and VO2max. The matched 
subjects in each pair were required to conduct all training sessions together in an identical 
manner. One athlete from each of the matched pairs was randomly assigned to perform 4 weeks 
of endurance training, including a normal carbohydrate-enriched diet (High CHO), while the 
other followed the same training protocol, but occasionally with an isocaloric low CHO diet 
three times per week (Low CHO) (Fig. 1). The paired design ensured identical average training 
volumes and intensities of training during the intervention between the two groups. 
During the 4-week intervention period, the subjects accomplished three training blocks per week 
with carbohydrate manipulation (Monday, Wednesday and Friday) (Fig. 1). Accordingly, 11 
carbohydrate manipulation days were distributed across the training period. On these days, each 
subject completed one hour of high intensity intermittent cycling in the morning, in order to 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
deplete muscle glycogen (34). Then the athletes recovered for approximately 7 hrs and 
performed 2 hrs of moderate-intensity cycling thereafter. During the recovery period, the athletes 
in each pair consumed either a high CHO diet or an isocaloric low CHO diet and during the 
afternoon session the low CHO group consumed water and the high group a CHO bevrage. On 
the other days, each athlete trained once to three times daily in accordance with a supervised 
program and consumed a CHO-enriched diet of their own choice.  
Before the 4-week intervention, subjects reported to the laboratory on two separate days to 
perform submaximal incremental cycling and VO2max tests (test day 1) and an endurance 
performance test with provision of CHO (test day 2). Following the intervention, the participants 
underwent similar procedures, as well as the same performance test twice, with provision of 
CHO or placebo in a randomized order (test days 3 to 5; see further below). Within subjects, all 
tests were carried out at the same time of the day. 
 
The training intervention 
Based on retrospective training diaries and with the advice of exercise researchers and the 
Danish national triathlon coach, training schedules were designed for each pair of athletes (Fig. 
1). Weekly customized training plans were similar within pairs but different between pairs 
throughout the training period. On average, the matched pairs carried out 16 hrs [12 to 20 hrs] of 
training per week (triathletes avg. 17 hrs [14 to 20 hrs]; road cyclists avg. 14 hrs [12 to 17 hrs]). 
The three weekly 2h “train-low” sessions comprised 30-50% of the total training volume. For the 
purposes of recovery, one (triathletes) or two (cyclists) weekly training days involved a 
maximum of 45 mins of easy training. The remaining training days included a total of two easy-
to-moderate bike sessions in road cyclists (1.5 to 3.5hrs at 65-75 % of HRmax) and 2 to 4 easy-to-
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
moderate swim sessions and 4 to 6 easy-to-moderate run sessions (65-85% HRmax) in triathletes 
(Fig. 1).  
This study was conducted in pre-season and the intensity in the mornings of the days involving 
CHO manipulation was greater than normal for this period, whereas the total volume was 
maintained and normal.  
 
Training involving CHO manipulation 
The training intensity on the three weekly days involving CHO manipulation was based on 
continuously measured heart rate (Polar Team 2, Polar Electro Oy, Kempele, Finland), thereby 
comprising a gradual increase in absolute training load during the intervention period. Both 
morning and afternoon sessions were carried out on personal bikes by use of turbo trainers (Tacx 
Bushido Smart T2780, Wassenaar, Netherlands).  
The morning session consisted of eight 5-min cycling intervals interspersed with 2 mins active 
recovery. The first six intervals were conducted with a target intensity of 85% HRmax, while the 
final two 5-min blocks consisted of five 15s maximal sprints to recruit type II fibers, separated 
by 45s of easy spinning. This is a modified version of the 8 x 5-min protocol employed by Stepto 
et al., which was shown to reduce muscle glycogen content by 50% in well-trained athletes (34). 
The afternoon session entailed 2 hrs of moderate cycling exercise with a target intensity of 65% 
of HRmax. with CHO intake in the high group only (see below).  
Power output during the morning and afternoon training sessions on days involving CHO 
manipulation was estimated on the basis of the W-HR relationship derived from the submaximal 
tests performed before and after the training intervention. 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Dietary recording and meals in relation to tests 
Both prior to and during the second week of the intervention period, all of the participants 
recorded individual food and fluid intake for 4 days, for subsequent analysis of caloric and 
macronutrient content (Madlog, Kolding, Denmark). A person with extensive food log 
experience informed the participants about how to perform the dietary recording. Of particular 
interest in this context was the detection of athletes with a daily CHO intake lower than 
recommended prior to the intervention. The mid-intervention dietary recording included two 
days with CHO manipulation and two days without CHO manipulation, and was used to evaluate 
the compliance with the dietary recommendations and maintenance of a mixed CHO-enriched 
diet on days with routine training.  
Both energy intake and dietary composition was identical between groups before the 
intervention. The average total energy intake was 44 ± 2  kcal∙ kg bm-1∙day-1 in the Low CHO 
group (50% derived from CHO; 5.4 g∙kg bm-1∙day-1), while the High CHO group consumed 43 ± 
3 kcal∙kg bm-1∙day-1 (54% derived from CHO; 5.7 g∙kg bm-1∙day-1). Based on the pre-
intervention dietary log, a few were asked to increase energy intake if total energy intake or 
CHO intake was less than recommended (1.8 PAL∙(0.0669∙bw + 2.28) MJ∙day-1 or 5 g CHO∙kg 
bm-1∙day-1) (7,20).  
On training days without CHO manipulation, athletes were asked to maintain their usual diet and 
to consume CHO enriched meals in the morning, for lunch and for dinner. To ensure a matched 
timing of meal consumption, all subjects received a time schedule informing about the 
consumption of each meal on all training days and the research group was in almost daily contact 
with the participants to make sure that they complied with the diet plan. Macronutrient intake on 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
training days without CHO manipulation was investigated from the mid-intervention diet log and 
identical between groups for both energy intake and macronutrient composition. Energy intake 
was 45 ± 3 kcal∙kg bm-1 ∙ day-1 (CHO: 5.9 ± 0.5 g∙ kg bm-1∙day-1; Protein: 1.9 ± 0.1 g∙kg bm-
1∙day-1; Fat: 1.4 ± 0.1 g∙kg bm-1∙day-1) in the Low group and 48 ± 2 kcal∙kg bm-1∙day-1 in the 
High group (CHO: 6.3 ± 0.4 g∙kg bm-1∙day-1; Protein: 1.9 ± 0.1 g∙kg bm-1∙day-1; Fat: 1.7 ± 0.1 
g∙kg bm-1∙day-1). Thus, 53% of the energy was derived from CHO in both groups on days 
without CHO manipulation.   
To ensure dietary conformity, all subjects received food and beverages during the last 24 hrs 
prior to all tests. The day before, they received 5 g CHO∙kg bm-1∙day-1 with a total energy intake 
of 34.8 kcal∙kg bm-1∙day-1 (56% CHO, 16% protein and 29% fat). To reflect competition 
conditions and maximize performance, each subject consumed small and identical body mass 
corrected meals on test days (5.7 kcal∙kg bm-1, 65% CHO, 14% protein and 21% fat), containing 
17.3 ± 0.2 g protein, 74.2 ± 0.8 g CHO and 11.5 ± 0.1 g fat every second hour from 7 AM until 
60 mins prior to the initiation of the test. Thus, subjects consumed 2 to 4 small meals before 
tests. 
 
Diet manipulation  
On the days involving CHO manipulation, each subject received a time schedule and meals and 
drinks taking body mass, allergies and dislikes into consideration. Each subject consumed a 
small CHO-enriched breakfast, similar to the meal on test days (see above), 60 mins before the 
high intensity morning sessions (5.7 kcal∙kg bm-1). During the subsequent 7 hrs of recovery, the 
High and Low CHO groups were provided with isocaloric diets (2217-2495 kcal) containing 6g 
and 1g CHO∙kg bm-1, corresponding to 414 ± 2.4 g and 79.5 ± 1.0 g CHO, respectively (13% 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
CHO, 17% protein and 70% fat vs. 72% CHO, 16% protein and 12% fat, respectively). Protein 
intake was similar in both groups during the 7 hrs of recovery to prevent bias from this route for 
gluconeogenesis and to avoid manipulation with three different macronutrients. During the 
subsequent 2 hrs of moderate training, the Low CHO group consumed only water ad libitum, 
while the High CHO group consumed a beverage containing 1g CHO∙kg bm-1∙h-1. To match 
overall energy balance between groups, the diet was based on body mass. 
 
VO2 measurements  
The participants refrained from exercise during the 36 hrs preceding all tests. On the first and last 
day of the study (test day 1 and 5, Fig. 1), body composition was determined by dual-energy x-
ray absorptiometry (DEXA) (Lunar Prodigy Advance, GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, United 
Kingdom) and a submaximal ramp test and a maximal cycling test were performed. Cycle tests 
were performed on an electronically braked ergometer (Schoberer Rad Messtechnik (SRM), 117 
GmbH Julich, Germany), calibrated before each test.  
The submaximal ramp test, undertaken following 10 mins of easy warm-up (100-150 W), 
involved 4-min intervals at an initial workload of 135 W. The workload was elevated by 35 W 
every fourth minute until the RER value remained above 1.00 for one minute. A maximal test 
was conducted 15 mins after termination of the submaximal test, with the initial 2-min workload 
corresponding to the workload during the penultimate step of the submaximal test and thereafter 
increased 25 W every minute until exhaustion.  
VO2 and VCO2 were estimated using an Oxygraf CPET OEM system for AMIS 2001 
(Innovision, Glamsbjerg, Denmark) with sampling every 10 sec. Prior to each test, the gas 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
analyzer was calibrated with two standard mixtures of gases containing 21 and 15% of O2 and 0 
and 5% of CO2. Ventilation sensors were calibrated manually with a 3L syringe. The VO2 and 
RER values of each workload were defined as the mean VO2 and RER during the last two 
minutes of that workload. The highest mean 30-sec value for VO2 during the maximal test was 
defined as VO2max.  During the final 30 secs of each workload, capillary blood was drawn from a 
fingertip for subsequent determination of lactate.  
  
Fat oxidation rate 
The fat oxidation rates at submaximal power outputs (170, 205 and 240W) were calculated using 
the stoichiometric equation developed by Frayn: fat oxidation = (1.67 x VO2) – (1.67 x VCO2), 
assuming that urinary nitrogen excretion was negligible (14). Moreover, the association between 
the relative utilization of VO2max during the graded test and fat oxidation rate was determined by 
polynomial curve fitting. The relative utilizations of VO2 were divided into 7.5% intervals from 
30% to 75% of VO2max. Maximal fat oxidation was calculated as the apex of the best-fit 
polynomial curves. 
 
Endurance performance test 
Endurance performance was determined three days after the first VO2 measurements, as well as 
six and three days before the final measurements of these same parameters (Fig. 1). These tests 
were conducted on the same ergometer as described above (SRM) and consisted of a 30-min 
maximal TT performed after 90 mins of intermittent exercise. During this initial intermittent 
exercise, the workload alternated continuously between 4 mins 30 secs at 45% of pre Wmax (145-
209W) and 30 secs at 90% of this same pre Wmax (290-413W). For direct comparison of 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
endurance performance pre to post, the workload during the 90-min pre-load phase was identical 
during the pre and post tests. The athletes were used to employ power meters and heart rate 
monitors and well aware of their bike capabilities. For the purpose of familiarization and to 
optimize the pacing strategy, the subjects conducted a 20-km outdoor TT during the last two 
weeks prior to the study using a heart rate monitor. During the test itself, subjects monitored time 
as well as instantaneous heart rate and power output on a screen throughout the test and they 
were instructed to attain the highest possible mean power output. During the initial 90 mins of 
intermittent exercise before the TT at baseline (Pre) and before the TT in one of the last two 
endurance performance tests (Post CHO) the athletes ingested 0.7g CHO ∙ kg-1 ∙ h-1. In contrast, 
the athletes consumed a placebo beverage (i.e. artificially sweetened beverage) during the initial 
90 min of intermittent exercise before the other TT following the intervention (Post placebo). 
The order of the two post-intervention endurance performance tests was randomized and double-
blinded. VO2, power output and heart rate were measured continuously during the 30-min TT. 
Endurance performance is presented as both absolute (W) and relative power output (W∙kg body 
mass-1). Because of an injury, one subjects missed the endurance performance test with placebo 
after the training period. 
 
Muscle biopsies  
Three muscle biopsies (i.e. Pre, acute after the 7th carbohydrate manipulation day, and Post, Fig. 
1) were obtained randomly from m. quadriceps femoris of the right and left thighs using 5 mm 
Bergström needles as previously described (6, 15). Pre and Post biopsies were obtained two 
hours before the VO2 measurements and 1 hour after a standard meal (see above). The acute 
biopsy was obtained 1 hr after the moderate 2 hr training session in a subgroup of the athletes (n 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
= 17; Low n = 9, High n = 8). The procedure for extraction of muscle tissue was identical at all 
time points. Muscle tissue was placed on filter paper upon an ice-cooled Petri dish, blotted and 
dissected free from fat and connective tissue. Two parts of the biopsy were immediately frozen 
in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80ºC for subsequent analysis of enzyme activity and glycogen 
content, as well as immunoblotting. Another part was manually homogenized with a potter-
elvehjem glass-glass homogenizer (Kontes Glass Industry, Vineland, NJ, USA) for 
determination of MHC distribution. Parts of the biopsies and also blood samples were stored for 
later analysis in companion studies.  
 
Muscle Glycogen and enzyme activity 
Muscle glycogen content was determined spectrophotometrically (Beckman DU 650) as 
previously described (15). Freeze-dried muscle tissue (1.5mg) was boiled in 0.5ml 1M HCL for 
150 mins before it was quickly cooled, whirl-mixed and centrifuged at 3500g for 10 mins at 4ºC, 
before analysed for glucose content. Muscle glycogen content is expressed as mmol·kg dw-1.  
Enzyme activities were measured at 30°C in freeze-dried muscle dissected to be free from non-
muscle constituents (28). Citrate synthase (CS) activity was determined by the addition of 
oxaloacetate to a buffer solution containing muscle homogenate, DTNB buffer, acetyl-CoA and 
H2O. β-Hydroxyacyl-coenzyme A Dehydrogenase (HAD) activity was measured after the 
addition of acetoacetyl CoA to a buffer solution containing Imidazol, NADH and EDTA. 
Absorbance of CS and HAD was recorded for 600 secs, converted into enzyme activity rates and 
expressed as µmol·g dw-1·min-1. Because of limited amounts of biopsy material, CS and HAD 
activity was determined in 11 and 10 subjects from the Low and High group, respectively. 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Immunoblotting 
20mg of frozen muscle tissue was freeze-dried and subsequently homogenized, separated and 
electroblotted as previosuly described (32). The following primary antibody was purchased from 
Cell Signalling Technology (Danvers, MA, USA) and utilized as follows; phospho-specific 
ACCSer79 (cat # 3661, conc. 1:1000 in 5% BSA). The following primary antibody was purchased 
from ABCAM (Cambridge, UK) and utilized as follows; CPT1B (cat # AB134135, conc. 1:1000 
in 5% BSA). With regards to secondary antibodies for both targets, membranes were then 
incubated for 1 hr with Horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-rabbit (Cat # 2054, Santa 
Cruz,TX, USA) and utilized as follows: phosphospecific ACCSer79 (conc. 1:5000 in 1% BSA) 
and CPT1B (conc. 1:4000 in 1% BSA). Proteins were visualized by chemiluminiscence (Thermo 
Scientific, MA, USA) and quantified with a UVP imaging system (UVP, CA, USA). Precision 
Plus Protein All Blue standards were used as markers of molecular weight (Bio-Rad, CA, USA). 
Values derived for quantification of immunoblotting for each protein target were normalized to 
the total amount of protein loaded for each sample, using the Stain Free Technology approach 
previously described (16,17). 
 
Fiber type distribution.  
Myosin heavy chain (MHC) composition was determined from homogenate using gel 
electrophoresis as previously described (11) and modified for humans (26). Briefly, muscle 
homogenate and sample-buffer (10% glycerol, 5% 2-mercaptoethanol and 2.3% SDS, 62.5mM 
Tris and 0.2% bromophenolblue at pH 6.8), was boiled for 3 mins and loaded with three different 
amounts of protein on a SDS-PAGE gel and run at 80V for at least 42 hrs at 4°C. The gels were 
stained with Coomassie and MHC bandswere quantified densitometrically (Phoretix 1D, 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
nonlinear, Newcastle, UK) by scanning (Lino-scan 1400 scanner, Heidelberg, Germany).  The 
MHC band density was estimated as an average of the three loaded protein amounts. MHC II 
was identified with Western Blot using monoclonal antibody (Sigma M 4276) with the protocol 
Xcell IITM (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA).  
 
Statistical analysis 
Statistical analyses of treatment effects were carried out using a two-way ANOVA with repeated 
measures (group vs. time) and the Sidak post hoc test correcting for multiple comparison (Graph 
Pad Prism 6.07). Values are expressed as mean ± SEM and P < 0.05 were considered significant. 
Data from immunoblotting were log-transformed due to lack of normal distribution and then 
analyzed by a two-way ANOVA. Correlations between variables were tested by linear regression 
analysis. 
 
Results 
Training compliance and intensities 
All 26 subjects completed the 11 carbohydrate manipulation days. The average intensities during 
the initial 6 x 5-mins in the morning and the moderate 2-hr training in the afternoon were 86.3 ± 
0.5% of HRmax (Low CHO: 86.5%; High CHO: 86.0%) and 66.7 ± 0.3% of HRmax (Low CHO: 
66.9%; High CHO: 66.7%), respectively. There were no differences in training intensities 
between the groups. Using the W–HR relationship, power output during the morning sessions 
was estimated to increase from 293 ± 9 W to 346 ± 14 W (76 ± 2% to 89 ± 3% of Wmax pre) 
during the intervention period in the Low CHO group and from 293 ± 9 W to 327 ± 11 W (76 ± 
3% to 85 ± 2% of Wmax pre) in the High CHO group. Likewise, power output during the 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
moderate 2-hr training sessions was estimated to increase during the training period (Low CHO: 
165 ± 5 W to 205 ± 8 W; High CHO: 154 ± 7 W to 191 ± 6 W). Estimated power output during 
both training sessions increased to a similar extent in both groups. Besides the nine hours of 
training associated with the CHO manipulation, average training volume of the easy-to-moderate 
training sessions was 6 ± 1 hrs per week and identical between the groups because of the 
matched design (Fig. 1), thus entailing a total training volume of 16 ± 1 hrs per week. 
 
Body composition and MHC distribution  
Body mass was maintained in both groups after the intervention period (Low CHO: 74.9 ± 1.9 to 
75.1 ± 2.0kg; High CHO: 75.3 ± 1.7 to 75.4 ± 1.7kg). However, fat mass was reduced (Low 
CHO: 9.7 ± 0.8 to 8.9 ± 0.9kg; High CHO: 10.4 ± 0. to 10.0 ± 0.6kg; P = 0.001), while fat free 
mass increased to a similar extent in both groups (Low CHO: 68.7 ± 1.8  to 69.3 ± 1.8kg; High 
CHO: 68.5 ± 1.5 to 69.2 ± 1.5kg; P < 0.0001).  
Prior to the training period, the relative distribution of MHC I and II isoforms was not different 
between the Low CHO group (MHC I: 49 ± 2%, MHC II 51 ± 2%) and the High CHO group 
(MHC I 51 ± 3%, MHC II 49 ± 3%). 
 
VO2max and Endurance performance  
After the training period, VO2max was increased by 5 ± 2% and 6 ± 1% in the Low and High 
CHO groups, respectively, with no difference between the groups (overall time effect: P = 
0.0003) (Fig. 2A). From the W-VO2 relationship, Wmax was estimated to increase from 395 ± 10 
W to 422 ± 12 W in the Low CHO group and from 395 ± 11 W to 428 ± 11 W in the High CHO 
group during the intervention period (overall time effect: P < 0.0001). 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Mean power output during the 30-min TT including CHO provision increased by 6 ± 1% and 5 ± 
2% in the Low and High CHO group, respectively, with no difference between the groups 
(overall time effect: P < 0.001) (Fig. 2B). Also, with CHO provision, the relative power output 
increased to a similar extent in the Low CHO group (+5 ± 2%; 4.08 ± 0.1 to 4.28 ± 0.1W∙kg-1) as 
in the High CHO group (+4 ± 2%; 4.05 ± 0.1 to 4.20 ± 0.1W∙kg-1) (overall time effect: P < 
0.001) (Fig. 2C). 
Mean power output during the two 30-min post-intervention TTs was similar after consuming 
CHO and placebo during the 90-min preload phase in both the Low CHO (320 ± 9 W vs 318 ± 
10 W) and the High CHO group (317 ± 10 W vs 316 ± 12 W) (Fig. 2B). Furthermore, relative 
power output during the two post-intervention TTs was similar with CHO and placebo provision 
(Low CHO: 4.28 ± 0.1 W∙kg-1 vs. 4.25 ± 0.1 W∙kg-1; High CHO: 4.21 ± 0.1 W∙kg-1 vs. 4.22 ± 
0.1W∙kg-1) (Fig. 2C). 
RER values were identical within and between the groups in all 30-min TTs (Low CHO: Pre 
0.99 ± 0.01; Post CHO 0.99 ± 0.01; Post placebo 0.99 ± 0.01) (High CHO: Pre 0.99 ± 0.01; Post 
CHO 0.99 ± 0.01; Post placebo 0.99 ± 0.01) 
 
Muscle Glycogen  
After the training period, resting muscle glycogen concentration was similarly increased by 18% 
in the Low CHO group (543 ± 22 mmol·kg dw-1 to 643 ± 31 mmol·kg dw-1) and 15% in the High 
CHO group (557 ± 23 mmol·kg dw-1 to 643 ± 28 mmol·kg dw-1) (overall time effect P = 0.001) 
(Fig. 2D).  
To investigate the acute effect of the carbohydrate manipulation on muscle glycogen content, 
acute biopsies were obtained from 17 athletes after the moderate 2-hr training session on the 7th 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
carbohydrate manipulation day (i.e. after ≈ 2 weeks of training). Compared to the resting post 
biopsy, glycogen was reduced to a similar extent in both the Low CHO (-31 ± 7%; 648 to 431 
mmol·kg dw-1) and the High CHO group (-39 ± 4%; 652 to 396 mmol·kg dw-1) after the 
moderate 2-hr session (overall time effect P < 0.0001) (Fig. 2D). Glycogen utilization correlated 
with VO2max (P = 0.03, r2 = 0.30), while no associations were observed between glycogen 
utilization and endurance performance (r2 = 0.16, ns) or enzyme activity: CS: r2 = 0.02, ns ; 
HAD: r2 = 0.14, ns. 
 
Submaximal measurements 
No differences were observed between the Low and High CHO groups in any parameters during 
the graded submaximal tests before and after the training period. Heart rate was significantly 
reduced by 10-14 bpm at 135, 170 and 205W in both groups after the training and diet 
intervention (Table 2). Likewise, blood lactate was reduced to a similar extent in both groups at 
205W and 240W. By contrast, VO2, RER and the fat oxidation rate remained unchanged at all 
submaximal intensities in both groups after the intervention period (Table 2).  
The relationship between the fat oxidation rate and relative utilization of VO2max remained 
unchanged in both groups after the training period, with no differences between the groups (Fig. 
3). However, in the High CHO group the fat oxidation rate tended to be lower after the training 
period (P = 0.07). From the polynomial curve fitting, the average maximal fat oxidation was 
calculated to be 0.25 and 0.27 g ∙ min-1 in the Low CHO group and 0.30 and 0.24 g ∙ min-1 in the 
High CHO group before and after the training period, respectively. 
 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Mitochondrial adaptations 
Maximal citrate synthase activity increased to the same extent in the Low CHO group (+11%; 
134 ± 5 to 147 ± 5 mmol·kg dw-1·min-1, n = 11) as in the High CHO group (+12%; 130 ± 7 to 
142 ± 7 mmol·kg dw-1·min-1, n = 10) during the training period (overall time-effect: P = 0.05) 
(Fig. 4A). HAD activity remained unchanged after the training period in both the Low CHO 
group (+7%; 185 ± 6 to 196 ± 7 mmol·kg dw-1·min-1 n = 11, ns) and the High CHO group (+4%; 
185 ± 8 to 191 ± 7 mmol·kg dw-1·min-1 n = 10, ns) (Fig. 4B) (overall time-effect: P = 0.21, ns). 
The pACC protein level exhibited an overall time-effect (P < 0.01). Although no difference was 
observed between the groups, this seemed to be primarily driven by a ~ 65% increase in the Low 
CHO group, whereas only an 11% increase was observed in the High CHO group (Fig. 4C). The 
total CPT1b level was unchanged in both the Low and High group after the training period (Fig. 
4D). 
 
Discussion 
The present investigation demonstrated that superimposing periodic CHO restriction to four 
weeks of routine endurance training in highly trained endurance athletes does not lead to superior 
training effects compared to the same training with a CHO enriched diet. Thus, changes in 
VO2max, endurance performance, resting glycogen levels and mitochondrial adaptations were 
similar, regardless of CHO availability.  
 
 
 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
“Train-low” in elite endurance athletes 
CHO restriction during exercise and recovery has been shown to enhance signaling for 
mitochondrial biogenesis, and consequently it has been proposed as a strategy to improve 
endurance performance in athletes (30,31). However, most training studies have not been able to 
demonstrate a translation of these cellular adaptations into superior effects on endurance 
performance (8,12,22,25,36,38). The main part of studies investigating the effects of CHO 
restriction in combination with training, have been conducted in untrained or moderately 
endurance trained individuals (10,18,24,12,25,36,38) while only a few recent studies have 
employed highly trained endurance athletes (8,22). The present study used an applied approach 
to evaluate the effects of superimposing periodic CHO restriction to routine training in elite 
triathletes and road cyclists. To meet the complex physiological demands of both triathlon and 
road cycling, the weekly training programs encompassed important training sessions (i.e. 
recovery and prolonged bike sessions in cyclists and swim and run sessions in triathletes) in 
addition to the three days with carbohydrate manipulation. By using this applied design, and in 
accordance with the recent studies in elite endurance athletes, endurance performance increased 
similarly by periodic CHO restriction and a normal CHO enriched diet.  
 
Impact of diet manipulation on endurance performance 
Superior effects of training and recovery with CHO restriction on performance have previously 
been shown in some (10,18,24), but not all studies (8,12,22,25,36,38). There can be various 
explanations for this discrepancy, including differences in study designs, the duration of the 
performance tests, the magnitude of the training-induced glycogen depletion and the athlete 
training status. Most of these studies were not matched for timing of energy intake between 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
groups (i.e. highly fluctuating energy intake in low-groups) (8,12,18,22,24,25,36,38). This 
implies an exposure to various energy deficiencies rather than just CHO restriction, thus 
complicating the interpretation of the effects of CHO restriction per se.  
Potential effects of periodic CHO restriction or fasting on endurance performance may have been 
underestimated by the use of relatively short test protocols (≤ 60 min.) in several studies 
(8,10,18,25,36). The superior acute regulatory effects of “train-low” on muscle cell adaptations 
have generally involved targets related to lipid oxidation and mitochondrial biogenesis, and to 
investigate the potential of the strategy for endurance athletes, prolonged performance tests 
therefore seem preferable. Here we used a 2-hr test protocol consisting of a 90min pre-load phase 
with intermittent exercise followed by a 30-min maximal TT. With CHO provision during the 
pre-load phase, we registered a 5% increase in mean power output in both groups which can be 
explained by the increases pre-exercise glycogen, lean-body mass, enzyme activity and VO2max in 
both groups. Since the superior effects of endurance training with CHO restriction have 
previously been associated with increased fat oxidation capacity (e.g. HAD activity, fat oxidation 
rate, mitochondrial biogenesis), enhancements in endurance performance could be expected 
during prolonged exercise with restricted CHO availability (22,38). We therefore also conducted 
an endurance performance test with CHO omission during the 90-min preload phase after the 
training period. Surprisingly, there was no difference in mean power output during the tests with 
and without CHO provision, neither within nor between the groups. RER values of 0.99 during 
the final 30-min TT after both CHO and placebo provision clearly demonstrated that energy 
came almost solely from CHO oxidation and that glycogen and CHO availability were not 
critically reduced during the performance test. Thus, in these highly trained athletes the 
performance during 2hrs of high intensity endurance exercise was not limited by CHO 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
availability. This observation is in disagreement with previous studies, which have shown 
positive effects of CHO provision during high-intensity exercise lasting up to 120 mins in highly 
trained athletes (35). This discrepancy may be explained by differences in exercise intensities 
and the use of overnight fasting before performance tests in many previous studies, which is 
however not relevant to the “real life” training and competition situation. Future studies in elite 
athletes, should investigate even longer performance tests, to clarify for how long time these 
athletes can exercise before CHO availability limits performance and if “train-low” is beneficial 
during competitive events where glycogen availability becomes markedly reduced.  
The duration of the performance tests used by Hansen et al. (18) and Cochran et al. (10) was less 
than 20 mins, surprisingly still demonstrating superior effects of “train-low” on performance. 
Hansen and colleagues compared two different training regimes (i.e. twice every second day vs. 
once every day), and demonstrated a marked advantage of training twice every second day. 
Muscle glycogen was markedly reduced to ≈ 100 mmol·kg dw-1 by the “twice every second day” 
training protocol, which is much lower than seen generally and in the present study, thus 
possibly amplifying the training stimuli. Furthermore, the use of isolated knee extensor exercise 
in training and testing differs from the exercise modes used in other studies and could likely 
explain why no studies have been able to demonstrate similar performance enhancing effects 
using whole body exercise. The use of different weekly training distributions between groups in 
the study by Hansen and colleagues (18) however complicates the evaluation of “train-low” per 
se. 
Despite dietary control, losses of body mass have been a consequence of the “sleep-low” strategy 
in some studies (8,24) which likely explains part of the superior effects of “train-low” on running 
performance observed by Marquet and colleagues (24). Also, using various “train-low” strategies 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
in elite race walkers, Burke and colleagues (8) observed a larger reduction in body mass in the 
“train-low” group compared to the high CHO group, but without superior effects on race walking 
performance. Together with the present results, the latter could indicate that highly trained 
endurance athletes are generally less responsive to “train-low”, which should be further 
examined in future studies.  
 
“Train-low” applicability in elite endurance athletes  
Anecdotally, elite athletes in a variety of endurance sports employ “train-low” strategies to 
enhance performance (33). Based on the present results and the results of Burke and colleagues 
(8) and Hulston and Colleagues (22), the applicability and effects of “train-low” in elite 
endurance athletes seem limited, however. Conducting 2-4 daily training sessions as part of their 
normal training programs, athletes of this caliber inevitably experience occasional unintentional 
glycogen depletion and they may therefore be less responsive to “train-low” stimuli. From the 
post-exercise muscle glycogen concentrations, measured after seven days with CHO restriction, 
it moreover seems difficult to achieve sufficiently low glycogen levels for a prolonged period in 
elite endurance athletes, at least with the present protocol (i.e. high resting glycogen levels and 
isocaloric diets). Using a slightly more intense training protocol with 11 hrs of fasted recovery 
between training sessions, Lane and colleagues reported a net glycogen utilization of 334 mmol · 
kg dw-1 in elite endurance athletes, which is 100 mmol · kg dw-1 more than observed here (23). 
This either suggest that energy restriction instead of CHO restriction may be a preferable strategy 
to reduce muscle glycogen or that the net muscle glycogen utilization was reduced as a 
consequence of repeated exposure to the same training protocol in the present study.   
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Power output was gradually increased during training throughout the intervention period in the 
present study, and a higher training intensity or volume was not possible in our highly trained 
athletes. Thus, the present “train-low” strategy, in combination with the other weekly training 
sessions (Fig. 1), imposed a significant physiological stress, and increasing the intensity or the 
number of intervals would probably compromise other important training adaptations, thus 
deviating from a “real-world” intervention. In order to investigate whether our athletes were able 
to tolerate a higher intensity during the moderate 2-hr training session in the afternoon, the 
intended intensity was increased to 70% of HRmax on the 4th day with carbohydrate manipulation. 
Despite the relatively low intensity, average intensity in both groups was only 68% of HRmax, 
with several athletes not being able to exceed 65% of HRmax. This indicates that the athletes were 
sufficiently challenged by the original intensity of 65% of HRmax, which may be explained by the 
high intensity morning session, but also the training load from days without CHO restrictions, 
especially in those athletes with the highest training volume conducting up to three training 
sessions a day.  
On a weekly basis, the present “train-low” strategy included 6hrs of training (30-50% of total 
training volume) and 21 hrs of “recovery-low” (Fig. 1). In comparison, the 3-week study by 
Marquet and colleagues (24) included 3 weekly 1h “train-low” sessions (≈ 30% of total training 
volume) and three nights of “recover low” (24) while the 3-week study by Burke and colleagues 
(8) used 6 weekly “train-low” sessions (≈ 50% of total training volume (km)). To ensure 
maintenance or development of other important training adaptations, it may not be appropriate to 
perform more than ≈ 50 % of the total training volume as “train-low” for a prolonged period in 
elite athletes. As shown by the present results, there may furthermore be some difficulties of 
achieving reduced glycogen availability in elite endurance athletes within an applied “real-
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
world” training regimen, which challenges the development of “train-low” strategies for daily or 
weekly use by elite athletes.   
 
Net glycogen breakdown  
Superior acute regulatory effects of CHO restriction have previously been associated with 
relatively low post exercise muscle glycogen availability ([100:300] mmol·kg dw-1) 
(18,23,30,37), suggesting that the relatively high glycogen content after the CHO restriction in 
the present study constituted an insufficient stimuli. Based on the literature, we employed a 
glycogen-depleting cycling protocol, which we assumed would reduce muscle glycogen by ≈ 
50% in well-trained athletes (34). Nevertheless, muscle glycogen was only reduced by 31% (- 
217 mmol·kg dw-1) in the Low group, which may be partly explained by the minor intake of 1g 
CHO∙kg bm-1 during recovery and that muscle glycogen was resynthesized during recovery, 
despite the CHO restriction. Moreover, the utilization of resynthesized muscle glycogen during 
the afternoon session were likely larger in the High CHO group, explaining, at least partly, the 
similar net glycogen utilization in this group (-39 %; -256 mmol·kg dw-1). 
As the present study was conducted in elite athletes, we were not able to obtain multiple muscle 
biopsies and consequently we were not able to quantify the extent of gluconeogenesis and 
glycogen re-synthesis during the 7 hr recovery period. Skeletal muscles have the capacity to 
resynthesize muscle glycogen at relatively high rates during recovery from high intensity 
exercise, even with the absence of exogenous carbohydrate in untrained and moderately trained 
individuals (1,2,3,21). Since gluconeogenesis is furthermore positively associated with training 
status, the rate of gluconeogenesis was presumably high in the present group of elite athletes (5). 
Lactate has been proposed as the primary source of gluconeogenesis during the initial recovery 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
from high-intensity exercise and since blood lactate concentrations were markedly increased 
after the initial 6 x 5 mins (≈ 4 mmol·L-1) and the subsequent 2 x 5 min. (≈ 12 mmol·L-1), it is 
likely that lactate conversion contributed to muscle glycogen resynthesis (13). Protei). In 
addition to the minor intake of CHO in the low group, protein may also have served as a source 
for glycogenesis, resynthesizing glycogen, although the intake of exogenous protein was 
relatively small (16% of energy intake) in both groups. 
 
Enzyme activity and long-chain fatty acid uptake 
To our knowledge, this 4-week “train-low” study is the first to collect muscle biopsies to 
investigate myocellular responses in elite athletes. Contrary to our hypothesis, enzymatic 
changes were independent of carbohydrate availability during training and recovery. CS activity 
and glycogen content increased equally in both groups by ≈15% and ≈14%, respectively. By 
contrast, HAD activity remained unchanged in both groups. Moreover, even though total CPT1b 
protein remained unchanged in both groups, the observed chronic increase in pACC (a proxy of 
ACC activity), by 65% in the Low group and 11% in the High group, indicates that the capacity 
for long-chain fatty acid mitochondrial entry was enhanced. Although the increase in pACC did 
not differ statistically, it was obviously driven predominantly by CHO restriction. The 
comparable myocellular adaptations between the groups are in accordance with the identical 
improvements in endurance performance between the groups. A similar lack of chronic 
difference in metabolic proteins after training in a CHO-restricted versus a CHO-fed state has 
previously been observed in two studies that included physically active, but not elite trained, 
individuals (10,12). On the contrary, training studies in both untrained or endurance trained 
individuals by Morton et al. (25), Yeo et al. (38) and Hulston et al. (22) reported that oxidative 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
enzyme activity (i.e. SDH, CS and HAD activity) was enhanced more by CHO restriction 
compared to a CHO enriched diet. Manipulating energy intake by fasting and not just by CHO 
intake may partly explain the enhanced response in enzyme activity observed in some previous 
studies (22,38). Collectively, the present and previous results indicate that differences may exist 
in the responsiveness of specific metabolic enzymes due to differences in training status and 
“train-low” strategies. Our data suggest that highly trained individuals are less responsive to 
changes in enzyme activity induced by “train-low”, at least when the energy intake, and the 
timing hereof, is standardized and equal to control.  
 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, four weeks of regular endurance training in elite athletes, including either periodic 
CHO restriction or a CHO-enriched diet, induced similar effects on performance and the 
myocellular response. With the present matched and isocaloric design, endurance performance, 
VO2max, glycogen availability and markers of mitochondrial adaptations all increased to the same 
extent with high and periodically low CHO availability. The lack of group differences could be 
explained by the modest glycogen depletion in the Low group after the CHO manipulation, 
suggesting that more aggressive manipulation protocols may be needed to achieve superior 
effects in elite endurance athletes.   
 
 
 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Acknowledgement 
This study was supported financially by Team Danmark, The Danish Ministry of Culture and 
The Swedish National Centre for Research in Sports. 
We would like to thank Kasper Kristensen, Aske Lundsgaard, Brian Vith, Rasmus Jørgensen and 
Ronja Hoejbjerg for their technical assistance. 
 
Conflict of interest 
The authors report no conflict of interest and the results of the present study do not constitute 
endorsement by ACSM. We declare that the results of the study are presented clearly, honestly 
and without fabrication, falsification, or inappropriate data manipulation. 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
References 
1. 
Astrand PO, Hultman E, Juhlin-Dannfelt A, Reynolds G. Disposal of lactate during and 
after strenuous exercise in humans. J Appl Physiol (1985). 1986; 61(1):338-43. 
2. 
Bangsbo J, Gollnick PD, Graham TE, Saltin B. Substrates for muscle glycogen synthesis 
in recovery from intense exercise in man. J Physiol. 1991; 434:423-40. 
3. 
Bangsbo J, Madsen K, Kiens B, Richter EA. Muscle glycogen synthesis in recovery from 
intense exercise in humans. Am J Physiol. 1997; 273(2 Pt 1):416-24. 
4. 
Bartlett JD, Louhelainen J, Iqbal Z et al. Reduced carbohydrate availability enhances 
exercise-induced p53 signaling in human skeletal muscle: implications for mitochondrial 
biogenesis. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2013; 304(6):450-8 
5. 
Bergman BC, Horning MA, Casazza GA, Wolfel EE, Butterfield GE, Brooks GA. 
Endurance training increases gluconeogenesis during rest and exercise in men. Am J 
Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2000; 278(2):244-51. 
6. 
Bergstrom J. Percutaneous needle biopsy of skeletal muscle in physiological and clinical 
research. Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 1975; 35(7):609-16.  
7. 
Black AE, Coward WA, Cole TJ, Prentice AM. Human energy expenditure in affluent 
societies: an analysis of 574 doubly-labelled water measurements. Eur J Clin Nutr. 1996; 
50(2): 72-92.  
8. 
Burke LM, Ross ML, Garvican-Lewis LA et al. Low Carbohydrate, High Fat diet impairs 
exercise economy and negates the performance benefit from intensified training in elite 
race walkers. J Physiol. 2016 Dec 23. doi: 10.1113/JP273230. 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
9. 
Cochran AJ, Little JP, Tarnopolsky MA, Gibala MJ. Carbohydrate feeding during 
recovery alters the skeletal muscle metabolic response to repeated sessions of high-
intensity interval exercise in humans. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2010;108(3):628-36 
10. 
Cochran AJ, Myslik F, MacInnis MJ, Percival ME, Bishop D, Tarnopolsky MA, Gibala 
MJ. Manipulating carbohydrate availability between twice-daily sessions of high-
intensity interval training over 2 weeks improves time-trial performance. Int J Sports 
Nutr Exerc Metab. 2015; 25:463-70 
11. 
Danieli Betto D, Zerbato E & Betto R. Type 1, 2A, and 2B myosin heavy chain 
electrophoretic analysis of rat muscle fibres. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1986; 138: 
981–987. 
12. 
De Bock K, Derave W, Eijnde BO et al. Effect of training in the fasted state on metabolic 
responses 
during 
exercise 
with 
carbohydrate 
intake. 
J 
Appl 
Physiol 
(1985). 2008 Apr;104(4):1045-55. 
13. 
Fournier PA, Bräu L, Ferreira LD et al. 2002. Glycogen resynthesis in the absence of 
food ingestion during recovery from moderate or high intensity physical activity: novel 
insights from rat and human studies. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol. 2002; 
133(3):755-63 
14. 
Frayn K. Calculation of substrate oxidation rates in vivo from gaseous exchange. J Appl 
Physiol Respir Environ Exerc  Physiol. 1983; 55:628-34. 
15. 
Gejl K, Hvid L, Frandsen U, Jensen K, Sahlin J, Ørtenblad N. Muscle glycogen content 
modifies SE Ca2+ release rate in elite endurance athletes. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2014. 46 
(3):496-505.  
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
16. 
Gilda JE, Gomes AV. Stain-Free total protein staining is a superior loading control to β-
actin for Western blots. Anal Biochem. 2013; 440(2):186-8.  
17. 
Gürtler A, Kunz N, Gomolka M et al. Stain-Free technology as a normalization tool 
in Western blot analysis. Anal Biochem. 2013. 433(2):105-11. 
18. 
Hansen AK, Fischer CP, Plomgaard P, Andersen JL, Saltin B, Pedersen BK. Skeletal 
muscle adaptation: training twice every second day vs. training once daily. J Appl Physiol 
(1985). 2005; 98(1):93-9. 
19. 
Heargreaves M. Exercise, muscle, and CHO metabolism. Scand J Med Sci Sports. 2015; 
Suppl 4: 29-33 
20. 
Henry CJK. Basal metabolic rate studies in humans: measurement and development of 
new equations. Public Health Nutr. 2005; 7A: 1133-52 
21. 
Hermansen L, Vaage O. Lactate disappearance and glycogen synthesis in human muscle 
after maximal exercise. Am J Physiol. 1977; 233(5):422-9. 
22. 
Hulston CJ, Venables MC, Mann CH et al. Training with low muscle glycogen enhances 
fat metabolism in well-trained cyclists. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2010; 42(11):2046-55 
23. 
Lane SC, Camera DM, Lassiter DG et al. Effects of sleeping with reduced carbohydrate 
availability on acute training responses. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2015; 119(6):643-55 
24. 
Marquet LA, Brisswalter J, Louis J et al. Enhanced Endurance Performance by 
Periodization of Carbohydrate Intake: "Sleep Low" Strategy. Med Sci Sports 
Exerc. 2016;48(4):663-72. 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
25. 
Morton JP, Croft L, Bartlett JD et al. Reduced carbohydrate availability does not 
modulate training-induced heat shock protein adaptations but does upregulate oxidative 
enzyme activity in human skeletal muscle. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2009; 106(5):1513-21.  
26. 
Ørtenblad N, Nielsen J, Saltin B, Holmberg HC. Role of glycogen availability in 
sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ kinetics in human skeletal muscle. J Appl Physiol. 2011; 
589.3: 711-725 
27. 
Ørtenblad N, Westerblad H, Nielsen J. Muscle glycogen stores and fatigue. J Physiol. 
2013; 591(18):4405-13 
28. 
Passonneau J, Lowry O. Enzymatic Analysis – A practical guide. 1st ed. The Humana 
Press Inc.; 1995. 302 p   
29. 
Philp A, Hargreaves M, Baar K. More than a store: regulatory roles for glycogen in 
skeletal muscle adaptation to exercise. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2012; 
302(11):1343-51 
30. 
Pilegaard H, Osada T, Andersen LT, Helge JW, Saltin B, Neufer PD. Substrate 
availability and transcriptional regulation of metabolic genes in human skeletal muscle 
during recovery from exercise. Metabolism. 2005; 54(8):1048-55. 
31. 
Psilander N, Frank P, Flockhart M, Sahlin K. Exercise with low glycogen increases PGC-
1α gene expression in human skeletal muscle. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2013;113(4):951-63. 
32. 
Rahbek SK, Farup J, de Paoli F, Vissing K. No differential effects of divergent isocaloric 
supplements on signaling for muscle protein turnover during recovery from muscle-
damaging exerciseæ Amino Acids. 2015; 47(4):767-78 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
33. 
Stellingwerff T. Contemporary nutrition approaches to optimize elite marathon 
performance. Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 2013; 8(5):573-8.  
34. 
Stepto NK, Martin DT, Fallon KE, Hawley JA. Metabolic demands of intense aerobic 
interval training in competitive cyclists. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2001; 33(2):303-10 
35. 
Vandenbogaerde TJ, Hopkins WG. Effects of acute carbohydrate supplementation on 
endurance performance: a meta-analysis. Sports Med. 2011; 41(9):773-792 
36. 
Van Proeyen K, Szlufcik K, Nielens H et al. Training in the fasted state improves glucose 
tolerance during fat-rich diet. J Physiol. 2010; 588(Pt 21):4289-302 
37. 
Wojtaszewski JF, MacDonald C, Nielsen JN et al. Regulation of 5'AMP-activated protein 
kinase activity and substrate utilization in exercising human skeletal muscle. Am J 
Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2003;284(4):813-22.  
38. 
Yeo WK, Paton CD, Garnham AP, Burke LM, Carey AL, Hawley JA. Skeletal muscle 
adaptation and performance responses to once a day versus twice every second day 
endurance training regimens. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2008; 105(5):1462-70 
 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Figure legends 
 
Figure 1. Schematic illustration of the 36-day study period, including the timing of the five 
laboratory visits and the training period including periodic CHO manipulation and moreover an 
example of a weekly training schedule, including routine training and three days with CHO 
manipulation. The schedule is representative for those triathletes completing the highest training 
volume. In addition to the three CHO manipulation days, the triathletes conducted swim and run 
sessions, while road cyclists carried out supplemental bike sessions. Training schedules were 
similar within pairs but different between pairs throughout the 4-week training period. More 
information about training plans is described in “Methods”. ST = strength training.  
 
 
Figure 2. VO2max (A), power output during the 30-min TT undertaken after 90 mins of 
intermittent exercise with either CHO or placebo provision (B & C) and resting  glycogen 
content before and after 4 weeks of endurance training including a periodic low CHO intake 
((Low, n = 13) or a high CHO intake (High, n = 13) as well as muscle glycogen 1 hr after the 
moderate 2-hr afternoon session on the seventh day with CHO manipulation (n = 17; Low n = 9, 
High n = 8) (D). # Overall time effect from pre to post with no differences between the groups, P 
≤ 0.001. * Different from pre and post. 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Figure 3. Association between relative exercise intensity and fat oxidation rates during the 
graded submaximal test. The association between the relative utilization of VO2max and the fat 
oxidation rate was determined by polynomial curve fitting. The relative utilizations of VO2max 
were divided into 7.5% intervals from 30% to 75% of VO2max and associated with corresponding 
fat oxidation rates. The fat oxidation curves did not differ between the Low and High CHO 
groups before and after the training period. However, the fat oxidation rate tended to be lower in 
the High CHO group after compared to before the training period (P = 0.07). 
 
 
Figure 4.  Effects of 4 weeks of endurance training with either a periodic low CHO diet (Low) or 
a high CHO diet (High) in elite endurance on (A) citrate synthase activity (CS, Low: n = 11; 
High: n = 10); (B) 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity (HAD, Low: n = 11; High: n = 
10); (C) pACCSer79 (Low: n = 13; High: n = 12); and (D) CPT1b (Low: n = 13; High: n = 12). # 
Overall time effects from pre to post with no differences between the groups: citrate synthase: P 
= 0.05; pACCSer79: P = 0.004. 
 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Figure 1 
 
 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Figure 2 
 
 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Figure 3 
 
 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Figure 4 
 
 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 
Table 1. Descriptive variables for Low and High CHO groups 
 
Low CHO 
  
High CHO 
 
 
   
Subjects (n) 
13 
  
13 
Age, years 
24 
± 
1 
  
25 
± 
1 
Body mass, kg 
74.9 
± 
1.9 
  
75.3 ± 
1.7 
Height, cm 
184 
± 
2 
  
183 ± 
2 
Body fat, % 
9.7 
± 
0.8 
  
10.4 ± 
0.7 
LBM, kg 
68.7 
± 
1.8 
  
68.5 ± 
1.5 
VO2max (mL∙min-1) 
4835 
± 
142 
  
4920 ± 153 
VO2max (mL∙kg-1∙min-1) 
64.7 
± 
1.4 
  
65.3 ± 
1.3 
Training volumen (h∙week-1) 
17 
± 
1 
    
17 
± 
1 
Values are from baseline and means ± SEM. No differences were 
observed between groups. 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED
 Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Table 2. Submaximal measurements during cycling exercise. 
    
    
    
  
    
  
  
  
170 W 
  
205 W 
  
240 W 
  
 
 
Low 
High 
 
Low 
High 
 
Low 
High 
 
Heart rate (bpm) 
Pre 
130 
± 
3 
134 ± 
3 
 
143 ± 
2 
144 ± 
4 
 
154 ± 
3 
155 ± 
4 
 
Post 
119 
± 
3 
122 ± 
3 
* 129 ± 
3 
132 ± 
3 
* 140 ± 
3 
146 ± 
3 
* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VO2  (ml · min-1) 
Pre 
2348 ± 
35 
2439 ± 
45 
 2728 ± 
37 
2800 ± 
33 
 3121 ± 
41 
3174 ± 
38 
 
Post 2303 ± 
51 
2374 ± 
44 
 2662 ± 
51 
2773 ± 
44 
 3044 ± 
70 
3174 ± 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RER (VCO2· VO2
-1) 
Pre 
0.93 ± 0.01 0.93 ± 0.01  
0.95 ± 0.01 0.95 ± 0.01  
0.97 ± 0.01 0.97 ± 0.01 
 
Post 0.93 ± 0.01 0.94 ± 0.00  
0.94 ± 0.01 0.94 ± 0.01  
0.96 ± 0.01 0.96 ± 0.01 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fat oxidation (g∙min-1) 
Pre 
0.27 ± 0.04 0.29 ± 0.03  
0.22 ± 0.04 0.23 ± 0.04  
0.15 ± 0.04 0.18 ± 0.05  
Post 0.25 ± 0.04 0.24 ± 0.02  
0.26 ± 0.04 0.24 ± 0.03  
0.21 ± 0.04 0.19 ± 0.05  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Blood lactate (mmol · L-1) Pre 
1.22 ± 0.07 1.40 ± 0.14  
1.41 ± 0.12 1.51 ± 0.16  
2.06 ± 0.16 2.43 ± 0.30  
Post 1.08 ± 0.07 1.21 ± 0.16   1.15 ± 0.07 1.28 ± 0.13 * 1.55 ± 0.13 1.60 ± 0.22 * 
Oxygen consumption (VO2), Repiratory Exchange Ratio (RER), fat oxidation rate and blood lactate at 170, 205, 240 W before and after the 
training period in the Low and High CHO group. Subjects consumed identical meals every second hour from 7am until 60 min. prior to the 
submaximal test. The meals (5.7 kJ ∙ kg bw-1) contained 0.9 g CHO ∙ kg bw-1, with a relative contribution of 65% CHO, 14% protein and 
21% fat. Values are means ± SEM. * Overall time effect pre to post, P < 0.05. 
 
 
ACCEPTED
