 ARTICLE
Human single neuron activity precedes emergence
of conscious perception
Hagar Gelbard-Sagiv
1,2,3,4, Liad Mudrik
1,4,5, Michael R. Hill1,2, Christof Koch1,6 & Itzhak Fried2,7
Identifying the neuronal basis of spontaneous changes in conscious experience in the
absence of changes in the external environment is a major challenge. Binocular rivalry, in
which two stationary monocular images lead to continuously changing perception, provides a
unique opportunity to address this issue. We studied the activity of human single neurons in
the medial temporal and frontal lobes while patients were engaged in binocular rivalry. Here
we report that internal changes in the content of perception are signaled by very early
(~-2000 ms) nonselective medial frontal activity, followed by selective activity of medial
temporal lobe neurons that precedes the perceptual change by ~1000 ms. Such early acti-
vations are not found for externally driven perceptual changes. These results suggest that a
medial fronto-temporal network may be involved in the preconscious internal generation of
perceptual transitions.
DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03749-0
OPEN
1 Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, 91126 CA, USA. 2 Department of Neurosurgery, David Geffen School of Medicine and Semel
Institute for Neuroscience and Human Behavior, University of California, Los Angeles, 90095 CA, USA. 3 Department of Physiology and Pharmacology,
Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 6997801, Israel. 4 Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 6997801, Israel.
5 School of Psychological Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 6997801, Israel. 6 Allen Institute for Brain Science, Seattle, WA 98109, USA. 7 Functional
Neurosurgery Unit, Tel-Aviv Medical Center and Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv 6423906, Israel. Correspondence and requests for
materials should be addressed to H.G-S. (email: hagar.sagiv@gmail.com)
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:2057 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03749-0| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
1
1234567890():,;
 O
ne of the greatest challenges of cognitive neuroscience is
bridging the gap between the binary activity of single
neurons and the complexity and vividness of conscious
experience. To date, only a few studies have addressed this ques-
tion in humans, using single neuron recordings from the medial
temporal lobe (MTL)1–3. In these studies, conscious perception was
manipulated using three paradigms: flash suppression, in which the
perception of an image presented to one eye is suppressed by
flashing a different image to the other eye4; backward masking, in
which a briefly presented image is suppressed by the immediate
presentation of a mask image5; and the attentional blink, in which
the second of two target stimuli appearing in close succession is
often not perceived6. Firing patterns of human MTL neurons in
response to these paradigms correlated with conscious perception,
responding stronger and earlier when the patient perceived the
stimulus compared to when the stimulus was perceptually sup-
pressed1–3. Notably, the response of MTL neurons started 200–300
ms after the external manipulation that led to the change in per-
ception, raising the question of whether these neurons have a role in
generating the percept. However, in these studies, the perceptual
content was externally driven by the experimental manipulation,
rather than by internal processes. Thus, the involvement of MTL
neurons in the internal generation of conscious perception could
not be assessed using these paradigms.
As opposed to the above paradigms, in binocular rivalry7,8
(BR), perception alternates while the stimulus is constant and
stationary. Due to the absence of external changes, BR provides
an exceptional opportunity to detect internally driven changes in
perception. In BR, a different image is presented to each eye,
inducing involuntary stochastic perceptual alternations between
the two associated percepts, with periods of exclusive dominance
of each image and transition periods of mixed percept (piece-
meal). In a series of seminal studies9–11, Logothetis and colleagues
used BR while tracking the firing rate (FR) of neurons from
primary visual areas up to inferior temporal cortex in monkeys.
They reported more cells correlating with the monkeys’ percept
when ascending the visual hierarchy, from 20% of cells in primary
visual areas to 90% of the cells in inferior temporal cortex12. But
what happens further in the processing chain, in MTL neurons?
Given the previously demonstrated role of these neurons in
conceptual representations13,14, are they causally involved in the
perceptual alternations observed in BR?
Annette Bening
Snakes
Rivalry
Replay
0
5
10
15
20
25
Time (s)
Constant stimulus
Alternating stimulus
Time
a
b
c
Rivalry
Replay
Non-rivalrous
Alternating percept
Perceptual transitions are internally driven 
d
Alternating percept
Perceptual transitions are externally driven 
Fig. 1 Experimental paradigm and behavior. a Non-rivalrous condition. Images were presented binocularly to both eyes, hence no binocular conflict. In this
example a picture of snakes and a picture of the actress Annette Bening (marked by a placeholder due to copyrights issues) were used. b Binocular rivalry
condition. A distinct constant image presented to each eye using red-blue goggles (top), resulted in spontaneous perceptual alternations (bottom)
reported by the patients by holding (filled circles) and releasing (empty circles) two assigned buttons, for the beginning of the dominance and transition
periods, respectively. Gray rectangles mark the report of transition onset towards the suppressed image (end of dominance period of the other image;
button release), which is the behavioral event on which the analysis was focused. c Matched-duration replay condition. Internally driven perceptual
alternations during rivalry were mimicked by gradual and duration-matched physical (externally driven) alternations on screen, presented binocularly to
both eyes, with an identical behavioral task. d Rivalry (purple) and replay (cyan) behavioral report example. Note how closely the replay reports follow the
rivalry reports with a delay of 0.7 ± 0.1 s. An amygdala neuron from this session is presented in Fig. 3
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03749-0
2
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:2057 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03749-0| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 A similar question relates to the role of different frontal areas
in internally driven perceptual alternations, which is highly
debated15–24. This question is of special interest, given the more
general controversy among leading theories of consciousness25–30
regarding the role of frontal areas in generating conscious
perception.
Here we recorded from human medial-temporal and medial-
frontal lobe neurons in neurosurgical patients, implanted with
intracranial electrodes
for clinical purposes.
Patients
were
engaged in either BR, where perceptual alternations were
internally driven, or in a matched-duration replay condition, in
which the perceptual alternations were externally driven by an
actual stimulus change. This opportunity to measure single cell
activity in humans able to readily report their subjective experi-
ence allowed us to track the neural events that precede sponta-
neous alternations in perception. We show that neurons in the
pre-supplementary motor and anterior cingulate areas are active
almost 2 s prior to the reported emergence of conscious percepts
during BR. This early activation is followed by selective activity of
MTL neurons that precedes the perceptual alternations by 1 s.
Such early activity is not found when perceptual alternations are
externally driven by an actual stimulus change. Thus, medial
frontal and medial temporal activity are persumably part of the
chain of events that leads to an internal perceptual transition
during rivalry.
Results
Experimental design. Nine pharmacologically intractable epi-
lepsy patients implanted with intracranial depth electrodes to
localize the focus of seizure onset for potential surgical cure
participated in 20 sessions of the experiment. For each patient,
placement of the depth electrodes was determined exclusively by
clinical criteria31.
Patients first participated in a selectivity screening session,
where they were presented with a large number of images to find
ones that elicit selective responses in MTL neurons32. Images that
induced the strongest responses were paired with images that did
not induce responses. These image pairs were used in the
following BR session, which took place a few hours later.
Each block of the BR session began with 3–24 (M = 6.45 ±
1.71) non-rivalrous presentations of each of the two images to
both eyes (non-rivalrous condition; Fig. 1a) in a pseudo-random
order. Patients pressed two pre-assigned buttons in response to
the two images. After they reached eight successive correct
responses to each image, the non-rivalrous condition was
terminated. This non-rivalrous condition was aimed at training
patients to accurately report the content of their percept, as well
as to reassess the selectivity of the targeted units. During the
rivalry condition, the two images were presented monocularly,
one to each eye. Patients reported four perceptual events:
dominance onset of each of the two images, defined as the time
at which this image started to be exclusively perceived; and
transition onset for each of the images, defined as the instant at
which that image started to emerge into awareness (i.e. become
visible)
after
being
perceptually
suppressed.
Patients
were
instructed to report transition onset as soon as something in
the dominant image started to change and not to wait for seeing a
clear part of the emerging image—any change in the dominant
percept should have been reported as transition onset. Impor-
tantly, our analysis focused on these transition onset events,
marking the emergence of a new percept. Reports of dominance
and transition onsets were done by holding and releasing the two
assigned buttons, respectively11 (Fig. 1b). As opposed to the non-
rivalrous condition, here the patients were asked to report their
perceptual changes as quickly as possible (Methods).
These reports were then used to create a matched-duration
replay condition in which the same stimulus was presented to
both eyes in an order specified by the reports during rivalry (Fig.
1c): during reported dominance periods, the relevant image was
presented, and during transition periods (times between transi-
tion onset to dominance onset), the transparency of the previous
image was linearly ramped up to 100% while the transparency of
the next image was linearly ramped down to zero. As opposed to
many previous BR studies that used instantaneous replay very
different from actual rivalry20, this stimulation was designed to
produce a perception that closely mimics rivalry, resulting in a
matched sequence of motor responses in the two conditions (see
for example, Fig. 1d). Note that patients were not informed about
the difference between the conditions, and performed the same
behavioral task. Patients were also not debriefed about this at the
end of the experiment, in order to keep them naïve for additional
sessions.
Rivalry and replay time courses. Rivalry blocks lasted either 90
or 120 s (114.50 ± 12.76 s mean ± standard deviation; SD). Over-
all, patients completed rivalry and replay blocks with 1−4 (M =
2.70 ± 0.73) different pairs of images per session, including 2−5
(M = 2.67 ± 0.66) rivalry and 1−2 (M = 1.08 ± 0.24) replay blocks
for each image pair. On average, subjects had 44.87 ± 23.29
alternations per image pair during rivalry, with each dominance
period lasting 3.59 ± 1.50 s. Twenty-four percent of the alterna-
tions were incomplete (i.e., did not lead to full dominance of the
emerging image, but rather to the return of the previously
dominant one). Averaged transition duration was 1.68 ± 1.32 s.
Patients’ predominance score was calculated by dividing the total
dominance time of one of the images by the total dominance time
for both images. On average, patients’ percepts were equally
distributed between the two images (predominance score = 0.50
± 0.05; t(53) = 0.40; p = 0.69; 95% CI = [0.45 0.53]; two-tailed t
test against 0.5). Note that images were switched between the eyes
in the middle of the rivalry condition to minimize ocular dom-
inance influence on image dominance distribution (Methods).
Frequency histograms of the relative dominance durations—i.e.,
normalized by dividing by the average dominance duration for
each image—fit a gamma distribution33 (Supplementary Fig. 1).
For each pair of images, a matched-duration replay block was
generated, based on the behavioral responses during one of the
rivalry blocks (Methods). Mean dominance duration in the replay
condition was 4.91 s (SD = 2.23 s; compared to 3.43 s, SD = 1.27 s
in
the
corresponding
rivalry
block;
W(7) = 34,
z = 2.24,
p = 0.025; Wilcoxon signed-rank two-tailed test) and transition
duration was 1.12 s (SD = 0.87 s; compared to 1.49 s, SD = 1.08 s
in
the
corresponding
rivalry
block;
W(7) = 36,
z = 2.52,
p = 0.008; Wilcoxon signed-rank two-tailed test). The shorter
transition times during replay compared to rivalry probably stem
from the time it takes the change in transparency to become
noticeable on both ends of the transition period. Importantly, this
delay should make it easier to find early neuronal responses in the
replay condition with respect to the transition report (button
release), as during a replayed transition – but not during
internally generated transition – the neurons can respond to the
physical changes that precede the perceptual change.
MTL activity precedes perceptual transitions. We recorded
from a total of 402 MTL (166 single32) units (see Supplementary
Table 1 and Supplementary Fig. 2). 75 (19%) MTL units
responded selectively to at least one of the images in at least one
of
the
image
pairs
during
the
non-rivalrous
condition
(120 selective responses, 15 of which were for both images of the
pair; see Methods). This relatively low fraction of responsive units
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03749-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:2057 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03749-0| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
3
 a
b
c
d
House On
Ed Helms On
20
FR [Hz]
10
0
20
10
0
Ed Helms
House
House
Ed Helms
20
FR [Hz]
10
0
20
10
0
–2
2
Time [s]
0
–2
2
Time [s]
0
Rivalry
Replay
Fig. 2 Activity of a single-unit in parahippocampal gyrus during rivalry and replay. a, b Responses to the non-rivalrous presentation of a house (a) or the
actor Ed Helms (b) images. Raster plots (order of trials is from top to bottom) and post-stimulus time histogram (PSTH; 250 ms bins) are given for each
image; vertical lines indicate image onset and offset; horizontal lines separate different blocks; black horizontal bars denote significant activity relative to
baseline. Inset presents waveforms of this unit. c Neuronal firing around the report of transition onset to the house image (t = 0; end of Ed Helms
image exclusive dominance) during rivalry (purple) and replay (cyan). PSTHs are computed with a moving square-window of 200 ms. Shaded areas
represent standard error (SE). Purple and cyan horizontal bars denote periods where the instantaneous FR was significantly different than baseline in rivalry
and replay, respectively (onset of these periods marked by arrows). Note the earlier activation during rivalry as compared to replay. d Neuronal firing
around the report of transition onset to the Ed helms image
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03749-0
4
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:2057 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03749-0| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 is typical of pre-screening based studies2,3,32, as units that
responded in the pre-screening session might not be recorded
anymore, or change selectivity in the main experimental session
that takes place a few hours later. This low yield is all the more
expected here given the long duration of each rivalry and replay
block and the limited time with the patients, which allowed the
use of only 4–6 images per session on average. Responses were
either positive (i.e. increase in FR above baseline; 86 responses) or
negative (decrease below baseline FR; 34 responses); Negative
responses were also previously reported in the human MTL34,35
and medial frontal cortex36. For each pair of images, the image
with the stronger response during the non-rivalrous condition
was defined as the unit’s “preferred image”.
Out of these responsive units, we identified units that
significantly increased or decreased their FR around the onset
of the transition to the unit’s preferred image using permutation
a
b
c
d
Snakes On
Annette Bening On
Annette Bening
Snakes
Snakes
Annette Bening
10
5
0
10
5
FR (Hz)
0
10
5
FR (Hz)
0
10
5
0
–2
0
2
Time (s)
–2
0
2
Time (s)
Rivalry
Replay
Fig. 3 Activity of a single-unit in amygdala during rivalry and replay. Conventions as in Fig. 2. a, b Responses to the non-rivalrous presentation of snakes (a)
or the actress Annette Bening (b) images. c Neuronal firing around the report of transition onset to the snakes image (t = 0; end of Annette Bening
image exclusive dominance) during rivalry (purple) and replay (cyan). d Neuronal firing around the report of transition onset to the Annette Bening image.
Note the strikingly different onset of firing in rivalry and replay. Behavioral reports from this session are presented in Fig. 1d
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03749-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:2057 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03749-0| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
5
 statistics (see Methods). Note that all transition onsets to the
unit’s preferred image, whether complete or incomplete, were
taken into account; as long as an image starts to emerge into
consciousness after being perceptually suppressed (marked by
transition onset report), it should be accompanied by a neural
event, whether that image gains full dominance or not. The
permutation analysis allowed us to both identify active units, and
time their activity relative to the behavioral report. Thirty-one
MTL units were active during rivalry and/or replay (Supplemen-
tary Table 1).
For example, Fig. 2 depicts a parahippocampal unit, which
responded selectively to a picture of a house (Fig. 2a) but not to a
picture of the actor Ed Helms (Fig. 2b) in the non-rivalrous
condition. During rivalry, this unit started to fire about a second
prior to the report of the onset of perceptual transition to the
house image (Fig. 2c, purple). On the contrary, when the subject
reported transitioning to the Ed Helms image (Fig. 2d, purple),
the unit’s FR was substantially reduced. Interestingly, in the
externally driven replay condition, the activity preceding the
perceptual switch started almost 600 ms later than during rivalry
(Fig. 2c, cyan).
This anticipatory activity during rivalry started even earlier in
an amygdala unit recorded from another patient, selective to a
picture of snakes (Fig. 3a) and not to a picture of the actress
Annette Bening (Fig. 3b). Here, the FR increased more than a
second before the report of the perceptual transition to the snakes
image but not before the transition to the Annette Bening image
(compare purple traces on Fig. 3c, d). During replay, on the other
hand, the unit started to fire much later, only at ~150 ms before
the report (Fig. 3c, cyan). The same pattern of earlier anticipatory
activity in rivalry compared to replay was found regardless of the
type of response, that is, also for units that responded by
decreasing
their
FR
in
the
non-rivalrous
condition
(e.g.
Supplementary Fig. 3 from another unit in the same patient).
The above analysis reveals the times at which the activity of
each unit started to diverge significantly from baseline. For MTL
units, this happened earlier with respect to the reported transition
onset to the unit’s preferred image during rivalry (−604 ± 317 ms;
n = 36 traces. Figure 4b, significance periods highlighted) than
during replay (−269 ± 207 ms; n = 26 traces; Fig. 4c; t(60) = 4.70,
p < 0.0001, 95% CI = [−478 −192ms], two-tailed independent
samples t test). Note that seven out of the 31 recorded units were
active in more than one image pair in rivalry and/or replay. As
the activity patterns were often different for the different image
pairs, we did not collapse across pairs, but rather considered each
activity “trace” (i.e., a certain unit responding to a certain image
pair) as an independent sample. This led to 36 rivalry-active
traces and 26 replay-active traces. To further assess the strength
of this difference and the sufficiency of the evidence, we
computed the Bayes factor (BF) for this effect (Methods), testing
the likelihood of a difference between rivalry and replay activity
onsets (H1) vs. the lack of such difference (H0). A BF of 1123 was
found, suggesting extreme evidence for the existence of a
difference between rivalry and replay activity onsets37.
In
addition,
we
used
an
automatic
response
detection
analysis3,38 (Poisson spike train analysis; see Methods), to detect
activity onset on a trial-by-trial basis (see Supplementary Fig. 4a
for an example of the application of this method on the data from
Fig. 2). Note that this analysis cannot detect decreases in FR; thus,
only units that showed increase in FR in either rivalry or replay
were included in this analysis (n = 33 traces). Accordingly, we
used this analysis as an additional way to examine the data and
assess the robustness of the main analysis above. Though this
analysis is not ideal for this type of continuous data, that does not
contain a clear baseline period essential for this analysis, it yielded
similar results: an earlier activity onset during rivalry (−526 ±
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
Time from button release (s)
5
10
15
20
25
Unit number
10
20
30
Unit number
a
b
c
600
Rivalry (n=36)
Replay (n=26)
500
400
Firing rate change (%)
300
200
100
0
Fig. 4 MTL population-level activity started earlier during rivalry than
during replay. a FR percent change (mean ± SE) around the report of
perceptual transition onset to the preferred image is averaged across all
MTL rivalry-active (purple; n = 36) and replay-active traces (cyan; n = 26).
Traces with significant decrease below baseline FR (n = 8 rivalry-active and
n = 4 replay-active traces; see bluish highlighted periods in (b) and (c))
were inverted to enable averaging. Thick horizontal bars denote times
where population activity significantly diverged from baseline (onset of
these periods marked by arrows); note the ~600 ms difference in onset
between rivalry and replay. The normalized FR time courses used to create
the average responses are presented in color code (dark blue = 0; dark red
= 1) for all MTL rivalry-active (b) and replay-active (c) units, with periods
of significance at the unit level highlighted
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03749-0
6
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:2057 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03749-0| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 214 ms; median ± SD) as compared to replay (−278 ± 300 ms; t
(23) = 4.39, p = 0.0002, 95% CI = [−341 −123ms], two-tailed
paired t-test; Supplementary Fig. 4b).
Notably, both the permutation and
automatic response
detection analyses examine the responses at the level of individual
units. Thus they may underestimate the actual timing of the
population-level MTL anticipatory activity, which might have
started earlier but did not reach significance at the unit level. In
order to quantify the timing of unit activity at the population
level, we ran the same permutation procedure, this time with the
FR change percentage of all rivalry/replay-active units (see
Methods). We found that group activity diverged from baseline
1072 ms prior to the report of transition onset to the preferred
image during rivalry, compared to 455 ms during replay (Fig. 4a)
—a ~600 ms difference (for rivalry vs. replay activity in the
different subregions in the MTL, see Supplementary Fig. 5a).
Note that here we separately analyzed rivalry-active and replay-
active units, even though many units were active in both rivalry
and replay. Supplementary Figs. 6 and 7 present the same analysis
for the intersection and union of these two populations,
respectively, with very similar results.
To further validate these results, we considered and rejected
four possible confounds that could have biased the analysis. First,
since we timed the activity by comparing the instantaneous FR
against the baseline FR in each trial, the difference between rivalry
and replay could have stemmed from a difference in baseline FR
rather than actual timing difference. To rule out this possibility,
we compared the baseline FR in rivalry and replay and found no
difference between the conditions, both when inspecting only
rivalry/replay-active
units
(t(39) = 0.11,
p = 0.91,
two-tailed
paired t-test), or all non-rivalrous condition responsive units
(t(104) = 0.39, p = 0.7, two-tailed paired t-test).
A
second
possible
concern
is
that
the
earlier
rivalry
response reflects the higher statistical power in rivalry that
results from the larger number of trials in this condition (2–5
rivalry vs. 1–2 replay blocks). To control for this concern, we
repeated the analysis while equating the number of trials in the
two
conditions.
A
similar
pattern
of
results
was
found
(Supplementary Fig. 8).
A third concern is that the earlier activity relative to transition
onset (end of dominance period) simply reflects the difference in
dominance durations between rivalry and replay (see behavioral
results above). This is less likely since the anticipatory activity was
longer (i.e. started earlier) during rivalry, where dominance
durations were actually shorter. Yet to make sure there is no
relation between firing onset time and dominance duration, we
computed the correlation between the trial-by-trial perceptual
transition activity onset time (as determined by the trial-by-trial
response detection analysis) for each unit, and the preceding
dominance period duration. No significant correlation was found
150
a
b
c
Rivalry-active units
Replay-active units
100
Rivalry (n=26)
Replay (n=26)
Rivalry (n=39)
Replay (n=39)
50
0
–50
150
100
50
10
5
FR (Hz)
Firing rate change (%)
Firing rate change (%)
0
0
–50
–3
–2
–1
0
–2
2
0
Time from button release (s)
Time (s)
1
2
3
Fig. 5 ACC and preSMA activity during rivalry and replay. a Firing of an ACC multi-unit around the report of a perceptual transition onset during rivalry
(purple) and replay (cyan); convention as in Fig. 2c. Note that this anticipatory activity was nonselective and accompanied the transition to any image.
Average FR percent change (mean ± SE) across all rivalry-active units (b) and replay-active units (c); conventions as in Fig. 4a. Note the very early
anticipatory activity (almost 2 s before the report) of the rivalry-active units during rivalry as compared to replay
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03749-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:2057 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03749-0| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
7
 (all
corrected
pvalues > 0.4;
Simes
correction
for
multiple
comparisons39).
Finally, to test the robustness of these results and validate that
they do not depend on a few outliers, we conducted a
bootstrapping analysis, in which we repeated the analysis
10,000 times while sampling units randomly with replacement.
The mean bootstrapped activity onset value was −1004 ± 160 ms
and −545 ± 191 ms for rivalry and replay respectively (Supple-
mentary Fig. 9). Note that the actual replay activity onset (−455
ms) was later than 99.9998% of the bootstrapped rivalry onsets,
while the actual rivalry activity onset (−1072 ms) was earlier than
99.9826% of the bootstrapped replay onsets.
Medial frontal activity precedes MTL activity. We recorded
from a total of 134 (54 single) anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)
units in three patients and 50 (29 single) pre-supplementary
motor area (preSMA) units in two patients (see Supplementary
Table 1). These neurons did not show selective responses during
the non-rivalrous condition. Inspired by fMRI reports of frontal
involvement in perceptual transitions15,16,21,23,24,40–42 (but see ref.
43) we looked for units that changed their FR compared to baseline
around the perceptual transitions, irrespective of image identity.
Sixty such units (33%) were found in ACC/preSMA. Figure 5a
depicts an exemplary ACC unit. To assess the activity onset dif-
ference between rivalry and replay at the population level, the
same
group-level
permutation
analysis used
in
MTL
was
conducted. Here, the anticipatory activity of rivalry-active ACC/
preSMA units (n = 39; defined as units that were active
during rivalry at the unit level; 19 of them decreased their FR
below
baseline)
started
1885 ms
prior
to
the
rivalry
transition report, but only 131 ms prior to the replay transition
report (Fig. 5b; for individual patient data see Supplementary
Fig. 10a). In comparison, MTL group activity started only 1072 ms
prior to rivalry transition report. This regional difference holds
also for the subset of patients with responsive units in both regions
(Supplementary Fig. 11), suggesting that this difference does not
stem from differential response times between patients.
The anticipatory activity of replay-active ACC/pre-SMA units
(n = 26; defined as units that were active during replay at the unit
level) started 224 ms prior to the replay transition report, and 324
ms after the rivalry transition report (Fig. 5c; for individual
patient data see Supplementary Fig. 10b).
We also recorded from 39 (9 single) supplementary motor area
(SMA) units in one patient. Eighty-five percent of them were
rivalry/replay-active (33 units; for an example see Fig. 6a; seven of
them decreased their FR below baseline). Interestingly, popula-
tion level activity had similar timing in rivalry and replay: 547 ms
and 436 ms prior to the report of perceptual transition during
rivalry and replay, respectively, for rivalry-active units (n = 24;
Fig. 6b), and 683 ms and 571 ms for replay-active units (n = 27;
Fig. 6c). As these units are all from the same patient we cannot
assess the generality of these findings.
300
a
b
c
200
100
0
300
Rivalry (n=27)
Rivalry (n=24)
Replay (n=27)
Replay (n=24)
Rivalry-active units
200
100
Firing rate change (%)
Firing rate change (%)
0
–3
–2
–2
2
0
Time (s)
Time from button release (s)
0
10
20
FR (Hz)
30
–1
0
1
2
3
Replay-active units
Fig. 6 SMA activity during rivalry and replay. Convention as in Fig. 5. a Firing of an SMA multi-unit around the report of a perceptual transition onset during
rivalry (purple) and replay (cyan). Note that this anticipatory activity was nonselective and accompanied the transition to any image. Average FR percent
change across all rivalry-active units (b) and replay-active units (c). Note that here activity onset during rivalry and replay is highly similar
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03749-0
8
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:2057 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03749-0| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 Discussion
This study reports human single unit correlates of internally
driven changes in the content of visual awareness in the medial
temporal and frontal lobes. Strikingly, we found early activity,
which preceded the report of internally generated perceptual
transitions by as much as 2 s in the ACC/preSMA and 1 s in the
MTL. Activity in these regions started at least half a second later
when the perceptual transitions were externally (retinal) driven
during replay. These findings extend those from previous studies
in several ways: first, they target neurons in higher level areas in
the visual hierarchy compared with previous intracranial BR
studies in monkeys that did not surpass the inferior temporal
cortex44. Similarly, as opposed to previous monkey single unit
studies of subjective perception that targeted lateral frontal
areas45–48, this study focused on neurons in medial frontal areas
(specifically the preSMA and ACC). Second, the high spatio-
temporal resolution of single unit recordings allowed us to extend
previous fMRI BR studies15,21,49,50 in closely tracking the time-
courses of MTL vs. frontal activity during rivalry and replay.
These comparisons showed that ACC/preSMA activity precedes
MTL activity.
Furthermore, the results suggest that the temporal dynamics of
rivalry is different from that of replay: while replay activity was
strong and more centered around the report of perceptual tran-
sition onset, rivalry activity was prolonged and started earlier
relative to the report. Most importantly, the use of BR allowed us
to focus on internally driven changes in perception, in contrast to
previous human intracranial studies that examined externally
driven changes1–3 (although see preliminary results from BR51).
Thus, we were able to examine internal mechanisms that are
involved in conscious perception, and—as opposed to the above
studies which could only track the relations between MTL firing
and stimulus onset—to determine the temporal relations between
neuronal responses and subjective conscious perception, as
reflected by patients’ reports. Indeed, we found activity that
substantially precedes the report of perceptual transitions.
It is important to note that here we focused on the report of the
beginning of the transition period as opposed to most previous
studies of BR that focused on the beginning of the dominance
period (e.g. refs. 10,11,49). In our opinion, the former is more
meaningful because it marks the emergence of the new image into
consciousness, while the latter marks the end of the transition
period, during which the new image was already partially per-
ceived. Note that for the patients, determining the exact point in
which an image became dominant (e.g., differentiating between a
state in which the image is 90% dominant to 100% dominant),
was more difficult than determining when a change—irrespective
of
its
magnitude—first
occurred.
For
completeness,
Supplementary Figs. 12 and 13 present the responses aligned to
the report of the beginning of the dominance period for MTL and
frontal units, respectively (Supplementary Fig. 5b presents this
data for each MTL subregion separately). As expected, when MTL
activations are locked to dominance onset, they begin earlier
during both the rivalry and replay conditions, and the difference
in activity onset between the conditions is even larger. In the
ACC/preSMA, fewer units were active around the dominance
event than around the transition event (21 vs. 39 units, respec-
tively) and the responses were weaker, attesting to the relevance
of this frontal activity to the transition itself (or the mechanisms
which trigger it); however the difference between the conditions is
still well preserved.
These early activations, however, could potentially be attrib-
uted to long post-perceptual processes, which take place after the
transition has occurred, yet prior to report, especially in a clinical
environment. This interpretation does not seem likely given how
early these responses were, especially in the ACC/preSMA, and
given that replay responses started much later. Yet one could still
claim that post-perceptual processes are different in the two
conditions, and might be shorter in replay. This would suggest
that the perceptual transition actually occurred earlier dur-
ing rivalry than during replay, indexed by firing onset, but it took
longer to report it during rivalry. Admittedly, even though we
used a matched-duration replay, it was still not perceptually
identical to rivalry experience, which is distinctive and often
fragmented and wave-like52 and accordingly difficult to simulate.
While an experienced observer, if asked to, could probably dif-
ferentiate between the conditions, patients had no prior experi-
ence with rivalry, hence unlikely to spot the difference, and were
not informed about the two distinct presentation methods.
Indeed, the behavioral time courses of rivalry and replay are quite
close (see an example in Fig. 1d, and the relatively similar gamma
distributions in Supplementary Fig. 1). In addition, if the rivalry-
replay activity onset differences found in the MTL and ACC/
preSMA only stem from differential post-perceptual processes,
they should affect all neuronal responses. But several MTL units
responded at the same time in the two conditions, or even earlier
in replay (see color traces in Supplementary Fig. 6b,c). Similarly,
in one patient from which we recorded from SMA, activation
profiles were almost identical for rivalry and replay. Thus, we do
not think that a difference in post-perceptual processes can
explain the results.
The early ACC/preSMA activity—preceding even MTL neu-
rons—is especially surprising given several recent studies that
questioned frontal involvement in BR, in particular, and in
conscious experience, in general29. These studies showed that
when the duration of perceptual events in rivalry and replay is
matched20, or when subjects are not required to report18,19,53, the
difference in frontal activity between rivalry and replay is sub-
stantially reduced or even eliminated. The matched duration
criticism does not apply here, since we used gradual replay
transitions, matched in duration to the rivalry behavioral time
course.
While
we
cannot
rule
out
that
ACC/preSMA
activity relates to report, this does not seem likely given that the
response starts 2 s before the report, and precedes MTL activity.
Notably, if ACC/preSMA activity relates only to the report, we
would expect it to follow MTL activity, held to correlate with
perception1,2.
This suggests that ACC/preSMA might have a role in settling
the ongoing conflict between the two rivaling images throughout
rivalry, in line with ACC and preSMA suggested role in conflict
monitoring54–57 and in executive functions58. Notably, this
should not be taken as evidence that these areas are necessarily
the earliest involved in the perceptual switch; it could be, for
instance, that the switch is triggered by a subcortical stochastic
oscillator59,60 (e.g. locus coeruleus61 which is the source of nor-
adrenaline in the forebrain62 and is involved in attention, or
raphe nuclei, responsible for the release of serotonin63, whose
levels have been shown to affect rivalry alternations64) that pro-
jects to these frontal structures. While medial frontal activation
has been reported in a few fMRI studies of bistable percep-
tion15,20,21,23,24, most of these studies found activations in lateral
prefrontal regions. The region that is most consistently implicated
in imaging studies (also after controlling for the matched dura-
tion16 and no-report criticism19,65,66) is the inferior frontal cortex
(IFC). Intriguingly, both the preSMA and the ACC are anato-
mically connected to the IFC67,68 and activity in these regions has
been shown to actually precede that of IFC in bistable and conflict
monitoring situations23,69. Notably, dissociation between single-
unit and imaging findings has been reported in the context of
BR70, and is not uncommon in general71,72, specifically in the
prefrontal cortex30. For example, the frontal eye field was
implicated in bistable perception in single-unit studies45–47, but
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03749-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:2057 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03749-0| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
9
 not in the above-mentioned imaging studies. Thus, the under-
representation of preSMA and ACC in imaging studies of BR
does not necessarily contradict our findings.
What conclusions can be drawn from these results, then,
regarding the mechanisms of BR, and—more generally—about
the processes that lead to the emergence of a new percept?
Most computational models of BR emphasize competitive inhi-
bitory interactions at multiple neural sites, as well as feedback
connections73 and attentional modulations, mediated by signals
from late to early visual areas and/or signals from frontoparietal
areas74. Our results are in general agreement with such models,
with the MTL either sending feedback signals to bias the com-
petition that takes place in lower level areas or being the locus of
competition itself, especially for high-level rivaling stimuli as
used here. In this regard, it is interesting to note that MTL
activity actually displayed competitional dynamics, being more
gradual and prolonged in rivalry as compared to replay.
One might have speculated that the decreasing FR responses in
MTL neurons represent inhibition or some form of adaptation,
yet this seems less likely because these responses appear also in
the non-rivalrous condition, where there is no competition.
Rather, the neurons with negative responses are part of an MTL
network in which some neurons respond by increasing their FR
while other respond by decreasing it. A typical activity in any part
of the network might reinstate the activity in other parts of the
network and lead to the emergence of the represented concept.
The earlier frontal activity—whether positive or negative—can
also serve as attentional signal that biases the competition in MTL
or lower-level regions. However as our study was limited to
specific areas dictated by clinical considerations, and does not
include low-level visual areas nor most of frontoparietal cortex,
we
cannot
provide
a
full
description
of
the
underlying
mechanisms.
Taken together, our findings suggest that internal changes in
the content of perception may be influenced by early activity in a
cortical network that includes the ACC and preSMA followed by
MTL activity that presumably leads to the perceptual change. The
abstract, conceptual representations of these MTL units, pre-
viously shown to be reinstated prior to the emergence of a
memory14, may be likewise involved in the internal emergence of
a percept, as our findings suggest. On a more theoretical level,
these processes may be quite similar: during free recall, the pat-
tern of MTL activity that accompanied the actual experience is
internally regenerated, leading to the perceptual state of re-
experience, which is the recall event. Similarly, during BR the
pattern of MTL activity might lead to the internal generation of a
new perceptual state.
Methods
Patients and recordings. The data were collected in 20 recording sessions in 9
patients (mean age 39, range 19–50, 5 females) with pharmacologically intractable
epilepsy. Extensive noninvasive monitoring did not yield concordant data corre-
sponding to a single resectable epileptogenic focus. Therefore, they were implanted
with chronic depth electrodes for 7–10 days to determine the seizure focus for
possible surgical resection31. Electrode locations were based exclusively on clinical
criteria and were verified by postimplant computer tomography (CT) coregistered
to preimplant magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Each electrode consisted of a
flexible polyurethane probe containing nine 40-μm platinum–iridium microwires
protruding ~4 mm into the tissue beyond the tip of the probe. Eight microwires
were active recording channels and referenced to the ninth, lower impedance,
microwire. The differential signal from the microwires was amplified by using a
128-channel Blackrock™ system, filtered between 0.3 and 7500 Hz and sampled at
30 kHz. Here we report data from sites in the hippocampus, amygdala, entorhinal
cortex, parahippocampal gyrus, anterior cingulate cortex, presupplementary motor
area and supplementary motor area. 33 ± 19 units per session were recorded in
these areas. All sessions were conducted at the patients’ quiet bedside. All studies
conformed to the guidelines of the Medical Institutional Review Boards at Uni-
versity of California at Los Angeles and Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, and all
patients provided written consent forms.
Unit identification and spike sorting. Spike detection and sorting was applied to
the continuous recordings by using the well-established “wave-clus” software75.
Briefly, extracellular microwire recordings were high-pass filtered above 300 Hz, a
threshold was set at 5 SD above the median noise level and detected events were
sorted using superparamagnetic clustering. After sorting, the clusters were classi-
fied into noise, single-unit or multi-unit based on: (i) the spike shape and its
variance; (ii) the ratio between the spike peak value and the noise level; (iii) the
interspike interval (ISI) distribution of each cluster; and (iv) the presence of a
refractory period for the single units, i.e., less than 1% spikes within 3 ms ISI32.
Forty-one percent of the units were classified as single units (see Supplementary
Table S1). On average 1.4 ± 0.6 units were identified per wire. We computed several
spike sorting quality measures for all identified units (Supplementary Fig. 2): (a)
percentage of ISIs below 3 ms was 0.84% ± 1.83% (0.35% ± 0.42% for units classi-
fied as single units); (b) the ratio between the peak-to-peak amplitude of the mean
waveform of each cluster and the SD of the residuals was 7.9 ± 3.3 (SNR76; 10.1 ±
3.7 for single units); (c) the median L-ratio77, which is the amount of con-
tamination of a given cluster based on the Mahalanobis distance of spikes not
included in the cluster from the center of the cluster, divided by the total number of
spikes in the cluster, was 0.03 (SD = 0.69).
Stimuli and procedure. Visual stimuli were generated by MATLAB with the
Psychophysics Toolbox extension78, running on a 15-inch Apple MacBook Pro
laptop. Stimuli were presented on the laptop screen at 60 Hz and screen resolution
of 1440 × 900. Responses were collected using a Logitech F310 gamepad.
Selectivity screening session. In a first recording session, usually done early in
the morning, a large number of images (107 ± 25) of famous people, landmarks,
animals, objects and family members were presented to the patient. This set was
composed based on patient’s preferences. 300 × 300 pixels images (5° visual angle)
were presented for 1 s followed by a blank screen of 0.5–1 s, and repeated 6–8 times
in a pseudorandom order, while patients were engaged in simple discrimination
tasks (e.g. person/other, building/other, man/woman etc.). Images that elicited the
strongest responses in the screening session (using the same procedure as in ref. 38)
were selected for use in the BR session that took place a few hours later. Data from
the selectivity screening session is not presented here. Importantly, the BR session
(see below) included a non-rivalrous condition in which images were presented
normally to both eyes. Units were selected for rivalry/replay analysis based on the
results of this condition and not based on the screening session results.
Binocular presentation. During the BR session, the visual stimulation to the left
and right eyes was independently controlled using one of the following two
methods79:
(1) Red-blue goggles (n = 6 patients): The two visual streams were presented in
either red or blue at the center of the screen. Each lens passes only one of the
streams, so that the two streams fall on corresponding retinal locations of the two
eyes.
(2) Mirror stereoscope (n = 3 patients: patients 2–4 in Supplementary Table 1;
one of the five sessions of patient 4 was with red-blue goggles): patients viewed the
screen via an adjustable mirror stereoscope (SA200LT, Stereo Aids, Australia www.
stereoaids.com.au). Left and right eyes’ visual streams were presented at different
horizontal locations of the screen and were projected on corresponding locations of
the retinae of the two eyes using the stereoscope.
Identical vergence cues (black and white dashed frames around the images, a
440 × 440 pixels cross (7° visual angle) behind the frames, and a 20 × 20 pixels
fixation cross (0.3°) at the center of the images) were presented to both eyes 1 s
before the beginning and throughout each of the conditions of the BR session, to
ensure binocular fusion.
Note that the mirror stereoscope, used in the first three patients, was
cumbersome to use in the clinical setting. Therefore we switched to the red-blue
goggles that were more convenient and familiar to patients. Notably, the separation
between the two eyes might be incomplete with the red-blue goggles, yet that
actually makes it more difficult to find changes in firing locked to the perceptual
transitions.
Binocular rivalry session. Based on time restrictions with the patient, a variable
number of image pairs (M = 2.70 ± 0.73) were used in each session. Images that
elicited the strongest responses in the screening session were usually paired with
images that did not elicit a response in the same units. Before recording, patients
were carefully instructed with the details of the task and were trained with a demo
of rivalry, where transitions physically occurred on the screen, so that the
experimenter could confirm that they execute the task well. Then patients wore
red-blue goggles (or viewed the screen via a stereoscope, see “Binocular pre-
sentation” section above) and completed one or more repetitions of the following
three conditions for each pair of images:
Non-rivalrous condition: A slide informing the patient on the assignment of
one button (either left or right arrows of the gamepad) to each of the two images
was presented. Patients were asked to press the assigned button for each image
appearing on screen. Each of the two images (5° visual angle) was
presented binocularly to both eyes (hence no binocular conflict; Fig. 1a) 8-10 times,
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03749-0
10
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:2057 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03749-0| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 for 1 s or longer, until a correct response was made. Order of presentation was
pseudo-random, and one-second interleaving blanks were used between images. To
ensure correct button assignment, the non-rivalrous condition was stopped only
after 8–10 successive correct responses to each image in the non-rivalrous
condition that preceded the first rivalry block, and four correct responses in
subsequent blocks.
Rivalry condition: The two images (5° visual angle) were presented
simultaneously one to each eye (see “Binocular presentation” section above) for
either 90 or 120 s. This type of presentation creates BR, in which each image
dominates conscious perception for a certain period while the other image is
perceptually suppressed. These dominance and suppression periods reverse
irregularly, interleaved by periods of mixed percept (transition/piecemeal periods;
Fig. 1b). Note that the physical stimulus is constant hence the perceptual
transitions are internally driven. Patients were asked to report perceptual
dominance onset of each image by pressing and holding the assigned button for
that image, and to immediately release that button as soon as something in the
image starts to change (dominance offset/ transition onset11). This scheme of
reports provided four behavioral events: image1 dominance onset (button A press);
image2 dominance onset (button B press); emergence of image1 = image2
dominance offset = image2→image1 transition onset (button B release); and
emergence of image2 = image 1 dominance offset = image1→image2 transition
onset (button A release). To avoid unbalanced duration due to ocular dominance
the two images were switched between the eyes in the middle of the rivalry
condition, by linearly increasing the transparency of the current image in each eye
from zero to 100% while linearly decreasing the transparency of the other image
from 100% to zero over the course of 1 s. Additionally, two catch trials, in which
the same image was presented to both eyes for 1 s, were included. The transparency
of one image was linearly ramped up to 100% while the transparency of the other
image was ramped down to zero over the course of 1 s before and after the catch
trial. Eye-switching and catch trials periods and the following 1 s after these periods
were not included in the rivalry analysis.
Replay condition: The four types of reports from the rivalry condition were
used to create a matched-duration replay condition that immediately followed the
rivalry condition (Fig. 1c). In the replay condition, the same stimulus was always
presented to both eyes. During dominance periods of each image (defined as the
time between press and release of the corresponding button), that image was
presented to both eyes. During transition/piecemeal periods (defined as the time
between the release of one button to the press of the other button), the
transparency of the previous image was linearly ramped up to 100% while the
transparency of the next image was linearly ramped down to zero in both eyes.
During incomplete transition periods, in which a button release was followed by
the same button press, the transparency of the dominant image was linearly
ramped up to 50% while the transparency of the other image was linearly ramped
down to 50% over the first half of that piecemeal period, and then the transparency
of the dominant image was ramped down back to zero while the transparency of
the other image was ramped up back to 100% over the second half of that period.
The replay stimulation was designed to externally generate a perception that would
closely mimic rivalry, thus resulting in a matched sequence of motor responses in
the two conditions (see for example, Fig. 1d). Patients’ task was identical and
patients were not informed that this condition is different from the rivalry
condition. The replay condition was included for only one (usually the first) or two
repetitions of the rivalry condition.
Selectivity analysis. The data from the non-rivalrous condition was used to define
selective responses in MTL units. For each image, FR was calculated in three 250-
ms bins starting 150 ms after image onset and ending 100 ms before image offset.
FR outliers (>2 standard deviations above/below the mean) were discarded. For
each bin, FR in all trials were compared to the FRs in a 250-ms window before all
non-rivalrous image presentations (baseline FR) by means of a Mann−Whitney U
test, using the Simes correction for multiple comparisons39 and applying a con-
servative significance threshold of p = 0.00538. This procedure identified both
positive (i.e. increases above baseline FR; 72% of responses) and negative (i.e.
decreases below baseline FR; 28% of responses) responses. Only MTL units that
responded to one or more of the images in the non-rivalrous condition were
included in the subsequent activity onset analysis. For each image pair, if a unit
responded to only one of the images, this image was considered the “preferred
image” for this unit, while the second image was the “non-preferred image”. If a
unit responded to both images, the image that elicited the response with the lower
pvalue, or with the same pvalue but in more bins, was considered the “preferred
image”, and the other one was considered “non-preferred”.
Critical events for MTL and frontal units. Two critical events were analyzed for
each unit: perceptual transition onset (button release) during rivalry and replay.
For MTL units, this pertained to the preferred image only, and analyzed separately
for each image pair, while for frontal units, where there was no selectivity to
specific images—all transition events were analyzed together, across all images of
all pairs. The “Individual unit activity onset analysis” (see below) was focused on
these events. Note that all transition onsets to the unit’s preferred image, whether
complete or incomplete (i.e. that do not lead to full dominance; 24%), were taken
into account. For MTL units, only responsive units from the non-rivalrous
condition were included. For frontal units, all recorded units were subject to this
analysis. Supplementary Figs. 12 and 13 show the same analysis for perceptual
dominance onset events (button press).
Individual unit activity onset analysis. To identify activity that significantly differ
from baseline and determine its onset, a permutation test was conducted with
cluster-based multiple comparison correction across time points80: at each time
point in the [−1500,1000 ms] window around the critical event, the instantaneous
FR (iFR; calculated with a sliding square window of 200 ms) was compared to the
baseline FR (mean iFR during [−3000,−2000ms] window; first 100 ms were dis-
carded due to edge effect of the square window smoothing) over trials, using a
paired two-tailed t-test. Temporal clusters of significant activity were defined as
consecutive significant timepoints (p < 0.05) with a maximal gap of 100 ms, and
were assigned a cluster-level statistic corresponding to the sum of the tvalues of the
time points belonging to that cluster (t-total). The distribution of maximal absolute
cluster-level statistics obtained by chance was estimated by repeating the analysis
1000 times with randomly rearranging the spikes in a [−3000,3000 ms] window of
each trial while preserving the ISI distribution of that trial. Only clusters with
absolute t-total in the top 5% of this distribution (p < 0.05) were considered sig-
nificant. This method allowed us to both detect positive or negative activity (i.e.
significant increase or decrease relative to baseline FR, respectively) and measure its
onset. Out of these significant clusters, only the one that was closest to the critical
event (t = 0) was included in subsequent analyses. Clusters that started more than
500 ms after the critical event were discarded. Note that the baseline time window
was not completely clean—for 15% of the perceptual transitions trials, the [−3000,
−2000 ms] time window included the previous dominance onset event, and thus
might have also included significance changes in FR. This results from the con-
tinuous nature of the paradigm and critically only makes it more difficult to detect
an effect.
Population-level activity onset analysis. The above units were further analyzed
at the population level. Here instead of conducting a t-test over trials at each
timepoint, we averaged the iFR across trials for each trace (a unit response to a
certain image-pair) and conducted a t-test over traces at each timepoint. As dif-
ferent traces had different baseline FR and either positive or negative activations
(i.e. increased/decreased FR relative to baseline FR), we looked at absolute iFR
percent change relative to baseline. To do so we normalized the iFR time-course to
0–1 range, and inverted the timecourse (1-timecourse) of traces that had a negative
t-total in the individual unit activity onset analysis. The iFR percent change was
calculated as the ratio of the difference (iFR − baseline FR), and baseline FR. The
permuted data (n = 1000) was generated by separately shuffling the spikes of each
unit and each trial while preserving the ISI distribution. Traces for which the iFR
timecourse was inverted in the real data were inverted also in the permuted data.
Three units with FR lower than 0.5 Hz were discarded from the analysis.
Bayes factor analysis. We calculated the Bayes factor (BF), defined as the ratio of
the probability of observing the data given H0 and the probability of observing the
data given H1, using JASP (Version 0.8.5; JASP team, 2017). We adopted the
convention that a BF less than 0.1 implies strong evidence for lack of an effect (that
is, the data are ten times more likely to be observed given H0 than given H1), a BF
between 0.1 and 0.33 provides moderate evidence for lack of an effect, BF between
0.33 and 3 suggests insensitivity of the data, BF between 3 and 10 denotes moderate
evidence for the presence of an effect (i.e., H1), BF greater than 10 implies strong
evidence and BF greater than 100 suggests extreme evidence for the presence of an
effect37.
Automatic trial-by-trial response detection analysis. Trial-by-trial activity onset
times relative to the perceptual transition reports were determined by Poisson spike
train analysis (Hanes et al., 1995)81. For this procedure, the ISIs of a given unit are
processed continuously over the [−1500, +1500 ms] window around the report,
and the onset of a spike train is detected based on its deviation from a baseline
exponential distribution of ISIs (i.e. an exponential distribution with λ = 1/mean
FR in [−3000, +3000 ms] window across all trials). Only spike train onsets <0 (i.e.
earlier than the motor response) were considered. Activity onset time in rivalry and
replay was determined for each trace as the median onset time for this condition,
with the constraint that significant activity onset was recognized in at least
40% of the condition trials for this trace. An example of this analysis appears in
Supplementary Fig. 4a. Note that this analysis can only recognize increases in FR
relative to baseline, and therefore was not used on traces with decreased FR
response.
Bootstrapping analysis. The bootstrapping analysis was aimed at assessing the
robustness of the effects found at the population-level activity onset analysis. This
analysis was repeated 10,000 times, so that in each iteration a random sample of 36/
26 traces (corresponding to the number of MTL active traces in rivalry/replay) was
selected with replacement (allowing repetition). The population permutation test
described above was conducted for each sample, and the onset was determined
both for replay and for rivalry. The bootstrapped onset distributions were plotted
(Supplementary Fig. 9), and their means were calculated. Finally, we calculated the
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03749-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:2057 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03749-0| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
11
 chances of obtaining the actual rivalry onset under the bootstrapped replay dis-
tribution, and the chances of obtaining the actual replay onset under the boot-
strapped rivalry distribution.
Data availability. The data that support the findings of this study are available
from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Received: 24 August 2017 Accepted: 6 March 2018
References
1.
Kreiman, G., Fried, I. & Koch, C. Single-neuron correlates of subjective vision
in the human medial temporal lobe. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 8378–8383
(2002).
2.
Quiroga, R. Q., Mukamel, R., Isham, E. A., Malach, R. & Fried, I. Human
single-neuron responses at the threshold of conscious recognition. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 105, 3599–3604 (2008).
3.
Reber, T. P. et al Single-neuron correlates of conscious perception in the
human medial temporal lobe. Curr. Biol. 27, 2991–2998.e2 (2017).
4.
Wolfe, J. M. Reversing ocular dominance and suppression in a single flash.
Vision Res. 24, 471–478 (1984).
5.
Breitmeyer, B. H. & Ogmen, H. Visual Masking: Time Slices Through
Conscious and Unconscious Vision (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2006).
6.
Raymond, J. E., Shapiro, K. L. & Arnell, K. M. Temporary suppression of
visual processing in an RSVP task: an attentional blink? J. Exp. Psychol.:
Human. Percept. Perform. 18, 849–860 (1992).
7.
Breese, B. B. Binocular Rivalry. Psychol. Rev. 16, 401–406 (1909).
8.
Levelt, W. J. On Binocular Rivalry 1–118 (Institute for Perception RVO-TNO,
Soesterberg, The Netherlands, 1965).
9.
Logothetis, N. K. & Schall, J. D. Neuronal correlates of subjective visual
perception. Science 245, 761–763 (1989).
10. Leopold, D. A. & Logothetis, N. K. Activity changes in early visual cortex reflect
monkeys’ percepts during binocular rivalry. Nature 379, 549–553 (1996).
11. Sheinberg, D. L. & Logothetis, N. K. The role of temporal cortical areas in
perceptual organization. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94, 3408–3413 (1997).
12. Logothetis, N. K. Single units and conscious vision. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond.
B Biol. Sci. 353, 1801–1818 (1998).
13. Quiroga, R. Q. Concept cells: the building blocks of declarative memory
functions. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 13, 587–597 (2012).
14. Gelbard-Sagiv, H., Mukamel, R., Harel, M., Malach, R. & Fried, I. Internally
generated reactivation of single neurons in human hippocampus during free
recall. Science 322, 96–101 (2008).
15. Lumer, E. D., Friston, K. J. & Rees, G. Neural correlates of perceptual rivalry in
the human brain. Science 280, 1930–1934 (1998).
16. Weilnhammer, V. A., Ludwig, K., Hesselmann, G. & Sterzer, P. Frontoparietal
cortex mediates perceptual transitions in bistable perception. J. Neurosci. 33,
16009–16015 (2013).
17. Safavi, S., Kapoor, V., Logothetis, N. K. & Panagiotaropoulos, T. I. Is the
frontal lobe involved in conscious perception? Front. Psychol. 5, 1063 (2014).
18. de Graaf, T. A., de Jong, M. C., Goebel, R., van Ee, R. & Sack, A. T. On the
functional relevance of frontal cortex for passive and voluntarily controlled
bistable vision. Cereb. Cortex 21, 2322-2331 (2011).
19. Frassle, S., Sommer, J., Jansen, A., Naber, M. & Einhauser, W. Binocular
rivalry: frontal activity relates to introspection and action but not to
perception. J. Neurosci. 34, 1738–1747 (2014).
20. Knapen, T., Brascamp, J., Pearson, J., van Ee, R. & Blake, R. The role of frontal
and parietal brain areas in bistable perception. J. Neurosci. 31, 10293–10301
(2011).
21. Roy, A. V., Jamison, K. W., He, S. & Engel, S. A., & He, B. Deactivation in the
posterior mid-cingulate cortex reflects perceptual transitions during binocular
rivalry: evidence from simultaneous EEG-fMRI. NeuroImage 152, 1–11 (2017).
22. Naber, M. & Brascamp, J. Commentary: is the frontal lobe involved in
conscious perception? Front. Psychol. 6, 1736 (2015).
23. Kondo, H. M. & Kashino, M. Neural mechanisms of auditory awareness
underlying verbal transformations. NeuroImage 36, 123–130 (2007).
24. Sato, M. et al. Multistable representation of speech forms: a functional MRI
study of verbal transformations. NeuroImage 23, 1143–1151 (2004).
25. Dehaene, S. & Changeux, J.-P. Experimental and theoretical approaches to
conscious processing. Neuron 70, 200–227 (2011).
26. Lau, H. & Rosenthal, D. Empirical support for higher-order theories of
conscious awareness. Trends Cogn. Sci. 15, 365–373 (2011).
27. Lamme, V. A. & Roelfsema, P. R. The distinct modes of vision offered
by feedforward and recurrent processing. Trends Neurosci. 23, 571–579
(2000).
28. Block, N. The higher order approach to consciousness is defunct. Analysis 71,
419–431 (2011).
29. Boly, M. et al. Are the neural correlates of consciousness in the front or in the
back of the cerebral cortex? Clinical and neuroimaging evidence. J. Neurosci.
37, 9603–9613 (2017).
30. Odegaard, B., Knight, R. T. & Lau, H. Should a few null findings
falsify prefrontal theories of conscious perception? J. Neurosci. 37, 9593–9602
(2017).
31. Fried, I. et al. Cerebral microdialysis combined with single-neuron and
electroencephalographic recording in neurosurgical patients. Technical note. J.
Neurosurg. 91, 697–705 (1999).
32. Quiroga, R. Q., Reddy, L., Kreiman, G., Koch, C. & Fried, I. Invariant visual
representation by single neurons in the human brain. Nature 435, 1102–1107
(2005).
33. Logothetis, N. K. & Leopold, D. A. On the Physiology of Bistable Percepts 1–18
(MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1995).
34. Fried, I., Cameron, K. A., Yashar, S., Fong, R. & Morrow, J. W. Inhibitory
and excitatory responses of single neurons in the human medial
temporal lobe during recognition of faces and objects. Cereb. Cortex 12,
575–584 (2002).
35. Ison, M. J. et al. Selectivity of pyramidal cells and interneurons in the human
medial temporal lobe. J. Neurophysiol. 106, 1713–1721 (2011).
36. Fried, I., Mukamel, R. & Kreiman, G. Internally generated preactivation of
single neurons in human medial frontal cortex predicts volition. Neuron 69,
548–562 (2011).
37. Lee, M. D. & Wagenmakers, E.-J. Bayesian Cognitive Modeling: A Practical
Course 1–129 (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2013).
38. Mormann, F. et al. Latency and selectivity of single neurons indicate
hierarchical processing in the human medial temporal lobe. J. Neurosci. 28,
8865–8872 (2008).
39. Rodland, E. A. Simes’ procedure is ‘valid on average’. Biometrika 93, 742–746
(2006).
40. Sterzer, P. & Kleinschmidt, A. A neural basis for inference in perceptual
ambiguity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104, 323–328 (2007).
41. Ricci, C. & Blundo, C. Perception of ambiguous figures after focal brain
lesions. Neuropsychologia 28, 1163–1173 (1990).
42. Meenan, J. P. & Miller, L. A. Perceptual flexibility after frontal or temporal
lobectomy. Neuropsychologia 32, 1145–1149 (1994).
43. Valle-Inclan, F. & Gallego, E. Bilateral Frontal Leucotomy Does Not Alter
Perceptual Alternation during Binocular Rivalry Vol. 155, 235–239 (Elsevier,
Amsterdam, 2006).
44. Leopold, D. & Logothetis, N. Multistable phenomena: changing views in
perception. Trends Cogn. Sci. 3, 254–264 (1999).
45. Thompson, K. G. & Schall, J. D. The detection of visual signals by macaque
frontal eye field during masking. Nat. Neurosci. 2, 283–288 (1999).
46. Thompson, K. G. & Schall, J. D. Antecedents and correlates of visual detection and
awareness in macaque prefrontal cortex. Vision Res. 40, 1523–1538 (2000).
47. Libedinsky, C. & Livingstone, M. Role of prefrontal cortex in conscious visual
perception. J. Neurosci. 31, 64–69 (2011).
48. Panagiotaropoulos, T. I., Deco, G., Kapoor, V. & Logothetis, N. K. Neuronal
discharges and gamma oscillations explicitly reflect visual consciousness in the
lateral prefrontal cortex. Neuron 74, 924–935 (2012).
49. Tong, F., Nakayama, K., Vaughan, J. T. & Kanwisher, N. Binocular rivalry
and visual awareness in human extrastriate cortex. Neuron 21, 753–759
(1998).
50. Lumer, E. D. & Rees, G. Covariation of activity in visual and prefrontal cortex
associated with subjective visual perception. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96,
1669–1673 (1999).
51. Kreiman, G. On the Neuronal Activity in the Human Brain During Visual
Recognition, Imagery and Binocular Rivalry 1–496. PhD thesis, California
Institute of Technology (2001).
52. Wilson, H. R., Blake, R. & Lee, S. H. Dynamics of travelling waves in visual
perception. Nature 412, 907–910 (2001).
53. Brascamp, J., Blake, R. & Knapen, T. Negligible fronto-parietal BOLD activity
accompanying unreportable switches in bistable perception. Nat. Neurosci. 18,
1672–1678 (2015).
54. Botvinick, M. M., Cohen, J. D. & Carter, C. S. Conflict monitoring and
anterior cingulate cortex: an update. Trends Cogn. Sci. 8, 539–546 (2004).
55. Nachev, P., Rees, G., Parton, A., Kennard, C. & Husain, M. Volition and
conflict in human medial frontal cortex. Curr. Biol. 15, 122–128 (2005).
56. Wolbers, T. Changes in connectivity profiles as a mechanism for strategic control
over interfering subliminal information. Cereb. Cortex 16, 857–864 (2005).
57. Bartoli, E. et al. Temporal dynamics of human frontal and cingulate neural
activity during conflict and cognitive control. Cereb. Cortex, https://doi.org/
10.1093/cercor/bhx245, 1–15 (2017).
58. Mansouri, F. A., Tanaka, K. & Buckley, M. J. Conflict-induced behavioural
adjustment: a clue to the executive functions of the prefrontal cortex. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 10, 141–152 (2009).
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03749-0
12
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:2057 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03749-0| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 59. Pettigrew, J. D. Searching for the switch: neural bases for perceptual rivalry
alternations. Brain Mind 2, 85–118 (2001).
60. Carter, O. L. & Pettigrew, J. D. A common oscillator for perceptual rivalries?
Perception 32, 295–305 (2003).
61. Einhäuser, W., Stout, J., Koch, C. & Carter, O. Pupil dilation reflects
perceptual selection and predicts subsequent stability in perceptual rivalry.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105, 1704–1709 (2008).
62. Foote, S. L., Bloom, F. E. & Aston-Jones, G. Nucleus locus ceruleus: new
evidence of anatomical and physiological specificity. Physiol. Rev. 63, 844–914
(1983).
63. Jacobs, B. L. & Azmitia, E. C. Structure and function of the brain serotonin
system. Physiol. Rev. 72, 165–229 (1992).
64. Carter, O. L. et al. Modulating the rate and rhythmicity of perceptual rivalry
alternations with the mixed 5-HT2A and 5-HT1A agonist psilocybin.
Neuropsychopharmacology 30, 1154–1162 (2005).
65. Zaretskaya, N. & Narinyan, M. Introspection, attention or awareness? The
role of the frontal lobe in binocular rivalry. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 8, 527
(2014).
66. Brascamp, J., Sterzer, P., Blake, R. & Knapen, T. Multistable perception and
the role of frontoparietal cortex in perceptual inference. Annu. Rev. Psychol.
69, 77-103 (2018).
67. Aron, A. R., Behrens, T. E., Smith, S., Frank, M. J. & Poldrack, R. A. Triangulating
a cognitive control network using diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) and functional MRI. J. Neurosci. 27, 3743–3752 (2007).
68. Beckmann, M., Johansen-Berg, H. & Rushworth, M. F. S. Connectivity-based
parcellation of human cingulate cortex and its relation to functional
specialization. J. Neurosci. 29, 1175–1190 (2009).
69. Swann, N. C. et al. Roles for the pre-supplementary motor area and the
right inferior frontal gyrus in stopping action: electrophysiological
responses and functional and structural connectivity. NeuroImage 59,
2860–2870 (2012).
70. Maier, A. et al. Divergence of fMRI and neural signals in V1 during
perceptual suppression in the awake monkey. Nat. Neurosci. 11, 1193–1200
(2008).
71. Boynton, G. M. Spikes, BOLD, attention, and awareness: a comparison of
electrophysiological and fMRI signals in V1. J. Vis. 11, 12 (2011).
72. Dubois, J., de Berker, A. O. & Tsao, D. Y. Single-unit recordings in the
macaque face patch system reveal limitations of fMRI MVPA. J. Neurosci. 35,
2791–2802 (2015).
73. Tong, F., Meng, M. & Blake, R. Neural bases of binocular rivalry. Trends Cogn.
Sci. 10, 502–511 (2006).
74. Li, H.-H., Rankin, J., Rinzel, J., Carrasco, M. & Heeger, D. J. Attention
model of binocular rivalry. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 114, E6192–E6201
(2017).
75. Quiroga, R. Q., Nadasdy, Z. & Ben-Shaul, Y. Unsupervised spike detection and
sorting with wavelets and superparamagnetic clustering. Neural Comput. 16,
1661–1687 (2004).
76. Joshua, M., Elias, S., Levine, O. & Bergman, H. Quantifying the isolation
quality of extracellularly recorded action potentials. J. Neurosci. Methods 163,
267–282 (2007).
77. Schmitzer-Torbert, N. & Redish, A. D. Neuronal activity in the rodent dorsal
striatum in sequential navigation: separation of spatial and reward responses
on the multiple T task. J. Neurophysiol. 91, 2259–2272 (2004).
78. Brainard, D. H. The psychophysics toolbox. Spat. Vis. 10, 433–436 (1997).
79. Carmel, D., Arcaro, M., Kastner, S. & Hasson, U. How to create and use
binocular rivalry. J. Vis. Exp.45 (2010).
80. Maris, E. & Oostenveld, R. Nonparametric statistical testing of EEG- and
MEG-data. J. Neurosci. Methods 164, 177–190 (2007).
81. Hanes, D. P., Thompson, K. G., & Schall, J. D. Relationship of
presaccadic activity in frontal eye field and supplementary eye field to saccade
initiation in macaque: Poisson spike train analysis. Exp. Brain Res. 103, 85–96
(1995).
Acknowledgements
We thank the patients for their participation; Rafi Malach, Yuval Nir, Tal Golan, Tomer
Livne, Dan Biderman, and Natalie Biderman for discussions; Amit Marmelshtein for
code; Michelle Tran, Deena Pourshaban, and Mariana Holliday for assistance with data
acquisition; Eric Behnke and Tony Fields for technical assistance; Brooke Salaz for
administrative help. C.K. thanks the Allen Institute founder, Paul G. Allen, for his vision,
encouragement, and support. This work was supported by grants from the National
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS no. R01NS033221 and
R01NS084017) and Mathers foundation, fellowships from the Human Frontiers Research
Program (HFSP), European Union’s Horizon 2020 Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions
(MSCA; under grant agreement no 659759 and 659765), the European Molecular Biology
Organization (EMBO), the Israel National Postdoctoral Award Program for Advancing
Women in Science, and the L’Oréal-UNESCO For Women in Science program.
Author contributions
H.G.-S., C.K., and I.F. designed the experiment. I.F. performed the surgeries. M.R.H.
contributed the pre-screening presentation and analysis code. H.G.-S. implemented the
paradigm and collected the data. H.G.-S. and L.M. analyzed the data. H.G.-S., L.M., and I.
F. wrote the manuscript. H.G.-S., L.M., C.K. and I.F. discussed the results and com-
mented on the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Additional information
Supplementary Information accompanies this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
018-03749-0.
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Reprints and permission information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/
reprintsandpermissions/
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2018
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03749-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:2057 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03749-0| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
13
